23345.5 24448867 27673
DOMINE DIRIGE NOS blazon or coat of arms
THE SURVEY OF LONDON: CONTAINING The Original, Increase, Modern Estate and Govern∣ment of that City, Methodically set down. With a Memorial of those famouser Acts of Charity, which for publick and Pious Ʋses have been bestowed by many Worshipfull Citizens and Benefactors. As also all the Ancient and Modern Monuments erected in the Churches, not only of those two famous Cities, LONDON and WESTMINSTER, but (now newly added) Four miles compass. Begun first by the pains and industry of JOHN STOW, in the year 1598. Afterwards inlarged by the care and diligence of A. M. in the year 1618. And now compleatly finished by the study & labour of A. M. H. D. and others, this present year 1633. Whereunto, besides many Additions (as appears by the Contents) are an∣nexed divers Alphabetical Tables: especially two, The first, and Index of Things. The second, a Concordance of Names. LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourn, and are to be sold at his Shop at the South Entrance of the ROYAL-EXCHANGE▪ 1633.
Adrian Drift Esqr. blazon or coat of arms
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RALPH FREEMAN, now Lord Maior of the City of LONDON, Sir Edward Barkham, Sir Martin Lumley, Sir Iohn Gore, Sir Hugh Hamrsley, Sir Richard Deane, Sir Iames Cambell, Sir Robert Ducy, Sir George hitmore, Sir Nicholas Raynton, Knights; Edward Litleton, Esquire, Recorder of LONDON: And to all the other Aldermen, Brethren-Senators in the state of so famous a City; All of them being my Honorable and worthy Masters: A. M. Wisheth the fruition of all temporall Felicities in this life; and the never-failing fulnesse of blessednesse in the life to come. RIGHT HONORABLE, THis famous City hath now enioyed the peacefull succession of more than one and thirty worthy Lord Maiors, since Master Iohn Stow (the painfull Searcher into Reverend Antiquity) did first pre∣sent LONDONS SVRVEY to this Ho∣nourable Senate, Sir Robert Lee, then Lord Maior, with gracious and favourable acceptance. Who purposing to adde increase to this Worke (accor∣ding to the dignity of the Subiect) but prevented by infir∣mity, and Sicknesse-bringing Death, imparted not only his good Intentions, but best Collections also unto me, by his importunacy now perswaded both to correct the Errors, and perfect so well deserving a VVorke: And had his re∣quest beene wanting, the respect and honour I owe to this Royall City (the tender Mother and Nurse to us both) had beene incitement enough to further a Booke of such consequence, as far as my weake abilities would give leave.
Having therefore at first drawne a briefe Discourse there∣of, lest I might unadvisedly dash on the Rocks of Displea∣sure, I delivered it to the Right VVorshipfull, Sir Henry Mountague, then Recorder of London, by whom com∣manded to appeare before your Worships in the Councell Chamber at Guild-Hall, I received Encouragement and Authority, with promise of helpe and furtherance, to per∣fect this worthy Monument. VVhich accordingly (after the care and paines of twelve yeeres travell about it) I pre∣sented unto this Honourable Senate, in the yeere 1618. But now that I might adde a Complement to this Survey, which might best become it, have I done my diligent en∣devour (unto which have I called the assistance of other learned Antiquaries) to set downe Methodically,M. D. the Ori∣ginall, Increase, Moderne Estate, and Government of this City; as also by what Name, or Office rather, whether of Port-graves, Port-reeves, Barons, Provosts, or Bayliffes, the Governours, Rulers, and Magistrates were anciently distinguished. Before all other, I find the name of Alderman, well wor∣thy observation, as being derived from most venerable An∣tiquity: Cmbd. in Brit. For ancient Records say, that in the dayes of King Edgar, there was a worthy Noble man, of the Blood Roy∣all, named Ailwine, in great authority and favour with the King, insomuch that he was therefore termed, Healf-Koning, as much to say, as Halfe-King; and by Office was stiled, Alderman of all England: as appeares by this Epi∣taph engraven on his Tombe, in that Famous Monastery (by him founded) in the Ile of Ely: Hic requiescit D. Ailwinus, incliti Regis Edgari Cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus, & huius sacri Coenobii mira∣culosus Fundator. Here resteth Lord Ailwine, Cousin to the Noble King Ed∣gar, Alderman of all England, and miraculous Founder of this holy Abbey.
VVhich plainly sheweth, that in those times of ancient and venerable respect, this Title of Alderman, was only gi∣ven, for a further addition of Repute and Honour. Some Authors have delivered,Math. Paris. Geffery Monm. Will, Malmes. Pol▪ Virgil. that men bearing such a Stile, were sometimes called Doomesmen, sometimes Ealder∣men, Judges of the Kings Courts, &c. As being distinguished by those additions of Honour and Esteeme from other men, for their greater maturity of Iudgement, gravity of yeeres, experience and person; and therefore the fitter for weighty imployment in the State-affaires, by apt correspondency of their trust and fidelity. Which name of dignity declaring the most eminent degree of Magistracy, doth still (as here∣tofore it hath) extend it selfe thorowout all England, in Ci∣ties, Townes, and Corporations; and in some the Alderman only is the chiefe Commander: Even so is it much more Maiesticall here, in the supreme City of the whole Land, London, the Metropolis of Great Britaine, the Mother of authentike Memory, the Ancient and Moderne Seat of our Kings, yea, the very Chamber Royall for Maiesty it selfe, and the open Haven for all Merchandise and Commerce, as being the rich Store-house of Peace and Plenty. It shall be needlesse to trouble your Honour, and the rest of my worthy Masters, with repetition here of those Officers and Governours, that ruled this Great City in elder times, because you shall finde them sufficiently set downe in their apt and distinct places, untill this higher degree of Honour came to full perfection, I meane the Maioralty, which some hold to be in King Iohns time, but most maintaine & avouch it to bee in the first yeere of King Richard the first, whose Vertue and Courage won him the name of Cueur-de-lion. From which happy beginning, it hath neither beene mine, nor my most industrious and helpfull Friends good fortune,W. W. to ranke downe in formall order the successive line of the Sheriffes, Maiors, and Aldermen, according to my former intended purpose, concerning their Birth-place, and Paren∣tage; nor how many of them this Honourable City it selfe
then yeelded, as challenging them her owne Off-spring, she being as well a loving Mother to breed them in her owne Bowels, as a carefull Nurse afterward to bring them up. For my selfe, Londons Off-spring, though the meanest, yet hold I it no small attribute of Honour to record it, how much more Glory then for you (equall in worth and ranke) to reade it, and what comfort for Posterity to remember and acknowledge it, that this Ancient, Famous, and Renowned Mother City, never wanted from time to time Honourable Sonnes of her owne bearing and breeding, to sit at Sterne, to undergoe all Offices of Credit and Authority, yea, even the Maioralty, from Father to Son in the third Generation; and they to boast their Grandfathers, and great Grandfa∣thers, Witnesse Garrards. Bares. Rowe. Branch, &c. borne & bred in this worthy City, some to the fourth, others the third, but many the second Generation, as in the Reportary following will more at large appeare. I forbeare to speake of such as have beene Aldermen and Sheriffes;Witnesse Barnhams, Fa∣ther and Son. first, the Fathers; then, the Sonnes; yet neither li∣ving to enioy the Maioralties Dignity. As also what flu∣ent plenty of Magistrates in the same high Office, the seve∣rall Sheirffes of England have yeelded, wherewith the said Discourse will more familiarly acquaint you. And now, let me beseech your Honour and VVorships, to allow this Survey of London your gracious entertainment; and the rather, for that it now comes in a fairer Volume than ever, replete with plenty and enlargement of memorable Additions, not only with the splendor of Armes, and other glorious Ensignes of Honour, but with speciall observations of venerable Antiquity, and infinite supplements of Ancient and Moderne Monuments, as well of the Churches in the famous Cities of London and Westminster, as in foure miles compasse round about them, such as before this instant were never published.
To the Reader. THat I may give you a reason of such things as the Iudicious and se∣vere Censurer may deeme blemishes and imperfections in this Worke: For the Order, you may be pleased to understand, it is not so absolutely Methodicall as I could wish it were, yet needs none other Apologie, than the length of time it hath beene grow∣ing to this Bulke, and Mortality of the Authors, who have spent (two of them now) their lives in the disquisition of venerable Antiquity concerning this City. The Learned know, Men are all various in their Opinions, as in their Faces you hardly finde of a Nation two that resemble in all proportions, so in their Minds is there as much discrepancy, and then must there needs be the same or more in their Writings, the expresse Image of their Minds. And this is the Fate of our present Worke, which begun Methodically, hath not beene so well prosecuted, whether out of difference in Iudgement, or want of Information, I dispute not: Probable it may be, the desire of inserting all things for the delight of the Reader, might breed this want of Method, and the rather am I induc'd to incline thereto, since every dayes Experience teaches, how unstable oftentimes and incertaine Friendship is, when she promises Information in this kinde: Yet this, the ingenuity of a courteous Reader will excuse, since the Benefit compensates the Wrong. And to administer a salve to this sore, and prevent Distraction in the Reader, in this last Impression have you variety of Tables, succinct and pithy, yet not ob∣scure: In the beginning, the whole body of the Book dissected into sixtie Chapters, whose short Contents epitomize the Substance of the Work: Then briefe Schemes as well of all the Churches in and about London and Westminster foure miles compasse, as of all the Halls and Companies of this Honourable City, both Alpha∣betically ranged with reference to their proper places. Lastly, that nothing might be wanting which should bring ease and furtherance to the Studious Reader, have you a Catalogue of Authors, on whose authority the truth of our Assertions may depend. Neither leave we you heare: In the end also have we furnished it with two exact Tables; The first an Index, containing in it the chiefe Streets, Lanes, Con∣duits, stately Houses of Noblemen, Innes of Court, Chancery, and other ancient Monuments of this City, not without the admixion also of worthy Acti∣ons and Customes of Citizens. The other a Concordance of those, whose Honour in their Office, Charity in their Almes, Memory in their Monu∣ment,
hath acquainted Posterity with their Names: By this Guide, hee who boasts his Birth in a Magnificent City (as the Ancient did in Rome or Athens) may with great facility finde his Ancestors in their Honours, Almes giving, Tombes, or other memorable and worthy Actions here recorded: For instance (not to exceed our Memories) finde the name of Anderson in the Concordance, and according to the first figures (105. a. ¶) turne to the Page, and you have his Liberality or Benefaction to Brazen-nose College in Oxford; then consult the second (291. a. ¶) in like manner, and you have his Monument in Saint Olave Vpwel's Church: so the third (592. b. ¶.) and you shall finde him there She∣riffe, Anno Dom. 1601. The same order is observed in the rest, onely for distin∣ction sake, I have added these letters. B. to such as have beene Bishops, and M. to those that have borne the Office of Maior. Thus have we endevored to prevent Distraction, and reduce the copious Va∣riety of this Worke to heads, for the Readers ease; not without a great deale of Paines, Care, and Charge: The udicious can give the best estimate of the Paines; of the Care none better than he that hath reaped benefit by the reading; as for the Charge, the proportion of the Volume speakes, especially to the skilfull in that My∣stery; to which if you adde the length of time (now almost three yeeres) it hath lyen under the Presse, there is none but may conceive the greatnesse thereof. Yet no small satisfaction to all these may you afford (Gentle Reader) by your candide and courteous acceptance, with a future encouragement (in this, or the like) to the ready endevours of him that will study to be Your Servant, C. I.
The Contents of the severall Chapters of this BOOKE. CHAP. I. OF the Originall, Antiquity, and Increase of this City of London. Fol. 1 CHAP. II. Of the Wall about the City. 4 CHAP. III. Of the ancient and present Brookes, Boornes, Pooles, Wels, and Conduirs of fresh Water, serving the City: as also of the Dch com∣passing the Wall of the same for defence thereof. 8 CHAP. IV. Of the ancient and famous River of Thames, from whence she deriveth her head or rig∣nall, and so conveyeth her selfe to the Ciies service, being supplyed by divers other sweet Rivers in her course. 14 CHAP. V. A further testimony concerning the River of Thames, and of the right and authority of the Lord Maior of London, to the conservacy and defence of the said famous River. 20 CHAP. VI. Of Towne-Ditch about the City Walls. 26 CHAP. VII. Of the Bridges of this City. 27 CHAP. VIII. Of the severall Gates in the Wall of the City, and of their increasing and new building from time to time, as occasion served. 31 CHAP. IX. Of Towers and Castles in and about this City. 40 CHAP. X. Of the rights that belonged anciently to Robert Fitz-walter, Chastillion and Banner-bearer of London, Lord of Wadeham, &c. 50 CHAP. XI. Of Schooles and other houses of Learning. 63 CHAP. XII. Of Houses and Innes of Students in the Com∣mon Law. 66 CHAP. XIII. Of orders and customes observed by the Citi∣zens in elder times. 67 CHAP. XIV. Of great Families kept in lder times. 70 CHAP. XV. Of charitable Almesgiving in ancient times. 74 CHAP. XVI. Of Sports and Pastimes used of old in this City. 75 CHAP. XVII. Of Watches in this City, and other Matters commanded, and the causes why. 83 CHAP. XVIII. Of the honour of Londons Citizens, and the wor∣thinesse of men and women dwelling in the same City, by their liberall bounty and cha∣rity to good and godly uses from time to time. 86 CHAP. XIX. The division of the City of London into Parts, Precincts, and Wards. 113 Of the 26. WARDS. CHAP. XX. 1 Portsoken Ward, with the Parish Chur∣ches, Monuments, and Halls of Companies therein 115 CHAP. XXI. 2 Towerstreet Ward. 225 CHAP. XXII. 3 Ealdgate Ward. 144 CHAP. XXIII. 4 Limestreet Ward. 161 CHAP. XXIV. 5 Bishopsgate Ward. 16 CHAP. XXV. 6 Broad-street Ward. 183 CHAP. XXVI. 7 Cornehill Ward. 206 CHAP. XXVII. 8 Langborne Ward, and Fenny about. 217 CHAP. XXVIII. 9 Belinsgate Ward. 225 CHAP. XXIX. 10 Bridge Ward within. 230 CHAP. XXX. 11 Candlewickstreet, or Candlewright street Ward. 234 CHAP. XXXI. 12 Walbrooke Ward. 241
CHAP. XXXII. 13 Downegate Ward. 248 CHAP. XXXIII. 14 Vintrie Ward. 254 CHAP. XXXIV. 15 Cordwainer street Ward. 264 CHAP. XXXV. 16 Cheape Ward. 272 CHAP. XXXVI. 17 Coleman street Ward. 287 CHAP. XXXVII. 18 Bassings Hall Ward. 297 CHAP. XXXVIII. 19 Creplegate Ward. 301 CHAP. XXXIX. 20 Aldersgate Ward. 320 CHAP. XL. 21 Faringdon Ward within. 335 CHAP. XLI. 22 Breadstreet Ward. 390 CHAP. XLII. 23 Queenehiche Ward. 397 CHAP. XLIII. 24 Castle Baynard Ward. 404 CHAP. XLIV. 25 Faringdon Ward without. 414 CHAP. XLV. 26 Bridge Ward without, consisting of the Borough of Southwarke, in the County of Surrey. 442 CHAP. XLVI. Of the Suburbes without the Wall of London, as also without the Liberties. 461 CHAP. XLVII. Of the Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster with∣out the Suburbes. 489 CHAP. XLVIII. Of the City of Westminster, with the Antiquities, Bounds, and Liberties thereof: As also a Bre∣viate of the first Foundation, Alterations, and Rebuilding of that famous ancient Abbey, from time to time, till it came to be called a Collegiate Church; together with a briefe description of most of the worthy Monu∣ments in that Church. 493 CHAP. XLXIX. Of the Government of the City of London: and first of the Ecclesiasticall Governours, the Bi∣shops of London, what time they sate in that See, with the places of their burialls. 527 CHAP. L. Of the Temporall Government of this City, with the Names and Armes of all the Lord Maiors, as also the Order and Armes of all the Companies in London. 535 Whereunto is added also: The Statutes of the Streets. 665 An Act for Reformation of divers abuses crept into the Wardmote Inquest. 669 CHAP. LI. An Apologie for the City of London. 631 CHAP. LII. Stephanides, or a description of London. 703 CHAP. LIII. A Relation of the two Lordships of Stepney and Hackney, together with their free Customes, Privileges, &c. 715 CHAP. LIV. The Charter of London: and an Ordinace for the Affiz and Weight of Bread. 739 CHAP. LV. The Popes Bull, and other Bishops their Let∣ters, concerning the Offerings (or Tithes) of the Parishes of London, to their Curates. 747 CHAP. LVI. The Patrons (anciently) of all the Benefices in the City of London. 751 The REMAINES, wherein is contained: CHAP. LVII. First, many memorable things which should have beene inserted in due place, had the Au∣thors friends supplied them in due time, as the College of Dulwich, &c. 757 CHAP. LVIII. Then, a Perambulation foure miles about Lon∣don, with the Monuments of all the Chur∣ches in that compasse, and observation of many other worthy matters. 783 CHAP. LIX. Besides, a Returne of London, with particular notes of the Reparations and Adornments of every Church therein. 819 CHAP. LX. And lastly, a Review of the sixteene Parishes without the Walls, and the nine out Pari∣shes. 872. 889
All the Churches in and about LONDON, foure miles compasse (Alphabeti∣cally digested) with reference to the severall places where their Situation, Monuments, Reparations, and other memorable things recorded thorowout this whole Booke. The 97. Churches within the Walls. Names. Fol. Albanes Woodstreet. 308. 819 Alhallowes Barking. 130. 820 Breadstreet. 391. 820 Great. 251. 821 Honilane. 282. 822 Lesse. 251. 822 Lumbardstreet. 219. 822 Stayning. 222. 822 The Wall. 183. 823 Alphage. 305. 823 Andrew Hubbard. 228. 824 Audrew Vndershaft. 151. 824 Andrew Wardrobe. 407. 825 Anne Aldersgate. 326. 825 Anne Black-Friers. 374. 826 Antholins. 265. 827 Austins. 351. 827 Bartholomew Exchange. 191. 827 Bennet Fink. 189. 828 Bennet Grasse-Church. 231. 773. 828 Bennet Pauls wharfe. 406. 829 Bennet Sherehog. 276. 829 Botolph Belinsgate. 225. 829 Christs Church. 341. 763. 830 Christophers. 192. 831 Clements East-cheape. 235. 832 Dionis Backe-Church. 218. 832 Dunstans East. 138. 832 Edmunds Lumbard street. 221. 833 Ethelborough. 178. 833 Faiths. 355. 833 Fosters. 338. 773. 836 Gabriel Fenchurch. 217. 836 George Botolphlane. 228. 836 Gregories by Pauls. 411. 836 Hellins. 178. 837 Iames Dukes place. 148. 837 Iames Garlikhithe. 262. 838 Iohu Baptist. 246. 838 Iohn Evangelist. 395. 838 Iohn Zacharie. 321. 838 Katherine Coleman. 158. 839 Katherine Creechurch. 149. 839 Lawrence Iewrie. 284. 840 Lawrence Pountney. 239. 843 Leonard Eastcheape. 231. 843 Leonard Fosterlane. 325. 844 Magnus. 230. 844 Margaret Lothbury. 292. 845 Margaret Moses. 395. 845 Margaret New fishstreet. 230. 845 Margaret Pattons. 137. 228. 846 Mary Abchurch. 235. 846 Mary Aldermanbury. 303. 847 Mary Aldermary. 266. 847 Mary le Bow. 268. 848 Mary Bothaw. 246. 849 Mary Colechurch. 275. 850 Mary Hill. 227. 850 Mary Mounthawe. 400. 850 Mary Summerset. 400. 850 Mary Staynings. 321. 851 Mary Wooll-church. 244. 851 Mary Woollnoth. 223. 852 Martins Ironmonger lane. 282. 852 Martins Ludgate. 372. 852 Martins Orgars. 28. 853 Martins Oteswich. 188. 853 Martins Vintry. 261. 853 Matthew Frydaystreet. 350. 854 Maudlins Milkestreet. 306. 854 Maudlins Oldfishstreet. 409. 855 Michael Bassingshall. 299. 855 Michael Cornehill. 212. 856 Michael Crookedlane. 236. 856 Michael Queenhithe. 400. 857 Michael Querne. 387. 857 Michael Royall. 256. 859 Michael Woodstreet. 311. 859 Mildred Breadstreet. 392. 859 Mildred Poultrey. 273. 861 Nicholas Acons. 223. 862 Nicholas Coleabby. 398. 863 Nicholas Olaves. 399. 863 Olaves Harestreet. 134. 863 Olaves Jewrie. 290. 863 Olaves Silverstreet. 324. 865 Pancras Soperlane. 277. 866 Peters Cheape. 337. 866 Peters Cornehill. 210. 867 Peters Pauls wharfe 400. 867 Peters Poore. 184. 868 Stevens Colemanstreet. 293. 869 Stevens Walbrooke. 244. 870 Swithins. 241. 870 Thomas Apostle. 258. 871 Trinity Church. 397. 872 The 16. Churches without the Walls, standing part within the Liberties, and part without. Andrew Holborne. 48. 763. 770. 872 Bartholomew great. 420. 873 Bartholomew lesse. 415. 874 Brides Church. 437. 762. 875 Bridewell Precinct. 312. 876 Botolph Aldersgate. 330. 772. 867 Botolph Algate. 118. 878 Botolph Bishopsgate. 169. 780. 879 Dunstans West. 431. 879 George Southwarke. 454. 793. 882. Giles Criplegate. 312. 762. 778. 883 Olaves Southwarke. 457. 884 Saviours Southwarke. 450. 884 Sepulchres. 423. 779. 885 Thomas Southwarke. 457. 887 Trinity Minories. 146. 888 The 9. out Churches in Middlesex and Surry. Clement Danes. 491. 889 Giles in the Fields. 488. 800. 894 Iames Clarkenwell. 484. 899 Katherine Tower. 117. 900 Leonard Shorditch. 471 Martins in the Fields, 493. 800. 901 Mary Whitechapell. 469. 903 Magdalens Bermondsey. 460. 905 Savoy Church. 490. 905 The 17. Churches foure miles compasse about London, and in the City of Westminster. Battersey. 795 Chelsey. 786 Detford. 805 Fulham. 783 Greenwich. 803 Hackney. 796 Islington. 798 Kenzington. 799 Lambeth. 790 Westmin. Marg. 499. 519. 773. 807 Peter. 500. 763. 774. 814. Putney. 784 Newington. 792 Roderith. 806 Stepney. 787 Stratford Bow and Bromley. 789 Wandsworth. 793
All the Companies in LONDON, Alphabetically ordered, together with their severall Halls, and Armes, with reference to the places where they are spoken of in this Worke. Their Halls. Armes. ARmorers. 293. 624 Apothecaries.  645 Bakers White. Browne. 138. 624 642 Barber-Surgeons. 339. 623 Black-Smithes. 409. 635 Bottle-makers, and Home-makers 638 Bowyers. 312. 634 Brewers. 311. 622 Bricklayers and Tylers. 144. 634 Butchers. 340. 627 Carpenters. 184. 628 Clerkes. 255. 644 Clothworkers. 137. 610 Cooks and Pastelars. 330. 633 Coopers. 299. 633 Cordwainers. 395. 628 Curriers. 311. 629 Cutlers. 258. 626 Diers. 249. 621 Drapers. 187. 601 Farriers. 640 Fishmongers. 231. 602 Fletchers. 156. 635 Founders. 293. 631 Fruterers. 256. 637 Girdlers. 297. 626 Glasiers. 261. 644 Goldsmiths. 323. 603 Grocers. 274. 600 Haberdashers. 312. 606 Imbroderers. 338. 632 Inne-holders. 249. 631 Ioyners. 249. 636 Ironmongers. 156. 608 Leathersellers. 179. 622 Lorimers. 641 Masons, or Marblers. 297. 630 Mercers. 281. 599 Merchantaylors. 188. 605 Painter-Stayners. 399. 629 Paviers. 641 Pewterers. 217. 623 Pinners, now Plaisterers. 310. 636 Plummers. 256. 630 Poulters. 632 Sadlers. 338. 627 Saltars. 392. 607 Scriveners. 638 Skinners. 248. 604 Stationers. 372. 639 Tallow-Chandlers. 248. 625 Turners. 643 Vintners. 255. 609 Vpholsters. 643 Watermen. 645 Waxe-Chandlers. 312. 625 Weavers. 297. 637 Woodmongers. 408. 642 Wooll-packers. 640 The Companies of the Merchants. Their Armes. ADventurers. 612 Adventurers new French Merchants. 618 East Indian. 617 Of Elbing. 614 French. 619 Turkish. 615 Russian. 613 Spanish. 616 Of the Staple. 611 Virginian. 620
A Catalogue of Authors, venerable for Antiquity, out of whom the Truth of those worthy and Ancient Matters contained in this Booke is excerpted: Ranged into an Alphabeticall order. ABbas Floriacensis Alfred of Bever∣ley. Antonius Florentinus. Arnold Rich. Asserius Menevensis. Baconthorpe Iohn. Baldock Ralph. Bale Iohn. Bannester Iohn. Beda. Benedict of Whirhall. Beware the Cat. Body William. Bradshaw Henry. Buchanan. Burchard. Caesars Commentaries. Camden Clarencieux. Capgrave Iohn. Caxtons Chronicle. Chancery Rolls. Chaucer. Chronica Chronicorum. Chronicle of Abingdon. Chronicle of S. Albans. Chronicle of Britaine. Chronicle of Dunstable. Chronicle of Scarborow. Clifford Thomas. Cooper Thomas. Dedicato Radulphus. Dector Dee. Dion Rom. Dunthorne William. Dyson Humphrey. Edmrus. Edmond de Hadenbam. Elderton William. Eversden Ioh. Fabians Chronicle. Fabians Manuscript. Fitz-Stephen. Flores Historiarum. Floriansis Wigorniensis Fox his Monuments. Froisard. Gaguin Rebert. Geffery of Monmouth. Gervase of Tilburie. Glastenbury Antiquities Giraldus Cambrensis. Gower Iohn. Grafton Richard. Guildas. Halls Chronicle. Hall Edward. Hardings Chronicle. Harrison William. Henry of Leicester. Henry of Marleborow. Higeden Ranulph. Historia Tripartita. Holinshed Raphael. Horne Andrew. Hoveden Roger. Huntingdon Henry. Ioceline of Furneis. Iohn de Bavow. Iohn of Beverley. Ingulphus. Iucliffe Roger. Knighton Henry. Lambert William. Lanquet Thomas. Leyland Iohn. Lhuyd Humphrey. Lib. Albo. Lib. S. Bartholomew. Lib. Bermondsey. Lib. Burton sup. Trent. Lib. Bury S. Edmonds. Lib. Chartsey. Lib. de Clarkenwell. Lib. Colchester. Lib. Constitutionum. Lib. Customes London. Lib. Dunmow. Lib. Dunthorne. Lib. Ely. Lib. Erswicke. Lib. Fleetwood. Lib. de S. Katharines. Lib. de Knighton Guild. Lib. S. Mariae Eborum. Lib. S. Mariae Overies. Lib. S. Martins. Lib. Osney. Lib. de Papie. Lib. Roffens. Lib. Tewkesbury. Lib. Trinitatis. Lib. Waverley. Lib. de Woodbridge, Lidgate Iohn. Lilie George. Lilie William. Livius. London Iohn. Lucan. Magna Charta. Malverne Iohn. Manuscripts. Manuscript French. Marianus Scotus. Mathew Paris. Mathew of Westminster. Melancthon. Merimouth Adam. More Thomas, Knight. Mountgomery Iohn. Nevil Alexander. Osbernus Dorobernensis. Otherborne Henry. Packenton William. Paradine William. Paston William. Patten William. Pattent de Iugham. Philip Comines. Politianus. Poly Chronicon. Polydore Virgil. Pomponius Mla. Price Iohn, Knight. Ptolomaeus. Ralph Cogshall. Records Canterbury. Records of Guildhall. Records Parliament. Records Patent. Records of Pontfract. Records in the Rolls. Records of the Tower. Records of the Vintry. Register of Brockesden. Rishanger William. Robert de Amesbury. Roger of Wendover. Rouse Iohn. Savage Dennis. Scoggan Henry. Simon of Durham. Smith Thomas, Knight. Socrates. Sorocold Thomas. Spelman Henry. Spot Thomas. Strabo. Sulcardus. Tacitus. Textor Iohn. Thorne William. Tuke Brian, Knight. Vita Erkenwaldi. Walsingham Thomas. Walter of Coventry. Whethamsted. William of Huntingdon. William of Malmesbury. Witchendus. Wolfe Reginald. To these might be added many more, who cover rather the benefit and furtherance of so necessa∣ry a Worke, than vain-glory and reputation amongst men.
THE SURVEY OF LONDON: Containing the Originall, Antiquity, Increase, Mo∣derne Estate, and Description of that Citie. AS the Romane Writers, to glorify the Ci∣tie of Rome, drew the Ori∣ginall thereof from gods & demygods, by the Trojan pro∣genie: so Geoffrey of Monmouth, the Welsh Historian, deduceth the founda∣tion of this famous Citie of London, for the greater glorie thereof, and emulati∣on of Rome, from the very same Origi∣nall. For he reporteth, that Brute line∣ally descended from the demy-god Ae∣neas, the sonne of Venus, daughter of Iu∣piter, about the yeere of the world 2855. and 1108. before the nativity of Christ, builded this Citie neere unto the River now called Thames,Trinobantū hath the written copie. Livi. and named it Troy∣novant, or Trenovant. But herein, as Li∣vie (the most famous Historiographer of the Romanes) writeth, Antiquity is pardonable, and hath an especiall priviledge, by interlacing divine matters with humane, to make the first foundation of Cities more honourable, more sacred, and as it were, of greater Majestie. King Lud (as the aforesaid Geoffrey of Monmouth noteth) afterward, not on∣ly repaired this Citie; but also increa∣sed the same with faire Buildings, Tow∣ers and Walls, and after his owne name, called it Caire-Lud,Caire Lud, the Citie of Lud, but Luds-towne is a Saxon word. as Luds Towne, and the strong Gate which he builded in the West part of the Citie, he likewise (for his owne honour) named Ludgate. This Lud had issue two sonnes, An∣drogeus, and Theomantius, or Tenanticus, who beeing not of age to governe at the death of their Father; their Vncle Cassibelan tooke upon him the Crowne; about the eighth yeere of whose reigne, Iulius Caesar arrived in this Land, with a great power of Romanes to conquer it. The manner of which Conquest, I will summarily set downe out of his owne Commentaries, which are of farre bet∣ter credit, than the relations of Geoffrey Monmouth. The chiefe government of the Britains,Caesars cō∣mentaries, lib. 5. and ordering of the Warres, was then (by common advice) committed to Cassibelan, whose Signiorie was separated from the Ci∣ties towards the Sea-coast, by the River cal∣led Thames, about 80. miles off from the Sea. This Cassibelan in times past, had made continuall warre upon the Cities ad∣joyning; but the Britains being moved with the Romanes invasiton, had resolved in that necessity to make him their Soveraigne and Generall of the Warres. Caesar having know∣ledge of their intent, marched with his Army to the Thames,The River of Thames to be pas∣sed afoot in Caesars time. into the Signory of Cassibe∣lan. This River can be passed but onely in one place on foot, and that very hardly. When he came thither, he saw a great power
of his enemies in battaile array, on the other side of the River. Now was the Banke stick∣ed full of stakes, sharpned at the end; and likewise other stakes (of the same making) were driven into the Channell, and hidden with the water. Caesar having understan∣ding thereof, by his Prisoners and Runne∣awaies, sent his Horsemen before, and com∣manded his Footmen to follow immediately after them. But the Romane Souldiers went with such speed and force, having no more than their heads onely above the water: that the enemy being not able to withstand the violence of the Footmen, and the men of Armes, forsooke the banke, and tooke them to flight. Cassibelan despairing of his good successe, by fighting in plaine battaile, sent away all his greater powers,The poli∣cie of Cas∣sibelan up∣on his ill successe. and keeping still about foure thousand Waggoners, watched which way the Romanes went, and drew somewhat aside out of the way, hiding him∣selfe in cumbersome and woody places. And wheresoever hee knew the Romanes should march, hee drave both Cattell and people thence into the Woods. When the Romanes Horsemen ranged any thing freely abroad into the fields for forrage, or to harry the Countrey: he sent his Waggoners by allwaies and paths out of the woods, upon their men of Armes,His advā∣tage a∣gainst the Romane horsemen. and encountred with them to their great prejudice, through the feare whereof, he kept them short from ranging at their pleasure. So the matter was brought to this passe, that Caesar would not suffer his Horsemen to stray any farnesse from his maine Battaile of Footmen, and adventured no further to annoy his enemies, in wasting their fields, and burning their houses, than he could com∣passe by the travaile of his Footmen, as they were able to journey. In the meane while,Trinobants Citizens of London. the Trinobants, which was the strongest Citie, wel-neere, of all those Countries, and out of which Citie, a yong Gentleman called Mandubrace, upon confidence of Caesars helpe, comming unto him into the maine Land of Gallia, now called France, had thereby escaped death, which he should have suffered at Cassibe∣lans hand, (as his Father Imanuence had done, who had reigned in that Citie:) sent Ambassadours to Caesar,Mandu∣brace and the Trino∣bants yeeld to Caesar, and he de∣fended them. promising to yeeld unto him, and to doe what hee should com∣mand them. Instantly desiring him, to pro∣tect Mandubrace from the furious Tyranny of Cassibelan, and to send him into the City, with authority to take the government there∣of upon him. Caesar accepted the offer, and appointed them to give unto him 40. Hosta∣ges, and withall to finde him graine for his Armie, and so sent hee Mandubrace unto them. When others saw that Caesar had not only defended the Trinobants against Cassibe∣lan, but had also saved them harmlesse from the pillage of his owne Souldiers: then also did the Cenimagues, Segontians, Aucalits, Bibrokes, and Cassians like∣wise submit themselves unto him,Cassibelans Towne west from London, for Caesar saith, 80. miles from the Sea. and by them he learned, that not farre from thence was Cassibelans Towne, (fortified with woods and marish grounds) into the which he had gathered a great number both of men and cattell. For the Brittans call that a Towne,Cities of the Britains were cum∣bersome woods for∣tified. when they have fortified a cumbersome wood with a ditch and Rampire, and thither they resort to eschew the invasions of their enemies. To this place therefore marched Caesar with his Legions; hee found it excellently fortified, both of nature, and by mans advice: never∣thelesse, he resolved to assault it in two seve∣rall places at once; whereupon the Britaines being not able to endure the force of the Ro∣manes, fled out at another part, and left the Towne unto him: a great number of cat∣tell he found there, and many of the Bri∣taines he slew, and others hee tooke in the chase. Whilest these things were a doing in these quarters, Cassibelan sent messengers into Kent, which lyeth upon the Sea, and in which there reigned then foure particular Kings, named, Cingetorix, Carvil, Taximagul, and Segonax, whom he commanded to raise all their forces, and suddenly to set upon, and assault the Romanes in their Trenches by the Sea side: the which when the Ro∣mans perceived, they sallied out upon them, slew a great sort of them, and taking Cin∣getorix their noble Captaine prisoner, reti∣red themselves to their Campe in good safe∣tie. When Cassibelan heard of this, and had formerly taken many other losses, and found his Countrey sore wasted, and himselfe left almost alone, by the defection of the other Ci∣ties, he sent Ambassadours by Comius of Arras to Caesar, to intreat him concerning his owne submission: the which Caesar did accept; and taking Hostages, assessed the Realme of Britaine to a yeerely Tribute,
to be paid to the people of Rome,Britaine ses∣ed to pay a yeerely tribute to Rome. giving straight charge to Cassibelan, that he should not seeke any revenge upon Mandubrace, or the Trinobants, and so withdrew his Ar∣mie to the Sea againe. Thus farre out of Caesars Commenta∣ries, concerning this History, which hapned in the yeere before Christs nati∣vity, 54. In all which processe, there is for this purpose to be noted, that Caesar nameth the Citie of Trinobantes, which hath a resemblance with Troy nova, or Trinobantum,Trinobant, new Londō. having no greater diffe∣rence in the Orthography, than changing (b) into (v), and yet maketh an errour, whereof I will not argue. Onely this I will note, that divers learned men doe not thinke Civitas Trinobantum, to bee well and truely translated, the Citie of the Trinobantes: but it should rather bee the state, communalty, or Signiorie of the Trinobantes, for that Caesar in his Commentaries useth the word Civitas, onely for a people living under the selfe∣same Prince and Law. But certaine it is,Cities of the Britains not artifi∣cially buil∣ded with houses, nor walled with stone that the Cities of the Brittaines were (in those daies) neither artificially buil∣ded with houses, nor strongly walled with stone, but were onely thicke and cumbersome Woods, plashed within, and trenched about: and the like (in ef∣fect) doe other the Romane and Greeke Authors affirme,Strabo. as Strabo, Pomponius Mela,Pomponius Mela. and Dion, a Senator of Rome, which flourished in the severall reignes of the Romane Emperours,Tacitus. Tiberius,Dion. Claudius, Domitian, and Severus: to wit, that be∣fore the arrivall of the Romanes, the Brit∣taines had no Townes, but called that a Towne, which had a thicke intangled Wood, defended (as I said) with a ditch and banke, the like whereof the Irishmen, our next neighbours, doe at this day call Fastnes. But after that these hither parts of Britains were reduced into the forme of a Province, by the Romans, who sowed the seeds of civility over all Europe; this Citie, whatsoever it was before, began to be renowned and of fame.London most fa∣mous for merchants and enter∣course. For Taci∣tus, who first of all Authors nameth it Londinium, saith, that in the 26. yeere after Christ, it was, albeit no Colonie of the Romanes, yet most famous for the great multitude of Merchants, provisi∣on, and entercourse. At which time, in that notable revolt of the Britaines from Nero, in which threescore and ten thou∣sand Romanes and their confederates were slaine; this Citie, with Verulami∣um, neere Saint Albans, and Maldon in Essex, then all famous, were ransacked and spoiled. For Suetonius Paulinus, then Lieutenant for the Romanes in this Ile, abandoned it, as not then fortified, and left it to the spoile. Shortly after,The Bri∣taines had no houses, but cotta∣ges. Iulius Agricola, the Ro∣mane Lieutenant, in the time of Domiti∣an, was the first that (by adhorting the Britaines publikely, and helping them privately) wonne them to build houses, for themselves, Temples for the gods, and Courts for Justice, to bring up the Noble mens children in good Letters, and humanity, and to apparell them∣selves Romane like.The Bri∣taines wen naked, their bo∣dies pain∣ted. Whereas before (for the most part) they went naked, pain∣ting their bodies, &c. as all the Romane Writers have observed. True it is, I confesse, that afterward many Cities and Townes in Britaine, under the Government of the Romanes, were walled with Stone, and baked Brickes,Richborrow in Kent. or Tyles; as Richborrow, Rypta∣chester, Verulamiū. in the Ile of Thanet, till the chan∣nell altered his course;Cilcester. besides Sand∣wich in Kent,Wroxcester. Verulamium, besides Saint Albanes in Hartfordshire,Kencester. Cilcester in Hampshire,Leyland. Wroxcester in Shropshire, Kencester in Herefordshire, there miles from Hereford Towne; Ribcester, seven miles above Preston, on the water of Rible; Aldeburge, a mile from Borrow∣bridge, or Wathelingstreet, on Vre River, and others. And no doubt but this Citie of Lon∣don was also walled with Stone,Of the wal about Lon∣don. in the time of the Romane Government here, but yet very lately. For, it seemeth not to have beene walled in the yeere of our Lord 296. because in that yeere, when Alectus the Tyrant was slaine in the Field, the Franks or Franconians ea∣sily entred London, and had sacked the same, had not GOD (of his great favour) at the very instant, brought along the River of Thames, certaine Bands of Romane Souldiers, who slew those Franks in every street of the Citie.
Wall about the Citie of LONDON. IN few yeeres after, as Si∣meon of Durham,Simeon of Durham. an anci∣ent Writer, reporteth, Helen, the Mother of Constatine the great, was the first that in∣walled this Citie, about the yeere of Christ, 306. But howsoever those wals of stone might be builded by Helen, yet the Britaines (I know) had no skill of building with stone, as it may appeare by that which followeth, about the yeere of Christ, 399. when Arcadius and Honorius, the sonnes of Theodosius Magnus, governed the Empire, the one in the East, the other in the West. For Honorius having received Britaine, the Citie of Rome was invaded and de∣stroyed by the Gothes;The Ro∣manes left to govern in Britaine. after which time the Romanes left to rule in Britaine, as be∣ing imployed in defence of their Ter∣ritories neerer home. Whereupon the Britaines, not able to defend themselves against the invasions of their enemies, were many yeeres together under the oppression of two cruell Nations, the Scots and Picts,The Scots and Picts invade this Land. and at length were for∣ced to send their Ambassadours, with Letters and lamentable supplications to Rome, requiring aide and succour from thence, upon promise of their continuall fealtie, so that the Romanes would rescue them out of the hands of their enemies. Hereupon, the Romanes sent unto them a Legion of armed Souldiers, which comming into this Iland, and encoun∣tring with the enemies, overthrew a great number of them, and drave the rest out of the frontiers of the Country. And so setting the Britaines at liberty, counselled them to make a Wall, ex∣tending all along between the two seas, which might be of force to keepe out their evill neighbours, and then retur∣ned home with great triumph. The Britaines wanting Masons, builded that wall,Britaines unskilfull of buil∣ding with stone. not of stone (as they were advised) but made it of turfe, and that so slender, that it served little or nothing at all for their defence. And the enemy percei∣ving that the Romane Legion was retur∣ned home, forthwith arrived out of their Boats, invaded their borders, over∣came the Countrey, and (as it were) bare downe all that was before them. Whereupon, Ambassadours were eftsoones dispatched to Rome, lamenta∣bly beseeching, that they would not suf∣fer their miserable Countrey to bee ut∣terly destroyed. Then againe, another Legion was sent, which comming on a sudden, made a great slaughter of the enemy, and chased him home, even to his owne Countrey. These Romanes at their departure told the Britaines plain∣ly, that it was not for their ease or lea∣sure, to take upon them (any more) such long and laborious journies for their de∣fence, and therefore bade them practise the use of Armour and Weapons, and learn to withstand their enemies, whom nothing else did make so strong, as their faint heart and cowardise. And for so much as they thought, that it would be no small helpe and encouragement unto their tributarie friends, whom they were now forced to forsake: they buil∣ded for them a wall of hard stone,Witchendus. from the West Sea to the East Sea,Wall of stone buil∣ded by the Romanes, betwixt the Britains and Scots. right be∣tweene those two Cities, which were there made to keepe out the enemies, in the selfe-same place where Severus be∣fore had cast his Trench: the Britaines also putting to their helping hands as labourers. This Wall they builded eight foot thicke in bredth, and twelve foot in height, right as it were by a line from East to West; as the ruines thereof, (remaining in many places till this day) doe make to appeare. Which worke thus perfected, they gave the people straight charge to looke well to them∣selves, they teach them to handle their weapons, and instruct them in warlike feats. And lest by the Sea side South∣wards, where their Ships lay at harbor, the enemie should come on Land; they made up sundry bulwarkes, each some∣what distant from other, & so bid them farewell, as minding no more to return. This hapned in the dayes of Theodosius the yonger, almost 500. yeeres after the first arrivall of the Romanes here, about the yeere after Christs Incarnation, 434.
The Britaines after this continuing a lingring and doubtfull warre with the Scots and Picts; made choice of Vortiger to be their King and Leader: which man (as saith Malmesbury) was neither valo∣rous of courage,Malmesb. nor wise of counsell,Bede. but wholly given over to the unlawfull lusts of his flesh.The Bri∣tains given to glutto∣ny, drun∣kennesse, pride, and contenti∣on. The people likewise (in short time) being growne to some quietnesse, gave themselves to gluttony and drun∣kennesse, pride, contention, envie, and such other vices, casting from them the yoke of Christ. In the meane season, a bitter Plague fell among them,The Brī∣taines Pla∣gued for their sinful life. consu∣ming in short time such a multitude, that the quicke were not sufficient to bu∣rie the dead: and yet the remnant re∣mained so hardned in sinne, that neither death of their friends, nor feare of their owne danger, could cure the mortality of their soules; wherupon a great stroke of vengeance ensued upon the whole sinfull Nation. For, being now againe infested with their old neighbours, the Scots and Picts, they consult with their King Vortiger,Witchendus. and send for the Saxons, who shortly after arrived here in Bri∣taine; Bede. where,The Saxons Sent for to defend the Britaines, but they drave thē into the Moun∣taines. saith Bede, they were re∣ceived as friends: but as it proved, they minded to destroy the Countrey as ene∣mies. For after they had driven out the Scots and Picts, they also drave the Bri∣taines, some over the Seas, some into the waste mountaines of Wales and Cornwall, and divided the Countrey into divers Kingdomes amongst themselves. These Saxons were likewise ignorant of building with stone,Saxons un∣skilfull of building with stone. untill the yeere 680. for then it is affirmed, that Bennet, Abbot of Wirrall, Master to the reve∣rend Bede,Bennet, a Monke, brought in Masons. first brought Artificers of stone houses, and glasse windowes into this Iland, amongst the Saxons: Arts, before that time, unto them unknowne, and therefore used they but woodden buildings. And to this accordeth Poly∣chronicon, Woodden churches, and goldē priests. who saith, that then had yee woodden Churches; nay woodden Cha∣lices, and golden Priests; but since, gol∣den Chalices, and woodden Priests. And, to knit up this Argument, King Edgar, in his Charter to the Abbey of Malmesbury, dated the yeere of Christ 974. hath words to this effect: All the Monasteries in my Realme,Monaste∣ries of rot∣ten timber to the outward sight, are nothing but worm-eaten and rotten Timber, and boords; and that worse is, within they are almost empty and void of di∣vine Service. Thus much be said for walling, not onely in respect of this Citie, but gene∣rally also of the first within the Realme. Now to returne to our Trinobant, (as Caesar cals it;) the same is (since) by Tacitus, Ptolomaeus, and Antonius, called Londinium, Longidinium; of Ammianus, Lundinum, and Augusta, who calleth it also an ancient Citie. Of our Britaines, Lundaine; of the old Saxons, Lunden∣ceaster, Lundenbirig, Londennir. Of stran∣gers, Londra and Londres; of the inha∣bitants, London: whereof you may read a more large and learned Discourse, and how it tooke the name, in that Worke of my loving friend, Master Camden, now Clarenceaulx, which is called Bri∣tania. Concerning Mr. Camden, in his more absolute relation of London, the Argu∣ment we have now in hand; I will be so bold as to borrow his owne words, as he hath set them downe in his Britania. Summing over the severall names then given and attributed thereto, as former∣ly hath beene declared: hee comes to his owne iudgement: For mine owne part,Camden in his Britan∣nia concer∣ning the name of London. (saith hee) seeing that Caesar and Strabo doe write, that the ancient Britaines called those Woods and Groves, by the name of Cities and Townes, which they had fenced with Trees, cast down and plashed, to stop up all passage: Seeing also I have understood, that such Woods or Groves are in the British Tongue named Llhwn:Of British Townes and Cities I incline a little to the opinion, that London thence tooke name, as one would say, by way of excellencie; The Citie, or A Citie thicke of Trees. But if herein I faile of the truth; let me (with good leave) give my conjecture. And here would I have no man to charge me with inconstancie, while I disport in conjecture; that whence it had the fame,London re∣ceived nama frō Ships and shipping. thence also it took name, even from Ships, which the Britaines in their language call Lhong: so that Londinum may seeme to sound as much as a Ship-Road, or Citie of Ships. For the Britaines terme a Citie Dinas,Dinas Brit. whence the Latines have fetched their Dinum.Dinum Lat. And hence it is, that else∣where it is called Longidinium; and in the Funerall Song or Dumpe of a most anci∣ent BritishPo. Bard, Lhong-porth, that is,
An Harbour or Haven of Ships. And by this very terme Bononia, or Bolen in France, which Ptolomee calleth Gessori∣acum Navale, in the British Glossarie is named Bolunglhong:How ma∣ny cities have deri∣ved their names frō Ships. as Naupactus, Naustathmos, Nauplia, Navalia Au∣gusti, &c. But of these, none hath better right to as∣sume unto it the name of a Ship-Roade, or Haven, than our London. For in regard of both Elements, most happy and blessed it is;The situ∣ation of London. as being situated in a rich and fertile soile, abounding with plentifull store of all things, and on the gentle ascent and rising of an Hill, hard by the Thames side, the most milde Merchant (as one would say) of all things that the world doth yeeld: which swelling at certaine houres with the Ocean Tides, by his safe and deepe Channell (able to entertaine the greatest Ships that be) dai∣ly bringeth in so great riches from all parts,The bene∣fit of the Thames eb¦bing and flowing, & also of the shipping. that it striveth at this day with the Mart-Townes of Christendome for the second Prize, and affordeth a most sure and beau∣tifull Road for Shipping. A man would say that seeth the Shipping there, that it is (as it were) a very Wood of Trees, disbranched to make glades and let in light: So shaded it is with Masts and Sayles. Who was the first Founder,Concer∣ning the first foun∣der of London. is by length of time growne out of knowledge: and in∣truth, very few Cities there are, that know theier owne first Founders, considering they grew up to their greatnesse by little and lit∣tle. But as other Cities, so this of ours, fa∣thereth her originall upon the Trojans, as verily beleeving that Brute (the Nephew in the third descent of great Aeneas) was the builder thereof.Brute sup∣posed to bee the builder. But whosoever founded it; the happy and fortunate estate thereof hath given good proofe, that built it was in a good houre, and marked for life and long conti∣nuance. Antiquity of London. And that it is for Antiquity Ho∣nourable, Ammianus Marcellinus giveth us to understand; who called it in his time, (and that was 1200. yeeres agoe) An old Towne. And Cornelius Tacitus in like manner, who in Nero's dayes, 1540. yeeres since, reported it to have bin a place Very fa∣mous for fresh trade, concourse of Mer∣chants, & great store of victuals, and all things necessary. This onely at that time was wanting to the glory thereof,London no free Citie, nor Colonie in the Romanes time. that it had the name neither of a free City, nor of a Co∣lony. Neither verily could it have stood with the Romanes profit, if a Citie flourishing with Merchandize, should haue enjoyed the right of a Colonie or Free Citie. And there∣fore it was (as I suppose) that they ordained it to be a Praefectura:London a Praefectura, governed by Officers yeerely sent to it from Rome. for so they termed all Townes where Marts were kept, and Iu∣stice ministred: Yet so, as that they had no Magistrates of their owne: but Rulers were sent every yeere to governe in them, and for to minister Law, which in publike matters, namely of Taxe, Tributes, Tolles, Customes, Warfare, &c. they should have from the Se∣nate of Rome. Hence it commeth that Ta∣citus, the Panegyrist, and Marcellinus call it onely a Towne. And although it was not in name loftier;London flourished equall with any other place. yet in wealth, riches and prosperity, it flou∣rished as much as any other: yea and conti∣nued in manner alwaies the same, under the dominion of Romanes, English-Saxons, and Normans, seldome or never afflicted with any great calamities. In the reigne of Nero, when the Britaines had conspired to recover and resume their liberty under the leading of Boadicia;Suetonius Paulinus, Lieute∣nant for Rome. the Londoners could not with all their weeping teares, hold Sue∣tonius Paulinus, but that after he had le∣vied a power of the Citizens to aide him, he would needes dislodge and remove from thence, leaving the Citie naked to the enemy; who forthwith surprized and slew some few, whom either weaknesse of sexe, feeblenesse of age, or sweetnesse of the place had detained there. This City of Londō having bin destroy∣ed & burnt by the Danes & other Pagan enemies,The Citie of London destroyed by the Danes and againe re∣paired. about the yeere of Christ 839; was, by Alfred, King of the West-Saxons, in the yeere 886. repaired, honourabley restored,The Citie of London lay waste, & not in∣habited for the space of almost 50 yeeres. and made againe habitable: Who also committed the custody there∣of unto his sonne in law, Ethelred, Earle of Mercia, unto whom before he had gi∣ven his daughter Ethelfled. And that this Citie was then strong∣ly walled, may appeare by divers acci∣dents; W. Malmes∣bury. whereof William of Malmesbury hath,Assur. that about the yeere of Christ, 994 the Londoners did shut up their gates,Marianu. and defended their King,Florentius. Ethelred, within their Wals against the Danes. In the yeere 1016. Edmund Ironside, reigning over the West-Saxons, Canutus the Dane, bringing his Navy unto the west part of the Bridge, did cast a trench about the Citie of London, and then at∣tempted to have won it by assault: but
the Citizens repulsed him, and drave them from their Wals. Also in the yeere 1052. Earle Godwin, with his Navie sayled up by the South end of the Bridge, and so assailed the Walles of this Citie. William Fitzstephen,W. Fitzste∣phen. in the reigne of Henry the second, writing of the Wals of this Citie,The Citie of London walled round a∣bout by the River of Thames. hath these words: the wall is high and great, well towred on the North side, with due distance betweene the Towres. On the South side also, the Citie was walled and towred: but the fishfull River of Thames, by his ebbing and flowing, hath long since subverted them. By the North side, he meaneth from the River of Thames in the East, to the River of Thames in the West: for so stretched the Wall in his time, and the Citie being farre more in length from East to West, than in breadth from South to North; and also narrower at both ends, than in the middest, is there∣fore compassed with the Wall on the Land side, in forme of a bow, except denting in betwixt Cripplegate and Al∣dersgate. But the Wall on the South side, along by the River of Thames, was straight, as the string of a bow, and all furnished with Towres or Bulwarkes, (as we now terme them) in due distance every one from other, as witnesseth our Author, and our selves may behold for the Land side. This may suffice for proofe of a Wall, and forme thereof a∣bout this Citie, and the same to have beene of great Antiquity, as any other within this Realme. And now touching the maintenance and repairing the said Wall,Wals of London re∣paired. I read, that in the yeere 1215. the 6. of King Iohn, the Barons entring the City by Ealdgate,Roger of Randover. first took assurance of the Citizens,Mat. Paris. then brake into the Iews houses,Ranul. searched their coffers,Coshal. to fill their owne purses: and af∣ter, Mat. Paris. with great diligence repaired the wals and gates of the Citie, with stones taken from the Iewes broken houses. In the yeere 1257. Henry the third caused the wals of this Citie, which were sore decayed, and destitute of Towres and Towrets, to be repaired in more seeme∣ly wise than before, at the common char∣ges of the Citie. Also, in the yeere 1282 King Edward the first, having granted to Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Can∣terbury, licence for the enlarging of the Blacke Friers Church, to breake and take downe a part of the Wall of the Citie, from Ludgate to the River of Thames: He also granted to Henry Waleis, Maior, and the Citizens of London, the favour to take toward the making of the wall, and inclosure of the Citie, certaine customs, or toll, as appeareth by his Grant. This wall was then to be made from Ludgate west to Fleetbridge, along behinde the houses, and along by the water of the Fleet unto the River of Thames. More∣over, in the yeere 1310. Edward the se∣cond commanded the Citizens to make up the Wall already begunne, and the Tower at the end of the same Wall, within the water of Thames, neere unto the Blacke Friers, &c. 1322. the second of Edward the third, the Wals of this Citie were repaired.Patent. It was also granted by King Richard the second, in the tenth yeere of his reigne, that a toll should be taken of the wares, sold by Land or by Water, (for tenne yeeres) towards the repairing of the Wals, and cleansing of the Ditch about London. In the 17. of Edward the fourth, Ralph Ioseline Maior, caused part of the Wall about the Citie of London to be repaired; to wit, betwixt Ealdgate and Aldersgate. He also caused the Moore-field to be searched for clay, and bricke thereof to be made and burnt: he likewise caused chalke to be brought out of Kent, and to be burnt into lime in the same Moore-field, for more furthe∣rance of the worke. Then the Skinners, to beginne in the East, made that part of the Wall, betwixt Ealdgate and Buries markes, towards Bishopsgate; as may ap∣peare by their Armes in three places fixed there. The Maior, with his Com∣panie of Drapers, made all that part be∣twixt Bishopsgate and Alhallowes Church in the same Wall, and from Alhallowes towards the Posterne called Mooregate. A great part of the same Wall was re∣paired by the Executors of Sir Iohn Cros∣by, late Alderman, as may appeare by his Armes in two places there fixed: And other Companies repaired the rest of the VVall to the Posterne of Crip∣plegate. In a Record which I have seene, and affirmed also by Iohn Rouse, and (after him) by Raphael Holinshed, I finde thus
written: In Anno 1477. by the diligence of Ralph Ioseline, Maior of London, the Wall about London was new made, be∣twixt Aldgate and Creplegate. He caused the Moore-fields to be searched for clay, and bricke to be made and burnt there. He caused chalke also to be brought out of Kent, and in the same Moore-fields to be burnt into lime, onely for the furthe∣rance of that worke. The Maior, with his company of Drapers, made all that part betwixt Bishopsgate and Alhallowes Church in the same wall.Bishopsgate new buil∣ded. Bishopsgate it selfe was new built by the Merchants Almanes of the Stillyard. And from Al∣hallowes Church in the wall, towards Mooregate, a great part of the same was builded, of the goods, and by the Exe∣cutours of Sir Iohn Crosby, sometimes an Alderman, and Maior of London, as may appeare by his Armes thereon fi∣xed in two places. The Company of Skinners made that part of the wall be∣tweene Ealdgate and Buries markes, to∣wards Bishopsgate; as may appeare by their Armes in three places fixed. The other Companies of the Citie, made the other deale of the wall: which was a great worke to be done in one yeere. The Goldsmiths repaired from Cre∣plegate towards Aldersgate, and there the worke ceased. The circuit of the wall of London on the lands side, to wit, from the Tower of London in the East, unto Ealdgate,Circuit of the Wall from the East to the West, and according∣ly to eve∣ry gate. is 82. Perches: from Ealdgate to Bishopsgate, 86. Perches: from Bi∣shopsgate in the North, to the Posterne of Creplegate, 162. Perches: from Creple∣gate to Aldersgate, 75. Perches: from Al∣dersgate to Newgate, 66. Perches: from Newgate in the West, to Ludgate, 42. Perches: in all, 513. Perches of assise. From Ludgate to the Fleet-Dike West about 60. Perches: from Fleet-bridge South to the River Thames, about 70. Perches: and so the Totall of these Per∣ches amounteth to 643. every Perch consisting of 5. yardes and an halfe; which doe yeeld 3536. yards and an halfe, containing 10608. foot, which make vp two English miles, and more by 608. foot. Of Ancient and present Rivers, Brooks, Boorns, Pooles, Wels, and Conduits of fresh Water, serving the Citie, as also of the Ditch compassing the Wall of the same, for Defence thereof. ANciently, untill the Conquerours time, and two hundred yeeres after, the Ci∣tie of London was watred (besides the famous River of Thames on the south part) with the River of Wels, as it was then called: on the west, with water called Walbrooke, running thorow the midst of the Citie into the River of Thames, serving the heart thereof: and with a fourth water or Boorne, which ranne within the Citie, through Lang∣boorne Ward, watring that part in the East. In the West Suburbs was also another great water, called Oldborne, which had his fall into the River of the Wels. Then were there three principall fountains or wels in the other Suburbs; to wit, Holy-Well, Clements Well, and Clarkes Well. Neere unto this last na∣med Fountaine, were divers other wels; to wit, Skinners Well, Fags Well, Tode Well, Loders Well, and Radwell. All which said Wels having the fall of their over∣flowing into the foresaid River, much increased the streame, and in that place, gave it the name of Well. In west Smith∣field there was a Poole, in Records cal∣led Horsepoole, and another neere unto the parish Church of S. Giles without Creplegate. Besides all which, they had in every street and lane of the Citie, di∣vers faire Wels, and fresh Springs: and after this manner was this Citie then served with sweet and fresh waters, which being since decayed, other means have beene sought to supply the want; as shall be shewed: but first of the a∣fore-named Rivers and other waters, is to be said as followeth:
Thames,River of Thames. the most famous River of this Iland, beginneth a little above a Village called Winchcomb in Oxfordshire, and still increasing, passeth first by the Vniversity of Oxford, and so (with a mar∣vellous quiet course) to London, and thence breaketh into the French Ocean by maine tides, which twise in twenty foure houres doth ebbe and flow, more than threescore miles in lenght, to the great commodity of Travailours, by which all kinde of Merchandises are ea∣sily conveyed to London, the principall Storchouse, and Staple of all commodi∣ties within this Realme. So that, omit∣ting to speake of great ships, and other vessels of burthen, there appertaineth to the Citie of London, Westminster, and the Burrough of Southwarke, above the number (as is supposed) of two thousand Wherries,Wherries on the Thames. and other small Boats, wher∣by three thousand poore men (at least) be set on worke, and maintained. That the River of Wels in the West part of the Citie,River of Wels. was of old so called of the VVels, it may bee proved thus: William the Conquerour, in his Char∣ter to the Colledge of Saint Martin le grand in London, hath these words: I doe give and grant to the same Church, all the land and the Moore without the Po∣sterne which is called Creplegate, on ey∣ther part of the Posterne: that is to say, from the North corner of the Wall (as the River of the Wels, there neere running, departeth the same Moore from the Wall) unto the running water which entreth the Citie. This water hath beene long since called, the River of the Wels; which name of River continued, and it was so called in the Reigne of Edward the first: as shall be shewed, with the decay also of the said River. In a faire book of Parliament records,Dcay of the Ri∣ver of the Wels. now lately restored to the Tower, it appeareth,Parliament Record. that a Parliament being holden at Carlile, in the yeere 1307. the 35. of Edw. the first, Henry Lacy, Earle of Lincolne, complained, that whereas (in times past) the course of water, running at London under Oldborne-bridge, and Fleet-bridge into the Thames, had beene of such bredth and depth, that ten or twelve Ships,River of Wels bare Ships. Navies at once with Merchandises, were wont to come to the foresaid Bridge of Fleet, and some of them unto Oldborne-bridge: Now the same course (by filth of the Tanners, and such others) was sore decayed; also by raising of Wharfes, but e∣specially, by a diversion of the water, made by theni of the New Temple, for their Milles standing without Baynards Ca∣stle, Patent Record. in the first yeere of King Iohn,Milles by Baynards Castle, made in the first of K. Iohn. and by divers others impediments, so as the said Ships could not enter as they were wont, and as they ought. Wherefore hee desired, that the Maior of London, with the Shi∣riffes, and other discreet Aldermen, might be appointed to view the said course of the said water, and that by the oathes of good men, all the foresaid hindrances might bee removed, and it to be made as it was wont of old. Whereupon Roger le Barbason, the Constable of the Tower, with the Maior and Shiriffes, were assigned to take with them honest and discreet men, and to make diligent search and enquirie, how the said River was in former time, and that they leave nothing that may hurt or stoppe it,River so called in the yeere 1307. but keepe it in the same estate that it was wont to be. So farre the Record. Whereupon it followed, that the said River was at that time cleansed, these Milles removed, and other things done for the preservation of the course therof: notwithstanding never brought to the old depth and bredth: wherupon the name of River ceased, and it was since called a Brooke; namely, Turne∣mill or Tremill Brooke,Turnemill Brooke. for that divers Milles were erected upon it, as appea∣reth by a faire Register Booke, contai∣ning the foundation of the Priorie at Clarken-well, and donation of the lands thereunto belonging, as also by divers other Records. This Brooke hath beene divers times since cleansed, namely, and last of all to any effect, in the yeere one thou∣sand five hundred and two, the seven∣teenth of Henry the Seventh, the whole course of Fleet-Dike, then so called, was scowred (I say) downe unto the Thames, so that Boats with Fish and Fewell were rowed to Fleet-bridge and Oldborne-bridge, as they of old time had beene accustomed, which was a great commodity to all the inhabitants in that part of the Citie. In the yeere 1589. was granted a fif∣teen by a common Councel of the City,
for the clensing of this Brooke or Dike: Fleet-Dike promised to be clen∣sed, the mony col∣lected, and the Citi∣zens de∣ceived. the money amounting to a thousand marks, was collected, and it was under∣taken, that by drawing divers Springs about Hampsted Heath into one head and course, both the Citie should bee served of fresh water in all places of want, and also, that by such a follower, (as men call it) the channell of this Brooke should be scowred into the Ri∣ver of Thames. But much money being therein spent, the effect failed; so that the Brooke, by meanes of continuall in∣crochments upon the banks, getting o∣ver the water, and casting of soylage in∣to the streame, is now become worse cloyed than ever it was before. The running water, so called by Willi∣am Conqueror in his said Charter, which entreth the Citie, &c. (before there was any ditch) betweene Bishopsgate and the late-made Posterne called Mooregate, entred the wall, and was truely of the wall called Walbrooke, not of Gualo, as some have farre fetched. It ran through the Citie, with divers windings from the North towards the South, into the River of Thames; and had (over the same) divers Bridges along the streets and lanes through which it passed. I have read in an old Booke, long since printed, that the Prior of holy Trinity within Ealdgate, ought to make over Walbrooke in the VVard of Broadstreet, a∣gainst the stone wall of the Citie, viz. the same bridge that is next the Church of All Saints at the VVall. Also, that the Prior of the New Hospitall, S. Mary Spittle, without Bishopsgate, ought to make the middle part of one other Bridge next to the said Bridge towards the North: and that in the 28. yeere of Edward the first, it was by Inquisition found before the Mayor of London, that the Parish of S. Stephen upon Walbrooke, ought of right to scowre the course of the said Brooke; and therefore the Shi∣riffes were commanded to distraine the said Parishioners so to do. In the yeere 1300. the keepers of those bridges at that time, were William Iordan, and Iohn de Bever. This water-course having di∣vers Bridges, was afterwards vaulted over with Bricke,Walbrooke vaulted and paved over. and paved levell with the streets and lanes, where-through it passed; and since that also, houses have been builded thereon, so that the course of Walbrooke is now hid under ground, and thereby hardly knowne. Langborne water,Langborne. so called of the length thereof, was a great streame breaking out of the ground in Fen Church street, which ranne downe with a swift course, west, through the street, thwart Grastreet, and downe Lumbard street, to the west end of Saint Mary Wolnoths Church, and then turning the course South,Shareborne Lane. downe Shareborne Lane (so ter∣med of sharing or dividing) it brake in∣to divers rilles or rillets to the River of Thames. Of this Boorne that VVard tooke the name, and is to this day called Langborne VVard.Langborne Ward. This Boorne is also long since stopped up at the head, and the rest of the course filled up, and pa∣ved over, so that no signe thereof re∣maineth, more than the names afore∣said. Oldborne or Hilborne,Oldborne. was the like wa∣ter, breaking out about the place where now the Barres doe stand, and it ranne downe the whole street to Oldborne bridge, and into the River of the Wels, or Turne-mill brooke. This Boorne was like∣wise (long since) stopped up at the head, and in other places, where the same hath broken out: but yet till this day, the said street is there called, high Oldborne hill, and both the sides there∣of, (together with all the grounds ad∣joyning, that lye betwixt it and the Ri∣ver of Thames) remaine full of Springs, so that water is there found at hand, and hard to be stopped in every house. There are (saith Fitzstephen) neere Lon∣don, Fitzstephen. on the North side, speciall Wels in the suburbs, sweet, wholsome and cleere, among which, Holy VVell, Clarkes VVell, and Clements VVell, are most famous, and frequented by schollers and youths of the Ci∣tie in summer evenings, when they walke forth to take the Ayre. The first,Holy Well, to wit, Holy Well, is much decayed and spoiled, with filthines pur∣posely laid there, for the heightning of the ground for Garden plots. The Fountaine called Saint Clements Well,Clements Well. North from the Parish Church of S. Clements, and neere unto an Inne of Chancerie, called Clements Inne, is faire curbed square with hard stone, cleane for common use, and is alwaies full.
The third is called Clarkes Well,Clarks Well. or Clarken-Well, and is curbed about square with hard stone: not farre from the west end of Clarken-well Church, but close without the VVall that incloseth it. The said Church the tooke name of the Well; and the Well tooke name of the Parish Clarkes in London, who (of old time) were accustomed there yeere∣ly to assemble, and to play some large Historie of holy Scripture. For exam∣ple, of later time, to wit, in the yeere 1390. the 14. of Richard the second, I read,Playes by the Parish Clarks at Clarks Well. that the Parish Clarkes of London, on the 18. of Iuly, plaid Enterludes at Skinners Well, neere unto Clarkes Well, which Play continued three dayes toge∣ther, the King, Queene, and Nobles be∣ing present. Also the yeere 1409. the tenth of Henry the fourth, they played a Play at the Skinners Well,Playes at the Skin∣ners well. which lasted eight dayes, and was of matter from the Creation of the world: there were to see the same, the most part of the Nobles and Gentiles in England, &c. Other smaller Wels were many neere unto Clarkes well;Skinners well. namely Skinners well, so called, for that the Skinners of London held there certain Playes, yeere∣ly plaid of holy Scripture, &c. In place whereof,Wrestling place. the wrestlings have of latter yeeres beene kept, and is in part conti∣nued at Bartholomewtide. Then was there Fags well,Fags well. neere unto Smithfield, by the Charter-house, now lately dammed up. Todwell, Loders well, and Radwell are all decayed, and so fil∣led up, that their places are hardly now discerned. Somewhat North from Holy well, is one other Well, curbed square with stone, and is called Dame Annis the cleere; and not farre from it, but somewhat west, is also another cleere water, called Perilous Pond, because divers Youths (by swimming therein) have beene drow∣ned. And thus much be said for Foun∣taines and Wels. Horsepoole in West smithfield, was some∣time a great water; and because the in∣habitants in that part of the Citie did there water their Horses, the same was in old Records called Horsepoole. It is now much decayed, the Springs being stopped up, and the Land-water fal∣ling into the small bottome, remaining inclosed with Bricke, is called Smith-field Pond. By S. Giles Churchyard was a large water,Poole without Creplegate. called a Poole: I reade in the yeere 1244. that Anne of Lodbury was drowned therein. This Poole is now (for the most part) stopped up; but the Spring is preserved, and was coopeped a∣bout with stone, by the Executors of Richard Whittington. The said River of Wels, the running water of Walbrooke, the Boornes afore∣named, and other the fresh waters that were in and about this Citie, being in processe of time, by incroachment for buildings, and heightnings of grounds, utterly decayed, and the number of Ci∣tizens mightily increased; they were forced to seeke fresh waters abroad; whereof some, at the request of King Henrie the third, in the 21. yeere of his reigne,Patent, 1236. were (for the profit of the Citie, and good of the whole Realme thither repairing; to wit, for the poore to drink, and the rich to dresse their meat) granted to the Citizens,Water conveyed from Tey∣borne. and their Suc∣cessors, by one Gilbert Sanford, with li∣berty to convey water from the Towne of Teyborne, by pipes of lead into their Citie. The first Cisterne of lead,Andr. Horn. Great Conduit in west Cheape. castellated with stone in the Citie of London, was called the Great Conduit in west Cheap, which was begun to be builded in the yeere 1285. Henry Wales being then Maior:Water coēveyed frō Teyborne to London. the water-course from Pading∣ton to Iames hed, hath 510. rods; from Iames hed on the hill, to the Mewsgate, 102. rods; from the Mewsgate to the Crosse in Cheape, 484. rods. The Tonne upon Cornhill was cister∣nated in the yeere 1401.Tonne up∣on Cornhill. Iohn Sandworth then being Maior. Bosses of water at Belinsgate,Bosse of Belinsgate, and other Bosses. by Pauls wharfe, and by S. Giles Church without Creplegate, made about the yeere 1423. Water conveyed to the Gaoles of Newgate and Ludgate, 1432. Water was first procured to the Standard in west Cheap, about the yeere 1285. which Standard was againe new builded by the Executors of Iohn Welles, as shall bee shewed in another place. King Henry the sixth, in the yeere 1442. granted to Iohn Hatherley, Maior,
licence to take up 200. fodar of Lead, for the building of Conduits, of a com∣mon Granery, and of a com∣mon Granery, and of a new Crosse in west Cheape, for the honour of the Ci∣tie. The Conduit in west Cheap, by Pauls gate, (commonly called, The little Con∣duit) was builded about the yeere 1442. one thousand markes was granted by common Councell for the building thereof, and repairing of the other Con∣duits. The Conduit in Aldermanbury, and the Standard in Fleetstreet, were made and finished by the Executors of Sir William Eastfield, in the yeere 1471. A Cisterne also was added to the Stan∣dard in Fleetstreet, and a Cisterne was made at Fleet bridge, and another with∣out Creplegate, in the yeere 1478. Conduit in Grastreet, in the yeere 1491. Conduit at Oldborne Crosse, about 1498. againe new made by Mr. William Lambe, 1577. Little Conduit by the Stockes Mar∣ket, about 1500. Conduit at Bishopsgate, about 1513. Conduit at London wall, against Cole∣manstreet, about 1528. Conduit at Ealdgate without, about 1535. Conduit in Lothbury, and in Coleman∣street, neere to the Church, 1546. Conduit of Thames water at Dowgate, 1568. Thames water conveyed into mens houses by pipes of Lead,Thames wa∣ter con∣veyed into mens hou∣ses in the east part of the Ci∣ty. from a most artificiall Forcier standing neere unto London Bridge, and made by Peter Mor∣bis, Dutchman, in the yeere 1582. for the service of the Citie on the East part thereof. Conduits of Thames water by the pa∣rish Churches of S. Mary Magdalen, Conduits in old Fishstreet. and S. Nicholas cole-Abbey, neere unto old Fishstreet, in the yeere 1583. One other new Forcier was made neere to Broken Wharfe,Thames water con∣veyed into the west part of the Citie. to convey Thames water into mens houses of west Cheape, about Pauls, Flectstreet, &c. by an English Gentleman, named Bevis Bulmer, in the yeere 1594. Another Conduit was also built at Aldersgate, without the Gate, in Anno 1610. and Thames water conveyed unto it in pipes of wood and stone, by an En∣glish Gentleman, named Mr. Thomas Hayes. Next to the Conduit water thus con∣veyed to Aldersgate, and as you have al∣ready heard; that famous (and never to be forgotten) new River, brought from Chadwell and Amwell, by the onely care, cost, and liberall expences of one wor∣thy man, Sir Hugh Middleton, Knight and Barornet, Citizen and Goldsmith of London, deserveth to be recorded in everlasting memory. I spare here to speake of the length of time that such an intent was in talking on, like much good matter, well motio∣ned, though little minded; long deba∣ted, but never concluded, till courage and resolution lovingly shooke hands together, as it appeares it did in the Soule of this (no way to bee daunted) well-minded Gentleman. For,Malignant enemies to all ho∣nest and commen∣dable acti∣ons. if those enemies to all good en∣devours, Danger, Difficulty, Impossibili∣ty, Detraction, Contempt, Scorne, Derisi∣on, yea, and Desperate Despight, could have prevailed by their accursed and malevolent interposition, either before, at the beginning, in the very birth of proceeding, or in the least stolen advan∣tage of the whole prosecution; this Worke of so great worth had never bin accomplished. I am not ignorant of an Act of Parlia∣ment, In or a∣bout the 10. yeere of her reigne. granted by Queene Elizabeth of blessed memory, to her Citizens of Lon∣don, for cutting and conveying a River from any part of Middlesex or Hertford∣shire, to the Citie of London, with a li∣mitation of ten yeeres time for the per∣formance thereof: But the expiration of her Royall life sooner came, than any such matter would be undertaken. Also our late gracious Soveraigne King Iames pleased to grant the like Act (but without date of time) for the same effect: and when all else refused, Sir Hugh Middletō undertook it, to bring his intended River from Chadwell and Amwell, to the North side of London, neere Isington, where he builded a large Cisterne to receive it. The Worke began the 20. day of Fe∣bruary, VVhen the River began at the first, and fini∣shed in 5. yeeres. Anno Dom. 1608. and in five yeers space was fully accomplished: con∣cerning the conveyance of it along to
London, from Chadwell and Amwell, I my selfe (by favour of the Gentlemen) did divers times ride to see it, and dili∣gently observed, that admirable Art, paines and industry were bestowed for the passage of it, by reason that all grounds are not of a like nature, some being ozie and very muddy, others a∣gaine as stiffe, craggy and stony. The depth of the Trench (in some places) descended full thirty foot,The inge∣nious con∣veying of the River in some places. if no more; whereas (in other places) it re∣quired as sprightfull Art againe, to mount it over a valley in a Trough, be∣tweene a couple of hils, and the Trough all the while borne up by woodden Ar∣ches, some of them fixed in the ground very deepe, and rising in heighth above 23. foot. Being brought to the intended Ci∣sterne, The Lord Maior and Aldermen rode to see the Ci∣sterne. but not (as yet) the water ad∣mitted entrance thereinto: on Michael-masse day, in Anno 1613. being the day when Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight, (Brother to the said Sir Hugh Middle∣ton) was elected Lord of London for the yeere ensuing; in the afternoone of the same day, Sir Iohn Swinerton, Knight, and Lord Maior of London, ac∣companied with the said Sir Thomas, Sir Henry Montague, Knight, and Re∣corder of London, and many of the wor∣thy Aldermen, rode to see the Cisterne, and first issuing of the River thereinto: which was performed in this manner: A troope of Labourers,The work∣men in the Ci∣sterne. to the number of 60. or more, well apparelled, and wearing greene Monmouth Caps, all a∣like, carryed Spades, Shovels, Pickaxes, and such like instruments of laborious imployment, marching after Drummes twice or thrice about the Cisterne, pre∣sented themselves before the Mount, where the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and a worthy company beside, stood to be∣hold them, and one man (in behalfe of all the rest) delivered this Speech. The Speech at the Cisterne, according as it was delivered to me. LOng have we labour'd, long desird & pray'd For this great works perfection: & by th'ayd Of Heaven, and good mens wishes, 'tis at length Happily conquer'd by Cost, Art, and Strength. And after five yeeres dcare expence in dayes, Trvaile and , beside the infinite Wayes Of Malice, , false suggestions; Able to daunt the spirits of mighty ones In wealth and courage: This, a worke so rare, Onely by one mans industry, cost and care, Is brought to  effect, so much withstood; His onely ayme, the Cities generall good. And where (before) many  complaints, Enviously  oft restraints, Stops, and great crosses, to our Masters charge, And the Works hindrance: favour nw at large Spread it selfe open to him, and commends To admiration both his paines and ends. (The Kings most gracious love) Perfectiō draws Favour from Princes, and (from all) applause. Then worthy Magistrates, to whose content, (Next to the State) all this great care was bent, And for the publike good (which grace requires) Your loves and furtherance chiefly he desires, To cherish these proceedings, which may give Courage to some that may hereafter live, To practise deedes of Goodnesse, and of Fame, And gladly light their Actions by his Name. Clarke of the Worke, reach me the Booke to show, How many Arts from such is Labour flow. First, hered the Overseer,All this he readeth in the Clarks Booke. this tride man, An ancient Souldier, and an Artizan. The Clarke, next him Mathematician, The Master of the rimber-worke takes place Next after these; the Measurer, in like case, Brick-layer, and Enginer; and after those; The Borer and the Pavier. Then it showes The Labourers next; Keeper of Amwell-head, The VValkers last: so all their names are read. Yet these but parcels of six hundred more, That (at one time) have beene imployd before. Yet these in sight, and all the rest will say, That all the weeke they had their Royall pay. Now,At the let∣ting open of the Sluce. for the fruits then: Flow forth; precious Spring, So long and dearely sought for, and now bring Comfort to all that love thee: loudly sing, And with thy Chrystal murmurs strook together, Bid all thy true wel-wishers welcome hither. At which words the Flood-gates flew open, the streame ranne gallantly into the Cisterne, Drummes and Trumpets sounding in triumphall manner, and a brave Peale of Chambers gave full issue to the intended entertainment. Thus much for waters serving this Citie; first by Rivers, Brookes, Boorns, Fountaines, Pooles, &c. And since by Conduits, partly made by good and charitable Citizens, and otherwise by charges of the Communalty, as shall bee more amply shewed in our descrip∣tion of the Wards wherein they are placed.
And now some Benefactors to these Conduits shall be remembred.Benefa∣ctors to∣wards the Water-Conduits. In the yeere 1236. certain Merchant strangers, of Cities beyond the Seas, to wit, of Amiens, Corby, and Nele, for pri∣viledges which they enjoyed in this Ci∣tie, gave 100 l. towards the charges of conveying water from the Towne of Teyborne. Robert Large, Mayor, 1439. gave to the new water Conduits then in hand, 40. Markes; and towards the vaulting over of Walbrooke, neere to the parish Church of S. Margarets in Lothbury, 200. Markes. Sir William Eastfield, Maior, 1438. conveyed water from Teyborne to Fleet∣street, to Aldermanbury, and from High∣tory to Creplegate. William Combes, Sheriffe, 1441. gave to the worke of the Conduits. 10. l. Richard Rawson, one of the Sheriffes, 1476. gave 20. l. Robert Revel, one of the Sheriffes, 1490. gave 10. l. Iohn Mathew, Maior, 1490. gave 20. l. William Bucke, Taylor, in the yeere 1494. towards repairing of Conduits, gave 100. Marks. Dame Thomasin widdow, late wife to Sir Iohn Percivall, Merchant Taylor, Maior, in the yeere 1498. gave toward the Conduit in Oldborne, 20. Marks. Richard Shore, one of the Sheriffes, 1505. gave to the Conduit in Oldborne, 10. l. The Lady Ascue, widdow to Sir Chri∣stopher Ascue, 1543. gave towards the Conduits, 100. l. David Woodroofe, Sheriffe, 1554. gave toward the Conduit at Bishopsgate, 20. l. Edward Iackman, one of the Sheriffes, 1564. gave towards the Conduits, 100. l. Barnard Randulph, common Serjeant of the Citie, 1583. gave to the water Conduits, 900. l. Thus much for the Conduits of fresh water to this Citie. Of the Ancient and famous River of Thames, whence it deriveth her head or originall, and so conveyeth it selfe on to the Cities service, being supplyed by divers other sweet Rivers in her course, YOV have already heard, what Rivers, Brookes, Boornes, Pooles and Con∣duits of fresh water have liberally afforded (out of their plenty) most commodious helpe for the service of so great a Citie. And yet the River of Thames,The River of Thames a chife honour to the whole Land, and especially to the Ci∣tie of Lon∣don. much more fa∣mous than all the reft, yeelding by For∣niers, Conduits, and other meanes of conveyance, inestimable benefit to the Citie, we have said little or nothing of her due worth, neither of her antiqui∣ty, course and originall, all which de∣serve to be more especially respected. According therefore to the advice of very wise and learned judgements, and borrowing such helps as they have glad∣ly lent me, I will begin with the head or spring of this famous River, and shew how it glideth along in current, untill it come to imbrace the bosome of the Sea, and there to take up her entertainement in his liquid armes. Giving credit to such mens writings,The head or begin∣ning of the Thames out of the side of an Hill in Cotswold, neete to Tetbury. as have (of set pur∣pose) sought out the Spring of the Thames, it is faithfully affirmed, That this famous streame hath her head or beginning, out of the side of an Hill, standing in the Plaines of Cotswold, a∣bout a mile from Tetbury, neere unto the Fosse, (an highway so called of old) where it was sometime named Isis,Isis, or the Ouse. or the Ouse, although divers doe (ignorant∣ly) call it Thames even there; rather of a foolish custome, than any skill, because they either neglect, or are utterly igno∣rant, how it was named at the first. From hence it runneth directly toward the East, (as all good Rivers should doe) and meeteth with the Cirne or Churne, a Brooke,The Cirne called co∣rinium. called in Latine Corinium: whereof Cirncester Towne (by which it commeth) doth take the denominati∣on in most opinions. From hence it hasteth unto Creekelade,Creekelade.
alias Crekanford,Lechlade. Lechlade, Radcotebridge, Newbridge,Radcote∣bridge. and Evesham, receiving (by the way) an infinite sort of small Streames,Newbridge. Brookes,Evesham. Beckes, Waters and Rundels. And here (on this side of the Towne) divideth it selfe into two cour∣ses, of which one goeth straight to Bot∣ley and Hinksey; the other passeth by Godstow, a Village not farre off. This later spreadeth it selfe also (for a whi) into sundry smaller branches, which not farre, before they be reunited, and then beclipping sundry pleasant Med∣dowes, Oxford or Ouseford, so called of the River Charwell. it passeth at length by Oxford, of some supposed rather to be called Ouse∣ford, of this River, where it meeteth with the Charwell. A little from whence the originall branches doe joyne, and goe together by Abbandune (alias Sen∣sham or Abbington,Abbandune or Abbing∣ton. as wee call it,) al∣though no part of it (at the first) came so neere the Towne as it now doth,Some write that the maine streamè was brought thither, which ran before be∣tweene Andredes & Culingham. till a branch thereof was led thither from the maine streame, through the indu∣stry of the Monkes, as (beside the testi∣mony of old Records thereof, yet extant to be seene) by the decay of Cair Dour, now Dorchester it selfe, sometime the thorow-fare from Wales, and the West Countrey unto London, which ensued upon this fact,Cair Dour, Dorchester. is easie to bee seene. From hence it goeth to Dorchester, and so unto Thame, where joyning with a River of the same denomination, it lo∣seth the name of Isis or Ouse,Ousenie at Oxford. (whereof Ousennie at Oxford is producted) and from thence is called Thamesis all along as it passeth.Thamesis at Thame, and so forward From Thame it goeth to Wallingford, and so to Reding, which (in time past) of the number of Bridges there,Reding sometime Pontium. was called Pontium. Albeit that the English name doth rather proceed from Rhe or Ree, the Saxon word for a water-course or River: which may bee seene in Overee,S. Maryo∣ver Rhee. or Suthree, for over the Ree, or south of the Ree; as to the skilfull doth readily appeare. Yet some hold, (and not altogether against probability and likelihood) that the word Sutheree, is so called of Sudrijc;Sudrijc the South Kingdom. to wit, the south Kingdome, whereunto (in part) the Thames is a bound. But that holdeth not in denomination, either of the said Chruch, or name of the foresaid Coun∣tie. Other affirme likewise, that Reding is so called of the Greeke word (REO) which is to overflow.(REO) Re∣ding, to o∣verflow. Surely, as neither of these conjectures are to be contemned, so the last com∣meth most neere to mine ayd, who af∣firme, that not only the course of every water it selfe; but also his overflowing, The Saxon name to water-courses & over-flowes. was in times past called Rhee, by such Saxons as inhabited this Iland. And e∣ven to this day, in Essex, I have oft ob∣served, that when the lower grounds (by rage of waters) hath beene over-flowne; the people beholding the same have said;All is on a Rhee, All is now a Ri∣ver. All is on a Rhee; as if they would have said; All is now a River. Al∣beit the word River is derived from the French, and borrowed by them from the Latines: but not without corruption, as it was brought to them. I will not here give notice how far they are deceived, which call the aforesaid Church by the name of Saint Mary Auderies,S. Mary Auderies, S. Mary over Isis or Ise. or Saint Mary over Isis, or Ise: but I will pro∣ceede with the course of this Noble Streame; which, howsoever these mat∣ters stand,Reding. it hath passed by Reding, and there received the Kenet,Kenet. which com∣meth from the Hills that lye West of Marleborough;Thetis, cō∣ming from Thetisford. and then the Thetis, commonly called the Tide, that com∣meth from Thetisford. It hyeth thence to Sudlington,Sudlington. otherwise called Maiden∣head, Maidenhead Windleshore. and so to Windleshore, or Windsore, Aeton,Eaton. and then to Chertsey, where Er∣kenwald Bishop of London,Chertsey. sometime builded a Religious House or Cell, as I doe reade. From Chertsey it hasteth directly unto Stanes,Stanes. and receiving another Streame by the way,Cole. Cole∣brooke. called the Cole, (where∣upon Colebrooke standeth) it goeth by Kingstone,Kingstone. Shene,Shene. Sion. Sion, and Brentford, or Bregentford:Brentford, where it meeteth with the Brane or the Brene,Bregētford. another Brooke descending from Edgeworth.Brane, Brene. Vpon this Brooke also, Sir Iohn Thinne had sometime a sumptuous and stately House,Mortlach. with a marvellous provision to inclose and retaine such Fish,Putney. as should come about the same.Fulham. From Brentford it passeth by Mortlach,Battersey. Putney,Chelsey. Fulham, Battersey,Lambeth. Chelsey, Lambeth, and so to London.London. Our famous River being thus brought to London, and hasting on apace, to meete with Oceanus her amorous Hus∣band:
the first water that it then mee∣teth withall,Thams be∣yond London, east∣ward. is the Brome on Kent side, west of Greenwich, whose head is Bromis in Bromley Perish,Brome on Kent side. and going thence to Lewsham,Lewsham. it taketh in a water from the East, and so directeth its course forth∣right unto the Thames. The next water that it meeteth with∣all, Wolwich. Lee or Luie on Essex side. is on Essex side, almost against Wol∣wich, and that is the Lee or Luie. And being past that, the Darwent also mee∣teth with our Thames on Kent side,Darwent on Kent side. two miles and more beneath Erith, it rising at Tanridge. The next River that fal∣leth into the Thames,The Wany Iles. is West of the Wa∣nie Iles, a Rill of no great fame, neither long course: for, rising about Coring∣ham, it runneth not many miles East, and by South, till it fals into the mouth of this River, which I doe now describe. Last of all we come to the Medway, a notable River, in mine opinion, wate∣ring all the South, and Southwest parts of Kent, in whose description we cannot (at this time) proceed any further. Having (in this manner) briefely touched this Noble River, and such Brookes as fall into the same: I will in∣sert a word or two,Commo∣dities of this noble River. concerning the com∣modities of the said River, which I will performe with so much brevity as is possible; hereby also finding out her whole tract and course from the head, to the fall thereof into the Sea. It appea∣reth evidently, that the length thereof is (at the least) an hundred and eighty miles,The lēgth of the Thames, frō the head to the fall into the Sea. if it be measured by the journies of the Land. And as it is in course, the longest of the three famous Rivers of this Ile: so is it nothing inferiour to them, in abundance of all kind of Fish, whereof it is hard to say, which of the three have either most plenty, or grea∣test variety, if the circumstances be du∣ly weighed. What some other write, concerning the Rivers of their Countries, it skilleth not, neither will I (as divers doe) invent strange things of this Noble streame, therewith to nobilitate,An hono∣rable affir∣mation of the River of Thames. and make it more honourable: But this will I in plaine termes affirme, That it neither swalloweth up bastards of the Celtish Brood, nor casteth up the right-begot∣ten, that are throwne in, (without hurt) into their Mothers lappe: as Politian fableth of the Rhene,Position in lib. 8. Epist. Epist. . Epistolarum lib. 8. Epist. 6. nor yeeldeth clots of gold, as the Tagus doth: but an infinite plenty of excellent, sweet and pleasant Fish, wherwith such as inhabit neere to her banks, are fed and fully nourished. What should I speake of the fat and sweet Salmons,The great plenty of fat & sweet Salmons taken in the Thames daily. dayly taken in this streame, and that in such plenty, (after the time of the Smelt is past) as no Ri∣ver in Europe is able to exceed it? But what store also of Barbels, Trowts, Che∣vins, Pearches, Smelts, Breames, Ro∣ches, Daces, Gudgeons, Flounders, Shrimps, Eeles, &c. are commonly to be had therein, I refer me to them that know by experience better than I, by reason of their daily trade of fishing in the same. And albeit it seemeth from time to time, to be (as it were) defrau∣ded in sundry wise,The spoile and havok of cove∣tous Fi∣shermen. of these her large commodities, by the insatiable avarice of Fishermen: yet this famous River complaineth commonly of no want, but the more it loseth at one time, the more it yeeldeth at another.Carps a Fish late brought into Eng∣land, and later into the Thames. Onely in Carpes it seemeth to be scant, sith (not long since) that kinde of Fish was brought o∣ver into England, and but of late (to speake of) into this streame; by the vi∣olent rage of Land-floods, that breake open the heads and dammes of divers Gentlemens Ponds, by which meanes it became somewhat partaker also of this said commodity, whereof (before) it had no portion that I could ever heare. Oh that this worthy River might bee spared but one yeere from Nets, &c. but alas, then should many a poore man be undone.The River choaked up with sands and shelves in many pla∣ces, a matter much pitttied, and requi∣ring re∣dresse. In the meane time it is lamen∣table to see, how it is and hath beene choked of late, with sands and shelves, by the penning and wresting of the course of the water for commodities sake. But as this is an inconveniency easily remedied, if good order were ta∣ken for the redresse thereof: so now, the fine or pay set upon the Ballast, some∣times freely given to the Merchants by Patent, even to the Lands end, (Iusques aupoinct) will be another cause of harme to this noble streame: and all through an advantage taken at the want of an (i) in the word ponct: which grew through an errour committed by an
English Notarie, unskilfull in the French tong, wherein that Patent was granted. Furthermore, the said River floweth and filleth all her chanels,The River ebbeth & floweth every 12. houres, for the length of seventy miles. twice in the day and night; that is, in every 12. houres once, and this ebbing and flowing hol∣deth on for the space of 70. miles with∣in the maine Land: the streame or Tide being alwaies highest at London, when the moon doth exactly touch the north∣east, and south or west points of the hea∣vens, of which one is visible, the other under the earth,The alte∣ration and difference of the tides. & not in our sight. These Tides also differ in their times, each one comming later than other, by so many minutes as passe, yet the revolution and naturall course of the heavens do reduce and bring about the said Planet, to these her former places, wherby, the common difference between one Tide & another, is found to consist of 24. minutes, which wanteth but 12. of a whole houre in 24. as experience doth confirme. In like sort,The just distance between one tide & another. we see by daily tryall, that each Tide is not of equall height and great∣nesse. For at the full and change of the Moone, we have the greatest floods, and such is their extraordinary course, that as they diminish from their changes & fuls, unto the first and last quarters: so afterwards they increase againe, untill they come to the full and change. Sometimes also they rise so high,The extra∣ordinary rising of the tides, and how caused. (if the wind be at the North or North-east, which bringeth in the water with more vehemency, because the Tide that fil∣leth the channell, commeth from Scot∣land ward) that the Thames overfloweth her bankes neere unto London: which hapneth especially in the fuls and chan∣ges of Ianuary and February, wherein the lower grounds are (of custome) soo∣nest drowned. This order of flowing in like sort is perpetuall, so that when the Moone is on the South-west and North of points, then is the water at London at the highest. Neither doe the Tides al∣ter, except some rough winds out of the West or South-west, doe keepe backe and checke the streame in her entrance:The streame oftētimes checkt in her en∣trance into the Land. as the East and North-east doe hasten the comming in thereof, or else some o∣ther extraordinary occasion put by the ordinary course of the Northerne Seas, which doe fill the said River by their naturall returne and flowing. And that both these doe happen eftsoones a∣mong, I referre me to such, as have not seldome observed it: as also the sensible chopping in of three or foure Tides in one naturall day, whereof the unskilfull doe descant many things, according to their minds. But howsoever these small matters doe fall out,Two seve∣rall times of the Moone, the waters finde their true course and how often soever this course of the streame doth happen to be distur∣bed: yet at two severall times of the Moone, the Waters returne to their na∣turall course and limits of time exactly. Polydore saith,The error of Polydore Virgil. that this River is seldome increased, or rather never overfloweth her banks by land-flouds: but he is here∣in very much deceived, as it shall more apparantly be seene hereafter. For the more that this River is put by of her right course, the more the water must (of necessity) swell with the white wa∣ters, which run downe from the Land: because the passage cannot bee so swift and ready in the winding, as in the straight course. The Land-flouds also doe greatly staine the finenesse of the streame,Land-floods doe much staine the streames finenesse. in∣somuch that after a great land-floud, you shall take up Haddocks with your hands beneath the Bridge, as they float aloft on the water: whose eyes are so blinded with the thicknesse of that ele∣ment, that they cannot see where to be∣come, and make shift to save themselves before death take hold on them.Thames water as cleere as that of the Sea. Other∣wise, the water (of it selfe) is very cleere, and, in comparison, next unto that of the Sea, which is most subtill & pure of all other; as that of great Rivers is most excellent in comparison of smal brooks.The obje∣ction of A∣ristotle an∣swered. Although Aristotle will have the salt water to be most grosse, because a Ship will beare a greater burden on the Sea, than on the fresh water, and an Egge sinks in this, that swimmeth in the o∣ther. But he may easily be answered, by the quantity of roome, and abundance of waters in the Sea, whereby it becom∣meth of more force, to sustaine such ves∣sels as are committed to the same, and whereunto the greatest Rivers are no∣thing comparable. I would here make mention of sundry Bridges over this noble streame: of which, that of London is most chiefely to be commended: for it is (in a manner)
a continuall street, well replenished with large and stately houses on both sides, and situate upon twenty Arches, whereof each one is made of excellent free stone, every of them being three∣score foot in height, and full twenty in distance one from another, as I have of∣ten viewed. In the like manner, I could entreat of the infinite number of Swans daily to be seene upon this River, and of two thousand Wherries and small Boats,Two thou∣sand boats upon the Thames, and 3000. pooremen maintai∣ned by the same, whole gaines come in most in the Terme time. whereby three thousand poore Watermen are maintained, through the carriage and recarriage of such per∣sons as passe or repasse (from time to time) upon the same. Beside, those huge Tide-boats, Tilt-boats, and Barges, which eyther carry passengers, or bring necessary provision from all quarters of Oxfordshire, Barkeshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, Essex, Surrey, and Kent, unto the Citie of London. Having thus farre proceeded in the description of this famous River, even from her head and originall, till her im∣bracing the Sea: I thought good to go on a little further, concerning the extent of the Thames jurisdiction,The extēt of the Ri∣ver of Thames un∣der the ju∣risdiction of the L. Maior, Commu∣nalty and Citizens of London. from a place called Colnie Ditch, a little above the Bridge of Stanes westward, to London Bridge: and from thence to a certaine place called Yendall, alias Yenland, alias Yenleete, and of the Water of Medway, as being matter more proper to the Ci∣tie of Londons Survey, than any other discourse else whatsoever. For many yeeres, the authority and jurisdiction of this River, hath undoubtedly belonged to the Lord Maior, Communalty, and Citizens of London, by the sufficient te∣stimony of divers Grants, Charters, and Confirmations, made by the precedent Kings and Queenes of this Land,Acts of Parliamēt for the Ci∣ties prero∣gative on the River. and by our late deceased King Iames of hap∣py memory, besides sundry Acts of Par∣liament ordained to that end. But because some question appeared to be not long since made by the Lord high Admirall of England, concerning that case of Power or Jurisdiction, a full and finall conclusion was at length esta∣blished, betweene the Lord high Admi∣rall, and the Lord Maior and Commu∣nalty of London also, concerning the Prerogative then questioned. Whereby, as in former ancient pri∣viledges, the right and title hath beene alwaies evident; so then it appeared a plaine and manifest case, that the Lord Maior of London for the time being, and his successors for ever in that eminent dignity,The Lord Maior of London his title and authority over the River, and to inflict punishmēt on all of∣fenders. have full power and authority over the said Rivers, the Lord Maior bearing the stile and title of Conserva∣tor or preserver of them, within the forenamed bounds and limits; Having absolute power, of inflicting punish∣ment for all unlawfull fishings, eyther by Fishermen or any other, fishing with∣in the same at any time: yea, and to search, oversee and punish all such, as shall abuse his lawfull authority in those proceedings from time to time. And because his great and serious imploy∣ments withhold him from such atten∣ding on this important businesse, as the urgent necessity thereof doth (almost continually) require:The water Bailiffe of London, his power on the River under the L. Maior. he hath a Deputy or Substitute, named the Water-Bay∣liffe of London, who under his Honours authority, and by vertue of his more ab∣solute power, doth continually search, oversee and punish all offenders, that dare infringe those rights of duty, be∣longing to so famous a River, or make spoile of that intended for generall be∣nefit. And whereas there are a certaine company of Fishermen,Tinckermen mighty de∣stroyers of the Frie of Fish. called Tincker∣men, frequenting the River of Thames, Eastward, who (in times past) not onley have beene reported, but also manifest∣ly approved, and found out, to make an infinite destruction of the yong brood and Fry of Fish, by use of unlawfull Nets, and unpermittable Engines, fee∣ding and glutting their Hogges with them, as M. Doctor Dee reporteth: By the diligent and extraordinary cost and care of the Lord Maior, his Brethren, and the rest of the Citizens of London, as also the vigilant respect of his worthy Officer the Water-Bayliffe, day and night attending to cut off such an hor∣rible abuse; those unlawfull Nets and Engines are now quite supprest, and a true & orderly forme of fishing brought into use,Waste and spoile ve∣ry provi∣dently prevented and cut off. that such waste and havocke may no more be made. Through which restraint of robberie, and application of continuall providence, our River of
Thames (the honour and beauty of this whole Iland) is become againe most rich and plentifull, yeelding daily out of her bountifull bosome, great store of Fish of all kindes, and at much more reasonable rate, than in many yeeres past hath beene seene, as our weekely Markets in this Honourable Citie, can better testifie, than I report: a matter highly to bee commended, and (no doubt) but will bee as heedfully conti∣nued. Vpon a great complaint lately made to the Lord Maior,Timbers in the Thames at Tilbury hope no meane hurt to the River. concerning Tim∣bers being and standing in Tilbury Hope, beneath Gravesend, a matter not onely perillous to passengers upon the River, but a cause also to destroy (infinitely) the yong brood and fry of Fish, by the harmes those Timbers did to Fisher∣mens Nets, by reason of their continuall standing in the maine course, and spee∣dy current of the streame, which was mightily annoyed and injured thereby: his honourable care extended so farre, that by the paines and diligence of his Water-Bayliffe, being thereto by his Office and place warrantably directed, those grievous hurts and annoyances were all taken up, and conveyed to the Guildhall in London, as an example to all that should dare to offend in the like nature, or presume to prejudice such an honourable course of our fishing, as it is faithfully reported, at every Tide, by day and night, foure Bushels of small Fish and Fry, (continually throughout the whole) are saved and preserved by this worthy providence,The bene∣fit ensuing by taking up those annoying Timbers out of the streame. which other∣wise had remained to the former despe∣rate spoile, and continued a great hin∣drance to the abounding increase now likely to ensue thereby. The Lord Maior and Communalty, not many yeeres since, have caused this Noble River of Thames westward,The clea∣ring and clensing of the River westward of stops & hatches. to be cleered and cleansed of 79. stops or hatches, consisting of divers great stakes and piles, purposely erected by Fisher∣men for their private gaine, and stan∣ding dangerous for passengers neere un∣to the faire deepe: so that none of them doe now remaine upon the River, but onely such as stand out of the passable to faire way, and can bee no prejudice to passengers. For otherwise, they serve as a great succour to the young breed and Frie, being planted at the waters bottome, and placed so remotely on the River; that they releeve and comfort many poore Fishermen thereon dwel∣ling. Some things see∣ming hurt∣full, may be benefi∣ciall as they are used. Beside, in the great heate and drought of Summer, when usually wa∣ter is most scanty, these are then the cause of raising it so high, that Barges may well and safely passe, with all kind of goods to our ancient Mother Citie; whereas else they would be grounded, how many soever, and be void of pas∣sage, by lownesse of the water. There are likewise a number of Fi∣shermen belonging to the River of Thames,Tinckermen, Hebbermen, Petermen, Trawlermē, All great abusers of Gods bles∣sings in the River. some stiled by the name of Tinckermen, others, Hebbermen, Peter∣men, Trawlermen, &c. that have lived (in precedent times) by very unlawfull fishing on this River, and to the great injurie of her abounding store. But by meanes of this wel-provided restriction, so forwarded in the maine Magistrate, and followed in the diligent endevour of the carefull Water-Bayliffe, (making no spare of his paines at all times what∣soever) their insolence hath beene redu∣ced to a more temperate qualification, and the awfull hand of civill Govern∣ment appeareth to carry much better respect, than formerly it did. Nor let this provident care, both for the safety of passengers on the River,Care had of the River of Thames in former times. and preservation of the Breed, Frie, and Fish in the River, bee understood as a matter of novelty, without any prece∣dent example in elder dayes; when it plainely appeareth, that the very like course was kept and effected in the time of King Henry the fourth, the seventh yeere of his reigne, Anno Dom. 1405. Also more late in the dayes of King Henry the eighth, &c. As appeareth by Records in divers Chronicles, and so warranted and avouched, as already hath beene said, and shall (in more am∣ple manner) hereafter appeare. Concerning the controversiall que∣stion, The end of contro∣versie con∣cerning the Thames and Med∣way. about the Rivers of Thames and Medway, all variance and difference was absolutely concluded, in the yeere 1613 the twentieth day of Mary: Sir Iohn Swynnerton Knight, being then Lord Maior, and carefull Conservator of the said Rivers rights; and Thomas Sparrey,
Esquire, his Substiture, and respective Water-Bayliffe, for the performing of such a maine trust reposed in him, ap∣pertaining justly unto his place and of∣fice. At eight severall times yeerely,Courts kept for the yeere∣ly preser∣vation of the River. with∣in the foure Countries of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, the Lord Mai∣or of London for the time then being, with his Brethren the Aldermen, for the better maintaining of the Rivers rights and priviledges, doe sit in per∣son judicially, and charge foure Juries by oath, to make inquisition after all offences, committed upon the River of Thames. And as the verdict (presented by the said Jurie) maketh appearance, so doe they accordingly proceed to the punishment of the transgressors, answe∣rably to the nature of their offences, and as to Justice shall see me expedient: Wherein, the Rivers prosperity, safety of passengers, and generall good of the Common-wealth, are their chiefest re∣spects. And because it may appeare more probably unto all men,A late and honorable testimony what care the Citie hath for the Rivers conserva∣tion. in what worthy manner the Lord Maior and his Bre∣thren doe proceed in this case, by the helpe of Master Edmund Howes, Gent. I have hereto added, the last Courts that were kept about this Rivers service, in the time of Sir Iohn Iolles, Knight, to take away all sinister scruple or doubt, that can be otherwise alledged. For he being present in the Journey, (as I my selfe might also have beene, if my leasure would have so permitted) ob∣served the course of all that then pas∣sed, and as hee delivered it to mee, so have I set it downe, with some other few collections of mine owne, out of such Antiquities as have come to my hands. A further testimony concerning the River of Thames, and of the right and authority of the Lord Maior of London, to the conservancie of the said River, &c. IN the yeere 1616. on Wednesday, being the third of Iuly, Sir Iohn Iolles, Knight, L. Maior of the Citie of London, and Conservator of the River of Thames,What Al∣dermen & other went with the L. Maior in the journey. and waters of Med∣way, assisted and accompanied by Fran∣cis Iones, Edward Rotheram, Alexander Prescot, Martin Lumley, Aldermen of London; and William Gore, Alderman, and Shiriffe (at that time) of the said Citie; Thomas Iones Esquire, Com∣mon Serjeant of the said Citie, in the absence of Sir Henry Mountague, Recor∣der of the same Citie, attended by Tho∣mas Sparrey, Esquire, Subconservator of the said River of Thames, with fifty Of∣ficers and other servants, tooke Barges at Belinsgate, and (within few houres) arrived at Gravesend in Kent, where a Session for the Conservancie of the said River was kept, before the said Lord Maior, and his forenamed Assistants. At which time and place,A Iury of Freehol∣ders of the said coun∣trey. a Jurie of Freeholders of the said Countrie, being sworne to enquire of all offences com∣mitted in any part of that River what∣soever within the said County; Master Common Serjeant delivered them a charge to this effect: That,The effect of Mr. Cō∣mon Ser∣jeants charge to the Iury. forasmuch as there had not been any Session of Conservancy in ma∣ny yeeres past, kept by any Lord Mai∣or of London in that place: it was pro∣bable and evident, that they could not be well informed, neither of the Lord Maiors jurisdiction and power, to re∣forme annoyances and offences there, and to inflict due punishment vpon the offenders, nor of the nature of the ser∣vice by them to bee performed, in the course of their enquirie. And therefore hee thought it convenient, to make knowne unto them, both the one and the other. And hereupon he shewed them, that the Jurisdiction of the Citie of London, The extē∣dure of the Citie of Londons Iurisdictiō in the Ri∣ver of Thames. in the River of Thames, from Stanes Bridge Westward, unto the points of the River next the Sea Eastward, ap∣peared to belong to the Citie, in man∣ner and forme as followeth:
In point of Right 1. By Prescription. 2. By allowance in Eire. 3. By ancient Charters. 4. By Acts of Parliament. 5. By Inquisitions. 6. By Decrees upon Hearing Coram Rege ipso, & in Camera Stella∣ta. 7. By Letters Patents. 8. By Proclaimations. 9. By Report of the Kings Councell learned. 10. By a Quo Warranto. In point of Vsage 1. By ancient Ordinances. 2. By punishment of offenders. 3. By Writs and Precepts. 4. By accompts for charges of Searches, from 17. R. 2. till 2. Eliz. Regina. 5. By Commissions. 6. By continuall claime ever since 37. Hen. 8. when the Lord Admirall first interrupted the Citie, to exer∣cise her authority below London Bridge. And to crowne all these points both of right and usage,To cut off all contro∣versies in times to come. Et ad omnem contro∣versiam temporibus futuris tollendam: the Citie of London hath King Iames his most gracious and liberall Charter in that point granted, in the third yeere of his Majesties happy reigne. 1. By Prescription. IT appeareth by an ancient Booke, called Dunthorne,Ex Lib. vo∣cat. Dun∣thorn. that Civitatis fun∣dationis, aedificationis & constructionis, causa erat Thamesis Fluvius; quorum vero Civitatis & fluminis gubernationem tam Duces, Maiores, Custodes, Vicecomites, Aldr.The Ci∣ties go∣vern∣ment of the River. & Magnates Civitatis memoratae hucus{que} obtinuerunt & habuerunt. So as the government of the River hath be∣longed to the Citie time out of minde. In 21. H. 3. Iorden Coventry,Kidels re∣moved by the Shi∣riffe of London, sent by the Maior and Aldermen. one of the Shiriffes of London, was by the Mai∣or and Aldermen sent, to remove cer∣taine Kiddels that annoyed the Rivers of Thames and Medway; who ultra Yen∣land versus Mare, did take divers per∣sons that were offenders, and impriso∣ned them. Whereupon, complaint be∣ing made to King H. 3. hee tooke the matter ill at the first, and sent for the Lord Maior & Citizens to Kennington; and upon hearing of the matter before the said King,The Cities Iurisdicti∣on on the River, ap∣proved be∣fore King Hen. 3. the Cities Jurisdiction on the River was set forth and allowed, and the Complainants convicted, and every of them amerced at 10. pounds, and the Amercements adjudged to the Citie; and their Nets were afterwards burned, by judgement given by the Lord Maior and Aldermen in the Hustings. 37. H. 3.In the 37-yeere of King Hen. 3. Eodem Anno, ante Penteco∣stem, Vicecomites London, quia aqua Tha∣misiae pertinet ad London, per praecetum dict. Dom. Regis, deriverunt omnes alios gurgites à London usabque; Mare. 1. R. 2. Writs to the Shiriffes of Kent and Essex,The Citi∣zens not to be trou∣bled in their li∣berties. reciting the Cities title, with command, not to suffer the Citi∣zens of London to be molested, contrary to the liberties formerly granted and al∣lowed unto them. 2. In Eire. In 41. H. 3. Before Hugh Bigot,The Ci∣ties Iuris∣diction on the River, called in question. be∣ing Justice Itinerant, the Shiriffes and Citizens of London were called in que∣stion, for their jurisdiction exercised on the Thames. Before whom, it was found by a Jurie in Southwarke, Quod nullus a∣liquid juris habet in Thamisia, usque ad novum gurgitem, nisi Cives London. 14. Ed. 2. Lib. Antiq. Reg. 156. The Constable of the Tower was indicted by divers Wards of London,The Con∣stable of the Tower indicted by the Wards of London. before the Justices in Eire at the Tower: De mu∣neris & recep. cove. pro Kidellis in Thami∣sijs. Et Constabularius ad Kidellas respon∣det, quod Iustic. non habent jurisdictionem extra London, plitum. inde cognoscere cum praedict. Kidelli sunt in alijs Comitatibus. Et Iustic, dixerunt, aqua Thamisiae perti∣net ad Civitatem London, usque mare; & si velit respondeat: who then pleaded, Not guilty. 3. By Charters. 8. R. 1. Dom.K. Richard the first his Char∣ter. Richardus Rex, filius Regis Henrici secundi, concessit & firmiter praecepit, ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Tha∣misia amoveantur, ubicun{que} fuerint in Tha∣misia. 1. Ioh. Rex concessit & firmiter praece∣pit, K. Iohn his Charter. ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia vel in Medway amoveantur, & ne caeteri Kidelli alicubi ponantur in Thamisia vel in Medway, super forf. x. li. sterlingorum.
Henry the third, sonne to King Iohn, granted this Charter to the Citie, in forme following: HENRY by the Grace of God,The Char∣ter of K. Hen. 3. as it is recor∣ded in the ancient Booke cal∣led the Customes of London. King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandie and Aqui∣taine, and Earle of Anjou: Vnto Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earles, Barons, Iustices, Sheriffes, Stewards, Mi∣nisters, and to all Bailiffes, and to all his true men, greeting: Weteth well, that we, for the health of our soule, and the health of the soule of King Iohn our Fader, and the soules of all our Ancestours; and also for common profit of our Citie of London, and of all our Realme, have granted and sted∣fastly commanded: That all the Weares that beene in Thames or in Medway, where that ever they be in Thames or in Medway, be done away: And that from henceforth, no Weares be set in Thames nor in Medway, upon the forfaiture of ten pounds. Also wee claime quite to our Citizens of London, all that that the Constable of our Tower of London was wont to take of the said Weares. Wherefore we will, and stedfastly command, that no Constable of the aforesaid Tower, at any time from henceforth forward, any thing aske, nor any grievance doe to any of the same Citie, by enchesen of the same Weares. It is to us knowne enough, and by our true men doe us to understand, that most privacie and least profit might fall unto the same Citie, and to the whole Realme, by en∣chesen of the same weares: which we make forever firme and stable to the same Citie, as the Charter of our Lord King Iohn our Fader, which our Barons of London there∣of have reasonably witnessed. Witnesses, Eustace of London, Peter of Winche∣ster, Ioceline of Bath, Richard of Salis∣bury, Bishops: Hubert of Burgh, Earle of Kent, our Iustice; Gilbert of Clare, Earle of Glocester and Hertford; Raufe Fitz-Nichol, and Richard of Argentine, our Stewards. Given by the hand of our Wor∣shipfull Fader, Raufe, Bishop of Chiche∣ster, our Chauncellour, at Westminster, the 18. day of February, the yeere of our reigne, eleven. In the 68. Article also are these words: Authority of the Ci∣tizens for punishmēt. And that the said Citizens remene and doe away all the Weares in Thames and Medway, and that they have the punish∣ment thereof longing to us. Likewise in the 68. Article are these words:The Con∣stable of the Tow∣er to make no prices of victuals. And the Constable of the Tower of London make no prices by Land nor by water, of vitaile or any o∣ther things whatsoever they beene, of men of the aforesaid Citie, nor of none other, comming to the Citie, nor going out. Nor he shall not arresten by any manner of way, Ships ne Boats, bring∣ing or leading vitaile or other merchan∣dises to the Citie, or fro the Citie afore∣said. 11. H. 3. Concessimus etiam eisdem Ba∣ronibus nostris,Anno 11. Hen. 3. & Carta nostra confirma∣vimus, quod habeant bone & in pace libere & quiete, omnes libertates suas quibus ha∣ctenus usi sunt, tam in Civitate London, quàm extra; tam in aquis, quàm in terris & omnibus aliis locis. 7. E. 3. Volumus & concedimus,Anno 7. Ed. 3. quod dicti Cives amoveant & capiant omnes Ki∣dellas in aqua Thamistae & Medway, & habeant punitiones ad nos inde pertinentes. 4. By Acts of Parliament. W. 2. Ca. 47. An. 13. L. 1. No Sal∣mons to be taken,Against taking of Salmons. from the nativity of our Lady, unto S. Martins day, in all points. Nor none to be taken in Mill. pooles, from the midst of April, untill Midsummer. 1. Offence,Punish∣ment of offenders. burning the Nets and Engines. 2. Imprisonment for a quarter of a yeere. 3. For a whole yeere. 13. R. 2. Cap. 19. Confirmes the o∣ther, Anno 13. Ric. 2. and restraines the taking of yong Salmons in many waters, from the mid∣dest of April untill Midsummer, upon the same paine. None (within that time) to use any Nets called Stalkers,Nets cal'd Stalkers. nor any other En∣gines, by which the Frie may bee de∣stroyed, upon the same paine. 17. R. 2. Cap. 9. Justices of peace shall be Conservators,Iustices of peace con∣servators for destru∣ction of the Frie & brood. and to survey all offen∣ces against the said Statutes, and shall survey and search all the Weares, that they be not strait, for the destruction of the Frie and brood, but of reasonable widenesse,Appoint∣ment of under-conserva∣tors, and their charge. after the old assize. And they shall punish according to the said Sta∣tutes; and they to appoint under-con∣servators, who shall bee sworne. And the same Justices shall enquire, as well
ex officio, as by information of the under-conservators: And such as be indicted, they shall cause to come before them; and if they be thereof convicted, they shall have imprisonment, and make fine after the discretion of the same Justi∣ces. And if the same be at the informa∣tion of any of the under-conservators, he shall have halfe the fine. 11. Hen. 7. Cap. 15. The like power is granted to the Maior of London,Power of the Lord Maior of London, in breaches and creeks▪ in Breaches and in Creeks, as in the River, so farre as it ebbeth and floweth: ex∣cept in the Kings ground, or in the li∣berties and franchises of others. 1. Eliz. Chap. 17. None shall with a∣ny maner of Net,Against Nets, Weeles, and other Engines, for the de∣stroying of Fish. Weele, But-eayning, Kepper, Lymecreele, Raw Fagnet, Trolnet, Trymnet, Scalboat, Webli∣ster, Sturlamet, or with any other de∣vice or engines, made of cheare, wooll∣bine, canvas; or shall by any heeling-Nets, or Trimbleboat, or any other de∣vice, engine, cautelles, wayes or means soever, heretofore made or devised, or hereafter to bee made or devised, take and kill any yong brood, spawne, or frie of Eeles, Salmon, Pike or Pickerell, or of any other Fish, in any floudgate, pipe or the taile of any Mill, Weare, or in a∣ny straites, streames, brookes, Rivers, salt or fresh. Secondly,For kil∣ling of Sal∣mons and Trows out of season. none shall take and kill any Salmons and Trowts, not being in season, being kepper Salmons, or kep∣per Trowts, or shedder Salmons or shedder Trowts. Thirdly,Length of Pike, Pic∣kerel, Sal∣mon, Trowt, Barbel, &c. none shall take and kill a∣ny Pike or Pickerell, not being in length ten intches Fish, and more; nor any Salmon, not being 16. intches fish, and more; nor any Trowt, not being eight intches; nor any Barbell, not being 12. intches, and more. Fourthly,Order for fishing with Nets and Tra∣mels. none to fish with any Nets, Tramels, Keep, Weare, Helme, Creele; or by any other Engine, device, wayes or meanes; but onely with Net or Tra∣mell; wherof every mesh or mash shall be two intches and an halfe broad; Ang∣ling excepted. A Provisio,An Excep∣tion. that this shall not extend to Smelts, Roches, Minoes, Bulheads, Gudgeons or Eeles, in place where the same have beene used to be taken.Penalty for offen∣ders. The Offenders to lose for every of∣fence 20. shillings, and the fish; and also the unlawfull Nets, Engines and Instruments. The Maior of London (inter alia) shall have full power and authority by this Act,The May∣or of Lon∣don his power for enquirie, &c. to enquire of all offences commit∣ted contrary to this Act, by the oathes of twelve men or more, and to heare and determine all and every the same. The paines and forfeitures to be at the use of every such person and persons (being no body politick nor corporate,For the paines & forfei∣tures. or head of the same) before whom such conviction shall be had: and to the use of every body politicke and corporate, that hereafter have lawfully had any fines, &c. upon such conviction. 5. By Inquisition. By two Inquisitions,Inquisiti∣ons at Raynam & at Graves∣end, before the Lord Maior of London, Conser∣vator, &c. the one taken at Raynam in Essex, the other at Gravesend in Kent: 9. Hen. 5. before William Cam∣bridge, Grocer, then Lord Maior of London, and Conservator of the waiters of Thames and Medway; it was presen∣ted, That where by the ancient ordi∣nances of London, the Mesches of Nets should be two intches in the forepart, and one intch in the hinder-part. And further, it was thereby found, that the offences in the same Inquisition, are con∣tra libertates & consuetudines Civitatis. And it was adjudged, that the Nets should be burned, according to the an∣cient custome in that behalfe provided. 6. By Decrees. In 8. H. 4. The Maior and Alder∣men of London did exhibite their hum∣ble Petition to the Kings Councell,The long conserva∣tion of the River of Thames ex∣hibited to the Coun∣cell of K. Hen. 4. re∣citing that (time out of minde) they have had the Conservation and corre∣ction of the River of Thames, and of all Trinckes, Nets and other Engins what∣soever, in the Rivers of Thames and Med∣way placed, and have used to make a Subconservator under them: And com∣plained, that Alexander Bonner, then Subcōservator, having done his duty in removing Kiddels,Abusers of the sub∣conservator of the River. he was evil entreated by the owners: the same owners dwel∣ling in Erith, Pratriferry, Barking, Wool∣wich, and other places in the Counties of Kent and Essex. And upon hearing of the matter in Camera Stellata, they were found guilty, and constrained to submit
themselves to the Lord Maior, and or∣dered (alwaies) to bring their Nets to the Lord Maior, before they should use them: And that the Kiddels then taken, should be at the disposition of the Lord Maior: and the offenders made their submission accordingly. 7. By Letters Patents. A Grant made by King E. 4. to the E. of Pembrooke,A Grant to the Earle of Pembrooke for buil∣ding of a Weare in the Thames cancelled afterward. for building a Weare in the River of Thames: which Grant was canceled at the request of the Lord Maior and Aldermen, upon shewing of their right, for that it was contrary to their ancient liberties. At which time the Cities title to the conservacie of the River of Thames and Medway, was at large set forth, and is recited to have beene shewne to the Lord Chancelour, and to the Earle and his Councell; and was afterward allowed, and the Patent thereupon cancelled. 8. By Proclamations. By Proclamation made by King H. 8. in 34. of his Reigne,The con∣servacy of the Thames to the Lord Maior, without interrup∣tion. it is affirmed, that the Lord Maior and his predecessors, have had by divers Grants of the Kings of England, and by Acts of Parliament, and have also long enjoyed the conser∣vacy of Thames, without interruptiō or impediment of the said King Hen. 8. or of any of his Subjects. And by the same Proclamation it was commanded, that none should resist, deny, or impugne the Lord Maior and his Deputy, in do∣ing or executing any thing, for the con∣servacie of the River, and of the Fish and Frie within the same. 9. By Report. A Controversie being betweene the Lord Admirall and the Lord Maior,For mea∣suring of Coales, and other things on the River of Thames, a contro∣versie. for the measuring of Coales and other things upon the Thames: it then fell in∣to consideration, to whom the conser∣vacie of the said River did belong. Which cause, in Anno 1597. was by the Lords of the Queenes most Honou∣rable Privie Councell, referred to the then Atturney generall, and Solliciter; who certified (among other things) that the conservacy of the River of Thames did, and ought to belong to the Citie of London. 10. By Quo Warranto. 3. Iacobi Regis,A Quo Warranto brought a∣gainst the Citie for the Rivers conserva∣cie. A Quo Warranto was brought against the Citie in the Exche∣quer, to know, by what title they clai∣med the conservacie of the River of Thames, and of the waters of Medway: The Citie made their title to the same, by antient prescription: and judgement was given for them. For proofe of Vsage. 1. By ancient Ordinances. 2. By punishment of offenders. THe Lord Maior and Aldermen have (time out of minde) made Ordinances,Times & manner of fishing. concerning the good governement of the River of Thames, for the times and manners of Fishing beneath London Bridge East∣ward, to be observed upon paines. And it appeareth, (that from time to time) from the time of King Hen. 3. and so downeward,Remo∣ving of all unlawfull Engines for fishing. the Lord Maior hath re∣moved Kiddels, Weares, Trinkes, and other unlawfull Engines, and hath re∣formed the disorders of such as have of∣fended in the River of Thames;Punish∣ment of offenders. and pu∣nished offenders, sometimes by impri∣sonment, sometimes by Fine, and by burning of their unlawfull Nets. 3. By Writs and Precepts. 9. H. 5. Precepts under the Teste of the Lord Maior,Precept for the re∣curning of Iuries. to the Shiriffes of Kent and Essex, for the returning of Juries before the Lord Maior, to enquire of offences done in the River of Thames. 4. By Accompts. In the accompts of the Chamberlaine of London,Accompts of the Chamber∣laine of London. from 17. of R. 2. to 11. of Eliz. Reginae, it appeareth, that the Wa∣ter-Bailiffe of London hath made search for unlawfull Nets, in the waters of Thames and Medway. 5. By Commissions. 9. H. 5. Commission to the Lord Maior,Commis∣sion for execution of Acts of Parlia∣ment. to put in execution the Acts of Parliament, made for the conservacie of Thames and Medway; and to enquire of all offences made or done in the said waters, and to punish the delinquents for the same.
A like Commission 3. H. 6. A like Commission 1. Eliz. A like Commission 1. Iacobi. And all these, or the like Commissi∣ons in this case, were and are directed to the Lord Maior for the time being. 6. By continuall claime. 37. H. 8. Letters from the Lord Ad∣mirall, A stay mo∣ved for matters in question, by letters from my Lord Ad∣mirall. for stay of such matters as were then in question, betweene his Lord∣ship and the Citie, concerning the Ju∣risdiction of this Citie upon the Thames. 3. Edw. 6. Order, that the Cham∣berlaine should take care,An order for stay of Inquests. for stay of certaine Inquests, charged by vertue of a Commission, directed to the Lord Admirall, to enquire of abuses used in fishing beneath the Bridge. 4. Edw. 6. Master Common Serje∣ant, The Cities authority to pull downe weares in the River. appointed to repaire to the Duke of Somerset, and to informe his Lord∣ship of the Cities authority, in pulling downe Weares within the River of Thames. 6. Edw. 6. Order, that suit should be made to the Kings Majesty and his Councell,Determi∣nation of the Cities jurisdictiō. for the determination and al∣lowance of the Cities Jurisdiction and interest in the River of Thames. 1. Mariae Reginae, A great number of the Fishermen of the East side of Lon∣don, present in the Court of the Lord Maior and Aldermen,Obediēce comman∣ded to the Water-Bayliffe. were comman∣ded to obey the Water-Bayliffe: And that one Hunter of the Admiraltie, should be warned to be before the Lord Maior and Aldermen, at the next Court to be holden for the same matter. 1. Eliz. Reginae,Commit∣tees ap∣pointed a∣bout the contro∣versie. Certaine Commit∣tees appointed to conferre with the L. Admirall, touching the controversie be∣tweene his Honour and the Citie, con∣cerning the conservacie of the River of Thames. 3. Eliz.Commit∣tees for the jurisdi∣ction of the River. Certaine Committees ap∣pointed to attend the Lord Admirall, concerning the Jurisdiction of the Ri∣ver of Thames. 7. Eliz.For the same cause. The Lord Admirall to bee conferred with, touching the Cities Ju∣risdiction in the River of Thames. 8. Eliz.The Cities right to the con∣servacy. L. Admirall to be conferred with, touching the Cities right to the conservacy of the River of Thames. 13. Eliz. L. Admirall to be moved, that the Citie may enjoy their liberties in Thames and Medway.The Cities liberty in the River. 17. Eliz.The Cities title East∣ward. Aldermen and others, to conferre with the Lord Admirall, for the Cities title in the River eastward. 23. Eliz.The Con∣servacy be∣low the Bridge. Mr. Norton and others ap∣pointed to attend on the Lord Treasu∣rer of England, and to informe his Lord∣ship touching the Cities title to the conservacie of the River of Thames be∣low London Bridge. 23. Eliz. Sessions appointed for the conservancie of the River of Thames,Sessions for the conserva∣cy East∣ward. the ninth of October at Barking in Essex, and on Wednesday following, to be kept at Woolwith in Kent. 24. Eliz.Aldermen about the cōservacy. Certaine Aldermen ap∣pointed to treat with the Lord Admi∣rall, touching the conservacy. 29. Aldermen appointed to the L. Admirall,Aldermen againe ap∣pointed about the Cities right. and to informe his Lordship touching the Cities right to the conser¦vacie of the River of Thames, from Lon∣don Bridge, to Yenland and the Recul∣vers. In the Letters Patents,The kings letters pa∣tents to the City. granted by King Iames of happy memory, in the 3. yeere of his reigne; the Cities title to the conservacie of the River of Thames and the waters of Medway, is recited and set downe at large. And therein men∣tion is made, that the Citie hath beene interrupted in the said office, and a doubt conceived, that the same did not belong to his Highnesse Citie of Lon∣don. His Majestie therefore (of his e∣speciall grace and favour to the Citie of London) Ad omnem controversiam in hac parte temporibus tam praesentibus quàm fu∣turis tollendam, ac omne dubium amoven∣dum: did by those his Letters Patents, grant, ratifie and confirme to the Citie of London, the conservacie of the said River of Thames, and waters of Medway. So much concerning the Right and Vsage. Now,Concer∣ning the extent of the word cōservacy. de re ipsa. This word Conser∣vancie, doth extend it selfe to the pre∣servation of the streame, and the banks of the River; as also the Fish and Frie within the same. For by the Lawes of the Land, all navigable Rivers are the high streames of the King,Navigable Rivers are as Via Re∣gia. for the pas∣sage of Ships, Boats, &c. As the high∣way is Via Regia, for the people to passe
by. And if the bankes be not kept from decaying and incroachment: it will not only be an annoyance to the River it selfe, by diverting the water, and hin∣dring the Navigation; but will also an∣noy the grounds next adjoyning to the same.Due sea∣sons for taking fish And if the Fish be taken at un∣due seasons, and the Frie not kept and preserved, the fishing will be soone de∣stroyed. And first touching the streame:Enquirie for the streame, Weares, Kidels, En∣gines, &c. in the Ri∣vers for hindring passage. you are to enquire whether any person or persons have erected any Weares, Kid∣dels, or Engines, or knocked any Posts, Piles, or Stakes within the Rivers, or a∣ny part thereof, which may (in any sort) hinder the streame, or the navigation, or passage of any Ships, Barges, Boats, or vessels within the same. And whe∣ther any have cast any soyle, dust or rub∣bish, or other filth whatsoever, into the same. You are to present the persons, times, and places, touching the com∣mitting of every such offence. Secondly, you are to enquire of all encroachments upon the River, and the bankes of the same:For en∣crochmēts on the Ri∣ver and bankes. and of all Bridges, Flood-gates, Mill-dammes, and such like annoyances, erected and builded upon, or neere to the bankes of the same River; and where, and by whom, and when the same were done. Thirdly,For fishing at undue seasons, & with un∣lawfull nets, &c. for the preservation of the Fish and Frie within the River, you are to enquire, whether any Fishermen, or others, have fished at any undue or pro∣hibited seasons, or with any unlawfull and prohibited Nets, or Engines: and when, where, and by whom every such offence was committed. Thus much for a generall direction. But for your more particular instructi∣on, and for the ease of your memories, here are certain printed Articles,Articles for more particular instructiō. which you shall have with you; to every one of which you shall give a particular an∣swer. The like charge was given by the said Master Common Serjeant, on the next day following, at Lee, in the County of Essex; and the like Sessions kept there for the same purpose. The Towne-ditch without the Wall of the CITIE. THe Ditch, which partly now remaineth,Lib. Dunsta∣ble. and com∣passed the wall of the Ci∣tie, Ditch a∣bout Lon∣don 200. foot broad Lib. Trin. was begun to be made by the Londoners, in the yeere 1211. and finished 1213. the 15. of K. Iohn: this ditch being then made of 200. foot broad, caused no small hin∣drance to the Canons of the holy Trini∣tie, whose Church stood neere Ealdgate, for that the said ditch passed through their ground from the Tower unto Bi∣shopsgate. This Ditch being originally made for the defence of the Citie, was also long time together carefully clean∣sed and maintained, as need required: but now of late neglected, and forced eyther to a very narrow, and the same a filthy channell, or altogether stopped up, for Gardens planted, & houses buil∣ded thereon, even to the Wall, and in many places upon both Ditch & Wall, houses are builded, to what danger of the Citie, I leave to wiser consideration than mine owne: and can but wish that reformation might be had. In the yeere of Christ 1354. 28. Ed. 3. the ditch of this Citie flowing over the banke into the Tower ditch,Ditch of the Citie overflow∣ed the banke, in∣to the Tower Ditch. the King commanded the said ditch of the Citie to be cleansed and so ordered, that the o∣verflowing thereof, should not force any filth into the Tower ditch. Ann. 1379. Iohn Philpot, Maior of Lon∣don, caused this ditch to be clensed, and every houshold to pay 5. d. which was for a dayes worke toward the charges therof. R. 2. in the 10. of his reigne, gran∣ted a Toll to be taken of wares sold by water or by land for 10. yeeres, towards repairing the wall, & clensing the ditch. Thomas Fawconer Maior, 1414. caused the ditch to be clensed. Ralph Ioseline Maior, 1477. caused the whole ditch to be cleansed, and so from time to time it was cleansed and other∣wise reformed: namely, in 1519. the 10 of Hen. 8. for clensing and scowring the
ditch, betweene Ealdgate and the Po∣sterne next the Tower ditch: the chiefe ditcher had by the day 7. pence, the se∣cond ditcher 6. pence, the other dit∣chers, 5. pence. And every vagabond (for so were they then termed) one pen∣ny the day, meat and drink, at the char∣ges of the Citie. Sum. 95. l. 3. s. 4. d. In my remembrance also the same was cleansed, namely the Moore ditch, when Sir William Hollies was Maior, in the yeere 1540. and not long before, from the Tower of London to Ealdgate. It was againe cleansed in the yeere 1549. Henry Ameotes being Maior, at the charges of the Companies. And a∣gaine 1569. the 11. of Q. Eliz. for clean∣sing the same Ditch, betweene Ealdgate and the Posterne, and making a new Sewere, and Wharfe of Timber, from the head of the Posterne into the towne ditch, 814. l. 15. s. 8. d. Before the which time, the said ditch lay open, without wall or pall, having therein great store of very good fish,Plenty of good fish in the Towne ditch. of divers sorts, as many men yet living, who have taken and tasted them, can well witnes: but now no such matter, the charge of cleansing is spared, and great profit made by letting out the bankes, with the spoile of the whole ditch. I am not ignorant of two Fifteenes granted by a common Councell, in the yeere 1595. for the reformation of this ditch, and that a small portion thereof, to wit, betweene Bishopsgate and the Po∣sterne called Mooregate, was cleansed, and made somewhat broader than it was before: but filling againe very fast, by reason of over-raising the ground neere adjoyning, therefore never the better: and I will so leave it, for I can∣not helpe it. Bridge of this Citie. THe originall founda∣tion of London bridge,London Bridge first of imber. by report of Bartho∣lomew Linsted, alias Fowle, last Prior of Saint Mary Overees Church in South∣warke, A Ferry over the Thames be∣tweene London Bridge & Southwark. was this: A Ferry being kept in the place where now the Bridge is buil∣ded, at length the Ferry-man and his wife deceasing, left the same Ferry to their onely Daughter, a Maiden, na∣med Mary, which with the goods left her by her parents, as also with the profits rising of the said Ferry, builded an House of Sisters, in place where now standeth the East part of Saint Mary Overees Church, above the Queere, where shee was buried, unto which house shee gave the oversight and profits of the Ferry. But afterward, the said House of Sisters being conver∣ted into a Colledge of Priests, the Priests builded the Bridge of Timber, as all other the great Bridges of this Land were, and from time to time kept the same in good reparations; till at length, considering the great charges which were bestowed in the re∣pairing the same, there was (by ayd of the Citizens and others) a Bridge buil∣ded with stone, as shall be shewed. But first of the Timber Bridge,W. Malmes. the Antiquity thereof being great, but un∣certaine: I remember to have read, that in the yeere of Christ 994. Sweyn King of Denmarke besieging the Citie of Lon∣don, both by water and by land, the Ci∣tizens manfully defended themselves, and their King Ethelred, so as part of their enemies were slaine in battaile, and part of them were drowned in the River of Thames, because in their hastie rage they tooke no heed of the Bridge. Moreover, in the yeere 1016. Can∣tus the Dane, with a great Navie came up to London, and on the South of the Thames, caused a Trench to bee cast, through the which his Ships were tow∣ed into the west side on the Bridge, and then, with a deepe Trench and straight siege he compassed the City about. Also 1052. E. Goodwin, with the like Navy, taking his course up the River of Thames, and finding no resistance on the Bridge, he sailed up the South side. Fur∣ther, 1067. Will. Conq. in his Charter to the Church of Saint Peter at
Westminster, confirmed to the Monkes, serving God there, a Gate in London, then called Buttolphs Gate, with a Wharfe, which was at the head of Lon∣don Bridge. We read likewise, that in the yeere 1114. the 14. of Henry the first, the Ri∣ver of Thames was so dryed up, and such want of Water there, that betweene the Tower of London & the Bridge, and under the Bridge,Men went dry-shod under Lon∣don bridge. not only with horse, but also a great number of men, women and children did wade over on foot. In the yeere 1122. the 22. of Hen. 1. Thomas Arden gave to the Monkes of Bermondsey,Lib. Ber∣mond. the Church of S. George in Southwarke, and five shillings rent by the yeere, out of the Land pertaining to London Bridge. I have also seene a Charter under seale, to the effect following: Henry King of England,Henry 1. to Ralfe Bi∣shop of Chichester, and all the Ministers of Sussex, sendeth greeting. Know ye, &c. I command by my Kingly authority, that the Mannor called Alceston, which my Father gave, with other Lands, to the Ab∣bey of Battle, be free and quiet from Shires and Hundreds, and all other Customes of earthly servitude, as my Father held the same, most freely and quietly; and namely, from the worke of London bridge, and the worke of the Castle at Pevensey: and this I command upon my forfeiture. Witnesse William de Pontlearche at Berry. The which Charter, with the seale very faire, remaineth in the custody of Ioseph Holland, Gent. In the yeere 1136 the first of King Stephen,Lib. Berm. a fire began in the house of one Ailewarde,Lib. Trin. neere unto London stone, which consumed East to Ealdgate, and West to S. Erkenwalds shrine in Pauls Church:London Bridge brent. the Bridge of Timber over the River of Thames was also burnt, &c. but afterwards againe repaired. For Fitz stephen writeth, that in the Reigne of King Stephen, and of Henry the 2. when pastimes were shewed on the Ri∣ver of Thames, men stood in great num∣ber on the Bridge, Wharfes, and Hou∣ses, to behold. Now in the yeere 1163. the same Bridge was not onely repayred but new made of timber,London Bridge of Timber new built. as before, by Peter Cole-church, Priest and Chaplaine. Thus much for the old timber-bridge, maintained partly by the proper Lands thereof, partly by the liberality of di∣vers persons, and partly by taxations in divers Shires, as I have proved for the space of 215. yeeres, before the Bridge of stone was built. Now touching the foundation of the stone Bridge,London Bridge of stone founded. it followeth: About the yeere 1176. the stone Bridge over the River of Thames at London, was be∣gun to be founded by the foresaid Peter of Cole-Church, neere unto the Bridge of Timber, but somewhat more towards the West: for I reade, that Buttolph-Wharfe was in the Conquerours time at the head of London Bridge.Lib. Waver∣ley. The King assisted this worke: A Cardinall then being Legate here, and Richard Arch∣bish. of Cant. gave one thousand marks towards the foundation. The course of the River (for the time) was turned an∣other way about by a Trench, cast for that purpose; beginning (as is supposed) east about Radriffe, and ending in the west about Patricksey, now termed Bat∣tersey. This worke, to wit, the Arches, Chappell, and stone Bridge over the Thames at London,London Bridge 33. yeeres in building. having been 33. yeers in building, was in the yeere 1209. fini∣shed by the worthy Merchants of Lon∣don, Serle Mercer, William Almaine, and Benedict Botewrite, principall masters of that worke: for Peter Cole-Church decea∣sed foure yeeres before, and was buried in the Chappell on the Bridge, in the yeere 1205. King Iohn gave certaine void places in London to build on, the profits thereof to remaine towards the charges of buil∣ding and repayring of the same Bridge. A Mason, being Master-workman of the Bridge, builded (from the foundati∣on) the large Chappell on that Bridge,Chappell on the Bridge, on the East side. of his owne charges; which Chappell was then endowed for two Priests, foure Clarkes, &c. besides Chanteries; since founded by Iohn Hatfield, and others. After the finishing of this Chappell, which was the first building upon those Arches, sundry houses (at times) were erected, and many charitable men gave lands,Gifts givē to London Bridge, in a table no∣ted for po∣sterity. tenements, or summes of money towards the maintenance thereof; all which was sometimes noted, and in a Table faire written for posterity:
remaining in the Chappell, till the same Chappell was turned to a dwelling house, and then removed to the Bridge-house. The effect of which Table I was willing to have published, in this Booke, if I could have obtained the sight thereof: but making the shorter worke, I finde by the accompt of William Mari∣ner and Christopher Eliot, Wardens of London Bridge, from Michaelmas the 22. of Hen. 7. untill Michaelmas next ensu∣ing, by one whole yeere, that all the payments and allowance came to 815. l. 17. s. 2. d. ob. as there is shewed by particulars: by which accompt then made, may be partly ghessed the great charges and discharges of that Bridge at this day, when things bee stretched to so great a price. And now to actions on this Bridge. The first action to be noted, was la∣mentable: Actions on London Bridge to be noted. for within foure yeeres after the finishing thereof, to wit, in the yeere 1212. on the 10. of Iuly at night, the Borrought of Southwarke, upon the South side of the River of Thames, as al∣so the Church of our Lady of the Ca∣nons there, being on fire, and an excee∣ding great multitude of people passing the Bridge, either to extinguish and quench it, or else to gaze and behold it; suddenly the North part,Liber Dun∣mew. by blowing of the South wind, was also set on fire, and the people which were even now passing the Bridge,Guat. Co∣vent. perceiving the same,W. Packētō. would have returned,London Bridge pe∣rished by fire. but were stopped by the fire; and it came to passe, that as they stayed or protracted the time, the other end of the Bridge also, namely, the South end, was fired; so that the people thronging themselves betweene the two fires, did nothing else but ex∣pect present death. Then there came to aide them many ships and vessels, in∣to which the multitude so unadvisedly rushed, that the ships being thereby drowned, they all perished. It was said, that through the fire and shipwracke, there were destroyed above three thou∣sand persons, whose bodies were found in part, or halfe burned, besides those that were wholly burnt to ashes, and could not be found.Five ar∣ches of London Bridge borne downe. About the yeere one thousand two hundred eighty two, through a great frost and deepe snow, five Arches of London Bridge were borne downe, and carried away. In the yeere 1289. the Bridge was so sore decayed for want of reparations,Patent the 14. of Edw. the 2. that men were afraid to passe thereon, and a Subsidy was granted towards the amendment thereof, Sir Iohn Britaine being Custos of London, 1381. a great collection or gathering was made, of all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ec∣clesiasticall persons, for the reparations of London Bridge. In Anno 1381. Wat Tyler, and other Rebels of Kent, by this Bridge entred the Citie, as yee may reade in my Sum∣mary and Annales. In the yeere 1395. on S. Georges day, was a great Justing on London Bridge, betwixt David Earle of Craford of Scot∣land, and the Lord Wels of England: In the which, the Lord Wels was at the third course borne out of the Saddle: Which History proveth, that at that time the Bridge (being coaped on ey∣ther side) was not replenished with hou∣ses builded thereupon, as since it hath beene, and now is. The next yeere,Nine per∣sons crow∣ded to death on London Bridge. on the 30. of Novem∣ber, the yong Queene Isabel, common∣ly called the little, (for she was but 8. yeeres old) was conveyed from Ken∣nington, beside Lambeth, through South∣warke, to the Tower of London; and such a multitude of people went out to see her, that on London Bridge nine persons were crowded to death, of whom the Prior of Tiptre, a place in Essex, was one, and a Matron on Cornehill, was another. The Tower on London Bridge, at the North end of the draw-bridge,Tower on London Bridge builded. (for that bridge was then readily to bee drawne up, as well to give passage for ships to Queenehith, as for the resistance of any forreigne force) was begun to be builded in the yeere 1426. Iohn Rain∣well being Maior. Another Tower there is on the said Bridge, over the Gate at the South end towards Southwarke, whereof in another place shall be spoken. In the yeere 1450. Iacke Cade,Iacke Cade entred the Citie by the Bridge and other Rebels of Kent, by this Bridge en∣tred the Citie, hee strake his sword on London stone, and said himselfe then to be Lord of the Citie; but they were by the Citizens overcome on the same
Bridge, and put to flight, as in my An∣nales. In the yeere 1471. Thomas the Ba∣stard Fawconbridge besieged this Bridge,Bastard Fawcon∣bridge be∣sieged the Bridge. burned the Gate, and all the Houses to the draw-bridge, being at that time 13 in number. In the yeere 1481. an house,An house of the Bridge fell downe. called The common siege, on London Bridge, fell downe into the Thames: through the fall whereof five men were draw∣ned. In the yeere 1553. the third of Fe∣bruary,Sir Thomas Wyat lay in Southwarke at the Bridge foot. Sir Thomas Wyat and the Kentish men, marched from Depeford towards London, after knowledge whereof, forthwith the draw-bridge was cut downe and the Bridge gates shut.The draw∣bridge cùt downe. Wyat and his people entred Southwarke, where they lay till the 6. of Feb. but could get no entry of the Citie by the Bridge, the same was then so well defended by the Citizens, the Lord W. Howard assisting: wherefore bee removed towards King∣stone, &c. as in my Annales. To conclude, of this Bridge over the said River of Thames,The bridge described. I affirme, as in o∣ther my descriptions, That it is a worke very rare, having with the draw-bridge 20. arches, made of square stone, of height 60. foot, and in bredth 30. foot, distant one from another 20. foot, com∣pact and joyned together with vaults and cellars; upon both sides be houses builded, so that it seemeth rather a con∣tinuall street than a bridge: for the for∣tifying whereof, against the incessant assaults of the River, it hath overseers and officers, (viz.) Wardens, as afore∣said, and others. Fleet-bridge in the west,Fleet bridge. without Lud∣gate, a bridge of stone, faire coaped on either side with iron pikes, on the which towards the South, bee also certaine Lanthornes of stone, for lights to be pla∣ced in Winter evenings, for commodi∣ty of travellers. Vnder this Birdge runs a water, sometimes called (as I have said) the River of the Wels; since, Turne∣mill brooke; now, Fleet Dike, because it runneth by the Fleet, and sometime about the Fleet, so under Fleet-bridge in∣to the River of Thames. This Bridge hath beene farre greater in times past; but lessened, as the wa∣ter-course hath beene narrowed. It seemeth, this last Bridge to bee made or repaired at the charges of Iohn Wels Maior, in the yeere 1431: for on the coping is ingraved, Wels imbraced by Angels, like as on the Standard in Cheape, which hee also builded. Thus much of the Bridge: for of the water∣course and decay thereof, I have spoken in another place. Oldborne-bridge,Oldborne bridge. over the said River of Wels more towards the North, was so called, of a Boorne that sometimes ran¦downe Oldborne Hill, into the said Ri∣ver: This bridge of stone, like as Fleet-bridge, from Ludgate west, serveth for passengers, with carriage or otherwise, from Newgate toward the West and by North. Cowbridge, more North over the same water,Cowbridge. by Cowbridge street, or Cow-lane: this bridge being lately decayed, ano∣ther of timber is made somewhat more North, by Chicklane, &c. Bridges over the Towne-ditch, there are divers:Bridges over the Towne∣Ditch. to wit, without Ealdgate, without Bishopsgate, the Posterne cal∣led Mooregate, the Posterne of Creplegate, without Aldersgate, the Posterne of Christs Hospitall, Newgate and Ludgate: all these be over-paved levell with the streets. But one other there is of Tim∣ber, over the River of Wels, or Fleet dike, betweene the precinct of the Blacke Fri∣ers, and the House of Bridewell. There have beene of old time also,Bridges over the course of Walbrooke. di∣vers bridges in sundry places over the course of Walbrooke, as before I have partly noted; besides Horshooe bridge, by the Church of S. Iohn Baptist,Horshooe bridge. now called S. Iohns upon Walbrooke. I reade that of old time, every person having Lands on either side of the said brooke, should cleanse the same, and mend and repaire the bridges so far as their Lands extended. More, in the eleventh of Edward the third, the inhabitants upon the course of this brooke, were forced to pile and wall the sides thereof. Also, that in the third of Henry the fifth, this water-course had many brid∣ges,Walbrooke vaulted o∣ver, and paved with stone since vaulted over with bricke, and the streets where-through it passed, so paved, that the same water-course is now hardly discerned. For order was taken in the second of Edw. the fourth,
that such persons as had any ground ly∣ing on eyther side of the River of Wal∣brooke, should vault and pave it over, so farre as his ground extended. And thus much for Bridges in this Citie may suffice. Gates in the Wall of this Citie. GAtes in the Wall of this Citie of old time, were foure:Gates of London, 4. East, West, North, & South. to wit, Ealdgate, for the East, Aldersgate for the North, Ludgate for the West, and the Bridgegate over the River of Thames for the South; but of later times, for the ease of Citizens and passengers, divers other Gates and Posternes have beene made, as shall be shewed. In the reigne of Henry the second (saith Fitzstephen) there were seven double gates in the wall of this City,Seven double gates in the wall of this Citie. but he na∣meth them not. It may therefore bee supposed, hee meant for the first, the Gate next the Tower of London, now commonly called, the Posterne: the next, to be Ealdgate; the third, Bishopsgate; the fourth, Aldersgate; the fist, Newgate; the sixth, Ludgate; the seventh, Bridge∣gate.Other gates buil∣ded beside. Since the which time hath been buil∣ded the Posterne called Mooregate, a Po∣sterne from Christs Hospitall towards S. Bartholomewes Hospitall, &c. Now of every of these Gates, and Posternes in the Wall, and also of certaine water∣gates over the River of Thames, several∣ly somewhat may, and shall be noted, as I finde authority, or reasonable con∣jecture to warrant me. The first Gate Eastward. FOr the first,Posterne by the Tower. now called the Po∣sterne by the Tower of London, it sheweth by that part which yet remaineth, to have beene a faire and strong arched Gate, partly builded of hard stone of Kent, and partly of stone brought from Cane in Normandy, since the Conquest, and foundation of the high Tower, and served for passengers on foot out of the East, from thence through the Citie to Ludgate in the West. The ruine and overthrow of this Gate and Posterne began in the yeere 1190. the second of Richard the first, when William Longshampe, Bishop of Ely, Chancelour S. England, caused a part of the Citie Wall; to wit, from the said Gate towards the River of Thames, to the white Tower, to be bro∣ken downe,Wall em∣battelled about the Tower of London. for the enlarging of the said Tower, which he then incompassed farre wide about with a Wall embattel∣led, and is now the outer Wall.Ditch a∣bout the Tower. He al∣so caused a broad and deepe ditch to be made without the same Wall, inten∣ding, to have derived the River of Thames with her Tides, to have flowed about it, which would not be. But the South side of this Gate, being then by undermining at the foundation loosed, and greatly weakned; at length, to wit, after 200. yeeres and odde,Posterne sell downe. the same fell downe, in the yeere 1440. the 18. of Henrie the sixth, and was never since by the Citizens re-edified. Such was their negligence then, which hath bred some trouble to their successors; since, they suffered a weake and woodden building to bee there made, inhabited by persons of lewd life, often by inquest of Portsoken Ward presented, but not re∣formed: whereas in former times, the said Posterne was accounted of, as other Gates of the Citie, and was appointed to men of good credit. Amongst other, I have read, that in 49. Ed. 3. Iohn Cobbe was admitted Custos of the said Postern, and all the habitation thereof, for terme of his life, by W. Walworth, then Maior of London, 1374. being the first time of his Maioralty; for he was L. Maior againe in An. 1380. More, that Iohn Credy E∣squire, in the 21. of Rich. 2. was admit∣ted Custos of the said Posterne and ap∣purtenances, by R. Whittington, Maior, the Aldermen and Communalty, &c. Ealdgate. THe next Gate in the East,Ealdgate. is called Ealdgate, of the antiquity or age thereof. This is one, and the first of the foure principall Gates,
and also one of the seven double Gates, mentioned by Fitzstephen. It hath had two paire of Gates, though now but one, the hookes of them both remaine. Also there hath beene two Portclo∣ses, the one of them remained till the new building of the Gate, the other wanteth, and the place of letting downe was manifest. For Antiquity of the Gate, it appeareth by a Charter of King Edgar,Lib. Trinit. to the Knights of Knighton Guild, that in his dayes, the said Port was cal∣led Ealdgate, as ye may read in the Ward of Portsoken. Also Matild the Queene, wife to Henrie the first, having founded the Priorie of the Holy Trinity within Ealdgate, gave to the same Church, to Norman, the first Prior, and the Canons that devoutly served God there in the Port of Ealdgate,Soke or Court. the Soke or Franches thereunto belonging, with all customes, as free as shee held the same. In the which Charter, she nameth the House Christs Church, and reporteth Ealdgate to be of its demaine. More,Mat. Paris. I read in the yeere 1215. that in the civill Warres betweene King Iohn and his Barons, the Londoners assi∣sting the Barons faction, who then be∣sieged Northampton, and after came to Redford Castle, where they were well received by William Beauchampe, and Captane of the same: having then also secret intelligence, that they might en∣ter the Citie of London, if they would; they removed their Campe to Ware, from whence in the night comming to London, they entred Ealdgate, and pla∣cing guardians or keepers of the Gates, they disposed of all things in the Citie at their pleasure. They spoiled the Friers houses,Radul. cosh. and searched their coffers: which being done, Robert Fitzwater, Ieffrey Magna∣vile, Earle of Essex, and the Earle of Glocester, chiefe Leaders of the Armie, applyed all diligence to repaire the Gates and Walles of this Citie, with the stones taken from the Iewes broken houses; namely Ealdgate, being then most ruinous, (which had given them an easie entire) they repaired,Ealdgate new buil∣ded. or rather newly builded, after the manner of the Normans, strengly arched, with bul∣warkes of stone, brought from Cane in Normandy, and small Bricke, called Flanders tile, was brought from thence, such as hath beene here used since the Conquest, and not before. In the yeere 1471. the 11. of Edward the 4. Thomas the Bastard Fawconbridge,W. Dun∣thorne. having assembled a riotous companie of Shipmen and other,Thomas L. Fawcon∣bridge set upon Eald∣gate. in Essex and Kent, came to London with a great Na∣vie of Ships, neere to the Tower: where∣upon the Maior and Aldermen, by con∣sent of a common Councell, fortified all along the Thames side, from Bainards Castle to the Tower, with armed men, Gunnes, and other instruments of war, to resist the invasion of the Mariners, whereby the Thames side was safely pre∣served and kept, by the Aldermen and other Citizens, that assembled thither in great numbers. Whereupon the Re∣bels being denyed passage thorow the Citie that way, set upon Ealdgate, Bi∣shopsgate, Creplegate, Aldersgate, London bridge, and along the River of Thames; shooting arrowes and gunnes into the Citie,Suburbs burnt. fired the Suburbs, and burned more than threescore houses. And fur∣ther, on Sunday the eleventh of May, five thousand of them assaulting Eald∣gate, wanne the Bulwarkes,Rebels wanne the Bulwarks of Ealdgate. and entred the Citie; but the Portclose being let downe, such as had entred, were slaine: and Robert Basset, Alderman of Ealdgate Ward, with the Recorder, comman∣ded in the Name of God to draw up the Portclose: which being done, they issued out, and with sharpe shot and fierce fight, put their enemies backe so farre as Saint Buttolphus Church; by which time the Earle Rivers, and the Lieutenant of the Tower,Lieutenāt of the Tower as∣sisted the Citizens against the Rebels. was come with a fresh companie; which joyning together, discomfited the Rebels, and put them to flight; whom the afore∣said Robert Basset, with other Citizens, chased unto the Miles end, and from thence, some to Popular, some to Strat∣ford; flew many, and tooke many of them prisoners. In the meane while, the Bastard having assaied other pla∣ces upon the Water side, and little prevailing, fledde towards his Ships. Thus much for Ealdgate, as it was, and continued in those elder dayes: But the new building thereof remaineth till I come to speake of the Ward wherein the same Gate is situated.
Bishopsgate. THe third and next Gate toward the North,Bishopsgate. is called Bishopsgate: for that (as it may be supposed) the same was first builded by some Bi∣shop of London; though now unknown, when, or by whom: but true it is, that this Gate was first builded for the case of passengers toward the East, and by North; as into Norfolke, Suffolke, Cam∣bridge-shire, &c. The travellers into which parts (before the building of this Gate) were forced (passing out at Eald-gate) to goe East till they came unto the Miles end, and then turned on the left hand to Blethenhall-greene, to Cambridge-heath, and so North, or East and by North, as their journies lay. If they tooke not this way,A further way win∣ding a∣bout. by the East out at Ealdgate, they must then take their way by the North out at Aldersgate, through Aldersgatestreet, and Goswellstreet, to∣wards Iseldon, and by a crosse of stone on their right hand, set up for a marke by the North end of Golding-lane, to turne eastward through a long street, unto this day called Alderstreet, to ano∣ther crosse then there standing, where now a Smiths forge is placed, by Sewers ditch Church; and then to turne againe North towards Totenham, Enfield, Wal∣tham, Ware, &c. The eldest note that I read of this Bishopsgate, is, that Wiliam Blund one of the Shiriffes of London, in the yere 1210 sold to Serle Mercer, & william Almaine, Procurators or Wardens of London Bridge,Lib. Trim. all his Land, with the Garden, in the Parish of Saint Buttolph without Bishopsgate, between the Land of Richard Casiarin, towards the North, and the Land of Robert Crispie towards the South, and the high-way called Beare∣wards lane on the East, &c. Next,Charter. I read in a Charter, dated the yeere 1235. that Walter Brune, Citizen of London, and Rosia his Wife, having founded the Priorie or new Hospitall of our blessed Lady, since called S. Ma∣ry Spittle,Bishopsgate street without. without Bishopsgate, confirmed the same to the honour of God and our blessed Lady, for Canons regular. Also in the yeere 1247. Simeon Fitz∣Mary,Record. one of the Shiriffes of London, in the 29. of Henrie the third, founded the Hospitall of S. Mary called Bethlem, without Bishopsgate. Thus much for antiquity of this Gate. And now for repairing the same:Reparati∣ons of Bishopsgate. I finde, that Henry the 3. confirmed to the Merchants of the Haunce▪ that had a house in the Citie, called Gialla Theu∣tonicorum, certaine Liberties and Pri∣viledges: Edward the first also confir∣med the same; in the tenth yeere of whose reigne it was found, that the said Merchants ought of right to repaire the said Gate, called Bishopsgate. Whereupon Gerard Marbod,Bishopsgate repaired by the merchants of the Haunce. Alder∣man of the Haunce, and other, then re∣maining in the Citie of London, for themselves and all others, Merchants of the said Haunce, granted 210. markes sterling to the Maior and Citizens: and covenanted, that they and their succes∣sors should (from time to time) repaire the same Gate.Bishopsgate new buil∣ded. This Gate was againe beautifully builded in the yeere 1479. in the reigne of Edward the fourth, by the said Hannce Merchants. Moreover,Bishopsgate provided to have been new builded. in the yeere 1551. These Haunce Merchants, having prepared stone for that purpose, caused a new Gate to be framed, there to have beene set up: but then their liberties, through suit of our English Merchants, wer sea∣zed into the Kings hand, and so that worke was stayed, and the old Gate yet remaineth. Posterne of Mooregate. TOuching the next Posterne, cal∣led Mooregate,Posterne called Mooregate. I finde, that Tho∣mas Falconer, Maior about the yeere 1415. the third of Henry the 5. caused the Wall of the Citie to be bro∣ken neere unto Colemanstreet, and there builded a Posterne now called Moore∣gate, upon the Mooreside, where was never Gate before. This Gate he made for ease of the Citizens, that way to passe upon Cawseys into the Field for their recreation:The Fiold a meere marish ground. for the same Field was (at that time) a Marish. This Posterne was re-edified by William Hampton, Fishmonger, Maior, in the yeere 1472. In the yeere also 1511. the third of Hen. 8. Roger Achely Maior, caused Dikes and Bridges to be made, and the ground to be levelled, and made more commo∣dious for passage; since which time the
same hath beene heightned so much, that the Dikes and Bridges are covered: and it seemeth to me, that if it be made levell with the Battlements of the City Wall, yet will it be little the dryer, such was then the moorish nature of that ground. Posterne of Creplegate. THe next is the Posterne of Cre∣plegate, Posterne of Creple∣gate. so called long before the Conquest. For I reade in the History of Edmund, King of the East Angles,Abba Flo∣riacensis. written by Abba Floriacensis, and by Burchard,Burchard. sometime Secretary to Of∣fa, King of Mertia; but since then, by Iohn Lidgate, Monke of Bury, that in the yeere 1010. the Danes spoiling the Kingdome of the East Angles, Alwyne Bishop of Helmeham, caused the body of King Edmund the Martyr, to bee brought from Bedrisworth, (now called Bury S. Edmunds) through the King∣dome of East Saxons, and so to London, in at Creplegate. A place, saith mine Author, so called of Cripples begging there: and at which Gate, (it was said) the body entring, miracles were wrought, and some of the lame to goe upright, praising God. The body of King Ed∣mund rested, for the space of three yeers, in the Parish Church of Saint Gregory, neere unto the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul. Moreover, the Charter of William the Conquerour, confirming the foundation of the Colledge in Lon∣don, Martin le grand. called Saint Martin the great, hath these words: I doe give and grant to the same Church,Liber S. Barlilmew. and Canons serving GOD therein, all the lands, and the Moore with∣out the Posterne, which is called Creple∣gate, on either part of the Posterne. More I read, that Alfune builded the Parish Church of S. Giles, nigh a Gate of the Citie, called Porta contractorum, or Crip∣plesgate, about the yeere 1090. This Posterne was sometime a Pri∣son, Creplagate a prison for trespassers whereunto such Citizens and o∣thers, as were arrested for debt, or com∣mon trespasses, were committed, as they be now to the Compters. Which thing appeareth by a Writ of Edward the first in these words: Rex Vic. London salu∣tem. Record. Ex gravi querela B. capt. & detent. in prisona nostra de Criplesgate pro x. l. quas coram Radulpho de Sandwico, tunc Custod. Civitatis nostrae London, & I. de Blackwell Civis recognit. debit. &c. This Gate was new builded by the Brewers of London,Creplegate new buil∣ded. in the yeere 1244. as saith Fabians Manuscript. Edmund Shaw Goldsmith, Maior in the yeere one thousand foure hundred eighty three, at his decease, appointed by his Testament his Executors, with the cost of foure hundred Markes, and the stuffe of the old Gate, called Crip∣plesgate, to build the same Gate anew, which was performed and done in the yeere one thousand foure hundred nine∣ty one. Aldersgate. THe next is Aeldersgate or Alders∣gate, Aldersgate. so called, not of Aldrich, or of Elders, that is to say, an∣cient men, builders thereof; nor of El∣derne trees, growing there more abun∣dantly than in other places, as some have fabuled but for the very antiqui∣ty of the Gate it selfe,In a booke called, Be∣wre the Ct. as being one of the first foure Gates of the Citie, and serving for the Northerne parts, as Ealdgate for the East; which two Gates being both old Gates, are for difference sake called, the one Ealdgate, and the o∣ther Aldersgate. This is the fourth prin∣cipall Gate, and hath at sundry times beene increased with buildings; name∣ly, on the South side, or inner side, a great frame of Timber hath beene ad∣ded and set up, containing divers large roomes and lodgings. Also on the East side, is the addition of one great buil∣ding of Timber,A Well of great depth at Aldersgate. with one large floore, paved with stone, or tile, and a Well therein curbed with stone, of a great depth, and rising into the said Roome, two stories high from the ground: which well is the onely peculiar note belonging to that Gate; for I have not seene the like in all this Citie, to be rai∣sed so high. Iohn Day Stationer, a late famous Printer of many good Bookes, in our time dwelled in this Gate, and builded much upon the Wall of the Citie, towards the Parish Church of Saint Anne. Concerning the late new building of this Gate, we shall speake more there∣of, in the description of the Ward.
Posterne out of Christs Hospitall. THen there is also a Posterne gate made out of the Wall, postern out of Christs Ho∣spitall. on the North side of the late dissolved Cloister of Friers Minors, commonly of their habit called Gray Friers, now Christs Church and Hospitall. This Posterne was made in the sixth yeere of Edward the sixth, to passe from the said Hospitall of Christs Church, un∣to the Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield: and licence was given to the Lord Maior and Aldermen, to breake downe so much of the Cities Wall as should suffice to make the same passage: by vertue of an Act of common Coun∣cell, made 1. Augusti, Anno 6. E. 6. in the Maioralty of Sir Richard Dobbes, Knight. Newgate. THe next Gate on the West and by North,Newgate. is termed Newgate, a latelier builded than the rest, & is the fifth principall Gate. This Gate was first erected about the reigne of Henry the first, or of King Stephen, upon this occasion. The Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul,Pauls Church in London new buil∣ded. being burnt about the yeere 1086. in the Reigne of William the Conqueror, Mauritius, then Bishop of London, repaired not the old Church, as some have supposed; but began the foundation of a new worke, such as men then judged would never have beene performed, it was to them so wonder∣full for heighth, length, and breadth; as also in respect it was raised upon Ar∣ches or vaults, a kinde of workmanship brought in by the Normans, and never knowne to the Artificers of this Land before that time, &c. After Mauritius, Richard Beaumore did wonderfully ad∣vance the worke of the said Church, purchasing the large Streets and Lanes round about, wherein were wont to dwell many lay people; which grounds he beganne to compasse about with a strong wall of stone, and Gates. By meanes of this increase of the Church territory, but more by inclo∣sing of ground for so large a Coemitery, or Church-yard; the high and large Street, stretching from Ealdgate in the East, to Ludgate in the West, was in this place so crossed and stopped up, that the carriage through the City westward, was forced to passe without the said Churchyard wall on the North side, through Pater noster row, and then South down Ave Marie lane, and againe West through Bowyer row to Ludgate: or else out of Cheape, or Wathelingstreete, to turne South, through the old Change, then West through Carter lane, againe North up Creed lane, and then west to Ludgate. Which passage, by reason of so often turning, was very cumbersome and dangerous, both for horse and man. For remedy whereof, a new Gate was made,Newgate first buil∣ded, and the cause why. and so called, by which men and cattell, with all manner of carriages, might passe more directly (as before) from Ealdgate, through West Cheape by Pauls, on the North side, through S. Nicholas shambles and Newgate Market, to Newgate: and from thence to any part Westward over Oldborne-bridge, or turning without the Gate into Smith∣field, and through Iseldon, to any part North and by West. This Gate hath of long time beene a Gaole or Prison for Felons and Trespas∣sers, as appeareth by Records in the reigne of King Iohn, and of other Kings: amongst the which, I finde one testify∣ing, that in the yeere 1218. the third of King Henry the third,Close Roll. the King writeth unto the Shiriffes of London,Newgate a Gaole or prison∣house. comman∣ding them to repaire the Gaole of New∣gate, The King repaired it for the safe keeping of his priso∣ners, promising that the charges laid out, should be allowed unto them upon their accompt in the Exchequer. Moreover, in the yeere 1241. the Iewes of Norwich were hanged, for cir∣cumcising a Christian child, their house called the Thor, was pulled downe and destroyed. Aaron, the sonne of Abra∣ham, a Iew, at London, and the other Iewes were constrained to pay twenty thousand Marks, at two Termes in the yeere, or else to be kept perpetuall pri∣soners in Newgate of London, and in o∣ther prisons. 1255. King Henry the third lodged in the Tower of London, upon displea∣sure conceived towards the Citie of London, for the escape of Iohn Offrem, a prisoner, being a Clarke convict, out of Newgate, which had killed a Prior that
wa, of alliance to the King, as Cousin to the Queene: he sent for the Mayor and Sheriffes to come before him, to an∣swer the matter. The Maior laid the fault from him to the Sheriffes, foras∣much as to them belonged the keeping of all prisoners within the Citie, and so the Maior returned home; but the She∣riffes remained there prisoners,The She∣riffes of London pri∣soners in the Tower, for escape of a priso∣soner out of Newgate by the space of a moneth and more; and yet they excused themselves, in that the fault chiefly rested in the Bishops Offi∣cers: For whereas the prisoner was un∣der custodie, they (at his request) had granted licence, to imprison the offen∣der within the Gaole of Newgate; but so, as the Bishops Officers were charged to see him safely kept. The King not∣withstanding all this, demanded of the Citie 3000. Marks for a fine. In the yeere 1326. Robert Baldocke,The Kings Chancel∣lour priso∣ner in Newgate. the Kings Chancelour, was put in New∣gate the third of Edward the 3. In the yeere 1237. Sir Iohn Poultney gave foure Markes by the yeere, to the reliefe of prisoners in Newgate. In the yeere 1358. William Walworth gave somewhat, to relieve the prisoners in Newgate, so have many others since. In the yeere 1414. the Gaolers of Newgate and Ludgate dyed, and priso∣ners in Newgate, to the number of 64. In the yeere 1418. the Parson of Wor∣tham in Kent was imprisoned in New∣gate. The yeere 1412. the first of Henry 6. licence was granted to Iohn Coventre, Ienken Carpenter, and William Grove, exe∣cutors to Richard Whittington, to re-edi∣fie the Gaole of Newgate,Newgate new buil∣ded. which they did with his goods. Thomas Knowels, Grocer, sometimes Maior of London, by licence of Reynold, Prior of S. Bartholomews in Smithfield, and also of Iohn Wakering, Master of the Hospitall of S. Bartholomew, and his brethren, conveyed the waste of water, at the Cesterne neere unto the common. Fountaine,VVater conveyed to Newgate & Ludgate. and Chappell of S. Nicholas, (situate by the said Hospitall) to the Gaoles of Newgate and Ludgate, for the reliefe of the prisoners. Tuesday next after Palme Sunday, 1431. all the prisoners of Ludgate were conveyed into Newgate,Prisoners of Ludgate removed to Newgate by Walter Chart∣sey and Robert Large, Sheriffes of London. And on the 13. April, the same She∣riffes (through the false suggestion of Iohn Kingesell, Gaoler of Newgate) did fetch from thence 18. persons, freemen, and these were led to the Compters pi∣nioned, as if they had beene Felons. But on the 16. of Iune, Ludgate was againe appointed for freemen, prisoners for debt, and the same day, the said free∣men entred by ordinance of the Maior, Aldermen and Commons, and by them Henry Deane Taylor, was made keeper of Ludgate. In the yeere 1457. a great Fray was in the North Countrey, betweene Sir Thomas Percie, Lord Egremond, and the Earle of Salisburies Sonnes, whereby many were maymed and slaine: but in the end, the Lord Egremond being ta∣ken, was by the Kings Councell found in great default, and therefore condem∣ned in great summes of money, to bee payed to the Earle of Salisbury, and in the meane time committed to Newgate. Not long after,L. Egre∣mond and others, brake pri∣son out of Newgate. Sir Thomas Percy Lord Egremond, and Sir Richard Percie his Brother, being in Newgate, brake out of Prison by night, and went to the King, the other prisoners tooke the Leads of the Gate, and defended it (a long while) against the Sheriffes and all their Of∣ficers, insomuch that they were forced to call more ayd of the Citizens, where∣by at last they subdued them, and laid them in Irons. And this may suffice for Newgate. Ludgate. IN the West is the next; and sixth principall Gate,Ludgate. and is called Lud∣gate, at first builded (saith Geoffrey Monmouth) by King Lud, a Britaine, a∣bout the yeere before Christs Nativity, 66. Of which building, and also of the name, as Ludsgate or Fludsgate, hath bin of late some question among the lear∣ned, wherefore I overpasse it, as not to my purpose; onely referring the Reader to that I have before written out of Cae∣sars Commentaries,Roger Win∣dover. and other Romane Writers,Mat. Paris. concerning a Towne or Citie amongst the Britains. This Gate I sup∣pose to be one of the most ancient; and as Ealdgate was builded for the East, so was this Ludsgate for the West. I read, as I told you, that in the yeere 1215.
the 17. of King Iohn, the Barons of the Realme, being in Armes against the King, entred this Citie, and spoiled the Iewes Houses: which being done, Ro∣bert Fitzwater, and Geffrey de Magna villa, Earle of Essex, and the Earle of Glocester, chiefe leaders of the Armie, applyed all diligence to repaire the Gates and Wals of this Citie, with the stones of the Iewes broken houses; espe∣cially (as it seemeth) they then repaired (or rather new builded) Ludgate.Ludgate new built. For in the yeere 1586. when the same Gate was taken downe, to bee new builded, there was found couched within the wall thereof, a stone taken from one of the Iewes houses, wherein was graved in Hebrew Characters,Iewes hou∣ses spoiled. these words fol∣lowing: Haec est statio Rabbi Moses, filij insignis Rabbi Isaac: which is to say, This is the Station or Ward of Rabbi Moses, the sonne of the Honourable Rabbi Isaac. And it had beene fixed upon the front of one of the Iewes houses, as a note or signe that such an one dwelled there. In the yeere 1260. this Ludgate was repaired,Patent. and beautified with Images of Lud, and other Kings, as appeareth by Letters Patents of licence given to the Citizens of London, to take up stone for that purpose, dated the 25. of Henrie the third. These Images of Kings, in the reigne of Edward the sixth, had their heads smitten off, and were other∣wise defaced, by such as judged every Image to be an Idoll; and in the reigne of Queene Mary were repaired, as by setting new heads on their old bodies, &c. All which so remained, untill the yeere 1586. the 28. of Queene Eliza∣beth, Iudgate a∣gaine new builded. when the same Gate (being fore decayed) was cleane taken downe, the prisoners in the meane time remaining in the large South-east quadrant of the same Gate adjoyning; and the same yeere, the whole Gate was newly and beautifully builded, with the Images of Lud and others (as afore) on the East side, and the picture of her Majesty, Queene Elizabeth,Ludgate in∣larged in the reigne of Queen Elizabeth. on the West side. All which was done at the common charges of the Citizens, amounting to 1500. pounds, or more. This gate was made a free Prison in the yeere 1378. the first of Richard the second,Ludgate a free pri∣son. Nicholas Bremer being Maior. The same was confirmed in the yeere 1382. Iohn Northampton being Maior,Record Guildhall. by a Common Councell in the Guild∣hall: by which it was it was ordained, that all free-men of this Citie, should for debt, trespasses, accompts, and contempts, be imprisoned in Ludgate; and for Trea∣sons, Felonies, and other criminall offen∣ces, committed to Newgate, &c. In the yeere 1439. the tenth of King Henrie the 6. Iohn Wels being Maior, a Court of common Councell established ordinances, (as William Stanley and Ro∣bert Chicheley, late Maiors before had done) touching the Guard and govern∣ment of Ludgate, and other Prisons. Also in the yeere 1463. the third of Edward the fourth, Mathew Philip be∣ing Maior, in a common Councell, at the request of the wel-disposed,Memory of wor∣thy wo∣dan. blessed, and devout Woman, Dame Agnes For∣ster, Widdow, late wife to Stephen For∣ster, Fishmonger, sometime Maior, for the comfort and reliefe of all the poore prisoners,Articles for reliefe of the poore pri∣soners in Ludgate. certaine Articles were esta∣blished. Imprimis, That the new workes, then lately edified by the same Dame Ag∣nes, for the enlarging of the Prison of Lud∣gate, from thenceforth should be had and taken, as a part and parcell of the said Pri∣son of Ludgate, so that both the old and new worke of Ludgate aforesaid, to be one Prison, Gaole, Keeping, and charge for ever∣more. The said Quadrant,The lēgth, bredth, & largenesse of the qua∣drant. strongly builded of stone, by the forenamed Stephen For∣ster and Agnes his Wife, containing a large walking-place by ground, of 38. foot and an halfe in length, besides the thicknesse of the wals, which are at the least 6 foot, makes all together 44. foot and an halfe; the breadth within the wals is 29. foot and an halfe; so that the thicknes of the wals maketh it 35. foot and an halfe in breadth. The like roome it hath over it for lodgings, and over it againe faire Leads to walke upon, well embattelled, all for fresh ayre, and ease of prisoners, to the end they should have lodging and water free without charge; as by certaine Verses graven in Copper, and fixed on the said Quadrant, I have read,At Ludgate engraved on a Cop∣per plate. in forme following: Devout soules that passe this way,
For Stephen Forster, late Maior, heartily pray, And Dame Agnes his spouse, to God consecrate, That of pitty, this house made for Londoners in Ludgate. So that for lodging and water, prisoners here nought pay, As their keepers shall all answer at dreadfull doomes-day. This place, and one other of his Armes, being 3. broad Arrow-heads, taken downe with the old Gate, I cau∣sed to be fixed over the entry of the said Quadrant: but the verses being unhap∣pily turned inward to the wall, procu∣red the like in effect to be ingraven out∣ward in prose, declaring him to bee a Fishmonger, because some, upon a light ocasion (as a Maydens head in a glasse window) had fabled him to be a Mercer, and to have begd there at Lud∣gate, &c. Thus much for Ludgate. Next this,A breach in the Wall against Bridewell. there is a breach in the Wall of the Citie, and a Bridge of Timber over the Fleet-dike, betwixt Fleet-bridge and Thames, directly over against the house of Bridewell. Thus much for the Gates in the Wall. Water-gates on the banks of the Ri∣ver Thames,Watergates. have beene many, which being purchased by private men, are al∣so put to private use, and the old names of them forgotten. But of such as re∣maine, from the West, towards the East, may be said as followeth. The Blacke Friers stayres,Black Friers. a free lan∣ding place. Then a Water-gate at Puddle wharfe,Puddle wharfe. of one Puddle, that kept a wharfe on the West side thereof, and now of Puddle water, by meanes of many horses wa∣tered there. Then Paules wharfe, also a free lan∣ding place with stayres,Paules wharfe. &c. Then Broken wharfe,Broken wharfe. and other such like. But Ripa Regina,Queen Hith the Queenes Banke, or Queene hithe, may well be accounted the very chiefe and principall Water∣gate of this Citie, being a common strand or landing place, yet equall with, and (of old time) farre exceeding Be∣linsgate, as shall be shewed in the Ward of Queene Hithe. The next is Downgate, so called of the sudden descending, or downe going of that way, from Saint Iohns Church up∣on Walbroke unto the River of Thames, whereby the water in the Chanell there hath such a swift course, that in the yeere 1574. on the fourth of September after a strong showre of raine,A Lad of 18 yeeres old drow∣ned in a Channell at Downe∣gate. a Lad of the age of eighteene yeeres, minding to have leapt over the Channell, was ta∣ken by the feet, and borne downe with the violence of that narrow streame, and carried toward the Thames with such a violent swiftnesse, as no man could rescue or stay him, till hee came against a Cart-wheele, that stood in the Watergate, before which time, he was drowned and starke dead. This was sometime a large water-gate frequented of ships, and other vessels, like as the Queenes Hithe,An inqui∣sition con∣cerning Dewnegate. and was a part thereof, as doth appeare by an inquisiti∣on, made in the 28. yeere of Henry the third, wherein was found, That aswell corne as fish, and all other things comming to the Port of Downgate, were to be orde∣red after the customes of the Queens Hith for the Kings use.Merchants of the Hanse, landed their corn betwixt their house and the Black Friers. As also, that the corne arriving betweene the gate of the Guild∣hall of the Merchants of Cullen: the (Stil-yard) which is East from Downe∣gate, and the house then pertaining to the Archbishop of Canterbury, west from Bai∣nards Castle; was to bee measured by the measure, and measurer of the Queenes Soke, or Queen Hithe. I read also, in the 19. of Edward the third, That customes were then to bee paid for ships and other ves∣sels, resting at Downgate, as if they roade at Queene Hith, and as they now doe at Belinsgate. But now it is fallen to such great decay, that not onely there is no use made thereof, but also by reason that the Water-gates are not repaired, it is very dangerous to passengers travelling through in the night season. And thus much for Downegate may suf∣fice. The next was called Wolfes gate in the Ropary,Wolfes gate in the Ro∣pary. in the Parish of Alhallowes the lesse, of later time called Wolfes lane, but now out of use: for the lower part was builded on by the Earle of Shrewsbury, and the other part was stop∣ped up, and builded on by the Cham∣berlaine of London.
The next is Ebgate,Lib. Horne. a Water-gate so called of old time,Lib. S. Al∣bane. as appeareth by di∣vers Records of tenements,Ebgate. neere unto the same adjoyning.Lib. Trini∣tat. It standeth neere unto the Church of Saint Laurence Pountney,Lib. S. Al∣bane. but is within the Parish of Saint Marten Ordegare.Record E. 3. In place of this gate, is now a narrow passage to the Thames, and is called Ebgate lane, but more commonly the Old Swanne. Then is there a Watergate at the Bridge foot,Oyster∣gate. called Oystergate, of Oy∣sters that were there (of old time) commonly to be sold, and was the chief∣est Market for them, and for other shell Fish. There standeth now an engine or Forcier, for the winding up of wa∣ter to serve the Citie, whereof I have already spoken. Bridgegate. THe next is the Bridgegate, so cal∣led of London Bridge,Bridge-Gate. whereon it standeth: This was one of the foure first and principall Gates of the Citie, long before the Conquest, when there stood a Bridge of Timber; and is the seventh and last principall Gate mentioned by W. Fitzstephen,The Bridg-Gate often times re∣paired by divers good Be∣nefactors. which gate being new made, when the Bridge was builded of stone, hath beene often-times since repayred. This Gate, with the Tower upon it, in the yeere 1436. fell downe, and two of the farthest Arches Southwards also fell therewith, and no man perished or was hurt thereby. To the repayring whereof, divers wealthy Citizens gave large summes of money, namely Robert Large, sometime Maior, 100. Markes, Stephen Forster, 20. l'. Sir Iohn Crosby Alderman, 100. l'. &c. But in the yeere 1471.W. Dun∣thorne. the Kentish Mari∣ners, Gate at the Bridge foot bur∣ned. under the conduct of Bastard Fauconbridge, burned the said Gate, and thirteene houses on the Bridge, besides the Beere houses at Saint Ka∣therines, and many other in the Sub∣urbs. The next is Buttolphs gate so called of the Parish Church of S. Buttolph neere adjoyning.Buttolphs Gate. This Gate was sometime given,K. William the Con∣querour his gift of the Gate. or confirmed by William Con∣querour, to the Monks of Westminster, in these words: VVill. Rex Angliae, &c. VVilliam King of England, sendeth greating to the Sheriffes, and all his Mini∣sters, as also to all his loving subjects, French and English, of London. Know yee, that I have granted to God and Saint Peter of VVestminster, and to the Abbot Vitalis, the gift which Almundus, of the Port of Snt Buttolph, gave them, when he was there made Monke: that is to say, his Lords Court, with the houses, and one Wharfe, which is at the head of London Bridge, and all other his lands which hee had in the same Citie, in such sort, as King Ed∣ward more beneficially, and amply granted the same: And I will and com∣mand, that they shall enjoy the same well, and quietly, and honourably, with sake and soke, &c. The next is Belinsgate,Belinsgate. used as an e∣speciall Port, or Harbour for small Ships and Boats comming thereto, and is now most frequented, the Queene Hith being almost forsaken. How this Gate tooke that name, or of what An∣tiquity the same is, 1 must leave uncer∣taine, as not having read any ancient Re∣cord thereof,Geffery Monmouth. more than that Geffrey Monmouth writeth, that Belin, a King of the Britans, about 400. yeeres before Christs Nativity, builded this Gate, and named it Belinsgate, after his owne Name: And that when he was dead, his body being burned, the Ashes in a Vessell of Brasse,Belins Vrne of Brasse. were set upon a high pinacle of stone over the same Gate. But Caesar, and other Roman writers af∣firme of Cities, Walls and Gates, as ye have before heard, and therefore it seemeth to mee, not to be so ancient; but rather to have taken that name, of some later owner of the place, haply named Beling, or Biling, as Somars key, Smarts key, Frosh wharfe, and others there-by, tooke their names of their owners: Of this Gate more shall bee said, when we come to speake of Belins∣gate Ward. Then have you a Water-gate on the West side of Wool-wharfe,Watergate by the Cu∣stome house. or Customers key, which is commonly called the Watergate, at the South end of Water lane. One other Water-gate,Watergate by the To∣wer. there is by the Bulwarke of the Tower, and this is the last and farthest Water gate East ward on the River of Thames, so farre as the Citie of LONDON extendeth
within the Wals: both which last na∣med Water-gates be within the Tower Ward. Besides these common Water-gates,Wharfes and keyes. were divers private Wharfes and Keies, all along from the East to the West of this Citie, on the banke of the River of Thames; where Merchants (of all Nati∣ons) had landing places, Ware-hou∣ses, Cellars, and stowage of their goods and Merchandises, as partly shall bee touched in the Wards adjoyning to the said River. Now for the ordering and keeping of these Gates of this Citie in the night time, it was appointed in the yeere of Christ 1258. by Henry the 3. the 42. of his reigne, that the Ports of England should be strongly kept,Mat. Paris. Gates of London to be kept & watcht. and that the Gates of London should bee new repaired, and diligently kept in the night, for feare of French deceits, where∣of one writeth these verses: Per noctem portae clauduntur Londoniarum, Moenia, ne fortè fraus frangat Francigenarū. Of Towers and Castles. THE Citie of London (saith Fitzstephen) hath in the East,The Tow∣er of Lon∣don. a ve∣ry great, and a most strong Palatine Tow∣er, whose Turrets and Wals doe rise from a deepe foundation, the mortar thereof being tempred with the blood of beasts. In the West part are two most strong Castles, &c. To begin therefore with the most fa∣mous Tower of London, situate in the East, neere unto the River of Thames; it hath beene the common opinion, and some have written, (but of none assured ground) that Iulius Caesar, the first Con∣querour of the Britaines, was the origi∣nall Author and Founder, aswell there∣of, as also of many other Towers, Ca∣stles, In my An∣nales. and great buildings within this Realme. But (as I have already before noted) Caesar remained not here so long, nor had he in his head any such matter; but onely to dispatch a conquest of this barbarous Countrey, and to proceed to greater matters. Neither doe the Ro∣mane Writers make mention of any such buildings erected by him here. And therefore leaving this, and pro∣ceeding to more grounded authority, I finde in a faire Register Booke, con∣taining the acts of the Bishops of Roche∣ster, Edmund de Hadenham. set downe by Edmund de Hadenham: that William the first, surnamed Conque∣rour, builded the Tower of London;Tower of London built by W. Cōquerour, namely the white Tower. to wit, the great white and square Tower there, about the yeere of Christ, 1078. appoin∣ting Gundulph then Bishop of Rochester to be principall Surveyor and Overseer of that worke; who was (for that time) lodged in the house of Edmere, a Burgesse of Lon∣don. The very words of which mine Author are these in Latine: Gundulphus Episcopus, mandato Wil∣lielmi Regis magni praefuit operi magnae Turris London, quo tempore hospitatus est apud quendā Edmerum, Burgensem Lon∣don, qui dedit unum Were Ecclesiae Rof∣fen. Ye have before heard, that the wall of this Citie was all round about furni∣shed with Towers and Bulwarkes, in due distance every one from other, and also that the River of Thames, with her ebbing and flowing, on the South-side, had subverted the said Wall, and Tow∣ers there. Wherefore King William, for defence of this Citie, in place most dan∣gerous, and open to the enemy, having taken downe the second Bulwarke in the East part of the Wall, from the Thames, builded this Tower, which was the great square Tower, now called the white Tower; and hath beene since (at divers times) enlarged with other buil∣dings adjoyning, as shall bee shewed. This Tower was bytempest of wind sore shaken,. Hunting∣ton. in the yeere 1092. the 4. of Wil.W. Malmes. Rufus,Mat. Paris. and was againe, by the said Rufus and Henry the first repaired.Ioh. London. They al∣so caused a Castle to be built under the said Tower;Castle by the Tower builded. namely, on the South-side toward the Thames, and also incastella∣ted the same round about. Henry Huntington, libro sexto, hath these words: William Rufus challenged the investure of Prebates, he pilled and sha∣ved the people with Tribute, especially to
spend about the Tower of London, and the great Hall at Westminster. Othowerus,First Con∣stables of the Tower Acolinillus, Otto; and Gef∣frey Magnaville Earle of Essex, were 4. the first Constables of this Tower of London by succession: all which held by force, a portion of Land (that pertained to the Priorie of the holy Trinity within Ealdgate) that is to say,Eastsmith field a Vineyard. Eastsmith field, neere unto the Tower, making thereof a Vineyard, and would not depart from it,Ex Charta. till the second yeere of King Stephen, when the same was adiudged and resto∣red to the Church. This Geffrey Magnaville was Earle of Essex,Geffrey Magnaville Earle of Essex, Con∣stable of the Tower and She∣riffe of London. Constable of the Tower, Shiriffe of London, Middlesex, Essex, and Hert∣fordshire, as appeareth by a Charter of Maude the Empresse, 1141. Hee also fortified the Tower of London against King Stephen; but the King tooke him in his Court at S. Albanes, and would not deliver him, till he had rendred the Tower of London, with the Castles of Walden and Plashey in Essex. In the yeere 1153. the Tower of Lon∣don and the Castle of Windsore were by the King delivered to Richard de Lucie,Richard de Lucy Cu∣stos of the Tower. to be safely kept. In the yeere 1155. Thomas Becket, be∣ing Chancellour to Henry the second,Roger Win∣dover. caused the Flemmings to be banished out of England, their Castles lately builded, to be pulled downe, and the Tower of London to be repaired. About the yeere 1190. the second of Richard the first,Iohn Bever. William Longshampe, Bi∣shop of Ely, Chancelour of England, for cause of dissention betwixt him and the Earle Iohn, the Kings Brother, that was Rebell;The Tow∣er of Lon∣don com∣passed a∣bout with a wall and a ditch. inclosed the Tower and Castle of London with an outward wall of stone embattailed; and also caused a deepe Ditch to be cast about the same, thin∣king (as I have said before) to have en∣vironed it with the River of Thames. By making of this inclosure and ditch in Eastsmithfield, the Church of the holy Trinity in London, lost halfe a mark rent by the yeere; and the Mill was remo∣ved, that belonged to the poore bre∣thren of the Hospitall of S. Katherine,S. Katherins Mill stood where is now the Iron gate of the Tower. and to the Church of the holy Trinitie aforesaid; which was no small losse and discommodity to either part. And the Garden, which the King had hyred of the brethren for sixe markes the yeere, for the most part was wasted and mar∣red by the ditch. Recompence was of∣ten promised, but never performed, till King Edward comming after, gave to the Brethren five Markes and an halfe, for that part which the ditch had de∣voured: and the other part thereof without he yeelded them againe, which they hold; and of the said rent of five Markes and an halfe, they have a Deed, by vertue whereof they are well paid to this day. It is also to be noted, and cannot bee denyed, but that the said inclosure and ditch, tooke the like or greater quanti∣ty of ground from the Citie within the VVall; namely, on that part called the Tower Hill, besides breaking downe of the Citie VVall, from the white Tower to the first Gate of the Citie, called the Posterne. Yet have I not read of any quarrell made by the Citizens, or re∣compence demanded by them for that matter; because all was done for good of the Cities defence thereby, and to their good likings. But Matthew Paris writeth,Mat. Paris. that in the yeere 1239. King Henry the third fortified the Tower of London to another end;Bulwarkes of the Tower builded. wherefore the Citizens fearing, lest that was done to their detriment, complai∣ned, and the King answered: That hee had not done it to their hurt; But (saith he) I will from henceforth doe as my brother doth, in building and fortifying Castles, who bea∣reth the name to be wiser than I am. It followed in the next yeere,West gate and Bul∣warkes of the Tower fell downe (saith mine Author) the said Noble buildings of the stone Gate and Bulwarke, which the King had caused to be made by the Tower of London, on the West side thereof, was sha∣ken as it had beene with an Earthquake, and fell downe; which the King againe comman∣ded to be built in better sort than before, which was done. And yet againe, in the yeere 1241. the said Wall and Bulwarkes that were newly builded,Wall and Bulwarkes againe fall downe, and new builded. wherein the King had bestowed more than twelve thousand Markes, were unrecoverably quite throwne downe, as a∣fore: for the which chance, the Citizens of London were nothing sorry: for they were threatned, that the said wall and Bulwarkes were builded, to the end, that if any of them would contend for the liberties of the Citie,
they might be imprisoned: And that many might be laid in divers prisons, many lod∣gings were made, that no one should speake with another. Thus much Matthew Paris avoucheth for this building. More of Henry the third his dealings against the Citizens of London, we may read in the said Author, in 1245. 1248. 1249. 1253. 1255. 1256. &c. But con∣cerning the said Wall and Bulwarke, the same was finished, though not in his time. For I read, That Edward the first, in the second of his reigne, commanded the Treasurer and Chamberlaine of the Ex∣chequer, to deliver out of his Treasurie, un∣to Miles of Andwarp, 200. Markes, of the fines taken of divers Merchants,Ditch made a∣bout the Bulwarke, without the West gate of the Tower. or V∣surers of London (for so be the words of the Record) toward the worke of the ditch, then new made about the said Bulwarke; now called the Lion Tower. I find also recorded, that Henry the third, in the 46. of his reigne, wrote to Edward of Westminster, commanding him,H. 3. his Orchard by the Tower. That hee should buy certaine Perie Plants, and set the same in the place without his Tower of London, the ninth of Edward the second. Edward the fourth in place whereof builded a wall of Bricke. But now for the Lion-Tower, and Lions in England, the originall, as I have read, was thus: Henry the first builded the Mannor of Woodstocke,First Parke in England. with a Parke which hee walled about with stone, seven miles in compasse, destroying for the same, di∣vers Villages, Churches and Chappels, and this was the first Parke in England; the words of the Record are these fol∣lowing: He appointed therein (beside great store of Decre) divers strange beasts, to be kept and nourished, such as were brought to him from far Countries; as Lions, Leo∣pards, Lions in Woodstocke Parke. Linxes, Porpentines, and such other: For such was his estimation among outlan∣dish Princes, that few would willingly of∣fend him. More I read, that in the yeere 1235. Fredericke the Emperour sent to Henry the third, three Leopards,Lions sent to Hen. 3. and kept in the Tower. in token of his regall Shield of Armes, wherein three Leopards were pictured: since which time, those Lions, and others, have beene kept in a part of this Bul∣warke, now called the Lion Tower, and their keeper there lodged. King Edward the second, in the twelfth yeere of his reigne, commanded the Sheriffes of London, to pay the keeper of the Kings Leopards in the Tower of London, 6. d the day, for the sustenance of the Leo∣pards; and three halfe-pence a day, for dyet of the said keeper, out of the fee-farme of the said Citie. More, the 16. of Edward the third, one Lion, one Lionesse, one Leopard, and two Cattes Lions, in the said Tow∣er, were committed to the custody of Robert, the sonne of Iohn Bowre. Edward the fourth fortified the Tow∣er of London,Edw. the 4. builded bulwarks without the Tower▪ and inclosed with Bricke (as is aforesaid) a certaine piece of ground, taken out of the Tower hill, west from the Lion Tower, now called the Bulwarke. His Officers also, in the fifth of his reigne, set upon the said Hill both Scaffold and Gallowes,Seaffold and Gal∣lowes first set on Tower Hill. for the ex∣ecution of offenders; whereupon the Maior & his brethren cōplained to the King, and were answered, that the same was not done in derogation of the Ci∣ties Liberties; and therefore caused proclamation to be made, &c. as shall be shewed in Towerstreet. Richard the third repaired and buil∣ded this Tower somewhat.Rich. 3. re∣paired the Tower. Henry the 8. in 1532. repaired the white Tower,White Tower re∣paired by Hen. 8. and other parts thereof. In the yeere 1548. the second of Ed∣ward the sixth, on the 22. of November, in the night, a Frenchman lodged in the round Bulwarke, betwixt the West Gate and the Posterne, or draw bridge, called the Warders Gate, by setting fire on a barrell of Gunpowder,A bulwark of the To∣wer blown up. blew up the said Bulwarke, burnt himselfe, and no moe persons. This Bulwarke was again forthwith new builded. And here, because I have (by occasi∣on) spoken of the west gate of this Tow∣er; the same (as the most principall) is used for the receipt and delivery of all kindes of carriages;Gates and Posterne of the Tower. without the which Gate, be divers Bulwarkes and Gates, turning towards the North, &c. Then neere within this West gate, opening to the South, is a strong Posterne for passengers, by the Ward-house, over a draw-bridge, let downe for that pur∣pose. Next, on the same South side, to∣ward the East, is a large water-gate, for
receipt of Boats and small vessels, partly under a stone bridge, from the River of Thames. Beyond it is a small Posterne, with a draw-bridge, seldome let down, but for the receipt of some great per∣sons, prisoners. Then towards the East is a great and strong Gate, commonly called the Iron gate, but not usually o∣pened. And thus much for the founda∣tion, building, and repairing of this Tower, with the Gates and Posternes, may suffice. And now somewhat of ac∣cidents in the same, shall be shewed. In the yeere 1196.Actions of the Tower William Fitzosbert, a Citizen of London, seditiously moving the common people to seeke liberty, and not to be subject to the rich and more mighty; at length was taken, and brought before the Archbishop of Can∣terbury in the Tower,Iustices sate in the Tower. where he was by the Judges condemned, and by the heeles drawne thence to the Elmes in Smithfield, and there hanged. 1214. King Iohn wrote unto Geffrey Magnaville,Patent the 15. of King Iohn. to deliver the Tower of London, with the Prisoners, Armour, and all other things sound therein, be∣longing to the King; to William, Arch∣deacon of Huntington. The yeere 1216. the first of Henry the third,Mat. Paris. the said Tower was delivered to Lewes of France, and the Barons of England. In the yeere 1206. Plees of the Crown were pleaded in the Tower:Plees of the crown pleaded in the Towers likewise in the yeere 1220. and likewise in the yeere 1224. and againe in the yeere 1243. before William of Yorke, Richard Passelew, Henry Brahe, Ierome of Saxton, Justicers. In the yeere 1222. the Citizens of London having made a tumult against the Abbot of Westminster;Mat. Paris. Hubert of Burgh, chiefe Justice of England, came to the Tower of London, and called be∣fore him the Maior and Aldermen, of whom hee inquired for the principall Authors of that sedition: Amongst whom,Constantine Fitz Ael∣ulfe hang'd one named Constantine Fitz Ael∣ulfe avowed, that he was the man, and had done much lesse than he thought to have done. Whereupon, the Justice sent him (with two other) to Falks de Brent, who with armed men brought them to the Gallowes, where they were hanged. In the yeere 1244.Griffith of Wales fell from the Tower. Griffith the eldest sonne of Leoline, Prince of Wales, being kept prisoner in the Tower, devised meanes of escape; and having (in the night) made of the hangings, sheets, &c. a long line, he put himselfe downe from the top of the Tower. But in the sliding, the weight of his body, being a very bigge and a fat man, brake the Rope, and he fell on his necke, and brake his necke withall: whose miserable carkas, being found in the morning by the Tower wall, was a most pitifull sight to the beholders: for his head and necke were driven into his brest, between both the shoulders. The King hearing there∣of, punished the watch-men, and cau∣sed Griffiths sonne, that was imprisoned with his Father, to bee more straitly kept. In the yeere 1253.Sheriffes of London prisoners in the Tower. King Henry the third imprisoned the Sheriffes of Lon∣don in the Tower more than a moneth, for the escape of a prisoner out of New∣gate, as ye may read in the Chapter of Gates. In the yeere 1260. King Henry,K. Henrie lodged in the Tower and held his Parlia∣ment there. with his Queene (for feare of the Barons) were lodged in the Tower. The next yeere he sent for his Lords, and held his Parliament there. In the yeere 1263. when the Queene would have removed from the Tower by water,Citizens of London despised the Qu. Wife to Hen. 3. towards Windsore, sundry Lon∣doners got them together to the Bridge, under the which she was to passe, and not onely cryed out upon her with re∣prochfull words, but also threw mire and stones at her, by which she was con∣strained to returne for the time. But in the yeere 1265. the said Citizens were faine to submit themselves to the King for it, and the Maior, Aldermen, and Sheriffes were sent to divers prisons, and a Custos also was set over the Ci∣tie; to wit, Othon, Constable of the Tower, &c. Leoline Prince of Wales,Leoline, Prince of Wales, his head set on the Tower. came downe from the Mountaine of Snowdon, to Mountgomery, and was taken at Bluith Castle: where using reprochfull words against the Englishmen, Roger le Strange ran in upon him, and with the Sword wherewith he was girt, cut off his head, leaving his dead bodie on the ground. Sir Roger Mortimer caused the head of
this Leoline to be set upon the Tower of London, crowned with a wreath of I∣vie. Such was the end of Leoline, be∣trayed by the men of Bluith: And this was the last Prince of the Britaines blood, that bare rule and dominion in Wales. In the yeere 1290. divers Justices,Iustices of the bench sent to the Tower. as well of the Bench, as of the Assises, were sent prisoners to the Tower, which with great summes of money redeemed their liberty. Sir Thomas Weyland had all his goods,Adam Meri. chro. Dun. Rad. Bald. Sca. Chro. Io. Rouse. both moveable and unmoveable, confis∣cated, and himselfe banished. Sir Rafe Hengham, chiefe Justice of the higher Bench, offered seven thousand Markes: Sir Iohn Lovelet, Justice of the lower Bench, three thousand Markes. Sir Wil∣liam Bromtone, Justice, sixe thousand Markes. Of their Clarkes, for their re∣demption; of Robert Littlebury, 1000. Markes; and of Roger Leicester, 1000. Markes: And of a certaine Clarke of the Courts, called Adam de Straton, 32000. Markes, of old money and new; beside Jewels (without number) and precious vessels of Silver, which were found in his house, and a Kings Crown, which some men said was King Iohns. Moreover, the King constrained the Ju∣stices to sweare, that (from thenceforth) they should take no pension, see or gift of any man, except onely a breakfast or such like present. Edward 2. the 14. of his reigne, ap∣pointed for prisoners in the Tower, a Knight, 2. d. the day, an Esquire, 1. d. the day, to serve for their dyet. In the yeere 1320. the Kings Justices sate in the Tower,Iustices sate in the Tower. for tryall of matters: whereupon, Iohn Gissors, late Maior of London, and many other, fled the City, for feare to be charged of things which they had presumptuously done. In the yeere 1321. the Mortimers yeelding themselves to the King, hee sent them prisoners to the Tower, where they remained long, and were judged to be drawne and hanged. But at length, Roger Mortimer of Wig∣more, Mortimer made an escape out of the Tower. by giving his Keepers a sleepy drinke, escaped out of the Tower, and his Vnckle Roger being still kept, there dyed about five yeeres after. In the yeere 1326. the Citizens of London wanne the Tower,Citizens of London wrested the keyes of the To∣wer from the Con∣stable. wresting the keyes out of the Constables hands, deli∣vered all the prisoners, and kept both the Citie and Tower to the use of Isabel. the Queene, and Edward her sonne. In the yeere 1330. Roger Mortimer, Earle of March,Mortimer drawne from the Tower to the Elmes, and there hanged. was taken and brought to the Tower, from whence hee was drawne to the Elmes, and there hanged on the common Gallowes, where hee hung two dayes and two nights by the Kings commandement, and then was buried in the Gray Fryers Church. Hee was condemned by his Peeres, and yet never was brought to answer before them. For it was not then the custome, after the death of the Earles of Lanca∣ster, Winchester, Glocester, & Kent: wher∣fore this Earle had that law himselfe, which before hee had appointed for o∣thers. In the yeere 1344. King Edward the third, in the 18. yeere of his reigne,A Mint in the Tow∣er, Floren∣ces of gold coyned there. commanded Florences of Gold to bee made, and coyned in the Tower; that is to say, a penny a peece, of the value of 6. shillings and eight pence; the halfe∣penny peece, of the value of 3. shillings and foure pence; and a farthing peece, worth 20. pence. Percevall de Port of Lake, being then Master of the coine. And this is the first coyning of Gold in the Tower, whereof I read, and also the first coynage of Gold in England. I finde also recorded, that the said King,The Kings exchange in Buckles bury. in the same yeere, ordained his Exchange of money to be kept in Sernes Tower, a part of the Kings house in Buckles Bury. And here, to digresse a little (by occasion offered) I finde, that in times before passed, all great summes were paid by weight of gold or silver, as so many pounds,Round plates, cal∣led blanks, delivered by weighr, Argent. and Pecunia, af∣ter called Easterling. or markes of silver, or so many pounds or markes of gold, cut into blankes, and not stamped, as I could prove by many good authorities, which I overpasse. The smaller summes also were paid in starlings, which were pence so called: for other coynes they had none. The antiquity of this starling penny usually in this Realme, is from the reigne of Henry the second: notwithstanding the Saxon coynes (before the Conquest) were pence of fine silver, the full weight and somewhat better than the latter
starlings, as I have tryed by conference of the pence of Burghrede King of Mer∣cia, Aelfred, Edward, and Edelred, Kings of the West Saxons, Plegmond Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, and others. William the Conquerours penny also was fine silver, of the weight of the Ea∣sterling, and had on the one side stam∣ped, IV. Conque∣rour did weare no beard. an armed head, with a beardlesse face, (for the Normans ware no beards) with a Scepter in his hand. The Inscri∣ption in the circumference,IV. Malmes∣bury. was this, Le Rei Wilam. On the side, a crosse double to the Ring, betweene 4. rowels of six points. King Henry the first his penny was of the like weight, finenesse, forme of face, crosse, &c. This Henry, in the eighth yeere of his reigne, ordained the penny which was round, so to be quartered by the crosse, that they might easily bee broken into halfe pence and farthings. In the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth of King Richard the first his reigne,R. Hoveden. and afterwards, I finde commonly Ea∣sterling money mentioned, and yet oft∣times the same is called Argent, as afore, and not otherwise. The first great sum that I read of to be paid in Easterlings, was in the fifth of Richard the first, when Robert Earle of Leicester, being prisoner in France, prof∣fered for his ransome a thousand marks Easterlings; notwithstanding, the Ea∣sterling pence were long before. The weight of the Easterling penny may appeare by divers Statutes, name∣ly, of weights and measures, made in the 51. yeere of Henry the third, in these words:Weight of starling pence 32. graines of wheat. Thirty two graines of Wheat, dry and round, taken in the middest of the eare, should be the weight of a starling penny; twenty of those pence should weigh one ounce, twelve ounces a pound Troy. It followeth in the Statute, Eight pound to make a gal∣lon of Wine, and eight gallons, a bushell of London measure, &c. Notwithstanding which Statute, I finde in the eighth of Edward the first, Gregorie Rokesley, Mai∣or of London, being chiefe Master or Mi∣nister of the Kings Exchange or Mints, a new coyne being then appointed, the pound of Easterling money should con∣taine (as afore) 12. ounces, to wit, fine silver, such as was then made into foyle, and was commonly called silver of Gu∣thurons lane; 11. ounces, two Easter∣lings, and one ferling or farthing, and the other 17. pence halfepenny farthing to be lay. Also the pound of money ought to weigh 20. shillings 3. pence by account; so that no pound ought to be over 20. shillings 4. pence, nor lesse than 20. shillings 2. pence by account; the ounce to weigh 20. pence, the pen∣ny weight 24. graines. Which 24. by weight then appointed, were as much as the former 32. graines of Wheat: a penny force, 25. graines and an halfe; the penny deble or feeble, 22. graines and an halfe, &c. Now for the penny Easterling,The pen∣ny Easter∣ling how it tooke the name. how it tooke that name, I think good briefe∣ly to touch. It hath beene said, that Nu∣ma Pompilius, the second King of the Romanes, commanded monies first to be made, of whose name they were called Numi; and when copper pence, silver pence, and gold pence were made, (be∣cause every silver penny was worth ten copper pence, and every gold penny worth ten silver pence) the pence were therefore called in Latine, Denarij; and oftentimes, the pence are named of the matter or stuffe of gold or silver. But the Money of England was called of the workers and makers thereof: as the Flo∣ren of gold is called of the Florentines,H. 2. made a new coyne in the third of his reigne. that were the workers thereof; and so the Easterling pence tooke their name of the Easterlings, which did first make this money in England, in the reigne of Henry the second. Thus have I set downe, according to my reading in Antiquity, of money matters;Starling money, when it tooke be∣ginning in this Land. omitting the imaginations of late Writers; of whom some have said, Easterling money to take that name of a starre stamped in the border or ring of the penny: othersome, of a bird, called a Stare or Starling, stamped in the cir∣cumference: and other (more unlikely) of being coyned at Strivelin or Starling, a Towne in Scotland. &c. Now concerning halfepence and far∣things, Of halfe pence and farthings. the accompt of which is more subtiler than the pence, I need not speak of them more, than that they were only made in the Exchange at London, and no where else: First, pointed to be made by Edward the first, in the eighth of his
reigne: and also at the same time, the said Kings coine was some few groats of silver, but they were not usuall. The Kings Exchange at London was neere unto the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul, and is to this day commonly called, the Old Change;The Old Change. but in Evidences, the Old Exchange. The Kings Exchanger in this place, was to deliver out to every other Ex∣changer throughout England, or other the Kings Dominions, their Coyning Irons, that is to say, one Standard or Staple, and two trussels, or Punchions: and when the same were spent and worn, to receive them with an account, what summe had been coyned, and al∣so their Pix, or Box of assay, and to de∣liver other Irons new graven, &c. I finde that in the 9. of King Iohn,Mints in England. Patent 9. John. there was, besides the Mint at London, other Mints, at Winchester, Excester, Chichester. Canterbury, Rochester, Ipswich, Norwich, Linne, Lincolne, Yorke, Carleil, Northam∣pton, Oxford, S. Edmondsbury, and Dur∣ham. The Exchanger, Examiner and Tryer,Dimini∣shing of coyne. buyeth the silver for coynage: answering for every hundred pound of silver, bought in Bolion, or otherwise 98. l. 15. s. for hee taketh 25. s. for coynage. King Edward the first, in the 27. of his reigne,Starling mony for∣bidden to be tran∣sported. held a Parliament at Stebun∣beth, in the house of Henry Waleis, Maior of London, wherein amongst other things there handled, the transporting of starling money was forbidden. In the yeere 1351. William Edington, Bishop of Winchester,Thom. Wals. and Treasurer of England, a wise man, but loving the Kings commodity more, than the wealth of the whole Realme and common peo∣ple (saith mine Author) Caused new coyne,First groats and halfe coyned. called a Great and halfe a Groat to be coyned and stamped, the Groat to bee taken for 4. d. and the halfe Groat for 2. d. not conteyning in weight according to the pence called Easterling, but much lesse, to wit, by 5. s. in the pound: by reason whereof, victuals and merchandizes became the dea∣rer through the whole Realme. About the same time also, the old coyne of gold was changed into a new; but the old Floren or Noble, then so called, was worth much above the tax∣ed rate of the new. And therefore the Merchants ingrossed up the old, and conveied them out of the Realme, to the great losse of the Kingdome.Coyns of gold en∣haunced. Where∣fore a remedy was provided, by chan∣ging of the stampe. In the yeere 1411. King Henry the fourth caused a new coyne of Nobles to be made, of lesse value than the old, by 4. d. in the Noble, so that fifty Nobles should be a pound, Troy weight. In the yeere 1421. was granted to Henry the fifth a fifteene to be paid at Candlemas, and at Martinmasse, of such money as was then currant gold, or silver, not overmuch clipped or wa∣shed, to wit, That if the Noble were worth 5. s. 8. d. then the King should take it for a full Noble, of 6. s. 8. d. And if it were lesse of value, than 5. s. 8. d. then the person that gold, to make it good to the value of 5. s. 8. d. the King alway receiving it for an whole Noble of six shillings 8. d. And if the Noble so payed were better than 5. s. 8. d. the King to pay againe the surplus∣age, that it was better than 5. s. 8. d. Also this yeere was such scarcity of white mony,More plē∣ty of coyn in gold than in sil∣ver. that though a Noble were so good of gold, and weight, as six shil∣lings eight pence; men could get no white money fro them. In the yeere 1465. King Edward the fourth caused a new coyne, both of gold and silver to be made,Coines of gold allay∣ed, and al∣so raised in value. whereby he gai∣ned much, for he made of an old Noble, a Royall: which he commanded to goe for ten s. Neverthelesse to the same Royall was put 8. d. of allay, and so weyed the more,Rose No∣bles. being smitten with a new stampe, to wit, a Rose. Hee like∣wise made halfe Angels of 5. s. And far∣things of 5. s. 6. d. Angelets of 6. s. 8. d. And halfe Angels 3. s. 4. d. Hee made silver money of three pence, a groat, and so of other coynes after that rate, to the great harme of the Com∣mons. W. Lord Hastings the Kings Cham∣berlaine, being Master of the Kings Mints, saith the Record, undertooke to make the monies under forme following: to wit, of gold a peece of 8. s. 4. d. starling, which should be called a Noble of gold, of the which there should be fifty such peeces in the pound weight of the Tower. Another piece of gold, 4. s. 2. d. of starling, and to be of them an
hundred such pieces in the pound. And a third piece of gold, 2. s. 1. d. starling, two hundred such pieces in the pound, every pound weight of the Tower to be worth 20. l', 16. s. 8. d. of starlings, the which should be 23. Carits, 3. graines, and halfe 5. &c. and for silver, 37. s. 6. d. of starlings, the piece of 4. pence, to be 112. Groats, and 2. pence in the pound weight. In the yeere 1504. King Henry the seventh appointed a new coyne;Halfe fa∣ced groats. to wit, a Groat, and halfe a Groat, which bare but halfe faces. The same time also was coyned a Groat, which was in value 12. d. but of those but a few, after the rate of forty pence the ounce. In the yeere 1526. the 18. of Hen. the eight, the Angell Noble, being then the sixt part of an ounce Troy, so that six Angels were just an ounce, which was 40. shillings starling, and the Angell was also worth two ounces of silver; so that six Angels were worth 12. ounces of silver,Gold and silver en∣haunced. which was 40. s. A Procla∣mation was made on the 6. of Septem∣ber, that the Angell should goe for 7. s. 4. d. the Royall for 11. s. and the Crowne for 4. s. 4. d. And on the 5. of November following, againe by Pro∣clamation, the Angell was enhaunced to 7. s. 6. d. and so every ounce a gold to be 45. s. and the ounce of silver at 3. 9. d. in value. In the yeere 1544. the 35. of Henry the 8. on the 16. of May,Base mo∣nies coy∣ned and currant in England. Proclamation was made, for the enhauncing of gold to 48. shillings, and silver to 4. shillings the ounce. Also the King caused to bee coyned base monies, towi, pieces of 12. d. 6. d. 4. d. & 1. d. in weight as the late starling, in shew good silver, but inwardly Copper. These pieces had whole or broad faces, and continu∣ed currant after that rate, till the 5. of Edward the 6. when they were on the 9. of Iuly called downe, the shilling to 9. d. the Groat to 3. d. &c. and on the 17. of August from 9. d. to 6. d. &c. And on the 30. of October, was published new coynes of silver and gold to bee made,Crownes and halfe Crownes of silver coyned. a piece of silver 5. s. starling, a piece 2. s. 6. d. of 12. d. of 6. d. a pen∣ny with a double Rose, a halfe penny a single Rose, and a farthing with a Port∣close. Coyns of fine Gold, a whole So∣veraigne of 0. s. an Angell of 10. s. an Angeler of 5. s. Of Crowne gold, a Soveraigne 20. S. halfe Soveraigne 10. s. 5. s. 2. s. 6. d. and base monies to passe as afore, which continued till the 2. of Queene Elizabeth then called to a lower rate, taken to the Mint, and refi∣ned, the silver whereof being coyned with a new stampe of her Majesty, the drosse was carried to foule high∣waies, to heighten them. This base mo∣nies (for the time) caused the old star∣ling monies to be hoorded up,Starling monies hoorded up, 21. c. currant, given for an Angell of gold. so that I have seene 21. s. currant, given for one old Angell to gild withall. Also rents of lands and tenements, with prices of victuals, were raised farre beyond the formerrates, hardly since to be brought downe. Thus much for base monies, coyned and currant in England have I knowne: But for Leather monies, as many people have fondly talked, I find no such matter.Philip Co∣min. I read that King Iohn of France, being taken prisoner, by Ed∣ward the blacke Prince, at the Battell of Poytiers, payed a ransome of 3. Milli∣ons of Florences, whereby, he brought the Realme of France into such poverty,Leather mony in France. that many yeeres after they used Lea∣ther money, with a little stud or nayle of silver in the midst thereof. Thus much for Mint, and coynage, by occa∣sion of this Tower (under correction of other more skilfull) may suffice. And now to other accidents there. In the yeere 1360. the peace be∣tweene England and France being confir∣med, French K. prisoner in the Tower. King Edward came over into Eng∣land, and straight to the Tower, to see the French King then prisoner there, whose ransome hee assessed at 3. Milli∣ons of Florences, and so delivered him from prison, and brought him with ho∣nour to the Sea. In the yeere 1381. and the fourth yeere of the reigne of King Richard the second,A grievous taxe and tallage granted to the King, which cau∣sed a great rebellion in England. was granted to the King a grie∣vous tax and tallage of his subjects, both spirituall and temporall: through the which was raised in England a ship∣wracke of great troubles. For divers Courtiers, desirous to enrich them∣selves with other mens goods, enformed the King and his Court, that the tallage was not gathered up faithfully to the Kings use by the Collection. Where∣upon, they offered to the King, that
they would pay a great summe of mo∣ney for the farme of that, which they would gather over and above that which had beene paid, if they might be by the King thereunto authorized. Some of them getting the Kings Let∣ters and Authority,The peo∣ple misu∣sed in ve∣ry base manner. sate in divers places of Essex and Kent, and handled the peo∣ple sore and uncourteously, almost not to be spoken, for the levying of the said summe of money: which some of the people taking in evill part; they secret∣ly tooke counsell together, gathered as∣sistants, and resisted the exactors, rising against them, of whom, some they slew, some they wounded, and the rest fled. This tumult beganne principally in Kent,The Ken∣tish men a∣rise in a tumult, for there the mischiefe began. and after this manner, as I finde the same set downe in a Chronicle of S. Albans: One of the Collectors of the Groats, or pole money, comming to the house of Iohn (others say Watt) Tylar, in the Towne of Dartford in Kent, deman∣ded of the Tylars wife, for her Husband, for her selfe, for her servants, and for their daughter (a young maiden) every one of them a Groat;The pole groat cal∣led (by some) the groape groat. which the Tylars wife denyed not to pay, saving for her daughter; who (she said) was a childe, and not to bee accounted as a woman. That will I soone wete (answered the Collector) and taking the yong maiden dishonestly turned her up to search whether shee were under-growne with haire, or not; for in many places they had made the like shamefull tryall. Whereupon,The hus∣band com∣meth home ha∣stily from his worke. her mother cryed out, which caused neighbours to come in, and her husband (being at worke in the same Towne, tyling of an house) when he heard thereof, caught his Lathing∣staffe in his hand, and ran presently home: where reasoning with the Col∣lector; who made him to be so bold? The Collector answered with stoutwords, & strake at the Tylar. But the Tylar avoy∣ding the blow,The Col∣lector slaine by the Tylar. smotethe Collector with his Lathing-staffe, that the braines flew out of his head: where-through great noyse arose in the streets, and the poore people being glad, every one prepared to support the said Iohn Tylar. Thus the Commons being drawne together,The Com∣mons flocke to∣gether in the Tylars defence. went to Maidstone, and from thence backe againe to Black-heath, and so (in short time) they stirred all the Country (in a manner) to the like com∣motion. Then, besetting the waies that led to Canterbury, arrested all passengers, compelling them to sweare:An oath exacted by the Rebels on all pas∣sengers. First, that they should keepe allegeance to King Ri∣chard, and to the Commons: And that they should accept no King that was named Iohn: in envy they bare unto Iohn Duke of Lancaster, who named himselfe King of Castile: And that they should bee ready whensoever they were called, and that they should agree to no taxe, to be levied (from thenceforth) in the Kingdome, nor consent to any, except it were a fifteene. The Fame of these doings spread in∣to Sussex,Evill news do alwaies quickly spread them∣selves. Hertford, Essex, and Cam∣bridgeshires, Norfolke, suffolke, &c. And when such assembling of the common people daily tooke encrease, and that their number was now made almost in∣finite, so that they feared no man to re∣sist them: they began to shew some such desperate Acts, as they had rashly con∣sidered on in their minds: And tooke in hand to behead all men of Law,Iustice, Lawyers, and Iurors beheaded. as well Apprentices, as utter-Baristers, and old Justices, with all the Jurors of the coun∣try, whom they might get into their hands. They spared none whom they thought to be learned, especially, if they found any to have a Pen and Inke-horne about him: they pulled off his Hood, and all with one voyce crying, Hale him out, and cut off his head.Bondmen of Essex joyne with them of Kent. The bondmen and other of Essex, being joyned with them of Kent on Black-heath, there came Knights to them from the King, to en∣quire the cause of their assembly: to whom they made answer, That for cer∣taine causes, they were come together, to have talke with the King: And ther∣fore willed the Knights to tell him, that he must needs come unto them, that he might understand the desire of their hearts. The King was counselled by some, to make haste unto them:Ex Chron. Dun. but Simon Sud∣bury, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancelor, and Robert Hales of Saint Iohns, Treasurer, affirmed: that it was not meet for the King to goe to such a rude company, but rather some order to be taken for their suppression.Insolent fury is ea∣sily mo∣ved. Which when the Commons heard, being mo∣ved to a furious rage, they swore, that they would goe seeke the Kings Tray∣tors,
to take off their heads. Forthwith they took their journey towards London, and came to Southwarke, where they fel∣led all the places of that Borough, and in the Countrey about.The Pa∣lace of the Archbi∣shop at Lambeth spoiled. They spoiled the Archbishops Palace at Lambeth, for de∣spight they bare him. The Lord Maior of London and Aldermen (fearing the Cities spoyle) decreed to shut up the Gates: But the Commons of the City, especially the poorer people, favouring the Commons of the Country; would not suffer the Maior to shut them out, but threatned death to them that went about it. All the night following, to wit, Cor∣pus Christi Even,The Com∣mons of London hartned on by the Rebels. the Rebels enjoyed free ingate and outgate, and encouraged the Commons of London, as also of all the Realme, to favour their cause. For, said they, their purpose was but to search out the Traytors of the Land, and so to cease. The more credit was given to speeches, because they tooke nothing from any man, but at a just price: and if they found any man wich theft, they be∣headed him. The morrow after, to wit, on Corpus Christi day, comming into the Citie, talking with the Commons of procuring liberty to them, and appre∣hending of Traytors (as they tearmed them) especially the Duke of Lancaster: they shortly got all the poorer Citizens to conspire with them.The poo∣rer Citi∣zens joyn with the Rebels, and burne the Savoy, the Duke of Lanca∣sters house. And the same day after it was waxen somewhat warm, and that they had tasted divers Wines (for the Citizens did set open their Cellers for them, to enter at their plea∣sure) they exhorted each other, that go∣ing to the Savoy, the Duke of Lancasters house (to the which there was none in the whole Realme to be compared, for beauty and statelinesse) they might set it on fire, and burne it downe to the ground. Straightway they ran thither, and set∣ting fire on it round about, applied their travell to destroy it. And that it might appeare to the Communalty, that they did not any thing for avarice: they cau∣sed to be proclaimed, that none (upon paine of losing his head) should pre∣sume to convert to his owne use,The Re∣bels would have no∣thing to a∣ny private mans use. any thing that was there; but that they should breake such Plate, and vessels of Gold and Silver (as was there in great plenty) into small pieces, and then to throw the same into the Thames, and to all (whatsover) was destroyed. But one of the Rebels (saith Henry Kniton) contrary to the Proclamation,Ex Hen. Kniton. tooke a goodly silver piece, and hid it in his bo∣some: but another that espied him, told his fellowes, who (forthwith) hurled him and the piece of Plate into the fire,The Re∣bels burne one of these fel∣lowes. saying, We be zealous of Truth and Iustice, and not theeves or robbers. Also, two and thirty of those Rebels entred a Celler of the Savoy,Two and thirty Re∣bels mu∣red up in a Celler. where they dranke so much of sweet Wines, that they were not able to come out againe in time: but were shut in with wood and stones, that mu∣red up the doore, where they were heard crying and calling seven dayes after, but none came to helpe them our, till they were all dead. These things being done,The new Temple of London burnt, in anger to Sir Robert Hales. they brake downe the place called the new Tem∣ple at the Barre, in which place, Ap∣prentices at the Law were lodged: for anger which they had conceived against Sir Robert Hales, Master of Saint Iohns Hospitall, unto which Hospitall of St. Iohns the Temple belonged, where ma∣ny Monuments, which the Lawyers had in their custody, were consumed with fire. After a number of them had sac∣ked this Temple: what with wearinesse of labour, and what with Wine, being overcome,The Re∣bels mur∣ther one another. they lay downe under the wals and housing, and were slaine like Swine; one of them killing another for old grudges, and other also made quick dispatch of them. Another troope (in the meane time) set fire on the noble house of Saint Iohn at Clarkenwell,The Prio∣ry of Saint Iohn be∣yond Smithfield burnt. causing it to burne by the space of seven dayes together, not suffe∣ring any to quench it. On Friday, they burned the Manor of Highburie,The Ma∣nor of Highbury burnt. the whole number of the Common people (being at that time) divided into three parts. Of the which division,The Re∣bels divi∣ded into 3. bands. one part was attending to destroy the Manor of Highbury, and other places belonging to the Priory of Saint Iohn. Another com∣pany lay at the Miles-end, East of the City. The third kept at the Tower-hill, There to spoile the King of such victu∣als, as were brought toward him. The company that were assembled on the Miles-end, sent to command the King,
that hee should come to them without delay,The Re∣bels com∣mand the King, and hee goeth to them to the Miles-end. unarmed, or without any force: which if he refused to doe, they would pull downe the Tower, neither should he escape alive. The King taking coun∣sell, with a few unarmed, went toward them in great feare on Horseback: and so the Gates of the Tower being set o∣pen, a great multitude of them entred into it. There was (at the same time) within the Tower 600. Armed valiant persons,The Re∣bels en∣tred into the Tower of London, and their impudent behaviour there. and expert in Armes, and sixe hundred Archers: all which did quaile in sto∣macke, and stood as men amazed. For the basest of the Rusticks (not many to∣gether, but every one by himselfe) durst presume to enter the Kings Chamber, and his Mothers, with their weapons, to put in feare each of the men of War, Knights and other. Many of them went into the Kings Privie-Chamber, and played the wantons, in sitting, lying and sporting them on the Kings Bed. And that which is much more sawcily,Their bold insolence to the Kings Mo∣ther. invited the Kings Mother, to kisse with them: yet durst none of those men of Warre (strange to bee said) once with∣stand them: they went in and out like Masters, that were but base slaves, and of most vile condition. While these rude wretches sought for the Archbishop,The Re∣bels sought for the Archbi∣shop of Canturbury. running up and downe with terrible noyse and fury: at length, finding one of his servants, they charged him to bring them where his Master was, whom they named Tray∣tor. The servant not daring to displease them, brought them to the Chappell: where, after Masse had been said, and having received the Communion, the Arch-bishop was busie in his prayers: for,The Arch∣bishop dreadlesse of the Re∣bels cruel∣ty, and his speeches with them. not unknowing of their comming and purpose, he had passed the last night in confessing of his sinnes, and in devout prayers. When therefore he heard that they were come, with great constancy, he said to his men: Let us now goe, surely it is best to dye, when it is no pleasure to live.The Arch∣bishop is fetcht out of the Tower, and drag∣ged to the Tower hil. And with that, the tormentors en∣tring, cryed, Where is the Traytor? The Archbishop answered: Behold, I am the Archbishop, whom you seeke, not a Traytor. They therfore laid hands on him, and dragging him out of the Chappell, they drew him forth of the Tower gate, to the Tower-hill, where being compassed about with many thousands, and seeing swords about his head drawn in excessive manner, threat∣ning death to him, he spake unto them in these words. What is it (deare brethren) you purpose to doe?The Arch∣bishops words to the Rebels on Tower hill. What is mine offence committed a∣gainst you, for which you will kill me? You were best to take heed, that if I be killed, who am your Pastor, there come not on you the indignation of the iust Revenger, or (at the least) for such a fact, all England be not put under interdiction. Vnneath could hee pronounce these words, before they cry∣ed out with an horrible noise: That they neither feared the interdiction, nor al∣lowed the Pope to be above them. The Archbishop seeing death at hand, with comfortable words (as hee was an eloquent man, and wise, beyond all the wise men of the Realme) spake fairely to them.The Arch∣bishop of Canturbury most cru∣elly behea∣ded by the Rebels. Lastly, after forgivenesse gran∣ted to the executioner, that should be∣head him, kneeling down, he offered his necke to him that should imite off his head. Being stricken in the necke, but not deadly, hee putting his necke, said, Aha, it is the hand of God. He had not removed his hand from the place where the paine was, but that being suddenly stricken againe, his fingers ends being cut off, and part of the Arteries, he fell downe, but yet he dyed not, till being mangled with 8. severall strokes in the necke and head, he fulfilled most wor∣thy Martyrdome.The inhu∣manity to his body after hee was dead There lay his body unburied all that Friday, and the mor∣row till afternoone, none daring to deli∣ver his body to Sepulture. His head those wicked villaines tooke, and nay∣ling thereon his Hood, they fixed it on a pole, and set it on London Bridge, in place where before stood the head of Sir Iohn Minstarworth. This Archbishop, Simon Tibald, alias Sudbury,A further relation concer∣ning this worthy Archbi∣shop, and his religi∣ous acti∣ons. Son to Nicholas Tibald, Gen∣tleman, borne in the Towne of Sudbury in Suffolke, Doctor of both Lawes, was eighteene yeeres Bishop of London, in the which time, hee builded a goodly Colledge, in place where his Fathers house stood, and endued it with great possessions: furnishing the same with secular Clarks, and other Ministers, being valued at the suppression, at 122.
l. 16. s. in Lands by the yeere. Hee builded the upper end of St. Gregories Church at Sudbury. Afterward, being translated to the Archbishopricke of Canturbury,The Wals of Cantur∣bury re-e∣dified by this Arch∣bishop. in An. 1375. he re-edified the Wals of that City, from the West∣gate (which he builded) to the North∣gate: which had been destroyed by the Danes, before the Conquest of King Wil∣liane the Bastard. Hee was slaine, as you have heard, and afterward buried in the Cathedrall Church of Canturbury.The Lord Prior of Saint Iohns beheaded with the Archbi∣shop. There died with him Sir Robert Hales, a most valiant Knight, Lord of Saint Iohns, and Trea∣surer of England, and Iohn Degge, one of the Kings Serjeants at Armes, and a Franciscane Fryer, named W. Apledore, the Kings Confessor. Richard Lyons also, a famous Lapidary and Goldsmith, late one of the Sheriffs of London, was drawn out of his house,Many be∣headed both Flem∣mings and English to fulfill the head∣strong cru∣elty of the commons. and beheaded in Cheap. Many that day were beheaded, as well Flemmings, as Englishmen, for no cause; but only to fulfill the cruelty of the rude Commons. For it was a solemne pa∣stime to them, if they could take any that was not sworne to them, to take from such a one his Hood, with their accustomed clamours, and forthwith to behead him. Neither did they shew a∣ny reverence to sacred places; for in the very Churches they did kill any whom they had in hatred. They fetched 13. Flemmings out of the Augustines Fryers Church in London, and 17. out of ano∣ther Church, and 32. in the Vintry, and so in other places of the Citie, as also in Southwarke, all which they beheaded: except they could plainely pronounce Bread and Cheese.The vil∣laines made a pastime of putting men to death. For if their speech sounded any thing on Brot or Cawse, off went their heads, as a sure marke that they were Flemmings. The King comming to the Miles-end, the place before recited, was greatly a∣fraid, beholding the mad-headed Com∣mons: who (with froward countenan∣ces) required many things, which they had put in writing, and to be confirmed by the Kings Letter Patents. The demands made by the Rebelles to the King at Miles-end. THat all men should be free from servi∣tude and bondage;The first Article. so as (from thence∣forth) there should be no bondmen. That hee should pardon all men,The se∣cond Arti∣cle. of what estate soever, all manner actions and insur∣rections committed, and all manner of Trea∣sons, Felonies, transgressions and extorti∣ons, by any of them done, and to grant them peace. That all men (from thenceforth) might bee enfranchised to buy and sell in every County,The third Article. City, Borough, Towne, Faire, Mar∣ket and other place within the Realme of England. That no Acre of Land,The fourth Ar∣ticle. holden in bondage or service, should bee holden but for foure pence: And if it had been holden for lesse in former time, it should not hereafter bee in∣haunsed. These, and many other things they required:Reprehen∣sion of the Kings go∣vernment. And told him moreover, that hee had beene evilly governed till that day: but from that time forward hee must be governed otherwise. The King perceiving that he could not escape,A hard ex∣treamity for a king. except hee granted to their re∣quest, yeelded to the same: and so, cra∣ving Truce departed from them,The Essex men re∣turned home. and the Essex men returned homeward. On the morrow, being Saturday, and the 15. of Iune, the King (after dinner) went from the Wardrobe in the Royall in London, to Westminster, to visite the Shrine of Saint Edward the King,The King goeth to Westminster. and to see if they had done any mischiefe there. Then went he to the Chappell, called our Lady in the Piew, where hee made his prayers: and returning by the Sub∣urbes of West Smithfield, he found all that place full of people, to wit, the Kentish men.The King sendeth to the Kentish men. Wherfore he sent to shew them, that their fellowes the Essex men were gone home, and that hee would grant to them the like forme of Peace, if it liked them to accept thereof. Their chiefe Captaine, named Iohn, or,Walter Hil∣liard, alias, Tylar their chiere Captaine. as other affirme, Walter Hilliard, alias Tylar, being a crafty fellow, and of an excellent wir, but wanting grace, an∣swered, That he desired peace, but with conditions to his liking, meaning, to seed the King with faire words untill next day, that hee might in the night time have compassed his purpose. For they thought (the same night) to have
spoiled the Citie,The wic∣ked and bloody in∣tent of the Rebels in the night time. the King being first slaine, and the great Lords that were a∣bout him: then to have burnt the City, by setting fire in foure parts thereof. But God that resisteth the proud, did suddenly disappoint him. For whereas the forme of peace was written in three several Charters, and thrice sent to him: none of them could please him. Where∣fore at length,The King sendeth Sir Iohn Newton to Wat Tylar about his owne de∣mands. the King sent to him one of his Knights, named Sir Iohn Newton, not so much to command, as to intreat him (for his pride was well enough knowne) to come and talke with him, about his owne demands, to have them put into his Charter: of which demands I will set downe one, that it may plain∣ly appeare, how contrary to reason all the rest were. First,One of Wat Tylars arrogant demands made to the King. he would have a Commission to behead all Lawyers, Escheators, and others whatsoever, that were learned in the Law, or communicated with the Law, by reason of their office. For hee had conceived in his mind, that this be∣ing brought to passe, all things after∣ward should bee ordered, according to the fancy of the Common people. And indeed it was said, that he had (but the day before) made his vaunt, putting his hand to his own lips:A hold brag of a Rebell. that before foure daies came to an end, all the Lawes of England shuld proceed from his mouth. When Sir Iohn Newton was in hand with him for dispatch, he answered with indignation: If thou art so hasty, thou maist get thee to thy Master, for I will come when it pleaseth mee. Notwith∣standing, he followed on horsebacke a slow pace: and by the way,Iohn Tickle the Doubb∣let maker his com∣ming to Wat Tylar, and what answer he made him. there came to him a Doublet maker, who had brought to the Commons threescore Doublers, which they bought and wore, and hee demanded thirty Markes for them, but could have no payment, Wat Tylar ansered him, saying, Friend, ap∣pease thy selfe, thou shalt be well pay∣ed before this day be ended: keep thee neere to me, I will be thy Creditor. Setting spurs to his horse, he depar∣ted from his company,Wat Tylar his com∣ming to the King, and his au∣dacious words to him. and came so neere to the King, that his horse had touched the crooper of the Kings horse, and the first words he spake, were these: Sir King, seest thou all yonder people? Yea truely, quoth the King, wherefore saist thou so? Because (said he) they be all at my commandement, and have sworne to mee their faith and truth, to doe all that I will have them. In good time, replyed the King, I beleeve it well. Then said Wat Tylar, beleevest thou, King that these people,A lamen∣table case when a King should bee in such di∣stresse. and as many moe as be in London, at my command, will de∣part from thee thus, without having thy Letters? No, said the King, yee shall have them, they bee ordained for you, and shall bee delivered to every one of them. At these words, Wat Tylar seeing the Knight Sir Iohn Newton neere to him on horsebacke, bearing the Kings sword, was offended, and said,Wat Tylars words to Sir Iohn Newton who did heare the Kings sword. It had become him better to be on foot inhis presence. The Knight (not having forgot his old accustomed manhood) answered, That it was no harme, seeing himselfe was also on horsebacke. Which words so offended Wat, that he drew his Dagger, and offered to strike the Knight, calling him Traitor. The Knight answered, that he lied, and drew his Dagger likewise. Wat Tylar, not suffering such an indigni∣ty to be done him, and before his rustick companions, made as if he would have run upon the Knight.The Knight comman∣ded to a∣light on foot be∣fore the Rebell. The King there∣fore, seeing the Knight in danger, to as∣swage the rigor of Wat for the time, commanded the Knight to alight on foot, and to deliver his Dagger to Wat Tylar. But when his proud mind could not bee so pacified, but hee would also have his Sword: the Knight answered, It was the kings sword, and (quoth he) thou art not worthy to have it, nor durst thou aske it of me, if here were no more but thou and I. By my faith, said Wat Tylar, I shall never eat, untill I have thy head, and would have run in upon the Knight. At that very instant came to the King William Walworth,The com∣ming of William Walworth L. Maior of London to checking and his worthy words to him. Lord Maior of Lon∣don, a bold, couragious and brave min∣ded man, with many Knights and Squires to assist the King, and hee said; My Liege, it were a great shame, and such as never had before been heard of, if in that presence, they should permit a Noble knight to be shamefully mur∣thered, and before the face of their So∣veraigne: wherefore hee ought to bee rescued, and Tylar the Rebell to be ar∣arrested.
Which words being heard, the king, although he were but of ten∣der yeers, taking boldnesse and courage to him, commanded the Maior of Lon∣don to lay hand upon him. The Maior, being a man of an incomparable spirit and boldnes, without any further delay or doubting, straight arrested him with his Mace upon the head,William Walworth Lord Mai∣or of Lond. arrested VVat Tylar and felled him to the ground. and in such sort, that he fell downe at the feet of his horse. By and by, they which attended on the king, environed him round about, whereby he was not seene of his compa∣nie. And an Esquire of the Kings, cal∣led Iohn Cavendish, alighted from his horse, and thrust his Sword into Wat Ty∣lars belly: albeit more opinions do hold, that the Maior did it with his Dagger, and many beside did thrust him in, in many places of his body, and then drew him from among the people,VVat Tylar the Rebell slaine in Smithfield. into the Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew. Which when the Commons perceived, they cryed out, that their Captaine was trai∣terously slaine, heartning one another to fight, and to revenge his death, bending their Bowes. But the King rode to them, saying,The kings kinde words to the rude multitude What a worke is this, my men? What meane you to doe? Will you shoot at your king? Be not quarrellous, or sorry for the death of a Traytor and Ribald: I am your king, I will be your Captaine and Leader: follow me into the Field, there to have whatsoever you will require. This the king did, lest the Commons, being bitterly bent in minde, should set fire on the houses in Smithfield, where their Captain was slaine. They therfore followed him into the open Field,They fol∣lowed the King into the field. and the Souldiers that were with him, not knowing as yet, whether they would kill the king, or be in rest, and depart home with the kings Charter. In the meane while, worthy Walworth, the (for ever) famous Maior of London, to second his first peece of service, that fell out to so good purpose, onely with one servant, riding speedily into the Citie, began to cry, You good Citizens, come to helpe your king,Another worthy a∣ction per∣formed by the Lord Maior. that is in doubt to be murde∣red, and succour me your Maior, that am in the like danger: Or if you will not succour me, yet leave not the king destitute. When the Citizens heard this, in whose hearts the love of the king was ingrafted, suddenly, and very seemely prepared,A Noble and loyall forwardnesse in true-hear∣ted Citi∣zens, for the succor of their king, be∣ing in great di∣stresse. (to the number of a thousand) they tarried in the streets, for some one of the knights to lead them (with the Lord Maior) to the king. And by good fortune, Sir Robert Knowles, a Freeman of the Citie, came in the very instant, whom they all required to bee their Leader. Hee gladly undertooke part of them; and Perducas Dalbert, the Lord Maior, and some other knights, led on the rest to the kings presence. The king, and all that were with him, rejoy∣cing not a little at the unhoped for com∣ming of these brave armed Citizens, suddenly compassed the whole multi∣tude of the Commons. There might a man have seene a won∣derfull change of Gods right hand,A wonder∣full altera∣tiō among the Rebels how the Commons did now throw downe their weapons, and fall to the ground, beseeching pardon; who lately before did glory that they had the kings life in their power; and now were glad to hide themselves in caves, ditches, corne∣fields, &c. The knights therefore, desi∣rous to be revenged, besought the king to permit them to take off the heads of and hundred or two ofthem.Great wis∣dome and discretion in the king being so yong. But the king would not condiscend to their request, but commanded the Charter which they had demanded, written and sealed, to be delivered to them for the time, to avoid any more mischiefe: As knowing well, that Essex was not yet pacified, nor Kent stayed, the Commons and Ru∣sticks of which Countries were ready to rise again, if he did not satisfie them the sooner. The Commons having got the Charter, departed homeward, and the rude people being disperted and gone, the king called for his valiant Maior of Lond. W. Walworth,VV VVal∣worth, L. Maior of London knighted in the field and other Aldermen with him. whom (with great ho∣nour) he knighted there in the field, and as he had very worthily deserved. The like he did to Nicholas Brember, Ioh. Phil∣pot, Robert Lawnd, Iohn Standish, Nicho∣las Twiford, and Adam Frances, Alder∣men. Afterward, the king, with his lords and his company, orderly entred into the Citie of London with great joy, and went to his royal Mother, who was lod∣ged in the Tower Royall, called then the Queenes Wardrobe, and there shee had remained two dayes and two nights, very much abashed and amazed.
But when shee saw the king her sonne, she was highly comforted, and said, Ah faire Sonne, what great sorrow have I suffered for you this day!The com∣fortable words of the King to his mo∣ther. The king an∣swered, and said: Certainely, Madame, I know it well: but now rejoyce, and thanke God, for I have this day recove∣red mine Heritage, and the Realme of England, which I had neere-hand lost. The Archbishops head was taken off the Bridge, and Wat Tylars head set up in the place. Here we are further to consider, that for an eternall remembrance of this happy day,The Arms or London augmen∣ted by ad∣dition of a Dagger. and the Cities honour with∣all, the king granted, that there should be a Dagger added to the Armes of the Citie, in the right quarter of the shield, for an augmentation of the same Armes, and a memory of the Lord Mai∣or his valiant act, as doth appeare unto this day. For till that time, the Citie bare onely the Crosse without the Dag∣ger. And whereas it hath been farre spred abroad by vulgar opinion,Concer∣ning vul∣gar mista∣king the Captaines name of the Rebels that the Re∣bell smitten downe so manfully by Sir William Walworth, the then worthy Lord Maior of London, was named Iack Straw, and not Wat Tylar: I thought good to reconcile this rash conceived doubt, by such testimony as I find in ancient and good Records. The principall Leaders and Captaines of the Commons, were Wat Tylar,The name of the chiefe Captaines and ring∣leaders in the rebel∣lion. as the first man that tooke himselfe to be offended. The second, was Iohn or Iack Straw: the third, was Iohn Kirkby: the fourth, Allen Thredder: the fifth, Thomas Scot: the sixth, Ralfe Rugge. These and many other were Lea∣ders of the Kentish and Essex men. At Mildenhall and Burie in Suffolke, was Robert Westbrome, that made himselfe a king; and was most famous, next to Iohn Wrawe, who being a Priest, could not set Crowne upon Crowne: but left the name of king and Crowne to the same Robert. At Norwich, Iohn Litester a Dyer, exercised the name and power of a king, till he was taken and hanged for his paines. Thus dangerously had this Rebellion dispersed it selfe abroad.The rebel∣lion had extended it selfe in∣to many places. But the happy and prosperous successe at London, with other good care for them further off, gave a gracious issue to all in the end. After the death of Wat Tylar, and Iack Straw being taken, with divers other, as chiefe actors in this monstrous disorder: the fore-named Lord Mayor sate in judgement upon the offenders, and pronounced the sentence of death upon them.The Lord Maior sate in judge∣ment on the Re∣bels, and his words that he u∣sed to Iack Straw. At which time, the Lord Maior spake openly to him thus: Iohn (quoth he) behold, thy death is at hand without all doubt, and there is no way through which thou mayst hope to e∣scape: wherefore, for thy soules health, without making any lye, tell us what you purposed to have done among you, and to what end you did assemble the Commons. When hee had stayed a while, as doubtfull what to say, the Maior began thus againe to him: Sure∣ly thou knowest, Iohn, that the thing which I demand of thee, if thou doe it truely, it will redound to thy soules health, &c. He therefore, animated by the Lord Maiors good words, began as followeth: The Confession of Iack Straw, to the Lord Maior of London, before his death. NOw it booteth not to lye, neither is it lawfull to utter any untruth: especially, understanding that my Soule is to suffer more straiter torments if I should so doe. And because I hope for two commodities by speaking the truth: first, that what I shall speake, may profit the Com∣mon-wealth: and secondly, after my death, I trust by your suffrages to be succoured, ac∣cording to your promises, which is to pray for me: I will speake faithfully, and with∣out any deceit. At the same time as wee were assembled upon Black-heath,What they intended to doe at Black heath. and had sent to the King to come unto us: our purpose was, to have slaine all such Knights, Squires and Gen∣tlemen, Their in∣tent for keeping the King. as should have given their atten∣dance thither upon him: And as for the King, we would have kept him among us, to the end that the people might more boldly have repaired to us: sith they would have thought, that whatsoever we did, the same had beene done by his authority. Finally, when we had gotten power enough, that wee needed not to feare any force which might be made against us, we would have slaine all such Noblemen as might either have given counsell, or made any resistance against us: especially, we would have slaine the Knights
of the Rhodes or Saint Iohns,The killing of all No∣blemen. Killing the King & all that had any possessi∣ons. and lastly, were would have killed the King himselfe, and all men of possessions: with Bishops, Monks, Canons, and Parsons of Churches. Onely Friers Mendicants wee would have spared, that might have sufficed for Mini∣stration of the Sacraments. When we had made a riddance of all those,Lawes de∣vised by thēselves. we would have devised Lawes, according to which Lawes the subjects of the Realme should have lived. For we would have cre∣ated Kings,Creation of kings a∣mong thē. as Wat Tylar in Kent, and other in other Countries. But because this our purpose was disappointed by the Arch∣bishop of Canturbury,Their ma∣lice to the Archbi∣shop. that would not per∣mit the King to come to us: wee sought by all meanes to dispatch him out the way, as at length we did. Moreover, the same eve∣ning that Wat Tylar was kild, wee were determined (having the greatest part of the Commons of the City bent to joyne with us) to have set fire in foure corners of the Citie,Their in∣tent to burue Lon∣don. and so to have divided among our selves, the spoile of the chiefest riches that might have been found at our  pleasure. And this (said he) , as God may helpe me now at . After this confession de hee was beheaded, and  ad set on London bridge by Wat Tylars, and many other. In the yeere 1387. King Richard held his feast of Christmas in the Tower.Richard the 2. prisoner in the Tower. And in the yeere 1399. the same King was sent prisoner to the Tower. In the yeere 1414. Sir Iohn Oldcastle brake out of the Tower.Porter of the Tower beheaded. And the same yeere a Parliament being holden at Lei∣cester, a Porter of the Tower was drawn, hanged and headed, whose head was sent up, and set over the Tower Gate, for consenting to one Whitlooke, that brake out of the Tower. In the yeere 1419. Fryer Randulph was sent to the Tower, and was there slaine by the Parson of Saint Peters in the Tower. In the yeere 1426. there came to London a lewd fellow,A counter, feit Physi∣cian his head set on the Tower of London. feining himselfe to be sent from the Emperour, to the yong king Henry the sixt, calling him∣selfe the Baron of Blackamoore, and that he should be the principall Physician in this Kingdome: but his subtilty being knowne, he was apprehended, condem∣ned, drawne, hanged, headed and quar∣tered, his head set on the Tower of Lon∣don, and his quarters on toure Gates of the Citie. In the yeere 1458. in Whitson-week, the Duke of Somerset, with Anthony Rivers,lusting in the tower. and other foure, kept Iusts be∣fore the Queen in the Tower of London against three Esquires of the Queenes, and others. In the yeere 1465. King Henry the sixt was brought prisoner the Tower, where he remained long. In the yeere 1470. the Tower was yeelded to Sir Richard Lee Maior of Lon∣don and his Brethren the Aldermen, who forthwith entred the same, delive∣ring King Henry of his imprisonment,Henry the 6 murthe∣red in the Tower. and lodged him in the Kings lodging there, but the next yeere he was againe sent thither prisoner, and there murde∣red. In the yeere 1478. George Duke of Clarence,Duke of Clarence drowned in the Tower. was drowned in a Butte of Malmesey in the Tower: and within 5. yeeres after King Edward the fift, with his Brother,Edward the 5. murthe∣red in the Tower. were said to be murthered there. In the yeere 1485. Iohn Earle of Ox∣ford was made Constable of the Tower,Pacent 1. of Henry the 7. Iuste and tur∣neying in the Tower. and had custody of the Lyons granted him. In the yeere 1501. in the moneth of May, was royall Turney of Lords and Knights in the Tower of London before the king. In the yeere 1502. Queen Elizabeth, wife to Henry the 7. died of Childbirth in the Tower. In the yeere 1512. the Chappell in the high white Tower was burned. In the yeere 1546. Queene Anne Bullein was beheaded in the Tower. 1541. La∣dy Katherine Howard, wife to king Hen∣ry the eighth, was also beheaded there. In the yeere 1546. the 27. of April,VVilliam Foxley slept in the Tower 14. dayes and more without waking. being Tuesday in Easter weeke William Foxley, Potmaker for the Mint of the Tower of London, fell asleepe, and so continued sleeping, and could not bee wakened with pricking, cramping, or otherwise burning whatsoever, till the first day of the tearme, which was full 14. daies, and 15. nights, or more, for that Easter tearme beginneth not afore 17. dayes after Easter. The cause of his thus sleeping could not bee knowne, though the same were diligently sear∣ched
after by the Kings Physicians, and other learned men: yea, the king him∣selfe examined the said Wil. Foxley, who was in all points found at his wakening, to be as if he had slept but one night, and he lived more than forty yeeres af∣ter in the said Tower, to wit, untill the yeere of Christ, 1587. and then decea∣sed on Wednesday in Easter weeke. Thus much for these accidents: and now to conclude thereof in summary. This Tower is a Cittadell, to defend or command the Citie:Vse of the Tower to defend the Citie. a Royall place for assemblies and treaties: a Prison of E∣state, for the most dangerous offenders: The onely place of coynage for all Eng∣land at this time: the Armorie for war∣like provision: the Treasurie of the Or∣naments and Iewels of the Crowne, and generall conserver of the most Re∣cords of the kings Courts of Iustice at Westminster. Tower on London Bridge. THe next Tower on the River of Thames,Tower at the north end of the Draw∣bridge. was on London Bridge, at the north end of the Draw∣bridge. This Tower was new begun to be builded 1426. Iohn Reynwell, Maior of London, laid one of the first corner∣stones in the foundation of this worke; the other three were laid by the She∣riffes and Bridge-masters: upon every of these foure stones was ingraven in faire Romane letters, the name of Ihesus. And these stones I have seene laid in the Bridge Storehouse, since they were ta∣ken up, when that Tower was of late newly made of timber. This Gate and tower was at the first strongly builded up of stone, and so con∣tinued untill the yeere 1577. in the mo∣neth of April, when the same stone ar∣ched gate and tower, being decayed, was begun to be taken downe, and then were the heads of the traytors removed thence, and set on the tower over the gate at the Bridge foot, towards South∣warke. This said tower beeing taken downe, a new foundation was drawne, and Sir Iohn Langley, Lord Maior, laid the first stone, in the presence of the Sheriffes and Bridge masters. On the 28 of August, and in the mo∣neth of September, the yeere 1579. the same tower was finished, a beautifull and chargeable peece of worke, all a∣bove the Bridge being of timber. Tower on the South of London Bridge. ANother tower there is on Lon∣don Bridge,Tower at the south end of the bridge. to wit, over the gate at the South end of the same Bridge, toward Southwarke. This gate, with the tower thereupon, and two Ar∣ches of the Bridge fell downe, and no man perished by the fall thereof, in the yeere 1436. Towards the new building whereof, divers charitable Citizens gave large summes of monies: which Gate being then againe new builded,W. Dun∣thorne. was, with thirteene houses more on the Bridge,The fourth gate on London bridge bur∣ned. in the yeere 1471. burned by the Mariners and Saylers of Kent, Ba∣stard Fawconbridge being their Cap∣taine. Baynards Castle. IN the west part of this Citie (saith Fitzstephen) are two most strong Ca∣stles, Baynards Castle. &c. Also Gervasim Tilbury,Fitzstephen. in the Reigne of Henry the second,Gervas. Til∣bery. writing of these Castl  to this effect: Two Castles (saith he)  built with wals and rampires, whereof one is in right of possession Baynards: the other, the Barons of Mount∣fitchet. The first of these Castles, ban∣king on the River Thames, was called Baynards Castle, of Baynard, a Nobleman that came in with the Conquerour, and then builded it, and deceased in the reigne of William Rufus: after whose de∣cease Geffrey Baynard succeeded, and then William Baynard, in the yeere 1111 who by forfeiture for Felonie, lost his Baronry of little Dunmow, and king Hen∣ry gave it wholly to Robert, the sonne of Richard, the sonne of Gilbert of Clare, and to his heires, together with the ho∣nour of Baynards Castle. This Robert mar∣ried Maude de Sent Licio, Lady of Brad∣ham, and deceased 1134. was buried at Saint Needes by Gilbert of Glare his Fa∣ther: Walter his sonne succeeded him, he tooke to wife Matilde de Bocham; and after her decease, Matilde the daughter and coheyre of Richard de Lucy, on whom hee begate Robert, and other: hee deceased in the yeere 1198. and was buried at Dunmow: after whom succeeded Robert Fitzwater, a valiant knight.
About the yeere 1213. there arose a great discord betwixt king Iohn and his Barons,Lib. Dun∣mow. because of Matilda, surnamed the faire, daughter to the said Robert Fitzwater, whom the king unlawfully loved, but could not obtain her, nor her Father would consent thereunto: wher∣upon, and for other like causes, ensued warre through the whole Realme. The Barons were received into Lond. where they greatly endamaged the King, but in the end, the king did not onely (therefore) banish the said Fitzwater amongst other,Robert Fitz∣water ba∣nished. out of the Realme, but also caused his Castell, called Baynard, and other his houses to bee spoiled.Baynards Castell de∣stroyed. Which then being done, a Messenger being sent unto Matilda the faire,Virginity defended with the losse of worldly goods and life of the body, for life of the soule. about the kings suit, whereunto shee would not consent, she was poysoned: Robert Fitzwater, and other being then passed into France and some into Scotland, &c. It hapned in the yeere 1214. king Iohn being then in France with a great Army, that a truce was taken betwixt the two kings of England and France, for the tearme of five yeeres, and a River, or arme of the Sea  then betwixt either host. There was a Knight in the English host, that cryed to them of the other side, willing some one of their Knights, to come and just a course or twaine with him: whereupon, without stay, Robert Fitzwater, being on the French part, made himselfe ready, fer∣ried over, and got on horsebacke, with∣out any man to helpe him, and shewed himselfe ready to the face of his chal∣lenger, whom at the first course, hee strooke so hard with his great Speare, that horse and man fell to the ground: and when his Speare was broken, hee went back againe to the king of France. Which when the king had seene, by Gods tooth,King Iohns oath. quoth hee (after his usuall oath) he were a king indeed, that had such a Knight. The friends of Robert hearing these words, kneeled downe and said:Robert Fitz∣water re∣stored to the Kings favour. O king, he is your knight; it is Robert Fitzwater, and thereupon the next day hee was sent for, and restored to the kings favour: By which meanes, peace was concluded,Baynards Castell a∣gain buil∣ded. and he received his livings, and had licence to repaire to his Castell of Baynard, and other Ca∣stles. The yeere 1216. the first of Henry the third, the Castell of Hartford, being delivered to Lewes the French, and the Barons of England,The kee∣ping of Hertford Castell belonged to Robert Fitzwater. Robert Fitzwater re∣quiring to have the same; because the keeping thereof did by ancient right and title pertaine to him, was answered by Lewes; That English men were not worthy to have such holds in keeping, because they did betray their own Lord, &c. This Robert deceased in the yeere 1234. and was buried at Dunmow, and Walter his sonne succeeded him, 1258. and his Barony of Baynard, was in the ward of King Henry in the nonage of Ro∣bert Fitzwater. This Robert tooke to his second wife, Aelianor, daughter and heire to the Earle of Ferrars, in the yeere 1289. and in the yeere 1303. on the 12. of March. Before Iohn Blondon, Maior of London, he acknowledged his service to the same Citie, and sware upon the Evangelists, that he would be true to the liberties thereof, and maintaine the same to his power, and the counsell of the same to keepe, &c. The rights that belonged to Robert Fitz∣water, Chastilian and Banner-bearer of London, Lord of Wodeham were these. THe said Robert and his heires,Robert Fitz∣water, Ca∣stilian and Banner bearer of London. ought to be, and are chiefe Ban∣nerers of London, in fee for the Chastilary, which he and his ancestors had by Castell Baynard, in the said Citie. In time of warre, the said Robert and his heyres ought to serve the City in man∣ner as followeth: that is; The said Robert ought to come, hee being the twentieth man of Armes on horsebacke, covered with cloth, or Ar∣mour, unto the great West doore of St. Paul, with his Banner displaied before him, of his Armes. And when hee is come to the said doore, mounted and apparelled, as before is said, the Maior with his Aldermen and Sheriffs, armed in their Armes, shall come out of the said Church of Saint Paul unto the said doore, with a Banner in his hand all on foot,Banner of S. Paul. which Banner shalbe Gules, the Image of Saint Paul gold: the face, hands, feet, and sword of silver: and as∣soone as the said Robert shall see the Maior, Aldermen, and Sheriffs come
on foot out of the Church, armed with such a Banner, he shall alight from his horse, and salute the Maior, and say to him; Sir Maior, I am come to doe my ser∣vice, which I owe to the Citie. And the Maior and Aldermen shall answer: We give to you, as to our Banneret of fee in this Citie, the Banner of this Citie to beare and governe, to the honour and profit of this Citie, to your power. And the said Robert and his heires shall receive the Banner in his hands, and shall goe on foot out of the gate, with the Banner in his hands; and the Maior, Aldermen, and Shiriffes shall follow to the doore, and shall bring an horse to the said Robert, worth twenty pound, which horse shall bee saddled with a saddle of the Armes of the said Robert, and shall be covered with sindals of the said Armes. Also they shall present to him twen∣ty pounds starling money, and deliver it to the Chamberlaine of the said Ro∣bert, for his expences that day. Then the said Robert shall mount upon the horse which the Maior presented to him, with the Banner in his hand, and as soone as he is up, hee shall say to the Mayor, that he cause a Marshall to be chosen for the host, one of the Citie; which Marshall being chosen, the said Robert shall command the Maior and Burgesses of the Citie, to warne the Commons to assemble together, and they shall all goe under the Banner of S. Paul, and the said Robert shall beare it himselfe unto Ealdgate, and there the said Robert and Maior shall deliver the said Bauner of Saint Paul from thence, to whom they shal assent or think good. And if they must make any issue forth of the Citie; then the said Robert ought to choose two forth of every Ward, the most sage personages, to foresee to the safe keeping of the Citie, after they be gone forth. And this counsell shall bee taken in the Priorie of the Trinity neere unto Ealdgate. And againe, before eve∣ry Towne or Castle, which the host of London shall besiege, if the siege conti∣nue a whole yeere, the said Robert shall have for every siege, of the Communal∣ty of London, one hundred shillings for his travell, and no more. These be the rights that the said Ro∣bert hath in the time of warre.Rights be∣longing to Robert Fitz∣water in the time of peace. Rights belonging to Robert Fitzwater and to his heires in the Citie of London in the time of peace, are these; that is to say, The said Robert hath a Soke or Ward in the Citie; that is, a wall of the Canon∣rie of Saint Paul, as a man goeth down the street before the Brewhouse of Saint Paul, unto the Thames, and so to the side of the Mill, which is in the water that commeth downe from the Fleet∣bridge, and goeth so by London wals, be∣twixt the Friers preachers and Ludgate, and so returneth backe by the house of the said Fryers, unto the said wall of the said Canonrie of Saint Paul; that is, all the Parish of Saint Andrew, which is in the gift of his Ancestors, by the said Signiority: and so the said Robert hath appendant unto the said Soke, all these things under-written: That he ought to have a Sokeman, and to place what Sokeman he will, so he be of the Soke∣manrie, or the same Ward; and if any of the Sokemanry be impleaded in the Guildhall, of any thing that toucheth not the body of the Maior that for the time is, or that toucheth the body of no Sheriffe, it is not lawfull for the Soke∣man of the Sokemanrie of the said Ro∣bert Fitzwater, to demand a Court of the said Robert; and the Maior and his Citizens of London ought to grant him to have a Court,A Court to bee granted Robert Fitzwater for his Sokeman. and in his Court hee ought to bring his judgements, at it is assented and agreed upon in the Guild∣hall, that shall be given them. If any therefore be taken in his Soke. manry, he ought to have his Stocks and imprisonment in his Soke; and he shall be brought from thence to the Guild∣hall, before the Maior, and there they shall provide him his judgement that ought to be given of him: but his judge∣ment shall not be published till he come into the Court of the said Robert, and in his liberty. And the judgement shall bee such,Iudgemēt for diver∣sity of of∣fence. that if he have deserved death by trea∣son, he to be tyed to a post in the Thames at a good Wharfe, where Boats are fast∣ned, two ebbings and two flowings of the water. And if he be condemned for a com∣mon thiefe, he ought to bee led to the
Elmes, and there suffer his judgement as other Theeves. And so the said Ro∣bert and his heires hath honour, that he holdeth a great Franches within the Ci∣tie, that the Maior of the Citie and Ci∣tizens are bound to doe him of right; that is to say, that when the Maior will hold a great Councell, he ought to call the said Robert and his heires, to be with him in councell of the Citie; and the said Robert ought to be sworne, to be of counsell with the Citie, against all peo∣ple, saving the King and his heires. And when the said Robert commeth to the Hustings in the Guild hall of the Citie, the Maior or his Lieutenant ought to rise against him, and set him downe neere unto him, and so long as hee is in the Guild-hall, all the judgements ought to be given by his mouth, according to the Record of the Recorders of the said Guild-hall. And so many waifes as come so long as he is there, he ought to give them to the Bayliffes of the Towne, or to whom he will, by the counsaile of the Maior of the Citie. These be the Franchises that belon∣ged to Robert Fitzwater in London, in time of peace, which, for the antiquity thereof, I have noted out of an old Re∣cord. This Robert deceased in the yeere 1305 leaving issue, Walter Fitzrobert, who had issue, Robert Fitzwalter, unto whom, in the yeere 1320. the Citizens of London acknowledged the right, which they ought to him and his heires for the Ca∣stle Baynard. He deceased 1325. unto whom succeeded Robert Fitzrobert, Fitz∣walter, &c. More of the Lord Fitzwa∣ter may ye read in my Annales, in the 51 of Edward the third. But how this ho∣nour of Baynards Castle, with the appur∣tenances, fell from the possession of the Fitzwaters, I have not read: only I find, that in the yeere 1428. the seventh of Henry the sixth,Baynards Castle peri∣shed by fire. a great fire was at Bay∣nards Castle, and that Humfrey Duke of Gloucester builded it new. By his death and attaindor,Humfrey, Duke of Gloucester, new buil∣ded it. in the yeere 1446. it came to the hands of Henry the sixth, and from him to Richard Duke of Yorke, of whom wee reade,Richard, Duke of Yorke, ow∣ner of Bay∣nards Castle. that in the yeere 1457. he lodged there as in his owne house. In the yeere 1460. the 28 of February, the Earles of March and of Warwicke, with a great power of men, (but few of name) entred the City of London, where they were of the Citizens joyfully re∣ceived; and upon the third of March, be∣ing Sunday, the said Earle caused his people to be mustred in S. Iohns field: where, unto that host was shewed and proclaimed, certaine Articles & points, wherein King Henry, as they said, had offended, and thereupon it was deman∣ded of the said people, whether the said Henry was worthy to raingne as King any longer, or not: wherunto the people cry∣ed, nay. Then it was asked of them, whe∣ther they would have the E.Edward the 4 elected in S. Iohns field. of March for their King: and they cryed, yea, yea. Whereupon certaine Captaines were appointed to beare report thereof to the said Earle of March, then being lodged at his Castle of Baynard. Whereof when the Earle was by them advertised, he thanked God, and them for their electi∣on: notwithstanding, he shewed some countenance of insufficiency in him, to occupie so great a charge, till by exhor∣tation of the Archbishop of Canturbury,Edward the 4. took on him the Crownein Baynards Castle. the Bishop of Excest. and certain Noble∣men, he granted to their petition: and on the next morrow at Pauls, he went on Procession, offered, and had Te Deum sung. Then was he with great Royalty conveyed to Westminster, and there in the great Hall, set in the Kingss Seat, with Saint Edwards Scepter in his hand. In the seventh yeere of King Edwards reigne,Ex lib. Ers∣wick. Treason surmised against many men many men were arrested of trea∣son, surmised against them, where∣though many of them were put to death, and other escaped for great sums of money. Amongst whom were, Sir Thomas Cooke,Divers Al∣dermen unjustly charged with trea∣son. Sir Iohan Plummer, Knights, Humfrey Heyward, and other Aldermen of London arrested, and charged with treason: whereof they were acquitted, but they lost their goods to the King, to the value of 40000. Marks, or more, as some have written. And for example, Sir Thomas Cooke, lately before L. Maior of London, was by one, named Hawkins, appeached of Treason, for which he was committed to the Tower, his place in London seized on by the Lord Rivers; and his Lady and servants cleerely put out thereof, the cause being thus:
The forenamed Hawkins came (up∣on a time) to the said Sir Thomas Cooke,The rea∣son of Sir Thomas Cooke his troubles. requesting him to lend him a thousand Markes upon good surety; wherunto he answered, that he would first know for whom it should be: At length un∣derstanding that it should bee for the use of Queen Margaret, hee answered; he had no currant wares, whereof a∣ny shift might bee made, without too much losse, and therefore required Hawkins to move him no further, for he intended not to deale therewithall. Yet the said Hawkins requested but one hundred pounds at length, and went a∣way without it, or the value of one pen∣ny, and never after came again to move him; which rested so for two or 3. yeere after, till the said Hawkins was com∣mitted to the Tower; and brought at length to the Brake or Racke, common∣ly called,The Brake or Racke in the Tower, u∣sually cal∣led the Duke of Excesters Daughter the Duke of Excesters daugh∣ter, because hee was the deviser of that torture. By meanes of which paine, he revealed many things: and among the rest, the motion, which hee had made to Sir Thomas Cooke, was one. In regard whereof, the said Sir Thomas was trou∣bled, as you have heard, and a Iury, by the meanes of Sir Iohn Fogge, endighted him of treason. After which, an Oyer determiner was held in the Guildhall,An Oyer de∣terminer for the tryall of Sir Thomas Cooke. where sate the Lord Maior, the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Warwicke, the Lord Rivers, Sir Iohn Fogge, with other of the kings Councell. To this place was the said Sir Thomas brought, and there arraigned upon life and death: where he was acquitted of the said endightment,Sir Thomas Cooke ac∣quitted by the Iury. and sent to the Counter in Breadstreet, and from thence to the Kings Bench. Being thus acquit∣ted, his Wife got possession againe of his house, the which she found in a very evill plight: for the servants of Sir Iohn Fogge, and of the Lord Rivers, had made havocke of what they listed. Also, at his place at Giddy Hall in Essex,When men are in distresse much spoil is made of them. anó∣ther sort had destroyed the Deere in his Parke, his Conies and Fish, and spared not Brasse, Pewter, Bedding, and all that they could carry away; for which, neuer a penny might be gotten backe a∣gaine in recompence, nor Sir Thomas Cooke bee delivered, untill he had paid 8000. pounds to the King, and 800. pounds to the Queene. And because that Sir Iohn Markham knight, then chiefe Iustice of the Pleas, determined somewhat against the kings pleasure (that the offence done by Sir Thomas Cooke was no treason, but misprision, the which was no desert of death, but to be fined at the kings pleasure:Sir Iohn Markham Lord chiefe Iu∣stice lust his Office for doing Iustice.) the Lord Rivers, and the Dutches of Bed∣ford his wife, procured, that he lost his Office afterward. Edward the fourth being dead, leaving his eldest sonne Edward, and his second sonne Richard, both infants; Richard Duke of Glocester,Richard the third took on him the Crown in Baynards Castle. being elected by the Nobles and Commons in the Guildhall of London, tooke on him the title or the Realme and kingdome, as imposed up∣on him in this Baynards Castle, as yee may read pended by Sir Thomas Moore, and set downe in my Annals. Henry the seventh,Of Baynards Castle. about the yeere 1501. the 16. of his reigne, repaired or rather new builded this house, not imbattelled, or so strongly fortified Castle-like▪ but farre more beautifull and commodious for the entertainment of any Prince or great Estate: hee also kept a Royall Turney, and Iusts in the Tower of London, for his Lords, knights and other. In the seventeenth of his reigne, he with his Queene were lod∣ged there, and came from thence to Fauls Church, where they made their offering, dined in the Bishops Palace, and so returned. The 18, of his reigne he was lodged there,Henry the lodged in Baynards Castle. and the Ambassadours from the King of the Romanes, were thither brought to his presence, and from thence the king came to Pauls, and was there sworne to the King of the Romans, as the said King had sworne to him. The twenty of the said King,Henry the seventh and Knights of the Garter rode in then ha∣bits from the Tower to Pault Church. he with his Knights of the Order, all in their habits of the Gatter, rode from the Tower of London through the City, un∣to the Cathedrall Church of St. Pauls, and there heard Evensong, and from thence they rode to Baynards Castle, where the king lodged, and on the next morrow, in the same habit they rode from thence againe to the said Church of St. Pauls, went on Procession, heard the divine Service, offered and retur∣ned. The same yeere the King of Castile
was lodged there. In the yeere 1553. the 19. of Iuly, the Councell,The coun∣sell assem∣bled at Baynards Castle, & proclai∣med Queene Mary. partly moved with the right of the Lady Maries cause, partly considering, that the most of the Realm was wholly bent on her side, changing their minde from Lady Iane, lately pro∣claimed Queen; assembled themselves at this Baynards Castle, where they communed with the Earle of Pembrooke and the Earle of Shrewsbury, and Sir Iohn Mason, Clerke of the Councell, sent for the Lord Maior, and then ri∣ding into Cheape to the Crosse, where Garter King at Armes (Trumpets being sounded) proclaimed the Lady Marie, Daughter to King Henry the eight, and Queene Katharine, Queene of England, &c. This Castle now belongeth to the Earle of Pembrooke. Next adjoyning to this Castle, was sometime a Tower, the name thereof I have not read, but that the same was builded by Edward the second, is mani∣fest by this that followeth: King Edward the third,A Tower by Baynards Castle builded by Edward the second. in the second yeere of his reigne, gave unto William de Ros, of Hamelake in Yorkeshire, a Tow∣er upon the water of Thames, by the Gastle Baynard, in the Citie of London, which Tower his Father had builded, he gave the said Tower and appurtenances to the said William Hamesake, and his heires, for a Roseyeerely to be paid for al service due, &c. This Tower as it seemeth to me, was since called Legates Inne, the 7. of Edward the fourth. Tower of Mountfiquit. THe next Tower or Castle,Tower of Mountfi∣quit. ban∣king also on the river of Thames, was (as is afore shewed) called Mountfiquits Castle, belonging to a No∣bleman, Baron of Mountfiquit, the first builder thereof, who came in with Wil∣liam the Conquerour, and was after∣ward named, William le Sir Monntfiquit. This Castle hee builded in a place, not far distant from Baynards, towards the West. The same William Mountfiquit li∣ved in the reigne of Hen. the 1. and was witnesse to a Charter then granted to the Citie for the Shiriffes of London, Richard Mountfiquit lived in king Iohns time, and in the yeere 1213. was by the same king banished the Realme in∣to France, when (peradventure) king Iohn caused his Castle of Mountfiquit, amongst other Castles of the Barons, to be overthrowne. The which, after his returne, might bee by him againe re e∣dified; for the totall destruction there∣of, was about the yeere 1276. when Ro∣bert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Cantur∣bury, began the foundation of the Fry∣ers Preachers Church there, com∣monly called, the Blacke Fryers, as appeareth by a Charter, in the fourth of Edward the first, in these words. Gregory Rokesley,Cant. Récord ex Charta. The prea∣ching Fri∣ers Church founded by Baynards Castle; before which time their Church was in Oldborne. Lord Maior, and the Barons of London, granted, and gave to the Archbishop of Canturbury Robert Kilwarby, two lanes or wayes, ly∣ing next to the street of Baynards Castle, and the Tower of Mountfiquit, or Mount∣fichet to be destroyed. In the which place, the said Robert builded the late new Church of the Blacke Fryers, with the rest of the stones that were left of the said Tow∣er. For the best and choise stones the Bi∣shop of London had obtained of King Wil∣liam Conquerour, to re-edifie the upper part of Saint Pauls Church, which was then (by chance of fire) decaied. One other Tower there was also,Tower on the Thames si∣tuate on the River of Thames, neere un∣to the said Black Fryers Church, on the West part thereof, builded at the Ci∣tizens charges, by licence and comman∣dement of Edward the first, and of Ed∣ward the second as appeareth by their gránts. Which Tower was then fini∣shed, and so stood for the space of 300. yeeres; and was at the last taken downe by the commandement of Iohn Sha, Maior of London, in the yeere 1502. Another Tower or Castle also was there,Tower or Castle on the west of London by Saint Brides Church. in the West part of the Citie, pertaining to the king. For I read, that in the yeere 1087. the 20. of William the first, the City of London, with the Church of Saint Paul, being burned, Mauritius then Bishop of London, after∣ward began the foundation of a new Church, whereunto king William (saith mine Author) gave the choise stones of his Castle, standing neere to the bank of the River of Thames, at the west end of
the Citie.In vita Ar∣kenwald. After this Mauritius, Richard his successor purchased the streets about Pauls Church, compassing the same with a wall of stone, and gates, King Henry the first gave to this Richard, so much of the Moat or wall of the Castle, on the Thames side to the South, as should be needfull to make the said wall of the Churchyard, and so much more as should suffice to make a way without the wall on the North side. This Tower or Castle being thus de∣stroyed, stood, as it may seeme, in place where now standeth the House called Bridewell. For notwithstanding the de∣struction of the said Castle or Tower, the house remained large, so that the Kings of this Realme long after were lodged there,The kings house by S. Brides in Flceistreet. and kept their Courts. For untill the 9. yeere of Henry the third, the Courts of Law and Iustice were kept in the Kings house, wheresoever he was lodged, and not elsewhere. And that the Kings have beene lodged, and kept their Law Court in this place, I could shew you many, authors of record; but for a plaine proofe, this one may suf∣fice: Haec est finalis concordia, facta in Cu∣ria Dom.Lib. Barton super Trent. Regis apud Sanct. Bridgid. Lond. a die Sancti Michaelis in 15. dies Anno reg∣ni Regis Iohannis 7. Corā G. Fil. Petri, Eu∣stacio de Fauconberg, Iohanne de Gestlinge, Osbart filio Hervey, Walter de Crisping, Iu∣sticiar. & aliis Baronibus Domini Regis. More (as Mathew Paris hath) about the yeere 1210. King Iohn,Mat. Paris Manuscrip. Parliament at S. Brides. the 12. of his reigne, summoned a Parliament at S. Brides in London, where he exacted of the Clergie and religious persons, the summe of one hundred thousand pounds, and besides all this, the white Monks were compelled to cancell their priviledges, and to pay 40000. l. to the King, &c. This house of S. Birdes of la∣ter time being left, and not used by the Kings, fell to ruine, insomuch that the very platforme thereof remained (for great part) waste, and as it were, but a lay-stall of filth and rubbish, only a faire Well remained there. A great part of this house, namely on the west, as hath beene said, was given to the Bishop of Salisbury;Bridewell builded by King Henry the eighth. the other part toward the East remained waste, untill King Henry the 8. builded a stately and beautifull house thereupon, giving it to name, Bridewell, of the Parish and Well there. This house he purposely builded for the entertainmēt of the Emp. Charles the 5. who in the yeere 1522. came into this Citie, as I have shewed in my Summa∣rie, Annales, and large Chronicles. On the North-west side of this Citie, neere unto Redcrosse-street, there was a Tower, commonly called Barbican,Barbican or Burhkenning or Burhkenning, for that the same, being placed on an high ground, and also buil∣ded of some good height, was (in old time) used as a Watch-Tower for the Citie, from whence a man might be∣hold and view the whole Citie towards the South, and also into Kent, Suffex and Surrey, and likewise every other way, East, North, or West. Some other Burhkennings or Watch-Towers there were of old time, in and about the Citie, all which were repay∣red, yea and others new builded, by Gil∣bert de Clare, Earle of Gloucester, in the reigne of King Henry the third, when the Barons were in Armes, and held the Ci∣tie against the King. But the Barons being reconciled to his favour, in the yeere 1267. he caused all their Burhken∣nings, Watch-Towers, and Bulwarkes, made and repaired by the said Earle, to be plucked downe, and the ditches to be filled up, so that nought of them might seeme to remaine.The de∣struction of the Bar∣bicun. And then was might seeme to remaine. And then was this Burhkenning, amongst the rest, over∣throwne and destroyed: and although the ditch neere thereunto, then called Hounds-ditch, was stopped up, yet the street (of long time after) was called Hounds-ditch, and of late time (more commonly) called Barbican. The plot or feat of this Burhkëning or watch-tow∣er, King Edward the third, in the yeere 1336. the tenth of his reigne, gave unto Robert Vfford, Earle of Suffolke, by the name of his Mannor of Base-court, in the Parish of S. Giles without Creplegate of London, commonly called the Barbican. Tower Royall was of old time the kings house,Tower Royall. King Stephen was there lodged; but since called the Queenes Ward∣robe. The Princesse, mother to King Ri∣chard the 2. in the 4. of his reigne, was lodged there, being forced to fly frō the Tower of London, when the Rebels pos∣sessed it. But on the 15. of Iune, (saith Frosard) Wat Tylar being slaine,Iob. Frosard the King
went to this Lady Princesse his mother, then lodged in the Tower Royall, called the Queenes Wardrobe, where shee had tarried two dayes and two nights: which Tower (saith the Record of Ed∣ward the third, the thirty sixth yeere) was in the Parishe of the Saint Michael de Pater noster, &c. In the yeere 1386. King Richard with Queene Anne his wife,Lib. S. in Eborum. kept their Christmas at Eltham, whither came to him Lion King of Ermonie,The King of Ermonie came into England. under pre∣tence to reforme peace betwixt the Kings of England and France; but what his comming profited, he onely under∣stood. For, besides innumerable gifts that he received of the King and of the Nobles, the King lying then in this Tower Royall,Richard 2. lodged in the Tower Royall. or the Queenes Ward∣robe in London, granted to him a Char∣ter, of a thousand pounds by yeere du∣ring his life. He was, as hee affirmed, chased out of his Kingdome by the Tar∣tarians. More concerning this Tower shall you read, when you come to the Vintry Ward, in which is standeth. Sernes Tower in Bucklersberie,Sernes Tow∣er in Buck∣lersbery. was sometimes the Kings house. Edward the third, in the eighteenth yeere of his reigne, appointed his Exchange of monies therein to be kept, and in the two and thirtieth, hee gave the same Tower to his free Chappell of S. Ste∣phen at Westminster. Of Schooles and other Houses of Learning. IN the reigne of King Ste∣phen, Famous schooles of Philo∣sophy by priviledge in London. and of Henry the second, (saith Fitzstephen) there were in London 3. principal Churches, which had famous Schooles, ei∣ther by priviledge and ancient dignitie, or by fauour of some particular persons, as of Doctors, which were ceounted notable and renowned, for knowledge in Philosophie. And there were other inferior Schools also. Vpon Festivall dayes,Solemne meetings and dispu∣ting of scholars Logically and de∣monstra∣tively. the Masters made solemne meetings in the Churches, where their Schollers disputed Logically and de∣monstratively: some bringing Enthimems, other, perfect Syllogismes: some disputed for shew; others to trace out the truth; and cunning Sophisters were brave scholars, when they flowed with words. Others used fallacies: Rhetoricians spake aptly to per∣swade, observing the precepts of Art, and omitting nothing that might serve their pur∣pose. The Boyes of divers Schooles did cap or pot verses, and contended of the princi∣ples of Grammar. There were some,Grammar schooles & scholers their exer∣cises. which (on the other side) with Epigrams and Rimes, nipping and quipping their fellowes, and the faults of others, though suppressing their names, moved thereby much laughter among their Auditors. Hitherto Fitzstephen, for schooles and scholars, and for their exercise in the Citie in his dayes,: sithence the which time, as to me it seemeth, by increase of Colledges of students in the Vaiversi∣ties of Oxford and Cambridge, the fre∣quenting of schooles, and exercises of scholars in the Citie, as had beene ac∣customed, very much decreased. The three principall Churches which had these famous shooles by priviled∣ges, must needs be the cathedral Church of S. Paul for one: seeing that by a gene∣rall Councell,Mat. Paris. Every Ca∣thedrall Church had his schoole for poore scholars. holden in the yeere 1176. at Rome, in the Patriarchie of Laterane, it was decreed, that every Cathedrall Church should have his schoolemaster, to teach poore schollers, and others, as had bin accustomed, and that no man should take any reward for licence to teach. The second, as most ancient, may seeme to have beene the Monasterie of S. Peters at Westminster, whereof Ingul∣phus, Abbot of Crowland, in the reigne of William the Conqueror, writeth thus: 1 Jngulphus, an humble servant of God, borne of English parents, in the most beau∣tifull Citie of London,Free schoole at Westminster in the reigne of Edward the Confessor. for to attaine to learning, was first put to Westm. & after to study at Oxford, &c. And writing in praise of Queene Agitha, wife to Ed∣ward the Confessor: I have seene (faith he) often, when being but a Boy, I came to see my Father, dwelling in the Kings Court, and often comming from Schoole, when I
met the Queene, she would oppose me tou∣ching my learning and lesson. And falling from Grammar to Logicke, wherein she had some knowledge, she would subtilly conclude an Argument with me. And by her hand∣maiden give me three or foure peeces of mo∣ney, and send mee unto the Palace, where I should receive some victuals, and then bee dismissed. The third Schoole seemeth to have beene in the Monastery of S. Saviour, at Bermondsey in Southwarke. For other Priories, as of Saint Iohn by Smithfield, Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield, Saint Mary Overie in Southwarke, and that of the Holy Trinity by Ealdgate, were all of later foundation, and the Friers Col∣ledges, and Hospitals in this Citie, were raised since them, in the reignes of Hen∣ry the 3. Edward the 1, 2, and 3. &c. All which houses had their Schools, though not so famous as these first named. But touching Schooles more lately advanced in this Citie, I read, that King Henry the fifth, having suppressed the Priories Aliens,Priories Aliens. whereof some were a∣bout London, namely, Our Lady of Roun∣civall by Charing-Crosse: one other Ho∣spitall in Oldborne: one other without Creplegate; and the fourth without Al∣dersgate: besides other that are now worne out of memory, and whereof there is no monument remaining, more than Rouncivall, converted to a Brother∣hood, which continued till the reigne of Henry the eighth, or Edward the 6. This, I say, and other of their Schooles, being broken up and ceased, King Henry the 6. in the 24. of his reigne,Henry the sixth ap∣pointed Grammar Schooles. by Pa∣tent appointed, that there should be in London Grammar-Schooles, besides S. Pauls, at S. Martins le grand, S. Mary le Bow, in Cheap, S. Dunstans in the west, and S. Anthonies. And in the next yeere, to wit, 1394. the said King ordained by Parliament,Grammar schooles appointed by Parlia∣ment. that foure other Gram∣mer-Schooles should be erected, to wit, in the Parishes of Saint Andrew in Old∣borne, Alhallowes the great, in Thames street, Saint Peters upon Cornhill, and in the Hospitall of Saint Thomas of Acons in west Cheape. Since the which time, as divers Schooles, by suppressing of religious houses (whereof they were members in the reigne of Henry the eighth, have beene decayed: so againe have some others beene newly erected and founded for them.Pauls Schoole new buil∣ded. As namely, Pauls schoole, in place of an old ruined house, was builded in most ample manner, and largely endowed in the yeere 1512. by Iohn Collet, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Pauls, for 153. poore mens children: for which there was ordained a Master, Submaster or Vsher, and a Chaplaine.Free schools in Christs Ho∣spitall. Againe, in the yeere 1553. after the erection of Christs Hospitall, in the late dissolved house of the Gray Friers, a great number of poore children being taken in, a schoole was also ordai∣ned there, at the Citizens charges. Also in the yeere 1561. the Mer∣chant Taylors of London,Free schooles founded by the Merchant Taylors. founded one notable free Grammar-schoole, in the Parish of Saint Laurence Poultney, by Candle-weeke street; Richard Hils, late Master of that Company, having given 500. pound toward the purchase of an House, called the Mannor of the Rose, sometime the Duke of Buckinghams, wherein the schoole is kept. As for the meeting of Schoolemasters on festivall dayes, at festivall Churches, and the disputing of their schollers Lo∣gically, &c. whereof I have before spo∣ken, the same was long since disconti∣nued. But the arguing of schoole-boies about the principles of Grammar, hath beene continued even till our time: for I my selfe (in my youth) have yeerely seene, on the Eve of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, the schollers of divers Grammar-schooles,Scholars disputed in S. Bar∣tholomews Church∣yard. repaire unto the Churchyard of Saint Bartholomew the Priory in Smithfield, where, upon a banke boorded about under a Tree, some one scholar hath stepped up, and there hath apposed and answered, till he were by some better scholler overcome and put downe. And then the overcommer taking the place, did like as the first: and in the end, the best opposers and answerers had rewards, which I obser∣ved not: but it made both good schoole∣masters, and also good scholars (dili∣gently against such times) to prepare themselves for the obtaining of this Garland. I remember there repaired to these ex∣ercises, (amongst others) the Masters and scholars of the free schooles of S. Pauls in London, of Saint Peters at
Westminster, of Saint Thomas Acons Ho∣spital, and of Saint Anthonies Hospitall: whereof the last named, commonly pre∣sented the best Scholers, and had the prize in those dayes. This Priorie of Saint Bartholomew be∣ing surrendred to Henry the eighth, those disputations of Scholers in that place surceased,Disputati∣on of scholars in Christs Hospitall. and was againe, onely for a yeere or twaine, in the reigne of Edward the sixth, revived in the Cloister of Christs Hospitall, where the best Scho∣lers, (then still of S. Anthonies Schoole) were rewarded with Bowes and Ar∣rowes of silver, given to them by Sir Martin Bowes, Goldsmith. Neverthelesse, howsoever the incou∣ragement failed, the Scholers of Pauls, meeting with them of Saint Anthonies, would call them Saint Anthonies Pigs,Anthonies Pigs. and they againe would call the other Pigeons of Pauls;Pigeons of Pauls. because many Pige∣ons were bred in Pauls Church, and S. Anthonie was alwaies figured with a Pig following him: and mindfull of the former usage, did for a long season, dis∣orderly in the open street, provoke one another, with Salve tu quoque, placet tibi mecum disputare? placet. And so procee∣ding from this to questions in Gram∣mar, they usually fell from words to blowes, with their fatchels full of books, many times in great heaps, that they troubled the streets and passengers: so that finally they were restrained with the decay of Saint Anthonies Schoole. Out of this Schoole have sprung di∣vers famous persons, whereof although time hath buried the names of many, yet in mine owne remembrance may be numbred these following: Sir Thomas Moore, Knight, Lord Chancellour of England: Doctor Nicholas Heath, some∣time Bishop of Rochester, after of Wor∣cester, and lastly, Archbishop of Yorke, and Lord Chancellour of England: Doctor Iohn Whitgift, Bishop of Worce∣ster, and after Archbishop of Canturbu∣ry, &c. Of later time,Lecture in Chirur∣gerie. in the yeere of Christ 1582. there was founded a publike Le∣cture in Chirurgerie, to be read in the Colledge of Physicians in Knight-riders-street, to beginne in the yeere 1584. on the sixth of May, and so to be continued for ever twice a week, on Wednesdsy & Friday, by the honourable Baron, Iohn, Lord Lombley, and the learned Richard Chadwell, Doctor in Physicke: the Rea∣der whereof to be Richard Forster, Do∣ctor of Physicke, during his life. Furthermore,Mathema∣ticall Le∣cture read. about the same time, there was also begun a Mathematicall Lecture, to be read in a faire old Chap∣pell, builded by Simon Eayre, within the Leaden-hall; whereof a learned Citizen borne, named Thomas Hood, was the first Reader. But this Chappell, and other parts of that Hall, being imploy∣ed for stowage of goods, taken out of a great Spanish Caracke, the said Lecture ceased any more to be read, and was then in the yeere 1588. read in the house of Master Thomas Smith in Grasse-street, &c. Last of all,Sir Thomas Gresham. Sir Thomas Gresham knight, Agent to Queene Elizabeth, by his last Will and Testament, made in the yeere 1579. gave the Royall Exchange, and all the buildings therunto appertaining; that is to say, the one moity to the Mai∣or and Communalty of London, and their successors, upon trust, that they performe as shall be declared: and the other moity to the Mercers,Lectures to be read in London. in like con∣fidence. The Maior and Communalty are to finde foure, to reade Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Musicke and Ge∣ometry, within his dwelling house in Bishopsgate-street, and to bestowe the summe of two hundred pound; to wit, fifty pound apeece, &c. The Mercers likewise are to find three Readers; that is, in Civill Law, Physicke and Rheto∣ricke, within the same dwelling house, the summe of 150. pound, to every Rea∣der 50. pound, &c. Which gift was (since that time) confirmed by Parlia∣ment, to take effect, and beganne after the decease of the Lady Anne Gresham, which hapned in the yeere 1596. and so is to continue for ever. Wherupon,Names of the 7. first Lecturers. the Lectures were accor∣dingly chosen, and appointed to begin their Readings in the Moneth of Iune, 1597. Whose names were, Master An∣thony Wotton, for Divinity; Master Do∣ctor Mathew Gwyn, for Physick; Doctor Henry Mountlow, for the Civill Law; Doctor Iohn Bull, for Musicke; Ma∣ster Breerewood, for Astronomie; Ma∣ster Henrie Bridges, for Geometrie;
and Master Caleb Willis, for Rhetorick. These Lectures are read daily, Sundaies excepted, in the Termetimes, by every one upon his day, in the morning be∣twixt nine and ten, in Latine: in the af∣ternoon betwixt two and three, in Eng∣lish; save that Doctor Bull was dispen∣sed with to reade the Musicke Lecture in English onely, and upon two severall dayes, Thursday and Saturday in the af∣ternoons, betwixt 3. and 4. of the clock. The Readers of the seven Liberall Sciences at Gresham Colledge, Iune 27. 1631. were these following: First, Master Richard Holdsworth, Rea∣der of Divinity, on Munday. Doctor Eaton, Reader of Civill Law, on Tuesday. Doctor Winston, Reader of Physicke, on Saturday. Master Iohn Taverner, Reader of Mu∣sicke, on Saturday. Master Henry Gilibrand, Reader of A∣stronomy, on Wednesday. Master Iohn Greaves, Reader of Geo∣metry, on Thursday. And Master Edward Wilkinson, Rea∣der of Rhetoricke, on Friday. Houses of Students in the Common Law. BVt beside all this,An Vni∣versity of Students in and a∣bout this Citie. there is in and about this Citie, a whole Vniversitie, as it were, of Students, pra∣ctisers or pleaders, and Iudges of the Lawes of this Realme, not living of common stipends, as in other Vniversities it is for the most part done, but of their owne private maintenance, as being altogether fed, either by their places, or practice, or otherwise by their proper Revenues,Houses of Students of the Cō∣mon Law, & Iudges. or exhibition of pa∣rents and friends: for that the yonger sort are either Gentlemen or the sonnes of Gentlemen, or of other most wealthy persons. Of these Houses there bee at this day foureteene in all, whereof nine doe stand within the Liberties of this Citie, and five in the Suburbs there∣of: VIZ. Within the Liberties.Of every of these Innes, ye may reade more in their seve∣rall places where the stand For Iudges and Sergeants onely. Sergeants Inne in Fleetstreet, Sergeants Inne in Chancery Lane, In Fleetstreet, Houses of Court. The Inner Temple, The middle Temple, Houses of Chancerie. Cliffords Inne in Fleetstreet, Thavies Inne in Oldborne, Furnevals Inne in Oldborne, Barnards Inne in Oldborne, Staple Inne in Oldborne, Without the Liberties. Houses of Court. Grayes Inne in Oldborne, Lincolnes Inne in Chancerie∣lane, by the old Temple. Houses of Chancerie without Temple barre, in the liberty of Westminster. Clements Inne, New Inne, Lions Iune, There was sometime an Inne of Ser∣geants in Oldborne,A Serge∣ants Inne in Oldborne as ye may reade of Scroopes Inne, over against Saint An∣drews Church. There was also one other Inne of Chan∣cerie, Chesters Inne, or Strand Inne, in place whereas standeth Sommerset House. called Chesters Inne, for the neere∣nesse to the Bishop of Chesters house, but more commonly termed Strand Inne, for that it stood in Strand street, and neere unto Strand bridge without Tem∣ple Barre, in the liberty of the Dutchie of Lancaster. This Inne of Chancery, with other houses adjoyning, were pulled down in the reigne of Edw. the 6. by Ed∣ward Duke of Sommerset, who in place thereof raised that large and beautifull house, called Sommerset House. There was moreover, in the reigne of
King Henry the sixth, a tenth House of Chancery, mentioned by Iustice Forte∣scue, in his booke of the Lawes of Eng∣land: but where it stood, or when it was abandoned, I cannot find, and ther∣fore I will leave it, and returne to the rest. The Houses of Court be replenished,Houses of Court, what they be. partly with yong students, and partly with Graduates and practisers of the Law: but the Innes of Chancerie, being (as it were) provinces, severally subje∣cted to the Innes of Court, bee chiefly furnished with Officers, Atturneys, Sol∣liciters and Clerkes, that follow the Courts of the Kings Bench, or Com∣mon Pleas. And yet there want not some other, being young students, that come thither sometimes from one of the Vniversities,Some students cō∣ming from the Vni∣versities. and sometimes imme∣diately from Grammer Schooles, and these having spent some time in study∣ing upon the grounds of the Law, and having performed the exercises of their owne houses, (called Boltas Mootes, and putting of cases) they proceed to be ad∣mitted, and become students in some of these foure houses or Innes of Court, where continuing by the space of seven yeeres, or thereabouts, they frequent Readings, Meetings, Boltings, and o∣ther learned exercises, whereby grow∣ing ripe in the knowledge of the Lawes, and approved withall,The pre∣ferment of students according to their deserving. to bee of honest conversation, they are either by the ge∣nerall consent of the Benchers, or Rea∣ders, (being of the most ancient, grave, and judiciall men of every Inne of the Court, or by speciall priviledge of the present Reader there, selected and cal∣led to the degree of Vtter Barristers, and so enabled to be common Counsellors. and to practise the Law, both in their Chambers, and at the Barres. Of these, after that they be called to a further step of preferment, called the Bench, there are two (every yeere) cho∣sen among the Benchers of every Inne of Court,Readers in every Inne of Court. to be Readers there, who doe make their Readings at two times of the yeere also: that is, one in Lent, and the other in the beginning of August. And for the helpe of yong Students in every one of the Innes of Chancerie, they doe likewise choose out of every one Inne of Court a Reader, being no Bencher, but an Vtter Barrister there, in tenne or twelve yeeres continuance, and of good profit in studie. Now from these of the said degree of Counsel∣lours, or Vtter Barristers, having conti∣nued therein the space of foureteene or fifteene yeeres at the least, the chiefest and best learned are (by the Benchers) elected to increase the number, as I said, of the Bench amongst them; and so in their time doe become, first single, and then double Readers, to the students of those houses of Court. After which last Reading, they bee named Apprentices at the Law,Apprenti∣ses at Law. and in default of a sufficient number of Serje∣ants at Law, these are, at the pleasure of the Prince, to bee advanced to the places of Serjeants. Out of which number of Serjeants also,Serjeants & Iudges. the void places of Iudges are like∣wise ordinarily filled, albeit (now and then) some be advanced by the speciall favour of the Prince, to the estate, dig∣nity, and place both of Serjeant and Iudge, as it were in one instant. But from thence-forth, they hold not any roome in those Innes of Court, by being translated to one of the said two Innes, called Serjeants Innes, where none but the Serjeants and Iudges doe con∣verse. Of Orders and Customes. OF Orders and Customes in this Citie, Fitzstephen (in his time) said as follow∣eth: Men of all Trades in dictinct places. Men of all Trades, sel∣lers of all sorts of Wares, la∣bourers in every worke, every morning are in their distinct and severall places.Wine in Ships, and Wine in Taverns. Fur∣thermore, in London, upon the River side, betweene the wine in Ships, and the wine to be sold in Taverns,Cookes row in Thames street. is a common Cookery, or Cookes Row, where daily for the season of the yeere, men might have meat, roast, sod,
orfryed fish, flesh, fowles, fit for rich and poore. If any come suddenly to any Citi∣zen from afarre, weary, and not willing to tarry till the meat be bought, and dressed, while the servant bringeth water for his masters hands, and fetcheth bread, he shall have immediately (from the Rivers side) all viands whatsoever hee desireth, What multitude soever, either of Souldiers, or strangers doe come to the Citie, whatsoever houre, day or night, according to their plea∣sures, may refresh themselves, and they which delight in delicatenesse, may bee sa∣tisfied with as delicate dishes there, as may be found elsewhere. And this Cookes row is very necessary to the Citie: and accor∣ding to Plato in Gorgius; next to Physick is the office of Cookes, as part of a City. Without one of the Gates is a plaine field, both in name and deed,Smithfield for a plain smooth ground, is called smeth and smothie. where every Fry∣day, unlesse it bee a solemne bidden Holy∣day, is a notable shew of horses to bee sold, Earles,Market for horses and other cat∣tell. Barons, Knights and Citizens re∣paire thither to see, or to buy: there may you of pleasure see amblers, pacing it deli∣cately: there may you see trotters, fit for men of armes, setting more hardly: there there may you have not able young horses not yet brokene may you have strong steeds, well limmedgeldings, whō the buiers do especially regard for pace, and swiftnesse. The boyes which ride these horses, sometime two, some∣time three, doe runne races for wagers, with a desire of praise, or hope of victory. In another part of that fieldare to be sold all implements of husbandry, as also fat swine, milch kine,Merchants of all Na∣tions tra∣ded at this City, and had their severall keyes and wharfes. sheepe and Oxen: there stand also Mares and Horses, fit for Ploughes and Teames, with their young Colts by them. At this City, Merchant strangers of all Nations, had their keyes and wharses: the Arabians sent gold: the Sabeans spice and Frankincense:The Au∣thors opi∣nion of this City, the anti∣quity ther∣of. the Scythian Armour, Babylon oyle, Indian purple garments, Egypt precious stones, Norway and Russia Ambexgreece and sables, and the French∣men wine. According to the truth of Chro∣nicles, this City is ancienter than Rome, built by the ancient Troians and by Brute,This City divided in∣to Wards more than 400. yeers since, and also had then both Aldermen and She∣riffes. before that was built by Romulus and Remus; and therefore useth the ancient customes of Rome. This Citie, even as Rome, is divided into Wards. It hath yeerely Shriffes, in stead of Consuls. It hath the diginity of Senators, in Aldermen. It hath under-Officers, Common Sewers, and Conducts in streets,Customes of London. according to the quality of causes. It hath generall Courts and assemblies upon appointed daies. I doe not thinke that there is any City, wherein are better customes, in frequenting the Churches, in serving God, in keeping Ho∣ly-daies, in giving almes, in entertaining strangers, in solemnizing Marriages, in furnishing banquets, celebrating funerals, and burying dead bodies. The only plagues of London,Casualties of fires when houses were covered with church. is immode∣rate quaffing among the foolish sort, and of∣ten casualties by fire. Most part of the Bi∣shops, Abbots, and great Lords of the land, have houses there, whereunto they resort and bestow much, when they are called to Parli∣ament by the King, or to counsell by their Metropolitane, or otherwise by their pri∣vate businesse. Thus firre Fitzstephen, of the estate of things in his time, whereunto may bee added the present, by conference whereof, the alteration will easily ap∣peare. Change of place and tradesmen. Men of trades and sellers of wares in this City have oftentimes since chan∣ged their places, as they have found their best advantage. For whereas Mer∣cers, and Haberdashers used wholly then to keepe their shops in west Cheap; of later time, they held them on Lon∣don bridge, where some of them doe as yet remaine. The Goldsmiths of Gu∣therons lane, and the Old Exchange, are now (for the most part) removed into the South side of West Cheape. The Pepperers & Grocers of Sopers lane, are now in Bucklesbury, and other places disperced. The Drapers of Lombard-street, and of Cornehill, are seated in Candleweeke street, and Watheling streete. The Skinners from St. Mary Pellipers, or at the Axe; into Budgerow and Wal∣brook. Stockfish monger row, old Fish street, and new Fish street. The Stockfishmongers in Thames street: wet Fishmongers in Knightriders street, and Bridge-street. The Ironmon∣gers of Ironmongrs lane, and Old Iury, into Thames street. The Vintners, from the Vinetree, into divers places. But the Brewers (for the most part) remai∣ned neere to the friendly water of Thames. The Butchers in Eastcheap, St. Nicholas Shambles, and the Stockes Market. The Hosiers (of old time) in Hosier lane, neere unto Smithfield, are since then removed into Cordwayner
street, the upper part thereof by Bow-Church, and last of all, into Burchover∣lane by Cornhill. The Shoomakers and Curriors of Cordwayner street, removed, the one to Saint Martins legrand, the o∣ther to London Wall, neere to Moore∣gate. The Founders remaine by them∣selves in Lothbury. Cookes or Pastelars, (for the most part) were in Thames street, the others dispersed into divers parts. Poulters of late removed out of the Poultrie, betwixt the Stockes and the great Conduit in Cheape, into Grasse∣street and S. Nicholas shambles. Bowyers from Bowyers row by Ludgate, into di∣vers parts, and almost worne out with the Fletchers. Pater noster-makers, of old time, or Bead-makers, and Text-wri∣ters, are gone out of Pater noster row, and are called Stationers of Pauls Church-yard. Patten-makers, of Saint Marga∣ret Pattens Lane, cleane worne out. La∣bourers, every worke-day to be found in Cheap, about Sopers lane end. Horse-coursers, and sellers of Oxen, sheepe, swine, and such like, remaine in their old Market of Smithfield, &c. That Merchants of all Nations had their Keyes and Wharfes at this Citie,Merchāts of all nati∣ons. wherunto they brought their Merchan∣dizes, before, and in the reigne of Hen∣ry the second, mine Author wrote (of his owne knowlege) to be true, though for the Antiquity of the Citie, he tooke the common opinion. Also, that this Citie was (in his time, and before) divi∣ded into Wards; had yeerely Sheriffes and Aldermen, generall Courts and as∣semblies, and such like notes by him set downe, in commendation of the Citi∣zens, whereof there is no question. He wrote likewise of his owne experience, as being borne and brought up amongst them. And to confirme his opinion, concer∣ning Merchandizes then hither trans∣ported, whereof haply may be some ar∣gument; Tho. Clifford. Thomas Clifford (before Fitz∣stephens time) writing of King Edward the confessor, saith to this effect: King Edward, intending to make his Sepulchre at Westminster, for that it was neere to the famous Citie of London, and the River of Thames, which brought in all kinde of Merchandizes from all parts of the world, &c. And William of Malmesbury, thatW. Malmesb. that lived in the reigne of William the first and second, Henry the first, and King Stephen, calleth this A Noble Citie, full of wealthy Citizens, frequented with the trade of Merchandizes from all parts of the world. Also I read in divers Records, that (in old time) No woad was stowed or har∣boured in this Citie, but all was presently seld in the Ships, except by licence purcha∣sed of the Sheriffes; till of more later time, to wit in the yeere 1236. Andrew Bokerell, being Maior, by assent of the principall Citizens, the Merchants of Amiens, Nele and Corby, purchased Let∣ters ensealed with the common seale of the Citie, that they, when they came, might harborow their Woads, and therefore should give the Maior every yeere 50. Markes starling. And the same yeere they gave an hundred pound toward conveying of water from Tyborn to this Citie, as already hath beene re∣lated. Also the Merchants of Normandy made fine, for licence to harbour their Woads, till it was otherwise provided, in the yeere 1263. Thomas Fitzthomas being Maior, &c. Which proveth, that then (as before) they were here, among other Nations, priviledged. It followeth in Fitzstephen;Plagues of London, im∣moderate quaffing, and casualties by fire. That the plagues of London (in that time) were im∣moderate quaffing among fooles, and often casualties by fire. For the first, to wit, of quaffing, it continueth still as afore, or rather, is mightily increased, though greatly qual∣med among the poorer sort, not of any holy abstinency, but of meere necessity: Ale and Beere being small, and Wines in price above their reach. As for prevention of casualties by fire, the houses in this Citie (being then builded all of timber, and covered with thatch of straw or reed;)Lib. Constit. it was long since thought good policie in our fore-father, Lib. Horne. wisely to provide;Lib. Clarkē∣well. namely, in the yeere of Christ, 1189. the first of Richard the first, Henry Fitzalwine, (be∣ing then Maior) that all men in this Ci∣tie should build their houses of stone up to a certaine height, and to cover them with slate or baked tile. Since which time, thankes bee given to God, there hath not hapned the like often consu∣ming fire in this Citie, as before.
But now in our time, insteed of these enormities,Purpre∣stur in and about this City. others are come in place, no lesse meet to be reformed, namely, Pur∣prestures, or encrochments on the high∣wayes, lanes, and common grounds, in and about this City. Whereof a lear∣ned Gentleman,W. Paucns. a grave Citizen, hath (not many yeeres since) written and exhibited a Book to the Maior and communalty, which Booke, whether the same hath been by them read, and diligently considered upon, I know not; but sure I am, nothing is reformed since concerning this matter. Then the number of Cars, Draies, Carts,Carts and Drayes not well governed in this City dange∣rous. and Coaches, more than hath been accustomed, the streets and lanes being streightned, must needs be dan∣gerous, as daily experience proveth. The Coach-man rides behinde the horse tailes, lasheth them, and looketh not behind him. The Dray-man sitteth and sleepeth on his Dray, and letteth his horse leade him home.L. S. Mary Aborum. I know, that by the good Lawes and Customes of this City, shod Carts are forbidden to enter the same, except upon reasonable causes, as service of the Prince, or such like, they be tolerated. Also that the fore-horse of every carriage should bee led by hand: but these good orders are not observed. Of old time, Coaches were not known in this Iland,Riding in Whirlicotes. but Cha∣riots or Whirlicotes, then so called, and they onely used for Princes or great E∣states, such as had their footmen about them. And for example to note, I reade that Richard the second being threatned by the Rebels of Kent, rode from the Tower of London to the Miles-end, and with him, his Mother, because she was sicke and weake, in a Whirlicote, the Earles of Buckingham, Kent, War∣wicke, and Oxford, Sir Thomas Percie, Sir Robert Knowles, the Maior of London, Sir Aubery de Vere that bare the Kings sword, with other Knights and Esquiers attending on horsebacke. It followed in the next yeere, that the said King Richard, who took to wife Anne, daugh∣ter to the King of Boheme, that then was, first brought hither the riding upon side Saddles,Riding on side Sad∣dles, that were wont to ride a stride. and so was the riding in those Whirlicotes and Chariots forsken; ex∣cept at Coronations and such like spe∣ctacles. But now of late yeeres, the use of Coaches, brought out of Germany,Riding in Coaches. is taken up, and made so common, as there is neither distinction of time, nor diffe∣rence of persons observed: for the world runnes on wheeles with many, whose Parents were glad to goe on foot. Last of all,W. Fitstephen. mine Author, in this Chapter hath these words: Most part of the Bishops, Abbots, and great Lords of the land, as if they were Citizens and Free∣men of Lond. had many faire houses to re∣sort unto, and many rich & wealthy Gentle∣men spent their money there. And in ano∣ther place, he hath these words: Every Sunday in Lent, a fresh company of young men comes into the fields on horsbacke, and the best horsemen conduct the rest, then march forth the Citizens Sonnes, and other yong men with disarmed Launces and Shields, and practise feats of Warre. Many Courtiers likewise, and attendants on No∣blemen, repaire to this exercise, and whilest the hope of victory doth inflame their minds; they doe shew good proofe, how serviceable they would bee in Martiall affaires, &c. Againe he saith, This Citie, in the trou∣blesome time of King Stephen, shewed at a Muster 20000. armed horsemen, and 40000. footmen, serviceable for the Wars, &c. All which sayings of the said Au∣thor well considered, doe plainly prove, that in those dayes, the inhabitants and repaireres to this City (of what este so∣ever, spirituall or temporall) having houses here, lived in amity with the Citizens, every man observing the cu∣stomes and orders of the City, and chose to be contributary to charges here, rather than in any part of the land whersoever.The causes of greater shewes and musters in this City of old time, more than of late. This City being the heart of the Realme, the Kings Chamber, and Princes seat, whereunto they made re∣paire, and shewed their forces, both of Horses and of men, which caused in troublesome time, as of King Stephen, the Musters of this City to be so great in number. Great Families of old time kept. ANd here to touch somewhat of great Families and households,Great fa∣milies of old time kept. kept in former times by Noble men, and great estates of this Realme, according to their honors and dignities. I have seene an account made by Henry
Leicester, Cofferer to Thomas Earle of Lancaster,Tho. Earle of Lanca∣ster, his housekee∣ping and charge thereof for one yeere. for one whole yeeres expen∣ces in the Earles house, from the day next after Michaelmasse, in the seventh yeere of Edward the second, untill Mi∣chaelmasse in the eight yeere of the same King, amounting to the summe of seven thousand,Record of Pontfract, as I could obtaine of M. Cudnor. nine hundred, fifty seven pound, thirteene shillings, foure pence halfe penny, as followeth. To wit, in the Pantry, Buttry, and Kitchin, 3405. l. &c. For 184. Tuns, 1. pipe of Red or Cla∣ret wine, and one Tun of White wine, bought for the house 104. l. 17. s. 6. d. For Grocery ware, 180. l. 17. s. For sixe Barrels of Sturgeon, nine∣teene pound. For 6800. Stockfishes, so called, and for dryed fishes, of all sorts, as Lings, Haberdines, and other, 41. l. 6. s. 7. d. For 1714. pound Waxe, with Ver∣milion and Turpentine to make red Wax, 314. l. 7. s. 4. d. ob. For 2319. pound of Tallow candles for the houshold, and 1870. of lights for Paris candles, called Perchers, 31. l. 14. s. 3. d. Expences on the Earles great Horses, and the Keepers wages, 486. l. 4. s. 3. d. ob. Linnen cloth for the Lord and his Chaplaines, and for the Pantry 43. l. 17. d. Fro 129. dozen of Parchment, with Inke, 4. l. 8. s. 3 ob. Summe. 1230. l'. 17. d. 7. d. ob. Item, for two clothes of Scarlet for the Earle against Christmasse,159. Cloths in Liveries a∣gainst Christmas. one cloth of Russet, for the Bishop of Anjou, 70. cloths of blew for the Knights, (as they were then tearmed) 15. clothes of Medley for the Lords clerks, 28. cloths for the Esquire, 15. cloths for Officers, 19. clothes for Groomes, 3. clothes for Archers, 4. clothes for Minstrels and Carpenters, with the sharing and car∣riage for the Earles Liveries at Christ∣mas, 460. l. 15. d. Item, for 7. Furs of variable Miniver (or powdred Ermin) 7. Hoods of pur∣ple, 395. Furs of Budge, for the Live∣ries of Barons, Knights, and Clerkes, 123. Furres of Lambe, for Esquires, bought at Chrismas, 147. l. 17. s. 8. d. Item, 65. clothes Saffron colour,104. cloths in Live∣ries in summer. for the Barons and Knights: in summer, 12. red clothes mixt, for Clerks, 26 clothes ray, for Esquires, one cloth ray, for Officers coats in summer, and foure clothes ray, for carpets in the Hall, 345. l. 13. s. 8. d. Item, 100. peeces of greene silke for the Knights, 14. Budge Furs for sur∣cotes, 13. hoods of Budge for Clerkes, and 75. Furs of Lambs, for the Lords liveries in summer, with Canvas and cords to trusse them, 72. l. 19. s. Item, Saddles for the Lords liveries in summer, 51. l. 6. s. 8. d. Item, for one Saddle for the Earle, of the Princes armes 40. s. Summe. 1079. l. 18. s. 3. d. Item, for things bought, whereof no∣thing can bee read in my note, 241. l. 14. s. 1. d. ob. For horses lost in service of the Earle 8. l. 6. s. 8. d. Fees paid to Earles, Barons, Knights, and Esquires, 623. l. 15. s. 5. d. In gifts to Knights of France, the Queene of Englands Nurces, to the Countesse of Warren, Esquires, Min∣strels, Messengers and riders, 92. l. 14. s. Item,Northern Russt halfe yard and halfe quarter broad, I have seen sold for foure pence the yard, and was good cloth of a mingled colour. 168. yards of Russet cloth, and 24. coats for poore men, with money given to the poore on Maundy Thurs∣day, 8. l. 16. s. 7. d. Item, 24 silver Dishes, so many saw∣cers, and so many Cups for the Buttry, one paire of Pater nosters, and one silver coffen bought this yeere, 103. l. 5. s. 6. d. To divers Messengers about the Earles businesse, 34. l. 19. s. 8. d. In the Earles Chamber 5. l. To diuers men for the Earles old debts, 88. l. 16. s. ob. q. Summe. 1270. l. 7. s. 11. d. ob. q. The expences of the Countesse at Pickering, for the time of this account, as in the Pantry, Buttry, Kitchin, and other places concerning these Offices, two hundred, fourescore and 5. pounds thirteene shillings, halfe penny. In Wine, Waxe, Spices, Clothes, Furs, and other things for the Countes∣ses Wardrobe, an hundred fifty foure pounds, seven shillings, foure pence, halfe penny.
Summe. 439. l. 8. s. 6. d. q. Summa totalis of the whole expences, 7957 l' 13. s. 4. d. ob. This much for this Earle of Lancaster. More,Record Tower. I read that in the 14. of the same Edward the second,Hugh Spen∣cer the el∣der, his provision for house-keeping, which sheweth a great fa∣mily to be kept in houshold. Hugh Spencer the elder (condemned by the comunal∣ty) was banished the Realme, at which time, it was found by inquisition, that the said Spencer had in sundry shires. 59. Mannors, He had 28000. sheep, 1000. Oxen and Streeres, 1200. Kine with their Calves, 40. Mares with their Colts, 160. drawing horse, 2000. Hogges, 300. Bullocks, 40. Tuns of Wine, 600. Bacons, 80. Carkases of Martilmasse Beefe, 600. Muttons in Larder, 10. Tuns of Sidar. His Armor, plate, jewels, ready mony, better than 10000. pound, 36. sacks of Wooll, and a Library of Bookes. Thus much the Record: which provision for houshold, sheweth a great Family there to bee kept. Neerer to our time,Rob. Fabian manuscript. I read in the 36. of Henry the sixt, that the greater estates of the Realme being called up to Lon∣don. The Earle of Salisbury came up to London with 500. men on horsebacke, and was lodged in the Herber. Richard Duke of Yorke with 400. men lodged at Baynards Castle. The Duke of Excester and Sommerset with 800. men. The Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Egremont, and the Lord Clifford, with 1500. men. Richard Nevell,Nevell Earle of Warwicke his house keeping. Earle of Warwicke, with 600. men all in red Iackets, Im∣brodered with ragged staves before and behinde, and was lodged in Warwicke lane: in whose house there was often∣times sixe Oxen eaten at a breakefast, and every Taverne was full of his meat, for he that had any acquaintance in that house might have there so much of sod∣den and rost meat, as hee could pricke and carry upon a long Dagger. Richard Redman,Richard Redman Bishop of Ely. Bishop of Ely, 1500. the 17. of Henry the seventh, besides his great family, housekeeping, Almes dish, and reliefe to the poore, whereso∣ever he was lodged. In his travaiing, when at his comming, or going to or from any Towne, the Bels being rung, all the poore would come together, to whom he gave every one sixe pence at the least. And now to note of our owne time somewhat.The wor∣thy house keeping of Thomas Woolsey Lord Arch∣bishop of Yorke. Not omitting in this Tho∣mas Woolsey, Archbishop of Yorke, and Cardinall. You shall understand, that hee had in his hall (continually) three tables or boords, kept with three prin∣cipall Officers, to wit, a Steward, who was alwaies a Priest, a Treasurer a Knight, and a Controler an Esquire. Also a Cofferer, being a Doctor, three Marshals, three Yeomen Vshers in the Hall: besides two Groomes and Alm∣ners. Then in the Hall kitchin, two Clerks of the kitchin, a Clerke con∣troler, a Survevor of the dressor, a clark of the Spicery: all which (together) kept also a continuall Messe in the Hall.Officers for the Hall kit∣chin. Also, in his Hall-kitchin, he had of Ma∣ster cookes two, and of other cookes, labourers,Master-Cookes and other. and children of the kitchin, twelve persons: foure Yeomen of the ordinary scullery, foure Yeomen of the silver scullery, two Yeomen of the Pa∣stry, with two other Pastelers under the Yeomen. In the Privie kitchin,For the Privy kit∣chin. he had a Ma∣ster cooke, who went daily in Velvet and Sattin, with a chaine of Gold about his necke, and two other Yeomen, and a Groome.Scalding house, Pantry, Buttry. In the scalding house, a Yeomen and two Groomes. In the Pantry, two Yeoman. In the Buttery, two Yeomen,Chandery. two Groomes, and two Pages.Wafary. In the Chandery two Yeomen. In the Wafary two Yeomen.Wardrobe of beds. In the Wardrobe of Beds, the Master of the VVardrobe, and tenne other persons attending.Laundery. In the Laundery a Yeoman, a Groome, thirty Pages, two Yeomen Purveyors,Bakehouse and one Groome. In the Bake-house a Yeoman and 2 Groomes. In the Wood-yard a Yeoman and a Groome.VVood-yard. In the Barne one.Barne. In the Gar∣den a Yeoman and two Groomes:Garden. A Yeoman of his Barge;Barge. a Master of his Horse, a Clerke of the Stable,Stable. a Yeoman of the same; the Saddler; the Farriar; a Yeoman of his Chariot; a Sumpter∣man,; a Yeoman of his Stirrop; a Mule∣ter, and sixteen Groomes of his Stable, every one of them keeping 4. Geldings. Porters at his gate,Porters. two Yeomen and
two Groomes. In the Almnorie, a Yeo∣man and a Groome. In his Chappell he had a Deane,The order of his Chappell. a great Divine, and a man of excellent learning: a Subdeane, a repeater of the Quire, a Gospeller, a Pisteler, of sin∣ging Priests ten, a master of the chil∣dren, twelve Seculars, being singing-men of the Chappell; ten singing chil∣dren, with a servant to attend upon the children. In the Revestry, a Yeoman and two Groomes; over and beside di∣vers retainers, that came thither at principall Feasts. For the furniture of his Chappell,The rich furniture of his Chappell. it exceedeth my cpacity to declare, or to speake of the number of costly orna∣ments and rich Jewels that were used in the same continually. There hath bin seene in procession about the Hall, foure and forty very rich Coaps worne, all of one sute; besides the rich Crosses and Candlesticks, and other ornaments be∣longing to the furnishment of the same. He had two Crosse-bearers, and two Pillar-bearers in his great Chamber.Crosse-bearers & pillar-bearers. And in his Privie-chamber these per∣sons: First, the chiefe Chamberlaine and Vice-chamberlaine.His privie chamber. Of Gentlemen Vshers (beside one in his Privie-cham∣ber) he had twelve daily waiters: and of Gentlemen waiters,Gentlemē waiters. in his Privie-Chamber, Lords and their at∣tendants. he had six; of Lords nine or tenne, who had (each of them) two men allowed to attend upon them: except the Earle of Darby, who alwaies was al∣lowed 5. men. Then had he of Gentle∣mē, Cupbearers, Carvers, Sewers, both of the Privie chamber and of the great chamber,For the privie and great chamber. with Gentlemē (daily waiters there) 40. persons. Of Yeomen Vshers 6. of Groomes in his chamber, 8. of Yeo∣men in his chamber 45. daily. He had al∣so Almes-men, sometime more in num∣ber than at other times. There was attending on his Table daily,Daily attendāts on his Table. of Doctors and Chaplaines, (be∣side them of his Chappell) 16. A Clerk of his Closet, two Secretaries, 2 Clerks of his Signet; and foure Counsellours, learned in the Lawes. And forasmuch as it was necessary to have divers Offi∣cers of the Chancery to attend upon him;Officers of the Chan∣cerie. that is to say, the Clerke of the Crowne, a riding Clerke, a Clerke of the Hamper, and a Clerke of the Wax; then a Clerke of the Checke, (aswell vpon the Chaplaines, as on the Yeomen of his chamber,) he gave allowance to them all.His Foot∣men. He had also foure Footmen, who were clothed in rich running coats, whensoever hee rode on any journey. Then had he an Herauld at Armes,A Herald and Ser∣jeant at Armes. a Serjeant at Armes, a Physician, an A∣pothecarie, foure Minstrels, a keeper of his Tents, an Armorer, an instructor of his Wards, two Yeomen of his Ward-robe of Robes, and a keeper of his cham∣ber continually in the Court. He had also in his house the Survey or of Yorke,Surveyor of Yorke, & Clerke of the Greene-cloth. and a Clerke of the Greene cloth. All these were daily attending, downe ly∣ing and uprising; as we use to say, and at meales. He kept in his great chamber, a continuall Table for the Chamberers and Gentlemen Officers: having with them a Messe of the yong Lords,Yong Lords and Gentlemē and an∣other of Gentlemen. And besides all these, there was never an Offices, Gen∣tleman, or other worthy person, but hee was allowed in the house,Attendāts allowed in the house. some three, some two, and all other, one at the least, which grew to a great number of persons. Thus farre out of the Checke-roll: besides other Officers, servants and re∣tainers, and Suiters, that most common∣ly dined in the Hall. Nicholas West,Lib. Ely. in the yeere 1532. kept continually in his house 100. servants,West, Bi∣shop of Ely giving to the one halfe of them 53. s. 4. d. apiece yeerly: to the other halfe, each 40. s. apiece: to every one for his winter Gowne, foure yards of broadcloath, and for his Sum∣mer Coat three yards and an halfe. He daily gave at his Gates, besides bread and drinke, warme meate to two hun∣dred poore people. The house-keeping of Edward late Earle of Darby is not to be forgotten,Edward, Earle of Darby. who had 220. men in check-roll: his feeding aged persons twice every day, 60. and odde, beside all commers, thrice a weeke appointed for his dealing daies, and every Good-friday, 2700. with meat, drinke, and money. Thomas Audley,Thomas Lord Audley. Lord Chancellour, his family of Gentlemen before him, in coats garded with velvet, and chaines of gold, his Yeomen after him, in the same Livery not garded.
William Powlet or Pawlet,Every Li∣very coat had three yards of bread cloth. Lord great Master, Marquesse of Winchester, kept the like number of Gentlemen and yeo∣men, in a Livery of Reading tawny, and great reliefe at his gate. Thomas Lord Cromwell,Tho. Lord Cromwell. Earle of Es∣sex, kept the like or greater number in a Livery of gray Marble; the Gentle∣men guarded with Velvet, the Yeomen with the same cloth, yet their skirts large enough for their friends to sit upon them. Edward,Duke of Sommerset. Duke of Sommerset was not inferiour in keeping a number of tall and comely Gentlemen and Yeomen, though his house was then in building, & most of his men were lodged abroad. The Earle of Oxford hath beene no∣ted within these fifty yeeres,Earle of Oxford. to have ridden into this Citie, and so to his house by London-stone, with fourescore Gentlemen in a Livery of Reading Taw∣ny, and chaines of gold about their necks, before him; and one hundred tall Yeomen in the like Livery to follow him, without Chaines, but all having his Cognizance of the blew Bore, em∣broydered on their left shoulder. Of charitable Almes in old time given. THese, as all other of their times, gave great reliefe to the poore. I my self, in that declining time of charity,Almes gi∣ven at the Lord Crom∣wels gate. have oft seene at the Lord Cromwels gate in London, more than 200 persons, served twice every day with bread, meat and drinke sufficient; for he observed that ancient and charitable custome, as all Prelates, Noblemen, or men of honour and worship his pre∣decessours, had done before him: wher∣of somewhat to note for example: Ve∣nerable Bede writeth; that Prelates of his time, having peradventure but woodden Churches, had (notwithstan∣ding) on their boord at their meales, one Almes dish, into the which was carved some good portion of meat, out of every other dish brought to their Ta∣ble, all which was given to the poore, besides the fragments left. Insomuch as in a hard time, a poore Prelate wanting victuals, hath caused his Almes dish, be∣ing silver, to be divided amongst the poore, therewith to shift as they could, till God should send him better store. Such a Prelate was Ethelwald, Bishop of Winchester, in the reigne of King Ed∣gar, about the yeere of Christ, 963. He in a great famine, sold away all the sa∣cred vessels of his Church,Bishop of Winchester his saying touching the reliefe  the poore. for to relieve the almost starved people, saying: That there was no reason that the senselesse Tem∣ples of God should abound in riches, and lively Temples of the Holy Ghost to lacke it. Walter de Suffilde, Bishop of Norwich, was of the like minde,Bishop of Norwich sold his plate. about the yeere 1245. In a time of great dearth, he sold all his Plate, and distributed it to the poore every penniworth. Robert Winchelsey,Archbi∣shop of Canturbury his charity Archbishop of Can∣turbury, about the yeere 1293. besides the daily fragments of his house, gave every Friday and Sunday to every beg∣gar that came to his gate, a loate of bread sufficient for that day, and there were usually every such almes day in time of dearth, to the number of 5000. and otherwise 4000 at the least. More, hee used every great Feastivall day, to give 150. pence to so many poore peo∣ple, and sent daily meat, bread, and drinke, to such as by age, or sicknes, were not able to fetch his Almes, and did send meat, money and apparell to such as he thought needed it. I reade in 1171. that Henry the se∣cond, Pater de Ioh. Tenne thousand poore people daily fed and sustai∣ned by Henry the third. after his returne into England, did penance for the slaughter of Thomas Bec∣ket, by whom (a sore dearth then in∣creasing) ten thousand persons, from the first of April; till new corne was inned, were daily fed and sustained. More I finde recorded, that in the yeere 1236. the 20. of Henry the third,Record of the Tower Hen. 3. fed 6000. poore people in one day. William de Haverhull, the Kings Trea∣surer, was commanded, that upon the day of the Circumcision of our Lord, 6000. poore people should bee fed at Westminster, for the state of the King, Queene, and their children. The like commandement the said King Henry gave to Hugh Gifford, & William Brown, that upon Friday next after the Epipha∣nie, they should cause to be fed in the great Hall at Windsore, at a good fire, all the poore & needy children that could be found, and the Kings children being weighed and measured, their weight and measure to be distributed for their good estates. These few examples for charity of Kings may suffice.
I read in the reigne of Edward the 3. that Richard de Berry,Richard de Berry, Bi∣shop of Durham. Bishop of Durham, did weekely bestow for releefe of the poore, eight quarters of wheat made into bread, besides his Almes dish, frag∣ments of his house, and great summes of money given to the poore when hee journied. And that these Almes dishes were as well used at the Tables of No∣blemen, as of the Prelates, one note may suffice in this place. I read in the yeere 1452. that Richard Duke of York then claiming the Crown, the Lord Rivers should have passed the Sea about the Kings busines, but staying at Plinouth till his money was spent, and then sending for more;Duke of Gloucesters Almes dish con∣tained a great quantity of silver. the Duke of Somerset sent him the Image of S. George in silver and gold, to be sold, with the Almes dish of the Duke of Gloucester, which was also of great price: for coyne had they none. To end the Orders and Customes in this Citie, as also of great families kept by honourable persons thither repai∣ring, and of charitable Almes of old time given: I say, for conclusion, that all Noble persons, and other of honour and worship, in former times lodging in this Citie, or liberties thereof, did without grudging, beare their parts in charges with the Citizens, according to their estimated estates, as I have be∣fore said, and could prove it by exam∣ples. But let men call to minde Sir Thomas Cromwell,Tho. Crom∣well at the great Muster. then Lord Privie Seale, and Vicar generall, lying in the Citie of Lon∣don, he bare his charges to the great Mu∣ster there, consisting of 15000, besides Whisslers and other waiters, all in bright harnesse, with coats of white silke or , and chaines of gold, in three great battels. In Anno 1539. hee sent his men (in great number) to the Miles end, and af∣ter them their Armour in Carres, with their coats of white cloth, and the Armes of this Citie, to wit, a red crosse and a sword, on the brest and backe, which Armour and Coats they ware a∣mongst the Citizens, without any dif∣ference, and marched thorow the Citie to Westminster. Sports and Pastimes of old time used in this Citie. LEt us now (saith Fitzste∣phen) come to the Sports and Pastimes,Of sports and pas∣times in this Citie. seeing it is fit that a Citie should not be commodious and serious,Every thing hath his time, a time to weepe, a time to laugh, a time to mourne, & a time to dance. Eccles. 3. but also merry and sportfull. Whereupon, in the seales of the Popes, untill the time of Pope Leo, on the one side was Saint Peter fishing, with a key over him, reached as it were by the hand of God out of Heaven, and about it this verse: Tu pro me navē liquisti, suscipe clavem. And on the other side was a Citie, and this inscription on it, Aurea Roma. Like∣wise to the praise of Augustus Caesar and the Citie, in respect of the shewes and sports, was written, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectaculs mane, &c. All night it raines, and shewes at morrow-tide returne againe; And Caesar with almighty Iove hath matcht an equall reigne. But London for the shewes upon The∣aters, Stage∣playes. and Comicall pastimes, hath holy playes, representations of miracles, which holy Confessors have wrought; or represen∣tations of torments, wherein the constancle of Martyrs appeared. Every yeere also on Shrove-Tuesday, (that we may beginne with childrens sports, seeing wee all have beene children:) the Schoole-boyes doe bring Cockes of the game to their Master, and all the fore-noone they delight themselves in Cock-fighting.Cocke-fighting. After dinner, all the youths goe into the fields to play at the Ball.Ball-play. The scholars of every Schoole have their Ball, or bastion in their hands: the ancient and wealthy men of the Citie come forth
on horsebacke, to see the sport of the Young∣men, and to take part of the pleasure, in be∣holding their agility. Every Friday in Lent,Exercises of warlike feats on horseback with disarmed Lances. a fresh companie of young-men comes into the field on horse∣backe, and the best horse-men conduct the rest. Then march forth the Citizens sonnes, and other young-men with disarmed Lances and Shields, and there they practise feats of Warre. Many Courtiers likewise, when the King lyeth neere, and attendants on Noble-men, doe repaire to these exercises, and while the hope of victory doth inflame their mindes, they shew by good proofe how serviceable they would be in Martiall affaires. In Easter Holydayes,Battell on the water. they fight battels on the water, a Shield is hanged upon a pole, fixed in the midst of the streame; a Boat is prepared without Oares, to be carried by violence of the water, and in the fore-part thereof standeth a young-man, ready to give charge upon the Shield with his Launce. If so be he breake his Launce against the Shield and doth not fall, he is thought to have per∣formed a worthy deede. If so bee without breaking his Launce, he runneth strongly a∣gainst the Shield, downe he falleth into the water; for the Boat is violently forced with the Tide; but on each side of the Shield ride two Boats, furnished with yong-men, which recover him that falleth, as soone as they may. Vpon the Bridge, Wharfes and houses by the Rivers side, stand great numbers to see, and laugh thereat. In the Holydaies all the Summer, the youths are exercised in leaping, dancing, shooting, wrastling, casting the stone, and practising their Shields: the Maidens trip with their Timbrels,Fighting of Bores, baiting of Beares & Buls. and dance as long as they can well see. In Winter, every Holiday before dinner, the Bores prepared for brawne are set to fight, or else Buls or Beares are baited. When the great Fenne or Moore, which watereth the wals of the Citie on the North side is frozen, many yong men play upon the Ice; some striding as wide as they may, doe slide swiftly: others make themselves seats of Ice, as great as Milstones. One sits downe, many (hand in hand) doe draw him, and one slipping on a sudden, all fall toge∣ther. Some tye bones to their feet, and un∣der their heeles, and shoving themselues by a little piked staffe, doe slide as swiftly as a bird flyeth in the ayre, or an arrow out of a Crosse-bow, Sometime two runne together with poles, and hitting one the other, either one or both doe fall, not without hurt: some breake their armes, some their legs: but youth (desirous of glory in this sort) exerci∣seth it selfe against the time of warre.Hawking & hunting Many of the Citizens doe delight themselves in Hawkes and Hounds, for they have liberty of hunting in Middlesex, Hertfordshire, all Chiltron, and in Kent to the water of Cray. Thus far Fitzstephen of sports. These or the like exercises have been continued til our time, namely in Stage∣playes, whereof ye may read, in Anno 1391. a Play by the Parish Clerkes of London at the Skinners Well besides Smithfield;A stage∣play that continued 3. dayes, A stage∣play that lasted 8. dayes. which continued three dayes together, the King, Queene, and Nobles being present. And of another in the yeere 1409. which lasted eight dayes, and was of matter from the Creation of the World, whereat was present most part of the Nobility, and Gentry of England. Of late time,Theater & Curten for Comedies and othe shewes, in stead of those Stage∣playes, have beene vsed Comedies, Tra∣gedies, Enterludes, and Histories, both true and sained: for the acting whereof, certaine publike places have beene ere∣cted. Also Cockes of the game are yet cherished by divers men for their plea∣sures, much money being laid on their heads, when they fight in pits, whereof some be costly, made for that purpose. The Ball is used by Noblemen and Gentlemen in Tennis-courts,The Ball at Tennis play. and by people of meaner sort in the open fields and streets. The marching forth of Citizens sons and other yong men on horse-backe, with disarmed Launces and Shields, there to practise feats of warre, man a∣gainst man, hath long since beene left off, but in their Citie they have used on horse-backe, to runne at a dead marke, called a Quinten. For note whereof,Running at the Quinten, for prizes, Mat. Paris. I read, that in the yeere of Christ 1253. the 38 of Hen. 3. the youthfull Citizens, for an exer∣cise of their activity, set foorth a game to runne at the Quinten, and whosoever did best, should have a Peacocke, which they had prepard as a prize.
Certaine of the Kings servants, be∣cause the Court lay then at Westminster, came,The kings servants deriding the Citi∣zens, were fore bea∣tē, but the Citizens were fined by the King. as it were, in despight of the Ci∣tizens, to that game, and giving re∣prochfull names to the Londoners, which for the dignity of the Citie, and the an∣cient priviledge which they ought to have enjoyed, were called Barons: the said Londoners being wrongfully abused, fell upon the Kings servants, and beat them shrewdly, so that upon complaint made to the King, he fined the Citie to pay a thousand Markes. This exercise of running at the Quinten, was practised by the youthfull Citizens, aswel in sum∣mer as in winter; namely, in the feast of Christmas. I have seene a Quinten set upon Cornhill,Quinten upon Corn∣hill. by the Leaden Hall, where the attendants of the Lords of merry di∣sports have runne, and made great pa∣stime: for he that hit not the broad end of the Quinten, was of all men laughed to scorne; and he that hit it full, if hee rode nor the faster, had a sound blow in his necke with a bag full of sand, han∣ged on the other end. I have also in the Summer season, seene some upon the River of Thames,Running with staves on the Thames. rowed in Whirries, with staves in their hands, flat at the fore-end, running one against another, and for the most part, one or both overthrowne, and well dowked. On the Holy-dayes in Summer,Leaping, dancing, shooting, wrestling. the Youths of this Citie have in the Field exercised themselves, in leaping, dan∣cing, shooting, wrestling, casting of the stone or ball, &c. And for defence and use of the Wea∣pon, there is a speciall profession of men that teach it.Mat. Paris. I reade that in the yeere 1222. and the 6. of King Henry the 3. on Saint Iames day, the Citizens of London kept games of defence and wrestling, neere to the Hospitall of Matilda, at S. Giles in the field, where they got the ma∣stery of the men of the Suburbs. The Bailiffe of Westminster devising to be revenged,A game at VVestmin∣ster on Lam∣mas day. proclaimed a game to be at Westminster upon Lammas day: whereunto the Citizens willingly re∣paired. When they had played a while, the Bailiffe, with the men of the Suburbs, harnessed themselves treacherously, and fell to such fighting, that the Citizens (being sore wounded) were forced to runne into the Citie, where they rung the common Bell, and assembled the Citizens in great number. When the matter was declared, every man wished to revenge the fact:The ad∣vice of  L. Maior. but the Lord Mai∣or of the Citie, being a wise and quiet man, willed them first to move the Ab∣bot of Westminster in the matter, and if he would promise to see amends made, it was sufficient.The bad counsel of Constantine Fitz Arnulit as bad fol∣lowed. But a certaine Citizen, named Constantine Fitz Arnulit, willed, that all the houses of the Abbot and Bai∣liffe should be pulled downe. Which desperate words were no sooner spoken, but the common people (as unadvised∣ly) issued forth of the Citie without a∣ny order, and fought a cruell battell, Constantine pulling downe divers hou∣ses; and the people (as praising Constan∣tine) cryed; The joy of the Mountaine, the joy of the Mountaine; God help, and the Lord Lodowike. A few dayes after this tumult, the Abbot of Westminster came to London,Clon. Don. The Ab∣bot of VVestminst. put to his shifts. to Philip Dawbeney, one of the kings Coun∣cell, to complaine of the injuries done to him: the Londoners perceiving it, be∣set the house about, and tooke by vio∣lence twelve of the Abbots horses a∣way, cruelly beating his men, &c. But whilest the said Dawbeney labou∣red to pacific the vprore, the Abbot got out at the backe doore of the house, and so, by a Boat on the Thames, hardly esca∣ped, the Citizens throwing stones after him in great abundance. These things being thus done,The Lord chiefe Iu∣stice en∣tred the Citie of London with an Army. Hubert de Burge, chiefe Iustice of England, with a great Army of men, came to the Tow∣er of London, and sent for the Maior and Aldermen, of whom hee enquired for the principall Authors of this Faction. Constantine, being constant in the sedi∣tion, was more constant in the answer; affirming, that hee had done it, and that he had done much lesse than hee meant to have done. The Justice tooke him, and two other with him, and that morning sent him to Faulcatius by water, with a great number of armed men, who brought Constantine to the Gallowes. But when he saw the Rope about his necke,Constantine and other hanged. hee offered for his life fif∣teene thousand Markes, yet it would
not seeme to save him: so he was hang∣ed, with Constantine his Nephew, and Galfrid that proclaimed his proclamati∣on, on the 16. of August. Also in the yeere 1453. of a tumult made against the Maior,Gamos of defence. at the wrest∣ling besides Clerks well, &c. Which is sufficient to prove, that (of old time) the exercising of wrestling, and such like, hath beene much more used than of lat∣ter yeeres. The youths of this Citie also have u∣sed, on holidayes, after Evening Pray∣er, Playing at the Buck∣lers. at their Masters doores, to exercise their Wasters and Bucklers: and the Maidens, one of them playing on a Timbrell,Dancing for Gar∣lands in the streets in sight of their Masters and Dames, to dance for Garlands, hanged thwart the streets, which open pastimes in my youth, being now suppressed, worser practices within doores are to be feared. As for the baiting of Buls and Beares, they are till this day much frequented, namely in Beare-gardens on the Banke∣side, Beare and Bull bai∣ting. wherein be prepared scaffolds for beholders to stand upon. Sliding on the Ice is now but childrens play: but in Hawking and Hunting many grave Citizens at this present have great delight, and doe rather want leasure than goodwill to follow it. Of triumphant shews made by the Ci∣tizens of Lond.Mal. Paris. ye may read in the yeere 1236. the twentieth of Henry the third,Shewes for triumphs. Andrew Bockrell then being Maior, how Elianor, daughter to Reymond, Earle of Provence, riding thorow the Citie to∣ward Westminster, there to be crowned Queene of England, the Citie was ador∣ned with silkes, and in the night with Lamps, Cressets, and other lights, with∣out number, besides many Pageants, and strange devices there presented; the Citizens also rode to meet the King and Queene,The Citi∣zens rode. clothed in long garments em∣broydered about with gold,Imbroide∣red gar∣ments. and silkes of divers colours, their horses gallantly, trapped, to the number of 306. every manbearing a Cup of gold or silver in his hand, and the Kings Trumpetters before them: These Citizens did mi∣nister Wine, as Buttlers, which is their service at the Coronation. More, in the yeere 1298. for victory obtained by Edward the first against the Scots, every Company, according to their severall Trade, made their severall shew:Fishmon∣gers Pro∣cession for triumph of victory, more than 1000. hors∣men. but specially the Fishmongers, which in a solemne Procession passed thorow the Citie, having amongst o∣ther Pageants and shewes, foure Sturge∣ons git, carried on foure horses; then, foure Salmons of silver, on foure horses, and after them sixe and forty armed Knights, riding on horses, made like Lu∣ces of the Sea, and then one presenting Saint Magnes, because it was upon Saint Magnes day, with a thousand horsemen, &c. One other shew in the yeere 1377. made by the Citizens for disport of the yong Prince Richard, sonne to the black Prince, in the Feast of Christmas, and in this manner: On the Sunday before Candlemas,A shew by Torch∣light, be∣ing a Mummery of more than 100: men on horseback in the night, one hundred and thirty Citi∣zens, disgnised and well horsed, in a Mummery, with sound of Trumpets, Sackbuts, Cornets, Shalmes, and other Minstrels, and innumerable Torch∣lights of Wax, rode from Newgate tho∣row Cheap, over the Bridge, through Southwarke, and so to Kennington besides Lambeth, where the yong Prince remai∣ned with his Mother, and the Duke of Lancaster, his Vncle, the Earles of Cam∣bridge, Hertford, Warwicke, and Suffolke, with divers other Lords. In the first ranke did ride 48. in the likenesse and habit of Esquires, two and two together, clothed in red coats, and gownes of Say or Sendall, with comely vizors one their faces. After them came riding 48. Knights, in the same Livery of colour and stuffe. Then followed one richly arrayed, like an Emperour; and after him some di∣stance, one stately tyred like a Pope, who was followed by 24. Cardinals: and after them eight or ten with blacke vizors, not amiable, as if they had been Legates from some forraigne Princes. These Maskers, after they had entred the Mannor of Kennington, alighted from their horses: and entred the Hall on foot; which done, the Prince, his Mother, and the Lords came out of the chamber into the hall, whom the Mum∣mers did salute: shewing by a paire of Dice on the Table, their desire to play with the yong Prince: which they so
handled, that the Prince did alwaies winne when he cast at them. Then the Mummers set to the Prince three Jewels,The Prince did win three Iewels of the Mas∣kers. one after another; which were, a Boule of gold, a Cup of gold, and a Ring of gold, which the Prince wanne at three casts. Then they set to the Princes Mother, the Duke, the Earles, and other Lords, to every one  Ring of gold, which they did also winne. After which they were feasted, and the Musicke sounded, the Prince and Lords danced on the one part with the Mummers, who did also dance: which jollity being ended, they were againe made to drinke, and then departed in order as they came. The like was to Henry the fourth, in the second of his reign, he then keeping his Christmas at Eltham, twelve Alder∣men of London, and their sonnes, rode in a mumming, and had great thanks. Thus much for sportfull shewes in Triumphes may suffice. Now for sports and pastimes yeerely used. First, in the Feast of Christmas, there was in the Kings house, wheresoever he was lodged,Lord of Misrule at Christmas a Lord of Misrule, or Ma∣ster of merry disports, and the like had ye in the house of every Nobleman of honour, or good worship, were he spi∣rituall or temporall. Among the which, The Maior of London, and either of the Sheriffes had their severall Lords of misrule, ever contending, without qua∣rell or offence, who should make the ra∣rest pastimes to delight the beholders. These Lords beginning their rule at Al∣hallon Eve, continued the same till the mocrow after the Feast of the Purifica∣tion, commonly called Candlemas day: In all which space, there were fine and subtill disguisings, Maskes and Mum∣meries, with playing at Cards for coun∣ters, nayles and points in every house, more for pastime than for gaine. Against the Feast of Christmas, every mans house, as also their Parish Chur∣ches, were decked with Holme, Ivie, Bayes, and whatsoever the season of the yeere affoorded to be greene: The con∣duits and standards in the streets were likewise garnished. Among the which, I read, that in the yeere 1444. by tem∣pest of thunder and lightning, on the first of February at night,Tempests of light∣ning and thunder fi∣red Pauls steeple, o∣verthrew the stan∣dard at Leaden hall, and threw stones of the paye∣ment into mens houses. Pauls steeple was fired, but with great labour quen∣ched: and toward the morning of Can∣dlemas day, at the Leaden Hall in Corn∣hill, a Standard of tree being set up in the midst of the payement, fast in the ground, nayled full of Holme and Ivie, for disport of Christmas to the people; was torne up, and cast downe by the malignant Spirit (as was thought) and the stones of the payement all about, were cast in the streets, and into divers houses, so that the people were sore a∣gast at the great tempests. In the weeke before Easter,Twisted trees et from the woods. had yee great shewes made, for the fetching in of a twisted Tree, or With, as they ter∣med it, out of the woods, into the kings house, and the like into every mans house of Honour or Worship. In the Moneth of May,May games namely on May day in the morning, every man, except impediment, would walke into the sweet Meddowes and green woods, there to rejoyce their spirits with the beauty and savour of sweet Flowers, and with the harmonie of Birdes, praising God in their kinde. And for example hereof,Edward Hall. Edward Hall hath noted, that King Henry the eighth, as in the third of his reigne, and divers other yeeres, so namely in the seventh of his reigne, on May day in the morning, with Queene Katharine his wife, accompanied with many Lords and Ladies, rode a Maying from Greenwich to the high ground of Shooters-hill: where as they passed by the way, they espyed a company of tall Yeomen, clothed all in greene, with greene hoods, and with bowes and ar∣rowes, to the number of 200. One, be∣ing their Chieftaine,Robin Hood and his men shot before the King. was called Robin Hood, who required the King and all his company to stay and see his men shoot: whereunto the King granting, Robin Hood whistled, and all the 200. Archers shot off, loosing all at once; and when he whistled againe, they likewise shot a∣gaine: their Arrowes whistled by craft of the head, so that the noise was strange and loud, which greatly delighted the King, Queene, and their company. Moreouer, this Robin Hood desired the King and Queene, with their retinue, to enter the greene Wood, where, in Arbours made with boughes, and deckt
with flowers, they were set and served plentifully with venison and wine, by Robin Hood and his meyny, to their great contentment, and had other Pa∣geants and Pastimes, as yee may read in my said Author. I find also, that in the month of May, the Citizens of London (of all estates) lightly in every Parish, or sometime two or three Parishes joyning toge∣ther, had their severall Maynings, and did fetch in May-poles, with divers warlike shewes, with good Archers, Morice-dancers, and other devices for pastime all the day long; and towards the evening, they had stage-plaies, and Bonefires in the streets. Of these Mayings, we read in the reign of Henry the sixth, that the Aldermen and Sheriffes of London, being on May day at the Bishop of Londons Wood in the Parish of Stebunheath,Bishops Wood. and having there a worshipfull dinner for them∣selves and other commers,Bishops Hall by Blehen∣hall green. Lydgate the the Poet, that was a Monk of Bury, sent to them by a Pursivant a joyfull com∣mendation of that seasen, containing sixteene staves in meeter Royall, begin∣ning thus: Mighty Flora, Goddesse of fresh flowers, which clothed hath the soyle in lusty green,The plea∣sāt month of May commen∣ded. Made buds to spring, with her sweet showers, by influence of the Sunne shine, To doe pleasance of intent full cleane, unto the States which now sit here, Hath Ver downe sent her own daughter deare, Making the vertue, that dared in the root, Called the vertue, the vertue vegetable, for to transcend, most wholesome & most soote, Into the top, this season so agreeable: the baw my liquor is so commendable, That it rejoyceth with his fresh moisture, man, beast, and fowle, and every creature, &c. About the ninth yeere of the reigne of King Henry the eight, a great he art∣burning and malicious grudge grew a∣mongst the Englishmen of the City of Lon∣don, against strangers: and namely, the Artificers found themselves much a∣grieved; The num∣ber of strangers in London misliked. because such number of stran∣gers were permitted, to resort hither with their Wares, and to exercise Han∣dicrafts, to the great hinderance and impoverishing of the Kings Liege peo∣ple. Which malice grew to such a point that one Iohn Lincolne a Broker,Iohn Lincolne a Broker beginner of the in∣surrection busied himselfe so farre in the matter, that a∣bout Palme Sunday, or the fift of April, he came to one Doctor Henry Standish, with these words; Sir, I understand, that you shall preach at the Spittle on Munday in Easter-weeke, and so it is, that English men, both Merchants and o∣ther, are undone by stangers, who have more liberty in this Land than they, which is against reason, and also against the Common-weale of this Realme: I beseech you therefore,A bill of∣fered by Lincolne to Doctor Standish. to declare this in your sermon, and in so doing, you shall deserve great thanks of my Lord Maior, and of all his Brethren. And herewith he offered unto the said Doctor a bill, containing the matter more at large. But Doctor Standish wisely considering, that there might more inconvenience arise thereof, than he would wish, if he should deale in such a sort: both refused the bill, and told Lincolne plainely, that he meant not to meddle with any such matter in his Sermon. Whereupon, the said Lincolne went unto one Doctor Bell, a Canon of the foresaid Spittle,Doctor Beder∣tooke to read Lin∣colns bill in the Pul∣pit. that was appointed like∣wise to preach upon Tuesday in Easter-weake at the same Spittle, whom hee perswaded to reade his said bill in the Pulpit: which bill contained (in effect) the griefes that many found with stran∣gers, for taking the livings away from Artificers, and the entercourse from Merchants, the redresse whereof must come from the commons knit in one; for as the hurt touched all men, so must al set to their helping hands. Which let∣ter he read,The bill contained much sedi∣tious mat∣ter. or the chiefest part thereof, comprehending much seditious matter. And then he began with this sentence: Coelum coeli Domino, terram autem dedit filiis hominum. And upon this Text he entreated, how this Land was given to Englishmen, and as Birds defend their nests, so ought Englishmen to cherish and maintaine themselves, and to hurt and grieve Aliens, for respect of their Common-wealth. And on this Text, Pugna pro Patria, he brought in, how (by Gods Law) it was was lawfull to fight for their Country:Pugna pro Patria. and thus he subtilly moved the people to rebell against strangers. By this Sermon, many a light-headed person tooke courage, and
openly spake against strangers: and by mishap, there had beene divers evill parts (of late) plaid by strangers, in and about the Citie of London, which kin∣dled the peoples rancor the more furi∣ously against them. The twenty eighth day of April,Quarela urged to strangers as they were in the streets di∣vers yong-men of the Citie picked qua∣rels with certaine strangers, as they pas∣sed along the streets: some they smote and buffetted, and some they threw in the channell: for which, the Lord Mai∣or sent some of the Englishmen to pri∣son, as Stephen Studley, Skinner, Steven∣son, Bets, and other. Then suddenly rose a secret rumour, and no man could tell how it began, that on May-day next following,Evil May-day. the Citie would slay all the Aliens: insomuch that divers strangers fled out of the Ci∣tie. This rumour came to the knowledge of the Kings Councell: whereupon the Lord Cardinall sent for the Maior, and other of the Councell of the Citie, gi∣ving them to understand what hee had heard. The Lord Maior (as one ignorant of the matter) told the Cardinall, that he doubted not so to governe the Citie, but as peace should be observed. The Cardinall willed him so to doe, and to take good heed, that if any rio∣tous attempt were intended, he should by good policy prevent it. The Maior comming from the Car∣dinals house,A meeting of the L. Maior and his bre∣thren at Guildhall. about foure of the clocke in the afternoone on May Eve, sent for his Brethren to the Guild-hall, yet was it almost seven of the clocke before the Assembly was set. Vpon conference had of the matter, some thought it ne∣cessary, that a substantiall watch should be set of honest Citizens, which might withstand the evill doers, if they went about any misrule. Other were of con∣trary opinion, as rather thinking it best, that every man should be commanded to shut in his doores, and to keepe his servants within. Before 8. of the clock, Master Recorder was sent to the Cardi∣nall, with these opinions: who hearing the same,The Re∣corder & Sir Thomas More sent to the Cardinall. allowed the latter. And then the Recorder, and Sir Thomas More, late under-sheriffe of London, and now of the Kings Councell, came backe a∣gaine to the Guild-hall, halfe an houre before nine of the clock, and there shew∣ed the pleasure of the Kings Councell: whereupon every Alderman sent to his Ward, that no man (after nine of the clocke) should stir out of his house, but keepe his doores shut, and his ser∣vants within, untill nine of the clocke in the morning. After this commandement was gi∣ven, An Alder∣man resi∣sted, and put to flight. in the Evening, as Sir Iohn Mundy Alderman, came from his Ward, hee found two young-men in Cheape, play∣ing at the Bucklers, and a great many of young-men looking on them, for the command seemed to bee scarcely pub∣lished; he commanded them to leave off; and because one of them asked him why, hee would have him sent to the Counter. But the Prentices resisted the Alderman, taking the young-man from him, and cryed Prentices, Prentices, Clubs, Clubs: then out at every doore came Clubs and other weapons, so that the Alderman was forced to flight. Then more people arose out of every quarter, and forth came Servingmen, Watermen, Courtiers, and other, so that by eleven of the clocke, there were in Cheape, 6. or 7. hundred, and out of Pauls Church-yard came about 300. From all places they gathered together, and breake up the Counter, took out the Prisoners, which had beene committed thither by the Lord Maior, for hurting the strangers: also they went to New∣gate, and tooke out Studley and Bets, committed thither for the like cause. The Maior and Sheriffes were present, and made Proclamation in the Kings name, but nothing was obeyed. Being thus gathered into severall heaps,Sir Thomas More labo∣red to pa∣cifie the rude mul∣titude. they ran thorow Saint Nicholas shambles, and at Saint Martins Gate, there met with them Sir Thomas More, and other, desiring them to goe to their lodgings. As they were thus intreating, and had almost perswaded the people to depart, they within Saint Martins threw out stones and bats, so that they hurt di∣vers honest persons, which were with Sir Thomas More, perswading the rebel∣lious Rout to cease. Insomuch as at length, one Nicholas Dennis, a Serjeant at Armes, being there sore hurt, cryed
in a fury, Den, a Serjeant  mes sore hurt. Downe with them: and then all the unruly persons ran to the doores and windowes of the houses within St. Martins, and spoiled all that they found. After that they ran into Cornehill, and so on to a house East of Leadenhal, called the Green-gate, where dwelt one Mewtas a Piccard or Frenchman, within whose house dwelled divers French men,Mewtas a Piccard. whom they likewise spoyled: and if they had found Mewtas, they would have stricken off his head. Some ran to Blanchapleton, and there brake up the strangers houses,The stran∣gers hou∣ses broken up at Blanchapleton. and spoi∣led them. Thus they continued till 3. a clocke in the morning, at which time, they began to withdraw: but by the way they were taken by the Maior and other, and sent to the Tower, Newgate and Counters, to the number of 300. The Cardinall was advertised by Sir Thomas Parre, whom in all haste he sent to Richmond,The King sendeth to know the state of the City. to informe the King: who immediately sent to understand the state of the City, and was truely infor∣med. Sir Roger Cholmeley Lievtenant of the Tower, during the time of this businesse, shot off certaine peeces of Ordnance against the City, but did no great hurt. About five of the clocke in the morning, the Earles of Shrewsbury and Surrey, Thomas Dockery, Lord Prior of Saint Iohns,The Lords came with power to London. George Nevill, Lord A∣burgaveny, and other, came to London with such powers as they could make, so did the Innes of Court; but before they came, the businesse was done, as ye have heard. Then were the prisoners examined,Doctor Bell sent to the Tower for his Ser∣mon. and the Sermon of Doctor Bell called to remembrance, and hee sent to the Tower. A Commission of Oyer and Determiner was directed to the Duke of Norfolke, and other Lords, for pu∣nishment of this insurrection. The se∣cond of May, the Commissioners, with the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Iusti∣ces, went to the Guildhall, where many of the offenders were indicted, where∣upon they were arraigned, and pleaded not guilty, having day given them till the 4. of May. On which day,The Duke of Norfolke entred London with 1300 men. the Lord Maior, the Duke of Norfolke, the Earle of Surrey and other, came to sit in the Guildhall. The Duke of Norfolke entred the City with one thousand three hundred men, and the prisoners were brought through the streets tyed in ropes, some men, some lads but of thirteen or foureteene yeeres old, to the number of 278. per∣sons. That day Iohn Lincolne and divers other were indicted, and the next day thirteen were adjudged to bee drawne, hanged, and quartered: for execution whereof,Ten paire of Gal∣lowes set up in di∣vers streets of London. ten payre of Gallowes were set up in divers places of the City, as at Aldgate, Blanchapleton, Grasse-street, Lea∣den-hall, before either of the Counters; at Newgate, Saint Martins, at Aldersgate and Bishopsgate. And these Gallowes were set upon wheeles, to bee removed irom street to street, and from doore to doore whereas the prisoners were to be executed. On the seventh of May, Iohn Lincoln, one Shirwin, and two brethren, named Betts,Iohn Lin∣colne the Broker executed, but the rest respi∣ted by the King. with divers other were adjudged to dye. They were on the Hurdles drawne to the Standard in Cheape, and first was Lincolne executed: and as the other had the ropes about their neckes, there came a commandement from the King, to respit the execution, and then were the prisoners sent againe to prison, and the armed men sent away out of the Citie. On the thirteenth of May, the King came to Westminster-hall, and with him the Lord Cardinall, the Dukes of Nor∣folke, and uffolke, the Earles of Shrews∣bury, Essex, Wiltshire, and Surrey, with many Lords and other of the Kings Councell; the Lord Maior of London, Aldermen and other chiefe Citizens, were there in their best liveries, by nine of the clocke in the morning.The pri∣soners were brought before the King at Westminster Hall. Then came in the prisoners, bound in ropes in a ranke one after another, in their shirts, and every one had a Halter a∣bout his necke, being in number 400. men, and 11. women. When they were thus come before the Kings presence, the Cardinall laid sore to the Maior and Aldermen their negligence, and to the prisoners he de∣clared how justly they had deserved to dye. Then all the prisoners together cryed to the King for mercy,The King graciously pardoned all the pri∣soners. and there∣with the Lords besought his grace of pardon: at whose request, the King pardoned them all. The generall pardon
being pronounced, all the Prisoners shouted at once, and cast their Halters towards the roofe of the Hall. The pri∣soners being dismissed, the Gallowes were taken downe, and the Citizens tooke more heed to their servants: kee∣ping (for ever after) as on that night, a strong watch in Armour, in remem∣brance of Evill May-day.Evill May-day. These great Mayings and Maygames made by the Governours and Masters of this City, with the Triumphant set∣ting up of the great shaft (a principall May-pole in Cornehill, before the Parish of Saint Andrew) therefore called Vn∣dershaft, by meane of that insurrection of youths, against Aliens on May-day, 1517. the 6. of Henry the eight, have not been so freely used as before. And therefore I leave them, and will some∣what touch of Watches, as also of shewes in the night. Of Watches in this Citie, and other matters com∣manded, and the cause why. WIlliam Conquerour com∣manded, Curfe Bel at 8. of the clocke comman∣ded fire & candle to be quen∣ched. that in every Towne and Village, a Bell should be night∣ly rung at eight of the clocke, and that all people should then put out their fire, and candle, and take their rest. Which order was observed through this Realm during his reigne, and the reigne of William Rufus: but Henry the first, re∣storing to his Subjects the use of fire and lights, as afore, it followeth (by reason of Warres within the Realme) that many men also gave themselves to robbery and murders in the night: for example whereof in this City, Roger Hoveden writeth thus: In the yeere 1175. a councell was kept at Nottingham,Roger Hove∣den manu∣script. in time of which Coun∣cell, a brother of the Earle Ferrers, being in the night privily slaine at London, and thrown out of his Inne into the durty street when the King understood thereof he sware that he would be revenged on the Citizens. For it was then (saith mine Author) a common practice in this City; that a hun∣dred or more in a company, young and old, would make nightly invasions upon houses of the wealthy, to the intent to rob them, and if they found any man stirring in the City within the night, that were not of their crue,Nightwal∣kers mur∣thered all they met. they would presently murder him: insomuch, that when night was come, no man durst adventure to walk in the streets. When this had continued long, it fortuned, that as a crue of yong and wealthy Citizens assembling together in the night, assaulted a stone house of a certaine rich man, and breaking through the wall, the good man of that house, having prepared himselfe with other in a corner, when hee percei∣ved one of the theeves, named Andrew Bucquint, to lead the way, with a burning brand in the one hand, and a pot of coles in the other, which hee assaied to kindle with the brand, he flew upon him, and smote off his right hand, and then with a loud voyce cryed theeves. At the hearing whereof, the theeves tooke their flight, all saving he that had lost his hand, whom the good man (in the next morning) delivered to Richard de Lucie the Kings Iustice.Rich theeves most wor∣thy to bee hanged. This theefe, upon warrant of his life, appeached his con∣federates, of whom many were taken, and many were fled. Among the rest that were apprehended,The judg∣ment of fire and water cal∣led Ordalii, was con∣demned by Pope Innocent the third 1205. De∣cretal. lib. 5. a certaine Citizen of great countenance, credit, and wealth, named Iohn Senex, who for as much he could not acquit himselfe by the Water-doome (as that law was then tearmed) hee offered to the King five hundred pounds of silver for his life. But forasmuch as he was condem∣ned by judgement of the Water, the King would not take the offer, but commanded him to be hanged on the Gallowes,Cause why watches in the night were com∣manded and when. which was done, and then the City became more quiet for a long time after. But for a full remedy of enormities in the night, I read, that in the yeere of Christ 1253. Henry the third comman∣ded Watches in Cities, and Borough Townes to be kept, for the better obser∣ving of peace and quietnesse amongst his people. And further, by the advice of them
of Savoy, hee ordained, that if any man chanced to be robbed, or by any means damnified, by any theese or robber; he to whom the charge of keeping that Country, City or Borough chiefly ap∣pertained, where the robbery was done, should competently restore the losse. And this was after the use of Savoy; but yet thought more hard to bee observed here, than in those parts: and therefore leaving those laborious Watches, I will speake of our Pleasures and Pastimes in watching by night. In the Months of Iune and Iuly,Bonefires and ban∣queting in the streets on the Vigils of Festivall dayes, and on the same Festivall dayes in the Evenings, after the Sun-setting, there were usually made Bone-fires in the streets, every man bestowing wood or labour towards them. The wealthier sort also before their doores, neere to the said Bonefires would set out Tables on the Vigils, fur∣nished with sweete bread, and good drinke, and on the Festivall dayes with meats and drinkes plentifully, where∣unto they would invite their neigh∣bours and passengers also to sit, and be merry with them in great familiarity, praysing God for his benefits bestowed on them. These were called Bonefires, as well of amity amongst neighbours, that being before at controversie, were there by the labour of others reconciled, and made of bitter enemies, loving friends; as also for the vertue that a great fire hath, to purge the infection of the ayre. On the Vigill of Saint Iohn Bap∣tist,Marching watch at Midsum∣mer. and on Saint Peter and Paul the A∣postles, every mans doore being shad∣dowed with greene Birch, long Fennel, Saint Iohns wort, Orpin, white Lilies, and such like, garnished upon with Garlands of beautifull flowers,Garni∣shing of mens doores, & furnishing them out. had also Lamps of glasse, with Oyle burning in them all the night; some hung out bran∣ches of Iron curiously wrought, contai∣ning hundreds of Lamps lighted at once, which made a goodly shew, namely in new Fish street, Thames-street, &c. Then had ye besides the standing watches, all in bright harnesse, in every Ward and street of this City and Suburbs, a mar∣ching watch, that passed through the principall streets thereof, to wit, from the little Conduit by Pauls gate, through West Cheape, by the Stocks, through Cornehill, by Leaden hall to Aldgate, then backe down Fen-Church street, by Grasse-Church, about Grasse-Church Conduit, and up Grasse-Church street into Cornhil, and through it into West Cheape again, and so broke up.Almost 1000. cres∣sets light, for the watch at Midsum∣mer. The whole way orde∣red for this marching watch, extended to 300. Taylors yards of assize, for the furniture whereof with lights, there were appointed 700. Cressers, 500. of them being found by the Companies, the other 200. by the Chamber of Lon∣don. Besides the which lights,More than 240. Con∣stables in London, the one halfe of them each night went in the mar∣ching watch, the otherhalfe kept their standing watch in every street and lane. every Constable in London, in number more than 240. had his Cresset: the charge of every Cresset was in light two shil∣lings foure pence, and every Cresset had 2. men, one to beare or hold it, another to beare a bag with light, and to serve it: so that the poore men pertaining to the Cressets, taking wages, besides that eve∣ry one had a strawen hat, with a badge painted, & his break fast in the morning, amounted in number to almost 2000. The marching watch contained in num∣ber 2000. men, part of them being old Souldiers, of skill to bee Captaines, Licutenants, Serjeants, Corporals, &c. Wiffers, Drummers, and Fifes, Stan∣dard and Ensigne-bearers, Sword-play∣ers, Trumpeters on horsebacke, Demi∣launces on great horses, Gunners with hand-guns, or halfe hakes, Archers in cotes of white fustian, signed on the brest and backe with the Armes of the City, their bowes bent in their hands, with sheafes of arrowes by their sides, Pike-men in bright Corslets, Burganets &c. Holbards, the like Billmen in Al∣maine Rivets, and Aperns of Mayle in great number. There were also divers Pageants, Morris dancers, Constables, the one halfe which was 120. on St. Iohns Eve, the other halfe on Saint Peters Eve in bright harnesse, some over-gilt, and every one a Jornet of Scarlet thereupon and a chaine of Gold, his Hench-man following him, his Ministrels before him, and his Cresset light passing by him: the Waytes of the City, the Ma∣iors Officers, for his guard before him, all in a Livery of Wosted or Say Iac∣kets, party coloured, the Maior himselfe wel mounted on horseback, the Sword-bearer before him in faire Armour, well
mounted also, the Maiors foot-men, and the like Torch-bearers about him; Hench-men twaine, upon great stirring horses following him. The Sheriffes Watches came one after the other in like order, but not so large in number as the Maiors: for where the Maior had besides his Giant three Pageants, each of the Sheriffes had besides their Gi∣ants, but two Pageants; each their mor∣rīs-dance, and one Hench-man, their Officers in Jackets of Wosted, or Say, party-coloured, differing from the Mai∣ors, and each from other, but having harnessed men a great many, &c. This Midsummer Watch was thus accustomed yeerely, time out of minde, untill the yeere 1539. the 31. of Henry the eighth, in which yeere, on the S. of May,A great Muster at London. a great Muster was made by the Citizens at the Miles end, all in bright harnesse, with coats of white silke or cloth, and chaines of gold, in three great battels, to the number of 15000. which passed thorow London to Westminister, and so through the Sanctuary, and round about the Parke of S. Iames, and retur∣ned home thorow Oldborne. King Henry then considering the great charges of the Citizens, for the furni∣ture of this unusuall Muster, forbad the marching Watch provided for at Mid∣summer for that yeere; which being once laid downe, was not raised againe till the yeere 1548. the second of Ed∣ward the sixth, Sir Iohn Gresham then being Maior, who caused the marching Watch, both on the Eve of Saint Iohn Baptist, and of S. Peter the Apostle, to be revived and set forth, in as comely order as it had been accustomed; which Watch was also beautified by the num∣ber of more than 300. Demilances and light-horsemen, prepared by the Citi∣zens to be sent into Scotland, for the re∣scue of the Towne of Haddington, and others, kept by the Englishmen since this Maiors time. The like marching Watch in this Citie hath not beene used, though some attempts have been made thereunto, as in the yeere 1585. a Booke was drawne by a grave Citizen,Iohn Moūt∣gomery. and by him dedicated to Sir Tho. Pullison, then L. Maior, and his brethren the Aldermen, containing the manner and order of a marching Watch in the Citie upon the Evens accustomed, in commendation whereof, namely, in times of peace to be used, he hath words to this effect: The Artificers of sundry sorts were there∣by well set aworke,Commo∣dities of the watch at Midsū∣mer, in the time of peace. none but rich men char∣ged, poore men helped, old Souldiers, Trum∣peters, Drummers, Fifes, and Ensigne-bea∣rers, with such like men, meet for the Prin∣ces service, kept in ure, wherein the safety and defence of every Common-weale consi∣steth. Armour and Weapons being yeerely occupied in this wise, the Citizens had of their owne readily prepared for any neede, whereas by intermission hereof, armorers are out of worke, Souldiers out of ure, weapons overgrowne with foulenesse, few or none good being provided, &c. In the Moneth of August,Wrestling at kin∣ners we, nere un∣to Clerks wel before the Maior. about the Feast of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, before the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and Sheriffes of London, placed in a large Tentneere unto Clarkenwell, of old time were divers dayes spent in the pastime of wrestling; where the Officers of the Citie, namely the Sheriffes, Serjeants, and Yeomen, the Porters of the Kings Beame, or weigh-house, (now no such men) and other of the Citie, were chal∣lengers of all men in the Suburbs, to wrestle for games appointed. And on other dayes, before the said Maior,Shooting the stan∣dard, broad ar∣row and flight be∣fore the Maior. Al∣dermen and Sheriffes, in Fensbury field, to shoot the standard, broad-ar∣row and flight, for games. But now of late yeeres, the wrestling is onely pra∣ctised on Bartholomew day in the after∣noone, and the shooting some three or foure dayes after, in one afternoone and no more. What should I speake of the ancient daily exercises in the long Bow by Citizens of this Citie,Shooting in the long bow suppressed Bowling∣alleys ere∣cted and frequēted. now almost cleane left off and forsaken? Lover-passe it: for by the meanes of closing in of Common grounds, our Archers, for want of roome to shoot abroad, creepe into Bowling-Alleys, and ordinarie Dicing-houses, neerer home, where they have roome enough to hazzard their money at unlawfull Games, and there I leave them to take their plea∣sures.
Honour of Citizens, and worthinesse both of men and women in the same. THis Citie (saith Fitzste∣phen) is glorious in Man∣hood: furnished with muni∣tions, populous with inhabi∣tants; insomuch that in the troublesome time of King Stephen, it hath shewed at a Muster 20000. armed Horse∣men, and threescore thousand Foot-men, serviceable for the Warres. Moreover (saith he) the Citizens of London, wheresoever they become, are notable before all other Ci∣tizens, in civility of manners, attire, table, and talke.The mo∣dest Ma∣trons that have bin, & ought to be. The Matrons of this Citie, are the very modest Sabine Ladies of Italie. The Londoners, sometime called Trino∣bants, repelled Caesar, who alwaies made his passage by shedding blood: whereupon Lucan sung: Territa quaesitis ostēdit terga Britannis. The Citie of London hath bred some,Worthi∣nesse of men, Citi∣zens of London. which have subdued many Kingdomes, and also the Romane Empire. It hath also brought forth manyothers, whom Vertue and Valour hath highly advanced, accor∣ding to Apollo in his Oracle to Brute, Sub occasu Solis, &c. In the time of Christianity, it brought forth that Noble Emperour Constantine,Constatine the Em∣perour borne in London. which gave the Ci∣tie of Rome, and all the Imperiall signes, to God, Saint Peter, and Pope Silvester, chu∣sing rather to be called a Defender of the Church, than an Emperour. And lest peace might be violated, and their eyes troubled by his presence, he retired from Rome, and built the Citie of Constantinople. Lon∣don also in late time hath brought forth fa∣mous Kings: Maude the Empresse, King Henrie, sonne to Henry the second, and Thomas the Archbishop, &c. This Thomas, surnamed Becket, borne in London,A Sheriffs Clerke of London be∣came chancelor of England, and Arch∣bishop of Canturbury. brought up in the Priory of Marton, and a Student at Paris, be∣came the Sheriffes Clerke of London for a time, then Parson of S. Mary-hill, he had a Prebend at London, another at Lincolne, studied the Law at Bononie, &c. was made Chancellour of England, and Archbishop of Canturbury, &c. Vnto these might be added innumera∣ble persons of honour,Honora∣ble actions done by the wor∣thy citi∣zens of London. wisedome and vertue, borne in London: but of actions done by worthy Citizens, I will onely note a few, and so to other matters. The Citizens of London,Hospitall of S. James in the fields. time out of minde, founded an Hospitall at Saint Iames in the fields, for leprous women of their Citie. In the yeere 1197. Walter Brune,VValter Brune. a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, founded the Hospitall of our Lady, cal∣led Domus Dei, or S. Mary Spittle, with∣out Bishopsgate in London, an house of such reliefe to the needy, that there was found standing at the surrender thereof, ninescore beds, well furnished for re∣ceipt of poore people. In the yeere 1216. the Londoners sen∣ding out a Navie, tooke 95. ships of Pi∣rates and Sea-robbers, besides innume∣rable others that they drowned, which had robbed on the River of Thames. In the yeere 1247.Simon Fitzmary. Simon Fitzmary, one of the Sheriffes of London, founded the Hospitall of S. Mary, called Beth∣lem, without Bishopsgate. In the yeere 1283. Henry Wallis,Henry VVallis, then Maior, builded the Tunne upon Corne∣hill, to bee a Prison for night-walkers, and a Market-house called the Stocks, both for fish and flesh, standing in the middest of the Citie. Hee also buil∣ded divers Houses on the West and North side of Pauls Church-yard, the profits of all which buildings are to the maintenance of London Bridge. In the yeere 1332. William Elsing,VVilliam Elsing, Mercer of London, founded Elsing Spit∣tle, within Creplegate, for fustentati∣on of an hundred poore blinde men, and became himselfe the first Prior of that Hospitall. Sir Iohn Poultney, Draper,Sir Iohn Poultney. 4. times Maior, 1337. builded a faire Chappell in Pauls Church, wherein he was buri∣ed. He founded a Colledge in the Parish Church of S. Laurence, called Poultney. Hee builded the Church called lit∣tle Alhallowes, in Thames streete:
and the Carmelite Friers Church in Coventry: he gave reliefe to prisoners in Newgate and the Fleet, and ten shil∣lings the yeere to Saint Giles Hospitall by Oldborne for ever, and other legacies long to rehearse. Iohn Stody Vintner,. Maior, 1358. gave to the Vintners all the Quadrant, wherein the Vintners Hall now stan∣deth, with all the tenuments round a∣bout, from Stodies Lane, where is foun∣ded thirteene Almes-houses, for so ma∣ny poore people, &c. Henry Picard,Henry Picard. Vinner, Maior, 1357. In the yeere 1363. did in one day um∣ptuously feast Edward the third, King of England; Iohn, King of France; David, King of Scots; the King of Cipres, then all in England; Edward, Paince of Wales, with many other Noblemen, and after kept his Hall for all commers, that were willing to play at dice and hazard; the Lady Margaret his wife kept her cham∣ber to the same effect, &c. Iohn Lofken Fishmonger,Iob. Lofken. foure times Maior, 1367. builded an Hospitall cal∣led Magdalens, at Kingstone upon Thames, gave thereunto 9. tenements, 10. shops, one Mill, 125 acres of Land, 10 acres of meddow, 120. acres of pa∣sture, &c. More, in Lond. he builded the faire parish Church of Saint Michael in crooked Lane, and was there buried. Iohn Barnes,Joh. Barnes. Maior, 1371. gave a Chest with three locks, & 1000. marks therein, to be lent to yong men upon suf∣ficient pawne, and for the use thereof, to say De profundis, or Pater noster, and no more: he also was a great builder of S. Thomas Apostles Parish Church, as appeareth by his Armes there both in stone and glasse. In the yeere 1378. Iohn Filpot,Ioh. Filpot. some∣time Maior, hired with his mony 1000. Souldiers, and defended the Realme from incursions of the enemy; so that in small time his hired men tooke Iohn Mercer, a Sea-rover, with all his ships, which he before had taken from Scar∣borrow, and fifteene Spanish ships, laden with great riches. In the yeere 1380. Thomas of Wood∣stocke, Thomas Percy, Hugh Calverley, Ro∣bert Knowles, & others, being sent with a great power to ayde the Duke of Bri∣taine, the said Iohn Filpot hired Ships for them of his owne charges, and re∣leased the Armour, which the Souldi∣ers had pawned for their victuals, more than a thousand in number. This most Noble Citizen, (saith Thomas Walsingham) that had travelled for the com∣modity of the whole Realme, more than all other of his time, had often relieved the King, by lending him great summes of money, and otherwise. He deceased in the yeere 1384. after that he had assu∣red lands to the Citie, for the reliefe of thirteene poore people for ever. In the yeere 1381. William Walworth,William Walworth valianey. then Maior, a most provident, valiant, and learned Citizen, did by his arrest of Wat Tylar, (a presumptuous Rebell, up∣on whom no man durst lay hands) deli∣ver the King and Kingdome from the danger of most wicked Traitors, and was for his service knighted in the field, as before hath beene related. Nicholas Brembar, Iohn Filpot, Robert Laund, Nicholas Twiford, and Adam Fran∣cis, Aldermen, were then for their ser∣vice likewise Knighted, and Sir Robert Knowles, for assisting of the Maior was made free of the City. Sir Robert Knowles,Ro. Knowles. thus worthily en∣franchised a Citizen, founded a Col∣ledge with an Hospitall at Pountfract: he also builded the great stone bridge at Rochester, over the River of Medway. Iohn Churchman Grocer,Iohn Churchman. one of the Sheriffes, 1386. for the quiet of Mer∣chants, builded a certaine house upon Wooll wharse, in Tower ward to serve for Ternage, or weighing of wools, and for the Customer, Comptrollers, Clerkes, and other Officers to sit, &c. Adam Bamme,Adam Bamme. Goldsmith, Maior, 1091, in a great dearth, procured corne from divers parts beyond the Seas, to be brought hither in such abundance, as sufficed to serve the Citie, and the Countries neere adjoyning: to the fur∣therance of which good worke, he took out of the Orphants Chest in the Guild∣hall, 2000. Marks to buy the said corne, and each Alderman laid out 20. pound to the like purpose. Tho. Knowles,Thomas Kles. Grocer, Maior, 1400. with his brethren the Aldermen, began to new build the Guild-hall in London, and in stead of an old little Cottage in Alderman-bury street, made a faire
and goodly house, more neere unto S. Laurence Church in the Jurie. Hee re∣edified S. Anthonies Church, and gave to the Grocers his house neere unto the same, for reliefe of the poore for ever. More, he caused water to be conveied to the gates of Newgate and Ludgate, for reliefe of the prisoners there. Iohn Hinde,Iohn Hinde. Draper, Maior 1405. new∣ly builded his parish Church of Saint Swithen by London stone, his monument is defaced, save onely his Armes in the glasse windows. Thomas Falconer Mercer,Thomas Falconer. Maior, 1414 lent to King Henry the 5. towards main∣tenance of his warres in France, 10000. markes upon Iewels: more, hee made the posterne called Mooregate, caused the ditches of the Citie to be cleansed, and did many other things for good of the same Citie. William Sevenock Grocer,VVilliam Sevenock. Maior 1419. founded in the Towne of Sevenock in Kent, a free schoole for poore mens chil∣dren, and 13. Almes-houses: his Testa∣ment saith 20. poore men and women. Richard Whittington Mercer,Richard VVhitting∣ton. 3. times Maior, in the yeere 1421. began the Li∣brary of Gray Friers in London, to the charge of foure hundred l. his execu∣tors (with his goods) founded and buil∣ded Whittington Colledge, with Almes∣houses for 13. poore men, and Divinity Lectures to be read there for ever. They repaired Saint Bartholomews Hospitall in Smithfield, they bare some charges to the glazing and paving of the Guildhall, they bare halfe the charges of building the Library there, and they builded the west gate of London, of old time called Newgate, &c. Iohn Carpenter,Iohn Car∣penter. Towne-Clerke of Lon∣don, in the reigne of Henry the fifth, caused (with great expences) to be cu∣riously painted upon boord, about the North Cloister of Pauls, a monument of death, leading all estates, with the speeches of death,Dance of death, cal∣led the dance of Pauls. and answer of every state. This Cloyster was pulled downe 1549. He also gave Tenements to the Citie, for the finding and bringing up of foure poore mens children, with meat, drinke, apparell, learning at the Schooles in the Vniversity, &c. untill they might be preferred, and then other in their places for ever. Robert Chichley,Ro. Chichley. Grocer, Maior, 1422. appointed by his Testament, that on his birth-day, a competent dinner should be ordained for two thousand foure hun∣dred poore men, housholders of this Ci∣tie, and every one to have two pence in money. More, he gave one large plot of ground, thereupon to build the new parish Church of S. Stephen neere unto Walbrooke, &c. Iohn Rainwell Fishmonger,Ioh. Rainwell. Maior, 1427. gave Tenements to discharge certaine Wards of London of Fifteenes, and other payments. Iohn Welles Grocer,Ioh. VVels. Maior, 1433. a great builder of the Chappell or Col∣ledge of the Guild-hall, and was there buried: he caused fresh water to be con∣veyed from Teyborne, to the Standard in West Cheap, for the service of the Citie. William Eastfield Mercer,VVilliam Eastfield. 1438. ap∣pointed his executors, of his goods, to convey sweet water from Teyborne, and to build a faire Conduit by Alderman∣bery Church, which they performed, as also made a Standard in Fleetstreet, by Shew-lane end: they also conveyed wa∣ter to Creplegate, &c. Stephen Browne Grocer,Stephen Browne. Maior 1439. sent into Prusia, causing corne to bee brought from thence, whereby hee brought downe the price of Wheat, from three shillings the bushell, to lesse than halfe that money: for corne was then so scarce in England, that poore people were enforced to make them bread of Fearne roots. Philip Malpas,Philip Malpas. one of the Sheriffes, 1440. gave by his Testament 125. l. to reliefe of poore prisoners, and every yeere for five yeeres, 400. shirts and smocks, 40. paire of sheets, and 150. gownes of Freeze to the poore. To 500 poore people in London, every one six shillings eight pence: to poore maids marriages, 100. markes: to high-waies, an hundred markes: twenty markes the yeere to a Graduate to preach, twen∣tie pounds unto Preachers at the Spittle on the three Easter holy-daies, &c. Robert Large Mercer,Robert Large. Maior 1440. gave to his parish Church of S. Olive in Surrey 200. l. to S. Margarets in Loth∣bery 25. l. to the poore twenty pounds: to London bridge one hundred markes.
Towards the vaulting over the water∣course of Walbroke two hundred marks. To poore Maids marriages, one hun∣dred markes: to poore House-holders, one hundred pounds, &c. Richard Rich Mercer,Richard Rich. one of the She∣riffes, 1442. founded Almes houses at Hodsdon in Hertfordshire. Simon Eyre Draper,Simon Eyre. Mayor, 1346. builded the Leaden-hall, for a common Garner of corne, to the use of this City, and left five thousand markes to chari∣table uses. Godfrey Bullein,Godfrey Bullein. Maior of London, 1458. by his Testament gave liberally to the prisons, hospitals, and Lazer-hou∣ses; besides a thousand pound to poore house-holders in London, and 200. l. to poore householders in Norfolke. Richard Rawson,Richard Rawson. one of the She∣riffes, 1477. gave by Testament large Legacies to the Prisoners, Hospitals and Lazer-houses. To other poore, to high wayes, to the water-conduits, besides to poore Maids marriages, 340. pounds, and his executors to build a large house in the Churchyard of S. Mary Spittle, wherein the Maior and his brethren do use to sit, and heare the Sermons in the Easter holy-dayes. Thomas Ilam,Tho. Ilam. one of the Sheriffes, 1480. newly builded the great Conduit in Cheape, of his owne charges. Edward Shaw Goldsmith,Edw. Shaw. Maior 1483 caused Creplegate of London to bee buil∣ded of his owne goods, &c. Thomas Hill Grocer,Tho. Hill. Maior, 1485. caused of his goods, the Conduit of Grasse-street to be builded. Hugh Clopton Mercer,Hugh Clop∣ton. during his life a batchelour, Maior 1492. builded the great stone arched Bridge at Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire, and did ma∣ny other things of great charity, as in my Summary. Robert Fabian,Robert Fabian. one of the Sheriffes, 1494. gathered out of divers good Au∣thors, aswell Latine as French, a large Chronicle of England and of France, which he published in English, to his great charges, for the honor of this Ci∣tie, and common utility of the whole Realme. Sir Iohn Percivall Merchant-Taylor,Iohn Perci∣vall. Maior, 1498. founded a Grammar∣schoole at Macklefield in Cheshire, where he was borne, hee endowed the same schoole with sufficient Lands, for the finding of a Priest, master there, to teach freely all children thither sent, without exception. The Lady Thomasine his wife,Rich. Carew. foun∣ded the like Freeschoole, together with faire lodgings for the Schoolemasters, Scholars, and other, and added twenty pound of yeerely revennue for suppor∣ting the charges, at Saint Mary Wike in Devonshire, where she was borne. Stephen Gennings,Stephen Gennings. Merchant-Taylor, Maior 1509. founded a faire Grammar∣schoole at Vlfrimhampton in Stafford∣shire, left good lands, and also builded a great part of his Parish Church, called Saint Andrewes Vndershaft in London. Henry Keble Grocer,Hen. Keble. Maior 1511. in his life a great benefactor to the new building of old Mary Church, and by his Testament gave a thousand pounds toward the finishing thereof. He gave to highwaies two hundred pound; to poor Maids marriages, one hundred markes. To poore husbandmen in Oxford and Warwickshires, one hundred and forty Ploughshares, and one hundred and for∣ty Cultars of iron, and in London to se∣ven Almes-men, six pence the week for ever. Iohn Collet,Ioh. Collet. a Citizen of London by birth, and by dignity Deane of Pauls, Doctor of Divinity, etected and buil∣ded one Free-schoole in Pauls Church∣yard, 1512. for 3. hundred fifty three poore mens children, to be taught free in the same schoole, appointing a Ma∣ster, a submaster and a Chaplaine, with sufficient stipends to endure for ever, and committed the oversight there∣of to the Mercers in London, because himselfe was sonne to Henry Collet, Mer∣cer, Maior of London, and endowed the Mercers with Lands, to the yeerely va∣lue of 120. pound, or better. Sir William Fitzwilliam the elder,William Fitzwilliam be∣ing a Merchant-taylor, and servant som∣time to Cardinall Wolsey, was chosen Alderman of Breadstreet Ward in Lon∣don, in Anno 1506. Going afterward to dwell at Milton in Northamptonshire, in the fall of the Cardinall his former ma∣ster, he gave him kinde entertainement there at his house in the Countrey. For which deed being called before the
King, and demanded how he durst en∣tertaine so great an enemy to the State? His answer was, that hee had not con∣temptuously or wilfully done it; but on∣ly because he had beene his Master, and (partly) the meanes of his greatest for∣tunes. A just and royall dis∣position in the King. The King was so well pleased with his answer, that saying, himselfe had too few such servants, immediate∣ly he knighted him, and afterward made him a Privie Counsellour. This worthy Knight dying,The libe∣rall and bountifull minde of this Fitz-William. His death. gave an hundred pounds to poore maids marri∣ages. His debts and debtors (over whose names he had written, Amore Dei remitto) he freely forgave. He gave to the Vniversities forty pounds; to the poore, thirty pounds; to mend the high waies betwixt Chigwell and Copersall in Essex, fifty pounds. To mend other high waies, about Thorney and Sawtry Chap∣pell, and the Bridge, fifty pounds more. And to the Merchant-Taylors his Bre∣thren, he gave his best standing Cup, as a friendly remembrance of him for e∣ver. Iohn Tate, Brewer,Iohn Tate. then a Mercer, Maior, 1514. caused his Brewhouse, called the Swanne, neere adjoyning to the Hospitall of Saint Anthonie in Lon∣don, to be taken downe, for the inlar∣ging of the said Church, then new buil∣ded, being a great part of his charge: This was a goodly foundation, with Almes houses, a Free Schoole, &c. George Monnox Draper,George Monnox. Maior 1515. re-edified the decayed Parish Church of Waltamstow or Walthamstow in Essex, he founded there a Free Schoole, and Almes-houses for thirteene Almes-peo∣ple: He made also a cawsey of Timber over the Marshes, from Walthamstow to Locke-Bridge, &c. Sir Iohn Milborne,Iohn Mil∣borne. Draper, Maior, 1522. builded Almes-houses, foureteen in number, by the crossed Friers Church in London, there to be placed foureteen poore people, and left to the Drapers, certaine Messuages, Tenements, and Garden-plots, in the Parish of Saint O∣laves in Hartstreet, for performance of stipends to the said Almes people, and other uses. Looke more in Aldgate Ward, where you shall be further satis∣fied. Robert Thorne,Robert Thorne. Merchant-Taylor, de∣ceasing a Batchelour, in the yeere 1532. gave by his Testament to charitable a∣ctions, more than foure thousand, foure hundred and forty pounds, and legacies to his poore kindred more, five thou∣sand, one hundred forty two pounds, be∣sides his debts forgiven, &c. Sir Iohn Allen,Sir Iohn Allen. Mercer, Maior of Lon∣don, and of counsell to King Henry the 8. deceased 1544. buried at Saint Thomas of Acres, in a faire Chappell by him builded. He gave to the Citie of Lon∣don a rich collar of gold, to be worne by the Maior, which was first worne by Sir William Laxton. He gave five hun∣dred Markes to be a stocke for Sea-cole, his Lands purchased of the King, the rent thereof to bee distributed to the poore in the Wards of London for ever. He gave besides to the Prisons, Ho∣spitals, Lazer houses, and all other poore in the Citie, or two miles without, very liberally, and over-long to be recited. Sir William Laxton,Sir William Laxton. Grocer, Maior, 1545. founded a faire free Schoole at Owndale in Northamptonshire, with six Almes-houses for the poore. Sir Iohn Gresham,Sir Iohn Gresham. Mercer, Maior 1548 founded a Free schoole at Holt, a Mar∣ket Towne in Norfolke: He gave to e∣very Ward in London tenne pounds, to be distributed to the poore; and to 120. poore men and women, every one of them three yards of broad cloth, of 8. or 9. shillings the yard, to be made in Gownes ready to their backes. He gave also to Maids marriages, and to the Ho∣spitals in London, aboue 200. pounds in ready money. Sir Rowland Hill,Sir Rowland Hill. Mercer, Maior, 1550. caused to be made divers caw∣seyes, both for horse and man: he made foure Bridges, two of stone, containing 18. Arches in them both. He builded one notable Free-schoole at Drayton in Shropshire: he gave to Christs hospitall in London, 500. pounds, &c. Sir Andrew Iud Skinner,Sir Andrew Iud. Maior 1551. erected one notable Free-scoole at Tun∣bridge in Kent, and Almes-houses nigh Saint Helens Church in London, and left to the Skinners, Lands to the value of threescore pounds, 3. shillings eight pence the yeere, for the which they bee bound to pay 20. l. to the Schoolmaster, 8. l. to the Vsher yeerely for ever,
and foure shillings the week to the sixe almes people, and twenty five shillings foure pence the yeere in coales, for e∣ver. Sir Thomas White,The fa∣mous me∣mory of Sir Thomas White. Lord Maior of this honourable City in Anno 1554. and a worthy Brother likewise of the Mer∣chant-Taylors Society, being a lover of learning, & an earnest furtherer ther∣of, first purchased the Hall in Oxenford, called Glocester Hall,Glocester Hall in Oxenford. for Schollers and Students, to receive there the benefit of learning. But his private thoughts very often soliciting him, that he should (in time) meet with a place, where two Elmes grew, and that there his further purpose should take effect. At length, he found out the place, where (at his owne cost and expences) hee founded the famous Colledge, called Saint Iohn Baptist Colledge,The buil∣ding of S. Iohn Baptist Colledge in Oxen∣ford. and where these two Elmes (as I have heard) are yet standing endowing it with such liberall gifts, lands and revenues, as would require too much time, here to be remembred of set downe. Beside his provision for learning in this worthy place,Other Schooles by him builded & maintai∣ned. hee erected other Schooles: as at Bristow, Reading, and a Colledge at Higham Ferries. More, he gave to the City of Bristow, the summe of two thousand pounds to purchase land,His great bounty to the City of Bristow. amounting to the yeerely value of an hundred and twenty pound: The Maior and Citizens paying therefore yeerely an hundred pounds. Eight hun∣dred pounds must bee lent to sixteene poore Clothiers, fifty pounds each man, for the space of ten yeeres, sufficient se∣curity being given by them for the same. Afterward that eight hundred pounds, was to passe to other sixteen poore clo∣thiers, according to the discretion of them put in trust.Provision of Corne for the poore. Two hundred pounds beside was reserved, for provision of corne, and needefull occasions for the poore, in the order and care of the Ma∣ior, Aldermen and Citizens, &c. Then according to his will, which re∣maineth yet to be seen, out of this boun∣tifull gift to Bristow,His order out of his gift to Bri∣stow. these memorable branches, and benevolences, were (by himselfe) devised, and thus ordered, be∣ginning in the yeere 1577. and so thence forward, they went on according to his owne direction. Then on the Feast of Saint Bartholmew was brought to the Merchant-Taylors Hall,An hun∣dred and 4. pounds brought to Merchant Taylors Hall al∣waies on Bartholo∣mew day. an hundred and foure pounds, the hundred pound to be lent (for ten yeeres space) to foure poore young men in the City of Yorke, Free-men and Inhabitants being Clo∣thiers: and the foure pound overplus, to bee imployed about the charges and paines, that no man (used in the busi∣nesse) might receive discontentment. Then in 1578. the like sum was to bee delivered thence to Canturbury: and so thence forward, the same summes (yeerely) to the Cities and Townes fol∣lowing orderly. To 1579 Reading.The order of the yeerely lending. 1580 The Merchant-Taylors them∣selves. 1581 Glocester. 1582 Worcester. 1583 Excester. 1584 Salisbury. 1585 West-Chester. 1586 Norwich. 1587 Southampton. 1588 Lincolne. 1589 Winchester. 1590 Oxenford. 1591 Hereford East. 1592 Cambridge. 1593 Shrewsbury. 1594 Linne. 1595 Bathe. 1596 Derbie. 1597 Ipswich. 1598 Colchester. 1599 New-Castle. This sum of one hundred and foure pounds,The hun∣dred and foure pounds is yeerely delivered at the Merchant Taylors Hall. passing thus yeerly to the fore∣named places, is delivered still at the Merchant-Taylors Hall, and to the good intended uses of the giver; and that there might be no breathing while for so just a Stewards talent, but to have it still kept in continuall employment for the poore: the same order was ap∣pointed, to take beginning againe (as before) at the City of Yorke, and so suc∣cessively (while the world endureth) to the Townes before named,Passing still in or∣der from place to place. in the selfe∣same course as it had the Originall; with great care and observance in them, to whom it belongeth, that the dead may not be abused, nor poore mens right in∣jured.
But did he thus shut up his purse, and say to himselfe; I have given sufficient? No,His libe∣ral bounty to the Ci∣ty of Co∣ventry, it being then in great di∣stresse. he did cast his pitying eye next on the City of Coventry, distressed (at that time) in great and grievous manner: What his instant benevolence was, hee tooke it to be but as an houres Sun-shine after a whole day of storme and tem∣pest; although it might yeeld some comfort, were the season never so short. But to establish a certainty, that no dis∣may or doubt should ever after bee able to remove (even as a worthy Pyramides erected to perpetuity) he gave to the Ci∣ty of Coventry, 1400. pounds, therewith to purchase lands, rising to the annuall value of seventy pounds.Twelve poore a∣ged Inhabitants of Coventry yeerely. Twelve aged poore inhabitants of that City, were to have (in free Almes) 24. pounds, each man 40. shillings yeerly, on the eleventh day of March, or within six dayes after Foure poore young men also were to have 40. pounds lent them in free lone,Foure poore yong men of the same City. ten pound each man, and for nine yeers space, upon sufficent security given. And their turnes being thus served, then foure other poore young men were to have the like summes, and for like li∣mitation, and so from 9. yeeres to nine yeeres for ever. Afterward, it was ordered (in free lone) to two poore men of the same Ci∣ty, and lastly, to one: in which nature (according to the severall limitations) it doth yet, and doubtlesse shall for ever continue. Also the same summe was appointed to one yong man in Northam∣pton for 9. yeeres in free lone,Northamp∣ton. next, to one in the City of Leicester;Leicester. thirdly, to one in Nottingham;Nottingham VVarwicke. fourthly, to one in Warwicke; and for the like time. Then returning againe to Coventry for one yeere, it repasseth to the said Townes a∣gaine, each after other in like nature, for ever. And lest his worthy intent should faile in the continuance, he enlarged his first gift to Coventry of 1400. l. to 2000. and 60. pound to be employed as hath been remembred: 40. l. being yeerely paid out of it, to Saint Iohn Baptist Col∣ledge in Oxenford, and allowances also by himselfe given in each place, that bonds should bee made, without any charge to the receiver. Edward Hall Gentleman,Edward Hall. of Grayes Inne a Citizen by birth and office, as common Serjeant of Lond. & one of the Iudges in the Sheriffes Court, he wrote and published a famous and eloquent Chronicle, intituled, The uniting of the two noble Families, Lancaster and Yorke. Richard Hils Merchant-Taylor,Richard Hils. 1560. gave 500. pound towards the purchase of an house, called, the Mannor of the Rose, wherein the Merchant-Taylors founded their free Schoole in London: he also gave to the said Merchant-Tay∣lors one plot of ground, withcertainsmal Cottages on the Tower hill, where he builded faire Almes-houses for foure∣teene sole women. About the same time,W. Lambert. William Lam∣bert Esquire, free of the worshipfull Company of. Drapers, borne in Lon∣don, a Iustice of the peace in Kent, foun∣ded a Colledge for the poore, which he named of Queene Elizabeth in East Greenwitch. William Harper. Merchant-Taylor,Sir VVilli∣am Harper. Maior, 1562. sounded a a free Schoole in the Towne of Bedford where he was borne and also buried. Sir Thomas Gresham Mercer,Sir Thomas Gresham. 1566. builded the Royall Exchange in London, and by his Testament left his dwelling house in Bishopsgate street, to be a place for readings; allowing large stipends to the Readers, and certaine Almes-houses for the poore. William Patten Gentleman,VV. Patten. a Citizen by birth, and customer of London out∣ward, Iustice of Peace in Middlesex, the Parish Church of Stokenwenton being ruinous, he repaired or rather new buil∣ded. Sir Thomas Rowe Knight,Sir Thomas Rowe his worthy liberality. Lord Maior of the City of London, in 1568. a wor∣thy brother also of the Merchant-Tay∣lors Company, beside his charitable cost and charges, in building the new Church yard in Bethlem, containing neere one Acre of ground, and inclosed with a wall of bricke, and a Sermon to be prea∣ched every Whit-Sunday in the morning, in presence of the Lord Maior and Al∣dermen; as also giving one hundred pounds, to be lent to eight poore men: gave to the merchant-Taylors, lands, or tenements,Ten poore men to be maintai∣ned for ever. out of them to be given 40. pounds yeerely, to maintaine ten poore men for ever, such as were not brethren of his owne society, but chosen out of
five severall Companies,Clothwor∣kers. viz. Clothwor∣kers, Armorers, Carpenters, Tylars, and Plaisterers.Armorers. As considering, that by over toyling labour,Carpēters. dangers,Tylars. fall, bruises and such like inconveniences,Plaisterers they were soonest like to become impotent, and unable to help or maintaine themselves. Therefore, to each of these ten men, he freely gave the summe of foure pounds, quarterly to bee paid them at the Mer∣chant-Taylors Hall, during their lives. And then to succeed to other men in the same Companies, according to due con∣sideration of just cause, and most neces∣sitie. Ambrose Nicholas Salter,Ambrose Nicholas. Maior 1576. founded 12. Almes-houses in Monks∣well street, neere unto Creplegate, where∣in he placed 12. poore people, having each of them 7. d. the weeke, and once every yeere, 5. sackes of coles, and one quarter of a hundred Faggots, all of his gift for ever. William Lambe Esquire, sometime a Gentleman of the Chappell to King Henry the eighth,VVilliam Lambe Ci∣tizen and Clothwor∣ker of Lon∣don. and in great favour with him: was also a free Brother of the worshipfull Company of Clothwor∣kers, and a kind loving Citizen to the City of London. Out of his love to Lear∣ning and Schollers, in the Town of Sut∣ton Valens in Kent, where hee was borne, at his owne proper cost and charges he erected a free Grammar-Schoole,A free Grammar Schoole at Sutton Va∣lens in Kent. for the education & instruction of youth, in the feare of God, good manners, know∣ledge, and understanding, allowing yeerely to the Master twenty pounds, and ten pouuds yeerely to the Vsher, from time to time, as either place shall be supplied by succession, and for their yeerely stipends or perpetuall pensions. In the same Towne of Sutton also,Almes-houses at Sutton for the poore. for the reliefe of poore people, he caused to bee builded sixe Almes-houses, having an Orchard and Gardens, and the sum of ten pounds yeerely payed them. At Maidstone likewise in Kent,Free Schoole at Maidstone. hee hath given ten pounds yeerely to the free Schoole for ever: with this speciall caution, that needy mens children may bee preferred onely, to the enjoying of this benefit. The Gentleman foresecing,His reliefe to poore Clothiers in divers places. in his life time, the decay of sundry Trades and Occupations, to the utter undoing of very many, especially poore Clothi∣ers, whose impoverishing deserved greatly to be pittied, freely gave to the poore Clothiers in Suffolke, in Bridge∣north and in Ludlow in Shropshire, 300. pounds to be paid by even portions: to each severall Towne of the said Coun∣ties, one hundred pounds apeece, for their supportation and maintenance, at their worke or occupation. And as his charity extended it selfe thus liberally abroad in the Countrey,His buil∣ding of the Conduit neere to Oldborn, and the Standard at Oldborn bridge. so did the Citie of London likewise taste thereof not sparingly. For neere unto Holborne hee founded a faire Conduit, and a standard with a Cocke at Holborne bridge, to convey thence the waste. These were begun the six and twentieth day of March, 1577. and the water car∣ried along in pipes of Lead, more than two thousand yards, all at his owne cost and charges, amounting to the summe of fifteene hundred pounds, and the worke fully finished the foure and twen¦tieth of August in the same yeere. Moreover,Poore wo∣men bene∣fited by the Con∣duit. he gave to poore women, such as were willing to take paines, 120 Pailes, therwith to carry & serve water. Being a member (as I have already said) of the Cloth-workers Company,His gift to the wor∣shipfull Company of Cloth∣workers. and to shew that he was not unmindfull of them, hee gave them his dwelling house in London, with other Lands and Tenements to the value of thirty pound yeerely, besides, 4. pounds more also yeerely, by them to be thus bestowed; to wit, for the hyring of a Minister to read divine Service, thrice every weeke, as Sunday, Wednesday and Friday, throughout the yeere, in the Chappell or Church belonging to his house, cal∣led by the name of Saint Iames in the Wall,Allowance for foure yeerely Sermons. by Creplegate; and for foure Ser∣mons there to be preached, a competent allowance for each. And also out of the thirty pounds yeerely,Every pooreman and poore woman, a shirt, a smock and a gowne, and a payre of shooes, &c. it is provided, that a deduction be made by the said Clothworkers, for apparelling of twelve men, and as many women, in forme as followeth: To every of the twelve men a Freeze gowne, one Lockeram shirt, and a good strong paire of Winter shooes. To the twelve women likewise, a Freeze gowne, a Lockeram smocke, and a good paire of Winter shooes, all ready made for their wearing. Alwaies
remembred, that they be persons both poore and honest, to whom this chari∣table deed is to be extended; and this is yeerely done on the first of October. To the Parish Church of Saint Giles without Creplegate,S Giles without Creplegate. hee gave fifteene pound to the Bels and Chime, inten∣ding a further liberality thereto, if they had taken due time. To the worshipfull Company of the Stationers he gave a legacie of sixe l. 13. s. 4. d. for perpetuall reliefe of the poore,His gift to the Com∣pany of Stationers. in the Parish Church of Saint Faiths under Pauls: namely, to twelve poore people, twelve pence in money, and twelve pence in bread, every Friday throughout the yeere. To Christs Hospitall in London,His gift to Christs Hospitall. toward the bringing up of poore mens children he hath given 6. l. yeerely for ever: and an hundred pounds in ready money to∣gether, therewith to purchase Lands, that their reliefe (by the revennues of the same) may be perpetuall. To Saint Thomas Spittle or Hospital in Southwarke,His gift to S. Thomas Hospitall. towards the succour of the sicke and diseased, he gave foure l. yeerely for ever. An hundred pounds he intended to the Hospitall called the Savoy,His intent to the Sa∣voy. but by reason that such agreements could not be made as he thought convenient, his contribution that way, (much against his minde) went not forward. For the reliefe of poore prisoners in the two Compters,His reliefe for poore prisoners. Newgate, Ludgate, the Marshalseas, the Kings-Bench, and the White Lion, he dealt very bountifully and discreetly; giving unto the two Compters six pound apeece, and to bee paid unto them by twenty shillings each moneth. To the other Prisons fore-men∣tioned, six mattresses apeece, the whole number being two dozen and an halfe. He was not unmindful of poore maids marriages,Marriage money for poore maids. but gave twenty pounds to be equally divided among forty, by e∣quall portions of tenne shillings apiece. Yet with this proviso, that those poore maids to be married, should be of good name and fame. His love and bounty to his servants,His love and libe∣rality to his ser∣vants. as also the hundred and eight Freeze gownes ready made, which he bequea∣thed at his Funerall to poore men and women, with dispersing the remnant of all his goods after his buriall, where need and reason required, I am conten∣ted to passe over, referring what else is further to be said of him, till I come to speake of the place where he lyeth bu∣ried. Sir T. Offley,Sir Thomas Offley be∣queathed much to the poore. Merchant-Taylor, Mai∣or, deceased 1580. appointed by his Testament, the one halfe of all his goods, and two hundred pounds dedu∣cted out of the other halfe, given to his sonne Henry, to be given and bestowed in deeds of charity, by his executors, ac∣cording to his confidence and trust in them. Barnard Randulph,Bernard Randolph, Common Serjeant of London, his liberall bounty. Common Serjeant of London, 1583. This man (in his life time) somewhat before his death, gave and delivered with his owne hand, to the Company of Fishmongers in Lon∣don, the summe of nine hundred pounds; of good and lawfull money of England, to be imployed towards the conducting of Thames water, cesterning the same in lead,For con∣veying of Thames water. and caseling it with stone, in the Parishes of Saint Mary Magdalen, and Saint Nicholas Cold-Abbey, neere unto old Fishstreet, seven hundred pounds. The other two hundred pounds, to pay for ever yeerely, the sum of ten pounds: to wit, towards the maintenance of a poore Scholler,For a poor Scholar. in the Vniuersitie of Ox∣enford, yeerely, foure pounds. Towards mending the high-waies in the Parish of Tisehurst,For men∣ding high wayes. in the County of Sussex where the said Barnard was borne, every yeere foure pounds.For the poore in divers parishes. And to the poore people of the Parishes of Saint Nicholas Oliffe in Breadstreet, and St. Mary Mag∣dalen neere to old Fishstreet, forty shil∣lings; to wit, twenty shillings to either Parish for ever. More he willed and bequeathed by his last will and testament, to be bestow∣ed in land or annuities, for reliefe of the poore, inhabiting in the Wards of Queen Hith, and Castle Baynard in the City of London, and in the forenamed Parish of Tisehurst, in the County of Sussex, the summe of 1000 pounds. Master Thomas Ridge,Master Tho. Ridge. Grocer, gave 1163. l. 6. s. 8. d. to godly and chari∣table uses in forme following. To the Company of Grocers,Benefit of yong be∣ginners. for the benefit of Young-men, free of the same Society, and to be lent unto them for a
certaine time one hundred pound. To the Hospitals in and about Lon∣don, 100. l. For the releefe of poore Preachers, Love to Religion. Care of poore tradesmen 400. l. For the helpe of poore and decayed Trasedmen, in and about London, 300. l. To a Lecture in Grasse-Church in Lon∣don, 100. l. To his men and maid servants, 63. l. In gownes for poore men, 100. l. Master Iohn Haydon Mercer,Master Iohn Haydon his boun∣tifull cha∣rity. Alder∣man, and one of the Sheriffes of London, deceasing in the time of his Shrievalty 1583. gave these christian and liberall gifts following. An hundred gownes, which cost 100. l. given to an hundred poore men,To the poore in gownes. and every man 12. d. in mony beside. For the benefit of young beginners in the world he gave,Benefit of young be∣ginners. to his owne Com∣pany of the Mercers, 600. l. to bee lent to young men, after the allowance of 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. in the hundred pound. And the 20. pound yeerely arising by that money, yeerely to be given to the poore. To the same Company also he gave 400. l. more, to bee likewise lent out, according to the former rate: and the benefit ensuing thereby; of 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. yeerely,Love to Religion. allowed towards the main∣taining of a Lecture at Saint Michaels Church by Pater noster row, called St. Michaels in the Querne. He gave to Christs Hospitall 500. l. Hee gave to the eleven chiefe wor∣shipfull Companies,Care for young be∣ginners and the poore. beside his owne, the summe of 1100. l. to bee lent out (for time) to young beginners, at 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. in the hundred pound, and the benefit of 20. pound arising thereby yeerely, to goe to the Hospitals, and sixteene pound besides to the poore yeerely.To seve∣rall Cities for the be∣nefit of young be∣ginners and the poore pri∣soners. He gave to the City of Excester one hundred pound. To the City of Bristow one hundred pound. To the City of Glocester, one hundred pound. This money is intended to be lent to poore young beginners in trading, at the rate of benefit (by the money) of 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. in the 100. l. And that benefit should go to the reliefe of poore prisoners, and other poore people. He gave to the Towne of Wardbury, in the County of Glocester, 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. He gave to his Company of the Mer∣cers, Remem∣brance of his Company and of his servants. to make them a Cup, 40. l. He gave to his servants among them all, . l. What remained out of this moity, as an over-plus, he gave to the before re∣membred Companies, viz. 50. pound to each of them and to the uses fore-na∣med. Master Richard Walter Girdler,Richard Walter. 2200. pound to the foure Hospitals of London. And 500. pound towards building and maintaining a Free-Schoole at Thiryden in Northampton shire. William Norton, Stationer, sometime Treasurer of Christs Hospitall,VVilliam Norton his benevo∣lence. gave the summe of 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. yeerely to his Company to be lent to young men, free of the same Society: And 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. yeerely for ever, he gave also un∣to Christs Hospitall. Thomas Iennings,Thomas Iennings his love to the poore. Fishmonger, to 7. Parishes in London, gave 4. l. 13, s. 2. d. yeerely. To Christs Hospitall he gave 40. s. yeerely. To the Towne of Braughin in Hart∣ford shire, where he was borne, he gave 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. Master Peter Blundell,Peter Blun∣dell his most libe∣rall chari∣ty. Clothier of London, a man very godly and christian∣ly disposed all his life time, dying in Anno 1599. gave by his last will and te∣stament, these bountifull gifts follow∣ing. He gave to Christs Hospitall in Lon∣don, To Hos∣pitals in and about London. 500. l. To S. Bartholomews Hospitall 250. l. To S. Thomas Hospitall 250. l. To Bridewell Hospitall yeerely 8. l. To the Church of Tiverton, in which Towne he was borne, 50. l. Towards mending the High-waies there, 100. l. To the twelve chiefe Companies in London,For the reliefe of poore pri∣soners. to each of them 150. l. toward the releeving of poore prisoners, and o∣ther charitable uses, the whole summe amounting to 1800. l. Towards the helpe of poore Maides marriages in the Towne of Tiverton, To poore maides marriages 400. l.
He gave to the City of Excester,To helpe poore Ar∣tificers. to bee lent there to poore Artificers nine hundred pound. He gave toward the building of a free Grammar-Schoole in Tiverton,To a free Schoole and Offi∣cers there∣to belon∣ging. 2400. pound. More afterward laid out by his exe∣cutors 1000. pound. To the Schoole-master yeerely, fifty pounds. To the Vsher yeerly, 13. l. 6. s. 8. d. To the Clerke yeerely, 40. s. To place foure boyes Apprentises in husbandry yeerely 20. pound.For Ap∣prentises. For the maintenance of six Schollers yeerely,His love to Lear∣ning and Schollers. three in Oxenford, and the o∣ther three in Cambridge, 2000. l. Robert Comin,Robert Chil∣cot a wor∣thy ser∣vant to so good a Master. alias Chilcot, servant sometime to the said Peter Blundell, imi∣tated the worthy steps of his Master, so farre as power permitted him leave, gi∣ving as insueth. He gave to Christs Hospitall in Lon∣don, 100. l. To poore prisoners,Reliefe of poore pri∣soners. whose debts did not amount above five pound, 100. l. Towards the building of an ordinary Free-Schoole,His love to lear∣ning and the poore. that children might bee made apt and ready for his Masters free Grammar-Schoole in Tiverton, where he himselfe also was borne, 400. l. Towards the maintaining of the said lesser schoole,To the Schoole and the attending Officers. and for reliefe of certaine poore people yeerely, 90. l. To the Schoole-master yeerely 20. pound. To the Clerke yeerely 3. l. For reparations yeerely 4. s. For 15. poore mens Gownes,For the poore. and each of them 2. s. in money yeerly 16. l. 10. s. To 15. poore Artificers 15. pound. To as many poore people weekely,Repairining the Church. 6. d. to each. Towards repayring the Church 19. l. 10. s. To mend the High-waies there ten pound. To other uses foure pound. Iohn Holmes Draper,Iohn Holms. gave to the Pa∣rish of Saint Sepulchres, in Anno 1588. his dwelling house in the same Parish, yeelding yeerely, 32. pound. Thomas Atkinson Baker,Thomas Atkinson. gave also to the same Parish, 10. l. yeerely. Master Thomas Cure, Sadler, and Squire Sadler to Queene Elizabeth,Thomas Cure his hospitall in South∣warke. as his sonne also was after him, did build an Hospitall in Southwarke, having some helpe afforded him by the Parish of St. Saviour: but the main and chiefe charge was his owne proper cost. The house was for 18. poore people each of them having two Chambers, and allowance of 4. pound ten shillings to each person yeerely. The building of the Hospitall cost above three hundred pounds. Master George Bishop, Stationer, gave 6. pound yeerly to his Company:George Bi∣shop his memora∣ble cha∣rity. and hath allowed ten pound yeerely for ever towards maintaining Preachers at Pauls Crosse. Hee gave likewise sixe pound yeerly to Christs Hospitall. Master Richard Culverwell,Richard Culverwell. Brewer, gave to the Hospitall of Bridewell, two hundred pound. Master William Whitmore,William VVhitmore Haberda∣sher, gave also to the same hospitall, 200. pound. Master Iohn Norton,Iohn Nor∣ton mind∣full of the poore, and of his Company. Stationer, gave to his owne Company the summe of one thousand pound to purchase lands amounting to the value of fifty pound yeerly, and some part to be lent to poore yong men. He gave also one hundred and fifty pounds to the Parish of S. Faiths under Pauls, to purchase seven pounds tenne shillings yeerely for ever, to be given to the poore. Master Henry Fisher, Fishmonger, gave to his Company nine pound yeer∣ly, Henry Fisher his love to learning. to maintaine a Scholar in the Col∣ledge of Brazen-nose in Oxenford, with the allowance of nine pound and two shillings yeerely for two Sermons. Master Thomas Aldersey,Thomas Aldersey his love to religi∣on and the poore. Haberdasher, out of an Appropriation which he had at Bunbery in Cheshire, gave the allow∣ance of two hundred Markes yeerely, one hundred Markes whereof was for the maintenance of a Preacher. He gave to the Minister 20. pound. He gave to a Schoole, thirty pound. He gave to the poore, ten pound. Master Robert Offley,Robert Offley his liberall charity. Haberdasher, to the Maior and communalty of Che∣ster gave sixe hundred pound to be lent there to young Traders. For reliefe of the poore, and men in prisons, besides other charitable uses two hundred pound.
More, he gave two hundred pounds, to pay tenne pounds yeerely to the poore of the Company. More,Reliefe for two poore scholars yeerely. he gave two hundred pounds, that tenne pounds might be yeerely gi∣ven to either of the Vniversities, toward the maintaining of two Scholars there, one in each. Hee gave to Bethlem, one hundred pounds. He gave to the other Hospitals, to pri∣sons, and to the poore, one hundred and threescore pounds. Master Thomas Fisher,Tho. Fisher his love to lear∣ning, and respect of the poore. Skinner, gave forty five pounds yeerely, out of which, twenty pounds was to be yeerely allow∣ed, for a Free-schoole at Standon in the County of Hertford. To buy paper, bookes, pennes and inke, yeerely for the Scholars, 5. poends. To Christs Hospitall yeerely, tenne pounds. For the redemption of Prisoners in either of the Compters and Ludgate, ly∣ing there for three pounds debt, twenty pounds. Master Florence Caldwell,Florence Caldwell his charity Haberda∣sher, to divers poore Parishes in London gave twenty pounds yeerely. Divers wel-disposed Citizens of Lon∣don, The love of divers Citizens to lear∣ning. desirous (as yet) not to be named, being born in or neere to Ashborn in the Peake, in the Country of Derby, combi∣ning their loving benevolence together, have builded there a faire School-house, with convenient lodgings for a Master and Vsher, and liberall maintenance yeerely allowed thereto. Master Robert Rogers,The Chri∣stian and charitable works of Robert Ro∣gers Leatherseller, and a Batchelour, like a most liberall and bountifull benefactor, gave these gifts following: To the Prisons in and about London, twelve pounds. To the poore of two severall Townes in the west Countrey, thirteene pounds sixe shillings eight pence. To the poore of the Towne of Poole, where he was borne, tenne pounds. For the building of Almes-houses there, three hundred thirty three l. For the reliefe of poore prisoners, A speciall note of a godly di∣sposition. such as were neither Atheists nor Pa∣pists, and might be delivered, each man at the summe of twenty Nobles, an hun∣dred and fifty pounds. For the benefit of poore Preachers, Care of Religion. allowing to each man tenne pounds, an hundred pounds. For the comfort of poore decayed Artificers, being charged with wife and children, and of knowne honest reputa∣tion, one hundred pounds. He gave to the Company of Mer∣chant Adventurers,His care for poore decayed brethren. for the reliefe of poore decayed people, and toward the support of yong Free-men, foure hun∣dred pounds. He gave to Christs Hospitall, to pur∣chase Lands for the reliefe of the house, five hundred pounds. For the erection of certaine Almes-houses in and about London,His pro∣vident care for the poore in divers places and Pa∣rishes. and also for the maintenance of twelve poore peo∣ple, six hundred pounds. To the Parish wherein he dwelt, 10. l. That two dozen of bread may every Sunday (through the yeere) for ever be given to the poore, an hundred pounds. He gave to Christs-Church Parish, fif∣teene pounds. For reliefe of the poore in sundry Pa∣rishes without the wals, as Newgate, Cre∣plegate, Bishopsgate, and the Parish of S. George in Southwarke; unto every one of them he gave twenty sixe pounds, thir∣teene shillings, fourepence. Moreover, he gave to S. Georges Pa∣rish in Southwarke, Saint Sepulchres, S. Olaves beyond the Bridge, Saint Giles without Creplegate, and S. Leonard in Shorditch, to buy coales for the poore in each Paris, thirty pounds apeece. He gave beside to either Parish of S. Buttolph, without Aldgate and Bishops∣gate, twenty pounds. For the maintaining of foure Scholars, His love and libe∣rality to Learning. two in Oxenford, and two in Cambridge, Students in Divinity, 400, l. Of which the Company of Leather-sellers have great respect, and not onely see it dili∣gently performed; but also have added their bounty thereto. Master Iohn Fuller,Iohn Fuller his Almes-houses and charity. Esquire, and one of the Judges in the Sheriffes Court in London, by his last will and testament, bearing date the 10. of Iune, 1592. ap∣pointed his wife, her heires and assignes, to erect certaine Almes-houses in the Parish of Stoken-heath, for twelve poore aged single men, being aged fifty yeeres or upwards.
He appointed also the like Almes-houses to be builded in the Parish of S. Leonard in Shorditch,For poore aged wid∣dowes. for twelve poore Widdow women of the like age, and shee to endow them with the yeerely maintenance of one hundred pounds; namely, to each fifty pounds by the yeere for ever. And that mony to be de∣ducted out of his Lands in Lincolnshire, assuring over the same to certaine Feof∣fees in trust, by a Deed of Feoffement. Moreover,Feoffees put in trust to see his will perfor∣med. hee gave his Messuages, Land, and Tenements, lying and being in the severall Parishes of S. Bennet, and S. Peter by Pauls wharfe, to Feoffees in trust, yeerely for ever, to disburse all the issues and profits of the said Lands and Tenements, to the relieving and dis∣charging of poore prisoners, in the Hole or Two-penny wards,Care for the reliefe and dis∣charge of poore prisoners. in either of the Compters in London, by equall porti∣ons to each Compter. Provided, that the debt doe not exceed the summe of twenty shillings eight pence, for every prisoner at any time to be set free. Master Edward Elmer,Edward Elmer. Grocer, gave to both the Compters in London, an hun∣dred pounds, partly to bee laid out in Faggots for the Prisoners in cold wea∣ther; and for two load of straw yeerely to Bethlem. Master William Nelson,William Nelson his love to learning. Grocer, to∣wards the maintaining of twelve poore Scholars in Oxenford and Cambridge, gave foure hundred pounds, to be paid yeerely to each place twenty pounds; and thirty three shillings foure pence to each man. And to the Prisons, 33. l. Master Rafe Newbery,Rafe New∣bery. Stationer, gave a stocke of Bookes, and priviledges of Printing, to bee sold for the benefit of Christs Hospitall and Bridewell. Master Robert Row, Haberdasher, for the furtherance of poore Scholars in both the Vniversities,Robert Row a savourer of lear∣ning. gave 20. l. yeere∣ly, and the remainder of his goods that were not bequeathed. Master Edmond Stile,Edmond Stile his charity. Grocer, and Sheriffe of London, gave to be distribu∣ted among the said Hospitals in London, the summe of threescoure pounds. Iohn Stockley,Iohn Stock∣ley his cha∣rity and love to learning. Merchant-taylor, gave to Christs Hospitall, and the other Ho∣spitals beside, towards the education of poore children in the feare of God, the summe of forty pounds. He gave besides to the Vniversities, forty pounds more, towards the main∣tenance of foure poore Scholars, to bee disposed by the Master and Wardens of the Merchant-taylors, with consent of his Executors and Overseers; desiring that S. Iohn Baptists Colledge in Oxen∣ford should have the prerogative of the gift, if such be there to be found, as are capable of the same. Gaius Newman,Gaius New∣man his charity. Goldsmith, gave to Christs Hospitall, five pounds: to Saint Bartholomews Hospitall, six pounds, thir∣teene shillings, foure pence: and to the hospitall of Bridewell, three pounds. Iohn Newman,Iohn New∣man his charity. Grocer, gave to Christs Hospitall; three pounds: to Saint Bar∣tholomews hospitall, six pounds: and to Saint Thomas in Southwarke, and Bride∣well hospitall, forty shillings to each house. Richard May,Richard May his love-tokē to London, and chari∣ty to the poore. Merchant-taylor, gave (by his last will and testament) to the Chamber of London, the summe of three hundred pounds, toward the new buil∣ding of old, ruined and decayed Blackwell Hall, in London: It being a Market place for the selling of woollen clothes, on such usuall market-dayes as are ther∣unto assigned. Vpon the receipt of this gift, the said Hall was taken downe, a new foundation laid; and within the space of tenne moneths following, the worke was finished, with the full charge of 2500. pounds. He gave besides to Christs Hospitall, the summe of ninety pounds. Peter Chapman,Peter Chap∣man his charity, & love to learning. Ironmonger, gave to the eight Prisons in and about London, the summe of threescore pounds. He gave also to two poore Scholars of Oxenford, studying Divinity, 5. l. to each yeerely. To poore Scholars in Cambridge also, following the same study, hee gave the like summe of money. To the poore of the Towne of Coke∣ham in Barkeshire, where it appeared he was borne, he gave the summe of five pounds yeerely. Iohn Carre,Iohn Carre his care for lear∣ning, and the poore. Ironmonger, gave a gift of twenty pounds yeerely, for the space of one and twenty yeeres. Five pounds thereof was to goe to a Preacher at Standon in Essex. Concerning the other 15. pounds, it
was ordered to passe in this manner of course. The first yeere, it was for the bene∣fit of certaine poore Parishes in London, thereto appointed. The second yeere it was for the helpe of two poore Scholars, one in Oxenford, and the other in Cambridge. The third yeere it was appointed for reliefe of the poore in Standon. And so (according to this course) to continue for time and place, during the space of one and twenty yeeres. Henry Cowche,Henry Cowche his charity. or Croutch, Merchant-Taylor, gave unto Christs Hospitall the benefit of his house, known by the name of the Crowne without Aldgate, having divers yeeres as then to come in the Lease, and yeelding yeerely the summe of fifteene pounds. Five pound is yeere∣ly appointed to be paid to the poore of the Parish, and tenne shillings to a Preacher. The rest remaineth to the Hospitall, and after the Leases expira∣tion, it is judged to yeeld above an hun∣dred markes yeerely. David Smith,David Smith his care of the poore. Embroiderer, at his owne charge did build certaine Almes∣houses, upon the hill called S. Peters hill, neere unto old Fishstreet, allowing suf∣ficient maintenance to them. He gave also five and twenty pounds yeerely to the Company of Ironmon∣gers, appointing it to be distributed a∣mong the poor, in the Wards of Queen Hithe, and Castle Baynard. Iohn Scot,Iohn Scot his charity to the poore. Salter, gave to his Compa∣nie the summe of twenty pounds yeere∣ly, because they should allow to the six poore Almes-men of the Company, each man twelve pence weekely. The rest is to be divided among other poore, and thirty shillings to bee bestowed in Coles yeerely for the poore. William Stoder,William Stoder his charity. Grocer, gave to Christs hospitall, for reliefe of the poore chil∣dren there, fifty pounds yeerely. William Mascall,William Mascall his charity. Brewer, gave to the same hospitall, and to the same intent, nine pounds yeerely. Stephen Skidmore,Stephen Skidmore his love & charity to the poore. Vintner, gave a gift of forty foure pounds yeerely, and or∣dered in this manner: To seventeene poore Parishes in Lon∣don, appointed by nomination, seven∣teene pounds. To the poore of the Parish of S. Ste∣phen in Colemanstreet, twelve pence week∣ly in bread. To the poore of Corke in Ireland, (where it seemeth he was borne) being twelve in number, to each poore body forty shillings. Richard Iacob,Richard Iacob his charity to hospitals & prisons. Vintner, gave a gift of sixteene pounds for ever, that it should be distributed to Christs Hospitall, Saint Bartholomews, Bridewell, and Saint Tho∣mas in Southwark, forty shillings to each house yeerely: and the other eight pounds to be given to certaine appoin∣ted poore Parishes in London. He gave moreover (for so long time as two hundred yeeres should last) the summe of twenty eight pounds yeerely.A time of honest & large con∣tinuance. Of which portion of money, sixteene pounds was appointed for poore Priso∣ners, that lay imprisoned in any of the eight Prisons in and about London yeer∣ly; to each Prison forty shillings: as the Gatehouse, the Fleet, both the Compters of the Poultry and Woodstreet, Ludgate, the Marshallsea, the Kings Bench, and the White Lion. What remained of the over plus of the money, was to be distributed to the poore of divers appointed Parishes. Iohn Russell,Iohn Russell his chari∣table deeds. Draper, gave the summe of fourescore pounds yeerely for ever: out of which these summes following should be deducted, and the rest remain to be employed by the Company of Drapers. He gave thirteene pounds nine shil∣lings yeerely to thirteene poore people. For reliefe of the poore,His espe∣ciall re∣spect of the poore. to be bestow∣ed in bread yeerely, two and fifty shil∣lings. To be bestowed in Coales yeerely for the poore, three pounds. For the maintaining of Preachers yeerely at Pauls Crosse,His love to religiō and lear∣ning. tenne pounds. Toward the maintaining of two Scho∣lars, one in Oxenford and the other in Cambridge, the sum of thirteene pounds six shillings eight pence. For maintaining a Scholemaster at Burton in Staffordshire, thirteen pounds, sixe shillings, eight pence. Item,Rob. Gale his love to lear∣ning, and respect of the poore. To the Visher, five pounds. And to the Visitors, thirty shillings. Robert Gale, Vintner, out of his Lands lying in divers places, gave the summe
of one hundred and forty pounds yeere∣ly, to be imployed in manner following, after the decease of Dorothy his wife. To six of the poorer sort of Scholars in Corpus Christi Colledge, in the Vni∣versity of Oxenford, usually commorant and residing in the said Colledge, and yeerely to be chosen on the Feast day of Saint Thomas the Apostle, by George La∣cocke, his heires or assignes, under his or their hand and seale: To each Scholar he gave three pounds, six shillings eight pence yeerely for ever, to be paid by the said Lacocke, his heires or assignes for ever, out of his Lands in Claipoole, in the County of Lincolne, and Brassington, in the County of Derby. To the poore Towne of Chippenham, in Wiltshire, he gave twenty pounds. To the Preacher there, 20. shillings. To the Bailiffe and Burgesses, as a friendly remembrance, yeerely twenty shillings. To Christs Hospitall in London, twen∣ty pounds. To the Company of Vintners, twen∣ty pounds. To the poore in Lincolne, 20. pounds. To a Preacher there yeerely, ten shil∣lings. To the Maior and Chamberlaine, twenty shillings. To the Minister of S. Markes Church there, ten shillings. Iohn Quarles,Iohn Quarles his charity. Draper, gave yeerely to be bestowed in bread, for reliefe of the poore, six pounds. William Dummer,William Dummer his charity. Draper, gave to the poore the summe of 13. pounds, 18. shillings, 4. pence yeerely for ever. William Parker,W. Parker his charity a Brother also of the same Society, gave towards the main∣taining of a Lecture yeerely at Saint Antlins, six pounds. Owen Clun, another Brother also of the same Society,Owen Clun his charity gave to the poore of the said Company yeerely for ever, the summe of twenty five pounds. Iames Stoddard,Iames Stoddard his loue to Learning. Grocer, for the main∣taining of two poore Scholars, the one in the Colledge of Brazen-nose in Oxen∣ford, and the other to be of Queenes Col∣ledge in Cambridge, gave 10. l. yeerely to be paid for ever, out of his Tenement called the Swan with two neckes, in the Parish of S. Laurence old Jury. Iohn Skeete,Iohn Skeete his respect of the poore, and his love to learning. Draper, for reliefe and maintenance of the poore, in the Hospi∣tals in and about London, gave the sum of three hundred pounds. Moreover, hee gave to foure poore Scholars studying Divinity in the Vni∣versity of Oxford, and which are not a∣ble to proceed in their degrees, five pounds to each Scholar, to be paid at the next Act or Commencement. The like liberality he gave to the o∣ther Vniversity of Cambridge, for so ma∣ny Scholars, five pound to each, and at the same time. Roger Owfield,Roger Ow∣field, his love to learning. Fishmonger, gave the summe of one hundred pounds towards the maintenance of poore Scholars, that studied. Divinity in the Vniversities of Oxenford and Cambridge, or else where. And his desire was, that some of them might be of the Towne of Ashborne, if any such could there be found fit for it. Otherwise he appointed the money to be imployed in Scholarships, in Sidney or Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge. Be∣side, hee gave to Christs Hospitall one hundred pounds. Iohn Berriman,Iohn Berry∣man his re∣spect of the poore. of Bishops Tawton, in the County of Devonshire, Clothier, and said to be a free Draper of London, gave to Christs Hospitall, an hundred pounds: to Saint Bartholomews, five pounds: to Saint Thomas, six pounds: to Bridewell, forty shillings: and to Bethlem fifty pounds. Iohn Ireland,Iohn Ireland his charity Salter, gave to Christs Hospitall, foure pounds: to Saint Bar∣tholomews, foure pounds: to Saint Tho∣mas and Bridewell, twenty shillings to each house. Thomas Thorney,Thomas Thorney his charity. Barber Chirurgion, gave to Christs Hospitall, five pounds, and to Bridewell, five pounds. Francis Evington,Francis E∣vington his charity & love to learning. Merchant-Taylor, gave to Christs Hospitall, tenne pounds, and to Saint Bartholomews Hospitall, tenne pounds. Hee gave also to poore Scholars in both the Vniversities, sixe pounds to each Scholar. Henry Butler, Draper, gave to Saint Thomas Hospitall,Henry But∣ler his cha∣rity. tenne pounds: to Christs Hospitall, five pounds: and to S. Bartholomews and Bridewell, five pounds to each house. Peter Hall,Peter Hall his charity Draper, gave to Christs
Hospitall, tenne pounds: to Saint Bar∣tholomews, three pounds: and the like to Saint Thomas. Roger Ienkins,Roger Ien∣kins his love to Learning. Barber Chirurgion, to the poore Scholars in Christs Hospitall, gave five pounds, to buy them Bookes at the discretion of the Treasurer. George Chamberlaine,George Chāberlaine his charity Ironmonger, gave to Christs Hospitall, tenne pounds; to Saint Thomas, five pounds: to Saint Bartholomews, five pounds: and to Bride∣well, tenne pounds. Thomas Church,Tho. Church his charity Draper, gave to Christs Hospitall, tenne pounds: to Bride∣well, tenne pounds: to Saint Bartholo∣mews five pounds; and to Saint Thomas, five pounds. Andrew Banning Grocer, gave for e∣ver, Andrew Banning his love to learning. 120. pounds to the Company of Grocers, therewith to purchase lands of five pounds value yeerely, for the reliefe of some poore Scholar in the Vniversity of Cambridge. Randall Manning,Randall Manning His love to Lear∣ning. Skinner, gave to∣ward the reliefe of foure poore Scholars yeerely, forty shillings to each Scholar, being of Christs and Emanuel Colledges in Cambridge, and this gift to continue the space of thirty yeeres. Katharine, wife to the said Randall Manning, gave also the summe of one hundred pounds, that her husbands will might the more effectually be kept and performed. Hugh Cappe,Hugh Cappe his liberall charity. Plaisterer, gave for re∣liefe of the poore children in Christs Ho∣spitall, the summe of 100. pounds. He gave also to the two Hospitals of Saint Bartholomews and S. Thomas in South∣warke, tenne pounds to each house. Lewes Randall,Lewes Ran∣dall his charity. Pewterer, gave unto Christs Hospitall, fifty pounds: and to S. Thomas Hospitall, twenty shillings. Henry van Hilton,A strāgers charity. Merchant Stran∣ger, and a free Denison of London, gave unto Christs Hospitall, thirty pounds. Humfrey Fox,Hufrey Fox his charity. Draper, gave to the poore childrens succour in Christs Hospi∣tall, the summe of fifty pounds. William Parker,William Parker his bountifull charity. Merchant-taylor, gave to Christs Hospitall, to purchase lands for maintenance of the poore children, five hundred pounds. He gave also to the Treasurer of Bride∣well, to set forty Boyes on worke, which should bee taken up begging in the streets, and there bound Apprentices for 7. yeeres, to learne severall Trades; for each boy should five pound be paid to the Treasurer, untill the summe of two hundred pound should fully be run out. Of this man expect more when I come to speake of the new building of Aldersgate. George Palin,George Pa∣lin his boū∣tifull cha∣rity. Merchant, and free of the Girdlers Society, by his last Will and Testament,Those Almes∣houses are builded neere to Creplaegate. to good and charitable uses gave these gifts following: First, he gave nine hundred pounds towards the erection or building of cer∣taine Almes-houses, in or about the Ci∣tie of London, wherein six poore people should have the yeerely allowance of six pounds, thirteene shillings and foure pence to each person. More, he gave towards the having a sweet Chime in Bow Church in London, one hundred pounds. He gave to Saint Iohn Baptist,His care & love to Learning. and Bra∣zen-nose Colledges in Oxenford, towards the maintaining of foure Scholars there yeerely, three hundred pounds, to each Colledge, and to each Scholar, foure pounds yeerely. To the six severall Prisons in and a∣bout London,His care for priso∣ners, and the poore. he gave threescore pounds. He gave unto Christs Hospitall to pur∣chase Lands after the rate of twenty pounds yeerely, for benefit of the poore children there, the summe of three hun∣dred pounds. Moreover,His zeale to lear∣ning. in further expression of his zeale and love to learning, and for the like uses as we have before declared, he gave to Trinity and Saint Iohns Col∣ledge in Cambridge, the summe of six hundred pounds. To the Hospitall of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, he gave fifty pounds. Towards the bearing of such Scho∣lars charges,The fruits of a Chri∣stian faith as should come (from time to time) to preach at Pauls Crosse, hee gave the summe of 200. pounds. He gave 132. pounds to be distribu∣ted to certaine Parishes in London, to some tenne pounds, to others twenty pounds. He gave to the Towne of Wrenbury in Cheshire,His care of poore people in the coūtry 200. l. to purchase Lands, after the rate of twenty markes by the yeere, for reliefe of the poore there. He gave also for behoof of the Church
there, the summe of thirty pounds. He gave for forty poore Gownes, for∣ty pounds. Laurence Campe,Laurence Campe his love to learning. Draper, gave forty pounds towards the maintenance of poore Schollers in Cambridge, at the dis∣cretion of Robert Meakin, Preacher of S. Iohns Church in Walbrooke. Robert Dove, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London,The wor∣thy chari∣table gifts of Master Robert Dove gave (in his life time, and long before he dyed) to the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of that wor∣shipfull Company, the summe of two thousand, nine hundred, fifty eight l.. tenne shillings, to be yeerely imployed in these good uses following: First,This cha∣rity extē∣deth only to poore brethren of the same com∣pany. for the mantaining of thirteen poore Almes-men, in gownes of good cloth, well lined, with a silver Dove up∣on each mans left sleeve. And six other poore men, termed Reversioners, to suc∣ceed in the roomes of the deceased Gowne-men, they wearing Cloakes of good cloth in the meane time, with a silver Dove also upon each mans left arme: the yeerely allowance to per∣forme this is one hundred and seven pounds. He gave to the Schoolemaster eight pounds. He gave also to the poore of Saint Buttolphs without Aldgate, in which Pa∣rish he dwelt and dyed, twenty pounds, nine shillings. To Saint Iohn Baptists Colledge in Oxenford he gave 100. pounds.His love to lear∣ning. To the prisoners in the two Coun∣ters of London, and to the Prisons of Lud∣gate and Newgate, hee gave twenty pounds. He gave to Christs Hospitall in Lon∣don, to purchase Lands, after the rate of tenne pounds yeerely, and for one to in∣struct the boyes in singing, two hundred and forty pounds. He gave to the Parish of S. Sepulchers the summe of fifty pounds,A notable and moste Christian care for poor con∣demned persons, and their going to their death. that after the severall Sessions in London, when the Prisoners remaine in the Gaole, as condemned men to death, expecting execution on the morrow following, the Clerke of the Church should come in the night time, and likewise early in the morning, to the window of the pri∣son where they lye, and there ringing certaine toules with a hand-bell, ap∣pointed for the purpose, he doth after∣ward (in most Christian manner) put them in minde of their present conditi∣on, and ensuing execution, desiring them to be prepared therefore as they ought to bee. When they are in the Carts, and brought before the wall of the Church, there hee standeth ready with the same Bell, and after certaine toules, rehearseth an appointed Prayer, desiring all the people there present to pray for them. The Beadle also of Mer∣chant-taylors Hall hath an honest al∣lowed stipend, to see that this be duely done. What else remaineth concerning this man, expect when I come to speake of the Hall. Randulph Woolley,Randulph Wolley his love to learning, and care for the poore. Merchant-Taylor, gave to the Governours of Christs Ho∣spitall, therewith to pay yeerely for e∣ver, five pounds, to the Reader of Oare Chappell, in the Parish of Mucklestone, in the County of Stafford, by fifty shil∣lings at each halfe yeere. For which he is to teach freely the children of the in∣habitants of Aston, in the fore-named Parish of Mucklestone. He gave more to the said Hospitall one hundred pounds, for the allowing of fifty shillings yeerely every Easter day, that the poore children may then eat roast meat. He gave moreover to the said Go∣vernours one hundred pounds, there∣with to pay yeerely unto the poore of the Parish of Muckle stone five pounds. He gave also to Saint Bartholomews Hospitall, three pounds. Henry Walcot,Henry Wal∣cot, his cha∣rity. Grocer, gave to Saint Bartholomews Hospitall twenty pounds: to Christs Hospitall, five pounds: to S. Thomas in Southwarke, five pounds: to Bridewell, three pounds sixe shillings, eight pence: and to Bethlem, three pounds, six shilling eight pence. Henry Woolaston,Henry VVoolaston his chari∣ty. Draper, gave to S. Thomas Hospitall, forty pounds: and to the foure Beadles, Coats of good new cloth. Also he gave to every Governour, go∣ing to his buriall, and staying there the Sermon time, halfe a crowne to each man, to dine together afterward. Iohn Vernon,Iohn Vernō his cha∣rity. Merchant-Taylor, gave to Christs Hospitall, forty pounds: to S.
Bartholomews Hospitall, fifty pounds: to Bridewell and S. Thomas, five pounds to each house. Edward Harvist,Edward Harvist his charity. Brewer, gave unto Christs Hospitall, the summe of one hun∣dred pounds: and fifty pounds, to bee equally divided betweene the two Ho∣spitals of S. Bartholomews and S. Thomas in Southwarke. Iohn Brown,Iohn Brown his chari∣ty. Wool-winder, and Mag∣dalen his wife, gave certaine lands ly∣ing in Barking in Essex, amounting then to 5. l. 6. s. 8. d. yeerely. And this gift they gave unto Christs Hospitall for ever. Iohn Porter,Iohn Porter his chari∣ty. of Porters Key, Fish∣monger, gave unto Christs Hospitall, twenty pound. Lewis Randall,Lewis Ran∣dall his charity. Pewterer, but a Brewer by his profession, of his owne free cost and charge, paved (with faire free Stone) the East Ile of Christs Hospital Cloyster, and renewed all the Armories of former liberall Benefactors to that house, wher∣of himselfe was one of the Governours. Hee gave beside 50. pound to the Treasurer,His love to the children. that the poore children there maintained, might eate roste-meat, at dinner, on every Saint Mathias day, if it fall out of Lent. But if it fall in Lent, then they are to eat good and well made Furmenty, both at dinner and supper. Iohn Whithall,Iohn VVhithall his chari∣ty. Skinner, gave to the Childrens reliefe in Christs Hospitall, 40. pound. William Iones,VVilliam Iones his bountifull charity. Merchant, and free of the worshipfull Company of Haberda∣shers, in his life time did many charita∣ble deeds, and by his Will and Testa∣ment ordained many more, putting his owne Society in trust to see them per∣formed, as shall briefly be declared. First,His Chri∣stian care for Reli∣gion in his coun∣try. many yeeres before he dyed, he allowed 50. pound yeerely to a Prea∣cher at Monmouth, there to instruct the people in Gods true Religion. After∣ward hee grew to settle a certaine sti∣pend there, amounting to the summe of 100. Markes yeerely, to maintaine a good Preacher there. Providing also, that a convenient house should be built for him, with all necessary matters be∣longing to it, that hee might (with the more comfort) dwell there among them.His care for the mainte∣nance of Learning. Also, for the instruction of youth in Learning and Religion, he ordained to have a faire Free-Schoole there built at his owne charge, and a faire house also to be erected for the chiefe Master. Al∣lowing him yeerly (for ever) 60. pound, and 30. pound also yeerly to the Visher. Beside,His pro∣vidence for the poore and needy people in Monmouth. being Christianly mindfull of the poore and needy people in those parts, he tooke order for the building of an Hospitall in the same Towne, ordai∣ning it for twenty poore people: giving to every one of them a good Gowne yeerely, and 2. shillings 6. pence apeece weekely. And because himselfe (being farre absent) could bee no Surveyor of these workes, hee committed the care thereof to the loving Brethren of his Company, paying to them (in his life time) the summe of 8000. pound. And left them by his will, 1000. pound more, for the full finishing of so good a worke. More,Still his Piety and Christian Charity walk hand in hand together. he appointed to the said Com∣pany of Haberdashers, the summe of 5000. pound by them to be disbursed, for the maintenance of a good Preacher at Newland in Glocester shire, and of cer∣taine poore people in the same Parish. More,His care for poore decayed brethren of the Company. Hee gave to the same Society, one thousand foure hundred and forty pounds, to allow unto nine poore men, being free Brethren of the same Com∣pany, eight pounds apeece yeerely for ever. Moreover,His main∣taining of a Preacher in the Ci∣ty of Lon∣don for ever. he left (by his will) 600. pound in money, and a faire house in the City of London, to the disposition of the Company, to bestow the yeerely pro∣fits, for the yeerely maintenance of a godly Preacher in this City for ever, which Preacher from time to time is to benominated by the Company. As alrea∣dy they have thereto appointed Master Iohn Downham, Batchelor in Divinity, and a very learned Preacher. More,His love to poore Preachers. hee gave the summe of 1000. pound to bee faithfully distributed a∣mong poore Preachers here in England. To be distributed among the severall Hospitals in London,His chari∣ty to Hospi∣tals and poore people be∣yond the Seas. he gave the summe of 500. pound. To the poore in Stoad hee gave 200. pound. To the poore of Hamborough, he gave 50. pound. Beside, to such poore English men as lived in Hamborough, he gave 50 pound.
He gave likewise a good summe of money (by way of gratitude and thank∣fulnesse) to his owne Company,His love to his own Company as a token of his love, for their care and paines-taking, in the managing of so se∣rious a businesse. The Hospitall at Monmouth was built (by the Company) in his life time,What care and dili∣gence the worthy Company have taken in the exe∣cution of his will, according to the times and severall appointed places. and the poore people placed in it. Since his death, the house for the Preacher there, the Free-schoole, and the house for the Schoolmaster, all these are (by this time) neere hand finished. An house also for the Preacher at Newland, and the Hospitall for tenne poore people there, is already (by them) begun, and in very good forwardnesse. His intended care for a Preacher in London, is already performed, and the same continued in a Lecture, at S. Bar∣tholomews Church, neere to the Ex∣change, every Thursday in the after∣noone. Whatsoever else remaineth, concer∣ning the trust reposed in them, they wil (with all speed) both truely and faith∣fully effect. Here I could enter into a further rela∣tion, Divers men yet living, have been and still are most bountifull benefa∣ctors to the poore, and many other reli∣gious uses concerning some men yet living, whose liberall bounty and most Chri∣stian charity, doth deserve no meane commendation, and is very little infe∣riour to many of them already named. But because they account it honour e∣nough to them, that divers poore peo∣ple (in private) should rather sufficient∣ly finde it, than the world (in publike) know it, I am content to spare their no∣mination, as knowing very well, that they who have beene so liberall in their life time, have (no doubt) set downe ex∣traordinary determinations, which nei∣ther death, nor any deceiving Execu∣tors, can or shall frustrate and disap∣point. Let me commend that truly-religious man,The testi∣mony of a good and godly con∣science in∣deed. who perceiving the heavy want of divers honest house-holders, laboriously endvouring (night and day) to main∣taine their charge; but that the worlds extremity frowned too fiercely upon them. I know the man, and oftentimes in teares hath he said to mee; Here is true poverty indeed, too modestly silent in speaking their mighty need and mi∣sery, and therefore justly deserving pit∣tie. To two, three, foure, and many times more of these, hath he beene, and is, a liberall Benefactor (weekely) with his owne hands: yet not in his owne name, or as comming from himselfe, (he being so meanely disguised at such times of his comming to them, and so sudden also in departing from them, that they were not able to distinguish him;) but alledging, that the reliefe was sent them from some, who under∣stood their neede (almost) as well as themselves, and willed them to bee thankfull onely to God for it. Oh that London had a Park neer adjoi∣ning to it, stored with many such choise Deere; as doubtlesse it hath, though not easily knowne. For some build Almes-houses, Free-Schooles, Caw∣seyes and Bridges in very needfull pla∣ces: yea, and repaire old ruined Chur∣ches, releeving Hospitals also in very bountifull manner, and are weekly Be∣nefactors to Prisons: yet performed by such agents faithfully, that the true be∣stowers are not noted, though vehe∣mently suspected; and the glory they shunne here, will (for ever) shine on them else-where. But God stirre up the mindes of many more, to imitate them in this tonguelesse liberality. Master William Masham,William Masham his love to Learning. Grocer, and Alderman of London, gave (beside his liberall charity to the Hospitall) toward the maintenance of poore Scholars, at both the Vniversities, twenty pounds. Master Henry Prannel,Henry Prannel his charity. Vintner, and Alderman of London, gave among the said Hospitals the summe of 50. pounds yeerely. Master William Elkin,William El∣kin his bountifull charity. Mercer, and Al∣derman of London, in the yeere 1593. gave to Christs Hospitall in London, and for certaine charitable uses, the summe of 800. pounds. He gave also to the Prisons in and a∣bout London, threescore pounds. Beside, he gave to Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge, five pounds, and to both the Vniversities together, threescore pounds. Master Richard Gurney,Richard Gurney his charity. Slater and Al∣derman of London, gave to be distribu∣ted among the severall Hospitals in and about London, threescore pound. And to
the Vniversities yeerely five pound. Master Hugh Offley,Hugh Offley his love to learning and care for the poor. Leather seller and Alderman of London, gave for the main∣taining of Scholars in both the Vniver∣sities, 77. pound. He gave to Christs Hospitall in Lon∣don, the like summe of 77. pound. Beside, hee gave to the prisoners in and about London, 20. pound, and 35. shillings yeerly to continue for certaine yeeres. Master Robert Brooke,Robert Brook his chari∣ty. Grocer and Al∣derman of London, gave to be distribu¦ted among the Hospitals in London, the summe of sixe and thirty pound. Master Benedict Barnham,Benedict Barnham, his chari∣ty. Draper and Alderman of London, gave to be distri∣buted among the severall Prisons in London, fifty pounds. Master Robert Taylor,Robert Tay∣lor his charity. Haberdasher and Alderman of London, gave in distri∣bution to the Hospitals in London, the summe of one hundred pound. Master Paul Banning,Paul Ban∣ning his charity. Grocer, and sometime an Alderman of London, gave unto Christs Hospitall the sum of one hundred pounds. Sir Richard Goddard,Sir Richard Goddard. Draper and Al∣derman of London, gave to the Hospitall of Bridewell, two hundred pound. Master William Walthall,VVilliam VValthall his chari∣table be∣nevolence Mercer and Alderman of London, gave to the Ho∣spitals of London, two hundred pounds. More, he gave to poore Scholars in Cambridge, nine pound yeerely. To the Prisons beside, in and about London, he gave one hundred thirty five pounds. Beside his former gifts, hee gave ten pound yeerely to Christs Hospitall. To his Company of the Mercers he gave five hundred pounds to be lent to young men that begin the world.Care for young be∣ginners. Sir Robert Hampson,Sir Robert Hampson, his chari∣ty. Merchant-Tay∣lor, and Alderman of London, gave to the charitable reliefe of poore prisoners, one hundred and fifty pounds in ready money, and the reversion of two Tene∣ments beside. Sir Henry Anderson,Henry An∣derson, his love to learning. Grocer and Al∣derman of London, and Richard Anderson his sonne, gave to the Colledge of Bra∣zen-nose in Oxenford, for the reliefe of poore Scholars there, one hundred and thirteen pounds. Sir William GloverVVilliam Glover his charity. Dyer and Alder∣man of London, gave also to the Hospi∣tals, in and about London, the summe of two hundred pounds, Sir William Rumney,VVillia, Rumney his charity. Haberdasher, and Alderman of London, gave also to be di∣stributed among the same Hospitals, the summe of threescore and five pounds. Sir Roger Iones,Roger Jones his chari∣ty. Dyer and Alderman of London, gave likewise to the said Ho∣spitals, two and twenty pounds. Master Richard Faringdon,Richard Faringdon his chari∣ty. Clothwor∣ker, and Alderman of London, gave also to be distributed among the same Ho∣spitals, the summe of threescore and six pound thirteene shillings foure pence. Nicholas Stile,Nicholas Stile, his charity, and care for poore Sea-men. Grocer, and Alder∣man of London, gave unto Christs Ho∣spitall five pound, to St. Bartholomews, 10. pound, and to St, Thomas Hospitall three pound. Moreover, he gave to poore maimed Sea-faring souldiers, in S. Bartholomews Hospitall ten pound, if no house were erected in or about London, for the har∣bour and reliefe of such maimed Souldi∣diers and Saylors. Master Ieffrey Elwes,Ieffrey Edwes his charity. Merchant-Tay∣lor, and Alderman of London, gave un∣to Christs Hospitall the summe of one hundred pounds. And to the Hospitall of St. Bartholomew, and St. Thomas in Southwarke ten pounds to each house. Master Cuthbert Martin,Cuthbert Martin his charity. Skinner, and Alderman of London, gave unto Christs Hospitall, the summe of twenty pounds. Sir Iames Deane,Iames Dean his chari∣ty. Draper, gave to be distributed among the severall Hospi∣tals in and about London, the summe of one hundred and thirty pounds. And to the Prisoners threescore and ten pounds. Master George Smithes,George Smithes his charity. Goldsmith, and Alderman of London, gave to Christs Hospitall, ten pounds. And to Bridewell ten pounds. Sir William Bowyer,VVilliam Bowyer, his charity. Grocer, Alder∣man and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1543. gave to the severall Prisons in and about London, the summe of two hundred pounds. Sir Iohn Lion, Grocer, Alderman, and Lord Maior of Lond,Sir Iohn Lion his charity. in the yeere 1554. gave to Christs Hospitall. St. Bartholo∣mews, S. Thomas in Southwark, and Bride∣well, one hundred pounds.
Sir Richard Champion,Sir Richard Champion his chari∣ty for re∣liefe of the poore. Drapet, Alder∣man and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere, 1565. gave the summe of nine∣teene pound and foureteene shillings yeerely, to a Christian and charitable worke, formerly begun by Sir Iohn Mil∣bourne, Draper, Alderman and Lord Maior of London likewise, and with the like yeerely allowance of nineteene pounds and fourteene shillings towards the maintenance of 13. poore Almes-houses at Tower-hill, and neere to the dwelling of the Lord Lumley. Sir Christopher Draper,Sir Christo∣pher Draper his chari∣ty. Ironmonger, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1566. gave to the Prisons in and about London, and Bethlem with∣all, threescore and eight pounds. Sir Lionel Ducket,Sir Lionel Ducket his charity. Mercer, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1572. gave to be distributed among the Hospitals in London, the summe of one hundred pounds. Sir Thomas Ramsey,Sir Thomas Ramsey his charity. Grocer, Alder∣man and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1577. gave also in distribution a∣mong the said Hospitals threescore pounds. Sir Wolstane Dixie,Sir VVol∣stane Dixie his chari∣table be∣nevolence Skinner, Maior, 1586. gave as followeth. He founded a Free-schoole at Bosworth and endowed it with twenty pound yeerely. To Christs Hospitall in London hee gave yeerely for ever two and forty pounds. For a Lecture in St. Michaels Bassings Hall, yeerely, ten pounds. To the poore of Newgate, twenty pounds.His boun∣ty to Pri∣sons in di∣vers pla∣ces. To the two Compters, and to Lud∣gate and Bethlem, to each of them tenne pounds. To the foure Prisons in Southwarke, twenty pounds, thirteene shillings, and foure pence. To the poore of Bassings Hall, tenne pounds. To Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge,Out of his love to learning. to buy lands for the maintenance or two Fellowes, and two Scholars, sixe hun∣dred pounds. To the building of the Colledge, fifty pounds. To bee lent unto poore Merchants,To poore Merchants. five hundred pounds. To the Hospitals of Saint Bartholo∣mew, To Hospi∣tals and poore maids marria∣ges, &c. and Saint Thomas, fifty pounds to each. To the the poore of Bridewell, twenty pounds. To poore Maids marriages, one hun∣dred pounds. To poore Strangers of the Dutch and French Church, fifty pounds. Towards the building of the Pesthouse, To the Pesthouse. two hundred pounds. Sir Iohn Hart,Sir Iohn Hart his care of Learning, and re∣spect of the poore. Grocer, Alderman and Lord Maior London, in the yeere 1589. erected and founded a Free-schoole in Yorkeshire, with the allowance of thir∣ty pound yeerely to a Master and an Vsher. Sir Iohn Allot,Sir Iohn Allot his charity. Fishmonger, Alder∣man and Lord Maior of London, gave likewise in distribution among the said Hospitals, threescore and sixe pound thirteene shillings. Sir William Webbe,Sir William VVebbe his charity. Salter, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1591. gave likewise to be distributed among the said Hospitals, fourescore pound. Sir Stephen Slanie,Sir Stephen Slanie, his charity. Skinner, Alder∣man and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1595. beside his bountifull chari∣ty to the severall Hospitals, gave to bee bestowed among the severall Prisons, the summe of one hundred pounds. Master Thomas Skinner,Thomas Skinner his charity. Clothwor∣ker, Alderman and Lord Maior of Lon∣don, in the yeere 1596. gave to the seve∣rall Hospitals in and about London one hundred and twenty pound to be equal∣ly divided among them. Sir Robert Lee,Sir Robert Lee his charity. Merchant-Taylor, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, 1602. gave also in distribution among the said Hospitals, two and forty pound. Sir Iohn Wattes,Sir Iohn VVats, his charity. Clothworker, Al∣derman and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1606. gave unto Christs Ho∣spitall the summe of ten pound, and to Saint Thomas hospitall in Southwarke, twenty pounds. Sir Henry Rowe,Sir Henry Rowe his charity. Mercer, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, 1607. gave likewise to bee distributed among the same hospitals, the summe of one hun∣dred pounds. Sir Humfrey Weld,Sir Humfrey VVeld his charity. Grocer, and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1608.
gave to be distributed among the seve∣rall hospitals, the summe of one hun∣dred pounds. Sir Thomas Cambell,Sir Thomas Cambell his charity. Ironmonger, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1609. gave to Christs Ho∣spitall the summe of twenty pounds. And to the two Hospitals of S. Bartholo∣mews, and Saint Thomas, five pound to each house. Sir Iames Pemberton,Sir Iames Pemberton his love to learning and to the poore. Goldsmith, and lately Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1611. in his life time founded a Free-schoole at Heskin in the Parish of Ek∣klesden, in Lamcashire, endowing it with fifty pounds yeerely. Hee gave also to Christs Hospitall, five hundred pounds. Hee gave to his Company of Gold∣smiths, two hundred pounds. To divers Prisons hee gave one hun∣dred pounds. And to sundry poore Parishes hee gave charitably, leaving it to his Execu∣tors discretion. Sir Iohn Swinnerton,Sir Iohn Swinnerton his chari∣ty. Merchant-Tay∣lor, Alderman and Lord Maior of Lon∣don, in the yeere 1612. gave unto Christs Hospitall the summe of one hundred pound. And to the other three hospi∣tals, of Saint Bartholomews, Saint Tho∣mas, and Bridewell, tenne pound to each house. Sir Henry Rowe,Sir Henry Rowe his love to learning. Mercer, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, beside his former bounty to the hospitals, gave to the two Vniversities, Oxenford and Cam∣bridge, forty pound to poore scholars that study Divinity: and when they shall proceed Masters of Arts, to each scholar forty shillings. Sir Thomas Hunt,Sir Thomas Hunt his charity. Skinner, gave to be divided among the poore of Christ Church, Saint Bartholomews, Saint Tho∣mas in Southwarke, and Bridewell, one hundred pounds. Sir William Rumney,William Rumney his love to learning. Haberdasher, and Alderman of London, beside his for∣mer liberality to the hospitals, gave to 40. poore scholars in Cambridge, the sum of twenty pounds. Sir William Stone,William Stone his charity. Clothworker, gave to the severall Prisons in London, the summe of fifty pounds. Master Ieffrey Elwes,Ieffrey Elwes his love to learning. Merchant-Tay∣lor, and Alderman of London, over and beside his bountifull charity to the Ho∣spitals in London, gave to the Chance∣lor, Master and scholars of the Vniver∣sity of Oxenford, to the use of the body and corporation of the said Vniversity, and to Saint Iohn Baptist Colledge, the summe of three hundred pounds. Thus much for famous Citizens have I noted, concerning their charitable actions, for the most part done by them in their life time. The residue left in trust to their Executors, I have knowne some of them hardly (or never) perfor∣med. Wherefore I wish men to make their owne hands their Executors, and their eyes their Overseers, not forget∣ting the old Proverbe, Women be forgetfull, Children be unkinde, Executors bee covetous, and take what they finde. If any body aske where the deads goods became, They answer; So God mee helpe and holydome, hee dyed a poore man. And now of some women, Citizens wives, deserving memory, for example to posterity, shall be noted. Dame Agnes Foster widdow,Agnes Fo∣ster. some∣time wife to Sir Stephen Foster, Fish∣monger, Maior, 1455. having enlarged the Prison of Ludgate, in 1463. shee procured in a common Councell of this City, certaine Articles to be established for the ease, comfort and reliefe of poor Prisoners there, as in the Chapter of Gates I have set downe. Avice Gibson,Avice Gib∣son foun∣ded a Chappell, a Free-schoole, and Almes houses at Radcliffe. wife unto Nicholas Gib∣son, Grocer, one of the Sheriffes, 1539. by licence of her husband, founded a Free-schoole at Radcliffe neere unto London, appointing to the same for the instruction of threescore poore mens children, a Schoole-master and Vsher with fifty pound. Shee also builded Almes-houses for foureteene poore and aged persons, each of them to receive quarterly sixe shillings eight pence the peece for ever. The government of which Free-schoole and Almes-houses,
she left in confidence to the Coopers in London. This vertuous Gentlewoman, was afterward joyned in marriage with Sir Anthony Knevet,Cursed is hee that removeth his neigh∣bours marke, have I read. Knight, and so called the Lady Knevet. A faire painted Table of her picture was placed in the Chap∣pell, which she had built there, but of late removed thence, by the like reason, as the Grocers Armes (fixed on the outer wall of the Schoole-house, are pulled downe, and the Coopers set in place. Margaret Danne,Margaret Danne. Widdow to Willi∣am Danne, Ironmonger, one of the She∣riffes of London, 1570. gave by her te∣stament to the Ironmongers two thou∣sand pounds, to be lent to young men of that Company, paying after the rate of 5. pounds the yeere for every hundred, which hundred pounds so arising yeerly was to be imployed on charitable acti∣ons, as shee then appointed; but not performed in more than thirty yeeres after. The Lady Baineham, sometime an Aldermans Widdow of this City,The Lady Baineham her chari∣ty. gave to the poore of the Drapers Company, ten pounds yeerely for ever. The Lady Forman gave to be distri∣buted among the severall hospitals forty pounds.The Lady Forman her charity. The Lady Barne,The Lady Barne her charity. Wife to Sir George Barne, Haberdasher, and Lord Maior of London, gave also to the said hospitals, fourescore pounds. The Lady Anne Saunders,The Lady Saunders her chari∣ty. sometime also an Aldermans wife of London, gave unto the reliefe of the said Hospitals, the summe of one hundred and twenty pound. The Lady Anne Hunt,The Lady Hunt her charity. Wife to Sir Thomas Hunt, Skinner, gave in like manner for reliefe of the several Ho∣s∣pitals in London, the summe of one hun∣dred and fourescore pounds. The Lady Frances Ierningham,The Lady Ierningham her chari∣ty. Wid∣dow, out of her Christian and charita∣ble disposition to the said Hospitals, gave liberally the summe of three hun∣dred and forty pounds. The Lady Frances,The Coun∣tesse of Sussex her charity. sometime Coun∣tesse of Sussex, but a great friend and well-willer to the City of London, and knowne to be a very godly and religious Lady, gave to the said Hospitals the summe of one hundred pounds. The Lady Katharine Constable,The Lady Constable her chari∣ty. being said to be bred and brought up in this Honourable Citie, declared her love thereto at her death, and gave unto the Hospitals the summe of two hundred pounds. The Lady Webbe, sometime Wife to Sir William Webbe,The Lady VVeb her charity. Ironmonger, Al∣derman and Lord Maior of London, gave to be distributed among the seve∣rall Hospitals, the summe of three hun∣dred pounds. The Lady Gresham, wife sometime to Sir Thomas Gresham,The Lady Gresham her chari∣ty, Mercer, and A∣gent beyond the Seas to Queene Eli∣zabeth of famous memory, gave also to the Hospitals, fourescore and tenne pounds. The Lady Mary Ramsey,The Chri∣stian and bountifull charity of the Lady Ramsey. wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, about the yeere one thousand, five hundred, seventy se∣ven, being seized of Lands in Fee-sim∣ple of her owne inheritance, amounting to the yeerely value of two hundred forty three pounds; by consent of her said husband, gave the same to Christs Hospitall in London, towards the reliefe of the poore children there, and other charitable uses, as shall bee decla∣red. To the Master and Vsher of the Schoole belonging to Christs-Church, she gave yeerely twenty pounds. To the Schoolemaster of Hawsted,Her love to lear∣ning. by the yeere for ever, shee gave twenty pounds. To tenne poore Widdowes, beside apparell and houses, yeerely twenty pounds. To two poore people,Her care of the poore. a man and a woman by her appointed, during their lives she gave unto each of them yeere∣ly, two pounds thirteene shillings and foure pence. To two Fellowes of Peter-house, in the Vniversity of Cambridge, and towards the reliefe of foure Schollers yeerly for∣ty pounds. To St. Bartholemews Hospitall, tenne pounds. To Newgate, Ludgate, and both the Compters,Her cha∣rity to the poore pri∣soners. each of them, ten pounds. After the expiration of certaine Lea∣ses, there is to come unto Christs Ho∣spitall
yeerely the summe of one hun∣dred and twenty pounds. To three severall Parishes in London,To pari∣shes in London. namely, Saint Andrews Vndershaft, Saint Peters the poore, and Saint Mary Wol∣noth in Lumbardstreet, tenne pounds to each. Towards the maintenance of sixe poore Scholars in Cambridge, twenty pounds. Towards the reliefe of tenne poore maimed Souldiers,Care for poore maimed Souldiers. beside cassoks, caps, hose and shooes yeerely, the summe of twenty pounds. For two Sermons yeerely, forty shil∣lings. She gave to the poore of Christschurch Parish yeerely for ever, the summe of fifty shillings. To the poore of the Company of Drapers in London, she gave ten pounds yeerely. All these gifts already rehearsed, are to continue for every yeerely. Moreover, to each of these five Com∣panies, Her care for poore beginners in the world. of Grocers, Drapers, Gold∣smiths, Haberdashers, and Merchant-Tailors, shee gave the summe of one thousand two hundred pounds, to bee lent to young Trades-men for foure yeeres. Shee gave to the Maior and Com∣munalty of Bristow, a thousand pounds, to be imployed toward the new hospi∣tall there, and other charitable uses, by the consent of her Executors. To certaine Parishes in the Coun∣trey, Her cha∣rity to di∣vers Pa∣rishes in the coun∣trey. as Berden, Newport, Clavering, Langley, Rickling, Quenden, Stocking, Pelham, and Walden, she gave the sum of one hundred pounds, to buy forty Gownes of Freeze for women, and sixty Coats for men, the remainder and over∣plus to goe to the poore. She gave to poore maids marriages, forty pounds. Moreover, shee gave the summe of five hundred pounds, towards the relea∣sing of such prisoners, as lye for the debt of forty shillings, in any of the prisons in London and Southwarke. She gave beside, the summe of three thousand pounds, to other good and godly uses. The Lady Elizabeth Billingsley,The Lady Billingsley her love to learning. wife to Sir Henry Billingsley, Haberdasher, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, gave to her said husband, the summe of 4000. pounds, therewith to purchase lands in convenient time, and willed, that the residue of the profits of the said lands, should be bestowed upon a Scho∣larship and a Fellowship, in the Vniver∣sity of Cambridge, in Saint Iohns Col∣ledge, or any other Colledge there at his discretion. The Lady Anne Iones, sometime wife to Sir Roger Iones,The Lady Iones her love to learning. Dier, and Alderman of London, gave towards the encourage∣ment of poore Scholars in the Vniversi∣ties, 29. pounds, at the discretion of her Executors. The Lady Spencer,The Lady Spencer her charity. sometime wife to Sir Iohn Spencer, Clothworker, Alder∣man and Lord Maior of London, gave to be distributed among the Hospitals, the summe of threescore and ten pounds. The Lady Anne Glover,The Lady Glover her charity. sometime wife to Sir William Glover, Dier, Alder∣man of London, gave to reliefe of the Hospitals, the summe of fourescore pounds. The Lady Barbara Stone,The Lady Stone her charity. sometime wife to Sir William Stone, Clothworker, gave to the reliefe of Christs Hospitall, one hundred pounds. Mistris Elizabeth Walter,Mistris Walter her love to learning. sometime wife to Richard Walter, Girdler, gave 2. Fellowships to Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge. More, for the reliefe of poore Prea∣chers, such as want livings, she gave the summe of three hundred pounds. Mistris Alice Barnham,Mistris Barnham her love to lear∣ning. mother to M. Benedict Barnham, Draper and Alder∣man of London, gave to both Vniversi∣ties, 20. pound. Mistris Elizabeth Scot,Mistris Scot, her love to learning. sometime wife to Iohn Scot, Salter, gave to the re∣liefe of poore Scholars in the Vniversi∣ties, forty pounds. Mistris Katharine Garway gave also to the same benefit of poore Scholars,Mistris Garway her love to learning. twenty pounds. Mistris Cicely Hawes,Mistris Hawes her love to learning. gave to poore Scholars in the Vniversities, twenty pounds. Mistris Alice Hill,Mistris Hill her chari∣ty. Widdow, gave for the reliefe of poore prisoners, in the severall Prisons in and about London, one hundred pounds. Mistris Elizabeth Packingten,Mistris Packingten her chari∣ty. Wid∣dow,
gave to Christs Hospitall,Mistris Packington her chari∣ty. three∣score pounds. Mistris Elizabeth Smith,Mistris Smith her charity. Widdow, gave to be distributed among the Ho∣spitals, fourescore pounds. Mistris Elizabeth Flicton,Mistris Electon her charity. sometime wife to Robert Electon, Grocer, gave un∣to Christs Hospitall, the summe of 66. pounds. Mistris margery Simcotes,Mistris Simcotes her chari∣ty. sometime wife to George Simcotes, Grocer, gave unto Christs Hospitall, for reliefe of the poore Children, one hundred pounds. Mistris Margaret Search,Mistris Search her charity. Widdow, gave unto Christs Hospitall, twenty pounds. Mistris Iane Allington,Mistris Allington her chari∣ty. Widdow, gave unto Christs Hospitall, twenty pounds. Mistris Iane Baker,Mistris Baker her charity. widdow gave to the reliefe of poore maids marriages, an hundred pounds. Mistris Sambach,Mistris Sambach her chari∣ty. widdow, gave to the poore of the parish of Saint Brides in Fleetstreet, the summe of twenty five pounds yeerely. Mistris Venables,Mistris Ve∣nables her charity. widdow, in her love to Christian Religion, gave for the help of poore Preachers, the summe of five thousand pounds. Mistris Clarke,Mistris Clarke her love to Learning. widdow, late wife of Roger Clarke, Salter, and Alderman of London, in the Parish of Saint Margaret Moses, gave for the maintenance of poore Scholars, and other charitable uses beside, the summe of one thousand foure hundred pounds. Mistris Ioane Doxie,Mistris Doxie her charity. Widdow, of Saint Bennet Grasse-Church in London, gave unto Christs Hospitall 5. pounds. She gave to poore Maids marriages, twenty pounds. She gave to the Company of Armo∣rers, for reliefe of foure poore wid∣dowes, for ever yeerely, five pounds to each widdow, desiring to have it called The poore Widdowes Mite. She gave also towards the mainte∣nance of the Lecture in Grasse-Church, fifty shillings yeerely. Mistris Bakhouse,Mistris Bakhouse her love to learning. widdow, gave to the worshipfull Company of Haber∣dashers, the summe of forty pounds yeerely, towards the maintaining of 8. poore Scholars in the Vniversities; al∣lowing to each Scholar yeerely five pounds. Mistris Katharine Woodward,Mistris Woodward her chari∣ty. widdow, gave two hundred pounds to the Com∣pany of Ironmongers, to be lent out to yong men for their helpe. She gave two hundred pounds more, to be distributed unto poore Scholars, the Hospitals, poore Prisoners, poore Parishes, poore Householders, poore Maids marriages: and three pounds thereof for three Sermons yeerely. Mistris Iane Baker,Mistris Ba∣ker her love to learning. widdow, over and besides her former gift, for the helpe of poore Maids marriages, gave to three poore Scholars in Cambridge, and as ma∣ny in Oxenford, the summe of twenty foure pounds, that when they shall se∣verally take degree of Batchelours of Arts, they are to receive foure pounds each man. Mistris Sibilla Iacob,Mistris Ia∣cob her charity. widdow unto Richard Iacob, Vintener, gave unto Christs Hospitall, three pounds, and to Saint Thomas, three pounds. Mistris Margery Philips,Mistris Philips her charity. widdow, gave unto Christs Hospital five pounds, and to Saint Thomas, five pounds. Mistris Anna Whitmore,Mistris Whitmore her liberal charity. sometime wife to Master William Whitmore, Ha∣berdasher, out of her most bountifull charity, gave unto Christs Hospital the summe of foure hundred pounds. More, she gave to Saint Thomas Ho∣spitall, twenty pounds. To Saint Bartholomews Hospitall, threescore pounds. She gave also to the Hospitall of Bridewell, to set the poore on worke, an hundred pounds. Mistris Margaret Awdley of Hackney,Mistris Awdley her charity. Widdow, gave unto Christs Hospitall, one hundred pounds. She gave to Saint Bartholomews, fifty pounds. And to Saint Thomas Hospitall, fifty pounds. Mistris Alice Elkin,The wor∣thy chari∣ty of Mi∣stris Alice Owen. widdow to Ma∣ster William Elkin, Mercer and Alder∣man of London, was afterward married to the learned Lawyer, Master Thomas Owen, one of the learned Judges of the Land. This Mistris Alice Owen, caused (in her life time) an Hospitall to bee builded at Istington, for tenne poore women, with very convenient roomes,
and Gardens to them adjoyning. Many other good workes were by her perfor∣med, and in her life time: and accor∣ding as shee franckly and freely gave them, so will I set them downe in order, as followeth. First,The ma∣nifest te∣stimony of her af∣fection to learning. she gave to the Library in the Vniversitie of Oxenford, the summe of two hundred pounds. She gave also to the Library in the Vniversity of Cambridge the summe of twenty pounds. For the foundation of one Fellow∣ship, as also one Scholarship, in Ema∣nuel Colledge in the Vniversity of Cam∣bridge, shee gave a summe of money, the certaine value thereof is not as yet come to my hands. She gave unto Christs Hospitall in London,Her care of the poore. to the end that twelve pence a peece weekely might be given to cer∣taine poore people of Islington, three∣score pounds. Towards the beautifying of the Cloi∣sters of Christs Hospitall, shee gave the summe of sixty six pounds, thirteene shillings, foure pence. Shee gave, towards the maintai∣ning of a Schoole-house at Edmunton, twenty pounds. For a great Bell,A token of her love to the Coun∣trey. to be rung and used in the Parish of Condover in Shrop∣shire, shee gave the summe of fiftie pounds. Item, The building of the Almes∣houses at Islington, and purchasing of the Land laid to them, did cost her the sum of one thousand, foure hundred and fifteene pounds. Close to the said Almes-houses,Her pro∣vidence for the poore in her almes-houses. she builded a Schoolehouse and a Chappel of ease, that the poore might not goe over-far to Church, the charges where∣of did cost her the summe of three hun∣dred, sixty one pounds. Yeerely also shee gave good summes of money,All these things were done in her life time. to poore Preachers unbene∣ficed, as also to the Prisons in and about London, all these being done in her life time. By her last Will and Testament,Gifts ap∣pointed by her will. she hath provided, that 22. pounds yeerely shall be purchased, for the maintenance of the Schoole at Islington. She hath bequeathed to poore Prea∣chers the summe of 35. pounds. She hath given to the Parish of Bash∣ingshaw, (wherein sometime she dwelt) to increase the stocke of the poore there, twenty pounds. She hath given to the Prisons, eight pounds. To the Company of Brewers in Lon∣don, to whose trust and care shee hath committed the government and over∣sight of the forenamed Almes-houses and Schoole-house at Islington; as a gratefull remembrance of her love, and that their paines should not goe altoge∣ther unregarded, she hath given in plate and money, one hundred pounds. And here let mee tell you, that the charity of this vertuous and religious woman,A worthy example, and well deserving imitation. deserveth the more to bee re∣membred, and commended also to po∣sterity; because she made her owne eyes the witnesses, to all or the greater part of the severall summes, first mentioned and given in her life time. And yet at the time of her death, of children and childrens children, she had no lesse than two and twenty: A motive very able to hinder charity, espe∣cially in a worldly and covetous minde. Neverthelesse, looking on all the parts disposed to her children, and the other dividents beside, she selected out so bountifull a portion for those poore members of Christ, that (even to the worlds end) may successively remember her good done to them, and justly terme her their liberall and mercifull mother. One thing (above the rest) I may not forget; because in deliverances from a∣ny dangers, wee owe a more speciall duty and gratitude to God. This worthy woman being borne at Islington,A great danger she esca∣ped in her childhood. in the time of her childhood, she hapned there to escape a great dan∣ger, by meanes of an Arrow shot at randome in the field, where shee was then sporting among other children, the Arrow missing all the other, pierced quite thorow the hat on her head, and (God be praised for it) did not touch her with any other harme:The reasō of ere∣cting her Almes-houses. whereupon, in the Towne of her birth, and where shee escaped such an expected perill, shee made choice to expresse her thank∣fulnesse to GOD, upon the Altar of her
charitable Almes-houses and Schoole. Thus much for the worthinesse of Citizens (both men and women) in this Citie,Iohn Lid∣gate, in praise of Londoners of his time. touching whom, Iohn Lid∣gate, a Monke of Bury, in the reigne of King Henry the sixth, made (amongst other) these Verses following: Of seven things I praise this Citie: Of true meaning and faithfull observance, Of righteousnesse, truth and equity; Of stablenesse aye kept in Legiance, And for of vertue thou hast suffisance: In this lond here, and other londs all, The Kings Chamber of Custom men thee call.
Having thus in a generality handled the Original, the Wals, Gates, Ditches, and fresh Waters; the Bridges, Towers and Castles; the Schooles of Learning, and Houses of Law; the Orders and Customes, Sports and Pastimes, Watchings and Martiall Exercises; and lastly, the honour and worthinesse of the Citizens: I am now to set downe the distribution of this Citie into Parts; and more especially, to declare the Antiquities (note worthy) in every of the same: and how both the whole and parts have bin (from time to time) ruled and governed. THe ancient division of this Citie,The Citie of London divided from East to west, in∣to a South halfe and a North halfe. was in∣to Wards or Alder∣manries: and there∣fore I will beginne at the East, and so proceed thorow the high and most principall street of the Citie to the West, after this manner: First, through Aldgate street, to the West corner of Saint Andrews Church, called Vndershaft, on the right hand, and Limestreet corner on the left; all which is of Aldgate Ward. From thence through Cornehill street, to the West corner of Leaden-hall; all which is of Limestreet Ward. From thence, leaving the street that leadeth to Bishopsgate on the right hand, and the way that leadeth into Grasse-street on the left, still through Cornehill street, by the Conduit, to the West corner against the Stockes; all which is in Cornehill Ward.The Stocks market the midst of the Ci∣tie. Then by the said Stockes (a Market-place both of Fish and Flesh, standing in the midst of the Citie) through the Poultry, (a street so called, to the great Conduit in West Cheape, and so through Cheape to the Standard, which is of Cheape Ward, except on the South side from Bow-lane to the said Standard, which is of Cord∣wayner-street Ward. Then by the Stan∣dard to the great Crosse, which is in Creplegate Ward on the North side, and in Breadstreet Ward on the South side: and to the little Conduit by Pauls gate, from whence (of old time) the said high street stretched straight on to Ludgate, all in the Ward of Farringdon within, then divided truely from East to West: but since,S. Pauls Church burned in the Con∣querour time. by meanes of the burning of Pauls Church, which was in the reigne of William the first, Mauricius, then Bi∣shop of London, laid the foundation of a new Church, so farre in largenesse ex∣ceeding the old, that the way towards Ludgate was thereby greatly straight∣ned, as before I have discoursed. Now, from the North to the South,The Citie divided frō north to south, into an east halfe & a west halfe. this Citie was (of old time) divided, not by a large highway or street, as from East to West, but by a faire Brooke of sweet water, which came from out the North Fields, through the Wall and midst of the Citie, into the River of Thames, and which division is (till this day) constantly and without change maintained. This water was called (as I have said) Walbrooke;The course of Wal∣brooke, and reason of the name. not Gallus brook, of a Romane Captaine, slaine by Ascle∣piodatus, and throwne therein, as some have fabuled; but of running through and from the Wall of this Citie. The course whereof, (to prosecute it parti∣cularly) was and is from the said Wall, to Saint Margarets Church in Lothbu∣ry; from thence, beneath the lower part of the Grocers Hall, about the East part of their Kitchen, under Saint Mildreds Church, somewhat West from the said Stockes Market: from thence, through Buckles berry, by one great house buil∣ded of stone and Timber, called the old Barge; because Barges out of the River of Thames were then rowed up so farre into this Brooke, on the backe-side of the houses in Walbrooke street, (which street taketh name of the said Brooke) By the West end of S. Iohns Church upon Walbrooke, under Horshooe Bridge,
by the West side of Tallow-Chandlers Hall, and of the Skinners Hall, and so behind the other houses to Elbow lane, and by a part thereof, downe Greene∣witch lane, into the River of Thames. This is the course of Walbrooke,The course of VVal∣brooke ar∣ched over. which was (of old time) bridged over in divers places, for passage of horses and men, as need required: but since, by meanes of encrochment on the banks thereof, the channel being greatly straightned, and other annoyances done thereunto, at length the same (by common consent) was arched over with bricke, and paved with stone, equall with the ground, where-through it passed, and is now in most places builded upon, that no man may by the eye discerne it; and there∣fore the trace thereof is hardly knowne to the common people. This Citie being thus divided from East to West,This City divided intowards and from North to South; I am now further to shew, how the same was (of old time) broken into divers parts, called Wards, whereof Fitzstephen,Fitzstephen. more than foure hundred yeeres since, writeth thus: This Citie (saith he) even as Rome, is divided into Wards: it hath yeerely Sheriffes, in stead of Consuls: It hath the dignity of Senators in Aldermen, &c. The number of these Wards in Lon∣don, Wards in London 24. Patent Record. were both before and in the reigne of Henry the third, 24. in all: whereof 13. lay on the East side of the said Wal∣brooke, and 11. on the West. Notwith∣standing, these 11. grew much more large than those on the East: and ther∣fore in the yeere of Christ, 1393. the seventeenth of Richard the second, Fa∣ringdon Ward, which was then one en∣tire Ward, but mightily increased of buildings without the gates; was by Parliament appointed to be divided in∣to twaine, and to have two Aldermen, to wit, Faringdon within, and Faringdon without, which made up the number of twelve Wards on the West side of Walbrooke, and so came the whole num∣ber of 25. on both sides.Wards in London 25. Moreover, in the yeere 1550. the Mai∣or, Communalty, and Citizens of Lon∣don, purchasing the liberties of the Bur∣rough of Southwarke, appointed the same to be a Ward of London; and so became the number of thirteene wards on the East, twelve on the West, and one South the River Thames, in the said Borough of Southwarke, in the County of Surrey;VVards in London and the Borough of South∣warke, 26. which in all arise to the num∣ber of 26. Wards, and 26. Aldermen of London to governe them. Wards on the East part of Walbrook are these: 1. Portsoken ward,Names of wards in London. without the wals. 2. Towerstreet ward. 3. Ealdgate ward. 4. Limestreet ward. 5. Bishopsgate ward, within the wals, and without. 6. Broadstreet ward. 7. Cornehill ward. 8. Langbourne ward. 9. Billingsgate ward. 10. Bridge ward within. 11. Candlewike-street ward. 12. Walbrooke ward. 13. Downgate ward. Wards on the West side of Walbrook are these: 14. Vintry ward. 15. Cordwainer-street ward. 16. Cheape ward. 17. Colman-street ward. 18. Bassings-Hall ward. 19. Creplegate ward, within and without. 20. Aldersgate ward, within and without. 21. Faringdon ward within. 22. Breadstreet ward. 23. Queene Hith ward. 24. Castle Baynard ward. 25. Faringdon ward without the wals. One ward is south the River of Thames in the Burrough of Southwarke, by the name of, 26. Bridge ward without.
OF PORTSOKEN VVARD: The first Ward in the East part. SEeing that of every of these Wards I have to say somewhat,Portsoken ward. I will be∣gin with Portsoken ward without Ealdgate. This Portsoken, which soundeth the Franchise at the gate, was sometime a Guild,Lib. Trinit. Knighten Guild. and had beginning in the dayes of King Edgar, more than six hundred yeeres since. Therewere then 13. Knights or Souldiers, well belo∣ved to the King and Realme, for servi∣ces by them done, who requested to have a certaine portion of Land on the East part of the Citie, being left deso∣late and forsaken by the Inhabitants, by reason of too much servitude. They be∣sought the King to have this Land, with the liberty of a Guild forever. The King granted to their request, with conditi∣ons following; to wit, That each of them should victoriously accomplish three Combates; one above the ground, one under ground, and the third in the water. And after this, at a certaine day in East Smithfield, they should runne with Speares against all commers; all which was gloriously performed; and the same day the King named it Knighten Guild,Bounds of Knighten Guild, or Portsoken ward. and so bounded it, from Ealdgate, to the place where the barres now are toward the East, on both the sides of the street, and extended it towards Bishopsgate in the North, unto the house then of Willi∣am Presbyter, afterward of Geffrey Tan∣ner, and then of the heires of Clover; after that, of Iohn Easeby: but since of the Lord Bourchier, &c. And againe, to∣wards the South, unto the River of Thames, and so farre into the water, as a Horseman entring the same, might ride at a low water, and throw his Speare. So that all East Smithfield, with the right part of the street that goeth to Dodding Pond, into the Thames, and al∣so the Hospitall of Saint Katharine, with the Mils, that were founded in King Stephens dayes, and the outward stone wall, and the new ditch of the Tower, were of the said Fee and Liberty: for the said wall and ditch of the Tower, were made in the time of King Richard the first, when he was in the holy Land, by William Longshampe, Bishop of Ely, as before I have noted unto you. These Knights had as then none o∣ther Charter, by all the dayes of Edgar, Ethelred, and Cnutus, untill the time of Edward the Confessor, whom the heires of those Knights humbly besought to confirme their liberties: whereunto he graciously granting, gave them a Deed thereof,Lib. Trinit. as appeareth in the Booke of the late house of the holy Trinity. The said Charter was faire written, in the Saxon letter and Tongue. After this, King William, the sonne of William the Conquerour, made a confir∣mation of the same Liberties, unto the heires of those Knights, in these words: William, King of England, to Mau∣rice, Bishop, and Godfrey de Magum, and Richard de Parre, and to his faith∣full people of London, greeting: Know yee me to have granted to the men of Knighten Guild, the Guild that belonged to them, and the Land that belonged thereunto, with all Customes, as they had the same in the time of King Edward, and my Fa∣ther.
Witnesse Hugh de Buche; at Re∣thing. After him, King Henry the first con∣firmed the same by his Charter, to the like effect,Priory of the Trini∣ty within Ealdgate. the recitall whereof I preter∣mit for brevity. After which time, the Church of the holy Trinity within Eald∣gate of London, being founded by Queen Matilde, wife to the said Henry, the mul∣titude of brethren praising God there∣in, in short time so increased, that all the Citie was delighted in beholding of them: insomuch that in the yeere 1115. certaine Burgesses of London, of the progeny of those Noble English Knights; to wit, Radulphus Fitzalgod, Wilmarde le Devereshe, Orgare le Prude, Edward Hupcornehill, Blackstanus, and Alwine his kinsman, and Robert his bro∣ther, the sonnes of Leofstanus the Gold∣smith, Wiso his sonne, Hugh Fitzvulgar, Algare Secusme, comming together into the Chapter house of the said Church of the holy Trinity,Knighten Guild givē the Canōs of the ho∣ly Trinity. gave to the same Church and Canons serving God ther∣in, all the Lands and Soke called in English, Knighten Guild, which lyeth to the wall of the Citie without the same gate, and stretcheth to the River of Thames: they gave it, I say, (taking up∣on them the brotherhood and partici∣pation of the benefits of that house) by the hands of Prior Norman. And the better to confirme this their Grant, they offered upon the Altar there, the Charter of Edward, together with the other Charters which they had thereof; and afterward they did put the foresaid Prior in seisin thereof, by the Church of Saint Buttolphs, which is builded thereon, and is the head of that Land. These things were thus done, be∣fore Bernard Prior of Dunstable, Iohn Prior of Derland, Geffrey Clinton Cham∣berlaine, and many other Clerkes and Laymen, French and English: Orgare le Prude (one of their company) was sent to King Henry, beseeching him to con∣firme their gift, which the King gladly granted by his deed. Henry, King of England, to R. Bishop of London, to the Sheriffes and Provost, and to all his Barons, and faithfull people, French and English, of London and Mid∣dlesex, greeting: Know ye me to have gran∣ted and confirmed to the Church and Ca∣nons of the holy Trinity of London, the Soke of the English Knighten Guild, and the Land which pertaineth thereunto, and the Church of S. Buttolph, as the men of the same Guild have given and granted un∣to them: And I will and straightly com∣mand, that they may hold the same well, and honourably and freely, with Sacke and Soke, Toll and Thea, infangthefe, and all customes belonging to it, as the men of the same Guild in best sort had the same in the time of King Edward, and as King William my Fa∣ther, and brother, did grant it to them by their Writs. Witnesse, A. the Queene, Geffrey Clinton the Chancellour, and William of Clinton: at Woodstocke. All these prescribed witings (saith my Booke) which sometime belonged to the Priory of the holy Trinity, are registred in the end of the Booke of Re∣membrances, in the Guildhall of Lon∣don, marked with the letter C. folio 134. The King sent also his Sheriffes, to wit, Abery de Vere, and Roger, Nephew to Hubert, which (upon his behalfe) should invest this Church with the possessions hereof, which the said Sheriffes accom∣plished by comming upon the ground, Andrew Buchevite, and the forenamed witnesses, and other standing by; not∣withstanding, Othowerus, Acolivillus, Otto,Cōstables of the Tower. and Ieffrey, Earle of Essex, Con∣stables of the Tower by succession, with∣held by force a Portion of the said land, as I have before delivered.Part of Knighten Guild with-held by the Cōstables of the Tower. The Prior and Canons of the holy Trinity, being thus seised of the said land and soke of Knighten Guild, a part of the Suburbe without the wall, (but within the liber∣ties of the City) the same Prior was for him, and his successors, admitted as one of the Aldermen of London,Prior of the Trini∣ty an Al∣derman of London. to governe the same land and soke. According to the Customes of the City, hee did sit in Court, and rode with the Maior and his Brethren the Aldermen, as one of them in Scarlet, or other livery as they then used; untill the yeere 1531. at the which time, the said Priory (by the last Prior there) was surrendred to King Henry the eight in the 23. of his reigne, who gave this Priory to Sir Thomas Audley, Knight, Lord Chancelor of Eng∣land, and hee pulled downe the Church. Sithence the which dissolution of that house, the said Ward of Portsoken, hath
been governed by a temporall man, one of the Aldermen of London, and elected by the Citizens, as by the Aldermen of other Wards. Thus much for the out∣bounds of Knighten Guild, or Portsoken Ward, and for the antiquity and govern∣ment thereof. Now for the parts therein, this is spe∣cially to be noted. First, the East part of the Tower standeth there, then an Hospitall of Saint Katharine, founded by Matilde the Queene, wife to King Stephen, by licence of the Prior and Co∣vent of the holy Trinity in London, on whose ground shee founded it.Hospitall of Saint Katharines. A second Foundres. Elianor the Queene, wife to King Edward the first, a second Foundresse, appointed to be there, one Master, three Brethren Chaplaines, and three Sisters, ten poore women, and sixe poore Clerkes; shee gave to them the Manor of Clarton in Wiltshire, and Vpchurch in Kent, &c. Queene Philip, wife to King Edward the third, 1351. founded a Chauntry there, and gave to that Hospitall tenne pound land by yeere; it was of late time cal∣led a free Chappell, a Colledge, and an Hospitall for poore sisters. The Quire, which (of late yeeres) was not much in∣feriour to that of Pauls, was dissolved by Doctor Wilson, a late Master there, the brethren and sisters remaining. This house was valued at 315. l. 14. s. 2. d. being now of late yeeres inclosed about or pestered with small Tenements, and homely cottages, having inhabitants English and Strangers, more in number than in some City in England. There lye buried in this Church, the Coun∣tesse of Huntington, Countesse of the March, in her time 1429. Iohn Holland Duke of Excester, and Earle of Hunting∣ton, 1447. and his two wives, in a faire Tombe on the North side the Quire: Thomas Walsingham Esquire, and Thomas Ballard Esquire by him 1465. Thomas Flemming Knight, 1466. &c. On the East and by North of the Tower,New Abby on East∣smithfield. lieth Eastsmithfield and Tower hill, two plots of ground so called, with∣out the wall of the City, and East from them both was sometime a Monastery, called, New Abby, founded by King Edward the third, in the yeere 1359. upon occasion as followeth. In the yeere 1348. the 23. of Edward the third,Buriall for the dead prepared in time of pestilence. the first great pestilence in his time began, and increased so sore, that for want of roome in Church-yards to bury the dead of the City, & of the Sub∣urbes, one Iohn Corey Clerke, procured of Nicholas, Prior of the holy Trinity within Ealdgate, one toft of ground neere unto Eastsmithfield, for the buriall of them that dyed, with condition that it might be called the Church-yard of the holy Trinity, which ground he caused by the ayd of divers devout Citizens to be inclosed with a wall of stone. Robert Elsing, sonne of William Elsing, gave five pounds thereunto: and the same was dedicated by Ralfe Stratford, Bishop of London, where innumerable bodies of the dead were afterward buried, and a Chappell built in the same place, to the honour of God: to the which King Ed∣ward setting his eye (having before in a Tempest on the Sea, and perill of drow∣ning, made a vow to build a Monastery to the honour of God, and our Lady of grace, if God would grant him grace to come safe to land) builded there aCausing it to bee named Eastmin∣ster. Mo∣nastery, placing an Abbot, and Monkes of the Cistercian, or white order. The bounds of this plot of ground, together with a decree for tithes thereof, are ex∣pressed in the Charter, the effect wher∣of I have set down in another place, and have to shew. This house at the late generall sup∣pression was valued at 546. l. 10. d. yeerely, it was surrendred in the yeere 1539. the 30. of Henry the 8. Since the which time, the said Monastery being cleane pulled down, by Sir Arthur Dar∣cy, Knight, and other; of late time (in place thereof) is builded a large Store∣house for Victual,The Kings Store∣house. and convenient Ovens are builded there, for baking of Bisket to serve his Majesties Shippes. The grounds adjoyning and belonging to the said Abby, are imployed in building of small Tenements. For Tower-hill,Towerhill. as the same is great∣ly diminished, by building of tenements and Garden plots, &c. So it is of late, to wit, in the yeere of Christ, 1593. on the North side thereof, and at the West end of Hogstreet,Merchant-Taylors Almes∣houses at the Tower hill. beautified by certaine faire Almes-houses, strongly builded of Bricke and Timber, and covered with Slate for the poore, by the Merchant-Taylors
of London, in place of some small Cottages, given to them by Ri∣chard Hils, sometime a Master of that Company, one hundred loads of Tim∣ber for that use, being also given by An∣thony Radcliffe, of the same Society, Al∣derman. In these Almes-houses 14. charitable brethren of the said Merchant-Taylors then living, caused to be placed foure∣teene poore sole women, which receive each of them of their Founders sixteene pence, or better, weekely, beside 8. l. 15. s. yeerely, paid out of the common Treasury of the same Corporation for fewell. From the West part of this Tower∣hill, towards Ealdgate, being a long con∣tinuall street, amongst other smaller buildings in that row, there was some∣times an Abby of Nunnes of the order of S. Clare,Abby of S. Clare Nuns called the Minories. called the Minories, founded by Edmund, Earle of Lancaster, Leicester and Darby, brother to King Edward the first, in the yeere 1293. the length of which Abby contained 15. perches and seven foot, neere unto the Kings street, or high-way, &c. as appeareth by a deed dated 1303. A plague of pesti∣lence, being in this City, in the yeere 1515. there dyed in this house of Nuns professed, to the number of 27. besides other lay people, servants in the house. This house was valued to dispend 418. l. 8. s. 5. d. yeerely, and was surren∣dred by Dame Elizabeth Salvage, the last Abbesse there, unto King Henry the 8. in the thirty of his reigne, the yeere of Christ, 1539. In place of this house of Nunnes,Store-house for Armour. is now builded with divers faire and large Store-houses for Armour, and habili∣ments of warre, with divers workhouses serving to the same purpose:Parish Church of S. Trinity. There is also a small Parish Church for inhabi∣tants of the Close, called, Saint Tri∣nity. Neere adjoyning to this Abby,A farme by the Mi∣nories, wherein hath been sold three pints of milke for one halfe-penny, in memo∣ry of men living. on the South side thereof, was sometime a Farme belonging to the said Nunrie, at the which Farme, I my selfe (in my youth) have fetched many a halfe-pen∣ny worth of milke, and never had lesse than three ale pintes for a halfe penny in the Summer, nor lesse than one ale quart for a halfe-penny in the Winter, alwaies hot from the Kine, as the same was milked and strained. One Trolop, and afterwards Goodman, were the Far∣mers there, and had thirty or forty Kine to the paile. Goodmans son, being heire to his fathers purchase, let out the ground, first for grazing of horses, and then for Garden plots, and lived like a Gentleman thereby. He lyeth buried in S. Buttolphs Church. On the other side of that street,Ditch of the City lay open and was cleansed, but now filled up. lyeth the Ditch without the walls of the City which of old time was used to lye open, alwaies (from time to time) cleansed from filth and mud, as need required, of great breadth, and so deepe, that divers watring horses, where they thought it shallowest, were drowned both horse and man. But now of later time, the same Ditch is inclosed, and the bankes thereof let out for Garden plots, Car∣penters yards, Bowling Allies, and di∣vers houses thereon builded, whereby the City wall is hidden, the Ditch fil∣led up, a small Channell left, and that very shallow. From Ealdgate East, lyeth a large street, and high-way, sometime reple∣nished with few, but faire and comely buildings; on the North side whereof, first was and is, the Parish Church of Saint Buttolph, in a large Cemitery, or Church-yard. This Church hath beene lately new builded,Parish Church of S. Buttolph. at the speciall charges of the Priors of the holy Trinity, Patrones thereof, as it appeareth by the Armes of that house engraven on the stone worke. The Parishioners of the Parish, being of late yeeres mightily increased, the Church is pestered with lofts and seats for them. Monuments of this Church are few, Henry Iorden founded a Chauntery there, Iohn Romany, Olarie and Agnes his wives were buried there, about Anno 1408. Richard Chester Al∣derman, one of the Sheriffes 1484. Tho∣mas Lord Darcy of the North, Knight of the Garter, beheaded, 1537. Sir Ni∣cholas Carew of Bedington in Surrey, Knight of the Garter, beheaded, 1538. Sir Arthur Darcy, yongest sonne to Tho∣mas Lord Darcy, deceased at the new Abby on the Tower-hill, and was buri∣ed there. There is a faire Vault under ground,
purposely made (as appeareth) for the whole Family. Over which Vault (be∣ing in the East end of the Chancell, but leaning somewhat to the North) is a faire ancient Tombe of Alabaster, inge∣niously wrought: having these lines fol∣lowing engraven thereon: Here lyeth Thomas Lord Darcy of the North, and sometime of the Order of the Garter. Sir Nicholas Carew, Knight, sometime of the Garter. Lady Eliza∣beth Carew, Daughter to Sir Francis Brian, Knight: and Sir Arthur Darcy Knight, yonger sonne to the above-named Lord Darcy. And Lady Mary his deare wife, Daughter to Sir Nicholas Carew Knight; who had tenne Sonnes, and five Daughters. Here lye Charles, Willi∣am and Philip, Mary and Vrsula, Sons and Daughters to the said Sir Arthur, and Mary his Wife: whose soules God take to his infinite mercy. Amen. On the North side of this Tombe, there is a small Monument, fixed in the wall, bearing this inscription: Here lyeth Sir Edw. Darcy, Knight, third Son of Sir Arthur Darcy, Knight, of the Privy Chamber to the late Queene Eli∣zabeth. Hee married the Daughter of Thomas Asteley, Esquire, by whom he had fifteene Children. Sir Robert Dar∣cy, Knight, his eldest Sonne, caused him to bee buried in this Vault amongst his Ancestors, according to his desire. Hee dyed at his house called Dartford-Place in Kent, the 28. day of October. Anno Dom. 1612. He being 69. yeeres old. Another smaller Monument is also fixed in the same wall, but somewhat more toward the South, having this in∣scription: Here lyeth buried the corps of Robert Tay∣lor, of Silverdale, in the Parish of Warton in the County of Lancaster, Gentleman, the Father of Iohn Taylor, Citizen and Draper of London, and of this Parish Beere-brewer. He departed this life, about the age of 80. yeeres, the 15. day of February, An. Dom. 1577. Vpon the ground, under the head of the Communion Table, lyeth an anci∣ent faire stone, and these lines engraven theron in brasse: Hic jacet Ioannes, Episc. Bathon. & Wellensis, qui cum obiissit plures in∣sig. Legation. tandem obiit summum in Legatione Clevensis, in Ianuarii. M. C. XL. Cujus anima propitietur Deus. Neere unto the place where the Mi∣nister readeth Divine Service, there is a small brasse plate fixed in the wall, a very unworthy Monument (in my mind) for a man of so great charity and boun∣ty, not having so much as a graven stone bestowed on him upon the ground. The Plate containeth these lines following. Here before this Pew lyeth buried the body of Robert Dow, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, with Lettice his Wife, and Thomas his Son. Which Ro∣bert deceased the second day of May, in the yeere, 1612. His age was 89. yeeres. Who amongst other his charities done in this Citie, and elsewhere sundry wayes, as to severall Hospitals abroad and at home, Prisons, and to nineteene poore housholders, of the Merchant-Taylors Company in perpetuum, gave to this Parish of S. Buttolphs without Ald∣gate (whereof he was a member) the no∣mination of two Almes-women freely re∣lieved. And twenty pound yeerely to be distributed to threescore poore aged and impotent men and women, by Nobles a peece upon every S. Thomas Eve for e∣ver. Ad gloriam Dei. Per Nepotem ac Haeredem Zachari Dow, Posthumum. In the North Ile of the Chancell, ly∣eth a faire stone on the ground, with this inscription upon it, engraven in brasse: Here lyeth the body of William Cowch, one of the ordinary Yeomen of her Maje∣sties Chamber, Citizen and In-holder of London. He deceased the 13. day of Iu∣ly, An. Dom. 1583. Who hath given (after the decease of Ioane his Wife) the house, called the Crowne, being at the East end of this Church, called S. But∣tolphs without Aldgate, unto Christs Hospitall for ever. Out of the which house after the decease of the said Ioane his Wife, is to be paid by the Governours of the said Hospitall, five pound yeerely
for ever, to the poore of Portsoken Ward, within the said Parish. In the middle Ile of the Church, be∣fore the entrance into the Chancell, ly∣eth a faire Grave-stone on the ground, having this inscription engraven upon Brasle upon it: Dies mei sicut umbra declinaverunt, & ego sicut foenum aresco. Here under this Stone lyeth buried the bo∣dy of Robert Cockes, late Citizen and Tallow-Chandler of London: Who by his last will and Testament, gave to this Ward of Portsoken (wherein he dwelt) the summe of one hundred pounds, to be employed for the use and benefit of the poore of the said Ward. He departed this mortall life the 20. day of September, An. Dom. 1609. and was here enter∣red the 3. day of October next following: Aetatis suae. LXVII. Vixi dum volui, volui dum Christe volebas, Christe mihi spes es, vita, corona, salus. In the same Ile, but a little lower, ly∣eth another faire grave-stone, having (in a whiter kind of stone) a coat of Armes on it, and a description in well formed letters, speaking thus: Here underneath this stone, lyeth the body of Daniel Balgay, sometime an Inhabi∣tant of this Parish; of good account and credit: being a Citizen of this honoura∣ble City of London, and free of the wor∣shipfull Company of the Mercers: Who parted this mortall life the 20. day of DDDecember, in the yeere of our Lord, 1608 being the day of the Nativity of our Lord Iesus Christ. Christus mihi vita. In the Church-yard Southward, and toward the street, standeth a handsome Ttombe, well defenced over from wea∣ther, and a faire Grave-stone upon it. Beneath, on the outside of the Tombe, are engraven the Armes belonging to the Vintners, and the Barber Chirurgi∣ons: upon the Grave-stone is a faire plate of Brasse, with all these following lines engraven on it: Here under this Stone lyeth the body of George Clarke, Citizen and Vintner of London, who by his last Will and Testa∣ment, gave for divers good and chari∣table uses, these Legacies hereafter fol∣lowing. First, for a publike Schoole in the Vniversity of Oxenford, the summe of two hundred pounds. To the use of the poore of the foure Precincts of the Ward of Portsoken, be∣ing in the Parish of St. Buttolps with∣out Aldgate, the summe of 293. pounds 6. shillings, 8. pence. To the Parish of White Chappell, for the reliefe of the poore there, the sum of 230. pound. To the Parish of S. Leonards in Shor∣ditch, to the use of the poore there, the summe of 106. pound, 15. shillings, 4. pence. To the Company of the Vintners, he gave the summe of ten pounds. And to the poore of Christs Hospi∣tall he gave the summe of 5. pounds. He deceased the 19. day of April, Anno Dom. 1606. And was here buried the 24. day of the same next following: Ae∣tatis suae 63. East from this Parish Church, there are certaine faire Innes, for receipt of Travellers repairing to the City, up to∣wards Hog-lane end, somewhat within the Barres, and a marke there shewing, how farre the liberties of the City doe extend. This Hog-lane stretcheth North to∣ward S. Mary Spittle,Hog-lane. without Bishops∣gate, and within these 40. yeeres, had (on both sides) faire hedge-rowes of Elme Trees, with Bridges and easie Stiles to passe over into the pleasant fields, very commodious for Citizens therein to walke, shoote, and otherwise to recreate and refresh their dulled spi∣rits, in the sweet and wholsome ayre, which is now (within few yeeres) made a continuall building throughout, of Garden houses, and small Cottages: and the fields on either side bee turned into Garden plots, Tenter-yards, Bow∣ling Allies, and such like; from Hounds∣ditch in the West, so farre as White Chap∣pell, and further towards the East. On the South side of the High-way from Aldgate, were some few tenements thinly scattered here and there, with many voyd spaces betweene them up to
the Barres. But now that street is not onely replenished with buildings out∣ward, and also pestred with divers Al∣leys, on either side to the Barres; but to White Chappell and beyond. Amongst the which late buildings,Water-Conduit at Aldgate. one, memorable for the commodity of that East part of this Citie, is a faire wa∣ter-Conduit, hard without the gate, the building whereof, in the yeere 1535. Sir Bohn Allen being Maior, two fif∣teenes were granted by the Citizens, for the making, and laying of pipes to con∣very water from Hackney to that place, and so that worke was then finished. Here I may not omit to tell you, that although this Water-Conduit was very beneficiall to the people inhabiting there round about: yet in regard of the situation, being then upon the streets South side, and immediately descen∣ding downe many steps or stayres of stone, it was troublesome to the poore people fetching water there, in com∣ming up laden with their Tubs, Pailes, anand Tankards. Beside, vntill the turne of each party came by order and due course, their Tankards, Tubs, and Pailes did greatly pester the passage about and thorow the Gate, endangering divers personall harmes, and other great incon∣veniences. Which since then, at the taking downe of the old Gate, that a new might bee builded in the same place, is exceeding commendably a∣mended, to the Cities honour, their credit that had care for the disposing of the worke, and great case of the poore. Water-bearers, and all passengers. For now there is a faire spacious Court, wherein all the Tankards and other ves∣sels orderly stand, (without any annoy∣ance to the Street:) and the descent to the Conduit is made very convenient, free from offending one another in their labour, the passage to and fro is so aptly ordered, and the roome so large for their attendance. The old ruinous Gate being taken downe, and order provided for a new foundation: divers very ancient peeces of Romane coyne,The two pieces of Coyne were of Traionus & Dioclesianus Emperors▪ were found among the stones and rubbish; which as Mr. Martin Bond (a Worshipfull Citizen, and one of the Surveyors of the worke) told me, two of them (according to their true forme and figure) he caused to bee carved in stone, and fixed on eyther side of the Gates Arch without, East∣ward. The rest of these stamped Romane peeces, were sent for by the Lord Maior an his brethren to the Guild-hall, where as yet they remaine to be seene. Moreover, under his owne hand-wri∣ting, he delivered me this briefe note, which (for mine owne discharge) I have here set downe. The 10. day of March, Anno 1607. I Martin Bond, laid the first founda∣tion stone of Ealdgate, Northward. The bottome of which foundation was sixteene foot deepe, and eight foot broad. Now concerning the building of the Gate,Begun to be taken downe in An. 1606. and fini∣shed in An. 1609. what time it was in hand, and the care and paines taken about it: it would require a larger explanation, than here I am limited unto. But the Gate being very worthily and famously finished, it may be thus described to posterity. Eastward, upon the height of the Gate, standeth a faire golden Spheare, with a goodly Vane on it. On the upper Battlements (as vigilant Sentinels, and kept waking by Fames golden Trum∣pet) are placed the shapes of two armed ancient Souldiers, each holding a great stone in his hand, as denying the en∣trance of any bold enemy, or such as are not friends to the City. Beneath, in a faire large square, stan∣deth the imaginary figure of our Royall Soveraigne King Iames, in bright gilt Armour, at whose feet (on either side) lye the Lion and golden-chained Vni∣corne mildly couching, as expressing awe and humility in so great a pre∣sence. So much for the out-side of the Gate, with the two Romane Coynes before re∣membred. Westward, or within, highest of all, standeth Fortune, ingenuously carved and guilded, standing upon her Globe or Mound, with her Saile spreading over her head, and looking with a gracefull and auspicious countenance upon the Citie. Beneath her, in a large square, are
placed the Kings Armes, richly wrought and engraven, bearing the Motto, DIEV EST MON DROIT. And a little lower, VIVATE REX. Somewhat lower, and to grace each side of the Gate, are set two feminine personages, the one Southward, appea∣ring to be Peace, with a silver Dove up∣on her one hand, and a guilded wreath or garland in the other. On the North side standeth Charity, with a child at her breast, and another led in her hand: Implying (as I conceive) that where Peace, and love or Charity do prosper, and are truly embraced, that Citie shall be for everblessed. Over the Arch of the Gate is thus fairely ingraven: Senatus Populus{que} Londinens. fecit, 1609. And vnderneath: HVMFREY WELD, Maior. From Ealdgate Northwest to Bishops∣gate, Hounds-ditch. lyeth the Ditch of the Citie, cal∣led Hounds-ditch, because that in old time, when the same lay open, much filth (conveyed forth of the Citie) espe∣cially dead dogs, were there laid or cast: wherfore (of later time) a mud wall was made, inclosing the Ditch, to keep out the laying of such filth as had beene accustomed. Over against this mudde wall, on the other side of the street, was a faire field, sometime belonging to the Priory of the Trinity, and since, by Sir Tho. Awd∣ley, given to Magdalen Colledge in Cam∣bridge. This field (as all other about the Citie) was inclosed, reserving open passage thereinto, for such as were dis∣posed. Towards the street were some small Cottages, of two stories high, and little Garden-plots backward, for poore bedred people, (for in that street dwelt none other) builded by some Prior of the holy Trinity, to whom that ground belonged. In my youth, I remember, devout people,Bedred people in Hounds-ditch. as well men as women of this Citie, were accustomed oftentimes (e∣specially on Fridayes weekely to walke that way purposely) there to bestow their charitable Almes, every poore man or woman lying in their bed with∣in their window, which was towards the street, and open so low, that every man might see them; a cleane linnen cloth lying in their window, and a paire of Beads, to shew that there lay a bed∣red body, unable but to pray onely. This Street was first paved in the yeere 1503. About the latter end of the reigne of King Hen. 8. three brethren that were Gun-founders,Brasse ord∣nance  in Hounds-ditch. surnamed Owens, gate ground there to build upon, and to in∣cloze for casting of Brasse Ordnance. These occupied a good part of the street on the field side, and in short time di∣vers others also builded there, so that the poore bedred people were worne out, and in place of their homely Cot∣tages, such houses builded, as doe ra∣ther want roome than rent; which hou∣ses bee for the most part possessed by Brokers, sellers of old apparell, and such like. The residue of the field was for the most part made into a Garden, by a Gardiner named Cawsway, one that then served the Markets with herbs & roots: and in the last yeere of King Edw. the 6. the same was parcelled into Gardens, wherein are now many faire houses of pleasure builded. But as it is fatall to the Suburbs of e∣very great Citie,A matter greatly de∣serving reformati∣on in Hounds-ditch. to be infected with some foule and unclean Birds, that there build their nests, although not with pro∣fessed and ignominious staine of lewd life; because (within the limits of Hounds-ditch) dwell many a good and honest Citizen, that will never endure such scandalous neighbourhood: yet there are crept in among them a base kinde of vermine, wel-deserving to bee ranked and numbred with them, whom our old Prophet and Countryman Gyl∣das, The un∣conscio∣nable broking Vsurers their li∣ving. called Aetatis atramentum, the black discredit of the Age, and of place where they are suffered to live. Or rather (as S. Bernard thinkes it more convenient to terme them) Baptisatos Iudaeos; who take themselves to be Christians, when they are worse (indeed) than the Iewes ever were for usurie.The Iewes were ne∣ver any such grip∣ple Extor∣tioners. These men, or rather monsters in the shape of men, professe to live by len∣ding, and yet will lend nothing but up∣on pawnes; neither to any, but unto
poore people onely, and for no lesse gaine, than after fifty or threescore l. in the hundred. The pawne of the poore borrower, must needs be more than dou∣ble worth the money lent upon it, and the time of limitation is no longer than a moneth; albeit they well know, that the money needs not be repayed backe, untill a twelvemoneths end. By which time, the interest growes to be so great, that the pawne, which (at the first) was better than twice worth the money bor∣rowed on it, doth not (in the end) prove to be valuable to the debt, which must be prayed, before the poore party can redeeme it. By which extorting meanes of proceeding,Such gaines are the gree∣dy Vsurers glory. the poore borrower is quite cheated of his pawne, for lesse than the third part, which it was truly worth indeed. It is a great errour (in my poore opi∣nion) that in so ancient and famous a Citie, abounding (otherwise) in most Christian Almes and workes of mercy, that among so many worthy liberalities bestowed on the poore in divers and di∣stinct Parishes,A publike stocke would doe well for the poore in every Parish. no order is taken for such a publicke stocke, for the truely-poore, that when in their urgent neces∣sitie, either by want of meanes, sicknesse and other hinderances, their pawnes may not goe to the cut-throat Vsurer; but remaine to their owne good (living or dying) or to theirs; without any o∣ther benefit, than that it may still serve for the like reliefe. And let mee not here bee mistaken, that I condemne such as live by honest buying and selling, and make a good conscience of their dealing: no truely, I meane onely the Iudas Broker, that lives by the Bagge, and (except God be more mercifull to him) will follow him that did beare the Bagge. On the ditch side of this street, the mudde wall which was, is also (by little and little) taken all downe, the Banke of the ditch being raised, made levell ground, and turned into Garden-plots, and Carpenters yards, and many large houses are there builded, for the uses before remembred; the filth of which houses, as also the earth cast out of their vaults, is turned into the ditch; by which meanes the ditch is filled up, and both the ditch and wall so hidden, that they cannot be seene of the passers by. Here, according to my purpose in all other Wards and Parishes, I meane not to forget Gods blessings bestowed, by the hands and mercifull mindes of charitable Benefactors. In this Parish of Saint Buttolphs without Aldgate, these persons following doe justly deserve memory. Benefactors to the Poore. Master William Newton,For relief of the poore in the Parish of S. But∣tolphs with∣out Ald∣gate. Citizen and Sadler of London, gave divers Tene∣ments in the high street. Mistris Mary Bristow, gave a Tene∣ment to the poore, the yeerely rent be∣ing, 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. Mistris Ioyce Ripton, gave the summe of 40. l. that fewell may be given thrice yeerely for ever to the poore. Master William Cowch (of whom wee have already spoken) gave 5. l. yeerely to the poore, and for a Sermon also ten shillings. Mr. Anthony Duffield gave the summe of 20. l. to have 400. of good Faggots yeerely given to the poore. Mistris Ioane Duffield gave 10. l', to have 200. of good Faggots given yeer∣ly to the poore. Mr. Iohn Franke gave an annuity of 20. s. yeerely for ever to the poore. Mistris Margaret Holigrave gave the like summe of 20. s. and for the like in∣tent yeerely to the poore. Mr. Bernard Williamson gave yeerely a summe of mony, (which since is made up twenty pounds) that a load of Char∣coales, and a certaine summe of money, may yeerely for ever bee given to the poore. Mr. Toby Wood, Esquire, gave a tene∣ment of 6. l. rent yeerly; the rent wher∣of is quarterly given to the poore, and for 4. Sermons. Mistris Anne Clarke, widdow, of Houndsditch, gave 40. l. to have foure Sermons yeerely, and a certaine allow∣ance of bread given to the poore. Mr. Henry Iorden, sometime Citi∣zen and Fishmonger of London, gave an annuity of twenty shillings yeerely for ever, to be given in fewell to the poore.
Mr. George Palin, Girdler, gave 10. l. for ever, to be imployed for the benefit of the poore. Mr. Robert Rogers, late Citizen and Leatherseller, gave 20. l. to be laid out yeerely in Coales, that the poore may have them at a reasonable price in win∣ter. Mr. Stephen Seudamour, late Citizen and Vintner, gave 20. s. yeerely for e∣ver, to be given in fewell to the poore. Mr. Francis Tirrell, late Citizen and Grocer, gave 10. l. in money to the poore, and 5. Chauldrons of Coales yeerely for ever. Mr. Robert Dow, a great Benefactor, both in his life time, and for ever after death: as also Mr. George Clarke, and Mr. Robert Coxe, wee have spoken of before. Now,The li∣mits of Fortsoken VVard, and of the whole Pa∣rish, which extendeth a great way fur∣ther than the VVard doth. concerning the bounds and li∣mits, both of the Parish and Ward, and how far they extend themselves every way; there can be no better direction therein, than following the order of their own yeerly perambulation, which for avoiding of prolixity, thus I observe. Walking downe Hounds ditch North∣ward, so far as the dwelling house of one Edward Ansell, Carpenter, they there crosse the way Eastward into Still and Hand Alley, passing on along by a Gar∣den bricke wall, belonging to a faire goodly Place, termed sometime, Fishers Folly. Thence they proceed into Hogge∣lane, in the middle of which lane, is the partition betweene the two Parishes of White Chappell and S. Buttolphs. There they goe on to the Barres in the com∣mon street, and crossing the way South∣ward, goe thorow a now Tavern house, knowen by the name of the Castle, where turning backe againe, the bredth of two small Gardens, they then passe on right forward (west) to the Minories wall, untill they come to the Minories barres. There (at the further end) they turne downe into an Alley, called Brownes Alley, to a Wall being by Goodmans Fields, and so along by that wall, so far as to Goodmans gate. Where, by reason of a controversie hapning betweene the Parish of White Chappell and Saint But∣tolphs, and a Barne and other buildings erected in the way, they are constrained to turne up into the street againe. Then they goe downe Red-Lion Alley, to the house of one Darby Morgan, passing on thence directly into Rosemary lane. Then downe on the South side, till they come to the East side of a new Church-yard, there builded at the Parishes cost, and for their helpe in times of sicknes. There they goe thorow an house, then thorow the Church-yard, and afterward tho∣row the house of one Iohn Batcheler. Thence they goe down Nightingale lane, on the West side, untill they come to the middle of a Foord, which sometime turned Wapping Mill; and there the fore∣said two Parishes are divided againe by that Foord. Then goe they on so far as M. Duppa, or Duppers house, and so round about Saint Katharines, till they come to the signe of the Maiden-head, and there they fix their marke. And then passe over Tower-hill, to the house of one Iohn Atkinson, neere to the Posterne gate; and then goe directly Northward up the Minories street, till they come to the Portcullis under Ald∣gate, where the testimony of their marke concludeth all. In these, or the most part of these lat∣ter directions, I have beene greatly fa∣voured by Master Iohn Brigges, the pain∣full and industrious Minister of S. But∣tolphs, who by the helpe of the Clerke and Sexton, most lovingly and gently befriended me. This Portsoken Ward hath an Alder∣man and his Deputy; common Coun∣sellours, 6. Constables, 4. Scavengers, 4. for the Wardmore inquest, 18. and a Beadle. To the Fifteene it is seased at 4. l. 10. s.
TOWER-STREET VVARD. THe first Ward in the East part of this Ci∣tie, Towerstreet Ward. within the wall, is called Tower-street Ward and exten∣deth along the Ri∣ver of Thames, from the said Tower in the East, almost to Belingsgate in the VVest: one halfe of the Tower, the ditch on the West side, and Bulwarkes adjoyning, doe stand within that part, where the wall of the Citie (of old time) went straight from the Posterne gate South to the River of Thames, before that the Tower was builded. From and without the Tower ditch west and by north, is the said Tower Hill,Tower hill. sometime a large plot of ground, now greatly streightned by in∣croachments (unlawfully made and suf∣fered) for Gardens and houses, some on the banke of the Tower-ditch, whereby the ditch is marred, and more neere un∣to the wall of the Citie from the Po∣sterne north, till over against the princi∣pall fore-gate of the Lord Lumleyes house, &c. but the Tower ward goeth no further that way. Vpon this Hill is alwaies readily pre∣pared (at the charges of the Citie) a large Scaffold and Gallowes of timber, for the execution of such Traitors or Transgressors, as are delivered out of the Tower, or otherwise to the Sheriffes of London by writ, there to be executed. I read, that in the fifth of King Edward the fourth, a Scaffold and Gallowes were there set up by other the Kings Of∣ficers, and not of the Cities charges; whereupon the Maior and his Brethren complained, but were answered by the King, that the Tower hill was of the li∣berty of the Citie; and whatsoever was done in that point, was not in deroga∣tion of the Cities liberties, and there∣fore commanded Proclamation to bee made, aswell within the Citie as in the Suburbs, as followeth: Forasmuch as the seventh day of this pre∣sent moneth of November, Gallowes were erect and set up besides our Tower of Lon∣don, within the liberties and franchises of our Citie of London, in derogation and pre∣judice of the liberties and franchises of this Citie: The King our Soveraigne Lord would have it be certainely understood, that the erection and setting up of the said Gal∣lowes was not done by his commandement: wherefore, the King our Soveraigne Lord willeth, that the erection and setting up of the said Gallowes, be not any president, or example thereby hereafter to be taken, in hurt, prejudice or derogation of the franchi∣ses, liberties and priviledges of the Citie, which he at all times hath had, and hath in his benevolence, tender favour, and good grace, &c. Apud Westminst. nono die Novembris, Anno regni nostri quinto. Many Controversies have beene in times past, betwixt the Lord Maior and Citizens of London, on th'one party, and the Lieutenant of the Tower of London on th'other party, touching their liber∣ties: The Lieutenant usurping divers priviledges which were against the Lawes of the Realme: as for example: If A. B. were indebted to C. D. dwel∣ling in the precinct of the Tower, and would suffer himselfe to be arrested and prosecuted by the said C. D. in the Court held within the Tower, and there to have judgement upon the said debt obtained against him: after which judgement obtained, a Precept was
awarded under the seale of office of the Lieutenant, redirected unto the Porter of the Tower or to his deputy, to take A. B. in execution for the same debt. And after that A. B. is so taken in exe∣cution, there is returne made of the exe∣cution of the said Precept; and there∣upon the Lieutenant not onely appoin∣teth about a dozen or more Keepers to the said A. B. and such as the said A. B. will nominate;This pre∣tended Priviledge is directly against the Lawes of the Realm, as here∣under is resolved by the Iudges. but also suffereth the said A. B. to goe at liberty, giving unto him a Protection under the seale of his Office: And thereby commandeth all Officers in any wise to forbeare to arrest or trouble the said A. B. for the space of one whole yeere, beeing his prisoner. Then if it shall happen that the said A. B. shall be arrested, being in the custo∣dy of any of his Keepers, and having the said Protection to shew; if immediate∣ly upon the shewing of the same, he bee not set at liberty againe, In such case, the Lieutenant pretendeth that he hath power to arrest the body of any person, dwelling in such Citie or Countie, wherein the said A. B. was so arrested and troubled, if any such person can bee found within the liberties of the Tower, and the body of the same person to de∣taine in safe custody, untill such time as the said A. B. shall be enlarged. By which meanes the execution of the Lawes of the Realme is hindred, and the Subjects wronged. The forme of a Precept of the Lieutenant of the Tower, for the taking of one in executi∣on, with the returne of the same Precept. PRaeceptum est Ianitori Turr.Tur. Lond. praedict. quod capiat Willm. Aston de Lond. Civem & Haberdasher: Ita quod habeatur corpus ejus corā Edwardo VVar∣ner, milite, Locumtenen. Dominae Reginae Turr. praed. & ejus Senescall. ibi ad prox. Cur. infra Turr. praed. tenend. ad satisfaci∣end. Johanni Thomson viginti lib. legalis monetae Angliae, quas idem Johannis in eadem Curia recuperavit adversus praefat. VVillm. & xxj. s. pro miss. & custag. Curiae, quae eidem Iohanni in eadem Curia adjudicat. fuerunt. Et qualiter hoc Prae∣ceptum per te fuerit executum constare fac, adpraefat. Cur. Et hoc non omitt. periculo incumbent. Dat. apud Turr. praed. sub si∣gillo quo utor in hoc officio, decimo tertio die Novembris, Anno Regni Elizabethae, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, & Hyberniae Re∣ginae, primo. Ianitori Turris Lond. aut suo Deputato. RESPONS. CEpi Corpus supranominati Willm. Aston, & eum paratum habeo, prout mihi superiùs prcaeipitur. Hugh Pope, Iohn Laston, Iohn Spar∣row, Edward Sanders, Thomas Browne, Gregory Newman, Hen∣ry Hudson, Iohn VVoodward, Thomas Bullen, VVilliam Law∣man, Mathew Hinde, &c. His Keepers appointed. Christoph. Southows. The forme of a Protection, granted by the Lieutenant of the Tower, to a Prisoner being in exe∣cution for debt, to goe at large. EDwardus VVarner Miles,Tur. Lond. Locum∣tenens Dominae Reginae Turr'. suae praedict. omnibus Officiariis, mini∣stris, & subditis dictae Dominae Reginae, sa∣lutem. Cùm secundum privilegium & con∣suetudinem in Curia Turris praedictae ab an∣tiquo usitat. & opprobat. quilibet condem∣natus in Curia praedictae ad sectam alicujus in placito debiti, ac in custodia dicti Locum∣tenentis sivè ejus deputat. pro eodem debito existen. super certas considerationes ipsum Locumtenentem moventes, praedict. con∣demnat. ire & redire quò voluerit infra regnum Angliae permissus fuerit. Et quia VVillm. Aston de London Civis & Ha∣berdasher, coram me praefato Locumtenente & Senescall. in Curia Turris praedictae, ve∣nit ad sectam cujusdam Johannis Thom∣son in placito debiti, super demand. viginti librarum bonae & legalis monetae Angliae, & xxj. s. pro missis & custagiis Curiae
condemnat. existit, & in prisona Turris praedictae sub custodia mei praefati Locumte∣nentis, prout mos est, pro eodem debito ex∣isten. Sciatis me praefatum Locumtenentem considerantem statum & paupertatem prae∣dicti VVillm. Aston, ac eò quòd citiùs de∣bitum suum praedictum de amicis & bonis suis propriis levare possit, presentium. VVillm. cum custode seu latore praeseatium super considerationem praedictam, quo vo∣luerit, dimiss. fore a die dat. praesentium pro uno Anno integro prox-futuro. Igitur ex parte dictae Dominae Reginae, vobis & cuili∣bet vestrii mando, Quod praedictu Willm. prisonarium meum, cum Custode sen latore praesentium, in aliquo non molestatis nec ar∣restetis pro aliqua personali actione. Nec quantum in vobis ab aliis infer. permitt. periculo incumbent. Dat. apud Turr. praed. sub sigillo quo utor in hoc officio, Decimo tertio die Novembris, An. Regni Elizabe∣thae, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, & Hi∣berniae Reginae, fidei Defensoris, &c. Pri∣mo. Edward VVarner. Also in the yeere of our Lord God,Ex Relati∣one Hum. Dyson No∣taris Pub. 1585. Sir Owen Hopton, Knight, Lieute∣nant of the Tower of London, by colour of his office, pretending title to a Gar∣den-plot neere the Tower, did cause his servants violently to take possession ther∣of, and to bring those persons before him that kept the possession, whom he im∣prisoned in the Tower. Whereupon, a Writ of Habeas Corpus was sued forth of the Kings Bench for the removing of the body of Robert Shapeley, one of the pri∣soners, which Writ was brought and delivered unto the Lieutenant by Robert Smith, then Solicitor of the City of Lon∣don, but the Lieutenant would not re∣ceive nor obey the Writ, but would have compelled the said Robert Smith to carry it backe againe with him: which hee refusing, the Lieutenant put the Writ into his pocket, and abused and imprisoned also the said Robert Smith in the Tower: For redresse of which wrongs, and of many others, there was complaint made to the Lords of the Pri∣vie Councell, who referred the hearing of those controversies, and the exami∣nation of the rights and priviledges which the Lieutenant pretended to be∣long unto his Office, to the Lords chiefe Iustices and to the Master of the Rolles, who were to certifie their opinions therof in writing, as by the letters of the Lords of the Councell in that behalfe sent and directed unto them, of the te∣nor following, appeareth. The Councels letters to the Lords chiefe Iustices, and to the Master of the Rolles. AFter our very hearty Commendati∣ons, &c. There hath been complaint made unto us in the behalfe of the Lord Maior and Citizens of London, a∣gainst Sir Owen Hopton, Knight, Lieu∣tenant of the Tower, whom they charge with some disordered dealing by him used towards one Robert Smith, a Soliciter for the City, sent lately unto him with a Writ of Habeas Corpus, out of the Court of her Majesties Bench, for the removing of the body of one Robert Shapeley, a servant to one Willi∣am Wikins a Citizen, imprisoned by the Lieutenant upon some pretended quarrell of priviledge; the manner whereof shall best appeare unto you by the severall complaints and articles herein inclosed, exhibited unto us by the said Smith and VVikins. And forasmuch as the Maior, Aldermen and Citizens of London, have heretofore of∣tentimes found themselves grieved, with sundry actions of unkind and violent dea∣lings, offered by the said Lieutenant and his Officers as they have enformed, to the breach of their Charters and liberties, wher∣by there is growne some division and dissen∣tion betweene them (which we desire by all good meanes to have removed;) and whereas▪ the Lieutenant seemeth to warrant his do∣ings by ancient priviledges and customes of the Tower, whereunto the Citizens on their parts, upon opinion of the validities of their Charters, refuse to yeeld: VVee consi∣dering what inconvenience may ensue of the private dissention betweene them, have thought good to require you, calling Master Lieutenant before you, and the parties, whose complaints are herewith sent unto you; with such proofes and witnesse as may be produced, effectually to examine the mat∣ters thereby informed against him: and that you also take knowledge of such other com∣plaints and controversies, as the L. Maior
and the Recorder of London shall deli∣ver unto you against the Lieutenant of the Tower concerning their former debates and strifes, for matter of liberties, prescriptions and customes, and the like on the behalfe of the Lieutenant against them, praying you to take some paines to are the matters at large on both sides; and to see upon what priviledges, customes, and prescriptions, their severall claims are grounded and pre∣tended: as also to consider of their strength and validity in Law, wherein after you shal have spent some time, and heard and under∣stood the matters at large, wee require you then to make report unto us what you shall have found on both sides, as well touching the complains of Smith and Wikins, as of the Lord Maior and Citizens, with your opinions of their said complaints and con∣troversies, and what course were fittest to be taken betweene them, which we pray you to doe with as convenient speed as you may: And so bid you heartily farewell. From the Court at Greenwitch. Subscribed by Bromley Cancellarius. Leicester. Hunsdon, Chamberl. M. Treasurer. M. Controller. M. Secretary. Sir Walter Mildmay. Directed to the Lords chiefe Iusices, and to the Master of the Rolles. Vpon the receit of which letters, the said Lords chiefe Iustices, and Master of the Rolles, did at large heare the al∣legations and proofes of both parties, and did accordingly certifie their opini∣ons thereof to the Lords of the Privie Councell in manner following: The Certificat, touching as well the Ar∣ticles and Complaints made to your Ho∣nours, by Robert Smith and VVilliam VVikius, against Sir Owen Hopton, Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower, as the controversies between the Ma∣ior and Citizens of London and the said Lieutenaut. FIrst, upon examination of the mat∣ter, touching the said Smith and VVikins, mentioned in your Ho∣nours letters, it appeareth unto us, that (some controversie being betweene the Maior and Citizens, and the said Lieu∣tenant, touching a Garden-plot neere the said Tower) one Ralph Gasken, ser∣vant to the said Lieutenant, violently did draw forth of the said Garden, one Shapeley, servant to the said VVikins, then labouring there for his said Master, in such violent manner, as thereby blood was drawne of him in severall places, and carried him to the Tower, and there kept him in prison eight dayes; and that one Shawe, another of the Lieutenants servants, was present with the said Gas∣ken ayding him, but that he did not hurt the said Shapeley; which Gasken and Shawe did detaine some of the apparell of the said Shapeley, and yet doe for any thing knowene to us. And that likewise one Payne was ta∣ken forth of the said Garden, and carri∣ed to the Tower, and there imprisoned three dayes, and then delivered upon bond, to render his body to the Tower when he should be required, and that Payne hath left a pawne of the value of tenne shillings for his meat and drinke. And that Her Majesties VVrit of Habeas Corpus for the body of Shape∣ley was sued forth of her Bench, directed to the Lieutenant, which carried and delivered to him by the said Smith, who prayed the said Lieutenant to make al∣lowance thereof, and paid him the Fee due therefore. But forthwith he would have forced the said Smith to have recei∣ved the money againe and the VVrit: which Smith refused to doe, praying him not to be offended for bringing of her Majesties Processe. And thereupon Master Lieutenant said he would put his VVrit in his poc∣ket, as he had done many, and there∣with rubbed Smith on the cheekes, and threatned to imprison him, if he would not carry backe the VVrit againe and the money: whereupon the said Lieu∣tenant imprisoned Smith, and detained him about three houres, untill upon a Bill of his hand to returne to prison when the Lieutenant should send for him, he was delivered; which matter the Lieutenant confesseth to be true. And touching such liberties as Ma∣ster Lieutenant claimeth to have beene
used for the Officers and Attendants in the Tower, as not to be arrested by any Action in the Citie of London, and Protections to be granted to them by Master Lieutenant, and not obeying of VVrits of Habeas Corpus, we thinke such persons as are daily attendant in the Tower, serving her Majesty there, are to be priviledged, and not to be arrested upon any plaint in London. But for VVrits of execution, or Capias ut liga∣tum, and such like, we thinke they ought to have no priviledge. Moreover, touching Protections gran∣ted by Master Lieutenant, for such as be condemned in any action in the Court kept in the Tower, to goe at large, and not to be arrested by any Processe out of the Queenes high Courts, or else∣where, or any other Protection to that effect, for any priviledged person, we thinke the same against Her Majesties Lawes and dignity. Item, That Matter Lieutenant ought to returne every Habeas Corpus, out of any Court at Westminst. so as the Justi∣ces before whom it shall bee returned, (as the cause shall require) may either remand it with the body, or retaine the matter before them, and deliver the bo∣dy, as Justice shall require. As touching the jurisdiction of the Court in the Tower, and the contro∣versies for certaine liberties upon the Tower-hill, and the soile there, and di∣vers places about the Tower, we are not yet fully resolved, but desire your Lord∣ships to have some further time to con∣sider thereupon: for, that there be ma∣ny matters alleaged, and to be shewed in writing for the same, as we are infor∣med, which we have not yet seene. Item, The said Lieutenant doth claime a liberty, that if any person priviledged in the Tower be arrested in London, that he may take the body of any Citizen that shall come within the liberties of the Tower, and keepe his body there, untill the other be delivered: which we thinke altogether against the Lawes of this Realme. Christopher Wray. Edmond Anderson. Gilbert Gerrard. After the Lords of the Privie Coun∣cell had received the same Certificat, they did thereupon make this finall Or∣der and Decree following, viz. At Non such, the third day of October. 1585. Present, Lord Treasurer. Lord Admirall. Lord Chamberlaine. Master Treasurer. Master Secretary. WHereas sundry variances & contentions have here∣tofore arisen, and have of late yeeres depended, betwixt the Lord Maior and Communalty of the City of London, on the one part; and the Lieu∣tenant of Her Majesties Tower of Lon∣don, on the other part, touching matters of liberties, prescriptions, customes, and other claimes and pretences: by reason wherof, and for lack of order for stay of those variances and contentions, divers tumults have heretofore growne, and Her Majesties Peace hath many times beene in hazard to be dangerously bro∣ken; whereupon, severall complaints have beene heretofore exhibited to the Lords and others of Her Majesties most Honourable Privie Councell, by the Lord Maior and Communalty afore∣said, against the said Lieutenant, for di∣vers injuries alleaged to bee offered on his part to the Citizens of London, with∣out order of Law or equity: After con∣sideration had of which severall com∣plaints, it pleased their Lordships (ha∣ving care to procure an end of those controversies, for avoiding of inconve∣niences that might ensue) by their Ho∣nourable letters to give order to Sir Christopher Wray, Knight, Lord chiefe Justice of England; Sir Edmond Ander∣son, Knight, Lord chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas; and to Sir Gilbert Ger∣rard, Knight, Master of the Rolles, that they (calling the said Lieutenant and the parties complainants before them) should effectually heare and examine the controversies (on both sides,) and certifie their Lordships what they should finde, together with their opi∣nions
touching the same, who having called the parties accordingly before them, and advisedly and with good de∣liberation sundry times heard their Al∣legations and answers, as well by writing as by word, with counsell learned on all parts, have signified their opinions of the said controversies in writing, as hereafter followeth: First, touching such liberties as M. Lieutenant claimeth to have beene used for the Officers and Attendants in the Tower, as not to be arrested by any acti∣on in the City of London, and prote∣ctions to be granted to them, by Master Lieutenant, and not obeying of writs of we thinke such persons as bee dayly attendant in the Tower serving her Majestie there, are to be priviledged and not to be arrested upon any plaint in London, but for writs of Executions, or and such like, wee thinke they ought to have no privi∣ledge. Secondly, concerning protections granted by Master Lieutenant for such as bee condemned in any action in the Court, kept in the Tower, to goe at large, and not to be arrested by any Pro∣cesse out of the Queenes high Courts, or elsewhere, or any other protection to that effect for any priviledged person, we thinke the same against her Majesties lawes and dignitie. Thirdly, that M. Lieutenant ought to returne every Habeas Corpus out of a∣ny Court at Westminster, so as the Iusti∣ces before whom it shall be returned (as the cause shall require) may either re∣mand it with the body, or retaine the matter before them, and deliver the bo∣dy as Iustice shall require. Lastly, whereas the Lieutenant doth also claime a liberty, that if any person priviledged in the Tower be arrested in London, hee may take the body of any Citizen that shall come within the li∣berties of the Tower, and keepe his bo∣dy there untill the other bee delivered, we thinke the same to bee altogether a∣gainst the lawes of the Realme. The Lords therefore of her Majesties said Privie Councell, upon grave and deliberate considerations had of the cer∣tificate and opinions of the said Lords chiefe Iustices and Master of the Rolles, and to the end occasions of contenti∣on, trouble, and disorder, and the dan∣ger of breach of her Majesties peace, which have heretofore of late yeeres a∣risen and growne upon the controversies aforesaid, may from henceforth cease, and bee althougher removed and taken away; It was this day by their Lordships or∣dered and decreed, betwixt the Lord Maior, Communalty and Citizens of London, and their successors, and the Lieutenant of her Highnesse said Tower of London, and all other Lieutenants and Officers of the Tower at any time here∣after to succeed: That the matters, points and articles contained in the Certificate of the said Iustices and Master of the Rolles before mentioned, wherein their resolutions, opinions and determinati∣ons be set downe, declared and signifi∣ed, shall at all times from henceforth stand and remaine for rules and resoluti∣ons and finall determination and decisi∣on: for so much and so many of the points of controversies as are contained in the said Certificate (whereof they have delivered their opinions) to be for ever hereafter duely observed and kept, and that nothing bee hereafter at any time done, or attempted on either part, to the violating or interrupting of the same. On the North side of this hill, is the said Lord Lumleyes house, and on the West side, divers houses lately builded, and other encrochments along South to Chicke lane,Chicke lane. on the East of Barking Church, at the end whereof you have Tower-street, stretching from the Tower-hill, West to Saint Margaret Pattens Church Parsonage. Now therefore,Tower-street Alhallowes Barking a Parish Church. to begin at the East end of the Street, on the North side thereof, is the faire Parish Church, cal∣led, Alhallowes Barking, which standeth in a large, but sometime far larger Ce∣mitery or Church-yard. On the North side whereof was sometime builded a faire Chappell,Barking Chappell of our Lady. founded by King Ri∣chard the first; some have written that his heart was buried there under the high Altar. This Chappell was confir∣med and augmented by King Edward the first. Edward the fourth gave licence
to his Cousin Iohn, Earle of Worcester, to found there a Brotherhood for a Master and Brethren, and hee gave to the Cu∣stos of that fraternity, which was Sir Iohn Scot, Knight, Thomas Colte, Iohn Tate, and Iohn Croke, the Priory of To∣tingbecke, and the avousion of the Parish Church of Stretham in the Country of Surrey, with all the members and appur∣tenances, and a part of the Priory of Oke∣borne in Wiltshire,The Kings Chapell of Barking. both Priors Aliens, and appointed it to be called the Kings Chappell of Chantry, In Capella beatae Mariae de Barking. King Richard the third, new builded and founded therein a Colledge of Priests, &c. Hamond de Lega was buri∣ed in that Chappell. Robert Tate, Maior of London, 1488. and other were there buried. This Colledge was suppressed and pulled downe in the yeere 1548. the second of,Iohn Rowse. King Edward the sixth, the ground was imployed as a Garden-plot during the reignes of King Edward, Queene Mary, and part of Queene Eli∣zabeth, till at length a large strong frame of Timber and Bricke was set thereon, and imployed as a Store-house of Mer∣chants goods brought from the Sea, by Sir William Winter, &c. Monuments in the Parish Church of Alhallowes Barking, not defaced are these: Sir Thomas Studinham of Norwich Di∣oces, Knight, 1469. Thomas Gilbert Draper, and Merchant of the Staple, 1483. Iohn Bolt, Merchant of the Staple, 1459. Sir Iohn Stile, Knight, Draper, 1500. William Thinne, Esquire, one of the Clarks of the Greene cloth, and Master of the Houshold to King Henry the 8. 1546. Humfery Monmouth, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1535. buried in the Church yard. VVilliam Denham, one of the She∣riffes, 1934. Henry Eoward, Earle of Surrey behea∣ded, 1546. Sir Richard Devereux, sonne and heire to the Lord Ferrers of Chartley. Richard Browne Esquire, 1546. Philip Dennis, Esquire, 1556. Andrew Evenger, Saiter. VVilliam Robinson, Mercer, Alderman 1552. VVilliam Armorer, Clothworker, Es∣quire, Governour of the Pages of Ho∣nour, or Master of the Hance men, ser∣vant to Henry the eight, Edward the sixt and Queene Mary, buried 1560. Be∣side, which, there be divers Tombes without inscription. Iohn Crolys and Thomas Pike, Citizens of London, founded a Chantery there, 1388. Vpon further view of this Parish Church, and the monuments, I finde these following: In the Chancell lyeth a faire Marble stone with a plate of Brasse engraven, bearing this inscription: Hic jacet Ioannes Ruche,All these Moun∣ments are in the Chancell on the ground neere to one ano∣ther as they are here set downe. Generosius, qui obiit octavo die Mensis Maii, An. Dom. 1493. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Vpon a faire large Marble stone, by occasion lately taken up, and being bu∣ried somewhat deep in the ground, on a Brasse plate fixed thereon was this in∣scription: Hic concluduntur ossa Iacobi Zamboni, illustrissimi Dom. Veneti Secretarii, Agentis apud Serenissimum hunc Angliae, &c. Regem. On a faire Marble stone, but without any plate, are these lines following en∣graven. In this Vault hereunder lyeth Elizabeth, late Wife unto William Denham, Al∣derman of London, and Merchant of the Staple at Callis: VVho departed un∣to God, on Wednesday, at 5. of the clock in the after-noone, in Easter-weeke, the last day of March, 1540. On whose soule Iesus have mercy, Amen. And by the Grace of God, the said Willi∣am Denham, purposing to lye here by her, departed unto God the day of &c. Close by it is another stone thus in∣scribed: Hic jacet Dom. Thomes Vyrby, quondam Vicari istius Eccles. Qui obiit 2. die Mensis Decemb. 1453. Cujus anima, &c.
Neere unto it is another stone, thus inscribed: Hic jacet Nicholaus Bremisgrave, quon∣dam Vicarius istius Eccles. Qui obiit II. die Mens. August. An. Dom. 1416. Cujus, &c. By it also another stone, thus inscri∣bed: Hic jacet M. Radulphus Darling, Almae Vniuer. Oxoniae olim Magist. in Arti∣bus, & huius Eccles. quondam Vicarius peritissimus. Qui obiit An. Dom. 1500. 9. die Mens. Octob. Cuius, &c. By it also another stone, thus inscri∣bed: Hic jacet tumulatus M. Thomas Cayfi. Can. & Baccalaurius in Art. vir perit. & unus Vicar. istius Eccles. Qui obiit 6. die Mens. Feb. 1475. Cuius, &c. By it also another stone, thus inscri∣bed: Hic jacet Dom. Willielm. Tylling, quon∣dam Capellanus istius Eccles. Qui obiit 24. die Mens. Iulii, An. Dom. 1430. Cuius, &c. On the same stone: Ac Johannes Vale, nuper Capellanus, & bonus reparator Cantar. ejusdem Eccles. Qui obiit 10. die Novemb. An. Dom. 1563. Cuius, &c. Vpon a very faire Marble stone, ver∣ged about with plates of brasse, and con∣cluding with the like plates in the mid∣dle, is thus ingraven: Pray for the soule of M. William Thinne, Esquire, one of the Master of the honou∣rable houshold to King Henry the 8. our Soveraigne Lord. He departed from the prison of this fraile life, the 10. day of August, An. Dom. 1546. in the 38. yeere of our said Soveraigne Lord the King, which body, and every part there∣of, in the last day shall bee raised up a∣gaine, at the sound of the Lords Trum∣pet. In whose comming, that we may all ioyfully meet him, our heavenly Father grant us, whose mercy is so great towards us, that hee freely offertth to all them that earnestly repent their sinnes, ever∣lasting life, through the death of his dearely beloved Sonne, Iesus: To whom be everlasting praise. Amen. Before the entrance into the Vestrie, lyeth a faire Marble stone, without any plate of Brasse, but thus engraven upon it: Nicholas Andrewes to his dearest wife Anne, doth this last office of love: for she was, Religious, Chaste, Discreet, Loving, Faire, Obedient. She lived but 25. yeeres, and dyed at Chig∣well in Essex, the 12. day of Iune, 1606. and was here-under interred (in great sorrow) the munday following: leaving behind her living, two sonnes, William and Nicholas. Hard by it is another stone, thus in∣scribed: Here resteth the body of Agnes Bond, Widdow, sometime the wife of William Bond, Esquire; the which William and Agnes had issue betwixt them, 8. sonnes and 8. daughters; which Agnes decea∣sed the 4. day of February, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1552. Lower in the Chancell toward the doore, is another faire stone plated, and thus engraven: Hereunder lyeth the body of Roger James, late of London, Brewer, who being of the age of 67. departed this life the se∣cond day of March, An. Dom. 1591. leaving behind him Sara his wife, eight sonnes, and one daughter. Neere unto it, another stone, thus in∣scribed: Here under this Marble stone lyeth, M. Henry Poulsted, Esquire, and Alice his wife; the which Henry deceased the 10. of December, 1556. and begot of her body one sonne and one daughter, Ri∣chard and Mabell, &c. Close by it, another smaller stone, thus inscribed: Here lyeth buried Barbara Thornix, Daughter of Thomas Thornix Esquire,
who deceased the eleventh day of April, 1613. being of the age of three yeeres. By it another faire stone, thus inscri∣bed: Here lyeth the body of Mary Burnell, late wife of Iohn Burnell, Citizen and Mer∣chant of London, the onely daughter of Mathew Brownrig of Ipswich, in Suf∣folke, Esquire, a woman sincerely living in the feare of God, and dying constantly in the faith of Christ Iesus. She departed this life the 5. day of April, 1612. be∣ing of the age of 20. yeeres: Having fi∣nished in wedlocke with her said husband 2. yeeres and 5. moneths, and bearing him issue, one sonne, whereof she dyed in childbed, and expecteth now (with the Elect of God) a joyfull resurrection. Then there is a goodly ancient faire Tombe, dividing the North Ile from the Chancell, bearing these ingraven lines: Hic jacet Iohannes Bacon, quondam Ci∣vis & Woolman London, Qui obiit 6. die Mens. Maii, Anno Dom. 1437. Et Ioanna Vx. eius. There is a very goodly Tombe,In the North Ile of the Qeire. but much defaced, and the Brasse plates stolne off from it: but so many of the words as are remaining, are these: Stapulo fuit seniorum, & unius Londills habitans, sermene fidelis, cum Marga yera Domina costa{que} beata. Hunc rapuit Michael ad Coeli gaudi a lati, &c. By it is a faire Monument in the wall, bearing this inscription: Hic facet Hieronymus Benalius, Bergami netus, qui dum vixit, pietatem coluit, & futurae vitae resurrectionem expectat. Obiit 4. dic Martii, An. Dom. 1585. Aetatis suae, 58. On the ground in the middest of the way, lyeth a faire stone, by the appea¦rance, entring into a Vault. The stone is thus ingraven: This stone belongeth to Francis Cherry, Merchant, Vintner, and to his heires. Here lyeth Margaret Cherry, the wife of Francis Cherry, by whom he had issue 11. children, 4. sonnes, and 7. daugh∣ters, and dyed of the 12. child, 1695. A small Brasse plate is fixed in the wall East, thus inscribed: Of your charity prayser the soule of Philip Dennis, of London, Esquire: whose body lyeth buried before this stone. Who dyed the 3, day of September, 1556. A faire Marble Tombe much defa∣ced, In the South Ile o the Qre. whereon are figured kneeling, a man and a woman, hee having three sonnes kneeling behinde him, and shee foure Daughters. A labell proceedeth from his mouth, with these words: Ego resurgam, & in carne mea videbe te Iesum, Deum Sabvatorem meum. Another from her, thus: Qui Lazarum resuscitasti à monumento fetidum, dona nobis requiem. Vpon the ground, somewhat neere to one another, are divers faire Grave∣stones, bearing these inscriptions: Vnder this stone lyeth William Roberts, Citizen and Mccer of London, and Merchant of the Staple at Callis, sonne of William Roberts, Alderman of the said place: which William his sonne de∣ceased the seventh day of Ianuary, Anno Domini, 1555. Here lyeth buried the body of Christopher Rawson, late Mercer of London, and Merchant of the Staple at Callis, who deceased the second day of October, An∣no Domini, 1518. Here-under lyeth Master VVilliam Ro∣binscn, Alderman of London, Citizen and Merr, and Merchant of the Sta∣ple as Callis, and Elizabeth his wife. He deceased the thirtieth day of Decem∣ber, 1552. Here under this stone lyeth buried the body of Mistris Iane Russell, one of the Gen∣th women of the Privie Chamber to Qu. Mary, andwife to William Russell, Serjeant of the Celler to our late Sove∣aigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth: Ad
deceased the 16. day of Ianuary, Anno Domini, 1558. Gods blessings bestowed on the poore of this Parish, by the benevolence and charity of wel-disposed people. Given by Margaret Martin, of the Parish of Alhallowes Barking in London, in the yeere 1557. to and amongst the poor of the said Parish, yeerly for ever, 26. s. 8. d. And to the Churchwardens for their paines, 20. d. to each, to bee paid them yeerely for ever. Given by Mr. William Armorer, to hold for tenne yeeres, one load of Char∣coales, and two hundred of Faggots, by his wife to be delivered every Christ∣masse, to and amongst the poore of the same Parish. Given by Mistris Alice Polsted, to the use of the poore of the same Parish, the summe of 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. to bee paid them yeerely for ever. Given by Mr. William Haines, 5. l. a yeere for ever, after the death of Alice his wife. Given by Richard Smith, his dwelling house, knowne and called by the name of the White-Lion, situate neere to the Tower Hill, to the use of the poore of the said Parish: after the decease of his wife, and Richard and Margaret his chil∣dren, if they happen to dye without issue. Given by Mr. Wilkinson, after the decease of his wife, the lease of the house situate at Tower Hill, to be let by the Churchwardens of the said Parish: and they to give out of the same rent, during the said lease, forty shillings yeerely to the poore of the Parish, and twenty shillings yeerely to the Preacher or Le∣cturer there. And the residue of the said rent to be distributed in such sort as in her will is mentioned. Concerning the bounds and limits of this Parish, according to our precedent order: They goe Northward from the Church, so farre as the corner, where is the backe gate, sometime belonging to Sir Francis Walsingham, but now to Sir Nicholas Salter. Thence they goe on a∣along by the Garden wall belonging to the Lady Lumley, to the East corner: where going over, they passe on so farre as the house of one Peter Porter, right over against the great gate of the Lady Lumleyes house, where turning backe downe a passage to the South part of Mr. Covelles garden, in the midst wher∣of Eastward, upon London wall, their marke is fixed. Returning backe that way againe, they crosse Southward o∣ver Tower Hill, where sometime stood a Crosse, distinguishing the Tower li∣berty and Alhallowes. So they goe on the Tower-docke, to the house of Mr. Clay, Brewer, where they go up petty Wales, to the Custome-house gate. And there they turne up Water-lane, on the East side onely, till they come forth thereof, and crosse o∣ver into Mart-lane, so farre as Sir Henry Bakers house, where they turne over East, and so passe on that end of Mart-lane South, where turning againe East to Sydon-lane, they goe up that Lane North, so farre as part of the house be∣longing to Sir Nicholas Salter, and there fixe their marke; returning to Chappell-Alley, and there ending where they be∣gan. Here I confesse my selfe beholding to Mr. Edward Abbot, Parson of Alhal∣lowes Barking, and the Officers that there gave me friendly assistance. By the West end of this Parish Church and Chappell,Sydon-lane. lyeth Sydon-lane, now corruptly called Sything-lane, from Tower-street up North to Hart-street. In this Sydon-lane divers faire and large houses are builded; namely, one by Sir Iohn Allen, sometime Maior of London, and of Councell unto King Hen∣ry the eighth: Sir Francis Walsingham, Knight, principall Secretary to the Queenes Majestie that then lived, was lodged there, and so was the Earle of Essex, &c. At the North-west corner of this lane standeth a proper Parish Church of Saint Olave,Parish Church of S. Olave in Hart-street. which Church, together with some houses adjoyning, and also others over against it in Hart-street, are of the said Tower-street Ward. Monuments in this Parish Church of Saint Olave, be these: Richard Cely, and Robert Cely, Fel∣mongers,
principall builders and bene∣factors of this Church. Dame Ioane, wife to Sir Iohn Zouch, 1439. Iohn Clarentiaulx, King of Armes. Thomas Sawle. Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer, Maior, 1512. Thomas Burnell, Mercer, 1548. Thomas Morley, Gentleman, 1566. Sir Iohn Radcliffe, Knight, 1568. And Dame Anne his wife, 1585. Chapone, a Florentine Gent. 1582. Sir Hamond Vaughan, Knight. George Stoddard, Merchant, &c. In the wall,In the Chancell. on the North side, is an ancient Monument, but very much de∣faced, appearing to belong to Sir Ri∣chard Haddon, Mercer and Lord Maior of London, with some shew of two wives, two sonnes, and three daughters: but the plates of memory are gone. A faire Marble stone lyeth by the Communion Table,On the ground. and a large plate upon it, on the top whereof these La∣tine Verses are ingraven: Ortu praeclarus curans illustrior Arte Efficier, patriam deserit iste suam, Discendi studio varias transiverat oras, Heu tandem febrius Anglia fintiter. Nobilitas, virtus, pietas, doctrina bearūt, Schraderum si vis pergere plura scies. In the midst are two faire Coats of Armes, the one having Schrader as the Motto, and the other, Non Wechtelt. Lower is this inscription fairely in∣graven: Georgius Schraderus, Brunswigae, An. 1580. Mens. Februarii, nobili Familia Patre autore Schradero, à Consiliis se∣cretissimis illustrissimorum Duc. Bruns∣wig & Luneb. Matre Catharina à Vechtelt natas, in vera Dei notitia e∣ducatus, postquam maximum Germaniae partem, totam Galliam, Brabant. Fland. vidisset, in Angliam se recepit, inde do∣mum ut rediret, febri verè correptus, placidè in Domino obdornivit, 3. Octob. An. salutis, 1605. Aetatis suae, 24. & in hoc tumulo requiescit. Two faire Marble stones lye some∣thing neere to this, bearing these inscri∣ptions: Orate pro anima Roberti Byrche, Wool∣packer: Qui obiit vicessimo septimo die Iulii, Anno Dom. 1433. Cuius animae propitietur Deus. D. O. M. Matthaeo Babalio, Nobili Ragusino, pieta∣te ac probitate insigni, immaturá{que} mor∣te vita defuncto, Anno aetatis suae, 27. Domini vero, 1567. Mens. Iunio. Nicholaus Gozzius amicus posuit. A faire Marble Tombe, with a Knight in Armour lying along on it, and his wife kneeling by him, thus inscribed: Hic jacet Joannes Radcliffe, Miles, filius Roberti, Comitis Sussexiae: Qui obiit (nullis susceptis liberis) nono die Novem∣bris, Anno Domini, 1585. Here lyeth Dame Anne, the wife of Sir John Radcliffe, Knight, who dyed the tenth of Decemb. An. Dom. 1568. A faire Monument, erected behind the Tombe of Sir Iohn Radcliffe, but somewhat higher, with halfe the lively figure of the party it concerneth, inscri∣bed thus: Memoriae Sacrum Petro Turnero, Gulielmi Turneri Patris inclyto filio, probitatis ac eruditionis fa∣ma, illustri{que} Medicinae Doctori peri∣tissimo; quem Cantabrigia aluit, Heidel∣brigia Doctoris insignibus honoravit, Ox∣onium cohonestavit, Pascha Turnera Conjux moestissima aeternum pietatis, a∣moris ac doloris sui Monumentū. L. M. P. Henricus Parreus Episc. Wigorniensis, Paschae Turnerae frater moeroris consors, Piis defucti manibus hoc Epicediū parētauit. Obiit Maii 27. Anno Dom. 1614. Ae∣tatis suae, 72. In the South-east wall, a stone ingra∣ven, with out any plate, bearing this in∣scription: Gulielmo Turnero, Medico, ac Theologo peritissimo, Decano Wellens. Per Annos triginta in utra{que} scientia exercitatissi∣mus, Ecclesiae & Reipublicae profuit, & contra utrius{que} pernitiosissimos hostes; maximè vero Romanum Antichristum fortissimus Jesu Christi Miles acerrimè dimicavit, ac tandem corpus senio & la∣boribus
compertum, in spem beatissim. re∣surrectionis hic deposuit; devictis Chri∣sti virtute mundi, carnis{que} civibus cap. triumphat in aeternum. Magnus Apollinea, quondam Turnerus in arte, Magnus & in vera religione fuit: Mors tamen obrepens, majorem reddidit illum, Civis enim Coeli regna superna tenet. Obiit 7. die Iulii, An. Dom. 1568. Vnder it, upon a small plate is thus engraven: In God is my whole trust. I. O. 1591. Iohn Orgen, and Helen his wife. As I was, so be ye, As I am, you shall be. What I gave, that I have, What I spent, that I had: Thus I count all my cost, What I left, that I lost. There is a very faire Tombe erected in the South wall of the Quire, where∣on these lines are engraven: Hic juxta in Choro situs est Jacobus Deane, Eques auratus, vir bonus & in operibus charitatis, qui primo Susannā filiam Christopheri Bumsted Generos. Vxorem habuit, ex qua unicum suscepit filiolum. Postea Elizab. filiam Hugon. Offley Armigeri, Alderm. Lond. De∣inde Elizab. filiam Richardi Thorne∣hill Armig. & viduam Christopheri Web Arm. duxit conjugē, ex qua duas genuit filiolas, nullam tamen relinquens prolem, se moriente, superstitem, An. Ae∣tatis, 63. 15. Maii, 1608. in Domino. Two faire stones plated, one by ano∣ther, thus inscribed: Here lyeth buryed (in the mercie of God) the bodies of Thomas Beckingham, E∣squire, Merchant of the Staple at Callis, and Anne his wife. He deceased the 4. day of Decemb. An. Dom. 1576. And she the 22. of May, 1565. Here lyeth Thomas Prenthoit, Citizen and Vpholder of London, and Joane his wife. Hee deceased the 7. day of April, Anno Domini, 1521. A faire Alabaster Tombe,In the Northside of the Quire. and the figure of a man kneeling on it, thus in∣scribed: D. O. M. Hic situs est Petrus Caponius, Florentinus in vita Nobilitate clarus, morum inte∣gritate, summis Principibus gratissimus, exilium quod iniquiore fato subierat con∣stanter tulit. Obiit An. aetaris, 32. Sal. 1582. 6. Cal. Novembris. Mortuum Britannia, quem vivum in sinu tulerat, in sinu nec dum discincto conser∣vat. Petrus Landus, ex parentibus Florentinis, apud Lugdunum Galliae natus, hoc amo∣ris & moeroris Monumentum P. Vpon two plates fixed in the wall, these inscriptions: Here-under lyeth buried the body of Phi∣lip Van Wyllender, Esquire, Musici∣an, and one of the privie Chamber to King Henry the eight of most famous memory, and to King Edward the sixth. Who dy∣ed the 24. day of February, Ann. Dom. 1553. And had issue by Frances his wife, foure sonnes, and two daughters, &c. Here lyeth buried the body of Thomas Bur∣nell, late Citizen and Mercer of Lon∣don, and Merchant of the Staple at Cal∣lis. He deceased the 26. day of February, Ann. Dom. 1448. Comming now to the charities given to the poore in this Parish, I finde no nomination of any, but of one Mistris Bainham, and Sir Iames Deane, whose gifts are benevolence in bread weekely to the poore. There standeth also in the lower part of the Church, a memory of one yet living, inscribed thus: Iohn High-Lord, senior, of London, Skinner, in his life time, and in the 85. yeere of his age, gave forty shillings yeere∣ly for ever, to be bestowed in New-castle Coales, for the reliefe of the poore in this Parish of S. Olave in Hare-street. There are many men of great and good account in this Parish, who at divers times are bountifull unto the poore in money, and as they send it, it
is faithfully divided among them. Now for the limits and bounds of the Parish, they go on from the Church West, and turning downe on the East side of Mart-lane, crosse the way over to Sir Henry Bakers house, and so go up on the West side, till turning into Hart∣street, they goe on into Sydon-lane, so farre as their marke standeth, on the house of Sir Nicholas Salter, joyning to theirs of Barking Parish. Then they goe over on the West side, and so passe downe Crochet Friers, to Tower-hill, to the further part of the Lady Lumleys garden wall, and the backe gate of the foresaid Sir Nicholas, where turning backe to Porters house, and going on Northward, they goe into an Alley, which guideth them to the North end of Master Covels garden, and there they fix their marke by theirs of Barking, on London Wall. So returning againe, they goe up towards Aldgate on the East side, so far as directly against the signe of the Cocke, returning backe on the West side to the Pumpe in Crochet Friers, and then to the place where they began. Here I was favoured by Master Iohn Simpson, Parson of S. Olaves, and the friendly Officers there. Then have ye out of Tower street also on the North side,Mart-lane, of a Mart kept about Blanch Chappelton, or Appleton. one other lane, called Mart-Lane, which runneth up towards the North, and is for the most part of this Tower-street Ward; which lane is about the third quarter thereof, divided from Aldgate Ward, by a chaine to bee drawne thwart the said lane, above the West end of Hart-street. Cokedon-lane, sometime at the South-west end of Mart-lane, I read of. A third lane out of Tower-street on the North side,Mincheon lane. is called Mincheon-lane, so called of Tenements there, sometime pertaining to the Minchuns or Nunnes of S. Helens in Bishopsgate-street: This Lane is all of the said Ward, except the corner house towards Fen-Church-street. In this lane of old time dwelled di∣vers strangers borne, of Genoa and those parts; these were commonly called Galley-men,Galley-men dwel∣led there. as men that came up in the Galleys, brought up Wines and other Merchandises, which they landed in Thames street, at a place called Galley Key: they had a certaine coyne of siluer amongst themselves, which were halfe pence of Genoa, and were called Galley halfe-pence. These halfe-pence were forbidden in the 13. yeere of King Hen∣ry the 4. and againe by Parliament in the 4. of Henry the 5. it was enacted, that if any person bring into this Realm Galley halfepence, Suskins, or Dodkins, he should be punished as a Thiefe, and he that taketh or payeth such money, shall lose an hundred shillings, whereof the King shall have the one halfe, and he that will sue, the other halfe: not∣withstanding in my youth I have seene them passe currant, but with some diffi∣culty, for that the English halfe-pence were then (though not so broad) some∣what thicker and stronger. The Cloth-workers Hall is in this Lane.Cloth. workers Hall. Then at the West end of Tower-street, have ye a little turning towards the North,Gristes house. to a faire house, sometime belonging to one named Griste, for hee dwelled there in the yeere 1449. And Iack Cade, Captaine of the Rebels in Kent, being by him in this his house fea∣sted, when he had dined, like an unkind guest, robbed him of all that was there to be found worth the carriage. Next to this is another faire house, sometime builded by Angell Dunne, Grocer,Iohn Champneis, Alderman blind. Alderman of London; since pos∣sessed by Sir Iohn Champneies, Alder∣man and Maior of London. He builded in this house an high Tower of Bricke, the first that ever I heard of in any pri∣vate mans house, to overlooke his neigh∣bours in this Citie. But this delight of his eye was punished with blindnesse some yeeres before his death. Since that time, Sir Percevall Hart, a jolly Courtier, and Knight Harbenger to the Queene, was lodged there, &c. From this house somewhat West, is the Parish Church and Parsonage house of Saint Margaret Pattens, to the which Church and house on the North side, and as farre over against on the South, stretcheth the farthest West part of this Ward. And therefore, to begin againe at the East end of Tower-street; on the South side have ye Beare-lane, wherein are many faire houses, and runneth downe to Thames-street. The next is
Sporiar-lane,Sporiar lane or VVater-lane, or Hart-lane. of old time so called, but since and of later time, named, Water-lane, because it runneth downe to the Water-gate by the Custome House in Thames-street:Harpe-lane. then is there Hart-lane for Harp-lane, which likewise runneth downe into Thames-street. In this Hart-lane is the Bakers Hall, sometime the dwelling house of Iohn Chichley,Bakers Hall. Chamberlaine of London, who was son to William Chichley, Alderman of London, brother to William Chichley, Archdeacon of Canturbury, Nephew to Robert Chichley, Maior of London, and to Henry Chichley Archbishop of Cantur∣bury. This Iohn Chichley (saith our Leyland) had foure and twenty children. Sir Tho. Kitrioll of Kent, after he had been long prisoner in France, married Elizabeth, one of the Daughters of this Chichley, by whom he had this Chichleyes house. This Elizabeth was secondly married to Sir Ralfe Ashton, Knight Marshall: and thirdly, to Sir Iohn Bourchier, Vncle to the late Bourchier, Earle of Essex, but she never had child. Edward Poynings made part with Bourchier, and Elizabeth to have Ostenhanger in Kent, after their death, and entred into it they living. In Tower-street, betweene Hart-lane, and Church-lane,Galley Row. was a quadrant, called Galley Row,Church lane. by East. because Galley men dwel∣led there.Church lane in the West. Then have yee two lanes out of Tower-street, both called Church-lanes, because one runneth downe by the East end of Saint Dunstans Church, and the other by the West end of the same: out of the West lane, turneth another lane, West toward Saint Mary Hill, and is called Fowle-lane,Fowle lane. which is for the most of Tower-street Ward. This Church of Saint Dunstane is cal∣led in the East,Parish Church of S. Dunstane in the East. for difference from one other of the same name in the West: it is a faire and large Church of an ancient building, and within a large Church-yard: it hath a great Parish of many rich Merchants, and other occupiers of divers trads; namely Salters and Ironmongers. The Monuments in that Church bee hese: In the Quire Iohn Kennington Parson there buried, 1374. Willim Islip, Parlon, 1382. Iohn Kiryoll Esquire, brother to Tho∣mas Kiryoll, 1400. Nicholas Bond. Thomas Barry, Merchant, 1445. Robert Shelley, Esquire, 1420. Robert Pepper, Grocer, 1445. Iohn Norwich, Grocer, 1390. Alice Brome, wife to Iohn Coventry, sometime Maior of London, 1433. William Isaack, Draper, Alderman, 1508. Edward Skales, Merchant, 1521. Iohn Ricroft, Esquire, Serjeant of the Larder to Henry the seventh and Henry the eighth, 1532. Edward Waters, Esquire, Serjeant at Armes, 1558. Sir Bartholomew Iames, Draper, Maior 1479. buried under a faire Monument, with his Lady. Ralfe Greenway, Grocer, Alderman, put under the stone of Robert Pepper, 1559. Thomas Bledlow, one of the Sheriffes, 1472. Iames Bacon, Fishmonger, Sheriffe, 1573. Sir Richard Champion, Draper, Maior 1568. Henry Herdson, Skinner, Alderman, 1555. Sir Iames Granado Knight. William Hariot, Draper, Maior, 1481. buried in a faire Chappell, by him buil∣ded, 1517. Iohn Tate, sonne to Sir Iohn Tate, in the same Chappell, in the North wall. Sir Christopher Draper, Ironmonger, Maior, 1566. buried 1580. and many other worshipfull personages besides, whose monuments (for the most part) are altogether defaced, but such as re∣maine, and merit memory, I will de∣clare them in this order following. On the South side of the Chancell, standeth an ancient Marble Tombe,In the Chancell. cooped about with filliting of brasse plates, bearing these words engraven on them: Hic jacet Bartholomeus Iames, Miles, Civis & Pannarius, ac Aldermannus, necnon quondam Maior hujus inclitae Civitatis London, &c. Close by it standeth another very faire Alabaster Tombe, richly and curi∣ously gilded, and two ancient figures
of Aldermen in Scarlet kneeling, the one, at one end of the Tombe in a good∣ly Arch, the other, at the other end in like manner, and a comely figure of a Lady betweene them, who was wife to them both. By the one standeth a Ta∣ble, with this inscription: Here lyeth Henry Heardsons corps, within this Tombe of stone: His soule (through faith in Christs death,) to God in Heaven is gone. VVhiles that he lived an Alderman, and Skinner was his state: To Vertue bare hee all his love, To vice hee bare his hate. His Almes that weekely he bestowed, within this Parish here, May witnesse to the poores releefe, what good-will hee did beare. Hee had to wife one Barbara, which made this Tombe you see: By whom he had of issue store, eight Sonnes and Daughters three. Obiit 22. Decemb. An. Dom. 1555. By the other standeth the like Table, thus inscribed: The corps of Richard Champion, Knight, Maior and Draper, herein doth rest Whose soule by most assured hope, with Christ in heaven is blest. His life was such, and so imployed, to right from wrong; that hee Whom God did so direct in life, must needs with comfort dye: Both rich and poore did like him well, and yet doe praise his name: Though he behinde him left no child, which might declare the same. His weekely almes that is bestowed, within this Parish here: Doth witnesse to the poores comfort, the good will he did beare. Obiit 30. Octobris, An. Dom. 1568. There is a faire Alabaster Tombe,In the South Ile of the Quire. principally belonging to Sir Christopher Draper, Knight, yet bearing all these in∣scriptions following, in regard of the se∣verall marriages of his daughters: Sir Christopher Draper; Knight, Iron∣monger, and Lord Maior of London, 1560. deceased, being 70. yeeres of age. Lady Margaret his wife made this Mo∣nument for him. Sir William Webbe, Knight, Salter and Lord Maior of London, 1591. de∣ceased the fourth day of Iuly, 1599. La∣dy Bennet his Wife, yet living, Daugh∣ter to Sir Christopher Draper, Knight performed this in her love to him. Sir Wolstane Dixie, Knight, Skinner and Lord Maior of London, An. Dom. 1582. deceased, being 69. yeeres of age. Lady Agnes his Wife, Daughter to Sir Christopher Draper, Knight, decea∣sed in the 37. yeere of her age. Sir Henry Billingsley, Knight, Haber∣dasher, and Lord Maior of London, 1596. yet living in An. 1602. Mistris Bridget his Wife, Daughter to Sir Christopher Draper, Knight, decea∣sed in the 44. yeere of her age. Master Christopher Woodroffe, sonne to the said Mistris Bridget, deceased 37. yeers of age. Hoc Monumentum amoris ergo posuit Do∣mina Benet Webbe superstes in memo∣riam sui coniugis dignissimi equitis Guil Webbe, defuncti 4. Iulii, 1599. Vt etiam in observantiam officii erga paren∣tes suos Dom. Christ. Draper, & Mar∣garetam Vxorem eius, necnon caeteros tune sorores tum posteros praefixos. Vnderneath it is an ancient Marble Monument, and upon a plate are these words engrauen: Here lyeth buried Iames Bacon, late of London Alderman, who departed this mortall life, the 5. day of Iune, Anno Dom. 1573. Having issue by Mary first wife, one Son and three Daugh∣ters. And by Margaret his second wife, three sonnes, and one Daughter. And by Anne his third wife, no child, &c. On the North side of the Chancell is a faire Monument erected in the wall, bearing this inscription: Iohannes Hawkins, Eques Auratus, cla∣riss. Regiae Marinarum causarum The∣saurarius. Qui cum XLIIII. annos mu∣niis bellicis, & longis periculosisque na∣vigationibus detegendis novis regionibus, ad Patriae utilitatem, & suam ipsius glo∣riam, strenuam & egregiam operam na∣vasset, in expeditione, cui Generalis prae∣fuit ad Indiam occidentalem dum in Auchoris ad portum S. Ioannis in insa∣la Boriquena staret, Placidè in Domino
ad Coelestem Patriam emigravit, 12. die Novembris, Anno salutis, 1595. In cujus memoriam ob virtutem, & res¦gestas, Domina Margareta Hawkins, Vxor moestissima, hoc monumentum cum lacrymis posuit. By the Tombe hangs a faire Table, fastned in the wall, with these Verses in English: Dame Margaret, a Widdow well affected, This Monument of memory erected, Deciphering unto the viewers sight, The life and death of Sir Iohn Hawkins, Knight, One fearing God, and loyall to his Queene, True to the State by tryall ever seene, Kind to his Wives, both Gentlewomen borne, Whose counterfeits with grace this work adorn. Dame Katharine the first, of rare report, Dame Margaret the last, of Court consort, Attendant on the Chamber and the Bed Of Englands Queene ELIZABETH, our head Next under Christ, of whom all Princes hold Their Scepters, States, and Diadems of Gold: Free to their friends on either side his kinne, Carefull to keepe the credit he was in: Vnto the Sea-men beneficiall, As testifieth Chattams Hospitall. The poore of Plimouth, and of Debtford Towne, Have had, now have, and shal have many a crown; Proceeding from his liberality, By way of great and gracious Legacie. This Parish of Saint Dunstane standing East, (Wherein he dwelt full thirty yeeres at least) Hath of the springs of his good will a part, Derived from the Fountaine of his heart, All which bequests, with many moe unsaid, Dame Margaret hath bountifully paid. Deepe of conceit, in speaking graue and wise, Endighting swift, and pregnant to devise; In conference revealing haughty skill, In all affaires having a Worthies will, On Sea and Land spending his course & time, By steps of yeeres as he to age did climbe. God hath his soule, the Sea his body keepes, Where (for a while) as Ionas, now he sleeps; Till he which said To Lazarus, Comeforth; Awake this Knight, and give to him his worth. In Christian faith, and faithfull penitence, In quickning hope, and constant patience, He running ranne a faithfull Pilgrims race, God giving him the guiding of his grace. Ending his life with his experience, By deepe decree of Gods high providence, His yeeres to six times ten and three amounting, The ninth, the seventh Climactericke by counting: Dame Katharine, his first religious Wife, Saw yeeres thrice tenne and two of mortall life: Leaving the world the sixth, the seventh ascending, Thus he and she, alike their compasse ending, Asunder both by death of flesh alone,
Together both insoule, two making one, Among the Saints above, from troubles free, Where two in one shall meet, and make up three. The Christian Knight and his good Ladies twaine, Flesh, Soule and Spirit united once againe; Beholding Christ, who comfortably saith, Come, mine Elect, receive the Crowne of faith. Lenvoy. Give God, saith Christ, give Caesar lawfull right, Owe no man, saith Saint Paul, ne mine, ne mite Save love, which made this chaste memoriall, Subscribed with Truths restimoniall. FINIS. Now, in regard that this Parish of S. Dunstane is the last (in our account) of Tower-street Ward, we are to speake of Gods blessings there to the poore, which I finde to be seven shillings three pence every Sunday through the yeere, given in ready money, beside bread and other gifts, according to the wils and disposi∣tions of Sir Richard Champion, and Ma∣ster Alderman Heardson, with Coales given beside at certaine times. More, I finde, that one man hath given yeerely for ever, an whole Oxe to be distributed by a quarter thereof quarterly, and a pecke of Oate-meale there withall to the poore. But yet so discreetly ordered, that they that have the quarter of Beese and pecke of Oate-meale at one quarter, must stay till other poore bee so served, and that it comes to their turne againe. Other charities there are which came in gifts of ready money, and are accor∣dingly truly distributed. In the perambulation of this Parish, they goe first so farre North from the Church, as to the house next William Offington, and thence returning, walke down on the North side of Tower-street, so farre as Mincheon-lane, and to the house of Master Dumbelowe, next to Clothworkers Hall, where they returne againe, and so goe on to the signe of the Dolphine in Tower-street, being a Ta∣verne. There they crosse the way, and goe downe the West side onely of Wa∣ter-lane, and then walke along Thames-street, leaving the Custome house, pas∣sing on to Smarts-key; whence returning backe into the Crosse-lane, so farre as Sir Cuthbert Buckles house, now in the custody of Sir Iohn Lemnian, Knight, and Lord Maior of London, they goe home to the place where they began. Here I was favoured by Master Iohn Childerlay, Doctor of Divinity, my wor∣thy good friend, and his diligent Offi∣cers. Now as concerning the two Church-lanes, they meeting on the South side of this Church and Church-yard, doe joyne in one: and running downe to the Thames-street, the same is called Saint Dunstans Hill: at the lower end where∣of the said Thames-street (toward the West, on both sides almost to Belins-gate but towards the East up to the VVater-gate, by the Bulwarke of the Tower) is all of Tower-street VVard. In this street on the Thames side, are divers large lan∣ding places, called VVharffes, or Keys, for Cranage up of VVares and Mer∣chandise, as also for shipping of Wares from thence to be transported. These Wharffes and Keys common∣ly beare the names of their owners, and are therefore changeable. I read, in the 26. of Henry the sixth, that in the Parish of Saint Dunstane in the East, a tene∣ment called Passekes Wharffe,Passekes VVharffe, and Hor∣ners Key. and ano∣ther called Horners Key in Thames-street, were granted to William Harindon Es∣quire. I read also, that in the sixth of Richard the second, Iohn Churchman Gro∣cer, for the quiet of Merchants, did new∣ly build a certaine house upon the Key, called Wool-wharffe,Wool-wharffe by Custo∣mers Key. in the Tower-street Ward, in the Parish of Alballewes Bar∣king, betwixt the tenement of Paul Sa∣lisbury, on the East part, and the Lane called the Water-gate on the West,Water-gate by VVool Key. to serve for Tronage, or weighing of VVools in the Port of London:Custome house. Where∣upon, the King granted, that during the life of the said Iohn,Tronage of Wools. the asoresaid Tro∣nage should be held an kept in the said
house, with easements there for the Ballances and Weights, and a counting place for the Customer, Controwlers, Clerkes and other Officers of the said Tronage, together with ingresse and re∣gresse to and from the same, even as was had in other places, where the said Tronage was wont to be kept, and that the King should pay yeerely to the said Iohn (during his life) forty shillings, at the termes of S. Michael and Easter, by even portions by the hands of his Cu∣stomer, Custome house. without any other payment to the said Iohn, as in the Indenture there∣of more at large appeareth. Neere unto this Customers Key, to∣wards the East, is the said Water-gate, and West from it,Porters Key or Porters lane. Porters Key: then Galley Key,Galley Key. where the Galleys were u∣sed to unlade, and land their Merchan∣dizes and wares: and that part of Thames street was therefore of some called Gal∣ley row, but more commonly, Petty-Wales.Petty-Wales. On the North side, as well as on the South of this Thames-street, are many faire houses, large for stowage, builded for Merchants, towards the East end thereof, namely, over against Galley Key, Wooll Key, and the Custome-house. There have beene of old time some large buil∣dings of stone, the ruines whereof doe yet remaine, but the first builders and owners of them are worne out of memory: wherefore the common peo∣ple affirme Iulius Caesar to be the builder thereof, as also of the Tower it selfe, but thereof I have spoken already. Some are of another opinion, and that a more likely, that this great stone building, was sometime the lodging appointed for the Princes of Wales, when they re∣payred to this City, and that therefore the streete in that part is called Petty Wales,Princes of Wales their lodging. which name remaineth there most commonly untill this day: even as where the Kings of Scotland were used to be lodged betwxit Charing-crosse, and White-hall, it is likewise called Scotland: and where the Earles of Brittain were lodged without Aldersgate, the street is called Brittain street, &c. The said building might (of old time) pertaine to the Princes of Wales, as is a∣foresaid, but is since turned to other use. It is before noted of Galley Key, that the Gallies of Italy,The Mer∣chants of Italy their lodging by their Gal∣lies. and other parts, did there discharge their VVines and Mer∣chandizes brought to this City. It is like therefore that the Merchants and Owners procured the place to build up∣on for their lodgings and store-houses, as the Merchants of Haunce of Almaine were licensed to have an house, called Guilda Teutonicorum, the Guild-Hall of the Germanes. Also the Merchants of Burdeaux were licensed to build at the Vintry, strongly with stone, as may yet be seene, and see∣meth old, though often repaired: much more cause have these buildings in Petty Wales (though as lately builded, and party of the like stone brought from Cane in Normandy) to seeme old,No Gal∣lies landed here in memory of men li∣ving. which for many yeeres, to wit, since the Gal∣lies left their course of landing there, hath fallen to ruine, and been letten out for stabling of horses, to Tipplers of Beere, and such like. Amongst others, one Mother Mampudding (as they ter∣med her) for many yeeres kept this house, or a great part thereof, for victu∣alling: and it seemeth, that the builders of the Hall of this house were Ship∣wrights, and not house-Carpenters: for the frame thereof (being but low) is raised of certaine principall posts of maine timber,A strange kind of building by the Shippe-wrights or Galley-men. fixed deep in the ground, without any groundsell, boorded close round about on the inside, having none other wal from the ground to the roofe: those boords not exceeding the length of a Clap-boord, about an inch thicke, every boord ledging over other, as in a Ship or Gally nayled with Ship nayles called rough, and clench, to wit, rough nayles with broad round heads, and elenched on the other side with square plares of Iron. The roofe of this Hall is also wronght of the like boord, and nay∣led with rough and clench, and seemeth as it were a Gally, the Keele turned up∣wards: and I observed, that no worme or rottennesse is seene to have entred in∣to either boord or timber of that Hall, and therefore, in mine opinion, of no great antiquity. I read in the 44. of Edward the third,An Hospi∣tall for lu∣naticke or phrensie people. that an Hospitall in the Parish of Bar∣king Church, was founded by Robert Denton Chaplen, for the sustentation of
poore Priests, and other both men and women, that were sicke of the Phrenzie, there to remaine till they were perfectly whole, and restored to good memory. Also I read, that in the sixth of Hen. 5. there was in the Tower ward, a Mes∣suage or great house, called Cobhams Inne:Cobhams Inne. and in the 37. of Henry the sixth, a Messuage in Thames street, pertaining to Richard Longvile, &c. Some of the ruines before spoken of, may seeme to be of the foresaid Hospitall, belonging peradventure to some Prior Alieu, and so suppressed amongst the rest, in the reigne of Edward the third, or Henry the fifth, who suppressed them all. Thus much for the bounds and Anti∣quity of this Ward, wherein noted, first, the Tower of London, three Pa∣rish Churches, the Custome-house, and two Hals of Companies; to wit, the Cloth-workers, and the Bakers. This Ward hath an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Counsellors eight, Constables thirteen, Scavengers twelve, VVard-mote men thirteene, and a Bea∣dle: it is taxed to the Fifteene at six and twenty pounds.
EALDGATE VVARD. THE second VVard within the Wals on the East part,Ealdgate ward. is cal∣led Ealdgate Ward, as taking name of the same Gate. The principall street of this VVard beginneth at Ealdgate, stretching West to sometime a faire Well, where now a Pumpe is placed. From thence (the way being divided in∣to twaine) the first and principall street, (called Aldgate-street) runneth on the South side to Lime-street corner, and halfe that street downe on the left hand, is also of that Ward. In the mid way on that South side, betwixt Ealdgate and Lime-street, is Hart-horne Alley,Hart-horne Alley. a way that goeth tho∣row into Fen-Church street, over against Northumberland House. Then have yee Brick-layers Hall,Bricklay∣ers Hall. Sprinkle Alley. and another Alley, called Sprinkle Alley, now named Sugar∣loafe Alley, of the like signe. Then is there a faire house, with di∣vers Tenements neere adjoyning, some∣time belonging to a late dissolved Prio∣ry, but since possessed by Misti is Corne∣wallies, widdow, and her heires, by the gift of King Henry the eighth, in reward of fire puddings (as it was commonly said) by her made, wherewith she had presented him: such was the Princely liberality of those times. Of later time, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, Knight, was lodged there. Then somewhat more west is Belzet∣ters lane,Belzetters Lane. so called of the first builder and owner thereof; now corruptly cal∣led Billitar lane. Betwixt this Belzetters lane and Limestreet, was (of later time) a frame of three faire houses, set up in the yeere 1590. in place where before was a large Garden-plot, inclosed from the high street with a Brick wall, which wall being taken downe, and the ground digged deepe for Cellerage, there was found right under the said Bricke wall, another wall of stone,Wall, gate and win∣dowes of stone  under ground. with a gate ar∣ched of stone, and gates of timber to be closed in the midst towards the street; The timber of the gates was consumed, but the hinges of iron still remained on their scaples on both the sides. Moreover, in that Wall were square windowes, with barres of iron on either side the gate this wall was under ground above two fathomes deepe, as I then e∣steemed it, and seemeth to be the ruines of some house burned in the reigne of King Stephen, when the fire began in the house of one Aleward, neere London stone, and consumed East to Ealdgate; where∣by it appeareth, how greatly the ground of this Citie hath beene in that place raised. On the North side, this principall street stretcheth to the West corner of Saint Andrews Church, and then the Ward turneth towards the North, by S. Mary street,S. Mary street on the East side, to S. Augustines Church in the Wall, and so by Buries marks againe, or about by the Wall to Ealdgate. The second way from Ealdgate, more towards the South, from the Pumpe a∣foresaid, is called Fen-Church street, and is of Ealdgate VVard, till yee come to Calver Alley,Culver Alley. on the West side of Iron∣mongers Hall, where sometime was a lane, which went out of Fen-church street to the middest of Limestreet: but this lane was stopped up, for suspicion of Theeves that lurked there by night. Againe, to Ealdgate, (out of the prin∣cipall street, even by the gate, and wall of the Citie) runneth a lane South, to Crossed or Croed Friers, and then
Woodroofe lane, to the Tower-hill, and out of this Lane West, a street called Hart-street,Hartstreet. which of that ward stretch∣eth to Sydon-lane, by S. Olaves Church. One other lane more West from Eald∣gate, goeth by Northumberland House toward the Crossed Friers: then have ye on the same side, the North end of Mart lane, and Blanch-axleton or Chappelton, where that Ward endeth. Thus much for the bounds: Now for Monuments, or places most ancient and notable. I am first to begin with the late dissolved Priory of the holy Trini∣ty, called Christs-church, on the right hand within Ealdgate. This Priore was founded by Matilda, Queene, wife to Henry the first, in the same place where Siredus sometime beganne to erect a Church, in honour of that Crosse, and and of S. Mary Magdalen, of which the Deane and Chapter of Waltham were wont to receive thirty shillings. The Queene was to acquire her Church thereof, and in exchange gave unto them a Mill. King Henry her Husband confirmed her gift. This Church was given to Norman,Priory of the Trinity of Canons regular. the first Canon regu∣lar in all England. The said Queene also gave unto the same Church, and those that served God therin, the plot of Ealdgate, and the Soke thereunto belonging, with all cu∣stomes, so free as she had held the same, and 25. l. Blanks, which she had of the Citie of Excesser, as appeareth by her Deed, wherein she nameth the house of Christs-church, and reporteth Ealdgate to be of her Demains, which she granteth, with two parts of the rent of the Citie of Excest. Norman took on him to be Prior of Christs-church, in the yeere of Christ, 1108. in the Parishes of S. Mary Mag∣dalen, S. Michael, S. Katharine, and the blessed Trinity, which now was made but one Parish of the holy Trinity, and was (in old time) of the holy Crosse, or holy Rood parish. The Priorie was builded on a piece of ground in the parish of Saint Katha∣rine, towards Ealdgate, which lyeth in length betwixt the Kings street, by the which men goe towards Ealdgate, neere to the Chappell of Saint Michael to∣wards the North, and containeth in length eighty thee Elles; halfe quarter, and halfe quartern of the Kings Iron Eln, and lyeth in bredth; &c. The Soke and Ward of Ealdgate was then boun∣ded, as I have before shewn: the Queen was a meane also, that the land and Eng∣lish Knighten Guild was given unto the Prior Norman, and the Honorable man Geffrey de Clinton was a great helper therein, and obtained, that the Canons might inclose the way betwixt their Church and the wall of the Citie, &c. This Priorie in processe of time became a very faire and large Church, rich in Lands and ornaments, and passed all the Priories in the Citie of London, or shire of Middlesex,Prior of Christs-Church an Alderman of London. the Prior whereof was an Alderman of London, to wit, of Portsoken Ward. I reade, that Eustacius, the eighth Prior, about the yeere 1264. because hee would not deale with temporall matters, instituted Theobald Fitz Iuonis, Alderman of Portsoken Ward under him, and that William Rising, Prior of Christs-Church, was sworne Alderman of the said Portsoken Ward, in the first of Richard the second. These Priors have sitten and ridden amongst the Al∣dermen of London, in Liverie like unto them, saving that his habit was in shape of a spirituall person, as I my selfe have seene in my child-hood: at which time, the Prior kept a most bountifull house of meat and drinke, both for rich and poore, aswell within the house, as at the gates, to all commers, according to their estates. These were the Monuments in this Church: Sir Robert Turke, and Dame Alice his wife. Iohn Tirell, Esquire. Simon Kempe, Esquire. Iames Manthrope, Esquire. Iohn Ascue, Esquire. Tho. Fauset of Salset, Esquire. Iohn Kempe, Gentleman. Robert Chirwide, Esquire. Sir Iohn Henningham, and Dame Isabel his wife. Dame Agnes, wife to Sir William Bar∣dolph, and then to Sir Thomas Morti∣mer. Iohn Ashfield, Esquire. Sir Iohn Deddam, Knight.
Sir Ambrose Charcam. Ioane, wife to Thomas Nucke, Gent. Iohn Husse, Esquire. Iohn Beringham, Esquire. Thomas Geodwine, Esquire. Ralfe Walles, Esquire. Dame Margaret, daughter to Sir Ralfe Cheny, wife to Sir Iohn Barkley, to Sir Thomas Barnes, and to Sir W. Bur∣sire. William Roose. Simon Frances. Iohn Breton, Esquire. Helling, Esquire. Iohn Malwen and his wife. Anthony Wels, sonne to Iohn Wels. Nicholas de Avesey, and Margery his wife. Anthony, sonne to Iohn Milles. Baldwine, sonne to King Stephen, and Matilda, daughter to King Stephen, wife to the Earle of Mellen. Henry Fitzalwine, Maior of London, 1213. Geffrey Mandevile, 1215. And many other. But to conclude of this Priory: King Henry the eighth, minding to reward Sir Thomas Audley, Speaker of the Par∣liament against Cardinall Woolsey, as ye may read in Hall, sent for the Prior, commending him for his hospitality, promised him preferment, as a man wor∣thy of a far greater dignity; which pro∣mise surely hee performed, and com∣pounded with him, though in what sort I never heard,Priory of the holy Trinity surren∣dred and suppressed so that the Priory, with the appurtenances, was surrendred to the King, in the moneth of Iuly, in the yeere 1531. the 23. of the said Kings reigne. The Canons were sent to other houses of the same order, and the Prio∣rie, with the appurtenances, King Hen∣ry gave to Sir Thomas Audley, newly Knighted, and afterwards made Lord Chancelour. Sir Thomas Audley offered the great Church of this Priorie, with a ring of nine Bels well tuned (wherof foure the greatest were since sold to the Parish of Stebunhith, and the five lesser to the pa∣rish of S. Stephen in Coleman-street) to the parishioners of S. Katharine Christs-Church, in exchange for their small Pa∣rish Church, minding to have pulled it downe, and to have builded there to∣wards the street: But the parishioners, having doubts in their heads of after∣claps, refused the offer. Then was the Priory Church and steeple proffered to whomsoever would take it downe, and carry it from the ground; but no man would undertake the offer. Whereupon, Sir Thomas Aud∣ley was faine to be at more charges, than could be made of the stones, timber, lead, iron, &c. For the workmen, with great labour, beginning at the toppe, loosed stone from stone, and threw them downe, whereby the most part of them were broken, and few remained whole, and those were sold very cheap: for all the buildings then made about the Citie, were of Bricke and Timber. At that time, any man in the Citie, might have a Cart-load of stone for pa∣ving, brought to his doore for 6. d. or 7. d. with the carriage. The said Thomas Lord Audley builded and dwelt on this Priorie during his life, and dyed there in the yeere 1544. since the which time, the said Priorie came (by marriage of the Lord Audleys daughter and heire) unto Thomas,The Duke Place. late Duke of Norfolke, and was then called the Dukes Place. At this time the Inhabitants,The inha∣bitants the Duke place  them∣selves Pa∣rishionem of St. Ka∣tharine Cree  by lacked a Church of their owne. dwel∣ling and abiding in the said Dukes place, became utterly destitute of any Parish Church, for resorting to Gods Divine Service, and the administration of the blessed Sacraments, which in the time of their former blind zeale, the demoli∣shed Priory not onely seemed for their use, but infinite other thereto resorting. In which respect, the Parish Church of S. Katharine being so neere, and standing in the Coemitery or Church-yard of the late dissolved Priory of the Holy Trini∣ty, whereby it was called Saint Katha∣rine Christs Church: they resorted thi∣ther at the houres of Divine Service, and benefit of the blessed Sacraments; whereby (to speake rightly) they be∣came a burthen to the said Parish, yet well enough borne withall, in regard of the benefit ensuing by them. So that they carried the respect of equall Pari∣shioners, exercising and accomplishing all duties there, even as if it had beene their owne proper Parish. The long continuance of them in
this kinde,The time of such continu∣ance, did meerely make a custome of it in o∣pinion. although some much misli∣ked, and giadly would have compassed means for remedy therof: yet their pow∣er not stretching so far, nor the way (as yet fiting for their purpose; they re∣mained contented against their wils, till time would fit them with more conve∣nient opportunity. Ground they wan∣ted not, for raising a sufficient Parish Church to themselves, neither did any good will faile in them for the effecting their purpose: but onely were curbed by the lacke of strength, how and which way to bring it about. At length, perceiving their ground (intended for so good a use to them∣selves) aimed at for buildings to private mens benefits, that so they might bee frustrate of any such helpe, when occa∣sion should in better manner shine on them: Some of the best advised among them, by petition sollicited the Lord Archbishop of Canturbury, to make their desire and intention known to the Kings most excellent Majesty,The Arch∣bishop moved King Iames in the ju∣stice of the suit. which most graciously he did. And the King finding the case so truly honest and re∣ligious, for new erecting a Churh where such necessity required, and where su∣perstition had so long time formerly beene harboured: not onely gave the Lord Archbishop and the sutors both thankes and commendation; but also under his Hand and broad Seale, au∣thorizable warrant for their proceeding. The Lord Maior and Senate of Alder∣men having intelligence in the case, and perceiving what an honour would re∣dound thereby, first to God, who inspi∣red them thereto, next to the King for so Royally granting the suit, and then to the City for furthering it to effect: not∣withstanding contrary opposition by them, who would have had them stil continue, as formerly they were, with∣out benefit of a parish Church of their owne, it proceeded on with good and prosperous successe, to the no meane ho∣nour and commendation of the Lord Maior then being, Sir Edward Barkham by name,The , decayed ruines of  Christ-Church in the Dukes place. the Court of Aldermen, and state of this famous City, by whose good meanes it is made a very beauti∣full and mely Parish Church, it being called in the time of re-edifying, Trini∣ty Christs Church, raised out of the long decayed ruines, of Trinity Priory in the Dukes-place. On a faire Table hanging in the Chan∣cell, are these Verses depicted: Ac David could h eyes no rest afford, Till he had found a place out to the Lord, To build an Altar: So this man of worth, The mirrour which these later dayes brings forth Barkham the Worthie, whose immortall name, Marble's too weake to hold, for this workes fame. He never ceast in industrie and care, From ruines to redeeme this House of Praier; Following in this the holy Patriaks waies, That ready were him Altars still to raise, Where they receiv'd a blessing: So this Lord, Scarce warme in Honours seat, did first accord To this most pious worke, in which is showne, Gods blessing, and his thanks met both in one. The charge the honourable Citie beares, Whose bounty in ful Noblenesse appeares To acts of best condition, in such wise, That al things, bettering by their ruine, rise. Two noble faithfull Supervisors then, Amongst a Senate of religious men, Selected weare, to whom the care they gave, Generous Hamersley, and Cambell the grave, Each being a master-piece of zeale and care Towards Gods owne Temple, fit for truths affaire. Now at the blessed Foundresse I arrive,
Matilda, whom Henry the first did wive, The Christendome she gave it held the same, Till James our Soveraigne gave it his owne name. And since I touch Antiquity so neere, Observe what notes remarkable appeare:Norman, the first Prior, was made an Alderman of London, and rode with them on solemn dayes, but in an Ec∣clesiastical habit. An Alderman of London was at first Prime Prior of this Church. Falling to worst, It is now rais'd by encouragement and care Of a Lord Maior of London, which is rare, And worth observing. Then, as I began, I end best with the honour of the man. This Cities first Lord Maior lies buried here, Fitz-Alwine,This is mistaken by Mr. Stowe. of the Drapers Company, And the Lord Maior, whose fame now shines so cleere, Barkham, is of the same Society. By this time the worke is growne to such fulnesse and perfection, as now no∣thing wanteth but the windowes gla∣zing, which was performed in this man∣ner: The maine and great East light in the Chancell,The win∣dowes gla∣zed, and by whom. Sir Edward Barkham him∣selfe undertooke, and effected it at his owne charge, as expressionitestifieth in the same window. The other sideling by it, but inclining more Southerly, the two Worshipfull Gentlemen, Master George Whitmore,These two Gentlemē were She∣riffes then and Master Nicholas Ranton, worthily performed. And the third, standing Northerly in the same Chancell; Mr. Walter Leigh, who had beene a Serjeant at Armes to the Kings Majestie, and now Sword-bearer of Lon∣don, did likewise at his owne charge performe. The two Westerne lights in the bottome of the Church, being (in∣deed) very faire lights; the honourable Company of Drapers effected the one, and the Woodmongers worshipfull So∣ciety finished the other. Beside, the two Southerly windowes, the one done at the charge of Master Cornelius Fish, Chamberlaine of London, and the other by Mr. Waldron, then Marshall. So now ye have the Church of Saint Iames com∣pleat. Onely there is a faire Monument in the East end of the Chancell,An artifi∣ciall Sun, and the ingenious forming of it. made in resemblance of a golden Sunne, with beames and rayes very ingeniously for∣med, charactering these Verses in and among them: The rising here of the cleere Gospels Sunne, Is through the Senates free donation. The Globe of that bright Sunne, the God of might, Christ Iesus is the rising and the light. The heat the blessed Spirit of Truth and Right: And as these three, the Globe, the light, the heat, Are all one Sunne, so Three One God compleat: Thrice Allelujah speakes about the rayes, That Three in One may onely have the praise. This Temple received Consecration the morrow after New-yeeres day, in the yeere 1622. The Right Honourable, Sir Peter Proby being then Lord Maior; and the Right Worshipfull, Mr. Iohn Hodges, and Sir Humfrey Hanford, Knight, She∣riffes, and Aldermen. The names of all the rest of the Ho∣nourable Senators, all worthy Patrons of this pious worke, and then present at the consecration: Sir Iohn Garrard. Sir Thomas Bennet. Sir Thomas Lowe. Sir Thomas Middleton. Sir Iohn Leman. Sir William Cokayne. Mr. Martin Lumley. Mr. William Goare. Mr. Iohn Goare. Mr. Allen Cotton. Mr. Cuthbert Hacket.
Mr. William Holliday. Mr. Robert Iohnson. Mr. Richard Hearne. Mr. Richard Deane. Mr. Robert Ducie. Aldermen. This Sacred Structure, which this Senate fames, Our King hath stil'd, The Temple of S. James. Nor could I have said so much of this new Church, but only by the firend∣ly help and assistance of my honest well-willer, George Cooper, Clerke there, who under his own hand delivered the same to mee. The Parish Church of S. Katharine standeth in the Coemetorie of the late dissolved Priory of the holy Trinity,Parish Church of S. Katharin Christs-Church, common∣ly called Cree-church and is therefore called S. Katharine Christs-Church. This Church seemeth to bee very old; since the building whereof, the high street hath beene so often rai∣sed by payements, that now men are faine to descend into the said Church by divers steps, seven in number. But the Steeple or Bell-tower thereof hath beene lately builded; to wit, about the yeere 1504. For Sir Iohn Percivall, Mer∣chant-taylor, then deceasing, gave mo∣ney towards the building thereof. Now concerning this Parish Church of Saint Katharine Christs Church,The new building of S. Ka∣tharin Cree-Church. com∣monly Cree-Church, as formerly hath been said, it had a descent downe into it by seven steps or stayres. But being now newly built, and made a very faire Church indeed: the ascenting into the Church is by foure or five degrees. Ve∣ry gladly would I have delivered fur∣ther satisfaction concerning the new structure thereof: but I was answered, they would admit no meddling ther∣with, untill they had new built the Sree∣ple, and other necessary occasions ther∣to belonging. The Monuments formerly mentio∣ned in my last Edition of this Booke, I finde (by their report) to remaine their still, with the Tombe of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, and the rest there named; but I finde no newer, to be spoken of. There be Monuments of Sir Thomas Flemming, Knight, of Rowles in Essex, and Margaret his wife, 1464. Roger Marshall, Esquire. Lane Horne, wife to Roger Marshall. Wil. Multon alias Burdeaux, Herald. Iohn Goad, Esquire, and Ioane his wife. Beatrix, daughter to William Browne. Thomas Malton, Esquire, sonne to Bur∣deaux, Herald. Iohn Chitcroft, Esquire. Iohn Wakefield, Esquire. William Criswicke. Anne, and Sewch, daughters to Ralfe Shirley, Esquire. Sir Iohn Rainsford, Knight, of Essex. Sir Nicholas Throkmorton, chiefe But∣ler of England, one of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer, Ambassadour, &c. 1570. who hath a faire Alabaster Tombe, in the South side of the Chan∣cell. His figure lyeth therein in Armor, with this description ingraven by it: Here lyeth the body of Sir Nicholas Throkmorton,In the South side of the Chancell. Knight, the fourth sonne of Sir George Throlemorton, Knight. The which Sir Nicholas was chiefe But∣ler of England, one of the Chambelaines of the Exchequer, and Ambassadour Lie∣ger to the Queenes Majestie, Queene Elizabeth, in France. And after his returne into England, he was sent Am∣bassadour againe into France, and twice into Scotland. He married Anne Ca∣rew, daughter to Sir Nicholas Carew, Knight, and begate of her tenne sonnes and three daughters. He dyed the 12. day of February, Anno Dom. 1570. aged 57. yeeres. Here lyeth the buried the body of Frances Croke,A faire Tombe in the midst of the Chancel. the loved and beloved wife of Paulus Ambrosius Croke, of the in∣ner Temple, Esquire. Shee was one of the daughters and heires of Francis Wellesborne, Esquire, of Hanny in the County of Berk, who deceased the 10. day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 1605. aged 22. yeeres. VVell borne she was, but better borne againe. Her first birth to the flesh did make her debtor, The latter, in the Spirit (by Christ) hath set her.
Freed from Fleshes debts, Deaths first and latter gaine. Wives pay no debts, whose Husbands live and raigne. Here lyeth the body of Master Iohn Smith, Esquire, Citizen and Mercer of Lon∣don, who had two wives, the first named Anne,A faire stone pla∣ted in the North Ile of the Quare. the daughter of Fulke Mullert, in the County of Surrey, Esquire, which brought him one daughter, named Mary. His other wife was Mary, daughter to Sir Iames Hawes, Knight, and Lord Maior of London, by whom hee had no issue. Hee deceased the 24. day of De∣cember, Anno Domini, 1594. Aeta∣tis suae, 63. Gods blessings to the poore of this Parish, by the gifts of Christian Bene∣factors. Mr. William Gilborne, Draper, by his last Will and Testament, gave foure Markes yeerely for ever, to be bestowed in one dozen of bread, and to be distri∣buted on every Sabboth day to the poore of the said Parish: which said summe is yeerely paid out of the rent of his late dwelling house in the said Parish. Also hee gave twenty pounds more, towards the building of a Galle∣rie in the said Church. Mr. Iohn Smith, Mercer, in like man∣ner, gave three pounds yeerely for ever, out of his late dwelling house in the said Parish, to be paid by the Church-war∣dens for the time being, to and amongst the poore of the said Parish, at every Christmas yeerely. Mr. George Lee, Sadler, gave twenty shillings yeerely for ever to the poore, out of his rent in the said Parish. Mistris Dane, Widdow, gave eight shillings yeerely for ever to the poore, payed by the Ironmongers to M. Depu∣tie in a greater summe. Mistris Alice Bateman, appointed and gave in her life time, the summe of 42. pounds, 6. shillings, to the said Parish, the profits thereof to bee distributed yeerely to the poore for ever. Mr. Iohn Bedow, Gentleman, gave ten pounds, to be distributed in bread yeerely to the poore. Mr. George Hothersall, Merchant-tay∣lor, gave foure and twenty shillings yeerely for ever out of his Land, to the poore of this Parish. Mr. Iohn Waddis, Cooke, borne in this Parish, gave to the poore thereof three pounds, to bee distributed among them in bread yeerely for ever. Stephen Roberts, Cooke, gave also foure and forty shillings yeerely for e∣ver, to bee distributed in bread. The bounds and limits of this Parish are in this manner: From the Church into the Church-yard, to the corner westward, where turning East, they crosse the Church-yard thorow a great house, where sometime dwelt one Master Wilford, but bought since by Sir Henry Billingsley, and converted into di∣vers tenements. So on into the street to the Pumpe, and westward on to the signe of the Rose, sometime the dwel∣ling house of one Thomas Shepheard. There crossing the street to the Smiths house, his name Iohn Tatum, next to the signe of the Moore-fields Tavern: thence they goe backe East to the Pumpe, tur∣ning at the corner West, to Harts-horne Alley to the middest, to Homes his house and over against him, so backe to Bille∣ter-lane, to the house of Iohn Lemote, crossing the street there, to the house of Peter Rutt, Taylor. And so back to the end of Billeter-lane, turning west to a Bricke house, sometime in the custody of Master Leese, but possessed now by Widdow Dewen. There crossing the street to the house next Master Leaning, they goe East to the Church lane, and then North, through a lane betweene Heneadge house and the Dukes Place, to Buries markes. Then West by Heneadge house, to the wall of Sir Iames Lancasters house, sometime belonging to Sir Fran∣cis Walsingham: where they goe backe, and crosse the way to London wall to the compast place, where stands the Cities Armes. Thence forward by the wall to the outer part of Ealdgate, and so South towards the Croched Friers, to the house of Master Peers, where a piece of an Iron Gun stands fixed in the ground. Then backe, crossing the street to the house of Mistris Smith, going forward to the Bell Taverne, and so up to the signe of the Rose, ending where Thomas Shepheard did dwell. My help here was
by Master Stephen Denison, Minister, but more especially, by Iohn Beard, Clarke. At the North-West corner of this Ward in the said high street, standeth the faire and beautifull Parish Church of S. Andrew the Apostle, with an ad∣dition, to be knowne from other Chur∣ches of that name,Parish Church of S. Andrew Vndershaft. of the Knape or Vn∣dershaft, and so called S. Andrew Vnder∣shaft, because that of old time, every yeere (on May-day in the morning) it was used,A shaft or May-pole high∣er than the Church Steeple. that an high or long shaft, or May-pole, was set up there, in the midst of the street, before the South doore of the said Church, which shaft when it was set on end, and fixed in the ground, was higher than the Church Steeple. Geffrey Chawcer, writing of a vaine boa∣ster, hath these words, meaning of the said shaft. Right well aloft, and high ye beare your head,Chawcer chance of dice. The Weather-cocke with flying, as ye would kill, When ye be stuffed, bet of wine, than bread, Then looke ye, when your wombe doth fill, As yee would beare. the great shaft of Corne-hill. Lord so merrily crowdeth then your croke, That all the street may heare your body cloke. This shaft was not raysed at any time since evill May day (so called of an in∣surrection made by Prentises,As hath bin at large be∣fore de∣clared. and other young persons against Aliens, in the yeere 1517) but the said shaft was laid along over the doores, and under the Pentises of one rowe of houses, and Al∣ley gate, called of the shaft, Shaft alley, (being of the possessions of Rochester bridge) in the ward of Limestreet. It was there, I say, hanged on iron hookes amny yeeres, till the third of King Edward the sixt, that one Sir Ste∣phen, Shaft or Maypole preached against at Pauls Crosse. Curate of Saint Katherine Christs Church, preaching at Pauls Crosse, said there, that this shaft was made an Idoll, by naming the Church of Saint An∣drew, with the addition of under that shaft: he perswaded therefore, that the names of Churches might be altered: Also, that the names of dayes in the weeke might be changed, the fish daies to be kept any daies, except Friday and Saturday, and the Lent any time, save onely betwixt Shrovetide and Easter. I have oft-times seene this man, forsaking the Pulpet of his said Parish Church, preach out of an high Elme tree in the middest of the Church-yard,The said Elm tree his prea∣ching place is lately ta∣ken down. and then entring the Church, forsaking the Al∣tar, to have sung his high Masse in En∣glish, upon a Tombe of the dead to∣wards the North. I heard his Sermon at Pauls Crosse, and I saw the effect that followed: for in the after-noone of that present Sunday, the neighbours, and Tenants to the said bridge, over whose doores the said Shaft had laine, after they had dined, to make themselves strong,Shaft or Maypole saved in pieces and burnt. gathered more helpe, and with great labour raising the Shaft from the hookes (whereon it had rested two and thirty yeeres) they sawed it in pieces, e∣very man taking for his share, so much as had layne over his doore and stall, the length of his house, and they of the Alley, divided amongst them so much as had laine over their Alley gate. Thus was this Idoll (as he tearmed it) mang∣led, and after burned. Soone after was there a commotion of the commons in Norfolke, Suffolke, Es∣sex, and other shires, by meanes where∣of, streight orders being taken for the suppression of rumors, divers persons were apprehended, and executed by Marshall Law; amongst the which, the Bayliffe of Rumford in Essex was one,Bayliffe of Rum∣ford exe∣cuted within Ealdgate for words spoken to the priest of the pa∣rish. a man very well beloved: he was early in the Morning of Mary Magdalens day (then kept holy-day) brought by the Sheriffes of London, and the Knight Marshall, to the Well within Ealdgate, there to be executed upon a Gibbet set up that morning, where being on the Ladder, he had words to this effect; Good people, I am come hither to dye, but know not for what offence, ex∣cept for words by me spoken yester night to Sir Stephen, Curat and Preacher of this Parish, which were these: He as∣ked me what newes in the Country? I answered, heavy newes. Why, quoth he? It is said, quoth I, that many men be up in Essex, but thanks be to God all is in
good quiet about us: and this was all, as God bee my Iudge, &c. Vpon these words of the Prisoner, Sir Stephen to a∣void reproach of the people, left the Ci∣ty, and was never heard of sinceamongst them to my knowledge. I heard the words of the prisoner for he was execu∣ted upon the pavement of my dore, where I then kept house. Thus much by digression:Parish Church of Saint An∣drew Vn∣dershaft new buil∣ded. now againe to the parish Church of Saint Andrew Vndershaft, for it still retaineth the name, which hath beene new builded by the Parishoners there, since the yeare 1520. every man putting to his helping hand, some with their purses, other, with their bodies. Stephen Iennings Marchant-Tay∣lor, sometime Major of London, caused (at his charges) to be builded the whole North side of the great middle Ile, both of the body and Quire, as appeareth by his Armes over everie piller graven, and also the North Ile, which he roofed with timber and seeled: also the whole South side of the Church was glazed, and the Pewes in the South Chappell made of his costs, as appeareth in every Window, and upon the said Pewes. He deceased in the yeere 1524. and was bu∣ried in the Gray Fryers Church. Iohn Kirby Marchant-Taylor, sometime one of the Sheriffes, Iohn Garland, Merchant Taylor, and Nicholas Levison, Mercer, Executor to Garland, were great benefa∣ctors to this worke: which was finished (to the glazing) in the yeere 1529. and fully finished 1532. Buried in this Church, Philip Malpas, one of the Sheriffes, 1439. Sir Robert Dennie, Knight, and after him Thomas Dennie his son, in the yeere, 1421. Thomas Stokes, Gentleman, Grocer, 1496. In the New Church, Iohn Nichell, Merchant-Taylor, 1537. William Draper, Esquire, 1537. Isa∣bel and Margaret his wives. Nicholas Levison, Mercer, one of the Sheriffes, 1534. Iohn Gerrard, Woolman, Merchant of the Staple, 1546. Stepten Kyrton, Merchant-Taylor, Al∣derman, 1553. David VVoodroffe, Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffes, 1554. Stephen VVoodroffe his sonne, gave 100. l. in money, for the which, the poore of that Parish receive two shil∣lings in bread weekely for ever. Sir Thomas Offley, Merchant-Taylor, Maior, 1556. hee bequeathed the one halfe of all his goods to charitable acti∣ons, but the Parish received little bene∣fit thereby.Stephen Woodroffe the best Benefa∣ctor to the poore in that Pa∣rish. Thomas Starkey, Skinner, one of the Sheriffes, 1578. Hugh Offley, Letherseller, one of the Sheriffes, 1588. William Hanbury, Baker. These other Monuments I find there beside: Nicholai de Nate,On a faire plated Stone in the Chan∣cell. Ragsini caro hoc in tu∣mulo repulverescit, spiritus ad Celum reversus reassumptionem carnis expectat. Obiit die 1. Ianuar. 1566. A nativita∣te vixit, An. 50. Mens. 7. dies 29. Au∣gustinus amantissimo fratri moerens po∣nere curavit. Henry Man,Before the doore within the Chan∣cell. Doctor of Divinity in the V∣niversity of Oxenford, and sometime Bishop of Man. Which Henry departed this life the 19. day of October, An. Do. 1556. and lyeth buried under this stone. Memoriae Sacrum. Resurrectionem in Christo hic expectat Io∣annes Stowe,At the up∣per end of the North Ile in the Quire. Civis Londinensis: Qui in antiquis Monumentis eruendis accuratissima diligentia usus, Angliae Annales, &, Civitatis Londini synopsim bene de sua, bene de postera aetate meri∣tus luculente sripsit, vitae{que} studie pie & probe decurso. Obiit Aetatis Anno 80. die 5. Aprilis, 1605. Elizabetha Coniux, ut perpetuum sui amoris testimonium dolens. Neere to this place,A faire guilded plate in the wall. lyeth buried the body of Simon Burton, Citizen & Wax-Chan∣dler of London, a good Benefactor to the poore of this Parish. Who was three times Master of his Company, and one of the Governours of Saint Thomas Hospitall and of the Common Councel of this Ward 29. yeeres. He had two Wives, Eliza∣beth and Anne, and had issue by Eli∣zabeth one sonne and foure daughters. He deceased the 23. day of May, Anno
Dom. 1593. being aged 85. yeers: In whose remembrance, his loving Daugh∣ter Alice Coldocke erected this Monu∣ment. Neere unto this Monument, lyeth Alice Byng in a Vault with her Father, Si∣mon Burton:In the wal close by the other. shee had three husbands, all Batchelers and Stationers. Her first was Richard Waterson, by him she had a Sonne. Next him was Francis Col∣dock, by birth a Gentleman, he bare all the Offices in his Company, and had issue two daughters, Ioane and Anne, with whom she lived 40. yeeres. Lastly, Isaac Byng, Gent. who dyed Master of his Company. She dyed the 21. day of May Anno Dom. 1616. Aged 73. yeeres, 5. Moneths, and 25. dayes. Neere unto this Monument, lyeth buried the body of Dorothy Greswolde,A hand∣some small Monu∣ment in the wall, South in the Quire. the onely Daughter of Roger Greswolde, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of Lon∣don: which Roger was the third Son of Richard Greswolde, of Solyhull, in the County of Warwicke, Esquire. She was first married to Iohn Weld, Citi∣zen and Haberdasher of London, who was the second Sonne of Iohn Weld of Eaton, in the County of Chester, Gent. By whom shee had foure Children, viz. Iohn, Elizabeth, Ioane and Dorothy. After his decease, shee married Hugh Offley, Citizen and Alderman of Lon∣don, and by him had only one Daughter, named Susanna. After his death shee lived a Widdow sixteene yeeres, and be∣ing of the age of 60. yeeres, dyed in the true faith of Christ, and hope of eternall happinesse, the 29. of Iune, 1610. Here before this place, lyeth buried the bo∣dy of Margery,In the Ile beneath the Quire and on the same side, a comely Monu∣ment in the wall. late the Wife of Hum∣frey Turner, Gent. who deceased the 10. day of December, 1607. being of the age of 56. yeeres. As also the body of her first husband, Master Isaac Sutton, late Citizen and Goldsmith of London: who deceased the 2. day of May, 1589. By which Husband she had issue, 6. Sons and 6. Daughters. All deceasing at the time of her death, onely Ioane excepted, daughter and heire of the said Isaac, mar∣ried unto William Howpill, Gent. Tempus & Patientia. Death hath added to the ornaments of this place, the blessed memoriall of Edward Warner Esquire a worthy Citi∣zen and Merchant of London, who de∣parted this mortall life the 28. day of October, 1628. he was the second Sonne of Francis Warner, of Parham in the County of Suffolke Esquire, by Mary his second wife, Daughter and Coheire of Sir Edmund Rowse of the said County, Knight. Which Francis Warner was truely and lineally descended from the ancient and generous Family of the War∣ners, who possessed a place of their owne name at Warners Hall in great Wal∣tham in the County of Essex. He dyed without issue, and made Francis Warner of Parham aforesaid Esquire, his Nephew and next heire in blood, the Executor of his Will, and principall heire to his estate, who out of duty and affecti∣on to the memory of his deare Vncle, hath dedicated this Monument. He had to his first wife Mary,In the lower part of the Mo∣nument. daughter of Master Aylmer of Risden in Hartford∣shire; And to his second, Margaret, daughter of Master Iohn Cheynie. At entrance into the Quire, and be∣fore the Pulpet: Here lyeth buried Ioane Cartwright,A faire Grave∣stone, with the per∣sons of him and her en∣graven in brasse. the Wife of Abraham Cartwright, Citi∣zen and Draper of London; who had issue by him foure Sons and five daugh∣ters. And dyed the 24. of November, An. Dom. 1609. Gods blessings by Christian Benefa∣ctors, to the poore of this Parish. Master Stephen Woodroffe, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, by his last will and testament, bearing date the 20. of April, 1576. gave one hundred pound in money, to the use of the poore of this Parish: with which summe, and 20. l. 12. s. 4. d. more laid out by the said Parish, they purchased a house, called by the name of the White Horse in Holy-well street, in the Parish of S. Leonard in Shorditch, in the County of Middlesex. Out of which, is and hath been given to the poore of the said Parish, every Sab∣bath since his death, 2. s. in bread, and so shall continue for ever, 5. l. 4. s. per annum.
Master Simon Burton, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, by his deed indented, dated the 14. of Ianuary, 1579. hath appointed 32. s. to be given yeerely for ever to eight poore Wid∣dowes, or poore housholders of the said parish: to bee issuing out of all that Messuage or Tenement, set and being in the said parish, late in the tenure or occupation of Peter Hewes, and Edward Hide: to bee paid to the Church-war∣dens of the said parish, for the use of the poore aforesaid, every quarter 8. s. or within 40. dayes after every quarter for ever quarterly, to every of the said 8. persons, 12. d. a piece. Also, he gave unto S. Thomas Hospi∣tall, two Closes of Land or Meadow ground, lying in the parish of Shorditch, upon condition, that the Governours of the said Hospitall, or their Assignes, shall give unto 30. poore persons of the said parish (wherof the Minister, Clark and Sexton to be three of them) on the 21. 22. or 23. dayes of December, yeere∣ly for ever, the summe of 26. s. where∣of 20. s. to bee paid amongst the 30. poore, by 8. d. apeece, and the other 6. s. for a Sermon yeerely to be made for ever in Lent. Master Hugh Offley Citizen and Al∣derman of London, by his last will and testament, dated the 2. day of October, 1594. and by an Indenture of the same date, explaining his minde; gave to the Parson and Church-wardens of the said parish, and their successors for ever, an Annuity or rent charge of 4. l. to be is∣suing out of his Messuages or tenements in Limestreet, London, and within the said parish: then or lately in the seve∣rall tenures of Thomas Offley his sonne, Iohn Norman, Iames Boomer, Susanna Gar∣ret, Widdow, Thomas Blomefield, and Widdow Allison, or their assignes: To be paid yeerely at the Feast of the Birth of our Lord God, and the Nativity of S. Iohn Baptist, or within 14. daies next ensuing either the said Feasts, by even portions, with a distresse for non pay∣ment therof▪ to the end & intent, that on the first Sunday in every month, month∣ly for ever, there shall be given to 12. of the poorest persons inhabiting in the said parish, to be named and appointed by the Parson and Church-wardens, for the time being, receiving the Commu∣nion in the said Church, if any be there celebrated, each of them 3. d. apeece in money and a penny loafe of bread. And to the Clarke monethly 4. d. in money, and to the Sexton 3. d. in mo∣ney, and one penny loafe, being the ad∣vantage of the 12. d. Also, he gave 5. s. a yeere, for ever yeerely, to bee paid to such Parson or Curate, as shall monethly minister the Communion to the said poore people: and to a learned Preacher for foure se∣verall Sermons, to bee made in the said parish Church at foure severall dayes yeerely for ever, five shillings for every Sermon. Master William Hanbury, Citizen and VVhite-Baker of London, by a surrender, bearing date the 11. day of August, 1595. did give unto his daughter, Mi∣stris Elizabeth Spearing, wife of Master George Spearing Merchant, certaine cop∣py-hold land, lying and being in Stebun∣heath and Radcliffe, in the County of Middlesex. Vpon condition, that she, her heires or assignes, shall pay to the Parson and Church-wardens of the said parish, for the use of the poore people there, 52. s. yeerly for ever, at the Birth of our Lord God and the Purification of our Lady the Virgin: which (by con∣sent of the parish) is bestowed among the poore abroad, on Wednesday week∣ly 12. d. Mistris Alice Hanbury, widdow, by her last will and testament, dated the 3. day of December, 1595. did give unto the said Master George Spearing, one tenement in the said parish, where∣in William Bridges a Taylor then dwel∣led: upon condition, that the said George, his heires or assignes, shall pay to the Church-wardens of the said parish, and their successors, to the use of the poore and impotent people there, 13. s. 4. d. yeerely for ever, at the Feasts of the Annunciation of our Lady, and Saint Michael the Archangell, by even porti∣ons: Or else to assure to the said parish, the like value in some other place: which summe (by consent of the parish) is given in coales amongst the poore yeerely for ever at Christmas. Mr. Ralfe Carter, Citizen and Salter of London, by his Deed indented, dated
the 22. day of October, 1576. hath gi∣ven to divers Feoffees, between the Pa∣rishes of Alhallowes in Lumbard-street, and Saint Andrews Vndershaft, after the decease of Alice his wife, one Messuage, with a Garden, called the Halfe-moone in East-Smith-field, in the parish of Saint Buttolphs without Ealdgate, to the end that there should be distributed to the poore in either Parish, in bread every Sunday weekely for ever, twelve pence, and thirty shillings in Coales to eyther parish, betweene Midsummer and Christmasse for ever. Mistris Margaret Moore, widdow, late wife of William Moore, Citizen and Mer∣chant-taylor of London, by her deed in∣dented, dated the tenth day of May, 1583. hath given to divers Feoffees of the said parish, one messuage, which she had by the gift of her said husband, and situate in the same parish, now in the occupation of Thomas Fitall; to the end that there should be distributed to the poore there yeerely for ever, 20. shil∣lings, at the discretion of the Parson and Churchwardens: And to a Preacher to make foure Sermons quarterly, every yeere for ever 20. shillings. Dame Mary Ramsey, late wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey, Knight, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, by her Testa∣ment and last Will, dated the 19. of Jan. 1596. gave to the L. Maior, Com∣munalty and Citizens of London, one messuage or tenement, situated in the Parish of Saint Peter the poore, in Broad∣street Ward, London, then or late in the occupation of Richard Hull, Citizen and Draper; to the end that they should yeerely (after her decease) pay to the Parson and Churchwardens of this Pa∣rish, forty shillings, to be distributed a∣mong the poore of the said Parish, at the discretion of the Parson and the Churchwardens then being, and by di∣rection and allowance of two of the chiefest Parishioners: And to the like use for ever, twenty shillings more yeerely for ever, after decease of one E∣lizabeth Worley, in the County of North∣hampton, to be paid and distributed in the like manner. Mr. Iohn Hide, Citizen and Merchant Taylor of London, by his last Will and Testament, dated the 8. day of Septem∣ber, 1604. did give unto the Parson and Church-wardens of the said Parish and their successors, a yeerely rent of Coles, to be issuing out of all his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in the Precinct of the Minories without Eald∣gate, London, to be paid yeerely at the east of the Nativity of S. Iohn Baptist for ever, or within 30 daies next ensuing with distresse for non-payment thereof: To the intent that there should be be∣stowed yeerely in old clift Char-coles, 30. shillings thereof, and one other 12. d. yeerely given to some trusty body, to see the due measuring thereof: And the same coale to be delivered to the poore of the same Parish, alwaies two dayes before S. Michael the Archangel yeerly, by advice of the Parson and Church-wardens for the time being, and 3. or 4. Ancients of the said parish. Mr. Edmond Hill, Citizen and Dra∣per of London, by his testament and last will, dated the 5. day of August, 1609. did give and bequeath to the Church-wardens and parishioners of this parish the summe of 52. pounds, to be imploy∣ed by the parishioners, as in a stocke for ever, and the benefit thereby arising, to bee given weekely to the poore in bread. Master Laurence Overton, Citizen and Mercer of London, by his testament and last will, dated the 3. day of Sept. 1612. did give and bequeath to the poore of the said parish (whereof then he was a parishioner) the summe of 20. pounds, to be distributed at the discre∣tion of the Churchwardens for the time being, and his Executors. Their bounds and limits are thus: First they goe East, so far as the house of one Allen Barker, Grocer, over against Billeter lane end, and so North all the side of the high street, to Mr. Francis Philips house, over against the Kings∣head Taverne, West. There, on the South side of the high street, beginning at the Italian Ordinary of Ieronymo di Soldi, they turne East to one Thomas Georges, two houses beyond the Pewter Pot. Then they turne backe into Lime∣street, South, on both sides the way, so far as the house of Nicholas Hobland, Merchant stranger, on the one side, and
William Ruddock, Taylor, on the other. Returning backe, they crosse the way into S. Mary Axe, all the West side throughout the whole street, with some certaine houses over against London wall towards Bishopsgate, the last whereof is the dwelling house of Griffin Martin, Trumpeter. So turning backe into S. Mary Axe, they goe upon the East side, from the house of Master Iohn Holding, commonly called Fletchers hall, and so on to Master George Sares, adjoyning to the Church, and there end. Master Hen∣ry Mason is Parson there, but my friend∣ly furtherance was by Thomas Iohnson the Clarke. Now downe St. Mary street, by the West end of the Church towards the North,S. Mary street. stand divers faire houses for Merchants, and other: namely, one faire great house builded by Sir William Pickering the father, possessed by Sir William his Sonne,Pickering house. and since by Sir Ed∣ward Wootton of Kent. North from this place is the Fletchers hall,Fletchers Hall. and so downe to the corner of that street over against London wall; and againe Eastwards to a faire house lately new builded, partly by Mr. Robert Beale, one of the Clerkes of the Councell. Then come you to the Papey,Papey a brother hood or Hospitall for poore Priests. a proper house, wherein sometime was kept a Fraternity or brother-hood of S. Chari∣ty, and Saint Iohn Evangelist, called the Papey, or poore impotent Priests, (for in some language, Priests are called Papes) founded in the yeere, 1430. by William Oliver, William Barnabie and Iohn Stafford Chaplens, or Chauntry Priests in London, for a Master, two Wardens, &c. Chaplens, Chauntry Priests, Conducts, and other brethren and sisters, that should be admitted in∣to the Church of Saint Augustine Papey in the wall. The brethren of this house becomming lame, or otherwise into great poverty, were here relieved, as to have Chambers, with certaine allow∣ance of bread, drinke, and cole, and one old man and his wife to see them served and to keepe the house cleane. This brotherhood (amongst others) was sup∣pressed in the reigne of Edward the sixt, since the which time, in this house hath been lodged Master Morris of Essex, Sir Francis Walingham, principall Secretary to her Majesty, Master Barret of Essex, &c. Then next is one great house, large of roomes, faire courts and garden plots, sometime pertaining to the Bassets, since that,The Abbot of Bury his Inne. to the Abbots of Bury in Suffolke, and therefore called Buries markes, cor∣ruptly, Bevis markes. Bevis markes, and since the dis∣solution of the Abby of Bury, to Thomas Heneage the father, and to Sir Thomas his sonne. Then next unto it, is the be∣fore spoken Priory of the holy Trinity, to wit, the West and North part there∣of, which stretcheth up to Ealdgate, where we first begun. Now in the second way from Eald-gate, more toward the South, from the VVell or Pumpe aforesaid,Fenne Church street. lyeth Fenne-Church street, on the right hand where∣of, somewhat west from the South end of Belzetters lane,Ironmon∣gers hall. is the Ironmongers hall: which company was incorporated in the third of Edward the fourth: Richard Fleming was their first Master, Nicholas Marshall and Richard Coxe were Custos or VVardens. And on the left hand or South side (even by the gate and wall of the City) runneth downe a lane to the Tower-hill the South part whereof is called Woodroffe lane,Woodroffe lane by the wall of the Tower hil. and out of this lane toward the VVest, a street called Hart-street. In this street, at the South-east corner thereof,Crossed F∣ers Church. sometime stood one house of Crouched or (Crossed) Fryers founded by Ralph Hosier; and VVilliam Sabernes, about the yeere, 1298. Stephen the 10. Prior of the Holy Trinity in London, granted three tenements for 13. s. 8. d. by the yeere, unto the said Ralph Hosiar and VVilliam Sabernes, who afterwards became Fryers of S. Crosse: Adam was the first Prior of that house. These Fryers founded their house in the place of certaine tenements, purchased of Richard Wimblush, the 12. Prior of the Holy Trinity, in the yeere, 1319. which was confirmed by Edward the third, the seventeenth of his reigne, valued at 52. l. 13. s. 4. d. surrendred the 12. of November, the 30. of Henry the eighth. In this house was buried Master Iohn Tirres. Nicholas the son of VVilliam Kyriell, Esquire. Sir Thomas Mellington, Baron of VVe∣mese, and Dame Elizabeth his VVife,
daughter of Wil. Botear, Baron of Wome. R. Mellington, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Ferreis of Ousley. Henry Lovell, son to Wil. Lord Lovell. Dame Isabel, wife to William Edwards, Maior of London, 1471. Wil. Norborow, and Elizabeth his wife. Wil. Norborow, and Beatrix his wife. William Brosked, Esquire. William Bowes. Lionel Mollington, Esquire, sonne of Ro∣bert Mollington. Nicholas Couderow, and Elizabeth his wife. Sir Iohn Stratford, Knight. Sir Tho. Asseldey, Knight, Clerke of the Crowne, Submarshall of England, and Justice of the Shire of Middlesex. Iohn Rest, Grocer, Maior of Lond. 1516. Sir Iohn Skevington, Knight, Merchant∣taylor, Sheriffe, 1520. Sir Iohn Milborne, Draper, Maior in the yeere 1521. was buried there, but removed since to S. Edmonds in Lum∣bard street. Sir Rice Griffith, beheaded on the Tower hill, 1531. In place of this Church is now a Car∣penters yard, a Tennis-court, and such like: the Friers Hall was made a glasse-house, or house wherein was made glasse of divers sorts to drinke in; which house in the yeere 1575. on the 4. of Septemb. burst out into a terrible fire,The glasse house bur∣ned. where be∣ing practised all meanes possible to quench it, notwithstanding, as the same house in a small time before, had con∣sumed a great quantity of wood by ma∣king of glasses, now it selfe, having with∣in it about 40000. billets of wood, was also consumed to the stone wals, which neverthelesse greatly hindred the fire from spreading any further. Adjoyning unto this Friers Church,Almes houses by Crossed Fri∣ers. by the East end therof in Woodroffe lane, towards the Tower hill, are certaine proper Almes-houses,Testamōt of Sir Iohn Milborne. 14. in number, builded of bricke & timber, founded by Sir Ioh. Milborn, Draper, sometime Mai∣or, 1521. wherein be placed 13. aged poore men and their wives, if they have wives: these have their dwelling rent-free, and 2. s. 4. d. apiece, the first day of every moneth for ever. Whereas there is mention made by Mr. Stow (in this his Survey) of a month∣ly pension of 4. s. to belong to a foure∣teenth house, being one of the said alms-houses; also of certaine bread & coales, to be delivered to the Parishes of S. Ed∣mund in Lumbard street and S. Michael in Cornehill: and of divers messuages and garden-plots in the Parish of S. O∣lave in Hart-street, London, mentioned to be given to the Company of Drapers, for the performance thereof: Vpon a perfect view of the Will it selfe, by which the said Almes-houses were gi∣ven to the Company of Drapers, and upon other writings touching the same; And withall, upon diligent and paine∣full search touching that matter; I find that Mr. Stowe was much deceived or mistaken in that matter; and that there was no such bread and coales given to those Parishes, neither at any time had the Company and such houses or gar∣dens, whereby to performe the same. But the Company, by the Will, had lands given them in other Parishes, (which now they doe enjoy) onely to maintaine the Almes-houses, and for payment of the pensions there, and to pay some small summes of money to the Officers and others of that Company, for the looking to the houses, and paines taking in paying the pensions, according as by the Will is limited, and for no o∣ther use or purpose. Next to these Almes-houses is the Lord Lumleyes house,L. Lumleys house. builded in the time of King Henry the 8. by Sir Thomas Wiat the father, upon one plot of ground of late pertaining to the foresaid Cros∣sed Friers, where part of their house stood: And this is the farthest part of Ealdgate Ward toward the South, and ioyneth to the Tower hill. The other side of that Lane, over against the Lord Lumleys house, on the wall side of the Citie, is now for the most part (or alto∣gether) builded, even to Ealdgate. Then have ye on the South side of Fenne-Church street, over against the wall or Pumpe, amongst other faire and large-builded houses, one that some∣time belonged to the Prior of Monte Ioves,Prior of Horne-Church in Essex. or Monasterie Cornute, a Cell to Monte Ioves beyond the Seas. In Essex it was the Priors Inne, when he repaired to this Citie. Then a Lane that lea∣deth downe by Northumberland house,
towards the Crossed Friers, as is afore∣shewed. This Northumberland house, in the Parish of Saint Katharine Coleman, be∣longed to Henry Percy,Northumb. house. Earle of Nor∣thumberland, in the 33. of Hen. the 6. but of late being left by the Earles, the gar∣dens thereof were made into Bowling∣alleys, and other parts into Dicing-hou∣ses, common to all commers for their money, there to bowle and hazard. But now of late, so many Bowling-Alleys, and other houses for unlawfull gaming, have beene raised in other parts of the Citie and the Suburbs, that this their ancient and onely patron of misrule, is left and forsaken of her Gamesters, and therefore turned into a number of great rents, small cottages, for strangers and others. At the East end of this lane, in the way from Ealdgate toward the Crossed Friers,The poore Jurie. of old time, were certaine tene∣ments, called the Poore Iurie, of Iewes dwelling there. Next unto this Northumberland house,Parish Church of S. Katharine Coleman. is the Parish Church of S. Katharine, called Coleman; which addition of Cole∣man, was taken of a great Haw yard, or Garden, of old time called Coleman haw, in the parish of the Trinity, now called Christs-Church, and in the Parish of S. Katharine, and All Saines, called Coleman Church. Monuments in this Church, I finde none recorded by Mr. Stowe; and upon my view, these were the most remarka∣ble that I found there: Here lyeth the body of Henry Webbe,In the Northeast end of the Chancell, an ancient Tombe. E∣squire, Gentleman Vsher to King Henry the eighth. And here lyeth also Barbara his wife. She dyed the 5. day of Februa∣rie, An. Dom. 1552. And he the last day of March, 1553. Here lyeth the body of Sir Henry Billings∣ley, A faire stone on the groūd by the Cō∣munion Table. Knight, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, who dyed the 22. day of No∣vember, An. Dom. 1606. And also the body of Elizabeth his first wife, who departed this life the 29. of Iuly, 1577. Here lyeth the body buried,A small A∣labaster Monumēt fixed in the wall. of Elizabeth, late wife to Henry Billingsley, one of the Queenes Majesties Customers in the Port of London, who dyed the 29. day of Iuly, An. Dom. 1577. In obitum ejus. Stat sua cuique dies, atque ultima funeris hora, Cum Deus hinc & Mors insidiosa vocant. Nec tibi, vel pietas tua, velforma Elizabetha, Praesidium fate ne trahereris erat, Occidis exactis terris cum conjuge lustris, At septem vitae lustra fuêre tua. Fecerat & proles jam te numerosa parentem, Filiolae trinae caetera turba mores, Vndecimo in partu, quum Mors accessit & una Matrem te & Patrem sustulit undecimum, Scilicet ex mundo, ex terrena faece malisque Sustulit, at superis reddidit atque Deo, Est testis sincera fides, testis tua virtus. Grata viro virtus, grata fidesque Deo, Hic charitas dormit,At the doore  to the  Cha a very  faire  on the  gro nominata beata Beatrix, Atque Dei donum, quoniam fuit optima Conjux. Filia Georgii Cotton, Arm. Vxor Roberti Barners. Obiit 5. Novēb. Anno Dom. 1616. I had rather bee a Doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the Palaces of Princes. An Epitaph on the death of the Noble, vertuous, and charitable Gen∣tlewoman, Mistris Barners, whose body lyeth under the stone you tread on. IN ancient times,In the north  just a∣gainst the Grave∣stone. the friends surviving gave Some rich memoriall to the dead friends grave, Gold, Pearles or Gemmes, which custome did intend, Our riches ought to wait upon our friend,
In life and death. O blessed Ages, when Men parted fortunes, and not fortunes men But now perverted are our present ends, That (for wealth) sell the fame of living friends: The dead we live by, now can scant afford The rites and sacrifice of one good word: Of which, lest I be one, though I can bring (For worthy Obsequie) no precious thing; My gratitude presents unto her Hearse, My teares for Balme For Offering, my sad Verse. Give leave then, griefe, let my drown'd Muse declare What she that's dead was, unto them that are. The Rule and Index to finde all the good That ever Heaven dealt upon woman-hood: For if we but anatomize her life, We find both a good woman, and good wife: First, she lov'd God, Not like the Pharisee, In ostentation and hypocrisie; But even with all her heart, and all her soule: She secretly did raging sinne controule: For she (for goodnesse sake) was innocent, And not for glory, or feare of punishment. Next, to her neighbour did her love extend, Ready to helpe at need, and to befriend The poore, and those that never could repay, But with their prayers at the latter day: The remnant of her love she did bestow Vpon her Husband, not in outward show, Or else in feign'd adulterate flattery; But in sound truth, and deepe sincerity. Thus did she live, divided in her love From this unworthy world: and Nature then, Which had but lent her, tooke her backe agen. Where let us live in peace, and let us try To live like her, that we like her may dye. Come hither, Women, leave your vanities, Your lust, your scornes, your pride, your fooleries? For hither you must all. The Dust and grave All your adored braveries must have: And all those beauties that are now afraid Of Ayre, of Sunne, must in the ground be laid. Then decke your soules, unto whose quintessence, Nor time, nor death, nor grave can bring offence. For so you may (for ever) beautifie Your selves as Angels, in eternity. FINIS. Concerning Charity to the poore in this Parish, besides the Christian dis∣position of the parishioners themselves, I finde by information, that Sir Iames Deane hath given two shillings weekly in bread for ever, which is duely perfor∣med every Friday. And as much they themselves doe give in bread every Sunday. Sir Henry Billingsley (by his will) gave the sum of 200. l. for reliefe of the poor in this Parish; but by not making his own eyes Overseers, and his hands his trustiest Executors, his good intent is injured, and the poore disappointed. The limits and bounds of this Parish need no relation, because they are con∣tained within so small a compasse, and at every place where their marke is fix∣ed, there is likewise a Katharine wheele
of iron, not easie to be broken off or re∣moved. Mr. Wright, the learned Parson here, gave me his gentle furtherance, shewing mee a glasse window in the South Ile of the Church, where is figu∣red the shape of an Alderman in Scar∣let, kneeling on his knees, and the words set downe by him, doe expresse his name to be William White, Maior of this honourable Citie. Whereby his is perswaded, and I am likewise of his o∣pinion, (by divers opinions thereto in∣ducing) that all that Ile was either of his building, or (at least) repairing, it appeareth so novell to the rest. Then have ye Blanch Apleton,Mannor of Blanch Apleton. where∣of I read in the thirteenth of Edward the first, that a lane behind the same Blanch Apleton, was granted by the King to be inclosed and shut up. This Blanch Aple∣ton was a Mannor, belonging to Sir Tho∣mas Roos of Hamelake, Knight, the se∣venth of Richard the second, standing at the North-east corner of Mart lane,Mart lane. so called, of a priviledge sometime enjoy∣ed to keepe a Mart there; long since discontinued, and therefore forgotten, so as nothing remaineth for memory, but the name of Mart lane, and that not uncorruptly termed Marke lane. I read that in the third of Edward the fourth, all Baskert-makers,Basket-makers at Blanch Apleton, Wyer-draw∣ers, and other Forrainers, were permit∣ted to have shops in this Mannour of Blanch Apleton, and not else-where with∣in this Citie, or suburbs thereof. And this also being the farthest West part of this Ward on that South-side, I leave it, with three Parish Churches; Saint Katharine Christs-Church, S. An∣drew Vndershaft, and S. Katharine Cole∣man; and three Halls of Companies; the Brick-layers Hall, the Fletchers Hall, and the Ironmongers Hall. It hath an Alderman, his Deputy, common Counsellours, six; Constables, six; Scavengers, nine; VVard mote men for Inquest, eighteene, and a Bea∣dle. It is taxed to the Fifteene in Lon∣don, at five pounds.
LIMESTREET VVARD. THe next is Limestreet VVard,Limestreet Ward and taketh the name of Lime∣street,Limestreet. of making or selling of lime there (as is supposed:) the East side of this Limestreet, from the North corner ther∣of, to the middest of Ealdgate Ward, as is aforesaid: the West side, for the most part, from the said North corner, south∣ward, is of this Limestreet Ward: the South end on both sides is of Langbourn Ward: the body of this Limestreet Ward,High street of Cornehill. is of the high street called Corn∣hill street, which stretcheth from Lime∣street on the South side, to the West corner of Leaden-hall: and on the North side, from the South-west corner, to S. Mary street, to another corner over a∣gainst Leaden-hall. Now for Saint Mary street, the west side thereof is this Limestreet Ward, and also the street which runneth by the North end of this S. Mary street, on both sides; frō thence west to an house called the Wrestbers, a signe so called, almost to Bishopsgate. And these are the bounds of this small Ward. Monuments or places notable in this Ward, bee these: In Limestreet are divers faire houses for Merchants and others: there was sometime a mansion house of the Kings,An house in Lime∣street, cal∣led the Kings Ar∣tirce. called the Kings Ar∣tirce, whereof I finde record in the 14. of Edward the first, but now growne out of knowledge. I read also of ano∣ther great house in the West side of Limestreet, having a Chappell on the South, and a Garden on the West, then belonging to the Lord Nevill, which Garden is now called the Greene yard of the Leaden hall. This house, in the ninth of Richard the second, pertained to Sir Simon Bur∣ley, and Sir Iohn Burley his brother: and of late the said house was taken downe, and the fore-front thereof new builded of timber, by Hugh Offley, Alderman. At the North-west corner of Lime∣street, was (of old time) one great Mes∣suage, Benbridges Inne. called Benbridges Inne: Raph Hol∣land, Draper, about the yeere 1452. gave it to Iohn Gill, Master, and to the Wardens and Fraternity of Taylors, and Linnen Armorers of Saint Iohn Baptist in London, and to their successors for ever. They did set up in place ther∣of a faire large frame of Timber, con∣taining in the high street one great house, and before it, to the corner of Limestreet, three other tenements, the corner house being the largest: and then downe Limestreet divers proper Tene∣ments. All which the Merchant-taylors in the reigne of Edward the sixth, sold to Stephen Kirton, Merchant-taylor and Alderman: he gave with his daughter Grisild, to Nicholas Woodroffe, the said great house, with two tenements before it, in lieu of an hundred pounds, and made it up in money, three hundred six∣ty six pounds, thirteene shillings, foure pence. This worshipfull man, and the Gentlewoman his widdow after him, kept those houses downe Limestreet in good reparations, never put out but one Tenant, tooke no fines, nor raised rents for them, which was tenne shil∣lings the piece yeerely: But whether that favour did over-live her Funerall, the Tenants now can best declare the contrary. Next unto this on the high street was the Lord Sowches messuage or tenement,Messuage of the L. Sowch. and other. In place whereof, Richard Wethell, Merchant-Taylor, builded a faire house, with an high Tower,
the second in number, the first of tim∣ber that ever I learned to have beene builded, to overlooke neighbours in this Citie. This Richard, then a yong man, be∣came in short time so tormented with gouts in his joynts, of his hands and legs, that he could neither feed him∣selfe, nor goe further than he was led, much lesse was he able to climbe, and take the pleasure of the heighth of his Tower. Then is there another faire house, builded by Stephen Kirton, Alderman: Alderman Lee did then possesse it, and againe new builded it: but now it is in the custodie of Sir William Cravon. Then is there a faire house,Messuage called the Green-gate. of old time called the Greene-gate, by which name one Michael Pistoy, a Lumbard, held it, with a tenement and nine shops, in the reigne of Richard the second, who in the 15. of his reigne, gave it to Roger Corphull and Tho. Bromester, Esquires, by the name of the Greene-gate, in the Parish of S. Andrew upon Cornehill, in Limestreet Ward: since the which time, Philip Malpas, sometime Alderman, and one of the Sheriffes, dwelled therein, and was there robbed and spoiled of his goods,Philip Mal∣pas robbed to a great value, by Iacke Cade, and other Rebels, in the yeere 1449. Afterwards, in the reigne of Henrie the seventh, it was seased into the Kings hands, and then granted first unto Iohn Alston, after that, unto William de la Ri∣vers, and since by Henry the eighth, to Iohn Mutas, a Pickard, or Frenchman, who dwelled there, and harboured in his House many Frenchmen, that kalen∣dred wolsteds, and did other things, contrary to the Franchises of the Citi∣zens. Wherefore on evill May day, which was in the yeere 1517. the Pren∣tises and other spoiled his house, and if they could have found Mutas,Mutas house spoiled. they would have stricken off his head. Sir Peter Mutas, sonne to the said Iohn Mu∣tas, sold this house to David Woodroofe, Alderman, whose sonne, Sir Nicholas Woodroofe, Alderman, sold it over to Iohn Moore, Alderman, that then pos∣sessed it. Next is a house called the Leaden Porch,Leaden Porch. lately divided into two tene∣ments, whereof one is a Taverne, and then one other house for a Merchant, likewise called the Leaden Porch, but now turned to a Cookes house. Next is a faire house and a large, wherein divers Maioralties have beene kept, whereof twaine in my remem∣brance; to wit, Sir William Bowyer, and Sir Henry Huberthorne. The next is Leaden-Hall,Mannor of Leaden Hall. of which I read, that in the yeere 1309. it belon∣ged to Sir Hugh Nevill, Knight, and that the Lady Alice his wife, made a Feoffment thereof, by the name of Lea∣den Hall, with the advousions of S. Peter on Cornehill, & other Churches, to Rich. Earle of Arundell and Surrey, 1362. More, in the yeere 1380. Alice Nevil, widdow to Sir Iohn Nevill, Knight, of Essex, confirmed to Thomas Cogshall, and others, the said Mannor of Leaden Hall, and the advousions, &c. In the yeere 1384. Humfrey de Bohun, Earle of Hereford, had the said Mannor. And in the yeere 1408. Robert Rikeden of Essex, and Margaret his wife, confir∣med to Richard Whittington, and other Citizens of London, the said Mannor of Leaden Hall, with the Appurtenances, the advousion of S. Peters Church, S. Margaret Pattens, &c. And in the yeere 1411. the said Whittington and other confirmed the same to the Maior and Communalty of London, whereby it came to the posses∣sion of the Citie. Then in the yeere 1443. the 21. of Henry the sixth, Iohn Hatherley, Maior, purchased licence of the said King to take up 200.Licence to take up Lead to the buil∣ding of a common granary. fodder of Lead, for the building of water Conduits, a common Granarie, and the Crosse in West Cheape, more richly, for the honour of the Citie. In the yeere next following, the Par∣son and Parish of Saint Dunstane in the East of London, seeing the famous and mighty man (for the words bee in the Grant; Cum nobilis & potens vir,) Simon Eyre, Citizen of London, among other his workes of Piety, effectually deter∣mined to erect and build a certain Gra∣narie, upon the soile of the same Citie at Leaden-Hall, of his owne charges, for the common utility of the said Citie; to the amplifying and inlarging of the said Granarie, granted to Henry Frowicke,
then Maior, the Aldermen and Com∣munalty and their successors for ever, all their tenements, with the appurtenan∣ces, sometime called the Horse-mill in Grasse-street, for the annuall rent of foure pounds, &c. Also, certaine Evidences of an Alley and Tenements pertaining to the Horse-mill, Horse-mill in Grasse-street. adjoyning to the said Leaden-Hall in Grasse-street, given by William King∣stone, Fishmonger, unto the parish Church of St. Peter upon Cornehill, doe specifie the said Granary, to be builded by the said honourable and famous Mer∣chant, Simon Eyre sometime an Vphol∣ster, then by chan∣ging of his Copy a Draper. Leaden-hall new buil∣ded to bee a common Garner. Simon Eyre, sometime an Vphol∣ster, and then a Draper, in the yeere, 1419. He builded it of squared stone in forme as now it sheweth, with a faire and large Chappell in the East side of the Quadrant, over the porch of which hee caused to be written, Dextra Domi∣ni exaltavit me, The Lords right hand exalted me. Within the said Church,A Chap∣pell buil∣ded in Lea∣den hall. on the north wall was written, Honorandus famosus Mercator Simon Eyre, hujus operis, &c. In English thus: The honourable and fa∣mous Merchant Simon Eyre, founder of this worke, once Maior of this City, Citizen and Draper of the same, departed out of this life the 18. day of September, the yeere from the incarnation of Christ, 1459. and the 38. yeere of the reigne of King Henry the 6. He was buried in the Parish Church of St. Mary Wolnoth in Lumbard street: hee gave by his Testa∣ment, which I have read, to be distribu∣ted to all Prisons in London, or within a mile of that City, somewhat to relieve them. More,Legacies given by Simon Eyre. Daily Ser∣vice by note, &c. and three free schooles in the Lea∣den Hall. hee gave 2000. Markes upon a condition, which not performed, was then to be distributed to maids marria∣ges, and other deeds of charity: he also gave 3000. Markes to the Drapers, up∣on condition, that they should within one yeere after his decease, establish perpetually a Master or Warden, five se∣cular Priests, sixe Clarkes, and two Queristers, to sing daily Divine Service by note for ever, in his Chappell of the Leaden-Hall: Also, one Master, with an Vsher for Grammer, one Master for Writing, and the third for Song, with houses there newly builded for them for ever, the Master to have for his Salary, tenne pounds, and every other Priest 8. pounds, every other Clerke, 5-pounds, 6. shillings, 8. pence, and every other Chorister, five Markes. And if the Drapers refused this to doe, within one yeere after his decease; then the three thousand Markes to remaine to the Pri∣or and Covent of Christs-church in Lon∣don, with condition to establish as is a∣foresaid, within two yeeres after his decease. And if they refused, then the three thousand Markes to bee disposed by his Executors, as they best could de∣vise in workes of charity. Thus much for his Testament, not performed by establishing of divine ser∣vice in his Chappell or Free Schooles for Scholars;Liber albus. neither how the stocke of three thousand Markes (or rather five thousand Markes) was imployed by his Executors, could I ever learne: he left issue Thomas, who had issue Thomas, &c. True it is, that in the yeere 1464. the third of Edward the fourth, it was agreed by the Maior,Beame for Tronage of wools at Leaden-hall. Aldermen and Cōmunal∣ty of London, that notwithstanding the King Letters patents, lately before gran∣ted unto them, touching the Tronage or weighing of Wares to be holden at the Leaden-Hall; yet suit should be made to the King for new letters patents, to be granted to the Maior of the Staple, for the Tronage of Wools to bee holden there, and order to be taken by the dis∣cretion of Thomas Cooke, then Maior, the Counsell of the City, Geffrey Filding then Maior of the Staple at Westminster, and of the Kings Councell, what should be paid to the Maior and Aldermen of the City, for the laying and housing of the Wools there, that so they might be brought forth and weighed, &c. Touching the Chappell there,A brother∣hood of 60 Priests in the Chap∣pell of Leaden hall. I find, that in the yeere 1466. by licence obtai∣ned of King Edward the fourth in the 6. of his reigne, a Fraternity of the Trini∣ty of 60. Priests (beside other brethren and sisters) in the same Chappell, was founded by William Rouse, Iohn Risby, and Thomas Ashby Priests, some of the which 60. Priests, every Market-day in the fore-noone, did celebrate Divine Service there, to such Market people as repaired to prayer, and once every yeere they met all together, and had solemne Service, with Procession of all the Bre∣thren
and Sisters. This foundation was in the yeere 1512. by a common Coun∣cell confirmed to the 60. Trinity Priests and to their successors, at the will of the Maior and Communalty. In the yeere 1484. a great fire hap∣ned upon the Leaden-Hall,Leaden-hall burned. by what ca∣sualty I know not, but much housing was there destroyed, with all the stocks for Guns, and other provision belonging to the City, which was a great losse, and no lesse charge to bee repaired by them. In the yeere 1503. the eighteenth of Henry the seventh,Rich. Arol. a request was made by the Commons of the City, concer∣ning the usage of the said Leaden-hall, in forme as followeth: Please it the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and Common Councell,A request of the Ci∣tizens to the Maior and Alder∣men. to enact, that all Frenchmen bringing Canvas, Linnen cloth, and other wares to be sold, and all Forreins bringing Wolsteds, Sayes, Stamins, Kive∣rings, Nayles, Iron worke, or any other wares, and also all manner Forreins, bring∣ing Lead to the City to be sold; Shall bring all such their wares aforesaid, to the open Market of the Leaden-Hall,Leaden hall Market for Can∣vas and linnen cloth. and no where else to be shewed, sold, and uttered, like as of old time it hath been used, upon paine of forfeiture of all the said wares, shewed or sold in any other place than aforesaid: And the shew of the said wares to bee made three dayes in a weeke, that is to say, Munday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. It is also thought reasonable, that the common Beame be kept from henceforth in the Leaden-hall, and the Farmer to pay therefore reasonable rent to the Chamber: for better it is that the Chamber have advantage thereby, than a forraine person. And also the said Leaden-hall, which is more chargeable now by halfe than profitable, shall better beare out the charges thereof. Also the common Beame for Wool at Leadenhall,Common Beame to be kept in Leaden hall. Leaden hall pertai∣ning to the Com∣munalty. may pay yeerely a rent to the Chamber of London, toward the supportation and charges of the same place: for reason it is, that a common Office occupied upon a common ground, beare a charge to the use of the Communalty. Also that Forraines bringing Wools, Fels, or any other Merchandizes or wares to Leaden-hall, Wools, Fels, and other Mer∣chandizes to be sold in Leaden-hall. to be kept there for the sale and Mar∣ket; may pay more largely for keeping of their goods, than freemen. Thus much for the request of the Commons at that time. Now to set downe some proofe,Leaden hall used as a Garner. that the said Hall hath been imployed and u∣sed as a Granary for Corne and graine (as the same was first appointed) lea∣ving all former examples,Roger Ach∣ley Maior made good pro∣vision for the City. this one may suffice: Roger Acheley Maior of London in the yeere 1512. the third of Henry the 8. when the said Maior entred the Maioralty, there was not found 100. quarters of Wheat in all the Garners of this City,Bread Carts of Stratford the Bow. either within the liberties, or neere adjoyning. Through the which scarcity, when the Carts of Stratford came laden with Bread to the City (as they had been accustomed) there was such presse about them, that one man was ready to destroy another, in stri∣ving to be served for their mony. But this scarcity lasted not long: for the Maior (in short time) made such provi∣sion for Wheat, that the Bakers both of London, and of Stratford, were weary of taking it up, and were forced to take much more than they would, and for the rest the Maior laid out the money and stored it up in Leaden-hall, and o∣ther Garners of the City. This Maior also kept the Market so well, that hee would be at the Leaden-hall, by foure a clocke in the Summers mornings, and from thence he went to other Markets, to the great comfort of the Citizens. I read also, that in the yeere, 1528. the 20. of Henry the 8. Surveyors were appointed to view the Garners of the City, namely, the Bridgehouse and the Leaden-hall, how they were stored of Graine for the service of the City. And because I have here before spoken of the bread Carts comming from Strat∣ford at the Bow, ye shall understand, that of old time, the Bakers of bread at Strat∣ford were allowed to bring daily (ex∣cept the Sabbath and principall Feasts) divers long Carts laden with bread, the same being two ounces in the penny wheaten loafe heavier than the penny wheaten loafe baked in the City, the same to be sold in Cheape, three or foure Carts standing there, betweene Guthe∣rans lane and Fausters lane end, one cart on Corne-hill, by the Conduit, and one other in Grasse-street. And I have read, that in the fourth yeere of Edward the second, Richard Reffeham being Maior, a Baker named Iohn of Stratford, for
making Bread lesser than the Assise;Liber. D. A Baker of Stratford punished in London for baking bread un∣der the Assize. was with a fooles hood on his head, and loaves of bread about his necke, drawn on a Hurdle through the streets of this City. Moreover, in the 44. of Edward the third, Iohn Chichester being Maior of London, I read in the visions of Pierce Plowman, a Booke so called, as follow∣eth. There was a carefull commune,Iohn Mal∣verne. when no Cart came to towne with Basket bread from Stratford:Bread Carts frō Stratford missed in this City in time of scarcity. tho gan beggers weepe, and workemen were agast, a little this will bee thought long in the date of our Dirte, in a dry Averell a thousand and three hundred, twice thirty and ten, &c. I read also in the 20. of Henry the 8. Sir Iames Spencer being Maior▪ sixe Ba∣kers of Stratford were merced in the Guild-hall of London, for baking under the size appointed. These Bakers of Stratford left serving this City, I know not upon what occasion, above forty yeeres since. In the yeere 1519. a petition was ex∣hibited by the Commons to the Com∣mon Councell,A Petition of the Commons concer∣ning the use of the Leaden hall. and was by them allow∣ed, concerning the Leaden-hall, how they would have it used, viz. Meekely beseeching, sheweth unto your good Lordship, and Masterships, divers Ci∣tizens of this City, which (under correction) thinke, that the great place called the Lea∣den-hall, should nor ought not to be letten out to farme, to any person or persons, and in especiall, to any fellowship or company in∣corporate, to have and hold the same Hall for terme of yeeres, for such inconveniences as thereby may ensue, and come to the hurt of the Common weale of the said City in time to come, as somewhat more largely may appeare in the Articles following. First, if any assembly, or hasty gathering of the Commons of the said City, for sup∣pressing or sub duing of misruled people with∣in the said City, hereafter shall happen to be called or commanded by the Maior, Al∣dermen and other Governours and Counsel∣lors of the said City for the time being; there is none so convenient, meet and neces∣sary a place to assemble them in, within the said City, as the said Leaden-hall, both for largenesse of roome, and for their sure de∣fence in time of their counselling together a∣bout the premises. Also, in that place hath beene used the Artillery, Guns, and other Armors of the said City, to be safely kept in a readinesse, for the safeguard, wealth and defence of the said City, to be had and occu∣piedat times when need required. As also the store of timber, for the necessary reparations of the tenements belonging to the Chamber of the said City, there commonly hath beene kept. Item, if any Triumph or Noblenesse were to be done, or shewed by the Communalty of the City, for the honour of our Soveraigne Lord the King, and Realme, and for the worship of the said City: the said Leaden-hall is the most meet and convenient place, to prepare and order the said Triumph there∣in, and from thence to issue forth to the pla∣ces thereof appointed. Item, at any largesse or doe of any mo∣ney, made unto the poore people of this City; it hath been used, to bee done and given in the said Leaden-hall, for that the said place is most meet therefore. Item, the people to stand drie. the honourable Father, that was mar of the said Hall, had a speciall will, intent and mind, that (as it is cōmonly said) the Market men and women, that came to the City with victuals and other things, should have their free standing within the said Leaden-hall in wet weather, to keepe themselves and their wares dry, and there∣by to encourage them, and all other, to have the better will and desire, the more plenti∣ously to resort to the said City, to victuall the same. And if the said Hall should bee letten to farme, the will of the said honoura∣ble Father should never be fulfilled, nor take effect. Item, if the said place, which is the chiefe fortresse and most necessary place within all the City, for the tuition and safegard of the same, should bee letten out to farme, out of the hands of the chiefe heads of the same Ci∣ty, and especially to any other body politike, it might at length (by likelihood) be an oc∣casion of discord and debate betweene the said bodies politike, which God defend. For these and many other great and rea∣sonable causes, which hereafter shall be shew∣ed to this honouoable Court, your said besee∣chors thinke it much necessary, that the said Hall bee still in the hands of this City, and to be surely kept by sad and discreet Officers in such wise, that it might alway be ready to bee used and occupied, for the common weale of the said City when need shall re∣quire, and in no wise to be letten to any body
politike. Thus much for the petition. About the yeere 1534. great meanes was made about the Leaden Hall,Leaden Hall, meant to have been made a Burse for Mer∣chants. to have the same made a Burse for the As∣sembly of Merchants, as they had been accustomed in Lumbard-street: many Common Councels were called to that end but in the yeere 1535. Iohn Champ∣neis being Maior, it was fully concluded, that the Burse should remaine in Lum∣bard-street, as afore, and Leaden Hall no more to be spoken of concerning that matter. The use of Leaden Hall in my youth was thus: In a part of the North Qua∣drant, on the East side of the North gate, were the common beames, for weighing of Wooll and other Wares, as had been accustomed: On the West side of the gate was the Scales to weigh meale: the other three sides were reser∣ved (for the most part) to the making and resting of the Pageants shewed at Midsummer in the watch: the remnant of the sides & Quadrāts were imployed for the stowage of Woolsacks, but not closed up: the lofts above were partly used by the Painters, in working for the decking of Pageants and other devices, for beautifying of the Watch and Watch-men, the residue of the lofts were letten out to Merchants, the Wool-winders and Packers therein to winde and packe their Wools. And thus much for Leaden-hall may suffice. Now on the North of Limestreet Ward, in the high street are divers faire houses for Merchants, and proper tene∣ments for Artificers, with an Alley also called Shaft Alley, of the Shaft or May-pole sometime resting over the gate thereof, as I have declared in Ealdgate Ward. In the yeere 1576. partly at the char∣ges of the parish of S. Andrew,A Pumpe in the high street of Lime-street Ward. and partly at the charges of the Chamber of Lond. a water-Pumpe was raised in the high street of Limestreet Ward,Cornchill street in some place raised two fadome higher than of old time, as appea∣red by buildines found so deepe. neere unto Limestreet corner: for the placing of the which Pumpe, having broken up the ground, they were forced to digge more than two fadome deepe, before they came to any maine ground, where they found a Harth made of Britaine, or ra∣ther Roman Tile, every Tile halfe yard square, and about two inches thicke: they found Coale lying there also (for that lying whole will never consume) then digging one fadome in the maine, they found water sufficient, made their prall, and set up the Pumpe, which Pumpe, with o repairing and great charges to the parish, continued not 24. yeeres, but being rotted, was taken up, and a new set in the place, in the yeere 1600. Thus much for the high street. In Saint Mary street had yee (of old time) a parish Church of Saint Mary the Virgin,St. Mary street Pa∣rish Church of Mary, St. Vrsula, and 11000. Virgins, called at the Axe, letten out of a ware∣house. St. Vrsula, and the 11000. Virgins, which Church was common∣ly called Saint Mary at the Axe, of the signe of an Axe, over against the East end thereof, or Saint Mary Pellipar, of a plot of ground lying on the North side thereof, pertaining to the Skinners in London. This parish about the yeere, 1565. was united to the parish Church of Saint Andrew Vndershaft, and so was Saint Mary at the Axe suppressed, and letten out to be a warehouse for a Mer∣chant. Against the East end of this Church, was sometime a faire wall, now turned to a pumpe. Also against the North end of this St. Mary street, was sometime one other parish Church of Saint Augustine,Parish Church of S. Augu∣stine in the wall, made a Chappel to the Pa∣pey, and since pul∣led downe and made a stable. called Saint Augustine in the wall, for that it stood adjoyning to the wall of the City, and otherwise called Saint Augustines Papey, or the Poore, as I have read in the reigne of Edward the 3. About the yeere, 1430. in the reigne of Henry the sixt, the same Church was allowed to the brethren of the Papey, the house of poore Priests, wherof I have spoken in Ealdgate Ward. The Parishioners of this Church were appointed to the Parish Church of Al∣hallowes in the wall, which is in Broad∣street Ward: and this brotherhood cal∣led Papey, being suppressed, the Church of Saint Augustine was pulled downe, and in place thereof one Grey, Apothe∣cary, builded a Stable, a Hay-loft, &c. It is now a dwelling house. Those two Parish Churches, both lying in the Ward of Limestreet, being thus suppres∣sed, there is not any one parish Church or place for Divine Service in that Ward, but the inhabitants thereof re∣paire to Saint Peter in Corne-hill Ward, Saint Andrew in Ealdgate Ward, Al∣hallowes in the wall, in Broadstreet Ward,
and some to Saint Dennis in Langbourne Ward. Now because of late there hath been some question, to what Ward this Church of S. Augustine Papey should of right belong; for the same hath been challenged by them of Ealdgate Ward, and (without reason) taken into Bishops∣gate Ward, from Limestreet VVard, I am somewhat to touch it. About thirty yeeres since,Houses by London wall in the ward of Limestreet. the Cham∣ber of London granted a Lease of ground (in these words) Lying neere London Wall, in the Ward of Limestreet, from the West of the said Church or Chappell of Saint Augustine Papey, towards Bishopsgate, &c. On the which plot of ground, the Leasee builded three faire tenements, and placed Tenants there: these were charged to beare scot and lot, and some∣of them to beare office in Limestreet VVard: all which they did willingly without grudging. And when any sus∣pected or disordered persons were by the Landlord placed there, the Officers of Limestreet VVard fetched them out of their houses, committed them to ward, procured their due punishments, and banished them from thence: wher∣by in short time that place was refor∣med, and brought into good order: which thing being noted by them of Ealdgate VVard, they moved their Al∣derman, Sir Thomas Offley, to call in those houses to be of his VVard. But I my selfe shewing a faire Ledgier booke, sometime pertaining to the late dissol∣ved Priory of the holy Trinity within Ealdgate, wherein were set downe the just bounds of Ealdgate VVard, before Sir Thomas Offley, Sir Rowland Hayward, the Common Counsell, and VVard. mote Inquest of the said Limestreet VVard; Sir Thomas Offley gave over his challenge, and so that matter rested in good quiet, untill the yeere 1579. that Sir Richard Pype (being Maior, and Alderman of Bishopsgate VVard) chal∣lenged those houses to be of his ward,A part of Limestreet ward un∣justly withheld by Bishops∣gate ward. whereunto (without reason shewed) Sir Rowland Hayward yeelded: and thus is that side of the street, from the North corner of S. Mary street, almost to Bi∣shopsgate, (wherein is one plot of ground, letten by the Chamberlaine of London, to the parish of S. Martins Oteswich, to be a Churchyard or burying-place for the dead of that Parish, &c.) unjustly drawne and with-holden from the ward of Limestret. Dives other proofes I could set downe, but this one following may suf∣fice. The Maior and Aldermen of Lon∣don made a grant to the Fraternity of the Papey, in these words: Be it remembred, that where now of late the Master and Wardens of the Fraternity of the Papey, have made a bricke wall, clo∣sing in the Chappell of S. Augustine, called Papey Chappell, situate in the Parish of All Saints in the Wall, in the Ward of Limestreet of the City of London: from the South-east corner of the bricke wall, is a Scutcheon of 12. foot of assize from the said corner Eastward: And from the said Scut∣cheon there, to a Messuage of 55. foot and an halfe Westward: the said Scutcheon brea∣keth out of line right Southward, betwixt the measures aforesaid, three foot and five inches of assise, upon the common ground of the Citie aforesaid: Ralph Verney, Mai∣or, and the Aldermen of the same Citie, the 22. day of October, the 6. yeere of Ed∣ward the 4. granted to John Hod, Priest, M. John Bolt, and Tho. Patchet, Priests, wardens of the Fraterniey of Papey afore∣said, and to their successors for ever, &c. yeelding 4. d. sterling yeerely at Michael∣mas. Lib. Papey. And this is (saith my booke) in∣rolled in the Guild-hall of London: which is a sufficient proofe, the same plot of ground to be of Dimestreet ward, and ne∣ver otherwise accounted or challenged. On the South side of this street, stret∣ching west from Saint Mary street, to∣wards Bishopsgate street, there was (of old time) one large Messuage builded of stone and timber, in the parish of S. Augustine in the wall, now in the parish of Alhallowes in the same wall, belon∣ging to the Earle of Oxford;Patent. Oxford Place. (for Rich. de Vere, Earle of Oxford, possessed it in the 4. of Henry the 5.) but in processe of time, the Lands of the Earle fell to Fe∣males; amongst the which, one being married to Wingfield of Suffolke, this house with the appurtenances, fell to his lot, and was by his heire, Sir Robert Wingfield, sold to Mr. Edward Cooke, at the time when this was written, the Queenes Attourney Generall. This house being greatly ruinated, of late
time, for the most part hath beene let out to Poulters, for stabling of Horses and stowage of Poultrie, but now lately new builded into a number of small te∣nements, letten out to strangers, and o∣ther meane people. It was ordered by the Lord Maior and Aldermen,Hum. Dyson at a Court holden on Thursday, the 24. of April, in the 4. yeere of Edward the 6. That the Cham∣berlaine of London should yeerely pay unto the Scavenger of Limestreet ward, twenty shillings by even portions, out of the profit comming by the Butchers stalles in Leaden-hall, toward the cle∣sing and sweet keeping of the same Ward. One note more of this Ward, and so an end: I finde of record, that in the yeere 1371. the 45. of Edward the 3. a great Subsidie of 100000. pounds was granted towards the Kings warres in France, whereof the Cleargie payed 50000. pounds, and the Laitie 50000. pounds, to bee levied in 39. shires of England, containing Parishes 8600. of every parish, 5. l. 16. s. the greater to helpe the lesser. This Citie (as one of the Shires) then containing 24. wards, and in them 110.Subsidy of parishes, Limestreet ward, in the yeere 1371. was therfore assessed to 635. l. 12. s. whereof Lime∣street Ward did beare 34. s. and no more; so small a Ward it was, and so accounted, as having no one whole pa∣rish therein, but small portions onely, of two parishes in that Ward. This Ward hath an Alderman, his Deputy, common Counsellours, foure; Constables, foure; Seavengers, two; VVard-mote Inquest, sixteene, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene at 1. l. 19. s. 2. d. ob. q.
BISHOPSGATE VVARD. THe next is Bishopsgate Ward,Bishopsgate Ward. whereof a part is without the Gate, and of the Suburbs, from the Barres by S. Mary Spittle to Bishops∣gate, and a part of Hounds-ditch, almost halfe thereof, also without the Wall, of the same Ward. Then within the Gate is Bishopsgate street, so called of the Gate, to a pumpe, where sometime was a faire Well with two buckets, by the East end of the parish Church of S. Martin Oteswich, and then winding by the west corner of Leaden Hall, downe Grasse∣street, to the corner over against Grasse-Church: and these are the bounds of that Ward.Parish Church of S. Buttolph without Bishopsgate. Monuments most to bee noted, are these: The parish Church of Saint But∣tolph without Bishopsgate, in a faire Church-yard, adjoyning to the Towne-Ditch, upon the very banke thereof, but of old time inclosed with a comely wall of bricke, lately repaired by Sir William Allen, Maior in the yeere 1571. because hee was borne in that parish, where also hee was buried. An Anchoresse (by Bishopsgate) re∣ceived forty shillings the yeere of the Sheriffes of London. The Monuments that I observed in the Church of Saint Buttolph without Bishopsgate, were these: Johannes Threll Armig.Faire pla∣red stones lying one by another on the ground in the Chan∣cell. Nobilli familia Sussexiae ortus, hic jacet. Vixit usque ad annum sexagesimum tertium: Mortuus est sexto die Octobris, Anno Domini, 1609. Sub hoc Marmore jacet corpus Johannis Redman, quondam hujus Ecclesiae Re∣ctoris bene meriti: qui ab hac luce mi∣gravit tertio die Iulii, Anno Domini, 1523. Hic jacet Johannes Picking, Magister Artium, nuper Rector istius Ecclesiae, qui Obiit 6. die Septemb. An. Dom. 1490. Hereunder lyeth the body of Joane Wood,At the en∣trance in∣to the Quite, in the mid∣dle Ile. wife to Robert Wood, Citizen and Brewer of London, who had issue, two sonnes, and three daughters; viz. Iohn, Richard, Ioane, Anne and Francis. She deceased the 25. day of November, An. Dom. 1600. She gave large gifts and legacies to this Parish, as hereunder is expressed: At her buriall she gave tenne pounds to the poore. She gave tenne shillings yeerely for a Sermon on Midsummer day. For a friendly meeting among the neighbours, forty shillings. In bread weekly to the poore for e∣ver, two shillings. Also foure load of Char-coales yeer∣ly to the poore for ever. To the Parson of the parish yeerely for ever, tenne shillings. To the Two Church-wardens, tenne shillings to each in like manner. To the Clerke 6. s. 8. d. and to the Sexton, 5. s. yeerely for ever. For a friendly meeting of the Parson and parishioners, accompanying him yeerely in walking the bounds of the parish, thirty shillings. To the poore of the parish, in mo∣ney yeerely (for ever) to be distributed, eight pounds. And the remainder of the yeerly rents for the halfe Moone, and halfe Moone
Alley, to remaine in the Church stocke, towards the repairing of the Church. Over and beside the memorable cha∣rity of this worthy Widdow, Mistris Wood, God hath raised divers other good Benefactors to the poore in the same Parish, as appeareth by this small recordation. Iohn Heyward,This gift is perfor∣med by the Company of Tallow-Chandlers yeerely. Citizen and Alder∣man of London, had his last Will and Testament enrolled in the Court of Hustings in the Guild-Hall of London, on munday next before the Feast of Saint Cuthbert the Bishop, in the thir∣teenth yeere of Edward the fourth, after the Conquest. Wherein hee gave to the poore peo∣ple of this Parish, five and twenty Quarters of Char-coales, yeerely to be delivered by the Companie of Tal∣low-Chaundlers, betwixt the Feast of All Saints, and the Nativity of our blessed Saviour; with a penalty of for-feiture of twenty shillings for the first Quarter, if they bee not delivered as aforesaid; and forty shillings for the second Quarter; foure pounds for the third Quarter; and eight pounds for the whole yeere, if they bee not delive∣red: And so double still from Quar∣ter to Quarter, if defect of payment herein be made. Iohn Bricket, Citizen and Tooth∣drawer of London, (by his last Will and Testament, dated the eleventh day of February, 1554.) gave for ever at the Feast of Easter, twelve Sackes of Char-coales, to the poore of this Pa∣rish: out of two Tenements, the one now in the occupation of Andrew Par∣tridge, Tallow-Chaundler; the other late in occupation of Andrew Seywell, Bricklayer, both joyning together at the South side of Bell Alley gate in this Pa∣rish. We receive of the gift of Mistris Ma∣ry Wilkinson deceased, out of 2. faire hou∣ses in S. Mary Spittle, 4. load of coalés out of each house, 30. quarters being. 2. load: the first 30. quarters to be given to the poore of this parish, in the month of November for ever; the next thirty quarters to bee likewise given to the poore of this parish, in December for ever: provided that out of each load, the Overseers of the Precinct of Norton Folgate shall have tenne Sacks, to be by them given to the poore of that Precinct. Likewise is paid yeerly by the Com∣pany of Ironmongers, the summe of thirty shillings per annum, of the gift of Sir William Allen, to bee distributed among the poore in bread. Also of the Company of Vintners, the summe of twenty shillings, yeerely for ever, of the gift of Sir Stephen Scuda∣more, Knight, and Alderman of Lon∣don. Also of Mistris Wood, the Relict of Master Thomas Wood, late of Saint But∣tolphs without Ealdgate, the summe of tenne shillings yeerely for ever, to bee received on Saint Thomas day, issuing out of certaine Tenements in Katharin∣wheele Alley, in this Parish, of the gift of Mary Webster, Widdow. Mistris Price,The mir∣rour of this Age for a matchiefe woman. in the time of her wid∣dow-hood, did at her owne charge new build the Pulpit, in the yeere of our Lord, 1614. and shortly after, did likewise send (to furnish the same) faire and rich Ornaments for the said Pulpit, as also for the Communion Table. For the Pulpit, a costly Cloth of Crimson Velvet, edged in the bottome with a deepe gold fringe, and laced about with a faire gold lace. Likewise, a Cushion sutable to the same, with a very faire Verge to adorne the upper part of the Pulpit, edged like∣wise with a deepe gold fringe. And for the Communion Table, a goodly large Carpet of Crimson Vel∣vet, Nor did she this worthy service to God here onely, but in other Parishes beside, as at Pauls, Christs-Church, &c. edged with a deepe gold fringe; also a faire Table-cloth of fine Cam∣bricke, to be used upon the Communi∣on dayes, with a Cambricke Cloth la∣ced, to cover the Bread upon the Table: Also a faire Surplice of Cambricke, for the Parsons use: all which were, with a new haire Brush, kept in a Sarsanet Case, to bee locked up in a new waine∣scot Chest, by her bought for the same purpose, and so carefully kept for their severall uses. To the which Chest was set two Locks; the two severall Keyes wherof the one to be kept by the Parson of the parish, the other by the Church-warden of the same parish, for the safe keeping thereof.
As for the Kings Armes imbroidred upon the said Pulpit Cloth;The thankfull gratitude to God of Humfrey Swanne Imbroide, rer. it was made, set on and freely given by Hum∣frey Swan of this parish, Imbroiderer, in remembrance of Gods great mercy ex∣tended towards him, in the yeere of the great visitation, 1625. for in that yeere he had buried his wife, with divers of his family; himselfe also, lying a long while under the Lords heavy hand, without all hope of recovery; by Gods gracious providence hee was at the last restored to his former health. In regard whereof, and to expresse his further thankefulnesse to Almighty God, hee adorned the said Pulpit Cloth as now it is. Moreover, in the same Parish Church of Saint Buttolph, among other benevo∣lences given thereto, may not be omit∣ted the bountifull gift of Master William Hobby, Citizen and Ale-brewer of Lon∣don, to wit, the Tenor Bell in the Stee∣ple, bearing his owne name, and called Hobby, which hee caused to bee foun∣ded at his owne cost and charges: And afterwards to bee re-cast two se∣verall times, onely to make it tunable with the other Bells in the Steeple; which was performed accordingly, and they are now as perfect and pleasing a ring of Bels, as can be wished. When hee gave this Bell to the Pa∣rish, he enjoyned this condition, that at what time soever any man deceased, that had borne any place of eminence and office in the Parish, and afterward hapned (by any crosse or misadventure) to fall in decay: That yet hee should have the benefit of this Bels service free∣ly bestowed on him at his buriall, not paying any costs or duties therefore to the Church. No doubt but this man had an honest meaning, and most cha∣ritable minde, both in the promise (which was in merriment, and when he expected not place of degree or office to fall on him) and likewise in the perfor∣mance; wherein he shewed himselfe no way slacke, but so forward as any man could bee. Let his worthy example in∣cite on others; to the like good inclina∣tion (one way or other) towards the Church. Mr. Ralph Pinder, Citizen and Dra∣per of London, Aldermans Deputy of this Ward,M. Pinder gift of three core pounds. who was buried the 28. of May, 1622. gave to the poore of this Parish in mony 60. l. for which is given to 13. poore people every Sunday in the yeere for ever 2. pence a peece in good wheaten bread. In the yeere, 1626. Nichlas Reive,The bene∣volence of Nicholas Reive a Scrivener in Cornehill Scrivener in Cornehill (whose Father was Clerke of this Parish) gave by his last will and testament, the summe of 406. l. 5. s. to the said parish, to buy so much land as the said monies will ex∣tend unto, and the rents and profits ther∣of to bee given and distributed to the comfort of such people within this pa∣rish. With which monies was purcha∣sed certaine lands lying at Stratford Bow, now in the tenure of Henry Chester, the rent of which lands is 25. l. per annum. In the yeere, 1628. the 20. of Iune,The chari∣ty of the Eearle of Devonshire. William Earle of Devonshire dyed at De∣vonshire house without Bishopsgate, and gave 100. l. for ever, to the use of the poore of this parish, for which the Church-wardens doe give every Sun∣day in the yeere to 15. poore people of this parish 2. d. a peece in good whea∣ten bread. WHereas the sixth day of No∣vember last past, T. C. Ci∣tizen and Armorer of Lon∣don, humbly petitioned unto the Court, that they would bee pleased to receive into the Chamber of London the summe of 100. l. presently to be paid, in allowing and paying therfore yeerly frō the Birth of our Lord God 1629. for ever to the releefe & comfort of 5. aged poore Widdowes of the Parish of Saint Buttolph without Bishopsgate, London, the summe of five pounds to be given and e∣qually distributed to and amongst them, eighteene dayes before Christmas yeerely, as of the free gift and benevolence of him the the said T. C. at the oversight and direction of the Parson and Church-wardens, for the time being of that parish. whereupon in fur∣therance of that pious and charitable worke, this Court was pleased to accept of the said 100. l. and to grant performance of that his petition: As by an order in that behalfe made it may and doth appeare: which said 100. l. was the 13. day of the said moneth of November last, accordingly paid and delivered by the said T. C. into the said Chamber of London, to and for the intent
and purpose aforesaid. Now the said T. C. in further declaration of his full minde and intent concerning the distribution of the said five pounds, yeerely and for ever, as afore∣said; he hath expressed and declared, that the same shall bee done and performed in this manner, viz. tha of and with the same five pounds yeerely and for ever, there shall bee bought and provided by the said T. C. du∣ring his life, and after his decease by the Parson and Church-wardens of the said pa∣rish of Saint Buttolph without Bishops∣gate aforesaid for the time being and their successors, five Wastcoats and five Kirtles, ready made up of good Kersey or Cloth, the Kersey or Cloth of every Wastcoat and Kir∣tle to be worth fifteene shillings at the least, and five paire of Stockings and five paire of shooes, every paire of the same Stockings to be worth eighteene pence at the least, and e∣very paire of the said shooes to be worth two shillings at the least. Which Wastcoats, Kir∣tles, Stockings and shooes, shall bee yeerely and for ever delivered on the Feast day of S. Thomas the Apostle, as the free gift of the said T. C. After in the parish Church of St. Buttolph without Bishopsgate afore∣said, unto five aged poore Widdowes within the same parish, being knowne or reputed to be of honest life and conversation, and past their labour (that is to say) to every of the same five poore Widdowes a Wastcoat and Kirtle, a paire of Stockings and a paire of Shooes. And that the same five oore Wid∣dowes shall bee yeerely nominated and ap∣pointed by the said T. C. during his life, and after his decease the same five poore Wid∣dowes shal be at the nomination and appoint∣ment of the Parson and Church-wardens of the said parish of S. Buttolph without Bi∣shopsgate aforesaid, for the time being, and their successors yeerely and for ever. Where∣in the meaning and desire of the said T. C. is, that those five poore Widdowes, or so many of them which shall bee living at the time of his decease, that shall bee nominated by him in his life time, for to have receive the gifts and benevolences aforesaid, shall and may e∣very one of them yeerely, during their lives, respectively have and receive one Wastcoat and Kirtle, a paire of Stockings and a paire of Shooes, of the gift aforesaid; provided that they and either of them bee of good life and conversation. Now without this Churchyard wall, was a Cawsey,Petty-France, neere to the Town ditch. leading to a Quadran called Petty-France, of divers French-men dwelling there, and to other dwel∣ling houses, lately builded on the banke of the said ditch by some Citizens of London, that more regarded their owne private gaine, than the common good of the Citie. For by meanes of this Cawsey raised on the banke, and soy∣lage of houses, with other filthines cast into the ditch, the same became infor∣ced to a narrow channell, and almost fil∣led up with unsavoury things, to the danger of impoisoning the whole City. For prevention whereof, and in a worthy charitable disposition of so ho∣nourable a Citie (in regard that this pa∣rish was greatly unprovided of the bu∣riall for their dead) that needlesse Caw∣sey or passage to Petty-France, was given by the Citie to the said Parish,A new place of buriall, made by the other Church-yard. for the same intent; which they have (since then) made good and firme ground, walling it about with a good strong bricke wall, serving as a lower and sup∣plying Church-yard by it selfe; and towards the charges whereof, divers good Parishioners (that desire to bee namelesse) gave large and honest con∣tribution. And because they would not shew themselves unthankfull to the Ci∣tie for so great a benefit, their expressi∣on standeth thus fixed over the Gate, at entrance into the said Church-yard. Coemeterium hoc inferius Civitate Londi∣nensi huic Parochiae concessum, sumpti∣bs ejusdem Parochiae mure lateritio septum est. An. Dom. 1615. Stephano Gossono, Rectore, Thomo Johnsono & Johanne Hedicio, Ecclesiae Gardianis. This Churchyard being consecrated the 4. day of Iune, 1617. the first man buried therein chanced to be a French∣man borne; upon whose buriall, these Verses were written by my friend Mr. Th. Collins. A Frenchman borne, hight Martin de la Toure, Was the first man was buried in this ground, A Schoolemaster he was: And this a part of our Neere-neighbouring point, of Petty France small bound,
So Martin of the Tower may well be said T'have dyed in England, yet in France was laid. August 10. 1626. In Petty France out of Christian bu∣riall, The me∣mory of a Persian bu∣ried out of the Church-yard. was buried Hodges Shaughsware a Persian Merchant, who with his sonne came over with the Persian Ambassa∣dour, and was buried by his owne Son, who read certaine prayers, and used o∣ther Ceremonies, according to the cu∣stome of their owne Country,This was thus En∣glished by his inter∣preter. Morning and Evening, for a whole moneth after the buriall: for whom is set up at the charge of his Sonne, a Tombe of stone with certain Persian Characters thereon; the exposition thus, This Grave is made for Hodges Shaughsware, the chiefest ser∣vant to the King of Persia, for the space of 20. yeeres, who came from the King of Persia and dyed in his service. If any Persian commeth out of that Country, let him read this and a prayer er him, the Lord receive his soule, for here lyeth Maghmore Shangh∣sware, who was borne in the Towne of No∣voy in Persia. The bounds of Saint Buttolphs Parish without Bishopsgate, London, are thus: From Bishopsgate (under a part of which the Citie Ditch runneth) Westward, close by the Ditch, they passe along by Petty France, into Moore-field: under the wall and Cawsey thereof (towards Be∣thelem;) there did runne a ditch, and from the North part of the said Field, still doth, so farre as Hog lane, which is at the upper end of the Garden Alleys. Close to which ditch, the Parish exten∣deth all along on the inside, and taketh in one side of Hog-lane. Thence straight forth, it beginneth on the further side of Norton Folgate: thence into S. Mary Spittle, and thence into a part of Petticoat lane, so farre as Gravell-lane end: and so through divers Gardens on the backe side of Fishers-Folly, into Hounds-ditch, at the signe of the Hand and Still. So to the Ditch and Citie Wall: thence right opposite, on to Bishopsgate againe. My friendly fur∣therance here, was by the helpe of Mr. Richard Weoley, Parish Clerke there. Next unto the Parish Church of S. Buttolph,Hospitall of Bethe∣lem. was a faire Inne for receipt of Travellours: then an Hospitall of Saint Mary of Bethlem, founded by Simon Fitz Mary, one of the Sheriffes of London, in the yeere 1246. He founded it to have beene a Priory of Canons, with Bre∣thren and Sisters: and King Edward the third granted a Protection (which I have seene) for the brethren, Militiae beatae Mariae de Bethlem, within the Ci∣tie of London, the 14. yeere of his reigne. It was an Hospitall for distracted peo∣ple. Stephen Gennings, Merchant-taylor, gave 40. l. toward purchase of the Pa∣tronage, by his Testament, 1523. The Maior and Communalty purchased the patronage thereof, with all the Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, in the yeere 1546. The Copie of an ancient Deed of Gift, given to Bethlem or Bedlem, by Simon the sonne of Mary. TO all the children of our Mother holy Church, to whom this present writing shall come; Simon the sonne of Mary sendeth greeting inour Lord. Where among other things, and before other Lauds, the high altitude of the heavenly Councells, marvelously wrought by some readier devotion, it ought to be more wor∣shipped; of which things the mortall sicknes (after the fall of our first Father Adam) hath taken the beginning of this new repay∣ring: Therefore forsooth, it beseemeth wor∣thy, that the place, in which the Sonne of God is become man, and hath proceeded from the Virgins wombe, which is increaser and beginner of mans redemption, namely ought to be with reverence worshipped, and with beneficiall portions to bee increased. Therefore it is, that the said Simon, sonne of Mary; having speciall and singulor devo∣tion to the Church of the glorious Virgin at Bethelem, where the same Virgin of her brought forth our Saviour incarnate, and lying in the Cratch, and with her own milke nourished; and where the same Child to us there borne, the Chivalrie of the heavenly Company, sang the new Hymne, Gloria in excelsis Deo. The same time, the increa∣ser of our health, (as a King, and his Mo∣ther a Queene) willed to bee worshipped of Kings: a new starre going before them at
the honour and reverence of the same Child, and his most meeke Mother: And to the exaltation of my most Noble Lord, Henry, King of England; whose wife and child the foresaid Mother of God, and her onely Son, have in their keeping and protection: And to the manifold increase of this Citie of Lon∣don, in which I was borne: And also for the health of my soule, and the soules of my predecessors and successors, my Father, Mo∣ther, and my friends: And specially for the soules of Guy of Marlowe, John Durant, Ralph Ashwye, Maud, Margaret, and Dennis, women: Have given, granted, and by this my present Charter, here have confirmed to God, and to the Church of S. Mary of Bethelem, all my Lands which I have in the Parish of S. Burtolph without Bishopsgate of London; that is to say, whatsoever I there now have, or had, or in time to come may have, in houses, gardens, pooles, ponds, ditches and pits, and all their appurtenances, as they be closed in by their bounds; which now extend in length from the Kings high street East, to the great ditch in the West, the which is called Deepe ditch and in breadth, to the Lands of Raph Dow∣ning in the North: and to the Land of the Church of Saint Buttolph in the South. To have and to hold the foresaid Church of Be∣thelem in free and perpetuall Almes: And also to make there a Priorie, and to ordaine a Prior and Canons, Brothers and also Si∣sters, when Iesus Christ shall enlarge his grace upon it. And in the same place, the Rule and order of the said Church of Bethe∣lem solemnly professing, which shall beare the token of a Starre openly in their Coapes and Mantles of profession, and for to say di∣vine Service there for the soules aforesaid, and all Christian soules: And specially to receive there the Bishop of Bethelem, ca∣nons, Brothers and Messengers of the Church of Bethelem for evermore, as often as they shall come thither. And that a Church or Oratory there shall be builded, as soone as our Lord shall enlarge his grace: under such forme, that the order, institution of Pri∣ors, Canons, Brothers, Sisters of the visita∣tion, correction and reformation of the said place, to the Bishop of Bethelem and his successors, and to the Charter of his Church, and of his Messengers, as often as they shall come thither, as shall seeme them expedient, no mans contradiction notwithstanding, shall pertaine for evermore: Saving alway the services of the chiefe Lords, as much as per∣taineth to the said Land. And to the more surety of this thing, I have put my selfe out of this Land, and all mine: And Lord God∣frey, then chosen of the Nobles of the Citie of Rome, Bishop of Bethelem, and of the Pope confirmed then by his name in Eng∣land, in his name, and of his successors, and of his Chapter of his Church of Bethelem, into bodily possession: I have indented and given to his possession, all the foresaid lands, which possession hee hath received, and en∣tred in forme abovesaid. And in token of subjection and reverence, the said place in London without Bishopsgate, shall pay yeerely in the said Citie, a Marke sterling at Easter, to the Bishop of Bethelem, his Successors of his Messengers, in the name of a Pension. And if the faculties or goods of the said place (our Lord granting) happen to grow more, the said place shall pay more, in the name of pension, at the said terme, to the Mother Church of Bethelem. This (forsooth) gift and confirmation of my deed, and the putting to of my Scale for mee and mine heires, I have stedfastly made strong, the yeere of our Lord God,Anno 39. A thousand, two hundred,Hen. 3. forty seven, the Wednesday after the Feast of S. Luke the Evangelist: These being witnesses, Peter the sonne of Allen, then Maior of London, Nicholas Bet, then Sheriffe of the said Citie, and Alderman of the said Ward; Raph Sparling, Alder∣man; Godfrey of Campes, Simon Co∣micent, Simon Ronner, Rob. of Wood∣ford, Thomas of Woodford, Walter Pointell, Walter of Woodford, &c. The same yeere, King Henry the 8. gave this Hospitall unto the Cittie: the Church and Chappell whereof were taken downe in the reigne of Queene Elizabeth, and houses builded there, by the Governors of Christs Hospitall in London. In this place, people that be di∣straught in their wits, are (by the suite of their friends) received and kept as a∣fore, but not without charges to their bringers in.Hm. At a Court of Aldermen, holden on Tuesday, the 20. of Ianuary, An. 4. Ed. 6. a Carre-roome was freely given to the inhabitants of Bishopsgate Ward, to the intent, that they should cause the utter parts of the said Ward without the gate to be kept cleane.
Also, at a Court of Aldermen, hol∣den on Tuesday the 7. of April, An. 5. Edw. 6.Hm. Diso It was ordered that the inhabi∣tants within the precinct of Bethlem should be (from thenceforth) united to the parish Church of Saint Buttolph without Bishopsgate, and so by the Par∣son and parishioners of the same parish accepted and taken; and to bee allotted and charged with them, to all offices and charges (Tithes and Clarkes wages ex∣cepted:) In consideration whereof, the Parson of the said parish was to receive yeerely out of the Chamber of London 20 shillings, and the Parish Clarke 6. shillings 8. pence. In the yeere 1569. Sir Thomas Roe,Buriall for the dead prepared. Merchant-Taylor, Maior, caused to bee inclosed (with a wall of brick) about one Acre of ground,Deepe ditch by Bethlem. being part of the said Hospitall of Bethlem, to wit, on the bank of a deepe ditch so called, parting the said Hospitall of Bethlem from the Moore field: this he did for buriall, and ease of such parishes in London, as wan∣ted ground convenient within their Parishes. The Lady his wife was there buried (by whose perswasion hee inclo∣sed it) but himselfe borne in London, was buried in the Parish Church of Hack∣ney. From this hospitall Northward upon the streets side, many houses have been builded with Allies backward, of late time too much pesterd with people (a great cause of infection) up to the Bars. The other side of this high streete from Bishopsgate and Hounds-ditch,Dolphin without Bishopsgate. the first building is, a large Inne for receit of travellers, and is called the Dolphin, of such a signe. In the yeere 1513. Margaret Ricroft Widdow, gave this house with the Gardens and appurtenances, unto Willi∣am Gam, R. Glye, their wives, her daugh∣ters, and to their heires, with condition, they yeerely give to the Warden or Governour of the Gray Fryers Church within Newgate fortie shillings, to finde a Student of Divinity in the Vniversity for ever. Then is there a faire house of late builded by Iohn Powlet. Next to that, a farre more large and beautifull house, with Gardens of pleasure, howling al∣lies, Fishers folly. and such like, builded by Iasper Fi∣sher, free of the Goldsmiths, late one of the sixe Clerkes of the Chancery, and a Iustice of peace. It hath since (for a time) beene the Earle of Oxfords place. The late Queene Elizabeth hath lod∣ged there: It now belongeth to the Earle of Devonshire. This house being so large and sumptuously builded, by a man of no great calling, possessions or wealth, (for hee was indebted to many) was mockingly called Fishers folly, and a Rithme was made of it, and other the like, in this manner; Kirbies Castle, and Fishers Folly, Spinilas pleasure, and Megses glory. And so of other like buildings about the Citie, by Citizens, men have not letted to speake their pleasure. From Fishers folly,Berwards lane. up to the west end of Berwards lane, of old time so called, but now Hogge lane, because it meeteth with Hogge lane, which commeth from the Barres without Ealdgate, as is afore∣shewed; is a continuall building of te∣nements, with Allies of Cottages, pe∣stered, Tazell Close. &c. Then is there a large Close, called Tazell Close, sometime, for that there were Tazels planted for the use of Cloth-workers: since letten to the Crosse-bow makers, wherein they used to shoote for games at the Popingey. Now the same being inclosed with a Bricke wall,Artillary yard. serveth to bee an Artillery yard, or Garden, whereunto the Gun∣ners of the Tower weekely doe repaire; namely, every Thursday, and there le∣velling certaine Brasse Pieces of great Artillery against a But of earth, made for that purpose, they discharged them for their exercise. Present use is made thereof, by divers worthy Cittizens, Gentlemen and Captaines, using Mar∣tiall Discipline, and where they meete (well-neere) weekely, to their great commendation in so worthy an exer∣cise, wherof hereafter I will speake more at large. Then have ye the late dissolved Pri∣ory and Hospitall,Walter Brune Mer∣cer, one of the Sheriffes of London, 1203. commonly called, Saint Marie Spittle, founded by Walter Brune, and Rosia his wife, for Canons regular; Walter, Archdeacon of London, laid the first stone in the yeere 1197. William of Saint Mary Church, then Bishop of London, dedicated it to the
honour of Iesus Christ, and his Mother the perpetuall Virgin Mary by the name of Domus Dei, and Beatae Mariae, ex∣tra Bishopsgate, in the parish of S Buttolph, the bounds whereof, as appeareth by composition betwixt the Parson & Prior of the said Hospitall,Berwards lane. concerning tithes, beginneth at Berwards lane toward the south & extendeth in breadth to the Pa∣rish of S. Leonard of Sores ditch towards the North,Soreditch so called more than 400. yeers since. and in length, from the Kings streete on the West to the Bi∣shops of Londons field, called Lollesworth on the East. The Prior of this Saint Ma∣ry Spittle, for the emortising and pro∣priation of the Priory of Bikenacar in Essex, to his said house of S. Mary Spit∣tle, gave to Henry the seventh 400. l. in the two and twentieth of his reigne. This Hospitall surrendred to Henry the eighth, was valued to dispend 478. l. wherein was found, besides ornaments of the Church, and other goods pertai∣ning to the Hospitall, 180. beds well furnished, for receipt of the poore: for it was an Hospitall of great reliefe. Sir Henry Plesington, Knight, was buried there, 1452. In place of this Hospitall,Pulpit Crosse at the Spittle. and neere adjoyning,Charnell and Chap∣pell of S. Edmond and of Mary Magdalen. are now many faire houses builded, for receipt and lodging of wor∣shipfull persons. A part of the large Church-yard pertaining to this Hospi∣tall, and severed from the rest with a Brick wall, yet remaineth as of old time, with a Pulpit Crosse therein,Sermons in the Ea∣ster holy∣dayes at the Spittle. somewhat like to that in Pauls Church-yard. And against the said Pulpit on the South side before the Charnell and Chappell of Saint Edmond the Bishop, and Mary Magdalen, which Chappell was foun∣ded about the yeere 1391. by W. Eue∣sham, Citizen and Peperer of London, who was there buried; remaineth also one faire builded house of two stories in height for the Maior, and other hono∣rable persons, with the Aldermen and Sheriffes to sit in, there to heare the Sermons preached in the Easter holy∣dayes. In the Loft over them stood the Bishop of London, and other Prelates; but now the Ladies, and Aldermens Wives doe there stand at a faire Win∣dow, or sit at their pleasure. And here is to bee noted, that time out of minde, it hath beene a laudable custome, that on good Fryday in the af∣ter-noone, some especiall learned man, by appointment of the Prelates, hath preached a Sermon at Pauls Crosse, treating of Christs passion: and upon the three next Easter Holydayes, Mun∣day, Tuesday, and Wednesday, the like learned men, by the like appointment, have used to preach on the forenoones at the said Spittle, to perswade the Ar∣ticle of Christs resurection: and then on Low Sunday, one other learned man at Pauls Crosse, to make rehearsall of those foure former Sermons, either commending or reproouing them, as to him (by iudgement of the learned Di∣vines) was thought convenient. And that done, he was to make a Sermon of his owne studie, which in all were fiue Sermons in one. At these Sermons so severally preached, the Maior with his Brethren the Aldermen were accusto∣med to bee present in their Violets at Pauls on good Fryday, and in their Scarlets at the Spittle in the Holydaies, except Wednesday, in Violet, and the Maior with his Brethren on Low Sun∣day in Scarlet, at Pauls Crosse, continu∣ed untill this day. Touching the Antiquity of this Custome, I find that in the yeere 1398. King Richard having procured from Rome, confirmation of such statutes, and ordinances, as were made in the Parlia∣ment, begun at Westminster, and ended at Shrewsbury, he caused the same con∣firmation to be read and pronounced at Pauls Crosse and at Saint Mary Spittle, in the Sermons before all the people. Philip Malpas one of the Sheriffes in the yeere 1439. gave 20. shillings by the yeere to the three Preachers at the Spit∣le. House in S. Mary Spittle Church-yard builded for the Maior and Aldermen Pulpit Crosse in Spittle Church-yard new builded. Stephen Forstor Maior in the yeere 1594. gave forty pounds to the Prea∣chers of Pauls Crosse and Spittle. I finde also, that the aforesaid house, wherein the Maior and Aldermen doe sit at the Spittle, was builded (for that purpose) or the goods, and by the exe∣cutors of Rich. Rawson Alderman, and Isabel his wife, in the yeere 1488. In the yeere 1594. this Pulpit being old, was taken downe, and a new one set up, the Preachers face turned towards the South, which was before toward the West. Also a large house (on the East
side of the said Pulpit) was then buil∣ded, A house in Spittle Church-yard buil∣ded for the Gover∣ners and Children of Christs Hospitall. for the Governours and Children of Christs Hospitall to sit in: and this was done of the goods of William Elkin Alderman, late deceased. But within the first yeere, the same house decaying, and like to have fallen, was againe (with great ost) repaired at the Cities charge. Here I may not omit an especiall mat∣ter, because in my remebrance, nor else (in my reading) I finde not the like. On Munday in Easter weeke,On Mun∣day in Ea∣ster week, An. Dom. 1617. A Saint Ma∣ry Spittle. be∣ing April 21. 1617. our most Gracious Soveraigne King Iames, being gone on his Journey to Scotland: It pleased di∣vers Lords and other of his Majesties most Honourable Privie Councell, to visit this place of Saint Mary Spittle, and there to remaine in company (du∣ring the Sermon time) with the Lord Maior, Sir Iohn Lemman, and his wor∣thy Brethren the Aldermen of this City. The Sermon being ended, they rode home with the Lord Maior to his house neere Belingsgate, where they were loving∣ly and honourably both welcommed and entertained with a most liberall and bountifull Dinner, and all the Gentle∣men attending on them. The Lords, were the right reverend Father in God, George Lord Archbishop of Canturbury, Sir Francis Bacon, Lord keeper of the great Seale of England; the Earle of Worcester; the Lord Lise, Lord Cham∣berlaine to her Majesty, the Lord Bi∣shop of London; the Lord Carew; the Lord Knivet; Sir Iulius Caesar; Sir Tho∣mas Edmonds; Sir Iohn Digby, with di∣vers other Knights and worthy Gentle∣men, &c. And the Preacher that then preached, was Master Doctor Page, of Detford in Kent. On the East side of this Churchyard ly∣eth a large field,Lolesworth field. of old time called Loles∣worth,Buriall of the Romans in Spittle field. now Spittle field, which about the yeere 1576. was broken up for Clay to make Bricke: in the digging thereof many earther pots called Vrnae, were found full of Ashes,Old Mo∣numents of the Ro∣manes found. and burnt bones of men, to wit of the Romans that inhabi∣ted here. For it was the custome of the Romans, to burne their dead, to put their Ashes in an Vrne, and then bury the same with certain Ceremonies, in some field appointed for that purpose neere unto their City. Every of these pots had in them (with the Ashes of the dead) one piece of Copper money, with the inscription of the Emperour then reigning: some of them were of Claudius, some of Vspasian, some of Nere, of Antoninus Pius, of Tra∣janus, and others. Besides those Vrnes, many other pots were found in the same place, made of a white earth, with long necks, and handles, like to our stone Jugs: these were empty, but seemed to be buried full of some liquid matter, long since consumed and soked through. For there were found divers Vials, and other fashioned Glasses, some most cun∣ningly wrought, such as I have not seen the like, and some of Chrystall, all which had water in them, nothing dif∣fering in clearnesse, taste, or savour from common spring water; whatsoever it was at the first. Some of these Glasses had Oyle in them very thick, and earth∣ly in savour. Some were supposed to have Balme in them, but had lost the vertue: many of these pots and Glasses were broken in cutting of the Clay, so that few were taken up whole. There were also found divers Dishes and Cups, of a fine red coloured earth, which shewed outwardly such a shining smoothnesse, as if they had been of Cur∣rall. Those had (in the bottomes) Ro∣man letters printed, there were also Lampes of white earth and red, artifi∣cially wrought with divers Antiques a∣bout them, some three or foure Images, made of white earth, about a span long each of them: one I remember was of Pallas, the rest I have forgotten. I my selfe have reserved (amongst divers of those antiquities there) one Vrne, with the Ashes and bones, and one pot of white earth very small, not exceeding the quantity of a quarter of a wine pint, made in shape of a Hare, squatted upon her legs, and betweene her eares is the mouth of the por. There hath also been found (in the same field) divers Coffins of stone,Troughs of Stone found in the Spittle field. con∣taining the bones of men: these I sup∣pose to bee the burials of some speciall persons, in time of the Brittons, or Sax∣ons, after that the Romans had left to go∣verne here. Moreover, there were also found the scuis and bones of men, with∣out Coffins, or rather whose Coffins
(being of great timber) were consumed.Great Nayles of Irō found in the field and fond opinions of men. Divers great Nayles of Iron were there found, such as are used in the Wheeles of shod Carts, being each of them as big as a mans finger, and a quarter of a yard long, the heads two inches over. Those Nayles were more wondred at than the rest of the things there sound, and many opinions of men were there uttered of them, namely, that the men there buried, were murthered by dri∣ving those Nayles into their heads; a thing unlikely: for a smaller Nayle would more aptly serve to so bad a pur∣pose, and a more secret place would lightly be employed for such buriall. But to set downe what I have obser∣ved concerning this matter, I there be∣held the bones of a man lying (as I no∣ted) the head North, the feet South, and round about him (as thwart his head, along both his sides, and thwart his feet) such Nayles were found. Wher∣fore I conjectured them to be the nayles of his Coffin, which had been a trough, cut out of some great tree, and the same covered with a planke of a great thick∣nesse, fastened with such Nayles, and therfore I caused some of the Nayles to be reached up to me; and found under the broad heads of them, the old wood, skant turned into earth, but still retai∣ning both the graine and proper colour. Of these Nayles (with the wood under the head thereof) I reserved one, as al∣so the nether jaw-bone of the man, the teeth being great, sound, and fixed, which (amongst many other Monu∣ments there found) I have yet to shew; but the Nayle lying dry, is by scaling greatly wasted. And thus much for this part of Bishopsgate Ward, without the Gate: for I have in another place spo∣ken of the Gate, and therefore I am to speake of that other part of this Ward, which lyeth within the Gate. And first to begin on the left hand of Bishopsgate street,Clarkes Hall and their alms∣houses in Bishopsgate street. from the Gate ye have certaine Tenements of old time pertai∣ning to a brotherhood of St. Nicholas, granted to the Parish Clarkes of London for two Chaplens to bee kept in the Chappell of St. Mary Magdalen, neere unto the Guild hall of London, in the 27. of Henry the sixth. The first of these house towards the North, and against the Wall of the City, was sometime a large Inne or Court, called the Wrastlers of such a signe, and the last in the high street towards the South, was sometime also a faire Inne called the Angel, of such a signe. Amongst these said Tenements was (on the same street side) a faire En∣try or Court to the common Hall of the said Parish Clarks, with proper Almes-houses, seven in number, adjoyning, for Parish Clarkes, and their Wives, their Widdowes, such as were in great yeeres not able to labour. One of these, by the said Brotherhood of Parish Clarkes, was allowed sixteene pence the weeke, the other sixe had each of them nine pence the weeke, according to the Pa∣tent thereof granted. This Brotherhood (amongst other) being suppressed: In the reigne of Edward the sixth, the said Hall with the other buildings there, was given to Sir Robert Chester, a Knight of Cambridge-shire, against whom the Pa∣rish Clarkes commencing sute, in the reigne of Queen Mary, and being like to have prevailed, the said Sir Robert Che∣ster pulled down the Hall, sold the tim∣ber, stone and lead, and thereupon the sute was ended. The Almes-houses re∣mained in the Queenes hands, and peo∣ple were there placed, such as could make best friends. Some of them ta∣king the pension appointed, have let forth their houses for great rent, giving occasion to the Parson of the Parish, to challenge tithes of the poore, &c. Next unto this is the small Parish Church of Saint Ethelburge,Parish Church of S. Ethel∣biage. Virgin, and from thence some small distance is a large Court, called little S. Helens, be∣cause it pertained to the Nunnes of St. Helens,Priory of S. Helens and almes-houses. and was their house: there were seven Almes-roomes or houses for the poore, belonging to the Company of Leathersellers. Then somewhat more West is another Court with a winding lane, which commeth out against the West end of Saint Andrew Vndershafts Church. In this Court standeth the faire Church of Saint Helen,Parish Church of S. Helen. sometime a Priory of blacke Nunnes, and in the same a parish Church of S. Helen. This Priory was founded before the reigne of Henry the third. William Ba∣sing, Deane of Pauls was the first Foun∣der, and was their buried, and William
Basing, one of the Sheriffes of London, in the second yeere of Edward the se∣cond, was holden also to be a Founder, or rather an helper there. This Priory being value at 314. l. 2. s. 6. d. was surrendred the 25. of November, the 30. of Henry the 8. The whole Church, th rtition betwixt the Nuns Church and Parish Church being taken down, remaineth now to the Parish, and is a faire Parish Church, but wanteth such a steeple, as Sir Thomas Gresham promi∣sed to have builded, in recompence of ground in their Church filled up with his Monument. The Nuns Hall, and other housing thereto pertaining,Leather∣sellers Hall. was since purchased by the Company of Leather sellers, and is their common Hall: which Compa∣ny was incorporate in the 21. yeere of Richard the second. In the Church of S. Hellen, have yee these Monuments of the dead: Thomas Langton, Chaplaine, buried in the Quire, 1350. Adam Francis, Maior 1354. Elizabeth Vennar, wife to William Vennar, Alderman, one of the Sheriffes of London, 1401. Ioane, daughter to Henry Seamer, wife to Richard, sonne and heire to Robert Lord Poynings, dyed a Virgin, 1420. Iohn Swinflat, 1420. Nicholas Marshall, Ironmonger, Al∣derman, 1474. Sir Iohn Crosby, Alderman, 1475. and Anne his wife. Thomas Williams, Gentleman, 1495. Ioane Cocken, wife to Iohn Cocken, E∣squire, 1509. Mary Orrell, wife to Sir Lewes Orrell, Knight. Henry Sommer, and Katharine his wife. Walter Huntington, Esquire. John Langthrop, Esquire, 1510. John Gower, Steward of Saint Helens, 1512 Robert Rochester, Esquire, Serjeant of the Pantrie to Henry the eighth. Sir William Sanctlo, and Sir William Sanctlo, father and fonne. Elianor, daughter to Sir Thomas Butler, Lord Sudley. John Southworth. Nicholas Harpsfield, Esquire. Thomas Sanderford, or Sommerford, Alderman. Alexander Cheney. Walter Dawbeney. George Fastolph, fonne to Hugh Fa∣stolph. Robert Liade. Thomas Benolt, alias Clarentiaulx, King at Armes, 1534. William Hollis, Maior, 1540. John Fauconbridge, Esquire, 1545. Hacket, Gentleman of the Kings Chappell. Sir Andrew Iud, Maior, 1551. Sir Thomas Gresham, Mercer, 1579. William Skegges, Serjeant Poulter. Richard Gresham, fonne to Sir Thomas Gresham, 1564. Quiescit hic Gulielmus Pickeringus, Pa∣ter, Equestris Ordinis vir, Miles Mari∣scallus. Qui obiit 19. die Maii, An∣no Salutis a Christo, 1542. Iacet hic etiam Gulielmus Pickeringus, Films, Miles, corporis animi{que} bonie in-signiter ornatus; Literis excultus, & Re∣ligione Sincerus; linguas exacte percal∣luit. Quatuor Principibus Summa cum laude inservivit: Henrico Scilicet octa∣vo, Militari virtue: Edvardo sexto, Legatione Gallica: Regine Mariae, ne∣gotiatione Germanica : Elizabethae, Principi omnium illustrissimae, summis officiis devotissimus. Obiit Londini, in adibus Pickeringiis, Etate 58. Anno Gratie, 1574. Ianuarii quarto. Cujus Memorie, Thomas Henneagius, Miles, Camer & Regi & Thesaurarius; Johannes Asteley, Armiger, Iocalium Magister; Drugo Drureius, & Tho∣mas Wotton Armig. Testamenti Sui Executores, Monumentum hoc posuere. Here lyeth the body of William Bond, Al∣derman, and sometime Sheriffe of Lon∣don; A Merchant Adventurer, and most famous (in his age) for this great ad∣ventures both by Sea and Land. Obiit 30. die Maii, 1576. Flos Mercatorum, quos terra britanna creavit, Ecce sub hoc tumulo Gulielmus Bondus humatur. Ille mari multum pass us per saxa per undas,
Vitavit Patrias Peragrinis mercibus oras. Magnanimum Greci mirantur Iasona vates, Aurea de gelido retulit guiavellera Phasi. Grecia decta tace, Graii concedite vates, Hicjacet Argolico Mercator Iafone Major. Vellera multa tulit, magis aurea vellere phryxi, Etsreta multa Scidit magis ardua Phasidos undis: Hei mihi quod nullo morsest Superabilis auro, Fles Mercatorum, Gulielmus Bondus humatur. Hicsitus eft Ioannes Spencer, Eques Au∣rasus Civis & Senator Loadinenfis, ejufdem Civitatis Pretor, An. Dom. 1594. Lui ex Alicia Bromefeldia Vxore, unican reliquit Filiam Eli∣zabeth, Gulielmo, Earoni Compton e∣nuptam. Obit 30. die Martii, Anno fa∣lutis. M.D. C.IX. Socero bene merico Gulielmus Baro Compton gener pofuis. Within this monument lyeth the earthly parts of Iohn Robinson, Merchant of the Staple in England, free of the Mer∣chant Taylors, and sometime Alderman of London: And Christian his wife, eldest daughter of Thomas Anderson, Grocer. They spent together in holy wed∣locke 36. yeeres, and were happy (be∣sides other worldly blessings) in nine Sonnes and Seven Daughters. Shee chan∣ged her mortall habitation for a heaven∣ly, on the 24. day of April, An. Dom. 1592. Her Husband following her, on the 19. day of February, 1599. Both much beloved in their lives, and more lamented at their deaths; especially by the poore, to whom their good deeds (being alive) begot many prayers, now (being dead, many teares. The Glaffe of his life held 70. yeeres and then ranne out. To live long, and happy, is an honour; but to dye happy, a greater glory: Both these aspired to both. Heaven (no doubt) bath their foules, and this house of stone their bodies, where they Sleepe in peace, till the summons of a glorious resurrecti∣on wakens them. Here lieth the body of William Kerwin,A comely Alabaster Tombe, standing in the midst of the Church below. of this Citie, free Mason. Who departed this life the 26. day of Decemb. 1594. Aedibus Attalicis Londinum qui decoravi, Exiguum tribuunt hanc mihi fata domum. Me duce surgebant aliis regalia tecta, Me duce conficitur ossibus urna meis. Here also lyeth the body of Magdalen Ker∣win, his wife, by whom he had issue, two sonnes and two daughters. She deceased the 23. day of August, 1592. Magdalena jacet virtus post fata superstes, Conjugiique fides, Religioque manen. Corpus humo tectum, Christo veniente resurget, Vt mentis consors astra suprema colat. Christus mihi vita. Mors mihi lucrum. Nos quos certus amor primis conjunxit ab annis, Iunxit idem Tumulus, junxit idemque polus. There is a faire Grave-stone, engra∣ven on the plaine stone, being there laid in memoriall of Mr. Abraham Orelius, a learned Preacher of the French Church; it lyeth neere to Sir Iohn Spen∣cers Tombe, in the South Ile of the Chancell; but none new else beside. A yong new-borne childe was taken up,A printed memory hanging up in a Table, at the en∣tranced to the Church doore. betweene the great Ware-house and Sir Iohn Spencers backe gate, being (by a most unnaturall mother) there bu∣ried in a great dung-hill of Sea-coale ashes, with the face upward; yet found alive by Richard Atkinson, who used to make cleane the passage there of the soyle, carrying it thence with his wheel-barrow. The child had not any ragge or cloth about it, but was all bloudied, by reason that the Navillstring was un∣tyed, and the body meerely crusted o∣ver with the Sea-coale dust. Yet being made cleane by the poore mans wife, it
was found to be a most goodly Man∣child, strong and well featur'd, without any blemish or harm upon it: but stran∣gled inwardly, by sucking in the noy∣some filth and ashes. It was christened, and named Iob cl∣nere extractus; Iob taken out of the ashes. It lived 3. dayes, and dying, lyes buried in the Churchyard, the 5. of September, 1612. Richard Ball, Minister; William Robinson, and Richard Westney, Church-wardens; Thomas Edwards and Abra∣ham Gramer, Side-men; Iohn Harvey, Clerke. The charity that I finde in this Parish given to the poore, is 2. s. every Sun∣day (for ever) in Bread, allowed by the gift of the fore-remembred Mr. Robin∣son. And 1. s. also in Bread every Sun∣day given by Mistris Scioll. The bounds and limits of S. Helens Parish, called Bishopsgate-street, the fur∣thest house on the East side, wherein Thomas Childe now dwelleth, towards the South, abutteth upon the tenement now in the occupation of Iames Austen, in the Parish of Saint Martins Otes∣wich. The furthest house, wherein Ed∣ward Higges, Sadler, now dwelleth, to∣wards the North, abutteth upon the Parsonage house of Saint Ethelburges Parish, enclosing (withall) little S. He∣lens Close, wherein the Leather-sellers Hall, other Tenements, and Almes-houses belonging to the said Company, doe stand. As also great Saint Helens Close; wherein the Parish Church, with a thorow-fare to the backe-gate, leading into S. Mary at the Axe; and the utmost house belonging to the said Parish, is next adjoyning to the said gate towards the South, and openeth into the street there, commonly called Saint Mary at Axe. On the West side of the street, cal∣led Bishopsgate-street, the furthest house, wherein Thomas Goodson now dwelleth, (towards the South) abutteth upon the gate, wherein Mr. Richard Foxe, Alder∣mans Deputy,  dwelled, in the Pa∣rish of S. Martin Oteswich. And the furthest house, wherin Nathaniel Wright then also dwelled, towards the North, abutteth upon the messuage or Tene∣ment Inue, called the Blacke Bull, in the said Parish of Saint Ethelburge. By me, Io. Warner, Parish-Clerke there. Then have ye one great house,Of  place, and of Sir Iohn  called Crosbie Place, because the same was builded by Sir Iohn Crosbie, Gracer and Woollman, in place of certaine Tene∣ments, with their appurtenances, letten to him by Alice Ashfeld, Prioresse of S. Helens, and the Covent, for ninety nine yeeres, from the yeere 1466. unto the yeere 1565. for the annuall rent of eleven pounds six shillings eight pence. This house hee builded of stone and timber, very large and beautifull, and the highest at that time in London: hee was one of the Sheriffes, and an Alder∣man in the yeere 1470. knighted by Edward the fourth, in the yeere 1471. and deceased in the yeere 1475. so short a time enjoyed he that his large and sumptuous building. He was buried in Saint Helens, the Parish Church, a faire Monument of him and his Lady is raised there: hee gave towards the reforming of that Church five hundred markes, which was bestowed with the better, as ap∣peareth by his Armes, both in the stone-worke, roofe of Timber, and gla∣sing. I hold it a fable said of him, to be na∣med Crosbie, of being found by a crosse; for I have reade of other to have that name of Crosbie before him; namely, in the yeere 1406. the 7. of Henry the 4. the said King gave to his servant Iohn Crosbie, the wardship of Iohn, daughter and sole heire to Iohn Iordaine, Fish∣monger, &c. This Crosbie might bee Father or Grandfather to Sir Iohn Crosbie. Richard Duke of Glocester, and Lord Protector, afterward King, by the name of Richard the third, was lodged in this house: since which time, among other, Anthony Bnvice, a rich Merchant of I∣taly, dwelled there; after him Garmain Cioll. Then William Bond, Alderman, increased this house in heighth, with building a Turret on the top thereof: Hee deceased in the yeere 1576. and was buried in Saint Helens Church. Divers Ambassadours have beene lod∣ged there; namely, in the yeere 1586. Henry Ramelius, Chancellour
of Denmarke, Ambassadour unto the Queens Majesty of England, from Fre∣derick the second, King of Denmarke: An Ambassadour of France, &c. Sir Iohn Spencer, Alderman, lately purcha∣sed this house, made great reparations, kept his Maioralty there, and since builded a most large ware-house neere thereunto. From this Crosby place, up to Leaden Hall corner, and so downe Grasse-street, among other tenements, are divers faire and large-builded houses for Mer∣chants and such like. Now for the other side of this Ward, namely the right hand,Water-conduit at Bishopsgate. hard by within the Gate, is one faire water-Conduit, which Tho. Knesworth, Maior in the yeer 1505. founded, hee gave 60. pounds, the rest was furnished at the common charges of the Citie. This Conduit hath since beene taken downe, and new builded. David Woodroffe, Alderman, gave 20. pounds towards the convey∣ance of more water thereto. From this Conduit have ye (amongst many faire tenements) divers faire Innes, large for receit of travellers, and some houses for men of Worship; namely, one most spacious of all other there about, buil∣ded of bricke and timber,Sir Thomas Greshams house builded. by Sir Tho∣mas Gresham, Knight, who deceased in the yeere 1579. and was buried in S. Helens Church, under a faire Monu∣ment, by him prepared in his life: hee appointed by his Testament, this house to be made a Colledge of Readers, as before is said in the Chapter of schools and houses of learning. Somewhat West from this house, is one other faire house, wherein Sir Wil∣liam Hollis kept his Maioralty, and was buried in the Parish Church of Saint Helen. Sir Andrew Iud also kept his Maioralty there, and was buried at S. Helens.Sir An∣drew Iud his Almes houses. He builded Almes-houses for six poore Almes-people, neere to the said Parish Church and gave Lands to the Skinners, out of which they are to give 4. shillings every weeke to the six poore Almes-people, 8. d. the peece, and 25. s. 4. d. the yeere in Coales a∣mongst them for ever. Then in the very West corner, over against the East end of S. Martins Otes∣wich Church, (from whence the street windeth towards the south, you had, of old time, a faire Well with two Buc∣kets, so fastned, that the drawing up of the one let downe the other; but now of late that Well is turned into a Pumpe. From this to the corner over against the Leaden Hall, and so downe Grasse-street, are many faire houses for Mer∣chants and Artificers, and many faire Innes for travellours, even to the corner where that Ward endeth, over against Grasse-Church. Thus much for this Bishopsgate Ward shall suffice: which hath an Alderman, two Deputies, one without the Gate, another within; Common Counsel∣lors, 6. Constables, 7. Scavengers, 7. for Wardmore inquest, 13. and a Bea∣dle: it is taxed to the Fifteene at 13. l.
BROADSTREET VVARD. THe next is Broadstreet Ward,Broadstreet Ward. which be∣ginneth within Bi∣shopsgate, from the Water Conduit, Westward, on both sides of the street, by Alhallows Church, to an Iron grate on the channell, which runneth into the water-course of Walbrooke, before yee come to the Posterne called Mooregate: and this is the farthest West part of that Ward. Then have ye Broadstreet, whereof the Ward taketh name, which stretcheth out of the formerstreet, from the East corner of Alhallowes Church-yard, somewhat South, to the Parish Church of Saint Peter the poore, on both sides; and then by the South gate of the Augustine Friers, West, downe Throkmorton street, by the Drapers hall, into Lothbury, to another grate of Iron over the channell there, whereby the water runneth into the course of Wal∣brooke, under the East end of S. Marga∣rets Church; certaine posts of timber are there set up: and this is also the far∣thest West part of this Ward, in the said street. Out of the which street, runneth up Bartholomew Lane, South, to the North side of the Exchange: then more East out of the former street, from over against the Friers Augustines Church South gate, runneth up ano∣ther part of Broadstreet, south, to a Pump over against S. Bennets Church. Then have ye one other street,Three Nee∣dle street. called Three Needle street, beginning at the VVell with two buckets, by S. Martins Oteswich Church wall. This street run∣neth downe on both sides to Finkes lane, and halfe way up that Lane, to a gate of a Merchants house on the West side, but not so farre on the East. Then the aforesaid street, from this Finkes lane, runneth downe by the Royall Exchange, to the Stockes, and to a place formerly called the Scalding house, or Scalding wicke, but now, Scalding Alley, by the west side whereof, under the Parish Church of Saint Mildred,Parish Church of Alhallowes in the wall. runneth the course of Walbrooke: and these bee the bounds of this VVard. Especiall Mo∣numents therein are these: First, the Parish. Church of Alhal∣lowes in the wall; so called of standing close to the wall of the Citie, in which have beene buried: Thomas Durrem, Esquire, and Marga∣ret his wife. Robert Beale, Esquire, 1601. Deo Opt. Max. Sacrum & Memoriae.A faire Menumēt in the wall close by the Pulpit, on the west side thereof. Nobilis viri Dominici ab Heila, ex antiqua apud Flandros Equestri familia, ob sin∣gularem sidem in Principem & Patri∣am, in Historiis subinde celebrata oriun∣di, qui cum Orthodoxae Religionis ergo, relicta Patria, cui cum laude diu inser∣vierat; in Angliam, ut tutum fidelium refugium, se recepisset, ibidem XXIV. Postremos senectutis annos in Diveni verbi jugi studio, pauperum{que} subventi∣one potissimii transegisset, & diu ante, ut quotidie moriturus, de domo sua dis∣posuisset. Dissolvi, & cum Christo esse cupieus: tandem satur dierum placidè in Deo Salvatore obdomivit, 28. Apri∣lis, An. Christi, M.D.CVIII. Aetatis, 82. Londini Anglorum. Item Memoriae. Nobilis Matronae, Gulielmae ab Heila, Conjugis ipsius, natae Patre Joanne Do∣mino Haleme & Finae, prope Insulas Flandorum, ex Salopia Equaestri spud Artesios Familia.. Quae marito Patri∣am ob Religionem relinquenti, in utra∣que fortuna fida socia, & in educandis piè liberis, curanda{que} re domestica Ma∣terfamilias
incomparabilis. Obiit in Christo, die ult. Maii. An. M.D.CV. Aetatis 70. Conjugii, LI. Huic utri{que} Parenti optimè de se merito, debiti Honoris & gratitudinis ergo, Pe∣trus ab Heila, F. Serenissimi Electoris Palatini Consiliarius, H. M. Moest. P. Charities in this Parish are few or none, but ordinary benevolences from the parishioners themselves: except some slender moity, issuing from cer∣taine Almes-houses, builded by London wall, neere to Bishopsgate, by Mr. Kempe, and in his life time, as I have beene in∣formed. The bounds of the Parish are need∣lesse to be spoken of, because their cir∣cuit containeth no great extent of ground.Carpen∣ters Hall. Mr. Andrew Geneway, the Par∣son, used me here very kindly. On the otherside of the street, among many proper houses, (possessed for the most part by Curriers) is the Carpen∣ters Hall, which Company was incor∣porated in the 17. yeere of Edward the fourth.Curriers Row. Then East from the Curriers Row, is a long and high wall of stone, inclosing the North side of a large garden, adjoy∣ning to as large an house, builded in the reignes of King Henry the eighth, and of Edward the sixth, by Sir William Pow∣let, Lord Treasurer of England. Thorow this Garden, which (of old time) consi∣sted of divers parts, now united, was sometimes a faire foot way,Lane stop∣ped up. leading by the west end of the Augustine Friers Church straight North, and opened somewhat VVest from Alhallowes Church against London wall, towards Mooregate, which foot-way had gates at either end, locked up every night; but now the same way (being taken in∣to those Gardens) the gates are closed up with stone, whereby the people are inforced to goe about by Saint Peters Church,Sir William Powlet, L. Treasu∣rers house in Broad-street. and the East end of the said Friers Church, and all the said great place and Garden of Sir Wiliam Powlet to London wall, and so to Mooregate. This great house adjoyning to the Garden aforesaid, stretcheth to the North corner of Broadstreet, and then turneth up Broadstreet, all that side, to and beyond the East end of the said Fri∣ers Church. It was builded by the said Lord Treasurer, in place of Augustine Friers house, cloyster, and gardens, &c. The Friers Church hee pulled not downe, but the west end thereof, inclo∣sed from the Steeple and Quire, was in the yeere 1550. granted to the Dutch Nation in London, to be their Preaching place. The other part, namely, the Steeple, Quire, and side Iles to the Quire adjoyning, he reserved to house∣hold uses, as for stowage of corne, coale, and other things; his sonne and heire, Marquesse of Winchester, sold the Monu∣ments of Noblemen (there buried) in great number, the paving stone, and whatsoever, (which cost many thou∣sands) for one hundred pounds, and in place thereof made faire stabling for horses. He caused the lead to be taken from the roofes, and laid tile in place; which exchange proved not so profita∣ble as he looked for,Sir Tho. Gresams Almes-houses. but rather to his disadvantage. On the East side of this Broadstreet, amongst other buildings, on the backe part of Gresham house, which is in Bi∣shopsgate street, he placed eight proper Almes-houses, builded of bricke and timber, by Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, for eight Almes-men, which bee now there placed rent-free, and receive each of them by his gift, 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. yeerely for ever.Parish Church of S. Peter the poore. Next unto Powlet house, is the Parish Church of S. Peter the poore; so called for a difference from other of that name; sometime (peradventure) a poore parish, but at this present there be ma∣ny faire houses, possessed by rich Mer∣chants, and others. Buried in this Church: Richard Fitzwilliams, Merchant-tay∣lor, 1520. Sir William Roch, Maior, 1540. Robert Calthrope, Maior, 1588. Dominus Joannes Hales,On a faire ancient place, in the wall North the Quire. à pueritia lite∣ris deditus, excellenti ingenio, docilita∣ti, memoriae, studio & industria singu∣lari, adjuncta Linguarum, disciplinarum juris antiquitatis-rerum di-vinarum, at∣que humanarum, magna & multiplici doctrina instructissimus, evasit innocen∣tia, integritate, gravitate, constantia, fide, pietate, Religione, gravissimae etiam aegrotationis, & rerum difficilium diu∣turna
perpessione, & in patientia orna∣tissimus fuit, vitae honestissime sanctissi∣meque actae, diem supremum quinto Cal. Ianuar. 1572. clausit anima excorporis; reliquiae hoc loco sitae sunt. Expecto resurrectionem mortaorum, & vitam aeternam. Two other Plates there are beneath in the same wall, the one of Iohn Quarles, Draper, and the other of Ed∣ward Catcher, Pewterer. Here under this stone,A faire plated stone on the groūd in the Chancell. are buried the bodies of John Lucas, of S. Johns beside Col∣chester, Esquire, Master of the Re∣quests to the most vertuous, Noble, and worthy Prince, King Edward the sixth. He departed this life the 26. day of Octe∣ber, An. Dom. 1556. And his daugh∣ter Margaret, late wife to Thomas Pennie, Doctor of Physicke, here buried the 13. day of November, 1587. Here lyeth the body of the Worshipfull Mr. William Cockaine the elder,A comely Monumēt fixed in the wall, at the east end of the Chancell. Citizen and Skinner of London, who departed this life the 18. day of November, 1599. Also here lyeth the body of Elizabeth Medcalfe, his first wife; by whom hee had 7. sonnes and 4. daughters. All which daughters departed this life, be∣fore any of them accomplished the age of 10. yeeres. The 7. sonnes lived, and the yongest of them (at his death) was fully 28. yeeres of Age. which said E∣lizabeth departed this life, the 5. day of April, 1589. Here also lyeth the bo∣dy of Katharine Wonton, his second wife, who dyed the 19. of September, 1596. by whom he had no issue. In the East end of the North Ile,A beauti∣full Monu∣ment in the North Ile. there is a faire and comely Monument, There raised and placed, in the remem∣brance of Sir William Garaway, Knight, and his wife. This Monument standeth highest of all, next to the doores en∣trance. Thomas Lowe,Too mean a remem∣brance (in my mind) for a man so deser∣ving. Eques Auratus, D. Ma∣joris Civitatis London, Ann. Domini, 1604. Vir probus & prudens. Obiit 11. die Aprilis, An. 1623. Aetat. 78. Cui 28. die Ian. 1615. Aetatis suae 67. aessit Anna lectissima foemina ex eodem Thoma mater, 15. liberorum; vixerum suavissima conjunctione, An. 48. The Charities given yeerely to the poore of this Parish, are these ensuing: The Lady Payton, deceased, hath gi∣ven yeerely for ever, in bread and other∣wise, the summe of 40. s. The Lady Ramsey, deceased, hath gi∣ven the summe of 4. l. yeerely for ever. Mr. Iohn Quarles, Citizen and Dra∣per of London, deceased, hath given the summe of 5. l. yeerely for ever. Mr. William May, Merchant-taylor, deceased, hath given yeerely for ever, 2. s. Other gifts have beene there bestow∣ed, to the poores reliefe, as one of forty shillings, and another of twenty shil∣lings yeerely: but being tyed to no cer∣tainty, I am the more willing to omit them. Then next have ye the Augustin fri∣ers Church and Churchyard,Friers Au∣gustines Church, part wher∣of is the Dutch Church. the en∣tring thereunto, by a South gate, to the West Porch, a large Church, having a most fine spired steeple, small, high, and streight, I have not seene the like: founded by Humphry Bohun, Earle of He∣reford and Essex, in the yeere 1253. Re∣ginald Cobham gave his Messuage in London, to the inlarging therof, in the yeere 1344. Humphry Bohun, Earle of Hereford and Essex, re-edified this Church in the yeere 1354. whose body was there buried in the Quire. The small spired steeple of this Church was overthrowne by tempest of wind, in the yeere 1362. but was raised of new, as still it might have stood, had not pri∣vate benefit (the onely devourer of An∣tiquity) pull'd it downe. Both that goodly Steeple, and all that East part of the Church, hath lately beene taken downe, and houses (for one mans com∣modity) raised in the place, whereby London hath lost so goodly an ornament, & times hereafter may more talke of it. This house was valued at 57. pound, and was surrendred the 12. of Novemb. the 13. of Henry the 8. There lie buried in this Friers Church, amongst others, Edmond, first sonne to Ioane, Mother to King Richard the se∣cond.
uy Meri arle of S. Paul.What per∣sons of note and name.  bu∣ed in the ugustine . Lucie, Countesse of Kent, and one the Heirs of Barnaby, Lord of Mill with an Epitaph. Dame Ide, wife to Sir Thomas▪ Dame Margaret West. Steven Lindericle, Esquir Humfrey Bohun, and Essessex, Lord of Bre . Ric  great rundell, Surrey  1397. Sir  Dame Eli∣zabeth his wife. Sir Francis Atcourt, Earle of Pembroke, which married Alice, Sister to the Earle of Oxeford. Dame Lucie Knowles, of Kent. Sir Peter Garinsers of France. The Lord Iohn Vere, Earle of Oxford, beheaded on the Tower-hill, 1463. Aubery de Vere, son and heire to the Earle of Oxford. Sir Thomas Tudnam, Knight. William Bourser, Lord Fitz Warren. Sir Thomas de la Lande, Knight. Dame Ioane Norris, the Lady of Bed∣ford. Anne, Daughter to Iohn, Viscount Welles. Walter Nevell, Esquire. Sir Iohn Manners, Knight. The Wife of Sir David Cradocke, Knight. The Mother to the Lord Spencers Wife. Sir Bartlemew Rodlegete. Iohn, sonne to Sir Iohn Wingfielde. Sir VValter Mewes. Robert Newenton, Esquire. Philip Spencer, son to Sir Hugh Spencer. Dame Isabell, daughter to Sir Hugh Spencer. The Lords Barons, slaine at Barnet field, buried there, 1471. In the body of the Church. Dame Iulian, Wife to Sir Richard Lacy. Sir Thomas Courtney, son to the Earle of Devonshire, and by him his sister, wedded to Cheverstone. The Daughter of the Lord Beaumont. Two sonnes of Sir Thomas Morley, to wit, VVilliam and Ralph. Sir William Talmage, Knight. Nicholas Blondell, Esquire. Sir Richard Chamberlaine. Iohn Halton, Gentleman. Sir Iohn Gifford, Knight. Thomas Manningham, Esquire. Sir William Kenuda, Knight. Sir William, sonne to Sir Thomas Ter∣rill. Ioha Surill, Gentleman. In the East Wing, Margaret Baren∣tine, Gentlewoman. Iohn Spicer, Esquire, and Lettis his wife. Iohn le Percers, Esquire. Roger Chibary, Esquire. Peter Morens, Esquire. Thomas, sonne to Sir William Beck∣land. Iames Cuthing, Esquire. Iohn Chornet, Esquire. William Kenely, Esquire. Margery, wife to Thomas Band, and daughter to Iohn Huch. The L. William, Marquesse of Barke∣ley, and Earle of Nottingham, and Dame Ioane his wife. In the West Wing, Sir Iohn Tirrell, and Dame Katharine his wife. Sir Walter of Powle, Knight. Sir Iohn Blanckwell and his wife. Dame Iane Sayne, daughter to Sir Iohn Lee. Sir Iohn Dawbeny, sonne and heire to Sir Giles Dawbeny. William, sonne to Sir Roger Scroope. Dame Ioane Dawbeny, wife to Sir William Dawbeny. Thomas Charles, Esquire. Sir Iohn Dawbeny, Knight, and his sonne Robert. Sir Iames Bell, Knight. Sir Oliver Manny Knight. Henry Deskie, Esquire. Sir Diones Mordaske. Sir Bernard Rollingcort. Sir Peter Kayor. Sir William Tirell, and Sir William his brother, Knights. William Collingborne, Esquire, behea∣ded, 1484. Sir Roger Clifford, Knight. Sir Thomas Coke, Maior in the yeere 1462. William Edward, Maior, 1471. Sir Iames Tirell, Sir Iohn VVindany, Knights, beheaded, 1502. Sir Iohn Dawtrie, Knight, 1519. Dame Margaret Rede, 1510.
Edward, Duke of Buckingham, behea∣ded, 1521. Gwiscard, Earle of Huntington. On the South side, and at the West end of this Church,Throkmor∣ton street. many faire houses are builded, namely in Throkmorton street, one very large and spacious, buil∣ded in the place of old and small tene∣ments, T. Cromwell his house. by Thomas Cromwell, Master of the Kings Jewell-house; after that, Ma∣ster of the Rolls, then Lord Cromwell, Knight, Lord Privie Seale, Vicar gene∣rall, Earle of Essex, high Chamberlain of England, &c. This house being fini∣shed, and having some reasonable plot of ground left for a Garden, hee caused the pales of the Gardens adjoyning to the North part thereof, on a sudden to be taken downe, 22. foot to be measu∣red forth-right into the North of every mans ground, a line there to be drawn, a trench to be cast, a foundation laid, and an high bricke wall to be builded. My Father had a Garden there, & there was a house standing close to his South pale: this house they loosed from the ground, and bare upon Rowlers into my Fathers Garden 22. foot, ere my Father heard thereof: no warning was given him, nor other answer, (when he spake to the surveyers of that worke) but that their Master, Sir Thomas, commanded them so to doe: no man durst goe to argue the matter, but each man lost his Land; and my Father paid his whole rent, which was 6. shillings 8. pence the yeere, for that halfe which was left. Thus much of mine owne knowledge have I thought good to note, that the sudden rising of some men, causeth them to forget themselves. The Company of Drapers in London bought this house,The Dra∣pers hall. and now the same is their common Hall. This Company obtained of King Henry the 6. in the seventeenth of his reigne, to bee in∣corporate; Iohn Gedney was chosen to be their first Master; and the 4. War∣dens were, 1. VVotton, I. Darby, Robert Breton,The Dra∣pers Armes. and T. Cooke. The Armes gran∣ted to the said Company, by Sir VVil∣liam Bridges, Knight, first Garter King at Armes, in Blason are thus: Three Sun Beames, issuing out of three clouds of flame, crowned with three Crownes Imperials of gold, upon a shield Azure. From this Hall, on the same side, downe to the grates and course of VVal∣brooke, have ye divers faire houses for Merchants and other, from the which grates backe againe on the other side in Lotisbury (so called in Record of Edward the third,Lotisbury or Lothbury. the 38. yeere, and now cor∣ruptly called Lothbury) are Candlestick-founders placed, till ye come to Bartho∣lomew Lane, so called of Saint Bartholo∣mews Church, at the South East corner thereof. In this Lane also are divers faire builded houses on both sides, and so likewise have ye in the other street, which stretcheth from the Friers Augu∣stines South gate, to the corner over a∣gainst Saint Bennets Church. In this street, amongst other faire buildings, the most ancient was (of old time) an house pertaining to the Abbot of Saint Albans. Iohn Catcher,Abbot of S. Albans his Inne. Alderman (after dwelled there. Then is the free schoole, pertaining to the late dissolved Hospi∣tall of Saint Anthony,S. Antho∣nies school▪ whereof more shall be shewed in another place, and so upto Three Needle street. On the South part of which street,Three Nee∣dle street. beginning at the East, by the Well with two buckets, now turned to a Pumpe,S. Martins Oteswitch. is the Parish Church of S. Mar∣tin called Oteswitch, of Martin de Otes∣twich, Nicholas de Oteswich, William Otes∣wich, and Iohn Oteswich, founders there∣of, and all buried there, as appeareth by their ancient Monument. There be Monuments in this Church, of VVilliam Constantine, Alderman, and Emme his wife. Katherine, wife to Benedict Augustine. Sir VVilliam Drifield, Knight. Iohn Oteswich and his wife, under a faire Monument on the South side. Iohn Churchman, one of the Sheriffes in the yeere 1385. Richard Naylor, Taylor, Alderman, 1483. Iames Falleron. Iohn Melchborne. Thomas Hay and Ellen his wife. VVilliam Clitherow and Margeret his wife. Oliver and VVilliam, sonnes to Iohn VVoodroofe, Esquire. Hugh Pemberton, Taylor, Alderman, 1500. and Katharine his wife. Matthew Pemberton, Merchant-Tay∣lor,
about 1514. he gave 50. l. to the repairing of S. Lawrence Chappell. Illustri ac Nobilissimo V. Domino Jacobo Falckio,A faire engraven stone on the South side of the Commu∣niō Table. Domino Zelandiae Thesaura∣rio, summo Consiliario ordinum ejusdem Provinciae, post plurimas apud plerosque Europae Reges, ac Principes obitas Ho∣norificè Legationes, & regendarum re∣rum infinitas, cum omnium laude, ac admiratione curas, in extremis Ecclesiae ac Patriae cum hostibus luctis defuncto, Legati munere communi Patriae totius Provinciarum Belgicarum foederatarii apud Serenissimum & potentissimū Ja∣cobū 1. Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hy∣berniae Regem: Hoc intestinorum recep∣taculum. Reliquum à funere totius mo∣lem, in Patria Zelandia pietati inter planctus posuit affinis ex Sorore Antho∣nius Taymon. Obiit 4. Nonas Iunii. 1603. Parte solo recubo peregrino, parte paterno, Hoc bene si didici vivere, & hocce mori. I. Murdisonius. Quae natat Oceano Zelandia corpus, Olympus Ipse animam, peregrè hoc viscera marmor habet. A. Hunterus. Viscera terra Britanna tegit, Zelandia corpus, Sic mea divisit funera parce mihi. I. Meursius. Here lyeth the body of Clemens Langley,A faire stone, on the other side of the Table. late wife of Richard Langley, and Daughter to Thomas Whitton, Gent. And of Joane his first wife, daughter of Robert Cresset, Esquire: who yeelded her soule to her Redeemer, the last of A∣pril, 1603. Thyzealous care to serve thy God, thy constant love to Husband deare: Thy harmelesse heart to every one remaines alive, though corps lye here. Spes vermis & ego. R. L. Vivit post funera Virtus. C. L. Also the 19. day of March, 1612. Richard Langley her husband was here buried. Here resteth the body of the Worshipful M. Rich. Staper,A very goodly Tombe e∣rected in the wal on the South side of the Church. elected Alderman of this Citie, 1594. He was the greatest Mer∣chant in his time, the chiefest Actor in discovery of the Trades of Turkey and East India: A man humble in prosperity, painefull and ever ready in the affaires publike, and discreetly carefull of his pri∣vate. A liberall house-keeper, bounti∣full to the poore: an upright dealer in the world, and a devout aspirer after the World to come. Much blest in his poste∣rity, and happy in his and their alliances. He dyed the last day of Iune, An. Dom. 1608. Intravit ut exiret. Sir Henry Rowe allowed 5. l. yeerely for ever to the poore of this Parish, to be bestowed in bread and coales. And Mistris Sotherton yeerely for ever in bread, 50. s. The aforesaid Iohn Churchman, for William and Iohn Oteswich, (by licence of H. the fourth, the sixth of his reigne) gave the Advouson or Patronage of this Church, foure messuages and 17. shops with the appurtenances, in the Parish of S. Martins Oteswich, &c. to the Ma∣ster and Wardens of Taylors and Lin∣nen Armorers, keepers of the Guild and Fraternity of S. Iohn Baptist in London, and to their successors, in perpetuall Almes, to be imployed upon the poore Brethren and Sisters. Whereupon, ad∣joyning upon the West end of this Pa∣rish Church, the said Master and War∣dens builded (about a proper quadrant or squared Court) seven Almes-houses,Tailors & Linnen Armorers their alms houses in Broadstreets Ward: looke more in Portsoke ward. wherein they placed seven Almes-men of that Company, and their wives, (if they had wives) each of these seven, of old time, had 14. pence the weeke; but now of later time, their stipend by the said Master and Wardens hath beene augmented to the summe of 26. shil∣lings the quarter, which is 5. l. 4. s. the yeere to each of them, beside coales. More, to each of them 20. s. the yeere, by gift of Walter Fish, sometime Master of that Company, and Taylor to Her Majestie. Some small distance from thence is the Merchant-Taylors Hall,Taylors & Linnen Armerers Hall. pertaining to the Guild and Fraternity of Saint Iohn Baptist, time out of mind called of Taylors and Linnen Armorers of Lon∣don.
Antiquity of the Tai∣lors feast by autho∣rity. For I finde that King Edward the first, in the 28. of his reigne, confirmed this Guild by the name of Taylors and Linnen Armorers, and also gave to the brethren thereof, authority every yeere at Midsummer to hold a Feast, and to choose unto them a Governour or Ma∣ster, with Wardens: whereupon, the same yeere, 1300. on the Feast day of the Nativity of Saint Iohn Baptist, they chose Henry de Ryall to be their Pilgrim. For the Master of this Mystery (as one that travelled for the whole Company) was then so called, untill the 11. yeere of Richard the second: and the foure War∣dens were then called Purveyors of Almes, (now called Quartredge) of the said fraternity. This Merchant-Taylors Hall, some∣time pertaining to a Worshipful Gen∣tleman, named Edmond Crepin, Dominus Creeping, after some Record: he, in the yeere of Christ, 1331. the sixth of Ed∣ward the third, for a certaine summe of money to him paid,Taylors purchase their Hall. made his grant thereof, by the name of his principall Messuage, in the Wards of Cornhill and Broadstreet, which Sir Oliver Ingham, Knight, did then hold; to Iohn of Yakley, the Kings Pavilion-maker. This was cal∣led the New Hall,Taylors Hall. or Taylors Inne, for a difference from their old Hall, which was about the backe side of the Red Li∣on in Basing lane, and in the Ward of Cord-wayner street. The 21. of Edward the fourth, Tho∣mas Holme, alias Clarentiaulx, King of Armes for the South part of England, granted by his Patents, to the said fra∣ternity and Guild of Saint Iohn Baptist, of Tailors and Linnen Armorers, to beare in a Field Silver,The Mer∣chant-tai∣lors Arms. a Pavilion be∣tweene two Mantles Imperiall, purple, garnished with gold, in a chiefe Azure, a holy Lambe, set within a Sunne, the Creast upon the Helme, a Pavilion pur∣ple, garnished with gold, &c. After this, King Henry the 7. was himselfe a Brother of this Fraternity, or Guild of S. Iohn Baptist, of Tailors or Linnen Armorers, (as divers others of his predecessours Kings had beene) to wit, Richard the 3. Edward the 4. Henry the 6. Henry the 5. Henry the 4. and Ri∣chard the 2. And for that divers of that Fraternity had (time out of minde) bin great Merchants, and had frequented all sorts of merchandises into most parts of the world, to the honour of the Kings Realme, and to the great profit of his subjects, and of his Progenitors, and the men of the said mystery, (during the time aforesaid) had exercised the buy∣ing and selling of all wares and Mer∣chandises; especially, of woollen cloth, as well in grosse, as by retaile, through∣out all this Realme of England, and chiefly within the said Citie:Taylors & Linnen Armorers incorpo∣rated Merchant Taylors. therefore he of his especiall grace, did change, transferre and translate the Guild afore∣said, and did incorporate them into the name of the Master and Wardens of the Merchant-Taylors, of the fraternity of S. Iohn Baptist, in the Citie of London. Some distance West from this the Merchant Taylors Hall,Finke lane. is Finkes-Lan; so called of Robert Finke, and Robert Finke his sonne, Iames Finke, and Rosa∣mond Finke. Robert Finke the elder, new builded the Parish Church of S. Bennet commonly called Finke, of the Founder; his Tenements were both of S. Bennets Parish, and Saint Martins Oteswich pa∣rish: the one halfe of this Fink lane is of Broadstreet Ward; to wit, on the West side, up to the great and principall house, wherein the said Finke dwelled: But on the other side, namely the East, not so much towards Cornehill. Then without this Lane, in the aforesaid Three Needle street,Parish Church of S. Bennet Finke. is the said Parish Church of S. Bennet, a proper Church, in which are these Monuments: Robert Simson, and Elizabeth his wife. Roger Strange, Esquire, Treresse. William Coolby. Iohn Frey. Thomas Briar, Plummer, 1410. &c. By this Pillar was buried the body of Dame Anne Awnsham, who dyed the 23. of December, 1613. being neere 12. yeeres the wife of Sir Gedeon Awnsham, of Istleworth in the County of Middle∣sex, Knight: And before the wife to William Barradaile, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, dwelling in this parish together some 30. yeeres. He dyed in March, 1600. who by his will gave 5. pounds to the poore of this parish, and 6. pounds, 13. shillings, 8. pence, toward the building a loft in the Church, besides his other Legacies to the
poore in other places. And the said Dame Anne, besides her other good deeds to Istleworth, and other places, she also ap∣pointed five pound to the poore of this Parish, which the said Sir Gedeon paid. As they both (thankes be to God) lived godly and well: so they could not but dye well, by the onely mercy of Iesus Christ. Some distance West is the Roy∣all Exchange, whereof more shall bee spoken in the Ward of Cornehill, and so downe to the little Conduit, called the Pissing Conduit, by the Stocks Mar∣ket, and this is the South side of Three Needle street. On the North side of this streete, from overagainst the East corner of St. Martins Oteswich Church,Hospitall of Saint Anthony sometime a Syna∣gogue of the Iewes. have yee di∣vers faire and large houses, til you come to the Hospitall of St. Anthony, some∣time a Cell of Saint Anthonies of Vienna. For I read, that King Henry the third, granted to the Brotherhood of Saint Anthony of Vienna, a place amongst the Iewes, which was sometime their Syna∣gogue, and had been builded by them, about the yeere 1231.Patent re∣cord. But the Christi∣ans obtained of the King, that it should be dedicated to our blessed Lady, and since, an Hospitall being there builded, was called Saint Anthonies in London. It was founded in the Parish of Saint Bennet Finke, for a Master, two Priests, one Schoole-master, and twelve poore men: after which foundation, amongst other things, was given to this Hospitall one Message and Garden, whereon was builded the faire large free-school,Free Schoole of S Antho∣nies buil∣ded. and one other parcell of ground contai∣ning 37. foot in length, and 18. foot in bredth, whereon were builded the Almes-houses of hard stone and Tim∣ber, Almes-houses of S. Anthonie builded. in the reigne of Henry the sixth, which said Henry the sixth,Gift of Henry the sixth to Saint Anthonies. in the 20. of his reigne, gave unto Iohn Carpenter, Doctor of Divinity, and Master of S. Anthonies Hospitall, and to his bre∣thren and their successors for ever, his Mannor of Poinington, with the appur∣tenances, with certaine pensions and portions of Milburn, Burneworth, Charl∣ton, and Vp-wimburne, in the County of Southampton, towards the maintenance of five Scholars in the Vniversity of Oxford, to bee brought up in the facul∣ty of Arts, after the rate of tenne pence the week for every Scholar: so that the said Scholars bee first instructed in the rudiments of Grammar, at the College of Eaton, founded by the said King. In the yeere 1474. Edward the fourth granted to William Say, Batcheler of Di∣vinity, Master of the said Hospitall, to have Priests, Clerkes, Scholars, poore men, and brethren of the same, Clerks, or Lay men, Queristers, Proctors, Mes∣sengers, Servants in houshold, and o∣ther things whatsoever, like as the Pri∣or, and Covent of Saint Anthonies of Vienna, &c. Hee also annexed, united, and appropriated the said Hospitall, unto the Collegiate of Saint George in VVindsor. The Protectors of this house were to collect the benevolence of charitable persons, towards the building and sup∣porting thereof. And amongst other things observed in my youth, I remem∣ber, that the Officers (charged with o∣versight of the Markets in this City) did divers time take from the Market people, Pigs starved, or otherwise un∣wholsome for mans sustenance: these they did slit in the eare.Saint Anthonies Pigs fed on the dunghils. One of the Proctors for St. Anthonies tyed a Bell about the necke, and let it feed on the Dunghils, no man would hurt, or take it up: but if any gave to them bread, or other feeding, such would they know, watch for, and daily follow, whining till they had somewhat given them: whereupon was raised a Proverbe, Such an one wil follow such an one, & whine as it were an Anthonie Pig: but if such a Pig grew to be fat, and came to good liking (as oft times they did) then the Proctor would take him up to the use of the Hospitall. In the yeere, 1499. Sir Iohn Tate, sometime Alebrewer, then a Mercer, caused his Brewhouse, called the Swan neere adjoyning to the said Free Chap∣pell, College, or Hospitall of Saint Anthony, to bee taken for the enlarging of the Church, which was then newly builded; toward the building whereof, the said Tate gave great summes of mo∣ney, and finished it in the yeere 1501. Sir Iohn Tate deceased 1514. and was their buried, under a faire Monument by him prepared. Doctor Tayler Master of the Rolles and other.
Walter Champion, Draper, one of the Sheriffes of London, 1529. was buried there, and gave to the Beadmen twenty pounds. The Lands by yeere of this Hospitall, were valued in the 37. yeere of Henry the 8. to be 55. pounds, 6. shil∣lings, 8. pence. One Iohnson,Schoole∣master of S. Antho∣nies made Prebend of Windsor, spoiled the school and ho∣spitall. (a Schoolemaster of the famous Free-schoole there) became a Prebend of Windsore, and then (by little and little) followed the spoile of this Hospitall: he first dissolved the Quire, conveyed away the Plate and Orna∣ments, then the Bels, and lastly put out the Almes-men from their houses, ap∣pointing them portions of 12. pence the weeke to each. But now I heare of no such matter performed; for their houses, with other, bee letten out for rent, and the Church is a Preaching-place for the French Nation. This Schoole was commended in the reigne of Henry the sixth, and sithence commended above other; but now de∣cayed, and come to nothing, by taking that from it which thereunto belonged. Next it the Parish Church of Saint Bartholomew,Parish Church of S. Bar∣tholomew. at the end of Bartholomew lane. Thomas Pike, Alderman, with the assistance of Nicholas Yoo, one of the She∣riffes of London, about the yeere 1438. new builded this Church. Sir Iohn Fray, Knight, was buried there. Margery his daughter and heire, wife to Sir Iohn Lepington, Knight, founded there a Chauntry, the 21. of Edward the fourth. Alderban, a Gascoigne, was buried there. Sir W. Capell, Maior, 1509. aded un∣to this Church a proper Chappell, on the South side thereof, and was buried there. Giles Capell was also buried there. Iames Wilford, Taylor, one of the She∣riffes, 1499. appointed by his Testa∣ment, a Doctor of Divinity, every Good Friday for ever, to preach there a Sermon of Christs passion, from sixe of the clocke till eight before noone, in the said Church. Io. Wilford, Merchant-Taylor, Al∣derman, 1544. Sir Iames Wilford, 1550. Sir George Barne, Maior, 1552. Iohn Dent. Miles Coverdale, Bishop of Excester. Thomas Dancer, and Anne his wife. In Obitum Reverendissimi Patris,A faire plated stone on the groūd in the Chancell. Mi∣lanis Coverdal, OGDOASTICON. HIc tandem requiemque ferens finem{que} laborum, Ossa Coverdali mortua Tumbus habet. Oxoniae qui Praesul erat dignissimus olim, Insignis vitae vir probitate suae. Octoginta annos grandevus vixit, & nullum Indigni passus saepius exilium. Sic dimitti variis jactabam casibus, ista Excepitur gremio terra benigna sua. Here lyeth buried the body of Richard Bowdler,Severall faire pla∣ted stones in the Chancell. Citizen and Draper of Lon∣don, being one of the Society of Mer∣chants Adventurers in England, for Moscovia and the East-Indiaes. Here lyeth also Anne his wife, by whom hee had issue, 7. children, 5. sonnes, and 2. daughters; whereof three deceased, but the other foure were living at the time of his death. He dyed the 16. day of November, 1603. And shee, &c. Here lyeth the body of Iohn Dent, whilest he lived, Citizen and Merchant of Lon∣don, borne at Halloughton in Lei∣cester-shire, and free of the Salters Company, as also of the Spanish and Moscovia Companies: but his chiefe trading was to France. Hee was once chosen Sheriffe of London, and once Al∣derman, and fined for the same. His last fine was 1000. Markes, towards the repairing of Christs Hospitall in Lon∣don. He married twise; his first wife was Margaret, by whom hee had one sonne, who dyed, and the mother. The second wife was Alice, by whom he had 3. Daughters, Elizabeth, Mary, and Elizab. The first dyed in her Fathers life time, the rest with the Mother re∣mained living. Hee beeing aged 63. yeeres, dyed the 10. of Decemb. 1595.
Here lyeth the body of Master Thomas Church, Citizen and Draper of Lon∣don. He was helpfull to many, hurtfull to none, and gave every one his due. In memory of whose love to them, and theirs to him, Mary Bagwell, his sister, Wil∣liam Bagwell, her sonne, his Execu∣tors, and Bernard Cooper, the second Husband to the said Mary Bagwell, caused this stone to be laid here, the 28. day of May, 1617. Hee departed this life in August the 26. day, 1616. being aged 55. yeeres. A good life hath the dayes num∣bred, but a good name endureth for ever. To Gods Glory. In pious Memory of the nobly∣vertuous, A faire Monumēt in the North wal or the Chancell. and religions Matrone, Mar∣garite, wife of Robert Hall, Doctor of Divinity, and Pastor of this Parish. HEre lyes a Margarite that the most excell'd, (Her Father Wyts, Her Mother Lichterveld, Rematcht with Metkerke) of remarke for birth, But much more gentle for her genuine worth: Wyts (rarest) Iewell, so her name bespeakes) In pious, prudent, peacefull, praise-full life, Fitting a Sara and a Sacred's Wife, Such as Saravia, and (her second) Hill, Whose joy of life, Death in her death did kill. Quàm piè obiit, Puer∣pera, Die 29. Iunii, Anno Salutis, 1615. Anno Aetatis, 39. Pignus Amoris, Sigum Honoris, ac Moeroris, Posuit Rob. Hill. Composuit Io. Syl. Vxor Foelix. Loquitur post Funera Virtus. FRom my sad Cradle to my sable Chest, Poore Pilgrim, I did finde few moneths of rest. In Flanders, Holland, Zeland, England, all, To Parents, troubles; and to me did fall. These made me pious, patient, modest, wise: And, though well borne, to shun the Gallants guise: But now I rest my soule, where rest is found, My body here, in a small piece of ground, And from my Hill, that Hill I have ascended, From whence (for me) my Saviour once descended. Live ye to learne that dye you must, And after come to Judgement just. Maritus moestissimus. Thy rest gives me a restlesse life, Because thou wert a matchlesse Wife; But yet I rest in hope to see That day of Christ, and then see thee. MARGARITA, a Jewell. I, like a Iewell tost by Sea and Land, Am bought by him, who weares me on his hand. MARGARITA, MARGARETA. Margarita beat, sed Margareta beavit. O utinam possit dicier, ista beat. One night, two dreames, made two Propheticals, Thine of thy Coffin, mine of thy Fuuerals. If women all were like to thee, We men for wives should happy be. R. H. MARGARITA surreptus est, Mons exarvit. Then lower downe,Parish Church of Saint Christopher. towards the Stockes Market, is the Parish Church of Saint Christopher, but re-edified of new: for Richard Shore, one of the She∣riffes, 1506. gave money towards the building of the steeple. There lye buried, Richard Sherington, 1392. who gave Lands to that Church. The Lady Margaret Norford, 1406.
Iohn Clavering, 1421. who gave lands thereunto. Iohn Godney,An Al∣derman of London put to pe∣nance by the Clear∣gie, for wedding a widdow professed to chasti∣tie. Draper, Maior, 1427. This Godney, in the yeere 1444. wedded the Widdow of Robert Large, late Mai∣or, which Widdow had taken the Man∣tle and Ring, and the vow to live chaste to God terme of her life; for the breach whereof, the marriage done, they were troubled by the Church, and put to pe∣nance both he and she. William Hampton, Maior, 1472. was a great benefactor, and glased some of the Church windowes. Sir William Martia, Maior, 1492. Roger Acheley, Maior, 1511. Hee dwelt in Cornhill Ward, in a house be∣longing to Cobham Colledge, rented by the yeere, 26. s. 8. d. Robert Thorne, Merchant-Taylor, a Batchelor, 1532. he gave by his Testa∣ment in charity, more than 4445. pounds. Iohn Norryholme. Raph Batte. Alice Percivall. Iane Drew. William Borresbie. Iohn Broke. Richard Sutton. William Batte. Iames Well. Henry Beecher, Alderman, 1570. Robertus cubat hic Thornus Mercator honestus,A very faire Tombe of pure Touch, in the South side of the Quire. Qui sibi legitimas Arte paravit opes. Huic vitam dederat puero Bristollia quondam, Londinum hoc Tumulo clauserat ante diem. Ornavit studiis, patriam virtutibus auxit, Gymnasium exexit, sumptibus ipse suis. Lector quisquis ades, requiem cineri precor optes, Supplex et precibus numina flecte tuis. Obiit 1532. aetatis vero suae, Au. 40. Heere lye the bodies of Henry Beecher, Alderman, and late Sheriffe of London; and of Alice his first wife, one of the daughters to Thomas Heron of Edge∣comb, in the County of Surrey, Esquire, by who he had 10. children. After whose decease he married with Iane, the widdow of one Oliver Loveband, of London, Gent. with whom he lived three yeeres, and dyed the 15. day of Ianuary, Anno Dom. 1570. Here lyeth the body of Iohn Tryon, who departed this life at Paris in France, the 15. of August, and was here interred the 14. day of September, An. Dom. 1612. Having seene and observed the said Parish Church of S. Christopher,Robert Thorne, a bounti∣full Bat∣chelour, buried in the same Parish of S. Christo∣pher. with all the Grave-stones and Monuments therein: and finding a faire Tombe of Touch, wherein lyeth the body of Ro∣bert Thorne, Merchant-Taylor, and a Batchelor buried, having given by his Testament in charity, 4445. pounds, and to pious uses. Then looking for some such memory, as might adorne and beautifie the name of another fa∣mous Batchelor, Mr. Iohn Kendrick; and finding none, but onely his Hatchments and Banners, yet he being buried so long since; I thought it fit to let his owne last Will and Testament speake his due and deserved praises, according, and as (among other) it came to my hands. The last Will and Testament of Mr. Iohn Kendrick, Citizen and Draper of London: Who departed this life the 30. day of December, Anno, 1624. IN the Name of God,Present at thi godly worke, Io. Skinner, Andrew Kendrick, Tho. Single∣ton, &c. Amen. The nine and twentieth of December, An∣no Domini, 1624. And in the two and twentieth yeere of the reigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Iames, &c. I Iohn Kendrick, of the Citie of Lon∣don, Draper, being sicke in body; but of good and perfect memory, (for which I give most humble and hearty thankes to Almighty God) doe make, ordaine and declare this my last Will and Te∣stament, in manner and forme follow∣ing: That is to say: First,Dispositi∣on of his soule to God. and before all things, I com∣mend and commit my soule to Almigh∣ty God, my Creator; trusting most as∣suredly to be saved by the death, passion and onely merits of Iesus Christ, my Sa∣viour and Redeemer.
And I will that my body be decent∣ly interred in Christian buriall,For burial of his bo∣dy. in the Parish Church of S. Christopher, where I dwell; as mine Executor, hereafter named, shall order and appoint. Item, I give and bequeath to three∣score poore men,For poore mourners. to every of them a Gowne of broad-cloth, to weare on the day of my buriall: and twelve pence a piece in money, to pay for their din∣ners. The same poore men to bee such as my Executor shall appoint. Item, I give and bequeath blacke Gownes and Cloakes,For kin∣dred, friends, & servants mourners. to be worne at my buriall by my kindred, friends, and servants, as my Executor shall thinke meet: not exceeding the summe of sixe hundred pounds in the said Gownes and Cloakes, and the rest of the charges of my Funerall. Item, I give and bequeath the sum of threescore pounds,A Dinner for his friends, and the Parish inhabitants. to bee bestowed upon a Dinner, to be provided for my friends, and the inhabitants of the Pa∣rish of Saint Christopher, where I now dwell, upon the day of my buriall, and in such place as my Executor shall thinke meet and convenient. Item,His gift to the Maior & Burges∣ses of Rea∣ding. I give and bequeath to the Maior and Burgesses of the Towne of Reading, in the Country of Berkshire, (I meane, to the body corporate, or Cor∣poration of the said Towne of Reading, by whatsoever name or addition the same is made knowne) the summe of seven thousand & five hundred pounds, upon especiall trust and confidence, that they shall therewith performe the uses following: That is to say: The said Maior and Burgesses shall buy and purchase unto them and their successors for ever,The uses intended for the said sum. (I say, to the body corporate of the said Towne of Reading, by whatsoever name or addition the same is made or knowne) Lands and Here ditaments, of the cleere value of fifty pounds by the yeere, over and a∣bove all charges and reprises. Which summe of fifty pounds a yeere, my will and  aning is, shall bee paid by the said Maior and Burgesses, and their suc∣cessours, unto my Sister Anne Newman,Care of his Sister. yeerely during her naturall life. And after her decease, the same yeerely sum of fifty pounds, shall bee paid by the said Maior and Burgesses, and their suc∣cessors, to the Overseers of the poore of the said Towne of Reading (for the time being) yeerely for ever: And by them the said Overseers (for the time being) shall be bestowed and distributed to and among the poore people of the said Towne for ever: To wit, the moity thereof every halfe yeere, in such sums, and to such persons, as the said Over∣seers (for the time being) shall thinke meet, according to the necessity and de∣sert of the same severall persons. Provided alwayes,The usuall benevo∣lence of the rich is not to bee hindred by this gift. and my meaning is, that this my yeerely gift shall not any way abridge the said poore of the ordinary allowances, usually assessed and collected of the wealthier sort of the inhabitants of the said Towne, to∣wards the reliefe of the said poore peo∣ple: but shal be unto them as an addita∣ment, and cleere increase of reliefe yeer∣ly for ever. And if this my gift and provision shall happen (which I trust it shall not) to be by the said Maior and Burgesses,For negli∣gence in the distri∣bution of this gift. or by the said Overseers for the time being, ordered and disposed contrary to my meaning thus declared; or that my will and desire above expressed, touching the bestowing and distribution of the said summe of fifty pounds yeerely, bee omitted, neglected, or left unperformed by the space of one whole yeere, after it is by this my Will appointed to be di∣stributed and bestowed as aforesaid: Then my will and meaning is, that the said summe and revenue of fifty pounds a yeere, shall be by the said Maior and Burgesses, and their successors for the time being for ever, paid unto the Treasurer of Christs Hospitall: and by the Governours of the same Hospitall,How to be bestow∣ed upon their neg∣ligence. imployed and bestowed in the reliefe and education of the poore children, of the said Hospitall. Or else, that the said Maior and Burgesses for the time being; shall by their Deed in Law, con∣veigh and make over the Lands and He∣reditaments of the said yeerely value of fifty pounds, unto the Maior and Com∣monalty and Citizens of the Citie of London, and their successors for ever, unto the use of the said Hospitall, to be imployed as aforesaid. Provided alwaies, that the said fifty pounds a yeere, bee yeerely paid unto
my said Sister Anna Newman,Payment to his Si∣ster du∣ring her naturall life. during her naturall life: And after her decease, to the charitable uses aforesaid. Moreover, my will and meaning is, as also my trust and confidence in the said Maior and Burgesses of the Towne of Reading is,A house to be purcha∣sed for set∣ting the poore to worke. that with another compe∣tent part of the said summe of seven thousand five hundred pounds, so byme devised as aforesaid; they the said Maior and Burgesses shall buy and pur∣chase unto them and their successors for ever, a faire plot of ground, within the said Towne of Reading, or the liber∣ties thereof. And thereupon shall erect and build a strong house of Bricke, fit and commodious for setting the poore on worke therein: Or else shall buy and purchase such an house, being already built, if they can finde one already fit∣ting, or that may with a reasonable sum be made fit for the said use.The house is to have a Garden thereto adjoy∣ning. The same house to have a faire Garden adjoyning, and to bee from time to time kept in good and sufficient reparations, by the said Maior and Burgesses for the time being, for ever. Which house and Gar∣den, my will is, shall be used and occu∣pied by such as the said Maior and Bur∣gesses, and their successors from time to time for ever shall appoint and or∣daine, Imploy∣ing and u∣sing the stocke of money. for the imploying and handling of the stocke of money, by mee hereby left and devised to that purpose. And my will and meaning is, that the said Lands and Hereditaments of the yeerely value of fifty pounds, and also the said house and Garden, being bought and purchased as aforesaid, with parcell of the said summe of seven thou∣sand five hundred pounds: Then the whole residue and remainder of the same seven thousand and five hundred pounds,How the remain∣der of the money is is to bee imployed for a com∣mon stock shall make and be a common stocke, to be imployed and bestowed in Trades of clothing; either in making of coloured clothes, or whites, as the time shall require. And also in working of Wooll, Hemp, Flax, Iron, grinding of Brazill woods, and other stuffes for dying, or otherwise, as to the said Maior and Burgesses aforesaid, and their suc∣cessors for ever shall seeme meet and convenient, for the imployment of poore people, and for the preservation and increase of the said common stock. And the said Maior and Burgesses,For han∣dling and husban∣ding the common stocke in the house. and their successors for ever, shall have the election, placing and ordering, as also the displacing (if cause bee) of all and every person and persons, to bee imployed in the handling and husban∣ding, of the common stock in the house aforesaid: according to their the said Maior and Burgesses good discretion, from time to time for ever. Wherein yet my desire is, that they shall prefer the poore of the said Town to the said worke and imployment; be∣fore others of other places. And for the performance of these premisses,In what manner the 7500. pounds is to be paid. my will is, that the somme of seven thousand and five hundred pounds, before (for this end) by mee bequeathed to the said Maior and Bur∣gesses, or their successors: shall be paid unto them or their successors, in man and forme following; that is to say, Two thousand pounds thereof at the end of one yeere next after my decease: Other two thousand pounds thereof, at the end of two yeeres, next after the day of my decease. And the residue of the said whole sum, being three thou∣sand and five hundred pounds, at the end of three yeeres next ensuing, after and from the day of my decease. But if it shall happen (as my trust is it will not) that the said Maior and Bur∣gesses, For misim∣ploying the stocke contrary to the Doners will. or their successors, shall neglect, omit or faile to performe the premisses, according to my will and meaning a∣bove declared; or shall misimploy the said stocke, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this my device and dis∣position, for the good of the poore, and their honest imployment and mainte∣nance as aforesaid; and that such their neglect shall continue at any time, by the space of one whole yeere together: Then my will and meaning is, that my said whole Legacy of seven thousand and five hundred pounds, and every part and parcell thereof, shall be thence utterly void, frustrate and of none effect, as to, for and concerning the said Maior and Burgesses and their successors; and as to, for and concerning the uses ther∣of before limited and expressed. And that the said whole common stocke, shall bee by them the said Maior and Burgesses, and their successors for the
time being;His intent for London upon their fay∣ling. forthwith paid unto the Maior and Communalty and Citizens of the City of London, to the use of Christs Hospitall in London, according as I have above devised and disposed, touching the revenue of fifty pounds a yeere for ever, first bequeathed to the use and reliefe of the poore people of the Towne of Reading. As also my will and meaning is, that in this case of non-performance by the said Maior and Burgesses, the house and Garden to bee purchased in Reading,Concer∣ning the house and Garden at Reading devised. as aforesaid: Shal be by the said Maior and Burgesses, and their successors, convey∣ed and made over by their deed suffici∣ent in Law, unto the said Maior and Communalty and Citizens of the City of London, and their successors for ever, to the like use of Christs Hospitall in London, as aforesaid. Item, I give and bequeath to the Maior, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury in the County of Berks (I meane the body corporate of the same Towne,For pur∣chasing a house and Garden at Newbery to set the poore on worke.) the summe of foure thousand pounds, to buy and purchase therewith a commodious house, and Garden within the same Towne, or the liberties thereof; to set the poore on worke. And with the residue of the same summe, to make a common stock, for the imployment of the poore in the said house; according to the good dis∣cretion of the said Maior, Aldermen and Burgesses from time to time for e∣ver. And according to my meaning before declared, in the devising of the summe of seven thousand and five hun∣dred pounds, to the Maior and Burges∣ses of the Towne of Reading, to the like use. But my will and meaning is, that if it shall happen (which I trust will not) that the said Maior,For neg∣lect and misim∣ployment of the stock com∣mitted un∣to their trust. Aldermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury, or their successors, shall neglect or faile to performe my trust and meaning, hereby committed unto them, or shall misim∣ploy the said stocke, contrary to my good intent to the poore before decla∣red, by the space of one whole yeere (at any time) after my said Legacy shall be paid unto them: Then my will and meaning is, that my said whole Legacy of foure thousand pounds, and every part and parcell thereof, shall thence∣forth be utterly void, and of none effect, as to, for and concerning the said Maior Aldermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury, and their successors for e∣ver. And that the said whole common stock, be by them the said Maior, Al∣dermen and Burgesses of Newbury, and their successors for the time being,Returned over to Reading and im∣ployed to the use of the poore there. forthwith paid over unto the Maior and Burgesses of the Towne of Reading in the same County. To be by them and their successors for ever imployed, be∣stowed and used in like manner, as I have by this my Will devised and ap∣pointed another stocke common for the poore in the same Town of Reading: as by my said devise and disposition (before herein more at large expressed) doth and may appeare. In the like manner also my will and meaning is, that in case of such non-per∣formance of my will and intent, by the said Maior, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury,For non performance of the T∣tors wil and in∣tent in the Towne of Newbury the house and Garden by them so to bee purcha∣sed and built, as aforesaid: Shall be by said Maior, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury, and their suc∣cessors; conveyed and made over by their deed sufficient in Law, unto the Maior and Burgesses of the said Towne of Reading, and their successors for ever; to be by them sold and converted into money, and the same money to be used and imployed in their common stocke for the poore in the said Towne of Rea∣ding aforesaid, in such sort, as I have formerly hereby expressed. And for the performance of the said trust and uses, by the said Maior, Al∣dermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury aforesaid,In what manner the four thousand pounds is to be paid to the Towne of Newbury my will and mea∣ning is: that the said summe of foure thousand pounds so to them bequea∣thed and devised as aforesaid; shall be paid unto them, or their successors, in manner as followeth; that is to say, One thousand pounds therof at the end of one yeere, next ensuing after the day of my decease: One other thousand pounds thereof, at the end of two yeers from and after my said decease. And the residue (being two thousand l.) shall be paid them, at the end of three yeeres next after my decease.
Item, I give and bequeath to the Company of Drapers of the City of London (of which Company I am free) the summe of two thousand and foure hundred pounds,Two thou∣sand foure hundred pounds given to the Com∣pany of Drapers London. to purchase Lands and Heeditaments, to the cleare yeer∣ly value of one hundred pounds for e∣ver: over and above all charges and re∣prises. And with the same to performe these good uses hereafter mentioned; that is to say: The summe of twenty foure pounds thereof yeerely for ever,For the yeerely re∣leasing of sixe poore Prisoners. to be bestowed in the moneth of December, for the re∣leasing of sixe poore prisoners, out of these Prisons in London, to wit, the two Compters, Ludgate, Newgate and the Fleet, by foure pounds for each in Pri∣soner. Or if such cannot bee found in the said Prisons,For relea∣sing Priso∣ners in o∣ther Pri∣sons, &c. or some of them to be re∣leased for these sums: Then the same (or the residue thereof) to be bestow∣ed in like releasing of other Prisoners, out of some of the Prisons neere Lon∣don, and out of the liberties thereof; as to the Wardens of the said Compa∣ny (for the time being) shal seeme meet. More, twenty pounds yeerely for e∣ver, To the Curate of the Parish Church of S. Christo∣phers. to the Curate of the Parish of St. Christopher, wherein I now dwell: To read divine Service in the said Parish Church at sixe a clocke in the morning every day of the weeke for ever. In like manner as is now used in the Chappell, at the great North-gate of Saint Pauls Church in London. More,To the Clerke and Sex∣ton of S. Christopher. to the Clerke and Sexton of the said Parish of Saint Christopher, to each of them fifty shillings yeerely for ever: to doe their severall attendance and assistance at the time of Divine Service every morning. More,To the poore of the Parish to the Church-wardens of the same Parish of Saint Christopher: five pounds yeerely for ever, for the main∣tenance of lights in the Winter time. More, three pounds yeerely for ever, to the poore of the said Parish of Saint Christopher. More,To the Compters and New∣gate. to the poore Prisoners in Lon∣don ten pounds yeerely for ever: name∣ly, to the Prisoners of the Compters in the Poultry and Woodstreet, and in New∣gate; to each of these Prisons forty shil∣lings yeerely for ever. To the poore Prisoners in Ludgate and in the Fleet;To Ludgate and the Fleet. to each house thirty shillings for ever. And to the poore Prisoners in Beth∣lem,To Bedlem. or Bedlem; twenty shillings yeere∣ly. More,To the Clerke of the Dra∣pers. to the Clerke of the Compa∣ny of the Drapers, for the time being: for his paines herein, forty shillings for ever. More,To the Beadles of the Livery and Yeo∣manry. to the Beadle of the said Com∣pany; thirty shillings for ever. More, to the Beadle of the Yeoman∣ry of the same Company; ten shillings yeerely for ever. More,For poore Clothwor∣kers and their wid∣dowes. five and twenty pounds yeere∣ly for ever to be distributed by the said Wardens, among poore and religious men and women in the City of London; to some more and to some lesse, as the said Wardens shall find their necessity and desert to be: Wherein my desire is, that poore Clothworkers and their Widdowes shall bee first preferred; and next, the poore of the Drapers Company. The residue of the said sum of one hundred pounds a yeere, being foure pounds yeerely for ever,A remem∣brance to the foure Wardens. I entreat the foure Wardens of the said Compa∣ny, to accept for their paines, to bee e∣qually divided between them by twen∣ty shillings to each of them, for the time being for ever. And if the said Company of Dra∣pers, doe either of purpose or negli∣gence, omit and not performe the pre∣misses; but shall leave the same unper∣formed one whole yeere, after they shall have received this my Legacy of two thousand & foure hundred pounds (which I will shall be paid them at the end of one yeer next after my decease:) Then my will and minde is,If the Dra∣pers omit perfor∣mance of this Lega∣cy of two thousand and foure hundred pounds. that the Governours of Christs Hospitall in London, shall recover the whole two thousand and foure hundred pounds, before specified, or the Lands and the Hereditaments, that the said Compa∣ny shall have bought with the same money: And keepe twenty pounds yeerely for ever of the same rent, for the maintenance of the poore Children in the said Hospitall, as if the same had been first given to them. And the Dra∣pers Company to have nothing to doe with it, or the rest of the said hundred
pounds yeerely for ever. And that in this case,A restraint of the o∣ther Le∣gacies gi∣ven and bequea∣thed to the Com∣pany. the yeerely payment of eight pounds unto the Clerke, Beadles and Wardens of the said Company, as also twelve pounds, parcell of the said five and twenty l. a yeere before devised, to be paid and distributed by the said Company, a∣mong poore and religious men and women in the City of London, utterly and for ever to cease. But this twenty pounds a yeere, be∣ing so converted (as aforesaid) to the use of the Hospitall, the residue of the said yeerly rent of one hundred pounds a yeere, I will that the Governours of the said Hospitall,Concer∣ning the residue of the yeere∣ly rent. shall pay and distri∣bute yeerely for ever, in manner and forme as the said Company of Dra∣pers should have done. Item, I give and bequeath to the said Company of Drapers, one hun∣dred pounds, to be paid within a yeere after my decease;An hun∣dred pounds to be bestow∣ed in Plate. and by the Wardens of the said Company to be bestowed in Plate: such as they shall thinke good, for the use of their common Hall in London, at their meetings and dinners there. Item,Five hun∣dred pounds given to Christs Hospitall in London. I give and bequeath to the poore of Christs Hospitall in London, five hundred pounds, to be by the Go∣vernours thereof bestowed in Lands and Hereditaments, for and towards the yeerely maintenance of the Chil∣dren of the said Hospitall for ever. This summe to bee paid to the said Gover∣nours, or the Treasurer of the said Ho∣spitall, so soone as they shall have found out a fit purchase to bestow it, and a greed on the price of the same. Item, I give and bequeath towards the curing of sicke,Fifty pounds to S. Bartholo∣mews Ho∣spitall. fore and diseased persons in Saint Bartholomews Hospital in London, the summe of fifty pounds. Item, I give and bequeath towards the curing of sicke,To the poore of S. Thomas Hospitall. sore and disea-sed persons in Saint Thomas Hospitall in Southwarke neere London, the summe of fifty pounds. Item, I give and bequeath towards the repayring of the Parish Church of Saint Christopher,Repairing of S. Chri∣stophers Church. where I now dwell, the summe of forty pounds: To be paid to the Church-wardens of the same Pa∣rish, within one yeere after my decease. Item,Repairing S. Pauls Church in London. I give and bequeath towards the repayring of the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in London, the summe of one thousand pounds: to be paid to the Chamberlaine of London, at such time as that worke of repayring the same Church, shall be ready to proceed with effect; and to be disposed by the directi∣on and appointment of the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the said City. Item, I give and bequeath to bee given at the marriages of poore Maids within the City of London,To poore Maids marriages in London. two hun∣dred pounds: to be distributed by for∣ty shillings a peece upon the dayes of their marriage; to such as have served one Master or Mistresse, by the space of five yeeres together. Item,To poore Maids marriages in the Towne of Reading. I give and bequeath to be gi∣ven and distributed to poore Maids in Towne of Reading, in the County of Berks, and at their severall marriages, by forty shillings a peece, at the discre∣tion of the Maior and Burgesses of that Towne; the summe of one hundred pounds. Provided, none enjoy the be∣nefit thereof, but such as have served Master, Mistris or Dame, by the space of seven yeeres together. This hundred pounds to bee paid to the said Maior and Burgesse (for the use aforesaid) within one yeere next after my de∣cease. Item, I give and bequeath to the Mai∣or, To twen∣ty five poore Maids marriages in the Towne of Newbury. Aldermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury in Barkeshire, the summe of fifty pounds: to be by them bestowed and distributed to twenty five Maids marriages, on their severall daies of their weddings in the same Towne. None to enjoy this gift; but such as have well and honestly served with one Master, Mistris of Dame, by the space of seven yeeres at the least. And this fifty pounds to be paid to the said Maior Aldermen and Burgesses, within one yeere next after my decease. Item,For set∣ting poore vagrant Boyes on worke in Bridewell. I give and bequeath towards the setting on worke of forty idle va∣grant Boyes, such as goe up and downe the streets in the City of London, beg∣ging and pilfering, the summe of two hundred pounds: to be paid to the Trea∣surer for the time being, being of the house of correction, called Bridewell in London, in manner and forme following,
that is to say, When any such Boy is taken up by my Executor or his As∣signes, in any place within the liberties of this Citie of London, and by the Trea∣surer of the same House of Correction, and Governours there for the time be∣ing, placed and bound Apprentice with a Master, for the terme of seven yeeres at the least, with a Master or Art-ma∣sters, as Glovers, Pinners, Shoomakers, or any other occupation of Art, which they shall bee thought most fit for, to learne in the said house; whereby (in time) they may prove good members, and live like honest men in the Com∣mon-wealth. I say, with every one of these Boyes shall be paid to the Treasu∣rer and Governours for the time being; the summe of five pounds, untill the said summe of two hundred pounds bee fully paid for that use. Item,50. pound for S. Ma∣ries in Reading. I give and bequeath towards the finishing of the Pinacles of the Stee∣ple of the Parish of Saint Maries in Rea∣ding, in Berkshire, fifty pounds; to bee paid to the Churchwardens of the same Parish, within one moneth after the same Pinacles shall be finished. Item,Five hun∣dred pounds to be lent to severall parties in Reading. I give and bequeath to the Maior and Burgesses of the Towne of Reading aforesaid, the summe of five hundred pounds, to be first lent to these parties, and in the summes hereafter na∣med, for seven yeeres, gratis: That is, to Iames Winche, two hundred pounds: and to Walter Rye, Richard Stampe, and William Blacknall, Clothiers, one hun∣dred pounds apiece: each of them gi∣ving Bond with two sufficient sureties, for repayment thereof to the said Mai∣or and Burgesses, at the end of the said seven yeeres. And afterwards, the same five hundred pounds shall be lent to ten severall honest industrious poore Clo∣thiers, free men of the same Towne, by fifty pounds apiece, gratis, for three yeeres, upon like good security: and no man to have the use of this money twise. But if there shal not be Clothiers enow found in the said Towne,For lacke of Clo∣thiers, the same mo∣ney lent to other Trades∣men of the same Towne. to enjoy this loane in manner aforesaid: That then the said money shall bee lent also unto other Tradesmen, free of the said Town, by the summes and termes of yeeres last before appointed; to such as set most poore people aworke, according to the discretion of the said Maior and Bur∣gesses: And this said summe of five hundred pounds shall be paid to the said Maior and Burgesses, (to the use a∣foresaid) at the end of one yeere next after my decease. Item,Other five hun∣dred pounds to Clothiers of Newbury lent freely I give and bequeath to the Mai∣or, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbury, in the County of Berks, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be lent first for the terme of seven yeeres, gratis, unto these severall Clo∣thiers here named; that is to say, To Thomas Newman, one hundred pounds: to Richard Avery, one hundred pounds: to Martin Broaker, fifty pounds: to Wil∣liam Goodwin the elder, fifty pounds: to Timothy Avery, fifty pounds: to Robert Bacon, fifty pounds: and to Griffin For∣ster, fifty pounds. Every of the said se∣verall parties entring into bond, with 2. sufficient sureties, for repayment of the said summes to the said Maior and Al∣dermen and Burgesses at the end of se∣ven yeeres. And afterwards, the same five hundred pounds shall be lent to ten severall honest industrious poore Clo∣thiers, To tenne other poore Clothiers the same money lent after∣wards. free of the said Towne of Newbu∣rie, by fifty pounds apiece, gratis, for three yeeres: And after that in like man∣ner, from three yeers to three yeeres for ever; and no man to have the same mo∣ney twise. But if there shall not bee Clothiers enow found in the same Towne of Newbury, to enjoy this loane in manner as aforesaid; then the same money shall bee lent also unto other Tradesmen, free of the same Towne, by the summes and termes of yeeres last before appointed, to such as set most poore people on worke, according to the discretion of the said Maior, Alder∣men and Burgesses; to whom this said five hundred pounds shall bee paid, to the use aforesaid, at the end of one yeere after my decease. Item,Nine hundred pounds given to the Mer∣chant Ad∣venturers. I give and bequeath to the Go∣vernour, Assistants, and fellowship of Merchant Adventures of England, the summe of nine hundred pounds, to bee lent by three hundred pounds in a par∣cell, for three yeeres, gratis, unto three honest, industrious and frugall young men, free of that Company, none of them being partners with each other; and every of them giving Bond with
two sufficient sureties, to be tryed and allowed by ballotting, and not other∣wise, for repayment of the same money to the said Company. And so the same money to be lent out by the said Com∣pany in this manner, from three yeeres to three yeeres, for ever. And my will and desire is, that these my five present servants,His ser∣vants first preferred to the be∣nefit of the loane. shall be (upon security as aforesaid) first preferred to the enjoying of this loane; to wit, Wil∣liam Powle, Thomas Newman, and Simon Gundy, the first three yeeres; and An∣drew Kendricke and Christopher Pack, the next two parcels that shall come in, and be received in, after they shall be free∣men of that Company. And for perfor∣mance hereof, the said nine hundred pounds shall be paid unto the Treasurer of the said Company in London, for the time being, at the end of one yeere next after my decease. Item,To his Brother William Kendrick and his children. I give and bequeath to my bro∣ther William Kendrick of Reading in the County of Berks, Clothier, and to his Children now borne and living, the summe of two thousand pounds: wher∣of one third part for himselfe, and the other two parts for his said Children. The same two third parts of the said summe of two thousand pounds, to be equally divided to and amongst his said children, share and share like. And my will is, that the said two thousand pounds bee paid to my said brother,Payment of the two thousand pounds to his Bro∣ther and children, and how. at the end of three yeeres next after my decease: and that he shall pay his said children their severall shares thereof before limited; that is to say, to his Sonne his share and part, when he commeth to the age of twenty foure yeeres: And to his Daughter, her share and part, when she commeth to the age of one and twenty yeeres, or at the day of her marriage, which shall first hap∣pen. And if it fortune either of my said brothers children to dye or decease, be∣fore their respective Legacies aforesaid shall grow due,For mor∣tality in either of the chil∣dren. as above; that then the part of such child so deceasing, shall ac∣crue and be paid to the surviver of the said children, at the day and time before appointed. Item,The gift of his gold Ring. I give and bequeath to my said brother William Kendrick, my gold Ring which was my Fathers; with the Let∣ters T. K. therein engraven, and a knot betweene the same Letters. Item, I give and bequeath to my Si∣ster Anne Newman of Reading in the Country of Berks,A thou∣sand Markes given to his sister. the sum of one thou∣sand Marks, to be paid unto her at the end of one yeere next after my decease. Item, I give and bequeath unto the Children of my said Sister,Two thousand Markes given to his Sisters children, and in what man∣ner. Anne New∣man, the sum of two thousand Markes; to bee equally divided amongst them share and share like. And the shares of such as are already married (if they be Daughters) or are foure and twenty yeeres of age, to bee paid them at the end of one yeere after my decease. And the shares of the rest, to be paid to such as be Sonnes; when they shall be foure and twenty yeeres of age. And to the Daughters, at their day of marriage; or when they shall come to one and twenty yeeres of age respectively, which of these shall happen to bee first. And if it shall happen any of the said Children of my said Sister to dye, be∣fore the age and time so prefixed for payment,In case of morta∣lity or death hap∣pening a∣mong the children. as aforesaid (I meane, those that be yet under that age, and unmar∣ried) then my will is: That the share and part of such as shall so dye, shall ac∣crue and bee paid unto the rest of the same Children then surviving, share and share like; and at the dayes and times of payment before appointed, for their own severall shares and parts. But my will and meaning is, that Thomas Newman, son of my said Sister; shall not have any part or share of this said Legacy of two thousand Markes: Thomas Newman excepted from this Legacy. because I give him a large Legacy apart by this my will. Therefore the said two thousand Markes is to bee divided and shared among the rest of the Children of my said Sister, as aforesaid. Item, I doe hereby absolutely acquit and forgive my brother in law Thomas Newman,A Bond forgiven to his Si∣sters hus∣band. of Reading aforesaid, husband to my Sister Anne Newman; the summe of one hundred Markes, which he ow∣eth me by his bond, due the second day of November, An. Dom. 1623. being all that he oweth me at the date of this my will. Item, I give and bequeath to my
Sister Alice Vigures of Excester,Five hun∣dred pounds given to his Sister Alice Vi∣gures. in the County of Devon, the summe of five hundred pounds; to be paid her at the end of two yeeres next after my de∣cease. Item, I give and bequeath to the children of my said Sister Alice Vigures the summe of one thousand pounds,A thou∣sand pounds given to his said Sisters Children, and in what man∣ner. to be equally divided among them share and share like. And if any of them be∣ing Sonnes) bee of the age of foure and twenty yeeres; or any of them (being Daughters) bee of the age of one and twenty yeeres, or married, then the share and parts of such respectively, shall bee paid at the end of two yeeres next after my decease. And the shares and parts of the rest, shall bee paid to such as are Sonnes, at the age of foure and twenty yeeres: and to such as bee Daughters, at their age of one and twenty yeeres, or at the dayes of their marriage, which of them shall first hap∣pen to come respectively. But my will and meaning is, that Si∣mon Gandy, Sonne of my said Sister A∣lice Vigures,Simon Gan∣dy exclu∣ded from this thou∣sand pounds and the intent of this distri∣bution. shall not have any part or share of this Legacy of one thousand pounds: because I give him a large Le∣cy apart by himselfe in this my Will. But my meaning is, that this said Le∣gacy of one thousand pounds, so given as aforesaid, shall bee equally divided among the rest of the Children of my said Sister; excluding the said Simon Gandy from all part and share of the same: And if it shall happen any of the said Children of my said Sister Alice Gandy, to dye before the age and time of payment appointed as aforesaid (I meane, when they bee under that age, and unmarried:) then my will and meaning is, that the share and part of such as shall so dye; shall bee paid and accrue unto the rest of the same Chil∣dren so surviving,In case of mortality and death of the Children. to each of them e∣qually, and share and share like: and at the dayes and times of payment be∣fore appointed, for their owne severall shares and parts. Item, I give and bequeath to my Brother Iames Winche of Parley in the County of Berks,To his Brother Iames VVinche, and his Children. and to his Children, the summe of one thousand pounds: whereof one third part for himselfe, the other two third parts for his said Chil∣dren. The same two third parts to bee divided equally amongst the said Chil∣dren of my said Brother, share and share like. And my will is, that this said summe of one thousand pounds,The pay∣ment of this thou∣sand pounds to his Bro∣ther and Children. shall bee paid to my said Brother Iames Winche, at the end of one yeere next after my decease, and that hee shall pay forthwith unto such of this Children, as (being sonnes, and of the age of foure and twenty yeeres, or married) their severall shares and proportions of the said two third parts of this summe of one thousand pounds. The shares and parts of the rest of his Children, hee shall retaine in his owne hands, untill his said Chil∣dren (being Sonnes) shall be of the age of foure and twenty yeeres: And being Daughters, shall bee of the age of one and twenty yeeres, or be married; and then he shall pay every of them their se∣verall shares and parts respectively. And if it shall happen any of the said younger Children to dye,In case of death and mortality of the younger Children. before the time of payment so limited as aforesaid: Then my will and meaning is, that the part and share of such as shal so decease shall accrue unto the rest of the said Children of my said Brother, that shall then survive; to bee equally divided amongst them share and sharelike, and to bee paid at the daies and times be∣fore appointed. Item, I give and bequeath to thirty of my poorest Kindred in the Towne of Reading in Barkshire,Three hundred pounds to his poo∣rest Kin∣dred in Reading. the summe of three hundred pounds, to bee paid unto my Brother William Kendrick, within three moneths after my decease. And by him to be distributed by ten pounds in every parcell, as hee in his discretion shall thinke good: wherein I pray him to be very carefull, to bestow the same where there is most need and best desert. Item,Fifty pounds to old Eliza∣beth Ken∣dricke of Reading. I give and bequeath to old E∣lizabeth Kendrick of Reading, Daughter to my Fathers Brother William Kendrick (as I take it) the summe of fifty pounds; to be paid her within three moneths af∣ter my decease. Item, I give and bequeath to my Kinseman Thomas Newman, now resi∣ding at Delft in Holland, the summe of one thousand pounds. To be paid him upon the five and twenty day of October
which shall be in the yeere of our Lord God,To Thomas Newman of Delft in Holland. 1626. when his time of service ex∣pireth. Provided, that he remaine with my partner Mr. Laurence Halstead, and serve him his said full time. Item,One thou∣sand pounds to Simon Gan¦dy. I give and bequeath to my kinsman and late servant, Simon Gandy, the summe of one thousand pounds, to be paid him within one yeere next after my decease. Item,Five hundred pounds to Arthur Aynscombe. I give and bequeath unto Ar∣thur Aynscombe, Merchant, now residing at Antwerp; who hath a share with me in trade; the summe of five hundred pounds, to be paid him within 2. yeeres after my decease. Provided that he goe forward in trade with Mr. Laurence Hal∣stead, (if he the said Master Halstead shall desire it) unto the end of our Con∣tract, which will be the five and twen∣tieth day of October, Anno Dom. 1626. Item,Five hundred pounds to Barney Reymer. I give and bequeath to Barney Reymer, Merchant, now residing at Delft, who hath also a share with me in trade; the sum of five hundred pounds, to be paid him within two yeeres next after my decease. Provided that hee goe forward in trade with Mr. Laurence Halstead, (if he the said Mr. Halstead shal desire it) unto the end of our contract, which will bee the five and twentieth day of October, Anno Dom. 1626. as is above-said. Item,Five hundred pounds to his Master Io. Quarles, living in the house. I give and bequeath to Master Iohn Quarles, who was my Master, the summe of five hundred pounds, to bee paid him within a yeere next after my decease. And my earnest request unto Mr. Laurence Halstead is, that unto the end of our contract of Partnership, (which will be the five and twentieth day of October, Anno Domini 1626.) the same Mr. Quarles may have his dyet, lodging and washing, in his the said Mr. Halsteads house, free, and without pay∣ing any thing therefore, as he now hath it with me. And my desire also is, that he may continue to keepe the bookes of our partable account, untill the aforesaid twenty fifth day of October, 1626. and be paid his wonted yeerely allowance of fifty pounds for the same. And I doe hereby freely and absolutely forgive the said Mr. Iohn Quarles, the summe of three hundred pounds, which he oweth me, payable at pleasure, being lent him the last of March, Anno 1615. and being all that he oweth me at the date of this my Will. Item,Three hundred pounds to Mr. George Lowe. I give and bequeath to Master George Lowe, heretofore my partner, the summe of three hundred pounds, to bee paid him within one yeere next after my decease. And I doe hereby absolutely forgive him, all that is due unto me for his lodging, diet, firing and washing, which he hath had of me now six yeeres together. Item,Two hun∣dred li. to Thomas Bilingsley. I give and bequeath to Thomas Billingsley, sonne of Sir Henry Bilingsley, Knight, and Alderman of London, de∣ceased, the sum of two hundred pounds, to be paid him within one yeere next af∣ter my decease. And I doe absolutely forgive him the summe of two hundred pounds, which hee oweth mee by his Bond, due the twentieth of December, Anno, 1625. and lent him the twentieth of this present Moneth, for a yeere. Item,300. li. to Thomas Iacksons Executors▪ I give and bequeath to the Exe∣cutors of Thomas Iackson, of London, Merchant, deceased (whom I take to be Miles Iackson, the sonne of the said Tho∣mas) the sum of three hundred pounds, to be paid at the end of one yeere next after my decease. Item,50. li. to Lucas van Peenen. I give and bequeath to Lucas van Peenen of Middleburgh in Zealand, sonne of Roger van Peenen of that Town, deceased; the summe of fifty pounds sterling, to be paid over by Exchange, within two moneths after my decease: Payable at Vsance to Iohn Mount-Ste∣phen, now residing in that Towne, to be paid over to the said Lucas van Peenen, forthwith after he hath received it, in the full Flemmish summe which the same shall produce. Item,20. pound 10 Ieremias Poets of Middle-burgh. I give and bequeath to Iremias Poets, of the same Towne of Middle-burgh in Zealand, (if he be the Execu∣tor of his brother Hance Poets, decea∣sed) the summe of twenty pounds ster∣ling: to be made over by Exchange within two moneths after my decease. Payable at Vsance, to Iohn Mount-Ste∣phen aforenamed; and by him forthwith (after his receipt thereof) to be paid o∣ver to the said Ieremias Poets, in the full Flemmish summe which the same shall produce. Item, I give and bequeath to William
Powle my covenant Servant,Two hundred pounds to his ser∣vant Wil∣liam Powle. the summe of two hundred pounds: to bee paid him within sixe moneths after my de∣cease. Item, I give and bequeath to Andrew Kendricke my Apprentice,Three hundred pounds to his Ap∣prentice Andrew Kendricke. the summe of three hundred pounds: to bee paid him, when hee shall have served seven yeeres, from the commencement of the terme of his Indenture. Item, I give and bequeath to the said Andrew Kendricke,One hundred pounds more to the same person. the summe of one hundred pounds more: in lieu of so much given mee with him by his Fa∣ther Iohn Kendricke; to bee paid him within three moneths next after my de∣cease, upon acquittance to be given by his said Father therefore. Item,To Christo∣pher Pack his Ap∣prentice one hun∣dred pounds. I give and bequeath to Chri∣stopher Packe mine Apprentice, the sum of one hundred pounds: to bee payed him within three months next after my decease. Item,Twenty pounds to his Horse-keeper. I give and bequeath to Thomas Mayle my Horse-keeper, the summe of twenty pounds: to be paid him within two moneths next after my decease. Item,Twenty pounds to his Maid Dorothy, I give and bequeath to my Maid Dorothy, the summe of twenty pounds; to bee paid her within two moneths next after my decease. Item,Twenty pounds to his Maid Margaret. I give and bequeath to my Maid Margaret the summe of twenty pounds; to bee paid her within two moneths next after my decease. Item,To his Drawer Hutwith fif∣ty pounds. I give and bequeath unto Iohn Hutwith my Drawer, the summe of fif∣ty pounds; to be paid him within three moneths after my decease. Item,To his Drawer Bird five and twen∣ty pounds. I give and bequeath to Walter Bird my Drawer, five and twenty pounds; to bee paid him within three moneths after my decease. Item,Among the ser∣vants of Hutwith twenty five pound▪ I give and bequeath to the pre∣sent men servants of Iohn Hutwith my Drawer, the summe of twenty five pounds; whereoften pounds to Charles, and the other fifteene pounds to bee e∣qually divided amongst the rest, as well Apprentices as Journeymen; to bee paid within two months next after my decease. Item,To his twelve Cloth∣workers, 130. pounds. I give and bequeath to my twelve Clothworkers, that usually row and sheere my Clothes; the summe of one hundred and thirty pounds: where∣of twenty pounds to Owen Dobbins, and ten pounds a peece to the rest; to bee payed within three moneths next after my decease. Item,To Bigge and Salis∣bury 25. pounds. I give and bequeath to William Bigge and William Salisbury, that usually presse and fold my Clothes; the sum of twenty five pounds: whereof fifteen pounds to William Bigge, and ten pounds to William Salisbury, to bee paid them within three moneths next after my de∣cease. Item,To his Porters twenty pounds. I give and bequeath to my Por∣ters at the waterside, ten pounds, to be equally divided among them. And ten pounds to my Porters, that usually pack in my house; to bee paid within two moneths next after my decease. Item,Tenne pounds to his Water-bearer and Wa∣sher. I give and bequeath to my Wa∣ter-bearer three pounds: And to my Washer Anthony five pounds, to be paid them forthwith after my decease. Item, I give and bequeath to William Beadle of Reading Clothier,To VVil∣liam Bea∣dle of Rea∣ding 50. pounds. the summe of fifty pounds, if he be yet living; and if he be dead; then to his Executors: to to be paid within three moneths next after my decease. And I doe hereby also forgive the said William Beadle the ten pounds he now oweth me. Item,To Slye of Readings Executors 50. li. I give and bequeath to the Ex∣ecutors of Mark Slye of Reading Clothier deceased, the summe of fifty pounds; to be paid within three moneths next after my decease. Item,100. li. to Newman of Newbury. I give and bequeath to Thomas Newman of Newbury Clothier, the sum of one hundred pounds, to be paid him within three moneths after my de∣cease. Item,100. li. to John Skin∣ner. I give and bequeath to Iohn Skinner, Secretary to the Merchants Adventurers; the summe of one hun∣dred pounds, to bee paid within three moneths next after my decease. Item, I give and bequeath to the Widdow Harison and her Daughter, dwelling in the Alley next to my dwel∣ling house,To Wid∣dow Hari∣son and her daugh¦ter five pounds. five pounds, to be paid with∣in one moneth next after my decease. Item, I give and bequeath to Master Richard Bennet,To Master Bennet 300. li. who was heretofore my Partner, the summe of three hundred pounds, to bee paid at the end of one yeere next after my decease. Item, I give and bequeath to Master
William Towerson Skinner,Tenne pounds to make two Rings. Deputy of the Merchant Adventurers, five pounds to make him a Ring. And to Master Thomas Smith Skinner, five pounds to make him a Ring; to bee paid them forthwith after my decease. Item,To three men five pound a peece. I give and bequeath unto Rafe Barnet, William Ellets and Iohn Southern Officers of the Merchant Adventurers, five pounds a peece; to bee paid them forthwith after my decease. Item,For Ser∣vice by six a clocke every mor∣ning at Reading. I give and bequeath to the Maior and Burgesses of the Towne of Reading, in the County of Berks; the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds; to be paid them at the end of one yeere next after my decease: Therewith to purchase Lands and Hereditaments, to the cleare yeerely value of ten pounds for ever; to maintaine Divine Service to be said in the Parish Church of St. Mary in that Towne, by the Parson or his Curate every morning of the week, at sixe of the clocke for ever. Item,For the like Di∣vine Ser∣vice eve∣ry mor∣ning at Newbury. I give and bequeath to the Maior, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of Newbury, in the County of Berks, the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds, to bee paid them at the end of one yeere next after my decease: Ther∣with to purchase Lands or Heredita∣ments, of the cleare yeerely value of ten pounds for ever; to maintaine Di∣vine Service to bee said in the Parish Church of that Towne by the Parson or his Curate, every morning of the week at sixe of the clocke, to continue for e∣ver. Item,To his Kinseman Bye 100. li. I give and bequeath to my Kinseman William Bye, dwelling neere the Allum Mines in Yorkeshire, the summe of one hundred pounds; to bee paid him within three moneths after my decease. And I doe here∣by forgive him the tenne pounds, which hee oweth me by his Bond, due long since. Item,Forty pounds for his fu∣nerall din∣ner at Drapers Hall. I give and bequeath to the Company of Drapers in London, the summe of forty pounds, to be bestowed upon a dinner for the Livery of that Company, to be at their Hall upon the day of my buriall: This to bee paid forthwith after my decease. And my will and meaning is, that in case any of the persons aforenamed, to whom I have bequathed Legacies as aforesaid,Dispositi∣on of the Legacies, if any studye in the meane time. and not especially dispo∣sed for case of their decease, shall hap∣pen to dye before the same Legacies grow due unto them. Then the Le∣gacie or Legacies so by mee given to them as aforesaid, shall bee paid un∣to their Executors or Administra∣tors, at such time as I have before severally appointed unto them my Le∣gataries. And I doe make and ordaine my loving Friend and Partner,Appoint∣ment of his Execu∣tor. Master Laurence Halstead, my sole Executor, of this my last Will and Testament: Charging him, as hee will answer it before Almighty GOD at the last Day of Judgement, that hee truly and punctually (in every particular) performe this my said last VVill and Testament; as I nothing doubt but hee will bee carefull to doe it.The  of his e∣states to his Exe∣cutor. Here∣by giving and bequeathing unto him my said Executor, all the residue and remainder of my estate; my Legacies before bequeathed being first payed and discharged. In witnesse of the premisses, I have unto this my last Will and Testament, contained in eighteene severall sheets of Paper, put my hand and Seale. That is, my Seale once at the top, and my name under every severall sheete, the day and yeere first above written. John Kendricke. Sealed, pronounced and deli∣vered by the said Iohn Kendricke, as his last Will and Testament, in the presence of us, Iohn Skinner. Andrew Kendricke. Thomas Singleton. West from this Church have yee Scolding Alley,Scalding house of Scalding wicke. of old time called Scal∣ding house, or Scalding wicke, because that ground (for the most part) was
then imployed by Poulterers, that dwelled in the high street, from the Stockes Market to the great Conduit. Their Poultrie which they sold at their stalles, were scalded there: the street doth yet beare the name of the Poultrie, and the Powlterers are but lately depar∣ted from thence into other streets, as in∣to Grasse-street, and the ends of S. Ni∣cholas flesh shambles. This Scalding wicke is the farthest part of Broadstreet Ward, and is (by the water called Walbrooke) parted from Cheap Ward. This Broadstreet Ward hath an Alder∣man, with his Deputy, Common Coun∣sellors, ten, Constables, ten; Scavengers, eight; Wardmote inquest, thirteen, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene in London, at seven and twenty pounds, and accounted in the Exchequer after twen∣ty five pounds.
CORNE HILL VVARD. THe next Ward to∣wards the South,Cornehill Ward. is Cornehill VVard: so called of a Corn∣market, time out of mind there holden, and is a part of the principall high street, beginning at the West end of Leaden Hall, stretching downe West on both the sides, by the South end of Finkes lane on the right hand, and by the North end of Bircho∣vers lane, on the left part; of which lanes, to wit, to the middle of them, is of this Ward, and so downe to the Stockes Market; and this is the bounds. The upper or East part of this Ward, and also a part of Limestreet Ward, hath beene (as I said) a Market-place, especi∣ally for corne, and since for all kinde of victuals, as is partly shewed in Lime-street Ward. It appeareth of record, that in the yeere 1522. the Rippiers of Rie and o∣ther places, sold their fresh Fish in Lea∣den Hall Market, upon Cornehill; but forraigne Butchers were not admitted there to sell flesh, till the yeere 1533. And it was enacted,Flesh Market at Leaden hall, and alte∣ration of prises in short time. that Butchers should sell their Biefe not above a halfe penny the pound; and Mutton, halfe penny, halfe farthing: which act being devised for the great commodity of the Realme, (as it was then thought) hath since proved farre otherwise: For before that time, a fat Oxe was sold at London, for 26. s. 8. d. at the most: a fat Wea∣ther for 3. s. 4. d. a fat Calfe the same price; a fat Lambe for 12. d. pieces of Biefe weighed two pounds and a halfe at the least; yea, three pound or better, for a penny, on every Butchers stall in this Citie; and of those pieces of Biefe, thirteene or foureteen for twelve pence: fat Mutton for eight pence the quarter, and one hundred weight of Biefe for 4. s. 8. d. at the dearest. What the price is now, I neede not to set downe: many men thought the same act to rise in price, by reason that Grasiers knew or supposed what weight every their beasts contained, and so rai∣sing their price thereafter, the Butcher could be no gainer, but by likewise rai∣sing his price. The number of Butchers then in the Citie and Suburbs, was ac∣counted sixe score, of which every one killed 6. Oxen a peece weekely: which is in 46. weekes, 33120. Oxen, or 720. Oxen weekely. The forraigne Butchers (for a long time) stood in the high street of Lime-street Ward, on the North side, twice every weeke; viz. Wednesday and Sa∣turday, and were some gaine to the Te∣nants, before whose doores they stood, and into whose houses they set their blockes and stalles: but that advantage being espied, they were taken into Lea∣den Hall, there to pay for their standing to the Chamber of London. Thus much for the Market upon Cornehill. The chiefe Ornaments in Cornehill Ward,Standard of Thames water by Leaden hall are these: First, at the East end thereof, in the middle of the high street, and at the parting of foure wayes, have ye a water-standard, placed in the yeere 1582. in manner following: A certain German, named Peter Morris, having made an artificiall Forcier for that pur∣pose, conveyed Thames water in pipes of lead, over the steeple of Saint Mag∣nus Church, at the North end of Lon∣don Bridge, and from thence into divers mens houses in Thames street, new Fish-street, and Grasse-street, up to the north-west corner of Leaden Hall, the highest
ground of all the Citie,The high∣est ground of the Citie of Lon∣don. where the waste of the maine pipe rising into this Stan∣dard, (provided at the charges of the Citie) with foure spouts, did at every tyde run (according to covenant) foure wayes, plentifully serving to the com∣modity of the inhabitants neere adjoy∣ning in their houses, and also cleansed the Chanels of the street toward Bishops-gate, Aldgate, the Bridge, and the Stocks Market; but now no such matter, whose default I know not. Then have ye a faire Conduit, of sweet water, castellated in the midst of that Ward and street. This Conduit was first builded of stone, in the yeere 1282. by Henry Wallis,The Tun upon Cornehill a prison∣house for night-wal∣kers. Maior of London, to be a prison for night-walkers, and o∣ther suspicious persons, and was called the Tunne upon Cornehill, because the same was builded somewhat in fashion of a Tunne, standing on the one end. To this prison,Temporal men pu∣nish spiri∣tuall per∣sons for inconti∣nency. the night Watches of this Citie committed not onely night-walkers, The Bi∣shop com∣plaineth. but also other persons, as well spirituall as temporall, whom they sus∣pected of incontinencie, and punished them according to the customes of this Citie: but complaint thereof being made,The King forbids the Laity for puni∣shing the Clergy men. about the yeere of Christ, 1297. King Edward the first writeth to his Ci∣tizens thus: Edward by the grace of God, &c. where∣as Richard Gravesend, Bishop of Lon∣don, hath shewed unto us, that by the great Charter of England, the Church hath a priviledge, that no Clerke should be impri∣soned by a Lay-man, without our comman∣dement, and breach of peace; which not∣withstanding, some Citizens of London, upon meere spight, doe enter in their Watches into Clerks chambers, and then (like Felons) carry them to the Tunne, which Henry le Wallis, sometime Maior, built for night-walkers. Wherefore wee will that this our commandement be proclaimed in a full Hoy∣stings, and that no Watch hereafter enter in∣to any Clerks chamber, under the forfeit of 30. pound. Dated at Carlile, the 18. of March, the 25. of our Reigne. More,Citizens of London breake up the Tun upō Cornhil I read that about the yeere of Christ, 1299. the 27. of Edward the first, certaine principall Citizens of London; to wit, T. Romane, Richard Glou∣cester, Nicholas Faringdon, Adam Heling∣bury, T. Saly, Iohn Dunstable, Richard Ashwy, Iohn Wade, and William Stortford, brake up this prison called the Tunne, and tooke out certaine prisoners, for the which they were sharply punished, by long imprisonment, and great fines. It cost the Citizens (as some have writ∣ten) more than 20000.Tho Wal∣singham. Markes, which they were amerced in, before William de March, Treasurer of the Kings Ex∣chequer, to purchase the Kings favour, and the confirmation of their liber∣ties. Also,Citizens of London punished fornicatiō and adul∣tery in Priests and other, without partiality. that in the yeere 1383. the se∣venth of Richard the second, the Citi∣zens of London taking upon them the rights that belonged to their Bishops, first imprisoned such women aswere ta∣ken in fornication or adultery, in the said Tunne; and after, bringing them forth to the sight of the World, they caused their heads to be shaven, after the manner of Theeves, whom they na∣med Appellators, and so to be led about the Citie, in sight of all the inhabitants, with Trumpets and Pipes sounding be∣fore them, that their persons might be the more largely knowne: Neither did they spare such kind of men a whit the more, but used them as hardly, saying; They abhorred not only the negligence of their Prelates, but also detested their avarice, that studied for money, omit∣ted the punishment limited by Law, and permitted those that were found guilty, to live favourably by their fines. Wherefore they would themselves, they said, purge their Citie from such filthinesse, lest through Gods venge∣ance, either the Pestilence or Sword should happen to them, or that the Earth should swallow them. Last of all to be noted, I reade in the charge of the Wardmote inquest in every Ward in this Citie,Priests pu∣nished in the Tnn upō Cornhil forced to forsweare this City. these words: If there bee any Priest in service within the Ward, which be∣fore-time hath beene set in the Tunne in Cornehill for his dishonesty, and hath forsworne the Citie, all such shall bee pre∣sented. Thus much for the Tunne in Cornhill have I read. Now, for the punishment of Priests, in my youth, one note and no more. Iohn Atwod, Draper, dwelling in the
Parish of Saint Michael upon Cornehill, directly against the Church, having a proper woman to his wife, such an one as seemed the holiest amongst a thou∣sand, had also a lusty Chauntry Priest of the said Parish Church, repairing to his house, with the which Priest, the said Atwod would sometime after sup∣per play a game at Tables for a pint of Ale. It chanced on a time, having haste of worke, and his game proving long, he left his wife to play it out, and went downe to his shop: but returning to fetch a pressing-iron, he found such play (to his misliking) that hee forced the Priest to leap out at a window, over the Penthouse into the street, and so to run to his lodging in the Church-yard. At∣wod and his wife were soone reconciled, so that he would not suffer her to be cal∣led in question;A Priest punished for leche∣rie. but the Priest being apprehended and committed, I saw his punishment to be thus: He was on three Market dayes conveyed thorow the high street and Markets of the Citie, with a paper on his head, wherein was written his trespasse. The first day hee rode in a Carry; the second, on a horse, his face to the horse taile; the third, led betwixt twaine, and every day rung with Basons, and proclamations made of his fact at every turning of the streets, and also before Iohn Atwods Stall, and the Church doore of his Service, where hee lost his Chauntry of twenty Nobles the yeere, and was banished the Citie for ever. By the West side of the foresaid pri∣son, A faire Well in Cornhill. then called the Tun, was a faire Well of Spring water, curbed round with hard stone:The Tun upon Corn∣hill made a Conduit of sweet water. but in the yeere 1401. the said Prison-house called the Tunne, was made a Cesterne for sweet water, conveyed by pipes of Lead from Ty∣borne, and was from thenceforth called the Conduit upon Cornehill.Cage, stocks and pillory in Cornhill. Then was the Well plancked over, and a strong prison made of Timber, called a Cage, with a paire of Stocks therein, set upon it;Bakers, Millers, Bauds, Scolds, & common Iurors for rewards, punished on the pillory. and this was for night-walkers. On the top of which Cage was placed a Pillorie, for the punishment of Bakers, offending in the assise of bread; for Millers stealing of Corne at the Mill; for Bawds, Scolds, and other offen∣ders. As in the yeere 1468. the 7. of Ed. 4. divers persons, being common Iurors, such as at Assises were forsworne for re∣wards, or favour of parties, were judged to ride from Newgate to the Pillorie in Cornhill, with Miters of paper on their heads, there to stand, and from thence againe to Newgate, and this Iudgement was given by the Maior of London. In the yeere 1509. the first of Henry the 8. Darby, Smith, and Simson, Ring∣leaders of false inquests in London, rode about the Citie with their faces to the horses tailes, and papers on their heads, and were set on the Pillorie in Cornehill, and after brought againe to Newgate, where they dyed for very shame,Ring-lea∣ders of in∣quests will prffer their ser∣vice, and bend eve∣ry way for gaine. saith Robert Fabian. A Ring-leader of In∣quests, as I take it, is he, that making a gainefull occupation thereof, will ap∣peare upon Nisi prius's ere hee be war∣ned, or procure himselfe to be warned to come on by a Tallis.Carefull choice of Iurors in to be had a man de∣rected, & that had sworne foolishly against his brother, is not to bee admitted a cōmon Iuror, ne∣ther But∣cher not Surgeon is to be admitted. Hee will also pro∣cure himselfe to be Fore-man, when hee can, and take upon him to over-rule the rest to his opinion: such an one shall be laboured by plaintifes and defendants, not without promise of rewards; and therefore to be suspected of a bad con∣science. I would wish a more carefull choice of Iurors to bee had: for I have knowne a man carted, rung with Ba∣sons, and banished out of Bishopsgate Ward, and afterward, in Aldgate Ward admitted to be Constable, a grand Iu∣rie-man, and Foreman of their Ward∣mote inquest. What I know of the like, or worse men, preferred to the like of∣fices, I forbeare to write, but wish to be reformed. The foresaid Conduit upon Cornehill was in the yeer 1475. inlarged by Robert Drope,Conduit on Cornehill inlarged. Draper, Maior, that thē dwelt in that Ward, he increased the Cestern of this Conduit with an east end of stone, and castellated it in comely manner. In the yeere 1546. Sir Martin Bowes, Maior, dwelling in Lumbard street, and having his back gate opening into Corn∣hill, against the said Conduit, minded to have inlarged the Cesterne thereof with a West end, like as Robert Drope before had done towards the East. View and measure of the plot was ta∣ken for this worke: but the Pillory and Cage beeing removed, they found
the ground planked, and the Well a∣foresaid worne out of memory, which Well they renued and restored to use; it is since made a Pumpe: they set the Pillorie somewhat west from the Well, and so this worke ceased. On the North side of this street, from the East unto the West, have ye divers faire houses for Merchants and others; amongst the which, one large house is called the Wey house,The wey-house or Kings beame up∣on Cornhill. where Merchandi∣ses brought from beyond the Seas, are to be weighed at the Kings beame. This House hath a Master, and under him foure Master Porters, with Porters un∣der them; they have a strong Cart, and foure great Horses, to draw and carry the wares from the Merchants houses to the Beame, and backe againe. Sir Tho. Lovell, Knight, builded this house, with a faire front of Tenements toward the Street, all which hee gave to the Grocers of London, himselfe being free of the Citie, and a Brother of that Company. Then have ye the said Finkes lane, the South end of which lane on both the sides, is in Cornehill Ward. Then next is the Royall Exchange,The Burse upon Corn∣hill, or the Royall Ex∣change. ere∣cted in the yeere 1566. after this order, viz. Certaine houses upon Cornehill, and the like upon the backe thereof, in the Ward of Broadstreet, with three Alleys; the first called Swan Alley,Swan Alley. opening in∣to Cornehill;New Alley. the second, New Alley, passing thorow out of Cornehill into Broadstreet Ward, over against S. Bar∣tholomew lane;S. Christo∣phers Alley. the third, S. Christophers Alley, opening into Broadstreet Ward, and into Saint Christophers Parish, con∣taining in all 80. housholds;Houshol∣ders dis∣placed for building of the Burse. were first purchased by the Citizens of London, for more than 3532. pounds, and were sold for 478. pounds, to such persons as should take them downe, and carry them thence; also the ground or plot was made plaine at the charges of the Citie,The Citie charged with buil∣dings of the Burse. and then possession thereof was by certaine Aldermen (in name of the whole Citizens) given to Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, agent to the Queens Highnesse, there-upon to build a Burse, or place for Merchants to assem∣ble in, at his owne proper charges: and hee, on the seventh of Iune, laying the first stone of the foundation, beeing Bricke, accompanied with some Alder∣men, every of them laid a piece of gold, which the workemen tooke up, and forthwith followed upon the same such diligence, that by the moneth of No∣vember, in the yeere 1567. the same was covered with slate, and shortly after fully finished. In the yeere 1570. on the 23. of Ia∣nuary, Queene Elizabeth came to the Burse. the Queenes Majestie, attended with her Nobility, came from her house at the Strand, called Sommerset House, and entred the Citie by Temple-Barre, through Fleet-street, Cheape, and so by the North side of the Burse, through Three-needle street, to Sir Thomas Gres∣hams house in Bishopsgate street, where she dined. After dinner, her Majestie returning through Cornehill, entred the Burse on the South side, and after shee had viewed every part thereof above the ground; especially the Pawne, which was richly furnished with all sorts of the finest wares in the Citie: she caused the same Burse,The Burse called the Royall Exchange. by an Herauld and a Trumpet, to be proclaimed the Royall Exchange, and so to bee called from thence-forth, and not otherwise. Next adjoyning to this Royall Ex∣change, remaineth one part of a large stone house, and is now called the Castle, of such a signe at a Taverne doore; there is a passage thorow out of Cornehill into Three-needle street: the other part of the said stone house was taken downe, for enlarging the Royall Exchange. This stone house was said of some to have bin a Church, whereof it had no proporti∣on. Of others, a Iewes house, as though none but Iewes had dwelt in stone houses: but that opinion is without warrant. For beside the strong building of stone houses, against invasion of theeves in the night, when no watches were kept: In the first yeere of Richard the first, (to prevent the casualties of fire, which of∣ten had hapned in the Citie, when the houses were builded of timber, and co∣vered with Reed or straw,The cause of stone houses builded in London. Henry Fitz Alwine being Maior) it was decreed, that from thenceforth, no man should build within the Citie, but of stone, untill a certaine heighth, and to cover the same building with slate, or burnt tile. This was the very cause of such
stone buildings, whereof many have re∣mained till our time, that for gaining of ground they have been taken down, and in place of some one of them, being low (as but 2. stories above the ground) many houses of 4. or 5. stories high are placed. From this stone house downe to the Stockes, are divers large houses, especi∣ally for height, for Merchants and Ar∣tificers. On the South side of this high street, is the Parish Church of Saint Peter up∣on Cornehill,Parish Church of S. Peter upon Cornhill. which seemeth to be of an ancient building, but not so ancient as fame reporteth; for it hath beene lately repaired, if not all new builded, except the steeple, which is ancient. The roofe of this Church, and glasing, was finished in the reigne of Edward the fourth, as appeareth by Armes of No∣blemen, and Aldermen of London then living. There remaineth in this Church a Table, wherein it is written, I know not by what authority, but of no late hand; that King Lucius founded the same Church, to bee an Archbishops Sea, Metropolitane and chiefe Church of his Kingdome, and that it so endured the space of foure hundred yeeres, unto the comming of Augustine the Monke. Now, because many have urged it very earnestly to me, to let them be fur∣ther acquainted therewith: I have here inserted the same verbatim, as it is there recorded in the Table. A Copie taken out of the Table, fast chained in S. Peters Church on Cornehill. BE it knowne unto all men, that the yeeres of our Lord God, C. lxxix. Lucius, the first Christian King of this Land, then called Brytaine, founded the first Church in London, that is to say, the Church of Saint Peter upon Cornhill. And he founded there an Arch-bishops See, and made that Church the Metropolitane and chiefe Church of this Kingdome: and so endured the space of CCCC. yeeres, unto the comming of S. Austin, the Apostle of England, the which was sent into this Land by S. Gregory, the Doctor of the Church, in the time of King Ethelbert. And then was the Archbishops See and Pall removed from the foresaid Church of Saint Peter upon Cornehill, unto Dereberni∣am, that now is called Canturbury, and there remaineth to this day. And Millet, Monke, the which came into the Land with S. Austen, was made the first Bishop of Lon∣don, & his See was made in Pauls Church. And this Lucius King, was the first foun∣der of Saint Peters Church upon Corne∣hill. And he reigned in this Land after Brute, a M. C C. Xlv. yeeres. and the yeeres of our Lord God, a C. xxiiij. Luci∣us was crowned King, and the yeeres of his reigne were Lxxvij. yeeres. And hee was (after some Chronicle) buried at London: And (after some Chronicle) he was buried at Glowcester, in that place where the Or∣der of S. Francis standeth now. Ioceline of Furneis writeth, that Thean or Theon, the first Archbishop of London in the reigne of Lucius, builded the said Church, by the aide of Ciran, chiefe Butler to King Lucius;Library  S.  upon , now a Gram schoole. and also that El∣vanus, the second Archbishop, builded a Library to the same adjoyning, and coverted many of the Druides, learned men in the Pagan law, to Christianity. William Harrison, discoursing hereon more at large,Out of the descri∣ptiō of ∣taine, writ∣ten by VVilliam Harrison. discoursing hereon more at large, hath these very words: There is a Controversie (faith hee) moved among our Historiographers, whether the Church that Lucius buil∣ded at London, stood at Westminster, or in Cornehill. For, there is some cause, why the Metropolitane Church should be thought to stand where Saint Peters now doth, by the space of foure hundred and odde yeeres, before it was removed to Canturbury by Austin the Monke, if a man would leane to one side, without any conference of the asseverations of the other. But herein (as I take it) there lurketh some scruple: for, beside that S. Peters Church stood in the East end of the Citie, and that of Apollo in the west, the word Cornehill, a denomination gi∣ven of late (to speake of) to one street, may easily be mistaken for Thorney. For, as the word Thorney proceedeth from the Saxons, who called the West end of the Citied by that name, where Westminster now standeth, because of the wildernesse and bushinesse of the soile: so doe I not read of any street in London
called Cornehill,No street in London called Corn∣hill, before the Nor∣mans Conquest. before the Conquest of the Normans. Wherefore, I hold with them, which make Westminster to be the place, where Lucius builded his Church, upon the ruines of thatThere were three Archfla∣mines, 1. at London, the 2. at Yorke, the 3. at Caer∣lbeon upon the River Vske, buil∣ded by Be∣linus, and called Gla∣morgantia, now Che∣ster, all de∣stroyed by Lucius, be∣cause they were ere∣cted to A∣pollo, Mars and Miner∣va: hee builded 3. other Churches in their stead. Fla∣mine, 264. yeeres (as Malmesbury saith) before the comming of the Saxons, and 411. before the arrivall of Augustine. Read also his Appendix in lib. 4. Pontif. where he noteth the time of the Saxons in the 444. of Grace, and of Augustine in 596. of Christ, which is a manifest accompt, though some Copies have 499. for the one, but not without mani∣fest corruption and error. And now to returne where we left: True it is, that a Library there was per∣taining to this Parish Church, of old time builded of stone, and of late re∣paired with Bricke, by the Executors of Sir Iohn Crosby, Alderman, as his Armes on the South end doe wit∣nesse. This Library hath bin (of late time) to wit, within these 70. yeeres, well furnished of Books, Iohn Leyland view∣ed and commended them; but now those Bookes are gone,Io. Leyland. and the place is occupied by a Schoolemaster, and his Vsher, for a number of Scholars lear∣ning their Grammar rules, &c. Not∣withstanding, before that time, a Grammar Schoole had beene kept in this Parish, as appeareth in the yeere, 1425. I read,Grammar Schooles comman∣ded by Parlia∣ment. that Iohn Whitby was Rector, and Iohn Steward Schoolemaster there: and in the 25. of Henry the sixth it was enacted by Parliament, that 4. Gram∣mar Schooles in London, should bee maintained, viz. In the Parishes of Alhallowes in Thames street: Saint An∣drew in Oldborne: Saint Peters upon Cornehill; and Saint Thomas of Acres. Monuments of the dead in this Church defaced. I read that Hugh Waltham, Nicholas Pricot, Mercer, Alderman, Richard Manhall; 1503. VVilliam Kingstone, Fishmonger, gave his Tenements called the Horse∣mill in Grasse-street, to this Church, and was there buried, about the yeere, 1298. Iohn Vnisbrugh, Poulter, 1410. Iohn Law. Also, Peter Mason Taylor, gave to this Church seven pound starling yeer∣ly for ever, out of his Tenements in Colechurch Parish, and deceased about the yeere, 1416. Iohn Foxton founded a Chauntry there. A Brotherhood of Saint Peter was in this Church established by Henry the fourth, the fourth of his reigne. VVilliam Brampton, and William Ask∣ham, Fishmongers and Aldermen, were chiefe procurers thereof, for the Fish∣mongers of late buried there Sir William Bowyer, Maior, 1543. Sir Henry Huberthorne, Maior, 1546. Sir Christopher Morice, Master Gunner of England to King Henry the eight. Edward Elrington, Esquire, chiefe Butler to Edward the sixth. Thomas Gardener, Grocer. Justice Smith, and other beside.A falte ancient Tombe for Sir VVilli∣am Bowyer in the south Ile of the Quire. In the yeere of Iesus Christ's Incarnation, One thousand, five hundred, forty and foure, The 22. day of April, by just computation; In this place was buried with great honour, VVhich proved a man Meet to bee a Governour, For the Common-wealth of this high and famous Citie: Called Sir William Bowyer, Lord of the Maioralty, Which departed not with finding great calamity: And pray wee to GOD, to grant his Soule mercy. O London, if thou looke to the Lacedemonies, There to finde Lycurgus that noble and kinde King; Or if thou seeke for Ciceroes men most of prize, Or if thou apply thee to have all the whole desiring Of Amphyon, Orpheus, or of Mecaenas demeaning a Seeke no further to finde, for here hee is buried, VVhich had all their properties for Londons good ordering. Bee wee then of his honourable degree well conceiving,
For his acts for ever be registred in Londons meaning. Here lyeth Sir Henry Huberthorne,A faire Marble stone un∣der the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble, plated about. sometime Lord Maior and Merchant-taylor of this Citie of London, and Dame Elizabeth his Wife. Hee departed this life, &c. And the said Dame Elizabeth left this transitory life in Anno Domi∣ni, 1551. Hereunder lieth buried William Messe of this Citie,A faire plated stone, neere to the other. Whil'st he lived, free of the Grocers Company, And Julian his wife, to whom 24. yeeres married was he, By whom God sent him five sonnes and daughters three, And to Gods will his heart was alwaies bent, So did his death shew a life well spent. Here this is written, that other may remember, His godly departure from this world the 26. of September. In the same Vault with Sir William Bowyers body, is Mr. Alderman VVal∣thals also laid, but no Monument as yet made for him, beside his Funerall Ban∣ners. The Charities of the Parish of Saint Peter upon Cornehill. Launcelot Tompson of London, Draper, was buried in this Parish Church, and gave 20. l. for the yeerely preaching of five Sermons, untill the money should be fully run out. Which Sermons were all preached by Doctor Ashbold, Parson there. Also he gave 100. l. to the Dra∣pers Company, and they to allow 5. l. yeerely for ever, for Bread and Coales for the poore of the said parish. Boniface Tatam of London, Vintner, buried in the said Parish the third of February, 1606. gave 40. s. yeerely to the Parson, for preaching foure Ser∣mons every yeere, so long as the Lease of the Marmaid in Cornehill, (a Taverne so called) shall endure. He gave also to the poore of the Parish thirteene penny loaves every Sunday, during the fore∣said Leafe. Mr. William Walthal, late of London, Alderman, buried in the said Parish Church the second of September, 1606. gave twenty pound to the stocke of the Parish. Next, he gave forty Markes, for forty Sermons to be preached in the said Church. Also hee gave two hun∣dred pounds, to bee imployed as fol∣loweth: Tenne young men, trading and dwelling in the Parish, with two suffi∣cient sureties, each man, from foure yeeres to foure yeeres, to enjoy the be∣nefit thereof. And every one of them, for the time being, having the usage of the said money, is to pay yeerely to the good of the poore of the said Parish, for bread and coales, the summe of thir∣teene shillings foure pence, which a∣mounteth in the whole, to the summe of six pounds, thirteene shillings, foure pence. Hee hath also allowed to the Churchwardens and Overseers for the poore, five shillings yeerely among them, to see his good meaning effectu∣ally performed. Robert Warden, of London, Poulter, buried in the same Church the 18. of November, 1609. hath given out of one Messuage or Tenement, lying and being in Bishopsgate street, in the said Parish, the summe of three pounds twelve shil∣lings, yeerely for ever, viz. 52. shillings in wheaten bread every Sunday, for the poore of the Parish, 10. s. a yeere for two Sermons, to bee preached to the Company of Poulters, 4. s. for the Clerks attendance at the said Sermons, and 2. s. a yeere for the Sexton, allow∣ed by the said Company. Mr. Iohn Malin, Physician, buried in the said Church the 25. of May, 1613. gave to the poore of this Parish the sum of 40. l. to bee weekly bestowed on them, on Friday mornings for ever. Then have ye the Parish Church of S. Michael the Archangell:The Pa∣rish Church of S. Mi∣chael on Cornhill. for the An∣tiquity thereof, I finde that Alnothus the Priest gave it to the Abbot and Co∣vent of Covesham; Reynold Abbot, and the Covent there, did grant the same to Sparling the Priest, in all measures, as he and his Predecessors before had held it: to the which Sparling also, they gran∣ted all their Lands which they there had, except certaine Lands which Or∣gar le Prowde held of them, and paid two shillings yeerely. For the which grant,
the said Sparling should yeerely pay one Marke of rent to the said Abbot of Cove∣sham, and finde him his lodging, salt, water, and fire, when hee came to Lon∣don; this was granted 1133. about the 34. of Henry the first. Thus much for antiquity. Of later time I finde, that Elizabeth Peake, Widdow, gave the Patronage or gift of this Benefice to the Drapers in London: shee lyeth buried in the Bel∣frey, 1518. her Monument yet remai∣neth. This hath beene a faire and beau∣tifull Church, but of late yeeres, since the surrender of their lands to Edward the sixth, greatly blemished by the buil∣ding of foure Tenements on the North side thereof, towards the high street, in place of a greene Church-yard, where∣by the Church is darkened and other waies annoyed. The faire new Steeple or Bell-Tower of this Church, was be∣gun to bee builded in the yeere, 1421. which being finished,This was accounted the best Ring of 6. Bels to be rung by 6. men that was in England for harmonie, sweetnesse of sound and tune. and a faire ring of five Bels therein placed; a sixth Bell was added, and given by Iohn VVhitwel, Isabel his wife, and VVilliam Rus, or Rous Alderman and Goldsmith, about the yeere, 1430. which Bell named Rus, (nightly at eight of the clocke, and o∣therwise for Knels, and in Peales, rung by one man, by the space of 160. yeeres) of late over-haled by foure or five at once, hath been thrice broken, and new cast, within the space of ten yeeres, to the charges of that Parish, more than 100. Markes. And here note of this Steeple, as I have oft heard my Father report.Lightning and thun∣der, with ugly shaps seen in S. Michaels Steeple. Vpon Saint Iames night, certaine men in the Loft next under the Bells, ringing of a Peale, a Tempest of Lightning and Thunder did arise, and an ugly shapen sight appeared to them, comming in at the South window, and lighted on the North, for feare whereof, they all fell downe, and lay as dead for the time, let∣ting the Bels ring and cease of their own accord. When the Ringers came to themselves,The print of clawes to be seen in hard stone. they found certaine stones of the North window to bee razed and scrat, as if they had been so much Butter printed with a Lyons clawe: the same stones were fastned there againe, and so remaine till this day. I have seen them oft, and have put a feather or small stick into the holes, where the clawes had en∣tred 3. or 4. inches deepe. At the same time, certain maine tim∣ber posts at Queene Hith,Pulpit-Crosse in Pauls Church-yard over∣turned. were scrat and cleft from the top to the bottome, and the Pulpit Crosse in Pauls Church-yard was likewise scrat, cleft, and overturned. One of the Ringers lived in my youth, whom I have oft heard to verifie the same to be true; but to returne. William Rus was a speciall Benefactor to this Church, his Armes yet remaine in the Windowes. VVilliam Comerton, Simon Smith, Wal∣ter Belengham were buried there, and founded Chaunteries there. Iohn Grace, 1439. Robert Drope, Maior, buried on the North side the Quire, under a faire Tombe of Grey Marble, 1485. he gave to poore Maides marriages of that Pa∣rish twenty pound, to the poore of that Ward ten pound; Shirts and smockes three hundred, and gownes of broad-cloth, one hundred, &c. Iane his wife, matching with Edward Gray, Vicount Lisle, was buried by her first husband 1500. She gave 90. pound in money to the beautifying of that Church, and her great Messuage with the appurtenance, which was by her Executors, W. Caple and other, 1517. the ninth of Henry the eighth assured to Iohn Wardroper, Parson, T. Clerke, W. Dixson, and Iohn Murdon, Wardens of the said Church, and their successors for ever, they to keepe yeerely for her an Obit, or Anniversary; to be spent on the poore, and otherwise, in all three pounds, the rest of the profits to be im∣ployed in reparation of the Church. In the 34. yeere of Henry the eighth, Edward Stephan, Parson, T. Spencer, P. Guntar, and E. Grouch, Churchwardens, granted to T. Lodge, a Leafe for three∣score yeeres of the said great Messuage, with the appurtenances, which were called the Lady Lisles Lands, for the rent of eight pound, thirteene shillings, foure pence the yeere. The Parishio∣ners since gave it up as Chauntry land, and wronged themselves; also the said Robert Drope and Lady Lisle (notwith∣standing their liberality to that Church and Parish) their Tombe is pulled down no Monument remaineth of them.
Peter Houghton, late Alderman, is layd in their Vault, 1569. Robert Fabian Alderman, that wrote and published a Chronicle of England, and of France, was buried there, 1511. with this Epitaph. Like as the day his course doth consume, And the new morrow springeth again as fast, So man and woman by natures custome, This life to passe, at last in earth are cast, Injoy, & sorrow, which heretheirtime do wast Never in one state, but in course Transitory, So full of change, is of this world the glory. His Monument is gone: Richard Gar∣nam, 1527. buried there. Edmond Trindle, and Robert Smith. William Dickson, and Margret his wife, buried in the Cloister under a faire Tombe now defaced. Thomas Stow my Grandfather, about the yeere, 1526. and Thomas Stow my Father, 1559. Iohn Tolus, Alderman, 1548. he gave to Iohn Willoby,Iohn Tolus his gift to the church not per∣formed but con∣cealed. Parson of that Church, to Thomas Lodge, G. Hind, P. Bolde, Church-wardens, and to their succes∣sors (towards the reparation of that Church, and reliefe of the poore for e∣ver) his Tenement, with the appurte∣nances in the Parish of Saint Michael, which hee had lately purchased of Alve∣ry Randalph, of Badlesmeere in Kent: but the Parish never had the gift, nor heard thereof, by the space of 40. yeeres after: such was the conscience of G. Barne, and other the Executors to conceale it to themselves, and such is the negligence of the Parishioners, that (being infor∣med thereof) make no claime there∣unto. Philip Gunter, that was Alderman for a time, and gave 400. pound to bee discharged thereof, was buried in the Cloyster, about the yeere 1582. and Anne his wife, &c. Thomas Haughton father to the said Peter Haughton. Francis Beneson, and William Towerson. Philip Gunter,A han∣some Mo∣nument in the wall of the Chan∣cell, the south side. Skinner, sometime Alder∣man of this City, departed this life the 15. day of February, 1582. and lyeth buried in the Cloyster of this Church: who married Anne, Daughter of Hen∣ry Barley, of Albery, in the County of Hereford, Esquire; and had issue by her 11. Sonnes, and foure daughters. He left good maintenance for two Sermons yeerely for ever in this Church: the one on the 15. day of March, the other the 25. of December. Here lyeth buried the body of Peter Houghton,A very faire Mo∣nument richly gu∣ded, in the Chancell wall on the Nor side. of London Alderman: he was free of the Grocers Company, a Mer∣chant of the Staple in England, and a Merchant Adventurer. Hee was one of the Sheriffes of this City, in An. 1593. and dyed the last day of December, 1596. Hee gave to the foure Hospitals (that is to say) Saint Bartholomewes, Christ Church, St. Thomas and Bridewell, 600. pound, equally to bee divided be∣tweene them. Hee gave also to the Gro∣cers Company 400. pound to bee lent to eight young men of the same Company (gratis) from two yeeres, to two yeeres, for ever. Which 1000. pound was paid by Iohn Vernon, Merchant-Taylor, ac∣cordingly. He had to wife Mary Hough∣ton, who sithence married with Sir Tho∣mas Vavasor, Knight Marshall. Hee had children by her, two Sonnes, named Hatton, and Peter, who dyed young; and two Daughters, Mary and Eliza∣beth. Mary was married to Sir Iames Scudamore, Knight, and Elizabeth to Sir Henry Bedingfield, Knight. Here lyeth buried (by a desired promise made to Alderman Houghton while hee li∣ved) the body of Iohn Vernon,His Pi∣cture stan∣deth alo on the o∣ther Mo∣nument. Mer∣chant-Taylor: who was Master of the said Company, in An. 1609. And hee was also a Merchant of the Staple in England. He dyed the day of An. Dom. Nemo ante obitum felix. Here in the Vault lyeth buried the bodies of of Iohn Taylor,In the South Ile of the Quire a hansome Monumēts in the wa. Citizen and Draper of London, and Constance his wife, one of the Daughters and Coheires of Regi∣nald Wooddeson, of Alresford in Hampshire, Gent. They had issue be∣tween them three Sonnes, Iohn, who dyed young, Robert and Iohn. Hee departed this life the 4. day of April, 1597. be∣ing about the age of 63. yeeres: and she, being the age of 67. the 29. of October,
1614. Votum S. Pauli. Phil. 1. Adepti. In March; 1588. was buried in this place,In the same wall lower, a hansome small Mo∣nument. Alexander Every, Merchant but 40. yeeres of age, Whose godly gifts, by will, are warrants of Gods grace In him. By whom, thinke on thy selfe, and on the stage Thou stand'st, and measure it, and other worldly things: As streames that swiftly slide downe from their springs. An. Dom. 1570. primo Feb. Here lyeth Francis Benneson, a Citizen was hee,A plated stone in the same Ile on the ground. A Merchant Adventurer also, and of the Mystery Of Haberdashers Company. A man of honest name, Who here on earth to feare of God, his vitll dayes did frame. Two wives hee had, the first of them in Antwerpe borne she was; The other hee a Widdow left, so God brought it to passe. His Soule (no doubt) doth now remaine with God among the rest Of other worthy Christians, who evermore are blest. Hereunder lyeth buried the body of the wor∣shipfull, A faire small Mo∣nument on a Pillar right a∣gainst the Pulpit. John Harby, Citizen and Skin∣ner of London, and free of the Merchant Adventurers Company, for Muscovia, Spaine, and the East Iudiaes: who had two wives, Anne Mording, Widdow, by whom he had issue foure Sonnes, and one Daughter, viz. Thomas, Francis, John, William, and Emme. And lastly he married with Anne Saltonstal, Daughter to Sir Richard Saltonstall, Knight, sometime Lord Maior of this City: by whom hee had two Sonnes, Ri∣chard and Daniel; which John Harby after 74. yeeres, departed this life the 15. day of April, 1610. Expecting a joyfull resurrection by Iesus Christ. Hic dormivit in Christo Joannes Cowper, Armiger;A faire Tombe in the Cloy∣ster South. Vxorem habuit Elizabeth Ironside ante se mortuam. Obiit 3. Iu∣nii. An. Dom. 1609. There is a comely Monument,In the wall on the North side of the Chancell. although of no great cost or charge, there placed for Master Laurence Caldwell, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, and Mary his wife. Great pitty it is, that it is no better kept and looked unto, for shortly the inscriptions engraven thereon, will not any way possibly be read, &c. This Parish Church hath on the south side thereof a proper Cloyster,Pulpit-Crosse in S. Michael Church-yard. and a faire Church-yard, with a Pulpit-crosse, not much unlike to that in Pauls Church yard. Sir Iohn Rudstone Maior, caused the same Pulpit-Crosse, in his life time to be builded, the Church-yard to bee enlarged, by ground purchased of the next Parish, and also proper houses to be raised, for lodging of Quire men, such as at that time were assistants to Divine Service, then daily sung by Note, in that Church. The said Io. Rudstone deceased, 1531. and was buried in a Vault under the Pulpit-Crosse: he appointed Sermons to bee preached there, not now perfor∣med. His Tombe before the Pulpit-Crosse is taken thence, with the Tombe of Richard Yaxley, Doctor of physicke to King Henry the eighth and other. The Quire of that Church being dis∣solved, the lodgings of the Quire men were (by the grave Fathers of that time) charitably appointed for receit of anci∣ent decayed parishioners; namely, wid∣dowes, such as were not able to beare the charge of greater rents abroad, which blessed worke of harbouring the harbourlesse,Mat. 2. 5. is promised to be rewar∣ded in the Kingdome of Heaven. Then have ye Birchover lane,Birchovers lane. so called of Birchover, the first builder and owner thereof, now corruptly called Birchin lane, the North halfe whereof is of the said Cornehill Ward, the other part is of Langborne Ward. This lane and the high street neere adjoyning, hath been inhabited (for the most part) with wealthy Drapers, from Birchovers lane on that side the street, downe to the Stockes. In the reigne of Henry the sixth,Vpholders sellers of old stuffe in Cornhill. had yee (for the most part) dwelling there, Frippers or Vp∣holders, that sold apparell and old hous∣hold stuffe. I have read of a Country man, that then having lost his hood in Westminster Hall, found the same in Cornhill, hanged
out to be sold, which hee challenged, but was forced to buy, or goe without it: for their stall (they said) was their market.Popes head Taverne on Cornhil. At that time also, the VVine∣drawer of the Popes-head Taverne, (stan∣ding without the doore in the high street) took the same man by the sleeve, and said, Sir, will you drinke a Pint of VVine?Wine one pint for a penny, & bread gi∣ven free. VVhereunto he answered, A penny spend I may: and so dranke his Pint: for bread nothing did he pay, for that was then allowed free. This Popes-head Taverne, with other houses adjoyning, strongly builded of stone, hath of old time beene all in one, pertaining to some great Estate,The Kings house in Cornhill. or ra∣ther to the King of this Realme, as may be supposed, both by largenesse thereof, and by the Armes; to wit, 3. Leopards passant gardant, which was the whole Armes of England, before the reigne of Edward the third, that quartered them with the Armes of France, three Flower de Luces. These Armes of England,Armes of England supported by Angels supported then betweene two Angels, are faire and largely graven in stone on the fore∣front towards the high street, over the doore or stall of one great house, lately (for many yeeres) possessed by Mr. Phi∣lip Gunter. The Popes-head Taverne is on the backe part thereof, towards the South, as also one other house, called the stone house in Lombard street. Some say this was King Iohn's house; which might so be: for I finde in a written co∣pie of Mathew Paris his Historie, that in the yeere 1232. Henry the third sent Hubert de Burgho,Hubert de Burgho, Earle of Kent, sent into Cornhill. Earle of Kent, to Corn∣hill in London, there to answer all mat∣ters objected against him: where hee wisely acquitted himselfe. The Popes-head Taverne hath a foot-way through, from Cornehill into Lombard street. And downe lower on the high street of Corn∣hill, is there one other way thorow by the Cardinals Hat Taverne,The Cardi∣nals Hat Taverne. into Lombard street. And so let this suffice for Corne∣hill VVard. In which be Governours, an Alderman, his Deputy, Common-Counsellours, foure, or sixe; Consta∣bles, foure; Scavengers, foure; VVard∣mote inquest, 16. and a Beadle: it is charged to the Fifteene at 16. pounds.
LANGBOVRNE VVARD, And Fenny about. LAngbourne Ward, so called,Langbourne Ward, and Fenny about of a long Boorn of sweet wa∣ter, which (of old time) breaking out into Fenne-Church-street, ranne downe the same street, and Lombard street, to the West end of S. Mary Woolnoths Church, where turning South, and breaking into small shares, rils or streams,Shareborne or South borne lane. it left the name of Share∣borne lane, or Southborne lane, (as I have read) because it ranne South to the Ri∣ver of Thames. This Ward beginneth at the West end of Ealdgate Ward, in Fen-Church street, by the Ironmongers Hall, which is on the North side of that street,Culver Al∣ley. at a place called Culver Alley, where sometime was a lane, through the which men went into Limestreet; but that being long since stopped up,Lane stopped up. for suspition of Theeves that lurked there by night, as is shewed in Limestreet Ward; there is now in this said Alley a Tennis Court, &c. Fenne-Church street tooke that name of a Fenny or Moorish ground,Fen-church street. so made by meanes of this Boorne, which passed thorow it; and therefore (untill this day) in the Guild-hall of this Citie, that Ward is called by the name of Lang∣borne, and Fenny about, and not other∣wise: yet others be of opinion, that it tooke that name of Foenum, that is, Hay, sold there, as Grasse-street-tooke the name of Grasse or Herbes there sold. In the midst of this street standeth a small Parish Church,Parish Church of S. Mary & S. Gabriel. called S. Gabriel Fenne-Church, corruptly, Fan-Church. Helming Legget, Esquire, by licence of Edward the third, in the 49. of his reigne, gave one Tenement, with a cur∣telarge thereto belonging, and a garden with an entry thereto leading, unto Sir Iohn Hariot, Parson of Fen-Church, and to his successors for ever; the house to be a Parsonage house; the Garden to be a Church-yard, or burying place for the Parish. Then have ye Lombard street,Lombard street so called be∣fore Ed. 2. so cal∣led of the Longobards, and other Mer∣chants, strangers of divers Nations, assembling there twise every day, of what originall, or continuance, I have not read of record, more than that Ed∣ward the second, in the twelfth of his reigne, confirmed a Messuage sometime belonging to Robert Turke, abutting on Lombard street toward the South, and toward Cornehill on the North, for the Merchants of Florence: which proveth that street to have had the name of Lombard street before the reigne of Ed∣ward the second. The meeting of which Merchants and others there, continued untill the 22. of December, in the yeere 1568. on the which day, the said Mer∣chants began to make their meetings at the Burse, a place then new builded for that purpose, in the ward of Cornehill, and was since by Her Majestie, Queene Elizabeth, named the Royall Exchange. On the North side of this Ward, is Limestreet,Limestreet. one halfe whereof (on both sides) is of this Langborne VVard, and therein on the west side, is the Pewte∣rers Hall,Pewterers Hall. which Company were admit∣ted to be a Brotherhood, in the 13. of Edward the fourth. At the South-west corner of Lime∣street, standeth a faire Parish Church
of S. Dionis called Backe-Church, lately new builded in the reigne of Henry the sixth. Iohn Bugge, Esquire, was a great Benefactor to that worke, as appeareth by his Armes, three water-Budgets, and his Crest, a Morions head, graven in the stone-worke of the Quire, at the upper end, on the North side, where he was buried. Also Iohn Darby, Alderman, added thereunto a faire Ile or Chappell on the South side, and was there buried, about the yeere 1466. He gave (besides sun∣dry ornaments) his dwelling house and others unto the said Church. The Lady wich, widdow to Hugh Wich, sometimes Maior of London, was there buried, and gave Lands for Ser∣mons, &c. Iohn Master, Gent. was by his chil∣dren buried there, 1444. Thomas Britaine. Henry Travers of Maidstone in Kent, Merchant, 1501. Iohn Bond, about 1504. Robert Paget, Merchant-Taylor, one of the Sheriffes 1536. Sir Tho. Curteis, Pewterer, then Fish∣monger, Maior 1557. Sir Iames Harvie, Ironmonger, Mai∣or, 1581. William Peterson, Esquire. William Sherington. Sir Edward Osborne, Cloth-worker, Maior, &c. Thomas Curticius sub Marmore conditus iste,An anci∣ent Mar∣ble Tomb in the North Ile of the Quire, upper-most East∣ward. Quem mundo eripuit Parca severa senem: Quemque suum Cives voluere augere Senatum, Iustitia & gravitas hunc meruere gradum. Purpuriens sic Praeturam gessit in urbe, Ferret ut hoc multum laudis ab officio. Animus huic Consul Sceptroque insignis & ense, Londinium vexit dexteritate bona. Thomam progenuit solumque moestis humanis, Vita adeo fragili sorte fugaxue datur. Vnica neptis avo, est Anna haeres, filia Thomae, Dignaque neptus avo, dignaque nata patre. Stuclea haec nupsit Generoso stemmata certo, Fraeclaroque domi Militiaeque viro. Fumus & umbra sumus, quicquid mortale peribat, Sola manet pietas, quae sine fine viret. Neere unto it is a very goodly Mo∣nument, belonging to Sir Iames Har∣vey, but without any inscription or E∣pitaph. D. D. M. S. Emanuel de Meteren, Mercatori Ant∣werpiensi, A small Monumēt in the wal on the same side. atque inter ordinis ejusdem Belgas Londini, quondam Cos. Des. viro pio, viro docto. Qui rerum in Bel∣gia gest. Historiam opus luculentum & fidei plenum posteris reliquit. Esther de Corput. conjux conjugi libe∣rique ix. parenti optimo P. P. Obiit die 8. Aprilis, Anni CIC. ICC. XII. Cum vixisset An. lxxvj. Mens. 3. Animae super Aethera vivunt. Iacobo Colio G. F. Belgol.On a pil∣lar in the midst of the Chan∣cell. Regis Henrici 8. munere Angl. indignae Mercatori pro∣bo. Qui obiit Ann. Chri. CIC. IC. XCI. suo Lxxiix. Et Elizab. Orteliae, Qui obiit Anno Christi, CIC. IC. XC III. Connubio nuper nunc Tumu∣lo junctis Iac. Colins parentibus pientiss. M. H. F. C. Christo duce, & ossa resurgent. This Tombe of Sir Edward Osborne, Knight,A goodly Monu∣ment in the South Ile of the Quire. sometime Lord Maior of this Noble Citie, who was buried An. Dom. 1591. And of Dame Margaret his se∣cond wife, who married after with M. Baron Clarke, (by whom this Tombe was erected) and was buried, An. Dom. 1602. Mistresse Katharine VVoodward,In the west end of the Church, but on the south side. wid∣dow, having (in her life time) beene a godly, religious, and vertuous Ma∣trone, charitable to the poore, and not spa∣ring of her purse to pious uses: Two wor∣thy Gentlemen (her Executors) have there raised a comely remembrance of her to all posterity.
This Monument was erected for the Wor∣shipfull M. John Hewet, Gent. Citizen and Merchant of London, and free of the Clothworkers Company: who in his life time was loving to all, and pittifull to the poore: witnesse the yeerely pension he hath given for ever, of five pounds to the poore of this Parish. He changed this mortall habitation the third day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 1602. This Charity, and 12. d. beside, gi∣ven every Sunday in bread to the poore, is all that there I understand of. Then by the foure corners (so called of Fen-church street in the East,The foure corners, a place so called, of 4. wayes meeting. Bridge-street on the South, Grasse-street on the North, and Lombard street on the west) in Lombard street is one faire Parish Church,Parish Church of Alhallowes in Lambard street. Lib. Trin. called Alhallowes Grasse-church in Lambard street. I doe so reade it in Evidences of Record, for that the Grasse-Market went downe that way, when that street was farre broader than now it is, being straightned by incroch∣ments. This Church was lately new builded. Iohn Warner, Armorer, and then Grocer, Sheriffe, 1494. builded the South Ile; his sonne Robert Warner, Esquire, fini∣shed it, in the yeere 1516. The Pew∣terers were Benefactors towards the North Ile, &c. The Sleeple or Bel-tow∣er thereof was finished in the yeere 1544. about the thirty and sixth of Hen∣ry the eighth. The faire stone Porch of this Church, was brought from the late dissolved Priory of S. Iohn of Ierusalem by Smithfield, so was the frame of their Bels; but the Bels being bought, were never brought thither, by reason that one old Warner Draper of that Parish de∣ceasing, his son Mark Warner would not performe what his Father had begunne and appointed; so that faire Steeple hath but one Bell, as Friers were wont to use. The Monuments of this Church bee these:A faire Monu∣ment in the wall, at the East end of the North Ile of the Quire. the said Warners, and Iohn Walden, Draper. Memoriae Sacrum. Spe certa in Christo resurgendi, hic requi∣escit Christopherus Tolderney, Armi∣ger, vir prudens, & optimis studiis in∣nutritus: Atque Susanna Vxor, Filia Joannis Alnwici, Generos. Qui cum plures annos fide & amore conjugali con∣cordissimè vixissent; Obiit illa nono die Ianuarii, An. Domini, M. D. CXII. Ille Martii sequentis die 20. Quatuor liberis superstitibus, Christophero & Joanne, Iana, (Roberto Darello de Calehill, Militi enupta) & Eliza∣betha. Here under this stone resteth (in assured hope of a joyfull resurrection) the body of Rebecca Crispe,A very goodly stone pla∣ted, on the ground in the same Ile. Daughter to Iohn Pake of Bromefield in Essex, Gent. and late wife to Nicholas Crispe of Lond. Merchant. She departed this life the 27. day of April, An. Dom. 1616. and in the 37. of her age: Giving to the world (both in her life and death) undoubted testimo∣ny of her faith in Christ Iesus: Having had issue 3. sonnes, and 8. daughters. Here lyeth buried the body of Simō Horse∣poole, In the Chancell a faire stone plated, a∣gainst his Pew dore. free of the Drapers Company: al∣so free of the ancient Wooll-staple; free of the Merchants Adventurers of the old Haunce and Moscovia. He was chosen sheriffe of London, in An. 1591. He married Elizabeth Smith, daughter to Iohn Smith of Cosham, in the County of Wiltshire, Gent. and sister to Tho∣mas Smith, Customer of London. And by her he had issue 3. sons and 3. daugh∣ters, William, Simon and Thomas, Elizabeth married with Alexander King, one of the Queenes Majesties Au∣ditors. Hawys married with Francis Dorington, Merchant of Tripolie. And Ioan, maried with Iohn Whitbrooke, Gent. He dwelt in Grasse-Church street in this Parish, 35. yeeres, and he appointed to this Parish of All Saints, foure pounds and foure shillings every yeere for ever: and also foure pounds and foure shillings to the Parish of Saint Christopher by Cornehill, where hee was borne, and where his Father Iohn Horsepoole (al∣so free of the Drapers Company, and borne in Leicestershire) dwelt, and lyeth bu∣ried: That every Sunday after Morning Service, there bee given to twelve poore people of this Parish, to every one of them one penny loafe of wheaten bread; and al∣so every Sunday to twelve poore people of Saint Christophers Parish, to every one
of them one penny loafe of wheaten bread; and every yeere upon Saint Thomas the Apostles day, to every one of the said 24. poore people, twelve pence in money: and every yeere upon the said Saint Thomas his day, to the two Paris-Clerkes of the said Parises, to every of them for their paines, 13. s. 4. d. and to the two Sex∣tons of the said Parishes, to every of them for their paines, 6. s. 8. d. In performance whereof,Yet li∣ving, and of whom I received these in∣structions. William Horse∣poole, sonne of the said Simon Horse∣poole, hath granted two severall annui∣ties and Rents, charge of foure pounds and foure sillings apiece, out of an house in Corbets Alley in Grasse-Church street, in the Parish of Saint Peter, to certaine parishioners of the said Parishes respectively, and their heires in trust, to the foresaid uses for ever. Hee dyed the 14. day of Ianuary, 1601. Aged 75. yeeres. Vertue is not dead.A faire plated stone ly∣ing by the other. The soule in Heaven, the body here of Izan lies, By her John Edwards good, and by her parents both: She deare to her all three, that living, still she cries, Lay me by them. for other Grave I loath. O God! that heard'st the cry of this thy creature, Make Izans many, in vertue, grace, and feature. As love (in life) eonjoyn'd us once, And God (by death) disjoyn'd us twaine: So love (by death) rejoyn'd our bones, And God (in joy) joyn'd us againe. Stand here firme (God permitting) ever, a patterne,A faire Monumēt erected in the South Ile of the Quire for the same person. a spurre to sacred vertue: In memory of a blessed Matrone heere buri∣ed: Rich in true piety, vertue, and re∣verend modesly, from her Cradle to her Cossin: an ornament (of her sexe) for true constancy in both fortunes: the onely mo∣ther and beauty of her race, in her time, named Izan Wright by her Father, Ed∣wards by her first husband, both of this Parish, and also here buried. Her shining to the vaine world (to whom Adversity is Vice, and Prosperity is Vertue) was eclip∣sed by a second marriage, wherein she de∣ceased the fifth day of March, An. Dom. 1613. Aged about 66. yeeres. Here under this place lyeth buried the body of Thomas Walker,A comey samll Mo∣numeat in the South  of the Quire, East. Citizen and Vint∣ner of London, who deceased the 25. day of Ianuary, 1599. Which said Tho∣mas Walker had two wives, Joane and Mary. By Joane he had issue eight chil∣dren, foure sonnes, and foure daughters. Joane his wife lyeth hereunder buried, who deceased the 29. day of August, 1592. Aetatis suae, 69. Mans life, betimes tryit who shall, Shall find no time in it to trust: Sometime to climbe, sometime to fall, Till life of man be brought to dust. Next is a common Osterie for travel∣lours, called the George, of such a Signe, This is said to have pertained to the Earle Ferrers, and was his London lod∣ging in Lombard street: And that to the yeere 1175. a brother of the said Earle, being there privily slaine in the night, was there throwne down into the dirty street, as I have afore shewed in the Chapter of Night-watches. Next is the Parish Church of S. Ed∣mond the King and Martyr,Parish Church of S.  in Lombard street, by the South corner of Birchover lane. This Church is also called. S. Edmond Grasse-Church, because the said Grasse∣market came downe so low. The Monuments in this Church, are these: Sir Iohn Milborne, Draper, Maior, deceased, 1535. buried there by Dame Ioan and Dame Margaret his wives, un∣der a Tombe of Touch. Humfrey Heyford, Goldsmith, Maior, 1477. Sir William Chester, Draper, Maior, 1560. with his wives, amongst his pre∣decessors. Sir George Barne, Maior, 1586. D. Ioanni Milburno, vitrico, D. Ioanni Chestero, patri. D. Roberto Tempesto, genero. Gulielmus Chesterus, osuit.
by Birchovers lane, (the one halfe of which Lane is of this VVard) and so downe, be divers faire houses; namely, one with a faire fore-front towards the street, builded by Sir Martin Bowes, Goldsmith, since Maior of London: And then one other, sometime belonging to William de la Pole,Noblemē of this Realme, of old time, as also of late yeers, have dealt in Mer∣chandises. Knight Baronet, and yet the Kings Merchant, in the 14. of Edward the third; and after him, to Mi∣chael de la Pole, Earle of Suffolke, in the 24. of Richard the second, and was his Merchants house, and so downe toward the Stockes Market, lacking but some three houses thereof. The South side of this VVard begin∣neth in the East, at the chaine to bee drawne thwart Mart lane, up into Fen-Church street, and so west, by the North end of Mincheon lane, to Saint Margaret Pattens street, or Rood lane, and downe that street, to the mid-way towards S. Margarets Church:Philpot lane. Then by Philpot lane, (so called of Sir Iohn Philpot that dwelled there, and was owner thereof) and downe that Lane, some six or eight houses on each side, is all of this VVard. Then by Grasse-Church corner, into Lombard-street,S Clements lane. to S. Clements lane, and downe the same to S. Clements Church: then downe Saint Nicholas lane, and downe the same to S. Nicholas Church, and the same Church is of this VVard. Then to Abchurch lane, and downe some small portion thereof: then downe Sherborne lane, a part thereof, and a part of Beare-binder lane, be of this VVard: and then downe Lombard street to the signe of the Angell, almost to the corner over against the Stockes Market. On the South side of this VVard, somewhat within Mart lane, have yee the Parish Church of Alhallowes,Parish Church of Alhallowes Stane Church. com∣monly called Stane-Church, (as may be supposed) for a difference from other Churches of that name in this Citie, which (of old time) were builded of timber, and since were builded of stone. In this Church have beene divers faire Monuments of the dead; namely, Iohn Costin,Of late it is fixed there in better manner than ever it was before. Girdler, a great benefa∣ctor: he deceased 1244. his name re∣maineth painted in the Church roofe: if it had beene set in brasse, it would have beene fetched downe. Hee gave out of certaine Tenements to the poore of that Parish, an hundred quarters of Charcoales yeerely for ever. Sir Iohn Test, Knight of the holy Se∣pulcher, and Dame Ioan his wife, about 1486. Robert Stone. Sir Iohn Stiward, and Dame Alice his wife. Iohn Bostocke, Esquire. Christopher Holt. Sir Richard Tate, Knight, Ambassa∣dour to King Henry the eighth, buried there, 1554. His Monument remai∣neth yet; the rest beeing all pulled downe, and swept out of the Church, the Church-wardens were forced to make a large account, twelve shillings that yeere for Broomes, beside the car∣riage away of stone and brasse, at their owne charge. And here I am to note, that being in∣formed of the Writhsleys to bee buried there, I have since found them and o∣ther, to be buried at Saint Giles without Creplegate, where I mind to leave them. Our Holt (alas) hath stint his hold,A faire Marble Tombe is the South wall of the Quire. by Death cal'd hence in haste, Whose Christen name being Christopher with Christ is better plac't. In Sawton borne of gentle race, in London spent his dayes, A Clerke that serv'd in Customehouse, in credit many wayes. So that we leese the losse of this so deare a Friend, Whose life well while he was here, hath gain'd a better end. Iohn Mun,A small Monu in the  wall. Citizen and Mercer of London, who deceased the third day of Iune, 1615. gave towards the repairing of this Church, 100. l. Mary Benam, lying here buried,Beneath in the lower part of the Church,  faire pla∣ted stone. gave 10. l. 4. s. for ever yeerely to this Pa∣rish, and the Parish of Saint Olaves in Hartstreet, which is in money truely performed every Sunday, 2. s. in each place to the poore. By this Church somtime passed a lane called Craddockes lane,Craddocks lane. from Mart lane, winding by the North side of the said Church into Fenne-church street: the which Lane being straightned by in∣croachments, is now called Church-Alley.
Then is the parish Church of Saint Nicholas Acon,Parish Church of S. Nicholas Hacon. or Hacon (for so have I read it in Records) in Lombard street. Sir Iohn Bridges Draper, Maior, 1520. new∣ly repaired this Church, and imbattled it, and was there buried. Francis Bowyer, Grocer, one of the Sheriffes, was buried there, 1580. with other of the Bowyers. So was Iulian, wife to Iohn Lambard, Alderman. Here resteth in hope of a joyfull resurrection the body of Francis Bowyer, late Alder∣man of London, who was borne in Chi∣chester, the Sonne of Robert Bowyer of Chichester, and Margaret his wife. He had Brethren, Robert eldest, Wil∣liam, Henry, and Peter: which Sonnes together with their Mother Margaret, doe rest in this Church. He married E∣lizabeth, daughter to William Tilles∣worth: with whom hee lived most lo∣vingly and faithfully, the space of 27. yeeres: And by her had seven Sonnes and foure Daughters, of whom remained living at his death foure Sonnes, Willi∣am, Robert, Francis, and John: And three Daughters, Joane, Margaret, and Elizabeth. Obiit 14. Iunii. An. Dom. 1581. Then is there (in the high street) a proper Parish Church of Saint Mary Wolnoth,Parish Church of S. Mary VVolnoth. of the Nativity, the reason of which name I have not yet learned. This Church is lately new builded. Sir Hugh Brice, Goldsmith, Maior in the first yeere of Henry the seventh, Keeper of the Kings Exchange at London, and one of the Governours of the Kings Mint in the Tower of London, under William Lord Hastings, the fifth of Ed∣ward the fourth deceased, 1496. Hee builded in this Church a Chappell, cal∣led the Charnel, as also part of the body of the Church and of the Steeple, and gave money toward the finishing there∣of, besides the stone that he had prepa∣red; hee was buried in the body of the Church, and Guy Brice or Boys, was also buried there. Dame Ioane, Wife to Sir VVilliam Peach. Thomas Nocket, Draper, 1396: hee founded a Chauntry there. Simon Eyre, 1459. hee gave the Ta∣verne, called the Cardinals Hat in Lom∣bard street, with a Tenement annexed on the East part of the Taverne, and a mansion behind the East Tenement, to∣gether with an Alley from Lombard street to Cornehill with the appurtenan∣ces, all which were by him new builded toward a Brotherhood of our Lady in Saint Mary Wolnoths Church. Iohn Moger, Pewterer, and Emme his wife in S. Iohns Chappell. Sir Iohn Percivall, Merchant-Taylor, Maior, about 1504. Thomas Roch, and Andrew Michael, Vintners, and Ioane the Wife of them both. William Hilton, Merchant-Taylor, and Taylor to King Henry the eighth, was buried there, 1519. under the Chappel of Saint George, which Chappell was builded by George Lufken, sometime Taylor to the Prince. Robert Amades, Goldsmith, Master of the Kings Jewels. Sir Martin Bowes,Langborne Ward dis∣charged of Fifteenes. Maior, buried about 1569. he gave Lands for the discharge of that Langborne Ward, of all Fifteenes to bee granted to the King by Parlia∣ment. George Hasken. Sir Thomas Ramsey, late Maior, &c. Sir Iohn Percivall,A faire Tombe in the Chan∣cell. Knight, sometime Lord Maior of this City, and Dame Thomasine his Wife, worthy Benefactors to this parish, lye both here buried, &c. The severall wils made by them both in ancient writing, are (to the parishes great commendation) very carefully kept and preserved in this Church, in a goodly enclosure made for the purpose and to bee turned open like folding Ta∣bles: I have not seene the like in any o∣ther Church. Moreover I read (concerning this man) that hee was one of the Maior of Londons Officers,An obser∣vation out of Richard Grafton. and was the Carver at the Maiors Table. And when the Maior (as the custome of London is) doth elect one of the Sheriffes of London for the yeere ensuing, by taking and drinking a cup of Wine to such a man as he plea∣seth to name: The Maior at that time (whose name was Sir Henry Collet, Knight, and free of the Mercers) tooke the cup of VVine and dranke to the
aforesaid Iohn Percival,Iohn Perci∣vall, Car∣ver to the Lord Mai∣or or chosen Sheriffe of London. his Carver, stan∣ding bare-headed waiting before him, and called him Sheriffe of Lond. for the yeere ensuing: forthwith the said Maior caused the same Percivall to sit downe at his owne Table, and to cover his head. And the same Percivall tooke upon him the office of Sherivalty, and afterward was Lord Maior of London, and made knight. Register of Maiors. Here lyeth buried the body of Sir Martin Bowes,A goodly Marble close Tombe under the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. Knight, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, and also free of the Goldsmiths Company: with Cicilie, Dame Anne and Dame Elizabeth, his wives. The which Sir Martin Bowes deceased the 4. day of August, An. Dom. 1566. His will also is there kept in a faire Table. Here lyeth interred the body of Sir Tho∣mas Ramsey,A very goodly Monu∣ment in the East end of the Chancell. Knight, a most worthy Ci∣tizen, and lately Lord Maior of Lon∣don, being free of the Grovers Company, with whom (by will) he hath left a per∣petuall reliefe for poore yong men, Retay∣lours of the said Company, which he saw performed in his lifetime. He was a most carefull Magistrate, walked in the feare of God, and loved peace. Hee lived 79. yeeres, and dyed (without issue) in the faith of Iesus Christ, the 19. day of May, Anno Dom. 1590. Whose godly end was a true testimony of his vertuous life. Here lyeth buried also Dame Alice, the first wife of the said Sir Thomas Ram∣sey, she being eldest daughter to Bevis Lea of Enfield in the County of Staf∣ford, Gent. Vnto whom hee was married 37. yeeres: and having lived 85. yeeres, she departed this life the 18. day of Ia∣nuary, An. Dom. 1577. Dame Mary, the second wife to the said Sir Thomas Ramsey, was eldest daugh∣ter to William Dale of Bristoll, Mer∣chant, unto whom he was married 12. yeeres. In regard therefore of so worthy a Knight, and his two vertuous Ladies: This Monument is heere placed, by the Executors to the said Sir Thomas Ram∣sey, the 18. day of November, Anno Dom. 1596. Thus have yee seven Parish Chur∣ches in this Ward; one Hall of a Com∣pany; divers faire houses for Merchants; and other Monuments none. It hath an Alderman, his Deputy; Common-Counsellors, 8. Constables, 15. Scaven∣gers, 9. Men of the Wardmote inquest, 17. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fif∣teene, in the Exchequer, at 20. l. 9. s. 8. d.
BELINSGATE VVARD. BElinsgate Ward be∣ginneth at the West end of Tow∣er-street Ward in Thames street,Belinsgate Ward. a∣bout Smarts Key, & runneth downe along that street, on the South side, to Saint Magnus Church at the Bridge foot, and on the North side of the said Thames street, from over against Smarts Key, till over against the North-west corner of Saint Magnus Church aforesaid. On this North side of Thames street is S. Mary Hill lane, up to Saint Marga∣rets Church, and then part of S. Mar∣garet Pattens street, at the end of Saint Mary Hill Lane. Next out of Thames street is Lucas lane, and then Buttolph lane, and at the North end thereof Phil∣pot lane: Then is there Rother lane, of old time so called, and thwart the same lane is Little Eastcheape: And these bee the bounds of Belinsgate Ward. Touching the principall Ornaments within this Ward: On the South side of Thames street, beginning at the East end thereof,Smarts Key there is first the said Smarts Key, so called, of one Smart, sometime owner thereof. The next is Belinsgate,Belinsgate. whereof the whole Ward taketh name, the which (leaving out of the fable thereof, fai∣ning it to be builded by King Belinus, a Britaine, long before the incarnation of Christ) is at this present a large Water∣gate, Port or Harborough for Ships and Boats, commonly arriving there with Fish, both fresh and salt, Shell-fishes, Salt, Oranges, Onions, and other Fruits and Roots; Wheat, Rie, and Graine of divers sorts for service of the Citie, and the parts of this Realme adjoyning. This Gate is now more frequented than of old time, when the Queenes Hith was used, as being appointed by the Kings of this Realme, to be the speciall or onely Port for taking up of all such kind of Merchandises, brought to this Citie by strangers and Forrainers; be∣cause the Draw-bridge of timber at London Bridge, was then to bee raised, and drawne up for passage of Ships with tops thither. Touching the ancient customes of Belinsgate;Customes of Belins∣gate. in the Reigne of Edward the third, every great Ship landing there, paid for standage, two pence; every lit∣tle Ship with Orelockes, a penny; the lesser Boat, called a Battle, a halfe-pen∣ny. Of two quarters of Corne measured, the King was to have one farthing; of a Combe of Corne, a penny; of every weight going out of the Citie, a halfe-penny; of two quarters of Sea-coales measured, a farthing; and of every Tun of Ale going out of England beyond the Seas, by the Merchants stranger, 4. pence; of every thousand Herring, a farthing, except the Franchises, &c. Next to this is Sommers Key,Sommer Key, which likewise tooke that name of one Sommer dwelling there,Lion Key. as did Lion Key of one Lion, owner thereof, and since of the signe of the Lion. Then is there a faire Wharfe or Key,Buttolph VVharfe. called Buttolphs-gate, by that name so called in the time of William the Con∣querour, and of Edward the Confessor, as I have shewed already in the descri∣ption of the Gates. Next is the Parish Church of Saint Buttolph,Parish Church of S. Buttolph. a proper Church, and hath had many faire Monuments therein, now defaced and gone: notwithstanding, I finde by testimonies abroad, that these were buried there, to wit:
Roger Cogger, 1348. Andrew Pikeman, and Ioane his wife, 1391. Nicholas Iames, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffes, 1423. William Rainwell, Fishmonger, and Iohn Rainwell his sonne, Fishmonger, Maior, 1426. and deceasing, 1445. bu∣ried there, with this Epitaph: Citizens of London, Iohn Rain∣well His Epitaph. call you to remembrance The famous Iohn Rainwell, sometime your Maior, Of the Staple of Callis, so was his chance. Here lyeth now his corps, his soule bright and faire, Is taken to heavens blisse, thereof is no despaire. His acts beare witnesse, by matters of accord, How charitable he was, and of what record: No man hath beene so beneficiall as he, Vnto the Citie in giving liberally, &c. He gave a stone house to be a Reve∣stry to that Church for ever:Belinsgate Ward, Downegate Word, and Ealdgate VVard dischar∣ged of all Fifteens. More, hee gave Lands and Tenements to the use of the Communalty, that the Maior and Chamberlaine should satisfie, unto the discharge of all persons, inhabiting within the Wards of Belinsgate, Downe∣gate, and Ealdgate, as oft as it shall hap∣pen any Fifteene, by Parliament of the King to be granted. Also to the Exche∣quer, in discharge of the Sheriffes, ten pounds yeerely, which the Sheriffes u∣sed to pay for the Farme of Southwarke, so that all men of the Realme, comming or passing with carriage, should be free quitted and discharged of all Toll and other payments, aforetime claimed by the Sheriffes. Further, that the Maior and Cham∣berlaine shall pay yeerely to the She∣riffes eight pounds, so that the Sheriffes take no manner Toll or money of any person of this Realme, for their Goods, Merchandises, Victuals and Carriages, for their passages at the great Gate of the Bridge of the Citie, nor at the Gate called the Draw-Bridge, &c. The over-plus of money comming of the said Lands and Tenements, divided into even portions, the one part to bee employed to instore the Grainaries of the Citie with Wheat, for the reliefe of the poore Communalty; and the other moity to cleere and cleanse the shelves, and other stoppages of the River of Thames, &c. Stephen Forster, Fishmonger, Maior in the yeere 1454. and Dame Agnes his wife, lye buried there. William Bacon, Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffes, 1480. was there buried; besides many other persons of good worship, whose Monuments are all de∣stroyed by badde and greedy men of spoile. This Parish of S. Buttolph is no great thing;The nu∣ber of stranger lately to created in this . notwithstanding divers Stran∣gers are there harboured, as may ap∣peare by a presentment, not many yeers since made, of Strangers inhabitants in the Ward of Belinsgate, in these words: In Belinsgate Ward were one and fiftie housholds of Strangers; whereof thirty of these House-holders inhabited in the Parish of Saint Buttolph, in the chiefe and prin∣cipal houses, where they give 20 pounds a yere for an house lately letten for foure Markes. The neerer they dwell to the water side, the more they give for houses, and within thirty yeeres before, there was not in the whole Ward above three Netherlanders, at which time, there was within the said Pa∣rish levied for the helpe of the poore, seven and twenty pounds by the yeere; but since they came so plentifully thither, there cannot be gathered aboue eleven pounds: for the Stranger will not contribute to such charges as other Citizens doe. Thus much for that South side of this Ward. On the North side is Bosse Alley,Bosse Alley and the Bosse of Belinsgate. so called of a Bosse of Spring water conti∣nually running, which standeth by Be∣linsgate, against this Alley, and was sometimes made by the Executors of Richard Whittington. Then is S. Mary Hill lane,S. Mary Hill lane. which run∣neth up North from Belinsgate, to the end of S. Margaret Pattens, commonly called Rood lane, and the greatest halfe of that lane is also of Belinsgate Ward.
In this S. Mary Hill lane, is the faire Parish Church of S. Mary, called, on the Hill, because of the ascent from Be∣linsgate. This Church hath beene lately buil∣ded, as may appeare by this that follow∣eth. Richard Hackney, one of the Sheriffes in the yeere 1322. and Alice his wife, were there buried; as Robert Fabian writeth, saying thus: In the yeere 1497. in the moneth of A∣pril,Alice Hack∣ney found uncorrup∣ted, more than 150. yeers after she was buried. as labourers digged for the foundation of a wall, within the Church of Saint Mary Hill, neere unto Belinsgate, they found a Coffin of rotten timber, and therein the Corps of a woman, whole of skinne, and of bones undissevered, and the ioynts of her armes plyable, without breaking of the skin, upon whose Sepulcher this was engraven: Here lye the bodies of Richard Hackney, Fishmonger; and Alice his wife: The which Richard was Sheriffe in the 15. of Edward the second. Her body was kept above ground 3. or foure dayes, without noyance; but then it waxed unsavourie, and was a∣gaine buried. Iohn Mordant, Stock-fishmonger, was buried there, 1387. Nicholas Exton, Fishmonger, Maior, 1387. William Cambridge, Maior, 1420. Richard Goslin, Sheriffe, 1422. William Philip, Sergeant at Armes, 1473. Robert Revell, one of the Sheriffes, 1490. gave liberally toward the new building of this Church and steeple, and was there buried. William Remington, Maior, 1500. Sir Thomas Blanke, Maior, 1582. William Holstocke, Esquire, Controller of the Kings Ships. Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Maior, 1594. Here lyeth a Knight in London borne,A faire Tombe in the east end of the Chancell. Sir Thomas Blanke by name, Of honest birth, of Merchants trade, A man of worthy fame. Religious was his life to God, To men his dealing iust: The poore and Hospitals can tell That wealth was not his trust. With gentle heart, and spirit milde, And nature full of pitie, Both Sheriffe, Lord Maior and Alderman; He ruled in this Citie. The Good Knight was his common name, So cal'd of many men: He lived long, and dyed of yeeres, Twice seven, and six times ten. Obiit 28. Octob. An. Dom. 1588. An Epitaph upon the death of Dame Margaret Blancke, who depar∣ted this life the second of Febru∣ary, An. Dom. 1596. DEath was deceiv'd,On the other side of the Tombe, southward▪ which thought these two to part: For though this Knight first left this mortall life, Yet till she dyed, he still liv'd in her heart. What happier husband, or more kinder wife? Whom foure and forty changes of the Spring, In sacred wedlocke, mutuall love had linkt: The deare remembrance of so deare a thing, Was not by death in her chaste breast extinct. Building this Tombe not long before she dy'd, Her latest duty to his Funerall Rite, Crown'd with her vertues, like an honest Bride, Here lyes at rest by her beloved Knight. Though worthy Blancke her name it still endures, Yet, Traves, boast, her birth was onely yours. Beati qui moriuntur in Domino. Here lye intombed the bodies of Sir Robert Hampson,A very faire Monumēt in the South wall of the Quire. Knight, and Alderman of London; who deceased the 2. day of May, 1607. in the 50. yeere of his age: And of Dame Katharine his wife, at whose charge this Monument is erected. They had issue, nine children, whereof foure are living. The said Dame Katharine deceased, &c.
This Lane on both sides is furnished with many faire houses for Merchants, and hath at the North end thereof one other Lane,S. Margaret Pattens lane. called S. Margaret Pattens, because of old time Pattens were usual∣ly there made and sold: but of latter time this is called Roode lane, of a Rood there placed, in the Churchyard of S. Margaret,Parish Church of S. Margaret Pattens. whilest the old Church was taken downe, and againe new builded; during which time, the oblations made to this Rood, were imployed towards building of the Church. But in the yeer 1538. about the 23. of May in the mor∣ning, the said Roode was found to have beene in the night preceding (by peo∣ple unknowne) broken all to pieces, to∣gether with the Tabernacle, wherein it had beene placed. Also on the 27. of the same moneth, in the same Parish, amongst the Basket-makers, Fire in Reod lane. a great and sudden fire happned in the night season, which within the space of three houres, consumed more than a dozen houses, and nine persons were brent to death there. And thus ceased that worke of this Church, being at that time nigh finished to the steeple. The Monuments that I finde in this Parish Church, are these following: Here lyeth buried Mr. Reginald West, In the midst of the Chan∣cell, under the Com∣munion Table a faire pla∣ted stone. Batchelor in divinity, and late Parson of this Parish, who deceased the second day of October, Anno Domini, 1563. for whose sincere, pure and godly Doctrine, as also his vertuous end, the Lord be praised for evermore. Here-under lyeth buried Thomas Gelson, The like stone, and neere to the other. Citizen and Grocer of London, who de∣ceased the 16. day of September, Anno Dom. 1563. And in the same Church also lyeth buried Jane his wife: for whose vertuous lives and godly departing, God be praised for ever. Here lyeth buried the body of Richard Glo∣ver, A very faire stone well pla∣ted by the other twaine. Citizen and Pewterer of London, who was twice Master of his Companie, and one of the Common Councell of this Citie: Having two wives, Elizabeth, and Mary; and had issue by his first wife, three sonnes; and by his second, hee had eight sonnes and foure daughters. He de∣ceased the 16. day of August, An. Dom. 1615. being aged 59. yeeres. The Lane, on both sides beyond the same Church, to the mid-way towards Fen-church street, is of Belinsgate Ward. Then againe, out of Thames street, by the West end of S. Mary Hill Church, runneth up one other Lane, of old time called Rope Lane,Rope lane Lucas. since called Lucas lane, of one Lucas, owner of some part there∣of, and now corruptly called Love lane; it runneth up by the East end of Saint Andrew Hubbert,Parish Church  S. Andrew Hubbert. or S. Andrew in East∣cheape. This Church, and all the whole Lane called Lucas Lane, is of this Belins∣gate Ward. Then have ye one other Lane out of Thames street, called Buttolph lane, be∣cause it riseth over against the Parish Church of S. Buttolph, and runneth up North by the East end of Saint Georges Church, to the West end of S. Andrews Church, and to the South end of Phil∣pot lane. This Parish Church of S. George in Buttolph lane,Parish Church S. George Buttolph lane. is small, but the Monu∣ments (for two hundred yeeres past) are well preserved from spoile. Whereof one is of Adam Bamme, Mai∣or, 1397. Richard Bamme, Esquire his sonne, of Gillingham in Kent, 1452. Iohn Walton, Gentleman, 1401. Marpor, a Gentleman, 1400. Iohn Saint-Iohn, Merchant of Levant, and Agnes his wife, 1400. Hugh Spencer, Esquire, 1424. William Combes, Stocke-fishmonger, one of the Sheriffes, 1452. who gave forty pounds towards the Workes of that Church. Iohn Stocker, Draper, one of the She∣riffes, 1477. Richard Dryland, Esquire, and Katha∣rine his wife, daughter to Morrice Brune, Knight of Southukenton in Essex, Stew∣ard of the houshold to Humphrey Duke of Glocester, 1487. Nicholas Partrich, one of the Sheriffs 1519. in the Churchyard. William Forman, Maior, 1538. Iames Mountford, Esquire, Surgeon to King Henry the eighth, buried, 1544. Thomas Gayle, Haberdasher, 1340. Nicholas Wilford, Merchant-Taylor, and Elizabeth his wife, about the yeere 1551. Edward Heyward, 1573. &c.
Roger Delakere, founded a Chauntrie there. Then have ye one other Lane,Rother lane, or Red-Rose lane. called Rother lane, or Red Rose lane, of such a signe there; now commonly called Pud∣ding lane, because the Butchers of East-Cheape have their Scalding-house for Hogs there, and their Puddings, with other filth of Beasts, are voided downe that way to their dung-boats on the Thames. This Lane stretcheth from Thames street to little East-cheape, chiefely inha∣bited by Basket-makers, Turners, and Butchers, and is all of Belinsgate Ward. The Garland in Little East-cheape, sometime a Brewhouse, with a Gar∣den on the backe-side, adjoyning to the Garden of Sir Iohn Philpot, was the chiefe House in this East-cheape: It is now divided into sundry small Tene∣ments, &c. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputie; Common Counsellors, 7. Constables, eleven; Scavengers, sixe; for the Ward-more Inquest, foureteen, and a Beadle, it is taxed to the Fifteene in London, at two and thirty pounds; and in the Exchequer, at one and thir∣ty pounds, tenne shillings.
BRIDGE VVARD VVithin. BRidge Ward with∣in,Bridge Ward within. so called of London Bridge; which Bridge is a principall part of that Ward, and beginneth at the stups on the south end by Southwarke, runneth along the Bridge, and North up Bridge-street, commonly called (of the Fish-market) New Fish-street: from Fish street hill, up Grasse-street, to the North corner of Grasse-church. All the Bridge is reple∣nished on both the sides, with large, faire and beautifull buildings, inhabi∣tants for the most part rich Merchants, and other wealthy Citizens, Mercers and Haberdashers. In New Fish-street bee Fishmongers and faire Tavernes: on Fish-street Hill and Grasse-street, men of divers Trades, Grocers and Haberdashers. In Grasse-street have ye one faire Con∣duit of sweet water,VVater Conduit in Grasse-street. castellated with crest and vent, made by the appoint∣ment of Thomas Hill, Maior, 1484. who gave by his Testament a hundred marks towards the conveyance of water to this place. It was begun by his Execu∣tors, in the yeere 1491. and finished of his goods whatsoever it cost. On the East side of this Bridge ward, have ye the faire Parish Church of S. Magnus,Parish Church of S. Magnus. in the which Church have bin buried many men of good Worship, whose Monuments are now for the most part defaced. I finde, Iohn Blund, Maior, 1307. Henry Yeuele, Free Mason to Edward the third, Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, who deceased 1400. his Monument yet remaineth. William Brampton. Iohn Michell, Maior, 1436. Iohn French, Baker, Yeoman of the Crowne to Henry the seventh, 1510. Robert Clarke, Fishmonger, 1521. Richard Turke, one of the Sheriffes, 1546. William Steed, Alderman. Richard Morgan, Knight, chiefe Ju∣stice of the Common Peas, 1556. Mauricius Griffith, Bishop of Roche∣chester, 1559. Robert Blanch, Girdler, 1567. Robert Belgrave Girdler. VVilliam Brame. Iohn Cooper, Fishmonger, Alderman, who was put by his turne of Maioralty, 1584. Sir VVilliam Garrard,This Mo∣nument  lately reedified,  new fen∣ced by Sir Iohn , his sonne, & L. Maior 1602. Haberdasher, Maior 1555. a grave, sober, wise and discreet Citizen, equall with the best, and inferior to none of our time, decea∣sed 1571. in the Parish of Saint Christo∣pher, but was buried in this Church of Saint Magnus, as in the Parish where he was borne. A faire Monument is here raised on him. Robert Harding, Salter, one of the Sheriffes, 1568. Simon Low, Merchant-Taylor, E∣quire, &c. Then is the Parish Church of Saint Margarets on Fish-street Hill, a proper Church; but Monuments it hath none; onely one of noe, and well worth the observation, being unknowne, and nor ound till very lately; whereof Master VVood (the reverend Parson of the Church, made mee acquainted by his
Clerke, to have me come see it; which I did very thankfully. Finding it to bee the figure of a man of good respect, ly∣ing upon his Tombe, according to the manner of persons of Antiquity. And this inscription he delivered me, writ∣ten with his owne hand: Joannes de Coggeshall, Civis & Corda∣rius de Parochiae S. Margaretae de Bridgestreet, London. Anno 1384. An. Reg. Richardi Secundi, Octavo. Testamentum irrotulat. in Hustingo Lon∣don, die Lunae in Festo S. Leonai di Ab∣batis. An. Reg. Richardi Secundi, 9. He lyeth buried in the said Church wall, under the Marble stone in the Window, next to S. Peters Altar on the North side of the Church. A foot-way passeth by the South side of this Church, from Fish-street hill into Rother-lane. Vp higher on this Hill, is the Parish Church of Saint Leonard Milke-Church,Parish Church of S. Leonards Milke-Church so termed of one VVilliam Melker, an e∣speciall builder thereof, but commonly called Saint Leonards East-cheape, be∣cause it standeth at East-cheape corner. Monuments there be of the Doggets, namely; VValter Dogget, Vintner, one of the Sheriffes, 1380. Iohn Dogget, Vintner, and Alice his wife, about 1456. This Iohn Dogget gave Lands to that Church. VVilliam Dogget, &c. And none else of note. This Church, and from thence into Little East-cheape, to the East end of the said Church, is of the Bridge Ward. Then higher in Grasse-street,Grasse-Church of S. Bennet Grasse-church. is the Parish Church of Saint Bennet, called Grasse-Church, of the Herbe Market there kept: this Church also is of the Bridge Ward, and the farthest North end thereof. Some Monuments re∣maine there undefaced: As of Iohn Harding, Salter, 1576. Iohn Sturgeon, Haberdasher, Cham∣berlaine of London. Philip Cushen, or Corsine, a Florentine, and a famous Merchant, 1600. The Customes of Grasse-church Mar∣ket, in the reigne of Edward the third, as I have read in a Booke of Customes,Customes of Grasse-street Market. were these: Every forraigne Cart, laden with Corne, or Mault, comming thi∣ther to be sold, was to pay one halfe∣penny. Every forraigne Cart bringing Cheese, two pence. Every Cart of Corn and Cheese together (if the Cheese be more worth than the Corne) two pence; and if the Corne be more worth than the Cheese, it was to pay a halfe-penny. Of two horses laden with Corne or Mault, the Bailiffe had one farthing: the Cart of the Franchise of the Tem∣ple, and of S. Mary le Grand, paid a far∣thing: the Cart of the Hospitall of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, paid nothing of their proper goods: and if the corne were brought by Merchants to sell againe, the loade paid a halfe-penny, &c. On the West side of this Ward, at the North end of London Bridge,Thames street. is a part of Thames street, which is also of this Ward; to wit, so much as of old time was called Stock-fishmonger Row,Stockfish∣mongers Row. of the Stock-fish-mongers dwelling there, downe West to a Water gate, of old time called Ebgate,Ebgate lane since Ebgate lane, and now the Old Swan, which is a common staire on the Thames, but the passage is very narrow, by meanes of encroch∣ments. On the South side of Thames street, about the mid-way betwixt the Bridge foot and Ebgate lane,Fishmon∣gers Hall. standeth the Fish∣mongers Hall, and divers other faire houses for Merchants. These Fishmongers were sometimes of two severall Companies, to wit Stock∣fishmongers, Antiqui∣ties of the Fishmon∣gers, 1290 and Salt-fishmongers, of whose antiquity I reade, that by the name of Fishmongers of London, they were for forestalling, &c. contrary to the Lawes and constitutions of the Ci∣tie, fined to the King at 500. Markes, the 18. of King Edward the first. More, that the said Fishmongers,A trium∣phant shew made by the Fishmon∣gers for the victory of the King▪ hearing of the great victory obtained by the same King against the Scots, in the 26. of his reigne, made a triumphant and solemne shew thorow the Citie, with divers Pa∣geants, and more than 1000. horsemen, &c. as in the Chapter of Sports and Pastimes. These two Companies of Stocke-fishmongers and Salt-fishmon∣gers, of old time had their severall Halls, to wit, in Thames street twaine,
in New Fish-street twaine, and in Old Fish-street twaine:Fishmon∣gers had 6. Hals in London. in each place one for either Company; in all six severall Hals, the Company was so great, as I have read, and can prove by Records. These Fishmongers have beene jol∣ly Citizens,Fishmon∣gers, 6. of them Mai∣ors in 24. yeeres. and sixe Maiors of their Company in 24. yeeres; to wit, Walter Turke, 1350. Iohn Lofkin, 1359. Iohn Wroth, 1361. Iohn Pechie, 1362. Simon Morden, 1369. and William Walworth, 1374. It followed, that in the yeere 1382. through the counsel of Ioh. North∣hampton, Draper, then being Maior, William Issex, Iohn More, Mercer, and Richard Northbury,Fishmon∣gers for their gree∣tings en∣vied of the other com∣panies. the said Fishmon∣gers were greatly troubled, hindred of their liberties, and almost destroyed, by congregations made against them: So that in a Parliament at London, the con∣troversie depending betweene the Mai∣or and Aldermen of London, and the Fishmongers there,Nicholas Exton for the Fish∣mongers craved the Kings pro∣tection. Nic. Exton, Speaker for the Fishmongers, prayeth the King to receive him and his Company into his protection, for feare of corporall hurt. Whereupon it was commanded, either part to keepe the peace, upon paine of losing all they had. Hereupon a Fishmonger starting up, replyed, that the complaint brought against them by the moovers, &c. was but matter of malice; for that the Fishmongers, in the reigne of Edward the third, being chiefe Officers of the City,Fishmon∣gers by Parliamēt restored to their liberties. had for their misdemeanors then done, committed the chiefe exhibitors of those petitions to prison. In this Parliament, the Fish∣mongers (by the Kings Charter patents) were restored to their Liberties. Not∣withstanding, in the yeere next follow∣ing, to wit, 1383. Iohn Cavendish, Fish∣monger, craveth the peace against the Chancellour of England,Iohn Caven∣dish craved the peace againg the Chancel∣lor, chal∣lenged him of ta∣king a bribe. which was granted, and hee put in sureties, the Earles of Stafford and Salisbury. Caven∣dish challengeth the Chancellour for ta∣king a bribe of 10. l. for favour of his Case: which the Chancellour by oath upon the Sacrament avoideth. In fur∣ther triall, it was found, that the Chan∣cellours man (without his Masters pri∣vitie) had taken it. Whereupon Caven∣dish was adjudged to prison, and to pay the Chancellour 1000. Markes for slan∣dering him. After this, many of the Nobles assem∣bled at Reding, to suppresse the seditious stirres of the said Iohn Northampton, or Combarton, late Maior, that had attem∣pted great and heinous enterprizes, of the which he was convict; and when he stood mute, nor would utter one word, it was decreed, that he should be com∣mitted to perpetuall prison, his goods confiscate to the Kings use, and that he should not come within 100. miles of London during his life. He was therfore sent to the Castle of Tintegall,Principal adversa∣ries to the Fishemon∣gers con∣demnted to perpe∣tuall pri∣son. in the confines of Cornewall, and in the meane space the Kings servants spoiled his goods. Iohn More, Richard Northbury, and other, were likewise there convict, and condemned to perpetuall prison, and their goods confiscate, for certaine congregations by them made against the Fishmongers in the Citie of London,Paten as is aforesaid; but they obtained and had the Kings pardon, in the 14. of his reigne, as appeareth of Record: and thus were all these troubles quieted. Those Stock-fishmongers and Salt∣fishmongers were united in the yeere 1536. the 28. of Henry the 8. their Hall to bee but one,Stock-fish∣mongers and Salt-fishmon∣gers uni∣ted. in the house given unto them by Sir Iohn Cornwall, Lord Fan∣hope, and of Ampthull,Sir Ioh. Cornwall created Baron  the 6. of Edw. 6. in the Parish of Saint Michael in Crooked-lane, in the reigne of Henry the sixth. Thus much have I thought good to note of the Fishmongers, men ignorant of their Antiquities, and not able to shew a reason why, or when they were joyned in amity with the Goldsmithes,Fishmon∣gers joy∣ned in a∣mity with the Gold∣smiths. doe give part of their Armes, &c. Nei∣ther to say ought of Sir William Walworth (the glory of their Company) more than that he slew Iack Straw, which is a meer fable:VV. VVal∣worth slan∣dred by a fable of Iack Straw, T. VVal H. Knight Lib. Eb. for the said Straw was after the overthrow of the Rebels, taken, and by judgement of the Maior beheaded; whose confession at the Gallowes is ex∣tant in my Annales, where also is set downe the most valiant and praise-wor∣thy act of Sir William Walworth, against the principall Rebell, Wat Tylar: as in reproofe of VValworth Monument in S. Michaels Church, I have declared, and wished to be reformed there, as in other places. On that South side of Thames street,Drink water VVharfe. have yee Drinke-water VVharfe, and
Fish Wharfe,Fish wharfe in the Parish of S. Mag∣nus. On the North side of Thames street is S. Martins lane, a part of which lane is also of this Ward; to wit, on the one side to a Well of water, and on the o∣ther side, as farre up as against the said Well. Then is S. Michaels Lane, part whereof is also of this Ward, up to a Well there, &c. Then at the upper end of New-Fish-street, Crooked lane. is a Lane turning towards Saint Michaels Lane, and is called Crooked-lane, of the crooked windings thereof. Above this Lanes end, upon Fish-street Hill, is one great house, for the most part builded of stone, which pertained sometime to Edward the blacke Prince, sonne to Edward the third,Edward the blacke Prince. who was in his life time lodged there. It is now altered to a common Ho∣sterie, having the Blacke Bell for a signe. Above this house, at the top of Fish-street Hill, is a turning into Great East-cheape, and so to the corner of Lombard street, over against the North-west cor∣ner of Grasse-Church. And these be the whole bounds of this Bridge Ward within: The which hath an Alderman and his Deputy; for the Common-Counsell, 16. Constable, 15. Scaven∣gers, 6. for the Ward-more Inquest, sixteene, and a Beadle. It is is taxed to the Fifteene in London, at forty seven pounds.
CANDLEWICKE STREET VVARD. CAndlewicke street,Candlewick street, or Candle-wrightstreet Ward. or Candlewright street VVard, beginneth at the East end of Great East-Cheape, it passeth West tho∣row East-Cheape to Candlewright street, and thorow the same downe to the North end of Suffolke lane, on the South side, and downe that Lane, by the west end of S. Laurence Church-yard, which is the farthese West part of that Ward. The street of Great East-Cheape,Great East-cheape. is so cal∣led of the Market there kept in the East part of the Citie, as West-Cheap is a Mar∣ket so called, being in the West. This East-Cheape is now a flesh-Mar∣ket of Butchers,East-cheape a Cookes row. there dwelling on both sides of the street; it had sometime also Cookes mixed amongst the Butchers, and such other as sold victuals ready dressed of all sorts. For of old time, when friends did meet, and were disposed to be merry, they went not to dine and sup in Taverns, but to the Cookes, where they called for meat what them liked, which they alwayes found ready dres∣sed, and at a reasonable rate, as I have before shewed. In the yeere 1410. the 11. of Henry the fourth,The kings sons bea∣ten in East Cheape. upon the Even of Saint Iohn Baptist, the Kings sonnes, Thomas and Iohn,There was no Tavern then in East-cheape▪ being in East-Cheape at Supper, (or rather at breakefast; for it was after the Watch was broken up, betwixt two and three of the clocke after midnight) a great debate hapned betweene their men, and other of the Court, which lasted one houre, till the Maior and Sheriffes with other Citizens appeased the same: for the which afterwards, the said Maior, Aldermen and Sheriffes, were called to answer before the King; his sonnes and divers Lords being high∣ly moved against the Citie. At which time, William Gascoigne, Chiefe Iustice, required the Maior and Aldermen, for the Citizens, to put them in the Kings grace: whereunto they answered, that they had not offended, but (accor∣ding to the Law) had done their best in stinting debate, and maintaining of the peace: upon which answer the King re∣mitted all his ire, and dismissed them. And to prove this East-Cheape to be a place replenished with Cookes, it may appeare by a Song, called London licke∣penny, made by Lidgate a Monk of Bury, in the reigne of Henry the fifth, in the person of a Countrey-man comming to London, and travelling thorow the same.In West-Cheap lin∣nen cloth sold, but no silkes spoken In West-Cheape (saith the Song) hee was called on to buy fine Lawne, Paris thread, Cotton Vmble, and other linnen clothes, and such like: (he speaketh of no silkes) In Cornehill, to buy old apparell, and house∣hold-stuffe, where he was forced to buy his owne Hood,Fripparia Vphol∣ders upon Conhill, sellers of old appr¦rell and houshold-stuffe. which he had lost in Westmin∣ster Hall: In Candlewright street, Dra∣pers profered him cheape Cloth: In East-Cheape, the Cookes cryed hot Ribs of Beefe rosted, Pies well baked, and o∣ther victuals: There was clattering of Pewter pots,East-cheape. Harpe, Pipe and Sawtrie; yea by cocke, nay by cocke, for greater oathes were spared: some sang of Ienkin and Iulian, &c. all which melodie liked well the passenger, but he wanted mo∣ney to abide by it, and therefore gat him into Gravesend Barge, and home in∣to Kent.
Candlewright (so called in old Records of the Guild-hall of Saint Mary Overies,Candle-wright or Candlewick street is a working place. and other) or Candlewicke street; tooke that name (as may be supposed) either of Chandlers, or makers of Candles, both of Wax and Tallow: for Candle∣wright is a maker of Candles; or of weeke, which is the Cotten or Yarne thereof: or otherwise Wike, which is the place where they used to worke them; as Scalding-wike by the Stockes Market, was called of the Poulters dressing and scalding their Poultrie there. And in divers Countries, Dayrie-houses, or Cottages wherein they make Butter and Cheese, are usually called Wickes. There dwelled also of old time, divers Weavers of woollen Clothes,VVeavers in Candle∣wick street. brought in by Edward the third. For I read that in the 44. of his reigne, the Weavers brought out of Flanders,Weavers brought out of Flanders & Brabant. were appoin∣ted their meetings to be in the Church∣yard of S. Laurence Poultney, and the Weavers or Brabant in the Churchyard of S. Mary Sommerset. There were then in this Citie, Weavers of divers sorts, to wit, of Drapery or Tapery, and Na∣pery. These Weavers of Candlewicke street, being in short time worne out, their place is now possessed by rich Drapers, sellers of wollen cloath, &c. On the North side of this Ward, at the West end of East-cheape, have ye S. Clements lane,S. Clements lane. a part whereof (on both sides, is of Candlewicke street Ward; to wit, somewhat North, beyond the Pa∣rish Church of S. Clement in East-cheap.Parish Church of S. Clement in East-cheape. This is a small Church, void of Monu∣ments, other than of, Francis Barnam, Alderman, who de∣ceased 1575. and of Benedict Barnam his sonne, Alderman also 1598. William Chartney and William Overie founded a Chauntery there. Francisci Barneham,A faire Tombe on the North side of the Quire, made into the wall. Civis, Senatoris, Vicecomitis Londinensis: Aliciae{que} Vx∣oris suae, è Bradbrigeorum Familia ae∣ternae memoriae. Vixit Annos L X. Obiit X. Maii, 1576. Filios genuit Martinum. Stephanum. Antonium. Benedictum. Deo & Posteris. Benedictus Barneham, filius junior Fran∣cisci Barneham,Another beautifull Tombe on the South side of the Quire. Senatoris, & quondam Vicecomitis London, cum iisdem honori∣bus, quibus Pater summa cum laude in hac Vrbe functus fuisset. Et ex Doro∣thea Vxorae charissima, filia Ambrosii Smith, unius è filiis Ioannis Smith, de Wocock, in Com. Leicestriae, Armigeri; Quinque filias, Elizabetham, Aliciam, Dorotheam, Bridgettam & Benedictam superstites & haeredes reliquisset: Qua∣rii minor natu Benedicta, paulo post hunc erectum Tumulum diem obiit. Ipse quod à terra accepit, hîc terra commendavit. Quod verò è Coelo, laetus lubens{que} Christo reddidit, summumque sui desiderium omnibus bonis ob eximiam prudentiam, doctrinam, eloquentiam, & praeclara in hanc Vrbem merita reliquit. Vixit Annos 39. Obiit Aprilis die tertio, Anno Dom. 1598. Next is Saint Nicholas Lane, for the most part on both sides of this Ward, almost to S. Nicholas Church. Then is Abchurch lane,Abchurch lane. which is on both sides, almost wholly of this ward:The Pa∣rish Church of S. Mary Abchurch. the Parish Church there (called of S. Mary Abchurch, Apechurch, or Vpchurch, as I have read it) standeth somewhat neere unto the South end thereof, on a rising ground: It is a faire Church: Simon de Winchcombe founded a Chaun∣terie there, the 19. of Richard the se∣cond. Iohn Littleton founded another, and Thomas Hondon another: and hath the Monuments of, I. Long, Esquire, of Bedfordshire, 1442. William Wilkenson, Alderman, 1519. William Iawdrell, Taylor, 1440. Sir Iames Hawes, Maior, 1574. Sir Iohn Branch, Maior, 1580. Iohn Minors. William Kettle, &c. Joanni Branche,A comely Monumēt in the South wall of the Quire. Equiti, hujus Vrbis olim Praetori, viro bono, & prudenti, 24. Iu∣lii, Anno Dom. 1588. Aetatis suae 73. vita functo in Sepulchro Wilkinsoni Avi Materni humato: Daniel Dun, Legum Doctor, ipsius ex Sorore Nepos posuit. In felicem Memoriam,A faire Tombe in the wall at the East end of the Church. piae, pulchrae & pudicae feminae, Dominae Helenae Branch, filiae venerabilis Gulielmi Ni∣colson, olim Civis & Pennarii London:
Quondam (per quadraginta annos & eo amplius) uxoris viri dignissimi, Ioannis Minors, Civis, acetiam Pannarii Londō: Cui peperit filium unum Rogerum, & filias tres, Iosnnam, Ripinam, & Mar∣garetam, omnes sine prole defunctos; nu∣per (ad annum us{que} vigessimum) uxoris venerabilissimi viri Ioannis Branch, mi∣litis Aurnati, Qnondam praeclarissimae Civitatis London Hrnoratissimi Majo∣ris. Robertus Nicolson Generosus, exfratre Ne∣pos, utrius{que} heres, & dictae Dominae so∣lus Executor, suis sumptibus spontaneis hoc Monumentum posuit. Quam ter felicem, pietas, opulentia, forma Fecêre in terris, modo suffragante popello, Suffagante Deo fidei, Constantia vivae, Aeternum in coelis, te nunc jubet esse beatā. Nonagenaria obiit 10. Aprilis, Anno Salu∣tis, 1594. This Dame Helen Branch, Widdow to Sir Iohn Branch, Knight, Lord Maior of London, An. 1580. gave fifty pounds to be lent to two yong men of the Com∣pany of Drapers, from foure yeeres to foure yeeres for ever, 50. l. Which La∣dy, gave also to poore Maids marriages 10. l. And to the poore of Abchurch 10. l. To the poore Prisoners in and about London, 20. l. Besides, 26. Gownes to poore men and women, 26. l. And many other worthy Legacies to the V∣niversities, &c. On the South side of this Ward,S. Michaels lane. be∣ginning againe at the East, is S. Micha∣els lane, which lane is almost wholly of this Ward, on both sides downe to∣wards Thames street, to a Well or Pump there. On the East side of this lane is Crooked lane aforesaid,Crooked lane. by St. Michaels Church, towards New-Fishstreet. One the most ancient house in this lane,Leaden Porch in Crooked lane. is called the Leaden Porch, and belonged sometime to Sir Iohn Merston, Knight, the first of Edward the fourth: It is now called the Swanne in Crooked lane, pos∣sessed of strangers, and selling of Rhe∣nish Wine. The Parish Church of this S. Michaels,Parish Church of S. Michael in Crooked lane. was sometime but a small and homely thing, standing upon part of that ground, wherein now standeth the Parsonage house: and the ground thereabout was a filthy plot, by reason of the Butchers in East-cheap, who made the same their Laystall. W. de Burgo gave two Messuages to that Church in Candlewick street, 1317. Iohn Loveken Stock-fishmonger, foure times Maior, builded (in the same ground) this faire Church of S. Micha∣el, and was there buried in the Quire, under a faire Tombe, with the Images of him and his wife in Alabaster: the said Church hath been since increased with a new Quire, and side Chappels by Sir W. Walworth, Stock-fishmonger, Maior, sometime servant to the said Iohn Loveken. Also the Tombe of Love∣ken was removed, and a flat stone of gray Marble, garnished with plates of Copper laid on him, as it yet remaineth in the body of the Church. This William Walworth is reported to have slaine Iacke Strawe:Fable of VV Wal∣worth and Iack Straw reproved. but Iack Straw being afterward taken, was first adjud∣ged by the said Maior, and then execu∣ted by the losse of his head in Smithfield. True it is,Praise of VV. VVal∣worth for his man∣hood in arresting of VVat Tylar. that this William Walworth, being a man wise, learned, and of an in∣comparable manhood arrested VVat Ty∣lar, a presumptuous Rebell, upon whom no man durst lay hand, whereby he de∣livered the King and Kingdome from most wicked tyranny of Traytors. The Maior arrested him on the head with a sound blow: whereupon Wat Tylar fu∣riously strooke the Maior with his Dag∣ger, The Maior was well armed, and had on his head a Basenet. but hurt him not, by reason he was well armed. The Maior having recei∣ved his stroke, drew his Basiliard, and grievously wounded VVat in the necke, and withall, gave him a great blow on the head:T. Walg, H. Knight Li. S. May Aborum. in the which conflict, an Es∣quire of the Kings house, called Iohn Cavendish, drew his sword, and woun∣ded VVat twice or thrice, even to the death: and VVat spurring his horse, cryed to the Commons to revenge him: the horse bare him about 80. foot from the place, and there he fell downe halfe dead: and by and by, they which at∣tended on the King, environed him a∣bout, so as he was not seen of his Com∣pany: many of them thrust him in, in divers places of his body, and drew him into the Hospitall of Saint Barthole∣mew, from whence againe the Maior caused him to be drawn into Smithfield, and there to bee beheaded. In reward
of this service (the people being disper∣sed) the King commanded the Maior to put a Basenet on his head:Maior made Knight, and other∣wise re∣warded. and the Ma∣ior requesting why he should so do, the King answered, hee being much bound unto him, would make him Knight. The Maior answered, that hee was nei∣ther worthy, nor able to take such an e∣state upon him; for hee was but a Mer∣chant, and had to live by his Merchan∣dise onely. Notwithstanding, the King made him to put on his Basenet,Order of making a Knight for service in the field. and then with a sword in both his hands, he strongly strooke him on the necke, as the manner was then. And the same day he made 3. other Citizens Knights (for his sake) in the same place, to wit, Iohn Philpot,Aldermen Knighted. Nicholas Brember, and Ro∣bert Launde, Aldermen. The King gave to the Maior 100. pound land by yeere, and to each of the other 40. pound land yeerely, to them and their heires for ever. After this,S. Michaels Crooked lane. in the same yeere, the said Sir William Walworth founded in the said Parish Church of Saint Michael, a Colledge, of a Master and nine Priests or Chaplens, and deceasing 1385. was there buried in the North Chappell by the Quire:Monumēt of Sir VV. VValworth defaced and since falsified, and so re∣maineth. but his Monument being (amongst other by bad people) defaced in the reigne of Edward the sixth, and a∣gaine since renued by the Fishmongers, for lacke of knowledge, whatsoever be∣fore had beene written in this Epitaph, they followed a fabulous Booke, and wrote Iacke Strawe, in stead of Wat Ty∣lar: a great error, meet to be reformed there, and elsewhere; and therefore have I the more at large discoursed of this matter. It hath also been, and is now growne to a common opinion, that in reward of this service done by the said VVilliam VValworth against the Rebell; that King Richard added to the Armes of this Ci∣ty (which was Argent, a plaine Crosse Gules) a Sword,Dunthorne. or Dagger, (for so they terme it) whereof I have read no such Record, but to the contrary. I finde, that in the fourth yeere of Richard the second, in a full assembly made in the upper Chamber of the Guildhall, summoned by this William Walworth, then Maior, as well of Aldermen, as of the Common Councell in every Ward, for certain affaires concerning the King; it was there by common consent agreed and ordained, that the old Seale of the Office of the Maioraltie of the City,Old Seale of the Ma∣ioralty broken, and a new Seale made. be∣ing very small, old, unapt, and uncome∣ly for the honour of the City, should be broken, and one other new should bee had, Which the said Maior comman∣ded to be made artificially, and honou∣rable for the exercise of the said Office therafter in place of the other. In which new Seale,The Arms of this Ci∣ty were not alte∣red, but remaine afore: to wit, Ar∣gent, a plaine Crosse Gules, a Sword of S. Paul in the first quarter, and no Dagger of VV. VVal∣worth, as is fabuled. besides the Images of Peter and Paul, which of old were rudely en∣graven, there should bee under the feet of the said Images, a Shield of the Armes of the said City perfectly graven with two Lions supporting the same, and two Sergeants of Armes, in the o∣ther part, one, and two Tabernacles, in which, above, should stand two Angels between whom (above the said Images of Peter and Paul) should be set the glo∣rious Virgin. This being done, the old Seale of the Office was delivered to Ri∣chard Odiham Chamberlain, who brake it, and in place thereof, was delivered the new Seale to the said Maior, to use in his Office of Maioralty, as occasion should require. This new Seale seemeth to be made before VVilliam VValworth was Knighted, for he is not there intitu∣led Sir, as afterwards he was: and cer∣taine it is, that the same new Seale then made, is now in use, and none other in that Office of the Maioralty. Which may suffice to answer the former Fable, without shewing of any evidence sealed with the old Seale which was the Crosse, and Sword of Saint Paul, and not the Dagger of VVilliam VValworth. Now, of other Monuments in that Church, Simon Mordon, Maior, 1368. was buried there. Iohn Olney, Maior, 1446. Robert March, Stocke-fishmonger, gave two peeces of ground to bee a Church-yard. Iohn Radwell, Stock-fishmonger, bu∣ried, 1415. George Gowre, Esquire, sonne to Ed∣ward Gowre Stock-fishmonger, Esquire, 1470. Alexander Purpoynt, Stock-fishmon∣ger, 1373. Andrew Burel, Gentleman of Grayes Inne, 1487.
Iohn Shrow, Stock-fishmonger, 1487. with this Epitaph. Farewell, my friends, the tide abideth no man, I am departed hence, and so shall yee. But in this passage, the best song that I can, Is Requiem aeternam, now Iesu grant it mee: When I have ended all mine adversity, Grant me in Paradise to have a mansion, That shedst thy blood for my redemption. Iohn Finkell, one of the Sheriffs, 1487. was Knighted, and gave 40. pound to this Church, the one halfe for his Mo∣nument. Iohn Pattesley, Maior, 1441. Thomas Ewen, Grocer, bare halfe the charges in building of the Steeple, and was buried, 1501. William Combes, Gent. of Stoke by Gilford in Surrey, 1502. Sir Iohn Brudge, Maior, 1530. gave 50. pound for a house,Colledge∣house in Crookedlane. called the Col∣ledge in Crooked lane: he lyeth buried in S. Nicholas Hacon. Walter Faireford, Robert Barre, Alexan∣der Heyban, Iohn Motte, Iohn Gramstone, Iohn Brampton. Iohn Wood, Stock-fishmonger, 1531. Sir Henry Amcots, Maior, 1548. &c. Hic jacet Richardus Gurneyus, Civitatis London Aldermanus:A comely small Mo∣nument in the East end of the South Ile. Qui tam summis quam infimis viris gratus, charusque semper fuit, tum ob integritatem vitae ac humanitatem, tum propter curam Rei∣publicae singularem: vixit cum dulcis∣sima uxore sua Anna Annos Sus∣cepitque ex ea duodecim liberos, quorum septem superstites reliquit, cum summo omnium dolore excessit è vita quinto die Martii, Anno Domini 1596. Aetatis suae LXXII. Hic etiam uxor ejus Anna jacet, quae post viri obitum Annos tres, menses & sep∣timanas totidem vidua vivens, tandem justè Aetatis morito, viro Nobili nupsit, qui etiamsi ab illa magna commoda, e∣molumenta, immo honores accepit, multa tamen illi contra spem, & merita amore juxta conjungali benevolentia defecit, hoc nomine sibi accelerato senio. Cum jam Annos duodecim, menses duos, & dies quinque illocum conjunxit, prae dolore ac angore, tricesmo primo Augusti, 1612. Annum agens septuagesimum, se∣cundam vitam clausit. Relictis ex priore marito Richardo Gourneyo liberis quinque, justa e solennia (à ma∣rito superstite denegata per filium uni∣cum suum) Thoma Gourney piè perage∣bantur, sumptibus ejus propriis, & in vita ipsi eo nomine mandatis, vicesimo secundo Septemb. Anno Salutis huma∣nae, Millesimo sexcentesimo duodecimo. Here-under lyeth the bodies of Sir Henry Amcores,A goodly ancient Tombe within the Southgra∣ted Chap∣pell. Knight, Alderman and Lord Maior of London, and Dame Ioane his wife. Which Sir Henry Amcotes de∣ceased the 5. day of September, Anno 1554, And the said Dame Ioane de∣ceased the 4. day of September, Anno Dom. 1573. Hard by this Saint Michaels Church,Houses in Crookedlane. blowne up with Gun-powder. on the South side thereof, in the yeere 1560. on the fifth of Iuly, through the shooting of a Gunne, which brake into the house of one Adrian Arten, a Dutch man, and set fire on a Firkin and Barrell of Gunne-powder, foure houses were blowne up, and divers other sore shat∣tered, eleven men and women were slaine, and sixteene so hurt and bruised, that they hardly escaped with life. West from this Saint Michaels Lane,S. Martins Orgar lane and Parish Church. is Saint Martins Orgar lane, by Candle∣wicke street, which Lane is on both sides downe to a Well, replenished with faire and large houses for Merchants, & it is of this Ward: one of which houses was sometime called Beauchamps Inne, as pertaining unto them of that family. Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Cantur∣bury, commonly for his time was lod∣ged there. The Parish Church of Saint Martin Orgar is a small thing VVilliam Crowmer Maior,Parish Church of S. Martin Orgar. builded a proper Chappell on the South side thereof, and was buried there in an ancient Tombe, 1533. Iohn Matthew, Maior, 1490. Sir VVilliam Huit Maior, 1559. with
his Lady and daughter, wife to Sir Ed∣ward Osburne. Relph Tabinham, Alderman. Alice, wife to Thomas Winslow. Thorndon, Benedicke Reading, Thomas Harding, Iames Smith. Richard Gainsford, Esquire. Iohn Bold, &c. An ancient Tombe in the East end of the North Ile, of Robert Cosyn, Esquire; Elizabeth his wife, and Robert his sonne, Gent. All there buried. Tumulus VValburgis Gretsiin, Georgii Stecher, P. M. viduae. Obiit An. 1597. 19. Iulii. Filiaeabque; moerentes P. P. A Memoriall of John Franke,A faire Monumēt in the wal of the Chancell, East. Esquire, and Cecilie his wife, who had issue 4. sonnes; viz. John. a Souldier; Peter, Gentleman-Vsher, and daily wayter to Queene Anne; Robert, Gentleman V∣sher, and Quarter-wayter to the said Queene: and Edward, a Souldier. And foure Daughters, viz. Elizabeth, Do∣rothie, Hester, and Iane. For remembrance of whom, the said Peter Franck, who lyeth interred neere unto this place, bestowed the charge of this Monument. And the said Robert (be∣ing his Executor) caused the same to be erected. And the which Peter dyed the 24. day of October, 1612. Then is there one other Lane, called S. Laurence, of the Parish Church there. This Lane, downe to the South side of the Churchyard, is of Candlewicke-street Ward. The Parish Church of Saint Laurence was increased with a Chappell of Iesus, by Thomas Cole, for a Master and Chap∣laine: the which Chappell and Parish Church was made a Colledge of Iesus, and of Corpus Christi,Parish Church of S. Laurence Poultney, made a Colledge. for a Master and seven Chaplaines, by Iohn Poultney, Maior, and was confirmed by Edward the third, the twentieth of his reigne. Of him was this Church called S. Lau∣rence Poultney in Candlewick street, which Colledge was valued at 79. l. 17. s. 11. d. and was surrendred in the reigne of Edward the sixth. Robert Radcliffe, Earle of Sussex, and Henry Radcliffe, Earle of Sussex, were buried there. Alderman Beswicke was buried there. Iohn Oliffe, Alderman. Robert Browne, and others. Here-under lyeth the body of William Beswyke,An anci Monumēt in the North Ile, Eastward. of Beswyke, Citizen, while he lived, and Draper, and sometime Al∣derman of London, who deceased the 5. day of May, An. Dom. 1567. Iohn Olyffe, Alderman, lying under this stone, dyed the 26. day of Iune, 1577.A faire stone on the groūd in the same Ile. Aged 65. yeeres: He was married for∣ty yeeres to Ioane his wife: Hee had se∣ven children; Anne, Iohn, Ioane, Iohn, Thomas, Matthew, and Edward, who dyed all without issue, save onely Ioane, who married Iohn Leigh, Esquire, and heire of Addington in Surrey, and had issue Olyffe Leigh, now living. EVery Christian heart seeketh to extoll The glory of the Lord,A very faire stone and fairly plated, in the South Ile and body of the Church. Our onely Redeemer: Wherefore Dame Fame must needs inroll Paul VVithypoll his childe, by love and Nature, Elizabeth, the wife of Emanuel Lucar, In whom was declared the goodnesse of the Lord, With many high vertues, which truely I will record. She wrought all Needle-workes men exercise, With Pen; Frame, or Stoole, all Pictures artificiall, Curious Knots or railes, what fancy would devise, Beasts, Birds, or Flowers, even as things naturall: Three manner hands could she write, them faire all. To speake of Algorisme, or accounts, in every fashion, Of women,  like (I thinke) in all this Nation. Dame Cunning her gave a gift right excellent, The goodly practice
of her Science Musicall, In divers tongues to sing, and play with Instrument, Both Viall and Lute, and also Virginall; Not onely upon one, but excellent in all. For all other vertues belonging to Nature, God her appointed a very perfect creature. Latine and Spanish, and also Italian, She spake, writ, and read, with perfect utterance; And for the English, she the Garland wan, In Dame Prudence Schoole, by Graces purveyance, which cloathed her with Vertues, from naked Ignorance: Reading the Scriptures, to judge light from darke, Directing her faith to Christ, the onely Marke. The said Elizabeth deceased the 29. day of October, An. Dom. 1537. Of yeeres not fully 27. This Stone, and all here∣on contained, made at the cost of the said Emanuel, Merchant-Taylor. Thus much for this VVard, and the Antiquities thereof. It hath an Alder∣man and his Deputy; common. Coun∣sellours, eight; Constables, eight, Sca∣vengers, six; Ward-mote Inquest men, twelve, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene at sixteene pounds.
WALBROOKE VVARD. WAlbrooke Ward be∣ginneth at the west end of Candlewicke street Ward.VValbrooke Ward. It run∣neth down Candle∣wicke street, West toward Budge row. It hath on the North side thereof S. Swithens Lane, so called of S. Swithens, a Parish Church by London-stone. This Lane is repleni∣shed (on both the sides) with faire buil∣ded houses, and is wholly of Walbrooke Ward.Parish Church of S. Swithen. The said Parish Church of S. Swithen standeth at the South-west cor∣ner of this lane. Licence was procured, to new build and increase the said Church and Steeple, in the yeere 1420. Sir Iohn Hend, Draper, Maior, was an especiall Benefactor thereunto, as ap∣peareth by his Armes in the Glasse-windowes, even in the tops of them; which is in a Field Argent, a chiefe A∣zure, a Lion passant Argent, a Cheve∣ron Azure, three Escalops Argent. He lyeth buried in the body of this Church, with a faire stone laid on him, but the Plates and inscriptions are defaced. Roger Depham, Alderman. Thomas Aylesbourgh, William Neve, and Matilde Caxton, founded Chaun∣tries, and were buried there. Iohn Butler, Draper, one of the She∣riffes, 1420. Ralph Iocoline, Maior, a Benefactor, buried in a faire Tombe. William White, Draper, one of the She∣riffes, 1482. and others. Stephanus Slanie,A faire Tombe in the East end of the North Ile. Miles, Senator, Viceco∣comes et Praetor clementissimae istius Vr∣bis; Cum summa fide, nec minore pru∣dentia iis Honoribus functus fuisset, Et ex Margareta Conjuge, Filia Gaspari Phesant, Armig. quinque filios & sex filias suscepisset: Tandem satur annis, Aetatis 84. Salutis, 1608. Decembris 27. Animam Coelo, corpus humo red∣didit. Stephanus, filior, natu maximus, superstite Anna unica filia ex Catharina, filia Wal∣teri Aston, Militis. Obiit Gasparus & Thomas Coelibes, Richardus Biennis, Ti∣motheus Bimestris obierunt. Maria primogenita superstes, nupta primum Richarde Broadgate, Mercatori, deinde Humphrey Weld, Militi, Maiori istius Civitatis: Alicia moritur, Elizabetha superstes nupta Samueli Lennard, Mili∣ti. Alicia obiit: Anna nupta Thomae Culpepper, Armig. cui cum tres liberos superstites peperisset, è vita migravit. Martha Coelebs expiravit. In Obitum viri verè Venerabilis, Domini Ioannis Hart, Equitis, olim hu∣jus Civitatis Praetoris, & hujus Ec∣clesiae Patroni, Carmen Funebre. QVis laudes memorare tuas?A goodly Tombe, East, in the upper end of the South Ile, Quis facta valebit Nuper ad Aethereos Harte reverse polos? Quis genium ingenium magnaeque capacia Curae Pectora, Londino pectora grata tuo? Aspice qui dubitas, surgentia culmina Musis, Illa sub arctois qua jacet ora plagis, Nunc obiit. Cohibe lachrymas, nec credito Lector Vitam, quae fuerat non nisi sancta, brevem.
Neere this place lyeth the body of the wor∣shipfull, A faire Monumēt in the South wal of the Church. Randall Manning, Esquire, Merchant-Adventurer, Citizen and Skinner of London: who had to wife, Katharine, daughter of Nicholas Dew∣ren, Citizen and Goldsmith of London: And had by her sundry children, where∣of eight married, and sixe of them were living at his death. He departed this life at the age of 78. yeeres, on the nine∣teenth day of Ianuary, Anno Domini, 1611. Master Bartholomew Barnes,A small Memorie on a pil∣lar in the middle Ile Citizen, Mercer, and Merchant-Adventurer, a worshipfull and wise Gentleman, and a worthy friend and favourer of Reli∣gion. He had fined both for Sheriffe and Alderman, and at last, being 61. yeeres old, sickned, died, and was buried at Bathe, October the first, 1606. and left behind him Margaret his wife; by whom he had issue, Bartholomew, Margaret and Mary. Bartholomaeus adest tumulo Barnesius isti Nomen adest, non cum nomine corpus inest. Sexaginta nimis, quem sex donasse ministros Constat, erat tantus Religionis amor. Attigerat summes quos abnuit urbis honores, Subcomitis fasces, patriciamque togam. Iamque sui luctum desideriumque reliquit Nato & natabus cum genetrice tribus. In the middle Ile lyeth the body of Walter Plummer,In the middle Ile upon a pillar. of this Citie and Parish, Mer∣chant-taylor, who departed this life in March, 1607. Also of Elizabeth his Wife, daughter of Robert Delacre, who dyed in Anno 1595. And had together five sonnes, and one daughter, and left living three sonnes, John, Edward and Thomas. John Plummer of London, Esquire, one of those sonnes, dyed in Sep∣tember, 1603. and lyeth here buried: who had two sonnes, and one daughter, wherof John and Elizabeth were living at his death, and his wife with child of a third sonne. Discesserunt è vita Anno Aetatum suarum 78. & 58. No living creature lives so long,A faire plated stone in the mid∣dle Ile. but once must needs give place, When dolefull Death, that Champion strong, arrests them with his Mace. Example take by me, which did my life enjoy The space of sixty yeeres, lacke three, which Death did then destroy. Like thee I was sometime, but now am turn'd to dust, As thou at length (O earth and slime) returne to ashes must. Of the Company of Clothworkers a brother I became, A long time in the Livery, I lived of the same. Then Death that deadly stroke did give, which now my joyes doth frame, In Christ I dyed, by Christ to live, John Rogers was my name. My loving wife and children two, my place behind supply, God grant them living so to doe, that they in him may dye. Hee departed the 5. day of August, An. Dom. 1576. And she then living, did also decease the, &c. Triste puer Carmen Patris posui Monumente, Hic lapis ut possit Carmina scripta loqui. This sorrowfull Verse, I silly sonne my Fathers Grave did give, That it might speake now he is dead, as though he still did live. On the North side of this Church and Church-yard, is one faire and large builded house,Prior of Tortington his Inne. sometime pertaining to the Prior of Tortington in Sussex, since to the Earles of Oxford, lately to Sir Iohn Hart,Oxford Place by London∣sint. Alderman, and now to Ma∣ster Humphrey Smith, Alderman of this Citie: which house hath a faire Gar∣den belonging thereunto, lying on the West side therof. On the backe∣side of two other houses in Walbrooke, in the reigne of King Henry the seventh, Sir Richard Empson,Empson and Dudley. Knight, Chan∣cellour of the Dutchie of Lancaster,
dwelled in one of them, and Edmond Dudley, Esquire, in the other: either of them had a doore of entercourse into this Garden, wherin they met, and con∣sulted on matters at their pleasures. In this Oxford Place Sir Ambrose Nicholas kept his Maioraltie: since him, the said Sir Iohn Hart; and now the said Master Humphrey Smith dwelleth in it. On the South side of this high street, London stone. neere unto the channell, is pitched up∣right a great stone, called London-stone, fixed in the ground very deepe, fastned with barres of Iron, and otherwise so strongly set, that if Carts doe runne a∣gainst it through negligence, the wheeles be broken, and the stone it selfe unshaken. The cause why this stone was there set, the time when, or other memory thereof is none; but that the same hath long continued there, is manifest, name∣ly, since (or rather before) the Conquest. For in the end of a faire written Gospell booke,Lib. Trint. given to Christs Church in Can∣turbury, Antiquity of London stone. by Ethelstane, King of the West Saxons, I finde noted of Lands or Rents in London belonging to the said Church, whereof one parcell is described to lye neere unto London-stone. Of later time we reade, that in the yeere of Christ, 1135. the first of King Stephen, a fire, which began in the house of one Ali∣ward, neere unto London-stone, consu∣med all East to Ealdgate, in which fire the Priory of the holy Trinity was burnt, and West to S. Erkenwalds shrine in Pauls Church: and these be the eldest notes that I reade thereof. Some have said,Read Mr. Iohn Speed, what he saith ther∣of, and of the like stones. this stone to be set there, as a marke in the middle of the Citie within the wall: but in truth it standeth farre neerer to the River of Thames, than to the wall of the Citie. Some others have said, the same to be set, for the tendering and making of payment by debtors to their creditors, at their appointed dayes and times, till of later time, payments were more usu∣ally made at the Font in Ponts Church, and now most commonly at the Royall Exchange. Some againe have imagined, the same to be set up by one Iohn or Tho∣mas London-stone, dwelling there against it; but more likely it is, that such men have taken name of the Stone, than the Stone of them; as did Iohn at Noke, Thomas at Stile, William at Wall, or at Well, &c. Down west from this Parish Church, and from London-stone,VValbrooke street. have yee VVal∣brooke corner: from whence runneth up a street, North to the Stocks, called Wal∣brooke, because it standeth on the East side of the same Brooke, by the Banke thereof, and the whole Ward taketh name of that street. On the East side of this street, and at the North corner ther∣of, is the Stockes Market, which had this beginning: About the yeere of Christ,Stockes Market. 1282. Henry Wallis, Maior, caused divers hou∣ses in this Citie to be builded towards the maintenance of London Bridge; namely, in one void place, neere unto the Parish Church, called Wooll-church, on the North side thereof, where some∣time (the way being very large & broad) had stood a paire of stocks, for punish∣ment of offenders. This building tooke name of those stocks, and was appoin∣ted (by him) to be a Market-place for fish and flesh in the midst of the Citie.The midst of the Ci∣tie. Other houses be builded in other places, as by Patent of Edward the first it doth appeare, dated the tenth of his reigne. After this, in the yeere 1322. the 17. of Edw. 2. a decree was made by Ha∣mond Chickwell, Maior, that none should sell fish or flesh out of the markets ap∣pointed, to wit, Bridge-street, East-cheap, Old fish-street, S. Nicholas shambles, and the said Stocks, on paine to forfeit such fish or flesh as were there sold, for the first time, and the second time to lose their freedome: which Act was made by commandement of the King, under his Letters Patents, dated at the Tower the 17. of his reigne: and then was this Stocks let to farme for 46. l. 13. s. 4. d. by yeere.Ro. Fabian. This Stockes Market was againe begun to be builded, in the yeere 1410. in the 11. of Henry the 4. and was fini∣shed in the yeere next following. In the yeere 1507. the same was rented 56. l. 19. s. 10. d. And in the yeere 1543. Iohn Cotes being Maior, there was in this Stockes Market for Fishmongers, 25. boords or stalles, rented yeerely to thir∣ty foure pounds, thirteene shillings, foure pence: there was for Butchers 18. boords or stalles, rented at one and
forty pounds, sixteene shillings, foure pence; and there were also Chambers above, sixteene, rented at five pounds thirteene shillings foure pence, in all, 82. l. 3. s. Next unto this Stockes is the Parish Church of S. Mary Wooll-Church,Parish Church of S. Mary Wooll Church. so cal∣led of a Beame placed in the Church∣yard, which was thereof called Wooll-Church Haw, of the Tronage or weigh∣ing of Wooll there used.Tronage or weigh∣ing of wooll, cau∣sed the Church to be called VVooll-Church Haw. And to veri∣fie this, I finde amongst the Customes of London, written in French, in the reign of Edward the second, a Chapter inti∣tuled, Les Customes de VVooll-Church Haw, wherein is set downe, what was there to bee paid for every parcell of Wooll weighed. This Tronage, or weighing of Wooll, till the sixth of Ri∣chard the second, was there continued: Iohn Churchman then builded the Cu∣stome-house upon VVooll Key, to serve for the said Tronage, as is before shewed in Tower-street Ward. This Church is reasonable faire and large, and was lately new builded, by Licence granted in the 20. of Henry the sixth, with condition to be builded 15. foot from the Stockes Market, for spa∣ring of light to the said Stocks. The Par∣son of this Church is to have 4. markes the yeere, for tythe of the said Stockes, paid him by the Masters of the Bridge-house, by a speciall decree made the se∣cond of Henry the seventh. Iohn VVingar, Grocer, Maior 1504. was a great helper to the building of this Church, and was there buried, 1505. Hee gave unto it by his Testa∣ment, two large Basons of Silver, and 20. pounds in money. Also Richard Shore, Draper, one of the Sheriffes, 1505. was a great Bene∣factor in his life, and by his Testa∣ment, gave twenty pounds, to make a Porch at the West end thereof, and was there buried. Richard Hatfield of Steplemorden in Cam∣bridge-shire, lyeth entombed there, 1467. Edward Deoly, Esquire, 1467. Iohn Hanford, Grocer, made the Font of that Church, very curiously wrought, painted and guilded, and was there bu∣ried. Iohn Archer, Fishmonger, 487. Anne Cawood founded a Chauntrie there, &c. In Sevenoke,A faire stone at the Chan∣cell doore within. into the world my Mother brought me, Hawlden House in Kent, with Armes ever honour'd me; Westminster Hall (thirty six yeeres after) knew me. Then Seeking Heaven, Heaven from the world tooke me. VVhilome alive, Thomas Scot men called me: Now laid in Grave, Oblivion covereth me. From the Stockes Market, and this Parish Church, East up into Lombard street, some foure or five houses on a side, and also on the South side of Wool-Church, Beare-bin∣der lane. have ye Beare-binder lane, a part whereof is of this VValbrooke Ward. Then downe lower in the street cal∣led VValbrooke,Parish Church of S. Stephen by VVal∣brooke. is one other faire Church of S. Stephen, lately builded on the East side thereof: for the old Church stood on the West side, in place where now standeth the Parsonage House, and therfore so much neerer to the Brooke, even on the banke. Robert Chichly, Maior in the yeere 1428. the sixth of Henry the sixth, gave to this Parish of S. Stephen one plot of ground, containing 208. foot and a halfe in length, and 66. foot in breadth, there∣upon to build their new Church, and for their Churchyard. And in the se∣venth of Henry the sixth, the said Robert (one of the Founders) said the first stone for himselfe, the second for VVilliam Stondon, Maior, with whose goods the ground that the Church standeth on, and the housing, with the ground of the Church-yard, was bought by the said Chichley for two hundred markes from the Grocers, which had been letten be∣fore for 26. markes the yeere. Robert Whittingham, Draper, laid the third stone. Henry Barton then Maior, &c. The said Chichler gave more 100. l. to the said Worke, and bare the charges of all the Timber-worke on the Proces∣sion way, and laid the Lead upon it of his owne cost. He also gave all the tim∣ber for the roofing of the two side Iles, and paid for the carriage thereof.
This Church was finished in the yeere 1439. The breadth thereof is 67. foot, and length 125. foot; the Church∣yard 90. foot in length, and 37. in breadth, and more. Robert Whitting∣ham (made Knight of the Bath) in the yeere 1432. purchased the patronage of this Church from Iohn, Duke of Bed∣ford, Vncle to Henry the sixth, and Ed∣ward the fourth, in the second of his reigne, and gave it to Richard Lee, then Maior. There be Monuments in this Church of Thomas Southwell, first Parson of this new Church, who lyeth buried in the Quire. Iohn Dunstable, Master of Astrono∣mie and Musicke, in the yeere 1453. Sir Richard Lee, Maior twice, who gave the said Parsonage to the Grocers. Rowland Hill, Maior, 1549. Sir Thomas Pope, first Treasurer of the Augmentations, with his Wife Dame Margaret. Sir Iohn Cootes, Maior, 1542. Sir Iohn Yorke, Knight, Merchant-Taylor, 1549. Edward Iackman, Sheriffe, 1564. Richard Acheley, Grocer. Doctor Owen, Physician to King Hen∣ry the 8. Iohn Kirkbie, Grocer, 1578. and o∣thers. A friend to Vertue,In the South Ile on the ground, a faire stone a lover of Learning, A foe to Vice, and vehement Corrector, A prudent person, all Truth supporting, A Citizen sage, and worthy Counsellor, A lover of VVisedome, of Iustice a furtherer: Loe, here his corps lyeth, Sir Rowland Hill by name, of London late Lord Maior, and Alderman of fame. Venerabili viro Rogero Fenton,Vnder the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. Lancastri∣ensi, Aulae Penbrochianae in Academia Cantabrigiensi olim socio, Sacrae Theo∣logiae Doctori, viro insigniter docto, pio, dilecto, sed immatura nimis morte ob∣repto: Sancti Stephani sua (dum viveret) Parochia, ex justo sensu & sui & cōmunis damni; hoc pii doloris testimonium cor∣dibus prius impressum viventium, jam{que} lapide tantum expressum Monumentum, ut sacrum amoris sui memoriale, Cum perpetuae memoriae voto po∣suit. Qui obiit 16. Jan. An. Dom. 1615. Aetatis suae, 50. Clauditur hoc tumulo,Two faire plated stones in the Chan∣cell, each by other. qui Coelum pectore clausit Dunstaple 1. juris, Astrorum conscius illo Iudice novit hiramis abscondita pandere coeli. Hic vir erat tua laus, tua lux, tua musica princeps, Quique tuas dulces per mundum sperseratonus, Anno Mil. Equater, semel L. trius jungito Christi. Pridie natale sidus transmigrat ad astra, Suscipiant proprium civem coeli sibi cives. Musarum doctus pietatis fidus alumnus,Another faire stone close by it. Edwardus Monecroft corpus inane jacet: Spiritus Aetherea superest tamen arce receptis, Quo sibi dum vixit januit ante viam. Mens pia, larga manus parsim dispersit egenis, Divitias Coeli Divitias{que} Soli. Within this Grave entombed lyes,In the Chancell aside. a man of honest fame, A Grocer of this Noble Towne, Iohn Kirkbie was his name. He lived forty yeeres and nine, in credit with the best: He dyed such time as here you see, his soule in heaven doth rest. Obiit 17. die Iulii, An. Dom. 1578. Hic jacet Thomas Pope,An anci∣ent Tomb in the North Ile of the Quire. primus Thesaura∣rius Augmentationum: Et domina Mar∣gareta uxor ejus: Quae quidem Marga∣reta obiit 16. die Ianuarii, An. Dom. 1538. This life hath on earth no certaine while,
Example by John, Mary,A faire Grave∣stone in the North Cloyster. and Oliver Stile, Who under this stone lye buried in the dust, And putteth you in memory that dye all must. John Stile borne in An. 1582. the 22. of May, Dyed in An. 1583. of Iune the 25. day. Also the 5. of October, 1583. Mary Stile borne was, The 5. of August, 1585. out of this life did passe. Oliver Stile the 25. of February, 1584. this mortall life begun, And ended the same the 9. of August, 1585. his course then being run. Thus may you see, that as you are, so were we, And as we now be, even so shall ye. Yet none can tell the hower, nor whan, That gift was never given to man: Therefore while you have time and space, Pray unto God for mercy and grace. Lower downe from this Parish Church, be divers faire houses, namely one, wherein of late Sir Richard Baker, a Knight of Kent, was lodged, and wher∣in also dwelled Mr. Thomas Gore, a Mer∣chant famous for Hospitality. On the West side of this Walbrooke street, over against the Stockes Market, is a part of the high street, called the Poultry, on the South-side west, till over against S. Mildreds Church, and the Scalding wike, is of this Ward. Then downe againe Walbrooke street,Buckles Bury. some small distance, is Buckles Bury, a street so called of Buckle, that sometime was owner thereof; part of which street on both sides, three or foure houses, to the course of the Brook, is of this ward, and so downe Walbrooke street, to the South corner: from whence, West, downe Budge Row, some small distance, to an Alley, and thorow that Alley, South,S. Iohn upō VValbrooke by the West end of Saint Iohns Church upon Walbrooke, by the South side and East end of the same, againe to Walbrooke corner. This Parish Church is called S. Iohn upon Walbrooke, because the West end thereof is on the very banke of Walbrooke,Horshooe Bridge in Horshooe Bridge street. by Horshooe Bridge, in Horshooe-Bridge street. This Church was also lately new builded: for about the yeere 1412. li∣cence was granted by the Maior and Communalty, to the Parson and Parish, for the inlarging thereof, with a piece of ground on the North part of the Quire, one and twenty foot in length, seventeene foot in breadth, and three inches; and on the South side of the Quire, one foot of the common soyle. There bee no Monuments in this Church of any account, onely these: William Combarton, Skinner, who gave Lands to that Church, was there buried 1410. Iohn Stone, Taylor, one of the She∣riffes, 1464. was likewise buried there. On the South side of Walbrook Ward, from Candlewicke street, in the mid-way betwixt London-stone and Walbrooke cor∣ner, is a little Lane, with a turnepike in the middest thereof, and in the same a proper Parish Church,Parish Church of S. Mary Bothaw. called S. Mary Bothaw, or Boat-haw, by the Erbar. This Church being neere unto Downegate, on the River of Thames, hath the addition of Bothaw, or Boat-haw, of neere adjoy∣ning to an Haw, or Yard, wherein (of old time) Boats were made, and landed from Downegate, to be mended, as may be supposed: for other reason I finde none, why it should be so called. Within this Church and the small Cloystrie adjoyning, divers Noblemen and persons of Worship have been bu∣ried, as appeareth by Armes in the win∣dowes, the defaced Tombes, and print of plates, torne up and carried away: There remaine onely of Iohn West, E∣squire, buried in the yeere 1408. Thomas Huytley, Esquire, 1539. but his Monumeut is defaced since. Lancelot Bathurst, &c. Here lyeth the body of Lancelot Bathurst, Citizen, Grocer, and chosen Alderman of this Honourable Citie: who deceased the 27. day of September, 1594. &c. But the most memorable Monument of all other there, was that of Sir Henry
Fitz-Alwine,The first Lord Mai∣or of Lon∣don, Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine, bu∣ried there. Draper, the first Lord Maior of London that ever was, and con∣tinued (by several elections) in the Mai∣oraltie above 24. yeeres. His dwelling house remaineth yet in the Parish, di∣vided now into two or three houses. His Monument can be proved to bee in that Church, as his Armes in the glasse windowes and Grave-stones doe suffi∣ciently shew. Besides, those houses were his gift to the Drapers, and they pay a quit-rent in his name yeerely for ever. All which are sufficient to testifie that he was not buried in the Priorie of the holy Trinity within Ealdgate, (now called the Dukes Place) as formerly hath beene avowched by Mr. Stowe; but that there his body resteth, in undoubted hope of a joyfull resurrection. Such as make any doubt hereof, may be further satisfied in the Drapers Hall. The Erbar is an ancient place so cal∣led, but not of Walbrooke Ward, and therefore out of that Lane, to Walbrooke corner, and then downe, till over a∣gainst the South corner of Saint Iohns Church upon Walbrooke. And this is all that I can say of VVal∣brooke Ward. It hath an Alderman, and his Deputy; Common-Counsel∣lours, 11. Constables, 9. Scavengers, 6. for the Wardmote Inquest, 13. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene in London, at 33. pounds, 5. shillings.
DOWNEGATE VVARD. DOwnegate Ward be∣ginne that the south end of VValbrooke Ward,Downegate Ward. over-against the East corner of Saint Iohns Church upon Walbrooke, and descendeth on both the sides to Downegate, on the Thames, and is so called, of that downe-going or descending therunto: and of this Down∣gate the Ward taketh name. This Ward turneth into Thames street VVestward, some ten houses on a side, to the course of Walbrooke, but East in Thames street (on both sides) to Ebgate lane, or Old Swanne, the land-side whereof hath ma∣ny Lanes turning up, as shall be shewed when I come to them. But first to begin with the highstreet called Dowgate:Conduit upon Downegate. at the upper end there∣of is a faire Conduit of Thames water, castellated, and made in the yeere 1568. at charges of the Citizens, and is cal∣led the Conduit upon Downegate. The descent of this street is such, that in the yeere 1574. on the fourth of September in the afternoone, there fell a storme of raine, where-through the channels sud∣denly arose, and ranne with such a swift course towards the common shores, that a Lad of eighteene yeeres old,A Lad of 18. yeeres old drow∣ned in the Channell. minding to have leapt over the channell, neere unto the said Conduit, was taken with the streame, and carried from thence towards the Thames with such a vio∣lence, that no man, with staves, or o∣therwise, could stay him, till hee came against a Cart-wheele, that stood in the said Water-gate, before which time he was drowned, and starke dead. On the West side of this street, is the Tallow-Chandlers Hal,Tallow-Chandlers Hall. a proper house, which Company was incorporated in the second yeere of Edward the fourth. Somewhat lower standeth the Skin∣ners Hall,Copped Hall, now Skinners Hall. a faire house, which was som∣time called Copped Hall, by Downegate, in the Parish of S. Iohn upon Walbrooke. In the 19, yeere of Edward the second, Ralph Cobham possessed it, with five shoppes, &c. This Company of Skinners in Lon∣don, was incorporate by Edward the 3. in the first of his reigne: they had two Brotherhoods of Corpus Christi, viz. one at St. Mary Spittle, the other at St. Mary Bethlem, without Bishopsgate. Ri∣chard the second, in the eighteenth of his reigne, granted them to make their two Brotherhoods one, by the name of the Fraternity of Corpus Christi of Skin∣ners. Divers royall persons were named to bee Founders, and Brethren of this Fraternity,Sixe Kings Brethren with the Skinners Company in . to wit; Kings sixe, Dukes nine, Earles two, Lords one. Kings, Edward the third, Richard the second, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, and Ed∣ward the fourth. This Fraternity had also once every yeere,Their pompous Proces∣sion. on Corpus Christi day, after noone a Procession, which passed through the principall streets of the City, wherein was borne more than one hundred Tor∣ches of VVaxe (costly garnised) bur∣ning light, and above two hundred Clerkes and Priests in Surpleffes and Coapes, singing. After the which, were the Sheriffes servants, the Clerkes of the Compters, Chaplaines for the Sheriffes, the Maiors Sergeants, the Councell of the City, the Maior and Aldermen in Scarlet, and then the Skinners in their best Liveries. Thus much to stop the tongues of unthankfull men, such as use to aske, VVhy have yee not noted this, or that, and give no thanks for what is done?
Then lower downe was a Colledge of Priests, called Iesus Commons, a house well furnished with Brasse, Pewter, Na∣pery, Plate, &c. besides a faire Library well stored with Bookes, all which of old time were given to a number of Priests, that should keepe Commons there, and as one left his place (by death or otherwise) another should be admit∣ted into this room; but this order with∣in this thirty yeers being discontinued, the said house was dissolved and turned to Tenements. Down lower have ye Elbow-lane, and at the corner thereof was one great stone house,Elbow-lane. called Old-hall: it is now taken downe, and divers faire houses of Tim∣ber placed there. This was sometime pertaining to William de pont le Arch,William de pont le Arch his house. and by him given to the Priory of S. Mary Overy in Southwarke, in the reigne of Henry the first. In this Elbow-lane is the Inholders hall,Inholders Hall. and other faire hou∣ses: this lane runneth West, and sud∣denly turneth South into Thames street, and therefore (of that bending) is cal∣led Elbow-lane. On the East side of this Downegate street, is the great old house before spoken of, called the Erbar, neere to the Church of Saint Mary Bothaw;The Erbar S. Mary Bothaw. Geffrey Scroope held it by the gift of Ed∣ward the third in the foureteenth of his reigne. It belonged since to Iohn Nevell, Lord of Raby, then to Richard Nevell, Earle of Warwicke; Nevell, Earle of Sa∣lisbury was lodged there, 1457. Then it came to George Duke of Clarence, and his heires males, by the gift of Edward the fourth in the foureteene yeere of his reigne. It was lately builded by Sir Thomas Pullison Maior, and was after∣ward inhabited by Sir Francis Drake, that famous Navigator. Next to this great house, is a lane turning to Bush∣lane, (of old time called Carter-lane, of Carts, and Carmen having Stables there) and now called Chequer-lane, or Chequer-Alley, of an Inne called the Chequer. In Thames street,Greenwitch lane, or Fryer lane. on the Thames side West from Downgate, is Greenwitch-lane, of old time so called, and now Frier lane, of such a signe there set up.Ioyners Hall. In this lane is the Joiners Hall, and other faire hou∣ses. Then is Granthams lane,Granthams lane. so called of Iohn Grantham, sometime Maior and owner therof, whose house was very large and strong, builded of stone, as appea∣reth by gates arched yet remaining. Ralph Dodmer, first a Brewer, then a Mercer, Maior, 1529. dwelled there, and kept his Maioraltie in that house: it is now a Brewhouse, as it was before. Then is Downgate, whereof is spoken in another place.Cosin lane. East from this Down∣gate, is Cosin lane, named of one William Cosin, that dwelled there, in the fourth of Richard the second, as divers his pre∣decessors, Father, Grandfather, &c. had done before him. William Cosin was one of the Sheriffes in the yeere 1306. That house standeth at the South end of the lane, having an old and artificiall con∣veyance of Thames water into it, and is now a Dye-house, called Lambards Mes∣suage. Adjoyning to that house,A Ginne to convey Thames wa∣ter to Downegate Conduit. there was lately erected an engine, to convey Thames water unto Downegate Conduit aforesaid. Next to this lane, on the East, is the Steleyard (as they terme it) a place for Merchants of Almaine,Steleyard for Mer∣chants of Almaine. that used to bring hither, as well Wheat, Rie, and other graine, as Cables, Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tarre, Flaxe, Hempe, Linnen Cloth, Wainscots, Waxe, Steele, and other profitable Merchandizes. Vnto these Merchants, in the yeere, 1259. Henry the third, at the request of his Brother Richard, Earle of Cornwall, King of Almaine, granted, that all and singu∣lar the Merchants, having a house in the City of London, commonly called Guilda Aula Theutonicorum,Guilda Au∣la Theutoni∣corum. should bee maintained and upholden through the whole Realme, by all such freedomes, and free usages or liberties, as by the King and his Noble Progenitors time they had and enjoyed, &c. Edward the first renued and confirmed that Charter of Liberties, granted by his Father. And in the tenth yeere of the same Edward, Henry Wallis being Maior, a great con∣troversie did arise between the said Ma∣ior, and the Merchants of the Haunce of Almaine, about the reparations of Bi∣shopsgate, then likely to fall, for that the said Merchants enjoyed divers priviled∣ges, in respect of maintaining the said Gate, which they now denyed to re∣paire: for the appeasing of which con∣troversie,
the King sent his Writ to the Treasurer, and Barons of his Exchequer commanding, that they should make inquisition thereof: Before whom the Merchants being called, when they were not able to discharge themselves, sith they enjoyed the liberties to them gran∣ted for the same; a Precept was sent to the Maior and Sheriffes, to distraine the said Merchants to make reparations, namely, Gerard Marbod, Alderman of the Haunce; Ralph de Cussarde, a Citi∣zen of Colen, Ludero de Denevar, a Bur∣gesse of Trivar; Iohn of Aras, a Bur∣gesse of Trivon; Bartram of Hamburgh; Godestalke of Hundondale, a Burgesse of Trivon; Iohn de Dele, a Burgesse of Mun∣star, then remaining in the said City of London, for themselves, and all other Merchants of the Haunce: and so they granted 210. Markes sterling to the Maior and Citizens, and undertooke, that they and their successors should (from time to time) repaire the said Gate, and beare the third part of the charges in mony, and men to defend it, when need were. And for this agreement, the said Ma∣ior and Citizens granted to the said Merchants their liberties,Merchants of the Haunce, of Almaine, li∣cenced to lay up their corn in Gar∣ners, but to sell it within 40. dayes af∣ter. which till of late they have enjoyed, as namely, a∣mongst other, that they might lay up their Graine, which they brought into this Realme, in Innes, and sell it in their Garners, by the space of forty dayes af∣ter they had laid it up; except by the Maior and Citizens they were expresse∣ly forbidden, because of dearth, or o∣ther reasonable occasions. Also, they might have their Aldermen, as they had been accustomed, foreseen alwaies, that he were of the City, and presented to the Maior and Aldermen of the Ci∣ty, so oft as any should be chosen, and should take an oath before them, to maintaine Iustice in their Courts, and to behave themselves in their Office ac∣cording to Law, and as it stood with the Customes of the City. Thus much for their Priviledges: Whereby it appeareth, that they were great Merchants of Corne, brought out of the East parts hither, insomuch, that the occupiers of husbandry in this Land were enforced to complaine of them, for bringing in such aboundance, when the Corne of this Realme was at an ea∣sie price.Act of Parliamēt forbidding Corne to be brought from be∣yond Se. Whereupon it was ordained by Parliament, That no person should bring into any part of this Realme, by way of Merchandise, VVheat, Rye, or Barley, growing out of the said Realme, when the quarter of Wheat exceeded not the price of 6. s. 8. d. Rie 4. s. the Quarter, and Barley 3. shillings the Quarter, upon forfeiture the one halfe to the King, the other halfe to the seisor thereof. These Merchants of the Haunce had their Guild hall in Thames street, in place aforesaid, by the said Cosin lane. Their Hall is large, builded of Stone, with three arched Gates towards the street, the middlemost whereof is farre bigger than the other, and is seldome o∣pened, the other two be mured up: the same is now called the Old Hall. Of later time, to wit, in the sixth of Richard the second, they hired one house next adjoyning to their old Hall, which sometime belonged to Richard Lions, a famous Lapidarie, one of the Sheriffes of Lond. in the 49. of Edward the third, and in the fourth of Richard the second, by the Rebels of Kent drawn out of that house, and beheaded in West Cheape. This also was a great house, with a large Wharfe on the Thames: and the way thereunto was called Windgoose, or Wild∣goose lane,Windgoose lane. which is now called Windgoose Alley, for that the same Alley is (for the most part) builded on by the Stilyard Merchants. The Abbot of S. Albans had a Mes∣suage here, with a Key given to him, in the 34. of Henry the sixth. Then is one other great house, which sometime pertained to Iohn Rainwell, Stock-fishmonger, Maior, and it was by him given to the Maior and Com∣munalty, to the end, that the profits thereof should bee disposed in deeds of piety: which house in the 15. of Edward the fourth, was confirmed unto the said Merchants in manner following, viz. It is ordained by our Soveraigne Lord and his Parliament,Patent. that the said Mer∣chants of Almaine, being of the Company called the Guildhall Theutonicorum, (or the Flemish Geld) that now be, or here∣after shall be, shall have, hold, and enjoy to them and their successors for ever, the said
place, called the Steele-house, yeelding to the Maior and Communalty an annuall rent of threescore and tenne pounds, three shillings, foure pence, &c. In the yeere 1551. the fifth of Ed∣ward the sixth,Steelyard put down. through complaint of the English Merchants, the liberty of the Steelyard Merchants was seized into the Kings hands, and so it resteth. Then is Church lane,Church lane. at the West end of Alhallowes Church, called Alhallowes the more in Thames streete,Parish Church of Alhallowes the more. for a diffe∣rence from Alhallowes the lesse, in the same street. It is also called Alhallowes ad foenum in the Roperie, because Hay was sold neere thereunto, at Hay Wharfe, and Ropes of old time made and sold in the high street. This is a faire Church, with a large Cloister on the South side thereof, about their Church-yard, but foulely defaced and ruinated. The Church also hath had many faire Monuments, but now defaced: There remaine in the Quire some Plates on Grave-stones, namely of William Lich∣field, Doctor of Divinity, who deceased the yeere 1447. Hee was a great Stu∣dent, and compiled many Bookes, both Morall and Divine, in Prose and Verse; namely one, intituled, The complaint of God unto sinfull man. Hee made in his time 3083. Sermons, as appeared by his owne hand-writing, and were found when he was dead. One other Plate there is of Iohn Bric∣kles, Draper, who deceased in the yeere 1451. Hee was a great Benefactor to that Church, and gave by his Testament certaine Tenements, to the reliefe of the poore. Nicholas Loven, and William Peston, founded Chauntries there. Willielmus dudum Lichfield quem mors fora pressit,A faire plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. Ista post ludum mundi sub rupe quiescit. In domum rure cultor, sator ac operosus, Dum preciat ture, pastor vigil, & studiosus. Hanc aedem rexit, ornavit & amplificavit, Pignora provexit, ac sacro dogmate pavit. Pauperibus carus, inopes in mente gerebat, Consilio gnarus dubitantibus esse solebat. Christe pugil forcis ejus dissolve reatus, Vt vivat mortis post morsum glorificatus. Luce bis X. quat' I. migrat Octobris sine panno, Equat' X. quat' V. semel I. ter. I. M. Karus. Staprecor interne,Another faire stone lying by it▪ qui transis aspice, cerne, Non nitidis pannis, sed olentibus oss'a Johannis Brickles, ista mei specus includit requiei, Taliter indutus tumulabere tu resolutus. Dormit in hac cella mea conjuge ac Isabella, Appollinaris quam vixit lux nece stratratus. Aequater X. ter V. semel I. bis & M. sociatis. At the East end of this Church go∣eth downe a Lane,Hay-wharfe Lane. called Hay-Wharfe lane, now lately a great Brew-house, builded there by one Pot; Henry Cam∣pion, Esquire, a Beere-brewer, used it, and Abraham his sonne since possessed it. Then was there one other Lane,VVoolseys Lane. sometime called Woolseys gate, now out of use: for the lower part thereof, upon the banke of Thames, is builded by the late Earle of Shrewsbury, and the o∣ther end is builded on and stopped up by the Chamberlaine of London. Iohn Butler, Draper, one of the Sheriffes, in the yeere 1420. dwelled there: Hee appointed his house to be sold, and the price thereof to be given to the poore: it was of Alhallowes Parish the lesse. Then is there the said Parish Church of Alhallowes,Parish Church of Alhallowes the lesse. called the lesse; and by some, Alhallowes on the Cellers, for it standeth on Vaults: it is said to be buil∣ded by Sir Iohn Poultney, sometimes Maior. The Steeple and Quire of this Church, stand on an arched Gate, be∣ing the entrie to a great house, called Cold Harbrough:Cold Har∣brough. the Quire of late being
falne downe, is now againe at length, in the yeere 1594. by the Parishioners new builded. Touching this Cold Harbrough, I find, that in the 13. of Edward the second, Sir Iohn Abel, Knight, demised or let unto Henry Stow, Draper, all that his capitall Messuage, called the Cold Har∣brough, in the Parish of All Saints ad foe∣num, and all the purtenances within the Gate, with the Key which Robert Hart∣ford, Citizen, sonne to William Hartford, had, and ought, and the foresaid Robert paid for it the rent of 33. shillings the yeere. This Robert Hartford being own∣er thereof, as also of other lands in Sur∣rey; deceasing without issue male, left two daughters his Coheires, to wit, I∣donia, married to Sir Ralph Bigot, and Maude, married to Sir Stephen Cosenton, Knights, betweene whom the said house and lands were parted. After the which Iohn Bigot, Sonne to the said Sir Ralph and Sir Iohn Cosenton, did sell their moi∣ties of Cold Harbrough unto Iohn Poult∣ney, sonne of Adam Poultney, the eighth of Edward the third. This Sir Iohn Poult∣ney dwelling in this house, and being 4. times Maior, the said house tooke the name of Poultney's Inne. Notwithstan∣ding, this Sir Iohn Poultney, the 21. of Edward the third, by his Charter gave and confirmed to Humfrey de Bohune, Earle of Hereford and Essex, his whole tenement, called Cold Harbrough, with all the Tenements and Key adjoyning, and appurtenances sometime pertaining to Robert de Herford, on the way called Hay-wharfe lane, &c. for one Rose at Midsummer, to him and his heires, for all services, if the same were demanded. This Sir Iohn Poultney deceased 1349. and left issue, by Margaret his wife, Wil∣liam Poultney, who dyed without issue: and Margaret his Mother was married to Sir Nicholas Lovel, Knight, &c. Phi∣lip S. Cleare gave two Messuages, per∣taining to this Cold Harbrough, in the Roperie, towards the inlarging of the Parish Church and Church-yard of All-Saints, called the lesse, in the 20. of Ri∣chard the second. In the yeere 1397. the 21 of Richard the second, Iohn Holland, Earle of Hun∣tington, was lodged there, and Richard the second his Brother dined with him: it was then counted a right faire and stately house. But in the next yeere following, I finde, that Edmond, Earle of Cambridge, was there lodged: not∣withstanding, the said house still retai∣ned the name of Poultney's Inne, in the reigne of Henry the sixth, the 26. of his reigne. It belonged since to H. Holland Duke of Excester, and hee was lodged there in the yeere 1472. In the yeere 1485. Richard the third, by his Letters Patents granted and gave to Iohn Writh, alias Garter, principall King of Armes of English men, and to the rest of the Kings Heralds and Pursevants of Arms, all that Messuage with the appurtenan∣ces, called Cold Harber, in the Parish of All Saints the little in London, and their successors for ever. Dated at Westmin∣ster the second of March, Anno regni suiprimo, without fine or see. How the said Heralds departed, therewith, I have not read, but in the reigne of Henry the eighth, the Bishop of Durhams house, neere Charing Crosse, being taken into the Kings hand, Cuthbert Tunstal, Bi∣shop of Durham, was lodged in this Cold Harber, since the which time it hath belonged to the Earles of Shrews∣bury, by composition (as is supposed) from the said Cuthbert Tunstall. The last deceased Earle tooke it downe, and in place thereof builded a great number of small Tenements now letten out for great rents, to people of all sorts. Then is the Diers Hall, which Com∣pany was made a Brotherhood or Guild,The Diers Hall. in the fourth of Henry the sixth, and appointed to consist of a Gardian or Warden, and a Communalty the 12. of Edward the fourth. Then bee there divers large Brewhouses, and o∣thers, till you come to Ebgate lane, where that Ward endeth in the East. On the North side of Thames street bee divers lanes also, the first is at the South end of Elbow-lane before spoken of, west from Downegate, over-against Greene∣witch lane: then bee divers faire houses for Merchants, and others all along that side. the next lane East from Downe∣gate, is called Bush lane,Bush-lane. which turneth up to Candlewicke street,Suffolke lane. and is of Down-gate Ward. Next is Suffolke lane, like∣wise turning up to Candlewicke street:Merchant Taylor Schoole. in this lane is one notable Grammer
Schoole, founded in the yeere 1561. by the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Merchant-taylors, in the Parish of S. Laurence Poultney; Richard Hils, sometimes Master of that Company, having before given 500. l. toward the purchase of an house,The Man∣ner of the Rose. called the Mannor of the Rose, sometime belonging to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein the said Schoole is kept. Then is there one other Lane,S. Laurence Lane. which turneth up to S. Laurence Hill, and to the Southwest corner of Saint Laurence Church-yard:Poultney Lane. then other Lane, called Poultney Lane, that goeth up, of this Ward to the South-east corner of S. Laurence Church-yard, and so downe againe, and to the West corner of Saint Martin Orgar lane, and over against Eb∣gate lane:13. Wards on the east side of VValbrook, not ha¦ving one house on the west of the said Brooke. and this is all of Downegate Ward, the 13. in number lying East from the water-course of VValbrooke, and hath not any one house on the west side of the said Brooke. It hath an Alderman, his Deputy; Common-Counsellors, nine; Consta∣bles, eight; Seavengers, five; for the Wardmote Inquest, foureteene, and a Beadle: it is taxed to the Fifteene at eight and twenty pounds.
WARDS ON THE VVEST SIDE OF WALBROOKE: AND FIRST, OF VINTRIE VVARD. NOw I am to speak of the other Wards,Wards on the VVest side of Walbrooke, and first, of Vintrie VVard. 12. in number, all lying on the West side of the course of Walbrook: and first of the Vintry ward, so called of Vintners, and of the Vin∣trie, a part of the banke of the River of Thames, where the Merchants of Burde∣aux, craned their Wines out of Ligh∣ters, and other Vessels, and there lan∣ded and made sale of them, within for∣ty dayes after, untill the twenty eighth of Edward the first, at which time the said Merchants complained, that they could not sell their wines, paying poun∣dage, neither hire houses or cellars to lay them in: and it was redressed by vertue of the Kings Writ, directed to the Maior and Sheriffes of London, da∣ted at Carlaveroke, or Carlile. Since the which time, many faire and large hou∣ses (with Vaults and Cellars for stow∣age of VVines, and lodging of Bur∣deaux Merchants) have beene builded, in place where before time were Cooks houses: for Fitzstephen, in the reigne of Henry the second, writeth, that upon the Rivers side, betweene the VVine in Ships, and the VVine to be sold in Ta∣vernes, was a common Cookes Row, &c. as in another place I have set down. wherby it apeares, that in those daies, (and till of late time) every man lived according to his owne professed Trade,Every man lived by his se∣verall pro∣fessed trade. not any one interrupting another. The Cookes dressed meat, and sold no wine; and the Taverner sold wine, but dres∣sed no meat for sale, &c. This VVard beginneth in the East, at the West end of Downegate Ward, at the water-course of Walbrooke, which parteth them, to wit, at Granthams lane, on the Thames side, and at Elbow lane, on the Land side: it runneth along in Thames street, West, some three hou∣ses beyond the Old Swan, a Brewhouse, and on the Land side, some three hou∣ses West, beyond Saint Iames at Gar∣licke hithe. In breadth, this VVard stretcheth from the Vintrie North, to the wall of the West gate of the Tower Royall: the other North part is of Cordwainer street Ward. Out of this Royall street by the South gate of Tower-Royall, runneth a small street, East to Saint Iohns upon Wal∣brooke, Horshoo-bridge street which street is called Horse∣shoo-bridge, of such a bridge sometime over the brooke there, which is now vaulted over. Then from the South gate West, runneth one other street,Knight-ri∣ders street. called Knight-riders street, by Saint Thomas Apostles Church, on the North side, and Wring∣wren lane, by the said Church, at the West end thereof, and to the East end of the Trinity Church in the said Knight-riders street, where this Ward endeth on that South side the street: but on the North side, it runneth no farther than the corner against the new builded Ta∣verne, and other houses, in a plot of ground where sometime stood Or∣mond place. Yet have yee one other lane lower downe in Royall streete, stretching forth from over against
Saint Michaels Church, to and by the North side of Saint Iames Church by Garlicke hith,Kerion lane. this is called Kerion lane: And thus much for the bounds of the Vintrie Ward. Now on the Thames side west from Granthams lane, have ye Her∣bert lane,Brickles lane. or Brickles lane, so called of Iohn Brikles, sometimes owner there∣of. Then is Simpsons lane,Simpsons lane. of one Simpson; or Emperours-head lane, of such a signe: then the Three Cranes lane, so called, not onely of a signe of three Cranes at a Ta∣verne doore, but rather of three strong Cranes of Timber, placed on the Vin∣trie wharfe by the Thames side, to crane up Wines there, as is afore shewed: this Lane was of old time, to wit, the 9. of Richard the second,Painted Ta∣verne, or three Cranes lane. called the Pain∣ted Taverne lane, of the Taverne being painted. Then next over against Saint Mar∣tins Church, is a large house builded of stone and timber, with vaults for the stowage of wines,The Vintry Record. and is called the Vin∣trie. There dwelled Iohn Gisers, Vint∣ner, Maior of London, and Constable of the Tower, and then was Henry Picard, Vintner, Maior. In this house Henry Picard feasted foure Kings in one day; as in my Summary I have shewed. Then next is Vannars lane,Vanners Lane. so called of one Vannar that was owner thereof, it is now called Church lane, of the comming up from S. Martins Church. Next is Broad lane, for that the same is broader for the passage of Carts from the Vintrie Wharfe,Broad lane. than be the other lanes. At the North-west corner of this lane is the Parish-Clerks Hall,Parish Clerks Hall. lately by them purchased, since they lost their old Hall in Bishopsgate street. Next is Spit∣tle lane, of old time so called; since, Sto∣dies lane,Stodies lane of the owner thereof, named Stodie. Sir Iohn Stodie, Vintner, Mai∣or in the yeere 1357. gave it, with all the Quadrant wherein Vintners Hall now standeth,Vintners Hall. with the Tenements round about, unto the Vintners: the Vintners builded for themselves a faire Hall,Almes-houses of the Vint∣ners. and also 13. Almes-houses there, for 13. poore people, which are kept of charity, rent-free. The Vintners in London were (of old time) called Merchants Vintners of Gascoyne, and so I reade them in the records of Edward the 2. the 11. yeere, and Edward the 3. the ninth yeere, they were as well Englishmen, as strangers borne beyond the Seas, but then subjects to the King of England, great Burdeaux Merchants of Gascoyne and French wines; divers of them were Maiors of this Ci∣tie; namely, Ioh. Adrian, Vintner, Reig∣nold at Conduit, Iohn Oxenford, Henry Picard, that feasted the Kings of Eng∣land, France, Scotland, and Cypres: Iohn Stodie, that gave Stodies lane to the Vint∣ners: which foure last named, were Maiors in the reign of Edward the third, and yet Gascoyne Wines were then to be sold at London, not above 4. pence, nor Rhenish Wines above 6. pence the Gallon. I reade of sweet Wines, that in the 50. of Edward the third, Iohn Peachie, Fishmonger, was accused, for that hee procured a Licence for the onely sale of them in London: which notwithstan∣ding he justified by Law, he was impri∣soned and fined. More I read, that in the 6. of Hen. 6. the Lombards corrupting their sweet Wines, when knowledge thereof came to Iohn Rainwell, Maior of London, hee (in divers places of the Citie) comman∣ded the heads of the Buts and other ves∣sels, in the open streets, to be broken, to the number of one hundred and fifty, so that the liquor running forth, passed thorow the Citie like a streame of raine water, in the sight of all the people; from whence there issued a most loath∣some savour. I read in the reigne of Henry the 7. that no sweet VVines were brought in∣to this Realme, but Malmsies, by the Longobards, paying to the King for his Licence, 6. . 8. d. of every But, besides 12. d. for Bottell-large. I remember, within these 54. yeeres, Malmsey not to be sold above 1. d. ob. the pint. For proofe whereof, it appeareth in the Church-Booke of S. Andrew Vndershaft, that in the yeere 1547. I. G. and S. K. then Church-wardens, for 80. pints of Malmsey, spent in the Church, after 1. d. halfepenny the pint, paid at the yeeres end for the same tenne shillings. More I remember, that no Sackes were sold, but Rumney, and that for Me∣dicine more than for drinke: but now
many kindes of Sackes are knowne and used. And so much for Wines. For the Vintrie,The Kings sonnes supped in the Vintrie to end therewith, I read, that in the reigne of Henry the 4. the yong Prince Henry, T. Duke of Cla∣rence, I. Duke of Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of Glocester, the Kings sonnes, be∣ing at supper amongst the Merchants of London in the Vintrie, in the house of Lewes Iohn,Hn. Scogan Henry Scogan sent to them a Ballad, beginning thus: My Noble Sonnes, and oke my Lords deare, I your Father called unworthily, Send unto you this Ballad following here, Written with mine owne hand full rudely: Although it be, that I not reverently Have written to your Estates, I you pray, Mine uncunning take benignely, For Gods sake, and hearken what I say. Then follow in like Meeter, 23. staves, containing a perswasion from losing of time foolishly, in lust and vice, but to spend the same in vertue and godlines; as ye may read in Geffrey Chawcer his Workes,Chawcer fol. 334 & 33. lately printed. The successors of those Vintuers and Wine-drawers, that retayled by the Gallons, Pottell, Quart,Wine-tun∣ners in∣corpora∣ted the 15. of Hen. 6. and Pint, were all incorporated by the name of Wine-tunners, in the reigne of Edward the third, and confir∣med the 15. of Henry the sixth. Next is Palmers Lane,Palmers lane, or An∣cho lane. Plumers Hall. now called An∣chor Lane. The Plummers have their Hall there, but are Tenants to the Vintners. Then is Worcester House,Worcester House. sometimes belonging to the Earles of Worcester, now divided into many tenements.Fuiterers Hall. The Fruiterers have their Hall there. Then is the Old Swan,Old Swan. a great Brew-house. And this is all, on the Thames side, that I can note in this Ward. On the Land side, is the Royall street, and Pater noster Lane,Pater noster Lane, I thinke of old time called Arches: for I read, that Ro∣bert de Suffolke gave to Walter Darford,. S. Ma Ov. his tenement with the appurtenance, in the Lane called Les Arches, in the parish of S. Michael de Pater noster Church, be∣tweene the wall of the Field called Win∣chester field, on the East, and the same Lane on the West, &c. More I reade of a stone House, called Stoda de Win∣ton, juxta Stodum bridge, which in that Lane was over Walbrooke water. Then is the faire Parish Church of S. Michael,Parish Church of S. Michael , a Col∣ledge, one Almes-house or Hospit. called Pater noster Church in the Royall. This Church was new builded, and made a Colledge of S. Spirit, and S. Mary, founded by Richard Whittington, Mercer, foure times Maior, for a Master, foure Fellowes, Masters of Art, Clerkes, Conducts, Chorists, &c. and an Almes-house, called Gods house or Hospitall, for thirteene poore men, one of them to be Tutor, and to have 16 pence the weeke, the other twelve, each of them to have 14. pence the weeke for ever, with other necessary provisi∣on, an Hutch with three lockes, a com∣mon scale, &c. These were bound to pray for the good estate of Richard Whittington, and Alice his wife; their Founders; and for Sir William VVhittington,R. VVhi∣ttington, n to Sir VV. VVhitting∣ton Knight. Knight, and Dame Ioan his wife; and for Hugh Fitz∣warren, and Dame Molde his wife, the Fathers and Mothers of the said Richard VVhittington, and Alice his wife; for King Richard the second, and Thomas of Woodslocke, Duke of Glocester, speciall Lords and Promoters of the said Richard VVhittington, &c. The Licence for this foundation was granted by King Henry the fourth, the eleventh of his reign: and in the twelfth of the same Kings reigne, the Maior and Communalty of London, granted to Richard VVhittington a vacant peece of ground, thereon to build his Colledge in the Royall: all which was confirmed by Henry the 6. the third of his reigne, to Iohn Coventry, Ienkin Carpenter, and VVilliam Grove, Executors to Richard VVhittington. This foundation was againe confir∣med by Parliament, the tenth of Henry the sixth, and was suppressed by the Statute of Edward the sixth. The Almes houses, with the poore men, doe re∣maine, and are paid by the Mercers. This Richard Whittington was (in this
Church) three times buried:Richard Whittington thrice bu∣ried. first, by his Executors, under a faire Monument: then, in the reigne of Edward the sixth, the Parson of that Church, thinking some great riches (as he said) to be bu∣ried with him, caused his Monument to be broken, his body to be spoiled of his Leaden sheet, and againe the se∣cond time to be buried. And in the reigne of Queene Mary, the Parishio∣ners were forced to take him up, to lap him in Lead, as afore, to bury him the third time, and to place his Monument, or the like, over him againe, which re∣maineth, and so he resteth. Thomas Winford, Alderman, was bu∣ried in this Church, 1448. Arnold Macknam, Vintner a Merchant of Burdeaux, 1457. Sir Heere Tanke, or Hartancleux, Knight of the Garter, borne in Almaine, a noble Warrior in Henry the fifth and Henry the sixth's dayes. Sir Edmond Mulshew, Knight, neere to Thomas Cockham, Recorder of London. The Lady Kyme. Sir William Oldhall, Knight, 1460. William Barnocke. Sir Iohn Yong, Grocer, Maior 1466. Agnes, daughter to Sir Iohn Yong, first married to Robert Sherington, after to Robert Mulleneux, then to William Chey∣ney, Esquire. Iohn Having, Gentleman. William Roswell, Esquire. William Postar, Clerk of the Crowne, 1520. Sir William Bayly, Draper, Maior, 1533. with Dame Katharine his Wife, leaving sixteene children. Iohn Haydon, Mercer, Sheriffe, 1582. who gave Legacies to the 13. Almes-men, and otherwise for a Lecture. Vt fragrans Nardus,A goodly plaine Marble Tombe in the Chan∣cell, with new Ban∣ners to a∣dorne it, very late∣ly hung up. famâ fuit iste Ricardus, Albificans villam qui justè rexer at illam. Flos Mercatorum, fundator Presbyterorum, Sic & regonarum testis sit certus eorum. Omnibus exemplum barathrum vincendo morosum, Condidit hoc Templum Michaelis, quam speciosum? Regia spes & pres: divinis res rata turbis. Pauperibus pr. & Maior qui fuit urbis, Martius hunc vicit, en Annos gens tibi dicit. Finiit ipse dies, sis sibi Christe quies. Ejus sponsa pia, Generosa, probata, sophia Iungitur, &c. Hic jacet Eduardus Lupton cognomine dictus, Occidit heu juvenis cum spes foret omnibus una. Pauperibus fuerat studiosis ille patronus, Mille & quingintos tersaevos vidit ademptos Moribus & studiis qui vivens claruit olim; Spiritus iste Iesus mens à te suscipiatur. Quisquis ades plora fata dolenda viri,A faire plated stone be∣fore the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. Hujus Collegii quique Magister erat; Doctor, & in sacre Dogmate clarus erat; Qui obiit Octobris & quoque nona fuit. Credere nuncfas est spiritus astra tenet: Spes me tua Iesus es, gratia, non opera. At the upper end of this Street,Tower-Roy∣all builded about Hen∣ry the 1. as may bee supposed. is the Tower Royall, whereof that street ta∣keth name. This Tower and great place was so called, of pertaining to the Kings of this Realme:King Ste∣phen was lodged there. but by whom the same was first builded, or of what Antiquity continued, I have not read more, than that in the reigne of King Edward 1. se∣cond, fourth, and seventh yeeres, it was the tenement of Simon Beawmes. Also, that in the 36. of Edward the third, the same was called the Royall, in the Parish of S. Michael de Pater noster,Frisard. and that in the three and fortieth of his Reigne, he gave it by the name of his Inne, cal∣led the Royall, in his Citie of London, in value twenty pounds by yeere, unto his Colledge of S. Stephen at Westminster. Notwithstanding, in the reigne of Ri∣chard the second, it was called The Queene Wardrobe, as appeareth by this that followeth: King Richard, having in Smithfield o∣vercome and dispersed the Rebels, hee,
his Lords and all his Company,The Lady Princesse lodged in the Tower Royall. entered the City of London, with great joy, and went to the Lady Princesse his Mother, who was then lodged in the Tower-Royall, called the Queenes Wardrope, where shee had remained three dayes and two nights, right sore abashed. But when shee saw the King her Sonne, she was greatly rejoyced and said, Ah Sonne, what great sorrow have I suffe∣red for you this day! The King answered and said; Certainely, Madame, I know it well, but now rejoyce, and thanke God, for I have this day recovered mine heritage, and the Realme of England, which I had neere-hand lost. This Tower seemeth to have beene (at that time) of good defence, for when the Rebels had beset the Tower of Lon∣don and got possession thereof, taking from thence whom they listed, as in my Annales I have shewed; the Princesse being force to flye, came to this Tow∣er Royall▪ where shee was lodged, and remained safe as yee have heard, and it may bee also supposed, that the King himselfe was at that time lodged there. I reade, that in the yeere 1386. Lyn King of Armony, being chased out of his Realme by the Tartarians, received innumerable gifts of the King and of his Nobles,King Ri∣chard lod∣ged in the Tower-Royall. the King then lying in the Roy∣all, where hee also granted to the said King of Armony, a Charter of a thou∣sand pounds by yeere during his life. This for proofe may suffice, that Kings of England have beene lodged in this Tower, though the same (of later time) hath been neglected, and turned into stabling for the Kings, horses, and now letten out to divers men, and divided into Tenements. In Horse-bridge street is the Cutlers Hall,Culters Hall. Richard de Wilehale 1295. confir∣med to Paul Butelor, this house and edi∣fices, in the Parish of Saint Michael Pa∣ter noster Church, and Saint Iohns upon Walbrooke, which sometime Lawrence Gisors, and his son Peter Gisors did pos∣sesse, and afterward Hugonis de Hingham, and lyeth betweene the Tenement of the said Richard towards the South, and the lane called Hors-shoo bridge towards the North, and betweene the way cal∣led Pater noster Church on the West, and the course of Walbrooke on the East, pay∣ing yeerely one Clove of Gilliflowers at Easter, and to the poore and Covent of Saint Mary Overy, 6. s. this house sometime belonged to Simon Dolesly, Grocer, Maior, 1359. They of this Company were (of old time) three Arts, or sorts of Workmen, to wit, the first were Smiths, Forgers of Blades, and therefore called Bladers, and divers of them proved wealthy men,Bladers or Blade-Smiths. as name∣ly, Walter Nele, Blader, one of the She∣riffes, the twelth of Edward the third deceased, 1352. and buried in S. Iames Garlicke hith. He left Lands to the men∣ding of High-waies about London, be∣twixt Newgate and VVicombe, Ealdgate and Chelmesford, Bishopsgate and VVare, Southwarke and Rochester, &c. The se∣cond were makers of Hafts, and other∣wise garnishers of Blades:Haft∣makers. The third sort were Sheathmakers for Swords,Sheathma∣kers. Daggers, and Knives. In the 10. of Hen∣ry the fourth certaine ordinances were made betwixt the Bladers, and the o∣ther Cutlers, and in the fourth of Henry the sixth, they were all three Compa∣nies drawne into one Fraternity or Bro∣therhood, by the name of Cutlers. Then is Knight riders street,Knight riders street. so called (as is supposed) of Knights well armed and mounted at the Tower Royall, riding from thence through the street, West to Creed lane, and so out at Ludgate towards Smithfield, when they were: there to Turney, Just, or otherwise to shew acti∣vities before the King and States of the Realme. In this streete is the Parish Church of Saint Thomas Apostles,Wring-wren lane, by Wring-wren lane, a proper Church,Parish Church of S. Thomas the Apostle. and in the yeere 1629. well repaired and finely garnished; but Monuments of antiquity, I finde none beyond the reigne of Henry the eighth, except some Armes in the windowes, as also in the stone-worke, which some suppose to be of Iohn Barns Mercea, Maior of London, in the yeere 1371. a great builder there∣of, H. Causton Merchant, was a Bene∣factor, and had a Chantry there about, 1396. T. Roman, Maior 1310. had also a Chantry there 1319. Fitz-Williams al∣so a Benefactor, had a Chantry there. More, Sir VVilliam Littlesbury, alias Horne, (for King Edward the fourth so named him) because he was a most ex∣cellent blower in a Horne, hee was a
Salter, and Merchant of the Staple, Maior of London in the yeere 1487. and was buried in this Church, having ap∣pointed (by his Testament) the Bels to be changed for foure new Bels of good time and found; but that was not per∣formed: he gave 500. Markers towards the repairing of high-wayes betweene London and Cambridge; his dwelling house, with a Garden, and appurtenan∣ces in the said Parish, to be sold, and be∣stowed in charitable actions, as his Ex∣ecutors would answer before God. His house called the George in Bread∣street he gave to the Salters,George in Breadstreet given to the Sal∣ters upon conditi∣ons not perfor∣med. they to finde a Priest in the said Church, to have six pounds, thirteene shillings, foure pence the yeere, to every Preacher at Pauls Crosse, and at the Spittle, 4. pence for ever; to the Prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, Marshalsey, and Kings Bench, in victuals tenne shillings at Christmas, and tenne shillings at Easter for ever; which Legacies are not performed. William Shipton, William Champneis, and Iohn de Burford, had Chauntries there: Iohn Martin, Butcher, one of the Sheriffs, was buried there 1533. Those Monuments that be extant of these lat∣ter times, be these following: There lieth buried neere this Monument,On the North side of the Chancell. Margaret one of the daughters of the Lord Broke, Chiefe Baron of the Ex∣chequer, in the reigne of King Henry the eighth: who lineally descended of the House of Broke of in Che∣shire; which said Margaret was first married to William Whorwood, se∣cond son to John VVhorwood of Com∣pton in the County of Stafford, Esquire, which said William dyed Atturney Ge∣nerall to the said King Henry the 8. Af∣ter whose death, shee tooke to her second Husband, William Sheldon of Beeley in the County of Worcester, Esquire; who also dyed, leaving her a Widdow, and so she continued many yeeres after; and then dyed, being about the age of 80. yeeres, and was buried in March, 1589. in the 32. yeere of Qu. Elizabeth. On the South side of the Chancell, a very fine, neat and well-contrived Mo∣nument, but without any date, where∣on these Verses are insculpt: In mortem suam haec Carmina dum vixerat scripsit D. Katharina Killigreia. Dormio nunc Domino, Domini vitute resurgam; Et  meum carne videbo mea. Mortua ne dicar, fruitur pars altera Christo, Et surgar capiti, tempore, tota, meo. Elizabethae in Obitum Katharinae Sororis Epicaedia. , . , . Chara valto Soror, in Caelo morte triumphas, Mors tua vita tibi, mors tamen illa tuis. Mens tua labe carens, pietas, doctrina, modesta Vita, lepos suavis digna fuere Deo. Vt junxit Sanguis, nos jungat in aethere Christus: Interea taceo mortua morte tua. Felicissimae & in Christo charis∣simae Memoriae Katharinae Kiligreiae, Robertus Massonus Formanus Pa∣stor Ecclesiae Londino-Gal∣licae, his Versibus parentavit. Coelestem conclusam pectore mentem Audivi, aspexi, saepius obstupui; Caelicolam sancto seclusam corpore mentem, Quam colui carus, maestus ovans{que} cano. Quis non ereptas tot dotes lugeat? & quis Coelo caelestes lividus invideat? Cedere sed Patri gnatos, terrena supernis Est aequum, sequimur: tu  praei.
Epitaphium praestant. Feminae, Ka∣tharinae Kiligreiae Autore Andrea Melvino. Palladis & Phoebi comes una, & Pieris una, Pieridum{que} Soror, Pieridum{que} Parens. Gratia, Suada, Lepos, Gravitas, Constantia, Candor, Relligio, Pietas, & Pudor & Probitas, At{que} Palestinae, & Latiae, Graiae{que} Camenae Clausit olim uno omnes pectore, nunc tumulo. Aliud Epitaphium Autore Guilielmo Charco. Hic Katharina jacet de stemmate nobilitato Cociadum, & claro Kiligreio nupta marito: Hoc satis est, Hospes: Rhodanus nam caetera novit, Et dives Rhenus celebrat, sic fama Sororem Musarum, & magnam magnae Pietatis Alumnam. Vnder the Communion Table, a stone ingraven. Here lyes interred the body of Mr. John FFoy,Vnder the Cōmuni∣on Table. Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, who departed this life 1. De∣cemb. 1625. and left issue 4. Sonnes, (viz.) John, George, Henry and Ri∣chard: Hee lived and dyed in the true faith of Christ Iesus, which he hath amply expressed, in a worthy annuall contribu∣tion towards the poore of this Parish. Then West from the said Church on the same side,Ipres Inne. was one great Messuage, sometime called Ipres Inne, of William of Ipres a Flemming, the first builder there∣of. This William was called out of Flan∣ders, King Ste∣phen lod∣ged in the Tower-Royall. with a number of Flemmings to the aide of King Stephen, against Maude the Empresse, in the yeere 1138. and grew in favour with the said King for his ser∣vice, so farre, that he builded this house neere unto Tower-Royall, in the which Tower it seemeth the King was then lodged, as in the heart of the City, for his more safety. Robert Earle of Glocester, Brother to the Empresse, being taken, was com∣mitted to the custody of this William, to be kept in the Castle of Rochester, till King Stephen was also taken, and then the one was delivered in exchange for the other, and both set free: This Wil∣liam of Ipres gave Edredes Hith, now called Queenes Hith, to the Prior and Canons of the holy Trinity in London: he founded the Abbey of Borley in Kent, &c. In the first of Henry the second, the said William, with all the other Flem∣mings (fearing the indignation of the new King) departed the Land, but it seemeth that the said William was short∣ly called back againe, and restored both to the Kings favour, and to his old pos∣sessions here, so that the name and fami∣ly continued long after in this Realme, as may appeare by this which follow∣eth. In the yeere 1377. the 51. of Edward the third, the Citizens of London min∣ding to have destroyed Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and Henry Percy Marshall, (for causes shewed in my Annals) sought up and downe, and could not finde them, for they were that day to dine with Iohn of Ipres at his Inne, which the Lon∣doners wist not of, but thought the Duke and Marshall had beene at the Savoy, and therefore poasted thither. But one of the Dukes Knights seeing these things, came in great haste to the place where the Duke was, and after that hee had knocked, and could not be let in, he said to Haveland the Por∣ter, If thou love my Lord and thy life, open the Gate: with which words hee gat entry, and with great feare he tels the Duke, that without the gate were infinite numbers of armed men, and unlesse he tooke great heed, that day would bee his last. With which words the Duke leapt so hastily from his Oy∣sters, that he hurt both his legs against the forme: VVine was offered, but hee could not drinke for haste, and so fled with his fel∣low Henry Percy out at a backe gate, and entring upon the Thames, never stayed rowing, untill they came to a house neere the Manor of Kennington,Kennington besides Lambeth. where at that time the Princesse lay, with Richard the young Prince; before whom hee made his complaint, &c.
On the other side, I read of a Messu∣age, called Ringed hall: King Henry the eighth the 32. of his reigne, gave the same (with foure Tenements adjoy∣ning) unto Morgan Philip, alias Wolfe, in the Parish of St. Thomas Apostles in London, &c. Over-against Ipres Inne in Knight-ri∣ders street, at the corner towards Saint Iames at Garlicke hith, was sometime a great house builded of stone, and called Ormond place, for that it sometime be∣longed to the Earles of Ormond.Ormond place. King Edward the fourth in the fifth of his reigne, gave to Elizabeth his wife, the Manor of Greenwitch, with the Tower and Parke, in the County of Kent. Hee also gave this Tenement called Ormond place, with all the appurtenances to the same situate in the Parish of St. Trinity in Knight-riders street in London. This house is now lately taken downe, and divers faire Tenements are builded there, the corner house whereof is a Ta∣verne. Then lower downe in Royall street, is Kerion lane,Kerion lane. of one Kerion sometime dwelling there. In this lane bee divers faire houses for Merchants; and amongst others,Glasiers Hall. is the Glasiers Hall. At the South corner of Royall street,Parish Church of S. Martin in the Vin∣trie. is the faire Parish Church of Saint Mar∣tin, called in the Vintrie, sometime cal∣led S. Martin de Beremand Church. This Church was new buided about the yeer 1399. by the Executors of Mathew Co∣lumbars, Li. Trinitate London. a stranger borne, a Burdeaux Merchant of Gascoine and French Wines: His Armes yet remaine yet in the East Window; and is a Cheveron, betweene three Columbins. There lye buried in this Church, Sir Iohn Gisors, Maior, 1311. Henry Gisors, his sonne, 1343. and Iohn Gisors, his brother, 1350. He gave to his sonne T. his great Mansion house,Gisors Hall, corruptly called Ge∣rards Hall. called Gisors Hall, in the Parish of Saint Mildred in Breadstreet. This Thomas had issue, Iohn and Thomas: Iohn made a Feoffement, and sold Gisors hall, and other his Lands in London, about the yeere 1386. Thomas deceased 1395. Henry Vennar. Bartholomew de la Vauch. Thomas Cornwallis, one of the Sheriffes, 1384. Iohn Cornwallis Esquire, 1436. Iohn Mustrell, Vintner 1424. William Hodson. William Castleton. Iohn Gray. Robert Dalusse, Barber, in the reigne of Edward the fourth, with this Epitaph. As flowers in field,Epitaph. thus passeth life, Naked, then clothed, feeble in the end. It sheweth by Robert Dalusse, and Alison his Wife: Christ them save from the power of the Fiend. Hic jacet Petrus de la Genebra,A faire Stone be∣yond the Pulpit. filius & he∣res Ioannis de la Genebra, quondam Bur∣gensis, & Mercatoris de Civitate Bur∣degali. Qui obiit 27. die Martii, An. Domini 1439. Civis animae propitietur Deus. Hic jacet Willielmus Stokesby,A very faire pla∣ted Stone under the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. quondam Civis & Vintener London, & Iuliana uxor ejus. Qui obbiit 25. die Decemb. An. Dom. 1381. Cujus, &c. Hic jacet Thomas Cornwaleis,Another close by it. quondam Civis London. Qui obiit quarto die Ianuarii, Anno Domini 1384. Cujus, &c. Honorabilis viri Radulphi Astri Militis,A very goodly plated Stone at the en∣trance in∣to the Quire. nuper Maioris ac Aldermanni & Piscenarii Civitatis London: & prae∣carissimarum Dominae Margeria, ac Margareta uxorum ejus. Qui quidem Radulphus obiit 18. die Novembris, An. Dom. 1494. Et dicta Domina Marga∣reta obiit die Ac praedicta Margeria ab hoc saeculo migravit 10. die Martii. An. Dom. 1492. Cujus, &c. Micolt,An anci∣ent Mar∣ble Tombe in the Chancell. quondam Civis & vini∣tarius London, & Ioanna uxor ejus, ac pueri eorundem. Qui quidem Iohannes obiit 17. die Aprilis, An. Dom. 1424. Quorum animae per Dei immensam mi∣sericordiam in pace perpetua permaneant, ac requiem possideant. Es testis, Christe, quod non jacet hic lapis iste, Corpus ut ornatur, sed spiritus ut memoretur. Hunc tu qui tum sis magnus parvus puer ansis Pro me funde preces, quod sic mihi fit veniae spes. Radulphus Astry,Another faire stone close by the other. Generos. unus filiorum Rad. Astry, Militis, quondam Maioris Civitatis London. Qui quidem Rad.
filius in sua florida juventute, ab hoc sae∣culo migravit, 19. die mens. Septembris, Anno Domini, 1501. Henry Gisors gist yci, Dieu de sa' Ame tien pittie, è Iohn le filz à mercy. Qui morust le veille de S. Katharine, En l' An de Grace, 1343. Martis Pascha tenes,All these stones, fairely plated, are in the bo∣dy of the Church. Edward Rex luce tiburci Hunc del Foorll. Dominum, strage ruisse dolet. Is dabat Gascon, Anglus sum corde Ioannes, In Campis Barnet mortis amara tulit. Bis septingeno, decies sept. & simul uno, Mane resurgente obviat iste Iesu. Anglicus haec relegens, miserere tui Peregrini, Et pro te moriens, te sciat esse pium. Haec petra substrati Kirkman tegit ossa Roberti, Qui Rector fuerat istius Ecclesiae. M. D. deme quater septem Christi cadit Anno, Aprilis terna raptus ab orbe die. Artibus ille Magister erat, Ecclesia tandem, Tristia post fati gaudia dentur ei. Sir Ralph Austrie, or Astry, Fishmon∣ger, Maior, new roofed this Church with Timber, covered it with Lead, and beautifully glased it. Hee deceased 1494. and was there buried, with his two wives. Ralph Austrie his son, Gent. William Austrie, and other of that name. Bertrand, wife to Grimond Descure, Es∣quire, a Gascione, and Merchant of Wines, 1494. Thomas Batson, Alice Fowler, daughter and heire to Iohn How∣ton, wife to Iohn Hulton. Iames Bartlet and Alice his wife. William Fennor, Ro∣ger Cotton, Robert Stocker, Iohn Pember∣ton, Philip de Plasse, Iohn Stapleton, Iohn Mortimer, William Lee, William Ham∣steed, W. Stokesbie, and Gilbert March, had Chantries there. Then is the Parish Church of Saint Iames,Parish Church of St. Iames Garlicke Hith. called at Garlicke Hith, or Gar∣licke hive, for that (of old time) on the River of Thames, neere to this Church, Garlicke was usually sold. This is a pro∣per Church, whereof Richard Rothing, one of the Sheriffes, 1326. is said to be the new builder, and lyeth buried in the same: so was Walter Nele, Blader, one of the Sheriffes, 1337. Iohn of Ox∣enford, Vintner, Maior, 1341. I read in the first of Edward the third, that this Iohn of Oxenford gave to the Priory of the holy Trinity, in London, two Tosts of Land, one Mill, fifty Acres of Land, two Acres of Wood, with the appurte∣nances, in Kentish Towne, in value twen∣ty shillings and three pence by yeere. Richard Goodcheape, Iohn de Cressing∣ham, and Iohn Whitthorne, and before them, Galfrid Moncley, 1281. founded a Chantry there. Monuments remaining there: Ro∣bert Gabeter, Esquire, Maior of Newca∣stle upon Tine, 1310. Iohn Gisors, William Tiligham, Iohn Stanley, L. Strange, eldest sonne to the Earle of Darby, 1503. Nicholas Staham. Robert de Luton, 1361. Richard Lions, a famous Merchant of VVines, and a Lapidary, sometime one of the Sheriffes, beheaded in Cheape by Wat Tylar, and other Rebels, in the yeere 1381. his picture on his Grave∣stone very faire and large, is with his haire rounded by his eares, and curled, a little beard forked, a gowne girt to him, downe to his feet, of branched Damaske, wrought with the likenesse of flowers, a large Purse on his right side, hanging in a Belt from his left shoulder, a plain Hood about his neck, covering his shoulders, and hanging backe behind him. Sir Iohn Wrotch, Fishmonger, Maior, 1361. deceased 1407. Thomas Stonard of Oxfordshire. Iohn Bromer, Fishmonger, Alder∣man, 1474. The Lady Stanley, mother to the Lord Strange. The Countesse of Huntington, The Lady Herbert. Sir George Stanley. Gilbert Bovet, 1398.
A Countesse of Worcester, and one of her children. William Venor, Grocer, Maior, 1389. William More, Vintner, Maior, 1395. Robert Chichley, Maior, 1421. Iames Spencer, Vintner, Maior, 1543. Richard Plat, Brewer, founded a free Schoole there, 1601. Rogerus Iones,A faire Tombe in the East end of the Chancels South Ile. Middletoni, in Comitatu Lancastrensi natus, vix puberta egressus, se Londinum contulit, ubi Civitate dona∣tus, & Artem Tinctoriam exercens, Ag∣netem, Thomae Hacketti filiam, Matri∣monio sibi junxit. Ex qua filios novem, quatuor verò filias Suscepit. Quarum una Patre adhuc superstite diem obiit. hic cum varia Civitatis munia laudabiliter obiisset, tandem in celebrem supremi or∣dinis Senatum, Aldermannorum scilicet, cooptatus est; Mox Aeques abillustris∣simo Rege Iacobo creatus est, & paulo post Vicecomes Civitatis London est de∣signatus. Quo Magistratu nondum ex∣pleto, non sine magno bonorum luctu, vi∣cesimo quinto die mensis Iulii, Anno Domini 1605. piè in Domino requi∣escit. Here lyeth buried the body of Richard Plat Brewer,A comely Monumēt in the wall of the South Ile. and sometime chosen Sheriffe of London. The Founder of a free School, and sixe Almes-houses, in Aldenham, in the County of Hertford. Hee dyed the 28. of November, 1600. having ta∣ken to wife Alice Birtles, the daughter of John Birtles, Esquire, and having is∣sue foure sons and one daughter. Here Edmund Chapman,In the same wall a comely Monumēt. clos'd in clay, undoubtedly doth rest, Who to his Neighbours (while he liv'd) the fruits of love exprest: Fine Pewes within this Church he made, and with his Armes support, The Table, and the Seats in Quire, hee set in comely sort. To Prisoners, and to Hospitals, hee living, was a friend, And ever sought, the innocent from danger to defend. Esquier-Ioyner to our Queene, hee in his life time was, And Yeoman of her Armory at Greenwitch, in like case: VVherein hee like a servant just, for duty duly done, Vnto himselfe of Prince and Peeres the love and favour wonne. Threescore seven yeeres hee lived here, in worship and good name, And left this life, to live with Christ, to his eternall fame. His Soule, the fourteenth day of May, did from his body fleet, Which he with cheerefull voyce did yeeld to Christ his Saviour sweet: And on the eighteenth of that moneth, by computation just, A thousand five hundred eighty eight, his body was laid in dust. But body and soule at last, be sure, through Gods abundant grace, Shall rise, and knit againe in one, and stand before his face: Where, with his Saints elect (we hope) hee shall receive a Crowne, And live for ever with sweet Christ, in glory and renowne. Thus, friends (by this deare friend of ours) let's learne to live and dye, That after death wee may have above the starry skie. And thus an end of Vintrie Ward, which hath an Alderman, with a Deputy, com∣mon Counsellors 9. Constables 9. Sca∣vengers 4. Ward-mote inquest 14. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene, 6. pound, 13. shillings, 4. pence.
CORDWAINER STREET VVard. THe next is Cordwai∣ner street Ward,Cordwainer street ward. ta∣king that name of Cordwainers, or Shoomakers, Cur∣riers, and workers of Leather dwel∣ling there: for it ap∣peareth in the Records of Henry the 6. the ninth of his reign, that an order was taken then for Cordwainers and Cur∣riers in Corney street, and Sopers lane. This Ward beginneth in the East, on the West side of VValbrooke, and run∣neth West thorow Budge row,Budge Row. (a street so called of Budge, Furre, and of Skin∣ners dwelling there:) then up by Saint Anthonies Church, thorow Atheling (or Noble-street) as Leyland termeth it,VVathling street. com∣monly called VVathling-street, to the Red Lion, a place so called, of a great Lion of Timber placed there, at a gate entring a large Court, wherein are di∣vers faire and large shops, well furni∣shed with broad-cloathes, and other Draperies of all sorts to bee sold: and this is the farthest West part of this Ward. On the South side of this street from Budge row, lyeth a lane turning downe by the West gate of the Tower Royall, and to the South end of the stone Wall beyond the said gate, which is of this Ward, and is accounted a part of the Royall street. Against this West gate of the Tower Royall, is one other Lane, that runneth West to Cordwainer street, and this is called Turnebase lane:Turnebase Lane. on the South side whereof is a piece of Wring-wren lane, to the North-west corner of Saint Thomas Church the Apostle. Then againe out of the high street called Watheling, is one other street which runneth thwart the same,Cordwainer street. and this is Cordwainer street, wher∣of the whole VVard taketh name. This street beginneth by West-Cheape, and Saint Mary Bow Church is the head thereof on the VVest side, and it run∣neth downe South,Hosier lane in Cord∣wainer street. thorow that part, which of latter time was called Hosier lane, now Bow lane, and then by the west end of Aldermary Church, to the new∣builded houses, in place of Ormond-House, and so to Garlickehill or hith, to S. Iames Church. The upper part of this street towards Cheape, was called Hosier lane, of Hosi∣ers dwelling there in place of Shooma∣kers: but now those Hosiers beeing worne out by men of other trades, (as the Hosiers had worne out the Shooma∣kers) the same is called Bow lane, of Bow Church. On the west side of Cordwainer street, is Basing lane,Basing lane. right over against Turne∣base lane. This Basing lane, west, to the backe gate of the Red Lion in Wathling street, is of this Cordwainer street VVard. Now againe on the North side of this high street, is Budge row: by the East end of Saint Anthonies Church, have ye Saint Sithes lane,S. Sithes lane. so called of S. Sithes Church, (which standeth against the North end of that Lane) and this is wholly of Cordwainer street VVard: also the South side of Needlers lane, which reacheth from the North end of Saint Sithes lane,Needlers lane. west to Sopers lane: then west from S. Anthonies Church, is the South end of Sopers lane,Sopers lane. which lane tooke that name, not of Sope-making, as some
have supposed, but of Alen le Sopar, in the ninth of Edward the second. I have not read of Sope-making in this Ci∣tie, till within this hundred yeeres, that Iohn Lambe, dwelling in Grasse-street, set up a boyling-house: for this Citie (in former time) was served of white Sope in hard cakes (called Ca∣stle Sope, and other) from beyond the Seas,Gray Sope made in London, dearer than bought from Bri∣stow. and of gray Sope, speckled with white, very sweet and good, from Bri∣stow, sold here for a penny the pound, and never above penny farthing, and blacke Sope for an halfe-penny the pound. Then in Bow lane (as they now call it) is Goose lane,Goose lane. by Bow Church. VVilliam Essex, Mercer, had tenements there, in the 26. of Edward the third. Then from the South end of Bow lane, up VVathling street, till over against the Red Lion: And these be the bounds of Cordwainer street Ward. Touching Monuments therein: first, you have the faire Parish Church of S. Anthonies in Budge row,Parish Church of S. Antho∣nies. more vulgarly knowne by the name of Saint Antlins, on the North side thereof. This Church was lately reedified by Thomas Knowles, Grocer, Maior, and by Thomas Knowles, his sonne, both buried there, with Epi∣taphs of the Father, thus: Here lyeth graven under this stone,Epitaph of Tho. Knowles. Thomas Knowles, both flesh and bone, Grocer and Alderman yeeres forty, Sheriffe, and twice Maior truely. And for he should not lye alone, Here lyeth with him his good wife Joane: They were together sixty yeere, And nineteene children they had in feere, &c. Thomas Holland, Mercer, was there buried, 1456. Thomas VVindent, Mercer, Alderman, and Katharine his wife. Thomas Hind, Mercer, 1528. He was a Benefactor to this Church, to Aldermarie Church, and to Bow. Hugh Acton, Merchant-Taylor, buried 1520. He gave 36. pounds to the repai∣ring of the Steeple of this Church. Simon Street, Grocer, lyeth in the Church wall toward the South: his Armes be three Colts, and his Epitaph thus: Such as I am,Simon Street his Epitaph. such shall you be: Grocer of London sometime was I, The Kings Weigher more than yeeres twenty: Simon Street called in my place, And good fellowship faine would trace: Therefore in Heaven, everlasting life Iesu send me, and Agnes my wife. Kerlie Merlie, my words were the, And Deo gratias I coupled thereto. I passed to God in the yeere of grace, A thousand foure hundred it was, &c. Henry Collet, Mercer, Maior, a great Benefactor to this Church. The pi∣ctures of him, his wife, ten sonnes, and ten daughters, remain in the glasse-win∣dow, on the North side of the Church: but the said Henry Collet was buried at Stebunhith. Henry Halton, Grocer, one of the Sheriffes, deceased 1415. Thomas Spight, Merchant-Taylor, 1533. Iohn Grantham and Nicholas Bull had Chauntries there. Here lyeth William Dauntesey,An anci∣ent Tomb in the South side Mercer and Alderman of this Citie, and Mer∣chant of the Staple of Callis; and Ag∣nes his wife: the which William decea∣sed the 23. day of April, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1543. Vnto Sir Roger Martin, Knight,A very goodly Tombe in the Chan∣cell. A Mercer and a Merchant late; By wisedome, and by waies upright,
That so both wealth and worship gate. Well fam'd, belov'd of each estate, Pleasant and sage in gravity, Rose by degrees in dignity. First Alderman elected here, Then Shrieve, and then Lord Maior he was: Pass'd all with praise. His faithfull Feere, Dame Elizabeth, erected has This Monument, in mind, that as With him a while in Tombe to stay, So afterward in blisse to joy alway. Ex D. Elizabeth octo prolum Parens. Obiit in Christo, die 20. Decemb. An. Dō. 1573. & regni Reg. Eliz. 16. Here lyes the Lady Martin eke, Of Grecia soyle, and Castlynes race, Both constant, vertuous, wise and meeke, That shewed her selfe in any place. And God endued her so with grace, That she both liv'd and dy'd with praise. Two husbands had she in her dayes, Whose corps are both inclosed here, Together with the foresaid Dame: Her love to them was aye so deare, Her cost and charge sustain'd the same: These three, their deeds will shew their fame: Who as she liv'd in amity, So here she sleepes in unity. Domina Elizab. cum Maritis. Credimus quod Redemptor noster vi∣vit, & in novissimo die videbimus De∣um Salvatorem nostrum, Iob 19. And Thomas Knowles is placed here,At the west end of the same Tombe. Whose bones from Bow were hither borne: His godly life did well appeare, In helping those that were forlorne, And vertue did him so adorne, That he beloved was of all: Mercer he was, when death did call, In prime of yeeres his life alway: Who dying like a worthy wight, Did hope in Christ, to live for aye. His wife him wailes in wofull plight, And for meere love, him here she pight, With her second Spouse to sleepe in peace; And she with them, when life shall cease. Ex eadem Domina Elizab. trium pro∣lum parens. Qui quidem Thomas obiit 11. die Iulii, An. à Messia nato, 1550. Over a little doore in the South side of the Quire,This is said to be the true portrai∣ture of Iohn Wells, whose Ex∣ecutors builded the Stan∣dard in West-d cap. at the time of late new repairing the Church, was found an ancient figure of a man, clothed in Scarlet furred, hol∣ding open his hands, as in admiration; having rings on the thumbe and fingers of his left hand, and two bookes before him, one closed, and the other lying open, with these words to be read: Recogitabo tibi omnes annos meos in amaritudine animae meae.On one leafe. Mercy and Grace,On the other. and for ever mercy, sweet Iesus, Ego rogo. Next on the South side of Budge row, by the West corner thereof, and on the East side of Cordwainer street, is one o∣ther faire Church, called Aldermarie Church, because the same was very old, and elder than any Church of Saint Mary in the Citie, till of late yeeres the
foundation of a very faire new Church was laid there by Henry Keble, Grocer, Maior, who deceased 1518. and was there buried in a vault by him prepa∣red, with a faire Monument raised over him on the North side of the Quire, now destroyed and gone. He gave by his Testament 1000. l. toward the buil∣ding up of that Church; and yet was not permitted a resting place for his bones there. Thomas Romane, Maior, 1310. had a Chauntrie there. Richard Chawcer,Richard Chawcer, Father to Geffrey Chawcer the Poet, as may be supposed. Vintner, gave to that Church his tenement and Taverne, with the ap∣purtenances, in the Royall street, the cor∣ner of Kirion lane, and was there buried, 1348. Iohn Briton, Ralph Holland, Dra∣per, one of the Sheriffs, deceased, 1452. William Taylor, Grocer, Maior, decea∣sed, 1483. He discharged that Ward of Fifteenes to be paid by the poore. Thomas Hinde, Mercer, buried in S. An∣thonies, gave 10. Fodder of Lead to the covering of the middle Ile of this Al∣dermary Church. Charles Blount, Lord Montjoy, was buried there, about the yeere 1545. he made or glazed the East window, as appeareth by his Armes: his Epitaph made by him in his life time, thus: Willingly have I sought; and willingly have I found The fatall end that wrought thither as duty bound: Discharged I am of that I ought, to my Country by honest wound, My soule departed Christ hath bought: the end of man, is ground. Sir William Laxton, Grocer, Maior, deceased 1556. and Thomas Lodge, Gro∣cer, Maior, 1583. were buried in the Vault of Henry Keble, whose bones were unkindly cast out, and his Monument pulled downe, in place whereof Monu∣ments are set up of the later buried. Wil∣liam Blount, Lord Montjoy, buried there, 1594. Here is fixt the Epitaph of Sir Henry Kebyl, Knight, Who was sometime of London Maior, a famous worthy wight, Which did this Aldermary Church erect and set upright. Though death prevaile with mortal wights;On the out-side of the fol∣ding Ta∣bles which hang in the uppe end of the Chancell. and hasten every day, Yet vertue over-lives the Grave, her fame doth not decay: As memories doe shew reviv'd, of one that was alive, Who being dead, of vertuous fame, none should seeke to deprive; Which so in life deserv'd renowne, for facts of his to seee, That may encourage other now, of like good mind to be. Sir Henry Keble, Knight, Lord Maior of London, here he sate, Of Grocers worthy Company, the chiefest in his state, Which in this Citie grew to wealth, and unto worship came, When Henry reign'd, who was the seventh of that redoubted name: But he to honour did atchieve the second golden yeere Of Henries reigne, so call'd the eighth, and made his fact appeare. When he this Aldermanry Church 'gan build with great expence, Twice thirty yeeres agon, no doubt, counting the time from hence: Which worke began the yeere of Christ, well knowne of Christen men, One thousand and five hundred just, if ye will adde but ten. But lo, when man purposeth most, God doth dispose the best, And so before this worke was done, God call'd this Knight to rest. This Church as then not fully built; he dyed about the yeere, When Ill May day first tooke his name, which is downe fixed here:1516. Whose workes became a Sepulcher, to shrowd him in that case: God tooke his soule, but corps of his was laid about this place. Who when he dyed, of this his worke so mindfull still he was, That he bequeath'd a thousand pounds to have it brought to passe. The execution of whose gift, or where the fault should be, The worke as yet unfinished shall shew you all for me▪ VVhich Church stands there; if any please to finish up the same, As he hath well begun, no doubt, and to his endlesse fame;
They shall not onely well bestow their Talent in this life, But after death, when bones be rot, their fame shall be most rife; With thankfull praise and good report of our Parochians here, Which have of right Sir Henries fame, afresh renewed this yeere. God move the minds of wealthy men, their workes so to bestow As he hath done, that though they dye, their vertuous fame may flow. Inclita perpetuo durabit tempore Virtus, Et floret fato non violenda truci. Sir William Laxton lyes interr'd Within this hollow vault,A faire Tombe in the Chan∣cell. That by good life had happy death, the end for which he sought. Of poore and rich he was belov'd, his dealings they were just, God hath his soule, his body here consumed is to dust. Here lives by fame, that lately died, Sir William Laxtons wife, That ever was a doer of good, and liv'd a vertuous life: A mindfull Matron of the poore, and to the learned sort, A true and faithfull Citizen, and dyed with good report. He dyed the 29. day of July, 1556. Here lyeth buried Sir Thomas Lodge,A small Monumēt laid on the groūd by the Tombe, within the iron grate Knight, and Dame Anne his wife. Hee was L. Maior in the yeere of our Lord God, 1563. when God did visit this Ci∣tie with a great plague for our sinnes. For we are sure that our Redeemer liveth, and that we shall rise out of the earth in the latter day, &c. Job 19. At the upper end of Hosier lane, to∣ward West-Cheape, is the faire Parish Church of S. Mary Bow. This Church in the reigne of William the Conque∣rour, being the first in this Citie buil∣ded on Arches of stone,New Mary Church, or S. Mary Bow in West Chea∣ping. L. Colchester was therefore called new Mary Church, of Saint Ma∣ry de Arcubus, or le Bow, in West Chea∣ping: As Stratford Bridge, being the first builded (by Matilda, the Queene, wife to Henry the first) with Arches of stone, was called Stratford le Bow, which names to the said Church and Bridge, remaine till this day. The Court of the Arches is kept in this Church, and ta∣keth name of the place, not the place of the Court; but of what antiquity or continuation that Court hath there continued, I cannot learne. This Church is of Cordwainer street Ward, and for divers accidents hapning there, hath bin made more famous than any other Parish Church of the whole Citie, or Suburbs. First we read, that in the yeere 1090. and the third of Wil∣liam Rufus, by tempest of wind, the roofe of the Church of Saint Mary Bow in Cheape was overturned,Roofe of Bow Church o∣verturned by tem∣pest. wherewith some persons were slaine, and foure of the rafters of sixe and twenty foot in length, with such violence were pitched in the ground of the high street, that scantly foure foot of them remained a∣bove ground, which were faine to bee cut even with the ground, because they could not be plucked out; for the Citie of London was not then paved, but a moorish ground. In the yeere 1196. William Fitz Os∣bert, Bow stee∣ple forti∣fied. a seditious Traitor, tooke the stee∣ple of Bow, and fortified it with muni∣tions and victuals; but it was assaulted, and William with his complices, were taken (though without blood-shed) for he was forced by fire and smoke to for∣sake the Church, and then being by the Iudges condemned, he was by the heels drawne to the Elmes in Smithfield,A false ac∣cuser of his elder brother, in the end was han∣ged. and there hanged with nine of his fellowes, where because his favoures came not to deliver him, he forsooke Maries Son, (as he termed Christ our Saviour) & cal∣led upon the Divell to help and deliver him. Such was the end of this deceiver, a man of an evill life, a secret murtherer, a filthy fornicator, a polluter of concu∣bines, and (amongst other his detestable facts) a false accuser of his elder brother, who had (in his youth) brought him up in learning, and done many things for his preferment. In the yeere 1271. a great part of the Steeple of Bow fell downe,Bow stee∣ple fell downe. and slew ma∣ny people, men and women. In the yeere 1284. the thirteenth of Edward the first, Laurence Ducket, Goldsmith, having grievously wounded one Ralph Crepin in West Cheape, fled into Bow Church, into the which (in the night time)
entred certaine evill persons, friends unto the sayd Ralph, and slew the sayd Laurence lying in the Steeple, and then hanged him up, placing him so by the window, as if hee had hanged himselfe, and so was it found by inquisition. For the which fact, Lawrence Ducket being drawne by the feete, was buried in a ditch without the City. But shortly af∣ter (by relation of a Boy, who lay with the sayd Lawrence at the time of his death, and had hid him there for feare) the truth of the matter was disclosed. For the which cause, Iordan Good-cheape, Ralph Crepin, Gilbert Clarke, and Geffrey Clarke were attainted, and a certaine woman named Alice, that was chiefe causer of the sayd mischiefe, was bur∣ned, and to the number of sixteene men were drawne and hanged; besides o∣thers, that being richer, after long im∣prisonment, were hanged by the purse. The Church was interdicted,Bow Church interdi∣cted. the doores and windowes were stopped up with Thornes: but Lawrence was ta∣ken up, and honestly buried in the Church-yard. The Parish Church of Saint Mary Bow, by meanes of incroachment, and building of houses, wanting roome in their Church-yard for buriall of the dead, Iohn Rotham, or Rodham, Citizen and Taylor, by his Testament dated the yeare 1465. gave to the Parson and Church-wardens a certaine Garden in Hosier lane, to be a Church-yard: which so continued neere a hundred yeares, but now is builded on, and is a private mans house. The old Steeple of this Church was by little and little re-edifi∣ed, and new builded up, at the least so much as was fallen downe; many men giving summes of money to the furthe∣rance thereof: So that at length, to wit, in the yeare 1469. it was ordained by a Common Councell,Bow Bell to bee rung nightly at nine of the clock. that the Bow Bell should bee nightly rung at nine of the clocke. Shortly after, Iohn Donne, Mercer, by his Testament dated 1472. accor∣ding to the trust of Reginald Longdon, gave to the Parson & Church-wardens of Saint Mary Bow, two Tenements, with the appurtenances, since made in∣to one, in Hosier lane, then so called, to the maintenance of Bow Bell, the same to bee rung as aforesayd, and other things to bee observed, as by the VVill appeareth. This Bel being usually rung somewhat late, as seemed to the young men Pren∣tises, and other in Cheape, they made and set up a time against the Clerke, as followeth: Clarke of the Bow-Bell with the yellow lockes, For thy late ringing, thy head shall have knockes. Wherunto the Clerke replying, wrote: Children of Cheape, hold you all still, For you shall have the Bow-bell rung at your will. Robert Harding, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffes 1478. gave to the new worke of that Steeple forty pound. Iohn Haw, Mercer, ten pound, Doctor Allen, foure pound, Thomas Baldry foure pound, and other gave other summes, so that the sayd worke of the Steeple was finished in the yeere 1512. The Arches or Bowes thereupon,Bow or Arches on Bow stee∣ple. with the Lanthornes five in number, to wit, one at each corner, and one on the top in the middle vpon the Arches, were also afterward finished of stone, brought from Cane in Normandy, delivered at the Customers Key for foure shillings eight pence the Tunne. William Cop∣land Taylor, the Kings Merchant, and Andrew Fuller, Mercer, being Church-wardens 1515. and 1516. It is sayd that this Copland gave the great Bell, which made the fifth in the ring, to be rung nightly at nine of the clocke. This Bell was first rung (as a knell) at the buriall of the same Copland. It ap∣peareth, that the Lanthornes on the top of this Steeple, were meant to have been glased, and lights in them placed nightly in the winter, whereby travel∣lers to the City might have the better sight thereof, and not to misse of their wayes. In this Parish also was a Grammar Schoole,Grammar schoole in Bow Church∣yard. by commandement of King Henry the sixth, which Schoole was (of old time) kept in an house for that pur∣pose prepared in the Church-yard; but that Schoole being decayed, as others about this City, the Schoole-house was let out for rent, in the reign of Henry the
eighth, for foure shillings the yeare, a Cellar for two shillings the yeere, and two Vaults under the Church for fif∣teene shillings both.Vaults un∣der Bow Church. The Monuments in this Church bee these, viz. of sir Iohn Coventry, Mercer, Maior, 1425. Nicholas Alwine, Mercer, Maior, 1499. Robert Harding, Gold∣smith, one of the Sheriffes, 1478. Iohn Locke, one of the Sheriffes, 1461. Ed∣ward Bankes, Alderman, Haberdasher, 1566. Iohn Ward, William Pierson, Scrive∣uer, and Attourney in the common place. In a proper Chappell on the South side the Church, standeth a Tombe, eleuate and arched: Ade de Buke, Hatter, glased the Chappell, and most part of the Church, and was there buried. All other Monuments be defaced. Hauley and Sowtham had chauntries there. Here lyeth Richard Lambert,An anci∣ent Mar∣ble tombe in the Chancell, plated a∣bout on the North side. Grocer, late Alderman and Sheriffe of London, Merchant-Adventurer, & free of Mus∣covia and Russia, who deceased in the time of his Shrievalty, the fourth day of April, An. Dom. 1567. &c. Magnificus sed justificus,The like ancient Marble Tombe on the North side of the Quire. miseris sed amicus, Vir speciosus, vir generosus, virque pudicus. Et peramabilis, & venerabilis, atque piarum, Vis, dux, lex, lampas, flos Maior Londoniarum. In terrae ventre jacet hic Iohn rite Coventre Dictus, quem necuit veluti decuit lue plenus, Bis septingenus tricenus si trahis unum Martius in sole, triceno si trahis unum, Virginis à partu carnis modo mortuus artu, Vivus erit Coelis tuba clanxerit ut Gabrielis. Amen. Here lyeth the body of Humphrey Wal∣cot,A faire grave∣stone in the Chan∣cell. of Walcot, in the County of Salop, Esquire, Merchant-Adventurer, and of the company of Grocers in this City of London. He died the 28. day of August, 1616. being about the age of seventy one: Leaving behinde him his wife A∣lice, the daughter of Richard Halsy, Esquire: and by her he had ten children, five sonnes, and five daughters; having had by her eight more, who dyed young. Without the North side of this Church of Saint Mary Bow,A shed or standing for the King called Crowne Silde. towards West Cheape, standeth one faire building of stone, called in Record Sidam, a shed which gratly darkeneth the sayd Church: for by meanes thereof, all the windowes and doores on that side are stopped up. King Edward the third, upon occasion, as shall be shewed in the VVard of Cheape, caused this sild or shed to bee made, and strongly to bee builded of stone for himselfe, the Queene, and other Estates to stand in, there to behold the Iustings, and other shewes at their pleasures. And this house (for a long time after) served to that use: namely, in the reigne of Ed∣ward the third, and Richard the second: but in the yeare 1410. Henry the fourth, in the twelfth of his reigne, confirmed the sayd shed or building to Stephen Spilman, William Marchford, and Iohn Wattle, Mercers, by the name of one new Sildam, shed or building, with shops, cellars, and edifices whatsoever apperataining, called Crounsilde or Ta∣mersilde,Croun∣silde. situate in the Mercery in West Cheape, and in the Parish of Saint Mary de Arcubus in London, &c. Notwithstanding which grant, the Kings of England, and other great E∣states, as well of forraine Countries re∣pairing to this Realme, as inhabitants of the same, have usually repaired to this place, therein to behold the shewes of this City, passing through West Cheape; namely, the great VVatches accustomed in the night, on the Even of Saint Iohn Baptist, and Saint Peter at Midsummer, the examples whereof were over-long to recite: wherefore let it suffice briefly to touch one.K. Henry the eight came in the like∣nesse of a Yeoman of his Guard, to the Kings head in Cheape. In the yeere 1510. on Saint Iohns E∣ven at night, king Henry the eight came to this place, then called the Kings head in Cheape, in the livery of a Yeoman of the Guard, with an Halberd on his shoulder, and there beholding the VVatch, departed privily, when the
VVatch was done, and was not knowne to any but whom it pleased him. But on Saint Peters night next following, he and the Queene came royally riding to the sayd place, and there with their No∣bles beheld the VVatch of the City, and returned in the morning. This Church of Saint Mary, with the sayd shed of stone, all the housing in or about Bow Church-yard, and without, on that side the high streete of Cheape to the Standard, be of Corndwayner street Ward. These houses were (of old time) but sheds: for I reade of no housing o∣therwise on that side the streete, but of divers sheds, from Sopers lane to the Standard, &c. Amongst other, I reade of three shops or sheds by Sopers lane, pertaining to the Prior of the holy Tri∣nity within Aldgate: the one was let out for twenty eight shillings, one other for twenty shillings, and the third for twelve shillings by the yeere. Moreover, that Richard Goodcheape, Mercer, and Margery his wife, sonne to Iordan Good∣cheape, did let to Iohn Dalinges the youn∣ger, Mercer, their shed and chamber in West Cheape, in the Parish of Saint Mary de Arches, for three shillings foure pence by the yeare. Also the men of Breadstreete Ward contended with the men of Cordwainer streete Ward, for a sild or shed, opposite to the Standard on the South side, and it was found to bee of Cordwainer streete Ward, William Wal∣drone being then Maior, the 1. of Henry the sixth. Thus much for Cordwayner streete Ward: VVhich hath an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Counsellers eight, Constables eight, Scauengers eight, VVardmote in quest men fourteene, and a Beadle. It standeth taxed to the Fif∣teene in London, at fifty two pounds six∣teene shillings, in the Exchequer at fif∣ty two pounds sixe shillings.
CHEAPE VVARD. NExt adjoyning is Cheape Ward,Cheape Ward. taking name of the Market there kept, called West Cheaping: which VVard, as a ri∣ver that hath 3. heads, and running along to the uttermost of his bounds, issueth out on the sides into little streames: So this Ward, begin∣ning on the course of Walbrooke, and is not the meanest of the Wards (if for no other cause, yet because it is neerest to the heart of the City) hath his begin∣ning on the East from three places; The high streete of the Poultry, The lower end of Buckles bury, and The neather part of the Venell or Entry into Scalding Alley; and so running along, as farre as unto the North-east corner of Bow lane on the South side, & from thence into Bow lane on the East side, untill ye come to the channel over-against the cellar door under the Church; and then, on the North side of Cheape, up to the Stan∣dard, stretching it selfe into divers Lanes and Peeces on the right hand, and on the left hand, as it commeth along. First, for the high streete of the Poul∣try (which is the maine body of this Ward:) On the South side thereof, to∣ward the East, this Ward beginneth at the corner house, now in the tenure of one Robert Knight, in the way going downe to Saint Mary Wool-Church, an∣ciently knowne by the signe of the Li∣on: the out-most part of which house, and of this Ward there (the house be∣ing divided) is at the crosse-channell over-against (or very neere) the great West doore of Wool-Church, and so it goeth along on the South side of the Poultry to the great Conduit, and so in∣to Bow lane, as is aforesaid. Secondly, for Buckles bury, this Ward beginneth there toward the lower end: On the North side, at a Channell neere to the end of the house, bearing the signe of the Christopher, toward the East, now in the tenure of one Iohn Hodges: On the South side, it beginneth at the East end of the great new Frame of Building, over-against the said Chri∣stopher; which is the Tenement on the East side, next to the blacke Bull; and so it goeth into all the Barge. And then VVestward, it goeth on both sides the way, viz. on the North side, to the great Conduit, and so to Bow lane, as is aforesayd; and on the South side, to the end of Saint Sythes lane. Then crossing over the Channell, to S. Bennet Shorhogs Church, it stretcheth all along through Needlers lane, by St. Pancrates Church, on the same side, untill yee come to a great Gate, which is in the nooke of a little passage or entry to the VVest, and is the backe gate of a house, standing in Bow lane, sometime the dwelling house of Master Paruis. Then againe it stretcheth from the Chaine in the middest of Sopers lane (on both sides the Lane) upward toward the North, into Cheape on the South side, and so in∣to Bow lane, as is aforesayd. Thirdly, for the last place of this VVards beginning: On the North side of the high streete, neere unto the Stockes-Market, is an Alley or Lane, called Scalding Alley, not erroneously (as some have published) but truely, as neerest to the most ancient denominati∣on thereof; which was, Scalding-house, alias, Scalding-wike, and Scalding lane, as appeareth by good records extant of two hundred yeeres continuance. VVithin the Venell or entry of this Lane or Alley, neere unto the VVell, that standeth in a corner to the VVest, this VVard beginneth at the end of the stone wall, wherein is the doore leading
unto the Parsonage house and Church of Saint Mildred (of which, more anon) and it runneth on that side the Chan∣nell along to the East corner of the said Church, and from thence on the North side of the streete, into the Compter, and Cony-hoope lane, and within Cony-hoope lane, into all Skinners Alley, and the Grocers Hall and Garden; and then backe againe into the Old Iewry Lane, on the West side as farre as Alderman Welds house, and on the East side as farre as the dead stone Wall of the great house over-against it, sometime Alderman Andersons house. Then to re∣turne to the west end of Old Iewry a∣gaine, this VVard stretcheth along on the North side by the Mercers Hall un∣to Iron-mongers lane, (which all wholly on both sides is in this VVard) and so into Catton streete. In Catton streete this Ward entreth, toward the East, at a house anciently knowne by the signe of the Talbot, on the South side, now in the tenure of Master Packhurst; and o∣ver-against it, on the North side, at a deepe Channell, issuing out of a house, and so goeth up to the west on both sides, videlicet, on the South side of the way, beyond the end of Saint Lawrence lane, untill ye come to that middle part of the Church wall, which is beyond the Church Porch; and on the North side, from that corner of the Church wall, it goeth on the East side of the Channell to the Church yard; and from thence, on both sides the way, un∣to the outward gate leading unto Guild-hall yard, and adioyning to the Taverne of the three Tunnes. Then a∣gaine to come into Cheape, there, on the North side, is Saint Lawrence lane, all which is wholly of this VVard, and so is Hony lane above that; and so it rea∣cheth westward as farre as a shallow Channell, close beyond the Standard. And thus stand the bounds of Cheape Ward. Now, for Antiquities, and things worthy of memory in Cheape Ward. First, in the maine body of this VVard, that is, the Poultry, standeth the proper little Church, that beareth the name of Saint Mildred in the Poul∣try, S. Mil∣dreds Church. the Virgin; which name was given surely for distinction, not for superstiti∣on: For so was the custome of the Kingdome (and yet is) in building these thing for the service of God, that the Founders called them by the name of some Apostle, Saint, Martyr, or Con∣fessor, as best liked their owne conceit at the present time, to distinguish them from others. VVho this Mildred was; whether she was that eldest daughter of Merwal∣dus, King of VVest-Mercians, as some thinke, or that shee was daughter of E∣thelbert, King of Kent, one of the Foun∣ders of Pauls Church; I finde no Re∣cord to specifie, neither is it much ma∣teriall: but it is probable, that shee was some holy and devout Maide, which the people of that age held to bee a Saint afterward in heaven. In what yeeres this Church was first erected, or who was the first Founder of it, we finde not: But it appeareth by some ancient Evidences of the sayd Church, that from the beginning it had not so much spare ground about it, as to make a Church yard of; untill in the yeere of our Lord God 1420. and the eighth of King Henry the fifth, Thomas Morsted, Esquire, and Chirurgeon to the Kings, Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth, (and after∣ward, in Anno Dom. 1436. was Sheriffe and Alderman of London) gave unto the Church a parcell of ground,The Church yard gi∣ven. lying be∣tweene his dwelling house and the sayd Church (and adjoyning unto the sayd Church toward the North) to make a Church yard of, for the buriall of their dead; containing in length, from the course of Walbrooke, toward the west, forty five foote, and in breadth, from the Church toward the North, thirty five foote. Within short time after,The Par∣sonage house and chambers. some body, of religious and charitable disposition, erected upon the sides of the sayd Church yard, but upon Posts and Pil∣lars, with Cloysters underneath, toward the west, a Parsonage house, or Mansi∣on and free dwelling of the Ministers and Rectors of the sayd Church: and toward the East foure chambers, then called the Priests Chambers; now con∣verted into a Tenement or dwelling house, and demised for yeerly rent. But the Church yard is much abridged, and
of late foulely defaced, and the lights of the said Parsonage hindered by additi∣ons of Peeces to the said ancient cham∣bers, which ought not to be. After some yeeres expired,Church taken downe and new built. the Par∣son and Parishioners, as it seemeth, see∣ing the Church to bee very old, purpo∣sed to take it downe, and to build it new againe: Which they began to doe about the yeere of our Lord God, 1456. At what time Robet Snell and Iohn King were Church-wardens, and continued in the office till the end of the yeere 1467. Toward the which Building, as it may appeare by their Accompts, Iohn Saxton being Rector or Parson of the said Church, gave thirty two pounds; and afterward Richard Bowyer being Parson, gave sixe pound and fifteene shillings. Of later dayes, to wit, Anno Domini 1594. and 35. of Queene Elizabeth, of blessed memory, this Church yard, and all the Buildings thereon,Church yard and Buildings supposed to be con∣cealed. which had been thus long in the free possession of the Ministers and Parishioners of the said Church, were, through the infor∣mation of an evill minded man, then Tenent in the chambers, sold for con∣cealed land; whereby the said Tene∣ment, Church yard, and Cloysters, were like to bee lost from the possession of the Church, and the Ministers of the Church to bee charged with an yeerely rent of their Parsonage house for ever. But the Parson and Parishioners, by a Iudiciall proceeding then in her Maje∣sties Court of Exchequer, cleared all the whole Soyle from that incom∣brance: the tryall whereof was held by Nisi prius in the Guild-hall of London, and the Record is kept in Master Fan∣shawes Office for the Exchequer. Richard Shore, Draper, one of the Sheriffes in the yeere 1505. gave fif∣teene pounds to the making of a Porch to this Church. In the great East window of this Church are the Armes of divers Gen∣tlemen, as Benefactors: and namely, the Armes of Lovell and Pury, quarte∣red, and the Armes of Richard Keston, single. All the rooffing of the Church is garnished with the Armes of one Tho∣mas Ashehill, who had lent a great summe of money toward the new buil∣ding of the said Church, and was one of the Church-wardens there, in the yeere 1474. and lyeth buried there in the South Chappell: His Armes also are to be seene in the same Chappell, in the window to the East. Besides this Thomas Ashehill are bu∣ried in this Church, as by their Monu∣ments appeare, Iohn Saxton, of whom we heard before, with this Epitaph; Hanc subter speciem corpus jacet eccè Iohannis, Saxton qui fuerat vocitatus ejus in Annis: Hunc qui plasmavit de terra, suppeditavit, Nunc Pater & Flamen sibi dent cum Prole locamen, Qui obiit die Mens. Anno 14 Cujus, &c. Others buried here, as appeareth by Monuments. Iohn Hildie, Poulter, 1416. Iohn Kendall, 1468. Iohn Garland, 1476. Ro∣bert Bois, 1485. and Simon Lee, Poul∣ters, 1487. Thomas Lee, of Essex, Gen∣tleman, William Harlingridge, Christo∣pher Seliocke, 1494. Robert Draiton, Skinner, 1484. Iohn Christopherson Do∣ctor of Physicke, 1524 William Turner, Skinner, 1536. Blase White, Grocer, 1558. Thomas Hobson, Haberdasher, 1559. William Hobson, Haberdasher, 1581. Thomas Tusser, 1580. with this Epitaph: Here Thomas Tusser, clad in earth, doth lie, That sometime made the points of Husbandrie: By him then learne thou maist; here learne we must, When all is done, we sleepe, and turne to dust: And yet, through Christ, to Heaven we hope to goe; Who reades his bookes, shall finde his faith was so. And last of all, Thomas Iken, Skin∣ner, with this Epitaph: In Hodnet and London
God blessed my life Till forty and sixe yeeres, with children and wife: And God will raise me up to life againe, Therefore have I thought my death no paine. Thomas Iken, qui obiit 10. die Martii, 1590. And there also lyeth buried Elizabeth his wife, and divers of their children: where, on a Pillar in the Chancell, to∣ward the South, is this Monument: In this Chancell lyeth the body of Thomas Iken, Citizen and Skinner of London, who was borne in Hodnet in the County of Salope, and had to wife Elizabeth the daughter of Roger Smith of New∣port-Pagnell in the County of Buckin∣gham, by whom he had sixe sonnes and eight daughters: which Thomas depar∣ted this life the tenth day of March, An∣no Dom. 1590. In the yeere 1594. Thomas Lane, Ci∣tizen and Serivener of London, by his last Will and Testament gave his small Tenement, over against London Wall, neere Bishopsgate, unto the Church to∣wards the reparations thereof, and re∣liefe of the poore of the Parish. On the North side of the said Church yard, remaine two Tombes of Marble, but not knowne of whom, or otherwise than by tradition, it is said they were of Thomas Muschampe, and William Bro∣thurs, about 1547, &c. Some foure houses West from this Parish Church of Saint Mildred,Counter in the Poultry. is a Prison-house, pertaining to one of the Sheriffes of London, and is called the Counter in the Poultry. This hath been there kept and continued time out of minde; for I have not read of the ori∣ginall thereof. West from this Coun∣ter, was a proper Chappell, called of Corpus Christi,Chappell of Corpus Christi. and Saint Mary at Cony hope lane end, in the Parish of Saint Mil∣dred, founded by one named Ionnirun∣nes, a Citizen of London, in the raigne of Edward the third, in which Chappel was a Guild or Fraternity, that might dispend in Lands better than twenty pound by yeere: it was suppressed by Henry the eighth, and purchased by one Thomas Hobson, Haberdasher: hee tur∣ned this Chappell into a faire Ware∣house and shops towards the streete, with lodgings over them. Then is Cony hope lane,Cony hope lane. of old time so called, of a signe of three Conies hang∣ing over a Poulters stall at the Lanes end. Within this Lane standeth the Grocers Hall, which Company, being of old time called Pepperers, were first incorporated by the name of Grocers, in the yeere 1345. at which time they elected for Custos or Gardian of their Fraternity,Grocers Hall pur∣chased & builded. Richard Oswin, and Laurence Hallwell, & twenty Brethren were then taken in, to be of their Society. In the yeere 1411. the Custos or Gardian, and the Brethren of this Company, purcha∣sed of the Lord Robert Fitzwaters, one plot of ground with the building there∣upon in the said Cony hope lane, for 320. Markes, and then laid the foundation of their new common Hall. About the yeere 1429. the Grocers had licence to purchase 500. Markes land: since the which time, neere ad∣joyning unto the Grocers Hall, the said Company had builded seven pro∣per houses for seven aged poore Almes people.Almes-houses by the Gro∣cers hall. Thomas Knowles, Grocer, Maior, gave his Tenement in Saint Anthonies Church yard to the Grocers, towards the reliefe of the poore Brethren in that Company. Also Henry Keble, Grocer, Maior, gave to the seven Almes people, sixe pence weekly for ever, which pen∣sion is now increased by the Masters, to some of them two shillings a peece weekly, and to some of them lesse, &c. Henry Ady, Grocer, 1563. gave a thou∣sand Marks to the Grocers to purchase lands. And sir Henry Pechy, Knight Ban∣neret, free of that Company, gave them five hundred pound to certaine uses: hee builded Almes-houses at Lu∣dingstone in Kent, and was there buried. West from this Cony hope lane is the old Iury, whereof some portion is of Cheape Ward, as afore is shewed: at the South end of this Lane, is the Parish Church of S. Mary Cole-Church,Parish Church of S. Mary Cole-Church. named of one Cole that builded it: this Church is builded upon a vault above ground, so that men are forced to goe to ascend up therunto by certain steps. I find no Mo∣numents
of this Church more, than that Henry the fourth granted licence to William Marshall and others, to found a Brotherhood of Saint Katharine there∣in, because Thomas Becket and Saint Ed∣mond the Archbishop were baptized there. More I reade of Bordhangly lane, to be of that Parish: and thus much for the North side of the Poultry. The South side of the said Poultry, begin∣ning on the banke of the said brooke, over-against the Parish Church of Saint Mildred, passing up to the great Con∣duit, hath divers faire houses, which were sometimes inhabited by the Poul∣ters, but now by Grocers, Haberda∣shers, and Vpholsters. Concerning other Antiquities there: first,Buckles bury of one Buc∣kle. is Buckles bury, so called of a Man∣nour and Tenements pertaining to one Buckle, who there dwelled, and kept his Courts. This Mannor is supposed to be the great stone-building, yet in part remaining on the South side of the streete, which of late time hath beene called the Old Barge, of such a signe hanged out, neere the gate thereof. This Mannour, or great House, hath of long time beene divided and letten out into many tenements: and it hath beene a common speech,Barges towed up Walbrook unto Buc∣kles bury. that when Walbrooke did lye open, Barges were rowed out of the Thames, or towed up so farre: and therefore the place hath ever since been called the Old Barge. Also, on the North side of this street, directly over-gainst the said Buckles bu∣rie, was one ancient and strong Tower of stone the which Tower King Edward the third, in the eighteenth of his reign, by the name of the Kings house, called Cornet stoure in London,Cornet stoure in Buckles bury the Kings Ex∣change. Exche∣quer. did appoint to be his Exchange of money, there to bee kept. In the 29. he granted it to Frydus Guynysane, and Landus Bardoile, Mer∣chants of Luke, for twenty pound the yeere. And in the 32. he gave the same Tower to his Colledge, or free Chappel of Saint Stephen at Westminster, by the name of Cornet stoure at Buckles bury in London. This Tower, of late yeeres, was ta∣ken downe by one Buckle, a Grocer, meaning, in place thereof, to have set up and builded a goodly frame of Tim∣ber: but the said Buckle greedily labou∣ring to pull downe the old Tower, a part thereof fell upon him, which so sore bruised him, that his life was there∣by shortened: and another that married his widow, set up the new prepared frame of Timber, and finished the worke. This whole streete, called Buckles bu∣rie, on both the sides throughout, is possessed of Grocers and Apothecaries. Toward the west end thereof, on the South side, breaketh out one other short Lane,Peneritch streete. called in Records Peneritch street, it reacheth but to Saint Sythes lane,Parish Church of S. Sythe Benet Shrog. Needlers lane. and Saint Sythes Church is the farthest part thereof; for by the west end of the said Church, beginneth Needlers lane, which reacheth to Sopers lane, as is aforesaid. This small Parish Church of St. Syth, hath also an addition of Bennet shorne, (or Shrog, or Shorehog) for by all these names have I read it, but the ancientest is Shorne: wherefore it seemeth to take that name of one Benedict Shorne, some∣time a Citizen and Stockefishmonger of London, a new builder, repairer, or benefactor thereof, in the yeere of Ed∣ward the second: so that Shorne is but corruptly called Shrog, and more cor∣ruptly Shorehog. There lye buried in this Church, Iohn Froysh, Mercer, Maior, 1394. Iohn Roch∣ford, Rob. Rochford, Iohn Hold, Alderman, Hen. Frowike, Mercer, Maior, 1435. Edw. Warrington, Iohn Morrice, Iohn Huntley, Richard Lincolne, Felmonger, 1548. Sir Ralph Warren, Mercer, Maior, 1553. Sir Iohn Lion, Grocer, Maior, 1554. these two last have Monuments, the rest are all defaced. Edward Hall, Gentleman of Greyes Inne, common Sergeant of this City, and then Vnder-Sheriffe of the same, hee wrote the large Chroni∣cles from Richard the second, till the end of Henry the eighth, was buried in this Church. Grace and Religion,A faire Monumēt in the East wall of the Chancell. with the best of Nature, All striving to excell, yet all agreeing To make one absolute and perfect creature: Would any see a sight, so worth the seeing? He comes too late:
here she lyes buried, With whom they lately liv'd, and now are dead. In the Vault there by, Lieth buried the body of Anne  of Iohn Farrar, Gentleman, and Mer∣chant Adventurer of this City, daugh∣ter of William Shepheard, of Great Rowlright, in the County of Oxenford, Esquire. She departed this life the 12. day of Iuly, An. Dom. 1613. being then a∣bout the age of 21. yeeres. To whose well-deserving memory, this Monument is by her said husband erected. Here was a Bud,A small gilt en∣graven Plate fa∣stened under the Monu∣ment. beginning for her May: Before her Flower, Death tooke her hence away. But for what cause? That friends might joy the more, Where their hope is, she flourisheth now before. She is not lost, but in those joyes remaine, Where friends may see, and joy in her againe. Here lyeth buried the right Worshipfull,A faire ancient Marble Tombe in the Chancell. Sir Ralph Warren, Knight, Alder∣man, and twice Lord Maior of this City of London, Mercer, Merchant of the Staple at Callis; with his two wives, Dame Christian, and Dame Ioane: Which said Sir Ralph departed this life the 11. day of Iuly, An. Dom. 1553. Here lyeth Katharine Prettyman,A faire plated stone in the midst of the Chancell. a Mayde of seventeene yeeres, In Suffolke borne, in London bred, as by her death appeares. With Natures gifts she was adorn'd, of honest birth and kin, Her vertuous minde, with modest grace, did love of many win. But when she should with honest match have liv'd a wedded life, Stay there (quoth Iove) the world is naught, for she shall be my wife, And Death, since thou hast done thy due, lay nuptiall rites aside, And follow her unto the grave, that should have been your Bride: Whose honest life, and faithfull end, her patience therewithall, Doth plainly shew, that she with Christ now lives, and ever shall. She departed this life the 11. day of August, 1594. Quod mihi dilectissimus & memorabile pii,A plated stone in the North Ile. Donavit, breviter abstulit ecce Deus. Dulcis Ioannes artorum parvule-cultor Occidis heu pietas & lachrymosa dies. Affer opem quicunque pores medicabile vultu, Et aliud dederis si mihi sancte Deus. Obijt 3. die Aprilis, 1592. Then,Parish Chruch of S. Pancrate. in Needlers lane have yee the Parish Church of Saint Pancrate, a pro∣per small Church, but divers rich Pa∣rishioners therein, and hath had, of old time, many liberall Benefactors: But of late, such as (not regarding the order taken by Queene Elizabeth) the least Bell in their Church being broken,Iustices charged to punish such as sell Bels from their Churches, Eliz. 14. have rather sold the same for halfe the value, than put the Parish to charge with new casting: late experience hath proved this to bee true, besides the spoyle of Monuments there. In this Church are buried Sir Aker, Iohn Aker, Iohn Barnes, Mercer, Maior, 1370. Iohn Beston, and his wife, Robert Rayland, Iohn Hamber, Iohn Gage, Iohn Rowley, Iohn Lambe, Iohn Hadley, Grocer, Maior, 1379. Richard Garde∣ner, Mercer, Maior, 1478. Iohn Stock∣ton, Mercer, Maior, 1470. Iohn Dane, Mercer, Iohn Parker, Robert Marshall, Alderman, 1439. Robert Corcheford, Ro∣bert Hatfield, and Robert Hatfield, Ni∣cholas Wilfilde, and Thomas his sonne, the Monuments of all which bee defaced and gone. There doe remaine, of Robert Bur∣ley, 1360. Richard Wilson, 1525. Robert Packenton, Mercer, slaine with a Gunne, shot at him in a morning, as he was go∣ing to morrow Masse from his house in Cheape, to Saint Thomas of Acars, in the yeere 1536. The murderer was never discovered, but by his owne confession, made when hee came to the Gallowes at Banbury, to be hanged for
Felony. T. Wardbury, Haberdasher, 1545. Iames Huysh, Grocer, 1590. Am∣brose Smith, &c. Hereunder lyeth buried Iames Huysh,A faire Monumēt in the North wall of the Quire. Ci∣tizen and Grocer of London, third son of Iohn Huysh, of Beuford, in the County of Somerset, Esquire: which Iames had to his first wife, Margaret Bourchier; by whom hee had issue ele∣ven children: And to his second wife, Mary Moffet, by whom he had issue, 18. children. He dyed the 20. day of August, Anno Dom. 1590. Hac defunctus Huysh tenui sub mole quiescit, Nec tamen hac totus mole quiescit Huysh. Corpus inest Tumulo, colit aurea spiritus astra, Scilicet hunc Coelum vendicat, illud humus. Londinensis erat Civis dum fata sinebant: Iam cum sydereo Millre Miles agit. Bis Thalami sociam duxit, prior edidit illi Vndenas proles, altera bisque novem. Munificam persaepe manum porrexit egenis, Virtutum fautor, Pieridumque fuit. Nil opus est plures illi contexere laudes, Sufficit in Coelo▪ jam reperisse locum. Hoc qualecunque Monumen∣tum, Rowlandus, dicti Ia∣cobi haeres, posuit pie∣tatis ergo. Here lies a Mary, mirror of her sexe For all that best their soules or body decks. Faith, forme, or fame, the miracle of youth, For zeale and knowledge of the sacred truth, For frequent reading the whole holy Writ. For fervent prayer, and for practice fit, For meditations, full of use and art, For humblenesse, in habit and in heart, For pious, prudent, peacefull, praisefull life, For all the duties of a Christian wife; For patient bearing seven dead-bearing throwes, For one alive, which yet dead with her goes. From Travers her deare Spouse, her father Hayes, Lord Maior, more honoured in her vertuous praise. Quam piè obiit puerpera die octavo Martii, Anno Aeta∣tis 29. Anno Salutis 1614. Then is a part of Sopers lane, turning up to Cheape. By the assent of Stephen Abunden,Pepperers in Sopers lane. were admitted to sell all such Spices, and other Wares, as Grocers now use to sell, retaining the old name of Pep∣perers in Sopers lane; till at length, in the reigne of Henry the sixth, the same Sopers lane was inhabited by Cord∣wainers and Curriers, after that the Pepperers or Grocers had seated them∣selves in a more open streete, to wit, in Buckles bury, where they yet remaine. Thus much for the South Wing of Cheape Ward. At the West end of this Poultry, and also of Buckles bury,West Cheap a large Market place. beginneth the large street of West Cheaping, a Market place so called, which street stretcheth West, till yee come to the little Conduit by Pauls gate, but not all of Cheape Ward. In the East part of this streete standeth the Great Conduit,Great Conduit in West Cheape. of sweete water, con∣veyed by pipes of Lead under ground from Paddington, for service of this Ci∣ty, castellated with stone, and cisterned in Lead, about the yeere 1285. and a∣gain new builded and enlarged by Tho∣mas Ilam, one of the Sheriffes, 1479. About the middest of this street is the Standard in Cheape; of what antiquity, the first foundation I have not read. But Henry the sixth, by his Patent dated at Windsore the 21. of his reigne, which
Patent was confirmed by Parliament, 1442. granted licence to Thomas Knolles, Iohn Chichle, & other, executors to Iohn Wells, Grocer, sometime Maior of Lon∣don, with his goods to make new the high-way, which leadeth from the Ci∣tie of London towards the Palace of West∣minster, before and nigh the Mannour of Savoy, parcell of the Duchy of Lanca∣ster; a way then very ruinous, and the pavement broken, to the hurt and mis∣chiefe of the subjects: Which old pave∣ment, then remaining in that way, with∣in the length of five hundred foote, and all the breadth of the same, before and nigh the site of the Mannour aforesaid, they to breake up, and with stone, gra∣vell, and other stuffe, one other good & sufficient way there to make, for the commodity of the subjects. And fur∣ther, The old Standard in Cheape, with a Conduit therein, taken downe, and new∣builded. that the Standard in Cheape, where divers executions of the Law before∣time had beene performed, which Standard at that present was very rui∣nous with age, in which there was a Conduit should bee taken downe, and another competent Standard of stone, together with a Conduit in the same, of new, strongly to bee builded, for the commodity & honour of the City, with the goods of their said Testator, with∣out interruption, &c. Of executions at the Standard in Cheape,Executi∣ons at the Standard in Cheape. we reade, that in the yeer 1293. three men had their right hands smit∣ten off there, for rescuing of a prisoner, arrested by an Officer of the City. In the yeere 1326. the Burgesses of Lon∣don caused Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exceter, Treasurer to Edward the se∣cond, and other, to be beheaded at the Standard in Cheap (but this was by Pauls Gate.) In the yeere 1351. the 26. of Ed∣ward the third, two Fishmongers were beheaded at the Standard in Cheape, but I reade not of their offence. 1381. Wat Tyler beheaded Richard Lions and other there. In the yeere 1399. Henry the fourth caused the Blank Charters, made by Richard the second, to be burnt there. In the yeere 1450. Iacke Cade, Captain of the Kentish Rebels, beheaded the Lord Say there. In the yeere 1461. Iohn Davy had his hand stricken off there, because hee had stricken a man before the Iudges at Westminster, &c. Then next is the great Crosse in West Cheape:Great Crosse in West Cheape first buil∣ded. Which Crosse was there ere∣cted in the yeere 1290. by Edward the first, upon occasion thus: Queene Elia∣nor his wife died at Hardeby (a Towne neere unto the City of Lincolne) her body was brought from thence to West∣minster, and the King in memory of her, caused in every place where her body rested by the way, a stately Crosse of stone to be erected, with the Queenes Image and Armes upon it; as at Gran∣tham, Woborne, Northhampton, Stony-Stratford, Dunstable, S. Albones, Wal∣tham, West Cheape, and at Charing, from whence shee was conveyed to Westmin∣ster, and there buried. This Crosse in West Cheap,Crosse in Cheap new builded. being like to those other which remaine till this day, & being by length of time decaied; Iohn Hatherley, Maior of London, procu∣red in the yeer 1441. licence of K. Henry the sixth, to re-edifie the same in more beautifull manner, for the honour of the City: & had licence also to take up 200. fodder of Lead for the building there∣of, of certain Conduits, & a cōmon Gra∣nary. This Crosse was then curiously wrought, at the charges of divers Citi∣zens: Ioh. Fisher, Mercer, gave 600. Marks towards it, the same was begun to be set up, 1484. and finished 1486. the second of Henry the 7. It was after gilt over, in the yeere 1522. against the comming in of Charles the fifth Emperour, in the yeere 1553. against the Coronation of Queene Anne, new burnished against the Coronation of Edward the sixth, and againe new gilt 1554. against the comming in of King Philip: since the which time,Crosse in Cheape in∣dighted, the Ima∣ges bro∣ken. the said Crosse having beene presented by divers Juries (or Quests of Wardmote) to stand in the high-way, to the let of carriages (as they alledged) but could not have it removed; it followed, that in the yeer 1581. the twenty one of June, in the night, the lowest Images round about the said Crosse (being of Christ his re∣surrection, of the Virgin Mary, King Ed∣ward the Confessor, and such like) were broken, and defaced. Proclamation was made, that whoso would bewray the doers, should have forty Crownes; but nothing came to light: the Image of the blessed Virgin, at that time was
robbed of her Son, & her armes broken, by which shee staid him on her knees, her whole body was also haled with ropes, and left likely to fall: but in the yeere 1595. was again fastened & repai∣red, & in the yeer next following, a new mis-shapen Son, as born out of time, all naked, was laid in her armes, the other Images remaining broke as afore. But on the East side of the same Crosse, the steppes being taken thence under the I∣mage of Christs resurrection defaced, was then set up a curious wrought Ta∣bernacle of gray Marble,Image of Diana let upon the Crosse in Cheape. & in the same an Alabaster Image of Diana, & water conveyed from the Thames, prilling from her naked breast for a time, but now decayed.Socrat. li. 1. cap. 13. In the yeere 1599. the timber of the Crosse at the top being rotted within the lead,Top of the crosse being fea∣red to fall, was taken downe. the arms therof bending, were feared to have fallen, to the harming of som people;Crosse in Cheape comman∣ded to be repaired. & therfore the whole body of the Crosse was scaffolded about, and the top thereof taken down, meaning in place therof to have set up a Pyramis; but some of her Majesties honourable Counsellors directed their letters to sir Nicholas Mosley, then Maior, by her Highnes expresse commandement con∣cerning the Crosse, forthwith to be re∣paired, and placed again as it formerly stood, &c. Notwithstanding, the said Cross stood headlesse more than a yeer after: whereupon the said Counsellors in greater number, meaning not any lon∣ger to permit the continuance of such a contempt,Cōmand again sent for repai∣ring the Crosse in Cheape, it being an ancient Ensigne of Christi∣anity. wrote to Wil. Rider, then Mai∣or, requiring him by vertue of her High∣nesse said former direction & comman∣dement, without any further delay, to accomplish the same her Majesties most princely care therein, respecting especi∣ally the antiqity & continuance of that Monument, ancient Ensigne of Christi∣anity, &c. dated the 24. of December, 1600. After this a crosse of timber was framed, set up, covered with lead, & gil∣ded, the body of the Crosse downward cleansed of dust, the Scaffold carried thence. About 12. nights following, the Image of our Lady was again defaced, by plucking off her crown, & almost her head, taking from her her naked childe, and stabbing her in the breast, &c. Thus much for the Crosse in West Cheape. Then at the West end of West Cheape streete, was sometime a Crosse of stone, called the Old Crosse. Ralph Higden in his Polycronicon sait, that Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exceter, Treasurer to Edward the 2. was by the Burgesses of London beheaded at this Crosse, then called the Standard, without the North doore of S. Pauls Church, and so is it noted in o∣ther writers, that then lived. This old Crosse stood and remained at the East end of the Parish Church, called S. Mi∣chael in the Corne by Pauls gate, neer to the North end of the Old-Exchange, till the yeere 1390. the 13. of Richard the 2. in place of which old Crosse then taken down, the said Church of S. Michael was enlarged, & also a faire water-Conduit builded about the 9. of Henry the sixth. In the reigne of Edward the 3. divers Iustings were made in this streete,Iustings and Tour∣nament in West Cheape. be∣twixt Sopers lane & the great Crosse, namely, one in the yeer 1331. about the 21. of September, as I finde noted by divers writers of that time. In the mid∣dle of the City of London (say they) in a streete called Cheap, the stone pavement being couered with sand, that the horse might not slide, when they strongly set their feet to the ground, the King held a Tournament 3. daies together with the Nobility,Edward the 3. held Tourna∣ment or Iusts in West Cheap 3. daies together. valiant men of the Realme, & other, some strange Knights. And to the end the beholders might with the bet∣ter ease see the same, there was a wood∣den Scaffold erected crosse the streete, like unto a Tower,Queene Philip and her ladies fell from a Scaffold in Cheape. wherein Queen Phi∣lip, & many other Ladies, richly attired and assembled from all parts of the Realme, did stand to behold the Justs: but the higher frame in which the La∣dies were placed, brake in sunder, wher∣by they were (with some shame) forced to fall downe, by reason whereof the Knights and such as were underneath were grievously hurt: wherefore the Queen took great care to save the Car∣penters from punishment, and through her praiers (which she made upon her knees) pacified the King & Councell, & therby purchased great love of the peo∣ple. A shed or standing made for the King to behold the shews in Cheape. After which time the King caused a Shed to bee strongly made of stone for himselfe, the Queen, & other States to stand on, & there to behold the Justings, and other shewes at their pleasure, by
the Church of S. Mary Bow, as is shew∣ed in Cordwainer streete Ward. Thus much for the high streete of Cheape. Now let us returne to the South side of Cheape Ward:Southside of Cheape street so fat as Cheape Ward rea∣cheth. from the great Con∣duit west be many faire and large hou∣ses, for the most part possessed of Mer∣cers, up to the corner of Cordwainer street, corruptly called Bow lane, which houses in former times were but sheds, or shops, with sollors over them, as of late one of them remained at Sopers lane end, wherein a woman sold seeds, roots, and herbes: but those sheds or shops, by incroachments on the high streete, are now largely builded on both sides outward, and also upward, some three, foure, or five stories high. Now of the North side of Cheape street and Ward,North side of Cheape Ward. beginning at the great Con∣duit, and by S. Mary Cole Church, where we left. Next thereunto Westward is the Mercers Chappell, sometime an Hos∣pitali, intituled of S. Thomas of Acon, or Acars,Hospitall of S. Tho. of Acars. for a Master and Brethren, Mili∣tia hospitalis, &c. saith the Record of Ed∣ward the third, the 14. yeere, it was foun∣ded by Thomas Fitztheobald de Heili, & Agnes his wife. Sister to Thomas Becket, in the reigne of Henry the second. They gave to the Master and Brethren the lands with the appurtenances, that sometimes were Gilbert Beckets, father to the said Thomas, in the which he was borne, there to make a Church. There was a Charnell and a Chappell over it of S. Nicholas & S. Stephen. This Hospi∣tall was valued to dispend 277. pounds, three shillings foure pence surrendred the 30. of Henry the eighth, the 21. of October, and was since purchased by the Mercers, by meanes of sir Richard Gresham, and was againe set open on the Eve of S. Michael, 1541. the 33. of Henry the 8. It is now called the Mercers Chap∣pell, Mercers Chappell. therein is kept a free Grammar Schoole,A free Schoole in the Hospitall of S. Thom. of Acars. as of old time had bin accusto∣med, commanded by Parliament. Here bee many Monuments remaining, but more have been defaced: Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, and Dame Ioane his Countesse, 1428. Iohn Norton Esquire, Stephen Cavendish, Draper, Maior, 1362. Thomas Cavendish, William Cavendish, Thomas Ganon called Pike, one of the Sheriffes, 1410. Hungate of Yorkshire, Ambrose Cresacre, Iohn Chester, Draper, Iohn Trusbut, Mercer, 1437. Thomas Nor∣land, Sheriffe, 1483. Sir Edmond Sha, Goldsmith, Maior, 1482. Sir Thomas Hill, Maior, 1485. Thomas Ilam, Sheriffe, 1479. Lancelot Laken, Esquire, Ralph Tilne, Sheriffe, 1488. Garth, Esquire, Iohn Rich, Thomas Butler, Earle of Or∣mond, 1515. Sir W. Butler, Grocer, Maior, 1515. William Browne, Mercer, Maior, 1523. Iohn Locke, 1519. Sir Thomas Bal∣dry, Locke his Armes in the win∣dowes. Mercer, Maior, 1523. Sir W. Locke, Mercer, Sheriffe, 1548. Sir I. Allen, Mercer, Maior, 1525. deceased 1544. Sir Thomas Leigh, Mercer, Maior, 1558. Sir Richard Malory, Mercer, Maior, 1564. Humfrey Baskervile, Mercer, Sheriffe, 1561. Sir George Bond, Maior, 1587, &c. Before this Hospitall towards the street, was builded a faire and beautifull Chappell arched over with stone, and thereupon the Mercers Hall, a most cu∣rious peece of worke: Sir Iohn Allen, Mercer, being founder of that Chap∣pell, was there buried, but since his Tombe is removed thence into the bo∣dy of the Hospitall Church, & his bo∣dy-roome divided into shops, are letten out for rēt. These Mercers were enabled to be a Company, & to purchase lands to the value of 20. li. the yeer, the 17. of Richard the 2. they had 3. messuages & shops in the Parish of St. Martin Otes∣wich, in the Ward of Bishops-gate, for the sustentation of the poore, & a Chantry, the 22. of Richard the second. Henry the fourth in the 12. of his reign, confirmed to Stephen Spilman, W. Marchford, & Iohn Whatile, Mercers, by the name of one new Seldam, shed, or building, with shops, celers, and edifices whatsoever appertaining, called Crownsilde, situate in the Mercery in West Cheape,Crownsilde, under Bow Church. in the Pa∣rish of St. Mary de Arcubus in London, &c. to be holden in Burgage, as all the City of London is, & which were worth by yeere, in all issues according to the true value of them, 7. li. 13. s. 4. d. as was found by inquisition before Thomas Knolles, Maior, and Eschetor in the said City. Henry the sixth, in the 3. of his reigne, at the request of Iohn Coventry, Iohn Carpenter, and William Grove, gran∣ted to the Mercers to have a Chaplaine, & a Brotherhood, for reliefe of such of
their Company, as came to decay by misfortune on the Sea. In the yeere, 1536. on Saint Peters night, King Hen∣rie the eighth, and Queene Iane his wife, stood in this Mercers Hall, then new builded, and beheld the marching Watch of the City, most bravely set out, sir Iohn Allen, Mercer, one of the Kings Councell, being Maior. Next beyond the Mercers Chappell, Ironmonger lane. and their Hall, is Ironmonger lane, so cal∣led of Ironmongers dwelling there, whereof I reade in the reigne of Edward the first, &c. In this Lane is the small Parish Church of St. Martin,Parish Church of S. Martins Pomary. called Po∣mary, upon what occasion I certainly know not. It is supposed to be of Ap∣ples growing, where now houses are lately builded: for my selfe have seene large voide places. Monuments in that Church none to be accounted of. Farther west,S. Laurence lane. is St. Laurence lane, so called of St. Laurence Church, which standeth directly over-against the north end thereof. Antiquities in this Lane I find none other, than that among many faire houses, there is one large Inne for receit of Travellers, called Blossoms Inne,Blossoms Inne. but corruptly Bosoms Inne, and hath to signe S. Laurence the Deacon, in a border of Blossomes or Flowers. Then neere to the Standard in Cheape, Hony lane. is Hony lane, so called, not of sweetnesse thereof, being very narrow, and some∣what dark, but rather, of often washing and sweeping, to keep it cleane. In this Lane is the small Parish Church, called Alhallowes in Hony lane:Parish Church of Alhallowes Hony lane. There bee no Monuments in this Church worth the nothing. I finde, that Iohn Norman, Dra∣per, Maior, 1453. was buried there: He gave to the Drapers his Tenements on the North side the said Church, they to allow for the Beame light and Lampe, 13. shillings 4. pence yeerly, from this Lane to the Standard. And thus much for Cheape Ward, in the high streete of Cheape; for it stretcheth no farther. Now, for the North Wing of Cheape Ward,Catte-street. have yee Catte-streete, corruptly called Catteten streete, which beginneth at the North end of Ironmonger lane, and runneth to the west end of St. Laurence Church, as is afore shewed. On the North side of this streete is the Guild-hall, wherein the Courts for the City be kept: namely, 1. The Court of Common Councell,The Guild-Hall, and Courts kept. 2. The court of the Lord Maior & his Brethren the Al∣dermen, Lib. Fle. 3. The court of Hustings, 4. The court of Orphanes, 5. The 2. courts of the Sheriffes, 6. The court of the Wardmote, 7. The court of Hallmote, 8. The court of Requests, commonly cal∣led the Court of Conscience, 9. The Chamberlaines court for Prentises, and making them free. This Guild-hall, saith Robert Fabian, was begun to be builded new in the yeere 1411. the twelfth of Henry the fourth, by Thomas Knoles, then Maior, & his Brethren the Alder∣men: The same was made of a little cot∣tage, a large and great house, as now it standeth; towards the charges whereof, the Companies gave large benevolen∣ces. Also offences of men were pardo∣ned for summes of money towards this Worke, extraordinary Fees were rai∣sed, Fines, Amercements, and other things imployed, during 7. yeeres, with a continuation there of 3. yeers more, all to be imployed to this building. The first yeere of Henry the sixth, Iohn Coventry and Iohn Carpentar, Executors to Richard Whitington, gave towards the paving of this great Hall twenty pound, and the next yeere fifteene pound more to the said Pavement with hard stone of Purbecke: They also gla∣sed some Windowes thereof, and of the Maiors Court, on every which Win∣dow, the Armes of Richard Whitington are placed. The foundation of the Maiors court was laid in the third yeere of the reigne of Henry the sixth; and of the Porch, on the South side of the Maiors court, in the fourth of the said King. Then was builded the Maiors Chamber, and the Councell Chamber, with other roomes above the staires. Having here so just occasion, speaking of that former ancient Councell Cham∣ber, The new Councell Chamber at the Guild-Hall, and the buil∣ding ther∣of. which hath continued so ever since; I cannot but account it expedient (as in no place better fitting) to remem∣ber the faire and goodly new Councell Chamber; a worthy Act and Honour, whereby to renowne deservedly the City for ever. The said new Councell Chamber, with a faire Roome over the same, appointed for a Treasury, where∣in to preserve the Bookes and Records
belonging to the Citie; and another roome also underneath the said Cham∣ber, reserved for necessary use and im∣ployment, began to be builded the first weeke after Easter, in the time of the Maioralty of Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight and Alderman; in the yeere of our Lord, 1614. It was fully finished shortly after Michaehas, 1615. at the latter end of the Maioralty of Sir Tho∣mas Hayes, Knight and Alderman. But the Lord Maior, and the Aldermen his brethren, kept their first Court in the said new Councell Chamber,The first Court kepe in the new Councell Chamber. on the seventh day of November, in the yeere of our Lord, 1615. Sir Iohn Iolles, Knight and Alderman, being then Lord Maior: By whose order and direction, the said building was performed, from the first beginning thereof, to the finall finishing of the same; amounting to the charge of 1740. pounds: than which, no money (in my mind) could be better bestowed, nor more to the Ci∣ties credit and renowne. Last of all, a stately Porch, entring the great Hall, was erected, the front thereof towards the South, being beau∣tified with Images of stone, such as is shewed by these verses following, made about some thirty yeeres since, by Wil∣liam Elderton, at that time an Atturney in the Sheriffes Courts there: Though most the Images be pulled downe,Verses made on the Ima∣ges over the Guild-hall gate. And none be thought remaine in Towne, I am sure there be in London yet Seven Images, such, and in such a place, As few or none, I thinke, will hit: Yet every day they shew their face, And thousands see them every yeere, But few, I thinke, can tell me where: Where Iesu Christ aloft doth stand,Names of Images. Law and Learning on either hand; Discipline in the Divels necke, And hard by her are three direct; There Iustice, Fortitude and Temperance stand, Where finde ye the like in all this Land? Divers Aldermen glazed the great Hall, and other Courts, as appeareth by their Armes in each window. Willi∣am Hariot, Draper, Maior, 1481. gave forty pound to the making of two Loo∣vers in the said Guild-hall, and toward the glazing thereof.Kitchens by the Guild-hall. The Kitchens, and other houses of Office adjoyning to this Guild-hall, were builded of later time, to wit, about the yeere 1501. by pro∣curement of Sir Iohn Sha, Goldsmith, Maior, (who was the first that kept his Feast there) towards the charges of which worke, the Maior had of the Fel∣lowships of the Citie (by their owne agreement) certaine summes of money; as, of the Mercers forty pounds; the Grocers, twenty pounds; the Drapers, thirty pounds; and so of the other Fel∣lowships thorow the Citie, as they were of power. Also Widdowes, and other wel-dis∣posed persons, gave certaine summes of money: as, the Lady Hill, ten pounds; the Ladie Austrie, ten pounds; and so of many other, till the worke was fini∣shed. Since the which time, the Maiors Feasts have beene yeerely kept there, which before-time had beene kept in the Taylors Hall, and in the Grocers Hall. Nicholas Alwin, Grocer, Maior, 1499. deceased 1505. gave by his Te∣stament, for a hanging of Tapestrie, to serve for principall dayes in the Guild-hall, 73. l. 6. s. 8. d. How this gift was performed, I have not heard: for Exe∣cutors of our time, having no consci∣ence, (I speake of my own knowledge) prove more Testaments than they per∣forme. Now for the Chappell or Colledge of our Lady Mary Magdalen,Chappell or Col∣ledge at Guild-hall. Patent. and of All Saints by the Guild-Hall, called London Colledge: I read, that the same was builded about the yeere 1299. and that Peter Fanelore, Adam Frauncis, and Hen∣ry Frowicke Citizens, gave one Messuage with the appurtenances, in the Parish of S. Foster, to William Brampton, Custos
of the Chauntry, by them founded in the said Chappell, with foure Chap∣lains, and on the other house in the Pa∣rish of S. Giles without Creplegate, in the 27. of Edward the third, was given to them. Moreover I finde, that Richard the 2. in the 20. of his reigne, granted to Ste∣phen Spilman, Mercer, licence to give one messuage, three shops, and one garden, with the appurtenances, being in the Parish of S. Andrew Hubberd, to the Custos and Chaplaines of the said Chappell, and to their successors, for their better reliefe and maintenance for ever. King Henry the 6. in the eighth of his reigne, gave licence to Iohn Barnard, Cu∣stos, and the Chaplains, to build of new the said Chappell or Colledge of Guild Hall:Chappell or Col∣ledge at Guildhall new buil∣ded. and the same Henry the 6. in the 27. of his reigne, granted to the Paris-Clerks in London, a Guild of S. Nicho∣las, for two Chaplaines, by them to bee kept in the said Chappell of S. Mary Magdalen, neere unto the Guild-hall, and to keepe 7. Almes-people. Henry Bar∣ton, Skinner, Maior, founded a Chap∣laine there: Roger Depham, Mercer, and Sir VVilliam Langford, Knight, had also Chaplaines there. This Chappell or Colledge had a Custos, 7. Chaplaines, 3. Clarkes, and 4. Quiresters. Monuments there have beene sundry, as appeareth by the Tombes of Marble yet remaining, seven in number, but all defaced. The uppermost in the Quire, on the South side thereof, above the Revestrie doore, was the Tombe of Iohn Welles, Grocer, Maior 1451. The like∣nesse of Wels are graven on the Tombe, on the Revestrie doore, and other pla∣ces on that side the Quire. Also in the glasse window, is the likenesse of Welles, with hands elevated out of the same Wels, holding scrowles, wherein is written, Mercy: the writing in the East window (being broken) yet re∣maineth Welles.Iohn Welles a princi∣pall bene∣factor to Guild hall Colledge. I found his Armes also in the South glasse window: all which doe shew, that the East end and South side of the Quire of this Chappell, and the Revestire, were by him both builded and glazed. On the North side of the Quire, the Tombe of Thomas Knesworth, Fishmonger, Maior 1505. who decea∣sed 1505. who decea∣sed 1515. was defaced, and within these 44. yeeres againe renewed by the Fish∣mongers. Two other Tombes lower there are, the one of a Draper, the other of a Haberdasher, their names not knowne: Richard Stomin is written in the window by the Haberdasher. Vnder flat stones doe lye divers Custos of the Chappell, Chaplaines and Officers to the Chamber. Amongst others, Iohn Clipstone, Priest, sometime Custos of the Library of the Guild-hall, 1457. Another of E. Alison, Priest, one of the Custos of the Library, 1510. &c. Sir Iohn Langley, Goldsmith, Maior, 1576. lyeth buried in the vault, under the Tombe of Iohn Welles before∣named. This Chappell or Colledge, valued to dispend 12. l. 8. s. 9. d. by the yeere, was surrendred amongst o∣ther: the Chappell remaineth to the Maior and Communalty, wherein they have service weekely, as also at the ele∣ction of the Maior, and at the Maiors Feast, &c. Adjoyning to this Chappell on the South side,Library at Guild-hall. was sometime a faire and large Library, furnished with Bookes, pertaining to the Guild-hall and Col∣ledge. These Bookes (as it is said) were, in the reigne of Edward the 6. sent for by Edward Duke of Somerset, Lord Prote∣ctor, with promise to be restored short∣ly: men laded from thence three Car∣ries with them, but they were never re∣turned. This Library was builded by the Executors of R. VVhitington, and by VV. Bury. The Armes of VVhitington are placed on the one side in the stone-worke: and two letters, to wit, W. and B. for William Bury, on the other side: it is now losted through, and made a store-house for Clothes. South-west from this Guild-hall,Parish Church of S. Laurence, in the Iurie. is the faire Parish Church of S. Laurence, called in the Iurie, because (of old time) many Iewes inhabited thereabout. This Church is faire and large, and hath some Monuments, as shall be shewed. I my selfe, more than 70. yeeres since, have seene in this Church the shanke bone of a man (as it is taken) and also a tooth of a very great bignesse,The tooth of some monstrous Fish as I take it. hanged up, for shew, in chaines of iron, upon a
pillar of stone; the tooth (being about the bignesse of a mans fist) is long since conveyed from thence: the thigh or shanke bone,A shanke bone of 25. inches long, of a man, as is said, but might be of an Ele∣phant. of 25. inches in length by the Rule, remaineth yet fastned to a post of timber, and is not so much to be noted for the length, as for the thicknes, hardnesse and strength thereof; for when it was hanged on the stone pillar, it fretted (with moving) the said pillar, and was not it selfe fretted, nor (as see∣meth) is not yet lightned, by remaining dry: but where or when this bone was first found or discovered, I have not heard; and therefore, rejecting the fa∣bles of some late Writers, I overpasse them. VValter Blundell had a Chauntry there, the 14. of Edward the second, There lye buried in this Church, Eliza∣beth, wife to Iohn Fortescue; Katharine Stoketon, Iohn Stratton, Philip Albert, Iohn Fleming, Philip Agmondesham, Wil∣liam Skywith, Iohn Norlong, Iohn Baker, Thomas Alleyne, William Barton, Mercer, 1410. William Melrith, Mercer, one of the Sheriffes, 1425. Simon Barlet, Mer∣cer, 1428. Walter Chartsey, Draper, one of the Sheriffes, 1430. Richard Rich, E∣squire of London, the Father, and Ri∣chard Rich his sonne, Mercer, one of the Sheriffes, 1442. deceased, 1469. with this Epitaph: Respice quod opus est Praesentis temporis aevum, Omne quod est, mihil est, Praeter amare Deum. This Richard was Father to Iohn, bu∣ried in S. Thomas Acars, which Iohn was Father to Thomas, Father to Richard Lord Rich, &c. Iohn Pickering, honoura∣ble for service of his Prince, and for the English Merchants beyond the Seas, who deceased, 1448. Iohn Atkenson, Gen∣tleman, Dame Mary S. Maure, Iohn Waltham, Roger Bonifant, Iohn Chayhee, Iohn Abbot, Iohn Marshall, Mercer, Mai∣or, 1493. William Purchat, Maior 1498. Thomas Burgoyne, Gentleman, Mercer, 1517. A wife to a Master of Defence, servant to the Princes of Wales, Dutches of Cornewall, and Countesse of Chester. Sir Michel Dormer, Maior, 1541. Robert Charsey, one of the Sheriffes, 1548. Sir William Rowe, Ironmonger, Mai∣or, 1593. Samuel Thornhill, 1597. Lo here the Lady Margaret North,An anci∣ent Tomb in the Chancell. in Tombe and earth doth lye; Of husbands foure the faithfull Spouse, whose fame shall never dye. One Andrew Fraunces was the first, the second Robert hight, Sirnamed Chartsey, Alderman: Sir David Brooke, a Knight, Was third. But he that passed all, and was in number fourth, And for his vertue made a Lord, was call'd, Sir Edward North. These all together doe I wish a joyfull rising day: That of the Lord, and of his Christ, All honour they may say. Obiit 2. die Iunii, An. Dom. 1575. Hic jacet Simon Bennington, Civis & Pan∣narius London,An anci∣ent Tomb in the South wall▪ Sustentatorum istius Ca∣pellae, ac unius Capellani, in eadem divi∣na quotidie celebratis. Cujus animae Propitietur Deus. Hic incineratur corpus quondam Galfridi Bullayne,A grave∣stone on the groūd, well pla∣ted. Civis, Merceri, & Maioris London, Qui ab hac—Ann. Dom. 1463. Cujus animae pax sit perpetua. Amen. The word (Now thus) 32. times di∣spersed in Brasse all over the Grave∣stone. Hic jacet Thomas Boleyne, de Comitatu Norfolciae, Armiger: Qui obiit ultimo die Mensis Aprilis, An. Dom. 1571. Cujus, &c. Here lyeth Sir Richard Gresham,An anci∣ent Tomb East in the wall. Knight, sometimes Lord Maior of London and Audrey his first wife, by whom hee had issue, Sir Iohn Gresham, and Sir Tho∣mas Gresham, Knights, William and Margaret: which Sir Richard deceased the 20. day of February, An. Domini, 1548. And the third yeere of King Ed∣ward the sixth his reigne. And Adurey deceased the 28. day of December, An. Dom. 1522. Here lyeth the body of Geffrey Felding,A grave∣stone pla∣ted before the Tomb. sometime Maior of this Citie, and Angell his wife, and Thomas, Richard, and
Iohn, sonnes of the said Geffrey, Ann. Dom. 1517. Hic jacet Iohannes Marshall, Civis & Mercerus Civitatis London.An anci∣ent Mar∣ble Tomb in the North side of the Quire. Qui qui∣dem Iohannes obiit 4. die Januarii, An. Dom. 1498. Et Ioanna Vxor e∣jus: quae quidem Ioanna obiit 18. die Decembris, 1484. Quorum, &c. Hereunder lyeth buried the body of the La∣dy Alice Avenon,A faire Monumēt in the North wall of the Quire. being one of the daughters and heires of Thomas Hu∣chen, Citizen and Mercer of London, whose last husband was Sir Alexander Avenon, Alderman, and late L. Maior of this Citie of London. Her second hus∣band, was Iohn Blundell, of London, Mercer, by whom she had issue one sonne, named Philip, deceased, and eight daugh∣ters, whereof five lived untill they were married, and they were coheires to their Father; namely, Elizabeth, married un∣to Edmond Hogan, of London, Mer∣cer; Mary, unto Sir Gerard Crockar, of Oxfordshire, Knight; Theodora, married first unto John Denton, of Ox∣fordshire, Gent. and after unto Justini∣an Champneis, of Kent, Esquire; Anne, married to Thomas Cordel, of London, Mercer; and Susanna, unto Richard Freston, of London, Gent. The which Alice Blundel, in the time of her widdowhood, left a foundation within the Mercers Hall in London, for thirteen penny Ioaves of good sweet bread, to be gi∣ven (in her name) among thirteen poore folkes of this Parish of Saint Laurence in the Old Iewrie, every Sunday at Mor∣ning Prayer for ever, in the presence of the worshipfull of the same Parish. And her first husband was Hugh Methwold of London, Mercer, by whom shee had issue, William, her sonne and heyre, and a daughter named Anne, deceased. The which Dame Alice departed this world, the 21. day of November, Ann. Dom. 1574. unto whom God send (through Ie∣sus Christ) a joyfull resurrection. Amen. Aetatis suae, 61. Qualis vita, finis ita. Hereunder resteth,A small Monumēt on a pillar in the North Ile. in assured hope of the re∣surrection, the bodies of Iohn Fox, Citi∣zen and Goldsmith of London, and Jo∣hanna his wife: whose lives as they were blamelesse and holy, so their end was full of peace. The said John was the Founder of the free Schoole of Deane, in the Coun∣ty of Cumberl. besides 18. d. weekly to an Almes-man, belonging to the Gold∣smiths Hall. And other charitable deeds, to the poore prisoners, and Hospitals in the Citie of London: The memory of whose good deeds, God grant others to doe the like. The said John, being of the age of 78. fell on sleepe the 8. day of Iune, 1597. And Iohanna his wife, of the age of 87. departed this life the 9. of Febru∣arie, 1600. Fiducia Christianorum, Resurrectio Mortuorum. Thus much for Cheape Ward, which hath an Alderman, his Deputy; Com∣mon Counsellours, 11. Constables, 11. Scavengers, 9. for the Wardmote In∣quest, 12. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene, at 72. l. 16. s. and in the Ex∣chequer, at 72. l. 11. s.
COLEMAN STREET VVard. NExt to Cheape Ward, on the North side thereof, is Coleman street Ward, and beginneth also in the East, on the course of Walbrooke, in Loth∣bury, and runneth West, (on the South side) to the end of Ironmongers lane, and on the North side, to the West corner of Basings Hall street. On the South side of Lothbury, is the street called the Old Iewrie, the one halfe, and better, on both sides towards Cheape, is of this Ward. On the North side lyeth Coleman street, whereof the Ward taketh name, whol∣ly on both sides North to London wall, and from that North end along by the Wall, and Mooregate, East, to the course of Walbrooke. And againe, from Coleman street, West, to the Iron grates: and these be the bounds of this Ward. Antiquities therein to be noted, are these:Lothbery. First, the street of Lothbery, Lath∣bery, or Loadbery, (for by all these names have I read it) tooke the name (as it see∣meth) of a Bery, or Court of old time there kept, but by whom, it is growne out of memorie. This street is possessed (for the most part) by Founders, that cast Candlestickes, Chafingdishes, Spice Morters, and such like Copper or Laten works, and doe afterward turne them with the foot, and not with the wheele, to make them smooth and bright, with turning and scratting, (as some doe terme it) making a lothsome noise to the by-passers, that have not beene used to the like; and therefore by them disdainedly called Lothburie. On the South side of this street, amongst the Founders, be some faire houses and large, for Merchants; namely, one that of old time was the Iewes Synagogue, The Iewes Syna¦gogue. which was defaced by the Citizens of London, after that they had slaine 700. Iewes, and spoiled the residue of their goods, in the yeere 1262. the 47. of H. the 3. And not long after, in the yeere 1291. King Edward the first banished the remnant of the Iewes out of England, as is afore shewed. The said Synagogue being so sup∣pressed, certaine Friers got possession thereof: For in the yeere 1257. (saith Mathew Paris) there were seene in Lon∣don a new order of Friers,Fratres de Saccae, or de poeniten∣tia. called De Poe∣nitentia Iesu, or Fratres de Sacca, because they were apparelled in Sackcloth, who had their house in London, neere unto Aldersgate, without the gate, and had li∣cence of Henry the third, in the 54. of his reigne, to remove from thence to a∣ny other place: and in the 56. hee gave unto them this Iewes Synagogue. After which time, Eleanor the Queene, wife to Edward the first, tooke into her pro∣tection, and warranted unto the Prior and brethren De poenitentia Iesu Christi of London, the said land and building in Cole-church street,Cole-church street, or Old Iewe. in the parish of Saint Olave in the Iury, & S. Margaret in Loth∣burie, by her granted, with consent of Stephen de Fulborn, Vnder-warden of the Bridge-house, and other brethren of that house: for threescore Markes of Silver, which they had received of the said Prior and brethren of repentance, toward the building of the said Bridge. This order of Friers gathered many good scholars, and multiplyed in number ex∣ceedingly, untill the Councell at Lyons, by the which it was decreed, that (from that time forth) there should no more Orders of begging Friers be permitted, but onely the foure Orders; to wit, the
Dominicke or Preachers, the Minorites or gray Friers, the Carmelites or white Friers, and the Augustines: and so from that time the begging Friers decreased and fell to nothing. Now it followed, that in the yeere 1305. Robert Fitzwalter requested and obtained of the said King Edward the first,Ro. Fitz∣walter his house. that the same Friers of the Sacke, might assigne to the said Robert their Chappell or Church, of old time called the Synagogne of the Iewes, neere ad∣joyning to the then mansion place of the same Robert, which was in place where now standeth the Grocers Hall: and the said Synagogue was at the North corner of the Old Iewry. Robert Large, Mercer, Maior, in the yeere 1439. kept his Maioraltie in this house, and dwelled there untill his dying day. This house standeth and is of two Parishes, as opening into Lothbury, of Saint Margarets Parish, and opening into the Old Iewry, of Saint Olaves Pa∣rish. The said Robert Large gave libe∣rally to both these Parishes, but was bu∣ried at S. Olaves. Hugh Clopton,The Wind mill Ta∣verne in the old Iu∣rie. Mercer, Maior, 1492. dwelled in this house, and kept his Mai∣oralty there. It is now a Taverne, and hath to signe a Wind-mill. And thus much for this house, some∣time the Iewes Synagogue, since, an house of Friers, then a Noble-mans house, after that, a Merchants house, wherein Maioralties have beene kept, and now a Wine-Taverne. Then is the Old Iury,The Old Iurie. a street so called of Iewes sometime dwelling there, and neere adjoyning, in the Parishes of S. Olave,The Iewes brought from Rone by William Duke of Normandy. S. Michael Bassings Hall. S. Mar∣tin Ironmonger lane, S. Laurence, called the Iewrie, and so West to Woodstreete. William, D. of Normandy, first brought them from Rone to inhabit here. William Rufus favoured them so farre,W. Rufus favoured them. that he sware by Lukes face, his com∣mon Oath, if they could overcome the Christians, hee would bee one of their Sect. Henry the second grievously punished them for corrupting his coyne.Hen. the 1. punished them. Richard the first forbade Iewes and women to be present at his Coronation,Rich. the 3. forbade them to come to his coro∣nation. for feare of inchantments: for breaking of which commandement, many Iewes were slaine, who being assembled, to present the King with some gift, one of them was stricken by a Christian, which some unruly people perceiving, fell up∣on them, beat them to their houses, and brent them therein, or slew them at their comming out. Also the Iewes at Norwich, S. Ed∣mondsbury, Lincolne, Stanford, and Lyn, were robbed and spoiled; and at Yorke, to the number of 500. besides Women and children, entred a Tower of the Ca∣stle, proffered money to be in surety of their lives, but the Christians would not take it: whereupon they cut the throats of their owne wives and chil∣dren, and cast them over the walles on the Christians heads, and then entring the Kings lodging, they burned both the house and themselves. King Iohn, in the eleventh of his reign, commanded all the Iewes,King Iohn tormen∣ted the Iewes. both men and women, to be imprisoned and grie∣vously punished, because hee would have all their money: some of them gave all they had, and promised more, to escape so many kinds of torments; for every one of them had one of their eyes at the least plucked out. Amongst whom there was one, which being tor∣mented many wayes, would not ran∣some himselfe, till the King had caused (every day) one of his great teeth to be plucked out, by the space of seven daies, and then he gave the King tenne thou∣sand Markes of silver, to the end they should pull out no more: the said King at that time spoiled the Iewes of sixty six thousand markes. The 17. of this King,The Ba∣rons rifled the Iewes. the Barons brake into the Iewes houses, rifled their coffers, and with the stone of their hou∣ses, repaired the gates and wals of Lon∣don. King Henry the third, in the eleventh of his reigne,. of Hen. 3. Hen 3. ex∣cheted the lands and goods of the Iewes. granted to Semaine or Bal∣laster, the house of Benomye Mittun the Jew, in the Parish of S. Michael Bassing∣hanghe, in which the said Benomye dwelt, with the fourth part of all his Land in that Parish, which William Elie held of the fee of Hugh Nevell, and all the land in Coleman street, belonging to the said Benomye, and the fourth part of the land in the Parish of S. Laurence, which was the fee of Thomas Buckerell, and were
excheted to the King for the murther which the said Benomye committed in the Citie of London, to hold to the said Semaine, and his heires, of the King, pray∣ing at Easter a paire of gilt Spurres, and to doe the service thereof due unto the Lords Court. In like manner, and for like services, the King granted to Guso for his ho∣mage, the other part of the Lands of the said Benomye in S. Michaels Parish, which Law the Painter held, and was the Kings Exchete; and the Lands of the said Benomye, in the said Parish, which Walter Turner held, and 15. foot of Land which Hugh Harman held, with 15. iron Ells of Land, and an halfe, in the front of Ironmonger lane, in the Pa∣rish of S. Martin, which were the said Benomyes, of the see of the Hospitall of S. Giles, and which Adam the Smith held, with 2. stone houses, which were Moses the Jew of Canturbury, in the Pa∣rish of S. Olave, and which are of the fee of Arnold le Reus, and are the Kings Exchetes, as aforesaid. The 16. of the said Henry,The Iews builded them a Syna∣gogue in London. the Iewes in London builded a Synagogue, but the King commanded it should be dedica∣ted to our blessed Lady, and after gave it to the Brethren of S. Anthonie of Vi∣enna, and so was it called S. Anthonies Hospitall. This King Henry founded a Church and house for converted Iewes,Hen. the 3. founded an house for con∣verted Iewes. in a new street by the Temple, whereby it came to passe, that (in short time) there was gathered a great number of Con∣verts. The 20. of this King Henry, seven Iewes were brought from Norwich,Iews stale a child and circū∣cised him, and min∣ded to have cru∣cified him. which had stolne a Christned child, had circumcised, and minded to have cruci∣fied him at Easter, wherefore their bo∣dies and goods were at the Kings plea∣sure. The 26. the Iewes were constrai∣ned to pay to the King 20000. Markes, at two termes in the yeere, or else to be kept in perpetuall prison. The 35. he taketh inestimable sums of money of all rich men;Hen. 3. ex∣acteth money of the Iewes. namely, of A∣aron, a Iew borne at Yorke, 14000. marks for himselfe, and tenne thousand marks for the Queene, and before, he had ta∣ken of the same Iew as much, as in all a∣mounted to 30000. markes of silver, and two hundred markes of gold to the Queene. In the 40. yeere were brought up to Westminster 202. Iewes from Lincolne,Iewes han∣ged for crucifying of a child. for crucifying a child, named Hugh, 18. of them were hanged. The 43. a Iew at Tewkesburie fell into a Privie on the Saturday, and would not that day be taken out, for reverence of his Sabbath; wherfore Richard Clare, Earle of Glocester, kept him there till Munday, that he was dead. The 47. the Barons slew of the Iewes at London,700. Iewes slaine at London. 700. the rest were spoiled, and their Synagogue defaced, because one Iew would have forced a Christian to have paid more than 2. s. for the lone of 20. s. a weeke. The third of Edward the first,Vsury for∣bidden. in a Parliament at London, vsurie was for∣bidden to the Iewes: and that all Vsu∣rers might be knowne, the King com∣manded that every Vsurer should weare a Table on his brest, the breath of a paveline, or else to avoid the Realm. The sixth of the said King Edward, a reformation was made for clipping of the Kings Coyne; for which offence, 267. Iewes were drawne and hanged;English Iewes hanged. three were English Christians, and o∣ther were English Iewes. The same yeere the Iewes crucified a childe at Northampton,Iews han∣ged at Lon∣don, for crucifying a child at Northam∣pton. for the which fact, many Iewes at London were drawn at horse tayles and hanged. The eleventh of Edward the first, Iohn Perkham, Archbishop of Canturbu∣rie, commanded the Bishop of London to destroy all the Iewes Synagogues in his Dioces. The 16. of the said Edward,All the Iewes in England ap∣prehēded & redee∣med for money. all the Iewes in England, were (in one day) ap∣prehended by precept from the King, but they redeemed themselves for 12. thousand pounds of silver; notwithstan∣ding in the 19. of his reigne he banished them all out of England, giving them onely to beare their charge till they were out of his Realme: the number of Iewes then expulsed, were 15060. per∣sons. All the Iewes ba∣nished this Realme. The King made a mighty masse of money of their houses, which he sold, and yet the Commons of England had granted, and gave him a fifteenth of all their goods, to banish them. And thus much for the Iewes.
In this street called the Old Iewrie,Parish Church of S. Olave Vpwell in the Iewrie. is a proper Parish Church of S. Olave Vp∣well, so called in Record, 1320. Iohn Bri∣an, Parson of Saint Olave Vpwell, in the Iewry, founded there a Chauntry, and gave two messuages to that Parish,A Well was under the East end of this Church, late tur∣ned to a Pump, but decayed. the 16. of Edward the second, and was by the said King confirmed. In this Church, to the commendation of the Parsons and Parishioners, the Monu∣ments of the dead remaine lesse defaced than in many other. First, of William Dikman, Fereno, or Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffes of London, 1367. Robert Havelocke, Ironmonger, 1390. Iohn Or∣gan, Mercer, one of the Sheriffes, 1385. Iohn Forrest, Vicar of Saint Olaves, and of Saint Stephen, which at that time was as a Chappell annexed to S. Olave, 1399. Henry Friole, Taylor, 1400. Tho∣mas Morsted, Esquire, Chirurgian to Henry the fourth, fifth, and sixth, one of the Sheriffes, 1436. He builded a faire new Ile, to the in∣largement of this Church, on the north side therof, wherein hee lyeth buried, 1450. Adam Breakspeare, Chaplaine, 1411. William Kirkbie, Mercer, 1465. Robert Large, Mercer, Maior, 1440. He gave to that Church 200. l'. Iohn Bel∣win, Founder, 1467. Gabriel Rave, Ful∣ler, 1511. Wentworth, Esquire, 1510. Tho∣mas Michell, Ironmonger, 1527. Giles Dewes, servant to Henry the seventh, and to Henry the eighth, Clerke of their Libraries, and Schoolemaster for the French tongue to Prince Arthur, and to the Lady Mary, 1535. Edmond Burlacy, 1583. Iohn Brian. Here lyeth under this Tombe,An anciēt Marble Tombe in the East end of the Quite. the body of Richard Chamberlaine, Ironmonger, Alderman and late Sheriffe of London, Merchant Adventurer, and free of Rus∣sia, who had two wives, Anne, the first of whom he had issue, 8. sonnes and 5. daughters. Of Margaret his last wife no issue, which Richard dyed the 19. day of November, An. Dom. 1566. To the poore he was liberall, and gave for Gods sake, But now his fame is plentifull, and he an heavenly Make, He was like one of us, according to our mould, But now he is unlike us, in heaven where he would. His time was short, in sicknes rare, as to all is knowne: But now his time shall long endure, and never be cast downe. Hic requiescit in Gratia & misericordia Dei,A placed stone on the groūd in the South Ile. Robertus Large, quondam Mer∣cerui & Maior istius Civitatis. Qui obiit 24. die Aprilis, 1441. Et Eliza∣beth uxor ejus, ac pueri eorundem. Cu∣jus, &c. Humfrido Weld militi, & nuper Maiori Civitatis London, vire integerrimo, san∣ctissimo, summa in Deū pietate, in homi∣nes fide ac comitate praedito: Joanne Weld unicus filius & haeres, hoc Monu∣mentum pietatis ergo moerens posuit. Habuit ex Anna uxore, primâ filiâ Nicho∣lai wheler Armigeri, filios duos, Hum∣fridum, olim defunctum, & Ioannem Maritum Franciscae filiae Gulielmi Whit∣more Armig. & quinque filias, Ioannam, nuptam Roberte Brooke, de Cockfield, in Com. Suff. militi. Annam, nuptam Ri∣cardo Corbet, de Stoke super Terne, in Com. Salop. Armigero, Mariam, Saram & Elizabetham, olim defunctas. Post cujus obitum, duxit uxorem secundam Mariam, filiam Stephani Slani Mili∣tis, adhuc superstitem. Obiit 29. die Novembris, An. Dom. 1610. Aetatis suae, 64. Quem tegit hoc marmor,A goodly Tombe is the South Ile. Quem cassum lumine flemus, Abstulit una dies, Quantum si forte requiris, Weldus erat nomen, Maior celeberrimus urbis; Justitiae splendor, verae pietatis Imago, Religionis amans, aevi prudentia nostri, Mens humilis, purus{que} animus, patiensque laborum, Frons hilaris, faciles aures, pectus{que} fidele, Os verax, mites oculi, gravitate refulgens Vultus; Cor placidum studiosis, dextra benigna, Quos non instimulent nobis reticentibus ipsi,
Incipient scopuli vivis sermonibus uti; Iustè Welde minor si spes, si fama fuisset, De te Welde minor nostra querela foret. Thomas Cambell Eques,A very faire and costly Tombe in the East end of the Chancell. secundo Regis Ia∣cobi, Civis London ejusdem Vrbis patri∣cius & Praetor aequissimus & prudentis∣simus: domicilium sibi hoc in perpetuam memoriam dicatum habet: feliciter bis nuptus erat, & ex 1. conjugio filii nati sunt 6. filiae, 7. ex inde vero nepotes 39. quem cives privatim & publicè, honori∣ficè omnes colebant. Annos autem 78. cum adimplesset, suorum & omnium ho∣nestorum cum luctu, fato concessit, 13. die Februarii, An. Dom. 1613. Transiit ad vivos è vivis Pacis alumnus, Iustitiae columen; Qui decus inde suum Extulit egregiè: Pietatem caetera praeter Dilexit: cultus, Religione, side. Non patrem tantum proles, sine murmure luctus Percipit; at vetuit mors superare modum: Vulnus opem{que} ferens, aequè. Quid plangitis ultra? Angelus en factus! nec minor ante fuit. Quae potuit cuiquam, optari Mors, vita{que} honore Fulta: & amicitiis inclita; prole, fide. Obtigit haec, Cambelle, tibi, utra{que} scilicet annis Maturis, meriti & plenus amoris obis. Digna viro tibi vita fuit, qui viveret ultra, Digna{que} mors vitâ sed meliora frui. Terminus incertae mors vitae, & certa salutis Spes promissa rapit, non colit ima fides.A very faire Mo∣nument in the ne∣ther part of the Church. Memoriae. Henrici Anderson, Equitis Aurati, Alder∣dermanni Civitatis London, & Eliza∣bethae uxoris ejus, filiae Fran. Bowyer, Al∣derm. Lond. Qui 8. liberos habuêre, viz. 2. filios, Georg. defunct. & Rich. qui uxorem duxit Mariam, fil. primogenit. Rob. Spencer, Dom. Wormeleiton. Kath. nuptam Tho. Derham, de West Derham, in Com. Norff. Armig. Elizab. nupt. Tho. Cowley, Mercat. Lond. Francise. nupt. Rob. Nedeham, de Shaurigton, in Com. Salop. Armig. Saram & Mariam in∣nupt. Qui obiêre: Haec Iul. 9. 1599. Ille 13. April. 1605. Pietatis ergo moerens posuit Rich. Anderson filius haeres. Edwinus Smith,An engra∣ven plate, in the South wall of the Quire. filius Roberti Smith, Ci∣vis & Aromatarii Londinensis, apud Cantabrigiensis in Artibus Magister, ibi∣demque Collegii Iesus Socius praedilectus, propter summam ingenii ubertatem, me∣moriam, noticiam, pietatem, modestam∣que festivitatem, omnibus gratus: sin∣gulare sui generis ornamentum, & par decus Collegii (non dicam Academiae) futurus, diem obiit, horum omnium cum incredibili luctu, nono Calend, Septem∣bris, qui festus D. Bartholomaeo fuit. An∣no salutis, 1598. Aetatis suae, 23. Ecclesiast. 44. ver. 8. Reliquit nomen, narrantur laudes. From this Parish Church of S. Olave, to the North end of the Old Iewrie, and from thence West to the North end of Ironmonger lane, & from the said corner into Ironmonger lane, almost to the Pa∣rish Church of S. Martin, was (of old time) one large building of stone, very ancient, made in place of Jewes houses, but of what antiquity, or by whom the same was builded, or for what use, I have not learned, more than that King H. the 6. in the 16. of his reigne, gave the office of being Porter or keeper thereof,Kings Pa∣lace in the Old Iewrie. unto Iohn Stent, for terme of his life, by the name of his Principall Palace in the Old Iewry. This was (in my youth) called the Old Wardrobe: but of later time, the outward stone wall hath been by little and little taken downe, and di∣vers faire houses builded thereupon, e∣ven round about. Now for the North side of this Loth∣burie, beginning againe at the East end thereof: Vpon the Water-course of
Walbrooke, have yee a proper Parish Church, called S. Margaret, which see∣meth to be newly re-edified and buil∣ded, about the yeere 1440. For Robert Large gave to the Quire of that Church one hundred shillings, and 20. pounds for Ornaments, more, to the vaulting over the water-course of Walbrooke by the said Church, for the enlarging ther∣of, two hundred Markes. There be Monuments in this Church, of Reginald Coleman, Sonne to Robert Coleman, buried there, 1483. This said Robert Coleman may bee supposed the first builder or owner of Coleman street, and that Saint Stephens Church, then builded in Coleman street, was but a Chappell belonging to the Parish Church of S. Olave in the Iewry: for we read (as afore) that Iohn Forrest, Vicar of Saint Olaves, and of the Chappell an∣nexed of S. Stephen, deceased in the yeere 1399. Hugh Clopton, Mercer, Mai∣or, deceased, 1496. Anselme Becket, Iohn Iulian, William Ilford, Chanteries there, Sir Brian Tuke, Knight, Treasu∣rer of the Chamber to King Henry the eighth, and Dame Grisilde his wife, that deceased after him, were there buried 1536. Iohn Fetiplace, Draper, Esquire, 1464. and Ioan his wife, Sir Hugh Witch, Mercer, Maior, sonne to Richard Witch, intombed there, 1466. He gave to his third wife three thousand pound, and to Maids marriages five hundred markes. Here lyeth buried Dame Grisilde Tuke, late wife of Sir Brian Tuke,A faire ancient Tombe in the North Ile of the Quire. Knight, Treasurer of the Chamber to King Hen∣ry the eighth. She dyed the 28. day of December, 1538. Vnder this stone lyeth George Beamon,A plated stone by the Com∣munion Table. Clerke, and Doctor in Divinity, who de∣parted this life the 29. day of April, An. Dom. 1571. A man mercifull and good to the poore, and borne in Kinnegall in Cumberland: whose body and Soule God grant a joyfull resurrection. Se piu Si puote. No wealth, no praise,A goodly ancient Tombe in the Chan∣cell. no bright renowne, no skill, No force, no fame, no Princes love, no toyle, Though forraine Lands by travels search you will, No faithfull service of thy Country foyle, Can life prolong one minute of an houre: But death at length will execute his power. For Sir Iohn Leigh, to sundry Countries knowne, A worthy Knight, well of his Prince esteem'd: By seeing much, to great experience growne: Though safe on seas, though sure on land he seem'd, Yet here he lyes, too soone by death opprest, His fame yet lives, his soule in heaven hath rest. Here lyeth Ioh. Dimock,A faire plated stone be∣fore the ascending to the Cō∣munion Table. sonne to Iohn Dimock, Esquire, sometimes Citizen & Draper of London: he married Anne his first wife, by whom he had one son: which Anne dyed the yeere of Christ, 1558. Af∣ter whom he married his second wife Ma∣ry, by whom he had a daughter. He ser∣ved the Princes of famous memory, King Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth. For his faithfull and good ser∣vice he was well esteemed; for his upright dealing he was well beloved of his equals; for his benevolence to the poore, hee was both praised and prayed for. Hee lived 100. yeeres lacking 7. very commenda∣bly, and the 14. of Iuly, 1585. he dyed Christianly. Here lyeth the body of Christian Tower∣son, A faire Py∣ramide e∣rected a∣gainst the South wall of the Quire. wife of William Towerson of London, Merchant, who lived together 21. yeeres and 6. moneths, and had issue 10. children. Leaving behind her Iohn, William, Robert, Elizab. and Mary. She left this life the 19. day of February, 1611. Here resteth in hope of a ioyfull resurrection,A small Monumēt newly ere∣cted in the East end of the Quire. the body of Nicholas Style, late Alder∣man of London, who was borne at Langley, in the Parish of Beckingham, in the County of Kent: the son of Hum∣frey Stile, Knight, and of Dame Bridget his wife. He married Gertrude, the daughter of Thomas Bright of London,
Ironmonger, with whom hee lived most lovingly and faithfully the space of forty yeeres, and by her had three sonnes and foure daughters; of whom remained li∣ving at his decease, one sonne, Humfrey, and one daughter, Mary. He dyed the sixteenth day of November, An. Dom. 1615. By the West end of this Parish Church,Conduit in Lothbery. have ye a faire Water-condu∣it, builded at the charges of the Citie, in the yeere 1546. Sir Martin Bowes being Maior, two Fifteenes were levi∣ed of the Citizens, toward the charges thereof: This water is conveyed (in great abundance) from divers springs, lying betwixt Hoxton and Iseldon. Next is the Founders Hall,The Foū∣ders Hall. a proper house: and so to the South-west corner of Bassings Hall street, have ye faire and large houses for Merchants; namely, the corner house, at the end of Bassings Hall street, an old piece of worke, buil∣ded of stone, sometime belonging to a certaine Iew, named Mansere, the sonne of Aron, the sonne of Coke the Iew, the seventh of Edward the first: since, to Rahere de Sopars lane; then, to Simon Francis. Thomas Bradbery, Mercer, kept his Maioralty there,Bay Hall, deceased, 1509. Part of this house hath beene lately im∣ployed as a Market-house, for the sale of woollen Bayes, Watmoles, Flanels, and such like. Alderman Bennet now possesseth it. On this North side, against the Old Iurie,Coleman street. is Coleman street, so called of Cole∣man, the first builder and owner there∣of, as also of Cole-church, or Coleman-church, against the great Conduit in Cheape. This is a faire and large street, on both sides builded with divers faire houses, besides Alleys, with small tene∣ments, in great number. On the East side of this street, almost at the North end thereof,Armourers Hall. is the Armourers Hall, which Company of Armourers were made a Fraternity or Guild of S. George, with a Chantry in the Chappell of S. Thomas, in Pauls Church, in the first of Henry the 6. Also on the same side is Kings Alley,Kings Alley-Love lane. and Love Lane, both contai∣ning many tenements. And on the west side, towards the South end, is the Pa∣rish Church of S. Stephen, wherein the Monuments are defaced: Notwith∣standing, I finde, that William Crayhag founded a Chauntry there, in the reign of Edward the second, and was buried there. Also Iohn Essex, the 35. of Ed∣ward the third. Adam Goodman, the 37. of Edward the third. William King, Dra∣per, sometime owne of Kings Alley, the 18. of Richard the second. Iohn Sokeling, the tenth of Henry the sixth. Iohn Arnold, Leather-seller, the seventeenth of Henry the sixth. Thomas Brudbery, Mercer, Maior, the first of Henry the eighth. His Tombe remaineth on the North side of the Quire. Richard Hamney, 1418. Kirnigham, 1468. Sir Iohn Garme, Richard Colsel, Ed∣mond Harbeke, Currier: all these were Benefactors, and buried there. Here lyeth in peace the body of the Right Worshipfull,A faire Monu∣ment in the Chan∣cell. Sir William Glover, Knight, late Citizen and Alderman of London, who for the many good gifts, both in sincere Religion, wisedome, and gravity, wherewith he was very plenti∣fully graced, was elected Sheriffe of London, and served the same, Anno Domini, 1601. He had lived in good name and fame fifty eight yeeres, and ve∣ry blessedly departed this transitory life, the seventeenth day of Decemb. 1603. Leaving two sonnes, (viz.) Thomas and William; and five daughters, viz. Anne, married to Barne Roberts, of Willesden, in the County of Mid∣dlesex, Esquire; Susan, Elizabeth, Mary, and Alice, behinde him, to con∣dole the want of so kinde and loving a Father. To whose dearest Memorie, the La∣dy Anne Glover, the most sorrow∣full Widdow of the said Sir Willi∣am, lamenting his death, and her owne unrecoverable losse; at her owne charge erected this Monu∣ment, in testification both of her love and duty. Here lyeth the body of Barne Roberts, eldest son of Francis Roberts of Willesden, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire; who tooke to wife Anne, eldest daughter of Sir William Glover, Knight, and Al∣derman of Lond. by whom he had issue,
three sonnes, and five daughters. The said Barne Roberts dyed the 30. day of Ianuary, 1610. being of the age of 34. yeeres, and five moneths. In remem∣brance of whom, his said wife, (of her ve∣ry kind and loving affection) at her owne proper cost and charges, hath caused this Monument to be made and erected, An. Dom. 1611. If humane worth could have preserv'd him still,Another close by the grea∣ter. He had beene much too strong for death to kill. Yet being conquer'd, he got by the strife, A better being, in a better life: So that great Victor over Nature, left him More happinesse ten fold than he bereft him. Gulielmo Danieli, Equiti Aurato, alteri è Iudicibus cōmunium Placitorum,A faire Tombe in the East end of the South Ile. qui Maii 19. Annos natus septuaginta tria, An. Do. 1610. diem ult. explevit, devotū Carmen. Qui Patriae Leges aequo moderamine flexit, Et Iudex populo gratus amans{que} fuit, Hoc decorat genio marmor placido{que} pioque, Stabit in aeternum quod bona fama tegit. Gentem si quaeras? erat ille Checestriensis, Overtabelio nobilis ortus agro. Vxores binas duxit, nec pignora desunt, Connubii duplicis pulchra, pudica, pia. Filius egregii nominis speciemque parentis, Qui celebrat primi munus amoris erat. Elizabetha illi soror est, ab utroque parente Onsyloi vivit quae sociata toro. Conjugii sed Martha decus non sola secundi, Coco Equiti nupta est, nec satiatur Hymen, Nam binas expectat adhuc sub matre sorores, Foelices thalamos utraque digna manet. Margareta & illis paulo est maturior annis, Nomine Iudithae sit tibi nota minor. Sic numero florens natorum, munere Iudex, Ordine Eques obiit, plenus honore senex. Anna defuncti Iudicis piissima vidua, in perpetuum amoris memoriaeque testi∣monium, lugubre hoc Monumentum extrui fecit. In this Ile lye the bodies of George Gol∣ding, A hans small Mo∣nument is the wall by the o∣ther. Esquire, buried the 27. day of November, 1584. and of Anne Barte∣let, widdow, buried 12. day of Iune, 1596. and of Mary Golding, widdow, late wife of the said George, and daugh∣ter of the said Anne, buried the 29. of April, 1612. by her said husband and mother, according to her owne desire. She lived a widdow 28. yeeres, religiously to God, hospitably to her friends, and chari∣tably to all, especially to poore widdowes: and deceased the 25. day of April, 1612. being then 79. yeeres of age. An honest heart,A faire Monumēt in the South wall of the Quite. religiously affected, A zealous soule, a charitable mind, True dealing conscience, all untruth rejected; All these in one are hard and far to find: Yet in the course, both time and truth have tryed, In youth and age, Iohn Taylor liv'd and dyed. His honest heart, his honest friends have found; His zeale to God, God and the godly know; His charity, His true reliefe may sound, That on the poore his bounty did bestow: His heavenly rest, upon this point resolved, To be with Christ, I wish to be dissolved.
Here lyeth buried the body of Iohn Taylor, Esquire, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, who married Berseba, daugh∣ter of Edward Hall, late Citizen and Haberdasher of London, deceased, and had by her only one daughter, named Eli∣zabeth; first married to Francis Smith, Citizen and Mercer of Lon∣don, deceased, by whom she had one son, named Francis Smith; and since mar∣ried to Thomas Freake, of Serne, in the County of Dorset, Esquire, by whom she hath five sons and daughters, now li∣ving. Hee hath given by his Will 200. pound in money, to be delivered and lent to young men of the Company of Haber∣dashers; to distribute every Sunday (weekly, for ever) two shillings in bread and the advantage, to poore house∣holders of this Parish. And also twenty pound more for a stocke, to be yeerly im∣ployed for ever, in buying and providing of Fuell for the same poore. The blessed token of the Daughters love, Vnto the Fathers kinde and loving care, May to the world this Monument approve, How blessed Parents in their Children are: And blessed God, that so his love expresseth, Who thus both Parents and the Children blesseth. Sepelitur hic cor. Philippi Paskin,A grave stone in the same Ile. Qui obiit 12. Calend. Iunii, Anno Dom. 1580. Anno Aetat. 52. duos post se reliquit fil. Tho. & Ric. & unig. filiam Ioannam ex chariss. sibi Con. Anna. Here lyeth Dame Iane,A comely Monumēt on a Pillar in the Quire. daughter and sole heire of Iohn White, of this Parish, Esquire: First married to Samuel Thornehill, of Bromley, in the County of Kent, Esquire, by whom she had issue two sonnes, Timothy and Iohn, and one daughter, named Elizabeth. Shee secondly married Sir Richard Smith, Knight, son of Thomas Smith, of Oe∣stenhanger, in the County of Kent, E∣squire, and had issue by him but one daughter, named Mary. The said Dame Iane died the 13. of October, 1607. be∣ing about the age of 33. yeeres. In whose remembrance, her said husband caused this Monument to be made, 1608. Lady Bradvery gave 30. s. per annum in Charcoales to the poore of this Parish for ever from the worshipfull Company of Mercers. On the Southside of the Chancell is a faire grave-stone, with this Epi∣taph in brasse: Georgius heu quondam jacet hic Skeffingtonus humatus, Mercator Stapulae clarus in urbe fuit. Quae spes divitiis bona quam fallacia mundi, Quam subito pereunt quae valuere vide? Ast qui terram olim vano fragilem pede pressit, Aeterna hic petiit firmior astra fide. Obiit An. Dom. 1581. die 1. Iu∣lii. A. vero aetatis suae 43. On the lower end of the Chancell is a faire grave-stone with this Epi∣taph in brasse: Our life is all but death, time that insueth Is but the death of time that went before. Youth is the death of childhood, age of youth, Die once to God, and then thou diest no more. Agnes the wife of Leonard Darr, whose sight By sicknesse much impair'd, in heavenly light Looke, liv'd, and died, as dimnesse her were given, That her soules eies might better looke to heaven. Leonardus Darr nuper Maior ville de Totnes, posuit in mortem Agnetae charissimae conjugis suae. Obiit 29. Ianuarii 1596. Iohn White, Citizen and Haberdasher, 1585. gave 12. d. weekly in bread to the poore of this Parish for ever. William Man, Citizen and Merchant-taylor, 1585, gave the remainder of a
lease of yeeres to come in a lease of Tene∣ments in Swanne alley, to the poore of this Parish, and the Towne of Buckin∣gham, 2. l. 10. s. Stephen Scudamore, Citizen and Vint∣ner, 1585. gave weekly 12. d. in bread to the poore of this Parish for ever. Iohn Taylor, Citizen and Haberdasher, gave in stocke 20. l. for Billets, Fagots, or Coales, for provision for the poore of this Parish for ever; and 2. s. weekly in bread for ever to the poore householders, 1600. Dame Anne Glover gave a stocke of ten pounds for provision for the poor of this Parish, for wood or coale for ever, 1612. Mistresse Dane, widow, gave to the poore 10. s. per annum for ever, from the Company of Ironmongers, 1614. Henry Gibs, sometimes servant to Sir Maurice Abbot, Knight and Alder∣man of London, gave to the poore of this Parish 50. l. Dame Daniel, sometimes wife to Sir Wil∣liam Daniel, gave a stocke for the poore of this Parish 30. l. 1616. Hugh Cap, Citizen and Plasterer of Lon∣don, gave 100. l. to purchase lands for the poore of this Parish for ever, 1616. Iohn Terry, stranger, gave in stocke to the poore of this Parish 10. l. for ever, 1617. Christopher Ayer, Merchant, Citizen, and Lether-seller of London, gave 240. pounds for the building of sixe Almes∣houses, and 400. pounds to purchase lands towards the maintenance of sixe poore couple of this parish for ever, 1624. Sir Richard Smith, Knight, gave in stock for provision of Sea-coales for the poore of this Parish, one hundred pounds every yeere to bee returned for the use of the poore for ever, 1627. And another hun∣dred pounds afterward for reliefe of the poore also. I obtained these instructions, by the helpe and assistance of my loving friend and brother, Thomas Price, Pa∣rish Clarke there. This Church was sometime a Syna∣gogue of the Iewes,Parish Church of S. Stephen, sometime a Syna∣gogue of the Iewes. then a Parish Church, then a Chappell to St. Olaves in the Iewry, untill the seventh of Ed∣ward the fourth, and was then incorpo∣rated a Parish Church. By the East end of this Church is pla∣ced a Cocke of sweet water,Cocked water▪ St Streets Church taken out of the maine Pipe that goeth into Loth∣bery. Also, in London Wall,Co at  Wall. directly a∣gainst the North end of Coleman streete, is a Conduit of water, made at the char∣ges of Thomas Exmew, Goldsmith, Mai∣or, 1517. And let here be the end of this Ward, which hath an Alderman, his Deputy, common Counsellors foure, Constables foure, Scavengers foure, of the Ward∣mote Inquest thirteene, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene, fifteene pound, sixteene shillings, nine pence.
BASSINGS HALL VVARD. THe next adjoyning to Coleman streete Ward,Bassings Hall Ward. on the West side thereof, is Bas∣sings Hall Ward, a small thing, and consisteth of one streete, called Bas∣sings Hall streete, of Bassings Hall, the most principall house, whereof the Ward taketh name. It beginneth in the South, by the late spoken Market house, called the Bay Hall, which is the last of Coleman streete Ward. This streete run∣neth from thence North downe to Lon∣don Wall, and some little distance both East and West, against the said Hall: And this is the bounds of Bassings Hall Ward. Monuments on the East side thereof, amongst divers faire houses for Mer∣chants, have ye three Hals of Compa∣nies; Masons Hall. namely, the Masons Hall for the first; but of what antiquity that Com∣pany is, I have not read. The next is the Weavers Hall:Weavers Hall. which Company hath been of great antiquity in this Ci∣ty, as appeareth by a Charter of Henry the second, in these words; Rex omnibus ad quos, &c. to be englished thus: Henry, King of England, Duke of Normandy,Patent of Henry 2. and of Guian, Earle of An∣jou, to the Bishop, Iustices, Sheriffes, Ba∣rons, Ministers, and all his true Lieges of London, sendeth greeting: Know ye, that we have granted to the Weavers in Lon∣don their Guild, with all the Freedomes and Customes that they had in the time of King Henry my Grandfather:Henry 1. so that none but they intermit within the City of their Craft, but he be of their Guild; neither in Southwarke, or other places pertaining to London, otherwise than it was done in the time of King Henry my Grandfather. wherefore I will and straightly command, that over all lawfully they may treat, and have all aforesaid, as well in peace, free, wor∣shipfull, and wholly, as they had it, freer, better, worshipfullier, and whollier, than in the time of King Henry my Grandfa∣ther. So that they yeeld yeerly to mee two Markes of Gold, at the Eeast of Saint Mi∣chael. And I forbid, that any man to them doe any unright, or disease, upon paine of ten pound. Witnesse Thomas of Canter∣bury, Warwicke fili Gar, Chamberlaine, at Winchester. Also I reade,Patent. that the same Henry the second, in the 31. of his reigne, made a Confirmation to the Weavers, that had a Guild of Fraternity in London; wherein it appeareth, that the said Weavers made woollen cloth, and that they had the correction thereof. But a∣mongst other Articles in that Patent, it was decreed, That if any man made cloth of Spanish wooll, mixed with Eng∣lish wooll, the Portgrave or principall Magistrate of London ought to burne it, &c. Moreover,Mathew Paris. in the yeere 1197. King Richard the first, at the instance of Hu∣bert, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Iu∣sticiar of England, ordained, That the woollen clothes in every part of this Realme, should be in breadth two yards within the Lists, and as good in the middest as in the sides, &c. King Henry the third granted to the Citizens of London, that they should not bee vexed for the Burels, or Cloth-listed, accor∣ding to the constitution made for breadth of cloth the 9. of his reigne, &c. Richard the 2. in the third of his reigne, granted an order of agreement between the Weavers of London, Englishmen, and Aliens or Strangers borne, brought in by Edward the third. Lower downe,Girdlers Hall. is the Girdlers Hall: and this is all touching the East side of this Ward. On the VVest side,Bakewall Hall. almost at the
South end thereof, is Bakewell Hall, cor∣ruptly called Blackwell Hall. Concer∣ning the originall whereof, I have heard divers opinions, which I over-passe as fables, without colour of truth: for though the same seemed a Building of great antiquity, yet (in mine opinion) the foundation thereof was first laid since the Conquest of William, Duke of Normandy: for the same was builded upon Vaults of stone, which stone was brought from Cane in Normandy. The like of that of Pauls Church, builded by Mauritius and his successors, Bishops of London. But that this house hath beene a Temple, or Iewish Synagogue (as some have fantasied) I allow not, seeing that it had no such forme of roundnesse, or other likenesse. Neither had it the forme of a Church, for the assembly of Christians, which are builded East and West: but contrariwise, the same was builded North and South, and in forme of a Noble mans house: and therefore the best opinion (in my judgement) is, that it was (of old time) belonging to the Family of the Bassings, which was in this Realme a name of great antiquity and renowne, and that it bare also the name of that Family, and was called therfore Bassings Haugh,Bassings Hall. or Hall. Where∣unto I am the rather induced, for that the Armes of that Family were (of old time) so abundantly placed in sundry parts of that house,Armes of the Bas∣sings. even in the stone∣worke, but more especially on the wals of the Hall, which carried a continuall painting of them on every side so close together, as one Escocheon could bee placed by another, which I my selfe have often seene and noted, before the old Building was taken downe. These Arms were a Gerond of twelve points, Gold and Azure.How Bas∣sings Hall Ward took that name Of the Bassings there∣fore, builders of this House, and owners of the ground neere adjoyning, that VVard taketh the name; as Coleman streete Ward of Coleman, and Faringdon Ward of William and Nicholas Faringdon, men that were principall owners of those places. And of old time the most Noble per∣sons that inhabited this City, were ap∣pointed to bee principall Magistrates thereas was Godfrey de Magun (or Mag∣navilla) Portgrave or Sheriffe, in the reigne of William the Conquerour, and of William Rufus; Hugh de Buch, in the reigne of Henry the first; Aubery de Vere, Earle of Oxford. After him, Gilbert Bec∣ket, in the reigne of King Stephen. After that, Godfrey de Magnavilla, the sonne of William, the sonne of Godfrey de Mag∣navilla, Earles of Essex, were Port∣graves or Sheriffes of London and Mid∣dlesex. In the reign of Henry the second, Peter Fitzwalter: after him, Iohn Fitzni∣gel, &c. So likewise in the reigne of King Iohn, the 16. of his reigne, a time of great troubles, in the yeere 1214. Sa∣lomon Bassing,Salomon Bassing and other of that name and Hugh Bassing, Barons of this Realme, as may bee supposed, were Sheriffes; and that the said Salo∣mon Bassing was Maior in the yeer 1216. which was the first of Henry the third. Also Adam Bassing, son to Salomon (as it seemeth) was one of the Sheriffes, in the yeere 1243. the 28. of Henry the third. Vnto this Adam de Bassing, King Hen∣ry the third, in the 31. of his reign, gave and confirmed certaine Messuages in Aldermanbury, and in Milke streete (pla∣ces not farre from Bassings Hall) and the advowson of the Church at Bassings Hall, with sundry liberties and priviledges. This than was afterwards Maior, in the yeere 1251. the 36. of Henry the third. Moreover, Thomas Bassing was one of the Sheriffes, 1269. Robert Bas∣sing, Sheriffe, 1279. and William Bassing was Sheriffe, 1308, &c. For more of the Bassings in this City I neede not note, only I reade of this Family of Bassings in Cambridge shire, called Bassing at the Bourne,Bassing Bourne. and more shortly, Bassing-Bourne, and gave Armes, as is afore shewed, & was painted about this old Hall. But this Family is worne out, and hath left the name to the place where they dwelt. Thus much for this Bassings Hall. Now how Bakewell Hall tooke that name,Bakewell Hall given to the Ci∣tie. is another question: For which I reade, that Thomas Bakewell dwelled in this house, in the 36. of Edward the third, and that in the 20. of Richard the second, the said King, for the summe of fifty pounds, which the Maior and the Cōmonalty had payed into the Hana∣par, granted licence, so much as was in him, to Iohn Frosh, William Parker, and Stephen Spilman (Citizens and Mercers) that they, the said Messuage, called
Bakewell Hall, and one Garden, with the appurtenances, in the Parish of St. Mi∣chael of Bassings Haugh, and of St. Lau∣rence in the Iewry of London, and one Messuage, two Shops, and one Garden, in the said Parish of S. Michael, which they held of the King in Burgage, might give and assigne to the Maior and Commonalty for ever. This Bakewell Hall thus established,Bakewell Hall a Market place for woollen clothes. hath beene long since imployed, as a weekly Market place for all sorts of woollen clothes, broad and narrow, brought from all parts of this Realme there to bee sold. In the 21. of Richard the second, Richard Whitington, Maior; and in the 22. Drew Barringtine being Maior, it was decreed, that no Forraine or Stranger should sell any woollen cloth, but in the Bakewell Hall, upon paine of forfeiture thereof. This house (of late yeeres) growing ruinous, & in danger of falling, Richard May, Merchant-Taylor, at his decease gave towards the new building of the outward part thereof, 300. pounds, up∣on condition that the same should bee performed within 3. yeeres after his de∣cease. Bakewell Hall new builded. Whereupon the old Bakewell Hall was taken downe, and in the moneth of February next following, the foundati∣on of a new, strong, and beautifull Store-house being laid, the work there∣of was so diligently applyed, that with∣in the space often moneths after, to the charges of 2500. pounds, the same was finished, in the yeere 1588. Next beyond this house, are placed divers faire houses for Merchants, and others, till ye come to the backe gate of Guild-Hall, which gate, and part of the building within the same, is of this Ward. Some small distance beyond this gate,Coopers Hall. the Coopers have their com∣mon Hall. Then is the Parish Church of Saint Michael,Parish Church of S. Michael. called St. Michael at Bassings Hall, a proper Church, lately re-edified or new builded: whereto Iohn Burton, Mercer, and Agnes his wife, were great Benefactors; as appeareth by his mark, placed throughout the whole Roofe of the Quire, and middle Ile of the Church. He deceased in the yeer 1460. and was buried in the Quire, with this Epitaph: Iohn Burton lieth under here, Sometimes of London Citizen & Mercer; And Jenet his wife with their progenie, Beene turned to earth, as ye may see. Friends free, what so ye be, Pray for us, we you pray; As you see us in this degree, So shall you be another day. Francis Cooke, Iohn Martin, Edward Bromflit, Esquire of Warwickshire, 1460. Richard Barnes, sir Roger Roe, Roger Velden, 1479. Sir Iames Yerforde, Mercer, Maior, de∣ceased 1527. buried under a faire Tombe, with his Lady, in a speciall Chappell by him builded, on the north side of the Quire. Sir Iohn Gresham, Mercer, Maior, de∣ceased, 1554. Sir Iohn Ailife, Chirur∣geon, then a Grocer, one of the She∣riffes, 1548. Nicholas Bakhurst, one of the Sheriffes, 1577. Sir Wolston Dixi, Skinner, Maior, 1585. And sir Leonard Hallyday, Maior, 1605. but no Monu∣ments were made for them, nor so much as any Grave-stone laid. Hereunder lieth buried the bodies of Sir Iames Yerforde,An anci∣ent Mo∣nument in the North Ile of the Quire. Knight, Mercer, and sometimes Lord Maior of this City of London; and of Dame Elizabeth, his wife. The which Sir Iames deceased the 22. day of Iune, An. Dom. 1527. And the said Elizabeth deceased the 18. day of August, An. Dom. 1548. In Chirurgery brought up in youth, a Knight here lieth dead;An anci∣ent Mar∣ble  in the Chancell A Knight, and eke a Surgeon such, as England seld hath bred. For which so soveraigne gift of God, wherein he did excell, King Henry 8. call'd him to Court, who lov'd him dearly well. God gave the gift, the king gave goods, the gift of God t' enhance; Where God & such a Prince do joyne, such man hath happy chance. King Edward for his service sake, bade him rise up a Knight; A name of praise, and ever since, he Sir Iohn Ailife hight. Right Worshipful, in name and charge, in London liv'd he than; In Blackwell Hall, the Merchant chiefe,
first Sheriffe, then Alderman.Blakewell Hall was his dwel∣ling house The Hospitals bewaile his death, the Orphan children mone, Their chiefe Erector being dead, and Benefactor gone. Dame Isable, who liv'd with him, his faithfull Wife and Make, With him (as dearest after death) doth not her Knight forsake. The Knight,1548. the 24. of October yeelded up his breath, And she soone after followed, to live with him in death. Here lyeth buried under this Tombe,An anci∣ent Mar∣ble tombe in the South lle of the Quire. the body of Sir Iohn Gresham, Knight; sometime Alderman and Lord Maior of this City of London; who had two wives, Dame Mary his first wife, by whom bee had issue five sonnes and sixe daughters: by Dame Katharine, his last wife, no issue. Which Sir Iohn deceased the 23. day of October, Anno Domini, 1556. And Dame Mary died the 21. day of September, 1538. Dame Katha∣rine died,— His jacet Dom. Richard. Sarich,Vnder the Com∣munion Table. quon∣dam Rector istius Eccles. Qui obiit 13. Novemb. An. Dom. 1359. Cujus animae propitieture Deus. Thus have you noted one Parish Church of St. Michael Blackwell Hall, a Market place for woollen clothes; the Masons Hall, Weavers Hall, Gird∣lers Hall, and Coopers Hall. And thus I end this VVard, which hath an Alder∣man, his Deputy, for Common Coun∣sell foure, Constables two, Scavengers two, for the VVardmote inquest seven∣teene, and a Beadle. Jt is taxed to the Fifteene in London 7. pounds, and like∣wise in the Exchequer at 7. pounds.
CREPLEGATE VVARD. THe next Ward is called of Creple∣gate, Creplegate Ward. and consisteth of divers streets & lanes, lying as well without the Gate and VVall of the City, as within. First, within the VVall on the East part thereof, towards the North, it runneth to the west side of Bassings Hall Ward: & towards the South, it joyneth to the Ward of Cheap, it beginneth at the west end of St. Laurence Church in the Iury, on the North side, and runneth west to a Pumpe, where sometime was a Well with 2. Buckets, at the South corner of Alderman bury street, which streete run∣neth down North to Gay-spur lane, & so to London Wall, which street and lane are wholly (on both sides) of this Ward, and so be some few houses (on both the sides) from Gay-spur lane, by and against the Wall of the City, East to the Grates, made for the water-course of the chan∣nels, and west to Creplegate. Now on the South side,From the Standard to the Crosse in Cheape, on the North side, is of Creplegate Ward. from over-against the west end of Saint Laurence Church to the Pumpe, & then up Milk∣street, South unto Cheape, which Milk∣street is wholly (on both the sides) of Cre∣plegate Ward, as also without the South end of Milkstreet, a part of West Cheape, to wit, from the Standard to the Crosse, is all of Creplegate Ward. Then downe great Woodstreete, which is wholly of this VVard on both the sides thereof; so it little Woodstreete, which runneth downe to Creplegate. Out of this Woodstreete be divers lanes; namely, on the East side is Lad lane, which runneth East to Milkstreete cor∣ner; downe lower in Woodstreete is Love lane, which lyeth by the South side of S. Albans Church in Woodstreet, and run∣neth down to the Conduit in Alderman∣bury streete. Lower downe in Wood∣streete, is Addlestreete, out of the which runneth Philip lane downe to London VVall.Philip lane. These be the Lanes on the East side. On the west side of Woodstreete, is Huggen lane, by the South side of S. Mi∣chaels Church, and goeth thorow to Gu∣therous lane. Then lower is Maiden lane, which runneth VVest to the North end of Gutherons lane, and up the said Lane on the East side thereof, till against Kery lane, and backe againe: then the said Maiden Lane, on the North side, go∣eth up to Staining lane, and up a part thereof on the East side, to the farthest North part of Haberdashers Hall; and backe againe to Woodstreete, and there lower downe is Silverstreete, which is of this VVard, till yee come to the East end of St. Olaves Church on the South side, and to Monkes-well streete on the North side; then down the said Monkes∣well streete on the East side thereof, and so to Creplegate, doe make the bounds of this VVard within the wals. Without Creplegate Forestreete run∣neth thwart before the Gate, from a∣gainst the North side of Saint Giles Church, along to More lane end, and to a Posterne lane end, that runneth betwixt the Towne ditch on the South, and cer∣taine Gardens on the North, almost to Moregate; at the East end of which lane is a Pot-makers house, which house, with all other the Gardens, Houses, and Allies on that side to More-fields, till yee come to a Bridge and Cow-house, neere unto Fensbury Court, is all of Cre∣plegate VVard. Of these More-fields you have former∣ly read,An. 1477. Rose Ioccline then being L. Maior. what a moorish rotten ground they were, unpassable, but for Caws∣waies purposely made to that intent; what they were also in our owne neerer times of memory, even till Sir Leonard
Hallyday was Lord Maior of London, I am very well assured many doe perfect∣ly remember: And what they are now at this instant, by the honourable cost and care of this City, and the industri∣ous paines and diligence of that worthy Citizen, Master Leate, wee all (to our continuall comfort) doe evidently be∣hold. M. Iohn Speed, my especiall kinde friend; acquainted me with the draught of a Mappe, done after that true shape and modell, as at the first (by the fore∣named Gentleman) they were inten∣ded, and laboured with the then Lord Maior, and Court of Aldermen, that the same might have bin accordingly effe∣cted. But how it was prevented, I know not, only I purposed to have beene at so much charge, as to have had that Map (in some apt & convenient forme) prin∣ted in this booke: but that I could not attaine thereto; being promised, that at the next impression I shall have it. For the Walkes themselves, and con∣tinuall care of the City, to have them in that comely & worthy maner main∣tained: I am certainly perswaded, that our thankfulnesse to God being first truely performed, they are no meane cause of preserving health and whole∣some ayre to the City, and such an eter∣nall honour thereto, as no iniquity of time shall ever be able to deface. Then to turne backe againe through the said Posterne lane to More lane, which More lane, with all the Allies and buildings there, is of this Ward. After that is Grubstreete, more than halfe thereof to the streightning of the street, next is White-crosse street, up to the end of Beech lane; and then Red-crosse street wholly, with a part of Golding lane, even to the Posts there placed, as a bounder. Then is Beech lane before spoken of, the East side of the Red-crosse, and the Barbican streete, more than halfe there∣of, toward Aldersgate street, and so have you all the bounds of Creplegate VVard without the wals. Now for Antiquities and Ornaments in this Ward, to be noted: I finde, first at the meeting of the corners of the Old Iury,A Pumpe at the cor∣ner of Al∣derman-bury street. Milkstreet, Lad lane, and Alderman bury, there was (of old time) a faire Well with two Buckets, of late yeeres converted to a Pumpe. How Alderman bury streete took that name, many fables have been bruted, all which I overpasse, as not worthy the counting: but to bee short, I say, this streete tooke the name of Aldermans bury (which is to say, a Court) there kept in their Bery, or Court Hall, now called the Guild Hall, which Hall (of old time) stood on the East side of the same street, not far from the West end of Guild Hall now used. Touching the Antiquity of this old Aldermans bury or Court, I have not read other, Alderman bury Hall by Alderman bury Church. than that Richard Renery, one of the Sheriffes of London, in the first of Richard the first, which was in the yeere of Christ, 1189. gave to the Church or Saint Mary at Osney by Oxford, certaine ground and rents in Alderman bury of London, as appeareth by the Register of that Church, as is also entred into the Hoistings of the Guild Hall in London. This old Bery, Court, or Hall conti∣nued, and the Courts of the Maior & Aldermen were continually holden there, untill the new Bery, Court, or Guild hall that now is, was builded & fi∣nished, which Hall was first begun to be founded in the yeere 1411. and was not fully finished in 20. yeers after. I my self have seene the ruines of the old Court Hall, in Alderman-bury streete, which of late hath beene imployed as a Carpen∣ters yard, &c. In this Alderman-bury street be divers faire houses on both the sides, meete for Merchants or men of worship, & in the midst therof is a faire Conduit, made at the charges of W. Eastfield, sometime Maior, who took order as well for water to be conveyed from Teyborne, & for the building of this Conduit, not far distant from his dwelling house; as also for a Standard of sweet water to be erected in Fleetstreet, all which was done by his Ex∣ecutors, as elsewhere is shewed. Then is the Parish Church of S. Mary Aldermanbury,Parish Church of S. Mary Alderman∣bury. a faire Church, with a Church-yard & Cloister adjoyning, in the which Cloister is hanged & fastned a shanke-bone of a man (as is said) very great,Shanke∣bone of a man 28. inches & a halfe long. and larger by 3. inches & a halfe, than that which hangeth in S. Laurence Church in the Iurie; for it is in length 28. inches and a halfe of assise, but not so hard and steely, like as the other, for the same is light, and somewhat pory
and spongy. This bone is said to bee found amongst the bones of men remo∣ved from the Charnell house of Pauls, or rather from the Cloyster of Pauls Church: of both which reports I doubt, for that the late Reyne Wolfe,Reyne Wolfe a grave Antiqua∣ry, colle∣cted the great Chroni∣cles, in∣creased, & published by his Ex∣ecutors, under the name of Ralph Ho∣lenshead. Stationer (who payd for the carriage of those bones from the Charnell to the More∣fields) told mee of some thousands of Carre loads and more to bee conveyed, whereof he wondred; but never told of any such bone in either place to bee found, neither would the same have bin easily gotten from him, if he had heard thereof, except he had reserved the like for himself, being the greatest preserver of antiquities in those parts for his time. True it is, that this bone (from whence soever it came) being of a man, as the forme sheweth) must needes bee mon∣strous, and more than after the propor∣tion of five shanke bones of any man now living amongst us. There lye buri∣ed in this Church Simon Winehcombe, E∣squire, 1391. Robert Combarton, 1422. Iohn Wheatly, Mercer, 1428. Sir Willi∣am Estfild, Knight of the Bath, Maior, 1438. a great Benefactor to that Church, under a faire Monument: he al∣so builded their steeple, changed their old Bels into 5. tuneable Bels, and gave 100. l. to other workes of that Church. Moreover,Conduit in Alder∣manbury. he caused the Conduit in Aldermanbury, which he had begun, to be performed at his charges, and water to be conveyed by pipes of Lead, from Teyborne to Fleetstreete, as I have said. And also from High Bery, to the parish of S. Giles without Creplegate, where the Inhabitants of those parts incastellated the same in sufficient Cisternes. Iohn Middleton, Mercer, Maior, 1472. Iohn Tomes, Draper, 1486. William Bucke, Taylor, 1501. Sir William Browne, Mai∣or, 1507. Dame Margaret Ienings, wife to Stephen Ienings, Maior, 1515. A Wi∣dow, named Starkey, sometime wife to Mody. Ralph Woodcocke, Grocer, one of the Sheriffes, 1586. Dame Mary Gre∣sham, wife to Sir Iohn Gresham, 1528. Thomas Godfrey, Remembrancer of the Office of the First fruits. Thomas Digges, Esquire, sonne and heyre of Leonard Digges, of Wotton, in the County of Kent, Esquire, & of Bridget his wife, daughter to Thomas Wil∣ford, Esquire, which Thomas deceased the 24. day of August, An. Dom. 1595. Agnes,A faire Tombe in the North side of the Chancell. wife to Thomas Digges, Esquire, daughter of Sir William Sentleger, Knight, and of Vrsula his wife, daughter of George Nevil, Lord of Aburgave∣ny, by whom the said Thomas had is∣sue, Dudley, his sonne and heyre; Leo∣nard, his second son; Margaret and Vr∣sula, now living, beside VVilliam and Mary, who died young. Deo Opt. Max. & memoriae. Hic resurrectionem mortuorum expe∣ctat Thomas Digsaeus, Armiger, ex Antiqua Digsaeorum in Cantia Fa∣milia oriundus, vir fide & pietate in Deum singulari, rei militaris admo∣dum peritus, optimarum literarum studiosus, & scientiis Mathematicis ad miraculum (ut ex libris editis constat) eruditissimus: Quem Deus in Coelestem Patriam, Anno salutis, 1595. evocavit: charissimo Marito Vxor moestissima posuit. Here lieth in an assured hope to rise in Christ, Thomas Digges, Esquire, some∣time Muster-Master of the English Ar∣my in the Low-Countries: A man zea∣lously affected to true Religion, wise, dis∣creete, courteous, faithfull to his friends, and of rare knowledge in Geometry, A∣strologie, and other Mathematicall scien∣ces: who finished this transitory life with a happy end, in Anno 1595. That the dead might live, Christ dyed. Here lieth buried,A plated stone by the Com∣munion Table. Elizabeth Norreis, daughter of the right Honourable Sir Henry Norreis, Knight, Lord Norreis of Ricot, who deceased the 18. day of A∣pril, 1574. Armig. hic Jon. Constantinus positus; A marvel∣lous anci∣ent plated stone. genetrici subjacet; aeternè laetenur in arce polorum. Qui Februo cessit. Mil. 1. Cent. quatuor bis & octo. Here lieth entombed,A very faire Tombe in the South side of the Quire. Ralph Woodcock, Grocer and Alderman of London, who departed this life the first day of Septem∣ber, 1586. aged, 67. yeeres. Hee had foure wives, Helen Collier, by whom he had five sonne and three daughters.
Good Bower, by whom he had ten sons and five daughters. Elenor Carew, by whom he had one daughter. And Mary Lovyson, by whom he had no issue. Elizabeth,A faire plated stone by the Com∣munion Table. whose husband Davy hight, Lyeth buried here till time the Trumpet blow: But sure the heavens possesse her sacred spright, Her vertuous life and godly end did show. And they that knew her pathes of perfect love, The sundry gifts that garnished her life, Can witnesse well, and by her end approve, There seldome hath been seene a better wife. Give God the praise for such her happy race: And pray, that we like vertues may embrace. She died the 12. day of August, 1569. Beneath this Church have ye Gay-spur lane,Gay-spur lane. which runneth down to London Wall,Priory or Hospitall called, El∣sing Spittle. as is afore shewed. In this lane, at the North end thereof, was (of old time) a house of Nuns, which house be∣ing in great decay, Wil. Elsing, Mercer, in the yeere of Christ, 1329. the 3. of Ed∣ward the 3. began in place thereof the foundation of an Hospitall, for sustenta∣tion of 100. blind men. Towards the e∣rection whereof, he gave his 2. houses in the Parishes of S. Alphage, & our blessed Lady in Aldermanbury, neere Creplegate. This house was after called a Priory or Hospital of S. Mary the Virgin, foun∣ded in the yeere 1332. by W. Elsing, for Canons regular: the which W. became the first Prior there. Robert Elsing, son to the said W. gave to the said Hospitall, 12. l. by the yeere, for the finding of 3. Priests, he also gave 100. s. towards the inclosing of the new Church-yard with∣out Ealdgate:Charter-house Church-yard with∣out Aldos∣gate, and one other the like without Ealdgate. and 100. s. to the inclo∣sing of the new Church-yard without Aldersgate: to Tho. Elsing his son, 80. l. the rest of his goods to be sold, and gi∣ven to the poore. This house valued, 193. l. 15. s. 5. d. was surrendred the eleventh of May, the 22. of Henry the 8. A briefe remembrance of SYON Colledge, in the Parish of Saint Alphage. IN the same place where the foresaid Elsing Spittle and Priory were for∣merly situated;A Col∣ledge for the Cler∣gy of Lon∣don. there is now newly erected a Colledge for the Clergy of London, and liberties thereof, called by the name of Syon Colledge: And Almes-houses for twenty poore people, ten men, and ten women. This was done by the especiall care and paines of M. Iohn Simson, Rector of S. Olaves Hartstreet London, one of the Executors of the last Will and Testa∣ment of M. Thomas White,Doctor White of S. Dunstanes in the West. Doctor in Di∣vinity, Vicar of S. Dunstanes in the west, and one of the Canons Residentiary of S. Pauls Church London: which forena∣med Thomas White (besides sundry sums of mony, and great yeerly by him to pious and charitable uses in divers places) gave 3000. l. to pur∣chase and build the foresaid Colledge for the use of the Clergy, and Almes-houses for the 20. poor people aforesaid. He also gave unto the said Colledge and Almes-houses 160. l. per annum for ever,An hun∣dred and three∣score pounds yeerly al∣lowed. whereof there is 120. l. yeerly al∣lowed for the maintenance of the poore Almes-men & women. And 40. l. yeer∣ly for 4. dinners for the Clergy, who are to have 4. Latine Sermons in the yeere; one every quarter, and upon these daies are to dine together in the Colledge. In the same Colledge the aforenamed Iohn Simson did in his life time at his owne proper costs and charges build a very faire and spacious Library,A faire & goodly Library in Syon Col∣ledge. contai∣ning 121. foote in length, within the wals, & above 25. foot in breadth. And hath furnished it with wainscot, stalls, deskes, seates, and other necessary and usefull ornaments befieting the place. He likewise at his cost and charges e∣rected the new building adjoyning to the Library,A new building joyned to the Library. all along the Southside of the Colledge Court, for lodging for the Governours, or others at their ap∣pointment. to this Library there have beene al∣ready divers bountfull and well dispo∣sed Benefactors,Liberall Benefac∣tors to the Library, & their gift. who have given large summes of money towards the furni∣shing of it with bookes.
The right Honourable Paul, Lord Viscount Bayning, gave fifty pounds. The right Honourable Anne, Vicoun∣tesse Bayning, his wife, gave 50. l. Sir George Croke, Knight, one of his Majesties Iustices of his Pleas before him assigned to be holden, gave 100. l. Rebecca, Lady Rumney, widow to Sir William Rumney, late Alderman of Lon∣don, gave 100. l. M. Thomas Gonnell, late Citizen and Merchant-Adventurer of London, gave by his Will 100. l. M. Iohn Greenough, late Citizen and Woolman of London, gave by his Will fifty pounds. M. Robert Parkhurst, Citizen and Al∣derman of London, gave fifty pounds. Besides divers others; whose names, legacies, gifts, and bookes bought there∣with: are (by way of a gratefull memo∣riall) registred in a faire Booke kept in the Library. The Monuments that were in this Church defaced, Thomas Cheney, son to William Cheney, Thomas, Iohn, and Wil∣liam Cheney, Iohn Northampton, Draper, Maior, 1381. Edmond Hungerford, Hen∣rie Frowike, Ioane, daughter to Sir Wil∣liam Cheney, wife to William Stokes, Ro∣bert Edarbroke, Esquire, 1460. Dame Ioane Ratcliffe, William Fowler, William Kingston, Thomas Swineley, and Helen his wife, &c. The principall Ile of this Church, to∣wards the North, was pulled downe, & a frame of foure houses set up in place: the other part from the steeple upward, was converted into a Parish Church of S. Alphage,Parish Church of S. Alphage. & the Parish Church which stood neere unto the VVall of the City by Creplegate, was pulled downe, the plot thereof made a Carpenters yard, with saw-pits. The Hospitall it selfe, the Prior, and Canons house, with other Lodgings, were made a dwelling house, the Church-yard is a Garden plot, and a faire Gallery on the Cloyster: the lodg∣ings for the poore are translated into stabling for horses. In the yeere 1541. Sir Iohn Williams, Master of the Kings Jewels, dwelling in this house, on Christmas Even at night, about seven of the clocke,Elsing Spit∣tle burned. a great fire began in the Gallery thereof, which burned so sore, that the flame firing the whole house, and consuming it, was seene all the City over, and was hardly quenched; whereby many of the Kings Iewels were burned, and more imbesel∣led (as was said.) Sir Rowland Hayward, Maior, dwel∣led in this Spittle, & was buried there, 1593. Richard Lee, alias, Clarenciaulx, King of Armes, 1597. Here lieth the body of Sir Rowland Hay∣ward, A very goodly Monumēt in the wall of the Quire on the South side. Knight, twice Lord Maior of this City of London, and living an Alder∣man the space of 30. yeeres, and (at his death) the ancientest Alderman of the said City. He lived beloved of all good men, and died (in great credit and repu∣tation) the fifth day of December, Ann. Dom. 1593. And the 36. yeere of the reigne of our Soveraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth. He had two vertuous wives, and by them many happy children. Ioane, daughter of William Tillesworth, Esquire, was the first wife to Sir Row∣land Hayward, by whom he had issue, 3. sons and 5. daughters, which 3. sons, and 2. of the daughters died in their in∣fancy. The eldest of the surviving daugh∣ters, named Elizabeth, was first mar∣ried to Richard VVaren, Esquire, and (after his decease) to Thomas Knevet, Esquire, one of her Majesties Privie Chamber. Susanna, the second daugh∣ter, was married to Henry Townsend, Esquire. Ioane the third daughter, was married to Iohn Thinne, Esquire. Katharine, the second wife of Sir Rowland Hayward, was daughter to Thomas Smith, Esquire, by whom hee had like∣wise issue three sons and five daughters, whereof one sonne and one daughter died infants. The two sons and foure daugh∣ters yet living, are George, Iohn, A∣lice, Katharine, Mary, and Anne, all young, and unmarried at their fathers death. Decus vitae, est honorata Mors. This Tombe was erected by the appointment of Edward Pilsworth, and VVilliam Cotton, Citizens of London, and Executors of the said Sir Rowland.
Here lieth buried under this stone the body of Robert Hodgson,A Grave∣stone at the en∣trance in∣to the Quire doore. Esquire, one of the Auditors of the Queenes Majesties Court of Exchequer, who died the 26. day of May, in the yeere of our Lord 1577. Now to returne to Milkestreet, so cal∣led of milke sold there, there bee many faire houses for wealthy Merchants and other: among the which I reade, that Gregory Rokesley,Gregory Ro∣kesley, Mai∣or of Lon∣don, his house rent 20. shil∣lings the yeere. Maior of London, in the yeere 1275. dwelled in this Milkstreete, in an house belonging to the Priory of Lewes in Sussex, whereof he was Tenant at will, paying 20. s. by the yeere with∣out other charge: such were the rents of those times. In this Milkestreete,Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen. is a small Parish Church of Saint Mary Magdalen, which hath of late yeeres been repaired: Wil∣liam Browne, Maior, 1513. gave to this Church forty pounds, and was buried there. Thomas Exmew, Maior, 1528. gave forty pounds, and was buried there: so was Iohn Milford, one of the Sheriffes, 1375. Iohn Olney, Maior, 1475. Richard Rawson, one of the She∣riffes, 1476. Henry Kelsey. Sir Iohn Browne, Maior, 1497. Thomas Mus∣champe, one of the Sheriffes, 1463. Sir William Cantilow, Knight, Mercer, 1462. Henry Cantilow, Mercer, Mer∣chant of the Staple, who builded a Chappell, and was buried there, 1495. Iohn West, Alderman, 1517. Iohn Ma∣chel, Alderman, 1558. Thomas Skinner, Clothworker, Mai∣or, 1596. Here lieth the corps of Thomas Skinner, late Citizen and Alderman of London,A comely Monumēt in the South Ile of the Quire. borne at Saffron Walden in Essex, who in the 63. yeere of his age, and on the 5. day of December, Anno Dom. 1596. being then Lord Maior of this City, de∣parted this life, leaving behind him three sonnes, Iohn, Thomas, and Richard: and three daughters, Aunc, Iulian, and Elizabeth. Here lieth interred the body of Mistresse Mary Collet, wife of M. John Collet, Citizen and Salter of London, who de∣ceased the 22. of December, An. Dom. 1613. being aged 35. yeeres. This Marble witnesse,A faire Stone in the same Ile before the Monu∣ment fore∣named. dew-dropt with the eies Of grived Niobe, els thee, that here lies Her second husband joy, her first content, Her parents comfort, her friends ornament, Her neighbours welcome, her deare kinreds losse, Her owne health's foe, deeming all pleasure drosse, The world a layle, whence, through much paine we see Her soule at length hath purchast liberty; And soar'd on high where here Redeemer lives: Who (for her torment) rest and glory gives. Here lie the bodies of Gerard Gore,A comely  the Chan∣cell, by a∣nother much more an∣cient Tombe of Henry Can∣tilowe. Citi∣zen, Merchant-Taylor, and Alderman of London, and of Helen his wife: who lived together married 57. yeeres. The said Gerard died the 11. day of Decem∣ber, 1607. in the 91. yeere of his age. And shee departed this life the 13. day of February, in the foresaid yeere, being 75. yeeres old. Here lyeth the body of Thom. Henshawe,A faire Stone at the en∣trance in∣to the Quire. Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of Lon∣don, who had to wife Flower Hen∣shawe, and had issue by her 9. sons, and 4. daughters. He deceased the 11. day of Ianuary, 1611. aged, 76. yeeres: and she died the 6. of March, 1615. aged, about 60. yeeres. Here lieth the body of sir William Stone,A very faire Mo∣nument in the Chan∣cell on the North side. Knight, free of the Clothworkers and Turkie Companies, sometime Alderman of this City. He was the sonne of Rey∣nold Stone, Citizen and Fishmonger of London. The said Sir VVilliam depar∣ted this life the 14. of September, 1609. aged, 63. yeeres, &c. As the Earth, the Earth doth cover, So under this stone lyes another. Sir William Stone, who long deceased, Ere the worlds love him released,
So much it lov'd him. For they say, He answered death before his day, But 'tis not so: for he was sought Of one that both him made and bought. He remain'd the great Lords treasure, Who called for him at his pleasure, And receiv'd him. Yet be'it said, Earth griev'd that heaven so soone was paid. Here likewise lyes inhumed in one bed, Dame Barbara, the welbeloved wife Of this remembred Knight: whose soules are fled From this dimme Vale, to everlasting life. Where no more change, nor no more separation Shall make them flye from their blest habitation. Grasse of levitie, Span in brevity, Flowers felicity, Fire of misery, Winds stability Is mortality. Their Riches were like corne lent to the field, What it receiv'd it manifold did yeeld. Their bodies have a grave their vertues none, But shall with time grow greene, when they are gone. Stone walls, brasse Towers, decay as flowers: One gone, their good is, Lo, here they stood. So transitory is our glory. This Stone,A comely Monumēt in the east end of the South Ile. this Verse, two Mountfords doe present, The corps of one, the others Monument: Two lovely brethren, by their vertues knowne, Whom Cambridge, and Kings Colledge cal'd their owne. Osbert and Richard, of which worthy paire, The first imployed by Sea in great affaire, Made Heaven his Haven, and at that Port, the other (By land) did overtake his elder Brother. So now the bones of both are laid asleepe, These in this Church, those in the Easterne Deepe: Till all the dead shall wake from Sea and Land, Before the Iudge of quicke and dead to stand. Amen. We sonne-lesse parents, yet not childlesse left, Bewaile (as men) our seed untimely reft. As Christians, we hope, and joy, and say; Heaven is our home, and thither, Death the way. By Sea or Land, it skils not, so we minde The Faithfull Pilgrims narrow path to finde. Mort. Osbert, Mense Decemb. 1614. Mort. Richard, Mense Ian. 1615. Then next is Woodstreet,Woodstreet. by what rea∣son so called, I know not; true it is, that (of old time) according to a De∣cree made in the reigne of Richard the first, the houses in London were builded of stone, for defence of fire, which kind of building was used for two hundred yeeres or more; but of later time, for the winning of ground, taken downe, and houses of timber were set up in place. It seemeth therefore, that this street hath beene of the later building, all of timber, (for not one house of stone hath beene knowne there) and there∣fore called Woodstreet; otherwise it might take the name of some builder or owner thereof. Tho. Wood, one of the Sheriffes, in
the yeere 1491. dwelled there: he was an especiall Benefactor towards the building of S. Peters Church at Wood∣street end, which is called Gold-smiths , garnished with the likenesse of Wood-men: his predecessors might be the first builders, owners and namers of this street, after their owne name. On the East side of this street is one of the Prison houses,. pertaining to the Sheriffes of London, and is called the Compter in Woodstreet, which was prepa∣red to be a prison-house, in the yeere 1555. and on the Eve of S. Michael the Archangell, the prisoners that lay in the Compter in Breadstreet, were remo∣ved to this Compter in Woodstreet. Be∣neath this Compter is Lad Lane,Ladle lane, corruptly called Lad lane. or La∣dle Hall; for so I find it of Record, in the Parish of Saint Michael Woodstreet, and beneath that is Love Lane,Love lane. so called of wantons. By this Lane is the ancient Parish Church of S. Albans.Parish Church of S. Alban. One note of the great antiquity of it, is the name: by which it was at first dedicated to Saint Albane, the first Martyr of England. An∣other character of the antiquity of it, is to be seene in the manner of the tur∣ning of the Arches in the windowes, and heads of the Pillars. A third note appeares in the Romane bricks, here and there inlayed amongst the stones of the building. Very probable it is, that this Church is at least of as ancient a stan∣ding, as King Adelstane the Saxon, who, as the Tradition sayes, had his house at the East end of this Church. This Kings house having a doore also into Adel∣street, in this Parish, gave name, as 'tis thought, unto the said Adel-street: which in all Evidences to this day, is written King-Adelstreet. One great square Tow∣er of this Kings house seemes yet re∣maining: to be seene at the North cor∣ner of Love Lane, as you come from Al∣derman-bury: which Tower is of the ve∣ry same stone and manner of building with S. Albanes Church. This Church, decayed with meere age, is this yeere beginning to be taken downe, and to be new builded. It hath the Monuments of Sir Rich. Illingworth, Baron of the Exchequer, Thomas Catworth, Grocer, Maior, 1443. Iohn Woodcocke, Maior, 1405. Iohn Collet and Alice his wife: Ralph Thomas, Ralph and Richard, sonnes of Ralph Illingworth, which was sonne to Richard Illingworth, Baron of the Exchequer. Thomas, sonne of Thomas Fitzwilliams; Thomas Halton, Mercer, Maior, 1550. Thomas Ostrich, Haberdasher, 1483. Richard Swetenham Esquire; and William Dunthorne, Town-Clerke of London, with this Epitaph: aelix prima dies postquam mortalibus aevi, Cesserit, hic morbus subit, atq, repentè senectus, Tum mors qua nostrum Dunthorn cecidisse Wilemum, Haud cuiquam latuisse reor, dignissimus (inquam,) Artibus hic Doctor, necnon celeberrimus hujus Clericus Vrbis erat primus, nulli{que} secundus, Moribus, ingenio, studio, nil dixeris illi, Quin dederit natura boni, pius ipse modestus, Longanimus, solis patiens, super omnia gratus, Quique sub immensas curas variosque labores, Anxius atteritur vitae, dum carpserit auras, Hoc tetro in tumulo, compostus pace quiescit. Simon Morsted, Thomas Pikehurst, E∣squire, Richard Take, Robert Ashcombe, Thomas Lovet, Esquire, Sheriffe of Nor∣thamptonshire, 1491. Iohn Spoore, 1429. Katharine, daughter to Sir The Mirley, Knight, William Linchlade, Mercer, 1392. Iohn Penny, Mercer, 1450. Iohn Thomas, Mercer, 1485. Christopher Hawse, Mer∣cer, one of the Sheriffes, 1503. William Sharborough, Vintner, Simon de Berching. Sir Iohn Cheke, Knight, Schoole-master to King Edward the 6. deceased, 1557. doth lye here. Hunc posuit Tumulum frater,A Monu∣ment in the East end of the Chancell. superaddidit illi Triste Nepos Carmen; dignus utroque fuit. Cur Tumulum? justo ne funus honore careret. Cur Carmen? laudes ne tegerentur humo.
Vita pia, & foelix mors, vitam morte prehendunt, Et pensant-Coeli munere, damna soli. Here lyeth buried M. Albayne Hill, Do∣ctor of Physicke, who dyed the 26. day of December, An. Dom. 1559. Here also lyeth buried Mistris Alice Hill,A monu∣ment in the South wall of the Chappell. sometime wife to the said M. Dr. Hill: who dyed the last day of May, An. Dom. 1508. Ethelreda White,An anciēt plate fixed in the wall of the North Chappell. quondam uxor Henrici White, Armigeri, & unius filiarum & haeredum Roberti Frother, Aldermanni London. Quae quidem Ethelreda obiit in vigilia S. Iohan. Baptist. An. Regis Hen∣rici 8. 26. An. Dom. 1534. The 13. day of September,A faire plated Grave∣stone in the North Chappell of the Quire. 1557. Doctrinae tamen Chekus uter{que} Magister, Aurea naturae sabrica morre jacer. Non erat è multis unus, sed praestitir unus Omnibus & Patriae flos erat ille suae: Gemma Britanna fuit, tam magnum nulla tulerunt Tempora Thesaurum, tempora nulla ferent. Hic jacet Benedictus Trotter,A grave∣stone in same Chappell. nuper Civis, & Grocerus London, Mercator Stapulae villae Caliciae. Qui obiit ultimo die Men∣sis Octobris, 1496. Cujus, &c. Hic jacet Willielmus Hinchlade,A faire plated stone by the Com∣munion Table. quondam Civis & Mercerus London. Qui obiit 9. die Ianuarii, An. Dom. 1392. Et Alicia uxor ejus. Quorum, &c. Of William Wilson,A faire plated stone in the body of the Church. Ioane his wife, and Alice their daughter deare, These lines be left to give report, these three lye buried here; And Alice was Henry Decons wife, which Henry lives on earth, And is the Serjeant Plummer unto Queene ELIZABETH. With whom this Alice left issue here, her vertuous daughter Iane, To be his comfort every where, now joyfull Alice is gone. And for these three departed soules, gone up to joyfull blisse; Th' Almighty praise be given to God, to whom the glory is. Alice dyed, the eleventh day of March, 1572. Ad sacros cineres,A small Monumēt on a pillar in the middle Ile. & piam memoriam Al∣leni Downer, Civis London, è libertate Potifica, & aetate & officio aliquando se∣nioris, & Mariae Vxoris Parentum in∣tegritate quadrata, Thomas Filius unus, & uncus superstes, ultimum hoc pli & filialis amoris testamentum assert. Si vere dicunt monumenta monentia men, Mille mihi monumenta pii posuēre parentes. Ingratus ne sim monumento hoc miile rependo. Vpon the Wall by the North doore, a faire Monument in stone, with these inscriptions: Misericordiam Dei per Jesum Chri∣stum obtinuimus. Here lye the bodies of Anne, the wife of Laurence Gibson, Gent. and of their three sonnes. She was a most faithfull and loving wife, and a right-religious, wise, vertuous and modest woman, and adorned with many other such excellent and com∣mendable gifts and qualities, that she is worthy of perpetuall memory. She was of the ancient Family of the Bamfords in Lincolnshire: and the 29. day of De∣cember, 1611. she patiently and Christi∣anly ended this mortall life. Spe resurgendi ad vitam aeternam requiescimus. Hoc moestissimus ejus maritus, in piam me∣moriam Vxoris suae, talis, tam{que} charis∣simae construi fecit: eundem{que} hic cum illa esse sepulturum sperat & exoptat. In Christo filii sumus Dei, & haere∣des aeternae vicae. Mentis vis magna. What, is she dead? doth he survive? No: both are dead, and both alive.
She lives, hee's dead, by love, though grieving, In him, for her, yet dead, yet living. Both dead, and living? then what is gone? One halfe of both, not any one. One mind, one Faith, one hope, one Grave, In life, in death, they had, and still they have. Amor conjugalis aeternus. Hic jacet in requiem Woodcocke Iohn,An Anci∣ent Tomb in the Chancell, lately in∣truded on with new Pewes. vir Generosus, Maior Londiniae, Mercerus, valdè morosus. Hic jacet Tom Shot-hose, sine Tombe, sine Sheets, sine Riches, Qui vixit sine Gowne, sine Cloake, sine Shirt, sine Breeches. In the Vestrie South Window, there is the figure of Thomas Heritagh, in a red Mantle: Right before him in another pane is the Mercers Armes, of which Company (it seemes) he was free. This man was the builder of this Vestry-house. At the East end of the Chancell, on the right hand, is a faire Monument, with this inscription: To the sacred Memory of Thomas Shelly, eldest sonne and heire of Henry Shelly of Patcham in the Country of Sussex, Esquire, departed this life the second day of Decemb. 1620. being 23. yeeres of age: by his most sorrowfull wife, Mary Shelly, eldest daughter of Thomas Ste∣phens of the middle Temple, Esquire, Atturney Generall to Prince Henry. If Youth, Religion, Vertue, and the rest Of Graces that in fraile Man are the best, Could have conser'd long life, this Funerall Verse Had not so soone beene offered at thy Herse By thy sad Widdow: whose Fate did allow Her onely three weeks happinesse, to know How good thou wert: and what remaines of life, To her yeelds sorrow: she was once a wife To such an husband, whose like 'twere in vaine, And flattery to her griefe, to hope againe. But thou wert flesh, and that to earth must turne, Thy pure soule blest; she onely left to mourne. Adjoyning to this on the right hand, is a faire Marble Monument in Ovall: Deo Trino & Vno opt. max. sacrum, ac Aeternae Memoriae ornatissimae & lauda∣tissimae feminae, Annae Walleriae in Icenis oriundae, unius at{que} unicae paren∣tum prolis; Ingenio, Genio & Genere conspicuae: Guilielmi Waadi, Regii Con∣sistorii sanctioris{que} Concilii Serenissimae Heroinae, Dominae Elizabethae, Angliae, &c. Reginae, à secretis. Conjugis, Quae annos enata Xix. in puerperio, 10. Calendas Septembris, Anno Salutis Ie∣su merito restitutae, M.D.XIC. ex hac peritura ad perennam vitam emigra∣vit. Cui Placidè in Christo gentis humanae sospita∣tore obdormienti, hoc mortale immorta∣lis amoris Monumentum Conjux moe∣stissimus posuit. On the South side of the Church, on the wall adjoyning to the Vestry, is an ancient Monument, in the memory of Christopher Hawes, Mercer and Alder∣man of London, who dyed the 25. of O∣ctober, 1508. and is interred in a Vault under the foundation of the Church. Then is Adle street,Adle street. in old Evidences written King-Adel-street; and so cal∣led from King Adel stane the Saxon. At this present it is replenished with faire buildings on both fides:Pinners Hall, now the Plai∣sterers Hall. Amongst which, there was sometime the Pinners Hall: but that Company being decay∣ed, it is now the Plaisterers Hall.
Not farre from thence is the Brewers Hall,Brewers Hall. a faire house: which Company of Brewers was incorporated by King Henry the sixth, in the 16. of his reigne; confirmed by the name of Saint Mary and Saint Thomas the Martyr, the 19. of Edward the fourth. From the West end of this Adle street, Little Woodstreet runneth downe to Cre∣plegate: and somewhat East (from the Sunne Taverne, against the wall of the Citie) is the Curriers Hall.Curriers Hall. Now on the West side of Woodstreet have ye Huggen lane,Huggen lane so called of one Hugan, that of old time dwelled there. He was called Hugan in the Lane, as I have read in the 34. of Edward the first. This Lane runneth downe by the South side of S. Michaels Church in Wood∣street; and so growing very narrow by meanes of late encrochments, to Guthu∣rons lane. The Parish Church of Saint Michael in Woodstreet is a proper thing,Parish Church of S. Michael in Wood∣street. and late∣ly well repaired. Iohn Iue, Parson of this Church, Iohn Forster, Goldsmith, and Peter Fikeldon, Taylor, gave two Messuages and Shops, with Sollars, Cellars, and other Edifices, in the same Parish and street, and in Ladle Lane to the reparations of the Church, Chancell, and other workes of charity, the 16 of Richard the second. The Monuments here, be of William Bambrough, the son of Henry Bambrough of Shardborough, 1392. William Turner, Waxe-Chaundler, 1400. Iohn Peke, Goldsmith, 1441. VVilliam Taverner, Girdler, 1454. VVilliam Mancer, Ironmonger, 1465. Iohn Nash, 1466. with an Epitaph. Iohn Allen, Timber-monger, 1441. Robert Draper, 1500. Iohn Lambard, Draper, Alderman, one of the Sheriffes of London, who de∣ceased 1554. and was father to William Lambard, Esquire, well knowne by sun∣dry learned Bookes that he hath publi∣shed. Iohn Medley, Chamberlaine of Lon∣don. Iohn Marsh, Esquire, Mercer, and Common Sergeant of London, &c. Here lyeth Ioh. Blount, Citizen and Cloth∣worker of Lond. eldest son of W. Blount of Mauggareffield,A comely small Mo∣nument in the East end of the North Quire, in the wall. in the County of Glocest. Esquire, who had to wife Anne Layton, of whom he had issue, six sonnes and eight daughters, and lived together man and wife nine and twenty yeeres, in worshipfull and good reputation, and dy∣ed at the age of threescore and three yeers, the first day of May, 1599. Here lyeth the body of Nicholas Waren,A smaller Monumēt in the same Ile and wall. Citizen and Grocer of London, borne at Whitby in Yorkshire, who had to wife Margaret Crome, who lived together married two and twenty yeeres and ele∣ven moneths. He dyed in joy and peace of a faithfull confession, the tenth day of April, 1614. being about the age of two and fifty yeeres. IOB 17. Vers. 5. My breath is corrupt, my dayes are cut off, the Grave for me. The body of William Harvie,A comely Monumēt in the same wall & Ile. Citizen and Grocer of London, and Deputy to the Alderman of this Ward of Creplegate within, was buried the twentieth day of March, Anno Domini, 1597. of the age of 68. yeeres. Maudlin, his first wife, by whom he had issue, foure sonnes and one daughter, was buried the 16. day of November, 1581. Margaret, his se∣cond wife, by whom he had issue, one son, was buried the 14. of Ianuary, 1593. Joane, his third wife, survived. Robert Harvie,A Memo∣ry on the same Mo∣nument. his eldest sonne, Citizen and Grocer of London, was buried in his Fathers Grave the ninth of November, 1608. out of his house in the Old Iewry, being of the age of 47. yeeres, 5. moneths, and 10. dayes; when he had served his Prince, Comptroller of the Custome∣house, and Warden of the Grocers. Hee had to wife Sara Audley, of whom hee had issue, three sonnes and three daugh∣ters, &c. There is also (but without any out∣ward Monument) the head of Iames,Iames, the 4. King of Scots, his head buri∣ed in S. Michaels Church in Wood∣street. the fourth King of Scots of that name; slaine at Flodden field, and buried here by this occasion: After the Battell, the body of the said King being found, was closed in Lead, and conveyed from thence to
London, and so to the Monastery of Sheyne in Surrey, where it remained for a time, in what order I am not certaine. But since the dissolution of that house, in the reigne of Edward the sixth, Henry Gray, Duke of Suffolke, being lodged and keeping house there; I have beene shewed the same body, so lapped in Lead, close to the head and body, throwne into a waste roome amougst the old Timber, Lead, and other rub∣ble. Since the which time, workemen there (for their foolish pleasure) hewed off his head: And Launcelot Young, Ma∣ster Glasier to Queene Elizabeth, fee∣ling a sweet savour to come from thence, and seeing the same dryed from all moysture, and yet the forme remai∣ning, with the haire of the head and beard red; brought it to London, to his house in Woodstreet, where (for a time) he kept it for the sweetnesse: but in the end, caused the Sexton of that Church to burie it amongst other bones, taken out of their Charnell, &c. I reade in divers Records,Blacke Hall in Wood∣street, in S. Michaels Parish. of a house in Woodstreet, then called Blacke Hall; but no man at this day can tell thereof. On the North side of this Saint Mi∣chaels Church, is Maiden lane, now so called,Ingene lane, or Maiden lane. but (of old time) Ingenelane, or Inglane. In this Lane the Wax-Chan∣dlers have their Common Hall,Wax-Chandlers Hall. on the South side thereof: and the Haberda∣shers have their like Hall on the North side, at Stayning lane end. This Compa∣ny of the Haberdashers,Haberda∣shers Hall. or Hurrers, of old time so called, were incorporated a Brotherhood of S. Katharine,Record in the Rolles the 26. of Henry the 6. and so confirmed by Henry the seventh, the 17. of his reigne; the Cappers and Hat-merchants, or Hur∣rers, being one Company of Haberda∣shers. Downe lower in Woodstreet is Silver street,Silver street (I thinke, of Silver-smiths dwel∣ling there) in which bee divers faire houses. And on the North side thereof is Monkes-well street,Monks-well street. so called, of a Well at the North end thereof, where the Abbot of Garendon had an house or Cell, called Saint Iames in the Wall by Creplegate, and certaine Monkes of their house were the Chaplains there; where∣fore the Well (belonging to that Cell or Hermitage) was called Monkes-well, and the street of the Well, Monkes-well street. The East side of this street, down against London wall, and the south side thereof to Creplegate, bee of Creplegate Ward, as is afore shewed. In this street,Bowyers Hall. by the corner of Monks-well street, is the Bowyers Hall. On the said East side of Monks-well street,Almes. houses in Monks-well street. be proper Almes-houses, twelve in number, founded by Sir Ambrose Ni∣cholas, Salter, Maior, 1575. wherein be placed twelve poore and aged people rent-free, having each of them 7. pence the weeke, and once the yeere each of them five sackes of Charcoales, and one quarter of an hundred of Faggots, of his gift for ever. On the North side of the way, tur∣ning towards Creplegate, and even upon, or close to London Wall, (as it were) are certaine new-erected Almes-hou∣ses, six in number, of the cost and gift of Mr. Robert Rogers, Leather-seller, and very good maintenance allowed (for e∣ver) to such people as are appointed to dwell in them. Then, in little VVoodstreet,Almes. Chambers in little Woodstreet. bee seven proper Chambers in an Alley on the West side, founded for seven poore people, therein to dwell rent-free, by Henry Barton, Skinner, Maior, 1516. Thus much for the Monuments of this Ward within the Walles. Now without the Posteme of Creple∣gate, Parish Church of S. Giles without Creplegate▪ first is the Parish Church of Saint Giles, a very faire and large Church, lately repaired, after that the same was burned, in the yeere 1545. the 37. of Henry the eighth; by which mischance, the Monuments of the dead in this Church are very few. Notwithstanding, I have read of these following: Alice, William and Iohn, wife and sons to T. Clarell. Agnes, daughter to Thomas Niter, Gen∣tleman. William Atwell. Felix, daughter to Sir Thomas Gisors, and wife to Thomas Travars. Thomas Mason, Esquire. Edmond Wartar, Esquire. Ioan, wife to Iohn Chamberlaine, E∣squire, daughter to Roger Lewkner, E∣squire. William Frier.
Iohn Hamberger, Esquire. Hugh Moresbye. Gilbert Prince, Alderman. Oliver Cherley, Gentleman. Sir Iohn Wright, or Writhesley, alias Garter, King at Armes. Ioan, wife to Thomas Writhesley, sonne to Sir Iohn Writhesley. Garter, daughter and heire to Willi∣am Hall, Esquire. Iohn Writhesley the yonger, sonne to Sir Iohn Writhesley and Eleanor. Eleanor, second wife to Iohn Writhe∣sley, daughter and heire to Thomas Ar∣nold, sister and heire to Richard Arnold, Esquire. Iohn, her sonne and heire. Margaret, with her daughter. Iohn Brigget. Thomas Ruston, Gent. Iohn Talbot, Esquire, and Katharine his wife. Thomas Warfle, and Isabel his wife. Thomas Lucie, Gentleman, 1447. Ralph Rochford, Knight, 1409. Edmond Watar, Esquire. Elizabeth, wife to Richard Barnes, si∣ster and heire to Richard Malgrave E∣squire, of Essex. Richard Govere, and Iohn Govere, Esquires. Sir Henry Grey, Knight, son and heire to George Grey, Earle of Kent, 1562. Reginald Grey, Earle of Kent. Richard Choppin, Tallow-Chandler, one of the Sheriffes, 1530. Iohn Hamber, Esquire, 1573. Thomas Busbie, Cooper, who gave the Queenes head Taverne to the re∣liefe of the poore in the Parish, 1575. Iohn Wheler, Goldsmith, 1575. Richard Bolene, 1563. William Bolene, 1575. W. Bolene, Physician, 1587. Robert Crowley, Vicar there, all these foure under one old stone in the Quire. The learned Iohn Foxe, Writer of the Acts and Monuments of the English Church, 1587. The skilfull Robert Glover, alias So∣merset, Herauld, 1588. Iohannis Hambei,An anciēt Marble Tombe on the North side of the Chancell. Armigeri, caro hoc in Tumulo repulverescet, sicut & Ianae cha∣rissimae Conjugis. Qui dum vixit, Edo∣vardo sexto, Mariae & Elizabethae An∣gliae Regibus, in variis calculorum & rationum generibus, tam praestitorum & exterorum, quam decimarum & primitiarum ratiocinator dignissimus extiterat. Obiit autem Iohannes 8. Calend. Aprilis, Anno Salutis à Chri∣sto, 1573. Quem Iana secundo post Mense insequuta est, 16. scilicet Calend. Iunii. Quorum spiritus ad Coelum re∣versi reassumptionem carnis expectant. Francisco Borono, Nobilissimi Mediolanen∣si, Another faire Mar∣ble Tomb close ad∣joyning. & Annae Baptistae Boroni uxori, nec∣non & filio; Quorum ossa hoc claudun∣tur Tumulo. Idem Baptista Baronus, Francisci frater, ac Annae maritus, in e∣orum memoriam hanc posuit scriptionem. Obiit Franciscus Londinensis, 16. die Aprilis, Anno Domini, M.D.XXXIII. Aetatis suae, XXXI. Anna vero & filius, ultimo die Octobris, M.D.XLVI. Hic jacet Henricus Giffard, filius tertioge∣nitus Iohannis Giffard,A small Monumēt at the South wal of the Chancell. nuper de North∣hall, in Comitatu Middless. Armigeri. Qui cum corporis castitatem quadragin∣ta trium annorum coelibatu comprobas∣set, Animam Sponso suo Iesu Christo pi∣am sanctam{que} tradidit, 15. die Iulii, Anno Domini, 1602. Christo S. S. Iohanni Foxo,A very faire Mar∣ble stone set up on end in the same wall. Ecclesiae Anglicanae Marty∣rologo fidelissimo, Antiquitatis Histori∣cae Indagatori sagacissimo, Evangelicae veritatis propugnatori acerrimo, Thau∣maturgo admirabili; Qui Martyres Marianos, tanquam Phoenices, ex cineri∣bus redivivos praestitit. Patri suo omni pietatis officio imprimis colendo, Samuel Foxus illius primogenitus, hoc Monu∣mentum posuit, non sine lachrymis. Obiit die 18. Mens. April. An. Dom. 1587. jam septuagenarius. Vita vitae mortalis est, Spes vi∣tae immortalis. Here lyeth the body of Robert Crowley,A faire plated stone on the groūd in the Chancell. Clerke, late Vicar of this Parish; who de∣parted this life the 18. day of Iune, An. Dom. 1588. Sacra sub hoc saxo tria corpora mista quiescunt,A Plate engraven on a faire stone neer to the o∣ther. Gulielmi Bullen Medici, Fratrisque Richardi,
Ac Johannis Foxi: qui tres mihi crede fuerunt Doctrina clari, rari & pietatis alumni. Gulielmus Bullen Medicamina semper habebat, Aequè pauperibus danda, ac locupletibus aequè. Sicque Richardus erat benefacere & ipse paratus, Omnibus ex aequo quibus ipse prodesse valebat. At Foxus noster per multas hos parasangas, Vita praecurrit, studiisque accedimus omnes. Extant quae scripsit tormenta cruenta piorum, Extant perdoctè permulta volumina scripta, Quae scripsit Foxus: nulli fuit ipse secundus. Obiit An. Dom. 1587. April. 16. Here lyeth buried William Bullen,On the same stone. who dyed the seventh day of Ianuary, 1576. Vnder this stone sleepeth the body of Ri∣chard Bullen, a faithfull Servant and Preacher of Iesus Christ: And was bu∣ried the sixteenth day of October, Anno Domini, 1563. Here lieth the body of Richard Westerne, one of the sonnes of Richard Westerne,Another plated stone in the Chan∣cell. of London, Grocer, who being aged 25. yeeres, deceased the 15. day of Decem∣ber, Anno Domini, 1602. Christus mihi vita, Mors mihi lucrum. Heere lyeth buried Sir Henry Grey,A faire Tombe in the South Ile of the Quire. Knight, sonne and heire to George, Lord Grey, of Ruthen, and Earle of Kent. The which Sir Henry Grey departed this life the 24. day of September, in the yeere of Christ, 1562. Anna Thomae Tumulo jacet hoc uxorcula Strangae,A faire plated stone in the same Ile. Quae quia bella fuit, placuit{que} marita marito, Marmore sic texit, dulci devictus amore. Obiit Anno Salutis, 1573. Aetatis suae, 19. Februarii vicessimo quarto. Tolerandum, Sperandum.A comely Monumēt in the South wal of the Quire. Roberto Glovero, alias Somerset, Feciali celeberrimo: Heraldicae Scientiae, & ve∣ritatis antiquae, vindici acerrimo: sum∣mam laudem & benevolentiam ob prae∣clarum ingenium, per acre judicium; ex multa veterum scriptorum (labore indefesso) perscrutatione; ob morum fa∣cilitatem, vitaeque innocuae sanctimoni∣am, apud omnes consecuto; Avunculo chariss. Thomas Milles Nepos, amoris hoc Monumentum moerens posuit. Robertus iste, natus Ashsordiae Can∣tii emporio, parentibus ingenuis, li∣beraliter educatus, in multis apprimè versatus, Heraldicae unicè peritissi∣mus evasit. Fratrem unicum Guliel∣mum ex Tho. & Mildreda P. P. Soro∣res autem 5. habuit. ex Elizabetha Flower Conjuge, 5. tantum, supersti∣tes reliquit liberos, filios scilicet 3. fi∣lias{que} 2. Tandem cum jam Patriae or∣bi{que} post varia exantlata studia acu∣minis peritiae, & diligentiae stupendae gustum insignem praebere, at{que} Prin∣cipi Sereniss. suis meritis gratissimus esse ceperit. 10. April. 1518. aetat. suae 45. vitam erumnosam cum morte piè & placidè, in uno Christo commuta∣vit. Idque omnium cum doctissi∣morum tum optimorum undique pro tanto literar. pietatis & virtutis alumno dolore ac gemitu utpote; Quem fata tantum terris ostendisse videantur, nec amplius esse sinant. R. G. moriens ut viverat, vixit ut moriturus. In the North Ile of the Quire, han∣geth vp the Ensignes of Armes belon∣ging to Thomas Hawley, alias Clarenti∣aulx, King at Armes, buried 1573. but no other Monument there made for him. Roger Mason, of this Parish, Citizen and Vintner of London, gave to the poore of the freedome of this Parish, 200. pounds, wherewith an yeerely rent of 16. pounds or thereabout, is purchased for ever; to be bestowed on ten Gownes of blacke Cloth lined, to bee distributed yeerely upon tenne poore men of the freedome of this Parish, upon All Saints day, at the discretion of the Vicar, and
Church-wardens for the time being. He died the 3. day of Septemb. 1603. Aetat-suae, 37. Leaving his wife Iane, by whom he had three sons and three daughters; whereof one onely now liveth, named Katharine. Which Iane truely paid the above mentioned two hundred pounds, and joyned the ere∣ction of this Monument, set up, An. Dom. 1606. May the 8. day: Iohn Buckeridge, Doctor of Divinity, being Vicar; Edward Sikling, Richard May, David Iones, and Roger Webbe, then Churchwardens. William Day,Another small Mo∣nument in the wall of the same Ile in the Quire. Citizen and Vintner of London, the sonne of Thomas Day of Boseham, in Sussex, Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, gave to the poore of this Parish 80. pounds, which was payed by his brother George Day, wherewith an yeerely rent of sixe pounds, or thereabout, is purchased for ever: to be bestowed on twelve Coats of greene Cloth, to be distri∣buted yeerely upon twelve poore Or∣phans, upon All Saints day; at the discretion of the Vicar and Church-wardens for the time being. Hee ly∣eth buried in his Parish Church of S. Michael in Cornhill, and dyed the 22. day of September, 1603. Aetatis suae, 32. Set up Anno Domini, 1606. May the 8. day: Iohn Buckeridge, Doctor of Divinity, being Vicar, and the fore-remembred Church-wardens. Here lyeth the body of Edward Harvist,A very faire Mo∣nument in the North wal of this Ile. Citizen and Brewer of London, Al∣dermans Deputy of this Parish, and one of His Majesties Gunners; and Anne his beloved wife. They were both very charitable persons: as in giving Land to this Parish perpetu∣ally, for the reliefe of poore Wid∣dowes; as also Land to the Compa∣ny whereof he was free, for mending of the high way betweene Edgeworth and Paddington. He gave great Lega∣cies to his poore kindred, and depar∣ted this life the foureteenth day of March, 1610. Shee departed this life the foure and twentieth day of May, Anno Domini, 1610. Expe∣cting both a glorious resurrection in Iesus Christ. A Remembrance of Tho. Busbie, Citizen and Cooper of London, who departed this life in the yeere 1575. and was buried the 11. day of Iuly. This Busbie,A comely Monumēt by the o∣ther. willing to relieve the poore, with fire and with bread, Did give the house wherein he dwelt, then called the Queenes Head. Foure full Loads of the best Charcoales he would have bought each yeere, And forty dozen of Wheaten Bread, for poore Householders here. To see these things distributed, this Busbie put in trust The Vicar and Church-wardens, thinking them to be just. God grant that poore Householders here, may thankfull be for such; So God will move the minds of more, to doe for them as much: And let this good example move such men as God hath blest, To doe the like, before they goe with Busbie to their rest. Within this Chappell, Busbies bones, in dust a while must stay, Till he that made them, raise them up, to live with Christ for aye. A Remembrance of Master Richard Roper, &c. If you on earth that live,An engra∣ven Plate fixed in the wall. did know what rest the dead possesse, You would not wish to wander here, in Vale of wretchednesse. Good Helen, wife to me that was, prepare thy selfe with speed, That thou and I, with this yong Maid, a Plant of both our Seed, May rest in one, and rise in three, by power of Godheads might, When we with Angels shall assemble, to everlasting light. Richard Roper lived 70. yeeres, and dyed the 28. day of Septemb. An. Dom. 1578. Helen Roper lived 65. yeeres. Ioane Roper lived the age of two yeeres. Within this Ile lyeth buried the body of Charles Langley, sometime of this Parish, Ale-Brewer, who was buried
the eighth day of Iune, An. Dom. 1602. And did give bountifully to the poore of this Parish. If Langleys life you list to know,A comely Monumēt in the wall beneath the Quire read on, and take a view, Of faith and hope I will not speake, his workes shall shew them true: Who whilst he liv'd, with counsell grave, the better sort did guide; A stay to weake, a staffe to poore, without back-bite or pride: And when he dyed, he gave his Mite, all that did him befall, For ever (once a yeere) to cloath S. Giles his poore withall. All Saints he pointed for the day, Gownes twenty ready made, with twenty Shirts, and twenty Smocks, as they may best be had. A Sermon eke he hath ordain'd, that God may have his praise, And other might be won thereby, to follow Langleys wayes. On Vicar and Church-wardens then, his trust he hath repos'd, As they will answer him one day, when all shall be disclos'd. Thus being dead, yet still he lives, lives, never for to dye, In Heavens blisse, in Worlds fame; and so I trust shall I. Launcelot Andrewes, Vicar. Iohn Taylor, Wil. Hewet, Edw. Sickling, Rich. May, Churchwardens. Charities to the poore in the Parish of Saint Giles without Creplegate. Master Thomas Busby,Thomas Busby his gift to the poore. Cooper, gave forty dozen of Wheaten Bread, and foure Loads of Charcoales, to be distri∣buted yeerely for ever unto the poore of this Parish, in manner following: The weeke before Alhallontide, one load of Char-coales, and tenne dozen of bread; the weeke before Christmas; the weeke before the five and twentieth day of January; and the weeke before Easter, the foresaid proportion of bread and Coales. Mr. Blighton,Mr. Blighton his gift. Butcher, gave 40. dozen of wheaten bread, and 2. load of Char∣coales, to bee distributed at the same time, and in the same proportion. Master Charles Langley, Brewer, gave twenty Gownes for men and women,Charles Langley his gift. to be distributed, and twenty shirts for twenty other men, and twenty smocks for twenty other women yeerely for e∣ver, at the Feast of All Saints: and a re∣mainder of money to be given amongst the poore people the same day, and for∣ty shillings also that day allowed for a Sermon. Master Roger Mason, Vintner, gave two hundred pounds in Money,Roger Ma∣son his gift. with the which summe, tenne Gownes are likewise to be provided for tenne poore men or women, on the same Feast day of All Saints, for ever. Master William Day,William Day his gift. Vintner, gave fourescore pounds: with the which sum are to be provided twelve Coates, for twelve poore mens Children, for ever yeerely, and to bee distributed at the said Feast of All Saints. Mistris Anne Harvist gave foure te∣nements in Monks-well street,Anne Har∣vist her gift. neere Cre∣plegate, amounting to the yeerely rent of twenty pounds, to bee distributed quarterly to twenty poore widdows, to each of them 5. shillings the quarter. Master Robert Smith hath given foure Bibles in Octavo,Rob. Smith his gift. well buffed and bossed, to foure poore mens children, such as can best deserve them by reading, to be distributed yeerely for ever at Easter. And also two and fifty dozen of Whea∣ten bread, every weeke one dozen for e∣ver. Master Richard Hanbury,Rich. Han∣bury and Richard Budd their gift. and Master Richard Budd, have given six new Books of Common Prayer in Quarto, well buffed and bossed, to be given yeerely for ever at Easter, to sixe poore mens children, such as can best deserve them by reading. And also 52. dozen of wheaten bread, to be given every week for ever. Master Roger Bellow,Roger Bel∣low his gift. Brewer, hath given the Lease of an house in Moore-lane, called the signe of the Cocke, the yeerely rent whereof is twenty pounds. Out of the which summe, tenne pounds is yeerely to be given to the poore, at the Feast of Christmas: And the re∣mainder (except twenty shillings, o∣therwise by his will disposed) is yeerly to be reserved, for the purchasing of some parcell of Land, towards the re∣liefe of the poore.
The circuit of the Parish of S. Giles without Creplegate. THe Parishioners, in their Per∣ambulation, first strike downe the Alley (which hath some∣time beene part of their Church-yard) close by S. Giles his Well, and crossing the Towne-ditch, keepe along by the Citie Wall, almost to Aldersgate, where they should crosse the Ditch againe, and take in certaine Garden-houses, which stand neere the Ditch, and so comming downe a little Garden Alley, (through which sometime hath beene a way into Aldersgate street) returne again by S. Giles his Well, the same way they went in. Then walking up the West side of Red-crosse street, and the South side of Barbican, till they come toward the far∣ther end thereof, over against the signe of the Bores head, they set up their marks upon a great Post (as it seemeth set there for the same purpose) where they should crosse over to the North side, right over against the said bound, tho∣row certaine Garden Alleys, lying on the West side of Willoughby House: but by reason of some contention, that course is of late denyed them, so that they passe through Barbican, and turne up Goswell street, (being part of S. But∣tolphs Parish) untill they come a little beyond the Barres, where they enter their owne bounds againe, and setting up their markes, passe along the right side of the Kings high way, leading to Islington, and leaving the Mount Mill upon their right hand, they proceed on, till they come within three roddes of a little Bridge, (at the lower end of the Close next unto Islington, over which lyeth a foot-path toward Newington Greene,) where they digge a way over the Ditch, and so keepe upon the top of the Ditch banke, all the breadth of the lower end of the said Close; where they turne againe South-east, and ta∣king in all the Lay-stalles, and low grounds, where bricke hath been made, strike over betweene those low grounds and the Brick-hils, that now are adjoy∣ning to the foot-path, leading from the Pest-house to Islington, which they leave on the left side; in the South end of which Brick-hill, there is a stone set, now almost digged downe: From the which stone, they come straight South, till they come over a Bridge, which is laid purposely for them, and after re∣moved; which as soone as they have past, they strike downe, by the said Ditch side Eastward, to the farthest Conduit head, where they give the Children Poynts. From whence they keepe a straight course into the Kings high way, to Dame Anne de Clare, upon the right side of which way they keepe, till they come to the Butts, where a planck is purpose∣ly laid for them, over which they passe into Holywell Close, and so keepe dire∣ctly to the farthest of the sixe Milles, next unto Holywell, which they leave on their left hand, and so passing over the high way, keepe a straight course over the Walks, to the farthest Wall, South of the middle Walke, (leaving the But∣chers Close, and the lower Gardens, some three Roddes on the left hand) in the which VVall there is a marke or Bound: From thence (not entring the lowest Walke at all) they turne full West, over the high way leading from Moregate, and comming into little More∣fields, (as we call it) they keepe close to the Pales and Tentors (for they have not passing eight or ten foot of ground from the Pales) till they come to the Posterne, where they set up their mark; and so through the Posterne they make their returne, &c. There was in this Church (of old time) a Fraternity or Brother-hood of our blessed Lady,Brother-hood in S. Giles Church. or Corpus Christi and S. Giles, founded by Iohn Belancer, in the reigne of Edward the third, the 35. yeere of his reigne. Some small distance from the East end of this Church,Water-Conduit without Creplegate. is a water-conduit, brought in pipes of lead from Highbery, by Iohn Middleton, one of the Executors to Sir William East field, and of his goods. The inhabitants adjoyning, castellated it of their own coses and charges, about the yeere 148 There  also a Bosse of cleere wa∣ter in the Wall of the Church-yard,Bosse in the Wall of S. Giles Church-yard.
made at the charges of Richard Whiting∣ton, sometimes Maior, and was like to that of Belinsgate. Of late the same was turned into an evill Pumpe, and so is cleane decayed. There was also a faire Poole of cleere water,Poole of Spring water. neere unto the Parsonage, on the west side thereof, which was filled up in the reigne of Henry the sixth. The Spring was cooped in, and arched over with hard stone, and staires of stone to goe downe to the Spring, on the banke of the Towne ditch. And this was also done of the goods, and by the Execu∣tors of Richard Whitington. In Whitecrosse-street,White-crosse-street. King Henry the fifth builded one faire House, and foun∣ded there a Brotherhood of S. Giles, to be kept: which House had sometime beene an Hospitall of the French Order,Hospitall of the French Order. by the name of Saint Giles without Cre∣plegate, in the reigne of Edward the first; the King having the Jurisdiction, and pointing a Custos thereof, for the pre∣cinct of the Parish of Saint Giles, &c. Patent Rich. 2. the 15. yeere: Which Hospitall being suppressed, the Lands were given to the Brotherhood, for re∣liefe of the poore. One Alley, of divers Tenements, o∣ver against the North wall of S. Giles Church-yard, was appointed to bee Almes-houses for the poore, wherein they dwelled rent-free, and otherwise were relieved: but the said Brother∣hood was suppressed by Henry the 8. since which time, Sir Iohn Gresham, Maior, purchased the Lands, and gave part thereof to the maintenance of a Free Schoole, which he had founded at Holt, a Market Towne in Norfolke. In Red crosse street,Red-crosse streete. on the West side from S. Giles Church-yard, up to the said Crosse, be many faire houses buil∣ded outward,Liber. S. Buttoph. with divers Alleys, tur∣ning into a large plot of ground, of old time called the Iewes Garden,The Iewes Garden, or place to bury their dead. as being the onely place appointed them in Eng∣land, wherein to bury their dead; till the yeere 1177. the 24. of Henry the se∣cond, that it was permitted them (after long suit to the King and Parliament at Oxford) to have a speciall place assigned them in every quarter where they dwelled. This plot of ground remained to the said Iewes, till the time of their finall banishment out of England and is now turned into faire Garden-plots and Summer-houses for pleasure. On the East side of this Red-crosse street, be also divers faire houses, up to the Crosse. And there is Beech lane,Beech lane. per∣adventure so called of Nicholas de la Beech, Lieutenant of the Tower of Lon∣don, put out of that Office in the 13. of Edward the third. This Lane stretcheth from Red-crosse street, to White-crosse street, replenished, not with Beech trees, but with beautifull houses of stone, bricke and timber. Amongst the which, was (of old time) a great house, pertaining to the Abbot of Ramsey for his lodging,The Ab∣bot of Ramsey his Inne. when he repaired to the Citie: It is now called Drewrie House, of Sir Drew Drewrie, a worshipfull ow∣ner thereof. On the North side of this Beech lane, towards White-crosse street, the Drapers of London have lately builded 8. Almes-houses of bricke and timber,Almes-houses in Beech lane. for eight poore Widdowes of their owne Com∣pany, whom they have placed there rent-free, according to the gift of the Lady Askew, Widdow to Sir Christo∣pher Askew, sometime Draper, and Maior, 1533. Then in Golding lane,Golding lane. Richard Gal∣lard, of Islington, Esquire, Citizen and Painter-stainer of London,Almes people there. founded 13. Almes-houses, for so many poore peo∣ple placed in them rent-free. Hee gave to the poore of the same Almes-houses, 2. d. the piece weekly, & a load of Charcoales among thē yeerly for ever; he left faire Lands about Isling∣ton, to maintain his foundation. T. Hayes, sometime Chamberlaine of London, in the latter time of H. the 8. married Eli∣zabeth his daughter and heire; which Hayes and Elizabeth had a daughter na∣med Elizabeth, married to Iohn Iron-monger, of London, Mercer, who now hath the order of the Almes-people. On the West side of Red-crosse street is a street called the Barbican,Burgh-kenning, or Barbican. because sometime there stood on the North side there of a Burghkenning, or VVatch-tow∣er of the Citie, called in some language a Barbican, as a Bikening is called a Bea∣con. This Burgh-kenning, by the name of the Mannor of Base Court, was
given by Edward the third, to Robert Vf∣ford, Earle of Suffolke, and was lately pertaining to Peregrine Barty, Lord Wil∣loughby of Ersby. Next adjoyning to this, is one other great house,Garter Place. called Garter Place, some∣time builded by Sir Thomas Writhe, or Writhesley, Knight, alias, Garter, princi∣pall King of Armes, second son of Sir Iohn Writhe, Knight, alias Garter, and was Vncle to the first Thomas, Earle of Southampton, Knight of the Garter, and Chancelor of England: Hee built this house, and in the top therof a Chappel, which hee dedicated by the name of S. Trinitatis in Alto. Thus much for that part of Creplegate Ward without the VVall, whereof more shall be spoken in the Suburbe of that part. This VVard hath an Alderman & his Deputy with∣in the gate. Common Councell, 8. Con∣stables, 9. Scavengers, 12. for VVard∣mote Inquest, 15. and a Beadle. Without the gate, it hath also a De∣puty, Common Councell, 2. Consta∣bles, 4. Scavengers, 4. VVardmote In∣quest, 17. and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the Fifteene, at 40. pounds.
ALDERSGATE VVARD. THe next is Alders∣gate Ward,Aldersgate Ward. taking name of that North Gate of the City; this Ward also consisteth of divers Streetes and Lanes, lying as well with∣in the Gate and Wall, as without; and first, to speake of that part within the Gate, thus it is. The East part thereof joyneth unto the West part of Creple∣gate Ward in Engain lane or Maiden lane. It beginneth on the North side of that Lane, at Staining lane end, and runneth up from the Haberdashers Hall, to St. Mary Staining Church: and by the Church East winding almost to VVood∣streete. Oate lane. And west through Oate lane, and then by the South side of Bacon house in Noble streete,Noble street backe againe by Lilipot lane, which is also of that VVard to Maiden lane, and so on that North side west to Saint Iohn Zacharies Church, and to Foster lane. Now on the South side of Engaine or Maiden lane, is the west side of Guthe∣rons lane, to Kery lane, and Kery lane it selfe (which is of this Ward) and backe againe into Engaine lane, by the North side of the Goldsmiths Hall, to Foster lane, almost wholly of this Ward, which beginneth in the South toward Cheape, on the East side, by the North side of Saint Fosters Church, & runneth downe North-west by the west end of Engaine lane by Lilipot lane,Noble street and Oate lane, to No∣ble streete, and through that by Shelly house, (of old time so called,Shelleyes house, now Bacon house. as belong∣ing to the Shellies) Sir Thomas Shelley, Knight, was owner thereof in the first of Henry the fourth. It is now called Ba∣con house, because the same was new builded by Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seale. Downe on that side by Serjeant Fleetwoods house, Recorder of London, who also new buil∣ded it to Saint Olaves Church in Silver∣streete, which is by the North-west end of this Noble streete. Then againe in Foster lane, this Ward beginneth on the west side therof, over∣against the South-west corner of Saint Fosters Church, and runneth downe by Saint Leonards Church, by Pope lane end, and by Saint Annes lane end, which Lane is also of this Ward, North to the stone wall, by the wall of the City, over-against Bacon house, which stone wall, and so downe North to Creplegate on that side, is of Faringdon Ward. Then have yee the maine streete of this VVard,S. Martins lane. which is called Saint Mar∣tins lane, including Saint Martin on the East side thereof, and so downe on both the sides to Aldersgate. And these be the bounds of this VVard within the wall and gate. Now, before wee speake of that part of the wall without, let us say some∣what of the Gate it selfe. Aldersgate be∣ing very old, ruinous, and in danger of some further decay; the Lord Maior & his Brethren, with the advice of the worthy Commoners, determined to have it taken downe, and builded again in beautifull manner. For the more hastening of which intention, a worthy Citizen,M. William Parker, Ci∣tizen and Merchāt-Taylor of london, gave three thousand pounds towards the new building of Alders∣gate. Master VVilliam Parker, (of whose Christian and liberall charities, wee have in briefe manner spoken be∣fore) out of his owne bountifull dispo∣sition, gave the sum of three thousand pounds, towards the furtherance of so good a worke, in new re-edifying and building the Gate, requiring & appoin∣ting (by his VVill) that it should bee new builded, within the space of three yeeres after his decease. And the mony to bee payd (by his Executor) to the Lord Maior of London, and the Alder men his Brethren (for the time being)
for the said use of new building the said Gate, in manner and forme following. That is to say,The man∣ner and forme of paying the said mony. 200. pounds thereof at the taking downe of the first Tile: Other 200. l. thereof, at the laying of the first stone, which was laid by the right Worshipfull,The first Tile was taken downe the last day of March, 1617. Sir William Cravon, Knight, and Alderman of the City of London, on Munday, the 26. day of May, 1617. Other 200. l. thereof, when the new building should bee a yard in height above the ground. Other 200. l. thereof, when the new building should be arched over the Gate. And the other 200. l. in full payment, when the said building shall be full finished. Master Richard Foxe, Citizen and Clothworker of London (a most painfull and industri∣ous Gentleman) having the oversight, direction, and ordering of the said buil∣ding. VVithout the Gate,Aldersgate street. the maine street called Aldersgate streete, runneth up North on the East side, to the west end of Hounds-ditch, or Barbican streete: A part of which streete is also of this Ward. And on the west side to Long lane, a part whereof is likewise of this VVard. Beyond the which Aldersgate, is Goswell streete up to the Barres.Goswell street. And on the west side of Aldersgate streete, by Saint Buttolphs Church, is Briton streete,Briton street. which runneth west to a Pumpe, and then North to the Gate, which entreth the Church-yard, some∣time pertaining to the Priory of Saint Bartholomew on the East side: and on the west side towards Saint Bartholo∣mewes Spittle, to a paire of posts there fixed. And these bee the bounds of this Aldersgate VVard without. The Antiquities bee these:Staining lane. First, in Staining lane, of old time so called, as may bee supposed, of Painterstainers dwelling there. On the East side thereof, adjoyning to the Haberdashers Hall,Almes-houses there. be ten Almes-houses, pertaining to the Haberdashers, wherein bee placed ten Almes people of that Company, every of them ha∣ving eight pence the peece every Friday for ever, by the gift of Thomas Huntlow, Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffes, in the yeere, 1539. More, Sir George Barne gave them ten pounds by the yeere for ever. Then is the small Parish Church of Saint Mary,Parish Church of St. Mary Staining. called Staining, because it standeth at the North end of Staining lane. In the which Church, being but newly builded, there remaine no Monu∣ments worth the noting, but one lately erected. Here lieth the body of George Smithes,A goodly Monu∣ment in South wall of the Chancell. Goldsmith and Alderman of London, who tooke to wife, Sarah, the daughter of Anthony Wolhouse, Citizen, and Haberdasher of London: by whom hee had issue foure sonnes and five daugh∣ters. He departed this life the eleventh day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 1615. be∣ing 52. yeeres of age. To whose memory, Sarah his wife, being sole Executrix of his last Will and Testament, at her own proper cost and charges, caused this Monument to be erected. Then is Engaine lane, or Maiden lane, and at the North-west corner thereof, the Parish Church of Saint Iohn Zacha∣rie, Parish Church of Saint Iohn Zachary. a faire Church, with the Monu∣ments well preserved, of Thomas Lich∣field, who founded a Chauntry there, in the foureteenth of Edward the second, of Sir Nicholas Twiford, Goldsmith, Maior, 1388. and Dame Margery his wife: of whose goods the Church was made and new builded, with a Tombe for them, and others of their race, 1390. Drugo Barentine, Maior, 1398. He gave faire lands to the Goldsmiths: he dwel∣led right against the Goldsmiths Hall. Betweene the which Hall and his dwel∣ling house, he builded a Gallory thwar∣ting the streete, whereby he might goe from the one to the other, hee was bu∣ried in this Church, and Christian his wife, 1427. Iohn Adis, Goldsmith, 1400. and Margaret his wife. Iohn Fran∣cis, Goldsmith, Maior, 1400. and Eli∣zabeth his wife, 1450. I. Sutton, Gold∣smith, one of the Sheriffes, 1413. Bar∣tholomew Seman, Gold-beater, Master of the Kings Mints, within the Tower of London, and the Towne of Calice, 1430. Iohn Hewet, Esquire, 1500. Wil∣liam Breakespeare, Goldsmith, 1461. Christopher Eliot, Goldsmith, 1505. Bartholomew Reade, Goldsmith, Maior,
1502. was buried in the Charter-house, and gave to this Parish 100. l. His wife was buried here with a faire Monu∣ment, her picture in habit of a widow. Thomas Keyton, Lorimar, 1522. Willi∣am Potken, Esquire, 1537. Iohn Cornish with an Epitaph, 1470. Robert Fenrbu∣ther, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffes in the yeere, 1512. Hereunder lieth buried sir Nicholas Twi∣ford, These words are engraven on an an∣ciēt place in the Chancell. Knight, sometime Lord Maior of this City, and Dame Margery his wife; of whose goods this Church was made a Tombe for themselves, and for many other more. He died in Anno Domini, 1390. Hic jacet Iohannes Adys,A faire plated in the South Ile of the Quire. Civis, & Au∣rifaber London, & Margareta uxor ejus, Obiit ultimo die Februarii, 1461. Et Margareta, &c. Here lieth Iohn Hewet,The like stone close by it. of London, E∣squire, the which Iohn deceased the first day of May, in the yeere of our Lord God 1510. and in the fifth yeere of the reigne of King Henry the seventh, &c. Here lieth the body of Iohn Sutton,The like stone and in the same Ile. Citi∣zen, Goldsmith, and Alderman of Lon∣don, who died the 6. day of Iuly, 1450. Here lieth buried before this place,A small Plate with his Armes in the South wall. the body of Iohn Strelley, Esquire, who decea∣sed the ninth day of December, 1595. being about 86. yeeres of age. Here lieth buried within this Ile,A comely Monumēt in the East end of the South Ile. the bodies of Iohn Greenwood, Citizen, and Painter-Stainer of Lond. who descen∣ded of a younger house of Greenwood, of Greenwoodley in Yorekshire: And Elizabeth his wife, by whom hee had many children; but at the time of their death, left onely one sonne and a daughter, Robert, and Ioane, which Robert, after many yeeres spent in this Parish, was laid by his father and mo∣ther the 23. of Iune, 1585. In memory of whom this Monument was erected by his sisters sonne, Samuel Thompson, the sixth of September, Anno 1602. Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Randolf,A faire stone within the Chancell doore. Capellanus. Qui obiit 29. die No∣vembris, Anno Domini, 1459. Cu∣jus animae propitietur Deus. Hic jacet Ioannes Frances,A very faire pla∣ted stone by the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. Civis, & Aurifaber, & quondam Maior Lon∣don. Qui obiit 13. die Decemb. An. Dom. 1405. Cujus, &c. Hic jacet Elizabeth ux. dict. Ioan. Qui obiit 11. Mensis Octobris, An. Dom. 1432. Cujus, &c. Hic jacet Drugo Barantine,The like faire pla∣ted stone close by the other. Civis & Aurifaber, & quondam Maior Lon∣don. Qui obiit 15. die Mensis De∣cemb. An. Dom. 1415. Cujus, &c. Hic jacet Christiana, ux. dict. Drugo∣nis. Quae obiit 11. die Mensis Martii, An. Dom. 1427. Cujus, &c. This Monument is erected to the memory of Sir Iames Pemberton,A very goodly Monu∣ment in the East end in the Chancell. Knight, who being Sheriffe of this City at the com∣ming in of King IAMES, entertained neere 40. Earles and Barons in his house on the day of the Kings being proclai∣med. Afterwards, Anno 1612. was elected Maior of this most honourable Citie of London. Hee erected a Free-schoole in the Parish of Ecleston in Lan∣cashire, sixteene yeeres before his death, and gave fifty pounds by the yeere to the maintaining thereof for ever. Hee gave also five hundred pounds to Christs Hos∣pitall, and two hundred pounds to the Company of Goldsmiths, besides many liberall gifts to the poore of his Kinred, and many other most charitable uses: He died the eighth day of September, 1613. aged, 68. yeeres. Marble nor Touch, nor Alabaster can Reveale the worth of the long buried man: For oft (we see) mens goods, when they are gone, Doe pious deeds, when they themselves did none. Mine (while I liv'd) no goodnesse did expresse, 'Tis not Inscriptions make them more or lesse: In Christ I hope to rise amongst the Iust, Man is but grasse, all must to Wormes and Dust.
Vertue and Death being both enamoured On worthy PEMBERTON, in heate of Love, To be possest of that each coveted, Thus did they dialogue, and thus they strove. Vertue. WHat Vertue challengeth, is but her right. Death. What Death layes claime to, who can contradict? Vert. Vertue, whose power exceeds all other might. Dea. Where's Vertues power, when Death makes all submit? Vert. I gave him life; and therefore he is mine. Dea. That life he held no longer than I list. Ver. J made him more than mortall, meere Divine. Dea. How hapt he could not then Deaths stroke resist? Ver. Because (by Nature) all are borne to dye. Dea. Then thine owne tongue yeelds Death the victory. Ver. No, Death, thou art deceiv'd, thy envious stroke Hath given him life immortall, 'gainst thy will: Dea. VVhat life can be, but vanisheth as smoake? Vert. A life that all thy darts can never kill. Dea. Have I not lockt his body in my grave? Vert. That was but dust, and that I pray thee keepe. Dea. That is as much as I desire to have, His comely shape in my eternall sleepe. Vert. But wher's his honourable life, renowne, and fame? Dea. They are but breath, them I resigne to thee. Ver. Them I most covet. Dea. I preferre my claime, His body mine. Ver. Mine his Eternity. And so they ceast, Death triumphs o're his grave, Vertue o're that which Death can never have. And as faire Trophees, fit to beautifie His Hearse, Vertue hangs up these Ornaments: His Justice, VVisedome, and Integritie, His courage, dreadlesse of what are events, His upright soule in that high dignitie, VVhich London gives her chiefest Presidents. Free from compare with such as went before, Or should succeed. It was his sole desire Truth might report those actions lesse or more, Which honest thoughts did in his heart inspire. His care of learning and his liberall minde Vnto the poore, love to his Company, Kinred and Friends, to whom he was most kinde, And with whom he dealt truly bounteously: These graces better doe become his Grave, Than wastfull words of fruitlesse flattery, And their due merit (doubtlesse) he shall have, Among the blessed in Eternity. VVhereto faire Vertue now hath brought her son, Worthily honour'd, Sir Iames Pemberton. A. M. On the East side of this Foster lane,The Gold∣smiths Hall. at Engaine lane end, is the Goldsmiths Hall, a proper house, but not large. And therefore to say that Bartholomew Read, Goldsmith, Maior in the yeere, 1502. kept such a feast in this Hall,R. Grafton. as some have fabuled, is farre incredible, and altogether unpossible, considering the smalnesse of the Hall, and number of the
guests, which as they say, were more than 100. persons of great estate. For the messes and dishes of meats to them served, the paled Parke in the same Hall, furnished with fruitfull trees, beasts of Venery, and other circumstan∣ces of that pretended feast well weigh∣ed, Westminster Hall would hardly have sufficed; and therefore I will over-passe it, and note somewhat of principall Goldsmiths. First, J reade, that Leofstane, Gold∣smith, was Provost of this City, in the reigne of Henry the first. Also, that Henry Fitz Alewin,The first Maior of London was a Gold∣smith. Fitz Leafstane, Gold∣smith, was Maior of London, in the first of Richard the first. Also, that Gregory Rocksly, chiefe Say-master of all the Kings Mints within England (and there∣fore by my conjecture,Principall men of the City, Gold∣smiths. a Goldsmith) was Maior in the third of Edward the first, and continued Maior seven yeeres together. Then William Faringdon, Goldsmith, Alderman of Faringdon Ward, one of the Sheriffes, 1281. the ninth of Edward the first, who was a Goldsmith, as appeareth in record, and shall bee shewed in Faringdon Ward. Then Nicholas Faringdon his son, Gold∣smith, Alderman of Faringdon Ward, foure times Maior in the reigne of Ed∣ward the second, &c. For the rest of la∣ter time are more manifestly knowne; and therefore I leave them: the men of this mystery were incorporated or con∣firmed in the sixteenth of Richard the second. Then at the North end of Noble street is the Parish Church of Saint Olave in Silver streete,Parish Church of S. Olave in Silver street a small thing, and with∣out any note-worthy Monuments, but these following. Here under this stone lieth buried the body of Iohn Darcy,A faire plated stone in the Chan∣cell. second son to Iohn, Lord Darcy of Ehie, who died in An. 1593. aged, 33-yeeres. Here lieth Grisseild Windsore,Another stone neer to it. daughter of Henry, Lord Windsore, and Lady Anne his wife, daughter and heyre of Sir Thomas Rivet, Knight, who de∣parted this life the seven and twentieth day of Iune, and in the yeere of our Lord God, 1600. A Remembrance of Master IOHN BANESTER, Chirurgeon, and Li∣centiate in Physicke. GReat men that ne're did good in all their dayes, But at the very instant of their death, Finde yet no meane commenders of their praise, Although it lasts no longer than a-breath: Shall then good men, though lesser in degree, Finde none to give them right and equity? If one shall say, The great mans life was such, So good, so full of hospitality: When God doth know, he ne're did halfe so much, Though thus he must be grac'd with flattery. Shall meane men, who such workes truly did, Be nothing spoken of? Oh God forbid. Not then, as equalling with any Great, My fatherly good friend, Iohn Banester: No more but truth of thee let me repeate, A Sonnes Love-teares, thy body to interre. That such as knew thee better same than I: May say, Thy vertues did not with thee dye, Thy Skill and Practice, that it selfe commends, Some of the best have truely found the same, Not partially employed to wealthy friends, But even the poorest wretch, the sicke and lame Felt of the best. Some difference there might be: The rich payd somewhat,
poore men had it free. Thy care and cost layd out for common good, In greater measure than came in againe: But that heavens blessing with thy bounty stood, Hardly had stretcht so many to sustaine. But it is true: The liberall heart God loves, And from him still all cause of lacke removes, Thy weekly charity given to the poore In Bread, beside, in money from thy Purse: Even in the hardest yeeres dealt at thy doore, When some repin'd that every day did worse; Makes poore men say: Our good reliefe is gone, Let them goe to thy find-faults and have none. Poore maymed Souldiers, sore-sicke hearted men, That under miseries hard Crouch did bow, Were freely cur'd, me thinkes they cry: Lord, when, Where shall we finde our good Physician now? I doubt not, but some others will as much: Yet (in these dayes) we finde not many such. Sleepe then, thou happy Soule, in endlesse rest, All good mens groanes be powred on thy grave: Live thou in Abrahams bosome with blest; Where Faith and VVorkes due recompence shall have, My sight growes dimme, sighing my heart makes sore: Teares blot my paper, I can write no more. On the west side of Foster lane is the small Parish Church of S. Leonards,Parish Church of St. Leonard in Foster lane. for them of St. Martins le graund. A num∣ber of Tenements being lately builded in place of the great Collegiate Church of Saint Martin, that Parish is mighti∣ly increased. In this Church remaine these Monu∣ments: First, without the Church is graven in stone on the East end, Iohn Broke it well, an especiall re-edifier or new builder thereof. In the Quire graven in brasse, Ro. Purfet, Grocer, 1507. Robert Traps, Goldsmith, 1526. with this Epitaph: When the Bels be merrily rung, And the Masse devoutly sung: And the meate merrily eaten, Then shall Robert Traps his wife and children be forgotten. Sub hoc Marmore requiescit corpus Humfred. Barret,A stone at the en∣tring into the Quire filli Iohannis Bar∣ret, Generosus. Qui obiit, An. Do∣mini 1501. Live to Dye. All flesh is grasse,A faire stone in the Chan∣cel, name∣lesse. and needs must fade, To earth againe, whereof it was made. Felici, piae, & munificentissimae fe∣minae, A faire Monu∣ment in the North wall of the Chancell. Iodocae Franckland viduatae, siliae Roberti & Ioannae Trappes Londinensium: Gratitudinis hoc of∣ficii & pietatis Monumentum adop∣tione filii Principalis & Scholares Collegii de Brasennose apud Oxoni∣ensee exhibùûre. Dilecti cineres, non sic requiescitis urna In tenui, ut vobis sola haec monumenta parantur, Quae tandem vel sera dies pessundare possit: Aenea vos monumenta tegunt, vivumque Trophaeum (Aeternum meruistis enim vivumque Trophaeum) Vobis vestra dedit Iodoca, perenniùs aere, Nes etenim aeternumqne omnes, quos postera nobis Secla dabunt vobis sumus immortale Sepulchrum. Then in Pope lane, so called of one Pope that was owner thereof,Pope lane. on the North
side is the Parish Church of Saint Anne in the willowes,Parish Church of S. Anne in the wil∣lowes. so called, I know not upon what occasion: but some say, of willowes growing thereabouts: but now there is no such voide place for willowes to grow, more than the Church-yard, wherein doe grow some high Ash trees. This Church by causualty of fire, in the yeere 1548. was burnt, so farre as it was combustible; but since being new∣ly repaired, there remaine a few Monu∣ments of antiquity, of Thomas Lekhimp∣ton, Clarke of the Pipe, who was buried there, 1499. Ralph Caldwell, Gentleman of Greyes Inne, 1527. Iohn, Lord Shef∣feld, Iohn Herenden, Mercer, Esquire, 1572. And these Verses are on an anci∣ent Table, hanging in the Quire. Vt tibi praeceptis mens conformetur honestis, Sex animo semper, sunt repetenda tuo. Principio Deus est,Deus. noster servator & Author, Hostis in opposita stat regione Sathan.Diabolus. Tertia res praesens est,Vita. vita simillima ventis, Mors sequitur nobis,Mors. quae prope semper adest. Ordine sunt quinto,Coelum. Coeli palatia summis, Tartara sunt sexto,Inferuum. constituenda loco. Haec animo tacitè secum, qui saepe revolvit, Miror in hoc vitij, siquid inesse potest. Gualterus Haddonus. A table in the North Ile of the Chancell. Quos anguis Tristi de iro cum vulnere strauit hos sanguis Christi miro Tum munere lauit Corda, manus, oculos, aures, animosque levemus, Et Domino, voces, sua sunt, & ei sua demus. Quos amor aeterno vivos in foedere junxit, Concordes tumulo mors sic conjunxit in uno. Non sors unanimes, nec mors disjungit amantes, Sed post fata vides inviolata amant. Here lieth buried the body of Edward He∣renden, A hand∣some smal Monumēt in the North wal of the Quire. Esquire, Citizen and Mercer of London, and Millescent his wife, daughter of Richard Samond, of An∣sley Woodhouse, in the County of Nottingham, Esquire: who had issue then living, Edmund, Henry, and Sey∣more their sonnes; Frances, Martha, Magdalene, and Judith, their daugh∣ters: which Edward Herenden was sonne and heyre of Richard Herenden of West Farleige, in the County of Kent, Esquire, An. 1572. Memorare novissima, & in aeternum non peccabis. Eccles. 7. Here lieth the bodies of Edmund Heren∣den, A smaller Monumēt by the other. Gentleman, sonne and heyre of Ed∣ward Herenden, Esquire, whose Mo∣nument next adjoyneth. Which Ed∣mund had to his first wife, Helen, daughter of William Dunkeyn, Citi∣zen, and Merchant-Taylor of London: And he had issue by her nine sonnes, and foure daughters. Hee had to his second wife, Helen, daughter of Iohn Bird, Citizen and Draper of London. Obiit 10. die Aprilis, 1590. Here-under this stone lieth the body of Ste∣phen Brakynbury,A faire plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion table. Gent. Vsher to King Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Queene Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, and Ioan his wife: which Stephen died the 2. day of Febru. An. 1563. & Ioane died, &c. Orate devotè pro anima Magistri Ioannis Pem∣berton, Another stone by the Com∣munion Table. utriusque Juris Baccalaurii, quond. Resi∣dentiar. Eccles. Cath. de Rippon, Ebor. Diocesis, hujus{que} alius Eccles. Rectoris. Qui obiit 12. die Septemb. An. Dom. 1499. Cujus, &c. William Gregory, Skinner, Maior of Lon∣don in the yeere 1451. was there buried, and founded a Chauntry, but no Mo∣nument of him remaineth. Then in St. Martins lane was (of old time) a faire and large Colledge, of a
Deane and secular Canons or Priests,Colledge of Saint Martins le graund. and was called Saint Martins le graund, founded by Ingelricus, and Edwardus his brother, in the yeere of Christ, 1056. and confirmed by William the Conque∣rour, as appeareth by his Charter dated 1068. This Colledge claimed great priviledges of Sanctuary,Lib. S. Mar∣tin. and other∣wise, as appeareth in a booke written by a Notary of that house, about the yeere 1442. the nineteenth of Henry the sixth, wherein amongst other things, is set downe and declared, that on the first of September, in the yeere aforesaid, a Souldier, prisoner in Newgate, as hee was led by an Officer towards the Guild hall of London, there came out of Panyer Alley five of his fellowship, and tooke him from the Officer, brought him into Sanctuary, at the West doore of Saint Martins Church, and tooke grithe of that place. But the same day Philip Malpas, and Robert Marshall, then She∣riffes of London, with many other entred the said Church, and forcibly tooke out with them the said five men thither fled; led them fettred to the Compter, and from thence chained by the neckes to Newgate: of which violent taking, the Deane and Chapter in large man∣ner complained to the King, and requi∣red him as their Patron, to defend their priviledges, like as his Predecessors had done, &c. All which complaint and sute, the Citizens by their councell, Markam, Serjeant at the Law, Iohn Carpenter,Argument against priviledge challen∣ged by the Deane of S. Martins. late Common Clarke of the City, and other, learnedly answered, offering to prove, that the said place of Saint Martin had no such immunity or liberty as was pretended; namely, Car∣penter offered to lose his live-lode, if that Church had more immunity than the least Church in London: notwithstanding, after long debating of this con∣troversie, by the Kings commande∣ment, and assent of his Councell in the Starre-Chamber, the Chancellour and Treasurer sent a Writ unto the Sheriffs of London, charging them to bring the said five persons, with the cause of their taking, and withholding afore the King in his Chancery, on the Vigill of All∣hallowes. On which day, the said She∣riffes, with the Recorder and Councell of the City, brought and delivered them accordingly, afore the said Lords, whereas the Chancelor, after hee had declared the Kings commandement, sent them to Saint Martins, there to a∣bide freely, as in a place having franchi∣ses, whiles them liked, &c. Thus much out of that Booke have I noted concerning the Priviledge of that place, challenged in those dayes; since the which time, to wit, in the yeere 1457. the 36. of the said Henry the sixth, an Ordinance was made by the King and his Councell, concerning the said Sanctuary men in S. Martins le graund, whereof the Articles are set downe in the Booke of K. within the Chamber of the Guild hall, in the leafe 299. Henricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae & Franciae, & Dominus Hyberniae: Omnibus ad quos presentes literae perventium, salutem. Inspeximus te∣norem quondam ordinationis, con∣cessionis, & stabilimenti certorum Articulorum infra Sanctuarin li∣berae Capellae nostrae, S. Martini infra Civitatem nostram London observandam & custodiendam, co∣ram Nobis & Concilio nostro, 5. die Februarii ultimo praeterito, apud Westmon. in Camera Stellata, or∣dinatorum & stabilitorum, Nobis in Cancellar. nostram de mandato nostro missum factū in haec verba: THe fifth of Feverer,Set downe according to the English then used, and as it standeth in the Re∣cord. the yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne Lord, King Henry the 6. thirty fifth: at Westminster, in the Sterred Cham∣ber, our said Soveraigne Lord, calling to his high remembrance, the good and blessed entent that his full Noble Pre∣genitours have at all times had, to the honour, worship, conservation and wele of the Free Chappell of Saint Martins, within the Citie of London, of the which the King our said Soveraigne Lord is founder and Patron: desiring to doe all that may serve to th' ease and restful roule of the same; and conservati∣on of the Sanctuary, Immunity, Privi∣leges and Liberties, as appertaine to the said Chappell and place, willing
that hereafter none occasion be yeven, to the breach or hurting of them.Offence taken by the City, against the indi∣rect cour∣ses used in the San∣ctuary. Re∣membring also the great complaints, grudging, and displeasure that his sub∣jects have taken, and specially the Citi∣zens and Commonalty of the said City of London, of the demeaning of misru∣led persons comming and abiding in the said place, under umbre and colour of the Sanctuary there, the which have at divers times issued out of the said Sanctuary, and committed many ry∣ots, robberies, man-slaughters, and o∣ther mischiefes; where-through the said Sanctuary hath be greatly dislaun∣dered, and (over that) great inconve∣nience like to ensue. After great deliberation and com∣munication had as well with Doctors of Divinity, as of Law Civill and Ca∣nonicall, called also thereto the Iudges of this our Land, and their advices had in that behalfe, other men also of great wisedome and experience for the weale and conservation of the said San∣ctuary, and to eschew the said misgo∣vernance and mischiefe, called also be∣fore our said Soveraigne Lord and his Councell the Maior and the Aldermen of the said City, and Master Richard Cawdre, Deane of the said place of Saint Martins.Order from the King and his Coun∣cell to the Deane of the San∣ctuary. Our said Soveraigne Lord (by the advice of his Councell a∣bove said) Ordained, granted, and esta∣blished certaine Articles under writ∣ten, to bee kept and observed within the said Sanctuary, from this time forth, without any interruption of them. VVilling and ordaining, that the said Deane that now is promit by his oath the observance of the same for the time that hee shall bee Deane there. And that every Deane after him in his admission to the said Deanary, be sworne to keepe the said Articles in semblable wise, and make them to bee kept within the said Sanctuary: the which Articles beene such as follow: 1. First,For fugi∣tives clai∣ming be∣nefit of the San∣ctuary, & the causes moving th thereto. That every person fugitive comming unto the said Sanctuary for tuition, and challenge to enjoy the im∣munities and priviledges thereof, at his entree, as soone as hee commodiously and reasonably shall now present him∣selfe unto the said Deane, his Commis∣sarie, or Depute in that behalfe, and before him declare the cause of the feare moving him to come to the said Sanctuary, be it for treason, felony, surmised upon him, or for other causes, and that the said declaration and cause bee registred in the common Register, ordained therefore in the said Sanctu∣ary, and the name of the said fugitive. 2. Item, That hee at his first entree present and deliver unto the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute, all manner of weapon and armour that hee bringeth with him as well invasive as defensive,Against armour & weapons in the Sanctuary and that he be not suffered to weare or use any such weapon or ar∣mour, or it to have in his keeping with∣in the said Sanctuary in any wise, Ex∣cept a reasonable knife, to kerve with∣all his meate, and that the said knife be pointlesse. 3. Item, That every ervaunt and o∣pen Theefe,For theeves, felons, murde∣rers, and infamous persons. Robber, Murderer, and Felon, notoriously noised by the com∣mon fame of the people, or if the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute bee credibly informed, or due proofe bee yoven or made, that hee is such one repairing to the said Sanctuary, to the intent that hee shall not (under co∣lour of the said Sanctuary) intend to doe further mischiefe, finde sufficient seurte to bee made unto the King, as well by his owne obligation, as by the obligations of other, of his good bea∣ring for the time of his abode (within the said Sanctuary, and for a quar∣ter of a yeere after his departing out of the same. And that hee bee kept in ward into the time hee have found and made the said seurte: And if it so bee, that it bee complained or shewed un∣to the Kings Highnesse,Concer∣ning secu∣rity for good be∣haviour to be gi∣ven. that the said seurte bee not sufficient, that then at the commandement of the said Coun∣cell (if it bee thought necessary) the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute shall take other and better securte, or else commit them to ward unto the time better securte bee sound. Fore∣seene alway that if the said fugitive will depart out of the said Sanctua∣ry, that hee may so doe when hee will. 4. Item, That all the out gates, as well posternes, doores, as all other issues
outward whatsoever they be of the said Sanctuary,For close keeping the gates and po∣sternes of the San∣ctuary nightly. bee surely closed and shut nightly at nine of the clocke. And so remaine shut from the same houre, un∣to sixe of the clocke in the morning, from the Feast of Alhallowes, unto the Feast of Candlemasse. And the rema∣nent of the yeere nightly from the said houre of nine unto foure of the clocke in the morning, or unto the time that the first Masse beginneth within the said place: And that all those that been fled to the said Sanctuary for treason or felony, bee within the closure on nights time. 5. Item,For bring∣ing stolne goods in∣to the Sanctuary▪ If any such theefe, murde∣rer, or felon resort to the said Sanctu∣ary for tuition of the same, with any manner robbery, or stollen goods, if the party robbed make fresh sute there∣fore, and prove by open evidence, that the same felon hath brought into the said Sanctuary the said goods so stolne thence, the said Deane, Com∣missary, or Depute, shall put in true devoire, withouten any dissimulation, fraud, or malengyne, to make full re∣stitution unto the party so grieved of the same stolne goods, if they can bee had. And semblably, if any Fugitive come to the said Sanctuary with other mens goods, merchandize, or things, intending there to live with the same: And the owner of the said goods, mer∣chandize, or things, make proofe that they bee his, and verifie that they bee brought into the said Sanctuary, the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute shall put him in full devoire, to make restitution, to the party so proving, that the same goods, merchandizes, or things were his. And no Fugitive, nor none dwelling within the said Sanctu∣ary shall receive, conceale, nor buy any such goods; but that they bee brought to the said Deane, Commis∣sary, For resti∣tution or amends making to the ow∣ners. or Depute, to the intent the ow∣ners may have the sooner knowledge of them. And if the said goods so stolne and brought to the said Sanctu∣ary, be concealed from the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute, and bought by any dwelling in the said Sanctuary: that then the ouyer (abiding there) make restitution or satisfaction to the party grieved, proving the said goods so stolne to bee his, and so sold in the same Sanctuary. 6. Item,For offen∣ces com∣mitted by Sanctuary persons. If any person having tuiti∣on of the said Sanctuary, from thence issue out by day or by night, and com∣mit or doe any robbery, murder, trea∣son, felony, or battery, without the said Sanctuary. And thereupon resort againe to the said Sanctuary for tuition; the said Deane, Commissary, or De∣pure, shall upon credible information given unto him of the said robbery, murder, treason, felony, or battery so done (withoutensorth) commit the same misdoer to ward, there to remaine as long as he will abide in the said San∣ctuary. And if so bee hee will depart from thence, he shall depart at an houre to be assigned unto him by day betwixt sunne and sunne. 7. Item,For Pick∣lockes, counter∣feiters of divers no∣torious crimes. That subtle pickers of Lockes, counterfeitours of Keyes, con∣trivers of Sealx, forgers of false eviden∣ces, workers of counterfeit Chaines, Beades, Brouches, Ouches, Rings, Cups, Spoones silvered, and plates of Copper gilt, uttered for Gold, unto the common hurt of the people, be not suf∣fered in the said Sanctuary. And if any being within the said Sanctuary be hol∣den suspect of the things abovesaid, let him be committed to ward, till he find sufficient surety, as in the third Article abovesaid. 8. Item,For strum∣pets, bawdes, & other foule li∣vers. That common Putuers, Strumpers, and Bawdes be not suppor∣ted in the said Sanctuary: And if they claime the tuition of the said Sanctu∣ary, that they bee set in open ward on day times, till shame cause them to de∣part, or to amend their vicious living. 9. Item,Against unlawfull games. That deceitfull games, as playes at hazzard, the Dice, the Guek, the Kayelles, the Cloysh, and other such unleefull and reprovable games bee not used, supported, nor cherished within the said Sanctuary. 10. Item,For Artifi∣cers dwel∣ling in the San∣ctuary. That all Artificers dwel∣ling within the said Sanctuary (as well Barbours as other) keepe holy the Sundayes and other great Festivall dayes without breach, or exercising of their craft, in such wise as done the Inhabitants of the said City of Lon∣don. And if they doe the contrary, to bee committed to ward, till they
finde sufficient surety, as in the third Article abovesaid, to use their crafts in manner and forme as doe the Inhabi∣tants of the said City, and according to the ordinances of the same City. 11. Item,For such as come to live in the San∣ctuary, to take an oath. That every person com∣ming to the said Sanctuary for immu∣nity and tuition of the same, that hee at his admission to the said Sanctuary, bee sworne on a booke, to obey, keepe, and observe the Articles abovesaid, and e∣very each of them with their pains and rules appertaining to the same. And the King by the advice abovesaid would, granted and ordained, that this Act be exemplified under his great Seale, and be enrolled in his Chancellary, to the intent that the ordinance abovesaid re∣maine of Record, and that his subjects may have knowledge thereof. Nos autem tenore praecedentium ad requi∣sitinem dilecti & fidelis nostri Galfridi Baleyne, Maioris Civitatis nostrae Lon∣don, & Aldemannorum ejusdem Civita∣tis, duximus exemplificandum per prae∣sentes: In cujus rei testimonium has li∣teras nostras fieri fecimus Patentes, Te∣ste meipso apud Westmon. 24. die No∣vembris, Anno Regni nostri, 36. Examinatur per Clericos. Io∣hannem Fankes, & Thomam Ive. By the meanes and friendly helpe of Master William Williams, clarke of the Chamber of London, I prevailed to have the true copy of the said Articles: and therefore in this manner have here in∣serted them. This Colledge was surrendred to King Edward the sixth, the second of his reigne, the yeere of Christ, 1548. And the same yeere, the Colledge Church being pulled down, in the East part thereof a large VVine-Taverne was builded; and withall, downe to the west, and throughout the whole pre∣cinct of that Colledge, many other hou∣ses were builded, and highly priced, letten to strangers, borne, and other such as there claimed benefit of priviledges, granted to the Canons, serving God day and night (for so bee the words in the Charter of William the Conqueror) which may hardly be wrested to artifi∣cers, buyers, and sellers, otherwise than is mentioned in the 21. of S. Matthewes Gospel.Matth. 21. Lower downe, on the west side of Saint Martins lane, in the Parish of St. Anne, almost by Aldersgate, is one great house, commonly called Northumber∣land house: it belonged to Henry Percy. King Henry the fourth, in the seventh of his reigne gave this house, with the tenements thereunto appertaining, to Queene Iane his wife, and then it was called her VVardrope: it was afterward a Printing-house; but now a Taverne. VVithout Aldersgate, on the East side of Aldersgate streete,Cookes Hall. is the Cooks Hall: Which Cookes (or Pastelars) were ad∣mitted to be a Company, and to have a Master and VVardens, in the two and twentienth of Edward the fourth. From thence, along unto Hounsditch, or Barbi∣can streete, bee many faire houses. On the west side also be the like faire buil∣dings, till yee come to Long lane, and so to Goswell streete. In Britaine streete,Britaine street. which tooke that name of the Dukes of Britaine lodging there,Parish Church of S. Buttolph. is one proper Parish Church of Saint Buttolph: In which Church was sometime a Brotherhood of Saint Fa∣bian and Sebastian, founded in the yeere 1377. the 51. of Edward the third, and confirmed by Henry the fourth, in the sixth of his reigne. Then Henry the sixth, in the 24. of his reigne, to the ho∣nour of the Trinity, gave licence to Dame Ioane Astley, sometime his Nurse, to R. Cawood and T. Smith, to found the same a Fraternity, perpetually to have a Master and two Custos, with Brethren and Sisters, &c. This Brotherhood was indowed with Lands, more than thirty pounds by the yeere, & was suppressed by Edward the sixth. There lye buried, Iohn de Bath, Wea∣ver, 1390. Philip at Vine, Capper, 1396. Benet Gerard, Brewer, 1403. Thomas Bilsington founded a Chaun∣try there, and gave to that Church an house, called the Helmet upon Cornhill. Iohn Bradmote, Chirurgeon, Margaret and Katharine his wives, 1411. Iohn Michael Serjeant at Armes, 1415. Allen Bret, Carpenter, 1425.
Robert Malton, 1426. Iohn Trigilion, Brewer, 1417. Iohn Mason, Brewer, 1431. Rob. Cawood, Clerke of the Pope in the Kings Exchequer, 1466. Rich. Emmesey, Iohn Walpole. I. Hartshorne, Esquire, servant to the King, 1400. And other of that Fami∣ly, great Benefactors to that Church. W. Marrow, Grocer, Maior, and Ka∣tharine his wife, were buried there, a∣bout 1468. The Lady Anne Packington, widdow, late wife to Iohn Packington, Knight, Chirographer of the Court of Com∣mon Pleas: she founded Almes houses neere unto the white Friers Church in Fleetstreet, the Clothworkers in London have oversight thereof. Here lye buried the bodies of Richard Downis,An anciēt Tombe in the South Ile of the Quire. and Joane his wife. which Richard deceased the day of 1500. And the said Joane dyed the 13. day of Ianuary, 1519. Hic jacet Johannes Rukeby,In the South Ile a plated Grave∣stone. nuper Ci∣vis & Atturnatus London, & Elizabe∣tha uxor ejus. Qui quidem Ioh. obiit 1 die Mensis Septembris, 1427. The Corps of Iohn Milsam lyeth here,A grave∣stone in the South Ile of the Quire. Who lived fourescore and one yeere. Free of the Notaries he was, a friendly Citizen; And eke a long time in Guild-Hall, an Atturney hath been: Who willingly this mortall life did yeeld with constant mind, Inperfect hope through Christ his blood, th' immortall life to find: And now is gone the way before, that we also must wend; For Death is due to every man, by it all things must end. Ianuary the 18. day, 1567. Out of this life he tooke the way. Domina Margareta & Lichtervelde fi∣lia Iohannis supremi Flandriae Prae∣toris, In the same Ile upon a painted Table. nuptum primum Nobili viro Johanni Wits, Topatchae Bouchar∣diriae, & Franconatus apud Flandros, Burghi Magistro: Peperit ei Ferdi∣nandum, Jacobum, & Margare∣tam, D. Domino Adolpho à Meet∣kerck Equiti Aurato, & summo Flan∣driae, ex quo Mater facta est Edovar∣di, Elizabethae & Salomes. Matrona excellentissimo ingenio, ornatissimis moribus, insigni pietate, aliis{que} sum∣mis praedita virtutibus. Marito in u∣tra{que} fortuna assidua comes, Exiliiq, postremi fida socia. Vixit Ann. 45. Mens. 7. dies 14. Piè in Deo obdor∣mivit, Idus Novembris, M.D.XC.IIII. Londini Anglorum. His additus est tumulus Nobilis viri Pau∣li Knibbii, i. Ser. Daniae Regis, Con∣siliarii generei supradicti Adolphi à Meetkerck, qui dum apud Ser. Aug. Reginam dicti Regis Legatum agit Lond. Piè defunct. est, 8. Id. Octob. M.D.XII. Cinibus hosce suis posuit Van Heilus honores Digna horum meritis alii Monumenta reponent. Patience Vaincra. DEO. Here resteth the body of William Purde,A grave∣stone in the same South Ile. Esquire, late Clerke of the Pipe and Pri∣vie Seale, which payed the generall tri∣bute of Nature, divided from the mun∣dane vexations by natural death, the 15 day of August, the 31. yeere, in the reigne of King Henry the eighth. Hic jacet Petrus Swift, de London,A grave∣stone in the same Ile: Ge∣neros. dum vixit Auditor Eccles. Ca∣thedrali D. Pauli London. Qui obiit 2. die Septemb. An. Dom. 1562. Cujus, &c. Pars Terrestris. Joannis Coston,A small Monu∣ment on a pillar in the same Ile. Registrarii sedis Ar∣chiepiscopalis Cantuar. Principalis, Almae{que} Curiae Cant. de Arcubus Lond. Procuratorum generalium u∣nius. Sexaginta annos cum multa pi∣etate & probitate sub Polo praeter∣gressus, 3. Iulii, 1614. animam effla∣vit. Relictis Simone & Anna, flio & filia unicis in sacros cineres redact. sub pedibus diem novum expectat. Heere lyeth Robert Greene, Gentleman, who departed this world on Thursday, the twelfth of November, and was bu∣ried
in this Church, upon Saturday, the foureteenth day of the same Moneth, 1590. Here under this Tombe lyeth the body of Dame Anne Packington,An anci∣ent Tomb in the East end of the Chancell. widdow, late wife of Sir Iohn Packington, Knight, late Chirographer in the Court of Com∣mon Pleas: which Dame Anne deceased the 22. day of August, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1563. Iohannes Sotherton,A small Monumēt in the East end of the Chancell. Baro Scaccarii, sin∣cera fretus in Deum pietate, studiosa in Principem fidelitate, spectata in omnes humanitate & benevolentia, annum aetatis ingress. octogesimum, placidè in Christo obdormivit, 26. Octob. Anno Domini, 1605. & una cum duabus conjugibus, Francisca & Maria castiss. feminis hic sepultus. Francisca, filia & haeres de Iohannes Smith de Cromer, Norff. Per quam habuit unum filium Christopherum, obiit Octob. 1563. Maria, filia Edovardi Woton, Medici∣nae Doctoris, per quam habuit alte∣rum filium Iohannem, & unicam fili∣am Mariam. Obiit 10. Iunii. Iohan. primogenitus Franciscae, unige∣nitus Mariae privignus, non ingratus Christopherus Sotherton posuit. An. Dom. 1604. Martii 31. Obiit. Michael Crud,A small Monumēt in the East end of the Chancell. Divini Verbi Concio∣nator, atque hujus Ecclesiae Past or fi∣delis, post vitam piè gestam, tam in partibus transmarinis, quam in natali solo, in Anno aetatis suae quinquage∣simo, pacificè dormivit in Christo, atque juxta tumulatur impensis Mar∣garetae ejus relictae, quae hoc fieri in foelicem Marici memoriam curavit. D. O. M. Gulielmo Mill,A comly Monu∣ment in the End of the Chan∣cell. Armigero, fide, chari∣tate, & in arduis constantia celeber∣rimo, Marito charissimo conjunx a∣mantissima, in honoris perpetui tes∣seram Monumentum hoc lugubre moerens posuit. Gulielmus iste Croydoniae (Surriae Comitatus emporio) natus, Guliel∣mi Mill, & Hawisiae Harwell secun∣do genitus, ex antiqua Millorum de Horscombe (Agri Governiensis) fa∣milia oriundus, liberaliter educatus, Graiensis Hospitii Alumnus, in literis foeliciter versatus, Consilii Sanctioris in Camera quam Stellatam dictitant amanuensis prius per annos quinqua∣ginta, deinde Clericus, & Actuarius summus, viginti plus minus ibidem suis meritis evasit. Fratres duos Ni∣cholaum & Iohannem innuptos, Eli∣zabetham, Franciscam, Milicentam, Margaretam atque Annam, uterinas, & Margaretam sororem habuit. Mar∣garetam, Thomae Greeke, Fisci Re∣gii Baronis, filiam, (Gulielmi Butleri viduam) in uxorē grandaevus duxit. Tandem Londini in Carthusianis 16. die Iulii, Anno Verbi incarnati, 1608. Aetatis suae 71. (nulla suscepta prole) vitam erumnosam ut Christo viveret, piè sed placidè commutavit. Non temerè sepimur, nec nos Fortuna gubernat, Sed Deus es vitae, Dux es & ipse via. Fraternae Pietatis Symbolum. Iohannis Mill,A small Monu∣ment on a pillar in the Chan∣cell. Gulielmi Patris Armi∣geri, de Croydon, filius secundò ge∣nitus, vita integerrima defunctus hic coelebs requiescit, corpore autem sub Marmore istic pulverescente; Ani∣mus in Coelis secundam per Chri∣stum Iesum, repurgatae carnis assum∣ptionem expectat. Obiit 27. die Mensis Augusti, An. Domini, 1595. Aetatis suae 57. Gulielmo Fratre primaevo at{que} unico (sanctioris in Ca∣mera Stellata Consilii Clerico) su∣perstite. What Epitaph shall we afford this Shrine? Words cannot-grace this Pyramid of thine:A faire Pyrami∣des ere∣cted a∣gainst a pillar. Thy sweet perfections, all summ'd up, were such, As Heavens (I thinke) for faith did thinke too much. Religious zeale did thy pure heart command, Pitty thine eye, and Charity thy hand: These Graces, joyn'd with more of like degree,
Make each mans word an Epitaph for thee. Calme was thy death, well-ordered was thy life, A carefull Mother, and a loving wife. Aske any, how these Vertues in thee grew? Thou wast a Spencer, and a Mountague. Katharina Mountague obiit 7. die De∣cembris, Anno Domini, 1612. Mortua Tamworthi spectas Monumenta viator?A faire Tombe of white stone in the Chan∣cell. Quin potius vivus, disce quis ille fuit. Si proavos quaeras, Generoso sanguine ductus, Vsque per innumeros invenietur Avos. Si mores, dicam mores? nec amantior aequi, Nec Patriae quisquam, nec probitatis erat. Si quae conditio, (si quid sit laudis in illa) Vita sub illustri Principe clara fuit. Et si Principibus laus est placuisse probatis, Laudibus haec pars est annumeranda suis. Iam volucris sua Iustra novem transegerat aetas, Quum Mors hunc saeva falce cruenta metat. Haec satis hospes, abi, nec vivere differ in horas, Quae sua pars hodie, cras tua forsan erit. Obiit 19. die Aprilis, 1569. Iohanni Morlcio Armigero,Another beautifull Pitamides directly opposite to the o∣ther. & Eliza∣bethae Wotton Conjugi, parentibus charissimis, Iohannes Morleius de Halnaker, in Comitatu Sussexiae, Mi∣les, & Edwardus filii, pietatis & me∣moriae ergô hoc posuerunt. Vixerunt Conjuges annos 16. Ille obiit die 20. Novembris, 1587. Illa die 7. Novembris, 1603. Tres filios toti∣dem{que} filias superstites reliquerunt: Iohannem, Edwardum, Willielmum Mariam, Elizabetham, & Magdale∣nam. Hereunder lyeth buried in the mercy of God,A faire plated stone under the Com∣munion Table. the body of Thomas Goodwin, Esquire, who married Anne the daugh∣ter of Thomas Peacocke, by whom hee had issue, one daughter, named Anne. which Thomas deceased the 27. day of ianuary, An. Dom. 1565. Hoc latet in Tumulo praestanti corpore Nympha Margareta quidem repsque parente sata.A faire Grave∣stone by the said Table. Censor erat genitor, Sponsus venerabilis extat, Woodhouse; bis decies quinaque arista tulit. Siste pedes igitur sternis qui busta prophanus, Nam Christi cupiens, sic bonitatis erat. Vixit & illa piè, moriens & sancta vocatur, Exemplo simili vivere disce piè. Here lyeth buried the body of Frances,Another stone, by the said Table. late wife of Iohn Sotherton, forraine Appo∣ser of the Queenes Majesties Exchequer; who departed this present life, in the true faith of Christ, the 20. of Octob. 1563. Barbara Bradburii simul & Marianna Someri,Another. Progenies pariter Tumulo conduntur in isto, Vtraque Conjugio Thomae conjuncta Pagetto, Vna virum moriens septena in prole reliquit, Altera fuit sterilis parili quoque tempore conjux; Ambarum pia vita fuit, pia mors{que} secuta est. Primae 24. Februarii, An. Dom. 1583. Alterae Decembris ultimo, Anno, 1598. Heere lyeth buried the body of Thomas Greeke,A grave∣stone in the North Ile of the Quire. one of the Barons of the Queens Majesties Court of Exchequer; who dy∣ed the 18. day of November, in the 20. yeere of the reigne of our Soveraigne La∣dy, Queene Elizabeth. Hee lived 63. yeeres. Here under lyeth buried the body of Tho∣mas Neale,Another in the same Ile. the sonne of Francis Neale Esquire, one of her Majesties Auditors
of the Exchequer; who deceased the 8. day of December, 1597. Aetatis suae, 99. Here lyeth the body of Anne,A faire Garve∣stone in the same North Ile. daughter of John Branche, Citizen and Draper of London, by Ioane his wife, daughter and heire of Iohn Wilkinson, sometime Alderman of this Citie. She was marri∣ed first to Robert Dunne, and (after his death) to Richard Stoneley, Esquire. By Dunne she had three sonnes; Sir Da∣niel Dunne, Knight, and Doctor of Law, her eldest; Samuel Dunne, and Wil∣liam Dunne, the yongest, Doctor of Phy∣sicke. And by Stoneley she had divers children, whereof two lived to be marri∣ed, Dorothie, to William Dantrey, of Sussex; Anne, to William Hig∣ham of Essex, Esquire. Her life was vertuous and godly, and so dyed the ele∣venth day of Ianuary, An. Dom. 1611. being of the age of fourescore and six yeers, having seene her childrens children, to the fourth generation: and lyes here buried betweene her husbands, and among some other of her children, according to her de∣sire. Hic jacet Susanna,A small Monu∣ment in the South wall in the body of the Church. Andreae Lionis Pa∣tria Garnseyensis, unica filia, uxor Roberti Creswell, alias Blew-mantle, Prosecutoris ad Arma Serenissimae Elizabethae, Angliae Reginae. Quae modo fida Deo, quae vixit chara marito, Non invita animam Christo moribunda reliquit. —23. Decemb. Anno Domini, 1590. And thus and end of this Ward, which hath an Alderman, his Deputy; Com∣mon Counsellors, five; Constables, eight; Scavengers, nine; for the Ward∣mote inquest, fourereene, and a Bea∣dle. It is taxed to the Fifteene in Lon∣don, seven pounds, and in the Exche∣quer, six pounds, nineteene shillings.
FARINGDON VVARD Infra, or within. ON the South side of Al∣dersgate Ward,Faringdon Ward within. lyeth Fa∣ringdon Ward, called in∣fra, or within, for a diffe∣rence from another ward of that name, which lyeth without the wals of the Citie,Faringdon extra. and Faringdon infra, all one Ward, and then divided into 2 by Parliamēt. and is therefore cal∣led Faringdon extra. These two Wards (of old time) were but one, and had al∣so but one Alderman, till the 17. of Ri∣chard the second, at which time, the said Ward (for the greatnesse thereof) was divided into twaine, and by Parlia∣ment ordered to have two Aldermen, and so it continueth till this day. The whole great Ward of Faringdon, both infra and extra,Faringdon Ward tooke that name of W. Farendon. took name of W. Faren∣don, Goldsmith, Alderman of that Ward, and one of the Sheriffes of Lon∣don, in the yeere 1281. the 9. of Edward the first: He purchased the Alderman∣rie of this Ward, as by the abstract of Deeds which I have read thereof, may appeare. Thomas de Arderne,Sir Ralph Arderne, Knight, Alderman of that ward, now called Fa∣ringdon, in the reigne of Hen. 3. sonne and heire to Sir Ralph Arderne, Knight, granted to Ralph le Feure, Citizen of London, one of the Sheriffes in the yeere 1277. all the Aldermanrie, with the appurtenances, with∣in the Citie of London, and the Suburbs of the same, betweene Ludgate and New-gate, and also without the same Gates: which Aldermanrie, Ankerinus de Aver∣ne held during his life, by the Grant of the said Thomas de Arderne, to have and to hold to the said Ralph, and to his heires, freely without all challenge, yeelding there∣fore yeerely to the said Thomas and his heires, one Clove or Slip of Gilli flowers, at the Feast of Easter, for all secular service and customes, with warrantie unto the said Ralphle Feure, and his heires, against all people, Christians and Iewes, in considera∣tion of twenty Markes, which the said Ralph de Feure did give before-hand, in name of a Gersum, or Fine, to the said Tho∣mas, &c. Dated the fifth of Edward the first. Witnesse, G. de Rokesley, Maior, R. Arrar, one of the Shriffes. H. Wales, P. le Taylor, T. de Basing, I. Horne, N. Blackthorn, Aldermen of London. After this,Iohn le Feure, Al∣derman. Iohn le Feure, sonne and heyre to the said Ralph le Feure, granted to William Farendon,W. Farendon Alderman and one of the She∣riffes of London. Citizen and Gold∣smith of London, and to his heyres, the said Aldermanry, with the appurtenan∣ces, for the service thereunto belong∣ing, in the seventh of Edward the first, in the yeere of Christ, 1279.Nicholas Farendon Alderman and Maior. This Al∣dermanry descended to Nicholas Faren∣don, sonne to the said William, and to his heyres: which Nicholas Farendon, also a Goldsmith, was foure times Maior, and lived many yeeres after; for I have read divers Deeds, whereunto he was a wit∣nesse, dated the yeere 1360. He made his Testament, 1361.Nicholas Farendon lived 53. yeers after he had bin once Mai∣or. which was fifty three yeeres after his first being Maior, and was buried in Saint Peters Church in Cheape. So this Ward continued un∣der the governement of William Faren∣don the father, and Nicholas his sonne, by the space of fourescore and two yeeres, and retaineth their name untill this present day. VVhereas Master Stowe saith,Either Mr. Stowe was much wronged in infor∣mation, or else it was no true Deed which he saw at that time. That Thomas de Arderne, sonne and heire to Sir Ralph Arderne, Knight, granted to Ralph le Feure, Citizen of London, and one of the Sheriffes of the same Citie, in the yeere 1277. all the Aldermanrie, with the appurtenances within the Ci∣tie of London, and Suburbs of the same, betweene Ludgate and Newgate, and
also without the same gates. Which Aldermanrie, Ankerinus de Averne held, during his life, by the Grant of Thomas de Arderne, to have and to hold to the said Ralph, and to his heires, free∣ly without all challenge, yeelding ther∣fore yeerely to the said Thomas and his heires, one Clove or Slip of Gilliflow∣ers, at the Feast of Easter, for all secular service and customes, with warrantie to the said Ralph le Feure, and his heires a∣gainst all people, Christians and Iewes, in consideration of 20. marks, which the said Ralph de Feure did give beforehand in name of a Gersum or Fine, to the said Thomas, &c. Dated the fifth of Edward the first. VVitnesse, G. de Roke∣sley, Maior, R. Arrar, one of the She∣riffes, H. Wales, P. le Taylor, T. de Ba∣sing, I. Horne, and N. Blackthorn, Al∣dermen. I finde (to the contrary) by an espe∣ciall Deed (yet to be seene) delivered me by that worthy favourer of Antiqui∣ties, M. Iohn Speed can testifie this to be true  for I brought the sealed Deed to him, and to divers other be∣side, who can beare me wit∣nesse, that herein I doe no way de∣prave Mr. Stowe, but set downe the truth, as I recei∣ved it. Master Iohn Williams, Goldsmith, all the former Deed, verbatim, to bee granted by William de Farndon, Citizen and Alderman of London, (of whom the VVard, both within and without the Gates fore-named, being then but one, and governed by one Alderman onely, tooke name) to Nicholas, the sonne of Ralph de Feure, Citizen of London, in the very same manner and forme as hath beene recited, for a Clove or Slip of Gilliflowers, twenty pounds, and not Markes, given for a Gersum, or Fine, and the very same warrantie or defence against all people for ever. To which Deed, sealed with his own Seale, as he calleth it, being the very same of the Goldsmiths Armes, yet en∣graved about in this manner: Sigilli Willi. de Farndon; he nameth as witnes∣ses, Domino Ioh. le Bretonn, Milite, tune Custode London, Elia Russel, and Henry le Bole, tunc Vicecom. London; Steph. Asse∣wy, Ioh. de Bachkewelle, Roberts de Basing, Will. de Bettune, Rad. le Blund, Walt. de Finchingfeld, Ioh. de Blund, Thoma de Esta∣nes, Richardo Assewy, & multis aliis. Anno Reg. Ed. fil. R. Hen. xxj. This VVard of Faringdon within the wals, is bounded thus: Beginning in the East, at the great Crosse in VVest Cheape, from whence it runneth VVest, On the North side, from the Parish Church of Saint Peter, which is at the South-west corner of Woodstreet, unto Guthurons lane, and downe that Lane, to Hugon lane on the East side, and to Kery lane on the West. Then againe into Cheape and to Foster lane, and downe that Lane on the East side, to the North side of Saint Fosters Church, and on the west, till over a∣gainst the South-west corner of the said Church, from whence, downe Foster lane, and Noble street, is all of Aldersgate street Ward, till ye come to the stone wall in the west side of Noble street, as is afore shewed. Which said wall, down to Nevils Inne, or Windsore House, and downe Monkes-well street, on that west side, then by London wall, to Creplegate, and the west side of that same Gate, is all of Faringdon VVard. Then backe againe into Cheape, and from Foster lane end to Saint Martins lane end, and from thence through S. Nicholas Shambles, by Pentecost lane, and Butchers Alley, and by Stinking lane, through Newgate Market to Newgate: All which is in the North side of Faring∣don VVard. On the South, from against the said great Crosse in Cheape, west to Fridaies street, and downe that streete on the East side, till over against the North∣east corner of Saint Matthews Church, and on the west side, till the South cor∣ner of the said Church. Then againe along Cheape to the Old Exchange, and downe that Lane, (on the East side) to the Parish Church of S. Augustine, which Church and one house next adjoyning in Watheling street, be of this Ward; and on the west side of this Lane, to the East Arch or Gate by S. Augustines Church, which entreth the South Church-yard of Saint Pauls, which Arch or Gate was builded by Nicholas Farendon, about the yeer 1361. and within that Gate on the said north side, to the Gate that entreth the north Church-yard, and all the north Church-yard is of this Faringdon ward. Then againe into Cheape, and from the North end of the Old Exchange, west by the north gate of Pauls Church-yard
up Pater noster Row, by the two lanes out of Pauls Church, and to the signe of the Golden Lyon, which is some twelve houses short of Ave Mary lane, the West side of which lane is of this Ward. Then at the South end of Ave Mary Lane, is Creed lane, the West side wher∣of is also of this Ward. Now betwixt the South end of Ave Mary lane, and the North end of Creed lane, is the cōming out of Pauls Church-yard, on the East, and the high street, called Bowyer Row, to Ludgate, on the West, which way to Ludgate is of this Ward. On the north side whereof is S. Martins Church: and on the South side a turning into the Blacke Friers. Now to turne up againe to the north end of Ave Marie lane, there is a short lane, which runneth West some small distance, and is there closed up with a gate into a great house: and this is cal∣led Amen lane.Amen lane. Then on the North side of Pater no∣ster Row, beginning at the Conduit over against the Old Exchange lane end, and going west by Saint Michaels Church: at the West end of which Church, is a small passage thorow toward the north. And beyond this Church some small distance, is another passage, which is called Panier Alley,Panier lane. and commeth out against S. Martins lane end. Then further West in Pater noster Row,Ivie Lane. is Ivie lane, which runneth North to the West end of S. Nicholas Sham∣bles: and then West Pater noster Row, till over against the Golden Lion, where the Ward endeth for that street. Then about some dozen houses, which is of Baynards Castle VVard, to Warwicke lane end: which Warwicke lane stretch∣eth North to the high street of Newgate Market. And the West side of Warwick lane is of this Foringdon VVard: For the East side of Warwicke lane, of Ave Mary lane, and of Creed lane, with the west end of Pater noster Row, are all of Baynards Castle VVard. Yet to begin againe at the said Con∣duit by the old Exchange, on the North side thereof is a large street, that run∣neth up to Newgate, as is aforesaid. The first part, or South-west side thereof, from the Conduit to the Shambles, is called Bladder street.Bladder street. Then on the backe side of the Shambles bee divers slaugh∣ter-houses, and such like, pertaining to the Shambles: and this is called Mount Godard street.Mount Go∣dard street. Then is the Shambles it selfe, and then Newgate Market. And so the whole street on both sides up to Newgate, is of this VVard: and thus it is wholy bounded. Monuments in this VVard be these: First, the great Crosse in West Cheape street, but in the VVard of Faringdon, the which Crosse was first erected in that place by Edward the first, as before is shewed in West Cheape street. At the South-west corner of Wood∣street, Parish Church of S. Peter in Cheape. is the Parish Church of S. Peter the Apostle, by the said Crosse, a pro∣per Church, lately new builded. Iohn Sha, Goldsmith, Maior, deceased 1503. appointed by his Testament, the said Church and Steeple to be new builded of his goods, with a flat roofe. Notwith∣standing, Tho. Wood, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffes, 1491. is accounted a prin∣cipall benefactor, because the roofe of the middle Ile is supported by Images of VVoodmen. I finde to have beene buried in this Church, Nicholas Farendon, Maior, Ri∣chard Hadley, Grocer, 1592. Iohn Palmer, Fishmonger, 1500. Wil. Rous, Goldsmith, Sheriffe, 1429. Thomas Atkins, Esquire, 1400. Iohn Butler, Sheriffe, 1420. Henry Warley, Alderman, 1524. Sir Iohn Mund, Goldsmith, Maior, deceased, 1537. Augustine Hinde, Clothworker, one of the Sheriffes, in the yeere 1550. whose Monument doth yet remaine, with this inscription here-under, &c. the other being gone. Sir Alexander Avenon, Maior, 1579. Here-under this Stone lieth buried the body of Augustine Hinde, Clothworker, Al∣derman, and late Sheriffe of London: who deceased the tenth day of August, Anno Domini, 1554. Here also lieth Dame Elizabeth his wife, by whom hee had issue foure sons and two daughters: which Dame Elizabeth deceased the 12. day of Iuly, An. Dom. 1569. God grant us all such race to run: To end in Christ as they have done.
The long Shop or Shed, incroching on the high street before this Church wall,Long shop in Cheape. was licensed to bee made in the yeere 1401. yeelding to the Chamber of London, 30. s. 4. d. yeerely for the time. Also the same Shop was letten by the Parish, for three pounds at the most, many yeeres since. Then is Guthuruns lane,Guthuruns Lane. so called of Guthurun, sometime owner thereoof: the inhabitāts of this lane (of old time) were Goldbeaters. as doth appeare by Re∣cords in the Exchequer. For the Easter∣ling money was appointed to be made of fine silver, such as men made into foyle, and was commonly called silver of Guthuruns lane,Imbroide∣rers Hall. &c. The Imbroide∣rers Hall is in this Lane. Iohn Trowstone Imbroiderer, then Goldsmith, Sheriffe, deceased 1519. gave 40. l. towards the purchase of this Hall.Hugon lane. Hugon lane, on the East side,Kery lane. and Kery lane (called of one Kery) on the West. Then in the high street on the same North side,Sadlers Hall. is the Sadlers Hall: and then Foster lane,Foster lane. so called, of Saint Fosters, a faire Church,Parish Church of S. Fo∣sters. lately new builded. Henry Coote, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffes, deceased, 1509. builded S. Dunstanes Chappell there. Iohn Throwstone, one of the Sheriffes, gave to the building thereof 100. pounds by his Testament. Iohn Browne, Sergeant-Painter, Alder∣man, deceased 1532. was a great Be∣nefactor, and was there buried. William Trist, Selerar to the King, 1425. Iohn Standelfe, Goldsmiths, lye buried there. Richard Galder, 1544. Agnes, wife to William Milborne, Chamberlaine of Lon∣don, 1500. Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Baby,A faire Stone in the Chan∣cell. quondam Capellanus Aurifabrorum London. Qui obiit 3. die Mens. Novemb. An. Dom. 1452. Cujus, &c. Here lieth buried the body of John Lony∣son, A faire stone by the Com∣munion Table. Esquire, Master of the Mint of England, Citizen and Goldsmith of London: who most joyfully changed this miserable and wearisome life, with the felicity and happinesse of Gods King∣dome, in good Religion and godly chari∣tie, in true feare and stedfast faith, with a full perswasion of remission in the blood of Iesus Christ, the one and twentieth day of May, An. Dom. 1583. being about the 59. yeere of his age. Here lyeth interred the body of Christo∣pher Wase,A Monu∣ment in the wall, South of the Quire. late Citizen and Godsmith of London, aged 66. yeeres, and dyed the 22. of September, 1605. who had to wife Anne the daughter of William Prettyman, and had by her three sonnes and three daughters. Reader, stay, and thou shalt know What he was that here doth sleepe: Lodg'd amidst the stones below, Stones that oft are seene to weepe. Gentile was his birth and breed, His carriage gentle, much contenting: His word accorded with his deed, Sweet his nature, soone relenting. From above he seem'd protected, Father dead before his birth, An Orphane, onely but neglected, Yet his branches spread on earth, Earth, that must his bones containe, Sleeping till Christs Trumpe shall wake them, Ioyning them to soule againe, And to blisse eternall take them. It is not this rude and little heape of stones, Can hold the fame, although't containes the bones. Light be the earth, and hallowed for thy sake, Resting in peace, peace that so oft didst make. Vnder the Stone right against this Monu∣ment, A small Monumēt in the wall with a gilt plate. lye buried the bodies of Robert Marsh, Citizen and Grocer of London, and Florence his first wife, by whom he
had issue seven Sonnes. By Elizabeth, his second wife, (left living) he had issue three sonnes and a daughter. He depar∣ted this life the 7. day of October, Anno Dom. 1602. after he had lived 65. yeeres and three dayes. Here-under lyeth buried the body of Mi∣stris Martha Prescot,A faire plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. the wife of Alex∣ander Prescot, Citizen and Alderman of London: whose soule the Lord tooke to his mercy the 26. day of Novemb. 1616. when she had lived a married wife just 23. yeeres that day, and 40. yeeres, 2. moneths, 3. weekes, and odde dayes, from the time of her birth. She had issue by her said Husband, 6. Sonnes, and 5. daughters, and her yongest of all, being a daughter, named Elizabeth, lyeth here∣under interred, in the same Grave, on the same day of buriall with her said mother. Lord,A faire plated Grave∣stone in the middle Ile. of thine infinite grave and pitie, Have mercy on me Agnes, sometime the wife Of William Milborne, Chamberlaine of this Citie, Which tooke my passage fro this wretched life, The yeere of Grace, one thousand, one hundred and five, The twelfth day of Iuly, no longer was my space, It pleased then my Lord to call me to his grace. Now ye that are living, and see this picture, Pray for me here while ye have time and space, That God of his goodnesse would me assure, In his everlasting mansion to have a place. Then downe Foster Lane, and Noble street, both of Aldersgate street Ward, till ye come to the stone wall, which in∣closeth a Garden-plot before the wall of the Citie, on the West side of Noble street, and is of this Faringdon Ward. This Garden-plot, containing 95. Elles in length, 9. Elles and an half in bredth, was by Adam de Burie, Maior, the Al∣dermen, and Citizens of London, letten to Iohn de Nevell, Lord of Raby, Radulph and Thomas, his sonnes, for threescore yeeres, paying 6. s. 8. d. the yeere. Da∣ted the 48. of Edw. 3. having in a seale pendant on the one side,Barons of London their seale. the figure of a walled Citie, and of S. Paul, a Sword in his right hand, and in the left a Banner; 3. Leopards, about that Seale, on the same side written, Sigillum Baronium Londoniarum. On the other side, the like figure of a Citie, a Bishop sitting on an Arch, the inscription, Me: quae: e: pe∣peri: ne: Cesses: Thoma: tueri. Thus much for the Barons of London, their common seale at that time. At the North end of this Garden∣plot, is one great house builded of stone and timber, now called the Lord Win∣sors house, of old time belonging to the Nevels, as in the 19. of Rich. 2. it was found by inquisition of a Iurie, that Eli∣zabeth Nevell dyed, seized of a great Messuage in the Parish of S. Olave in Monkes-well street in London, holden of the King in free Burgage, which shee held of the gift of Iohn Nevell of Raby, her husband, and that Iohn Latimer was next sonne and heire to the said Eliza∣beth. In this West side is the Barber Chi∣rurgeons Hall.Barber Chirurge∣ons their Hall. This Company was in∣corporated by meanes of Thomas More∣stede, Esquire, one of the Sheriffes of London, 1436. Chirurgeon to the Kings of England, Henry the fourth, fifth, and sixth. He deceased 1450. Then Iaques Fries, Physician to Edw. the fourth, and William Hobbs, Physician and Chirur∣geon for the same Kings body, continu∣ing the suit the ful time of twenty yeers, Edward the fourth, in the second of his reigne, and Richard Duke of Glocester, became Founders of the same Cor∣poration, in the Parish of Saint Cosme and Damiane. The first assembling of that Mysterie was by Roger Strippe, William Hobbs, Thomas Goddard, and Richard Kent, since the which time they builded their Hall in that street, &c. At the North corner of this street,Hermi∣tage of S. Iames in the wall. on the same side, was sometime an Her∣mitage or Chappell of Saint Iames, cal∣led in the wall, neere Creplegate: it be∣longed to the Abbey and Covent of Ga∣radon, as appeareth by a Record, the se∣ven and twentieth of Edward the first: And also the 16. of Edward the third,
William de Lions was Hermit there, and the Abbot & Covent of Garadon found two Chaplaines, Cestercian Monkes of their house: in this Hermitage one of them, for Aymor de Valence, Earle of Pembrooke, and Mary de Saint Paul, his Countesse. Of these Monkes, and of a Well per∣taining to them, the street tooke that name, and is called Monkes-well street. This Hermitage with the appurtenan∣ces, was in the reigne of Edw. the 6. pur∣chased from the said King, by W. Lambe, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Chappell, Citizen and Cloth-worker of London: Hee deceased in the yeere 1577. and then gave it to the Cloth-workers of London, with other Tene∣ments, to the value of fifty pounds the yeere, to the intent they shall hire a Mi∣nister to say divine Service there. Againe, to the high street of Cheape, from Foster Lane end to S. Martins, and by that Lane to the Shambles or Flesh-market, on the North side whereof is Pentecost lane,Pentecost Lane. containing divers slaugh∣ter-houses for the Butchers. Then was there of old time a proper Parish Church of S. Nicholas,Parish Church of S. Nicholas. whereof the said Flesh-market tooke the name, and was called S. Nicholas Shambles. This Church, with the Tenements and Ornaments, was by Henry the eight given to the Maior and Communalty of the Citie, towards the maintenance of the new Parish Church, then to be ere∣cted in the late dissolved Church of the Gray Friers: so was this Church dissol∣ved and pulled downe: in place where∣of, and of the Church-yard, many faire houses are now builded, in a Court with a Well, in the middest whereof the Church stood. Then is Stinking lane,Stinking Lane, or Chicke lane. formerly so cal∣led, or Chick lane, at the East end of the Gray Friers Church: it is now kept clean and free from annoyance, and called by the name of Butchers-Hall Lane; and there is the Butchers Hall. In the third of Richard the second, mo∣tion was made, that no Butcher should kill any flesh within London, but at Knightsbridge, or such like distant place from the wals of the Citie. Then the late dissolved Church of Gray Friers,Gray Friers Church. the originall whereof was thus: In the yeere 1224. being the 8. yeere of the reigne of King Henry the third,How the Gray Friers house be∣came first to a Frie∣ry, colle∣cted out of an anciēt Manu∣script de∣livered to me by a friend. there came out of Italy nine Friers of the Order of the Franciscans, or Frier Minors, five whereof were Priests, and the other foure Lay-men. The Priests placed themselves at Canturbury in Kent: but the other foure came to Lon∣don, and were lodged (for some short while) among the preaching Friers, who lived then in Oldborne. Afterward, they obtained to be placed in Cornehill, Lon∣don, in an house belonging to one Iohn Travars, who was then one of the She∣riffes of London, in the same yeere 1224. In which house they made themselves Celles, and inhabited there for a cer∣taine time; till their number so increa∣sed, and the Citizens devotion grew to be so great, that (within few yeeres after) they were thence removed, by the meanes of one Iohn Ewin, Mercer, who purchased a void plot of ground, neere to Saint Nicholas Shambles, where to erect an House for the said Friers. Divers Citizens seemed herein to joyne with the said Iohn Ewin, and ere∣cted there very beautifull buildings, upon the same ground so formerly pur∣chased by Iohn Ewin, and a great part builded at his owne charge, which hee appropriated to the Communalty of London, and then entred into the same Order of Friers, as a Lay Brother. William Ioyner,The buil∣ding of a Chappell for them. Lord Maior of Lon∣don, in the yeere 1239. builded them a Chappell, which cost him two hundred pounds Sterling, which Chappell made part of the Chancell, as it now standeth. Henry Walleis,The body of a Church. who was likewise Lord Maior of London, builded them a body of a Church, which afterward was pul∣led downe, and made as now it is. Mr. Walter Porter,Their Chapter-house builded. Alderman of Lon∣don, builded a Chapter-house for them, and gave divers vessels of Brasse for the Kitchin service; building places also for sicke persons, and other Offices beside. Thomas Felcham builded the Vestry house.The Ve∣stry house. Gregory Rokesley,The Dor∣ters and Cham∣bers. Lord Maior of Lon∣don, builded their Dorters and Cham∣bers, and gave Beds to them. M. Bartholomew of the Castel,The Hall or Refe∣ctory. buil∣ded a faire house or Refectory for them.
Mr. Peter de Helyland builded the In∣firmitory, and divers places for disea∣sed persons. Mr. Bevis Bond, Herald, and King at Armes, builded the studies. Margaret, Queene, second wife to Edward the first, began the Quire of their new Church, in the yeere 1306. to the building whereof, in her life time she gave 2000. marks, and 100. markes by her Testament. Iohn Britaine, Earle of Richmond, buil∣ded the body of the Church, to the charges of 300. pounds, and gave ma∣ny rich Iewels and ornaments to be u∣sed in the same. Mary, Countesse of Pembrooke 70. l. Gilbart de Clare, Earle of Glocester, and bestowed 20. great beames out of his Forrest of Tunbridge, 20. l. starlings. Lady Helianor le Spencer, Lady Eliza∣beth de Burgh, Sister to Gilbert de Clare, gave summes of money, and so did di∣vers Citizens, as Arnold de Tolinea, one hundred pounds. Robert Picae Lisle, who became a Fri∣er there, 300. pounds. Bartholomew de Almaine, 50. pounds. Also Philippe, Queene, wife to Ed∣ward the third, gave 62. pounds. Isabel, Queene, Mother to Edward the third, gave threescore and tenne pounds. And so the worke was done within the space of 21. yeeres, 1537. This Church, thus furnished with windowes, made at the charges of di∣vers persons; the Lady Margaret Se∣grave, Countesse of Norfolke, bare the charges of making the Stalles in the Quire, to the value of 350. markes, a∣bout the yeere 1380. Richard Whiting∣ton, Library of the Gray Friers. in the yeere 1429. founded the Li∣brary, which was in length, one hun∣dred twenty and nine foot, and in breadth, thirty one; all seeled with Wainscot, having 28. Desks, and eight double Settles of Wainscot. Which (in the next yeere following) was alto∣gether finished in building, and within three yeeres after, furnished with Bookes, to the charges of five hundred fifty six pounds, tenne shillings, where∣of Richard Whitington bare 400. pounds, the rest was borne by Doctor Thomas Winchelsey, a Frier there: and for the writing out of D. Nicholas de Lira his Workes, in two Volumes to be chained there, 100. Markes, &c. The eeling of the Quire at divers mens charges, 200. markes, and the painting at 50. markes: their Conduit head and water-course was given them by William Tayler, Taylor to Hen. 3. This whole Church contained in length 300. foot,Length & breadth of Gray Friers Church. of the feet of S. Paul, in breadth eighty nine foot, and in heighth from the ground to the roofe, 64. foot, and 2. inches, &c. It was con∣secrated, 1325. and at the generall sup∣pression, was valued at 32. pound, 19. shillings, surrendred the 12. of Novem∣ber, 1533. the 30. of Hen. 8. the orna∣ments and goods being taken to the Kings use: the Church was shut up for a time, and used as a Store-house of goods taken prizes from the French: But in the yeere 1546. on the third of Ianuary, it was againe set open. On the which day preached at Pauls Crosse the Bishop of Rochester, where he declared the Kings gift thereof to the Citie, for the relieving of the poore, which gift was by Patents. S. Bartholomews Spittle in Smithfield, lately valued at 305. pounds,Gray Friers Church made a Parish Church. 6. shil∣lings, 7. Pence, and surrendred to the King; of the said Church of the Gray Friers, and of two Parish Churches, the one of Saint Nicholas in the Shambles, and the other of Saint Ewins in Newgate Market, they were to be made one Pa∣rish Church in the said Friers Church. In Lands he gave for maintenance of the said Church, with divine service, re∣parations, &c. 500. markes by yeere for ever. The 13. of Ianuary,The Mai∣or and Commu∣nalty of London Parsons of Christs Church, the Vicar to be at their ap∣pointmēt. the 38. of Henry the 8. an agreement was made betwixt the King and the Maior, and Commu∣nalty of London, dated the 27. of De∣cember: by which the said gift of the Gray Friers Church, with all the Edi∣fices and ground, the Fratrie, the Li∣brary, the Dortar, and Chapter-house, the great Cloistrie and the lesser; Te∣nements, Gardens and vacant grounds, Lead, Stone, Iron, &c. The Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew in West Smith∣field, the Church of the same, the Lead, Bels, and Ornaments of the same Hospitall, with all the Messuages, Te∣nements and appurtenances.
The Parishes of S. Nicholas and of S. Ewin, and so much of S. Pulchers Parish as is within Newgate, were made one Parish Church in the Gray Friers Church,  and called Christs Church, founded by King H. the 8. The Vicar of Christs Church was to have 26. l. 13. s. 4. pence the yeere. The Vicar of S. Bartholomew 13. l. 6. s. 8. pence. The Visiter of Newgate (be∣ing a Priest) ten pounds. And other 5. Priests in Christs Church, all to be hel∣ping in divine Service, ministring the Sacraments and Sacramentals, the five Priests to have 8. pounds the piece. Two Clerks, 6. pounds to each. A Sexton, 4. pounds. Moreover, he gave them the Hospitall of Bethlem, with the Laver of Brasse in the Cloister, by estimation eighteene foot in length, and two foot and an halfe in depth, and the water∣course of Lead to the said Frier-house belonging, containing by estimation in length, 18. Acres. In the yeere 1552. began the repai∣ring of the Gray Friers House,Christs Ho∣spitall. for the poore fatherlesse children. And in the moneth of November the children were taken into the same, to the number of almost 400. On Christmas day in the af∣ternoone, while the Lord Maior and Aldermen rode to Pauls, the children of Christs Hospitall stood, from Saint Laurence lane end in Cheape, towards Pauls, all in one Livery of Russet Cot∣ton, three hundred and forty in num∣ber; and at Easter next they were in Blue at the Spittle, and so have conti∣nued ever since. What further I have read and under∣stood, concerning the first begining and erection of this famous Hospitall, fol∣loweth, Ex R. Graf∣ton. according to the originall Co∣pie, set downe by M. Richard Grafton. Mr. Doctor Ridley,Doct Rid∣ley prea∣ched be∣fore King Edw. 6. Mercy & Charity. then Bishop of London, came and preached before the Kings Majestie at Westminster. In which Sermon, he made a fruitfull and godly Exhortation to the rich, to be mercifull unto the poore: and also to move such as were in authority, to travaile by some charitable way and meanes, to comfort and relieve them. Wherupon, the Kings Majestie (being a Prince of such toward∣nesse and vertue for his yeeres, as Eng∣land before never brought forth, and being also so well retained and brought vp in all godly knowledge, as well by his deare Vncle the lateEdw. Si∣mer Duke of Somerset Protector, as also by his vertuous and learned School∣masters) was so carefull of the good go∣vernement of the Realme, and chiefely to doe and prefer such things as most e∣specially touched the honour of Al∣mighty God. And understanding, that a great number of poore people did swarme in this Realme, and chiefly in the Citie of London, and that no good order was taken for them, did suddenly (and of himselfe) send to the said Bi∣shop, as soone as his Sermon was ended, willing him not to depart, untill that he had spoken with him. And this that I now write, was the very report of the said Bishop Ridley, who (according to the Kings command) gave his atten∣dance. And so soone as the Kings Maje∣stie was at leasure he called for him, and caused him to come unto him in a great Gallery at Westminster, where (to his knowledge, and the King likewise told him so) there was present no more per∣sons than they two; and therefore made him sit downe in one Chayre, and hee himselfe in another, which (as it see∣med) were before the comming of the Bishop there purposely set, and caused the Bishop, maugre his teeth) to be co∣vered, and then entred communication with him in this manner: First, giving him hearty thankes for his Sermon and good Exhortation: hee therein rehearsed such speciall things as he had noted, and that so many, that the Bishop said: Truely, truely (for that commonly was his Oath) I could never have thought that excellency to have beene in his Grace, but that I beheld, and heard it in him. At the last the Kings Majesty much commended him for his Exhortation, for the reliefe of the poore. But my Lord (quoth he) you willed such as are in authority to bee carefull thereof,A most vertuous and noble saying of King Edw. to Bishop Ridley. and to devise some good order for their re∣liefe: Wherein, I thinke you meane mee, for I am in highest place; and therefore am the first that must make answer unto God for my negligence, if I should not bee carefull therein, knowing it to bee the expresse Commandement of Almighty God, to have compassion of his poore and needy
members, for whom wee must make an ac∣count unto him. And truly, my Lord, I am (before all things else) most willing to travaile that way, and I doubting nothing of your long and approved wisedome and learning, who having such good zeale, as wisheth helpe unto them; but also that you have had some conference with others, what waies are best to be taken therein, the which I am desirous to understand: and therefore I pray you to say your minde. The Bishop thinking least of that matter, and being amazed, to heare the wisedome & earnest zeale of the King, was (as hee said himselfe) so astonied, that hee could not well tell what to say. But, after some pause, said, That hee thought (at this present) for some en∣trance to bee had, it were good to pra∣ctise with the City of London,The Citi∣zens of London moved to be assi∣stants in this chari∣table acti∣on. because the number of the poore there are very great, and the Citizens also are many and wise; and hee doubted not but that they were also both pitifull and merci∣full; as the Maior and his Brethren, and other the Worshipfull of the said City. And that if it would please the Kings Majesty to direct his gracious Letters unto the Maior of London, willing him to call unto him such assistants as hee should thinke meete, to consult of this matter, for some order to bee taken therein; hee doubted not but good would follow thereon. And hee him∣selfe promised the King to be one him∣selfe that should earnestly travaile therein. The King (forth-with) not onely granted his Letter,The kings letter sent by the Bi∣shop to the Lord, Maior of London. but made the Bi∣shop tarry untill the same was written, and his hand and Signet set thereto: And commanded the Bishop not onely to deliver the said Letter himselfe; but also to signifie unto the Maior, that it was the Kings especiall request and ex∣presse commandement, that the Maior should therein travell; and so soone as he might conveniently, give him know∣ledge how far he had proceeded there∣in. The Bishop was so joyous of the having of this Letter, and that now hee had an occasion to travell in so good a matter, wherein hee was marvellous zealous, that nothing could have more pleased and delighted him: wherefore the same night hee came to the Lord Maior of London, who was the Sir Ri∣chard Dobbs, Knight, and delivered the Kings Letter, and shewed his message with effect. The Lord Maior not only joyously re∣ceived this Letter:The rea∣dinesse of the Lord Maior to preferre this good deede. but with all speede agreed to set forward the matter; for he also favoured it very much. And the next day, being Munday, hee desired the Bishop of London to dine with him, and against that time the Maior promi∣sed to send for such men, as he thought meetest to talke of this matter, and so he did. He sent first for 2. Aldermen and 6. Commoners, and afterward more were appointed, to the number of 24. In the end, after sundry meetings (for by the meanes and good diligence of the Bishop, it was well followed) they agreed upon a Booke that they had de∣vised, wherein first they considered on nine speciall kindes and sorts of poore people,9. Sorts of poore people distingui∣shed into 3. degrees. and those they brought into these three Degrees: Three degrees of Poore. 1. The poore by impotency. 2. Poore by casualty. 3. Thriftlesse poore. 1. The Poore by Impotency are also divided into three kindes; that is to say: 1. The fatherlesse poore mans childe. 2. The aged, blinde, and lame. 3. The diseased person by Leprosie, Dropsie, &c. 2. The Poore by Casualty are likewise of three kindes; that is to say: 1. The wounded Souldier. 2. The decayed Hous-holder. 3. The visited with any grievous disease. 3. The Thristlesse Poore are 3. kindes in like manner; that is to say: 1. The Riotour, that consumeth all. 2. The Vagabond, that will abide in no place. 3. The Idle person, as Strumpets and others. For these sorts of Poore,The first beginning of Hospi∣tals. three seve∣rall houses were provided: First, for the Innocent and Fatherlesse, which is the
Beggars childe, and is (indeed) the seed and breeder of beggary, they pro∣vided the house that was the late Gray Friers in London, and called it by the name of Christs Hospitall, where poore children are trained up in the know∣ledge of God, and some vertuous exer∣cises, to the overthrow of beggary. For the second degree was provided the Hospitals of Saint Thomas in South∣warke,The first begin∣ning of S. Thom. and S. Bartholm. Hospitals. and Saint Bartholomew in VVest Smithfield, where are continually (at least) 200. diseased persons, which are not only there lodged and cured, but also sed and nourished. For the third degree they provided Bridewell,The first begin∣ning of Bridewell, where the vagabond and idle Strumpet is chastifed, and compelled to labour, to the overthrow of the vici∣ous life of idlenesse. They provided also for the honest de∣cayed House-holder,Reliefe for decay∣ed house-holders & Lazers. that he should be relieved at home at his house, and in the Parish where hee dwelled, by a weekly reliefe and pension. And in like manner they provided for the Lazer, to keepe him out of the City, from clapping of dishes and ringing of Bels, to the great trouble of the Citi∣zens, and also to the dangerous infecti∣on of maney; that they should be relie∣ved at home at their houses, by severall pensions. Now after this good order taken,The king acquain∣ted with the Cities furthe∣rance. and the Citizens (by such meanes as were devised) willing to further the same: the report thereof was made to the Kings Majesty, and his Grace (for the advancement thereof) was not on∣ly willing to grant such as should be O∣verseers and Governours of the said houses, a Corporation and authority for the government of them: but also required, that hee might bee accounted as the chiefe Founder and Patron there∣of. And for the furtherance of the said worke,K. Edward. the sixth Founder of the Hospitals in London. and continuall maintenance of the same; hee of his me mercy and goodnesse granted, that whereas (be∣fore) certaine land were given, to the maintaining of the ho of the Savoy, founded by King  eventh, for the loding of  and Strangers, and that the same  now made but a loding for Loyre, Vagabonds, and Strumpets, that lay all day in the fields, and at night were harboured there,The  land for rendred to the King, and given to the City of London. the which was rather the maintenance of beggary, than any reliefe to the poore: gave the same lands, being first surren∣dred by the Master and Fellowes there (which lands were of the yeerly value of 600. pounds) unto the City of Lon∣don, for the maintenance of the founda∣tion aforesaid. And for a further reliefe, a Petition being made to the Kings Majesty, for a licence to take in Mortmaine, or other∣wise without licence, lands to a certaine yeerly value, and a space left in the Pa∣tent, for his Grace to put in what summe it would please him: Hee loo∣king on the voide place, called for pen and inke, and with his own hand wrote this summe, in these words, 4000. Markes by the yeere, and then said in the hearing of his Councell,The words of a blessed King. Lord, I yeeld thee most hearty thankes, that thouhast gi∣ven me life thus long, to finish this worke to the glory of thy Name. After which foun∣dation established, he lived not above two dayes: whose life would have been wished equall to the Patriarkes, if it had pleased GOD so to have prolon∣ged it. By example of the charitable act of this vertuous young King,Sir William Chester, and Io. Calthrop, Draper. Sir W. Chester, Knight, and Alderman of London, and Io. Calthrop, Citizen and Draper of the same City, at their owne proper costs and charges, made the bricke wals and way on the backe side, which leadeth from the said new Hospitall, unto the Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew, and al∣so covered and vaulted the Town-ditch, from Aldersgate to Newgate, which (be∣fore) was very noysome, and contagious to the said Hospitall. This Hospitall being thus erected,Rich. Castel, Shooma∣ker, The Cocke of Westminster and put into good order, there was one Richard Castell, alias Casteller, Shooma∣ker, dwelling in Westminster, a man of great travaile and labour in his faculty with his owne hands, and such a one as was named, The Cocke of Westminster, be∣cause both Winter and Summer hee was at his worke before foure of the clocke in the morning. This man thus truely and painfully labouring for his living, God blessed and increased his labours so abundantly, that he purcha∣sed
lands and tenements in Westminster, to the yeerly value of forty and foure pounds. And having no childe, with the consent of his wife (who survived him, and was a vertuous good woman) gave the same lands wholly to Christs Hospitall aforesaid, to the reliefe of the Innocent and Fatherlesse Children, and for the succour of the miserable, sore and sicke, harboured in the other Hospitals about London. Saint Bartholomews Hospitall is incor∣porated by the name of the Maior,The in∣corporati∣on of St. Bartholo∣mews Hos∣pitall in West Smithfield. Communalty, and Citizens of the Ci∣tie of London, Governours of the Hospi∣tall for the poore, called Little Saint Bar∣tholomews, neere to West Smithfield, of the Foundation of King Henry the 8. Christs Hospitall,The in∣corporati∣on of the Hospitals of King Edward the sixth. Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apostle in Southwarke, are incorporated by the names of the Mai∣or, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, Governours of the Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the Hospitals of Edward King of England, the sixth, of Christ, Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apostle, &c. The defaced Monuments in this Church were these:Monu∣ments in Christs Church. First, in the Quire, of the Lady Margaret, daughter to Phi∣lip, King of France, and wife to Edward the first, Foundress of this new Church, 1317. Of Isabel,4. Queens buried In this Church. Queene, wife to Edward the second, daughter to Philip, King of France, 1358. Ioane of the Tower, Queene of Scots, wife to David Bruise, daughter to Ed∣ward the second, dyed in Hartford Ca∣stle, and was buried by Isabel her mo∣ther, 1362. William Fitzwaren, Baron, and Isabel his wife, sometime Queene of the Isle of Man. Isabel, daughter to Edward the third, wedded to Lord Couse, of France, after created Earle of Bedford. Eleanor, wife to Iohn, Duke of Bri∣taine. Beatrix, Duchesse of Britaine, daugh∣ter to Henry the third. Sir Robert Lisle, Baron, the Lady Lisle, & Margaret de Rivers, Countesse of Devon, all under one Stone. Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, be∣headed, 1329. Patar, Bishop of Carbon in Hungary, 1331. Gregory Rocksley, Maior, 1282. Sir Iohn Devereux, Knight, 1385. Iohn Hastings, Earle of Pembroke, 1389. Margaret, daughter to Thomas Bro∣tharton, Earle Marshall, shee was Du∣chesse of Northfolke, and Countesse Marshall, and Lady Segrave, 1389. Richard Havering, Knight, 1388. Robert Trisilian, Knight, Chiefe Ju∣stice, 1308. Geffrey Lucy, son to Geffrey Lucy. Iohn Aubry, son to Iohn Maior of Nor∣wich, 1361. Iohn Philpot, Knight, Maior of Lon∣don, and the Lady Lane Stamford his wife, 1384. Iohn, Duke of Burbon, and Angue, Earle of Claremond, Mountpencier, and Baron Beangen, who was taken prisoner at Agencourt, kept prisoner eighteene yeeres, and deceased 1433. Robert Chalons, Knight, 1439. Iohn Chalons. Margaret, daughter to Sir Iohn Phil∣pot, first married to T. Santlor, Esquire, and after, to Iohn Neyband, Esquire. Sir Nicholas Brembar, Maior of Lon∣don, buried 1386. Elizabeth Nevil, wife to Iohn, son and heyre to Ralph, Earle of Westmerland, & mother to Ralph Earle of Westmerland, and daughter to Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent, 1423. Edward Burnel, son to the Lord Bur∣nel. In Alhallowes Chappell; Iames Fines, Lord Say, 1450. and Helenor his wife, 1452. Iohn Smith, Bishop of Landaffe, 1478. Iohn, Baron Hilton. Iohn, Baron Clinton. Richard Hastings, Knight, Lord of Willoughby and Wells. Thomas Burder, Esquire, beheaded, 1477. Robert Lisle, sonne and heyre to the Lord Lisle. In our Lady Chappell: Iohn Gisors of London, Knight, and Lord Maior. Humfrey Stafford, Esquire, of Worce∣stershire, 1486. Robert Bartram, Baron of Bothell. Ralph Barons, Knight.
William Apleton, Knight. Reynold de Cambrey, Knight. Thomas Beaumond, sonne and heyre to Henry Lord Beaumond. Iohn Butler, Knight. Adam de Howton, Knight, 1417. Bartholomew Caster, Knight of Lon∣don. Reinfredo Arundel, Knight, 1460. Thomas Covil, Esquire, 1422. In the Apostles Chappell; Walter Blunt, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Mountjoy, Treasure of England, sonne and heyre to T. Blunt, knight, Treasu∣rer of Normandy, 1474. E. Blunt, Lord Mountjoy, 1475. Alice Blunt, Mountjoy, sometime wife to Wil. Browne, Maior of London, and daughter to H. Kebel, Maior, 1521. Anne Blunt, daughter to I. Blunt, knight, Lord Mountjoy, 1480. Sir Allen Cheiny, knight, and Sir T. Greene, knight. William Blunt, Esquire, son and heire to Walter Blunt, Captaine of Gwynes, 1492. Elizabeth Blunt, wife to Robert Cur∣son, Knight, 1494. Bartholomew Burwash, and Iohn Bur∣wash, his son, Iohn Blunt, Lord Mountjoy, Captaine of Gwynes and Hames, 1485. Iohn Dinham, Baron, sometime Trea∣surer of England, knight of the Garter, 1501. Eleanor, Duchesse of Buckingham, 1530. Iohn Blunt, knight, 1531. Rowl. Blunt, Esquire, 1509. Robert Bradbury, 1489. Nicholas Clifton, knight. Francis Chape. Two sonnes of Allayne, Lord Cheiny, and Iohn, sonne and heyre to the same Lord Allayne Cheiny; knight. Iohn Robsart, knight of the Garter, 1450. Allayne Cheiny, knight. Thomas Malory, knight, 1470. Thomas Yong, a Justice of the Bench, 1476. Iohn Baldwin, Fellow of Grayes Inne, and Common Serjeant of London, 1469. Walter Wrotsley, knight, of Warwick∣shire, 1473. Sir Stephen Iennings, Maior, 1523. Thomas a Par, and Iohn Wiltwater, slaine at Barnet field, 1471. Nicholas Poynes, Esquire, 1512. Robert Elkenton, knight, 1460. Iohn Water, alias Yorke, Herald, 1520. Iohn More, alias Nory, King of Arms, 1491. George Hopton, knight, 1489. Betweene the Quire and the Altar, Ralph Spiganel, knight. Iohn Moyle, Gentleman of Grayes Inne, 1495. William Huddy, knight, 1501. Iohn Cobham, a Baron of Kent. Iohn Mortaine, knight. Iohn Deyncort, knight. Iohn Norbery, Esquire, high Treasu∣rer of England. Henry Norbery his son, Esquire. Iohn Southlee, knight. Tho. Sakvile. Tho. Lucy, knight, 1525. Robert de la Rivar, son to Mauricius de la Rivar, Lord of Tormerton, 1457. Io. Malmaynas, Esquire, and Tho. Mal∣maynas, knight. Hugh Acton, Taylor, 1530. Nicholas Malmaynas. Hugh Parsal knight, 1490. Alexander Kirketon, knight, &c. In the body of the Church; William Paulet, Esquire, of Somersetshire, 1482. Iohn Moyle, Gentleman, 1530. Peter Champion, Esquire, 1511. Io. Hart, Gentleman, 1449. Alice Lat. Hungerford, hanged at Ty∣borne for murdering her husband, 1523. Edward Hall, Gentleman of Grayes Iune, 1470. Ri. Churchyard, Gentleman, Fellow of Grayes Inne, 1498. Iohn Bramre, Gentleman of Grayes Inne, 1498. Iohn Mortimer, knight, beheaded, 1423. Henry Frowike, Alderman. Reynold Frowike. Philip Pats, 1518. William Porter, Serjeant at Armes, 1515. Tho. Grantham, Gentleman, 1511. Edmond Rotheley, Gentleman, 1470. Henry Roston, Gentleman of Grayes Inne, 1485. Nicholas Mountgomery, Gentleman,
sonne to Io. Mountgomery of Northamp∣tonshire, 1485. Sir Bartholomew Emfield, knight. Sir Barnard S. Peter, knight. Sir Ralph Sandwich, knight, Custos of London. Sir Andrew Sakevile, knight. Iohn Treszawall, Gentleman, and Taylor of London, 1520. All these, and five times so many more have beene buried there, whose Monuments are wholly defaced: for there were nine Tombes of Alabaster and Marble, invironed with strikes of Iron, in the Quire, and one Tombe in the body of the Church, also coped with Iron, all pulled downe, besides sevenscore Grave-stones of Marble, all sold for fifty pounds, or thereabouts by Sir Martin Bowes, Goldsmith and Alderman of London, of late time bu∣ried there. These two,A faire Monumēt in the South wal of the Quire. Sir Christopher Edmonds, and, Dame Dorothy his wife, lived to∣gether 44. yeeres, in perfect love and so∣ciety: both servants to one Prince; and in great credit both in the Court and Country where they lived, both for their Religion, fidelity to their Soveraigne, and liberality to the Poore. This is the Monument of Sir Christopher Edmonds, Knight, who was a domesti∣call servant to the most sacred Queene ELIZABETH, both before her Coro∣nation, and after, so long as he lived. He was of great credit and estimation in his Country, for his integrity of life, upright∣nesse in justice, and hospitality, and gave to this Hospitall of Christs Church three hundred pounds, towards the main∣tenance of the poore children. Hee lived seventy and two yeeres, and died Anno Domini, 1596. This is the interrement of Dame Dorothy Edmonds, wife to the said Sir Chri∣stopher, and daughter to Christopher Litcot, Esquire; who also served the most gracious Mayden-Queene, ELI∣ZABETH, being (ever since her Coro∣nation, and before) of her most Honoura∣ble Privy Chamber: who joyned with the said Sir Christopher, her husband, in the said gift of three hundred pounds to this Hospitall, being a Legacie (onely spoken of by him) and performed by her. Times Triumph on the death of Master Robert Rogers, who deceased Anno. 1601. in the manner of a Dialogue, between Time, Death, and Rogers. Death. STand fairely encountred both,A faire Monumēt close by, in the same wall. Grave, Soveraigne Time; Borne of Eternity, Ages Father: Prince of all Power; all Powers on earth are thine, That doest my Ruines truest Records gather; Lend thy consent, thy helping hand to mine; And Death will make Times Soveraignty as great As the three Sisters, Ladies of sterne Fate. Time. Impartiall Death, Honours respectlesse foe, Grim, meager Caytife, wherefore doest thou come? Must Vertues children to the slaughter goe, In thy bloud-yawning Cell to fill a roome? Can none but they, quench thy bloudy thirst? Death. No; Rogers I come for: Time, thou canst not save him, This Dart must strike him, and grim Death will have him. Rogers. Death, welcome; all by thee (I know) must end; Nor doe I care for for longer life than this; I thanke thee, thou hast stai'd so long; (kinde friend.) Sweere Time, be patient, pardon mine amisse, If I have time mis-spent; alas, we all offend. If, said I? yes, 'tis certaine, sure I have; For which offence (deare
Time) I pardon crave. Time. Death, grant me this (sweet) doe not kill him Till I returne but from the Destinies. Dea. I cannot stay a moment. Reg. Oh will him (Grave Time) to strike me then: I Death despise. Dea. There lye thou dead. Time. Thou canst not spill him: Time shall erect a Trophee of such fame, That while Time lives, dye shall not Rogers name. TIMES Epitaph. Give me an Adamantine Pen, and Leafe of Brasse, To character his name, whose like nere was. A single life he led, loving to all, The poore mans succour, the reliefe of thrall: Vertues example, guide to eternall life; In carriage courteous, all devoid of strife. Here lyeth he interred, Rogers his name, Times onely Sonne, eternized by Fame. Ougly Detraction, flye, and blacke Oblivion, hence; Whil'st Rogers dust lyes here, Time will his fame commence. Behold the Workes of God,Vpon a Monumēt on a Pillar by the Tombe. First, on the one Table. done by his Servant, Dame MARY RAMSEY. SHe hath given a yeerly mainte∣nance for two Fellowes, and foure Schoolers in Cambridge. More, two Livings of good value, when they shall become fit to supply them. More, towards certaine Sermons to be preached in this Church yeerly. More, in Christs Hospitall a free Wri∣ting-Schoole for poore mens children. More, in the Country a free Gram∣mar-Schoole for the poorer sort. All which severall gifts before re∣membred, are to continue yeerly for ever. Forma, Decus, Mores, Sapientia, Res & Honores, Morte ruunt subita; vivit post funera Fama. The rest of the godly Workes done by this good Lady. SHe hath given a worthy mainte∣nance to the poore of Christs Hos∣pitall.Secondly, on the o∣ther Ta∣ble. More, a bountifull gift for the hea∣ling of poore wounded Souldiers. More, a liberall maintenance for ten poore maimed Souldiers. More, a liberall maintenance for ten poore aged Widowes. More, a bountifull gift to release poore men out of prison. More, a bountifull gift to relieve poore men in prison. More, a yeerly Stipend to poore Maides Marriages. More, to the reliefe of the Poore of foure severall Parishes. All which severall gifts are for ever. Her faith hath wrought, her Tree was not barren. And yet an unprofitable Servant. 1596. Gamaliel Pye,A faire plated stone in the Quire▪ under this Stone doth lye in peace and rest, Whose service to his Prince and Realm, well knowne not to be least: At Bullen, Muttrel, & each place else, where then the King had warres, Not any one that serv'd in Campe, lesse feared wounds and scarres. In age he liv'd in peace and love, abhorring worlds inconstancy, And chosen was eleven times the Warden of his Company. The poore, sicke, lame, abroad, at home, his bounty ever felt, But chiefly his owne Parishioners, where threescore yeers he dwelt. He held disdaine to brawle, or seeke
what others had to doe; And with his wife he liv'd full forty yeeres and two, He liv'd devout, and dy'd devout, the chiefest way to Heaven; The complete date of this his life, was fourescore yeers and seven. Mole sub hac, si fortè roges quis (Candide Lector) Vel qualis recubat? Gamaliel Pius est. Vita pium, nomenque pium, mors sancta piumque Exhibet, & vita est, nomine, morte Pius. S. Memoriae. Gualtero Haddono,A faire Monumēt in the wal, at the upper end of the Chancell. Equestri loco nato Iu∣risconsulto, Oratori, Poetae celeberri∣mo, Graecae, Latinaeque eloquentiae sui temporis facilè principi, sapien∣tia & sanctitate vitae, in id evecto, ut Reginae Elizabethae à supplicum libel∣lis Magister esset: Destinareturque majoribus nisi fato immaturius cessis∣set: Interim in omni gradu viro longè eminentissimo, Coniugi suo optimo me∣ritissimoque Anna Suttona, uxor eius 2. flens, moerens desiderii sui signum posuit. Obiit Anno Salut. hum. 1572. Aetatis 56. Within this Grave enclosed here, Anne Beaumont now doth rest,A faire plated stone by the Com∣munion Table. A loving and a faithfull wife, with many children blest. She served God with zeale of truth, and learn'd to flye from sinne; And as she learn'd his holy will, so liv'd and dy'd therein. A friend to such as vertue sought, a foe unto no wight; A helpe to those that feared God, with all her power and might. The poore shall oft bewaile her want, by whom they found reliefe; VVhose minde with earnest care was bent, to ease them of their griefe. Thus happy she, that now is gone from hence, reward to finde; Vnhappy yet for such her friends, as she hath left behinde: But thrice unhappy for his losse, that doth her praise rehearse; A wofull praise unto her Sonne, who wrote this dolefull Verse. Anne, wife unto Nicholas Beaumont, of Coleoverton, in Leicesteshire, E∣squire, and daughter unto VVilliam Saunders, of Welforde, in North∣hamptonshire, Esquire, and halfe sister unto Walter Haddon, Master of the Requests, departed this life the 7. day of September, An. Dom. 1581. leaving be∣hinde her sixe children. Hic jacent corpora Wil. Drewe, Ar∣mig. fil. Joh. Drewe, de Ken, in Com. Devon.Another plated stone on the other side of the Table. Armig. & Eliz. ux. ejus. fil. & haered. Wil. Cecil. ac consang. & hae∣red. Tho. Cecil. Armig. Quae quidem Elizab. obiit 10. die Novemb. Anno Dom. 1586. Et praedict.Wil. Drewe obiit, &c. We dye to live, that liv'd to dye, Through Jesus Christ, and so did I: Which Christ, as I have loved best, Among his Saints I trust to rest. Vnder this Stone lyeth buried the body of Robert Smith,A faire plated stone in the South fide of the Quire. Gentleman: who had to his first wife, Elizabeth Reycroft, by whom hee had issue three daugh∣ters, viz. Margaret, Iulian, and Ioane. And he had to his second wife, Margaret Larkin, by whom hee had no issue. The which Robert dyed the eighth day of December, Anno Domini 1581. whose soule resteth with God. Here lyeth buried Margaret,A faire plated stone in the South Ile. the wife of Lawrence Hussie, Doctor of Law, and daughter of sir Iohn White, Knight, for her vertuous life, worthy of memory: who dyed the third day of August, 1569. D. Opt. Max. Laus. Gulielmo Herberto, naturali F. Georgii Herberti de Swansey,A plated stone at entring into the Quire. Militis, Ioan∣nes eiusdem Georgii ex filio Nepos, ac Sereniss. Elizabethae Angliae Re∣ginae à supp. libellis. H. S. moesto ani∣mo P. K. Ianuar. 1590. Here lyeth the body of Iohn Tredwey, of Easton,A Grave∣stone in the North Chappell of the Quire. in the County of Northamp∣ton, Gentleman; who dyed the 10. day of May, An. Dom. 1610. Rodolpho Waddingtono, huius scholae per annos 48. Moderatori digniss.
Qui postquam una cum uxore sine prole,A small Monumēt erected in the Schoole wal, in the Cloyster, where (ac∣cording to his de∣sire) he lyeth bu∣ried. anno 47. suavissimè degisset, An. aetatis 84. An. Dom. 1614. Aug. 24. in Domino placidè obdormivit. Ioanna uxor ejus moestiss. posuit. Hic Waddingtonus tenui requiescit in urna, Nestor verè annis, & gravitate Cato. Tullius eloquio, Damon sincerus amico, Et par praeceptis (Quintiliane) tibi. Dulcis, amoenus, amans, cultis, praestante, probata, Vir, Vates, Coniux, Moribus, Arte, Fide. Tales secla puto paucos antiqua dedissnet: Postera non multos secla datura pares. Vita. Angligenae hunc peperit Londinum gloria gentis, Aetona huic Artis semina prima dedit. Granta tulit segetem fructum{que} tumescere fecit, Londini Messes Orphana turba tulit. From this Church, West to Newgate, is of this Ward. Now for the South side of this Ward, beginning again at the Crosse in Cheap, from thence to Friday street, and downe that street, on the VVest side, till over∣against the North-west corner of Saint Matthewes Church.Parish Church of S. Matthew in Friday street. And on the VVest side, to the South corner of the said Church, which is wholly in the VVard of Faringdon. This Church hath these few Monuments: Thomas Pole, Goldsmith, 1395. Rob Iohnson, Goldsmith, Alderman, Iohn Twiselton, Goldsmith, Alder∣man, 1525. Ralph Allen, Grocer, one of the She∣riffes, deceased 1546. Anthony Gamage, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffes, deceased 1579. Iohn Mabbe, Chamberlaine of Lon∣don, &c. Allen at Condit, and Thomas Warling∣worth founded a Chauntry there. Sir Nicholas Twiford, Goldsmith, Maior, gave to that Church an House, with the appurtenances, called the Grif∣fon on the Hope, in the same street. Anthony Cage entombed here,A comely Monumēt in the wall, on the Chan∣cels South side. doth rest, Whose wisedome still prevail'd the Common-weale: A man with Gods good gifts so amply blest, That few, or none, his doings may impleale. A man unto the widow and the poore, A comfort and a succour evermore. Three wives he had, of credit and of fame: The first of them, Elizabeth, that hight; VVho buried here, brought to this Cage by name, Seventeene young Plants, to give his Table light. The second wife (for her part) brought him none; The third and last, no more but only one. He deceased the 24. day of Iune, An∣no Domini, 1583. In the midst of this Quire lyeth the body of Gaius Newman,A faire Monumēt in the North wal of the Chancell. Citizen and Gold∣smith of London, of the age of 66. yeers. Hee had issue by his wife Anne, the daughter of Nicholas Cullum, of Lon∣don, Merchant-Taylor, 7. sonnes and 5. daughters, Gabriel, Gaius, Robert, Nicholas, Francis, Thomas, and Hugh; Elizabeth, Mary, Anne, Sa∣rah, and Iudith. He deceased the third day of March, 1613. Here lyeth buried the body of Iohn Perte,Another Monumēt in the same wall. Citizen and Fishmonger of London; who tooke to wife Elizabeth Eyre, the daughter of Henry Eyre, Citizen and Skinner of Lond. by whom he had issue one only daughter, named Mary. The said Iohn deceased the tenth day of Octo∣ber, Anno Domini 1604. being aged 51. yeeres. As Man liveth,A Plate in the South wal of the Chancell. so he dyeth; As Tree falleth, so it lyeth:
Anne Middleton, thy life well past, Doth argue restfull blisse at last. Obiit Anno à partu Virginis Mariae, 1596. Mens. Ianuar. die 11. Anno Reg. Reginae Elizabethae, 39. Aetatis suae, 54. From this Friday streete;Old Change. West to the Old Exchange, a streete so called, of the Kings Exchange there kept, which was for the receit of Bullion, to bee coyned. For Henry the third, in the sixth yeere of his reigne, wrote to the Scabines and men of Ipre, that hee and his Councell had given prohibition, that none, Eng∣lishmen, or other, should make change of Plate, or other Masse of Silver, but only in his Exchange at London, or at Canturbury. Andrew Bukerell then had to farme the Exchange of England, and was Maior of London in the reigne of Henry the third. Iohn Somercote had the keeping of the Kings Exchange over all England. In the eighth of Edward the first, Gregory Rocksly was keeper of the said Exchange for the King. In the fifth of Edward the second, William Hausted was keeper thereof. And in the 18. Ro∣ger de Frowicke, &c. These received the old Stamps, or Coyning-Irons, from time to time, as the same were worne, & delivered new to all the Mints in England, as more at large in another place I have noted. This streete beginneth by West Cheape in the North, and runneth downe South to Knight-Rider streete; that part there∣of which is called Old Fish-streete: But the very Housing and Office of the Ex∣change & coynage, was about the midst thereof, South from the East gate that entreth Pauls Church-yard, and on the VVest side, in Baynards Castle Ward. On the East side of this Lane, be∣twixt West Cheape and the Church of St. Augustine, Henry Walleis, Maior, (by li∣cence of Edward the first) builded one row of houses, the profits rising of them, to be imploied on London Bridge. The Parish Church of St. Augustine,Parish Church of S. Augustine▪ and one house next adjoyning, in Wathe∣ling streete, is of this Ward called Fa∣ringdon. This is a faire Church, and lately well repaired, wherein be Monu∣ments remaining, of H. Reade, Armou∣rer, one of the Sheriffes, 1450. Robert Bellesdon, Haberdasher, Maior, 1491. Sir Townley. Wil. Dere, one of the Sheriffes, 1450. Robert Raven, Haberdasher, 1500. Thomas Apleyard, Gentleman, 1515. William Moncaster, Merchant-Tailor, 1524. Wil. Holt, Merchant-Taylor, 1544. Hic jacet Magister Robertus Bursted, Bac∣calaurius Iuris civilis,A plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. & hujus Ecclesiae quondam Rector. Qui obiit 16. die mens. Augusti, An. Dom. 1417. Cujus, &c. Hic jacet Magister Iohannes Battaill, quon∣dam Rector huius Ecclesiae.The like stone by the other. Qui obiit Anno Domini, 1426. sexto die Mensis Augusti, Cuius, &c. Ecce ut defuncti cineres mirere beates, Ecce in tantillo temporis quantus honor. Dudum vita mihi fuerat, quae patria mundus, Sed mihi jam Coelum Patria, vita Deus. Dudum mortis eram peccato victima, sed jam Iustiae Christo victima; quantus honor? Hic requiescit in pace corpus Roberti Brett,A small Monumēt in the East end of the Quires South Ile. Civis & Mercatoris-Scissoris London, filii & haeredis Roberti Brett, de Whit∣stanton, in Com. Somerset, Armig. Qui uxorem duxit Elizabeth, filiam Regi∣naldi Highgati, Armig. Ex ea genuit 11. filios, & 3. filias, è quibus 4. filii & 1. silia superstites sunt. Idem Robertus & Elizabetha in sancto conjugii statu 31. An. vixerunt. Et obiit 9. Aprilis, An. Domini, 1586. Aetatis 63. Hunc Tumulum propriis sumptibus fi∣eri fecit Elizabeth uxor ejus, 10. die Septemb. Anno Domini, 1596. Cum jam post obitum marti praedicti, de∣cem annos viduam vixisset, atque hic etiam sepeliri decrevit, quando. cunque Deo placuerit ex hac natu∣rali vita tollere. Here resteth the body of Edward VViat,A faire plated stone at the en∣trance into the Quire. late of Tillingham, in the County of Essex, Esquire, who deceased the 24. of August 1571. He had one onely wife, Mary, the daughter of Sir VVilliam Waldegrave, of Smalbridge, in the
County of Suffolke, Knight, by whom hee had issue three sonnes and foure daughters; but all his said children dy∣ed young, except one sonne, named Ed∣ward, whom hee left behinde him alive, about the age of eleven yeeres. His said wife, his Executrix, caused this Monu∣ment to be made. Hic jacet Richardus Warner, dum vix∣it, Cives Civitatis London, ac quon∣dam Magister Fraternitatis Sancti Joannis Baptistae, Scissor, in Civit. praedict. & Margareta uxor ejus. Qui quidem Richardus obiit 18. die Mens. Januarii,One faire stone for both these, in the body of the Church. Anno Domini, 1476. Here lieth Richard Coxe, sometime Citi∣zen and Skinner of London, which de∣ceased the eight day of March, Anno Domini, 1467. And Agnes his wife; the which deceased the 13. day of April, Anno Dom. 1472. Then in the North Church-yard of Pauls,Cathedral Church of S. Paul. in the which standeth the Ca∣thedrall Church, first founded by Ethel∣bert King of Kent, about the yeere of Christ, 610. He gave thereto lands, as appeareth: Aethelbertus, Rex, Deo inspi∣rante, pro animae suae remedio, dedit Epi∣scopo Melito terram quae appelltur Til∣lingeham, ad Monasterii sui solatium, sci∣licet, Doctoris Gentium. S. Pauli: & ego Rex Aethelbertus ita firmiter concedo tibi praesuli Melito potestatem ejus habendi & possidendi, ut in perpetuum in Monasterii utilitate per∣maneat; &c. Athelstan, Edgar, Edward the Confessor, and others also, gave lands thereunto. William the Conque∣rour gave to the Church of Saint Paul, and to Mauricius, then Bishop, and his successors, the Castle of Stortford, with the appurtenances, &c. He also confir∣med the gifts of his Predecessors, in these words: Omne 1. Rex Angl. Clamo quietas in perpetuum, 24. Hidas quas Rex Aethelbert dedit S. Paulo juxta murum London, &c. The Charter of King William the Conquerour, exemplified in the Tower, Englished thus: William, by the grace of God, King of Englishmen, to all his wel beloved French and English people, greeting. Know yee, that I doe give unto God and the Church of Saint Paul of London, and to the Rectors and Servitors of the same, in all their Lands which the Church hath, or shall have, within Borough, and without, Sack and Sock, Thole and The, Infangtheefe, and Grithbriche, and all free, Ships by Sea, and by Land, on Tide, and off Tide, and all the Rights that into them Christen∣dome by rad and more speake, and on Bu∣right hamed, and on Buright worke, afore all the Bishoprickes in mine Land, and on each other mans Land. For I will, that the Church in all things be as free, as I would my Soule to bee in the day of Iudgement. Witnesses, Osmond our Chancellour, Lan∣frank the Archbishop of Canturbury, and T. Archbishop of Yorke, Roger, Earle of Shrewsbury, Alane the County, Geffrey de Magna villa, and Ralph Peverel. In the yeere 1087. this Church of S. Paul was burnt with fire,S. Pauls Church burnt. and therewith the most part of the Citie: which fire began at the entrie of the West gate, and consumed the East gate. Mauricius,Foundati∣on of the new Church of S. Paul builded. then Bishop, began therefore the foun∣dation of a new Church of S. Paul; a worke, that men (of that time) judged would never have beene finished, it was to them so wonderfull, for length and breadth; and also the same was builded upon Arches (or Vaults) of stone, for de∣fence of fire; which was a manner of worke (before that time) unknowne to the people of this Nation, and then brought in by the French:Stone brought from Cane in Nor∣mandy. and the stone was fetcht from Cane in Normandy. This Mauricius deceased in the yeere, 1107. Richard Beaumor succeeded him in the Bishopricke, who did wonderfully in∣crease the said Church, purchasing (of his own cost) the large Streets & Lanes about it, wherein were wont to dwell many Law-people; which ground hee began to compasse about with a strong wall of stone,Wall a∣bout Pauls Church-yard. and gates. King Henry the first gave to the said Richard so much of the Mote (or Wall) of the Ca∣stle, on the Thames side, to the South, as should bee needfull to make the said Wall of the Church, and so much as should suffice to make a Wall without the way on the North side, &c. It should seeme, that this Richard in∣closed but two sides of the said Church or Cemitory of Saint Paul, to wit, the South and North side: for King Edw. the second, in the 10. of his reigne, granted,
that the said Church-yard should bee inclosed with a wall, where it wanted, for the Murthers and Robberies that were there committed.The com∣mon Bell in Pauls Church-yard, rung for the calling together of the Ci∣tizens to their Folke-motes. But the Citi∣zens then claimed the East part of the Church-yard, to be the place of assem∣bly to their Folke-motes; and that the great Steeple, there situate, was to that use, their common Bell, which being there rung, all the Inhabitants of the City might heare and come together. They also claimed the West side, that they might there assemble themselves together, with the Lord of Baynards Castle, for view of their Armour, in defence of the City. This matter was in the Tower of London referred to Harvi∣us de Stanton, and his fellow Iustices Ite∣nerantes: but I finde not the decision or judgement of that controversie. True it is, that Edward the third, in the 17. of his reigne, gave commande∣ment for the finishing of that VVall: which was then performed, and to this day it continueth; although now on both the sides (to wit, within and with∣out) it be hidden with dwelling houses. Richard Beaumor deceased in the yeere 1127. and his successors (in processe of time) performed the worke begun. The Steeple of this Church was buil∣ded and finished in the yeere 1222.Pauls stee∣ple. The Crosse on the said Steeple fell downe, and a new was set up in the yeere 1314. The new worke of Pauls (so called) at the East end above the Quire,The new worke of Paul in the East. was be∣gun in the yeer 1251. Henry Lacy, Earle of Lincolne, Constable of Chester, and Custos of England, in his time was a great Benefactor to this worke, and was there buried, in the yeere 1310. Also Ralph Baldocke, Bishop of London, in his life time gave 200. Markes to the buil∣ding of the said new worke, and left much by his Testament towards the fi∣nishing thereof: hee deceased in the yeere 1313. and was buried in the La∣dy Chappell. Also the new worke of Pauls, to wit, the crosse Iles, were begun to be new builded in the yeere 1256. The first of February,Pauls stee∣ple fired by Light∣ning. in the yeere 1444. about two of the clocke in the af∣ternoone, the Steeple of Pauls was fired by Lightning, in the midst of the Shaft or Spire, both on the West side, and on the South: but by labour of many well disposed people, the same (to appea∣rance) quenched with Vineger; so that all men withdrew themselves to their houses, praysing God. But between 8. and 9. of the clocke in the same night, the fire burst out againe more fervently than before, and did much hurt to the Lead and Timber, till by the great la∣bour of the Maior and people that came thither, it was throughly quenched. This Steeple was repaired in the yeer 1462. and the Weather-cocke againe erected:Pauls stee∣ple repai∣red. Robert Godwin winding it up, the rope brake, and hee was destroyed on the Pinacles, and the Cocke was sore brused. But Burchwood (the Kings Plum∣mer) set it up againe.Weather-cocke of Pauls stee∣ple. Since the which time, needing reparation, it was both taken down, and set up in the yeer 1553. At which time it was found to bee of Copper, gilt over, and the length, from the bill to the taile, being 4. foote, and the breadth over the wings 3. foot and a halfe, it weighed 40. l. the Crosse, from the Bole, to the Eagle (or Cock) was 15. foote and 6. inches of assise; the length thereof, overthwart, was 5. foot and 10. inches, and the compasse of the Bole was 9. foot and 1. inch. The inner body of this Crosse was Oake, the next cover was Lead, and the outermost was of Copper, red varnished. The Bole and Eagle, or Cocke, were of Copper, and gilt also.Height of the stee∣ple. The height of the Steeple was 520. foot, whereof the stone-worke was 260. foot, and the Spire was likewise 260. foote.Length of Pauls Church. The length of the whole Church, is 240. Taylors yards, which make 720. foot. The breadth thereof is 130. foot: And the height of the body of that Churc, is 150. foot. This Church hath a Bishop,Gover∣nors of this Church. a Deane, a Presentor, Chancellour, Treasurer, and five Archdeacons, to wit, of Lon∣don, Middlesex, Essex, Colchester, and Saint Albans: It hath Prebendaries thirty, Canons twelve, Vicars Corall sixe, &c. The Colledge of Petty Canons there,Petty Ca∣nons of Pauls. was founded by King Richard the se∣cond, in honour of Queene Anne his wife, and of her Progenitors, in the se∣venteenth of his reigne. Their Hall and Lands was then given unto them, as ap∣peareth by the Patent, Master Robert Dokesworth then being Master thereof.
In the yeere 1408. the Petty Canons then building their Colledge, the Maior and Communalty granted them their Wa∣ter-courses, and other easements. There was also one great Cloyster,Great Cloystry of Pauls. on the North side of this Church, invi∣roning a plot of ground, of old time cal∣led Pardon Church-yard; whereof Tho∣mas More, Deane of Pauls, was eyther the first Builder, or a most especiall Be∣nefactor, and was buried there. About this Cloyster, was artificially and richly painted the Dance of Macha∣bray, Dance of Pauls. or Dance of Death, commonly called the Dance of Pauls; the like whereof was painted about S. Innocents Cloyster at Paris in France: the Meeters or Poesie of this Dance were translated out of French into English by Iohn Lid∣gate, Monke of Bury, the Picture of Death leading all estates; at the dis∣pence of Ienken Carpenter, in the reigne of Henry the sixth. In this Cloyster were buried many persons, some of Worship, and others of Honour: The Monuments of whom, in number and curious workmanship, passed all other that were in that Church. Over the East Quadrant of this Cloy∣ster, Library of Pauls. was a faire Library, builded at the costs and charges of Walter Sherington, Chancellour of the Duchy of Lancaster, in the reigne of Henry the sixth: which hath beene well furnished with faire written bookes in Vellam; but few of them now doe remaine there. In the midst of this Pardon Church-yard, Chappell in Pardon Church-yard was also a faire Chappell, first founded by Gilbert Becket, Portgrave, and principall Magistrate of this City, in the reigne of King Stephen, who was there buried. Thomas More, Deane of Pauls, before named, re-edified or new builded this Chappell, and founded three Chaplaines there, in the reigne of Henry the fifth. In the yeere 1549. on the tenth of April, the said Chappell, by comman∣dement of the Duke of Somerset, was begun to bee pulled downe, with the whole Cloystrie, the Dance of Death, the Tombes and Monuments: so that nothing thereof was left, but the bare Plot of ground, which is since conver∣ted into a Garden for the Petty Ca∣nons. There was also a Chappell at the North doore of Pauls,Chappell at the North doore of Pauls. founded by the same Walter Sherington, by licence of Henry the sixth, for two, three, or foure Chaplaines, indowed with 40. l. by the yeere. This Chappell also was pulled down in the reigne of Edw. the sixth, & in place thereof a faire house builded. There was furthermore a faire Chap∣pell of the holy Ghost in Pauls Church, on the North side, founded in the yeere 1400. by Roger Holmes, Chancelor and Prebendary of Pauls, for Adam Bery, Al∣derman and Maior of London, 1364. Iohn Wingham and others, for seven Chaplaines,Holmes Colledge. and called Holmes his Col∣ledge. Their common Hall was in Pauls Church-yard on the South side, neere unto a Carpenters yard. This Colledge was with others suppressed in the reigne of Edward the sixth. Then under the Quire of Pauls is a large Chappell, first dedicated to the name of IESV,Iesus chap∣pell. foun∣ded, or rather confirmed the 37. of Hen. the 6. as appeareth by his Patent therof, dated at Crowdowne to this effect: Many Liege-men and Christian people, having begun a Fraternity and Guila to the honour of the most glorious name of Iesu Christ our Saviour, in a place called the Crowds of the Cathedrall Church of Pauls in London, which hath continued long time peaceably, till now of late: whereupon they have made request, and we have taken upon us the name and charge of the founda∣tion, to the laud of Almighty God, the Fa∣ther, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and especi∣ally to the honour of Iesu, in whose honour the Fraternity was begun, &c. The King ordained William Say, then Deane of Pauls, to bee the Rector, and Richard Ford (a Remembrancer in the Exchequer) and Henry Bennis (Clarke of his Privie Seale) the Gardians of these Brothers & Sisters; they and their suc∣cessors to have a common seale, licence to purchase lands or tenements, to the value of 40. l. by the yeere, &c. This foundation was confirmed by Henry the seventh, the 22. of his reigne, to Doctor Collet, then Deane of Pauls, Rector there, &c. And by Henry the 8. the 27. of his reigne, to Richard Pace, then Deane of Pauls, &c. At the West end of this Iesus Chap∣pell, under the Quire of Pauls, also was
and is a Parish Church of S. Faith,Parish Church of S. Faith. com∣monly called Saint Faith under Pauls, which served (as still it doth) for the Stationers, and others dwelling in Pauls Church-yard, Pater noster Row, and the places neere adjoyning. The said Chappell of Iesus, being sup∣pressed in the reigne of Edward the 6. the Parishioners of S. Faiths Church were removed into the same, as to a place more sufficient for largenesse and lightsomnesse, in the yeere 1551. and so it remaineth. The Monuments there are these: Here buried is Elizabeth,A fair pla∣ted stone over a Vault in the East end of the Church. of honour worthy Dame, Her Husband erst Lord Shandoys was, her Sonne hath now like name: Her Father was of Wilton Lord, a Gray of puissant fame, Her Brother left with us behinde, now Lord is of the same. Her vertuous life yet still doth live, her honour shall remaine, Her corps, though it be growne to dust, her Soule the heavens containe, Quae obiit 29. die Decembris, Ann. Dom. 1559. Lo,A faire plated stone neere to the former Thomas Mond, Esquire by birth, doth under buried lye, To shew, that men (by Natures Law) are borne to live and dye: In Shropshire at the Mindtowne borne, the time we here prefixe, And dyed the seventh of February, in Anno, seventy sixe. Threescore and seven yeeres he saw, though body lye in Tombe: His soule (immortall) lives in heaven, by Gods eternall doome. Natus octavo Mensis Julii, 1510. Obiit septimo Februarii, 1576. Here under this stone resteth, in the mercy of God,Another stone close adjoyning the body of M. Thomas Dock∣wray, Notary, late one of the Proctors of the Arches, Citizen and Stationer of London, and Anne his wife. The which Thomas deceased the 23. day of Iune, An. Dom. 1559. &c. Cur Sacerdos eram, jam factus vile cadaver? Et cito pulvis erit:This stone is covered with a Pew, that nothing can bee seene but these ver∣ses. Quaeso memento mei. Siste gradum qui me teris hic, & funde precatus Me Deus ut levet hinc, ducat ad usque Polum. William Babham, and Alice Butcon his wife,In the middle Ile a faire pla∣ted stone. An. Dom. 1577. Lo here the certaine end of every mortall one, Behold, alive to day, to morrow dead and gone. Live well, so endlesse life (by death) you shall obtaine, Nought lose the good by death, since life thereby they gaine. Dum mihi persuasi me quaesivi{que}A faire plated stone in the Chan∣cell. salutem, En morior dixit, nam Deus esse diem: Non equidem invideo, peccati debita merces, Cum sit mors nostri, cum reus omnis homo, Cum{que} operum requires, & sit mihi vita perennis, In Christo morior, mors mihi gratus adest, Quem mors sic raputi; Cujus sunt ista sepulchra Si quaeras, subsunt quae tibi cuncta notant. Lodovicus Nicols, Civis London, fili∣lius tertius Thomae Nicols, North∣hamptoniensis hic sepelitur. Obiit 22. Aprilis, 1592. Anno Aetatis suae, 28. Ad vocem Tubae resurgent mortui. Here lyeth the body of George Whitgift,Another stone in the Chan∣cell. Esquire, one of the naturall brothers of Iohn Whitgift, late Lord Archbishop of Canturbury: which George deceased the 19. day of April, An. Dom. 1611. William Lambe, so sometime was my name,Vpon a brasse plate fixed on a Pill by the Tombe in the open Church beneath Whiles I alive did run my mortall race, Serving a Prince of most immortall fame, Henry the eighth, who of his Princely grace,
In his Chappell allowed me a place. By whose favour, from Gentleman t'Esquire, I was prefer'd, with worship for my hire. With wives three I joyned wedlocke band, Which (all alive) true lovers were to me: Ioane, Alice and Ioane, for so they came to hand, VVhat needeth praise, regarding their degrees? In wively truth none stedfast more could be. VVho though in earth death's force did once dissever, Heaven yet (I trust) shall joyne us all together. O Lambe of God, which sinne didst take away, And (as a Lambe) wast offered up for sinne; VVhere I (poore Lambe) went from thy flocke astray, Yet thou (good Lord) vouchfafe thy Lambe to winne Home to thy Fold, and hold thy Lambe therein? That at the Day, when Lambes and Goats shall sever, Of thy choice Lambes, Lambe may be one for ever. Vnder which remembrance there are two Verses more added,The bene∣volence is given eve∣ry Friday ordinarily through-out the yeere. containing both a pe∣tition, and an injunction of duety to the poore, who weekely receive their allow∣ance, at the hands or appointment of the Worshipfull Company of Sationers: To whom he bearing great affection, and ha∣ving also no small affiance in them, made them his disposers and Stewards in that behalfe. The Verses are these: I pray you all that receive bread and pence, To say the Lords Prayer before you goe hence. As for the Verses engraven upon the upper stone of the Tombe, they are these: As I was, so are ye, As I am, you shall be. That I had, that I gave, That I gave, that I have. Thus I end all my cost, That I left, that I lost. Then was there on the North side of this Church-yard,Charnell-house with a Chappel▪ a large Charnell-house for the bones of the dead, and o∣ver it a Chappell of an old foundation, such as followeth: In the yeere 1282. the 10. of Edward the first, it was agreed, that Henry Wal∣leis, Maior, and the Citizens, for the cause of shops by them builded, without the wall of the Church-yard, should as∣signe to God, and to the Church of S. Paul, tenne Markes of rent by the yeere for ever, towards the new building of a Chappell of the blessed Virgin Mary, and also to assigne five Markes of yeere∣ly rent to a Chaplaine to celebrate there. Moreover, in the yeere 1430. the 8. of Henry the sixth, licence was granted to Ienken Carpenter (Executor to Richard Whitington) to establish upon the said Charnell, a Chaplaine, to have eight Markes by the yeere. Then was also in this Chappell two Brotherhoods. Ro∣bert Barton, Henry Barton, Maior, and Thomas Mirfin, Maior, all Skinners, were intombed, with their Images of Alabaster over them, grated or cooped about with iron, before the said Chappell; all which was pulled down in the yeere 1549. The bones of the dead, couched up in a Charnell, under the Chappell, were conveyed from thence into Finsbury field, (by report of him who paid for the carriage) amoun∣ting to more than one thousand Cart loads,Reyne Wolfe. and there laid on a moorish ground, in short space after raised by soylage of the Citie upon them, to beare three Milles. The Chappell and Charnell were converted into dwelling houses, ware-houses, and Sheds before them, for Stationers in place of the Tombes. In the East part of this Church-yard standeth Pauls Schoole,Pauls Schoole. lately new builded, and endowed in the yeere 1512. by Iohn Collet, Doctor of Divini∣ty, and Deane of Pauls, for 153. poore
mens children to be taught free in the same Schoole, for which he appointed a Master, a Surmaster or Vsher, and a Chaplaine, with large stipends for e∣ver, committing the oversight thereof to the Masters, Wardens and Assistants of the Mercers in London, because hee was sonne to Henry Collet, Mercer, some∣time Maior. He left to these Mercers Lands, to the yeerely value of 120. l. or better. Neere unto this Schoole, on the North side thereof,Clochier in Pauls Church-yard. was (of old time) a great and high Clochier, or Bell-house, foure square, builded of stone, and in the same a most strong frame of timber, with foure Bels, the greatest that I have heard; these were called Iesus Bels, and belonged to Iesus Chappell, but I know not by whose gift. The same had a great spire of timber, covered with Lead, with the Image of Saint Paul on the top, but was pulled downe by Sir Miles Partridge, Knight, in the reigne of Hen∣ry the eighth. The common speech then was, that hee did set one hundred pounds, upon a cast at Dice against it, and so wonne the said Clochier & Bels of the King: and then causing the Bels to be broken as they hung, the rest was pulled downe. This man was afterward executed on the Tower hill, for matters concerning the Duke of Summerset, the fifth of Edward the sixth. In place of this Clochier, of old time, the common Bell of the Citie was used to be rung,Common Bell of the City. for the assembly of the Ci∣tizens to their Folke-motes, as I have before shewed. About the middest of this Church-yard, Pulpit-crosse in Pauls Church-yard. is a Pulpit-crosse of timber, moun∣ted upon steps of stone, and covered with Lead, in which are Sermons prea∣ched by learned Divines, every Sunday in the fore-noone. The very antiquity of which Crosse is to me unknowne. I read, that in the yeere 1259. King Henry the third commanded a generall Assembly to be made at this Crosse, where he in proper person commanded the Maior, that on the next day follow∣ing, he should cause to be sworne before the Aldermen, every Stripling, of 12. yeeres of age, or upward, to be true to the King and his heires, Kings of Eng∣land. Also, in the yeere 1262. the same King caused to be read at Pauls Crosse, a Bull, obtained from Pope Vrban the fourth, as an absolution for him, and for all that were sworne to maintaine the Articles made in Parliament at Oxford. Also, in the yeere 1299. the Deane of Pauls accursed, at Pauls Crosse, all those which had searched in the Church of S. Martin in the field, for an hoord of gold, &c. This Pulpit-crosse was by tempest of lightning and thunder, defaced. Thomas Kempe, Bishop of London, new builded it, in forme as it now standeth. In the yeere 1561. the fourth of Iune, betwixt the houres of three and foure of the clocke in the afternoon,Pauls stee∣ple and Church newly burne. the great spire of the steeple of S. Pauls Church, was fired by lightning, which brake forth (as it seemed) two or three yards beneath the foot of the Crosse, and from thence it burnt downeward the spire to the battlements, stone-worke, and Bels, so furiously, that within the space of 4▪ houres, the same steeple, with all the roofes of the Church, were consumed, to the great sorrow and perpetuall re∣membrance of the beholders. After this mischance, the Queenes Majestie dire∣cted her Letters to the Maior,Speedy repairing of Pauls Church. willing him to take order for speedy repairing of the same: And she, of her gracious disposition, for the furtherance thereof, did presently give and deliver in gold,The Queenes gift. one thousand Markes; with a warrant for a thousand Loads of Timber, to be taken out of her Woods, or else-where. The Citizens also gave first a great benevolence, and after that three Fif∣teenes to be speedily paid. The Clergie of England, within the Province of Canturbury,Benevo∣lence. granted the fortieth part of the value of their Bene∣fices, charged with first fruits; the thir∣tieth part of such as were not so char∣ged; but the Clergie of London Dio∣ces, granted the thirtieth part of all that payed first fruits, and the twentieth part of such as had paid their fruits. Six Citizens of London, and two Pe∣tie Canons of Pauls Church, had charge to further and oversee the worke, wher∣in such expedition was used, that with∣in one Moneth next following the bur∣ning thereof, the Church was covered
with boords and lead, in manner of a false roofe against the weather, and be∣fore the end of the said yeere, all the said Iles of the Church were framed out of new timber, covered with lead, and fully finised. The same yeere also, the great roofes of the West and East ends were framed out of great timber in Yorkshire, brought thence to London by Sea, and set up, and covered with lead, the North and South ends were framed of timber, and covered with lead, before April, 1566. Concerning the Steeple, divers mo∣dels were devised and made, but little else was done, through whose default God knoweth: it was said, that the mo∣ney appointed for the new building of the Steeple, was collected. Monuments in this Church, be these: First,Monu∣ments in Pauls as I read of Erkenwalde, Bishop of London, buried in the old Church, a∣bout the yeere of Christ, 700. whose body was translated into the new work, in the yeere 1140. being richly shri∣ned, above the Quire, behinde the high Altar. Sebba, or Seba, King of the East Sa∣xons, was first buried in the old Church, afterward removed into the new, and laid in a coffin of stone, or gray Marble, having this Inscription hanging by it: Hic jacet Sebba,Church. At the en∣trance of the north side or Ile of the Quire. Rex orientalium Saxonū, qui conversus fuit ad fidem per Erken∣waldum, Londonens. Episcopum, Anno Christi, 677. Vir multum Deo devo∣tus, actibus religiosis, crebris precibus, & piis Eleemosynarum fructibus plurimum intentus, vitam privatam & Monasti∣cam cunctis Regni divitiis & honoribus praeferens. Qui cum regnasset Ann. 30. habitum Religiosum accepit, per benedi∣ctionem Waltheri Londinensis Antistitis, qui praefato Erkenwaldo successit. De quo Venerabilis Beda, in Historia Gentis An∣glorum, &c. Ethelred, King of the West Saxons, was like wise buried in the old Church, and after removed, lying next unto King Sebba, and this Inscription fastned by him: Hic jacet Ethelredus, Anglorum Rex, filius Edgari Regis,In ano∣ther cof∣fin of gray Marble by the other. cui in die consecrati∣onis hic post impositam Coronam,Etbelred, sirnamed the unrea∣dy. fertur S. Dunstanus Cantuar. Archiepiscopus dira praedixisse his verbis: Quoniam a∣spirasti ad Regnum per mortem fratris tui, in cujus sanguine conspiraverunt An∣gli, cum ignominiosa Matre tui: Non deficiet Gladius de domo tua, saeviens in te omnibus vitae tuae, interficiens de semine tuo, quousque Regnum tuum transferatur in Regnum alienum, cujus ritum & linguam, gens cui praesides non novit; nec expiabitur, nisi longa vindi∣cta peccatum tuum, & peccatum Ma∣tris tuae, & peccata virorum, qui inter∣fuêre consilio illius nequam. Quae sicut à viro sancto praedicta erant, evenerunt: Nam Ethelredus variis praeliis per Suanū Danorum Regem, filium{que} suum Canutū fatigatus & fugatus, ac tandem Londini arcta obsidione conclusus, miserè diem o∣biit, Anno Dominicae Incarnationis, 1017. postquam Annis 36. in magna tribulatione regnasset. William Norman, Bishop of London, in the reignes of the Kings, Edward the Confessor, and William the Conqueror, de∣ceased Anno 1070. and was after newly buried in the body of the Church, with this Epitaph or Memory: Gulielmo, viro sapientia & vitae sanctitate claro,Being first buri∣ed in the Quire, & afterward removed into the body of the Church, at the Citi∣zens ear∣nest suit, and upon good oc∣casion. qui primùm Edwardo Regi & Con∣fessori familiaris, nuper in Episcopum Londinensem erectus; nec multò pòst a∣pud invictissimum Principem Guilielmū Angliae Regem ejus nominis primum: Ob prudentiam, fidem{que} singularem, in Con∣cilium adhibitus; Amplissima tunc urbi celeberrimae privilegia ab eodem impetra∣vit: Senatus populus{que} Londinensis bene merenti posuit. Sedit Episcopus Annos 20. Decessit Anno à Christo nato, 1070. Haec tibi (clare Pater) posuerunt Marmora Cives, Praemia non meritis aequiparanda tuis. Nam{que} sibi populus te Londoniensis amicum Sensit, & huic urbi non leve praesidium. Reddita libertas duce te, donata{que} multis:
Te duce, res fuerat publica muneribus. Divitias, genus, & formam brevis opprimat hora, Haec tua sed pietas & benefacta manent. To Wiliam, a man famous in wisedome and holinesse of life, who first with S. Ed∣ward the King and Confessor being fa∣miliar, of late preferred to be Bishop of London, and not long after (for his pru∣dencie and sincere fidelity) admitted to be of Councell with the most victorious Prince, William, King of England, of that name the first, who obtained of the same, great and large priviledges to this famous Citie. The Senate and Citizens of London, to him, having well deserved, have made this. Hee continued Bishop twenty yeeres, and dyed in the yeere af∣ter Christs Nativity, 1070. These Marble Monuments to thee thy Citizens assigne, Rewards (O Father) far unfit to those deserts of thine. Thee unto them a faithfull friend thy London people found, And to this Towne, of no small weight, a stay both sure and sound. Their Liberties restor'd to them, by meanes of thee have beene, Their Publike weale by meanes of thee, large gifts have felt and found. The Riches, Stocke, and beauty brave, one houre hath them supprest: Yet these thy vertues and good deeds, with us (for ever) rest. The Lord Maior of London,This man is termed by some Richard de Gravesend. and the Aldermen his brethren, upon those so∣lemne dayes of their resort to Pauls, have long time used to walke to the Grave-stone, where this Bishop lyeth buried, in remembrance of their former priviledges by him obtained. And now of late yeeres, there is an Inscription fastned to that Pillar which is next his Grave;Right a∣gainst the little South doorein the lower Church. termed, The revivali of a most worthy Prelaes remembrance: There erected at the sole cost and char∣ges of the Right Honourable and wor∣thily affected, Sir Edward Barkham, Knight, Lord Maior of the Citie of Lon∣don, Anno 1622. speaking thus to the walkers in Pauls: Walkers, whosoere ye be,Set up at the Lord Maiors cost and charges. If it prove you chance to see Vpon a solemne Scarlet day, The Citie-Senate passe this way, Their gratefull Memory for to show Which they the reverend ashes owe Of Bishop Norman, here inhum'd, By whom this Citie hath assum'd Large proviledges: Those obtain'd By him, when Conquerour William raign'd: This being by thankfull Barkham's minde renu'd, Call it The Monument of Gratitude. Hic jacet Magister Fulco Lovell,An inscri∣ption in the wall. quondam Archidiaconus Colcestriae. Floruit sub Henrico 3. Rege. Hic requiescit in Domino Rogerus cogno∣nomento Niger,In the midst of Quire, neere to the place where they stand to heare Sermons. quondam Canonicus hu∣jus Ecclesiae S. Pauli: Ac deinde in Lon∣dinens. Episcopum consecratus Anno Salutis, 1228. vir in literatura profun∣dus, moribus honestus ac per omnia lau∣dabilis, Christianae Religionis amator, ac defensor strenuus. Qui cum pastorale Officium vigilanter & studiosè rexisset Annis 14. diem suum clausit extremum, apud Manerium suum de Stebunheath, 3. Calend. Octob. An. Christi, 1241. Regnante Rege Henrico 3. Contigit his diebus, dum Episcopus iste Ro∣gerus in hac Ecclesia ante majus Altare staret infulatus ad celebrandum divina, quod tanta in aëre facta est nubium densitas, ut vix alterum discernere pos∣sit, quam confestim secuta est tonitrui horribilis concussio, cum tanta fulminis coruscatione, ac faetore intolerabili, ut omnes qui aderunt rapidè fugientes, ni∣hil verius quàm mortem expectarent. So∣lus Episcopus cum uno Diacono remansit intrepidus. Aëre tandem purgato, E∣piscopus residuum rei divinae explevit.
Epitaphium ejus super Tumulo. Ecclesiae quondam Praesul praesentis, in Anno M. bis C. quater X. jacet hic Rogerus humatus. Hujus erat manibus Domino locus iste dicatus: Christe suis precibus veniam des, tolle reatus. Hic infra jacet corpus Magistri Thomae de Evre,At the en∣tring the middle doore of the Quire, a faire pla∣ted stone. Legum Doctoris, istius Ecclesiae S. Pauli quondam Decani, qui die nono Mensis Octobris, Anno Domino Mille∣simo, quadringentesimo, & sui Decanatus Anno 12. diem suum clausit extremum. Cuius animae propitietur Deus, Amen. Hic in Domino obdormivit Iohannes Gan∣davensis, A very goodly Tombe, curiously framed of white stone, ha∣ving his Lance & Target hanging by it. vulgò de Gaunt, à Gandavo Plandriae urbe loco natali, ita denomina∣tus, Edwardi 3. Regis Angliae filius, à patre Comitis Richmondiae titulo orna∣tus. Tres sibi uxores in Matrimonio da∣xit: Primam, Blancham, filiam & hae∣redem Henrici, Ducis Lancastriae, per quem amplissimam adiit haereditatem: Nec solum Dux Lancastriae, sed etiam Leicestriae, Lincolniae, & Derbiae Comes effectus: Ecuius sobole Imperatores, Re∣ges, Principes, & Proceres propagati sunt plurini. Alteram habuit uxorem Con∣stantiam (quae hic contumelatur) filiam & haeredem Petri, Regis Castiliae & Le∣gionis, cuius iure optimo titulo Regis Ca∣stiliae & Legionis usus est. Haec unicam illi peperit filiam Katharinam, ex qua ab Henrico Reges Hispaniae sunt propagati. Tertiam vero uxorem duxit Katharinā, ex Equestri Familia, & eximia pulchri∣tudine foeminam, ex qua numerosam sus∣cepit prolem: unde genus ex Matre du∣xit Henricus 7. Rex Angliae prudentis∣simus, cuius foe licissimo coniugio cum Ed∣wardi 4. filia, è stirpe Eboracensi, Regiae illae Lancastriensium & Eboracensium Familiae, ad exoptatissimam Angliae pa∣cem coaluerunt. Illustrissimus hic Princeps, cogno∣mento Plantagenet, Rex Casti∣liae & Legionis, Dux Lancastriae, Comes Richmondiae, Leice∣striae, Lincolniae & Derbiae, Locumtenens Aquitaniae, Mag∣nus Senescallus Angliae, Obiit Anno 22. Regni Regis Richardi 2. Anno{que} Domini, 1399. Hic requiescit Simon Burley,Vnder a faire Mo∣nument in the North Walke a∣gainst the Quire. Banerettus, Quinque Portuum Praefectus, Ordinis Garterii Miles, & Richardo 2. Consili∣arius longè charissimus. Connubio sibi coniunctas habuit ex amplissimis Famili∣is duas uxores: alteram Staffordiae, al∣teram Baronis de Roos filiam. Ver diffi∣cilimo illo tempore, cum inter Angliae pro∣ceres omnia sub iuvene Principe simulta∣tibus agitarentur, in tantū nōnullorū odi∣um incurrit, ut Parliamentaria authori∣tate capite plectetur, Anno Domini, 1388. Posteri autem eadem postea au∣thoritate sub Rege Henrico quarto sunt restituti. Obiit Anno Salutis, 1398. Per versus patet hos, Anglorum qui jacet hic flos,Within the North wall buri∣ed. Legum qui tuta dictavit vera statuta: Ex Hengham dictus, Radulphus vir benedictus. Anno 1308. In the North Walke, against the Quire, lye all these buried: Sir Iohn Poultney, Citizen, Draper, and Lord Maior of London, in the yeere 1348. lyeth buried in a faire Chappell, builded by himselfe, on the North side of Pauls Quire, wherein he founded 3. Chaplaines. Hamond Chickwell, six times L. Maior of London, 1328. Henry Guildford, Clarke, at the Altar of the Apostles, 1313. Richard Newport, Bishop of London, 1318. William Chatesleshunt, Canon in the New Worke, who had a Chauntrie there. Sir Nicholas Wokendon, Knight, at the Altar of S. Thomas, in the new Worke, 1323. Iohn Cheshul, Bishop of London, 1279. Robert Monden, and Iohn Monden, his brother, both Canons, in the New Worke, 1332. Richard de Plesseys lyeth in the North Walke, just before S. Georges Chappel, Anno 1361.
William Melford, and Richard de Pla∣cito, both Archdeacons of Colchester, 1345. lye buried before Saint Thomas Chappell. Adam de Burie,Holmes Colledge. Lord Maior of Lon∣don in the yeere 1364. lyes buried in a Chappell of S. Mary Magdalen, or the Holy Ghost, called Holmes Colledge, be∣cause Roger Holmes, Chancellour and Prebend of Pauls, was there buried, in the yeere 1400. The Dutchesse of Bedford, Sister to Philip, Duke of Burgundy, Anno Dom. 1433. Robert Fitz-Hugh,In the Quire. Bishop of London, Anno, 1435. Perpetuae pietati Sacrum. Guil. Herberto, Pembrochiae Comiti, Equi∣ti Aurato,A very beautifull Tombe, wherein he lyeth buried with his wife. praenobilis ordinis Anglici. Hen. 8. à Cubiculis: Edwardi 6. R. Equitum Magistro: Walliae Praesidi: Tumultu Occidentali cum Russello & Grayo Baronibus paribus auspiciis sum∣mae rerum praeposito: Maria Reginae con∣tra perduelles ac expeditione ad Augu∣stam Veromanduorum bis totius exerci∣tus duci: bis summo in agro Caletum limitum Praefecto: Elizabethae Reginae Officiorum seu magno Regiae Magistro. Pariter & Dominae Annae ex vetustae Parorum gente oriundae, Sorori Katha∣rinae Reginae, Hen. 8. R. sexto matri∣monio conjunctae, ac Marchionis North∣hamptionii, prudentissimae Feminae, pie∣tatis, religionis, probitatis, omnisque A∣vitae virtutis retinentissimae fidis Co∣mitis conjugi. Secunda conjuge supersti∣te, Georgio Salopiae Comite genita, in∣signi praeter antiquum Nobilitatis De∣cus, uirtute femina. Liberis relictis ex prima Henrico Pembr Comiti. Edwardo Equiti Aurato. Domina Anna, Bar. Talbot nupta. Henr. F. ac Comes P. P. Chatis. sibi ac suis P. Obiit Aetatis, Salutis, Anno 63. 1569. Si quis erat prudes unquam fidus{que} Senator,Right o∣ver a∣gainst the Fle of Pembrokes Tombe, in the same Ile. Si quis erat Patriae charus amans{que} suae, Si quis ad externas Legatus idoneus oras, Si cui justitiae cura bonique suit, Is Masonus erat, sit tota Britannia testis, Testis amor Procerum, sit populique favor, Tempore quinque suo, reguantes ordine vidit, Ho à Consiliis quacuor ille fuit. Tres & sex decies vixit non amplius annos; Hic tegitur corpus, spiritus astra tenet. Hunc Tumulum Conjux posuit dilecta marito, Quem{que} viro posuit, destinat ipsa sibi. Triste Nepos Carmen, quem fecit adoptio natum, Tum Patris inscripsit, tum Patrui Tumulo. Obiit Anno, 1566. Alexandro Nowello,A faire Monumēt in the wall above Iohn of Caunts Tombe. Lancastriensi, prisca Nowellorum gente oriundo, Theologiae Doctori, Aedis S. Pauli Decano, ad ex∣emplum hospitali, Rob. Nowelli, cujus hic cum suis miscentur cineres, Fratri, & opum quae sibi jure testamentario ces∣serunt, diribitori pientissimo. Marianis temporibus propter Christum exulanti: Reducum. verae Religionis, contra An∣gliae Papistas duobus Libris assertori primae & ultimae quadragesimalis Con∣cionis per an. 30. p. m. continuos ad S. E∣lizabetham, summa libertate Praeconi; Scholae Middletonianae Patrono; Coll. Aenei Nasi Oxonii, ubi ab anno aeta∣tis 13. Annos 13. studuit, 13. studio∣sis & 200. Libris annuis opera, & im∣pensis suis ampliati: Praesidi Scholae Paulinae plurimorum bonorum auctori: Pietatis frequentissimis Concionibus & triplici Catechismo propagatori: qui pub∣licum se in utrius{que} Academiae, & Ec∣clesiarum exterarum testimonium, at{que} aeternorum Principum Edwardi 6. & Elizabethae judicum procerumque provocavit: Pauperum (Literatorum
praecipuè) nutritori: afflictorum morbis corporis vel animi consolatori. Hoc Sepulchrum ob munificentiam & merita erga Remp. & optimum statum Ecclesiae suae ab eo pervigili administrat. redditum, Exec. O. D. S. M. Posuit. Quam speciosa Vestigia Evangelizantium pacem! Exul quae amisit primaevo flore Nowellus, Foenore centena repperit aucta redux Dat Christus, reddit danti longaevus honores, Reddenti aeternos gratia dantis habet, Praeco, Auctor, Condus, Christo, Colit, Ampliat, ornat, Voce, Libris, Opibus, Sabbatha, Templa, Schola; Dans, meditans, orans, Christi expiravit in ulnis, Sic oritur, floret, demoritur{que} Deo. Sedit B. R. P. & Ecclesiae P. M. 42. Nonagenarius, cum nec animi nec corporis occuli caligarent. O∣biit, Anno Domini, 1601. Feb. 13. Virtuti & Honori Sacrum. Franciscus Walsinghamus,There is neither Tomb, or any other Monu∣ment, but only this Inscripti∣on. ortus Familia multis seculis illustri, claritatem gene∣ris Nobilitate, ingenii praestantibus{que} a∣nimi dotibus superavit. Puer, ingenuè domi educatus, generosis moribus arti∣bus{que} optimis animum excoluit. Adoles∣cens, peregrinatus in exteras Regiones, earum Instituta, Linguas, Policiam, ad civilem scientiam rei{que} publicae usum didicit. Iuvenis, exilium Maria reg∣nante subiit voluntarium Religionis er∣go. Serenissimae Reginae Elizabethae, ma∣tura jam aetate, Orator fuit apud Gal∣lum, turbulentissimo tempore, annis cō∣pluribus: rursum bis in Galliā, semel in Scotiam, semel in Belgiam, super gravis∣simis Principis negotiis Legatione fun∣ctus est: ei{que} annis sedecim ab intimis Conciliis & secretis fuit, ac triennium Cantellarius Ducatus Lancastriae. Qui∣bus in muneribus tanta cum prudentia, abstinentia, munificentia, moderatio∣ne, pietate, industria & sollicitudine versatus est; ut à multis periculis Patri∣am liberarit, servarit Rempublicam, conformarit pacem, juvare cunctos stu∣duerit, imprimis quos doctrina aut bel∣lica virtus commendarit, seipsum deni∣que neglexerit, quo prodisset aliis, eos∣que valetudinis & facultatum suarum dispendio sublevaret. In Matrimonio habuit lectissimā feminam Vrsulam, è stirpe S. Barborum, antiquae Nobilivatis: E quq unicam filiam sus∣cepit, Franciscam, Philippo Sydneio primùm nuptam: deinde honoratissimo Comiti Essexiae Obiit Apr. 6. 1590. Shall Honour,These Verses, called Acrosticks are also there han∣ged up. Fame, and Titles of renowne In clods of clay be thus inclosed still? Rather will I, though wiser wits may frowne, For to inlarge his fame, extend my skill. Right gentle Reader, be it knowne to thee, A famous Knight doth here interred lye, Noble by birth, renown'd for policie, Confounding foes, which wrought our jeopardy. In forraine Countries their intents he knew, Such was his zeale to doe his Countrie good, When dangers would by enemies ensue, As well as they themselves he understood. Lanch forth ye Muses into streames of praise, Sing and sound forth praise-worthy harmony; In England Death cut off his dismall dayes, Not wrong'd by death, but by false trechery. Grudge not at this unperfect Epitaph, Herein I have exprest my simple skill, As the first fruits proceeding from a graffe,
Make then a better whosoever will. Disce quid es, quid eris, Memor esto quod morieris E. W. England,A Table hung up∣on the same Pil∣lar by the other of Sir Francis Walson∣gham, without any other Monumēt for each of them. Netherland, the Heavens and the Arts, The Souldiers and the World have made sixe parts Of the Noble Sidney, for none will suppose, That a small heape of stones can Sidney inclose. His body hath England, for she it bred. Netherland his bloud, in her defence shed. The Heavens have his Soule, the Arts have his Fame; All Souldiers the griefe: the VVorld his good Name. Hic jacet Robertus Benn, de Newport Cranley, in Comitatu Surrey, Gene∣rosus. Qui obiit decimo die mensis Fe∣bruarii, Anno Verbi Incarnati, 1606. Cum ante annos triginta, in vigore sci∣licet aetatis suae, mortis non immemor, Sepulturae sibi locum in hac Ecclesia à Decano & Capitulo impetraverat. hanc novissimam & ultimam suam volunta∣tem, Elizabetha Benn, dilecta Conjux ejus executa est. Veniet iterum qui me in lucem reponet dies. Ioannes Wolleius, Eques Auratus, Reginae Elizabethae à Secretioribus Conciliis, Secretarius Linguae Latinae, Cancella∣rius Ordinis Periscelidis: Doctrina, Pie∣tate, Fide, Gravitate clarissimus. Obiit Anno 1595. Wolleii,A very goodly Tombe, erected betweene the Chap∣pels of St. George, and our Lady, enclosing the bodies of Sir Iohn Wolley, his wife, and Sir Francis Wolley, his son, buri∣ed in Anno 1611. clarum nomen, Natusqüe Paterque, Ambo Equites, Natus Franciscus Patre Ioanne: Clarus, ut haeredem virtutis, amoris, honoris Praestaret, Monumenta sibi haec, & utrique Parenti Constituit, generis, qui nominis, unicus haeres: Tam citò claros est defecisse dolendum. Ille Pater, lumen literarum Nobile, sydus Oxoniae, ex meritis Reginae accitus Elizae, Vt qui à Secretis cum scriberat illa Latinè, Atque à Conciliis cum consultaret in Aula, At Periscelidis qui Cancellarius esset, Tantum illo ingenio voluir, tantum instat in illo. Non minùs omnimoda virtute illa inclyta Mater, Nobilibus Patre & Fratre illustrissima Moris; Clara domo per se: sed Elizam ascivit Eliza Clarior ut fieret Wolleio ornata marito, Quo viduata, viro, quo non praeclarior alter, Nubat Egertono, repetat sed mortuae primum. Franciscus tandem, at nimium citò, utrumque sequutus, Hic jacet ante pedes Eques Illustrissimus, illis, Haec poni jussit, seque & tria nomina poni, Sic voluit, placuit Superis pia grata voluntas. Discite mortales, memores sic esse Parentum, Discite qui legitis, sic, sic petit aethera virtus. Inclyta Ioannes Londini gloria gentis,A comely Tombe, at entring into the South Ile of the Quire. Is tibi qui Quondam Paule Decanus erat, Qui toties magno resonabat pectore Christum, Doctor & interpres fidus Evangelii: Qui mores hominum multum sermone diserta Formârat, vitae sed probitate magis. Quique Scholam struxit celebrem cognomine Iesu, Hac dormit tectus membra Coletus humo.
Floruit sub Henrico 7. & Hen∣rico 8. Reg. Obiit Anno Do∣mini, 1519. Disce mori mundo, Vivere disce Deo. This Epitaph was made by William Lily, the first Schoolemaster of Pauls Schoole: which was founded by Iohn Colet, Do∣ctor in Divinity, and Deane of Pauls: sonne to Sir Henry Colet, Mercer, twice Lord Maior of London. Memoriae S. Gulielmo Hewit,Next a∣bove this Tombe in the same South Ile. Armigero Roberti Hewit A. Killamarch, in Agro. Derbiensi Filio, secundo genito. Qui mortuo Fratre, Natu majore, Paternam crevit haereditatem, Posterisque transmittit: Nobilem Mercaturam exercuit. Vita integerrima fuit, & moribus suavissi∣mis. Bonarum literarum studia promo∣vit. Egenorum proventus largiter auxit. Liberalitate, Charitate, Insignis, Nec minor Pietate. Religionem, cum Ministris sacris, & coluit & fovit. Ita per omnia se ubique gessit, ut Probitatis, Comitatis, Candoris Vivum exemplar. Christum Redemptorem cogitans, Vitam ante mortem consummaverit. Filios genuit quatuor, Ioannem, Salomonem, Thomam, Gulielmum: Et Filias duas. Mariam, Elizabetham. Annum LXXVII. agens, XII. Iun. CIO. D. XCIX. ad patriam coelestem evocatus, Magnum sui desiderium reliquit Posteris, Qui hoc piè ac moeven. M. S. Gulielmus Cokainus Eques Auratus,Adjoy∣ning to the other in that Ile▪ Civis & Senator Bondinensis, sep∣temque ab hinc annis Vrbis Praefe∣ctus: Antiquâ Cokainorum Derbi∣ensium Familiâ oriundus. Qui bo∣no publico vixit, & damno publico decessit, & gaudio publico, Regem Iacobum, ad decorem hujus domus Dei senescentis jam & corrugatae re∣stituendum, solenniter huc venien∣tem consulatu suo, magnificè exce∣pit: Idcirco in Templo publico, ad aeternam rei memoriam Hîc situs est. At verò & Famae celebritas, quae viget in ore Hominum, & gloria Beatitu∣dinis, quam migrando adeptus est, & splendor Sobolis, quam numero∣sam genuit, atque nobilèm reliquit, junctim efficiunt omnia, ne dicatur Hîc situs est. Vnà cum illo, tot homines mortui, quot in illo defunctae sunt virtutes; simul∣que & acies ingenii, & popularis elo∣quii suada, & morum gravitas, & probitas vitae, & candor mentis, & animi constantia, & prudentia singu∣laris, & veri Senatoris insignia Hîc sepulta sunt. Jam tuum est Lector, felicitatis ad cul∣men anhelare per ista vestigia laudis, & venerandi imitatione exempli cu∣rare, ne unquam virtutis sic semina, intereant, ut dicatur Hîc sepulta sunt. Obiit 20. Octob. An. Dom. 1626. Et Aetatis suae 66. Hic Nicolaum me Baconem conditum Existima illum,A faire Tombe in the midst of the Chancell, in the same Ile. tam diu Britannici Regni secundum Columen, exitium Malis, Bonis Asylum, coeca quem non extulit Ad hunc honorem sors, sed equitas, fides, Doctrina, Pietas, unica & Prudentia,
Neu morte reptum crede: qui unica brevi Vita perennes emeruit duas, agit Vitam secundam coelites inter animos, Fama implet orbem, vita quae illi tertia est. Hac positum in Ara est corpus, olim animi domus, Ara dicata sempiternae memoriae. Sacrum Memoriae. D. Chr. Hattoni,A very faire and goodly Tombe out of the Chancell, above it. Guil. Fil. Io. Nepo. An∣tiquiss. Hattonorum Gente oriundi. Regiae Majestatis D. Elizabethae ex No∣bilibus Stipatoribus: L. Vici: Sacratio∣ris Camerae Generosorū unius, Praetori∣anorum Militum Ducis: Regii Pro-Camerarii: Sanctioris Concilii Senato∣ris, Summi Angliae ac Oxon. Acad. Cancellarii: Ordinis Nobiliss. San-Georgiani de Periscellide Equitis. Maximo Principis omnium que bono∣rum moerore (cum 51. Annos coe∣lebs vixisset) 20. Novemb. Anno 1591. in Aedibus suis Holburnae piè fato functi. Guil. Hattonus, Eques Auratus, ejus ex Sorore, Nepos, adoptione Fili∣us, ac haeres moestissimus, Pietatis ergô posuit. Quae vero,These ses are in∣scribed on the other side of the Tombe. quae digna tuis virtutibus (Heros) Constituent Monumenta tui? Si qualia debet, Posteritas, si quanta tibi prudentia justi Quantus amor, si quanta fuit facundia Linguae, Et docus & pulchro veniens in corpore virtus, Illaque munificae semper tibi copia dextrae; Denique quanta fuit magna tibi gratia quondam Principis, Eque tuis quae creverat inclyta factis. Gloria tanta tibi statuant Monumenta Nepotes. Ipsa tuos caperet vix tota Britanuia Manes. Stay,Vpon a Monumēt fixed on a Pillar by the Tomb▪ and behold the mirror of a dead mans house, Whose lively person would have made thee stay and wonder; Looke, and withall learne to know how to live and dye renowned; For never can cleane life and famous Herses sunder. Hatton lyes here, whose name Hugh Lupus gave, Lupus the Silices, sonne of William Conqueror, For Nigel, his cleere servants sake, Worship and Laud: Lo, there the Spring; looke here the Honor of his Ancestrie. When Nature moulded him, her thoughts were most on Mars; And all the Heavens to make him goodly, were agreeing: Thence was he valiant, active, strong, and passing comely, And God did grace his minde and spirit with gifts excelling. Nature commends her workmanship to Fortunes charge; Fortune presents him to the Court, and to the Queene: Queene Eliz. (O Gods deare Handmaid) his most Miracle, Now hearken, Reader, rarity not heard nor seene. This blessed Queene, Mirror of all that Albion rul'd, Gave favour to his faith, and precepts to his hopefull time; First,First, she made him one of her Moble Pentio∣ners. train'd him in the stately band of Pentioners: Behold, how humble hearts make easie steps to climbe. High carriage, honest life, heart ever loyall, Diligence, delight in duty, God doth reward: So did this worthy Queene, in her just thoughts of him,Next, Captaine of her guard. And (for her safety) made him Captaine of her Guard.
Now doth she prune this Vine,Next, Vice Chamber∣laine, and of the Councell. and from her sacred brest Lessons his life, makes wise his heart for her great Councels, And so Vice-Chamberlaine; where forreine Princes eyes Might well admire her choice, wherein she most excels. So sweetly tempred was his soule with vertuous Balme; Religious,Lastly, L. Chancel∣lor of Eng∣land. just to God and Caesar in each thing; That he aspired to the highest Subjects Seat, Lord Chancelor (measure and conscience of an holy King.) Robe, Coller, Garter, dead Figures of great Honor, Almes-deeds, with faith, honest in word, franke in dispence, The poore's friend, not popular, the Churches Pillar; This Tombe shewes the one, the Heavens shrine all the other. Franciscus Florus ad memoriam Heri sui defuncti luctus{que} sui solatium posuit. Anno Domini, 1593. Thomas Heneage, Eques Auratus, ex an∣tiqua Heneagiorum Familia,A very goodly Tombe Eastward behind the high Altar. in Comi∣tatu Lincolniensi oriundus; Ingenii splendore, morum, elegantia, orationis facultate, & optimis studiis ornatissi∣mus, Camerae Regiae Thesaurarius, Pro-Camerarius, Ducatus Lancastriae Cancellarius, & ab intimis Conciliis Elizabethae Reginae, cui privatae & principi, fide & fama integra maximis negotiis spectatus, summa cum gratia, Annis 38. inservivit: Hic secundum Christi Adventum in pace expectat. Vna cum Anna, uxore charissima, filia Nicolai Points, Equitis Aurati, ex Joanna, filia Thomae Baronis Berkley, femina lectissima, sanctis∣simis moribus, & à teneris ad mor∣tem usque Elizabethae Reginae prae∣dilecta Famula. Que illi unicum fi∣liolum infantia praereptum, & unica enixa filiam, Haeredem Elizabe∣tham, Moylo Finch, Equiti Aurato, enuptam. Obiit ille 17. Octob. An. Dom. 1594. Praeivit illa Novemb. An. Dom. 1592. Optimis & charissimis parentibus, Elizabe∣thae Finch moestissima hoc posuit. Iohn Elmar,Both these lye before S. Georges Chappell without Monu∣ments. Bishop of London, buried in Anno, 1594. Richard Fletcher, Bishop of London, buried in Anno, 1596. These are the glories of a worthy praise, Which (Noble Baskervile) here now are read, In honour of thy life, and latter dayes, To number thee among the blessed dead. A pure regard to thy Immortall part, A spotlesse Minde, a Body prone to paine, A giving Hand, and an un-vanquisht Heart, And all these Vertues void of all disdaine. And all these Vertues yet not so unknowne, But Netherlands, Seas, Indiaes, Spaine, and France, Can witnesse that these Honors were thine owne; Which they reserve, thy merit to advance: That Valour should not perish void of Fame, Nor Noble Deeds, but leave a Noble Name. Eustacius de Fauconbridge, Regis Iustici∣arius, Buried in the South Ile above the Quire within the wall. una atque altera Legatione per∣functus in Gallia, sub Ioanne & Henri∣co 3. Regibus: Quibus ab intimis Con∣ciliis, & supremus Angliae Thesaurari∣us fuit: Post Concessionem Guil. de San∣cta Maria huius Ecclesiae Antistitis, Electus est in Episcopum Londinen∣sem, Anno Verbi Incarnati, 1221. Consecratus à Benedicto, Roffensi Epis∣copo, cum jam obesset Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis. Quum{que} sedisset Annos 7. Menses 6. obiit diem pridiè Cal. No∣vemb. Anno Salutis, 1228.
Henricus de Wengham,He lies al∣so buried in the same South Ile above the Quire. Regi Henrico 3. à sacris, & Cancellarius, Decanus de To∣tenhale, & S. Martini London, Came∣rarius Gasconiae; Vir (ut inquit Flori∣logus) curialis, discretus, & circumspe∣ctus. Hee also lyeth bu∣ried there Electus Anno Christi 1259. Win∣toniensis Episcopus, consentire noluit. Tandem, post mortem Fulconis Basset, hujus Ecclesiae Pontificis, eodem anno in Episc. Londin. consecratus fuit, sed vix tribus annis sedit. Obiit Anno Salutis 126.At the East end behinde the high Altar. Hoc in loco requiescit in Domino Er∣kenwaldus 3. post Anglo-Saxonum in Britannia ingressum Episcopus Londinensis.Episcopi. Cujus in Episcopatu & ante Episcopatum vita & conversa∣tio fuit sanctissima;1. Mellitus. 2. Wina. 3. Erken∣waldus. 4. Walche∣rus. 5. Ingualdus 6. Egulplnes. 7. Wigherus. 8. Edbri∣thus. 9. Edgarus. 10. Ke∣walchus. 11. Edbal∣dus. 12. Edber∣tus. 13. Osmon∣dus. 14. Ethehto∣thus. 15. Celber∣tus. 16. Rebul∣pbus. 17. Swi∣thulphus. 18. Eadsi∣nus. 19. Wilsiue. 20. Ethel∣wardus. 21. Eadsta∣nus. ex Nobili Proso∣pia oriundus. Offae, Orientalium Saxonum Regis erat filius, ad fidem Christianam à Mellito primo Lon∣don. Episcopo, Anno Domini 642. conversus. Is priusquam Episcopus factus esset, dua praeclara construxit Monasteria sumptibus suis, de bonis quae jure haereditario sibi obvenerunt: unum sibi in finibus Australium Saxonum loco, qui Certesey vocatur: Alterum Edelburgae Sorori suae feminae lau∣datiffimae, ad Berching in ditione Orientalium Saxonum. In Episcopatum vero Anno Salutis, 675. à Theodoro, Dorobernensium sive Cantuariae Archiepiscualia sa∣cratus est. Sebbam, Orientalium Saxonum Regem ad Christi fidem convertit, & salutari Baptismatis un∣da suis manibus perfudit, qui statim mundo renuncians,Isli Episcopi in Margine notati, post Erkenwal∣dum, seria∣tim in Ca∣thedra Lon∣dinens. us{que} in tempora Edwardi senioris An∣glorum Re∣gis successe∣runt. Quo∣rum omni∣um adeo obsolevit memoria, ut nec eorum acta, nec mausolea sanur. se totum Deo ad∣dixit, & in hac ipsa Ecclesia Archa Marmorea (quae ad nostra usque tem∣pora permanet) sepultus est. Idem Erkenwaldus celeberrimum hoc S. Pauli Templum novis aedificiis auxit, proventubus locupletavit, & eidem immunitates nonnullas à Regibus impetravit. Tandem, circiter Annum Domini 683. spiritum Deo reddidit, postquam Annis 11. in Pontificatu se∣disset, & magnifico Sepulchro hic conditus est. quod nostra memoria circiter Annum Domini 1533. hoc loco visebatur. Michael Norborow,In the new workes of S. Dun∣stanes Chappell. Bishop of Lon∣don, 1361. Robert Brewer, Deane of Pauls, 1366. Adam de Bury, Lord Maior of Lon∣don, 1390. Ralph Baldocke,In our La∣dy Chap∣pell, at the East end of the Quire. Bishop of London, 1313. Robert Breybrooke, Canon of Lichfield, Bishop of London, & made Lord Chan∣cellour in the sixth yeere of King Ri∣chard the second.R. Baldocke was Foun∣der of that Chappell. Hee sate Bishop 20. yeeres, and deceased in Anno 1404. Iohn Stokesley, Bishop of London, An∣no 1539. Henry Lacy,In the new work of Pauls betweene our Lady Chappell and Saint Dunslanes. Earle of Lincolne, had a faire Monument erected for him with his picture in Armour, lying on it crosse-legged (like a Knight Templer) as one that professed his uttermost in∣deavour, for defence of the holy Land against the Infidels. He was buried in Anno 1310. and his Monument is great∣ly defaced. Some have noted that in digging the foundation of this new worke,Wil. Paston. Chappell on the South Ile of Pauls builded▪ Scalps of Oxen found in digging the foun∣dation. namely, of a Chappel on the South side of Pauls Church, there were found more than an hundred scalpes of Oxen or Kine, in the yeere one thousand three hundred and sixteene, which thing (say they) confirmed greatly the opinion of those, which have reported, that (of old time) there had been a Temple of Iupiter, and that there was daily sacrifice of beasts. Othersome both wise and learned, have thought the Buckes head borne before the Procession of Pauls, on Saint Pauls day, to signifie the like. But true it is, I have read an ancient Deed to this effect: Sir William Baud, Knight, the third of Edward the first, in the yeere 1274. on Candlemas day, granted to Harvy de Borham, Deane of Pauls, and to the Chapter there, that in consideration of twenty two Acres of ground or land, by them granted within their Mannor of Westley in Essex, to bee inclosed into his Parke of Curingham; hee would (for ever) upon the Feast day of the Conver∣sion of Paul in VVinter give unto them a good Doe, seasonable and sweete, and upon the Feast of the Commemoration
of Saint Paul in Summer,A Bucks head orn before the Processiō at Pauls. a good Buck, and offer the same at the high Altar, the same to bee spent amongst the Ca∣nons residents: the Doe to bee brought by one man at the houre of Procession, and thorow the Procession to the high Altar; and the bringer to have nothing: the Bucke to be brought by all his mey∣ney in like manner, and they to have payd unto them by the Chamberlaine of the Church twelve pence onely, and no more to be required. This Grant hee made, and for per∣formance, bound the Lands of him and his heyres to bee distrained on: and if the Lands should bee evicted, that yet he and his heires should accomplish the gift. Witnesses, Richard Tilbery, Wil∣liam de Wockendon, Richard de Harlowe, Knights, Peter of Stanford, Thomas of Waldon, and some others. Sir Walter Baude, sonne to William, confirmed this gift, in the thirtieth of the said King; and the witnesses there∣unto, were Nicholas de Wockendon, Rich. de Rokeley, Thomas de Mandevile, Iohn de Rochford, Knights, Richard de Broni∣ford, William de Markes, William de Ful∣ham, and other. Thus much for the Grant. Now, what I have heard by report, and have partly seene, it followeth: On the Feast day of the Commemo∣ration of Saint Paul, the Bucke being brought up to the steps of the high Al∣tar in Pauls Church, at the houre of Procession, the Deane and Chapter be∣ing apparelled in Coapes and Vest∣ments, with Garlands of Roses on their heads, they sent the body of the Bucke to baking, and had the head fixed on a Pole, borne before the Crosse in their Procession, untill they issued out of the VVest doore; where the Keeper that brought it, blowed the death of the Bucke, and then the Horners that were about the City, presently answe∣red him in like manner: For the which paines, they had each man of the Dean and Chapter, foure pence in mony, and their Dinner, and the Keeper that brought it, was allowed, during his a∣bode there (fore that service) Meate, Drinke, and Lodging, at the Deane and Chapters, charges, and five shillings in money at his going away, together with a Loafe of bread, having the picture of Saint Paul upon it, &c. There was belonging to the Church of Saint Paul, for both the dayes, two speciall sutes of Vestments, the one em∣broidered with Buckes, the other with Does, both given by the said Bauds (as I have heard.) Thus much for that matter. Now to the residue of the Monu∣ments which are beneath the staires, in the sides and body of the Church. Sir Iohn Beauchamp,In a comely Chappell in the bo∣dy of the Church, on the South side. Constable of Do∣ver, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knight of the Garter, the sonne of Sir Guy Beauchamp, Earle of Warwicke, and brother to Thomas Earle of Warwicke, lyeth buried in the body of the Church, on the South side, 1358. within a pro∣per Chappell purposely made for him. This deceased Nobleman (by igno∣rant people) hath been erroneously mis∣termed,Divers fond peo∣ples opi∣nion con∣cerning Duke Humfrey, buried in Pauls Church. and said to bee Duke Humfrey, the good Duke of Glocester: who lyeth honourably buried at Saint Albans, in Hartfordshire, twenty miles from Lon∣don. In idle and frivolous opinion of whom, some men (of late times) have made a solemne meeting at his Tombe, upon Saint Andrewes day in the mor∣ning (before Christmasse) and conclu∣ded on a breakfast or dinner, as assuring themselves to be servants, and to hold diversity of offices under the good Duke Humfrey. Likewise on May-day, Tankard-bea∣rers, Watermen, and some other of like quality beside, would use to come to the same Tombe early in the morning, and (according as the other) have deli∣vered serviceable presentation at the same Monument, by strewing herbes, and sprinkling faire water on it, as in the duty of servants, and according to their degrees and charges in Office. But as Master Stowe hath discreetly advised such as are so merrily disposed, or sim∣ply professe themselves to serve Duke Humfrey in Pauls:A due and fit Penāce for fond Duke Humfreyes idle ser∣vants. if punishment of lo∣sing their dinners daily there, bee not sufficient for them; they should be sent to St. Albans, to answer there for their disobedience, and long absence from their so highly well-deserving Lord
and Master, because in their merry dis∣position they please so to call him. Margaret, Countesse of Shrewsbury, in the Crowdes, or Iesus Chappell, as ap∣peareth by an Inscription on a Pillar there. Here before the Image of IESVS, lyeth the Worshipfull and right Noble Lady Mar∣garet,Margaret Countesse of Shrews∣bury, her Monumēt painted over the entry of Iesus chap∣pell. Countesse of Shrewsbury, late wife of the true and victorious Knight, and redoubtable Warriour, 1. Talbot, Earle of Shrewsbury; which Worship∣full man dyed in Guien, for the right of this Land. Shee was the first daugh∣ter, and one of the heyres of the right fa∣mous and renowned Knight, Richard Beauchamp, late Earle of Warwicke (which dyed in Roane) and of Dame E∣lizabeth his wife; the which Elizabeth was daughter and heyre to Thomas, late Lord Berkly, on his side, and on her mothers side, Lady Lisle, and Tyes. Which Countesse passed from this world the fourteenth day of Iune, in the yeere of our Lord 1468. On whose soule IE∣SVS have mercy, Amen. Wenlocke, by his last Will, dated 1477. appointed, that there should be dispended upon a Monument, over the Lady of Shrewsbury, where shee is buri∣ed, afore Iesus, one hundred pounds. He left Sir Humfrey Talbot his Super∣visor. This Sir Humfrey Talbot, Knight, Lord Marshall of the Towne of Callis, made his Will the yeere 1492. Hee was the younger sonne of Iohn Earle of Shrewsbury, and Margaret his wife. He appointed a Stone to be put in a Pillar, before the grave of his Lady Mother in Pauls, of his Portraiture and Armes, according to the Will of Iohn VVenlock: But for want of roome and lightsome∣nesse in that place, it was concluded, that the Image of Jesus should be curi∣ously painted on the wall in Pauls Church, over the doore that entreth into the said Chappell of Iesus, and the Portraiture also of the said Lady Mar∣garet, Countesse of Shrewsbury, knee∣ling in her mantle of Armes, with other of her Progeny; all which was so per∣formed, and remaineth till this day. In the Chappell of Jesus, Thomas Dowroy, William Lambe, 1578. and ma∣ny other have beene interred. Iohn of London under the North Roode, 1266. Iohn Lovell, Clarke. Iohn Romane. Iohn of Saint Olave. Walter Bloxley. Sir Allen Boxhul, Knight of the Gar∣ter, Constable of the Tower, Custos of the Forrest and Parke of Clarendon, the Forrest of Brokholt, Grovell, and Mel∣chet, buried beside S. Erkenwalds Shrine. Hic jacet Dominus Richardus de Piri∣ton,An In∣scription in brasse, by sir Iohn Beauchamps Tombe. quondam Archidiaconus Col∣cestriae, Canonicus & Stagiar, hujus Ecclesiae. Qui obiit 26. die Augusti, Anno Domini, 1387. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Iohn Nevil,In Saint Thomas Chappell, neere the North doore. Lord Latymer, in Anno 1542. whose widow was the last wife unto King Henry the eighth, lyeth there interred; but his Tombe is very much wronged and defaced. Thomas Lynacrus,A brasse Plate a∣bove in the wall, neere the North doore. Regis Henrici 8. Medicus, Vir & Graecè & Latinè at∣que in re Medica longè eruditissi∣mus. Multos aetate sua languentes, & qui jam animam desponderant, vitae restituit: Multa Galeni opera Latina lingua mira & singulari facundia ver∣tit. Egregium opus de emendata structura Latini sermonis, amicorum rogatu, paulò ante mortem edidit. Medicinae studiosis Oxoniae publicas lectiones duas, Cantabrigiae unam in perpetuum stabilivit. In hac Vrbe Collegium Medicorum fieri sua in∣dustria curavit, cujus & Praesidens proximus electus est: Fraudes dolos∣que mirè perosus, fidus amicis, omni∣bus ordinibus juxta charus: Aliquot annis antequam obierit Presbyter fa∣ctus. Plenus annis, ex hac vita mi∣gravit multùm desideratus, Ann. Do∣mini 1524. die 7. Octob. Vivat post Funera Virtus. Thomae Lynacro clarissimo Medico, Ioannes Caius posuit, Anno 1557. Memoriae Sacrum. Edwardo Stanhopo, Michaelis Stanho∣piex
ordine Equestri filio,A Monu∣ment ere∣cted in the wall, neere to the staires going up into the North Quire. Equiti Aurato, Legum Doctori, Episcopi Lndinensis Cancellario, Archiepi∣scopi Cantuariensis Vicario Gene∣rali, in publicis Ecclesiae & Reipub∣licae negotiis versatissimo. Qui certa spe in Christo resurgendi, piè placi∣deque animam Deo reddidit, die 16. Martii, 1608. Ioannes, Baro Stanhopus de Haring∣ton, & Michael Stanhopus, E∣ques Auratus, fratres moestissi∣mi, Officiosae Pietatis ergo P. P. Thomas Kempe,A comely Chappell founded by himself on the north side the body of the Church. Bishop of London, in a proper Chappell, termed of the Tri∣nity, lyeth there buried in Anno 1489. As appeareth not onely by his name and Armes thereon in divers places; but likewise by this ensuing inscription, engraven on a Plate, and fixed in the same Chappell. Infra Capellam istam requiescit corpus D. Thomae Kemp, quondam Episcopi Lon∣don, fundatoris eiusdem, & unius Can∣tariae perpetuae in eadem. Qui multa bona tempore vitae suae Ecclesiae Sancti Pauli dedit, & stetit 39. Annis, 84. diebus Episcopus London. Ac obiit 28. die mensis Martii, An. Domini 1489. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen. Richard Vaughan,In the same Chappell. likewise Bishop of London, lyeth buried in the said Chap∣pell, 1607. Richard Fitz-Iames,Beneath the north-west Pil∣lar, that supports Pauls stee∣ple, in a Chappell builded by himselfe. Bishop of London, lyeth buried under a faire Tombe, and in Saint Pauls Chappell, builded of Timber, with stayres mounting up thereto, over his Tombe of gray Mar∣ble, in Anno 1521. But this Chappell was burned by fire falling from the steeple, and his Tombe taken thence. Gulielmo Lilio,A Brasse plate fixed in the wall, by the great North doore. Pauliae Scholae olim Prae∣ceptori Primario, & Agnetae Conjugi, in sacratissimo hujus Templi Coemiterio hinc à tergo nunc destructo consepultis: Georgius Lilius, hujus Ecclesiae Canoni∣cus, parentum memoriae piè consulens, Tabellam hanc ab amicis conservatam, hic reponendam curavit. Obiit ille G. L. An. Dom. 1522. Calend. Mart. Vixit An. 54. Memoriae Sacrum. Thomas Ravis,A faire Tombe in the wall, at the up∣per end of the North Ile, below. claris natalibus Maul∣denae in Suthreia natus, Regius A∣lumnus in Schola VVestmonasteri∣ensi educatus, in Academiam Oxo∣niensem adscitus, omnes Academi∣cos honores consequutus, & Margi∣stratibus perfunctus, Decanus Eccle∣siae Christi ibidem constitutus, & bis Academiae Pro-Cancellarius. Vnde ob doctrinam, gravitatem, & spectatam prudentiam, à Rege Iaco∣bo, primùm ad Episcopatum Glo∣cestrensem provectus, deinde ad Londinensem translatus, & demum à Christo, dum Ecclesiae, Patriae, & Principi vigilaret, in Coelestem Pa∣triam evocatus, placidè pieque emi∣gravit, & quod mortale fuit, certa spe resurgendi hic deposuit, die 14. Decembris, An. Salutis 1609. Gulielmus Harington,In S.  Chappell, neere to the great South doore. Iurisconsultus, Pro∣tonotarius Apostolicus, D. Pauli Cano∣nicus, ex illis quos Residentiarios dicunt: Patria Eboracensis natus, in pago qui E∣stryngton vocitatur, Patre Gulielmo Ha∣ringtono, viro claro, genere orto in pago Commerlandiae non ignobili, qui Neu∣byging nuncupatur; & Matre Ioanna, Filia Gulielmi Haskae, aliter Balivi dicti, viri Generosi in eodem pago E∣stryngton nata: memor exitus vitae, qui omnibus horis impendet, hoc sibi Sepul∣chrum posuit. Anno Salutis humanae, 1523. Sixe Lines this Image shall delineate,A Table hanging on a Pil∣lar, in the South Ile. Hight Croft, high-borne, in spirit and vertue high; Approv'd, belov'd, a Knight, stout Mars his mate, Loves fire, Warres flame, in Heart, Head, Hand, and Eie: Which flame, Warres Comet, Grace now so resignes, That fixt in Heaven, in Heaven and Earth it shines. Prosopopeia. The Wombe and Tombe in Name be not so neere, As Life to Death,
and Birth is to the Beere. Oh! then how soone to Beere are Captaines brought, That now doe live, and dye now with a thought? Then, Captaines, stay and reade, still thinke on me, For, with a thought, what I am, you may be. As Mars neere Mors doth sound, So Mors neere Mars is found. 1. Da. of H. Hoc Saxo tegitur corpus Thomae Creke,Somwhat neere to the Con∣vocation staires, a faire pla∣ted stone upon the ground. L. Doctoris, & Almae Curiae Cantuar. de Arcubus Londini Ad∣vocatorum unius, viri utriusque Iuris tam Canonici quàm Civilis scientia non modo peritissimi, sed & eorun∣dem usu & praxi longo tempore ex∣ercitatissimi. Cujus in Clientem causas defendendo, industria quanta fuit, quanta integritas, quanta fides, quanta denique si quid contra vo∣tum, & (ut sibi videbatur) aequita∣tem, accidebat solicitudo, & ii qui e∣jus usi sunt patrocinio optimè praedi∣care possunt, & celebris illius famae memoria nunquam moritura verissi∣mè praedicavit. Honestè vixit, Neminem laesit, Suum cuique tribuit. Hic requiescit in Domino Gulielmus Dethick,In the bo∣dy of the Church, on the South side, a faire stone, thus inscribed. Eques Auratus, filius & haeres Gilberti Dethick, Equitis Au∣rati. Qui ambo fuerunt Garterii Principales Reges Armorum An∣gliae. Cor. hic An. 1584. Aetatis suae 48. Ille Anno 1612. Aetatis suae 70. in Domino obdormierunt, expe∣ctantes resurrectionem per Jesum Christum Salvatorem nostrum. Domina Thomasina sup. 40. Annos uxor praedict. Williel. & filii Georgius, Gilbertus & Henricus pietatis ergo posuerunt. Hic jacet Robertus Hare,A faire plated stone in the West end of the middle Ile. quondam Cler. Thesaur. & Scriptor Rotulorum de Re∣cept. & exitu Thesaur. Scaccarii. Qui obiit senex die 2. Novemb. An. 1611. Now, to close up all these Memories, concerning this Cathedrall Church of Saint Pauls, London, we may not be un∣mindfull of a very bountifull Benevo∣lence given thereto, by Master William Parker, whose worthy gifts deserve Vo∣lumes of Remembrance.Five hun∣dred pounds given by M. William Parker, to∣wards the glasing of Pauls win∣dowes. By his last Will and Testament he hath given the summe of five hundred pounds, to bee imployed in the repairing of the VVin∣dowes of Pauls Church, from the upper end of the Staires, from the first entring of the Quire, unto the upper end of the Church: By the order and direction of the Right Honourable the Lord Maior of the City of London, and the Right VVorshipfull the Aldermen, his Bre∣thren, for the time being. So are the expresse words, set downe in the Co∣decill annexed to his Will. Without the North gate of Pauls Church,Pater noster Rowe. from the end of the Old Ex∣change, VVest up Pater noster Rowe, by the two Lanes out of Pauls Church, the first out of the Crosse Isle of Pauls, the other out of the body of the Church, a∣bout the midst thereof, and so VVest to the golden Lyon, bee all of this Ward, as is aforesaid. The houses in this Streete, from the first North Gate of Pauls Church-yard, unto the next Gate, were first builded without the Wall of the Church-yard, by Henry Walleis, Maior, in the yeere 1282. The Rents of those houses goe to the main∣tenance of London Bridge. This Streete is now called Pater no∣ster Rowe, because of Stationers or Text-writers, that dwelled there, who wrote and sold all sorts of Bookes then in use, namely, A. B. C. with the Pater noster, Ave, Creed, Graces, &c. There dwelled also Turners of Beads,Pater noster makers. and they were called Pater noster ma∣kers, as I read in a Record of one Robert Nikke, Pater noster maker, and Citizen, in the reigne of Henry the fourth, and so of other. At the end of this Pater noster Rowe,Ave Mary lane. is Ave Mary lane, so called upon the like occasion, of Text-writers and Bead-makers then dwelling there. And at the end of that Lane is like∣wise Creed lane,Creed lane. late so called, but some∣time Spurrier Rowe, of Spurriers dwel∣ling there.Amen lane. And Amen lane is added thereunto, betwixt the South end of
Warwicke lane, and the North end of Ave Mary lane. At the North end of Ave Mary lane,Duke of Britaines house, since Pem∣brookes Inne, then Aburgaveny house, and now Sta∣tioners Hall. is one great House, builded of stone and timber, of old time pertaining to Iohn Duke of Britaine, Earle of Richmond, as appeareth by the Records of Edward the second. Since that, it was called Pembrookes Inne, neere unto Ludgate, as belonging to the Earles of Pembrooke in the times of Richard the second, the 18. yeere, and of Henry the sixth, in the 14. yeere. It was after called Aburgaveny house, and belonged to Henry late Lord of Aburgaveny. But the VVorshipfull Company of Stationers have (since then) purchased it, and made it the Hall for the meeting of their Society, con∣verting the stone-work into a new faire Frame of timber, and applying it to such serviceable use, as themselves have thought convenient. Betwixt the South end of Ave Mary lane, and the North end of Creede lane, is the comming out of Pauls Church-yard, on the East, and the high streete on the West, towards Ludgate, and this was called Bowyer Rowe,Bowyer Rowe. of Bowyers dwelling there in old time, now worne out by Mercers, and others. In this Streete, on the North side, is the Parish Church of Saint Martin, a proper Church,Parish Church of S. Martin by Lud∣gate. and lately new builded: for in the yeere 1437. Iohn Michael, Maior, and the Communalty, granted to William Downe, Parson of S. Martins at Ludgate, a parcell of ground, contai∣ning in length 28. foote, and in breadth 24. foote, to set and build their stee∣ple upon, &c. The Monuments here have been of William Seven-oake, Maior, 1418. Henry Belwase, and Iohn Gest, 1458. William Taverner, Gentleman, 1466. Iohn Barton, Esquire, 1439. Stephen Peacocke, Maior, 1533. Sir Roger Cholmley. Gulielmo Huseo Coelebi, comely Monu∣ments, each by other, in the East end of the Quire. Almae Curiae Can∣tuariensis Registro, literarum scientia, vitae probitate, morumque urbanitate claro, notis E. amicis omnibus dilecto. Antonius & Katharina conjuges, Chari parentes orbati filio Monumentum hoc dolentes posuerunt. Obiit quinto Ka∣lendas Novembris, Anno Dom. 1559. vixit annos 28. menses 3. dies 7. Obdormiat in Domino. Hic situs est Antonius Huse, Armiger, Londini natus, Archiepiscopi Can∣tuariensis, atque Capitulis de Pauli Londinen. Registrarius primarius. Qui aliquot annos Judicis causarum Maritimarum officio integrè fun∣ctus, ac etiam in Magistratorum Cu∣riae Cancellariae concessum coopta∣tus, vergente demum aetate ad Prae∣fectum Collegiorum Mercatorum Angliae, tam apud Belgas, quàm a∣pud Moscovitas, & Rhutenos com∣mercia exercentium accitus, lingua facundus, memoria tenax, ingenio, prudentia, doctrinaque pollens, mo∣rum comitate & probitate gratiosus, Laurentio, Gulielmo, Gilberto, & Vrsula liberis, ex Katharina conjuge procreatis non infelix, sexagesimo tertio aetatis Anno è vita excessit, Ka∣lendis Junii, An. Dom. 1560. Here lye the bodies of Florens Caldwell,Another sightly Monumēt in the same wall. Esquire, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, and Aldermans Deputy of the Ward of Faringdon without: And Ma∣ry Wilde, his first wife; by whom hee had issue one daughter, named Mary, married to Thomas Gourney, Esquire. And Sibill Greene, his second wife. which Florens deceased the  and Mary his wife the 19. day of Iune, An. Dom. 1590. &c. Earth goes to Earth treads on Earth as to Earth shall to Earth As Mold to Mold, Glittering in Gold, Return nère should, Goe ere he would. Earth upon Earth goes to Earth though on Earth shall from Earth Consider may, Naked away, Be stout and gay, Passe poore away. Be mercifull and charitable, Relieve the poore as thou art able, A Shrowd to thy grave, Is all thou shalt have. Thomas Cooke,A very faire new Monumēt in the same wall. Citizen and Haberda∣sher of London, of little Wolton, in the County of Lancaster, had to wife Ioyce Hanbury, with whom hee lived
thirty yeeres, and had issue one sonne, and three daughters; whereof two (viz. Elizabeth, wife to Iohn Bourman, Mercer, and Mary, wife to Thomas Bayly, Skinner) be yet living. Hee de∣parted this life the 17. day of April, 1608. in the 55. yeere of his age. Shee (his said wife, sole Executrix of his last Will and Testament) yet surviving (to the memo∣rie of her deare husband) erected this Monument, 1612. To God, his Country, and the Poore, he had A zealous soule, true heart, and liberall minde: His wife, his children, and his kindred sad, Lacke of his love, his care and kindnesse finde: Yet is their sorrow swaged, with the thought, He hath attain'd the Happinesse he sought. Dies mortis, aeternae vitae natalis est. To the Memory of William Yeardley, Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, sometime of this Parish. He died the 28. day of October, 1523. She died the 20. day of Iuly, 1593. William Yeardley,A Table hanging on a pillar in the Chancell. and Elizabeth his wife, Who lived on earth free from strife, Not farre from this, in earth doth lye, To shew, that all that live, must dye: Where they doe quietly expect, To rise againe, as Gods elect, They left foure daughters, and a sonne, Who left them this, when they were gone. Iaspero Cholmley,A comely Monumēt in the same wall, but on the quires South side. Armig. Wigorniensi, Cle∣rico Recognitionum capiendi, sive recog∣nosc. Virtute cujusdam statuti fact. & ordinati 23. Hen. 8. pro debit. recuperan. Iusticiario Pa. & Quor. Dom. Reginae in Com. Middl. Patri suo chariss. & aman∣tiss. Ioannes Cholmley, hoc Monu. dolens posuit, decem liberos ex Margareta sua unica conjuge procreatos, viz. Ioannem, Thomam, Gulielmum, Hugonem, Fran∣ciscum, Mariam, Iulianam, Margare∣tam, Annam & Ianam tempore mortis superstites reliquit. Obiit ultimo die Octob. Anno atatis suae 48. & Salutis nostrae 1586. Here lieth the body of Thomas Antrobus,A new faire Mo∣nument in the same wall. Esquire, who deceased the first day of May, 1611. Having issue by Elizabeth his late wife (the daughter of Ralph Woodcocke, Citizen and Alderman of London) three sonnes and two daugh∣ters, viz. Thomas, John, Richard, E∣lizabeth, and Margaret. Here-under lyeth buried Amy Edlyn,A small Monumēt in the same wall. and her sonne with her, the daughter of Ri∣chard Edlyn, of Woodhaue, in Mid∣dlesex, and the wife of Robert Gomer∣sall, Citizen & Ironmonger of London, who departed this life the 2. day of Sep∣tember, 1586. and left behinde her one sonne and one daughter. On the South side of this Streete,The Black Friers. is the turning into the Black Friers: which Order (sometime) had their houses in Old-borne, where they remained for the space of five and fifty yeeres; and then, in the yeere 1276. Gregory Rocksley,Maior & Barons of this City. Maior, and the Barons of this City, granted and gave to Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canturbury, two Lanes or Wayes next the Streete of Baynards Castle, and also the Tower of Mount∣fitchit to bee destroyed; in place of which, the said Robert builded the late new Church of the Blacke Friers, and placed them therein. King Edward the first and Eleanor his wife were great be∣nefactors thereunto. This was a large Church, and richly furnished with Or∣naments: wherein divers Parliaments, and other great meetings have beene holden: Namely, in the yeere 1450. the 28. of Henry the sixth, a Parliament was begun at Westminster, and adjour∣ned to the Blacke Friers in London, and from thence to Leycester. In the yeere 1522. the Emperour Charles the fifth was lodged there. In the yeere 1524. the fifteenth of April, a Parliament was begun at the
Blacke Friers, wherein was demanded a Subsidy of 800000. pounds, to bee rai∣sed of goods and lands, 4. s. in every pound, and in the end was granted 2. s. of the pound, of their goods and lands, that were worth 20. pounds, or might dispend 20. l. by the yeere, and so up∣ward, to be payed in two yeeres. This Parliament was adjourned to Westminster,Parliamēt at the Blacke Fri∣ers, called the Blacke Parliament. amongst the blacke Monks, and ended in the Kings Palace there the 14. of August, at nine of the clocke in the night, and was therefore called the Blacke Parliament. In the yeer 1529. Cardinall Campeius the Legate, with Cardinall Woolsey, sate at the said Blacke Friers, where before them, as Legates and Iudges, was brought in question the Kings marriage with Queene Katharine, as to be unlaw∣full, before whom the King and Queen were cited and summoned to appeare, &c. whereof reade more at large in my Annals, as I have touched it. The same yeere, in the moneth of October, began a Parliament in the Blacke Friers, in the which Cardinall Woolsey was condemned in the Premu∣nire: this house valued at 104. l. 15. s. 5. d. was surrendred the 12. of Novem∣ber, the 30. of Henry the eighth. There were buried in the ancient Church, Margaret, Queene of Scots. Hubert de Brugh, Earle of Kent, tran∣slated from their old Church, by Old Bourne. Robert de Attabeto, Earle of Bellimon. Dame Isabel, wife to Sir Roger Bygot, Earle Marshall. William and Iame Huse, children to Dame Illis, Countesse of Arundell, and by them lieth Dame Illis, daughter to the Earle Warren, and after Countesse of Arundell. Dame Ide, wife to Sir Walter daughter to the Lord Ferrers of Chart∣ley. Richard de Brewes. Richard Strange, son to Robert Strange. Elizabeth, daughter to Sir Bartholo∣mew Badlesmere, wife to Sir William Be∣han, Earle of Northampton. Marsh, The Earles of March and He∣reford, and Elizabeth, Countesse of A∣rundell. Dame Ioan, daughter to S. Io. Carne, first wife to Sir Gwide Brian. Hugh Clare, Knight, 1295. The heart of Queene Heleanor the Foundresse. The heart of Alfence her son. The hearts of Iohn and Margaret, chil∣dren to William Valence. Sir William Thorpe, Iustice. The Lord Lioth, of Ireland. Maude, wife to Geffrey Say, daughter to the Earle of Warwicke. Dame Sible, daughter to Wil. Patte∣hulle, wife to Roger Beauchampe, and by her Sir Richard or Roger Beauchampe. The Lord S. Amand, and Dame Eli∣zabeth his wife, daughter to the Duke of Lancaster. Sir Stephen Collington, Knight. Sir William Peter, Knight. The Countesse of Huntington. Duchesse of Exceter, 1425. Sir Iohn Cornwall. Lord Fanhope died at Ampthill in Bed∣fordshire, and was buried here, 1443. Sir Iohn Triptofte. Earle of Worcester, beheaded, 1470. and by him in his Chappell, Iames Turchet. Lord Audley, beheaded, 1497. William Paston, and Anne, daughter to Edmond Lancaster. The Lord Beaumond. Sir Edmond Cornewall, Baron of Bur∣ford. The Lady Nevil, wedded to the Lord Dowglas, daughter to the duke of Exceter Richard Scrope, Esquire. Dame Katharine Vaux, alias Cobham. Sir Thomas Browne, and Dame Eliza∣beth his wife. Iane Powell. Thomas Swinforth. Iohn Mawsley, Esquire, 1432. Iohn de la Bere, Nicholas Eare, Geffrey Spring, William Clifford, Esquires. Sir Thomas Brandon, Knight of the Garter, 1509. William Stalworth, Merchant-Taylor, 1518. William Courtney, Earle of Devonshire, nominate, but not created, the third of Henry the eighth, &c.Parish Church of S. Anne new buil∣ded in the Blacke Fri∣ers. There is a Parish of St. Anne, within the Precinct of the Blacke Friers, which was pulled downe with the Friers Church, by sir Thomas Corden: but in the
reigne of Queene Mary, hee being for∣ced to finde a Church to the Inhabi∣tants, allowed them a lodging Cham∣ber above a staire, which since that time, to wit, in the yeere 1597. fell downe, and was againe (by collection therefore made) new builded and en∣larged in the same yeere, and was dedi∣cated on the eleventh of December. Here I thought good to insert the Copy of an ancient Record, concerning the Priviledges and Liberties (in elder times) granted to the said Blacke Friers, which happened to my hands by friend∣ly information, and the originall there∣of brought mee, as here Verbatim it fol∣loweth: Notes and Articles for maintenance of the ancient Liberties and Privi∣ledges of the late dissolved Black Friers, neere Ludgate in Lon∣don. 1. FIrst, it appeareth, that on the 25. day of November,Iob. Alforde executed at Tyborne. 1484. Iohn Alforde, Shoomaker, dwel∣ling within the Blacke Friers in London, was apprehended and put to death at Tyborne for Felony, Thomas Newland, a∣lias Norland, and William Martin then being Sheriffes of London, who sought to have had the goods of the said Felon; but the Prior of the said Blacke Friers withstood them, and possessed the same goods to the use of the Lord of S. Iohns, of whom the same Friers was then hol∣den. 2. Item,The Bridge at the Blacke Friers. The Lord of St. Iohns hath usually made the Bridge at the Thames, adjoyning to the said Friers, and not the City of London, &c. 3. Item,Incorpo∣rating of the Prior & Covent▪ The Prior and Covent were incorporated by Act of Parliament, in the time of K. Hen. the 6. whereby they might prescribe, and did alwaies use & keep the Liberty inviolately, and cleer∣ly exempted from the Citizens. 4. Item,No arrest within the Friers Pre∣cinct. The Precinct hath alwaies bin of such liberties, as that no man hath bin arrested within the same, by any of the Sheriffes Officers. And if at any time any Officers of the City hath taken upon him to execute within the foure Gates, hee was rescued by the Fri∣ers and Inhabitants of Antiquitie. 5. Item,Forrai∣ners tra∣ded in the Precinct freely. At all times there hath dwelt within the Precinct divers and many persons not free, and yet they have used their occupations there, with∣out controulement of the City and Ci∣tizens. 6. Item,Crafts∣men come out of the countries. Alwaies at sundry times (of long continuance) divers and many Carpenters, Masons, and such like, have bin sent out of the Countrey, and have wrought within the Precinct aforesaid; which is not sufferable within the Li∣berties of the City, by their owne cu∣stomes and ordinances. 7. Item,The in∣quiry af∣ter the death of any one slaine, by the Coro∣ner of the Verge. Vpon the view of any per∣son slaine, the Coroner of the Verge did alwaies make enquiry thereof. And the Deodand is due to the Lord of Saint Iohns, and not to the City; but now to the Queenes Highnesse due by law, e∣quity, and good conscience, whose right and lawfull title the owners and inhabi∣tants of the said exempted place and Precinct, doe seeke with their bodies & goods to defend and maintaine against all pretended title and claime of the Ci∣tizens. Notwithstanding divers of the said Precinct & Liberty have bin great∣ly vexed and troubled with often impri∣sonments within the Compters of the City. 8. Item,Freedome from watching, warding, &c. The inhabitants within the said Precinct were never charged to watch or ward, or to be within the com∣passe of any imposition; such as the Citizens are used and accustomed unto by their lawes. 9. Item, In the time of K. Edw. the 6. sir Andrew Iude then being Maior,A Riot commit∣ted in the Blacke Fri∣ers. there was a Riot committed in the Blacke Fri∣ers, in the house of one Master Lucas, by one Crouchman of the City, and o∣ther persons with him. The force whereof was soone overswayed by Sir Thomas Saunders, and Sir Henry Iernin∣gham, Knights, Master William Moore, Esquire, with other Gentlemen inhabi∣ting in the said Friers. And the parties by pursuit were twice endighted in the Marshalsea court holden in Southwark: Sir Nicholas Hare then being Steward, and sitting at the doing thereof. After which time, the said Crouchman (with other Confederates with him) sought to endight the said Gentleman by an especiall Sessions in the said City. For
stay whereof the Lords of the Kings Privie Councell, understanding the lewd practices of the said Crouchman and other, and that the Lord Maior had nothing to doe within the said Pre∣cinct; Letters from the Councell to the Lo. Maior. wrote their letters unto the said Sir Andrew Iude, then Maior, willing him not to disturbe the said Gentle∣men for the said fact, to the infringing of the Liberties of the said Friers: The said Sir Thomas Saunders, and Master William Moore being bearers of the said Letters to the said Lord Maior; who upon deliberation, made answer to the said bearers by word of mouth, That forasmuch as there was a complaint made to him of a Riot committed with∣in the City; hee must needes (within one moneth after) enquire by Sessions of the same, which he said could not be prejudiciall unto them, being out of the Jurisdiction of the City: for that the same should be Non coram Iudice, and yet they discharged of the perill of the Statute. And so they proceeded with the said Letters notwithstanding: Whereupon, the said Sir Thomas, and Master William Moore, making report of their successe with the Maior to the Lords of the Councell; they wrote et∣soones other Letters to the said Maior, but of such force touching the premis∣ses, which were also carried and delive∣red by the said Sir Thomas and Master Moore: Whereupon, the said Maior stayed from any further proceeding therein, or any other, &c. 10. Item, In Queen Mary her time, the Councell of the City put a Bill into the Parliament house,A Bill put into the Parliamēt house. seeking by the same to have the Liberties of the said Friers, which Bill, with all their surmi∣ses, were so utterly rejected, that their Bill never came to the question, but was so suppressed, by argument openly in the same house. 11. Item, The Liberties granted to Master Cawarden,Cawardens Letters Patents. by Letters Patents of King Edward the sixth, the goods of Fe∣lons therein not granted, and so due to the Queenes Majesty, whose right and title the City hath not had, nor can bee suffered to enjoy, according to their seeking; by the onely resistance of the said owners and inhabitants within the said Liberty and Precinct, clearly ex∣empted from the City, by metes and bounds on every side. 12. Item, The said Precinct hath al∣wayes been shut up and kept by Wals and Gates,Wals and gates be∣longing to the Precinct. so as there was no egresse that way, but by licence of the Porters, who were maintained and placed by the owners of the said Friers, and Liberties of the same, by especiall and generall words, granted by Letters Patents un∣der the great Seale of England, to di∣vers owners and Free-holders there of the Queenes Majesty. And in especiall above all other, to Sir Thomas Cawarden, Knight, deceased, in his Letters Patents dated the 12. day of May, in the fourth yeere of King Edward the sixth; in as large, ample and full manner, and with as many pithy and effectuall words, as ever was read or seene in any Patent, made for grant of Liberties of any place exempted, as by the same Patent more largely appeareth: The true copy whereof is annexed to these Articles, by the delivery of Master Moore, true ow∣ner of the most part of the said liberties. 13. Item, That Iames Norrice, Curate of S. Peters in Cornehill, being sometime one of the Friers,The Cu∣rate of S. Peters in Cornehill his affirmati∣on. and Brethren of the Black Friers aforesaid, neere Ludgate in London, saith and affirmeth, That one Robert Struddell, late Prior of the said Friers, was by order of Law constrained to pave the high street adjoyning round about the channell wals, from the Flow∣er-de-Lize towards the hill at Creed lane end. And a Cage at that time standing on that side the street, adjoyning to the foresaid wall, within the Parish of Saint Andrew, which Cage was plucked down by the said Prior, and not since set up a∣gain; the Prior aforesaid saying; Seeing they of the City cause mee to pave all this side of the street next my wall, they shall have no Cage of others standing on my ground, against mine owne wall: And so the City never builded Cage on that side after. 14. Item, Moreover, the said Master Norrioe saith, That the Liberties of the Blacke Friers in the said Priors dayes were such,The Li∣berties of the Pre∣cinct in the Priors dayes. that the Lord Maior of the City of London, nor the Sheriffes did arrest any man within the said Liberty for any thing, as free, as hee well re∣membreth in all his time.
15. Item,Foure Gates be∣longing to the Friers and Porters. Hee remembreth, that foure Gates were shut in during the Friers time, by the commandement of the Prior. And one Father Seagar, be∣ing then Porter, appointed by the said late Prior, Robert Struddell, with others after him, at the appointment of other Priors then succeeding: And not by the Maior of London, nor any other. The saying of Thomas Vlverston, alias Wolverston, of Garlicke Hithe, Officer to the Vintners of London, and sometime a Frier of the Blacke Friers: Taken before mee Sir Thomas Saunders, Knight, the 30. day of May, An∣no Domini, 1562. 16. ITem, He saith, he hath heard say many times among the Friers and others,Of other mens doores in∣to the Blacke Fri∣ers. that Master Peacocke of London, and his Predecessours, had never doore into the Blacke Friers out of his house; but by fine and agreement, made for the same with the Prior of Blacke Fri∣ers, long before his time of remem∣brance. 17. Item, He saith, that the Porters of the Friers alwayes kept their foure Gates (time out of minde) by the ap∣pointment of the Prior and Covent,How the Porters of the Friers kept their foure Gates. cleere exempted from the City. And when the Porters perceived any suspe∣cted persons or malefactors within the limits of the Friers; they declared it to the Prior, who forthwith comman∣ded them, to take the ayde of the ho∣nest Inhabitants within the Friers, to make search and watch for the appre∣hension of such lewd persons: which so found, were alwayes examined by Sir William Kingston, Knight, and other good men there inhabiting within the Friers, at the Porters desire, and not o∣therwise. 18. Item,No search or watch within the Pre∣cinct, &c. Hee never heard, nor did know in all his time, any search or watch to bee made within the Precinct of the Friers, by any Watchman or Consta∣ble of the City, who could never come within any of the Friers Gates, but by the Porters licence of the same Fri∣ers. 19. Item,Paving the street by the Prior and Covent. He saith, that the Prior and Covent did once pave the Streetes (by his time) from the Friers Turne∣gate, unto the Flower-de-Lize, along by the VVall, to the Channell of the same Streete. But as for pulling downe of any Cage, he doth not well remem∣ber. 20. Item,For puni∣shing dis∣ordered persons. He saith, if any Vagabond, or any Drunkard, or misordered per∣son, were taken culpable within the Precinct of the Friers, they were al∣wayes punished in the Friers Stockes against the Church doore, by the Pri∣ors commandement; and not by the Lord Maiors, or Sheriffes of London. 21. Item,Against claiming the Liber∣ties of Blacke Fri∣ers. Sir Iohn Portenary, Knight, inhabiting within the late Blacke Fri∣ers, neere Ludgate in London, about 30. yeeres past, doth well remember, That after the suppression of the said Blacke Friers, the Lord Maior of London would have entred into the said Blacke Friers, and claimed the Liberties of the said Blacke Friers. For the which, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Zanche, Sir Thomas Cheyney, Sir William Kingston, Sir Francis Brian, Knights, with many other VVorshipfull Gentlemen, then being Inhabitants within the Liberties and Precinct of the said late Blacke Friers, denied the Lord Maior and Ci∣tizens entrance, and would not permit nor suffer them, or any of them, to en∣ter within the same. And shortly af∣ter, Sir Francis Brian, and Sir Thomas Cheyney, moved the Kings Majesty, then being King Henry the eighth; how the said Maior and Citizens would have entred into the said Friers. And then the Kings Majesty said unto them these words following: Are not Wee as able to keepe our Priviledges and Liberties, as the Friers did keepe their Priviled∣ges alwayes before time, free from the City. Whereupon, they all (by one consent and agreement) sent the said Lord Maior word of the Kings Majesty his answer and pleasure therein. Whereupon the Lord Maior and Al∣dermen were satisfied, and would no further proceed upon the Kings right and title of Liberties; as then they promised and affirmed by the mouth of the Recorder, being sent by the Mai∣or to the Worshipfull of the said Friers.
And the said Sir Iohn Portenary further saith, That after the said Friers were supprest, the Lord Cromwell, Vicar Generall, caused to bee delivered unto the said Sir Iohn Portenary, the keyes of all the said Friers, safely to keepe from the said City, and to provide, that all within the said Liberty should bee in safety and safegard. The which keyes were afterward delivered by the said Sir Iohn Portenary, to the hands of Do∣ctor Layton, and Doctor Wendie, they being Visitors there. For the which, the said Sir Iohn Portenary had a cer∣taine reward payed unto him by the Lord North, then being Chancellour of the Augmentation Court. All which matter the said Sir Iohn Portenary will depose to bee most certaine and true, as hee will answer at the dread∣full day of Iudgement upon his soule. 22. Bee it in remembrance perpe∣tuall for infallible truth,Two Al∣dermens entring into the Liberties of the Blacke Fri∣ers. that one A∣lexander Avenon, being Sheriffe of London, and one other, being Alder∣man of the VVard of Faringdon infra, came and entred very stoutly into the Liberty of the Blacke Friers neere Lud∣gate, the fifteenth day of May, 1562. to carry away all the Hosiers and Tay∣lors, to come to the Guild-Hall in London, according to the Queenes new Proclamation. Which Hosiers and Taylors denied to goe with the said Sheriffe, affirming and saying, That they had put in Bonds (before their comming) to the Lord Cobham, and to Sir Thomas Saunders, Knight, two of the Queenes Iustices of the Peace within the said Liberty (being within the Verge, and exempted from the City of London) according to the Queenes Proclamation. And thereupon, one Iohn Bradford, being Constable of the same exempted place, and within the Liberty of the said Queenes Verge; caused the foure Porters of the said Friers, to shut all the Gates; which being perceived by the said Sheriffe and Alderman; the said Sheriffe commanded the Gates to bee opened; whereunto the said Consta∣ble of the Friers said, That they should not be opened, before the Iustices plea∣sures of the Friers were knowne. And then the Sheriffe of London said, That hee was of greater authority than the Iustices were. The Constable affirming him so to bee within the City of Lon∣don, but not within the Precinct of the Liberty of the Black Friers. For the Con∣stable said, that he had greater power & authority there than the Sheriffe had. Which being heard, and scant well di∣gested by them; fearing further incon∣venience to arise thereupon (as by sud∣den changing of the grieved counte∣nance was plainly declared) the said Sheriffe and Alderman (with gentle language) desired the Constable to o∣pen the Gates quietly, and suffer them to passe thence. VVhich hee did at their gentle request and entreaty: And so they departed out of the Liberty of the Blacke Friers, by the Porters commandement, and gave to the Por∣ters for opening the Gates money. People of Saint Martins,What en∣sued upon this busi∣nesse in the Blacke Friers. as well Strangers as other (in the open high Streete) marvelling and wondering at the said Sheriffes and Aldermans inclo∣sure within the said Friers Gates: On the morrow after, being the sixteenth day of May, 1562. one Hardford being Constable of Saint Martins Parish within Ludgate, in the high Streete there, tooke one Tretheru, a Hosier and Taylor, dwelling in the said Fri∣ers, and carried him to the Lord Maior of London. Who by and by (without delay, or any further speech) comman∣ded the said Gilbert to the Counter in London. Whereupon, the said Sir Tho∣mas Saunders, as one of the Iustices of the said Liberty, went to the Earle of Arundell, Lord Steward to the Queenes most honourable Houshold, declaring the whole circumstance of the said Sheriffe and Aldermans enter∣prise. And obtained a token to the Lord Maior, no further to enter the said Liberty within the Verge; untill by Law, or the Privie Councels judge∣ment, the question moved were deter∣mined, concerning the infringing of the said ancient Liberty. All this was spoken in the presence of Peter Baugh, Lewes Rawbone, and divers other Stran∣gers. In witnesse and probatior where∣of, the said Sir Thomas hath subscribed his name, with divers other here-under written, which were present.
23. Be it had in perpetuall memory,A further testimony concer∣ning one Robert Flower, Tailor and Hosier in the same precinct of Blacke Friers. for a continuall perfect declaration of the truth, whereunto all matters of va∣riance and controversie should be refer∣red and advanced; and not the sparkes of troth to be hidden (as a Candle, bea∣ring perfect light, under a Bushell) and so washed away in the flowing waters of unmindfull oblivion, which (amongst all good Christian men) is at all times, and in all ages to be rejected, and not to be imbraced; but rather to be buried in the bottome of the earth, never to rise againe. In consideration whereof, by these presents, it is for an infallible truth, to be holden with all men, which shall heare or see this present writing: That Robert Flower, Taylor and Hosier, dwel∣ling within the Precinct and liberties of the late Blacke Friers, neere Ludgate in London; was by order and commande∣ment of the whole Bench or Aldermen, committed into one of the Compters of London, the 20. day of May, 1502. For that the same Robert Flower refused to be bound (acording to order taken) from the making of monstrous great Hosen, according to the Queens gracious Pro∣clamation in that behalfe: Because the said Robert Flower had (amongst other persons) put in Bonds before the Hono∣rable Warden of the Five Ports, and Sir Thomas Saunders, Knight, Justices within the Liberty of the Queenes Verge. After which reveiled and knowne to the Honourable Earle of A∣rundell, Lord Steward of the Queenes most Honourable Houshold, who cau∣sed the Knight Marshall to goe to the said Lord Maior, requiring the delive∣rance of the said prisoner. The Lord Maior (being sickly) made answer, that he knew nothing thereof; but desired him to speake with Master Recorder: who made answer, that the said impri∣sonment was done by the whole Bench of Aldermen, and he (as one particular person) could not deliver the prisoner, untill the next Court day, which could not be till two dayes after, to the great charges and hinderance of the said pri∣soner. Whereupon the Lord Steward sent for Master Cholmeley, he being then Re∣corder of London, and commanded him to deliver the prisoner; or else he would imprison the Maior of London, and the said Recorder, and the fattest Alder∣man in the Citie, which hee could get within the Verge: And declared, that the Queenes Liberties and Franchises should not bee overcome by the Lord Maior and Bench of Aldermen, so long as he was Officer: with many other words against the Citizens, which were too long to write. Adding further, that the Maior did not meddle with Saint Martins, being within the Citie, and a parcel of Westminster Deanry; much lesse should he meddle with the said liberty of the Friers, bounded out by walls and gates from the City, being in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex, and not within the Ci∣tie. And so commanded the Recorder to send home the prisoner into the liber∣ty presently: which was so done accor∣dingly: Promising, that if the L. Maior could declare or shew any good Title, whereby to breake the Liberty, the Queenes learned Councell should an∣swer him and them therein. And then the Recorder said, he never heard be∣fore that time, that the Lord Steward did claime the precinct of the said Black Friers, to be within the liberty of the Queenes Verge: Out of which Ju∣risdiction the Citie of London is exem∣pted by the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. Cap. 2. Vnder colour of which Statute, the Maior would bring the said Friers to be in London; which in all the Friers time was freely exempted. All the which matter was debated in the presence of Sir Thomas Saunders, Knight; Master Robert Hopton, one of the Knight Marshals, and Mr. Bromeley, under Steward of the Marshalsea, the day and yeere above-written. 24. Item,A man slaine in the liberty of the Blacke Friers. That in Queene Maries time, or King Edwards time, her Bro∣ther, there was a man slaine within the said precinct of the Blacke Friers: and the goods of him that was supposed to doe the deed, were stayed within the said Friers, and an Inventory taken by the next Justice of Peace within the Verge, Roger Cholmeley, Knight, by the commandement of Sir Thomas Che∣ney, Knight; and afterward one Master Garrard and the Recorder of London, came unto the said Sir Thomas Cheney's
house within the same precinct, and would have made an Inventory of the goods of the partie offender aforesaid, now deceased. But the said Sir Thomas Cheyney would not permit nor suffer them so to doe; for that hee had made stay of the same goods for the Queene before, if it were lawfully found that the said partie had slaine the man dead. Which afterward was otherwise found by a Quest of twelve men, sitting super visum corporis of the dead, by the Coro∣ner of the Verge within the said Liber∣ty: where the Maior of London and Bench of Aldermen have not to doe, nor intermit with the Inhabitants there∣in: Because the whole Friers liberties, and franchises of the same, were freely given unto King Henry the eighth, by Act of Parliament: whereby the Lord Maior of London, and Bench of Alder∣men are cleerely barred and secluded from the Friers Liberties, and the inha∣bitants thereof franchised, and cleane exempted from all the Citizens, and their impositions or other taxations. The true Copie of the Vicar of Brom∣leys Letter in Kent, sent to Ma∣ster Thomas Walsingham of Scadborough in the said County, Esquire: who sent the same Letter to Sir Tho. Saunders, Knight, he being also one of the Queenes Iu∣stices of the Peace in the said Coun∣tie; to examine the severall parti∣culars therein, concerning the liber∣tie of the said Friers, &c. RIght Worshipfull; you shal un∣derstand that I have received your kinde Letter; according whereunto,The Vicar of Bromley dwelt for∣merly in the Blacke Friers. these are to satisfie your minde; That I was dwelling in the Blacke Friers foure or five yeeres, and came thither from Oxford, where I had beene a Student of Divinity. I was al∣so Curate of the Parish within the Blacke Friers, called Saint Agnes. Wee had within us a Porter, who did shut all the Gates every night; at nine of the clocke in the Winter, and at ten of the clocke in the Summer. No Sheriffe, Bailiffe or Constable, nor yet the Maior of London, tooke interest there at any time, nor forreine porters had to doe within our Priviledge: And the Friers did pave both within the Turn-gate and without, unto Saint Andrews Church, downe by the great Garden wall: And without the Turne-gate there was a Cage, pulled downe by my time, which was set up by the Lord Maior of London. The inhabitants within the Friers never watched, neither the Constable of Saint Martins Parish warned any watch there, neither came within the Gates, after the houre appointed at any time. The Sheriffes of London had no Felons goods there, neither did arrest any per∣son within the Precinct of the house. As for Bakers and Brewers that belon∣ged to the house, they be dead. There is one Iames Norrice,The same man spo∣ken of be∣fore. Curate, alive, who was brought up in the house, and dwelling at Saint Michaels in Cornehill, he can give you further in∣structions: whether there be any more living, I know not. The fatall VESPER, or dis∣mall EVENSONG, happening at the Blacke Friers on Sunday in the afternoone, it being the 26. day of October. 1623. THere were upon that day, being dedicated to the service of God, assembled together in the Black Friers neere the French Embassadours house in ordinary, above three hundred persons of sundry Nations, as English, Scottish, Welch, and Irish, to heare a Sermon, & after that to celebrate Even∣song, according to the Rites and Cere∣monies of the Romish Church. Of which number it is certainly knowne and confidently reported, that about the number of threescore of them, had that morning both confessed them∣selves, and received the Sacrament, ac∣cording to the order of the Romish Church. Hee that was to supply that exercise for the present, was Father Drury, a Iesuite by profession, and by birth a Gentleman, being extracted
out of the house of the Norfolcian Dru∣ries, and sonne unto Doctor Drury, late professor of the Civill Law, and practi∣ser thereof in the Court of the Arches here in London. Hee was by those of the Romish religion reputed to bee a man of great learning, as having studied many yeeres beyond the Sea, with much approbation and allowance of his Superiours. And although he were opposite in point of faith and beliefe unto the Religion now professed in Eng∣land, yet was he held by the generality of our Nation, both Protestants and Papists, who knew him, and could make a true estimate of his vertues and vices by the outward circumstance and appearance of his actions, to bee a man of a good moralllife, and of a plau∣sible and laudable conversation. So that in respect of these indowments, there could nothing have been desired more by us of the Reformed Church, than that hee had not beene a Papist, but a member of our Church, Religion, and Profession. All the day before, which was the last that ever his eyes beheld, he was observed to be wondrous sad and pensive, contrary unto his wonted hu∣mour and disposition, hee being a man of a free, merry and affable conversati∣on, as though that some spirit of predi∣ction had foretold him of that fatall disaster, which was at hand. Thus wee reade of Caesar, that hee was possessed with a strange and unwonted sadnesse that morning when hee entred into the Senate house, where he was stabbed to death by the Senators. And so was that Assassine Cass much perplexed and troubled in minde before that mortall and bloudy battell of Pharsalia. By meanes of which affection, Father Dru∣rie finding an indisposition in himselfe, hee would (if with his reputation hee could) have made a retraction of his promise, and a demurre of the intended exercise. But being prest on by divers of his friends, who told him that the Audience was great, and their expecta∣tion farre greater, hee did then againe resolve to goe forward with the enter∣prise. The place wherein this Congregati∣on was assembled, was not the French Ambassadours Chappell, according as the first report went currant; for that was reserved for the use of himselfe and his family, to celebrate their Even-song after their owne manner and custome, but it was a Chamber neere unto the gate, some three stories high, being some threescore foot long, and twenty foot broad, or thereabouts. The wals were not made of Lome, composed of Laths and Rafters, and covered over with Clay and Lime, as some at first reported: but were of Brick and Stone, which are held by all Architects to bee the strongest and the surest building. But howsoever, a Gentlewoman of a noble house, and of a quicke and judici∣ous spirit, who was then present, and had taken a curious view of the pressing multitude of the people, which was at length their owne oppression, and of the unfitnesse and uncapacity of the place besides, told him, That shee thought it would prove an action full of danger, if he should offer to preach in that place respectively in respect of the premises. But he being led on by a divine and fatall necessity, which blinds the judgement of the wise men of this world, he told her that he did meane as then to preach, and to goe forward with the greatest expedition he could, with his intended Sermon. For the ac∣complishment of which designe, the Father predicant being clad in those robes and ornaments which are used by those of his Order, being a Iesuit, ha∣ving a Surplice girt about his middle with a linnen girdle, a red Cap with a white one underneath, turned up about the brimmes of his Cap, and his other accoutrements belonging, which the Ignatian Orders have imposed upon them: and being placed in a Chaire a∣bout the middest of the roome, which Chaire was raised up something higher than the ordinary levell of the floore: hee crossing himselfe with the signe of the Crosse, and having ended some pri∣vate prayers, accommodated himselfe to his Text, between three and foure of the clocke in the afternoone of the fore∣said Sunday. The words of the Text were part of the Gospel appointed for the present day, according to the order and instruction of the Church of Rome, being their fifth of November, which
account is thought to bee the truest by the Romane Catholikes, and begins ten dayes before that of England. The Gospel was written in the eighteenth Chapter of St. Matthewes Gospel, and delivered unto us by the holy Spirit, in these words: Therefore is the Kingdome of Heaven likened unto a certaine man that was a King, which would take account of his servants. And when hee had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him which ought him ten thousand Talents. But for∣asmuch as hee was not able to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The servant fell downe and be∣sought him, saying: Sir, have patience with mee and I will pay thee all. Then had the Lord pity of that servant, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. So the same ser∣vant went out, and found one of his fel∣lowes which ought him an hundred pence: And he laid hands on him, and tooke him by the throat, saying: Pay that thou owest. And his fellow fell downe and besought him, saying: Have patience with mee and I will pay thee all. And he would not, but he went out and cast him into prison, till hee should pay the debt. So when his fellowes went and saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told their Master all that happened. Then his Lord called him and sayd unto him: O thou ungracious ser∣vant, I forgave thee all that debt thou desi∣redst mee, shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee, &c? The words which he insisted especi∣ally upon, were these:Note that this Text was divided into three partes; whereof the first part trea∣ted of Gods mer∣cie, the se∣cond of mans in∣gratitude, the third of the Re∣medies which man might use for the procuring of Gods mercie, and cure himselfe from this contagi∣cus dis∣ease of his ingrati∣tude. Which first part onely in part he handled. O thou ungraci∣ous servant, I forgave thee all the debt thou oughtest mee, shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? Vpon which subject dis∣coursing with much vehemency, and implying out of it the infinite mercy and goodnesse of God, whereby he doth not onely give us all that wee have, but forgives us all our trespasses and offen∣ces, bee they never so deeply stayned with the scarlet dye and tincture of our guiltinesse: which mercifull act of God is paraboliz'd unto us by a certain man that was a King, who tooke account of his servants, and after much intreaty and submission, forgave one ten thou∣sand Talents, which he ought him. And also dilating by way of blame and re∣prehension of the ungratefull and un∣relenting heart of man, who doth not forgive trespasses as God doth forgive him; but out of his swelling and ma∣lignant humour, writes benefits in the sand, and injuries in marble, which un∣charitablenesse of theirs is intimated in the Parable by the ungracious servant, who would not forgive his fellow a small debt, although his Master had forgiven him one of a farre greater va∣lue. Moreover, upon the application of these words, hee did inveigh with much bitternesse, as some give out (but I know not how truly) against the manners and doctrine of the Prote∣stants. But having proceeded thus farre, loe what a sudden and unexpected accident fell out. The Sermon inclining to∣wards the middest, and the day decli∣ning towards an end, it being almost foure of the clocke in the afternoone, the multitude and crowde of the assem∣bly breaking downe with their over∣bearing weight the beames and side∣timbers wherewith this roome was sup∣ported, they fell downe into the next Chamber, the floore whereof being broken downe also with the descending weight of them and the ruines, they fell at last upon the lowest Chamber of the edifice, where some of them perished, some were hurted and maymed, other∣some were free from all hurt and dan∣ger except of that which the present fright and terror did impose upon them, and those were they especially who fell not at all, but remained in one angle or corner of the Chamber, which was free from falling. Which persons beeing thought to be betweene twenty and thirty in number, as I heard by one, who was one of them, perplexed and frighted thus as they were, by conside∣ration of that most fearefull danger, whereinto they had seene their fellowes and brethren to fall, who did lift up their hands for helpe, and beat their breasts for life, whereof they then were spectators; and being doubtfull that they should be Actors with them pre∣sently in that Scene of their calamity; the place being weake, tottering and un∣assured, for this cause feare and necessity
giving motion and strength unto their armes, they opened with their Knives a Lome wall, which parted that roome and a Chamber belonging to the Am∣bassadours Lodging. By which meanes, after much difficulty and labour, they got their passage, and live as yet to glo∣rifie God for their deliverance. Presently upon the report of the fall and cry, divers persons of all sorts re∣sorted unto the place, some out of cha∣rity, to helpe those that were thus di∣stressed; for which cause they brought Spades, Pickaxes, and other instru∣ments fit for that purpose; others out of meere curiosity came thither, to see this wonderfull event, and this object so full of admiration. Where, after the guards were set upon all the Advenues and pas∣sages leading into the Blacke Friers, and from thence into the Ambassadours house, by the direction and command of Sergeant Finch, Recorder of the Citie, who was exceeding carefull that my Lord Ambassadour and his servants should not suffer any detriment in their goods or persons, being jealous in this point of the Kings, his owne, and the Ci∣ties honour: and matters being thus dis∣posed for the safety and assurance of the strangers, after they had broken downe a wall, and opened some doores, they fell to worke upon the ruines it selfe, with all possible diligence and dexte∣rity: where at the opening of every boord, planke, and peece of Timber, there were objects which presented themselves full of horrour and confu∣sion. Here you might have seene a man shaking of his legges, and striving for life: There you might have seene ano∣ther, putting forth his bloudy hands, and crying for helpe: Here you might have seene one like some spectre, thrusting out his head out of the grave: There you might have seene his fellow halfe dead and halfe living, intomb'd in that grave which he was not long to keepe. Here you might have seene the living thus pressed, as they were mourning for the dead; and there the dead senselesse, as they were imbracing of the living. So that since the Sicilian Vespers, there was never an Evensong more dolorous vnto the French, nor more lamentable unto the Scots and English. The Count of Til∣lier, who was Ambassadour here in or∣dinary for the most Christian King, which place hee hath executed with great dignity and authority for many yeeres together, to the generall liking and applause of both Nations, although he was fortunate in this, that not one of his retinue perished, was much agree∣ved with this unluckie accident, with whom the Spanish Delegates did con∣dole, as by mutuall reference feeling that griefe, which fellow-feeling had made their owne. Moreover, it was reported by one who had good intelligence in Elie house, that Don Carlos Colom's Steward should say, that his Master would not for a million of gold, this accident should have falne out in his or Exeter house. A report like enough to be beleeved of those, who know how strangely zealous this Nati∣on is in their Religion, and how jealous they are besides of their owne, their Kings, and of their Countries honour. Neither were the sorrows meaner a∣mongst the naturals of this Kingdome, and the inhabitants of the Citie of Lon∣don. So that here some men lost their wives, women their husbands, parents their children, children their parents, masters their servants, and one friend la∣mented the losse of another. So that Rachel was weeping for her children because they were not. Iob was lamen∣ting for his sonnes and daughters, be∣cause they were slaine together by the downefall of an house, whilest they were eating of their last banquet. Insomuch that the streets did eccho with their do∣lorous moanes, the wals and houses did resound with their cries and lamentati∣ons. The subsequent night was so full of horrour unto many, that it may bee truely said of it, as was said of another dismall night in the like kind: Quis cladem illius noct is, quis funera fando Explicit? aut potis est lachrymis aequare dolorem? When the bodies were drawn forth of those heapes of earth and timber, which taske of charity they were accom∣plishing
all that night, and part of the next day following, they were found to be 95. persons, or therabout, of divers cō∣ditions, besides those who were bruised, maim'd or wounded. Amongst whom were divers persons of worth and quali∣tie: as Father Drurie, who was the Preacher; Father Redyate, in whose lod∣ging this calamity befell; the Lady Web, descended of the Family of the Treshams, and sister unto my La. Morley, & my La. Sturton, and many moe besides of that weaker sexe, who then and there were assembled at their accustomed devoti∣ons. Yet were there many who were in that unfortunate downefall, which esca∣ped the danger strangely and wonder∣fully. Amongst whom was Mistris Lu∣cie Penruddocke, extracted from a wor∣thy and Noble Family, who fell be∣tweene the Lady Webbe and her owne maid-servant, both of which perished, yet she was preserved alive, by meanes of a Chaire which fell hollow upon her, and sheltered her from further danger. So was yong Mistris Webbe, daughter to my Lady Webbe, who fell neere unto her mother, and Elenor Sanders, who was covered, with many others, whose lives were saved within the heapes of these blood-guilty ruines. There was also a Minister, whose name I cannot learne, and therefore al∣though he survives this misfortune, it must be buried as yet in silence, who be∣ing present at the Sermon, as being in∣vited by some Romish Catholike to that exercise; who also gave him the con∣duct unto the place; hee fell with the rest of the multitude assembled there to∣gether; and being covered with the rubbish, boords, and other timbers, which fell upon him from the higher roomes, and prest with the weight of divers persons besides, whereof some were dead, and some were living: be∣ing in this agonie, which his present paine, and the feare of death, in his own judgement even hanging over his head, did impose (and that not without just cause) upon him; being (I say) thus di∣stressed, and striving under those heaps & ruines for life, the hope whereof, in re∣spect of the premised impediments, had almost forsaken him; one of the French Ambassadours Gentlemen, hearing the noise and report of this great and dismal fall, suddenly (as hee could) opened a doore, which gave entrance into that chamber, upon the floore whereof, the heapes and ruines, together with the oppressed multitude, as then lay. Who perceiving light by the doore then o∣pened, the place before being covered over with darknesse, he strove with all the strength and agilicy he could, which in him was not meane, he being a man of a very strong and able body, and at last, after the losse of his cloke and ren∣ting of his clothes, hee recovered him∣selfe, without any further hurt. Which the Gentleman perceiving, came and demanded of him, whether or no hee were hurt, or that he stood in need of a∣ny thing that might doe him service, or procure him comfort. But he being al∣most exanimated and astonisht, could not at first apprehend those courteous proffers which were tendred unto him by this stranger, who presently went and brought him into a Chamber; where after he had sate a while, and re∣freshed himselfe with wine, which was brought unto him; and having thus re∣covered his strength and spirits, hee re∣turned to the foresaid place againe, and used his best endevours for the releeving of others from that calamity, whereof but even now he was a fellow-sufferer. His man who attended on him, was re∣covered amongst the rest, hee being something bruised and hurt in the arme. Moreover, there was a yong girle, about the age of ten yeeres, as is suppo∣sed, (when this Minister, out of his cha∣ritable and commiserating disposition, was labouring for the safety and preser∣vation of them, whose necessities did then require it) came crying unto him, and said, O my Mother, O my Sister, which are downe under the timber and rubbish. But he wisht her to be patient for a time, and by Gods grace they should get forth quickly. Vpon which speech the child replyed presently, that howsoever this accident would prove a great scandall to their Religion. A speech which is worth admiration in all men, as this Relator did truely admire it, that a childe of so tender yeeres, wherein amongst the most towardliest,
there is scarce ability to discerne be∣tweene good and evill, should next un∣to that griefe, which the danger of her mother and sister did inflict upon her, lament for nothing more than for the scandall which their cause was like to suffer by the disaster. It was reported also that many more were drawne out alive the next mor∣ning: but I will not stand too much upon the justification of this report, lest I should seeme to bee too credulous of those things, which are contrary to the rules of reason and nature. The day following, which was Mun∣day, and the Eve of Simon and Iude, there was great care had for viewing the place, and for buriall of the dead. For this cause the Recorder and She∣riffes, about one of the clocke in the af∣ternoone, met at the French Ambassa∣dors house, having first shut up Ludgate, to prevent the throng and resort of the people, which was exceeding great and turbulent in those places: and then ha∣ving doubled their guards upon every Port and passage, and given expresse charge unto the warders, upon paine of their displeasure and punishment, that no man should enter in without theirs, or the Coroners Warrant, they fell at length to consult about the businesse, and after mature consideration, conclu∣ded, that this dolefull accident fell out, not by any indirect practise or conspi∣racie (as was by some maliciously repor∣ted) but that those fourescore and odde persons fell by meanes of their owne weight, and the weaknesse of those tim∣bers which did support the Chamber. The Iurie having thus brought in their verdict, they disposed presently for the buriall of the dead, some of whom were carried by their friends unto Churches, farre remote, there to receive their due obsequies; others were buried in the same place, & those were of the meanest ranke, whereof some twenty, or therea∣bout, were laid in one Sepulcher, having a common grave, as they had a common death and downefall. The conjectures concerning this event were divers: For some gave out, that it was the just pu∣nishment and vengeance of God infli∣cted upon thē for their Idolatry. More∣over, there were divers doubting spirits amongst the Romane Catholikes, who thought that this was some conspiracie of the Protestants. But if the building had beene demolished and overthrown by their indirect & treacherous means, it must have been done either by blow∣ing it up with Gunpowder, by sapping away the earth from the foundation, by undermining it, or by cutting off, or taking away those supporters and pil∣lars, upon whom the frame and ma∣chine of the building was grounded. All which were found to bee false, upon most diligent search and inquirie made in that behalfe. But that which carried apparent appearance of truth, and that which the Protestants and Papists did allow, who were of the more milder, temperate, and sounder judgement, was thus: That this disaster hapned not by means of any divine miracle, or humane malice; but by the defect and weaknes of the place, into which such a multi∣tude were crowded and assembled to∣gether, the judgement of God concur∣ring therewithall. The Society of the Jesuites did suffer much, in losing the persons of Father Drurie and Father Redyate. And divers persons of both Religions, but especial∣ly the Priests, who are men of as great care and vigilancie, but of a farre grea∣ter moderation, did taxe and blame them, for that they brought their flocke into a place of no greater safety or assu∣rance; and besides, because their conven∣ticle and meeting was so publike, there being divers Protestants assembled at it, some of whom were reported to have a share in this calamity, and the times as yet not serving for such assemblies, the Kings pardon being not yet publish∣ed, which was granted, as they say to all the Romane Catholikes of these King∣domes. But whatsoever thou be, Prote∣stant or Papist, that doth see this mourn∣full object, judge not, lest thou bee jud∣ged. Neither thinke thou, that those 18. men, upon whom the Tower of Silom fell, or those persons whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifice, were more grievous sinners than all the rest of the children of Israel; or that these who pe∣rished thus together, were more noto∣rious offenders than all the rest of their brethren and Religion: for assure thy
selfe, that except thou repent, thou al∣so shalt perish. And this repentance of thine must not be propter scandalum mun∣di, for the scandall and offence of the world, for so did Saul repent, when out of a foolish and State-spoiling pitie, he had spared Agag the cursed Tirant of Amalecke; and but of a faire yet foule pretence, had spared the fairest of the Cattell for sacrifice: for being rebuked by the Prophet Samuel, he doth repent, and desires him to honour him in the sight of the Elders, and to turne unto him, and he would turne unto the Lord his God. Neither must it be propter poe∣nam peccati, for their punishment, that is due unto sinne; for so did Ahab repent, when hee was reprooved by Elias for killing of Naboth, and detaining of his Vineyard, he rent his clothes, and gir∣ded himselfe in sack-cloath, as the Text hath it: But after that the fright and terrour of Gods must terrible sentence was worne out of his minde, and the custome of sinne began to prevaile a∣gaine, he sold himselfe to commit such abominations, the like whereof were never committed in Israel. But our re∣pentance must be propter reatum peccati, for the guilt of sinne, as sinne is a breach of the Law, and a transgression of Gods Commandement. Quae sic dolet com∣missa, ut non doleat committenda: Which repentance doth grieve for sinnes com∣mitted, as though it meant to commit no more; and mourne for offences past, as though it did meane to passe over no more. We must take Repentance as Iob did, in dust and ashes. Being dust, we must take it in dust; and being ashes, we must take it in ashes. Our transgressions in this Kingdome and in this Citie have beene most grievous, therefore our con∣trition should bee eminent and exem∣plar. Our pride hath made us, with Lu∣cifer, to superbire & superire, to looke o∣ver our selves, not into our selves, and to esteeme our selves like unto God, when we are scarce men. Neither is this pride simplex peccatum, a single and simple sinne, but it drawes after it excesse and riot, as it were, with a cart-rope: unto which luxurie of ours, neither Persian nor Romane were equall. After which follow fornications and adulteries, which are so frequent in this place, that in vaine may we speake of the Bordellas of Rome, or the Stewes of Venice, since the Suburbs of this sin∣full Citie, are as bad as the Suburraes of Rome or Venice. Moreover, our drunkennesse is such, that although our eyes looke red, and our hearts are as fat as brawn with drin∣king of Wine, yet, we rise up early to drinke strong drinke: which when it hath inflamed our blood and spirits, we are ready, with Lot, to fall into all pol∣lution and uncleannesse. And last of all, wee are so uncharita∣ble, so stony-hearted and close-fisted, that wee may bee fitly compared unto lumps of clay, tempered with blood, although we are statues of flint, with∣out the blood or life of charity. For this cause, repent, ô England, re∣pent, ô London; repent Protestants, re∣pent Papists, for your transgressions and offences: repent, repent; for by these wonderfull signes and tokens, it doth appeare most cleerely, that the King∣dome of Heaven is at hand. A Note of such persons as were slaine, by the fall of the Roome wherein they were, in the Blacke Friers, at Father Druries Sermon, Octob. the 26. 1623. MAster Drurie the Priest. Mr. Redyate the Priest. Lady Webbe. Lady Blackstones Daughter. Thomas Webbe, her man. William Robinson, Taylor. Robert Smith, Master Hicks man the Apothecarie. Mr. Davisons Daughter. Anthony Hall his man. Anne Hobdin, Mary Hobdin, lodging in Mr. Da∣visons house. Iohn Galloway, Vintner. Mr. Peirson, his wife, two sonnes In Robin-hood Court in Shoo-lane.
Mistris Vudall. Abigal her maid. Two more in her house. Iohn Netlan, a Taylor. Nathaniel Coales. Iohn Halifaxe. Mistris Rugbie in Holborne. Iohn Worrals sonne in Holborne. Master Becket, a Cornish man. Thomas Mersit, his wife and his sonne and maid, in Mountague Close. Mistris Summel, and Mary her Maid, in Blacke Friers. Andrew whites daughter in Holborn. Mr. Staker, Taylor in Salisbury court. Elizab. Sommers, in Grayes Inne lane. Mr. Westwood. Iudeth Bellowes. A man of Sir Lues Pembertons. Elizabeth Moore, widdow. Iohn Iames. Morris Beucresse, Apothecarie. Davie Vaughan. Anne Field. Mr. Ployden. Robert Heifime. One Medalfe. Mr. Maufield. Mr. Simons. Dorothy Simons. Thomas Simons, a Boy. Robert Pauerkes. Anne Davison. Anthony Hall. Mistris Morton and her Maid. Francis Downes. Edmond Shey. Isua Perry. Iohn Tullye. Robert Drury. Thomas Draper. Iohn Staiggs. Thomas Elis. Michael Butler in Woodstreet. Edmund Rivals. Edmund Welsh. Bartholomew Bauin. Davie, an Irishman. Richard Price. Thomas Wood. Christopher Hobbs. Elizabeth Astime. Iohn Butler. Clarentia, a Maid. Iane Turner. Mistris Milbourne. Frithwith Anne. Mistris Elton. Mistris Walsteed. Margaret Barrom. Henry Becket. Sarah Watsonne. Iohn Bethoms. Master Harris. Mistris Tompson. Richard Fitguift. George Ceaustour. Master Grimes. One Barbaret, One Hucble, VValter Ward, Rigaret. enquired for. Iohn Brabant, a Painter in Little Brit∣taine. A man-servant of Master Buckets, a Painter in Aldersgate street. Now to turne againe to the Blacke Friers, through Bowyer Row, Ave Mary lane, and Pater noster Row, to the Church of Saint Michael ad Bladum, or at the Corne, (corruptly, at the Querne) so cal∣led, because in place thereof, was some∣time a Corne-Market,Corne-market by Pater noster Row. stretching up West to the Shambles. It seemeth that this Church was new builded, about the reigne of Edward the third.Parish Church of S. Michael ad bladum. Thomas Newton, first Parson there, was buried in the Quire, in the yeere 1461. At the East end of this Church stood a Crosse,Old crosse in West-Cheape. called the Old Crosse in VVest Cheape, which was taken downe in the yeere 1390. since the which time, the said Parish Church was also taken downe; but new builded and enlarged, in the yeere 1430. the eighth of Henry the 6. VVilliam Eastfield, Maior, and the Com∣munalty, granted of the common ground of the Citie, three foot and an halfe in breadth on the North part, and foure foot in breadth toward the East, for the inlarging thereof. This is now a proper Church, and hath the Monu∣ments of Thomas Newton, first Parson. Roger VVoodcocke, Harter, 1475. Thomas Russell, Brewer, 1473. Iohn Hulton, Stationer, 1475. Iohn Oxney. Roger North,Roger North▪ Merchant, Haberdasher, 1509. Iohn Leyland, the famous Antiquary. Henry Prannell, Vintner, one of the Sheriffes, 1558.
Wil. Elkin, one of the Sheriffs, 1586. Thomas Bankes, Barber-Chirrgeon, 1598. Here lyeth buried the body of Henry Pran∣nell, A comely Monumēt in the South side of the Chancell. late Citizen and Alderman of Lon∣don, and free of the Vintners, who decea∣sed the 22. day of October, Ann. Dom. 1589. Anno aetatis suae, 58. He had to wife Anne, the daughter of Edmond Baxtar, and had issue by her, three sonnes and one daughter. Here lyeth the body of William Elkin,Another like Mo∣nument in the same wall. Mercer, late Citizen and Alderman of London, who deceased the last day of October, 1593. Anno aetatis suae, 70. who tooke to wife Alice Robinson, the Daughter of Thomas Wilkes, by whom he had issue one daughter, named Vrsula. Thomas Bankes,A smaller Monumēt in the same wall. Barber Chirurgeon, De∣putie of this Ward, who had to wife Joan Laurence, by whom he had issue seven sonnes and ten daughters. Iohn Mundham had a Chauntry there in the fourth of Edward the second. At the East end of this Church, in place of the old Crosse,Water-Conduit by Pauls gate. is now a water-Conduit placed; William Eastfield, Mai∣or, the ninth of Henry the sixth, at the request of divers Common-Councels, granted it to be: whereupon, in the 19. of the same Henry, 1000. Markes was granted by a Common Councell, to∣wards the workes of this Conduit, and the reparations of other: this is called the Little Conduit in West Cheap, by Pauls gate. At the West end of this Parish Church,Passage thorow S. Michaels Church. is a small passage for people on foot thorow the same Church, and West from the said Church, some di∣stance, is another passage out of Pater noster row, and is called (of such a signe) Panyer Alley,Panyer Alley. which commeth out into the North, over against Saint Martins Lane. Next is Ivie Lane,Ivie lane. so called of Ivie growing on the walls of the Prebends houses, but now the Lane is repleni∣shed on both the sides with faire houses, and divers Offices have beene there kept, by Registers, namely, for the Prerogative Court of the Archbishop of Canturbury, the Probate of Wils, which is now removed into Warwicke lane, and also for the Lord Treasurers Remem∣brance of the Exchequer, &c. This Lane runneth North, to the West end of Saint Nicholas Shambles. Of old time there was one great house, sometimes belonging to the Earles of Britaine, since that, to the Lovels, and was called Lovels Inne:Lovels Inne. for Matild, wife to Iohn Lovell, held it in the first of Hen∣ry the sixth. Then is Eldenese Lane,Eldenese or Warwicke Lane. which stretch∣eth North to the high street of Newgate Market, the same is now called Warwick lane, of an ancient house there builded by an Earle of Warwicke, and was since called Warwicke Inne.Warwicke Inne. It is in Record called a Messuage in Eldenese Lane, in the Parish of S. Sepulchre, the 28. of Henry the sixth. Cicilie, Duchesse of Warwicke, possessed it. Now againe, from the Conduit by Pauls gate, on the North side is a large street, running West to Newgate, the first part whereof, from the Conduit to the Shambles, (of selling Bladders there) called Bladder street.Bladder street. Then behind the Butchers shops bee now divers slaughter-houses inward, and Tipling-houses outward.Mountgod∣dard street. This is called Mount∣goddard street, of the Tippling-houses there, and the Goddards mounting from the Tappe to the Table, from the Table to the mouth, and sometimes o∣ver the head. This street goeth up to the North end of Ivie lane. Before this Mount-goddard street, Stall-Boords were of old time set up by the Butchers, to shew and to sell their Flesh meat upon; over the which Stall-Boords, they first builded sheds, to keepe off the weather: but since that (incroching by little and little) they have made their Stall-boords and Sheds, faire houses, meet for the princi∣pall Shambles. Next is Newgate market,Newgate Market. first of Corne and Meale, and then of other Victuals, which stretcheth almost to Eldenese lane. A faire new and strong Frame of Tim∣ber, covered with Lead, was therefore set up at the charges of the Citie, neere to the West corner of S. Nicholas Sham∣bles, for the Meale to bee weighed,
in the first of Edward the sixth; Sir Iohn Gresham being then Maior. On this side the north corner of Eldenese lane, stood sometime a proper Parish Church of S. Ewine,Parish Church of S. Ewine. as is before said, given by Henry the eighth towards the erecting of Christs Church: It was taken downe, and in place thereof, a faire strong frame of Timber erected, where∣in dwell men of divers Trades. And from this frame, to Newgate, is all of this Ward: and so an end thereof. It hath an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Counsell, twelve; Consta∣bles, seventeene; Scavengers, eighteen; Wardmote Inquest, eighteene, and a Beadle: and is taxed to the Fifteene, fifty pounds.
BREADSTREET VVARD. BReadstreet ward beginneth in the high street of West Cheape,Breadstreet Ward. to wit, on the South side, from the Stan∣dard to the great Crosse. Then is also a part of Watheling street of this Ward, to wit, from over against the Red Lion, on the North side, up al∣most to Pauls gate; for it lacketh but one house of Saint Augustines Church. And on the South side, from the Red Lion Gate to the Old Exchange; and downe the same Exchange, on the East side, by the West end of Maiden Lane, or Distar lane, to Knight-Riders street, or, as they call that part thereof, Old Fish-street. And all the North side of the said Old Fish-street, to the South end of Breadstreet, and by that, still in Knight-Riders street, till over against the Trinitie Church, and Trinitie Lane. Then is Breadstreet it selfe,Breadstreet. so called, of Bread in old time there sold: for it appeareth by Records, that in the yeere 1302. which was the 30. of Edward the first, the Bakers of London were bounden to sell no bread in their shops or houses, but in the Market; and that they should have foure Hall-motes in the yeere, at foure severall termes, to deter∣mine of enormities belonging to the said Company. This street, giving the name to the whole Ward, beginneth in West Cheape, almost by the Standard, and runneth downe South, through or thwart Wathe∣ling street, to Knight-Riders street afore∣said, where it endeth. This Breadstreet is wholly on both sides of this Ward. Out of the which street, on the East side, is Basing lane, a piece whereof, to wit, to and over against the backe gate of the Red Lion in Watheling street, is of this Breadstreet Ward. Then is Friday street,Friday street. beginning also in West Cheape, and runneth downe South through Watheling street, to Knight Riders street, or Old Fish-street. This Friday street is of Breadstreet Ward, on the East side, from over against the North-east corner of Saint Matthewes Church, and on the West side, from the South corner of the said Church, downe as aforesaid. In this Friday street, on the West side thereof, is a Lane, commonly cal∣led Mayden Lane, or Distaffe Lane, cor∣ruptly for Distar Lane, which runneth West into the Old Exchange: and in this Lane is also one other lane, on the South side thereof, likewise called Di∣star Lane, which runneth downe to Knight-Riders street, or Old Fishe-street: And so bee the bounds of this whole Ward. Monuments to be noted here: first at Breadstreet corner, the North-east end 1595. of Thomas Tomlinson, causing in the high street of Cheape a Vault to bee digged and made, there was founde at fifteene foot deepe,A faire pa∣ved way found, 15. foot deep, in Cheape street. a faire pavement, like unto that above ground; and at the further end, at the Chanell, was found a Tree, sawed into five steppes, which was to steppe over some Brooke, run∣ning out of the West, towards Wal∣brooke: and upon the edge of the said Brooke, as it seemeth, there were found lying along, the bodies of two great Trees, the ends whereof were then saw∣ed off, and firme Timber, as at the first when they fell; part of the said Trees remaine yet in the ground undigged. It was all forced ground, untill they went past the Trees aforesaid, which was about seventeene foot deepe, or better; thus much hath the ground of this Citie (in that place) beene raised from the maine.
Next to be noted, the most beautifull Frame of faire houses and shops,Goldsmiths Rowe in Cheape. that be within the Wals of London, or else∣where in England, commonly called Goldsmiths Rowe, betwixt Breadstreete end and the Crosse in Cheape, but is within this Breadstreete Ward; the same was builded by Thomas Wood, Gold∣smith, one of the Sheriffes of London, in the yeere 1491. It containeth in number ten faire dwelling houses, and foureteene shops, all in one Frame, uni∣formely builded foure stories high, beautified towards the streete with the Goldsmiths Armes, and the likenesse of Wood-men, in memory of his name, riding on monstrous Beasts; all which is cast in Lead, richly painted over, and gilt: these hee gave to the Goldsmiths, with stockes of money to bee lent to young men, having those shops, &c. This said Front was againe new pain∣ted and gilt over in the yeere 1594. Sir Richard Martin being then Maior, and keeping his Maioralty in one of them; serving out the time of Cutbert Buckle, from the second of Iuly, till the 28. of October. Then for Watheling streete,Watheling street. which Ley∣land calleth Atheling or Noble street: but since hee sheweth no reason why, I ra∣ther take it to be so named, of the great high-way of the same calling. True it is, that at this present the inhabitants thereof are wealthy Drapers, retaylers of Woollen Clothes, both Broad and Narrow, of all sorts, more than in any one street of this City. Of the Old Exchange,Knight-Ri∣ders street. I have noted in Faringdon Ward: VVherefore I passe downe to Knight-Riders street, whereof I have also spoken in Cordwainer streete Ward. But in this part of the said Knight-Riders street, is a Fish-Market kept, and therefore called Old Fishstreet, for a dif∣ference from New Fishstreet. In this Old Fishstreet is one Rowe of small houses,Fish-Mar∣ket, called Old Fish∣street. placed along in the mid∣dest of Knight-Riders street, which Rowe is also of Breadstreet Ward. These hou∣ses, now possessed by Fishmongers, were at the first but moveable Boords (or Stals) set out on Market daies, to shew their Fish, there to bee sold: but procuring licence to set up Sheds, they grew to Shops, and by little and little, to tall Houses, of three or foure stories in height, and now is called Fishstreete. Walcer Turke, Fishmonger, Maior, 1349. had two Shops in Old Fishstreet, over-against Saint Nicholas Church, the one rented five shillings the yeere, the other foure shillings. Breadstreet,Breadstreet. so called of Bread sold there (as I said) is now wholly inhabi∣ted by rich Merchants, and divers faire Innes be there, for good receit of Car∣riers, and other Travellers to the City. On the East side of this street,Parish Church of Alhallowes in Bread∣street. at the corner of Watheling street, is the proper Church of Alhallowes in Breadstreete, wherein are the Monuments of Iames Thame, Goldsmith. Iohn Walpole, Goldsmith, 1349. Thomas Beaumont, Alderman, one of the Sheriffes, 1442. Robert Basset, Salter, Maior, 1476. Sir Richard Chaury, Salter, Maior, 1509. Sir Thomas Pargitar, Salter, Maior, 1530. Henry Sucley, Merchant-Taylor, one of the Sheriffes, 1541. Richard Reade, Alderman, that served and was taken prisoner in Scotland, 1542. Robert House, one of the Sheriffes, 1589. William Albany, Richard May, and Ro∣ger Abdy, Merchant-Taylors. Hic jacent Thomas Beaumond,An anciēt gray Mar∣ble tomb, as in a Chappell by it selfe. Civis, Sal∣ter, & quondam Vicecomes Civitatis London, Alicia, & Alicia uxores ejus. Qui quidem Thomus obiit 14. die men∣sis Augusti, Anno Domini, 1457. Quo∣rum animabus propetietur Deus. Es te∣stis Christe, &c. Corporis ut Christi festum possit venerari, Hic magis instituit Salter iter Beaumond. Cui Deus uxoribus binis Coeleste solamen, Detque suis pueris:All these have faire plate  other. Sit benedictus. Amen. Here lieth buried the body of William Al∣bany, Esquire, Citizen, and Merchant-Taylor of London, with his two wives, Thomasine, by whom hee had issue five
sonnes, and foure daughters, who decea∣sed the 15. of December, 1565. And Ioane, who dyed without issue, the 7. of Iuly, 1579. And the said William yeelded his soule to the Almighty the 18. day of February, 1589. being of the age of 82. yeeres: so rest they all here in the assured hope of a blessed resurre∣ction. Respice & prospice finem. Here lieth Henry Suckley, late Sheriffe, Citizen, and Merchant-Taylor of Lon∣don, which Henry deceased the one and twentieth day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 1564. And his foure wives, Anne Boughton, Elizabeth English, Alice Fletcher, and Agnes Cachemaide, &c. Here lieth Robert Mellishe, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, which de∣ceased the thirtieth day of March, Anno Domini 1562. &c. Robert Hulson lyeth here,A white stone by it self, neere to the Tombe. In his time well knowne to all; He lived well, and died so, When God from hence did him call. In the three and twentieth of Henry the eighth, the seventeenth of August, two Priests of this Church fell at vari∣ance, that the one drew bloud of the o∣ther: Wherefore the same Church was suspended,Church suspended. and no Service sung or said therein for the space of one moneth af∣ter; the Priests were committed to pri∣son, and the fifteenth of October, being injoyned penance, went before a gene∣rall Procession, bare-headed, bare-foo∣ted, and bare-legged, before the Chil∣dren, with Beades and Bookes in their hands, from Pauls, through Cheap, Corn∣hill, &c. More to bee noted of this Church,Spire of Ahallowes, steeple smitten by Tem∣pest. which had sometime a faire spired Steeple of stone. In the yeere 1559. the fifth of September, about mid-day, fell a great Tempest of Lightning, with a terrible clap of Thunder, which struck the said spire about 9. or 10. foot beneath the top; out of the which place fell a stone, that slew a Dogge, and over∣threw a man that was playing with the Dogge. The same Spire, being but little damnified thereby, was shortly after taken downe, for sparing the char∣ges of reparation. On the same side is Salters Hall,Salters Hall. with sixe Almes-houses in number, builded for poore decayed Brethren of that Company. This Hall was burned in the yeere 1539. and againe re-edified. Lower downe,Parish Church of S. Mildred in Bread∣street. on the same side, is the Parish Church of St. Mildred the Virgin. The Monuments in this Church be, of the Lord Trenchaunt, of Saint Albans, Knight, who was supposed to be either the new builder of this Church, or best Benefactor to the Workes thereof, a∣bout the yeere 1300. and certaine Cor∣nish Gentlemen, 1312. William Palmer, Blader, a great Bene∣factor also, 1356. Iohn Chadworth, Maior, 1401. who gave the Parsonage house, a Revestry, and Church-yard to that Parish, in the yeere 1428. notwithstanding, his Mo∣nument is pulled downe. Stephen Budge, Gentleman; his Armes be three Water-Budges, 1419. Henry Budge founded a Chauntry there, 1419. Roger Forde, Vintner, 1440. Thomas Barnwell, Fishmonger, one of the Sheriffes, 1424. Sir Iohn Hawlen, Clarke, Parson of that Church,Parson of S. Mildred & his man burned. who built the Parsonage house newly, after the same had beene burned to the ground, together with the Parson and his man also, burned in that fire, 1485. Iohn Parnell, 1510. William Hurstwaight, Pewterer to the King, 1526. Christopher Turner, Chirurgeon to King Henry the eighth, 1530. Ralph Simonds, Fishmonger, one of the Sheriffes, in the yeere 1527. Thomas Langham gave to the Poore of that Parish 4. Tenements, 1575. Thomas Hall, Salter, 1582. Thomas Collins, Salter, Alderman. Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, Maior, 1575. was buried in sir Iohn Chadworths Vault.
An Obite consecrated to the happy Memoriall of Sir JOHN CHADWORTH,A very ancient Tombe in the North side of the Chancell. or SHADWORTH, Knight, sometime Mer∣cer, and Lord Maior of this City of Lon∣don; who gave a Vestry to this Church, an house for the Pastor to dwell in, and a Church-yard to the Parishioners, where∣in to bury their dead. He deceased the 7. day of May, An. Dom. 1401. Here lieth a man,A faire in∣scription on the wall. that Faith and Works did even (Like fiery Chariots) mount him up to Heaven: He did adorne this Church. When words were weake, And men forget, the living Stones will speake, He left us Land: This little Earth him keepes, These balcke words Mourners, and the Marble weepes. Here lieth the body of Thomas Copyn∣ger, A plated stone be∣fore the Commu∣nion table▪ the which deceased the 14. day of November, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1513. On whose soule, &c. Here lieth buried Thomas Clivelod,The like stone by the other. of Warmoster, in the County of VVilt∣shire, Clothier; who deceased the 24. day of Iune, An. Dom. 1558. Here lieth Sir Cuthbert Barne,One faire stone pla∣ted, for both these, by the Com∣munion table. Knight, who deceased the 16. day of October, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1521. On whose, &c. Here lieth Roger Forde, Vintner of Lon∣don, with Ioane and Margaret his wives. The which Joane deceased the eighth day of August, Anno Domini, 1467. And Margaret deceased the eleventh day of Iune, Anno Domini. 1492. And the foresaid Roger decea∣sed, &c. Here lye buried the bodies of Iohn Ire∣land, A faire plated stone in the South Quire. Citizen and Salter of London, and Elizabeth his wife, who were mar∣ried together about nine and forty or fif∣tie yeeres: And hee had issue by her sixe sonnes and sixe daughters, and hee lived in this Parish sixty yeeres. He was De∣putie of this VVard fifteene yeeres, and was the first Master of the Company of Salters. She deceased the second day of April, 1613. being of the age of seventy and five yeeres. And hee deceased the five and twentieth day of Iune, being a∣ged 83. yeeres. So rest they both here in the bed of death, in hope of a joyfull resurrection. Respice & prospice finem. Out of this Breadstreet,Basing lane called the Bakehouse. on the same side, is Basing lane, a part whereof (as is afore shewed) is of this VVard, but how it tooke the name of Basing I have not read. In the twentieth yeere of Ri∣chard the second, the same was called the Bakehouse, whether meant for the Kings Bakehouse, or of Bakers dwel∣ling there, and baking Bread to serve the Market in Breadstreet, where the Bread was sold, I know not: but sure I am, I have not read of Basing, or of Ger∣rard the Gyant, to have any thing there to doe. On the South side of this Lane is one great house, of old time builded upon arched Vaults, and with arched Gates of stone brought from Cane in Norman∣die. The same is now a common Ostrey for receit of Travellers, commonly and corruptly called Gerards Hall, of a Gy∣ant said to have dwelled there. In the high rooffed Hall of this house some∣time stood a large Firre-Pole,A Pole of 40. foot long and 15. inches about, a∣buled to be the ju∣sting staffe of Gerard a Gyant. which reached to the roofe thereof, and was said to be one of the staves that Gerard the Gyant used in the warres to runne withall. There stood also a Ladder of the same length, which (as they said) served to ascend to the top of the staffe. Of later yeers this Hall is altred in buil∣ding, and divers roomes are made in it. Notwithstanding, the Pole is removed to one corner of the Hall, and the Lad∣der hanged broken, upon a wall in the yard. The Hosteler of that house said to mee, the Pole lacked halfe a foote of forty in length. I measured the com∣passe thereof, and found it fifteene in∣ches. Reason of the Pole could the Ma∣ster of the Hostery give me none, but ade mee reade the great Chronicles; for there he heard of it. Which answer
seemed to me insufficient: for he meant the description of Britaine, for the most part drawne out of Iohn Leyland his Commentaries, (borrowed of my selfe) and placed before Reyne Wolfes Chroni∣cle, as the labours of another (who was forced to confesse, that he never travel∣led further than from London to the Vniversity of Oxford) hee writing a Chapter of Gyants or monstrous men, hath set down more matter than troth, as partly (against my will) I am enfor∣ced here to touch. R. G. in his briefe Collection of Histories (as he termeth it) hath these words: I the writer hereof, did see the tenth day of March, in the yeere of our Lord, 1504. and had the same in my hand, the tooth of a man, which weighed ten ounces of Troy weight: and the scull of the same man is ex∣tant and to bee seene, which will hold five peckes of wheate; and the shin-bone of the same man, is sixe foote in length, and of a marvellous greatnesse: this saw R. G. The errour thereof is thus:R. G. saw a stone, and said the same to be a tooth, but being by my self proved a stone, there fai∣led both scull and shank∣bone, and followed a cluster of lies toge∣ther, yet since in∣creased by other. he affir∣meth a stone to be the tooth of a man, which stone (so proved) having no shape of a tooth, had neither scull nor shin-bone. Notwithstanding, it is ad∣ded in the said description, that by con∣jecturall symetry of those parts, the body to be twenty and eight foote long or more. From this he goeth to another like matter, of a man with a mouth six∣teene foote wide, and so to Gerard the Gyant, and his staffe. But to leave these fables, and returne where I left, I will note what my selfe hath observed con∣cerning that house. I reade, that Iohn Gisors, Maior of London,Gerards Hall re∣stored to his old name. in the yeere 1245. was owner thereof, and that Sir Iohn Gisors, Knight, Maior of London, and Constable of the Tower 1311. and divers others of that name and family, since that time owed it. William Gisors was one of the She∣riffes, 1329. More, Iohn Gisors had is∣sue, Henry and Iohn: which Iohn had is∣sue, Thomas: Which Thomas deceasing in the yeere 1350. left unto his sonne Thomas his messuage,Gerards Hall over∣throwne with Ge∣rard the  great Speare. called Gisors Hall, in the Parish of Saint Mildred in Bread∣street: Iohn Gisors made a Feoffment thereof 1386. &c. So it appeareth, that this Gisors Hall of late time (by corrup∣tion, hath been called Gerards Hall, for Gisors Hall, as Bosomes Inne, for Blossoms Iune, Bevis Markes, for Buries Markes, Marke lane, for Mart lane, Billiter lane, for Belzetters lane, Gutter lane, for Gu∣thuruns lane, Cry Church, for Christs Church, Saint Michael in the Querne, for Saint Mihel at Corne, and such o∣thers. Out of this Gisors Hall, at the first building thereof, were made divers ar∣ched doores yet to be seen, which seem not sufficient for any great Monster, or other than men of common stature to passe thorow. The Pole in the Hall might bee used of old time (as then the custome was in every Parish) to bee set up in the Summer a May-Pole, before the principall house in the Parish or Streete,Every mans house of old time was dec∣ked with Holly and Ivie in the Winter, e∣specially at Christ∣mas. and to stand in the Hall before the Scrine, decked with Holme and Ivie, at the Feast of Christmas. The Ladder served for the decking of the May-Pole, and Roofe of the Hall. Thus much for Gisors Hall, and for that side of Breadstreet may suffice. Now on the West side of Breadstreet, amongst divers faire and large houses for Merchants, and faire Innes for pas∣sengers, had yee one Prison-house, per∣taining to the Sheriffes of London, cal∣led the Compter in Breadstreet: but in the yeere 1555. the Prisoners were re∣moved from thence,Compter in Bread∣street. to one other new Compter in Woodstreet, provided by the Cities purchase, and builded for that purpose: the cause of which remove was this: Richard Husband, Pastelar, keeper of this Compter in Breadstreete,Prisoners removed from the Compter in Bread∣street to a new Cop∣ter in Woodstreet▪ Keeper of the Compter sent to Newgate. being a wilfull and head-strong man, dealt (for his owne advantage) hard with the prisoners under his change, ha∣ving also servants, such as himselfe li∣ked best for their bad usage, and would not for any complaint bee reformed: whereupon, in the yeere 1550. Sir Row∣land Hill being Maior, by the assent of a Court of Aldermen, he was sent to the Goale of Newgate, for the cruell hand∣ling of his prisoners: and it was com∣manded to the Keeper, to set those I∣rons on his legges, which are called the Widowes almes. These he ware from Thursday, till Sunday in the afternoon, and being by a Court of Aldermen re∣leased on the Tuesday, was bound in an hundred Markes, to observe from thenceforth an Act made by the Com∣mon
Councell, for the ordering of pri∣soners in the Compters: all which not∣withstanding, hee continued as afore, whereof my selfe am partly a witnesse: For being on a Iurie,Quest of inquiry indight the Kee∣pers of the Goals for dea∣ling hard∣ly with their pri∣soners. to enquire against a Sessions of Goale delivery, in the yeere 1552. wee found the prisoners hardly dealt withall for their achates and otherwise, as also that Theeves and Strumpets were there lodged for foure pence the night, whereby they might be safe from searches that were made abroad:They in∣dighted the Bow∣ling-Al∣ies, &c. for the which enormities, and other not needfull to be recited, hee was indighted at that Session, but did rubbe it out, and could not bee reformed, till this remove of the prisoners: for the house in Breadstreete was his owne by lease, or otherwise, so that he could not be put from it. Note that Iaylors, buy∣ing their offices, will deale hardly with pitifull prisoners. Now in Friday street,Friday street. so called of Fish∣mongers dwelling there, and serving Fridayes Market, on the East side is a small Parish Church,Parish Church of S. Iohn E∣vangelist, sometime of S. We∣bridge. commonly called Saint Iohn Evangelist. The Monuments therein, be of Iohn Dogget, Merchant-Taylor, one of the Sheriffes in the yeere 1509. Sir Christopher Askew, Draper, Mai∣or, 1533. William de Avinger, Farrier, was bu∣ried there in the 34. of Edward the se∣cond. Then lower downe is one other Pa∣rish Church of S. Margaret Moyses,Parish Church of S. Margaret Moyses. so called (as seemeth) of one Moyses, that was founder or new builder thereof. The Monuments there, be of Sir Ri∣chard Dobbes, Skinner, Maior, 1551. William Dane, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffes, 1569. Sir Iohn Allot, Fishmonger, Maior, 1591. There was of elder time buried, Ni∣cholas Stanes, and Nicholas Bray, they founded Chauntries there. Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur. APOC. 14. To William Dane that sometime was An Ironmonger;A Monu∣ment in the South wall of the Chancell. where, each Degree He worthily (with praise) did passe. By wisedome, truth, and heed, was he Advanc'd an Alderman to be: Then, Sheriffe; that, he with justice prest, And cost, performed with the best. In Almes franke, of Conscience cleare; In grace with Prince, to People glad: His vertuous wife, his faithfull Phèere, Margaret, this Monument hath made: Meaning (through God) that as shee had With him (in house) long lived well; Even so in Tombes blisse to dwell. Obierunt in Christo. Ille, Sabat. 5. Septemb. 1573. Ae∣tatis 56. Haec vero 18. Novemb. An. 1579. April. 5. An. Domini, 1593. The Monument of the Right Honourable Sir Iohn Allot,A faire Monumēt in the North wal of the Chancell. Knight, late Lord Maior of this City of London, and Maior of the Staple of England; who deceased the seventeenth day of Septem∣ber, Anno 1591. in the time of his Maioralty. Aetatis suae 66. Here lieth the body of Alice Daniel,A faire plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion table the wife of Iohn Daniel, Esquire, and mo∣ther of Gerard Daniel, Fishmonger. Which Alice deceased the thirteenth day of October, Anno Domini 1481. On whose, &c. Ever doe well. On the West side of this Friday street is Mayden lane,Mayden lane, or Disiar lane. so named of such a Signe, or Distaffe lane, for Distar lane, as I reade in Record of a Brew-house, called the Lambe in Distar lane, the six∣teenth of Henry the sixth. In this Distar lane,Cordway∣ners Hall. on the North side thereof, is the Cordwayners or Shoo∣makers Hall; which Company were made a Brotherhood or Fraternity, in the eleventh of Henry the fourth. Of these Cordwayners I reade, that since the fifth of Richard the second, (when he tooke to wife Anne, daughter to Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia) by her example the English people had used piked Shooes,Long pi∣ked shoos, tied to the knees. tyed to their knees with Silken Laces, or Chaines of Silver and Gilt: Wherfore in the fourth of Edward the fourth it was ordained and proclai∣med, Piked shooes forbidden. that Beakes of Shin and Bootes should not passe the length of two in∣ches,
upon paine of cursing by the Cler∣gie, and by Parliament to pay 20. s. for every paire. And every Cordwayner that shod any man or woman on the Sunday, to pay 30. s. On the South side of this Distar lane, is also one other Lane, called Distar lane; which runneth downe to Knight-Riders street, or Old Fishstreet. And this is the end of Breadstreete Ward: Which hath and Alderman, his Deputy, Common Councell ten, Con∣stables ten, Scavengers eight, Ward∣mote Inquest thirteene, and a Beadle. It standeth taxed to the Fifteene in Lon∣don, at seven and thirty pounds, and in the Exchequer, at sixe & thirty pounds, eighteene shillings, two pence.
QVEENE HITH VVARD. NExt unto Breadstreete VVard on the South side thereof,Queene Hith Ward is Queene Hith Ward, so called of a Water-gate, or Harborow for Boates, Lighters, and Barges, and was (of old time) for Ships, at what time, the Tim∣ber Bridge of London was drawne up, for the passage of them to the said Hith, as to a principall stand for landing and unlading against the middest and heart of the City. This VVard beginneth in the East,Knight Ri∣ders street. in Knight-Riders street, on the South side thereof, at the East end of the Parish Church called the Holy Tri∣nity, and runneth VVest on the South side, to a Lane called Lambart hill, which is the length of the VVard in Knight-Riders street. Out of the which street are divers Lanes, running South to Thames street, and are of this VVard. The first is Trinity lane,Trinity lane. which runneth downe by the VVest end of Trinitie Church. Then is Spuren lane, or Spoo∣ners lane,Spuren lane, or Huggen lane. now called Huggen lane. Then Breadstreet hill. Then St. Mary Mount∣haunt: out of the which Lane, on the East side thereof, is one other Lane, turning East through S. Nicholas Olaves Church-yard, to Breadstreet hill. This Lane is called Finimore lane,Finimore, or Five foot lane. or Five foot lane, because it is but five foot in breadth at the VVest end. In the middest of this Lane, runneth downe one other Lane broader, South to Thames street, I think the same to be called Desborne lane,Desborne lane. for I reade of such a Lane to have beene in the Parish of S. Mary Summerset, in the 22. of Edward the third, where there is said to lye betweene the Tenement of Edward de Mountacute Knight, on the East part, and the Tenement sometime pertaining to William Gladwine, on the VVest, one plot of ground, containing in length towards Thames street twenty five foot, &c. Last of all,Lambart hill. have you Lambart hill, so called of one Lambart owner thereof: and this is the farthest VVest part of this VVard. On the North side, comming downe from Knight-Riders street, the East side of Lambart hill is wholly of this Ward: and the VVest side from the North end of the Black-smiths Hall (which is a∣bout the middest of this Lane) unto Thames street. Then part of Thames street is of this VVard, to wit, from a Cooks house called the signe of King David, three houses west from the Old Swanne Brewhouse in the East, unto Huntington house, over-against Saint Peters Church in the West, neere unto Pauls Wharse: And on the Lane side, from a Cookes house called the Blue Boore, to the West end of Saint Peters Church, and up Saint Peters hill, two houses North a∣bove the said Church. And these bee the bounds of this VVard: in which are Parish Churches seven, Hals of Companies two, and other Ornaments, as shall be shewed. First,Parish Church of the Trinity. in Knight-Riders streete is the small Parish Church of the Holy Trini∣ty, lately very old, & in danger of down falling: collections were made for the repairing thereof, but they would not stretch so farre, untill a generall meanes was made, as appeareth by a publike no∣tice therof declared in the said Church. Iohn Brian, Alderman in the reigne of Henry the fifth, was a great benefactor: Iohn Chamber had a Chauntry there. Thomas Rishby, Esquire, and Alice his wife buried within the Chancell. Iohn Mirfin, Auditor of the Exchequer, 1471. Sir Richard Fowlar of Riches in Oxfordshire, 1528. George Cope, se∣cond sonne to Sir Iohn Cope of Copes-Ashby,
in Northamptonshire, 1572. Towards the West end of Knight-Riders street,Parish Church of S. Nicholas Cold Abbey. is the Parish Church of Saint Nicholas Cold Abbey, a proper Church, somewhat ancient, as appea∣reth by the waies raised thereabout, so that men are forced to descend into the body of the Church. It hath been cal∣led of many Colden Abbey, of some Cold Abbey, or Cold Bey, and so have the most ancient writings, as standing in a cold place, as Cold Harbor, and such like. The Steeple or tall Tower of this Church, with the South Isle, hath bin of later building, to wit, the first of Ri∣chard the second, when it was meant that the whole old Church should have been new builded, as appeareth by the Arching begunne on the East side the Steeple, under the which, in the stone worke, the Armes of one Buckland, E∣squire, and his wife, daughter to Beau∣pere, are cut in stone, and also are in the Glasse windowes; whereby it appea∣reth, he was the builder of the Steeple, and repairer of the residue. The sixe and twentieth of Edward the third, An∣drew Aubery being Maior, Thomas Frere, Fishmonger, gave one peece of ground to the said Parish Church of Saint Ni∣cholas, containing fourescore and sixe foot in length, and three and forty foot at one end, and foure and thirty at an∣other, in breadth for a Cemitory or Church-yard. The twentieth of Richard the second; Thomas Barnard, Castle Clerke. Iohn Sonderash, Clerke, and Iohn Nouncy, gave to the Parson and Church-wardens of the said Church and their successors, one Messuage and one Shop, with the appurtenances in Distaffe lane, and Old Fishstreet, for the reparation of the body of the late Church, the Belfrey or Steeple, and Ornaments. Buried in this Church, Iohn Calfe, and William Cogeshall, 1426. Walter Turke, Fishmonger, Maior, 1349. Richard Esgastone, Fishmonger, 1330. Nicholas Wolberge, Fishmonger, 1407. Thomas Padington, Fishmong. 1485. Robert Hary Fishmonger. Iohn Suring, 1490. Roger Darlington, Fishmonger, 1557. Rich. Lacy, Parion, under a faire tombe on the North side of the Quire, 1491. Richard Bradburge, 1497. William Clarke, 1501. Iames Pitman, 1507. Richard Farneford, 1525. Thomas Nicholas, Fishmonger, 1527. William Brade, Fishmonger, 1528. The 14. day of May, An. Dom. 1601. Leonard Smith, Fishmonger,A faire plated stone in the East end of the chan∣cell. ended his dayes, He feared the Lord, and walkt in his wayes: His body here in earth doth rest, His Soule with Christ in heaven is blest. Here lye buried the bodies of Dorothy Halye,A faire plated stone by the Com∣munion table. late wife of Robert Halye, of Ipswitch, in the County of Suffolke, Merchant: And of William Wymer, son of William Wymer, and Mary his wife, daughter of the said Robert and Dorothy, which William the son de∣ceased the 19. day of August; and the said Dorothy the 20. day of September next following, An. Dom. 1601. Hic jacet Magister Wil. Sandhill,A faire plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion table. Ca∣nonicus Eccle.—magni London. Et huius Ecclesiae quondam Rector; Qui obiit 26. die Mens. Augusti. An. Dom. 1445. Cuius animae, &c. Hic jacet in cossa,A faire plated stone in the mid∣dle Isle. Putredo mortis & ossa, Cum mulieris quie in coelis vivit amoenè, Vt puto per vitam morum signis redimitam, Anno Millino qt. i. C. X. quae seno Bissque die deno cum perit en Elena, Cum quarto pleno, requiem tenet hic in ceno, Quo cuius Iane consternis corpus inane. On the North side of this Church,Water Conduit. in the wall thereof, was of late builded a covenient Cesterne of Stone & Lead for receit of Thames water, conveighed in pipes of Lead to that place, for the ease & commodity of the Fishmongers;
and other inhabitants in and about Old Fishstreate. Barnard Randolph, Com∣mon Sergeant of the City of London, did (in his life time) deliver to the Company of Fishmongers, the summe of nine hundred pounds, to be imploy∣ed towards the conducting of the said Thames water, and cesterning the same, &c. In the Parishes of St. Mary Magdalen, and Saint Nicholas Cold Ab∣bey, neere unto Fishstreet, seven hundred pounds, and other two hundred pounds to charitable deedes. Hee deceased 1583. and shortly after, this Conduit with the other was made and finished. In Trinity lane,Painter stainers Hall. on the VVest side thereof is the Painter-stainers Hall; for so of old time were they called: but now that workmanship of staining is departed out of use in England. Lower downe in Trinity lane,Earle of Cornwall his house. on the East side thereof, was sometime a great Messuage, pertaining unto Iohn, Earle of Cornwall, in the 14. of Edward the third. On Breadstreet hill, downe to the Thames, on both sides, bee divers faire houses, inhabited by Fishmongers, Cheefemongers, and Merchants of di∣vers Trades. On the VVest side where∣of is the Parish Church of Saint Nicho∣las Olave,Parish Church of S. Nicholas Olave. a convenient Church, having the Monuments of W. Newport, Fish∣monger, one of the Sheriffes, 1375. Richard Welles, Parson, 1391. Richard Sturges, Fishmonger, 1470. Thomas Dewen, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffes, 1537. who gave his Mes∣suage (with the appurtenances) where∣in he dwelt, with 14. Tenements in the said Parish of S. Nicholas, to be had, af∣ter the decease of Agnes his wife, to the Ironmongers, and they to give stipends, appointed to Almes-men, in five hou∣ses by them builded in the Church∣yard of that Parish; but now they are converted into foure. More to poore Scholars in Oxford and Cambridge, &c. Blitheman, an excellent Organist of the Queenes Chappell lyeth buried there, with an Epitaph, 1591. Hic jacet Richardus Sturges,An anciēt Tombe in the South wal of the Quire. Civis & Piscenarius London, & Katharina uxor ejus. Qui quidem Rich. obiit 3. die mensis Iulii, Anno. Dom. 1479. Et praedicta Katharina obiit, &c. Hic jacet Dominus Henricus Welleus,A faire plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion table. quondam Rector istius Ecclesiae. Qui obiit 4. die Maii, An. Domini 1391. Cujus animae. &c. Here Blitheman lias, a worthy wight,An engra∣ven plate in the North wall of the Chancell. who feared God above, A friend to all, a foe to none, whom rich and poore did love. Of Princes Chappell, Gentleman, unto his dying day; Whom all tooke great delighe to heare him on the Organs play. Whose passing skill in Mustokes Art, a Scholar left behinde; Iohn Bull (by name) his Master veine expressing in each kinde. But nothing here continues long; nor resting place can have; His soule departed hence to Heaven, his body here in Grave. He died on Whitsunday, Anno Domini 1591. Here, before this place,A small Monumēt in the North wall of the Chancell. lieth buried the bo∣die of Iohn Widnell; Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, sometime Master of that Company, and Deputy of this ward; who deceased the 15. day of February, 1601. being of the age of 70. Here lie the bodies of Thomas Lewen,An anciēt Tombe in the North Isle of the body of the Church: Ironmonger, and sometime Alderman of this City of London, and Agnes his wife. Which Thomas deceased the 29. day of Iune, Anno Domini 1555. And the said Agnes deceased the 26. day of October, An. Dom. 1562. The next is Old Fishstreet hill, a pas∣sage so called,Old Fish∣street hill. which also runneth down to Thames street. In this Lane, on the East side thereof, is the one end of Fini∣mbre, or Five foot lane. On the west side of this Old Fishstreet hill,Bishop of Herefords house. is the Bishop of Herefords Inne, or Lodging; an ancient House, and large Roomes, builded of Stone and Tiber, which sometime belonged to the Mounthaunts in Norfolke. Radulphius de Maydenstone, Bishop of Hereford, about 1234. bought it of the Mounthaunts, and gave it to the Bishops of Hereford, his successors; Charles, both Bishop of
Hereford, and Chancellour of the Mar∣ches, about the yeere 1517. repaired it: Since the which time, the same is great∣ly ruinated, and is now divided into many small Tenements: the Hall and principall roomes, are an house to make Suger-loaves, &c. Next adjoyning is the Parish Church of Saint Mary de Monte alto,Parish Church of S. Mary Monte alto. or Mount∣haunt, this is a very small Church, and at the first builded, to bee a Chappell for the said house of the Mounthaunts, and for Tenements thereunto belong∣ing. The Bishop of Hereford is Patron thereof. Monuments in this Church of Iohn Glocester, Alderman, 1345. who gave Salt-wharfe, for two Chauntries there. Iohn Skip, Bishop of Hereford, 1539. sate 12. yeeres, dyed at London in time of Parliament, and was buried in this Church. There was sometime a faire house in the said Parish of Saint Mary Mount∣haunt, belonging to Robert Belkenape, one of the Kings Iustices,Robert Bel∣kenape his house gi∣ven to VV. Wick∣ham. but the said Belke∣nape being banished this Realme, King Richard the second, in the twelfth of his reigne, gave it to William Wickham, Bi∣shop of Winchester. On the East side of this Old Fishstreet hill,One old Hall of the Fish∣mongers. is one great house, now letten out for rent, which house sometime was one of the Hals pertaining to the Com∣pany of Fishmongers,Fishmon∣ger Hall-motes, six in num∣ber. at such time as they had sixe Hall-motes or meeting places: namely, twaine in Bridgestreet, or New Fishstreet,Patents. twaine in Old Fish∣street, whereof this was one, and twaine in Stockfishmonger Rowe, or Thames street, as appeareth by a Record the 22. of Ri∣chard the second. Next West-ward, is one other Lane, called Lambard hill,Lambard Hill. the East side where∣of is wholly of this Ward, and but halfe the West side, to wit, from the North end of the Black-smiths Hall.Black-smiths Hall. Then in Thames street, of this Ward, and on the North side over-against the Queenes Hith,Parish Church of S. Michael at Queene Hith. is the parish Church of S. Michael, a convenient Church, but all the Monuments therein are defaced. I finde that Stephen Spilman, Gentle∣man, of that Family in Norfolke, some∣time Mercer, Chamberlaine of London, then one of the Sheriffes, and Alder-man, in the yeere 1404. deceasing without issue, gave his Lands to his Fa∣mily the Spilmans, and his goods to the making or repairing of Bridges, and o∣ther like godly uses: and amongst o∣thers, in this Church hee founded a Chauntry, and was buried in the Quire. Also Richard Marlow, Ironmonger, Maior, 1409. gave twenty pounds to the poore of that Ward, and ten Marks to the Church. Richard Gray,His Mo∣nument yet remai∣neth. Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffes, 1515. gave 40. l'. to that Church, and was there buried. At the West end of that Church, go∣eth up a Lane, called Pyellane.Pyellane. Parish Church of S. Mary Summerset. On the same North side, at the South end of S. Mary Mounthaunt lane, is the Parish Church of Saint Mary Summerset, over-against the Broken Wharfe: it is a pro∣per Church, but the Monuments are all defaced, except a Grave-stone lately there layed, with this inscription: Here lieth buried the body of Master Ri∣chard Randall of this Parish,A faire plated stone in the chan∣cell by the Com∣mmunion Table. who had issue by Margaret his first wife foure sons and seven daughters, one only daugh∣ter surviving, named Ioyce. He was by freedome a Pewterer, by trade a Brewer, and one of the Governours of Christs Hospitall. Hee departed this life the 7. day of Iune, An. Domini 1616. being aged 75. yeeres. No cause to mourne, though here he lye, That gave to many cause to cry. For though his body turne to dust, His Soule doth live among the just. I thinke the same to bee of old time called Summers Hith,Summer Hith. of some mans name, that was owner of the ground neere adjoyning, as Edreds Hith was so called of Edred, owner thereof, and since called Queene Hith, as pertaining to the Queene, &c. Then is a small Parish Churcch of St. Peter;Parish Church of S. Peter Parva by Pauls VVharfe. called Parva, or little, neere unto Pauls Wharfe: In this Church no Mo∣numents doe remaine.
At the West end thereof is a Lane, called St. Peters Hill: but two houses up that Lane, on the East side, is of this Ward, and the rest is of Castle Baynard VVard. On the South side of Thames streete, beginning againe in the East, among the Cookes; the first in this VVard is the signe of David the King. Then is Townes-end lane, turning down to the Thames.Townes-end Lane. Then is Queene Hith, a large Recep∣tacle for Ships,Eldreds Hith or Queene Hith. Lighters, Barges, and such other Vessels. Touching the Anti∣quity and use of this Gate and Hith, first I finde, that the same belonged to one named Edred, & was then called Edreds Hith: which since falling to the hands of King Stephen,Lib. Trini∣tte. it was by his Charter confirmed to William de Ypre: the Farme thereof in Fee and in Heritage. William de Ypre gave it unto the Prior and Co∣vent of the Holy Trinity within Eald∣gate, as appeareth by this Charter. To Theobald, by the grace of God, Arch∣bishop of Canturbury, Primate of Eng∣land, and Legate Apostolike to the Bishop of London, and to all faithfull people, Clerkes and Lay-men, William de Ypre sendeth greeting: Know ye me to have given and granted to God, and to the Church of the Holy Trinity of London, to the Prior and Canons there, serving God, in perpetu∣all Almes, Edreds Hith, with the appur∣tenances, with such devotion, that they shall send every yeere twenty pounds, unto the maintenance of the Hospitall of Saint Ka∣tharines, which Hospitall they have in their hands, and an hundred shillings to the Monkes of Bermondsey, and threescore shillings to the Brethren of the Hospitall of Saint Giles, and that which remaineth, the said Prior and Canons shall enjoy to them∣selves. Witnesses, Richard de Luce, Ralph Bigot, &c. This Edreds Hith,. after the aforesaid Grants, came again to the Kings hands, by what meanes I have not read: but it pertained unto the Queene; and there∣fore was called Ripa Reginae, the Queens Banke, or Queenes Hith, and great pro∣fit thereof was made to her use, as may appeare by this which followeth. King Henry the third, in the ninth of his reigne, commanded the Constables of the Tower of London,Ships of the Ports arrested, and forced to bring their Corne to Queene Hith. to arrest the ships of the Cinque-Ports on the River of Thames, & to compell them to bring their Corne to no other place, but to the Queenes Hith only. In the eleventh of his reigne, he charged the said Con∣stable, to distraine all Fish offered to be sold in any place of this City, but at the Queenes Hith. Moreover, in the 28. of his reigne, an Inquisition was made be∣fore William of Yorke, the Provost of Be∣verley, Henry of Bath, and Hierome of Caxton, Justices Itinerantes, sitting in the Tower of London, touching the Cu∣stomes of Queene Hith, observed in the yeere last before the warres betweene the King and his father, and the Barons of England, and of old customes of other times, and what customes had beene changed, at what time the taxe and payment of all things comming thither, and betweene Woorepath, and Anede Hith, were found and seized, according to the old order, aswell Corne and Fish, as of other things.Liberty of the Queens Hith from the Steele∣yard to the Blacke Fri∣ers. All which customes were as well to be observed in the part of Downegate, as in Queene Hith, for the Kings use. When also it was found, that the Corne arriving betweene the gate of the Guild Hall of the Merchants of Colleyne, and the Soke of the Archbi∣shop of Canturbury (for he had a house neere unto the Blacke Friers) was not to be measured by any other quarter,Soke is Court. than by that of the Queenes Soke. After this, the Bailiffes of the said Hith complained, that since the said Recog∣nition, foureteene forraine Ships, laden with Fish, arrived at Belinsgate, which Ships should have arrived at the said Hith: And therefore it was ordered, that if any forraigne Ship laden with Fish, should in forme aforesaid arive else-where than at this Hith, it should be at the Kings pleasure to amerce them at 40. s. Notwithstanding, the Ships of the Citizens of London were at liber∣ty, to arrive where the owners would appoint them. After this,Queene Hith let to farme to the Maior and Com∣munalty of London. the said Henry the third confirmed the Grant of Richard Earle of Cornewall, for the Farme of Queene Hith, unto Iohn Gisors, then Maior, and to the Communalty of London, and their successors for ever, as by this his Charter appeareth.
Henry by the grace of God, King of Eng∣land, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guien, and Earle of Anjou, to all Archbishops, &c. Be it knowne, that Wee have seene the Cove∣nant betweene our Brother Richard, Earle of Cornwall, of the one party, and the Maior and Communalty of London on the other party, which was in this sort. In the thirtieth yeere of Henry,Lib. Trinit. Lon. the sonne of King Iohn, upon the Feast of the Translation of S. Edward at Westminster, this Cove∣nant was made betweene the Honourable Lord Richard, Earle of Cornwall, and Iohn Gisors, then Maior of London; and the Commons thereof, concerning certaine exactions and demands pertaining to the Queene Hith of London. The said Earle granted for himselfe and his heyres, that the said Maior, and all Maiors ensuing, and all the Commons of the City, should have and hold the Queene Hith, with all the Liberties, Customes, and other appur∣tenances, repaying yeerly to the said Earle, his heires and assignes, fifty pounds, at Clarken-well, at two severall termes; to wit, the Sunday after Easter 25. pounds, and at Michaelmas 25. pounds. And for more surety hereof, the said Earle hath set thereunto his Seale, and left it with the Maior, and the Maior and Communalty have set to their Seale, and left it with the Earle. Wherefore We confirme and establish the said Covenant, for Vs and for our heires. Witnesses, Ralph Fitz-Nichol, Richard Gray, Iohn and Will. Brithem, Paulin Painter, Ralph Wancia, Iohn Cum∣band, and other: At Windsor, the 26. of February, the 31. of our reigne. The charge of this Queene Hith was then committed to the Sheriffes, and so hath continued ever since; the profits whereof are sore diminished; so that (as writeth Robert Fabian) it was worth (in his time) little above 20. Markes,Rob. Fabian Lib. Constit. or 15. pounds one yeere with another. Now, for Customes of this Queene Hith:Custome of Queene Hith. In the yeere 1302. the thirtieth of Edward the first,  was found by the oath of divers men, that Bakers, Brew∣ers, and others, buying their Corne at Queen Hith, should pay for Measuring, Portage, and Carriage, for every Quar∣ter of Corne whatsoever, from thence to West Cheape, to S. Anthonies Church, to Horse-shoo Bridge, and to Woolsey street, in the Parish of Alhallowes the lesse, and such like distances, one ob. q. to Fleetstreet, to Newgate, Creplegate, to Birchovers lane, to East-Cheape, and Bil∣linsgate, A Corne-Meater, 8 Master Porters, and 24. Porters under them, at Queene Hith. one penny. Also, that the Mea∣surer (or the Meater) ought to have eight chiefe Master Porters, every Ma∣ster to have three Porters under him, and every one of them to finde one Horse, and seven Sackes, and hee that so did not, to loose his Office. This Hith was then so frequented with Vessels, bringing thither Corne (besides Fish, Salt, Fuell, and other Merchandizes) that all these men, to wit, the Meater, and Porters, thirty seven in number, for all their charge of Horses and Sackes, and small stipend, lived well of their labours: but now the Bakers of London, and other Citizens, tra∣vell into the Countries, and buy their Corne of the Farmers, after the Far∣mers price. King Edward the second,Lib. . in the first of his reigne, gave to Margaret, wife to Peter de Gavestone, forty three pounds, twelve shillings, nine pence halfe pen∣ny farthing, out of the Rent of London, to be received of the Queenes Hith. Cer∣taine impositions were set upon Ships and other Vessels comming thither, as upon Corne, Salt, and other things, to∣ward the charge of cleansing Roomeland there,Roomeland at Queene Hith. the 41. of Edward the third. The third of Edward the fourth, the Market at Queene Hith being hindered by the slacknesse of drawing up London Bridge, it was ordained, that all man∣ner of Vessels, Ships, or Boates, great or small, resorting to the City with vi∣ctuall, should be sold by retaile, and that if there came but one Vessell at a time, were it Salt, Wheate, Rie, or other Corne from beyond the Seas, or other Graines, Garlicke, Onions, Herrings, Sprats, Eeles, Whiting, Plaice, Cods, Mackarell, &c. then that one Vessell should come to Queene Hith, and there to make sale. But if two Vessels came, the one should come to Queene Hith, the other to Billinsgate:Queene Hith to be more fre∣quented of Ships & Boates than Bil∣linsgate. if three, two of them should come to Queene Hith, the third to Billinsgate, &c. alwaies the more to Queene Hith. If the Vessell being great, comming with Salt from the Bay, and could not come to these Keyes, then the
same to be conveied by Lighters, as be∣fore is meant. One large house,Garner for Corne at Queene Hith. for stowage of Corne, craned out of Lighters and Bar∣ges, is there lately builded. Sir Iohn Li∣on, Grocer, Maior 1554. by his Testa∣ment gave 100. l'. towards it: But since it hath beene increased and made lar∣ger, at the charges of the Citie, in the yeere 1565. Against this Queenes Hith, on the Ri∣ver of Thames, of late yeeres was placed a Corne-Mill,A Corne Mill upon Barges or Lighters on the Thames. upon, or betwixt two Barges or Lighters, and there ground Corne, as Water-Mills in other places, to the wonder of many, that had not seene the like. But this lasted not long without decay: such as caused the same Barges and Mill to be removed and ta∣ken asunder, are soone forgotten. I read of the like to have been in former time, as thus: In the yeere 1525. the 16. of Henry the 8. Sir William Bayly being Maior, Iohn Cooke of Glocester, Mercer, gave to the Maior and Communalty of London, and theirs for ever, one great Barge, in the which two great Corne-mills were made and placed;Two corne Mils in one Barge given to this City, 1525. which Barge and Mills were set in and upon the streame of the River of Thames, within the jurisdiction and liber∣tie of the said Citie of London. And also he gave to the Citie all such Timber, Boords, Stones, Iron, &c. provided for making, mending, and repairing of the said Barge and Mils: in reward whereof, the Maior gave him 50. l'. presently, and 50. l'. yeere∣ly, during his life: and if the said Cooke deceased before Ioane his wife, then shee to have forty Markes the yeere during her life. Next adjoyning to this Queene Hith, on the West side thereof,Salt Wharfe is Salt Wharfe, named of Salt taken up, measured, and sold there. The next is Strew lane,Stew lane. of a Stew, or Hot-house there kept. After that is Timber Hith,Timber Hith. or Timber street, so called, of Timber, or Boords, there taken up and wharfed: It is in the Parish of S. Mary Sonners-Hith, as I read in the 56. of Henry the third, and in the ninth of Edward the second. Then is Brookes Wharfe,Brookes Wharfe. and Broken Wharfe,Broken Wharfe. a Water-gate or Key so called, of being broken, and falne downe into the Thames. By this Broken Wharfe remaineth one large old building of stone,Bygots house by Broken Wharfe. with arched Gates; which Message, as I find, in the reigne of Henry the third, the 43. yeere, pertained unto Hugh de Bygot; and in the 11. of Edward the third, to Thomas Bro∣thertun, the Kings Brother, Earle of Norfolke, Marshall of England. In the 11. of Henry the 6. to Iohn Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke, &c. Within the Gate of this House (now belonging to the Citie of London) is late∣ly, An En∣gine for enforcing of Thames water. to wit, in the yeere 1594. and 1595. builded one large house, of great height, called an Engine, made by Bevis Bul∣mar, Gentleman, for the conveying and forcing of Thames water, to serve in the middle and West parts of the Citie. The ancient great Hall of this Messuage is yet standing, and pertaining to a great Brew-house for Beere. West from this is Trigge lane,Trigge lane. going downe to the Thames. Next is called Bosse lane,Bosse lane. of a Bosse of water, like unto that of Belinsgate, there placed by the Executors of Richard Whitington. Then is one great Messuage, sometime belonging to the Abbots of Chartsey in Surrey, and was their Inne, wherin they were lodged when they repaired to the Citie: it is now called Sandie house, by what reason I have not heard: I thinke the Lord Sands hath been lodged there. And this is an end of this Queen Hith Ward; which hath an Alderman, and his Deputy; Common-Counsell, sixe; Constables, nine; Scavengers, eight; Ward-mote Inquest, thirteene, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteene in London, twenty pounds, and in the Ex∣chequer, at nineteene pounds, sixteene shillings, two pence.
CASTLE BAYNARD VVard. THen next is Castle Baynard Ward,Castle Bay∣nard Ward so named of an old Castle there. This Ward beginneth in the East, on the Thames side, at an House called Huntington House, and run∣neth West by Pauls Wharfe, by Baynards Castle, Puddle Wharfe, and by the South side of Blacke Friers. Then turning by the East wall of the said Friers, to the South-west end of Creed lane. Then on the North side of Thames street, over a∣gainst Huntington House, by Saint Peters Church and lane, called Peter Hill, a∣long till over against Puddle Wharfe; and then North up by the great Ward∣robe, to the West end of Carter lane. Then up Creed lane, Ave Mary lane, and a piece of Pater noster Row, to the signe of the Golden Lion, and backe againe up Warwicke lane, all the East side thereof, to the signe of the Crowne by Newgate Market: and this is the farthest North part of this Ward. Then out of Thames street bee Lanes ascending North to Knight-riders street: The first is Peter Hill Lane, all of that Ward, (two houses excepted, adjoy∣ning to S. Peters Church.) The next is Pauls Wharfe Hill, which thwarting Knight-riders street and Carter lane, goeth up to the South Chain of Pauls Church-yard. Then is Adle street,Adle street. over against the West part of Baynards Castle, going up by the West end of Knight-riders street, and to Carter lane. Thus much for Lanes out of Thames street. The one halfe of the West side of Lambard Hill lane being of this ward, at the North-west end thereof, on the South side, and at the West end of S. Mary Magdalens Church: on the North side, beginneth Knight-riders street to be of this Ward, and runneth West, on both sides, to the Parish Church of S. Andrew by the Wardrobe. Then at the said East end of Saint Mary Magdalens Church, goeth up the Old Exchange, all the West side where∣of, up to the South-east gate of Pauls Churchyard, and by S. Austens Church, is of this Ward. About the midst of this Old Exchange, on the West side thereof, is Carter lane, which runneth West, to the East entry of the Black Friers, and the South end of Creed lane; out of the which Carter lane descendeth a Lane,Do little lane. called Do little lane, and commeth into Knight-riders street, by the Bores-bead Taverne: and more West is Sermon lane, by an Inne called the Powle-head. Then out of Carter lane, on the North side thereof, the South Chaine of Pauls Church-yard, and the Church-yard it selfe, on that South side of Pauls Church, and the Church of Saint Gregorie, the Bishops Palace, and the Deanes lodging, bee all of this VVard: and such be the bounds thereof. The Ornaments in this VVard, be, Parish Churches, foure; of old time, a Castle; divers Noble-mens houses; Halls of Companies, twaine; and such others, as shall be shewed. In Thames streete, at the South-east end, is an ancient Messuage, of old time called Beaumonts Inne,Beaumonts Inne. as belonging to that Family of Noble-men of this Realme, in the fourth of Edward the 3. Edward the fourth, in the fifth of his
reigne, gave it to W. Hastings, Lord Chamberlaine, Master of his Mints. It is now called Huntington house, as belon∣ging to the Earles of Huntington. Next is Pauls Wharfe,Pauls Wharfe. a large landing-place, with a common Stayre upon the River of Thames, at the end of a Street called Pauls Wharfe Hill, which runneth downe from Pauls Chaine. Next is a great Messuage, called Scroopes Inne,Scroopes Inne. sometimes belonging to the Scroopes, in the 31. of Henry the sixth. Then is one other great Messuage, sometime belonging to the Abbey of Fiscampe, beyond the Sea: and by rea∣son of the Warres, it comming to the hands of King Edward the third, the same was given to Sir Simon Burley, Knight of the Garter, and therefore called Burley house in Thames street,Burley house. be∣tweene Baynards Castle & Pauls Wharfe. Then have you Baynards Castle,Baynards Castle. wher∣of this whole Ward taketh name. This Castle banketh on the River Thames, and was called Baynards Castle, of Baynard, a Nobleman, that came in with William the Conquerour: Of the which Castle, and of Baynard himselfe, I have spoken in another place. There was also another Tower by Baynards Castle, builded by King Edward the second, Edward the third, in the second of his reigne, gave it to William Duke of Hamelake, in the County of Yorke, and his heires, for one Rose yeere∣ly to be paid for all service. The same Place (as seemeth to me) was since cal∣led Legates Inne,Legates Inne. in the seventh of Ed∣ward the fourth, where bee now divers VVood-wharfes in place. Then is there a great Brew-house, and Puddle Wharfe,Puddle Wharfe. a VVater-gate into the Thames, where Horses use to be wa∣tered, and therefore being filled with their trampling, and made puddle-like, as also of one Puddle dwelling there, it is called Puddle Wharfe. Then is there a Lane betweene the Blacke Friers and the Thames, called in the 26. of Edward the 3. Castle lane. In this Lane also, is one great Mes∣suage, of old time belonging to the Pri∣orie of Okeborne in Wiltshire,Prior of Okebornes house. and was the Priors lodging when hee repaired to London. This Prior being of the French Order, was suppressed by Henry the 5. and with other Lands and Tenements pertaining to the said Priorie, was by Henry the 6. given to his Colledge in Cambridge, called now the Kings Colledge. About this Castle Lane was sometime a Mill or Mils,A Mill or Mils by Baynards Castle. belonging to the Tem∣plers of the New Temple, as appeareth of Record: for King Iohn, in the first yeere of his reigne, granted a place in the Fleet, neere unto Baynards Castle, to make a Mill, and the whole course of water of the Fleet, to serve the said Mill. I read also, that in the yeere 1274. the second of Edward the first, Rich. Rai∣son and Atheline his wife, did give to Nicho. de Musely, Clerke, ten shillings of yeerely free and quiet rent, out of all his tenements, with the houses there∣upon built, and their appurtenances, which they had of the demise of the Master and Brethren of Knights Tem∣plars in England, next unto their Mill of Fleet, over against the houses of Lau∣rence de Brooke, in the Parish of Saint Andrew, next to Baynards Castle: which tenements lye betweene the way lea∣ding to the said Mill on the VVest part. Also in the Rights belonging to Robert Fitzwater,Soke, Court or Ward be∣longing to Robert Fitzwater. and to his heires, in the Ci∣tie of London, in the time of peace, it was declared in the yeere 1303. that the said Robert, Castillon of London, and Banner-bearer, had a Soke (or VVard) in the Citie, that was by the wall of S. Paul, as men goe downe the street be∣fore the Brewhouse of S. Paul, unto the Thames, and so to the side of the Mill, which is in the water that commeth downe from Fleet bridge, and goeth by London walls, betwixt the Friers Prea∣chers Church and Ludgate; and so that Ward turned backe by the House of the said Friers, unto the said common wall of the said Chanonrie of S. Paul: that is all of the Parish of S. Andrew; which is the gift of his Ancestors by Seniority, as more I have shewed in the Castles. Now here is to bee noted, that the VVall of London, at that time, went straight South from Ludgate, downe to the River of Thames: But for buil∣ding of the Blacke Friers Church, the said VVall in that place was by com∣mandement taken downe, and a new VVall made, straight VVest from Lud∣gate to Fleet bridge, and then by the
water of Fleet, to the River of Thames, &c. In the yeere 1307. the 35. of Edward the first, in a Parliament at Carlile, Hen∣ry Lacie, Earle of Lincolne, complained of annoyances done to the water of the Fleet;Mill by Baynards Castle de∣stroyed. whereupon it was granted, that the said Mill should bee removed and destroyed. This Ward ascendeth up by the East wall of the Blacke Friers, to the South∣west end of Creed lane, where it endeth on that side. Then to begin againe on the North side of Thames street, over against Hun∣tington house, by Saint Peters Church and lane, called Peter Hill, and so to S. Bennet Hude (or Hith) over against Pauls Wharfe,Parish Church of S. Bennet by Pauls Wharfe. is a proper Parish Church, which hath the Monuments of Sir Wil∣liam Cheyny, Knight, and Margaret his wife, 1442. buried there. Doctor Chadwell, Physician. Sir Gilbert Dethicke, alias Garter, King at Armes. Mariae Martin,A comely Monu∣ment in the South Ile of the Quire. Iohannis Roissei filiae, lectissimae feminae, uxori optimè meritae 4. liberorum incolumium Matri, ex longa infirmitate, quam ex puerperio contraxit, defunctae ad perpetuam federis nostri conju∣galis memoriam, simul ut fidei, pie∣tatis, & in omni vita probitatis ejus aliquod Monumentū extaret: Tho∣mas Martinus Jurisconsultus moe∣stissimus Conjunx posui. Obiit Calendas Maii, 1565. Vixit Annos 32. David Smith,Another faire Mo∣nument in the same wall. Embroyderer to Queene Elizabeth, &c. deceased the tenth day of August, 1587. aged 63. yeeres, and lyeth here-under buried: whose honest, vertuous, and compassionate care for the needy, both in soule and body, is expres∣sed by his benevolence that way exten∣ded, like a good Steward, making others partakers of his well-imployed Talent. Who had to wife Katharine, (by whom he had eight sonnes and eight daughters) at whose proper charges (in memory of her said loving husband) is erected this Monument, the 25. of March, in An. 1596. Who living his faithfull Wid∣dow till the fourth day of February, 1607. aged 78. yeeres, lyeth also here∣under buried. The Tombe of Master James Austen,A faire grave-stone in the Chan∣cell. a good Benefactor of this Parish, who dyed Anno 1602. and of Joyce his wife, and of William their onely sonne: which Ioyce married after with Sir Robert Clarke, Knight, one of the Barons of the Kings Majesties Court of Exche∣quer, who caused this Tomb to be erected. Here lyeth the body of Ellis Hilton, Es∣quire, who deceased the 12. day of De∣cember, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1528. &c. Hic sepultus Griffinus LLoyd, Legum Doctor,A very faire pla∣ted stone by the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. Qui obiit in Christo, No∣vemb. 26. An. Dom. 1586. Hic discas morti dominari, spernere fatum. Diram morborum vim superare mori. Nam jacet hic legum Doctor virtutibus olim Insignis, verae Relligionis amans. Qui moriens docuit vivos benè vivere, vivus, Afflictos docuit pro pietate mori. Divitias justus cumulavit, dives amavit Iustitiam, voluit sic memor esse boni. Divitias moriens Musis donavit, ut illos Qui Musas colerent emoriendo juvat. Sic vivus moriens{que} fuit propensus ad omne Legis opus, voluit tam memor esse Dei. Relligio vigilem, Lex lumen, Cambria patrem, Oxonia eximium perdidit alma decus. Cum fera mors illum violento perdidit ictu, Quem nollet virtus inclita posse mori. Postquam per denos professor Regius annos Vixerat, hoc gelido condidit ossa thoro.
Here lyeth buried the bodies of Iohn Par,A faire Monumēt in the South wall of the Quire. and Mary his wife, who were married together 34. yeeres, and had issue one onely daughter betweene them, named Anne, who after married Thomas Gough, of the Inner Temple in Lon∣don, Esquire, who had fruitfully borne him sixe sons and one daughter: which said Mr. Par was Embroyderer to our late Queene Elizabeth, and to the Kings Majestie that now is, 25. yeeres. He was a man of good respect in the Ci∣tie, liberall to the Company whereof hee was free, a good benefactor to the poore of this Parish, and bountifull to all men. He departed this life the 17. day of Iu∣ly, 1607. being aged 72. yeeres and Mary his wife dyed a yeere and an halfe before him. This Tombe was erected and made by Thomas Gough, and Anne his wife, appointed by the last Will of Iohn Par, who made the said Anne his full Executrix: And it was finished the 29. day of Iune, 1611. West from this Church, by the South end of Adle street, almost against Puddle Wharfe, there is one ancient building of stone and timber, builded by the Lords of Barkley,Barklies Inne. and therefore called Barkleys Inne. This house is now all in ruine, and letten out in severall tenements, yet the Armes of the Lord Barkley remaine in the stone-worke of an arched gate, and is betweene a Cheveron, Crosses ten, three, three, and foure. Richard Beauchampe,Parish Church of S. Andrew in the War∣drobe. Earle of War∣wicke, was lodged in this house, then called Barkleys Inne, in the Parish of S. Andrew, in the reigne of Henry the 6. Then turning up towards the North, is the Parish Church of S. Andrew in the Wardrobe, a proper Church, but few Monuments hath it. Iohn Parnt founded a Chauntry there. Hic jacet Ioannes Ley,A plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. Armig. de Co∣mitatu Wiltz. Qui obiit 7. die Iu∣nii, An. Dom. 1604. Aetat. suae 54. Hic jacet Ioannes Barnard, nuper Civis & Sciffor Lond. ac Aelinora & Ali∣cia, The like stone ∣ing by the other. uxores ejus. Qui quidem Ioan∣nes obiit 21. die Novemb. An. Dom. 1503. The 29. day of October,A faire plated in∣graven plate with Armes on a pillar in the Chan∣cell. An. Dom. 1573. deceased Thomasine, the wife of Tho∣mas Butler, of Bewsen, in the County of Lancaster, Esquire, and lyeth buried before this Pillar. Via omnis carnis: hodie mihi, cras tibi. Marmoreum decus hoc consortis munere grato, Non vita verum nomine, Longus habet. Here lyeth Henry Long of Shingay,A  Monu∣ment in the East end of the Chancell. E∣squire, sonne and heire of Sir Richard Long, Knight, Gentleman of the Privie Chamber to King Henry the eighth, the third son of Sir Thomas Long, Knight, of Wiltshire: who married Dorothie, the daughter of Nicholas Clarke of Weston, Esquire, and Elizabeth Ram∣sey his wife, sole heire of Thomas Ram∣sey of Hicham, Esquire, her Father: By whom he had issue one sonne and three daughters: Hee dyed the 15. day of A∣pril, An. Dom. 1573. leaving alive at that time of his death, Elizabeth, his sole daughter and heire. Dorothea uxor, conjugis amore posuit. Nomine Longus, vita brevis, inclitus ortu, Ingenio praestans, & pietatis amans. Nere to this place lyeth interred the corps of William Nicholson, sometime of Walton, in the County of Buck, Gent. and Citizen and Draper of London. He had to wife Ioane, the eldest daughter, and one of the heires of William Com∣pany, Gent. By whom he had issue (a∣mong divers other) these which survived, namely, Helen, first the wife of Iohn Minor, of London, Draper, and after∣ward of Sir Iohn Branch, Knight, Lord Maior of London, An. Dom. 1580. And Beniamin, who deceased at Bram∣ley, in the County of Surrey, where hee hath also left issue 2. sonnes, Robert and George. The said William Nicholson departed this life in September, An. Do. 1531. Being a benefactor to this Church, and to other charitable uses: whose soule (we doubt not) resteth with the Lord.
Qui genere at{que} opibus quondam florebat honestis, Nicholson, jacet hac parvus in aede civis. Quod mortale fuit fluxit: sed fama perennis Mens{que} manet; nihil hic funera juris habent. Spiritus in Coelis divino splendet honore, In terris memori nomen amore viget. Then is the Kings great Wardrobe. Sir Iohn Beauchamp, Knight of the Gar∣ter, Constable of Dover, Warden of the Cinque Ports, (sonne to Guido de Beauchampe, Earle of Warwicke) builded this house, was lodged there, deceased in the yeere 1359. and was buried on the South side of the middle Ile of Pauls Church. His Executors sold the house to King Edward the third, unto whom the Parson of S. Andrews complaining, that the said Beauchampe had pulled downe divers houses, in their places to build the same house, whereby he was hindred of his accustomed Tithes paid by the Tenants of old time; granted him 40. s. by the yeere out of that house for ever. King Richard the third was lodged there in the second of his reign. In this house of late yeeres was lod∣ged Sir Iohn Fortescue, Knight, Master of the Wardrobe, Chancellour and un∣der-Treasurer of the Exchequer, and one of her Majesties most Honourable Privie Councell. The secret Letters and writings, touching the estate of the Realme, were wont to be inrolled in the Kings Wardrobe, and not in the Chan∣cerie, as appeareth by the Records. Claus. 18. E. 4. 1. Memb. 13. Claus. 33. E. 1. Memb. 3. Et liberat. 1. E. 2. Memb. 4. &c. From this Wardrobe, by the West end of Carter lane, then up Creed lane, Ave Mary lane, and a piece of Pater noster row, up Warwicke lane, all the East side, to the Brewhome called the Crowne, as I said, is of this Ward. Touching Lanes ascending out of Thames street,Peters Hill. to Knight-riders street, the first is Peters Hill,Almes-houses for poore viddowes. wherein I finde no matter of note, more than certaine Almes-houses, lately founded on the West side thereof, by Dauid Smith Em∣broyderer, for sixe poore widdowes, whereof each to have 20. s. by the yeere. On the East side of this lane standeth a large house, of ancient building, some∣time belonging to the Abbot of S. Mary in York, and was his abiding house when he came to London, Thomas Randolph E∣squire hath lately augmented and re∣paired it. At the upper end of this Lane, to∣wards the North, the corner houses there, be called Peter Key,Peter Key. but the rea∣son thereof I have not heard. Then is Pauls Wharfe Hill,Pauls Wharfe Hill. on the East side whereof is Wood-mongers Hall. And next adjoyning is Darby House,Wood-mongers Hall. sometime belonging to the Stanleys, for Thomas Stanley, first Earle of Darby, of that name, who married the Lady Mar∣garet, Countesse of Richmond, mother to Henry the seventh, in his time buil∣ded it. Queene Mary gave it to Gilbert De∣thicke, then Garter, Principall King of Armes of Englishmen, Thomas Hauley Clarentieux, King of Armes of the South parts, William Harvy, alias Norroy, King of Armes of the North parts, and the other Heralds and Pursevants of Armes and to their successors, all the Capitall messuage or house,Darby House. called Darby house, with the appurtenances, situate in the Parish of Saint Bennet, and Saint Peter, and then being in the tenure of Sir Ri∣chard Sackvile,I have the Copie of the said Patent de∣livered me by Hum. Dyson. Knight, and lately par∣cell of the Lands of Edward Earle of Darby, &c. to the end that the said Kings of Armes, Heraults, and Purse∣vaunts of Armes, and their successors might (at their liking) dwell together, and at meet times to congregate, speak, conferre, and agree among themselves, for the good government of their fa∣culty, and their Records might bee more safely kept, &c. Dated the eigh∣teenth day of Iuly 1555. Philip and Ma∣rie the first and third yeere. Then higher up,Pauls Brew-house, or Powle head Taverne. neere the South Chaine of Pauls Church-yard, is the Powle head Taverne, which house with the appurtenances, was (of old time) called Pauls Brewhouse, for that the same was so imployed, but being since left off, and letten out. On the VVest side of this streete is
one other great house builded of stone, which belongeth to Pauls Church, and was sometime letten to the Blunts, Lord Mountjoy; but of later time to a Col∣ledge in Cambridge, and from them to the Doctors of the Civill Law and Ar∣ches, who keep a Commons there, and many of them being there lodged, it is called the Doctors Commons.Doctors Commons. Above this, on the same side, was one other great building over-against Pauls Brewhouse, and this was called Pauls Bakehouse,Pauls Bakehouse. and was imployed in baking of Bread for the Church of Pauls. In Addle street or Lane I find no Mo∣numents. Addle street In Lambart hill lane,Lambart hill. on the West side thereof,Blacke∣smiths Hall. is the Blacksmiths Hall, and ad∣joyning to the North side thereof have ye one plot of ground, inclosed with a Bricke wall for a Church-yard,Church-yard of S. Mary Magdalen. or b∣rying plot, for the dead of Saint Mary Magdalens by Old Fishstreet, which was given to that use by Iohn Iwarby, an Of∣ficer in the receit of the Exchequer, in the sixe and twentieth of King Henry the sixth, as appeareth by Patent. Iohn Iwarby, &c. gave a peece of Land lying voide in the Parish of Saint Mary Magdalen, nigh to Old Fishstreet, be∣tweene the Tenement of John Phipot on the South, and the Tenement of Bartholo∣mew Burwash on the West, and the Tene∣ment peraining to the Covent of the Holy VVell on the North, and the way upon Lambarts Hill, on the East, for a Church-yard to the Parson and Church-wardens, &c. Over-against the North-west end of this Lambart hill lane in Knight-riders street,Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen. is the Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, a small Church, having but few Monuments. Richard Woodroffe, Merchant-Taylor, 1519. Barnard Randalph, Esquire, 1583. Ioannes Sugar,A very ancient Tombe in the North Ile of the Quire. Civis & Piscenarius London: Qui obiit 29. die Dcemb. An. Dom. 1455. & Margareta uxor ejus, quae obiit 13. die Novemb. An. Dom. 1485. Quorum animarum, &c. Here lieth buried the body of Barnard Randolph,A faire Monumēt in the east end of the Chanc. Esquire, while hee lived, Commons Sergeant of this City of Lon∣don. He died the seventh day of August, An. Dom. 1583. And of his liberality hath been beneficiall to the City, as for∣merly hath been declared. Here lieth buried the body of Herbert Randolph,A comely Monumēt in the South Ile of the Quire. of Wardis, in the County of Sussex, Esquire, Cousin and next heire to Barnard Randolph, Esquire, &c. He tooke to wife Judith, the eldest daughter of Anthony Shirley, of Fre∣ston, in the said County of Sussex, E∣squire, and departed this life (without issue) on the 9. day of April, 1604. In Obitum lectissimae feminae Marga∣retae Serle,A Monu∣ment neere to the other. nuper uxoris Alexandri Serle, Reg. Majest. Procuratoris, &c. Quae obiit 8. die Mens. Martii, Anno Salutis humanae (qua nunc beatissi∣ma fruitur) iuxta stilum Angliae, 1605. Virgo decem & septem vixi intaminata per annos, Deme duos totidem tum pia nuptafui. Funera gnatorum vidi lugubria quinque, Deque nevem, reliqui his duo, nostra vident. Casta domi vixi, invigilans prolique larique, Sara viro, mundo Martha, Maria Deo. Memoriae Sacrum. Selectissimae feminae Ioannae,Another Monumēt beneath the for∣mer. uxoris Gilberti Dethick, sil. 2. Domini Gu∣lielmi Dethick, Mtis filiae Alexandri Serle, Regiae Maiestatis Procuratoris Genti, & Margaretae uxoris suae. Quae quidem Ioanna 10. Martii, An. 1607 stilo Angliae, sub certa spe ven∣turae in Christo Resurrectionis, Spi∣ritum Deo, corpus terrae commenda∣vit. Vt semel partu geminas eodem, Tristis, enixa est tacitas, sorores, Langido tandem picidè quievit. Quindecem virge pia vixit annos, Quindecem menses pia nupta facis Tum piè cedens, pia mens fit alti, Tabida Incola Coeli Virgo dum, spes haec & amorparentum,
Nupta dum, lux haec & honor mariti, Vxor & virgo, decor haec, propinquis, Et decus omnes. George Coleman,A comely Monumēt with arms in the same South Ile. Gent. a free-man of this City of London, was born in Rich∣monshre, and afterward inhabited at Callis, in the time of the first surprize thereof by the French, An. Dom. 1558. where he lost all his lands and substance; and at the age of 95. yeers he died, the 16. of September, 1600. and lyeth interred on the North side of the Communion Ta∣ble. By him is buried Alice his wife, the onely daughter of George Gains∣ford, Esquire, a younger sonne of Sir Iohn Gainsford of Crohurst, in the County of Surrey, Knight, and brother to the last Sir Iohn Gainsford, of the same place, Knight. Which Alice was sole heire to her Mother Elizabeth, daughter and coheire to Iohn Alphew, of Boare Place, in the County of Kent, Esquire. Shee dyed the fourth of March, Anno Domini, 1581. On the West side of this Church,Conduit of Thames water. by the Porch thereof, is placed a Conduit or Cesterne of Lead, castellated with Stone, for receit of Thames water, con∣veyed at the charges of the forenamed Barnard Randolph, Esquire. By the East end of Saint Mary Mag∣dalens Church, runneth up the Old Ex∣change lane, by the West end of Carter lane, to the South-east gate or Chaine of Pauls Church yard, as is before shew∣ed. And in this part was the Exchange kept, and Bullion was received for coy∣nage, as is noted in Faringdon Ward within. In this Parish Church of Saint Mary Magdalen, out of Knight-riders street, up to Carter lane, be two small Lanes: the one of them called Do little Lane,Doe little lane. as a place not inhabited by Artificers, or o∣pen Shop-keepers, but serving for a neere passage from Knight-riders street, to Carter lane. The other, corruptly called Sermon Lane,Sheremo∣niers lane. for Sheremoniers Lane. For I find it by that name recorded in the foure∣teenth of Edward the first: And in that Lane, a place to be called the Blacke Loft,Blacke Loft of Silver melting. (or melting Silver,) with foure Shops adjoyning. It may therefore bee well supposed, that lane to take name of Sheremoniers, such as cut and rounded the Plaes, to bee coyned or stamped into Estarsing pence, for the place of Coyning was the Old Exchange, neere unto the said Sheremoniers lane. Also I finde, that in the thirteenth of Richard the second, VVilliam de la Pole had an House there. In Knight-riders street is the Colledge of Physicians,Colledge of Physi∣cians. wherein was founded, in the yeere 1582. a publike Lecture in Surgerie,Lecture in Churge∣ry to be read. to be read twice every weeke, &c. as is shewed else-where. In the South Church-yard of Pauls, is the South side and West end of the said Church: In the which West end, be three stately Gates,West gates of Pauls Church. or entries, curi∣ously wrought of stone, namely the mid∣dle Gate, in the midst whereof is placed a massie pillar of Brasse, whereunto the Leaves of the said great Gate are clo∣sed, and fastened with Lockes, Bolts, and Barres of Iron: All which notwith∣standing, on the 24. of December, in the yeere 1565. by a Tempest of Wind then rising from the West,Gates of Pauls Church blowne open. these Gates were blowne open, the Barres, Bolts, and Lockes broken in sunder, or greatly bended. Also, on the fifth of Ianuary, in the yeere 1589. by a like tempest of Wind, then in the South-west, the lesser West Gate of the said Church, next to the Bishops Palace, was broken, both Bolts, Barres, and Lockes, so that the same was blowne over. At either corner of this West end, is also of ancient building, a strong Tower of stone, made for Bell-Towers: the one of them, to wit, next to the Palace is at this present to the use of the same Pa∣lace; the other, towards the South, is called the Lollards Tower,For Lol∣lards Tower reade M. Foxe. and hath beene used as the Bishops Prison, for such as were detected for Opinions in Religion, contrary to the faith of the Church. The last prisoner which I have knowne committed thereto, was in the yeere 1573. one Peter Burcher,Pet. Burcher. Gent. of the middle Temple, for having de∣sperately wounded, and minding to have
murdered a serviceable Gentleman, named Iohn Hawkins, Esquire, in the high street, neere unto the Strand, who being taken and examined, was found to hold certain Opinions erroneous, and therefore committed thither, and con∣victed: but in the end, by perswasion, he promised to abjure his Heresies; and was, by commandement of the Coun∣cell, removed from thence to the Tower of London, &c. where he committed, as in my Annales I have expressed. Adjoyning to this Lowlards Tower,Parish Church of S. Gregory. is the Parish Church of Saint Gregory, appointed to the Pettie Chanons of Pauls. Monuments of note, these I find there: Alcia Barwis,A plated stone by the Com∣munion Table. Relicta Iohannis Bar∣wis, Civis ac Minutarii Londinensis, posuit defuncto. Debita peccati solvens terrestria linquo, Visurus patriam quam mihi Christe dabis. Da patriam, Rex Christe Iesu, spes unica vitae, Da feuti veniam Rex bone Christe Iesu. Virtus post Fata. Thomas Redman,The like Stone ly∣ing by the other. Almae Curiae Cantuar. de Arcubus London Procuratorum gene∣ralium unus, qui officium Registrariatus principalis Sedis Archiepiscopalis Cantu∣ar. per nonnullos Annos laudabiliter ex∣ercuit, hic inhumatur. In uxorem duxit Annam Miliner, quacum piè & aman∣tissimè vixit. Ex ea unam sibi filiam no∣mine Elizabetham procreavit: mortem obiit 12. die Novemb. An. Dom. 1601. Aluredus Copeley,Another Stone in the Chan∣cell. de Botley, in Com. Ebor. Armig. quondam Socius Lin∣colniensis Hospitii, Obiit 5. die Feb. An. Dom. 1598. & aetatis suae, 37. Memoriae Sacrum. Sanctissimae & chariffimae Conjugi,A very goodly Monu∣ment in the South Ile of the Quire, vp∣permost. A∣lisonae Heriot, Iacobi Primrosii, Re∣giae Majestatis in sanctiori Concilio Regni Scotiae amanuensis filiae, fe∣minae omnibus tum animi tum cor∣poris dotibus, ac pio cultu instructis∣simae; Moestissimus ipsius Maritus, Georgius Heriot, Armiger, Regis, Reginae, Principum Henrici & Ca∣roli Gemmarius, bene merenti, non sine lachrymis hoc Monumentum pi∣è posuit. Obiit Mensis Aprilis, die 16. Anno Salut. M. D. C. XII. aetatis 20. in ipso flore juventae, & mihi pa∣rentibus amicis tristissimum sui desiderium reliquit. Hic Alisis Primrosa jacet crudo obruta fato▪ Intempestivas ut Rosa passa manus. Nondum bis denos annorum impleverat orbes, Pulchra, pudica, Patris delicium at{que} viri: Quum gravida, heu nunquam Mater, discessit in inde Cura dolor{que} Patri, cura dolorq viro: Non sublata tamen, tantum translata recessit, Nunc Rosa prima Poli quae fuit ante Soli. Here lyeth Martha Forthe,A faire Monu∣ment close by the o∣ther in the same end of the Church. sometime wife to Robert Forthe, Doctor of Law, with whom she lived very comfortably in true marriage, a most faithfull and loving wife, the space of 24. yeeres and 5. mo∣neths. She lived vertuously and modest∣ly, and beloved of all that did know her, and dyed in sound faith, and in the feare of God, the 26. day of November, Ann. Dom. 1589. in the 45. yeere of her age, in constant hope of a joyfull resurrection, with the elect children of Almightie God. Memoriae Sacrum. Edwardo Baker,Another Monu∣ment close adjoyning Armig. Regiae Maje∣statis ad causas Ecclesiasticas Regi∣strario principali, viro eximia erudi∣tione, prudentia singulari, moribus probatissimis, & in publicis negotiis plurimum versato. Qui longo mor∣bo intabescens, certa spe in Christo resurgendi, piè placideque animam Deo reddidit, die 26. Maii, Anno Domini, M. D. C. II.
Here lyeth intombed the body of Mary,A faire Monumēt in the South wal of the Chancell. late wife of Thomas Sandys, Esquire, and onely daughter to Sir Stephen Thornehurst, Knight, and Dame Sy∣bill his wife: Whose soule departed this life unto Christ, the last day of Iuly, in the yeere of our Redemption, 1598. and in the one and twentieth yeere of her age. In remembrance of whose pi∣ety and singular vertues, the eternall love of her Husband hath caused this Monument to be erected. In Heaven her soule, In me her love, her body resteth here, Which is to God, Was to the World, to me her Husband, deare. Here-under resteth Arthur Medlycote,A faire Monu∣ment in the East end of the Chancell. Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of Lon∣don, sonne of Richard Medlycote of Shrewsbury, Gentleman, with Eliza∣beth his wife, daughter of John Phi∣lips. The said Arthur, in assured hope to be with Christ, ended this transitory life the seven and twentieth day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 1605. And the said Elizabeth, the eighteenth day of Octo∣ber, 1605. Here lyeth Dorothie,A comely Monu∣ment in the East end of the Chancell. Daughter of John Theobald, the elder, of Shepie, in the County of Kent, Esquire. She first mar∣ried John Crooke, Doctor of Law; by whom, shee had onely Dorothie, first wife to Robert Honywood, E∣squire. Secondly, to Ralph Allen, Alderman of London. Thirdly, to that most Reverend, excellent, and leaed Iudge, Sir Roger Manwood, Knight, Lord chiefe Baron of the Ex∣chequer; by whom she had issue, Iohn and Thomas, who dyed young. Mar∣grie, the first wife of Sir John Lew∣son, Knight; and Anne, first wife to Sir Percivall Hart, Knight, and Sir Peter Manwood, Knight of the Bath. Shee dyed the fourteenth day of Septem∣ber, Anno Domini, 1575. To whose reverend Memory, the said Sir Peter Manwood hath dutifully ere∣cted this Monument, Anno Dom. 1606. Gulielmi Coci hoc Tumulo parvo ossa quiescunt,A comely small Mo∣nument by the o∣ther. Illius ast virtus non ita parva cubit: Plura nam ut omittam, Civili Iure secundus Nulli, nec vera dexteritate fuit. Cui pia, ne merito careat post funera virtus, Hoc uxor Maria nobile struxit opus. Moritur 25. Augusti, Anno Do∣mini 1558. & Mariae Regi∣nae, 6. 12. Septemb. An. Dom. 1587. obiit. Ioanna,A faire plated stone in the South Ile. filia Nich. Wallron, relicta Thomae Yale, Legū Doctoris, Can∣cellarius Archiepiscopalis Sedis Catuarien. & sepelitur sub spe sutu∣rae Resurrectionis. The rest of that South side of Saint Pauls Church, with the Chapter-house, (a beautifull piece of VVorke, builded about the reigne of Edward the third) is now defaced, by meanes of Licences granted to Cutlers, Budget-makers, and other, first to build low Sheds, but now high houses, which doe hide that beau∣tifull side of the Church, save onely the toppe and South gate. On the North-west side of this Church-yard, is the Bishops Palace,The Bi∣shops Pa∣lace. a large thing for Receit, wherein di∣vers Kings have beene lodged, and great House-hold hath beene kept, as appea∣reth by the great Hall, which of late yeeres, since the rebatement of Bishops Livings, hath not beene furnished with House-hold Meynie and Guests, as was meant by the builders thereof, and was of old time used. The Deanes Lodging, on the other side, directly against the Palace, is a faire old House, and also divers large Houses are on the same side builded, which yet remaine, and (of old time) were the Lodgings of Prebendaries and Residenciaries, which kept great House-holds, and liberall Hospitalitie; but now either decayed, or otherwise converted.
Then was there the Stationers Hall,The Stati∣oners Hall in former dayes, but now it is in Amen lane, at the end of Pater noster Row. on the same side, lately builded for them, in the place of Peter Colledge: Where, in the yeere, one thousand, five hundred, forty, and nine, the fourth day of Ianuary, six men were slaine by the fall of Earth upon them, digging for a Well. And let this bee an end of Baynards Castle Ward: which hath an Alderman, his Deputy; Common Counsell, nine; Constable, tenne; Scavengers, seven; Wardmote Inquest, foureteene, and a Beadle: And to the Fifteene, it is taxed at twelve pounds, in the Exchequer, eleven pounds, thirteene shillings.
THE WARD OF FARINGDON Extra, or without. THE farthest West Ward of this Citie,The Ward of Faring∣don without being the 25. Ward of London, but with∣out the walls, is cal∣led Faringdon with∣out, and was of old time part of the other Faringdon within, untill the 17. of Richard the second, that it was divided, and made twaine, by the names of Faringdon infra, and Faringdon extra, as is afore shewed. The bounds of which Ward, with∣out Newgate and Ludgate, are these: First, on the East part thereof, is the whole Precinct of the late Priory of S. Bartholomew, and a part of Long lane, on the North, towards Aldersgate street, and Ducke lane, with the Hospitall of S. Bartholomew on the West, and all Smithfield, to the Barres in Saint Iohn street. Then out of Smithfield, Chicken lane, toward Turne-Mill Brooke, and over that Brooke, by a Bridge of Timber, into the Field: then backe againe by the Pennes (or Folds) in Smithfield, by Smithfield Pond, to Cow lane, which turneth toward Oldbourne; and then Hosiar lane, out of Smithfield also to∣ward Oldborne, till it meet with a part of Cow lane. Then Cocke lane, out of Smithfield, over against Pye corner: then also is Gilt-spurre street, out of Smithfield to Newgate: then from Newgate West by Saint Sepulchres Church, to Turne-a∣gaine lane, to Oldbourne Conduit, on Snor Hill, to Oldbourne Bridge, up Oldbourne Hill, to the Barres, on both sides. On the right hand, or North side, at the bottome of Oldbourne Hill,Gold lane. is Gold lane, sometime a filthy passage into the Fields, now both sides builded with small Tenements. Then higher is Lither lane,Lither lane. turning also to the Field, lately replenished with houses builded, and so to the Barres. Now, on the left hand or South side from Newgate, lyeth a street called the Old Bayly, or Court of the Chamber∣laine of this Citie: this stretcheth down by the Wall of the Citie, unto Ludgate. On the West side of which street, brea∣keth out one other Lane, called Saint Georges Lane, till yee come unto the South end of Sea-coale Lane; and then, turning towards Flect-street, it is called Fleet lane. Then next out of the high street, from Newgate, turning downe South,Old Bayly. is cal∣led the Little Bayly, and runneth downe to the East of S. Georges lane.Line bar∣ners lane, or Sea-coale lane. Then is Sea-coale lane, which turneth downe into Flect lane. Neere unto this Sea-coale lane, in the turning towards Oldbourne Conduit, is another lane,Winde-a∣gaine lane. called in record Winde-a∣gaine lane, it turneth downe to Turnmill Brooke, and from thence backe againe, for there is no way over. Then beyond Oldbourne Bridge,Shoo lane. to Shoo lane, which runneth out of Oldborne unto the Conduit in Fleetstreet. Then also is Fewtars lane, which like∣wise stretcheth South into Fleet street,Fewtars lane. by the East end of S. Dunstanes Church: And from this Lane to the Barres, bee the bounds without Newgate. Now, without Ludgate, this VVard runneth up from the said gate to Temple
barre, and hath on the right hand, or North side, the South end of the Old Bayly: then downe Ludgate hill, to the Fleet lane over Feeet bridge, and by Shoo lane, and Fewtars lane, and so to New street (or Chancery lane) and up that Lane, to the House of the Rolles, which House is also of this Ward; and on the other side, to a Lane over-against the Rolles, which entreth Ficquets field. Then,Shire lane. hard by the Barre, is one other Lane, called Shire lane, because it divi∣deth the City from the Shire, and this turneth into Ficquets field. From Ludgate againe, on the left hand, or South side, to Fleet bridge, to Bridge lane, which runneth South by Bridewell; then to Water lane, which runneth downe to the Thames. Then by the White Friers, and by the Temple, evern to the Barre aforesaid, bee the bounds of this Faringdon Ward with∣out. Touching Ornaments and Antiqui∣ties in this VVard, first, betwixt the said Newgate, and the Parish of Saint Sepul∣chers, is a way towards Smithfield, cal∣led Gilt Spurre,Gilt Spurre, or Knight-Riders street or Knight-Riders streete, of the Knights and other riding that way into Smithfield, replenished with building on both sides up to Pie corner, a place so called of such a signe, some∣times a faire Inne for receit of Travel∣lers; but now divided into Tenements, and over-against the said Pie corner, ly∣eth Cocke lane,Cocke lane. which runneth downe to Oldbourne Conduit. Beyond this Pie corner,West smithfield. lyeth VVest Smithfield, compassed about with buil∣dings, as first on the South side, follow∣ing the right hand, standeth the large Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew,Hospitall of S. Bar∣tholomewes. foun∣ded by Rahere, the first Prior of St. Bar∣tholomewes, thereto neere adjoyning, in the yeere 1102. Alfune,The first M. or Pro∣cter of the Hospitall of S. Bar∣tholomew. that had not long before buil∣ded the Parish Church of Saint Giles without Creplegate, became the first Hospitelar, or Protector for the poore of this house, and went himselfe daily to the Shambles and other Markets, where he begged the charity of devout people for their reliefe, promising to the libe∣rall givers (and that by alledging testi∣monies of the holy Scripture) reward at the hands of God. Henry the third granted to Katharine, late wife to Willi∣am Hardell, twenty foote of Land in length and breadth in Smithfield, next to the Chappell of Saint Bartholomew, to build her a Recluse or Ankorage,A recluse or Anko∣rage by S. Bartholo∣mewes Hospitall. commanding the Maior and Sheriffes of London, to assigne the said twenty foot to the said Katharine, Charta 11. of Henry the third. The foundation of this Hospitall for the poore and diseased, and their speciall sstentation, was con∣firmed by Edward the third, the 26. of his reigne. It was governed by a Ma∣ster, and eight Brethren being Priests, for the Church; and foure Sisters, to see the poore served. The Executors of Richard Whitington, sometime Maior of London, of his goods repaired this Hospitall, about the yeere 1423. Sir Iohn Wakering, Priest. Master of this House, in the yeere 1463. amongst other Bookes, gave to their common Library the fairest Bible that I have seene, written in large Vellam, by a Brother of that House, named Iohn Coke, at the age of 68. yeeres, when hee had beene Priest 43. yeeres. Since the spoile of that Library, I have seene this Booke in the custody of my Worship∣full friend, Master Walter Cope. Monuments in this Church of the dead, Benefactors thereunto, be these: Elizabeth, wife to Adam Hone, Gen∣tleman. Bartholomew Bildington. Iane, wife to Iohn Cooke. Dame Alice, wife to Sir Rich. Isham. Alice, wife to Nicholas Bayly. Iohn woodhouse, Esquire. Robert Palmar, Gentleman. Idona, wife to Iohn Walden, lying by her husband on the North side, late new builded, 1424. Sir Thomas Malifant, or Nanfant, Ba∣ron of Winnow, Lord Saint-George, in Glamorgan, and Lord Ockeneton and Pile, in the County of Pembroke, 1438. Dame Margaret his wife, daughter to Thomas Astley, Esquire, with Edmond and Henry his children. William Markeby, Gentleman, 1438. Richard Shepley, and Alice his wife. Thomas Savill, Sergeant at Armes. Edward Beastby, Gentleman, and Margaret his wife.
Walter Ingham, and Eleanor his wife. Robert Warnar, and Alice, Lady Carne. Robert Caldset, Iohan and Agnes his wives. Sir Robert Danvars, and Dame Agnes his wife, daughter to Sir Richard Dela∣bar. William Brookes, Esquire. Iohn Shirley, Esquire, and Margaret his wife, having their Pictures of Brasse, in the habit of Pilgrims, on a faire flat Stone, with an Epitaph thus: Behold, how ended is our poore Pilgrimage, Of Iohn Shirley, Esquire, with Margaret his wife, That twelve children had together in marriage, Eight sonnes, and foure daughters, withouten strife, That in honour, nurture, and labour, flowed in fame: His pen reporteth his lives Occupation, Since Pier his life time, Iohn Shirley by name, Of his degree, that was in Brutes Albion; That in the yeere of Grace deceased from hen, Foureteene hundred Winters, and sixe and fifty; In the yeere of his age, fourescore and ten, Of October moneth, the day one and twenty. This Gentleman, a great Traveller in divers Countries, amongst other his Labours, painfully collected the Works of Geffrey Chawcer, Iohn Lidgate, and o∣ther learned VVriters; which Workes he wrote in sundry Volumes, to remain for posterity: I have seene them, and partly doe professe them. Iane, Lady Clinton, gave ten pounds to the poore of this House, and was there buried, 1458. Agnes, daughter to Sir VVilliam Saint-George. Iohn Rogerbrooke, Esquire. Richard Sturgeon. Thomas Burgan, Gentleman. Elizabeth, wife to Henry Skinard, daughter to Chincroft, Esquire. William Mackley, Gentleman, and Alice his wife. William Fitzwater, Gentleman, 1466. Here Robert Balthorp lies intomb'd,A comely Monumēt in the South wal of the Chancell. to Elizabeth our Queene, Who Sergeant of the Chirurgeons sworne, neere thirty yeeres hath beene. He died at sixty nine of yeeres, December ninth the day, The yeere of Grace eight hundred twice, deducting nine away. Let here his rotten bones repose, till Angels Trumpet sound, To warne the world of present change, and raise the dead from ground. Vivit post funera Virtus. Thomas Bodleius,A Monu∣ment in the North wall of the Chancell. Eques Auratus, fecit Annae Conjugi piissimae, atque om∣nibus exemplis bene de se meritae, cum qua dulciter vixit Annos 24. Iohn vir honoratus jacet his Nedham tumulatus,A faire plated stone by the Com∣munion table. Qui prudens, gratus, justus fuit & moderatus. Fratribus ille suis fuerat prae quatuor Annis Quem mors crudelis 29.q; Decembris M. C. quater Domini septem simul X. numerandi, Cujus spiritui sint Coeli gardia regni. The foureteenth yeere of our Lord seventy,Vnder the Commu∣nion table Passed Sir William Knight to God Almighty, The 15. day of Iuly, Master of this place: Iesus for his mercy receive him into grace. Hic jacet Dominus Ioannes Byry,By the same table quon∣dam Magister istius Hospitall. Qui obiit 28. die Septemb. An. Domini, 1417. Cujus, &c. Ecce sub hoc Tumulo Gulielmus conditur Honus,An anciēt Tombe in the North wall, be∣neath the Quire. Vir justus, verbis integer, atque Deum Corde timens. Qui cum
Guilda sit functus in Aula, Cumque palam in Templo bis legerat Anglica jura, Cunctorum sanè non sine laude virum, Mors hominem accersens supremum (dixit) adio. Sic moritur, corpus terrae, vermique relinquens, Scandit at excelsis sidera mente poli. Hoc posuit Conjunx dilecta Iocosa Sepulchrum, Dicta locosa licet plena dolore tamen. Sub praesenti marmore requiescunt cor∣pora Walter Ingham Generosi,At the en∣tring into the Quire in the middle Ile ac Aelianorae consortis suae. Qui qui∣dem Walterus ingressus est viam universae carnis 7. die Mensis Martii, Anno Domini 1464. Et praedicta Aelianora, uxor sua terrenae mortis degstavic pecula 15. die Septemb. An. Dom. 1466. Quorum, &c. Hic vir pacificus Shipley Richardus humatur,A faire Stone ly∣ing close by the o∣ther. Verus Catholicus domus haec hoc testificatur. Esurientes ac sitientes namque fovebat, Pace fruentes, justa petentes corde gerebat. C. quater & Mille, X. & M. V. cadit ille Luce Maii deca ter que monas fit humus sibi mater, Colux postque sua finivit Alicia flamen, Qos manus tua salvet precor O Deus. Amen. Hic vir Catholicus bonus ecce Richardus humatur Sturgeon pacificus,A faire plated stone close by the Pil∣grim and his Wife. quem mors rapuisse probatur. Armi ger hic Regis fuit, & vir Nobilitatis, Mandatum legis servans, celsis probitatis. Annis trigenis fit Clericus ipse Coronae Et quivis plenè hunc cape Christe bone. Mille, quater contum semel L. sex tempore Christi. Dat fundamentum quindena Martius isti, Vxor eius quem bona iungitur ecce Ioanna, Vt capiant dona Coelorum Iesus Hosanna. Here lyeth now dead,At the foot of the same Stone. which late was quick, The comely Corps of Anne Westwick; Who died in Child-bed, of her first, Vpon the fifth day of August: Whose soule (doubtlesse) is long ere this, In Heaven with Christ, in joy and blisse; But yet, for order of Charity, Vpon her soule say, Jesu have mercy. Anno Domini, 1556. Hic jacet Dominus Richardus Lye,A faire plated Stone in the South Ile. quon∣dam Abbas Salopiae, qui sua industria, sumptibus magnis & suis laboribus (Deo suadente) recuperavit libertates suae Ec∣clesiae Salopiae praedict. & postea obiit die Martii, tempore Parliamenti, Anno Domini 1512. Cuius, &c. This Hospitall was valued at the sup∣pression, Hospitall of S. Bar∣tholomew suppressed. in the yeere 1539. the 31. of Henry the eighth, to five and thirty pounds, sixe shillings, seven pence, yeerly. The Church remaineth a Pa∣rish Church to the Tenents dwelling in the Precinct of the Hospitall: But in the yeere 1546. on the thirteenth of Ianuary, the Bishop of Rochester, prea∣ching at Pauls Crosse, declared the gift of the said King to the Citizens, for re∣lieving of the Poore, which contained the Church of the Gray Friers, the Church of Saint Bartholomew, with the Hospitall, the Messuages, and appur∣tenances in Gilt Spurre, alias Knight Ri∣ders street, Briton street, Peter Kay, in the Parish of Saint Mary Magdalen, in Old Fish street, and in the Parish of St. Benet Huda, Lymehurst, or Limehost, in the Parish of Stebunbeth, &c. Then also were Orders devised for
reliefe of the Poore: the inhabitants were all called to their Parish Chur∣ches; where, by Sir Richard Dobbes, then Maior, their severall Aldermen, or other grave Citizens, they were by eloquent Orations perswaded, how great and how many commodities would ensue unto them and their City, if the poore of divers sorts, which they named, were taken from out their Streets, Lanes, and Allies, and were bestowed and provided for in Hospi∣tals abroad, &c. Therefore was every man moved, liberally to grant (what they would impart) towards the prepa∣ring and furnishing of such Hospitals, and also, what they would contribute weekly towards their maintenance for a time, which (they said) should not bee past one yeere, or twaine, untill they were better furnished of Endowment. To make short, every man granted li∣berally, according to his ability: Books were drawne of the Reliefe in every VVard of the City, towards the new Hospitals, and were delivered by the Maior to the Kings Commissioners, on the seventeenth of February; and order was taken therein, so as the sixe and twentieth of Iuly, in the yeere 1552. the repairing of the Gray Friers house, for poore fatherlesse children, was ta∣ken in hand; and also, in the later end of the same moneth, began the repai∣ring of this Hospitall of Saint Bartholo∣mew, and was of new endowed, and fur∣nished at the charges of the Citizens. On the East side of this Hospitall ly∣eth Ducke lane, which runneth out of Smithfield South, to the North end of Little Britaine street. On the East side of this Ducke lane,Priory of Saint Bar∣tholomew. and also of Smithfield, lieth the late dis∣solved Priory of St. Bartholomew, foun∣ded also by Rahere, a pleasant witted Gentleman; and therefore in his time called the Kings Minstrell, about the yeere of Christ, 1102. He founded it in a part of the oft before named Moo∣rish ground, which was therefore a common Lay-stall oll filth, that was to be voided out of the City. He placed Canons there; himselfe became their first Prior, & so continued till his dying day, and was there buried in a faire Mo∣nument, of late renewed by Prior Bolton. Amongst other memorable matters touching this Priory, one is of an Arch∣bishops Visitation, which Matthew Paris hath thus: Boniface (saith hee) Archbishop of Canturbury,Archbi∣shop of Canturbury visiteth S. Bartholo∣mews Pri∣ory with stripes. in his Visitation came to this Priory; where, being received with Proces∣sion in the most solemne wise, he said, That hee passed not upon the honour, but came to visit them; to whom the Canons answered, That they having a learned Bishop, ought not, in contempt of him, to be visited by any other: which answer so much offended the Archbishop, that hee forthwith fell on the Sub-Prior, and smote him on the face, say∣ing; Words of the Arch∣bishop to the Prior and Ca∣nons. Indeed, indeed, doth it became you English Traytors so to answer mee? Thus raging, with oathes not to bee recited, hee rent in peeces the rich Cope of the Sub-Pri∣or, Sub-Pri∣ors Cope rent and trodden under foot, and himselfe almost slaine. and trode it under his feete, and thrust him against a Pillar of the Chancell with such violence, that hee had almost killed him. But the Canons seeing their Sub-Prior thus almost slaine, came and plucked off the Archbishop with such force, that they overthrew him backwards; whereby they might see,The Arch∣bishop ar∣med, and ouer∣throwne. that he was armed, and pre∣pared to fight. The Archbishops men seeing their Master downe, being all strangers, and their Masters Countrimen borne at Pro∣vince, The Ca∣nons bea∣ten and trod un∣der foot. fell upon the Canons, beat them, tare them, and trode them under foot. At length, the Canons getting away as well as they could, ran bloudy, miry, rent and torne to the Bishop of London to complaine, who bade them goe to the King at Westmin∣ster, and tell him thereof: whereupon foure of them went thither,The Ca∣nons com∣plained but could not bee heard. the rest were not able, they were so sore hurt. But when they came to Westminster, the King would neither heare nor see them; so they returned with∣out redresse.The whole City is an uproare a∣gainst the Archbi∣shop. In the meane season the City was in an uproare, and ready to have rung the common Bell, and to have hewed the Archbishop into small peeces, who was se∣cretly crept to Lambhith, where they sought him, and not knowing him by sight, said to themselves; where is this Ruffian, that cruell smiter? Hee is no winner of soules, but an exactor of money, whom nei∣ther God, nor any lawfull or free election did bring to this promotion: but the King did unlawfully intrude him, being unlear∣ned, a stranger borne, and having a wife, &c. But the Archbishop conveighed him∣selfe over, and went to the King with a great
complaint against the Canons, whereas him∣selfe was guilty. This Priory of Saint Bartholomew was againe new builded in the yeere 1410. Bolton was the last Prior of this house,Bolton last Prior of Saint Bar∣tholomew a great buil∣der there. a great builder there: for hee repaired the Priory Church, with the Parish Church adjoyning, the offices and lodgings to the said Priory belonging and neere adjoyning:Canon∣bury. he builded of new the Mannor of Canonbury at Islington, which belonged to the Canons of this house, and is situate in a low ground, somewhat North from the Parish Church there. But he builded no house at Harrow on the hill,Edward Hall. as Edward Hall hath written, following a fable then on foote. The people (saith hee) being feared by Prognostications, which declared that in the yeere of Christ, 1524. there should bee such Eclises in watry signes, and such con∣junctions, that by waters and flouds many people should perish: people victualled themselues, and went to high grounds for feare of drowning, and especially one Bol∣ton, which was Prior of Saint Bartholo∣mewes in Smithfield, builded him an house upon Harrow on the hill, onely for feare of this floud: thither he went and made provi∣sion of all things necessary within him, for the space of two moneths, &c. But this was not so indeed, as I have been credibly informed: true it is, that this Bolton was also Parson of Harrow, and therefore bestowed some small re∣parations on the Parsonage house, and builded nothing there more than a Dovehouse, to serve him when hee had forgone his Priory. To this Priory King Henry the se∣cond granted the priviledge of a Faire to bee kept yeerly at Bartholomewtide, Bartholo∣mew Faire. for three daies, to wit, the Eve, the Day,The For∣tainers were li∣censed for 3. daies, the free men so long as they would, which was sixe or se¦ven daies. and the next morrow, to the which the Clothiers of England, and Drapers of London repaired, and had their Boothes and standings within the Church-yard of this Priory, closed in with VVals and Gates locked every night, and watched for safety of mens goods and wares; a Court of Piepow∣ders was daily during the Faire holden, for debts and contracts.Court of Piepow∣ders. But notwith∣standing all Proclamations of the Prince, and also the Act of Parliament, in place of Booths within this Church-yard (only letten out in the Faire time, and closed up all the yeere after) bee many large houses builded, and the North VVall towards Long lane, taken downe, a number of Tenements are there erected, for such as will give great rents. Monuments of the dead in this Prio∣ry, these are, of Rahere, the first founder. Roger VValden, Bishop of London, 1406. Iohn Warton, Gentleman, and Eliza∣beth his wife, daughter to William Scot, Esquire. Iohn Louth, Gentleman. Robert Shikeld, Gentleman. Sir Bacon, Knight. Iohn Ludlow, and Alice his wife. W. Thirlewall, Esquire. Richard Lancaster, Herald at Armes. Thomas Torald. Iohn Royston. Iohn Watford. Iohn Carleton. Robert, son to Sir Robert Willowby. Gilbert Halstocke. Eleanor, wife to Sir Hugh Fen, mother to Margaret, Lady Aburgaveny. William Essex, Esquire. Richard Vancke, Baron of the Exche∣quer, and Margaret his wife, daughter to William de la River. Iohn Winderhall. Iohn Duram, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife. Iohn Malwine. Alice, wife to Balstred, daughter to Kniffe. William Scarlet, Esquire. Iohn Golding. Hugh Walter, Gentleman, and the late Sir Walter Mildmay, Knight, Chan∣cellor of the Exchequer. Vana salus hominis. Memor esto,A comely Monumēt in the East end of the Chancell. quoniam mors non tardat, & restamentum inferorum, quia de∣monstratum est tibi: testamentum e∣nim hujus mundi morte morieris. Omnia suo proveniunt tempore at{que} transeunt. Ante mortem, ne lau∣des hominem quenquam, quoniam in filiis suis agnoscitur vir. Percinalus Samlpace, Armiger, obiit
secundo die Februarii, Anno Dom. 1568. R. Elizabetha regnante: Cu∣jus quidem corpus juxta hunc Tumu∣lum humatum existit. Agnes uxor ejus, & filia Ioannis Tebowld, Armi∣geri, obiit 3. die Septemb. An. Dom. 1588. R. Elizabetha regnante. Liberi inter eos Michael & Thomas, adhuc viventes, qui in religiosa memoria optimorum parentum, hoc monumentum posuerunt. Behold your selves by us, such once were we as you, And you in time shall be even dust as we are now. Mors nobis lucrum. Hic jacet Gualterus Mildmay,A very faire Tombe in the Chancell. miles, & Maria uxor ejus. Ipse obiit ultimo die Maii, 1589. Ipsa 16. die Martii 1576. Reliquerunt duos filios, & tres filias. Fundavit Collegium Emanu∣elis Cantabridgiae, moritur Cancella∣rius & Sub-thesaurarius Scaccarii, & Regiae Majestati à Consiliis. This Pricy, at the late surrender, the 30. of Henry the eighth, was valued at 653. l. 15. s. by the yeere. This Church having in the Bell-Tower sixe bels in a tune, those bels were sold to the Parish of Saint Sepul∣chres, and then the Church being pulled downe to the Quire, the Quire was by the Kings order annexed, for the enlar∣ging of the old Parish Church there to adjoyning, and so was used till the reigne of Queene Mary, who gave the remnant of the Priory Church to the Friers preachers, or Blacke Friers, and was used as their Coventuall Church, untill the first of our Soveraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth: then those Friers were put out, and all the said Church, with the old parish Church, was whol∣ly as it stood, in the last yeere of Ed∣ward the sixth, given by Parliament, to remaine for ever a parish Church to the Inhabitants within the Close, called great Saint Bartholomewes. Since the which time, the old parish Church is pulled downe, except the Steeple of rotten Timber, ready to fall of it selfe. I have oft heard it reported, that a new Steeple should bee builded with the Stone, Lead and Timber of the old pa∣rish Church, but no such thing was performed. The parish have lately re∣paired the old woodden Steeple, to serve their turne. On the North side of this Priory, is the Lane truly called Long, which reacheth from Smithfield to Aldersgate street. This Lane is now lately builded on both the sides with Tenements for Brokers, Tiplers, and such like: the rest of Smithfield from Long lane end to the Barres,Long lane. is inclosed with Innes, Brew-houses, and large Te∣nements; on the VVest side is Chicken lane, downe to Cowbridge.Chicken lane. Cowbridge. Pens in Smithfield. Then be the pens or folds, so called of sheepe there parted, and penned up to be sold on the Market dayes. Then is Smithfield Pond,Smithfield Pond sometime a poole. which of (old time) in Records was called Horse-Poole, for that men watered Horses there, and was a great water. In the sixth of Henry the fifth, a new building was made in the VVest part of Smith∣field, betwixt the said Poole and the Ri∣ver of the Wels, or Turnemill-brooke, in a place then called the Elmes,The Elms in Smith∣field a place wherein trespassers were exe∣cuted. for that there grew many Elme trees, and this had been the place of execution for Of∣fenders: since the which time, the buil∣ding there hath been so increased, that now remaineth not one tree growing. Amongst these new buildings is Cow∣bridge street, or Cow lane; which turneth toward Oldbourne, in which Lane the Prior of Semperingham had his Inne, or London lodging. The rest of that West side of Smith∣field hath divers faire Innes, and other comely buildings,Hosier lane. up to Hosier lane, which also turneth downe to Oldbourne, till it meet with Cowbridge street. From this Lane to Cocke lane,Cocke lane. over-against Pie-corner. And thus much for incroachments and inclosure of this Smithfield, where∣by remaineth but a small portion for the old uses, to wit, for markets of hor∣ses, and cattell, neither for Military ex∣ercises, Iustings in Smith∣field. as Iustings, Turnings, and great Triumphs, which have beene there performed before the Princes and No∣bility, both of this Realme and sorraine Countries. For example to note: In the yeere
1357. the 31. of Edward the third,Fabian. great and royall Iusts were then holden in Smithfield, there being present the Kings of England, France, and Scotland, with many other Nobles, and great E∣states of divers lands. In the yeere 1362. the 36. of Edward the 3. on the first five daies of May, in Smithfield were Iusts holden, the King and Queene being present, with the most part of the Chivalry of England, and of France, and of other Nations, to the which came Spaniards, Cyprians, and Armenians, Knightly requesting ayde of the King of England, against the Pagans that invaded their confines. The 48. of Edw. the third, Dame Alice Perrers,Alice Per∣rers rode from the Tower to Smithfield, as Lady of the Sun. or Pierce (the kings Concubine) as Lady of the Sunne, rode from the Tower of London, through Cheape, ac∣companied of many Lords and Ladies, every Lady leading a Lord by his horse bridle, till they came into West Smith∣field, and then began a great Just, which endured seven daies after. Also the 9. of Richard the 2. was the like great riding from the Tower to Westminster, and every Lord led a Ladies horse bridle, and on the morrow began the Iusts in Smithfield, which lasted two dayes: there bare them well, Henry of Darby, the Duke of Lancasters sonne, the Lord Beaumont, Sir Simon Burley, and Sir Paris Countney. In the 14. of Richard the second, after Froisard, royall Iusts and Turnements were proclaimed to be done in Smith∣field, to begin on Sunday next after the feast of Saint Michael; many strangers came forth of other countries: namely, Valariam, Earle of S. Paul, that had mar∣ried king Richards sister, the Lady Maud Courtney, and William the young Earle of Ostarvant, son to Albret of Baviere, Earle of Holland and Henault. At the day appointed,Tower Royall. there issued forth of the Tower, about the third houre of the day 60. Coursers, appar∣relled for the Iusts, and upon every one an Esquire of honour riding a soft pace: then came forth 60. Ladies of honour mounted upon Palfraies, riding on the one side richly apparrelled, and every Lady led a Knight with a chain of gold, those Knights being on the Kings party, had their armour & apparell garnished with white Harts, and crownes of gold about the Harts neckes, and so they came riding through the streets of Lon∣don to Smithfield, with a great number of Trumpets, and other instruments of Musicke before them. The King and Queene, who were lodged in the Bi∣shops Palace of London, were come from thence, with many great Estates, and placed in chambers to see the Iusts: the Ladies that led the knights, were taken downe from their Palfraies, and went up to chambers prepared for them. Then alighted the Esquires of Honour from their Coursers, and the knights in good order mounted upon them; and after their Helmets were set on their heads, and being ready in all points, Proclamation made by the Heralds, the Iusts began, and many commendable courses were runne, to the great plea∣sure of the beholders: this Iusts conti∣nued many dayes with great feasting, as ye may reade in Froisard. In the yeere 1393. the 17. of Richard the 2. certaine Lords of Scotland came into England to get worship, by force of Armes, the Earle of Marre challenged the Earle of Notingham, to Iust with him, and so they rode together certaine courses, but not the full challenge, for the Earle of Marre was cast both horse and man, and two of his ribbes broken with the fall, so that he was conveighed out of Smithfield, and so towards Scot∣land, but dyed by the way at Yorke. Sir Wil. Darell, knight, the Kings Ban∣ner-bearer of Scotland, challenged Sir Percy Courtney, knight, the Kings Ban∣ner-bearer of England, and when they had runne certaine courses, gave over without conclusion of victory. Then Cookborne, Esquire of Scotland, challen∣ged Sir Nicholas Hawberke, knight, and rode five courses, but Cookborne was borne over horse and man, &c. In the yeere 1409. the tenth of Henry the fourth, a great Play was played at Skinners Well, which lasted eight dayes, where were to see the same, the most part of the Nobles and Gentles in Eng∣land: and forthwith began a royall Ju∣sting in Smithfield, between the Earle of Somerset, and the Seneshall of Henalt, Sir Io. Cornwall, Sir Richard Arundell, and the sonne of Sir Iohn Cheyney, against
certaine French men. And the same yeere a battell was fought in Smithfield, between two Esquires, the one called Glaucester Appellant, and the other Ar∣thure Defendant, they fought valiantly, but the King tooke up the quarrell into his hands, and pardoned them both. In the yeere 1430. the eighth of Hen∣ry the sixth, the fourteenth of Ianuary, a battell was done in Smithfield, within the Lists, before the King, between two men of Feversham in Kent, Iohn Vpton, Notary, Appellant, and Iohn Downe, Gentleman, Defendant: Iohn Vpton put upon Iohn Downe, that he and his Com∣piers should imagine the Kings death upon the day of his Coronation. When these had fought long, the King took up the matter, & forgave both the parties. In the yeere 1442. the 20. of Henry the sixth, the 30. of Ianuary, a Chal∣lenge was done in Smithfield, within the Lists, before the King, there being Sir Philip la Beaufe, of Aragon, Knight, the other an Esquire of the Kings house, called Iohn Ansley, or Anstley; they came to the field all armed, the Knight with his sword drawne, and the Esquire with his Speare, which Speare hee cast a∣gainst the Knight, but the Knight avoi∣ded it with his sword, and cast it to the ground. then the Esquire tooke his Axe, and smote many blowes on the Knight, and made him let fall his Axe, and brake up his Vmber three times, & would have smit him on the face with his dagger, for to have slaine him; but then the King cried hold, and so they were parted: the King made Iohn An∣sley Knight, and the Knight of Aragon offered his Harnesse at Windsor. In the yeer 1446. the 24. of Hen. the 6. Iohn David appeached his Master Willi∣am Cater of treason:Iohn David a false ac∣cuser of his ma∣ster: of him was raised the by-word, If ye serve me so, I will call you Davy. and a day being as∣signed them to fight in Smithfield, the Master being well beloved, was so che∣rished by his friends, and plied with wine, that being therewith overcome, was also unluckily slaine by his servant. But that false servant (for he falsly accu∣sed his Master) lived not long unpuni∣shed; for he was after hanged at Teyborn for felony. Let all such false accusers note this for example, and looke for no better end, without speedy repentance. The same yeere, Thomas Fiiz-Thomas, Prior of Kilmaine, appeached Sir Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, of treasons: which had a day assigned them to fight in Smithfield, the Lists were made, and the field prepared: but when it came to the point, the King commanded they should not fight, and tooke the quarrell into his hands. In the yeere 1467. the seventh of Ed∣ward the fourth, the Bastard of Burgoigne challenged the Lord Scales, brother to the Queene, to fight with him, both on horse-back and on foot: the King there∣fore caused Lists to bee prepared in Smithfield, the length of 120. Taylors yards, and ten foote, and in breadth 80. yards, and 20. foot, double barred, five foot betweene the barres, the timber worke whereof cost 200. Marks, besides the faire and costly Galleries prepared for the Ladies and other: at the which Martiall enterprise, the King and No∣bility were present. The first day they ranne together with Speares, and de∣parted with equall honour. The next day they turneyed on horse∣backe, the Lord Scales horse having on his Chafron a long speare pike of steele, and as the two Champions coaped to∣gether, the same horse thrust his pike into the nostrils of the Bastards horse, so that for very paine, he mounted so high that he fell on the one side with his Ma∣ster, and the Lord Scales rode about him with his sword drawne, till the King commanded the Marshall to helpe up the Bastard, who said; I cannot hold by the clouds; for though my horse faile me, I will not faile an incounter compa∣nion: but the King would not suffer them to doe any more that day. The next morrow they came into the Lists on foot, with two Pole-Axes, and fought valiantly, but at the last the point of the Pole-Axe of the Lord Scales en∣tred into the side of the Bastards Helm; and by force might have placed him on his knees: But the King cast downe his warder, and the Marshall severed them. The Bastard required that hee might performe his enterprise: but the King gave Judgement, as the Bastard relin∣guished his challenge, &c. And this may suffice for Iusts in Smithfield. But yet we may not part with Smith∣field
so:Smithfield being con∣tinually subject to extremity of weather by an ho∣nourable motion made, it was paved all over in An. 1614. for, as it hath beene a place for such honourable Iusts and Triumphs, by reason it was a soft ground, and un∣paved: so was it a Market place for Cattell, Hay, Straw, and other neces∣sary provisions, and likewise (once in the yeere) at Bartholomewtide a generall Faire, commonly called Bartholomew Faire, hath usually beene kept in that place. But in regard that it was conti∣nually subject to the iniquity of wea∣ther, and being a place of such goodly extendure, deserved to be much better respected; it pleased the Kings Majesty, with the advice of his honourable Lords of the Councell, to wite graciously to the Lord Maior and the Aldermen his Brethren, that Smithfield might be suf∣ficiently paved, which would bee the onely meanes, whereby to have it kept in far cleaner condition. And as no mo∣tion (to any good end and intent) can be made to the City, but they as gladly embrace and willingly pursue it: even so this honourable motion found as ac∣ceptable entertainment, and it was very speedily proceeded withall. Some vo∣luntary contribution in the severall Pa∣rishes (what each man willingly would give) was bestowed on the worke; but (indeed) hardly deserving any report. Notwithstanding, on the fourth day of February, in An. 1614. the City began the intended labour, and before Bartho∣lomewtide then next ensuing, to the cre∣dit and honour of the City for ever,Bartholo-Faire kept in much better manner, than ever formerly it hath beene. it was fully finished, and Bartholomew Faire there kept, without breaking any of the paved ground, but the Boothes discreetly ordered, to stand fast upon the pavement. The Citizens charge thereof (as I have been credibly told by Master Arthur Strangwaies) amoun∣ting well neere to sixteene hundred pounds. Now to returne through Gilt-spurre street by Newgate, where I first began, there standeth the faire parish Church, called S. Sepulchers in the Bayly, or by Chamberlaine gate, in a faire Church-yard, though not so large as of old time; for the same is letten out for buildings, and a Garden plot. This Church was newly re-edified or builded, about the reigne, of Henry the sixth, or of Edward the fourth, one of the Pophames was a great builder there:Io. Leyland. namely, of one faire Chappell on the South side of the Quire, as appeareth by his Armes, and other Monuments in the Glasse windowes thereof, and also the faire Porch of the same Church to∣wards the South:Pophames builders of St. Sepul∣chers Church. his Image faire gra∣ven in stone, was fixed over the said Porch, but defaced and beaten downe, his titles were these, by offices: Chan∣cellour of Normandy, Captaine of Ver∣noyle, Pearch, Susan, and Bayon, and Trea∣surer of the Kings Houshold; hee dyed rich, leaving great treasure of strange coynes, and was buried in the Charter-house Church, by West Smithfield. The first Nobilitating of these Pop∣hames, was by Matilda the Empresse, daughter to Henry the first, and by Hen∣ry her son: one Popham, a Gentleman of very faire lands in Southampton shire, dy∣ed without issue Male, about Henry the sixth, and leaving foure daughters, they were married to Fostar, Barentine, Wod∣ham, and Hamden. Popham Deane (di∣stant three miles from Clarendon, and three miles from Mortisham) was some∣time the chiefe Lordship or Mannour house of those Pophames. There lie buried in this Church, Wil∣liam Andrew, Stephen Clamparde, Lau∣rence Warcam, Iohn Dagworth, William Porter, Robert Scarlet, Esquires. Here-under lieth buried the body of the vertuous Lady,A faire plated stone in the Chan∣cell. the Lady Elenor Sent∣leger, wife to Sir Anthony Sentleger, Knight, Master of the Rolles of the Chancery of the Realme of Ireland, and one of her Majesties Privie Councell of the same Realme; the daughter of Ri∣chard Markham of Seggebrooke, in the County of Lincolne, Esquire, decea∣sed; who died the second day of Februa∣ry, 1598. being of the age of 52. yeeres, and Moneths odde. Here lieth Dame Elizabeth Langton,A faire stone close by the o∣ther. late wife of Sir Thomas Langton, Knight, Baron of Newton, in the Coun∣tie of Lancaster: one of the daughters of Sir Edward Stanley, Knight, Lord Mounteagle, which deceased the 17. day of Iune, An. Dom. 1533. Here lieth buried the body of Richard
Snelling of West Greensted in the County of Sussex,A faire plated stone in the same Chancell. Esquire, who died the 25. day of August, An. Dom. 1611. He married Margery May, the eldest daughter of George May, in the County aforesaid, Esquire: By whom hee had is∣sue 2. sons and 3. daughters; which said Margery was living in An. 1612. and caused this Monument to bee laid, desi∣ring to be interred here-under. Elionora praehonorabilis viri, Iohannis Fortescue,A very faire pla∣ted stone in the Chancell. Equitis Aurati, Ducatus Lancastriae Cancellarii, à sanctiori∣bus Regiae Majestatis Conciliis, filia Edvardi Hubbard Armig. defuncti, aliquando Conjux perquam dilecta, sub hoc Marmore jacet sepulta. Vixit annos 36. piè, justè, sobriè, quoad De∣um, mundum, seipsam, gestos in fide, pace, spe Christi, conscientiae, gloriae. Obiit 10. die Mensis Iulii, An. Regni Regis Jacobi, Angliae, &c. 3. Anno Domini 1605. Qualis vita, finis ita. Here-under lyes the wonder of her kinde,A faire stone by the Com∣munion Table, richly done with Armes. The Quintessence of Nature and of Grace, Wit, Beauty, Bounty, and (in Noble race The rarest Iewell) a right humble minde; Here lyes her body, but her soule refin'd Above th' Empyreall, hath imperiall place, In blisse so boundlesse, as no words embrace, Nor Art can seigne, nor mortall heart can find. Her fame remaines a Monument of honour, Built by her vertue gilt with purest gold, With Lilly-flowers and Roses strewed upon her, Her Epitaph Vrania thus enrol'd: Milde childe, chaste mayden, and religious wife: The Even crownes the day, Ioane Essex death her life. Piè obiit die Martis Martii 15. Ann. aetat. suae 26. Salutis nostrae, 1607. A Dorcas milde,Vnder the Commu∣nion Table, a faire plated stone. a Mary full of grace, A Virgin chaste, and of rare education, Entombed lyeth here underneath this place. Whose life and name deserved commendation. But in the blooming Month of pleasant May, Vntimely Death hath stolne her life away. Yet spight of Death, her vertue still remaineth; And in the heaven a better life she gaineth: Vpon whose Tombe I consecrate this Verse, In stead of flowers. to decke her Funerall Hearse. Nemo ante obitum foelix. In Ioannem Brewster Armigerum, in obitum D. Elizabethae Deane, uxoris ejus. Obiit 24. die Octob. 1609. MAde generous by birth and kept that fount,A very faire Mo∣nument in the Chancell. From times pollution, striving still to rise, Above the earth, high in the worlds account For outward and in-bred courtesies. Her actions, almes, her life, faith, hope, and love, A suffering spirit, rendring right for wrong: Her heart a Spheare, where all good thoughts did move, Whose influence was dispersed by the tongne. Religion was her Compasse, Truth her Starre, In sundry Seas of worlds prosperity. Wealth her bad angell, flesh and bloud her warre, Yet wisedome made this discord Harmony. Then Marble keepe to all posterity Her lives deare memory, upon whose urne
And to her obsequies (O, obsequiously) In loves sweet Odours hearts shall ever burne. And let each Christian heart joyne with my pen, T' imbalme her vertues in the hearts of men. Thou bed of rest, reserve for him a roome, Who lives a man divorc't from his deare wife: And as they were one heart, so this one Tombe May hold them neere in death, as linckt in life. Shee's gone before, and after comes her head; To sleepe with her among the blessed dead. Here is buried the body of Henry Cotton,A Monu∣ment on a Pillar in the body of the Church. Gentleman, eldest son of Thomas Cot∣ton, of Connington, in the County of Huntingdon, Esquire, by Dorothy Tamworth, his second wife. Hee living honestly, died the 11. day of Iune, 1614. And made his Elcecutors, Sir Edward Montagu, Knight of the Bath, married to Frances his second sister, and Willi∣am Mulsho, Esquire, married to Re∣becca his third sister; who in requitall of his kindnesse to them, erected this re∣membrance for him. Barckly sublatus, jacet hic sub marmore stratus,A Grave∣stone at the North Ile en∣tring into the Quire▪ Qui pueros docuit multos veluti bene sciunt. Quem rapuit Dominus, sed vivit spiritus ejus, Inter seculas quo' obierunt qui bene formas Annis millenis quingentenis simul oct, Quod Domini migrat qui non cursum sibi pigrat. Mense Decembre fero de quo non plus majus edo Binas uxores habuit senas quoque proies. Quarum tres nati, natae tres atque fuere, Quos nece truncavit Christus quicunque creavit. Next to this Church is a faire and large Inne for receit of Travellers, and hath to signe the Sarasens head. There lyeth a streete from Newgate West, to the end of Turne-againe lane, and winding North to Oldbourne Con∣duit. Oldbourne Conduit by Oldbourne Crosse. This Conduit by Oldbourne Crosse was first builded 1498. Thomasin, wi∣dow to Iohn Percival, Maior, gave to the second making thereof 20. Markes, Richard Shore ten pounds, Thomas Knes∣worth, and others also did give towards it. But of late, a new Conduit was there builded in place of the old, namely, in the yeere 1577. by William Lambe, some∣time a Gentleman of the Chappell to King Henry the eighth, and afterward a Citizen and Clothworker of London, the water thereof he caused to bee con∣veighed in Lead, from divers Springs to one head, and from thence to the said Conduit, and waste of one Cocke at Oldbourne bridge, more than 2000. yards in length, all which was by him perfor∣med at his owne charges, amounting to the summe of 1500. l. From the West side of this Conduit is the high way, there called Snor hill, stretching out by Oldbourne bridge over the oft named water of Turnmill Brook, and so up to Oldbourne hill, all repleni∣shed with faire building. Without Oldbourne bridge, on the right hand, is Gold lane, as is before shewed: up higher on the hill be certain Innes, & other faire buildings, amongst the which (of old time) was a Messuage called Scroopes Inne;Scroopes Inne, some∣time Ser∣geants Inne, in Old∣bourne. for so I finde the same recorded in the 37. of Henry the 6. This house was sometime letten out to Sergeants at the Law, as appeareth, and was found by Inquisition taken in the Guild-hall of London, before William Purchase, Maior, and Escheator for King Henry the seventh, in the 14. of his reigne, after the death of Iohn Lord Scroope, that he dyed deceased in his de∣mesne of fee, by the feoffement of Guy Fairfaix, Knight, one of the Kings Iusti∣ces, made in the 9. of the same King, un∣to an Esquire, the said Io. Scroop, Knight, Lord Scroope of Bolton, and Robert Wing∣field, of one house or tenement late cal∣led Sergeants Inne, situate against the Church of St. Andrew in Oldbourne in
the City of London, with two Gardens, and two Messuages to the same Tene∣ment belonging in the said City, to hold in burgage, valued by the yeere in all reprises 10. s. Then is the Bishop of Elies Inne,Ely place in Old∣bourne. so called of belonging and pertaining to the Bishops of Ely. William de Luda, Bishop of Ely, deceased 1297. and gave this house, by the name of his Mannour with the appurtenances in Oldbourne, to his successors, with condition, that his next successour should pay a thou∣sand Markes towards the finding of three Chaplains in the Chappell there. More, Iohn Hotham, Bishop of Ely, did give by the name of sixe Messuages, two Cellars, and forty Acres of land in the Suburbs of London, in the Parish of Saint Andrew in Oldbourne, to the Prior and Covent of Ely, as appeareth by Pa∣tent the ninth of Edward the third: this man was Bisop of Ely 20. yeeres, and deceased 1336. Thomas Arundell, Bishop of Ely, beau∣tifully builded of new his Palace at Ely, and likewise his Mannours in divers places, especially this in Oldbourne, which he did not only repaire, but ra∣ther new builded, and augmented it with a large Port, Gate-house, or Front towards the street, or high-way: his Armes are yet to bee discerned in the stone worke thereof: he fate Bishop of Ely fourteene yeeres, and was translated to Yorke. In this house, for the large and com∣modious roomes thereof, divers great and solemne feasts have bin kept, espe∣cially by the Sergeants at the Law, whereof twaine are to bee noted for po∣sterity. The first in the yeer 1464. the fourth of Edward the fourth,Sergeants feast in Ely house. in Michaelmas Terme, the Sergeants at Law held their feast in this house, to the which a∣mongst other Estates, Matthew Philip, Maior of London, with the Aldermen, Sheriffes, & Commons of divers crafts being invited, did repaire: but when the Maior looked to keep the State in the Hall, as it had been used in all pla∣ces within the City and Liberties (out of the Kings presence) the Lord Gray of Ruthen, then Lord Treasurer of England, unwitting the Sergeants, and against their wils (as they said) was first placed: whereupon the Maior, Aldermen, and Commons departed home, and the Maior made the Aldermen to dine with him: howbeit, hee and all the Citizens were wonderfully displeased, that hee was so dealt with, and the new Serge∣ants and others were right sorry there∣fore, and had rather than much good (as they said) it had not so happened. One other feast was likewise there kept, in the yeere 1531. the 23. of King Henry the eighth. The Sergeants then made were in number eleven: namely, Thomas Audeley, Walter Luke, 1. Bawld∣wine, 1. Hinde, Christopher Ienny, Iohn Dowsell, Edward Mervine, Edmond Knightley, Roger Chomley, Edward Mon∣tague, and Robert Yorke. These also held their feast in this Ely house for five dayes, to wit, Friday the tenth of November, Saterday, Sunday, Munday, and Tuesday. On Munday (which was their principall day) King Henry and Queene Katharine dined there (but in two chambers) and the forraine Ambassadors in a third cham∣ber.K. Henry the 8. and Queene Katharine dined at the Serge∣ants feasts. In the Hall at the high table, sate Sir Nicholas Lambard, Maior of London, the Iudges, the Barons of the Exchequer, with certaine Aldermen of the City: At the board on the South side sate the Master of the Rowles, the Master of the Chancery, and worshipfull Citizens: On the North side of the Hall certaine Aldermen began the board, and then followed Merchants of the City: In the Cloystry, Chappell and Gallery, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen were placed: In the Hals the Crafts of London: the Sergeants of Law and their Wives kept in their owne cham∣bers. It were tedious to set downe the pre∣paration of fish, fles, and other victu∣als spent in this feast, and would seeme almost incredible, and (as to mee it see∣meth) wanted little of a feast at a Coro∣nation: Neverthelesse a little I will touch, for declaration of the change of prices. There were brought to the slaughter house foure and twenty great Beefes, at 26. s. 8. d. the peece from the Shambles, one carkasse of an Oxe, at 24. s. an hun∣dred
fat Muttons, 2. s. 10. d. the peece, fifty one great Veales, at 4. s. 8. d. the peece, thirty foure Porkes, 3. s. 8. d. the peece, ninety one Pigs, 6 d. the peece, Capons of Grece of one Poulter (for they had three) ten dozens, at twenty pence the peece: Capons of Kent, nine dozen and sixe, at twelve pence the peece: Capons course nineteene dozen, at sixe pence the peece. Cocks of grose, seven dozen and nine, at eight pence the peece: Cockes course, fourteen do∣zen and eight, at three pence the peece: Pullets the best, 2. d. ob. other Pulles, two pence: Pigeons, thirty seven dozen, at ten pence the dozen: Swans, foure∣teene dozen: Larkes, 340. dozen, at five pence the dozen, &c. Edward Ne∣vill was Seneshall or Steward, Thomas Ratcliffe Controwier, Thomas Wildon Clerke of the Kitchin. Next,Lither lane. Furnivals Inne, an Inne of Chancery▪ beyond this Mannour of Ely house, is Lither lane, turning into the field. Then is Furnivals Inne, now an Inne of Chancery, but sometime belong∣ging to Sir William Furnival, Knight, and Thomasin his wife, who had in Old∣bourne two Messuages, and 13. Shops, as appeareth by Record of Richard the second in the sixth of his reigne. Then is the Earle of Bathes Inne, now called,The Earle of Bathes Inne. Bathe Place, of late (for the most part) new builded, and so to the Barres. Now againe from Newgate, on the left hand or South side, lyeth the Old Bayly, which runneth down by the wall upon the ditch of the City, called Hounds Ditch to Ludgate:Hounds Ditch. I have not read how this street tooke that name, but it is like to have risen of some Court of old time there kept: and I finde, that in the yeere 1356. the 34. of Edward the third, the tenement and ground up∣on Hounds Ditch, betweene Ludgate on the South, and Newgate on the North, was appointed to Iohn Cambridge, Fish∣monger, The Chamber∣laines house and Court in the Old Beyly. Chamberlaine of London, whereby it seemeth, that the Chamber∣laines of London have there kept their Courts, as now they doe in the Guild hall, and till this day, the Maior and Ju∣stices of this City kept their Sessions in a part thereof, now called the Sessions hall,The Sessi∣ons hall. both for the City of London, and Shire of Middlesex. Over-against the which house, on the right hand, turneth downe Saint Georges lane,S. Georges lane, and Inne of Chancery there. towards Ficet lane. In this St. Georges lane, on the North side thereof, remaineth yet an old wall of stone, inclosing a peece of ground up Seacole lane, wherein (by report) some∣time stood an Inne of Chancery: which house being greatly decayed, and stan∣ding remote from other houses of that profession, the Company removed to a common Hostery, called of the signe, our Lady Inne, not farre from Clements Inne, which they procured from Sir Iohn Fineox, Lord chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, and since have held it of the Owners,Originall of New Inne. by the name of the New Inne, paying therefore sixe pounds rent by the yeere,An Inne of Chan∣cery. as renants at their owne will: for more (as is said) cannot be got∣ten of them; and much lesse will they be put from it. Beneath this Saint Georges lane, the Lane called Fleet lane, winding South by the prison of the Fleet, into Fleetstreet, by Fleet Bridge. Lower down into the Old Bayly,P. stan∣dard of Spring water in the Old Beyly. is at this present a Standard of Timber, with a Cocke, or Cockes, delivering faire Spring water to the inhabitants, and is the waste of the water, serving the Pri∣soners in Ludgate. Next, out of the high street turneth downe a Lane, called the Little Bayly, which runneth down to the East end of Saint Georges lane. The next is Sea-coale lane,Sea-coale lane, or Lime-burners lane, sometime so called. I thinke, called Lime burners lane, of burning Lime there with Sea-coale. For I reade in Record of such a Lane, to have bin in the Parish of Saint Sepuldre, and there yet remaineth in this Lane an Alley, called Lime-burners Alley. Neere unto this Sea-coale lane, in the turning towards Oldbourne Conduit, is Turnë-againe lane,Wind-againe lane. or rather, as in a Re∣cord of the fifth of Edward the third, Wind-againe lane, for that it goeth downe VVest to Fleet Dike, from whence, men must turne againe the same way they came; for there it is stopped. Then the high street turneth downe Snor hill,Snore lane. to Oldbourne Conduit, and from thence to Oldbourne Bridge; beyond the which Bridge,Shoo lane. on the left hand, is Shooe lane, by the which men passe from Old∣bourne
to Fleetstreet, by the Conduit there. In this Shooe lane, on the left hand, is one old House,Oldbourne hall. called Oldbourne Hall; it is now letten out into divers Tene∣ments. On the other side, at the very corner, standeth the Parish Church of St. An∣drew; Parish Church of S. Andrew in Old∣bourne. in the which Church, or neere thereunto, was sometime kept a Gram∣mar Schoole,Grammar schoole in Oldbourne. as appeareth in another place by a Patent, made (as I have shewed) for the erection of Schooles. There be Monuments in this Church of Thomas, Lord Wriothesley, Earle of Southampton, buried 1550. Ralph Rokeby, of Lincolnes Inne, E∣squire, Master of Saint Katharines, and one of the Masters of Requests to Queene Elizabeth, who deceased the 14. of Iune, 1596. He gave by his Testament to Christs Hospitall in London, an hundred pounds. To the Colledge of the Poore of Queene Elizabeth, in East Greenwitch, an hundred pounds. To the poore Scholars in Cambridge, an hundred pounds. To the poore Scholars in Oxford, an hundred pounds. To the Prisoners in the two Comp∣ters in London, two hundred pounds. To the prisoners in the Fleet, an hun∣dred pounds. To the prisoners in Ludgate, an hun∣dred pounds. To the prisoners in Newgate, an hun∣dred pounds. To the prisoners in the Kings Bench, an hundred pounds. To the prisoners in the Marshalsey, an hundred pounds. To the prisoners in the White Lion, twenty pounds. To the poore of S. Katharines, twen∣ty pounds; and to every Brother and Sister there, forty shillings. Wil. Sydnam founded a chauntry there. There was also of old time (as I have read in the third of Henry the fifth) an Hospitall for the poore,Hospitall in Old∣bourne. which was a Cell to the house of Cluny in France, and was therefore suppressed among the Priories Aliens. Here resteth the body of Margery Parkin∣son, late wife of Iohn Parkinson,A Monu∣ment in the North wall of the Chancell. of the City of Chester, Gentleman, the daugh∣ter of William Dimmocke, of the same City, Gentleman, who died in the faith of Christ on the fourth day of Febru∣ary, Anno Domini 1610. She left be∣hinde unto her said husband these chil∣dren at her death, Gerrard, VVilliam, Iohn, Edward, and Katharine Par∣kinson; which Gerraid died at Bra∣zen-nose Colledge in Oxford, the 4. day of Ianuary, Anno Domini 1611. Iohn Parkinson, her sorrowfull hus∣band, caused this Monument to be here erected, for a memori∣all of her vertue, and of their mutuall love. Here lieth buried William Tipper,A faire stone be∣fore the doore of the Vestre▪ E∣squire of the body to our Soveraign Lord King Iames, who departed this world the first day of September, An. Domini 1613. being aged 71. yeeres. Hec was the sonne of Henry Tipper, of London, Citizen and Grocer, and of Helen his wife, daughter of Randall Dodd of Cheshire. This VVilliam Tipper married Mary, daughter of Io. Clarke, of London, Goldsmith, and had issue Robert Tipper. Memoriae Sacrum. Michael Lewes,A small Monumēt in the wal at the east end of the Chancell. of Collyweston, in the County of Northampton, Esquire, zea∣lous in Gods truth, and vertuous in con∣versation, did learnedly reade in the Common Law of Grayes Inne, Anno 1584. Aetatis suae 45. whose body lieth here buried, but his soule is with Christ, at the right hand of God, expecting the glorious resurrection of the faithfull. Vincemus mundi Praelia pace Dei. Reginaldus Biens, ortu clarus,A comely small Mo∣nument in the wal in the Chancell. virtue Militari clarior, terris multùm jacta∣tus & undis: huic tandem libens, ac laetus appulit portui. An. Dom. 1611. Aetatis 49. En fuit, en non est hic qui sepelitur in umbris; En fuit, en non est umbra, cadaver, homo. Vixit sua tempora nosque se∣quemur.
Monumentum Roberti Coke de Mille∣ham in Comitatu Norfolciae Armig.A faire Monumēt in the same wall. Illustrissimi Hospitii Lincolniensis quondam Socii Primarii. Qui ex Winefrida uxore sua, Guli∣mi Knightly filia, hos suscepit li∣beros: Edwardum Coke, filium, Majestatis Regiae Attornatum Generalem. Winefridam, Miloni Mingay, Generos. Dorotheam, Gulielmo Francklyn, Ge∣neros. Elizabetham, Richardo Osborne, Ge∣neros. Vrsulam, Georgio Ledys, Generos. Annam, Francisco Stubbe, Generos. Margaretam, Roberto Barker, Armig. Ethelredam, Nicholae Bohun, Armig. Obiit in Hospitio praedicto 15. die Novemb. An. Domini, 1561. Elizab. 4. Aetat. suae 48. Ioannes Corbettus, à Chri. bene mot. Hic jacet spe novissimae tubae Jo. Corb.A comely Monumēt in the South wal of the Chancell. Armig. fil. Milonis Corbetti, Militis, natus quintus mortuus 2. unus Cleri∣corum Serenissimi Iacobi à secretio∣ribus Conciliis. Occubuit 9. Decem∣bris, 1611. Si totus parvam promeretur frater in urnam Flerem, sed pars est vilior ista sui Quam Tumulo clausam, pars altera vidit Olympo Redditam, ut invidiam semodo flere velim. Elizabethae Ferreriae unicae filiol. Ioan.A small Monumēt under the other. Ferrerius Galvidamus Carnutensis, & Francisca Iuberta, moesti. par. P. P. Anno CIC. IC. LXX. Octavo Kalend. Sextil. Here lie the bodies of Richard Aldworth,A gilt Plate in the South wall of the Quire. Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, who had issue sixe sonnes and three daugh∣ters: which Elizabeth deceased the 24. day of August, 1603. And the said Richard, &c. My Turtle gone, all joy is gone from me, Ile mourne awhile, and after flee: For Time brings youthfull Youths to Age, And Age brings Death, our Heritage. They lived married together foure and forty yeeres. Their race is runne, and Heaven is wonne. Non illo melior quisquam, nec amantior aequi. Radulpho Rokeby,A comely Monumēt in the same wall of the Quire. à Marthamla (Op∣pido Richmondiensis agri) oriundo, Lincolniensis Hospitii Socio Prima∣rio. Xenodochii diuae Catharinae prope Arcem Londinensem Magi∣tro; Augustissimaeque Anglorum Reginae Elizabethae à libellis suppli∣cibus, non minus domi ac foris, quam pace bellóque de Principe, ac patria benè merito. Caelibi septuagenario, fatisquea demum 14. Iunii. Anno post natum Messiam, 1596. feliciter functo: Heredes in Testamento scripti piae grataeque memoriae gra∣tia posuerunt. Here lyeth the body of Henry Topham,Two faire Grav-stones in South Ile of the Quire. Esquire, one of the Readers of Grayes Inne: who dyed the first day of May, An. Dom. 1612. Hic jacet corpus Saintmontis Welles, Generos. de Grayes Inne, qui coelebs obiit 18. Februarii, 1612. Here lyeth the body of Thomas Thorney,A comely Monumēt in the South Ile of the Church in the wall. late Citizen and Barber-Chirurgion of London, who dyed the 4. of Iune, 1614. and lived 71. yeeres, being twice Ma∣ster of his Company, and one of the Com∣mon Councell of this City: who gave to the poore of this Parish of St. Andrew, 10. pounds to be distributed on the day of his funerall, and ten pounds a yeere afterward to ten poore Pentioners of this Parish for ever. And twenty shillings to the poore people of Acton for ever; who dyed without issue of his body, and made Peter Thorney, Citizen and Bar∣ber-Chirurgion of London (his bro∣thers sonne) his heire and sole Executor: who kneeleth with him in this module, being finished and set up in the month of
December, An. Dom. 1614. and at the onely cost and charges of the said Peter Thorney, in memory of so worthy a mem∣ber, who lived in good credit, name and fame all the dayes of his life, and did many good offices, and memorable acts in this Parish. George Harison Gentleman,A comely Monumēt in the North wall of the Quire. lyeth here, and Elizabeth his wife, Which in this Parish many a yeere did live a gracious life: And he at her departure gave to the poore of Parishes twaine, Saint Giles in the Field, and this, Annuity to remaine, For six and forty yeeres to come, to give the poorest soules, One yeere six and twenty Gownes, and two good loads of Coales. Next yeere as many shirts and smocks, and as many Coales agen, Till six and forty yeeres run out, to women and to men. To Prisoners and to many more great gifts she gave beside, And in the faith of Iesus Christ, they both assured dy'd. Quid superbis terra & cinis? Huc oculos, Lector, versa, de corpore caeso I am cineres praeter quod superest, nihil est. Crede mihi de quo laetaris corpore, digent, Iam cineres praeter quod superest, nihil est. Georgio Egeock, de Salford prioris in agro varvicensi,A comely Monu∣ment on a pillar in the Quire Armigero, viro om∣ni virtutum genere instructo: inte∣gerrimae fidei cum erga Deum tum erga homines, illaesae probitatis, illi∣bati nominis, de Patria, Conjuge, amiciss. omnibus optimè merito. Dorothea (origine S. Iohn) relicta moestissimi officii & desiderii, con∣jugalis triste argumentum, adju∣mentum memoriae, Monumentum posteris & nonnullum moeroris ac viduitatis lenamentum posuit. Obdormivit in Domino fideliter ac feliciter An. Salutis hum. 1601. Eliz. Reg. 43. Aetatis suae circa 40. nexus Conjug. 11. Mens. Martii 19. die Veneris, 1606. Here rest the bodies of Francis Ienner, sometime of little Walsingham in the County of Norfolke,A Grave at the Chancell doore. Esquire, and some∣time Fellow of Grayes Inne, and Mar∣garet his wife (daughter to William Hamon of Acris in the County of Kent, Esquire) who had issue one onely daugh∣ter and Heire, named Frances Ienner, yet living. The said Margaret deceased in October, Anno 1603. From this Church to Saint Andrew up Oldbourne Hill, be divers faire buil∣ded houses, amongst the which, on the left hand, there standeth three Innes of Chauncery,Crookehorn Alley, Thavies Inne. whereof the first, adioyning unto Crookehorne Alley, is called Thavies Inne, and standeth opposite to Ely House. Then is Fewter lane,Fewters lane. which stretcheth South into Fleetstreet, by the East end of Saint Dunstanes Church, and is so called of Fewters (or idle people) lying there, as in a way leading to Gardens; but the same is now oflater yeeres on both sides builded thorow with many faire houses. Beyond this Fewters lane is Barnards Inne,Barnards Inne. alias Mackworths Inne, which is of the Chancery, belonging to the Deane and Chapter of Lincolne,Pat. Hen. 3. 32. 1. as saith the Re∣cord of Hen. the 6. the 32. of his reigne, and was founded by Inquisition in the Guild-hall of London, before I. Norman, Maior, the Kings Exchetre. The Iury said, that it was not hurtfull for the King to licence Thomas Atkins, Citizen of London, and one of the Executors of Iohn Mackworth, Deane of Lincolne, to give one Messuage in Oldbourne in Lon∣don, with the appurtenances, called Mackworths Inne (but now commonly knowne by the name of Barnards Inne) to the Deane and Chapter of Lincolne, to finde one sufficient Chaplaine, to ce∣lebrate divine Service in the Chappell of S. George, in the Cathedrall Church of Lincolne, where the body of the said Iohn is buried, to have and to hold the said messuage to the said Deane and Chapter, and to their successors for e∣ver, in part of satisfaction of twenty pound Lands and Rents, which Edward
the third licenced the said Deane and Chapter to purchase to their owne use, either of their owne fee, or tenure, or of any other, so the Lands were not holden of the King in Capite. Then is Staple Inne also,Staple Inne. of Chancery but whereof so named, I am ignorant; the same of late is (for a great part ther∣of) faire builded, and not a little aug∣mented: And then at the Barres endeth this Ward without Newgate. Without Ludgate, on the right hand or North side, from the said Gate, lyeth the Old Bayly, as I said: Then the high street, called Ludgate Hill, downe to Fleet lane;Ludgate hill. in which lane standeth the Fleet, a Prison-house, so called of the Fleet or Water running by it, and some∣time flowing about it, but now vaulted over. I read,The Fleet, or Gaole, in the reigne of Richard the first. that Richard the first, in the first yeere of his reigne, confirmed to Osbere (brother to William Longshampe, Chancelor of England, and elect of Ely) and to his heires for ever, the custody of his House, or Palace at Westminster, with the keeping of his Gaole of the Fleet at London. Also King Iohn by his Patent dated the third of his reigne, gave to the Arch-deacon of Welles, the custody of the said Kings House at West∣minster, and of his Gaole of the Fleet, to∣gether with the VVardship of the daughter and heire of Ro. Leveland, &c. Then is Fleet bridge, pitched over the said Water, whereof I have spoken in another place. Then also,Conduit in Fleet∣street. against the South end of Shoo lane, standeth a faire Water-Con∣duit; whereof William Eastfield, some∣time Maior, was Founder: For the Maior and Communalty of London be∣ing possessed of a Conduit Head, with divers Springs of water gathered there∣into, in the Parish of Padington, and the water conveyed from thence by Pipes of Lead towards London unto Teyborne, where it had layne by the space of sixe yeeres, and more; the Executors of Sir William Eastfield obtained licence of the Maior and Communalty, for them, in the yeere 1453. with the goods of Sir William, to convey the said waters, first, in Pipes of Lead, into a Pipe begun to be laid besides the great Conduit Head at Maribone, which stretcheth from thence unto a Separall, late before made against the Chappell of Rounsevall, by Charing Crosse, and no further; and then from thence to convey the said water into the City, and there to make Receit or Receits for the same, unto the Com∣mon-weale of the Communalty, to wit, the poore to drinke, the rich to dresse their meats: which water was by them brought thus into Fleetstreet, to a Stan∣dard, which they had made and finished 1471. The inhabitants of Fleetstreet, in the yeere 1478. obtained licence of the Ma∣ior, Aldermen, and Communalty, to make (at their owne charges) two Ce∣sternes, Conduit at Fleet bridge. the one to bee set at the said Standard, the other at Fleet bridge, for the receit of the waste water. This Ce∣sterne at the Standard they builded, and on the same, a faire Tower of Stone, garnished with Images of Saint Christo∣pher on the top, and Angels round a∣bout, lower downe, with sweet soun∣ding Bells before them, whereupon, by an Engine placed in the Tower, they divers houres of the day and night, chy∣med such an Hymne as was appointed. This Conduit, or Standard, was a∣gaine new builded, with a larger Ce∣sterne, at the charges of the Citie, in the yeere 1582. From this Conduit,Parish Church of S. Dunstane. up to Fewters lane, and further, is the Parish Church of Saint Dunstane, called in the West, (for difference from St. Dunstan in the East) where lyeth buried T. Duke, Skin∣ner, in Saint Katharines Chappell, by him builded, 1421. Nicholas Coningston, Iohn Knape, and other, founded Chan∣tries there. Ralph Bane, Bishop of Co∣ventry and Lichfield, 1559. and other, lye there buried. O bone Protector animae,A faire plated stone un∣der the Commu∣nion Ta∣ble. miserere Iohannis Hor sepoole, qui Rector Auerham fuit ejus in annis. Cancellariae fuerat vivendo Magister, Sis sibi fons veniae cujus fuit ipse Magister. Morte die decimo nono Iuii ruit anne, M. C. quater nono seciato bis sibi dee,
Hic jacet Richardus Nordon,Another faire stone close by the other. Civis & Scissor, ac quondam Vicecomes Londini, & Ioanna uxor ejus: Qui quidem Richardus obiit 23. die Martii, Anno Domini 1460. Ac e∣tiam dicta Ioanna obiit 21. die No∣vembris, Anno 1459. Hic jacet Gulielmus Chapman, nuper Civis & Scissor,Another faire stone lying by it▪ ac Vicecomes Ci∣vitatis London, & Alicia uxor ejus. Qui Guliel. pro uno Capellano hic perpetuò celebraturo, ac pro uno Cereo coram venerabili Sacramen∣to ad summum Altare hujus Eccle∣siae continuè ardente, neonon pro¦suo Anniversario in perpetuum fien∣do feliciter ordinavit. Et idem Gu∣liel. obiit primo die Mensis Iulii, An. Dom. 1446. Hic jacet Rogerus Horton,A faire stone, hard by. quondam u∣nus Justiciariorum de Banco Domi∣ni Regis. Qui obiit ultimo die A∣prilis, An. 1423. Cujus, &c. Iesu animae famuli tui Laurentii Bartlot nuper Registrarii Episcop.A faire stone by the Com∣munion Table. Lincoln. Qui obiit die Octobris, Anno 1470. Dona requiem, &c. Quisquis ades vultumque vides, sta, perlege, plora, Iudicii memor esto mei, tua nam venit hora. Sum quod eris, fueramque quod es, tua posteriora Commemorans, miseris miserans, pro me precor ora. Here Edward Cordell,A comely Monumēt at entring into the Vestry. Squire, lyes; who when hee life possest, Had place among the learn'd and wife, and credit with the best. Abigail Heningham, his wife, this Monument prepared, For love to him, who in his life, to love her well declared. God hath his soule, this Earth his Earth, her heart his love shall keepes; The ods 'twixt you and him, is breath; which gone, all flesh thus sleepes. In obitum Thomae Valentis, Lincolni∣ensis Hospitii Socii. Qui obiit 23. die Decemb. Anno 1601. Aetatis 78. Hoc Tumulo Thomae requiescunt ossa Valentis,A small Monumēt in the east end of the Chancell, North. Et parvum corpus parvula terra tegit: Sed mens, quae melior pars est, expresque Sepulchri, Infima despiciens sidera celsa colit. Here-under lyeth the body of Thomas Powle,A faire Monumēt in the South wall of the Chancell, at the east end. Esquire, Clerke of the Crowne, and one of the sixe Clerkes of the High court of Chancery, Controller of the Hamper, Clerke of the Forrest of Wal∣tham, and High Steward to the late Queene Elizabeth, of all her Mannors within the County of Essex. Hee had by his wife Iane Tate (descended from the Line of honourable Ancesors) five sonnes and one daughter; who like∣wise is here with him buried. Both li∣ved in the feare of God, and dyed in his favour: Shee, in the 57. yeere of her age, the 24. day of November, 1577. And hee, in the 88. yeere of his age, the 26. day of Iune, Anno 1601. Stephen Powle, Esquire, their onely surviving sonne, and successor to his father in the Office of one of the sixe Clerks of the Chancery; in dutifull pietie, consecrated to lasting memory this holy Monu∣ment. Corpus foetidum carcer, Mors libertas, Vita mare procellosum, Sepulchrum perortus, Mundus vaga peregrinatio, Coelum Patria. Disce ergo mori, dedisce vivere. In God is onely my Trust: God is my Defender.A Brazen Plate on a Pillar in the Chan∣cell. My friend, whoso this place of mine thou be that shalt behold, With petience pawse, and heare a friend his minde to thee unfold, Seeke not with heapes of worldly toyes to furnish thy delight; Nor let him fancy high degree, that hopes to live aright. If thou have wealth supply their want
that languish and decay, And linger not thy good intent, untill the later day. If poverty oppresse thy minde, let patience be thy guide; Let rigour faile to false thy faith, what hap so thee betide: For, as from death no way there is, whereby thee to defend; So, happy may no creature be, before his finall end. Wherefore, of God his mercy crave, who hath of mercy stoe, And unto him commend my soule: (my friend) I crave no more. Here before,An anciēt Marble Tombe in the South Ile of the Quire. lieth buried in the Vault, Ro∣bert Witchcotte, of Lyons Inne, Gen∣tleman, the sonne of Thomas Witch∣cotte, Esquire, who deceased the 9. day of August, in An. Dom. 1557. Here lieth the body of Sir Roger Cholme∣ley, Another like Tombe close ad∣joyning. Knight for the body to King Henry the eighth: which Sir Roger deceased the 28. day of April, An. Dom. 1538. Ranulphus Cholmeley clara hîc cum conjuge dormit.Another Tombe by it, in the wall. Binaque Connubii corpora juncta fide, Haec brevis urna tenet veros disjungere amantes Nec potuit mortis vis truculenta nimis. Justitia in signis nulli pietate secundus, Ranulphus clara stirpe creatus erat. Non deerant Artes Generoso pectore dignae, Doctus & Anglorum Iure peritus erat. Ille Recordator Londini huic extitit urbis, Et miseris semper mite levamen erat. Hujus acerba viri Londinum funera deflet, Dicens, justitiae vive perennis honor. Obiit 25. die Aprilis, An. 1563. Mors mihi lucrum. Neere to this place lieth buried the body of Elizab. North,A faire Monumēt in the east end of the North Quire. wife to Roger North, Esquire, and one of the daughters and coheires of Sir Iohn Gilbert, Knight, of great Finborow, in Suffolke. Shee had issue, two sonnes and one daughter, Henry North, Dudley North, and Mary North. On the 29. of Novem∣ber in Anno 1612. (she being about the age of 22. yeers) ended this life: Leaving behind her many of the gravest, that may justly imitate her vertues and godly course of life. Anno Domini 1556. Hic jacet humatus Williel.An anciēt Monumēt in the South end of the Quire. Portman, Miles, Serviens inclitissimae Princi∣pis H. 8. ad Legem, & illo tempore unus Iustic. suorum ad placitum co∣ram ipso Rege tenend. ac postea temp. illustriss. Principum, Phil. & Mariae Regis & Reginae Angliae Ca∣pitalis iusticiarius hujus Regni An∣gliae, eoque officio summa aequitate ita perfunctus erat, ut in Deum in primis sanctus & pius, in Patriam ac Principem fidus & morigerus, in om∣nes denique semper aequabil. fuit & perseveravit. Ab hac autem luce in coelestem Praetorum coetum 5. die Fe∣bruarii, Anno Regni praefat. Regis & Reginae 3. & 4. emigravit. Here lieth Thomas Browke,A small ancient Monumēt in the east end of the South Quire. Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of Lond. and somtime Master of his Company, and Alice his wife: which Thomas deceased the first day of November, An. Dom. 1546. And the said Alice deceased, &c. Gerardi Legh, Generosi, & clari viri inte∣rioris Templi Socii Tumulus. Civis & Hospes Interloquutores. C. Hospes fiste pedem,A comely Monumēt in the East end of the North Quire. Tumulum nec temne, Gerardus Legh jacet hac humili contumulatus humo. H. Vnde genus duxit? C. Generoso è sanguine natum, Antiquae stirpis en Monumenta docent. Nec Generosus erat vir sola ex parre caduca, Sed virtute magis, mens Generosa fuit.
Religio summa splendebat mentis in arce, Et sedes Verae pectus amicitiae. Ingenio ac raro morum candore refulcit, Mens violare fidem credidit esse nefas. H. Quod studium vivo placuit? C. Scrutare solebat Vivens clarorum magna Trophaea virûm. Abdita naturae & rerum cognoscere vires Occultas, vivo maxima cura fuit. H. Talibus imbutum studiis reor esse beatum, Sed lethi causam tu mihi quaeso refer? C. Vrbe ista passim dum faevit lucida pestis, Occldit heu relo pestis acuta tuo. H. O durum fatum! sed sculptum cur stat in urna Numen Amicitiae Civis amice refer? C. Numen Amicitiae quo magni haec machina Mundi Constat, divina quae fabricata manu, Hujus acerba viri deplorat funera, dicens, Vives, O verae cultor Amicitiae, Donec summa dies nostros dissolverit artus, Corruat & summa mundus ab arce poli. H. Mercurius nitidis cur star caducifer alis Hic  lugt magnus sunera & ista Deus? C. Nuncius ille Deúm plangens sua pectora palma, Incans Parcas talia verba reert: Crudeles Parcae nostrum rapuistis Alumnum, Artibus ornatum, muneribusque meis In terris, cujus docti Monumenta laboris Extant, & nullo sunt peritura die. Obiit An. 1563. Octob. 13. Ardum vitis non deserit ulmum. The memoriall of William Crowche,A small Table. Ci∣tizen and Mercer of London, and one of the Common Councell of this City;Monumēt on a pal∣lar in the North Ile of the Quire. who gave by his VVill ten shillings a yeere for a Sermon on his Funerall day, and forty shillings yeerly for a Dinner to be made on that day, for the Common Councell, the Church-wardens, and twelve free-men of this Parish, at the election of his Executors. And he al∣so gave ten pounds a yeere for ever to be distributed yeerly among sixe and thirty poore people of honest life, dwelling in this Parish. Hee was buried neere to this place the sixteenth day of April, Anno Domini 1606. Loe, thus he dyed, for vaine and fraile is flesh; Yet lives his sould (by faith) in endlesse blisse, By faith in Christ; whose grace was so enlarged, That by his blond, mans sinne he hath discharged. Here lieth George Harington, of Salby, Esquire,On the same Pil∣lar. who died the ninth day of Octo∣ber, 1556. Here lieth Laurence Dalton,On the same Pil∣lar. Esquire, late Norroy, King of Armes; who deceased on Saturday the thirteenth of December, 1561. And Dorothy his wife, daugh∣ter to Richard Breame, late of Lon∣don, Esquire. Henry Leigh,On the same Pil∣lar. sometime Citizen and Dra∣per of London, a man borne of a good Family, whose life and conversation was pleasing to God and man, departed out of this life the ninth day of April, Anno Dom. 1568. And lieth buried in the Church-yard by his two wives, Isabel and Elizabeth, both very vertuous, good to their neighbours, and therefore right heartily beloved.
Here lieth buried Colborne,On the same Pil∣lar. Esquire, late Yorke, Herald of Armes: who deceased on Saturday, the thirteenth of Septem∣ber, 1567. and was buried on Munday, the 15. of the same moneth. Memoriae Sacrum. Hic jacet Cutbertus Fethestone,A comely Monumēt in the wall of the South Ile. Ge∣neros. nuper Optiarius & Proclama∣tor Dom. Regis, in Curia ipsius Re∣gis coram ipso Rege ubicunque fue∣rat in Anglia. Functus est hoc munere, Ann. 35. Obiit 10. Decembris, 1615. Aetatis 78. Quem saepe transcit casus, aliquando invent. Next beyond this Church is Clif∣fords Inne,Cliffords Inne. sometimes belonging to Ro∣bert Clifford, by gift of Edward the se∣cond, in these words: The King granteth to Robert Clifford that messuage, with the appurtenances next the Church of S. Dunstane in the West, in the Suburbs of London, which messuage was sometime Malculines de Herley, and came to the hands of Edw. the 1. by reason of certaine debts, which the said Malculine was bound at the time of his death to our said Father, from the time that he was Es∣cheator on this side Trent: which house, Iohn, Earle of Richmond, did hold at our pleasure, and is now in our possession, Patent the third of Edward the second. After the death of this Robert Clif∣ford, Isabel his wife let the same Messu∣age to Students of the Law, as by the Record following may appeare: Isabel, quae fuit uxor Roberti Clifford, Messuagium unipartium, quod Robertus Clifford habuit in Parochia S. Dunstani, West. in Suburbio Londini, &c. tenuit, & illud dimisit post mortem dict. Roberti Ap∣prenticiis de Banco, pro 10. l. Annuatim, &c. Anno 18. Edvardi tertii, inquisitis post mortem Roberti Clifford. This house hath since fallen into the Kings hands, as I have heard, but retur∣ned againe to the Cliffords, and is now letten to the said Students for foure pounds by the yeere. Somewhat beyond this Cliffords Inne is the South end of New street (or Chancelar lane) on the right hand,New street. or Chance∣lar lane. whereof is Sergeants Inne called, in Chan∣cery lane. And then next was sometime the house of the Converted Iewes,House of Converts. founded by K. Henry the third, in place of a Iewes house to him forfeited, in the yeere 1233. and the 17. of his reigne, who builded there for them a faire Church, now used, and called the Chappell, for the custody of Rolles and Records of Chancery. It standeth not far from the old Temple, but in the mid-way between the Old Temple and the New: in the which house, all such Iewes and Infidels as were converted to the Christian Faith, were ordained and appointed (under an honest rule of life) sufficient mainte∣nance; whereby it came to passe, that in short time there were gathered a great number of Converts, which were bap∣tized, instructed in the Doctrine of Christ, and there lived under a learned Christian, appointed to governe them. Since the which time, to wit, in the yeere 1290. all the Iewes in England were banished out of the Realme, wher∣by the number of Converts in this place was decayed: and therefore in the yeere 1377. this House was annexed by Pa∣tent to William Burstall, Clerke, Custos Rotulorum, or Keeper of the Rolles of the Chancery, by Edward the third, in the fifty one yeere of his reigne; and this first Master of the Rolles was sworn in Westminster Hall, at the Table of Marble stone: since the which time, that House hath been commonly called the Rolles in Chancery lane. Notwith∣standing, such of the Iewes,Rolles in Chancery lane. or other Insidels, as have in this Realme beene converted to Christianity, and bapti∣zed, have beene relieved there: for I finde in Record, that one William Piers, a Jew, that became a Christian, was baptized in the fifth of Richard the se∣cond, and had two pence the day al∣lowed him, during his life, by the said King. On the West side,Prior of Necton Parke, his Inne or house of the sixe Clerkes. sometime was an house pertaining to the Prior of Necton Parke, a house of Canons in Lincoln∣shire: this was commonly called Here∣flete Inne, and was a Brewhouse, but now faire builded for the sixe Clerkes of the Chancery, and standeth over∣against the said house, called the Rolles, and neere unto the Lane which now entreth Fickets Croft,Fickets croft Shere lane. or Fickets field. Then is Shere lane, opening also into
Fickets field, hard by the Barres. On this North side of Fleetstreet, in the yeer of Christ, 1595. I observed, that when the Labourers had broken up the pave∣ment from against Chancery lanes end, up towards Saint Dunstans Church, and had digged foure foot deep, they found one other pavement of hard stone, more sufficient than the first; and therefore harder to bee broken, under the which they found in the made ground piles of Timber, driven very thicke, and almost close together, the same being as blacke as pitch or coale, and many of them rotten as earth, which proveth that the ground there (as sundry other places of the City) have been a Marish or full of Springs. On the South side from Ludgate, be∣fore the wall of the City, bee faire buil∣ded houses to Fleet bridge,Conduit at Fleet bridge. on the which bridge, a Cesterne for receit of Spring water was made by the men of Fleet-street, but the water-course is decayed, and not restored. Next,Bridewell the Kings house. is Bride lane, and therein Bride∣well, of old time the Kings house: for the Kings of this Realem have beene there lodged, and till the ninth of Henry the third, the Courts were kept in the Kings house wheresoever hee was lodg∣ed, as may appeare by ancient Records, where of I have seene many, and for ex∣ample have set forth one in the Chapter or Towers and Castles. King Henry the eighth builded there a stately and beautiful house of new, for receit of the Emperour Charles the fifth, who in the yeere of Christ 1522. was lodged himselfe at the Blacke Friers; but his Nobles in this new builded Bride∣well, a Gallery being made out of the house over the water, and thorow the wall of the City, into the Emperours lodging at the Blacke Friers, King Henry himselfe oftentimes lodged there also, as namely, in the yeere 1525. a Parlia∣ment being then holden in the Blacke Friers, hee created States of Nobility there; to wit: Henry Fitz Roy,States created at Bridewell. a child (which he had by Elizabeth Blunt) to bee Earle of Not∣tingham, Duke of Richmond, & of Somer∣set, Lievtenant Generall from Trent northward, Warden of the east middle, and west Marches for anenst Scotland. Henry Courtney, Earle of Devonshire, Cousin-German to the king, to be Mar∣quesse of Excester. Henry Brandon, a childe of two yeers old, son to the Earle of Suffolke, to bee Earle of Lincolne. Sir Thomas Manners, Lord Rosse, to be Earle of Rutland. Sir Henry Clifford to be Earle of Cum∣berland. Sir Robert Ratcliffe to bee Vicount Fitzwater. Sir Thomas Boloine, Treasurer of the Kings Houshold, to be Vicount Rochford In the yeere 1528. Cardinall Campeius was brought to the Kings presence, be∣ing then at Bridewell, whither hee had called all his Nobility, Judges and Councellers, &c. And there the eighth of November, in his great Chamber, he made unto them an Oration touching his marriage with Queene Katharine, as ye may reade in Edward Hall. In the yeere 1529. the same K. Henry and Queene Katharine were lodged there, whilest the question of their mar∣riage was argued in the Blacke Fri∣ers, &c. But now you shall heare how this house became a house of correction. In the yeere 1553. the seventh of Ed∣ward the sixth,Bridewell given to the City of London to be a Worke-house for the poore. the tenth of April, Sir George Barne, being Maior of this City, was sent for to the Court at White Hall, and there at that time the King gave unto him, for the Communalty and Ci∣tizens to be a Work-house for the poore and idle persons of the City, his house of Bridewell, and seven hundred Markes land, late of the possessions of the house of the Savoy, and all the Bedding and other furniture of the said Hospitall of the Savoy, towards the maintenance of the said Worke-house of Bridewell, and the Hospitall of Saint Thomas in South-warke. This gift King Edward confirmed by his Charter, dated the 26. of Iune, next following. And in the yeere 1555. in the moneth of February, Sir William Gerard, Maior, and the Aldermen, en∣tred Bridewell, and tooke possession thereof, according to the gift of the said King Edward, the same being confirmed by Queene Mary. The Bishop of S. Davids had his Inne
over-against the North side of this Bridewell,The Bi∣shop of S. Davids house. as I have said. Then is the Parish Church of Saint Bridges,Parish Church of S. Bridges, or Bride. or Bride, of old time a small thing, which now remaineth to bee the Quire, but since increased with a large Body, and side Iles, towards the West, at the charges of William Venor, Esquire, Warden of the Fleet, about the yeere 1480. all which he caused to be brought about in the stone, in the figure of a Vine, with Grapes and Leaves, &c. The partition betwixt the old VVorke and the new, somtime prepared as a Screne, to be set up in the Hall of the Duke of Somersets house at Strand, was bought for eightscore pounds, and set up in the yeere 1557. One wilfull body began to spoyle and breake the same, in the yeere 1596. but was (by the high Commissi∣oners) forced to make it up againe, and so it resteth. Iohn Vlsthorpe, William Evesham, Iohn Wigan, and other founded Chauntries there. Here lieth Edward Trussell,A comely small Mo∣nument in the South wal of the Quire. Citizen and Clothworker of London, son of Avery Trussell, of Bilseley, in the County of Warwicke, Esquire, with Anne his wife, daughter of Iames Philpot. which Anne departed this life An. Dō. 1586. And hee having lived 38. yeeres in this Parish, departed in the Lord the nine∣teenth day of Iune, Anno Dom. 1613. Aetatis 67. He left behind three sons by the said Anne, and one daughter by Eli∣zabeth, his second wife. Iacobus, filius natu maximus pietatis ergo posuit. Here lieth Iames Kinnon,A faire Monumēt in the same Quire, in the East corner of the wall. a Gent. of Len∣tilo in Monmouthshire, a Citizen, and Cannoniere, and a Souldier. He dyed a∣ged 67. yeeres, over-heating his bloud in preparing of 40. Chambers, at the enter∣tainment of the Prince in the Artillery Garden; to the which Society he gave 40. Chambers, and five Markes in mony. To the poore of this Parish hee gave 10. l. per annum for one and twenty yeers, and to the poore of Lentilo the like summe, and five pounds present. He had one wife and one sonne. Obiit 19. die Decemb. An. Dom. 1615. It ever was his wish to dye in Field, Or else at Sea. Fates halfe his wish did yeeld. A Prince and Army stood about him round: Yet age (o're-wearied) tooke the mortall wound. Arts Mathematicke he both lov'd and knew, In which his skill increast, as his yeeres grew. Wales gave him breath, faire was his birth and name, And though death stole his life, he left him fame. The next is Salisbury Court,The Bi∣shop of Salisbury his house. a place so called, for that it belonged to the Bi∣shop of Salisbury, and was their Inne or London house, at such time as they were summoned to come to the Parlia∣ment, or came for other businesse. It hath of late time been the dwelling, first of Sir Richard Sackvile, and after of Sir Thomas Sackvile his sonne, aron of Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer, who very greatly enlarged it with stately buil∣dings. Then is Water lane, running downe by the West side of a house,Water lane. called the Hanging Sword, to the Thames. Then was the White Friers Church,White Fri∣ers▪ called Fratres beatae Mariae de monte Car∣meli,Iohn Bacon∣thorpe. first founded (saith Iohn Bale, by sir Kich. Gray, knight, Ancester to the Lord Gray of Codnor, in the yeere 1241. King Edward the first gave to the Prior and Brethren of that house, a plot of ground in Fleetstreet, whereupon to build their house, which was since re-edified or new builded by Hugh Courtney, Earle of Devonshire, about the yeere 1350. the 24 of Edward the third. Iohn Lufken, Maior of London, and the Communalty of the City, granted a Lane, called Crockers lane, reaching from Fleetstreet to the Thames,Crockers lane. to build in the VVest end of that Church. Sir Robert Knoles, Knight, was a great builder there also, in the reigne of Richard the second, and of Henry the fourth: hee deceased at his Man∣nour of Scone Thorpe, in Norfolke, in the yeere 1407. and was brought to London, and honourably buried by the Lady
Constance his wife, in the body of the said White Friers Church, which he had newly builded. Robert Marshall, Bishop of Hereford, builded the Quire, Presbytery steeple, and many other parts, and was there buried about the yeere 1420. There were buried also in the new Quire, sir Iohn Mowbray, Earle of Not∣tingham, 1398. Sir Edward Courteny. Sir Hugh Mongomery, and sir Iohn his brother. Iohn Wolle, son to sir Iohn VVolle. Thomas Bayholt, Esquire. Elizabeth, Countesse of Athole. Dame Iohan, wife to sir Thomas Say of Alden. Sir Pence Castle, Baron. I. Lord Gray, sonne to Reginald, Lord Gray of VVilton, 1418. Sir Iohn Ludlow, knight. Sir Richard Derois, knight. Richard Gray, knight. Iohn Ashley, knight. Robert Bristow, Esquire. Thomas Perry, Esquire. Robert Tempest, Esquire. William Call. William Neddow. In the old Quire were buried Dame Margaret, &c. Elianor Gristles. Sir Iohn Browne, knight, and Iohn his sonne and heire. Sir Simon de Berford, knight. Peter VVigus, Esquire. Robert Matthew. Esquire. Sir Iohn Skargell, knight. Sir Iohn Norice, knight. Sir Geffrey Roose, knight. Matthew Hadocke, Esquire. William Clarell, Esquire. Iohn Aprichard, Esquire. William Wentworth, Esquire. Thomas VVicham, Esquire. Sir Terwit, knight. Sir Stephen Popham, knight. Bastard de Scales. Henry Blunt, Esquire. Elizabeth Blunt. Io. Swan, Esquire. Alice Foster, one of the heires of sir Stephen Popham. Sir Robert Brocket, knight. Iohn Drayton, Esquire. Iohn, son to Robert Chanlowes, and his daughter Katharine. Iohn Salvin, VVilliam Hompton, Iohn Bampton, Iohn Winter, Edmond Oldhall, Wil. Appleyard, Thomas Dabby, Esquires. Sir Hugh Courtney, knight. Iohn Drury, son to Robert Drury. Elizabeth Gemersey, Gentle woman. Sir Thomas Townsend, knight. Sir Richard Greene, knight. VVilliam Scot, Esquire. Thomas Federinghey. Iohn Fulforde, Esquire. Edward Eldsmere, Gentleman. William Hart, Gentleman. Dame Mary Senclare, daughter to sir Thomas Talbot, knight. Ancher, Esquire. Sir William Moris, knight, and Dame Christian his wife. Sir Peter de Mota, knight. Richard Hewton, Esquire. Sir Iohn Heron, knight. Richard Eton, Esquire. Hugh Stapleton, Gentleman. William Copley, Gentleman. Sir Ralph Saintowen, knight. Sir Hugh Bromeflete, knight. Lord Vessey, principall Founder of that order, the 6. of Edw. the fourth, &c. This house was valued at 26. pounds, seven shillings, and three pence, and was surrendred the tenth of November, the 30. of Henry the eighth. In place of this Friers Church, bee now many faire houses builded, lodg∣ings for Noblemen and other. Then is the Sergeants Inne,Sergeants Inne in Fleet∣street. so called, for that divers Iudges and Sergeants at the Law keepe a Commons, and are lodged there in Terme time. Next,New Tem∣ple. is the New Temple, so called, because the Templers before the buil∣ding of this house, had their Temple in Oldbourne. This house was founded by the knights Templers in England, in the reigne of Henry the second, and the same was dedicated to God and our blessed Lady, by Heraclius, Patri∣arke of the Church, called the holy Resurrection in Ierusalem, in the yeere of Christ, 1185. These knights Templers tooke their beginning about the yeere 1118. in maner following:Originall of the Templers. Certaine Noblemen, horse-men, religiously bent, bound by
vow themselves in the hands of the Patriarke of Ierusalem, to serve Christ after the manner of Regular Canons, in chastity and obedience, and to renounce their owne proper wils for ever: the first of which order were Hugh Paganus, and Geffrey de S. Andromare. And wher∣as at the first they had no certaine habi∣tation, Baldwin, King of Ierusalem, gran∣ted unto them a dwelling place in his Palace by the Temple, and the Cannons of the same Temple, gave them the street, thereby to build therein their houses of office, and the Patriarke, the King, the Nobles, and the Prelates, gave unto them certaine revenues out of their Lordships. Their first profession was for safegard of the Pilgrimes,Profession of the Templers. comming to visit the Sepulchre, and to keepe the high waies against the lying in wait of theeves, &c. About ten yeeres after, they had a rule appointed unto them, and a white Ha∣bite, by Honorius the second, then Pope; and whereas they had but nine in num∣ber, they began to increase greatly. Af∣terward in Pope Eugenius time, they bare crosse of red cloth on their upper∣most garments, to be knowne from o∣thers: and in short time, because they had their first mansion hard by the Temple of our Lord in Ierusalem, they were called Knights of the Temple. Many Noblemen in all parts of Chri∣stendome, became Brethren of this or∣der, and builded for themselves Tem∣ples in every City or great Towne in England, but this at London was their chefe house, which they builded after the forme of the Temple neere to the Sepulchre of our Lord at Ierusalem. They had also other Temples in Cam∣bridge, Bristow, Canturbury, Dover, War∣wicke. This Temple in London was of∣ten made a Store-house of mens Trea∣sure, I meane such as feared the spoyle there of in other places. Mathew Paris noteth,Mat. Paris. Hubert Earle of Kent his Treasure in the new Temple. that in the yeere 1232. Hubert de Burgh, Earle of Kent, being Prisoner in the Tower of London, the King was enformed that he had much treasure laid up in this New Temple, under the custody of the Tem∣plers: whereupon hee sent for the Ma∣ster of the Temple, and examined him straightly, who confessed, that money being delivered unto him and his Bre∣thren, to bee kept, hee knew not how much there was of it: The King de∣manded to have the same delivered: but it was answered, that the money be∣ing cōmitted unto their trust, could not be delivered, without the licence of him that committed it to Ecclesiasticall pro∣tection; whereupon the King sent his Treasurer and Iusticier of the Exche∣quer unto Hubert, to require him to re∣signe the mony wholly into his hands: who answered that hee would gladly submit himselfe and all his unto the Kings pleasure, and thereupon desired the Knights of the Temple (in his be∣halfe) to present all the Keyes unto the King to doe his pleasure with the goods which hee had committed unto them. Then the King commanded the money to bee faithfully told, and laid up in his Treasure by Inventory, wherein was found (besides ready money) vessels of Gold, and Silver unpraiseable, and ma∣ny precious Stones, which would make all men wonder, if they knew the worth of them. This Temple was againe dedicated 1240. belike also newly re-edified then. These Templers at this time were in so great glory, that they entertained the Nobility, forraine Ambassadours, and the Prince himselfe very often,Mat. Paris. inso∣much that Mathew Paris cryeth out on them for their pride, who being at the first so poore, as they had but one horse to serve two of them, in token whereof they gave in their Seale, two men ri∣ding on one horse;Seale of the Tem∣plers. yet suddenly they waxed so insolent, that they disdained other orders, and sorted themselves with Noblemen. King Edward the first,30. Dun∣mow. in the yeere 1283. taking with him Robert Waleran and other, came to the Temple, where calling for the keeper of the Treasure∣house, as if he meant to see his Mothers Iewels, that were laid up there to bee safely kept, hee entred into the house, breaking the Coffers of certaine per∣sons, that had likewise brought their mony thither, and he tooke away from thence to the value of 1000. l. Many Parliaments and great Coun∣cels have been there kept,Parliament at the new Temple. as may ap∣peare by our Histories.
In the yeere 1308. all the Templers in England, as also in other parts of Chri∣stendome, were apprehended and com∣mitted to divers prisons. In 1310. a Provinciall Councell was holden at London against the Templers in England, upon heresie, and other Ar∣ticles whereof they were accused, but denyed all except one or two of them: Notwithstanding, they all did confesse, that they could not purge themselves fully, as faultlesse, and so they were con∣demned to perpetuall penance, in seve∣rall Monasteries, where they behaved themselves modestly. Philip,The order of Tem∣plers con∣demned. King of France, procured their over-throw through-out the whole world, and caused them to be condem∣ned by a generall Councell to his advan∣tage, Templers burned. as he thought, for hee beleeved to have had all their Lands in France, and therefore seizing the same in his hands, (as I have read) caused the Templers,Rob. Fabian. to the number of 54. or after Fabian, three∣score, to be burnt at Paris. Edward the second, in the yeere 1313. gave unto Aimer de la Valence Earle of Pembrooke,Patent. The Tem∣ple given to Aimer de Valence. the whole place and houses called the New Temple at London, with the ground called Fiquetes Croft, and all the Tenements and Rents, with the ap∣purtenances that belonged to the Tem∣plers in the City of London, and Suburbs thereof. After Aimer de Valence (saith some) Hugh Spencer (usurping the same) held it during his life. By whose death it fell againe to the hands of Edward the third, but in the meane time, to wit, 1234. by a Councell holden at Vienna, all the Lands of the Templers (lest the same should bee put to prophane uses) were given to the Knights Hospitalers of the order of Saint Iohn Baptist,Temple given to the Hospi∣talers of Saint Iohn of Ierusa∣lem. called S. Iohn of Ierusalem, which Knights had put the Turkes out of the Ile of Rhodes, and after wan upon the said Turke day∣ly for a long time. The said Edward the third therefore granted the same to the said Knights,Patent 2▪ E. 3. Clase, 18. E. 3. who possessed it, and in the eighteenth yeere of the said Kings reigne, were for∣ced to repaire the Bridge of the said Temple. These Knights had their head house for England by West Smithfield, and they, in the reigne of the same Edward the third, granted (for a certaine rent of tenne pounds by the yeere) the said Temple,The Tem∣ple gran∣to the Students of the Law and made an Inne of Court. with the appurtenances there∣unto adjoyning, to the Students of the Common Lawes of England: in whose possession the same hath ever sithence remained, and is now divided into two houses of severall Students, by the name of Innes of Court, to wit, the Inner Tem∣ple, and the Middle Temple; who kept two severall Halls. But they resort all to the said Temple Church: in the round Walke whereof (which is the West part, without the Quire) there remaine Monuments of Noblemen bu∣ried, Monu∣ments in the Tem∣ple. to the number of eleven: eight of them are Images of Armed Knights; five lying crosse-legged,Images of Knights buried crosse-leg∣ged, the cause why. as men vowed to the Holy Land, against the Infidels and unbeleeving Iewes; the other three straight-legged: The rest are coaped stones, all of gray Marble. The first of the crosse-legged, was W. Marshall the elder, Earle of Pembrooke, who dyed 1219. Wil. Marshall, his sonne, Earle of Pembrooke, was the second; he dyed 1231. And Gilbert Marshall, his brother Earle of Pembrooke, slaine in a Turna∣ment at Hartford, besides Ware, in the yeere 1241. After this, Robert Rose, otherwise called Fursan, being made a Templer in the yeere 1245. dyed, and was buried there. And these are all that I can re∣member to have read of. Sir Nicholas Hare, Master of the Rolles, was buried there, in the yeere 1557. In the yeere 1381. the Rebels of Es∣sex and of Kent destroyed and plucked downe the Houses and Lodgings of this Temple,Records of the Tem∣ple de∣stroyed. tooke out of the Church the Bookes and Records that were in Hut∣ches of the Apprentices of the Law, car∣ried them into the streets, and burnt them:Gate∣house of the Tem∣ple new builded. the house they spoyled and burnt for wrath that they bare Sir Robert Hales Lord Prior of Saint Iohns in Smithfield. But it was since againe at divers times repayred; namely the Gate-house of the Middle Temple, in the reigne of Hen∣ry the 8. by Sir Amias Paulet, Knight, upon occasion,Great Hall of the Temple new buil∣ded. as in my Annals I have shewed. The great Hall of the Middle Temple was newly builded in the yeere 1572. in the reigne of Queen Elizabeth.
This Temple Church had a Master,Order for Divine Service in the Tem∣ple. and foure stipendary Priests, with a Clerke: These, for the ministration of divine Service there, have stipends al∣lowed unto them, out of the possessions and Revenues of the late Hospitall and House of S. Iohns of Ierusalem in Eng∣land, as it had beene in the reigne of Ed∣ward the sixth. And thus much for the said New Temple, the farthest West part of this Ward, and also of this Citie, for the Liberties thereof: which Ward hath an Alderman, and his Deputies three. In S. Sepulchres Parish, common Councell, six; Constables, foure; Scavengers, 4. Wardmote Inquest, twelve. In S. Brid∣gets Parish, common Councellors, 8. Constables, eight; Scavengers, eight; Wardmote Inquest, twenty. In S. An∣drews, common Councell, two; Con∣stables, two; Scavengers, three, Ward∣mote Inquest, twelve. It is taxed to the Fifteene at 35. pounds, one shilling.
BRIDGE WARD WITHOVT, The 26. in number, consisting of the Borough of Southwarke, in the County of Surrey. HAving treated of Wards in London,Bridge Ward without. on the North side the Thames (in num∣ber five and twenty) I am now to crosse over the said River, into the Borough of Southwarke, which is also a Ward of London without the walls, on the South side thereof, as is Portsoken on the East, and Faringdon extra on the West. But before I come to the particular description of this Ward, it will not be impertinent to declare,Ex Humr. Dysn. when, and by what meanes the Borough of Southrk now called Bridge Ward without, was made one of the six and twenty Wards, belonging to the City of London; which was in this manner: After the dissolution of the Monaste∣ries, How the Borough of South∣warke be∣came at the first to be one of the 26. Wards of London. Abbeys, Priories, and other religi∣ous Houses, in this Realme of England: The Maior, Communalty, and Citi∣zens of this City of London taking into their considerations, how commodious and convenient it would be unto the Ci∣ty, to have the Borough of Southwarke annexed thereunto, and that the same Borough was in the Kings hands whol∣ly; they became humble suiters unto King Henry eighth, and to the Lords of his Highnesse Privie Councell, for the obtaining of the same. Which suit not being granted unto them; after the de∣cease of King Henry the eighth, they re∣newed their suit unto his Sonne and next successor, King Edward the sixth, and to the Lords of his Privie Councell for the obtaining of the same Borough. At the length, after long suit, and much labour, it pleased King Edward the sixth, by his Letters Patents, sealed with the great Seale of England, bearing date at Westminster the three and twen∣tieth day April, in the fourth yeere of his reigne, as well in consideration of the summe of sixe hundred forty seven pounds, two shillings, and a penny, of lawfull money of England, paid to his Highnesse use, by the Maior, Commu∣nalty, and Citizens of London, as for di∣vers other considerations him thereun∣to moving; To give and grant unto the said Maior and Communalty, and Ci∣tizens of London, divers Messuages, lands & Tenements, lying in or neere the said Borough of Southwark, in the said Letters Patents particularly expressed, which were sometimes the Lands of Charles, then late Duke of Suffolke, and of whom King Henry the eighth did buy and pur∣chase the same. But there was excepted out of the said Grant,The Mint of Coy∣nage in Southwarke. and reserved unto the said King Edward the sixth, his Heires and successors, all that his Capitall Messu∣age, or Mansion House, called South∣warke Place, late of the said Duke of Suf∣folke, and all Gardens and Land to the same adjoyning: And all that his Parke in Southwarke: And all that his Messu∣age, and all Edifices and ground, cal∣led the Antilope there. And the said King Edward the sixth did by his said Letters Patents give and grant to the said Maior, Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors, all that his Lordship and Mannor of South∣warke, with all and singular the Rights, Members, and appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late belonging to the late Monastery of Ber∣mondsey,
in the same County: And al∣so all that his Mannor and Borough of Southwarke, with all and singular the Rights, Members, and appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late parcell of the Possessions of the Archbishop and Archbishoprickes of Canturbury, Together with divers yeer∣ly rents, issuing out of divers Messuages or Tenements, in the said Letters Pa∣tents particularly expressed. And also the said King Edward the sixth, by his said Letters Patents, as well for the above-mentioned conside∣rations, as also for the summe of five hundred Markes, paid to his use, by the said Maior, Communalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, did give and grant to the said Maior, Communalty, and Citizens of the said City, and to their successors, in and through the whole Borough and Towne of South∣warke, and in and through the whole Parish of▪ Saint Saviors, Saint Olaves, and Saint George in Southwarke, and in and through the whole Parish, then late called Saint Thomas Hospitall, and then called the Kings Hospitall in Southwark,The kings Hospitall in South∣warke. and elsewhere whersoever, in the Town and Borough of Southwarke, and in Ken∣tish street and Blackman street, in the Pa∣rish of Newington, All Wayffes, Estrays, Treasure-trove, Goods and Chattels of Traytors, Felos, Fugitives, Out-lawes, Condemned persons, Convict persons, and Felons defamed, and of such as bee put in Exigent of Outlawry, Felons of themselves, and Deodands, and of such as refuse the Lawes of the Land: And all Goods disclaimed, found, or being within the said Borough, Towne, Pari∣shes and Precincts: And all mannor of Escheats and Forfeitures. And that the said Maior, Commu∣nalty, The pow∣er of the Maior, Commu∣nalty, and Citizens of London in South∣warke. and Citizens, by themselves, or their Deputy, or Officer or Officers, should have in the Towne, Borough, Parishes, and Precincts aforesaid, the Taste and Assize of Bread, Wine, Ale, and Beere, and of all other Victuals, and things whatsoever, sold in the same Towne. And whatsoever should or might appertaine to the Office of the Clarke of the Market of his Majesties House-hold. And the correction and punishment of all persons there selling Bread, Wine, Beere, and Ale, and o∣ther Victuals; and of others there inha∣biting, or using any Arts whatsoever. And all Forfeitures, Fines, and Amerci∣aments, to be forfeited to the King, or his Heires or Successors. And that they should have the execution of the Kings Writs, and of all other Writs, Com∣mandements, Precepts, Extracts, and Warrants, with the returnes thereof, by such their Minister or Deputy as they should chuse. And that they should have,The Faire to be kept in South∣warke. keepe, and hold there, every yeere, yeerely, one Faire, to endure for three dayes, viz. the seventh, eighth, and ninth daies of September. And that during the said three dayes, they should hold there by their Minister or Deputy, from day to day, from houre to houre, and from time to time, all Actions, Plaints, and Pleas of the Court of Pipowder, with al Summons, Attachments, Arrests, Issues, Fines, Redemptions, Commodities, and other Rights whatsoever, to the Court of Pipowder by any meanes be∣longing. And also, that they should have throughout the whole Precinct a∣foresaid, View of Franke-pledge, with all Sommons, Attachments, Arrests, Issues, Amerciaments, Fines, Redemp∣tions, Profits, Commodities, and other things, which thereof to the King, his Heires, or Successors, should apper∣taine. And also, that the said Maior, Com∣munalty, and Citizens, and their suc∣cessors, by themselves, or by their Offi∣cers or Deputies, may take and arrest in the Borough, Towne, Parish, and Pre∣cincts aforesaid,Felons in Southwarke commit∣ted to Newgate in London. all Theeves, Felons, and other Malefactors, and may carry them to the Gaole of Newgate. And that the said Maior, Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors, should for ever have in the said Borough, Town parishes, and Precincts, all such Liber∣ties, priviledges, Franchises, Dischar∣ges, and Customes, which the King or his Heires should have had, if the said Borough had remained in the Kings hands. And also he granted to the said Ma∣ior, Communalty, and Citizens of London, and to their successors, that they should for ever hold and keepe, all
manner of Pleas,Pleas, Actions, Plaints, and perso∣nall Suits. Actions, Plaints, and personall Suites, and all manner of cau∣ses, Matters, Contracts, and Demands whatsoever, happening in the Precincts aforesaid, before the Maior and Alder∣men of London, and before the Sheriffes of London, for the time being, or any of them, in the Guild hall and Hustings of the said City: and the like Actions, Bills, Plaints, Proces, Arrests, Iudge∣ments, Executions, and other things whatsoever, and the same dayes and times, and in such like maner, as the like Pleas happening in the said City, before the Maior, Aldermen and Sheriffes, or any of them, in the said Courts, or any of them, time out of minde, have been taken, holden, prosecuted, or executed. And that the Serjeants at Mace, and o∣ther Officers of London, using to serve Proces, might from thenceforth, for e∣ver, serve and execute all manner of Pro∣ces in the said Borough, Towne, Pari∣shes and Precincts, concerning such Pleas and executions of the same, as time out of mind hath been used in the City of London. And that the Inhabitants of the same Borough,Inhabi∣tants of the Bo∣rough to implead, and be im∣pleaded in London. Parishes, and Precincts, for Causes and Matters there growing, may implead or bee impleaded in the said City, in forme aforesaid, and in the said Courts. And that if the Iuries impa∣nelled, and so moved to try such Issues, shall not appeare before the said Maior and Aldermen, or Sheriffes, in the said Courts in London, they shall bee amer∣ced in like manner, and forfeit such Is∣sues, as Iuries in London, making default of appearance, have used to forfeit. And that the Issues so forfeited, shall bee to the use of the Maior, Communalty, and Citizens of London, and their successors for ever. And also, that the said Maior and Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors for ever, should have the Cognizance of all manner of Pleas, Plaints, and personall Actions, out of all the Kings Courts, before the King, or before any of his Iustices, for any thing happening in the said Borough, or Precincts,Issues ta∣ken upon Suits try∣ed before the Maior and Alder∣men. before the said Maior and Aldermen, and Sheriffs, or any of them, in the Courts of the said City. And that the Issues taken upon the said suits, shall be tryed in the said Courts, before the Maior and Aldermen and Sheriffes, by men of the said Borough, as Issues in London are tryed. And that the said Maior,Two Co∣roners for the Bo∣rough. Commu∣nalty, and Citizens, and their successors, should for ever chuse, according to the Law, every yeere, or as often as they should thinke meet, two Coroners in the said Borough: And that the said Coroners, and either of them so chosen, should in the Precincts aforesaid, have and use like authority, as any Coroners in England ought to have and execute: and that no other of the Kings Coroners should in any wise presume to execute any thing belonging to the Office of a Coroner,The Ma∣ior of Lon∣don Es∣cheatr in Southwarke and Clark of the Market there also. in the Precincts aforesaid. And that the Maior of London, for the time being, should be Escheator in the Precincts aforesaid, and have power to direct Precepts to the Sheriffe of the County of Surrey for the time being, and to do all other things, which to the Office of Escheator in any of the Coun∣ties of England appertaineth: and that no other Escheator shall enter there, or intermeddle with any thing belonging to the Office of Escheator: and that the Maior of London, for the time being, shall be the Kings Clarke of the Market within the Precincts aforesaid, and may doe all things there appertaining to the Office of Clarke of the Market, and that the Clarke of the Market of the Kings Household shall not there intermeddle with any thing. And that the said Maior, Commu∣nalty, and Citizens, and their succes∣sors for ever, should have, hold, use, and enjoy, in the Precincts aforesaid, as well all the Liberties and Franchises afore∣said, as the Toll, Tallage, Picage, and all other the said Kings Iurisdictions,Toll, Tal∣lage, Pi∣cage, &c. Franchises, and Priviledges, which any Archbishop of Canturbury, Charles D. of Suffolke, or any the M. Brother and Sisters of the then late Hospitall of St. Thomas in Southwarke, or any Abbot of the then late Monastery of S. Saviors of Bermondsey, neere Southwarke; or any Prior or Covent of the then late Priory of Saint Mary Overy, or any of them e∣ver had, then had, or ought to have had in the premises, in any of the places a∣foresaid; or which the said King Ed∣ward the sixth then lately held and en∣joyed,
or ought to have had & enjoy, & in as ample manner as King Henry the 8. had and enjoyed, or ought to have had, and enjoy the same: So that none of the Kings Sheriffes, or any other of his Of∣ficers should intermeddle in any thing in the said Borough and Precincts a∣foresaid. And the said King Edward the sixt did by his said Letters Patents further grant,The inha∣bitants to be within the gover∣nance and correcti∣on of the Maior, &c. that all the Inhabitants of the said Precincts should be within the or∣dinance, governance and correction of the Maior and Officers of London and their Deputies, as the Citizens and In∣habitants of London ought to be; by rea∣son of any Charter formerly granted by any of the said Kings Progenitors, to the Maior, Communalty and Citizens of London. And that the said Maior, Com∣munalty and Citizens, and their Succes∣sors for ever should haue, enjoy, and use such Lawes, Iurisdictions, Liberties, Franchises and Priviledges whatsoever in the Borough, and Precincts aforesaid, as fully and freely as they then used, or ought to have used and enjoyed the same in London, by vertue of any grant to them made by any of the said Kings Progenitors. And that the Maior of London for the time being, and the Recorder of London for the time being, after they have borne the Office of Maioraltie of London, should be Iustices of the Kings Peace in Southwarke, and the Precincts aforesaid, so long as they should stand Aldermen of the said Citty,Iustices of London in the like Office in Southwark. and should in the said Borough and Precincts aforesaid doe and execute all things which other Iu∣stices of the Peace might doe in the County of Surrey, according to the Lawes and Statutes of England. And also, that the said Maior, Com∣munaltie & Citizens, & their Successors should have every weeke, on Munday, Wednesday, Friday and Satterday in the said Borough and Towne of South∣warke, 3. Market & Markets in South∣warke. one Market or Markets there to bee kept, and all things to Markets ap∣pertaining: All which Mannor, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Liberties, Priviled∣ges, Franchises, and other the premises granted by the said Letters Patents, did extend to the cleere yeerely value of 35. li. 14. s. 4. d. And were granted to bee holden to the said Maior, Commu∣nalty and Citizens of London, and their Successors for ever, of the said King, his Heires and Successors, as of his Mannor of East Greenwitch, in the County of Kent, by Fealty onely in Free Socage (and not in Capite) for all manner of services and demands whatsoever. But there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant,Excepti∣ons and reservati∣ons to the King. to the said King Edward the sixt, his Heires and Succes∣sors, all his Rights, Iurisdictions, Li∣berties & Franchises whatsoever, with∣in the Walke, Circuit, and Precinct of his Capitall Messuage, Gardens, and Parke in Southwarke, and in all Gar∣dens, Curtilages, and Lands, to the said Mansion House, Gardens, and Parke belonging. Also, there was excepted and reser∣ved out of the said Graunt, the House, Messuage, or Lodging there, called the Kings Bench, and the Gardens to the same belonging, so long as it should be used as a Prison for Prisoners, as it was then used. Also, there was excepted and reser∣ved out of the said Graunt, the House, Messuage, or Lodging there, called the Marshalsey, and the Gardens to the same belonging, so long as it should be used as a Prison for Prisoners, as it was then used. Also it was provided, that the said Letters Patents should not be prejudi∣ciall to the Offices of the Great Master or Steward of the Kings Household, within the Borough and Precincts a∣foresaid, to be executed while the same Borough and Precincts should be with∣in the Verge: Nor to Ioh. Gates, Knight, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Pri∣vie Chamber, concerning any Lands, Tenements, Offices, Profits, Franchises, or Liberties to him granted during his life, by the said King Edward the sixth, or by his Father King Henry the eight. About the space of a moneth after the said Borough of Southwarke was so granted by King Edward the sixt to the Maior, Communaltie, and Citizens of London, and that they by force of the said Letters Patents stood charged with the Ordering, Survev, and Government
of the same Borough, and of al the Kings subjects inhabiting therein,The orde∣ring sur∣uey, and gouern∣ment of the Bo∣rough, &c. and repay∣ring thither: At a Court holden before Sir Rowland Hill, Knight, then Lord Maior of London, and the Aldermen of the same Citie, in the Guild-Hall of London, on Tuesday the eight and twen∣tieth of May, in the said fourth yeere of the raigne of King Edward the sixth, the said Towne or Borough was named and called the Ward of Bridge Ward with∣out. The Ward of Bridge Ward without; and Sir Iohn Ayliffe first Alder∣man thereof. And Sir Iohn Ayliffe, Knight, Ci∣tizen and Barber-Surgeon of London, was then also named, elected, and cho∣sen by the same Court, to be Alder∣man of the same Ward, albeit that be∣fore that time there neyther was any such Ward nor Alderman. And it was then also ordered, That the said Sir Iohn Ayliffe, by that name of Alderman of Bridge Ward without, and all other that from thenceforth should be Alderman of the same Ward, should have the Rule, Survey, and Go∣vernment, not onely of the Inhabitants of the said Towne & Borough of South∣warke, and other the Kings people re∣payring to the same, but also of all the Liberties, Franchises, and Priviledges within the said Towne and Borough, then formerly granted by the King and his Progenitors to the said Maior, Communaltie, and Citizens of Lon∣don. Sir Iohn Ayliffe sworne & admitted in the Ma∣ioralitie of Sir Row∣land Hill. And for the due execution of which Office, the said Sir Iohn Ayliffe was then presently sworne and admit∣ted. Not long after, videlicet, at a Court of Common Councell, holden in the Guild-Hall of London, on the last day of Iuly, in the said fourth yeere of the raigne of King Edward the sixth, and in the time of the Maioraltie of the said Sir Rowland Hill, it was enacted, That besides the then ancient accustomed number of five and twentie Aldermen, there should be one Alderman more elected, to have the Rule, Charge, and Governance of the said Borough and Towne. And that foure discreet persons, or more, being Freemen of London, and dwelling within the said Cittie, or the Borough of Southwarke, or in other the Liberties of the said Citie, sould from thenceforth, as often as the case should require, be from time to time nomi∣nated, appointed, and chosen by the In∣habitants of the said Borough for the time being, before the Lord Maior of London for the time being, sitting in the said Borough for that purpose, in such sort and order, as the Aldermen of Lon∣don were in those dayes commonly ele∣cted. And that the said Lord Maior for the time being should (at the next Court of Aldermen to be holden at the Guild-Hall of the said Citie, next after such election) present the names and sur∣names of all such persons as so should be named before him, and put in the said election.Election of an Al¦derman by Scrutiaie. And that the said Lord Maior & Aldermen for the time being, should of those foure persons, or mo, so presented, elect and chuse one, by way of Scrutinie, to be an Alderman of the said Citie, and to have the peculiar Or∣dering, Rule and Governance of the said Borough and Towne of Southwarke, and of the Inhabitants thereof, and of all o∣ther the Kings liege people, repayring to the same. And that the said Alderman so espe∣cially elect and chosen, and from time to time, as the cause sould require thenceforth, to be elect and chosen for the Survey and Government of the said Borough, and the Inhabitants and other remayning in and to the same, should alwayes be named and called the Alder∣man of Bridge Ward without,The Alder∣man of Bridge Ward without. and by none other Name, for or concerning that Office, or Roome, and should have the Cure and Charge of the good Ordering and Government of the said Borough and Towne of Southwarke, and of the Inhabitants and People of and in the same, and of none other Place within the said Citie, by reason or colour of the said Roome, as long as he should re∣maine and stand Alderman of the said Ward, but as the residue of the said Al∣dermen of the said Citie be commonly charged: And therein to doe and use himselfe, as other Aldermen within the Liberties of the said Citie were accu∣stomed and used to doe, in as much as the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme would permit and suffer. Yet neverthelesse it was prouided, & by the said Cōmon Councell further or∣dained and enacted, That the said Sir
Iohn Ayliffe, Knight, should then be Al∣derman of the said Ward: And that as well the same Sir Iohn Ayliffe, as also all and every person and persons, that thenceforth should fortune to be Alder∣man of the same Ward, should have and enjoy like prerogative, liberty, and benefit, to change and remove from the same Ward,The Al∣derman to change from that Ward, as occasion served. and to accept and take at his and their free will and pleasure any such other Ward or Wards within the said City, as it should fortune him, or them, or any of them, to be thenceforth duely elect and chosen unto by the In∣habitants of the same other VVard, or VVards, or any of them in like manner and forme, as the other Aldermen of the said City lawfully might, and com∣monly use to doe: Any thing in the said recited Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Neverthelesse, at a Court of Alder∣men holden on Tuesday, the second of September, in the said fourth yeere of the reigne of king Edward the sixth, and in the time of the Maioralty of the said Sir Rowland Hill, it was ordered, That the Aldermen of Bridge Ward without, for the time being,The Al∣derman of Bridge Ward with∣out to con∣tinue so for the space of 3▪ yeeres, without removing. should stand and re∣maine Alderman of the same VVard three whole yeeres next after his electi∣on, before hee should bee permitted to bee removed to the governance of any other VVard: Notwithstanding any former Law, Vsage, or Custome. But afterwards it seemeth, upon bet∣ter advice, that another order should be taken in the election of the Alderman of the same Ward: For at a Common Councell holden in the Guild-Hall in London, on the 16. day of Iune, in the fourth and fifth yeeres of King Philip and Queene Mary, and in the time of the Maioralty of Sir Thomas Curtis, Knight, the said former Act, made on the last day of Iuly, in the fourth yeere of King Edward the sixth, for so much thereof as did concerne the forme and order of the election of the Alderman of the said VVard of Bridge Ward with∣out, 4. Another order for electing the Alder∣man of Bridge Ward with∣out, in the time of K. Philip & Queen Mary. was utterly repealed. And then it was enacted, That from thenceforth the Alderman of the same Ward should alwaies, at the time of vacation, or lack of an Alderman thereof, be elected and chosen by the Lord Maior and Alder∣men of London, for the time being, at a full Court of Aldermen, by them to be holden in the Inner Chamber of the Guild-Hall of the same City in this manner, viz. That the Lord Maior and Aldermen should at their said full Court, amongst themselves, nominate foure discreet and meet Citizens, being Freemen of London, either resiant with∣in the said Borough, or in London, or the Liberties thereof, to be put in election of Alderman of that Ward. And of the said foure persons so nominated, the said Lord Maior and Aldermen should by Scrutiny, according to their accusto∣med manner, elect one to bee Alder∣man of the same VVard: VVhich Al∣derman, so by them elected and sworne, should use and behave himselfe in all things, as by the residue of the former Act of Common Councell, made the last day of Iuly, in the fourth yeere of King Edward the sixth was ordained and appointed. Thus having declared, by what means and at what time the said Borough of Southwarke was made and named one of the sixe and twenty VVards, now belonging to the City of London; I in∣tend to proceed to the description of the severall particular places of the same VVard, and likewise of such Mo∣numents of Antiquity, as are to bee found therein. This Borough being in the County of Surrey, consisteth of divers streetes, waies, and winding lanes, all full of buildings inhabited: and first, to begin at the West part thereof, over-against the West Suburbe of the City. On the banke of the River Thames, there is now a continuall building of Thenements, about halfe a mile in length to the Bridge. Then South a continuall street called Long Southwarke, builded on both sides with divers Lanes and Allies up to St. Georges Church, and beyond it thorow Blackman street, towards Newtowne (or Newington) the liberties of which Bo∣rough extend almost to the Parish Church of Newtowne aforesaid, distant one mile from London bridge, and also Southwest a continuall building, almost to Lambith, more than one mile from the said Bridge.
Then from the Bridge along by the Thames Eastward,S. Olaves street. is S. Olaves street, ha∣ving continuall building on both the sides, with lanes and Alleyes up to Bat∣tle bridge, to Horse-downe, and towards Rother-hith: also some good halfe mile in length from London bridge. So that I account the whole continu∣all buildings on the Banke of the said River, from the West towards the East, to be more than a large mile in length. Then have yee from the entring to∣wards the said Horsedowne, one other continuall street, called Barmondes eye strees, which stretcheth South, likewise furnished with buildings on both sides, almost halfe a mile in length, up to the late dissolved Monastery of S. Saviour, called Bermondsey. And from thence is one long lane (so called of the length) turning West to Saint Georges Church afore-named. Out of the which lane mentioned Long lane, breaketh one other street towards the South and by East, and this is called Kentish street, for that it is the way lea∣ding into that Country: and so have you the bounds of this Borough. The Antiquities most notable in this Borough are these: first, for Ecclesiasti∣call, there was Bermondsey, an Abbey of blacke Monkes, Saint Mary Overies, a Priory of Canons Regular, Saint Thomas a Colledge or Hospitall for the poore, and the Loke, a Lazar-house in Kent street. Parish Churches there have been sixe, whereof five doe remaine, (viz.) Saint Mary Magdalen, in the Priory of Saint Mary Overy: now the same Saint Mary Overy is the Parish Church for the said Mary Magdalen, and for Saint Margaret on the Hill, and is called St. Saviour. Saint Margaret on the Hill being put downe, is now a Court for Iustice. S. Thomas in the Hospitall serveth for a Parish Church, as afore, Saint George a Parish Church, as before it did: So doth Saint Olave, and Saint Ma∣ry Magdalen, by the Abby of Bermond∣sey. There be also these five Prisons, or Gaoles. The Clinke, on the Banke. The Compter, in the late Parish▪ Church of S. Margaret. The Marshalsey. The Kings Bench. And the White Lion; all in Long South∣warke. Houses most notable, be these. The Bishop of Winchesters House. The Bishop of Rochesters House. The Duke of Suffolkes. House, or Southwarke Place. The Tabard, an Hostery, or Inne. The Abbot of Hyde his House. The Prior of Lewis his House, The Abbot of S. Augustine his house. The Bridge-house. The Abbot of Battaile his House. Battaile-Bridge. The Stewes on the Banke of Thames. And the Beare-Gardens there. Now to returne to the West Banke:The Beare Gardens▪ there were two Beare-Gardens, the Old and New, Places wherein were kept Beares, Buls, and other Beasts, to be bay∣ted: As also Mastives, in severall kenels, nourished to baite them. These Beares, and other Beasts are there baited in plots of ground, scaffolded about, for the beholders to stand safe. Next, on this Banke,Liber Ma∣nuscript. was sometime the Bordello or Stewes, a place so called, of certaine Stew-houses priviledged there,The Stewes on the Bank-side. for the repaire of incontinent men to the like women; of the which Priviledge I have read thus: In a Parliament holden at Westmin∣ster, the eighth of Henry the second, it was ordained by the Commons, and confir∣med by the King and Lords, That di∣vers Constitutions for ever should be kept within that Lordship, or Franchise, accor∣ding to the old Customes, that had beene there used time time of minde: Amongst the which, these following were some: vi∣delicet. That no Stew-holder, or his wife, should let or stay any single woman to goe and come freely at all times, when they li∣sted. No Stew-holder to keepe any woman to boord, but she to boord abroad at her plea∣sure. To take no more for the womans chamber in the Weeke, than foureteene pence.
Not to keepe open his doores upon the Ho∣ly-dayes. Not to keepe any single woman in his house on the Holy-dayes, but the Bay∣liffe to see them voyded out of the Lord∣ship. No single woman to bee kept against her will, that would leave her sinne. No Stew-holder receive any woman of Religion, or any mans wife. No single woman to take mony to lye with any man, except she lye with him all night, till the morrow. No man to be drawne or enticed into any Stew-house. The Constables, Bayliffe, and others, e∣very weeke to search every Stew-house. No Stew-holder to keepe any woman, that hath the perillous infirmity of Burning; nor to sell Bread, Ale, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Coale, or any Victuals, &c. These and many more Orders were to bee observed, upon great paine and punishment. I have also seene divers Patents of confirmation,Li. S. Mary Eborum. namely, one dated 1345. the ninetenth of Edward the third.English people disdayned to bee Bawds. Also I finde, that in the fourth of Richard the second, these Stew-houses belonging to William Walworth, then Maior of London, were farmed by Froes of Flaunders,Froes of Flaunders were wo∣men for that pur∣pose. and spoyled by Walter Tylar, and other Re∣bels of Kent: notwithstanding, I finde that ordinances for the same place, and houses, were againe confirmed in the reigne of Henry the sixth, and to be con∣tinued as before.Rob. Fabian. Also Robert Fabian writeth, that in the yeere 1506. the one and twentieth of Henry the seventh,Stew hou∣ses put downe by Henry the 7. for a time. the said Stew-houses in Southwarke were (for a season) inhabited, and the doores closed up: but it was not long (saith he) ere the houses there were set open a∣gaine, so many as were permitted, for (as it was said) whereas before were eighteen houses, from thenceforth were appointed to be used but twelve onely. These allowed Stew-houses had signes on their fronts, towards the Thames, not hanged out, but painted on the wals as a Boares head,Signes on the Stew-houses. the Crosse keyes, the Gunne, the Castle, the Crane, the Car∣dinals Hat, the Bell, the Swanne, &c. I have heard ancient men of good cre∣dit report, that these single women were forbidden the rights of the Church,Single women forbidden rights of the Church. so long as they continued that sinnefull life, and were excluded from Christian buriall, if they were not re∣conciled before their death. And ther∣fore there was a plot of ground, called the Single womens Churchyard, appointed for them, far from the Parish Church. In the yeere of Christ, a thousand five hundred forty sixe,Stew-hou∣ses put downe. the seven and thir∣tieth of Henry the eighth, this row of Stewes in Southwarke was put downe by the Kings commandement, which was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet no more to be priviledged, and used as a common Brothel; but the inhabitants of the same to keepe good and honest rule, as in other places of this Realm, &c. Then next is the Clinke, a Gaole or Prison for the Trespassers in those parts; namely, in old time for such as should brabble, fray, or breake the peace on the said Banke, or in the Brothell hou∣ses, they were by the inhabitants there∣about apprehended and committed to this Gaole, where they were straightly imprisoned. Next is the Bishop of Winchesters house,Winchester house. or lodging when he commeth to this City: which house was first buil∣ded by William Gifford, Bishop of Win∣chester, about the yeere one thousand, one hundred and seven, the seventh of Henry the first, upon a plot of ground pertaining to the Prior of Bermondsey, as appeareth by a Writ directed unto the Barons of the Exchequer, in the yeere 1366. the one and fortieth of Ed∣ward the third (the Bishops Sea being void) for 8. pounds due to the Monkes of Bermondsey, for the Bishop of Winche∣sters lodging in Southwarke. This is a very faire house wel repayred, and hath a large Wharfe, and a landing place cal∣led the Bishop of Winchesters staires. Adjoyning to this on the South side thereof,Rochester house. is the Bishop of Rochesters Inne or lodging, by whom first erected I doe not now remember me to have read, but well I wot, the same of long time hath not beene frequented by any Bi∣shop, and lyeth ruinous for lacke of re∣parations. The Abbot of Naverley had a house there. East from the Bishop of Winchesters house, directly over-against it standeth
a faire Church, called S. Mary over the Rie,Saint Ma∣ry Overies a Priory, and now a Parish Church. or Overy, that is, over the water. This Church, or some other in place thereof, was (of old time long before the Conquest) an house of Sisters, founded by a Maiden, named Mary, unto the which house and Sisters she left (as was left to her by her Parents) the over-sight and profits of a Crosse Ferrie, or traverse Ferry over the Thames, there kept be∣fore that any Bridge was builded. This house of Sisters was after by Swithen a noble Lady, converted unto a Colledge of Priests, who in place of the Ferrie, builded a Bridge of Timber, and from time to time kept the same in good re∣parations; but lastly the same Bridge was builded of Stone, and then in the yeere 1106. was this Church againe founded for Canons Regular, by William Pont de le Arch, and William Dauncy, Knights Normans. William Gifford, Bishop of Winchester, was a good Benefactor also,Lib. Rufen. for hee (as some have noted) builded the body of that Church,Liber Ber∣mondsey. in the yeere one thou∣sand, one hundred and sixe, the seventh of Henry the first. The Canons first entred the said Church, then Algodus was the first Prior. King Henry the first, by his Charter gave them the Church of Saint Marga∣ret in Southwarke. King Stephen confirmeth the gift of King Henry, and also gave the Stone House, which was William de Ponte le Arche, by Downgate. This Priory was burned about the yeere 1207. wherefore the Canons did found an Hospitall neere unto their Pri∣ory, where they celebrated untill the Priory was repayred: which Hospi∣tall was after (by consent of Peter de la Roch, Bishop of Winchester) removed into the land of Anicins, Archdeacon of Sur∣rey, in the yeere 1228. a place where the water was more plentifull, and the ayre more wholsome,S. Thomas Hospitall. and was dedica∣ted to S. Thomas. This Peter de Rupibus, or de la Roch, founded a large Chappell of Saint Ma∣ry Magdalen,Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen. in the said Church of St. Mary Overy, which chappell was after∣ward appointed to be the Parish Church for the inhabitants neere adjoyning. This Church was again newly builded in the reigne of Richard the second and King Henry the fourth. Iohn Gower, Esquire, a famous Poet, was then an especialll Benefactor to that worke,Iohn Gower was no Knight, neither had he a∣ny Gar∣land of lvie and Roses, but a Chaplet of foure Roses on∣ly. and was there buried on the North side of the said Church, in the Chappell of Saint Iohn, where he foun∣ded a Chantry, hee lyeth under a Tombe of Stone, with his Image also of Stone over him. The haire of his head aburne, long to his shoulders, but curling up, and a small forked beard; on his head a Chaplet, like a coronet of foure Roses, an habite of Purple, da∣masked downe to his seet, a Collar of Esses of gold about his necke, under his feet the likenesse of three Bookes, which hee compiled. The first, named Speculum Meditantis, written in French: The second, Vox Clamantis, penned in Latine: The third, Confessi Amantis, written in English, and this last is prin∣ted. Vox Clamantis, with his Cronica Tripartita, and other both in Latine and French, never printed, I have and doe poffesse, but Speculum Meditantis, I ne∣ver saw, though heard thereof to bee in Kent; Beside on the wall where he ly∣eth, there was painted 3. Virgins crow∣ned, one of the which was named Cha∣rity, holding this divice: En toy qui es Fitz de Dieu le Pere, Savue soit, qui gist sours cest Pierre. The second writing Mercy, with this device. O bone lesu fait ta mercy, Al'ame, dont le corps gift icy. The third writing Pitty, with this de∣vice. Pour ta pite Iesu regar'de, Et met cest a me en savue garde. His Armes, in a Field Argent, on a Cheveron Azure, three Leopards heads Gold, their tongues Gules, two Angels Supporters; on the Crest a Talbot. His Epitaph, Armigeri Scutum nihil a modo fert sibi tutum, Reddidit immolutum morti generale tributum, Spiritus exutum se gaudeat esse solutum,
Est ubi virtutum Regnum siue labe statutum. The roofe of the middle waste Ile sell downe in the yeere 1469. This Priory was surrendered to Henry the eighth, the one and thirtieth of his reigne, the seven and twentieth of October, the yeere of Christ 1539. valued at sixe hundred, twenty foure pounds, six shil∣lings, sixe pence, by the yeere. About Christmas next following, the Church of the said Priory was pur∣chased of the King by the inhabitants of the Borough.Priory of S. Mary Overy made a Parish Church. Doctor Stephen Gar∣dener, Bishop of Winchester, putting to his helping hand, they made thereof a Parish Church for the Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen, on the South side of the said Quire, out of Saint Marga∣ret on the hill, which were made one Parish of S. Saviour. There be Monuments in this Church of Robert Liliard, or Hilliard, Esquire. Margaret, Daughter to the Lady Audley, wife to Sir Thomas Audley. William Grevill, Esquire, and Marga∣ret his wife, one of the heires of William Spershut, Esquire. Dame Katharine, wife to Iohn Stoke, Alderman. Robert Merfin, Esquire. William Vndall, Esquire. Lord Ospay Ferar. Sir George Brewes, Knight. Iohn Browne. Lady Brandon, Wife to Sir Thomas Brandon. William Lord Scales. William Earle Warren. Dame Maude, wife to Sir Iohn Peach. Lewknor. Dame Margaret Elrington, one of the heires of Sir Thomas Elrington. Iohn Bowden Esquire. Robert Saint Magil. Iohn Standhurst. Iohn Gower. Iohn Duncell, Merchant-Taylor, 1516. Iohn Sturton, Esquire. Robert Rouse. Thomas Tong, first Norroy, and after Clarenciaulx, King of Armes. William Wickham, translated from the Sea of Lincolne, to the Bishopricke of Winchester, in the moneth of March, 1595. deceased the 11. day of Iune next following and was buried here. Thomas Cure, Esquire, Sadler to King Edward the sixth, Queene Mary and Queene Elizabeth, deceased the 24. day of May, 1598. Hic jacet Ioannes Gower,A very faire Tombe in the North Il of the Church. Armiger, An∣glorum Poeta celeberrimus, ac huic sa∣cro Aedificio benefactor insignis, vixit temporibus Ed. 3. & Rich. 3. Noviter constructum impensis Parochiae, An. Dom. 1615. Epicsion Thomae Cure, Southwarchien∣sis Armigeri. Elizabetha tibi Princeps servivit Equorum A sellis Curus,A faire Tombe in the North wall of the Quire. quem lapis iste regit. Servivit Edvardo Regi, Mariaeque Sorori, Principibus magna est laus placuisse tribus. Convixit cunctis charus Respublica Curae Semper erat Curo, commoda plebis erant: Dum vixit tribui senibus curavit alendis, Nummorum in sumptus annua dona domos. Obiit 24. die Maii, An. Dom. 1588. An Epitaph upon John Trehearne, Gen∣tleman Porter to King James the first. Had Kings a power to lend their Subjects breath,A very Monumēt close by the other. rehearne, thou shouldst not be cast downe by death: Thy Royall Master still would keepe thee then; But length of dayes are beyond reach of men. Nor wealth, nor strength, nor great mens love can ease The wound Deaths Arrowes make, for thou hast these. In thy Kings Court good place to thee is given: Whence thou shalt goe to the Kings Court of Heaven.
Peter Humble,A very faire Tombe in the chan∣cell. Gentleman, dedicates this Monument to the pious memory of Ri∣chard Humble, Alderman of London, and Margaret his first wife, daughter to Iohn Pierson of Nathing, in the County of Essex, Gentleman. By whom he had issue two sonnes, Iohn, who died young, and the above-named Peter, now living. Also foure daughter, Katha∣rine, Weltham, Margaret, and Eliza∣beth, who survived the other three, and was interred the same day with her Fa∣ther, being the 30. of April 1616. Ri∣chard left Isabel his second wife, wi∣dow, who was the daughter of Robert Kitchinman, of Hemsley, in the Coun∣ty of Yorke, Gentleman, bequeathing to the poore of this Parish five pounds, foure shillings yeerly for ever, out of a Tene∣ment adjoyning to the Southside of the three Crownes gate in Southwarke. Gulielmus Wickham,A very faire stone by the Commu∣nion ta∣ble. translat. à sede Lincoln. & Mense Martii, 1595. ex∣isten Episcopus Winton. Obiit 11. Iunii, prox. sequent. Reliquit uxorem laudatiff. quae sepelit in Awkenbery, Com. Hunt. Doctrina Antistes praestans & moribus aequis, Eloquio & pietate gravis, mensaque manuque. Non parcus, justi neglectus honore sepulchri, Hic jacet. O seculum insipiens, verum aequior illi, Dum moritur, Deus Aligeros dat cernere, missos, Qui migrantem animam Coeli ad sublimina ferrent. F. M. posuit 10. Iunii, Anno Domini 1600. The Monument of Bishop Andrewes is in a Chappell at the East end of the Church, and his body lyeth within the Monument. Lector, Si Christianus es, siste: Morae pretium erit, Non nescire te, qui vir hîc situs sit: Ejusdem tecum Catholicae Ecclesiae membru, Sub eadem felicis Resurrectionis spe, Eandem D. Iesu praestolans Epiphaniam, Sacratiss. Antistes Lancelotus Andrews, Londini oriundus, educatus Cantabrigiae, Aulae Pembroch. Alumnor. Socior. Praefector. Vnus, & nemini secundus: Linguarum, Artium, Scientiarum, Humanorum, Divinorum, Omnium Infinitus Thesaurus, Stupendum Oraculū: Orthodoxae Christi Ecclesiae, Dictis, scriptis, precibus, Exemplo Incomparabile propugnaculum: Reginae Elizabethae à sacris, D. Pauli London. Residentiarius, D. Petri Westmonast. Decanus: Episcopus Cicestrensis, Eliensis, Wintoniensis, Regique Iacobo tum ab Eleemosynis, Tum ab utriusque Regni Consiliis, Decanus denique Secelli Regii: Idem ex Indefessa opera in studiis, Summa sapientia in rebus, Assidua pietate in Deum, Profusa largitate in Egenos, Rara amoenitate in suos, Spectata probitate in omnes, Aeternum admirandus. Annorum pariter & publicae famae satur, Sed bonorū passim omnium cum luctu denatus, Coelebs hinc migravit ad aureolam coelestem, Anno Regis Caroli 11o. Aetatis S. LXXIo. Christi MDCXXVIo. Tantum est (Lector) quod te moerentes posteri Nunc volebant, atque vt voto tuo valeas, dicto Sit Deo gloria. There is a Monument of Iohn Bin∣gham, Esquire, Sadler to Queene Eliza∣beth and King Iames. Who was a wor∣thy benefactor to the Parish, and to the Free-Schoole there: who departed this life in the yeere of our Lord, 1625. There is a Monument for VVilliam Emerson,This Mo∣nument standeth in the South Ile. who departed this life the 27. of Iune, An. Dom. 1575. in the yeere of his age 92. Arvum hoc Sepulchrale. Exuviarum opt. matris Iocosae dominae Clerke. Sui ipsius lectissimaeque uxoris consitioni destinatum, Gulielmus Augu∣stinus Armiger vivus sacravit.
Anna Conjux charissima primo. inseritur. Quae post decimū partum (An MDCXXIII. Ian. XXI. Marito, ac liberis quinque su∣perstitibus) Tricenaria valedicens: In restorescendi dic & spem; Hac terra tegitur. Sequimur caeteri: Sati corruptibiles, Suscitandi incorruptibiles. The Monument with this inscripti∣on standeth on the South side of the Quire. Monumentum viri justi. In memory of Iohn Symons, Citizen and White-Baker of London; who departed this life the 10. of August, in the yeere of our Lord 1625. and was a good Bene∣factor unto this Parish: who gave unto the poore the summe of eight pounds Per Annum for ever, to be distributed on the Feast day of St. Thomas before Christ∣mas. And unto Saint Georges Parish in Southwarke the summe of ten pounds per Annum, for ever. And unto the Parish of Saint Mary Newington in Surrey, the summe of five pounds per Annum, for ever. These summes to come unto the said Parish, after the de∣cease of his father Samuel Symons, who yet liveth, in the yeere 1631. The Monument standeth in the South side of the Church, with this Epitaph: His flesh interr'd here once contain'd a spirit, Who (by Gods mercy and his Saviours merit) Departed in that constant hope of trust, To reigne eternally amongst the just: To live and dye well was his whole endeavor, And in (assurance) dyed to live for ever. In the South side of the Church by the Quire there standeth the Monu∣ment of William Austin, Esquire, very faire and beautifull; the invention thus: Over the head of the Angell is a Sunne, and in it written Sol Iustitiae. There standeth an Angell upon a Rocke, with a Sickle in the left hand, and the right hand erected towards heaven, with these words written on the Rocke: Petra erat Christus; and un∣der the Rocke is a field of ripe wheate, and in it written: Si non moriatur, non reviviscit. And under that these words: Nos sevit, fovit, lavit, cogit, renovabit. Vpon the right hand of this Angell are written these words: Vos estis Dei. And on the left this: Agricultura. On each side of this Angell sitteth two other Angels, leaning on their armes; the one with a Forke, and un∣der written Messores. The other with a Rack, and under written: Congregabunt. Vnder all this is the forme of a win∣nowing Fanne, and words written in it. The Lady Clarke, mother to Master William Austin, gave a very faire Com∣munion Table railed about, where 60. may kneele to receive the Sacrament, with a faire Carpet for it, and the railes hung about with the same embroide∣red. Master William Austin gave a faire Silver Chalice, and a Dish for the Bread, to the value of almost forty pounds. And his wife that now is, who was the Relict of Iohn Bingham, Esquire, gave two very faire Silver Flagons of the like value. Ex Registro Curiae Praerogativae Cant. extracto.16. Septem. 1619. Master Sampsons Will. Item, I give and bequeath these An∣nuities ensuing to be issuing out of cer∣taine Tenements of mine, viz. twenty shillings yeerly for ever to the Master and Society of Peter house in Cam∣bridge, towards the maintenance of the Library there: and twenty shillings yeerly for ever to the Church-wardens of Saint Olaves in Southwarke, for the use of the poore of the Parish. And ten shilligs yeerly for ever to the Church-wardens of the Parish of St. Saviours, for the poore in the precinct of old Pa∣rish Garden, Master Smith hath given unto the said Parish of S. Saviours the summe
of twenty eight pounds per Annum, for ever unto the poore of this Parish. Master Randall Carter, Citizen and Tallow Chandler of London, hath given seven pounds per Annum, for ever unto a poore Scholar that shall bee elected out of the Free Schoole to either of the Vniversities; and this seven pounds he is to enjoy for sixe yeeres, and his time expired to another: and so forward. Master Edward Hulit, Gentleman, hath given forty pounds per Annum, to the poore of the same Parish for ever, to bee received out of certaine Tene∣ments, situate in the Borough of South∣warke. Hugh Brooker, Esquire, hath given unto the Free Schoole the summe of five pounds per Annum, for ever. And likewise unto the poore of the same Pa∣rish five pounds per Annum, for ever: and lyeth buried in Saint Saviours Church in the North Ile by the Quire. Thomas Marshall gave an hundred pounds for ever to the Parish, for to clothe sixe poore boyes every Christ∣masse, who dyed in the yeere 1625. Now passing through Saint Mary Overies Close (in possession of the Lord Mountacute) and Pepper Alley,S. Mary Overies Close. into Long Southwarke,Pepper Al∣ley. on the right hand thereof, the Market hill, where the Leather is fold, there stood the late na∣med Parish Church of Saint Margaret,S. Margaret on the hill made a Court of Iustice. given to Saint Mary Overies by Henry the first, put downe and joyned with the Parish Church of Saint Mary Mag∣dalen, and united to the late dissolved Priory Church of S. Mary Overy. A part of this Parish Church of St. Margaret is now a Court, wherein the Assises and Sessions bee kept,Court of Admiral∣tie. and the Court of Admiralty is also there kept. One other part of the same Church is now a Prison,Compter in South∣warke. called the Compter in Southwarke, &c. Farther up on that side, almost di∣rectly over-against St. Georges Church, was sometime a large and most sump∣tuous house, builded by Charles Bran∣don, late Duke of Suffolke, in the reigne of Henry the eighth, which was called Suffolke house;Suffolke house, a Mint in Southwark. but comming afterwards into the Kings hands, the same was called Southwarke Place, and a Mint of Coynage was there kept for the King. To this place came King Edward the sixth, in the second of his reigne, from Hampton Court, and dined in it. He at that time made Iohn Yorke, one of the Sheriffes of London, Knight, and then rode through the City to Westminster. Queene Mary gave this house to Ni∣cholas Heth, Archbishop of Yorke, and to his successors for ever, to bee their Inne or lodging for their repaire to Lon∣don, in recompence of York house, neere to Westminster, which King Henry her father had taken from Cardinall Wool∣sey, and from the Sea of Yorke. Archbishop Heth sold the same house to a Merchant, or to Merchants, that pulled it downe, sold the Lead, Stone, Iron, &c. and in place thereof builded many small Cottages of great rents, to the increasing of beggars in that Bo∣rough. The Archbishop bought Nor∣wich House, or Suffolke Place, neere unto Charing-Crosse, because it was neere un∣to the Court, and left it to his succs∣sors. Now on the South side, to returne backe again towards the Bridge. Over-against this Suffolke Place, is the Parish Church of Saint George,Parish Church of S. George. sometime per∣taining to the Priory of Bermondsey, by the gift of Thomas Arderne, and Thomas his son, in the yeere 1122. There lye buried in this Church Wil∣liam Kirton, Esquire, and his wives, 1464. Loe,A faire Monumēt in the South wal of the Chancell. Master William Evans he whose body lieth here, Bequeathed hath by his last will, for ever by the yeere Ten pounds, eight shillings to the poore, which is a blessed stay, And must be given them in bread, on every Sabbath day. One halfe to Crekederus poore, his native soile so deare: The other moity to the poore of this our Parish here. See now all ye that love the poore, how God did guide his wayes, Ten score and eight are serv'd with bread in two and fifty daies,
More than many would have done, to yeelded any share. Praise God, ye poore, who gave to him so provident a care. He was free of the right Worship∣full Company of the Merchant-Taylors, and deceased the nine and twentieth of Iuly 1590. in the two and thirtieth yeer of the most prosperous reigne of our Soveraigne Lady Queene Eliza∣beth. Aetatis 67. Behold,A faire grave∣stone un∣der the Commu∣nion ta∣ble. Iames Savage graciously hath done a godly deed To the poore of this Parish, for to relieve their need, Five pounds a yeere for evermore, by will he hath bequeath'd, Which must out of the Angell rents, quarterly be receiv'd, By the Church-wardens of this Church, whom he hath put in trust, As Fathers in the poores behalfe, to be upright and just. Which men I doubt not but our God, who seeth all things, shall finde True in dispersing of the same, according to his minde. Ye poore, thanke Christ for Savage still, extoil Gods name with praise, That he to follow his good art, in time may many raise. Anno Domini 1588. Then is the White Lion,White Lion a Goale for Surrey. a Gaole so called, for that the same was a common Hostery for the receit of Travellers by that signe. This house was first used as a Gaole within this threescore yeeres last, since the which time the Prisoners were once removed thence to an house in Newtowne, where they remained for a short time, and were returned backe a∣gaine to the aforesaid White Lion, there to remaine, as the appointed Gaole for the County of Surrey. Next, is the Gaole or Prison of the Kings Bench,Kings Bench. but of what antiquity the same is, I know not. For I have read, that the Courts of the Kings Bench and Chancery, have oft times been removed from London to other places, and so hath likewise the other Gaoles that serve those Courts, as in the yeere 1304. Ed∣ward the first commanded the Courts of the Kings Bench and the Exchequer, which had remained seven yeeres at Yorke, to be removed to their old places at London. And in the yeere 1387. the eleventh of Richard the second, Robert Trisilian chiefe Iustice, came to the Ci∣tie of Coventry,H. Knighton▪ and there sate by the space of a moneth, as Iustice of the Kings Benche, and caused to be indited in that Court, about the number of 2000. per∣sons of that Country, &c. It seemeth therefore, that for that time, the Prison or Gaole of that Court was not far off. Also, in the yeere 1392. the sixteenth of the same Richard, the Archbishop of Yorke being Lord Chan∣cellor, for good will that he bare to his City, caused the Kings Bench and Chan∣cery to bee removed from London to Yorke, but ere long they were returned to London. Then is the Marshalsey another Gaole or Prison,Marshalsey in South∣warke. so called, as pertaining to the Marshals of England. Of what continu∣ance kept in Southwarke, I have not lear∣ned: but like it is, that the same hath been removeable, at the pleasure of the Marshals. For I finde, that in the yeere 1376. the 50. of Edward the third, Hen∣ry Percy (being Marshall) kept his pri∣soners in the City of London, where ha∣ving committed one Iohn Prendargest, of Norwich, contrary to the liberties of the City of London, the Citizens, by per∣swasion of the Lord Fitzwalter, their Standard-bearer, tooke armour, and ranne with great rage to the Marshals Inne, brake up the gates, brought out the prisoner, and conveighed him a∣way, minding to have burnt the stockes in the middest of their City; but they first sought for Sir Henry Percy, to have punished him, as I have noted in my Annals. More, about the Feast of Easter next following, Iohn Duke of Lancaster, ha∣ving caused all the whole Navie of Eng∣land to be gathered together at London, it chanced a certaine Esquire to kill one of the Mariners, which act the other Mariners taking in ill part, they brought their suit into the Kings Court of the Marshalsey, which then as chanced (saith mine Author) was kept in Southwarke: but when they perceived that Court to
be so favourable to the murderer; and further, that the Kings Warrant was also gotten for his pardon; they in great ury ranne to the house, wherein the murderer was imprisoned,Saylers brake up the Mar∣shalsey. brake into it, and brought forth the prisoner with his Gives on his legges, they thrust a knie to his heart, and sticked him, as if hee had beene a Hogge: after this they tyed a rope to his Gives, and drew him to the Gallowes, where when they had hanged him, as though they had done a great act, they caused the Trumpets to bee sounded before them to their ships, and there in great triumph they spent the rest of the day. Also the Rebels of Kent,Rebels of Kent brake up the Marshalsey. in the yeere 1381. brake downe the houses of the Marshalsey and Kings Bench in South∣warke, tooke from thence the prisoners, brake downe the house of Sir Iohn Im∣morth, then Marshall of the Marshalsey, and Kings Bench, &c. After this, in the yeere 1387. the eleventh of Richard the second, the morrow after Bartholomew day, the King kept a great Councell in the Castle of Nottingham, and the Mar∣shalsey of the King was then kept at Lughborow, by the space of sixe daies or more. In the yeere 1443. Sir Walter Many, was Marshall of the Marshalsey, the two and twentieth of Henry the sixth. William Brandon, Esquire, was Marshall in the eighth of Edward the fourth. In the yeere 1504. the priso∣ners of the Marshalsey then in Southwark brake out, and many of them being ta∣ken were executed, especially such as had beene committed for Felony or Treason. From thence towards London bridge, on the same side, bee many faire Innes, for receit of travellers, by these signes, the Spurre, Christopher, Bull, Queens head,The Ta∣bard in Southwark. Tabard, George, Hart, Kings head, &c. Amongst the which, the most ancient is the Tabard, so called of the signe, which as wee now terme it, is of a lacket or sleevelesse coate, whole before, open on both sides, with a square collar, winged at the shoulders: a state∣ly garment, of old time commonly worne of Noblemen and others, both at home and abroad in the wars; but then (to wit, in the warres) their Armes em∣broidered, or otherwise depict upon them, that every man by his Coate of Armes might bee knowne from others: But now these Tabards are onely worne by the Heralds, and bee called their Coates of Armes in Service. For the Inne of the Tabard,Geffery Chaucer. Geffrey Chaucer, Esquire, the most famous Poet of Eng∣land, in commendation thereof, writeth thus: It befell in that season, on a day, In Southwarke, at the Tabert, as I ay, Ready to wend on my Pilgrimage To Canturbury, with full devout courage; That night was comen into the Hostery Well nine and twenty in a company, Of sundry folke, by adventure yfall, In fellowship and Pilgrims were they all, That toward Canturbury woulden ride: The Stables and Chambers werenwide, And well we were eased at the best, &c. Within this Inne was also the Lodg∣ing of the Abbot of Hide (by the City of Winchester) a faire house for him and his Traine,The Ab∣bot of Hide his Lodging. when hee came to the City to Parliament, &c. And then Theeves lane,Hospitall of Saint Thomas. by St. Thomas Hospitall. The Hospitall of St. Thomas first founded by Richard, Prior of Ber∣mendsey, in the Sellerers ground, against the wall of the Monastery, in the yeere 1213. Hee named it the Almery, or House of Almes, for Converts and poore Children; for the which ground the Prior ordained, that the Amoner should pay ten shillings foure pence yeerly to the Sellerer at Michaelmas. But Peter de Rupibus,Li. S. Mary Overy. S. Thomas Hospitall the second time founded. Bishop of Win∣chester, in the yeere 1215. founded the same againe more fully for Canons Re∣gular, in place of the first Hospitall: He increased the rent thereof to three hun∣dred forty foure pounds by the yeere. Thus was this Hospitall holden of the Prior and Abbot of Bermondsey, till the yeere 1428. at which time a compositi∣on was made between Thomas Thetford, Abbot of Bermondsey, & Nicholas Buck∣land, Master of the said Hospitall of Saint Thomas, for all the Lands and Te∣nements, which were holden of the said Abbot and Covent in Southwarke, or elsewhere, for the old rent to bee paid unto the said Abbot. There bee the Monuments in this
Hospitall Church, of Sir Robert Cham∣ber, Knight, William Fines, Lord Say, Richard Chaucer, Iohn Gloucester, A∣dam Atwood, Iohn Ward, Michael Cam∣bridge, William West, Iohn Golding, Es∣quires. Iohn Benham, George Kirkes, Thomas Knighton, Thomas Baker, Gentlemen. Robert, Sonne to Sir Thomas Fleming. Agnes, wife to Sir Walter Dennis, Knight, Daughter and one of the heires of Sir Robert Danver, Iohn Evarey, Gen∣tlemen, &c. This Hospitall was by the Visitors, in the yeere 1538. valued at 266. l. 17. s. 6. d. and was surrendred to Henry the 8. in the 30. of his raigne. In the yeere 1552. the Citizens of London,The third foundati∣on of S. Thomas Hospitall by the Ci∣tizens of London. having purchased the voyd suppressed Hospitall of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, in the Month of Iuly, be∣began the reparations therof, for poore, impotent, lame, and diseased people, so that in the Moneth of November next following, the sicke and poore people were taken in.Gift of E. the sixt to the Mospi∣tall of S. Thomas in Southwarke. And in the yeere 1553. on the 10. of April, King Ed∣ward the sixt in the seventh of his raigne, gave to the Maior, Com∣munaltie, and Citizens of Lon∣don, to bee a workehouse for the poore and idle persons of the Citie, his house of Bridewell, and seven hundred Marks Lands of the Savoy Rents, which Hospitall he had suppressed, with all the beds, bedding, and other furniture belonging to the same, towards the maintenance of the said workehouse of Bridewell, and of this Hospitall of Saint Thomas in Southwarke. This gift, the King confirmed by his Charter, dated the 26. of June next following, and wil∣led it to be called the Kings Hospitall in Southwarke. The Church of this Hospitall, which of old time served for the Tenements neere adjoyning and pertaining to the said Hospitall, remaineth as a Parish Church. But now to come to S. Olaves street:S. Thomas Parish Church. on the banke of the river of Thames is the Parish Church of Saint Olave,S. Olaves street and Parish Church. a faire and meetely large Church, but a far larger Parish, especially of Aliens or strangers, and poore people; in which Church, there lyeth intombed Sir Iohn Burettur, Knight, 1466. Here th'earthly pare of William Benson lyes,A small Monumēt in the North wall of the Chancell. Whom Robert Benson had by Mary Lyle, The Heavenly mounted is above the Skies With wings of Faith, dissolv'd but for a while: The Linnen which he sold was nere so white, As is the Robe wherein the Soule is dight: Yes Thomas mourns in blacke, his onely Sonne, And Richard (of whole blood) his eldest Brother: But Londons reverend Bishop this hath done, Which was by Ravis borne of the same Mother: And William Lyle, first cousin to them all, Long live his Verse, penn'd this Memoriall. He departed in the 56. yeere of his age. An. Dom. 1603. Februar. 1579. To you that live possest,A graven Plate in the end of the Quire. great troubles do befall, Where we that sleep by death, do feele no harme at all: An honest life doth bring, a joyfull death at last, And life againe begins, when death is over-past. Death is the path to life, and way to endlesse wealth, The doore whereby we passe to everlasting health. These threescore yeere and six have passed here my life, And thirty seven yeeres thereof, thou Helen wert my wife, A Citizen also, and of the Cutlers free, And Warden of the same, so worthy thought to be. My loving wife farewell, God guide thee with his grace. Prepare thy selfe to come, and I will give thee place:
Acquaintance all farewell, and be assur'd of this, You shall be brought to dust, as Thomas Malledge is. Hic jacet corpus Ioannis Thomas,A plated Stone by the Com∣munion Table. nuper Ci∣vis & Groceri Civitatis London. Qui obiit die Mercurii, vid. 23. Augusti, Anno Domini 1564. Hic tres uxores habuit, vid. Christianam, Matildam, & Ioannam. Ex Christiana suscepit hos liberos, Rogerum, Ioannem, seu williel∣mum, Ioannem inter Richardum, Lam∣bertum, Henricum, Beatricem, & Pe∣trum. Ex Matilda, Aliciam, Agne∣tem, & Susannam. Ex Ioanna, Thomam, Martham, Margaretam, Annam, Ri∣chardum & Saram. Hic jacet corpus Richardi Philip,Another like Stone by it. Civis & Groceri London. Qui obiit 10. die Mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini 1412. & Isabella uxor ejus: Quae obiit, &c. Quorum, &c. Here resteth,The like Stone on the other side of the Table. in the mercie of God, the body of Iohn Eston, Esquire, late Iu∣stice of the Peace, and of Southwarke Steward, leaving behind him Mar∣garet his wife. Which Iohn died the eight day of May, Anno Domini 1565. How rich be they certaine, That Heavenly Kingdome gaine? No tongue can well expresse Their joyes, that be endlesse. Hic jacent Robertus Faireford,An anci∣ent Mar∣ble Tombe in the Chancell. quon∣dam Serviens excellentiss. Principis Henrici Reg. Angliae Quarti, ac nu∣per Coronator Curiae Marescalciae Hospitii Metuendissimorum Prin∣cip. Henrici Regis Angliae Quinti, & Henrici Sexti. Qui obiit 21. die Augusti, Anno Domini, 1456. &c. Et Agnet. ux.—Quae obiit— Over-against this Parish Church,Prior of Lewis his Inne. on the South side the street, was sometime one great House, builded of Stone, with arched Gates, which pertained to the Prior of Lewis in Sussex, and was his Lodging when hee came to London: It is now a common Hostery for Travel∣lers, and hath to Signe, the Walnut∣tree. Then East from the said Parish Church of Saint Olave, is a Key. In the yeere 1330. by the licence of Simon Swanlond, Maior of London, it was buil∣ded by Isabell, widow to Hamond Good∣cheape. And next thereunto was then a great house of stone and timber, belon∣ging to the Abbot of S. Augustin,Abbot of Augustines Inne. with∣out the wals of Canturbury, which was an ancient piece of work, & seemeth to be one of the first builded houses on that side the River,W. Thomas. over-against the City: It was called the Abbots Inne of Saint Augustine in Southwarke, and was some∣time holden of the Earles of Warren and Surrey, as appeareth by a deede, made 1281. which I have read, and may bee Englished thus: To all to whom this present writing shall come, Iohn, Earle Warren, sendeth gree∣ting. Know ye, that we have altogether re∣mised and quite claimed for us and our heires for ever, to Nicholas, Abbot of Saint Augustines of Canturbury, and the Covent of the same, and their successors, suit to our Court of Southwarke, which they owe unto us, for all that Messuage and houses thereon builded, and all their appur∣tenances, which they have of our fee in Southwarke, situate upon the Thames, betweene the Bridgehouse, and Church of Saint Olave. And the said Messuage with the buildings thereon builded, and all their appurtenances to them and their successors, we have granted in perpetuall Almes to hold of us, and our heires for the same: sa∣ving the service due to any other persons, if any such be, then to us. And for this remit and grant, the said Abbot and Covent have given unto us five shillings of rent yeerely in Southwarke, and have received us and our heires in all Benefices, which shall be in their Church for ever. This sute of Court one William Cras∣peis was bound to doe to the said Earle, for the said Messuage: and heretofore to acquit in all things, the Church of Saint Augustine, against the said Earle. This house of late time belonged to Sir Anthony Sentleger,Sentleger house. then to Warham Sentleger, &c. And now is called Sent∣leger house, but divided into sundry Tenements. Next is the Bridgehouse, so called, as being a store-house, for Stone, Timber,
or whatsouer pertaining to the buil∣ding or repairing of London bridge. This house seemeth to have taken beginning, with the first founding of the Bridge; either of stone or timber: it is a large plot of ground on the banke of the river Thames, containing divers large buildings, for stowage of things necessary, towards reparation of the said Bridge. There are also divers Garners,Garners for Come in the Bridge-house. for laying up of Wheate, and other Gray∣ners for service of the City, as need re∣quireth. Moreover, there bee certaine Ovens builded,Ovens in the Bridge-house. in number ten: of which sixe bee very large, the other foure be∣ing but halfe so bigge. These were purposely made to bake out the bread∣corne of the said Grayners, to the best advantage, for reliefe of the poore Citi∣zens, when neede should require. Sir I. Throstone, Knight, sometime an Im∣broderer, then Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffes, 1516. gave (by his Testa∣ment) towards the making of these Ovens two hundred pounds, which thing was performed by his Executors: Sir Iohn Munday, Goldsmith, then be∣ing Maior.A Brew-house buil¦ded in the Bridge-house. There was of late, for the enlarging of the said Bridge-house, taken in an old Brew-house, called Goldings, which was given to the Citie by George Monox, sometime Maior, and in place thereof, is now a faire brew-house builded, for service of the Citie with Beere. Next,Abbot of Battaile his Inne. was the Abbot of Battailes Inne, betwixt the Bridge-house and Bat∣taile bridge, likewise on the banke of the river of Thames; the walkes and gar∣dens thereunto appertaining, on the o∣ther side of the way, before the gate of the said house, was called the Maze: there is now an Inne, called the Flower de luce, for that the signe is three Flower de luces. Much other buildings of smal tenements are thereon builded reple∣nished with strangers and other, for the most part poore people. Then is Battaile bridge,Battaile bridge. so called of Battaile Abbey, for that it standeth on the ground, and over a water-course (flowing out of Thames) pertaining to that Abbey, & was therfore both buil∣ded and repaired by the Abbots of that house as being hard adjoyning to the Abbots lodging. Beyond this Bridge is Bermondsey streete,Bermond∣sey streete. turning South, in the South end whereof was sometime a Priory or Ab∣bey, of S. Sauioyr, called Bermonds eye in Southwarke, founded by Ailewin Childe, a Citizen of London, in the yeere 1081. Peter, Richard, Obstert, and Vmbalde, Monkes de Charitate, came to Bermond∣sey, the yeere 1089. and Peter was made first Prior there, by appointment of the Prior of the house, called Charitie in France: by which meanes this Priory of Bermondsey (being a Cell to that in France) was accounted a Priory of A∣liens. In the yeere 1094. deceased Ailewin Childe, founder of this house. Then Wil∣liam Rufus gave to the Monks, his Man∣nor of Bermondsey, with the appurtenan∣ces, and builded for them there a new great Church. Robert Blewit, Bishop of Lincolne (King Williams Chancelor) gave them the Mannor of Charleton, with the ap∣purtenances. Also Geffrey Martell, by the grant of Geffrey Magnaville, gave them the Land of Halingbury, and the tithe of Alferton, &c. More in the yeere Thomas of Arderne 1122. and Thomas his Son, gave to the Monkes of Bermonds Eye, the Church of Saint George in Southwarke. In the yeere 1165. King Henry the second confirmed to them the Hide or territorie of Southwarke,Hide of Southwark to the Monkes of Ber∣mondsey. and Laygham, Waddam, with the land of Coleman, &c. In the yeere one thousand, three hun∣dred, seventy one, the Priories of A∣liens (throughout England) being seized into the Kings hands, Richard Denten an Englishman, was made Prior of Bermondsey: to whom was committed the custody of the said Priory, by the letters patents of King Edward the third, saving to the King the advow∣sons of Churches. In the yeare 1380. the fourth of Ri∣chard the second, this Priory was made a Denizen (or free English) for the fine of 200. Markes, payd to the Kings Ha∣naper in the Chancery. In the yeare 1399. Attelborough, Prior of Bermond∣sey, was made the first Abbot of that house, by Pope Boniface the ninth, at the suit of King Richard the second.
In the yeere 1417. Thomas Thetford,Abbot of Bermond∣sey held a Plea a∣gainst the King, and prevailed. Abbot of Bermondsey, held a Plea in Chauncery against the King, for the Mannors of Preston, Bermondsey, and Stone, in the County of Summerset, in the which sute the Abbot prevailed, and recovered against the King. In the yeere 1539. this Abbey was valued to dispend by the yeere 474. l. 14. s. 4. d. ob. and was surrendred to Henry the eighth, the 31. of his reigne: the Abbey Church was then pulled downe by Sir Thomas Pope, Knight, and in place thereof, a goodly house builded of stone and timber, since pertaining to the Earles of Sussex. There are buried in that Church Loufstone Provost,Iohns Bae∣vw. Shrive or Domes∣man of London, 1115. Sir William Bowes, Knight, and Dame Elizabeth his wife. Sir Thomas Pikeworth, Knight. Dame Anne Audley. George, sonne to Iohn, Lord Audley. Iohn Winkefield; Esquire. Sir Nicholas Blonket, Knight. Dame Bridget, wife to Wil. Trussell. Holgrave, Baron of the Exchequer, &c. Next unto this Abbey Church stan∣deth a proper Church of Saint Mary Magdalen,Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen. builded by the Priors of Ber∣mondsey, serving for resort of the inha∣bitants (tenants to the Prior or Abbots neere adjoyning) there to have their di∣vine Service: this Church remaineth and serveth as afore, and is called a Pa∣rish Church. Then in Kentstreet is a Lazar house for Leprous people,The Loke a Lazar-house in Kent street. called the Loke in Southwarke: the foundation whereof I finde not. Now having touched divers principall parts of this Borough, I am to speak somewhat of government, and so to end. This Borough at a Subsidy to the King, yeeldeth about 1000. Markes, or 800. l. which is more than any one Ci∣ty in England payeth, except the City of London.Muster of men in Southwark. And also the Muster of men in this Borough doth like wise in number surpasse all other Cities, except London. And thus much for the Borough of Southwarke, one of the 26. Wards of London, which hath an Alderman, De∣puties three, and a Bayliffe. Common Councell none. Constables 16. Scaven∣gers 6. Wardmote Inquest 20. And is taxed to the Fifteene, at 17. pounds, 17. shillings, 8. pence.
THE SVBVRBS WITHOVT THE Wals of the said City, briefly touched. As also, without the Liberties, more at large described. HAving spoken of this Ci∣tie, the originall, and in∣crease by degrees: The wals, gates, ditch, castles, towers, bridges, schooles and houses of learning: Of the orders and customes, sports and pastimes: Of the honour of Citizens and worthinesse of men: And last of all, how the same City is divided into parts and Wards: And how the same are bounded. And what Monuments of Antiquity, or Ornaments of building be in every of them, as also in the Bo∣rough of Southwarke: I am next to speake briefly of the Suburbs, as well without the Gates and Wals, as with∣out the Liberties, and of the Monu∣ments in them. Concerning the estate of the Sub∣urbs of this City, in the reigne of Henry the second, Fitz-Stephen hath these words:Fitz-Ste∣phen. Vpwards on the West (saith hee) is the Kings Palace, which is an incompara∣ble building, rising with a Vawmure and Bulwarke, aloft upon the River, two miles from the Wall of the City, but yet conjoyned with a continuall Suburbe. On all sides, without the houses of the Sub∣urbs, are the Citizens Gardens and Or∣chards, planted with Trees, both large, sightly, and adjoyning together. On the North side are Pastures and plaine Me∣dowes, with Brookes running thorow them, turning Water-mils, with a pleasant noise. Not farre off is a great Fortest, a well woodded Chase, having good Covert for Harts, Buches, Does, Bores, and wilde Buls. The Corn fields are not of a hungry sandy mould; but as the fruitfull fields of Asia, yeelding plentifull increase, and fil∣ling the Barnes with Corne. There are neere London, on the North side, especiall Wels in the Suburbs, sweete, wholesome, and cleare.Liber Albo. Amongst which, Holywell, Clarkenwell, and Saint Clements well are most famous, and most frequented by Scholars and Youths of the City in Summer evenings, when they walke forth to take the ayre. Thus far out of Fitz-Stephen, for the Suburbs of that time. The second of Henry the third,Suburbe without the Po∣sterne by the Tower of London. the Forrest of Middlesex, and the Warren of Stanes were disaforested: since the which time, the Suburbs about London have bin also mightily increased with buildings: for first, to begin the East, by the Tower of London, is the Hospitall of S. Katharine, founded by Matilde, the Queen, wife to King Stephen, as is afore shewed in Portsoken Ward. From this Precinct of S. Katharine,Wapping in the East. to Wapping in the East, the usuall place of execution for hanging of Pirats and Sea-Rovers, at the low water marke, there to remaine till three tides had o∣verflowed them, was never a house stan∣ding within these 50. yeeres: but since (the Gallowes being after removed far∣ther off) a continuall streete, or filthy straight passage, with Alleyes of small Tenements or Cottages is builded, in∣habited by Saylors and Victuallers, a∣long by the River of Thames, almost to Radcliffe, a good mile from the Tower. The new Chappell in Wapping Ham∣bler, in the Parish of Whitechappell, was
builded in the yeere 1617. the charge being about 1600. l. was gathered some part of it of the severall Inhabi∣tants in the same Hamblet; the rest (be∣ing the greater part) was gathered by Letters Patents for collections in seve∣rall Counties: the Citizens of London, being worthy Benefactors toward it, procured by the principall care of Ma∣ster Rowland Catmore, Robert Bourne, and Robert Mott, and others of the same Parish: Master Richard Sedgwicke being the first Minister in that Chappell, and so continueth to this yeere 1631. Written upon a high beame in the middest of the Chappell. This Chappell was dedicated to Almigh∣tie God, and consecrated to the honour and glory of his great and wonderfull Name, the seventh day of Iuly, 1617. by the right re∣verend father in God, Iohn King, then Lord Bishop of London. A faire Gallery built on the South side of the Chappell, with part of the benevolence that was given for the use of the Chappell by the Mariners that went to the East Indies, Anno 1616. in the Royall Iames, under the command of Captaine Martin Pringe, procured by the care of Master Rowland Catmore, then Master of the said ship, and now at the building, hereof Warden of the Chappell, 1622. Master Richard Gardner being at that time of building of the Chappe, Rector of Whitechappell, who had to continued 47. yeeres, being 77. yeeres of age, as it was found in a glasse window made at his owne charge at the upper end of the Chancell. Richardus Gardenerus Whitechappell 1617. An. Resident. suae 47. Aetatissaae 77. 1617. A weekly Lecture maintained in the same Chappell by Master who hath given ten pounds yeerly for ever toward it. Friday the 24. of Iuly 1629. King Charles having hunted a Stragge or Hart from wansted in Essex, kild him in Nigh∣tingale lane, in the Hamblee of Wapping, in a garden belonging to one who had some damage among his herbes, by reason the multitude of peo∣ple there assembled suddenly. In the Hamlet of VVapping, in the Parish of VVhitechappell, was builded in Anno 1626. a large house of timber by Master William Turner, Gentleman, Ma∣ster George Lowe, Gentleman, and Tho∣mas Iones, Gentleman, and others, for the making of Allome, which grew to such an inconvenience through the an∣noyance that was with oyling of Vrine and other materials, by reason of the ill savour of it, and the excrement of it be∣ing found to be annoyance to the river of Thames, that upon the complaint of the Inhabitants to the King and Coun∣cell, it was proceeded withall, as ap∣peareth: The sixteenth of Iuly 1627. being Munday, and the tide being neere a low water, about eight of the cloke in the evening of the same day, there was a Lighter of Allome grease lying in the Hermitage Docke, which was taken out of a ship, lying there overthwart the mouth of the Docke. And upon the emptying of the water (out of the Ligh∣ter) which issued from the grease, there did arise a most noysome stinking scum of a frothy substance, and did spread all about the mouth of the Docke, and run downe into the Thames: and there was a Vessell caused to be filled with it, and it did so stinke, that wee were not able to endure the sent of it, insomuch that endangered all the Wels and Ponds thereabouts: This was seene and done in the presence of these under written. Master Cornelius Godfrey, Merchant. M. George Freeman. M. Ioseph Iaques. M. Leonard Leonard. M. Michael Leech. M. Fulke Wormleighton, M. Iohn Byrkes. Thomas Pope. Henry Chandler.These will be ready to testifie the truth hereof upon oath▪ Thomas Davies. Thomas Knight. Thomas Iones. Augustine Cope. Thomas Powell.
Nicholas Bugden. Tobias Greene. George Raymond. VVilliam Cooke. VVilliam Curteis. Iohn Cope. To the right worshipfull his Majesties Iustices of the Peace for the County of Meddlesex, and Commissioners for annoyances, and to all other his Majesties Officiars, whom in this case it shall concerne. WEe his Majesties loving Sub∣jects inhabiting within the Parish of Whitechappell, in the County of Middlesex, and St. Buttolphs without Ealdgate London, and in the Hamblets of Stepney, VVapping, East Smithfield, and Saint Katharines neere the Tower of London, finding and being continually choaked and poysoned up with the daily and continuall stinke and most noysome infectious smell that is lately begun amongst us, by a worke-house for making of Allome (as is re∣ported) by Master VVilliam Turner, Ma∣ster George Lowe, and Master Thomas Iones, and others, erected at the VVest end of Wapping; adjoyning upon the Ri∣ver of Thames, & neere unto the Tower of London, and to his Majesties Store-house on Tower hill, where the provi∣sion for his Highnesse shipping is daily provided, doe humbly shew, that wee findo, that the noysome smell that com∣meth of the making of the said Allome (which we suppose to be Vrine and such other infectious materials) being long kept, and then boyled for the use afore∣said, doe breed and make such an in∣fectious and most noysome smell a∣mongst us, that wee are not able to live in our houses, nor to keepe our families at worke about us, the detestable stinke thereof is so infectious and intolerable now this Winter time (much more will it be in the heate of Summer:) So that if speedy redresse thereof bee not had, we shall not be able to continue our ha∣birations there, wherein wee have long time lived. And it is generally thought, it will be a decay & dangerous infecti∣on to all inhabitants both on this side and the other side the water, within two miles compasse of the place it stan∣deth; for the stinke thereof (as the wind standeth) is further smelled, both by land and water: and daily complaint made thereof. And now there is begun but two or three Furnaces, but shortly there wil be many more Furnaces made there, to the further great damage and annoyance of his Majesties Subjects, which wee humbly referre to your Worships grave consideration, humbly desiring your speedy aide and reforma∣tion herein, otherwise we shall be com∣pelled to leave our houses & dwellings to our utter undoings: for the noysome smell is so dangerous, that no man will dwell thereabouts, if he might have his house rent-free: And wee as bound, shall daily pray for your Worships: Richard Maine. Fulke Wormleighton. Thomas Clarke. Thomas Champion. VVilliam Mott. Iames Ruddam. Iames Coulyn. Andrew Fursland. Iohn Parsons. Henry Munter. Henry Bludder. George Preston. Peter Leover. William Winson Hoof. Iohn Harrington. Romboult Iacobson. Iohn Wessels. Richard Rolfe. Iohn VVeekes. Richard Pountis. Ienkin Ellis. Robert Haddocke. Richard Studder. Iohn Vandeford. Robert Thomas. Austin Reinolds. Ieffrey Farmer. VVilliam Parsons. Reinold Thompson. Iohn Greene. William Plasse. VVilliam Popular. Thomas VVarton.
VVilliam Peacocke. Iohn Broocker. Matthew Fallen. George Flood. Thomas Gray. William VVelch. Cornelius Godfrey. Thomas Cobb. Iohn Dearsley. Ioseph Iaques. VVilliam Rayniborowe. Peter March. Richard Cooper. Arion Williams. VVilliam Foxe. Iohn Note. Thomas VVhite. William Speering. Michael Vngle. Richard Cray. Thomas Bercher. Osmond Colchester. VVilliam Webbe. William Bundrocke. William Evans. Michael Leech. Iohn Cope. Tobias Greene. Iohn Birke. Iohn Harris. Iohn Teabye. Robert Merret. William Clarke. To the Kings most excel∣lent Maiesty. The humble Petition of your Maje∣sties Liege-people and Subjects, be∣ing in number many thousands, in∣habiting within one mile compasse of your Majesties Tower of Lon∣don, within Middlesex and Sur∣rey, and the Borough of South∣warke. Most humbly sheweth, THat whereas of late divers Roomes have beene newly ere∣cted in the Parish of St. Mary Matfellon, commonly called White chap∣pell, in the County of Middlesex, by VVilliam Turner, Gentleman, George Lowe, Gentleman, and Thomas Iones, Gentleman, and others, neere unto ma∣ny great Brewhouses, which breweth Beere for the use and service of your Majesties Navie, and for divers within London and Middlesex, which said Roomes have been ever since their first erection imployed for boyling of Vrine for making of Allome, which hath and doth daily cast so noysome a savour and evill ayre to all the parts thereabouts, and to all passengers that way, or by the River of Thames, that they are in no sort able to endure the same, nor their dwel∣ling houses by reason thereof, and the same hath already cast many of them into extremity of great sicknesses and diseases, by which evill and unwhole∣some savour, of late many Fishes in the Thames there neere unto, have beene found ready to die, and dead, supposed to be poysoned by some ill substance is∣suing into the River of Thames: and all the Inhabitants thereabouts are much annoyed, and all the pasture ground ly∣ing neere thereabouts is tainted and spoiled in such manner, that the Cattell doe refuse to feed on the same. And they further humbly shew, that they ha∣ving preferred their grievances unto your Majesties Commissioners of an∣noyances, and having caused the same to bee presented unto them by Indict∣ment, by severall Iurors, sworne upon oath before your Majesties Iustices of the Peace, in their generall Sessions for Middlesex, upon due proofe and the te∣stimony of witnesses there also sworne and examined, upon which Evidences the said Iurors have given up severall verdicts, and presented upon their oathes the same annoyance to be excee∣ding great and intolerable to all inhabi∣tants dwelling thereabouts, and to all other passengers by the same, or upon the River of Thames: Yet your Petitio∣ners having no redresse thereby, are compelled by extreme necessity to com∣plaine unto your Majesty, and with much griefe, and with all humility be∣seech your Majesty to take to conside∣ration the speedy redresse in that be∣halfe, the same annoyance being so great and unsavoury, that otherwise your poore Subjects, being many thou∣sands
in number, shall be compelled to forsake their houses, and abandon their dwellings, to the losse of their trades and lives, and the utter undoing of them and their families: Wherefore they Most humbly beseech your Majesty to cōmit the examination there∣of unto the right Honourable Thomas Earle of Cleveland, Sir Allen Apsley, Knight, Lievtenant of the Tower, Sir Henry Spiller, Knight, Thomas Sanderson, and George Long, Esquires, or any three or two of them, or any o∣thers, being Justices and Com∣missioners of annoyances within the said County of Middlesex, who by your Majesties gracious reference being thereunto requi∣red, may examine and heare the Allegations on all parts, and that upon the Certificate of their opi∣nions therein, your Majesty will bee pleased to vouchsafe your poore Subjects such reliefe as the case requireth. And the Petitioners, according to their bounden duties and legiance, shall daily pray for your Majesties long and pro∣sperous reigne over us. At White-Hall the 25. of Iuly, 1627. Present, Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Earle of Dorset. Earle of Bridgewater. Master Secretary Cooke. M. of the Rolles. M. Chancelor of the Duchy. WHereas upon a complaint for∣merly made by divers Alder∣men of the City of London, on the behalfe of the Inhabitants of the Parishes of St. Buttolphs Ealdgate, and divers other Parishes thereabouts, con∣cerning a great annoyance unto the said Inhabitants, caused by certaine Al∣lome workes, erected thereabouts by his Majesties Farmers of the said works: It was by an order of the twentieth of this present moneth ordered, that the President of the Colledge of Physici∣ans, accompanied with sixe other Doctors of Physicke of that Society, as likewise, that some of the Aldermen should upon view of the said workes, and such observations by them made as fals within their experience, returne Certificate to the Boord, of their opi∣nions touching the same: Forasmuch as those whose names are here under∣written, did this day accordingly make their Certificate in writing to the Boord, as followeth; In haec verba: May it please your Lordships, according to an order of this Honourable Boord of the twentieth of Iuly last; Wee have viewed and observed the Allome works at Saint Katharines, and considered the materials therein used and imployed. And thereupon doe humbly certifie unto your Lordships, and are of opini∣on, that the workes standing in that place, must necessarily breed great an∣noyances both to the neere Inhabitants, and by the spreading vapours from thence issuing to many places more re∣mote, and to all such passengers as ei∣ther by land or by water have occasion to frequent those parts, not onely by their continuall noysome savours to make all their habitations grievous and unpleasant, but also by their putrid qua∣lity to endanger their healths: And so we humbly rest at your Lordships com∣mands, Iuly the 24. An. 1627. Signed, Iohn Argent, Pref. Iohn Gifford, Willi∣am Harvey, William Clement, Robert Fludd, Samuel Baskernite, Ottnell Move∣rell, and by Hugh Hamersley. Their Lordships upon consideration had thereof, did resolve, that the said Al∣lome works in and about the City, were fit to bee supprest. Neverthelesse, for that a Petition was now presented to the Boord by the Farmers of the said Allome workes, shewing that it was not possible for them to erect and finish any new workes in the Country before our Lady day next, and that if they should be restrained from working here in the meane time, the Kingdome would be unserved of Allome, of which
there is great use, and they likewise dis∣abled to pay his Maiesties rent. And therefore besought the Boord that they might have leave to proceed in their making of Allome here untill our Lady day next as aforesaid. It was thereupon thought fit & ordered that they should be at liberty to make Allome in those places where their works are already e∣rected untill our Lady day next only and no longer; and that in the meane time they presume not to erect any o∣ther works in any places in or about this cittie; Provided neverthelesse that they suffer not the dreggs and excrement proceeding from the boyling and ma∣king of the said Allom to be cast or fall into any places leading into the River of Thames, but that they cause the same from time to time to be either buried in the night time in the grounds where their works now are, or otherwise to be carried and buried in the night time in some other convenient place, where the same may breed no infection or an∣noyance to any his Majesties subjects. At White Hall the 12. of September, Anno 1627. Present, Lord President. Earle of Holland. Earle of Kellie. Master Secretarie Cooke. Master Chanch. of the Exchequer. Chanc. of the Duchie. WHereas an humble Petitiō was this day exhibited to the boord in the name of the inhabitants of the Parishes of S. Buttolphs neere Ealdgate, S. Katharine, White-Chappell, Stepney, Reddriffe, S. O∣laves, and others adjacent and neere his Majesties Tower of London. Shewing that whereas it had pleased the boord (on the 27. of Iuly last, after divers hea∣rings and reports made by six Doctors of the Colledge of Physitions of London) to order that the Farmer of his Maje∣sties Allome works (who had transpor∣ted themselves out of the Northerne parts of the Kingdome neere unto his Majesties Royall chamber and Citty of London) should not presume to erect any other worke in or about, nor suffer the dreggs or excrement of the boiling of Allom to be cast or fall into the river of Thames, but bury the same in the night time in some convenient place where it might not breed any infection or annoy∣ance, yet neverthelesse that sithence the making of the said order, and especially on the 16. of August last the said Far∣mers, their deputies or assignes, have in contempt of the order, powred or cau∣sed the said filth, dreggs or excremēts to fall into the Ponds or ditches leading to the Thames, wherby some of the Petitio∣ners have found their wells of water ap∣pointed for brewing so tainted with the tast & savour of Allom excremēt, as that within a very short space the Fish have been poisoned, and the water altogether unwholesome, for brewing or any other use, as by certificate under divers of the said Petitioners hands the chiefe offi∣cers and inhabitants of the Tower ap∣peared, and therfore humbly prayed re∣dresse of the growing mischiefe and dangerous contagion proceeding from the said Allom works, seconded with a presumptuous cōtempt of the said order of the Boord, to the end that by a sud∣den reformation the Petitioners may enjoy the benefit of the aire, and not be suffocated with the horrid and putrid savours occasioned by the said Allom works. The Boord taking this com∣plaint into their due and serious consi∣deration and finding that the former or∣der of the boord was not observed, as is before mentioned and that the annoy∣ance caused hereby, extendeth it selfe to the extreme parts of the Citty, and even so farre as his Majesties Court when the wind sitteth that way (which cannot but be of dangerous consequence by corrupting of both the aire and the water, whereof beere is made for his Majesties service & otherwise:) thought fit and ordered that the said Allom workes: should be presently suppressed from working, and utterly removed by the Farmers or others whom it may concerne within a convenient time, not∣withstanding the former order (which on their parts have not been observed) and that some one of the Messengers of
his Majesties Chamber shalbe sent with a transcript of this their Lordships or∣der, to the Farmers or deputies of the said worke, and see the same due∣ly executed, and of the performance thereof to give accompt to their Lord∣ships within ten or twelve dayes af∣ter the date hereof. And of this their Lordships order as well the said Far∣mers & the Messenger, as others whom it may concerne, are to take notice, and to regulate themselves accordingly, as they will answere the contrary. To the right Honorable Lords, and others of his Ma∣jesties most Ho∣norable Privie Councell: The humble petition of the Inhabi∣tants of S. Buttolphs Ealdgate, S. Katharines, White-Chap∣pell, Stepney, Redriffe, S. O∣laves, and others adjacent and neere his Majesties Tower of London. WHereas it pleased this ho∣norable Boord the 27. of Iuly last, after divers hea∣rings and a report made by six Doctors being of the Colledge of Physitians Lon∣don, to order that the Farmers of his Ma∣jesties Allom workes (who had trans∣planted themselves out of the North parts neere unto his Majesties Royall Chamber and Citty of London) should not presume to erect any other works in or about the same, nor suffer the dreggs or excrement proceeding of the boi∣ling of Allom to be cast or fall into the River of Thames, but to bury the same in the night time where it might not breed any infection or annoyance. But so it is right Honourable, that di∣vers times sithence the order of this ho∣norable Boord, but especially upon the 16. of this instant August, the said Far∣mers, their deputy or assignes, have in Contempt of the said order, powred or caused the said filth, dreggs or excre∣ment to fall into the Ponds or ditches leading to the Thames, whereby some of your Petitioners have found their wells of water appointed for brewing so tainted and grownered with the tast and savour of Allom excrement, as that within three houres after about 40. Fi∣shes were apparently found poisoned, as by the annexed Certificate appeareth. For redresse of which growing mis∣chiefe and dangerous Contagion, secon∣ded with a presumptuous Contempt of your honourable order, as formerly the Petitioners flye to this honourable Boord, beseeching a sodaine reformati∣on: To the end that your petitioners may enjoy the benefit of the aire, and not be suffocated with the horrid and putrid savours proceeding from the said Al∣lome works. And the petitioners shalbe (as ever) bound to pray for your honours, 1627. Wee his Majesties Subject whose Names are subscribed doe for a truth certifie and wilbe ready to depose, that sithence the 25. day of Iuly last, the Al∣lome farmers or their assignes, have ere∣cted new erections at or neere Wap∣ping, where there Allome works are: And that upon the 16. day of this in∣stant moneth of August, by meanes of the excrement or filth falling or being cast and washed out of the said Allome works, by the flowing of the River of Thames was carried into wells belon∣ging to Brewers thereabouts; and where divers poore people for their meanes, doe resort, and from thence doe carry water to divers houses, and to dresse their meate and diet for their families: As by example, at that time into one well or pond of one Ioseph Iaques, a Brewer neere thereunto, where Ecles, and other fishes to the number of 40. and upwards, which within three houres after, therein were suffocated and poi∣soned, in the presence of these certificats. Witnesse our hands hereunto put the day of August, 1627.
At White Hall the 12. of December, Anno 1627. President, Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Admirall. Earle of Suff. Earle of Dorset. Earle of Salisbury. Earle of Exeter. Earle of Bridgwater. Earle of Carlile. Earle of Holland. Earle of Banbury. Lord Vis. Grandison. Lord Bishop of Duresme. Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. Master Treasurer. Master Comptroller. Master of the Wards. Master Secretary Coke. Master Chanc. of the Exchequer. Master Chanc. of the Dutchy. VVHereas by an Order of this Boord, made in Iuly last, for reasons in the said order mentioned, the Allome works were suffered to be in those places neere London, where they were then erected, untill our Lady day next only and no longer. And afterwards the 12. of September last for contempts, in not pursuing the said order of the 25. of Iu∣ly, and for prevention of growing mis∣chiefe that might come by sufferance of the said Allome works; it was ordered that the said Allome works should be presently suppressed, & removed; which being not as yet done, although the Far∣mers of the said works have sought out other places, whither to remove the said works. Now the Boord upon the peti∣tion of the Company of Diers, being in∣formed that in these times of warrs, and danger, the Dyers and other Artificers using Allome cannot be furnished with that commodity, from any other per∣sons, or places, but onely from the Far∣mers aforesaid, and their Magazines. And that the said artificers, for want thereof shall be forced to give over their Trades to the great dammage of the Commonweale. And the said Farmers informing that by reason of some Ship∣wracks, and the danger of passages from out of the North hither, they have failed, nor cannot bring their Alloms hither to London, as they were wont. In consideration of all which; and for that their Lordships doe conceive that the said works will be lesse offensive to the Inhabitants dwelling in those parts in this winter season, the Boord hath thought fit and ordered, that the said Farmers, their Deputies, and Assignes, shall be permitted, untill our Lady day next according to the permission given by the former order of the 25. of Iuly, to convert the Materialls now upon their hands into Allome, at their house in S. Katharines, erected for that purpose, and to sell the same, for the use of his Maje∣sties subjects: And presently upon our Lady day next to remove the said works to some other place more remote from the Citty of London, and the Sub∣urbs thereof. And it is ordered, that in the meane while the said Farmers, their Deputies and Assignes, or some of them shall seeke, and find out some convenient place for their said works, & signifie unto the Boord of what place they have made choice, to the end they may have their Lordships allowance and approbation, for their Settlement in the same, whereof all persons whom it may concerne, are to take knowledge, and accordingly to governe themselves, as they and every of them will answere the contrary at their perills. Provided always, and it is hereby willed and com∣manded, that all things else required and set downe to be done by the said Farmers, in either of the said Orders, be∣fore mentioned, concerning the excre∣ment of the Allome, & otherwise what∣soever, be duly observed and performed by the said Farmers of the said Allome works. On the East side, and by North of the Tower, lieth East-Smithfield,Nightingall lane. Hogs streete,East Smith∣field. and Tower hill, and East from them both, was the new Abbey called Grace, founded by Edward the third. From thence Radeliffe, up East Smith∣field, by Nightingall lane, (which run∣neth South to the Hermitage, a Brew∣house
so called of an Hermite sometime being there,)Bramley. beyond this lane to the Mannor of Bramley (called in Record of Richard the second, Villa East Smithfield, and Villa de Bramley) and to the Man∣nor of Shadwell, belonging to the Deane of Pauls, there hath been of late, in place of Elme trees, many small Tenements raised, towards Radcliffe: And Radcliffe it self hath been also encreased in buil∣ding Eastward (in place where I have knowne a large high-way, with faire Elme trees on both the sides) that the same hath now taken hold of Lime-Hurst, Lime Hurst. Lime-Host, corruptly called Lime∣house, sometime distant a mile from Radcliffe. Having said thus much for building, at Wapping, East Smithfield, Bramley, and Shadwell, all on the South side of the high-way to Radcliffe; now one note on the North side also, concerning Pyrates: I reade, that in the yeere 1440. in the Lent season, certaine persons, with sixe shippes brought from beyond the Seas fish, to victuall the Citie of London; which fish when they had delivered, and were returning homeward, a num∣ber of Sea-theeves in a Barge, in the night came upon them, when they were asleepe in their Vessels, riding at anchor on the River Thames, and slew them, cut their throats, east them over-boord, tooke their money, and drowned their ships, for that no man should espy or ac∣cuse them. Two of these theeves were after taken and hanged in chaines upon a gallowes set upon a raised Hill, for the purpose made, in the field beyond East Smithfield, so that they might be seene farre into the River Thames. The first building at Radcliffe in my youth (not to be forgotten) was a faire Free Schoole,Free Schoole & Almes∣houses at Radisse. and Almes-houses, foun∣ded by Avice Gibson, wife to Nich. Gib∣son, Grocer, as before I have noted. But of late yeeres, Ship-wrights, and (for the most part) other Marine men, have builded many large and strong houses for themselves, and smaller for Smylers, from thence almost to Poplar, and so to Blacke well. Now for Tower hill,Tower hill without the walls. the plaine there is likewise greatly diminished by Mer∣chants, for building of small tenements: from thence towards Ealdgate, was the Minories, whereof I have spoken. From Ealdgate East againe lieth a large street, replenished with buildings, to wit, on the North side the Parish Church of Saint Buttolph, and so other building to Hoglane, and to the barres on both sides. Also,Suburbe without Ealdgate, without the Barres, both the sides of the Street be pestered with Cottages and Allies, even up to White Chappell Church; and almost halfe a mile beyond it, into the common field: all which ought to lye open and free for all men. But this common field (I say) being sometime the beauty of this Citie on that part, is so incroched upon, by building of filthie Cottages, and with other Purprestures, Inclosures, and Lay∣stalls, that (notwithstanding all Procla∣mations and Acts of Parliament made to the contrarie) in some places it scarce remaineth a sufficient high-way for the meeting of Cariages and Droves of Cattell, much lesse is there any faire, pleasant, or wholesome way, for people to walke on foot: which is no small ble∣mish to so famous a Citie, to have so un∣savourie and unseemely an entrie or pas∣sage thereunto. Now of White Chappell Church some∣what Of white Chappell. and then back againe to Ealdgate. This Church is as it were a Chappell of ease to the Parish of Stebunhith, and the Parson of Stebunhith hath the Gift thereof: which being first dedica∣ted to the name of God, and the Blessed Virgin, is now called Saint Mary Mat∣fellon, St. Mary Matfellon. About the yeere 1428. in the sixt of King henry the sixt, a devout widow of that Parish had long time cherished and brought up, of Almes, a certaine Frenchman, or Briton borne,A devout widow murdered. which most unkindly and cruelly in a night murthe∣red the said widow sleeping in her bed, and after fled with such Iewels and o∣ther stuffe of hers, as he might carsie. But he was so freshly pursved; that (for feare) he tooke the Church of Saint George in Southwarke, and challenged Priviledge of Sanctuarie there, and so abjured the Kings Land. Then the Con∣stables (having charge of him) brought him into London, intending to have con∣veyed him Eastward: but so soone as he was come into the Parish, where before he had committed the Murther; the
wives cast upon him so must filth and ordure of the streete, that (notwithstan∣ding the best resistance made by the Constables) they slew him out of hand: And for this feat it hath beene said, that Parish to have purchased that name of Saint Mary Matfellon; but I finde in Re∣cord, the same to be called Villa beatae Mariae de Matfellon, in the 21. of Richard the second. More, we reade, that in the yeere 1336. the 10. of Edward the third, the Bishop of Alba, Cardinall and Parson of Stebunhith, Procurator generall in Eng∣land, presented a Clerke to be Parson in the Church of blessed Mary, called Mat∣fellon, without Ealdgate of London, &c. Now againe from Ealdgate North∣west to Bishopsgate,Suburb without Bishopsgate. lyeth Hounds-ditch, and so to Bishopsgate. North and by East from Bishopsgate, lyeth a large street, or high-way, having on the West side thereof, the Parish Church of S. Buttolph. Then is the Hospitall of S. Mary of Bethelem, founded by a Citizen of Lon∣don, and as before is shewed, up to the Barres,Norton fall gate. without the which, is Norton fall gate,Priorie of S. Iohn Bap∣tist, at Holy∣well. a libertie so called, belonging to the Deane of Pauls. Thence up to the late dissolved Priorie of S. Iohn Baptist, cal∣led Holywell, a House of Nunnes, of old time founded by a Bishop of London. Stephen Gravesend, Bishop of London, a∣bout the yeere 1318. was a Benefactor thereunto, reedified by Sir Thomas Lo∣vel, Knight of the Garter, who builded much there, in the reignes of Henry the seventh, and of Henry the eight. Hee en∣dowed this House with faire Lands, and was there buried in a large Chappell by him builded for that purpose. This Priorie was ualued, at the suppression, to have of Lands two hundred ninetie three pound by yeere, and was surren∣dred 1539. the one & thirtieth of Henry the eight. The Church thereof being pulled downe, many houses have beene buildd for the Lodgings of Noblemen, of Strangers borne, and other. From Holywell, in the high Street, is a continuall building of Tenements to Sewers ditch, having one small side of a field already made a Garden Plot. Ouer-against the North corner of this Field, betweene it & the Church of S. Leonara in Shore-ditch,A Crosse at Shores-ditch, now a Smiths Forge. sometime stood a Crosse, now a Smiths Forge, dividing three Waies: Forthright the high-way is buil∣ded upon either side, more than a good flight shoot towards Kings land, New∣ington, Totenham, &c. On the left hand is Ealdestreet, which reacheth West to a stone Crosse, over-against the North end of Golding lane, and so to the end of Goswell street. On the right hand of this Ealdestreet not farre from Shores-ditch,Hoxton. but on the North side thereof is Hoxton, a large street with houses on both sides, and is a Prebend belonging to Pauls Church in London, but of Shores-ditch Parish. On the right hand beyond Shores-ditch Church, toward Hackney, are some late builded houses upon the common soile, for it was Lay-stall, but those houses belong to the Parish of Stebun∣hith. On the other side of the high-way, from Bishopsgate and Hounds-ditch, is the the Dolphin, a common Inne for receipt of Travellers, then a house builded by the L. Iohn Powlet, afterward called Fi∣shers-Folly, and so up to the West end of Berwardes Lane, is a continuall building of small cottages, then the Hospitall called Saint Mary Spittle, hard within the Barres, whereof I have spoken in Bi∣shopsgate Ward. From the which Bars towards Shores-ditch on that side,Shores-ditch so called more than 400. yeeres since, as I can prove by record. was all along, a conti∣nuall building of small and base Tene∣ments, for the most part lately erected. Amongst the which (I meane of the ancient'st building) was one row of proper small houses, with Gardens for poore decayed people, there placed by the Prior of the said Hospitall:Almes-houses in Shores-ditch. every one Tenant whereof payd one pennie rent by the yeere at Christmas, and di∣ned with the Prior on Christmas day. But after the suppression of the Hospi∣tall, these houses for want of reparations in few yeers were so decayed, that it was called Rotten Rowe,Rotten Rowe or Russell Rowe. & the poor worne out (for there came no new in their place) the houses (for a smal portion of money) were sold from Goddard to Russell a Dra∣per, who new builded them, & let them out for rent enough, taking also large Fines of the Tenants, neere as much as the houses cost him purchase and buil∣ding:
for he made his bargaines so hard∣ly with all men, that both Carpenter, Bricke-layer, & Plaisterer, were by that Worke undone. And yet in honour of his name, it is now called Russels Row. Now for the Parish Church of Saint Leonards in Shoresditch,Parish Church of S. Leo∣nards at Shoresditch. the Arch-deacon of London is alwayes Parson thereof, and the Cure is served by a Vicar. In this Church have been divers ho∣nourable persons buried, as appeareth by Monuments yet remaining. Sir Iohn Elrington, with Margaret his wife, daugh∣ter & heire to Thomas Lord Itchingham, widow to William Blount, sonne & heire to Walter Blount, the first Lord Mount∣joy: which Margaret died, 1481. Orate pro animabus Humfredi Starky, Militis,An anciēt Marble Tombe in the Quire. nuper Capitalis Baronius de Scaccario Domini Regis Hen. 7. & Isabella uxoris ejus, & omnium, &c. This Monument is erected in memorie, that within this Church doe lye buried the bo∣dies of the right Honourable & Noble La∣dies, A very faire Tombe in the upper end of the Quire. Lady Katharine Stafford, daugh∣ter to Edward Duke of Buckinghā, & wife to Ralph, Earle of Westmerland, who dyed 1553. Lady Elianor, daughter to Sir William Paston, Knight, and wife to the right honourable Lord Tho∣mas, Earle of Rutland, buried 1551. Lady Margaret Nevell, daughter to Ralph, Earle of Westmerland, & wife to Henry, Earle of Rutland, who died 1560. And the Lady Katharine Nevell, wife to Sir John Constable of Holder∣nes, Knight, and daughter to Henry, Earle of Westmerland. And Lady Anne Manners, daughter to Thomas, Earle of Rutland: which Katharine died the seven and twentieth day of March, Anno Domini 1591. And that here doe lye also the bodies of two right worthie Gentlemen, honourably des∣cended; namely, of Sir Thomas Man∣ners, Knight, and Oliver Manners, Es∣quire, Brethren, being the fourth & fifth sonnes of the aforesaid Thomas, Earle of Rutland. The first died about his age of 50. in Iune, 1591. after many valiant Services performed by him for his Prince and Countrey, both in Ireland and in Scotland, where he was Knighted; and witnessed by sundrie great wounds he therein received. The second died in his younger yeeres, 1563. about his age of twentie, yet not before good proofe made of his valour and forwardnesse, in the Ser∣vice of New-haven, against the French; where hee tooke the sicknesse, whereof hee died shortly after, in Shores-ditch. Founded by the Lady Adeline Neuell, at the direction of the said Lady Katharine Constable, deceased, her Sister, in February, 1591. Theodosia Vavasour. Oleum effusum nomen tuum, Ideo Adolescentulae dilexe∣runt te. Cant. 1. Fallax est gratia, & vana pul. chritudo: mulier timens De∣um, ipsa laudabitur. Pro. 11. Hac tuleris quicunque gradum sta, per∣lege, plora, Hic decor,A comely Monumēt in the wal, neere to the Tōbe. hic pietas, Nobilitas{que} jacet. Virgo annis animisque Dei (Theodosia) donum Qua meritis certat fama, decore pudor. Sed famam meritis superavit, moribus annos, Ingenio sexum, Religione genus. Quam neque Nobilitas tumidam, nec forma procacem▪ Fecerat, una humilis, clara, pudica, de∣cens. Flos aevi, florem dixi? dixi ergo dolorem Vt matura brevi est, heu ita rapta brevi est. Rapta sed Aethereis Rosa transplantan∣da viretis, Laeta ubi perpetui tempora veris aget. Inter & aeternas Agni comes Agna cho∣reas Ignotum casto succinet ore melos. Candida virginei tumulo date Lilia coetus, Virginis O partus, virginis esto memor. Ereptam Domino sociat lux ultima faelix. O faelix virgo quod cupit usque tenet. Anno Domini 1616. Martii 17. Here lyeth buried Elizabeth,A faire Tombe in the Chan∣cell. the wife of the late Reverend Father in God, Iohn Sko∣ry, late Bishop of Hereford. The said Re∣verend Father, in the reigne of King Ed∣ward the sixt, was Bishop of Rochester, & translated from thēce to Chichester. Hee departed this life at Whitborne, in the Countie of Hereford, the 26. day of Iune, Anno Domini 1585. And the said Elizabeth deceased in Holywell, in this Parish, the 8. day of March, 1592.
Beati mortui qui Domino moriuntur. Her Corps heere lyes in Chest, Her Soule in Heaven now lives; And she enjoyes that Rest, Which God to his Saints gives: For in Christ did she trust, That he will her restore Againe out of the dust, To live for evermore. Heere lyeth the body of Sir Thomas Sey∣mer, An anciēt Marble Tombe in the Chan∣cell. Knight, late Alderman and Lord Maior of London, and Dame Mary his wife. The which Sir Thomas decea∣sed the eleventh day of December, Anno Domini 1532. Heere-under lye the ashes and the bones Of Sir Thomas Leigh,An engra∣uen Place in the Northwall of the Quire. that good and learned Knight; Whose hastie death (alas) the god∣ly still bemones, Though his soule alwayes rejoyce in Gods sight. Great was his wisedome, and grea∣ter was his wit, His visage comely, with no sad change dismayed: A man in all affaires, a King to serve most fit, Had not death so soone his mortall life betrayed. He died the 25. day of November, Anno Domini, 1545. A table made at the costs and charge of Henry Hodge, Citizen and Brewer of London, containing the names of the Be∣nefactours to the Church, and the poore of the Parish of S. Leonards in Shore-ditch. Which table hangeth up in the Chan∣cell neere the Communion table; set up there, Anno Domini 1623. William Thornton of this Parish Tai∣lour, gave the Vestry house with a roome under for the Minister to dwell in, and a renement by  to this parish for ever: He likewise  the Gallery at the comming in  the great doore in the Church, and  the ricke wall on the West side of  Church-yard at his owne charge, Anno Domini 1581. Iohn Fuller of Bishops-ll Esquire, gave a summe of money for the building of 12. Almes-houses, for 12. poore wid∣dowes of this parish; which poore wo∣men doe receive during the life of the Lady his late wife, and after wife to Sir Thomas Mansfield the summe of 8. l. per annum. And after the Ladies decease there is to come 50. l. per annum to the said poore almes women for ever. The Lady being dead they doe now re∣ceive it. William Peake of this Parish Esquire, gave to be dealt in bread unto the poore of this Parish weekely the summe of 2. s'. on every Sunday for ever. Robert Brainforth, of this parish Gentleman gave yeerely 8. l. for ever unto the poore of this Parish, viz. upon every S. Thomas day before Christmas to 60. poore persons 3. l. and upon eve∣ry Good Friday unto 30. poore persons the summe of 50. s'. and upon every Sunday for ever the summe of 12. d'. in bread to the poore of this Parish. This money is to be paid accordingly out of the Hospitall of S. Thomas in South∣warke for ever. He hath also given a greene Carpet of broad cloth for the Communion table. Thomas Russell of London Draper, hath given to the poore of this Parish the summe of 12. d'. weekely to be di∣stributed to the poore of the Parish for ever, to be paid by the companie of the Drapers in London. George Clarke Citizen and Vintner of London, gave unto the use of the poore of this Parish the summe of 100. marks in money. Simon Burton of London Wax-chand∣ler, gave to 30. poore widdowes of this parish the summe of 30. groats yeerely for ever, to be distributed every S. Tho∣mas day. George Palin of London Girdler, hath given 10. l. in money to the use of the poore of this parish for ever. Robert Spence of London Fishmonger, gave 50. s'. a yeere to the poore of this Parish for ever, to be paid by the com∣pany of Fishmongers. Thomas Scriven Esquire, hath given 10. l. in money to the use of the poore of this Parish for ever. Robert Rogers of London Leather seller, gave the summe of 30. pound in money
for a stocke for the poore of this parish to buy sea-coles, which is to be laid out at best time for the benefit of the said poore for ever, reserving the stocke whole. Steven  of London Vint∣ner, gave the summe of 26. every yeere for ever, to be given in sagots to the poor of this Parish about Michaelmasse. This is to be paid by the company of Vintners in London. Iohn Eomans, alias Tice of this parish tuftafata-weaver, gave to the use of the poor of this parish the summe of 10. l. in money, to be distributed to the 12. poor Almes women in one chaldron of sea-coles yeerely for ever among thē. Cicely, late wife of the said Iohn Eomans, & after wife to Master Iohn Heath, gave to the use of the poore, the summe of 20. pound in money, for a stock to buy sea-coles for the poor of this parish for ever. Likewise she gave 20. pound to buy a flagon of sil∣ver for wine for the Communion. Like∣wise she gave 20. pound in money, for the maintenance of two sermons yeerely for ever, viz. one vpon the Lady day, in harvest, and the other upon the Lady day, in Lent. Anne Smith widdow late wife of Wil∣liam Nisam deceased, gave weekly to be dealt in bread to the poore of this parish upon every Sunday 2. s'. for ever, to be paid out of the company of Drapers in London. Likewise she gave a pulpit cloth and cushion to this Church. Nicolas Wilkinson, alias Tooly, Gentle∣men deceased, late of this parish, gave the summe of 80. pound in money, to remaine a stocke that upon every Sun∣day after morning praier, there should be distributed to 32. poore people 32. wheaten loaves for ever. And the Vicar, Church-wardens and Vestry-men out of their provident care, have made a purchase of a rent-charge yeerely, issu∣ing out of the George in Holywell streete, for the true performance thereof for ever. Besides these benefactours in the ta∣ble, since we have had these M. Zachary Elmer, Officiall to the Archdeacon of London, together with his brother M. Edmond Elmer, gave a flagon of silver for the wine in the communion; And Willi∣am Badger gardiner in Shore-ditch gave a∣nother; And a parishioner unknowne gave also another, every one cost 20. l. a peece. Also Iohn Leavis Weaver, gave a chalice, in which the communion wine is delivered; and Isabell Iackson widdow, late wise to William Iackson Grocer, living in this parish, gave a plate of silver to ca∣ry the bread in the communion. William Wood Gardiner in this parish, gave a cha∣lice to the communion table and foure pewter flaggons for the wine. Ioane Smales widdow of this Parish & formerly wife to Iohn Cooke of this Pa∣rish, gave allowance for 4. sermons eve∣ry yeere on foure Holy dayes: Namely, the feast day of S. Iohn Baptist, S. Michael, S. Stephen, and the Purification of the Vir∣gin Mary; and she bequeathed also 40. l. yeerly to be given to the poore of our Parish. On the North side of the Church a gallery was made at the cost of well dis∣posed parishioners, in the yeere 1617. William Badger, and Iohn Clarke, being Church-wardens. And another on the South part by Iames Slade, Captaine & servant to the East Indian company, was set up in the yeere 1630. And a long seate betweene, reaching from one gal∣to the other, for the catechising of youth out of the pulpit, according to the order then given, Iohn Squire being Vi∣car, Thomas Crowther, and Henry Empson, Church-wardens. Vnder this gallery is set, Not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of Hea∣ven, but he that doth the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matth. 7. 24. He loveth our nation and hath built us a Synagogue, Luc. 7. 5. Virgo annis animis{que} Dei () donum, Aethereis rosa transplantanda viretis. A Tombe on the South side of the chancell. Iane the wife of Ralfe Hansby Esquire, daughter to William Vavasour Es∣quire, Grandchild to Thomas Manners Knight, died the 22. day of Iuly, in the yeere of our Lord 1617. and of her age the 23. To whose blessed memory her her deare husband hath dedicated this sad monument to signifie that with her his joy lies here interred.
Si genus & virtus, & moribus au∣cta figura Pulchra bonis, pietas si quid ho∣noris habent; Hunc Ianae tumulum spectans ve∣nerare Viator, Cum qua tot bona tam bella se∣pulta jacent. Nec minor his aderat victrix pa∣tientia victae, Nec spolium mortis sed pudor il∣la fuit. If birth, if vertue, if faire feature deckt With gifts of minde, if piety breeds respect; Her tombe then view, and grace kinde Passenger, With whom so many graces buried were: Conquered, By patience yet she overcame, Nor was her youth deaths triumph but his shame. In the middle chancell this inscription in brasse is placed upon a grave stone. Georgius Gips, Generosus, fide subjectus, spe erectus, charitate Deo unitus, vitam mortalem mutavit pro immortali, 12. Iulii 1611. Quatuor genuit filios, fili∣asque undecim. Quorum Richardus, Georgius, Thomas, Anna, Maria, & Martha, Patris clauserunt, reliquorum ipse clausit lumina. A little below in the same chancell is set upon a grave stone. May 22. 1618. Richard Leigh, Mer∣chant and Citizen of London, placed this stone in memoriall of his deare wife Anne Leigh; Who lyeth heere interred by the body of Richard Brattuph her first husband, and of her 3. children, Ri∣chard, Sara, and Iohn, which she bare to the said Richard Brattuph. In some, sad sicknesse paine, and paine impatience, In thee a patient penitence it wrought, Thy sicknesse joy, thy tribulation hope, The bodies death gave life unto thy soule. Thus for his lambes the Lord can hony draw, From th'all devouring cruell lions jaw. Vbi tua, O mors, victoria? Vbi tuus, O sepulchra, tumulus? And over against this tombe in the wall on the South side of the chancell in a monument of brasse. Here lieth Katharine Liveley, wife of Ed∣ward Liveley Gentlemen, and daughter of Henry Hodge Citizen and Brewer of London, and Ioice his wife, who after she had runne a vertuous and religious course of life 21. yeeres, finished the same the 15. day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 1623. Proverbs 10. 7. The memory of the just is blessed. Furthermore, (of late time) one Vi∣car there, for covetousnesse of the Brasse, which hee converted into coyned Sil∣ver, plucked up many Plates fixed on the Graves, and left no memorie of such as had beene buried under them. A great injurie both to the living and the dead, forbidden by publike Proclama∣tion, in the reigne of our Soveraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, but not for∣borne by many, that either of a prepo∣sterous zeale, or of a greedie minde, spare not to satisfie themselves by so wicked a meanes. One note of Shores-ditch, and so an end of that Suburbe. I reade,A Fuller of Shores-ditch, for falsely ac∣cusing, hā∣ged and quartered. that in the yeere 1440. the eighteenth of Henry the sixt, a Fuller of Shores-ditch appeached of Treason ma∣ny worthie Esquires and Gentlemen of Kent: but he being proved false, was at∣tainted, condemned, and had judge∣ment to be drawne, hanged, and quar∣tered; which was done, his head set on London Bridge, and his Quarters on the Gates. This Iustice was done, according to the sixteenth of Deuteronomie,Deut. 16. The Iudges shall make diligent inquisition,The re∣ward of a false bro∣ther. and if the witnesse be found false, and to have given false witnesse against his brother, then shall they doe unto him, as he had thought to doe unto his brother, &c. I reade of the Kings Mannor, called Shores-ditch Place, in the Parish of Hack∣ney:
But how it tooke that name, I know not; and therefore I will turne backe from Shores-ditch Crosse to Bethelem Crosse,Bethelem Crosse. and so passe through that Hos∣pitall into the Moore-field, which lyeth without the Posterne called Moore-gate. This Field (of old time) was called the Moore; as appeareth by the Charter of William the Conquerour to the Col∣ledge of Saint Martin, declaring a run∣ning Water to passe into the Citie from the same Moore. Also Fitz-Stephen wri∣teth of this Moore, saying thus: When the great Fenne, or Moore, which watereth the Walls on the North side, is frozen, &c. This Fenne, or Moore-field, stret∣ching from the Wall of the City, be∣twixt Bishops-gate and the Posterne cal∣led Cripplegate, to Finsbery, and to Holy∣well, Finsbery fields and More-fields an unpro∣fitable ground. continued a waste and unprofita∣ble ground a long time, so that the same was all letten for foure markes the yeare, in the raigne of Edward the second. But in the yeare 1415. the third of Henry the fifth, Thomas Fawconer, Maior, as I have shewed, caused the wall of the City to bee broken toward the said Moore, and builded the Posterne called Mooregate, for ease of the Citi∣zens to walke that way upon Causies towards Iseldon and Hoxton. Moreo∣ver, hee caused the Ditches of the Ci∣tie, and other the Ditches from Shores ditch to Deepe ditch, by Bethelem into the Moore ditch, to be newly cast and clean∣sed, by meanes whereof the said Fenne or Moore was greatly dreined or dryed. But shortly after, to wit, in 1477. Ralph Ioceline, Maior, for repairing of the Wall of the City, caused the said Moore to be searched for Clay & Bricke to be burnt there, &c. by which meanes this field was made the worse for a long time. In the yeere 1498. all the Gardens which had continued time out of mind,Gardens without Mregate, destroyed and made plaine ground Ditches cast to drein the the More-field. without Mooregate, to wit, about and be∣yong the Lordship of Finsbury, were destroyed; And of them was made a plaine field for Archers to shoote in. And in the yeere 1512. Roger Atchley, Maior, caused divers dikes to be cast, and made to drein the waters of the said Moorefields, with Bridges arched over them, and the grounds about to be leve∣led, whereby the said field was made somewhat more commodious,Sluce to convey the stan∣ding wa∣ter out of the Moore. but yet it stood full of noisome waters. Where∣upon, in the yeere 1527. Sir Thomas Sey∣uor, Maior, caused divers Sluces to be made to convey the said waters over the Towne Ditch, into the course of Wal∣brooke, and so into the Thames: and by these degrees was this Fenne or Moore at length made maine and hard ground, which before being overgrowne with Flagges, Sedges and Rushes, served to no use, Since the which time also, the farther grounds beyond Finsbury Court,Moorefields raised and wind-Mils set there∣on. have beene so everheightned with Laystalls of dung, that now divers Wind-mills are thereon set, the Ditches be filled up, and the Bridges ouer-whel∣med. And now concerning the inclosures of common grounds about this City, whereof I mind not much to argue; Ed∣ward Hall setteth downe a note of his time,Edward Hall. to wit, in the fift or rather 6. of H. the 8. Before this time (saith he) the Inhabi∣tants of the Townes about London, as Isel∣done, Hoxton, Shores-ditch and others, had so inclosed the cōmon fields with hedges, and ditches, that neither the young men of the City might shoot, nor the ancient persons walke for their pleasures in those fields; but that either their bowes and arrowes were taken away or broken, or the honest persons arrested or indighted, saying: That no Londo∣ner ought to goe out of the City, but in the High-wayes. This saying so grieved the Londoners, that suddainly this yeere, a great number of the City assembled themselves in a mor∣ning, and a Turner in a fooles coate came crying thorow the City, shovels and spades, shovels and spades. So many of the people fol∣lowed, that it was wonder to behold; and (within a short space) all the hedges about the City were cast downe,Hedges pulled downe & ditches fil∣led up. and the ditches filled up, and every thing made plaine; such was the diligence of those worke-men. The Kings Councell hearing of this assem∣bly, came to the Gray Fryers, and sent for the Maior and Councell of the Citie, to know the cause, who declared to them the injurie & annoying done to the Citizens, & to their Liberties, which though they would not seeke disorderly to redresse, yet the Communalty and young persons could not be stayed thus to remedy the same. When the Kings Councell
had heard their answere, they dissimuled the matter, and commanded the Maior to see that no other thing were attempted, but that they should forth-with call home the younger sort: who having speedily atchie∣ved their desire, returned home before the Kings Councell, and the Maior departed without more harme: after which time (sayth Hall) those fields were never hedged. But afterward wee saw the thing in worse case than ever,Banque∣ting hou∣ses like Banque∣routs, bea∣ring great shew and little worth. by meanes of in∣closure for Gardens, wherein are buil∣ded many faire Summer houses, and as in other places of the suburbes, some of them like Midsummer Pageants, with Towers, Turrets, and Chimney tops, not so much for use or profit, as for shew and pleasure, and bewraying the vanity of mens mindes, much unlike to the disposition of the ancient Citizens, who delighted in the building of Hos∣pitals, and Almes-houses for the poore, and therein both imployed their wits, and spent their wealths in preferment of the common commoditie of this our City. But now to come backe againe to Moregate,Suburbe without Cripplegate. and from thence West through a narrow passage, called the Posterne, because it hath at either end a doore to shut in the night season, be∣twixt the More-ditch inclosed with Brick for Tenteryardes, and the Gar∣dens of the said Morefield, to Morelane: a part of the Suburbe without Cripple∣gate, without this posterne called Crip∣plegate, also lay a part of the said More, even to the River of Wels, as in an other place I have shewed, and no houses were there builded, till the latter end of the raigne of William the Conque∣ror, and his Sonne William Rufus, about which times, some few houses were there builded along East and West, thwart before the said Gate. One Alfune builded for the inhabitants a Parish Church which is of S. Giles, somewhat West from the said Gate,Parish Church of S. Giles. and is now on the banke of the Towne ditch, and so was there a street since called Fore∣street, as standing before the Gate. This Alfune in the raigne of Henry the first, became the first Hospiteler of Saint Bartholomewes Hospitall in Smith∣field, as in another place I have noted. And this Parish Church of S. Giles, be∣ing at the first a small thing, stood in place where now standeth the Vicarage house, but hath beene since (at divers times) much enlarged, according as the Parish hath increased, & was at the length newly builded in place where now it standeth. But the same new Church being large, strongly builded, & richly furnished with Ornamēts, was in the yeere 1545. by casualty of fire sore burnt and consumed: not withstan∣ding, it was againe (within short space of time) repaired as now it sheweth. Some little distance from the East end of this Church, standeth a faire Conduit castellated in Forestreet. Then had yee a Bosse of sweet water in the wall of the Church-yard, lately made a Pumpe, but already decayed. Then had yee a faire Poole of sweet water neare to the Church of S. Giles, wherein Anne of Lodbery was drowned as I have before declared. In the East end of Forestreet is More lane:Grub street. then next is Grub street, of late yeares inhabited (for the most part) by Bowyers, Fletchers, Bow-string makers and such like, now little occupied; Ar∣chery giving place to a number of bow∣ling Allies, and Dicing houses, which in all places are increased, and too much frequented. This street stretcheth North Everades Well street,Everades Well street. which thwarteth it to White Crosse street: the next from Forestreet North is White Crosse street, likewise ex∣tending it selfe up to the West end of Everades Well street, and from the end there of to Ealdestreet. From the West end of Forestreet lyeth Red Crosse street, from the which Crosse, on the right hand East lyeth Beech lane,Golding lane. and reacheth to the White Crosse street. From Red Crosse North lyeth Golding lane, which stretcheth up to a Crosse in Ealde street, which Golding lane (on both the sides) is replenished with many Tenements of poore people. On the left hand, and West of the Red Crosse lyeth a street, of old time called Hounds-ditch, & of later time na∣med Barbican, of such cause as I have before noted. And thus have you all the Suburbe without Cripplegate, being al∣most
altogether in the Parish of Saint Giles, which hath more than 1800. Housholders, and above 4000. Com∣municants. Without Aldersgate,Suburb without Aldersgate. on the left hand, is the Parish Church of S. Buttolph, on the North side of the which Church lyeth a way, called Little Britaine street, towards the Priory of Saint Bartholo∣mew in Smithfield; but the high-way without Aldersgate, runneth straight North from the said gate unto Houns∣ditch, or Barbican streete on the right hand, and Long lane on the left hand, which runneth into Smithfield. Then from the farther end of Al∣dersgate street, straight North to the Barre, is called Goswell street, repleni∣shed with small Tenements, Cottages, and Allies, Gardens, Banqueting hou∣ses and bowling places. Beyond these Barres, leaving the Charter-house on the left hand, or the West side of the way, stretcheth up towards Iseldon, & on the right hand or East side (at a red Crosse) turneth into Ealde-street,Eald street. so called, for that it was the old high-way from Aldersgate streete, for the North-east parts of Eng∣land, before Bishopsgate was builded, which streete runneth East to a Smiths Forge, sometime a Crosse before Shores-ditch Church, from whence the Passengers & Carriages were to turne North to Kings-land, Totenham, Wal∣tham, Ware, &c. There was sometime in this Suburbe without Aldersgate,Hospitall without Aldersgate. an Hospitall for the poore; but an Alien of Cluny, a French order, and therefore suppressed by King Henry the fift, who gave the house with lands and goods, to the Parish of Saint Buttolph, and a Brother-hood of the Tri∣nity was there founded, which was af∣terward suppressed by Henry the 8. or Edward the 6. There is (at the farthest North cor∣ner of this Suburbe) a Wind-mill, which was sometime by a tempest of wind overthrowne, and in place thereof a Chappell was builded by Queene KatharineThe Mount. (first wife to Henry the eight) who named it the Mount of Calvary be∣cause it was of Christs Passion, and was in the end of Henry 8. pulled downe, and a Windmill newly see up as afore. Without Newgate lih the West and by North Suburb,Suburbe without Newgate. on the right hand or North side whereof (betwixt the said gate, and the Parish of S. Se∣pulchre) turneth away towards West Smithfield, called, Giltspurre street, or Knight riders street; then is Smithfield it selfe, compassed about with buildings, as I have before declared in Faringdon Ward without. And without the Bars of West Smith field,S. Iohns streete. Charter house. lieth a large street or way, called of the house of S. Iohn there S. Iohns street, & stretcheth toward Isldō: On the right hand whereof stood the late dissolved Monastery, called the Charter-house, founded by Sir Walter Manny, Knight, a stranger borne, Lord of the Towne of Manny in the Diocesse of Cambrey, beyond the Seas, who for service done to King Edward the third, was made Knight of the Garter. This house he founded upon this oc∣casion: Charter-house. A great Pestilence entring this Iland, began first in Dorsetshire, then proceeded into Devonshire, Somerset∣shire, Glocestershire, and Oxfordshire, and at length came to London, and over∣spread all England, so wasting the peo∣ple, that scarce the tenth person of all sorts was left alive, and Church-yards were not sufficient to receive the dead, but men were forced to chuse out cer∣taine fields for burials: whereupon Ralph Stratford, Bishop of London, in the yeere 1348. bought a piece of ground, called No mans land,No mans land. which he inclosed with a wall of Bricke, and dedicated for buriall of the dead, builded there∣upon a proper Chappell, which is now enlarged,Pardon Church-yard by the Char∣ter-house. and made a dwelling house: and this burying plot is become a faire Garden, retaining the old name of Par∣don Church-yard. About this time, in the yeere 1349. the said Sir Walter Manny, in respect of danger that might befall in this time of so great a plague and infection, purcha∣sed 13. Acres and a Rod of ground, adjoyning to the said Nomans land, and lying in a place called Spittle Croft, be∣cause it belonged to Saint Bartholomews Hospitall, since that called the New Church Haw, and caused it to bee conse∣crated by the said Bishop of London to the use of burials.
In this plot of ground, there was (in that yeere) more than 50000. persons buried, as I have read in the Charters of Edward the third. Also I have seene and read an In∣scription fixed on a stone Crosse, some∣time standing in the same Church-yard and having these words: Anno Domini, 1349. Regnante magna pestilentia, consecratum fuit hoc Coemite∣rium, in quo & infra septa praesentis Mo∣nasterii, sepulta fuerunt mortuorum cor∣pora, plusquam quinquaginta millia, prae∣ter alia multa abhinc usque ad praesens, quorum animabus propitietur Deus, A∣men. In consideration of the number of Christian people here buried, the said Sir Walter Manny caused first a Chap∣pell to be builded, where (for the space of twenty three yeares) offerings were made: and it is to be noted, that above 100000. bodies of Christian people had in that Church-yard beene buried, for the said Knight had purchased that place for the buriall of poore people,Bull of Pope Cle∣ment. Travailers, and other that were disea∣sed, Charter-house. to remaine for ever; whereupon, an order was taken, for the avoyding of contention betweene the Parsons of Churches and that house,Churchyard prepared of the poore of poore, so to re∣maine for ever. to wit, that the bodies should bee had unto the Church where they were Parishioners, or dyed, and after the funerall service done, had to the place where they should be buried. And the yeere 1371. he caused there to bee founded an house of Carthusian Monkes, which he willed to be called the Salutation, and that one of the Monkes should be called Prior, and he gave them the sayd place of 13. Acres and a Rod of land, with the Chappel, and houses there builded for their ha∣bitation. He also gave them the three Acres of land, lying without the wals on the North part, betwixt the lands of the Abbot of Westminster, and the lands of the Prior of Saint Iohn; which three Acres being purchased, inclosed, and dedicated by Ralph Stratford, Bi∣shop of London,Vse for the Fryery Cart. as is aforeshewed, re∣mained till our time, by the name of Pardon Church-yard, & served for bury∣ing of such as desperately ended their lives, or were executed for Felonies, who were fetched thither usually in a close cart, bayled over and covered with blacke, having a plaine white crosse thwarting, and at the fore-end a S. Iohns Crosse without, and within a Bell ringing by shaking of the Cart, wherby the same might be heard when it passed, & this was called the Fryery Cart, which belonged to S. Iohns, and had the priviledge of Sanctuary. In this Charter-house were the Monu∣ments of the said Sir Walter Manny, and Margaret his wife, Marmaduke Lumley, Laurence Bromley, Knight, Sir Edward Hederset, Knight, Sir William Manny, Knight, Dame Iohan Borough, Iohn Dore, want Water, Knight, Robert Olney, Es∣quire, Katharine, daughter Sir William Babington, Knight, Blanch, daughter to Hugh Waterton, Katharine, wife to Iohn at Poot, daughter and heire to Richard Lacie, William Rawlin, Sir Iohn Len∣thaine, and Dame Margaret his wife, daughter to Iohn Fray, Iohn Peake Es∣quire, William Baron, and William Baron, Esquires, Sir Thomas Thawites Knight, Philip Morgan, Bishop of Ely, 1434. In the Cloystrie, Bartholomew Rede, Knight, Maior of London, buried 1505. Sir Iohn Popham, &c. This Monastery, at the suppression in the 29. of Henry the 8. was valued at 642. l. 4. d. halfe penny yeerely. Here now I find fit time, to commend to all succeeding posterity,The wor∣thie re∣mēbrance of M. Tho∣mas Sutton. the duely de∣served praises of that truely worthy (& never to be forgotten) Gentleman, Ma∣ster Thomas Sutton, the right Phoenix of Charity in our times. This late dissol∣ved Charter-house, by West Smithfield, belonging then to the Right Honorable Thomas Earle of Suffolke, after Lord Treasurer of England, is sufficiently knowne to bee a very large and goodly Mansion, beautified with spacious Gar∣dens, Walkes, Orchards and other pleasures,I have truely set downe all this, as it was deli∣vered mee in writing by a Gen∣tleman of good worth and credit. enriched with divers depen∣dencies of Lands and Tenements ther∣to belonging, and very aptly seated for wholesome ayre, and many other commodities. All which commodious∣nesse of situation, and largenesse of cir∣cuit, gave occasion to this well-minded Gentleman Master Sutton, to affect that house, as the onely place, whereon to
build the foundation of his Religious purpose. For, among other his Chri∣stian determinations, hee had former∣ly intended to build an house at Hal∣lingbury Bouchers in Essex, to be an Hos∣pitall for such poore men and Children as he himselfe (in his life time, or fu∣ture Governors for the same to bee de∣puted) should thinke fit to bee lodged and relieved there: Also, for a Schoole-master and Vsher,His first purpose at Hallingbu∣rie in Es∣sex to teach Children to reade and write, and instruct them in the Latine and Greeke Grammar: with a Learned Divine likewise to preach the Word of God to them all, and a Master beside, to governe all those people belonging to that house. To this blessed end and purpose,How hee intended to trme the Hos∣pitall. hee had procured (by earnest suit) power by an Act of Parliament, to build such an Hospitall in the Towne of Halling∣bury Bouchers, and that the same should be named, The Hospitall of King Iames, founded in Hallingbury in the Coun∣tie of Essex, at the humble Petition, and at the onely costs and charges of Thomas Sutton, Esquire: Appointing also such Honourable, Reverend and Worthy persons, as by the said Act of Parliament were nominated and ap∣pointed, to bee the first and instant Go∣vernors of the Lands, Possessions, Goods and Reveneues of the said Hos∣pitall. But afterward, upon more grounded deliberation,The Char∣ter house more ne∣cessary for an Hos∣pital than Hallingbury and finding this goodly house of the Charter-house, to bee much more convenient for the purpose, than that to be builded at Hallingbury could be: hee became an earnest suiter to the Earle of Suffolke, to purchase that house of him, acquianting his Honor with the alteration of his minde con∣cerning Hallingbury, and his earnest de∣sire to make the Charter-house his Hos∣pitall. The Earle being honourably enclined to so godly a motion, the mat∣ter sustained the lesse debating between them: but the price being concluded on, the bargaine and sale was assured. The summe disbursed for this purpose, amounted to 13000, l. which was paid downe in hand, before the ensealing of the Conveyance. Then he became suiter againe to his Majestie, to performe all that at the Charter-house, which he had formerly intended at Hallingbury: whereto the King readily yeelded, being graciously affected to so charitable a Worke, and granted his Letters Patents to the same effect.The first Gover∣nors ap∣pointed by Letters Patents, of King James his Hospitall, founded in the Charter-house. And the right Reverend Father in God, George, Archbishop of Cantur∣burie, Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancelor of England; Robert Lord high Treasurer of England; Iohn the e∣lect Bishop of London; Lancelot Bishop of Ely; Sir Edward Coke, Knight, chiefe Iustice of the Common Pleas; Sir Thomas Foster, Knight, one of his Majesties Iustices of the Common Pleas; Sir Henry Hobard, Knight and Baronet, Attourney generall; Iohn O∣verall, Deane of Pauls in London; George Mountaine, Deane of Westminster; Henry Thursby, Esquire, one of the Masters of the Chancerie; Geffrey Nigh∣tingale, Esquire; Richard Sutton, Es∣quire; Iohn Law Gentleman; Thomas Browne, Gentleman; and the Master of the Hospitall of King Iames, founded in the Charter-house, within the Country of Middlesex, at the humble petition, and the onely costs and charges of Thomas Sutton, Esquire, were elected, nomi∣nated and ordained by the Kings most excellent Majestie in his Letters Pa∣tents granted, to bee the first Gover∣nors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenues and goods of the fore-said Hospitall, and continuall maintenance thereof in forme following. All his Mannors and Lordships of Southminster,The lands made over by Master Sutton for the main∣tenance of the said Hospitall for ever, in the County of Essex. Norton, Little Hallingbury, alias Hallingbury Bouchers, and Much-Stanbridge, in the County of Essex. All those his Mannors and Lord∣ships of Bastingthorpe, alias, Bustingthorpe and Dunnesby in the County of Lin∣colne. All those his Mannors and Lord∣ships of Salthorp,In the County of Lincolne. alias, Saltrop, alias, Haltrop, Chlton and Blackgrove, in the County of Wilts.In the County of Wilts. And also all those his Lands & pasture-grounds, called Black∣grove, Lands & Pasture grounds in Wilts. contayning by estimation 200. Acres of pasture, with the appurte∣nances in Balckgrove and Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts.In the Counties of Cam∣bridge, Essex and Middlesex▪ And also in that his Mannor of Missenden, otherwise called the Mannor of Missunden, in the Parishes of Wroughton, Lydierde
and Tregose, in the said County. All that his Mannor of Elcombe, and a Parke, called Elcombe Parke, in the said County. All that his Mannor of Watelescote, ali∣as Wiglescete, alias Wigleskete, in the said County of Wilts. All that his Mannor of Westcote, alias, Westcete, with the appurtenances in the said County of Wilts. And also all those his Lands and Pastures, containing by estimation 100. Acres of Land, and 60. Acres of pasture, with the appurtenan∣ces in Wiglescote and Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. And all that his Mannor of Vffcote with the appurtenan∣ces. And also those his two Messuages, and 1000. Acres of Land, 2000. Acres of Pasture, 300. Acres of Meddowe, and 300. Acres of Wood, with the appur∣tenances, in Brodehinton, in the said County of Wilts. All those the Mannors & Lordships of Camps, alias, Campes Castell, otherwise called Castle Campes, with the appurte∣nances situate, lying, being, and exten∣ding in the Counties of Cambridge and Essex, or in either of them, or elsewhere within the Realme of England. His Man∣nor of Balsham, in the County of Cam∣bridge. And all his Messuages and Lands which are in the Parishes of Hackney & Totenham in the County of Middlesex, or in either of them.A briefe Rehearsall of the for∣mer grants. And all and singu∣ler the Mannors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Servi∣ces, Meddowes, Pastures, Woods, Ad∣vowsons, Patronages of Churches, and Hereditaments of the said Thomas Sut∣ton whatsoever, situate, lying or being within the said County of Essex, Lin∣colne, Wilts, Cambridge and Middlesex, or in any of them, with all and every of their rights, members and appurtenan∣ces whatsoever. Except all his Mannors or Lordships of Littlebury and Haddestocke,Excepti∣ons. with their appurtenances in the Countie of Essex. Beside all this bountie of his Hospi∣tall, Legacies given to charitable uses. behold what Legacies he hath given to charitable uses. To the poore people in Barwicke, 100. Markes. To the poore of Stoke-Newington. 10. li. To the poor Fishermen of the Towne of Oastend in the Low-Countries. 100. li. To the mending of the High-wayes betweene Islington and Newington,All these works to be done, and the monies payd with∣in a yeere after his decease. in the County of Middlesex, 40. Markes. To the mending of the High-wayes betweene Ashden and Walden, called Walden lane, in the Countie of Essex, 100. li. To the mending of the High-wayes, betweene great Lynton, in the Countie of Cambridge, and the said Towne of Wolden, 60. li. 13. s. 4. d. Towards the mending of Horseth lane. 60. li. To the mending of the Bridges and ordinary High-wayes, betweene South∣minster and Malden in Essex, 100. li. To the Chamber of London,To ten poore Mer∣chants. 1000. li. to be yeerely lent to ten young Mer∣chants, not having any great stockes of their owne. And those tenne men to be appointed by the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the City for the time be∣ing, and the Deane of Pauls: They are not to pay any use for the money, nor any to enjoy it above the space of one yeere. To the poore people of Hadstocke,Legades to the poore in sundry Tonnes. 20. li. To the poore of Littlebury and Bal∣sham, 40. li. To the Parson and Church-wardens of Balsham, for the time being, towards the buying a Bell, to be hanged up in the Steeple, to amend the Ring there, 20. li. To the poore of Southminster, 20. li. To the poore of Little Hallenbury, 20. li. To the poore of Dunsby Com. Lincoln. 20. li. To the poore prisoners in the prisons of Ludgate,The poore Prisoners. Newgate, the two Comp∣ters in London, the Kings-Bench, and the Marshalsey, 200. li. to be paid and divi∣ded among the same Prisoners by even and equall portions. To the Master,His love to Lear∣ning. Fellowes and Schol∣lers of the Corporation of Iesus Col∣ledge in Cambridge, 500. Markes. To the Master, Fellowes and Schol∣lers of the Corporation of Magdalen Colledge in Cambridge, 500. li. Towards the building of his intended Hospitall,To his Hospitall. Chappell and Schoole-house five thousand pounds, if he lived not to
see it performed in his life time. Beside, hee hath given into the Treasury or Store-house of the same intended Hos∣pitall, to begin their stocke with, & to defend the rights of the house 1000. l. To every one of his Feoffees, put in trust about his intended Hospital, 26. l. 13. s. 4. d. To the Poore of Beverley, a Close in Cottingham. To the Poore of Lincolne, a remain∣der of yeeres in the Rectory of Glen∣tham, Com. Lincolne. To Master Hutton, Vicar of Little∣bury, 20. l. To the Poore of Camps Castell, 10. l. To the Poore of Elcombe, 10. l. To M. Floud, Parson of Newington, 13. l. 6. s. 8. d. To the Poore of the Parish of Hack∣ney. 10. pounds. His Hospitall consisting of a Master, Governor, a Preacher, a Free-Schoole, with a Master and Vsher, 80. poore people, and 40. Schollers, maintained with sufficient cloathing, meat, drinke, lodging and wages:The whole number in the house, with the attendāte, in 180. beside Officers and ministers to attend on them, and the number to increase, according as the Revenues upon the expiration of the Leases is increased. This famous Hospitall of King Iames, with the value of the Lands layd unto it, the purchase of the House, stocke layd in, & allowance towards the buil∣ding: Also, the remainder of his goods unbequeathed, his large gifts and Le∣gacies to divers Honourable and wor∣thy friends, beside, great store of farre more inferiour account,The grea∣test and most com∣mendable that ever was given in England by one man, and to pious uses. surpassing my capacity to number, and the residue of 20000. pound left to the discretion of his Executors, may well and worthily be said to be the very greatest and most bountifull gift, that ever at any time was given in England, no Abbey (at the first foundation thereof) excepted, or therewith to be compared, being the gift of one man onely. But alas,M. Sutton died be∣fore hee could see his hopes take their effect. what perpetuity is there to be expected in this life, where there is no other certainty than of change? While all eyes stand gazing on this hopefull intention, and every eare liste∣ning to heare when it would come to effect: that enemy to infinite good and godly purposes, Death, takes away the worthy Master-workeman, yet, not unprovided, as too many are; for hee had his needfull occasions, befitting provision for so long a journey, readily sealed up in the peace of a good Con∣science, & that which the tyrant Death had bereft him of, he left to the perfor∣mance of his faithful Executors, Master Richard Sutton,The Exe∣cutors to M. Sutton. and Master Iohn Lawe, men of religious and upright soules, and (God be thanked) the worke is ac∣complished. And on the Munday after Michaelmas day, being the third day of October, An. Dom. 1614. the Captaines & Gentlemen entred into their famous prepared Hospital; to the glory of God, honour of the Kings most Royall Maje∣stie, credit of the Governors, comfort of them appointed to it, and joy of all good minds to behold it. Thus, though no tongue or penne can either so amply expresse, or suf∣ficiently set downe the great deserts of this so good and worthy a man: yet death having given a period to his life, and layd him in a goodly Tombe, in the Chappell of his owne Hospitall; there we must now leave him, with this Inscription thereon engraven. Sacred to the Glory of God, in gratefull memory of Thomas Sutton, Esquire. HEere lyeth buried the body of Thomas Sutton,A very costly and beautifull Tombe in the West side of the Quire. late of Ca∣stell Camps, in the County of Cambridge, Esquire: at whose onely costs and charges this Hospital was founded, and endued with large possessi∣ons, for the reliefe of poore men and chil∣dren. Hee was a Gentleman, borne at Knayth, in the County of Lincolne, of worthy and honest parentage. He lived to the age of 79. yeers, and deceased the 12. day of December, An. Dom. 1611. Master Hutton was the first Master of this Hospitall,Masters that have beene of the Hos∣pitall. according to the minde of M. Sutton. M. Pearne was the second. M. Hooker the third, who dyed there in his Mastership, and lyeth buried in the Chappell. M. Iohn Lawe, one of M. Suttons Ex∣ecutors, lyeth also there buried in the
Chappell, and hath a Monument or re∣membrance of him, fixed in the East wall of the said Chappell. An Epitaph written by a Friend to Goodnesse. WHen bad men dye, the memory remaines Of their corruptions and un∣godly wayes:Intended to bee hung in a faire Ta∣ble by the Tombe. As merit to their mis-applyed paines, Out of ill actions forming as ill prayse. For Vertue wounded by their deepe disgrace, Leav's Shame to their Posterity and Race. When good men dye, the memory re∣maines Of their true Vertue, and most Christian wayes; As a due guerdon to their godly paines, Out of good actions forming as good praise: For Vertue cherished by their deeds of grace, Leaves Fame to their posterity and Race. Among those good (if goodnesse may be said To be among the seede of mortall men) In upright ballance of true merit weigh'd, Needs must we reckon famous Sut∣ton then. In whom, as in a mirror doth ap∣peare. That faith with works did shine in him most cleere. And let us not, as is a common use, Measure him by a many other more; In death, to cover their bad lifes abuse, To lanch out then some bounty of their store. No, Sutton was none such, his Hos∣pitall, And much more else beside, speakes him to all. For as God blest him with abundant wealth, Like to a carefull Steward he im∣ploy'd, it, And ordered all things in his best of health, As glad to leave it, as when he en∣joyed it. And being prepared every houre to dye, Disposed all his gifts most Christi∣anly. In Abrahams bosome sleeps he with the blest, His workes, they follow him, his worth survives, Good Angels guide him to eternall rest, Where is no date of time, for yeeres or lives. You that are rich, doe you as he hath done, And so assure the Crowne that hee hath won. FINIS. A little without the Barres of West Smithfield,Charter-house lane. is Charterhouse lane, so called, for that it leadeth to the said plot of the late dissolved Monastery, in place wher∣of, first the Lord North, but since, Tho∣mas Howard, late Duke of Norfolke, have made large and sumptuous buildings, both for lodging and pleasure.Conduit by the Charter-house. At the gate of this Charter-house is a faire water-conduit, with two Cockes, serving the use of the neighbours to their great commodity. Saint Iohns street, from the entring this lane, is also (on both sides) repleni∣shed with buildings, up to Clarken well. On the left hand of which street, lyeth a lane called Cow Crosse,Cow-Crosse. of a Crosse sometime standing there, which lane turneth downe to another lane called Turne-Mill streete, which stretcheth up to the West side of Clarken well, and was called Turne-Mill streete, for such cause as is afore declared. One other lane there is, called Saint Peters lane, which turneth from Saint Iohns street to Cow-Crosse.
On the left hand also stood the late dissolved Priory of Saint Iohn of Ieru∣salem in England,Prioty of S. Iohn of Ierusalem. founded about the yeere of Christ 1100. by Iorden Briset, Baron, & Muriel his wife neere unto Clarkes well, besides West Smithfield, which Briset, having first founded the the Priory of Nunnes at Clarkes Well, bought of them ten Acres of Land, gi∣ving them in exchange ten Acres of Land in his Lordship of Welling Hall, in the County of Kent. Saint Iohns Church was dedicated by Heraclius, Patriarke of the holy Resurrection of Christ at Ierusalem, in the yeare 1185. & was the chiefe seat in England of the Religious Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusa∣lem. Whose profession was (besides their dayly service of God) to defend Christians against Pagans, and to fight for the Church; using for their habite a blacke upper garment, with a white Crosse on the forepart thereof, and for their good service was so highly estee∣med, that when the order of Templers was dissolved, their Lands and posses∣sions were (by Parliament) granted un∣to these, who after the losse of Ierusa∣lem, recovered the Ile of Rhodes, from the Turke, and there placed them∣selves, being called thereof (for many yeeres) Knights of the Rhodes, but after the losse thereof 1523. removed to the Ile of Malta, manfully opposing them∣selves against the Turkish invasions. The Rebels of Essex and of Kent 1381. set fire on this house, causing it to burne by the space of 7. dayes together, not suffering any to quenchit: since the which time, the Princes of that house have new builded both church & houses thereunto appertaining, which Church was finished by Thomas Docwray, late Lord Prior there, about the yeere 1504. as appeareth by the inscription over the Gate-house, yet remaining. This house at the suppression in the 32. of Hen. the 8. was valued to dispend in lands 3385. l. 19. s. 8. d. yeerely. Sir W. Weston being then Lord Prior, died on the same 7. of May, on which the house was suppres∣sed, so that great yeerely pensions being granted to the Knights by the King, and namely to the Lord Prior, during his life 1000. l. but he never received pen∣ny: The King tooke into his hands all the lands that belonged to that house, & to that order wheresoever in England and Ireland, for the augmentation of his Crowne. This Priory, Church and house of S. Iohn was preserved from spoyle or downe pulling, so long as King Henry the eight reaigned, and was imployed as a Store-house for the Kings Toyles and Tents for Hunting, & for the wars, &c. But in the third of King Edward the sixth, the Church for the most part, to wit, the body and side Iles, with the great Bell-tower, (a most curious piece of workemanship, graven, gilt, and in∣ameled, to the great beautifying of the City, and passing all other that I have seene) was undermined and blowne up with Gun-powder, the stone thereof was imployed in building of the Lord Protectors house at the Strand. That part of the Quire which remaineth, with some side Chappels, was by Car∣dinall Poole (in the raigne of Queene Mary) closed up at the West end, and otherwise repaired, and Sir Tho∣mas Tresham, Knight, was then made Lord Prior there, with re∣stitution of some Lands; but the same was againe suppressed in the first yeere of Queene Elizabeth. There was buried in this Church, Brethren of that house, and Knights of that order, Iohn Botell, William Bagecore, Richard Barrow, Iohn Vauclay; Thomas Launcelin, Iohn Mallory, William Turney, William Hulles, Hils or Hayles, Iohn We∣sion, Redington, William Longstrother, Iohn, Longstrother, William Tong, Iohn Wakeline. Then of other; Thomas Thorn∣burgh, Gentleman, William West, Gent. Iohn Fulling, & Adam Gill, Esquires, Sir Iohn Mortimor, and Dame Eleaner his wife, Nicholas Silverston, William Plompton, Esquire, Margaret Tong, and Isabell Tong, Walter Bellingham, alias, Ireland, K. of Armes of Ireland, Tho∣mas Bedle, Gent. Katharine daughter of William Plompton, Esquire, Richard Turpin, Gent. Ione wife to Alexander Dikes, Iohn Bottell and Richard Bottle, Esquires, Rowland Darcy, Richard Sut∣ton, Gent. Richard Bottill, Gent. Sir W. Harpden, Knight, Robert Kingston, Es∣quire, and Margery his wife, Iohn Roch, Richard Cednor, Gent. Simon Mallory,
1442. William Mallory, Robert Longstro∣ther, Ralph Astely, William Marshall, Robert Savage, Robert Gondall, Esquire, & Margery his wife, William Babthorpe, Baron of the Exchequer 1442. North from the house of S. Iohns was the Priory of ClarkenWell,Priory of Clarken-Well, called S. Iames at ClarkenWel. so called of Clarkes well adjoyning, which Priory was also founded about the yeere 1100. by Iorden Briset, Baron, the sonne of Ralph, the sonne of Brian Briset: who gave to Robert a Priest, foureteen Acres of land, lying in the field next adjoining to the said Clarkes VVell, thereupon to build an house of Religious persons, which he founded to the honor of God, and the Assumption of our Lady, and placed therein blacke Nuns. This Ior∣den Briset, gave also to that house one piece of ground, thereby to build a Windmill upon, &c. Hee and Muriell his wife were buried in the Chapter-house there. More buried in this Church, Iohn VVikes, Esquire, and Isa∣bel his wife, Dame Agnes Clifford, Ralph Thimbleby, Esquire, Dame Iahan, Ba∣ronnesse of Greystocke, Dame Iahan La∣dy Ferrar. And of later time in the Parish Church, Constantius Bennet, a Greeke borne, he gave two houses, the one in Saint Iohns street, the other in Turne∣mill street, the rents of them to be distri∣buted in Coales every yeere against Christmas, to the poore of that Parish. Heereunder lyeth buried Francis White,An engra∣ven Plate in the South wall of the Chancell. the 14. Sonne of Sir Thomas White of Southwerborne, Knight, deceased, and of Lady Anne his wife: who dyed at his age of sixteene, the last day of February, Anno Domini, 1566. he being their nineteenth Childe. Hic jacet Isabella Sackuill,A faire plated Stone in the Chan∣cell. quae fuit Priorissa nuper Prioratus de Clarken∣well, tempore dissolutionis ejusdem Prioratus, quae fuit 21. Octobris, Anno Domini, Millesimo Quin∣gentesimo Septuagesimo, & An. Reg. Elizab. Dei gratia, &c. duo∣decimo. Vnder this Stone lyeth the body of the good,The like stone close by it. charitable, and vertuous Gentlewoman, Mistris Anne Blunt, daughter unto Walter Blunt, of Blunt Hall in the Country of Stafford Esquire, and Sister unto the right VVorshipfull, the Lady Paulet, deceased and to the Lady Siden∣ham, now living. VVhich Anne died the 24. day of April, An. Domini, 1504. Contegit hoc marmor Doctorem no∣mine Bellum,A faire Stone by the Com∣munion Table. Qui bene tum rexit Praesulis officiū. Moribus, ingenio, vitae pietate vige∣bat, Laudatus cunctis, cultus & eloquio. Anno Domini, 1556. die August. 11. There is an ancient Marble Tombe in the North wall of the Chancell,A tombe seeming of great Antiquity. with the figure of a dead man by in his shrowd: and all the plates are stolen a∣way, only one piece remaining, contai∣ning these words: Hospitalitate inclytus, genere praeclarus: There an Armes, Hanc urna officii causu. Here lyeth the body of the Lady Elizabeth Ascough,A faire pla∣ted Stone by the Commu∣niō Table. sometime the wife of Wil∣liam Dallyson, and one of the Iu∣stices of the Kings Bench: And after∣ward wife to Sir Francis Ascough, Knight. The which Lady departed this life the 6. day of December, Anno Do∣mini, 1570. And here also lyeth William Dallison, Esquire, eldest son to the said William and Elizabeth, which William the Sonne deceased the 9. day of November, Anno Domini, 1585. Heere lyeth the body of Francis Butler,A plated stone in the Chan∣cell. fourth Sonne of Sir Iohn Butler, of Hat∣field Woodhall in the County of Kent, Knight. Obiit 4. Martii, 1615. The Lady Elizabeth Barckley of the Queenes Majesties Bed-Chamber,A faire Tombe in the North wall of the Chancell. and second wife to Sir Maurice Barckley, Knight, deceased (Standard-bearer to her Majestie, to her Father, and to her Brother) departed this life in this Parish, the 16. day of Iune, An. Dom. 1585. (being 52. yeeres old) in the faith of Ie∣sus Christ, and was buried in the floore under this Tombe. This Lady was the daughter of Anthony Sonds, Esquire. She had children, two sonnes and one daughter, Robert, Margaret and Iohn.
Rogero Wood Armigero,A comely Monumēt in the same North wall. Servienti ad Arma, tam Serenissimo Regi, quam ho∣noratissimo conventui Parliamenti. Rosa Conjunx hoc posuit amoris pii, momoriae perpetuae, observantiae debitae, Sacrum Monumentum. Qui legis, qui luges, Rogerum Wood Ne perisse putes, superesse scias, Extinctus extat, peremptus perennis est, Vivit in suorum desideriis, in bonorum Praeconiis, in Coelrum gaudiis. Obiit 18. Martii, 1609. Aetatis suae 46. Iohn Palmer of Clarkenwell,A faire Monumēt in the South wall of the Cahncel. Esquire, was buried here the 18. day of February, An. Dom. 1585. He married Panclin, the daughter of Anthony Sondes of Kent, Esquire: she was also buried in this Chancell: By whom he had issue An∣thony Palmer, Elizabeth Cheiney, Iane Thursby, and Mary Palmer. Iane Thursby had also one of her daughters here buried, named Elizabeth. In obitum Generosissimae, cha∣rissimae{que} Elizabethae Croftes, nuper uxoris Caroli Croftes, Armigeri: Christoph. Brooke devotissimus, hoc me∣moriae pignus posuit. Obiit 20. Decemb. 1597. GEntle beholder of these dolefull lines,A Table hanging on the wall over her grave. With carefull mutes and mournfull accents sounding, Resolve to teares, viewing these sad designes Of driery sorrow, and hearts deepest wounding. Consuming Time, abridging worlds desire, Insulting death, feareful, prodigious, strange, Eclipsing, waxing heat of Natures fire, With wayning forc'd, and necessarie change: Since you have done your worst to date her dayes, Whilome the worlds, now heavens gratious ghest: I, this sad memory of her liues praise Presume to write, in skilfull Arts the least. She was descended of right gentle blood, Kinde, courteous, affable and milde by nature, Modest her thoughts, her disposition good, Her mind Exchequers store to eve∣rie creature, Her Conscience spotles, her Religion pure, Her life sincere, her studie contem∣plation: Her hope was heaven, with life aye to endure, Her faith was constant in her soules salvation. Her vertuous care her children to direct, Conform'd to reason in her husbands will: Her bounty to her servants, friends respect, Desire to helpe, and wish no neigh∣bour ill. Thrice happy then (breath-lesse) in Tombe that lyest: Earth hath but earth, thy better part survives: From worldly warfare, summon'd to the highest, Whose death from life, a second life derives. Death life confirmes, Heaven earth unites in one: Her life in death, and blisse when world is done. Here lieth the body of Thomas Beding∣field, A faire plated Stone in a comely Chappell by the Pulpi. Esquire, second sonne unto Sir Henry Beding field, Knight, late of the County of Norf. and one of the privy Councell to Queene Mary. Also this Thomas Bedingfield, was one of the honorable band of Gentlemen Pen∣sioners unto the late famous Queene Eli. & Master of the Tents & Pavili∣ons
unto the most mighty King IAMES, Monarch of Great Britaine. He departed this life the 11. day of August, An. Dom. 1613. This Monument was made and pla∣ced here, at the cost and charges of Iohn Skillicorne, Esquire, being his Executor. William Herne, a Master of defence, and yeoman of the Guard, 1580. gave Lands and Tenements to the Cloth∣workers in London, they to pay yeerely for ever, 14. pound to the Church war∣dens of Clarken Well, and 14. l. on the Churchwardens of S. Sepulchres, to∣wards reparation of these Churches, and reliefe of the poore men. More hee gave after the death of one man, then living, 8. l. the yeare for ever, to the mending of High-wayes. Thomas Sackeford, Esquire, one of the Masters of Requests, gave to the poore of that Parish 40. s. the yeere for ever, out of his Almes-house at Woodbridge in Suffolke, where he is buried. Henry Stoke, Gardener, buried there, gave 20. s. the yeere for ever towards reparation of that Church. This Priory was valued to dispend 262. l. 9. s. by yeere, and was surren∣dred the 30. of H. the 8. Many faire houses are now builded about the Prio∣rie, namely, by the high-way towards Iseldon. So much of the Church which re∣maineth: for one great Ile thereof, which fell downe, serveth now as a Pa∣rish Church of S. Iames, not onely for the Tenements and neere Inhabitants, but also (as is aforesaid) for all up to Highgate, Moswell, &c. Neere unto this Church, besides Clarkes Well lane, were divers other Wels, namely, Skinners Well, Fags Well, Tode Well, Loders Well, Rede Well, &c. now damned up. Now to returne to Giltspurre streete, where I first began with this Suburb, there standeth the Parish Church of S. Sepulchre in the Bayly, as is before shewed, from this streete to Turnea∣gaine lane by Hosier lane, Cow lane, and Oldboorne Conduit, downe Snore hill, to Oldboorne bridge, and up Oldboorne hill, by Gold lane on the right hand, and Lither lane beyond it, to the Barres; be∣yond the which Barres on the same side is Port Poole,Port poole, or Grayes Inne lane an Inne of Court. or Grayes Inne lane, so cal∣led of the Inne of Court, named Grayes Inne, a goodly house there situate: by whom builded or first begun I have not yet learned, but it seemeth to be since Edward the 3. time, and is a Prebend to Pauls Church in London. This lane is furnished with faire buildings, and many tenements on both the sides, leading to the fields towards Highgate and Hamsted. On the high street have ye many faire houses builded, and lodgings for Gen∣tlemen, Innes for Travellers, and such like, up almost (for it lacketh but lit∣tle) to S. Giles in the fields: amongst the which buildings, for the most part being very new, one passeth the rest in largenesse of roomes, lately builded by a Widow,Widow A∣lington her building. sometime wife to Richard A∣lington, Esquire, which Rich. Alington de∣ceased in the yeare 1561. And thus much for that North side of Oldboorne. Now from Newgate on the left hand or South side,South side of Old∣boorne. lyeth the Old Bayly, & so downe by Seacoale lane end to Oldboorne bridge, up Oldboorne hill, by Shoo lane, and Fewters lane, to the Barres. Beyond the Barres had ye (in old time) a Temple,Old Temple. builded by the Tem∣plers, whose order first began in the yeere of Christ 1118. the 19. of Henry the first. This Temple was left, and fell to rune since the yeere 1184. when the Templers had builded them a new Tem∣ple in Fleetstreet, neere to the River of Thames. A great part of this old Tem∣ple was pulled downe but of late, in the yeere 1595. Adjoyning to this old Temple,The Bi∣shop of Lincolnes Inne. was sometime the Bishop of Lincolnes Inne, wherein he lodged when he repaired to this City. Robert de Curars, Bishop of L. builded it about the yeere 1147. I. Rus∣sel, Bishop of Lincolne, Chancelor of England, in the raigne of Richard the third, was lodged there. It hath of late yeeres belonged to the Earles of South∣hampton, Southamp∣ton house. and therefore called South∣hampton house. Agaster Roper hath of late builded much there, by means whereof, part of the ruines of the old Temple was seene to remaine, builded of Cane stone, round in forme as the New Temple by
Temple Barre, and other Temples in Eng∣land. Beyond this old Temple and the Bi∣shop of Lincolnes house, is New-streete, so called in the raigne of Henry the third,New streete. when he (of a Iewes house) founded the house of Converts betwixt the old Temple and the new. The same streete hath since been cal∣led Chancery lane,New streete or Chance∣ry lane. by reason that King Edward the third annexed the house of Converts by Patent, to the office of Cu∣stos Rotulorum, or Master of the Rolles, in the 15. of his raigne. In this streete, the first faire building to be noted on the East side,Cursitors Office in Chauncery lane. is called the Cursitors Office, builded with divers faire lodgings for Gentlemen, all of Bricke and Timber, by Sir Nicolas Ba∣con, late Lord Keeper of the great Seale. Neere unto this Cursitors Office, be divers faire houses and large Gardens, builded and made in a ground, some∣time belonging to one great house on the other side the street, there made by Ralph Nevill, Bishop of Chichester. This ground he had by the gift of Henry the third, as appeareth. The King granted to Ralph, Bishop of Chichester, Chauncelor, that place, with the Garden which Iohn erlirum forfeited in that street, called Newstreet, over∣against the land of the said Bishop, in the same streete, which place, with the Garden and appurtenance, was the Kings Exchete, by the libertie of the Citie of London, as it was acknowledged before the King, in his Court of the Tower of London, in the last Pleas of the Crowne of that City, Cart. 11. H. 3. Then was the house of Converts, wherein now the Rolles of Chancery be kept. Then the Serieants Inne, &c. On the West side of Newstreete,Blacke Fryers Church by Oldboorne. to∣wards the North end thereof, was (of old time) the Church, and house of the prea∣ching Friers: the which house I find that in the yeere of Christ 1221. the Fryers Preachers, 13. in number, came into England, and having to their Prior one named Gilbert de Fraxineto, in company of Peter de la Roch, Bishop of Winchester, came to Canturburie, where presenting themselves before the Archbishop Ste∣ven, he commanded the said Prior to preach, whose Sermon he liked so well, that ever after hee loved that Order. These Fryers came to London, and had their first house without the Wall of the City by Oldboorne, neere unto the old Temple. Hubert de Burgo,Earle of Kent burl∣ed in the Blacke Fryers. Earle of Kent, was a great benefactor unto these Fryers, and deceasing at his Mannor of Bansted in Surrey, or after some writers, at his Ca∣stell of Barkamsted in Hartfordshire, in the yeere 1242. was buried in their Church, unto the which Church he had given his place at Westminster, which the said Fryers afterward sold to Walter Gray, Archbishop of Yorke, and hee left it to his successors in that Sea, for ever to be their house, when they should re∣paire to the City of London. And ther∣fore the same was called Yorke-place, which name so continued, untill the yeere, 1529. that King Henry the eight tooke it from Thomas Woolsey, Cardinall and Archbishop of Yorke, and then gave it to name, White-Hall. Margaret, Sister to the King of Scots, Widdow to Geffrey, Earle Marshall, deceased 1244. and was buried in this Church. In the yeere 1250. the Fryers of this Order of Preachers, thorough Christen∣dome, and from Ierusalem, were by a Convocation assembled together, at this their house by Old-boorne,Convoca∣tion of Blacke Fryers by Oldboorne. to en∣treat of their estate, to the number of 400. having meate and drinke found them of Almes, because they had no possessions of their owne. The first day the King came to their Chapter, found them meate and drinke, and dined with them. Another day the Queene found them meat and drinke: afterward the Bishop of London, then the Abbot of Westminster, of S. Albons, Waltham, and others. In the yeere 1276. Gregory Roke∣sley, Maior, and the Barons of London, granted and gave to Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canturburie, two lanes or wayes next the street of Baynards Castell, and the Tower of Mountfichet, to be de∣stroyed. On the which place the said Ro∣bert builded the late new Church, with the rest of the Stones that were left of the said Tower. And thus the Black-Fryers left their Church and house by Oldboorne, and departed to their new.
This old Frier-house, (juxta Holboorn saith the Patent) was by King Edward the first in the sixteenth of his raigne, given to Henry Lacy, Earle of Lincolne. Next to this house of Fryers, was one other great House, sometime belonging to the Bishop of Chichester, whereof Ma∣thew Paris writeth thus: Ralph de nova villa,Bishop of Chiche∣sters Inne. or Nevill, Bishop of Chichester, and Chancelor of England, sometime builded a noble house, even from the ground, not farre from the New Temple and house of Converts, in the which place he deceased, in the yeere 1244. In this place after the decease of the said Bishop, and in place of the house of Blacke-Fryers before spoken of, Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne, Constable of Che∣ster, and Custos of England, builded his Inne,Lincolns Inne. and for the most part was lodged there: hee deceased in this house in the yeere, 1310. and was buried in the new worke (whereunto he had been a great benefactor) of Saint Pauls Church, be∣twixt our Lady Chappell, and Saint Dunstanes Chappell. This Lincolnes Inne, sometime pertaining to the Bi∣shops of Chichester, as a part of the said great house,Lincolns Inne an Inne of Court. is now an Inne of Court, retaining the name of Lincolnes Inne, as afore, but now lately encreased with faire buildings, and replenished with Gentlemen, studious in the Common Lawes. In the raigne of Henry the eight Sir Thomas Lovell was a great builder there, especially he builded the Gate∣house and forefront towards the East, placing theron aswell the Lacies Armes, as his owne. He caused the Lacies Armes to be cast and wrought in Lead, on the Lover of the Hall of that house, which was in the 3. Escutcheons a Ly∣on Rampant for Lacie, 7. Mascules voy∣ded for Quincie, and 3. Wheat sheaves for Chester. This Lover being of late re∣payred, the said Escutcheons were left out. The rest of that side, even to Fleet∣street, is replenishd with faire buildings. Now the high Oldborne streete, from the North end of New-streete stretcheth on the left hand (in building lately fra∣med) up to S. Giles in the field,Hospitall of S. Giles founded. which was an Hospitall, founded by Matilda the Queene, wife to Henry the first, a∣bout the yeere 1117. This Hospitall, saith the Record of Edward the third, the nineteenth yeere, was founded without the Barre, Veteris Templi Lon∣don & Conversorum. This Hospitall was founded, as a Cell to Burton Lagar of Ierusalem, as may ap∣peare by a deede dated the foure and twentieth of Henry the seventh in these words: Thomas Norton,Burton Lagar an Hos∣pitall in Leicester shire. Knight, Master of Burton Lagar of Ierusalem in England, and the Brethren of the same place, keepers of the Hospitall of Saint Giles, without the Barres of the Old Temple of London, have sold to Geffrey Kent, Citizen and Draper of London, a messuage or house, with two sollars above edified in the Parish of Alhallowes Hony lane, in West Cheape, adjoyning to the West part of a Tenement, called the Goate on the Hope, pertaining to the Drapers of Lon∣don, for 31. l. At this Hospitall,S. Giles bowle. the Prisoners, con∣veyed from the City of London towards Teyborne, there to be executed for Trea∣sons, Felonies, or other trespasses, were presented with a great Bowle of Ale, thereof to drinke at their pleasure, as to be their last refreshing in this life. Now without Ludgate,Suburbe without Ludgate. lyeth the South end of the Old Baily, then downe Ludgate hill by Fleet lane, over Fleet bridge, up Fleet street, by Shoo lane, Few∣ters lane, Newstreet, or Chancerie lane, and to Shire lane by the Barre on the right hand. And from Ludgate, on the left hand or South side, by Bridge-lane, Water-lane, Crokers-lane Serjeants Inne, and the New Temple by the Barre, all which is of Faringdon Ward, as is aforesaid shewed.
LIBERTIES OF THE DVTCHIE OF LANCASTER. NExt without the Barre the New Temple,Liberties of the Dut∣chie with∣out Temple barre, the bounds thereof. and Liberties of the Citie of London, in the Su∣burbs, is a Liberty per∣taining to the Dutchie of Lancaster, which beginneth in the East, on the South side or left hand by the River Thames, and stretcheth West to Ivie-bridge, where it en∣deth. And againe, on the North side or right hand, some small distance with∣out Temple-barre in the high street, from a payre of Stocks there standing, stret∣cheth one large middle row or troope of small Tenements, partly opening to the South, partly towards the North, up West to a Stone Crosse, now head∣lesse, over-against the Strand, and this is the bounds of that Libertie; which sometime belonged to Brian Lisle, since to Peter of Savoy, and then to the house of Lancaster,Strand street. as shall be shewed. Henry the third,Rotum car∣tar. Petri Sabaud. in the 30. yeere of his raigne, did grant to his Vncle, Peter of Savoy, all those houses upon the Thames, which sometimes pertained to Brain de Insula, or Lisle, without the Walls of his Citie of London, in the way or street called the Strand, to hold to him and to his heires, yeelding yeerely in the Exchequer, at the feast of Saint Michael th' Archangell, three barbed Arrowes for all services. Dated at Re∣ding, &c. This Peter of Savoy, builded the Savoy. But first amongst other buildings,Monu∣ments of Strand street. me∣morable for greatnesse on the River of Thames, Excester house, so called, for that the same belonged to the Bishops of Excester, and was their Inne or London lodging. Who was first builder thereof, I have not read; but that Walter Staple∣ton, was a great builder there, in the raigne of Edward the second is manifest: for the Citizens of London, when they had beheaded him in Cheape, neere unto the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, they buried him in a heape of Sand or rubbiso,Excesser house, since Pa∣get house, Lester house and Essex house. in his owne house without Temple barre, where hee had made great building. Edmond Lacy, Bishop of Exce∣ster, builded the great Hall in the raigne of Henry the sixth, &c. The same hath since been called Paget house, because William Lord Paget enlarged and posses∣sed it. Then Leicester house, because Ro∣bert Dudley, Earle of Leicester, of late new builded there and then Essex house, of the Earle of Essex lodging there. Then West,Chappell of the Ho∣ly Ghost. was a Chappell dedica∣ted to the Holy Ghost, called S. Spirit, upon what occasion founded I have not read. Next is Milford lane downe to the Thames:Mildford lane. but why so called, I have not read as yet. Then was the Bishop of Bathes Inne,Bishop of Bathes Inne, or Arundel house. lately new builded (for a great part thereof) by the Lord Thomas Seamer, Admirall, which house came sithence to be possessed by the Earle of Arundell, and thereof called Arundell house. Next beyond the which, on the street side, was sometime a faire Cemitorie, or Church-yard,Parish Church of S. Mary at the Strand. and in the same a Pa∣rish Church, called of the Nativitie of our Lady, and the Innocents of the Strand; and of some, by meane of a Bro∣therhood kept there, called of S. Vrsula at the Strand. And neere adjoyning to the said Church,Chesters Inne, or Strand Inne, an Inne of Chancery. betwixt it and the River of Thames, was an Inne of Chancery, com∣monly called Chesters Inne, (because it belonged to the Bishop of Chester,) by
others named of the situation, Strand Inne. Then was there an house belonging to the Bishop of Landaffe:The Bi∣shop of Landaffe his Inne. for I find in Record, the 4. of Edward the second, that a vacant place, lying neere the Church of our Lady at Strand, the said Bishop procured it of Thomas Earle of Lancaster, for the enlarging of this house. Then had yee in the high street a faire bridge,Strand bridge. called Strand Bridge, and under it a lane or way, downe to the landing place on the banke of Thames. Then was the Bishop of Chester (commonly called of Lichfield and Co∣ventrie) his Inne,Bishop of Chester his Inne. or London lodging, this house was first builded by Walter Langton, Bishop of Chester, Treasurer of England, in the raigne of Edward the first. And next unto it adjoyning, was the Bishop of VVorcesters Inne: all which, to wit, the Parish of Saint Mary at Strand, Strand Inne, Strand Bridge, with the lane under it, the Bishop of Chesters Inne, the Bishop of VVorcesters Inne, with all the Tenements adjoining, were by com∣mandement of Edward, Duke of Som∣merset, Vncle to Edward the sixth, and Lord Protector, pulled downe, & made levell ground, in the yeere 1549. In place wherof,Sommer∣set house he builded that large and goodly house, now called Sommerset house. In the high street neere unto the Strand,Stone Crosse at Strand. sometime stood a Crosse of Stone, against the Bishop of Coventrie or Chester his house, whereof I read, that in the yeere 1294. and divers other times, the Iustices Itinerants sate with∣out London, at the Stone Crosse over∣against the Bishop of Coventries house, and sometime they sate in the Bishops house, which was hard by the Strand, as is aforesaid. Then next is the Savoy,Savoy house, first buil∣ded by Peter, Earle of Savoy and Richmond. so called of Peter, Earle of Savoy and Richmond, Son to Thomas Earle of Savoy, Brother to Bo∣niface, Archbishop of Canturbury, and Vncle unto Heleanor, wife to King Henry the third. Hee first builded this house, in the yeere 1245. And heere is occasion offe∣red me, for satisfying of some deniers thereof, to prove that this Peter of Savoy was also Earle of Savoy. Wherefore, out of a Booke of the Genealogies of all the whole house of Savoy, compiled by Phil∣lebert Pingonio, Baron of Guzani, remai∣ning in the hands of William Smith, alias, Rouge dragon, Officer of Armes, I have gathered this. Thomas,Thomas Earle of Savoy, his Pedegree by occasiō. Earle of Savoy, had issue by Beatrix, daughter to Aimon, Earle of Geneva, 9. Sonnes, and 3. Daughters: Amadis his first Sonne, succeeded Earle of Savoy in the yeere 1253. Peter his se∣cond Sonne, Earle of Savoy and of Rich∣mond, in 1298. Philip his third Sonne, Earle of Savoy and Burgundy, 1284. Tho∣mas the fourth, Earle of Flaunders, and Prince of Piemont. Boniface the eighth Archbishop of Canturbury.Beatrix, sister to Peter, Earle of Savoy, Mo∣ther to five Queenes. Beatrix his Daughter, married to Reymond Beringa∣rius of Aragon, Earle of Province and Narbone, had issue, and was Mother to five Queenes. The first, Margaret, wife to Lewis King of France; the second, Eleanor, wife to Henry the third, King of England; the third, Sanctia, wife to Ri∣chard, King of Romans; the fourth, Bea∣trix, wife to Charles, King of Naples; the fift, Iohanna, wife to Philip King of Na∣varre. To returne againe to the house of Sa∣voy: Fratrèes de Monte Io∣vis, or Pri∣ory de Cor∣nuto by Have ring at the Bowre. Queene Eleanor, wife to King Hen∣ry the third, purchased this place after∣wards of the Fraternity or Brethren of Mountjoy, unto whom Peter of Savoy (as it seemeth) had given it,Henry Knighton. for her sonne Edmond, Earle of Lancaster, as Master Camden hath noted out of a Re∣gister booke of the Dukes of Lancaster. Henry Duke of Lancaster repaired, or ra∣ther new builded it, with the charges of 52000. Markes, which money he had gathered together at the Towne of Bridgerike. Iohn the French King was lodged there, in the yeere, 1357. and also, in the yeere 1363. for it was (at that time) the fairest Mannor in England. In the yeere,Henry Knighton. 1381. the Rebels of Kent and Essex burnt this house, unto the which there was none in the Realme to be compared in beauty and starelinesse, (saith mine Author.) They set fire on it round about, and made proclamation, that none, on paine to lose his head, should convert to his own use any thing that there was; but that they should breake such plate and vessell of Gold &
Silver, as was found in that house, (which was in great plenty) into small peeces, and threw the same into the Ri∣ver of Thames. Precious Stones they should bruise in mortars,Rebels more mali∣cious than covetons, spoyle all before them. that the same might be to no use, and so it was done by them: One of their companions they burned in the fire, because hee minded to have reserved one goodly peece of Plate. They found there certaine barrels of Gun-powder,Liber Ma∣nuscript. French. which they thought had been Gold or Silver, & throwing them into the fire, more suddenly than they thought, the Hall was blowne up, the houses destroyed, and themselves very hardly escaped away. This house being thus defaced, and almost overthrowne by these Rebels, for malice they bare to Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster,Savoy buil∣ded for an Hospitall. of later time came to the Kings hands, and was againe raised and beautifully builded, for an Hospital of S. Iohn Baptist, by King Henry the seventh, about the yeere 1509. For the which Hospitall, retaining still the old name of Savoy, he purchased Lands, to be im∣ployed upon the releeving of an hun∣dred poore people. This Hospitall being valued to dispend 529. pound, fifteene shillings, &c. by yeere, was suppressed the tenth of Iune, the seventh of Edward the sixt: the beds, bedding, and other furniture belonging thereunto, with seven hundred Markes of the said lands by yeere, he gave to the Citizens of Lon∣don, with his house of Bridewell, to the furnishing thereof, to bee a Worke∣house for the poore and idle persons,Hospitall of Savoy, suppres∣sed. & towards the furnishing of the Hospitall of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, lately suppressed. This Hospitall of Savoy was againe new founded,Hospitall of Savoy, a new foun∣dation thereof. erected, corporated and endowed with Lands by Queene Mary, the third of November: In the fourth of her raigne, one Iackson tooke possession, and was made Master thereof in the same Moneth of November. The La∣dies of the Court, and Maidens of Ho∣nor (a thing not to be forgotten) stored the same of new with beddes, bedding, and other furniture, in very ample man∣ner, &c. and it was by Patent so confir∣med at Westminster, the 9. of May, the 4. and 5. of Philip and Mary. The Chappell of this Hospitall ser∣veth now as a Parish Church to the Te∣nements thereof neere adjoyning,Parish Church of S. Iohn in the Sa∣voy. and others. The next was sometime the Bishop of Carliles Inne, which now belongeth to the Earle of Bedford, & is called Rus∣sell or Bedford house. It stretcheth from the Hospitall of Savoy,Bishop of Carlile his Inne, or Bedford house. West to Ivie Bridge; where Sir Robert Cecill, princi∣pall Secretarie to Queen Elizabeth, did then raise a large and stately house of Bricke and Timber, as also levelled and paved the high-way neere adjoyning, to the great beautifying of that street, and commodity of passengers. Richard the 2. in the 8. of his reigne, granted licence to pave with stone the high-way, called Strand street, from Temple Barre to the Savoy, and Tole to bee taken towards the charges: and againe the like was granted in the 42. of Henry the 6. Ivie Bridge in the high street, which had a way under it, leading downe to the Thames, the like as sometime had the Strand bridge, is now taken downe, but the lane remaineth as afore, or bet∣ter, and parteth the Liberty of the Dut∣chie, and the Citie of Westminster on that South side. Now to begin againe at Temple Barre over-against it. In the high street, as is afore shewed, is one large Middle Rowe of houses and small Tenements builded, partly opening to the South, partlie to∣wards the North. Amongst the which standeth the Parish Church of S. Cle∣ment Danes,Parish Church of S. Cle∣ment Danes. so called, because Harolde a Danish King, and other Danes were bu∣ried there. This Harolde, whom King Canutus had by a concubine, reigned 3. yeeres, and was buried at Westminster, but after∣ward, Hardicanutus, the lawfull sonne of Canutus, in revenge of a displeasure done to his mother, by expelling her out of the Realme, and the murder of his brother Alured,Liber Chart∣sey. commanded the body of Harolde to be digged out of the earth, and to bee throwne into the Thames, where it was by a Fisherman taken up and buried in this Church-yard. But out of a faire Leager Booke, sometime be∣longing to the Abbey of Chartsey, in the County of Surrey is noted, as in Francis thin, after this sort:
In the reigne of King Ethelred, the Mo∣nasterie of Chartsey was destroyed, 90. Monks of that house were slaine by the Danes, whose bodies were buried in a place neere to the old Monasterie.W. Malmes-Danes slaine at S. Clement Danes. William Mal∣mesburie saith: They burnt the Church, together with the Monks and Abbot; but the Danes continuing in their furie (throughout the whole lana) desirous, at the length, to returne home into Denmarke, were (by the just judgement of God) all slaine at Lon∣don, in a place which is called the Church of the Danes. This said middle rowe of houses, stretching West to a Stone Crosse now headlesse,Headlesse Crosse by the Strand. by or against the Strand, in∣cluding the said Parish Church of Saint Clement, is also wholly of the liberty and Dutchy of Lancaster. Thus much for the bounds and anti∣quities of this libertie, wherein I have noted Parish Churches twaine, some∣time 3. houses of name 6. to wit, the Sa∣voy, or Lancaster house, now an Hospitall, Sommerset house, Essex house, Arundell house, Bedford or Russell house, and Sir Ro∣bert Cecils house; besides of Chesters Inne, or Strand Inne, sometime an Inne of Chancery, &c. This liberty is governed by the Chan∣celor of that Dutchy at this present,Chance∣lor of the Dutchie of Lancaster. Sir Iohn Deckam, Knight, and one of his Ma∣jesties most honorable Privy Councel∣lors. There is under him a Steward, that keepeth Court and Leete for the King, he giveth the charge, and taketh the oathes of every under Officer. Then is there 4. Burgesses, and 4. Assistants to take up controversies, a Bayliffe, which hath two or three under-Bailiffes, that make arrests within that libertie, foure Constables, foure War∣dens, that keepe the lands and Stocke for the poore, foure Wardens for high∣wayes, a Iury or Inquest of 14. or 16. to present defaults, foure Alecunners, which looke to the Affise of weights and measures, &c. foure Scavengers and a Beadle, and their common Prison is Newgate. There is in this liberty 50. men, which are alwaies to bee at an houres warning, with all necessarie furniture, to serve the King, as occasion shall re∣quire. Their charge at a Fifteene is 13. s. 4. d. Thus much for the Sub∣urbe in the libertie of the Dutchie of Lancaster.
THE CITIE OF VVESTMINSTER, VVith the Antiquities, Bounds, and Liberties thereof. NOw touching the Citie of Westminster, I will be∣gin at Temple Barre, on the right hand or North side, and so passe up West, through a backe lane or street, wherein doe stand three Innes of Chancery:Clements lane of Chancery. the first called Cle∣ments Inne,Clements VVell. because it standeth neere to S. Clements Church, but neerer to the faire fountaine, called Clements Well. The second,New Inne of Chancery. New Inne, so called as latelier made of a common Hostery, and the signe of our Lady, an Inne of Chancery for Students then the other; namely, about the beginning of the reigne of Henry the seventh, and not so ancient as some have supposed, to wit, at the pul∣ling downe of Strand Inne, in the reigne of King Edward the sixt, for I read, that Sir Thomas More, somtime Lord Chan∣cellor, was Student in this New Inne, and went from thence to Lincolnes Inne, &c. The third is Lyons Inne,Lyons Inne of Chancery. Drury lane. and Inne of Chancery also. This street stretcheth up unto Drury lane, so called, for that there is a house belonging to the Family of the Druries. This lane turneth North toward S. Giles in the field. From the South end of this lane in the high-street, are di∣vers faire buildings, Hosteries, & houses for Gentlemen, and men of honor, a∣mongst the which Cecil house is one,Cecil house. which sometime belonged to the Par∣son of Saint Martins in the field, and by composition came to Sir Thomas Pal∣mer, Knight, in the reigne of Edward the sixt, who began to build the same of bricke, and Timber, very large and spa∣cious. But of later time, it hath bin farre more beautifully increased by the late Sir William Cecill, Baron of Burghley, Lord Treasurer, and great Counsellor of the Estate. From thence is now a continuall new building of divers faire houses, even up to the Earle of Bedfords house,Bedford house. lately buil∣ded nigh to Ivie bridge, and so on the North side, to a lane that turneth to the Parish Church of Saint Martins in the field,Parish Church of S. Martin in the field. in the liberty of Westminster. Then had yee one house, wherein sometime were distraught and lunatike people, of what antiquity founded, or by whom I have not read, neither of the suppression: but it was said, that sometime a King of England,An house belonging to Bethlem. not liking such a kind of people to remaine so neere his Palace, caused them to be removed farther off, to Beth∣lem without Bishops gate of London, and to that Hospitall the said house by Cha∣ring Crosse doth yet remaine. Then is the Mewse,The Mewse by Charing Crosse. so called of the Kings Faulcons there kept by the Kings Faulconer, which of old time was an of∣fice of great account, as appeareth by a Record of Richard the 2. in the first yeere of his raigne. Sir Simon Burley, Knight, was made Constable for the Castles of Windsore, Wigmore, and Gilford, and of the Mannor of Kenington,The Mewse now buil∣ded for stabling of the Kings horses. and also Master of the Kings Faulcons at the Mewse, neere unto Charing crosse by Westminster: but in the yeere of Christ 1534. the 28. of Henry the 8. the King having faire sta∣bling at Lomsbury (a Mannor in the far∣thest west part of Oldboorne) the same was fired and burnt, with many great horses, and great store of Hay. After which time the forenamed house, cal∣led the Mewse by Charing crosse, was new builded▪ and prepared for stabling of
the Kings horses, in the raigne of Ed∣ward the sixt and Queene Mary, and so remaineth to that use: and this is the far∣thest building West on the North side of that high streete. On the South side of the which streete, The Bi∣shop of Durham house. in the liberties of Westminster (beginning at Ivie bridge) first is Durham house, buil∣ded by Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Dur∣ham, who was made Bishop of that Sea, in the yeere 1545. and late Bishop there 36. yeeres. Amongst matters memorable con∣cerning this house,Iusting feast at Durham house. this is one: In the yeere of Christ 1340. the 32. of Henry the 8. on May day, a great and trium∣phant Iusting was holden at Westmin∣ster, which had been formerly proclai∣med in France, Flanders, Scotland and Spaine, for all commers that would un∣dertake the Challengers of England, which were Sir Iohn dudley, Sir Thomas Seymer, Sir Thomas Poynings, and Sir George Carew, Knights, and Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwel, Esquires. All which came into the Lists that day richly apparelled, and their horses trap∣ped all in white velvet; there came a∣gainst them the said day 46. Defen∣dants, or Vndertakers, viz. the Earle of Surrey formost, Lord William Howard, Lord Clinton, and Lord Cromwell, sonne and heire to Thomas Cromwell, Earle of Essex, and Chamberlaine of England, with other; and that day, after the Iusts were performed, the Challengers rode unto this Durham house, where they kept open household, and feasted the King, and Queene, with her Ladies and all the Court. The 2. day Anthony Kingston, and Ri∣chard Cromwel were made Knights there. The third day of May, the said Chal∣lengers did Tourney on horseback with swords, & against them 49. Defendants: Sir Iohn Dudley and the Earle of Surrey running first, which at the first course lost their Gauntlets, and that day Sir Ri∣chard Cromwell overthrew Master Palmer and his horse in the field, to the great honour of the Challengers. The fifth of May, the Challengers fought on foote at the Barriers, and a∣gainst thē came 50. Defendants, which fought valiantly: but Sir Richard Crom∣well overthrew that day at the Barriers, Master Culpepper in the field; and the 6. day the Challengers brake up their household. In this time of their house-keeping, Pensio∣ners. they had not only feasted the King, Queen, Ladies and all the Court, as is afore shewed: but also they cheered all the Knights & Burgesses of the common house in the Parliament, & entertained the Maior of London, with the Alder∣men and their wives at a dinner, &c. The King gave to every of the said Challen∣gers, and their heires for ever, in reward of their valiant activity 100. marks, and a house to dwell in of yeerely , out of the lands pertaining to the Hos∣pitall of S. Iohn of Ierusalem. Now to speake somwhat of later time: A row of old Stables belonging to Durham house. concerning this Durham house, it was wel knowne and observed, for how many yeers, I know not, that the outward art belonging thereto, and standing North from the houses, was but a low row of Stables, old, ruinous, ready to fall, and very unsightly, in so publike a passage to the Court & to Westminster. Vpon which consideration, or some more especiall respect in the mind of the right honora∣ble, Robert, Earle of Salisbury, Lord high Treasurer of England: it pleased him to take such order in the matter, that (at his owne costs and charges) that defor∣med row of Stabling was quite altered, by the erection of a very goodly & beau∣tifull building in stead therof, and in the very same place.The shape of the new ordered worke, like the Royall Ex∣change. Some shape of the mo∣delling, though not in all respects alike, was after the fashion of the Royall Ex∣change in London, with Sellers under∣neath, a walke fairely paved above it, & Rowes of Shops above, as also one be∣neath answerable in manner to the o∣ther and intended for the like trades and mysteries. This worke was not long in taking down,This good∣ly building erected in a small space of time. nor in the erection againe; for the first Stone was laid on the 10. day of Iune, 1608. and also was fully finished in the next ensuing November after. Al∣so on Tuesday, being the 10. day of April following, divers of the upper shops were adorned in rich and beautifull manner, with wares most curious to please the eye; so ordered against his Majesties comming thither, to give a name to so good a building. On the day
following,The King, Queene, &c. come to name it Britaines Bursse. it pleased his highnesse, with the Queene, Prince, the Duke of Yorke, & the Lady Elizabeth, to come thither, attended on by many great Lords, and choise Ladies. Concerning their enter∣tainment there, though I was no eye∣witnesse thereof; yet I knew the inge∣nuity and mind of the Nobleman to be such, as nothing should want to wel∣come so great an expectation. And ther∣fore, what variety of devices, pleasing speeches, rich gifts and presents as then flew bountifully abroad, I will rather re∣ferre to your imagination, than any way come short of, by an imperfect narra∣tion. Only this I adde, that it then plea∣sed his most excellent Majestie, because the worke wanted a name before, to en∣title it Britaines Bursse or Busse. Next beyond this Durham house,The Bi∣shop of Norwich his house. is another great house, sometime belon∣ging to the Bishop of Norwich, and was his London lodging, which now pertai∣neth to the Arch-bishop of Yorke, by this occasion: In the yeere 1529. when Car∣dinall Wolsey, Archbishop of Yorke, was indited in the Premunire, wherby King Henry the 8. was entitled to his goods and possessions: hee also seazed into his hands the said Arch-bishops house, com∣monly called Yorke Place, and changed the name thereof into White Hall: wher∣by, the Arch-bishops of Yorke being dis∣possed, and having no house of re∣paire about London, Queene Mary gave unto Nicolas Heth, then Arch-Bishop of Yorke, and to his successors, Suffolke house in Southwarke, lately builded by Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke, as I have shewed elsewhere. This house the said Arch-bishop sold, and bought the aforesaid house, of old time belonging to the Bishops of Nor∣wich, which (of the last purchase) is now called Yorke house; the L. Chancelors or L. Keepers of the great Seale of England, have been lately there lodged. Then was there an Hospitall of S. Ma∣ry Rouncivall,Hospitall of S. Mary Rouncivall. by Charing Crosse (a Cell to the Priory and Covent of Rouncivall in Navar, in Pampelone Dioces) where a Fraternity was foūded in the fifteenth of Edward the fourth,Hermi∣tage with a Chappell of S. Katha∣rine. but now the same is suppressed, and turned into Tenements. Neere unto this Hospitall was an Her∣mitage, Charing Crosse. with a chappell of S. Katharine, overagainst Charing Crosse, which Crosse builded of stone, was of old time a faire piece of work, there made by command∣ment of Edward the first, in the 21. yeere of his reigne, in memory of Eleanor his deceased Queene, as is before declared. West from this Crosse,Hospitall of S. Iames. stood some∣time an Hospitall of S. Iames, consisting of two hides of land, with the appurte∣nances, in the Parish of S. Margaret in Westminster, and founded by the Citizens of London, before the time of any mans memorie, for 14. Sisters, Maydens, that were leprous, living chastly and honest∣ly in divine Service. Afterwards, divers Citizens of Lon∣don gave 56. l. rent thereunto, and then were adjoined 8. Brethren to minister divine Service there. After this also, sundry devout men of London gave to this Hospitall, foure Hides of land in the field of Westminster; and in Hendon, Calcote, & Hamsted, eight Acres of land and Wood, &c. King Ed∣ward the first confirmed those gifts, and granted a Faire to be kept on the Eve of S. Iames,S. Iames faire for 7. dayes. the day, the morrow, & foure dayes following, in the eighteenth of his reigne. This Hospitall was surrendred to Hen∣ry the 8. the 23. of his reigne: the Sisters being compounded with, were allowed Pensions for terme of their lives, and the King builded there a goodly Mannor, annexing thereunto a Park, closed about with a wall of brick,S. Iames Parke. now called S. Iames Parke, serving indifferently to the said Mannor, and to the Mannor or Palace of VVhite Hall. South from Charing Crosse, on the right hand, are divers faire houses, late∣ly builded before the Parke:Tilt-yard at Westmin∣ster. then a large Tilt-yard for Noble-men and other, to exercise themselves in Iusting, Turney∣ing, and fighting at Barriers. On the left hand from Charing Crosse, be also divers faire tenements lately builded, till ye come to a large plot of ground inclosed with bricke, and is cal∣led Scotland,Scotland, a plot of ground so called. where great buildings have bin for receipt of the Kings of Scotland, and other estates of that Countrey. For, Margaret Q. of Scots, and Sister to King Henry the 8. had her abiding there, when she came into England, after the death of her husband, as the K. of Scotland hand in
former times, when they came to the Parliament of England. Then is the said White Hall,White Hall. sometime belonging to Hubert de Burgh, Earle of Kent, and Iusticier of England, who gave it to the blacke Fryers in Oldboorne, as I have before noted, King Henry the 8. ordained it to be called an Honor, and builded there a sumptuous Gallerie, and a beautifull Gatehouse, thwart the high street, to S. Iames Parke. &c. In this Gallerie, the Princes, with their Nobilitie, use to stand, or sit, and at Windowes to behold all triumphant Iustings, and other Militarie Exercises. Beyond this Gallerie, on the left hand is the Garden or Orchard belonging to the said White Hall. On the right hand be divers faire Tennis Courts,Tennis courts, Bowling Alleyes, and Cock∣pit. Bowling Alleyes, and a Cocke-pit, all built by King Henry the eight: and then one other arched Gate, with a way over it, thwarting the street, frō the Kings Gardens to the said Parke. From this Gate, up Kings street,Long-ditch. to a Bridge over Longditch (so called,S. Stephens Alley. for that the same almost insulateth the City of Westminster) neere which Bridge, is a way leading to Canon Row, so called, for that the same belonged to the Deane & Canons of S. Stephens Chappell, who were there lodged, as now divers No∣blemen and Gentlemen be: whereof, one is belonging to Sir Edw. Hobbey, one o∣ther to Ioh. Thin, Esquire, once stately builded by Anne Stanhop, Dutchesse of Somerset, Mother to the Earle of Hart-ford, who now enjoyeth that House. Next, a stately House, then in building by William Earle of Darby; over-against the which, is a faire House, builded by Henry Clinton, Earle of Lincolne. From this way, up to the Wooll-Staple, and to the high Tower, or Gate, which entreth the Palace Court, all is repleni∣shed with Buildings and Inhabitants. Touching this Wooll-Staple,T. Clifford. I reade, that in the raigne of Edward the first, the Staple being at Westminster, the Parishi∣oners of S. Margaret, and Merchants of the Staple, builded of new the said Church, the great Chancell excepted, which was lately before new builded by the Abbot of Westminster.Record. Moreover,No Silver to be trās∣ported. that Edward the third, in the 17. of his raigne, decreed, that no Silver be carried out of the Realme, on paine of death: And that whosoever transported Wooll, should bring over, for every Sacke, foure Nobles of Silver Bullion. In the 25. of his raigne,Wooll-Staple at VV. slmin∣ster. he appointed the Staple of Wooll to be kept onely at Canturbury, for the honour of S. Thomas. But in the 27. of the same King Edward, the Staple of Wooll, before kept at Bruges in Flanders, was ordained (by Parliament) to be kept in divers places of England, Wales, and Ireland; as at New-Castle, Yorke, Lincolne, Canturburie, Nor∣wich, Westminster, Chichester, Winchester, Excester, Bristow, Caermarden, &c. to the great benefit of the King, and losse unto strangers & Merchants. For there grew unto the King by this meanes (as it was said) the summe of a thousand, an hun∣dred & two pounds by the yeere, more than any his predecessors before had re∣ceived: The Staple at Westminster, at that time, began on the next morrow af∣ter the feast of S. Peter ad Vincula. The next yeere was granted to the King by Parliament,Robert de Amesbury. towards the reco∣verie of his Title in France, 50. shillings of every Sacke of Wooll, transported over Seas, for the space of six yeere next ensuing: by meanes whereof, the King might dispend dayly, during those yeeres, more than a thousand Markes starling: For by the common opinion, there were more than an hundred thou∣sand Sacks of Wooll yeerely transpor∣ted into forraine Lands; so that during six yeeres, the said grant extended to fif∣teen hundred thousand pound starling. In the 37. of Edward the third,Staple at Callis let to farme. it was granted unto him for two yeers, to take sixe and twentie shillings eight pence upon every Sack of Wooll trans∣ported: and the same yeere, the Staple of Wooll (notwithstanding the Kings Oath, and other great Estates) was or∣dained to be kept at Callis, and sixe and twenty Merchāts, the best & wealthiest of all England, to be Farmers there, both of the Town & Staple, for three yeeres, every Merchant to have sixe men of Armes, and foure Archers, at the Kings cost. He ordained there also two Mai∣ors, one for the Towne, and one for the Staple, and he took for Mala capta, com∣monly called Maltorth, 20. shillings.
and of the said Merchants; Guardians of the Towne, fortie pence upon every Sacke of Wooll. In the 44. of Edward the third, Quin∣borough, Kingston upon Hull, and Bo∣ston, were made Staples of Wooll: which matter so much offended some, that in the fifty of his raigne, in a Par∣liament at London, it was complained, that the Staple of Wooll was so remo∣ved from Callis, to divers Townes in England,Record. contrarie to the Statute, ap∣pointing, that Citizens and Merchants should keepe it there, and that the King might have the Profits and Customes, with the exchāge of Gold & Silver that was there made, by all the Merchants in Christendome (esteemed to amount to eight thousand pound by yeere) the ex∣change onely: And the Citizens and Merchants so ordered the matter, that the King spent nothing upon Souldiers; neither upon defence of the Towne a∣gainst the Enemies, whereas now he spent eight thousand pound by yeere. In the fifty one of Edward the third,Manus∣cript. when the Staple was setled at Callis, the Major of the Staple did furnish the Captaine of the Towne, upon any Rode, with an hundred Bill-men, two hun∣dred Arcers, of Merchants and their ser∣vants, without any wages.Frenth. In the yeere 1388. the twelfth of Ri∣chard the second,Wooll-Staples at Middle∣borough. in a Parliament at Cambridge, it was ordained, that the Staple of Woolls should be brought from Middleborough in Holland to Callis. In the foureteenth of his raigne, there was granted fortie shillings upon euery Sacke of Wooll: and in the one and twentieth, was granted fiftie shillings upon every Sacke transported by En∣glish-men, and three pounds by Stran∣gers, &c. It seemeth,Staple-Merchants the most ancientst of this Realme. that the Merchants of this Staple be the most ancient Mer∣chants of this Realme, and that all com∣modities of the Realme are Staple Mer∣chandizes by Law and Charter, as Woolls, Leather, Wooll-fells, Lead, Tynne, Cloth, &c. King Henry the sixt had six Wooll∣houses within the Staple at Westminster: those he granted to the Deane and Ca∣nons of S. Stephen at Westminster, & cōfir∣med it the 21. of his raigne. Thus much for the Staple have I shortly noted.The eving lane. And now to passe to the famous Mo∣nasterie of Westminster at the very en∣trance of the Close thereof, is a lane that leadeth toward the West, called Thee∣ving lane, for that theeves were led that way to the Gatehouse, while the Sanctua∣ry continued in force.Founda∣tion of VVestmin∣ster by Se∣bert a Chri∣stian King not only in word, but in deede. This Monasterie was founded and builded by Sebert, King of the East Sax∣ons, upon the perswasion of Ethelbert King of Kent, who having imbraced Christianity, and being baptized by Melitus, Bishop of London, immediate∣ly (to shew himselfe a Christian in∣deede) built a Church to the honor of God and Saint Peter, on the West side of the City of London, in a place (which because it was over-grown with thornes, and environed with water) the Saxons called Thorney, and now of the Monaste∣rie and West situation thereof, is called Westminster. What further I reade, con∣cerning the first foundation of this Church, followeth in this manner: When the Church of God first began to grow in Great Brittaine,Ex Sulcard. at such time (saith Sulcardus) as Antoninus Pius,The Tem∣ple of Apol∣lo over∣thrown by an Earth-quake. was Emperour of Rome, the Temple of Apollo, which was then seated on the West side of the City of London, where now Westminster standeth, fell downe by the violence of an Earthquake. Of the ruines wherof, Lucius (who was King of the Britaines, and reigned heere by per∣mission of the Romans) built a small Church to the honor of Christ, in the yeere of our Lord 170. which afterward was utterly defaced, when the heat of persecution (under Dioclesian) wasted Britaine. This place afterward (for a long time) lay altogether neglected,King Sebert built a Mo∣nastery in the place where the Church stood. and not regar∣ded, but became all overgrowne with thornes and bushes: in so much as the English Saxons named it Thornez or Thorney; untill Sebert King of the East Saxons (or of Essex and Middlesex) who was the first that subscribed to the wor∣ship of Christ, built in that place a Mo∣nasterie to Christ and Saint Peter, in the yeere of Christ 605. whereupon, part∣ly from the situation to the West, and partly, from the Monasterie or Minster, it began to take the name of Westminster: But afterward when this Monasterie
was destroyed in the furious warres of the Danes,The Mo∣nastery de∣stroyed by the Danes, and repai∣red by S. Dunstan. Dunstane, Archbishop of Canturbury (by the favor of King Edgar) repaired it, and granted, and gave it to a small company of Monks. Afterward King Edward, surnamed the Confessor,The Mo∣nastery re∣builded by K. Edward the Con∣fessor. with the Tenthes of all his revenewes, built it a-new, to be a place for his own Sepulcher, and a Mo∣nasterie for the Monks of S. Bennets or∣der, and endowed it with revenewes ly∣ing (here and there) in all places of Eng∣land, and it is an ancient Fabricke & ve∣ry stately. Since which time this Mona∣starie hath bin (and yet is) very famous, for the consecration and Coronation of the King of England, and the buriall of many of them and other great Perso∣nages, and for the custodie of the Rega∣lia for the Coronation. But 160. yeeres after,A new Church builded in most good∣ly and beautifull manner. King Henry the third pulled downe that ancient Fabrick of King Edward, and (with 50. yeeres worke) built a Church of a most goodly frame, with a multitude of Marble pil∣lars, set in comely order: wherof he him∣selfe layed the first stone, and covered the roofe with Lead, in An. 1220. which Church (afterward) the Abbots did much inlarge to the Westward:King Hen∣ry the 7. his Chap∣pell the Miracle of the world. And K. Henry the 7. in the yeere 1502. bestowed 14000. pounds on the East side, where he built a Chappell of admirable beauty (which Leland calls the Miracle of the World: for any man that sees it, may well say, that all elegancy of worship & matter, is couched in it) to be a place of Sepulture for himselfe, and all his poste∣rity: wherein (at this day) is to be seene his owne Tombe, most gorgeous and great, made all of solid Brasse. Afterward,The alte∣ration in the time of Henry eight. when the Monkes were expelled by K. Henry the eight, it was eftsoones converted to divers governe∣ments. First,A Bishop of Westmin∣ster. it had a Deane and Preben∣daries: Anon after, a Bishop, and that onely one, named Thomas Thurlbey, in Anno 1541. when the revenues of the Church were abridged, he departed, and left it to be governed by a Deane. Within short time after,A Nurserie for the collegiate Church of Westminster, instituted by Queen Elizabeth. Queen Mary brought in the Monks againe, with their Abbat, who not long after, being expul∣sed by Act of Parliament, Queene Eli∣zabeth (of blessed memory) converted it unto a Collegiate Church, or rather a Nurserie for the Church, in the yeere 1560. For there she ordained (to the glorie of God, and the propagation of true Religion and good Literature) a Deane, twelve Prebendaries, an upper Master, and an Vsher for the Schoole, forty Schollers, tearmed the Queenes or Kings Schollers; who (at their due times) are preferred to both the Vniver∣sities: besides Ministers, Singers, and Organists, tenne Quiristers, and twelve poore Souldiers, &c. The first Deane then of that Founda∣tion, The first Deane, ac∣cording to the foun∣dation. was Master William Bill; who being taken away within two yeeres, had for his successor, Master Gabriel Goodman, Doctor of Divinitie: who, when he had governed this Collegiate Church (with great commendation) the space of forty yeeres, died in the yeere of our Lord God, 160. And then Master Lancelot Andrewes, Doctor also in Divinitie, suc∣ceeded him: next, Doctor Neale; and af∣ter him, Doctor Mountaine. Sebert was buried in this Church, with his wife Athelgoda; whose bodies, many yeeres after, to wit, in the raigne of Ri∣chard the second (saith Walsingham) were translated from the old Church to the new,Walsingham. and there interred. Edgar, King of the West-Saxons, re∣paired this Monasterie about the yeere of Christ, 958. Edward, the Confessor builded it of new; whereupon T. Clif∣ford writeth thus:T. Clifford. Without the Walls of London (saith he) upon the River of Thames, there was in times passed a little Monasterie, builded to the honour of God and S. Peter, with a few Benedictine Monks in it, under an Abbot, serving Christ: very poor they were, & little was given them for their reliefe. Heere the King intended (for that it was neere to the famous Citie of London, and the River of Thames, that brought in all kind of Mer∣chandizes from all parts of the world) to make his Sepulcher: He commanded there∣fore, that of the tenthes of all his Rents, the Worke should be begun, in such sort, as should become the Prince of the Apostles. At this his commandement, the Worke was nobly begun, even from the foundation, and happily proceeded, till the same was finished: The charges be∣stowed, or to be bestowed are not regar∣ded. He grāted to this Church great pri∣viledges,
above all the Churches in this Land, as partly appeareth by this his Charter. &c. Edward, King, greetes William Bi∣shop, and Leosstane and Aeliffe Port∣reeves, and all my Burgesses of London, friendly: and I tell you, that I have this given and granted to Christ and S. Peter, the holy Apostle at Westminster, full free∣dome over all the land that belongeth to that holy place, &c. He also caused the Parish Church of Saint Margaret to bee newly builded,Parish Church of Saint Margaret. without the Abbey Church of Westmin∣ster, for the ease and commoditie of the Monkes, because (before that time) the Parish Church stood within the old Abbey Church in the South Ile, somewhat to their annoyance. King Henry the third, in the yeere of Christ, 1220. and in the fift of his reigne, began the new worke of our Ladies Chappell, whereof he laid the first stone in the foundation, and in the yeere 1245. the wals and steeple of the old Church (builded by King Edward) were taken down, & inlarging the same Church, caused them to bee made more comely. For the furtherance whereof, in the yeere 1246. the same King (de∣vising how to extort money from the Citizens of London towards the char∣ges) appointed a Mart to bee kept at Westminster,Mathew Paris. the same to last fifteene dayes,A Mart at Westminster. and in the meane space all trade of Merchandize to cease in the Citie, which thing the Citizens were faine to redeeme with two thousand pound of silver. The worke of this Church, with the houses of office, was finished to the end of the Quire, in the yeere 1285. the 14. of Edward the first. All which labour of 66. yeeres,Westminster with the Palace burned. was in the yeer 1299. defaced by a fire, kind∣led in the lesser Hall of the Kings Pa∣lace, at Westminster, the same with ma∣ny other houses adjoyning, and with the Queenes Chamber were all consu∣med, the flame thereof also (being dri∣ven with the wind) fired the Monastery, which was also consumed with the Pa∣lace consumed. Then was the Monastery againe re∣paired by the Abbots of that Church, King Edward the first and his succes∣sours, putting to their helping hands. Edward the second appropriated un∣to this Church, the Patronages of the Churches of Kelueden and Sabritswarth in Essex, in the Diocesse of London. Simon Langham Abbot (having beene a great builder there in the yeere 1362. gave foure hundred pound to the buil∣ding of the body of the Church: but (amongst others) Abbot Islip was (in his time) a great builder there, as may appeare in the stone worke, and glasse∣windowes of the Church. Since whose decease, that worke hath stayed as hee left it, unperfected, the Church and Steeple being all of one height. King Henry the seventh,New Chappell at Westmin∣ster. about the yeere of Christ 1502. caused the Chap∣pell of our Lady builded by Henry the third, with a Taverne also called the White Rose neere adjoyning, to bee ta∣ken downe: in which plot of ground on the 24. of Ianuary, the first stone of the new Chappell, was layd by the hands of Abbot Islip, Sir Reginald Bray, knight of the Garter, Doctor Barnes, Master of the Rolles, Doctor Wall, Chaplen to the King, Master Hugh Ald∣ham, Chaplen to the Countesse of Dar∣by and Richmond (the Kings Mother) Sir Edward Stanhop, knight, and divers other: upon the which stone was en∣graven the same day and yeere, &c. The charges in building this Chap∣pell amounted to the summe of 14000. pound. The stone for this worke (as I have beene informed) was brought from Huddlestone Quarry in Yorke∣shire. The Altar and Sepulchre of the same King Henry the seventh, wherein his body resteth in this his new Chap∣pel, was made and finished in the yeere 1519. by one Peter a Painter of Florence: for which hee received 1000. pound sterling, for the whole stuffe and worke∣manship, at the hands of the Kings exe∣cutors
Richard, Bishop of Winchester, Ri∣chard, Bishop of London, Thomas, Bishop of Durham, Iohn, Bishop of Rochester, Thomas, Duke of Norfolke, Treasurer of England, Charles, Earle of Worcester, the Kings Chamberlaine, Iohn Fineaux, Knight, chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, Robert Reade, Knight, chiefe Iu∣stice of the Common pleas. This Monasterie being valued to dis∣pended by the yeere 3470. pounds,VVestmin∣ster a Bi∣shops Sea. &c. was surrendred to Henry the eight in the yeere 1539. Benson then Abbot, was made the first Deane: and not long af∣ter, it was advanced to a Bishops Sea, in the yeere 1541. Thomas Thurleby, being both the first & last Bishop there, who, when he had impoverished the Church, was translated to Norwich, in the yeere 1550. the fourth of Edward the sixt, and from thence to Ely, in the yeere 1554. the second of Queene Mary. Richard Cox, Doctor in Divinity (late Schoole-master to King Edward the 6.) was made Deane of Westminster, whom Queene Mary put out, and made Doctor Weston Deane, untill the yeere 1556. and then he being removed from thence on the 21. of November, Iohn Feckenham (late Deane of Pauls) was made Abbot of Westminster, and tooke possession of the same, being installed, and 14. Monks more received the habite with him that day, of the order of S. Benedict: but the said Iohn Feckenham, with his Monkes, enjoyed not that place fully three yeers: for in the yeere 1559. in the Moneth of Iuly, they were all put out, and Queene Elizabeth made the said Monasterie a Colledge, instituting there a Deane, twelve Prebends, a Schoolemaster, and Vsher, 40. Schollers called commonly the Q Schollers, 12. Almes men, and so it was called the Collegiat Church of Westminster,VVestmin∣ster made a Collegiat Church. founded by Queene Eli∣zabeth, who placed Doctor Bill, first Deane of that new erection, after whom succeeded Doctor Gabriel Goodman, who governed that Church fortie yeeres, and after him Doctor L. Andrewes. Kings and Queenes crowned in this Church.Kings and Queenes crowned at VVest∣minster. William, surnamed Conqueror, and Matilda his wife, were the first, and since them all other Kings and Queenes of this Realme, have been there crow∣ned. Kings and Queenes buried in this Church in order following, are these: Sebert of the East Saxons, and Middle Saxons,Buried in the Chappell appointed for Kings. that is, Essex and Middlesex, King, the Sonne of Sledde, by Ricula, Sister to Ethelbert, King of Kent, first King of the East Saxons: by the perswa∣sions of Ethelbert, received and embra∣ced the Christian faith, and the Church of Westminster, which then was tear∣med Thorney; erected to blessed Saint Peter, wherein, with his wife Athel∣goda he lyeth buried. Hee dyed the last day of Iuly, in the yeere of our Redemp∣tion, 616. And 691. yeeres after, to wit, 1307. The Monks of Westmin∣ster translated his body out of the old Church into the new Kings Chappell, and placed it therein a Sepulcher of Stone, at the South part of the Lords Table, with this Epitaph: Labilitas, brevitas mundanae prosperitatis, Coelica, praemia, gloria, gaudia danda beatis Sebertum ceytum jure dedêre satis. Hic Rex Christicola verax fuit hac regione, Qui nunc coecolica gaudet mercede coronae: Rex humilis, docilis, scius, & pius, inclytus iste Sollicitè, nitidè, tacitè, placidè (bone Christe) Vult servire tibi perficiendo sibi. Ornat mores, spernit flores, lucis avarae Gliscens multum, Christi cultum laetificare, Ecclesiam nimiam nimio studio sabricavit, Haec illaesa manus quae fundamenta locavit. Hic sepringentis annis terra cumulatus, Christi clementis instinctibus inde levatus, Isto sub lapide nunc jacet ipse, vide. Atque domum Christo, quia mundo fecit in isto, Nunc pro mercede coeli
requiescit in aede. Respice mortalis, promisso sit tibi talis: Accipies si des, nil capies nisi des; Es Christo qualis, Christus erit tibi talis. Dapsilis esto sibi, largus eritque tibi. Effectus non affectus, si reddere possis, Debet censeri; si nihil reddere possis, Tunc bonus affectus pro facto debet haberi. Sicut de lignis per aquam depellitur ignis; Sic mala commissa fiunt donando remissa. Reddet ad usuram quod quis dat nomine Christi, Nam vitam puram pro parvo dat Deus isti. The fore-named King Sebert died the last day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 619. Whose wife, named Aetheloda, clo∣sed up her latest day of life before the said Sebert. viz. the 13. day of September, Anno Domini, 615. And with her hus∣band Sebert (as already wee have said) lyeth in this Church, which himself foun∣ded, in a Tombe of Lead honourably buried. Vpon the wall by this Tombe, are these Verses painted: Hic Rex Seberte plausus, mihi condita per te Haec loca lustravi, demùm lustrando dicavi. Edward,He lyeth also buri∣ed in the said Chap¦pell, ap∣pointed for Kings. King of England, for his singu∣lar piety numbred among the Confessors, was the Sonne of King Aetheldred. The annuall pension of foure thousand pound, called Dangelt, hee remitted to the English Legates (as Matth. West. writeth) He sent to Rome to Pope Da∣masus, to be absolved of a Vow which hee had promised by a journey to Rome, if he obtained his Paternall Kingdome. which Pope absolving his said Vow, wrote backe unto him, That the Expen∣ces prepared for his travaile, hee should bestow upon the poore; and a Monaste∣rie (in the honour of Saint Peter) hee should either newly build, or repaire some old one. The Legates being returned, Vlfinus, sometime a Monke, perswa∣ding, and all the Councell of the King∣dome approving, hee repaired West∣minster againe. He died Anno 1066. and there lyeth honourably interred in a Marble Tombe, checquered with varietie of beautifull colours, in the middest of the Chappell, with these Verses: Omnibus insignis virtutum laudibus haeres, Sanctus Edwardus Confessor, Rex venerandus, Quinto die Iani moriens Iuper aethera scandit. Sursum Corda. Obiit, Anno Dom. 1065. Editha,She lyeth buried at the North side of S. Edwards Tombe, in the same Chappell▪ Queene of England, Daughter to Goodwine Earle of Kent, and wife to S. Edward, King and Confesser, a woman of singular pietie and modestie, Edward her husband (as Matthew Westm. avoucheth) did not move this Edith by marriage rites, to know the manners of men, but whether in hatred to her father, or love to Chastitie hee did it, it remaineth uncertaine. Some doe af∣firme, that this holy King was not wil∣ling to beget any heires, that should succeed him out of a treacherous race. Matilda,Shee is buried at the South side S. Ed∣wards Tombe in the same Chappell. Queene of England, Daughter to Malcolme, King of Scots, and wife to King Henry the first, brought unto him children, William, Richard, and Mary, which perished by shipwracke, and Maude Empresse, who was wife to Henry the fift, Caesar Augustus, and Mother to King Henry the second. This Queene (as Wil. Malmesbury avoweth) every day in the Lent time went to Westminster, bare-foot and bare-legd,He is bu∣ried in the South side of the Chappell in a good∣ly Tombe, brought out of France by his Sonne Edward. and wearing a garment of haire. She died 1118. and lieth with∣out any Tombe. Henry the third, King of England, &c. Sonne of King Iohn, by Isabell, Daugh∣ter to the Earle of Angolesme, a very pious Prince, and most hightly commen∣ded for his vertues. In An. 1220. hee
began the new worke of the Chappell of our blessed Lady at Westminster, and himselfe layd the first Stone. And in An. 1245. after, the Conventuall Church of B. Peter the greater, he pul∣led down, and new builded it, and on the day of the Apostles Peter and Paul, he caused it to be fully and decently built and enlarged. He gave also to the said Church very Royall gifts, of Copes, Iewels and rich vessels, that it might e∣quall in riches all the Cisalpine Chur∣ches. Hee died, An. 1273. 11. Ka∣lend. Decem. when he had reigned fifty sixe yeares, and eighteene dayes: upon his Tombe are these verses, Tertius Henricus jacet hic, pietatis amicus, Ecclesiam stravit istam, quam post renovavit, Reddet ei munus qui regnat trinus & unus, Tertius Henricus est Templi conditor hujus. Dulce Bellum inexpertis. The Friend of pitie and Almes-deed, Henry the third, whilome of England King, Who this Church brake, and after his meed, Againe renewed into this faire building; Now resteth here which did so great a thing. He yeelded his meed that Lord of Deity, That as one Godreignes in Persons three. Edward the first,He lyeth in a Mar∣ble Tomb at his Fa∣thers head in the same Chappell. King of England, Duke of Normandy, and Aquitaine, Lord of Ireland, Sonne to King Henry the third, by Eleanor daughter to the Earle of Provence. Hee tooke to wife Eleanor, daughter to Ferdinand the third, King of Castile, and Lyons. He warred with the Scots, won Bar∣wicke, &c. Hee dyed in Anno 1308. and hath this Epitaph on his Tomb. Mors est moesta nimis, magnos quae jungit in imis, Maxima mors minimis, conjungens ultima primis: Nullus in Orbe fuit homo vivens, nec valet esse, Qui non morte ruit; est hinc exire necesse. Nobilis & fortis, tibi tu confidere noli, Omnia sunt mortis, sibi subdit singula soli. De mundi medio magnum mors impia movit, Anglia prae tedio satis anxia plangere novit: Corruit Edwardus vario veneratus honore, Rex nuper ut Nardus fragrans virtutis odore, Corde Leopardus, invictus & abs{que} pavore, Ad rixam tardus, discretus & eucharis ore, Viribus Armorum quasi Gigas ardua gessit, Colla superborum Prudens per praelia pressit, Inter Flandrenses fortuna sibi bene favit, Vt quoque Wallenses & Scotos suppeditavit, Rex bonus absque pari strenuè sua regna regebat: Quod na tura dare potuit bonitatis habebat, Actio justitiae, pax regni, sanctio legis, Et fuga nequitiae premunt praecordia Regis, Gloria tota ruit, Rege capit haec modo fossa, Rex quandoque fuit, nunc nil nisi pulvis & ossa: Filius ipse Dei quem corde colebat, & ore, Gaudia fecit ei nullo permista dolore. Dum vixit Rex & valuit sua magna potestas, Fraus latuit, Pax magna fuit, regnavit Honestas. Edwardus primus Scotorum malleus hic est. Pactum serva.
Death is too dolefull, which doth joyne The highest estate full low; Which coupleth greatest things with least, And last with first also. No man hath bin in world alive, Nor any may there be; Which can escape the dint of Death, Needs hence depart must we. O Noble and victorious man, Trust not unto thy strengh; For all are subject unto Death, And all must hence at length. Most cruell Fate from worldly Stage Hath wrest a worthy wight; For whom all England mourned lowd. To see his dolefull plight. Edward is dead, which was adorn'd With divers graces here: A King, or fragrant Nardus hight A gracious Princely Peere. In heart the which was Leopard like, Right puissant, voyd of feare. Most slow to strife, discreet and wise, And gracious every where. In Armes, a Gyant fierce and fell, Attempting famous facts: Most prudent, did subdue the proud By feate of Martiall acts: In Flanders, Fortune gave to him, By lot, right good successe: In Wales he wanne; the Scottish rout With Armes he did suppresse. This King without his like alive Did firmely guide his Land: And what good nature could conceive, He had it plight at hand. He was in Justice, and in Peace Excelling: Laws tooke place, Desire to chase all wicked workes, Did hold this Kings good Grace. He now doth lye entombed here, Which furthered each good thing: Now, nought he is but dust and bones, Which was a worthy King. The very SONNE of GOD, whom erst This King did love right deere: Hath given to him immortall blisse, For his good living here. Otherwise: Whil'st liv'd this King, by him all things Were in most goodly plight: Fraud lay hid, great Peace was kept, And Honestie had might.Her i∣mage ly∣eth on the Tombe in Brasse richly gil∣ded in the same Chappell. Eleanor, Queene of England, first wife of Edward the first, the onely daughter to Ferdinand the third, K. of Castile and Lyons, by Ioane his second wife,
Heire to Guydo, Earle of Ponthieu. This Earledome of Ponthieu, by right, became devolved to the Kings of Eng∣land, by the mother to Edward the se∣cond, Shee departed this life Anno Do∣mini, 1298. and lyeth at the feete of Henry the third, in a Marble Tombe, having these Verse: Nobilis Hispani jacet hic soror inclyta Regis, Eximii consors Eleanora thori, Edwardi primi Wallorum Principis uxor, Cui Pater Henricus tertius Anglus erat. Hanc ille uxorem gnato petit: omnie Princeps Legati munus suscepit ipse bono. Alfonso fratri placuit felix Hymenaeus, Germanam Edwardo nec sine dote dedit, Dos praeclara fuit, nec tali indigna marito, Pontino Princeps munere dives erat. Femina consilio prudens, pia, prole beata, Auxit amicitiis, auxit honore virum. Disce mori. Queene Eleanor is here interr'd, A worthy Noble Dame: Sister unto the Spanish King, Of Royall bloud and fame. King Edwards wife, first of that name, And Prince of Wales by right; Whose father Henry, just the third, Was sure an English Wight; Who crav'd her wife unto his Sonne: The Prince himselfe did goe On that embassage luckily, As chiefe with many moe. This knot of linked marriage, Her brother Alphonse lik'd, And so'tweene Sister and this Prince, The marriage up was strik'd: The Dowry rich and Royall was, For such a Prince most meet; For Pontine was the marriage gift, A Dowrie rich and great. A Woman both in Counsell wise, Religious, fruitfull, meeke: Who did increase her husbands friends, And larg'd his honour eke. Learne to Dye. Edward the third,He lyeth buried in the South part of the Kingly Chappell, with his figure in Brasse richly gilded. King of England, &c. Sonne to Edward the second, by Isabell, daughter to Philip the faire, King of France, a most Martiall man. When the brother by her Mother dyed, no Heires Males be∣ing left, and the French pretended their Salique Law, which admitted much lesse the Female Issue to suc∣ceed: He denounced warre against them, which very sharpely hee pur∣sued. Callis hee conquered, recove∣ring Aquitaine and Normandy by his forces. Iohn King of France, and David King of Scots hee tooke in warre, and kept them prisoners. The Armes the Title of France hee added to his owne: and when (like a Triumphant Monarch) hee had reigned fifty yeares, hee yeelded to the stroke of Death in Ann. 1377. And these verses are annexed by the Tombe.
Hic decus Anglorum, flos praeteritorum, Forma futurorum, Rex clemens, pax populorum, Tertius Edwardus: regni complens Iubilaeum, Invictus Pardus, pollens bellis Machabeus; Prosperè dum vixit regnum pietate revixit, Armipotens rexit: jam Coelo Coelice Rex sit. Tertius Edwardus fama super aethera notus. Pugna pro Patria. In every part of this Tombe,The Sons and daugh¦ters of K. Edward the third. are all the Sonnes and Daughters of this Kings expressed in solid Brasse. On the right side, Edward Prince of Wales; Ioane of the Tower, given in marriage to the King of Spaine; Lionel, Duke of Cla∣rence; Edmund, Duke of Yorke; Mary, Duchesse of Britaine; and William of Hatfield. On the left side, Isabell, Lady of Coucy; William of Windsor; Iohn Duke of Lancaster; Blanch, of the Tower of London; Margaret Countesse of Pembrooke; and Thomas Duke of Glecester. Of English Kings here lyes the beautifull flower, Of all before passed, and a mirror to them shall shew; A mercifull King, of peace conservatour; The third Edward, the death of whom may rue All English men; for he by Knighthood due Was Libard invict, and by feat Martiall: To worthy Macabe in vertue perregall. The Sword, which this most Potent and warrelike King Edward the third used in warre, is to bee seene by his Tombe, weighing eigh∣teene pound, and seven foote in length. Philip,She hath a beauti∣full Tomb and her Figure in Alablaster upon it. Queene of England, wife to Edward the third, daughter to William of Bavaria, Earle of Henault, a woman of singular Piety, and a Mother of most Noble Children, dyed Anno Domini, 1369. And lyeth at the feet of Edward her husband, and these Verses annexed: Gulielmi Hannonis soboles posterma Philippa, Hic Roseo quondam pulchra decore jacet. Tertius Edwardus Rex ista conjuge laetus Materno suasu Nobiliumque fuit: Frater Iohannes Comes Mavortius Heros, Huic illam voluit consociare viro. Haec junxit Flandors conjunctio sanguinis Anglis: In Francos venit hinc Gallica dira leus. Dotibus haec raris viguit Regina Philippa, Forma praestanti, Religione, Fide. Foecunda nata est proles numerosa parenti, Insignes peperit magnanimosque Duces, Oxonii posuit studiosis optima Nutrix Regineas aedes, Palladiamque Scholam. Conjux Edwardi jacet Regina Philippa. Disce Vivere. Faire Philip, William Henaults child, And youngest daughter deere; Of Roseate hue, and beautie bright, In Tombe lyes hilled heere. Edward the third, through Mothers will, And Nobles good consent, Tooke her to wife, and joyfully
With her his time he spent. His Brother Iohn, a Martiall man, And eke a valiant Knight, Did linke this woman to this King In bonds of Marriage rite. This Match and Mariage thus in bloud, Did binde the Flemings sure To Englishmen, by which they did The Frenchmens wracke procure. This Philip flowr'd in gifts full rare, And treasures of the mind; In Beautie bright, Religion, Faith, To all and each most kind. A fruitfull Mother, Philip was Full many a Sonne shee bred: And brought forth many a worthy knight, Hardy, and full of dread: A carefull Nurse to Students all; At Oxford shee did found Queenes Colledge; she, Dame Pallas Schoole, That did her fame resound. Learne to live. About this Tombe are round placed the Images of these Princes,Royall or∣naments there pla∣ced, to il∣lustrate the beau∣tie of the Tombe. and their Armes to expresse them, as in an old Manuscript Booke they were found. At the feet, the King of Navarre, the King of Bohemia, the King of Scotland, the King of Sicily, and the King of Spaine. At the head, Willia Earle of He∣nault, father to the said Queene; Iohn, King of France; Edward the third, King of England, and her Husband, Lodowicke, the Emperor; and Edward, Prince of Wales, her first begotten Sonne. On the left side of the Tombe, Ione, Queene of Scotland, Iohn of Eltham, Earle of Cornewall; Ione, Princesse of Wales; Lionel, Duke of Clarence; Isa∣bel, Countesse of Bedford; Iohn, Duke of Lancaster; Ione, Duchasse of Cla∣rence; Edmurd, Earle of Cambridge; Ione, Duchesse of Lancaster, Thomas, Earle of Buckingham. On the right side, the Empresse, mo∣ther to the said Queene; her Brother also, Marcus Duke of Gelderland, Elea∣nora, Duchesse of Gelderland; Iohn, Earle of Henault; Mary Duchesse of Britaine, Lodowicke, Duke of Bavaria; the Countesse of Prembrooke; Chorles, Sonne to the King of France, Duke of Brabant. Henry the fifth,He lyeth in the up∣permost part of that King∣ly Chap∣pell, with a Statue of gilt Plates. King of England, Sonne of Henry the fourth, vanquished the French in many battels, and at length was created Regent of France. He tooke to wife Katharine, daughter to Charles the sixth. He dyed, Anno Dom. 1422. And these verses are fixed there in me∣mory of him. Gallorum mastix jacet hic Henricus in urna. Domat omnia Virtus Pulchrum virumque suum sociat tandem Katharina. O mercifull God, what a Prince was this, Which his short time in martiall Acts spent In honour of conquest, that wonder to me it is, How he might compasse such deeds excellent. And yet for that his minde nothing detent, All ghostly counsell for his Soule to provide, Out of this world, ere he fatally should slide. So though I had Tully his eloquence, Or of Seneca the grave moralitie,
Or of Salmon the perfect Sapience, Or the sweet Ditties of Dame Calliope; Yet might I not in Prose or other dittie, Accordingly advance this Prince his fame, Or with due honour to enhaunce the same. Considering his acts, whereof parcell appeare In this rude worke, with many more left out: The time also was lesse than ten yeare, That he so shortly brought all things about, By Divine grace furthered no doubt: That mighty Lord he holpe his ghostly Knight; With grace and honour to passe this worlds fight. And to have reward double and condigne, And first for Martiall acts by him done. To be advanc'd amongst the worthies nine, And for his vertue us'd by him eftsoone, With many good deeds which he on earth had done. Above the Hierarchies, he is (I trust) now stall'd, That was in earth the King of Kings call'd. katharine Valois,Her body now lyeth in a smal place by her hus∣band un∣buried. Daughter to Charles the sixth, King of France, and wife to Henry the fifth, who (hee being dead) tooke in marriage Owen Teu∣dor, borne in Wales, his race descen∣ding from King Cadwallader. Of her he begot Edmund Earle of Richmund, Iasper, Duke of Bedford, and another that tooke on him a Monasticall ha∣bite at Westminster. She dyed in An. 1437. and was buried by K. Henry 5. Hic Katharina jacet, Francorum filia Regis Haeres & Regni (Carole Sexte) tui, Henrici Quinti thalamo bis laeta jugali, Nam sic vir duplici clarus honore fuit: Iure suo Anglorum, Katharinae jure triumphans Francorum obtinuit jus, decus imperii. Grata venit laetis felix Regina Britannis, Perque dies celebrant quatuor ore Deum. Edidit Henricum gemibunda puerpera Regem, Cujus in imperio Francus & Anglus erat, Non sibi nec Regno felici sidere natum, Sed patri & matri Religione parem. Post ex Owneo Tiddero tertia proles, Nobilis Edmundus te Katharina beat: Septimus Henricus quo non praestantior alter, Filius Edmundi, Gemma Britanna fuit: Felix uxor ergo, mater, ter filia felix, Ast Avia haec felix terque quaeterque fuit. Otium fuge. Here lyes Queene Katharine clos'd in grave, The French Kings Daughter faire, And of thy Kingdome (Charles the sixth, The true undoubted Heire. Twice joyfull wife in marriage matcht To Henry fifth by name: Because, through her, hee nobled was, And shin'd in double Fame. The King of England by descent, And by Queene Katharins right: The Realme of France he did enjoy,
Triumphant King of might. A happy Queene to English-men, Shee came right gratefull here: And foure dayes space they honoured God, With mouth and reverend feare. Henry the sixth this Queene brought forth In painefull labour plight: In whose Empire a French-man was, And eke an English wight. Vnder no lucky Planet borne Vnto himselfe nor Throne: But equall with his Parents both, In pure Religion. Of Owen Tedder after this, The next Sonne Edmund was, O Katharine, a renowned Prince, That did in glory passe. Henry the seventh, a Britaine Pearle, A Gemme of Englands joy: A peerelesse Prince was Edmunds Sonne A good and gratious Roy: Therefore a happy wife this was, A happy mother pure: Thrice happy Child, but Grandame she, More than thrice happy sure.His owne and his wives fi∣gures are in gilt Brasse cu∣riously done up∣on the Tombe. RICHARD the second, of England and France King, Lord of Ireland, Sonne to Edward Prince of Wales, by Ioane Daughter to the Earle of Kent. Hee made new the hall at Westminster, and when hee had reigned 22. years, Anno dom. 1399. he was bereaved of his kingdome, by Henry of Lanca∣ster (and not long after) murdered, and buried at Langley among the Domini∣cans. Afterward, An. 1414. (as Tho∣mas Walsingham saith) his body was brought to Westminster, and layd in a Royal Tombe, builded of gilded brasse, at the great charges of King Henry the fift, with theseverses added: Prudens & mundus Richardus, jure Secundus, Per Fatum victus, jacet his sub marmore pictus, Verax sermone fuit & plenus ratione: Corpore procerus, animo prudens ut Homerus: Ecclesiae favit, elatos suppeditavit, Quemvis prostravit regalia qui violavit. Obruit haereticos, & eorum stravit amicos: o clemens Christe, tibi devotus fuit iste, Votis Baptistae salves quem protulit iste. His jacet immiti consumptus morte Richardus. Fuisse Felicem miserrimum. Perfect and prrudent Richard, by right the second, Vanquished by Fortune, Iyes here now graven in stone: True of his word, and thereto well resound, Seemely in person, and like to Homer, as one, In worldly prudence, and ever the Church in one Vpheld and favoured, and casting the proud to ground, And all that would his royall estate confound. Anne,She lyeth in the same Tombe with the King het Husband. Queene of England, first wife to Richard the Second, Daughter to Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, and Em∣peror of the Germanes, dyed in Anno 1394. and at Westminster is buricd, having this Epitaph.
Sub petralata nunc Anna jacet tumulata, Dum vixit mundo Richardo nupta secundo, Christo devota fuit haec, facilis bene nota, Pauperibus prona semper sua reddere dona. Iurgia sedavit, & praegnantes relevavit. Corpore formosa, vultu miti speciosa, Praebens solamen, viduis, aegris medicamen. Anno milleno, ter centum quarto nonageno, Iulii septeno mensis migravit amoeno. Hoc jacet Anna loco Britonum redimita corona, Cui vir Richardus jure secundus erat: Cui pater illustris, gnata, generó que superbus, Romaeter felix, induperator erat. Winceslaus illam magna comitante caterva, Londinum misit laetus euānsque pater: Cujus in adventu ludi, spectacula fiunt, Regali pompa regia virgo venit. Sed bona sunt hominum tenni pendentia filo Reges, Reginas mors capit, omne rapit. Haec Regina fuit magna de stripe Quiritum, Omnibus illa fuit femina chara viris. Larga, coloratis virtutum splendida gemmis: Nunquam laeta parens, nam sine prole jacet. Forma fragilis. Queene Anne, Richard the Seconds wife, Lyeth buried in this place: Adorned with the Britaines Crowne, With whom shee found much grace. Whose Noble Sire, of Daughter proud, Of Sonne in Law, full glad: Of Rome, thrice happy Emperour was And that large Empire had. Winceslaus so call'd by name, Who thus in joyfull plight, Sent her to London, guarded well, With valiant men of might. Against whose comming Playes were made, And sights and shewes were seene: With Princely pompe to gratifie This Noble Virgin Queene. But all mens treasures last not long, They hang but on a twine Or slender threed: Death, Kings and Queenes Doth all catch up in fine. This Queene was of the Royall race Of Romans by descent: Of all belov'd, most deare to most, In honour relucent. Full liberall and bountifull, Adorn'd with vertues rare: No child shee had, but issuelesse, She lyes without such care. Margaret,She lyeth also in the Royall Chappell of Kings. daughter and fifth child to Ed∣ward the fourth, King of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, and Lady Elizabeth his royall Queene and wife, was borne the 19. day of April, Anno Dom. 1472. and dyed the 11. day of December.
Nobibitas & forma, decorque, tenella juventus In simul hîc ista mortis sunt condita cistâ, Vt genus & nomen, sexum, tempus quoque mortis Noscas, cuncta tibi manefestat margo sepulchri. Thomas of Woodstocke,He lyeth under Marble, adorned with Brasse in the pave∣ment by his Father Duke of Gloce∣ster, sixth Sonne to King Edward the third, a man of great Nobility and authority; whom King Richard the second, his Nephew, suddenly and forcibly tooke and sent to Callis, where endighted upon a capitall cause, hee was beheaded, Anno Dom. 1397. Ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio. Henry,His heart is buried in the Coffin with S. Edward. sonne to Richard, King of the Romans, and Earle of Cornewall, re∣turning from the Holy Land, while he was hearing Masse at Viterbium in Italy, by Simon and Guydo, sonnes to Simon Mountfort, Earle of Leice∣ster: He was slaine in Anno 1269. His body lyes buried in the Mona∣sterie of Hailes: Math. Westmonast. Elizabeth,She lyeth at the feet of King Henry the third. daughter to King Henry the seventh, is buried in a Tombe of blacke Marble, having also this In∣scription. Elizabetha, illustrissimi Regis Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, Henrici Septimi, & Dominae Elizabethae Reginae serenis∣simae confortis suae filia & secunda pro∣les, quae nata fuit secundo die mensis Iulii, Anno Dom. 1492. & obiit de∣cimo quarto die mensis Novembris, An. Dom. 1495. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Hîc post fata jacet proles Regalis in isto Sarcophago, juvenis, Nobilis Elizabeth, Princeps illustris, Henr. Sept. filia Regis, Qui bini Regni florida Sceptra tenet. Atropos hanc rapuit saevissima nunci a mortis, Sit super in Coelo vita perennis ei. The Chaire of the Kings of Scotland. King Edward the first, having subdued the Scots in An. 1297. triumphantly returned, with the Scepter and Crowne of the Kings of Scots, as also the Chaire, wherein those Kings used to be crowned,In a Table hanging by are these ver∣ses set downe. bringing it into the Church of West∣minster: which Chaire as yet remai∣neth in the Royall Chappell, with Ia∣cobs Stone, as they callit, placed in it. Siquid habent veri vel Chronica cana fidusve, Clauditur hac cathedra nobilis ecce lapis. Ad caput eximius Iacob cuondam Patriarcha, Quem posuit cernens numina mira poli; Quem tulit ex Scotis spolium quasi victor honoris, Edwardus primus, Mars velut armipotens, Scotorum domitor, noster validissimus Hector, Anglorum decus, & gloria Militiae. In the great and Kingly Chappell of King HENRY the seventh. Henry the seventh,He lyeth in a small Chappell made all of richly gilded Brasse. King of England, France, and Lord of Ireland, the first begotten Sonne of Edmund, Earle of Richmund, by Margaret, daughter and heire to Iohn, Duke of Somerset: When hee had justly deprived (both of Crowne and life) Richard the third at Bosworth: Hee was enstalled in the Kingdome in An. 1485. and before hee was 23. yeeres aged, hee qualified the loud and grievous garboyles, betweene the Families of Lancaster and Yorke, resting in the Lord, Anno 1509. And in this magnificent Chappell, which hee himselfe builded, with Elizabeth his Queene and wife: Hee lyeth in a most glorious Tombe of solid Brasse, compos∣sed about with these verses: Septimus Henricus Tumulo requiescit in isto, Qui Regum splendor, lumen & orbis erat.
Rex vigil, & sapiens, comis, virtutis amator, Egregius formae, strenous atque potens. Qui peperit pacem regno, qui bella peregit Plurima, qui victor semper ab hoste redit. Qui naras binis conjunxit Regibus ambas, Regibus & cunctis foedere junctus erat. Qui sacrum hoc struxit Templum, statuitque sepulchrum, Pro se, próque sua conjuge, prole, domo. Lustra decem, atque annos tres plus compleverat annis, Nam tribus octenis Regia Sceptra tulit. Quindecies Domini centenus fluxerat annus, Currebat nonus, cùm venit atra dies. Septimtermensis lux t cot. fulgebat Aprilis, Cum claūlit summum tanta corona diem. Nulla dedêre prius tantum tibi saecula Regem Anglia, vix similem posteriora dabunt. On the other side, under the Queenes Image. Hic jacet Regina Elizabetha,This Queene died in the Tower of London. Edwardi Quarti quondam Regis filia; Edwardi Quinti Regis quondam nominati Soror; Henrici Septimi olim Regis Conjux; at∣que Henrici octavi Regis mater inclyta. Obiit autem suum diem in Turre Lon∣doniarum die 11. Feb. Anno Domini, 1502. 37. Annorum aetate functa. Edward the sixt,He lieth at the head of his Grand∣father, K. Henry the seventh. King of England, France, and Ireland, &c. Sonne to King Hen∣ry the eight by Iane Seymour, was crowned King the 28. day of Ianua∣ry, 1546. Hee dyed (over-soone) in his younger yeeres the 6. day of Iuly, 1553. and lyeth under the Brasse richly gilded Altar, most curiously wrought with good workemanship. Mary, Queen of England, France and Ire∣land, She Hath buried in the North part of the great Roy∣all Chap∣pell. Daughter to King Henry the eighth, by Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinand, King of Spaine, suceeded her Brother Edward, An. 1553. The Romish Religion, which her Father and Brother had expelled, she againe restored, marrying with Philip, King of Spaine: And died when she had reigned 5. yeeres, 1558. Elizabeth,Vpon her gloriou. & goodly Tombe made by King Iames is this en∣suing in∣scription. Queen of England, France and Ireland, Daughter to King Henry the eight, by his second wife Anne Bullen, and Sister to Mary; succeeded her in Anno 1558. She was a most potent Princesse, and (for all vertues) to bee compared with the greatest Kings or Queenes whatsoever. Having reig∣ned 44. yeeres, foure Moneths, and eight dayes in highest glory (to for∣raigne admiration, and love of her owne people, England, acknowled∣ging her rather a Mother than a com∣mander) she yeelded her Soule to Christ both piously and contentedly, the 24. day of March, Anno Domini. 1602. Memoriae Sacrum. Religione ad primaeuam sinceritatem restau∣rata,In the great and Royall Chappell of King Henry the seventh. Pace fundata, Moneta ad justum volorem reducta, Rebellione domestica vindicata, Gallia malis intestinis praeci∣piti sublevata, Belgio sustentato, Hispa∣nica classe profligata, Hibernia pulsis Hispanis, & Rebellibus ad deditionem coactis pacata, Redditibus utriusque A∣cademiae lege annonaria plurimum adau∣ctib. Tota denique Anglia Ditata, Pru∣dentissimèque annos XLV. administrata; Elizabetha Regina victrix, triumpha∣trix, pietatis studiosissima, felicissima, placida morte septuagenaria soluta, mor∣tales reliquias dum Christo jubente re∣surgant immortales, in hac Ecclesia cele∣berrima ab ipsa conservata, & denuò fundata, deposuio. Obiit 24. Martii, Anno salutis, MDCII. Regni XLV. Aetatis LXX. Vpon the remove of her body from Richmond (where she dyed) to White Hall, by water, these lines were written.
The Queene was brought by water to White Hall, At every stroke the Oares teares let fall. More clung about the Barge, Bish under water Wept out their eyes of Pearle, and swom blind after: I thinke the Barge-men might with easier thighes, Have row'd her thither in her peoples eyes, For howsoever, thus much my thoughts have scann'd, Sh'ad come by water, had she come by land. Sophia,This young In∣fant lived not above 3. or 4. dayes. daughter to IAMES, King of great Britaine, borne at Greenwich, the 22. day of Iune, 1606. the 3. day after ended her life, and is buried in the same Chappell, where the Queenes, Mary and Elizabeth do rest in the Lord. Margaret,Shee is buried in the South part of the Chappell in a good∣ly Monu∣ment. Countesse of Richmond and Darby, daughter, and only Heyre to Iohn, Duke of Somerset, by Mar∣garet, daughter to the Lord Bello∣campe, or Beauchampe of Powicke: first married to Edmund the Son of Owen Tedder, who begate Henry the 7. King of England; and afterward, to Thomas Stanley, Earle of Darby: Two Col∣ledges (namely, of Christ, and Saint Iohn Baptist) she erected for Students in Cambridge. She instituted also two divinity Lectures, one at Cambridge, and the other at Oxford, &c. This E∣pitaph was made for her. Aspirate meis Elegis pia turma sororum, Et Margaretam collacrimate piam. Haec sub mole latet Regis celeberrima mater Henrici magni, quem locus iste fovet, Quem locus iste sacer celebri celebrat Polyandro, Illius ingenitrix hac tumulatur humo. Cui cedat Tanaquil (Titus hanc super astra reportet) Cedat Penelope charus Vlyssis amor; Haec Abigail, velut Hester erat pietate secunda, En tres jam proceres nobilitate pares: Pro Domina precor implora, pro Principe tanta Flecte Deum precibus qui legis hos aspices. Plura referre piget, calamus corpore rigescit, Dormit Moecenas, negligitur probitas: Nec juvat aut modicum prodest nunc ultima versu Fata recensere (mortua mors reor est) Quaeris quid decus est? decus est modo dicier hircus: Cedit honos hirco, cedit honorque capro. Falleris ipse Charon, iterum surrexit Abyron, Et Stygios remos despicit ille tuos. Vivitur ex voto, mentis praecordia tangunt Nulla sepulchra Ducum, nec monumenta patrum, Non Regum, non ulla hominum labentia fato Tempora, nec toties mortua turba ruens. Hinc statuo certè periturae parcere chartae, Seu Iuvenalis ovat eximius Satyrus. Margaret,She lyes buried in a goodly tombe of Alabaster in the same Chappell. Countesse, of Levenox, daugh∣ter to Archibald Dowglasse, Earle of Angus, by Margaret, Queen Dowager of Scotland, daughter to Henry the seventh, King of England; wife al∣so to Mathew Stuart, Earle of Leve∣nox, to whom she brought Henry, Lord of Darnly, father to Iames the sixth, King of Scotland, Charles, Earle of Levenox, and other children that died in their younger yeers. Shee de∣parted this life the 10. day of March, Anno Domini, 1577. and hath this E∣pitaph: Heere lyeth the Noble Lady Margaret, Countesse of Levenox, daughter and sole heire of Archibald, Earle of An∣gus,
by Margaret Queene of Scots his wife, that was eldest daughter to K. Henry the 7. who bare unto Mathew, Earle of Levenox her husband, foure sons, and foure daughters. This Lady had to her great Grandfather, King Edward the fourth; to her Grand∣father, King Henry the seventh; to her Vncle, King Henry the eight; to her Cousin Germane, King Edward the sixt, to her Brother King Iames, of Scotland the fifth, to her Sonne, King Henry the first; and to her Grand∣child, King Iames the sixth. Having to her great Grandmother, and Grandmother, two Queens, both named Elizabeth; to her Mother, Margaret Queene of Scots; to her Aunt, Mary, the French Queene; to her Cousins Germanes, Mary and Elizabeth, Queenes of England; to her Niece and Daughter in law, Ma∣ry, Queene of Scots. Henry, second sonne to this Lady, was King of Scots, and father to Iames the sixth, now King. This Henry was mur∣dered at the age of 21. yeeres: Charles her youngest Sonne, was Earle of Levenox, father to the Lady Arbella, hee dyed at the age of 21. yeeres, and is here entombed. Charles his Sonne,He lyeth buried in the vault with his mother. and Earle of Levenox, who tooke in marriage the daughter of William Cavendish, Knight, and had Arbella to his onely daughter, dyed in Anno 1576. Henry,A childe of two moneths old. first Sonne to King Henry the 8. by Queene Katharine of Spaine, lyeth buried at the doore of the Royall Chappell. Queene Anne,She lyeth in the South part of the ve∣stry. wife to King Richard the third, daughter to Richard Nevil, Earle of Warwicke, dyed in Anno Do∣mini, 1484. not without suspicion of poysoning. Anne of Cleve,She lyeth in a Tombe as yet not finished. Sister to William, Duke of Cleve, and Gulich, whom King Hen∣ry the eighth repudiated, when he tooke to wife Katharine Howard, died in Anno 1557. and lyeth buried at the head of King Sebert. Anne of Somerset, wife to the most Noble Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, and the daughter to Sir Edward Stanhop, Knight, by his wife Elizabeth, daugh∣ter to Fulke Bourchier, Lord Fitzwaren, died the 16. of the Calends of May, Anno 1580. &c. with this inscription on her Tombe: Heere lyeth intombed the Noble Du∣chesse of Somerset,She lyeth in a good∣ly Tombe in S. Ni∣cholas Chappell, the Tombe being 24. foote in height. Anne, Spouse un∣to that renowned Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, Earle of Hertford, Vicount Beauchamp, and Baron Sey∣mour, Companion of the most famous Knightly Order of the Garter, vncle to King Edward the sixth, Governour of his Royall Person, and most wor∣thy Protector of all his Realmes, Do∣minions, and Subjects; Lieutenant Generall of all his Armies, Treasurer and Earle Marshall of England, Go∣vernour and Captaine of the Isles of Garnesey & Iersey. Vnder whose pros∣perous Conduct, glorious Victorie hath beene so often and so fortunately obtained at Edenborough, Leith, and Muscleborough field. A Princesse descended of Noble Li∣nage, being daughter to the worthie Knight, Sir Edward Stanhop, by Eliza∣beth his wife, that was daughter to Sir Foulke Bourchier, Lord Fitzwaren, from whom our Moderne Earles of Bathe are sprung. Sonne hee was to William, Lord Fitzwaren, that was Brother to Henry Earle of Essex, and Iohn Lord Berners, whom William their Sire (sometime Earle of Ewe in Normandie) begate on Anne, the sole heire of Thomas of Wood∣stocke, Duke of Glocester, younger Sonne to the mightie Prince, King Edward the third, and of his Wife Eleanora, coheire unto the tenth Humphrey de Bohun, that was Earle of Hereford, Essex, and North∣ampton, High Constable of England. Many children bare this Lady unto her Lord of either sort, to wit, Edward Earle of Hertford, Henry, and younger Edward; Anne, Countesse of Warwicke, Margaret, Iane, Mary, Katharine, and Elizabeth: And with firme faith in Christ, and in a most mild manner, rendred she this life at 90. yeeres of age, on Easter day, the 16. of April, Anno, 1587.
The Earle of Hertford, Edward, her eldest sonne, in this dolefull dutie care∣full and diligent, doth consecrate this Monument to his deare Parent: not for her Honour, wherewith (living) she did abound, and now departed, flourisheth; but, for the dutifull love he beareth her, and for his last testification thereof. Lady Wenefrid,She lyeth in a faire Tombe of of Alaba∣ster in S. Nicholas Chappell. Marchionesse of Win∣chester, sprung of the worthy Family of Bruges, who first married with Richard Sacvile, Knight, and Chancellor of the Exchequer: by her he had Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, and the Lady Dacres of the South, beside other children. Afterward, she married with Iohn Powlet, Mar∣quesse of Winchester, and at length, well in yeeres, and a Widdow, died, An∣no Domini, 1586. Hic jacet in tumulo clarissima femina, primùm Fortunata bonis clarisque Parentibus: illi Sollicitè aetatem tenerae flexêre puellae Ad studium verae virtutis, & optima facta, Externo addentes internum lumen honori, Pòst adolescentis feliciter extitit aetas: Cum matura, viro veteri de stemmate nupsit, Qui genus à proavis longè ante Trophaea Guilielmi Normanasque acies, patria de gente trahebat: Quocum jucundè transegit tempora vitae, Donec mors illum rapuit: post fata mariti Moesta diu vitam tenebris luctuque trahebat. Sed melior tandem viduam fortuna revisit, Nobilitate potens ubi Marchio amabilis illam Connubio accepit firmo propriaroque dicavit: At nunc ter felix transcendit spiritus astra, Cumque suo regnat, coluit quem ante omnia, Christo. Anne,They lye buried in S. Nicholas Chappell, in a good∣ly Tombe. Countesse of Oxenford, Daughter to William Cecill, Baron of Bourgh∣ley, with Mildred her Mother, in one Sepulcher, with Magnificent Collumnes of Porphyrie and let Stone, 24. foot in height, lie buried together, which the said Baron of Bourghley caused to be there erected. Elizabeth Cecill,Shee lyeth at the doore of the same Chappell. Daughter of William Brooke, Baron Cobham, the wife deare∣ly affected of Robert Cecill, Knight, one of the Privie Councell to the illustri∣ous Queene Elizabeth, upon her Tombe hath these Dialogue Verses: 1591. Vxor. Regina a Cameris, Baronis filia, chari Fida Equitis conjux Elizabetha fui: Vnus amor nobis, una indivulsa voluntas, Cor unum, una fides inviolata fuit: Ille mei si quando potest deponere curam, Ille potest animae non memor esse suae. Maritus. Si lachrimis constaret amor (charissima conjux) Prosequere lachrimis funera saepe tua. Nam mihi quàm fueris redamata, tuum pia sponsa Testatur meritum, conscius ipse mihi: Sed nec amor patitur socia regnante dolere, Et Christi major te sibi strinxit amor. Ergo tuo dilecta bono cum pace fruare: Spero mihi tecum portio pacis erit. A Brooke by name, the Baron Cobhams child, A Newton was she by her Mothers side: Cecill her husband this for her did build, To prove his love
did after death abide: Which tels unto the world that after come, The worlds conceit whilst heere she held a roome: How nature made her wise and well beseeming, Wit and condition, silent, true and chaste: Her vertues rare wan her much esteeming, In Court with Soveraigne still with favour grac'd. Earth could not yeeld more pleasing earthly blisse, Blest with two Babes, the third brought her to this. William of Windsore,They lye buried in Saint Edmund Chappell. Sonne of King Ed∣ward the third, so called, because he was borne at Windsore with his Sister, named Blanch of the Tower, because in the Tower of London her Mother was delivered of her, lye both toge∣ther under a Marble Tombe. Iohn of Eltham,Buried al∣so in the same Chappell. Earle of Cornewall, se∣cond Sonne to King Edward the se∣cond, by Isabel, daughter to Philip le Bel, King of France: his Tombe of A∣labaster is on the left hand the dore, without any inscription. Frances,She lieth buried al∣so in the same Chappell. Dutchesse of Suffolke, daughter to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke, and Mary, Queene of France, daugh∣ter to King Henry the seventh. She was first married to Henry Gray, Mar∣quesse Dorset, who was created Duke of Suffolke by King Edward the sixth: And after to Adrian Stokes, Esquire, who raised this Alabaster Monument to her living remembrance. Anno. 1563. Nil decus aut splendor, nil regia nomina prosunt, Splendida divitiis nil juvat ampla domus. Omnia fluxerunt, virtutis sola remansit Gloria, Tartareis non abolenda rogis: Nupta Duci priùs est, uxor pòst Armigeri Stokes, Funere nunc valeas consociata Deo. The noble Lady Iane Seimour,She was honorably buried in the floore of the Chappell. daughter to the renowned Prince Edward, Duke of Sommerset, Earle of Hertford, Vi∣count Beauchamp, Baron Seymour; And to the right noble Lady Anne, Duchesse of Sommerset his wife, de∣parted this life in her Virginitie, at the age of 19. yeeres, the 19. of March, Anno. 1560. in the second yeere of the most happy reigne of Queene Elizabeth-Edward, Earle of Hertford, and Baron Beauchampe, her deare brother, caused this Monument to be made in her memorie: Ingenio praestans, & vultu Iana decore, Nobilis arte fuit vocis, & arte manus. Hinc Venus & Pallas certant utra debet babere: Vult Venus esse suam, Pallas & esse suam: Mors vero in virgineo figens in pectore telum: Neutrius (inquit) erït, sed mihi praeda jacet. Corpore Iana jacet, tellurem terra subibit, Sed pius in Coeli spiritus arce sedet. The Right Honourable Lady Katharine Knowles,She lyeth also buried in the floore of the same Chappell. chiefe Lady of the Queenes Majesties Bed-chamber, and wife to Sir Francis Knowles, Knight, Treasu∣rer of her Highnesse houshold, depar∣ted this life the 15. day of Ianuary, 1568. at Hampton Court, and was ho∣norably buried in the floore of this Chappell. This Lady Knowles, and the Lord Hunsdon her brother, were the children of William Carey, Esquire, & of the Lady Mary his wife, one of the Daughters and heires of Thomas Bul∣len, Earle of Wiltshire and Ormond: which Lady Mary was Sister to Anne, Queen of England, wife to King, Hen∣ry the eight, Father and Mother to Elizabeth, Queene of England. Quae Francisce fuit tibi conjux en Katharina, Mortua sub gelido marmore Knolle jacet. Excidet ex animo tibi mortua,
sat scio nunquam, Viva tibi vivo semper amata fuit. Illa tibi proles sex & bis quinque Marito Protulit, aequalis foemina masque fuit, Haec tecum multos utinam vixisset in annos, Et tua nunc conjux facta fuisset anus: Noluit at Deus, hoc voluit sed sponsa maritum In Coelis maneas, ô Katharina, tuum. Heere lyeth entombed the noble Fran∣ces, A goodly Monumēt is made where she is buried in the Chappell of S. Bene∣dict. Countesse of Hertford, deare spouse unto the noble Edward, Earle of Hertford, and Baron Beauchampe, Sonne of the renowned Prince Ed∣ward, Duke of Sommerset, Earle of Hertford, Vicount Beauchampe, and Baron Seymour. A Lady descended of right noble linage, being daughter of the noble Lord William, Baron Howard of Effingham, companion of the most famous order of the Garter, High Admirall to Queene Mary, and Lord Chamberlaine of the houshold, and Lord Privie Seale to Queene E∣lizabeth. Sonne was hee to the right noble Prince Thomas, Duke of Nor∣folke, and Earle of Surrey, Earle Mar∣shall of England, &c. This Lady, highly Renowned for her many vertuous gifts and graces both of mind and body, greatly favoured by her gracious Soveraigne, and dearely beloved of her Lord, after long sickenes, in firme faith in Christ, and constant patience, departed this life at 44. yeeres of age, the 24. day of May, An. 1598. in the 40. yeere of the most happy reigne of our most gracious Soveraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth. To whose memory, the said Earle her loving Lord and husband, much la∣menting her death, in testification of his great love towards her, and of his carefull diligence in this dolefull dutie, doth consecrate this Monu∣ment. Foy Pour Devoir. Desir N'a Repos. Heere lyeth the most honorable Lady Frances,She lieth in a good∣ly Tombe of Alaba∣ster, and various Marbles polished, in the Chappell of S. Paul. sometimes Countesse of Sus∣sex, daughter to Sir William Sidney of Pensehurst, Knight, wife and Wid∣dow to that most noble, most wise, and most Martiall Gent. Thomas Rat∣cliffe, Earle of Sussex. A woman while she lived, adorned with many and most rare gifts, both of mind and bo∣dy; towards God truely and zealous∣ly religious, to her friends and kins∣folkes most liberall; to the poore pri∣soners, to the Ministers of the Word of God alwayes most charitable. By her last will and Testament, shee instituted a Divinitie Lecture, to bee read in this Collegiate Church. And by the same her testament, gave also 5000. pound, towards the building of a new Colledge in the Vniversitie of Cambridge, with sufficient yeerely revenue, for the continuall mainte∣nance of one Master, tenne Fellowes, and 20. Schollers, either in the same Colledge, or else in another house in the said Vniversitie already builded, commonly called Clare Hall. She li∣ved 58. yeeres, and died the ninth of March, and was buried the 15. day of April, 1589. Misericordia & Charitate. Beati mortui qui Domino moriuntur. Omnia plena malis, fert Deus unus opem, Veni Domine Iesu, veni cite. Pietate & Prudentia. Fide conjugali. Henry Carey,He lyeth buried in the midst of S. Iohn Baptists Chappell, with a goodly Monumēt. Baron of Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlaine of the houshold to Q. Elizabeth, and allied to her in blood, Lord Governor, or Commander of the Towne of Barwicke, Knight of the noble Order of the Garter, and one of her Majesties most Honorable Privie Councell, died in Anno, 1596. Sepulturae familiae de Hunsdon Consecratum. In Domine hîc obdormit Henricus Carey, Baro de Hunsdon, villae Berwici limitis∣que tam orientalis quàm medii versus
Scotiam olim Praefectus: Pentionarorum Generosorum Capitaneus; Forestarum cis Trentam Iusticiarius summus; Garteriani ordinis Eques Auratus; Dominae Reginae Camerarius; a sacris Consiliis, eidemque consobrinus. Vnà cum illo conditur uxor charissima, filia Thomae Morgan Equitis aurati, quae plures illi liberos peperit, è quibus sunt superstites, Georgius, Iohannes, Edmundus, Robertus, equites aurati: Ca∣tharina, Comitissa Nottinghamiae, Phila∣delphe, Baronissa Scroope, & Margareta, Domina Hoby. Obiit 23. Iulii, 1596. Aetatis LXXI. Patri optimo Georgius Ca∣rey filius, Baro de Hunsdon, ordinis Gar∣terii Socius, Vectae Insulae Praefectus, Regi∣nae Elizabethae Camerarius, & à sacris con∣siliis: Maritoque charissimo Anna uxor, honoris & memoriae ergô sibique & suis mortalitatis memores posuerunt. In Australi plaga Ecclesiae. Galfridus Chaucer,He lyeth buried in the South part of the Church. Poëta celeberrimus, qui primus Anglicam Poësin ita illustravit, ut Anglicus Homerus habeatur. Obiit 1400. Anno vero 1555. Nicholaus Brigham, Musarum nomine hujus ossa transtulit, & illi novum tumulum ex marmore, his versibus inscriptis posuit: Qui fuit Anglorum Vates ter maximus olim, Galfridus Chaucer, conditur hoc tumulo. Annum si quaeras Domini, si tempora mortis; Ecce notae subsunt, quae tibi cuncta notant. 25. Octobris, 1400. Aerumnarum requies, Mors. N. Brigham hos fecit Musarum nomine sumptus. Si rogitas quis fueram, forsan te fama docebit: Quod si fama neget, mundi quia gloria transit, Haec Monumenta lege. The works of this famous Poet Gef∣frey Chaucer, were partly published in Print by VVilliam Caxton, Mercer, that first brought the incomparable Art of Printing into England; which was in the reigne of King, Henry the sixt: After∣ward, increased by Master VVilliam Thinne, Esquire, in the reigne of King Henry the eight. Since then, corrected and twice encreased through mine own painefull labours, in the reigne of Queene Elizabeth, to wit, in the yeere, 1561. And againe, beautified with di∣vers ample notes, by mee collected out of sundry Records and Monuments, which I delivered to my loving and learned friend, Master Thomas Speight. And he (having drawne them into a good forme and methode, as also, ex∣plained most of the old and obscure words) published the same worke a∣gaine, in Anno, 1597. Edmundus Spencer,He lieth also buried in the same South part of the Church. Londinensis, Angli∣corum Poetarum nostri saeculi facilè Princeps, quod ejus Poemata, faven∣tibus Musis, & victuro genio con∣scripta comprobant. Obiit immatura morte, Anno salutis, 1598. & prope Galfridum Chaucerum conditur, qui felicissimè poesin Anglicis literis pri∣mus illustravit. In quem haec scripta sunt Epitaphia. Hic prope Chaucerum situs est Spenserius, illi Proximus ingenio, proximus ut tumulo. Hic prope Chaucerum Spensere Poeta poetam Conderis, & versu, quàm tumulo proprior, Anglica te vivo vixit, plausitque Poesis; Nunc moritura timet, te moriente, mori. Mary,A Magni∣ficent Mo∣nument made by our most Royall So∣veraigne K. Iames, for his Mother. Queene of Scots, and Dowager of France, her body was translated from Peterborough to Westminster, and on her Tombe are these inscriptions: D. O. M. Mariae Stuartae, Scotorum Reginae, Fran∣ciae Dotariae, Iacobi V. Scotorum Regis Filiae, & haeredis unicae Henrici VII. Ang. Regis ex Margareta majori natu fi∣lia (Iacobo IIII. Regi Scotorum matri∣monio copulata) proneptis, Edwardi IIII. Angliae Regis ex Elizabetha filia∣rum natu maxima abneptis, Francisci II.
Gallorum Regis conjugis, Cornae An∣gliae, dum vixit, certae & indubitatae hae∣redis, & Iacobi Magnae Britanniae Mo∣narchae potentissimi Matris. Stripe verè regia & antiquissima prognata erat, maximis totius Europe Principi∣bus agnatione & cognatione conjuncta, & exquisitissimis animi & corporis dotibus & ornamentis cumulatissima. Verùm ut sunt variae rerum humanarum vices, postquam annos plus minus viginti in cu∣stodia detenta, fortiter & strenuè (sed frustrà cum malevolorum obtrectationi∣bus, timidorum suspicionibus▪ & inimi∣corum capitalium insidiis conflictata es∣set, tandem inaudito & infesto Regibus exemplo securi percutitur. Et contempto mundo, devicta morte, lassato carnifice, Christo Servatori animae salu∣tem, Iacobo filio spem regni & posterita∣tis, & universis caedis infaustae specta∣toribus exemplum patientiae cōmendans, piè, & intrepidè cervicem Regiam securi maledictae subjecit, & vitae caducae sor∣tem cum coelestis regni perennitate com∣mutavit. Vlt. Idus Februaril. Anno Christi, MDLXXXVII. Aetatis, XXXXVI. Obruta frugifero sensim sic cespice surgunt Semnia, per multos quae latuere dies. Sanguine sancivit foedus cum plebe Iehova, Sanguine placabant numina sancta patres: Sanguine conspersi quos praeterit ira Penates; Sanguine signata est quae modò credit humus. Parce Deus, satis est, infandos siste dolores, Inter funestos pervolet illa dies. Sit Reges mactare nefas, ut sanguine posthac Purpureo nunquam terra Britanna fluat. Exemplum pereat caesae cum vulnere Christae; Inque malum praeceps author & actor eat. Si meliore sui post mortem parte triumphet, Carnifices sileant, tormina, claustra, cruces. Quem dederant cursum superi Regina peregit: Tempora laeta Deus, tempora dura dedit. Edidit eximium fato properante Iacobum; Quem Pallas, Musae, Delia fata colunt. Magna viro, major natu, sed maxima partu, Conditur hic regum filia, sponsa, parens. Det Deus ut nati & qui nascentur ab illa Aeternos videant hinc sine nube dies. Although that famous and worthie HENRY,A Monu∣ment all of pure gold were too little for a Prince of such high hope and merit. eldest Sonne to our deare Soveraigne Lord King IAMES, hath (as yet) no Tombe or Monument made for him there in Westminster, but liveth still in the love and memory of all true English hearts: yet this excellent Epi∣taph was purposely made for him. Reader, wonder thinke it none, To heare me spake, that am a Stone. Heere is shrin'd Celestiall dust, And I keepe it but in trust; Should I not my Treasure tell, VVonder then thou might'st as well, How this stone could chuse but breake, If it had not learn'd to speake. Hence amaz'd, and aske not me, VVhose these Sacred Ashes be. Purposely it is conceal'd, For, if that should be reveal'd, All that reade, would by and by Melt themselves to teares and dye.
Another. Within this Marble Casket lyes, A matchlesse Iewell of rich price, Which Nature (in the worlds disdaine) But shew'd, and then shut up againe. This Church hath had great privi∣ledge of Sanctuarie within the precinct thereof;Sanctua∣ry at VVestmin∣ster. to wit, the Church, Church∣yard and Close, &c. from whence it hath not beene lawfull for any Prince or other, to take any person that fled thi∣ther for any cause. Which priviledge was first granted by Sebert, King of the East Saxons; since increased by Edgar, King of the West Saxons; renewed and confirmed by King Edward the Confes∣sor, as appeareth by this his Charter fol∣lowing: Edward, by the grace of God, King of Englishmen: I make it to bee knowne to all generations of the world after me, that by especiall commandement of our holy Father Pope Leo, I have renewed, and honoured the holy Church of the blessed Apostle, Saint Peter of Westminster, and I order and establish for ever, that what person, of what condition or estate soever he be, from whence∣soever he come, or for what offence or cause it bee, either for his refuge into the said ho∣ly place, he be assured of his life, liberty and limbs. And over this, I forbid (under the paine of everlasting damnation) that no Mi∣nister of mine, or of my Successors, inter∣meddle them with any the goods, lands or possessions of the said persons, taking the said Sanctuary: for I have taken their goods and livelode into my speciall protection; and ther∣fore I grant to every each of thē (in as much as my terrestriall power may suffice) all man∣ner freedome of joyous liberty, & whosoever presumes or doth contrary to this my grant; I will he lose his name, worship, dignity and power, & that with the great traytor Iudas, that betrayed our Saviour, he be in the ever∣lasting fire of hell. And I will and ordaine, that this my grant endure as long, as there remayneth in England either love or dread of Christian name. More of this Sanctuary ye may read in our Histories, and also in the Statute of Henry the eighth the 32. yeere. The Parish Church of Saint Mar∣garet,Parish Church of S. Mar∣garet. sometime within the Abbey, was by Edward the Confessor removed, and builded without, for ease of the Monks. This Church continued till the dayes of Edward the first, at what time the Merchants of the Staple, and Parishio∣ners of Westminster builded it all of new, the great Chancell excepted, which was builded by the Abbots of Westmin∣ster, and this remaineth now a faire Pa∣rish Church,In the reigne of Edward the sixth. though sometime in dan∣ger of downe pulling. In the South Ile of this Church, is a faire Marble Monument of Dame Mary Billing, the heyre of Robert Nesenham of Conington, in Huntington shire, first mar∣ried to William Coton, to whose Issue her inheritance alone descended, remaining with Robert Coto at this day, heyre of her & her first husbands family. Her second husband was Sir Thomas Billing, Chiefe Iustice of England; and her last, whom likewise she buried, was Thomas Lacy, erecting this Monument to the memo∣rie of her three husbands, with whose Armes shee hath garnished it, and for her owne buriall, wherein she was in∣terred in the yeere 1499. Next to this famous Monastery, is the Kings principall Palace, of what Anti∣quity it is uncertaine: but Edward the Confessor held his Court there, as may appeare by the testimonie of sundry; and namely, of Ingulphus, as I have before told you. The said King had his Palace, and for the most remained there: where hee also ended his life, and was buried in the Monastery which he had builded. It is not to be doubted, but that K. Willi∣am the first, as he was crowned there, so he builded much at this Palace, for he found it farre inferiour to the building of Princely Palaces in France. And it is manifest by the testimonie of many Authors,Great Hall at VVest∣minster. that William Rufus, builded the great Hall there, about the yeere of Christ,Mathew Paris. 1097. Amongst others, Roger of Windover and Mathew Paris, doe write, that K. VVilliam (being returned out of Normandy into England) kept his feast of Whitsontide very royally at Westminster in the new hall which he had lately builded, the length whereof (say some) was 270. foote, and seventy foure foot in bredth. And when he heard men say, that this Hall was too great, hee
answered and said:Liber Wood∣bridge. This Hall is not bigge enough by the one halfe, and is but a Bedde-chamber, in comparison of that I meane to make. A diligent searcher (saith Mathew Paris) might find out the foundation of the Hall, which he had supposed to have builded, stretching from the river of Thames, to the common high way. This Palace was repaired about the yeere,Palace re∣paired. 1163. by Thomas Becket,IV. Fitzsle∣pho. Chan∣cellor of England, with exceeding great celerity and speed, which before was ready to have fallen downe. This hath been the pricipall seate and Palace of all the Kings of England, since the Con∣quest: for here have they in the great Hall kept their Feasts, of Coronation especially, and other solemne Feasts as at Christmas and such like most com∣monly. For proofe whereof, I find recor∣ded, Record Tow. that in the yeere, 1236. and the twentieth of Henry the third, on the 29. of December, William de Haverhull, the Kings Treasurer, was commanded, that upon the day of the Circumcision of our Lord, he should cause 6000. poore people to be fed at Westminster, for the state of the King,The use of the great Hall was to feed the poore. the Queene, and their children. The weake and aged to bee placed in the great Hall, and in the les∣ser those were more strong and in rea∣sonable plight: In the Kings Chamber the children, and in the Queeues: and when the King knew the charge, hee gladly allowed it in the accounts. In the yeere 1238. the same King Henry kept his Feast of Christmas at Westminster in the great Hall,Mathew Paris great feasts in VVestmi∣ster Hall. so did hee in the yeere 1241. where he placed the Legate in the most honorable place of the table; to wit, in the middest, which the Noblemen tooke in evill part. The King sate on the right hand, and the Archbishop on the left, and then all the Prelates and Nobles, according to their estates: for the King himselfe did set the guests. The yeere 1242. hee likewise kept his Christmas in the Hall, &c. Also, in the yeere 1243. Richard, Earle of Cornewall, the Kings brother, married Cincia, daughter to Beatrice, Countesse of Provence, & kept his mar∣riage Feast in the great Hall at Westmin∣ster, with great royalty and company of Noble men: in so much, that there were told (triginta millia) 30000. dishes of meats at that dinner. In the yeere 1256. King Henry sate in the Exchequer of this Hall,Henry the 3. sate in the Exche∣quer, and amerced the She∣riffes. and there set downe order for the appearance of Sheriffes, and bringing in of their ac∣counts: there was 5. Marks set on every Sheriffes head for a fine, because they had not distrained every person, that might dispend 15. l. land by the yeere, to receive the order of Knighthood, ac∣cording as the same Sheriffes were com∣manded. Also, the Maior, Aldermen and She∣riffes of London, being accused of oppres∣sion & wrongs done by them, and sub∣mitting themselves in this place before the King, sitting then in judgment upon that matter; they were condemned to pay their fines for their offences com∣mitted, and further, every one of them discharged of assise and ward. In the yeeres 1268. and 1269. the same King kept his Christmas Feasts at Westminster, as before: and also in the same yeere 1269. he translated (with great solemnitie) the body of King Ed∣ward the Confessor,Translatiō of Edward the Con∣fessor, into a new Chap∣pell, at the back of the high Altar: which Chappell he had prepared of a marvai∣lous workemanship, bestowing a new Tombe or Shrine of gold. And on the day of his translation, he kept a Royall Feast in the great Hall of the Palace: Thus much for the Feasts of old time in this Hall. We read also,Marshes about VVool∣witch drowned. that in the yeere, 1236. the River of Thames overflowing the bankes, caused the Marshes about Wool∣witch to bee all on a Sea, wherein Boats and other Vessels were carried with the streame, so that besides cattell, the grea∣test number of men, women & children, Inhabitants there, were drowned. In the great Palace of Westminster,Wherries rowed in VVestmin∣ster Hall. men did row with Wherries in the middest of the Hall, being forced to ride to their chambers. Moreover, in the yeere 1242. the Thames overflowing the bankes about Lambith, drowned houses and fields, by the space of 6. miles, so that in the great Hall at Westminster, men tooke their horses, because the water ran over all. This Palace was (in the yeere 1299.
the 27. of Edward the first) burnt by a vehement fire,T. Walsingh. Palace at Westminster burne. kindled in the lesser Hall of the Kings house, the same with ma∣ny other houses adjoining, and with the Queenes Chamber, were consumed, but after that repaired. In the yeere, 1313. the 31. of Ed∣ward the first,The Kings treasury at Westminster robbed. the Kings treasurie at Westminster was robbed, for the which Walter, Abbot of Westminster, with 49. of his Brethren,The Ab∣bot and Monkes sent to the Tower. and 32. other were throwne into the Tower of London, and indighted of the robbery of an hundred thousand pound: but they affirming themselves to be cleare of the fact, and desiring the King of speedy justice, a Commission was directed for inquiry of the truth, and they were freed. In the yeere 1316. Edward the se∣cond did solemnize his Feast of Pente∣cost at Westminster,Edward the 2. kee∣ping his feasts at Westminster hall, was presented with a complaint of not re∣warding Souldiers. in the great Hall, where sitting Royally at the table, with his Peeres about him, there entred a woman adorned like a Minstrell, sitting on a great horse, trapped as Minstrels then used, who rode round about the tables, shewing pastime, and at length came up to the Kings table, and layd be∣fore him a Letter, and forthwith turning her horse, saluted every one, and depar∣ted. The Letter being opened, had these contents. Our Soveraigne Lord the King, hath no∣thing courteously respected his Knights, that in his Fathers time, and also in his owne have put forth their persons to divers perils, and have utterly lost, or greatly diminished their substance, for honor of the said King, and he hath inriched abundantly such as have not borne the weight (as yet) of the businesse, &c. This great Hall was begunne to be re∣paired in the yeere 1397. by Richard the second,Great Hall at Westmin∣ster repai∣red. who caused the wals, windowes and roofe, to be taken downe, and new made, with a stately porch, and divers lodgings of a marvailous worke, and with great costs. All which hee levied of Strangers banished, or flying out of their Countries, who obtained licence to remaine in this Land by the Kings Charters, which they had purchased with great summes of money, Iohn Bo∣terell being then Clarke of the works. This Hall being finished in the yeere 1399. the same King kept a most roy∣all Christmas there, with daily Iu∣stings, Great feasts at Westminster Hall. and runnings at Tilt, where∣unto resorted such a number of people, that there was every day spent twenty eight, or twenty sixe Oxen, and three hundred sheepe, beside fowle without number. He caused a Gowne for himselfe to bee made of Gold,Ro. Iuelefe. garnished with Pearle and precious Stones, to the va∣lue of three thousand Markes. He was garded by Cheshire-men, and had about him commonly thirteene Bishops, be∣sides Barons, Knights, Esquires, and other more than needed: in so much, that to the household came every day to meate, ten thousand people; as appea∣reth by the messes told out from the Kitchin to three hundred Servitors. Thus was this great Hall, for the ho∣nour of the Prince, oftentimes furnished with ghests, not onely in this Kings time (a prodigall Prince) but in the time of other also, both before and since, though not so usaully noted. For when it is said, the King held his Feast of Christmas, or such a Feast at Westmin∣ster; it may well bee supposed to bee kept in this great Hall, as most sufficient to such a purpose. I find noted by Robert Fabian (some∣time an Alderman of London) that King Henry the seventh,Ro. Fabian. in the ninth of his reigne,King Henry the 7. fea∣sted the Maior of London, &c. (holding his Royall Feast of Christmas at Westminster) on the twelfth day, feasted Ralph Austry, then Maior of London, and his brethren the Aldermen, with other Commoners in great num∣ber, and after dinner, dubbed the Mai∣or, Knight, caused him with his bre∣thren, to stay and behold the disguisings and other disports in the night follow∣ing shewed in the great Hall, which was richly hanged with Atras, and sta∣ged about on both sides. Which dis∣ports being ended, in the morning, the King, the Queene, the Ambassadors, and other Estates, being set at a table of stone, 60. Knights and Esquires served 60. dishes to the Kings Messe, and as many to the Queenes (neigher flesh nor fish) & served the Maior with 24. dishes to his Messe, of the same manner, with sundry wines in most plenteous wife. And finally, the King and Queene being conveyed with great lights into
the Palace; the Maior with his Compa∣ny in Barges, returned and came to Lon∣don, by breake of the next day. Thus much for building of this great Hall, and feasting therein. It moreover appeareth,Parlia∣ments kept in VVestmin∣ster Hall. that many Parliaments have been kept there: for I find noted, that in the yeere 1397. the great Hall at Westminster, being out of reparations; and therefore, as it were, new builded by Richard the second (as is afore shewed) the same Richard in the meane time having occasion to hold a Parliament, caused (for that purpose) a large house to be builded in the middest of the Palace Court, betwixt the clocke-Tower, and the gate of the old great Hall. This house was very large and long, made of Timber, covered with Tyle, open on both the sides, and at both the ends, that all men might see and heare what was both said and done. The Kings Archers (in number 4000. Cheshire men) compassed the house a∣bout with their bowes bent,I find of Record the 50. of Ed. the 3. that the Chapter-house of the Abbot of VVestm. was then the usuall house for the Com∣mons in Parliamēt. Bouch of Court. and Ar∣rowes nocked in their hands, alwayes ready to shoote: they had Bouch of Court (to wit, meate and drinke) and great wages, of six pence by the day. The old great Hall being new buil∣ded, Parliaments were againe there kept as before: namely, one in the yeere 1399. for the deposing of Richard the second. A great part of this Palace at Westminster was once againe burnt in the yeere, 1512. the fourth of Henry the eight; since the which time, it hath not beene reedified: onely the great Hall, with the offices neere adjoining, are kept in good reparations, and serveth as afore, for Feasts at Coronations, Ar∣raignements of great persons charged with treasons, keeping of the Courts of Iustice, &c. But the Princes have beene lodged in other places about the City, as at Baynards-Castell, at Bridewell, and White-hall, sometime called Yorke place, and sometime at S. Iames. This great Hall hath beene the usuall place of pleadings, and ministration of Iustice, whereof some what shortly I will note. In times past,Magna Charta. the Courts & Benches followed the King, wheresoever hee went, as well since the Conquest, as before, which thing at length being thought cumbersome, painefull, and chargeable to the people; it was in the yeere 1224. the 9. of Henry the third a∣greed, that there should be a standing place appointed, where matters should be heard and judged, which was in the great Hall at Westminster.Common pleas in VVestmin∣ster Hall. T. Smith. In this Hall he ordained three judge∣ment seates, to wit, at the entry on the right hand, the Common Pleas, where civill matters are to bee pleaded, speci∣ally such as touch Lands or contracts. At the upper end of the Hall, on the right hand, or South East corner, the Kings Bench, where Pleas of the Crowne have their hearing:Court of the Chan∣cerie. And on the left hand or Southwest corner, sitteth the Lord Chancellor, accompanied with the Ma∣ster of the Rolls, and other men, learned for the most part in the Civill law, and called Masters of the Chancery, which have the Kings fee. The times of pleading in these Courts are foure in the yeere, which are called Tearmes. The first is Hilarie Tearme, which beginneth the three and twentieth of Ianuary, if it be not Sunday, and endeth the twelfth of February. The second is Easter Tearme, and be∣ginneth seventeene dayes after Easter∣day, and endeth foure dayes after As∣cension day. The third Tearme beginneth six or seven dayes after Trinitie Sunday, and endeth the Wednesday fortnight af∣ter. The fourth is Michaelmas Tearme, which beginneth the ninth of October, if it be not Sunday, and endeth the 28. of November. And heere is to bee noted,Kings of this Realme have sate on the Kings Bench in VVest∣minster Hall. that the Kings of this Realme have used some∣times to sit in person in the Kings Bench: namely, King Edward the fourth, in the yeere, 1462. in Michaelmas Tearme, sate in the Kings Bench three dayes together, in the open Court, to understand how his lawes were ministred and executed. Within the Port, or entry into the Hall, on either side are ascendings up into large Chambers, without the Hall adjoining thereunto, wherein certaine Courts be kept,Court of the Exche∣quer. namely, on the right hand, is the Court of the Exchequer, a
place of account, for the revenewes of the Crowne: the hearers of the account have Auditors under them; but they which are the chiefe for accounts of the Prince, are called Barons of the Exche∣quer, whereof one is called the Chiefe Ba∣ron. The greatest officer of all, is called the High Treasurer. In this Court be heard those that are delators,Infor∣mers. or infor∣mers, in popular and penall actions, ha∣ving thereby part of the profit by the law assigned unto them. In this Court, if any question bee, it is determined after the order of the Common Law of England by twelve men, and all Subsidies, Taxes and Cu∣stomes, by account: for in this office, the Sheriffes of the Shire doe attend upon the execution of the commandements of the Iudges, which the Earle should do, if he were not attending upon the Prince in the warres, or otherwise a∣bout him. For, the Chiefe Office of the Earle was, to see the Kings Iustice to have course, and to bee well executed in the Shire, and the Princes Revenewes to bee well answered, and brought into the Treasurie. If any Fines or Amerciaments bee extracted out of any of the said Courts upon any man, or any Arrerages of ac∣counts of such things as is of Customes, Taxes, and Subsidies, or other such like occasions; the same the Sheriffe of the Shire doth gather, and is answerable therefore in the Exchequer. As for other ordinary Rents of Patri∣moniall Lands, and most commonly of Taxes, Customes and Subsidies, there be particular Receivers and Collectors, which doe answere it into the Exche∣quer. This Court of the Exchequer hath of old time, and as I thinke, since the Con∣quest, beene kept at Westminster, not∣withstanding, sometimes remooved thence by commandement of the King, and after restored againe; as namely, in the yeere, one thousand two hundred and nine, King Iohn commanded the Exchequer to bee remooved from West-minster to Northhampton, &c. On the left hand above the staire, is the Dutchie Chamber,Dutchy court. wherein is kept the Court for the Dutchie of Lancaster, by a Chancellor of that Dutchie, and o∣ther ther Officers under him. Then is there in another Chamber,Office of Receit. the Office of the receits of the Queenes Revenewes for the Crowne.Starre Chamber. Then is there also the Starre-Cham∣ber, where, in the Tearme time, every weeke once at the least, which is com∣monly on Fridaies and Wednesdaies, and on the next day after the Tearme endeth, the Lord Chancellor and the Lords, and other of the Privie-Coun∣cell, and the chiefe Iustices of England, from Nine of the Clocke, till it bee Eleven, doe sit. This place is called the Starre-Cham∣ber, because the Roofe thereof is decked with the likenesse of Starres gilt: there be plaints heard, of Ryots, Rowts, and other misdemeanours, which if they be found by the Kings Councell, the party offender shall be censured by these per∣sons, which speake one after another, and he shall bee both fined and com∣manded to prison. Then at the upper end of the great Hall by the Kings Bench,The court of Wards and Live∣ries. is a going up to a great Chamber, called the White-Hall, Court of Requests. S. Stephens Chappell. wherein is now kept the Court of Wards and Liveries, and adjoining thereunto is the Court of Requests. Then is S. Stephens Chappell, of old time founded by King Stephen, King Iohn in the seventh of his reigne, gran∣ted to Baldwinus de London, Clarke of his Exchequer, the Chappleship of Saint Stephens at Westminster, &c. This Chappell was againe since (of a farre more curious workemanship) new builded by King Edward the third, in the yeere 1347. for thirty eight persons in that Church to serve God, to wit, a Deane, twelve secular Canons, thirteene Vicars, foure Clarks, sixe Chorists, two Servitors, to wit, a Verger, and a keeper of the Chappell. He builded it for them from the house of receit, along nigh to the Thames, within the same Palace, there to inhabite: and since that, there were also buildings for them, betwixt the Clock-house, and the Wool-staple, cal∣led the Wey-house. Hee also builded to the use of this Chappell (though out of the Palace Court) some distance West,Little Sanctua∣ry. in the little Sanctuarie, a strong Clochard of Stone and Timber, covered with Lead,
and placed therein three great Bels, since usually rung at Coronations, Tri∣umphs, Funerals of Princes, and their Obits. Of those Bels men fabuled, that their ringing sowred all the drinke in the Towne. More, that about the biggest Bell was written: King Edward made mee thirtie thousand and three, Take me downe and weigh mee, and more shall ye find mee. But these Bels being taken down in∣deed, were found all three not to weigh twenty thousand. True it is, that in the Citie of Roane, in Normandy, there is one great Bell, that hath such an Inscription as fol∣loweth: Ie suis George d'Ambois, Qui trente cinq mille pois: Mes lui me pesera, Trente six mill me trovera. I am George of Ambois, Thirtie five thousand in pois: But he that shall weigh me, Thirtie six thousand shall find me. The said King Edward endowed this Chappell with lands to the yearly va∣lue of five hundred pound. Doctor Iohn Chambers,Cloyster of Saint Stephens Chappell builded. the Kings Physitian, the last Deane of this Colledge, buil∣ded thereunto a Cloyster, of curious workemanship, to the charges of ele∣ven thousand Markes. This Chap∣pell, or Colledge, at the suppression, was valued to dispend in lands by the yeere one thousand eighty five pound, ten shillings five pence,Parliamēt House. and was surren∣dred to Edward the sixth: since the which time, the same Chappell hath served as a Parliament House. By this Chappell of S. Stephen,Chappell of our La∣die in the Piew. was sometime one other smaler Chappell, called our Lady of the Piew; to the which Lady, great Offerings were u∣sed to be made: Amongst other things I have read, that Richard the second, af∣ter the overthrow of Wat Tilar, and o∣ther the Rebels, in the fourth of his raigne, went to Westminster, and there giving thankes to God for his victory, made his Offering in this Chappell. But as divers have noted, namely, Iohn Pigot, in the yeare 1252. on the seven∣teenth of February, by negligence of a Scholler, appointed by his Schoole∣master to put forth the Lights of this Chappell, the Image of our Lady rich∣ly decked with Iewels, precious Stones, Pearles, and Rings, more than any Ieweller could judge the price, for so saith mine author; was with all this Apparell, Ornaments, and Chappell it selfe, burnt: but since againe reedi∣fied by Anthony, Earle Rivers, Lord Scales, and of the Isle of Wight, Vncle and Governor to the Prince of Wales, that should have beene King Edward the fifth, &c. The said Palace,Clocke-house at VVestmin∣ster. before the entry thereunto, hath a large Court, and in the same a Tower of Stone, containing a Clocke, which striketh every houre on a great Bell, to bee heard into the Hall in sitting time of the Courts, or o∣therwise: for the same Clocke, in a calme, will bee heard into the City of London. King Henry the sixth gave the keeping of this Clock with the Tower, called the Clock-house, and the ap∣purtenances, unto William Walsby, Deane of Saint Stephens, with the wa∣ges of sixe pence the day out of his Exchequer. By this Tower standeth a fountaine,Foun∣taine in the Palace Court. which at Coronations, and great Triumphs is made to runne with Wine out of divers spouts. On the East side of this Court,VVestmin∣ster Bridge or com∣mon lan∣ding place▪ is an Arched Gate to the River of Thames, with a faire Bridge and landing place for all men that have occasion. On the North side, is the South end of Saint Stephens Alley, or Canon-Row, and also a way into the old Wooll sta∣ple: and on the West side is a very faire Gate, begun by Richard the 3. in the yeere 1484. and was by him buil∣ded a great height,High Tower at VVestmin∣ster. and many faire lodgings in it, but left unfinished, and is called the high Tower at West∣minster. Thus much for the Monasterie and Palace may suffice. And now will I speake of the Gate-house, and of Tote∣hill-streete, stretching from the West part of the Close. The Gate-house is so called of two
Gates,Gate-house at VVest∣minster. the one out of the Colledge Court toward the North, on the East side whereof was the Bishop of Londons Prison, for Clerkes convict, and the other Gate adjoyning to the first; but towards the West, is a Gaole or Prison for offenders thi∣ther committed. Walter Warfield, Celerer to the Monasterie, caused both these Gates (with the appur∣tenances) to be builded in the reigne of Edward the third. On the South side of this Gate,Almes-houses of Henry the seventh. King Henry the seventh, founded an Almes-house for thirteene poore men: one of them to bee a Priest, aged five and forty yeeres, a good Grammarian, the other twelve to bee aged fiftie yeeres, without wives, every Saturday the Priest to receive of the Abbot, or Prior, foure pence by the day, and each other two pence halfe penny by the day for ever, for their sustenance, and every yeere to each one a Gowne and a Hood ready made. And to three women that dressed their meat, and kept them in their sicknesse, each to have every Saturday sixteene pence, and every yeere a Gowne ready made. More to the thirteene poore men yeerely fourescore quarters of Coales, and one thousand of good Fagots to their use: In the Hall and Kitchin of their Mansion, a discreet Monke to bee over-seer of them, and hee to have forty shillings by the yeere, &c. and herunto was every Abbot and Prior sworne. Neere unto this house Westward,Chappell of Saint Anne. was an old Chappell of Saint Anne, over against the which, the Lady Margaret, Mother to King Henry the seventh erected an Almes-house for poore women,Almes-house founded by Lady Margaret. which is now turned into lodgings, for the singing men of the Colledge: the place wherein this Chappell and Almes-house stan∣deth, was called the Eleemosinary or Almory,Almory at VVest∣minster. now corruptly the Ambry, for that the Almes of the Abbey were there distributed to the poore. And therein I slip, Abbot of Westmin∣ster, Printing of Bookes at VVestm. the first in England. erected the first Presse of Book Printing that ever was in England, a∣bout the yeere of Christ, 1471. W. Caxton, Citizen of London, Mercer, brought it into England, and was the first that practised it in the said Abbey; after which time, the like was practised in the Abbeys of S. Augustin at Cant. S. Albans,Totehill-street. and other Monasteries. From the West gate runneth along Totehill street, wherein is a house of the Lord Gray of Wilton, and on the other side, at the entry into Totehill field, Stour∣ton house, which Giles, the last Lord Dacre of the South,Hospitall founded by Lady Anne Dacre. purchased and built new, whose Lady and wife Anne sister to T. the Lord Backhurst, left mo∣ney to her Executors, to build an Hospitall for twenty poore women, and so many children to be brought up under them, for whose maintenance shee assigned lands, to the value of one hundred pounds by the yeere, which Hospitall, her Executours have since begunne in the field adjoyning. From the entry into Totehill field,Pettie France. the streete is called Pettie France, in which, and upon S. Hermits hill, on the South side thereof, Cornelius van Dun (a Brabander borne, Yeoman of the Guard to King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth,Almes-houses for poore wo∣men. Queene Mary, and Queene Elizabeth) built twenty Hou∣ses, for poore women to dwell rent-free: Chappell of Mary Magdalen. And neere hereunto was a Chap∣pell of Mary Magdalen, now wholly ruinated. In the yeare of Christ 1256. the 40. of Henry the third,Matthew Paris. Iohn Mansell, the Kings Counsellor, and a Priest, did invite to a stately Dinner, the Kings and Queenes of England and Scotland, Edward the Kings sonne, Earles, Barons and Knights, the Bishop of London, and Divers Citizens: whereby his guests did grow to such a number, that his house at Totehill could not re∣ceive them,Seven hundred Messe of Meat at one Din∣ner in Totehill. but that hee was forced to set up Tents and Pavillions, to re∣ceive his guests; whereof there was such a multitude, that seven hundred Messe of Meat did not serve for the first Dinner. The Citie of Westminster,Governe∣ment of VVestmin∣ster City. for Ci∣vill Government, is divided into twelve severall Wards, for the which, the Deane of the Collegiate Church of Westminster, or the high Steward, doe elect twelve Burgesses, and as
many Assistants, that is, one Bur∣gesse and one Assistant for every Ward: out of the which twelve Burgesses, two are nominated yeere∣ly, upon Thursday in Easter weeke; for chiefe Burgesses, to continue for one yeere next following, who have authority given them by the Act of Parliament, 27. Elizabeth, to heare, examine, determine, and punish, ac∣cording to the Lawes of the Realme, and lawfull Customes of the Citie of London, matters of Incontinencie, common Scolds, Inmates, and com∣mon Annoyances, and likewise to com∣mit such persons as shall offend a∣gainst the Peace, and thereof to give knowledge within foure and twenty houres, to some Iustice of Peace, in the County of Middlesex.
Not farre from Westminster, by the River, there is erected a goodly Building, not yet finished, for Students in Di∣vinity commonly knowne by the name of Chelsey Colledge, whereof I thought fit to make mention, because I finde an Act of Parliament made in the seventh yeere of King, Iames, in the behalfe of the same Colledge, as also a Declaration pub∣lished by Authority in the yeere 1616. containing the Reasons that moved his Majesty and the State to erect the same which here followeth. WHereas his Majesty, of his most Royall and zealous care for the defence of true Religion now e∣stablished within this Realme of England,The cause of the e∣rection of the Col∣ledge there. and for the refuting or Errors and Heresies repugnant unto the same, hath been graciously pleased, by his Letters Patents under the great Seale of England, to found a Colledge at Chelsey, neere London, and therein to place certaine learned Divines, and to incorporate the same by the name of the Provost and Fellowes of the Col∣ledge of King Iames in Chelsey,The name of that corpora∣tion. neere London, of the foundation of the same Iames King of England, and hath of his most gracious bounty and goodnesse, not onely endowed the same with cer∣taine Lands, Priviledges, and Immu∣nities, but hath also for their further maintenance and sustentation, given unto them a capacity and ability to re∣ceive and take from his Majesty, or any of his loving Subjects,The abili∣ty thereof to receive  any Lands, Te∣nements, Hereditaments, Gifts, Be∣nefits, and Profits whatsoever, not ex∣ceeding in the whole the yeerely value three thousand pounds, as in and by Letters Patents doth more at large appeare. And whereas also it is manifest and evident, that the bring∣ing in of fresh streames of running wa∣ter into the City of London, is very con∣venient, necessary, and profitable, as well for the private use of such as shall rent the same, as a helpe for cleansing the said City in the time of sicknesse, and preserving the same against all so∣daine adventures of fire: It is therefore enacted, &c. that it shall and may be lawfull to the said Provost and Fel∣lowes, their Successors, Deputies, and Assignes, at all and every such place and places in the open Fields or Mar∣shes lying betweene the Bridge called Lock-Bridge, in or neere the Parish or Hackney, in the County of Middlesix, and the Bridge called Bow-Bridge, at Stratfort-Bow in the Parish of Stepney, in the said County,The Pro∣vest, &c. may dig a trench out of the River Lee. (As by the said Provost and Fellowes, their Successors, Deputies or Assignes, by and with the consent and allowance of the occupiers and owners of the soile in the said place or places, and in default of such assent and allowance, by such composition first to be made with the said occupiers and owners of the said soile, as by the Commissioners, by vertue of this Act
to be in this behalfe appointed, shall be thought fit and convenient) to dig or cut from and out of the maine River of Lee, on that side or banke of the same River which is next unto the City of London,Of what quantity. a ditch or trench not excee∣ding in breadth ten foot, or to scoure, cleanse, or enlarge unto the breadth aforesaid, any old ditch or trench there already made: and the same ditch or trench either old or new, so to be made or to be cleansed, to convey by and tho∣row the said Fields and Marshes, in all places convenient, in such sort as the same may againe bee returned, and made to open it selfe into the maine River, within some such convenient distance from the mouth thereof, as to the said Commissioners shall (for the intents and purposes hereafter expres∣sed) be thought fit: Vpon which ditch or trench, or places neere adjoyning thereunto, it shall and may be lawfull to the said Provost and Fellowes, their Successors, Deputies, or Assignes, to erect or cause to bee erected, certaine Engines,They may erect en∣gines, &c. Waterworkes, or Water∣wheeles, as also houses or couerings re∣quisite for the same, where by the as∣sent of the said Commissioners, the same shall be agreed upon, to be no let or hinderance to the ordinary passage of Barges, Boats, or other such Vessels upon the said River of Lee, and by and through the sayd ditch or trench, to carry and convey so much of the water of the said maine River, as by the said Provost and Fellowes, their Succes∣sors, Deputies, or Assignes, shall bee thought requisite and necessary to bee used for the working or motion of the said Engines or Waterwheeles, and shall also by the said Commissioners be thought to be no prejudice or hinde∣rance to the ordinary passage of Bar∣ges, Boats, or such other Vessels upon the same River. And that it shall and may bee lawfull to and for the said Pro∣vost and Fellowes, their Successors, Deputies, and Assignes (in all places apt and conuenient, within a conveni∣ent distance of the said Engines or Wa∣terworkes) to dig for the taking and further opening of Springs of fresh wa∣ter there found,They may open Springs, &c. or to bee found on the West side of the said River next unto the City of London, and the water of the said Springs to carry and convey by and through certaine little Gutters or Trenches, or Pots or Pipes under the ground, into one Pit, Pond, or head of convenient largenesse, to bee made by the said Provost and Fellowes, their Successors, Deputies, or Assignes, in some places apt for the same. And that it shall and may bee lawfull to and for the said Provost and Fellowes, their Successors, Deputies, and Assignes, having by Art and sleight of Engines and Waterworkes, or by any other meanes or devise raised the water of the said Springs, and so much of the water there running in the said Ditch or Trench as shall be thought necessa∣ry, to such height, and into such place, Pond, Head, or recept, (as to them shall seeme in that behalfe requisite) to convey and carry the same in close Pipes under the ground from the said Waterworkes,They may convey Pipes under ground. and the said other pla∣ces of receipt, unto the City of London and the Suburbes thereof, for the per∣petuall maintenance and sustentation of the said Provost and Fellowes, and their successors by the rent to be made of the said waters conveyed as afore∣said. And that for the convenience of the said water, it shall and may be law∣full to and for the said Provost and Fel∣lowes, their Successors, Deputies and Assignes, (in all places convenient be∣tweene the said Waterworkes and the said City of London) to digge,They may dig and open ground to make conduit heads. cut, and open the ground, to such depth and breadth as shall be convenient for the laying in of the said Pipes or Pots, tho∣row which the said water shall passe, and for making little Conduit heads for vents unto the same, for the better passage of the said waters, and the same ground so opened for the pur∣pose aforesaid, (after the said Pipes or Pots are layed in and placed) the said Provost and Fellowes, their Successors, Deputies and Assignes, shall with Turfe, Earth, Gravell, and other ma∣terials, againe fill up and cover. And be it, &c. that it shall and may be law∣full to and for the said Provost and Fel∣lowes, their Successors, Deputies, and Assignes, from time to time, and at all times convenient, with their men,
horses, carts, or other carriages, to have free entry and passage, by, over, and through any ground or land, in places, and at times meet and convenient, for the doing and performing of any thing requisite,They may hare free passage to make, and after to preserve the things rade. for the making of the said se∣verall passages of waters, or for the do∣ing of any other act or thing concer∣ning the same, authorized by this Act, as also for the continuall preservation and reparation of the said workes, as often as need shall require. And be it, &c. that the Lord Chancellour, or Lord Keeper of the great Seale of Eng∣land for the time being, by Commissi∣on under the great Seale of England, at the request and charges of the said Pro∣vost and Fellowes, their Successors, Substitutes and Deputies, or upon the complaint or petition of any person or persons whom it may concerne, shall nominate, appoint, and authorize by Commission or Commissions, under the great Seale of England, seven dis∣creet and sufficient persons, whereof two shall bee lustices of Peace of the County of Middlesex, and two of the City of London, and three others at the choyce and appointment of the said Lord Chancellour or Lord Keeper, every of the said persons having Lands and Tenements, of the cleere yeerely value of xl. li. at the least, which said seven persons, or any foure, or more of them,What re∣compence the ow∣ners of the ground shall have. shall have power to order and set downe what rate or rates, summe or summes of money shall be payed by the said Provost and Fellowes, as well for satisfaction and recompence of damages, in making the fore-recited workes, or any thing belonging to the same, as also for any manner of dama∣ges to be sustained, in the mending or reparation thereof, from time to time, or any other costs or charges sustained by reason of the same, to the Lords, owners, and occupiers of the ground and soile, or to others interessed in the said River or Waters, for which, com∣position is to be made by the intent of this Act, if the parties cannot of them∣selves agree, and in what manner the same shall bee paid.How they may rece∣ver it. And that for the recovery of such money, as shall bee so ordered and set downe by the said Commissioners, or any foure, or more of them, the party or parties to whom the same money shall be due and pay∣able, by the true intent of the said Or∣der, shall or may recover the same, to∣gether with the reasonable costs and dammages for the forbearance thereof, against the said Provost and Fellowes, by action of Debt, Bill, or Plaint, in any his Majesties Courts at Westmin∣ster, wherein no Essoine or Protection shall be allowed.What grounds may not be digged▪ Provided alwayes, and it is further enacted, &c. that the said water shall not bee conveyed tho∣row the House, Garden, or Orchard of any person or persons, or thorow any part thereof, or thorow any Corne∣fields, while the Corne is growing or standing in the same, without the con∣sent first had of the owners and occu∣piers of the said Houses, Gardens, Or∣chards, and Corne-fields. Anno 7. Iac. cap. 9.
A briefe Declaration of the reasons that moved his MAIESTIE and the STATE to erect a Colledge of Di∣vines, and other Learned men, at CHELSEY, together with the Copy of his Majesties Letters in favouring the same; and an addition of some Motives forcible to excite good Christians zeale to a voluntary and liberall contribution. VNderstanding by experi∣ence, that want of in∣formation hath much hindred mens devotion in contributing toward the erection and dotation of Chelsey Colledge, we have thought it very fit, together with his Majesties Letters, seconded by my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to declare the reasons that caused this worke to bee undertaken, and to adde such Motives, as wee have supposed may be most effectuall to give satisfaction to his Majesties desire, and perfection to this honourable designe. First it was considered, that the Popes Agents travelled Sea and Land, wrote bookes in favour of their faction, devised lies and slanders, to bring Re∣ligion and the Professors thereof into hatred, and not sparing any standing in their way, by falshood and trechery oppugned Kings and Princes, that could not endure the Popes tyrannicall government. And for this end, men of ready wits, good speech, long expe∣rience, and competent learning, have beene maintained in Colledges, furni∣shed with Bookes, holpen with Coun∣sell and directions, bound with Lawes and Oathes, to uphold the Papall Hie∣rarchie and Heresie, and which mo∣veth much, encouraged with great promises and large rewards. Whereunto albeit private men pi∣ously affected have from time to time opposed themselves, yet because they wanted encouragement to undertake so great a labour, counsell of their An∣cients to direct them, Bookes and Li∣braries to instruct them, formes of pro∣ceeding to keepe them in compasse, and rewards to maintaine them, those excepted that are due for Ecclesiasti∣call cures, it was further advised, that to make a sufficient defence for the truth of Religion, and honour of the State, and a strong and continuall op∣position against the continued lies, slanders, errors, heresies, sects, idola∣tries, and blasphemies of our Adversa∣ries, it was necessary to unite our for∣ces, and to appoint speciall men, that without other distraction might at∣tend the cause of Religion and the State, being furnished with Directi∣ons, Instructions, Counsell, Bookes, Presses, competent maintenance, and other necessaries. This then was the reason why this Colledge by his Majesty and the State was first designed, and a corporation granted with large privileges, viz. That a select number of Divines and others should bee gathered together into one body, and united with one forme of Lawes, and there maintained, who be∣ing furnished with Bookes, and dire∣cted by men of experience and action, might alwaies bee ready to maintaine
our Christian faith, to answer the Ad∣versaries Calumniations as well against Religion as the State, to defend the Majesty of Kings and Princes, against the vsurpation of Popes, the liberty of Christians, against the yoke of Super∣stition, to supply the defect of teaching where Appropriations have devoured the Ministery, by teaching and confe∣rence to convince the obstinate Papists and Atheist, and by all lawfull meanes to maintaine truth, and discover fals∣hood. This is the Colledge commended by his Majesty, and intended by the State, and easily to bee perfected if it please all true Christians to further it with their helpe and favour, according to some proportion of their means. His Majesties Letters directed to my Lord of Canterbury, follow in these words: Right trusty and well-beloved Coun∣cellour, we greet you well. WHereas the enemies of the Gospell have ever beene for∣ward to write, and publish bookes for confirming of erronious doctrine, and impugning the truth, and now of late seeme more carefull then before to send daily into our Realmes such their writings, whereby our loving Subjects, though other∣wise well disposed might be seduced, unlesse some remedy thereof should bee provided. We by the advise of our Councell, have late∣ly granted a corporation, and given our allowance for erecting a Colledge at Chel∣sey, for learned Divines to be imployed to write as occasion shall require for maintai∣ning the Religion professed in our King∣domes, and confuting the impugners there∣of. Whereupon Doctor Suteliffe designed Provost of the said Colledge, hath now hum∣bly signified unto us, that vpon divers pro∣mises of helpe and assistance towards the erecting and endowing the said Colledge, he hath at his owne charge begunne, and well proceeded in the building, as doth suffici∣ently appeare by a good part thereof already set up in the place appointed for the same. We therefore being willing to favour and further so religious a worke, will and re∣quire you to write your Letters to the Bi∣shops of your Province, signifying unto them in our Name, that our pleasure is, they deale with the Clergie, and other of their Diocesse, to give their charitable be∣nevolence for the perfecting of this good work so well begunne. And for the better perfor∣mance of our desire, wee have given order to the said Provost and his Associates to at∣tend you and others unto whom it may ap∣pertaine, and to certifie us from time to time of their proceding. Therford the 5. of May 1616. These Letters my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury sendeth abroad to the Bi∣shops of his Province, and secondeth them in these termes: NOw because it is so pious and reli∣gious a worke, conducing both to Gods glory, and the saving of ma∣ny a soule within this Kingdome, I cannot but wish that all devout and well affected persons should by your selfe and the Prea∣chers in your Diocesse, as well publikely as otherwise, be excited to contribute in some measure to so holy an intendment now will beganne. And although these and the like motions have beene frequent in these latter times, yet let not those whom God hath blessed with any wealth bee weary of well∣doing, that it may not be said that the ido∣latrous and superstitious Papists bee more forward to advance their falshoods, then we are to maintaine Gods Truth. Whatso∣ever is collected, I pray you Lordship may be carefully brought unto me; partly that it passe not thorow any difrauding hand, and partly that his Majesty may bee ac∣quainted what is done in this behalfe. Your Lordships very loving Brother G. Canterb. The like Letters are written to my Lord Chancellour, and my Lord Maior of London. By these Letters it may appeare, that this Colledge is not an idle pro∣ject of any private man, but a pious worke projected by the King & State, and that all that professe Religion, and desire the continuance and advance∣ment thereof, yea, all that honour his Majesty, and wish the prosperity of the State, and desire the increase of lear∣ning, have interest therein, and I hope shall receive contentment, and good satisfaction by the same.
Being then a worke of piety for the maintenance of true Religion, who can be accounted truly pious and religious, and yet yeeld no helpe to advance it? being a project to maintaine the ho∣nour of the State, what good Subject will not contribute to set forward this project? but to touch onely the point of Gods honour, let us remember the words of the Wise man, Prov. 3. Ho∣nour the Lord with thy substance. Let us also consider what the Lord himselfe saith, 1 Sam. 2. Them that honour me, I will honour; and they that despise mee, shall be despised. Now who can say, hee honoureth God that suffereth him by idolatry, superstition, and blasphemy to be dishonoured, and will give nothing to suppresse Baals Priests, and is con∣tent that the Pope be worshipped like the Idoll Bell? can Gods honour stand with the superstition, heresie, idola∣try, and blasphemy of Papists, prophan∣nesse of Atheists, fanaticall doctrine of Schismatickes, and idle Novelists? It is not sufficient for true Christians to professe true Religion, but they must with zeale maintaine it, and with heart abhorre, and with hand suppresse ido∣latry and superstition, Who will rise up with me against the wicked, saith the Pro∣phet, Psal. 94. And Psal. 139. he saith, Hee hated those that hated the Lord with an unfained hatred. The Law Deut. 13. is direct against such as intice us to serve other gods, our eye may not pity them, nor may we shew mercy unto them, no although they bee our bro∣thers, or our wives that lie in our bo∣some. An odious thing also it is, either to suffer truth to bee suppressed, or lies to be received. Saint Augustine in Epist. ad Casulanum, saith, It is a fault to hide truth, as well as to tell lies; Vterque reus est, & qui veritatem occultat, & qui mendacium dicit. Chrysostome Homil. 25. in Math. doth charge him to be a Tray∣tor unto Truth, that dare not boldly utter it or defend it; Non ille solum est proditor veritatis qui veritatem transgre∣diens pro veritate mendacium loquitur, sed etiam qui non liberè veritatem pronun∣tiat quam pronuntiare tenetur, aut non liberè veritatem defendit quam liberè de∣fendere convenit. Some suppose that Christianity and Popery may stand together, and them∣selves as Newters stand betweene both, or as Mediators would reconcile both. But can Christ bee reconciled to Anti-christ? there is no concord betwixt Christ and Belial, saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. Elias told us there is no halt∣ing betweene two Religions: no man that honoureth any Creature can say he truly honoureth God, for God gi∣veth not his honour to Creatures, As 1 King. 15. was a good King, yet it is imputed to him that hee tooke not downe the high places. The Bishop of the Church of Pergamus, Apocal. 2. is reproved for suffering them that taught the doctrine of Balaam; and the Bi∣shop of Thyatira, for permitting Iesabel to teach and deceive the people; and shall the Church of England any longer suffer the Romish Balamites, and the false Priests of Baal maintained by the Romish Iesabel and her Consorts to se∣duce Gods people? The false Priests of Bel used all art and cunning practices to deceive, and now will not suffer any Religion but that of their god Bel, the Pope; and shall not true Christians use equall diligence to maintaine truth, and suppresse Popery, and all other idola∣trous and false Religion? Ingemui fate∣or (saith Hierome) minus nobis inesse vo∣luntatis ad propugnandam veritasem, quam inest illis cupiditatis ad inculcandum mendacium: I sighed (saith he) seeing lesse desire in us to defend truth, then in our adversaries to maintaine lies. This Colledge then being erected for maintenance of truth and Gods true service, and a resoiute opposition a∣gainst errors and false worship of God, it cannot but please God and content godly men. The same will also bee a meanes to increase learning, and to sup∣ply the defects of places haunted with the spirits of Antichrist, the Jesuits, and Masse-priests, and therefore can∣not chuse but be well approved of all, that either desire a learned Ministery, or love learning. Finally, seeing the Church hath received no greater dis∣honour by any, then by unsufficient and unlearned Churchmen, I hope this may bee a meanes to recover some part of their lost honour.
Wherefore, whether we regard the service of God, or the honour we owe to our King, or the love wee beare to our Country and the State, let us not shew our selves sparing or backward in yeelding our ayd to set forward a worke so religious and profitable for the Church, so honourable for the State, so necessary in regard of the ma∣lice of our adversaries, and the defects and discouragement of our owne for∣ces. Other collections have beene ei∣ther for private persons or strangers, or places remote, or matters concerning some particular occasions. This con∣cerneth a generall good, and toucheth every man both in conscience and ho∣nour. Heretofore wee have endevou∣red to maintaine Religion, and favour others abroad, let us not therefore neg∣lect our selves, and our owne honour, profit, and necessary service at home. Neither let any man thinke it strange, that a worke of such greatnesse should be advanced by this weake meanes, or that a project so necessary should pro∣ceed so slowly. Almighty God, albeit all-sufficient, yet would have his owne Tabernable built by the voluntary offe∣rings of his people. Speake, saith God to Moyses, Exod. 25. to the children of Israel, that they receive an offering for me of every man whose heart giveth it freely. And Exod. 36. it followeth, and they brought still unto Moyses free gifts every morning, and they ceased not untill they were stayed from offering. King Solomon likewise was greatly holpen in the buil∣ding of the Temple by the contributi∣on of his Subjects, as appeareth by the words of Scriptures, 1 King. 9. 19. fur∣ther, by voluntary offerings and contri∣butions, the Temple was repaired by Ioash, 2 King. 12. and by Iosiah, 2 Chron. 34. and this hath beene the use and practice of ancient times in building, and endowing most famous Churches, Colledges, Schooles, and other Monu∣ments of Religion and Learning, both in our owne and other Countries. Our Adversaries by this course have had meanes to build many Monasteries and Colledges, and Schooles for Jesuites and Friers, as it were propugnacles of Superstition, Heresie, Idolatry, and Antichrists tyranny, to uphold and make good their owne corruptions in Religion, and usurpations upon the Magistrates government, and every Christian mans liberty. And this have they done not onely in Europe, but also in the Indies, and not one in every King∣dome, but in the same State divers, and almost in every great City one. And shall not this flourishing Kingdome build and endow one Colledge for the maintenance of Gods true service, and the honour of the whole State? It were a dishonour to our Nation, and the whole Church and State to thinke contrary. The worke we confesse hath hither∣to proceeded slowly: And no marvell, seeing great workes are not easily at∣chieved. Noes Arke, Gods Tabernacle and Temple, and famous Schooles and Colledges, albeit founded by Kings and great men, were long in build∣ing, and doe we wonder that this Col∣lege is not yet finished? further it plea∣sed God to deprive us of Prince Henry our principall hope, and the chiefe Author of this designe. Lastly, who knoweth whether God hath appoin∣ted these weake meanes to set forward a great worke, that his power in our weaknes might have the whole glory? Let us therefore, good Country∣men and Christians, hearken willingly to his Majesties motion, and readily follow his example. Let it appeare by our bounty how zealous wee are to maintaine his everlasting Truth, and root out error and idolatry. Let us by effects declare how studious we are to doe good workes, and to advance our Countries honour. They that have much may give of their abundance: the rest according to the measure of their meanes. God as well accepteth the Widowes mite, and poore mans good will, as the rich mans treasure. If wee honour God with our sub∣stance, he will honour us and encrease our substance. If we build a house for the maintenance of his truth, that it may continue to our posterity, God will uphold our houses, restore to us, and double it to our posterity. Abra∣ham by offering his , was made a father of many sonnes, yea of Nations. And Salomon that shewed his Royall
magnificence in building God a Tem∣ple, in honour and riches passed all o∣ther Kings. How then can wee excuse our selves, if wee deny God a small of∣fring, that daily offereth to us many graces, and giveth us all the good things we possesse. Our soules and bo∣dies are a sacrifice due to him: and therefore no Christian may deny to him an offring out of his wordly goods, if Gods service require it. As for those that draw backe in this service, and refuse to concurre in pro∣moting Gods honour, let them marke the words of our Saviour, Matth. 12. He that is not with me is against me. And the curse of the Angell upon the people of Meros, Iudg. 5. Curse ye Meros, saith the Angell, for they came not up to helpe the Lord. But we hope we shall not need ma∣ny words to move them, that already are so well perswaded, nor to perswade men, that in Religion and devotion are so forward. It is the duty of good Christians to advance Gods honour, and represse Superstition, Heresie, I∣dolatry, Blasphemy. It is the office of good subjects to defend the honour of the State, against the sycophancies of English Fugitives, and the secret pra∣ctices of fortaine enemies their adhe∣rents. The adversaries using all their skill, and joyning their forces against Religion and the State, it behoveth us likewise to unite our forces, and to joyne in consultation how to resist them. This common businesse requi∣reth common helpe, the practices of the Adversaries provoke us to use speed, the quality of the worke being for defence of Religion and the State, will move any whose heart is not har∣dened, cheerefully to give. Whoso∣ever shall willingly give, shall receive of God a full reward in this life, and when they dye, their workes shall fol∣low them, and then whatsoever they have given to God on earth, they shall assuredly finde in Heaven. Wherefore recommending the Col∣ledge of Chelsey to every religious Christians devout thoughts, we cease further to presse them. Only for satis∣faction of those that desire to know why this Colledge is erected at Chelsey, and not in one of the Vniversities, this we thought fit to adde, that this place was thought most fit to receive directi∣ons from our Superious, to consult with men of best experience, to ob∣taine intelligence from forraigne parts, to print Bookes, and to disperse them; And lastly, to obtaine the favour of the State and City. Further hereby, as all emulation may bee avoyded, so the helpe of both Vniversities may as well be had by entercourse of our Agents, as if the Colledge stood in either of the Vniversities. Thus all things now stand. God blesse the proceeding of this worke, and give honour to his owne name, and a happy issue to this holy designe. Amen.
GOVERNORS OF THE CITIE OF LONDON. And first of Ecclesiasticall Bishops; and other Ministers there. HAving thus runne through the description of these Cities of London and West-minster, aswell in their o∣riginall foundations, as in their increases of buildings and orna∣ments, together with such incidents of sundry sorts, as are before, both gene∣rally and particularly discoursed. It re∣maineth that somewhat bee noted by mee, touching the Policie and Govern∣ment, both Ecclesiasticall and Civill, of London,VV. Mal∣mesberie. as I have already done for West-minster, the order whereof is appointed by the late Statute, even as that of Lon∣don is maintained by the Customes thereof, most laudably used before all the time of memory. And first to begin with the Ecclesia∣sticall Iurisdiction.Antiqui∣ties of Gla∣ste. I read, that the Chri∣stian Faith was first preached in this I∣land (then called Britaine) by Ioseph of Arimathea, and his brethren, Disciples of Christ, in the time of Arviragus, then Governor heere,Lib. confii. under the Romane Em∣perour. Eleutherius died in the yeere 186. when he had sitten Bi∣shop 15. yeeres. After which time, Lucius, King of the Britaines, sent his Ambassadors, Elvanus and Meduvanus, two men lear∣ned in the Scriptures, with Letters to Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send some devout and Learned men, by whose instruction, hee and his peo∣ple might hee taught the Faith and Re∣ligion of Christ. Eleutherius baptized those Messengers, making Elvanus a Bi¦shop, and Meduvanus a Teacher, and sent over with them into Britaine, two other famous Clerks, Faganus and Deru∣vianus, by whose diligence, Lucius and his people of Britaine, were instructed in the Faith of Christ, and baptized, the Temples of Idols were converted into Cathedrall Churches, & Bishops were placed, where Flamines before had bin: at London, Yorke and Carleon upon Vske, were placed Archbishops, saith some. The said Epistle (to us sent by Eleuthe∣rius) to King Lucius,Liber Cu∣stom. for the establishing of the faith, yee may read in my An∣nales, Summaries and Chronicles, true∣ly translated and set downe, as mine Au∣thor hath i, for some have curtalled and corrupted it, and then fathered it, upon Reverend Bede,Bede. who never wrote word thereof, or otherwise to that effect, more than this as followeth: In the yeere 156. Marcus Aurelius Ve∣rus, the 14. Emperor after Augustus, go∣verned the Empire, with his brother Au∣relius Cōmodus. In whose time, Eleuthe∣rius, a Holy man, being Pope of the Church of Rome, Lucius King of Britaines wrote unto him, desiring that by his commande∣ment, he might bee made a Christian: which his request was granted him; whereby the Britaines receiving then the Faith, kept it sound and undefiled in rest and peace, untill Dioclesian the Emperours time. Thus far Bede, which may suffice to prove the Christian Faith then to bee received here. And now of the London Bishops, according as I find them re∣gistred. There remaineth in the Parish Church of Saint Peter upon Cornehill in London,This is be∣fore set downe in Cornehil VVard. a table wherein is written that Lucius
founded the same Church to bee an Archbishops See, and Metropolitane & chiefe Church of his Kingdome, and that it so endured the space of foure hundred yeeres, untill the comming of Augustine the Monke, and others from Rome, in the reigne of the Saxons. The Archbishops names I find only to bee set downe by Ioceline of Furnes,Ioceline of Furnes. in his booke of Brittish Bishops, and not else where. Theanus (saith hee) was the first Archbishop of London in the time of Lucius, who builded the said Church of Saint Peter, in a place called Cornehill in London, by the ayd of Ciran, chiefe Butler to King Lucius. 2 Elvanus was the second, & hee buil∣ded a Library to the same Church ad∣joyning, and converted many of the Druides (learned men in the Pagan law) to the Christian Faith. 3 Cadar was the third: then followed, 4 Obinus. 5 Conan. 6 Paludius. 7 Stephen. 8 Iltute. 9 Dedwin, or Theodwin. 10 Theodred. 11 Hillary. 12 Restitutus. 13 Guidelium, or Guiteline. 14 Fastidius. 15 Vodimus, slaine by the Saxons. 16 Theonw, the sixteenth, fled with the Brittaines into Wales,1. Tome. com. about the yeere of Christ, 587. Thus much out of Ioceline of the Archbishops: the credit whereof I leave to the judgement of the learned. For, I reade of a Bishop of London (heere also named) in the yeere of Christ 326. to be present at the second Councell, holden at Arles, in the time of Constan∣tine the great, who subscribed thereunto in these words: Ex Provincia Britanniae Civitate Londi∣nensi Restitutus Episcopus, as plainely ap∣peareth in the first Tome of the Coun∣cels. Hee writeth not himselfe Archbi∣shop, and therfore maketh the matter of Archbishops doubtfull, or rather over∣throweth that opinion. The Saxons being Pagans, having chased the Britaines with the Christian Preachers into the Mountaines of Wales and Cornewall, and having divided this Kingdome of the Britaines amongst thē∣selves; at the length, to wit, in the yeere 596. Pope Gregory, moved of a godly instinction (saith Bede) in the 147. yeere, after the Angles or Saxons in Britaine, sent Augustine, Melitus, Iustus and Iohn, with other Monkes, to preach the Gos∣pell to the said Nation of the Angles. These landed in the Ile of Thanet, and were first received by Ethelbert, King of Kent, whom they converted to the faith of Christ, with divers other of his people, in the 34. yeere of his reigne, which Ethelbert gave unto Augustine the City of Canturbury. The Metropolitane See being esta∣blished at Canturbury, these that fol∣low, were successively Bishops of Lon∣don, to this present time. This Augustine in the yeere of Christ 604. consecrated Melitus and Iustus Bi∣shops, appointing Melitus to preach un∣to the East Saxons, whose chiefe Citie was London: and their King Sebert, Nephew to Ethelbert, by preaching of Melitus, received the Word of Life. And then Ethelbert, King of Kent, buil∣ded in the Citie of London Saint Pauls Church,S. Pauls Church in London first founded. wherein Melitus began to be Bishop, in the yeere 619. and sate five yeeres. Ethelbert by his Charter gave Lands to this Church of Saint Paul:1. Melitus first Bishop of London, 619. so did other Kings after him. King Sebert, through the good life, and like preaching of Melitus, having received Baptisme, to shew himselfe a Christian, builded a Church to the ho∣nor of God and S. Peter, on the West side of London, which Church is called Westminster: but the successors of Sebert, being Pagans, expelled Melitus out of their Kingdomes. Iustus the second,2. Iustus, 624. Bishop for a time, and then Melitus againe: after whose decease, the seate was void for a time. At length Sigebert, Sonne to Sigebert, brother to Sebert, ruled in Essex: hee be∣came a Christian, and tooke to him a holy man, named Cdda, or Chadda, who wan many by preaching and good life, to the Christian Religion. Ceadda,3. Cedda, B. of London, 658. or Chadda, was (by Finan) con∣secrated Bishop of the East Saxons, and he ordred Priests and Deacons in all the parts of Essex,Ithancaster, and Tilbe∣rie. but especially at Ithanca∣ster, Ralph Cog∣shall. and Tilberie.
This City of Ithancaster (saith Ralph Cogshall) stood on the banke of the Ri∣ver Pante, that runneth by Maldun in the hundred of Danesey; but now is drow∣ned in Pante, so that nothing remaineth, but the ruine of the Citie in the River. Tilberie (both the West and East) stan∣deth on the Thames side, nigh over a∣gainst Gravesend. Wina,4 Wina, 666. expelled from the Church of Winchester by Cenewalche the King, was adopted to be the fourth Bishop of Lon∣don, in the reigne of Wolferus, King of Mercia, and sate nine yeeres. Erkenwald,5. Erken∣wald, 680. borne in the Castell or Towne of Stallingborough in Lindsey, first Abbot of Crotesey,Crotese, or Charlesey. was by Theodore, Archbishop of Canturbury, appointed to be Bishop of the East Saxons, in the Ci∣tie of London. This Erkenwald in the yeer of Christ, 677. before he was made Bi∣shop, had builded two Monasteries, one for himselfe, being a Monke in the Isle of Crote in Surrey, by the River of Thames and another for his Sister Edilburga, be∣ing a Nun, in a certaine place called Ber∣ching in Essex: he deceased at Berching, in the yeere, 697. and was then buried in Pauls Church, and translated into the new Church of S. Paul, in the yeere, one thousand, one hundred forty eight. Waldhere,6 Waldhere, 697. or Walthere, was Bishop of London:King Sebba became a Monke in Pauls Church. Sebba, King of the east Saxons, at his hands received the habite of Monke: for at that time there were Monks in Pauls Church, as writeth Ra∣dulphus Dedicato, and others. To this Bi∣shop he brought a great summe of mo∣ney, to be bestowed and given to the poore, reserving nothing to himselfe; but rather desired to remaine poore in goods, as in Spirit, for the Kingdome of Heaven. When he had reigned thirty yeeres, hee deceased at Pauls, and was there buried, and lieth now in a Coffin of Stone, on the North side of the Isle next the Quire. Ingwaldus,7. Ingwal∣dus, 716. Bishop of London, was at the consecration of Tatwine, Archbishop of Canturbury; hee confirmed the foun∣dation of Crowland, in the yeere, seven hundred and sixteene, (saith Ingulfus) and deceased in the yeere 744. as saith Hoveden. 746 Engulfe, called also Egwolfe, or Eg∣naldus, Bishop of London. 754 Wighead, or Wigherus, Bishop of London. 761 Eadbrightus, or Edbrithe, Bishop of London. 768 Eadgar, or Eadgarus, Bishop of London. 773 Kenewalth, Bishop of London. 784 Eadbaldus, Bishop of London. 795 Hedbert, or Hethobert, Bishop of London, deceased 802. saith Hoveden. 813 Osmund, or Oswin, Bishop of Lon∣don, hee was witnesse to a Charter made to Crowland, in the yeere 833. saith Engulfus. 835 Ethelmothe, Bishop of London. 838 Ceolbert, or Celbertus, B. of London. 841 Renulfe, or Ceorulfe, Bishop of Lon∣don. 850 Swithulfus, Bishop of London, he likewise was witnesse to a Charter of Crowland, 851. 860 Edstanus, Bishop of London, wit∣nesse to a Charter of Crowland, 860. 870 Wulfius, or Wolfius, Bishop of London. 878 Ethelwardus, Bishop of London. 886 Elstanus, Bishop of London, died in the yeere 900. saith Asser, & all these, saith the Author of Flores Historia∣rum, were buried in the old Church of S. Paul, but there remaineth now no memorie of them. 900 Theodricus, Bishop of London: this man confirmed King Edreds Char∣ter, made to Winchester, in the yeere, 947. whereby it seemeth, that he was Bishop of London of a later time than he is heere placed. 922 Wulstanus, Bishop of London. 941 Brithelme, Bishop of London. 958 Dunstanus, Abbot of Glastenburie: then Bishop of Worchester, and in time Bishop of London, he was afterward translated to Canturbury, 960. 960 Ealfstanus, Bishop of London: the 28. in number. 981 Edgare, Bishop of London, he con∣firmed the grants made to Winche∣ster, and to Crowland, 966. and againe to Crowland, 970. the Charter of E∣theldred, concerning Vlfrunhampton, 996. 1004 Elphinus, Bishop of London. 1010 Alwinus, Bishop of London. 1012 Alfhune, Bishop of London: he was sent into Normandy in the yeere 1013. saith Asser.
1044. Robert, a Monke of Gemerisius in Normandy, Bishop of London. 7. yeers. afterward translated from London to Canturbury. 1050 Spegasius elected, but rejected by the King. 1051 William, a Norman, Chaplain to Edward the Confessor, was made Bi∣shop of London, 1051. fare 17. yeeres, and deceased 1070. He obtained of William the Conqueror, the Charter of Liberties for the City of London, as I have set downe in my Summary, and appeareth by his Epitaph in Pauls Church. 1070 Hugh de Orwell, or Orivall, Bishop of London: he died of a Leprosie, when he had sitten fifteene yeeres. 1085 Mauricius, Bishop of London, in whose time, to wit, in the yeere 1089. the Church of S. Paul was burnt, with the most part of this Citie, and there∣fore he laid the foundation of a new large Church, and having sitten 22. yeeres, hee deceased, 1107. saith Ma∣thew Paris. 1108 Richard Beame, or Beamor, called by some Richard Bearvis, Bishop of London, did wonderfully increase the worke of this Church begun, purcha∣sing the streets and lanes (adjoining) of his owne money: and he founded the Monastery of S. Osyth in Essex, he sate Bishop 19. yeeres, and decea∣sed 1127. 1127 Gilbertus Vniversalis, a Canon of Lyons, elected by Henry the first, he deceased 1141. when he had sitten fourteene yeeres. 1142 Robertus de Sigillo, a Monke of Rea∣ding, whom Maud the Empresse made Bishop of London, where he sate eleven yeeres. Geffrey de Magna∣vile tooke him prisoner at Fulham, and he deceased 1152. 1153 Richard Beames, Archdeacon of Essex, Bishop of London ten yeeres, who deceased 1162. 1163 Gilbert Foliot, Bishop of Hereford, from whence translated to London, sate three and twenty yeeres, and de∣ceased, 1186. 1189 Richard Fitz Neale, the Kings Treasurer, Archdeacon of Essex, ele∣cted of London, at Pipwell, 1189. Hee sate nine yeeres and deceased, 1198. This man also tooke great paines a∣bout the building of Pauls Church, and raised many other goodly buil∣dings in his Diocesse. 1199 William S. Mary Church, common∣ly called, William de Sancta Maria, a Norman, Bishop of London, who was one of the three Bishops, that by the Popes commandement executed his interdiction or curse upon the whole Realme of England; but hee was for∣ced (with the other Bishops) to flie the Realme in 1208. & his Castell at Stratford in Essex was by commande∣ment of K. Iohn overthrowne, 1210. This William, in cōpany of the Arch∣bishop of Canturbury, and of the Bi∣shop of Ely, went to Rome, and there complained against the King, 1212. and returned, so as in the yeere 1215. King Iohn in the Church of S. Paul, at the hands of this William, tooke upon him the Crosse for the Holy Land. He resigned his Bishopricke of his owne voluntary, in the yeere 1221. saith Cogshall. 1221 Eustachius de Faulconbridge, Trea∣surer of the Exchequer (saith Mathew Paris) Chancelor of the Exchequer (saith Textor, and Cogshall) Bishop of London, 1223. Whilst at Chelmesford he was giving holy Orders, a great tempest of wind and raine annoyed so many as came thither, whereof it was gathered, how highly God was displeased with such as came to re∣ceive Orders, to the end, they might live a more easie life, of the Stipend appointed to the Church-men, gi∣ving themselves to banketting, and so with uncleane and filthy bodies, (but more uncleane soules) persume to mi∣nister unto God, the Author of pu∣rity and cleanesse. Falcatius de Brent was delivered to his custody in the yeere, 1224. This Eustachius deceased in the yeere 1228. and was buried in Pauls Church, in the South side, without or above the Quire. 1229 Rogerus Niger, Archdeacon of Col∣chester, made Bishop of London. In the yeere 1230. (saith Mathew Paris) upon the feast day of the Conversion of S. Paul, whē he was at Masse in the Ca∣thedrall Church of S. Paul, a great multitude of people being there pre∣sent
suddenly the weather waxed dark, so as one could scantly see another, and an horrible thunderclap lighted on the church, which so shook it, that it was like to hayfallen. And there withall out of a  croud proceeded a flash of light∣ning, that all the Church seemed to bee on fire; whereupon such a strench ensu∣ed, that all men though they should have dyed: thousands of men and wo∣men ran out of the Church, and being astonied, fell upon the ground, voyd of all sense and understanding. None of all the multitude traied in the Church, save the Bishop and one Deacon, which stood still before the high Altar, awaiting the will of God: when the Aire was cleansed, the mul∣titude returned into the Church, and the Bishop ended the Service.-Pa∣rish. This Reger Niger is commended to have been a man of worthy life, excel∣lently well learned, a notable Preacher, pleasant in talke, midle of countenance, & liberall at his Table. He admonished the Vsurers of his time, to leave such e∣normities, as they rendred the salvation of their soules, and to doe penance for that they had committed: but when he saw they laughed him to scorne, and also threatned him, the Bishop generally excommunicated and accursed all such, & commanded strictly that such Vsurers should depart further from the Citie of London, which hitherto had beene igno∣rant of such mischiefe and wickednesse, lest his Dioces should be infected there∣withall. He fell sicke, and dyed at his Mannor of Bishops Hall, in the Lordship and Parish of Stebunheth, in the yeere 1241. and was buried in Pauls Church, on the North side of the Presbytery, in a faire Tombe coped, of gray Marble. 1241 Fulco Bosset, Deane of Yorke, by the death of Gilbert Basset, possessed his lands, & was then made B. of Lon∣don, deceased on the 21. day of May, in the yeere 1259. as saith Iohn Tex∣or, and was buried in Pauls Church. 1259  de Wingham, Chancelor of England, made Bishop of London, de∣ceased in the yeere 1262. saith Tex∣tor, and was buried in Pauls Church, on the South side without, or above the Quire,  Marble Monument, close at the head of Faulconbridge. 1262 Richard Taloot, Bishop of Lon∣don, straightwayes after his conse∣cration deceased, saith Eversden. 1262 Henry Sandwich, Bishop of Lon∣don, deceased in the yeere 1273. as the same Author affirmeth. 123 Iohn de Chishull, Deane of Pauls, Treasurer of the Exchequer, & Kee∣per of the great Seale, was Bishop of London, and deceased in the yeere 1279. saith Eversden. 1280 Fulo Loved, Archdeacon of Col∣choster, elected Bishop of London, but refused the place. 1280 Richard de Gravesend, Archdea∣con of Northampton, Bishop of Lon∣don. It appeareth by the Charter warren granted to this Bishop, that (in his time) there were two Woods in the Parish of Stebunheth, pertaining to the said Bishop: I have (since I kept house for my selfe) knowne the one of them by Bishops Hall, but now they are both made plaine of wood, and not to be discerned from other grounds. Some have fabuled, that this Richard Gravesend,Fable of Richard Gravesend reproved. Bishop of London, in the yeere 1392. the 16. of Richard the second, purchased the Charter of liberties to this City; which thing hath no possibility of truth, as I have proved, for he decea∣sed in the yeere 2303. almost ninety yeeres before that time. 1307 Ralph de Baldocke, Deane of Pauls, Bishop of London, consecrated at Ly∣ons by Peter, Bishop of Alba, in the yeere 1307. He was a great furtherer of the new worke of Pauls, to wit, the East end, called our Lady Chappell, and other adjoyning: this Ralph de∣ceased in the yeere 1313. and was buried in the said Lady Chappell, under a flat stone. 1313 Gilbert Segrave was consecrated Bishop of London, & sate three yeers. 1317 Richard Newport, Bishop of Lon∣don, sate two yeeres, and was buried in Pauls Church. 1318 Stephen Gravesend, Bishop of Lon∣don, sate twentie yeeres. 1338 Richard Bintworth, or Wentworth, Bishop of London, and Chancelor of England, deceased the yeere 1339. 1339 Ralph Stratford, Bishop of Lon∣don: he purchased the piece of ground
called No mans land, beside, Smithfield, and dedicated it to the use of buriall, as before hath appeared: hee was borne at Stratford upon Avon, and therefore builded a Chappell to S. Thomas there: he sate 14. yeeres, and deceased at Stebunhith. 1354 Michael Northbroke, Bishop of London, deceased in the yeere 1361. saith Merimouth, sate 7. yeeres. 1362 Simon Sudbery, Bishop of London, sate 13. yeeres, translated to be Arch∣bishop of Canturbury, in the yeere 1375. 1375 William Conrtney, translated from Hereford to the Bishopricke of Lon∣don, and after translated from thence to the Archbishopricke of Canturbu∣ry, in the yeere, 1381. 1381 Robert Breybrooke, Canon of Lich∣field, bishop of London, made Chan∣cellour in the 6. of Richard the second sate Bishop 20. yeeres, and deceased in the yeere 1404. he was buried in the said Lady Chappell at Pauls. 1405 Roger Walden, Treasurer of the Exchequer, Archbishop of Cantur∣bury, was deposed, and after made bishop of London: he deceased in the yeere 1406. and was buried in Pauls Church, by Alhallowes Altar. 1406 Nicholas Bubwith, bishop of Lon∣don, Treasurer of the Exchequer, translated to Salisbury, & from thence to Bathe, and lyeth buried at Wells. 1407 Richard Clifford, removed from Worcester to London, deceased 1422. as saith Thomas Walsingham, and was bu∣ried in Pauls. 1422 Iohn Kempe, Fellow of Martin Colledge in Oxford, was made bi∣shop of Rochester, from whence remo∣ved to Chichester, and thence to Lon∣don: hee was made the Kings Chan∣cellor in the yeere 1425. the fourth of Henry the sixth, & was removed from London to Yorke, in the yeere 26. He sate Archbishop there 25. yeeres, and was translated to Canturbury; he was afterwards made Cardinall in the yeere 1452. In the bishop of Lon∣dons house at Fulham he received the Crosse, and the next day the Pall, at the hands of Thomas Kempe bishop of London: he deceased in the yere 1454. 1426 William Gray, Deane of Yorke, con∣secrated Bishop of London, who founded a Colledge at Thele in Hart∣fordshire, for a Master and foure Canons, and made it a Cell to Elsing Spittle in London. It had of old time been a Colledge decayed, and there∣fore newly founded: hee was transla∣ted to Lincolne 1431. 1432 Robery Fitz-Hugh, Archdeacon of Northampton, consecrated Bishop of London, sate 5. yeeres; he deceased in the yeere 1435. and was buried on the South side of the Quire of Pauls. 1435 Robert Gilbert, Doctor of Divi∣nity, Deane of Yorke, consecrated Bi∣shop of London, sate twelve yeeres, deceased 1448. 1449 Thomas Kempe, Archdeacon of Richmond, consecrated Bishop of London, at Yorke house, (now White Hall) by the hands of his Vncle, Iohn Kempe, Archbishop of Yorke, the eighth of February, 1449. Hee foun∣ded a Chappell of the Trinity in the body of Saint Pauls Church on the North side; he sate Bishop of London 39. yeeres, and 48. dayes, and then deceasing in the yere 1489. was there buried. 1489 Iohn Marshall Bishop of London, deceased in the yeere 1493. 1493 Richard Hill, Bishop of London, deceased 1495. and was buried in the body of S. Pauls Church. 1496 Thomas Savage, first Bishop of Ro∣chester, then Bishop of London 5. yeeres, was translated to Yorke 1510. where he sate Archbishop 7. yeeres, and was there buried in the yeere, 1507. 1502 William Warkham, Bishop of Lon∣don, made Keeper of the great Seale, sate two yeeres, was translated to Canturbury. 1504 William Barnes, Bishop of London, sate 10. Moneths and 11. dayes, de∣ceased in the yeere 1505. 2505 Richard Fitz-Iames, Fellow of Martin Colledge in Oxford, in the reigne of Henry the 6. was made Bi∣shop of Rochester, after Bishop of Chi∣chester, and then Bishop of London: he deceased 1521. and lyeth buryed hard beneath the North west pillar of the Steeple in Pauls, under a faire Tombe of Marble, over the which was builded a faire Chappell of Tim∣ber,
with stayres mounting thereun∣to: this Chappell was burned with fire from the Steeple 1561. and the Tombe was taken downe. 1521 Cuthbert Tunstall, Doctor of Law, Master of the Rowies, Lord Privy Seale, and Bishop of London, was thence translated to the Bishopricke of Durham, in the yeere 1529. 1529 Iohn Stokesley, Bishop of London, sate 13. yeeres, deceased in the yeere 1539. and was buried in the Lady Chappell in Pauls. 1539 Edmund Bonner, Doctor of the Civill Law, Archdeacon of Leicester, then Bishop of Hereford, was elected to London, in the yeere 1539. whilest he was beyond the Seas, Ambassador for King Henry the eighth. On the first of September 1549. hee preached at Pauls Crosse, for the which Sermon, hee was charged be∣fore the Councell of King Edward the sixth by William Latimer, Parson of S. Lawrence Poultney, and Iohn Hooper, sometime a white Monke: and being convented before certaine Commis∣sioners at Lambith, was for his diso∣bedience to the Kings order, on the 20. day of the same Moneth, sent to the Marshalsey, and deprived from his Bishopricke. 1550 Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Roche∣ster, elected Bishop of London, was installed in Pauls Church on the twelfth of April. This man by his deed dated the 12. day after Christmas, in the 4. yeere of Edward the sixth, gave to the King the Mannors of Branketry and South∣minster, and the Patronage of the Church of Cogshall in Essex, the Man∣nors of Stebunheth, and Hackney, in the County of Middlesex, and the Marsh of Stebunheth, with all the singular Messuages, Lands and Tenements to the said Mannors belonging, and also the Advowson of the Vicarage of the Parish Church of Cogshall in Es∣sex aforesaid: which grant was confir∣med by the Deane and Chapter of Pauls, Stebunheth and Hackney, as on∣ly pertained to them. The said King Edward by his Letters Patents, dated the sixteenth of April, in the said fourth yeere of his reigne granted to Sir Tho. Wentworth, Lord Wentworth, Lord Chamberlaine of the Kings houshold, for and in considera∣tion of his good and faithfull service before done, a part of the late recei∣ved gift, to wit, the Lordships of Ste∣bunheth and Hackney, with all the members and appurtenances thereto belonging in Stebunheth, Hackney way, Shorditch, Holiwell street, White Chap∣pell, Stratford at Bowe, Poplar, North-street, Liehouse, Ratcliffe, Cleve street, Brocke street, Mile end, Bleten Hall greene, Old Foord, Westheth, Kingsland, Shakelwel, Newington street, alias Hack¦ney street, Clopton, Church street, Well street, Humbarton, Grove street, Gun∣ston street, alias, More streete, in the County of Middlesex, together with the Marsh of Stebunheth, &c. The Mannor of Hackney was valued at 41. l. 9. s. 4. d. by yeere: and the Mannor of Stebunheth at 140. l. 8. s. 11. d. ob. by yeere, to bee holden in chiefe, by the service of the twentith part of a Kinghts fee. This Bishop, Nicholas Ridley, for prea∣ching a Sermon at Pauls Crosse, on the 16. of Iuly in the yeere 1553. was committed to the Tower of London, where hee remained prisoner till the 10. of April, in the yeere 1554. and was thence sent to Oxford, there to dispute with the Divines and learned men of the contrary opinion, and on the 16. of October 1555. he was bur∣ned at Oxford, for opinion against the Romish order of Sacraments, &c. 1553 Edmund Bonner aforesaid, being released out of the Marshalsey, was re∣stored to the Bishopricke of London, by Queene Mary, on the fifth of Au∣gust, in the yeere 1553. and againe deposed by Queene Elizabeth, in the Moneth of Iuly, Anno 1559. and was eftsoones, committed to the Marshal∣sey, where hee dyed on the 5. of Sep∣tembr 1569. and was at midnight buried amongst other prisoners in St. Georges Church-yard. 1559 Edmund Grindull, Bishop of Lon∣don, being consecrated the 21. of De∣cember 1559. was translated to York, in the yeere 1570. and from thence removed to Canterbury, in the yeere 1575. he dyed blind 1583. on the 6.
of Iuly, and was buried at Crodowne in Surrey. 1570 Edwine Sandys, being translated from Worcester to the Bishopricke of London, in the yeere, 1570. was thence translated to Yorke, in the yeere 1576. and dyed in the yeere 1588. 1576 Iohn Elmere, Bishop of London, de∣ceased in the yeere 1594. on the 3. of Iune at Fulham, and was buried in Pauls Church, before Saint Thomas Chappell. 1594 Richard Fletcher, Bishop of Worce∣ster, was on the 30. of December in Pauls Church elected Bishop of Lon∣don, and deceased on the 15. of Iune 1596. he was buried in Pauls Church without any solemne funerall. 1597 Richard Bancroft, Doctor of Di∣vinity, brought up first in Christs Colledge, and afterward in Iesus Col∣ledge in Cambridge, was consecrated Bishop of London, at Lambith, on Sun∣day, being the 8. day of May, 1597. and translated to Canterbury in De∣cember 1604. 1604 Richard Vaughan, Doctor of Di∣vinity, & Bishop first of Bangor, next of Chester, was translated to London in Ianuary 1604. and dyed in March 1607. 1607 Thomas Ravis, Doctor of Divini∣ty, and Deane of Christs Church in Oxford, was first Bishop of Glocester, and then removed to London, the 19. of May, 1607. and dyed the 14. of December 1609. 1609 George Abbot, Doctor of Divini∣ty, having beene little above one moneth Bishop of Coventry and Lich∣field, was called to London, towards the latter end of Ianuary 1609. and re∣moved to Canterbury in Anno 1611. 1611 Iohn King, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Christs Church in Ox∣ford, where he was brought up, and Archdeaeon of Nottingham, was con∣secrated Bishop of London, the eighth day of September, 1611. and wor∣thily remained long in the same dig∣nity. His Grandfather was Brother unto Robert King, sometime Bishop of Oxford. George Mountaine, Doctor of Divinity, Lecturer in Greshams Colledge, after∣ward Master of the Savoy, & Deane of Westminster, then Bishop of Lincolne, and thence removed to bee Lord Bi∣shop of London, and Almoner to his Majesty, last of all removed againe, to be Lord Archbishop of Yorke. William Laud, Doctor in Divinity, Presi∣dent of St. Iohn Baptists Colledge in Oxford, Deane of Glocester, next Bi∣shop of St. Davids, next Bishop of Bath and Welles, next Bishop of Lon∣don, and Deane of his Majesties Chap∣pell Royall, and now Archbishop of Canterbury, and one of his Highnesse most Honourable Privy Councell. William Iuxon, Doctor in Divinity, Pre∣sident of St. Iohn Baptists Colledge in Oxford, Deane of Worcester, next Clarke of the Closset to his Majesty, next Bishop elect of Hereford, next Deane of his Majesties Chappell Roy∣all, and Bishop of London. Thus much for the succession of the Bishops of London, whose Dioces con∣taineth the City of London, the whole Shires of Middlesex and Essex, and a part of Hartfordshire. These Bishops have for Assistants in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, a Deane, a Chaunter, a Chancelor, a Trea∣surer, five Archdeacons, to wit, London, Middlesex, Essex, Colchester, and S. Al∣bans, and 30. Prebendaries. There appertaineth also to the said Church for furniture of the Quire in Divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments, a Colledge of 12. Pety Canons, sixe Vicars, Chorall, and Que∣risters, &c. This Dioces is divided into Parishes, every Parish having his Parson, or Vi∣car at the least, learned men for the most part, and sufficient Preachers to instruct the people. There were in this City, and within the Suburbs thereof in the reigne of Henry the second (as writeth Fitz-Stephens) thirteene great Conventuall Churches, besides the lesser sort, called Parish Churches, to the number of 126. all which Conventuall Churches, and some others since that time founded, are now suppressed and gone, except the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul in Lon∣don, and the Colledge of Saint Peter at Westminster.
THE TEMPORALL GOVERNMENT OF THIS CITY, SOMEWHAT Discoursed in briefe manner. THIS City of Lon∣don being under the government of the Britaines,Pent. Ase∣rius Mene∣vem. Romans, and Saxons, the most ancient and famous City of the whole Realme,Florencius Wigor. Ma∣rianus Sco∣t. was at length destroyed by the Danes, and left desolate, as may appeare by our Histories. But Aelfred King of the West Saxons, having brought this whole Realme (from many parts) into one Monarchie, honorably repaired this City, and made it againe habitable, and then committed the custody thereof to his Sonne in law Adhered, Earle of Mer∣cia. After whose decease, the Citie, with all other possessions pertaining to the said Earle, returned to King Edward, sirnamed the Elder, &c. And so remai∣ned in the Kings hands, being governed under him by Portgraves (or Portreves) which name is compounded of the two Saxon words,Port∣graves. Porte and Gerefe or Reve-Porte betokeneth a Towne, and Gerefe signifieth a Gardian, Ruler or Keeper of the Towne. These Governors of old time (saith Ro∣bert Fabian) with the lawes and customes then used within this Citie,Lib. . Al∣bni. were registred in a Booke, called the Doomes-day Booke, written in the Saxon Tongue: but of later dayes, when the lawes and customes were changed, and for that also the said Booke was of a small hand, sore defaced, and hard to be read or understood; it was lesse set by, so that it was imbezeled and lost.Rob. Fabian. Thus farre Fabian. Notwithstanding, I have found by search of divers old Registers and other Records abroad; namely, in a Booke sometime appertaining to the Monaste∣ry of Saint Albans, of the Portgraves, and other Governours of this City, as followeth. First, that in the reigne of King Ed∣ward the last,Citizens of London called Burgesses. before the conquest, Wolfe∣gare was Portgrave, as may appeare by the Charter of the same King, in these words: Edward, King, greeteth Alfward Bishop, and Wolfgar my Portgrave, and all the Bur∣gesses of London. And afterward, that in another Charter, King Edward greeteth William, Bishop, and Swetman my Port∣grave. And after that, in another Char∣ter to the Abbey of Chertsey: To William, Bishop, and Leofstane and Alffy Port∣graves. In the reigne of William Conqueror, William, Bishop of London, procured of the said Conqueror his Charter of Li∣berties, to the same William, Bishop, & Godfrey, Portgrave, in the Saxon tongue, and turned into English, thus: William,Charter of William Conqueror. King, greeteth William, Bi∣shop, and Godfrey, Portgrave, and all the Burgesses within London, French, and English: And I grant that they be all their law worth, that they were in Edward dayes the King. And I will that each child bee his Fathers heire. And I will not suffer that a∣ny man doe you wrong: and God you keepe. And then in the reigne of the said Conquerour, and of William Rufus, God∣frey de Magnavile was Portgrave, (or Sheriffe) as may appeare by their Char∣ters, Provost. and Richard de Par was Provost. In the reigne of King Henry the first, Hugh Buche was Portgrave, and Leofsta∣nus, Goldsmith, Provost, buried at Ber∣mondsey. After them, Aubery de Vere was Port∣grave
and Robert Bar Querel, Provost. This Aubery de Vere was slaine in the reigne of King Stephen.I. Leyland. It is to bee no∣ted also, that King Henry the first gran∣ted to the Citizens of London, the Shi∣rifwicke thereof, and of Middlesex, as in another place is shewed. In the reigne of King Stephen,Sheriffes. Gilbert Becket was Portgrave, and Andrew Bu∣chevet, Provost. After him, Godfrey Magnavile, the Sonne of VVilliam, the Sonne of God∣frey Magnavile, by the gift of Maud the Empresse, was Portgrave or Sheriffe of London and Middlesex, for the yeerely farme of three hundred pound, as ap∣peareth by the Charter. In the time of King Henry the se∣cond, Peter Fitz Walter was Portgrave; after him Iohn Fitz Nigel was Port∣grave, after him, Ernulfus Buchel became Portgrave; and after him VVilliam Fitz Isable. These Portgraves are also in divers Records called,Port∣graves, since cal∣led She∣riffes, and Iudges of the Kings Court, & have ther∣fore Vn∣der-She∣riffes, men lear∣ned in the law, to sit in their Courts. Doomes∣men, or Iudges of the Kings Court. Vicecomites, Vicounties, or Sheriffes, as being under an Earle; for that they then, as since, used that of∣fice as the Sheriffes of London doe till this day. Some Authors do call them Doomes-men, Eldermen, or Iudges of the Kings Court. VVilliam Fitz Stephen, noting the e∣state of this City, & Government there∣of in his time, under the reigne of King Stephen, and of Henry the second, hath these words: This Citie (faith he) even as Rome, is divided into VVards, it hath yeerely She∣riffes in stead of Consuls, it hath the dignity of Senators and Aldermen, it hath Vnder-officers, and according to the qualitie of Lawes, it hath severall Courts, and generall Assemblies upon appointed dayes. Thus much for the antiquity of She∣riffes, and also of Aldermen in severall Wards of this Citie may suffice: and now for the name of Bayliffes, and after that, of Maiors as followeth. In the first yeere of King Richard the first,Bailiffes of London. the Citizens of London obtained to bee governed by two Bailiffes, which Bailiffes are in divers ancient dceds cal∣led Sheriffes, according to the speech of the Law, which called the Shire Balliva, for that they (like as the Portgraves) used the same office of Shrivewicke, for the which the City paid to fee-farme, 300. l. yeerely as before, since the reigne of Henry the first, which also is yet paid by the City into the Exchequer untill this day. They also obtained to have a Maior, to bee their principall Governour and Lieutenant of the City, as of the Kings Chamber. 1189 The names of the first Bailiffes or Officers, entring into their office at the Feast of S. Michael the Arch∣angell, in the yeere of Christ 1189. were named Henry Cornehill, and Ri∣chard Reynere, Bailiffes or Sheriffes. Their first Maior was Henry Fitz-Alwin, Draper, appointed by the said King, and continued Maior from the first of Richard the first, untill the 15. of King Iohn, which was 24. yeeres and somewhat more. 1190 The second of Richard the first, Sheriffes Iohn Herlion, Roger Duke: Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin.First Ma∣ior of London. 1191 The third Sheriffes, VVilliam Haverell, Iohn Buckmote: Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. 1192 The fourth, Nicholas Duke, Peter Newelye: Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. 1193 The fifth, Roger Duke, Richard Fitz-Alwin. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. 1194 The sixth,
VVilliam Fitz-Isabel,— VVilliam Fitz-Arnold:— Sheiffes. Maior, Henry Fitz Alwin. An. Dom. 1195 The seventh Robert Besaunt,— Ioke de Iosue:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1196 The eighth Gerard de Antiloche,— Robert Durant:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1197 The ninth Roger Blunt,— Nicholas Ducket:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1198 The tenth Constantine Fitz-Arnold,— Robert le Beau:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. King Iohn began his reigne the sixth of April 1199. An. Dom. 1199 The first of King Iohn, Arnold Fitz-Arnold,— Richard Fitz Bartholomew:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. King Iohn granted the Sheriffe∣wicke of London, and Middlesex, to the Citizens thereof, as King Henry the first before had done, for the summe of 300. l. yeerely. Also he gave them authori∣ty to chuse and deprive their Sheriffs at their pleasure. An. Dom. 1200 The second Roger Dorset,— Iames Bartholemew:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1201 The third VValter Fitz-Alice,— Simon de Aldermanbury:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Alwin. An. Dom. 1202 The fourth Norman Blondel,— Iohn de Ely:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1203 The fifth VValter Browne,— VV. Chamberlaine:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. VValter Brune, and Rosia his wife, founded the Hospitall of Saint Mary without Bishopsgate, commonly cal∣led, Saint Mary Spittle. An. Dom. 1204 The sixth Thomas Haverel,— Hamond Brond:— Sheriffes. Maior Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1205 The seventh Iohn VValgrave,— Richard de VVinchester:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1206 The eighth Iohn Holyland,— Edmund Fitz-Gerard:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin.
An. Dom. 1207 The ninth Roger VVinchester,— Edmund Hard Le:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Firz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1208 The tenth Peter Duke,— Thomas Neale:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. The King by his Letters Patents granted to the Citizens of London liber∣ty and authority, yeerely to chuse them∣selves a Maior. An. Dom. 1209 The eleventh Peter le Iosue,— William Blound:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1210 The twelfth Adam VVhitley,— Stephen le Grasse:— Sheriffes, Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1211. The thirteenth Iohn Fitz-Peter,— Iohn Garland:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1212 The foureteenth Randolph Eyland,— Constantine Iosue:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwin. This Henry Fitz-Alwin deceased, and was buried in the Parish Church of S. Mary Bothaw, neere to London Stone, where he dwelt. An. Dom. 1213. the fifteenth Martin Fitz-Alice,— Peter Bate:— Sheriffes. Maior, Roger Fitz-Alwin. This yeere the Ditch about London was begun to bee made, of 204. foote broad, by the Londoners. 1214 The sixteenth Salomon Basing,— Hugh Basing:— Sheriffes. Maior, Serle, Mercer. Roger Fitz-Alwin, saith Grafton. 1215 The seventeenth Iohn Travers,— Andrew Newland:— Sheriffes. Maior, VVilliam Hardel. King Henry the third began his reigne the 19. of October, 1216. 1216 The first Benet Seinturer,— William Bluntivers:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Iames Alderman for part, and Salomon Basing for part. 1217 The second Thomas Boker,— Ralph Holyland:— Sheriffes. Maior, Serle, Mercer, Robert Serle, saith Grafton. 1218 The third Iohn Wayle, or Veil,— Iohn le Spicer:— Sheriffes. Maior, Robert Serle, Mercer. The Forest of Middlesex, and the Warren of Stanes, were this yeere dis∣aforested. 1219 The fourth Richard Wimbledon,— Iohn Wayle, or Veil:— Sheriffes. Maior, Robert Serle, Mercer. 1220 The fifth Richard Renger,— Iohn Veil:— Sheriffes. Maior, Robert Serle, Mercer. 1221 The sixth Richard Renger,— Thomas Lambart:— Sheriffes. Maior, Robert Serle, Mercer. 1222 The seventh Richard Renger,— Thomas Lambart:— Sheriffes. Maior, Robert Serle, Mercer. Constantine Fitz-Arnulph raysed great troubles in this Citie, and was hanged with his Nephew and other. 1223 The eighth Iohn Travars,— Andrew Bokerel:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Renger. 1224 The ninth Iohn Travars,— Andrew Bokerel:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Renger. The King granted to the Comminal∣tie of London, to have a common Scale. 1225 The tenth Roger Duke,— Martin Fitz-William:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Renger. 1226 The eleventh Roger Duke,— Martin Fitz William:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Renger. This yeere the King confirmed to the Citizens of London free Warren, or li∣bertie to hunt a certaine circuite about the Citie, in the Warren of Stanes, &c. And also, that the Citizens of London should passe tol-free throughout all En∣gland, and that the Keddles, or Weres in the River of Thames, and Midway, should be plucked up and destroyed for ever, &c. Patent 11. Henry 3. 1227 The twelfth Stephen Bokerel,— Henry Cecham:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Roger Duke. The liberties and Franchises of Lon∣don were ratified, and the King granted, that either Sheriffe should have two Clerkes, and two Serjeants: also, that the Citizens should have a common Seale. 1228 The thirteenth Stephen Bokerel,— Henry Cocham:— Sheriffes. Maior, Roger Duke. 1229 The foureteenth William Winchester,— Robert Fitz Iohn:— Sheriffes Maior, Roger Duke. 1230 The fifteenth Richard VValter,— Iohn de VVoborne:— Sheriffes. Maior, Roger Duke. 1231 The sixteenth Michael of S. Helen,— VValter de Enfield:— Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1232 The seventeenth Henry de Edmonton,— Gerard Bat:— Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1233 The eighteenth Simon Fitz Mary,— Roger Blunt:— Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1234 The nineteenth Ralph Ashwy,— Iohn Norman:— Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1235 The twentith Gerard Bat,— Richard or Robert Hardle: Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1236 The one and twentith Henry Cobham,— Iordan of Coventry:— Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1237 The two and twentith Iohn Toloson,— Gervais the Cordwainer: Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1238 The three and twentith Iohn Codra,— Iohn VVilhall:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Renger. 1239 The foure and twentith Reymond Bongy,— Ralph Ashwy:— Sheriffes.
Maior, VVilliam Ioyner. This VVilliam Ioyner, builded the Quire of the Gray Friers Church in Lon∣don, and became a Lay brother of that house. 1240 The five and twentieth Iohn Gisors,— Michael Tony:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gerard Bat. This yeere Aldermen of London were chosen, and changed yeerely, but that order lasted not long. Gerard Bat was a∣gaine elected Maior for that yeere to come, but the King would not admit him, being charged with taking mo∣ney of the Victuallers in the precedent yeere. 1241 The six and twentieth Thomas Duresme,— Iohn Voyle:— Sheriffes. Maior, Reymond Bongey. 1242 The seven and twentieth Iohn Fitz-Iohn,— Ralph Ashwy:— Sheriffes. Maior, Reymond Bongey. 1243 The eight and twentieth Hugh Blunt,— Adam Basing:— Sheriffes. Maior, Ralph Ashwy. 1244 The nine and twentieth Ralph Foster,— Nicholas Bat:— Sheriffes. Maior, Michael Tony. 1245 The thirtieth Robert of Cornehil,— Adam of Bewley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Gisors Pepperer.
1246 The one and thirtieth Simon Fitz-Mary,— Lawrence Frowicke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Gisors. Simon Fitz-Mary, founded the Hos∣pitall of Mary, called Bethelem without Bishopsgate. Queene Hith was now let to farme to the Citizens of London. 1247 The two and thirtieth Iohn Voyle,— Nicholas Bat:— Sheriffes. Maior, Peter Fitz-Alwin. 1248 The three and thirtieth Nicholas Fitz Iosue,— Geffrey VVinchester:— Sheriffes. Maior, Michael Tony. 1249 The foure and thirtie Richard Hardell,— Iohn Tolason:— Sheriffes. Maior, Roger Fitz-Roger. 1250 The five and thirtieth Humfrey Bat,— VVilliam Fitz-Richard:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Gisors, Pepperer. The King now granted, that the Maior should be presented to the Ba∣rons of the Exchequer, and they should admit him. 1251 The six and thirtieth Lawrence Frowicke,— Nicholas Bat:— Sheriffes. Maior, Adam Basing. 1252 The seven and thirtieth VVilliam Durham,— Thomas VVimborne:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Tolason, Draper. The Liberties of this City were sei∣zed, and the Maior charged, that he looked not to the Assise of bread. 1253 The eighth and thirtieth Iohn Northampton,— Richard Picard:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1254 The nine and thirtieth Ralph Ashwy,— Robert of Limon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1255 The fortieth Stephen Doe,— Henry Walmond:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Hardell, Draper. The Maior, divers Aldermen, and the Sheriffes of London were deprived, and other placed in their roomes. 1256 The one and fortieth Michael Bockerell,— Iohn the Minor:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1257 The two and fortieth Richard Otwel,— William Ashwy:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Hardell; Draper. The King caused the walles of this Citie to bee repaired, and made with Bulwarkes. 1258 The three and fortieth Robert Cornhill,— Iohn Adrian:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1259 The foure and fortieth Iohn Adrian,— Robert Cornhill:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Gisors, Pepperer. 1260 The five and fortieth Adam Browning,— Henry Coventrie:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Fitz-Richard. 1261 The six and fortieth Iohn Northhampton,— Richard Picard:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Fitz-Richard. 1262 The seven and fortieth Iohn Tailor— Richard Walbrooke: Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Fitz-Richard. 1263 The eight and fortieth Robert de Mountpiter,— Osbert de Suffolke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Fitz-Richard. The Citizens of London fortified the Citie with iron Chaines, drawn rhwart over their streets. 1264 The nine and fortieth Gregory Rockesley,— Thomas de Deford:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Fitz-Thomas Fitz-Ri∣chard.
1265 The fiftieth Edward Blund,— Peter Anger:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Fitz-Thomas Fitz-Richard. The Chaines and Posts in London were plucked up, the Maior and prin∣cipall Citizens committed to Ward, and Otho Constable of the Tower, was made Custos of the Citie, &c. 1266 The one and fiftieth Iohn Hind,— Iohn Walraven:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Richards. The Earle of Gloucester entred the Citie with an Army, and therein buil∣ded Bulwarkes, cast Trenches, &c. 1267 The two and fiftieth Iohn Adrian,— Lucas de Batencourt:— Sheriffes. Custos, Alen de la Souch. This Alen de la Souch, being a Baron of this Realme, and also chiefe Iustice, was in the yeere 1270. slaine in West∣minster Hall, by Iohn warren Earle of Surrey. Thomas Fitz-Thobald, and Agnes his wife, this yeere founded the Hospitall of Saint Thomas of Acon in Westcheape. 1268 The three and fiftieth▪ Walter Harvy,— William Dursme:— Sheriffes. T. Wimborn; Custos, Sir Stephen Ed∣ward. A variance fell in London betweene the Goldsmiths and the Taylors, wher∣through many men were slaine. 1269 The foure and fiftieth Thomas Basing,— Robert Cornehill:— Sheriffes. Hugh Fitz-Ottonis, Custos of London, and Constable of the Tower. 1270 The five and fiftieth Walter Potter,— Philip Tailor:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Adrian Vintner. 1271 The six and fiftieth Gregory Rokesly,— Henry Walleys:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Adrian Vintner. The steeple of Bow Church in Cheape fell downe, and slew many people.
1272 The seven and fiftieth Richard Paris,— Iohn de Wodeley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Walter Harvy, Custos, H. Frowike, Pepperer, for part that yeere. King Edward the first beganne his reigne the sixteenth of No∣vember, 1272. 1273 The first Iohn Horne,— Walter Potter:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Walter Harvy, Knight. 1274 The second Nicholas Winchester,— Henry Coventry:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Walleis. 1275 The third Lucas Baencourte,— Henry Frowicke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rokesley; chiefe Say∣master of all the Kings Mints through∣out all England, and keeper of the Kings Exchange at London. 1276 The fourth Iohn Horne,— Ralph Blunt:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rokesley. 1277 The fifth Robert de Arar,— Ralph L. Fewre:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rokesley. 1278 The sixth Iohn Adrian,— Walter Langley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rokesley. 1279 The seventh Robert Basing,— William le Meyre:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rokesley. 1280 The eighth Thomas Fox, or Box,— Ralph Delamere, or Moore: Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rokesley. 1281 The ninth William Farendon,— Nicholas Winchester:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rakesley. This William Farendon, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffes was Father to Ni∣cholas Farendon: Of these two Faringden Ward tooke that name. 1282 The tenth W. le Meyre,— Richard Chigwel:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Walleis. This Henry Walleis builded the Tun upon Cornehill, to bee a Prison, and the Stockes to be a Market-house. 1283 The eleventh Ralph Blunt,— Ankerin de Betavil, or Haw∣kin Betuell:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Henry Walleis. 1284. The twelfth Iordan Goodcheape,— Martin Box:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Walleis. Lawrence Ducket, Goldsmith, mur∣dered in Bow-Church, and the murthe∣rers hanged. 1285 The thirteenth Stephen Cornehill,— Roberts Rokesley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Gregory Rokesley; Custos, Ralph Sandwitch, and Iohn Briton. It was ordained, that Millers should have but one halfe-penny for a quarter of Wheat grinding: and the great water Conduit in Cheape was now begun to be made. 1286 The foureteenth Walter Blunt,— Iohn Wade:— Sheriffes. Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. Wheate was now sold at London for sixteene pence, and for twelve pence the quarter. 1287 The fifteenth Thomas Crosse,— Walter Hawteyne:— Sheriffes. Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1288 The sixteenth W. Hereford,— Thomas Stanes:— Sheriffes. Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1289 The seventeenth W. Betaine,— Iohn of Canturbury:— Sheriffes. Custos, Ralph Sandwitch, Ralph Barna∣vars, and Sir Iohn Briton. This yeere a Subsidie was granted, for the reparations of London-bridge. 1290 The eighteenth Fulke of S. Edmond,— Salomon Langford, or Le Se∣tel:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Briton, Knight. 1291 The nineteenth Thomas Romain,— W. de Leyre:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Briton, Knight, Ralph Sandwitch. 1292 The twentieth Ralph blunt,— Hamond Box:— Sheriffes. Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1293 The one and twentieth Henry Bell, or Bole,— Elias Russell:— Sheriffes. Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. Three men had their right hands cut off at the Standard in Cheape, for recu∣ing of a prisoner, arrested by a Sergeant of London. 1294 The two and twentieth Robert Rokesley the yonger, Martin Aubery, or Amers∣bery:— Sheriffes. Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1295 The three and twentieth Henry Box,— Richard Gloucester:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Ralph Sandwitch.
1296 The foure and twentieth Iohn ,— :— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Briton. This yeere all the Liberties of the Ci∣ty were restored, the Mairalty excepted. 1297 The five and twentieth Thomas of Suffolke,— dam of Falham:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Briton. 1298 The six and twentith Richard Rea,— Thomas ely:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Walleis. Certaine Citizens of London brake up the Tunne upon Cornehill, and tooke out prisoners, for the which they were grie∣vously punished. 1299 The seven and twentieth Iohn Armenter,— Henry ingene, or Fingrith: Sheriffes. Maior, Elias Russell. 1300 The eighth and twentieth Lucas de Havering,— Richard Champnes:— Sheriffes. Maior, Elias Russell. 1301 The nine and twentieth Robert Callor, or Callet,— Peter de Besenho:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Blunt, Knight. 1302 The thirtieth Hugh Pourte,— Simon Paris:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Blunt. 1303 The one and thirtieth W. Combmartin,— Iohn de Burford:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Blunt. 1304 The two and thirtieth Roger Paris,— Iohn de Lincolne:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Blunt. Geffrey Hertelpole, Alderman, was elected to bee Recorder of London, and tooke his oath, and was appointed to weare his apparell as an Alderman. 1305 The three and thirtieth William Cawson,— Reginald Thunderley:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Blunt. 1306 The foure and thirtieth Geffrey at the Conduit,— Simon Billet:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Blunt. Seacoale was forbidden to bee bur∣ned in London, Southwarke, &c. Edward the second began his reigne the seventh of Iuly, the yeere of Christ, Anno, 1307. 1307 The first Nicholas Pigot,— Nigellus Drury:— Sheriffes. Custos, Sir Iohn Blunt. 1308 The second▪ W. Basing,— Iames Buttler:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Faringdon, Goldsmith.
1309 The third Roger le Palmer,— Iames of S. Edmond:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Romaine. 1310 The fourth Simon Cooper,— Peter Blackney:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Reffam, Mercer. The King commanded the Maior and communaltie to make the Wall of Lon∣don, from Ludgate to Fleetbridge, and from thence to the Thames. 1311 The fifth Simon Metwod,— Richard Wilford:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Gisors, Pepperer. Order was taken that Merchant-strangers should sell their wares within forty dayes after their arrivall, or else the same to be forfeited. 1312 The sixth Iohn Lambin,— Adam Lutkin:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Gisors, Pepperer. 1313 The seventh Robert Gurden, or Burdeint, Hugh Garton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Faringdon, Goldsmith. Prices set on victuals: a fat stalled Oxe, 24. shillings, a fat Mutton, 20. pence, a fat Goose, two pence halfe pen∣ny, a fat Capon, two pence; a fat Hen, one penny; two Chickens, one penny; three Pigeons, one penny; 24. egges one penny, &c. 1314 The eighth Stephen Abingdon,— Hamond Chickwell, or Chig∣well:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Gisors, Pepperer. Famine and mortality of people, so that the quicke might unneath bury the dead, horse flesh, and dogs flesh was good meate. 1315 The ninth Hamond Goodchape,— William Bodeleigh:— Sheriffes. Maior, Stephen de Abingdon. 1316 The tenth William Caston,— Ralph Balancer:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Wingrave. An earely Harvest: a Bushell of Wheate that had beene sold for tenne shillings, was now sold for tenne pence, &c. 1317 The eleventh Iohn Prior,— W. Furneux, or Furneis:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Wingrave.
Such a murren of Kin, that Dogs and Ravens that sed on them were poi∣soned. 1318 The twelfth Iohn Pointell,— Iohn Dalling:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Wingrave. 1319 The thirteenth Simon de Abingdon,— I. Preston:— Sheriffes. Maior, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. Iohn Gisors, late Maior of London, and many other Citizens fled the City, for things layd to their charge. 1320 The foureteenth Renauld at the Conduit,— W. Prodham, or Produn:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Farengdon, Goldsmith. 1321 The fifteenth Richard Constantine,— Richard de Hackney:— Sheriffes. Maior, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. 1222 The sixteenth Iohn Grantham,— Richard de Ely:— Sheriffes. Maior, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. Fish and Flesh market established at the Stockes, in the midst of the Citie. 1323 The seventeenth Adam of Salisbury,— Iohn of Oxford:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Farengdon, Goldsmith. Of this Nicholas Farengdon, and of William Farengdon his father, read more in Farengdon Ward. 1324 The eighteenth Benet of Fulham,— Iohn Cawson:— Sheriffes. Maior, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. 1325 The nineteenth Gilbert Mordon,— Iohn Causton, or Cotton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. The Citizens of London tooke the Bishop of Excester, and cut off his head at the Standard in Cheape. 1326 The twentieth Richard Rothing,— Roger Chaunteclere:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Britaine, Goldsmith. This Richard Rothing is said to new build the Parish Church of S. Iames at Garlicke-Hith. Edward the third began his reigne the 25. of Ianuary, the yeere of Christ, Anno, 1326. This King Edward granted, that the Maior should be Iustice for the Gaole delivery at Newgate, that the Citizens of London should not be constrained to go out of the City of London to any Warre. More hee granted, that the Li∣berties & Franchises of the City should not, after this time (for any cause) bee taken into the Kings hands, &c. More he granted by his Letters Patents, dated the sixth of March, that no Escheter should bee in the Citie, but the Maior for his time only. 1327 The first Henry Darcy,— Iohn Hawton, or Haughton: Sheriffes. Maior, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer.
This yeere the Walls of London were payred. 1328 The second Simon Frances,— Henry Combmartin:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Grantham, Grocer. 1329 The third Richard Lazar, William Gisors: Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Swandland. This yeere the King kept a great Iou∣sting in Cheape, betwixt Sopars-lane and the great Crosse. 1330 The fourth Robert of Elie,— Thomas Whorwode: Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Pountney, or Pultney, Draper. 1331 The fifth Iohn Mocking,— Andrew Aubery:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Pultney, Draper. 1332 The sixth Nicholas Pike,— Iohn Husband:— Sheriffes. Iohn Preston, Draper, This yeere was founded Elsing Spittle, by W. Elsing, Mercer, that became first Prior of that Hospitall. 1333 The seventh Iohn Hamond,— William Hansard:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Puleney, Drapes. 1334 The eighth Iohn Kingstone, or Kington, Walter Turke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Reginald at the Conduit, Vintner. 1335 The ninth Walter Mordon,— Richard Vpton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Wotton, Reignold at the Conduit, saith Grafton.
1330 The tenth Iohn Clarke,— W. Curtes: Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Pultney, Draper. This Sir Iohn Pultney founded a Col∣ledge in the Parish Church of S. Law∣rence Pountney, by Candlewicke streete. 1337 The eleventh Walter Neale,— Nicholas Crane:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Darcy. Walter Neale, Bladesmith, gave lands to the repairing of the high-wayes a∣bout London. 1338 The twelfth William de Pomfret,— Hugh Marbeler, or Marbe∣roll:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Darcy. The King granted, that the Sergeants of the Maior and Sheriffes of London, should beare Maces of Silver and gilt, with the Kings Armes engraven on them. 1339 The thirteenth William Thorney,— Roger Frosham:— Sheriffes. Andrew Aubery, Grocer, 1340 The foureteenth Adam Lucas,— Bartlemew Moris:— Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Aubery, Grocer. 1341 The fifteenth Richard de Barking,— Iohn de Rokesley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn of Oxenford, Vintner. 1342 The sixteenth Iohn Loufkin,— Richard Killingbery:— Sheriffes. Maior, Simon Francis, Mercer. The price of Gascoyn Wines at Lon∣don, fourepence, and Renish Wine six pence the Galon. 1343 The seventeenth Iohn Steward,— Iohn Aylesham:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Hmond. 1344 The eighteenth Geffrey Witchingham,— Thomas Leg:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Hamond.
1345 The ninteenth Edmund Hemenhall,— Iohn of Gloucester: Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Leget, Richard Lazar faith Grofton. 1346 The twentieth Iohn Croyden,— William Clopton: Sheriffes. Maior, Geffrey Witchingham. 1347 The one and twentieth Adam Brapson,— Richard Fas, or Bas:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Leggy, Skinner. King Edward now won Callis from the French. 1348 The two and twentieth Henry Picard,— Simon Dolseby:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Loufkin Fishmonger. A great Pest. Sir Walter Manny, knight, now founded the Charter-house by Smithfield, to bee a buriall for the dead. 1349 The three and twentieth Adam of Bury,— Ralph of Lynne:— Sheriffes. Maior, Walter Turke, Fishmonger. 1350 The foure and twentieth Iohn Notte,— William of Worcester:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Killingbury. 1351 The five and twentieth Iohn Wroth,— Gilbert of Stenineshorp:— Sheriffes. Maior, Andrew Aubery. 1352 The six and twentieth Iohn Peache,— Iohn Stotley:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Adam Francis, Mercer. This Maior procured an Act of Par∣liament, that no knowne whore should weare any hood, or attire on her head, except reyed, or striped cloth of divers colours, &c. 1353 The seven and twentieth William Wolde, or Wilde,— Iohn Little:— Sheriffes. Maior, Adam Francis, Mercer. This Adam Francis was one of the Founders of the Colledge in Guild-Hal Chappell, &c. H. Prowicke was the o∣ther. 1354 The eight and twentieth William Notingham,— Richard Smelt:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Leggy, or Legget Skin∣ner. Aldermen of London were used to be changed yeerely, but now it was ordai∣ned, that they should not be removed, without some speciall cause. 1355 The nine and twentieth Walter, or Thomas , Thomas Brandon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Simon Francis, Mercer. 1356 The thirtieth Richard Notingham,— Thomas Dolssel:— Sheriffes. Maior, Henry Picard, Vintner. This Henry Picard feasted the Kings of England, of France, Cypres, and Scots, with other great Estates, all in one day. 1357 The one and thirtieth Stephen Candish,— Bartholmew Prostling:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Stody, Vintner. This Iohn Stody gave tenements to the Vintners in London, for reliefe of the poore of that Company. 1358 The two and thirtieth Iohn Barnes,— Iohn Bis:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Loufkin, Stockfishmon∣ger. 1359 The three and thirtieth Simon of Benington,— Iohn of Chichester:— Sheriffes. Maior, Simou Dolseby, Grocer.
1360 The foure and thirtieth Iohn Dennis,— Walter Berny:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Wroth, Fishmonger. 1361 The five and thirtieth William Holbech,— Iames Tame: Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Peche, Fishmonger. 1362 The six and thirtieth Iohn of S. Albones,— Iames Andrew:— Sheriffes. Maior, Stephen Candish, Draper. 1363 The seven and thirtieth Richard of Croyen,— Iohn Hiltoft:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Not, Grocer. 1364 The three and fortieth Iohn de Metford,— Simon de Mordon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Adam of Bury, Skinner. 1365 The nine and thirtieth Iohn Bukylsworth,— Iohn or Thomas Ireland:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Loufkin, Fishmonger, and Adam of Bury, Skinner. 1366 The fortieth Iohn Ward,— Thomas of Lee, or at the Lee.— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Loufkin, Fishmonger. This Iohn Loufkin builded the Parish Church of S. Michael in Crooked-lane. 1367 The one and fortieth Iohn Turngold, or Torgold,— William Dickeman:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iames Andrew, Draper. 1368 The two and fortieth Robert Girdeler,— Adam Wimondham:— Sheriffes.
Maior Simon Mordon, Stockfish∣monger. This yeere Wheat was sold for two shillings six pence the bushell. 1369 The three and fortieth Iohn Piel,— Hugh Holdich:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Chichester, Goldsmith. 1370 The foure and fortieth William Walworth,— Robert Gayton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Barnes, Mercer. 1371 The five and fortieth Adam Staple,— Robert Hatfield:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Barnes, Mercer. This Iohn Barnes gave a chest with three locks, and one thousand Markes, to be lent to poore men. 1372 The six and fortieth Iohn Philpot,— Nicholas Brembar:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Piel, Mercer. 1373 The seven and fortieth Iohn Aubery,— Iohn Fished: Sheriffes. Maior, Adam of Bury, Skinner. 1374 The eight and fortieth Richard Lions,— William Woodhouse:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Walworth, Fish∣monger. 1375 The nine and fortieth Iohn Hadley,— William Newport: Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Ward, Grocer. 1376 The fiftieth Iohn Northampton,— Robert Laund:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Adam Staple, Mercer. The Londoners meant to have slaine Iohn, Duke of Lancaster: Adam Staple, Maior, put downe, and Nicholas Brem∣bar elected. Also the Aldermen were deposed and other set in their places. Richard the second began his reigne the one and twentieth of Iune, in the yeere 1377. 1377 The first Nicholas Twiford,— Andrew Pikeman:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Gro∣cer. Iohn Philpot, a Citizen of London, sent Ships to the Sea and scoured it of Pirats, taking many of them prisoners. 1378 The second Iohn Boseham,— Thomas Cornwalis:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Philpot, Grocer. This Iohn Philpot gave to the City lands, for the finding of thirteen poore people for ever. 1379 The third Iohn Helisdon,— William Barrat:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Hadley, Grocer. 1380 The fourth Walter Doget, or Docket,— William Knighthode:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Walworth, Fishmon∣ger. This William walworth arrested Wat Tiler, the Rebell, and this yeere was Knighted. Hee increased the Parish Church of Saint Michael in Crooked-lane, and founded there a Colledge. O∣ther Aldermen were also then Knigh∣ted with him, for their service in the field. 1381 The fifth Iohn Rota,— Iohn Hynde:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Northampton, Draper. 1382 The sixth Adam Bamme,— Iohn Sely:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Northampton, Draper, or rather Skinner, as I find in some Record. 1383 The seventh Simon Winchcombe,— Iohn More:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Grocer. Iohn Northampton, late Maior of Lon∣don, was committed to perpetuall pri∣son and his goods confiscated. 1384 The eighth Nicholas Exton,— Iohn French:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Grocer, Knighted with William Walworth. 1385 The ninth Iohn Organ,— Iohn Churchman:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Grocer. The foresaid Iohn Churchman now builded the Custome-house, neere to the Tower of London, and did many o∣ther workes for the commodity of this Citie. 1386 The tenth W. Stondon,— W. More:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Exton, Fishmonger. This yeere the Citizens of London, fearing the French, pulled downe hou∣ses neere about their Citie, repaired their Wals, and cleansed their dit∣ches, &c. 1387 The eleventh William Venor, or Vinor,— Hugh Falstalfe:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Exton, Fishmonger. Sir Nicholas Brembar, late Maior of London was this yeere beheaded. 1388 The twelfth Thomas Austen,— Adam Carlehul:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Twiford, Goldsmith, Knighted with William Walworth. 1389 The thirteenth Iohn Walcot,— Iohn Love:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Vinor, or Venour, Grocer. 1390 The fourteenth Iohn Francis,— Thomas Vivent:— Sheriffes. Maior, Adam Bamme, Goldsmith. This Adam Bamme provided from beyond the Seas, Corne in great abun∣dance, so that the City was well able to serve the Countrey. 1391 The fifteenth Iohn Shadworth, or Chad∣worth, — Henry Vamere:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Iohn Hind, Draper. This Maior was, for displeasure ta∣ken, sent to Windsor Castle, and the King made a Custos or Warden of the City. 1392 The sixteenth Gilbert Mafield,— Thomas Newington:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Stondon, Grocer. 1393 The seventeenth Drew Barentin,— Richard Whitington:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Hardley, Grocer. Faringdon Ward was now by Parlia∣ment appointed to bee divided into two Wards, to wit, infra, & extra. 1394 The eighteenth William Bramston,— Thomas Knoles:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Froyshe, Mercer. 1395 The nineteenth Roger Ellis,— William Sevenoke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William More, Vintner. 1396 The twentieth Thomas Wilford,— William Parker:— Sheriffes. Maior, Adam Browne, Goldsmith. 1397 The one and twentieth Iohn Woodcocke,— William Ascham:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Whitington, Mer∣cer. 1398 The two and twentieth
Iohn Wade,— Iohn Warnar:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Drew Barentin, Goldsmith. King Henry the fourth began his reigne the twentie ninth of September, in the yeere, 1399. 1399 The first William Waldern,— William Hende or Hide:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Knoles, Grocer. 1400 The second Iohn Wakel,— William Ebot:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Francis, Goldsmith. 1401 The third William Venor,— Iohn Fremingham:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Shadworth, or Chad∣worth, Mercer. The Conduit upon Cornehill was this yeere made, being before an old prison house, called the Tunne. 1403 The fourth Richard Marlow,— Robert Chicheley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Walcote, Draper. 1403 The fifth Thomas Falconer,— Thomas Poole:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Ascham, Fish-monger, 1404 The sixth William Louth,— Stephen Spilman:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Hind, Draper. This Iohn Hynd was a new builder of the Parish of Saint Swithen, by Lon∣don-Stone.
1405 The seventh Henry Barton,— William Cromer:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Woodcocke, Mercer. This Maior caused all the Weres in the River of Thames, from Stanes to the River of Medwey, to bee destroyed, and the Trinkes to be burned, &c. 1406 The eighth Nicholas Wotton,— Geffrey Brooke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Whitington, Mer∣cer. This yeere a great Pestilence in Lon∣don tooke away more than 30000. people. 1407 The ninth Henry Pontfract,— Henry Halton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Stondon, Grocer. 1408 The tenth Thomas Ducke,— William Norton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Drew Barentine, Gold∣smith. This Drew Barentine builded a part of Goldsmiths Hall, and gave them lands. 1409 The eleveth Iohn Law,— William Chichley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Marlow, Ironmon∣ger. A great play at Skinners well, which lasted eight dayes, and was of mat∣ter from the creation of the World: the most part of all the great Estates of England were there to behold it. 1410 The twelfth Iohn Penne,— Thomas Pike:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Knowles, Gro∣cer. This Thomas Knowles began a new to build the Guild-Hall in London, &c. 1411 The thirteeth Iohn Rainwell,— William Cotton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Robert Chichley, Grocer. 1412 The foureteenth Ralph Lovenham,— William Sevenoke:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Waldren, Mercer.
Henry the fifth beganne his reigne the twentieth of March, the yeere 1412. 1413 The first Iohn Sutton,— Iohn Michaell:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Cromar, Draper. Sir Iohn Oldcastle assembled a great power in Fickets field in London, which power was overcome and taken by the King and his power. 1414 The second Iohn Michaell,— Thomas Alen:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Falconer, Mercer. This Maior caused the Posterne cal∣led Moregate to be builded, and he lent to the King 10000. markes upon Iew∣els, &c. 1415 The third William Cambridge,— Allen Everard,— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Nicholas Wotton, Dra∣per. 1416 The fourth Robert Whitigton, or Wi∣dington,— Iohn Coventrie:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Henry Barton, Skinner. This Henry Barton ordained Lan∣thornes with Lights, to bee hanged out on the Winter evenings, betwixt Hallontide and Candlemasse. 1417 The fifth Henry Read,— Iohn Gedney:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Marlow, Iron∣monger. 1418 The sixth Iohn Brian,— Ralph Barton,— Iohn Paruesse: Sheriffes. Maior, VVilliam Sevenoke.
This Willam Sevenoke, sonne to Wil∣liam Rumsched of Sevenoke in Kent, was by his Father bound an apprentice with Hugh de Bois a Citizen and Ferrer of London, for a tearme of yeares, which being expired in the yeere 1394. the eighteenth of Richard the second, Iohn Hadley being Maior of London, and Ste∣phen Spilman, Chamberlaine of the Guild-Hall: hee alledged, that his ma∣ster had used the trade or mystery of a Grocer, and not of a Ferrer, and there∣fore required to bee made free of the Grocers Company, which was granted. This William Sevenoke, founded in the towne of Sevenoke in Kent, a free. Schoole, and Almes-houses for the poore. 1419 The seventh Robert Whitington,— Iohn Butler:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Whitington, Mer∣cer. This Maior founded Whitington Col∣ledge. 1420 The eighth Iohn Butler,— Iohn Welles:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Cambridge, Grocer. 1421 The ninth Richard Gosseline,— William Weston:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Robert Chichley, Grocer. This Maior gave one plot of ground thereunto, to build the Parish Church of Saint Stephen upon Wal∣brooke. Henry the sixth began his reigne the one and thirtieth day of August, in the yeere, 1422. 1422 The first William Eastfield,Newgate this yeere builded by the Execu∣tours of Richard Whitington.— Robert Tatarsal:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Walderne, Mercer, sonne of Geffrey Walderne, of the Pa∣rish of Walderne in Sussex. 1423 The second Nicholas Iames,— Thomas Watford, or Wind-ford:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Cromar, Draper, sonne of Iohn Cromar of Aldernham in Hertford-shire. 1424 The third Simon Seman,— Iohn Bywater:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Michell, Stockfishmon∣ne of Iohn Michell of Ekeling∣ham in Suffolke.
1425 The fourth William Milred, or Milreth, Iohn Brokle:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Coventrie, Mercer; sonne of William Coventrie, of the City of Coventrie in Warwick-shire. 1426 The fifth Iohn Arnold,— Iohn Higham:— Sheriffes. Maior,Three Wards in London discharged from Fif∣teenes by this Maior. Sir Iohn Rainewell, Fishmon∣ger, sonne of Robert Rainewell, Citizen, and Haberdasher of London. 1427 The sixth Henry Frowick,— Robert Otely.— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Gedney, Draper, sonne of William Gedney, of Saint Edes, in Cambridge-shire. 1428 The seventh Thomas Duffhouse, or Defe-house,— Iohn Abbot:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Henry Barton, Skinner, sonne of Henry Barton, of Myldenhall in Suffolke. 1429 The eighth William Russe,— Ralph Holland:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William East-field, Mer∣cer, sonne of William East field, of Tickel in Yorkeshire. Ralph Holland the She∣riffe gave to impotent poor on hun∣dred and twenty pounds, to prisoners fourescore pounds, to hospitals fortie pounds, &c. 1430 The ninth Walter Chertsey,A Charita∣ble She∣riffe.— Robert Large:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Wotton, Draper, sonne of Thomas Wotton of London, Gentle∣man. Walter Chertsey, Draper, gave to the poore, one hundred pounds, beside twentie pounds, to the Hospitals, &c. 1431 The tenth Iohn Aderley,— Stephen Browne:— Sheriffes. Maior,He builded the Stan∣dard in Cheape∣. Sir Iohn de Welles, Grocer, sonne of Iohn de Welles, of the City of Norwich. This Iohn de Welles was a great benefactor towards the new building of the Chappell  the Guild-hall: besides he builded the South Ile of the Quire
at Saint Antlins Church, as by his pi∣cture, (strangely there found) his Motto and Armes doth yet plainely appeare. 1432 The eleventh Iohn Olney,— Iohn Paddesley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Parveis, Fishmon∣ger, sonne to Iohn Parveis of Ersgeston in Barkeshe. 1433 The twelfth Thomas Chalton,— Iohn King:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Brokle, Draper. sonne to William Brokle, of Newport Pan∣nel in Buckinghamshire. 1434 The thirteenth Thomas Barnewell,— Simon Eyre:— Sheriffes. Maior,A great Frost of 14. weekes long. Sir Roger Oteley, Grocer, sonne to VVilliam Oteley of Vfford in Suffolke. 1435 The fourteenth Thomas Catworth,— Robert Clopton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Henry Frowicke, Mercer, sonne to Henry Frowicke of Middlesex. 1436 The fifteenth Thomas Morsted,— William Gregorie:— Sheriffes. Maior againe, Sir Iohn Michell, Stock∣fishmonger. 1437 The sixteenth William Hales,— William Chapman:— Sheriffes. Maior againe,This Maior a great  to the  Conduits. Sir William Easfield, and then made a Knight of the Bah. 1438 The seventeenth Hugh Dyker,— Nicholas owe:— Sheriffes. Maior,A great dearth Bread made of Fitches, Pease, Beanes, & Feare . Sir Stephen Brown, Grocer, son to Iohn Browne of Newcastle upon Time. Wheat was then sold for three shillings the Bushell; but this Maior sent into Prusia, and caused to bee brought from thence, certaine Ships laden with Rie, which caused great reliefe in so ex∣treame a necessity. 1439 The eighteenth Philip Malpas,— Robert Marshall:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Robert Large, Mercer, sonne of Thomas Large, Borne in London. Phi∣lip Malpas, at his decease, gave one hun∣dred and twentie pounds to poore Pri∣soners: and every yeere, for five yeere, foure hundred and three shirts and smockes,Bountifull Charity. fortie paire of sheets, and one hundred and fiftie gownes of good frize, to poore people. To poore maids marriages, one hundred markes. To re∣pairing high wayes, one hundred markes: And to five hundred poore people in London, every one six shillings eight pence, &c. 1440 The nineteenth Iohn Sutton,— William Welinhale:— Sheriffes. Maior,Hee was master of the money in the Tower of London. Sir Iohn Paddesley, Goldsmith, sonne to Simon Paddesley, of Bury Saint Edmond in Suffolke. 1441 The twentieth William Combis, or Combes, Richard Rich:— Sheriffes. Maior, Robert Clopton, Draper, sonne of Thomas Clopton, of Clopton in Cam∣bridge shire. 1442 The one and twentieth Thomas Beaumont,— Richard Nordon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Alderley, Ironmonger, sonne of Iohn Aderley or Hatherley, of the City of Bristoll. 1443 The two and twentieth Nicholas Wyfold,— Iohn Norman:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Catworth, Grocer, sonne of Iohn Catworth of Rushton in Northumberland. 1444 The three and twentieth Stephen Foster,— Hugh Witch:— Sheriffes. Maior,Pauls Stee∣ple was fi∣red with lightening and hardly quenched. againe Sir Henry Frowicke, son to Henry Frowicke of Totenham in Mid∣dlesex Gounty. 1445 The foure and twentieth Iohn Darby,— Godfrey Fielding:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Simon Eyre, Draper, sonne to Iohn Eyre, of Brandon in Suffole. This Simon Eyre builded  Hall in London, to be a Common Carner for the Citie. 1446 The five and twentieth Robert Horne,— Godfrey Bullen:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Olney, Mercer, sonne of of Iohn Olney of the City of Coven∣trie. 1447 The six and twentieth William Abraham,— Thomas Scot:— Sheriffes. Maior againe, Sir Iohn Gedney, Dra∣per. 1448 The seven and twentieth William Cotlow, or Catlow,— William Marrow:— Sheriffes. Maior againe, Sir Stephen Browne, Grocer. 1449 The eight and twentieth William Hulin,— Thomas Canning:— Sheriffes. Maior,. Sir sonne to Thomas in Redfordshire. 1450 The nine and twentieth. Iohn — William Deare:— Sheriffes. Maior, Nicholas Wilford, but more truely Wyfold, Grocer, sonne to Thomas Wyfold of Hertley in Barkeshire. 1451 The thirtieth Mathew Philip,— Christopher Wharton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Gregory, Skinner, sonne of Roger Gregory of Milden-hall in Suffolke. 1452 The one and thirtieth Richard Zee,— Richard Alley:— Sheriffes.
Maior,A great Fray was this yeere at the westling. Sir Geffrey Fielding, Mercer, sonne to William Fielding of Litterworth in Leicestershire. This Lord Maior was made of the Councell to King Henry the sixth and King Edward the fourth. 1453 The two and thirtieth Iohn Walden, or Waldron,— Thomas Cooke:— Sheriffes. Maior,The Alder∣men (be∣fore) rode by land on hourseback to West . Sir Iohn Norman, Draper, son to Io. Norman of Banbury in Oxfordshire. This I. Norman was the first Maior that was rowed by water to Westminster, to take his Oath: he caused a Barge to be made at his owne charge, and every Company had severall Barges, well decked & trimmed, to passe along with him. For joy whereof, the Water∣men made a Song in his prayse begin∣ning. Row thy Boate, Norman, &c. 1454 The three and thirtieth Iohn Field,— William Taylor:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Stephen Foster, Fishmon∣ger, sonne of Robert Foster of London, Stock-fishmonger. This man enlar∣ged Ludgate, for ease of the prisoners there. 1455 The foure and thirtieth Iohn Yong,— Thomas Oldgrave:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Marrow, Mercer, sonne to Stephen Marrow, of Stebun∣heath, in Middlesex. 1456 The five and thirtieth Iohn Styward.— Ralph Verney:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Canning, Gro∣cer, sonne to Iohn Canning, of the Ci∣ty of Bristoll. 1457 The six and thirtieth William Edwards,— Thomas Reyner:— Sheriffes. Maior,This Maior gave 1000  poore houshol∣ders in London. Sir, Godfrey Bullen, sonne to Geffrey Bullen of Salle in Norfolke. 1458 The seven and thirtieth Ralph Ioceline,— Richard Medham:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Thomas Scot, Draper, sonne to Robert Scot of Dorney in Buc∣kinghamshire. 1459 The eight and thirtieth Iohn Plummer,— Iohn Stocker:— Sheriffes. Maior,Now were the wofull battailes of Blore∣beath, Northhamp∣ton, Wake∣field, Saint Albanes, & Mortiners Crosse each ofter other. Sir William Hulin, Fishmon∣ger, sonne to Nicholas Hulin of Fulham in Middlesex. 1460 The nine and thirtieth Richard Fleming,— Iohn Lambert:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Leo, Grocer, sonne to Simon Lee, of the Citie of Wor∣cester. King Edward the fourth began his reigne the fourth of March, in the yeere 1460. after the account of the Church of England. 1461 The first George Ireland,— Iohn Locke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Hugh Witch, Mercer, son of Richard Witch, of Wice Malbano in Cheshire. 1462 The second William Hampton,— Bartholomew Iames:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Cooke, Draper, son of Robert Cooke of Lavenham in Suf∣folke. This Maior was made Knight of the Bath,This Maior was knight of the Bath and after Knighted in the field by the King. and had great troubles after. 1463 The third Robert Basset,— Thomas Muschamp:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Mathew Philip, Gold∣smith, sonne to Arnold Philip of the Ci∣tie of Norwich. 1464 The fourth Iohn Tate,— Iohn Stone:— Sheriffes.
Maior,Sir Ralph Ioceline, Knight of the Bath in the field. Sir Ralph Ioceline, Draper, sonne to Geffrey Ioceline, of Sabridge∣worth in Hertfordshire. 1465 The fifth Henry Weaver,Henry Wea∣ver, knight of the Bath being Sheriffe, Surmisted∣ly charged with Trea∣son.— William Constantine:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Ralph Varney, Mercer, son to Ralph Varney, borne in the Citie of London. 1466 The sixth Iohn Browne,— Henry Brice,— Iohn Darby:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Yong, Grocer, sonne of Thomas Young of the City of Bri∣stoll. This Maior was made Knight in the field: and this yeere began the trou∣bles of Sir Thomas Cooke, and of other Aldermen, as you may read more at large in my Summarie. 1467 The seventh Thomas Stalbrooke,— Humfrey Hoyford:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Oldgrave, Skin∣ner; sonne of William Oldgrave, of Knottysford in Cheshire. 1468 The eighth Simon Smith,— William Harriot:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Taylor, Grocer, sonne to Iohn Taylor of Ecclestone in Staffordshire. 1469 The nint Richard Gardner,— Robert Drope:— Sheriffes. Maior,King Hen∣rie the sixt delivered out of the Tower. Sir Richard a Lee, sonne to Iohn a Lee, of the City of Worcester. This yeere, the Tower of London being deli∣vered the Lord Maior, and his brethren the Aldermen, they deliverd, King Hen∣ry the sixt, who was kept there Priso∣ner. 1470 The tenth Iohn Crosby,— Iohn Ward:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Iohn Stockton, Mercer, sonne to Richard Stockton, of Bratoft in Lincolneshire. Thomas Nevil, the Ba∣stard Falconbridge, with a riotous com∣pany, The insur∣rection of the Bastard Faulcon∣bridge and his com∣plices. did this yeere set upon this Citie, at Aldgate, Bishops-gate, the Bridge, &c. And twelve Aldermen, with the Recor∣der were Knighted in the field, by Edw. the fourth, to wit, Iohn Stockton, Maior; Ralph Veruey, late Maior; Iohn Yong, late Maior; William Taylor, late Maior; Ri∣chard a Lee, late Maior; Mathew Phi∣lips, The most of these Knights were after∣ward made Maiors. late Maior, George Ireland; William Stocker; William Hampton; Thomas Stal∣brooke; Iohn Crosby; Bartholomew Iames; and Thomas Vrswike, Recorder. 1471 The eleventh Iohn Alen,— Iohn Shelley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Edwards, Grocer, sonne to William Edwards of the Parish of Hoton in Essex. The water-Con∣duit in Aldermanbury, and the Stan∣dard in Fleetstreete were this yeere fini∣shed. 1472 The twelfth Iohn Browne,— Thomas Bledlow:— Sheriffes. Maior,Mychen∣hampton. Sir William Hampton, Fish∣monger, sonne to Iohn Hampton of Min∣chen-hampton in Glocestershire.Punishmēt inflicted on strum∣pets and Vaga∣bonds. This Maior punished Strumpets, and caused stockes to be set up in every Ward, to punish Vagabonds. 1473 The thirteenth Sir William Stocker,— Robert Belisdon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Tate, Mercer, sonne of Iohn Tate,Serjeants and their yeomen appointed to the Sheriffes. borne in the Citie of Lon∣don. This yeere the Sheriffes of Lon∣don were appointed (each of them) to have sixteene Serjeants, & every Serje∣ant to have his Yeoman. Also six Clerkes, a Secondary, a Clerke of the Papers, and foure other Clerkes, besides the Vndersheriffes Clerkes. 1474 The fourteenth Edmond Shaa, or Shawe,— Thomas Hill:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Robert Drope, Draper,
sonne to Iohn Drope of Saint Edes in Huntingdonshire.This Maior increased the Water-Conduit in Corne-hill. 1475 The fifteenth Hugh Brice,— Robert Colwich:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Robert Basset, Salter, son to Robert Basset of Billerykey in Essex. 1476 The sixteenth Richard Rawson,— William Horne:— Sheriffes. Maior againe,He corre∣cted the Bakers & Victualers of this Ci∣tie. Sir Ralph Ioceline, Draper, Knight of the Bath, by whose diligence the wals of the Citie were re∣paired. 1477 The seventeenth Henry Collet,— Iohn Stocker:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Humfrey Heyford, Gold∣smith, sonne to Roger Heyford of Strat∣ford Bowe neere London. 1478 The eighteenth Robert Harding,Robert Bi∣field gave 50. li. to∣wards the water Cō∣duits.— Robert Bifield:— Sheriffes. Maior, Richard Gardener, Mercer, sonne of Iohn Gardener of Exning in Suffolke. 1479 The nineteenth Thomas Ilam,Tomas Il∣am newely builded the great Conduit in Cheape side.— Iohn Ward:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Bartholomew Iames, Dra∣per, sonne to Edward Iames of London, Vpholder. 1480 The twentieth Thomas, or William Daniel, William Bacon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Browne, otherwise called Iohn de Werks, Mercer, sonne of Iohn Browne of Okeham in Rutland-shire. 1481 The one and twentieth Robert Tae,— Richard Chawrey,— William Wiking:— Sheriffes.
Maior,New buil∣ding of Creplegate. Sir William Heriot, or Har∣riot, Draper, sonne to Iohn Heriot late of Segrave in the County of Leicester. 1482 The two and twentieth William White,— Iohn Mathew:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Edmond Shaa, or Shaw, Goldsmith, sonne to Iohn Shaa, late of Donkenfield, in the County of Chester. This Sir Edmond Shaa, caused the Po∣sterne called Creplegate to bee newly builded. King Edward the fift began his reigne the ninth of April, in the yeere 1483. Richard the third began his reigne the two and twentieth of Iune in the yeere 1483. 1483 The first Thomas Newland,— William Martia:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Robert Billesdon, Haber∣dasher, sonne to Alexander Billesdon, of Queeningborough in the County of Lei∣cester. 1484 The second Richard Chester,— Thomas Britaine,— Ralph Astrie:— Sheriffs. Maior,3 Lord Maiors, & three She∣riffes in one yeere, by reason of a swea∣ting sicke∣nesse. Sir Thomas Hill, Grocer: Sir William Stocker, Draper, and Iohn Ward, Grocer. Thomas Hill was sonne to Wil∣liam Hill of Hilston in the County of Kent. William Stoker was sonne to Tho∣mas Stocker of Eaton in the County of Bedford: and Iohn Ward was sonne to Richard Ward of Howdon in the Coun∣tie of Yorke. Thomas Hill appointed by his Testament, the water Conduit in Grasse-street to be builded this yeere. Henry the seventh began his reigne the two and twentieth of August in the yeere 1485. 1485 The first Iohn Tate,— Iohn Swan, or Swans:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Hugh Brice, Goldsmith, sonne to Richard Brice of Dublin in Ire∣land. This Hugh Brice was keeper of the Kings Mints at London. 1486 The second Iohn Percivol,— Hugh Clopton:— Sheriffes. Maior,This was father to him that builded Pauls Schoole. Sir Henry Collet, Mercer, son to Robert Collet of Wendover in the County of Buckingham. This yeere the Crosse in West Cheape was new buil∣ded in beautifull manner. 1487 The third Iohn Fenkel,— William Remington:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Florne, Saiter, sonne to Thomas Horne of Snaysewell in the County of Cambridge. This William was made Knight, in the field, by King Henry the seventh, and gave to the re∣pairing of high wayes betwixt London and Cambridge, five hundred Markes, and bountifully to the Preachers at Pauls Crosse. 1488 The fourth William Isaac,— Ralph Tinley or Tilney:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Robert Tate, Mercer, sonne to Thomas Tate of the Citie of Coven∣try. 1489 The fifth William Capell,— Iohn Brooke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William White, Draper, sonne to Williamwhite of Tickhill in the County of Yorke. 1490 The sixth Henry Cote, or Coote,— Robert Revell,— Hugh Pemberton:— Sheriffes. Maior,This man lived and dyed a Batchelor and never was Bat∣chelour Maior be∣fore. Iohn Mathew, Mercer, being first a Linnen Draper, and translated to the Mercers. He was sonne to Thomas Mathew of Sherington in the County of Buckingham,
1491 The seventh Thomas Wood,— VVilliam Browne:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Hugh Clopton, Mercer, sonne to Iohn Clopton of Stratford upon Avon in the County of Warwicke, where the said Hugh builded the goodly stone Bridge. 1492 The eighth William Purchase,— William Welbeck:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Martin, Skinner, sonne to Walter Martin of the County of Hertford. This yeere there was a ryot made upon the Easterlings, by the Mercers servants and others. d others. 1493 The ninth Robert Fabian,— Iohn Winger:— Sheriffes. Maior,This Maior was made Knight by King Hen∣ry the se∣venth. Sir Ralph Ostrich, or Astrie, Fishmonger, sonne to Geffrey Ostrich, or Astrie, of Hitchin in the County of Hertford. Robert Fabian, Alderman, made Fabians Chronicle, a very paine∣full labour, to the great honour of the City, and the whole Realme. 1494 The tenth Nicholas Alwin,— Iohn Warner:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Chawrie, Salter, sonne to William Chawrie, of Westram in Kent. 1495 The eleventh Thomas Kneesworth,— Henry Sommer:— Sheriffes. Maior againe,One man twice Lord Maior. Sir Henry Collet Mer∣cer. This yeere was much trouble, a∣bout the entercourse betweene England and Flanders. 1496 The twelfth Iohn Shaa,— Richard Haddon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Iohn Tate the yonger, sonne to Thomas Tate of Coventrie, and bro∣ther to Robert Tate, Maior before na∣med. The King made this Maior, Ro∣bert Shifield, Recorder, and both the Sheriffes Knights, for their service a∣gainst the Rebels at Blacke-Heath Field.
1497 The thirteenth Barthelomew Rede,— Thomas Windew or Windout: Sheriffes. Maior,The level∣ling of More-fields. William Purchase, Mercer, son to Iohn Purchase of Gamelinghey in the County of Cambridge. This yeere all the Gardens in More-fields were de∣stroyed, and made plaine ground. 1498 The fourteenth Thomas Bradbury,— Stephen — Sheriffes. Maior,Made Knight in the field by the King. Sir Iohn Percivall, Merchant-Taylor, sonne to Roger Percivall of Lon∣don. 1499 The fifteenth Iames Wilford,— Thomas, or Richard Brond:— Sheriffes. Maior,A good Maior for the poor. Sir Nicholas Aldwine, Mercer, sonne to Richard Aldwine of Spalding in Lincolneshire. Hee gave twelve pence a peece to three thousand poore people in London, and the like to as many more in and about Spalding. 1500 The sixteenth Iohn Hawes,— William Steed:— Sheriffes. Maior, William Rennington, Fish∣monger, sonne to Robert Rennington of Bostone in Lincolneshire. 1501 The seventeenth Lawrence Aylmer,— Henry Hede:— Sheriffes. Maior,The Lord Maiors first riding from the Guild hell to take Barge for Westminster. Sir Iohn Shaa, Goldsmith, son to I. Shaa of Rochford in Essex. This Maior was made Knight in the field by the King, and he caused his Brethren the Aldermen to ride from the Guild-hall to the waters side, when he tooke Barge to Westminster, where he was sworne by the Kings Councell. Hee first kept Court in his owne house, and called and redressed all matters comming be∣fore him. 1502 The eighteenth Henry Kebble,— Nicholas Nives:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Bartholomew Rede, Gold∣smith, sonne to Robert Rede of Crowmer in Norfolke. Thomas Granger. 1503 The nineteenth Christopher Hawes,— Robert Wats:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Capell, Draper, sonne of Iohn Capell of Stoke-Neyland,Hee was Knighted by Henry the se∣venth. in the County of Suffolke. This Maior first caused Cages to be set up in every Ward, for the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds. 1504 The twentieth Roger Acheley,— William Browne:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Winger, Grocer, sonne to William Winger of Leicester. 1505 The one and twentieth Richard Shoare,— Roger Grove:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Kneisworth, Fish∣monger, sonne to Iohn Kneisworth, of Kneisworth in Cambridgeshire. This Tho∣mas Kneisworth appointed the water-Conduit at Bishops-gate to be builded. 1506 The two and twentieth William Copinger,This Fitz-William, Merchant-Taylor, was after of councel to King Henry the eighth, He buil∣ded also the grea∣ter part of the Parish Church of Saint An∣drew Vn∣deraft In London.— Thomas Iohnson,— William Fitz-Williams:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer, sonne of William Haddon, Citizen and Mercer of London. 1507 The three and twentieth William Butler,— Iohn Kerkby:— Sheriffes. Maior, VVilliam Browne, Mercer, son of Iohn Browne, Citizen and Mercer of London, for part of the yeere; and Law∣rence Aylmer, Draper sonne of Thomas
Aylmer, of Ellesnam in Essex for the o∣ther part. 1508 The foure and twentieth Thomas Exmewe,— Richard Smith:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Stephen Iennings, Mer∣chant-Taylor, sonne to William Iennings of Woolnerhampton, in Staffordshire, where he builded a Free-School, which is still worthily maintained by the Company of Merchant-Taylors of London. King Henry the eighth began his reigne the two and twentieth of April, in the yeere 1509. 1509 The first George Monox,— Iohn Doget:— Sheriffes. Maior, Thomas Bradbury, Mercer, sonne to William Bradbury of Branghin in Hertfordshire, for part of the yeere, and Sir William Capell for the rest. 1510 The second Iohn Milborne,— Iohn Rest:— Sheriffes. Maior,He gave also 1000. li. to finish up his Pa∣rish church of Alder∣mary, with a steeple, not yet performed▪ Sir Henry Kebble, Grocer, sonne to George Kebble, Citizen and Grocer of London. He new builded the Parish Church of Aldermary by Watling-streete. 1511 The third Nicholas Shelton,— Thomas Mirsine:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Roger Acheley, Draper, son to Thomas Acheley, of Stanwardine in Shropshire.A carefull Magistrate for Corne. This Roger Acheley provi∣ded Corne for service of this Citie in great plenty, and caused the same to be stowed up in Leaden Hall, being called the Common Garner. 1512 The fourth Robert Holdernes, or Alder∣nes;— Robert Fenrother:— Sheriffes. Maior,This Copin∣ger gave halfe of his goods to his wife and the o∣ther hal to the poore that had most need▪ Sir William Copinger, Fish∣monger, sonne to Walter Copinger, of Buckfeill in Suffolke for part of the
yeere, and Sir Richard Haddon for the rest. 1513 The fifth Iohn Dawes,— Iohn Bruges,— Roger Basford:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Browne, Mercer, sonne to Iohn Browne, Citizen and Mer∣cer of London. Iohn Tate Mercer, this yeere builded the Church of Saint An∣thonies Hospitall in London. 1514 The sixth Iames Yarford,— Iohn Mundy:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir George Monox, Draper, borne in London, but his fathers name not remembred. 1515 The seventh Henry Warley,— Richard Grey,— William Baily:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Butler, Grocer, sonne to Richard Butler, of Bindenham in Bedfordshire. 1516 The eighth Thomas Seymer,— Iohn, or Richard Thurstone: Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Rest, Grocer, sonne to William Rest of Peterborough in North∣hamptonshire. 1517 The ninth Thomas Baldrie,— Ralph, or Richard Simons:— Sheriffes. Maior,He made the water Conduit at London wall by Moregate. Sir Thomas Exmewe, Gold∣smith, sonne to Richard Exmewe, of Ru∣thin in Flintshire. 1518 The tenth Iohn Allen,— Iames Spencer:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Mirfine, Skinner, sonne to George Mirfine of Ely in Cam∣bridgeshire.
1519 The eleventh Iohn Wilkinson,— Nicholas Partrich:— Sheriffes. Maior,Maiors Knighted by courte∣fie of the Kings. Sir Iames Yardford, Mercer, sonne to William Yardford of Kidwelley in Wales. From this time onward, the Maiors of London (for the most part) were Knighted by courtesie of the Kings, and not otherwise. 1520 The twelfth Iohn Skevington,— Iohn Kyme, alias Keble:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Brug, or Bruges, Dra∣per, sonne to Thomas Brug, or Bruges, of Dymmocke in Glocestershire. 1521 The thirteenth Iohn Breton, or Britaine,— Thomas Pargitor:— Sheriffes. Maior,He buil∣ded the Almeshou∣ses by To∣wer hill▪ Sir Iohn Milborne, Draper, sonne to Iohn Milborne of Long Melford in Suffolke. 1522 The fourteenth Iohn Rudstone,— Iohn Champneis:— Sheriffes. Maior,Not thir∣teen thou∣sand Pa∣rishes in England. then ap∣proved. Sir Iohn Mundy, Goldsmith, sonne to William Mundy of Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. 1523 The fifteenth Michaell English,— Nicholas Iennings:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Baldrie, Mercer, sonne to Richard Baldrie of Sow market in Suffol. 1524 The sixteenth Ralph Dodmere,— William Roche:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Baly, Draper, sonne to Iohn Baily of Thacksted in Essex. 1525 The seventeenth Iohn Caunton, or Calton,— Christopher Askew:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Iohn Allen, Mercer, sonne to Richard Allen of Thacksted in Essex. 1526 The eighteenth Stephen Peacocke,— Nicholas Lambert:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Seymer, Mercer, sonne to Iohn Seymer of London, Fish∣monger, who was sonne to Robert Sey∣mer of Walden in Essex. 1527 The nineteenth Iohn Hardy,— William Holleis:— Sheriffes. Maior,This yeere was the great swea∣ting sicke∣nesse. Sir Iames Spencer, Vintner, sonne to Robert Spencer of Congleton in Cheshire. 1528 The twentieth Ralph Warren,— Iohn Long:— Sheriffes. Maior,Testament in English translated by . Sir Iohn Rudstone, Draper, sonne to Robert Rudstone of Yorkeshire. 1529 The one and twentieth Michaell Dermer— Walter Champion:— Sheriffes. Maior,This Maior was tran∣slated frō the Brew∣ers to the Mercers. Sir Ralph Dodmer, Mercer, sonne to Henry Dodmer, of Pickering-Leigh in Yorkeshire. This yeere it was decreed that no man should be Maior of London more than one yeere. 1530 The two and twentieth William Dauntesey, or Dan∣cy,— Richard Champion: Sheriffes. Maior,The King first called Supreame head. Sir Thomas Pargitor, Salter, sonne to Iohn Pargitor, of Chippingnorton in Oxfordshire. 1531 The three and twentieth Richard Gresham,— Edward Altham:— Sheriffes.
Maior, Sir Nicholas Lambert, Gro∣cer, sonne to Edward Lambert of Wilton in Wiltshire. 1532 The foure and twentieth Richard Reynolds,— Iohn Martin,— Nicholas Pinchon,— Iohn Priest:— Sheriffes. Maior,This yeere was queen Elizabet's borne at Greenwich. Sir Stephen Peacock, Haber∣dasher, sonne to Stephen Peacock of the City of Dublin in Ireland. 1533 The five and twentieth William Forman,— Thomas Kitson:— Sheriffes. Maior,Oath ta∣ken to the succession. Sir Christopher Askew, Dra∣per, sonne to Iohn Askew of Edmonton in Middlesex. 1534 The six and twentieth Nicholas Leveson,— William Denham:— Sheriffes. Maior,The Popes power ex∣pelled out of England. Sir Iohn Champneis, Skinner, sonne to Robert Champneis, of Chew in Sommersetshire. 1535 The seven and twentieth Humfrey Monmouth,— Iohn Cotes:— Sheriffes. Maior,Serieants and their Yeomen put away by the Sheriffes. Sir Iohn Allen, Mercer, and made a Privie Counsellor to the King, for his great wisedome. The forenamed Sheriffes, Monmouth and Cotes, did put away twelve Sergeants & twelve Yeo∣men; but by a Court of Cōmon Coun∣cell, they were enforced to take them againe. 1536 The eight and twentieth Robert, or Richard Paget,— William Bowyer:— Sheriffes. Maior,The River of Thames over-fro∣zen. Sir Ralph Warren, Mercer, sonne to Thomas Warren Fuller, who was sonne to William Warren, of Fering in Essex. 1537 The nine and twentieth Iohn Gresham,— Thomas Lewin: Sheriffes.
Maior,The great Bible prin∣ted in En∣glish prin∣ted. Sir Richard Gresham, Mercer, sonne to Iohn Gresham of Holt, in Nor∣folke. 1538 The thirtieth William Wilkinson,— Nicholas Gibson:— Sheriffes. Maior,Suppressi∣on of Ab∣bies and religious houses. Sir William Forman, Haber∣dasher, son to William Forman, of Gains∣borough in Lincolneshire. 1539 The one and thirtieth Thomas Ferrer,— Thomas Huntlow:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Holleis, sonne to William Holleis, Citizen and Baker of London. 1540 The two and thirtieth William Laxstone,— Martin Bowes:— Sheriffes. Maior, in every  Church. Sir William Rche, Draper, sonne to Iohn Roche of Wixley in Yorke∣shire. 1541 The three and thirtieth Rowland Hill,— Henry Suckley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Michael Dormer, Mercer, sonne to Geffrey Dormer of Tame in Ox∣fordshire. 1542 The foure and thirtieth Henry Hobberthorne,— Henry Amcoates:— Sheriffes. Maior,The great Plague at London. Iohn Cotes, Salter, sonne to Thomas Cotes of Bearton in Buckingham∣shire. 1543 The five and thirtieth Iohn Tholouse,— Richard Dobbes:— Sheriffes.
Maior,Buen be∣sieged and yeelded. Sir William Bowyer, sonne to William Bowyer of Harston in Cambridge∣shire for one part, and Sir Ralph Warren Mercer, for the rest. 1544 The six and thirtieth Iohn Wilford,— Andrew Iud:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Laxton, Grocer, sonne to Iohn Laxton of Yongdell in Northamptonshire. 1545 The seven and thirtieth George Barne,— Ralph Allen, or Alley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Martin Bowes, Goldsmith, sonne to Thomas Bowes, an Inhabitant of the Citie of Yorke for many yeeres. 1546 The eight and thirtieth Richard Iarveis,— Thomas Curteis:— Sheriffes. Maior,The death of King Henry the Eight. Sir Henry Hobberthorne, Mer∣chant-Taylor, sonne to Christopher Hobberthorne of Waddingworth in Lin∣colneshire. King EDVVARD the sixth began his reigne the eight and twentieth day of Ianuary, in the yeere, 1546. 1547 The first Thomas White,— Robert Chertsey:— Sheriffes. Maior,2 Sonnes of one man Mai∣ors of Lon∣don each after o∣ther. Sir Iohn Gresham, Mercer, sonne to Iohn Gresham of Holt in Nor∣folke, and Brother to Sir Richard Gre∣sham, formerly Lord Maior. 1548 The second William Lock,— Sir Iohn Ayleph:— Sheriffes. Maior,A great death in London. Henry Amcoates, Fishmon∣ger,
sonne to William Amcoats, of Astrap in Lincolnshire. 1549 The third Iohn Yorke,— Richard Turke:— Sheriffes. Maior,Booke of Common Prayer in English. Sir Rowland Hill, Mercer, sonne to Thomas Hill of Hodnet in Shrop∣shire. 1550 The fourth Augustine Hind,— Iohn Lion:— Sheriffes. Maior,The se∣cond great Sweating Sicknesse. Sir andrew Iud, Skinner, sonne to Iohn Iud of Tonebridge in Kent. 1551 The fifth Iohn Lambert,— Iohn Cowper:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Richard Dobbes, Skinner, sonne to Robert Dobbes of Baitby in Yorkeshire. 1552 The sixth William Garret, or Gerrard, Iohn Mainard:— Sheriffes. Maior,The death of King Edward the sixth. Sir George Barne, Haberda∣sher, sonne to George Barne, Citizen and Haberdasher of London. Queene Marie began her reigne the sixth day of Iuly in the yeere 1553. 1553 The first Thomas Offley,— William Hewet:— Sheriffes. Maior,The boun∣ty of Sir Thomas White. Sir Thomas White, Merchant-Taylor, sonne to Thomas White of Rick∣mansworth in Hertfordshire., his rising and suppres∣sing. This Sir Thomas White founded Saint Iohn Bap∣tists Colledge in Oxford, and gave two thousand pound to the Citie of Bristol to purchase one hundred and twentie pound land yeerely. 1554 The second David Woodroffe,— William Chester:— Sheriffes.
Maior,Lady Iane beheaded▪ Sir Iohn Lyon, Grocer, sonne to Thomas Lyon of Peryfare in Middle∣sex. 1555 The third Thomas Lee, or Leigh,— Iohn Machel:— Sheriffes. Maior,Seven Al∣dermen in London dyed in lesse than 10 Months▪ Sir William Garret or Garrard, Haberdasher, sonne to Iohn Garret, Ci∣tizen and Grocer of London, who was sonne to William Garret of Seddingbourne in Kent. 1556 The fourth William Harper,— Iohn White:— Sheriffes. Maior,First ordai∣ning of the night Bel∣man. Sir Thomas Offley, Merchant-Taylor, sonne to William Offley of the City of Chester. 1557 The fifth Richard Mallory,— Iames Altham:— Sheriffes. Maior,Callis lost to the French. Sir Thomas Curteis, Fishmon∣ger, sonne to Iohn Curteis of Enfield in Middlese. Hee was free of the Pew∣terers, and translated to the Fishmon∣gers. 1558 The sixth Iohn Halsey,— Richard Champion:— Sheriffes. Maior,Death of Queene Mary. Sir Thomas Lee, or Leigh, Mer∣cer, sonne to Roger Lee of Willington in Shropshire. Queene ELIZABETH began her reigne, the seventeenth of No∣vember, in the yeere, 1558. 1559 The first Thomas Lodge,— Roger Martin: Sheriffes. Maior,Common Prayer in English, & Images pulled downe. Sir William Hwet, Cloth-worker,
worker, sonne to Edmund Hewet of Wales in Yorkeshire. 1560 The second Christopher Draper,— Thomas Rowe:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Chester, Draper, sonne to John Chester, Citizen and Dra∣per of London. This yeere the Mer∣chant-Taylors founded their notable Free-Schoole for poore mens chil∣dren, &c. 1561 The third Alexander Avenon,— Humfrey Baskervile:— Sheriffes. Maior,Pauls stee∣ple burned Iune 4. 1561. Sir William Harper, Merchant-Taylor, sonne to William Harper of the Towne of Bedford. 1562 The fourth William Allen,— Richard Chamberlaine,— Sheriffes. Maior,New-Ha∣ven yeel∣ded to the French. Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer, sonne to William Lodge of Cresset in Shropshire. 1563 The fifth Edward Bankes,— Rowland Heyward:— Sheriffes. Maior,The great Plague: No Maiors Feast by reason of the Plague The great frost and Thames o∣ver-frozen▪ Sir Iohn White, Grocer, sonne to Robert White of Farneham in Surrey. 1564 The sixth Edward Iackman,— Lionel Ducket:— Sheriffes. Maior,The Bursse builded by Sir Thomas  Sir Richard Mallory, Mercer, sonne to Anthony Mallory of Papwortha∣mus in Cambridgeshire. 1565 The seventh Iohn Rivers,— Iames Hawes:— Sheriffes. Maior,The birth of our Royal So∣veraigne King  Iune 9. 1566. Sir Richard Champion, Dra∣per, sonne to Richard Champion of Godil∣ming in Surrey.
1566 The eighth Richard Lambert,— Ambrose Nicholas,— Iohn Langley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Christopher Draper, Iron∣monger, sonne to Iohn Draper of Melton Mowbray in Leicestershire. 1567 The ninth Thomas Ramsey,— Iohn Bond:— Sheriffes. Maior,Downegate Conduit builded. Sir Roger Martin, Mercer, son to Lawrence Martin of Melford in Suf∣folke. 1568 The tenth Iohn Oleph,— Robert Harding,— Iames Bacon:— Sheriffes. Maior,The great Lottery at Pauls and the New Church-yard buil∣ded neere Bethlehem. Sir Thomas Rowe, Merchant-Taylor, sonne to Robert Rowe Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, who was sonne to Reynald Rowe of Lee in Kent. This yeere Sir Thomas Row enclosed a piece of ground by Moore-fields, with a Bricke wall, to be a place for buriall of the dead, to such Parishes in London as wanted Churchyards. 1569 The eleventh Henry Beecher,— William Dane:— Sheriffes. Maior,Rebellion of the Earles in the North. Sir Alexander Avenon, Iron∣monger, sonne to Robert Avenon, or Avenand of Kings-Norton in Worcester∣shire. 1570 The twelfth Francis Barneham,— William Boxe:— Sheriffes. Maior,Queene Elizabeth her com∣ming to the Royall Exchange. Sir Rowland Heyward Cloth∣worker, son to George Heyward of Bridge north in Shropshire. 1571 The thirteenth Henry Milles,— Iohn Branche:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Allen, Mercer,
sonne to William Allen, Citizen and Pa∣steller of London, who was sonne to Ri∣chard Allen of Stondon in Hertfordshire. 1572 The fourteenth Richard Pipe,— Nicholas Woodroffe:— Sheriffes. Maior,Duke of Norfolke beheaded, Iune 2. 1572. Sir Lionell Ducket, Mercer. 1573 The fifteenth Iames Harvey,— Tho. Pulloccell or Pullison:— Sheriffes. Maior,M. Saunders murdered: his wife, Browne, Mistris Drewry, & trusty Ro∣ger execu∣ted. Sir Iohn Rivers, Grocer, sonne to Richard Rivers of pensehurst in Kent. 1574 The sixteenth Thomas Blancke,— Anthony Gamage:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iames Hawes, Clothwor∣ker, sonne to Thomas Hawes, Citizen and Merchant of London, who was son to Iohn Hawes of Stoke-Newington in Middlesex. 1575 The seventeenth Edward Osborne,— Wolstane Dixie:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, sonne to Iohn Nicholas of Nedingworth in Huntingdonshire. 1576 The eighteenth William Kempton,— George Barne:— Sheriffes. Maior,Oldbourne. Conduit builded by by Master Lambe. Sir Iohn Langley, Goldsmith, sonne to Robert Langley of Althrope in Lincolneshire. 1577 The nineteenth Nicholas Backhouse,— Francis Bowyer:— Sheriffes. Maior,Strange sicknesse at Oxenford death of the Iud∣ges. Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, sonne to Iohn Ramsey of Flenbridge in Kent.
1578 The fourteenth George Bond,— Thomas Starle:— Sheriffes. Maior,The bla∣zing Star. The great deepe Snow. Sir Richard Pipe, Draper, son to Richard Pipe of Woolverhampton, in Staffordshire. He was free of the Leathersellers, and from them translated to the Dra∣pers. 1579 The one and twentieth Martin Calthrope,— Iohn Hart:— Sheriffes. Maior,The great and gene∣rall Earth∣quake, on Wednsday in Easter weeke the fir of A∣pril, 1580. Sir Nicholas Woodroffe, Ha∣berdasher, sonne to David Woodroffe, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, who was sonne to Iohn Woodroffe, or Woodrove, of the Parish of Vscombe, in Devonshire. 1580 The two twentieth Ralph Woodcocke,— John Allot:— Sheriffes. Maior,The bla∣ing starre  two one the ightly. Sir Iohn Branche, Draper, sonne to Iohn Branche, Citizen and Dra∣per of London, who was sonne to Iohn Branche of Laynham in Suffolke. 1581 The three and twentieth Richard Martin,— William Webbe:— Sheriffes. Maior,Mouesiers comming into Eng∣land, and his return. Sir Iames Harvey, Irohmon∣ger, sonne to William Harvey, of Cotwal∣ton in Staffordshire. 1582 The foure and twentieth William Rowe,— Iohn Haydon, deceased,— Cuthbert Buckle succeeded:— Sheriffes. Maior,Standard at Leaden-Hall for Thames-water. Sir Thomas Blanke, Haberda∣sher, sonne to Thomas Blanke, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, who was sonne to Thomas Blanke of Gilford in Surrey. 1583 The five and twentieth William Masham,—Desmonds head set on London-bridge. Iohn Spencer:— Sheriffes.Arden and Somerviles Treason. Maior, Sir Edward Osborne, Cloth∣worker
worker, son to Richard Osborne, of Ash∣ford in Kent. 1584 The six and twentieth Stephen Slany,— Henry Billingsley:— Sheriffes. Maior,W. Parries treason. E. of Nor∣thumberl. murdered himselfe in the Tower. Sir Thomas Pulloccill, or Pully∣son, Draper, sonne to William Pulloccill, of Footescray in Kent. 1585 The seven and twentieth Anthony Ratcliffe,— Henry Pranell:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Wolstane Dixie, Skinner, sonne to Thomas Dixie, of Catworth in Huntingdonshire. 1586 The eight and twentieth Robert House,Sir Philip Sidney his honoura∣ble Fune∣rall, Febr. 16. 1586.— William Elkin:Ludgate new buil∣ded by the Cities charge.— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir George Barne, Haberda∣sher, sonne to Sir George Barne, Knight, Citizen, Haberdasher, and Lord Maior of London; who was son also to George Barne, Citizen and Haberdasher of London. 1587 The nine and twentieth Thomas Skinner,— Iohn Catcher:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir George Bond, Haberda∣sher, sonne to Robert Bond, of Trull in Sommersetshire. 1588 The thirtieth Hugh Offley,The .— Richard Saltonstall:— Sheriffes. Maior,Queene Elizabeth her com∣ming to Pauls Ser∣mon. Sir Martin Calthrop, Draper, sonne to Martin Calthrop, Citizen and Draper of London: He served one part of the yeere, and Sir Richard Martin, Goldsmith, the other. 1589 The one and thirtieth Richard Gurney,— Stephen Some:— Sheriffes. Maior,Death of . Sir Iohn Hart, Grocer, sonne
to Ralph Hart, of Sproston-Court in York∣shire. 1590 The two and thirtieth Nicholas Mosley,— Robert Brooke:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Allot, Fishmonger, sonne to Richard Allot of Limbergh in Lincolnshire: He served one part of the yeere, and Sir Rowland Heyward the o∣ther. 1591 The three and thirtieth William Rider,— Benet, or Benedict Barnham— Sheriffes. Maior,The Thomas al∣most emp∣ty of water for two daies space. Sir William Webbe, Salter, sonne to Iohn Webbe, of Reading in Bark∣shire. 1592 The foure and thirtieth— Robert Taylor:— Sheriffes. Maior,No Bar∣tholomew Fayre at London. Sir William Rowe, Ironmon∣ger, sonne to Thomas Rowe of Penschurst in Kent. 1593 The five and thirtieth Paul Banning,— Peter Haughton:— Sheriffes. Maior,Doctor Lopez exe∣cuted at Teyborne. Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Vintner, sonne to Christopher Buckle, of Bourgh, in Westmerland: Hee served one part of the yeere, and Sir Richard Martin, Goldsmith, the other; which Sir Ri∣chard Martin was sonne to Thomas Mar∣tin, of Saffron Walden in Essex. 1594 The six and thirtieth Robert Lee,— Thomas Bennet:— Sheriffes. Maior,Vnrely youth ex∣ecuted on Tower-hill. Sir Iohn Spencer, Clothwor∣ker, sonne to Richard Spencer of Walding∣field in Suffolke. 1595 The seven and thirtieth Thomas Lowe,A Provost Marshall for London.— Leonard Hallyday:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Stephen Slany, Skinner, sonne to Iohn Slany, of Mitton, in Staf∣fordshire.
1596 The eight and thirtieth Iohn Wats,— Richard Godard:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir, Thomas Skinner, Cloth∣worker, sonne to Iohn Skinner, of Wal∣den in Essex. Hee served the one part of the yeere, and Sir Henry Billingsley, Haberdasher the other. This Sir Henry Billingsley was sonne to Roger Billingsley, of the City of Can∣terbury, in Kent. 1597 The nine and thirtieth Henry Row,— Iohn More:— Sheriffes. Maior,Lectures reading in Greshams College. Sir Richard Saltonstall, Skin∣ner, sonne to Gilbert Saltonstall, of Hal∣lyfax in Yorkshire. 1598 The fortieth Edward Holmedon,— Robert Hampson:— Sheriffes. Maior,Earle of Essex his going to∣wards Ire∣land. Sir Stephen Some, Grocer, sonne to Thomas Some, of Bradley in Suffolke. Hee was free of the Girdlers, and from them translated to the Grocers. 1599 The one and fortieth Humphrey Welde,— Roger Clerke:— Sheriffes. Maior,Earle of Essex re∣turned, & L.  sent in∣to Ireland. Sir Nicholas Mosley,Earle of Essex his ri∣sing, trou∣bles, and death. Cloth∣worker, sonne to Edward Mosley, of Hough in Lancashire. 1600 The two and fortieth Thomas Smith,— Thomas Cambell,— William Craven:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Rider, Haberda∣sher, sonne to Thomas Rider of Muckle∣stone in Staffordshire. 1601 The three and fortieth Henry Anderson,— William Glover:— Sheriffes.
Maior,Spaniards and Irish overcome in Ireland. Sir Iohn Garret, or Garrard, Haberdasher, son to Sir, William Garret, or Garrard, Knight, Lord Maior and Ha∣berdasher of London, son to Iohn Garret or Garrard, Citizen and Grocer of Lon∣don, who was sonne to William Garret, or Garrard, of Seddingborne, in Kent. 1602 The foure and fortieth Iames Pemberton,— Iohn Swinnerton:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Robert Lee, Merchant-Ta∣ler, sonne to Humphrey Lee of Bridge-North in Shropshire. King IAMES began his reigne the foure and twentieth of March in the yeere, 1602. 1603 The first Sir William Rumney,— Sir Thomas Middleton:— Sheriffes. Maior,This yeere died good Queene Elizabeth. Sir Thomas Bennet, Mercer, sonne to Thomas Bennet, of Willingford in Barkeshire. 1604 The second Sir Thomas Hayes, Knight, Sir Roger Iones Knight:— Sheriffes. Maior,Tearme , and  plague at London. Sir Thomas Low, Haberda∣sher, sonne to Simon Low, Citizen and Merchant-Tayler of London, who was sonne to Ralph Low, of London. 1605 The third Clement Scudamor, Knight, Sir Iohn Folles, Knight:— Sheriffes. Maior,The most happy dis∣covery and pre∣vention of the Gun∣powder Treasons. Sir Leonard Hollyday, Mar∣chant-Tayler, sonne to William Holly∣day of Redborough in Glocestershire. 1606 The fourth William Walthall,— Iohn Lemon:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Iohn Wats, Clothworker, sonne to Thomas Wats of Buntingford in Hertfordshire.
1607 The fifth Geffrey Elwes,— Nicholas Style:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Henry Rowe, Mercer, sonne to Sir Thomas Rowe, Knight, Lord Maior, Citizen and Merchant-Tayler of London. 1608 The sixth George Bolles,— Richard Farrington:— Sheriffes. Maior,This yeere Aldgate was fully finished. Sir Humfrey Weld, Grocer, sonne to Iohn Weld of Eaton in Cheshire. 1609 The seventh Sebastian Harvey,— William Cockaine:— Sheriffes. Maior,The Lord Maiors hews long left off, were now revived a∣gaine by order from the King. Sir Thomas Cambell, Jronmon∣ger, sonne to Robert Cambell, of Fulsam in Norfolke. 1610 The eighth Richard Pyat,— Francis Iones:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir William Cravon, Mer∣chant-Tayler, sonne to William Craven of Appletreewick in Yorkeshire. 1611 The ninth Edward Barkham,— George Smithes:— Sheriffes. Maior,This yeere died the Royall Prince Henry. Sir Iames Pemberton, Gold∣smith, sonne to Iames Premberton, of Ec∣clestone in Lancashire. 1612 The tenth Edward Rotherham,— Alexander Prescot:— Sheriffes. Maior,Marriage of the  to the Lady Eli∣zabeth. Sir Iohn Swinnerton, Mer∣chant-Tayler, sonne to Thomas Swin∣nerton, Citizen and Merchant-Tayler of London, who was sonne to Richard Swinnerton, of Oswestrey in Shropshire.
1613 The eleventh Thomas Bennet,— Henry Iaye:— Sheriffes. Maior,The new River brought to London frō Amwell. Sir Thomas Middleton, Gro∣cer, sonne to Richard Middleton, of Denbigh, in the County of Denbigh. 1614 The twelfth Peter Proby,— Martin Lumley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Thomas Hayes, Draper, sonne to Thomas Hayes of the City of Westminster. 1615 The thirteenth William Goare,— Iohn Goare:— Sheriffes. Maior,This yeere two bre∣then She∣riffes and the youn∣ger first chosen. Sir Iohn Iolles Draper, sonne to Thomas Ielles of Stratford-Bow in Middlesex.The Kings great iour∣ney to Scotland, and happy returne. 1616 The fourteenth Allen Cotten,— Cuthbert Hacket:— Sheriffes. Maior,This Maior was the se∣cond Bat∣chelor. Sir Iohn Leman, Fishmonger, sonne to Iohn Leman of Gillingham in Norfolke. 1617 The fifteenth William Hollyday,— Robert Iohnson:— Sheriffes. Maior, the right Honorable, George Bolles, Grocer, sonne of Thomas Bolles, of Newbold in the County of Leicester. 1618 The sixteenth Richard Hearne,— Hugh Hamersley:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Sebastian Harvey, Iro monger, he was sonne to Sir Iames H∣vey, Knight, Lord Maior of London, which was sonne to William Harvey, of Cot∣ton in Staffordshire.
1619 The seventeenth Richard Deane,— Iames Cambell:— Sheriffes. Maior,Doctor Abbot Lord Bi∣shop of London, translated and enstal∣led Arch∣bishop of Canterbury Aprill 9. Sir William Cockaine, Skinner, he was sonne to William Cockaine, sonne of Roger Cockaine of Baddesley in War∣wickeshire. 1620 The eighteenth Edward Allen,— Robert Ducie:— Sheriffes. Maior,The new River brought from Am∣well, was finished the twen∣tininth of September. Sir Francis Iones, Haberda∣sher, he was the sonne of Iohn Iones of Claverley in the County of Saloppe. 1621 The ninteenth George Whitmore,— Nicholas Rainton:— Sheriffes. Sir Edward Barkham, Draper, sonne of Edward Barkham, in the County of 1622 The twentieth Iohn Hodges,— Humfrey Hanford Knight:— Sheriffes. Maior,Prince Charles ha∣ving been in Spaine arrived in England the sixt of October. Sir Peter Proby, Grocer, com∣monly in the Countrey called Peter ap-Robin, his fathers name is not recorded, but is sayd to be borne neere Whitchurch in Shropshire. 1623 The one and twentieth Ralph Freeman,— Thomas Moulson:— Sheriffes. Maior,Our graci∣ous queen Mary lan∣ded at Do∣ver the 12. of Iune. Sir Martin Lumley, Draper, he was the sonne of Iames Lumley, of London. 1624 The two and twentieth Rowland Heilin,— Robert Parkhurst:— Sheriffes. Maior,King Iames died at Theobalds the 27. day of March. Sir Iohn Goare, Merchant-Taylor, hee was the sonne of Gerrard Goare, who was the sonne of Iohn Goare of London.
King Charles began his reigne the seven and twentieth of March, in the yeere, 1625. 1625 The first Thomas Westwray,— Ellis Crispe,— Iohn Poole,— Christopher Cletherowe:— Sheriffes. Maior, Sir Allen Cotton, Draper, hee was sonne to Ralph Cotton, of Whit∣church in the County of Salop. 1626 The second Edward Bromfield,— Richard Fenne:— Sheriffes. Maior,The Duke of Bucking∣ham made his voyage to the Isle of Ree neer Rhell. Sir Cuthbert Aket, alias Hac∣ket, Draper, hee was sonne of Thomas Aket, or Hacket, who was the sonne of Thomas Aket, or Hacket, of Dertford in Kent. 1627 The third Maurice Abbot,— Henry Garway:— Sheriffes. Maior,The death of Lambe called by divers Do∣ctor Lambe. Sir Hugh Hammersley, Haber∣dasher, The draw∣bridge also newly re∣paired. he was the sonne of Hugh Ham∣mersley, who was the sonne of Richard Hammersley, of the Towne and County of Stafford. 1628 The fourth Rowland Backhouse,— William Acton, Knight and Baronet:— Sheriffes. Maior,Iohn Felton for killing the Duke of Bucking∣ham, exe∣cuted and hanged in chaines. Sir Richard Deane, Skinner, he was sonne of George Deane, of Much∣dunmowe in Essex. 1629 The fifth Humfrey Smith,— Edmund Wright:— Sheriffes. Maior,The birth of Royall Prince Charles, May the 29 at S. Iames's neere Char∣ing Crosse. Sir Iames Cambell, Ironmon∣ger, hee was the sonne of Thomas Cam∣bell, who was sonne of Robert Cambel, of Fulsam in the County of Norfolke.
1630 The sixth Arthur Abdy,— Robert Cambell:— Sheriffes. Maior,Mervin Lord Aud∣ley, and arle of haven beheaded on Tower∣hill, May 14. Sir Robert Ducy, Merchant-Taylor, he was the sonne of Henry Ducy of London. 1631 The seventh Samuel Cranmer,— Henry Prat:— Sheriffes. Maior,The hou∣ses joining to the Ca∣thedrall Church of St. Paul began to be pulled downe. Sir George Whitmore, Haber∣dasher, hee was the sonne of William Whitmore, who was son to Richard Whit∣more, of the Parish of Charely in the County of Salop. 1632 The eighth Hugh Perry,— Henry Andrewes:— Sheriffes. Maior,The third part of London-Bridge bur∣ned. Sir Nicholas Raynton, Haber∣dasher, he was the son of Robert Rayn∣ton of Highinton in the County of Lin∣colne. 1633 The ninth Gilbert Harrison,— Richard Gurney:— Sheriffes. Maior, the right Honourable, Ralph Freeman, Clothworker, sonne of William Freeman of the Towne and County of Northampton. Thus much for the chiefe and principall Governours of this famous City; of whose publike Government, with the assistance of other inferiour Officers, their charges for preserving the Peace, service of the Prince, and Honour of this City, much might have beene said, and shall be hereafter discoursed more at large, when I have more spacious ground to walke in, and other helpes (thereto belonging) can more conveniently be had.
OF THE TWELVE HONOVRABLE COMPA∣NIES OF THIS ANCIENT AND Famous Citie; out of which the Lord Maior is to be chosen yeerely, because those of inferiour rancke, are not capable of such dignitie. MERCERS. THe Mercers were enabled to be a Company, and to purchase Lands, to the value of twenty pounds by the yeere, the seventeenth yeare of King Richard the second, Anno Dom. 1393.
GROCERS. GOD GRANT GRACE The Company of Grocers, in elder times called Pepperers: were first incorporated by the name of Grocers, in the twentieth yeere of King Edward the third, Anno Dom. 1345. The Armes antient, and supporters granted by Thomas Benote, Clarencieux, in the time of King Henry the eight, Helme and Crest, by William Harvey, Cla∣rencieux, Anno Dom. 1562.
DRAPERS. VNTO GOD ONLY BE HONER & GLORY. THe Company of Drapers were incorporated in the seven∣teenth yeere of King Henry the sixt, Anno Dom. 1430. The Armes first granted by Garter King of Armes: Crest and Suppor∣ters by William Harvy, Clarencieux, Anno Dom. 1561.
FISHMONGERS AL WORSHIP BE TO GOD ONLY THe Fishmongers were (at the first) two Companies, namely, Stockfishmongers, and Saltfishmongers; which Saltfishmongers, in the beginning of the Reigne of King Henry the eighth, Anno Dom. 1509. did beare their Armes as here is set downe. But lastly, in the 28. yeere of the same King, Anno Dom. 1536. the said Compa∣nies were vnited in one, and then their Armes more fully granted.
GOLDSMITHS. TO GOD ONLY. BE ALL GLORY THe Goldsmiths, were incorporated and confirmed in the six∣teenth yeere of King Richard the second, the Crest and Sup∣porters were granted by Robert Cooke, Clarencieux, Anno Dom. 1571.
SKINNERS. TO GOD ONLY. BE ALL GLORY. THe Company of Skinners were incorporated in the first yeere of King Edward the third, Anno Dom. 1327. And made a Bro∣therhood in the eighteenth yeere of King Richard the second. The Crest and Supporters were granted by William Haruy, who was free of the same Company, Anno Dom. 1561.
MERCHANT-TAILORS. CONCORDIA PARVA RES CRESCVNT. THe first Patent of these Armes, were granted by Sir Thomas Holne Knight, Clarencieux, King of Armes to the Company of Tailors and Linnen Armourers, in the one and twentieth yeere of King Edward the fourth, Anno Dom. 1480. And since then incorporated by King Henry the seventh, by the name of Merchant-Tailors, in the seventeenth yeere of his reigne, Anno Dom. 1501. The Crest and Supporters being granted by Robert Cooke, Clarencieux, Anno Dom. 1585.
HABERDASHERS. SERVE AND OBEY The Haberdashers, or Hurrers, (of old time so called) were in∣corporated a Brotherhood of Saint Katharine, in the six and twen∣tieth yeere of King Henry the sixth Anno Dom▪ 1447. And they were confirmed in the seventeenth yeere of King Henry the seventh, and named Merchant-Haberdashers. The Crest and Supportters were granted by Robert Cooke, Clarencioux, King of Armes. Anno Dom. 1571.
SALTERS. SAL SAPIT OMNIA THe Company of the Salters had their Armes first granted to them in the two and twentieth yeare of King Henry the eight, Anno Dom. 1530. by Thomas Benolt, Clarencieux. The Crest and Supporters by Robert Cooke, Clarencieux In the nine and twenti∣eth yeere of Queene Elizabeth, Anno Dom. 1587.
IRONMONGERS. THe Ironmongers were incorporated, in the third yeere of King Edward the fourth, Anno Dom. 1462. And their Armes first granted by Lancaster, King of Armes, Marshall to Clarencieux, King of Armes, Anno Dom. 1455. And the foure and thirtieth yeere of the reigne of King Henry the sixth.
VINTONNERS. THe Vintonners were incorporated in the Reigne of King Ed∣ward the third, by the name of Wine-Tonners, and confirmed in the fifteenth yeere of King Henry the sixt, Anno Dom. 1436. The Armes first granted by Clarencieux, in the sixth yeere of King Henry the sixt, Anno Dom. 1427.
CLOTHWORKERS MY TRVST IS IN GOD ALONE THe Clothworkers had their Armes first granted by Thomas Be∣nolt, Clarencieux, in the two and twentieth yeere of King Henry the eighth, Anno Dom. 1530. The Crest and Supporters granted by Robert Cooke, Clarencieux, King of Armes, Anno Dom. 1587.
NOW FOLLOW THE COMPANIES OF Merchants, and their seuerall Armes, so many as I could attaine vnto. MERCHANTS Of the Staple. GOD BE OVR FRIEND THe Company of Merchants, called of the Staple, incorpora∣ted by King Edward the third: in whose time they had their Staple of Wools at Callis.
Merchants Adventures. GOD BE OVR FRIEND THe Company of Merchants, called Merchants Adventures, were incorporated by King Edward the fourth: And had their Priviledges confirmed and enlarged by Queene Elizabeth.
Merchants of Russia. GOD BE OVR GOOD GVIDE THe Company of Merchants of Russia, who were incorpo∣rated by King Edward the sixth: and againe confirmed and augmented by Queene Elizabeth.
Merchants of Elbing. THe Company of Merchants of Elbing, they became incor∣porated by Queene Elizabeth.
Merchants of Levant, or Turkie Merchants. THe Company of Merchants of Levant, or (more com∣monly) termed Turkie Merchants, being first incorporated by Queene Elizabeth, were afterward confirmed and enlarged by our Soveraigne Lord King Iames.
Merchants of Spaine. THe Company of Merchants of Spaine, or more usually cal∣led Spanish Merchants, were incorporated by Queene Eli∣zabeth.
Merchants of East-India. DEVS-INDICAT DEO DVCENTE, NIL NOCET. THe Company of Merchants, called Merchants of East-India, were incorporated by Queene Elizabeth, Anno Dom. 1600.
New French Merchants Adventurers. REDDITE CVIQVE SVVM. A New Company of Merchant Adventures, but of their in∣corporating I am able to say nothing: but the Coat and Crest of their Armes were given and granted by Sir William Seger, Garter, and Master William Camden, Clarencieux, Kings of Armes, the thir∣teenth day of November, in the 14. yeere of King Iames, 1616.
The Company of French Merchants. THe Company now called of French Merchants: of their cre∣ating, incorporating, and Patents granting, no intelligence hath beene given me, and therefore I am the lesse able to speake of them: onely I heare them to be a Company of worthy Gentle∣men; and let that honest title at this time suffice them.
Merchants of Virginia. EN DAY VIRGINIA QVINTAM. THe Company of Merchants, called Merchants of Virginia, Bermudas, or Summer-Iands, for (as I heare) all these additi∣ons are given them. I know not the time of their incorporating, neither by whom their Armes, Supporters, and Crest were gran∣ted, and therefore am compelled to leaue them abruptly.
THE OTHER COMPANIES following the Twelve. DYERS. KIng Henry the sixt, late King of England, of famous memo∣ry, by his Highnesse Letters-Patents, or Charter of Incor∣poration, bearing date the sixteenth day of February, in the nine and fortieth yeere from the beginning of his Reigne; and in the first yeere of the redemption of his Royall power, did incor∣porate the Company of the Dyers in London, and so they have ever since continued.
BREWERS. THe Charter of the Brewers was granted by King Henry the sixth, and his Letters-Patents dated at Windsor, the two and twentieth of February, in the sixth yeere of his Reigne. Moreover, it was reconfirmed at Greenewich, Iuly the 13. and second yeere of Queene Elizabeth of blessed memory. LETHER SELLERS. THe Lethersellers being formerly a Society, or Brotherhood of long time, became incorporated in the sixth yeere of King Richard the second, and when Whittington was Lord Maior of London.
PEWTERERS. THe Pewterers were a Company, or Meeting of friendly and neighbourly men, in the time of King Edward the fourth; and in the thirteenth yeere of this King became incorporated, Ianu∣ary the 20. And from this King they have beene still confirmed by all Princes since: lastly, by King Iames. Barbers-Chirurgions. THe Barbers-Chirurgions, being a Company of no meane credit and estate, became a Brotherhood and Fellowship, incorpo∣rated by the Charter of King Edward the fourth; afterward by the Henries, the seventh and eighth, Philip and Mary, and Queene Eliza∣beth: last of all they were againe confirmed by King Iames, with other additions also: and all those former Charters have bin recon∣firmed (with larger additions) by our most gracious King Charles.
ARMOVRERS THe Society or Company of the Armourers, have beene a Bro∣therhood of ancient continuance, and became incorporated in the beginning of the reigne of King Henry the sixth: the King being pleased to stile himselfe a Brother of their Society. WHITE-BAKERS. THe Company of White-Bakers are of great Antiquity, as ap∣peareth by their Records, and divers other things of Anti∣quity, extant in their common Hall. They were a Compa∣ny of this City in the first yeere of Edward the second, and had a new Charter granted unto them in the first yeere of Henry the seventh; the which Charter was confirmed unto them by Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queene Mary, Queene Elizabeth, and King Iames.
VVax-Chandlers. THe Company of Wax-Chandlers, having beene a Brother∣hood of very ancient standing, and much used in the times of superstition, became yet to be incorporated in Anno, 1484. it being the second yeere of King Richard the third. Tallovv-Chandlers. THe company of the Tallow-Chandlers, were a Society of great antiquity, living in good formality among men, and loving agreement with themselves: they became to be incorpora∣ted in the second yeere of King Edward the fourth, and from him successively to King Iames.
CVTLERS. COncerning this Company of Cutlers, I finde them to be of great antiquity, and that they were incorporated in the beginning of the Reigne of King Henry the fifth, and afterward confirmed by King Henry the sixth, King Henry the eighth, King Philip and Queene Mary, famous Queene Elizabeth; and King Iames in his fifth yeere, the eighth day of February, fully confirmed all. GIRDLERS. I Finde the Company of the Girdlers not to be much behind-hand (with others) for eminency and antiquity, because they have held good correspondency with the world and with themselves: they became to bee incorporated the sixth day of August, in the seven and twentieth yeere of the Reigne of King Henry the sixth.
BVTCHERS. THe Butchers were incorporated by King Iames, under his Letters-Patents, bearing date the sixteenth day of Septem∣ber, in the third yeere of his Reigne of England, and of Scot∣land the nine and twentieth: they were incorporated by the name of Master, Wardens, and Comminalty of the Art or mystery of Butchers of the City of London, the Fraternity being very ancient. SADLERS. THe Company of Sadlers questionlesse declare themselves to be of great antiquity, as shewing their beginning in the times of these Kings following: Edward the first, Rich. the second, Henry the fourth, Edw. the second, Edw. the third, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, Edw. the fourth, rich. the third, Henry the seventh, Henry the eighth, Edw. the sixth, and since the first King above na∣med, the Craft of the Sadlers hath given Livery, and so have conti∣nued in their Livery by the space of 300 yeeres and more. What all the precedent Princes gave and granted, King Iames confirmed.
CARPENTERS. THe Company of the Carpenters, being a Society of ancient standing, were incorporated by Letters-Patents, bearing date the seventh day of Iuly, in the seventeenth yeere of the Reigne of King Edward the fourth; by the name of Master, Wardens, and Comminalty of the mystery of Freemen of the Carpentry of the City of London. CORDWAINERS. THe Company of Shoomakers or Cordwainers, as they stile themselves, have beene of long continuance, and were first incorporated in the seventeenth yeere of King Henry the sixth; be∣ing afterward confirmed by Philip and Queene Mary, in the fourth and fifth yeeres of their Reigne: then againe re-confirmed by Queene Elizabeth, in the fourth yeere of her Reigne: and lastly, by King Iames.
PAINTERS. THe Company of the Painters, having the addition of Painters-Stainers, for their skill and cunning in divers mysterious workes, have beene a Society of great antiquity from time to time, and were incorporated in Anno Dom. 1580. it being the three and twentieth yeere of Queene Elizabeth, &c. CVRRIERS. THe Company of Curryers, a Company of long continuance, and of good community amongst themselves, became incor∣porated in the third yeere of King Iames, the twelfth day of Iune.
MASONS. THe Company of Masons, being otherwise termed Free-Ma∣sons, of ancient standing and good reckoning, by meanes of af∣fable and kinde meetings divers times, and as a loving Brotherhood should use to doe, did frequent this mutuall assembly in the time of King Henry the fourth, in the twelfth yeere of his most gracious Reigne. PLVMBERS. THe Company of Plumbers, of large and very memorable antiquity, remaining a Fellowship or Brotherhood by the name of Plumbers. At length they attained to be incorporated by Letters-Patents, the eleventh or twelfth day of Aprill, in the ninth yeere of King IAMES of England, and of Scotland the foure and fortieth, &c.
INHOLDERS. THe Company of the Inholders, having beene a Community or Society of honest friendly men, by their often meeting and conversing together, as in those dayes it was a matter much obser∣ved: became to be incorporated in the sixth yeere of King Henry the eighth, and so renued from time to time. FOVNDERS. THe Company of Founders, no doubt of antiquity and long continuance in Brotherhood and Fellowship together, were incorporated the eighteenth day of September, in the twelfth yeere of the Reigne of King IAMES.
EMBROIDERERS. THe Company of the Embroiderers can make appeare by their worthy and famous pieces of Art, that they have beene of ancient use and eminence, as is to be seene in divers places at this day: but for the matter of their incorporating, it hath relation to the fourth yeere of Queene Elizabeth, &c. POVLTERS. THe Company of the Poulters were incorporated in the nine∣teenth yeere of King Henry the seventh, the three and twen∣tieth day of Ianuary, and renued againe in the thirtieth yeere of the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth, February the two and twentieth.
COOKES. THe Company of the Cookes, having beene a Fellowship or Brotherhood of antiquity, became to be incorporated in the twelfth yeere of the Reigne of King Edward the fourth, the ele∣venth day of Iuly: re-confirmed againe by Queene Elizabeth: and afterward by King Iames, in the thirteenth yeere of his Reigne, May the nineteenth day. COOPERS. THe Company of the Coopers, became to bee incorporated in the sixteenth yeere of the Reigne of King Henry the seventh, by the name of Master, Wardens, or Keepers of the Commi∣nalty of the Freemen of the mystery of Coopers in London, and the Suburbes of the same City.
Brick-layers and Tylers. THe Company of Tylers and Brick-layers, or Brick-layers and Tylers, notwithstanding their antiquity, were first incorpo∣rated in the tenth yeere of the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth, and confirmed againe in the second yeere of the Reigne of King Iames. BOWYERS. THe Company of Bowyers, in regard that the use of the long Bow hath added no meane honour to this Realme of England, making it famous in farre remote nations: they may well stand on a great priviledge of antiquity, yet their incorpora∣ting speakes but of the one and twentieth yeere of the Reigne of King Iames.
FLETCHERS. ALthough there is small reason of sundering Bowes from Ar∣rowes, or Arrowes from Bowes, yet because they have divi∣ded themselves into two severall Companies, let the fault be on their owne heads: for as I finde them, so I leave them. BLACK-SMITHES. THe Company of Smithes, or Black-Smithes, by which title you please to tearme them, being a very ancient Brotherhood or Fraternity of the City of London, were first incorporated by Queene Elizabeth, in the twentieth yeere of her Reigne, their Charter bearing ate the fifteenth of Aprill, &c. Afterward it was re∣confirmed by King Iames, in the second yeere of his Reigne, the one and twentieth day of March.
IOYNERS. THe Company of the Ioyners, called also Ioyners and Seelers, of ancient standing, and reputed to be a loving Society, were incorporated by Queene Elizabeth, in the thirteenth yeere of her Reigne. PLAISTERERS. THe Company of the Plaisterers, of larger antiquity then lea∣sure will admit to be delivered, of good and mutuall agree∣ment among themselves, like affable and loving Brethren, were incorporated in the time of King Henry the sevent, &c.
WEAVERS. THe Company of Weavers (not meaning them which are now called Silke-Weavers) were of very ancient note indeed; as ha∣ving three severall Societies of themselves, the Woollen-Cloth-Wea∣vers, the Arras-Weavers, and the Linnen-Weavers: all which I re∣ferre to a further relation. FRVITERERS. THe Company of the Fruiterers, being a very ancient Brother∣hood, and of long continuance, became to be first incorporated in the third yeere of the Reigne of King Iames, &c.
SCRIVENERS. THe Company of the Scriveners, an ancient and long conti∣nued Society, were incorporated the eight and twentieth day of Ianuary, in the fourteenth yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne Lord, King Iames. Bottle-makers and Horners. AS for Bottle-makers and Horne-makers, the precedent times have remembred them to be of Antiquity, and two distinct Companies combined in one: But I finde no Record that they were at any time incorporated.
STATIONERS. THe Company of the Stationers, of great antiquity, before the famous Art of Printing was invented or brought hither, as (for the most part) their then dwelling in Pater-noster Row, and the adjoyning parts can testifie. Their Charter of incorporation was granted the fourth day of May, in the third and fourth yeeres of King Philip and Queene Mary. MARBLERS. THe Company called by the name of Marblers, for their excel∣lent knowledge and skill in the Art of Insulpting personages for Tombes, Grave-stones, and Monuments in Churches, and else∣where in Religious places: their antiquity and what respect they have carried, is unknowne to me; nor can I finde them to bee in∣corporated, but hold some friendship with the Masons, and are thought to be esteemed among them in Fellowship.
WOOLL-PACKERS. THe Company of Wooll-packers I know not what to say of them, because it seemes that there were such men in the Haunse dayes, when the Wooll-Staple flourished, and that our Wooll-Merchants had their eminency. Further, I cannot speake of them, but leave them and their Armes to your consi∣deration. FARRIERS. THe Company of the Farriers. My relation concerning them, must needs be answerable to their owne allegation. Henry de Ferraris, or Ferrers, a Norman borne, came over with Willi∣am the Conquerour, who gave vnto the said Henry de Ferraris (as being his Farrier, or Master of his horse) the Honor of Tutbury, in the County of Stafford, which was the first Honor given to the Ferrars in England.
PAVIOVRS. THe Company of the Paviours, no doubt have beene a Com∣pany of antiquity, and maintained a Community or Brother∣hood among themselves; but for incorporation, no Record doth testifie it to me, and therefore I have the lesse to say of them. LORINORS. THe Company of the Lorinors, or Lorimers, which they please to accept, I have received a note from themselves, that the se∣cond day of October, and fourth yeere of King Henry the se∣venth, the Wardens of the Art of Lorimers came into the Court of our Lord the King, in the Chamber of Guild-hall, in the City of London, before Sir William Horne Knight, then Lord Maior, and Aldermen of the said City, preferring then and there a Bill or Sup∣plication to the Maior and Aldermen. And this is all that I can finde remembred of them.
BROWN-BAKERS. THe Company of the Brown-Bakers, a Society of long stand∣ing and continuance, prevailed to have their incorporating granted the ninth day of Iune, in the nineteenth yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Iames. WOOD-MONGERS. THe Company of the Wood-mongers, being a very ancient Fel∣lowship, and of good and amiable agreement together for long time, became to be incorporated the nine and twentieth day of August, in the third yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Iames.
VPHOLSTERS. THe Company of the Vpholsters, or Vpholders, were in elder times of good reckoning and esteeme, and had a Brother∣hood or Fellowship among themselves, but concerning their incorporating I finde it not recorded. TVRNERS. THe Company of the Turners had long continued a loving Fellowship or Brotherhood among themselves, to the good president and example of others: they became incorporated in the second yeere of King Iames.
GLASIERS. THe Company called of the Glasiers, have beene a Society of ancient memory, and maintained a league of Brotherly affe∣ction together; but because I am able to say nothing of their in∣corporating, I am the more willing to passe them over. CLEARKES. THe Company of the Clearkes, commonly tearmed Parish-Clearkes, I finde to bee very ancient in continuance, and stand registred in the Bookes of Guild-hall; they became first to bee in∣corporated in the seventeenth yeere of King Henry the third, and followed on still in all the Princes Reignes, to the ninth yeere of our Soveraigne Lord King Iames.
WATERMEN. THe Company of the Watermen, that have their maintenance by rowing in Boats on the River of Thames, being a Brotherhood under the power and command of the Lord Maior of London, I leave them for this time. APOTHECARIES. THe Company of the Apothecaries, that have divided themselves from the Ancient Society of Grocers, grew so highly favoured by our Sove∣raigne Lord, King Iames, that (as I have heard) he called them his Com∣pany; and granted them order for incorporation the sixth day of December, in the fifteenth yeere of his Highnesse Reigne. SILKE-THROVVERS. THis Company of Silke-throwers, having gained their Trade of Silke-throwing from the Strangers, since Anno quinto of Queene Elizabeth, and being for the most part Free men of this City, were made a Fellowship of this City 4. die Iunii, Anno 19. of King Iames, Sir Francis Iones, Knight, be∣ing then Lord Maior. And 23. die Aprilis Anne quinte Caroli Regis, they were in∣corporated by the name of the Master, Wardens, Assistants and Commonalty of the Trade, Art, or Mystery of Silke-throwers of the City of London.
LONDON. DOMINE DIRIGE NOS THus our most Noble, Ancient, and famous Mother, LONDON, (the Queene or Empresse of all Cities in this West part of the World) having, like an Amazonian Virago, led forth her warlike City-Sonnes into their Fields of Honour, without her Walls, to take an ample view of her Armes, Furni∣ture, and other warlike Embellishments, such as beseemed their worth, and her dignity; like a valiant Captaine, that takes it to be his honour, of abiding last in the field, and marshalling them home before her into her walled City, followes after them her selfe, in her owne Armes and brave Accoutrements.
The names of the Wards, and their Aldermen, as they now are. THere are in this City (according to the number of the Wards) six and twenty Aldermen: wher∣of, yeerely on the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angell, one of those Aldermen is elected to bee Maior for the yeere following: He is to begin and take place on the eight and twentieth day of October then next fol∣lowing. The other Aldermen his Brethren are to him Assistants in Councels and Courts, &c. As the Wards are formerly set downe, according to the order of their beginning Eastward: so I thought it fet to set downe those Aldermens names that have the instant government and direction of them: wherein let no ex∣ception be taken, although Aldermen (not knighted) are named as their Wards successively follow, because this observation is done but onely for or∣ders sake. Wards on the East side of VValbrooke. WARDS. ALDERMEN. 1 Portsoken. Alderman Parkhurst. 2 Aldgate. Alderman Rainton. 3 Tower-streete. Sir Hugh Hammersley. 4 Limestreet. Sir Iames Cambell. 5 Bishopsgate. Alderman Bacchus. 6 Broadstreet. Alderman Moulson. 7 Cornehill. Alderman Freeman. 8 Langborne. Sir George Whitmore. 9 Billingsgate. Alderman Cletherow. 10 Bridge within. Alderman Poole. 11 Candlewickstreet. Sir Richard Deane. 12 Walbrooke. Sir Iohn Goare. 13 Downegate. Alderman Bromfield.
14 Vintry. Alderman Garaway. 15 Cordwainerstreet. Alderman Wright. 16 Cheape. Sir Edward Barkham. 17 Colemanstreet. Sir Maurice Abbot. 18 Basing-Hall. Sir Robert Ducie. 19 Creplegate. Alderman Cranmer. 20 Aldersgate. Sir William Acton. 21 Faringdon within. Alderman Smith. 22 Breadstreet. Sir Martin Lumley. 23 Queene Hithe. Alderman Perry. 24 Castle Baynard. Alderman Venne, 25 Faringdon without. Alderman Cambell. 26 Bridge without. Alderman Abdy. Thus these Wards have (from time to time) held, and still doe their severall Aldermen, till either death, or occasion of remove, do make an alteration of them in their Aldermen. As for an ex∣ample, since the last Impression of this Booke, which is with∣in the compasse of fifteene yeeres, of all the Aldermen that then were living, there remaine no more then three at this instant. MOre, there is a Recorder of London, a grave and learned Lawyer, skilfull in the Customes of this City, also assistant to the Lord Maior: hee taketh place in Councels and in Courts before any man that hath not beene Maior, and learnedly delive∣reth the Sentence of the whole Court. THe Sheriffes of London (of old time) chosen out of the Com∣minalty, Commoners, and oftentimes never came to bee Aldermen; as many Aldermen were never Sheriffes, and yet advanced to be Maiors. But of later time, (by occasion) the She∣riffes have beene made Aldermen, before, or presently after their Election. Nicholas Faringdon was never Sheriffe, yet foure times Maior of this City, and so of other; which reprooveth a by-word, Such a one will be Maior, before he be Sheriffe, &c.
These Gentlemen beare Offices of especiall respect in the City. MAster Chamberlain of London, Master Common Sergeant. Master Town-Clarke, or Com∣mon Clarke. The Coroner of London. Officers belonging to the Lord Maiors house, according as they were first published by Master STOWE. SWord-bearer. Common Hunt. Common Crier. Water-Bayliffe. Esquires 4. Coroner of London. Sergeant Carvers. 3. Sergeants of the Chamber. 3. Sergeant of the Chanell. Yeoman of the Chanell. Yeomen of the water side. 4. Vnder-Water-Bayliffe. Yeomen of the Chamber. 2. Meale-weighers. 3. Yeomen of the Wood-wharfes. 2. The Sword-bearers man. Common Hunts men. 2. Common Criers man. Water-Bayliffes men. 2. The Carvers man. Gentle∣mens men, seven. Whereof nine of these have Live∣ries of the L. Maior, viz. The Sword-bearer and his man, the three Carvers, and the foure Yeomen of the Water-side. All the rest have their Liveries from the Chamber of London. Thus farre after my notes delivered by an Officer of the Lord Maiors house, but unperfect: for I remember a Crow∣ner, an Vnder-Chamberlaine, and foure Clarkes of the Maiors Court, and others. According to a TABLE hanging in the ancient Councell Chamber, and their dayes of waiting. MAster Sword-bearer, to waite dayly. Master Common Hunt, to wait Mundaies, Wednesdays, Fry∣dayes and Saturdayes. Master Common Crier, to wait Tuesdayes, Thursdayes, Frydayes, and Saturdayes. Master Water-Bayliffe, to wait Mun∣dayes, Tuesdayes, Wednesdayes and Thursdayes. The three Sergeant Carvers, to wait weekly, all excuses set apart. The three Sergeants of the Cham∣ber likewise, to wait weekely, without any excuse. The Sergeant of the Chanell, to wait dayly. The two Yeomen of the Chamber, one of them to wait dayly at dinner, to Vsher the Hall. The foure Yeomen of the Waters side, two of them to wait weekely, and not to be absent. The Yeomen of the Chanell, to wait dayly. The Vnder-Water-Bayliffe, to wait on Holydayes and Court dayes, if hee goe not up the River. The six young men, to wait dayly. The three Meale-Weighers, to wait on Holydayes, and Court dayes. The two Yeomen of the Wood-Wharfe, to wait on generall dayes. The Forraigne-Taker, to wait like∣wise on generall dayes. The Sheriffes of London, their Officers. THe Sheriffes of London, in the yeere 1471. were appointed each of them to have sixteene Ser∣geants,
every Sergeant to have his Yeo∣man. And six Clarkes, to wit, a Se∣condary, a Clarke of the Papers, and foure other Clarkes, besides the Vnder-Sheriffes Clarkes, their Stewards, But∣lers, Porters, and other in houshold many. Of the Maiors and She∣riffes Liveries somewhat. TO follow president of former time, the Clarks of Companies were to enquire for them of their Companies, that would have the Maiors Livery, their money (as a be∣nevolence given) which must be twen∣ty shillings at the least put in a purse, with their names that gave it, and the Wardens to deliver it to the Maior by the first of December. For the which, every man had then sent him foure yards of broad Cloth, rowed or stri∣ped thwart with a different colour, to make him a Gowne, and these were called Rey Gownes, which was then the Livery of the Maior, and also of the Sheriffes; but each differing from others in the colours. Of older times I read, that the Offi∣cers of this City ware Gownes of party colours, as the right side of one colour, and the left side of another: as for ex∣ample; I reade in Bookes of accounts in the Guild-Hall, that in the nineteenth yeere of Henry the sixth, there was bought for an Officers Gown two yards of Cloth, coloured Mustard-villars (a colour now out of use) and two yards of Cloth coloured blue, price two shil∣lings the yard, in all eight shillings. More, payed to Iohn Pope, Draper, for two Gowne clothes, eight yards of two colours eux ambo deux de Rouge (or red) Medley Brune and Porre (or Purple) co∣lour, price, the yard two shillings. These Gownes were for Piers Rider, and Iohn Buckles, Clarkes of the Chamber. More, I reade, that in the yeere 1516. in the 7. of Henry the 8. it was agreed by a Common Councell in the Guild-Hall, that the Sheriffes of London should (as they had beene accustomed) give yeerely Reyed Gownes to the Recor∣der, Chamberlaine, Common Serge∣ant, and Common Clarke, the Sword-bearer, Common Hunt, Water-Bayly, Common Cryer, like as to their owne Officers, &c. 1525. More, in the sixteenth of Hen∣ry the eighth, Sir William Bayly then being Maior, made a request, for that clothes of Ray (as hee alleaged) were evill wrought, his Officers might bee permitted (contrary to custome) for that yeere to weare Gownes of one co∣lour, to the which (in a common Coun∣cell) one answered and said, Yea, it might be permitted: and no man said nay, and so it passed. Thus much for party-coloured, and Ray Gownes have I read. But for benevolence to the Maior, I finde that of later time, each man giving forty shillings towards his charges, received foure yards of broad Cloth to make him a Gowne: for Sir Thomas White performed it in the first yeere of Queene Mary, but Sir Tho∣mas Lodge gave (in stead of foure yards of broad Cloth) three yards of Satten to make them Dubblets, and since that, the three yards of Satten is now tur∣ned into a silver Spoone, and so it hath held. The order observed by the Lord Maior, the Aldermen, and Sheriffes for their meetings, and wearing of their Apparell through∣out the whole yeere. Vpon Midsummer day, for the election of the Sheriffes of LONDON, &c. THe Lord Maior and the Alder∣men (with the Sheriffes) meet at the Guild-Hall,Their morning meeting at the Guild-Hall. at eight of the clocke in the morning, apparelled in their violet coloured Gownes lined, and their Cloakes of Scarlet lined, but without their horses.
And when they have beene together in the Councell Chamber a certaine time, concerning the nomination of certaine persons to bee elected: the Lord Maior and the Aldermen come forth, and put on their Cloakes in the Orphanes Court, and then goe downe in order to the Hustings Court,What is done in the Hust∣ings Court after the Speech of Master Re∣corder. where being set, Master Recorder ariseth, and standing forth before the Bench and Companies, for the same cause there assembled; having done his obeisance first to the Court, and then to them all: he declareth unto them, the reason why they are thus there assembled together: Shewing unto them, that it is for the e∣lection of one of the Sheriffs of London, and the Sheriffe of Middlesex for the yeere next ensuing: As also the confir∣mation of the other Sheriffe, nomina∣ted by the Lord Maior according to his prerogative. Then afterward, is the choice and election of Master Cham∣berlaine of London, and of other Offi∣cers. But first, the Lord Maior and Alder∣men go up into the Lord Maiors Court, The na∣ming and chusing of the She∣riffe by voyce and hands. and there remaine, untill the Sheriffe be named and chosen, the doore being fast shut to them all the while. Then the Sheriffes, Master Cham∣berlaine, Master Common Sergeant, Master Towne-Clarke, and the Coun∣cellors of the City, and other Officers, continue still in the Hustings Court, to take and receive the name of him, that shall seeme (by their judgements) free∣ly, and without consent to be nomina∣ted and elected, and justly tryed out, not only by voyce, but also by hands, to be Sheriffe for the yeere following. Then the Commons goe to the ele∣ction of Master Chamberlaine;The electi∣on of Ma∣ster Cham∣berlaine. and other Officers. the two Bridge-Masters; the Auditors of the City and Bridge-house accounts; and the Surveyors for Beere and Ale, according to the accustomed manner. That done, the Sheriffes, Master Chamberlaine, Master Common Ser∣geant, Master Towne-Clarke, the Councellors of the City,The certi∣fying of the She∣riffes choice. the two Se∣condaries of the Compters, and the Wardens of the head or chiefe Com∣panies (Master Common Cryer going before them, bearing his Mace) thus they carry up the report to the Lord Maior and Aldermen, concerning what they have done in their election. Which report being received, the Lord Maior and Aldermen came down againe to the Hustings Court.Their comming downe a∣gaine to confirme the Electi∣on. And there being in order set and placed, Master Recorder standeth up againe, as he did before, and maketh rehearsall of the names of those persons, whom they have nominated and chosen. Then hee demandeth of them, whether it bee their free election, yea or no? Which they confirming to be their free choice, Master Recorder giueth them thankes: And so they arise, and all depart thence home. On BARTHOLOMEVV Eve, for the Fayre in Smithfield. THE Aldermen meete the Lord Maior and the Sheriffes at the Guild-hall Chappell,Meeting at the Guild-Hall Chap∣pell. at two of the clocke after dinner, having on their violet Gownes lined, and their horses, but without their cloakes, and there they heare Evening Prayer. Which being done, they mount on their horses, and riding to Newgate, passe forth of the Gate.A Procla∣mation in the Cloth-Fayre. Then entring into the Cloth-Fayre, there they make a Proclamation, which Proclamation being ended, they ride thorow the Cloth-Fayre, and so returne backe a∣gaine thorow the Church-yard of great Saint Bartholomewes to Aldersgate: And then ride home againe to the Lord Ma∣iors House. On BARTHOLOMEVV day, for the Wrastling. SO many Aldermen as doe dine with the Lord Maior,The mee∣ting at the Lord Ma∣iors house on Bartho∣lomew day. and the Sheriffes, are apparelled in their Scarlet Gownes lined; and after din∣ner, their horses are brought to them where they dined. And those Alder∣men which dine with the Sheriffes, ride with them to the Lord Maiors house for accompanying him to the Wrast∣ling. When as the Wrastling is
done, they mount their horses, and ride backe againe thorow the Fayre, and so in at Aldersgate, and then home againe to the Lord Maiors house. The next day (if it be not Sunday) is appointed for the Shooting,The Shoo∣ting day. and the service performed as upon Bartholomew day: but if it bee Sunday, the Sabbath day, it is referred to the Munday then following. For the day of our LADY Fayre in Southwarke. THE Lord Maior and the She∣riffes ride to S. Magnus Church in their Scarlet Gownes lined,The Lord Maior weareth his Collar of Esses, without Hood, and the Sword beater weareth the em∣broiderd Cap, and carryeth the Pearle Sword. without their cloaks, after dinner at two of the clocke; and there the Aldermen meet the L. Maior: when evening Pray∣er is ended, they ride thorow the Faire, till they come unto St. Grorges Church, and then ride further to Newington Bridge, or to St. Thomas of Waterings to the Stones that point out the Liber∣ties of the City (if it bee so their plea∣sures) and they then returne backe a∣gaine unto the Bridge-house, where they refresh themselves with a Ban∣quet. Then returning over the Bridge, the Aldermen take their leave of the Lord Maior, and depart the next way every one unto his own house. After all this is done, & the Lord Maior brought home: his Officers have a supper pro∣vided for them by the Bridge-Masters. For swearing the Sheriffes upon Michaelmas Eve. WHat day soever it falleth on,Their me∣ting at the Sheriffes houses. so many of the Alder∣men as are bidden to din∣ner at either of the Sheriffes houses, come thither first to breakefast, or else to drinke, at eight of the clocke in the morning, in their violet coloured Gownes furred, and their violet cloaks, which are brought with them, without their horses. But if the Sheriffe bee an Alderman; then they must put on their Cloakes, and the Sheriffe likewise his Cloake:If the She∣riffe be an Alderman, or not. and so hee goes on to the Guild-Hall, betweene two Aldermen wearing their gray Cloakes. But if the Sheriffe be no Alderman: then hee is to come thither betweene two of the Aldermen without Cloakes, and the Sheriffe wearing his Livery Gowne and Hood. After he is sworne, then he is to put on his violet Gown and Cloak and his Chaine thereon. All which be∣ing done, the Aldermen are to bring him home to his dwelling place to din∣ner, wearing their cloakes: and after dinner, they may take their plea∣sure. Vpon Michaelmas day, for the election of the Lord Maior. ALL the Aldermen meet the Lord Maior and the Sheriffes,Their meeting at Guild-Hall in the morning by eight of the clocke. at eight of the clocke in the mor∣ning at the Guild-Hall, wearing their Scarlet Gownes and Cloakes furred, ri∣ding on their horses. And after they have beene a certaine time together in the Councell Chamber; they come forth into the Orphans Court, where putting on their Cloakes, they goe in order to the Chappell, there to heare Service and a Sermon: where also the Lord Maior (with certaine Aldermen) receive the Communion. After that the Communion is ended, and they have delivered their Offrings,The man∣ner of pro∣ceeding to the electi∣on of the L. Maior. they returne backe into the Councell Chamber, and pausing there a while, they come to the place where the court of Hustings is kept. Being there set in Recorder ariseth up, and making his obeisance first to the Lord after to the Commons, he unto them, that the manner custome is well knowne as also the reason of their and thus meeting together of Companies in London, which is, for the election of the Lord Maior for the yeere ensuing:From the time of King Ri∣chard the first, to this instant yeere. declaring unto them divers grants from the Kings rogenitors, for this their election from time to time. That done, the Lord Maior and the Aldermen goe up again
into the Lord Maiors Court: and there remain (the doors fast shut unto them) untill the election shall be brought un∣to them. Then standeth up Master Common Sergeant, having the Sheriffes standing on either side of him; and by the She∣riffes, Master Chamberlaine, Master Towne-Clarke, the two Secondaries of the Compters, and the Councellors of the Citty, in the said Hustings Court before the Commons. At that time, the said Common Sergeant maketh a briefe rehearsall of those former presi∣dents which Master Recorder had be∣fore delivered to them, saying; There remained no more now for him to say, but onely to put them in remembrance in what order and sort they should car∣ry themselves in their election.Advice gi∣ven them what they are to doe in their e∣lection. As namely, how they are to nominate and chuse two: of the which two, the Lord Maior and the Aldermen must confirm one. Those two being nominated, e∣lected and chosen; Master Common Sergeant, the Sheriffes (with the rest before-named) and certain of the prime Wardens of the chiefe Companies, go up to the Lord Maior and Aldermen, and there present the names of those two men, which the Commons have nominated in their election. Then the Lord Maior and the Al∣dermen proceed by Scrutiny,One of the two nomi∣nated per∣sons is e∣lected by Scrutiny. to elect one of those two persons, which the said Commons had before nominated. Then commeth downe the Lord Maior againe to the Hustings Court, and hee (whom they have chosen) goeth on his left hand; and so the Lord Maior and Aldermen sit downe againe in order. But hee who is chosen, sitteth next unto the Lord Maior on his left hand. Then standeth up Master Recorder, and rea∣deth unto them the names of such per∣sons whom they have nominated and chosen. Of which, the Lord Maior and the Aldermen have admitted one, whose name is N. demanding of them, whether it be their free election,The free∣dome of the par∣ties electi∣on. or no. Then the Commons affirming it to bee their free choice: the Sword-bearer steppeth to him, and taketh off his Tip∣pet, which he hath for his labour, and putteth on his Chaine. And the Mai∣or so lately elected, standing upon the Hustings Court,The brea∣king up of the Court. given them thankes, &c. which being done, the old Maior doth likewise give them thankes, &c. Then they arise up, putting off their cloakes, and the Lord Maior hath the Lord Elect riding with him, to the el∣dest Sheriffes to dinner. For presenting the Lord Maior Elect to the Lord Chan∣cellor, or Keeper. THen after dinner,How the Lord E∣lect goeth attended to his pre∣senting. the Lord E∣lect goeth to the Lord Chancel∣lor, if he be at home at his place or neere unto it, attended with five or sixe of the Aldermen, and Master Re∣corder also with him, they wearing their violet Gownes, passing either by land or by water, according as fitteth with conueniencie of the Lord Chan∣cellors dwelling place. The Common Hunt, with the extraordinary Officers, and those that be at liberty, doe also at∣tend on him. The morrow after Micha∣elmas day, for the new Sheriffes going to Westminster to bee sworne there. ALL the Aldermen are to meet at the two new Sheriffes houses in the morning at eight of the clocke,Meeting at the two new She∣riffes hou∣ses in the morning. wearing their violet Gownes furred, without their cloakes, yet ha∣ving their horses there ready. But the Lord Maior, Master Recorder, and the two Sheriffes, must weare their Scarlet Gownes furred, and their cloakes carri∣ed with them to Westminster. First, they ride to them Guild-Hall, and from thence to the Vinetree, and there taking Barge, land at Westminster-Bridge, and in the Hall they put on their cloakes;The swea∣ring of the new She∣riffes, and the old ones deli∣vering their ac∣count. then goe they up into the Exchequer, where the two new Sheriffs be presented, and the old sworne to their account. Then they put off their cloakes, and take Barge, landing againe at the Vine∣tree, where they mount their horses. And the Lord Maior rideth to the eldest
Sheriffes to dinner; Master Recorder & the Sheriffes riding next to the Lord Maior. The two Sheriffes carrying two white rods in their hands, and their Hench-men going after them. The ancient Order for the day of Simon and Iude. THe old Lord Maior is to have so many of the Aldermen,The fet∣ching of the old Lord Mai∣or from his owne house. as are appointed to dine with him that day, come to his house by eight of the clock in the morning, wearing their violet Gownes furred, with their violet cloakes furred, and their horses atten∣ding. Then the Sheriffes come to fetch him and them to the Guild-Hall, and there abide in the Councell Chamber, untill the comming of the new Lord Maior, and the rest of the Aldermen, with the Companies of either the Lords old and new going before them. After they haue continued in the Councell Chamber a certaine space of time, they come forth into the Or∣phanes Court, where they put on their furred cloakes, and then goe downe to the Hustings Court, where being set in order, the common Cryer maketh Pro∣clamation, commanding every man to keep silence. Then Master Towne-Clarke giveth the new elected Lord his Oath,The new Lord Mai∣or taketh his Oath in the Hu∣stings Court, and the ceremo∣nies there done. which when he hath taken, the old Lord Mai∣or ariseth, and giveth the new Lord his place, the old Lord sitting downe where the new Lord was placed. Then Ma∣ster Chamberlaine first delivereth to him the Scepter, next the Keyes of the common Seale; and lastly, the Seale of the office of the Maioralty. Afterward, Master Sword-bearer giveth him the Sword. And then they arise, put off their Cloakes, and the old Lord rideth home with the new Lord to his place, and there leaveth him, and so many of the Aldermen as dine with him. The old Lord (with the rest of the Alder∣men) ride home to his house, the Sword being carried before him. And so after dinner, the Aldermen depart home at their pleasure. On the morrow after the day of Simon and Iude, for the new Lord Maior his going to take his Oath at Westminster. ALL the Aldermen and the She∣riffes meet at the new Lords house,Meeting at the new Lord Mai∣ors house. by eight a clocke in the morning,The new Lord wea∣reth a vel∣vet Hood and the rich Col∣ler: the Sword bearer the Cap of Mainte∣nance. wearing their Scarlet Gowns furred, and their Cloakes, and their Horses there attending on them; from thence they ride to the Guild-Hall, with the Batchelers and Livery, as also the Gentlemen Vshers of the new Lords Company, going in decent order be∣fore him. But before this,The old Lord ri∣deth alone to the Guild-Hall, but wea∣reth his velvet Hood. the old Lord rideth alone from his owne place to the Guild-Hall, having no Officers to wait upon him, except the Common Hunt, as a Gentleman Vsher going before him, and those Officers that are at liberty, as also the Common Hunts man (with his owne men following him) and so he tarrieth at the Hall. And after they be all come together, they mount on their horses, riding on to the Vine-tree, where they take Barge to Westminster Bridge, where when they are landed,The or∣ders and ceremo∣nies per∣formed at West∣minster. the Lord Maior and Al∣dermen put on their Cloakes within the Palace, and then goe round about the Hall, where they performe many courtefies, going vp afterward into the the Exchequer Chamber to be sworne. When the Oath is taken in the Exche∣quer, they returne downe againe, and goe first to the Kings Bench, then to the Common-Pleas, and so putting off their Cloakes, walke about the Kings Tombes in Westminster Abbey, and then returne to take Barge againe. Being landed at London,The ser∣vice done to him at London, af∣ter his lan∣ding. all the seve∣rall Companies of the City, who had honoured him in their Barges to West∣minster and backe againe, doe likewise performe their attending service, as he (with the Aldermen) ride on to the Guild-Hall to dinner. Full well may this be called a Feast, and ranked next in Honour to Saint Georges Feast: For the Honourable Lords of his Highnesse Privie Councell, other Lords, Barons,
Iudges, Ladies, Gentlemen, and Gen∣tlewomen, with forraigne Ambassadors and Strangers, dine there as invited Guests. And therefore it is desertfully termed,The Lord Maiors Feast. The Lord Maiors Feast. At their comming into the Hall, the new Lord Maior, with two of the anci∣entest Aldermen,What or∣der is ob∣served at the Guild-Hall in welcom∣ming the Guests. Master Recorder, and the Sheriffes, goe vp to the Lords Ta∣ble to bid them welcome, as they doe the like to all the other guests, Lords, Ladies, and other. From thence they goe to the Lady Maioresse her Table, the Gentlewomens, and the Iudges; and then the said new Lord Maior (and they with him) goe into the Chamber∣laines Office, where he dineth. Con∣cerning the old Lord Maior, so soone as they come into the Hall, hee goeth vp to the high Table in the Hustings, and there keepeth the State for that Feast. When the Hall is served with the seconds, then the new Lord Maior goeth with Master Recorder, and those Aldermen that dined with him, to bid the old Lord, and all the Companies or Guests in the Hall welcome. Then after dinner he rideth with the Aldermen to Pauls,Order ob∣served af∣ter din∣ner, and for going to Pauls. the Companies waiting, and standing in their due pla∣ces for his comming. For going to PAVLS on All-Saints day, Christmas day, Twelfe day, and Candlemas day. ALL the Aldermen and the She∣riffes come to the Lord Maiors house,The new and old Lords weare both of them their blacke vel∣vet Hoods, and the Sword∣bearer the Hat of Mainte∣nance. in their Scarlet Gownes furred, and their Cloakes, as also their Horses brought thither with them. From thence they ride to the Guild-Hall, the Company belonging to the Lord Maior, and the band of Batche∣lers, with their Gentlemen Vshers wal∣king orderly before him; and there they heare Evening Prayer. When Prayer is ended, then they ride thence to Pauls Church, where both the new Lord Maior and the old put on their Cloakes,An anci∣ent cu∣stome ob∣served in Pauls Church. and goe vp into the Quire, where they sit to heare the Sermon. Which being done, the  about the Church, and  Cloakes where they did put them on. Then they mount on their Horses againe, and the Aldermen, with the Companies and Batchelours bring the Lord Maior home to his house: where they have Spice-bread and Hypocrasse, and so take leave of the Lord Maior. Here is further to be vnderstood, that All-Saints day is the last day of the old Lords ri∣ding with the new in this manner. On Saint Thomas day. THe Lord Maior,If it bee not Sun∣day. and every Al∣derman likewise, is to sit in the Ward belonging to him, about such businesse as is then necessarily re∣quired to be done. Each of them is to weare his Violet Gowne and Cloake furred. For the CHRISTMAS Holydayes. FOr the Christmas holydayes,No Cloak to bee worne with their Scarlet. vntill Twelfe day, if the Lord Maior and Aldermen go abroad to any pub∣like meeting, they are to weare Scar∣let. But on the working dayes, with∣in compasse of the Twelve dayes, if the Lord Maior goe to the Guild-Hall, Mar∣kets, or Streets, then he and they weare blacke. On INNOCENTS day. VPon Innocents day,No State is obser∣ved. the Alder∣men dine at the Lord Maiors and the Sheriffes, wearing Scarlet: but the Ladies weare blacke. For Munday after Twelfe day. THe Lord Maior and the Alder∣men meet at the Guild-Hall by eight of the clocke in the mor∣ning, Inden∣tures of the Ward∣mote En∣quests. wearing their furred Scarlet Gownes, and their furred Cloakes,
but using no Horses. Then and there they receive of their severall Wards, their sealed Indentures of the Ward∣mote Enquests: And take the Oathes of the Constables and Scavengers. For GOOD-FRYDAY. THe Lord Maior and the Alder∣men meet at Pauls Crosse at one of the clocke in the after∣noone, Pauls-Crosse Sermon on Good-Fryday: The Black Sword. to heare the Sermon for that day appointed: they then wearing their Pewke Gownes, and without their Chaines and Tippets. For Munday and Tues∣day in Easter weeke. ALL the Aldermen and Sheriffs come unto the Lord Maiors dwelling house,A Hood for the L. Maior. before eight of the clock in the morning, to breakfast, wearing their Scarlet Gownes furred, and their cloakes, as also their horses attending. When breakefast is en∣ded, The Cap or Hat of Mainte∣nance. they mount on their horses, and ride to the Spittle, the Sword and Mace borne before the Lord Maior. Be∣ing come thither, there they put on their Cloakes, and then sit downe in or∣der to heare the Sermon. Which be∣ing done, they ride thence homeward in due order, till they come to the Pumpe within Bishopsgate; and there, so ma∣ny of the Aldermen as doe dine with the Sheriffes, take their leave of the Lord Maior, and the rest go home with him. For Wednesday in Ea∣ster weeke. LIke as before on the other two dayes:The last Sermon at the Spittle▪ onely reserved, that the Lord Maior and the Aldermen must then weare their violet Gownes, and sutable Cloakes: But the Ladies (on the two former daies) wearing their Scarlet, on this day are attired in blacke. For Lowe Sunday. ALL the Aldermen meete the Lord Maior and the Sheriffes at Pauls Schoole,The Re∣hearsall Sermon. wearing their Scarlet Gownes furred (yet without their Cloakes or horses) and there stay to heare the Sermon. For Whitsunday. VPon Whitsunday,Sermon at the New Church-yard. all the Al∣dermen use to meet the Lord Maior and the Sheriffes at the new Church-yard by Moore-fields: wearing their Scarlet Gownes lined, without Cloakes, to heare the Sermon there appointed for that day, which be∣ing ended, they depart thence againe. For Munday and Tuesday in Whitsun weeke. ALL the Aldermen are to meete the Lord Maior and the Sheriffs at Pauls;If his plea∣sure be to goe. wearing their Scarlet Gownes, without Cloakes, to heare the Sermon at the Crosse. For the day of the Lord Maiors Knighthood. ALL the Aldermen doe meet the Lord Maior,Preparati∣on for ei∣ther place of the Kings then being. either at the three Cranes (if the King then bee at Westminster) or at Saint Mary Hill (if the King be then at Greenewitch) by se∣ven of the clocke in the morning; wea∣ring their Scarlet Gownes; and their Cloakes carryed with them. After morning Prayer is ended, they take Barge to the King his place, and there they give attendance, untill that the Ceremony bee finished: and then re∣turne home with the Lord Maior to dinner.
For going to Pauls the first Sunday of every Terme. ALL the Aldermen doe meet the Lord Maior and the Sheriffes at Pauls,The Mai∣or and Sheriffes only ride. wearing their Scarlet Gownes, either furred or lined, accor∣ding as the time of the yeere requireth: but without Cloakes or Horses, when the Terme beginneth. For Election of Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament. ALL the Aldermen doe meet the Lord Maior and the Sheriffes at Guild-Hall,Knights and Bur∣gesses for sitting in Parlia∣ment. by nine of the clocke in the morning, wearing their Violet Gownes and their Cloakes, either fur∣red or lined, according as the time of the yeere requireth when they are to be chosen, and they sit in the Hustings Court, vntill the Commons doe make choice of them. The order hath beene observed, that they chuse Master Re∣corder for one of their Knights, and one Gray Cloake for the other, and two Commoners for the Burgesses: which being done, they depart thence. For the LORDS of the Councell, when they come about the Subsidies. WHen the Lords and Com∣missioners come downe for assesment of the Sub∣sidies, Commis∣sioners for assessing the Subsi∣dies. the Lord Maior and the Alder∣men doe weare their blacke Gownes, as they use at other times. And the Com∣missioners are to be warned by the Of∣ficers, which doe belong to both the Sheriffes. For Election of Master Chamberlaine, and the Bridge-Masters, if any of them depart within the yeere. THe Lord Maior and the Alder∣men, Vpon death, or removing. wearing their violet Gowns without their Cloakes, being seated in the Hustings Court, doe there continue their sitting, and not remove thence, untill such time as the Election bee made. At such time as a King is to bee Crowned. ALL the Aldermen doe meet the Lord Maior and the Sheriffes at the three Cranes in the Vinetree,How the L. Maior and Al∣dermen are appa∣relled for such a so∣lemnity. according to the houre of their sum∣mons appointed. The Lord Maior (for that time of service & attendance) wea∣reth a Crimosin Velvet Gowne, a Col∣ler of Esses and Scepter, but no Cloake. The Aldermen weare their Scarlet Gownes, and their Cloaks carried with them, either furred or lined, according as the season of the yeere requireth. There taking Barge, they land at West∣minster, and there they give attendance in the Exchequer Chamber (being ser∣ved with Cakes and Wine) vntill they be called by the Heraulds: and then they put on their Cloakes. At what times the Lord Maior weareth his Cloake. FRom Michaelmas to Whitson∣tide, Begin∣ning up∣on Micha∣elmas E∣ven. Violet furred: and from Whitsontide to Michaelmas, Scarlet lined. The Lord Maior, and those Knights that have borne the office of the Maio∣ralty,
ought to have their Cloakes fur∣red with Gray Amis. And those Al∣dermen that have not beene Maiors, are to have their Cloakes furred with Calabre. And likewise,A very necessary observa∣tion. such as have been Mai∣ors, are to have their Cloaks lined with changeable Taffata: and the rest are to have their Cloakes lined with greene Taffata. For the first day of every Quarter Sessions. THe first day of every Quarter Sessions (in the forenoone only) the Lord Maior and the She∣riffes weare their violet Gownes and Cloakes furred. But at Midsummer Quarter Sessions, the first day, they weare Violet Gownes and Scarlet Cloakes: and on the other dayes Black. For the buriall of Aldermen. THe Aldermen are to weare their Violet Gownes,The last love, duty, and cere∣mony one to ano∣ther. except such as have (of their friends allowance) blacke Gownes, or mourning. When an Alderman dieth, Master Sword∣bearer is to have a blacke Gowne, or three and thirty shillings and foure pence in money. And if the Alder∣man deceased doe give the Lord Mai∣or mourning, then Master Sword-bea∣rer is to have mourning also, or forty shillings in money, as the value there∣of, and so to carry the Sword in blacke before the Lord Maior. Master Chamberlaine is not to weare his Tipper, but when the Lord Maior or Aldermen doe weare their Scarlet or Violet. At the Nomination of an Alderman. FOr the Nomination of an Alder∣man, Nomina∣ting an Alderman▪ the Lord Maior weareth his black Gowne, and violet Cloake, and both the Sheriffes their blacke Gownes. For the Orphanes Court. THe Lord Maior and the Alder∣men doe meet at the Guild-Hall,On the day, and at the houre ap∣pointed. wearing their Violet Gownes without Cloakes: but the Lord Maior ought to weare his Cloake. The Com∣mon Cryer is the Warner of this Court. Orders taken and enacted for Orphans and their Porti∣ons. Anno 1580. AD Commune Concilium, ten∣tum in Guildhaldia Civitatis Londini, xiij. die Octob. Anno Regni Edvardi sexti, Dei gratia An∣gliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Regis, fidei defensoris, & in terra Ecclesiae An∣glicanae, & Hibernicae supremi capitis, quinto: coram Andrea Iudde Mi∣lite, tunc Maiore, & Aldermannis Civitatis illius, ordinata sunt inter alia, inactitata, concessa & stabilita, omnia & singula subsequentia. FOr as much as the City of London is of late yeeres sore decayed, and dayly is like to decay more and more: A great cause and occasion wher∣of, among other, hath beene, for that freemens children (Orphans of the said City) sometimes in the lives of their Parents, and sometimes after their de∣ceases, being left wealthy and rich, doe bestow themselves in ungodly Marria∣ges, for the most part in their young age, at their owne wills and pleasures, without the consent, and against the mindes of their friends, saying and af∣firming, that the Law and Custome of the said City giveth unto them their portions, whether they marry by the assent of their friends or not, and so doe dayly cast away and undoe themselves, in trust to have their said Portions,
whether their parents or friends will or will not. And thereby doe they bestow them∣selves upon simple and light persons, having neither cunning, knowledge, substance, nor good or honest conditi∣ons. By reason whereof, such Orphans, inordinately, and insolently, doe spend and consume their patrimony and por∣tions in short time, not onely to the un∣doing of themselves, and to the great ignomy and shame of their friends, but also to the great slander of the Lord Maior and Aldermen of this City (who been reputed and taken as Fathers and Protectors of the same Orphanes) and to the great losse and hindrance of the said City. And for as much as the said Lord Maior and Citizens, have by their lawes, and customes, power and autho∣rity to make lawes and ordinances, by their Common Councel, for redresse of the same: It is therefore now (to the intent to reduce the same to a more godly, more profitable and decent order and confor∣mity) by the said Lord Maior, & Com∣minalty, and Citizens, in this present Common Councell assembled, and by authority of the said Common Coun∣cell, enacted, ordained, authorized, and established for a law perpetually to bee observed and kept within the said Ci∣ty: That if any Orphane, or child of any free man or free woman of the said Ci∣ty, doe offend in any the things hereaf∣ter expressed, and bee thereof lawfully convicted, afore the Lord Maior and the Aldermen or else where, that then they and every of them, shall to all en∣tents, purposes, constructions and mea∣nings, be unabled and barred to demand and claime their portion or portions, and also shall lose and forgoe and bee barred for euer, of all and every his, her or their part or parts, and portions to him or them belonging, by and after the death of his or their said father or mother, of the goods and cattals, of e∣very such father and mother, by reason of any law, custome, ordinance, usage, franches, priviledge, act of Common Councell, or other thing, heretofore had or used, within the said City: The same Law, Custome, Ordinance, or other thing whatsoe're, heretofore had, made, ordained, allowed, and put in ure, to the contrary in any wise notwithstan∣ding. That is to wit: First, if any man∣child, or woman-child, shall maliciously goe about or attempt to doe, or cause to be done, any bodily harme, death, or destruction to his or their Father or Mother: Or if any man-child doe here∣after marry or contract marriage in the life of his father or mother (by whom he will claime any portion) under the age of one and twenty yeeres, without the consent of his said Father, or Mo∣ther, by whom he will claime any por∣tion: Or if any woman-child doe here∣after marry or contract marriage, in the life of her father, or other parent, by whom she shall claime any portion, be∣fore the age of eighteene yeeres, with∣out the consent of her father, or such o∣ther parent by whom shee shall or may claime any portion: Or if any man-child be a Theefe, or a Fellon, or a com∣mon whore-hanter; a common Diser, or a common player at unlawfull games notoriously known: Or if any woman∣child shal hereafter commit any whore∣dome, or bee a common Picker, that then every of the persons so offending, shall be barred and excluded to have, or demand any portion. Provided alwaies, that it shall bee lawfull for the father, or mother of any such child, or children, to give and be∣queath in Legacy, to such child or chil∣dren, as much as the portion of such childe so offending shall amount unto, by the custome of the said City, & then such child therby to be enabled to have and demand the same, as portion, this Act notwithstanding, so that the same Legacy bee contained in his or their re∣stament in writing, and not otherwise. And that then, and from thenceforth his said child or children, to be admit∣ted and restored to claime such legacy, or legacies, in such sort, manner and forme, as if there had beene never any such offence done, or committed by any such childe. Item, it is further ordained, enacted, authorized and established, by the au∣thority aforesaid, that if any woman∣child, being an Orphane, and under the age of one and twenty yeeres, at any
time hereafter, after the death of her Father, doe ensure or contract her selfe in marriage, or else according to the Ec∣clesiasticall lawes of this Realme, doe perfitly solemnize or consummate Mar∣riage, with any free man of this City, the consent and agreement of the Lord Maior and Aldermen of this said City of London for the time being, not obtai∣ned and had, that then for every such default and offence committed or done by any Orphane, or Orphanes, of the said City, the same being confessed, or sufficiently proved by two witnesses; or otherwise before the said Lord Maior and Aldermen of this said City of Lon∣don, for the time being, at and in a Court of Aldermen, she or they that so happen to behave her or themselves, as is aforesaid, shall forfeit, forgoe and lose two pence of and for every pound, so due or to bee due unto her, or them, by reason of any such Orphanage, the summe of twelve pence of every pound, to goe, or to be to the use of the Cham∣ber of the said City, according to the ancient custome before this time, in such case used. And if the said contract or marriage of the said Orphane or Orphanes, bee made with any forreine, not being free of this City, at the time of any such contract or marriage made, that then the said Orphan or Orphans, and every of them shall forfeit and lose three shil∣lings of every pound, or to be due unto her or them, by vertue of any Orpha∣nage or custome had and used within the said City. The one shilling of the said three shillings of every pound, to goe, or to be, to the use of the Chamber of the said City, in such manner and forme as is aforesaid. And the other two shillings so for∣feited of every pound, to goe to the use of such other Orphane, or Orphanes, as then shall remaine unmarried. Or else for default of such Orphans, or Orphan, to remaine to the next of the kindred of the Orphane so offending. Also, be it further ordained, enacted, and established by authority aforesaid, for, & in eschewing of divers variances, contentions, and suits, that daily here∣tofore have, and hereafter may ensue: that if any free mans child, man or wo∣man fortune to bee married hereafter, in the life time of his, or their father, by his consent, and not fully advanced of, and to his, or her full part, or porti∣on of his or her said Fathers goods, as he shall be worth at the time of his de∣cease, according to the ancient lawes and customes of this said City: that then every such free mans child, so be∣ing married in the life time of his, or her Father, shall bee to all intents and purposes, disabled to demand any fur∣ther part or portion of his or her fathers goods, after the decease of his, or her father, but shall be adjudged, reputed, and taken to be fully advanced, accor∣ding as the law and custome of this Ci∣ty hath beene long time out of minde, except his or her said father doe men∣tion certainely in his last Will or Testa∣ment, or by other writing signed with his owne proper name, or marke the certainety of the summe or summes of money, goods and cattels, and the va∣lue of them that the Father gave, pay∣ed or departed withall, or otherwise as∣sured, or hereafter shall give, pay, depart withall, or otherwise make assurance of unto him, or her, before, at or after the marriage of him or her, or otherwise in his life time, for and towards their ad∣vancements, in the name of his, or her part, or portion. And then every such Orphane, or child, which after the decease of his or her said father, can bring forth the said Testament, or other writing signed or marked with the fathers hand or mark, wherein the certainety of such money, goods, or cattels, as they have or shall have received of their said Father, or by the same Father, assured by especialty, or otherwise, shall have asmuch of the ready money, goods, cattels, and debts of the said Father, as (with that which he or they shall have received towards their advancements, in the life of their said Father) shall make up a full childs part, of his goods and cattels, as he shall bee worth at the time of his decease. The same to be demanded, asked, and claimed, or sued for against the execu∣tor, or executors, administrator, or ad∣ministrators, of the goods, and cattels of the said Father, by bill Originall, to
be commenced to our Soveraigne Lord the Kings Court, holden in the vtter Chamber of the Guild-Hall of the said City, before the said L. Maior and Al∣dermen of the same City for the time being, any Law or Custome heretofore made or used to the contrary notwith∣standing. In which action, no wager of Law, or Essoine, shall bee admitted or allowed. Provided alway, and it is further en∣acted, that if any freee mans sonne, be∣ing of full age (which shall hereafter be married with the consent of his Fa∣ther, or any other person, being of full age, which shall hereafter marry any free mans daughter) doe at the time of the Espousals, or any time after, con∣fesse themselves by writing fully satis∣fied, of his or their portion, or doe otherwise acquit and discharge the Fa∣ther of such free mans sonnes or daugh∣ters, of all their part and portion due, or to be due, by the Law and Custome of the City; that then every such per∣son, so confessing, acquitting, or other∣wise discharging, shall be reputed and taken as fully advanced of his or their whole part or portion, and shall not be enabled to demand any further or grea∣ter part of the substance, goods, and cattels of his or her Father: this Law, or any other Law or Custome hereto∣fore had, made, or used to the contrary notwithstanding. And further, for as much as it is thought very prejudiciall and hurtfull to the fatherlesse children & Orphans, when the mother, or mother in Law, being Executrix of the last Will and Testament of her late husband, by whom, and after whose death, the Or∣phanes are intituled to an Orphanage, (according to the said laudable Cu∣stomes of this City) doe divers times marry, or contract Matrimony, some with Forriners, and persons unknowne, and some with Free men, or ever a just Inventory of the Goods, Cattels, Plate, Iewels, ready Money of the Testators, be by them brought in: By reason wher∣of, many times they (either for feare or affection of their husbands, or for some other sinister cause) doe bring in very suspicious Inventories, omitting there∣in either ready Money, Plate, Iewels, or Debts, or some other thing or things, whereby some benefit should redound to the fatherlesse children, to the great losse and hinderance of the Orphanes, and sometimes slander to the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the City, not∣withstanding their great care and tra∣vaile that they take for the good orde∣ring, and true answering of the said Orphanes: It is therefore, by like authority, or∣dained, established, and enacted, that if after the first day of November next ensuing, any Widow, which is, or shall be made Executrix of the Testament & last Will of her late Husband (being a free man) or shall take upon her the ad∣ministration of the Goods and Cattels of her late Husband (being a free man) doe not upon her Oath bring in and exhibit, or cause to be brought in and exhibited before the Lord Maior and Aldermen of this said City for the time being, at and in a Court of Aldermen, a just and perfect Inventory (to their knowledge) of all the Goods, Cattels, Plate, and Jewels, ready Money, and Debts, as were her said Husbands at the time of his death, appraysed accor∣ding to the Law of the said City, be∣fore she do ensure her selfe in marriage, or contract marriage, or else according to the Lawes of the Realme, doe per∣fectly solemnize or consummate marri∣age with any person before such time as aforesaid, that then every person so offending, shall forfait and lose eight shillings of every pound, of her Por∣tion, of the goods of her late Husband, due to her by the laudable Custome of the said City, the same to goe to the use of such Orphane, or Orphanes, as then shall bee intituled to have or de∣mand any Orphanage or Portion, after the death of his or her late Father▪ the same to be demanded, asked, claimed, or sued for, against such Executrix, or Administratrix, by Bill originall of debt, to bee commenced in our Sove∣raigne Lord the Kings Court, holden in the vtter Chamber of the Guild-Hall of the said City, before the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the same Ci∣ty for the time being, any Law, &c. In which action no wager, &c.
For the election of Gover∣nours at Christs Hospitall, &c. FOr the election of Governours belonging to the severall Hospi∣tals: At time and place appoin∣ted. the Lord Maior and the Al∣dermen do weare their blacke Gownes. A Note of Observation. THe foure Pleaders,Festivall times and generall dayes. the Cham∣berlaine, Towne-Clarke, Com∣mon Sergeant, two Judges of the Sheriffes Court, the Secondaries, the Vnder-Chamberlaine, and Bridge∣masters, are to attend the Lord Maior at his house, before his going abroad on all Festivall times, and generall dayes. Courts of Aldermen. COurts of Aldermen in ordinary,Court dayes, and of excep∣tion. are kept at the Guild-Hall, every Tuesday and Thursday thorow the whole yeere; except Holydayes, the moneth of August, untill Bartho∣lomew day bee past, the weeke before Christmas, Shrove-Tuesday, and the weeke before Easter. The Lavves of the Market. FIrst, in all the Markets of this City, no Victuall shall bee sold, but by the price set by the Maior of this City. 2 No man shall forestall any Victuall comming to the Market, as for to buy in any Inne or other privy place, or yet comming to the Market, whether it be found in the hands of the buyer or of the seller, under paine of forfeiture of the same: and no Inne-holder shall suffer nothing to bee sold in his house, vpon paine of forfeiture of forty shil∣lings. 3 No man shall regrate any Victu∣all which is in the Market, or buy any Victuall to ingrate in the Market, so that the Commons can or may have any part of such Victuall, as in especi∣all, such as be knowne for Hucksters, or other people, occupying their living by such Victuall as they would so ingrosse, under paine of forfeiture of such Victu∣all so regrated: Provided alwayes, that any Steward for any noble Feast, may buy or ingrate such Victuall as is con∣venient for the same Feast. 4 No Butter shall be sold, but accor∣ding to the waight, for the time of the yeere allowed. 5 No Poulters shall deceiveably occupy the Market, to sell any stale Vi∣ctuall, or such as bee Poulters of this City, for to stand in strange cloathing so to doe, under paine of forty shil∣lings, and the forfeiture of such Victu∣all, forty shillings. 6 No Hucksters shall stand or sit in the Market, but in the lower place, and the ends of the Market, to the intent they may be perfectly knowne, and the Stranger-market-people have the pree∣minence of the Market, under paine of three shillings foure pence, if the Huck∣sters disobey the same. 7 No unwholsome or stale Victuall shall be sold under paine of xi. s. and forfeiture of the same Victuall.
THE STATVTES OF THE STREETS OF THIS CITY, against Annoiances. FIrst, no man shall sweepe the filth of the Street into the Chancell of the City, in the time of any raine, or at any other time, under paine of six shillings eight pence. 2 No man shall cast, or lay in the Streets, Dogs, Cats, or other Carren, or any noysome thing contagious of Aire. Nor no Inholder shall lay out dung out of his house, but if the Cart bee ready to carry the same away in∣continently, under paine of forty shil∣lings. 3 No Brewer shall cast wilfully dregs or drosse of Ale or Beere into the Chanell, under paine of two shillings. 4 No man shall encumber the streets with Timber, Stones, Carts, or such like, under paine of forfeiture of the same thing that so encumbreth the streets, which is twenty shillings fine, if hee remove it not at the warning of the Sergeant of the Market. 5 Euery builder of houses ought to come to the Maior, Aldermen, and Chamberlaine, for a speciall licence for hourd of, by him to bee made in the high Street, and no builder to encumber the Streets with any manner of thing, taking downe for the prepa∣ring of his new building, under paine of forty shillings, except hee make a hourd of forty shillings. 6 No man shall set any Carts in the Streets by night time, under the paine of twelve pence, and recompence to such persons as shall bee hurt thereby, if any such be, twelve pence. 7 No Budge-man shall leade but two horse, and hee shall not let them goe vnled, under paine of two shil∣lings. 8 No man shall ride, or drive his Car or Cart atrot in the Street, but patiently, under paine of two shil∣lings. 9 No man shall gallop his horse in the Street, under paine of two shil∣lings. 10 No man shall shoot in the Street, for Wager or otherwise, under like paine of two shillings. 11 No man shall bowle, or cash any stone in the Street, for wager, or gaine, or such like, under paine of two shil∣lings. 12 No man shall dig any hole in the
Street for any matter, except hee stop it up againe, under paine of two shil∣lings, and recompence to any person hurt thereby, two shillings. 13 No man shall bury any dung, or goung, within the Liberties of this Ci∣ty, under paine of forty shillings. 14 No Goungfermour shall carry any Ordure till after nine of the Clocke in the night, under paine of thirteene shillings foure pence. 15 No Goungfermour shall spill any Ordure in the Street, under paine of thirteene shillings foure pence. 16 No man shall bait Bull, Beare, or Horse in the open street, under paine of twenty shillings. 17 No man shall have any Kine, Goats, Hogs, Pigs, Hens, Cocks, Ca∣pons, or Ducks in the open Street, un∣der paine of forfeiture of the same. 18 No man shall maintaine any bi∣ting Curs, or mad Dogs, in the streets, under paine of two shillings, and re∣compence unto every party hurt there∣with, two shillings. 19 No Carts that shall be shod with Spig-naile, that shall come upon the streets of this City, under paine of three shillings foure pence. 20 No Carts using daily carriage within this City, nor Car shall have Wheeles shod with any Iron, but bare, under paine of six shillings. 21 No man shall burne any Straw, Rushes, or other thing, Linnen or Wol∣len in the streets, by night or by day, un∣der paine of three shillings foure pence. 22 No man shall blow any Horne in the night within this City, or Whistle after the houre of nine of the clocke in the night, under pain of imprisonment. 23 No man shall use to goe with Vi∣zards, or disguised by night, under like paine of imprisonment. 24 That Night-walkers, and Eves∣droppers endure like punishment. 25 No Hammer-man, as a Smith, a Pewterer, a Founder, and all Artificers, making great sound, shall not worke af∣ter the houre of nine in the night, nor afore the houre of foure in the morning, under paine of three shil. foure pence. 26 No man shall cast into the Dit∣ches of this City, or the Sewers of this City, without the walls, or into the walls, Grates, or Gullets of this City, any manner of Carren, stinking Flesh, rotten Fish, or any Rubbish, Dung, Sand, Gravell, Weeds, Stones, or any other thing to stop the course of the same, under paine of cleansing them at his own cost and charge, under paine of imprisonment. 27 No man shall make any Wi∣drawtes in any of the Towne-Ditches, or the Towne-Gullets, under paine of twenty shillings. 28 No man shall build nigh the Walls of this City, without licence of the Lord Maior, Aldermen, & Cham∣berlaine, under paine of throwing down the same, and no licence may be gran∣ted, except that the Chamberlain free∣ly at all times have convenient and needfull ingresse, and entry, going out, and cleare recourse. 29 No man shall goe in the streets by night or by day with Bow bent, or Arrowes under his Girdle, nor with Sword unscabberd, under paine of im∣prisonment; or with Hand-Gun, ha∣ving therewith Powder and Match, ex∣cept it bee in an usuall May-game or Sight. 30 No man shall after the houre of nine at the Night, keep any rule where∣by any such sudden out-cry be made in the still of the night, as making any Affray, or beating his Wife, or Ser∣vant, or Singing, or Reveing in his house, to the disturbance of his neigh∣bors, under paine of 3. shil. 4. pence. 31 No man shall make any Affray,
upon any Officer, which with good de∣meanour doth his message by comman∣dement of my Lord Maior, or any Al∣derman, or M. Sheriffes, or M. Cham∣berlaine, or misbehave himselfe in any rayling upon any Judge of this City, or their Officers, which by commande∣ment are sent to bring any breaker of this Law and Custome to Ward, or to distresse, or such like, upon paine of Im∣prisonment of forty dayes, and forfei∣ture of the double penalty: for the of∣fences asseasing, railing upon any Al∣derman, or Maior in his office, is judge∣ment of the Pillory: railing upon Ma∣ster Chamberlaine in his office, forty dayes imprisonment: beating, threat∣ning, and railing of an Officer, is im∣prisonment, after as the trespasse is. 32 Memorandum, That every offence found in this City, it is accustomed that the Officer, a Free man, finding it, which is called primus Inventor, hath halfe the penalty by the grace of the Court. 33 Also, every Free man may finde any offence, but hee hath no power to bring the party before any Judge of this City without an Officer, except the party will come to his answer by free will. 34 No man hath power to Arrest, Attach, or make distresse of any goods forfeitable, or offences, except the Con∣stable or Sergeant of the Mace. 35 No Butcher, or his servant shall not use to drive any Oxe or Oxen, a∣trot in the streets, but peaceably: and ifan Oxe happen to be let goe when he is prepared to slaughter, the Butcher shall forfeit two shil. besides recom∣pence, if any person be hurt thereby. 36 No Butcher shall scald Hogs, but in the common scalding house, upon paine of six shillings eight pence. 37 No Butcher shall sell any Mea∣sell Hog, or unwholsome flesh, under paine of ten pounds. 38 No Butcher shall sell any old stale Victuall: that is to say, above the slaughter of three dayes in the Winter, and two in the Summer, under paine of ten pounds. 39 None unreasonable Victuall for all manner of Victuals. 40 No Victualer of this City shall give any rude or unsetting language, or make any clamour upon any man or woman in the open Market, for cheap∣ning of Victuall, under paine of three shillings foure pence. 41 No Butcher shall cast the in∣wards of Beasts into the streets, cleaves of Beasts feet, Bones, Hornes of Sheepe, or other such like, under paine of two shillings. 42 The Pudding-cart of the Sham∣bles shall not go afore the houre of nine in the night, or after the houre of five in the morning, under paine of six shil∣lings eight pence. 43 No man shall cast any Vrine∣boles, or Ordure-boles into the streets by day or night, afore the houre of nine in the night: And also hee shall not cast it out, but bring it downe, and lay it in the Chanell, under the paine of three shillings foure pence. And if he doe cast it upon any persons head, the party to have a lawfull recompence, if he have hurt thereby. 44 No man shall hurt, cut, or de∣stroy any Pipes, Sesperals, or Wind∣vents pertaining to the Conduit, un∣der paine of imprisonment, and making satisfaction, though hee doth it out of the City, if hee may bee taken within the City. 45 No man within this City may make any Quill, and breake any Pipe of the Conduit, comming thorow his house, or nigh his ground, under paine of the Pillory, or take any water pri∣vily unto his house. 46 Casting any corrupt thing, ap∣poysoning the water, is Lourgulary and Felony.
47 Whosoever destroy or perish any Cocks of the Conduit, must have imprisonment, and make satisfaction. Old Lawes and Customes of this City. 48 NO man shall set up shop, or occupy as a Free-man, afore he be sworne in the Cham∣ber of London, and admitted by the Chamberlaine, under paine of▪ 49 No man shall set over his Ap∣prentice to any other person, but by li∣cense of Master Chamberlaine, and there to be set over, under paine of▪ 50 No man which is a Forraine, shall not buy nor sell within the liber∣ties of this City with another Forraine, under paine of forfeiture of the goods so forraine bought and sold. 51 No Free-man shall be disobedi∣ent for to come at Master Chamber∣laines commandement, to any sum∣mons to him given by any officer of the Chamber, under paine of impri∣sonment. 52 Master Chamberlaine hath po∣wer to send a free man to Ward, so that he incontinently after send to the Lord Maior, the cause why that he is puni∣shed, so that the Lord Maior release him not, but by the Chamberlaines assent: and if he be a great Commoner, and disobeying to the Chamberlaine, Master Chamberlaine may referre it to a Court of Aldermen. Master Chamberlaine hath autho∣rity for to send or command any Apo∣prentice to the Counter for their of∣fences: and if their offences bee great, as in defiling their Masters houses by vicious living, or offending his Master by theft, or disslander, or such like, then to command him to Newgate. Apprentice Enrolled, his Master payeth two shillings six pence. Apprentice set over, hee that recei∣veth, two shillings. Apprentice made Free, hee payeth foure shillings. Apprentice never Enrolled, and made free, his Master payeth thirteene shillings two pence. A man made Free by his Fathers Copy, payeth eighteene pence. A Proclamation made in the time of the Maioralty of Sir Michael Dormer, Knight. An Act of Common Councell, made in the Even of Saint Michael, Anno Regis Henrici Octavi xxxj. That no person should lay any Wares in the Street, or beyond the edge of their Stall, upon paine of forfeiture the first time six shillings eight pence: the se∣cond time thirteene shillings foure pence: and the third time, the Ware so laid.
AN ACT FOR THE REFORMATION OF DIVERS ABVSES VSED IN the Wardmote Inquest: Together with the Articles of the charge of the said Inquest. By the Maior. To the Alderman of the Ward. Wardmote Inquest for a yeere. WEE charge and com∣mand you, that upon Saint Thomas day the Apostle next com∣ming, you doe hold your Wardmote, and that you have afore us at our generall Court of Aldermen to be holden in the Guild-Hall, the Munday next after the Feast of the Epiphany next comming, all the defaults that shall bee presented afore you by Inquest in the said Ward∣mote, and the said Inquest shall have full power and authority by one whole yeere, to enquire and present all such de∣faults as shall be found within your said Ward, as oftentimes as shal be thought to you expedient and needfull, which we will, shall bee once every moneth at the least. Inquest dying. AND if it happen any of your said Inquest to dye, or depart out of your said Ward within the said yeere, that then in place of him or them so dying, or departing out of your said Ward, you cause to be chosen one able person to inquire and present with the other in manner and forme a∣foresaid. Non appearance. AND that at the said generall Court, you give afore us the names and sur-names of al them of your said Ward, that come not to your said Wardmote, if they be duely warned, so that due redresse and punish∣ment of them may bee had, as the case shall require, according to the Law. Watch, Light, Vizard. AND that ye doe provide, that at all times convenient, covena∣ble Watch bee kept: and that Lanthornes with light by Nightertaile in old manner accustomed, be hanged forth, and that no man goe by nighter∣taile
without light, nor with Vizard, on the perill that belongeth thereto. Common Councell. AND also that you doe cause to be chosen men of the most sufficient, honest, and discreet men of your said Ward, to be for your said Ward of the Common Councell of this City for the yeere ensuing, ac∣cording to the custome in that behalfe yeerely used. And also that you doe cause the said men so to be chosen to be of the Common Councell, to be sworn before you and in your presence, accor∣ding to the oath for them used, and of old time accustomed, the Tenor of which oath hereafter ensueth. The Oath. YE shall sweare, that ye shal bee true to our Sove∣raigne Lord the King that now is, and to his heires and successors Kings of Eng∣land, and readily yee shall come when ye be summonned to the Common Coun∣cell of this City, but if yee be reasona∣bly excused, and good and true coun∣sell ye shall give in all things, touch∣ing the Common-wealth of this City, after your wit and cunning: and that for favour of any person ye shall main∣taine no singular profit against the common profit of this City, and after that you be come to the Common Coun∣cell, you shall not from thence depart, untill the Common Councell be ended, without reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Maiors License. And also any secret things that be spoken on said in the Common Councell, which ought to be kept secret, in no wise you shall disclose, as God you helpe. Constables, Scavengers, Beadle, Raker. AND that also in the said Ward∣mote you cause to be chosen cer∣taine other honest persons to bee Constables, and Scavengers, and a common Beadle, and a Raker to make cleane the streets and lanes of all your said Ward, according to the custome yeerly used in that behalfe, which Con∣stables have, and shall have full power and authority to distraine for the aa∣ry and quarterage of the said Beadle and Raker, as oftentimes as it shall bee behinde unpaid. Roll of names. ALso, that you keepe a Roll of the names, sur-names, dwelling pla∣ces, professions and trades of all persons dwelling within your Ward and within what Constables precinct they dwell, wherein the place is to bee specially noted by the street, lane, alley, or signe. Constable. Roll. ALso that you cause every Con∣stable from time to time, to cer∣tifie unto you, the name, sur∣name, dwelling place, profession, and trade of every person, who shall newly come to dwell within his Precinct, whereby you may make and keepe your Roll perfect: and that you cause every Constable for his Precinct to that pur∣pose to make and keepe a perfect Roll in like manner. Inholder, Lodger, Sojourner. ALso that you give speciall charge that every Inholder, and other person within your Ward, who shall receive any person to lodge or so∣journe in his house above two dayes, shall before the third day after his com∣ming
thither, give knowledge to the Constable of the Precinct where hee shall be so received, of the name, sur∣name, dwelling place, profession, and trade of life, or place of service of such person, and for what cause hee shall come to reside there: and that the said Constable give present notice thereof to you: and that the said Inholder lodge no suspected person, or men or women of evill name. Search. New commers. ALso that you cause every Con∣stable within his Precinct, once every moneth at the farthest, and oftner, if need require, to make di∣ligent search and inquiry, what persons bee newly come into his Precinct to dwell, sojourne, or lodge: and that you give speciall charge, that no Inholder or other person shall resist or deny any Constable, in making such search or in∣quiry, but shall doe his best endeavour to aide and assist him therein. Franke pledge. ANd for that of late there is more resort to the City of persons e∣vill affected in Religion, and o∣therwise than in former times have bin: You shall diligently inquire if any man bee received to dwell or abide within your Ward, that is not put under frank pledge, as he ought to be by the custome of the City, and whether any person hath continued in the said Ward by the space of one yeere, being above the age of twelve yeeres, and not sworne to bee faithfull and loyall to the Kings Maje∣sty, in such sort as by the Law and cu∣stome of the City he ought to be. Beadle. TO all these purposes the Bea∣dle of every Ward shall em∣ploy his diligence, and give his best furtherance. Fire. ALso that you have speciall re∣gard that from time to time, there be convenient provisiō for Hooks, Ladders, and Buckets, in meet places within the severall Parishes of your Ward, for avoiding the perill of fire. Streets. ALso that the Streets and lanes of this City, be from time to time kept clean before every Church, house, shop, ware-house, doore, dead wall, and in all other common passages and streets of the said Ward. Hucksters of Ale and Beere. AND where by divers acts of Common Councell, afore time made and established for the Common-weale of this City, amongst other things it is ordained and enacted, as hereafter ensueth: Also it is ordained and enacted, That from henceforth no Huckster of Ale or Beere, be within any Ward of the Ci∣ty of London, but honest persons, and of good name and fame, and so taken and admitted by the Alderman of the Ward for the time being, and that the same Hucksters doe find sufficient sure∣ty afore the Maior and Aldermen for the time being, to bee of good guiding and rule: and that the same Hucksters shall keepe no bawdry, nor suffer no letchery, dice-playing, carding, or any other unlawfull games, to be done, ex∣ercised, or used within their houses: and to shut in their doores at nine of the clocke in the night from Michaelmas to Easter, and from Easter to Michaelmas, at tenne of the clocke in the night, and af∣ter that houre sell none Ale or Beere. And if any Huckster of Beere or Ale, after this act published and proclaim∣ed, sell any Ale or Beere within any Ward of the City of London, and bee not admitted by the Alderman of the
same Ward so to doe, or finde not suf∣ficient surety as it is above rehearsed, the same Huckster to have imprison∣ment, and make fine and ransome for his contempt, after the discretion of the Maior and Aldermen: and also that the said Hucksters suffer no manner of common eating and drinking within their Cellars or Vaults contrary to the ordinance thereof ordained and provi∣ded, as in the said act more plainely ap∣peareth at large: wee charge you that you doe put the same in due execution accordingly. Measures sealed. AND also that ye see all Tiplers and other sellers of Ale or Beere as well of privy Osteries, as Brewers and Inholders within your Ward, not selling by lawfull measures sealed and marked with the letter C. crowned, according as in that behalfe it is ordained and purveighed, bee presen∣ted, and their names in your said In∣dentures bee expressed, with their de∣faults, so that the Chamberlain may be lawfully answer'd of their amersements. Stranger borne. ANd also that you suffer no stran∣ger borne out of the Realme, to bee of the Common Councell, nor to exercise or use any other Office within this City, nor receive or accept any person into your Watch, privie or open, but Englishmen borne: and if a∣ny stranger borne out of this Realme, made Denizen by the Kings Letters Patents, or any other after his course and lot be appointed to any watch, that then ye command and compell him or them to find in his stead and place one Englishman to supply the same. Billets and fire-wood. AND also that you cause an ab∣stract of the Assize appointed by act of Parliament, for Billers and other fire-wood, to bee faire written in Parchment, and to bee fixed or hanged up in a Table in some fit and conveni∣ent place in every Parish within your Ward, where the common people may best see the same. Streets. Paine 40. s. AND furthermore we charge and command you, that you cause such provision to be had in your said Ward, that all the streets and lanes within the same Ward be from time to time cleansed and clearely voided of or∣dure, dung, mire, rubbish, and other fil∣thy things whatsoever they be, to the a∣noyance of the Kings Majesties subjects. Vagarants. AND also that at all times, as you shall thinke necessary, you doe cause search to bee made within your said Ward, for all vagarant Beggers, suspicious and idle people, and such as cannot shew how to live, and such as shall bee found within your said Ward, that you cause to be puni∣shed and dealt with according to the law and the statute in such case ordain∣ed and provided. Iury-men. AND also wee will and charge you the said Alderman, that your selfe certifie and present before us, at the same generall Court to be holden the foresaid munday next after the Feast of Epiphany, all the names and sur-names truely written of such persons within your said Ward, as bee able to passe in a grand Iury by themselves: and also all the names and sur-names truly written of such persons, being and dwelling within your said Ward, as be able to passe in a petty Iu∣ry, and not able to passe in a grand Iury by themselves, that is to say, every grand Iury man to be worth in goods an hun∣dred Markes, and every petty Jury man forty Markes, according to an Act in
that case made and provided: and the same you shall indorce on the backeside of your Indenture. Harlots. ITem, for divers reasonable and ur∣gent considerations, vs especially moving, wee straightly charge and command you on the King our Sove∣raigne Lords behalfe, that you dili∣gently provide and foresee, that no manner of person or persons within your said Ward, of what condition or degree soever he or they be of, kee∣ping any Taverne or Ale-house, Ale∣seller or victualling house, or place of common resort to eate and drinke in, within the same Ward, permit or suf∣fer at any time hereafter, any common women of their bodies, or Harlors to resort and come into their said house, or other the places aforesaid to eat or drinke, or otherwise to bee conversant or abide, or thither to haunt or fre∣quent, upon paine of imprisonment, as well of the occupier and keeper of eve∣ry such house or houses, and all other the places afore remembred, as of the said common women or Harlots. Articles. ALso that you doe give in charge to the Wardmote Inquest of your Ward, all the Articles de∣livered to you herewith. An Act for the Reforma∣tion of divers abuses, used in the Wardmote Inquest. Commons, Dinners, Banquetings. ITEM, Where the Wardmote Inquests within the severall Wards of this City, for the maintenance of Honesty, Vertue, & good Li∣ving; and for the abolishment, exiling, and suppressing of all kinde of Vice, evill Rule, and In∣iquity, according to the ancient laudable Lawes and Customs of the said City, are yeerely several∣ly charged and sworne, upon the day of S. Thomas the Apostle, be∣fore the Aldermen of the said Wards, chiefely and principally to the end and intent, that they with all diligence should truly and duly inquire and present all such Enormities, Nusances, Mis∣order, and Offences, as are, or at any time within the space of one whole yeere then next ensuing, shalbe severally used, committed, or done within the said Wards, and have day yeerely to make their said Presentments, untill the Munday next after the Feast of the Epiphany: The said In∣quests heretofore little or no∣thing at all regarding (as it is very manifest and not unknown, the more is the pity) their said Oathes, or yet the great commo∣dities, Vtility, Quietnesse, Ho∣nour, and Worship, that might or should grow and insue to the said City, and inhabitants of the same, through their good, indu∣strious, and indifferent procee∣dings, for the advancement of Vertue, and repressing of Vices, have drawne it in a manner into a very ordinary course and com∣mon Custome, to consume and spend a great part of their said time, that they have yerely given unto them, when they receive their said charge; partly in set∣ting up among themselves a cer∣taine Commons, and making and
keeping many costly and sump∣tuous Dinners, Suppers, and Banquets, inviting and calling to the same at sundry times, in a manner, all the Inhabitants of the said severall Wards, to the no little charges of the same In∣habitants, and partly in passing and occupying much part of the same time in playing at Dice, Tables, Cards, and such other unlawfull Games both to the great costs, charges, and expen¦ces of the said Inquests (where∣of the greater part most com∣monly are but poore men) and also to the very lewd, perniti∣ous, and evill example of all such as have any accesse or recourse unto the same Inquests. And where also the said Inquests have of late usurped to dispense with such persons, as they by their search, and otherwise, have foun∣den to offend and transgresse the Lawes, in using and occupying of unlawfull Weights and Mea∣sures, taking of the said Offen∣ders certaine Fines (as it is said) the said Inquests have common∣ly used to imploy toward the maintenance of their said Fea∣sting and Banqueting, directly against the due order of our So∣veraigne Lord the Kings Lawes, and the publike wealth of all his Highnesse Subiects within the said City, and much to the re∣proch and dishonour of the same City. For remedy and Reformation thereof, be it Ordained Enacted, & Established by the Lord Mai∣or, Aldermen, and Commons, in this present Common Coun∣cell assembled, and by authority of the same, That all and every the Wardmote Inquests of the said City, from henceforth to be yeerely charged & sworne with∣in the severall Wards at the time afore rehearsed, shall at all times and places meet and convenient for the due execution of their said charge, meet and assemble themselves together, and that they and every of them after their said meetings, inquisition, and treating of their said neces∣sary matters, shall goe home to their owne severall houses to Breakefast, Dinner, and Supper, during all the said accustomed time of their charge and Session abovesaid: And that none of the said Inquests shal from hencefor∣ward set up any manner of Com∣mons, or keepe or maintaine any manner of Dinners, Suppers, or Banquets among themselves, or use at their said Assemblies and Sessions, any of the Games above mentioned, or any other whatso∣ever unlawfull Games or Playes at any time, before the giving up of the said Presentments at the time above remembred. Or shall take or receive any maner of Fine or Fines, for the concealement and discharging of any of the Of∣fences afore recited: but truly present the same Offences, and every of them, according to their Oaths, upon paine of imprison∣ment by the discretion of the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the said City for the time being.
Fire and Candle, &c. Recreation. PRovided alway, and bee it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall bee lawfull for all the every of the said Inquests, to take and receive towards the charges of their Fire and Candles, and other neces∣saries during the time of their said Session, all and every such summes of money, as any honest person or persons of their free will and benevolent minde, will give or offer unto them: and when they have made their said Presentments, to goe and assem∣ble themselves together for their Recreation and solace, where they shall thinke it good: and there not onely to bestow and spend the twenty shillings, which every Alderman within his Ward, according to a cer∣taine order lately taken, shall yeerely give unto them at the time of the delivery of the said Presentments, towards their said charges in this behalfe, but also the residue of the said money re∣ceived and gathered, as it is afore∣said, of the benevolence of their said loving friends, if any such residue shall fortune to remaine. Any Clause or Article in this present Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Not fayling hereof, as ye ten∣der the Common weale of this City, and advancement of good Iustice, and as ye will answer for the contrary at your vttermost perill. The Articles of the charge of the Wardmote Inquest. Peace. YEE shall sweare, that yee shall truly enquire if the Peace of the King our Soveraigne Lord bee not kept as it ought to be, and in whose default, and by whom it is broken or disturbed. Franke pledge. ALso if any man be received with∣in this Ward, but if he be under Free pledge, that is to say, bee sworn after the Alderman at his Court, or else afore the said Alderman, be∣tween this & the Munday next after the Feast of the Epiphany next comming. Outlawes, Traitors, Fellons, &c. ALso if there dwell any man with∣in the Ward, that is outlawed or indited of Treason or Fello∣ny, or bee any receiver of Traitors or Fellons. Thames. ALso yee shall enquire, and truly present all the offences and de∣faults done by any person or per∣sons within the River of Thames, ac∣cording to the intent and purport of an Act made by our late Lord King Ed∣ward the sixth, in his high Court of Parliament, and also of divers other things ordained by Act of Common Councell of this City, for the redresse and amendment of the said River, which as now is in great decay and ru∣ine, and will bee in short time past all
remedy, if high and substantiall provi∣sion and great helpe be not had with all speed and diligence possible: as more plainely appeareth in the said Act of Parliament, and the said Act of Com∣mon Councell of this City. Congregations. ALso if any maner of person make Congregation, or be receiver or gatherer of evill companies. Riotor, Barrator. ALso if any man be a common Ri∣otor, or a Barrator, walking by nightertaile without light, a∣gainst the rule & custome of this City. Peace, hue and cry. ALso if there be any man within this Ward, that will not helpe, aide, nor succour the Consta∣bles, Beadle, and other ministers of this City in keeping of the peace, and ar∣rest the evill doers with rearing of hue and cry. Hucksters, receivers of Ap∣prentices Artificers, &c. ALso if there be any Huckster of Ale and Beere, that commonly useth to receive any Apprenti∣ces, servants, Artificers or Labourers, that commonly use to play at the Dice, Cards, or Tables, contrary to the form of the statute in that case ordained and provided. Inholder, Taverner, Victualer. ALso if there bee any Inholder, Taverner, Brewer, Huckster, or other Victualer, that hold open their houses after the houre limited by the Maior. Curfue. ALso if any Parish Clarke doe ring the Bell, called the Curfue Bell, after Curfue rungen at the Churches of Bow, Barking Chruch, and Saint Giles without Creplegate. Bawds, maintainers of quarrels. ALso yee shall enquire if any Pu∣tour, that is to say, man-Bawd, or woman-Bawd, common hazer∣dours, contectour, maintainer of quar∣rels, champartours, or embracers of Inquests, or other common mis-doers bee dwelling within this Ward, and present their names. Strumpet, Adulterer, Witch, Scold. ALso if any Baud, common strum∣pet, common Adulterer, Witch or common Scold bee dwelling within this Ward. Hot-house. ALso if there be any house, where∣in is kept and holden any hot-house, or sweating-house, for ease and health of men, to the which be resorting or conversant any strumpets, or women of evill name or fame, or if there be any hot-house or sweating or∣dained for women, to the which is any common recourse of young men, or of other persons of evill fame and suspect conditions. Also, if there bee any such persons that keepe or hold any such hot-houses, either for men or women, and have found no surety to the Chamberlaine for their good and honest behaviour, according to the Lawes of this City, and lodge any manner of person by night, contrary to the ordinance therof made, by the which he or they shall for∣feit
twenty pounds to the Chamber, if they doe the contrary. Thames, ditches, streets, &c. ALso if any manner of person cast or lay dung, ordure, rubbish, seacole dust, rushes, or any other thing noyant, in the River of Thames, Walbrooke, Fleet, or other ditches of this City, or in the open streets, waies, or lanes within this City. Chanell. ALso if any person after a great rain falleth, or at any other time sweepe any dung, ordure, rub∣bish, rushes, Seacole dust, or any other thing noyant, downe into the chanell of any street or lane, whereby the com∣mon course there is let, and the same things noyant driven downe into the said water of Thames. Hogs, Kine, Oxen, Ducks. ALso if any manner of person nou∣rish Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Ducks, or any beasts within this Ward, to the grievance and disease of their Neighbours. Vsury. ALSO if any Vsurers or false chevesancers be dwelling with∣in this Ward. Persons indited in one Ward, flying into another. ALso where afore this time it is ordained and enacted as hereaf∣ter followeth. Item, for to es∣chew the evils of misgoverned persons that daily when they be indited in one Ward, flye into another: It is ordain∣ed by the Maior and Aldermen, that as soone as a man or woman suspect, first doe come to dwell within any house, in any Ward within the City, the Con∣stables, Beadles, or other Officers of the same, shall bee charged by their Oathes, at the generall Court, to en∣quire and espy from whence they come. And if they finde by their owne confes∣sion, or by the record of any of the Bookes of any Alderman of the Ci∣ty, that they be indited or cast of evill and noyous life, and will not finde sure∣ty for their good abearing and honest governance to the Alderman for the time being, that then they shall not dwell there from thenceforth, but shall bee warned to avoid within three or foure dayes, or more or lesse, after, as it shall bee seene to the Alderman of the Ward for the time being, and that the Landlord that letteth the house, or his attourney, shall bee al∣so warned to make them to avoid out of his house aforesaid, within the said time limited by the Alderman: and if they bee found there after the time, that then not onely the said dishonest persons shal have imprisonmēt of their bodies after the discretion of the Maior and Aldermen, but also the said Land∣lords, letters of the said houses, shall for∣feit to the Guild-hall, as much as they should have had for letting of the said house, or should be paid by the yeere, if the said persons or others had dwelled in the said house. Colouring forraine goods. ALso if any Freeman against his Oath made, conceale, cover, or colour the goods of Forrains, by the which the King may in any wise lose, or the franchises of this City bee imblemished. Forraine buying and selling. ALso if any Forraine buy and sell with any other Forraine within this City or the Suburbs thereof any goods or Merchandises, the same
goods or Merchandises bee forthwith forfeit, to the use of the Comminalty of this City. Freemen not resident. ALso if every Freeman, which re∣ceiveth or taketh the benefit, and enjoyeth the franchises of this City, bee continually dwelling out of the City, and hath not, nor will not (after his oath made) bee at scot and lot, nor partner to the char∣ges of this City, for the worship of the same City, when hee is duely re∣quired. Orphans, Wards, Marriages. ALSO if any man conceale the goods of Orphanes of this City, of whom the Ward and marri∣age of right belongeth to the Maior and Aldermen of this City. Officers. AND if any Officer by colour of his Office, doe extortion unto any man, or bee maintainer of quarrels against right, or take carriage, or arrest victuall unduely. Boatman, Ferriour. ALso if any Boatman or Ferriour be dwelling in the Ward, that taketh more for Boatmanage or ferriage, than is ordained. Purprestures. ALso if any man make Purpre∣stures, that is to say, encroach, or take of the common ground of this City, by land or by water, as in walls, pales, stoopes, grieces, or doores, or cellers, or in any other like within the Ward; or if any porch, pent-house, or jetty bee too low, in letting of men that ride beside, or carts that goe there∣forth. Pent-houses, Ietties, Stalls, &c. ALso that Pentises and Ietties be at the least the height of nine foot, and that the stalls bee not but of two foot and a halfe in breadth, and to be flexible or moveable, that is to say, to hang by Iemewes or garners, so that they may bee taken up and let downe. Way, Watercourse. ALso if any common way or com∣mon course of water be foreclo∣sed or letted, that it may not have his course as it was wont, to the noyance of the Ward, and by whom it is done. Pavements. ALso if any pavement bee defe∣ctive, or too high in one place, and too low in another, to the disturbance of riders and goers therby, and carts that goe thereupon. Regrators, Forestallers. ALso if any Regrator or Forestal∣ler of victuall, or of any other Merchandizes which should come to this City to be sold, bee dwel∣ling in this Ward: a Regrator is as much to lay, as hee that buyeth up all the vi∣ctual, or Merchandizes, or the most part thereof, when it is come to the City or the Suburbs of the same at a low price, and then afterwards selleth it at his owne pleasure, at a high and excessive price: a Forestaller is he that goeth out of the City, and meeteth with the vi∣ctual or Merchandize by the way, com∣ming unto the City to be sold, and there buyeth it, both these bee called in the
Law, Inimici publici patriae, which is to say, open enemies to a Country. Price of victuall. ALso if any Butcher, Fishmonger, Poulter, Vintner, Hostler, Cook, or seller of Victuall, doe sell Vi∣ctuall at unreasonable prices. Hay. ALso if any Hostler sell Hay, Oats or Provender at excessive prices, taking greater gain ther∣by then is reasonable and lawfull. Victuall unwholsome. Price. ALso if any Victualer sell any Victuals not covenable, or un∣wholsome for mans body, or else dearer than is proclaimed by the Maior. Measures unsealed. YE shall diligently make search and inquiry, whether there bee any Vintner, Inholder, Ale∣house-keeper, or any other person or persons whatsoever within your Ward, that doe use or keepe in his or their house or houses, any Cans, Stone pots, or other measures which be unsealed, & by Law not allowed to sell Beere or Ale thereby, and whether they doe sell any of their best Beere and Ale above a penny the quart, or any small Ale or Beere above a halfe penny the quart, & whether any of them doe sell by any measure not sealed. If there bee any such, you shall seize them, and send them to the Guild-Hall to the Cham∣berlaines Office, & present their names and faults by Indenture, so oft as there shall be any occasion so to doe. Weights and Measures. YE shall also make search in the Shops and Houses of all the Chandlers, and of all others which sell by Weight or Measure, dwelling within your Ward, and see that their Scales bee not one heavier then another, and that their Measures, as well Bushels as lesser Measures, as well those that sell Sea-coales by (which ought to bee heaped) that they bee in bredth according to the new Standard, sealed as all others; and that all Yards and Ells be their just lengths & sealed, that the poore and other his Majesties subjects be not deceived. And further, if any doe buy by one Weight or Mea∣sure, and sell by others: and if in your search you finde any false Weights, Measures, or Scales, ye shall seize them and send them unto the Guild-Hall to the Chamberlaine: and you shall also doe the like, if you shall finde any that doe sell any thing by Venice Weights, contrary to the Law, and his Majesties Proclamations, present their names and faults. Inholder, Browne-Baker. ALso if any Inholder bake any Bread to sell within his house: and if any Baker of sowre Bread bake white Bread to sell, or marke not his Bread, or else take more for the ba∣king then three pence for a Bushell. House, Tyle. ALso yee shall enquire, if any house bee covered otherwise, then with Tile, Stone, Lead, for perill of fire. Leper, Begger. ALso if any Leper, Faitour, or mighty Begger bee dwelling within this Ward. Bakers, Brewers. ALso if any Baker or Brewer bake or brew with Straw, of any other thing which is peril∣lous for fire.
Painted Vizage. ALso if any man goe with painted Vizage. Candle-light. ALso if there be any man that han∣geth not out a Lanthorne with a Candle therein burning after the Vsage, according to the comman∣dement thereupon given. Tall-wood, Billets, Faggots. ALso if any person bring or cause to be brought to this City or the Liberties thereof, to be sold, or sell, offer or put to sale, any Tall-wood, Billets, Faggots, or other fire-wood, not being of the full assize which the same ought to hold. Wood, Country. ALso if any Free man of this City, use to resort into the Countries neere to this City, and there to ingrosse and buy up much Billet, Tall∣wood, Faggot, Tofard, or other Fire-wood, and convey the same by water unto this City, and there lay it upon their Wharfes and other places, and so keepe it till they may sell it at high and excessive prices at their owne wills. Also if any Wood-monger, or any other, sell any Billets or other Fire-wood above the price set by the Lord Maior. Cheese, Butter. ALso if any Citizen of this City, by himselfe, or any other person for him or to his use, use to resort into the Country, and there buy and ingrosse great quantitie of Cheese and Butter, as well barrelled as otherwise, and after conveigh it by water or other∣wise to this City to be sold at deare and excessive prices. Freemen to shew their Copies. ALso forasmuch as it is thought that divers and many persons dwelling within the Liberties of this City, dayly occupy as Free∣men, whereas indeed they bee none, nor never were admitted into the Li∣berties of this City, ye shall therefore require every such person dwelling within this Ward, whom ye shall su∣spect of the same, to shew you the Co∣py of his Freedome, under the Seale of the Office of the Chamberlaine of the said City; and such as yee shall finde without their Copies, or deny to shew their Copies, ye shall write and present their names in your Indentures. Melting Tallow. ALso you shall inquire and truly present all such persons as use melting of Tallow, contrary to an Act of Common Councell in that case made and provided. Fire-Presses. ALso you shall truly present all persons which have or use any Fire-Presses within the said Ci∣ty or Liberties of the same, for pressing or dressing of Nether-stockes, Wollen∣clothes, or other things. Also you shall enquire of all Armo∣rers other Artificers,  to work which have or  Rear∣dor, or any other places dangerous or perious for fire. Appraysers. ALso if any have appraised any goods of any Free-man decea∣sed, leaving behind him any Or∣phan
or Orphanes, and the Appraisers not sworne before the Lord Maior or the Alderman of the Ward. Beames. ALso if any Free-man buy any Wares or Merchandizes un∣weighed, which ought to bee weighed at the Kings Beame, of any stranger or forreigne free of the Liber∣ties of this City, contrary to the Act of Common Councell in that case made and provided. Clothes. ALso if any buy or sell any Cloth or Clothes in the house, shop, ware-house, or other place of any Cloth-worker, or other person a∣gainst any Ordinance or Custome of this City, or if any Cloth-worker or other doe receive or harbour any Clothes, before the same be brought to Blackwell-Hall, contrary to the ordi∣nance made in that behalfe. Carmen. ALso if any Carman take any mo∣ney for carriage of any Goods, Wares, and Merchandizes, a∣bove the rates ordained. Buildings, divided Houses, Inmates. ALso if any make or cause to bee made any new Building or Buil∣dings, or divide or cause to bee divided any House or Houses, or re∣ceive any Inmate or Inmates contrary to the Kings Majesties Proclamation, or contrary to Law, or any Statute of this Realme. Hawkers. ALso if any bee dwelling within this Ward, which doe offer or put to sale any Wares or Mer∣chandizes in the open Streets or Lane of this City, or goe from house to house to sell the same, commonly called Hawkers, contrary to an Act made in that behalfe. Freedome. ALso if any have covenously, fraudently, or unduly obtained the freedome of this City. Collectors. ALso if any Collector of Fif∣teenes or other duties for the publike service of the King or of this City, doe retaine in his hands any part of the money collected to his owne use. Women receivers of Servants. YE shall also enquire if there bee dwelling within your Ward a∣ny Woman-broker, such as re∣fort unto mens houses, demanding of their Maid-servants if they doe like of their services: if not, then they will tell them they will helpe them to a better service, and so allure them to come from their Masters to their hou∣ses, where they abide as Boorders un∣till they bee provided for. In which time it falleth out, that by lewd young men that resort to those houses, they be oftentimes made Harlots to their un∣doing, and the great hurt of the Com∣mon-wealth: wherefore if any such be, you shall present them, that order may be taken for reformation. Privies. ALso if any have or use any com∣mon Privie, having issue into any common Sewer of the Citie.
Vagabonds. ALso if any Constable, Beadle, or other Officer, be negligent or remisse in discharging his duty touching the execution of the Statute made for punishment of Rogues, Va∣gabonds, and sturdy Beggers, or other∣wise, and wherein the default is. Poore. ALso if any to whom the execu∣tion of the Statute made for re∣liefe of the poore doth apper∣taine, be remisse in discharging his du∣ty touching the execution of the same Statute, and wherein the default is. Legacies. ALso if any Executor or other person retaine in his hands any Legacy, summe of money, or o∣ther thing given to any charitable use. Drunkard, Whoremonger, Sab∣bath-breaker, Iesuite, Seminary Priest, Secular Priest, popish Recusant, Coozeners, &c. YEE shall inquire whether there be within your Ward any com∣mon Drunkard, Whoremon∣ger, Blasphemer of Gods holy Name, Prophaner of the Sabbath, Iesuite, Se∣minary or Secular Priest, or any Re∣ceiver, Releever, or Maintainer of any of them, or any Popish Recusant, Coo∣zener, or swaggering idle Compani∣on, such as cannot give account how they live; if there bee any such, you shall present them and the names of those that lodge them or aid them. Masse. YEE shall also enquire, whe∣ther any person or persons doe or shall say or sing Masse with∣in your Ward, or bee persent at any Masse. Roman Catholike Religion. ALso if any person or persons within your Ward being evill affected, doe or shall extoll the Roman Catholike Religion above the Religion professed and established by the Kings Majesties authority in Eng∣land, or doe or shall deprave the Reli∣gion now professed in this Realme by authority as above, which may breed discord in the City, and dissension in the Common-wealth, ye shall carefully present the same persons and their of∣fences. Stable-Dung. ALso if any person or persons that keepeth Horses in their houses, doe lay his or their Stable dung, or such kinde of stinking filth in any Streets or Lanes of this City, to the great annoyance of the people passing that way, and doe not leade his Dung-Cart to his Stable doore as he ought to doe. Assembly monthly. YOu shall assemble your selves once every moneth, or oftner if need require, so long as you shall continue of this Inquest, and present the defaults which you shall finde to bee committed concerning any of the Articles of your charge, to the end due remedy may bee speedily suppli∣ed, and the offenders punished as oc∣casion shall require. Here end the Articles.
AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT FOR THE PRESERVATION OF the River of Thames, made in the 27. yeere of the raigne of our most dread Soveraigne Lord, King HENRY the eighth. WHere before this time the River of Thames, a∣mong all other Rivers within this Realme, hath beene accepted and taken, and as it is indeed most commodious and profita∣ble unto all the Kings liege people: and chiefly of all other frequented and used, and as well by the Kings High∣nesse, his Estates, and Nobles, Mer∣chants, and other repairing to the Ci∣ty of London, and other places, Shires and Counties adjoyning to the same: which River of Thames is, and hath been most meet and convenient of all other, for the safegard and ordering of the Kings Navy, conveighance of Merchandizes, and other necessaries, to, and for the Kings most Honoura∣ble houshold, and otherwise, to the great relief and comfort of all persons with∣in this Realme, till now of late divers evil-disposed persons, partly by mis∣ordering of the said River, by casting in of dung and other filth, laid nigh to the bankes of the said River, dig∣ging & undermining of the said banks and walls next adjoyning to the same River, carrying and conveighing a∣way of way-shides, shore-piles, boords, timber-worke, ballast for ships, and o∣ther things from the said bankes and walles in sundry places: by reason whereof, great shelfs and risings haue of late beene made and growne in the farway of the said Riuer, and such grounds as lye within the levell of the said water marke, by occasion thereof haue bin surrounded and ouerflowne by rage of the said water, and many great breaches haue ensued and followed thereupon, and daily are like to doe, and the said River of Thames to be utterly destroyed for euer, if conueni∣ent and speedy remedy bee not sooner provided in that behalfe. For reformation whereof, be it en∣acted, established, and ordained by the King, our Soueraigne Lord, and by the assent of the Lords spirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That if any person or persons hereafter, doe or procure any thing to be done in the an∣noying of the streame of the said Ri∣ver of Thames, making of shelfs by
any manner of meanes, by mining, digging, casting of dung, or rubbish; or other thing in the same Riuer, or take, plucke, or conueigh away any boords, stakes, piles, Timberworke, or other thing from the said bankes or walls, except it bee to amend, and the same to repaire againe, or dig or un∣dermine any bankes or walls on the water side of Thames aforesaid, to the hurt, impairing or dammage of any the said walls and bankes, then the same person or persons, and euery of them, shall forfeit and pay for euery time so offending, one hundred shillings: the one moity thereof to be to the King our Soueraigne Lord, and the other moity thereof to the Maior and Comminalty of London for the time being, the same to be recouered and obtained by the Maior and Comminalty of Lon∣don, by Bill or plaint, writ of debt or information seuerally against euery of∣fender in any of the Kings Courts, in which actions and suits, or any of them, the party defendant shall not be essoined or wage his law, or any pro∣tection to be allowed in the same. And it is further enacted by the au∣thority aforesaid, that if complaint shal happen to be made to the Lord Chan∣cellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Coun∣cell, Lord Priuie Seale, or to any of them by any person or persons or bo∣dy politick, that Sir Thomas Spert Knight, now hauing the Office and or∣dering, of, and for ballasting of Ships, or any other that hereafter shall haue the Office and order of ballasting of Ships, doe take any ballast for Ships neere the said Riuer of Thames, and do not take for parcell of the said bal∣lasting, the grauel and sand of the shelfs betweene Greenhyth and Rich∣mond within the said Riuer of Thames, or in any place or places, that is or shall bee unto the dammage or annoyance of the said Riuer of Thames, or in any part thereof, that then upon euery such complaint, the said Lord Chancelor, Lord Treasu∣rer, Lord President of the Kings most honourable Councell, Lord Priuie seale, and euery of them, calling both the chiefe Iustices of either bench, or one of them, shall haue power and au∣thority from time to time, to heare and finally determine euery such com∣plaint by their discretion, and to put such order therein, for the taking of ballast for ships upon euery such com∣plaint, as by their discretions shall seeme most conuenient for the preser∣uation of the said Riuer of Thames, and the parties offending such order, shall suffer imprisonment, and make no lesse fine than 5. pound to the Kings use for euery time offending or brea∣king the same. Prouided alwaies, and be it enacted, that it shall be lawfull to euery person and persons, to dig, carry, and take away sand, grauell or other rubbish, earth, or thing lying or being in, or upon any shelfe or shelfs within the said Riuer of Thames, without let or interruption of any person or per∣sons, or paying any thing for the same, any thing contained in this pre∣sent Act to the contrary notwithstan∣ding.
AN ACT OF COMMON COVNCELL, CONCERNING the Conservation and Cleansing of the River of THAMES, made the 28. of September, in the thirtieth yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Henry the 8. WHere by the Statute made in the 27. yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne LORD, King HENRY the eighth, among other, for reformation of the mis-ordering of the River of Thames, by casting in dung and other filth, many great shelves and o∣ther risings have beene of late growne and made within the same River: By reason whereof many great Breaches have ensu∣ed by occasion thereof, which of like shall be the occasion of the utter destruction of the said Ri∣ver, unlesse that the same Law bee put in due execution accor∣ding to the true intent and mea∣ning thereof. Wherefore for a further re∣formation of the same, and to the intent that the said good and wholsome Statute may bee put in more execution, and better knowledge of the people: It is enacted by the authority of this Common Councell, that Procla∣mation may be made within this said City, and the same to be put in writing, and Tables thereof made and set up in divers places of this City, that it shall be law∣full to every person or persons, to dig, carry away, and take away Sand, Gravell, or any Rubbish, Earth, or any thing lying or being in any Shelfe or Shelves within the said River of Thames, without let or interruption of any person or persons, and with∣out any thing paying for the same, and after that to sell the same away, or otherwise occupy or dispose the said Gravell, Sand, or other thing at their free liber∣ty and pleasure. And that all Paviours, Brick-layers, Tilers, Masons, and all other that shall occupy Sand or Gravell, shall endevour themselves with all their diligence, to occupy the said Sand or Gravell, and none other, paying for the same rea∣sonably, as they should & ought to pay for other Sand or Gra∣vell digged out of other mens grounds about the said City, which after is filled againe with much filthy things, to the great
infection of the inhabitants of the said City, and all other re∣pairing unto the same. And that further, humble suit may bee made to the Kings Highnesse, that all persons having lands or tenements along the said River side, upon certaine paine by his Highnesse, and the Lords of his Honourable Councell to bee li∣mited, shall well and sufficient∣ly repaire and maintaine all the Walls and Bankes adioyning un∣to their said Lands, that so the Water may not, nor shal break in upon the same: and the same to bee continued till the time that the said noble River be brought againe to his old course and for∣mer estate. And that strong grates of iron along the said wa∣ter side, and also by the street side, where any Water-course is had into the said Thames be made by the inhabitants of every Ward so along the said Water, as of old time hath beene accustomed. And that every grate be in height foure and twenty inches at the least, or more, as the place shall neede, and in breadth one from another one inch; and the same to bee done with all expedition and speed. And if the occupiers of the said Lands and Tene∣ments make default contrary to the Ordinance aforesaid: or else if any person or persons in great Raines and other times, sweepe their Soylage, or filth of their houses into the Chanell, and the same after is conveyed into the Thames, every person so offen∣ding, shall forfeit for every such default twenty pence, and that upon complaint to bee made to any Constable, next adioyning to the said place where any such default shall bee found, it shall be lawfull for the said Consta∣ble, or his sufficient Deputy for the time being, from time to time to distraine for the same offence: and to retaine the same irreplegiable, and like Law to be observed and kept. And like penalty to bee paid for every person that burnes Rushes and Straw in their houses, or wash in the common streets or lanes, and to bee recoverd as aforesaid, and the one moity thereof to be to the Maior and Comminalty, and the other moity to bee divi∣ded betweene the said Consta∣ble that taketh paine, and the party finder of the said default. And if the Constable or his De∣puty, refuse to doe his duty ac∣cording to the true meaning of this Act, that then the Consta∣ble or his Deputy, which shal so refuse to do his duty as aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay for every time so offending, three shillings foure pence. And the same pe∣nalty of the said Constable to be recovered and obtained by di∣stresse irreplegiable, to bee ta∣ken by any of the Officers of the Chamber of London, to the use of the Maior and Comminalty of London. And further, that no person or persons having any Wharfe or House by the said Water side, make not their Lay-stalls nigh to the River aforesaid, except onely the common Lay-stalls, where the common Rakers of
this City use to repose, and lay all their soylage, to bee car∣ried a way by them with their Dung-boats. And that the said Rakers shall lay their said Dung, carried in their Dung-boats, to such convenient place or places as shall bee appoin∣ted by the Lord Maior of LON∣DON, for the time being, with the advice of his brethren, the Aldermen of the same, and to no other place or places, up∣on paine to forfeit for every such default five pounds, to bee re∣covered in any of the Kings Courts within the City of LON∣DON, by Bill, Plaint, moity of Debt, or information by any person that will or shall pursue for the same: the one moity thereof to bee unto the Maior and Comminalty of London, and the other moity to him or them that will or shall pursue for the same; in which actions or suits, no wager of Law nor essoigne shall be allowed. The Oath of the Constables within the City of LONDON. YE shall sweare, that ye keep the Peace of our Sove∣raigne Lord the King, well and lawfully after your power. And yee shall arrest all them that make, contect, Riot, Debate, or afray, in breaking of the said Peace, and leade them to the house or Comp∣ter of one of the Sheriffes. And if ye bee withstood by strength of mis∣doers, ye shall reare on them an Out∣cry, and pursue them from street to street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be arrested: and ye shall search at all times, when ye bee required by the Scavengers or Beadles, the com∣mon noysance of your Ward. And the Beadle and Raker yee shall helpe to reare, and gather their Sallary and Quarter age, if yee bee thereunto by them required. And if any thing bee done within your Ward against the Ordinance of this City, such defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall them present to the Maior and Ministers of this City: and if ye bee letted by any person or persons, that yee may not duly doe your office, yee shall cer∣tifie the Maior and Councell of the City, of the name or names of him or them that so let . Yee shall also sweare, that during the time that yee shall stand in the Office, and occupy the roome of a Constable, yee shall, once at the least every moneth, certifie and shew to one of the Clarkes of the Maiors Court, and in the same Court, as well the names as surnames of all Free-men, which yee shall know to bee deceased within the moneth, in the Parish wherein yee bee inhabited, as also the names and surnames of all the Children of the said Freemen so de∣ceased, being Orphanes of this City. And thus ye shall not leave to doe, as God you helpe, &c. God save the King.
The Oath of the Scavengers. YEE shall sweare, that yee shall diligently oversee that the Pavements within your Ward, bee well and sufficiently repaired, and not made too high in noysance of your Neighbours: and that the Wayes, Streets, and Lanes bee cleansed of Dung and all manner of filb for the honesty of this City. And that all the Chimnies, Furnaces, and Rere∣does be of stone sufficiently and de∣fensively made against perill of fire. And if yee finde any the contrary, ye shall shew it to the Alderman of the Ward, so that the Alderman may ordaine for the amendment thereof. And thus yee shall doe, as God you helpe. God save the King. Instructions for the Apprentices in the City of LONDON. YOV shall constantly and devoutly, on your knees every day, serve God Morning and Evening, and make conscience in the due hearing of the Word preached, and endevour the right practice thereof in your life and conversation: You shall doe diligent and faithfull service to your Master for the time of your Apprentiship, & deale truly in what you shall be trusted: You shall often reade over the Coveants of your Indenture, and see and endevour your selfe to performe the same to the vttermost of your power: You shall auoid all evill Company, and all occa∣sions which may tend, or draw you to the same, and make speedy returne when you shall be sent of your Masters or Mistresse errands: You shall avoid idlenesse, and be ever imployed either for Gods service, or in your Masters bu∣sinesse: You shall be of faire, gentle, and lowly speech and behaviour to all men, and especially to all your Gover∣nours. And according to your carri∣age, expect your reward, for good or ill, from God and your friends. God save the King.
The Oath of every Free-man of this City of LONDON. YEE shall sweare, that yee shall be good and true to our Soveraigne Lord, King CHARLES, and to the Heires of our said Soveraigne Lord the King. Obeysant and obe∣dient yee shall bee to the Maior and Ministers of this City, the Franchi∣ses and Customes thereof yee shall maintaine, and this City keep harmlesse in that which in you is. Yee shall bee contributory to all manner of char∣ges within this City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tal∣lages, Lot and Scot, and to all other charges, bearing your part as a free∣man ought to doe. Yee shall colour no Forraines goods, under, or in your name, whereby the King or this City might or may lose their Customes or Advantages. Yee shall know no For∣raigne to buy or sell any Merchan∣dize with any other Forraigne with∣in this City or Franchise thereof, but yee shall warne the Chamberlaine thereof, or some Minister of the Chamber. Yee shall implead or sue no Freeman out of this City, whiles ye may have right and Law within the same City. Ye shall take none Appren∣tice, but if hee be free borne (that is to say) no bond-mans Sonne, nor the Sonne of any Alien, and for no lesse tearme then for seven yeeres, without fraud or deceit: and within the first yeere yee shall cause him to be enrolled, or else pay such Fine as shall bee rea∣sonably imposed upon you for omit∣ting the same: and after his tearmes end, within convenient time (being required) ye shall make him free of this City, if hee have well and truly served you. Yee shall also keepe the Kings Peace in your owne person. Ye shall know no Gatherings, Conven∣ticles, or Conspiracies made against the Kings Peace, but ye shall warne the Maior thereof, or let it to your power. All these points and Articles ye shall well and truly keepe, accor∣ding to the Lawes and Customes of this City to your power. So God you helpe. God save the King.
Commune Concilium tentum die Veneris primo die Iunii, An. Regni Regis Henrici octavi, &c. decimo octavo, in praesentia Iohannis Allen Maioris, Gulielmi Butler Militis, Iohannis Milbourne Militis, Iohannis Mundi Militis, Thomae Baldri Militis, Gulielmi Bayly Militis, Thomae Semer Militis, Iacobi Spencer Militis, Iohannis Rudstone, Radulphi Dodmer, Iohannis Browne, Nicho∣lai Lambert, Stephani Peacocke, Iohannis Harding, Nicho. Iennings, Hen. Dacres, Iohan. Canulen, & Christopheri Askew, viz. AT this Common Councell, it is a∣greed, granted, or∣dained, & enacted, That if hereafter any Free man or Free woman of this City, take any Apprentice, and within the terme of seven yeeres suffer the same Apprentice to goe at his large liberty and pleasure: and within, or after the said terme, agree with his said Apprentice for a certaine summe of money, or otherwise for his said service, and within or after the end of the said tearme, the said Free man present the said Apprentice to the Chamberlaine of the City, and by good deliberation, and upon his Oath made to the same City, the same Free man or Free woman assureth and affirmeth to the said Chamberlain, that the said Apprentice hath fully served his said tearme as Apprentice: Or if any Free man or Free woman of this City, take any apprentice, which at the time of the said ta∣king hath any Wife: Or if any Free man or Free woman of this City, give any wages to his or her Apprentice, or suffer the said Apprentices to take any part of their owne getting or gaines: Or if any Free man or Free woman of this City hereafter colour any Forraines goods, or from hence∣forth buy or sell for any person or persons, or with or to any per∣son or persons, being Forraine, or Forrainers, Clothes, Silks, Wine, Oyles, or any other goods or mer∣chandize whatsoever they bee; whether hee take any thing or things for his or their wages or labour, or not: Or if any person or persons being free of this City, by any colour or deceitfull meanes from henceforth, doe buy, sell, or receive of any Apprentice with∣in this City, any Money, Goods, Merchandize, or Wares, without the assent or licence of his Master or Mistresse: & upon examinati∣on duly proved before the Cham∣berlaine of the said City for the time being: And the same repor∣ted by the mouth of the said Chamberlaine at a Court to bee holden by the Maior and the Al∣dermen of the same City in their Councel Chamber: That as well the said Master as the said Ap∣prentice, shall for evermore bee dis-franchised. God save the King.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE NAMES AND FIRST CAVSES OF THE INSTITVTION of Cities and peopled Townes: And of the com∣modities that doe grow by the same: and namely, of the City of LONDON. Written by way of an Apology (or defence) against the opinion of some men, which thinke that the greatnesse of that City standeth not with the profit and security of this Realme. CIties and well peopled places be called Oppida in Latine, either ab ope danda, or ab opibus, or ab opponendo se hostibus. They bee named also Civitates a coëundo, and (urbes) either of the word urbare, because the first inclo∣sure of them was described with the draught of a Plow, or else ab orbe, for the round compasse that they at the first had. In the Greek a City is tearmed , either of the word , multus, or of , id est, habitare, alere, gu∣bernare. In the Saxon (or old English) some∣times Tun, which we now call Towne, derived of the word Tynan, to enclose or tyne, as some yet speake. But for as much as that word was proper to every Village, and inclosed dwelling, there∣fore our Ancestors called their walled Townes, Buh or Bii, and we now Bury and Borow, of the Greeke word , (as I thinke) which signifieth a Tower or a high building. The walls of these Townes had their name of vallum, because at the first they were but of that earth which was cast out of the trench, or ditch wherewith they were environed. But afterward, being made of matter more fit for defence, they were named A muniendo maenia. By the Etymologie of these names it may appeare, that Common Weales, Cities and Townes were at first invented, to the end that men might lead a civill life amongst themselves, and be saved harmelesse a∣gainst their enemies: Whereupon Plato saith, Civitates ab initio utilitatis causa constitutae sunt. Aristotle, 1. Politicorum 2. saith, Civitas à natura profecta est: homo enim animal aptum est ad coetus, & proinde civitatis origo ad vivendum, insti∣tutio ad bene vivendum refertur. And Cicero, lib. primo de inventione, in the be∣ginning saith, Fuit quoddam tempus cùm in agris homines passim bestiarum more va∣gabantur, &c. quo quidem tempore, qui∣dam (magnus viz. vir & sapiens) dispersos homines in agris, & tectis silvestribus ab∣ditos, ratione quadam compulit in unum lo∣cum, at{que} eos in unamquam{que} rem induxit utilem & honestam. Vrbibus vero consti∣tutis fidem colere, & justitiam retinere discebant, & aliis parere sua voluntate con∣suescebant, &c. The same man discour∣seth notably to the same effect, in his Oration Pro Sestio, a little after the mid∣dest thereof, shewing that in the life of men dispersed, vis, beareth all the sway: but in the civill life and society, ars, is
better maintained, &c. This thing well saw King William the Conqueror, who in his lawes, folio 125. saith, Burgi & Civitates fundata, & edificata sunt, ad tuitionem gentium & populorum Regni, & idcirco observari debent cum omni liberta∣te, integritate & ratione. And his Prede∣cessors, King Ethelstane, and King Ca∣nutus in their Lawes, fol. 62. and 106. had commanded thus: Oppida instau∣rantur, &c. Seeing therefore that as Cicero, 2. officior. saith, Proxime & secundum Deos, homines hominibus maxime utiles esse pos∣sunt. And that men are congregated into Cities and Common-wealths, for honesty and utilities sake, these shortly be the commodities that doe come by Cities, Cōminalties, and Corporations. First, men by this neerenesse of conver∣sation, are withdrawne from barbarous ferity and force, to a certaine mildnesse of manners and to humanity and ju∣stice: whereby they are contented to give and take right, to and from their equals and inferiors, and to heare and obey their heads and superiors. Also the Doctrine of God is more fitly deli∣vered, and the discipline thereof more aptly to be executed, in peopled Towns than abroad, by reason of the facility of common and often assembling. And consequently, such inhabitants bee bet∣ter managed in order, and better in∣structed in wisedome: whereof it came to passe that at the first, they that ex∣celled others this way, were called A∣stuti, of the Greeke word , which sig∣nifieth a City, although the terme bee now declined to the worst part, and doe betoken evill, even as Tyrannus Sophista, and some such other originally good words are fallen: And hereof also good behavior is yet called Vrbanitas, because it is rather found in Cities, than else∣where. In some, by often hearing, men be better perswaded in Religion, and for that they live in the eye of others, they bee by example the more easily trained to justice, and by shamefastnesse restrained from injury. And whereas Commonwealths and Kingdomes cannot have, next after God, any surer foundation, than the love and good will of one man towards another, that also is closely bred and maintained in Cities, where men by mutuall society and companying toge∣ther, doe grow to alliances, Commi∣nalties and Corporations. The liberall sciences and learnings of all sorts, which bee Iumina reipublicae, doe flourish onely in peopled Townes, without the which a Realme is in no better case than a man that lacketh both his eyes. Manual Arts or handy crafts, as they have for the most part been invented in Townes and Cities, so they cannot any where else bee either maintained or a∣mended. The like is to bee said of Merchandize, under which name I comprehend all manner of buying, sel∣ling, bartering, exchanging, commu∣nicating of things that men need to and fro. Wealth and riches, which are truely called, Subsidia belli, & ornamen∣ta pacis, are increased chifely in Townes and Cities, both to the Prince and peo∣ple. The necessity of the poore and needy is in such places both sooner to be espi∣ed, and hath meanes to be more chari∣tably relieved. The places themselves be surer refu∣ges, in all extremities of forrain invasi∣on, and the inhabitants be a ready hand and strength of men with munition to oppresse intestine sedition. Moreover, for as much as the force of the warres of our time consisteth chief∣ly in shot, all other Souldiers being ei∣ther horse-men or footmen, armed on land, or Mariners at the Sea: It see∣meth to me, that Citizens and Townes∣men be as fit to bee imploied in any of these services, that on horse backe onely excepted, as the inhabitants that bee drawne out of the Country. Furthermore, even as these societies and assemblies of men in Cities and great Townes, are a continuall bridle a∣gainst tyranny, which was the cause that Tarquin, Nero, Dinisius, and such o∣thers have alwaies sought to weaken them. So, being well tempered, they are a strong fort and Bulwarke not only in the Aristocritie, but also in the Law∣full Kingdome or just royalty. At once propagation of the Religiō, the execution of good policy, the exercise of charity, and the defence of the coun∣trey,
is best performed by Townes and Citties: and this civill life approach∣eth neerest to the shape of that mysti∣call body whereof Christ is the head, and men be the members: whereupon both at the first, that man of God Moses, in the common wealth of the Israelites, and the Governours of all Countries in all ages sithence, have continually main∣tained the same. And to change it, were nothing else but to Metamor∣phose the world, and to make wilde beasts of reasonable men. To stand lon∣ger upon this, it were in re non dubia, uti oratione non necessaria; and therefore I will come to London. The Singularities of the City of LONDON. WHatsoever is said of Cities generally, maketh also for LONDON specially: Howbei t these things are particularly for our purpose to bee considered in it. The situation; the former estimation that it hath had; the service that it hath done; the present estate and govern∣ment of it, and such benefits as doe grow to the Realme by the mainte∣nance thereof. This Realme hath onely three prin∣cipall Rivers, whereon a Royall City may well bee situated: Trent in the North, Severne in the South-West, and Thames in the South-East: of the which, Thames, both for the strait course in length, reacheth furthest into the belly of the land; and for the breadth and stilnesse of the water, is most navi∣gable up and downe the streame: by reason whereof, London standing al∣most in the middle of that course, is more commodiously served with pro∣vision of necessaries, then any Towne standing upon the other two Rivers can be, and doth also more easily commu∣nicate to the rest of the Realme, the commodities of her owne entercourse and trafficke. This River openeth indifferently upon France and Flanders, our mightiest neighbours, to whose doings we ought to have a bent eye and speciall regard: and this City standeth thereon in such convenient distance from the Sea, as it is not onely neere enough for intelli∣gence of the affaires of those Princes, and for the resistance of their attempts: but also sufficiently removed from the feare of any sudden dangers that may be offered by them: whereas for the Prince of this Realme to dwell upon Trent, were to turne his backe, or blind side, to his most dangerous borderers: and for him to rest and dwell upon Se∣verne, were to be shut up in a cumber∣some corner, which openeth but upon Ireland only, a place of much lesse im∣portance. Neither could London be pitched so commodiously upon any other part of the same River of Thames, as where it now standeth. For if it were removed more to the West, it should lose the benefit of the ebbing and flowing: and if it were seated more towards the East, it should bee neerer to danger of the enemy, and further both from the good Ayre, and from doing good to the inner parts of the Realme: nei∣ther may I omit, that none other place is so plentifully watered with springs, as London is. And whereas amongst other things, Corne and Cattell, Hay and Fuell bee of great necessity: of the which, Cat∣tell may bee driven from afarre, and Corne may easily be transported. But Hay and Fuell, being of greater bulke and burthen, must be had at hand: only London, by the benefit of this situation and River, may bee sufficiently served therewith. In which respect and Alder∣man of London reasonably (as mee thought) affirmed, that although Lon∣don received great nourishment by the residence of the Prince, the repaire of the Parliament, and Courts of Iustice, yet it stood principally by the advan∣tage of the situation upon the River: for when as on a time it was told him by a Courtier, that Queene Mary, in her displeasure against London, had ap∣pointed to remove with the Parlia∣ment and Terme to Oxford; this plaine man demanded, Whether shee meant
also to divert the River of Thames from London, or no? And when the Gentle∣man had answered, No; Then quoth the Alderman, by Gods grace we shall doe well enough at London, whatsoever become of the Terme and Parliament. I my selfe being then a young Scholler at Oxford, did see great preparation made towards that Tearme and Parlia∣ment, and doe well remember that the common opinion and voyce was, that they were not holden there, because provision of Hay could not be made in all the Country to serve for ten whole dayes together, and yet is that quarter plentifully stored with Hay for the pro∣portion of the shire it selfe. For proofe of the ancient estimation of London, I will not use the authority of the British Historie, nor of such as follow it (although some hold it credi∣ble enough that London was first Tri∣nobantum civitas, or Troia nova, that fa∣mous City in our Histories, and then Luds Towne, and by corruption London, as they report) because they be not of sufficient force to draw the gain-sayers. Neither will I stand much upon that honourable Testimony which Gervas. Tilberiens. giveth to London in his booke De otiis Imperialibus, saying thus, con∣cerning the blessing of God towards it. In Vrbe London, exceptione habet divul∣gatum id per omnes aequè gentes Lucani Proverbium. Invida fatorum series summisque negatum Stare diu: Name ea annis 354. ante Romam condita, nunquam amisit principatum, nec bello consumpta est. But I will rather use the credit of one or two ancient forrain Writers, & then descend to latter Histories. Cornel. Ta∣citus, lib. 4. Annal. saith, Londinum copia negociatorum, & comeatu maximè cele∣bris; and Herodian in the life of Severus the Emperour, saith, Londinum urbs magna & opulenta; Beda lib. Ecclesiastic. 10. chap. 29. sheweth that Pope Gre∣gory appointed two Archbishops Sees in England, the one at London, the other at Yorke. King Ethelstane in his Lawes appointing how many Mint-Masters should be in each City, allotteth eight to London, and not so many to any o∣ther City. The Penner of those Lawes that are said to be made by Edward the Confessor, and confirmed by William the Conquerour, saith, London est ca∣put Regni, & Legum. King Henry the first, in the third Chapter of his Lawes, commandeth that no Citizen of London should bee amerced above an hundred shillings for any pecuniary paine. The great Chapter of England, that Helena, for which there was so long and so great warre and contention, in the ninth Chapter saith, Civitas London habeat omnes suas Libertates antiquas, &c. About the time of King Iohn, London was re∣puted, Regni firmata Columna, as Alex. Necham writeth: And in the beginning of the Raigne of King Richard the se∣cond, it was called Camera Regis, as Tho∣mas Walsingham reporteth. I passe over the recitall of the Saxon Charter of King William the Conquerour; or the Latine Charters of Henry the first and second; of Richard the first; of Iohn; and of Edward the first; all which gave unto the Citizens of London great Pri∣viledges, and of Edward the third, who reciting all the grants of his Predeces∣sors, not onely confirmed, but also in∣creased the same: and of the lat∣ter Kings, who have likewise added many things thereunto. Onely I wish to bee noted by them, that during all this time, all those wife and politike Princes have thought it fit, not onely to maintaine London in such plight as they found it, but also to adorne, in∣crease, and amplifie it with singular tokens of their liberall favour and good liking. And whether there bee not now the same or greater causes to draw the like or better estimation and che∣rishing, let any man be judge, that will take the paines to compare the present estate of London, yet still growing to better, with the former condition of the same. It were too much to recite particu∣larly the Martiall services that this Ci∣ty hath done from time to time: nei∣ther doe I thinke that they be all com∣mitted to writing; only for a taste, as it were, I will note these few following. Almost threescore yeeres before the Conquest, a huge Army of the Danes, (where of King Sweyne was the Leader) besieged King Etheldred in London (then
the which, as the story saith, then hee had none other refuge) but they were manfully repulsed, and a great number of them slaine. After the death of this Sweyne, his sonne Canutus (afterward King of Eng∣land) besieged London, both by land and by water: but after much labour, find∣ing it impregnable, he departed: and in the same yeere repairing his forces, hee girded it with a new siege, in the which the Citizens so defended them∣selves, and offended him, that in the end he went away with shame. In the dissnsion that arose between King Edward the Confessor, and his Father in law Earle Goodwin (which was the mightiest subject within this Land that ever I have read of) The Earle with a great Army came to Lon∣don, and was, for all that, by the counte∣nance of the Citizens resisted, till such time as the Nobility made reconci∣liation betweene them. About seventy yeeres after the Conquest, Maude the Empresse made warre upon King Ste∣phen for the right of the Crowne, and had taken his person prisoner, but by the strength and assistance of the Lon∣doners and Kentishmen, Maude was put to flight at Winchester, and her Bro∣ther Robert then Earle of Glocester, was taken in exchange, for whom King Stephen was delivered; I dispute not whose right was better, but I avouch the service, seeing Stephen was in pos∣session. The History of William Walworth the Maior of London, is well knowne, by whose manhood and policy, the person of Richard the second was rescued, the City saved, Wat Tyler killed, and all his stragglers discomfited, in reward of which service, the Maior and other Al∣dermen were Knighted. Iacke Cade also having discomfited the Kings Army, that was sent against him, came to London and was there manfully and with long fight resisted, until that by the good policy of the Ci∣tizens, his Company was dispersed. Finally, in the tenth yeere of the raign of King Edward the fourth, and not ma∣ny dayes before the death of Henry the sixth, Tho. Nevill, commonly called the Bastard of Fauconbridge, armed a great Company against the King, and being denied passage thorow London, hee as∣saulted it on divers parts: but hee was repulsed by the Citizens, and chased as farre as Stratford, with the losse of a great many. Thus much of certaine their princi∣pall, and personall services, in warre on∣ly: for it were infinite to repeat the par∣ticular aides of men and money which London hath ministred: and I had ra∣ther to leave it to be conjectured at, by comparison to bee made betweene it, and other Cities, whereof I will give you this one note for an example. In the twelfth yeere of the raigne of King Edward the second, it was ordered by Parliament, that every City of the Realme should make out Souldiers a∣gainst the Scots: at which time London was appointed to send two hundred men, and Canterbury, being then one of our best Cities, forty, and no more. And this proportion of five to one, is now in our age encreased, at the least five to one, both in Souldiers and subsidy. As for the other services that London hath done in times of peace, they are to bee measured by consideration of the com∣modities, whereof I will speake anon. In the meane season let the estate and government of this City be considred, to the end that it may appeare that it standeth well with the policy of the Realme. Caesar in his Commentaries is wit∣nesse, that in his time the Cities of Bri∣taine had large Teritories annexed unto them, and were severall estates of them∣selves, governed by particular Kings or Potentates, as in Italy and Germany yet be: and that Mandubratius was King of the Trinobants, whose chiefe City London is taken to have beene. And I finde not that this government was al∣tered, either by Caesar, or his successors, notwithstanding that the Country be∣came to bee tributary unto them: but that it continued, untill at length the Britaines themselves reduced all their peoples into one Monarchy, howbeit that lasted not any long season: for up∣on Vortiger their King, came the Saxons our Ancestors, and they drave the Bri∣tains into Wales, Cornwall, and Britain in France, and in processe of warre divided
the Country amongst themselves into an Eptarchy, or seven Kingdomes, of the which one was called the King∣dome of the East Saxons, which having in manner the same limits that the Bi∣shopricke of London now enjoyeth, con∣tained Essex, Middlesex, and a part of Hertfordshire, and so included London. Againe it appeareth, that in course of time, and about 1800. yeeres after Christ, Egbert (then King of the West Saxons) Vt pisces saepe minutos magnus comest, overcame the rest of the Kings, and once more erected a Monarchy, the which till the comming in of the Nor∣manes, and from thence even hitherto hath continued. Now I doubt not (whatsoever Lon∣don was in the time of Caesar) but that under the Eptarchy and Monarchy it hath been a subject, and no free City, though happily endowed with some large priviledges: for King William the Conquerour found a Portreeve there, whose name was Godfrey (by which name hee greeteth him in his Saxon Chre) and his office was none other than the charge of a Bayliffe, or Reeve, as by the selfe-same name continuing yet in Gravesend, and certaine other places may well appeare. But the Frenchmen using their owne language, called him sometime a Provost, and sometime a Bayliffe; whatsoever his name and Of∣fice were, he was Perpetuus Magistratus, given by the Prince, and not chosen by the Citizens, as it seemeth, for what time King Richard the first needed mo∣ny towards his expedition in the Holy Land, they first purchased of him the liberty to choose yeerely from amongst themselves two Bailiffes: and King Iohn his successor, at their like suit chan∣ged their Bayliffes into a Maior, and two Sheriffes. To these Henry the third added Aldermen; at the first elegible yeerely, but afterward by King Edward the third made perpetuall Magistrates, and Justices of the peace within their Wards, in which plight of governe∣ment it presently standeth. This shortly as I could, is the Historicall and outward estate of London: now come I to the inward pith and sub∣stance. The estate of this City is to be exa∣mined by the quantity, and by the qua∣litie. The quantity therefore consisteth in the number of the Citizens, which is ve∣ry great, and farre exceedeth propor∣tion of Hippodamus, which appointed 10000. and of others which haue set downe other numbers, as meete stints in their opinions to be well gouerned; but yet seeing both reason and experi∣ence have feed us from the law of any definite number, so that other things be observed, let that be admitted: nei∣ther is London, I feare mee, so great as populous: for well saith one, Non idem est magna Civitas & frequens, magna est enim quae multos habet qui arma ferre pos∣sunt: Whatsoever the number bee, it breedeth no feare of sedition: for as much as the same consisteth not in the extremes, but in a very mediocrity of wealth and riches, as it shall better ap∣peare anon. And if the causes of Eng∣lish Rebellions bee searched out, they shall bee found in effect to bee these twaine, Ambition and Covetousnesse, of which the first raigneth in the minds of high and noble personages, or of such others, as seeke tobee gracious and po∣pular, and have robbed the hearts of the multitude, whereas in London if any where in the world, Honos verè onus est, and every man rather shunneth than seeketh the Maiorality, which is the best marke amongst them, neither hath there been any strong faction, nor any man more popular than the rest, for as much as the government is by a Patern, as it were, and alwaies the same, how often soever they change their Magi∣strate. Covetousnesse, that other Syre of sedition, possesseth the miserable and needy sort, and such as bee naughty∣packes, unthrifts, which although it cannot be chosen, but that in a frequent City as London is, there shall be found many, yet beare they not any great sway seeing the multitude and most part there is of a competent wealth, and ear∣nestly bent to honest labour. I confesse that London is a mighty arme and in∣strument to bring any great desire to effect, if it may be won to a mans devo∣tion: whereof also there want not ex∣amples in the English Historie. But for as much as the same is by the like
reason serviceable and meet to impeach any disloyall attempt, let it rather bee well governed then evill liked there∣fore; for it shall appeare anon, that as London hath adhered to some rebelli∣ons, so hath it resisted many, and was never the Author of any one. The qua∣lity of this City consisteth either in the Law and government thereof: or in the degrees and condition of the Citi∣zens, or in their strength and riches. It is besides the purpose to dispute, whether the estate of the government here be a Democratie, or Aristocratie, for whatsoever it bee, being considered in it selfe, certaine it is, that in respect of the whole Realme, London is but a Ci∣tizen, and no City; a subject, and no free estate; an obedienciary, and no place endowed with any distinct or ab∣solute power: for it is governed by the same Law that the rest of the Realme is, both in causes Criminall and Civill, a few customes onely excepted, which also are to bee adjudged, or forjudged by the common Law. And in the as∣sembly of the estates of our Realme (which we call Parliament) they are but a member of the Comminalty, and send two Burgesses for their City, as every poore Borough doth, and two Knights for their County, as every o∣ther Shire doth, and are as straightly bound by such Lawes, as any part of the Realme is: for if contribution in subsi∣dy of money to the Prince be decreed, the Londoners have none exemption, no not so much as to assesse themselves: for the Prince doth appoint the Com∣missioners. If Souldiers must be mustered, Lon∣doners have no Law to keepe them∣selves at home; if provision for the Princes houshold be to be made, their goods are not priviledged. In summe therefore, the government of London differeth not in substance, but in cere∣mony from the rest of the Realme, as namely, in the names and choice of their Officers, and in their Guildes and Fraternities, established for the main∣tenance of Handicrafts and Labourers, and for equity and good order, to bee kept in buying and selling. And yet in these also are they to bee controlled by the generall Law: for by the Sta∣tutes of 28. Edward the third, chap. 10. and of the first of Henry the fourth, chap. 15. the points of their misgovernment are inquirable by the inhabitants of the forren Shires adjoyning, and punish∣able by such Iusticiars as the Prince shall thereunto depute: to conclude therefore, the estate of London for go∣vernment, is so agreeable a Symphony with the rest, that there is no feare of dangerous discord to ensue thereby. The multitude (or whole body) of this populous City is two wayes to bee considered, generally, & specially: ge∣nerally, they bee naturall Subjects, a part of the Commons of this Realme, and are by birth for the most part a mixture of all Countries of the same, by blood Gentlemen, Yeomen, and of the basest sort without distinction; and by profession busie Bees, and travellers for their living in the hive of this Com∣mon-wealth; but specially considered, they consist of these three parts, Mer∣chants, Handicrafts-men, and Labou∣rers. Merchandise is also divided into these three sorts; Navigation, by the which, Merchandizes are brought, and carried in and out over the Seas: Inve∣ction, by the which, commodities are gathered into the City, and dispersed from thence into the Country by land: and Negotiation, which I may call the keeping of a retayling or standing Shop. In common speech, they of the first sort bee called Merchants, and both the o∣ther Retaylers. Handicrafts-men bee those which doe exercise such Arts as require both labour and cunning, as Goldsmithes, Taylors, and Haberdash∣ers, Skinners, &c. Labourers and Hire∣lings, I call those Quorum operae non ar∣tes emuntur, as Tully saith, of which sort bee Porters, Carmen, Water∣men, &c. Againe, these three sorts may be considered, either in respect of their wealth, or number: in wealth, Merchants, and some of the chiefe Re∣taylers have the first place: the most part of Retaylers, and all Artificers, the second or meane place: and Hirelings, the lowest roome: But in number, they of the middle place bee first, and doe farre exceed both the rest: Hire∣lings be next, and Merchants bee the last. Now out of this, that the estate
of London, in the persons of the Citi∣zens, is so friendly interlaced, and knit in league with the rest of the Realme, not onely at their beginning by birth and blood (as I have shewed) but also very commonly at their ending by life and conversation (for that Merchants & rich men being satisfied with gaine, doe for the most part) marry their chil∣dren into the Countrey, and convey themselves after Ciceroes counsell, Ve∣luti-ex pontu in agros & possessiones: I doe referre, that there is not onely no danger towards the common quiet thereby, but also great occasion and cause of good love and amity. Out of this, that they be generally bent to tra∣vell, and doe flie poverty, Per mare, per saxa, per ignes, as the Poet saith▪ I draw hope, that they shall escape the note of many vices, which idle people doe fall into. And out of this, that they be a great multitude, and that yet the greatest part of them bee neither too rich nor too poore, but doe live in the mediocritie: I conclude with Aristotle, that the Prince needeth not to feare se∣dition by them, for thus saith he, Mag∣nae vrbes, magis sunt à seditione liberae, quod in eis dominetur mediocritas, nam in parvis nihil medium est, sunt enim omnes vel pauperes vel opulenti. I am now to come to the strength and power of this City, which consisteth partly in the number of the Citizens themselves, whereof I have spoken before, partly in their riches, and in their warlike fur∣niture: for as touching the strength of the peece it selfe, that is apparent to the eye, and therfore is not to be treated of. The wealth and warlike furniture of London, is either publike or private, and no doubt the common treasure cannot be much there, seeing that the revenue which they have, hardly sufficeth to maintaine their Bridge, and Conduits, and to pay their officers and servants. Their Toll doth not any more then pay their Fee-Farme that they pay to the Prince. Their Issues for default of ap∣pearances bee never levied, and the profits of their Courts of Iustice doe goe to particular mens hands. Argu∣ments hereof bee these two, one, that they can doe nothing of extraordinary charge, without a generall contributi∣on: another, that they have suffered such as have borne the chiefe office a∣mongst them, and were become Bank∣rupt, to depart the City without re∣liefe, which I thinke they neither would nor could have done, it the com∣mon Treasure had sufficed to cover their shame; hereof therefore we need not bee afraid. The publike Armour and munition of this City remaineth in the Halls of the Companies, as it doth thorow out the whole Realme, for a great part, in the Parish Churches; neither is that kept together, but onely for obedience to the Law, which com∣mandeth it; and therefore if that threa∣ten danger to the State, it may by a∣nother law bee taken from them, and committed to a more safe Armory. The private riches of London, resteth chiefly in the hands of the Merchants & Retaylers; for Artificers have not much to spare; and Labourers had need that it were given unto them. Now, how necessary and serviceable the estate of Merchandise is to this Realme, it may partly appeare by the practice of that peaceable, politike, and rich Prince, King Henry the seventh, of whom Po∣lidore (writing his life) saith thus, Mer∣catores Ille saepenumero pecunia multa data gratuite uvabat, ut mercatura ars una omnium cunctis aequè mortalibus tum com∣moda, tum necessariae, in suo Regno copiosior esset. But chiefly by the inestimable cōmodities that grow thereby: for who knoweth not that we have extreme need of many things, whereof forraine Coun∣tries have great store, and that we may spare many things whereof they have need? or who is ignorant of this, that we have no Mines of Silver or Gold within our Realme, so that the increase of our Coine and Bulloine commeth from elsewhere, & yet neverthelesse, we be both fed, clad, and otherwise served with forraine commodities & delights, as plentifull as with our domesticall? which thing commeth to passe by the meanes of Merchandise onely, which importeth necessaries from other coun∣tries, and exporteth the superfluities of our owne. For seeing we have no way to increase our Treasure, by Mines of Gold or Silver at home, and can have nothing without Money or Ware from
other Countries abroad, it followeth necessarily, that if we follow the Coun∣sell of that good old Husband Marcus Cato, saying, Oportet patremfamilias vendacem esse, non emacem, and doe car∣ry more commodities in value over the Seas, than we bring hither from thence: that then the Realme shall receive that overplus in mony: but if we bring from beyond the Seas Merchandize of more value, than that which we doe send o∣ver may countervaile, then the Realme payeth for that overplus in ready mony, and consequently is a loser by that ill husbandry: and therefore in this part great and heedfull regard must be had, that Symmetria and due proportion bee kept, lest otherwise either the Realme bee defrauded of her treasure, or the Subjects corrupted in vanity, by exces∣sive importation of superfluous and needlesse Merchandize, or else that we feele penurie, even in our greatest plen∣ty and store, by immoderate exportati∣on of our owne needfull commodities. Other the benefits that Merchandize bringeth, shall hereafter appeare in the generall recitall of the commodities that come by London, and therefore it resteth that I speake a word of Retay∣lors, and finally shew that much good groweth by them both. The chiefe part of Retayling, is but a hand-maid to Merchandize, dispersing by piece-meale that which the Merchant bring∣eth in grosse: of which trade be Mercers, Grocers, Vinteners, Haberdashers, I∣ronmongers, Millayners, and all such as ell wares growing or made beyond the Seas, and therefore so long as Mer∣chandize it selfe shall be profitable, and such proportion kept, as neither we lose our treasure thereby, nor be cloyed with unnecessary forraine wares, this kind of Retayiing is to be retained also. Now, that Merchants and Retaylors of London be very rich and great, it is so farre from any harme, that it is a thing both praise-worthy and profitable: for Mercatura (saith Cicero) si tenuis est, sor∣dida putanda est, sin magna est & copiosa, non est vituperanda. And truely Mer∣chants and Retaylers doe not altogether intus Canere, and profit themselves only: for the Prince and Realme both are in∣riched by their riches: the Realme win∣neth treasure, if their Trade bee so mo∣derated by authority, that it breake not proportion, and they besides beare a good fleece, which the Prince may sheare when he seeth good. But here before I conclude this part, I have shortly to answer the accusation of those men, which charge London with the losse and decay of many (or most) of the ancient Cities, corporate Townes and Markets within this Realme, by drawing from them to her selfe alone, say they, both all trade of trafficke by Sea, and the Retayling of Wares, and exercise of Manuali Arts also. Touching Navigation, which I must confesse, is apparantly decayed in many port Townes, and flourisheth onely or chiefly at London, I impute that partly to the fall of the Staple, the which being long since a great Trade, and bestowed sometimes at one Town, and sometimes at another within the Realme, did much enrich the place where it was, and being now not one∣ly diminished in force, but also translated over the Seas, cannot but bring some decay with it, partly, to the impayring of Havens, which in many places have impoverisht those Towns, whose estate doth ebbe and flow with them, and partly, to the dissolution of Religious houses, by whose wealth and haunt, many of those places were chief∣ly fed and nourished. I meane not to rehearse particular examples of euery sort: for the thing it selfe speaketh, and I haste to an end. As for Retaylors thereof, and Handicrafts-men, it is no marvell if they abandon Countrey Townes, and resort to London: for not onely the Court, which is now adayes much greater, and more gallant than in former times, and which was wont to bee contented to remaine with a small company, sometimes at an Abbey or Priory, sometimes at a Bishops house, and sometimes at some meane Mannor of the Kings owne, is now for the most part either abiding at London, or else so neer unto it, that the provision of things most fit for it, may easily bee setched from thence: but also by occasion ther∣of, the Gentlemen of all shires doe flye, and flocke to this City, the yonger sort of them to see and shew vanity, and the
elder to save the cost and charge of hos∣pitality, and house-keeping. For here∣by it commeth to passe, that the Gen∣tlemen being either for a good portion of the yeere out of the Countrey, or playing the Farmers, Grasiers, Brewers, or such like, more than Gentlemen were wont to doe within the Country, Re∣taylers and Artificers, at the least of such things as pertaine to the backe or belly, doe leave the Country Townes, where there is no vent, and doe flie to London, where they be sure to finde rea∣dy and quicke Market. And yet I wish that even as many Townes in the Low-Countries of King Philips doe stand some by one handy Art, and some by another: so also that it might bee pro∣vided here, that the making of some things, might (by discreet dispensation) be allotted to some speciall Townes, to the end, that although the daintinesse of men cannot be restrained, which will needs seeke those things at London, yet other places also might bee relieved at the least by the Workemanshippe of them. Thus much then of the estate of Lon∣don, in the government thereof, in the condition of the Cittizens, and in their power and riches. Now follow the e∣numeration of such benefits, as redound to the Prince and this Realme by this City: In which doing, I professe not to rehearse all, but onely to recite and run over the chiefe and principall of them. Besides the commodities of the fur∣therance of Religion, and Justice: The propagation of Learning: The main∣tenance of Arts: The increase of riches, and the defence of Countries (all which are before shewed to grow generally by Cities, and be common to London with them) London bringeth singularly these good things following. By advantage of the situation, it dis∣perseth forrain Wares, (as the stomack doth meat) to all the members most commodiously. By the benefit of the River of Thames and great Trade of Merchandize, it is the chiefe maker of Mariners, and Nurse of our Navy and Ships, which (as men know) bee the woodden walls for defence of our Realme. It maintaineth in flourishing estate, the Countries of Norfolk, Suffolke, Essex, Kent, and Sussex, which as they lye in the face of our most puissant neighbor, so ought they above others, to bee con∣served in the greatest strength and ri∣ches: and these, as it is well knowne, stand not so much by the benefit of their owne soile, as by the neighbour∣hood and neerenesse which they have to London. It relieveth plentifully, and with good policy, not onely her owne poore people, a thing which scarcely any o∣ther Town or Shire doth, but also the poore that from each quarter of the Realme doe flocke unto it, and it im∣parteth liberally to the necessity of the Vniversities besides. It is an ornament to the Realme by the beauty thereof, and a terror to other Countries by rea∣son of the great wealth and frequency. It spreadeth the honour of our Country farre abroad by her long Navigations, and maketh our power feared, even of barbarous Princes. It onely is stored with rich Merchants, which sort onely is tolerable: for beggerly Merchants doe bite too neere, and will doe more harme than good to the Realme. It onely of any place in this Realme, is able to furnish the sudden necessity with a strong Army. It availeth the Prince in Tronage, Poundage and other his customes, much more than all the rest of the Realme. It yeeldeth a greater Subsidy than a∣ny one part of the Realm, I mean not for the proportion of the value of the goods onely, but also for the faithfull service there used, in making the assesse; for no where else bee men taxed so neere to their just value as in London: yea many are found there, that for their counte∣nance and credit sake, refuse not to bee rated above their ability, which thing never hapneth abroad in the country. I omit that in ancient time, the Inhabi∣tants of London and other Cities, were accustomably taxed after the tenth of their goods, when the Country was as∣sessed at the fifteenth, and rated at the eighth, when the Country was set at the twelfth: for that were to awake a sleeping dog, and I should be thought dicenda, tacenda, locutus, as the Poet said.
It onely doth, and is able to make the Prince a ready prest or loane of mony. It onely is found fit and able to en∣tertaine strangers honourably, and to receive the Prince of the Realme wor∣thily. Almighty God (qui nisi custodiat Ci∣vitatem, frustrà vigilat custos) grant, that his Majesty evermore rightly esteeme and rule this City, and He give grace, that the Citizens may answer duty, as∣well towards God and his Majesty, as towards this whole Realme and Coun∣try, Amen. An Appendix containing the examination of such causes, as have heretofore moved the Princes, either to fine and ransome the Citizens of LONDON, or to seize the Liberties of the City it selfe. THese all may be reduced to these few heads: for either the Citizens have adhered in aid or armes, to such as have warred upon the Prince, or they have made tumult, and broken the common peace at home: or they have misbehaved themselves in point of go∣vernment and justice: or finally, and to speak the plaine truth, the Princes have taken hold of small matters, and coyned good summes of money out of them. To the first head I will referre what∣soever they have done, either in those warres that happened betweene King Stephen and Maud the Empresse, being competitors of the Crown: or between King Iohn and his Nobles assisting Lew∣es the French Kings sonne when hee in∣vaded the Realme: for it is apparent by all Histories, that the Londoners were not the movers of these wars, but were onely used as instruments to maintaine them. The like is to bee said of all the offences that King Henry the third, whose whole raigne was a continuall warfare, conceived against this City, concerning the bearing of Armour a∣gainst him: for the first part of his reign was spent in the continuation of those warres that his Father had begun with Lewes. And the rest of his life hee be∣stowed in that contention, which was commonly called The Barons wars. In which Tragedy London, as it could not be otherwise, had now and then a part, and had many a snub at the Kings hand for it. But in the end, when he had tri∣umphed over Simon Mountford at Eve∣sham, London felt it most tragicall: for then he both seized their Liberties, and sucked themselves dry: and yet Edict∣um Kenelworth, made shortly after, hath an honourable testimony for London, saying, Te London laudamus, &c. As for the other offences that he tooke against the Londoners, they pertaine to the o∣ther parts of my division. Next after this, against whom the Londoners did put on armes, followeth King Edward the second, who in the end was deprived of his Kingdome, not by their meanes, but by a generall defecti∣on, both of his owne wife and sonne, and almost of the whole Nobility and Realme besides. In which trouble, that furious assault & slaughter, committed by them upon the Bishop of Excester, then Treasurer of the Realme, is to bee imputed, partly to the sway of the time wherewith they were carried, and part∣ly to a private displeasure which they had to the Bishop. Finally, commeth to hand King Ri∣chard the second: for these three onely in all the Catalogue of our Kings, have beene heavy Lords to London, who also had much contention with his Nobili∣ty, and was in the end deposed. But whatsoever countenance and aide the City of London brought to the warres and uprores of that time, it is notori∣ously true, that London never led the Dance, but ever followed the Pipe of the Nobility. To cloze up this first part therefore I affirme, that in all the trou∣blesome actions during the reigne of these three Kings, as also in all that
heaving in, and hurling out, that after∣ward happened betweene King Henry the sixth, and King Edward the fourth, the City of London was many times a friend and fautor, but never the first motive or author of any intestine warre or sedition. In the second roome I place a couple of tumultuous affraies, that chanced in the daies of King Richard the first: The one upon the day of his Coronation a∣gainst the Jewes, which, contrary to the Kings owne Proclamation, would needs enter the Church to see him sacred, and were therefore ctuelly handled by the common people. The other was caused by William with the long beard, who after that hee had inflamed the poore people against the richer sort, and was called to answer for his fault, took Bow Church for Sanctuary, and kept it Ca∣stle-like, till he was fired out. Here is a place also for the stoning to death of a Gentleman, servant to the halfe Brother of King Henry the third, which had before provoked the Citi∣zens to fury, by wounding divers of them without any cause 1257. for the riotous fray between the servants of the Goldsmiths and the Taylors, 1268. for the hurly burly and bloodshed between the Londoners and the men of Westmin∣ster, moved by the Youngmen upon an occasion of a wrestling on Saint Iames day, 1221. and made worse by one Con∣stantine an ancient Citizen: for the brawle and businesse that arose about a Bakers loafe at Salisbury place 1391. for the which and some other misde∣meanors, King Richard the second was so incensed by evill counsell against the Londoners, that he determined to de∣stroy them, and raze their City, and for the fight that was betweene the Ci∣tizens and Sanctuary men of Saint Martins 1454. under King Henry the sixth. And finally, for the misrule on evill May day 1519. and for such other like if there have beene any. To the third head may bee referred the seizer of their liberties, for a false judgement given against a poore wid∣dow, called Margaret Viel, 1246. The two severall seizers in one yeere 1258. for false packing in collections of money and other enormities: And fi∣nally, the seizer made by King Edward the first, for taking of bribes of the Ba∣kers 1285. But all this security in sei∣zing and resuming of the liberties, which was in old time the onely ordi∣nary punishment was at length mitiga∣ted by King Edward the third, and King Henry the fourth, in their statutes before remembred. In the last-place it and those offen∣ces, which I repute rather taken than given, and doe fall within the measure of the Adage, Vt canē caedas, citò invenias baculum: for King Iohn in the tenth of his reigne deposed the Bailiffes of Lon∣don, because they had bought up the wheate in the Market, so that there was not to serve his Purveyors. King Henry the third his sonne compelled the Lon∣doners to pay him 5000. pound, be∣cause they had lent to Lewes the French the like summe, of a good mind to dis∣patch him out of their City and the Realme, at such time as the Protectour and the whole Nobility fell to compo∣sition with him for his departure. And the same King fined them at three thou∣sand markes, for the escape of a priso∣ner out of Newgate, of whom they took no charge: for he was a Clarke, priso∣ner to the Bishop of London, under the custody of his owne servants; and as for the place, it was onely borrowed of the Londoners to serve that turne. Hi∣therto of these things to this end, that whatsoever misdemeanor shall bee objected out of History against Lon∣don, the same may herein appeare, both in his true place, and proper co∣lour.
The Author to the Reader. BEcause amongst other mine Authors I have oftentimes alleaged Fitz-Stephens, as one more choice then other, namely, for the an∣cient estate of this City, more then foure hundred yeeres since: and also the said Au∣thor being rare, I have in this place thought good by impression to impart the same to my loving friends, the learned Antiquaries, as the Author wrote it in the Latine tongue. And first to note in effect, what Master Bale in commendation of the said Author writeth. William Stephanides, or Fitz-Stephen, a Monke of Canterbury, borne of worshipfull Parents in the City of London, well brought up at the first under good Masters, did more and more increase in honest condicions and learning: for ever in his young yeeres there appeared in him a certaine light of a Gentleman-like disposition, which promised many good things, afterward by him performed. Such time as others spent in brawles and idle talke, hee imployed in wholsome exercises for the honour of his Country, following therein the example of Plato: and was very studious both in hu∣manity and divinity. The City of London, his birth place, the most Noble of all other Cities of this Land, and the Princes Seate, situated in the South part of this Iland, hee loved above all the other, so that at length he wrote most elegantly in Latine of the site, and rites of the same. Leland in divers of his Bookes commendeth him for an excellent Writer. He lived in the Raigne of King Stephen, wrote in the Raigne of Henry the second, and deceased in the yeere of Christ, 1191. in the Raigne of Richard the first.
DESCRIPTIO NOBILILISSIMAE Civitatis LONDONIAE. De Situ ejusdem. INter nobiles Vrbes orbis, quas fama celebrat, civitas Londonia, Regni Anglo∣rum sedes una est, quae fa∣mam sui latiùs diffundit, opes & merces longiùs transmittit, caput al∣tiùs extollit. Foelix est aëris salubritate, Christiana Religione, firmitate munitio∣num, natura situs, honore civium, pudici∣tia matronali, ludis etiam, quàm iucunda, & Nobilium faecunda virorum: quae singu∣la semotim libet inspicere. De Clementia aëris. IBi siquidem emollit animos hominum clementia Coeli, non ut sint in venerem putres, ut ne feri sint & bestiales, potius benigni & liberales. De Religione. ESt ibi in Ecclesia beati Pauli Episco∣palis sedes, quondam fuit Metropo∣litana, & adhuc futura creditur, si remeaverint cives in Insulam: nisi forte Beati Thomae Martyris titulus Archiepis∣copalis, & praesentia corporalis, dignitatem illam Cantuariae (ubi nunc est) conservet perpetuam. Sed cum utramque urbium ha∣rum Sanctus Thomas illustraverit, Lon∣doniam ortu, Cantuariam occasu: ipsius sancti intuitu, cum iustitiae accessu, habet al∣tera adversus alteram, quod amplius alle∣get. Sunt etiam (quod ad Christianae fidei cultum pertinet) tum in Londonia, tum in suburbano, 13. maiores Ecclesiae conven∣tuum, praeter minores parochianas, 126. De Firmitate Vrbis. HAbet ab Oriente arcem Palatinam, maximam & fortissimam, cuius & area, & muri à fundamento profundissimo exurgunt: cemento cum san∣guine animalium temperato. Ab occidente duo castella munitissima: muro urbis alto & magno, duplatis Heptapylae portis inter∣continuante, turrito ab Aquilone per inter∣capedines, Similiter{que} ab Austro Londo∣nia murata & turrita fuit: sed fluvius max∣imus piscosus Thamensis, mari influo reflu∣oque qui illac allabitur, maenia illa tractu temporis alluit, labefactavit, deieci. Item sursùm ab occidente Palatium Regium emi∣net super fluvium eundem, aedificium incom∣parabile, cum autemurali, & propugnaculis, duobus millibus ab urbe; suburbano frequen∣ti continuante. De Hortis. VNdi{que} extra domos suburbanorum Horti civium arboribus consiti, spa∣tiosi, & speciosi, contigui habentur.
De Pascuis & Sationalibus. ITem à Borea suno agri paseui, & pra∣torum grata planities, aquis fluvialibus interfluis: ad quas molinorum versati∣les rotae citantur cum murmure iocoso. Pro∣ximè patet foresta ingens, salcus nemorosi ferarum, latebrae cervorum, damarum, a∣prorum, & taurorum sylvestrium: Agri ur∣bis sationales non sunt teiunae glareae, sed pin∣gues Asiae campi qui faciunt laetas segetes, & suorum cultorum repleant horrea cerealis in∣gere culmi. De Fontibus. SVnt & circa Londoniam ab Aqui∣lone suburbani fontes praecipui aqua dulci, salubri, perspicua, & per claros rivo trepidante lapilles. Inter quos Fons Sa∣cer, Fons Clericorum, Fons Sancti Clemen∣tis nominatiores habentur, & adeuntur ce∣lebriori accessu, & maiori frequentia scho∣larum & vrbanae iuventutis in scrotinis aesti∣vis ad auram exeuniis. Vrbs sanè bona, cùm bonum habeat Dominum. De honore Civium. VRbs ista viris est honoratae, armis decorata, multo habitatore populosae, ut tempore bellicae cladis sub rege Stephano bello apti, ex ea exeuntes ostenta∣tui, haberentur 20000. armatorum equitum, 60. mille peditum aestimarentur. Cives Lon∣doniae ubicun{que} locorum prae omnibus aliis civibus ornatu morum, vestium & mensae, locutione, spectabiles & noti habentur. De Matronis. Vrbis Matronae ipsae Sabinae sunt. De Scholis. IN Londonia tres principales ecclesiae Scholas celebres habent de privilegio & antiquae dignitate. Plerunque tamen fa∣vore personae alus, vel aliquorum docto∣rum, qui secundum Philosophiam noti & praeclari habentur, & aliae ibi sunt Scholae de gratia & permissione. Diebus festis ad ec∣clesias festivas magistri coventus celebran∣tur. Disputant scholares, quidam demon∣strativè, Dialecticè alii: alii recitant enthy∣mematae: hi meliùs perfectis utuntur Syllo∣gismis. Quidam ad estemationem exercen∣tur disputatione, quae est inter colluctantes. Alii ad veritatem, ea quae est perfectionis gratia: sophisiae simulatores agmine & in∣undatione verborum beati iudicantur. Alii paralogizantur: Oratores aliqui quandoque orationibus Rhetoricis aliquid dicunt appo∣siiè ad persuadendum, curantes artis prae∣cepta servare, & ex contingentibus nihil omittere. Fueri diversarum scholarum ver∣sibus inter se conrixantur: & de principiis artis Grammaticae, regulis praeteritorum vel futurorum contendunt: Sunt alii qui epi∣griimatibus, rithmis & metris utuntur, vetere illa triviali dicacitate, licentia Fescennina socios suppressis nominibus liberiùs lacerant, Laedorias inculantur & scommata, salibus Socraticis sociorum, vel fortè maiorum vi∣tia tangunt, vel mordacius dente rodunt The∣onino. Auditores muliùm, ridere para∣li ingemidant tremulos naso crispante ca∣chinnos. De dispositione Vrbis. SIngulorum officiorum exercitores, sin∣gularum rerum venditores, singula∣rism operarum suarum locatores, quo∣tidiano mane per s. sunt locis distincti om∣nes, ut officiis. Praetereà est in Londonia supra ripam fluminis inter vina in navibus, & cellis vinariis venalia, publica coquina: ibi quotidiè pro tempore est invenire cibaria fercula, assa, frixa, elixa, pisces, pisciculos, carnes grossiores pauperibus, delicatiores di∣vitibus, venationum, avium, avicularum. Si subitò veniant ad aliquem civium amici fatigati ex itinere, nec libeat ieiunis expe∣ctare, ut novi cibi emantur, cequantur, dant famuli manibus limphas panesque, interim adripam curritur, ibi presso sunt omnia de∣siderabilia. Quantal bet militum vel peri∣grinorum infinitas intrat urbem, qualibet dici vel noctis hora, vel ab urbe extitura, ne vel hi nimium ieiunent, vel alii impransi exeant, illuc si placeat divertunt, & se pro∣modo suo singuli reficiunt: qui se curare volunt molliter, accipenserem vel aliam a∣vem
vel attagen Ionicum non quaerant, ap∣positis quae ibi inveniuntur deliciis: Haec equidem publica, coquina est & civitati plurimum expediens, & ad Civitatem per∣tinens: Hinc est quod legitur in Georgia Platonis, juxtae medicinam esse coquorum officium, simulantium & adulationem quartae particulae civilitatis. Est ibi extra unam portarum statim in suburbio quidam planus campus re & nomine. Omni sexta feria, nisi sit major festivitas prae ceptae so∣lemnitatis, est ihi celebre spectaculorum no∣bilium equorum venalium. Spectaturi vel empturi veniunt, qui in urbe adsunt, comi∣tes, harones, milites, cives plurimi. Iuvat videre gradarios succussatura nitente su∣aviter ambulantes: pedibus later aliter si∣mul erectis, quasi à subalternis, & demissis: Hinc equos, qui armigeris magis conveni∣unt, durius incedentes, sed expeditè tamen, qui quasi à contra dictoribus pedes simul ele∣vant & deponunt: Hinc nobiles pullos ju∣niores, qui nondum fraeno bene assueti, al∣tius incedunt, & mollia crura reponunt: Hinc summarios membris validis & vege∣tis. Hinc dextrarios precioses, elegan∣tis formae, staturae honestae, micantes auri∣bus, cervicibus arduis, clunibus obesis. In horum incessu spectant emptores, pri∣mo passum suaviorem, postea motum citatio∣rem, qui est quasi à contrariis pedibus ante∣rioribus simul solo amotis & admotis, & posterioribus similiter. Cum talium soni pedum cursus imminet, & aliorum fortè qui similiter sunt in genere suo ad vectu∣ram validi, ad cursuram vegeti: clamor at∣tollitur, vulgares equos in partem ire praeci∣pitur: Sessores alipidum pueri tres simul, aliquando bini ex condicto & bini certami∣ni sepraeparant docti equis imperitare, in∣domitorum lupatis temperant fraens ora: hoc maximè praecavent, ne alteralteri con∣cursum praeripiat. Et qui similiter pro mo∣do suo ad certamen cursus illius attollunt; tremunt artus, morae impatientes, stare loco nesciunt, facto signo membra extendunt, cur∣sum rapiunt, agilitate pervicaci feruntur: certant cssores laudis amore, spe victoriae, equis admissis subdere calcaria, & nec mi∣nus urgere eos virgis & ciere clamoribus. Putares omnia in motu esse, secundum Heraclitum, & falsam omnino Zenonis sen∣tentiam, dicentis, quoniam, non continget moveri, neque stadium pertransire. Parte alia stant serosim rusticorum peculia, agro∣rum instrumenta, sues longis lateribus, vac∣cae distentis vberibus, corpora magna boum, lanigerumque pecus: stant ibi aptae a∣ratris, trahis & bigis equae: quarundam ventres foetibus tument: alias editi foetus obeunt pulli lasciviores, sequela insepara∣bilis. Ad hanc urbē ex omni natione quae sub coelo est, navalia gaudent institores habere commercia. Aurum mittit Arabs, species & thura Sabaeus, Arma Scythes, oleum palmarum divite silva. Pingue solum Ba∣bylon, Nilus lapides preciosos. Seres pur∣pureas vestes. Norwegi, Russi, varium, grisium, sabelinas: Galli sua vina. Vrbe Roma secundum Chronicorum fidem satis antiquior est. Ab eisdem quippe patribus Trojanis haec prius à Bruto condita est, quàm a Remo & Romulo. Vnde & ad∣huc antiquis eisdem utuntur legibus com∣munibus institutis. Haec similiter illi re∣gionibus est distincta: habet annuos pro consulibus vicecomites: habet senatoriam dignitatem & magistratus minores: Eluvi∣ones & aquaeductus in vicis: Ad genera cau∣sarum deliberativae, demonstrativae, judi∣cialis loca sua, fora singula: habet sua die∣bus statutis comitia. Non puto urbem esse, in qua sint probabiliores consuetudines, in ecclesiis visitandis, ordinatis Dei honoran∣dis, festis feriandis, eleemosynis dandis, in hospitibus suscipiendis, in desponsationibus firmandis, matrimoniis contrahendis, nup∣tiis celebrandis, conviviis ornandis, coni∣vis hilarandis, etiam in exequiis curan∣dis & cadaveribus humandis. Solae pestes Londini sunt, immoderata stultorum pota∣tio, & frequens incendium. Ad haec om∣nes ferè Episcopi, Abbates, & Magnates Angliae, quasicives & municipes sunt ur∣bis Londoniae: sui ibi habentes aedifiia prae∣clara, vbi se recipiunt, ubi divites impensas faciunt, ad consilia, ad conventus celebres in urbem evocati, a Domino rege, vel Me∣tropolitano suo, seu propiis tracti nego∣tiis. De Ludis. AMplius & ad ludos urbis venia∣mus, quoniam non expedit utilem tantum & seriam urbem esse, nisi dulcis etiam sit, & iucunda. Vnde & in sigillis summorum Pontificum, us{que} ad tem∣por a Leonis Papae, ex altera parte Bullae, sculpto per impressionem piscatore Petro, &
supra eum clave quasimanu Dei de coelis ei porrecta & circa eum versu, Tu pro me navem liquisti, suscipe clavem. Ex altera parte impressa erat urbs, & Scriptura ista, Aurea Roma. Item ad laudem Caesaris Augusti, & Romae di∣ctum est: Nocte pluit tota, redueunt spectacu∣la mane, Divisum imperium cum Iove Cae∣sar habes. Londonia pro spectaculis theatralibus, pro ludis scenicis, ludos habet sanctiores, repraesentationes miraculorum, quae sancti Confessores operati sunt, sea repraesentatio∣nes passionum, quibus claruit constantia Martyrum. Praeterea quotannis die, quae dicitur Carnivale, ut à puerorum ludis incipiamus (omnes enim pueri fuimus) scholarum singuli pueri suos apportans ma∣gistro suo gallos gallinaceos pugnatores, & totum illud antemeridianum datur ludo puerorum vacantium, spectare in scholis su∣orum pugnas gallorum. Post Prandium exit in campos omnis iuventus vrbis ad lu∣sum pilae celebrem. Singulorum studorum scholares suam habent pilam: singulorum officiorum urbis exercitores suam singuli pilam in manibus. Majores natu patres & divites urbis, in equis spectatum veni∣unt certamina juniorum, & modo suo in∣veniuntur cum juvenibus, & excitari vi∣detur in eis motus caloris naturalis, con∣templatione tanti motus & participatione gaudiorum adolescentiae liberioris. Singulis diebus dominicis in Quadragesima post prandia, exit in campos juvenum recens ex∣amen in equis bellicosis: in equis certa∣mine primis: quorum quisque aptus & in gyros currere doctus equus. Erumpunt à portis catervatim filii civium laici, in∣structi lanceis & scutis militaribus, juni∣ores hastalibus ferro dempto praefurcatis, simulachra belli cient & agonisticam ex∣ercent militarem. Adveniunt & plurimi Aulici, Rege in vicino posito, & de familiis Consulum & Baronum ephebi: nondum cin∣gulo donati militiae gratia concertandi. Accendit singulos spes victoriae: equi feri adhinniunt, tremunt artus, fraenos man∣dunt, impatientes morae stare loco nesciunt. Cum tandem, Sonipedum rapit ungula cursum, sessores adolescentes divisis ag∣minibus, hi praecedentibus instant, nec asse∣quuntur hi socios dejiciunt & praetervo∣lant. In feriis Paschalibus ludunt quasi praelia navalia: in arbore iquidem medi∣amna scuto fortior innexo, navicula remo & raptu fluminis cita, in prora stantem habet juvenem, scutum illud lancea per∣cussurum: qui si scuto illi Linceamillidens frangat eam, & immotus persistat, habet propositum, voti compos est: si vero lancea integra fortiter percusserit, in profluentem amnem dijicitur: Navis motu suo acta praeterit. Sunt tamen hinc inde secus scu∣tum duae naves stationariae, & in eis juve∣nes plurimi, ut eripiant percussorem flu∣mine abscorptum cum primo emersus com∣paret, vel summa rursus cum bullit in unda. Supra pontem & in solariis suprae fluvium, sunt qui talia spectent, multum rideri parati. In festis tota aestate juvenes ludentes exercentur, in saliendo in arcu, in lucta, jactu lapidum, amentatis missi∣libus ultra metam expediendis, parmis du∣ellionum. Puellarum Cytherae ducit cho∣ros, & pede libero pulsatur tellus, usque imminente Luna. In hyeme singulis fere festis ante prandium, vel apri Spumantes pugnant pro capitibus, & verres falmineis accincti dentibus addendi Succidiae, vel pingues tauri Cornupetae, seu ursi imma∣nes cum objectis depugnant canibus. Cùm est congelata palus illa magna quae maenia urbis aquilonalia alluit, exeunt lusum super glaciem densae juvenum turmae: Hi ex cursu motu captato citatiore, distantia pe∣dum posita, magnum spatium latere altero praetenso perlabuntur. Alii qusi magnos lapides molares de glacie sedes sibi taci∣unt: sessorem unum trabunt plurimi pae∣currentes, manibus se tenentes: in tanta citatione motus aliquando pedibus lapsi ca∣dunt omnes proni. Sunt alii super glaciem ludere doctiores, singuli pedibus suis ap∣tantes, & sub talaribus suis alligantes ossa, tibias scilicet animalium, & palos ferro acuto superposito tenentes in mani∣bus, quos aliquando glaciei allidunt: tan∣ta rapacitate feruntur, quanta avis vo∣lans, vel pilum balistae. Interdum autem permagna procul distantia ex condicto, duo aliqui ita ab oppositis veniunt, concurri∣tur: palos erigunt, se invicem percutiunt: vel alter, vel ambo cadunt, non sine laesi∣one corporali, cùm post casum etiam vi motus feruntur ab invicem procul: & qua parte glacies caput tangit, totum ra∣dit, totum decorticat. Plerumque tibia cadentis, vel brachium, si super illud
ceciderit, confringitur. Sed aetas avida gloriae, juventus cupida victoriae, ut in veris praeliis fortius se habeant, ita in simulatis exercentur. Plurimi civium delectantur, ludentes in avibus coeli, Nisis, accipitri∣bus, & hujusmodi, & in canibus milit an∣tibus in silvis. Habentque cives suum jus venandi, in Middlesexia, Hertfordscira, & to a Chiltra, & in Cantia usque ad aquam Graiae. Lundonienses tunc Trino∣vantes dicti, Caium Iulium Caesarem, qui nullas nisi sanguine fuso vias habere gaudebat, repulerunt. Vnde Lucanus, Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Bri∣tannis. Civitas Londonia reperit aliquos, qui regna plurima, & Romanum sibi subdide∣runt imperium: & plurimos alios, quos mundi Dominos virtus euixit ad Deos, ut fuerat in Apollinis oraculo Bruto pro∣missum: Brute sub occasu solis, trans Gallica Regna, Insula in Oceano est undique clau∣sa mari: Hanc pete: namque tibi sedes erit illa peernis, Haec fiet natis altera Troja tuis. Hic de stripe tua reges nascentur, & ipsis Totius terrae subditus orbis erit. In temporibus Christianis nobilm illum edidit imperatorem Constantinum, qui urbem Romam, & imperialia insignia om∣nia Deo donavit, & beato Petro & Sil∣vestro Papae, cui & stratoris exhibuit of∣ficium, & se non amplius Imperatorem, sed Sanctae Ecclesiae Romanae defensorem gavisus est vocari: & ne pax Domini Pa∣pae occasione praesentiae ejus secularis stre∣pitus tumultu concuteretur, ipse ab urbe Domino Papae collata discessit, & sibi ci∣vitatem Bizantium edificavit. Lundonia & modernis temporibus, reges illustres magnificosque peperit. Imperatricem Ma∣tildem, Henricum regem tertium, & beatum Thomam Archiepiscopum Christi Martyrem gloriosum, quali non candidio∣rem tulit, nec quo fuerit devinctior alter omnibus bonis totius orbis Latini.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST HONOV∣RABLE CITY OF LONDON. The Situation thereof. AMong the Noble Cities of the World, honou∣red by fame, the City of LONDON is one, the chiefe Seate of the Kingdome of England, whose renowne is spred abroad farre and neere, but transporteth her wares and commodi∣ties much further, and so advanceth her greatnesse. It is happy by reason of the Aires wholsomnesse, by Christi∣an Religion, her munition also and strength, the nature of the situation, the honour of the Citizens, the chasti∣ty of grave Matrones. Very pleasant also with sports and pastimes, and re∣plenished with Honourable Persona∣ges. All which I thinke meet severally to consider. The temperatenesse of the Aire. IN this place, the calmnesse of the Aire doth mollifie mens minds, not corrupting them with venereall lusts, but preserving them from savage and rude behaviour, and seasons their inclinations with a more ingenious temper. Of Religion. THere is in the Church of Saint Paula Bishops See: It was for∣merly Metropolitane, and as it is thought, shall recover the said digni∣ty againe, if the Citizens shall returne backe into the Iland, except perhaps the Archepiscopall title of Saint Tho∣mas the Martyr, and his bodily pre∣sence, doe perpetuate this honour to Canterbury, where now his Reliques are. But seeing Saint Thomas hath gra∣ced both these Cities, namely, London with his birth, and Canterbury with his death; one place may alleage much against the other for the beholding of that Saint, and further additions to their holinesse. Now, concerning the worship of God in the Christian faith: There are in London and in the Suburbs 13. Churches belonging to Covents, besides 126. lesser Parish Churches. Of the strength of the City. IT hath on the East part a Tower Palatine large and strong, whose Court and Walls are secured with a very deepe foundation, the morter is
tempered with the blood of beasts. On the West side are two Castles well fenced. The Wall of the City is high and spacious, with seven gates, which are made double every way, and on the North side distinguished with Turrets. Likewise on the South side, London hath beene inclosed with Walls and Towers, but the large River of Thames being well stored with Fish, and in which the Tide ebbes and flowes, by continuance of time hath washed and worne away those walls. Further, a∣bove in the West part, the Kings Pa∣lace is eminently seated upon the same River, an incomparable building, ha∣ving a Wall before it, and some Bull∣warks; it is two miles from the City, and a continuall Subvrbs doth lye be∣tweene. Of the Gardens. NEere to the houses of the Sub∣vrbs, the Citizens have Gar∣dens and Orchards planted with trees, large, beautifull, and one joyning to another. Of Pasture and Tillage. ON the North side are Fields for Pasture, and open Meadowes, very pleasant, into which the River-waters doe flow, and Mills are turned about with a delightfull noise. Next, lieth a great Forest, in which are wooddy places, and Beasts for game. In the Coverts whereof doe lurke the Stag, the Bucke, the wilde Bore, and the Bull. The arable Lands are no hun∣gry pieces of gravell ground, but like the rich fields of Asia, which bring plentifull Corne, and fill the Barnes of the owners with a dainty crop of the fruits of Ceres. Of their Wells. THere are on the North part of London principall Fountaines of water, sweet, wholsome, and cleare, streaming forth among the gli∣stering pebble stones: In this number Holy-well, Clerken-well, and Saint Clements well, are of most note and fre∣quented above the rest, when Schollers and the youth of the City take the Aire abroad in the Summer evenings. Cer∣tainly the City is good, seeing it hath a good Lord. Of the Citizens honour. THe Honour of this City con∣sists in proper Men, brave Ar∣mour, and multitude of Inha∣bitants. In the fatall warres under King Steven, there went out to a Master, men fit for warre, esteemed to the number of 20000. horsemen armed, and 60000. footmen. The Citizens of London are knowne in all places, and re∣spected above all others, by their civill Demeanour, their good Apparell, their Table, and their Discourse. Of their Matrones. THe Matrones here may be paralleld with the Sabine women. Of their Schooles. IN London three famous Schooles are kept at three principall Churches, which they retaine by priviledge and ancient dignity. Notwithstanding by favour of some persons, or Teachers, who are knowne and well reputed for their Philosophie; there are other Schooles upon good will and suffe∣rance. Vpon the Holydayes, assemblies flocke together about the Church, where the Master hath his abode. There the Schollers dispute; some use demon∣strations, others topicall and probable arguments: Some practise Enthi∣mems, others are better at perfect Syl∣logismes: Some for a shew dispute, and for exercising themselves, & strive like adversaries: Others for truth, which is the grace of perfection. The dissembling Sophisters turne Verba∣lists,
and are magnified when they o∣verflow in speech; some also are intrapt with deceitfull arguments. Sometime certaine Oratours, with Rhotoricall O∣rations, speake handsomly to perswade, being carefull to observe the precepts of Art, who omit no matter contingent. The Boyes of divers Schooles wrangle together in versifying, and canvase the principles of Grammar, as the rules of the Preterperfect and Future Tenses. Someafter an old custome of prating, vse Rimes & Epigram: these can free∣ly quip their fellowes, suppressing their names with a festinine and railing li∣berty: these cast out most abusive jests, and with Socraticall witnesses either they give a touch at the vices of Supe∣riours, or fall upon them with a Saty∣ricall bitternesse. The hearers prepare for laughter, and make themselves mer∣ry in the meane time. How the Affaires of the City are disposed. SEverall Craftmen, and sellers of Wares, and Workemen for hire, all are distinguished every mor∣ning by themselves, both in their pla∣ces and imploiments. Besides, there is in London upon the Rivers banke, a pub∣like place of Cookery, betweene the Ships laden with Wine, and the Wines laid up in Cellers to bee sold: there ye may call for any dish of meat, rost, fried, or sodden, Fish both small and great, ordinary flesh for the poo∣rer sort, and more dainty for the rich, as Venison and Fowle. If friends come upon a sudden, wearied with travell, to a Citizens house, and they be loth to wait for curious preparations, and dres∣sings of fresh meat, the servants give them Water to wash, and Bread to stay their stomacke, and in the meane time goe to the water side, where all things are at hand answerable to their desire. Whatsoever multitude, either of Souldiers or other strangers, enter into the City at any houre, day or night, or elle are about to depart, they may turne in, bait there, and refresh themselves to their content, and so a∣void long fasting, and not goe away without their dinner. If any desire to fit their dainty tooth, they need not to long for the Accipenser, or any o∣ther Bird; no not the rare Godwit of Inia. This publike victualing place is very convenient, and belongs to the City. Hereupon we reade in Platoes Gorgias, that the office of Cookes is neere to Physicke, and the latrery of dissemblers is the fourth part of civi∣lity. Without one of the gates is a cer∣taine field, plaine both in name and situation. Every Fryday, except some Festivall come in the way there is a great market of horses: some come out of the City to buy or looke on, Earles, Barons, Knights, and many Citizens resort thither. It is a pleasant sight there to behold the Nags to jog on with an ambling pace, and their feet on either side up and downe together by turnes, or else croing horses which are more convenient for men that beare armes; these although they set a little harder, goe away readily, and lite up and set downe together the contrary feet on either side. Here are also young Colts of a good breed, that have not beene well accustomed to the bridle; these fling about, and by mounting bravely, shew their mettle. Here are principall horses, strong and well-lim∣med. Here also are brest horses, fit to bee joyned by couples, very faire and handsome, and sleeke about the eares, carrying their necks aloft, be∣ing well flesht, and round about the buttocks. The buyers at first looke at their soft and slow pace, and after cause them to put on with more speed, and behold them in their gallop. When these Coursers are ready to runne their race, and perhaps some others, which in their kinde are both good for carriage and strong for travaile: The people give a shout, and the common Hackneys are commanded to go aside The boyes that ride, make matches among themselves, two and two together, being expert in governing their horses, which they rule and curbe with a sharpe bridle, labouring by all meanes that one get not before the other. And the very beasts, after their fashion, doe not cease to strive, while their joynts tremble,
and impatient of delay, endure not standing still in a place. When the to∣ken is given, they stretch out their bo∣dies and runne speedily away, the Ri∣ders spurring them on for the love of praise, or hope of victory. You would thinke every thing were in motion with Heraclitus, and Zenoes opinion to bee false, saying that nothing moves from place to place. In another part stand the country people with Cattell, and commodities of the field, large Swine, and Kine with their Vdders strutting out, faire bodied Oxen and Sheepe. There are also Cart-horses fit for the Dray, or the Plough, and some Mares big with Foale, together with o∣thers that have their wanton Colts following them close at their side. To this City Merchants bring in Wares frō every Nation under heaven: The Arabian sends his Gold; the Sabe∣an his Frankincense & other Drugs; the Scythian his provision frō the plentifull wood of Date trees; Babylon bestowes the fruits of a fertile soile; and Ny∣lus his precious stones; the Seres send Purple garments; they of Norway and Russia, Trowts, Furs, and Sables. Ac∣cording to the report of Chronicles, it is more ancient then the City of Rome: for both being descended from the same Trojan stocke, Brute builded this, before Remus and Romulus the other. Whereupon it comes to passe, that their ancient Lawes doe so agree: For this our City is distinguished by Wards and severall limits; it hath Sheriffes every yeere, answerable to their Con∣suls; it hath Aldermen, enjoying the dignity of Senators, besides inferiour Magistrates; it hath also Conduits and conveyances for water in the streets. Concerning causes in question; there are severall places and Courts for mat∣ters Deliberative, Demonstrative, and Judiciall: upon set dayes also they have their Common Councell and great As∣semblies. I thinke there is no City that hath more approved Customes, for frequenting the Churches, for honou∣ring Gods Ordinances observing of Holy-dayes, giving Almes, entertai∣ning Strangers, confirmation of Con∣tracts, making up and celebrating of Marriages, setting out of Feasts, wel∣comming the Guests; and moreover, in funerall rites, and burying of the dead. The only plagues of London are immoderate drinking of idle fellowes, and often fires. Moreover, almost all Bishops, Abbots, and Noble men of England, are as it were, Citizens and Free-men of London; there they have faire dwellings, and thither they doe often resort, and are called into the City to Consultations and solemne meetings, either by the King, or their Metropolitane, or drawne by the peo∣ples affaires. Of Exercise and Pastimes. LEt us also come at last to their Sports and Exercises; for it is expedient that a City bee not onely commodious for gaine, and seri∣ous, but also pleasant and delightfull. Therefore to the time of Pope Leo, the Popes gave in their Seales, on one side of their Bull, Saint Peter like a Fisher∣man, and over him a Key reached forth to him as it were from Heaven by the hand of God, and this verse about it: For me thy Ship thou didst forsake, Therefore the Key of Heaven take. On the other part was stamped a City with this Inscription, Golden Rome. Also this was written to the praise of Caesar Augustus, and Rome: All night the Sky distils downe watry showeres, The morning cleeres againe to shew the play. Great Iove and Caesar have their severall houres, And in this Vniverse by turnes beare sway. London, in stead of common Enter∣ludes belonging to the Theatre, hath plaies of a more holy subject, represen∣tations of those miracles which the holy Confessors wrought, or of the suf∣ferings wherein the glorious constancy of Martyrs did appeare. Besides that, wee may beginne with the Schooles of youth, seeing once wee were all chil∣dren; Yeerely at Shrovetide the Boyes of every Schoole bring fighting Cocks
to their Masters, and all the forenoone is spent at Schoole, to see these Cockes fight together. After dinner, all the youth of the City goeth to play at the Ball in the fields, the Schollers of eve∣ry Schoole have their Balls. The tea∣chers also that traine up others in seats and exercises, have every one their Ball in their hands. The ancient and weal∣thy Citizens come on horsebacke to see these yongsters contending at their sport, with whom in a manner they participate by motion, stirring their owne naturall heat in the view of youth, with whose mirth and liberty they seeme to communicate. Every Sunday in Lent, after dinner, a com∣pany of young men ride out into the fields on horses which are fit for warre, and principall runners: every horse a∣mong them is taught to run his rounds. The Citizens sonnes issue out thorow the gates by troupes, furnished with Lances and warlike Shields: the yon∣ger sort have their Pikes not headed with yron, where they make a repre∣sentation of battell: There resort to this exercise many Courtiers, when the King lies neere-hand, and young strip∣lings out of the families of Barons and great persons, which have not yet at∣tained to the warlike Girdle, doe traine and skirmish. Hope of victory inflames every one: the neighing and fierce hor∣ses bestir their joynts, and chew their bridles, and cannot indure to stand still; at last they beginne their race, and then the yong men divide their troupes; some labour to outstrip their leaders, and cannot reach them; others fling downe their fellowes, and get beyond them. In Easter Holy-dayes they counterfeit a Sea-sight: a Pole is set up in the middle of the River, with a Target well fastened thereon, and a yong man stands in a Boat which is rowed with Oares, and driven on with the tide, who with his Speare hits the Target in his passage; with which blow, if he breake the Speare, and stand vpright, so that hee hold footing, hee hath his desire: but if his Speare con∣tinue unbroken by the blow, hee is tumbled into the water, and his Boat passeth cleere away: but on either side this Target, two Ships stand in Ward, with many yong men ready to tak him up after he is sunke: assoone as he appeareth againe on the top of the water; the spectators stand upon the Bridge, and other convenient places about the River to behold these things, being prepared for laughter. Vpon the Holy-dayes, the youth is exercised all Summer, in Leaping, Shooting, Wrestling, casting of Stones, and throwing of Javelins fitted with loopes for the purpose, which they strive to fling beyond the marke; they also use Bucklers, like fighting men. As for the Maidens, they have their exercise of Dancing. In Winter, almost every Holy-day before dinner, the foaming Bores fight for their heads, and pre∣pare with deadly Tushes to bee made Bacon; or else some lusty Bulls, or huge Beares, are baited with Dogs. When that great Moorish Lake at the North part of the City wall is frozen over, great companies of young men goe to sport upon th yee, then fetching a runne, and setting their feet at a di∣stance, and placing their bodies side∣wise, they slide a great way. Others take heapes of yee, as if it were great Mil-stones, and make seats: many go∣ing before, draw him that sits thereon, holding one another by the hand; in going so fast, sometime they all fall downe together: some are better pra∣ctised to the yee, and binde to their shooes, Bones, as the legs of some beasts, and hold Stakes in their hands, headed with sharpe yron, which some∣times they strike against the yee; and these men goe on with such speed, as doth a Bird in the Aire, or Darts shot from some warlike Engine: sometime two men set themselves at a distance, and runne one against another, as it were at tilt, with these Stakes, where∣with one or both parties are throwne downe, not without some hurt to their bodies; and after their fall, by reason of the violent motion, are carried a good distance one from another: and wheresoever the yee doth touch their head, it rubs off the skin and bruiseth it: and if one fall upon his leg or his arme, it is usually broken: But young men being greedy of honour, and desirous of victory, doe thus exercise them∣selves
in counterfeit battels, that they may beare the brunt more strongly, when they come to it in good earnest. Many Citizens take delight in Birds, as Spar-hawkes, Gosse-hawkes, and such like, and in Dogs to hunt in the wooddy ground. The Citizens have authority to hunt in Middlesex, Hert∣fordshire, all the Chilterns, and in Kent, as farre as Gray-water. The Londo∣ners, once called Trinovants, repulsed C. Iulius Caesar, who commonly pa∣ved his way with blood: whereupon Lucan; He was afraid, and foil'd by Britons hand, That first presumed to invade their land. The City of London can bring out some who subdued many Kingdomes, and the Empire of Rome, and many o∣thers who (being great Lords heires) were deified in another world: as A∣polloes Oracle did promise Brute: Brute, thou shalt finde an Iland in the West, Beyond the Gaules, environ'd with the maine; Direct thy journey thither for thy rest, And there a second Troy shall rise againe. Kings from thy Hieres, and Conquerours shall spring. Who will the world into subjection bring. In the times of Christianity, it brought forth the Noble Emperour Constan∣tine, who gave the City of Rome, and all the Imperiall Armes to God, and to Saint Peter, and Silvester the Pope, whose Stirrop hee refused not to hold, and pleased rather to be called, Defen∣dour of the holy Romane Church, than Emperour any more. And lest the peace of our Lord the Pope should suf∣fer any disturbance, by the noise of se∣cular affaires, he left the City, and be∣stowed it on the Pope, and founded the City of Constantinople for his owne habitation. London also in these latter times hath brought forth famous and magnificent Governours; Maud the Empresse, Henry the third, King, and Thomas the Archbishop, a glorious Martyr of Christ, then whom no man was more innocent, or more devoted to the generall good of the Latine world.
AN ABSTRACT OR BRIEFE RELATION OF THE TVVO MANNORS OR Lordships of Stebunheath, alias, Stepney; and Hackney, in the County of Middlesex; with the free customes, benefits, and priviledges to them belonging; and how they are holden by the Copy-hold Tenants, of the right Honourable, Thomas Lord Went∣worth: with some other especiall and remarkeable notes, both of reverend Antiquity, and moderne memory. Concerning the Indenture of Covenants, &c. WHereas (of late) differen∣ces have arisen betweene the right Honorable Tho∣mas L. Wentworth,The cause of the now compoun∣ding. Lord of the Mannors of Stepney and Hackney, and his Lordships Copy∣hold Tenants of the said Mannors, for and concerning some of the customes, benefits, and priviledges of the said Tenants: It hath now pleased the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, in considera∣tion of three thousand pounds,Thè con∣sideration given for it. of law∣full money of England, in the thirtieth yeere of the Reigne of our late Sove∣raigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, by the Copy-holders of the said Mannors, un∣to the right Honourable Henry Lord Wentworth (his Lordships Father) then satisfied and paid: As also of other three thousand and 5. hundred pounds more, to him the said Thomas Lord Wentworth now paid, by Indenture bea∣ring date the 20. day of Iune, in the 15. yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Iames of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the 50. made betweene him the said Thomas Lord Wentworth,The Deed of Cove∣nants. Lord of the said Mannors on the one part, and Sir Iohn Iolles Knight, and Alderman of London, and divers other of the Copy-hold Tenants of the said Mannors (whose names are parti∣cularly in the said Indenture recited) on the other part: for the appeasing and finall end of the said differences, and for prevention of the like, and all other which (in time to come) might happen, arise or grow, betwixt the said Lord his heires or assignes, Lords of the said Mannors, and the said Copy-hold Te∣nants, their heires or assignes, to cove∣nant, grant, conclude, and fully agree to the effect following, that is to say: Imprimis, that the said Thomas Lord Wentworth is,The Lord Thomas is seized in Fee. and untill a perfect Act of Parliament shall bee had and made, whereby all the liberties, priviledges, benefits, customes, immunities, dis∣charges, additions, alterations, enlarge∣ments, matters and things, in the Sce∣dules to the said Indenture annexed, mentioned; shall be for ever confirmed, shall be and continue seized of a good, absolute and indefeazeable estate of In∣heritance in fee-simple to him and his
heires for ever in possession, of, & in the said Mannors, and either of them, and of the Copy-hold Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said Copy-hold Tenants before mentioned, parties to the said Indenture. And that hee now hath,And hath power to confirme the follow∣ing Arti∣cles. and then shall have full power and lawfull authority, to ratifie, confirme, establish and make good, all and sin∣guler the covenants, articles, alterati∣ons, enlargements, free-customes, im∣munities, discharges and agreements contained in the said Indenture and Scedules, or either of them, to the said Copy-hold Tenants respectively, and to their severall and respective heires and assignes, of and in the severall and respective Messuages, Lands, Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments, whereof they are seized of any estate by Copy of Court-Roule. And that the said Thomas Lord Went∣worth, That these Articles for ever be observed. his heires, assignes, and all other Lords of the said Mannors, shall for e∣ver hereafter observe, performe, fulfill, allow, ratifie, make good and keepe all the said Articles, certainty of fines, usa∣ges, customes, priviledges, benefits, im∣munities, discharges, compositions and agreements in the said Indenture and Scedules contained: And shall not at any time hereafter leavy, take, require, or demand any other fines, suites, cu∣stomes, workes or services, or in any o∣ther manner, than in the said Scedules are specified: And the rents which for the said Copy-hold Tenements, by the space of two yeeres now last past, have beene yeelded and paid by the Copy-hold Tenants thereof. And also that the said Tenants, their heires and as∣signes, shall for ever hereafter peacea∣bly and quietly have, hold, maintaine, and enjoy their severall and respective Copy-holds, with their appurtenances, according to the severall grants thereof to them made; and under the severall rents for the same respectively, now due and payable according to the true meaning of the said Indenture and Sce∣dules, without let, suit, or hindrance, interruption, alteration, question, or contradiction whatsoever of him the said Lord Wentworth, his heires or as∣signes, or under any other claiming a∣ny estate, right, title, use, interest, office, profit, charge, or demand, under his Lordship, his heires or assignes, or un∣der the said Henry Lord Wentworth de∣ceased. And that the said Thomas Lord Went∣worth, That here∣after none of these Lands shal be severed from the Mannor. his heires or assignes hath not, nor hereafter shall grant or conuey, se∣vered from the Mannor thereof, the same is now holden; any of the Messu∣ages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said Copy-holders, for any other estate or terme, other than by Copy of Court-Roule, according to the custome of the said Mannors, except the free-hold to bee severed, at the desire of such person, as then shall bee Copy-hol∣der thereof respectively: And that the certainty of sines, free customes, im∣munities, liberties, priviledges, arti∣cles, discharges, and agreements in the said Scedules contained, for and con∣cerning the severall Messuages, Cotta∣ges, Lands, Tenements, and Heredita∣ments, whereof the said parties to the said Indenture are Copy-holders; shall (for ever) be, and bee had, used, accounted, ad∣judged, taken and enjoyed, as the true customes, usuages, priviledges, im∣munities, discharges, and liberties, of and within the said Mannors, and either of them not to be violated, alte∣red, changed, or denied by the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or either of them now or hereafter, at any time or times in any wise being.That a de∣cree shall be had in the Chan∣cery, to confirme the now a∣greements▪ Item, that for the better ratifying, e∣stablishing, confirming, strengthening; perfecting, and making good of all and singuler the said Articles, covenants, agreements, certainty of fines, usuages, customes, enlargements, and alterati∣ons of usuages and customes, composi∣tions, liberties, priviledges, freedomes, immunities, discharges, matters and things in the said Indenture and Sce∣dules contained, and for the setting forth of what estate the said Thomas Lord Wentworth is now, and then shall be seized of the said Mannors and pre∣misses, upon a Bill of complaint against his Lordship, in his Majesties Court of Chancery to be exhibited: his Lord∣ship will appeare, and make such an∣swer, and further such proceedings,
that thereupon a perfect decree (with the free consent and agreement of his Lordship) may bee had, and there en∣rouled against his Lordship, his heires and assignes. By which the said Arti∣cles, covenants, agreements, certainty of fines, usuages and customes, and all the compositions, liberties, priviled∣ges, freedomes, immunities, dischar∣ges, matters and things in the said In∣denture and Scedules, or any of them contained; shall bee decreed, ratified, established and made good, and put in ure, used and enjoyed for ever. That he the said Thomas Lord Went∣worth, That an Act of Parlia∣ment shall be procu∣red, to confirme the same for ever. his heires and assignes, at his and their own proper costs and charges, will procure at the first Session of the next Parliament of our Soveraine Lord the Kings Majesty, his heires or successors, one Statute or Act of Parliament, by force whereof the said Articles, cove∣nants, agreements, certainty of fines, usuages, customes, compositions, en∣largements, and alterations of usuages, customes, compositions, liberties, pri∣viledges, benefits, freedomes, immu∣nities, discharges, matters and things in the said Indenture and Scedules, or ei∣ther of them expressed; shall be esta∣blished, ratified, enacted and confir∣med to be, and to continue for ever of force, and to be put in ure and used for ever hereafter, in such state, manner and forme, quality, condition and de∣gree, as the same are in the said Inden∣ture or Scedules, or any of them ex∣pressed, for and concerning the Lands, Tenements,The Te∣nants must pay twenty pounds towards the char∣ges of it. and Hereditaments, wher∣of they now are Copy-holders, or repu∣ted Copy-holders. Towards the char∣ges of procuring of which the said Act of Parliament, the said Tenants are to pay unto the said Thomas Lord Went∣worth, his heires or executors, within one moneth next after the obtaining and passing thereof, the sum of twenty pounds. That he the said Thomas L. Wentworth,For better assurance within five yeeres. his heires and assignes, at any time within five yeeres next ensuing the date of the said Indenture, before such Act of Parliament, as aforesaid, had and obtained, at the costs in the law of the said Copy-hold Tenants, or some of them, upon request made unto him the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, his heires or assignes, by the said Sir Iohn Iolles, Knight and Alderman of London, Willi∣am Gough, Edmund Barber, Iohn Egles∣field, The names cō∣tained in the In∣denture. Isaack Cotton, Thomas Best, Richard Hoskins, George Saris, Henry Dethicke, Iohn Howland, Thomas Yardly, Iohn Low∣den, Richard Cheyney, Gresham Hoogan, William Palmer, Nicholas Dickens, Ni∣cholas Diggins, Peter Summer, Iohn Ben∣net, Richard Edwards, Michael Bonner, & Nicholas Hollam, or any ten of them, or any ten of the Heires or Assigues of them, shall and will make, doe, ac∣knowledge, execute and suffer all and every such further acts, deeds and assu∣rances, for better setling, assuring and confirming of the usuages, customes, benefits, liberties, priviledges, immu∣nities, discharges, certainty of fines, compositions, agreements, matters and things in the said Indenture and Scedules contained, as by them, or any ten of them shal be reasonably devised, advised and required. That every one of the said Copy-hold Tenants,That lea∣ses may be let for thirty one yeeres and foure meneths without licence. their heires and assignes, shall and may free∣ly hereafter from time to time, grant, lease or demise by deed or otherwise (without licence or Copy of Court Roule) such or so much of their said Lands, Tenements, and Heredita∣ments, to such person and persons, and for such tearme and estate, not excee∣ding one and thirty yeeres and foure moneths, in possession from the time of the making of any such grant or de∣mise; as to them, and every, or any of them respectively, shall bee thought fit or necessary, without any forfeit of estate, seizure, claime, disturbance, de∣niall or impeachment of his Lordship, his heires or assignes, or any of his or their Officers. So alwaies, that such grant, lease and leases so to bee made, be at the first or second generall Court, (for the Mannor whereof, the Lands or Tenements so happening to be gran∣ted, leased or demised are parcell) to be holden next after the making there∣of, be published in open Court of that Mannor, before the homage there, and a remembrance thereof to bee required to bee made in the Roules of the said Court, for the date, tearme and quan∣tity of Lands, Cottages, or Tenements
so granted, leased or demised. Which remembrance, the said Thomas Lord Wentworth convenanteth and granteth for him, his heires and assignes; to and with the said Sir Iohn Iolles, and the rest of the said Copy-hold Tenants, up∣on the tender of a certainty thereof in writing, to the Steward, or Deputy Steward that Mannour for the time then being, together with sixe pence in money, for the entring thereof, shall be in the Court Roules of that Mannor duely, and in convenient time, and without delay enrolled, and a note thereof delivered by the Steward, or his Deputy, to the party so leasing, or any for him, without any other conside∣ration, see or reward, to bee given or paid for the same. That whereas the said Thomas Lord Wentworth,Recitall of the Let∣ters Pa∣tents from the King to my L. concer∣ning the Free-hold. by his Highnesse Letters Patents under the great Seale of Eng∣land, dated the nineteenth day of Iuly, in the thirteenth yeere of his Maje∣sties reign of England, and forty eighth of Scotland, Hath obtained license to grant to such of his Majesties liege people as he shall thinke fit, Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, and He∣reditaments, parcell, or reputed parcell of the said Mannors: To hold to them, their heires and assignes (in free and common Socage) respectively, of his said Mannors of Stepney and Hackney, by such and the same rents and services, and other profits, as in the conveyan∣ces thereof shall be expressed, and not to hold of the King in Capite, nor of any of his Majesties Honours, or Man∣nors in Knights service, as by the said Letters Patents more at large may ap∣peare. If the Act of Parlia∣ment bee not pro∣cured, thē the Te∣nants (up∣on re∣quest) shal be made Free hol∣ders. Now if the said Thomas Lord Wentworth shall not at the first Session of the next Parliament procure such an Act of Parliament, to bee good and ef∣fectuall in law for the purposes afore∣said: Then his Lordship will at all times, after the end of the said first Ses∣sion of the said next Paliament, upon reasonable requests, and at the costs of the Tenants (whom it shall concerne) their heires or assignes, make, doe and execute such reasonable acts, devices, and assurances in Law; whereby the said Copy-holders, their heires or as∣signes respectively, shall hold and en∣joy their, and every of their said Copy-holds, Messuages, Houses, Lands, Cot∣tages and Hereditaments, with the like wayes, easements, commons and com∣modities, as are thereto now belonging, or now therewith used or enjoyed. And the free-hold and inheritance thereof respectively to them and to their respective heires and assignes for ever, to be holden of such of the same Mannors, whereof the same is now holden in free and common Socage, for and under the severall & respective yeerely rents for all services and de∣mands, as they or any of them doe now severally and respectively pay for the same, as by them, or their Councel lear∣ned, shall bee reasonably devised and required. That the said Copy-hold Tenants,For enjoy∣ing the Common. their heires and assignes respectively, shall and may for ever hereafter, with∣out any let, impediment, interruption, deniall or contradiction of his Lord∣ship, his heires or assignes, or any clai∣ming under the said Lord Henry Went∣worth deceased, not onely during the time they shall be Copy-holders, but also afterwards, when they have obtai∣ned the free-hold and inheritance of their severall and respective Copy-holds; peaceably hold and enjoy such and the like Commons of pasture, and in such manner, in all the Commons, wastes and common able places of the said Mannors, as they or any of them hertofore have had, used, held, taken, or enjoyed, or might lawfully have taken or enjoyed. Neverthelesse, it is agreed, that neither the said Indenture and Scedules, nor any covenant therein con∣tained, The Te∣nants not compoun∣ding, are excepted from all benefit hereby. shall in any wise extend or en∣ure, to the benefit or advantage of any other Copy-hold Tenants of the said Mannors, other than the Copy-hold Tenants, named parties to the said In∣dentures, their heires and assignes, and that for such and the same Lands, Te∣nements, Cottages, and Heredita∣ments, with the appurtenances onely, as they or any of them now hold, or claime to hold, by Copy of Court-Roule of the said Mannors, or one of them, as by the said Indenture (where∣unto relation be had) more plainly and at large appeareth.
Memorandum, that the said Inden∣ture of the twentieth of Iune, together with a duplicity thereof, were acknow∣ledged by the said Thomas Lord Went∣worth the 21. day of Iuly 1617. before Sir Mathew Carew Knight,The en∣rolling of the Deed, and where it is left. to bee en∣rolled, and is enrolled in the Chancery accordingly. The one part of which Indentures, is left in the custody of the Company of Goldsmiths in the City of London, and the other in the custody of the Brethren of the Trinity house at Radcliffe: In trust, and to the use of the said Copy-hold Tenants, named par∣ties to the said Indentures. The ninth day of Iuly 1617. in the said fifteenth yeere of his Majesties Reigne,A Statute of 12000. pounds for perfor∣mance of Cove∣nants. the said Thomas Lord Went∣worth acknowledged a statute of the summe of twelve thousand pounds of lawfull money of England, unto Alexan∣der Prescot and Iohn Gore, Aldermen of London, Thomas Iones common Serje∣ant of London, Francis Fulner and George Whitmore Esquires, and Robert Mildmay Grocer; In trust for, and to the use of the Copy-holders named in the Inden∣tures, and thereof is a defeasance by In∣denture, dated the same day to this ef∣fect (viz.) That if the said Thomas Lord Wentworth doe performe the covenants and agreements,The defea∣sance. contained in the a∣foresaid Indenture of the twentieth of Iune: Then the same Statute to bee void, and that the said Conusees shall deliver up the same Statute to the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, his heires, exe∣cutors, administrators or assignes, so soone as the said Act of Parliament shall be procured, according to the in∣tent and true meaning of the said reci∣ted Indenture. To this end, the said Statute and de∣feasance are left in the Chamber of the City of London,Where the Sta∣tute and Defea∣sance are kept. to bee kept in such sort, as that the said Conusees may have the same to bee delivered according to their Covenant. And the Chamber∣lain of the said City hath charged him∣selfe with the receit thereof, by order of the Court of the Lord Maior and Aldermen 1617. Sir Iohn Leman being then Maior, and Master Cornelius Fish Chamberlaine. In Trinity Tearme, in the said fif∣teenth yeere of his Majesties Reigne,The pro∣ceedings in the Chancery. to a Bill of complaint was by the Co∣py-holders, named parties to the said Indenture of the twentieth of Iune, ex∣hibited against the said Thomas Lord Wentworth in his Majesties high Court of Chancery; whereto the said Thomas Lord Wentworth did appeare, and by his answer confessed the contents of the said Bill to bee true. Whereupon, a perfect Decree (with the free con∣sent and agreement of the said Tho∣mas Lord Wentworth,The De∣cree. bearing date the two and twentieth day of July, in the said fifteenth yeere of the Reigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Iames) was obtained. And by the same, the said free customes, orders, immunities, &c. and all and whatsoever contained in the said Indenture of the twntieth of June, and the Scedules unto the same Indenture annexed, are for ever esta∣blished and confirmed. The said De∣cree is likewise there enrolled. The true Copy of the said Scedules followeth.
The Scedules, containing the free Customes, Orders, Immunities, Discharges, Benefits, and Priviledges of the Mannors of Stepney, alias, Stebunheath and Hackney, in the County of Middlesex: Agreed vnto, approved, allowed, and ratified, as well by the Right Honourable, Thomas, Lord Wentworth, Lord of the said Mannors; as also by his Lordships Copy-hold, or Custo∣mary Tenants, or reputed Copy-hold, or Customary Tenants of the said Mannors, or of either of them, named parties to the said Indenture, where vnto those Scedules are annexed. By which, all and every the same Copy-holders or Customary Tenants, their, and every of their Heires and Assignes, are to hold, vse, and enjoy, inherit, alien, de∣mise, or dispose all and every, or any the said Lands, Messuages, Te∣nements, Cottages, and Hereditaments, which they, every, or any of them respectively doe hold, claime, or enjoy, byforce, or pretext of any grant heretofore made by the Copy of Court Roll of the said Mannors, or ei∣ther of them, the day of the date of the said Indentures: That is to say, the twentieth day of Iune, in the yeeres of the Raigne of our Soveraigne Lord IAMES, by the grace of God of England, France, and Ire∣land King, Defender of the Faith, &c. the fifteenth, and of Scotland the fiftieth. These Copy-holds are of inhe∣ritance, held of the Lord by the Rod, according to the custome. IMprimis, by the Customs of the said Mannors, and either of them, all the Copy-hold Lands, Tenements, & Heredi∣taments, which the par∣ticular persons (named parties to the Indentures, whereunto these Scedules are annexed) doe hold or enjoy, and (time whereof the contrary hath not beene within the memory of man) have been Copy-hold and customary Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of in∣heritance, demised and demiseable by Copy of Court Roll of the Mannors aforesaid, or one of them respectively, according to the Customes of the Man∣nor whereof the same are holden. And all Copies of Court Rolls of the same Mannors, and either of them, by all the time aforesaid, for the same Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, have beene made, and ought to be made, to hold of the Lord by the Rod, accor∣ding to the Custome of the Mannor whereof the same is holden, by the
Rents and services therefore due and accustomed. And all the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments have beene passed, and are to passe and goe from such persons, as (according to the contents of these Scedules) have pow∣er, How Sur∣renders are to be made. and are enabled to make Surren∣ders to any other person or persons by way of Surrender, to bee made to the hands of the Lord,See fur∣ther in the 19. Article. by the acceptance of the Steward of the Mannor, or his Deputy for the time being, in Court or out of Court; or by the acceptance of the Reeve of the Mannor, whereof the same are holden, or by his Deputy within the same Mannor, or elsewhere, in presence of sixe Customary Te∣nants; or by any Headborough of some Township or Hamlet within that Mannor, in presence of sixe customary Tenants, in or out of the same Man∣nors. Which Surrender or Surrenders have beene, and shall, and may bee to the use of any person or persons, and their Heires for ever in Fee-taile, or for life or lives, with Remainders or without Remainders, as Lands may be assured by the course of the common Lawes of this Realme, or else to the use of the last Will and Testament of the Surrenderers, or of any other per∣sons, according to the intent and li∣mitation of such last Will and Testa∣ment. Quit-rents are to be paid yeerely at Michaelmas. ITem, the Rents of all the Tenants, both Free-holders and Copy-hol∣ders, which hold any Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, or He∣reditaments of the said Mannors, or of either of them, are yeerely payable on∣ly at the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-Angell, to the Lord and his Heires: the same to be collected by the Reeves of the said Mannors (severally and respectively to be yeerely chosen, as hereafter is expressed) or their De∣puties. And all and every the said cu∣stomary Copy-hold Tenants, to pay the severall yeerely Rents, now yeerely due & payable for their severall Copy-holds. And if any of the said Copy-holds, An intire Quit-rent come into severall hands, shall be apporti∣oned. for which any intire Quit-rent is now paid, shall hereafter come into severall hands, the Rent thereof shall then bee apportioned by the Homage, at the Court of the Mannor whereof the same are holden; and so much only as by the Homage shall bee appointed to be paid (pro rata) shall be paid to the Lord for the time being. At what Courts Tenants are bound to appeare. ITem, all and every Copy-hold Te∣nant of the said Mannors, or either of them, which now be, or hereafter for the time being shall bee, ought to appeare yeerely at two severall gene∣rall Courts holden for the Mannor, whereof his Lands or Tenements are holden, upon warning, as hereafter fol∣loweth. And also so many of them, at all other set or appointed Courts, set, appointed, and kept for the said Man∣nor whereof their Lands are holden, under the number of eighteene, as shall be (for that purpose) especially war∣ned thereunto by the Reeve, or his suf∣ficient Deputy for the time being. And the said Tenants shall doe their suits and services according to their tenures; except they bee essoined, licensed, or have some other lawfull excuse, upon the paine hereafter following.The two generall Courts yee rely held. Which two generall Courts have beene com∣monly kept (and are to be kept yeerely) the one of them on Tuesday, the ninth day after Easter day; and the other, a∣bout the Feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle, upon reasonable warning: That is to say, in the Churches and Chappels within the said Mannors, openly upon the Sunday sevennight, or Sunday fortnight, before the day of such Courts to be holden. Tenants failing to appeare, and not essoined, or reasonable excuse, shall be amended. ITem, if any of the Copy-hold, or Customary Tenants of the said Mannors, or of either of them, doe or shall make default of their appea∣rance
at any of the said two generall Ceuris, to which their suits shall bee due; Or if such Copy-hold Tenants, as shall be especially and lawfully war∣ned to appeare at any of the said Courts (in forme aforesaid) yeerely to be holden, doe make default (to which the said suit is or shall bee due) and warning openly given (as aforesaid) of the day and place of the holding of the same general Courts, and upon speci∣all and lawfull warning to be given for the said set or purchased Courts: That then they that shall so make default (except they be essoined, or have some other lawfull or reasonable excuse) shall be amerced by the Homage of the said Court,The man∣ner of amercing. to bee taxed and afferred by two Afferrors of the said Court: that is to say, by two Tenants of the Ho∣mage, or of either of them for the time being, hath alwayes vsed to chuse, and shall chuse one for the Lord, and the residue of the Homage have cho∣sen, and hereafter shall chuse the o∣ther. What the Tenants are to be allowed at set Courts. ITem, if any Tenant bee summoned to appeare at any set Court, or Courts to bee holden within the said Mannors, or in any of them, and doth appeare upon the said summons, he ought, and is to have for his paines foure pence, and his dinner, or eight pence and no dinner; which ought and is to be paid (by the said custome) by such person or persons, who shall bee the cause that any such Tenants doe appeare for his or their matter: So it bee not any matter or cause that con∣cerneth an enquiry or presentment to be made, only for the Lord for the time being, his Heiros and Assignes. The like allowance for view, partiti∣ons, and other summons. ITem, the Copy-hold Tenants of the said Mannors, and of either of them, ought to have every of them like allowance, upon every view by them to bee made, and upon every partition by them to bee made, or upon other sum∣mon to appeare betwixt Tenant and Tenant, when they be appointed there∣unto by precept from the Steward of the said Mannors, or of either of them for the time being, or by his sufficient Deputy. How Tenants way be righted against Encroachments, Annoyances, &c. THe Homage of the Court of the said Mannors, or of any of them, may appoint six or seven Tenants, upon any complaint to them made, by any person or persons, being Tenants of the said Mannors, or of ei∣ther of them in open Court: that hee or they bee wronged by any In∣croachment, or any other Annoyance to their Copy-hold Tenements, which Tenants shall (after the said Court) view the same Incroachment, An∣noyance, and Impediment, or place whereof any such complaint shall be made. And thereupon, to present or notifie the same by a day to the Stew∣ard, or to the Homage at the next ge∣nerall Court; that there may be set a paine or amerciament, or both, for the same, by the Homage at the said next Court, according to the quality of the offence. The Homage at every generall Court, is to present deceased Tenants. ITem, the Homage of either of the said Mannors, are to make present∣ment at every generall Court to be holden for the said Manors, or of either of them, of all the Customary or Copy-hold Tenants, that they shall know shall be deceased after the Court then last past, or at any time before the said Court, whose deaths were not then found and presented, and that held any Copy-hold, or Customary, or reputed Copy-hold or Customary Lands or Tenements of the said Mannors, or of either of them. And also (as neere as they can) present what Lands every of them died seized of, and of what estate,
and when he died, and who is the next Heire or Heires to the same person or persons so dying seized, and of what age or ages the said Heire or Heires shall then be of, as neere as they can. Also they must present the deaths of Free-holders, &c. ITem, the Homage likewise ought to present the deaths of the Free-hol∣ders, and when they dyed, and who be their next heire or heires, and the a∣ges of their heires, which held any Lands or Tenements of the said Man∣nors, or of either of them, and the na∣ture of their tenures, so neer as they can: To the intent the Lord may have his reliefe, which is but the value of one yeeres quit-rent, of the Tenements hol∣den of the said Mannors, or of either of them by Socage tenure. What shall bee done, if the next heire bee not knowne. IF the Homage at any of the said Courts of either of the said Mannors, shall not know who is next heire or heires to any of the said customary Te∣nants so dying seized, when they shall make their presentments; that then they shall make their presentment so accordingly, and then upon the said presentment at the next generall Court then after, the Steward of the said Mannors of either of them, or his De∣puty for the time being, within the said presentment shall so bee made, shall cause a Proclamation to bee made in o∣pen Court, to the intent every such heire or heires may have knowledge to come, and take up the Lands and Tene∣ments of his or their Ancestours, and so the Steward or his Deputy shall cause a Proclamation to be made,Three Proclama∣tions shall bee made in two yeeres space, for the heire to take know∣ledge, &c. from gene∣rall Court to generall Court, untill three open and publike Proclamations be made in full Court, at three generall Courts: which generall Courts (by the said custome) are used to be holden commonly one halfe yeere after ano∣ther, or thereabout: So that from the presentment made by the said homage, of the dying seized of the said last Te∣nant, unto the last Proclamation, shall be fully two yeeres. And if there shall come no heire of the said Lands or Tenements, nor any for him or them, before the end of the Court next after the Court, whereat the last of the said three Proclamations shall bee made, to male his or their claime, and prove himselfe, or them∣selves to the Homage of the Court, in such sort as they or the greater part of them shall allow of, to be the next heire or heires of the whole blood to the said Tenant deceased, or to have title to the Lands and Tenements, nor to shew and prove, as aforesaid, who is or ought to be next heire or heires of the whole blood to the said Tenant deceased,If no heire or heires appeare, the Lord may then seize the Land. or next heire or heires expectant, upon a∣ny estate determined: Then the Lord of the Mannor, whereof the same Land is holden for the time being; shall and may after the next Court, next after the said three Proclamations so to be made, seize the Lands and Tenements, which were the said persons so dying seized, whose next heire or heires, or such as shall have title thereunto cannot bee found, or shall not come and make his or their claime and proofe as aforesaid. And the same L. then to take the issues and profits thereof to his owne use,The Lord may keepe it, untill a an heire doe come. un∣till such person or persons come, that shall prove him or them next heire or heires to the said person or persons so dying seized.If no heire come with in three yeeres af∣ter the 3. Proclama∣tion, then the Land shall es∣cheat to the Lord. And if none shall come in within three yeeres next after the third and last Proclamation made as aforesaid, that shall and can convey and prove him or them to be next heire or heires of the whole blood, or shew or prove, who is or ought to be next heire or heires, or to have title as next in Re∣mainder or or Reversion as aforesaid; that the said Lands and Tenements be for∣feited, or shall escheat unto the Lord of the said Mannor or Mannors for the time being. Except,1. Except women covert ba∣ron. that if the said Land and Te∣nements shall or ought immediately to descend, remaine, revert, come to any woman Covert,2. Infants within age▪ or Infant within the age of one and twenty yeeres, or to any person or persons being in prison,3. Priso∣ners. or any
person or persons not of Sanae memoriae,4. Persons Non sanae memoriae. or that shall not be within the Realme at the time of the death of the said last Tenant dying so seized,5. Persons out of the Realme. or at the time of the first, second or third Proclama∣tion to be made as aforesaid, that there, in every such case, the Lord (for the time being) shall have but the profits of the said Lands and Tenements, un∣till such persons, or his, her or their heire or heires shall come and make their claime: So that the said claime be made by the said woman, or her heires,Five yeers limitation to make the claime in. within five yeeres next after the death of her said husband, or by her husband and her selfe during the time of her Coverture: And by such person being within age, or his heires, before he shall or should accomplish his full age of one and twenty yeeres: And by the person of Non sanae memoriae, with∣in five yeeres, next after he shall reco∣ver, and be of Sanae memoriae; and by the heire of such person of Non sanae me∣moriae, within five yeeres next after the death of his said Ancestor, or before: And by the said person that shall so be out of the Realme, or his heires, within five yeeres after he shall returne; or if he shall not returne, within five yeeres after his death: And by the said per∣son or persons in prison, within one whole yeere next after his or their en∣largement from such imprisonment. No dower for women, nor courtesie of England for men. ITem, in the said Mannors, or either of them, women ought not to have dowers of any customary Lands or Tenements within the Mannors afore∣said, nor any of them: Nor men to have any estate as Tenants, by the cour∣tesie of England. Estates of inheritance shall descend according to Gavelkind. ITem, if any shall bee seized of any customary Lands or Tenements, holden of the said Mannors, or of ei∣ther of them, of an estate of Inheritance and shall have two sonnes, or three sonnes, or more: Or having no sonnes, shall have divers daughters: Or ha∣ving neither sonnes nor daughters, shall have divers Collaterall heires in one neernesse of blood; or that are to make their resort, from those that were of the same neerenesse of blood to the Tenant dying: They shall bee all co-heires to their said Father, Mother, or other An∣cestor, touching the said customary Lands and Tenements, according to the custome of Gavelkind. Touching descents where the Te∣nant left issue. ITem, if any man or woman die seized (as aforesaid) of any customary lands or Tenements of any state of Inheri∣tance, holden of the said Mannors, or of any of them, and shall have issue two or three sonnes, or more, whereof one or two or more of them shall be marri∣ed, and have issue in the life of their Fa∣ther or mother, and shall dye before his or their Father or Mother: Or ha∣ving no sons, shall have divers daugh∣ters, whereof one or more shall be mar∣ried and have issue, and dye in the life of the Father or Mother: that then the said issue shall inherit, and be co-heire with the said sonne or sonnes, daugh∣ter or daughters that shall survive his, her, or their said Father or Mother, that so shall dye seized as is aforesaid; whether the said issue bee male or fe∣male, according to the custome of Ga∣velkind. How Lands shall descend to those of the whole blood, where the Tenant left no issue. ITem, if any person or persons dye sei∣zed as aforesaid, and shall leave be∣hind him neither son nor daughter; then the next of his or their kinne (be∣ing of the whole blood) shall be heire or heires to the said person or persons so dying seized: That is to say, his, her,
or their brother or brothers, brother or brothers children, or childrens chil∣dren, according to the custome of Ga∣velkind: & so forth, as long as any of that issue shall be alive, being of the whole blood. And in default of such issue, the sisters and sisters children, according to the custome of Gavelkind: and so forth so long as any issue shall be alive, and of the whole blood. And for lacke of such issue; the Vncles and their issues, being of the whole blood, so long as a∣ny issue shall be living. And in default of such issue; the Aunts and their chil∣dren, so long as any shall be living of the whole blood. And for lacke of such issue, the next of kin of the whole blood, according to the custome of Ga∣velkind. Males and Females of one wombe, cannot joyne to be co-heires. ITem, if any person so dying seized as aforesaid, without issue of his body, and having divers Brothers of the whole blood, whereof the one or some of them shall have beene married, and shall have issue, and after issue had, shall dye, before the said Brother dying sei∣zed, as aforesaid; that then the issues of the said Brother or Brothers, so dy∣ing before him that died seized, as a∣foresaid, shall joyne and bee co-heire with his Brother or Brothers, that sur∣viveth the Brother that so dyed seized, as aforesaid, whether the said issue bee males or females. But males and fe∣males of one belly or womb, canot joyn to be co-heires together: So that the course of descents is to be observed by the said custome, according to the cu∣stome and nature of Lands in Gavel∣kinde. Touching Descents. ITem, likewise shall the issue of the daughter, that shall dye in the life of the Father or Mother, bee co-heire with the Aunt that liveth, being of the whole blood. Descents. ITem, likewise shall the Vncles, and the Vncles Brothers children (being of the whole blood) be co-heires to∣gether as aforesaid. Descents. ITem, likewise shall the Aunts, & the Aunts Sisters children joyne and be co-heires as aforesaid, and so forth of all other further degrees, of all Colla∣terall heires, being of the whole blood, which may convey themselves to be a∣ny Cousins, and heires of the whole blood to any person or persons, dying seized of any of the aforesaid customary Lands or Tenements, according to the custome of Gavelkind. How Copy-holders of inheritance may surrender. ITem, by the custome of the said se∣verall Mannors, every Copy-holder of inheritance in fee-simple, may sur∣render his said Copy-hold Lands and Tenements, or any part or parcell ther∣of unto the Lord, to the use of any per∣son or persons, and to his and their heires for ever, or to his or their heires of his or their bodies, or any otherwise in taile, or for life or lives, or yeeres, or to any person or persons, and his or their heires: To the intent the said Co∣py-hold Tenant may declare his last Will and Testament upon the same Lands and Tenements,See more in the first Article, and in the 20. and 21. Arti∣cles, &c. or to any other use or uses, unlesse it be to any corpora∣tion or corporations, or bodies politicke or corporate. And every Copy-holder in taile, or for life, lives or yeeres, of either of the said Mannors, may in like manner (by the customes of the said Mannors and of either of them) surren∣der their Copy-hold Lands, Tene∣ments or Hereditaments, or any part thereof, according to the nature of their estates: so the same Surrender be made according to the custome concerning Surrenders, as afore in these presents is
specified, or hereafter ensueth. And all the same persons, to whose use every Surrender shall bee made, are to have their Copies made to hold of the Lord by the Rod, according to the custome of the Mannor, whereof they have beene holden by the Rents and services therefore due and accustomed. Vpon every of which Surrender,The Fines must be entred in∣to the Co∣pies: See Article 29. the Fine and Fines for the same hereafter expressed, is by the said custome to bee paid, and to be entred into the severall Copies, or the Margents of them. Surrenders taken by the Headbo∣rough or Reeve, inpresence of sixe Tenants. ITem, by the custome of the said Mannors, and of either of them; every Surrender taken out of the Court by the Headborough or Reeve, or his Deputy, and in the presence of sixe Customary Tenants of the Man∣nor, of which the said Lands or Tene∣ments surrendered shall be parcell, wit∣nessing the same Surrender of any per∣son or persons, of his or their customa∣ry Lands or Tenements, holden of the said Mannors, or of either of them. And being of the full age of one and twenty yeeres, or upwards (except wo∣men Covert-baron, and such as are not of perfect minde) to the use of any per∣son or persons; are, and ought to bee as good, as if it were taken in open Court by the said Steward of the Man∣nors, or of either of them; so that such Surrender bee by the Homage presen∣ted, as hereafter followeth. Surrender of women Covert-Baron, in extremity of sicknesse. ITem, the Surrender by a woman Co∣vert-baron, being of the age of one and twenty yeeres, made together with her husband, of the Lands, Tene∣ments, or Hereditaments, whereof she is seized or estated; is, and shall bee a good Surrender of her Lands, Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments, whereof she is seized and estated: and shall bee a good Surrender of her Lands, Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments, holden of the said Mannors, or of either of the same: the same Surrender being made in her extremity of sicknesse, or likeli∣hood of death, by the acceptance of the Reeve of the Mannor, whereof the Lands and Tenements so surrendered, are parcell, and his Deputy, or either of them, in the presence of sixe custo∣mary Tenants, or by the acceptance of the Headborough, in the presence of sixe customary Tenants.Concer∣ning the womans recovery of her health. But if any such woman Covert-baron, so surren∣dering, doe after that recover her health, and doe not at the next gene∣rall Court then following ratifie and confirme the same, before the Steward or his Deputy, in the presence of the Homage, then the same Surrender is and shall be void.All other Surren∣ders by women Covert-baron. And all other Sur∣renders made by any woman Covert-baron, except before the Steward of the Mannor, or his Deputy, where she shalbe solely examined, or in extremity of sicknesse, as is aforesaid, are and shall be void. All Surrenders taken by the Reeve or Headborough, must be presented at the first or second next generall Court. ITem, all Surrenders taken of wo∣men, as aforesaid, or of men by the Reeve, or his Deputy, or by a Head∣borow for the time being, and in the presence of six Customary Tenants, as aforesaid; shall be, and ought to be, by the Homage presented, at the first or second next generall Court, holden for the Mannor whereof the same is hol∣den, after the taking thereof; or with∣in one yeere and a day next after the taking of the same Surrender, if any such generall Court bee holden within a yeere and a day next after the same Surrender so taken. Or else if no such generall Court bee holden within a yeere and a day; then to be by the Ho∣mage presented at the next generall Court to be holden for the same Man∣nor, next after the same yeere and day;
is and shall be a good Surrender, as if the same had beene taken by the Ste∣ward or his Deputy of that Mannor; or woman examined, as foresaid, in o∣pen Court, or otherwise. All Surren∣ders taken by the Reeve or his Deputy, or by a Headborough, and in the pre∣sence of six Tenants, and not presented by the said Homage in manner and forme aforesaid,Or else they shall be void. are and shall be void. But when any Surrender shall be made by any person,When Surren∣ders, to the use of the last will, must be presen∣ted, or else void. to the use of his or her last Will and Testament, to the intent that hee or shee may thereby, or there∣upon, make and declare his or her last Will and Testament: that Surrender is to be presented at the first or second Court generall of that Mannor, hap∣ning next after the decease of the party so surrendring perfectly knowne, and not before. But if the same be not at the first or second Court (next after the death of the same party) presented; or if the same party hath before (in his life time) made any other Surrender of the same Lands or Tenements, and the same to bee presented: Then the said Surrender, to the use of such last Will and Testament, is, and shall be void. The Homage must write Billa Vera upon their Presentments and good Surrenders. ITem, the Homage must write Billa Vera, upon every Surrender by them presented, when they finde the same Surrenders agreeable to the custome. And also upon every other of their Pre∣sentments, shall make Billa Vera, when they be agreeable to the said custome. Or else, if the said Homage receive any Surrender, or other Bills to them ex∣hibited, which be doubtfull or repug∣nant to the custome of the Mannor whereof the Land is holden, upon eue∣ry such Surrender or Bill, Ignoramus shall be made, or the like Superscrip∣tion, to the intent it may bee knowne to bee doubtfull or naught: or else re∣turne the same naughty Surrenders or Bills backe againe, to the parties that exhibited the same. What Women Covert-baron may doe. ITem, every Woman being Covert-baron, of the age of one and twenty yeres or upwards, having any custo∣mary Lands or Tenements to her or her Heires, for life, lives, or yeeres, and holden of the said Mannors, or of ei∣ther of them; may together with her Husband (by the hands of the said Steward, or his sufficient Deputy) surrender all her said Lands and Tene∣ments, Interest, and terme of yeeres, to the use of her said Husband, or to any other person or persons at their will and pleasure;Solely exa∣mined be∣fore the Steward or his De∣puty. so as she be solely and se∣cretly examined before the Steward, or his sufficient Deputy. Surrenders taken out of Court by the Steward or his Deputy. ITem, all Surrenders taken out of the Court by the Steward of the said Mannors, or of any of them, or his sufficient Deputy, of any person or per∣sons, being of the full age of one and twenty yeeres or more, and of Sanae me∣moriae, of any of their customary Lands and Tenements holden of the said Mannors, or of either of them, be good by the customes of the said Mannors, and of either of them;Must bee presented, at the next generall Court. and the same ought to bee published and notified to the Homage at the next generall Court, or else those Surrenders are also void. The Fines are certaine, and not arbitrary. ITem, all the Fines upon admittan∣ces for any the now Lands, Tene∣ments, or Hereditaments, of all and every the persons, named parties to the said Indenture, holden by Copy of Court Roll, are and ought to bee cer∣taine, and not arbitrary, or at the will of the Lord. And the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or of either of them, ought to have and take Fines up∣on admittances, as hereafter follow∣eth, and not other, or greater: That is
to say, upon the admission of the Heire or Heires after a descent, for every Acre of land (of what nature and kind soever) sixteen pence, and so after that rate, for greater or lesser quantities of land.What Fines are due. And upon admission of one per∣son only, after any Surrender, the like summe of sixteene pence for every A∣cre; and so after that rate, for every greater or lesser quantity of land. But if more then one person bee admitted after or upon any Surrender:If more then one Person be admitted, then &c. then eve∣ry of the same persons are to pay halfe so much as one person ought to pay, and not more. Likewise upon admissi∣on of the Heires of Heire, after a de∣scent for every messuage Customary, with the Courts, Yards, Easements, Orchards, and Gardens thereunto be∣longing, for a Fine, the summe of thir∣teene shillings foure pence, and not more. And for a dwelling house, cal∣led a Tenement, with the Courts, Yards, Orchards, Easements, and Gar∣dens thereunto belonging, the summe of ten shillings, and not more. And for a Cottage, used for a dwelling, with Easements and Gardens thereun∣to belonging, or without Garden, and not demised for more then three pounds by the yeere, the summe of twenty pence.What Fine for a building, not used for a dwelling house. But for a building, not used for a dwelling house, so much onely as ac∣cording to the quantity of the land, af∣ter the rate of sixteene pence the Acre. And for greater Cottages used for dwelling, & which shalbe let for above three pounds by the yeere, with the Courts, Yards, Orchards, and Ease∣ments thereunto belonging, the summe of ten shillings. And the like is of Mes∣suages, Tenements, and Cottages here∣after to bee built. And upon or after any Surrender, at the admission, the like Fines are to bee paid for one per∣son. Admission of man and wife, a whole Fine. But if any Surrender be made by any person or persons, to a man and his wife, then a whole Fine is to be paid for the Husband, and halfe a Fine is to bee paid for the wife. And if more persons bee admitted upon one Sur∣render; then every of the same per∣sons are to pay for Fine, halfe so much as one person ought to pay, and not more. All Acres are to bee accounted, ac∣cording to the Statute or Ordinance, De terris mensurandis, and Orchards and Gardens not belonging to such Messuages, Tenements, or Cottages are to pay as Lands according to the quantity thereof, according to the rate aforesaid. And parts of Messuages, parts of Tenements, and parts of Cot∣tages, are to pay for Fines respective∣ly (in regard of the whole) according to the rate of the whole.The Fines must bee entred in the mar∣gent of the Co∣pies: See Article 19. And all Fines paid, are to bee set downe and expres∣sed in the Copy of the Court Roll ther∣of, or in the margent of the same Co∣py. And if any question or doubt shall hereafter arise, about the discerning and true estimation what, or which be, or ought to be accounted a Messuage; and what, or which, a dwelling house, called a Tenement; and what, or which, a Cottage: the same is to bee referred to the Homage of the Man∣nor at the next generall Court, and by the same to bee tried, ordered, deter∣mined, and presented, and according to such presentments, Fines are to bee paid. If the Lord refuse to admit, then, &c. ITem, if the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or either of them, or his or their Steward (for the time being) shall refuse to admit any person or persons, to whom or to whose use such Surrender (as in the precedent Ar∣ticle is expressed) shall bee made, or shall refuse to admit such person or persons, to whom any of the said Co∣py-hold, or Customary, or reputed Copy-hold, or Customary Lands, Te∣nements, or Hereditaments shall de∣scend, according to the custome of the said Mannors, and true meaning of these Scedules: then the person so not admitted, paying or tendering to the Lord or his Reeve, Fine or Fines for the same (according to the true mea∣ning of these Scedules) shal and may into such Lands, Tenements, or Here∣ditaments, so surrendered or descen∣ded, respectively enter; and the same quietly have, hold, and enjoy as freely, and in such sort, as if hee or they had
beene thereunto lawfully admitted, and not otherwise. Surrender to make the Wife a Ioynture. ITem, if any man make a Surrender, onely to the intent to make his wife a Jointure, or to assure it to his wife for tearme of her life, or during her wi∣dow-hood, not alterning the estate of the inheritance; then for the fine of the same, or any admittance thereupon; there shall bee paid but halfe a fine for the same things so surrendred: That is to say, halfe so much as one person should pay upon admittance, accor∣ding to the true meaning of these Sce∣dules. And the like is to be used, where the Husband, and Wife make a Surren∣der of the Lands of the Wife; to the end onely, to make an estate thereof to the Husband ioyntly with his Wife, or to the Husband for terme of his life in possession or remainder. And like∣wise (by the said custom) for every Tenant that shall not bee admitted in Reversion or Remainder expectant,Concer∣ning Te∣nants not admitted, &c. up∣on the estate of any particular Tenant for life, in taile or for yeeres, granted by the Copy; the same is but halfe so much as it is upon other admittances, upon alienations, surrenders, or dying seized as aforesaid. Duties to the Homage and Tenants for Bills and Surrenders. ITem, every person that exhibiteth or delivereth any Surrender, or Bill to the Homage, ought to give and pay to the same Homage, for every such sur∣render or Bill, foure pence, and every of the said sixe Tenants, and also the Headborought or Reeve (which shall be at the taking of any Surrenders as afore∣said) ought to have foure pence apiece of the parties that make the Surrender, if the same Surrender be taken within the said Mannors,Taking Surren∣ders out of the Man∣nors. or in either of them. But if they goe out of the said Man∣nors, or either of them, for the taking of the same, then to have eight pence apiece, and their charges, if they shall goe further off. And the party that procureth the said Surrender, ought to give to the said Tenants foure pence, beside the said sees; which foure pence is to be delivered with the said Surren∣der; or else he that bringeth in the said Surrender, without the said foure pence shall pay it of his owne  to the Homage. Though an heire be admitted, yet up∣on a new claime, the Homage shall en∣quire, &c. for a Co-heire. ITem, if it chance at any time, upon the death of any Copy-holder, or customary Tenant, that there is an heire or heires found, and presented by the Homage, and after, is or are admit∣ted to the Lands or Tenements of the said Copy-holder, and at that time no other heires shall be knowne. And af∣ter it shall chance that one or other commeth, and claimeth to be Co-heire with the said Heire that is admitted; then the Homage ought thereof to en∣quire; and if they finde his claime true, they ought to present the same. And then he or they so claiming, shall bee likewise admitted, and pay his fine, and have his part of the premisses, notwith∣standing the former admission. Where Tenants are admitted, and after that another claimeth the whole: the Homage is not bound to enquire, but he is driven to his suit. ITem, if any man bee admitted to any possession, or to any Reversion or Re∣mainder of any Lands or Tenements, whether they bee to him descended as shall be supposed, or to him surrendred by any other person, and after that commeth another person or persons, who pretendeth a title to the whole premisses, or any part thereof, and desireth that the Homage may en∣quire thereof: In this case the said Ho∣mage is not bound thereof to enquire: but he or they are driven to his or their suit or plaint, whether his or their title
be right or wrong: Except in such case, where any person or persons shall claim as in the next precedent Article. And yet if any shall require the homage, to finde whether hee or they were the son or daughter, or sonnes or daughters of such a one or no, and the homage know∣ing, or well enformed of the truth, that he or they shall be the sonne, or sonnes or daughters of him or her, that dyed seized of the Lands then in question The Homage ought therein to present the truth:How farre the Ho∣mage are to present, and what not. But not to present, whether he or they ought to have the premisses, or any part thereof, to the which ano∣ther person is already presented. But in such case, he or they shall be driven to his or their suit or plaint, as afore∣said; for recovery of their said right, if any right they have. Except in such case, where any person or persons shall claime, as in the next precedent Article. How Lands descended are to bee taken up. ITem, after the death of every person, being a Ccustomary Tenant of the said Mannors, or of either of them; the next heire or heires ought to come and take up the Lands and Tenements, whereof his or their Ancestors so shall dye seized, of what age soever he bee. And if he or they be of the age of foure∣teene yeeres or upwards;At foure∣teen yeers he is to be presented and admit∣ted in his owne per∣son. hee is to bee admitted in his owne person, within a convenient time after he or they shall be presented. Or else if he or they bee under the age of foureteene yeeres; then to come and take it up by his Gardian,Vnder 14. yeeres by a Gardian. untill hee bee of the age of foureteene yeeres, as aforesaid, and to pay for his fine, according to the rates expressed in these Scedules; and the Gardian to pay but three shillings and foure pence at the most for his fine for the Gardianship,Gardian three shil∣lings foure pence. or lesse, as the Stew∣ard or his Deputy shall thinke fit. And for Lands descended from the part of the Father; the next Cousien of the part on the Mother, not able to inherit those Lands, ought to be Gardian. And if the Lands came from the part of the Mother;Who shall be Gardi∣an. then the like Cousien of the part of the Father ought to be Gardian, if that person will accept thereof.See Arti∣cle 37. And upon their refusall, or not praying to be admitted Gardian, at the first or second Court after that Infant ought to be ad∣mitted; then may the Steward admit any other of the kindred of the Infant (to whom his Lands cannot descend) to bee Gardian.The kin∣dred refu∣sing to be Gardian. And if none of the kin∣dred will accept of the Gardianship; then may another bee admitted. And every Gardian shall account to the heire of the profits, and repaire the Co∣py-hold Tenements of him whose Gardian he is: And upon admittance shall be bound to the Lord for the time being,And shall be bound to the L. for perfor∣mance. with condition for performance thereof, in such summe as the Homage of the said Court, or the greater part thereof shall like of. And of the Lands of every Infant under foureteene yeeres of age, that shall bee a purchaser; a Gardian shall be admitted, and shall so demeane himselfe in such manner, as for the Gardian of an Infant (having Lands by descent) is limited and ap∣pointed. They to whose use Lands are surren∣dred, ought within three yeeres after the presentment take them up. ITem, every person, to whose use any of the said Lands ot Tenements shal be surrendred, ought to come with∣in three yeeres after the same bee pre∣sented, and take up the same by him∣selfe, if he be of age, and to bee admit∣ted as aforesaid, and to pay his fine, or else by his Gardian, as is aforesaid. The Lord may distrain for the Fines; or by default of distresse, seize the Lands. ITem, if any of the said Heires, Alie∣nees or Gardians, doe not pay their fines within one moneth after the same fines bee extracted, and the ex∣tracts delivered to the Reeve or his De∣puty for the gathering thereof, and by them or either of them demanded; then it shall be lawfull for the Lord or
Lords of the said Mannor or Mannors for the time being, or his or their Of∣ficers to distraine, and avow as for rents: And for want of distresse, to seize the Lands and Tenements, for the which the said Fine or Fines are to be paid, and to enjoy the same to his or their owne use, untill he or they shall bee fully satisfied, and paid the said Fine or Fines, to bee paid by him or them that so ought to pay the same. The like he may doe for non payment of the Quit-rent. ITem, if any Customary or Copy-hold Tenant of the said Mannors, or of either of them, shall not pay his Rents for his Copy-hold, for which the same is due, and demanded by the said Reeve or his Deputy, then it shall bee lawfull for the Lord or Lords of the said Mannor or Mannors for the time being, or his or their Of∣ficers to distraine and avow. And for want of sufficient distresse, to seize the Lands and Tenements out of the which the same ought to be paid, and to take and enjoy the Rents, Issues, and profits of the same to his or their owne use, untill hee or they shall bee fully satisfied and paid the same Rents by him or them that so ought to pay the same. Who shall be the Gardian. ITem, that when any Tenant dieth seized leaving his Heire under the age of fourteene yeeres, the next of the kin (to whom the said Lands and Tenements cannot descend) shall have, if hee shall require it, the cu∣stody of the Heire, and of his Lands and Tenements, committed unto him for the use of the Heire, untill he come to the age of fourteene yeeres,See Arti∣cle 33. as is a∣foresaid, and then hee to chuse his owne Gardian, And the former Gar∣dian at any time after (upon reasona∣ble request) to yeeld account to the Heire, of the profits of his Lands re∣ceived. Tenants may let Leases for 31. yeeres and foure moneths, without any Licence or Fine. ITem, if any person or persons bee disposed to let his or their custo∣mary Lands or Tenements to any other person or persons, and to their Executors and Assignes, for the terme of one and thirty yeeres, or lesse; the same person or persons have and shall have full power and authority, to set or let to farme his or their Copy-hold Lands, or Tenements to any person or persons, their Heires, Executors, and Assignes, for the terme of one and thirty yeeres and foure moneths,See the Abstract of the In∣denture. or lesse, in possession from the time of the making thereof in writing, without any Licence to him or them to bee granted, and without paying Fine to the Lord, or incurring any forfeiture or seizure of or for the same: So as the same Lease doe not exceed one and thirty yeeres and foure moneths, from the time of the making thereof.If such Leases be not pre∣sented to the Ho∣mage within one yeere after the making, they shall be void. But such Lease is and ought to be presen∣ted to the Homage of the Mannor, whereof the Lands or Tenements so leased are held, within one yeere after the making thereof: or else the same Lease so made, and not presented as aforesaid, shall bee void and of none effect. Either Mannor is vpon every change of Lord, to pay five pounds for Recognition money. ITem, the custome of the Mannor is, to give to the Lord of every of the said Mannors, upon the change of every Lord, at the next Court after the first entry, bona fide, ten pounds of lawfull money of England; that is to say, out of each Mannor five pounds, for the recognition and acknowledge∣ing the services, which is to be levied and collected by the Reeve for the time being; amongst all the said Co∣py-holders of the said Mannors, re∣spectively, according to the rates they shall be taxed at, by the Homage at
the next Court to bee holden, after the comming of the new Lord. How the Reeve of either Mannor is to bee chosen. ITem, the homage of every of the said Mannors ought yeerely (at the ge∣nerall Court to be holden next after Michaelmas) to elect & chuse severall Reeves for every of the said Mannors; that is to say, to elect and chuse two Customary Tenants, either of the said persons named parties to the said presents, their Heires or Assignes, or of others not named, to beare the Of∣fice of the Reeve for each of the said Mannors: namely, he that was before in election (if he bee alive) and one other: or if he be dead, two other, to the intent the Lord of the said Man∣nors, or of either of them, or his Ste∣ward, may appoint the one of them so elected for one whole yeere;Hee shall serve one whole yeere. that is, one to serve for each of the said Man∣nors; so he be appointed within that Mannor of which he is a Tenant, and for which he shalbe so chosen. Which Reeve being so appointed, ought to take upon him the said Office for one whole yeere then next ensuing, to ex∣ecute the same by himselfe or his De∣puty, for whom hee shall answer, and to be subject to account and answer for the same, as in the said presents is set downe. And if a Copy-holder shall bee duly chosen, and appointed by the Homage, to bee the Lords Reeve, as aforesaid, and (according to his turne) presented by the Homage, and shall refuse to serve the said Office by him∣selfe or his Deputy:For refu∣sing the Office, and what Fine to be paid in Hack∣ney. then every such person so refusing, within the said Mannor of Hackney, shall pay for a Fine, sixe pounds thirteene shillings and fourepence. And every such per∣son so refusing,The Fine for Step∣ney. within the said Man∣nor of Stebunheath or Stepney, shall pay for a Fine, ten pounds to the Lord of the Mannor,The Ho∣mage shall chuse ano∣ther, untill one do ac∣cept and serve. whereof his Lands are holden. And the Homage of the same Mannor shall bee charged from time to time to chuse another Reeve in the place of him that shall so refuse, untill such time as (for the same Mannor) one be chosen that shall and will serve the said Office. And every Copy-holder that shall bee chosen and ap∣pointed to the said Office as aforesaid, and shall refuse to serve the same Of∣fice, shall pay the Fine aforesaid to the Lord of that Mannor for his refu∣sall. The halfe of Fines paid by refusers, shall be al∣lowed him who next shall serve. The one halfe of all which Fines or Fine, of Tenant or Tenants so re∣fusing to accept and execute the said Office of Reeveship, according to the true meaning of these Scedules, the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or either of them, of whom such Te∣nant or Tenants so refusing shall hold, ought, and shall from time to time allow unto such person or persons, as being chosen and appointed to bee Reeve as aforesaid; And shall and will, next after the refusall of any one or more of the said Tenants so chosen, accept and serve the said Office; the moity of the said Fine or Fines, re∣spectively to bee by him defaulked and retained in his account.And be by him retai∣ned at his accoun∣ting. And by the Lord of that Mannor, upon the same Reeves account (whensoever hee shall account for the same) to be duly and justly allowed. In what cases the Lord may seize the Reeves Lands. ITem, if any Copy-holder, that shall accept, and execute the said Office of Reeve, shall refuse to satisfie and pay unto the Lord, the yeerely quit∣rents and fines for admittances upon Alienations or Descents, wherewith such Reeve shall or may bee lawfully charged, by and according to the true meaning of these presents; or shall refuse to account with the Lord, with∣in two moneths next yeerely after Mi∣chaelmas, having had the Rentall and Estracts of Fines upon admittances, as aforesaid, for that yeere, by the space of two moneths: Every such Reeves Lands & Tenements, that shal so refuse to account, and pay the said Rents and Fines which he shall or may have col∣lected, as aforesaid, shall bee seized into the Lords hands, and the Lord shall and may take to his owne use the
issues and profits of his said Lands and Tenements, untill he shall pay unto the Lord the Rents and Fines aforesaid: And untill hee hath also satisfied and paid for his said offence (viz.) being Reeve of Hackney,What he is to pay for his offence in both the Mannors. six pounds thirteene shillings foure pence: And being Reeve of Stepney, ten pounds. Neverthelesse, the Reeve ought not, nor shall be char∣ged or chargeable to answer any Quit∣rents, contained in any Rentall or E∣stracts, Hee is not to answer any Quit∣rent, un∣lesse hee know the Tenant, or where the Land lyeth. unlesse it appeare unto him by the Rentall of the former Reeve, or otherwise bee made knowne unto him by some of the Lords Officers, who is the Tenant, or where the Land lyeth; for and in respect of which, the same Quit-rents ought to be paid. No Reeves within this composition, shall be charged with the Leet, or Court Baron, otherwise then in Article 45. Nor provide for any dinners, except, &c. ITem, no Copy-holder of the said Mannors, or of either of them, being named parties to the said Indenture, nor their Heires or Assignes, ought or shall (at any time) bee charged to col∣lect or gather any of the Amerciaments, Fines, or other Issues or Profits of the Courts-Leets, or Courts-Baron, hol∣den within the said Manors, or of either of them, otherwise then in the last pre∣cedent Article is mentioned: nor to provide or allow for any Dinners, ei∣ther on the day or daies the Court-Leet shall be holden upon, or on the day or dayes of the two generall Courts: but are and shall bee thereof for ever freed and discharged; except that such Te∣nant, or his Heires, shall hereafter pur∣chase or have other customary Lands then those that the said persons, named parties to the said Indenture, or some one of them the said persons doe now hold, which shall be worth to be sold (at the least) two hundred pounds of law∣full money of England, or shall bee of the cleere yeerely value of twenty pounds of like money. What Tenants may be chosen Reeves. ITem, every one of the said Customa∣ry Tenants, named parties to the said Indenture, whose Lands, Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments, holden by Copy of Court-Roll of either of the said Mannors, are worth sixteene pounds of like money, as aforesaid, by the yeere to be let, or two hundred pounds to be sold, by the estimation and present∣ment of the Homage of the same Man∣nor, shall beare the Office of Reeve, of and for such of the said Mannors wher∣of hee shall bee a Tenant by Copy of Court-Roll, and for which he shall bee chosen and appointed Reeve, as afore∣said, when his or their time and course doth come. What allowances the Reeve is to have of the Lord. ITem, every of the said Reeves, is to bee allowed of the said Lords or Lord, for the executing of the said Office for one yeere, as followeth, viz. The Reeve of Stebunheath, three pounds sixe shillings and eight pence: and sixe shillings eight pence more, for and in respect of an allowance of a Coat-cloth to the said Reeve: And the Reeve of Hackney, fifty three shillings and foure pence: and sixe shillings eight pence more, for and in respect of an allowance of a Coat-cloth to the same Reeve: And all other commodities due and incident to the said Office, for ei∣ther of them, or used heretofore to be paid to the said Reeve, by any of the Tenants of the said Mannors respe∣ctively. The Reeve to deliver the Rentall to his Successour. ITem, the Reeves of the said Man∣nors, and of either of them, shall at the next generall Court, after his yeere of service expired, deliver the Rentall by which he made his account, to the Reeve that shall next succeed him,To bee amerced. upon paine to be amerced, or fined by the Homage, if he shall not so doe. What the Copy-holders may freely doe without forfeiture. ITem, all the Customary Tenants of the said Mannors, & of either of thē, may break and dig their Copy-hold
grounds, holden of the said Mannors, and of either of them, at his or their will & pleasure; and fell, and cut down their timber and woods growing, or that shall grow upon the same, and convert it to their best use and profit: and may also suffer their Copy-hold Tenements and houses to decay, without incurring any seizure or forfeiture of their estates therefore, or other paine: and may take and pull downe their said Tene∣ments, and erect or set them up againe, either where they stood before, or up∣on any other Lands, holden by Copy of Court-Roll of the said Mannors, or of either of them.No houses may bee pulled downe, to set them upon free-hold land. But they may not, or shall not take or pull them downe, to set them (or any part of them) upon their owne Free-holds, or upon the Free-holds of any other. Copy-holders may lop Trees grow∣ing upon the waste before their houses. ITem, every of the said Copy-hol∣ders, or reputed Copy-holders, na∣med parties to the said Indenture, may lop and shred all such Trees as grow before their houses or Tenements, upon the waste ground, and convert the same to their owne use, without any offence, so the said Trees stand for the defence of their Houses, Yards, or Gardens:They may dig Gra∣vell, &c. upon the waste. And also they may dig Gra∣vell, Sand, Clay, and Lome upon the said waste grounds, to build or repaire any of their Copy-hold Tenements within the said Mannors, or in either of them without any licence; so alwaies, as every of the said Copy-holders doe fill up so much as shall bee digged by him or them. Letting of Lands for more then 31. yeeres and foure moneths, is a forfeiture. ITem, if any person or persons, being Tenant Customary, shall (without Licence by Indenture, or other wri∣ting, or otherwise) let his said Custo∣mary Lands or Tenements for more then one and thirty yeeres and foure moneths, it shall be a forfeiture of his estate, by the custome of the said Man∣nors, and of either of them, being found and presented by the Homage, or else otherwise lawfully and suffici∣ently proved. For what offences these Copy-holders may forfeit their estates. ITem, for Treason or Felony what∣soever, that shall bee committed by any Copy-holder of the said Man∣nors, or of any of them, for which hee shall be lawfully attainted, he shall for∣feit his Copy-hold Lands and Tene∣ments to the Lord of the said Mannor. And for all other offence or offences, act or acts whatsoever, for which a Free-holder ought (by the common Lawes of the Land) to forfeit his Free-hold Lands and Tenements: There a Copy-holder of the said Mannors, or of either of them, shall forfeit as a Free-holder ought to forfeit in like case his Free-hold.Outlawry except for Treason or Felo∣ny, shall be no for∣feiture. But if a Copy-holder be out-lawed for any cause, saving Felo∣ny or Treason, the Lord shall not have the issues or profits of his Lands. And if a Copy-holder make a Feoffement of his Copy-hold, Gift in taile, or Lease for life or lives, by deed, or with∣out deed, by livery and seizin there∣upon: or shall suffer a recovery at the Common Law, levy a Fine, or wilfully refuse or deny to pay, doe or performe his Rents, Fines, Suits, Customes and Services, at any time due to the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or of ei∣ther of them for the said Copy-holds:How a man may make a further forfeiture of his e∣state seve∣rall waies. The same wilfull refusall being presen∣ted to the Homage, by the oathes of three Customary Tenants, with the Reeve or his Deputy (the said Tenants or Reeve, nor his Deputy, being none of the Lords servants) and being found and presented by the Homage, the same shall be holden and reputed a for∣feiture of his estate, whatsoever hee shall have by Copy of Court-Roll, at the time of any such act committed or done; in so much of his or their Copy-hold Lands and Tenements, as he shall have committed any such act: and on∣ly for so much of his Lands and Tene∣ments, Denying to pay Rents, Fines, &c. out of the which the said Quit∣rent, and other duties is demanded, and shall be due, and wilfully denied
by the said Tenant or Tenants, as afore∣said. Or if any Copy-holder shall in the Lords Court,Disclai∣ming to hold of the Lord, and clai∣ming their Copy-holds to be free-holds. or elsewhere in any court of Record, disclaime to hold his said Copy-hold Lands and Tenements of the Lord of the Mannor, whereof his Lands and Tenements are holden; or shall (by pleading in the Lords Court, or other Court of Record) wilfully claime their Copy-holds to bee Free-holds; Pleading wittingly in a reall action at Common Law, in chiefe as a Free-hold. or willingly and wittingly plead in any Reall action at the Common law in chiefe as a Free-hold Tenant; or shall willingly and wittingly doe any other act, or things, in or concerning his now Lands and Tenements, which shall be a disseisin or dis-inheritance of the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or of either of them, their heires or as∣signes (other than such acts, as in these Articles are especially mentioned, (or dispensed withall) that then hee shall forfeit his and their estate, of and in the same Lands and Tenements so dis∣claimed, to be holden or claimed to be free-hold; or for which he shall plead in chiefe, or do any such other act or thing as is aforesaid.What o∣ther for∣feitures the Lord shall haue. Finally, the Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them, shall have all such other Forfeitures, Issues, Profits, and Advantages of the said Copy-holds, as shall grow due to him by any Statute Lawes of this Realme, being not against and contra∣ry to these Articles and Customes here expressely set downe. The Act or Neglect of Tenant for lives or yeeres, shall not prejudice those in remainder. ITem, if any person or persons, ha∣ving any estate of any Copy-hold Lands or Tenements, holden of the said Mannors, or of either of them, for terme of life or lives, or for terme of yeeres, or (in the right of their wives) of any estate, although he, she, or they, shall doe or suffer, or neglect to doe any act or acts during the time afore∣said, in or upon the said Copy-hold Lands and Tenements, which may or shall be contrary to the custome of the said mannors, or of either of them. The same act or acts so being done, shall not prejudice or bee hurtfull unto the next person or persons to whom the said Customary Lands or Tenements should or ought to remaine, revert, or come,Concer∣ning the Wife and her heires. nor to the said Wife or her Heires, not being party in Court, or consenting in Court to the said act or forfeiture. Nor that the Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them, shall take any longer Advantage, Is∣sues, or Profits of the same Copy-hold Lands or Tenements, then during the time of such estates as aforesaid, of the party committing, doing, or assenting to such act or acts. So that after his or their decease, or estates determined, the said Lands and Tenements shall remaine, revert, or come to the next person or persons, or to such person or persons to whom the same should have come or remained, or goe or revert im∣mediatly after such estate or estates en∣ded or determined; as though there had bin no such act or acts done, contra∣ry to the tenor or true meaning of these presents, by any such person or persons. Private Acts of Tenants, hurt not the customes of the rest. ITem, the particular or private act or acts of any customary Tenant or Tenants of any of the said Mannors, which shall happen to be done by, or betweene them, or any of them, and the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or either of them, and his or their Reeve, or of either of them, contrary to the Ar∣ticles and true meaning of these pre∣sents, neither doth nor shall extend to be construed to be a breach of the anci∣ent customes of the said Mannors, or of either of them, to the hurt or preju∣dice of the rest of the Customary Te∣nants, but of themselves only, doing the said particular act. Tenant for life or yeeres, making waste, shall be fined by the Homage. ITem, that if any Tenant for terme of life, or lives onely, or for terme of yeeres of Customary Lands, shall make any waste, then he shall bee fined by the Homage; the third part of which Fine shall bee to the Lord, and the other two parts shall come to him in the reversion or remainder of the said Copy-hold.
The Lord may distraine, but not seize. ITem, the Lord, for non payment of Amerciaments, may distraine his said Tenants, parties to these pre∣sents, and avow for the same as for Rents: But hee cannot seize any of his or their Customary Lands or Tene∣ments, parties to these Presents, for non payment thereof, vntill hee bee payed. How partition is to be made betweene Co-heires, Ioynt-Tenants, or Tenants in common. ITem, upon the admission of any Co∣heires, Ioynt-Tenants, or Tenants in common, if they cannot agree to occupy their Lands and Tenements, or to make partition among themselves: then hee or they that bee grieved, may (by the custome of either of the said Mannors) have a Precept from the Steward, directed to seven Customary Tenants, or more, of the said Mannors within which the said Lands and Te∣nements doe lye, and they shall make partition thereof, and the same returne to the Steward of the said Mannors againe, to bee enrolled in the Court Rolls of the said Mannor, whereof the said Lands and Tenements bee holden. Whereupon the said Heires shall goe to the said Steward of the said Man∣nor, within which the said Lands or Te∣nements shall lye: and then elect and chuse their parts in forme following: That is to say,The mn∣ner of e∣lecting and chu∣sing their parts, ei∣ther in sons or daughters. The youngest Sonne to chuse first, and then hee that is next to the youngest to chuse next, and so after that rate unto the eldest (how many soever) which eldest shall chuse last. And likewise the same order is to be observed amongst daughters, if there bee no sonnes, and amongst all other degrees of Heires, touching the Cu∣stomary Lands and Tenements holden of the said Mannors, or either of them. And upon every such partition,Fine upon every such partition. they shall pay for a Fine to the Lord, two shillings and six pence, or lesse, at the discretion of the Steward, according to the quantity of the Lands or Tene∣ments so parted betweene Tenants in common and Ioynt-Tenants; for the like Fine the said division to bee by the said Tenants, without election of the parties themselves, but by casting of Lots, if they cannot otherwise agree. Copy-holders shall pay but a penny for poundage. ITem, if any Customary or Free Te∣nants Cattell, or the Cattell of their Farmers, bee brought to the Lords Pound, the said Tenant, or his Farmer shall pay for all his Cattell (if they bee a hundred heads, or upward or under) for the poundage therof, but one penny. And hee that is no Tenant, shall pay for every distresse of Cattell so poun∣ded, foure pence. Cattell impounded to be delivered by two Copy-holders. ITem, if any Cattell be impounded within the Lords Pound, by any per∣son or persons, being a Customary Tenant or Tenants of the said Man∣nors, or of either of them, for any tres∣passe committed or done within the said Mannors, or in either of them, up∣on their Copy-holds: that all such Cattell being so impounded, may by two of the said Customary Tenants, of such of the said Mannors, or of either of them, wherein the said trespasse shall be committed, which will answer for such damages and costs as shall bee recovered in the said Court, against the owners of the same Cattell for the said trespasse, bee delivered out of the said Pound, unto the owner of the said Cattell, by the custome of the same Mannors, and of either of them. No Suits for title of Copy-holds out of the Lords Court, without licence. ITem, no Customary Tenant shall sue, vexe, or trouble any other Cu∣stomary Tenant, for any title of Lands or Tenements, lying and being within the said Mannors, or in either of them, being Copy-hold Lands or Te∣nements of the said Mannors, or of ei∣ther of them, out of the Lords Court, without the speciall Licence first had and obtained of the L. of the said Man∣nors, or of either of them, or of his Ste∣ward for the time being; if any person do the contrary, he shall have his Lands or Tenements seized into the Lords
hands, untill he pay a Fine to the L. for the same offence, viz. such Fine as shall be ceassed by the Homage at the next generall Court of the said Mannor. Cattell offending, shall bee driven to the Lords Pound. ITem, that no Customary Tenants of the said Mannors, or of either of them, for any offence to be done by any mans Cattell, within the said Man∣nors, or in either of them, shal drive the same Cattell to any forraigne Pounds, but to the Lords Pounds, being within the said Mannors, or in either of them: if any man doe the contrary, to be amer∣ced at the next generall Court by the Homage. So alwaies as there be a suffi∣cient Pound of the Lords there. How Stakes, Markes, and Meares, betweene Tenant and Tenant ought to bee set. ITem, that no Tenant, or any other person shall set any Stake, Marke, or Meare, betweene Tenant and Te∣nant, or betweene Tenant and any other person that lieth next to him, without the parties doe thereunto agree, un∣lesse an order be appointed by the Ho∣mage, or the greatest part of them, that it may bee first viewed by twelve Te∣nants of the said Mannors, or of either of them, where the Stake or Meare is to bee set, and there to set the Stake or Meare (indifferently) betweene both the said parties, & so to continue it, upon paine of amercement by the Homage. Drivers of Commons, when to be chosen. ITem, the Homage doe, and shall yerely use at the next general Court, holden upon the Tuesday, the ninth day next after Easter day, to elect and chuse out of the Hamlets within every of the said Mannors, certaine customary Tenants, to be Drivers and Viewers of the Wasts and Commons of the said Mannors, and of either of them, for one whole yeere. Which Tenants so ele∣cted, have authority (by the said cu∣stome) to drive the Commons at any time when they finde it surcharged, and to impound the Cattell by them so taken: and no other to drive the said Common, then the persons that were so chosen as aforesaid. How surcharging the Commons is to be remedied. ITem, If by their driving, the surchar∣ging cannot be remedied, then they ought to informe the Homage therof at the next Court, that they may amerce the offenders, whether the offenders be Tenants or no Tenants. And also to put a  amerciament upō their heads, that they shall not likewise offend. The Drivers shall account to the Homage. ITem, if the said Drivers receive by the said poundages, any more mony then they spend in travaile, the rest shalbe imployed to the scowring of the com∣mon Sewers, which bee upon the said waste ground and Commons, and lay∣ing of Bridges over the said common Sewers; and shall make their account (in that behalfe) to the Homage at the generall Court, when the yeere (for which they were chosen) shall expire. The Homage may make by-Lawes, which shall binde the Tenants. ITem, the Copy-hold and customary Tenants, may make by-lawes at their generall Courts, when need shall re∣quire, which custome shall be so conti∣nued. And the said by-lawes so by them made, shall binde all the Copy-hold Tenants of the said Mannors, or of ei∣ther of them: so the same be not contra∣ry to the true meaning of these Articles. Recoveries may be suffered to barre Entailes. ITem, by the custome of the said Man∣nors, and of either of them, Tenants in taile of customary Lands and Te∣nements, may suffer common recoveries within the said severall Mannors, with single or double vouchers; or (by agree∣ment) forfeit the said Lands and Tene∣ments into the Lords hands, for the cut∣ting off the estate taile: which custome (by these Articles) shall have still con∣tinuance, and such recoveries and for∣feitures, are and shall be good to barre the said Entaile.
Tenants not appearing a set Courts, shall not be amerced above 4. pence. ITem, whensoever there shall be any Court, or Courts Baron (or other then the said two generall Courts) kept within the said Mannors, or either of them; no Copy-holder ought or shall be amerced above the summe of foure pence, for any default of his appearance at any the same Court or Courts, except the said two generall Courts: Neither shall incurre any forfeiture, or seizure of his Copy-hold Lands or Tenements, or any other damage for any such default. And the said amerciament to be taxed by the Assurers Tenants of that Court. The Stewards Fees. ITem, the Steward or his Deputy is to have such Fees and allowances, as hereafter is expressed, viz. for every Surrender taken out of the Court five shillings, and nothing for any Surren∣der taken in Court. For every woman covert-Baron, that shall be examined, sixe shillings eight pence; for every ad∣mittance of every person, two shillings; for entring every Surrender, and ma∣king the Copy of Court Roll thereup∣on, sixe shillings eight pence; for every Precept for a view of partition, and en∣tring the same, and the returne thereof upon the Court Roll, and the Copy thereof, two shillings six pence; and if it exceed two sheets of paper, then for every sheet over and above two sheets, twelve pence more. For searching the Court Rols for every yeere, foure pence. For every purchased Court, thirteene shillings foure pence. For entring a note of a Leafe, granted of any Lands or Te∣nements, containing the date, quantity of Lands or Tenements, and certainty of terme, and to whom the same shalbe granted, & for a note thereof to the par∣ty, sixe pence. For these things before expressed, the Steward shall have only such Fees as before is declared; and for all other things, he shall have as former∣ly hath anciently bin used, and no more. Buildings to bee erected, shall pay Fines, as those already built. ITem, all Messuages, Tenements, and Cottages, that shall hereafter bee built upon any the copy-hold Lands, wherof the customes are hereby meant to be declared; shall be held and enjoy∣ed by the Copy-hold Tenants thereof, under the same Customes and Articles herein declared, as the Lands whereon they shall bee built are holden and en∣joyed; but shall pay such Fines there∣fore, as is before expressed or declared for Messuages, Tenements, and Cotta∣ges, that shall be new built. The Lord shall not sever from the Mannor any of these Copy-holders, to any persons in Fee-simple, or other estate of Free-hold. ITem, the Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them, their Heires or Assignes, shall not at any time here∣after grant, or convey (severed from the Manor wherof the same is now holden, or ought to be holden, any of the Mes∣suages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, whereof any of the said persons, named parties to the said Indenture hereunto annexed, is now copy-holder or customary Tenant, to a∣ny person or persons in Fee-simple, Fee∣taile, or for terme of life, or other estate of Free-hold, or for any estate or terme, otherby Copy of Court Roll, according to the customes of the said Mannors, and true meaning of these presents, and the Indenture whereunto the same are an∣nexed; except the Free-hold to be gran∣ted or severed, at the petition and desire of such person or persons as then shall be Copy-holder thereof, according to the true meaning of these presents. And if the Lord hath granted away the Free-hold of any the Copy-hold Lands or Tenements,What the Lord is disabled of doing. whereof the Cu∣stome is hereby meant to bee declared: he shall get and take the same backe a∣gaine; and the same shall (notwithstan∣ding such grant or alienation) be annex∣ed to the Mannor whereof it was, or is held, and shall be held and enioyed by the Tenant, his Heires and Assignes thereof, by Copy of Court Roll of the same Mannor, under the Rents, Servi∣ces, and Customes in these Articles ex∣pressed, & not otherwise: and also, that the Lord shall admit by his Steward or his Deputy, all such Tenant & Tenants that ought of right to be admitted up∣on the presentment of the Homage.
HERE FOLLOVVETH THE COPY OF THE CHARTER OF London, of the first grant, and of the confir∣mation of divers Kings after. HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Anglie, Dominus Hibernie, Dux Normandie & Aqui∣tanie com. anegëarchîepisco∣pis Episcopis, &c. Salutem. Sciatis nos concescisse & hac presenti carta mea confirmasse Baroni∣but nostric de Civitate nostra London quod eligant sibi Mayer dese ipsis singulic annis qui nobis sit fidelis discretus & idoneus ad Regimen Civitatis. Ita quod electus fuerit nobis vel justiciis nostris si presenter nō fai∣mus presentetur & nobis juret fidelitatem. & liceat omnes ipsum in fine anni ammo∣vere & aliqui subtinere si voluerint vel eun∣dem retinere. Ita tn̄ quod nobis ostenda∣tur idem vel Iustice nostris si presenter non fuerimus. Concessimus & eisdem baronibus nostris & hac carta nostra confirmavimus quod habeant bene & in pace libere & quiete & integre omnes libertatès suas quibus hacte∣nus ubi sunt tam in Civitate London quam extra & tam in aequis quam in terris & omnibus aliis locis salva nobis camberlen∣geria nostra. Quare volimus & firmiter recipimus quod praedicti Barones nostre Civitatis London eligant sibi singulis annis de seipsis predeō mō. Et quod habeant om∣nes predictas libertates bn̄ & in pace inte∣gre & plenarie cū omnibus ad hujus liber∣tatis pertin̄. Secundum cartam domini patris nostri Iohannis illustris Rex Anglo∣rum quam Inspeximus raecionabiliter te∣stamur. Testis dominus Episcopus London Episcop. &c. Apud Westm. 18. die men∣sis Februarii. Anno Regni nostri 11. A Statute for the Hustings in the time of Saint Edward to be holden in London. SIcut continetur in lege Sancti Edwar∣di Capitulo 46. quod debet in Lon∣don quae caput Regni est & legum & semper curia domini Regis singulis Septim. die Lune Hastings sedere et tenere fundata enim erat olim & edi ficata ad instar mag∣ne troie & ad modum & in memoria in se continet in quae fuit super fuit ardua com∣pota & ambigua pcta corone & cor. do∣mini regis tocius regni pred. quia usus & consuetudines suas una semper inviolabili∣tate conservat ubi{que} ubicun{que} ipse Rex fu∣erit sive in expeditione sive alibi propter fa∣tigaciones gencium & populorii regni jux∣ta veteres consuetudines bonorum prim. & predecessorum & omnium principium & procerum & sapientum seniorum tocius regni predict. &c. The Charter of London grant by William Conquerour and of his Sonne. WIllm̄. kyng greit Wil∣liam bysshop and God∣fregis porterē and eall the borough waren byndē London
franchisce & engliste & ichkyd eth yt Ick yill ye grete bē ealbra yeara laga yee die ye gret yer an en Ed∣wardis dage kinge end ick yill yet sulke childe be his fader yrfnū ach∣ter his fader dage & ick nel geyoly∣an that enynge man ethe doīg y∣rang bede god ye be helde. Hoc est trāscriptū carte regis Wil∣lē cōquestorē frē ciuibus loudō que ad modum p̄scriptū in vera lingua Saxonica in angliā mirabiliter cō∣uertā ad modernā scripturam que totaliter nunc scribitur videl. An. dom. M. iii. C. xiiii. & nota quod ista littera. y. ī antiqua li tera o∣nitur pro. w. & ista littera. y. pr∣d liquid computatur i. y. WIlliam kynge grete Wil∣liam bisshop and godfrey porters and al the burgeis within London French and English. and I graunte yow that I wyll that yee be all your lawe worth that ye were in Edwardis dayes the kyng ¶And I wyl that ich childe be his faders eyer and I nyl suffur. that ony man you any wron∣gys beed. and god you kepe. Hoc est transcriptum in latinum. WIllm. rex salutat Willm. episcopum & godfridū por∣tegrinum & omnem bovi∣ghwr. infra london francisces & an∣glices amicabiliter. Ego vobis facio quod go volo quod vos sitis omni lege illa digni qua fuistis diebus Edwardi regis. Et volo quod omnis puaer sit patris sui heres post di∣em svi patris. Et ego nolo pati quod aliquit homo aliquam injuriam vobis inferat. De∣us vos salvet. The Ordinance for the Assise and Weight of Bread in the City of London. The price of a quarter Wheate. iii. s. THe ferthing simnell poise. xv. vuncis & di. qt{er}. The q whyt loof coket poise. xvii. vuncis di. & ob. The ob. whet loof poise. xxxv. vuncis & a peny. The ob. whet loof poise lii. vuncis di. & peny ob. The peny whet loof poise. Cv vuncis & di. q & ob. The ob. whet loof of al graynes poise lxx vuncis & ii d. The quarter Wheat at iii. s. vi. d. The ferthing simnell poise. xix. vuncis di. qt{er}. & quat. The q whit loof coket poise. xvi. vuncis & half peny. The ob. whit loof poise. xxxii. vuncis id. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xlviii vuncis ii. d. q. The peny whet loof poise. xcvi. vuncis & di. a q & ii d. weight. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. lxiiii. vunics & iii. d. The quarter whete at iiii. s. The q simnell poise. xii vuncis q iii d. The q whit loof coket poise. xiiii. vuncis iii. q. i. d. The ob. whit loof poise. xxix. vunces di. ii. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xliiii. vuncis qt{er}. di. & ob. The i. d whete loof poise. lxxxviiii. vuncis iii. q. i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. lix. vuncis & a q i. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at iiij. s. vj. d. The q simnel poise. xj. vuncis qt{er} & ij. d. The q whyt loof coket poise. xiij. vuncis di. and iij. qt{er}. The ob. whyte loof poise. xxvij. vuncis and halfe. The ob. whete loof poise. xij. vuncis and a qt{er}. The peny whete loof poise. lxxxij. vuncis and halfe. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. lv. vuncis. The quarter Wheat at v. s. The q simnell poise. x. vuncis. qt{er}. di. j. d. ob. The q whyt loof coket poise. xij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. & ij. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxv. vuncis. di. & half q j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xxxviij. vuncis. di. & j. d. The peny whete loof poise. lxxvij. vuncis ij. d. di. & ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. lj. vuncis. qt{er}. di. & ob. The quarter Wheat at v. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. ix. vuncis. di. di. qt{er}. j. d.  vunc. The q whyt loof coket poise. xij. vuncis. j. d. ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxiiij. vuncis. di. q. & ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxxvj. vuncis. di. qt{er}. & ob. The peny whete loof poise. lxxij. vuncis. q. di. j. d. ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xlviij. vuncis. qt{er}. & j. d. The quarter Wheat at vj. s. The q simnell poise. ix. vuncis. The q whyt loof coket poise. xj. vuncis. qt{er}. & di. ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. j. d. The halfpeny whete loof poise. xxxiiij. vuncis. di. qt{er}. & ob. The peny wheat loof poise. lxviij. vuncis. qt{er}. di. & ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. lxv. vuncis. di. ij. d. weight. The quarter Wheat at vj. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. viij. vuncis. qt{er}. & di. & ob. The q whyte loof coket poise. x. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. & . j. d. The ob. whyte loof poise. xxj. vuncis. di. & ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxxij. vuncis. qt{er}. di. & ob. The peny whete loof poise. lxiiij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. & j. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xliij. vuncis. di. qt{er}. j. d. ob. The quarter Wheat at vij. s. The q simnell poise. vij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ij. d. q. The q whyt loof coket poise. x. vuncis. qt{er}. and q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxj. vuncis. di. ob. weight. The ob. whete loof poise. xxx. vuncis. iij. q & ob. q. The peny whete loof poise. lxj. vuncis. & half. j. d. ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xlj. vuncis. j. d.
The quarter Wheat at vij. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. vij. vuncis qt{er} di. & q. The q whyt loof coket poise. ix. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xix. vuncis. & di. & j. d. ob. The ob. where loof poise. xxix vuncis. qt{er}. ij d. q. The peny where loof poise. lviij. vuncis. & di. & di. qt{er}. ij. d. The ob. loof of all graynis. poise. xxxix. vuncis. di. qt{er}. & ob. The quarter Wheat at viij. s. The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. di. j. d. ob. q. The q whyt loof coket poise. ix. vuncis qt{er}. ij. d. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xviij. vuncis. di. qt{er}. ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxviij. vuncis. i. d. ob. q. The peny whete loof poise. lvj. vuncis. di. & qt{er}. i. d. The ob. loofe poise. of all graynis xxxvij. vuncis. qt{er}. di. j. d. ob. The quarter Wheat at viij. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. di. & j. d. ob. The q whyt loof coket poise. viij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. di. ij. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. di. j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xxvj. vuncis, iij. qt{er}. di. j. d. The peny whete loof poise. liij. vuncis. iij. q. ij. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxxv. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. di. ob. The quarter Wheat at ix. s. The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. & di. qt{er}. j. d. q. The q whyt loof cocket poise. viij. vuncis. & di. ij. d. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvij. vuncis. di. qt{er}. ij. d. The halfe peny whete loof poise. xxv. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. j. d. ob. q. The peny whete loof poise. lj. vuncis. di. & half quar. j. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxxiiij. vuncis. qt{er}. & j. d. ob. The quarter Wheat at ix. s. vj. d. The q simnel poise. v. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. ʒ. q. The q whyt loof coket poise. viii. vuncis qt{er}. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvi. vuncis, ʒ. & j. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxiiii. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. ii. d. q. The peny where loof poise. xlix. vuncis. ʒ. & di. qt{er}. ii. d. The ob. loof of all graynis. poise. xxxiii. vuncis. di. qt{er}. & ob. The quarter Wheat at x. s. The q simnell poise. v. vuncis. ʒ. & ii. d. in weight. The q whyt loof coket poise. viii. vuncis. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvi. vuncis. The ob. whete loof poise. xxiiii. vuncis. The peny whete loof poise. xlviii. vuncis. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxxii. vuncis.
The q simnell poise. v. vuncis. q. & j. d. ob. weight. The q whyt loof coket poise. vij. vuncis. di. & qt{er}. ij. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xv. vuncis qt{er}. ʒ. j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xxiij. vuncis. half qt{er}. j d. The peny whete loofe poise. xlvj. vuncis & t. ij. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxx.vuncis iii. qt{er}. ob. The quarter Wheat at xj. s. The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. j. d. ob. weyght. The q whyt loof coket poise. vij. vuncis. qt{er}. & ʒ ij. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiiij. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. x j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xxij vuncis. q ʒ i. d. The peny whete loofe poise. xxij. vuncis. qt{er}. 11. d. The ob loof of all graynis poise. xxix. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ij. d. The quarter what at xj. s. vj. d. The q sinmnell poise. iiij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ʒ & ob. The q whyt loof coket poise. vii. vuncis. qt{er}. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiii. vuncis. ʒ. The ob. whete loof poise. xxj. vuncis. iiij. qt{er}. The peny whete loof poise. xliij. vuncis. ʒ. The ob. loof of all grynis poise. xxix. vuncis. The quarter Wheat at xij. s. The q simnell poise. iiij. vuncis. ʒ & half qt{er}. The q whyt loof coket poise. vij. vuncis. & ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiiii. vuncis. & i. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxj. vuncis. j. d. ob. The peny whete loof poise. xlii. vuncis ʒ & half q. i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxviii. vuncis. ii. d. weyghr. The quarter Wheat at xij. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. iiij. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & j. d. The q whyt loof coket poise. vj. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. i. d. ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiij. vuncis. ʒ & di. qt{er}. ob. The halfe peny whete loof poise. xx. vuncis. q. ʒ & ij. d. The peny whete loof poise. xl. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ʒ. j. d. ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxvij. vuncis. qt{er}. j. d. The quarter Wheat at xiij. s. The q simnell poise. iiii. vuncis. & di qt{er}. ij. d. q. The q whyt loof coket poise. vi. vuncis ʒ & d. q. qt{er}. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiii. vuncis, qt{er}. & ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xix. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. ʒ. ob. The peny whete loof poise. xxxix. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. i d. ob. The ob. loof of all graynis. poise. xxvi. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & i. d.
The quarter Wheat at xiij. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. iiii. vuncis. & i. d. qt{er}. The q whyt loof coket poise. vj. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ j. d. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xij. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. ʒ j. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xix. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ q. The peny whete loof poise. xxxvj. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ij. i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis. poise. xxv. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. ii. i. d. The quarter Wheat at xiiij. s. The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ʒ & ob. The q whyt loof coket poise. vj. vuncis. qt{er}. & j. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiij. vuncis. iii. ʒ & ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xviij. vuncis. iii. q ʒ & ob. The peny whete loof poise. xxxvij. vuncis. iii qt{er}. & i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxv. vuncis. & di. q. j. d. ob. The quarter Wheat at xiiij. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. The q whyt loof coket poise. vj. vuncis. & di. qt{er}. & ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xii. vuncis. qt{er}. & i. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xviij. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ i. d. ob. The peny whete loof poise. xxxvi. vuncis. iii. q. ʒ & ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxiiii. vuncis. ʒ & ii. d. The quarter Wheat at xv. s. The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. ʒ & ii. d. The q whyt loof coket poise. vi. vuncis. in weyght. The ob. whyt loof poise. xii. vuncis. The ob. whete loof poise. xviij. vuncis. The peny whete loof poise. xxxvi. vuncis. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxiiij. vuncis. The quarter Wheat at xv. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & j. d. ob. qt{er}. The q whyt loof coket poise. v. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ii. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xj. vuncis. ʒ & di. qt{er}. & ij. d. The halfe peny whete loof poise. xvij. vuncis. ʒ & j. d. ob. q. The peny whete loof poise. xxxv. vuncis. & di. q. & j. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxiii. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & j. d. ob. The quarter Wheat at xvj. s. The q simnell poise. iii. vuncis. qt{er}. & j. d. qt{er}. The q whyt loof coket poise. v. vun. & half & di. q. ob. iii. d. q The ob. whyt loof poise. xi. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & ii. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xvii. vuncis. & di. qt{er}. i. d. ob. q. The peny whete loof poise. xxxiiii. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis. poise. xxii. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & i. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at xvj. s. vj. d. The q simnel poise. iij. vuncis. & half qt{er}. i. d. q. ob. The q whyt loof poise. coket v. vuncis. & ʒ & ij. d. qua. The ob. whyte loof poise. xj. vuncis. & half q. ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xvj. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. j. d. ob. q. The peny whete loof poise. xxxiij. vuncis. ʒ & half qt{er}. j. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxij. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ i. d. ob. The quarter Wheat at xvij. s. The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. ij. d. wyght. The q whyt loof coket poise. v. vuncis. & half. The ob. whyt loof poise. xj. vuncis. The ob. whete loof poise. xvj. vuncis. & half. The peny whete loof poise. xxiij. vuncis. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxij. vuncis. The quarter Wheat at xvij. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. ii. vuncis. ii. qt{er}. ʒ ij. d. q. The q whyt loof coket poise. v. vuncis. qt{er}. ʒ & q. The ob. whyt loof poise. x. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. & ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xvj. vuncis. & di. qt{er}. ob. q. The peny whete loof poise. xxxij. vuncis. qt{er}. & j. d. ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxj. vuncis. & half. j. d. The quarter Wheat at xviij. s. The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ʒ & q. The q whyt loof coket poise. v. vuncis. & qt{er}. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. x. vuncis. ʒ & j. d. The half peny whete loof poise. xv. vuncis. iij. qt{er}. ij. d. q. The peny wheat loof poise. xxxj. vuncis. ʒ & di. qt{er}. ij. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxj. vuncis. & di. j. d. The quarter Wheat at xviij. s. vj. d. The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis. iij. quar. ob. q. The q whyte loof coket poise. v. vuncis. & di. quar. j. d. q. The ob. whyte loof poise. x. vuncis. quar. & di. The ob. whete loof poise. xv. vuncis. di. & j. d. q. The peny whete loof poise. xxxj. vuncis. & di. q. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xx. vuncis. iij. quarter. The quarter Wheat at xix. s. The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis. ʒ & di. quar. & j. d. q. The q whyt loof coket poise. v. vuncis. & j. d. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. x. vuncis. & di. qt{er}. & j. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xv. vuncis. qt{er}. & q. The peny whete loof poise. xxx. vuncis. ʒ & ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xx. vuncis. quar. & ij. d.
The price of a quarter Wheat at xix. s. vi. d. The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis ʒ & ij. d. weyght The q whit loof coket poise. v. vuncis. The ob. whit loof poise. x. vuncis. The ob. whete loof poise. xv. vuncis. The peny whet loof poise. xxx. vuncis. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xx. vuncis. The quarter Wheat at xx. s. The q simnell poise. ij vuncis. ʒ & a qt{er}. The q whit loof coket poise. iiij. vuncis. iii. qt{er}. ʒ ob. qt{er}. The ob. whit loof poise. ix. vunces. iij. qt{er}. j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xiiij. vuncis. & di. qt{er}. ij. d. q. The peny whete loof poise. xxix. vuncis. quart. ʒ ij. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xix. vuncis. ʒ & di q. ob. ¶Item, the half peny loof whyt of Stratford must wey ij. vuncis more than the half peny whyt loof of London. ¶Item, the half peny whete loof of Stratford must wey iij. vuncis more than the half peny whete loof of London. ¶Item, the peny whete loof of Stratford must weye vj. vuncis more than the peny whete loof of London. ¶Item, iij. half peny whyt loofes of Stratford must weye as much as the peny whete loof. ¶Item, the loof of all graynes, that is to say, the whete loof must weye as much as the peny whete loof and the halfe peny whyt loof.
The Copy of the Bull for the Offerings to the Curates of the Parishes of the City of LONDON in Latine and English, and of the composition of the same. Chap. LXXXVI. NIcholaus Episcopus servus servo∣rum Dei ad perpetuam rei memo∣riam, &c. The Copy of the Bull of Pope Nicholas for the same matter. OVr holy fader pope Nico∣las, for perpetuall memo∣ri wylleth to sequester & avoyed all doughtis, by the whiche stryues dys∣cordes and grete loffys that is feryd to happen to Curatis and their Perys∣shens, lest that if it be not remedyid, grete hurt might happen bothe to the curatis and perysshens, as well in things temporall as spyrituall. So it is that now of late, after that the right honou∣rable Thomas Archibishop of Canter∣bury, had shewed that he had found as he Rode in his visitation, that one Ro∣ger, byishop of London, had made a constytucyon upon offryngis on hooly dayes and solemp and doble festis, and namely of the appl'es whoos vygyls ben fasted by the inhabitants of houses, hostryes, and shops howsoever they be occupyed within the cite of london: that is to say, that all inhabitants and e∣very of them, occupyenge the sayd hou∣ses, hostryes, or shoppis, and pay for the yerly rent of them ten s. shall offer a q And yf his rente be twenty s. ob. and so upward as it hath ben used to bee payd by the sayd peryshes tyme out of mynde of man. And that the same constytucyon was good and laufull, it appereth by that, that divers of the pre∣decessours of Archbisshops of Canter∣bury; by theyr Letters patents, hath it confirmed and approuyd, and whan some evyll dysposed of the perysshens wolde labour and study to construe this constytucyon to other sensys than it was made for: They made explanaci∣ons of the same, and ordained that the Mayre and Aldyrmen of the said Cite, and all the inhabytants that wolde bee rebell therto, sholde stonde a cursyd by the same dede, and many other things than expressed, ordayned our holy fa∣der and predecessour Innocentius vii. ratefyenge and confermynge the let∣ters of the said Thomas Archbysshop, addinge and amendynge defaultys if ony were, as more plainely apperyth by the lytters of the foresaide Innocent, wherin be contayned the lytters of the forsaid Thomas. And after as it hath been shewed vs of diuers credible per∣sones that thought the Mayre, Sherefs, Aldyrmen, the Citezens, and the inha∣bytantes aforesaid, of the more part of them, after the olde and laudable cu∣stume in their offryngys on Sondayes and other folempne and double festys of the Appostles, namely whose euyns be fastyd yet within foure yeres or there aboute, Diuers hauyng litell regard to the well of their soules, and vnkinde to their moder the holy Chyrche, coue∣tinge be litell and litell to minishe and
take away the foresayd offryngys: (The which yf they were deuoute, they sholde encrease and freely giue) refuse to offyre but onely on Sondayes and on the solempne festys of the Appostles, whoos Euens been fastyd. And as for other solempne dayes, whiche be many; they sayd that it was not expressed in the lytters of Roger Bysshop, nor in they said constitucyon, that they ought to offyre on them: no∣ther in the lytters of Innocent, nor Tho∣mas Bysshop, there was no parsight sense; wherefore they thought the were but voyde. And also where we vnderstonde that iii. sentensys have been giuen agaynst one Robert Wryght, that is to say, one in this partyes, & in the court of Rome; for as moche as refused to offer ac∣cordinge to the rate as aforesaid; as on Sondayes, festis of the Appostles, whos vygyls ben fastyd: but as for thes thre Natiuities, of Saint Stephen, Saint Iohan, and in the Innocentis, he vrter∣ly refused, and as many dayes in Ester, and in many dayes in Witsontide, and the Circumcision, Epiphanye, and As∣cencion of our Lorde, and Corpus Christy, and foure vygyles of our La∣dy, Philip and Iacob, and the transla∣cion of Saint Edmonde. And for as moche as it were pain∣full to all Curatys, if they sholde sue for euery particular cause, if their pa∣risshens wolde bee frowarde. And for as much as we understonde that our welbelouyd Herry King of England, wolde that all stryfs and dewte touch∣inge the said offryngys sholde be auoy∣ded. We will, and by our poure Ap∣postolick conforme the lytters of the foresaide Innocent predecessour, and Thomas Archbishop, contayninge the constiucyon of the said Robert to bee observed and kepte for euer. And ouer that by this presentys, We will and ordaine that all inhabi∣tantys houses, hostryes, shoppys; foure yeres paste, and that aftyr this shall in∣habit, paye their offryngys according to the rate aforesaid in the thre Nati∣uites of Saint Stephen, Saint Iohan, and the Innocentis, and as many daies in Ester and Witsontide, Circumci∣sion, Epiphanye, and Ascencion of our Lorde, Corpus Christi, foure of our Lady, and Philip and Iacob, and euery dedicacion daye, and euery Sonday, and the festys of the Appostles whoos vygyls ben fasyd, and other double and solempne festys. And more plainely apperyth in the lytters of Innocent and Thomas arch∣bisshops aforesaide, and in all dayes they have vsed to offere foure yeres passe to the parishe Chyrche. Within the bondys whereof the foresaid hou∣ses, hostrys or shoppes ben sette vpon the paine of excommunicacion, con∣tained in the lytters of the said archbis∣shop, and of the which the shall not be assod, out if hee satyfie the said of∣frings, or elles friendly agree with his Curat, but if it be in the point of dethe. So that if it hapned him to live, or his eyers make dew satisfaction. And also we giue power to the Ordinarijs of the said Chyrches where such offryngys be not paid, that the may without cita∣cion summarily enquere of the said offryngys; and if the finde that be vn∣paide, to accurse the offenders, and them to punish according to this ordi∣nance; ony maner Bulle graunted wri∣ting generall or speciall; now knowen or herafter to bee knowen; not with standinge. The Letters of Innocent Bishop. THerfore for the parte, the Cu∣ratys of the cite of London, a peticion was made to vs, that a constituction the which was made by one Roger Bisshop of London, for the well both of the parisshens and the Curatys, the whiche was vsed the time out of minde, yet some vsed to constrew the said constitucion otherwise than it ought to be after their forward mind, and the which constitucion the saide Thomas Archbisshop of Canterbury, and in ony his predcessours hath ap∣proued and confirmed, that the same constitucion by vs sholde be confirmed. I inclined by their peticion, conferme all the said constitucion by the autorite appostolik; and fulfille all defautis, if
ony by the tenor of the said letters fol∣loweth. Thomas Archbishop of Canter∣bury, Primate of England, to the Mayer, Sheriffes, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, greetings. ALmighty God to whom belon∣geth therto and all that is ther∣in, commaundithe that tenthis sholde be giuen him, and wolde be ho∣noured spiritually with offrings; and therfore the reuernde fader, Roger Nyger, late Bisshop of London, made a constitucion, as we finde in our vista∣cion, upon offring on Sondaies and so∣lempne and doubly festis, and nambly of the Appostils, whoes vigils ben fa∣stid, by the inhabitantis of houses, ho∣stries, and Shoppis within the Cite of London: that is to say, that all and euery inhabitantes houses, hostries or Shoppes; for an house, hostrie, or shoppes, whoos pension is x. s. by yere, a ferthing: and so forth, if it assende to xl. s. a peny. Some yet hauing littell regarde to their soules, construed that if the said pension neuer so moch ex∣cedid xl. s. that hee shall pay but one peny. We therfore willing that all al∣teracion as touching that sholde be re∣moued, will by the autorite of this let∣ters, that if the said pension excede xl. s. by x. s. that he shall pay one pe∣ny ferthing, and for euery x. s. a sten∣ding q̄t{er}. and for as moche as we will not hereafter onely forward exposicion of this confirmation to be had, we will that all the that hereafter will not obey and follow this our exposicion, stonde acursed by the gret sentence by the same dede, and for as moche as no man shall excuse himselfe by cause of ingno∣runce, wee will and ordaine that all Curatis within the said Cite iiij. times in the yere in the Masse time, publisshe and expowne: and moreouer, wee or∣daine and giue power to all Persones and Vicars of the said Cite, to cite all the offenders of the said constitucion to apere before vs or our officiall, that there to obbey the law as reson will, to the whiche officiall by this presentis we giue our power, in witnesse wherof, &c. Let no man therfore offende this ordi∣naunce, for if he doe it, he shall ronne in the indignacion of God and his holy Appostolis, Peter and Powle. Giuen at Rome at Saint Peters, the xvj. kalendas of May. Maister William Freston offi∣ciall to the Deane of Powles, after that he had by grete deliberacion examined a cause of witholding of thentis. By me Robert Wright, of the parisshe of Saint Edmond in Lumberstret in the so∣lempne and double festis, and the festis of Saint Stheuen, Iohn, and Innocents, after Christmes, Circumcision, Epipha∣nie of our Lord, iij. holy daies in Estir∣weke, iij. holy daies in Witsoweke, Corpus Christi, ascencion of our Lord, Phelip and Iacob, and v. sestis of our Lady, and every dedicacion day by his sentence condempned the said Robert Wright, the which appealed to Rome, where the same sentence in all thing was affirmed by one William of Fun∣dera, Bisshop of Olern, and Commis∣sary to the Pope; saue that hee sholde haue said in three festis of our Lady and not in fiue, and therin the sentence was reuersed, and for that cause the said Robert was not condempned in the ex∣pensis. And after the same Robert ap∣pellyde to the Pope himselfe, the which affirmed in euery thing the sentence of the said William de Fundera, and con∣dempned the defendant in expencis in the last apppelle. The composition of all Offrings within the City of London, and Suburbs of the same. FIrst, that every persone dweller and inhabitant in ony houses in London, or suburbis of the same, hired and occupied as for the full rente and pension of x. s. yerely, shall offer to God and to the Chyrche, in whoos parisshe suche place standeth, one q euery day in the festis that following, that is to say, in euery Sonday in the yere, Christmas day, Circumcision, E∣phiphanie, Purificacion of our Lady, Mathei Appostle, Annunciacion of our Lady, the Assencion of our Lorde, Cor∣pus Christi, Saint Mathewe Appostle,
Simon and Iude, Alhalowen, Andrew Appostle, Concepcion of our Lady, Thomas Appostle, Iohn Baptist, Pe∣ter and Powle, Iames Appostle, Bartilmew Appostle, Assumpcion and Natiuity of our Lady, Dedication day, whiche from the day forward shall be through all London, and for the paris Chirches in London that be halowid the iij. day of Octobre, also one day of the principall festis of the Patron of e∣uery Chirch through London, the sub∣urbis of the same, yerely without con∣tradiction, and if such inhabited houses be leten for xx. s. ob. and if for xxx. s. ob. q. and if for xl. s. i. d. and if for l. s. i. d. q. and so euery assending and dis∣sending by x. s. into what summe that euer it bee, shall alwaie offer ferthing after the rate of x. s. in the festis aboue∣said; and if such dwellings, occupied and inhabited houses be not leten, but perauenter that owner that dwelle ther∣in, or frely let, or otherwise occupied as for a dwellingis, that than the of∣fringis shalbe as it was leten before, or else after a common value; and dowt thereof, that rent to be extemyd by the Chirch wardeins for the time being; and if a man dwell and inhabite diuers places & houses within the said Cite, in one or diuers parisshes, he than shall af∣ter the rate & daies aforesaid, offer eue∣ry house to the Chirch in whoos paris the stonde, prouided alway that when ii. of the festis aforesaid fall vpon one day, than the offring shalbe for one day. Item, where ony dwelled in the said Cite, inhabited or occupied a dwel∣ling place an howse, vnder the price, rent, or pension of vj. s. viij. d. that than he shalbe bound to offer iiij. daies in the yere, in the iiij. principall festis of the Chirch there as he is parishen, of and if such pension or rente extende to the full summe of vj. s. viij. d. or aboue, and not fully to the summe of x. s. that than them inhabitant for euery s. shall pay to the Chirch j. d. ob. onis in the yere. Prouided alway that if the said dweller come before his Curate, and say vpon his faith and trouthe, that he may not pay his said money according to the ordinaunce aforesaid beneth x. s. that then the said Curate shall holden him content with such as he will giue him, aught or naught, and the dweller thereupon shall be quite. Also and the pension of rent of such inhabitant hou∣ses, extend aboue the summe of x. s. and not fully to the summe of xxx. s. and so to any summe being betweene x. and x. than the Inhabitant shall pay ones a yere to the Curate for euery s. of the said summe being betweene x. and x. j. d. ob. yerely. Item, where as a dwelling house is hired of gret, and after leten out by par∣ties to sondry folkes, that than the hirer in grete, if that he dwelle in the prin∣cipall parte of the same house, shall of∣fer to God and to the Chirch in the daies aforsaid, for the rent of all the holy rent, if the said house bee inha∣bited and occupied, as dwelling pla∣ces, and ellis after the rule that follow∣eth: and if the said hirer in gret dwelle not in ony parte therof, but lete it out againe, that then hee that dwel∣leth in the principall parte shall offer all, and the remenunt iiij. d. by yere. Item, all tho in the said Cite or sub∣urbis, or that occupied houses not in∣habited, as Shoppis, Celars, Shad∣dis, Ware houses, Stables, Wharfes, Kranes, Timbre hawes, Teinter places for Fullers, or other places, Gardeins, shall ones in the yere for euery pounde that they be leten fore, if they be hired, or after a common value, if they be not hired, giue vnto the Curate of the Chirch there as such houses bin, vj. d. without ony other offrings for the said houses, affendingis and diffendingis af∣ter the rate of vj. d. of the pounde, and for x. s. iij. d. and so after the rate affen∣dingis and deffendingis, without more charge of offring for it. Item, that all apprentices, seruants, and hired men within the said Cite, not shargede with such rent and hou∣sings, which shall be houselder at Ester or about Ester, shall iiij. times in the yere, at iiij. principall festis offer to God and to the Chirch. Also as for personall tythes, the parisshens by this ordinance shall neither be charged nor dissharged, sauing that hereafter shall no Curat vex, trouble, sue, ordaine Sa∣craments or Seruice for no payment of the same, but leue them to good deuo∣cion, and conscience of the parisshens.
Item, all offryngs vndone before this day, or ony other attempted contrary beside, or against this present Wry∣ting, by ony person or persons, shall stonde quite, and not be remembred as vnto ony suit or stryf, but all such things before this day done, shall cleane be re∣met, and forgiuen on boothe perties. BE it in mynde, that this bonde and arbitrement is made the xvii. day of Decembre, the yeere of the incarna∣cion of our Lord, M. iiij. C. L. vij. by Maister Laurence Bothe, Maister Wil∣liam Radclyf, Master Lucas Lancok, Maister Iohn Aleyn, Master Iohn Lyle∣ford, Geffrey Felding, William Tay∣lor, Master Robert Kent, arbitra∣tour, chosen vpon the Premisse, as in the tenor of the compremisse there∣upon made openly made it may ap∣peare. In this Chapter is shewed the Patrones of all the Benefices in London. ANne on the Towrehill, and Abbey of white Monkes. Anne within Al∣drichgate, diocis Lon∣don, Patron Deane of Saint Martyn the graunde. The desine. Augustin in Bradstretward, the Pri∣our of friers August. Anthonius in Bradstretward, a Col∣lege, the Kinge Patron. Augustin by London wall, Priour of Crichirche in London Patron. Augustin in Watlingstrete by Poules gate, Patrone. Antelyne in bogerowe, diocis Lon∣don, Patrone Deane and Chapitur of Poules. The decins xx. s. Albon in Woodstret, diocis Lon∣don, Provost of Eaton Patron, Decins xx. s. Alphey within Criplegate, diocis London, Patrone Deane of Saint Mar∣tin the graunte. The sine. Alborought without Bishopsgate. Alhalwyn in Bredstrete, diocis Can∣terbury, Patrone Bisshop of Canter∣bury. Alhalwin Lumberstret, diocis Can∣terbury, Patrone Priour of Crichirch in Canterbury. The desine. Alhalwin by London wall, diocis London, Patrone Priour of Crichirche in London. The desine. Alhalwin the more, diocis London, the Kinge Patrone. The decis xiii. s. iiii. d. Alhalwin the lesse, diocis London, Patrone the Master of Laurence Pulte∣ney. The sine. Alhalwin Brekinge Chirche, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Breking. The desine x. s. viii. d. Alhalwin Staynings, diocis London Patron the Abbot of Tourhill. The de∣cis xvii. s. iiii. d. Alhalwin in Honilane London, Pa∣tron the Wardeins of Grocers. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Andrew in Cornehill, diocis Lon∣don, Parone Bisshop of London. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Andrew Hubert in Eastchepe, dio∣cis London, Erle of Shrewisbury Pa∣trone. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Andrew at Baynard Castle, diocis London, Patrone Bishop of London. The desine xx. s. Andrew in Holborne, diocis London, Patrone Abbot of Bermonsey. The de∣cis xiii. s. iiii. d. BOtulfe by Billings gate, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapitur of Poules. The decis x. s. iiii. d. Botulfe without Algate, diocis Lon∣don, Patrone the Priour of Crichirche in London. The dicis. Botulfe without Bishoppisgate, dio∣cis London, Patron the Bishop of Lon∣don. The decis xvii. iiii. d. Botulfe without Aldrichgate, diocis London, Patron Deane of Saint Mar∣tins graunt. The decis. Benet at Greshirche, diocis London,
Patrone Deane and Chapiter of Pouls. The decis xxiiii. s. Benet at Poules wharf, diocis Lon∣don, Deane and Chapiter of Poules Patrone. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Benet Sherehog, called Saint Sithes, diocis London, Patrone Priour of Saint Mary onirthere. Decis xx. s. Benet Fynke, diocis London, Patrone the Master of Saint Anthony. The de∣cis xvii. s. iiii. d. Bride in Fleetstreet, diocis London, Patrons the King and the Abbot of Westminster. Decis xx. s. Barthilmew the little, diocis Lon∣don, Patrone the Abbot on the Towre∣hill. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Barthilmew in Smithfield Prioury, Temperalties lxxxx. li. xiiii. s. iiii. d. Desine viii. li. xvii. s. q. Barthilmew in Smithfield spytell, a Master and a Colege. CLement beside Estchep, diocis London, Patrone Abbot of Westminster. Decis xx. s. Clement without Temple barre, di∣ocis London, Patron the Bishop of Ex∣cester. Decis. Clare Systers, Minores without Al∣gate, in the suburbs of London. Christofer by the Stokkys, diocis London, Patrone the Bishop of Lon∣don. The decis xxix. s. viii. d. Dominick Frier Pryechers of London at Ludgate Dunstan in the Est, diocis Canterbury, Patrone Prior of Cri∣chirche in Canterbury. The Decis. Dunstan the West, diocis London, Patrone the Abbot of Alnewik. The decis xx. s. Deonise in Fanchirche stret, diocis Canterbury, Patrone the Bishop of Canterbury, and the Priour of Cri∣chirche of Canterbury. Decis. EEdmond without Newgate, cal∣led Saint Sepulcre, diocis Lon∣don, Patron Priour of Saint Bar∣thilmewes. Decis x. s. Edmond in Lombardys strete, diocis London, Patron Priour of Chrichirche in London. Decis xx. s. Ethelborugh within Bisshopsgate, diocis London, Patron Priouresse of Saint Helyne. The decis. FAith within Powles, diocis Lon∣don, Patrons Deane and Chapi∣ter of London. The decis xx. s. Foster in Fosterlane, diocis Cant. Pa∣tron Bishop of Canterbury. The decis. Fraunces within Newgate Freers. GRegory by Powles, diocis Lon∣don, apropred to the pety Cha∣nons of Poules. The decins xx. s. Giles without Crepilgate. diocis London, Patrons Deane and Chapiter of Powles. The decins xx. s. George in Pudding lane, diocis Lon∣don, Patron Abbot of Bermonsey. The decins. George in Southwerke, diocis Win∣chester, Patron Abbot of Bermonsey. The desine. Gilis, an Hospitall beyonde Hol∣borne. HEleyne, Prioury of Nunnes within Bishopsgate. The de∣cin xvii. s. iiii. d. Heleyne paryschyrche within Bis∣shopsgate, diocis London, the Prioures of Saint Heleyn Parson. Heleyne beside Martlane, a Prioury of crossed Freers. IOhns, an Hospitall beside west Smithfield of London. Iohn Zachary, diocis London, Pa∣trons Deane and Chapiter of Poules. The decin xx. s. Iohn Euangelist in Fryday stret, di∣ocis Canterbury, Patrone Priour of Crichirche of Canterbury. The decis. Iohns in Walbroke, diocis London, Patrone Prioures of Saint Helene. The decis x. s. viii. d. Iames at Garlykhith, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Westminster. The decins ix. s. iiii. d. Iames an Hermitage within Crepil∣gate. Iames an Hospitale beside Charing∣crosse. Iames parish Chirche within the Prioury of Halywell. Iohns of Halywell without Bishops∣gate, a Pryoures of Nonnes.
KAterine on the Towrehill, Mai∣ster and Colege, the Kinge Pa∣trone. Katerine Chapell beside Charing∣crosse, an Hermitage. Katerine Chirch within Algate, di∣ocis London, Patrone Priour of Cri∣chirch in London. The decis. Katerine Colman within Algate. LEonard in Estchep, diocis Can∣terbury, Patrone the Priour of Crichirche in Canterbury. The decis. Leonard in Fosterlane, diocis Lon∣don, Patrone Deane of Saint Martins graunt. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Leonard in Shordich, diocis Lon∣don, belonging to the Archdeken of London. The decis. Laurence Pultendy, diocis London, Patrone Duke of Suffolke. The decis xx. s. Laurence in the Iury, diocis Lon∣don, Patron Bayly Colege of Oxford. The decis. MAry at Bowe, diocis Canter∣bury, Patron Bisshop of Can∣terbury. Decis. Mary Aldirmary Chirch in Wat∣lingstrete, diocis Canterbury, Patrone Bisshop of Canterbury. The decins. Mary Bothhawe by the Erber, diocis Canterbury, Patrone Priour of Cri∣chirch of Canterbury. The decins. Mary Colchirche, diocis London, Patrone Maister of Saint Thomas of Acres. The decins. Mary Staininglane, diocis London, Patrone Prioures of Clerkenwell. Mary in Aldermanbury, diocis Lon∣don, Patron Priour of Elsinge spitell. Decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Mary Wolnothe in Lumbardstrete, diocis London, Patrone Priours of S. Heleyn. The decis xxiiii. s. Mary Abchirche, diocis London, Pa∣tron Maister of Saint Laurence Pulte∣ney. The decins v. s. iiii. d. Mary Wulchirche, diocis London, the Abbot of Saint Iohns Colchester Patron. The decins xxiiii. s. Mary Foundchirche, diocis London, Priour of Crichirche Patrone in Lon∣don. The decins xvii. s. iiii. d. Mary Somerset, diocis London, Pa∣tron Deane and Chapiter of Poules. The decis. Mary on the Hill, diocis London, Patron Page of Dortford in Kent, Gen∣tleman. The decins xxiiii. s. Mary at Ax, diocis London, Patron Prioures of Saint Helyns. Dec. Mary Mounthawe, diocis London, Pa∣tron the Bisshop of Herford. The dec. Mary Matfelow, diocis London, Pa∣tron Bisshop of London. The decis. Mary at the Stronde crosse, diocis London, Patron Bisshop of Wurceter. The deocis. Mary in Fletstrete, a priory of white Freers. Mary Chapell by Berking chirche. Mary de grace, an Abbey of Monkes by the Towre of London. Mary Priory of Elsingspitell within Crepelgate. Mary the newe Hospitall without Bisshopsgate. Mary salutacion Chartyrhous, by West Smitfelde in London. Mary Hospitall of Bedleem without Bisshopsgate. Mary ouer the ree in Southwerke, a Priory of Chanons. Mary, called S. Mary Spitell, with∣out Bisshopsgate. Mary Magdalenen in Milkstreete, dio∣cis London, Patrone Deane and Cha∣piter of Poules. The decis xx. s. Mary Magdalenen in old Fishstrete, diocis London, Patrone Deane and Chapiter of Poules. Dec. xiii. s. iiii. d. Mary Magdalenen by Bermonsey, diocis Winchester, Patron Abbot of Bermonsey. Mary Magdalenen by Saint Mary ouer the Ree, diocis Winchester, Pa∣trone the Prior of Saint Mary ouer the Ree. The decis. Mary Magdalenen at Tuthill, called Lawlesse. Martin Otyrwich, diocis London, Patrons Wardens of Taylours. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Martin Pomers in Irmonger lane, diocis London, Patron Priour of Saint Bartilmews. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Martin in the Vintre, diocis London, Patron the Abbot of Glouceter. The decis xxvi. s. viii. d.
Martyn by Ludgat, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Westminster. Decis xxvi. s. viii. d. Martyn Orgar in Candilwykstrete, diocis london, Patron Deane and Cha∣piter of Powles. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Martyn in the felde beside Charing∣crosse. Magnes by london bridge, diocis lon∣don, patron the Abbot of Westmin∣ster and Bermonsey. The decis xxv. s. viii. d. Mathew in Frydaystrete, diocis lon∣don, patron the Abbot of Westmin∣ster. The decis xx. s. Margret in Lothbury, diocis london, patrones Abbeys of Berkinge in Essex. The dec. Margret in Brydgstrete, diocis lon∣don, patrone Abbot of Winchester. The dec. Margret Moyses in Friday strete, di∣ocis london, the Kinge patrone. The decis xxvi. s. viii. d. Margret patens, diocis london, pa∣trone Maior and Aldermen of london. The dec. Margret in Southwerk, diocis Win∣chester, patron the priour of Saint Ma∣ry ouer the ree. The desine. Margret at Westminster. Mildredys in bredstrete, diocis lon∣don, patrone the priour of Saint Mary ouer the ree. The decins xvii. s. iiii. d. Mildrede in the pultry, diocis lon∣don, patrone priour of Saint Mary ouer the Ree. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Mihell in Cornehyll, diocis london, patrone Abbot of Eyuesham. The de∣cins liii. s. iiii. d. Michell in Bassingys hawe, diocis london, patrone Deane and Chapytur of powles. The decins xiii. s. iiii. d. Mighell by Quenehyth, diocis lon∣don, patrone Deane and Chapitur of powles. The decis xx. s. Michell Querene by powles gate, di∣ocis london, partone Deane and Cha∣pitur of powles. The decis. Michell in Woodstrete, diocis lon∣don. Michell in Crokedlane, diocis Can∣ter. patrone bysshop of Canter. De∣cins. Michell pater noster Whittyngton College, diocis Canter. patrones War∣dens of Mercers. The decins. NIcholas Colde Abbey, diocis london. Nicholas Oluf in bredstrete, diocis london, patrone Deane and Cha∣pitur of powles. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Nicholas Acon by Lumbardstrete, diocis london, patrone Abbot of Mal∣mesbury. The decis xx. s. Nicholas in Fleshhamels, diocis lon∣don, patrons the King and the Abbot of Westminster. The decis xl. s. OLuf in Silverstrete, diocis lon∣don. Oluf in the Olde Iury, diocis london, patrone priour of bottle in suf∣folke. The decis. x. s. Oluf by the crossed Fryers, diocis london, patrone Cely in Martlane. The decis xx. s. Oluf in Southwarke, diocis Win∣chester, patron priour of Lews in South∣sex. The decis. Owyn within Newgate, diocis lon∣don, patrone lord of Saint Iones Ierl. The decis. Powles the Cathedrall Chyrche of london, Deane and Residences. Peter in Cornehill, diocis london, Patrons Maior and Aldermen of lon∣don. The decis xxvi. s. viii. d. Peter in West Chepe, diocis london Patrone Abbot of Saint Albons. The decis xx. s. Peter the Poore, diocis london. Peter the lytell at Powles wharfe di∣ocis london, Patrons Deane and Cha∣pitur of Powlis. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d. Pancrasse in Nedeler lane, diocis Canter. Patrone bisshop of Canter. de∣cis Pancrasse in the felde. Peter within the Towr of london. Peter of Westminster, Abbey of blacke Monkys. STephan in Walbrok, diocis lon∣don, Mayster Lee of the same Pa∣rishe Patrone. The decis xiii. s. iiii. d. Stephan in Colmanstret, diocis lon∣don, Patron Priour of botle in Sulfelde. The decis x. s. Stephan a College and the Kings
Chapell at Westmonster. Stephan in Candilwikstrete, diocis London, Patrone Priour of Cotting∣ton. The decis xx. s. Saluator of Bermonsey, an Abbey of blacke Monkes. TRinite called Crichirch, within Algate of London, a Priory. Trinite in Knight riders strete, diocis London, Patrone Deane and Chapitur of Powles. The decis xx. s. Thomas of Acres, a College in west chepe. Thomas Appostell, parish Chirch in the Ryall. Thomas, a Spitall in Southwerke. Thomas Martyr, a Chapell on Lon∣don bridge. Corpus Cristi Chapell, in the Pul∣try of London. Corpus Cristi Chapell, in the Col∣lege of Saint Laurence Pulteney. Trinite Chapell vpon the Charne∣hill, in the Chirch hawe of Saint Mi∣chell in Crokedlane. The Chapell vpon the Charnehill in the Chirch hawe of Saint Powles in London. The Chapell of Saint Thomas in pardon Chirch haw, London. The Chapell vpon the Charnell in the Chirche hawe of Saint Dunstan in the Este. The Chapell of the Guilde hall in London, called Saint Nichans. The Chapell vpon the Charnell, at Mary Spitall without Bisshopsgate. The litell Chapell of Bedlem with∣out Bisshopsgate. The litell Chapell vpon the Char∣nell, in the Chirch hawe of Saint Tho∣mas in Southwerke. The Chapell in the Chirche hawe at Chartirhous. The frary Chapell beside Saint Iohns Ierusalem, called Vrsula. The Chapell without Temple bare, called Saint Spirite. The Chap. of our Lady at Rounceuale. The Chapell within Barthelmew Spitell.
THE REMAINES OR REMNANTS OF DIVERS WORTHY THINGS, which should have had their due place and honour in this Worke, if promising friends had kept their words. But they failing, and part of them comming to my hands by other good meanes, they are here inserted, to accompany my Perambulation foure miles about London. LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, and are to bee sold by Nicholas Bourne, at his Shop, at the South Entrance of the ROYALL EXCHANGE. 1633.
The Colledge of Gods-Gift, at Dulwich, in the County of Surry: founded, raised, and builded, at the cost and charges of Master EDWARD ALLEYNE, Esquire, in Anno Dom. 1614. THe thirteenth day of Septem∣ber, How the Colledge was con∣firmed & establi∣shed by the Foun∣der him∣selfe. being Munday, Anno 1619. the Colledge of Gods-gift in Dulwich, consisting of one Master, one Warden, and foure Fellowes; three of which are persons Ecclesiasticall, and the fourth a skilfull Organist. More∣over, twelve aged poore people, and twelve poore children; Master Edward Aileyne, publikely and audibly, in the Chappell of the said College, did reade and publish one Writing Quadrupar∣tite in Parchment, bearing date the day and yeere forementioned. Where∣by he did make, create, erect, found, and establish the said Colledge, accor∣ding to the power and liberty given him by his Majesties Letters Patents, under his great Seale, bearing date at Westminster the 21. of Iune, in the yeere abovesaid. When he had read and pub∣lished the said Writing, he subscribed it with his name, and then fixed his Scale to every part of the Quadrupar∣tite writing, in the presence and hea∣ring of these witnesses: Frances Lord Verulam, Lord Chan∣cellour of England, and one of his Maje∣sties Privy Councell. Thomas Earle of Arundell, Knight of the Garter, Earle Marshall of England, and one of his Majesties Privy Coun∣cell. Sir Edward Cecill, Knight, alias Ge∣nerall Cecill, second Sonne to Thomas Excester. Sir Iohn Howland, Knight, and high Sheriffe of the Counties of Sussex and Surry. Sir Edmund Bowyer of Cammerwell, Knight. Sir Tho. Grymes of Peckham, Knight. Sir Iohn Bodly of Stretham, Knight. Sir Iohn Tonstal of Cashaulten, Knight. And divers other persons of great and worthy respect.The dis∣posing of the foure Writings. The foure Qua∣drupartite Writings forenamed, were ordered to foure severall Parishes. viz. Saint Betolphs without Bishops∣gate. Saint Giles without Cripplegate. Saint Saviours in Southwarke. And the Parish of Cammerwell. A briefe recitall of the particulars. Recitall of King Iames his Letters Pa∣tents. Recitall of the Founders deed Qua∣drupartite. Ordination of the Master, War∣den, &c. Ordination of the assistant mem∣bers, &c. The Master and Warden to bee un∣married, &c. The Master and Warden to bee one and twenty yeeres of age at the least. Of what degrees the Fellowes ought to bee.
Of what condition the poore Brothers and Sisters ought to be. Of what condition the poore Schol∣lers ought to be. Of what Parishes ought the Assi∣stants to be. Of what Parishes the poore are to be taken, and members of the Colledge. The forme of their election. The Warden to supply, when the Masters place is void. The election of the Warden. The Warden to be bound by Recog∣nizance. The Warden to provide a dinner at his election of his owne charges. The manner of investing the Fel∣lowes. The manner of electing the Schol∣lers. Election of the poore of Cammer∣well. The Master and Wardens Oath. The Fellowes Oath. The poore Brothers & Sisters Oath. The Assistants Oath. The pronunciation of admission. The Masters Office. The Wardens Office. The Fellowes Office. The poore Brothers & Sisters Office The Matron of the poore Schollers. The Porters Office. The Office of the thirty members. Of Residency. Orders for the poore, and their goods Of obedience. Orders for the Chappell and buriall. Orders for the Schoole and Schol∣lers, and placing of poore Schollers forth. Order of Diet. The Schollers Surplices and Coats. Time for viewing Expences. Publike Audit, and private sitting dayes. Audit and Treasure Chamber. Of Lodgings. Orders for the Lands and Woods. The Master and Warden allowed diet for one man apiece; and what Ser∣vants for the Colledge, and their wa∣ges. Disposition and division of the Re∣venues. Disposition of the Rent of the blue house. The poore to be taken out of any other Parish or County, in case none be found capable in the Parishes prescribed. The disposition of forfeitures. The Statutes to be read over foure se∣verall times in the yeere. The disposition of certaine Tene∣ments in Saint Saviours Parish, and Southwarke. A briefe Remembrance of such Noble and Charitable deeds, as have beene done by the late Right Honourable, Baptist Lord Hicks, Viscount Campden, as well in his life as at his death: Recorded to the glory of God, his owne honour, and good example of others. Good deeds done to the Towne of Campden, in the County of Gloucester. HE built an Almes-house or Hos∣pitall for sixe poore men, and sixe poore women, which cost 1000. li. Since the yeere of the foundation of the said Almes-house, to wit, 1612. he hath allowed the said twelve poore people weekely maintenance, to the value of 1300. li. And at his death, he hath settled 140. li. per annum, (for ever) upon the said Almes-house, allowing to each of the said poore Pentioners three shillings foure pence weekely; and yeerely, a Gowne, a Hat, and a Tunne of Coales. Hee built a commodious Market-house in the said Towne, which cost 90. li. By his last Will, he gave to the said
Towne, for the setting of the poore to worke, a Stocke of 500. li. To the Church of Campden. He gave a Bell which cost threescore and sixe pounds. He caused a Pulpit to be made, and gave a Cloth and Cushion thereto, which cost two and twenty pounds. He built a Gallery there, which cost eight pounds. Hee made a Window, which cost thirteene pounds. He gave a brasse Faulcon, which cost sixe and twenty pounds. Hee gave two Communion Cups, which cost one and twenty pounds. He built the Roofe of the Chancell, and new leaded it, which cost 200. li. He repaired the Chappell by the said Chauncell, supplied and new cast the Leads, which cost 20. li. He round walled the Church-yard, which cost 150. li. Within the County of Middlesex. He built a Sessions house for the Iu∣stices of Middlesex, to keepe their Sessi∣ons in, which cost 600. li. He repaired and adorned the Chap∣pell of Hampsted, which cost threescore and sixteene pounds. He caused a Window to be set up in the Chancell of Kensington, and beauti∣fied it, which cost 30. li. He hath given by his last Will to the said Towne of Kensington, to be imploy∣ed for the benefit of the poore, the sum of 200. li. In the City of London. Hee hath given by his last Will to Saint Bartholmewes Hospitall, 100. li. To Christs Church Hospitall, 50. li. To Newgate, Ludgate, and the two other prisons of the Counters, 40. li. He erected a Window in Saint Lau∣rence Church in the Old Iewry, and gaue a Pulpit Cloth, and a Cushion also, which cost 30. li. Impropriations purchased, and bestowed upon the Church. One in Pembrokeshire, to be given to the Towne of Tewkesbury in Gloucester∣shire; whereof one moity goeth to the Preacher, and the other moity to the poore, which cost 460. li. Another in Northumberland; where∣of one moity is to be given towards the maintenance of an able Preacher in Hampsted, the other moity to Saint Pauls Schoole in London, towards the maintenance of certaine Schollers in Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge, which cost 760. li. One in the Bishopricke of Durham, to bee bestowed on such Churches as shall have most need thereof; accor∣ding to the disposition of the Supervi∣sers, which cost 366. li. Another in Dorsetshire, to bee be∣stowed in the like manner, which cost 760. li. Certaine Chauntry Lands also in Lincolneshiere, which cost 240. li. He hath also given to two Ministers, to bee chosen out of Iesus Colledge in Oxenford, to serve in their severall pla∣ces, 40. li. each man per annum, which cost 80. li. He hath bequeathed Legacies to se∣verall Ministers, the summe of 140. li. Hee hath given to Master A. E. du∣ring his life, yeerely the summe of 100. li. He hath given among his houshold servants the summe of 300. li. An Epitaph made in his Memoriall. Reader, know, who-ere thou be, Here lies Faith, Hope, and Charity, Faith true, Hope firme, Charity free, Baptist, Lord Campden, was these three. Faith in God, Charity to Brother, Hope for himselfe, what ought he other? Faith is no more, Charity is crown'd, Tis onely Hope is under ground.
Vpon a Tombe in the Temple Church in London. Here lieth the body of Anne Littleton, Wife of Edward Littleton, of the In∣ner Temple, Esquire, sonne and heire of Sir Edward Littleton of Henley, in the County of Salop, Knight; daugh∣ter of Iohn Littleton of Franckley, in the County of Worcester, Esquire, by Meriel, the daughter of Sir Thomas Bomley, Knight, Lord Chancellor of England. She died the vj. day of February 1623. on whom was made this Epitaph: Here she lies, whose spotlesse fame invites a stone to learne her name. The rigid Spartan, that deny'd an Epitaph to all that dy'd, Vnlesse for Warre or Chastity; would here vouchsafe an Elegy. Shee did a Wife, but yet her minde (beyond Virginity refinde) From lawlesse fire remain'd as free, as now from heat her ases be. Her husband (yet without a sinne) was not a stranger, but her kin, That her chaste Love might seeme no other, vnto a husband then a brother. Keepe well this pawne, thou marble chest, till it be cal'd for, let it rest: For while this Iewell here is set, The grave is but a Cabinet. Vpon a Tombe in the Chancell in Saint Bo∣tolphs Aldersgate. She died a Virgin on Whitsunday, An∣no Domini 1622. about eighteene yeeres of age, and having at her death a spirituall combat with Satan about her Salvation, wherein shee prevai∣ling most cheerefully, departed from Earth to Heaven, to bee married to Christ Jesus the Lord of both. At the bottome. The Monument of Mistres Iudeth Plat, the onely Daughter of Sir Hugh Plat, Knight, with the matches of her An∣cestours, and neere Allies on her Fa∣ther and Mothers side; as also her lineall Descent from the ancient Earles of Surry, Huntingdon, Arun∣dell and Chester, and her spirituall conquest at her death against Satan. This Tombe is in Saint Brides Church. Here resteth the body of Sir George Curzon, of Croxall, in the County of Derby, descended from ancient Gen∣try, and of long continuance in that place; who, like the Race from whence he came, was a man of up∣right life, religious and hospitable; He tooke to Wife Mary, the daugh∣ter of Sir Richard Leveson, of Lelle∣shull, in the County of Salop, Knight, by whom he had Walter, who died young, and Mary, then his onely Daughter and Heire, who was mar∣ried to Edward Sackvill, Earle of Dor∣set, Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter; which Lady caused this Monument to be here infixed, to the sacred memory of her deare Fa∣ther. He departed this life the 17. of November, 1622. This Tombe stands in Saint Giles Cripplegate Church. Memoriae Sacrum. Here lieth the body of Matthew Pal∣mer, Esquire, who died the 18. of May, 1605. together with Anne his Wife, who died the last day of Iune, 1630. by whom hee had foure Sons and one Daughter, viz. Thomas Pal∣mer, his eldest Sonne, deceased the fifth of May, 1631. and here also buried: Elizabeth, Edward, Andrew, and Ralfe, who when as it so pleaseth
God, desire this place for the custody of their bodies likewise, till their as∣sured and glorious Resurrection. This Monument stands in St. Andrewes Church in Holborne. Antiquo Stemate Nobilis, avitis suis vir∣tutibus clarius; hic jacet Iohannes Ashburnham, nuper de Ashburn∣ham miles, qui obijt in festo Sancti Pe∣tri, 1620. Aetatis 49. Relictis conju∣ges charissimis Iohanne, Gulielmo; E∣lizabeth, Francisca, Anna, & Ca∣therina. Domina Eliz. Ashburnham. Vidua F. Thomae Beamount de Staugh∣ton in Com. Leicestr. Milit. Hoc amori & officio consulens, meritissimo viri lu∣gubris posuit, 1621. This Tombe was made 1629. and stands in the Temple Church. Memoriae Sacrum. Here resteth the body of Clement Coke, of Langford, in the County of Derby, Esquire, youngest Sonne of Sir Ed∣ward Coke, Knight, late chiefe Justice of England; and of Bridget his Wife, Daughter and Co-heire of Iohn Pa∣ston of Paston, in the County of Nor∣folke, Esquire: this Clement married Sara, Daughter and Co-heire of A∣lexander Rediche of Rediche, in the County of Lancaster, Esquire, and of Katherine his Wife, sole daughter & Heire of Humphrey Dethick of Newal, in the County of Derby, Esquire, and had issue by the said Sara, living at his death, Edward Robert, Bridget, and Avise: hee in the Inner Temple being a Fellow of the same, Christi∣anly and comfortably in his flourish∣ing age, yeelded up his soule to the Almighty, the three and twentieth of May, Anno Dom. 1629. This Monument stands in Christs Church, and was made 1627. Neere unto this place lyeth buried the body of Nicholas Beamount, of Cole-Overton, in the County of Leicester, Esquire, and Anne his Wife, the Daughter of William Saunders, of Welfard, in the County of Northam∣ton, Esquire, by whom he had issue foure Sonnes and two Daughters, viz. Henry, Francis, Thomas, and Hun∣ting, Dorothy, and Katherine; the said Nicholas died the fourth of Novem∣ber, 1598. His Wife died the tenth of February, 1591. In remembrance of whom, this Monument was ere∣cted at the care and cost of Elizabeth Lady Ashburnham, Widdow, late Wife of Sir Iohn Ashburnham, Knight, Daughter to Sir Thomas Beamount of Staughton, in the County aforesaid; their third sonne, at the appointment of her Vnkle, Master Francis Beamount, Esquire, their se∣cond Sonne, to whom the Erector hereof was Executrix. This Tombe was made 1631. and stands neere the South doore in Westminster. Michael Draiton, Esquire, a memora∣ble Poet of this age, exchanged his Laurell for a Crowne of glory, Anno Dom. 1631. Doe pious Marble, let thy Readers know, What they, and what their children owe To Draitons name, whose sacred dust We recommend unto thy trust: Protect his Memory, and preserve his Story, Remaine a lasting Monument of his glory: And when thy Ruines shall disclaime, To be the Treasurer of his Name: His Name that cannot fade, shall be An everlasting Monument to thee.
The Foundation of the Armory of that remarkable Nur∣cery of Military Discipline, called the Artillery Garden London, was begun to be erected the first day of May, An. Dom. 1622. and was finished the last day of November then next following, Co∣lonell Hugh Hammersley being then President, Edward Pierce Trea∣surer, Henry Petowe Marshall, and Iohn Bingham Esquire, Captaine, and one of the Councell of warre for this Kingdome. Vpon which Monument these Lines following were composed. Londons Honour, and her Citizens approved Love, exercising Armes in the Artillery Garden London. The Fabricke. THis Architecture, Phoenix of our age, (All Europe cannot shew her Equipage) Is Mars his Mistresse, which retaines the store Of Mars his Armes, being Mars his Paramore, This Fabricke was by Mars his Souldiers fram'd, And Mars his Armory's this Building nam'd. The Souldiers Honuor. It holds five hundred Armes to furnish those, That love their Soveraigne, and will daunt His foes, They spend their time, and doe not spare for cost, To learne the use of Armes, there's nothing lost; Both time and coyne to doe their Country good, They'l spend it freely, and will lose their blood. The Alder∣mans Love. Our City London is a Royall thing, For it is call'd the Chamber of our King; Whose worthy Senate we must not forget, Their Grant and our Request together met, They cherrish us, and wee doe honour them; Where Souldiers finde true love, they'l love agen.
The Ground. The Ground whereon this building now doth stand, The Teasell ground hath heretofore beene nam'd. The Donor of the ground. And William, Pryor of the Hospitall, Then of our blessed Lady, which wee call Saint Mary Spittle without Bishopsgate, Did passe it by Indeuture, bearing date, Ianuaries third day, in Henry's time, The eighth of that name, the Covent did conjoyne. The Vse. Vnto the Guyle of all Artillery, Crosse-bowes, Hand-guns, and of Archery, The terme of yeeres. For full three hundred yeeres excepting three, The time remaining wee shall never see. The Councels confirmation. Now have the Noble Councell of our King, Confirm'd the same, and under Charles his wing, We now doe exercise, and of that little Teasell ground, we inlarg'd Saint Mary Spittle, Trees we cut down, and Gardens added to it, Thankes to the Lords that gave us leave to doe it. A loyall Sub∣jects desire. Long may this worke endure, and ne'r decay, But be supported till the latest day. All loyall Subjects to the King and State, Will say Amen, mauger Spleene or Hate. Mariscallus Petowe composuit.
On a Tombe in the South wall of Saint Botolphs Church without Aldersgate, London. Neere to this place lyeth buried the body of Pierce Edgcombe, in the County of Devon, Gentleman, who deceased the 8. day of Iuly, 1628. in assured hope of a ioyfull Resurre∣ction. Behold the end of Dust and Clay, O thou which livest with living eye, Yet doth his soule for ever raigne With Christ, which he by faith did gaine: In Learning he his time did spend, And Vertue was the only end; So long before his glasse was runne, With World and Vanity he had done. A. E. Frater ejus. In Saint Botolphs Church, on a Tombe there. Here lyeth the body of Christo∣pher Tamworth, of Grayes-Inne, in Hol∣borne, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire, third Sonne of Christopher Tamworth of Halsted, in the County of Leicester, Esquire, who died the 19 of September, 1624. being of the age of threescore and ten yeeres. HE having dealt kindly and li∣berally with his Wife, and many of his kindred & friends, and to the poore of divers Parishes, hath also by his Will given xx. li. of currant money of England, to the Deane and Prebends of the Colledge of Saint Peters of the City of Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, to bee imployed by them about the reparations of the said Colledge Church of Saint Peters. And 400. markes, to the intent that with that mony, there should be twen∣ty markes worth of Lands of inheri∣tance of yeerely rent to be purchased, whereby there may be one in holy Or∣ders maintained, to say Divine Service, such as the Church of England shall al∣low of, every worke day in the yeere, twice perpetually, viz. at or about nine of the clocke in the morning, and at or about three of the clocke in the afternoone, in the Parish Church of Saint Botolphs without Aldersgate, London. And 400. li. to the end and intent that there should be 20. li. of lands of annuall Revenew, of inheritance by the yeere bought with it, to allow perpetu∣ally to sixe poore men, and foure poore Widdowes past labour, dwelling and inhabiting within the Parish of Saint Botolph aforesaid, 40. shillings a yeere apeece, to be paid quarterly, with this limitation, that the said poore people shall bee bound to repaire every worke day in the yeere twice a day, to heare Divine Service in the Parish Church aforesaid, at the houres and tearmes aforesaid. And 200. markes more to purchase Lands of inheritance of the annuall va∣lue by the yeere of 6. li. 3. s. 4. d. for the maintenance of one within holy Orders, to say divine Service as aforesaid, every worke day in the weeke twice, thorow the whole yeere perpetually, in the Parish Church of Saint Martins in Lei∣cester, in the County of Leicester afore∣said, at the hourses and times afore men∣tioned. All which said summes of money he willed should be actually and really de∣livered into the hands and possession of the Deane and Prebends of Westminster aforesaid, within xx. dayes next im∣mediatly after his death, for the per∣formance and use afore mentioned, within the space and time of two yeeres at the vttermost, after his death. And having made Audrey, one of the Daughters of Charles Allayne of the Mote, in the County of Kent, Esquire, Sonne and Heire of Sir Christopher Al∣layne, Knight, his deare and loving Wife, his full Executrix, she faithfully performed the same, according to the trust reposed on her by her Husbands Will: and in remembrance of him, hath at her owne cost and charges ere∣cted this Monument.
The Gift of Sir Paul Pinder to Saint Pauls Church in London. SIR Paul Pinder Knight, in the time of King Iames, his Majesties Embassadour many yeeres, resi∣dent at Constantinople with the great Turke, hath of sate, to the glory of God, to the delight and content of all good Protestants, and for the better expres∣sion of his love and zeale to true Reli∣gion, beautifully and bountifully with great costs and charges, repaired the old decayed stone worke of the West∣front of the Chancell in Saint Pauls Church in London, adorning the out∣side thereof with many faire polished pillers of blacke Marble, and with cu∣rious carved Statues of Kings and Bi∣shops, the first Founders and Benefa∣ctors of the whole Fabricke, and also graced the inside thereof with divers Angels and other ornaments; he hath likewise amended and repaired all the decayes and defects of the Wainscot worke of the Quier, and hath further beautified the same with a faire rayle of Wainscot, and a great number of Cherubins artificially carved: all which work he hath caused to be sump∣tuously gilded and painted with rich colours in Oyle; hee hath also magni∣ficently clothed the whole Quier, and the upper part of the Presbytery, with faire and chargeable Tapestry-Hang∣ings: Whose godly and pious exam∣ple, will (I hope) excite and stirre up other Religious and well-minde Gen∣tlemen, and Citizens, to performe some acts of piety and bounty towards the reparation of the same Church. Of the ancient Court of the Hustings. I Finde it diversly written in Latine, Hustingum, Hustingus, Hustingia, and sometimes (but falsely) Hustangus. It is the an∣cientest and the highest Court of Justice, of the famous City of London. The name it takes from the place of keeping that Court (as Pryta∣neum did at Athens) for  (hus) among the old Saxons, signified an house, and dhing or thing, a Cause or Plea; so that  Husthing, signified the house of Causes or Pleadings: where∣upon in the Saxon tongue , Thingere, Thingarius, signified an Ad∣vocate or Lawyer: which others would perchance derive rather from  or thung, or gedhung, which signifi∣ed Honourable, for that the most hono∣rable Magistrates of the City, held their Court there; like as the Lord Maior and Sheriffes, and in absence of the Sheriffes, sixe of the Aldermen at this day doe. The Antiquity of this famous Court of Hustings, is much magnified by the Compiler of King Edwards Lawes, cap. 35. in these words: There ought al∣wayes in the City of London, which is the head City of the Kingdome and of the Lawes, to bee held upon everyThis is altered unto Tues∣day, be∣cause of the She∣riffes in∣tending of the Mar∣kets: which being kept upō Mun∣day, would hinder their sit∣ting in the Hustings. Munday weekely, a Court of our So∣veraigne Lord the King, at the Hust∣stings. This Court was founded and built of old, after the fashion and man∣ner, yea and in the memory of the an∣cient City of Troy: and even unto this day containes it within it selfe the Lawes, and rights, and dignities, liber∣ties, and customes Royall of that anci∣ent and great Troy. There be handled the intricatestCompta perchance the word signifies Measures rather thā Accounts: for Compotus ager, is a field surveighed, whose quan∣tities were set downe in the Land marke or Terrier: and here perchance was kept a generall surveigh of all the Lands of the Kingdome, as now in the Domes-day Booke in the Exchequer. The forme whereof, the Conquerour perchance tooke from the Hustings. accounts and the doubtfull Pleas of the Crowne, and of the Court of our Lord the King, of the whole Kingdome aforesaid: and this Court hath even to this day preserved
her owne ancient Customes most invi∣olably. Thus farre my Author, who (by his leave) smels too rankly of that Fabler, Geffery of Munmouth. And yet something there is in the Hustings, which might give counte∣nance to this comparison of old Troy, namely, that the well-knowne weight used for Gold and Silver, called Troy-weight, was in time of the Saxons cal∣led, The Hustings weight of London, and kept there in the Hustings. So an ancient Record in the booke of Ramsey, Sect. 32 and 127. I Aethelgina Countesse, &c. bequeath two silver Cups of twelve markes of the Hustings weight of Lon∣don. The former Law of the said King Ed∣ward the Confessor, commands the Hustings Court to be held every Mun∣day, though at this day it be held upon the Tuesday: which that it may not be perceived by the Monuments and Rolls of the Court, to have differed too much from the first Institution, is yet said and written, to be holden upon the Munday. It is as it were distingui∣shed into two Courts: for one weeke the Iudges sit upon Pleas meerely reall, and the next weeke upon Acti∣ons mixt, or of any other nature what∣soever. Out of the same Booke of Ramsey Abbey, Sect. 268. will I here set down the ancient forme of purchasing and gi∣ving of possession used in the Hustings: which is farre different from the fashi∣on used at this day. Be it knowne unto all the sonnes of holy Church, that Wlfnoth of Walebroc, London, have sold unto Reynold, Abbot of Ramsey, a cer∣taine piece of land which hee hadSuper Walbroc. in Walebroc, whence he was called Wlf∣noth of Walbroc. As also a certaine house of stone, and a Shop which hee had built upon that land, with doores of yron, and windowes above and be∣neath, &c. Which said Wlfnoth hath sold that Land unto the Abbot of Ram∣sey, and hath given him seisin of it, by delivery of a certaine staffe, and hath Et clama∣vit solam & quietam, & abs{que} omni calumpnia. quite claimed unto it to all encumbrance: quiet, and void of all encumbrance: both he, and Mahald his Wife and his first wives Daughter: and Mahald his second Wife, and Henry his sonne by his second wife, and Christine her daughter, before the whole Husting of London, in the house of Alfwine, sonne of Leofstan: to bee held from this day forth for ever by the Church of Ram∣sey, in consideration of ten pounds of pence, which hee gave unto him in presence of the whole Court of Hu∣stings; of which ten pounds, he the said Wolfnoth gave forty shillings unto Maud his daughter for herPropter concessum suum. For giving up her right in it, per∣chance. good will, be∣cause he had the Land by her Mother. And the Abbot for his part gave her halfe a marke of silver; and unto Wlf∣noths Wife, and other two children, for their good wills, he gave five shillings. Of this bargaine and sale, be on the part of the Hustings these witnesses, William of Einesford, Sheriffe of London, and Iohn his Vnder-Sheriffe, and Gervase his Clarke; Andrew Bucuint, and Ralfe his sonne, and Ralfe his cousin; Gilbert Proudfoot, William Bukerell, and many others. This deed hath no date mentioned, but I finde this Reinold to have beene made Abbot of Ramsey, by King Henry the first as his Charter shewes, Sect. 214. The Successor to this Reinold was one Walter but what yeere he was made Abbot in, I finde not; but I finde that he flourished Anno, 1149. that is, the fourteenth yeere of King Stephen. By this may you judge of the antiquity of the deed, though the precise day be not dated. By this passage it cleerely appeareth, that London was honoured with her Sheriffes Office, even in the age of King Henry theWhich was above 500. yeers since. first, although our Chroniclers affirme the Sheriffes to be made first by King RichardWhich was almost 100. yeeres after. the first, at his comming to the Crowne: from whose time our said Chroniclers begin to reckon the first Maior and Sheriffes, that is, from the yere of our Lord 1189. But that the Sheriffes were granted unto the City, together with the Coun∣ty of Middlesex, plainely appeares by the said Kings Charter concerning the liberties of London, given in the begin∣ning of his Raigne: nor doe the Maior and Sheriffes much differ from those former Magistrates of the City, the Portreve, and Provost, as might bee proved.
Moreover, the Cities, of Yorke, Win∣chester, Lincolne, the Ile of Shepey, with other Burroughs and Cities, are also said to have had their Hustings. See Fleta. Lib. 2. cap. 55. A briefe Collection how the Court of Request, com∣monly called the Court of Con∣science, in London, hath beene established and continued for many yeeres past, for the re∣liefe of poore Debtors in Lon∣don, and the Liberties there∣of, viz. FIrst,Anno 9. H. 8. I finde that primo February, Anno 9. H. 8. an Act of Common Councell was made,The first begining of the said Court. that the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the same City for the time being, should monethly assigne and appoint two Al∣dermen, and foure discreet Commo∣ners to be Commissioners to sit in the same Court twice a weeke, viz. Wed∣nesday, and Saterday, there to heare and determine all matters brought be∣fore them betweene party and party, (being Citizens and Freemen of Lon∣don) in all cases where the due debt or damage did not exceed forty shillings. This Act was to continue but for two yeeres then next ensuing: But being found charitable and profitable for the reliefe of such poore Debtors as were not able to make present payment of their debts;The rea∣sons why the said Court hath had continu∣ation. and to restraine malicious persons, from proceeding in their wil∣full Suits: and also to bee a great ease and helpe to such poore persons as had small debts owing to them, and were not able to prosecute Suits in Law for the same elsewhere:Other Acts made since to the same purpose. The same Act hath sithence bin continued by divers other Acts of Common Councell: and hereby (besides the said two Aldermen monthly assigned) the number of Com∣missioners were increased, from foure to twelve. And so by that Authority, the same Court continued till the end of the Raigne of Queene Elizabeth, &c. And then divers people, being Ci∣tizens and Freemen of London (contrary to their Oathes formerly taken) repi∣ning at the authority of the same court, and not regarding the expence of any charges how great soever, so they might have their desires upon their poore Debtors,The mali∣cious pro∣ceeding of cruell Creditors against poore men that claimed the benefit of the Court. and being often animated thereunto by divers Attorneys and So∣licitors (for their owne particular gaine) did dayly commence Suits, for such petty debts and causes against poore men (Citizens and Freemen of London) in the high Courts at West∣minster, or else-where out of the said Court of Requests, to avoid the juris∣diction of the same Court, and to barre the said Commissioners from staying such Suits, and examining the said cau∣ses, and thereby caused the said poore men many times to pay sixe times as much charges as their principall debts or damage did amount unto, to the un∣doing of such poore men, their wives and children, and also to the filling of the Prisons with the poore so sued: where otherwise they might have got their Debts in the said Court of Re∣quests, for very small charge and little trouble. For remedy whereof, & for the streng∣thening & establishing the said Court, an Act of Parliament was then made in Anno primo Iacobi Regis,An. 1. Ian. An Act of Parlia∣ment for confir∣ming the power of the Court. that every Ci∣tizen and Freeman of London, that had, or should have any Debts owing to him, not amounting to forty shillings, by any Debtors (Citizens and Free men of London) inhabiting in London or the liberties thereof, should or might cause such Debtors to be warned to ap∣peare before the Commissioners of the said Court; and that the said Com∣missioner, or the greater number of them, should from time to time set downe such orders betweene such par∣ties, Plantiffe and Defendant, Credi∣tor and Debtor, touching such debts not exceeding forty shillings, as they should finde to stand with equity and good conscience. But sithence the making of that Act, divers persons (intending to subvert the good and charitable intent of the same)
have taken hold of some doubtfull and ambiguous words therein, and have wrested the same for their owne lucre and gaine, to the avoiding the jurisdi∣ction of the same Court, contrary to the godly meaning of the said Act. For remedy whereof, and to the in∣tent that some more full and ample provision might bee made for the fur∣ther establishing and strengthening of the said Court, and for the better re∣liefe of such poore Debtors; another Act of Parliament was made,An. 3. l. Anno 3. Ias. whereby the authority of the said Commissioners were much inlarged, viz. that every Citizen and Freeman of London,An other Act of Parlia∣ment concer∣ning all debts un∣der the summe of forty shil∣lings. [and every other person and persons inhabiting, or that shall inhabit within the City of London, or the liberties thereof, being a Tradesman, Victualer, or Labouring man,] which have or shall have any debts owing to him or them, not amounting to forty shillings, by any Citizen or Freeman [or by any other person or persons (being a Victualer, Trades∣man, or Labouring man) inhabiting with∣in the said City, or the Liberties thereof] should or might cause such Debtors to be warned to appeare before the said Commissioners of the said Court of Requests. And the said Commissio∣ners, or any three, or more of them, shall have power to set downe such Or∣ders betweene Plaintiffe and Defen∣dant, Creditor and Debtor, touching such debts not amounting to forty shil∣lings, as they shall finde to stand with equity and good conscience.Power of admini∣string an Oath. Also the said Commissioners, or any three, or more of them, have power (by the said Act) to minister an Oath to the Cre∣ditor or Debtor, and to such Witnes∣ses as shall bee produced on each part: And also to commit to prison in one of the Counters, such Creditor or Debtor, as shall not appeare upon lawfull Sum∣mons, or not performe such order as the said Commissioners, or any three, or more of them shall set downe. And by this last Act, the said Court of Requests is established & continued to this day; and God grant it may so long continue to the reliefe of the poore, &c. Collected by Thomas Griffins, sometimes a Clarke of the same Court, &c. This Tombe stands in St. Giles Cripplegate Church. P. M. S. Virtute, Prudentia, Generis No∣bilitate Inclytus, Clarus, Illustris, Hic Iacet. HENRICVS STAPLETONVS E. Dioecesi Eboracensi, Acri Wighilnencis Olim Domi∣nus, Aetatis Suae An. 56. ab Incarnato Verbo. 1630. Decimo Sexto die menfis Feb. V∣tam morte mortem Immortali glo∣ria Commutavit, atque Stipante Amicorum Syrmate collacry∣mantis, Patriae Cerentium vices, in hac aede elatus D. Andreae Ter∣rae mandatus est. MARIA, Iohannis Fosteri Equitis Aurati, mediorum Angliae finium boriali∣um Custodis, Filia, Moestissima hoc Junere vidua, tanti conjugij memor, Artemisianae pie∣tatis aemula non magnificentia, hoc perpetuum tam meritorum ejus, quam Superstitis amoris sui, Mo∣numentum Erigit, Consecrat, Di∣cat. By his Honourer and Kinsman, Robert Stapleton. There are thirteene Scutchions of Armes.
Vpon a Tombe in Grace Church, being at the corner as you goe into Fen-Church street, with this Inscription. To the memory of Iames Bune, Es∣quire, sometime Burgesse of the Par∣liament for this City, married Mary, daughter of George Holmeden of Kent, Gentleman, by whom hee had seven children, whereof living at the time of his decease, Iames his eldest son, who married Sarah, daughter of Thomas Gipps, Esquire, Mathew, and Mary, wife of Master Iohn Langham, of this City Merchant; he departed this life the 26. of Ianuary, Anno 1631. aged 68. When death cuts off a branch from earths worne stem, Faith, hope, transports the soule to heavens Didem. On a Grave-stone there. Here lyeth Iames Bune, Esquire, that departed this life the 26. of Ianuary, Anno 1631. and Mary his wife, that died the second of October, 1612. Vpon a Gravestone in St. Fosters Church in Faringdon Ward within, with this Inscription on it. Heere lyeth the bodyes of Lawrence Hawes, Citizen and Fishmonger of London, about 63. yeeres of age, and of Vrsla his Wife, the daughter of Iohn Hericke, of Leicester Esquire, 82. yeeres of age; they had issue together five Sonnes and two Daughters, Edward, George, Hum∣frey, Iohn, Dorothy, and Thoma∣sin; he deceased the inth of Aprill, 1588. and shee died the 24. of No∣vember, 1614. This Monument stands in Saint Margarets Church in Westminster, and hath this Inscription. Annae, vxori suae a mantissimae & optimae, Filiae Willielmi Barlowi, Episcopi Ci∣cestrensis, & Agathae Welsborne, gene∣rosae conjugis ejus, diem suum quinto idus Decembris, Anno Domini 1597. obeunti Westmonasterij, quo virum ad Parliamentum comitabatur; Harbartus Westfalingus, Episcopus Herefordiensis, susceptis ex ipsa quin{que} liberis; Harbar∣to, qui duxit Franciscam Rudhall gene∣rosam; Anna quae Gulielmo Ieffereys Ar. Margareta, quae Richardo Eedes wigor∣niae Decano; Elizabetha, quae Roberto Walweyne generso; & Francisca, quae Francisco Ienkes generoso nupta est. In memoriam virtutis, & amo∣ris ipsius posuit. In the same Church is a new Monument lately erected, in the North Ile, and this Inscription on it. In expectation of a joyfull Resurrecti∣on, neere this place resteth the body of Robert Golding, Gentleman, borne in this City of Westminster, and some∣time chiefe Burgesse thereof: His Honesty, and Charitable life, gai∣ned good esteeme; his Age, due and deserved respect of all. And in the house where he tooke beginning in his infancy, hee most peaceably and piously ended his dayes on the 22. of November, 1629. Being al∣waies carefull of his wayes, charita∣ble to the poore, and very judicious and ready in discharging of all Offi∣ces incident to the civill Governe∣ment of this City, wherein he fully
proceeded long before his death. He lived to see the change of foure Kings and Queenes, and yet in assu∣red hope of never changing blisse, by the meritorious passion of his only Mediator, Christ Jesus: Hee never altered or changed from the now truly professed Religion, wherein he most constantly died in the 78. of his age▪ leaving behinde him two sons and three daughters. To whose pious memory William Gol∣ding, his eldest sonne, and sole Exe∣cutor, hath at his owne charge ere∣cted this Monument, Iune 1631. This Monument stands in Westminster Abbey, and hath this Inscription. Here es expecting the second com∣ming of our Lord Iesus Christ, the body of Edmond Spencer, the Prince of Poets in his time, whose divine Spirit needs no other witnesse, then the workes which hee left behind him: He was borne in London, in the yeere and died in the yeere 1596. This Monument stands in Westminster Abbey with this Inscription. Deo Optim. Maxim. Hic in Domino requiescit Richardus Cox de Porters, eques Aurat: Filius Tertius Thomae Cox, de Beymonds Comit. Harford. Armigeri, In hospitio Regio per multos annos Oeconomicus, Fidelitate, Diligentia, Et Prudentia probatus, Reginae Eliz. à Dietis, Item & Rgi Iacobo, cui tandem factus est Magister Hospitij Digniss. Vir Religionis Cultu, Morum Comitate, Corporis Castitate Affectuum temperantia, Imprimiss spectatus Erga Bene-meritos Amore, suos Beneficentia, Pauperes Caritate, omnes Aequitate, Clarus. Anno Aetatis 69. Coelebs, postquam se vitae Meliori, multâ vigilantiâ, & Devotione praepar âsset, Deo placidè Animam rddidit, 13. Decemb. 1623. Ioannes Cox de Beymonds Armiger, Frater secundus Fratri è Testamento Haeres, Amoris hoc Monumentum posuit. Deus non est Mortuorum sed viventium. This Monument of Master Camden is in Westminster Abbey, where hee holds a Booke with Britannia on it. There followes this Inscription. Qui fide Antiqua, & opera assidita, Britanicam Antiquitatem Indagavit, Simplicitatem Innatam Honests Studijs excoluit, Animi Solertiam Candoe illustravit, Guliemus Camdenus, ab Elizabetha Rad Regis Armorum (CLrentij Titulo) Dignitatem evucatus, Hic spe certa Resurgendi in Christo. S. E. Q. Obijt Anno Domini 1623. 9. Novembris. Aetatis suae, 74.
IOHN KING Bishop of Lon∣don, descended from the An∣cient KINGS of Devonshire by his Father, and from the CONQVESTS of Haughton Conqnest, in Bedfordshire, by his Mother, lyes buried in the South Ile of Saint Pauls, behind the Bishops Seat, ha∣ving onely a plaine Marble over him, and RESVRGAM written on it for his Epitaph; as himselfe directed in his Will. These Verses hang by in a Table. IOANNIS KING Episcopi Lon∣dinensis, quicquid mortale est in hoc pulvere componitur. HICIACET, nisi quis calumnietur, Mendax Transliberinus Ambulator, Transferri Cineres, Fidemque Romam. Et migrâsse semel, simulque utrumque; Praesul Catholicus, sed Orthodoxus. Non partis studiosus, evagari per divortia multa opinionum, Aut Sectas didicit novas creare: Quod si qui fuerint notae prioris, Quos vulgus facit & colit Magistros, His tantâ levitate non adhaesit, Vt persona fide magis placeret: Magna nomina, sed minora semper Isthaec omnia, Veritate duxit. Tantum-non fuit Ille de Locustis, Aut rasis Monachis, pijs que nequam, Vrbem qui gravidâre Septicollem: Qui circum Capitolium strepentes Romanum, velut Anseres sonori, Cygnaeas temerare cantilenas Audent, per modulamen inficetum: Et pro vocibus ultimis Oloris, Commendare suas, & Anserinas. Sed, quod nec Calami, nec Ora centum: Nec Perjuria mille de Duaco; Nec Satan Decumanus ille mendax; Nec tandem Legio Diabolorum, Extorquere suis strophis valebunt: Vnus si Deus est, Fides & vna▪ Huic vni immoriens, & Anglicanae. Quod si quis Logodaedalus profanus, Aut Famae Plagiarius Scelestus, Quicquam Sacrilego reponat ore: Si Vafer Fidei , Qui vult de similâ Deum creare, Et Christum jubet innatare vino: Et sic Hereticos & Orthodoxos Confundit, facit utque symbolizent Plus quam Pythagorae , Seductum crepat hunc Apostatâsse: Tam ventosa Fides videtur illis; Tam ventosus & Ille Christianus; Vt post tot, docilis Senex, aristas, Accessisse putetur imparatus, Infansque, ad Documenta Lessian. Non plures libet, Arbitros citare, Quam Conscire suum: quod apprecares Testem, Carnificamque, Iudicemque, Illi, quisquis erat Sacer Poeta; An plus crediderit suae Legendae, Quam vulgi pius ille fascinator, Autor plumbeus Aureae Legendae. Quin si jurat idem sat impudenter, Lingua peierat; at quid inde? Mentem Injuratus habet; Scioque habebit. Tis si credideris secus VIATOR, Nugis, Impliciti necessitate Assensus, bibulam fidem recludens, Si quis Ser aphicus propinet Autor; Veternum excutias: & absque tandem Susceptore, tuum pares Adultus Examen, tibi teque cognitorem Ponas, & sapias monente Amico. Sin sis Credulitatis obstinatae, Conclamatus es: ILICET. Deinceps Te Stultum jubeo libenter esse. In Diem Obitus. Quem  Domini fecerat Sacriū Diem, Et Mors coronis integri Certaminis: Hunc aeque Amicum Numen indulsit diem. Desider ando, quod prope hic, Capiti, lacet, Quo solveretur Vita vitalis parum. Dolorum utrumque dixeris recte Virum; Hic Saxeam, Ille Ligneam sensit Crucem, Hic intus, Ille bajulans Extra suam: Dolorum, utri{que} Lux posuit una & modii. Quin ipsa Lux haec masculum robur dedi, Vt nil tremendum Mortis, incuteret metus; Sed Pascha verum, Transitus potius foret, Aeternitati Prodromus. Marmor loquax
Spirat RESVRGAM, Mysticis candes Notis: Nec ipse Sadducaeus apparet Lapis. Condit{que} tantum, non Premit Corpus: grave Spes ista superat pondus, & Summum petit; Nec detine bit mole Depositum suâ; Sed sponte ruptus Exitum tandem dabit. Cum Triduanum dormierit. Ipsus tulit Hanc, Christus Olim, Tertiae Lucis moram. (Nec mille Saecla Triduum excedunt Dei.) Sic tota demum, juncta Primitijs, Seges Egerminabit. Haec Via ad Patriam, Mori. Calata Mors est; Surget ad Patriam vigil. Hanc spē fovebat Ille: quod sculptii hic legis, Sed Corde fixum fuerat, & Coeloratum. Anagram: Nominis, & Chronogr: Aetatis 62. currentis. IOANNES KINGVS PRAELATVS. EN APERTVS IONAS ANGLIKVS. Chronogramma Anni Domini 1621. CCE CVIO DISSOLVI, AC CHRISTO ADGLVTINAL Philip. 1. 23. Pauli hoc dissolvi, repeti non desiit, ante Quam, quae protulerat, Lingua soluta fuit. EPITAPHIVM. Non hic Pyramides; non sculpta Panegyris ambit Hos Cineres; lapidum nec pretiosa strues. Quod frgale magis, Tibi Te cōmittimus unū: Si jaceas aliter, vilior Vmbra fores. Nam Tibi qui similis vivit, moritur{que}, Sepulcrū Ille sibi vivax, & sibi Marmor erit. SE QVENTVR QVI NNONDVM PRAECESSERE. Valentine Cary, sometimes Deane of Saint Pauls Church, and after Bishop of Excester, lyes buried on the South side of the Quire, vnder a plaine Stone, with this Inscription about it. Hic jacet Valentinus Carey, Sacrae The∣ologiae Doctor, olim Decaenus hujus Ec∣clesiae, qui obijt Episcopus Exon: Cujus Monumentum, ibidem, erectum patet. 1626. In the South side of the Quire of Saint Pauls Church stands a white Marble Statue on an Vrne, with this In∣scription over it. Ioannes Donne Sac. Theol. profess. Post varia studia, Quibus ab Annis Tenerrimis Fideliter, nec infaeliciter incubuit, Instinctu, & Impulsu Spir. Sancti, Monitu, & Hortatu Regis Iacobi. Anno sui Iesu, 1614. & suae Aetat. 42. Decanatu hujus Eccles. indutus 27. Novemb. 1621. Exutus morte ultimo die Martii. An. 1631. Hic licet in Occiduo Cinere, Aspicit eum Cujus Nomen, est Oriens. Vpon a faire Monument stand∣ing in the South Ile of Saint Pauls Church this is written. W. S. Gulielmus Cokaynus, Eques Auratus, Ci∣vis & Senator Londinenfis: Septemque abhine Annis, vrbis praefectus, Anti∣qua Cokaynorum Derbiensium Familia oriundus, Quia Bono publico vixit, & damno publico decessit, & Gaudio pub∣lico, Regem Iacobum, ad decorum hujus domus Dei, senescentis jam, & Corru∣gatae Restitudinem, solemnitèr, huc ve∣nientem, Consulatu suo, Magnificê ex∣cepit, id circo, in Templo publico, ad Ae∣ternam Rei Memoriam, Hîc situs est. At verò, & Famae Celebritas, Quae viget in ore Hominum, & Gloria Beatitu∣dinis, Quam Migrando adeptus est, & splendor Sobolis, quam Numerosam Genuit, atque Nobilem Reliquit, Iun∣ctim Efficiunt omnia, ne dicatur, Hîc situs est.
Vnà cum illo, tot Homines mortui, quot in illo defunctae sunt virtutes; simul que & acies Ingenij, & popularis eloquij suada, & Morum gravitas, & probitas vitae, & Candor Mentis, & Animi Constantia, & prudentia singularis, & veri senatoris Insignia, Hîc sepulta sunt. Iam tuum est, Lector, Felicitatis ad Cul∣men Anhelare, per ista vestigia laudis, & venerandi imitatione Exempli, cu∣rare, ne unquam virtutis sic semina intereant, vt dicatur, Hîc sepulta sunt. Obijt 20. Octob Anno Dom. 1626. Et Aetatis suae 66. Vpon another faire Monument standing by it is this In∣scription. Memoriae S. Gulielmo Hewyr Armigero, Roberti Hewyt A. Killamarch in Agro Derbiensi, Filio secundo Genito, Qui, mortuo Fratre Natu Maiore, Paternam crevit Haereditatem, Posterisque Transmisit. Nobilem Mercaturam exercuit. Vita integerrima fuit, & Moribus suavissimis. Bonarum literarum studia promovit, Egenorum proventus Largiter Auxit, Liberalitate, Charitate, Insignis, Nec minor pietate. Religionem, cum Ministris sacris, & Coluit, & Fovit, Ita, per omnia, se ubique gessit, ut Probitatis, Comitatis, Candoris, Vivum Exemplar, Christum Redemptorem Cogitans Vitam ante Mortem Consummaverit. Filios Genuit Quatuor, Ioannem, Salomonem, Thomam, Gulielmum, Et Filias duas, Mariam, Elizabetham. Annum, Lxxvij. Agens, xij. Iunij. M.D.XCIX. ad patriam Coe∣lestem evocatus, Magnum sui desiderium Reliquit Posteris, Qui Hoc pie ac Maeren. P. P. The Monument upon which this Inscription is set, stands in our Ladies Chapell, in S. Pauls Church: at the foure corners of this faire Monu∣ment stand foure Iet Pillars, upon each the figure of an Angell, on the one side of it is the representation of Sir Iohn Wolley and his Lady; on the other, of their sonne Sir Francis, at the head and foot of it, all in blacke (as Mour∣ners) the curious and artfull shadowes of his two Execu∣tors, Sir Arthur Mannering, and Master Iohn Minterne. The Inscription. WOllei clarum nomen, natusque paterque, Ambo Equites, Natus Franciscus patre Ioanne, Clarus vt Haeredem virtutis, amoris, Honoris Praestaret, Monumenta sibi haec, & utrique Parenti Constituit, Generis qui nominis unicus Haeres, Tam cito, tam Claros, est defecisse dolendum. Ille Pator, Lumen, literarum Nobile sydus, Oxoniae ex Meritis, Reginae accitus Elizae, Vt qui a secret is cum scriberet illa Latine,
Atque a consiliis cum consultaret in Aula, Atque Periscelidis, qui Cancellarius esset, Tantum ille ingenio valuit, tantum instar in illo. Non minus omnimoda virtute illa inclyta Mater, Nobilibus Patre & Fratre illustrissima moris, Clara domi per se: sed Elisam ascivit Elisa, Clarior ut fieret, Wollei ornata Marite. Quo viduata, vire quo non praeclarior alter Nubat Egertono, Repetat sed mortua primum. Franciscus tandem, at nimium cîto utrum{que} sequutus, Hic jacet ante pedes eques illustrissimus, illis Haecponi jussit, seque & tria nomina Poni: Sic voluit, placuit, superis pia grata voluntas. Discite mortales, Memores sic esse Parentum, Dicite qui legitis, sic sic petit Aethera virtus. The Stone bearing this Inscrip∣tion, is in the middle Ile of this Church, not farre from the steps to the Chancell. Spe Resurgendi Hic jacet Thomas Raymond Sacrae Theologiae Professor, Sancti Albani Archidiaconus, Hujusque Ecclesiae Canonicus. Obijt 4. die Novembris. Anno Aetatis 47. Salutis 1631. Not farre from this, a Stone with these words about it. Hic jacet Gulielmus Bonham, nuper Civis, & Vinitarius London, Filius Thomae Bonham de Stanway in Comitatu Essex Arm. Qui obijt duodecimo Februarij. Anno Dom. 1628. Not farre from the other. Over against the little North doore, in the same Ile, under a faire marble stone, without any Inscription upon it, lyeth bu∣ried the body of Doctor houson, late Bi∣shop of Durham. This Monument is in Saint Giles Cripplegate Church, on the South side the Chancell, and hath this Inscription. Piae Memoriae Charissimorum Parentum. Iohannis Speed, Civis Londinensis, Mer∣catorum Scissorum Fratris, servi fi∣delissimi Regiarum Majestatum E∣liz. Iacobi, & Caroli nunc superstitis. Terrarum nostrarum Geographi acu∣rati, & fidi antiquitatis Britannicae Historiographi, Genealogiae sacrae Elegantissimi delineatoris. Qui post∣quam Annos 77. superaverat, non tam morbo confectus, quam mortalitatis taedio lassatus, Corpore se levavit, Iulij 28. 1629. & jucundissimo Re∣demptoris sui desiderio sursū elatus, carnem hîc in custodiā posuit, denuò cum Christus venerit, Recepturus. On the other side of him. Susannae suae suavissimae, quae postquam duodecim illi Filios, & sex Filias pe∣perat, quinquaginta septem junctis utriusque solatijs cum illo vixerat,
LIberos, gravi & frequenti Horta∣mine, ad Dei cultum sollicitaverat, pietatis, & Charitatis opere quoti∣diano praeluxerat, emori demum e∣rudiit suo exemplo. Quae septuage∣naria placidè in Christo obdormivit, & Fidei suae mercedem habuit, Mar∣tij vigessimo octavo, Anno domi∣ni Millessimo sexcentessimo vigessi∣mo octavo. Another Monument on the North side the Quire, with this Inscription. Memoriae Sacrum. Hic jacet Robertus Cage Armiger, omni∣um literarum Homo, Vita integer, mor∣te Christianus, nec dum mortuus, nam in memoria aeterna erit justus. Solus Christus, Mihi sola salus. Anno Domini 1625. Another Monument neere to this last, with this Inscrip∣tion on it. Here lies the body of Matthew Palmer, Esquire, who died the 18. of May 1605. together with Anne his wife, who died the last day of Iune, 1630. by whom he had foure sons and one daughter, viz. Thomas Palmer, his eldest sonne, deceased the 5. of May, 1631. and is also buried. Elizabeth, Edward, Andrew, and Ralphe, who when it so pleaseth God, desire this place for the custody of theìr bodies likewise, till their assured and glori∣ous Resutrection. Another Monument on the South side of the Quire, with this Inscription. To the Memory Of Constance Whitney, eldest daugh∣ter to Sir Robert Whitney, of Whit∣ney, the proper possession of him and his Ancestors, in Herefordshire, for above 500. yeeres past. Her Mother was the fourth daughter of Sir Thomas Lucy. of Charlecoite in Warwickshire, by Constance Kingsmell, daughter and Heire of Richard Kingsmell, Survey∣or of the Court of Wards. This Lady Lucy, her Grandmother, so bred her since she was eight yeeres old, Thus farre written upon the figure or resemblance of a Coffin. As she excel'd in all noble qualities, becom∣ming a Virgin of so sweet propertion of beauty and harmony of parts, she had all sweetnesse of maners answerable: A delightfull sharpnesse of wit; An offencelesse modesty of conversation; A singular respect and piety to her Pa∣rents; but Religious even to example. She departed this life most Christianly, at seventeene; dying, the griefe of all; but to her Grandmother an unrecoverable losse, save in her expectation, shee shall not stay long after her, and the comfort of knowing whose she is, and where in the Resurrection to meet her. This Table is on the South side of the Quire in Saint Sepulchers, with this Inscription. To the living Memory of his deceased Friend, Captaine IOHN SMITH, who departed this mortall life on the 21. day of Iune, 1631. with his Armes, and this Motto, Accordamus, vincere est vivere. HEre lies one conquer'd that hath conquer'd Kings, Subdu'd large Territories, and done things Which to the World impossible would see me, But that the truth is held in more esteeme. Shall I report his former service done In honour of his God and Christendome:
How that he did divide from Pagans three, Their Heads and Lives, Types of his Chivalry: For which great service in that Climate done, Brave Sigismundus (King of Hungarion) Did give him as a Coat of Armes to weare, Those conquer'd heads got by his Sword and Speare? Or shall I tell of his adventures since, Done in Virginia, that large Continence: How that he subdu'd Kings unto his yoke, And made those Heathen flie, as wind doth smoke; And made their Land, being of so large a Station, A habitation for our Christian Nation: Where God is glorifi'd, their wants suppli'd, Which else for necessaries might have di'd? But what availes his Conquest, now he lyes Inter'd in earth, a prey for Wormes and Flies? O may his soule in sweet Elizium sleepe, Vntill the Keeper that all soules doth keepe, Returne to Iudgement, and that after thence, With Angels he may have his recompence. Captaine Iohn Smith, sometime Gover∣nour of Virginia, and Admirall of New England. Coya Shawsware. THis Monument, or that of which this is a shadow, with their Cha∣racters ingraven about it, stands in Petty France, at the West end of the lower Churchyard of Saint Botolphes Bishopsgate (not within, but without the walls, the bounds of our consecra∣ted ground) and was erected to the
memory of one Coya Shawsware, a Per∣sian Merchant, and a principall ser∣vant and Secretary to the Persian Am∣bassadour, with whom he and his sonne came over. He was aged 44. and buri∣ed the tenth of August, 1626. The Am∣bassadour himselfe, young Shawsware his sonne, and many other Persians, (with many expressions of their infi∣nite love and sorrow) following him to the ground betweene eight and nine of the clocke in the morning. The rites and ceremonies that (with them) are due to the dead, were chiefly perfor∣med by his sonne, who sitting crosse∣legged at the North end of the grave, (for his Tombe stands North and South) did one while Reade, another while Sing; his Reading and Singing intermixt with sighing and weeping. And this, with other things that were done in the Grave in private (to pre∣vent with the sight the relation) conti∣nued about halfe an houre. But this was but this dayes businesse: for, as this had not beene enough to performe to their friend departed, to this place and to this end (that is, Pray∣er, and other funerall devotions) some of them came every morning and eve∣ning at sixe and sixe, for the space of a moneth together. And had come (as it was then imagined) the whole time of their abode here in England, had not the rudenesse of our people disturbed and prevented their purpose. Camera Dianae. VPon Pauls wharfe Hill, within a great gate, and belonging to that gate next to the Doctors Com∣mons, are many faire Tenements, which in their Leaes made from the Deane and Chapter, goe by the name or title of Camera Dianae; so denominated from aspacious and speci∣ous building, that in the time of Henry the second, stood where they now are standing. In this Camera, or arch'd and vaulted Structure (full of intricate wayes and windings) this H. the second (as some∣time he did at Woodstocke) did keepe, or was supposed to have kept, that Iewell of his heart, faire Rosamond; she whom there he called Rosa Mundi; and here, by the name of Diana; and from hence had this house that title. To this day are remaines, and some evident testifications of tedious tur∣nings and windings; as also of a passage under ground, from this house to Caste-Baynard, which was no doubt the Kings way from thence to his Camera Dianae, or the Chamber of his brightest Diana. Of the three Brethen appointed to preach at Saint Maires Spittle at Easter 1632. HAving renued the memory of this, from a time so long before us, let us remember and ende∣vour to maintaine to posterity, among many memorable things of our owne time, that of those three worthy Bre∣thren, Doctor Samuel Wincope, Master Thomas Wincope, and Master Iohn Win∣cope, learned and reverend Divines, that upon Munday, Tuesday, and Wed∣nesday, in Easter weeke, 1632. prea∣ched at Saint Maries Spittle. Three Brothers, such a thing (as but in these) is not knowne to any man living, nor recorded to any mans reading. Yet to this let me adde this more, being cal∣led to this place to prech, from places divided by many miles one from ano∣ther
other, they met not so happily here to preach, as in the matter upon which they did preach: for though their Texts were severall, their subject was one and the same, this is worthy our observa∣tion; yet to make it worth admiration, and a perpetuall memory, wee are to take notice, how upon that one and the same subject, they did precede and suc∣ceed one the other like the linkes in a golden chaine, the second beginning where the first ended, and the third where the second ended; the last abso∣lutely concluding what the two former had so absolutely induced to, with their admirable ends and uses. A briefe relation of the six children drowned at the Ducking pond, Ianuary 19. 1633. VPon Saterday the 19. of Ianu∣ary, 1633. sixe pretty young Lads, going to sport themselves upon the frozen Ducking-pond, neere to Clearken well, the Ice too weake to support them, fell into the water, con∣cluding their pastime with the lamen∣table losse of their lives: to the great griefe of many that saw them dying, many more that afterward saw them dead, with the in-expressible griefe of their Parents. A briefe Relation of that lamentable Fire, that hapned on London Bridge, the 13. of February 1633. FRom this let us turne, our eyes up∣on that lamentable Fire upon Lon∣don bridge, that upon Monday the 13. of February, 1633. betweene ele∣ven and twelve towards midnight gave us ashes in stead of Beauty: the ashes, into which the third part of the Bridge was consum'd, for the beautifull Frames so consumed. The number of the houses then burnt on both sides the Bridge, from the Church called Saint Magnus, to the first open place, were two and for∣ty; all which (with a great part of their wares, the goods, and rich furni∣ture in them) were devoured to the ground (though many hands, much la∣bour, with a great deale of feare and danger, were carefully employed to prevent it) before eight of the clocke the next morning. Thus suddenly they were burnt to the ground, all above ground quencht and extinguisht, but beneath in their Vaults and Cellars, the fire remained glowing and burning for the space of a whole weeke after. The house in which it began was the house of one Master Brigs (at the hither end of the Bridge) a Needle-maker: but now it beganne, because divesly spoken by many, I would not set downe from any. The losse was great and sudden, pre∣senting (as a glasse) the length of a lease or of life, when such a sad chance shall betide us. Though getting a long lease of our lands, we presume of a lease of our lives, of a long and secure pos∣session; like those in the 4. of Iames, that say, To day or to morrow we will goe into such a City, and continue there for a yeere, and buy, and sell, and get money. They will goe, they will stay, they will get, such losses as these never thought on; though the same Prophet (in the same place) tell them, They know not what the morrow may bring with it.
A PERAMBVLATION OR, CIRCVIT-VVALKE foure miles about LONDON: And what Memorable matters and Monuments wee have found and met withall in our Iourney. In the Church at Fulham are these ensuing Monuments. This Monument is at the upper end of the Chancell, and hath this Inscription. HIc situs est Gulielmus Biliesby,Fulham. Eques Auratus, Fisci Regij ostia∣rius, cum Anna vxore, è Fami∣lia Brogravia, quae illi peperit duas Filias, Franciscam, & Margaretam, totidemque Eilîos, qui infantes objerunt. Obijt ille 25. Martij 1607. Illa 27. Maij 1608. Francisca Filia primogenita, primum npta Ioanni Madocks Armigero, postea Thomae Walker Armigero, Fisci Regij ostiario. Obijt die 6. Novembris 1607. & hic parentibus tumulatur. Margar. altera Flia e∣nupta Hugoni Parlor, de Plumsted Armigero. Obijt & in Ecclesia Sanct. Margaretae Westmonasterij Requiescit. Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription. D. O. M. Thomae Smitho Equiti Aurato, Regij Ma∣jestati, à supplicum libellis, & ab Epi∣stolis Latinis, viro doctrina, prudentia∣que singulari, Francisca Guil. Baronis Chandos filia, optimo Marito Conjux Moestiss. plorans posuit. Obijt 28. die Novemb. 1609.
Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription. Epitaphium D. Gulielmi Brutij E∣quitis Aurati, & Medici Regis Henrici octavi, qui obiis An. Dom. 1545. Novem. 17. Quid Medicina valet? quid Honos? quid Gratia Regum? Quid popularis Amor, Mors ubi saeva venit? Sola valet pietas, quae structa est, Auspice Christo Sola in morte valet, caetera cuncta fluunt. Ergo mihi in vita fuerit quando omnia Christus, Mors mihi nunc lucrum, vitaque Christus erit. Epitaphium hoc primitus inscriptum pa∣riete, & situ jam penè exesum, sic de∣mum restituit Leonardus Butts Ar∣miger Norfolciensis. Oct. 30. 1627. Amoris ergo. Another Monument neere to this last, with this Inscrip∣tion on it. At Earth in Cornwall was my first beginning, From Bonds and Corringtons, as it may appeare: Now to Earth in Fulham, God disposed my ending, In March the thousand and six hundred yeere Of Christ, in whom my body here doth rest, Till both in body and soule I shall be fully blest. Thomas Bond. Obijt Anno Aetatis suae 68. In the Church at Putney are these ensuing Monuments. This Monument is in the Chan∣cell on the North side, and hath this Inscription. Memoriae Sacrum. HEre lyeth the body of Richard Lusher of Putney,Putney. in the Coun∣ty of Surrey Esquire: who mar∣ried Mary, the second Daughter of George Scot of Staplefoord Taune, in the County of Essex, Esquire. He depar∣ted this life the 27. of September, An∣no 1615. Aetatis sua 30. What tongue can speake the vertues of this creature, Whose Body faire, whose Soule of rarer feature? He liv'd a Saint, he di'd a holy Wight, In Heaven, on earth, a joyfull heavy sight. Body Soule united, agree'd in one, Like strings well tuned in an Vni-sone. No discord harsh this Navell could untie, 'Twas Heaven, the Earth, this Musicke did envy. Wherefore may well be said. He lived well; And being dead, the world his vertues tell. Though Richard Lusher sleepeth in the dust, He sleepes in hope, and hopes to live againe: His soule in Heaven is waking with the just, And wakes in joy, being free'd from sense of paine, Bones take your rest, your soule in Heaven attends, The blest re-union of two loving friends.
Marito dilectissimo, Maria Lusher con∣jux Moestissima, in perpetuum Amoris Testimonium, hoc Monumentum plo∣rans posuit. Mary, by her first match, Lusher, daugh∣ter of George Scot, Esquire, descended from Iohn Scot, Lord chiefe Justice of England, in the raigne of King Ed∣ward the third, and after wife to Tho∣mas Knivet, descended from Iohn Knivet Knight, Lord chiefe Justice in the same Kings raigne, and Lord Chancellour of England. To Thomas Knivet. That you have laid my body here, By that first side I lov'd so deere, I thanke you Husband: That the poore Are still your care, I thanke you more. These last I charg'd you with alive, Being done, I rest, while you survive. But yet I have another Boone, When Fate shall come (as come full soone It will, and will not be deni'd) That you would close my other side. Y'ave thought it worthy to bee read You once were second to my bed; Why may you not like title have, To this my second bed, the Grave? This Stone will cover us all three, And under it we shall be free From Love, or Hate, or least distrust Of Jealousie to vexe our dust: For here our bodies doe but wait The summons for their glorious state. On the same Monument is this Inscription. Quam Diu Domine. Siste Siste Hospes: Quod Reliqui est Lectissimae Foeminae Te Rogitat, Etiam ego, superstes Maritus, superstes ipse Funeri meo. Nam in Conjuge, Conjunx vixi, et cum illa Elatus sum. Maria, mea Maria, Dulcissima Maria Hic sita est. Cor Gratiarum, flos venustatis Merus, Sedes amorum, Castitatis exemplar Tanti erga me affectus Talisque. Morum ac vitae perpetuae Sanctimoniae, ut vivens, Moriensque, Singulari Praeluxerit Face omoibus Vel ordinis sui, vel sexus. Heu qualem amisi Ex puerperio Raptam? Et cum ea, spem Posteritatis. Sic me relinquis? Sic Terras deseris? O Christianae perfectionis Imago, Injuriarum contemptrix Facilis, Doloribus Ferendis Fortis: Omnes in te certabant virtutes sed vicit Pieas. Fulges etiam in ipsa mortis umbra, Divini amoris dm vixisti Flamma Et Postquam vixisti Astrum. Vale, Vale Maria: Nullum de te dolorem Nisi ex Acerbissima tua morte Accepi. At (Cara Conjunx) non ego te desinam Lugere, donec vi doloris obrutus Meis & ipse liquero luctum parem. M. S. Mariae Pientissimae Mariae Cui lucis ortum Staplefordia dedit, Genus{que} Scottorum Familia vetus, Georgiae Filiae & Cohaeredi: Primis Nuptijs Richardo Lushero junctae, Nicholai Equitis Aurati Filio; Proximis mihi Thomae Knivetto, Maritorum Moestissimo. Obijt xxvij. Aug. CIO. IOC. xxiij. Aetatis 35.
In the Church at Chelsey, are these ensuing Monuments. In the South side of the North Ile is this inscription. In obitum illustrissimi viri,Chelsey. Domini Ar∣thuri Gorges, Equitis Aurati, Epicedium. Transtulit Lucanum Te deflent Nati, Natae, Cele∣berima Conjux; Te dolet argutae, magna Caterva scholae; At Lucanus ait, se vivo, non Moriturum Arthurum Gorges, Tran∣stulit ipse decus, Aethereas Cupiens Arthu∣rus adire per Auras, Et nonus ex ejus Nomi∣ne Natus adest. Domin? Arth. Gorg. Equ. Au∣rat. Filius eius Natu Maximus. In the same Ile on the South side is this inscription. Here ieth the right Noble and Excel∣lent Princesse, Lady Iane Guilford, late Dutchesse of Northumber land; Daughter and sole Heire unto the right Honourable, Sir Edward Guil∣ford, Knight, Lord Warden of the five Ports. The which Sir Edward, was sonne to the right Honourable, Sir Richard Guilford, sometimes Knight, and Companion of the most Noble Order of the Garter. And the said Dutchesse was wife to the right High and Mighty Prince, Iohn Dud∣ley, late Duke of Northumberland; by whom she had issue 13. children, that is to wit, eight sonnes and five daughters: and after shee had lived 46. yeeres, she departed this transi∣tory world at her Mannor of Chelsey, the 22. day of January, in the second yeere of the raigne of our Soveraigne Lady, Q. Mary the first, An. 1555. on whose soule Jesus have mercy. Another on the South side, thus inscribed. In obitum Nobilissimorum Conjugum Gregorij D. Dacres, & Annae uxoris. Quos ardens copulavit Amor, Iuvenilibus annis, Abstulit atra dies, mors inopina rapit; Ille prior Fatis, Dacrorum Nobile Germen Occidit, In Morbum, at incidit illa prius. Quae languescendo, Miserae praetedia vitae Sensit, tam dulci conjuga Cassa su. Vt teneri cordis concordia junxerat ambos, Sic idem Amborum contegit ossa locus. Quos jungit tumulus, conjungunt coelica Tecta, Vt teneant Coelum, qui tenuere fidem. Nobilis iste Vir obijt, Septem. 25. 1594. Nobilis ista Muli∣lier obijt, Maij 14. 1595. Nobilis Anna Iaces, prudens Sackvillia proles Viva tui defles funera Moesta viri. Nil mortale placet, Coelum tua pectora spirant, Postquam Parca viri, conscidit Atra, diem Foeminei lux Clara chori, pia, casta, pudica, Aegris subsidium, Pauperibusque decus. Fida deo, perchara tuis, constansque diserta, Vt patiens Mrbi, sic pietatis amans.
O quoties manibus passis, ad culmina Coeli, Hanc Animam dixti, suscipe quaeso Deus Menspia, Coelestis patriae pervenit ad Arcem, Hic tumulus corpus, mentis inane tenet. Another Monument on the North side the Chancell, and hath this inscribed. O Lord, in thee have I trusted, Let me never be confounded. Here lieth the body of Thomas Hunger∣ford of Chilsey in the County of Mid∣dlesex Esquire; the second sonne of Robert Hungerford the elder, of Cad∣name in the County of Wilth Esquire; who hath served King Henry the 8. in the roomth of a Gentleman Pen∣tioner, and was with his Majesty at the winning of Boloine; and King Edward the sixth at Mussleborough field; besides Queene Mary and Queene Elizabeth, in their affaires, being of the age of 70. yeeres, who had to Wife Vrsula Matdenhead, the Daughter of the Lady Sands. Anno Domini 1581. Another on the North side with this inscription. The yeeres wherein I liv'd were fifty foure, October twenty eight did end my life: Children five of eleven God left in store, Sole comfort to their mother, and my wife. The world can say what I have beene before, What I am now, examples still are rife: Thus Thomas Laurence speakes to times ensuing, That Death is sure, and Time is past renuing. Obijt. 1593. On the South side a Monument of Sir Thomas Moore, dated Anno Domini. 1532.   Another Monument in the same Church, with this in∣scription. Sacrum Memoriae Gulielmi Plumbe Armigeri & Elizabethae Vxoris ejusdem. Guilielmus Plumbe, Filius & Haeres Ioan∣nis Plumbe, de Eltham Armigeri. Du∣as Vxores duxit; priorem Magaretam, Filiam, & unicam Haeredem Thomae Nevill Equitis, quam Robertus South∣well Eques viduam Reliquerat, Ex qua nullam prolem Genuit. Alteram Eliza∣betham, ex qua unicus filius ntus est, Franciscus Plumbe. Elizabetha, unica Filia & Haeres Edvardi Dormer de Fulham Armigeri, Filij natu minimi Galfridi Dormer de Thame Armigeri. Priorem conjugem habuit Iohannem Gresham, de Mayfield, in Comitatu Sussexiae Armigerum, & secundum fi∣lium Iohannis Gresham Equitis (quon∣dam Majoris London) cui tres peperit filios, Thomam, Guilielmum, & Edvar∣dum Gresham, eo defuncto Guilielmum Plumbe praedictum conjugem accepit. Guilielmus Plumbe, obijt 9. die Febr. Anno 1593. Aetatis suae 60. In the Church at Stepney are these ensuing Monuments. On a Monument in the Chancell is this Inscription. ONe ancient Monument of Sir Henry Collet,Stepney. Knight, twice Lord Maior of London, and free of the Mercers, and Father to Doctor
Iohn Collet sometimes Deane of Saint Pauls, refreshed by the Company of Mercers in the yeere 1605. on the North side. In the upper end of the Chancell. In the upper end is a faire Monument of Elizabeth Startute, erected by Captaine Michael Miriall, and Clare his Wife, sometime Daughter to the said Elizabeth Startute. On the North side of the Chan∣cell, as followeth. Here resteth the body of Robert Clarke Esquire, sonne of Roger Clarke Es∣quire, late Alderman of the City of London, a man humble in prosperity, & a liberall distributer to the poore, courteous and affable to all, an up∣right and a just dealer in this world, and a most religious seeker of the world to come. Hee had to wife Margaretta, daughter to Iohn Lang∣ton Esquire, sometimes Governour of the English Company in Sprucia, under the King of Polonia, who lived together in great love and integrity almost sixe yeeres, he had by her one onely Daughter, named Frances, who lived one yeere three quarters, and here lies interred with her most deare and loving Father. In whose memory the said Margaretta, to expresse her true love and affecti∣on, hath caused this Monument to be erected; he died the xxx. day of May, Anno Dom. 1610. having li∣ved xxxvj. yeeres. A little Monument on the South side in the Chancell, and hath this Inscription. Genero suo Guilielmo Dawtrey, quondam Lincolniensis Hospitij socio, Willielmi Dawtrey Sussexiae Armigeri, Filio & Haeredi, viro ingenij acumine, mentis acie, & non vulgari Municipalium Angliae legum scientia praecellenti, Ri∣chardus Stonley Armiger, hoc Amoris, & pietatis simbolum posuit. Obijt 16. Octobris 1589. This Monument is at the upper end of the Chancell, and hath this Inscription. Sacrae Memoriae. Ianae Nevillae Dominae Dethicke Matronae Religiosissimae, Modestissimae, omni∣bus qua corporis, qua Animi (dum vixit) dotibus ornatissimae: Iesu Chri∣sti servae devotissimae; conjugi suae fide∣lissimae, amantissimae. Quae cum vi∣ginti fere duos Annos felicissime transe∣gerat. Alexander Nevillus Armiger, hoc nunquam intermorituri amoris sui Monumentum fieri Testamento cura∣vit. Postquam Annos ferè sexaginta novem vixerat vicessimo nono Novem∣bris 1606. placidissimè in Domino ob∣dormivit. Tobiah Worthington, Alexandro Nevillo, ex Testamento solus Executor, ipsius mandato, hoc Monumentum posuit. On a little brasse Monument in the South side of the Chan∣cell is thus written. Here under lieth buried Nicholas Gib∣son, Citizen and Grocer of London, and Avis his wife, who were Foun∣ders of the Free-Schoole at Ratcliffe; and after she married with Sir An∣thony Knevit, Knight, which lyeth here buried also. Which Nicholas died the xxiij. of September, Anno 1510. And the said Lady Avis died the third day of October, 1554. whose soules Jesu pardon.
In that Chancell likewise this is written. D. O. M. Here under was laid up the body of Sir Thomas Spert, Knight, sometime Controuler of the Navy to King Henry the eighth, and both the first Founder and Master of the worthy Society or Corporation of the Tri∣nity-house. He lived enobled by his owne worth, and died the eighth of September, in the yeere 1541. To whose pious memory the said Cor∣poration hath gratefully erected this Memoriall. Not that he needed Monument of stone, For his well gotten fame to rest upon, But this was rear'd, to testifie that he Lives in their loves, that yet surviving be. For unto vertue, who first rais'd his name, He left the preservation of the same: And to postery remaine it shall, When Brasse and Marble Monuments doe fall. Learne for to die while thou hast breath, So shalt thou live after thy death. Anno Domini 1622. by the Company of the Trinity-house, this Monument was erected 81. yeeres after the de∣cease of their Founder. Another Monument in the same Chancell. Here lieth also in the same Chancell, under the Communion Table, the body of Henry Steward, Lord Darley, of the age of three quarters of a yere, Sonne and Heire of Matthew Stew∣ard Earle of Lenox, and Lady Marga∣ret his Wife, which Henry, deceased the 28. day of November, in the yeere 1545. whose soule Iesu par∣don. In Stratford-Bow, and Bromley, are these ensuing Monuments. This Monument is in the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Abrahamus Iacob Armiger, Maria Con∣jux Superst, maestis. Obijt 6. Maij. A. D. 1629. Aetatis suae 56. Hic tumulus PArentes optimi cum prole numerosâ,Stratford-Bow and Bromley. non vestrae virtutis, sed Doloris mei Monumentum esto. Quam uterque erga Deum Pius, quam Regi suo obse∣quens, & commodus; quam amicis Fidus, quam Patriae utilis, quam pauperibus be∣nignus, aliorum esto effari, meum imitari, pij Lectoris supplere, quod Filialis mode∣stia Retinuit. Valete Posteri. Sic in Christo & vivite, & morimini. Ioh. Iacob. F. Parentibus maerens meren∣tibus P. As Nurses strive their Babes in bed to hie, When they too liberally the wantons play: So to prevent his future grievous crimes, Nature his Nurse got him to bed betimes. On another Monument in the same Church is thus written. Here lies the body of William Ferrars, the onely Sonne and Heire of Willi∣am Ferrars Esquire, late Citizen and
Mercer of London, who tooke to wife Iane, one of the Daughters of Sir Pe∣ter Van-lore of London, Knight, by whom he had one Childe, his Wife and Childe died both before him, and he departed this life a moneth before his Father. He was a Gentle-man of a religious soule towards God, and a sweet behaviour towards men, and his death was by his Kin∣dred, and generally by all much la∣mented. Hee died the 25. of Au∣gust, 1625. and left his Vnkle Tho∣mas Ferrars his Executor, who to the memory of him hath erected this small Monument. In this most pure and blessed shade, (Such by the sacred ashes made, That here inhabit must) do's lye The man, whose vertues cannot dye. His Almes, his Prayers, his Piety, Have sent his soule above the skie. Nature full well had taught his Wife, To summe her hourses in plous life; To God, to Friend, to poore, to all, She was as good as we dare call Fraile flesh; good passenger give praise To them who liv'd such happy dayes. Anno Domini 1625. In the same Church this is written. This Bread is given to the poore for the honour of God, and to the memory of William Ferrars the younger, by Thomas Ferrars his Executor. In the Church at Lambeth are these insuing Monuments. On the North side on a Marble Tombe as followeth. HEre under this Tombe lyeth buried the body of Thomas Clere Esquire,Lambeth. sonne of Robert Clerc in the County of Norfolke, Knight, which Thomas deceased the 14. day of April, Anno Domini 1545. on whose soule, and all Christian soules, Jesus have mercy. In the Chancell on the North side is an old Tombe of Marble, thus written on. Sub pedibus ubi statis, jacet corpus Ma∣gistri Hugonis Peyntwin, Legum Do∣ctoris, nuper Archi. Cant. Reveredissi∣morum Patrum Dō. Ioannis Morton Cardinalis, Henrici Dene, & William Warham Cant. Archiepiscop. Audien. Causar. Auditoris. Qui obijt vj. die Augusti, Anno Dom. M. D. iiij. cujus Animae Propicietur Deus. Amen. On a flat Stone there is thus written. Volente Deo. Hic jacet Richardus Bancroft, S. Theolo∣giae Professor, Episcopus Londinensis Primo, deinde Cantuariensis Archiepis∣copus, & Regi Iacobo à Secretioribus Consiliis. Obiit secundo Novembris, Anno Dom. 1610. aetatis suae 67. Volente Deo. On another flat Stone thus is written. Here Lieth the Lady Elizabeth Howard, sometimes Countesse of Wiltshire. On the South side Lieth the body of Sir Nowell Caroone, Ledger Ambassadour for the States of Holland, with his Armes and Hatchments, as namely his Crest, Helmet, Armes, Sword, Gantlet, and Spurres. In the South Chapell is a faire Monument of Marble, ingraven as followeth. Here lieth Sir Iohn Legh Knight of the Bath, sonne of Ralph Legh Esquire,
Lord of the Mannors of Stockwell and Levehurst, and Dame Isabel his wife, Daughter of Otwell Worsley, which Sir Iohn deceased the 17. day of August, Anno Dom. M. D. xxiij. and the same dame Isabel deceased the 18. day of Aprill. On the upper end on the wall, a Monument as followeth. Here lieth the body of Iohn Arundell of Gwarnicke, in the County of Corn∣wall, Esquire, Sonne and Heire of Roger Arundell, of the said County, Esquire, of an Ancient, Honourable, and faire descended Family, who died the 25. of May, 1613. without issue, and in the 56. yeere of his age. Sape & praevale. On the North side of the Quire is this Inscription. Neere to this place, lyeth interred, the body of Robert Scot Esquire, descen∣ded of the ancient Barons of Bawery in Scotland. Hee bent himselfe to travell, and study much, &c. And amongst many other things, he ein∣vented the Leather Ordinance, and carried to the King of Sweden 200. men; who after two yeeres service, for his worth and valour, was pre∣ferred to the office of Quarter Ma∣ster generall of his Majesties Army; which he possessed three yeeres. Frō thence, with his favour, he went in∣to Denmarke (where he was advan∣ced to be Generall of that Kings Ar∣tillery.) There being advised to ren∣der his service to his owne Prince, which hee doing, his Majesty wil∣lingly accepted and prefer'd him to be one of the Gentlemen of his most Honourable Privy Chamber, and rewarded him with a Pension of 600. li. per annum. This deserving Spirit, adorn'd with all Indowments befiting a Gentleman; in the prime of his flourishing age, surrendred his soule to his Redee∣mer, 1631. Of his great worth to knew who seeketh more, Must mount to Heaven, where he is gone before. In France hee tooke to wife Anne Scot, for whose remembrance she lovingly erected this Memoriall. This Monument is neere unto the other, and hath this Inscription. Epitaphium Thomae Clarear, qui fa∣to functus est, 1545. Auctore Hen∣rico Howard, Comite Surrey, in cujus foelicis ingenij specimen, & singularis Facundiae argumentum, appensa fuit haec Tabula per W. Howard Filium Tho. nuper Du∣cis Norff. Filij ejusdem Henrici Comitis. Norfolke sprung thee, Lambeth holds thee dead: Clere, of the Count of Cleremont thou hight: Within the wombe of Ormonds race thou bred, And sawest thy Cosin crowned in thy sight. Shelton for love, Surrey for Lord thou chase; Aye me, while life did last, that league was tender, Tracing whose steps, thou sawest Kelsall blase, Laundersey burnt, and batter'd Bulleyn's render, At Muttrell gates, hopelesse of all recure, Thine Earle halfe dead, gave in thy hand his will, Which cause did thee this pining death procure, Ere Summers foure times seven thou couldst fulfill. Aye Clere, if love had booted, care or cost, Heaven had not wonne. nor Earth so timely lost.
Over against the other in the same Ile, lieth the body of Elizabeth Bayly, late wife of Iohn Bayly. Obijt 24. of Iune, Aetatis suae 25. Reader tread soft, under thy foot doth lye, A mother buried with her progeny: Two Females and a Male, the last a sonne, Who with his life, his Mothers thred hath spun; His breath her death procur'd (unhappy sinne, That thus our joy with sorrow vshers in.) Yet he being loth to leaue so kinde a Mother, Changes this life to meet her in another. The daughters first were rob'd of vitall breath, The Mother next in strength of yeeres met death, The Fathers onely joy, a hopefull Sonne, Did lose his life when life was scarce begun. If harmlesse Innocence, if loyall truth, Found in a constant wife combin'd with youth, If a kind Husbands prayers, or Fathers teares Could have prevail'd, they had liv'd many yeeres. But these all fayling, here rak'd up in dust, They wait the resurrection of the just. A Husbands love, a Fathers piety, Dedicates this unto their memory: And when he hath his debt to Nature pai'd, In the same Grave himselfe will hen be lai'd, That altogether, when the Trumpe shall sound, Husband, Wife, Children, may in Christ be found. Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription. Here lieth foure foot distant from this wall, the body of William Suthes, Gent. a man adorned with the gifts of Grace, Art, and Nature: by Grace hee was Religious and Charitable; by Art he was in Masonry exquisite; and by Nature he was humane and affable. He, by Gods appointment, changed his mortall life of misery for glorious immortality on the fifth of October 1625. His sorrowfull and gratefull Wife, Mistresse Anne Suthes, as a loyall Testimony of her love to her deceased Husband, cau∣sed this Monument to be erected for an exemplary of his worthinesse, and her affection. He was Master Mason of Windsor Castle; he was a Citi∣zen and Goldsmith of London, and an Assistant of the said Worshipfull Company. He left three sonnes to∣wardly and hopefull, to bee each of them the imitators of their Fathers vertues, Iohn, Iames, and Matthew. And herein the Reader may see ex∣prest the goodnesse of the deceased Husband, and the thankfulnesse of a surviving Wife. He now sings praise amongst the heavenly Host, To God the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost. In the Church at Newing∣ton, on the North side, is this Monument. Deo viventium. Pietati sacrum. SIr Hugh Brawne,Newington. Knight, the Foun∣der and Adorner of this Ile, and for the space of 22. yeeres, the whole ornament of this Parish; Reli∣gious towards God, and respectfull of
the poore, determining to provide for the day of his death, desires here to repose his body, in a happy hope of a glorious Resurrection. Reader it pleas'd th'Almighty to infuse, Sense of his goodnesse in my blessed heart, Faith quickned Loue, and did this Churchworke choose, Both ioyntly here doe shew themselves in part: His be the glory, Peace, (soule saving) mine, Prayer, Thanksgiving use, example thine. 1614. Vivens posui. Anno Aetatis 77. In Saint Georges Church in Southwarke, on the North side are these Monuments thus written on. LOe,S. Georges. Master William Evans, he whose body lieth here, Bequeathed hath by his last will, for ever by the yeere Ten pound eight shillings to the poore, which is a blessed stay, And must be given them in bread, on every Sabbath day: One halfe to Creekens poore, his native soile so deare, The other moity to the poore of this our Parish here. See now all ye that love the poore, how God did guide his wayes; Tenscore & eight are serv'd with bread, in two and fifty dayes, More then money would have done, to yeelded any share: Praise God, ye poore, who gave to him so provident a care. Hee was of the Right Worshipfull Company of the Merchant-Taylors, and deceased the 29. of Iuly, Anno 1590. in the 32. yeere of the most prosperous raigne of our Soveraigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth. Aetatis suae 67. Another Monument on the North side, having this Inscription. Behold, Iames Savage, graciously Hath done a godly deed; To the poore of this Parish, For to releeve their need, Five pounds a yeere for evermore, By will he hath bequeath'd, Which must out of the Angell rents Quarterly be received, By the Churchwardens of this Church Whom he hath put in trust, As Fathers in the poores behalfe, To be vpright and just. Which men, I doubt not, but our God Who seeth all things shall finde, True in dispensing of the same According to his minde. Ye poore, thanke Christ for Savage still, Extoll Gods Name with praise, That he, to follow his good Act, In time may many raise. Anno 1588. In the Church at Wans∣worth, are these insuing Monuments. In the North side of the Chan∣cell is thus written. Vnder a Stone,Wansworth. within this place, doth lie Iohn Powel, who for the space Of thirty yeeres before Her death, did serve the Queene Elizabeth: And to King Iames of worthy fame, for nine yeres more he did the same: And when the yeeres of seventy foure, were now come to an end, Into the hands of God above, his soule he did commend. Obijt 26. die Iunij. Anno Dom. 1611.
At the upper end of that Chan∣cell, is thus written. Here lyeth the body of Henry Smith, E∣squire, sometime Citizen and Al∣derman of London, who departed this life the 30. day of Ianuary, An. Dom. 1627. being then neere the age of 79. yeeres, who while he li∣ved, gave unto these severall Townes in Surry following, one thousand pounds a piece, to buy Lands for perpetuity for the reliefe and set∣ting the poore people on worke in the said Townes, viz. To the towne of Croydon, one thousand pounds; To the towne of Kingstone, one thou∣sand pounds; To the towne of Guil∣ford, one thousand pounds; To the towne of Darkin, one thousand pounds; To the towne of Farneham, one thousand pounds. And by his last Will and Testament did fur∣ther give and devise, to buy lands for perpetuity for the reliefe and setting their poore on worke, unto the towne of Rigate one thousand pounds. And unto this towne of Wandsworth, wherein he was borne, the summe of 500. pounds, for the same uses as before. And did fur∣ther will and bequeath one thou∣sand pounds to buy land for perpe∣tuity, to redeem poore Captives and Prisoners from the Turkish tyranny. And not here stinting his charity and bounty, did also give and be∣queath the most part of his estate, being to a great value, for the pur∣chasing lands of inheritance for ever for the reliefe of the poore, and set∣ting them on worke. A patterne worthy the imitation of those whom God hath blessed with the abundance of the goods of this life to follow him herein. Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription. Here lieth the body of Edward Snow of Chicksands, in the County of Bedford, Esquire: in memory of whom, Em his Wife, daughter to William Byne, in the County of Sussex, Esquire, e∣rected this Monument; he had issue Elizabeth, Alice, and Sarah. He de∣ceased at the Mannor of Alfarthing, Anno Dom. 1587. At the upper end of this Chan∣cell is this Inscription. Susanna Powell, late of Wandsworth Wi∣dow, Daughter of Thomas Hayward of Wandsworth, Yeoman of the Guard unto King Henry the 8. King Edward the 6. to Queene Mary, and to Queene Elizabeth (of ever precious memory) and wife unto Iohn Powell of Wandsworth, Gentleman, who was servant to Queene Elizabeth. This Susanna Powell was a gracious Bene∣factor unto this Towne of Wands∣worth. She lived a Window the space (almost) of twenty yeeres, deceased the 19. day of February, 1630. & at her death bequeathed by her Will unto 24. poore Widowes of this Towne of Wandsworth for ever, foure pence in bread and foure pence in mony, to be distributed every Lords day, 12. on one Sabbath, and 12. a∣nother for ever, at the North doore of the Church at Wandsworth. She also bequeathed 40. shillings every yeere for ever, to put forth a poore man child an Apprentice, with di∣vers other loving Remembrances unto her good friends and neigh∣bours. These foresaid Donations are to issue out of the benefits and profits of the Rectory of Wandsworth. This was desired to be recorded, that God might be glorified, the memo∣riall of the Iust might bee blessed, and the living stirred up to such like good workes of Piety and Compas∣sion. More, To this Church, for the Communion Table, two Flagon pots of Silver, price xx. li. and upwards. To release poore Prisoners out of pri∣son, on the day of her buriall, xx. li.
To the poore of the parish of Putney, long before she deceased, 50. li. To the poore Housholders of Wands∣worth, for many yeeres before her death, toward payment of their Rent, per annum, 5. li. In the Church at Battersey, are these ensuing Monuments. On the North side of the Quire is this Inscription. Deo Trino & Vni Sacrum.Baersey. OLivero, Nicolai Sanct. Iohn de Lydeard, Filio secundo, Equiti Aurato, Antiquissimis, & illu∣stribus de Belle Campo, de Blestoe Gran∣disonis, & Tregoziae Familiis oriundo. Terra Marique, Domi Forisque, Belli pacisque, Artibus egregio, Diu Eliza∣bethae è Nobilissima Pensionariorum cohorte, suis inde meritis, & singulari Divi lacobi gratia, in Hibernia instru∣mentis Bellicis praefecto, Conaciae pro∣praeside questori summo, & Regis Vi∣cario, procomiti de Grandisonis, & Trigoziae de Hyworth in Anglia Baro∣ni, Eidem divo Iacobo, & Filio ejus pijssimo à secretioribus & Sanctioribus Consiliis, Postquam is Annos Honori∣bus Aequaverat, & Tranquillissimè se∣nuerat somnienti similiter extincto, Io∣hannes de Sanct. Iohn, Eques & Baro∣nettus, ex Fratre Nepos & Haeres A∣uunculo Moerentissime. Moestissimus P. in Ecclesia de Battersey. Vixit Annos 70. Mor. 29. Decembris 1630. This Monument is in the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Memoriae Sacrum. Elizabethae, Filiae Christophori Toldervey Armigeri, quae vivens moriensque fuit conjux dilecta Danielis Caldwall, Fi∣lij Laurentij Caldwall Armigeri, per quatuor annos, Filiorum par Enixa ac vnicam Filiolam, ipsa Mater, virgo prius Casta, Vxor dein fida, Morum suavita∣te vitae integritate, Religionis Con∣scientia insignis, fideliter obijt, & in domino foeliciter obdormivit die Iunij 20. Aetatis suae Anno 23. 1620. Moerens ejus Maritus, hoc Qualecunque Monumentum, Epitaphium, Amoris verè conjugalis ergo, posuit, composuit. D. G. This stone doth tell, the Children and the Mother, That liu'd and dy'd all in one yeere together: The children first Death did deprive of life, Yet stai'd not there, but tooke away the Wife. Insatiate Death, not with the Fruit content▪ But thy last malice on the Tree hast spent. Her vertuous life it needlesse were to praise, That's still the glosse to cover vicious wayes: Ile say but this, that all who knew her well, For life, for death, will say she did excell. Another Monument in the same Chancell with this Inscription. To Henry Hussy Esquire, his loving Wife Iudeth Paget hath erected this Monument: He was borne at Slink∣fold in Sussex, he was Clarke of the Spicery to Queene Elizabeth and King Iames, and lived in the Court 35. yeeres. He delivered his soule to God the 23. of May 1611. in the 64. yeere of his age, his body lyeth buried here, waiting for a joyfull esurrection.
In the Church at Hackney are these ensuing Monuments. A Monument made for Sir Henry Row, with this In∣scription. HEre under sime of Adams first defection,Hackney. Rests in the hope of happy Resurrection, Sir Henry Row (Sonne of Sir Thomas Row) And of Dame Mary his deare yoke-fellow) Knight, and right worthy (as his Father late) Lord Maior of London with his vertuous Mate. Dame Susan his (twice fifteene yeeres & seven) Their issue five (surviving of eleven) Foure named here in these foure names forepast, The fifth is found, if Eccho sound the last: Sad Orphanes all, but most their Heire (most debtor) Who built them this, but in  a better. Quam pie obijt,  lutis 1612. die Novemb.  atis 68. This Monument is neere unto the other, and hath this Inscription. Memoriae Sacrum. What needs an Epitaph to found our praise, Our wealth, our greatnes forth, or length of dayes; When briefly on this Marble we may reade, The glory of the living and the dead. A modest, chaste, religious loving Wife Lies here at rest, patient in death and life; Even all the graces which 'mongst many were Divided, sweetly flow'd and met in her. And though death did his worst, thinking in rage, To leave no patterne for succeeding age, Yet lives her vertues, and this memory Tells what she was, and what her Sex should be. Erected by Iohn Bennet, in memory of Elizabeth his beloved wife, who de∣parted this life the 18. of Novem∣ber, 1625. An ancient plaine Monument in the Chancell, with this Inscription. Christopher Vrswyke, Rector. Misericordiam. Another Monument there also, with this Inscription. Here under lyeth the body of Henry Thoresby, of Thoresby, in the County of Yorke, Esquire, late Councellor in the Law, Bencher and Reader of Lincolnes Inne, Iustice of Peace, and of the Quorum, one of the Masters of the most Honourable Court of Chancery, and one of the sixteene Governours of King Iames Hospi∣tall, elected at the first foundation thereof by Iohn Sutton Esquire the only Founder: which Henry Thoresby passed his pilgrimage in this life, in
all godlinesse and Christian piety, and so constantly did continue unto his last breath, which hee yeelded up to the Almighty in this Towne of Hackney, on the eleventh day of May, 1615. Heere under lyeth the body of Iane, late wife to the said Henry Thoresby Esquire, Daughter to Iohn Palmer of Clarkenwell, in the County of Midalesex, Esquire, and Paulina his wife, daughter to Anthony Sands of Throwly in the County of Kent, Esquire, which Iane lived with the said Henry in wedlocke 30. yeeres and more, and had issue by him two Daughters, viz. Iane, who died in her infancy about six yeeres of age, and Elinor Lady Hardresse, the now wife of Sir Thomas Hardresse, of great Hardresse, in the County of Kent, Knight, by whom she had issue foure Sonnes and one Daughter. Which said Iane overlived her said husband, Henry Thoresby, and died in all Chri∣stian piety on the 18. day of August, 1616. An Epitaph upon the death of the vertuous & worthy Gen∣tleman, Edward Saunders Es∣quire, Obijt vltimo die Novem∣bris Anno 1599. His name, his place, the gentry of his birth, And credit held unto his dying dayes, Were things that gave him favour here on earth, But gave him not the greatest of his praise. His greatest glory was his godly life, The bounty of his house and open doore, His Countries love, his kindnesse to his wife, Faith to his friend, and pitty to the poore. His vertue, valour, and all good desires, His zeale and life agreeing to the same, And last the death that such a life requires, These be the true records of lasting fame. These wright him blessed in the Heavens above, And leave him in the world good will and love. On the North side of the Chan∣cell, as followeth. A memory of the right Honourable, the Lady Lucy Latimer. Such as shee is, such surely shall ye be, Such as she was, such if ye be, be glad; Faire in her youth, though fat in age she grew, Vertuous in both, whose glosse did neuer fade, Though long alone she lead a widowes life, Yet never Lady liv'd a truer wife. From Wales she sprang, a branch of Worsers race, Graft in a stocke of Brownes her mother side; In Court she held a maid of Honors place, Whilst youth in her, and she in Court did bide: To Iohn Lord Latimer then became she wife, Foure Daughters had they breathing yet in life. Earle of Northumberland tooke the first to wife, The next the heire of Baron Burleigh chose, Cornwallis hap the third for terme of life; And Sir Iohn Davers pluckt the youngest Rose.
Their Fathers heires, mothers all she saw, Pray or praise her, make your list the Law. Made by Sir Will. Cornewallis, Knight, this Ladies sonne in law. A Monument of Sir Thomas Rowe, who lieth buried in this Church, and hath this Inscription. Anno Domini 1570. September 2. day. Sir Thomas Rowe lies buried here, Of London Knight and Alderman Who late was Maior, & rule did beare, To right the cause of every man: A Merchant venturer was he, Of Merchant-Taylors Company: A Citizen by birth also, And eke his Wife dame Mary Rowe. In wedlocke one and thirty yeere, They did continue man and wife, Eleven children she did beare, But five of them have left this life, And sixe alive doe yet remaine, Foure of them sons, & daughters twain, His soule with God we hope is blest, And doth remaine in Abrahams brest. In the Church at Islington, are these ensuing Monuments. In the South side of the Chan∣cell is this inscription. Vnder the hope of the Resurrection. HEre lyeth the body of Alice Owen Widow,Islington. the Daughter of Thomas Wilkes, she was first married to Henry Robinson, by whom she had sixe sonnes, Iohn, William, Henry, Iohn, Thomas, and Henry, which said Henry the younger, was married unto Mary, the daughter of Sir William Glover, Knight, Alder∣man of London; and five Daughters, Margaret married to Sir Iohn Bret of Edmonton, in the County of Middle∣sex Knight, Susan, Anne, and Anne the younger maried Sir Robert Rich, of Horndon on the Hill, in the County of Essex Esquire; and Alice married to Iohn Washborne of Withingfoord in the County of Worcester, Esquire. The se∣cond Husband was William Elkin E∣squire, Alderman of the City of Lon∣don, by whom she had issue, only Vr∣sula Elkin, married to Sir Roger Owen of Condover, in the County of Salop, Knight. The third Husband was Thomas Owen, one of the Iudges of the Court of Common Pleas to Queene Elizabeth. On a faire Stone in the Chancell is this Inscription. Hinc Sperat Resurrectionem (Filius Harbottelli Grimeston, Militis & Baronetti Natu Tertius.) Henricus Grimeston. Anagramma. En Christi Regno sum. Qui moritur, vivit, Christo, huic, Mors semita, Ductor Angelus, ad vitam Ianua Christus erit. Hac itur ad superos, calcane vestigia Lethi, Intrabam Christi Regia, Templa Dei. 12. die Mensis Iulij. An. Dom. 1627. In the North side of the Chan∣cell is thus written. Here lieth buried the body of Sir Nic∣holas Kempe, Knight, one of his Ma∣jesties Justices of the Peace, and an Honourable Member of the high Commission Court, &c. who had
to his first wife Cicely, with whom he lived in blessed amity neere forty yeeres, together with Sarah his se∣cond wife sixe yeeres: and having past, with much Prosperity, Love, and Credit, the reverend yeeres of 72. he changed this terrestriall con∣dition for that everlasting state of blessednesse, the third of Septem∣ber 1624. Wife, Loving Liberall, Religious, lust; Those graces fil'd the soule of him, whose dust Lies here in Tombe; all that praise can bring forth, There are not words enough to expresse his worth: For his good workes, this stone cannot comprise Half the particulars of his Pieties: What goodnesse ever was, is, and to come, In mortall man, that makes up his just summe. Another Monument on the North side the Chancell, and hath this inscribed. Vivit post funera virtus. Here lyeth the body of William Rie∣thorne, late of Canonbury Esquire, which William married with Anne, the Daughter of Iohn Quarles of London, Merchant, and died without issue, the 18. day of November. In the yeere of our Lord God 1582. and in the 54. yeere of his age. A Monument in the South Ile, with this inscription. To the sacred Memory of Anne late wife of Henry Chitting, Es∣quire, Chester Herauld at Armes, eldest Daughter of William Bennet, Gentleman, by Ioice, widow of Ri∣chard Ioselin, of Newhall Ioselins in Essex, Esquire, and Daughter of Robert Atkinson of Stowell, in the County of Glocester, Esquire, shee had foure children, whereof three are living, Thomas, Ioyce, and Henry, of which last she died in Child-bed, the 8. of May 1632. in the 27. of her age, and 4. yeere of her marriage. Mors mihi vita. Life is Deaths roade, and Death Heavens gate must be, Heaven is Christs Throne, and Christ is life to me. The Angels of the Lord protect All those that are his owne Elect. Vivit post funera virtus. In the Church at Ken∣zington, is this ensuing Monumeat. An Epitaph in memory of Sir William Blake, Knight, who deceased the 30. day of Oct. An. Dom. 1630. STay Reader,Kenzington. gaze, admire, and passe not sleightly ore, The Casket of his corpes imbalmed in this flore: Let his industrious hand, patterne of patternes be, And blazon forth his worth to all posterity. Let his ost foot-steps vnto this sacred place, Be pious. Clues to guide thee to like holy trace. Let him in peace rest here in peace, Till God of Peace returne, And give him peace that loued peace, And call him from his Vrne.
Vnto the worldly wise, Death doth Apologize. Suspend thy by-thoughts, his thoughts did ever aime at good, Had I forborne, they had at full beene better understood. The figure of Death lying under these lines. In Saint Giles Church in the Fields, are these ensuing Monuments. On the North side of the Quire is this Inscription. M. S. CHarissimae Matris Alliciae,Saint Giles▪ vx∣oris venerabilis olim viri Alexan∣dri Sheppard, Legum Doctoris, Nec non suavissimae nuper conjugis An∣nae, ex Antiquâ Daunteseyorum Fami∣lia in Agro Wilton oriundae, Pietatis, & Amoris ergô posuit, Thomas Sheppard hic loci, juxta quem (si Deo videbitur) mortales suas exuvias Hu∣mandas designavit, providus. Anno Dom. 1631. Another Monument on the North side, having this Inscription. Here before lyeth buried the body of William Styddulfe, third Sonne of Iohn Styddulfe, of Mickleham in the County of Surrey, Esquire; hee had issue by his wife Elizabeth, Daughter of Iohn Fox, of Saint Iohns in London, Gentleman, William, Iane, Mary, Thomas, and Elizabeth. Hee departed this life at the age of 55. being the last of December, Anno Domini 1600. Here also before rest∣eth the body of the aboue named E∣lizabeth, who departed this life at the age of 60. yeeres. 10. of Febru∣ary 1623. In Saint Martins Church in the Fields, are these ensuing Monuments. On the South side is a faire Mo∣nument, with this In∣scription. Arthur Gregory married Christian. HEre lyes buried William Downes,S. Martins. whom God hath taken to his mercy, who beleeved that he should rise at the last day, and see the glorious Maje∣sty of God, and receive life everlasting. Who while he lived here had two Wives, Margaret Ward & Elizabeth Rolfe; who had by his first wife one Son and one Daugh∣ter, and by his second wife two Sons and foure Daughters, who died the 26. of September 1589. Otho Maudit married Elizabeth. Iohn Thorpe married Margaret. William Bret married Mary. Another Monument there also, with this Inscription. Here lieth the body of Thomas Fouler, Esquire, borne in Wicam, in the County of Lancaster, who was Con∣trouler and Pay-master of the works to Queene Mary, and to our Sove∣raigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth, by the space of ten yeeres. He was very charitable to the poore in his life time, and at his death hee gave by Will out of his dwelling house, a
perpetuall annuity of 40. s. by the yeere, to be given to 20. poore hous-holders of this Parish at Christmas for ever. He had in marriage three wives, Ellen, Margaret, and Eliza∣beth, which also lyeth here intomb∣ed. He surviving them, having no childe at his death, made three of his old servants, namely Henry Blud∣der, Matthew Switzer, and William Humphrey, his Executors, who in re∣membrance of him, have caused this Monument to be made. Another on the South side, thus inscribed. Expectans Gloriam. Iuxta hoc requiescit Iohn Bembow, Arm. deputatus clerici Coronae in curia Can∣cellaria D. Regis. In quo officio, per spacium 40. An. Industriam praestitit, —expiravit die Veneris 7. Octob. An. 1625. Termino sexaginta Anno. Aeta∣tis suae finito. Tres habuit vxores, Dorotheam Prowde, & Katherinam Sparkes, eodem tumulo sepultas, Per quas genuit liberos etiam perfunctos, Et Elizabetham Hodges modo extan∣tem, quae sibi duos peperit filios, Guli∣elmum Bembowe, Aetatis 4. & 6. mens: & Iohannem Bembowe posthumum, Tres tantum Hebdomadas viventem, cum patre humatum. This Monument is neere unto the other, and hath this Inscription. Here lieth the Corpes of Iohn Worsley, Gentleman, who was Messenger to Queene Elizabeth, by 20. yeeres space. Hee died the 25. of March, 1595. in the 37. yeere of her raigne, being aged 40. yeeres. He gave to be paid yeerely vpon each Christ∣mas day, during the space of 21. yeeres, as well 15. shillings to the poore of Saint Martins Parish in the Fields, where he was a Parishoner, as also 10. shillings to the poore of the Parish of Whichurch, in Salop. In the same Ile on the South side is this inscription. To the memory of Sir Carew Keynell, Knight, late Gentleman Pentioner to Queene Elizabeth, and Gentle∣man Vsher of the Privy-Chamber to King Iames. Hee died the 7. of December 1624. in the 61. yeere of his age. Another Monument on the same side, with this Inscription. Hic jacet Thomas Heron Armiger, Filius Thomae Heronis de Edgecombe, in pro∣viciae Surrey Armigeri scaccarij Ma∣reschallus. Vxorem cepit olivam, Tho∣mae Britton generosi de Felmingham Norfolciae filiam. Cum qua viginti novem annos vixit; atque ex ea unico dotatus Filio Edoardo. Diem obijt mar∣tij 1590. Marito plurimum dilecto, praedicta conjux Amantissima, Moerore, & lachrimis perfusa, Monumentum hoc Amoris & Fidei Conjugalis ergo, Po∣suit & sacravit. On the same side is another Mo∣nument, with this In∣scription. Hic jacet Maria, vxor Thomae Clopton Armig. filia Domini Willi. Waldgrave Militis, vtrisque tam Mariti, quam patris illustrata Familiis. Obijt 19. Decemb. 1599. de qua sunt superstites 4. Liberi, Willielmus, Gualterus, Eli∣zabetha & Maria. Cloptoni jacet hic Conjux, Waldgravia pro∣les, Vxor digna viro, Filia digna Patre: Alter in alterius splendet virtutibus, vt lux Sitque viro, & Patri, virque pater{que} sibi.
This Monument is in the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Hic sita est Eliza. Dutton filia primoge∣nita Thomae Egerton, equitis aurati fi∣lij primogeniti Tho. Egerton, Equit. Aurat. Dom. magnis sigilli Angliae custo∣dis, qui nunc honorem summi Angliae Cancellarij & Baronis de Elesmere ge∣rit. Nupta fuit Iohan. Dutton ex an∣tiquissima familia Duttonorum in Co∣mitatu Cestriae, sed vxorem viduam & Virginem ab avo pie educatam, venu∣state pietate & modestia prestantissimā praematura mors ad loca excelsa & beatissima (quo omnes tendimus) non meltorum lacrimis praemisit. Obijt die secundo Octobris 1611 vixit annos 16. M. iiij D. XXI. Idem nobilissimus baro de Elesmere, Angliae Concellarius avus indulgentissimus moe∣stissimusque nepoti charissimae amoris ergo posuit. Another Monument in the same Church, with this in∣scription. To the worthy, learned, and godly Gentleman, William Cooke, Esquire, her deare Husband, Sonne to the Right Worshipfull, Sir Anth. Cooke, Knight, Frances his most loving wife, Daughter to that most noble Gen∣tleman, the Lord Iohn Gray, brother to the sometime high and mighty Prince, Henry Gray, the last Duke of Suffolke, hath dedicated this Monu∣ment in memory of his vertue and her love, died the 14. day of May, and in the yeere of his age 56. This Tombe for her deare Spouse, hath noble Frances placed, Lamenting much, with greater gifts this Tombe should not be graced, And grives as much companion-like, this Tombe should not containe Their wills in earth, since both on earth one will they did retaine. On the North side of the Chan∣cell is this Inscription. Honoratissimo patri Dauncio Pouleto e∣quiti aurato, insulae Ierseae praefecto, apud Christianissimum regem quon∣dam legato, nobilissimi ordinis Garte∣rij Cancelario & serenissimae principis Elizabethae Consiliario, Antonius Pou∣letus filius, hoc pietatis Monumentum Moerens posuit. Gardez la foy. Quod verbo servare fidem (Poulete) solebas, Quam bene conveniunt haec tria verba tibi: Quod gladio servare fidem Poulete solebas, Quam bene conveniunt haec tria signa tibi. Patria te sensit, sensit Regina fidelem, Sic fidus Civis, sicque senator eras. Te fidum Christus, te fidum Ecclesia sensit, Sic servat inter multa pericla fidem, Ergo quod servo princeps, Ecclesia nato, Patria quod fide cive sit orba dolet, Interea Christus defuncti facta coronat, A quo servatam viderat esse fidem. Margareta Poulet hoc Epitaphium moetoris simul & amoris sui perpe∣tuum testem amicio conjugi suo cha∣rissimo clarissimoque dicavit. Conjugis est (testante Deo) pars altera conjunx, Vir caput est, vnum corpus uterque refert, Vna caro, mens una, thoro sociata jugali, Solamen vitae praesidiumque suae: Ergo meo luctus quis par queat esse dolori Cui vitae pars est altera dempta meae.
Sed quid flere juvat, non sic revocabere conjux, Namque tibi pietas stravit ad astra viam: Haec spes sola juvat: qui nos conjunxit in vnum, Hunc sibi postremo jungere velle die. Another Monument in the same Church, with this Inscription. Hic jacet Maria Da. Cheake, filia R. Hill Armig. foemina pia & prudens, & quae fuit vsque ad obitum una dominarum in privata Camera Reginae Elizabethae (quae fuit tunc dignitas in praecipuo ho∣nore) nupta fuit primo Iohanni Cheake, Magist. principali Secretario Regis Edwardi 6. viro-optimo & erudi∣tissimo, cui peperit Henricum haeredem paternae virtutis, & Regiae Majestatis à Secretis in Consilio Eboracensi, Iohan. Cheake virum egregium & magnani∣mum, Edwardum Cheake. Vixit circa 84. Anno obijt Novemb. 30. 1616. Secundo nupta Henrico Mackwillims Arm. viro ex Nobilis. Familia Hibernorum cui peperit Henricum qui sine prole obijt, & Margaretam seniorem filiam nuptam viro honor. Iohanni Domino Stanhop, Baroni de Harrington, Vice∣camerario Reginae Eliza. & R. Iacobi thesaurario camerae & Magistro cur∣sarum Rigiō. Susannam nuptam Ed∣wardo Sandeys Arm. deinde Gothardo Pemberton Mil. & vltimo Thomae Ireland Mil. Ambrosiam nuptam Wil∣lielmo Kingswell Mil. Cassandra Geor∣gio Cotton Mil. & Ceciliam nuptam Thomae Dom. Ridgway, Dom. thesau∣rario Regio in Hibernia. On a flat Stone in the Chancell, is this written. Hem viator, Infans te paucis vult Carolus Blown, Honoratis. Dom. Mount∣joy, Comitis de Newport, & lectiss. Dom. Annae è nobili Bottelorum in agro Herfordiensi familia oriundae. Filius natu secundus bimulus hic praema∣turae posuit mortalitatis exuvias: tan∣tum est. Vivus nil poteram fari, quin mortuus infans, Ecce loquar mortis sis memor atque vale. In the Church at Greene∣wich, are these ensuing Monuments. In the Chancell, on the South side, this is written. Dilectissimae Conjugi sacrae Hettonae Franciscus Hettonus viduus Moe∣stus, non sine Lachrimis, posuit OMea sacra oculis multo mihi Charior ipsis,Greenewich▪ Deseris (Heu) viduum cur ita sacra virum? Tu secura manes, portu requiescis Amoeno Non tibifraus, Moribus nec mala obesse valent. Tu pace Aeterna frueris, tu vivis ovasque, Quippe tibi est Terris, gratior Aula Dei, Conjux ipse tuus mance vivoque superfles, Moestificis plenus solicitudinibus, Spero tamen tempusque brevi, (mea sacra) futurum est Cum te visurus sim, vel in Arce poli. Cuncta tibi scio salva manent, vereque Beata es, Cui mors vita fuit, vitaque morte viret. Eheu quam nostrae est evanida gloria vitae, Certa dies nobis nulla, nec hora datur:
Stare decet vigiles ergo, semper que paratos, Ne mors incautos nos inopina premat. Ecce rei testis, sacra hic Blomera, jugali Francisco Hettono Consociate Thoro. Annos octodecim, placuitque Marita Marito, Nulla magis potuit, nec placuisse magis. Filiolos illi peperit, ter quinque utriusque Pignora: & ex illis, octo fuere Mares. Quadraginta Hyemes, binos si dempseris annos Vixit, & octodecim, suasilis vxor erat. Obijt 13. Iul. Anno Dom. 1600. Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription. D. O. M. Et salvatori. I. C. S. In Memoriam. Gulielmi Hattecliffe, ex Antiqua Hatte∣clifforum, de Hattecliffe, in Agro Lin∣colniensi Familia oriundi. Qui cum summa in Deum Pietate, In pauperes Benignitate, in amicos humanitate, in omnes bonitate, Annos plus minus quinquaginta septem Coelebs in terris vitam egisset tranquillam, Tandem 17. nempe die Maij, Anno 1620. Deo A∣nimam Reddidit Grenovici, & hic situs in pace quiescit. On a Monument on the North side of the Chancell is this Inscription. In piam Memoriam Dilectissimae suae conjugis. Dorotheae Lok Filiae Iacobi Brampton, de Brampto, in Comitatu Norfolciae Ge∣nerosi, & Mariae vxoris ejus, Filiae Cla∣clarissimi viri Edwardi Bulein militis, & Annae Tempestiae vxoris ejus, &c. Quae post Annos triginta sex, in hac pe∣regrinatione terrena peractos (Annos∣que pene Trinos, in fideli, Castissimoque Matrimonio perimpletos) in vera Fidei Christianae confessione, & Ardentissi∣ma Dei omnipotentis invocatione, pie ex hac vita decessit 24. die Februarij 1596. Cujus corpus juxta inhumatur, in medio hujus Chori, Adjacente à sinistra cor∣pore Henrici Lok filii sui. Zacharias Lok Amoris & officii ergo Monumen∣tum hoc poni fecit 24. die Octobris 1597. In an Ile on the North side is this Inscription. Egregio viro, Roberto Adams, operum Re∣giarum Supervisori, Architecturae peri∣tissimo; Religione, & moribus Integer∣rimo. Qui piè obiit Anno suae Aetatis 1595. Simon Basil operationum Regiarum Con∣trotultor hoc posuit Monumentum 1601. Next to the other is this Inscription. Spiritus in Caelis, fax hic Clementis Adami, Cui ex tredecim, septem pignora viva Manent, Regius ille diu vixit, Moriturque scholarca, Tumque ubi bis septem lustra peregit, obit Anno Dom. 1586. Ian. 9. Et lateri conjuncta jacet suavissima conjux, Quindenis Annis qua fuit ille minor. Anno Dom. 1588. Maîj 11. Next to the other is this Inscription. Neere to this place lyeth interred, the body of Mistresse Mary Ward, late
wife of Richard Ward, Esquire, Ser∣jeant at Armes vnto King Iames, and King Charles, Father and Mo∣ther of Captaine Caesar Ward, who died in the service of his King and Country in October 1627. She died in February following, in the fore∣said yeere. Which three moneths time with sighs Her grieved life did spend, Her Sonnes untimely death Hastned her end. In the Church at Detford, or West Greenwich, are these ensuing Monuments. This Monument is at the upper end of the Chancell, and hath this Inscription. M. S. H. S. E. Rogerus Boyle,Deford. Richardi Comitis Corcagiensis Filius Primogentius, qui in Hibernia natus, in Cantio solo Patris Natali denatus, Dum hic ingenij cul∣tum capessit. Puer eximiae indolis, prae∣cocitatem ingenij funere luit immaturo. Sic luculenti, sed terreni Patrimonij fa∣ctus exhaeres, coelestem crevit Haeredi∣tatem. Decessit A. D. 1615. iv. eid. viii. Bris. Death. Richardus, praenobilis Comes Corca∣giensis Vxoris suae Patruo. B. M. P. Memoriae perenni Edwardi Fenton, Regi∣nae Elizabethae, olim pro corpore Armi∣geri, Iano O-Neal, ac post eum, Comite Desmoniae, in Hibernia Turbantibus, Fortissimi Taxiarchi, qui post lustra∣tum improbo ausu, septentrionalis Pla∣gae Apochryphum Mare, & excussas va∣riis Peregrinationibus inertis Naturae labras, Anno 1588. in celebri contrae Hispanos Naumachia, meruit Navis Praetoriae Navarchus. Obijt Anno Domini 1603. Cognatos Cineres, & Amicam Manibus umbram, O Fentone, tuis, excipias Tumulo. Vsuram Tumuli victure Marmore Pensat, Et reddit gratus, pro Tumulo Titulum. At the upper end of that Chan∣cell, on the North side, is thus written. Sacrae perpetuae{que} Memoriae Gulielmi Haukyns, de Plimouth Armigeri. Qui verae Religionis verus cultor, Paupe∣ribus praecipuè Navicularijs Munifi∣cus, Rerum Nauticarum studiossissimus, longinquas instituit saepè Navigationes; Arbiter in causis difficilimis Aequissi∣mus, Fide, Probitate & Prudentia sin∣gulari. Duas duxit Vxores, è quarum una 4. ex altera 7. suscepit liberos. Iohannes Haukyns Eques Auratus, Clas∣sis Regiae Quaestor, Frater Moestissi∣mus posuit. Obijt specerta Resurgendi 7. die mensis Octobris, An. Dom. 1589. In the upper end of the Chancell. There lyeth buried neere this place the body of Iane Edisbury, Widow, Mo∣ther of Kenrick Edisbury, Gentleman, Pay-master of the Kings Majesties Navy, under Sir William Russell, Knight, Treasurer. She died on the 16. day of March, 1618. On the North side of this Quire, a worthy Memoriall of Sir Sackevile Crow, for Seeling and beautifying of that North Ile.
In the Church at Rode∣rith, are these ensuing Monuments. In the South Ile, on the wall, is this written. Post tenebras, spero Lucem. NExt without this Wall,Roderith. are bu∣ried Brian, Richard, and Marke, Alize, and Elizabeth, the three Sons and two Daughters of Nicholas Reynolds, Citizen and Goldsmith of London, and of Elizabeth his wife. The forenamed Elizabeth, their younger Daughter, was married to Robert Wheatley, Salter, the 20. day of August, 1593. and died the 18. of September, in the same yeere. These Blossomes yong and tender, loe, Blowne downe by deadly wind, May vrge the riper sort to know, Like blast shall them out find. For Flesh, as grasse, away doth wither, No age can it eschew, The young and old decay together, When death shall them pursue. No Parents, Friends, or Advocate, Can him intreat to spare, The Faire, the Fine, or Delicate, For threats he doth not care. Let that most certaine Statute made, By God our heavenly King, All men assure, and eke perswade, Death shall them equall bring. Post Mortem, Vitam Aeternam. In the middle Ile of this Church is thus written. Trinitas in vnitate. Here lies buried the body of Richard Hills, Mariner, one of the eldest Bro∣thers and Assistants of the Compa∣ny of the Trinity, and his two wives; who while hee lived in this place, gave liberally to the poore, and spent bountifully in his house: and after many great troubles, being of the age of 80. yeeres and upward, de∣parted this life without issue, upon the 16. of February, 1614. This was made at the charge of Robert Bell. Though Hills be dead, Hills Will and Act survives, His Free-Schoole, and his Pension for the poore; Thought on by him, performed by his Heire, For eight poore Sea-mens children, and no more. 1627. On the outside of the North Wall is a Monument, bea∣ring the figure of a Ship at Sea; under it the portraiture of him for whom it was ere∣cted, with his Wife, six Sons, and foure Daughters; the li∣ving and the dead distingui∣shed by Deaths-heads, which the buried seeme to beare in their hands, and under them this Inscription. Here beneath lyeth interred, the body of Captaine Anthony Wood, who de∣parted this life the 24. of August, 1625. being the 40. yeere of his age, and had issue by his wife Mar∣tha Wood, sixe Sonnes and foure Daughters.
In Saint Margarets Church at Westminster, are these ensuing Monuments. On a very ancient Monument in Brasse, at the upper end of the North Ile, is thus written. Sacrum doloris. SHall teares,S. Marga∣rets at West∣minster. the silent Messengers of death, Dissolve their streames into a Sea of moane? No, no, in vaine you sacrifice reliefe, Over his Tombe, with eyes, with voyce, with groane, For Cole assign'd by God, the poore to pity, The widowes comfort, and eke the Orphans Sire, Who tun'd each string of hate to loves sweet ditty, Is dead: aye me, will death the best desire? Remorselesse death, thy wrath in him is ended, Maugre thy darts, his praises cannot dye, Thou hast his body, but his soule ascended Into the place of joyes eternity, And though his corps inter'd lye dead in grave, Yet still his vertues life and being have. An. Dom. 1597. In Parliament, a Burgesse, Cole was placed, In Westminster the like for many yeeres, But now with Saints above his soule is graced, And lives a Burgesse with Heavens royall Peeres. Oblessed change, from earth, where Death is King, To be united there where Angels sing. Ejusdem in eundem. Terra tegit Corpus, mens scandit ad Aethera Coeli, Fama virens floret, Caetera mors rapuit. Thus in English. The Grave my body, Heaven my soule doth keepe, The World my fame, the rest in death doth sleepe. Margaretta Cole posuit. In another columne of the same Table. This Monument unites two constant Lovers, He that is dead, and her that lives in death: His Body she, his Spouse, in honour covers, Wishing her dayes were shortned with his death. But she must live, yet living shall be mated, With him in death, while death her life hath dated. Full twenty yeeres and odde their league was firme, Witnesse the world, their children, and their love, Nothing but death, by death should give the tearme Of farewell to their faith, by false remove. Of breach of concord no tongue can accuse them, Vnlesse base envy by her Saints abuse them. O envy not the dead, but die to sinne, Expect the harvest of this dead mans blisse, Desire the Crowne which envy cannot winne, Amend in you, not others, what's amisse. Sad death shall be your Herauld to procure Rest to your soules with Christ for to endure. Marget in woe, distill those teares to comfort, And in thy childrens love addresse thy anguish:
Three live with thee, then love their living consort, No longer in thy Husbands sorrow languish. But imitate thy Cole in Vertues lawes, That thou maist live where Vertue pleads his cause. This Monument is in the North Ile, and hath this In∣scription. Here lyeth the Lady Dorothy Stafford, Wife and Widdow to Sir William Stafford, Knight, Daughter to Henry Lord Stafford, the onely Sonne of Edward, the last Duke of Bucking∣ham: her Mother was Vrsula, Daugh∣ter to the Countesse of Salisbury, the onely Daughter to George Duke of Clarence, Brother to King Edward the fourth. Shee continued a true Widdow, from the age of 27. till her death. She served Queene Eli∣zabeth 40. yeeres, lying in the Bed∣chamber, esteemed of her, loved of all, doing good all she could to eve∣ry body, never hurted any; a con∣tinuall remembrancer of the suites of the poore. As shee lived a religi∣ous life, in great reputation of ho∣nour and vertue in the world, so she ended in continuall fervent medita∣tion and hearty prayer to God. At which instant (as all her life) so after her death shee gave liberally to the poore, and died aged 78. the 22. of September 1604. In whose re∣membrance, Sir Edward Stafford her Sonne hath caused this memoriall of her to be, in the same forme and place as she her selfe long since re∣quired him. On a Monument on the North side of the Chancell is this Inscription. To the memory of Rob. Peeter, Esquire, Auditor of the Receipt, her first Husband, who gave to the use of the poore of this Parish one hundred pound: and of Edward English, her second Husband, a Gentleman, kinde, courteous, and of great Hos∣pitality, who gave twelve pounds in Annuity for ever to the same use. Margaret their loving wife, Daughter of Sir Iohn Tyrill of Gipping, Knight, who likewike hath bequeathed one hundred pounds for the purchasing of one yeerely Annuity of twenty nobles for ever to the foresaid poore, Lamenting their death, and for te∣stification of her dutifull love hath erected this Monument. Another Monument in the same Ile, with this Inscription. Here lyeth the body of Thomas Arne∣way, buried the 8. of September, Anno Dom. 1603. And Margaret Arneway his Wife, who was buried the 9. of August, Anno Dom. 1596. Neere unto the other, in a faire Plate, is this following Epitaph. A memoriall on the death of Iohn Varnam Gardiner, who deceased the xj. of De∣cember, 1586. Aetatis suae 46. O mortall man that lives on earth, consider well thy end, Remember that thou must depart, when God for thee doth send. This life is but a pilgrimage, so soone it doth decay, And all the riches of this world shall fade and passe away: As by example daily shew'd, before our eyes we see, That rich & poore to earth are brought for their iniquity. Let us that live on earth behind, to God for mercy call, With wofull heart & wringing hands, and he will blesse us all.
And now to speake of this good man, Iohn Varnam cal'd by name, Who in his life he lived well, by labour, travaile, and paine, In helping of the fatherlesse, and widowes very poore, And setting ever them on worke which went from doore to doore. A Gardiner by Art he was, great skill he had therein, And prosper'd well in all his life, with every living thing That he at all times tooke in hand: To God be given all praise, That did increase this honest man with riches many wayes. The poore they had great work of him, by weeding of his ground, And he to them was well content, to leave assurance ound, Of land and living to releeve the fatherlesse in need, So he confirmed this his minde, by will it was decree'd. Agnes Varnam left behind, his loving wife most sure, By her he had foure sonnes, likewise foure daughters, Virgins pure: Who all being dead, and none alive, but Elizabeth by name, And in remembrance of his life, they have set up this same. He willingly did yeeld himselfe, in God was all his trust, And in the last houre of his death, he shew'd his faith most just, To leave this world most cheerefully, desirous to depart, Asking forgivenesse of the world, and forgiving with his heart To those which he at any time in deed or word offended: Most joyfully his soule was then vnto the Lord commended. And thus he left his life, in briefe to tell you plaine, Hoping in Heaven to be receiv'd, for ever to remaine. In the same Ile, in the body of the Church, is this In∣scription. Cornelius Vandun lieth here, borne at Breda in Rabant, Souldier with King Henry at Turney, Yeoman of the Guard, and Vsher to King Henry, King Edward, Queene Mary, and Queene Elizabeth: of honest and vertuous life, a carefull man for poore folke, who in the end of this towne did build for poore widowes twenty houses of his owne cost. Round about his figure wrought as in his Guards Coa, these words. Obijt Anno Dom. 1577. buried the 4. of September. Aetatis suae 94. At the upper end of the South Ile in the Chancell, as followeth. Frances Haughton, in token of her love to her Husband, caused this Monu∣ment to be erected. Here resteth in assured hope to rise in Christ, the body of Hugh Haughton, the fourth sonne of Thomas Haughton of Haughton, in the County of Che∣ster, Gentleman, who married Fran∣ces, Daughter of William Coothe of Sherbourne, in the County of Dorset, Gentleman, and by her had issue two Daughters, Elizabeth and Fran∣ces: He departed this life the 17. day of October, 1616. aged 50. yeeres, and Elizabeth departed this life the 28. of August, 1615. aged seven yeeres, and lieth here also in∣terred.
On an ancient brasse Monument close by the other, is thus written. Give thankes to God for Edward Court∣ney Esquire, Sonne and Heire to Sir Peter Courtney of Devonshire, Knight, who living a life agreeable to his estate and stocke, ended the same like a fithfull Christian, the 27. day of November 1566. and is buried before this stone. On another neere to that is thus written. Here lyeth the body of Alexander Tom∣kins, the fifth sonne to Richard Tom∣kins of Momington upon Wye, in the County of Hereford, Esquire, who was buried in August, in the yeere of our Lord God 1615. On another neere to that is thus written. Vnderneath lieth the body of Iames Tomkins, second sonne to Iames Tom∣kins, of Momington upon Wye, in the County of Hereford, Esquire, buried in December, in the yeere of our Lord God 1613. Close to this a very faire Monu∣ment in the South wall of the Chancell, thus written on. Here under is intombed Blanch Parry, Daughter to Henry Parry of New∣Court, within the County of Here∣ford, Esquire, chiefe Gentlewoman of Queene Elizabeths most honou∣rable privy Chamber, and Keeper of her Majesties Jewels, whom she faithfully served from her Highnesse birth; beneficiall to her Kinsfolke and Countrimen, charitable to the poore, insomuch that shee gave to the poore of Bacton and Newton in Herefordshire, sevenscore bushels of Wheat and Rye yeerely for ever, with divers summes of money to Westminster and other places for good uses. She died a Maid in the 82. yeere of her age, the 12. of Febru∣ary 1589. Another faire Monument in the fame Ile, in the Chancell, thus written on. Here under resteth in expectation of a glorious Resurrection, the body of Thomas Bond Gentleman, sometimes a Burgesse of this City of Westmin∣ster; and also the bodies of Ellin his wife, of Thomas Bond their Sonne, and of Ellen their Daughter. To the memory of whose Christian vertues, their dutifull Sonne, and loving Brother Iohn Bond, hath erected this Monu∣ment. A Father, Mother, Sonne, and Daughter deere, Cover'd with earth, their corps be buried here; Two aged died, and two in prime of strength; To teach that death will conquer all at length: A vertuous life they liv'd, made Christian ends, And now a Crowne of glory them attends. At the foure corners of this Monument are these inscriptions. Thomas Bond the Father died the 7. of Aprill 1616. Ellin Bond the Mother died the 31. of May 1628. Thomas Bond the Sonne died the 26. of May 1627. Ellin Butts the Daughter died the 12. of August 1625.
On a faire Stone in the middle of the Chancell is this written. Here resteth in God the body of Anna Ebbis, borne in Denmarke, who ser∣ved our gracious Queene Anna, in her Bed-chamber, was married to Master Thomas Seringe, her Majesties Chaplaine, the 28. of Aprill, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1598. and died at Westminster the 26. of Febru∣ary 1608. unto whom God Al∣mighty give a joyfull Resurrection. Moerentis musa Mariti. Astra tuam foveant Animam, bona fama sepultae Restet in his terris, capiat tandem omnia Coelum. Iohannes Seringius, Thuringius. A faire Monument at the lower end of the North Ile in the wall, thus written on. Here lieth interred the body of Edward Reynolds, Esquire, late Clearke of his Majesties privy Seale, and Regi∣ster of the Court of Requests, who departed this life the 18. day of De∣cember Anno Dom. 1623. by him also lieth the body of his Brother, Master Owen Reynolds, who deceased the 16. of Aprill 1610. To whose memories Edward and Launcelet Rey∣nolds, Gentlemen, have here placed these ensuing Verses, made by the said Edward Reynolds in his life time. Gloria, Vita, Decor, Thesaurus, Fanta, Voluptas Vana, brevis, fragilis, fluxus, temeraria, mollis, Fumus, Bulla, Iris, Fax Viatus, Dulce venenū, Vanescit, perit, arescit, quefit, fugit, angit. Orbe nihil toto stabile est, citò corruet orbis, Et vasti in nihilum vanescet fabrica Mundi. Sola fides firmam parit, aesern amque Coronam, So fides Christi meritis, sunt etera Nugae. Haec vixi, hac morior side, mihi Christus in vitae, & morte lucrum. In the middle of the same Ile, in the wall, is a faire Monument, thus written on. M. S. Hîc sepultus jacet Iohannes Corbettus de Sprowslon, in Com. Norf. Baroncttus, qui vxorem duxit piissimam Annam, filiam Arthuri Capel de Haham, in Com. Hareford Militis, ex qua susce∣pit Filios ties, totiden que Filiae, Vi∣tam vixit integerrimam, Rei assertor publicae, Christianae columen, Mecaenas literariae, hinc migrans, Anno Dom. Millesimo, sexcentesimo vigesimo septi∣mo (Aetatis trigesimo septimo) die de∣cimo nono Ianuarij. Abunde illud sup∣plevit, in quo Marmor deficit, famam & memoriam indeptus terris diutius, at Caele in aeternum victuram. Iohannes Corbettus miles. Sanctusue is homo & liber? Et sanctus isle homo liber. Sir Iohn Corbett Baronet. Another in the same wall, thus inscribed. D. M. M. S. Ioannes Makeulio de Merton D N. Scoto-Britannus, Magni Hetruriae ducis Archiater quondam, Nec non In sapientia illustris, Pisis Cathedrae Doctor, Dein Magnae Britanniae Regis Medicus, Medicorum sui seculi Aesculapius, Therapeutices; promus-condus, conditumque prodigium,
Mortales, huic Cippo, in spem Resurrectionis, vitaeque melioris Reliquit exuvias Reparatae salutis 1622. Aetatis suae 46. Mense. Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origine pendet. On the same Wall, in a Table, is this Epitaph. In memory of the late deceased Virgin, Mistris Elizabeth Hereicke. Sweet Virgin, that I doe not set Thy Grave-verse up in mournfinll Jet Or dapl'd Marble, let thy shade Not wrathful seeme, or fright the maid, Who hither at her weeping howres, Shall come to strew thy earth with flowres: No, know blest soule, when there's not one Remainder left of brasse or stone, Thy living Epitaph shall be Though lost in them yet found in me: Deare, in thy bed of Roses then, Till this world shall dissolve (as men) Sleepe, while we hide thee from the light, Drawing thy Curtains round— Good night. On a Table hanging at the up∣per end of the South Ile is this written. In memory of the right vertuous and beautifull Gentlewoman, Mistris Margaret Radcliffe, Daughter to Sir Iohn Radcliffe Knight, one of the Maids of Honour to Queene Eliza∣beth, who deceased at Richmond the 10. of November, and was here buried with solemnity the 22. of the same, Anno Dom. 1599. An. Reg. Eliz. 41. Tell thou my wailing verse, and mourning show, What beauteous frame lies here interr'd below. Here underneath entomb'd a Dazie lies, The pride of nature, with perfection fil'd; O woe, whom Zephyres blasts can ne'r make rise, Being by Deaths blacke storms untimely kild. Ratcliffe's thy name, the glory of the Court, Vertue and Beauty strove t'adorne thee most, Though here inclos'd, yet fame shall still report Thy Vertues praise, thy graces time shall boast, Thou di'dst a Virgin pure, and spotlesse liver, Griefe caus'd thy death, death makes thee live for ever. If any aske, who sigh'd this sad complaint, Say one that liv'd, that lov'd, that ioyed, now faint. Another faire Monument at the vpper end of the Chancell, thus inscribed. Epitaphium Religiosissimi, spectatissimique viri, Francisci Egioke, de Egioke in Co∣mitatu Vigorniae Equitis Aurati, vitae Famaeque integerrimae, Musarum, Mi∣litum, Pauperumque Fautoris Meritis∣simi, Qui à Londino, Vigorniam versia proficiscens, in Vxbrigia vita defunctus est 21. die Novemb. 1622. Hic vero repositus habet Cineres.
Dilectissima, Moessissimaque vxor ejus Elinor, Filia Fra. Dingey Armigeri, in eodem Vigoriae Coitatus, Lugubre Hoc, Pij Amoris & obsequii, Monu∣mentum posuit. Ad Tumulum niflere libet, discedito Lector, Qui legis haec, Fletu, prodigus esto pio. Cum Musis omnes flerent, inpumque Catervis, Illis Patronus, His Benefactor erat. Arma virumque canit, Mors imperiosa, triumphans, Quod miles strenuus sic spoliatus obit. Vana quid insultas? te jam tua praedafefellit; Artes, arma, preces, hunc periisse vetant. Hunc (Mors) insequeris frustra, cui militat aether, Nec tibi, sed superis, praeda beata jacet. Quid quoditer carpens Cecidit? Moriturque viator? Quae supra terram est noverat; hîc Patriam. Quo tendens, proprios Lares, Terrasque relinquit, Et Coelum media possidet ille via. This Monument is neere unto the other, having this In∣scription. Here lyeth entombed Mary Lady Dudley, Daughter of William Lord Howard of Effingham, in his time Lord high Admirall of ENGLAND, Lord Chamberlaine, and Lord Pri∣vy Seale. Shee was Grand-childe to Thomas Duke of Norfolke, the se∣cond of that Sir-name, and Sister to Charles Howard Earle of Notting∣ham, Lord High Admirall of Eng∣land, by whose prosperous directi∣on, through the goodnesse of God, in defending his Handmaid, Queen Elizabeth, the whole Fleet of Spaine was defeated and discomfited. She was first married to Edward Sut∣ton, Lord Dudley, and after to Rich∣ard Mountpesson Esquire, who in the Memory of her Vertues, and lst Te∣stimony of his love, erected this Monument. Shee slept in Christ Iesus, in the yeere of our Lord 1600. the 21. of August, attending the joyfull day of her Resurrection. A faire Monument at the upper end of the North Ile, with this inscription. Here in peace resteth the body of Tho∣mas Seymour, second sonne to the Right Honourable, Edward Earle of Hartford, and Isabel his VVife, eldest Daughter to Edward Meley of Kates∣by, in the County of Northampton, Esquire, which said Thomas depar∣ted this life the 3. day of August, 1600. And the said Isabel the 20. day of August 1619. in the true faith of Iesus Christ, and in the bles∣sed hope of a joyfull Resurrection. On a faire Marble in the Chan∣cell is thus written. Depositum Mariae Filiae unicae Thomae Egerton Mili∣tis Baonis de llesinere Cacellaij Ag∣lis. Francisci Leigh Militis fidelissimae, optime meritae, ac unice llectae conju∣gis, quae tertio die Aprilis, An. Dom. M. DCXII. Aetatis suae 36. post par∣tum Filliorum 4. Filiarum 5. inpuerpe∣rio Filiae 6. Spiritum Deo, Corpus se∣pulchro liquit, in Christo obdormiens, Cui fide, spe & Charitate, Constantissi∣mè vixit. Pudicitiae, Pietatis, & Ve∣nustatis Rarissimum decus. Non obijt sed abijt.
In Westminster Abbey are these ensuing Monuments. In Obitum Serenissimae Principis & omnium virtutum genere Cumulatissimae Annae Dei gratia Magnae Britaniae, Franciae & Hiberniae Reginae, Dominaeque suae longè gratiosissimae, carmen funebre. Ad Potentissimum Serenissimae Annae Maritum Iacobum, Dei gratia, Magnae Britanniae Regem fidei defensorem &c. Annus & Anna in se redit,Westminster Abbey. hic novus, illa perennis: Cujus vir paer & frater Rex, Regia proles, In Coelo Aeternos Regina est Anna per Annos. Floreat illa suis in prole aeterna Britannis, Inque suo vigeat feliciter Anna Iacobo. Inclite Rex Britonum, veniam da vera loquenti. Iacobus caret Anna, & non caret Anna Iacobo: Maxime Rex Regum, Regem solare Iacobum. Ad Invictissimum Christianum Quartum Dei Gratia Daniae, Norwegiae, Gothorum, Vandolorumque Regem, &c. Pondere pressa, suo sub pondere, Palma Resurgit: Marmore pressa soror tua, Fertur ad Aethera victrix. Sanguinolenta olim, inter Danos atque Britannos, Pugna, nihil potuit, nostro conjuncta Iacobo, Absque cruore, omnes vicit Dana Anna Britannos, Aeterneque suis conjunxit Foedere Danis. Orbis, Danorum Pacis, Britonumque sit idem Terminus, & Reges Rex protegat orbis utrosque. Ad Foelicissimam Iacobi & Annae prolem Carolum Walliae Principem, Elizabetham, Frederici Electoris Comitis Palatini Vxorem, Regalemque eorum Progeniem quae nunc est, vel Dei gratia erit in Posterum. Indiae Phoenix, volucris per annos Vna sexcentos deciesque senos, Dicitur foelix superesse, dirae Nescia Mortis. Quod tibi Parcae dederant sorores Fila correptae breviora vitae, Anna, dicaris Mulier, sed esto Caetera Phoenix. Igne solari, moriens Crematur Mortuo-Vivos Cineres in albos, Sic, ut ex illis rediviva surgat Altera Phoenix. Anna, eui nunquā similem videbit Phoebus, expiras? moriare sic, ut In tua semper vigennt Beati Prole Britanni.
Hinc, illinc, ubicunque, cadem est, & ubique Beata. Obijt in Domino Anno Domini 1618. quarto Nonarum Martij, Annos nata 44. Menses 4. & dies 18. Ad sereuissimae Reginae familiam Moerore obrutam. Vos canite, O socij, funebria Carmina mecum; Nos relevet Dominus, perdidimus Dominam. Responsio Familiae. Non sunt canendo, talibus pressi malis, Sed nec loquendo, quos habet talis dolor: Nostris adhaerent fiucibus linguae graves. Loquantur alij, dum luctus nostri stupent. Edidit Serenissimae Reginae Moestissimus Capellanus, Guliclmus Swadonus, Collegij Wickamici Alumnus, Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, & Archidiaconus Wigorniae.
Vpon a very rich and stately Monument in the same Church is thus written. Depositum Illustrissimi & Excellentissimi Principis Ludovici Stuarti Esmei Le∣viniae Ducis Filij Ioannis Propatrui Seren: Regis, acobi Nepotis, Richmon∣diae & Leviniae Dacis, Novi Castelli ad Tinam & Darnliae Comitis, &c. Magni Scotiae Camerarij & Thalassi∣archae Hereditariè. Sacri Palatij Ia∣cobi Regis Seneschalli, Cubiculariorum∣que principalium primi, Regi à Sancti∣tribus Consilijs. San-Georgiani or∣dinis Eq. Scoticorumque per Gallias Cataphractorum praefecti. Viri excelsi ad omnia Magna & bona nati, ad meliora defuncti, vixit Annos 49. Menses 4. Dies 17. 2 Sam. 3. 38. Chronog: AN IGNORATIS, QVIA PRIN∣CEPS ET VIR MAGNVS OBIIT HODIE. 16. Febr. primo generalium Regni Comi∣tiorum designato. On the other side of the same Monument is thus written. Illustrissima & Excellentissima Princeps, Francisca Richmondiae & Leviniae Du∣cissa, Domini Thomae Howardi Din∣doniae Filia, Thomae Howardi Norfol∣ciae Ducis, ex Elizabethâ Edovardi Ducis Buckinghamiae Filiâ Neptis, Lodovici Stuarti Richmondiae & Le∣viniae Ducis Vxor, Charissvi conjugij nunquam non memor, conjugi optimè merito sibique posuit hoc Monumentum. Obijt Die mensis An. Dom. On a Table in the same Quire, is this following In∣scription. P. M. S. Vanae multitudinis Improperium hic jacet cuius tamen Hispania Prudentiam. Gallia Fortitudinem. Belgia Industriam. Toto Europa Mirata est Magnanimitatem. Quem Daniae & Reges Integerrimum. Sweciae Germaniae Transilvaniae & Princip. Ingenuum. Nassauviae Veneta Respublica Philobasilia. Subaudiae & Lotharingiae Duces Politicum. Palatinus Comes Fidelem. Imperator Pacificum. Turca Christianum. Papa Protestantem. Experti sunt. Quem Anglia Archithalassum Cantabrigia Cancellarium Buckinghamia Ducem habuit. Verum siste viator, & quid ipsa Invidia sugillare nequit audi. Hic est Ille Calamitosae virtutis Buckinghamius. Maritus redamatus, Pater amans, Filius obsequens. Frater amicissimus, Affinis Beneficus, Amicus perpetuus, Dominus Beniguus & Optimus omnium servus.
Quem Reges adamarunt, optimates honorarunt, Ecclesia deflevit, Vulgus oderunt. Quem Iacobus & Carolus Regum perspicacissimi, intimum habuerunt. A quibus Honoribus auctus, & Negotijs onustus, Fato succubuit Antequam par animo periculum Invenit. Quid jam Peregrine? Aenigma mundi moritur; Omnia fuit, nec quidquam habuit, Patriae Parens & Hostis audiit. Deliciae idem & querela Parlamenti. Qui dum Papistis Bellum infert, insimula∣tur Papista, Dum Protestantium partibus consulit, occiditur à Protestante. Tesseram specta Rerum Humanarum, At non est quod serio triumphet malitia, Interimere potuit, laedere non potuit. Scilicet has Preces fundens expiravit. Tuo ego sanguine Potiar (mi Iesu) dum mali pascuntur meo. This Monument is in a Chap∣pell on the North side of the high Altar. Georgio Holles Eq. Anglo-Brit. Clariss. Penatib. ori∣undo, rerum Militar. sic à pueritia de∣dito ut Castror. Alumnus nasci vide∣retur, Qui postquam cuncta quae dece∣rent Nobilem, stipendia in Belga Fe∣cerat ordin. Ductor suae gentis, supre∣mus vulgo Sergiant Major Gene∣ralis, Declaratus est. Augustaeq. Trinobantum Pacifice exces∣surus hic propter Franc. Verum Imper. suum & Consanguin. Cui tamen Peri∣culis quam sanguine Conjunctior, Am∣bitu Honestiss. Componi voluit. Ioannes FN. Comes de Clare FR. Meren∣tissimo Moerentissimus P. vixit A. L. M. iij. D. iiij. ob xiiii. Kal. Iun. Anno Dom. M. DC. XXVI. This Monument is in a Chap∣pell on the South side of the high Altar. What so thou hast of Nature or of Arts, Youth, Beauty, Strength, or what excelling parts Of Mind and Body, Letters, Armes, and worth, His eighteene yeeres, beyond his yeeres, brought forth, Then stand and reade thy selfe within this glasse, How soone these perish, and thy selfe may passe. Mans life is measur'd by the worke, not dayes, No aged sloth, but active youth hath praise. Francisco Holles juveni fortissimo qui ab exercitu è Belgia aeger regress  obiit Prid. Id.  Anno Dominicae Ae∣tatis M. DC. XXII. suae XVIII. Iohannes Comes de Clare, Filio natis 3. & merentissimo moerentissimus pa∣ter posuit. This Monument is in another Chappell on the South side the high Altar. Bonae Memoriae Georgio Villerio Equiti Aurato Marito B. M. Iuxta se P. Clarissima conjux Maria Cometissa Buckingamiae. S. P. I. T. D. O. M. OSSA Mariae de Bello Monte Cometissae kingamiae E quinque Potentissimor totius Europiae Regnorum regibus, que per totidem Immediatos Descensus oriunde Vix Ann. Lxij. M. xj. D. xix. Ho Mon. V. I. C.
On a Pillar on the North side of the high Altar is this Inscription. Iuliana Crem Virgo Pientissima Charissima & vnica filia Ranulphi de Creme, Equitis Aura∣ti, Regii Tribunalis capitalis Iustici∣arij, ex Iuliana de Cleppesby conjuge, vetustae familiae de Cleppesby in agro Norfolciensi Cohaerede suscepta, Redemptoris adventum hic expectat, ver∣nante Aetate, in patriam abijt xxij. April. M. DC. XXI. In the Abbey, in the North Ile, about the middle of the Ile, is thus written. Mors mihi Solus Christus Lucrum mihi sola salus. Spe Resurgendi▪ Hic jacet Iana Stotevill, Filia Thomae Stotevill de Brinckley, in Comitatu Cantabrig. Armigeri, uxor primo Ed∣vardi Ellis de Chesterton, in Comitatu Cantabrig. Armigeri, Cui peperit 6. Filios, & 3. Filias, vxor deinde Othe∣welli Hill Doctoris in Iare Civil, & Cancellarij Dioces. Lincoln. Cujus Re∣licta obijt 27. die Aprilis Anno Dom. 1631. Aetatis suae 78. Vivit post funera virtus. In another Chappell on the South side the high Altar, is this Inscription. Hic jacet Anna Garrard Filia (& Cohae∣res cum Fransisca) Georgio Garrard, & Margaretae Dacris, Parentibus, Nobilium, & antiquorum stemmatum, Vxor Dudleio Baroni Carleton de Im∣bercourt. Cui cum Filium vnicum pe∣pererit in infantia expirantem, eique legationibus ad Remp. Venetam, Subau∣diam, & unitas Belgiae Provincias per Sedecem annorum spatium indivisa co∣mes adhaeserit, dum iter illuc demo meditatur, rapta est morbo Apoplectico è molestis hujus Aevi laboribus in requi∣em aeternam 18. Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1627. Aetatis suae 42. à conjugio 20. Memoriam Posteritati faciens probae, & Religiosae Foeminae, Vxoris conjunctissi∣mae, oculatae Matrisfam: cui hoc Monu∣mentum sacravit Gemibundus conjux, Testimonium Amoris integri, ob eam∣que amissam intimi cruciatus, dum vi∣sum fuerit Deo Op. Ma. & illum etiam deducere in hoc idem Dormitorium, cui ipse vivens se mortuum designavit.
A RETVRNE TO LONDON: In which most of the Parish Churches have of late yeeres beene Rebuilded, Repaired, or at least Beautified. A Catalogue whereof here followeth, wherein not only the yeere in which, but the meanes likewise by which, each Worke was perfected are set downe, as also all the Monuments of Queene Elizabeth, as they are in every Church. S. Albanes Woodstreet. I Am sorry, that, but now beginning to speake of Building, repairing, and Beautifying of all the Parish Churches in this famous City of London, I must in the very Front of the Alpha∣bet (for that is the rule I goe by) speake of the pulling downe, Demolishment, and Ruines of a Church, and one of the most ancient among them; Saint Al∣banes in Woodstreet. This Church, being wonderfully decayed and perished, was by these Gentlemen, Sir Henry Spiller, Enigo Iones, Esquire, Captaine Leake, and Captaine Williams surveyed, to see what repaire might helpe it. But by these Gentlemen, and Workemen ap∣pointed with them, it was found to be too farre gone for Repaire; neither would any Workeman put himselfe into hazard upon it: affirming it to be in every part of it, so spent, decayed, and enfeebled, that they must sudden∣ly plucke it downe, or it would sudden∣ly prevent that labour, and fall to the ground of it selfe: which the Fallings every day encreasing (and more and more growing and appearing) did most evidently seeme to threaten. For this cause, many of the Parish∣oners refused to goe to it, many that went, went unwillingly, but all with much feare, where they sate with more; their danger all the time much troubling and disturbing their De∣votion. This great necessity inforcing, it was the last yeere 1632. betwixt Ea∣ster and Midsummer pul'd downe, and yet Iuly, 1633. (a sad object) so lies in its pitifull ruines. Many of the ablest sort of this Pa∣rish, to shew they would doe what they could towards the recovery of
this great losse, have joyned certaine monies (their free and voluntary gifts) together, which they have againe dis∣bursed in Stone, and some other Ma∣terials. But this many, being but few, to the number of those that in this kind, can doe little or nothing, and their good wills falling extremely short of that great summe that must beginne and finish so great a Worke as this, they were constrained to petition his High∣nesse for his Letters Patents, for the helpe of a collection for it. Their Petition graciously received, his Majesty was pleased (as a cause of all other his Piety especially favours) to send his Letter to the Lord Bishop of London, for the forwarding and ef∣fecting their desires. Yet notwithstanding this faire de∣gree to their wish, they are for a time put off, by reason (as I am informed) of the great Collection for the repaire of the famous Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, but they hope it will not be long. In which hope they have many Part∣ners, as also in their Prayers, for all the good meanes that may be, to the spee∣dy rebuilding of it; till which time, the Church appointed unto them for the Sabbath. Exercises, Marriage, Bu∣rying, Churching, and the Sacra∣ments, is the Parish Church of Saint Alphage neere Cripplegate. And thus much of this Church, Saint Albanes. Alhallowes Barking. THis Church was repaired and beautified in the yeere of our Lord God, 1613. and within some few yeeres before and after (in their severall times) other wants were supplied and furnished, viz. A very faire new Pulpit set up, many faire Pewes, a faire Communion table, with other gracefull Ornaments to it. This Table was the gift of one Master Iohn Burnell, all the rest the charge of the Parish: Also in the South Ile, over the entry into the Church, in the yeere of our Lord 1627. there was a very handsome Gallery erected, at the cost and charge of the Parish. Thomas Covell Iohn Shaw Churchwardens. In the South wall is a Monument with this Inscription. In the Ile against this place, lyeth the body of Francis Covell, Citizen and Skinner of London, he lived in this Parish 52. yeeres, was married to his wife Margery 42. yeeres, had Issue by her Thomas his onely sonne. He had borne Office in his Compa∣ny, and this Ward, with good re∣putation, was in his life Religious, Peaceable, and Charitable, and at his death gave Clothing to the poore of this Parish yeerely for ever. Hee lived 69. yeeres, and rendred his soule in peace to God, Septem∣ber 7. 1625. Alhallowes Bredstreet. THis Church, in the many de∣cayed places of it, was repai∣red, and in every part of it rich∣ly and very worthily beautified, at the proper cost and charges of the Parishi∣oners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1625. Samuel Tucker William Hunt Churchwardens. On the South side of the Chancell, in a little part of this Church, called The Saltars Chappell, is a very faire Window, with the Portraiture or Fi∣gure of him that gave it, very curiously wrought upon it, with this Inscrip∣tion: Thomas Beamont Salter, the Founder of this Chapell, and a worthy Benefactor to the Company of the Salters. 1629. This Window being then erected. In the midst of this little Chappell, in a faire Marble Tombe, this man with his two wives lies interred. The words round about this Tombe, with the Verses, you may reade in page 391.
To the sacred Memory▪ Of that worthy and faithfull Minister of Christ, Master Richard Stocke, who after 32. yeeres spent in the Ministery, wherein by his learned Labours, joyn'd with Wisdome, and a most holy life, Gods glory was much advanced, his Church edified, Piety increased, and the true honour of a Pastors place main∣tained, deceased Aprill, 20. 1626. Some of his loving Parishoners have consecrated this Monument of their never-dying love, Ian. 28. 1628. His situs exanimis Stocki sub pulvere Truncus, Quem quondam agnovit Pastorem Ecclesia Fidum: Istae suum nunc Sancta tenent Habitacula Sanctum, Quo Magn Vs Pan DV Cit oVes oVi Vmque magIstros. Thy livelesse Trunke (O Reverend Stocke) Like Aarons Rod sprouts out againe, And after two full Winters past, Yeelds Blossomes and ripe fruit amaine. For why, this worke of Piety, Performed by some of thy Flocke, To thy dead Corps and sacred Vrne, Is but the fruit of this old Stocke. A faire new Monument in the South Ile, on the wall, almost at the upper end. This Monument was erected at the cost of this Parish, in memoriall of Master Iohn Dunster, Citizen and Cothworker of London, who lieth buried neere this place, and gave a∣mongst other charitable gifts, 200. pounds towards the late building of this Church, and 200. pounds, which hath purchased 12. pounds a yeere for ever, towards the repara∣tion of the same. He departed this life the 14. of October, 1625. being of the age of 58. yeeres. Queene Elizabeths Monument. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, and henceforth is laid up for me a Crowne of Righteousnesse, &c. Alhallowes the great. THis Church, with much cost bestowed on the Steeple, was in many parts of it Repaired, and thorowout richly and worthily beautified, at the proper cost & charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1627. and 1629. Iames Ashby Henry Clinket and Christopher Robotham William Pagen Churchwardens. There was at this time a faire Gal∣lery built at the West end of the Church, and in the North Ile a new doore made, almost at the upper end. The last yeere 1632. all the Iles, to the Chancell, were raised a foot and a halfe, and the Pewes a foot above that; A worke much gracing the Church, but especially done for a ready and more easie hearing. The charge of these times rising to 600. pounds and upwards. Queene Elizabeths Monument. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For Temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all. In the figure of a Booke over Her, these words. They that trust in the Lord, shall bee as Mount Sion, which shall not be remo∣ved for ever. Psal. 125.
On the one side. Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths Ioy, World wonder, Natures chiefe. On the other side. Britaines blessing, Englands splendor. Religions Nurse, the Faiths Defendor. Vnder her. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Alhallowes Honylane. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1625. Francis Waterhouse Edward Powell Churchwardens. The charge of this repaire amount∣ing unto 55. pounds and upwards. Alhallowes the lesse. THis Church was repaired and beautified within and without, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1616. In the yeere 1613. two faire Dor∣mers were made on the South side of this Church to enlighten it, before be∣ing very darke: the one at the cost of Sir Thomas Glover, Knight, the other at the cost of Master Thomas Iones Gen∣tleman. In the yeere 1633. a faire large Gal∣lery built on the North side of the Church, and within nine or ten yeeres past, two other Galleries, which both in their cost and ends, but especially the last, much commend their religi∣ous Founders. Queene Elizabeths Monument. I have fought a good fight, &c. 2. Tim. 7, 8. Alhallowes Lumberstreet. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost of the Parishioners, in the yeeres of our Lord God 1622. and 1623. The charge of this repaire amount∣ing to the summe of 171. pounds, and nine shillings. William Skelton Henry Collinson Churchwardens. Alhallowes Stayning. THis Church was repaired in many parts of it, and very near∣ly and decently beautified, at the cost of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1630. Simon Parrat Robert Stileman Churchwardens. In the South wall of this Church is a Mo∣nument with this Inscription on it. Before this place lieth the body of Em Charleton, wife to Robert Charleton Citizen and Fishmonger of London, by whom shee had Issue three Sons and foure Daughters, and died in Childbed the 23. or Iune, 1623. having beene married ten yeeres, ten moneths, and thirteene dayes, and lived 31. yeeres, 4. moneths, and odde dayes. She was the youn∣gest childe of Thomas Harby of Ad∣ston, in the County of Northampton Esquire, by his last Wife Katha∣rine Throgmorton, Daughter of Cle∣ment Throgmorton of Hasdley in the County of Warwicke Esquire, and of Katherine Nevill, sister to the then Lord Aburgavenie. Et genus, & nomen nôsti, Nomenque Mariti, Progeniem atque dies, sic obitum & tumulum, Te latet ipsa tamen, licet haec externa tueris, Nobilia interius, Nobiliora latent.
Nobilitas vera est sanctis virtutibus orta, Hanc teneris annis, huic dedit omnisator. Nam cum lacte simul Materno Religionem Imbibit, assidue Matre docente pia. Posteaque ut vires Crescebam crevit in illa Vera Dei veri cognitio, atque fides. Nec sine fruge fides, fuit Alma, Pudica, Benigna, Compatiens, humilis, mitis, amica, Bona. Sic veram verâ cum justitia piecatem, & Facta bonis verbis junxerat illa bona. Vt Mater, Natam, Matris sic nata Nepotes Imbuit imprimis cognitione Dei. Non specie tantum, sed verè Religiosa, Et virgo, & conjux, & domina & Genitrix. Principio finis similis: sic vltima primae Linea conformis: mortua viva simul. Alhallowes at the Wall. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1613. Iohn Streame Robert Priest Churchwardens. It was againe repaired, richly and very worthily beautified at the cost of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1627. Robert Hanch Harman Brockard Churchwardens. The charge of the last repaire, a∣ccounting to the summe of 200. and 20. pounds. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Reade but her Reigne, this Princesse might have beene For wisdome called Nicaulis, Sheba's Queene, Against Spaines Holifernes, Iudeth shee. Dauntlesse gain'd many a glorious victory: Not Deborah did her in fame excell, She was a Mother in our Israel. An Hester, who her person did ingage, To save her people from thé publike strage; Chaste Patronesse of true Religion, In Court a Saint, in Field an Amazon, Glorious in life, deplored in her death, Such was unparallel'd ELIZABETH. Borne Anno 1534. Crowned Anno 1558. Ian. 15. Reigned yeeres 44. mon. 4. dayes 17. Died Anno 1602. March 24. S. Alphage. THis Church (the decayes in divers parts of it, calling upon the Parishioners for it) began to be repaired in the yeere of our Lord God 1624. the repaire continuing 25. and 26. in which time, the Masons worke amounted to 400. pounds. The farther repaire, in 27. and 28. in the last of which it was beautifully fini∣shed, arising to 100. pounds more; The sole cost and charge of the Parish. William Syddon Iohn Laurence Churchwardens. In the South Ile, upon a faire Marble stone is this Inscription. Hic jacet Willielmus Phillip, Ar. Rever. Patris Dom. Epi. London. suae Cur.
Commisariatus London, & qui 80. An∣norum pie transactis in Dom. placide obdormivit 4. die Mens. Septembris, An. Dom. 1625. Relinquens post se 6. ex 18. liberis. On another faire stone in the same Ile. In Christ alone I onely trust, To rise in number of the just. Here under lyeth buried the body of Katharine Edwards, sometime belo∣ved wife of Iohn Edwards, of this Pa∣rish of Saint Alphage; she departed this transitory life on the sixth day of Ianuary, 1628. and in the 45. yeere of her age, having had issue by her said Husband five Sonnes and seven Daughters. My body here in dust doth rest, Sin caus'd that earth claimes it as due, My soule's in Heaven for ever blest, Yet both in one Christ will renew. Andrew Hubbard. THis Church was repaird and richly beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1630. Enoch Lynd William Clobery Churchwardens. The charge of it amounting to sixe hundred pounds and above. Andrew Vndershaft. THis Church was repaired and laudably trimmed and beauti∣fied, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1627. William Bargins Simon Farewell Churchwardens. Then (I say) trimmed and beauti∣fied, although for some few yeeres before and since, to this present yeere 1633. The care and cost of the Pari∣shioners have beene still imployed in the supplying and furnishing of it with such things, as either for necessity or beauty, their love to Gods house, should finde wanting. Among other things these, viz. They have new raised their Chan∣cell, adding to that cost a Communi∣on Table, with a very faire frame about it, they have made many new Pewes, a faire Alabaster Font, and a Clocke: a necessary thing, that in the memory of man this Parish hath not had, nor the eldest Parishioner ever heard of. They have also in this Church (much commending the Founders & Continu∣ers of it) at the lower end of the North Ile, a faire Wainscot Presse full of good Bookes, the workes of many learned and reverend Divines, offering (at sea∣sonable and convenient times) the be∣nefit of reading, to any that shall bee as ready to embrace it, as they and their Maintainers to impart it. A faire Monument in the middle of the wall of the South Ile, with this Inscription. Death hath added to the ornament of this place the blessed memoriall of Edward Warner Esquire, a worthy Ci∣tizen and Merchant of London, who departed this mortall life the 28. of October 1628. He was the second sonne of Francis Warner of Parham, in the County of Suffolke, Esquire, by Mary his second Wife,  Daugh∣ter & Co-heire of Sir Edmond Rowse of the said County, Knight, which Francis Warner was truly and line∣ally descended from the ancient and generous Family of the Warners, who possessed a place of their owne name, at Warners hall in great Wal∣tham, in the County of Essex. Hee died without Issue, and made Fran∣cis Warner of Parham aforesaid, Es∣quire, his Nephew, and next Heire in blood, the Executor of his last Will, and principall Heire to his estate; who out of his duty and af∣fection to the memory of his deare Vncle, hath dedicated this Monu∣ment.
Hee had to his first Wife, Mary, the Daughter of Master Ailmer, of Ris∣den in Hartfordshire; and to his se∣cond, Margaret, Daughter of Ma∣ster Iohn Cheyney. On a faire Grave-stone lying in the same Ile, is thus written. I. H. S. Mors Christi, mihi vita. The memoriall of Mistresse Elizabeth Turnor, whose body resteth here in expectation of her Saviour. Shee lived the sorrowfull Widdow of three Husbands, Andrew White, Cut∣bert Burby, and Humphry Turnor, Gentleman, and the most deare Mother of seven children, being the Issue onely of her second: three of them buried her, Edward Burby, Cut∣bert, and Ioane, which inherit her sorrow to bewaile their losse. Her dissolution hapned in her great Clymactericall, being on the tenth Calends of August, in the yeere af∣ter her Saviour, 1630. Resurgam. Andrew Wardrope. THis Church was repaired, and worthily beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1627. A very faire Window on the South side of this Church, with this Inscription. This Window was glased at the charge of Peter Leonarts the elder, of East-Sm-field Brewer, Anno Domini 1627. In the South Ile, at the lower end of the Church, is this Epitaph. When God was pleas'd, (the world unwilling yet) Helias Iames, to Nature paid his debt, And here reposes: As he liv'd, he died, The saying strongly in him verified, Such life, such death: then a knowne truth to tell, He liv'd a godly life, and died as well. Anne Aldersgate. THis Church was repaired rich∣ly, and very worthily beauti∣fied in the yeere of our Lord God 1624. In the yeeres 1629. and 1630. the Steeple decayed and perished, with great care and much cost was repaired, a new Turret made for the Saints-Bell. Also the walls of the two Church-yards (the greater and the lesse) were raised, two faire Arched doores made in the middle of them, with a very faire Arched Entrance to the Church on the South side of it; and the Alley, or passage from Saint Annes lane into Noble Street, raised, levelled, and (with free Stone) very neatly and handsomly paved. Gabriel Butcher Robert Dimpleton Churchwardens. An Epitaph in the Chancell, with this Inscription. Here lyeth the body of Francis Spencer, eldest sonne of Richard Spencer, Es∣quire, who departed this life the 20. of Iune 1629. Mortis memor sis, me Ridebat Horula Natum, Renatum, Mortuum. Anne Black-Fryers. THe ancient Church belonging to the Black-Fryers, London, was (before the dissolution of Re∣ligious Houses by Henry the 8.) one
of the most spacious and faire Chur∣ches in London: but the Friers being put out, the Church (together with other faire buildings) was utterly de∣molished. Therefore the Inhabitants of the said Black-Fryers, London, fitted an upper Roome, of 50. foot in length, and 30. foot in breadth, for a publike place of Divine worship. The char∣ges of purchasing and fitting the said Roome for a Church, appeareth not in any Record that we can finde. In Anno 1597. when the Church was empty, and no body in it, a great part of the Roofe thereof fell downe, whereupon the then Inhabitants being about to repaire their said Church, ob∣tained of Sir George Moore Knight, so much ground as enlarged their Church with an Ile on the West, 50. foot in length and 15. foot in breadth: for which ground they built at their owne cost a faire Ware-house under the said Ile for the use of Sir Ierome Bows, Knight, who then had the said ground in lease, and also gave him 133. li. The new building of their said Church and Ile (beside the foresaid 133. li. gi∣ven to Sir Ierom Bows) cost 300. li. 18. shillings. In Iune 1607. the Inhabitants of the said Black-Fryers paid 120. li. to Sir George Moore, for the purchase of their Preachers house, their Church-yard, their Church, and the Porch ap∣pertaining thereunto, together with the right of Patronage of, in, and to the said Church. In Anno 1613. the Inhabitants of the said Black-Fryers, purchased on the South of their Church, so much hou∣sing as enlarged their Church afore∣said 36. foot in length and 54. foot in bredth, the purchase whereof, toge∣ther with the Vault for burying, and other Roomes under that part of the Church, and the new building of all, and making new Pewes, and Pulpit, cost 1546. li. 6. shillings. In Anno 1632. the Inhabitants of the said Black-Fryers, purchased the Roomes directly under the above men∣tioned upper Roome converted to a Church, which said under Roomes they purchased to repaire the Foun∣dation & Walls whereon the Church stood, which Walls were very much decayed. The Purchase whereof, and repaire of Decayes, cost 500. li. The summe of all bestowed upon Black-Fryers Church, since the refor∣mation of Religion in England, amoun∣teth to 2600. pounds 4. shillings. A faire Monument at the South end of this Church, with this Inscription. P. M. Iohannis Bill Mercatoris Librarij, qui Nationibus ab exteris supellectilem lit∣terariam in hoc Regnum per plusculos Annos Importavit. Vt Librorum Thesaurus, Bibliothecarum Parens, Academiarum Mercurius Merito dici possit. Typographi etiam Regij Iacobo & Carolo R. R. Serenissimis, per Annos XIII. fidele in hoc opere ministerium praestan∣tis. De Republica Librariâ bene, de∣suis optime Merentis. Non sine luctu & Moerore Amicorum, Anno Aetatis suae LVI. publicae vero salutis M. DC. XXX. Defuncti. Qui interim duas Vxores pudicas duxerat, Annam Filiam Tho. Montfort Theologiae Doctoris, Quae sine liberis obijt, & Ianan Henrici Franck∣lin Filiam, quae liberis quinque▪ Familiam auxit. Hoc Monumentum Fidei & Amoris ergo Iana Vxor Moestissima P. Quueene Elizabeths Monument. Sacred unto Memory: Religion to its primitive sincerity re∣stored, Peace thorougly setled, Coine to the true value refined, Re∣bellion at home extinguished, France neere ruine by intestine mischiefes relieved, Netherland supported, Spaines Armado vanquished, Ireland with Spaniards expulsion, and Trai∣tors correction quieted, both Vni∣versities Revenues, by a Law of Pro∣vision, exceedingly augmented, Fi∣nally, all England enriched, and 45. yeres most prudently governed,
Elizabeth, a Queene, a Conqueresse, Triumpher, the most devoted to Piety, the most happy, after 70. yeeres of her life, quietly by death departed. On the other side of the Monument. For an eternall Memoriall▪ Vnto Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, Daughter of King Henry the eighth, Grandchild to King Henry the seventh, great Grandchilde to King Edward the fourth, the Mother of this her Coun∣try, the Nurse of Religion and Lear∣ning: For perfect skill in very many Languages, for glorious Endow∣ments, as well of minde as body, and for Regall Vertues beyond her Sex. She began ended her raigne 17 No. 1558. 24 Mar. 1602 Vnder her Monument. I have fought a good fight, &c. S. Antholines. THis Church was repaired and beautified in the yeere of our Lord 1616. towards which the Gentlemen here under named, were free and very bountious Benefactors, Sir William Craven, Alderman, Master Henry Iay, Alderman, Master Adrian Moore, Master Thomas Boothby, Master Francis Dorrington, Master William Par∣ker, Master Cleophas Smith, Citizen and Draper of London. Richard Dight Thomas Browne Churchwardens. To this was added a very rich and beautifull Gallery, every Pane or di∣vision of it (the number of them 52.) fil'd with the Armes of Kings, Queens, and Princes of this Kingdome, begin∣ning with Edward the Confessor, and ending with the Badge or Simboll of Fredericke Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavere and Prince Elector, &c. Begunne in the yeere 1623. Francis Bickely William Stacy Churchwardens. And fully built and finished in the yeere 1624. William Stacy Edward Banbury Churchwardens. The charge of the foresaid Repara∣tion, 1616. as I was informed by some Officers in the Church, amounting to the summe of nine hundred pounds and upwards. S. Austin. THis Church was in part Re∣builded, Leaded, and in every part of it richly and very wor∣thily beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeeres of our Lord God, 1630. and 1631. Ralph Tonstell Daniel Hallingworth Samuel Langham Churchwardens. The charge of this great and costly Repaire, amounting to the summe of 1200. pounds. Bartholomew Exchange. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1620. William Drew Lancelot Iohnson Churchwardens. At the West doore is a very faire Screene, with this In∣scription. Ex dono Richardi Croshawe, Civis & Aurifabri Londinensis 1631. Monument in the South side of the Chancell thus written on. Here lieth Richard Croshawe, sometimes Master of the Company of Gold∣smithes,
and Deputy of this Ward. Hee was very liberall to the poore, and in the time of the great Plague 1625. neglecting of his owne safety, he abode constantly in this City to provide for their reliefe, he did ma∣ny charitable acts in his time, and by his Will he left above 4000. li. to the maintaining of Lectures, re∣liefe of the poore, and other pious uses. He dwelt in this Parish 31. yeeres, and being 70. yeeres old, hee died the the 2. of Iune, 1621. In the same Church, and the same Ile, upon a faire stone, is this Inscription. Heere lieth interred the body of Willi∣am Drew, Citizen and Grocer of London, who departed this life the 29. day of August, 1631. being of the age of 56. yeeres, expecting a blessed and joyfull Resurrection at the comming of Christ. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Eliza Beata, Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Earth's joy, Englands jem, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. I have fought a good fight, &c. Regni 45. Aetatis 70. obijt 24. Martij, Anno salutis 1602. Close by the word Eliza, is the figure of three Crownes, and these words by them. Manet ultima Coele. Bennet Fynck. THis Church is now repayring, they began in March last 1633. and by Michaelmas at the far∣thest, doe make account (God wil∣ling) it will be finished: and so com∣pleatly and absolutely, with all things befitting furnished, that wee may for that time say of this as of the rest. This Church was repaired and (at the cost and charge of the Parishioners) richly and very worthily beautified, in the yeere of our Lord God 1633. The charge of this repaire and beau∣tifying, by what they have done, and what they have to doe, very probably imagined, amounting to foure hundred pounds and upwards. Edward Barcocke Robert Claxon Churchwardens. Bennet Grace-Church. THere hath beene bestowed on this Parish-Church within the passage of 20. yeeres, severall charges, amounting to the summe of 700. pounds. But the greatest part of this in the last repaire, which was in the yeere of our Lord 1630. in which as it was very carefully repaired, so richly and very worthily beautified. Some usefull, necessary, and most needfull things in (and since added to) this worthy repaire, were these; A new Clocke, a new Diall, new Chimes, and now 1633. a very faire Turret for the Steeple. The Churchwardens in the time of this repaire 1630. Iohn Cudney, and Iohn Offeley. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, Daughter of King Henry the eighth, by Queene Anne Bullen his Wife. She died at Richmond the 24. of March, 1602. being 69. yeeres, sixe mo∣neths, and seventeene dayes old, when shee had reigned 44. yeeres, 4. moneths, and 7. dayes. As in the figure of a Booke. They that put their trust in the Lord, are even as the Mount of Sion, which may not be removed, but standeth firme for ever.
On the one side. Britaines blessing, Englands splendor, Religions Nurse, the Faiths defendor. On the other side. Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths joy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. Vnder her. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. Bennet Pauls-Wharfe. THis Church hath had no re∣paire or beauty bestowed upon it for many yeeres; but now standing in great need of both, it is shortly (as I am informed) to be (as the rest) repaired, richly and very worthi∣ly beautified. A faire Monument at the upper end of the South Ile, standing under and adjoy∣ned to the Monument of his Father, Master David Smith, Imbroythe∣rer to Queene Elizabeth, with this inscription. William Smith his seventh sonne, a wil∣ling Imitator of his Parents vertues, who deceased the third of October, Anno 1632. aged 68. He was the only survyving sonne and Heire to his Father, Aldermans Deputy of the Ward for the space of fifteene yeeres. He maried Sarah the Daughter of William Feake of London, Goldsmith, by whom hee had Issue Katharine his only Daugh∣ter and Heire, who was married un∣to Samuel Owfield of Gatton, in the County of Surrey, Esquire. Bennet Sherehog. THis Church being very much decayed and perished, was amply repaired and beautified at the cost of the Parishoners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1628. Divers faire Marble stones, that for∣merly lay hid under the Pewes, then removed and placed in the body of the Church, to adde (as most fit) to its further grace and beauty. Iohn Reyner William Parker Churchwardens. Botolph Billingsgate. THis Church was repaired, and very worthily beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parishi∣oners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1624. Robert Dowley Robert Lemman Churchwardens. A very faire Monument in the wall of the South Ile, with this Inscription. Anna Saris, nuper Vxor Iohannis Saris Armigeri, Filia Gulielmi Meggs Ar∣migeri, quam suscepit ex conjuge secunda Dorothea, filia venerabilis Dominae Annae Cambel adhuc superstitis, Ex hac vita Migravit, Febru. 21. Anno Dom. 1622. Aetatis 29. Conjugij 8. Haec pietate Deo, casta virtute Marito, Decessu sanctis, Matri conjuncta sepulcro est. Moestissimus conjux, Meritissimae conjugi, hoc Monumentum, Amoris & Remi∣niscentiae ergo posuit.
Queene Elizabeths Monument. Eliza Beata, Spaines Rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths joy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. Vnder the figure of three Crownes. Vltimum manet in Coelo. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. This Table was the gift of William Wig∣more, being Churchwarden 1625. Christs Church. THis Church, within some few yeeres past hath had many re∣paires and charges; but wee especially here remember the faire and spacious Gallery, that (at the cost of the Parishoners) was erected in the North Ile, in the yeere of our Lord God 1628. The charge of it amount∣ing to 149. pounds 10. shillings. A worke very worthily supplying a necessity, and adding to this Church a great deale of grace and beauty. Matthew Nelson Samuel Savin Churchwardens. A Table of Armes for the Lady Digby, of all her quarterd Coats, which by the right of Heires generall are involved into the Noble Fa∣mily of her Fathers. Insig. praeclariss. Dominae D. Venetiae Dig∣by, è Familia Stanleyorum Com. Dar∣biae exparte Patris, & Perciorum Com. Northumbriae Materno jure, aliisque quamplurimis Christian. orbis princi∣pibus oriundae. Hard by the other this, and thus written on. Memoriae Sacrum. Neere to this place lyeth buried the body of Nicholas Beamount of Cole-Overton in the County of Leicester Esquire, and Anne his Wife, the Daughter of William Saunders of Welford in the County of Northamp∣ton, Esquire, by whom he left Issue foure Sonnes and two Daughters, viz. Henry, Francis, Thomas, and Huntington, Dorothy and Katherine. The said Nicholas died the 24. of November, Anno Dom. 1585. His wife died the tenth of February, 1581. In remembrance of whom this Monument was erected, by the care and cost of Elizabeth Lady Ash∣burnham Widdow, late Wife of Sir Iohn Ashburnham Knight, daugh∣ter to Sir Thomas Beamount of Staw∣ton, in the County aforesaid, Knight, their third sonne, at the appoint∣of her Vncle, Master Francis Bea∣mont, Esquire, their second sonne, to whom the Erector hereof was Ex∣ecutrix. Vpon a faire Stone in the North Ile, is this Inscription. Spe Resurgendi hîc jacet Corpus, Ioannae Vxoris Edmundi Philipps Lon∣dini Armigeri, quae cum solo & Aman∣tissimo Marito, in dilecto matrimonio vixit per annos 48. Hec doloris Amphitheatrum Reliquit, mensis Aprilis, die 12. Anno salutis 1632. Aetatis suae 72. Vpon a faire stone at the entrance into the upper Church, with this Inscription. Lodovicus Williams, venedocus Hic jacet. Nuper Civis & Haberd. Lond. Vna cum Elizabetha, vxore ejus, Qui objerunt Anno Dom. M. DC. IX. Octob. ij. Hîc optat Cineres suos jacere Mauritius Wnis. in Mna. Dr. defunctorum F. vnicus superstes. A very faire Armes over it.
Vpon a faire stone in the middle Ile, is this Inscription. Here lyeth buried the body of Eliza∣beth Draper, the Wife of Robert Draper of this Parish, borne the third day of December, 1581. and died the third of December, 1613. All those that knew her, lov'd her; for her life, Chaste, Pure, and Pions, was of all approv'd; (A rich possession's such a vertuous Wife) All ill she hated, and all good she lov'd: Be this his comfort then bewailes her most, In Heaven shee's found, that here on Earth is lost. In a Table in the Quire, hanging upon the Organs, is this written. Memoriae Sacrum. Neere this lyeth the body of Ioaxe, Daughter and sole Heire of Edmond Bigs, Gentleman, and late Wife to Clement Goldsmith of Graies Inne, Esquire, who was in this Church Baptized the third of March, 1564. and interred the 17. of February, 1631. Close by this small Remembrance, you may finde That which apparel'd est an honest minde, A body there In-urn'd, where once did rest A charitable soule that was its guest. But see what sicknesse, age, and death hath done, These have they parted, yet the day shall come, When they shall meet, and re-unite againe, And be assum'd above the Heavens to raigne: Vntill which time may this poore Monument, To Reader, shew a sad sonnes true intent. But if this perish, yet her vertue shall (Shee dead) preserve her blest Memoriall. These two Stones lie close together, and close to the Communion Table. In which place also lyeth buried the body of that learned and worthy Divine, Doctor Sampson Price. Fui Claphamus, pater Istius Iohannis nuper defuncti, Et hìc sepulti, Qui obiit septimo die Feb. Anno Dom. 1621. Fui Claphamus, pater Istius Iohannis subter hunc pidem sepulti. Here lyeth buried the body of Iohn Clapham, Esquire, one of the sixe Clearkes of the Chancery, who di∣ed the sixth day of December, Anno 1618. his Father Luke Clapham then living. S. Christophers. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord 1621. But is now very shortly to be repai∣red and beautified againe, with a great deale of cost intended. In the same Church is this following Epitaph. Siste viator, leviter preme, Iacet hîc juxta, Quod mortale fuit, C. V. Thomae Harrioti. Hic fuit Doctissimus ille Harriotus de Syon ad Flumen Thamesin, Patria & educatione Oxoniensis, Qui omnes scientias Calluit, Qui in omnibus excelluit,
Mathematicis, Philosophicis, Theologicis. Veritatis indagator studiosissimus, Dei Trini-unius cultor piissimus, Sexagenarius, aut eo circiter, Mortalitati valedixit, Non vitae, Anno Christi M. DC. XXI. Iulii 2. Clements Eastcheape. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost & charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1632. Iohn Stoner Thomas Priestman Churchwardens. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Monumentum Elizabethae. In the figure of a Booke. Psal. 125. They that trust in the Lord, shall bee as Mount Sion, which cannot be remo∣ved, but remaineth for ever. On the one side. Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens jem, Earth's joy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. On the other side. Britaines Blessing, Englands Splendor, Religions Nurse, The Faiths Defendor. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Dionis Back-Church. THe middle Ile of this Church was new layed in the yeere of our Lord 1629. The Steeple was repaired, a new Turret built, new Frames were made for the Bells, and this Church very de∣cently beautified, in the yeere of our Lord, 1632. A Monument in the North Ile, with this Inscription. Cur quod partu obeas lachrimis Rigat ora Maritus, Et quasitu pereas se macerat per eas? Dum cedis domino, discedis ab orbe scelesto, Parendo & praeis, non pariendo peris. Hic jaceo Triplici Monumento à Morte beata, Marmoris hoc, Moesto vir mihi corde dedit; Virtus, Nobilitas, Pietas, Patientia nostra, Dant alium, hoc vero vincit honore prius: At Ternum Aeternum est coeloque locatus, & illud Nec vir, nec virtus, sed dedit ipse Deus. In obitum Foeminae Generosissimae Dom. Mariae Stanley, Vxoris Tho. Stanley Armigeri, Filiae Rogeri Apleton, Mi∣litis & Baronetti, Quae cum viro suo Tres Filios peperisset (quorum duo hîc jacent sepulti) ultimi partus, qui nunc superest, laboribus extincta fuit. 4. die Iunii 1609. Anno Aetatis suae 23. S. Dunstans in the East. THis Church began to be repai∣red in the yeere of our Lord God 1631. And was fully re∣paired, richly and very worthily beau∣tified, in the yeere of our Lord 1633. Christopher Vincent Iohn Dines Churchwardens. I might here dilate and enlarge my selfe, by spreading this generall into its particulars, but for that this shall suffice: The decayes of it were many and great, and consequently the re∣paires. The many and great parts of
it, almost making up the whole, which may easily be beleeved by the summe of this sumptuous repaire; the charge of it amounting to two thousand foure hundred pounds and upwards. To the making up of which, many of the worthy Parishioners have lent to the Lord, in giving to this poore decayed Church very large summes: And of such Givers, thus the Lord saith, He that giveth to the poore, lendeth to the Lord, &c. A faire Monument in the North Ile of the Chancell, with this inscription. Heere lieth the body of Richard Wyche, Merchant and Citizen of London, free of the Company of Skinners, amongst whom having borne all Offices, his life and carriage was ex∣emplary. Hee married Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sir William Salting stall, Knight, sometimes Alderman and Maior of this Honourable City of London, by whom he had issue, 12. Sonnes and 6. Daughters, viz. Richard, Thomas, Susan, Daniel, George, Saemuel, Peter, Elizabeth, Iames, Mary, Anne, Ed∣ward, Iulius, William, Henry, Abi∣gaile, Nathaniell, Rebecca. Sonnes 4 8 deceased. living. Daughters 2 4 deceased. living. Hee yeelded his soule in peace to his Maker the 20. of November, after 67. yeeres pilgrimage here amongst men, whose latter yeeres were be∣stowed in expectation of his end, exprest in setling of his estate here on earth, and in preparation of his soule for Heaven, where it now re∣maines in peace and happinesse. Edmonds Lumbardstreet. THis Church was repaired, and very worthily beautified at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1631. and 1632. In the first yeere Humphrey Gravenor Anthony Bradshaw Churchwardens. In the last Robert Smith Edward Hooke Churchwardens. The cost of it arising to two hundred eight and forty pounds. S. Ethelborough. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1612. In the yeere 1620. the Steeple greatly decayed was repaired. And in the yeere 1630. a Gallery built in the South Ile, at the proper cost of Owen Santpeere of this Parish. William Mefflin Peter Gaile Churchwardens. S. Faith. WEE cannot in this place keep our ordinary course, in speaking of decayes and repairing, for (as it is anciently said of this Church) This Church needs no Repaire at all, Saint Faith's defended by Saint Paul. And for beauty it hath sufficient, be∣ing still supplied and furnished with whatsoever the vertuous and religious Guardians of it know fit, either for use or ornament. Which while we speake of, we cannot forget that especiall ad∣dition of beauty, Light; that Light, that by pulling downe those houses that stood before it, is plenteously de∣scended into it: Nor (with that) the cost of the Parishioners, (having gai∣ned such a long wanted benefit) in trimming and new glasing their Win∣dowes. At that time also 1632. they pur∣chased at the lower end of the South Ile (going up thorow the Entry into Pauls) a convenient place for a Vestry,
upon which (having none before) they have bestowed a great deale of cost and beauty. William Aspeley Ioh Gill Churchwardens. A very faire Marble stone in the Chancell under the Communion Table, with these words. About it. Vnder this Stone lie buried the bo∣dies of Iohn and Francis Astley, the Sonnes of Sir Iohn Astley of Alling∣ton Castle in the County of Kent, Master of the Revels, and a Gentle∣man of the Privy Chamber in Or∣dinary to Charles the first. Vpon it. In obitum immaturum Ioh. & Fr. Astley, Filiorum Domini Ioh. Astley, Equitis Aurati, quorum hic undecem, Alter Duo de viginti Annos Natus, ad supe∣ros Migravit. Vtrique vero sub eodem Marmore Tumulantur. Sic Rebar, solum spes tanta invida Fata Ostendisse viris, & Rapuisse simul. Aut pater omnipotens, & qui dedit, abstulit, aptes Vidit quippe Astris, asseruitque sibi. Illi autem Humanis exempti Rebus, Olympum Nunc habitant, ubi pax, & sine fine quies. Vno hoc Felices; quod cum unus venter utrosque Foverat, una etiam nunc capit urna duos. A faire Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscripion. M. S. Hic juxta situs est Richardus Ironside, vir summa prudentia, industria, vstaeque integritate, vna cum 2. Lectiss. vxo∣rib quarum posteriorem, morum sua∣vitate, Elegantia, & Amore Conjun∣ctam, Fato sibi Raptam, non ita multo post sequutus est. Quibus hoc Monumen∣tum in opprobrium mortis, Quae has tampias Animas eripuit à 13. liberis, qui se ipsos poene quaerunt in illarum de∣siderio, Consecravit E. I. Filius & Haeres. 1627. A faire Monument at the upper end of the Chancell, with this inscription. Here lieth buried the body Katherine, (third Daughter of Edward Lord Nevill, Baron of Abergaveny) Wife of Sir Stephen Lessieur, of Chiswicke, in the County of Middlesex, Knight, She was brought from her said house to this Parish, in hope to recover her bodily health, by the helpe of God and Physicians. But the same God knowing, and having ordai∣ned that which was best for her pious soule, hath beene pleased to take her from the miseries of this vaine world, and to receive her soule with his Saints in Heaven. As she did professe in all the time that she lived in the state of a Maid, and of a Wife, to bee a true and obedient child of God; even so shee did be∣have her selfe in her sicknesse, bea∣ring her affliction with a true Chri∣stian Patience, much delighting to Reade, or to heare the Word of God read unto her, hoping and trusting to be saved by the onely Merits and Passion of our Saviour Jesus Christ: And recommending her Spirit into the hands of Almighty God, shee exchanged her mortall life for the Immortall, the 4. of August 1630. Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, yea saith the Spirit, that they rest from their labours, and their workes follow them. Quid aliud est Mors vitae hujus morta∣lis, quam finis mortis hujus vitalis, & Ianua vitae immortalis? Ergo Vive diu, sed vive Deo, nam vivere Mundo Mortis opus: viva est vivere vita Deo.
A very faire Table hanging about the middle of the South Ile of Saint Faiths Church. Anno Dom. 1630. Benefactors, and their Gifts to the Poore of this Parish. Yeeres. Names. Gifts. 1586 David Smith Embroiderer, gave 20. shillings a yeere for ever. 1592 The Lady Allington gave 5. pounds to be distributed. 1598 Iohn Payne, Esquire, gave 12. pence a weeke in Bread for ever. 1600 Iustinian Kidd, Gentleman, gave 10. pounds to be imployed for ever. 1605 Francis Lamplow, Clothworker, gave 10. pounds to bee im∣ployed for ever. 1610 George Bishop, Stationer, Alderman, gave 10. pounds to bee distributed. 1611 William Evans, Tallow-Chandler, gave 40. pound to be im∣ployed for ever. 1612 Iohn Norton, Stationer, Alderman, gave 150. pounds for 12. poore people to receive three pence a piece every Wednes∣day weekely for ever. 1613 Mary Bishop, the Wife of George Bishop, gave 10. pounds to be distributed. 1614 Iohn Law, Proctor of the Arches, gave 10. pounds to bee imployed. 1620 Thomas Adams, Stationer, gave 10. pounds to bee distri∣buted. 1623 Iasper Vnderwood, Vintener, gave 10. pounds to bee di∣stributed. 1624 Iohn Sanderson, Draper, gave 150. pounds for 12. poore men to receive three pence a weeke, every Sunday weekely, for ever. 1625 Elizabeth Vnderwood, Widdow, gave 10. pounds to be distri∣buted, and 60. pounds towards a Lecture for ever. 1626 Iohn Beliall Silkeman, gave 10. pounds to be distributed. 1628 Ally Mercer, gave 5. pounds to be distributed. 1629 Iohn Speed, Merchantaylor, gave 5. pounds to be distributed. Ex dono Iacobi Trussell.
S. Fosters. THis Church was repaired, the Gravestones new squared and layed, the Pewes new made, a Window in the North Ile enlarged, the rest new glased, and the whole tho∣rowout trimmed and beautified, in the yeere of our Lord 1614. Iohn Drake Iohn Hall Churchwardens. To this Church at the Chancell end, the breadth being 20. yards and above, was added 20. foot of ground, which ground so to engen the Church, was given unto the Parish ont of a faire Court then belonging to the Sadlers Hall. Gabriel Fen-Church. THis Church was enlarged in length nine foot, richly and ve∣ry worthily beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parish, in the yeeres of our Lord God 163 and 1632. Thomas Colt George Godscall Churchwardens. The cost of it aruing to 537. pounds 7. shillings and 10. pence. A very faire figure of the Kings Armes in Glasse in the Chancell Win∣dow, was the free gift of Thomas Clarke of this Parish, Gasier. Over the head, Touch not mine anointed. Vnder them, Qui leo de Iuda est, & flos de Iesse Lyristae, Carmina qui sacro psallere sacra dedit, Dulsisonam ô faciat Citharam, fortesque Leones, Foecundet Florem Carole magne tuum. George Botolph-lane. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1627. Walter Carter Iohn Delabar Churchwardens. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Regni 45. Aetatis 70. obijt 24. Martij, Anno salutis 1602. I have fought a good fight, &c. Gregories by Pauls. THis Church was repaired, and within, without, and in every part of it, richly and very wor∣thily beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeeres of our Lord God, 1631. and 1632. In the first, William Weston, Citizen and Merchanraylor of London, and Iohn Hart, Gentleman, and Proctor of the Arches, Churchwardens. In the ast, the said Iohn Hart and Thomas Brandwood, Churchwardens. I have not here named any great particulars, as Roofe, Wall, Arch, Porch, or the like; but the greatnesse of them, of their cost, and the love of the worthy Bestowers, may be read in the summe of this sumptuous repaire, which is two thousand pounds and up∣wards. S. Hellens. THis Church was begunne to bee repaired in the yeere of our Lord 1631. and was fully re∣paired, and in every part of it richly and very worthily beautified, at the
cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1633. William Hurt Thomas Aldridge Churchwardens. If this briefe shall bee thought too little for so great a repaire and beauty, I desire the Reader to enlarge the com∣mendations from that, among the rest, that most shall make to that purpose. The charge of this great repaire, the summe of one thousand three hundred pounds, and upward. In the South Ile of this Church, is a very faire Window with this inscription. This Window was glazed at the char∣ges of Ioyce Featly, Daughter to Wil∣liam Kerwyn, Esquire, and Wife to Daniel Featly, D. D. Anno Domini 1632. This Window is beautified with three rich Coates, her Fathers, her first, and her second Husbands. Over against this Window, to∣wards the middle Ile, is a Monu∣ment erected to the memory of her worthy Father, the aforenamed Willi∣am Kerwyn, Esquire, dated 1594. the time of his death and buriall. Also of Mistresse Magdalen Kerwyn her Mother, buried in the yeere of our Lord 1592. Of Benjamine Kerwyn her Brother, buried the 27. of Iuly, Anno 1621. who had Issue seven sonnes and five daughters, five of those children de∣ceast, and here (with them all that are before named) interred. This Monument in this passage of 39. yeeres, somewhat defaced and wi∣thered, was raised, repaired, beautifi∣ed, and encompast with iron Barres, in a faire and gracefull manner, at the charge of this loving Daughter, the aforenamed, Mistresse Ioyce Featley, 1632. About this Tombe these words. Here lyeth the body of William Kerwyn, of this City of London Free Mason, who departed this life the 26. of December 1594. And here also lyeth the body of Mag∣daline Kerwyn his Wife, by whom he had Issue three Sonnes and two daughters; she deceased the 23. of August, 1592. On the one side these Verses. Aedibus Attalicis Londinum qui decoravi, Exiguam tribuunt hanc mihi fata domum Me duce surgebant aliis regalia tecta, Me duce conficitur ossibus urna meis. On the other side these Verses. Magdalena jacet, virtus post fata superstes, Conjugiique fides, Relligioque manent. Corpus humo tectum Christo veniente resurget, Vt Mentis consors astra suprema colat. Christus mihi vita, Mors mihi lucrum. Nos quos certus amor primis conjunxit ab annis, Iunxit idem Tumulus, junxit idemque polus. About the bottome these words. Benjamin Kerwyn, the sonne of William Kerwyn, deceased the 27. of Iuly, 1621. who had Issue seven sonnes and five daughters; five of these children being buried in this Vault. Iames Dukes-place. OF this Church, from the be∣ginning to the finishing, and of every particular in it, you may reade in page 146, 147.
James Garlick-hithe. THe North Ile of this Church was new built, and the whole Church repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1624. William Gunnell Robert Boydell Churchwardens. The charge of it amounting to seven hundred pounds and upwards. John Baptist. REaedificatum & ornatum fuit hoc. Templum, Anno Millesimo sex∣centesimo vicesimo primo Roberto Peterson Rectore. Rogere Price, & Iohanne Smith, tunc Gardianis ejusdem Ecclesiae. Queene Elizabeths Monument. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. Vertue liveth after death, So doth Queene Elizabeth. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Iohn Evangelist. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the sole and onely cost of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1626. Iames Barnard Richard Malbone Churchwardens. In the same yeere a Gallery new built and beautified, at the onely cost of Thomas Goodyeare, Citizen and Dra∣per of London, and here a Parishio∣ner. S. John Zachary. THis Church within the time of 12. yeeres past hath had these many Repaires and charges. The last, in the yeere 1631. the charge 27. li. 10. s. 8. d. William Young Iohn Devoreaux Churchwardens. In the yeere 1629. the charge 76. pounds 10. shillings. Clement Carter Henry Tyler Churchwardens. In the yeere 1625. the charge 30. pounds. Richard Morrell Iohn Reynolds Churchwardens. In the yeere 1619. the charge 32. pounds 3. shillings 8. pence. William Young Patrick Chambers Churchwardens. In the yeere 1616. the charge 44. pounds 6. shillings 8. pence. William Raine Oliver Burnwood Churchwardens. The whole cost of these Repaires, 120. pounds 11. shillings. A faire Monument in the South Ile, with this Inscription. Here under lieth interred the body of Philip Strelley, late of London Gold∣smith, who gave to the poore of this Parish 40. s. a yeere for ever, out of the Revenues of the Manor of Vlker∣thorpe, lying in the Parish of South-winfield, in the County of Derby, to be paid to them by the hands of the Warden and Rentors of the Wor∣shipfull Company of Goldsmiths, whom he left in trust, to see it and other gifts disposed, as may appeare by his Will, dated September the 6. Anno Dom. 1603. though this Monument was erected but 1630.
Katherin Coleman. THis Church was repaired and beautified in the yeere of our Lord 1620. In the yeere 1624. their Vestry was built, and a Gallery new made for the poore of the Parish to sit in. Katherine Cree-Church. THe foundation of this now fa∣mously finished House of God, was begun to be laid upon the 23. day of Iune, in the yeere of our Lord God 1628. The first Bricke, as also the first Stone in this Foundation, was laid by Master Martin Bond, of this Parish Aldermans Deputy of the Ward, and one of our City Captaines. The Bricke was laid (as is aforesaid) the 23. of Iune, and the Stone (a principall cor∣ner Stone) the 28. of Iuly following. Many of the Parishioners (follow∣ing this worthy Leader) laid every man his Stone, with which they layd something else, which the Workemen tooke up very thankfully. On the backside of the North wall of the old Church was a Cloister, the breadth of it seven foot and above, which Cloister, by the taking downe of that wall, being taken into the Church, gave it all its breadth to enlarge it. In digging under this wall, there was found the figure of halfe the face of a man, cast in Lead, the Mould set∣ting likewise upon it this word, Comes. Digging under the South Row of Pillers, they found the scull of a man, the thicknesse of which was three quar∣ters of an inch and better, measured by many, and admired by all that have seene it. At the West end of this Church adjoyning to the Steeple, stands a Pillar of the old Church, as it stood and was there erected: This Piller (from the Basis or foot, to the Chapi∣ter or head, upon which the old Arch was raised) being eighteene foot high, and but three to bee seene above ground, shewes the measure or height to which the flore of this new Church hath beene raised above that of the old, which is, the hidden part of the Piller, or the 15. foot of it buried. This Structure, not of Bricke, but built from the ground with the choi∣sest Freestone might be got, without, within, and in every part of it supply∣ed, furnished, and inriched, with what∣soever might adde to its greatest grace and lustre, was finished in the yeere of our Lord God, 1630. In this yeere (accounting from March to March) upon the 16. day of Ianuary, it was consecrated by the right Reverend Father in God, Wil. Lord Bishop of London, and upon the same day (as on such it is usuall with us) were the Sacraments of the Lords Supper, and the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme administred. In this Church the Pulpit and Com∣munion Table are pure Cedar and (both) the gift of Master Iohn Dyke, a Merchant, living in this Parish. A very faire Gate built at the East end of the South wall, was the gift of William Avenen, Citizen and Gold∣smith of London, who died in Decem∣ber 1631. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Spaines Rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths joy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. Britaines blessing, Englands splendor, Religions Nurse, the Faiths defender. Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all. I have fought a good fight, &c. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildness shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For Temperance prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH.
This Table of Queene Elizabeth, one of the fairest that I have seene in this City, was the gift of one that is a stran∣ger to this Parish, at least to any to be the bestower of it, he is yet conceal'd, and still is desirous to be so. That of that great number of great and magnificent Benefactors, that joy∣ned to the making up of this great, and (in our time) unparalleld piece of worke, I have onely touched upon these, may (no doubt) seeme strange; there being none in this number, whose liberall hand and heart deserves not a golden Character. I confesse it. To all that may bee said, my answer is (briefly) this: Being doubtfull of get∣ting all, or all of those I might get, and loth of great things to speake to little purpose, I onely tooke these (that of∣fered themselves) by the way, leaving the rest to the Register of the Giver of their meanes to give: with whom all good deeds are recorded, and (un∣doubtedly) shall be rewarded. Lawrence Jurie. This Church was repaired, rich∣ly and worthily beautified at the charge of the Inhabitants of this Parish, in the yeere of our Lord 1618. Thomas Dalby Edmond White Churchwardens. To this, in the yeere 1631. they ad∣ded the cost of a new and very curious Pulpit; then also setting off their Font, and the place in which it stands, with a great deale of cost and beauty. In this yeere 1618. the time of this Repaire, all the Windowes in this Church were glazed by so many good Benefactors, the Armes of the Com∣pany of every one of them in them. Vnder the middle window in the Chancell, a very rich and costly one, is thus written. Sir William Eastfield Knight, and Al∣derman of this Honourable City, and free of the Worshipfull Company of the Mercers, glazed this Window at his owne proper cost and charges, in the yeere of our Lord 1442. And it was afterward repaired, and the story supplyed at the charge of the said Company, in the yeere of our Lord, 1618. A faire Window on the North side of it. Glazed at the cost and charges of Sir Baptist Hickes, Knight, in the yeere of our Lord 1619. A faire Window on the South side of it. Glazed at the charges of Richard Pyot, Grocer, and Alderman of this City of London, Anno Dom. 1618. A faire Window next to this, at the up∣per end of the South Ile. Glazed at the charges of Thomas Morley, Merchant, and free of the Wor∣shipfull Company of the Lethersellers, a Parishioner here, Anno Dom. 1618. A faire Window downeward next to this. Glazed at the charges of Edmond White, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, and Parishioner, Anno Dom. 1618. A faire Window next to this downeward. Glazed at the charges of Thomas Dal∣by, Mercer, Anno Dom. 1618. A faire Window next to this downeward. Glazed at the charges of Rowland Wilson, Citizen and Vintner of London, Anno Dom. 1618. A faire Window, the lowest on this side. Glazed at the charges of Robert Ducy, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of Lon∣don, Anno Dom. 1618. At the Westend of this Ile, a faire Window. Glazed at the charges of William
Pyot, Citizen and Grocer of London, Anno Dom. 1618. On the North side, the lowest Window. Glazedat the charges of Henry Hop∣kins, Citizen and Vintner of London, Anno Dom. 1618. A faire Window next to this upward, the resemblance of a blazing Starre on it. Glazed at the charges of Hugh Ley, Citizen and Skinner of London, and a Parishioner here, Anno Dom. 1618. At the bottome of this Window thus. Forget you not the Blazing Starre, This yeere to us is showne; Make use thereof both neere and farre, The like hath not beene knowne. Anno. Dom. 1618. The next Window upward. Glazed at the charges of Barbara Burnell, Widow, late wife of Iohn Bur∣nell, Merchant, and free of the Cloth∣workers, Anno Dom. 1618. The next Window upward. Glazed at the charges of the Lady Elizabeth Ihones, Wife to Sir Francis Ihones, Knight, and Alderman of this City, and Daughter to Master Henry Rolffe, of this Parish, deceased Iuly 1618. The next Window upward. This Window was Glazed at the charge of Cicilia Cleyton, late Widow to Master Richard Cleyton, Citizen and Salter, but free of the Worshipfull Company of Dyers of London, and de∣ceased the 23. of October 1602. Gla∣zed in October 1618. The uppermost Window on the North side. This Window was Glazed at the charge of Edmond Wright, Grocer, 1618. A faire Monument in the Chancell, on the North side, with this Inscription. Deo O. M. Memoriae & posteris sacrum. Hic in Choro intra Cancellos, sub medio sacrae Mensae, Franciscae Filiae Tho. wal∣ker, de Beconfield Armig. Dilectissimae Conjugis Gulielmi Bosweli, hujus Ec∣clesiae Vicarij, sub spe gloriosae Resurre∣ctionis, Cineres & exuviae Reponuntur. Lectissima Foemina, vultu, Moribus. Ge∣stu, incessu, vestitu, venusta, Modestis∣sima; Lingua pauciloqua, Maedica nunquam; sacrae lectioni, lachrymis & precibus assidua; Deo devotissima, Marito fidelissima, Amicis gratissima; In re familiari, & libera & provida; Pauperibus (quoad Facultatulas) in∣dulgentissima; Bonis chara, Malis in∣visa, omnibus Aequa; post piè & sine strepitu pacificè transactam vitam, cir∣ca medium Aetatis, Anno salutis 1630. ult. Oct. Dominico Requievit in Do∣mino. Benè dixit, & benè tacuit, Benè vixit, & benè latuit. Moestissimus Maritus (cujus per latera transfixa jacet) L. M. Q. serò tandem, sed & seriò posuit. Quicunque hanc Tabulam temeraris ma∣lae Conscientiae Reus esto. Ipse post illam vixit, sed vitam vix vita∣lem, Annum nec integrum, demumque moriens, Octob. 3. Anno 1631. Hîc juxta cum illa sepultus jacet. Natus fuit Bristolae, ubi primis litteris institutus, posteâ Oxonii in Artibus Ma∣gistratum, & in Theologia Bacchalau∣reatum Adeptus est, Baliolensis Collegii Socius, unde cum Domine Iohanne Digbeio, Comite Bristol. in Hispaniam, legato Regio, profectus, Per An. 5. plus minus illi à sacris ibidem inservivit, tandemque Reversus à Collegio Baliol. hujus Ecclesiae Vicaria, & à Domino Digbeio, Rectoria Ecclesiae de Horton juxta Colbrooke, in Com. Buck. dona∣tus, postquam diû cum infirmo Corpore, mens vegeta colluctata fuisset, postre∣mum
hî in Domo Vicariatus hujus, placide & piè in Christo obdormivit. Anno Aetat. 50. sobole Relicta nulla. Ingenium floridum, Mores ingenui, Ma∣nus larga, pectus Apertum. Gulielmus Bosvelus, hujus Ecclesiae Vicarius per An. 15. Qui obiit Octob. 3. Anno 1631. Et Vxor ejus, Octob. ult. 1630. This is written upon his Graveston in the Chancell, under the Commu∣nion Table. A very faire Monument over against it, on the South side of the Chancell. Christi quibus obierunt Anni Isthinc Numerantur. 1619. Apocalyps. cap. 14. vers. 13. BeatI qVi In DoMIno qVIesCVnt. 1624. Prima ad Corinth. cap. 15. vers. 57. Deo sIt gratIa qVI trIbVt NobIs (fatI) VICtorIaM. At the lower end of this rich Tombe this. Memoriae Sacrum▪ Richardi Pyot, nuper Civis, & Celeberri∣mae hujus Civitatis Adermani vene∣rabilis, Nec non Margeriae Pyot Vxo∣ris suae ut Fidelissimae, ita & Religio∣sissimae, qui quum in prospero rerum af∣flatu tranquille vitam Transegissent, tandem Annorum pleni, Pythagorico li∣berorum numero beati denario, omnium denique Bonorum suffragiis, laudibus∣que honorati, vitam auspicat initam, Feliciter Actam, fine quoque beato (carnis soluti ergastule) clauserunt. Hic quidem 19. die mensis Ianuarii, Anno Dom. 1619. Illa vero mensis Febru∣arii, vicesimo octavo; Anno Dom. 1624. Et hic Beatam manent Resurrectionem. Quos connexît Amor verus, Castum que cubile, Queis longi dantur Nestoriique dies; Vna quibus Regio natalis, Dives, opima, Vnum quique Dei Templum adiêre duo, Per totam tenuit nos una Paraecia vitam, Sors rerum nobis una eademque fuit: Denique (lector amans) quoniam convenimus ambo, Nos mens una Duos, nos rogus unus habet. On the North side of the Chancell, a very faire Monument, with this Inscription. M. S. Prudens senator Mercimonii Indici, Vigil Magister integrae famae & Rei, Domi Beatus conjug atque liberis, Poterat videri seculo felix suo, Nisi lapidasset tot bona infestus silex, Silex latentes cuspide lanians sinus, Sed Christianus id mali vertit bene Virtute adaucta: Fluxanam fastidiens, Mercator Adax Avidus niri Deo, Hac unione Reliqua mutavit libens. Sub hoc Marmore expectat Resurrectionem Gulielmus Haliday ex Antiqua Hali∣daiorum Familia in Comitatu Glocestr. Civis & Senator Londinensis, singu∣lare, Integritatis, Prudentiae & Pieta∣tis, exemplar: Is postquam VII. An∣nos inter purpuratos Patres urbis Re∣bus cum magna Aequitatis & Sapien∣tiae laude vacasset, Indicae societati prope Biennium, quantum per Aegritudinem licebat, summa cura praefuisset. Longis ex calculo doloribus fractus, Mente semper intacta, inter suorum Amplexus & lacrymas, bonis desideratus, Placide Animam suo Creatori Reposuit. Anno Aetatis 58. Febr. 14. Anno Dom. 1623. Marito dilectissimo Susanna Henrici Roe Equitis, quondam praetoris urbani Filia, Amisso compare suavissimo. M. P. Parenti dulcissimo Anna Vxor Henrici Mildmaei aequitis, ex Nobilis. Mild∣maeor umprosapia, in comitatu Essexiae.
Margareta nupta Edwardo Hungerford, militi ex illustri Hungerfordiorum domo in comitatu Wiltoniae. M. M. P. P. A very faire Stone in the South Ile, with this inscription about it. Here lyeth the body of Anne Barker, the Wife of Iohn Barker, of London, Merchant, the Daughter of Thomas Westrow, Alderman of London; She deceased the 2. of August 1629. In the middle of the Stone, with their Armes at the foure corners of it, these words. Though we are dead, yet our lives are hid in Christ with God. Christ is to mee both in life and death advantage. Though my flesh fayleth, and my heart also, yet God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France, Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of State, Of Armes, of Learning, Fate, and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne're was seene, So great a Prince, so good a Queene. Sith Vertues Her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirit inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Obiit 24. die Martii 1602. Anno Regni 45. Aetatis suae 70. Lawrence Pountney. THe Steeple of this Church was new Leaded, five new Bells were hung, and the Frames they hang in new made, all the Iles were new raised and levelled, and the whole Church within and without worthily repaired and beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parish, in the yeeres of our Lord God 1631. and 1632. George Downes Robert Meade Churchwardens. A Monument at upper end of the North Ile, with this Inscription. Hoc est nescire, sine Christo, plurima scire, Si Christum bene scis, satis est, si caetera nescis. This Monument▪ Was erected Anno Dom. 1620. by the Lady Anne Bromley, late Wife vnto Sir Henry Bromley, of Holt, in the County of Worcester, Knight, Daughter of William Beswicke of Lon∣don, Alderman, in remembrance of her first Husband, William Offley, of London, Merchant, who being free of the Merchant-Taylors, fined both for Sheriffe and Alderman. He had issue by the said Anne 15. chil∣dren, whereof five are living, viz. William, Elizabeth, Margaret, Robert, and Mary, the rest died Infants. Leonard Eastcheape. IN the yeere of our Lord 1618. this Church by a casualty of fire, hap∣ning by whiting of Baskets, in the house of one Ierome Baynton a Turner, (situate in Little Eastcheape, on the North side of the said Church, whose house was burned downe, and in the place thereof another built with Bricke) was fired in the Steeple there∣of, being a Spire covered with Lead; it was quenched, but not without great paines and much danger to some per∣sons (who were not unrewarded by the Parish) before any great hurt was done to it by the fire, more then the defacing of it, and other parts of the
Church; but for the said Steeple was very old, much ruined and decay∣ed in the stone worke thereof, to pre∣vent further danger, it was pulled downe, and all the West end of the Church thereto adjoyning, a new Foundation laid, inlarged three foot toward the East, and new built, not without great charge to the Inhabi∣tants of the Parish, who were all wil∣ling and ready to contribute towards the Rebuilding, Repairing, and Beau∣tifying of the house of God; and the better to set forward the worke, the Inhabitants of the Parish did taxe themselves toward the charge at 198. li. 6. s. 4. d. but for that the Parish is but small, and the greater part of the Inhabitants poore, they were inforced by their Petition to seeke help from his Majesty, who was graciously pleased to grant them his Letters Patents (for their reliefe) to collect and gather in severall Counties within this King∣dome towards the charge of the Re∣building the Steeple, and the Repai∣ring of the Church. The Steeple being finished as it now standeth, the South wall toward the Churchyard being much decayed, was also taken downe and new built, and the Church in other parts repai∣red, the charge thereof amounting to above 850. pounds, of which the Pa∣rish received by way of collection (to∣ward their charge) in London, and o∣ther places, the summe of 170. li. 1. s. 9. d. and of other Benefactors, 10. li. 15. s. they having one Patent for sixe Shires also, the partie that was imploy∣ed to lay the Briefes, and gather the Collections, went away with all, and brought to the Parish neither Briefe nor Peny. The Steeple of this Church, and the wall on the South side (toward the Churchyard) was builded, and the Church in other parts repaired and beautified, in the yeeres 1618, 1619, 1620, 1621. Abraham Colfe Rector. Edwin Fisher Richard Foster Richard Bourne Henry Gulstone Churchwardens. Leonards Fosterlane. INcurvate Domino, in decore Sancti∣tatis, Chron. 6. cap. 9. Psal. 29. v. 2. Domine dilexi decorem Domus tuae. Psalm. 26. 8. Haec Dei Domus, Auctior est facta, & Augustior, Opere, & Impensis Parochi∣anorum Sancti Leonardi Faust-lane, Lon∣don. Guardianis Ecclesiae tunc temporis exi∣stentibus, Francisco Ash, Cive & Auri∣fabro, una cum Richardo Stephano Mar∣tiniensi, 1631. Vnus huic operi suppetias fecit Maje∣res Iohannes Trot, Civis & Mercator, Pro singulari suo in Ecclesiam amore, hanc imprimis, quia Patria. A very faire Window at the upper end of the Chancell, 1633. The charge of this amounting to the summe of five hundred pounds and up∣wards. S. Magnus. THis Church, in the yeeres of our Lord God 1623, 1624, and 1625. in many parts of it, had many Repaires and Charges, the summes of them amounting to the summe of 500. pounds and upward. Also in the yeere of our Lord 1629. it was richly and very worthily beau∣tified. Iohn Langley Iohn Broome Churchwardens. This, as the former, being the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners. A very faire Monument in the South Ile of the Chancell, with this inscription. Here lyeth interred the bodies of Sir Iohn Garrard, Knight, and Dame Iane his Wife, who was Daughter to Richard Partridge, Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, by whom he had 13. Children, five whereof died young: they lived comforta∣bly together 43. yeeres. He was Lord Maior of London in the yeere of our Lord God 1601. She departed this life the 24. of Ianu∣ary 1616. And hee left this world the 7. of May, 1625. being 79. yeeres old, leaving only two sonnes and sixe daughters behind him. This Monument was erected at the charges of Benedict Garrard, Gentle∣man, his youngest Son, Anno 1629. Margaret Lothbury. THis Church was repaired and thorowout very worthily beau∣tified, at the cost and charge of the Parishiones, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1621. Francis Haddon Iohn Walker Churchwardens. A faire Monument in the South Ile, at the upper end, with this Inscription. Quid Diurnare Magnos invides Parea? Heis Robertus Ierminorum à Rushbrooke Nobile Germen, Hîc situs est, Plos Iuvenum, sub Aevi flore Raptus, Qui virtutum utriusque Aetatis Apicibus Potitus, Ingenio & Indole Iuventutis, Nec non senili pietate ac prudentia Infra se turbam Coaetaneam Reliquit, Impubes senex: Et quod negavit saeculo, Coelo dedit. Sic sapere ante annos nocuit, nam maxima virtus, Persuasit morti, ut Crederet esse senem. Margaret Moses. THis Church was very worthily repaired and beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1627. Symon Price Iohn Whitcombe Churchwardens. A very faire Monument on the South side, with this inscription. Here lyeth the bodies of Iohn Harper, Citizen and Fishmonger, Treasu∣ror of Christs Hospitall, and Alder∣mans Deputy of Breadstreet Ward, London: and Francis his Wife, Daughter to Iames Smith, of Great Limber, in the County of Lincolne, Gentleman, by whom he had issue five Children, but at the time of their death left onely a sonne Iohn, and a daughter Anne, married to Iohn Whitcombe of London. He died the 27. of November 1632. in the 79. yeere of his age. And shee de∣parted this life the 30. day of Octo∣ber 1630. being 72. yeeres old. Credimus quod Redemptor noster vivit, & Novissimo die videbimus deum sal∣vatorem nostrum. Margaret New-fishstreet. THis Church, not having any cost, or but little in a long time bestowed upon it, is now very suddenly to be repaired, and (as wee speake of the rest) very worthily trim∣med and beautified. Margaret Pattons. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1614.
Master Godwin Master Peate Churchwardens. The charge of it then amounting to the summe of 71. li. 15. s. 6. d. But since that time, as necessity hath called upon these honest and carefull Parishioners, for a supply either of strength or beauty, it hath had many repaires & charges, the whole summe of them all, from 1614. arising to the yere of our Lord 1632. to 275. li. 5. s. 6. d. Master Shalcrosse Master Milksoppe Churchwardens. A pretty fine Monument on a Pillar in the Chancell, on the North, with this inscription. In the middle part of this Chancell, lieth interred the body of Mistresse Elizabeth Freeman, Wife to Master Thomas Freeman, of this Parish, Mer∣chant, to whom shee was espoused sixteene yeeres, two moneths, and eight dayes, by whom she had issue sixe Sonnes and three Daughters li∣ving, and died in Childbed of the last Sonne. She descended of wor∣shipfull Parents, and as shee was vertuously bred, so lived and died, full of Faith, Hope, and Charity, as knowne to many that had made use thereof, to their great comfort in time of necessity; for her only study was, to serve God, and doe good to others; shee was of the age of 35. yeeres, and departed this life to a better the 21. of February 1631. On a faire Marble in the Chancell is this inscription. Here lieth buried Mistresse Anne El∣kington, the beloved Wife of Master Thomas Elkington, Merchant, shee was the Daughter of Master Iohn Goodwin, Merchant, likewise of this City. Shee lived and died in the feare of God, and in the faith of our Lord Iesus. Shee exchanged this life for a better the 27. day of Sep∣tember 1632. in the 23. yeere of her age, and in the third yeere of her marriage, leaving behind her Anne her only daughter, her only son is not. She shall rise againe. Mary Abchurch. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1611. William Stanly Iohn Cornish Churchwardens. A faire Monument in the Chancell, at the upper end, with this inscription. An Epitaph Vpon the departure of the Illustrious Pre∣sident of bounty and pious industry, Master Roger Montague, Esquire. In life and death, thy workes did well pursue The honourable name of Montague, Nobility of birth ran in thy blood, Nobility of Action made that good. Thy Charity, the top of all thy fame, The figure that thy Monument may claime With Justice, tis thine owne, fit to enroule Thy memory (here) as Heaven adornes thy soule. Summe up all Vertues, in man ever knowne, And set them to thy actions, th'are thine owne: That's the neer'st way to make for thy worth roome, Particular praises would o'respread the Tombe: Here's all, in briefe, who shall henceforth indite A good mans Epitaph, let him but write The Copy of thy life, it stands for all, That ever made mans praise, or ever shall.
Mary Aldermanbury. THis Church, for the space of 4. yeeres past, hath in one decayed part or another beene repairing; as the Steeple, Bels, Battlements, ma∣ny decayed places of the Walls, two faire Galleries built, many of the Pewes new made, the rest being all in hand, it can be no great offence to ac∣count them already done; which gran∣ted, and the Church in this yeere fini∣shed, we may conclude as we beganne with the rest of these Churches, thus: This Church was repaired, richly and very worthily beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1633. Bartholomew Edwards Abraham Nuns. Churchwardens A very beautifull Tombe at the upper end on the South side of the Chancell, with this inscription. Mary Brigs, the Daughter of Thomas Crofts, deceased the 8. day of Au∣gust, Anno Dom. 1610. being of the age of 31. yeeres. William, out of a dutifull respect to his deare Parents, consecrated this Mo∣nument. Ioyning with this in the same Monument. David Brigs, Citizen and Skinner of London, who had two Wives, Mary the Daughter of Thomas Crofts, Dra∣per, by whom hee had two sonnes and foure Daughters; and Rebekah, the Daughter of Humphrey Street, Merchant-Taylor, by whom he had no Issue; who deceased the 17. day of Iune, Anno Dom. 1626. being of the age of 57. yeeres, lyeth here in∣tombed in hope of a glorious Resur∣rection. A very faire Monument in the Chancell, over against the other, with this inscription. Here lyeth the body of Master Robert Offley, Gentleman, sonne of Hugh Offley, Alderman of this City, who tooke to Wife Elizabeth, the daugh∣ter of Humphrey Street, by whom he had issue seven Sons and six Daugh∣ters; he died at the age of 64. yeeres, on the 4. day of November 1631. A very faire Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Deo Trino & Vai-sacrum. Thomas Hayes, Eques Auratus, secundum Christi Adventum, sub hoc Tumulo ex∣pectat. Qui cùm ab Adolescentio, per mag∣nam Europae partem Mercaturam ex∣ercuisset, ita industria, & judicio cla∣ruit, nt unanimi omnium consensu, Major hujus Civitatis cooptatus fuerit, & cum hoc summum summi Magistra∣tus officium, non solum singulari inte∣gritate, sed & excellenti verae Religio∣nis promulgandae cura, & pietate exe∣quutus fulsset, tandem septuagesimo Aetatis Anno, Deo bonisque Charus, piè & placidè in Domino obdormivit 27. Septem. Anno salutis 1617. Martha Vxor Moestissima viro suo opti∣mo, Officiosae pietatis, & memoriae ergo, hoc Monumentum posuit. Mary Aldermary. THis Church was repaired, rich∣ly and very worthily beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord 1632. Iohn Edwards Thomas Archer Churchwardens. But while wee speake the love and liberality of the living, wee must not forget the dead, whose bounties (thogh they be dust) are as fresh in this good worke, as theirs that have seene it finisht.
And first, of Master William Rodo∣way, one borne and buried in this Pa∣rish, though from his youth to his end he lived and died in another, Michael Bassishaw, who at the time of his death (which was in the yeere of our Lord 1626) gave towards the Re-building of the Steeple of this Church, then greatly decayed and perished, the summe of 300. li. In this Parish, in the same yeere al∣so, there died one Master Richard Pier∣son, who towards the better and more beautifull building of this Steeple, gave the summe of 200. Markes, with this condition, with those with whom he intrusted this mony, that this Stee∣ple (thus to be built) should follow its ancient paterne, and goe forward and be finished, according to the founda∣tion of it, laid 120. yeeres since, by the Founder of this Church, a Knight, one Sir Henry Kibbell, which within three yeeres after was so finished, the cost of it amounting to a thousand pounds: of which all, above the cost of these two very worthy Benefactors (beside the charge before named) being the cost and charge of the Parish. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Monumentum Elizabethae Angliae Reginae. In the figure of a Booke. Psal. 112. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. On the one side. Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens jem, Earth's joy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. On the other side. Britaines Blessing, Englands Splendor, Religions Nurse, The Faiths Defendor. Vnder her Monument. Many Daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all. Mary le Bow. THis Chancell was raised, the Church new Pewed, and tho∣rowout repaired and beautified, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1620. William Parnell William Wallis Churchwardens. In a little Chappell on the South side of the Church, is a Monument thus written on. Per fidem introitus. Robertus Blankworth Scriptor peritus, ju∣stus, ac sapiens, qui desideratus vixit, obiitque una cum Bina conjuge, Sarah fideli ac pia, Elizabetha prudente ac so∣bria, & duabus filiis, Deborah patien∣te ac Religiosa, Martha Innocente Pu∣ellula. Non Carni sed Carnem hîc semi∣nantes, gloriesam expectant Resurrecti∣onem. Robertus Blankworth, filius Roberti ac Sa∣rae unigenitus, unicè dilectus, qui me∣moriale istud, in honorem patris ac pa∣ternae sortis extrui fecit, in hac valle La∣chrymarum pacificam expetit dissoluti∣onem. Istos Cista capit, Lachrymarum hunc orbe, utrosque pacifici gloria parta manet. Hac spe vivo. Dignitas ejus in ipso incipit, tua & is. A faire Monument in the Chancell, with this Inscription. Here lyeth interred the body of Ed∣mond Criche, Esquire, late Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, and Master of the said Worshipfull Company, Annis 1624. and 1625. who married Thomasin, the Daugh∣ter of Simon Henden of Beneden, in the County of Kent, Gentleman, and lived with her in conjugall love 40. yeeres, and had issue 12. children, and left at his decease 5. sonnes, viz. Iohn, Edward, Nathan, Samuel, Peter,
and 3. Daughters, Elizabeth, Tho∣masine, and Margaret; and among them eleven Grand-children. Obiit 23. Decemb. Anno 1627. Aetatis suae 73. Iohannes Criche filius suus primogenitus, ex officio, & amore suo, Moestissimus hoc posuit. Edward Criche, eldest sonne to the said Iohn Criche, lieth here interred by his Grandfather. Obiit 25. Febru. 1628. Aetatis suae 50. Queene Elizabeths Monument. In the Table onely this. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. From henceforth is laid up for me a Crowne of Righteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Iudge shall give mee at that day; and not me onely, but to them also that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. Vpon the Wall, on either side of this Table, these lines. A representation of the Monument e∣rected by King Iames (sacred unto Memory, and for an eternall Me∣moriall) for Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, &c. Daughter of King Henry the eighth, by Queene Anne Bullen, Grandchild to King Henry the seventh, great Grandchild to King Edward the fourth, and Sister to King Edward the sixth and Queene Mary; who restored Religion to its primitive sincerity; setled Peace thorowly; reduced Coine to the old Standards; extinguished Rebellion at home; relieved France, neere ruine by in∣testine mischiefes; supported the Netherlands; vanquished Spaines Armado; quieted Ireland, with Spa∣niards expulsion, and Traytors co∣ercion; augmented exceedingly both Vniversities Revenewes, by a Law of Provision, and enricht all Eng∣land: Was The Mother of this her Country; the Nurse of Religion and Learning; and for perfect skill of very many Languages; for glorious Indow∣ments, as well of Minde as Body; and for Regall Vertues beyond her Sex; A Prince Incomparable. And in the 45. yeeres most prudent and happy Governement, she died; in the 70. yeere of her age, and of our Redemption 1602. Whose Corps is interred in the famous Collegiate Church of Westminster, under the aforesaid Magnificent Monument. On the other side. Fame blow aloud, and to the world proclame, There never ruled such a Royall Dame. The Word of God was ever her delight, In it she meditated day and night. Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Earths joy, Englands em, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. She was, and is, what can there more be said? On Earth the Chiefe, in Heaven the second Maid. In a booke held over her by an Angell these words. Verbum Dei. Mary Bothaw. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1621. Iohn Bennet Thomas Dight Churchwardens. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, &c. Daughter to King
Henry the eighth, and Grandchild to King Henry the seventh, by Eliza∣beth, ldest Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Reli∣gion, reduced Coyne to the just va∣lue, assisted France and the Low-Countries, and overcame the Spa∣nish invincible Navy, enriched all England, and administred most pru∣dently the Imperiall State thereof 45. yeeres in true piety, In the 70. yeere of her age, in most happy and peaceable manner she departed this life, leaving her mortall parts inter∣red in the famous Church at West∣minster. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Mary Colechurch. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, February 1623. William Shamrocke Thomas Pulcher Churchwardens. Mary Hill. THis Church, in the many decay∣ed parts and places of it, was re∣paired, richly and very wor∣thily beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1616. To the continuing of which, the carefull overseers of it, every third or fourth yeere ever since, have bestowed a new trimming upon it: No sooner (as I am informed) finding any defect, fayling, or declining of it, than apply∣ing their care to revive, refresh, and restore it, which appeares in its present beauty. Mary Mounthaw. THis Church was in part new built, and very much inlarged and beautified, in the yeere of our Lord 1609. Robert Ploncker Marke Bateman Churchwardens. Benefactors towards this building: Robert Bennet, Bishop of Hereford, Sir William Craven, Sir Thomas Middleton, and Doctor Edwold. In the yeere 1610. this Church was wholly Glazed at the cost and charges of Thomas Tyler, Haberdasher, and Richard Tichburne, Skinner. In the South Ile of this Church hangs a very faire Picture of King IAMES, with the figures of Peace and Plenty on either side of him; Peace with her Olive Branch, and Plenty with her Sheafe of Wheat in her hands. The gift of the aforenamed Robert Ploncker, then Churchwarden. Mary Summerset. THis Church was repaired and beautified, in the yeere of our Lord, 1624. Robert Violet Thomas Cumbers Churchwardens. In a Table hanging close by the Pulpit are these words. Dictum Thomae Burtoni, Rectoris Ecclesiae, tempore Reparationis, & exornationis hujus Aedificii. Dominus Petra mea, & Arx mea, & Li∣berator meus, Deus meus, Adjutor meus, Sperabe in cum. Psal. 18. 2. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Psal. 112. The righteous shall bee had in everlasting remembrance. Prov. 6. The memoriall of the just shall bee blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c.
Mary Staynings. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost of the Pa∣rish, in the yeere of our Lord, 1630. August 23. Charles Medowes Thomas Francis Churchwardens. The Armoriall Atchievements of Sir Arthur Savage, Knight. In the Vault underneath, lyeth the bo∣dy of the honourable Sir Arthur Sa∣vage, Knighted at Cadez in Spaine, 1596. Generall of her Majesties forces in the Kingdome of France, at the siege of Amyaunce, the 39. of Queene Elizabeth: Colonell, Vice-Treasurer, Receiver generall, and Councellor of estate in Ireland: He had Issue by his second Wife, Sarah Daughter of Anthony Woolhouse, of Clapwell, in the County of Darby (Widow of George Smithes, Sheriffe and Alderman of London 1611) one onely Daughter named Iune. Hee died the 13. of March, 1632. Mary Woollchurch. THis Church was richly repaired and beautified, at the charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1629. Francis Browne Robert New Churchwardens. A very faire Screene at the middle West doore of this Church, was the gift of Capitaine Edward Dichfeyld, at the time of his going out of the Office of Churchwarden, in the yeere 1620. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, &c. second Daughter to Henry the eighth, begotten of the Lady Anne Bullen his second Wife, and Grandchild to K. Henry the se∣venth, and Elizabeth, eldest Daugh∣ter to Edward the fourth, borne at Greenewich the 17. of September, 1534. Shee succeeded her Sister Queene Mary, as Queene of Eng∣land, restoring true Religion, redu∣ced Coine to the just Value, assisted France, and the Low Countries, over∣came the Spanish invicible Ar∣mies, and was for Prudence, Justice, and Piety, not onely the Patron of her Sex, but a Patterne for all Prin∣ces of Christendome. She died at Richmond the 24. of March, 1602. being 69. yeeres, sixe mo∣neths, and seventeene dayes old, when shee had reigned 44. yeeres, 4. moneths, and 7. dayes. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For Temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. As in a Booke. They that trust in the Lord, shall bee as Mount Sion, which cannot be remo∣ved, but remaineth for ever. Spaines Rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths joy, Worlds wonder, Naturos chiefe. Vnder her. Th'admired Princesse through the world applauded, For supreme Vertues rarest imitation; Whose Scepters rule, Fames loud voic'd Trump hath lauded, Vnto the eares of every forraigne Nation, Canopied under powerfull Angels wings, To her immortall praise sweet Science sings.
Mary Woollnoth. IT is so long since this Church was repaired and beautified, that wee now rather looke upon what it is, than what it was; and forward to a re∣paire to come, then backward to that that is gone. Wee see it seemes to call upon the Parishioners for it, and heare it is shortly to have it: for (as I am in∣formed) it is promised and preparing; the preparation likewise promising a great deale of cost and beauty. Martins Ironmonger lane. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1629. A very faire Screene at the entrance into this Church, with this Inscrip∣tion: Me fieri fecerunt Hamletus Clarke, Gene∣rosus, & Radulphus Latham, Armiger, 20. Martii 1629. In the yeere 1627. a great part of the North wall of this Church, being very much decayed and perished, was at the cost of the Parish rebuilded: but in it a very faire Window, with these words: This Window was new built and finished, at the sole cost of Iohn and Humphrey Slany, 1627. The Armes of these Gentlemen over it, with this Motto: Deo Duce, Comite Industria. A faire Monument at the upper end of the Chancell, on the North side, with this Inscription. Here under lyeth buried Eleanor, Wife of Hamlet Clarke, free of the Wor∣shipfull Company of Fishmongers London, and one of the foure Clerkes of the Lord Maiors Court, London, aforesaid. She died on Sunday the 14. of Ianuary, 1626. and was bu∣ried on Fryday the 19. of the same, after they had beene married 33. yeeres and about two moneths. And they had issue onely Mary, married to Ralph Latham of Vpminster, in the County of Essex, Esquire, Common Sergeant at Law of this Honoura∣ble City. And the said Eleanor, had also Eliza∣beth, another Daughter, by Charles Barnard, a former Husband, marri∣ed to Thomas Latham of Stilford in Essex, Gentleman. A very faire Stone in the North Ile, with this inscription about it. Here lyeth interred the body of Ran∣doll Pickering, late Citizen and Ha∣berdasher of London, borne at Tur∣vine in the County of Chester, who put off this mortality, March 10. 1629. And Alice his Wife, daugh∣ter of William Madox, and borne in this Parish, who departed this life the 20. of Iune, 1618. By her hee had Issue three Sonnes and three Daughters, William, Randoll, Anne, and Elizabeth surviving, Iohn and Ma∣ry deceased. Martins Ludgate. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost & charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord God 1623. Henry Iohnson William Liod Churchwardens. A very handsome Monument in the Wall, at the upper end of the Chancell, with this Inscription. M. S. Here lieth the body of Thomas Allen, of London, Gentleman, who died
the 22. day of October 1630. divers of whose Ancestors have beene in∣terred in this Church. No Epitaph need make the just man fam'd, The good are prais'd, when they are onely nam'd. Martins Orgars. IN the yeere 1630. the Steeple of this Church was repaired, the East Window in the Chancell, and three great South Windowes, were new Glazed, which with the Plumb∣ers worke and Tiling, amounted to the summe of 122. li. 6. s. 6. d. Richard Tomes Iames Pickering Churchwardens. A rich and very beautifull Monument in the Chancell, with this Inscription. M. S. Sir Allen Cotton, Knight, and Alderman of London, sometime Lord Maior of this Honourable City, son of Ralph Cotton of Alkington, in the Parish of Whitchurch, in the County of Salop, Gentleman, was espoused unto Elli∣nor, the Daughter of Edmond Moore, Citizen and Draper of London, by whom he had Issue seven Sons and seven Daughters, and lived unto the age of 70. yeeres, generally belo∣ved, and died the 24. of December, 1628. being the Eve of the celebra∣tion of our blessed Saviours Nativi∣ty, which sell out by Gods provi∣dence, to bee the day of his second birth, and convoy to eternall blisse. He left behind him three Sonnes, Edmond, Iohn, and William, and two Daughters; which sonnes, in a fili∣all expression of their duties, have caused this Monument to be erected, in memory of their deare deceased Father. When he left Earth, rich Bounty d'd, Mild Courtesie gave place to Soft Mercy to bright Iustice said, O, Sister, we are both betraid; White Innocence lay on the ground By Truth, and wept at eithers wound. The sonnes of Levi did lament, Their Lamps wentout, their Oyle was spent; Heaven hath his soule, and onely we Spinne out our lives in misery. So Death, thou missest of thy ends, And kilst not him, but kilst his friends. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France. (State, Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of Of Ames, of Learning, Fate, and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne're was seene, So great a Prince, so good a Queene. Sith Vertue Her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirit inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts. Prov. 31. 29. Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou surmountest them all. She is is not dead, But sleepeth. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Martin Outwitch. IT is since this Church was repaired and beautified 39. yeeres, in the passage of which time, that repaire and beauty being lost, it is (as I am in∣formed, by some that belong to the Church) to bee repaired againe very shortly, with a great deale of cost and beauty. Martins Vintrey. THis Church was in part Re-edi∣fied, and in many parts Repai∣paired and beautified, at the
cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the second yeere of the reigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Iames, King of great Britaine, France, and Ireland. Iohn Woodbridge William Barnaby Churchwardens. The charge then amounting to the summe of foure hundred sixty and odde pounds. It was againe repaired, richly and very worthily beautified, in the yeere of our Lord 1632. as before, at the cost of the Parish. Iohn Norton Richard Travers Churchwardens. In this Church, at the upper end of the South Ile, lyeth buried the body of Sir Cutberd Hacket, sometime Lord Maior of this City; his Coat, Streamers, and other Adornments, hanging over his Grave, but no o∣ther Monument. Queene Elizabeths Monument. To the eternall memory of Elizabeth, Queene of England, France, and Ire∣land: Daughter to King Henry the eighth, Neece to King Henry the se∣venth, by the Daughter of King Ed∣ward the fourth; a Mother to her Country, a Nurse to Religion, and all good Arts, being of incompara∣ble Knowledge in very many Lan∣guages, and indued with rare Orna∣ments of Body and Minde, in all Princely Vertues above the Sex of Women. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Matthew Frydaystreet. THis Church was repaired and very worthily beautified, at the cost of the Parishioners, in the yeeres of our Lord, 1632. and 1633. Richard Clay Ioseph Stacy Churchwardens. The charge 140. pounds. Maudlin Milkestreet. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord God 1619. Gilbert Ward Thomas Smith Churchwardens. All the Chancell Window was built at the proper cost of Master Benjamin Henshaw, Merchant-Taylor, and one of our City Captaines, the charge of it arising to 60. pounds and upwards. In the yeere 1633. there was added to this, a faire Communion Table, with a faire Frame about it, which with some other things then done to the further beautifying of the Church, a∣mounted to the summe of 30. pounds. Iohn Rundell Iohn Clutterbucke Churchwardens. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Obiit 24. die Martii 1602. Anno Regni 45. Aetatis suae 70. In the figure of a Booke over Her, these words. Verbum Dei, manet in Aeternum. Vnder her. I have fought a good fight, &c. On the one side. Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, &c. Daughter to King Henry the eighth, and Grandchild of King Henry the seventh, by Eliza∣beth, eldest Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Reli∣gion, reduced Coyne to the just va∣lue, assisted France and the Low-Countries, and overcame the Spa∣nish invincible Navy, enriched all England, and administred most pru∣dently the Imperiall State thereof 45. yeeres in true piety, In the 70. yeere of her age, in most happy and
peaceable manner departed this life, leaving her mortall parts inter∣red in the famous Church of West∣minster, till the second comming of Christ. On the other side. Monumentum Elizabethae Reginae. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths Ioy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. Maudlins Oldfishstreet. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord, 1630. Richard Hubbard Iohn Blew Churchwardens. The charge of it amounting to the summe of 140. pounds. A very Monument in the same Church with this Inscription. Epitaphium. 1622. Clarissimi viri Gulielmi Druraei, ex Anti∣qua & Illustri Druraeorum Familiâ oriundi, Iuris Caesarii Doctoris, & Am∣plissimae Curiae praerogativae in Angliâ Dignissimi Iudicis, jam olim defuncti, Recenter verò Mariae Vxoris ejus Foe∣minae laudatissimae, ex spendidissimo Southwellorum genere prognatae. Hâc Gulielmus humo Terdenis dormiit Annis, Nunc subiit tumulum juncta Maria viro. Iustitiae fuit hic cultor, jurisque Magister, Haec quoque Magnanimâ Nobilitata fide. Senâ prole ferax, virtutum exempla futuris, Aeternanda Aevis liquit uterque Parens, Felices nimium utrâque, & Funere sponsos, Dant quibus haec unum Cor, Humus, Astra, Locum. Charissimis suis Patri & Matrihoc Carmine Parentavit Gulielmus Druraeus. Hoc Monumentum in memoriam de fun∣ctorum Amicorum poni curavit Tho. Cotton, A. R. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France. Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of State, Of Armes, of Learning, Fate, and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne re was seene, So great a Prince  good a Queene. Sith Vertue Her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirit inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts. Many Daughters have done vertuously but thou excellest them all. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Michael Bassishaw. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of this Parish, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1630. Thomas Barnie Christopher Price Churchwardens.
Michael Cornehill. HEre a Repaire followes a Re∣paire so close, that while I speake of the one I must not forget the other, the former being in the yeeres of our Lord God, 1618, 1619, and 1620. at the finishing. William Stannard George Hill Francis Mosse Churchwardens. Of the beauty conceive by the cost, the charge of it amounting to 644. li. The other in this present yeere of our Lord, 1633. in which the Roofe over the Chancell was new trim'd, the Chancell likewise inriched with a faire and very curious Table of the Com∣mandements, the Windowes about it were new Glazed, the Stones thorow the whole body of the Church taken up, new layed and levelled, and in a word, every part of it at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, was well and very worthily beautified. Iohn Collison Richard Norton Francis Middleton Churchwardens. The charge of this arising to 300. li. and upward. A very faire Monument on the Wall, in the North Ile, with this Inscription. Memoriae Sacrum Laurentio, & Mariae Caldwall Conjugi∣bus, sacro Foedare Iunctis, & Duodenae prolis Parentibus; Quorum Vxor, & Mater Maria obiit Octobris xx. Anno Dom. 1621. Maritus, & Pater Lau∣rentius, Novemb. xxj. 1625. Septua∣genariis utrisque; Liberalibus & suis, & de suis; Hoc sepulcrum posuere, pa∣rentalis Haeredes bonitatis, Filii eorum observantissimi, quos defunctos, & Deus habet, & pauperes Carendo lugent. As it were in a Scroll, held by an Angell. Omnia ossa justi custodit Dominus. Vnder this upon the figure of a Tombe. Heere is lodg'd a loving paire, Sleeping rest they free from care; Though their journey, from their birth, Hath beene tedious long on earth, He that freed them from their sinne, Sent them to this holy Inne, Ioyfull Requiems for to sing, Hallelujahs to their King, Till the summons, till the day, Till the Trumpe sound, Rise, Away. Michael Crookedlane. THis Church was repaired and beautified, in the yeere of our Lord God 1610. In the yeere 1621. the whole Roofe of it found to bee greatly decayed and perished was taken downe, with strong and sufficient Timber re-builded, and with the Lead new cast Re-covered. The charge of it amounting to 500. pounds. Not long after this, two Windowes at the East end of the Church, very much defaced and decayed, were re∣paired; the charge of it 40. li. A rich and very beautifull Monument on the South side the Chancell, this Ile called The Fish-mongers Chappell. S. S. Nec non piae Memoriae Ioanni Lemanni. ViriClariss. civis, ac Senatoris integerrimi, Equitis Aurat. olim hui Vrbis Praetoris. Qui se, in suo munere, laudatissime Gessit, Pietatis Cultor, Iustitiae vindex. Suis in Coelibatu perpetuo vixit parens. Et suis plus quam pater munifice mortuus. Hî R. Exp. Sallinghamiae ex Agro Norfolciensi oriundus
Probitate, Simplicitate, Nixus. Anno salut. Hu. CIC. ICC. XXxij. Et suo octagesimo octavo, die Mart. 26. Reg. Coeleste, Certa Fide Praestolatur. Vpon a Marble stone in the Chancell is this Inscription. Sub hoc Marmore Requiescit, in spe resur∣rectionis ad Gloriam, Maria, fidelis Vxor Iohannis More Mercatoris, Filia Edwardi whorwood, Grocer. Obijt 10. Decemb. Anno Christi 1632. Aetatis 35. The figure of a Deaths head. Memento Mori. Hîc Mitis, Amans, Humilis, Pia, pulchra, pudica, Modesta, Grata Deo, sponso Chara, Maria jaces. I. M. Queene Elizabeths Monument. The Righteous shall bee had in remem∣brance. Queene Elizabeth both was, and is alive, what then more can be said In Heaven a Saint, in Earth a blessed Maid. She ruled England yeeres 44. and more, and then return'd to God, At the age of 70. yeeres, and somewhat od. Christ is to me life, Death is to me ad∣vantage. Phil. 1. 21. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Michael Queenehithe. THis Church was repaired and beautified, great cost bestowed on the Roofe, the East and West Windowes new built and glazed, with other Repaires about it, at the cost and charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord 1615. Miles Gunthorpe Stephen Scot Churchwardens. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all. She is not dead, But sleepeth. On the one side. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France, Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of State, Of Armes, of Learning, Fate and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne're was seene, So great a Prince, so good a Queene. On the other side. Sith Vertue her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirits inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Michael Querne. THis Church was repaired, and with all things, either for use or beauty richly supplied and furnished, at the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord 1617. A faire Monument in the North Ile, with this Inscription. Iohn Bankes, Mercer, and Esquire, whose body lyeth here interred, the Sonne of Thomas Bankes, free of the Bar∣ber-Surgeans; this Iohn was aged 59. and expired the ninth of Sep∣tember, Anno 1630.
His first Wife was Martha, a Widow, by whom he had one onely Sonne deceased: his second Wife was Anne Hasell, who left unto him one Daughter and Heire, called Anna, since married unto Edmond Wallers, of Berkensfield in Buckinghamshiere, Esquire. He gave by his last Will and Testament (written with his owne hand) to unbenificed Mini∣sters; to decayed Housekeepers; to the poore of many Parishes; to all (or the most) of the Prisons, Bride∣wells, and Hospitalls, in and about London; to young Beginners to set up their Trades; to the Artillery Garden, and towards the mainte∣nance thereof, for ever, very boun∣tifully; to his owne Company, both in Lands and Money; to his Friends, in tokens of remembrance; to di∣vers of his Kindred; and to other charitable and pious uses, the summe of 6000. li. notwithstanding Noble and sufficient Dower to his Daugh∣ter reserved. And all these severall Legacies, by his carefull Executor Robert Tichbourne, and his overseers, punctually observed, and fully dis∣charged. Inbalm'd in pious Arts, wrapt in a shroud Of white in nocuous Charity, who vow'd, Having enough, the world should understand No deed of mercy might escape his hand, Bankes here is laid to sleepe, this place did breed him, A president to all that shall succeed him. Note both his life and immitable end, Know he th'unrighteous Mammon made his Friend, Expressing by his Talents rich Increase, Service that gain'd him praise and lasting Peace. Much was to him committed, much he gave, Entring his treasure there, whence all shall have Returne with use: what to the poore is given, Claimes a just promise of Reward in Heaven: Even such a Banke, Bankes left behind at last, Riches stor'd up, which Age nor Time can waste. A faire Monument in the South Ile, with this Inscription. Piae Memoriae Sacrum, Gilberto Erington, de Wolsington Armi∣gero, ex antiqua Eringtonorum Fami∣lia, de Denton in Comitatu Northum∣briae orto. Qui ex Dorothea Vxore Chrarissima una filiarum Iohannis de Lavale, de Seaton de Lavale, in dicto Com. Militis, tres filios Marcum, Robertum & Cuthbertum, & sex Fi∣lias Annam, Margaretam, Katherinam, Elizab. Dorotheam, & Graciam, sus∣cepit. Ex agro Nativo huc in hanc Civi∣tatem profectus, morboque correptus, obiit xviij. die Iunii, Anno Domini 1578 Aetatis suae 63. Patri optimo & Charissimo, efficiosae pietatis, & Me∣moriae perpetuum restem, novissimum hoc parentale Munusculum persolvit, posuit, praestitit Marcus Erington filius Maerens xx. die Feb. 1618. In te Domine speravi, non confundar in Aeternum, Psal. 31. Vita bonos sed poena malos, aeterna capescit, Vita bonis, sed poena malis, per secula crescit. His mors, his vita, perpetuatur ita. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France, Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of State, Of Armes, of Learning, Fate, and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne're was seene, So great a Prince, so good a Queene. Sith Vertue Her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirit inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts.
Monumentum Reginae Elizabethae. Many Daughters have done well, but thou surmountest them all. She is not dead, But sleepeth. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Michael Royall. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord, 1630. Richard Mills William Hawes Churchwardens. The charge of it amounting to 120. li. 9. s. Michael Woodstreet. THis Church was repaired, and thus beautified in the yeere of our Lord God, 1620. at the charge of the Parishioners. Thomas Wilson Humphry Michael Churchwardens. In the yeere 1627. the Parishioners made a new doore to this Church, through the head of the North Ile (be∣ing the Chancell end) into Wood∣street; where till then it had onely one doore in the middle of the South Ile, standing in Huggin lane. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France, Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of State, Of Armes, of Learning, Fate and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne're was seene, So great a Prince, so good a Queene. Sith Vertue her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirits inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts. Mildred Breadstreet. THis Church was repaired and very worthily beautified, in the yeere of our Lord 1628. The greatest part of the North wall was new built, the Arches in the mid∣dle of the Church, foure faire Win∣dowes over them, and a very faire Gal∣lery, at the cost and charge of the Parish. M. Nicholas Crispe M. Ralph King Churchwardens. This for a generall charge, somewhat of particular bounties. At the upper end of this Church, on the South side, is a faire Window with this Inscription. This Window was glazed at the charge of Hester Crispe, late Wife of Ellis Crispe, Citizen and Alderman of Lon∣don, who lieth fixt in a Vault at the bottome of this Window 1629. At the upper end of the Church, on the North side, another with this In∣scription. This Window was glazed at the charge of Samuel Crispe, Citizen and Salter of London, 1630. Betweene these two, at the upper end of the Chancell, is a faire Window full of cost and beauty, which being divi∣ded into five parts, carries in the first of them a very artfull and curious re∣presentation of the Spaniards great Armado, and the battell in 1588. In the second, of the Monument of Queen Elizabeth. In the third, of the Gun∣pouder plot. In the fourth, of the la∣mentable time of infection 1625. And in the fifth and last, the view and lively Portraitures of that worthy Gentle∣man, Captaine Nicholas Crispe, at whose sole cost (among other) this beautifull piece of worke was erected, as also the figures of his vertuous Wife and Children, with the Armes belong∣ing unto them: The Verses to every Story are these:
The Story of Eighty eight. Starre-gazing Wizards sate upon this yeere, Matter of wonder, and did threaten feare Towards us, in so much that Rome and Spaine, This Land accounted their assured gaine. But marke how God did quite their hopes confound, Both Ships and men we did see flee and drown'd. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Marvell not why we doe erect this Shrine, Since dedicated tis to Worth divine; Religion, Arts, with Policy and Armes, Did all concurre in her most happy Raigne, To keepe Gods Church and us from plotted harmes, Contriv'd by Romish wits, and force of Spaine. The Powder Plot. 1605. When force could not prevaile, nor plots abroad Could have successe, finne now invents new fraud: Guy Vaux is sent Ambassador to Styx, And thence returning, furnisheth with trickes His damned Crew, who forth withall conclude, To blow up King, the State, and Multitude. The great Plague 1625. The Stories past, Gods blessings to the State Doe clearely shew; But sure we were ingrate, For now, behold, in stead of sweet protection, Thousands are swept away by foule Infection. But marke Gods mercy, in midst of greatest cryes, He sheath'd his sword, and wip't teares from our eyes. The Founders figure, with his Wife, Children, and their Armes. These Ensignes which you see, and Monument, Are not so much to represent The Founders Person, as his zealous care T'expresse Gods love, and mercies rare To this his Vineyard; for to that sole end Did he these Stories thus commend To after ages, that in their distresse, They might Gods goodnesse still expresse. With this, this Gentleman gave to∣wards the repaire of this Church, a∣mong the Parishioners, above his share as a Parishioner 75. li. Also for the Communion Table, two great Flag on Pots, to the value of 57. li. Also very faire Font, in which a Childe of his owne was first Chri∣stened. His Brother, Master Samuel Crispe, beside his Window, above his ordina∣ry share as a Parishioner, gave to this faire Reparation 25. li. The Mother of these worthy Gentle∣men the aforenamed Hester Crispe, the late Wife of Ellis Crispe, Citizen and Alderman of London, now (by a se∣cond, and thrice happy Nuptialls) the Lady Pie, beside her Window, gave to this faire Reparation 20. li. though at that time out of the Parish, and re∣moved from thence to Christ-Church. A faire Stone in the South side of the Chancell. This Stone openeth upon the Staires of a Vault, made by Captaine Nicholas Crispe, Anno 1628. wherein lyeth buried his Grandfather, Master Iohn Ireland, late Deputy of this Ward, he
was buried the 29. day of Iune, 1614. And Mistresse Elizabeth Ire∣land his Wife, buried the 13. day of Aprill, 1613. And his Father Ellis Crispe, late Alderman, and died Sheriffe, he was buried the 10. day of November 1625. And his Sonne Nicholas. Crispe, who was buried the 23. day of Ianuary 1626. Nicholas Elizabeth Iohn Children of Captaine Nic∣holas Crispe, buried Anno Dom. 1632. A faire Monument belonging to this Stone standing over it, with this Inscription. Ere his worth was fully knowne, London lost him, once her owne; Let that yeere lye buried here, In which London two did gaine, Sheriffes good, and lost againe. City, Church, Wife, Children, weepe, Reason good, though he but sleepe. Ill can London not lament, Spoil'd of one chiefe Ornament, Pity Death had him oregrowne, Ere his worth was fully knowne. Mildred Poultrey. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the proper cost of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God 1626. George Besse Thomas Brownell Churchwardens. The charge of it amounting to the summe of 183. li. and upwards. A Monument on the wall in the North Ile, with this inscription. In this Ile lyeth buried the body of Su∣san Lewin, Daughter of Thomas Lew∣in, of Broxborne, in the County of Hartford, who had first to Hus∣band, Iohn Palmer, having Issue only one sonne, which Husband decea∣sed Anno 1589. And after some yeeres, the said Susan married with Iohn Kirby, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor, of this Parish, by whom she had foure Sonnes and eight Daugh∣ters, who departed this life after 30. yeeres living, the 30. of Septem∣ber 1624. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, &c. Daughter to King Henry the eighth, and Grandchild of King Henry the seventh, by Eliza∣beth, eldest Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Reli∣gion, reduced Coyne to the just va∣lue, assisted France and the Low-Countries, and overcame the Spa∣nish invincible Navy, enriched all England, and administred most pru∣dently the Imperiall State thereof 45. yeeres in true piety, In the 70. yeere of her age, in most happy and peaceable manner departed this life, leaving her mortall parts inter∣red in the famous Church of West∣minster, till the second comming of Christ. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. On the other side of the top of the Monument. If prayers or teares of subjects had prevail'd, To save a Princesse through the world esteem'd, Then Atropos in cutting here had fail'd, And had not cut her thred, but beene redeem'd, But pale fac'd Death, and cruell churlish Fate, To Prince and people brings the latest date. Yet spite of Death and Fate, Fame will display Her gracious Vertues through the world for aye.
Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths Ioy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. On the other side. Britaines blessing, Englands splendor, Religious Nurse, the Faiths defendor. In the figure of a Booke over Her, these words. They that trust in the Lord, shall bee as Mount Sion, which cannot be remo∣ved, but remaineth for ever. Psal. 125. Vnder her. Th' admired Empresse through the world applauded, For supreme Vertues, rarest Imitation, Whose Scepters Rule, Fames loud voyc'd Tumpet lauded, Vnto the eares of every forraine Nation. Canopied under powerfull Angels wings, To her immortall praise sweet Science sings. Nicholas Acons. THis Church was repaired and beautified in the yeere of our Lord God 1615. at the cost and charge of the Parishioners. Robert Old Nathaniel Buckcock Churchwardens. A handsome Monument on the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. This Picture is for others, not for me, For in my breast I weare thy memory. It is here plac'd, that passengers may know, Within thy ground no weeds, but Corne, did grow. That there did flow within thy vitall blood, All that could make one honest, just, and good. Heere is no Elbow roome to write of more, An Epitaph yeelds taste, but seldome store. Thy troope of Vertues grac'd thee amongst men, And now attend thee at the Court in Heaven. Thy worth, sweet Charles, deserves the rarest wit, Thy Iane, for such a taske, is most unfit. Corpus Caroli Haukins, Civis & Aroma∣tarii Londinensis, in hoc Tumulo deposi∣tum est. Erat Deo devotus, Charitatis plenus & virtutis; adeo studiosus, ut vitam laudabilem, fixemque optimum peregerit. Iana Vxor ejus, filia Iohan∣nis Reeve Armigeri natu minima, postea nupta fuit Iohanni Suckling Equiti Aurato, Regiae Majestati à supplicum libellis, praedicti Caroli & Ianae insig∣nes Dotes tanti Aestimavit, ut Monu∣mentum hoc, sumptibus propriis, in ho∣norem defuncti pie posuerit, Anno Dom. 1621. Over these lines, as in a Booke in the hands of this Gentleman, these words: Beatus vir, cui Dominus non imputavit peccatum, & in cujus Spiritu, non est Dolus. A Monument on the North side the Chan∣cell, with this Inscription. In God is all my hope. All men are borne to dye. In Christi is my Redemption. Iohn Hall, Draper, of the age of 90. yeeres, a Housholder in this Parish 58. yeeres, and in that time, by the providence of God, the Father of 27. Children, all borne here. These great mercies, I doe confesse in my heart, not to be of my deserts, but of God his good grace only, shewed unto mee more abundantly, than
unto many thousands in my time, wherefore with heart and tongue, I yeeld all honour and praise unto thee, O God. Here under lyeth interred the body of Iohn Hall, once Master of the Wor∣shipfull Company of the Drapers, and 25. yeeres one of the Bridge∣masters of the City of London, who deceased the 19. day of November, 1618. aged 93. yeeres. And also the body of Anne Browne, Daughter of Master Iohn Browne, Gentleman, being his third Wife, by whom he had 23. Children: she died the 17. of December 1619. being aged 73. yeeres. Nicholaes Coleabby. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord 1630. Robert Bromly Henry Hewes Churchwardens. In the yeere 1626. new Frames were made for their Bells. And in the yeere 1628. new Battlements added to the Steeple. Nicholas Olaves. THis Church was repaired and beautified in the yeere of our Lord God 1623. Edward Whitwell Alexander Colsen Churchwardens. The cost of it 24. pounds. Since that, in the yeere 1628. the South Ile, that like a Cottage before, was onely Tyled (and in that unseemly and unbefitting manner so left) was Seiled, and in that decently and very gracefully beautified, which with some cost bestowed on the Steeple, did arise to the summe of 22. li. This, as the former, being the sole cost and charge of the Parish. An ancient Monument on the North wall, revived and beautified with the Church, with this Inscripti∣on hanging by it. This Monument of Thomas Lewya, and Agnis his Wife, was newly revived and beautified at the charge of the Right Worshipfull Company of the Ironmongers, whereof hee was free, the 29. of May, Anno Dom. 1623. Olaves Hartstreet. THis Church in the many de∣cayed places of it (which in∣deed were many and great) was repaired richly, and very worthly supplyed with whatsoever it wanted, and furnished with whatsoever might further decke and adorne it (at the pro∣per cost and charge of the Parishio∣ners) in the yeeres of our Lord God, 1632. and 1633. In the first Thomas Redding and Roger Dreyton, Churchwardens; in the next, Roger Dreyton and Christopher Wigley. The charge of this repaire amount∣ing to the summe of 437. pounds and upwards. Some especiall particulars (leaving the Steeple, Walls, and Battlements) within the Church, were these: The Roofe in the middle Ile decayed, to the danger of falling, was with new Timber rebuilt, new Leaded, and the inside very worthily garnished. The Stonework of all the Windowes great∣ly defaced and perished; were new wrought, and all the Windowes new Glazed. And within some few yeeres before this, two very faire Galleries at the lower end of the Church, one on the North side, the other on the South were erected. A very faire Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Paul Bayning, Esquire, sometimes Sheriffe and Alderman of London,
lived to the age of 77. yeeres, and died the 30. of September, Anno Dom. 1616. Consecrated to the Memory of Paul and Andrew Bayning, Esquires. If all great Cities prosperously confesse, That he by whom their Trafficke doth increase Deserves well of them, then th' Adventure's worth Of these two, who were Brothers both by birth, And Office, prove, that they have thankfull bin, For the Honours which this City plac'd them in. And dying old, they by a blest consent This Legacy bequeath'd, Their Monument. The happy summe and end of their Affaires, Provided well both for their Soules and Heires. This Monument of his Brother adjoyning to this. Andrew Bayning, sometimes Alderman of London, lived to the age of 67. yeeres, and died the 21. of Decem∣ber, Anno Dom. 1610. Over the Tombe of Paul Bayning, Esquire, hang the Ensignes of Honour, as his Coat, Streamers, and the like of the Lord Bayning, Vicount Sudbury, his Sonne, there buried in the Monu∣ment of his Father. Next to that of Paul Bayning, Esquire, is this, having this In∣scription. Eave sis Gradum pergas Viator, piusquam haec perlegeris. In certam beatae Resurrectionis spem, Ter∣rae sequestratum, Hic est exanime Corpus, praeclarae quon∣dam Mentis Hospitium, viri juvenis Domini Ludolphi de Werder, Anhal∣tini, praenobili ac Antiquâ werdero∣rum Familiâ Orti: Cujus summam in Deum pictatem, inclyti Generis seriem, Amplas eruditi pectoris Do∣tes, cum tam angusto Marmoris non Comprehendantur, sacro silentio meri∣tò obsignamus. Generosus hîc vir Mxām partem, primum Germaniam lustra∣vit, in quâ Famigerabilium aliquot Academiarum, puta Lipsien. Ienev. Gissen. non Degenerem Incolam, diu egit, magnis literarum numinibus mi∣rum quantum carus. Deinde in Belgi∣am concessit, ubi veram Nobilitatem, decentibus studiis Quadrien. Leidae Combussit. Tandem in Angliam perve∣niens hîc Londini sesquiannum phthisi solito vehementius laboravit; cujus ma∣lignâ obstinatione, etiam Factum est, ut die 26. Decemb. Anno 1628. Na∣tus Annos 29. Rebus humanis valere, suis verô plangere, dixerit, Animâ suâ, Creatori suo, unde tam nobile de∣positum acceperat, Magnâ in Christum Fide Redonatâ. Monumentum hoece Ag∣nati, quibus accerbum sui desiderium Reliquit, pio ducti Affectu erigi Cu∣rarunt. Lectori. Quisquis adhuc vitam vivis, sic vivito vitam, Linquere eam quovis tempore rite queas. Neere unto the other this, having this Inscription. D. O. M. S. Viator Commorare, Rimare, Mirare. Christophorus Iacobus Elssenhaimer, ab Elssehaim in preprum Iunior, Welsin∣sis Austrius Generis splendore, verâ in Deum Religione, pietate in parentes, ob∣servantia in superiores, Charitate & Comitate in quosvis, verè Nobilissimus juvenis, Nobile Familiae Columen, Iu∣ventutis exemplar, Artium & Lingua∣rum Cognitionem infignem, pro divinis ingenii sui dotibus, in Ratisponensium Gymnasio Poetico Altorfiana Argenti∣nensi, Basiliensi, Leidensi Academiis
acquisitam peregrinationibus adauctu∣rus, hîc in Anglia, ad Angelorum Sanctorum Coelum avocatus, Animam suā Christo Redemptori reddidit, corpus verò huic solo commisit, Desiderium sui tristissimum omnibus bonis relinquens, Imprimis parentibus Christophoro Iacobo Elssenbaimero ab Elssenham in Preprunn Seniori, & Dorotheae ex Nobili Haen∣deliorum Familia prosatae, Qui Filio unicè unisoli senectutis portui extre∣mum hoc quod sibi ab illo desideravere animitus Amoris Monumentum inter Candissimas Lacrymas statuerunt. Obiit Anno Aetatis 21. Men. ix. die. 28. Anno Christi M. D. C. XVIII. die vj. August. Nemo nostrum sibi vivit, & nemo sibi mo∣ritur, sive enim vivimus, Domino vi∣vimus, sive morimur Domino morimur; sive ergo vivimus, sive morimur, Do∣mini sumus. Paul ad Rom. cap. 14. vers. 17. Fili ad Parent. Vivo fruor tandem veris, ne flete parentes, Deliciis, Coelo posteritate Deo. On a faire Stone in the middle Ile, with these words about it. Here lyeth the body of Alice Hull, the Wife of Walter Hull of London, Gen∣tleman, who was buried the 16. day of November, Anno Dom. 1627. In the middle of the Stone, with their Armes over it, these words. Though we are dead, yet our lives are hid in Christ with God. Christ is to me both in life and death advantage. Though my flesh faileth, and my heart also, yet God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Olaves Jewrie. THis Church was repaired in the yeere 1608. and againe re∣paired and beautified in the yeere of our Lord God, 1628. A faire Monument in the same Church with this Inscription. Memoriae Sacrum, Roberti Bowyer, Mercatoris London, ex Antiqua Familia Bouyes: De Knipper∣slay, in Com. Staffordiae oriundi, secun∣di filii Francisci Bowyer. Ar. Quondam Aldermani hujus Civitatis, Honorabi∣lis Societatis Grocerum London, olint pro tempore praefecti. Margaretam u∣num Filiarum Thomae Cordall, quon∣dam etiam Mercator London, ac Ho∣norabilis Societatis Mercerum, ejus∣dem Societatis prefecti, in Vxor: du∣centis amplissimam suscipientis prolem quinque Filios, viz. Thomam, Rober∣tum, Williclmum, & Henricum, modo Coelebes, superstites existentes, & Io∣hannem defunctum, & secundum Chri∣sti adventum hîc expectantem. Margareta Vxor, Thomas, & Robertus filii ejus, a ultimi Testamenti Executores, pietatis, & observantiae ergo, Moeren∣tes posuerunt. Vnder this Tombe, the sacred Ashes hold, The drossie part of more Celestiall gold; The body of a Man, a Man of men, Whose worth to write at large, would loose my Pen. Then doe thy worst, Death, glut thy selfe with Dust, The precious Soule is mounted to the Just. Yet Reader, when thou read'st, both reade and weepe, That men so good, so grave, so wise, doe sleepe. N. S. Moerens Posuit. Olaves Silverstreet. THis Church, being greatly de∣cayed and perished, was in the yeere of our Lord God 1609. new built, and enlarged in the breadth seven foot and above.
In the yeere of our Lord, 1619. it was againe repaired and beautified. And in the yeere of our Lord, 1632. inrched with a very faire Gallery, with this Inscription in the severall panes or parts thus: Deo Patri Filio Spiritu Sancto Trino & uni Gloria in aeternum. Richardus Turner, & Iohannes Morrell, Hanc porticum suis sumptibus erexe∣runt. Pancras Soperlane. THis Church was repaired and beautified, in the yeere of our Lord 1621. towards which Re∣paration, Sir Thomas Bennet, Alder∣man, Dame Anne Soame, and Master Thomas Chapman, were free and boun∣tifull Benefactors. The last of these, Master Thomas Chapman, having in the yeere 1617. given a faire and very costly Table, bearing the figure of the Monument of that ever famous after death, as in her life, Queene Elizabeth. In the yeere 1624. the Sonne of this worthy Gentleman, Master Thomas Chapman the younger, to the further beautifying of this Church, in the more gracefull entrance into it, built a very faire Porch, at his owne proper cost and charges. Also a faire Communion Table, with some other repaires in the South Wall, was the cost of Master William Doricke, Citizen and Grocer of Lon∣don. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Mors mihi lucrum Spiritus Astra petat. To the most happy, blessed, and pre∣cious Memory, of the late famous, renowned, aud never to bee forgotten Monarch, Q. Elizabeth. The Restorer of true Religion, A ten∣der nursing Mother of the Church of God, A powerfull Protector (un∣der Almighty God) of her owne Dominions, A ready helper of her neighbouring Princes, A hearty and unfeyned Lover, and beloved of her Subjects; who lived gloriously full of dayes, and whom the eternall Ie∣hovah blest with the longest life of any Prince of England since the Con∣quest. By way of due thankefulnesse to the most holy, sacred, and individuall Trinity, and her ever honoured Roy∣all Vertues, this Memoriall of hers was here erected, set up, and Con∣secrated, the 17. of November, 1617. Terram Terra Tegat. Peters Cheape. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in the yeeres of our Lord, 1616. and 1617. Iames Ridgeard Walter Eldred Churchwardens. The charge of it amounting to 314. pounds. Peters Cornehill. THis Church is yet in repaire; the Steeple beganne to be repai∣red in the yeere of our Lord, 1628. and was finished 1629. The Church it selfe was begunne to be repaired in March, 1632. and is (as they make account) about All Saints day, in this present yeere 1633. to be finished, and (at the sole cost & charge of the Parishioners) without, within, in all and every part of it, richly and very worthily beautified. The certaine charge cannot yet bee knowne, but as I have heard (probably imagined by what is done and to doe) it is about 1400. pounds. The Churchwardens this yeere of finishing, Thomas Birket and Theophilus Boulton.
In a Vault in the Chancell, upon the 18. day of December, in the yeere of our Lord 1625. was buried the body of Thomas Westrow, Alderman and Sheriffe of London, the sonne of Timothy Westrow, sometime Citizen and Grocer, in this Parish. His Hatchments, and such Ensignes as were to his name and degree, hanging over him. Neere to this in the Chancell, about a faire Marble stone is this inscription. Here lyeth buried the body of Iudith Fowler, with her new borne sonne, deceased the 22. of November, Anno Dom. 1613. Stilo Angliae. Vpon it thus: She was borne in Antwerpe, the daugh∣ter of Iohn Schine, Merchant (stran∣ger) of Middlebroche, and Wife of Iaspar Fowler, Citizen and Mercer of London; she died in Childbed in the faith and love of God. Shee left behind her living, one onely sonne, and one daughter, Richard and Cor∣nelia. Peters Pauls Wharfe. THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our our Lord 1625. and in the first yeere of the raigne of our Soveraigne Lord King CHARLES. Thomas Finch William Stanfoy Churchwardens. There is a very faire Table of the Commandements at the upper end of the Chancell, dated 1619. for then it was set up, standing so long as to the aforenamed date to shrinke, and was then finished. Queene Elizabeths Monument. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. From henceforth is laid up for me a Crowne of Righteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Iudge shall give mee at that day; and not me onely, but to them also that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. Peters Poore. THere hath beene in this Church since the beginning of the yeere 1615. to the yeere 1630. many costly repaires and charges. In the yeere 1615. this Church was on the West side inlarged in the breadth eight foot and better, by the taking downe of the North wall, and over a slip of ground that formerly lay behind it so farre outward, erecting another. Vpon the foundation of the old wall were erected new Pillars and Arches, and from them to the new, a faire Roofe. This empty uselesse and rude piece of ground, being turned to this use and beauty (with the very faire Windowes in it) at the sole cost and charge of Sir William Garway, Knight, who at the East end of this wall, in a Vault (made likewise at his owne cost) lyes under his faire Monument interred. The charge of this Ile was 400. pounds. In the yeere 1616. this new Ile, and the whole Church was new pewed, and the great Window in the Chan∣cell enlarged. In the yeere 1617. the Roofe, and the inside of the Church thorowout, was richly and very worthily beau∣tified. In the yeeres 1629. and 1630. the Steeple, and a very costly Gallery at the West end of the Church, were new built and beautified, and the Bells new cast and hung. The charge of all this amounting to the summe of 1587. pounds and up∣wards, all which, deducting the 400. pounds cost of the Ile, was the cost and charge of the Parish.
A very faire Monument at the upper end of the North Ile in the Chan∣cell, with this Inscription. Hic vivit Gulielmus Garway, Eques Au∣ratus, Civis Londinensis, qui Annos egit. 54. cum Elizabetha Vxore inte∣gerrima, Filia Thomae Anderson, Civis etiam Londinensis, beatitudine Lecti fructifera, Pater erat 17. liberorum, illustre probitatis, & pietatis exemplar, Industria singulari, universalem ex∣pectavit Mercaturam. Feliciter magis quam avare, bis ad Senatoriam dignita∣tem vocatus, qui Purpuram recusavit, nunc triumphat in Albis. Tandem post∣quam Alam hujus Templi sinistram construxisset, placide corpus suo operi, Animam suo opifici reposuit. Anno Aetatis suae 88. Domini 1625. Septemb. 26. Templa Dei in terris duo sunt, Ecclesia, Corpus, Vna Domus carnis, cultus domus altera, & Ambo Conveniunt tumulo, parvo coeuntque socello. Non quaeras igitur Cineres sub cespite Lector, Est templum in templo clausum, non essa sepulchre. Marmore sublato, subsellia, porta, columnae, Ala haec, & paries, spatium totum, atque Fenestrae, Omnia structorem monstrant, resonantque patronum, Sic tenet immortalem, & mortalem locus idem. Conditur in Templo quod condidit, & Monumentum Hoc unum vitae, & mortis commune Relinquit. In the North Ile, upon a faire Marble Stone is this Inscription. As in a Sheafe of Arrowes. Vis unita Fortior. The band of love, The unitor of brethren. Here lyeth the body of Thomas Harvy, of London, Merchant, Who departed this life the 2. of Feb. Anno Dom. 1622. With his first Wife Elizabeth, (the Daughter of Nic. Exton, of London, Merchant) she died the first of Ia∣nuary Anno 1618. He was a faithfull man, and feared God above many, Ier. 7. 2. A faire Monument at the upper end of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Anno 1624. Aetatis 54. A Memoriall Of the Worshipfull Master Robert Wad∣son, late Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London. Epitaphium. So fraile and brittle is the life of man, That who lives longest liveth but a span; In yout and age all dye, God hath so doom'd, That Earth returnes to Earth to be intomb'd. Wadson, who of that substance was compos'd, Lies in his Mothers Center here inclos'd, A sheet doth hide his face, but not his fame, The Grave containes his corps, not his good name: For his good name outlives (O blessed man) When others good names dye before they can. The sixt of Ianuary (that fatall day) Sixteene hundred twenty foure, he did pay The debt to Nature, which all men doe know, He was no sooner borne but he did owe. If Vertues could have staied the hand of Death, Then Wadson still had drawne his vitall breath.
His soule above, his worths doe here remaine, Till Christ shall come to raise him up againe: Thus he enjoyes Heav'ns immortality, And here on Earth, Earths happy memory. Post varios vitae casus, dabit urna quietem. Stevens Colemanstreet. THis Church was (in many parts of it) carefully repaired, and thorowout fairely and com∣mendably beautified at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1622. Francis Wheeler Thomas Newton Churchwardens. And further inriched and beautified with a very faire Gallery in the South Ile, in the yeere 1629. Robert Kay Robert Daukes Churchwardens. In the Chancell lyeth buried the body of Master Samuel Aldersey, Mer∣chant, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, Iuly 25. 1633. His Hatchments and Ensignes proper to his Name and estate hanging over him. To the memory Of that ancient Servant to the City, with his Pen, in divers imployments, especially the Survey of London, Master Anthony Munday, Citizen and Draper of London. He that hath many an ancient Tombstone read, (Ith labour seeming, more among the dead To live, than with the living) that survaid Obstruse Antiquities, and ore them laid Such vive and beauteous colours with his Pen, That (spite of time) those old are new agen, Vnder this Marble lies inter'd: His Tombe, Clayming (as worthily it may) this roome, Among those many Monuments his Quill Has so reviv'd, helping now to fill A place (with those) in his Survay: in which He has a Monument, more faire, more rich, Than polisht Stones could make him, where he lies Though dead, still living, and in That, nere dyes. Obiit Anno Aetatis suae 80. Domini 1633. Augusti 10. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, &c. Daugter to King Henry the eighth, and Grandchild of King Henry the seventh, by Eliza∣beth, eldest Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Reli∣gion, reduced Coyne to the just va∣lue, assisted France and the Low-Countries, and overcame the Spa∣nish invincible Navy, enriched all England; and administered most pru∣dently the Imperiall State thereof 45. yeeres in true piety, In the 70. yeere of her age, in most happy and peaceable manner departed this life, leaving her mortall parts inter∣red in the famous Church of West∣minster, till the second comming of Christ. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives still admir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. I have fought a good fight, &c. 2 Tim. 7, 8.
Stevens Walbrooke. THis Church within the time of 12. yeeres past, hath had these many and costly repaires. As first, in the yeere 1622. all the Chancell, and the two side Iles, as farre as the Chancell, repaired; the Pulpit, Pewes, and Communion Ta∣ble new. The charge of all this amounting to the summe of 126. li. 15. s. 6. d. Tobias Massie Affable Fairecloughe Churchwardens. In the yeere 1623. in the North side of this Church two Windowes new made, and certaine other Windowes repaired, the charge of this amounting to the summe of 16. li. and upwards. Tobias Massie Griffith Morgan Churchwardens. In the yeere 1626. the whole body of the Church was new Pewed, the charge of it amounting to 333. li. and upwards. Iohn Warner Ellis Southerton Churchwardens. In the yeere 1632. the repaire of the Steeple, the North side of the Church, the Tower on the South side, with o∣ther repaires and mendings, amounted to the summe of 35. li. Iohn Booker Richard Winston Churchwardens. The whole cost of these Repaires 510. li. 15. s. 6. d. S. Swithins. THis Church hath had no re∣paire since the yeeres of our Lord 1607. and 1608. In the first of which it was begunne to be re∣paired, Richard Glover and Thomas Wood Churchwardens: and in the last fully beautified and finished at the cost and charge of the Parishioners. Thomas Wood Richard Hewit Churchwardens. A very faire Monument on the South side of the Chancell, with this inscription. This Monument Was erected at the sole cost and char∣ges of Ione, Lady Bolles, in memory of her late deare and worthy Hus∣band, the Right Worshipfull, Sir George Bolles, Knight, sometimes Lord Maior of the City of London, a Gentleman worthily descended, of an ancient and unblamed Family, seated in Lincolnshire, which Lady Ione was the eldest Daughter of that worthy & famous deceased Knight, Sir Iohn Hart, sometimes likewise Lord Maior of the said City of Lon∣don, and both Brothers of the Right Worshipfull Fraternity of the Gro∣cers. Two branches of that vertu∣ous Stem now flourishing: his Son Iohn Bolles, Esquire, now living at Skampton in Lincolnshire, and his el∣dest Daughter Anne, the Wife of Captaine Humphry Smith, of London, Grocer, who deceased the first of September 1621. being aged 83. yeeres. Epitaph. Honour, Ingrity, Compassion, Those three fil'd up the life time of this man: Of Honour, the grave Praetorship he bare, Which he discharg'd with Conscience, Truth, and Care, He posses'd Earth, as he might Heaven possesse, Wise to doe right, but never to oppresse. His Charity was better felt than knowne, For when he gave, there was no Trumpet blown. What more can be compriz'd in one mans fame, To crowne a soule, and leave a living name? All his just praise in her life may be read, The true Wife of his worth as of his bed.
Over against the other, in the same Ile, is a faire Monument, with this Inscription. Epitaphium Generosi, & summae spei juvenis, Georgii Bolles Armigeri, Domini Iohannis Bolles, Baronetti, de Skampton in Co∣mitatu Lincolniensi, & Dominae Ka∣tharinae Vxoris Filii primogeniti, qui cùm ageret Annum Aetatis vicessimum, exiit ex hac vita, Anno Dom. 1632. Nil opus hos cineres, florum decorare corollis: Flos, hîc compositus qui jacet ipse fuit. Moribus, Ingenio, Naturâ suavis, aperto Pectore, cui niveus nilnisi Candor, erat. Quem Sidneiani spatiis, umbraque lycei, Artibus excoluit Granta diserta suis. Bis denos vitae, nondum numer averat Annos, Cum brevis extremum clauderet hora diem. O quantos gemit usque suis luctusque reliquit, Tam properè Angelices dum sitit ire domos. Euge Beate, tuo cum Christo sorte fruaris, Sentiat & similem, qui legit ista sitim. Ri. Dugard, Moerens composuit. Thomas Apostle. THis Church was repaired, and very worthily beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishio∣ners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1630. Henry Whaley Robert Perkins Churchwardes. The charge of it amounting to neere 300. pounds. Queene Elizabeths Monument. If Royall Vertues ever crown'd a Crowne, If ever Mildnesse shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour honour'd true Renowne, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princesse put all Princes downe, For Temperance, prowesse, prudence, equity, This, this was she, that in despight of death, Lives stilladmir'd, ador'd, ELIZABETH. If prayers or teares of subjects had prevail'd, To save a Princesse through the world esteem'd, Then Atropos in cutting here had fail'd, And had not cut her thred, but beene redeem'd, But pale fac'd Death, and cruell churlish Fate, To Prince and people brings the latest date. Yet spite of Death and Fate, Fame will display Her gracious Vertues through the world for aye. Monumentum Elizabethae Angliae Reginae. As in a Booke. Psal. 112. The righteous shall bee had in everlasting remembrance. On the one side. Spaines rod, Romes ruine, Netherlands reliefe, Heavens Iem, Earths Ioy, Worlds wonder, Natures chiefe. On the other side. Britaines Blessing, Englands Splendor, Religions Nurse, The Faiths Desendor. Vnder her Monument. Many Daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all.
Trinity Parish. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost & charge of the Parish, in the yeere of our Lord 1626. Nicholas Salbye Thomas Allam Churchwardens. This Church, in the yeere 1606. was so lamentably decayed and peri∣shed, that (in that great necessity of it) they were constrained to pull it downe to the ground, and from thence, with what speed they could, with much care and cost to rebuild it, which in the yeeres of 1607. and 1608. was fini∣shed. In the South Ile in the wall, hang two large Tables, the one shewing the Contributions of all her owne Parishi∣oners; the other the Contributions of all the Parishes within and without London, towards the rebuilding of it; the particular summes of every man in the first, and of every Parish in the last, there fairely set downe before them. Richard Owfall George Haeffeld then Churchwardens. To this pious worke also, the wor∣shipfull Companies of the Merchant-Taylors and Vinteners were very free and bounteous Benefactors. As also these Aldermen: Sir Thomas Cambell. Sir Iohn Swinnerton. Sir Iohn Gore. Sir William Craven. Sir Thomas Middleton. Their Names and Armes standing in a faire Window at the upper end of the Chancell. A Review also of the sixteene Parishes without the Walls of this City. Andrew Holborne. THis Church hath had no re∣paire or cost bestowed upon it (worthy any record or memo∣ry) for the space of many yeeres; in∣deed so many, that the many decayed parts & places of it, call rather for a Re∣building, than a Repairing. Which is (as I am told) now providing for; the Parishioners purposing very shortly to pull it all downe, and rebuild, enlarge, and enrich it, with that beauty that be∣comes so great a worke, and the House of the great God Almighty. What I have heard, I relate, and beleeve, both for the truth and speed: which when it begins, in the progressi∣on and finishing, the blessing of God goe with it. A very comely Monument upon a Pillar in the South Ile, with this Inscription. Aspice, Respice, Prespice. Neere to this place lyeth buried the body of Elizabeth Ade, late the wife of Iohn Ade, of Doddington, in the County of Kent, Gentleman: and eldest daughter of Thomas Waller, of Beckonfield, in the County of Bucking∣ham, Esquire, who in her time was the Mirror of her Sex, repleat with all the gifts that Grace or Nature could affoord: Religious towards God, and charitable towards men; loving and faithfull to her Husband, beloved of all, hated of none. This world not worthy of her, she was translated to a better, the third of May, 1619. and about the 32. yeere of her age, leaving by her death a most infortunate Husband, three Sonnes, Iohn, Edward, and Nicholas,
and foure Daughters, Dorothy, Eli∣zabeth, Mary and Francis. Whosoever thou art, that passest by, Learne here to live, and here to dye. On the South side of the Quire, upon a faire Marble stone, is this Inscription. Here lies buried the body of Christopher Sherland, Esquire, Reader of Greyes Inne, who died the 27. day of Ianu∣ary, Anno Dom. 1631. On a stone neere unto the other, is this Inscription. Here lyeth the Body of Henry Topham, Esquire, one of the Readers of Greyes Inne, who died the first day of May, Anno 1612. Vpon a Brasse plate, neere the North doore, is this Inscription. Here lies a Maid, for Heaven by her pure life So fit, she could not stay to be a Wife; And with her, halfe a man lies buried, That is but halfe himselfe, now she is dead: His other halfe lives but in hope to be Inclosed in this Vrne, as well as she. In losing her, the Lovets lost a Iemme, A Margarite, too rich (indeed) for Them, But not for Him, to whom she went from hence, Vsher'd by Faith, Hope, Love, and Innocence. Then you that are her friends, your Griefe forget, In Heaven your Margarite is richly set. Obiit 4. die Februarii, Anno Domini, 1631. Bartholomew the Great. OF this Church we are certainly informed, that from the yeere of our Lord, 1622. to this pre∣sent 1633. there hath not beene a yeere in the passage of which, there hath not beene (in one part or another of it) a great deale of money expended. What was done in every particular yeere, I doe not certainly know, but what I could learne take thus: In the yeere of our Lord 1620. the Porch at the West end of the Church was new built, which in the yere 1632. was againe repaired and beautified. In the yeere 1622. the inside of the Church was new painted, richly and very worthily beautified. In the yeere 1624. the Gallery at the lower end of the Church, was rebuilded, very much enlarged, and beautified. In the yeeres of our Lord 1625. and 1626. great cost was bestowed in Lead, and in the Plumbers labour. In the yeere 1628. the Steeple of this Church, being formerly part of Stone, and part of Timber, the upper part e∣specially Timber, being all ruined and decayed, was pulled downe to the very foundation, and a new re-builded of Bricke and Free-stone, very richly and fairely finished. Also the East Ile, and some other parts of this Church (very defective) were repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishioners. The charge of this yeere amounting to 698. pounds and upward. Richard Glover Richard Toppin Churchwardens. A Monument in the North Ile in the Chancell, with this Inscription. Sacred to the memory of that worthy and learned, Francis Anthony, Doctor in Physicke. There needs no Verse to beautifie thy praise, Or keepe in memory thy spotlesse Name, Religion, Vertue, and thy skill did raise
A threefold pillar to thy lasting fame: Though poysonous envy ever sought to blame, Or hide the fruits of thy intention; Yet shall all they commend that high designe, Of purest Gold to make a Medicine, That feele thy helpe by that thy rare invention. Hee died the 26. of May 1623. his age 74. His loving Sonne, Iohn Anthony, Doctor in Physicke, left this remembrance of his sorrow. Another Monument neere the Pulpit, with this Inscription. Roberto R. F. Chamberlanio, Iacobi Mag∣no-Britanici, Francici, Hibernici, Pii Foelicis semper Augusti Inauguratione Nobiliss. De Balneo ordinis Militi, Castelli de Sherburne in Agro Oxoni∣ensi Domino, ab Antiquiss. Tankevillae in Normandia Comitib. longa Maje∣rum serie demisso. Quantecunque for∣tunae capaci Animo Magna nato, nec virutibus Minorib. Quas dum sibi, suisque fovet, exteras Nationes com∣plurimas lustravit, Morum Calidus Linguarumque. Terram postremo san∣ctam, & sepulcrum domini venerandus adiit, sumque (Heufata) quale, aut ubi incomperto Reperiit, littore siqui∣dem solvens, Anno Virginei partus, 161. Tripolim inter Cyprumque (quantum Conjici fas est) fatorum an hominum inclementia, Coelebs à suis procul periit. Tam dulcis olim contubernii memor, tan∣toque dolori & desiderio impar, Amico Amicus merenti Moerens. P. Vixit Annos circiter 30. Coelo tegitur qui non habet urnam. A faire Monument in the South Ile, close by the Vestry doore. Here lyeth interred the body of Eliza∣beth Freshwater, late Wife of Thomas Freshwater of Heubridge, in the County of Essex, Esquire, eldest Daughter of Iohn Orme, of this Pa∣rish, Gentleman, and Mary his wife. She died the 16. day of May, Anno Domini, 1617. being of the age of 26. yeeres. Mors properans, quali tinxisti tela veneno, Vt sic trina uno vulnere praeda cadat: Vnam saeva feris, sed & uno hoc occidit Ictu, Vxor dulcis, Amans filia, Chara soror. Here also lieth the body of the said Iohn Orme, who died the 12. of Ianu∣ary, Anno Dom. 1617. And the bo∣dy of the said Mary Orme, who died the 16. of Aprill, 1618. Vpon a faire Marble Stone close by the last Monument, is this Inscription. Hîc jacet Nicholas Orme, de Hospitio Lin∣colniensi Armiger, qui postquam Annos 28. explevisset 4. die Februarii, Anno salutis 1628. expiravit; & jam pla∣cidè requiescit unà cum utroque paren∣te, duobus fratribus, unâ sorore, & du∣obus sobrinis, ex Thoma Gundroy Ge∣nerose oriundis, qui quod motale in illis fuit, hoc in pulvere prius deposuerunt. Vpon a faire Stone close to the other is this Inscription. In the figure of a Rose. Oritur & Moritur. Here lyeth the body of Abigall Coult, the Daughter of Maximilian Coult, who departed this life the 19. day of March, 1629. in the 16. yeere of her Virginity. Bartholomew the Lesse. OF this Church I can say but lit∣tle; receiving in my enquiry of it, touching its repaire and
beauty, so little and so sleight an an∣swer; for all that I could get, of those that might best have informed mee, was, that either for Monument or cost, there was nothing they thought, worth the Recording. My carefull inquiry and entreats, for the knowledge of that that was, pre∣vailing no farther with them: If any man seeme offended, that I speake nei∣ther more or better, hee sees where to place his displeasure. Notwithstanding all this, though I cannot point upon the yeere, yet I must tell you, that within these few yeeres, it hath had some repaire and beauty, though in respect of many other Chur∣ches, the cost was but sleight and easie: yet such as is worth remembrance, and such as in that, it yet remaines decent and comely. S. Brides. THis Church was repaired, and every part of it richly and very worthily beautified, at the pro∣per cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeeres of our Lord God, 1630. 1631. and 1632. In the last Thomas Lee Thomas Turner Churchwardens. Some memorable particulars (though included in the general commends) are these: The Battlements were new built, the middle Roofe, and a very faire Gallery on the North side of this Church, answerable to that on the South, which was erected in the yeere of our Lord, 1607. A very faire Monument standing in the South Ile, in the Chancell, with this Inscription. In this Chancell lyeth buried Frances Trevor, Wife of Sir Thomas Trevor, Knight, Solicitor Generall to the Prince, at the time of her death, and now one of the Barons of the Exche∣quer; shee was Daughter and Heire of Daniel Bleverhasset of Norfolke, Esquire. Shee died the 6. of Ianu∣ary, 1624. In whose memory her said Husband, Haec piè posuit. They had a Daughter buried neere unto her. In this Chancell also was buried, the sixth of Ianuary 1614. Prudence Tre∣vor, Daughter of Henry Butler, and former Wife to the said Sir Thomas, who bate him a Sonne, named Tho∣mas, now living, Also Iohn Trevor of Trevallyn, in Comitatu Denbighe, Esquire, Father to the said Sir Tho∣mas, died the 15. of Iuly, 1589. and lieth buried here. Randulph Trevor, Brother to the said Sir Thomas, died the 21. of Iuly, 1590. and is buried here. Margarite, Neece to the said Sir Tho∣mas, and Daughter of Sir Richard Trevor, of Trevallyn, Knight, was married to Iohn Griffith, of Lyn, in Comitatu Carnarvon, Esquire, and left many children, and was buried here the 19. of March, 1624. In the same Ile, at the upper end of this Church, on a faire Monument, in this Inscription. Here resteth the body of Sir George Curzon, of Croxall, in the Country of Derby, Knight, descended from ancient Gentry, and of long conti∣nuance in that place, who, like the Race from whence hee came, was a Man ofuprightlife, religious, and Hospitable. Hee tooke to Wife Mary, the Daughter of Sir Richard Levison, of Lolleshull, in the Country of Salop, Knight, by whom hee had Walter, who dyed young, and Mary then his onely Daughter and Heire, who was married to Edward Sack∣vile, Earle of Dorset, Knight Sack∣vile, Earle of Dorset, Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter. Which Lady caused this Monu∣ment to bee here infixed, to the sa∣cred memory of her deare Father. He departed this life the 17. of No∣Vember, 1622.
Bridewell Precinct. THis Chappell was enlarged and beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Governours and Inhabitants of this Precinct, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1620. Sir Tho∣mas Middleton being then President, and Master Thomas Iohnson Treasurer of this Hospitall. This enlargement was by the taking in of a large Roome, that (before the date above named) joyned upon the head of the Chappell. This ground adding to the length of it (all the full breadth going with it) 24. foote and better. This Roome thus taken in, trim'd, beautified, and consecrated, is now a beautifull Chappell, it being before a Roome empty, vast, rude, and unsight∣ly: though then, in the use, deserving a faire commendation. For then, that ground that is now a Chancell to the Prisoners of the house, was a Chappell, into which every Sab∣bath (through a bye or backward pas∣sage) they were brought from their se∣verall Lodgings, to heare divine Ser∣vice and Sermons. So that then, and now, in that wor∣thy use, and this worthy alteration and beauty, we may see the Pious and Re∣ligious care of these worthy and right Worshipfull Governours, continually imployed, and applyed to things of this excellent nature. Close by the Pulpit hangs the Picture of King EDVVARD the sixt, with these lines under it. This Edward of faire memory, the sixt. In whom with greatnesse goodnesse was commixt, Gave this Bridewell, a Palace in old times, For a chastising house of vagrant crimes. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France, Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of State, Of Armes, of Learning, Fate and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne're was seene, So great a Prince, so good a Queene. Sith Vertue her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirits inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, &c. Obiit 24. die Martii 1602. Anno Regni 45. Aetatis suae 70. Botolph Aldersgate. THough I cannot here speake of a generall repaire and beauty, yet I may say for this Church, that the eye of the yeerely Gardians of it is so continualy watchfull over it, that whensoever any part of it stands in need of either or both, they carefully and suddenly bestow it. An instance of this thus followes: The Steeple of this Church, being very much decayed and perished, was (so farre as they found it needfull) pul∣led downe, and rebuilded with Port∣land stone, beautified with new Bat∣tlements, and a Turret; some part of the Church repaired, and many of the Pewes were new made; as also a new Clocke and Diall (at the cost and charge of the Parishioners) in the yeere of our Lord God 1627. Iohn Wooton Anthony Ierman Churchwardens. The charge of all this 415. li. And but three yeeres before (in the yeere 1624.) was a very faire new Pul∣pit set up, the cost of that (that like∣wise
being the charge of the Parish) 35. li. William Wells George Graves Churchwardens. The whole cost of these times 450. li. A very faire Monument on the South wall of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Vicessimum tertium aetatis Annum Ingres∣sui obiit, vicessimo quarto die Novem∣bris, 1616. Vnder this in an Ovall, these words. Percivallo Smalpage, Michaelis filio Per∣civalli Pronepoti, ex Antiquis Baro∣num Familiis Hooe Wells & Engane oriundo, optimae spei Adolescenti, Im∣maturae Morte surrepto, fratri suo Cha∣rissimo, Moestissima soror Anna Monu∣mentum hoc Amoris & gratitudinis ergo posuit. Vpon a Stone in the Chancell, is this Inscription. Hic jacet Iana, Filia Arthuri Ducke, L. L. L. Doctoris, obiit 1. Aprilis 1633. Hi sequuntur Agnum quocun∣queierit. On a Stone neere to the other, is this Inscription. Here lyeth the body of Thomas Gillet, Gentleman, who deceased the 18. of October, 1624. A very handsome Monument on a Pil∣lar on the South side of the Chan∣cell, thus inscribed. Pars Terrestris Ioannis Coston Registarii sedis Archiepis∣copalis Cantuarien. Principalis. Al∣maeque Curiae Cant. de Arcubus Lond. Procuratorum generalium unius. Sex∣aginta octo annos, cum multa pietate & probitate sub polo praetergressus, 3. Iulii 1614. Animam efflavit, Relictis simo∣ne, & Anna, filio & filia unicis, in sa∣cros Cineres Redact. sub pedibus diem Novum expectat. A very faire Table full of rich Coats of Armes, hanging on a Pillar in the middle Ile, over against the Pulpit, with these severall Inscrip∣tions in it. 1. Francis Beaumont, 2. daughter, married to Sir Woolston Dyccy, of the County of Leicester, Knight. 2. Farnham Beaumont, 2. sonne, married Luce Dawes, of Dawson, in the Coun∣ty of Leicester. 3. Sir Henry Beaumont, Knight, eldest sonne, married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Turpin of Knaptoft, in the County of Leicester, Knight. 4. Thomas Bcaumont, 3. sonne, lives un∣married. 5. Anne Beaumont, third daughter, marri∣ed to Sir Iohn Dillon, of Northamp∣tonshire. 6. Iane Beaumont, 6. daughter, married to William Temple, of London, Merchant. 7. Elinor Beaumont, 4. daughter, lives un∣married. 8. Elizabeth Beaument, eldest daughter, married to Sir Iohn Ashbornham, of Ashbornham, in Sussex, Knight. 9. Isabel Beaumont, 5. daughter, married to Hugh Snasell, of the County of Yorke. 10. Mary Beaumont, 7. daughter, married to Richard paramoure, Esquire. In memory of the religious and vertu∣ous Lady, Katharine Beaumont, late Widow of Sir Thomas Beaumont, of Stoughton, in the County of Leicester, Knight, Daughter and sole Heire of Thomas Farnham of Stoughton afore∣said, Esquire, who deceased on As∣cention day, Anno 1621. leaving
Issue then alive, as above written, three sonnes and seven daughters. This Table was set up out of the love and true affection of Elizabeth, Lady Ashbornham, Widdow, her eldest Daughter, Anno 1622. And Mary, one of the Daughters of the aforesaid Lady Ashboruham, was likewise buried in this Church, No∣vember 25. 1619. Botolph Algate. THis Church was repaired and beautified in the yeere of our Lord God, 1621. In the yeere of our Lord, 1633. all the ground through the Church, was new laid and levelled. In the doing of which, where before from the lower end of the Church to the upper end, it was all but one even floore, without any ascent or rising, they have made a faire ascent at the beginning of the Chan∣cell; and in that againe, at the place where they give the Communion: fur∣ther gracing and inriching it with a faire new Table, and the whole Chan∣cell with new Pewes, very decently wrought and disposed. A faire Monument upon a Pillar on the South side of the Chancell, over against the Pulpit the figure of the Gentleman for whom it was erected leaning upon a Deaths head. A Memoriall erected by the Right Worshipfull, the Company of Mer∣chantaylors, for Robert Dove, Es∣quire, Citizen and Merchantaylor of London, Master of the same Com∣pany, and one of the Customers in the Port of London. Who gave in his life time 3528. li. 10. s. 8. d. to performe divers charita∣ble deeds for ever, to divers poore Bre∣thren of the same Company, and other uses for the said Company, viz. To Christs Hospitall. To Saint Se∣pulchers Parish. To the two Comp∣ters. To Ludgate, and Newgate. To the poore of this Parish. To Saint Iohn Baptists Colledge in Oxford, and to Queene Elizabeths Hospitall at Bristoll, 2958. li. 10. s. 8. d. To the Company. 320. li. To Christ-Church Hos∣pitall. 50. li. To Saint Sepulchers. 100. li. To Saint Iohns Colledge in Oxford. 100. li. To the City of Bristoll. He lived vertuously all his life time, and died in the true faith of our Lord Iesus, the second day of May, An. Dom. 1612. being full of dayes, at the age of 90. yeeres. His armes under him, Three Doves. Vpon a Marble Stone (in the middle of this Church) under the figure of a Deaths-head is this Inscription. Vnder this Marble stone, resteth in hope of a joyfull Resurrection, the bodies of two Sisters; Elizabeth Roe, Wife to Iohn Roe, Mariner, who di∣ed the 16. day of Iuly 1625. And Sarah Stevens, Wife unto Iohn Stevens, Citizen and Cooke of Lon∣don, who died the third of August, in the same yeere of our Lord, 1625. Botolph Bishopsgate. THe North wall of this Church, with the Roofe thereof, and the middle Roofe likewise were new built, and the Church begun to be repaired in the yeere of our Lord, 1617. Master Stephen Gosson, being then Parson. William Whitwell Dominicke Lomlie Churchwardens. The repaire of it, in pewing the Church thorowout, in painting, alte∣ring, adding, and ordering, to its grea∣ter conveniency and beauty, continu∣ed to the yeere 1620. in which it was fully finished.
Samuel Fond Iohn Day Churchwardens. The charge of it amounting to 600. li. and upward. A Monument on the South side of the middle Ile, with this In∣scription. Hugo Wicksteed, Filius Hugonis Wicksteed, nuper Civis & Mercatoris Scissoris London, & Aliciae Vxoris ejus, hoc Mo∣numentum, & lapidem inferius positum, Parentibus suis, & sibi ipsi dicatum, ultimo Testamento suo curavit fieri: Fuit Iuvenis egregiae indolis, Mira sua∣vitate morum preditus, erga deum & parentes summè pius, Flore Iuventutis suae Arreptus, magnum dolorem amicis Reliquit. Quis non, qui novit juvenem, sua funera deflet? Terra tegit corpus, Spiritus astra tenet. Obiit vicesimo septimo die Augusti, Anno Dem. 1625. & aetatis suae, vicesimo primo. Gualterus Stonus hanc Inscriptionem amici sui dilectissimi Memoriae consecravit. Dunstans West. IT is since this Church was repaired 20. yeeres, yet though so long, it hath more of that beauty still, and still remaines fresher and fairer than many other Churches, that halfe so much time hath not wrought upon. And yet, as I am informed (which is more to the businesse in hand) It is shortly againe to bee repaired, richly and very worthily beautified. A faire Table in Glasse, upon a Pallar in the middle Ile, thus written on. The comfortable farewell of a young Infant, sighed out in his dying sick∣nesse, to his mournefull Parents. Let not my Father greeve, or Mother moane, That I this wretched world have soone forgone, Better I dye before I doe amisse, Than live to sinne, and be berest of blisse; All I can now be charg'd with at the Tribunall Throne, Is sinne originall, for actuall I have none: And that I know my Saviour with his blood Hath washt away, and made my badnesse good. And cause I know (though knowledge I have small) That Iesus Christ did dye to save us all, I passe with joy, in Heaven to meet my King, With Angels and Archangels there to sing. Then Father mourne, and Mother weepe no more, I now dye rich, that might have liv'd but poore; For had I progrest unto mans estate, It is not certaine what would be my sate: Whether a Crosse, or Blessing I should prove, Or merit Parents direfull hate, or love. For oft you see, how youths rebellious prankes Make sonnes ingrate, to those they owe most thankes: And might not I have beene amongst the number, Of those that doe their Parents states incumber? Yes, yes, I might perhaps have beene a slave, And kil'd your hearts with care, and dig'd your grave. But now my silly Dove-like soule doth part, In peace of God, and love of Parents heart; Sweet Innocence, my shield, I beare in hand, To guard me towards that most holy Land, Where Parents both, and Sister I shall see,
In Gods appointed time triumphantly. Till when Adieu, sweet Parents, Jehovah calls away, My name isSimon sig∣nifies obe∣dience. Simon, and I must obey. Epitaphium. Young Simon up to Sion is ascended, His best life is begunne, his worst being ended. A faire Albaster Monument at the upper end of the South Ile, with this Inscription. Hîc requiescunt ossa Roberti Houghton, Militis, unius Iusticiariorum Dom. Iacobi nuper Regis ad placita coram Dom. Rege tenenda Asig. Qui natus est apud Gunthorpe, in Comitatu Nor∣folciae tertio die Augusti, Anno Dom. 1548. & ex hac vita Migravit infra hanc parochiam sexto die Februarii, Anno Dom. 1623. ex Maria Vxore Filia Roberti Rychers de Woortham, in Comitatu Cantiae Armigeri, tres sus∣cepit Filios, totidemque Filias, ex qui∣bus (Roberto & Susanna in vita ejus ex∣tinctis) Franciscus, Iohannes, Elizabe∣tha, & Maria, tempore mortis suae, dei favore fucre superstites. A very faire Monument on the North side of the South Ile, at the upper end, with this Inscrip∣tion. M. S. Nicholai Hare▪ Viri morum suavitate & elegantia, animi candore & magnitudine, ingenii denique Acumine & judicii gravitate Incompa∣rabilis: Disciplinarum & Linguarum, tam quae ad Artes, quam quae ad Aulas spectant cognitione ornatissimi, cujus Egregias & Raras Animi dotes, Ang∣lia, Belgia, Gallia, ipsaque Italia jam∣dudum suspexêre & stupuêre: Qui desiderio sui apud amicos, omnesque bo∣nos relicto obiit, Eheu nondum quadra∣genarius, Anno M. DC. XXI. Iohannes Harvy, Amico dulciss. & B. M. in perpetuam grati animi memoriam P. Magnificentius positurus si ei suam ipsius pietatem magis quam amici vo∣luntatem exequi licuisset. Vale anima candidissima, vale tuorum quos dolore & luctu conficis Aeternum desiderium, vale Patriae & seculi sum∣mum ornamentum. A faire Monument in the South Ile, on the wall, under the Monument of one Cuthbert Fetherstone. Before this Pew doore, next to the bo∣dy of the above named Cuthbert Fe∣therstone, lyeth his beloved Wife, Katharine Fetherstone, who as they piously lived in Wedlocke forty odde yeeres together, so at their deaths they desired to bee interred together, not doubting at the gene∣rall Resurrection, through Christs merits, to rise together, and for ever in Heaven to live together. Obiit Novemb. 1622. Aetatis 85. And this in part they doe attaine, Who by their deaths new lives doe gaine. Corpus moritur per poenam, resurgit per gloriam, Anima moritur per culpam, resurgit per gratiam. A Table with a faire Coat Armes, encom∣past with a Wreath of Lawrell, upon a Pillar in the Chancell, over against the Ve∣strey, thus inscribed. In this faire fragrant maiden moneth of May, When earth her Flowre. embroydery doth display, Iane Watson, one of Vertues flowers most faire, For Beauty, Wit, and Worth, a Primrose rare, Adorn'd this Earth, changing earths marriage bed, To joyne her Virgin soule to Christ her head.
A faire Monument over the Vestrey doore in the Chancell, with this Inscription. In memory of the Honourable, and Vertuous, Margaret Talbot, Wid∣dow, who deceased the 31. of March, 1620. By this small Statue (Reader) is but showne, That she was buried here, but hadst thou knowne The Piety, and Vertues of her minde, Thou wouldst have said, Why was she not enshri'nd? Both Veres and Windsors best blood fil'd her veines, She matcht with Talbot, yet their noble straines Were farre below her Vertue, in whose breast, God had infus'd his graces 'bove the rest, Of all her Sex, whose sacred course of life, Both in the State of Widow, Maid, and Wife For each she had beene, though her latter dayes Chaste widow-hood crown'd, to her immortall praise, Was so immaculate, she deserves to be The Crystall mirrour to posterity. More honour hast thou by her buriall here, Dunston, than to thee chanc'd this many a yeere; Earth from her Coffin heave thy ponderous stones, And for thy sacredst relique keepe her bones: Since, spite of envy, it cannot be deni'd, Saint-like she liv'd, and like a Saint she di'd. A Table hanging upon a Pillar, in the middle row of Pewes, with this Inscription. On the death of the Discreet and Ver∣tuous, Mistresse Mary Davies, daugh∣ter of Thomas Croft, of Okley-Parke, in the County of Salop, Esquire, and Wife of Iohn Davies of Hereford, she died on New-yeeres day, 1612. Here lies her dust, who in a span of life, Compast the vertue of the worthiest Wife: If oddes therebe (well measur'd) twill be found, She more acquir'd; so her bright stocke renown'd: And to those Wives that glory most doe gaine, She was a mirrour that no breath could staine. Though she a Female were, her judgement was, To truest Masculines a truer Glasse: For she by Nature, Grace, and Wisdome too, Shew'd by a Woman, what best men should doe In their best actions: for she acted nought That came not from a grave and gracious thought. But Nature (though familiar, yet most strange, Shewing how much she doth delight in change, In thousand fashions doth her selfe array) Permits nought heere to stand at constant stay. And Time and Death with her therein conspire, Else had these Ashes still held vitall fire. But these just lines, in Time and Deaths despight, Shall leade all times to doe her vertue right. A good name is better than a good Oynt∣ment, and the day of death, than the day that one is borne, Eccles. 7. 3. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Here lies her Type, who was of late, The prop of Belgia, stay of France. Spaines foile, Faiths shield, and Queene of
Of Armes, of Learning, Fate, and Chance: In briefe, of Women ne re was seene, So great a Prince, so good a Queene. Sith Vertue Her immortall made, Death (envying all that cannot dye) Her earthy parts did so invade, As in it wrackt selfe Majesty. But so her Spirit inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in loyall hearts. Many Daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. From henceforth is laid up for me a Crowne of Righteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Iudge shall give mee at that day; and not me onely, but to them also that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. George Southwarke. A Very faire Window in the North Ile, with the Armes and summes of all such Compa∣nies as were bountifull Benefactors to∣wards the great repaire of this faire Parish Church of Saint George. Mercers 20. li. Grocers 15. li. Drapers 10. li. Fishmongers 26. li. 13. s. 4. d. Goldsmithes 3. li. Skinners 6. li. 13. s. 4. d. Merchantaylors 15. li. Haberdashers 10. li. Salters 5. li. Ironmongers 6. li. 13. s. 4. d. Vintners 5. li. Clothworkers 13. li. Dyers 2. li. Brewers 5. li. Leathersellers 5. li. Pewterers 3. li. Wax-Chandlers 4. li. Tallow-Chandlers 2. li. Girdlers 2. li. 10. s. Sadlers 2. li. Cordwainers 5. li. The summe is 166. li. 10. s. Vnder these this Inscription. This Church, Steeple, and Gallery, was repaired, new Pewed, and beauti∣fied, and the South Ile inlarged by the Parishioners, with the assistance of these, and other good Benefactors, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1629. Twigden Masters Thomas Cooke Launcelot Hobson Churchwardens. The enlargement of the South Ile (above named) is above halfe the length of the Ile. The ground of it, from that small part of an Ile to which it was then ad∣joyned (downeward) taken out of the Churchyard, making a compleat Ile, and adding to the Church, as a great deale of roome, so a great deale of grace and beauty. In a Window next to this downe∣ward, is the Armes of one Master Tho∣mas Stone, at whose charge it was gla∣zed. The upper Window of the South Ile, is thus inscribed: The Armes of Iohn Wyndell, Citizen and Fishmonger of London, a good Be∣nefactor to this Parish. There adjoynes to this Window, the Armes of the Worshipfull Company of the Fishmongers, very artfully car∣ved in Wood, and under them a very faire large Pew, with two long Seats, one for the Men, the other for the Wo∣men-Almes-folke of Saint Peters Hos∣pitall, the Fishmongers Hospitall, or Almes-house at Newington, situate and being in this Parish. Next to this downeward, is a Win∣dow with a very faire Coate, but no name, the Motto, Sed Sanguine. Next to this another, with the Armes of one Master Robert Shaw, to this Church a good Benefactor. Next to this another, with the Armes of one Master Lionell Bennet, to this Church a good Benefactor.
A very faire Table, with a rich Coate Armes, hanging on the South side of the Chancell, with this In∣scription. Here lyeth the body of Elizabeth, the Daughter of Walter Spendelew, Gen∣tleman, and Ione Trussell his Wife; she departed this life in the faith of Christ the 7. of November, Anno 1625. Vpon a Marble Stone in the Chancell, neere the Communion Table, is this Inscription. Here under lyeth the body of Etheldred Reynell, Daughter and sole Heire to Sir Edward Peacocke, of Finchley, Knight, Wife to Sir George Reynell, Marshall of the Kings Bench, by whom he had Issue three sonnes and three daughters: She departed the 11. day of September 1618. in the 34. yeere of her age. Modest, Humble, Godly, Wife, Pity ever in her eyes, Patience ever in her breast, Great in Good, in Evill least, Loving Wife, and Mother deare, Such she was that now lies heare. Vpon another Stone close to the former, is this In∣scription. Sub hoc lapide, inhumatur corpus Iohannis Iones, qui migravit è vita quinto die Februarii, Anno 1600. Hîc genitor situs es, consumpto corpore letho, At Coelis puro mente manente Deo. Giles Cripplegate. HOw this Church, any thing in or about it (either for ne∣cessity or beauty) hath from time to time beene kept, supplyed, and maintained, all men that know it know; to the perpetuall credit and commends of those worthy Gentlemen, to whom, in their severall times and successi∣on, the charge of it hath beene com∣mitted. But to leave this generall commends, and come to some particulars, with their times, but a little time past, wee begin with the yeere 1623. In which all the Roofe over the Chancell, was on the outside repaired, and in the inside very curiously clouded. To the further grace and ornament of this Chancell, there was added in the same yeere, the cost of a very faire Table of the Commandements, and with these the Church (then) was tho∣rowout very worthily beautified. In the yeeres of our Lord God, 1624. and 1626. the two side Galleries were built, both very faire and spacious. In the yeere of our Lord, 1629. the Steeple very much decayed, was repai∣red, all the foure Spires (standing in foure Towers at the corners of it) taken downe, with new and very substantiall Timber-worke re-built, and with the Lead new cast new covered; every one of these Spires inlarged somewhat in the compasse, a great deale in height, but most in their stately, eminent, and gracefull appearance. In the midst of these, where there was none before (gracing and being graced by them) was a very faire Tur∣ret erected; the head of it (which much overpeeres those Spires) covered with Lead, as also the props that sup∣port it: This, and the Spires, having every one a Crosse, with very faire Vanes upon them. The charge of all this I could not certainly get, and would not uncertain∣ly speake it: But the greanesse of the things speake the cost to be great, all being the sole charge of the Parishio∣ners. A very faire Table, with a rich Coat Armes hanging upon a Pillar in the middle Ile, about it this Inscription. The sacred corps of Sarah, Wife of Henry Goodericke, daughter of William
Bodenham, Knight, was interred at the South end of this seat, towards the Pulpit. Within it thus: Buried the 6. of Iune, Anno 1616. The Bearers sorrow, sable Lions shew, Like to that Lion which did overthrow The man of God: And charg'd alike, doe stand, Grand Guardants here, to checke the upheav'd hand, Vnweeting wights, or ignorant, shall lay Vpon her hallowed corps, that here did pray. A sacred Temple 'twas, wherein did shine Her Makers glory, Humane and Divine: Sweet commerce sanctified with zeale, mov'd there In Beauties Fabricke, its owne proper spheare, For which it towers above the sight of eye, Gods Temples must lie low that tower so high. Vnder two hands joyn'd, one out of a Cloud, the other out of a Globe, these words: Till then, Farewell. Vpon a very faire Marble Stone, in the South Ile, is this Inscription. Here lyeth buried the body of Ellen Monyns, who died the 29. of Aprill, in the yeere of our Lord 1632. Here also lyeth buried the body of her Sister, Mistresse Frances Monyns, who died the 17. of Iune in the same yeere. They were the Daughters of Sir Willi∣am Monyns, of Waldershaw, in the County of Kent, Baronet, and of the Lady Iane his Wife, the Daughter of Roger Twisden, of Roydon Hall, in the same County, Esquire. They lived Religious and Vertuous lives, and in their youths departed this life in the true faith of Iesus Christ. Olaves Southwarke. THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1617. Edward Candish Benjamin Fry William Hundman Richard Clearke Churchwardens. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Monumentum Elizabethae. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. From henceforth is laid up for me a Crowne of Righteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Iudge shall give mee at that day; and not me onely, but to them also that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. All the Monuments here being very ancient, are to bee turned to before, in the Church as it stands in its Ward, which you may finde at folio 457. Saviours Southwarke. VPon this spacious and specious Church (for well it deserves those Epithites) we look back∣ward twenty yeeres or thereupon, at which time it was in many parts of it repaired, and within thorowout richly and very worthily beautified. About two or three yeeres after, that Gallery that is over that part of the Church that is called Saint PE∣TERS Chappell, and that that is over against it, as also that Gallery that crosses the middle Ile, over the entrance into the Chancell (much gracing the Church, and supplying a
great necessity) were worthily contri∣ved and erected. In the yeeres of our Lord God, 1621. and 1622. it was againe in many parts of it repaired; all the North side of it (at once) strengthened and beautified, with a substantiall and very artificiall Rough-cast, the other side Plaistered and Whited. Among many rich and beautifull things that have beene added to this Church at divers times, and to seve∣rall parts and places, some of a generall cost, and some of particular bounties (for some reserved causes omitted) we here only remember that extraordina∣ry faire and curious Table of the Com∣mandements, and the Screene at the West doore, set up in the yeere of our Lord God, 1618. But passing all these, somewhat now of that part of this Church above the Chancell, that in former times was called, Our Ladies Chappell. It is now called, The new Chappell; and indeed, though very old, it now may be cal'd a new one, because newly redeemed from such use and imploy∣ment, as in respect of that it was built to, Divine and Religious duties, may very well be branded, with the stile of wretched, base, and unworthy, for that that before this abuse, was (and is now) a faire & beautifull Chappell, by those that were then the Corporation (which is a body consisting of 30. Vestry men, sixe of those thirty, Churchwardens) was leased and let out, and this House of God made a Bake-house. Two very faire doores, that from the two side Iles of the Chancell of this Church, and two that thorow the head of the Chancell (as at this day they doe againe) went into it, were lath't, daub'd, and dam d up: the faire Pillars were ordinary posts, against which they piled Billets and Bavens; in this place they had their Ovens, in that a Bolting-place, in that their Kneading-trough, in another (I have heard) a Hogs-trough; for the words that were given mee were these, This place have I knowne a Hog-stie, in a∣nother a Store-house, to store up their hoorded Meale: and in all of it, some∣thing of this sordid kind & condition. It was first let by the Corporation afore named, to one  Wyat, after him to one  Peacocke, after him to one  Cleybrooke, and last to one Wilson; all Bakers, and this Chappell still imployed in the way of their Trade, a Bake-house, though some part of this Bake-house was sometime turned into a Starch-house. The time of the continuance of it in this kind, from the first letting of it to Wyat, to the restoring of it againe to the Church, was threescore and some odde yeeres, in the yeere of our Lord God 1624. for in this yeere the ruines and blasted estate that the old Corpo∣ration sold it to, were by the Corpora∣tion of this time, repaired, renewed, well, and very worthily beautified: the charge of it for that yeere, with many things done to it since, arising to two hundred pounds. This, as all the former Repaires, be∣ing the sole cost and charge of the Pa∣rishioners. One Ile in this Chappell, was paved at the onely cost of one Master Iohn Hayman, Taylor, and Merchantaylor, in the yeere 1625. A faire Monument on the North wall of the new Chappell, with this Inscription. Donec redeat Dominus Iesus Christus Subest quod Reliquum Iohannis Morton, in Artibus Magistri, qui cum singulare cum pietatis, tum eruditionis exhibu∣erat specimen, Literatam juventutis Ambitionem Gemens, unicique salva∣toris Iesu Christi adventum anhelans, expiravit die 17. Septem. Anno salutis 1631. Annum aetatis agens 25. V. M. Graecis Musis lugentibus. In the same Chappell and Ile, upon à Grave-stone is thus written. Not twice ten yeeres of age, a weary breath, Have I exchanged for a happy death; My course so short, the longer is my rest,
God takes them soonest whom he loveth best: For he that's borne to day, and dies to morrow, Loseth some dayes of rest, but more of sorrow. Here lies buried the body of Iohn Buck∣land, Glover, 1625. Who deceased the 16. of August. Vpon a faire stone close to this, under the Grocers Armes, is this In∣scription. Garret, some cal'd him, but that was too hye, His name is Garrard, who now here doth lye; He in his youth was toss'd with many a wave, But now at Port ariv'd, rests in his grave. The Church he did frequent while he had breath, And wisht to lye therein after his death. Weepe not for him, since he is gone before To Heaven, where Grocers there are many more. In the same Ile, upon a faire Marble stone, with the Merchantaylors Armes at the head of it, is this Inscription. This Stone was laid, and this Ile was paved, by Iohn Hayman, Taylor, and Merchantaylor, the 28. of October, 1625. Next to this, upon a brasse plate, is this Inscription. Here lyeth the body of Alice Dudson, the Wife of Thomas Dudson, who departed this life the 14. of Octo∣ber, 1626. who sometime did dwell in this Parish, but died in Saint Geor∣ges Parish. All these, with that rich and cosly Monument of the right Reverend Fa∣ther in God, Launcelot Bishop of Win∣chester, are in this Chappell. Queene Elizabeths Monument. Elizabetha Regina. Saint Peters Church at Westminster, Her sacred body doth interre; Her glorious soule with Angels sings, Her deeds live patternes here for Kings: Her love in every heart hath roome, This onely shadowes forth her Toome. Sepulchres Parish. Anno 1624. THere was expended this yeere extraordinary, about the new Vestry Window, in Masons worke, Glasiers worke, Iron worke, and other charge extraordinary, be∣sides the usuall charges of repaires, 30. li. Anno 1625. In this yeere the ten North Church-Windowes were new built, and repai∣red, the charge whereof amounted to 86. li. 14. s. 7. d. Anno 1626. In this yeere the sixe Windowes on the East end, and South side of the Church, with the Water-tables, Bat∣tlements, and Buttresses, were new made and repaired, the Windowes new glazed, and the Walls pointed downe, which with some Plumbers worke and Pew worke, cost 105. li. 3. s. 10. d. Anno 1627. The charge of repaire of the Church Windowes at the West end, & South side of the Church and Porch, with the Battlements, Water-table, and But∣tresses, and pointing downe the Walls, and other repaires this yeere within the Church, appeare by the accounts to have beene 169. li. 2. s. 8. d.
Anno 1628. In making new Pewes in the Church, and Plumbers worke upon the Church, and in Glazing worke this yeere, ex∣pended extraordinary, besides other ordinary repaires, 40. li. Anno 1629. The new Pewes this yeere made in the Church and Chancell, the cleering of the Churchyard, and other repara∣tions there, 55. li. 16. s. Anno 1630. The charge of taking downe, and new building of one of the great Pinacles of the Steeple this yeere, appeareth by the accounts and Bills examined, to be 139. li. 19. s. 4. d. Other Repaires done about the Church this yeere, in Plumbers worke upon the Steeple, and new Leading the Vestry, and making of new Pewes in the Church, 75. li. Anno 1631. The new casting of the fifth Bell, with the charge of Iron and Timber-worke, to the Bell-Founder, Bell-hanger, and Smith, paid 40. li. The Plumbers worke, and Carpen∣ters worke, in strengthening and new Leading the Roofe over Saint Stephens Chappell, and other Repaires of the Church this yeere, appeareth by the accounts to be above 100. li. Annis 1632. & 1633. The three great Pinacles of the Stee∣ple of the Church, with the Battle∣ments, and Water-tables round about the same, repaired, built, and made up with vent and crest, in manner, forme, height, thicknesse, and all other re∣spects answerable to that Pinacle which was there lately new made, with the taking and cutting out of the decayed stones, putting in new stone, working and pointing them downe, putting in new top stones, and three Vanes, answerable to the former Vane on the other Pinacle: the Masons work by composition, 140. li. the Vanes, I∣ron, and Lead-worke, 13. li. 6. s. 8. d. The new Leading and strengthening the Roofe in the North side of the Church thorowout with Lead and Timber worke, 115. li. Summa totalis expen∣sarum Annis praedict. 1110. li. 3. s. 1. d. Thomas Southwarke. THE Steeple of this Church greatly decayed, was repaired, new Leaded; from the ground to the top coated with a beautifull Rough-cast; and inriched with a very faire Turret, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1663. At the same time the Parishioners bestowed upon the entrance into the Church, a new bricke Wall, with a doore in the middle of it, fit for so wor∣thy passage. About foure or five yeeres since, some cost was bestowed upon the East Window; and in the yeere of our Lord 1618. (at the lower end of the Church) a very handsome Gallery builded. A Table with this Inscription. 1632. The yeerely gift of foure pounds, given by Master Henry Smith, Esquire, to this Parish of Saint Thomas, hath beene dispended on the poore this yeere past in manner and forme fol∣lowing. In witnesse whereof, wee the Minister, Churchwardens, and Over-seers, have subscribed our names. Widdow stringfeyld, aged 95. yeeres, a Coat, with letters, cost xviij. s. 1. d. Dorochy Burket, aged 82. yeeres, a Coat, with letters, cost xviij. s. iiij. d. Thomas Wingfield, aged 61. yeeres, a Coat, with letters, cost xvij. s. x. d. Nicholas Leeke, aged 70. yeeres, a Coat, with letters, cost vij. s. x. d. Ellen Gray, Innocent, aged 34. yeeres, a Coat, with letters, cost xviij. s. The summe 4. li.
Benjamin Spencer, Minister. William Phife Nicholas Eliot Churchwardens. Iohn Berry Gamaliel Voyce Sidemen. Trinity Minories. THis Church greatly decayed in the Roofe, (the Timber repai∣red and mended) was new Ti∣led in the yeere of our Lord God, 1618. In the yeere 1620. the Steeple, that before (as the Church) was covered with Tyles, was untyled, and (the Tim∣ber repaired and strengthened) was covered againe with Lead. In the yeere 1628. all the inside of the Church was well and very com∣mendably beautified. Also in the yeere 1623. the Church∣yard, that before was onely paled in with Boords, was (to the better de∣fence and grace of it) encompast about with Bricke, with a very handsome en∣trance into it. This, as all the Repaires before na∣med, being the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners. A handsome Monument on the North wall of the Chancell, with these fol∣lowing lines. Death first did strike Sir Iohn, here tomb'd in Clay, And then inforc'd his sonne to follow fast; Of Pelhams line, this Knight was chiefe and stay: By this behold, all flesh must die at last. But Bletsow Lord, thy Sister most may mone, Both Mate and Sonne hath left her here alone. Sir Iohn Pelham died the 13. of Octo∣ber, 1580. Oliver Pelham his sonne, died the 19. of Ianuary, 1584. About a faire Marble stone in the Chancell, close by the Com∣munion Table, are these words. Constantia Lucy, D. Thomae Lucy Iuni∣oris, Militis Aurati, & D. Constantiae Vxoris Foeminae Filia, Natu maxima, Annum agens plus minus un∣decimum, pridie Idus Februarii in Do∣mino, quam Foelicissimè, hîc posita, fato fungitur, Anno Dom. 1596. Vpon it these: Nascimur & Morimur, non exorabile fatum, Vita fugax, fragilis, lubrica, vana, brevis. Ocyus in Campis, flos Formosissimus aret: Optima praetereunt, deteriora manent. Rapta immaturo fato, Constantia Lucy, Nunc jacet: & quondam Lucida, luce caret. Ante annos Constans, humilis, mansueta, modesta, Dixeris, & Paphia membra polita manu. In vere aetatis, persensit frigora Brumae: Sic sic praeproerè praeoquapoma cadunt. On another Stone, neerè unto the last, is this Inscription. Hîc jacet corpus Irausis Marun. Gene∣rosi, qui obiit 14. die Septemh. Anno Dom. 1606. Haec verba soepissime in ore illius viventis: O Domine secundum merit a mea, Noli me judicare. Deprecor Majestatem tu∣am ut misericorditer deleas iniquita∣tes meas. Credo videre hona Domini, in Terra vi∣ventium.
In the body of the Church, is a Monument with this In∣scription. Vivere Cornices multos dicuntur in Annos: Cur nos Angusta conditione sumus. The figure of a Child. Henricus Nowelus, Filius D. Iohannis Noweli Doctoris Medici, optimae indo∣lis puerulus, unicum patris solatium, Natus 23. Iulii, 1598. & mortuus ex Atrophia 4. Augusti, 1599. Hîc sepultusjacet. Melioribus utere fatis. A Review also of the nine out Parishes in Middlesex and Surrey. Clement Danes. THe care of those that by an An∣nual succession, have the charge and over-sight of this Church, hath continually beene such, as upon the least defect or failing, either in strength or beauty, it hath instantly beene imployed, both in Repaires and Adornment. And first we beginne with that great costly repaire in the yeere of our Lord God, 1608. at which time, upon sixe and twenty foot of the Churchyard in length, and twenty foot in breadth (ta∣ken in at the East end of the Church) they built up a very faire Chancell. The charge of this building and repai∣ring, amounting to the summe of 1000. pounds, and upward. In the yeere of our Lord, 1616. there was laid out upon the Steeple, in repairing and inlarging of it, with some other needfull things in the Church, the summe of 496. li. In the yeere of our Lord God, 1631. some parts of this Church were againe repaired, and the whole body covered with a faire and beautifull Rough-cast, the charge of it 40. li. In the yeere 1632. and this present yeere 1633. this Church was within, thorowout richly and very worthily beautified. The charge of it 50. li. The summe of all these Repaires, all being the sole cost of the Parishioners, 1586. li. A faire Monument in the Chancell, on the North side, at the upper end, with this Incription. Georgii Roberti Wilelmi Christopheri Annae More de Lothesley Equit: Aurat: Filiae. Soror: Nept: Pronep: Foeminae Lectissimae, Dilectissimaeque, Conjugi Charissimae Castissimaeque, Matri Piissimae Indulgentissimaeque, XV. Annis in Conjugio Transactis, VII. post XII. partum (quorum VII. superstant) dies Immani Febre Correptae (Quod hoc saxum Fari jussit, pse prae dolore infans) Maritus (miserrimum dictu) olim Charae Charus Cineribus Cineres spondet suos, Novo Matrimonio (Annuat deus) Hoc loco sociandos, Ioannes Donne, Sacr. Theolog. Profess. Secessit, Anno XXIII. Aetat. suae & sui Iesu CIO. DC. XVII. Aug. XV. A faire Monument over against this, on the South side, with this Inscription. Viro praeclaris: Animi Corporisque dotibus ornate. Qui in Angelicani juris studio Foeliciss. versatus, Iuriscons. munere, quod Iure
optimo obtinuit, intermisso, Officiis in Curia Cancellariae, cum examinatoris, per integros 17. annos, tum sex Cleri∣corum unius, per menses quosdam fata∣les integerrimè perfunctus est: vitâ Lon∣dini in hoc vico (ubi & natus) Majori expartetransactâ, die Apr. 26. Anno Dem. 1610. Aetatis 51. defuncto, scil. Animâ Christo, Corpore hîc humo tra∣ditis, relictoque sui desiderio, non sine multis multorum lachrymis. Maria ipsi superstes vidua Thomae Oneli Filia, de Charleton, in Nor∣thantonensi quondam Agro Armige∣ri, Fidissima conjux Charissimo Marito, Quî cum ad Annos ferè 25. Conjunctis∣sime vizerat, Amoris inviolati perpe∣tuum posteris Testimonium, nec sibi minus lugubre, hoc posuit Monumen∣tum. A very faire Monument neere unto the other, with this Inscription. Memoriae Sacrum. Here lieth the body of Hippocrates de Otthen, Nobly descended from the Noble Family of the Otthens, out of Holsatia, Doctor of Physicke in the Vniversity of Monutpelliers, in France, and most worthily incorpo∣rated in the Vniversity of Oxford. After his first comming into Eng∣land with his Father (who was the Emperours Physician, and sent for over by Queene Elizabeth) he was desired by the Earle of Lecester him∣selfe, to pertaine unto him, in whose service (for many yeeres, both at home, and abroad in the Low-coun∣tries, with his Lord) he performed such worthy parts, as well in his owne faculty, as being imployed in other laudable services, that her Ma∣jesty and the State tooke especiall note of his worth. After the decease of the Earle, hee was in the same e∣steeme and regard with the Earle of Essex, and by her Majesty comman∣ded to attend upon him in the wars of France, and afterwards in his pro∣sperous Voyage to Cadiz. Retur∣ning home (hoping to retire him∣selfe to his owne Practice, and a more private life) hee was againe commanded to goe (as Physician in service into Ireland) with the Lord Montjoy (afterwards Earle of De∣vonshire) her Majesties Leiutenant in that Kingdome. But returning againe into England with his Lord, in the beginning of his Majesties Reigne, he continued not long, but went as Physician with the Earle of Hartford, his Majesties Ambassa∣dour unto the Arch-Duke of Au∣stria and Burgundi, in that Honou∣rable imployment: And so retur∣ning againe into England, hee spent the residue of his yeeres with his deare and most vertuous Wife, Mi∣stresse Dorothy Drew, daughter to Master Roger Drew, of Densworth, in Sussex, Esquire, in great blisse and happinesse: And being a most zea∣lous and penitent Christian, full of yeeres, and (unto his last gaspe) of perfect Memory, hee ended his pil∣grimage here on earth, and with alacrity of spirit surrendred his soule into the hands of his Creator, the 13. of November 1611. For whose love and memory, his late Wife (the now Lady and Wife unto Sir Stephen Thorneburst of Kent, the most worthy and valerous Knight) hath caused this Monument to bee ere∣cted, Amoris ergo P. P. Next to this another handsome small Monument, with this In∣scription. Anne, the Daughter of Francis Cary, Wife of Hugh Prust of Devon, 17. yeeres, aged 40. havig by him 9. Children, was buried here the 13. of February 1627. In Life and Death, most strict in right accord, She liv'd, she di'd true Servant of the Lord.
A faire Monument on the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. By the Churchwardens and Feofees of this Parish, this Monument was set up, the 20. of Ianuary, 1603. Here lieth buried the bodies of Richard Bedoe, Gentleman, and Anne his first Wife, one of the ancientest of this Parish, and a Feosee of the poore, who ended his life with a charitable disposition, the first day of Septem∣ber 1603. Annoque Regni Regis Iaco∣bi, &c. primo. Being when he died of the age of 56. yeeres, and was borne in the Parish of Ricken, in Sa∣lop, who of their Charity, have gi∣ven so many of their Tenements within the Dukes place in Cree-Church, alias Christs-Church, neere Algate, London, as do now go for 20. li. per Annum, to the maintenance and use of the poore of this Parish for ever. And also 110. li. to be lent gratis to 50. poore Housholders, and young beginners of the same Pa∣rish, for two yeeres a piece, putting in good security for the same: With condition, that this Stone, by the Churchwardens and Feofees of the same Parish for the time being, shall from time to time for ever be main∣tained; and foure Sermons yeerely for ever to bee made, on the Feast-dayes of All-Saints, the Purification of our Lady, the Ascension of our Lord God, and Saint Iohn Baptist, to re∣member and give God thankes for the Givers thereof. God increase Charity unfeyned. Margaret Bedoe, last Wife of Richard Bedoe, gave by her last Will, in the yeere 1633. the summe of twenty pounds to bee added to her Hus∣bands gift of a hundred pounds, and so to bee imployed and disposed of, as her Husbands now is, the Prea∣cher foure times a yeere, mentio∣ning her gift with his, according to her Will, or else her gift to be void. A very faire Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. M. S. Nobilissimo juveni Wolfgango Balthâsari à Crailsheim, ex Antiqua & clara Fa∣milia in Franconia, cum in Sereniss. Fre∣derici V. Electoris Palatini Comitatu huc in Angliam profectus & morbo Cor∣reptus, piè diem obiisset 29. Ian. Anni 1612. Hoc Monumentum positum fuit. A faire Monument at the upper end of the South Ile, with this Inscription. Vnto the Memory of Richard Iacob, late Vintener, deceased, who after 66. yeres of his life, where∣of he spent more than halfe in this Parish, wherein he had with good credit passed through all Offices, both in the Parish, as also in his Company, and for his Fidelity was elected one of the Governours of Bridewell, and likewise done ma∣ny charitable Acts, both to the Pa∣rish, to his Hall, to the Hospitall of Bridewell, Christs-Church, Saint Bartholomewes, and Saint Thomas in Southwarke, to divers persons in London, and Southwarke, and many other places, comfortably gave up his soule to his Redeemer, the 13. of October 1612. Sibil his mournefull Wife, hath caused this Monument to be erected. On the same wall downeward, another faire Monument, with this Inscription. This Monument was made at the only charges of Katharine Metcalfe of Be∣dale, in the County of Yorke, Wid∣dow, Mother to the hereunder na∣med Thomas and Nicholas, and Exe∣cutrix to the said Nicholas, the 28. of May, Anno Dom. 1583.
Memento Mori. Here against this place lyeth buried the body of Thomas Metcalfe, late of Bellerby, in the County of Yorke, Gen∣tleman, who died the 18. day of May, 1575. And also the body of Nicholas Metcalfe, Esquire, late one of the six Clerkes of the Chancery, and Brother to the said Thomas, who died the 8. day of September, Anno Dom. 1581. To whom God granta joyfull Resur∣rection, Amen. A faire Table in Glasse, hanging close by the Pulpit, with this Inscription. S. Memoriae Virg. Helenae Moseley ex equestri Moseleyorum Familia oriundae, cujus Annos nubiles summa virtus at modestia merito Co∣ronarunt, Correptae praematurâ mor∣te, heu dies 17. Feb. Anno Christi, 1607. Supremus diluxit. Amoris ergo Moest. P. Q. A. A faire Monument on the North side, with this Inscription. Iussus Iohannes Painus concedere Fate, Paruit, & Moriens constitit ipse sibi: Nam cum animas Caelo deberi, corpora Terrae Sciret, utrique suum reddidit ipse lubens. Hinc animam ipsius sedes Aeterna beavit, Foelici jussam conditione frui. Corporis haec Domus est, Terreni Terrea moles; Illa Dei, haec Fidi cura Nepotis erat. Anno Domini 1573. Aprilis 25. A very faire Monument in the same wall, neere unto the other, with this Inscription. Secundum Christi Redemptoris Adven∣tum, hoc in tumulo, expectat Rogerus Houghton, antiqua Houghtonorum Fa∣milia, in Agro Lancastriensi oriundus, Qui quum illustrissimi viri Dom. Ro∣berti Cecill Salisburiae Comitis & Angliae Magni Thesaurii per annos 42. Summa cum Fide & Industria Fami∣lia praefuissit, in Patriam Coelestem evo∣catus, placide pieque emigravit, Anno Dom. 1617. Aetatis 64. Charissimo viro Anna Conjux, filia Iohan∣nis Little, Moestissima, hoc Monumen∣tum in memoriam ejus & Filiolae, ac Mortuae, posuit. Vpon a faire Marble Stone in the middle Ile, is this In∣scription. Quam facit incertos humani temporis annos Addidit exemplo mors inimica novo. En Gulielmus erat teneris cui nomen ab annis Hac Saint albonus membra sepultus humo. Cujus non minimum mores meruere favorem, Regia in hoc plenus curia testis erit. Virtutis causa, comes Arundellius illum Qui summo studio persequeretur erat. Mitto quod assiduus fuerat virtutis amator, Quodque erat ex ortu stirps generosa suo. Membra sepulerali conduntur frigida lecto, Spiritus aethereis aestra petivit equis. William Saintalbone sleepes in rest, Within this Marble Stone, Whose corps in Clay, and soule well Deserves dispraise of none.
He had such feats, so full of fruits, So prompt with word and pen, So skilfull in his courtly suits, So deare a friend to men. So ripe to rule the workes of fame, So tempering hot and cold, His deeds deserve that his good name Were siphered here in gold. Vpon a Stone in the middle Ile, is this Inscription. Memoriae sacrum, & Deo opt. max. Sacrum. Secundum Christi Redemptoris adventum hoc in Tumulo expectat Rogerus Hough∣ton, Antiqua Houghtonorum Familia in Agro Lancastrensi oriundus. Qui quum illustrissimi viri Domini Roberti Cecilii Sarisburiae Comitis, & Angliae Magni Thesaurarii, per annos 42. sum∣ma cum Fide & Industria familia prae∣fuisset, in Patriam Coelestem evocatus, placide pieque emigravit. Anno Dom. 1617. Charissimo viro conjux Moestissimae Monu∣mentum hoc, Amoris & observantiae causa posuit. On another Stone neere to the former is this Inscription. Here lieth buried the body of Eliza∣beth, late Wife of George Dalton, Es∣quire, who died the 2. day of Ianu∣ary, 1605. and hath left Issue of her body to her Husband, Maximi∣lian, and Thomas. Yea, though I should walke thorow the val∣ley of the shadow of death, I will feare no evill, for thou art with me, the Rod and thy Staffe they comfort me. Iesus Christ is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I feare? God is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? A faire Stone in the middle Ile, neere the Chancell, having this Inscription. Bartinus Hesrigg Armiger, Capitaneus Militiae Leicestrensis, hic sepultus est, qui obiit 4. Maii, Anno Dom. 1630. Aetatis suae 24. Another in the same Ile, with this Inscription. Hic jacet Edmundus Arnold, postremus Aprilis Vlcere quem rapuit tristis atroxque dies, Istius Ecclesiae Rector Meritissimus olim, Et summus medica Doctor in Arte fuit, Non Ipocrate minor erat hic, non Peone, Doctor, Non opifex mirum vincis Apollo virum. M. D. deme ter X. semel V. Christi cadit Anno, Cui vitam Medicus det sine fine Deus. A handsome Monument on the Wall, in the South Ile, with this Inscription. Here by lyeth buried the body of Ed∣ward Price, Gentleman, and of Ed∣ward his onely Sonne, who for the space of 24. yeeres, lived in this Pa∣rish, wherein God so blessed him, that of his good and charitable de∣votion, he hath given three pounds a yeere for ever out of his free Land, called the Blew Lyon in the said Parish, to be bestowed in Sea-coales, and to bee distributed freely to the poore by the Churchwardens. And also twenty pounds for ever to bee lent to two poore young Houshol∣ders gratis, from two yeeres to two yeeres, ten pounds apiece. He departed this life the 8. of March, 1605. On the same Tombe, under that above, is this written. This Tombe was erected at the charge of Elizabeth, the Wife of Henry Ba∣ten, Esquire, one of his Majesties Sergeants at Armes, and late Wife of Edward Price, deceased, who of
her godly disposition, hath given 20. s. a yeere for ever to the Prea∣cher of this Parish, to be paid out of her house called the three Cups, next adjoyning on the West side of the same Blew Lyon, onely that he shall make recitall hereof at two se∣verall Sermons yeerely; one on the Sunday before Christmas day, and the other on the Sunday before Mid∣summer day. And the said Eliza∣beth also, of her godly love and zeale to the Church, hath given a Flagon-Pot, silver and guilt, weighing 38. ounces and an halfe, for the service of the Communion Table, to re∣maine for ever; and three pounds to the poore, to be distributed at her Funerall, and five pounds to the poore of Kniton in Derbyshore, where shee was borne. Shee departed the 10. of November, Anno 1616. A very faire Glasse Table, hanging on a Pillar in the South Ile, in which there is the figure of a Gentlewo∣man all in blacke, with a guilt booke in her hand, laid as upon her Tombe: Over her head an Angell, over her at the feet, Death with a Dart and Houre-glasse. Over her, adjoyning to a very faire Coat, encompast with a Lawrell wreath, these words: Filius Ararhnes Cyllenii, Factor paterque Tanaquillae. Vnder her. Memoriae Sacrum Katherinae Brydges (filiae & Haeredis Ro∣berti Essington generosi, unius olim Guardianorum pontis London) tri∣plici jugo junctae: Primò Thomae Gwyn de London generoso, filio secundo Guli∣elmi Vaughan de Berain in Com. Den∣bighe, Armigeri, & Margaretae Gwin, Vxoris ejus, defunctorum, Cui unicum Foetum edidit (Nimirum Edwardum Guyn, adhuc vitales Carpentem au∣ras) Secundo Gulielmo Forset Armi∣gero: Postremo Guilielmo Bridges, in∣terioris Templi London Armigero: Vitae sua virtute Clara, omnibusque naturae dotibus eximiè praedita. Cui (post lau∣dabilis vitae stadium, nitentemque in aulam migrationem) E. G. defunctae proles, officiosa pietate (ut decet) No∣vissimum hoc Parentale Munusculums exolvit. Obiit 16. Maii, Anno a partu Virginis salutifero 1598. Annoque Aetatis suae 45. Giles in the Fields. BEfore I speake of this new Church, I must briefly say of the old, that indeed it was very old: and in the antiquity of it, stood now still in danger of falling: that some part of it did fall, foretelling the rest to follow, if not speedily prevented, by pulling it downe to Re-build it, which after a diligent search, the necessity found, was done. For this new Church, it beganne to be raised in the yeere of our Lord God, 1623. was finished 1625. and encom∣past with a faire bricke Wall in the yeere 1631. Which take more amply, in that absolute delivery of it, that I finde en∣graven over the doore on the North side of this Church, the words are these: Quod felix bonumque sit Posteris, Hoc Templum loco veteris ex Annosâ vetustate Collapsi, Mole & Splendore Auctum Multo paraecorum Charitas Instauravit, In quibus pientissimae Heroinae D. Aliciae Duddeley Munisicentia gratum marmoris hujus meretur eloquium. Huc etiam accessit aliorum quorundam pictas, Quibus provisae in Coelo sunt grates. Opus Surgere Coepit Ad umbilicos deductum Muro undiquaque val∣latum Anno 1623 1625 1631 Heus Viator, an effaetum est bonis operi∣bus hoc seculum?
To the raising, finishing, and (in eve∣ry part of it) richly, and very excel∣lently beautifying of this great worke, there were many good and great Be∣nefactors: The names of all, with their particular gifts, my time gave not leave to compasse: neither for many of them, could any enquiry get them, they desiring to bee conceald, and by vertue of what they have done, obli∣ging those that know them, not to di∣vulge or reveale them. For the rich and costly Glazing of this Church, the Worke and Worke∣masters thus follow. A very rich and beautifull Window in the head of the Chancell, of foure severall Panes or Parts: In the first, the figure of Abraham sacrificing his Sonne: in the second, Moses with the Table of the Commandements: in the third, the figure of the holy Prophet David: in the fourth and last, Salomon. The inscription to the first is this: Credidit Abraham Deo, & reputatum est illi ad Iustitiam. Anno Dom. 1628. Of the second is this: Erat vir Moyses Mitissimus super omnes homines qui morabantur in terra. 1628. Of the third this: Solum medium tutum. 1627. Of the fourth this: Dum Spiro Spero. 1628. The first of these, was the charge of Abraham Speckart, Esquire. The second, of Hamo Claxton, Es∣quire. The third, of Sir Iohn Fenner, Knight. The fourth, of Frauncis Lord Mount-Norris. A very faire Window on the South side of the Chancell. At the top of it, Iehovah. Vnder the figures in it, Shelbery 1617. Shelbery and Wrothe. Domine misere nostri. A very faire Window on the North side of the Chancell: two faire Fi∣gures in it; the one of the Virgin Mary, with Christ in her armes; the other of Mary Magdalen. Vnder this Window lyeth buried, the body of Mary Pill, of this Parish; which Window was set up at the charges of Mary Maudit, her daugh∣ter and Heire, 1629. Vnder the first thefe Verses: From Maries teares to Maries joy, This Mary is translated: And after threescore yeeres annoy, In Heaven she is instated. With this, she chose the better part, Never to be repented; And held her Saviour in herart, Thus are her joyes augmented. Vnder the other these: This, sought her Saviour at his Tombe, His feet with Teares bedewed, That, bore our Saviour in her wombe, Whereby our joyes renewed. Then happy soule, thrice happy this, Happily interessed; In Maries Teares, and Maries blisse, Rest thou for ever blessed. A very faire Window, with the Kings Armes in it, over the entrance into the Chancell, Glazed at the charge of Sir William Segar, Knight, alias Garter principall King of Armes, Anno Dom. 1626. A very faire Window at the upper end of the South Ile, Glazed at the charges of Marmaduke Rawdon, Citizen and Clothworker of London, Anno Dom. 1625. Another next to this downeward, Glazed at the charge of Robert Rawdon, Citizen and Fishmonger of London, Anno Dom. 1625. Another next to this downeward, bea∣ring the figure of a Lyon in the Wildernesse, Glazed at the charge of M. Iohn Iohn∣son, Inne-keeper, in High-Holborne, 1625.
Another next to this downeward, ha∣ving the Figures of Saint Iohn, Saint Philip, and Saint Matthew, Glazed at the cost and charges of Phi∣lip Parker. Next to this downeward, a very faire Window, Glazed at the charges of Katherine Best, Widdow, late Wife of Iohn Best, deceased, who gave order in his life time for the glazing of this Window and was buried there un∣der, the 7. day of Aprill, 1625. And there lie also his Son Iames, and his Daughter Dorothy. Next to this downeward, a very faire Window, Glazed at the charges of Alice Hodges, Widdow, late Wife to Thomas Hod∣ges, Baker, deceased, who was buri∣ed under this Window, the 6. day of October, 1625. And here lye also his three children. A faire Window next to this, the low∣est in the South wall, Glazed at the cost of William Perkins, of London Merchantaylor, 1626. At the lower end of this Ile, over the Southwest doore, a very faire Win∣dow, bearing in it (very curiously done) the Figure of our Saviour. Over his head, as in a garland suppor∣ted by two Angels, these letters: I·H✚·S· Round about him Clouds full of Che∣rubins. On one side of him this, I am the doore, by mee if any man enter in, he shall be saved, Ioh. 10. 9. On the other side, Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matth. 11. 28. Beckinghamus Boteler Armiger fieri fecis. Anno Domini 1627. Over the great West doore, is a faire Window, with the Carpenters Armes, and a faire Coat Armes close by it. This Window hath no name, or o∣ther Inscription; It was (as I was told) the gift of a Stranger. One, that upon a day that they made a Collection for it, being there, was (among the rest) desired to bestow his good will, hee answered, Hee had no Money, but if the glasing of a Win∣dow, if they had any yet undisposed of, wouldbe accepted of, he would bee at the charge to doe it. The Collectors giving him thankes, and shewing this Window, he suddenly set a Glasier on worke, and what he had promised hee performed. A very faire Window at the head of the North Ile, bearing the figure of Christ crucified as also (one on the one side, the other on the other) of the two Maries. On the right side of him this, Woman, Behold thy Sonne. On the left, Behold thy Mother. Glazed at the cost of Thomas Esto, Cooke, of this Parish, Anno Dom. 1625. Another next to this downeward, Glazed at the charges of Iohn Beacon, of the City of Westminster, Yeoman, 1625. Another next to this downeward, Glazed at the charges of Robert Iohn∣son, free of the Company of the Ioyners, 1625. A faire Window over the doore in the middle of the North Ile, bearing a worthy Coat Armes, with these words: Whitaker & Egerton. This Window is divided into three parts, under the first this,
Ego sum ostium, per me si quis introierit, servabitur, & ingredietur, & egredi∣etur, & pascua inveniet. Ioh. 10. 9. Vnder the second thus: In tuo lumine (Domine Iesu) lumen Ae∣ernum videre sperantes, vitreum hoc luminare fabricari fecerunt Laurenti∣us & Margareta Whitaker, Anno salu∣tis humanae 1625. Vnder the third thus: Eligo frequentare limen in domo Dei mei magis quam habitare in Tentoriis Im∣probitatis. Psal. 84. 11. A faire Window next to this downe∣ward, bearing a very faire Coat Armes, with these words: Cope & Aston. Glazed at the charges of the Lady Ka∣therine Cope, Widdow, late Wife to Sir Ed. Cope, of this Parish, 1625. A very rich Window next downward, divided into three parts, bearing the curious Figures of the three Theologicall Vertues, under them, Fides, Spes, Chaeritas. Vnder Faith this: Faith Root, Hope Stocke, the branch is Charity; Faith sees, Hope lookes, for Charity is free; Faith knits to God, to Heaven hope, Love to men; Faith gets, Hope keepes, and Love poures out agen. 1626. Mandatum novum do vobis, ut diligatis unus alium, Ioh. 13. 34. Vnder Hope this: Tres Elohim: pater est primus qui procreat, inde Filius est, ex his Spiritus almus adest. Sunt Tria dona Dei: sit prima Fides pia Mater, Filia Spes, ex his ertius ortus Amor. 1626. Nam Speservati sumus, Spes autem si cer∣natur non est Spes: quod enim quis cer∣nit, cur speret? Rom. 8. 24. Vnder Charity this: Now remaine these three, Faith, Hope, Charity, but the greatest of these is Cha∣rity, 1 Cor. 13. 13. Scriptum est, Iustus ex Fide vivet, Rom. 1. 17. Next unto this downeward, the last of this North Ile, is a plaine Window, without either colour or Inscription. Vpon a faire Grave-stone in the middle Ile, is this Inscription. Here lyeth buried the body of Eliza∣beth, late Wife of Richard Maunsell, Esquire, one of the Daughters and Heires of Roger Wingfield, of great Dunham, in the County of Norfolke, Esquire. She departed this life up∣on the sixt of October, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1620. Vpon a faire Stone neere to the other, it this Inscription. Inter'd, the Corps of Baron Birch lies here, Of Greyes Inne sometime, by degree, Esquire; In Chequer 18. yeeres a Iudge he was, Till soule from aged body his did passe. Alive his Wife Eliza doth remaine, Of Stydfolke stocke, one Sonne and Daughters twaine, She bare by him: the eldest in his life, He gave to Thomas Boyer for his Wife. His body sleepes till Angels Trumpe shall sound, God grant we all may ready then be found. Iohannes Birch, Obiit Anno Dom. 1581. Maii 30. Aetatis suae 66.
On another Stone neere to the former, is this Inscription. Here lyeth buried the body of Elizabeth Byrche, Widdow, late Wife of Iohn Byrche, Esquire, and one of the Ba∣rons of her Majesties Court of the Exchequer, Daughter of Iohn Styd∣folke, Esquire, who deceased the third day of December, 1588. Close by the former Lyeth buried the body of Iohn Densill, sometime Serjeant at Law, and Ma∣ry his Wife. In the same Ile is a very faire Stone, which hath beene beautified with many faire Figures in Brasse: but much of it being gone, all we can see now of it is this: Here lieth George Carew, the fourth son of Sir Edmund Carew, &c. 1583. In the South Ile Eyes buried the body of Alexander Barnes, Vinter, sometime Church-warden of this Parrish, &c. Hee de∣ceased the 4. of November, 1614. being of the age of 57. yeeres. Alexander Barnes here doth lye, Glory bee to God on high, For he on earth hath finished his dayes, And now liveth in Heaven to give God praise. And now having done with the Chruch, we beginne in the Church-yard with this Inscription, standing in the middle of the South wall. Laus Deo. In cujus, & Christianae Sepulturae, hono∣rem, nimis arcti olim Coemeterii fines, novi hujus, 128. pedes longi, & 17. lati, Donatione, Abrahamus Speckart, Arm. & Dorothea Vxor ejus Amplia∣runt, Anno Dom. 1630. A very faire Tombe-stone in the Church-yard, about it these Verses. Thornton of Thornton, in Yorkeshire bred, Where lives the fame of Thorntons being dead: Full South this stone foure foot doth lye, His Father Iohn, and Grandsire Henry. Vpon it. Iohannes Thornton, in Memoria Charissi∣mae Vxoris Margaretae, Filiae Georgii Collins, hujus parochiae sancti Aegidii in Campis, hoc Monumentum posuit. Vnder this sad Marble sleepes, Shee, for whom even Marble weepes: Her praise lives still, though here she lies Seeming dead that never dyes: Religion, Love, in suffering Breast, Her Charity, Mildnesse, and the rest, Hath crown's her soule; all mourne with fame, Her Husbands losse, and Midwives blame. She died in Childbed, seventy times blest and seven, Her child and she deliver'd, both in Heaven. Obiit octavo die Ianuarii, Anno Dom. 1611. Aetatis suae 16. On a faire Stone in the Church-yard, is this Inscription. I·H✚·S· Here under lyeth buried the body of Ioane Barker, late Wife of Richard Barker, 17. yeeres of this Parish, who deceased the last day of Iuly,
Anno Dom. 1626. whom the Lord send a joyfull Resurrection. Expecta donec veniat. Vpon it thus: Honesta mors initium vitae. Turne againe then unto thy rest, O my soule, for the Lord hath rewarded thee; and why? thou hast delivered my soule from death, mine eyes from teares, and my feer from falling. I will walke before the Lord, in the land of the living. Psal. 116. This Stone was laid by her Husband Richard Barker, one of the Yeomen of the Guard to Queene Elizabeth and King Iames 30. yeeres, and now to King Charles. And was married to his late deceased Wife 20. yeeres and one moneth, and had seven chil∣dren, wherof five live, Horatio, Anne, Elizabeth, Katherine, and Mary. Close by this lies buried the body of William Howe, Aprill 3. 1626. Also the body of Elizabeth Mason, Wife of Amos Mason, Curate of the Temple, Iuly 18. 1632. Of Iohn Cartwrite, Gentleman, August 13. 1620. Of Richard Bestibitch, sonne of Daniel Bestbitch. James at Clarkenwell. 1623. THere hath beene within these few yeeres a great sum of mony expended upon this Chruch, by the sad and lamentable accidents of twice the fall of the Steeple. Spea∣king of which, I should say, the first in such a yeere, such a moneth, such a day; and as of that for the second: but my Information (though given mee by a very good friend) could by no meanes make me so punctuall. Howsoever, it was about the time afore dated; and the second, within a little time after. The first falling of this Steeple (or part of it) was through the antiquity, or length of time it had stood, without any repaire or mending; for (as I have beene certified) it hath had no cost, in that kinde, bestowed upon it, within the memory of any Parishioner living: neither among their Records can they finde any such thing mentioned. The second fall (as some have su∣spected) was either by the ignorance or dishonesty of the principall Work∣man, that for a certaine summe of mo∣ney (from the ruines of the first) had undertaken to raise and rebuild it. Ig∣norance in not looking into the strength of that, upon which hee was to reare such a burthen; Or dishonesty, in sleightly passing over (for the speedier dispatch of his Taske) a weaknesse up∣on which he knew (or might suspect) such an eminent danger to follow. How just the suspicion, I know not, but in the Re-building of this Steeple, before it was fully finished (although almost upon the end of that labour) it fell, with the Bells, their Carriages and Frames, beating a great part of the Roofe downe before them: the weight of all these together, bearing to the ground two large Pillars of the South Ile, a faire Gallery over against the Pulpit, the Pulpit, all the Pewes, and whatsoever was under or neere it. But now (as of all the rest) let us speake of building, repairing, and beau∣tifying, which briefly for this Chruch we doe thus: All those decayes and losses (excep∣ting the want of the Steeple which (at the lower end of the South Ile) is begun, and from the ground raised as high as the roofe of the Church) are re∣covered and made whole againe: all the Walls of it firme and faire; in the South wall a faire new doore: The Chruch, in the place of the old, furni∣shed with all things new, and is with∣out and within (notwithstanding there is much still to doe) well and very wor∣thily beautified.
The cost of all this amounting to (or much upon) 1400. pounds. It was thus finished in the yeere of our Lord, 1627. Vpon my very worthy Friend, Master Iohn Weaver, a learned Antiquary. Weaver, who laboured in a learned straine, To make men long since dead to live againe, And with expence of Oyle, and Inke, did watch, From the Wormes mouth the sleeping Course to snatch, Hath by his industry begot a way, Death (who insidiates all things) to betray, Redeeming freely by his care and cost, Many a sad Herse, which time long since gave lost; And to forgotten dust such spirit did give, To make it in our memories to live. Where Death destroy'd when he had power to save, In that he did not seeke to rob the Grave, For where so e're a ruin'd Tombe he found, His Pen hath built it new out of the ground. 'Twixt Earth and Him this interchange we finde, Shee hath to him, he bin to her like kinde, Shee was his Mother, he (agratefull Child) Made her his Theme, in a large worke compil'd Of Funerall Reliques, and brave Structures rear'd, On such as seem'd unto her most indear'd. Alternately a Grave to him she lent, O're which his Booke remaines a Monument. Master Weaver upon himselfe. Lankashire gave me breath, And Cambridge education, Middlesex gave me death, And this Church my humation, And Christ to me hath given A place with him in Heaven. Obiit Anno Aetat. suae 56. For the ancient Monuments of this Church, turne to folio 484, 485. Katherines Tower. THis Church was repaired, and within thorowout trimmed, and very commendably beau∣tified, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1618. A very faire Gallery at the lower end of the Church, built in the yeere 1613. was (with a great addition in the breadth of it) inlarged in the yeere 1621. The Walls & outside of this Church was againe in many decayed places of it repaired, and all over cloathed in a faire and very beautifull Rough-cast, at the sole cost and charge of Sir Iulius Caesar, Knight, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1629. His charge being (taken to be done by the great) 250. li. About the same time, there was a very faire Clocke-house built at the West end of the Chruch, and some other things done. All before named, except that of Sir Iulius Caesar, being the proper cost and charge of the In∣habitants. Vpon the South wall in the Chancell, is this inscribed. The gift of Master Steven Scudamore, late Citizen and Vintener of London, deceased, 20 s. per Annum, to be be∣stowed in Fewell amongst the poore of this Precinct, at the discretion of the Collectors for the time being,
Beganne the 20. day of December, Anno Dom. 1606. to bee continued unto them for ever. Neere unto the former is another Inscrip∣tion, as followeth. The gift of Master Iohn Bourne, late Ci∣tizen and White-baker of London, being 5. li. per Annum, to be bestow∣ed in Bread amongst the poore of this Precinct, Beganne the 10. day of May, Anno Dom. 1609. to be con∣tinued unto them for 40. yeeres fol∣lowing. On the same South Wall, this Monument done at the charges of William Beere∣blocke, Goldsmith, one of his Executors. Here dead in part, whose best part never dieth, A Benefactor, William Cutting lyeth: Not dead, if good deeds could keepe men alive, Nor all dead, since good deeds doe men revive. Gunvile and Kaies, his good deeds may record, And will, no doubt, him praise therefore afford: Saint Katherines eke, neere London, can it tell, Goldsmiths, & Merchantaylors, know it well: Two Country Townes his civill bounty blest, East Derham, and Norton-Fitzwarren West. More did he than this Table can unfold, The world his fame, this earth his earth doth hold. Leonards Shorditch. FOr the Repaires of this Church, Monuments, and Gifts, with the names of the bountifull Givers, and the like, turne to page 471, 472, and 473. Martins in the Fields. THe enlargement of this Church was begunne in the yeere of our Lord God, 1607. being the fifth yeere of the Reigne of our Sove∣raigne Lord King Iames, of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the 41. and it was finished in the yeere 1608. To the which enlargement, our said Soveraigne Lord King Iames, and our most Noble Prince Henry, were most gracious Benefactors; the rest of the charges were borne by the Inhabi∣tants of this Parish. Randall Hopkins, and Andrew Hacket, being the first yeere Churchwardens. And in the second yeere, Andrew Hacket, and Richard Stile. This inlargement was onely that ground, that at the East end of this Church (taken out of the Churchyard) was then made a beautifull Chancell. A very faire Table fastened to a Pillar neere the Pulpit; in which is curi∣ously drawne the figure of an An∣gell, holding the Coat of the Gen∣try, of the living Husband, and dead Wife, for whom it was there set up; Also of a Deaths-head, with an Houre-glasse upon it: The border of the Table filled (excellent in pro∣portion and colours) with Deaths-heads, braches of Palme, and other fresh and beautifull Flowers. Nascendo Morimur. Quid Cranii sibi forma novi vult ista? Quid Hora? Quidque super Cranio, lumen nova nata, segesque? Nempe dies mortis, vitae fit origo perennis; Quae moritur mundo, Nascitur illa Deo. What doth this Scull? what doth this Houre-glasse show?
The Corne and Palme, that on the Scull doth grow? It meaneth this, that Death the end of strife, Is the beginning to eternall life: Death is the doore to immortality, Shee's borne to God, that to the world doth dye. The burning Taper to his end doth waste, Whilst life and death to meet each other haste; Then happy she, that did her life apply, Here and above to live eternally. To the permanent honour and remem∣brance of the Pious and All-vertu∣ous Gentlewoman, Mistresse Susan Price, Daughter to the Honourable Baronet, Sir Paul Tracy, of Stanway, in Glocester; and the late dearely be∣loved Wife of the Religious, Lear∣ned, and truly Vertuous Gentleman, William Price, of Winchester, Esquire, one of his Majesties most honoura∣ble Privy Chamber. She died the 13. of March, 1632. Ye holy Angels, and ye Powers of light, The glad injoyers of Gods glorious sight; You that in faithfull Abrahams bosome rest, You have receiv'd your sanctified Guest. Faire Susan Price hath blessed Heaven obtain'd, And for her well run Race, Gods glory gain'd, Shining in Robes of Immortality, Contemnes the earth and worldly vanity. True Christian faith indued her constant minde, And unto her the promise was assign'd. Most honour'd be her memory, outwasting All Genealogies, and everlasting. Whilst therebe Elements, Stars, Orbes, or Spheares, Dayes Sunne, or Nights Moone, to direct the yeeres, The Heavens possesse her soule, the World her Fame, And faire example, her Vertues, Worth, and Name: What Nature, Goodnesse, Institution, Fact, Could heape to a perfection, was her Act. The Angels sing her glory, who did call Her sweet soule home to its originall, And now shees gone hence for to passe the time She ought her Husband, in a better Clime. There shall her Harvest and her Summer be, Where she shall never any Winter see. Then Price grieve you no more, she lives in joy, Wipe you your teares, her teares are wip'd away. The Epitaph. Stay ere you passe, lament, and fix your eyes Vpon a worthy Consorts obsequies. Susan here lies, for beauty, worth, and life, Admir'd, the worthy William Prices Wife. Never was after death one more desir'd, Nor ever living was one more admir'd. A file of lasting praises crownes her name, Perpetuall glories doe attend her fame: Rich in all joyes, she now hath chang'd her bed, Ioyned in marryage unto Christ her head. Come, whosoever would enjoy like state, Endevour all her worth to imitate.
Over the figure of Death: Ibimus omnes. Ladies, when you your purest beauties see, Thinke them but Tenants to mortalitie: Ther's no content on earth, Ioyes soone are fled, Healthfull to day we live, to morrow dead: I was as you are now, young, faire, and cleere, And you shall once be as you see me heere. Mors mihi lucrum. Moriendo Nascimur. Vpon her Tomb-stone, at the foot of this Monument. Mistresse Susanna Price, the wife of Wil∣liam Price, Esquire, one of the Groomes of his Majesties most Ho∣nourable Privy Chamber, Daugh∣ter of Sir Paul Tracy, Baronet, depar∣ted this life the 13. of March, 1632. before shee had beene married full 14. weekes. She was so full of Vertue and of Good∣nesse, few might compare with her, none could excell her. Her body is here interred, here is her body, her soule is in Heaven with her Saviour. A faire Tomb-stone in the Chancell, with this Inscription. Here lieth buried the body of Mistresse Dorothy Hervy, that Honourable matchlesse Virgin, the Daughter of the Right Honourable, William Lord Hervy, Baron of Kidbrooke, and of the Religious Lady his Wife, the Lady Cordelia Hervy, Daughter and Heire to Master Brian Ansley, Es∣quire, of Lee, in Kent, who departed this transitory life the 19. of Febru∣ary, Anno 1632. Glorious Dorothy here intombed lies, Lord Hervies Daughter, and faire Vertues prize. Modell of Honour, Graces Paragon, In whose great losse her Parents Ioyes are gone. Her life was such as well may be deni'd, That she did ever ill, but when she dy'd▪ Pity so soone so rare a Virgin must Stoope to Corruption, and be cloath'd in dust. Heaven and the world being Sutors, who should have her, To end the strife, she went to him that gave her. Nascendo Morimur. A very faire Table, with a rich Coat Armes, hanging on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Hae sunt Antiqua Moraviorum Insigniae, in memoriam Patricii Moravii, Domi∣no Carolo Regi à poculis, nuper defuncti hîc posita. Mary Whitechappell. THis Church, in the many (and greatly) decayed parts of it, was repaired; and within, with∣out, and in every part of it richly and very worthily beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1633. For Whitechappell side. Thomas Farrar Iohn Wood Iohn Mannering Churchwardens. For Wapping side. Captaine Hatch Master Allen Churchwardens. The cost of this Repaire, 300. li. and upwards.
To shew the never-dying love of these Parishioners, to their deceased Pastor, Master William Crashaw, take this Inscription from a very faire Gal∣lery in the South Ile. To the honour of God, the advance∣ment of Religion, and in thankful∣nesse to God for the safe returne of our hopefull and gracious Prince Charles from the dangers of his Spa∣nish Iourney, this Gallery was ere∣cted at the charge of this Parish, Anno 1623. and the seventh yeere of Master Crashawes Residence. His Name, as in this, in many other places remembred. The ground of this South Ile was added to the Church, and the Ile new built in the yeere of our Lord, 1591. And in the foure and thirtieth of the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth, Master Richard Gardner Parson. A faire Monument on the North wall of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Christo optimo maxime, pietati & posteritati, Sacrum, Elizabethae Conjugis dulcissimae, Foeminae Lectissimae è Claris. Skinneriana, & Emersoniana Familiis oriundae, In qua (Rara Felicitate) Pietas cum Pulchritudine, Ingenium cum Virtute, Forma cum pudicitia, Mirifice conveniebant, Quae in primo puerperio, in ipso enixu, Animam Deo, Memoriam Mundo, Vitam Naturae, Carnem terrae, Patri puerulum, Amicis luctum, Conjugi Moerorem ineffabilem, Omnibus ingens sui ipsius desiderium moriendo Reliquit, W. Crashaius, hujus Ecclesiae Rector, Conjux longe Moestissimus multis cum Lachrymis Lugens Lubens Invitus Posuit. I know that my Redeemer liveth, Iob 19. 25. To the honour of Christ Jesus, to the praise of Piety, to the example of Posterity, and for the preservation of the godly memory of Elizabeth, his most worthily beloved Wife, in whom (by a rare Conjunction) God∣linesse with Comlinesse, Wisdome with Vertue, Beauty with Chastity, Youth with Discretion, and Discre∣tion with Devotion, were most sweetely combined; who in the prime of her yeeres, upon her first Childe, yeelded up, by untimely death, as her selfe often had fore∣told, her soule to God, her life to Nature, her body to the Earth, her memory to the World, and left to the pensive Earth a deare bought Sonne, to her friends heavinesse, hard to be removed, to her Husband sorrow, not to be expected, and to all that knew her, a longing desire after her, William Crashaw, her most sad and sor∣rowfull Husband, Pastor of this Church, most unwilling to part with her, but most willing to honour her with many sighes and teares, dedi∣cated this Monument in assurance of her glorious Resurrection. She died October 8. in the 24. yeere of her age. A handsome Tombe, encompast with Iron grates in the Churchyard, hath this Inscription. To the Memory of Alice Shelton, daugh∣ter of Sir Ralph Shelton, of Shelton-Hall, in Norfolke, Knight, who had Issue by her first Husband, Thomas Waller, Esquire, 9. Sonnes, and 9. Daughters; and by her second Hus∣band, William Wrove, of London, Mer∣chantaylor, had Issue two Sonnes and one Daughter; but had no Issue by her third and last Husband, To∣bias Wilkinson. 1630. Another close by the former, with this Inscription. Favour is deceitfull, and beauty is vanity, but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.
Here lieth buried that vertuous Tha∣mozin, that gracious young Wo∣man, the faithfull Wife of Master William Eeles, of Limehouse, Marri∣ner; this mirrour of young Women, departed this life on the 10. of Iuly, 1620. Shee being of the age of 25. yeeres, and was Mother of a Sonne and a Daughter; but Thamozin the Daughter, departed this life on the 18. of December, 1621. being of the age of 6. yeeres, and lieth here buried. Every wise Woman buildeth her house, but the foolish pluketh it downe with her hands. The memory of the Iust is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. Remember, As you are now, so was she; As she is now, so you must be. William Eeles. Magdalens Bermondsey. THis Church was inlarged by the addition of all that ground that is now the South Ile, ta∣ken out of their spacious Churchyard; this Ile was begunne to be built in the yeere of our Lord God, 1608. Christopher Robinson Thomas Freeman Churchwardens. The Worke going on, and conti∣nuing to the yeere 1610. in which it was very worthily and compleatly fi∣nished. The charge of it amounting to 860. li. In the yeere 1619. on the top of the Steeple, was a very faire Turret ere∣cted. The charge of it, 33. li. 16. s. In the same yeere a new Clocke made, 7. li. The Steeple was againe repaired, and the inside of the Church trimmed and very commedably beautified, in the yeere 1621. The cost of this last (though I could not set downe the summe) as of all the former severall Repaires and Buil∣ding, the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners. A very faire Brasse Branch in this Church, was the gift of Ralph Alder, of this Parish, 1613. Savoy Parish. WE have not in the colle∣ction of all these Chur∣ches, looked so far backe upon any Repaire as this: but as wee finde it we present it. The repairing and trimming of this Church (which was at that time per∣formed with great cost and beauty) was in the yeere of our Lord God 1600. at the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners. Iames Houson Thomas Martin Churchwardens. In the yeere 1618. there was a faire Gallery built at the lower end of this Church. Rowland Hodges Daniell Hall Churchwardens. A very faire Monument at the upper end of the Church, having this Inscription. Ecce pudicitia, & pietas, Coeli utraque proles Accingunt, Dextra haec, haec tibi levae latus, Iure, salo coluere, Polo Rapuere, nec usquam Te neque jam tumulum destituere tuum. Da. Humius Theag. Non Delendae Amicitiae sempiternum Monumentum. M. N. M. S. Siste paululum quisquis es, & paucis quid Marmor hocce te volet scies. Hîc sacrum Beatissimae Animae depositum, & felicissimae quiescunt exûviae Nico∣laae Moraviae, ex clarissima Moravi∣orum, cum Tilibardinorum, tum Abir∣carniorum Gente, per utrumque paren∣tem ortae, & Roberti Duglassii, equitis Aurati, conjugis Lectissimae, Quae in∣credibili ingenio, rarissimo Iudicio,
Summa pietate, singulari prudentiae, omnique virtutis genere, imprimis mo∣destia, pudicitia, & suavissimis mori∣bus ornatissima, cum omnem propè Ae∣tatem, contempt is mundi hujus Foecib. in Rerum divinarum speculatione, & assidua meditatione consumpsisset, in Theologicis porrò ad miraculum usque docta doctissimos quosque Theologos in admirationem sui & stuporem Rapu∣isset, Nihilque unquam, per universam vitam quam Christum sperasset, ad eun∣demque tota jam adspirarat, primo par∣tu longissimis, & Acerrimis doloribus divexata, ubi Moestissimum conjugem, & circumfusos amicos ad vitae hujus fluxae ac caducae contemptum, & ad certissimam immortalitis spem erex∣isset prolixissimâ etiam & suavissimâ oratione, ipsam se suosque omnes, maxi∣mè vero conjugem Deo commendasset, gratissimam Christo Animam reddi∣dit, & extincto Foetu, in summo omni∣um Moerore expiravit. Abi jam quisquis es, & non dissimilem vitae exitum ipsi tibi opta & vale. Obiit die Novemb. Anno 1612. Aetatis suae A faire Monument on the West side, close to the former, with this In∣scription. Morieris. Resurges. Ianua vitae sepulchrum. Here lyeth Nazareth Coppin, Wife to George Coppin of London, Gentleman, Daughter to Thomas Thwaits of Har∣dington, in the County of Norfolke, Esquire, who being of the age of 24. yeeres, in the prime of her youth and beauty, as she lived most ver∣tuously, so she died most godly, the 22. of Iune 1592. in the 34. yeere of the most happy reigne of Queene Elizabeth. Mors certa, inevitabilis, incertae. On either side of her these lines. Morti praedajaces, potuit nec plurima formae Gratia, nec mentis vincere fata pudor: Et tamen in terris ultra spes figitur? alto Quaerenda est merces non peritura pole. Peregrinatio est vita. Vivis & aeternum victa de morte triumphas, Exuvias tantum possidet illa tui: Omnia sic patrias sedes unde orta revisunt, Redditur & Coelo mens pia, corpus humo, Mors meta laborum. Next to the other is a very Ancient Mo∣nument, with this Inscription. Pray for the soules of Sir Richard Roke∣by, Knight, and Dame Iane his wife, whose bones rest here under this Tombe, which Sir Richard deceased the 27. of Aprill, 1523. and the said Dame Iane deceased the 15. On whose soules Iesu have mercy. Over the Vestry doore in the Chancell, is a very faire Tombe with these words. Hîc jacet Alicia, Filia Simonis Steward, de la Kingheth, Suff. Obiit 18. Iunii, Humanae salutis, 1573. Virtutis praemium virtus. Vpon a faire Marble Stone in the Chancell, is this Inscription. Here lies interred the bodies of Peter Lilly, Doctor of Divinity, one of the Brothers of the Savoy, Prebend of Paules, and Archdeacon of Tanton, who died at the Savoy, Anno Dom. 1614. And of Dorothy Lilly, his ver∣tuous Wife, who also died at the Savoy, the 1. of Iune, Anno Dom. 1627. and of Mary Lilly, their onely Daughter, who departed this life at Fulham, the 10. of October, 1625.
Close to the other this: Here under lyeth the body of Frances Bulbecke, late of Clevedon, in the County of Somerset, Esquire, the 8. sonne of Iohn Bulbecke, of the same place and County, Esquire, decea∣sed, which said Frances died, being never married, the 9. of November, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1585. Close to the other this: Here lyeth buried Peter Richardson, Goldsmith and Ieweller, borne in Holland, in the parts beyond the Seas, servant to the most famous King, Henry the 8. and King Edward the the 6. to Queene Mary, and to our most dread Soveraigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth: which Peter ha∣ving married Anne, the Daughter of Robert Wilson, lived to the age of 84. yeeres, and died a faithfull Christi∣an, the 24. of March, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1586. There is also in this Chancell buried, the body of one David Bedo, Batche∣lour of the Law, and Steward to the Lord of Carleil, &c. 1541. Close by the former Lieth buried the body of Humphrey Lovell, Esquire, with his two Wives and five Children. He died the 16. of November 1585. Close to the other is this. Hîc jacet Dominus Richardus Ellis, quon∣dam Hospitularius hujus Hospitalis. Qui obiit 3. die Augusti 1550. qua∣dragessimo 5. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen. At the upper end of the Chancell, in the East corner, is a very ancient Monument, with this Inscription. Wilielmus Chaworth, secundus filius Iohan∣nis Chaworth, de Wynerton, in Comitatu Notingham, Militis, hic in suo Coeli∣batu repulverescit, cujus spiritus in Coe∣lis, carnis reassumptionem expectat. Obiit 24. die Martii, Anno salutis à Christo 1582. & suae Nativitatis 28. Necessitudinis Symbolum. A very faire Table with a rich Coat Armes, on the East wall, toward the lower end of the Church. Over it these words: So good a Father and Mother are never to be forgotten. Vnder it these: Here lieth the body of Rebecca Burton, Wife to Captaine Nicholas Burton, and Daughter to Henry Somaster of Painesford in Devonshire, Esquire; who departed this life the 28. of Fe∣bruary, Anno Dom. 1632. In the wall on the West side of the Church, is this ancient Memoriall. The first sepulted in this place after they it sacrated, Was Humphrey Summerset, Deacon, which here doth lye, Batchelour in the Arts, whom cruell Death oppressed, The sixteen hundred & fifteenth yeere of God Almighty, The fifteenth day of Aprill, which Humphrey doth call and cry, With lamentable escrikes, and good devotion, All devout Christen men and women, that passe hereby, Pray for my dolorous soule for Christs bitter passion. On an ancient Plate close to the formes, is this Inscription. Here by this wall side buried is William Vevian, Sonne and Heire unto Mi∣chael Vevian, of Cornewall, Esquire, which William was servant unto the Right Noble; Charles Sommerset,
Earle of Worcester, the Kings Cham∣berlaine, and by mis-fortune drow∣ned in the Thames, on Passion Sun∣day at afternoone, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1520. For whose soule pray of your Charity, as you would be prayed for. In the body of the Church, upon a brasse plate on the ground, is this Inscription. Here lyeth Humfrey Gosling, of London Vintener, of the White Hart of this Parish, a Neighbour of vertuous be∣haviour, a very good Archer, and of honest mirth, a good Company∣keeper, So well inclin'd to poore and rich, God send more Goslings to bee sich. He was servant to the Right Honoura∣ble, the Lord Hunsden, Lord Cham∣berlaine, and deceased the 22. of Iuly, 1586. Close by the other lyes buried the bo∣dy of George Skoowith, 1525. Also the body of Iohn Danson, 1577. A very faire Stone, with a faire Picture of the party buried wrought in Brasse, having these severall Inscriptions. Over his head two brasse Circles. In the one thus: Credo quod Redemptor meus vivit, & in novissimo die, de terra surrecturus sum. In the other thus: Et in Carne mea videbo Deum salvatorem meum. In a Circle upon his brest thus: Repesita est haec spes mea, in sinu meo. Vnder him thus: Situs hic est pietatis, ac Religionis cultor Ioannes Floid, Artis Muscae Bacchalau∣reus, qui dum vixit, Regis Henrici octa∣vi in sacello cecinit, & Christi Sepul∣crum invisit Ierosolimis. Obiit Anno Dom. 1523. Mens. Aprilis die tertio. Neere unto the other is this Inscription. Here resteth the body of the Lady Elea∣nor Kempe, Widdow, late Wife of Sir William Kempe, Knight, and Daughter and Heire unto Robert Browne, Esquire, which Lady Elea∣nor, deceased the 26. of September, in the yeere of our Lord God, 1559. Neere vnto the former is this Inscription. Orate pro anima Domini Iohannis Sam∣pull, quondam unius Vicariorum Colle∣gii Regii Sancti Steph. Westmonasterii, & in sua aetate in Cantaria Delin∣wood, Celebrans in Bassa Capella Sanctae Mariae D. Collegii. Qui obiit Anno Dom. 1510. Neere unto the other is this Inscription. Hic jacet Anna Pynta, Ispaniae, quae obiit 8. die Martii, Anno Dom. 1523. cu∣jus animae propitietur Deus, Amen. On a faire Stone close to the other, is this Inscription. Orate pro anima Iohannis Brime, Sacerdo∣tis, qui obiit 13. die mensis Martii 1525. cujus animae, &c. Neere to the other. Lyeth buried the body of Iohn Borwet, Esquire, sometime Sergeant Plum∣ber to King Henry the 7. and to King Henry the 8. deceased the 7. of De∣cember 1525.
Next unto the other is this Inscription. Of your Charity, pray for the soule of Humphrey Cooke, Citizen and Car∣penter of London, and Master Car∣penter of all the workes to our Sove∣raigne Lord, King Henry the 8. and Master Carpenter at the building of this Hospitall, called The Savoy: the which Humphrey deceased the 13. day of March, in the yeere of our Lord God 1530. and lyeth under this Stone. On the next unto the other, is this Inscription. Pray for the soule of Newell Loveday, Gentleman, late Groome for the moneth in the office of the Cellar, to the most excellent Prince, King Henry the 8. who died the 18. day of May, Anno Dom. 1523. A Table, or Memoriall of all such Benefactors as have gi∣ven any summes of Money or Legacies, to the value of five pounds and upwards, to this Parish of Saint Mary Strand, alias Savoy, for the use of the poore, or to other pious uses within this Parish; beginning from the yeere of our Lord God 1597. And as touching all other Legacies and summes of Money under five pounds, given by Bene∣factors in this kinde, since the time aforesaid, they are regi∣stred in a Booke kept for that purpose. Anno Dom. 1622. Richard Denham Iames Bradford Churchwardens. Ralph Abnet of this Parish, died in the yeere of our Lord God 1597. and gave unto the use of the poore of this Parish the summe of twenty pounds, and five pounds more for the advancement of 5. poore Maid∣servants of this Parish in marriage. Richard Iacob, of the Parish of Saint Clement Danes, Vintener, died in the yeere of our Lord God 1612. and gave unto the poore of this Pa∣rish, forty shillings per annum, for 32. yeeres, to be paid out of the Rent of the Cheaquer Taverne, in the Pa∣rish aforesaid. Meredith Thomas, of the Parish of Saint Clement Danes, Taylor, dyed in the yeere of our Lord God 1620. and gave the summe of sixe pounds to this Parish for ever, to bee lent unto two poore men of this Parish, either of them three pounds a piece for three yeeres, without interest; they giving good security to the Church∣wardens for the time being, to re∣pay the said sixe pounds at the three yeeres end. Francis Smith, of this Parish, Grocer, died in the yeere of our Lord God, 1621. and gave the summe of twen∣ty pounds, whereof ten pounds to the poore of this Parish, and the o∣ther ten pounds for the maintenance of a Sermon to bee yearely prea∣ched upon Midsummer day in this Church for ever. Dame Margaree Walter, Wife of Sir Iohn Walter, Knight, of this Pa∣rish, died in the yeere of our Lord God 1622. and gave unto the poore of this Parish, the summe of five pounds. Iohn Bennet, Baker, of this Parish, died in the yeere of our Lord God 1625. and gave unto the poore of this Pa∣rish, the summe of ten pounds for ever. Iane Lane, Widdow, Daughter of Iames Howson, of this Parish, died in the yeere of our Lord God 1625. and gave unto the poore of this Parish the summe of five pounds.
There is given unto this Parish, the sixe and twentieth day of March, 1628. by the summe of five pounds, for the maintenance of two Sermons to bee preached yeerely, on Easter Monday, and Whitson Monday, by some suffici∣ent and able Minister. A second Memoriall. of this Parish, Wid∣dow, in the yeere 1629. gave unto this Parish the summe of six pounds to buy a second Pulpit Cloth, to re∣maine to the Church for ever▪ Sir Iohn Walter, Knight, Lord chiefe Baron, died in the yeere 1630. and gave to the use of the poore of this Parish for ever, the summe of twen∣ty pounds. Iames Howson the elder, of this Parish, died in the yeere 1631. and gave unto the poore of this Parish the summe of five pounds. To the Reader. WE are here to give you notice (gentle Reader) that the Monuments, Epitaphs, and Inscriptions, that in this collection of Churches (Builded, Repaired, and Beau∣tified) are here (with their Churches) inserted, are onely such as as have beene raised, composed, and added, since the last imprin∣ting of this Booke, called The Survey of London, that Impression be∣ing in the yeere 1617. those of greater times and antiquity, are to be turned to as they stand before in their severall Wards and Pa∣rishes.
A Schedule indented, Containing a Survey taken the xxx. day of December, Anno Dom. 1567. and the tenth of Queene Elizabeth, of the Man∣nor of Finsbury, in the County of Middlesex, belonging to the Pre∣bend of Hallywell and Finsbury, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, London. Wherein are particularly specified, as well the ca∣pitall Messuage and Scite of the said Mannor, and all other Messu∣ages, Houses, Gardens, Orchards, Lands, Tenements, Medowes, Pa∣stures, Leasures, and other Grounds, being of the Demaynes of the said Mannor; with the Butts and Bounds thereof. As also the Rents and Services belonging to the said Mannor: and the names of the Tene∣ments by whom the same are to be paid. With mention also, for what Lands the same Rents and Services are due: with the Butts and Bounds thereof. The Demayne Lands. THe Mannor house, com∣monly called Finsbury Farme; a great Barne, a Gatehouse, and Sta∣bles: A Court and Or∣chard belonging to the said Mannor house. Sixe Gardens, whereof one in the tenure of William Chivall, Draper; the other five severally held by Master Li∣onel Ducket, Alderman; Iohn Bull, Grocer; William Fulwood, Grocer; Iohn Hewet, Clothworker; and Willi∣am Leonard, Mercer. All which lye together adjoyning to the said Man∣nor upon the North; and the Moore Field and Lane there, leading be∣tweene the said Gardens, and other Teintors and Gardens, belonging to the Prebend of the Moore: and now in the Tenure of the Merchant-Taylors, upon the South. And a Garden now divided into more parcels, also belong∣ing to the said Lordship, in the Te∣nure of Iohn God Merchant-Taylor, on the West, and the Ditch and way there, leading from London towards Finsbury Field, and Hallywell, on the party East. A Lodge, and certaine Gardens and Teinter ground, in the Tenure of Iohn God Merchant-Taylor, inclosed on the North towards Chiswell street, with a bricke wall; and upon a Tenement and Garden belonging to Richard Marten, Goldsmith; and others upon the West. And upon a Way lying betweene the same, and certaine Gardens and Ten∣ters belonging to the Prebend, called the Moore, in the Tenure of the Mer∣chant-Taylors of London, on the South. And the great Garden and Orchard belonging to the said Mannor, now in the Tenure of Iohn Gresham, Mercer, and other Gardens belonging to the said Lordship, on the party East.
A Tenement, a Lodge, a Loft over a Gate, and five Gardens, now in the Tenure of William Erdiswick, Merchant Taylor, whereof foure abutting upon Finsbury Field on the East, and Chiswell street on the South; and the Lands of late belonging to Iohn Coningsbye, now the Lands of William East, Gentleman, in the right of his Wife, one of the Daughters of William Wakefield: and late in the Tenure of Iohn Hillyard, Gold-smith, on the North party. And upon a Gate-way, leading from Chis∣well street, as well toward the said Gar∣dens, as towards a little Barne there, in the Tenure of Alban Chisselton, Bow∣yer, on the West. And the fifth Gar∣den East, upon the said great way; and South, upon the said Barne, in part; and West in part, upon a Tenement and Garden in the Tenure of Thomas Lee, Fletcher, being parcell of the said Demaine Lands, and the said Tenement, Lodge, and Loft, over the said gate, a∣butting on Chiswell street towards the South. Another Tenement, a Garden, and the said old Barne, in the Tenure of Alban Chisselton, Bowyer, butting up∣on the South side of Chiswell street, and next adjoyning to the said Tenement, now in the Tenure of the said Thomas Lee, on the party East. A Tenement and a Garden in the Tenure of Hugh Greene, Fletcher, next adjoyning to the said Alban Chisselton on the East, and upon Chiswell street on the South. A Cottage and certaine Gardens, in the Tenure of Iohn Mansbridge, Mer∣chant Taylor, lying in Chiswell street on the South, containing in length from South to North, stretching alongst a Bricke wall, belonging to the Lands sometimes Iohn Wishes, Founder, on the West party, thirteene Rods and eight foot of Assise; and in breadth at the North end, butting upon the ground or Garden plots, sometimes Iohn Conis∣bies, Gentleman, and now in the Te∣nure of William East, Gentleman, from the East to the West fifteene Rods and three foot of Assise; and in length from the North to the South, towards the East, running towards certaine Gar∣dens belonging to the said Mannor, now in the Tenure of the said Erdis∣wick, fifteene Rods and sixe foot of As∣sise; and in breadth, at the end to∣wards the South, from the East to the West, butting upon Chiswell street a∣foresaid, foureteene Rods and five foot of Assise. A peece of ground converted into certaine Gardens, now in the Tenure of Iohn Medcalfe, Skinner, lying neere Whitecrosse street, betweene the Pasture ground belonging to the said Mannor of Finsbury, called Bonhill Field, or Fins∣bury Fields, on the East, and the ground of Iohn Conisbye, Gentleman, now in the Tenure of Iohn Hillyard, Goldsmith, on the West & South, and the grounds of late belonging to the Priors of Hally-well, now belonging to the said Iohn Medcalfe, on the party North. A Garden plot, in the occupation of William Gill, stretching from Whitecrosse street on the East, Westward 165. foot of Assise; on the South side of the said ground, and on the North side from the said street, stretching Westward, 180. foot of Assise; and at the West end of the same, stretching North and South 62. foot of Assise; in breadth, right Line and Plummet, from limit to limit, and butting South upon the Lands late belonging to the Parish Clearkes of London, and the Lands of the said William Gill, (late Ralfe Sy∣monds's) on the party North and West, and the said Whitecrosse street on the party East. And eleven Tenements lying on the West side of Grubstreet, with eleven Gardens to the same belonging, in the severall Tenures of David a Powell, Iohn Gilham, Nicholas Hunt, Iohn Wildbore, Iohn Hayes, Iohn Tompson, Iohn An∣drewes, Iohn Ap Rice, Henry Everton, Iohn Reeve, and George Fuller, lying in the said Lordship, and County of Mid∣dlesex, and adjoyning to a corner Te∣nement, being in the Liberties of the City of London, in the Tenure of Wil∣liam Franklin, Fletcher, belonging to Henry Southcot, Mercer, and the Lands of the said Henry Southcot, in the Tenue. of William Bullen, and a Garden ground in the Tenure of Philip Garland, Cloth-worker, on the South, and extendeth in length upon the said South side,
from Grubstreet, aforesaid, unto cer∣taine Gardens upon the West, belong∣ing to Iohn Whitehorne, and others there, 199. foote of Assise; and in breadth, at the West end of the said Gardens, from the said South side, stretching unto Chiswell street on the North, 183. foot of Assise, and exten∣deth in length at the North side upon Chiswell street, 205. foot and a halfe of Assise. The Field called Bonhill Field, be∣longing to the said Mannor of Finsbu∣ry, butting South upon the high way there, called Chiswell street, and exten∣ding North upon the high way that leadeth from Wenlocks Barne, to the Well called Dame Agnes the cleere. The high way leading from the Mannor of Finsbury aforesaid, towards Hollywell, on the East party, and the Gardens and grounds late belonging to the Pri∣ors of Hollywell, now in the Tenure of Iohn Medcalfe, Skinner, William Gill, Gardiner, and other the Lands belong∣ing to Iohn Hillyard, Goldsmith, and certaine Gardens belonging to the said Mannor of Finsbury, now in the Te∣nure of the said Medcalfe; the Lands of late of Iohn Coningsby, Gentleman, now in the Tenure of William East, Gentle∣man: And also foure Gardens, now in the Tenure of William Erdiswick, also belonging to the said Mannor of Fins∣bury, on the party West: and the same Field, with halfe the Ditches measu∣red with the same, East, West, North, and South, containeth 23. Acres, one Rod, and sixe Pole. Whereof, foure Acres and a halfe, being at the South end of the said Field, butting upon Chiswell street, be∣ginning at the Ditch on the party West, extendeth towards the ground and Pond there (belonging to the said Mannor) on the party East, in breadth sixttene Pole: and extendeth from Chiswell street on the South, unto Bon∣hill on the North: in length 45. Pole, and from the East side, at the North end against the Bonhill, to the midst of the said Ditch on the West party, 16. Pole; and from the North end upon the West side, stretching to Finsbury Bridge, to Chiswell street there South, in length 45. Pole, every Pole contai∣ning sixteene foot and a halfe. And also there is one other Acre claimed for the lands late Iohn Coningsbys's, Gentle∣man, supposed to lye in the said Field, beyond the said Bonhill (as it is said) but it hath beene occupied as parcell of the Demaines of the said Mannor, by the space of 40. yeeres last passed. The Field called the Mallow Field, butting upon the Railes next to the Moore Field South, the high way lea∣ding from the Bricke Bridge there to∣wards the Wind-mils, belonging to the said Mannor of Finsbury on the par∣ty West, the high way leading from the said Wind-mils towards Norton-Folgate, on the North, and the Lands belonging to Iohn Worsop, Merchant-taylor, and Iohn Nichols, Girdler, on the party East, containing with the halfe Ditch, in measure on the sides, East, West, and North, 12. Acres and a halfe, and 12. Pole. The Field called the High Field, or Medow ground, where the three Wind∣mils stand, commonly called Finsbury Field,Pare of this Field is the medow where they usu∣ally shoot at twelve score, and where the Wrestling is usually. butting upon the high way that leadeth unto Norton-Folgate, on the party South; the high way that lea∣deth to Hollywell, and the lands belong∣ing to the Earle of Rutland on the party East; the lands belonging to the Heires of Mascall Brewer, and the high way leading from the Mannor of Wenlocks Barne, to the Well called Dame Agnes the cleere, upon the Bonhill Field on the party West: all which Field containes in measure 45. Acres, with the halfe Ditches that enclose the said Field on the party South, East, and North, in the said measure. Where of Iohn Worsop hath on the East side of the said Field, butting up∣on the high way leading to Norton-Folgate on the party South, the Wind∣mils and ground of the said Mannor on the party West, and the Medow and Pasture ground belonging to the said Mannor on the party North and East, six Acres and a halfe. More adjoyning to the said high way on the party South, and next the said Worsops Land there on the party East, one Acre and three Rods of Me∣dow or Pasture ground, belonging to Iohn Nichols, Girdler.
The summe of the Acres of the said three Fields, are 80. Arcres, 3. Rods, and 18. Poles, by the measure afore∣said. Whereof belongeth to the said Iohn Worsop, in the High Field aforesaid, sixe Acres and a halfe. To the said Iohn Nichols, in the same Field, one Acre and three Rods. To the Maior, Commonalty, and Citizens aforesaid, in Bonhill field afore∣said, foure Acres and a halfe. Summe 12. Acres and 3. Rods. So remaineth 68. Acres, and 18. Poles. Golding lane. The Free Tenants Of Henry Edon, Esquire, out of cer∣taine Tenements and Gardens at the North end of Golding lane,Saint Giles Parish. sometimes Master Ponds, and of late Richard Cal∣lerds, and since Elizabeth Hayes, daugh∣ter and Heire of the said Richard Cal∣lerd, butting on the West side of the said Lane;Sure of Court. and on the South side upon the Lands late of Henry Cletheroe, now in the Tenure of Iohn Hillyard, 13. s. 4. d. Of the said Henry Edon, out of a Te∣nement called the Swanne, and other Tenements thereunto adjoyning; in the Tenure of Iohn Collins,Sute of Court. Gardiner, abutting on the East side of the Lane, late the said Callerds, and since as afore∣said, 3. d. ob. Of William Hall, out of certaine Te∣nements there adjoyning to the signe of the Swanne in the said Lane,Sute of Court. now in the Tenure of Richard Drake, Gardi∣ner, 3. d. ob. Of the Master and Governours of Saint Bartholomewes Hospitall in West Smithfield, the hands of Thomas Hall∣way their Farmour, out of certaine Te∣nements and Gardens late Robert Mel∣li;hes, Merchantaylor, of the West side of Golding lane,Sute of Court. at the signe of the Leg, butting upon the Lands of the aforesaid Henry Edon, and upon the South of the Lands of William Wakefield, late in the Tenure of Dionise Wilson, 3. s. Of Richard Roper, Baker, out of cer∣taine Tenements and Gardens at the signe of the George, on the East side of Golding lane,Sute of Court. and the Lands now of Willi∣am Gill, Gardiner, Thomas Langham, Fishmonger, on the North, and th'eirs of Gregory Nicholas on the South, 2. s. 2. d. Of th'eirs of Iohn Willoughby, since Peter Dove, in the right of Ioane his Wife, out of certaine Lands and Te∣nements on the East side of Golding lane,Sute of Court. now in the Tenure of Ioice Austen, Widdow, butting upon the Lands be∣longing to Gregory Nicholas, now Tho∣mas Walton, Esquire, North and South, 2. s. 4. d. Of the Dutchesse of Suffolke, out of a Messuage and nine Tenements on the West side of Golding lane, butting up∣on the Lands of William Wakefield on the North:Sute of Court. and the Tenements late be∣longing to the Parish of Aldermary in London, now in the Tenure of Walter Cooper, Tyler, on the South, 1, li. Of Richard Atkinson, in the right of his Wife, out of a Cottage and Gar∣den in the said Lane, butting upon the Lands of Richard Buckland, Haberda∣sher, late Sir Michael Fishers, Knight, North and West, and on the South, butting upon the Lands of Henry Keene, upon Golding lane on the East, 1. s. 4. d. Of Henry Kneene aforesaid, Tenant by the courtessie, in the right of Agnes his Wife, Daughter and Heire of Hen∣ry Warner, deceased, out of the Tene∣ment Chequer, and other Cottages and Gardens on the West party of Gol∣ding lane, butting South upon the lands belonging to the Hospitall of Saint Bartholomewes aforesaid,Sute of Court. late the said Robert Mellishes, now in the Tenure of Thomas Hallyway; and North, as well upon the land of Richard Atkinson, as also upon the Lands, now the said Ri∣chard Bucklands, late the aforesaid Sir Michael Fishers, Knight, on the party West, 1. s. 1. d. Of Thomas Wilkinson, out of certaine Tenements at the signe of the Cocke, at the North end of Golding lane,Sute of Court. be∣longing to Armiger Wade, Esquire, 1. s. Of Thomas Walton, Esquire, out of certaine Tenements and Gardens ly∣ing on the East side of Golding lane,Sute of Court. late called Armitage Aley, late Gregory
Nichola's, & before that Richard Yongs, butting upon the Lands late Peter Doves, who married Ioane the Daugh∣ter and Heire of Iohn Willoughby, on the North side, and the Lands of the said Gregory Nicholas on the South, 2. s. Of the said Thomas Walton, out of certaine Tenements and Gardens at the signe of the Windmill, late the aforesaid Gregory Nicholasses, at the East side of Golding lane, sometimes Iohn Mores,Sute of Court. and before that William Wigmorepoles, abutting upon the Lands late the said Peter Doves, as is aforesaid, on the South: and the Lands belong∣ing to Saint Bartholomewes Hospitall, late Robert Mellishes aforesaid, and now in the Tenure of the said Richard Roper on the North, 2. s. 2. d. Of Iohn Hillyard, Goldsmith, out of the Tenement Flower-de-luce, and a Garden on the West side of Golding lane, now in the Tenure of Iohn Bankes, Brewer, butting upon the Tenement of Iohn Leese,Sute of Court. Carpenter, on the South, and the Tenements belonging to the said Hospitall of Saint Bartholomewes, late the said Robert Mellishes, and in the Tenure of Walter Cooper, Tyler, on the North, 7. d. ob. Beech lane. Of the Vicar of Saint Giles Cripple∣gate, out of the corner Tenement at the West end of Beech lane,Sute of Court. on the South side of the said lane, in the Te∣nure of Martine Capons, Barber-Sur∣geon, and openeth upon Red-crosse street on the West side, 8. d. White-crosse street. Of William Blighton, Butcher, out of two Tenements on the West side of White-crosse street,Sute of Court. late Edmond Godwins, butting upon the Lands late belonging to the Parish Clerkes of London, on the North, and a corner Tenement be∣longing to the said Blighton, on the South, 9. d. Of Thomas Perkins, Butcher, Te∣nant of certaine Lands and Tenements of late belonging to the said Parish Clerkes,Sute of Court. now belonging to  How, Gentleman, on the West side of White-crosse street, butting upon the Lands of William Blighton aforesaid, on the South party; and the Lands of Richard Lister, late Iohn Cores; in the Tenure of Tho∣mas Verey, Brewer, on the North, 1. li. 4. s. 4. d. Of Richard Lister, Clothworker, out of certaine Tenements and Gardens on the West side of Whitecrosse street,Sute of Court. late belonging to Iohn Core, Grocer, and since that Nicholas Carew's, and since that Adam Hutchinsons, butting upon the said Lands and Tenements of late belonging to the said Parish Clerkes, North and South, 4. s. 1. d. Of the said William Gill, out of a Cottage and Gardens at the West side of Whitecrosse street,Sute of Court. of late Ralfe Si∣monds's, and after Thomas Langhams, Fishmonger; and abutting upon a Garden belonging to the said Mannor of Finsbury, on the South side, and on the North part, of the Lands belong∣ing unto Iohn Worsop, 1. s. 10. d. Of Iohn Travies, in the right of his Wife, out of a Cottage and Garden on the West side of Whitecrosse street,Sute of Court. late belonging to Iohn Worsop, Scrive∣ner, and before that to Lettice Ireland, and late Thomas Popplewell, adjoyning to the said Gill on the South, 9. d. Of the said Travies, out of a little parcell of ground there,Sute of Court. on the North side of the said Gill, whereupon some∣times stood a Mill, late the said Wor∣shops, and late the said Popplewels, 3. d. Of Iohn Barnes, Mercer, out of two Tenements and a Garden, on the North side of Chiswell street, now in the Te∣nure of Thomas Mountaine, abutting to the Gardens belonging to the Mannor of Finsbury aforesaid, on the East side, and the Tenements of Robert Traps, Goldsmith, late Thomas Barnes's, and before that, Iohn Wishes's, Founder, on the West side, 1. s. 4. d. Finsbury Field. Of Iohn Worsop, Merchantaylor, for sixe Acres and a halfe of Medow and Pasture, lying in Finsbury Field.Sute of Court. in the Parish of Saint Leonards in Shore∣ditch, towards the Windmills; abut∣ting upon the Windmill next Norton Folgate, in the Tenure of Thomas Pullson
on the party West, the high way lea∣ding towards Norton-Folgate afore∣said, on the party South; and Me∣dow and Pasture grounds, parcell of the Demaines, belonging to the said Lordship on the party North and East, now or late in the Tenure of Iohn Popebolle, 4. s. 10. d. The said Iohn Worsop,In the Pa∣rish of S. Leonards Shodith. for ten Acres and three Rods of Land, lying in the said Field called the Moore, butting upon the Lands aforesaid of the said Nichols, now being Gardens, on the party South; and the said Mallow Field West: the high way leading from the said Farme of Finsbury, towards Nor∣ton-Folgate, on the party North, and the Lands and Gardens, late Sir Mar∣tin Bowes, East, 7. s. ob. One Annuall Rent of 20. s. issuing and going out of certaine Tenements without Ludgate,S. Martins within Ludgate. adjoyning to the said gate, in the Parish of Saint Martin within Ludgate, of London, sometimes in the Tenure of Iohn Benson, Haberda∣sher, and now in the Tenure of Christo∣pher Harbottell, Citizen and Haberda∣shet of London, 1. li. Memorandum, that this Survey was co∣pied out of the Survey annexed to the last Lease granted to the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, of the said Prebend, Mar. 15. 1582. Reg. Elizabetha 25.
Additions out of severall Charters of Kings, &c. con∣cerning the ancient Liberties, bounds and privi∣leges, of Saint Martins le grand in Aldersgate Ward; to bee inserted Page 330. in the second Columne, betwixt the words Gospell and lower downe. An Abstract out of King William the Conquerors Char∣ter, mentioned Page 327. of this Booke. Willimus Conquester per char∣tam suam corroborat et con∣confirmat, Deo & Ecclèsiae Beati Martini infra muros London Sitae; qùod sit qui eta ab omni exactione & inqui∣etudine Episcoporum, Arohidiaconorum, &c. Et possessiones suas ab omni regali ju∣risdictione liberas, & ab exercitus expe∣ditione, pontis restauratione, munitione & castelli auxilio, quietas, habeat; Secuam Sacam, & Toll, & Team, & Infangthefe, Blodwite, Mundbrice, Burghbrice, Mes∣kenning, Seawing, Alcesting, Frithsorne, Fleamina, Firnithe, Wergeldtheofe, Vthleap, Forfeng, Fyhfeng, Firdwyte, Firthwit, We∣ardwite, Hengwite, Hamsokne, Forsteal, & si quas alias libertates, & Consuetudi∣nes, aliqua Ecclesiarum regni mei Angliae meliores habeat. Si quis verò hoc in aliud quam concessimus, transferre praesumpserit, cum Iuda proditore Dei luat poenas. Dat. Anno Domini 1068. Anno{que} Regni mei se∣cundo, die natalis Domini. Et postmodum, in die Pentecostes confirmat: quando Ma∣tilda conjunx mea in Basilica Sancti Petri Westmonasterii, in Reginam divino nutu est consecrata. Subscript. per ipsum Regem, Reginam, Forte Ro∣bertum. Richardum filium Regis, ambos Archiepiscopos, & diversos alios. Notes out of King Henry the third his Charter, Anno Regni 50. HEE grants to Saint Martins, Secuam, Sak, Thol, & Theam, & Infangentheof: cum omnibm libertatibus, consuetudinibus & quietan∣ciis suis, in bosco & in plano, in viis & in se∣mitis, in pratis, pascuis & pasturis; in a∣quis molendinis & vinariis, in stagnis & piscariis, in moris & maressis, in grangiis & virgultis, infra burgum, & extra, in∣fra civitatem & extra, infra villam & ex∣tra: & in omnibus aliis locis & rebus, ad ipsum Decanum & memoratam ecclesiam Sancti Martini pertinentibus. Et quod omnes terrae, tenementa, & omnes homines praedicti Ecclesiae Sancti Martini, sint qui∣eti de Shiris, hundredis, & de sect. Shira∣rum & hundredarum & Wapentakarum: & de pecunia danda pro forisfactum; & de murdro & latrocinio, & geldis & dane∣geldis, hidagiis, assisis, & de operationibus Castellorum & murorum, fossarum, parka∣rum, pontium, calcearum; & de gualtis, regardis, & de essariis & placitis forestae: & de ferdwyta & hengwyta; & de flemens∣sir the & hainsoka, & de blodwyta & frith∣wyta, & de leirwyta, & de hundred spenny & de wardpenny & de haverpenny, & de
vigiliis faciendis, & de pont agio, passagio, lastagio, tallagio, stallagio, thelonio, scuta∣gio, & omni secua, examinatione, servitio, & servili opere; & omnibus placitis & que∣relis & occasionibus & consuetudinibus Sem: All this was confirmed in the second yeere of the reigne of King Edward the second, with this addition. Et prohibe∣mus, ne de aliquo ponantur in placitum ex∣tra curiam suam; nisi coram nobis vel capi∣tulari Iusticiario nostro: quia concessimus eisdem curiam suam, de omnibus homini∣bus tenentiis suis. Me teste. King Henry the 3. directs his Writ Vicecomitibus London, ne ingrediantur seu levent amerciamenta infra libertates Sancti Martini, pro transgressionibus & aliis contractibus, Regi debitis. The like was sent by King Edward the first, Iuly 10. in the eighth yeere of his reigne. Out of a Charter of King Henry the sixth, Data per manum nostram apud West∣monasterium 13. Martii Anno Regni 20. Per ipsum Regem, ac de dat. praedict. autho∣ritate Parliamenti: pro decem marcis so∣lutis in Hanaperio. Concedimus & confirmamus,Ligier fol. 69. quod prae∣dicti nunc Decanus & Capitulum & succes∣sores sui, virtute & praetextu dictarum chartarum praedictorum Progenitorum no∣strorū, & verborum in iisdem contentorum, ac vice & nomine eorum quae in dictis ver∣bis generalibus & obscuris continentur; in perpetuum habeant curias suas & usum franciplegii retornas omnium brevium, prae∣ceptorum et mandatorum et billarum no∣strorum, ac praeceptorum Iusticiariorum no∣strorum et haeredum nostrorum itineranti∣um, tam ad placita forestae, quam ad com∣munia placita, & placita coronae, & aliorum Iusticiariorum quorumcunque: necnon at∣tachimenta tam placitorum coronae, quam aliorum placitorum quorumcunque; de & in omnibus terris, tenementis, et feodis di∣ctorum nunc Decani & Capituli & succes∣sorum suorum; qui per se & per Ballivos et ministros suos, habeant in iisdem tenementis, terris, & feodis, executiones eorundem bre∣vium, praeceptorum, & mandatorum, & billarum. Ita quod nullus Vicecomes, Balli∣vus, vel minister noster aut haeredum nostro∣rum, tenementa, terras, & feoda praedicta, pro aliqua executione Brevium, praecepto∣rum, mandatorū & billarum praedictorum: seu aliquas alias res hujusmodi executio∣nem tangentes facienda, ingrediatur: nisi in defectu ipsorum Decani & Capituli & successorum suorum, seu ministrorum suo∣rum. Item, quod habeant bona & catalla fo∣risfacta, ex causa quacunque; tam utlega∣ta pro proditione, &c. felonia de se, & bo∣na forisfacta coram quibuscunque Iusticia∣riis & ministris Regis. Item exitus,Fol. 70. amerciamenta & forisfa∣cta quaecunque, ratione cujuscunque sta∣tuti. Item quod dicti Decanus & Capitulum & Canonici,Ibid. & sucessores sui, & tenentes, & alii residentes, in perpetuum sint quieti de thelonio, pontagio, passagio, & stallagio, & carriagio, & picagio, & terragio, in om∣nibus locis per totum regnum nostrum, tam per terram quam per aquam. Fines & forisfacta quaecunque;Fol. 71. quascun∣que forisfacturas, annum diem & estreppa∣mentum; & quicquid ad nos vel haeredes no∣stros partinere poterit, de anno, die, vasto, & estreppamento. Nec Seneschallus,Fol. 71. marischallus neque Co∣ronator Curiae Marischalciae hospitii nostri vel haeredum nostrorum; nec eorum aliquis minister, serviens, vel officiarius in praesen∣tia nostra vel haeredum nostrorum, in feoda & terras dictorum Decani & Capituli & successorum suorum, ad aliqua eorum officia facienda, ingrediantur: sine speciali licen∣tia dictorum Decani & Capituli & succes∣sorum suorum. Quod nullus emptor nec provisor noster vel haeredum nostrorum,Ibid. de ipsis nunc Deca∣no & Capitulo aut successoribus suis, aut de aliquibus tenentibus eorundem; contra voluntatem suam quicquid capiat in futu∣rum. By the said Ligier-Booke it likewise appeareth, that the said Deanry of Saint Martins had also priviledge of Sanctu∣ary, in the time of the said King Henry the sixth; see folio 78. and 79. There be diverse Presentations also and Pro∣bates of Wills; from Page 81. to the end of the of the said Ligier-Booke. For the exposition of the words of priviledge, occurring in the Charters aforesaid; I have added these follow∣ing observations. Sok, est Secta de hominibus in curia ve∣stra (Sancti Martini) secundum consuetu∣dinem regni.
Sak, est placitum et Emenda de trans∣gressionibus hominum in curia vestra. Sok, idem pre quele acheson: et Sak dicitur pur forfet. Tol, est quod vos & homines vestri, de toto homagio vestro sit is quieti, in omnibus mercatis, de toto tolneto, de rebus emp∣tis & venditis. Tem, est quod habeatis totam generati∣onem villanorum vestrorum, cum eorum se∣ctis & catallis, ubi cunque in Anglia fue∣rint inventi. Excepto, quodsi aliquis nati∣vus, quietus per unum annum et unum di∣em, in aliqua villa privilegiata manserit; ita quod in eorum communitatem et guil∣dam, tanquam unus eorum receptus fuerit: eo ipso a villenagio liberatus est. Infangtheof, est quod latrones capti in Dominico vel feodo vestro, & de suo la∣trocinio convicti; in curia vestra judicen∣tur. Hangewyte, est quietus de latrone sus∣penso; sine judicio, vel extra custodiam ve∣stram evaso. Vtfangtheof, est quod latrones de terra veslra, vel de feodo vestro, extra terram vestram vel feodum vestrum capti cum la∣trocinio; ad curiaem vestram revertantur, & ibi judicentur. Hamsoken, est quietum esse de amerci∣amento promagistro hospitiorum, violenter et sine licentia, & contrae pacem: & quod teneatis placita de hujusmodi transgressi∣onibus factis, in curia vestra, & in terra vestra. Grithbrech, et pax Domini Regis fracta. Blodwite, est quietum esse de amercia∣mento pro medlets: et quod teneatis pla∣cita in curia vestra: et quod habeatis a∣mer ciamenta inde provenientiae. Flistwite, est quietum esse de contenti∣one et conviciis: & quod habeatis inde pla∣citum in curia vestra: & quod habeatis inde amerciamenta. Fledwite, & quietum effe de amercia∣mento, cum quis utlegatus fugitivus vene∣rit ad pacem domini Regis, sponte vel licen∣tiatus. Flemenefith, quod habeatis catalla sive amerciamentae hominis vestri fugitivi. Letherwyte, est quod capiatis emenda∣tionem ab ipso qui corrupit nativam ve∣stram, sine licentia vestra. Childwyte, est quod capiatis ger∣mam de nativa vestra corrupta & pregnata sine licentia vestra. Forstatt, & quietum esse de amercia∣mento de cattallis arrestatis, infra terram vestram: & habeatis amerciamenta inde provenientia. Scot, est esse quietum de quadam con∣suetudine; sicut de tallagio facto ad opus Vice comitis, vel Ballivorum ejus. Geld, est quietum esse de consuetudini∣bus servilibus, quae quondam dari consue∣verunt, & adhuc dantur. Sicut Horne∣geld, & de alijs similibus. Hidage, & quietum esse si Dominus Rex talliaverit totam terram per Hi∣dam. Caruage, si Dominus Rex talliaverit terram per Carucas. Danegeld, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine, sive solutione; quam quidem Dani levaverunt primum in Anglia. Hornegeld, est quietum esse per totam terram de quadam consuetudine exactam per talliam: sicut de quasunque bestia cor∣nuta. Lesteage, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine exactam in nundinis & mer∣catis, pro rebus cariandis, ut homo vult. Stallage, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine exactam proploceis captis vel assignatis in nundinis vel mercatis. Seawing. Chewyng, est quietum esse de aetta∣chiamento in aliqua curia, & coram qui∣buscunque; de querelis ostensis, & non ad∣vocat. Miskennyng, est quietum esse de a∣merciamento pro querela, coram quibus∣cunque; in transumptione prolata. Burgbruch, est quietum esse de trans∣gressione facta in Civitate vel Burgo, contra pacem. Wardwyte, est quietum esse de dena∣rio dando pro Ward facienda. Hundred, est quietum esse de denario, vel consuetudine facienda Praepossto & Hundredae. Bordhalepeney, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine exactionis, pro tabu∣la levatae. Brigbote, est quietum esse de auxilio dando ad reficiendos pontes. Burgbote, est quietum esse de auxilio dando ad reficiendum burgum, castrum, ci∣vitatem, vel muros prostratos. Haverpeney, est quietum esse de dena∣riis dandis Averagio Domini Regis; cum similibus. For a larger and more accurate ex∣position
of these old words, I referre the Reader to that most elaborate and diligent Glossary of Sir Henry Spelman, Knight, the learnedest Antiquary of our Nation; yea (and in this kind) of all Europe. This Deanry, together with the San∣ctuary and Priviledges, was after put to the Abbey of Saint Peters in Westminster: as appeareth by what next followeth. A Declaration of William Abbot of the Monastery of St. Peter of Westminster, concerning his title to the Privilege and San∣ctuary of St. Martins le grand in London: with the precincts, Circuit, and Bounds of the same. FIrst the said Abbot saith, That the free Chappell of St. Martins le grand in London, and the Pre∣cincts of Saint Martins aforesaid, is a place priviledged: and was founded and endowed long time before the Conquest, aswell of possessions, as of immunities, franchises, and liberties: and corroborate and inlarged by King VVilliam the Conquerour, like as it ap∣peareth as well by the Charter of the said King VVilliam the Conquerour; as by divers other Charters, Writings, and Records. Item, the said King William the Con∣querour granted by his Charter to the same place of Saint Martins, divers li∣berties and franchises, by speciall and generall words, aswell in the Latine tongue as Saxon. And over that gran∣ted to the said place of Saint Martins, all other liberties, immunities, and cu∣stomes, which any Church of this Realme, best had. Which grant im∣porteth and includeth in himselfe as great priviledges, franchises, and immu∣nities, as VVestminster, Beverlay, or any other place priviledged, hath within the Realme. And also the said words in Saxon, importeth such sentence. That the said place should bee a Sanctuary franchised, priviledged, and have tui∣tion and immunities of all those per∣sons, which for treason, felonies, tres∣passes, or any other cause, should flee to the same or abide therein. Which franchises, priviledge, tuition, and im∣munities, the said place hath alway peaceably had and enjoyed, from the said Conquerours dayes unto this pre∣sent time. Item, the said franchises, immunities, and priviledges, of Saint Martins, have beene corroborate, confirmed, allowed and enlarged, by King Henry the first, King Stephen, Henry the second, King Iohn, King Henry the third, King Edward the second, King Edward the third, Ri∣chard the second, Henry the fifth, Hen∣ry the sixth, and in all other Kings times sithence the Conquest: as by divers Charters and Allowances before Ju∣stices of Oyer and Determiner, Writings and Records, more plainely at large is shewed, and may appeare. Item, it appeareth by divers Returnes made by the Sheriffes of London, aswell in the Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, and all other the Kings Courts, that the said place of Saint Martins, is a place priviledged, and Sanctuary: as by the same Returnes remaining of Re∣cord, more plainely may appeare. Item, the said Abbot saith, That the Precinct, Circuit, and Bounds of the priviledge and Sanctuary aforesaid, be and extend, as hereafter followeth. Imprimis, beginning at a wall lying directly against a Poast that standeth in the midst of one Roger VVrights a Grocers house, which standeth of the East side of the south gate of St. Mar∣tins: and from the wall in the said Gro∣cers house, with the halfe-deale of the street unto the chancell of the same side that house standeth upon, Sanctuary. And so forth from the East Westward unto the middest of Saint Martins lane next to the Chappell of Saint Martins, against the Tenement of the Bulls head, which Tenement lieth at the south end of the said lane on the West part. Item, halfe part of the streete of St. Martins lane, Sanctuary, from the south unto the North, as farre forth as the houses appertaining to the Bull-head do extend Northwards. Item, from the said place of the Buls head, then the whole lane of St. Mar∣tins,
Sanctuary on both sides, unto a Post or Stoope that standeth of the North side or end of the two Tene∣ments, standing by the great gate next going into the Deanes Court. Item, from the said Saint Martins Lane, at the aforesaid Buls head, tur∣ning by a wall that divideth the said Tenement of the Bulls head, and Saint Martins ground: Which wall turneth and extendeth from the East West∣wards, unto a backe wall that closeth in Saint Martins ground of the West side: all within the said Wall, San∣ctuary. Item, along by the same backe wall, that closeth in the West part of Saint Martins ground, from the South end of the said wall into the North, unto a wall that divideth my Lord of Northumber∣lands ground, and Saint Martins ground from the South end; all within the a∣foresaid Walls, Sanctuary: and so forth from the South side into the North my Lord of Northumberlands ground, Sanctuary; along by a backe wall of the Grey Fryars: which backe wall clo∣seth in my Lord of Northumberlands ground of the West part, unto the North part of Angell Alley, abutting Northwards upon the South side of Robert Bowmans house, into the Street∣wards. And so Sanctuary still, from the said backe wall of Grey Fryars, a∣long by the Angell Alley, and by the South part of the said Robert Bowmans house, from the West unto the East, untill you come to a Post or Stoope standing on the North part of the two Tenements next lying on the North side of a great gate entring into the Deanes Court. Item, from the same Post or Stoope before rehearsed, standing North from the great gate of the said Deanes Court directly Eastwards, by the North part of a Tenement, with the same Tenement inclosed (as by the wall there it sheweth) Sanctuary: which Tenement is now in the hands of one Hugh Payne. Item, from the aforesaid wall, along from the North, Southward unto Hugh Paynes dwelling house; and from thence by the North side of the said Hugh Paynes Garden, Sanctuary still; from the West unto the East part thereof. Item, againe from the North side of the above rehearsed Hugh Paynes Gar∣den Southward, unto the Deanes Gar∣den, Sanctuary. Item, along by the wall on the North side of the Deanes Garden, from the West into the East thereof, San∣ctuary. Item, from the North unto the South, of the East part of the aforesaid Deanes Garden, with Saint Leonards Church, Sanctuary, as by a wall it there shew∣eth. Item, from the East end of Saint Leonards Church, Westwards of the South of Saint Martins, unto the Bell-Alley, Sanctuary, as appeareth also thereby another wall. Item, from the Bell-Alley South∣wards, unto the wall spoken of at the beginning, which is within the Gro∣cers house, against the Post that stan∣deth within the middest of the same house. And so forth directly againe unto the Chanell of the high street, that lyeth afore the South gate of Saint Martins: all within the bounds reher∣sed, Sanctuary. Item, by a Statute made in the yeere of King Edward the third, it is affir∣med, The said place of Saint Martins to bee a place franchised and priviled∣ged, having tuition and immunity, in manner and forme as is above rehear∣sed. And in speciall, and for them that come in thither for Debt, Treason, and Felony. In proofe whereof, the Iudge that sitteth there for the King, as in a place not of the City, but by priviledge seperate, (the Maior not called there∣to, as he is to the deliverance of New∣gate, and other such Acts in the City) to have knowledge there in a case of Treason or Felony, hath ever, from time that no minde is, sitten in the gate of the said Sanctuary. And the person appeached or endited of Trea∣son or Felony, hath beene kept by the Officers on the further side of the street afore him, to the intent that he come not of the other side of the Chanell to∣wards the Sanctuary there, to claime the liberty and Franchises of the same. Item, wheras divers Kings of this land, for causes such as moved them, have
seazed into their hands the Franchises and Liberties that the City of London had, by reason whereof they were not suffered to use or enjoy the said Fran∣chises, for as long as it hath liked unto the said Kings: yet the said Chappell of Saint Martins le grand, in the said City of London, with the Precinct of the same, at the said times of such sea∣sing of the aforesaid Franchises; was afore and since alwayes a place privi∣ledged, without any disturbance, di∣minishing, or taking away by the said Kings, or by their Ministers: and peace∣ably used and enjoyed their Franchi∣ses, Liberties, and immunities, within the Sanctuary and Precinct of Saint Martins, as in a place excepted and priviledged, and no wayes pertaining unto the said City, ne parcell thereof, though it be set within the same. And moreover, the said Abbot saith, that the said Church or Chappell of Saint Martins, within the said Sanctu∣ary and Precinct of the same; were of late by the late King of famous memo∣ry, King Henry the seventh, lawfully annexed and given to the said Mona∣stery of Saint Peter of Westminster; at which time, and times without mind of man before that, the said Chappell, and Precinct, circuit and bounds of the said Sanctuary, comprized within the Limits above rehearsed, were used, allowed, and taken, and yet be, as San∣ctuary. Thus farre the Abbot of Westminsters declaration, at which time (as it ap∣peareth) there fell out so much conte∣station, concerning the Precincts of this Sanctuary, that the matter was faine to be tried by ancient sworne men de∣posed in Court as Witnesses. Some of their Depositions are come to my hands, which I here give you: the rest (and the beginning) have miscarried. Item, the said Henry Williamson de∣poseth for the claimed bounds, and al∣so for the priviledge of Sanctuary men, in the halfe Street and Lane next to Saint Martins; and for the setting up of the Gallowes on Evill May day; and for the removing thereof, as others therein before have deposed. Item, Ralfe Twyn deposeth, all whol∣ly the claimed bounds to be Sanctuary; and also the setting up of the Gallowes, and removing of the same, and the Pavement, to bee done by the Abbot: and that he knew one Bland privileged both for Treason and Murther, ever used to walke in the street claimed as Sanctuary, without any disturbance. Item, William Bayley deposeth, all the claimed bounds, and also the sitting of the Iustices in the South gate: and that he heard the Iustices say, that halfe the street against the said gate was Sanctu∣ary: and that there was persons then arraigned, and others therein depo∣sed: and that he knew the said Bland priviledged for Treason and Fellony, to dwell in Angell Alley: and that the Abbot ought to make the Pavement, as others have deposed there. Item, Iohn Smith, Clerke, deposeth for all the claimed bounds: and fur∣ther saith, that hee knew Doctor Mor∣ton, and also the Cardinall Morton to lye there, one in Roger Wrights house, and the other in Angell Alley, they both being priviledged for Treason. And also he supposeth both Angell Alley and Bland Alley, to be holden of Saint Mar∣tins by certaine Rent, as parcell of the Earle of Northumberlands Tenements. And also for the Pavement, as others before have deposed. At this time (I suppose) was there a Survey or Plat of the Precinct, exhibi∣ted into the Court of Chancery, where it appeareth these Witnesses to have beene deposed. The figure of which Plat we here exhibite unto you.
The Grey W. Fryars. All this is Shoomakers houses, which pay Rents to the Abbots of Westminster. Aldersgate The Chanell. Sanctuary ever used. The Chanell. No San∣ctuary. S. Martins lane, and Sanctu∣ary on both sides. A New Window broken out by Francis Godlike. The West Church doore. The Deanes gate. The Post. Hugh Paines Garden. The Deanes Garden. S. Leonards Church. All the Bounds and Limits about this Plat mentioned, beene contained in the Abbots claime: and is well pro∣ved to be good Sanctuary, by divers Witnesses sworne in the Chancery, as well Free-men of the City, as other credible persons. A stone Wall. Good Sanctuary ever used. The South Gate. Good Sanctuary ever used. The Chanell on the South side. Foster E. lane. The Post in Roger Wrights house.
It seemes that there hath beene some latter differences about a new doore into the Liber∣ties of the Freedome;Saint Mar∣tins le grand▪ where∣upon a Court being called, December 20. 1625. this Or∣der was given out, to bee en∣quired upon and certified. It is ordered by the Court, that the Foreman of the Enquest, with others of the same Enquest, shall view the South gate and Entry leading from Bladder street in∣to this Liberty: and also a doore made by Thomas Rodes in the East side of the same Entrey; and make their reports under their bands in writing, on Monday next after the Epiphany. ACcording to the direction of the Order abovesaid, we whose names are under written, being all of the Enquest sworne for this yeere, having viewed the Gate and Entry, doe find, and accordingly certifie, that Thomas Rodes, a Linnen-Draper, dwel∣ling in a house next adjoyning to the said Entry, on the East side thereof, (in part of which house Roger Wright did sometimes dwell) hath of late, without the privity or knowledge of most of the Inhabitants of this Liberty, taken downe, or caused to bee taken downe and carried away, a paire of strong, suf∣ficient, and serviceable gates, in the night time; which were, and time out of mind have bin, the common South gate of this Liberty. And in stead ther∣of, hath set up a new gate of Deale, opening all one way, viz. towards the West side; whereas the former paire of Gates or Leaves did fall open, the one towards the East side, and the other to∣wards the West side of the said Entry. Also the said Thomas Rodes hath bro∣ken downe the partition wall on the East side of the said Entry; against which, one Leafe of the said old Gate did fall open, as aforesaid: and hath there made a new doore (where never any was before, in the memory of man) of almost an Ell in breadth, out of the said Shop, into the said Entry or com∣mon passage into this Liberty. Wher∣by a free and open passage is made out of the City of London, thorow the shop of the said Rodes into this Liberty; to the great prejudice of the Lords of the same Liberty, and to the great hinde∣rance and damage of the Tenants and Inhabitants within the same. In wit∣nesse whereof wee have hereunto sub∣scribed our names, dated the 9. day of Ianuary, Anno Dom. 1625. Mathew Iumpar William Hewes William Hewes Richard Mattock Anthony Iohnson Timothy Smart Edward Napper Thomas Speare Henry Kuevet William Hunt Philip Richard William Purse. A very ancient Deed, to prove Lambs-Chappell to have anciently beene in the Parish of Saint Olaves Silverstreet. KNow all men, present and to come, that I Laurence de Frowik have granted and dimissed, and by this present Charter of mine have confirmed, unto Richard of Clerkenwell, Chaplaine, all that Land of mine, with the houses, buildings, and appurte∣nances which I have in London, in Muck∣well street, in the Parish of S. Olaves; lying betweene that Land which Willi∣am Throtegos held of mee, towards the South, and the Land of the Fryars of the new Hostell, towards the North; and which extendeth it selfe in length, from the Kings high-way, even unto the wall of the City towards the West, &c. he paying me twenty shillings a yeere, &c. and giving unto the Church of Saint Olaves aforesaid, one Waxe Candle of a pound weight, at the Feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle yeerely: and unto the Chappell (de inclusorio) in the Close or Cloister, within Criple∣gate,
at the upper end of Muckwell street towards the North, one other Waxe Taper of three quarters weight, upon the Feast of Saint Iames yeerely, &c. Witnesses, Nicholas Bat, then Maior of London, Iohn of Northampton, and Ri∣chard Pycard then Sheriffes, &c. Notes upon this Deed. These were Maior and Sheriffes, Anno 1253. which was the thirty eighth yeere of Henry the third. Out of this so ancient a Deed, may wee observe, first, That by the bounding of this Land, betwixt the streete and the City wall, towards the West; that this was that ground which is now Lambes Chappell yard. Secondly, by the assigning the latter Candle to bee paid to the Chappell, upon Saint Iames his day; that it was meant to this Lambes Chappell: which was anciently called, The Chappell of Saint Iames in the wall. Vpon whose Festivall, this Chappell seemes to have beene dedicated: and to honour the solemnity of which Wake, the Gentleman directed this Candle to be yeerely paid. The Originall of this Deed in Latin, is in the hands of that most Learned Antiquary of our dayes Sir Henry Spel∣man Knight. The Circuit of the Hospi∣tall or Free Chappell of Saint Katharine neere the Tower of London. FRom the East gate of the said To∣wer by the Thames, unto the Bancke beyond Saint Katharines Docke, Eastward: and from thence through all the Lane which leadeth from the said Docke, and in and by e∣very part of the said Lane, unto the Kings high way, Northward: which way, lyeth between the Abby of Grace and the said Hospitall or Free Chap∣pell; and leadeth from the City of Lon∣don, unto Radcliffe. And also from the said way, against the same Lane, unto the Tower Ditch, Westward; and from thence to the River of Thames, Southward. An Ancient Record con∣cerning East Smithfield to bee inserted Page 268. IN the times of King Knowt (or Ka∣nutus) the Dane,Out of Book Dan∣thorne in Guildhall folio 78. were there thir∣teene Knights very well beloved both of King and Kingdome. These begged of the Kings Grace, a certaine piece of Land in the East part of Lon∣don; which the Inhabitants had lately forsaken, by reason of the hardshipPro nimiâ servitute. and service they there stood charged withall. The Knights suit for to have this Land granted unto them for ever, with the liberty of a Guild upon it, the King upon this condition granted: Namely, that every one of them should performe three combats upon the land, and in the water; and come off with victory: and also, that upon a day ap∣pointed, they should runne at Tilt a∣gainst all commers, in the field which is now called East Smithfield. This they having performed gloriously, the King gave them the field, and the same day named it Kytte-guilden;These were En∣glish Knights; and there∣fore in some wri∣tings it is called An∣glish Kytte-guilden. appointing these Boundaries unto it. First, that it should reach from Ealdgate to the place where the Barres now are, Eastward on both sides the Towne. He extended it another way toward Bishopsgate, as farre as the house of William the Priest. To the Southward, the liberties of this Guild reached so farre into the water of the Thames, as a horseman riding into the River at a dead low water, could dart his horsemans staffe from him. So that all East Smithfield, with part of the right hand way, which stretcheth, by Doddings pond into the Thames; and also the Hospitall of Saint Katharines, with the Mills, (which Hospitall was founded in the reigne of King Stephen) together with the outer stone wall, and the new Ditch of the Tower, stand and
are within the Fee aforesaid. For the said Wall and Ditch,The Tow∣er Ditch first made. were not as yet made; but were afterwards, in the ve∣ry time that King Richard the first was at Ierusalem. Which was done by the Bishop of Ely, the Kings Justice over all the Kingdome. The occasion was, a difference betwixt Earle Iohn the Kings Brother, and the chiefe Iustice. By the digging of this Ditch in the ground of East Smithfield, did the Church of the Holy Trinity in London lose half a Marke a yeere revenue; and the Mill which belonged unto the poore Brotherhood of the Hispitall of Saint Katharines, and unto the Churches of Saint Katharines, and of the Holy Trinity altogether, was faine to be removed, to their no little hindrance. A Garden also which the King had hired of the Brotherhood a∣foresaid, at the rent of sixe Markes a yeere, was for the most part destroyed also by the said Ditch. Recompence was often sued for, but not made very speedily, though promised faithfully. Afterwards, King Edward gave five Markes and an halfe unto the poore Brotherhood, for that part of their Gar∣den which the Ditch had destroyed, and that part which it had not, hee re∣stored unto them againe, which they hold unto this day. As for their Rent of five Markes and a halfe, hee gave them his Charter, by which they receive it very duly either out of the Exchequer or the Hanaper, even untill this present. This Guild was by divers Kings af∣terwards confirmed. And first by Ed∣ward the Confessor, then by King Willi∣am Rufus;Out of the Booke C. fol. 134. of whose Charter, I here give you this Abstract. William King of England, &c. to Bi∣shop M. G de Magu, and R de Boare, and to his faithfullFidelibus. By which perchance both in this and other Kings Charters of those times, are meant, such as were the Kings Te∣nants or held lands of him, & had sworn fealty for them, to him. Liege-people of Lon∣don, sendeth greeting. Know ye that I have confirmed unto the men of Cnit∣tengilda, their Guild and Lands per∣taining unto it, with all their customes, entire; even as they enjoyed them in the time of King Edward, and of my Fa∣ther: Witnesse Henry de Both at Re∣thyng. Of King Henry the first his Charter this is the Abstract. Henry King of England, &c. to Bi∣shop M. to theViceo∣miti Lon∣don. Sheriffe of Lon∣don, and to all his Barons and faith∣full people of London, aswell French as English, sendeth greeting. Know yee that I have granted unto all the men of the Cnyttengilda, their Guild, and lands pertaining unto it; together with all their customes after the best manner, even as they enjoyed the same in the times of King Edward and my Father, and as the King my Brother by his Charter and Seale confirmed them. And I free it from any forfeiture that might accrue unto my selfe, forbidding all men, that upon pretence hereof, they presume not to offer them any molesta∣tion. Witnesses, R. de Momford, R. de Bigot, and H. de Booth, at Westminster. More concerning the Liberties and extent of the said Guild. Know yee,Out of Booke H. in fol. 48. that the Soken of Knytten∣gilda, reaches from Aldgate with the lands on both sides the streete, even un∣to the outer Barre. On the South side it reaches towards the Thames; joyn∣ing with the Soken within the Barre, 66. foot of Saint Paul. On the North it goes within the Barre 16. foot of St. Paul. The Soken also extendeth towards Bishopsgate, even unto the house belong∣ing sometimes unto William the Priest, and after unto Geffrey Tannar, together with all Smithfield, and so farre into the Thames as a horseman at low water ri∣ding upon hisSuper dex∣trarium his Horse of service, or great Horse. Destrier into the River could dart his Lance from him; toge∣ther with the right hand part of the streete, which goes by Doddings pond to the Thames. But as for that on the left hand, it is not of that Soken; but yet in the Parish of Saint Botolphs. More, concerning the Tower Ditch before mentioned; and of the enclosing the whole City of London with a Ditch. Whilest King Richard in his returne from Ierusalem,Out of Booke Dunthorn fol. 82. was kept prisoner by the Emperor of Almayne, there sell out a dissension betwixt Earle Iohn the Kings Brother, and the Bishop of Ely, Lord Chiefe Iustice of England: where∣upon, the Bishop thought good to for∣tifie the KingsThe To∣wer. Castle, which the
Earle at that time provided to belea∣ger. It seemed good to the Bishop therefore, to encompasse in the whole Bulwarke, with a wall of a most won∣derfull thicknesse, and to make a broad and deepe Ditch about that, which the Thames flowing into, the whole Tower might both be encompassed and forti∣fied by it. Vpon occasion therefore of this Ditch, which was then made in Smithfield; and by reason of that other Ditch, which the Citizens for the same cause then beganne to make round a∣bout their City: did the Church of the Holy Trinity lose halfe a Marke of yearely revenew; and the Mill also be∣longing unto the poore of the Hospi∣tall of Aldgate was taken away. Where∣upon there accrewed no small damage both untoThis is a Chara∣cter of the antiquity of this writing, and also that it was done either by the Par∣son, or some of the Pa∣rishioners of Trinity Parish. us, and to those poore peo∣ple: for which, though recompence hath beene often promised, yet have we hitherto received no satisfaction. More concerning this matter, out of a french Record in Booke H. folio 199. and in Booke Dunthorne, folio 88. Which is a desire of the Master of Saint Kathe∣rines Hospitall, to have leave of the Ci∣ty to enclose a certaine peece of ground neere the Tower of London. It was told unto the Maior, Alder∣men, and Commonalty, how that Iohn Hermesthorpe, Master of Saint Kathe∣rines Hospitall, by the Tower of Lon∣don, had a certaine peece of Land, which had somewhile beene a portion of the Garden of his Hospitall; which portion King Edward, sonne to King Henry, had purchased of those of the said Hospitall, for the enlargement of the Tower Ditch; for which hee paid unto the Master, Brothers, and Sisters of the said Hospitall, 3. li. 13. s. 4. d. yeerely for ever: and that the said Hos∣pitall had received the said Rent ever since the time of the Purchase. This place indeed, had heretofore laine void and waste, and had beene of no profit to any; serving onely for a resort or mee∣ting place of Rogues and Women of ill conversation. For the restraining of which naughtinesse and pilferies, the said Iohn had againe purchased it of King Edward the third, of whom he had received licence to enclose the said void peece for the benefit of his Hospitall: he paying to the King and his Heires, into their Exchequer, vj. s. viij. d. for ever. By vertue of which Licence, the said Master had already begunne to enclose the said void Plat of ground. This the Maior, &c. hearing of, sent to forbid the enclosure of; affirming, that the said Plat belonged unto the Com∣monalty of the City of London: where∣upon the Master forbare to proceede further for sixe or eight yeeres toge∣ther. At the end of this terme, the said Master made sure unto the Maior and Commonalty, that they would please to give him leave to enclose the said place, were it but onely to prevent and take away the Villanies which he affir∣med to be there committed: for which courtesie he then promised, that him∣selfe, and all the Brothers and Sisters of the said Hospitall, would particu∣larly, and in especiall manner, pray for the good estate of the City; and be willing moreover to pay some small yeerely Rent unto the Chamber of Guihald, London, for ever. To this suit the Maior, Aldermen, and Commo∣nalty consented: and further made choice of some certaine Aldermen and Commoners, who should take a view of this, and other void places belong∣ing to the City, and make report to them, &c. To prove that the Hospitall of Saint Ka∣therines, with the Mils, and all that belong to it, together with the Tower Ditch, all East-Smithfield without the Posterne, before the Abbey of Grace, with the right hand part of the street leading along by Duddings Pond, are, and time out of minde have beene within the Liberty of the City of London, and parcell of Portsoken Ward without Algate, in the Sub∣urbes.I finde two seve∣rall Co∣pies of this: one in Booke Dunthorne, fol. 80. & another in Booke K. fol. 56. The Maior and Commonalty of the City of London affirme, that in the time of the Conquerour, and long before, the said Ward of Portsoken, was called the Ward of Anglish Knightgilden. And that afterwards, about the eighth of
King Henry the first, Ralfe the sonne of Algode, Wolfard le Deverish, Otgar le Prude, with divers other substantiall Citizens of London, descended of the ancient race of the English Knights, being Lords of the Liberty of the said Guild, in the Soken aforesaid, and were seazed of all the Lands in the said Soken (as by the Charter of the said King Henry it appeareth) did bequeath the said Soken and Lands, unto the Church and Canons of the Holy Tinity, within Algate, London. Which gift the said K. Henry, by his Charter (which the Maior and Commonalty have here to shew) also confirmed. Vpon pretext of which Gift and Confirmation, Norman, at that time Prior, and the Covent of the Church aforesaid, as also their Suc∣cessors, stood a long time possessed. Afterwards, among other things, Ralfe the Prior, with the Canons of the said Church, did grant unto Maud Queene of England, Wife to King Stephen, a certaine parcell of Land in the said Soken (the very same, namely, upon which the said Hospitall of Saint Ka∣therines is now founded) together with all the Mill there in theIn Escam∣bio. Shambles, in lieu of sixe yard land in the Mannor of Bracching, in the County of Hert∣ford: even as by two Patents of the said King and Queene made upon that occasion, it manifestly is declared. Moreover they affirme, That whereas the Lord Edward the first, sometimes King of England, had not any piece of ground of his owne proper Lands neere enough unto his Tower of London, whereupon to build up his Wall, and to make his Ditch about the Tower, which he purposed to doe a new; hee purchased of the Master, Brethren, and Sisters of the Hospitall of Saint Kathe∣rines by the Tower aforesaid, a certaine Plat of ground with the appurtenan∣ces in East Smithfield, adjoyning unto the Tower, both for the laying of the Sand, Gravell, and Marle, which should be digged out of the Ditch, and that which should serve for the repai∣ring of the Wall aforesaid. And that he paid unto the Master, Brothers, and Sisters aforesaid, five Markes, sixe shil∣lings and nine pence, both for the pur∣chase of the said Plat, and the recom∣pence of their losse long since sustai∣ned, by the enlargement of the Ditch, and reparation of the Wall aforesaid: which hee caused for himselfe and his Successors to be yeerely payable out of the Exchequer. Which five Markes sixe shillings nine pence, the Masters, Brothers, and Sisters (for the time be∣ing) of the said Hospitall, have ever since the said Grant received, and doe actually at this present receive it by vertue of the said Patent, which they now have by them, &c. the Copy whereof was entered upon Record in the Chamber ofThis is severall times written Ginald. Guildhall; and ac∣knowledged by them before Nicholas Brembre, then Maior, and the Alder∣men. They affirme also, that in the fourteenth yeere of King Edward the second, at such time as he held Assises in the said Tower; it was proved, that the said Ward of Portsoken, (hereto∣fore called English Knightgeld) was in and of the Liberties of London; and that, so often as any Taxe was to bee raised for the King, or to bee assessed for the Commonalty of London, upon the Commoners of the said City, or that any other Assessement was to bee made by the said Commonalty, either for the raising of some Wall, making of any enclosure, or for the defence of the City: that all the people inha∣biting the said Ward, were accusto∣med to pay the said Taxes, like other Freemen of the City; and the said Assessements were wont to bee levied upon them, as upon other Freemen of the City, like as by the Transcript of the Rolls of the saidIn . Assizes of the Kings, now remaining in the Treasury of the Guildhall of the same City, most clearely it appeareth. They further affirme, that the Lord Edward the third, late King of England, Progenitor of our Lord the King that now is, in the seventeenth yeere of his Reigne, directed by hisPer  suum. Letter unto Iohn Hamond, at that time Maior of his City of London, and his Majesties Es∣cheator in the same: in which Letters he made rehearsall of all the former bu∣sinesse concerning the Wall and Ditch of the Tower, made in his Grandfa∣thers time. Hee rehearsed also, how Ralfe of Sandwich, and Iohn de Weston,
late Constables of the Tower, did let out the same place by parcels unto di∣vers men, without leave or licence had therefore, either from the Kings his Grand-father, Fathers, or Himselfe; and that the said place was then buil∣ded upon,East Smith∣field buil∣ded upon. and rented out for 40. s. a yeere, and that himselfe had given out Commissions to enquire upon the rea∣sons, manner, right, and valew of every thing, &c. And that the said Iohn Hamond making enquiry hereup∣on, made returne of all into the Chan∣cery, &c. They affirme moreover, that all the Lands and Tenents, upon the fore∣said right hand of the way by Duddings Pond, and about the said places of East Smithfield, Tower-hill, and Romeland, circularly situated, were and have beene in the time of the holding the Assises of the said King, impleaded and sued within the said City, and not else∣where; as by the evidences of the said Lands and Tenents, upon Record enrolled in the Guildhall, &c. appea∣reth. They further say, That in the times of all the former Kings and Assi∣zes (time out of minde) so often as any mis-hap or casualty, such as Murther, Drowning, or other indirect death of any person, in any of the places fore∣mentioned, hath fallen out, upon which there was any enquiry to be taken, or any Summons, Attachment, or Exe∣cution to bee made in any of the said places: yea, and which more is, even within the Tower it selfe, and at such time as the King (now and then) hath beene present, have the Sheriffes, Co∣roners, and other Officers of the said City of London for the time being, and no other, used to make such Quests of Enquiry, Summons, Attachments, and Executions, and had right so to doe: as it is most manifestly to be proved by divers Rolls of the Crowne, and other Records of the times aforesaid, now being in the sayd Treasury. They say moreover, that amongst other Liberties granted by the Kings Predecessors unto the Citizens of Lon∣don, and ratified in divers Parliaments, this expressely is one, That no Arrest, Attachment, or Execution, bee made by any Officers of the Kings within the said Liberty, either by Writ or with∣out Writ, but onely by the Officers of the City. By all which Charters, Let∣ters, Patents, Bills, Acts of Assize, Writs, Enquests, Returnes, Rolls of the Escheators, and Crowne Office, Assizes, Pleadings, Enrollments, Free∣domes, and most plentifull other kinds of Records and Proofes, it may easily and undoubtedly be concluded, That the said Hospitall of Saint Katherines, with the Mills and other its appurte∣nances, as also the whole Tower Ditch, with all the Lands of East Smithfield without the Posterne, before the Abby of Grace, together with the right side of the street going by Duddings Pond, as also the whole Ditch and Plaine without the Tower, within the Po∣sterne, called Romeland, with all the Houses and Gardens round about them, have all the time aforesaid, bin within the compasse of the Liberty of the City. The selfe same Copy of what is last above, is something differently recor∣ded also in Booke Dunthorne, fol. 84. the different poynts whereof, not men∣tioned in this former, I have tran∣scribed. That the Hospitall, Ditch, and the Tower hill, are of the Parish of Saint Botolphs Algate, and parcell of Port∣soken Ward. That another part, by Romeland and the Thames, towards the Posterne, by Saint Katherines Hospi∣tall, were of the Parish of Alhallowes Berking, and of the Ward of the Tower of London. That Queene Maud was the Foundresse of Trinity Church with∣in Algate; that the Ditch begunne by the Citizens in Richard the firsts time, was for the defence of the City. That there is another Soken within the Walls of the City, called the Inner Soken,Inner Soken▪ which reacheth from Algate, even unto that gate of the Tower cal∣led Cuning∣gate, per∣chance, or the Kings gate. Cinigate; which Soken is within the Liberties of the City, as by some Records kept by the Prior doth ap∣peare. That the Inhabitants of Port∣soken and the Tower, are to be implea∣ded onely in the Courts of the City, for all Matters, Causes, and Contracts howsoever arising. That the Tower
hath no proper Court of its owne, but onely the Court of the Baron, which is no Court of Record; as by Records ex∣emplified in the Kings Bench it appea∣reth. That when any murther or drow∣ning hath beene within the said Hospi∣tall or Tower, the City Officers have attached the Malefactors within the Tower, notwithstanding that the King himselfe sometimes hapned to be pre∣sent within the said Tower, and have carried the said men so arrested into some of the Kings Prisons within the City. That when the Iustices Itine∣rant have used to come to keepe Assi∣zes in the Tower, the Officers of the City have had the keeping both of the inner and outer Gates of the said Tow∣er; and that nothing was executed within the Tower, which pertained to the office of aSergeant perchance servant, but by the ser∣vants of the City. That the Sheriffe of London hath had the charge of all the Prisons in the Tower, so often as the said Iustices itinerant have comne thither: as appeares in many Rolls of Pleas of the Crowne, and of the said Itinerant Iustices. By another short Record in the said Dunthorne,Refer all this con∣cerning the privi∣ledge or the City within the Tower, un∣to page 125. fol. 85. it is specified, That if any were murthered within the Tower, or drowned in the Tower Ditch, or in the Gate, called The Wa∣ter Gate, that notwithstanding the King himselfe were there present, yet have the City Sheriffe and Coroner sitten upon the dead body, and empanelled their Iuries. The Letter or Commission of King Edward, unto Iohn Hamond Maior of London, before mentioned, is to bee seene in Dunthorne, fol. 87. Tis dated at Westminst. Octo. 21. in the 17. yeere of his Reigne over England, and over France the 4. The L. Maiors returne of the Inquisition is also there recorded. Of the founding of Trinity Church within Aldgate, and of the beginning of the Canons Regular, and Augustine Fryers in ENGLAND. Insert this in page 145. IN the yeere of Christ 1108. and in the eighth yeere of King Henry,Out of Booke C. in Guild∣hall folio 135. and Dunthorne, fol. 79. was the Church of the holy Trinity, within Aldgate, London, founded by the Venerable Lady, Maud, Wife unto the said King, by the perswasion of Archbishop Anselme. It was given unto Norman, who became the first Prior not onely there, and first Canon Regular of the whole Kingdome. For by him was all England (saith my Re∣cord) adorned with the Rule of Saint Augustine, and the Canonicall habit of that Order. Which Order, by the gathering together of many Fryers in∣to that Church, was the number of those that praised God day and night so much increased, that the whole City was much delighted with the sight of it. Insomuch, that in the yeere of our Lord, 1125. certaine Burgesses of the City, descended of the ancient race of the English Knights; by name, Ralfe the sonne of Algode, Wolsard le Deve∣rish, Orgar le Prude, Edward Vphill, Blacstan, and his Cosin Alwin, Alwis and Robert his brother, sonnes of Leo∣stan, Leostan the Goldsmith, and Wyz his sonne, Hugh the sonne of Wolgare, Algar Secusenne, Orgar the sonne of Dereman, Osbert Drinchepyn, and Ade∣lardus Hornpite, meeting together in the Chapter of the Church of Christ, which is situated within the Walls of the City neere Aldgate, freely gave un∣to the said Church, and unto the Ca∣nons serving God, all that Land and Soken, which was called Anglish Cnith∣gilda,
which lies by the wall of the City without Aldgate, and reaches into the Thames. They gave it, I say, themselves becomming Fryars, and partaking of the benefits of that place, by the hand of Norman the Prior, who received them into the Society, as he had done others before them; by an oath taken upon the Text of the Gospell. And to the intent that this gift of theirs might stand firme and unchang∣able; they surrendred up (among other Writings which they had for it) the Charter of St. Edward. After which, they gave the Prior seisin and possessi∣on of the said Land, byThat is, by giving him en∣trance & possession into the Church of St. Bo∣tolphs; which was the head, or (as it were) the Capita Messuage of the Mannor. the Church of Saint Botolph which had beene builded upon the same, and was the head of it. All this was done before these Witnes∣ses, Bernard, Prior of Dunstaple, Iohn Prior of Landa, and divers others French and English people. The said Donors hereupon, sent one of their owne Com∣pany (Ordgar le Prude by name) unto King Henry, with their petition, that hee would bee pleased to give his con∣sent and confirmation to their said gift; Whereupon, the King very willingly allowed the said Land and Soken unto the Church; and to be free and acquit∣ted from all service to himself, as franck Almes ought to be: which he thus con∣firmed by his Charter. Henry King of England, to R. Bishop of London, and to the SheriffeEt Vice. comiti & Praeposito. and Pro∣vost, and to all the Barons, and to his Liege people both French and English, both of London and Middlesex gree∣ting. Know yee that I have granted and confirmed unto the Church and Ca∣nons of the Holy Trinity, London, the Soken of the English Cnittengilda, with the Lands which belong unto it, and the Church of Saint Botolphs, even as the Homines. Lords of the same Guild have given and granted it. And I will, and firme∣ly doe command, that they may well and honourablyHonorisice and freely hold it; together with Sak and Sok, and Toll, and Thea, and Infangtheof, and all other their old customes; like as the men of it in the best manner did, in the times of King Edward, and like as King William my Father, and my Brother, by their Charters granted it unto them. Wit∣nesse A. the Queene, and Geffrey the Chancelor, and Geffrey de Clinton, and William de Clinton, at Wdestocke. The King also sent his Sheriffes; namely, Albric de Veer, and Roger Nephew of Or Hu∣bert. Herbert; which, for his part, should invest the Church in the said possessi∣on. More, concerning the same matter; and of the restoring to the Church of a little piece of Land, encroached upon by the Constables of the Tower. Stephen King of England, to the Bi∣shop of London, and to the Iustices, She∣riffes, Barons, Officers, & all hisFidelibus. Liege people of London, French and English, greeting. Know yee, that I have resto∣red and new granted unto God and the Church of the Holy Trinity, London, and to the Canons Regulars serving God there, for the soule of King Henry, and for the salvation of my selfe and Queen Maud my wife, and Eustace my Sonne, and of other my Children, and for ever doe restore and grant, that Land of theirs inEast Smithfield. Smithfield, which Earle Gef∣frey had in his occupation for the ma∣king of his Vineyard. Wherefore I will, and hereby firmely doe command; that they shall well and peaceably, free∣ly, quietly and honourably, have and hold the Land aforesaid: even as after the best manner they did freely and quietly enjoy other their Lands: and even as King Henry had before granted, and by his Charter confirmed it unto them. Witnesse Maud the Queene, Thomas my Chaplaine, William de Ipra, and Richard de Lucye, at London. At the same time did Earle Geffrey resigne up his possession, as by this his Deed ap∣peareth. Geffrey Earle of Essex, principall Constable of the Tower, &c. to the Bi∣shop of London,Fidelibus Ecclesiae. and all that hold of ho∣ly Church, greeting. Know yee that I have restored unto the Church of Christ in London, and to the Fryars there, their Mills neere unto the Tower, and all their land without the Tower; belong∣ing
sometimes unto the English Cnitten∣gilda; with Smithfield, and theHomini∣bus. tenants, and all other things belonging thereun∣to. I also restore unto them halfe a hide of landHidam de terrae de Brebelegia. of Brebelegia, with the Land and medowes and pastures, and all o∣ther things, liberties and customes; as William Widois sometimes gave it unto them, when as he tooke the habit of a Canon Regular upon him. And I will and command, that they hold the said Lands from mee and from mine heires, free, cleered, and acquitted, from all claime and secular service. That is to say, in such manner as it shall never bee lawfull either for me or for mine heires to do them any injury or contumely in consideration of the Lands aforesaid. Witnesse, R.In the Transcript taken out of the Ori∣ginall, which I used: I finde her written Rosha, with a dash, ig∣norantly; so that I know not what to make of . the Countesse my wife, Gregory Draper, Payn of the Temple, &c. And I also give unto them one Mark of silver, out of the service of Edward de Sekegeford. Witnesse those above-na∣med, and William Archdeacon of Lon∣don. King Stephen also restored something unto the said Church; as by this following Charter appeareth; which the Constables of the Tower had encreached. This was done after the lands were proved by oath to belong to the Church, before the Kings Chiefe Iustice. Stephen King of England, to the Bishop of London, the Iustices, Sheriffes, Barons, Officers, and all his Liege people, both French and English, of the County of Hertford, greeting. Know yee that I have given & granted unto the Church of the Holy Trinity, and to the Canons serving God there, T. S. of Land in the Manor of Bracking in perpetual almes; for the rest of the soules, that is to say, of Baldwin my sonne, and Maud my Daughter, which lye buried there. I have further also given and granted un∣to the said Church and Canons sixe yeards of Land in the same Mannor of Bracking; for thePro es∣caembio. exchange of their Mil and that plat of their ground, which they heretofore granted unto Queene Maud my wife, neere unto the Tower of London; upon which she hath now founded an HospitallSt. Ka∣tharines. for the poore. Those sixe yeards of Land, I meane, which I still kept in mine owneDominico meo. de∣maines, after I had made partition of the other parcels of the said Mannor: that is to say, that part upon which the Church is founded, and unto which, the Market belongeth. Wherefore I will, and firmly hereby command, that the said Church and Canons shall wel, peaceably, freely, and honourably for ever possesse the said Lands, acquitted from all secular exaction, as it becom∣meth free Almes. That is to say, my de∣maines with Sak, and Sok, and Toll, and Thea, and Infangtheof, with all such o∣ther customes, as they now hold other their possessions. Witnesse Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert B. of London, Robert B. of Hereford, and Ro∣bert B. of Excester, and Iard B. of Chi∣chester, and William B. of Norwich, and Maud my Queene, and Earle Eustace my sonne, and William , and Ro∣bert de Veer, and William Mart, Henry de Essex, and Richard de Lucye. Then next followes Queene Mands confirmation of the Kings gift; dated at London, under the same Witnesses, where the same things are repeated. Other things given by Queene Maud, to the same Church. Maud by the grace of God Queene of English,Out of Booke, C. fol. 136. to Robert Bishop of London, and to all that hold on holy Church, greeting. Know yee that  the coun∣sell of the Archbishop Anseme, and by the grant and confirmation of my Lord King Henry, I have given and confir∣med the Church of Christ within the Walls of London, to be free and acquit∣ted from all subjection, as well of the Church ofTo un∣derstand this, see pag. 145. Waltham, as of all other Churches, excepting the Church of S. Paul, and of the Bishop of London; to∣gether with all the appurtenances, un∣to the honour of God and to the Canons Regular there serving God with Nor∣man the Prior, for ever; and that for the redemption of our soules, and the soules of our Parents. In like manner have I given unto them, the gate called Aldgate, with the Soken thereunto be∣longing, which was mine owne de∣maines; and two parts of the revenues of the City of Excester. And I will and
command that the said Canons shall well, peaceably, freely, and honourably possesse those Lands and all belonging unto their Church; together with those customes and liberties, which my Lord King Henry hath by his Charter confir∣med unto them; so that no injury or re∣proach bee therefore done unto them. Witnesse William Bishop of Winchester, Roger Bishop of Sarum, Robert Bishop of Lincolne, &c. Dated at Westminster. Notes upon the foresaid Charters. First, observe the time of the building of Saint Botolphs Church without Ald∣gate, which was about the age of the Conquerour. So much wee know by this; that it was builded betwixt the time of Canutus, and Henry the firs;t. Adde this to page 118. Secondly, whereas the Kings write to the Barons of London; know what Mathew Paris in his Henry the third sayes, that the Citizens of London, both for their antiquity and the honour of the City, were called Barons. But they were onely the principall Citizens that had this title. The chiefe men of the City, whom we now call Barons, were heretofore stiled Captaines. They were the Kings Free Tenants, priviledged all over England. Sometimes the Kings Writs were directed to the Sheriffe and Barons of London. The Church al∣so had its Barons or Free Tenants; and divers other Cities of England. See for this word, in Sir Henry Spelmans Glos∣sary. Thirdly, observe London and Mid∣dlesex to be in those dayes joyned toge∣ther, as in King Henries Charter. Of the setting up of the Stone Conduit by the Stockes. To be inserted pag. 244. after the fifth line.Nots of Survey ta∣ken out of Acts of Common Councell, holden in the City. AT a Common Councell held on Tuesday, November 27. in the first yeere of King Henry the 8. was this patition preferred, and gran∣ted. To the Right Honourable Lord the Maior, and his Brethren the Al∣dermen, and to the discreet persons of the Common Councell of this City of London. Beseeching your good Lordship and Masterships, the Inhabitants dwelling about the Stockes, that by the space of five or sixe yeeres past, a vent of water hath runne by a Pipe of Lead beside the Stockes; which pipe of Lead by reason that it is not closed, is daily hurt with Horses and Carts. It may there∣fore please your good Lordship and Masterships, and all our Masters of the Common Councell, to grant and give licence unto the said Inhabitants, upon their owne proper costs and charges to make or cause to bee made, a little Po∣sterne of Stone with a Cesterne of lead therein: so that the said water shall bee therein preserved and conveyed: and so to bee drawne out by Cocks, to the Common weale of all the said In∣habitants thereabout dwelling. Thus at the reverence of God, and in the way of charity. This is the Posterne now presently there standing over against the South-East. A Note concerning Bre∣taske lane in Downegate Ward. To be inserted page 253. Col. second, after, Edward the fourth. AT a Common Councell holden December 11. Anno 3. of Henry the 8. A Bill was exhibited at this Court by the Wardens of the Dy∣ers Company; whereby they claimed a lane in the Ward of Downegate, cal∣led Bretaske lane, to bee their severall ground. For this, a search was made in the Bookes and Records of the City; by which it appeared, that the said lane was the common Lane of the City, and not severall to them. And so they were answered by the Court.
Concerning Blackwell Hall; An Act of Common Councell held August the first, in the 8. of Henry 8. To be inserted Page 129. Col. 1. after these words: This house (of late yeeres) WHereas by an Act of Common Councell, in the 22. yere of the reigne of King Richard the second, it was or∣dained and established, that no man∣ner of person should bring or conveigh any Woollen Clothes to the said Ci∣ty to bee sold, except they were first brought, harboured, and discharged at the Common Market of Blackwell hall, therefore ordained and provided, and of old time accustomed, upon paine of forfeiture of all the said Clothes so harboured and laid, contrary to the said Ordinance; which Act and Ordi∣nance, was by another Act of Com∣mon Councell holden at the Guild hall aforesaid, the day and yeere abovesaid, ratified, approved, and confirmed. And over that, it is now at this present ordained, established, and enacted, that no manner of person being Free∣man of this City, after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lady next comming, suffer any manner of person whatso∣ever, bee hee free or forraigne, to buy or sell any manner of Woollen Clothes harboured or lodged contrary to the said Ordinance: As broad Clothes, Carsies, Cottons, Bridgewater Frizes, Dosseins, or any other manner of Cloth made of Wooll, within his Shop, Chamber, or other place with∣in his house, unlesse the said Clothes were first brought to Blackwell hall a∣foresaid, and there bought and sold. Or else the said Freeman, the said Clothes lawfully bought in the Coun∣try out of the said City, upon paine to forfeit and to pay to the use of the Commonalty of this City; for his first offence, for every Broad-Cloth so sold, harboured, or lodged, contrary to the said Ordinance, vj. s. viij. d. for every Carsie iij. s. iiij. d. for every Dosseine, Bridgewaters, and other pieces of Cloth made of Wooll, xx. d. And for the second offence, the said pains to be doubled: and for the third offence, the party so offending to be disfranchised and deprived cleerely from the Liber∣ties of this City for ever. Of the enlargement of the Crossed Fryars Church. AT the Common Councell, the day and yeere above mentio∣ned, was there an Act passed for the grant unto the Prior and Co∣vent of the Crossed Fryars, besides the Tower of London (to the intent that they should pray for the good estate of the City) of the common ground of the said City, for the enlargement of their Church, viz. in breadth from the East end of their Church, from the maine Wall thereof on the North part, into the high street there, five foot of Assise; and at the West end of their Church, in breadth foure foot and a halfe, stretching in length from the East part to the West part, seven score and eight foot and an halfe. Afterwards, at a Common Coun∣cell holden on Tuesday, September 25. Anno 12. of Henry 8. the said Prior and Covent petitioned for succour towards the edifying and maintenance of their new Church, and to take upon them and the whole City to be their second Founders. Whereupon it was agreed, that severall exhortations should bee made in Writing to every Fellow∣ship in London, to see what they would doe of their devotions towards the same; and such summes to be certified to the Maior and Aldermen, to the intent it may be knowne to what it will amount.
Of the Conduit of Saint Giles Creplegate. To be inser∣ted pag. 319. AT a Common Councell held Aprill, the same yeere, it was a∣greed, that the Chamberlaine should, at the costs of the Chamber, cause the common Well and Spring at Saint Giles, to bee covered with a house of Bricke. Something to be added to page 281. concerning Saint Thomas of Acons in West-Cheape. TVesday, Aprill 27. Anno 10. of Henry the 8. it was granted unto the Master and his Bre∣thren of the Hospitall of Saint Thomas of Acon, in West-Cheape, whereThomas Becket. Saint Thomas the Martyr was borne, because they wanted roome in the said Hospi∣tall, that for their more ease they might make a Gallery in convenient height and bredth, from their said house over∣thwart the street in the Old Iury, into a certaine Garden and Buildings, which the Master and Brethren had then lately purchased. So as the said Gallery should bee of such height, as should not annoy Man, Horse, nor Cart. And to make a Window on ei∣ther side of the said Gallery, and there∣in yeerely in the Winter to have a suf∣ficient Light for the comfort of them that passe that way. Of Leaden Hall. To be in∣serted page 206. Columne 2. after Chamber of London. AT a Common Councell, holden September 28. Anno 10. Henry 8. was there a Petition exhibi∣ted, to the Right Honourable the Mai∣or, and his Worshipfull Brethren the Aldermen, and to the discreet Com∣moners in this Common Councell as∣sembled. Meekely beseeching and shewing unto your Lordship and Masterships, divers and many Citizens of this Ci∣ty, which with your favours under correction thinke, that the great place called Leaden Hall, should nor ought not to be letten to farme to any person or person; and in especiall, to any Fel∣lowship or Company incorporate, to have and to hold the same Hall for terme of yeeres; for such inconveni∣ences as may thereby insue and come, to the hurt of the Common weale of the same City in time to come. As somewhat more largely may appeare in the Articles hereafter following. 1 If any Assembly or hasty gathe∣ring of the Commons of the said City,The uses of Leaden-Hall. for oppressing or subduing of mis-ruled people within the said City, hereafter shall happen to bee called or comman∣ded by the Maior, &c. there is none so convenient, meet, and necessary place to assemble them in within the said City, as the said Leaden Hall; both for largenesse of roome, and for their City defence in time of their counselling to∣gether about the Premises. Also in that place hath beene used the Artil∣lery, Gunnes, and other common Ar∣mors of the said City, safely to be kept in a readinesse for the safegard, wealth, and defence of the City, to be had and occupied at times when need required. And also, the Store of Timber for the necessary reparations of the Tenements belonging to the Chamber of the said City, there commonly hath beene kept. 2 Item, if any Triumph or Noblesse were to bee done or shewed by the Commonalty of this City for the ho∣nour of our Soveraigne Lord the King, or Realme, and for the Worship of the said City, the same Leaden Hall is a most meet place to prepare and or∣der the same Triumph therein, and from thence to issue forth to the places thereto appointed. 3 Item, at every Largesse or Dole of Money made unto the poore people
of this City, by or after the death of any Worshipfull person within the said City, it hath beene used to bee done and given in the said Leaden hall, for that the said place is most meete therefore. 4 Item, the honourable Father that was maker of the said Hall, had a spe∣ciall intent, will, and minde (as it is commonly said) that the Market men and women that came to the City with Victuall and other things, should have their free standing within the said Lea∣den hall in wet weather, to keepe them∣selves and their Wares dry, and there∣by to encourage them and all other to have the better will and desire, the more plenteously to resort to the said City to Victuale the same. And if the said Hall should be letten to farme, the Will of the said Honourable Father should never be fulfilled nor take effect. 5 Item, if the said place (which is the chiefe Fortresse, and most necessa∣ry place within all this City, for the tu∣ition and safegard of the same) should be letten to farme out of the hands of the chiefe heads of the same City, and especially to another body politike, it might at length (by likelihood) be the occasion of discord and debate, be∣tweene the said bodies politicke, which God defend, &c. For these and many other great and reasonable causes, which hereafter shall be shewed to this honourable Court, your said beseechers thinke much ne∣cessary, that the said Hall be still in the hands of the City, and to be surely kept by discreet & sad Officers: in such wise that it may alwayes be ready to be used and occupied for the common Weale of the said City, when need shall re∣quire, and in no case to bee letten out to any body Politicke. This Petition was granted. Of the new Seale of the Bridge-house. AT a Common Councell, Iuly 14. Anno 33. Henry 8. It was ordered that the Seale of the Bridge-house should bee changed, be∣cause the Image of Thomas Becket, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury was graven therein. And a new Seale to be made, to bee devised by Master Hall, to whom the old Seale was de∣livered. Note, This was occasioned by a Pro∣clamation, which commanded the names of the Pope and Thomas of Becket to be put out of all Bookes and Monu∣ments; which is the reason that you shall see them so blotted out, in all old Chronicles, Legends, Primers, and Service bookes printed before those times. Of the priviledge of Saint Bartholomewes Hospitall. To be inserted, Pag. 345. AT a Common Councell, Tues∣day Iuly 19. 33. Henry 8. The most gracious Letters Patents of King Edward the second, made and granted to S. Bartholomewes Hospitall in Smithfield, were allowed; for and concerning such Priviledges as they doe claime thereby at this present time. Which is, that none of the Offi∣cers or Ministers of the City, should doe or execute any Arrest within the Precinct of the said Hospitall, and that the Arrest made by Vnderhill (one of my Lord Maiors Servants) upon Alice Browne, shall be discharged, &c. Also at a Common Councell, Au∣gust 1. the sixth of Edward the sixth, it was enacted, that the Lord Maior and Aldermen should have leave to breake downe a piece of the City Wall be∣hind Christ Church, for the making of a doore or passage thorow the said Wall, for the Governours of the house of the poore, of the Foundation of King Henry the 8. in West Smithfield, and o∣ther Citizens, to goe to and from the same house, unto and from the house ordained by the City for the reliefe of the poore, called The house of Worke, and Law, &c. notwithstanding.
Against abuses offered to Pauls. To bee inserted Page 371. Col. 2. after To his Will. AT an Act of Common Coun∣cell, August 1. Anno 1. and 2. of Philip and Mary. Forasmuch as the Materiall Temples of God were first ordained for the lawfull and de∣vout assembly of people, there to lift up their hearts, and to laud and praise Almighty God, and to heare his Di∣vine Service, and most holy Word and Gospell, sincerely said, sung, and taught, and not to bee used as Mar∣kets, or other prophane places or tho∣rowfares, with carriage of things. And for that (now of late yeeres) ma∣ny of the Inhabitants of the City of London, and other people repairing thither, have (and yet doe) common∣ly use and accustome themselves very unseemely and unreverently (the more the pity) to make their common car∣riage of great Vessels full of Ale and Beere, great Baskets full of Bread, Fish, Flesh, and Fruit, and such other things, Fardels of stuffe, and other grosse Wares and things, thorow the Cathedrall Church of Saint Pauls: and some in leading Moyles, Horses, and other Beasts thorow the same un∣reverently, to the great dishonour and displeasure of Almighty God, and the great griefe also and offence of all good people. Bee it therefore for remedy and reformation thereof, ordained, en∣acted, and established, &c. that no person, either free or forraigne, of what estate or condition soever, doe at any time from henceforth carry or con∣vey, or cause to be carried or convey∣ed thorow the said Cathedrall, any manner of great Vessell or Basket with Bread, Ale, Beere, Fish, Flesh, &c. or any other like thing or things, upon paine of forfeiture or losing for every such his or their first offence, 3. s. 4. d. for the second 6. s. 8. d. for the third x. s. and for every other offence after such third time, to forfeit x. s. and to suffer two dayes and two nights impri∣sonment, without Baile or Mainprise. The one moity of all which paines and penalties shall be to Christs Hospitall within Newgate, and the other halfe to him that will sue for the same in any Court of Record within the City, by Bill, originall plaint, or Information, to be commenced or sued in the name of the Chamberlaine of the said City for the time being; wherein none Es∣soine or wager of Law for the Defen∣dant, shall be admitted or allowed. The Abstract of an Act of Common Councell, held Sep∣tember 19. in the third and fourth yeeres of Philip and Ma∣ry, for the removing of the Compter Prison out of Bread∣street into great Woodstreet. To bee inserted pag. 312. or pag. 395. Col. 1. after Pitifull Prisoners. BY reason of divers hinderances, injuries, extremities and displea∣sures done unto the poore Priso∣ners in Breadstreet Compter, by the Kee∣pers of the same, who hiring the house of the Goldsmiths Company, would not (many times) suffer the Sheriffes of London (who stand charged with the Prisoners) to use them so well as they had purposed: whereby the City hath beene slandered, Law and good orders broken, and poore Prisoners too much abused. Therefore was the Pri∣son removed to a house belonging to the City, situate in great Woodstreet, where the Sheriffe and his Officers were to keepe their Courts, &c. as they had before used in Breadstreet. At which time it was also enacted; that the said Compter in Woodstreet should never hereafter for any cause whatso∣ever, be letten out to any other use or person, &c.
The Abstract of an Act of Com∣mon Councell, the last of Fe∣bruary, the second and third of Philip and Mary, concer∣ning Bridewell. To be inser∣ted Page 436. Col. 2. after By Queene Mary. FOr as much as King Edward the sixth had given his house of Bride∣well unto the City, partly for the setting of idle & lewd people to work, and partly for the lodging and harbou∣ring of the poore, sicke, weake, and sore people of the City, and of poore wayfaring people repairing to the same; and had for this last purpose, given the bedding and furniture of the Savoy to that purpose. Therefore in consideration that very great charges would be required to the fitting of the said house, and the buying of Tooles and bedding, the money was ordered to be gotten up among the rich people of the Companies of London, &c. Leystow by Baynards Castle re∣moved. To be inserted page 405. AT a Common Councell, Au∣gust 7. the third and fourth of Philip and Mary, it was agreed at the request of the Earle of Pembroke, that the Cities Leystow adjoyning to his Lordships house, and being noy∣some to the same, should be removed. Vpon condition, that hee should give the City, towards the making of a new Leystow in another place, 2000. foot of hard stone, to make the Vault and Wharfe thereof, or else forty Markes in ready Money, to buy the same stone withall. Something about Ludgate. LVdgate Prison, to pay Tithes, Clerkes wages, and Church duties, to Saint Martins Church within Ludgate. Agreed upon by Common Councell, March 21. in the second yeere of Queen ELIZABETH. Adde this to page 372. before these words, The Monuments here. Something about Broken wharfe. To be inserted page 403. AT a Common Councell, Iuly 23. the second of Queene Eli∣zabeth, order was taken, that out of a certaine void space of ground at Broken Wharfe, there should bee 33. foot inclosed and laid to the Cities Brewhouse; which was to have a sub∣stantiall pale about it, to keepe the Cities Fewell, and other goods, &c. Of the opening of a Lane in Downegate Ward. VVHereas certaine private persons had wrongful∣ly set up a doore at the end of  Lane, in Downegate Ward, and had converted it to their private use, it was order May 28. Anno fourth of Elizabeth, that the City Chamberlaine should take downe the doore, and leave the Lane common, like other streets in the City. Something to be inserted page 217. Col. 2. after Royall Exchange. BEfore the building of the Ex∣change, it was by divers Com∣mon Councells, about the 26. yeere of Henry the 8. consulted upon, whether there should bee a Bursle or convenient place of meeting, for Mer∣chants to treat of their feat of Merchan∣dize. The same yeere, the King sent his Letters to the City, for the making of a new Bursse at Leaden Hall. Where∣upon it being put to hands, whether the new Bursse should be removed out
of Lumbardstreet: it was agreed, that it should not. So that the Merchants meeting continued there, till the Roy∣all Exchange was builded. Something of Queenhith. To be inserted page 402. Col. 2. after Edward the third. THese were the impositions, and the occasions of them. This Romeland, being annoyed with Dung, Filth, &c. so as the Sellers of Corne and Victuall there, could not stand to sell their commodities as for∣merly they had done: it was ordered by a Common Councell, Anno 41. of King Edward 3. That the place should forthwith be made cleane and paved. And that from thenceforth towards the perpetuall cleansing and reparation thereof, there should be taken for eve∣ry quarter of Corne of what kinde so∣ever, there sold or comming, a Far∣thing; for every quarter of Salt, a Far∣thing; for every Vessell called a Bat∣tell, bringing Rushes, foure pence; for every Vessell called a Shout, bringing Corne or Malt, two pence; for every Shippe bringing other Victuall, two pence; and of every person daying Soile there, two shillings; and the Sel∣ler of Rushes to pay for every boat of Rushes, foure pence. Something concerning the Iurisdiction of the River of Thames. To be inserted page 26. Col. 2. after these words, And the like Sessions kept there for the same purpose. To my Honorable Friend Sir HENRY MARTEN, Knight, Iudge of the High Court of the Admiralty. SIR, his Majesty understanding that there is a second Edition of Stowes Sur∣vey of the City of London, new put to sale, wherein there are some passages prejudiciall to his Majesties right in his Admiralty and Derogatory to the just power belonging thereunto. He doth therefore require you his Iudge in that High Court to examine the said Booke, and to cause the said passages inserted in prejudice of the Admirall Iurisdiction, and in support of any other pretence against the same to be left out, or else to prohibit the publishing and sale of the said Booke. And for so doing this signification of his Majesties pleasure may be your sufficient Warrant. So I rest Garlicke Hith 21. De∣cember, 1633. Your assured Friend to serve you Iohn Coke. Further execution of the Letter above-mentioned could not bee made, for that it came after the impression was finished and published. Henry Marten. To the Master and Wardens of the Company of Stationers. YOu may understand by the contents of the Letter above-mentioned, di∣rected unto me what is required at my hands to performe. I am there∣fore to require you upon your receipt hereof, forthwith to cause the Booke to be brought unto you, and to take order that all the words together with the copy of the Letter, and my answer thereunto, as above made for this im∣pression to be imprinted page 939. Col. prima, verbatim in all the said Bookes, aswell sold as hereafter to be sold, before any further sale of the said Bookes bee made; and this shall be your Warrant in this behalfe. Doct. Commons `24. De∣cember, 1633. Henry Marten. FINIS.
The first Table Containing all the Ancient and Memorable places, Charitable and Noble Acts of Citizens, and most Honourable and Worthy Monuments recorded in this Booke; Alphabetically digested: Wherein the Figures referre to the Page, the Letters to the Columne, and the Asteriskcs * to the top of both Page and Columne. † to the middle of both Page and Columne. ¶ to the bottom of both Page and Columne. A For false Accusation, a Ful∣ler of Shoresditch han∣ged & quarted. 474 b ¶ Adelstreet tooke name of King Adelstanes house, standing there. 308 a ¶ Admiralty Court. 454 a ¶ Adultery and Fornication, how punished. 207 b * S. Alban, the first Martyr in Eng∣land. 308 a * Abbot of Saint Albans Inne. 187 b * Aldermanbury street, whence so named. 302 b † Aldermanry purchased. 335 a ¶ Aldermen Knighted. 237 a * Seven Aldermen died in lesse than ten moneths. 585 a * Aldersgate. 34 b 320 b † Aldersgate street. 321 a * Aldgate. 31 b ¶121 a ¶ Vide Ealdgate. Alhallowes Church in bread∣street suspended. 92 a ¶ The charitable Almes of the Lord Cromwell, &c. 74 a * Of Thomas Sutton. 481 b Of Baptist, Lord Hicks, Vis∣count Combden. 960 Of Christopher Tamworth. 766 a ¶ Of Sir Paul Pinder. 767 a † Of Henry Smith. 794 a † 887 b ¶ Of Susanna Powell. 794 b † Henry the second fed 10000. poore people, and Henry the third 6000. every day for a certain time, 74 b ¶ Vide Actions of worthy Ci∣tizens. 86. &c. An Almory at Westminster. 525 a ¶ The Widdow Allingtons buil∣dings. 480 b * The Allome house at Wapping, with the proceeding against it. 462. b † Amen lane 371 b ¶ Anchor lane, anciently called Palmers. 256. a ¶ An Anchorage by little Saint Bartholomewes. 415 b † Anne Queene of England, Wife to Richard the second, her Monument. 508 b ¶ Anne wife to Richard the third, her Monument. 513 a ¶ Anne of Cleve, her Monument. 513 a ¶ Anne Wife to King Iames, her Monument. 814 Anne Wife to Edward Duke of Sommerset, her Monument. 513 b † Anne Countesse of Oxford, her Monument. 514 b † Anthonies Pigs. 65 a 190 b * The Apologie of the City of London. 691 Instructions for the Apprentices of the City of London. 688 An Archbishops See at London. 528 a † The Court of Arches kept in Bow Church. 268 b † Three Arch-Flamines in England at London York Cacrleon 211 a † Coat-Armors, Ares of Eng∣land supported with Angles. 216 a † Armes of the City of London what they bee, with the Sword of Saint Paul in the first quarter. 237 a b 646 Seale and Armes of the Ba∣ron of London. 339 b † The Armes of the twelve preceding Companies of London 598
The Armes of the ten Compa∣nies of Merchants, 611. and of the other Companies fol∣lowing the twelve. 621 Artilery yard. 175 b * The Artilery Garden founded, Anno 1622. 764 The Kings Artirce in Lime∣street. 161 a ¶ Arundell house. 489 b ¶ Ave-Mary lane. 371 b ¶ Church of S. Augustine in the wall, now quite lost. 166 b * Of Augustine Fryers. 185 b * Their beginning. 930 Church of Saint Mary Axe, whence so called. 166 B BAiliffes of London. 536 a¶ Bakewell, or Blackwell hall sometimes the mansion house of the Bassings. 298 a † b ¶ A Market place for woollen Cloth, 299 a † See more concerning this 934 Rich. Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, his Monument. 790 b * The Banner of S. Paul. 57 b ¶ The Banner-bearer of the City of London. 57 b Banqueting houses, like Banke∣routs, bearing great shew and little worth. 476 a † Banquetings. 673 a ¶ Barbican or Burghkenning. 318 b ¶ Barkley house. 407 a * Barnards Inne. 430 b ¶ Barons of London. 359 b † 933 The Barons slaine at Barnet, buried. 486 a ¶ Barrators. 676 a * Bartholomew lane. 183 a ¶ Saint Bartholomewes Hospitall, 415 a b. Suppressed, 417 b ¶ The privileges thereof, 936 b ¶Priory, 418. Suppres∣sed, 420 a ¶The Archbi∣shop visits the Priory of S. Bartholomewes with stripes, 418. Bolton the last Prior there, 419 a † Bartholomew Faire, 419 a ¶423 a † How the Lord Maior goes to it, 651 b * The order of Wra∣stling on S. Bartholomewes day. 651 b ¶ Bassingborne in Cambridge shire 298 b ¶ Basing lane, or Turnebase lane, 264. or the Backhouse. 393 b † Bassings-Hall street. 293 Bathe place. 427 a * Battaile Bridge in Southwarke. 459 a ¶ Bay Hall. 293 a * Baynards Castle, 56. Rob. Fitz∣water, Lord thereof, bani∣shed by King Iohn, and re∣called; by place Banner-bea∣rer to the City of London, 57 Burnt, 59 a ¶King Edw. 4. and Rich. 3. crowned there, 60. Henry 7. lodged there, ibid. A Soke or Court be∣longing thereto, 405 b † The Leystow neere to it remo∣ved. 938 a † The Normans ware no Beards. 45 a † Bearehinder lane. 244 b * Beare lane. 137 b ¶ Beauchamps Inne. 238 b ¶ Beauments Inne. 405. A Mo∣nument of the Beauments. 877 b † Thomas Becket first a Sheriffes Clerke, afterwards Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, & Chan∣cellor of England. 86 a ¶ Bedford house, anciently the Bishop of Carliles Inne. 491 Bedlem, 173 a ¶When foun∣ded. 542 a † Beech lane, and the Abbot of Ramseys Inne there. 318 b † Belins Vrne of Brasse set over Belinsgate. 39 b * Belinsgate, with the Customes thereof, 225. The Bosse of Belinsgate. 226 b ¶ The great Bells at Westminster, 524 a † Bow-Bell, 269 a ¶ The best ring of sixe Bells in England. 213 a * Bellman when first ordained. 585 a ¶ Belzetters lane. 144 a ¶ Benbridges Inne. 161 b † Bermondsey street, with the Pri∣ory of S. Saviours, called Ber∣monds Eye, in Southwarke. 459 a † Berwards lane. 175 b * Bevis markes: See Buries. Sir William Billesby his Monu∣ment. 783 a ¶ Billitar lane: See Belzetter. Birchin, or rather Birchovers lane. 215 b ¶ Bishopsgate. 33 A Catalogue of the Bishops of London, 367 a * A lineall succession of them, 528 b * The Bishop of London his Pa∣lace. 412 b † Blacke Fryers, the originall of them, 375 b * A Parliament holden in the Black-Friers, 374 a † The liberties and privileges of the Black-Fri∣ers, 375. A Riot committed therein, ibid. The fatall Ve∣sper, or fall at Black-Friers, 381. b ¶The names of those that were slaine thereby, 386 b ¶ Black-Friers church in Holborne, 487 a ¶Their convocation and removall. ibid. b ¶ Bladder street. 337 b † 388 b * Blanch Apleton. 160 a † Blodwyte, what. 919 a ¶ Bornes: Oldborne, Langborne, Shareborne. 10 b Bordhalepeney, what. 919 b ¶ Bosomes Inne, or Blossomes Inne 282 a * Bosse alley. 226 b ¶ Bosse lane. 403 b ¶ Bow Bell not suffered to be rung late. 269 a ¶ Bow lane: See Cordwainer street. Bowyer-row, from Pauls to Lud∣gate. 372 a * Breadstreet. 390 a ¶ The Maior charged for not looking to the assize of Bread, 542 b ¶The Ordinance for the Assize & weight of Bread, 740. Bread-carts of Stratford at the Bow. 164 b * Bretaske lane in Downgate. 933 Brickles lane. 255 a †
Bridewell, King Henry the 8. his house, 62 a † How from a Kings Palace, it came to bee an house of correction. 436. 937 b ¶ Bridewell Precinct, 312. The Chappell there. 876 a † Bridges, 27. London Bridge first of Timber, ibid. Men went dry-shod under it, 28 a † Founded of stone, 28 b † A Subsidie granted for the repaire of it, 546 b † Burnt, 28 a ¶29 a ¶782 ¶Fa∣mous actions done on it, 29 The description of it, 30 a * The Bridgehouse, 459 a † The Seale thereof made new, 936 b † Westminster Bridge 524 b ¶Fleet Bridge, Old-borne Bridge, Cow Bridge, Horse-hoe Bridge. 30 Brigbote, what. 919 b ¶ Britaines, the first Inhabitants in London, 1. b. What their ancient Cities were of old, 2 b * Given to gluttony and drunkennesse, 5 a † Invaded by the Scots and Picts, 4 a * by the Saxons. 5 a * Britaines Burse. 464 b ¶ Briton street. 321 a * 330 b * Broad lane. 255 a ¶ Broad street. 183 Broken wharfe. 403 b † 938 b * Brokers in Houndsditch, called Aetatis at ramentum, and Bap∣tizati Iudaei. 122 b ¶ Brookes wharfe. 403 b † Sir William Bruce, Henry the 8. his Physician, his Monu∣ment. 784 a † Bucks head: See Procession at Pauls. The Duke of Buckinghams Mo∣nument. 116 b † 817 b ¶ Buckles-bury. 246 a ¶276 a * Budge row. 264 a * The cause of Stone Building in London. 209 b ¶ Burgbote, what. 919 b ¶ Burgebruch, what. 919 b ¶ The Citizens of London first called Burgesses, 535 b † An∣cient Burgesses of this City became Fryers. 930 Burhkenings, or Watch-tow∣ers. 62 b † Burley house. 405 a * A Persian buried without Chri∣stian Buriall. 173 a † 780 ¶ Whittingtons body thrice Buri∣ed. 256 a ¶ Buries markes. 144 b ¶156 b † A motion that Butchers should kill no meat within London, 340 a ¶ Butchers-hall lane, or Stinking lane, or Chick∣lane. 340 a ¶ Buttolph lane, 228 b * The Church of Saint Buttolph without Aldgate when built 933 a † C IAcke Cade entred the City by London bridge. 29 b ¶ When Callice was won from the French, 552 a ¶When lost. 585 b † Master Camden Clarenciaux, his Monument. 774 ¶ Camera Dianae, neere Doctors Commons. 781 * Candlewicke street, whence so called. 235 a † Henry Carey, Baron of Hunsdon, his Monument. 416 b ¶ Val. Carey, Bishop of Exeter, his Monument. 776 a ¶ A Monument of the Lord Carletons. 818 Sir Nowell Caroone, Ambassa∣dor for the States of Holland, his Monument. 790 b ¶ Caruage, what. 619 b † Castle, a Shoomaker, called the Cocke in Westminster. 344 b ¶ The Castle Taverne in Cornehill. 209 b * Catteten street. 282 a ¶ Cecill house, 493 a ¶ Elizabeth Cecill, her Monument, 514 b † The Chaire of the Kings of Scot∣land, brought in by Edward the first, kept in Westminster. 510 b † Chancelar, or Chancery lane. 435 a ¶487 a † Change of the King in Buckles∣bury. 44 b ¶ The Old-Change, 46 a. See Ex∣change. Charing Crosse. 495 b † In whose Maioraltie K. Charles began his reigne. 597 a † Charles Earle of Lenox his Mo∣nument. 513 a * Ancient Charters concerning the Priory of the holy Tri∣nity. 931 a * The Charter of London confir∣med by divers Kings. 739 Charterhouse, the first foundati∣on, 477 b The Monuments there, 478 b † Afterwards bought by M. Sutton, and made an Hospitall. 479, &c. Gessery Chaucer, his Monument. 517 a * The Cheapnesse of Flesmeat in former times. 206 a ¶548 a ¶ Cheapeside a Market place. 278 b ¶The Standard in Cheap∣side, 278. Executions done there, 279 a * The Crosse in Cheapside indicted, & the Images broken, 279 b. Iusts and Tournaments in Cheape-side, 280 b * A faire paved way found fifteen foot deep in Cheapside, 390 b ¶Gold∣smiths Row there, 391 a * Chelsey College, the true reason of the first foundation, with many worthy mtives to stir up the charity of good Chri∣stians towards it. 527 Chequer Alley, anciently Bash-lane. 249 a ¶ Chewying, what. 919 b * Chicke lane. 130 b ¶ Chicken lane. 420 b Childwyte what. 919 a ¶ Christs Church, anciently the Gray Fryers, with the an∣nexion of S. Bartholomewes Hospitall, and the revenues of the Officers: The Maior of London Parson thereof. 341 b ¶ Christs Hospitall, the erection
thereof, and charity of King Edward the sixth thereto. 342 a ¶ Church lane. 138 a ¶251 a † Cities whence so cald, 691 a * why built, ib. b * The com∣modities that come by them 692 a * Honourable and worthy acti∣ons of Citizens of London, 86. &c. The honour of Citi∣zens, 710 b † Their riches, 6. 8 b * Three kinds of Ci∣tizens: 1 Merchants, 2 Han∣dicraftsmen, 3 Labourers. 697 b * Clarkenwell, a Priory. 484 a † Where the Clarkes Hall was anciently. 178 a ¶ Clements Inne and Well. 493 a † S. Clements lane. 222 a * 235 a * The Church without Temple∣barre, why called Clement Danes. 491 a ¶ Clergie men forbidden by the King to be punished of the Laity. 207 a ¶ Cliffords Inne. 435 a * The Clinke. 449 b * Clocke house at Westminster. 524 b * Northerne Russet Cloth, sold for 4. d. the yard. 71 b * Poore Clothiers relieved by the bounty of Sir Thomas White. 91. Many others, 93 a ¶ M. Kenrick. 199 a ¶ Coat-Armorus: See Armorus. Cobhams Inne. 143 a † Sir William Cockaine his Monu∣ment. 776 b ¶ Cocke lane. 415 a * Cold Harbrough. 251 b ¶ Coleman street. 293 Iohn Collet Founder of Pauls Schoole, his Monument made by W. Lily. 363 b ¶ Court of Common Pleas. 522 b † Common Councell men, and their Oath. 670 a Doctors Comment. 409 a † Conduits, 11 b * The water Conduit at Aldgate, 121 a † By Leaden Hall 206 b ¶In Cornehill, 208 a ¶By the Stocks, 244. 933 a ¶By Saint Stephens, 296 b ¶In Grasse street 230 a ¶Vpon Downegate, 248 a * In Lothbery 293 a † In West Cheape, 278 b ¶At Lon∣don wall, 296 b ¶In Alder∣manbury, 303 a ¶With∣out Creplegate, and a Bosse, 317 b ¶935 a † By Pauls gate, 388 a † By Saint Ni∣cholas Coleabby, 398 b ¶ By Magdalenes Old-fish∣street, 410 a * In Oldborne 425 b † In Fleetstreet, 431 a ¶In Forestreet, 476 b † Pissing-Conduit. 190 a † Court of Conscience in London: See Request. Constables Oath. 687 Cony-hope lane. 275 b † The incorporation of the Com∣pany of Cookes. 330 b * A publike place of Cookery, where all manner of provi∣sion might be bought at any time. 711 a * 234 a * A Monument of the Corbets. 811 b * Cordwainer street. 264 b † Corne not to be brought from beyond Sea, 250 a ¶The custome therof: See Queen∣hith and Leaden Hall. No street call'd Cornehill before the Conquest, 211 a † Vp∣holders, sellers of old stuffe in Cornhill. 215 b ¶234 a ¶ Cornets Tower in Buckles-bury. 276 a ¶ Cosin lane. 249 b † The Counter in the Poultry, 275 a ¶In Woodstreet, 308 a † Formerly in Breadstreet, 394 b * Why and when re∣moved, 937 b † In South∣warke. 454 a ¶ The cause of decay in the Coun∣try. 699 b † A remedy to people Country Townes againe. 700 a † Ancient Coynes and manner of payment used in England, 44 b * The penny Easter∣ling, 45. Numi and Denarii whence so called, 45 b * Of Halfe-pence and Farthings, 45 b ¶Groat & halfe Groat 46 a ¶Rose Nobles, 46 b ¶ Coynes of Gold enhanced, al∣layed, ibidem. Halfe-faced Groats, 47 a. Crownes and halfe Crownes of silver Coy∣ned, ibid. Leather Money used in France. 47 b * Cowbridge Pens and Street, so called. 420 b Cow-crosse. 483 b ¶ Sir Richard Cox his Monument 774 * Cradocks lane. 222 b ¶ Three Cranes, or painted Ta∣vernes lane. 255 a * The malice of cruell Creditors. 469 b † Creed lane. 371 b ¶ Creplegate, a prison for Tres∣passers. 34 a ¶ A Monument of the Crew's. 818 Crooked lane. 233 a † 236 a ¶ Crookehorne Alley. 430 b * Crosbie place. 181 b † Old Crosse in Cheape, 280 b † The Crosse in Cheapside commanded to be repaired, as being an Ensigne of Chri∣stianity. 280 a ¶ Crossed, or Crowched Friers, 144 b ¶156 b ¶The Church there inlarged. 934 b * Crownesilde, a shed or standing in Bow Church for the King, 270 b † 280 b ¶281 b ¶ Culver Alley. 144 b ¶ Curfew Bell. 83 a * 676 b † Curriers Row. 184 a * Cursitors Office in Chancery lane. 487 a † Custome-house. 142 a † Customes and Orders. 67 ¶ Ancient Lawes and Customes of London. 668 a † Bladers, Hamakers, Sheath∣makers, drawne all three in∣to one Fraternity of Cutlers. 158 b †
D A Monument of the Da∣cres. 786 b † The addition of a Dag∣ger in the Armes of the City of London. 54 a † 237 b * Dance of death, called the dance of Pauls. 88 a ¶ Dainegeld, what. 919 b * Bishop of Saint Davids house. 436 b ¶ If ye call mee so, I will call you Davy, A Proverbe whence. 422 a ¶ The Deane of Pauls his lodging. 412 b ¶ Reliefe of poore Debters. 769 Desborne lane. 397 a ¶ Distaffe lane, 395. See Maiden lane. The Towne-Ditch about the Wall of the City. 26 * Divine Service to be read conti∣nually at 9 and 3 of the clock. 766 b * Doctors Commons. 409 a † Doe-little lane. 410 a ¶ Iohn Donne Deane of Pauls his Monument. 776 b † Anne Donne his wife her Monu∣ment. 889 b * Downegate. 248 A Lad of 18 yeeres old drownd in the channell at Downegate. 248 a ¶ Drink-water Wharfe. 232 b ¶ Drury lane. 493 a ¶ Laurence Ducket hang'd in Bow-steeple. 269 a † Ducke lane. 418 a ¶ Sixe Children drown'd in the Ducking-pond. 782 † A Monument of the Dudley's. 813 b ¶ Duke Humphrey's servants. 368 b ¶ The Dukes place. 146 b * Dulwich College in the Coun∣ty of Surrey, founded by Ed∣ward Alleyne Equire. 759 A new-borne Child buried in a Dung-hill of Sea-coale ashes. 80 b ¶ S. Dunstanes curse against King Ethelred. 358 a ¶ Durham House, a great Feast there, 494 a † A row of Sta∣bles there made a Royall Ex∣change. 494 b * The Dutch Church, anciently Sir W. Powlets house. 184 a ¶ The Dutchy Court. 523 a ¶ E EAldgate, 144. See Ald∣gate. East-cheap a Cooks Row; The Kings Sons beaten there 234 a * East-Smithfield a Vineyard 41 a † See Smithfield. Ebgate lane. 231 b * Editha Queene of England, her Monument. 501 b * Edward the Confessors Monu∣ment in Westminster. 501 a ¶ Edward 1. reigned 34 yeeres; Maiors in his time, 545 a * His Monument. 502 a ¶ Edward 2. reigned 20. yeeres; Maiors in his time. 547 b ¶ Edward 3. reigned 50. yeeres; Maiors in his time, 549 b ¶ His Monument. 504 b ¶ Edward the Blacke Prince his house, now the Blacke Bell. 233 b † Edward 4. elected in St. Iohns field, took on him the Crown in Baynards Castle, 59 b * Hee reigned 22 yeeres; Ma∣iors in his time. 568 a ¶ Edward 5. when hee began his reigne. 572 a ¶ Edward 6 his vertuous and god∣ly Speech to Bishop Ridley, concerning reliefe of the poore, 342 344 b * He was chiefe Founder of the Hospi∣tals in London, 344 a ¶He reign'd 6 yeeres; Maiors in his time, 583 b † His picture in the Chappell at Bride∣well, 876 a ¶His Monu∣ment. 511 a ¶ Elbow lane. 246 a † Eleanor, Queene of England her Monument. 503 b ¶ Elizabeth Daughter to Henry 4 and wife to Henry 7 her Mo∣nument 511 a ¶ Elizabeth Daughter to Henry 7 her Monument. 510 a * Queene Elizabeth reigned 44 yeeres; Maiors in her time, 385. Her Monument in 34 Churches, Westminster, 511 b † Alhallowes Breadstreet, 821 b † Alhallowes the great 821 b ¶Alhallowes the lesse, 822 a ¶Alhallowes on the Wall, 823 b † Anne Black-Fryers, 826 b ¶Bar∣tholomew Exchange, 828 a * Bennet Grace-Church, 828 b ¶Botolph Belinsgate, 930 a † Clements East∣cheape, 832 a * George Bo∣tolph Lane, 836 b † Iohn Baptist, 838 a * Katherine Cree-church, 839 b ¶Lau∣rence Iewry, 843 a * Mary Aldermary, 848 a ¶Mary le Bow, 849 a * Mary Bo∣thaw, 849 b ¶Mary Sum∣merset, 850 b ¶Mary wool-Church, 851 a ¶Martins Orgars, 853 b * Martins Vintry, 854 a * Maudlins Milkestreet, 854 b * Maud∣lins Old Fish-street, 855 b * Michael Querne, 858 b ¶ Michael Woodstreet, 859 a ¶Mildred Breadstreet, 859 b * Mildred Poultry, 861 b † Peters Pauls wharfe 867 a ¶Stephens Coleman∣street, 869 b ¶Thomas A∣postle, 871 b † Bridewell Precinct, 876 b † Dunstans west 881 b ¶Olaves South∣warke 884 b * Saviours Southwarke. 886 b † The Erbar. 247 b † 249 a * Erkenwald Bishop of London, buried in S. Pauls, An. Dom. 700. 358 a * 367 a † Essex house, anciently cal'd Ex∣ceter house. 489 a ¶ Ethelred King of West Saxons his Monument in Pauls, whereon is engraven Saint Dunstanes curse against him. 358 a ¶ Everards well street. 476 b ¶
Saint Ewins Church now de∣cayed. 389 a † The Duke of Exeters daugh∣ter what. 60 a * The Royall Exchange, so called by Queene Elizabeth, when and where founded, 209 a. b A place of Merchants mee∣ting. 938 b ¶ Cornets Tower in Buckles∣bury, anciently the Kings Exchange. 276 a ¶ The Old Exchange. 351 a † The Office of Kings Exchanger. 46 a † Court of Exchequer. 522 b ¶ F FAbian, an Alderman, wrote the Chronicle, call'd Fabians Chroni∣cle. 574 b † This Iland received the Chri∣stian Faith in the time of K. Lucius. 527 a ¶ Faringdon Ward, whence so called. 335 The Lord Fawconbridge, with his Rebels, set upon Eald∣gate, 32 b † When that In∣surrection was. 570 a † Great Feasts in Westminster Hall. 520, 521 Sir Iohn Sha kept the first Mai∣ors Feast in Guildhall, 283 b † The order at the Maiors Feast, 656 b No Maiors Feast, by reason of a great plague, 586 b * The Ser∣geants Feast at Ely house, whereto invited, came Hen∣ry the 8. and Queene Katha∣rine, 426 a ¶Seven hun∣dred messe of meat at one dinner at Totehill. 527 b ¶ Fenchurch street. 144 b ¶217 a ¶ Fewtars, or Fetter lane. 430 b * Fickets croft, now part of Lin∣colnes-Inne Fields. 435 b ¶ Fifteenes: See the end of every Ward. Certaine Wards discharged of all Fifteenes. 226 a * Finimore, or Fivefoot lane. 397 a ¶ Finkes lane. 183 a ¶189 b * A Survey of the Mannor of Finsbury (belonging to a Prebend of Pauls.) 911 Finsbury Fields. 472 a * Fire in Rood-lane, 228 a * At London Stone, 243 a * On London Bridge. 782 Fishwharfe. 233 a † Fishers Folly, now the Earle of Devonshires house. 175 a ¶ Antiquity of the Company of Fishmongers, 231 b ¶Sixe Hall-motes belonging to them, 400 a ¶A contro∣versie betweene the Lord Maior and them. 232 a † Old Fishstreet. 391 a ¶ Fitz-Osbert, a seditious Tray∣tor hanged in Smithfield, renounced his Saviour, 268 b * Fitz-Stephen, his birth and pa∣rentage, 703. His descrip∣tion of London. 704 Fledwite, what. 919 a ¶ The Fleet, a Gaole in Richard the seconds time. 431 a * Flemenefith, what. 919 a ¶ Flistwite, what. 919 a ¶ The Flower-de-luce, an Inne in Southwarke, anciently the Abbot of Battailes Inne. 459 a ¶ Forrenners, 677. A tumult in London about Forrenners & Strangers. 80 a ¶ Forstat, what. 919 b † Foster lane. 338 a * Fowle lane. 138 a ¶ Petty France. 172 b † 525 b * Frances Dutchesse of Suffolke, her Monument. 515 a ¶ Frances Countesse of Hertford, her Monument. 516 a † Frances Countesse of Sussex, her Monument. 516 b † French King Prisoner in the Tower. 47 b * The French Church, where S. Anthonies Hospitall was. 191 a † Freemen non-resident, 678 a † Every Freeman his Oath, 689 An Act concerning them. 690 Fryers, Austin, 185. 930 a ¶ Crossed or Crowched, 144. Gray, 340. Blacke, 373. White, 437 b ¶A Frater∣nity of begging Fryers, 287 b * Ancient Burgesses of this City turn'd Fryers, 930 b ¶The Friery Cart at Saint Iohns. 478 a ¶ Furnivals Inne. 427 a * G GAlley-Key. 142 a † Galley-Row. 138 a ¶ Ancient Games: See Sports. A Game at Westmin∣ster on Lammas day, cause of a great tumult. 77 a. b The Garland in little Eastcheape, 229 b A Garner for Corne, at Leaden Hall, 164 b † And Queene∣hithe. 403 a * Garter place. 319 a † Gates in the Wall of this City, 31 † 709 b ¶At first but 4. afterwards 7. and more, 31 a * The Posternes and Gates as they now are, bee these: 1 Posterne by the Tower. 31 a ¶ 2 Ealdgate. 31 b ¶ 3 Bishopsgate. 33 a 4 Posterne of Mooregate, 33 b 5 Posterne of Creplegate. 34 a 6 Aldersgate. 34 b 7 Posterne out of Christs Hospitall. 35 a 8 Newgate. 35 * 9 Ludgate. 36 b Many Watergates now tur∣ned to wharfes. 38 * Bridge-gate now destroyed. 39 * Buttolphs gate. 39 a ¶ Belinsgate. 39 b The Gatehouse at Westmin∣ster. 524 b ¶ Gayspur lane. 304 a * Geld, what. 919 b † Saint Georges lane, an Inne of
Chancery there. 427 b † The George Inne in Lombard street. 220 b * Gerards Hall, and the Giant Ge∣rards Staffe, forty inches long, and fifteene inches a∣bout, 393 b ¶All the Sto∣ry of the Giant and his Hall overthrowne. 394 a ¶ Saint Giles in the field, ancient∣ly an Hospitall, 488 b † St. Giles his bowle. 488 b * Giltspur street. 415 a * Gisors Hall, corruptly called Gerards. 261 a ¶394 a * A Glasse-house in Crossed Fri∣ers Hall. 157 a * Mount Goddard street. 337 b † 388 b * Gold lane. 414. 425 b ¶ Golding lane. 318 b * Goldsmiths Row in Cheape, 391 a † The first Maior and principall men of this City Goldsmiths. 324 a † Sir Arthur Gorges, his Monu∣ment. 786 a † Earle Goodwin, the mightiest Subject that ever was in England. 695 a * Goose lane. 265 a † Goslins Monument. 908 a † Goswell street. 321 London Governed by Barons, 339 b † 933. By a Custos, 544 a † By Maiors, 546 b † By Portgraves, 535 a * 696 a b By Provosts. 535 b ¶ Government of this City. 695 b Ecclesiasticall. 527 Temporall. 535 What kinde of Governement therein, 697 a † It differs but in ceremony, not sub∣stance, from the Lawes of this Realme. 697 a ¶ Iohn Gower, his Monument, in Saint Mary Overies Priory. 450 b † Granthams lane. 249 a ¶ Customes of Grasse street Mar∣ket. 231 Grayes Inne, a Prebend to Pauls. 486 b † Gray Friers, how it became a Friery, by the charity of well disposed people; their Li∣brary, &c. 340, 341 Greengate. 162 a * Greenwich lane, or Frier lane, 249 a ¶ Greenyard of Leaden hall. 161 a ¶ Gristes house. 137 b * Grithbrech, what. 919 a ¶ The Pole-Groat (or the Grope∣Groat) granted to Richard the second, cause of the Kentish tumult under Wat Tylar, 48 a * Grub-street. 467 b * The Guild Hall, antiquity ther∣of, and number of Courts kept therein, 282 b. The Councell Chamber there new builded, 282 b. Verses on the Images over the gate, 283 a ¶Kitchins by it for the Maiors Feasts, ibid. The Chappell there new built, 283 b ¶Monuments there∣in, 284 a ¶The Library at Guild Hall. 284 b * The Lady Iane Guilford, her Monument. 786 a ¶ Houses in Crooked lane blown up with Gunpowder. 238 b * Guthuruns lane. 338 a † H HAberdashers Almes∣houses. 321 a ¶ The body of Alice Hackney found incorrupted more than 150. yeeres after she was buried. 227 a † The Customes of the Mannor of Hackney. 715 Halliwell: See Finsbury. Hamsoken, what. 919 a * Hangewyte, what. 919 a * Where the Hanse-Merchants landed their Corne. 38 b * Harpe lane. 138 a † Hart-horne Alley. 144 a * Hart lane. 138 a † Hart street. 145 a † Sir Christopher Hattons Monu∣ment. 365 a * Haverpeney, what. 919 b ¶ Little Saint Helens. 178 b ¶ Henry the first, made the first Parke in England. 42 a ¶ Henry the third reigned seven and fifty yeeres; Maiors in his time, 538 b ¶His Or∣chard by the Tower, 42 a * His Monument. 501 b ¶ Henry the fourth reigned four∣teene yeeres; Maiors in his time. 559 a † Henry the fifth reigned nine yeeres; Maiors in his time, 561 a † His Monument. 506 b * Henry the sixth reigned nine and thirty yeeres; Maiors in his time. 562 b * Henry the seventh reigned foure and twenty yeeres; Maiors in his time, 572 b ¶He and the Knights of the Garter rode from the Tower to Pauls Church, 60 b ¶His Monument. 510 b ¶ Henry the eight reigned eight and thirty yeeres; Maiors in his time. 577 a * Henry sonne of Richard King of Romans, his Monument. 510 a * Henry son to Henry the eighth, his Monument. 513 a ¶ Prince Henry, sonne to King Iames, his Epitaph. 518 b * Haywharfe lane. 251 b * The Heart of Queene Eleanor and others, buried in Black-Friers. 374 b † Heralds. 408 b * Bishop of Herefords Inne. 399 b ¶ An Hermitage of Saint Iames in the wall; 339 b ¶Another in Nightingall lane, 468 b ¶ Another with a Chappell of Saint Katharines. 495 a ¶ William Hewit, his Monument. 777 a * The charitable Almes of Bap∣tist Lord Hicks, Viscount Cambden, as well in his life as at his death, 760 a ¶His Epitaph. 761 b ¶ Hidage, what. 919 b †
The Highest ground of the City of London. 207 a † Holborne: See Oldborne. Holles his Monument. 817 a ¶ Hog lane. 120 b ¶ Holy-well, anciently the Priory of Saint Iohn Baptist, 470 a * See Finsbury. Hony lane. 282 a * Hornegeld, what. 919 b * Horners Key. 141 b ¶ Horse-market, what it was anci∣enty. 711 b † Horse-mill in Grasse street. 163 Horse-shoo-bridge street. 246 b † 254 b † Hosier lane, in Cordwainer street, 264 b † In Smith∣field. 420 b ¶ The Hospitall of S. Katharines, 117 a † For Lunatikes, 142 b ¶Called the Papey, 156 a * Of Bethelem, 173 a ¶ Of Saint Mary Spittle, 175 b * Of Saint Anthonies, 190 a * Of Saint Thomas of A∣cons, 281 a * 935 a * Cal∣led Elsing Spittle, 304 a * Of the French order, 318 a * Called Christs Hospitall, 342 a * Of Saint Bartholo∣mewes, 415 a. Of Bridewell, 456 a. In Oldborne, 428 a ¶ Of Saint Thomas in South∣warke, 456 b * Of King Iames, called Charterhouse, 479 Of Saint Mary Roun∣civall, 495 a ¶Of Saint Iames, 495 b † The begin∣ning and true end of the se∣verall Hospitals now being in the City of London. 343 b ¶ Hucksters of Ale and Beere, 671 b * Huggen lane. 311 a † Duke Humphrey not buried in Pauls. 368 b * Hundred, what. 919 b ¶ Liberty of Hunting confirmed to the City of London, 539 b ¶ The ancient Court of Hustings in London. 767 I THe confession of Iacke Straw, to the Lord Mai∣or of London. 54 b Iames the fourth, King of Scots, slaine at Flodden field, his head buried in Saint Micha∣els Church in Woodstreet. 311 b ¶ King Iames reigned two and twenty yeeres; Maiors in his time, 593 a * In whose Maioralty he was borne, 586 b ¶His Picture in Mary Mounthaw Church. 850 b † Saint Iames's Faire, S. Iames's his Parke. 495 b * Lady Iane Seymor, her Monu∣ment. 515 b † Iesus Commons. 249 a † Iewes of Norwitch hanged for Circumcising a Christian Childe, 35 b ¶289 a. Iewes houses spoiled, 37 a † The Iewes Synagogue, now the Wind-mill Taverne, 287 b † 296 b ¶Where they inhabited, and what Kings favoured, what puni∣shed and banished them, 288, 289. Their burying place, 318 a. The house of converted Iewes, now the Rolls. 435 b † The old Iewrie. 287 b ¶288 a ¶The Kings Palace there, 291 b ¶The poore Iewrie. 258 a * The Inclosure of common grounds. 475 b † Infangtheof, what. 919 a * The Incorporation of the com∣pany of Inne-holders. 249 a * 670 b ¶ Innes of Court and Chancery, their names and situation. 66 * Chesters Inne, or Strand Inne, where Summerset house new stands. 66 a ¶ Iohn of Gaunts Tombe in Pauls. 360 a * Iohn of Eltham, Earle of Corn∣wall, and sonne to Edward the second, his Monument. 515 a * Priory of Saint Iohn of Ierusa∣lem, with the Monuments. 483 a † King Iohn reigned seventeene yeeres; Maiors in his time. 537 a * A Monument of the Saint-Iohns 795 a * Ipres Inne. 260 a ¶ Ironmonger lane. 282 a † Ivie lane. 388 a ¶ Ivie bridge. 491 b * The comming of Iulius Caesar into England, and his con∣quest over the Britons. 1 b ¶ Iury men. 672 b ¶ False Iurors, their course and punishment. 208 Courts of Iustice kept in West∣minster Hall. 522 a † Iustings or Tournaments; In Cheapside, 280 b * In Smith∣field, with the manner how. 420 b ¶ Iusting-Feast at Durham house. 494 a † K SAint Katharines Hospi∣tall, 117 a † The circuit thereof, 925 a ¶Monu∣ments therein. 117 a ¶901 a † Katharine Knowles, her Monu∣ment. 415 b * Katharine Valois, Queene of England, that married Owen Tudor, her Monument. 507 a ¶ Master Iohn Kendricks Will. 193 b * Kerion lane. 255 a † 261 a * Kery lane 338 a * When the King of England was first called Supreme head. 580 b ¶ Kings of this Realme have sate on the Kings Bench in West∣minster Hall. 522 b ¶ Kings Alley. 293 a ¶ Prior of Okebornes house, now Kings Colledge. 405 a ¶
Bishop Kings Monument. 775 Order of making a Knight for service in the field. 237 a † Knighten-Guild, 115 a * 925 b * Given to the Priory of the holy Trinity within Aldgate. 930 * Knight-riders street. 254, 258 b * Knights Templers: See Temple. L LAd or Ladle lane. 308 a * Alice Perrers rode from the Tower to Smith∣field, as Lady of the Sun. 421 Chappell of our Lady in the Piew, at Westminster. 524 a ¶ Lambes Chappell proved to have anciently beene of the Parish of Saint Olaves in Sil∣verstreet. 924 b ¶ Lamborne hill. 397 b † Liberties of the Dutchy of Lancaster, 489. Governe∣ment thereof. 492 b † When Lanthorne with lights began to bee hung out in Winter, and by whom. 561 b * Saint Laurence lane. 252 a † 282 a * A monstrous Shanke-bone of a man reserved for a monu∣ment in the Church of Saint Lawrence Iewrie. 285 a † Leaden Porch, 162 a ¶In Crooked lane. 236 a ¶ Leaden Hall, at first a Mannor, 162 b † A Chappell there∣in, 163 a * Burnt, 164 a † First used as a Garner, 164 b † Meant to have beene made a Burse for Merchants, 166 a † A Flesh-market there, 206 a ¶The neces∣sary uses thereof. 935 b ¶ Love to Learning. 86, &c. Lectures in London; Of Chi∣rurgery, Of Mathematikes, Of the seven Liberall Scien∣ces, founded by Sir Thomas Gresham, Anno Dom. 1596. 65 b * Legates Inne. 405 a ¶ The Duke of Lennox, his Mo∣nument. 816 The Earle of Lennox, his Mo∣nument. 513 a * The Arch-Deacon of London, Parson of S. Leonard Shore∣ditch. 471 a † A Bishop of London died of a Leprosie. 530 a † Lesteage, what. 919 b * Letherwyte, what. 919 a ¶ Library at Sion College 304 b ¶At Guild Hall, 284 b * At Pauls. 354 a William Lily, his Monument. 370 a ¶ Limehouse. 469 a † Limestreet. 161 Linacer, his Monument. 369 b * Lincolnes Inne. 488 a * Lion Key. 225 b ¶ Lions, where kept at first. 42 a ¶ Lions Inne of Chancery. 493 a ¶ Lither lane. 427 a * The Liveries of the Maiors and Sheriffes. 652 a † Lodgers. 670 b ¶ The Lok a Lazarhouse in Southwarke. 460 b † Lollards Tower, the last Priso∣ner there. 410 b ¶ Lollesworth field. 177 a ¶ Lombard street. 217 b * LONDON, the Originall, &c. 1 a. Thought founded by Brute, 1. a b. a * Repaired and increased by King Lud, 2 b. Called Trinobantum, 3 a † How by ancient Wri∣ters, the old Britaines, Stran∣gers, and Inhabitants, 5 b † Famous for Merchants, 3 a ¶ Walled, 3 b ¶Situation, 6 a † 693 b * 709 a * Anti∣quity, 6 a ¶694 a * Mar∣tiall Services done by it, 695. How watered, 8 a ¶ How divided, 113. Happy in temperatenesse of Ayre, Religion, Strength, 709. Happy in Gardens, Pasture and Tillage, Wells, Honor of Citizens, Matrons, Schooles, 710. Affaires well disposed, 711. Exercise and Pastimes, 712. The Char∣ter of London confirmed by divers Kings, 739. The de∣scription of London (both in Latine and English) writ∣ten by Fitz-Stephen, in the Reigne of Henry the second, 704. The cause of increase of Inhabitants in it, 699 b ¶ Freed from imputation of decaying other Cities and Markets in this Realme, 699 b † Of London the quantity or populousnesse, 696 b † Quality or profession, 697. Power, consisting in her Ri∣ches, and warlike furniture, 698. Benefits and honour that comes to the Realme by it, 700 a ¶It was never the Author of any Rebellion, 697 a † 701. Liberties con∣firmed by Edward the third, 549 b ¶Why at any time seized by the Prince, 701. Officers, 648, 649. Manner of electing Knights and Bur∣gesses, 659 a * An Arch∣bishop of London, 528. Two Plagues of London, Quassing and casualty by Fire, 69 b * Barons of London, 359 b † A song called, London-licke-peny, made by Lidgate the Monke, 234 b * London. Stone. 243 a † Long lane. 420 b † Long ditch at Westminster. 496 Lothbury. 187 b † 287 a ¶ Love lane. 293 a ¶308 a * See Lucas. Lovels Inne. 388 b † Lucas lane, or Rope lane. 228 b * Ludgate, 36 b. A free Prison, or for Freemen, 37 a ¶To pay Tithes, &c. to S. Mar∣tins. 938 b ¶ Lord Lumleyes house. 157 b ¶ An Hospitall for Lunatike per∣sons. 142 b ¶ The Monument of the Lushers at Putney. 784 b †
M THE principall Magi∣strates of London, were Noble persons Inha∣bitants, 298 a ¶Cal'd Ba∣rons of London. 339 b † 933 a * Maiden lane or Distar lane. 312 a ¶395 b * Mother Mampudding. 142 b * Saint Margarets Church on the Hll in Southwarke, made a Court of Justice. 454 a ¶ Margaret, Daughter to Edward the fourth, her Monument. 509 Margaret Countesse of Rich∣mond, her Monument. 512 a * Margaret, Countesse of Lennox her Monument. 512 b ¶ The Lawes of the Market. 664 Marriage-Money for poore Maids. 94 a ¶95 b ¶ A Mart at Westminster. 499 a ¶ Mart lane. 137 a * Martins lane. 233 a † S. Martin Orgars lane. 238 b ¶ College of S. Martins le grand, 327 a † Privilege of San∣ctuary there, 330. Severall Charters of Kings, &c. con∣cerning the ancient Liber∣ties, Bounds, and Privile∣ges thereof, 917 Surrendred 330 a ¶ The first Martyr, See Alban. S. Mary lane. 226 b ¶ S. Mary street. 144 b ¶ Parish Church of Saint Mary the Virgin, Saint Vrsula, and 11000. Virgins, commonly called S. Mary Axe. 166 b † The Antiquity of St. Mary le Bow Church, together with the fall of the Steeple, and o∣verturning the roofe of the Church, 268. The Church interdicted and encroached upon. 269 a * The Bishop of Hereford Patron of Saint Mary Mounthaw. 400 a * S. Mary Church in the Strand, either lost, 489 b ¶Or chan∣ged to the Savoy. 909 Queene Mary reign'd 6. yeeres; Maiors in her time, 584. Her Monument. 511 a ¶ Mary Queen of Scots, her Mo∣nument. 517 b ¶ Bennet a Monke brought Masons first into this Land. 5 a ¶ Matilda Queene of England, her Monument. 501 b ¶ Evill May-day. 81 a † May-games. 79 b * The first Lord Maior, Henry Fitz-Alwine; when obtained, continued from the first of Richard the 1. to the 15. of King Iohn, 536 b † Where buried, 247 a † 538 a ¶Li∣berty granted by King Iohn to chuse a Maior, 538 a ¶ A Maior denyed to bee ad∣mitted by the King, 541 a * The Barons of the Exche∣quer to admit him, 542 b † The first Lord Maior that went by water, 567 a * The first Batchelor Maior, 573 b. When the Maiors beganne to be Knighted by the cour∣tesie of the King, 579 a † A Maior made of the Privy Councell to two Kings, 567 a † 581 b * Three Maiors in a yeere 572 b ¶Two sonnes of one man Maiors, each af∣ter other, 583 b ¶An order for the Lord Maior and Al∣dermen their meeting, 652 b ¶The Lord Maiors Ele∣ction, 652 b * The Officers of the Lord Maior, 649. An Order of all things on (Si∣mon and Iude, or) the Lord Maiors day, 656. The man∣ner of Lord Maiors going to Pauls on solemne Festivals, 657. The Lord Maiors at∣tendance and attire at the Kings Coronation, 659 b * A Maior feasted foure Kings in one day, 255, 553 b † The Maioralty shun'd alwaies be∣cause Onus, 696 b * The Ci∣ty governed by a Custes in Henry 3. his time. 544 a † Measures sealing. 672 a * 679 a * Mercers Chappell sometimes an Hospitall of S. Thomas of Acon, 281 a † Monuments therin, 281 a ¶That Com∣pany incorporated. 281 b * Noblemen of this Realme (of old as well as of later yeeres) have dealt in Merchandise, 222 a † The commodity of Merchandise to this Realme, 698 b * Three sorts of Mer∣chandise, Navigation, Inve∣ction, Negotiation. 697 b * Merchants of all Nations traded in this City, 68 a. 69 a 712 a * Of Italy, 142 b † Of the Hane-Townes, 38 b * Of Almaine, 249 b * Their pri∣vileges, 250 a * Of Bur∣deaux. 254 a † Staple Merchants the most an∣cientest in this Realme. 497 a ¶ The Armes and Names of the ten Companies of the Mer∣chants. 611, &c. Beggerly Merchants hurt a Kingdome. 700 b * Merchant-Taylors Company, 188 b ¶Their Schoole. 252 b ¶ The Mewes by Charing-crosse. 493 b ¶ A Pulpit-crosse in the Church-yard of S. Michaels in Corn∣hill. 215 b † Iames the fourth King of Scots, his head buried in S. Micha∣els Woodstreet. 311 b ¶ A passage thorow St. Michaels at the Quene. 388 a Midsummer day meeting of the Lord Maior and Aldermen. 650 b ¶ The Antiquity of St. Mildred the Virgins Church, with the Church yard and Par∣sonage house. 273 Milford lane. 489 b ¶ Molkestreet. 306 a † A Mill by Baynards Castle. 405 b † Corne Mills on the Thames,
set betwixt a Lighter and a Barge. 403 a * When Millers had but an half penny for grinding a quarter of Wheat. 546 a * Mincheon lane. 137 a ¶ The Minories, anciently the Abbey of S. Clare Nunnes. 118 a * Mint in the Tower, 44 b In Southwarke, 454 b † Other Mints in England. 46 a The body of King Edmund the Martyr, brought thorow Creplegate, wrought Mira∣cles. 34 a † Miskennyng what. 919 b ¶ Monkeswell-street. 312 a ¶340 a † A Monument of Sir Thomas Moore. 787 b † Moore-fields a meere marish ground. 33 b ¶301 a ¶475 Mooregate. 33 b A great famine and Mortality of people. 548 b * Mount Calvary, now a Wind-Mill. 477 a ¶ Mountfiquit Tower. 61 a ¶ A widdow Murther'd. 469 b ¶ N NEedlers lane. 264 b ¶ Ill Newes quickly spreds 48 b Newgate first builded, and the cause why. 35 a b Newgate Market. 388 b ¶ New Inne the Originall of it. 727 b † 493 a † The New River brought from Chadwell and Amwell to the City of London, by Sir Hugh Middleton. 12 b † Nicholas Cold-Abbey, why so called. 398 a † A Prison for Night-walkers. 207 a † Nightingall lane in Wapping, 468 b ¶A Stagge hunted thither by King Charles. 462 a ¶ No-mans Land. 477 b ¶ William Norman Bishop of Lon∣don his Monument in Pauls. 358 b ¶Why the Maior and Aldermen walke about his Tombe on solemne daies 359 a ¶ Northumber land-house. 158 a † 330 b † O THE Offerings of Pari∣shes to the Curates in London. 747 Old-Bayly, 427 a ¶The Cham∣berlaine of London kept Court there. 427 a ¶ Oldborne, 10 b The Conduit by Oldborne-crosse, 425 b † Oldborne Hall. 428 a † Sir Iohn Oldcastle's rebellion & overthrow. 361 a * Ormond place in S. Thomas A∣postles. 261 a † The Orphans Court, with an Act Common Councel con∣cerning them. 660 b * 678 a * A Monument of Hippocrates de Otten, a famous Physician. 890 a * S. Mary Overies a Priory. 450 a † The scalpes of Oxen digged up by Pauls. 367 b * Oxford Place neere London-stone. 242 b ¶ P Robert Parkenton slaine with a Gun going to Masse. 277 b ¶ Panyer Alley. 388 a ¶ The Papey, 156 a * Church of S. Augustine Papey in Lime∣street. 166 b * Pardon Church-yard. 477 b ¶ The first Park in England made by Henry the first. 42 a ¶ Parliaments kept in Westmin∣ster Hall, 522 a † The black Parliament, 374 a † Parlia∣ment House. 524 a ¶ Passekes Wharfe. 141 b ¶ Pater-noster lane, 256 a ¶ Pa∣ter noster Row, so called of Pater noster makers. 371 b * Cathedrall Church of S. Paul founded by Aethelbert Mau∣ricius, 352. The Church burnt, 113 b † 352 b * Fir'd by lightning, 353 a ¶The steeple built repair'd with a Weathercocke, 353. The steeple burnt and repaired, 357 b * The height and length of both Church and steeple 353 b ¶Governors of the Church, 353. The great Cloystry, Dance, and Library, 354. Chappels, in Pardon Church yard, at the North doore of the Holy Ghost of Iesus, 354. The Charnell house and Schoole 356 b The Bell-house and Pulpit-crosse, 357 a The Gates of the Church, 410 b * The Monuments, 358 a * 725. Contribution to the repaire of Pauls Church, 198 b † Master Parkers gift to the glazing of the windowes 371 b † The Quire beauti∣fied and adorned by Sir Paul Pinder, 767 a † An Act a∣gainst abuses offered to the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, against carriage tho∣row, &c. 937 a † Pauls thought to have beene the Temple of Iupiter, 367 b * A Buckes head borne before the Procession at Pauls, 368 a † Pauls Pigeons, 65 a * Pauls Wharfe. 405 a † The Earle of Pembrokes Monu∣ment. 361 a * Peneritch street. 276 b † The Penny Easterling. 44, 45 Pentecost lane. 340 a * Penthouses. 678 a † Pepper alley in Southwark, 454 a * Pepperers in Sopers lane. 278 b * Coia Shawsware, a Persian, his Monument. 780 * King Lucius founded St. Peters Church in Cornehill. 210 Peters hill lane, and Peters Key. 408 Petty Wales. 142 a †
Philip Queene of England, her Monument. 505 b † Philosophy Schooles in London. 63 a. 710 b ¶ Philpot lane. 222 a * A counterfeit Physician had his head set on the Tower of London. 55 a ¶ Pickering house. 156 a * Piepowders Court. 419 a ¶ Master Suttons gift to the Char∣ter house, the greatest gift was ever given to Pious uses. 481 a ¶ The Company of Pinners now decayed. 510 b ¶ The Plantagents Monument in Pauls. 360 a ¶ Perillous Pond. 11 a ¶ Nine kinds or degrees of Poore people, 343 b * Releefe of the Poore, 86, 87, &c. See the Benefactors to every Pa∣rish in London. Pope lane. 325 b ¶ The name of Pope blotted out in all old Bookes, why. 936 b * Popes-head Taverne in Corne∣hill, sometime a Kings house. 216 a * The Populousnesse of this City. 696. &c. Porters lane, or Porters Key. 142 a † The Governours of the City of London, called Portgraves, 535 a * Or Portreeves. 696 a * Portpoole lane. 486 b † Portsoken, whence. 115 Pot, a Brewer. 251 b * Poultney lane. 253 a † The Powlehead Taverne, anci∣ently Pauls Brewhouse. 408 b ¶ A remarkable punishment of Pride in high buildings. 161 b ¶ Printing of Bookes at Westmin∣ster, the first in England. 525 a ¶ The Priory of the Trinity with∣out Aldgate, 116. 145. Of S. Iohns of Ierusalem, 483 a † Of S. Bartholomewes, 418. Of Clarkenwell, 484 a † Of S. Mary Overies. 450 a † Reliefe of poore Prisoners, 94 a ¶&c. See the Benefactors to every Parish Church, and Master Kendricks Will, 197 a † 428 a † The Prisoners go∣ing to bee executed at Tey∣borne, were presented with a great Bowle of Ale, there∣of to drinke as their last re∣freshing in this life. 488 b ¶ Pophams, builders of Saint Se∣pulchers Church. 423 Prisons; the Tun on Cornehill, now changed, 207 a † At Ludgate, 37 a ¶At New∣gate, 35. The Counters in the Poultrey, 275 a ¶In Woodstreet, 308 a † In Southwarke, 454 a ¶Lol∣lards Tower, 410 b ¶The Fleet, 431 a * The Clink, 449 b * The white Lion, 455 a ¶The Kings Bench, 455 a ¶The Marshalsea, 455 b * The Gatehouse at Westminster. 524 b ¶ The Keepers of Prisons indited for using their Prisoners hard∣ly. 395 a † Procession of Pauls. 367 b ¶ Provosts Governours of London. 535 b ¶ Pudding lane. 229 a † Puddle wharse. 405 a ¶ Pulpit-Crosse at Pauls, 357 a At Michael Cornehill, 215 b † At Spittle. 176 Punishments of Sabbath-brea∣king, 394 a † Of Adultery, 207 b * Of Slander, 232 a ¶The Pillory for Bakers, Millers, &c. 208 a ¶ Sir Stephen, an haire-brain'd Puritan. 151 a ¶ Pyel lane. 400 b * Q BEatrix, Sister to Peter of Savoy, Mother to five Queenes. 490 b † Queene hithe, or Edreds hithe, the antiquity, liberties, and customes thereof, 401. &c. When let to Farme to the City of London, 542 a † An Act of Common Councell concerning it. 939 a † R THe Racke in the Tower called the Duke of Ex∣ceters Daughter. 60 a * Radcliffe. 469 a † Thomas Raymond, Archdeacon of Saint Albans, his Monu∣ment. 778 a ¶ Ambition and Covetousnesse, the two causes of English Rebellions. 696 b * London never the Author of any Rebellion. 701 The Rebellion of the Commons under Wat Tylar, 48 a * Of Sir Iohn Oldcastle, 561 a * Of Lord Fawconbridge, 32 b † An Alderman made Recorder of London. 547 b * Redrosse street. 318 a * 476 b ¶ Reding, why so called. 15 a ¶ Redriffe: See Roderith. Redrose, or Rother lane. 229 a † Ree, or Rhe, what it signifies. 15 a ¶ Regrators. 678 b ¶ Repaire of Churches: See the Churches. Court of Request, or Conscience, in London, for reliefe of poore Debtors. 769 When three men had their hands cut off for Rescuing a Prisoner arrested by a Ser∣geant. 546 b ¶ Retayling, an handmaid to Mer∣chandize. 699 a ¶ Richard the first reigned ten yeeres; Maiors in his time. 336 b † Richard the second reigned 22. yeeres; Maiors in his time, 556 a † He in danger by the Rebels of Kent, 49 b ¶He lodged in Tower-Royall, 258 a * His Monument, 508 a ¶ Richard the third reigned three
yeeres; Maiors in his time, 572 a ¶Hee tooke on him the Crowne at Baynards Castle: See Baynards Castle. Ringed Hall in Saint Thomas A∣postles. 261 a † Three principall Rivers in this Kingdome to build a Royall City on, 693 a ¶Naviga∣ble Rivers are as Via Regia, 25 b ¶The new River, 12 b † The River of Thames. 14 * 693 a ¶ Robin Hood and his men shot before the King. 79 b ¶ Rochester house. 449 b ¶ The Rolls in Chancery lane. 435 b † Rood lane. 228 a † Ralph Rookeby, his charitable bounty. 428 a † Faire Rosamond, where kept by Henry the second. 781 Rotten Row, or Russell Row. 470 b ¶ S THe names of Saints gi∣ven to Churches, not for superstition, but for distinction sake. 273 a ¶ Salisbury Court, anciently the Bishop of Salisburies house. 437 b * Sak, what. 919 a † Salt wharfe. 403 a ¶ A Sanctuary for offenders at S. Martins, with the privile∣ges and articles thereto be∣longing, 327. &c. 917. A Sanctuary at Westminster. 519 a † Sandy house. 403 b ¶ The Savoy lands given unto Christs Hospitall, 344 b † The Savoy built by Peter Earle of Savoy and Richmond, 490 a ¶Burnt by the Rebels and built againe for an Hos∣pitall. 491 a * Scalding Alley. 183 a † 204 b ¶272 b ¶ Scavengers, 670 b † Their Oath 688. Schooles of Philosophy in Lon∣don, 63 a. 710 b ¶Every Cathedrall Church had a Schoole, 63 b. A free Schoole at Saint Pauls, 63 b * 356 b ¶Westminster, 63 b ¶ Saint Anthonies, 190 a * S. Peters on Cornehill, 211 a * In Bow Church yard, 269 b ¶In the Hospitall of S. Thomas of Acons, now Mer∣cers Chappell, 281 a ¶ Christs Church, 64 b † S. Saviours, 64 a † Merchant-Taylors, 64 b * 252 b ¶ Meetings of Schoole-masters, and disputations of Schollers. 64 b * Scoggans Ballad sent to King Henry the fourth his sonnes. 256 a † Robert Scot, Quarter Master Generall to the King of Swe∣dens Army, his Monument. 791 a ¶ Scot, what. 919 b † Scotland yard. 495 b ¶ Scroopes Inne, sometimes Serje∣ants Inne in Oldborne. 425 b ¶ Sacole lane, 427 b ¶When Seacoles were forbidden in London. 547 b * Sebba King of the East-Saxons, his Monument in Pauls. 358 a ¶Hee became a Monke of Pauls. 529 a * Sebert King of East-Saxons, his Monument. 500 b † Sentlegers house in Southwarke. 458 b † Sergeants Inne, 435 a ¶438 b ¶ The Sergeants Feast, and manner of it, with the provi∣sion. 426 a Sermon lane, or rather Sheremo∣niers. 410 a ¶ Sessions Hall. 427 a ¶ A Shankebone of a man 25. in∣ches long, 285 a † Another 28. inches and an halfe long. 302 b ¶ Shareborne, or South-borne lane. 217 a * Shere lane. 435 b ¶ The Sheriffe-wicke granted to the City, 537 a ¶The first Sheriffes, or Bailiffes thereof, when obtained, 536 a † The Sheriffes election, 650 b ¶ Their Officers, 649 b ¶ Their swearing on Michael∣mas day, 652, 655. Sheriffes in London in Henry the first his time, almost 100. yeeres before our Chronicles set downe, 768 b ¶The She∣riffes of London Prisoners in the Tower. 36 a † Shoo-lane. 428 a † Long piked Shooes tied to the knees, in use amongst Eng∣lish men. 395 b ¶ A penalty on Shoomakers, for Shooing men on the Sunday. 394 a † The Shops under Saint Peters in Cheape. 338 a † Tom Shorthose, his Monument. 310 a * Margaret Countesse of Shrews∣bury, her Monument. 369 a † Side-Saddles first in use. 70 a ¶ Sir Philip Sidney, his Monu∣ment. 363 a † Silver street. 312 a ¶ Saint Sithes lane, 264 b ¶Saint Sithes Church: See Bennet Sherehog. Simpsons lane, or Emperours head lane. 255 a † Single women that plaid the Whores in the Stewes were forbidden the rights of the Church, and therefore had a Churchyard proper to them for buriall. 449 b † The Six-Clerkes office, ancient∣ly a Brewhouse. 435 b ¶ The Incorporation of the Com∣pany of Skinners, 248 b † Six Kings brethren of that Com∣pany. 248 b † Slander punished in a Fine of 1000. Markes. 232 a ¶ William Foxley Slept in the Tow∣er of London 14. dayes and more, without waking. 55 b ¶ Smarts Key. 225 a * Sir Thomas Smith, Master of Re∣quests, his Monument. 783 b ¶
Captaine Iohn Smith, his Mo∣nument. 779 b ¶ East-Smithfield, 41 a † First builded upon, 931 a † Som∣times a Monastery called New Abbey, 117 a ¶An an∣cient record concerning it. 925 b † West Smithfield; the Pond there and Elmes, a place of Execution, 420 b ¶Horse-market there, 420 b ¶711 b † Iustings there, 421 a † Paved. 423 a † Snore hill. 425 b * Sojourners. 670 b ¶ Sok, what. 918 b ¶ Inner Soken. 931 Sommers Key. 225 b ¶ Sommerset house. 490 a † Gray Sope made in London, dearer than bought from Bristow. 265 a † Sopers lane. 264 b ¶ Sophia daughter to King Iames, her Monument. 512 a † Southampton house, sometimes the Bishop of Lincolnes Inne. 486 b ¶ The Borough of Southwarke, how it became one of the 26. Wards in London, 442 a * Sir Iohn Ayliffe, the first Alderman there, 446 a * The Lord Maiors comming thither to our Lady faire. 652 a * Iohn Speed his Monument. 778 b ¶ Edmond Speneer, his Monument. 517 b * 774 b ¶ Chappell of S. Spirit, now lost. 489 b ¶ The Spittle, 175 b ¶When founded, 537 b ¶The Pul∣pit-Crosse there, and anci-custome of Sermons at Ea∣ster, 176. Three Brethren preached there, on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in Easter weeke, 1632. 781 ¶ Sports and Pastimes used in this City, 75. Stage-playes, Ten∣nis-play, running at Quin∣ten. 76. &c. 712 b * Sprinkle Alley. 144 a † A Monument of the Staffords. 808 a * Stallage, what. 919 b * Staple Inne. 431 a † Starling money whence so cal'd 45 b ¶ The Starr-chamber Court. 523 b † Stationers Hall, sometimes the Duke of Britaines house. 372 a † Stayning lane. 321 a ¶ Customes, Priviledges, &c. of the Mannor of Stebunheath, or Stepney, and Hackney, &c. 715 The Steel-yard a place for Mer∣chants of Almaine. 249 b * S. Stephens Alley in Westmin∣ster. 496 a * S. Stephens Chappell in West∣minster. 523 b ¶ Stew lane. 403 a ¶ The Stewes on the Banke side kept onely by the Froes of Flanders, 449 a * Put down 449 b † Constitutions to be observed by the keepers of them. 448 b ¶ Master Stocke his Monument. 821 a † Stocke-fishmonger row. 231 b * Stockes Market, the midst of the City, 113 a ¶The antiqui∣ty and beginning thereof. 243 b † Stodies lane. 255 a ¶ A Monument of the Stotevils. 818 b * Strand Inne an Inne of Chan∣cery, 490. Strand Bridge and Stone-crosse there. 490 The number of Strangers mis∣liked in London, 80 a ¶226 b * Strangers borne. 872 a ¶ The Statutes of the Streets of London against annoyances 665, &c. 672 b † Studenes in the Common Law, their preferment. 66, 67 The Suburbs without the City of London and liberties ther∣of. 461 Simon Sudbury, Archbishop of Canturbury, slaine by Wat Tylar and the Kentish Re∣bels. 50 a * Suffolke house in Southwarke. 454 b † Suffolke lane. 252 b ¶ Summers Hithe, now Queene Hithe. 400 b ¶ Thomas Suttons Will, together with the erection of the Charter house, 479 b * His Monument. 482 b ¶ Old Swan 231 b * See Ebgate lane. 256 a ¶ Sweating sicknesses; the first 572 b ¶the second, 584 a ¶the third. 588 b ¶ Sydon lane. 134 b ¶ Fyon College for the Clergy of London built by Doctor White together with the Library, and Benefactors thereto. 304, 305 T THe Tabard, an Inne in Southwarke, 456 a ¶ Atwods Wife plaid so long at Tables, that she bore a man, the Priest, who was justly punished for his let∣chery. 207 b ¶ The pious and memorable cha∣rity of Christopher Tamworth of Grayes Inne, Esquire. 766 a ¶ A Popes head Tavern in Corn∣hill; a pint of wine was sold for a penny, 216 a † Cardi∣nals Hat Taverne in Lom∣bard street. 216 b † A grievous Taxe and Tallage granted to King Richard the second, cause of a great re∣bellion. 47 b ¶ Tazell Close. 175 * Tem what. 919 a † Tempests of lightning and thun∣der, 79 b † A Tempest drove all the people from Divine Service at Pauls, but Roger surnamed Niger, Bishop of London, 359 b ¶530 b ¶ The Spire of Alhallowes Steeple Thunder-stricken
392 a ¶S. Michaels Steeple fired in a Tempest. 213 a * The new Temple; the originall of the Knights Templers, their Profession, Seale, and disso∣lution, 438. &c. Their house granted to the Students of the Common Law, 440 b † Monuments in their Church 762 a † 763 a ¶Why the Images of Knights buried in the Temple, are laid crosse∣legged, 440 b * The old Temple in Holborne. 486 b ¶ Foure Termes or times of plea∣ding: Hilary. Easter. Trinity. Michaelmas. 522 b. Thames street. 231 b * Thames River, 14 * 675 b ¶ The head of it, 14 b ¶The course, 15 a. Commodities, Length, Plenty of Fish, 16. Constant Tides, 17 a † num∣ber of Boats and Water∣men, 18 a. Iurisdiction of the Lord Maior over it, 18 * 20, 21. &c. Acts for the conservation thereof, 683. 685. An Engine to enforce Thames water. 403 b * Thavies Inne. 430 b † Theeving lane in Southwarke, 456 b * In Westminster. 497 b ¶ Saint Thomas of Acons Hospi∣tall. 281 a * 935 Thomas of Woodstock, his Monu∣ment. 510 a † Three-needle street. 183 a ¶ Throckmorton street. 183 a * 187 a † Tiltyard at Westminster. 495 b ¶ Timber hithe. 403 a ¶ Tinckermen in the River of Thames. 18 b The Popes Bull, for the offe∣rings of the Parishes to the Curates in London by way of Tithes, 747. The ancient composition for them. 749 b ¶ Toll, what. 919 a † Tom Shorthose, his Epitaph. 310 a * Totehill street and Fields. 525 b † The Tower of London, first built by William the Conqueror, 40. Constables thereof, 41 a † Compassed with a Wall & Ditch, 41 a ¶926. Lyons kept in it, 42 a ¶Scaffold first set on Tower hill, 42 b Gates of the Tower, 42. See Gates. Famous actions done there, 43 a † Mint there, 44 b * Vse of the Tower to de∣fend the City, 56 a. Liber∣ties thereof, 125 b ¶The controversie betwixt the Lord Maior and the Lievte∣nant of the Tower about pri∣vileges. 126. 932 Two Towers on London-bridge. 56 Tower hill. 117 b ¶125 a * Tower street. 130 b ¶ Tower-Royall, 62 b ¶The an∣tiquity and honour thereof, 257 b * King Richard the second lodged there, 258 a * King Stephen lodged there. 260 a ¶ Townesend lane. 401 Men of Trades in distant pla∣ces, 67 a ¶Change of place and Tradesmen, 68 b. Trades∣men lived of their owne Trades, without medling with others. 254 a ¶ Trigge lane. 403 b ¶ Trinity Priory in the Dukes place, 145 a ¶The first founding thereof, 930 * An∣cient Charters of divers Kings concerning it, 931. Monuments therein. 145 b ¶ Trinity lane. 397 a * Triumphs and shewes, as Mum∣meries, Maskings, Lord of Mis-rule, May-games. 78 a * Tunne in Cornehill, a Prison. 207 a † Turne-againe lane. 414 b ¶427 b ¶ Turne-mill street, now called Turne-bold street. 483 b ¶ V VAgrants. 672 b * Vanners lane. 255 a * The fatall Vesper, at the Black-Friers. 381 b ¶ All manner of Victuals to bee bought anciently at all times in a certaine place called the Cookery. 711 a * The Incorporation of the Com∣pany of Vintners. 255 a ¶ The Vintrie, 225 a * King Henry the fourth his sonnes supped there. 256 a † Virginity (by Matilda the faire) defended with the losse of life. 57 Vsurers. 677 a ¶ Vsury forbidden by King Ed∣ward the first. 289 b * Vtfangtheof, what. 919 a * W WAll about the Ci∣ty of London, 4 a. When and why the Wall of the City was bro∣ken thorow Saint Bartholo∣mewes Hospitall. 936 b ¶ The Brooke called Walbrooke, 10 a * 113 b * Walbrooke street, 243 b † Vaulted over & paved with stone, 30 b ¶ Barges towed up Walbrooke into Bucklesbury. 276 a * Lodgings for the Prince of Wales. 142 a ¶ The Walnut-tree, an Inne in Southwarke. 458 a ¶ Sir Frances Walsinghams Monu∣ment. 362 a ¶ Walworth, Lord Maior, did not slay Iacke Straw, 232 b ¶ 236 b * His Monument de∣faced in St. Michael Croo∣ked lane, and since falsified. 237 a * Wapping, 461 b ¶The new Chappell there. 462 a † The names of their Aldermen, as they are this yeere, 1633. 647
Court of Wards. 523 b * An Act for reformation of a∣buses in the Wardmote In∣quest. 669, 673 a ¶ The Kings Wardrobe. 408 a † Warwicke, or Eldnese lane. 388 b * Wardwyte, what. 919 b ¶ Wat Tylars outragious rebelli∣on, 48, &c. His demand of the King, 51. Slaine by Wil∣liam Walworth. 53 a. 236 b * Watches, the originall and man∣ner, 83. &c. King Henry the eighth came to the Kings∣head in Cheape, to behold the Watch. 270 b ¶ Water-gate. 141 b ¶ Water lane. 437 b * Watheling street. 391 a * The Incorporation of the Com∣pany of Weavers. 297 a ¶ Wels River, decay thereof, 9 a * Holy-Well, Clements Well, 10 b ¶710 a ¶Clarkes Well 11 a † 710 a ¶Skinners Wel, Fags Well 11 a * A Well cal'd Dame Annis the Cleere, 11. A Well of great depth at Al∣dersgate, 34 b A Well under the East end of St. Olaves Church in the Iewry. 290 a † Weights; the Kings beame up∣on Corne-hill, 209 a † Tro∣nage of Wools at Custome∣house, 141 b ¶Tronage of Wooll at St. Mary Wooll-Church. 244 a † Wenefrid, Marchionesse of Win∣chester, her Monument. 514 a † The City of Westminster, 493. Foundation of the Abbey, 497 b † The burning thereof 499 a ¶King Henry the se∣venth his Chappell the mi∣racle of the World, 498 a * A Bishop of Westminster, 498 a ¶500 a † The first Deane there, 498 b † Monuments 500 b † 763, 774, 814. The Palace, 519 b * The great Hall, 519 b ¶The use ther∣of, to feed poore people; a Feast there, and Wherries rowing, 560. Parliaments kept there, and Courts of Iustice, 522. Government of the City of Westminster. 525 When Wheat was sold for 16. and 12. pence a quarter. 546 A Widdow in White-chappell murthered by a French man whom she brought up, 469 b ¶The Parson of Stepney Patron of White-chappell, 469 b * White-crosse street. 318 a † 476 b ¶ White Friers the antiquity ther∣of with the Monuments. 437 b ¶ White-Hall heretofore call'd York-Place. 487 b † 496 a † The White Lion in Southwark a Gaole for the County of Surrey. 455 a ¶ Whittington College. 256 b † Whores, 673 a † 676 b. See Stewes. All knowne Whores were to weare striped colou∣red cloth on their heads by an Act of Parliament. 553 a † Wildgoose, or Windgoose lane. 250 b * William of Windsor, sonne of Ed∣ward the third, his Monu∣ment. 515 a * Winchester house, 449 b † Bi∣shops of Winchester, Wickam, and Andrewes, their Monu∣ments. 452 Samuel, Thomas, and Iohn Win∣cope, three Brethren. 781 ¶ A Pint of Wine sold for a peny, and Bread given into the bargaine, 216 a * 551 b * Malmsey Wine sold for three halfe pence a pint, 255 b ¶ Rumney Sacke sold for Me∣dicines only. ibid. Reyne Wolfe, Stationer, colle∣cted Holensheads Chronicle. 303 Sir Iohn Wolley, his Monument. 777 b † Famous and honourable Wo∣men. 107 b † Woodroffe lane. 156 b * Woodstreet. 307 b ¶ Wooll-wharfe, 141 b ¶ Wooll∣staple at Westminster, 496 a ¶See Weights. Wolseyes lane. 251 b ¶ Worster house. 256 a ¶ Wrestlings, and other exercises used on Bartholomew day, now left, and worse taken up. 85 b ¶ Wringwren lane. 258 b * Y YOng beginners, provi∣sion for them. 91 b 94 b ¶95 a ¶See Kendricks Will. Yorke place, now Whitehall. 487 b † Yorke house. 495 a * Z ALlen dela Zouch, Custos of the City of London, slaine in Westminster Hall, by Iohn Warren Earle of Surrey. 544 a ¶ The end of the first Table.
The second Table Containing the Sirnames of all those, whom Honorable Dignities, Memorable Benefactions, Remarkeable Actions, and Venerable Monuments, have made worthy to be recorded in this Worke; Alphabetically digested: Wherein the Figures referre to the Page, the Letters to the Columne, and the Asteriskes * to the top of both Page and Columne. † to the middle of both Page and Columne. ¶ to the bottome of both Page and Columne. A ABbot. 134 b * 285 a ¶534 a ¶B. 563 a ¶597 a ¶ Abdy. 391 b * 598 a † Abingdon. 548 b † M. Abraham. 566 a ¶ Acheley. 193 a † 245 a ¶576 a ¶577 b * M. Acton. 265 b † 346 b * 598 b * Adams. 804 b * Ade. 872 b ¶ Aderley. 563 b ¶565 b † M. Adrian. 543 a ¶M. Adys. 322 a † Agmondesham. 285 a * Ailofe. 199 a ¶583 b ¶ Albany. 391 b ¶ Albert. 285 a * Alderban. 191 a ¶ Aldersey. 96 b ¶869 a * Aldworth. 429 a ¶ Alison. 284 b † Allen or Alley. 90 b † 170 b † 281 b † 285 a * 311 a ¶350 a ¶ 561 a * M. 578 b ¶ 580 a † M. 581 b * M. 583 a ¶586 a ¶ 852 b ¶566 b ¶587 b ¶. M. Allot. 106 b * 395 b * 589 a ¶59 a † M. Altham. 580 b ¶585 a ¶ Alwine, or Alewine. 270 a † 574 b † 575 a ¶M. Amades. 223 b * Amcotes. 283 b * 58 b ¶583 b ¶M. Anderson. 105 a ¶291 a ¶592 b ¶ Andrew, or Andrewes. 554 a * M. 132 b † 452 a ¶ Anger. 544 a † Anthony. 873 b ¶ Antiloche. 537 a * Antrobus. 373 b † Apleyard. 351 b † Appleton. 346 a † Archer. 244 a ¶ Arderne. 335 a ¶ Armenter. 547 a * Armorer. 131 b † 134 a † Arneway. 808 b * Arnold. 293 b † 563 a * 893 b ¶ Arundell. 186 a * 346 a † 791 b * Ascham. 558 b * M. Ascough. 484 b * Ascue. 145 b ¶395 a * 579 b ¶581 a ¶M. Ashburnham. 763 a * Ashcombe. 308 b ¶ Ashehill. 274 a ¶ Ashfield. 145 b ¶ Ashwy. 540 b † M. Askham. 211 b † Asseldey. 157 a † Astly. 834 a † Astry. 261 b * 572 b * Atcourt. 186 a * Atkins. 337 b * Atkinson. 96 a ¶285 a ¶ Atwell. 312 b ¶ Atwood. 207 b ¶ Aubry. 345 b † 546 b ¶551 a ¶M. Audley. 146 a ¶460 a * Avenon. 286 a * 337 b ¶586 a * 587 b * M. Avesey. 146 a † Avinger. 395 a * Austen. 406 b † 452 b ¶453 a ¶557 b † Aunsham. 189 b ¶ Ayer. 296 a ¶ Aylesbrough. 241 a ¶ Aylesham. 551 a ¶ Aylmer. 153 b * 573 b ¶ B BAbalius. 135 b † Babham. 355 b † Baby. 338 a ¶ Backehouse. 588 b ¶ 597 b † Bacon. 133 a * 364 b ¶ 571 b ¶226 b † 138 b * 139 b ¶587 a ¶ Bainham. 108 a * Baker. 285 a * 411 b ¶ Bakhurst. 299 b * Balamer. 548 b ¶ Baldocke. 365 b † 531 b ¶B.
Baldry. 269 b * 281 b † 578 b * 570 b * M. Baldwin. 346 a ¶ Balgay. 120 a ¶ Balthorp. 416 a † Bambrough. 311 a ¶ Banne. 87 b ¶228 b * 556 b ¶557 b ¶M. Bancroft. 534 a * B. 790 b * Band. 186 b * Bane. 431 b ¶ Banester. 324 b † Bankes. 270 a † 388 a * 586 b † 857 b ¶ Banning, or Bayning. 101 a * 105 a * 305 a † 591 b † 863 a ¶ Bardolph. 145 b ¶ Barentine. 186 b † 322 b † 558 a ¶M. Barker. 843 a † 898 b ¶ Barkham. 594 b † 596 a ¶M. Barkley. 425 a ¶484 b ¶ Barnard. 398 a ¶407 a ¶ Barne, or Barnes. 87 a ¶ 191 a ¶220 b ¶242 a † 258 b ¶299 b † 583 a * 395 a ¶532 b ¶B. 553 b ¶M. 584 b † 588 b * 590 a ¶M. 898 a ¶ Barneham. 105 a * 235 a ¶587 b * 591 a * Barners. 158 b ¶ Barnocke. 257 a * Barnwell. 392 b * 564 a ¶ Barons. 145 b ¶ Barradaile. 189 b ¶ Barre. 238 a * Barret. 325 b * 556 b † Barry. 138 b † Bartholomew. 340 b ¶ 537 b † Bartlet. 285 a * 432 a * Barton 285 a * 312 b * 356 b * 372 a ¶561 b * M. 560 a † Bartram. 345 b ¶ Barwis. 411 a † Bas. 552 a * Basford. 578 a † Baskervile. 281 b † 366 b * 586 a * Basset. 391 b * 531 a ¶B. 568 b ¶571 a † M. Bassing. 178 b ¶298 a ¶538 b † 542 b † M. Bat. 540 a ¶M. Bate. 538 a ¶ Bateman. 150 a ¶ Batencourt. 545 a ¶ Bath. 330 b ¶ Bathurst. 246 b ¶ Battail. 351 a * Batte. 193 a * Baude. 368 a * Bayly. 257 a ¶415 b ¶578 a ¶579 b ¶ M. 792 a † Beale. 183 b * Beame. 530 a * B. Beard. 151 a † Beastby. 415 b ¶ Bean. 537 a * Beauchampe. 368 b † Beaumond, or Beamont, 292 a ¶349 a ¶391 b ¶763 b † 565 b † 820 b ¶830 a ¶877 b † Becket. 86 a ¶292 a * Beckingham. 136 a ¶ Bedingfield. 485 b ¶ Bedoe or Bedow. 150 a ¶891 a † 907 a * Beecher. 193 a ¶587 a † Bell. 186 b ¶484 b † 546 b * Belengham. 273 b * Belgrave. 230 b * Belknape. 406 a * Bellesdon. 351 b † 570 b * Bellow. 316 b ¶ Belwase. 372 a ¶ Belwin. 290 a † Bembow. 801 a * Ben. 363 a * Benalias. 133 a ¶ Benam. 222 b ¶ Benneson. 215 a † Bennet. 148 b ¶561 b † 593 a ¶M. 796 a ¶ Bennington. 285 b * Benolt. 179 a † Benson. 457 b † Berching. 308 a ¶ Beringham. 146 a † Berry. 554 a † Berryman. 100 b * Besaunt. 597 a † Bestbitch. 899 a ¶ Beswike. 239 b † Betaine. 546 a ¶ Betwell. 545 b ¶ Bieus. 428 b ¶ Bifield. 571 a ¶ Bildington. 415 b ¶ Bill. 826 b † Billesby. 783 a ¶ Billet. 547 b * Billesdon. 572 b † M. Billing. 519 b † Billingsley. 139 b † 158 a ¶159 b ¶590 a † M. Bilsington. 330 b ¶ Bingham. 452 a ¶ Bintworth. 531 b ¶B. Birch. 897 b ¶ Bishop. 96 b † Blackney. 548 a † Blake. 799 b ¶ Blakynbury. 326 b ¶ Blanch. 230 b * Blanke. 227 a ¶588 a ¶589 b ¶M. Blankwell. 186 a * Blankworth. 848 b * Bledlow. 138 b * 579 a ¶ Blighton. 316 a ¶ Blitheman. 399 b † Blondell, or Blundell. 95 b * 186 a ¶285 a * 537 b † Blonket. 460 a * Blound, or Bland. 230 a ¶538 a * Blount, or Blunt. 267 a * 311 a ¶346 a * 484 a ¶537 a * 540 b † 547 a ¶M. 803 a ¶ Bloxley. 369 b † Bluntivers. 538 b ¶ Boaley, or Bodeleigh. 416 b * 548 b * Bohun. 186 a † Bois. 274 b * Bokerell. 539 a † M. Bold. 239 a † Bolen, or Boleyne. 313 a ¶285 b * Bolles. 595 b * M. 870 b † Bond. 121 a ¶218 a * 179 b ¶132 b * 281 b † 341 a † 587 a * 589 a † 590 b † M. 784 a ¶810 b * Bongey. 540 a ¶ Bonham 778 b † Bonnet. 533 a † B. Bonpfant. 285 a ¶ Boron. 313 b † Borresby. 193 a * Borwet. 908 b ¶ Boseham. 556 a ¶ Bostock. 222 b † Boswell. 841 b † Bovel. 262 b ¶ Bourne. 901 a † Bourser. 186 a * Bowden. 451 a ¶ Bowler. 191 b * Bowes. 157 a † 223 b * 460 a * 582 a ¶583 a ¶ Bowyer. 105 b ¶211 b * 223 a † 581 b * 583 a † M. 588 b ¶ 865 b † Box. 546 a † 587 b * Boxhull. 369 b † Boyle. 805 a * Bradbery. 293 b † 346 a * 575 a * 577 a ¶ M. Bradburge. 398 b † Brade. 398 b † Bradmote. 330 b ¶ Brainforth. 472 b † Brame. 250 b * Brampton. 211 b † 230 b † 238 a * Bramre. 346 b ¶ Bramston. 558 a ¶ Branch. 235 b ¶334 a † 587 b ¶589 a ¶ M.
Brandon. 451 a * 553 a ¶ Brapson. 552 a * Brawne. 792 b ¶ Bray. 395 a ¶ Breakspeare. 290 a * 321 b ¶ Brembar. 345 b * 555 b † M. Bremisgrave. 132 a † Bret 330 b ¶351 b * Brewer. 367 b † Brewes. 451 a ¶ Brewster. 424 b * Breybrook. 367 b † 532 a * B. Brian. 397 b ¶561 b ¶ Briar. 189 b ¶ Brice. 223 a ¶569 a * 573 a † M. Bricket. 170 a ¶ Brickles. 251 a ¶b † Bridges. 223 a † 894 a ¶ Brigs. 847 a ¶ Brime. 908 b ¶ Bristow. 123 b * Britaine, or Breton. 146 a † 218 a * 267 a * 341 a † 546 a * M. 549 b * M. 572 b * 579 a ¶ Broke. 193 a * 259 a * Broke-it-well. 327 b † Brokle. 563 a † M. Brome. 138 b † Bromer. 262 b ¶ Bromfield. 597 a * Bromflit. 299 b † Bromley. 843 b * Broud. 527 b ¶575 a. Brook. 505 a † 416 a † 573 b * 560 a * 591 a † Brooker. 454 a * Brosked. 157 a † Browke. 433 b ¶ Browne. 88 b * 103 a † 131 a ¶239 b † 281 b † 303 a ¶306 a * 338 a * 451 a * 537 b * 563 b ¶M. 569 a * 571 b ¶M. 576 b ¶M. 578 a † M. 558 b † M. Browning. 543 a ¶ Brudge. 238 b * Bruges. 578 a † 579 a * M. Brune. 86 b † 175 b ¶ 537 a * Bubwith. 532 a * Bucke. 303 a ¶ Buckland. 886 a † Buckle. 227 a ¶589 b * 591 b * M. Buckmote. 536 b ¶ Budd. 316 b ¶ Budge. 392 b * Bugge. 218 a † Buke. 270 a * Bukysworth. 554 b † Bulbeck. 907 a † Bullen, or Bullein. 89 a † 313 b ¶566 a † 567 b ¶M. Bunce. 773 a † Burder. 345 b ¶ Burel. 237 b ¶ Burgan, or Burgaine. 285 a ¶416 b ¶ Buris. 553 b ¶ Burley. 161 b † 277 b ¶360 b † Burnell. 133 a † 135 a † 345 b ¶ Bursted. 351 b † Burton. 152 b ¶154 a † 299 a ¶472 b ¶ 850 b * 907 b † Burwash. 346 a * Bury. 376 b † Busby. 313 a ¶315 b † 316 a ¶ Butler. 100 b ¶179 a ¶241 a ¶281 a ¶ b † 337 b * 346 a † 407 b † 484 b ¶547 b ¶562 a † 576 b ¶ 578 a ¶M. Byng. 153 a † Byrch. 135 b † Byry. 416 b ¶ Bywater. 562 b ¶ C CAge. 350 b † 779 a † Caldset. 416 a † Caldwell. 97 a * 215 b † 326 a † 372 b * 795 a ¶856 a ¶ Calfe. 398 a ¶ Callet. 547 a ¶ Calthrop. 184 b ¶344 b * 589 a * 590 b * M. Calton. 579 b ¶ Calverley. 87 a ¶ Cambell. 107 a † 291 a † 592 b * 394 a ¶ 597 b ¶M. Cambery. 346 a † Cambridge. 227 a * 561 a ¶M. Camden. 774 a ¶ Campe. 102 a † Candish, or Cavendish. 281 a ¶553 b † M. Canning. 566 a ¶M. Cantilow. 306 a ¶ Capell. 191 a ¶573 b * 576 a * M. Caponig. 136 b † Cappe. 101 a * 296 a ¶ Carew, or Carey. 149 b * 776 a ¶898 a * Carleshull. 557 b † Caroon. 790 b ¶ Carpenter. 88 a ¶ Carre. 98 b ¶ Carter. 154 b ¶454 a † Cartwright. 153 b * 899 a ¶ Castell. 344 b ¶ Castleton. 261 a ¶ Caston. 548 b * Castor. 346 a † Catcher. 185 a † 590 b † Catworth. 308 a ¶564 b † M. Causton. 258 b ¶ Cawood. 244 b † 331 a † Cawson. 547 b * Caxton. 241 a ¶ Cayfi. 132 a † Cely. 134 b ¶ Chadwell. 406 a * Chadworth. 393 a † 557 b ¶559 b † M. Chalons. 345 b † Chalton. 564 a * 566 b † M. Chamber. 397 b ¶ Chamberlaine. 101 a † 290 a ¶537 b * 586 a ¶874 a * Champion. 106 a † 139 a * 191 a † 346 b ¶ 580 b ¶585 b * 586 b ¶M. Champnies. 137 b * 547 a ¶579 b † 581 a † M. Chape. 346 a ¶ Chapman. 98 b ¶221 b * 263 a ¶432 a † 564 b * Chapone. 135 a † Chartam. 146 a † Charles. 186 b * Charleton. 822 b ¶ Chartney. 235 a ¶ Chartsey. 285 a * 563 a * 583 b * Chatesteshunt. 360 b ¶ Chaunticlere. 549 b * Chaury. 391 b * 571 b ¶574 b * M. Chawcer. 267 a † Chaworth. 907 a ¶ Chayhee. 285 a ¶ Cheeke. 309 a * 803 a * Cherry. 133 a ¶ Cheshull, or Chishull. 360 b ¶531 b † B. Chester. 118 b ¶178 b * 220 b ¶281 b † 344 b * 572 b * 584 b ¶586 a * M. Cheyney. 153 b * 179 b † 346 a * 406 a * Chibary. 186 b * Chichester. 555 a * M. Chickley. 88 b † 244 b * 263 a † 562 b † M. 559 b * Chickwell, or Chigwell. 360 b ¶545 b ¶548 b † M. Chirwide. 145 b ¶ Chitcroft. 149 b † Chitting. 799 a ¶ Cholmley. 372 a ¶433 a *
Choppin. 313 a ¶ Chornet. 186 b * Christopherson. 274 a * Church. 101 a † 138 a † 192 a † Churchman. 87 b ¶ 187 b ¶557 a † Churchyard. 346 b ¶ Clapham. 831 b † Clare. 341 a * Clarell. 312 b ¶ Clarke. 120 a ¶123 b ¶230 b † 398 b † 472 b ¶551 a † 592 b † 788 a * 852 a ¶ Clavering. 193 a † Clay. 134 b † Clere. 790 a ¶791 b ¶ Clifford. 186 b ¶532 a ¶B. Clifton. 346 a ¶ Clixston. 284 b † Clitherow. 187 b ¶597 a † Clivelod. 393 a ¶ Clopton. 89 a ¶292 a * 552 a † 564 a † 573 a † 574 a † M. 801 b ¶ Clun. 100 a ¶ Cobham. 346 b * 540 b * Cocham. 540 a † Cockain, or Cocken. 148 b ¶179 a ¶185 a * 364 b † 595 a † M. 776 b ¶ Cockes. 120 a † Codras. 540 b ¶ Cogger. 226 a † Coggeshall. 231 a † 398 a ¶ Coke. or Cooke. 186 b ¶ 299 a † 372 b ¶412 b † 415 b ¶429 a † 560 b * M. 567 a † 763 a * 802 a ¶909 a † Colborne. 435 a † Coldock. 153 a † Cole. 239 a ¶807 a † Coleman. 292 a * 410 a † Collet. 89 b ¶265 b ¶ 306 a ¶308 a ¶571 a * 573 a ¶787 b ¶ Collingborne. 186 b ¶ Collins. 218 b * 392 b ¶ Colsell. 293 b † Columbars. 261 a ¶ Colwich. 571 a † Combarton. 246 b * 303 a * Combes. 228 b ¶238 b * 565 a ¶ Combmartin. 547 b † Comerton. 213 b * Comin, alias Chilcot. 96 a † Coningston. 431 b ¶ Constable. 108 b † Constantine. 549 a * 569 a † Coolby. 189 b ¶ Cooper, or Cowper. 149 a † 215 a ¶230 b * 548 a † 584 a ¶ Cootes, or Cotes. 245 a * 338 a * 573 b ¶581 a † 582 b ¶ Cope. 397 b ¶ Copinger. 393 a * 576 b * 577 b ¶M. Copland. 269 b ¶ Coppin. 906 a ¶ Corbet. 429 a * 811 b * Cordell. 432 a ¶ Cornhill. 536 b † 543 a ¶ Cornewallis. 261 a ¶ 556 a ¶ Cornish. 322 a † Costin, or Coston. 222 a ¶331 b ¶877 a ¶ Cosyn. 239 a † 249 b † Cotlow. 566 a ¶ Cotton. 148 b ¶425 a * 560 b ¶597 a * 853 a * Covel. 134 b † 346 a † 820 b † Coventry. 270 a * 543 a ¶561 b † M. Coverdale. 191 b † Coult. 874 b ¶ Courtney. 186 a ¶532 a † B. 810 a † Cowch. 99 a † Cowdorow. 157 a † Coxe. 352 a * 774 b * Cradock. 186 a * Crane. 551 a † Cranmer. 598 a * Crashaw. 904 a * Cravon. 592 a ¶594 b † M. Crayhag. 293 b † Creke. 371 a † Cresacre. 281 b † Creswell. 334 b † Crew. 818 a † Criche. 848 b ¶ Crisp. 219 b * 597 a † 856 b ¶ Criswick. 149 b † Crofts. 370 b ¶485 a ¶ Croke. 149 b ¶305 a † Croles. 119 b ¶123 b * 131 b † Cromar, Cromer, or Crowmer. 238 b ¶ 560 a † 561 a * M. Cromwell. 187 a * Crosby. 179 a ¶181 b † 469 b ¶ Croshaw. 827 b ¶ Crosse. 546 a ¶ Crow. 805 b ¶ Crowch. 434 b † Crowley. 313 a ¶ Crowner. 238 b ¶ Croydon. 552 a † Crud. 332 a ¶ Culverwell. 96 b * Cure. 96 a ¶451 b † Curteis. 218 a * 551 a † 583 a ¶ Curzon. 762 b * Cushen. 231 a ¶ Cuthing. 186 b * Cutting. 901 a * D DAcres. 786 b † Dalling. 549 a † Dallison. 484 b * Dalton. 434 b ¶893 a ¶ Dalusse. 261 b † Dancer. 191 b † Dane. 150 a ¶395 a ¶ 587 b † Daniel. 294 a * 395 b * 571 b ¶ Danne. 108 a † Danson. 908 a * Danvers. 416 a † Darby. 218 a † 565 b ¶569 a ¶ Darcy. 117 b ¶118 b ¶119 a † 324 a ¶ 549 b ¶M. Darling. 132 a † Darlington. 398 a ¶ Darr. 295 b * Davies. 881 a ¶ Dauntesey. 295 b ¶ 580 b ¶ Davy. 304 a † Dawbeney. 176 b † 186 b * Dawes. 578 a † Dawtrey. 186 b ¶788 a ¶ Day. 315 a † 316 b † Deane. 105 b ¶136 a * 146 a † 597 b * M. Deare, or Dere. 351 b † 566 b † Deddam. 145 b ¶ Delakere. 229 a † Delamere. 545 b * Denham. 131 a ¶581 a ¶ Dennie. 152 a ¶ Dennis. 131 a ¶133 b † 554 a † Dennison. 151 a † Densill. 898 a † Dent. 191 b † Deoly. 244 a ¶ Depham. 241 a ¶ Deskie. 186 b ¶ Dethick. 371 a ¶406 a * 409 b ¶788 b † Devereux. 131 a ¶345 b † Dewes. 290 a ¶ Deyncourt. 346 b * Dickman. 290 a † 554 b ¶ Dickson. 214 a * Digby. 830 a ¶ Digges. 303 a ¶ Dimock. 292 b * Dinham. 346 a *
Dixie. 106 a * 139 b † 299 b * 588 b † 590 a * M. Dobber. 395 a ¶582 b ¶584 a ¶M. Dockwray. 355 a ¶ Dodmere. 579 b * 580 b * M. Dogget. 231 a * 395 a * 556 b † 577 a ¶ Dolseby. 552 a ¶M. Dolssell. 553 a ¶ Donne, or Dunn. 137 b * 269 a ¶776 b † Dormer. 285 a ¶580 b † 582 b * M. 787 b * Dorset. 537 b † Dove. 102 a † 119 b * 878 a ¶ Downer. 309 b † Downes, or Downis. 331 a * 800 b † Downham. 103 b ¶ Draper. 106 a † 139 a ¶152 a ¶311 a ¶ 586 a † 587 a † M. 831 a † Drayton. 274 b * 763 b ¶ Drew. 193 a * 349 b † 828 a * Drifield. 187 a ¶ Drope. 213 b * 569 b * 570 b ¶M. Drury. 547 b ¶ Dryland. 228 b ¶ Ducy. 149 a † 598 a † M. Ducke. 560 a ¶877 a * Ducket. 106 a † 537 a * 586 b * 588 a † Dudley. 242 a ¶813 a ¶ Dudson. 886 a ¶ Duffehouse. 563 a ¶ Duffield. 123 b * Duke. 431 b ¶536 b * 540 a † M. Dummer. 100 a ¶ Duncell. 451 a ¶ Dunstable. 245 a † b † 547 a † Dunster. 821 a ¶ Dunthorne. 308 b † Durant. 537 a * Duresme. 541 a ¶ Durham. 542 b * Durrem. 183 b * Dutcon. 802 a † Dyker. 564 b * E EAstfield. 88 b * 303 a * 387 b ¶ 562 b * M. Ebot. 559 a ¶ Edgecombe. 766 a † Edisbury. 805 b ¶ Edlyn. 773 b * Edmonds. 347 a † Edwards. 157 a † 186 b ¶220 a * 567 a ¶ 570 a * M. 824 a † Eeles. 905 a † Egeock, or Egioke. 430 a ¶812 b ¶ Eliot. 321 b ¶ Elkenton. 346 b † Elkin. 104 b ¶388 a † Ellis. 558 b † 907 a ¶ Elmer. 98 a * 366 b † 473 a ¶534 a † B. Elrington. 211 b * 451 a ¶471 a † Elsing. 86 b ¶ Elwes. 105 b * 107 a ¶ 594 a † Emerson. 452 b ¶ Emfield. 347 a † Empson. 242 a ¶ English. 579 b † 808 b † Eomans. 473 a † Erington. 858 a † Esgastone. 398 a ¶ Essex. 293 b † 419 b * 424 a * Eston. 458 a * Evans. 454 b ¶793 a ¶ Evenger. 131 b † Everard. 561 a ¶ Every. 215 a † Evington. 100 b ¶ Eure. 360 a † Ewin. 238 b * 340 b * Exmew 306 a * 577 a † 518 b * M. Exton. 227 a * 557 a † M. Eyland. 538 a ¶ Eyre. 89 a † 163 a * 223 b † 564 a ¶566 a † M. F FAbian. 89 a ¶ 214 a † 574 a ¶ Fairford. 238 a * 458 a ¶ Falckins. 188 a † Falconer. 88 a † 561 a ¶ M. 559 b * Falleron. 187 b ¶ Falstaffe. 557 a ¶ Faringdon. 105 b † 335 a * 337 b * 545 b * M Farnford. 398 b † Farrer. 277 a † Farrington. 594 a * Fastolph. 179 b † Fauconbridge. 179 b † 366 b ¶530 b * M. Fauset. 145 b ¶ Featly. 837 a † Felcham. 340 b ¶ Felding. 285 b ¶ Fen. 419 b * 597 a * Fenkell, or Finkill. 238 b * 573 a ¶ Fenrother. 577 b ¶ Fenton. 245 a ¶805 a ¶ Ferrers. 429 a ¶582 a ¶789 b ¶ Fetherstone. 435 a † 880 b * Fetiplace. 292 a * Ffoy. 260 a * Field. 567 a ¶ Fielding. 565 b ¶567 a † M. Fikeldon. 311 a * Filpot. 87 a ¶ Fines. 345 b * Finke. 186 b * Fingrith. 547 a * Fished. 555 b * Fisher. 96 b ¶97 a † Fitz-Alwine. 146 a * 245 a † 536 b * M. Fitz-Arnold. 537 a † Fitz-Hugh. 532 b † B. Fitz-Iames. 370 a ¶ 532 b ¶B. Fitz-Isabel. 537 a † Fitz-Mary. 86 b * 544 a † Fitz-Richard. 543 b † M. Fitz-Roger. 542 a ¶M. Fitz-Water. 416 b † Fitz-William. 89 b ¶ 184 b ¶308 b †. &c. Flemming. 149 a ¶285 a * 568 a * Fletcher. 366 b † 534 a † B. Floid. 908 b † Foliot. 530 a ¶B. Ford. 393 a ¶ Forman. 108 a * 228 b ¶581 a ¶582 a * M. Forrest. 290 a † Forster, or Foster. 226 b † 107 b * 311 a * 541 b * 567 a ¶M. Fortescue. 285 a * 424 a † Forthe. 411 b * Fowler. 397 b ¶800 b ¶867 a † Fox. 101 a ¶288 b † 313 a ¶b * 545 b * Foxton. 211 b † Frances. 146 a † 179 a * 322 b † 550 a † M. 557 b ¶559 a ¶M. Franckland. 325 b ¶ Franke. 123 b * 239 a * Fray. 191 a ¶ Freemen. 596 b * 846 a * Fremingham. 559 b ¶ French. 230 b † 557 a † Frere. 398 a * Freshwater. 874 a ¶ Friole. 290 a † Frosham. 551 a ¶ Frostling. 553 b † Frowike. 346 b ¶542 a † 562 a ¶M. Froyshe. 558 b † Fuller. 97 b ¶269 b ¶ 472 a ¶ Furneis. 548 b ¶
G GAbeter. 262 b * Gainsford. 239 a † Galder. 338 a ¶ Gale. 99 b ¶ Gamage. 350 a ¶588 a ¶ Ganon. 281 a ¶ Garaway. 185 a ¶597 a ¶868 a † Gardener. 211 b * 462 a ¶569 b * 571 b † M. Garinsers. 186 a * Garland. 152 a * 274 b * 538 a ¶ Garman. 214 a * Garme. 293 b † Garrard, or Gerrard. 148 b ¶152 a ¶230 b ¶ 330 b ¶584 b † 585 a * 591 a ¶593 a † M. 818 b † 844 b ¶ 886 a * Garth. 281 b † Garton. 548 a ¶ Gayle. 228 b ¶ Gedney. 561 b ¶M. Gelson. 228 a ¶ Gennings. 89 b † Gest 372 a ¶ Gibs. 296 a * Gibson. 107 b ¶309 b * 582 a † 788 b ¶ Gifford. 186 b † 313 b * Gilbert. 107 ¶131 a ¶ Gilborne. 150 a * Gillet. 877 a * Gips. 474 a * Girdler. 554 b ¶ Gisors. 255 a * 261 a ¶ 345 b ¶541 a † M. Glocester. 406 a † 546 b ¶ Glover. 105 a ¶228 a ¶293 b * 314 b † Goad. 249 b † Goare, or Gore. 148 b ¶246 a * 306 b † 595 a ¶596 b ¶ Goddard. 105 a * 592 a † Godfrey. 303 a ¶ Godney. 193 a † Golding. 294 b * 419 b ¶773 b ¶ Goldsmith. 831 a ¶ Gonnel. 305 Goodcheape. 546 a † Goodman. 293 b † Goodrick. 883 b ¶ Goodwin. 146 a † 333 b † Gorges. 786 a † Goslin, or Gosling, or Gosseline. 227 a * 562 a ¶908 a † Govere. 313 a * Gower. 179 a ¶237 b ¶ Grace. 213 b † Gramstone. 238 b * Granado. 138 b * Grantham. 265 b ¶346 b ¶549 a ¶M. Grasse. 538 a * Gravesend. 531 b * B. Gray. 261 a ¶400 b † 552 a ¶B. 578 a ¶ Greek. 333 b ¶ Green. 331 b ¶ Greenough. 305 a † Greenway. 138 b * Greenwood. 322 a ¶ Gregory. 326 b ¶564 b † 566 b ¶M. Gresham. 90 b * 92 b * 179 b † 182 a † 184 b * 285 b ¶299 b † 303 a ¶580 b ¶581 b ¶582 a † M. 583 b * M. 787 b ¶ Greswold. 152 a * Gretsim. 239 a † Grevill. 451 a * Grey. 313 a † Griffith. 157 a * 230 b * Grimeston. 798 b * Grindall. 533 b ¶B. Grove. 576 b * Guilford. 360 b ¶786 b ¶ Gunter. 214 a ¶ Gurden. 548 a ¶ Gurney. 104 b ¶238 b ¶590 b ¶ H HAcket. 148 b ¶ 179 a † 595 a † 597 a ¶854 a * Hackney. 227 a † Haddon. 135 a † 326 a * 349 a † 574 b † 576 b * M. Hadley. 337 b * 555 b ¶M. Haines. 134 a * Hales. 148 b ¶564 b * Hall. 92 a ¶100 b ¶ 276 b ¶346 b ¶ 392 b ¶862 b ¶ Halsey. 585 b † Halstock. 419 b † Hallyday. 299 b * 591 b ¶842 b * Halton. 180 b † 308 b † 560 a ¶ Halye. 398 b * Hamber. 313 a * ¶ Hamersley. 595 b ¶ 597 b † M. Hammond. 550 b * M. Hamney. 293 b † Hampson, or Hampton. 105 a ¶193 a * 227 b ¶568 b † 570 b † 592 a ¶ Hanbury. 152 b † 154 b * 316 a ¶ Hanford. 148 b ¶244 a ¶596 b † Hansard. 550 b * Hansby. 473 b ¶ Harbeck. 293 b † Harby. 215 a ¶ Hardell. 154 b † 538 b ¶M. Harding. 230 b ¶231 a ¶239 b † 571 a ¶ 587 a ¶ Hardy. 580 a * Hardley. 558 a ¶M. Hare. 371 a ¶880 a ¶ Harington. 370 b * 434 b ¶ Hariot. 138 b * 569 b † 572 a † 831 b ¶ Harlingridge. 274 b * Harper. 92 b * 585 a ¶ 586 a * M. 845 b † Harpfield. 179 a ¶ Harrison. 430 a † Hart. 106 b † 117 b ¶ 241 b ¶346 b ¶589 a * 590 b ¶ Hartford. 252 a * Hartshorne. 331 a † Harvey. 218 a * 311 a * 545 a † M. 588 a * 589 b † M. 595 b ¶ M. 868 a ¶903 a ¶ Harvist. 103 a † 315 a ¶316 b * Hary. 338 a ¶ Hasken. 223 b ¶ Hastings. 345 b ¶ Hatcliffe. 804 a * Hatfield. 244 a ¶555 a ¶ Havelock. 290 a † Haverell. 536 b * 537 b ¶ Havering. 245 b † Haughton, or Hawton. 549 b ¶591 b † 809 b ¶ Having. 257 a * Hawes. 150 a † 235 b ¶269 b * 308 a ¶ 310 b ¶575 b † 586 b ¶588 a ¶M. 773 a ¶ Hawkins. 139 b ¶805 b * 862 a ¶ Hawlen. 392 b ¶ Hawteine. 546 a ¶ Hay, or Hayes. 187 b ¶ 593 b † M. 595 a * M. 847 b * Haydon. 95 a † 257 a ¶ 584 b * Hayman. 886 a ¶ Heardson. 139 a † Hearn. 149 a † 595 b ¶ Hede. 575 b † Heila. 183 b ¶ Heilin. 596 b ¶ Heliland, or Holiland. 537 b ¶341 a † Helisdon. 556 b † Hemenhall. 552 a † Hend. 241 a ¶ Henneage. 179 b ¶366 a * Henningham. 145 b ¶ Henshaw. 306 b * Herbert. 349 b ¶
Hereford. 546 a ¶ Hereick. 812 Herenden. 326 b † Heriot. 411 a ¶ Heretagh. 310 a * Herlion. 536 b * Heron. 801 b * Hertelepole. 547 b * Heselrigg. 893 a ¶ Hetton. 803 b * Hewet, or Hewyt. 219 a † 322 a * 364 a † 777 a * Heyban. 238 a * Heyford. 220 b ¶569 a † 571 a ¶ Heyward. 226 b ¶305 b † 586 b † M. 587 b ¶M. 591 a † M. Heywood. 170 a † Hicks. 760 a ¶ Hide. 155 a ¶559 a * Higham. 563 a * High-lord. 136 b ¶ Hildie. 274 b * Hill or Hils. 89 a ¶90 b ¶92 b † 155 b * 192 a * 245 a * 281 b † 309 a † 532 b * B. 570 b ¶572 b * M. 582 b † 584 a * M. 806 a ¶ Hilliard. 451 a * Hiltoft. 554 ¶ Hilton. 101 a ¶223 b * 406 a † Hinchlade. 309 a ¶ Hinde. 88 a † 265 a ¶ 267 a * 337 b ¶544 a † 556 b ¶M. a * Hobby. 171 a * Hobson. 274 a * Hodge, or Hodges. 148 b ¶472 a ¶596 a † 558 a † M. Hodgson, or Hodson. 261 a ¶306 a † Holbech. 554 a † Holdernesse. 577 b * Holdich. 555 a † Holgrave, or Holigrave. 123 b ¶460 a ¶ Holland. 265 a ¶267 a * 563 b † Holliday. 149 a † 593 b * M. Hollis. 179 b † 580 a ¶ 582 a ¶M. Holmedon. 592 a ¶ Holmes. 96 a ¶ Holstocke. 227 a ¶ Holt. 222 b * 351 b ¶ Hondon. 235 b ¶ Hone. 416 b ¶ Hopton. 346 a † Horne. 245 a † 571 a * 573 a ¶M. Hosepoole. 219 b * 431 b ¶ Horton. 432 a † Hothersall. 150 a ¶ Houghton, or Howton. 214 a † b † 346 a † 880 a * 892 b † House. 391 b ¶590 a. Howard. 131 a ¶790 b ¶ Howe. 899 a * Howpill. 153 a † Huberthorne. 211 b † 212 a † 582 b ¶583 b † M. Huddy. 346 b † Huit. 238 b ¶ Hulin. 566 a ¶568 468 a * M. Hulit. 454 a † Hull. 865 a ¶ Hulson, or Hulton. 387 b ¶392 a * Humble. 452 a † Hunnes. 905 b ¶ Hungate. 281 a ¶ Hungerford. 346 b ¶ 787 a † Hunt. 107 a ¶108 a ¶ Huntington. 179 a ¶ Huntlow. 582 a ¶ Hurstwaight. 392 b ¶ Husband. 550 b † Huse, Husse, or Hussie. 146 a † 349 b ¶372 a ¶795 b ¶ Huysh. 278 a † Huytley. 246 b ¶ I IAckman. 245 a * 586 b * Iacob. 99 b † 789 b * 891 b * Iaie. 221 b † 595 a † Iames. 132 b * 138 b ¶ 226 a † 562 b * 568 b † 571 b * M. 825 a ¶ Iarveis. 583 a ¶ Iawdrell. 235 b ¶ Ienkins. 101 a † Ienner. 430 b † Iennings. 95 b * 152 a * 303 a ¶346 b † 575 a * 577 a † M. 579 b † Iermin. 845 a ¶ Iken. 274 a ¶ Ilam. 89 a * 281 b † 571 a * Illingworth. 308 a ¶ Ingham. 417 a † Ioceline. 241 a ¶567 b ¶569 a † M. Iohnson. 149 a † 191 a † 350 a ¶576 b * 595 b * Iolles. 593 b * 595 a ¶M. Iones. 103 a ¶105 b † 593 b † 596 a * 883 a ¶ Iorden. 118 b ¶123 b ¶ Iosue. 537 a † 538 a * Ioyner. 340 b ¶541 a † M. Ireland. 100 b ¶393 a ¶554 b * 568 a ¶ Ironside. 834 a ¶ Isaac. 138 b † 573 b † Isham. 415 b ¶ Islip. 138 a ¶ Iud. 90 b ¶179 b † 182 b † 583 a * 584 a * M. Ive. 311 a * K KAyor. 186 b ¶ Keble. 89 b * 276 a ¶575 b ¶577 b † M. Kelsey. 306 a * Kempe. 145 b ¶370 a † 532 a ¶B. 798 b ¶908 b † Kempton. 588 b * Kendall. 274 b * Kendricke. 193 b * Kenly. 186 b * Kennington. 138 a ¶ Kenuda. 186 b † Kerkby, or Kirby. 152 a * 245 b ¶290 a * 576 b ¶ Kerveyn, or Kervin. 180 b † 837 a * Keston. 274 a ¶ Kettle. 235 b ¶ Keynell. 801 b † Keyton. 322 a † Kiligreie. 259 b † Killingbery. 557 b † M. King. 293 b † 534 a ¶ B. 564 a * 775 Kingston. 211 a ¶550 b * Kinnon. 437 a ¶ Kirketon. 346 b * Kirkman. 262 a * Kirton. 454 b ¶ Kiryoll, or Kyriell. 138 a ¶156 b ¶ Kitriell. 138 a † Kitson. 581 a ¶ Knape. 431 b ¶ Knesworth. 182 a * 284 a ¶574 b * 576 b † M Knight. 416 b ¶ Knighthode. 556 b † Knowles. 87 b * 86 a † 265 a ¶266 b † 558 a ¶M. Kyme. 257 a * 579 a * Kyrton. 152 a ¶ L LAcy. 186 a ¶ 367 b * 398 a ¶ Laken. 281 b † Lambard, or Lambert. 92 b † 223 a † 311 a ¶270 a * 537 a ¶ 568 a * 580 a † 581 a † Lambe. 93 a * 355 b ¶ Lambin. 548 a ¶ Lancaster. 419 b * Land. 136 b † 186 a * Lane. 275 a * Langford. 546 b †
Langham. 392 b ¶ Langly. 188 a ¶284 b † 315 a ¶545 b * 587 a † 588 b * M. Langthrop. 179 a ¶ Langton. 179 a * 423 b. Large. 88 b ¶290 b † 563 b * 565 a † M. Latimer. 797 b * Laud. 534 b † B. Laund. 555 b ¶ Laurence. 787 a ¶ Law. 211 a ¶560 a ¶ Laxton. 90 b * 267 a ¶268 a * 582 a ¶ 583 a * Lazar. 550 a * Lee, Legh, or Leigh. 106 b ¶150 a ¶245 a * 274 b * 281 b † 292 b † 433 b ¶407 a ¶ 434 b ¶566 b ¶ 568 a * M. 569 b ¶ 585 a † b * M. 591 a * 593 a * M. 472 a * 474 a ¶790 a ¶ 813 b ¶ Leg. 551 b ¶ Legget, or Leggy. 217 a ¶551 a † M. 552 a ¶M. Lekhimpton. 326 a † Lemman. 148 b ¶593 b ¶595 b † M. 856 b ¶ Lepington. 191 a ¶ Lessieur. 834 b * Levison. 152 a * 581 a ¶ Lewen. 399 b ¶581 b ¶861 a ¶ Lewes. 428 b ¶ Lewknor. 451 a ¶ Leyland. 387 b ¶ Liade. 179 b † Lichfield. 321 b * 251 a * Lichterveld. 331 a ¶ Lily. 370 a ¶906 b ¶ Linacer. 369 b * Lindericle. 186 a † Lions. 105 b ¶250 b * 262 b * 555 b * 584 a * 585 a † Lisle. 341 a * 345 a ¶ Little. 553 a † Littlesbury. 258 b ¶ Littleton. 235 b ¶762 a † Liveley. 474 b † Lloyd. 406 b * Lock. 270 a † 281 b † 568 a ¶583 b ¶581 b † Lodge. 268 a ¶585 b ¶586 a ¶M. Lofken, or Loveken. 87 a * 236 b † 551 b * M. Lok. 804 a ¶ Long. 235 b ¶407 b † 580 a ¶ Lonyson. 338 a ¶ Love. 557 a * Loveday. 909 a * Lovel. 157 a † 274 a ¶ 359 b * 531 b † B. 907 a ¶ Lovenham. 560 b ¶ Lover. 308 b ¶873 a. Louth. 419 b * 559 b ¶ Low. 148 b ¶185 a ¶ 230 b ¶591 b ¶593 b † M. Lowen. 221 b † Lucas. 185 a † 551 a ¶ Lucy. 345 b † 346 b * 888 b * Ludlow. 419 b * Lumley. 148 b ¶134 a ¶595 a * M. Lupton. 257 b † Lusher. 784 b † Lutkin. 584 a ¶ Lye. 417 b * M MAbbe. 350 a ¶ Machel. 306 a * 585 a * Mackley. 416 b † Mackman. 257 a * Mafield. 558 a † Mainard. 584 b † Malifant. 415 b ¶ Malin. 212 b ¶ Malledge. 457 b ¶ Malmaynas. 346 b * Malory. 281 b † 336 a ¶585 a ¶586 b * M Malpas. 88 b ¶152 a ¶162 a * 564 b ¶ 565 a † Malton. 331 a † Malwen. 146 a † Man. 152 b * 295 b ¶ Mancer. 311 a ¶ Mandevile. 146 a * Manhall. 211 a ¶ Manners. 186 a. 471 a. Manning. 101 a * 242 a † Manningham. 186 b † Manny. 186 b ¶ Manthrop. 145 b ¶ Marbeler. 551 a * March. 237 b ¶ Markby. 415 b ¶ Marlow. 400 b † 561 b ¶M. 559 b † M. Marpor. 228 b * Marrow. 331, 566 a ¶ 567 b † M. Marsh. 311 a ¶338 b. Marshall. 149 b † 179 a * 286 a † 454 a * 532 b * B. 564 b ¶ Martin. 105 b * 193 a † 259 a * 265 b ¶ 299 b † 406 a * 572 a ¶574 a * M. 581 a † 585 b ¶587 a * M. 589 b † Mascall. 99 a ¶ Masham. 104 b * 589 b ¶ Mason. 211 a † 314 b ¶316 b † 331 a † 361 b † 899 a * Master. 218 a * Matthew. 238 b ¶572 a † 573 b ¶M. Maunsell. 897 b * S. Maure. 285 a ¶ May. 98 b * 185 b * 391 b ¶ Medham. 567 b ¶ Medly. 311 a ¶ Medlycote. 412 a * Melchborne. 187 b ¶ Melford 361 a † Mellington. 156 b ¶ Mellishe. 392 a * Melrith. 285 a * Merick. 186 a † Messe. 212 a † Metcalfe. 891 b ¶ Meteren. 219 b † Metwood. 548 a ¶ Mewes. 186 a ¶ Michael. 223 b † 330 b ¶372 a ¶561 a † Michell. 230 b * 290 a ¶562 b ¶M. Micell. 261 b * Middleton. 148 b ¶ 303 a ¶566 b * 593 a * M. Milborne. 90 a ¶157 a * 220 b ¶339 a * 577 a ¶579 a ¶M. Mildmay. 420 a * Milford. 306 a * Mill. 332 a ¶ Milred. 563 a † Mils. 146 a * 587 b ¶ Milsam. 331 a * Minors. 235 b ¶ Mirfin. 356 b * 397 b ¶451 a * 577 b * 578 b ¶M. Mirley. 308 b ¶ Moager. 223 b † Mocking. 550 a ¶ Mollington. 157 a † Moncaster. 351 b † Mond, or Mund. 337 b ¶355 a ¶ Monden. 360 b ¶ Monmouth. 131 a ¶ 581 b † Monox. 90 a ¶577 a ¶578 a ¶M. Montague. 846 b † Monyns. 884 a ¶ Mordant. 227 a * Mordaske. 186. b. ¶ Mordon. 237 b ¶549 b † M. Morens. 186 b * Moré, or Moore. 155 a † 263 a † 346 b * 556 b ¶557 a * 558 b * M. 592 a * 787 b † 857 a * Morgan. 230 b * Morley. 135 a † 186 a ¶333 a ¶ Morris. 206 b ¶211 b † 551 a ¶ Mortain. 346 b † Mortimer. 145 b ¶ 345 a ¶
Morsted. 273 b * 290 a * 308 a ¶339 b * 564 b † Morton. 825 b ¶ Mosley. 591 a † M. 892 a * Motte. 238 a * Mountfort. 228 b ¶ 307 a ¶510 a * Mountgomery. 346 b ¶ Moyle. 346 b † Munday, or Mundy. 578 a * 579 b † M. 869 a ¶ Mullert. 150 a † Mulshew. 257 a * Multon. 149 b † Mun. 222 b ¶ Murray. 905 b ¶ Muschamp. 306 a * 568 b ¶ Mustell. 261 a ¶ Mutas. 162 a ¶ N NAle. 152 b * Nash. 311 a ¶ Naylor. 187 b ¶ Neale, or Nele. 258 b * 333 b ¶530 a ¶B. 551 a † Nedham. 416 b * Nelson. 98 a * Neve. 241 a ¶ Nevel. 186 a * 336 b * 345 b * 369 b * 788 b * Newbery. 98 a ¶ Newenton, or Newing∣ton. 186 a ¶558 a † Newland. 538 b † 572 a ¶ Newley. 536 b ¶ Newman. 98 b † Newport. 360 b ¶399 a ¶531 b ¶B. 555 b ¶ Newton. 123 b † 387 b ¶ Nicholas. 93 a † 312 b † 392 b ¶398 b † 587 a † 588 b † M. Nicols. 355 b * Nicolson. 236 a † 407 b ¶ Niger. 530 b ¶B. Nives. 573 b ¶ Norbery, or Norborow. 157 a † 346 b * 367 b † Nordon. 432 a † 565 b † Norford. 192 b ¶ Norlong. 285 a * Norland. 281 b † Norman. 282 a ¶548 b † 565 b * 567 a † M. Norris. 186 a * 303 b ¶ North. 285 b † 433 b † Northampton. 542 b ¶ M. 556 b ¶ Northbroke. 532 a † B. Norton. 96 b * 281 a ¶ Norwich. 138 b † Notte. 552 b * M. Nottingham. 553 a ¶ Nouncy. 398 a ¶ Nowell. 361 b * 889 a † O OFfley. 94 b † 96 b ¶105 a † 152 b † 153 a * 154 a ¶584 b * 585 a ¶M. 590 b * 843 b * 847 b † Oldgrave. 567 b † 569 a † M. Oldhall. 257 a * Oleph. 587 a ¶ Olney. 237 b ¶306 a * 564 a † 566 a * M. Olyffe. 239 b † Organ. 136 a * 290 a † 557 a † Orme. 874 b * Orrell. 179 a ¶180 b ¶ Orwell. 530 a † B. Osborne. 218 a * b ¶ 588 b † 589 b ¶M. Ostrich. 308 b † 574 a ¶M. Otely. 563 a ¶M. Otwell. 543 a ¶ Overton. 155 b ¶ Overye. 235 a ¶ Owen. 245 a * 798 a ¶ Owfield. 100 b † P PAckenton. 277 b ¶332 a † Paddesley. 564 a † 565 a * Paget. 218 a * 333 b * Paine. 892 a ¶ Palin. 101 b † 124 a † 472 b ¶ Palmer. 337 b * 392 b * 485 a * 548 a † 762 b ¶779 a ¶ Par. 407 a † Pargitar. 391 b * 579 a ¶580 b ¶M. Paris. 545 a † Parker. 100 a ¶101 a ¶320 b ¶371 b † 558 b * Parkhurst. 305 a † 596 b ¶ Parkinson. 428 a ¶ Parnell. 392 b ¶ Parrie. 135 b * 810 a ¶ Parsall. 346 b * Partrich. 228 b ¶579 Parveffe. 561 b ¶M Paskim. 295 a ¶ Pats. 346 b ¶ Patten. 92 b * Pattesly. 238 a * Paulet. 346 b ¶ Payton. 185 b † Peach. 223 a ¶552 b ¶ M Peacocke. 372 a ¶580 a † 581 a * M. Peake, or Peke. 311 a ¶ 472 b † Pelham. 888 a ¶ Pemberton. 107 a † 187 b ¶322 b * 326 b ¶ 573 b ¶593 a * M. Penne. 560 b * Pepper. 138 b † Percers. 186 b * Percivall. 89 a ¶193 a * 223 b † 573 a † 575 a * M. Perry. 87 a ¶ Pert. 350 b ¶ Peter. 88 a ¶ Peterson. 218 a * Peyntwin. 790 b † Philip, or Philips. 227 a * 458 a * 566 b ¶ 568 b ¶M. 823 b ¶ 130 b * Philpot. 345 b † 555 b † M Picard. 87 a † 255 a * 542 b ¶552 a ¶M. Pickering. 179 b * 285 a ¶852 b * Picking. 169 b † Piel. 555 a † M. Pierson. 270 a † Pigot. 547 b ¶ Pike. 131 b † 191 a * 550 b † 560 b * Pikehurst. 308 b ¶ Pikeman. 226 556 a * Pikeworth 460 a * Pinchenon. 581 a † Pinder. 171 a ¶767 a † Pipe. 588 a † 589 a. M Piriton. 369 b † Plat. 263 a ¶762 b † Plesseis. 369 b ¶ Plumbe. 787 b * Plummer. 242 a ¶568 a † Pointell. 549 a † Pole. 350 a ¶ Pontfract. 560 a ¶ Poole. 559 b * 597 a † Pope. 245 a * b ¶ Porter. 103 a † 134 b † 340 b ¶346 b ¶ Portman. 433 b † Poster. 275 a ¶ Potter. 544 b † Poulsted. 132 b ¶ Poultney. 86 b ¶239 a ¶252 a * 360 b ¶ 550 a ¶M Pourt. 547 b † Powel, or Powle. 186 b * 432 b † 793 a ¶794 b ¶ Powlet. 184 a * 82 b † Poynes. 346 b † Prannell. 104 ¶387 b ¶590 a †
Prat. 598 a † Prescot. 339 a † 594 b ¶ Preston. 549 a † M. Price. 170 b * 831 b † 893 b ¶901 a ¶ Pricot. 211 a ¶ Priest. 581 a † Prince. 313 a † Prior. 548 b ¶ Proby. 148 b ¶595 a * 596 b † M. Prodham. 549 a * Provost. 460 a † Prust. 890 b ¶ Pullison. 588 a * 590 a * M. Purchase. 574 a * 575 a † M. Purchat. 285 a ¶ Purde. 331 b * Purfet. 325 b † Purpoint. 237 b ¶ Puty. 274 a ¶ Pye. 348 b ¶ Pyel. 594 a ¶842 a ¶ Q QVarles. 100 a * 185 a † b † R RAdcliffe. 135 a † 239 a ¶ 812 b † Radwell. 237 b ¶ Rainsford. 148 q † Rainton. 596 a ¶528 b † M. Rainwell. 88 b † 226 a † 563 a * M. 560 b. Ramsey. 106 a * 155 a * 223 b * 224 a ¶ 348 a ¶587 a † 588 b ¶M. Randall. 101 a ¶103 a * 400 b * Randulph. 94 b * 322 a ¶409 a ¶ Ratcliffe. 590 a * Rave. 290 a * Raven. 351 b † Ravis. 370 b † 534 a ¶B. Rawson. 89 a * 306 a * 133 b ¶391 b * Raymond. 778 a ¶ Read, or Rede. 186 b ¶ 321 b ¶351 a ¶ 561 a ¶575 a † 576 a † M. Redman. 167 b † 411 a * Rosham. 547 a ¶M. Reinere. 536 b † Reive. 171 b † Remington. 227 a ¶ 573 a ¶ Renger. 539 a ¶M. Rennington. 575 b † M. Rest. 577 a ¶578 b † M. Revell. 227 a ¶573 b ¶ Reynell. 883 a * Reyner. 567 b ¶ Reynolds. 581 a † 806 a † 811 a ¶ Rich. 89 b † 281 b † 285 a * 565 a ¶ Richards. 544 a * Richardson. 907 a † Ricroft. 138 b † 175 a ¶ Ricthorne. 799 a * Rider. 591 a * M. Ridge. 94 b ¶ Ridley. 533 a * B. Ripton. 123 b * Rishby. 397 b ¶ River. 346 b * 586 b ¶588 a ¶M. Roberts. 133 b * 150 b † 293 b ¶ Robinson. 131 b † 133 b ¶180 a * Robsart. 346 a ¶ Roch. 184 b ¶223 b † 579 b ¶582 b † M. Rochester. 179 a ¶ Rochford. 313 a * Rodlegete. 186 a * Roc. 299 b † 878 b * Rogerbrooke. 416 a ¶ Rogers. 97 a ¶124 a † 242 b * 347 b † 412 b ¶312 b * Rois. 221 b * Roiston. 419 b * Rokeby. 331 a * 428 a † 429 b † 966 b * Rokesby. 306 a † 340 b ¶345 b † 543 b ¶ M. Rallingcourt. 186 b ¶ Roman, Romaine, or Romany. 118 b ¶ 258 b ¶267 a * 546 b * 548 a † M. Roose. 146 a † Roper. 315 b ¶ Roston. 346 b ¶ Roswell. 257 a * Rotham. 269 a * Rocheley. 346 b † Rotherham. 594 b ¶ Rothing. 549 a * Rowe. 92 b ¶98 a ¶ 106 b ¶107 a ¶188 b † 285 b † 586 a † 587 b ¶M. 589 b * 591 a ¶M. 594 a † 796 a † 798 a * Rowse. 153 b † 337 b * 451 a ¶ Rudston. 215 a † 579 b † 580 b † M. Rumney. 105 b † 107 a ¶305 a † 593 a ¶ Rus. 213 b * 563 b † Russell. 99 b * 133 b ¶ 221 b ¶387 b ¶ 472 b ¶M. 546 b ¶ 806 a ¶ S SAckford. 486 a * Sackvile. 346 b * 484 a ¶ Saint Albane. 892 b ¶ Saint Iohn. 228 b * Salter. 134 a ¶ Saltonstall. 215 a ¶ 590 b * 592 a * M. Sampson. 453 b ¶ Sampull. 908 b * Sandhill. 398 b ¶ Sanderford. 179 b † Sandwich. 347 a † 531 b † B. 546 a * M. Sandys. 412 a † 534 a † B. Sarich. 300 b † Saris. 829 b ¶ Savage. 455 a † 532 b ¶B. 273 b † 851 a. Savill. 415 b ¶ Saunders. 297 a ¶ Saxton. 274 b † Scarlet. 419 b ¶ Schrader. 135 a ¶ Scot. 99 a ¶244 b † 566 a ¶M. 791 a ¶ Scriven. 472 b ¶ Scroop. 186 b * Scudamore. 124 a † 170 b † 296 a † 473 a † 593 b * 900 b ¶ Seamer. 179 a * Segrave. 531 b ¶B. Seinturer. 538 b ¶ Seliock. 274 b * Sely. 547 a † 556 b ¶ 562 b ¶ Seman. 321 b ¶ Sentleger. 423 b ¶ Seringe. 811 a † Serle. 409 b † 538 b * M. Sevenock. 88 a * 372 a ¶561 b ¶M. 558 b † Seyle. 594 a † Seymer. 472 a † 578 b † 580 a † M. 813 b * Sha, or Shaw. 89 a ¶ 281 b † 283 b † 337 b * 570 b ¶572 a * M. 575 b ¶ Shandoys. 355 a * Sharborough. 308 b ¶ Sheldon, or Shelton. 259 a ¶577 b * 904 b ¶ Shelley. 138 b † 310 a ¶570 a * Shepley. 417 a * Sheppard. 800 a * Shere. 192 b ¶ Sherington. 192 b ¶ 218 a * Seerland. 873 a † Shirley. 416 a † Shore. 244 a ¶274 a ¶ 576 b. Shorthose. 310 a *
Shrow. 238 a † Shute. 221 b † Simonds. 392 b ¶453 a † 578 b * Skales. 138 b † Skevington. 157 a * 297 b † 579 a * Skidmore. 99 a ¶ Skinner. 106 b ¶306 a ¶590 b † 592 a † M. Skip. 400 a * Skoowith. 908 a * Slany. 106 b * 241 a ¶ 590 a † M. Smales. 473 b † Smalpace. 419 b ¶877 a † Smithes. 105 b ¶321 b † 594 b † Smith. 99 a * 134 a * 150 a † 213 b * 214 a * 291 b † 296 b † 316 b * 349 b ¶398 b † 406 a ¶453 b ¶ 473 a * 569 b * 597 b ¶779 b ¶783 b ¶ 794 a † 829 a ¶ Snelling. 424 a † Snow. 794 a ¶ Sokeling. 293 b † Some. 590 b ¶592 a ¶M. Sommer. 179 a ¶574 b * Sotherton. 332 a † Southlee. 346 b * Southwell. 245 a † Southworth. 179 a ¶ Speare. 308 b ¶ Spence. 472 b ¶ Spencer. 180 a † 186 a * 228 b ¶341 a * 578 b ¶580 a ¶589 b ¶591 b * M. 774 b † 825 b ¶ Spendelew. 883 a † Spert. 789 a † Spicer. 186 b † 539 a * Spilman. 400 a ¶559 b ¶ Stafford. 345 b ¶471 a * 808 a * Staham. 262 b * Stalbrook. 569 b † Standelfe. 338 a ¶ Standhurst. 451 a ¶ Stanes. 395 a ¶546 a. Stanhope. 369 b ¶ Stanley. 262 b ¶832 b † Staper. 188 b † Staple. 555 a ¶M. Stapleton. 770 b † Starkey. 152 b † Startute. 788 a † Steed. 230 b * 575 b † Steward. 211 a ¶551 b ¶789 a ¶906 b ¶ Stile. 98 a ¶105 b † 131 a ¶246 a † 292 b ¶ Stiward. 222 b † 567 b * Stocke. 821 a † Stocker. 228 b ¶568 a † 570 b † Stoddard. 100 a ¶135 a † Stoder. 99 a ¶ Stody. 87 a † 553 b. M Stokes. 152 a ¶486 a * Stokesby. 261 b † 367 b † 533 a † B. Stonard. 262 b ¶ Stondon. 557 a * M. Stone. 107 a ¶222 b † 246 b * 306 a ¶568 b ¶ Storyt 471 b ¶ Stotevil. 818 a * Stotley. 552 b ¶ Stow. 152 b ¶214 a * Strange. 314 a ¶ Stratford 157 a *531 b ¶B. Street. 265 b † Strelley. 322 a * 838 b ¶ Studinham. 131 a ¶ Sturgeon. 231 a ¶417 a ¶ Sturges. 399 a ¶ Suckley. 392 a † 582 b Sudbery. 532 a † B. Sugar. 409 a ¶ Summerset. 907 b ¶ Suthes. 792 b ¶ Sutton. 153 a ¶193 a * 322 b † 479 a † 561 a † Swan. 171 a † 572 b ¶ Swandland. 550 a * M. Swetenham. 308 b † Swift. 331 b ¶ Swinflat. 179 a * Swinnerton. 107 a * 793 a * 594 b ¶M. Sydnam. 428 a ¶ T TAbinham. 239 a † Talbat. 313 a * 531 b † B. 881 a † Talmage. 186 a ¶ Tame. 554 a † Tamworth. 333 a * 766 Tatam. 212 a ¶ Tatarsali. 562 b * Tate. 90 a * 138 b ¶ 190 b ¶222 b † 568 b ¶570 b * M. 574 b ¶ Taverner. 311 a ¶372 a ¶ Taylor. 105 a * 119 a ¶ 190 b ¶214 b ¶ 267 a * 294 b ¶543 b † 567 a ¶569 b * M. 591 a ¶ Tempest. 220 b ¶ Terry. 296 a ¶ Test. 222 b † Thame. 391 a † Thinne. 131 a ¶132 a ¶ Thirlewall. 419 b * Tholouse. 582 b ¶ Thomas. 308 a ¶458 a Thompson. 212 a * Thoresby. 796 b ¶ Thorn. 90 a ¶193 a † Thorney. 100 b ¶429 b ¶551 a ¶ Thornhill. 285 b † 295 a ¶ Thernix. 132 b ¶ Thornton. 472 a ¶898 b † Throckmorton. 149 a ¶ b * Throwstone, or Thurston 338 a * 578 b † Thunderley. 547 b * Tiligham. 262 b ¶ Tilne, or Tilney. 281 b † 573 b † Tipper. 428 b * Tirrell. 124 a * 145 b ¶186 b ¶ Tirres. 156 b ¶ Tolason. 540 b * M. Tolderney. 219 a ¶ Tolus. 214 a * Tomes. 303 a ¶ Tomkins. 810 a * Tony. 541 a † M. Topham. 429 b * 873 Torald. 419 b * Torkington. 221 b * Towerson. 292 b ¶ Townley. 351 b † Traps. 325 b † Travers. 218 a * 278 a ¶538 b ¶ Tredway. 349 b ¶ Trehearne. 451 b ¶ Treszawall. 347 a † Trever. 875 a ¶ Trindle. 214 a * Trisilian. 345 b * Trist. 338 a * Trotter. 309 a ¶ Trusbut. 281 b † Trussell 437 a * Tryon. 193 b † Tudnam. 186 a * Tuke. 292 a ¶ Tunstall. 533 a † B. Turke. 145 b ¶230 b † 398 a ¶550 b * M. 584 a † Turner. 135 b ¶153 a ¶274 b * 311 a ¶ 392 b ¶825 a † Turngold. 554 b ¶ Tusser. 274 b ¶ Twiford. 322 a † 350 b † 556 a * 557 b † M Twiselton. 350 a ¶ Tylar. 48 a * Tilling. 132 a * V VAle. 132 a * Valens. 432 a ¶ Vamere. 557 b. Vancke. 419 b ¶ Vandun. 809 b † Varnam. 808 b ¶ Varney. 569 a * M Vavasor. 471 b †
Vaughan. 135 a † 370 a ¶534 a * B. Vennar, or Venor. 179 a * 261 a ¶263 a † 57 a ¶M. Vere. 186 a * Verney. 567 b * Vernon. 102 b ¶214 b. Vevn. 907 b ¶ Vine. 330 b ¶ Vivent. 557 b ¶ Vndll. 451 a * Voyle. 541 a ¶ Vpton. 550 b ¶ Vrswyke. 796 b ¶ Vyrby. 131 b ¶ W WAddington. 349 b ¶ Waddis. 150 b † Wade. 546 a ¶559 a † Wadson. 868 b * Wai. 539 a * Wakefield. 149 b † Wakering. 415 b * Wake. 559 a ¶ Walbrooke. 543 b † Walcot. 102 b ¶270 a ¶557 b * 559 b. M. Walden. 419 b † 532 a * B. 567 a † Walderne. 562 b * M. 559 a * M. Walgrave. 537 b ¶ Walker. 220 b † Waller. 310 b * Walles, or Wallis. 86 b ¶ 146 a † 340 b ¶544 b ¶M. Walmond. 543 a † Walpole. 391 b † Walraven. 544 a † Walsingham. 134 a ¶ Walter. 95 b † 419 b ¶ 540 a * Walthall. 105 a * 212 a ¶503 b ¶ Waltham. 211 a ¶285 a ¶ Watton. 228 b * Walworth. 87 b † 232 b ¶236 b * 555 b * M. Ward. 554 b * M. 569 b ¶804 b ¶ Warden. 212 b * Workham. 532 b ¶B. Warley. 337 b ¶578 a. Warner. 352 a † 416 a † 574 b † Warren. 277 a ¶311 b † 580 a ¶581 b. M. Warton, or Wharton. 419 b † 566 b ¶ Wase. 338 b † Waters. 138 b † Watford. 419 b * 562 b. Wats. 106 b ¶139 b † 576 a † 592 a † M. Watson. 221 b ¶880 b. Weaver. 569 a † 900 a † Webbe. 106 b * 158 a ¶ 589 b † 591 a * M. Welbeck. 574 a † Weld. 106 b ¶153 a * 290 b † 592 b † 594 a * M. Welinhale. 567 a * Wels. 88 b † 146 a * 193 a * 284 a ¶399 b † 429 b ¶562 a ¶M. Wengham. 367 a † Wentworth. 290 a ¶ West. 186 a † 228 a * 246 b ¶306 a * 314 a * Westfaling. 773 a † Weston. 562 a ¶ Westwick. 417 b † Westwray, or Westrow. 597 a † 867 a † Wheatly. 303 a ¶ Whitby. 211 a ¶ White. 91 a † 160 a † 241 a ¶274 b * 295 b ¶394 b * 309 a ¶ 484 a ¶572 a † 573 b ¶M. 583 b * 584 b * M. 586 a * M. Whirgift. 355 b ¶ Whithall. 103 a ¶ Whitley. 538 a * Whitmore. 96 b * 596 a ¶M. Whitney. 779 a ¶ Whittington. 88 a * 244 b ¶256 b † 915 b † 561 b * M. 558 a * M. Whorwood. 259 a ¶550 a * Wiat. 351 b ¶ Wich, or Whyche. 218 a † 292 a * 565 b ¶568 b † 833 a * Wicam. 452 a † Wicksteed. 879 a † Widnell. 399 b * Wiking. 571 b ¶ Wilford, or Wyfold. 191 a ¶228 b ¶548 a ¶ 565 b * 566 b * M. 583 a † 558 b * Wilhall. 540 b ¶ Wilde. 553 a * Wilkinson. 233 b ¶134 a ¶473 a ¶579 a † 582 a † Williams. 179 a ¶830 b ¶ Williamson. 123 b ¶ Wilson. 277 b ¶309 a. Wimbledon. 539 a * 542 a ¶ Wimborne. 542 b * M. Wimondham. 554 b ¶ Winchcombe. 235 b * 303 a * 556 b ¶ Windany. 186 b ¶ Windent. 265 b ¶ Winderhall. 419 b ¶ Windsor. 324 a ¶ Winford. 257 a * Wingar. 244 a ¶574 a ¶576 a ¶ Wingfield. 186 a * 460 a * Wingham. 531 a ¶B. Wingrave. 548 b ¶M. Witchcote. 433 a † Witchingham. 551 b M. Withypoll. 239 b * Wokendon. 360 b † Wolley, or Woolley. 102 b * 363 a ¶777 b * Wood. 123 b ¶169 b * 230 b ¶238 a ¶307 a ¶337 b * 485 a † 574 a † 806 b ¶ Woodcock. 303 b ¶308 a ¶387 b ¶558 b ¶ 560 a † M. 589 a ¶ Woodhouse. 333 b † 415 b 555 b * Woodroffe. 152 a ¶b † 153 b ¶187 b ¶409 a ¶584 b ¶588 a † 589 a * M. Woodstock. 87 a ¶ Woodward. 218 b ¶ Woolaston. 102 b ¶ VVorsley. 801 a ¶ VVotton. 550 b ¶M. 560 a * VVright. 160 a † 597 b ¶ VVrithesley. 313 a † 428 a † VVroth. 262 b ¶552 b ¶M. VVrotsley. 346 a ¶ Y YAle. 412 a * Yaxley. 215 b * Yeardley. 373 Yerford. 299 b * 578 a * 579 a * M. Yevcle. 230 a ¶ Yong. 257 a * 346 a ¶ 451 a ¶567 b † 569 a ¶M. Yorke. 245 a * 584 a † Yowe. 191 a * 64 b * Z ZAmbon. 131 * Zouch. 135 a † 544 a ¶M. FINIS.
