25093 99846913 11910
THE Poore Mans passions. AND Pouerties Patience. Written by Arthur Warren. Anno. Dom. 1605. AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for R. B. and are to be sold in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Sun.
To his kindest Fauou∣rer Maister Robert Quarme. DIssemble not Pen, paint thy naked mind, Draw the Anatomy of perfit loue, And though Fortune to slender meanes thee bind, Affectionate yet to thy Patron proue; And tell thy friend, if Pouerty may steede, He shall not faile to finde a friend at neede. Giue him thy Passions, and thy Patience, And in them both include thy louing hart, Inuite him to thy Contents Residence, And seast him there, to answere his desart: That hast no Currant him to satisfie, But loue, affection, and gratuity. Europe hath Owners in possession placed, Asia for her Subiects taketh care, Affrica her Inhabitants hath graced, America hath not a foote to spare, And Indigence will not make thy Release, Till some of these Possessioners decease.
Tell him, the Hand, that did this Pen direct, If seruiceable, shall on him attend; Tell him, the Hart, that doth his loue affect, By prayers his Humanity defend? Tell him, that Passions must his Patience craue, Till Pouerty a richer Nature haue. Arthur Warren.
The poore Mans passions. TRagicall Hart, inuectiue tearmes collect, Perturbe the passion of the worldly minde, Deluding Obiects of Content reiect, Counterfeit pleasures in a bundell binde, And ouer-whelme them midst the Oceans waue, Or them interre in some Cymmerian caue. Resigne possession of regardlesse Toyes, That hoodwinke thee in downefalles of distresse, Though in apparance superficiall ioyes, Yet tryed proue but Counterpanes of blesse: Ile not bestowe perusing on that lease, Whose expir'd Date doth at the sealing cease. I Caitife, Cressus Royaltie disclayme, Discarding golden Crassus choisest store, With Enuies darts at Epicures I ayme, And Diues Sumptuousnes I disadore; For tell the Porter of the proudest state, I scorne to knock at the securest gate.
Yet lowest Fortunes crosse my lostly minde, And apprentize my thoughts to seruile lawe, VVhich Nature to her Pupils ne'er assig'nde, And all to curbe my grand Conceipts in awe; Such as lawlesse Necessities impose, To gall the shoulder that this yoke would lose. I liue, yet loth to lead this lothsome life, I breath, yet doe suspire with painfull breath, I stirre, yet storme to manage tedious strife, And I shall die vntested in my death, Doubting least mine Executors refuse The statute of my Testament to vse. vvhile Crosse and Losse doe countermand desire, vvhile will with want conioines a Combatine, As powerfull to set the Seas on fire, Making the most gainst Patience to repine, That ill Successe in worlds vnhappie state, Makes haplesse man much more vnfortunate. To controuerse with mine Aduersity, Is but with vnarm'd Brest to pierce a sword; And so Philautus shall doe iniury Vnto himselfe, by his selfe-wild discord: And yet these Oppositions who can brooke, That with one eye, or halfe a face doth looke?
Can Flesh and Bloud, that loues to braue the best, Pocket these wrongs and bury such abuse? And can Humanity these pilles digest, Or like Melancholists get some Recluse, To make their Orizons in Saturnes eare, That sitting dumbe doth mute petisions heare? A man's a man, though he haue but a face, A beardlesse face the world for to controle, But I in cloke depriud of gard and lace, Poore patches for my fortunes must inrole, To signifie vnto the Earth, what lot, The Lack-lands of our lower House haue got. To monarchize a wretches woofull state, Importeth prowesse, though but little power, Once to commaund the world seemes fortunate, Though but a VVorld conceipted for an houre, Indigents may abound though but in dreames, Fortune Flowes not to all in Fauours streames. Demi-god Argent, and the Siluer Saint Passengers in their trauell must protect, And with the Tauerner their needes acquaint, The Pennilesse no choise of Innes elect; Hunger and Thirst needes must we wars proclaime, And try the Combat, though we take the maime.
Phisitian Gold doth fortifie the lame, VVith Argus eyes illuminates the darke, Skilleth to shrowd Sinners apparant shame, In ships of Siluer safe we may imbarke, To cut the Seas, and crosse by eu'ry coast, In peace to take all Harbours for our hoast. In vaine the Monylesse their mones confesse, In vaine the wealthlesse doe their wants repeat, In vaine the wretches warble their distresse, In vaine the miserable doe intreat, For helping hands the Needy to relieue, Or mercies minds their much and good to giue. To sue, sollicite, begge, beseech, intreate, To smooth, sooth, flatter, and doe what thou skillest; To malice, menace, mischiefe, storme, and threat, But VVorlds vacuity with ayre thou fillest: Requests nought feed the siluer-sucking minde, No Penny doth no Pater Noster finde. Loue liues by losse, Don Lucre all commaunds, Pittifull Complaints, dolefull passions Sound, But are not tuned by relieuing hands, VVhile miseries are weakest Motiues found; Sonne dutifies father, father loues Sonne, And all is for Consideration done.
O would I could by vertues of my voyce, The Beggar from my presence but exile, And on professions execute my Choise, Or to desires my fortunes reconcile, Then farewell whip, a sop hard to digest, And Pill'ry, where men take but Pinch-eares rest. I would not feare Freedome of Borrough townes, Nor strictest Restraints of immured wales, Nor seuere presence of Officious gownes, Which with Commaunds commend vs to their hales, To answere all Obiects with cappe and knee, And Abiects all the while reputed bee. Vppon our Doome the dull'st will whet his braine, If Fortunes Flower but beginne to fade; The rau'nous Cormorants will vs constraine A Common top for scourges to be made, Lamigers creepe to set on foote our harme, The Blind to view our woes about vs swarme. Poorelings but Caterpillers they account, Their proffits destinated to deuoure, That Seas of sorrowes shall our Soules surmount, VVhile Pride gainst Poore doth flouds of malice poure, Adiudging vs but Burthens of the Earth, And Canker-wormes increasing Countries dearth.
Beares Armes gainst Peace, besieging our Contents, Muster the troupes of controuersing minds, And of our Martyrdomes make monuments, Testifie their degenerating kinds, Vnnaturallizing peruersest harts, To scandallize our lawdable Desarts. New-gate, the worst gate, they protest too good, Coldly to entertaine such goldlesse guests, These Cowards durst exhaust a Beggers blood, And tyrannize in hindring our requests; Our serious expectations crosse with toyes, Plant obstacles to intercept our ioyes. Helpe Heauens, poore Harts poorer plaints may poure To carelesse shores, and to relentlesse rocks, Man is mans Woolfe, for man would man deuoure, vvhile Brother from Brother compassion locks, Yet Trees him shade midst Sol-in-loos heate, Beasts minister him foode to be his meate. The Christall fountaines quench the thirst of man, The Dogges vse dalliance, and on him attend, The Oxe drawes, and the Asse doth what he can, The flocks withfleeces him from cold defend, Yet goes it gainst the hayre with him to spare, The solace, which might cure his Brothers care.
Vnreasonable Creatures can him show, And sencelesse things in silence can bewray Duty, which to his Neighbours he doth owe, Though deafe, blind, and hard-harted thus he stray, And hath such Mydas eares, as will not heare, Though thence his Error to the world appeare. Man without many helps can hardly liue, Although his fields of acres know none end, Yet doth it worse then cut his throat to giue, To Impotents, to Indigents to lend: Fondling, forget'st thou how thou borrow'st still That hard'nest thus thine Adamantine will? Diggers, and Dikers, Drudges, Carters, Swaines, Sheepheards, and Cowards, friend thee at thy neede, The poorest persons worke thy richest gaines, Thy Dropsie with Commodities to feede, Coblers, and Curriers, Tinkers, Tanners all Support thy state, else would thy fortresse fall. It's worke tyme-worthy to obserue the wayes Of Worldlings, how prepost'rously they liue, That will not helpe, yet want helps all their dayes, That without gifts liue not, yet will not giue. O brazen fronts, ô iron-metled harts, Whose quiuers surfet with discourteous darts.
And all's to royallize their Progeny, And eternize their Names in Mammons bookes, Register their time-eaten Dignity, Catch the Circumferrence in golden hookes, Make Ignorance subscribe vnto their will, Perswade the Blind, the valley is a hill. Summon a Parliament, which may haue power To contradict rulelesse Necessity, Endowe Needs Daughter with conuenient Dower, To extirpate the roots of misery, And ruinae the edifice of wants, In Pleasures plots to set Contentments plants. Beggery men contemptible doth make, Rags with Robes assume no Society, Irus with Cressus neuer hands did shake, Tokens of Vnion to testifie: The Patch with Purple nere acquaintance tooke, Nor Siluerlesse suits with the Lawiers booke. The widowe VVant soiournes at low-streets end, VVhile Monsier Mony purchaseth a place, His Consistory midst the towne to spend, Mongst Magistrates, Monarchs of greatest grace; VVhile to the Rich the world a Lorship giues, Pouerty alwaies vndertenant liues.
O rich VVorlds Darling, bigge thou dost abound VVith treasures, pleasures, health, wealth, liberty, Harts ease and thoughts wish at a winke are found Thy mutable Humours to satisfie, All ioyes desir'd attend thee at a beck, As though thou didst both fate and fortune check. Little thou carest what cares I indure, And lesse thou feel'st what force I suffer must, My dolours can no rest from ruth procure, VVhile as thou list thou canst agglut thy lust, Flowing in Oceans of profoundest wealth, VVhile wretch I want helpes to support my health, My Palate dry, my lips seeme parch'd with thirst, Belly thinkes throat cut through the lack of meate, Yet Seconds striue not who shall be the first, To minister meanes what to drinke or eate, Small scraping mundifies my trenchers cleane, I neede no Dyet to conserue me leane. Phisicke farewell, thou neuer shalt take cure, Gainst surfetting to practise remedy, If seldome meale may make complexion pure, Fairensse my formall face shall beautifie, Make me Pigmalions pictures counterfaite, VVhile staruing stomacke for a crum doth waite.
VVhen Thirst like Aetna'es heat doth cause me craue, Some slender potion Appetite to drowne, And begging I sweet liquid cannot haue, The Butler with his bowle so blacke doth frowne; Then runne I to a Riuer,  faire Brooke, How comfortable doth thy current looke: There I in all Humility prostrate, Bow'd on bare knees, and empty belly laide, Sue for a suppe at kind Banks mercy-gate, Where of the water I am not denaide; Twixt lip and liuer, water wine is made, To flourish life, which did commence to fade. Thus solaced incontinent I rise, Bowing in token of my thankfull hart, VVith best Cursey, that Duty can deuise, To gratifie the Runners kind desart: Away I walke after this humble greete, As though I quaffed had the Nectar sweete. VVhen wooluish Hunger on my stomack gnawes, Inuocates Custome Victu'alls to prouide, Teeth ruminating on their empty iawes, As if they durst no longer dull abide, Sith Appetite precepteth them to dresse For dying Nature some reuiuing messe.
Then I importune, and sollicite Cooke, For one cold cut I tender him my loue, VVith hollow eyes and fleshlesse cheekes I looke, To pitty so the pittilesse to mooue: VVith Egle wings he flies to lock the dore, Is not at leasure to reliue the poore. Thus doe these iron hands Compassion shut From soules surcharg'd with sorrow through their neede, vvho neuer helpes vnto the helplesse put, Nor spare superfluous things our wants to feede, vvhich swell with fat, surfeit with dainty fare, Vnmindfull of their needy Neighbours care. The Belly-god with gourmandizing full Excludeth empty Appetite from minde, Bibbers beere-swollen eyes with quaffing dull, Thinke they can no where any thirsting find, Gluttons in Lethe lake drowne Penury, Drunkards imagine no throat to be dry. Midst this perplexity I make my mone To God, to man, man not regarding God, I sigh in sorrow, and in griefe I grone, Scourged with Persecutions piercing rod, O it's a Hell on earth all to indure, VVhich dayly men to mischiefe men procure.
Nature, that first gaue life, decreed a lawe, That Mortalls Earths-fruites should in Common hold, When Tymes Corruption priuate profit saw, Things gratis giuen must be bought and sold, And then Diuision striued for a store, To marre what golden Age had made before. This seeing I all Adams sonnes forsake, Ominous seeming in their odious sight, And to my Meditations me betake, To seeke the Cause, why they denie me right: Such Difference I find twixt store and dearth, That Rich count Beggers Bastards of the Earth. Because we are not elder Brethren borne, Apparant Heyres to earthly Heritage, Hence hautie VVorlds Inheritors vs scorne, As not begot in lawfull Marriage, The harme is ours, the iniury was theirs, To take all, ere we borne were to be Heires. These monster-natur'd People I forsweare, And to mismembred Syluane Satyres goe, Pouring my plaints into their brutish eare, So making them familiar with my woe; I warble forth a vvretches dolefull cryes, To proue what pitty in their bowels lyes.
These lodge a better Bounty in their Brest, These Heathen harbour more Humanitie, One may in surer safety with them rest, Than with his Brethren full of Tyrannie, They will conduct you to their mossy caue, VVhere part of their prouision you may haue. This moou'd the prudent Hermits to forsake Country, Acquaintance, Parents, liuings, land, And in the VVildernes a Cell to make, vvhere they secur'd from iniuries might stand; Though mosse, not downe they vsd in sted of bed, And were with hips and hawes for Dainties sed. It's Ease enough, whereas may lodge Content, It's cheere enough, where Nature is suffis'd, It's Right enough, whereas no wrong is ment, It's loue enough, where no hate is deuis'd, Better to liue alone in peace and rest, Then mongst the multitude, and be opprest. My sourged VVits doe waue with strange desires, VVhen Melancholy doth these planets note, My Soule to be a Soliuage requires, Intreats Earths Center for some place remote, There could I draw sweet and contented breath, vvhere friends faigne not, nor foes pretend my death:
The Clifts, the Rocks, the steepy Roughes, and Dales, The Mountaines, Promontories, Harbours, Plaines, Inhabitable Islands, Creekes, and vales, Estranged Continents, resortles Maines, Groues, Desolations, and vntroden waies My wandring steps with weary pace assaies. Some vnfrequented woods I seeke to find, Some vnknowne Desarts iourney I to see, vvhat Solitarines hath there assign'de For such, as her Inhabitants shall be, The Earth I suruey for the secret'st field, To proue what entertainement it may yeild. I meet with Lynx, and with the Lyon fell, vvith beastly Beares, Tygres of Hyrcanie, Calidons Bore, like Cerberus in Hell, That wrongs and wounds all Persons passing by, The Basan Bulls, the Irish vvolues I see, All which impose no violence on mee. The Lynx, that is the clearest Beast of fight, Seemeth to shed a showre of Christall teares, The Lyon, Monarch for his matchlesse might, Offers no force, to load my life with feares; Tygres are tame, Bulls hurt me not with horne, vvoolues are like Lambs by them I am not tonne.
My misaduentures doe them all amaze, Of mine Afflictions they remaine in awe, On my mishaps, and my misfortunes gaze, As though they so strange obiects neuer saw, So forlorne-like I passe, so vile so base, That they relent to view my ruthfull case. Thus I with eyes of farre-discerning mind, Home-ward conuert a distort Countenance, In esperance acquaintance some to find, vvhich might eye-witnes vnexpected chance, Earths Cormorant, heere to thy scandall see The mercy, which the mercilesse shew me. Maske thy hard forehead, to obscure thy shame, Viewing vnreasonable Creatures kind, That sauage, wild, and brutish are by name, And yet by Nature of a better mind, Then thou, that dost thy selfe a monster make, vvhile that a Beast doth mans Idea take. Yet Genius hath framed thee a man, Time and Experience ioynd assisting hand, Arte hath perform'd, what knowledge practise can, And all is but to number Ocean's sand, It seemes Impossibility to bee, To make a Metamorphosis of thee.
Thou wilt not alter, but from Haue to Hold, From catch to keepe, from much to gather more, From Cottages to farmes, from lead to gold, From Competence into superfluous store, Thy Nature nought to such but enuie yeilds, As haue a meadow greener then thy fields. VVhat i'st to begge, but to be counted base? VVhat i'st to borrow, but to be denide? When Poore are trespas'd, they learne Ploydons case, And must for recompence content abide, Yet giue the Rich but an vncourteous looke, It prooues a forfeit by their statute booke. It's wrong to them, if any pleasant liue: It's paine to them, if any sit in ease: It's griefe to them, if any one doe thriue: It's death to them, if any them displease: They doe prohibit that a horse should beare, But golden him, that siluer spurs doth weare. Degrading vs with contumelius spelles, They touch, attach, and summon vs with shames, To our discredit ring reprochfull bells, And Catalogue vs with inhumane names, Vagabonds, varlets, villaines, vassalls, slaues, Rogues, Caterpillers, Runnagates, and knaues.
O Heauens, yee haue heard these wrongs and more, Earth is eare-witnes of these iniuries, Produc'd to punish, and depose the poore, With more then suble villanies, That mauger  the oppressed cry, And death it is, that wretches may not die. Goods, Cattles, Fees, Lands, , and gold, Issues, Rents, Proffits, Fines, and , Worlds Argonauts from ouer-whelming hold, Midst Flouds, Rocks, Seas, and gulfes of miseries, VVhile Poore her person with the path doth weare, Bucephalus must Alexander beare. For in wealth consists worlds Nobility, Honour, Preferment, fridship, loue, and all, Birth, Learning, Vertue, is but Beggery, Least Hap it      ball: VVho is the Lord, but he, that hath the luck; VVho is the man, but he, that hath the muck? If Asses thus to Honours height ascend, Load but with siluer burthens, golden pas, If Manhood thus on Mous depend, VVhich hauing this all other merits lacks, Then Glory shall detaine Desa reward, And vertues will not  gard.
Then 'mong'st the Ladies may A , And hold a Disaffe, or ruine Carpet Knight; Vlisses may his  madnesse giue, And plow the sands, and in his ome delight, To Cowardice the   yeild, Mars sit indignifide in Honours field. Custome maintaine   in things, Or chang'd, for better  wish, Good Friday hath the Capon by the wings, While Easter day is fea b with fish, The Poore midst Richimens meple is forc'd to fast, And still into the S  cast. VVho presents Pouery with pin, or ought, Pining in Peny, naked with neede? Venson and Fatlings to the Rich, are brought, Iewells and iems their ees delight feede; VVhether goe gifts, but to the wealthy hand? VVho sit in Chaires, but they that best might stand? All to the tune of Ars versie goes, Cart drawes the Horse, them both the Diuell driues, Mens publique friends conuert to priuate foes, And these wounds most the harmelesse Patient grines, The vvealthy best theter succour might, But they'll no wrong pt, nor proffet right.
Couzen Diogenes, didst thou suruiue, Mine hart were freed from a thousand feares, If Pilgrim, thou couldst prosprously riue, Midst the Caniculars of our luck lesse yeares, Couldst thou fadge with the vvorld in thy state, I would thee for example imitate. Remember, how they once did Dogge thee name, Now Curre, and worse then ill, they would thee call, Bannish thy presence to thy future shame, Not spare a tub to couer thee with all, But intercept the Sun from warning thee, If them thou find such, as they prooue to mee. The shestring Hedge personates Beggars house, The trees, the fields, and bushes are his mates, Some silly Baucis poore Philemons spowse, Forgotten and forgone of greater states, His Rayment, Ragges, vndecency his lace, The Rent his Cut, his habits so to grace. The Cynick once with Candle in his hand, At noone  man in Macedoni sought; vvere he Suruyour of the spacious land, He scarcely should descry a courteous thought, That had Compassion to commiserate, The Indigence of some distressed state.
This frozen-harted Age so coldly loues, That Charity exting shed is found, Beneficence but ver  prooues, VVhile Promise doth but expectation sound, All are content to father Dignitie, Yet few will Parents be of Courtesie. Had I but honour, all I would aduance: Had I but wealth, I would inrich the poore: Or strength, I would the weakest countenance: Or had I skill, I would recure the loe: There should no penny of reward be nam'd, Till I had made strength, wealth, and Art asham'd. Ist not a disine to Humanity, That monie should thus tyrannize on earth? Or Niggardize our fames indignifie, And on the faculties raise needlesse dearth? The Arts are liberall, then why should price, Bury such gifts in obscure Auarice? VVhat Penury of Paper Scriueners find: VVhile Bills, and Bonds, Indentures, Leases, Deeds. The worldlings to their words performance bind; Though no Prouiso for Relapse of needs, The Poore bare Ecoes are content to take, VVhile Rich with wa and writings bargaine make.
VVhile vvrits and vvarrants, Executions, Rests, Lurke like Hyenna, Debts to apprehend, vvhile carefull Creditors perturbe their brest, In secresie their Messengers to send Vnto the Bank-rupt, that hath broken day, And doth not leuie, what he ought to pay. These troubles are become so common trade, That Shoulder-catching doth the vnthrift gall: Such Custodies for Euidences made, That they deuoure the timber, steele, and all; They must haue double gates before their doore, To stop the false, and to expell the poore. The Needy no key, lock, chest, closet lack, They without artificiall continent, Include in Belly, and support on back, vvhat Heauen giues, or niggard Earth hath lent, No folds for flockes, no treasuries for gold, But they haue present vse, that all can hold. Deneers not Duckats are the Summes we make, Pence and not pounds the charges we bestowe, Slender dole, and no large Donations take, Gratuity, the payments which we owe; Yet vvorldly Pompe, which doth our eies allure, Suggests, we should not this disgrace indure.
Coniecture what we thinke, when we behold, A vvealth-enobled vvorldling, to abound VVith rings, and pretious things, with gilt, and gold, As such a second vvorthy were not found: How true suppose yet prooues our Poore-mans ey, vvhen all these trickes and trims it doth espy? How faine it would relinquish homely head, And riuet to Obiects so faire in sight; VVhose robes and plumes so gloriouslie are spread, The gazers to amaze with rare delight! My dearest Treasures should be cheaply sold, To buy a minute, these Rares to behold. One of mine eies to ieopard could I brooke, On silkes, scarses, Sattans, iewells, bracelets, chaines, On cuffes, and ruffes, and Nouelties to looke, Although the price thereof procure my paines: Such difference in my muck-blinded minde, I betwixt their worth, and my want doe find. One of their fingers craues more sumptuous cost, Then all my Carkasse to inuest the same, So gloz'd with gold, with pearle so imbost, VVhose pricefull valew they at Hundreds name: Almost I am perswaded, that it shall Neuer to dust through times oppression fall.
For Iuries Solomon, that did abound With rarest Ornaments, that Art hath wrought, Nor Scriptures Lilly, was so royall found, To equallize what shewes they foorth haue brought; To make beholders at these sights admire, And the Ambitious hange on their desire. Caesar, whose troupes enforc'd the Earth to grone, VVith vvarriours waight in his triumphant daies, Numbred no more to gard his regall throne, Then doe attend the Rich in all assaies; For all the Earth is theirs to be inioyd, And all the world are theirs to be imployd. The vvinters frost nips not the Rich with colde, Their purse preuention gainst all plagues procures, Their steeds in stables stand, their flocks in folde, The Poore (poore Hart) all Detriments indures, VVealth neuer wrincheth griued with the gall, Alas it's want, that euer feeles the fall. Bare Neede constraines the eldest foote to trot, Through frost, through flint, through fire, though legge be bare. Ice neuer too cold, neuer Sun too hot, To worke our woe, and to increase our care, Although Disease and Death our liues possesse, VVealth stands vnmoou'd to pitty our distresse.
But with a Crucifie they on vs call. But with their helpe they adde griefe vnto griefe, But with their might they wrest vs to the vvall, But with their loues they leaue vs no reliefe, Fie on that call, helpe, might, loue, and that deede, vvhich makes our wounded hart the more to bleed. But aske my staffe, the witnes of my woes, vvhat crackes, what knockes, and strokes it hath indur'd, As secret shield against professed foes, By whom my blacke and blewes haue beene procur'd; It's worne, it's torne, spoil'd, and foil'd, & cut in twaine, To weaken force, which would augment my paine? But aske my Scrip, the Cubbord where I lay My crusts, my crumes, my Commons, victualls, meale, And it my fortunes will in briefe be wray, How niggardly with me these Earthlings deale: If fasting fare in diet I surmount, For euer me an Hereticke account. vvhile Aristippus in the Court doth seede, And fats his crammed Corps by flattery, I in the Country entertaine my neede, vvith herbes and roots of Natures charity, And for my priuate foode search common fields, vvhich Contents Plenty in abundance yeilds.
I thinke how Heauens gaue the Desolate Manna, and Quailes, and Honie from the rockes, Beautifide those harts vnfortunate, Open'd their Treasuries with Mercies-lockes, That thought they Egipts garlicke, onions lost, They found prouision of a dearer cost. Ist true Elyas, that the Rauens brought Such comfortable Nutriments of meate; And so meanes of thy Sustentation wrought, vvhen thou hadst nought but secresies to eate. Not daring in the worlds apparance stand, Fearing Oppressions tyrannizing hand? In aire Camelions foster vitall breath. In flaming fires the Salamander feeds: In Seas the Fish secure themselues from death: Mowles in Earths bowells doe expell their needes: Then will I not in doubtfull state despaire, vvhile I may liue by water, fire, earth, aire. These Cobs resemble Saturne, that deuour'd The stone Abider in the steede of Ioue; And all the flouds of their desires are pour'd, To make a Sea of what they chiefely loue: They couet drosse, and doe contemne the gold, Omit the good, which men by vertue holde.
Yet they themselues shrowd in security, Gainst aduerse Oppositions fortifide, Beare Armes against that trouping miserie, Which circumuents my Soule on eury side: They are not troubled with a touch of woe, VVhile we midst Legions of misfortunes goe. Seas, stormes, waues, tempests, and contrary wind, Did poore shipman Acaetes euer crosse, In calmest Ocean he did shipwraoke find, VVhich did conuert his lucre into losse; VVhile wealthy Marchants safely doe arriue, And at their pleasdre prosprously athriue. Thus Passions get a habit in my life, Making it tractable to Fortunes frowne, VVhile we liue Souldiours in sinister strife, Contending to attaine a Lawrell Crowne; Yet Mercenaries find a time to rest, vvhich is as much, as hapneth to the best. Horace, did not Cobler Alphenus liue? VVhy Vsurer Alphius did no more, Yet though the Fates to all like breathing giue, Fortune makes them not Stewards of like store; The doubtfull lots are so vnequall found, That some must want, while others doe abound.
The Seas Amalchi'um alwaies frozen stand, vvant flagrant Phaebus to dissolue the same; And poore are euer more depriu'd of land, vvhose former lot the Senior vvorldlings came, On the Philosophers stone they erect The edifice, which chiefely they respect. And they haue power to turne Fortunes wheele, As most contents their auaricious minde; They skill choisest Commodities to feele, Although their eies with earthly dust are blind; Vnable to discerne that royall thing, vvhich doth inrich the Beggar, grace the King. These Sysiphusians haue a stone to turne, A wandring thought to rumble vp and downe, vvith Tantalus in expectation burne, Couet the Country and affect the towne: For what they stoop to take, too low doth lie; And what they reach to catch, ascends too hic. These with Ancaeus plant the sprowting vine, Hedge in their garden, Orchard, Hearbory, Yet neuer tast of their expected wine, By Calidons bore intercepted die, For Fates preuent them with their tuskish wound, Before the Sweete fruits of their sweats are found.
Some Deianira venom'd shirts them send, From worldly ole to draw their loue, That midst their mirth with misery they end, Their harts from ioyes enioying to remooue: Then Hercules from reason runs to rage, And Death denies them of an elder age. These Fatlings feast, while as I pooreling fast, They dine, I pine; they sweetely sleepe, I wake: They leaue, I lacke; I want, they plenty wast: I seeke a crum, while choise of Cates they make, Their fast is dearth of stomacke, not of meate, Mine is because I haue not what to eare. These are vainglorious, lewd, vniust in life, Desperate, discontent in death they bee, Sedition-sowers, stirrers vp of strife, VVhile Heires for Inuentories disagree, These Purgatorians, though forgot in graue, Ora pro nobis must remembred haue. Funerall pomps, tombes, Ceremonies, Rites, Epitaphes, month-minds, Dirges, Candels, Bell, Rabbles of irreligion, Flatring writes, To intercept their passage into Hell, Their Memories in Chronicles must liue, VVhen Truth should them scandals sepulchre giue.
Yet false teares stepdame-like their partings ha Of friends, acquaintance, Kindred, children, wife, Scrikes, cries, sighes, and sobs circumuent their graue, Though death of one to twenty giueth life, For many Soules are comforted with that, VVherewith one Epicure fed one so fat. Might I heire to some Vsurer be found, VVhose gorged chests surfet with cramming gold, VVhose coffers with Commodities abound So full, that they no sterling more may hold: Rome Rascalls then make space and grace for me, VVhereas my vvorship shall in person bee. I would elect, Flaunt, Cut, and Swash for mates, For choise Companions, pleasure, mirth, delight, For equalls, Gentells, Honourables, States; Aiax would not presume to prooue my might: Mylo would beare his Bull, and let me goe, Malitious Momus durst not be my foe. Dignitie seeme inferiour, and too bad To be my shadowe, Science would attend, Inuention practize Arts to make me glad, Poetry my profession would commend, Dutifull Loyalty would humbly greete My Person, passing the prospicuous streete.
But now the worst are censured too good, The Miscreants, the Abiects, the forlorne, Adiudging Basenes borne of better blood, A corner of my Company doe scorne: So odible an Obiect am I thought, Contemn'd, forsaken, loth'd, and set at nought. Yet Miser thus disparaiged I liue, Succour and meanes of maintenance to mee, The heate, the ayre, the vvoods, and vvaters giue, Though Fortunatelings hate it so to bee, I borrow not, doubting to be denide, I steale not fearing my life should be tride. Come staffe, and manage mine vnhappy hand, Scrip, guard my Shoulders, burthen light to beare, Three merry mates we gainst the Sun will stand, Solace to see, that comforts none can heare, The lighter purse, the lesse the cares are found, Hearke, while I whistle to the winds a round. Arthur Warren.
POVERTIES Patience. DEpart yee Discontents like Reprobates, For Patience all Aduersities indures, In rarest Disposition imitates Hearbe Panace, that all diseases cures, Heales interne maladies of wounded mindes, And salues the sores that Phisicke saluelesse finds. Credit not vaine Perswasion, that deludes Fond Tractability with fallacies, And such inducements forcibly intrudes Into Credulitie with Sophistries, That man, whom Reasons Index should direct, Suggested is true iudgment to neglect. Aske Contentation, what's Felicity, And aske Felicity, what is Content, Aske life, what is the death of misery, And aske dumbe death, what makes life permanent: Peruse the Contents of contented minde, Thou nought, but Patience registred shalt find.
Tell Expectation, Hap doth frustrate Hope, Through frowning Fortunes fatall Accident: Tell Auarice, Vertue hath larger scope, VVhere to erect the Mansion of Content: And tell Content, that Suffrance drew the plot, Fit for foundation of so happy lot. Tell India, that gold's but yellow earth: Tell Greece, that words are but a breathed sound; Tell Ceres, that all Plenties haue their dearth; Tell stoutest Troy, Hector is mortall found; And tell thy selfe, that wealth, Art, store, and strength Prooues frailty, want, errour, and neede, at length. Discretion, censure which is better found, Much to possesse, and nethlesse liue in neede; Or to enioy but little, and abound, So Competence Necessities may steede: Brookes satisfie thirst with conuenient store, The spacious Oceans liquid can no more. Yes, Seas may swallow, Currents seldome drowne, This vvorld includs such Gulfes of ouerthrowes, For vvealths Deluge may ouerwhelme a Crowne, When Desires flouds to inundations growes, Sourging and sinking that waue-tossed minde, VVhich sailes Impossibilities to find.
And therefore Resolution, seale thy thought, Soone to surrender thy dismembred state, Because Contents Perfection is not bought, Such firme Prouiso hath beene made by Fate, VVhisper Chorebus in the eare, that Clay Prooues loosing gamster, with a knock to play. For knowe, Corruption will thee apprehend, VVhen Sherife Death shall execute arrest, And to thy sepulchre thee Captiue send, To soiourne there, till thy Debts be confest, Till Summes be paid, till thou acquittance haue, Or Creditors Release thy Credit saue. Sword, sheath thy sharpe, it's neither edge, nor point, Nor target, Buckler, shield, nor skill, nor might, That giues protection to thy safest ioint, vvhen maistring Destinies proclaime their fight, Chalenging a Quicunque vult to play About with them, for Conquest of the day. Gnatho, Fates haue no eares to entertaine The sugred phrase of soothing Parasites, And Ostentations brauings are but vaine, Ther's no regarde of proudest Thasonites; For Adulation proues but idle breath, Great words small wind, when they sollicite death.
Prostrate thy person Magnanimity. For Pompey doth, and Potentate thou must, Can Alexander lease his Chiualry? No t'is expir'd, and he dissolu'd to dust: VVhere's he, that would Achilles armour haue? Aiax in earth, Vlisses lies in graue. Cyrus his mouth with bowles of bloud hath fill'd, vvhile Tomyris the royall Butler plaid; Hell holds the Cob, that bigger batnes would build, vvith Soule consulting not to be denaide: So their Desires some augmention ment, vvhile sleeping thus they dream'd not of content. But Affectation, I haue past my word To Iustice Conscience, worlds Court forsake, vvhose Secretary Feare doth it record, That in Contents Cell I must Mansion make, And like a Hermit in that Residence Be weded, and conuerse with Patience. And from the many-headed multitude vvill sequester my presence and estate, In secret scene my Comedy conclude, And priuately with Meditation mate, Then farewell pleasure, and adew delight, Ile yeild to Fate, that must with fortune fight.
Pompe, Riot, Ease, delicious, costly, vaine, Glory, gold, my Regeneration see, Selfe-loue, hope, pleasure, lust, desires, and gaine, I haue subscrib'd with you at two to be, Presumption fly with Dedalls son, and fall, Drown'd in the sea, which men Icaean call. Intemperance, doe not on Venus looke, Chastity I haue vow'd to deify, And register my name in Vestas booke, And Cupids temples, gods, and Saints denie: No myrtle, no mellodious warbling string, Nor payre of Doues for sacrifice will bring. Tell Danae Virginity repelles The goldenst shower, that from Heauen falls, And him, that Ioue in Fortitude excells, VVhere maidenhood secured is in walls, VVhen Constancie, Faith, and Perseuerance, The Castle guard for lifes Continuance. Rich Tagus Runnet, which with gold dost run, I will not wash my gilded wish in thee, Beauty, which shinest to outbraue the Sun, For thy loue Ile not Prides Corriuall bee: The Alcumists Ile in defiance hold, VVhich durst conuert base Obiects into gold.
Inhumane Macheuilles I will abiure, And not be friend to Vertues enemies, Troupes of Antagonists I will procure To depose their presuming villanies, Constraining them to tergiuerse with mee, When Contents prowesse shall approoued bee. Pleasure, on Earth-wormes make intestine pray, And with thy golden baite delude the blind, No frauds my circumuented Troy betray, Though Synon for this Action be assign'd: So greedily I gape not after gaine, In short delight to swallow endlesse paine. Syrens harmonious Sonnets founding sweete Send no misinformation to their minde. Which nauigate their Common-wealth to meete, And after trauell Ithica to find, Vlisses to a pillar will be bound, That so he may escape home safe and sound. Circe, thy Potions want effectuall power, To intercept the passage of the wise, Calipso's dregs cannot retard one hoe The voyage, which Discretion doth deuise: Bewitching vvorld workes none impediment, To stop the Mortifides resolu'd intend.
Yet Pouerty seemes title of Contempt, A gracelesse word, a derogating Name, VVhich Honours Court from presence doth exempt, As scandall, which indignifies the same; I haue none ensignes of apparant worth, Nor Ornaments, to set my Person forth. I challenge no possession of a Crowne, vvhich earthly Realmes or Royaltie bestowes, I feare not fatall force of Fortunes frowne, vvhich to the proude Precipitation owes, I sit meeke, milde, inferiour vnto all, So low I am, lower I cannot fall. VVith Vsury I haue no league of loue, vvith Pride I clayme on Consanguinity, Yet though I cannot Fortunatus proue, vvorlds expectation I will fallify, And one day be possessour of that place, vvhich holds these fronted titles in disgrace. Fauour is but fading vncertainty, Maiesty some decaying Monument, Loue but a labarinth of misery, Riches are but Administrations lent, Then will I scorne Earths excrements, pelfe, drosse, And, till I come to Heauen, beare my crosse.
Romane Carbilius first refus'd his wife For Barrennes, but Natures bare defect: So this world lothes our incommodious life, Our wedlock by diorcement to reiect: Because we doe not yeerely fructifie, With Fortunes sprowting Prodigalitie. Campania is not our Naiue seate, VVhich the Italians iudge their fertill'st lands, But I about sterilitie must beate, And for Annuities imploy my hands: vvhile VVealth in largest seas his ship may put, vvith slender Hulke the Caspian streights I cut. Aduauncement, beare an eye vnto thy state, Securelesse Royaltie, liue circumspect, Ignorance, no dominion arrogate, Phaeton, thine Ambition correct, If loue incensed be gainst what's desir'd, He will confound thee, ere the VVorld be fir'd. Empires rule not with moderate Content, Scepters ioyne with terrestriall Diadems, Mansolus hath but fading Monument; Then basely I esteeme these Indy Iems, As for all Treasures found on seas or land, I admit none of them to touch my hand.
VVhen saw the VVorld me roab'd in rich aray? Or counterfeit in colours Esopes Py? Or countermand earths fashions euery day; Or with the Peacock gaze on brauery: Or like Lisicrates, gainst Nature black VVhite haires, that old I might seeme age to lack? VVhen trauell'd I in vvagon, chariot, Couch? Or Abbot-like with cushions cockred ease? Or had of Pleasures any tender touch? Or eyes with beauteous visions did I please? Or when my stomack did I fill and feede vvith choise of meats, or one meale more then neede? Lesse leafes do fitter lower shrubs become, And lower sayles lesse boats doe better guide, Lesse paces sooner bring the lighter home, And safer we arriue with lower tide: Great tides haue flouds, flouds waues, waues dangerous be, Take through the fords, if thou wilt passe with me. Th'Egyptian Island Chemnis alwaies swimmes, Tost hether, thether, vp and downe with wind, So worldly loue, so VVorldlings wandring limmes Course to and fro Commodities to find: Acquainted are with rarity of rest, Feeling disturbance of care-cumbred brest.
The Cercyraei were not more perplexed vvith warring oppositions of their foes, Then VVealth is with inquietation vexed, vvhile it from land to seas a coursing goes, Sending Inquiry to descry that store, vvhich makes the Owner to affect the more. If in a Senate house Content could liue, Then Office might adorne the Frankize gowne, If that a kingdome could sufficient giue, Then Maiestie might dignifie a Crowne: If Fates surpris'd not men with purging fan, Presull and Prelate were a happy man. Centurions then might on their guards be stout, And Generalls might troupes of Armies hold, Iustian then were manumist from doubt, But Death the Sheepheard playes, brings them to fold, No Magistracie length of life can giue, Caninus but seau'n houres did Consull liue. The Oxe, which of Clytumnus Current drinks, Transformed is into a Colour white, But who so tasteth of Contentment, thinks, Earths invitations can him not incite, To be translated into any minde, But those Conceyts, which Patience seekes to find.
Although no Bacchanalls I celebrate, To banish wit by sence-exiling wine, Though I my stomacke doe not ded To Luxury, and with the Glutton date, Yet doth Abstemius Christall water find, And Curius foote to content Natures minde. Essei were certaine Religious Iewes, Abstaining from flesh, women, oiles, and wines, Contenting Nature but with Dates and dewes, Neuer kil'd fatlings, neuer robbed vines, To flatter Palate, or feed Gluony, With Cates and Delicates variety. His Kingdome rauenous Erisicthon sold, And of so many Millions kept no mite, Exchang'd his daughter Protea for gold, To satisfie his Royall Appetite; Not thus content gainst Nature did rebell, And of his owne Flesh a deuouring fell. The Troyan horse, made by Epeus hand, Had no such Belly Hundreds to containe, Though it did swallow, Citty and the land, VVhich Pryam rul'd, during his happy Raigne: This vvoulfe, his Realme in gourmandizing spent, Tasting no sweete Ambrosin of content.
Diuine Content, thine Altars Ile frequent, Offring a mite with hand, talents with hart, Fortune to greatr ifts will not consent, Then goddesse, let desire stand for desart; And prooue propitious to thy poorest Saint, That doth thy godhead with his lot acquaint. Sweete Vertue, patronize my Patience, Though but Beggar to Biggers I appeare, Protect me with thy sacred Prouidence, Thy Suppliants petitions Ioue-like heare; And for me Glories paradize prouide, Aboue the Earth to haue me dignifide. Dismember limbs from Body of Delight, vvhich in times processe must disiointed bee, From Sensualitie my sences right, vvhich may conglutinate my loue to thee; Make perfet Vnion twixt Content and Poore, And knit that Gordion lasting euermore. Giue not Aboundance, least I should forget The Giuer, when such surplusage I see, Giue not too little, least I die in det, Vnable so to tender Charons fee; The golden Mediocrity I craue, To quite the vvorld, and me conduct to graue.
I couet not that penetrable way; Divulged to the Common Multitude, Ile not at passage with the Vulgars play, But steps into the narrow streits intrud, Not griuing though I leaue my shoes behind, So I the perfet path to Heauen find. vvhat ist a pleasant iourney to enioy, And in a painefull Inne be ente▪ Cursed are lodges, that the guests oy, vvhere Trauells Recreation should be : Tread hard by day; s ease at night e ound, Lament in life so ioyes in death abound. Imploy me not in Superfluities, vvhose summes surcharge a well-addicted minde, vvhich Marthaes conuersation occupies, To prosecute such earthly sutes assign'd: Disburthen my Conceipts of vvorldly cares, vvhich little Time to thinke on Tempe spres. Let diuine Contemplations be my treasures, And sacred songs my choisest harmonie, And Vertues Recreation my pleasures, And Hope the Prologue of my Comedie, Oh with what action would I gce my part, Had I a scene according to desart.
Pronuntiation should make Pride asham'd, Such sweetnes in distinction, Are in gesture, My grauity in face may not be nam'd, Nor Ornaments ibrodred on my sture; That muddi eies, base lamps, and earthy lights, Durst not behold the Obiects of these sights. The Mellodie of Cherbins me grace, And Millions of Ma me attend, Societies of Angels me embrae, Their time the Sints Communions with me spend, And robes of Righteousnes I haue in store, My person in Ioues presence o decore. And yet Earths Vulgars me indignifie, And on my habits cast disfull , Obraid me with odious vndncy; But worse obiections I then these haue borne; Better Coceipts I haue of rater things, VVhich men nto the blisse of blissings brings. Ile conuerse with my priuate Pilgrimage, Medling with Earth so little, as I may, Let Solitarines me patronage, Vntill by Death I Natures due repay; Yet I with Fortunes hand encounter must, And beare armes, till I be dissolu'd to dust.
Let Contents Coslet guard besieged life, Armour of Proofe vpon my Shoulders lay, Direct me Souldiour in this vale of strife, On Earth my Captaines ensignes to display, Though I vnfortunate loose gaines, gaine losse, Vnder the durance of the hardest crosse. Its Hart-griefe to suruey my wofull wounds, Death-passions, but to touch my miseries; These Troubles taste Digestions strength confounds, Courage sits daunted at these dolefull cries, Hell cannot adde one plague vnto my paine, That circumsept with mischiefes thus remaine. Earths Daemogorgon armed gainst me stands, To ruinate my Castle of Content, Hellish Briareus with his hundred hands, Against my Patience hath his forces sent, But I haue vow'd to loose my life in field, Ere tergiuerse, or coward weapons yield. Triumphant Victory shall me attend, And Confidence mine enterprise embold, Till gloriously mine Honours doe ascend, In Maiesties Pallace their Court to hold: That Admiration wonder shall anew The miracles of mine exploits to view.
Harpocrates thy Silence strangleth words, vvhile hote multiplications fire Debate, Bring flaxe to flame, and proffer Battle swords, And Authors are of life-suruiuing hate; There's such Omnipotence in Loyaltie, That yielding, it obtaines the Victorie. O it's a bloodlesse Conquest to submit, No maymes, no martyrdoms therein are found, Rashnes proues Argument of slender wit, vvhile Prouidence in whole skinnes sleepeth sound, vvith Lawrell leafes subduing stoutest foes, vvhile wild-heads by the eares in armour goes. Reuenge vvith Cocyx selfe-conceipt confounds, vvhile Tyme might salue the bleeding'st iniury, Precipitation scarred is with wounds, vvhile Suffrance purchaseth Securitie: O there's such Operation in Content, That it doth right the wrongfull'st detriment. Admit I seeme but homely in my House, My Commons course, my foode no dainty fare, Notable lodge a Friend, nor feast a Mouse, Next Neighbour to want Penury and Care; Nay, Care I leaue to carking Diues charge, vvhose treasur'd wealth his tortur'd woes inlarge.
Suruay mine head, search if thine eyes can finde True Testimonie of care-martyrd Hart, Or Euidence of discontented minde, Compelling Natures colour to depart, Planting a White, resembling Northern snow, vvhich doth possession of griefe-tenures show. My feature seemes as fayre, as Fatters bee, As comely, as the grossest of the land, As healthfull, as the Richest are to see, Nay they'r diseasd in head, foote, face, and hand, vvith dropsie, fleame, knobs, plurisy, and gout, vvith falling euills, itch, and breakings out. Humors and tumors, botclies, byles, and sores Theyr chiefest sences dang'rously displease, These are the issues of superfluous stores, Surburth'ning Nature to prouoke disease, To suffocate the Conduit of their breath, vvhile Riot causeth Surfet, surfet Death. VVealthlings suppose their parting peale they heare, See Deaths Idea with his maze in hand, If Bell but whisper in theyr guilty eare, Dreading that coram nobis they must stand, And beeing clpable, to feare begin Incuitable Iudgment for their sin.
All Obiects theyr Capacitie offend, Least suddaine perrils should abridge theyr breath, And Tasters must theyr trencher-meales attend, Least nutrimentall Dyet hasten death; A former Mouth must practize on their meate, And brooke their breakfast, ere they durst to eate. Rootes, Onions, garlick, and the Hermits meale, Proues better feasting then this dangerous fare: vvhich seekes a scratch of Hungers nailes to heale, And catch a wound, that bleeds with mortall care: (Digestion) I securely vow to fast, Ere fearfully feed on so deere repast. Nay more, the Belly burthned, Braines are dull, The body glutted, vices load the minde, The head is empty, when the wombe is full, The Corpulent doe slender knowledge find, For Abstinence and Temperance attaine, The marke of Honour, and the meanes of gaine, A little Cottage, common cloth, short meales, Is safest Seate, best Rayment, surest health, Not chargeably impayring Publique-weales, And seldome daify mans priuate wealth. It's sumptuous lodge, rich vesture, daintie fare, That robbe the purse, and make Reuenewes bare.
Double and Treble Chimnis mounting faire, Obserue the single Hospitality, All spent to build, and buildings to repayre, vvhich should support oppressed misery, Great halls, large tables, gold, plate, little meate, Feed but the eye, while mouth hath nought to eate. Apollo's diuine Oracle confe, Aged Aglaus farre more fortunate, Then was king Gyges in his royall rest, Amidst the mountaines of his lofty state, Aglaus ne'er past limits of his land, Gyges detained all that came to hnd. Agathocles mongst his Sycanian Lords Did earthen Vessells at his table vse: Like president Prsenna King affords, To teach that none Humility refuse: In iewells their Ability might eate, But they discern'd it bettred not the meate. Poyson is powred in the golden Crue, The Aconite in richest Bowles is laide, As with foule treason vnder fairest truce; So worldlings are in costly Cups betraide, Fie on those goods, though glorious to be seene, vvhich haue Efficients of destructions beene.
King Dionisius knew the restlesse state, VVhich to the perrill Potentes possesse, Experience taught him in what dangrous gate They enter, which to Kingdomes haue accesse, While by a haie  naked Sword hangs downe, Readie to fall vpon the Princes Crowne. What prooues Aboundance but aboundant Care? vvhat's vvealth: Plenty but Pouerty of Rest? Treasures are tortures, which doe neuer spare vvith ledden thoughts to onerate our brest: Elect Riches of a diuiner sort. Choose Burthens which thou better maist support. Content in Celles seemes richer by degrees, Then Discontent inthron'd in Courts of Kings; One dish of fruite more worth then twenty trees, Sufficient consists not in many things: Nought is inough for him that wanteth nought, Much is too little, whereas more is sought. Resolue me vvorldling, midst thy goods, nd ground, Heards, Flockes, Corne, Oyle, Fruits, Siluer, Gold, & gaine, What Contentation in this store is found, But Competence where with life to sustaine? Will not this gilt prooue Guiltines of minde; VVhen thine Accompt loue shall vnworthy find?
Miser, durst so much on one mouth bestow, As might a pettie-Commonwealth suffice? vvhat doth Possession such Reuenewes owe Vnto one Helluo's hellish Auarice? Condition knowes, thou hadst it to impart, Some portion thereof to the needy hart. So Admiration once beheld an Asse Loaden with rost, burthned with costly meate, VVith curbing bit in mouth the plaines to passe, Finding not nettles, hay or grasse to eate, His fortunes did some vvorldlings imitate, That fooles and beggars are in richest state. That pine in plenty, starue amidst their store, That want in vvealth, and in aboundance neede, That maugre Superfluities seeme poore, And Nature with no Contentation feede: Mans hart so small gorg'th not a kite one houre, Yet would it Earths Circumferrence deuoure. Must Man needs drossy Muck his Maister make, vvhich Fortune hath apprentiz'd for a slaue? And can Humanity with Patience take, That Basenes should of him dominion haue? I dare not call thee Asse, but aske thy selfe, VVhat eares thou hast, that harknest so to pelfe.
Doth mony purpose to  might? Doth vvealth imagine to discredit wit? Haue Riches Confidence to conquer Right? Doth gold boue Vertue vndertake to sit! Fie, will Moria shoote beyond her aime? And challenge more then iustly she can claime? How should Humanity it selfe behaue, And not with Oppositions be opprest, His scourged ship from Scilla's throte to saue, In harbour of Security to rest? Vaine Desperation seemes in misery, More vaine Presumption in prosperity. Pryam, that princely Gouernour of Troy, Father of Sonne coequallizing Kings, In the maturity of rarest ioy, Midst tenure of inualewable things, vvas slaine, and Time by Destinies defer'd, To haue his murdred Maiestie inte'd. Hector his Hee, had Time bestowd successe, Prince of the vvorthies, Mars for Chiualrie, vvas impotent Fortunes force to suppresse, And must shake hand with like Aduersity; Bearing the buhen of vnprosprous strife, To make vntimely Period of his life,
The Citty flow'd with teares at this distresse, Griefe sounded Clamours at his ouerthrow, And Cordiall Dolours did their harts possesse, Sith youth did leuy debts, which Age should owe, An hundred noble Courages did quaile, And thousand Ladies did his losse bewaile. No princely Pompe can Potentates secure, No earthly Kingdomes can eternize life, Prosperitie no safety can assure, Sith Fortune hath his frownes, Atrops her knife, Two too inexorable still haue been, That blind Director, and that fatall Queene. These Two vncertaine are, yet certaine bee, Fortunes pleasd helpe, Fortunes displeased hate, The Destinies are bribed by no fee, To lengthen life, or dayes to breuiate: No terme hath interest in their good will, They saue in shipwracks, and in harbours kill. Now Demonax should proue a Puritan, Instructed by Philosophy to hate, Siluers receipt in tyme of Adrian, Vnfit to be these Mony-mongers mae, vvhich morgage Soules, and their Saluation drowne, In depth of diuing for a golden Crowne.
Concupiscence with Lucre falls in loue, Demonica durst Ephesus betray, If Brennus will a bounteous Briber proue, Treasons demaunds with treasures sums to pay; Eryphale will haue her husband sold, while gold blinds worldlings, worldlings grope for gold. Temptation, vanish, with seducement die, vvhich golden Mountaines durst by promise giue, Suggesting Common-wealths of Dignitie, vvhile as thy Creditors in scandall liue; For what proues glory on an Empyre placed, But plodded meanes to make a man disgraced? Don Romulus no fallacies could find, But Brothers death, poore Rhemus must be slaine, To satisfie his all-affecting minde, Moeties seemed insufficient gaine, Daily the Diadem as fayre appeares Vnto his lustfull eyes, as second yeeres. Therefore enacts, that such as should ascend The Romane walls, this scale with death should buy, To Celer this obseruance doth commend, Rhemus gets vp, dreading no trechery, vvhich deare attempt exhausts his dearest life, Concluding so that twin-borne Brethrens strife.
Mismurdred Rhemus, by this tyme thou knowst Dignities valew, fading fruits of gaine, vvhat satisfaction thou to Honour owst, And what preferment Scepter-sutes attaine; Oh if that Brother spare not Brothers blood, At Aliants hands who expects any good? A vvolfe in woods, them equally did nurse, But Romulus retain'd the woluish minde, Lamb-natur'd Rhemus might his fortunes curse, vvhile Destinies had such euents assign'd, One kingdome is not capable of twaine, One Temple cannot Abel hold and Caine. The beauteous Solstice of a Crowne doth blind The clearest Argus eyes, that euer liue, what man is he, that might a kingdome find And Parents, Children, Brethren, would not giue? Princedoms seeme sweet pills, pleasant is a Crowne, He that hath no throat would them swallow downe. Yet lofty Cedars ouerthrowne are found, with boistrous blasts of ruine-threatning winde, when Iunipers stand stedfast on their ground, And seates of surer Residence doe finde; Fortune Presumption to preferment calls, To giue the heedlesse Climbers headlong falls.
Profit prouoketh, bids the Niggard hold; Pleasure perswadeth, motiue Method speakes, Diues will hoord, though hange in Hell for gold; Epicures gourmandize, though Belly breakes: From sugred baits what caueats can forbid, Though thousand harmefull hookes lie vnder hid? Darius will his Horsmans Counsell vse, Processe of his Direction execute, vvill not Obares decretalls refuse, If his deuise him Ruler constitute, If Horses bray may him proclyme a King, He puts in practise the ignoblest thing. Philoxenus the Parasite did wish His throat in length a Cranes neck might exceed, To feele the pleasures of the sweetest dish, Taste pleasant drinke his appetite to feede: vvith Phago placing his felicity And summum Bonum in his gluttony. Few with Phraortes worship Temperance, Sardanapal liues eminate, Scyron hardneth his thiish Countenaunce, Romane Sarmantus proues a coffing mate, And none with Z that Content desire, vvhich Horace of Mecenas did inqui.
VVhen Zancles hundred foure yeares had suruiu'd. vvhich tearme doth nought but imperfections gaine, Nature a Miracle in him contriu'd, Making his iawes young teeth a new retaine, Such is the Custome of the vvorldly minde, That loosing life, Aboundance seekes to find. Yeares Parents are of Mutability, And Mutability Natures decay, Time is the Trumpettour of secresie, Though Reuelation plead vpon delay; The ey-deluding shewes are shadowes found, Mortality to Dissolution bound. Pallaces, Temples, Castells, Citties, Townes, Towers, and Turrets equall to the skies, Subuerted by resistlsse fortunes frownes, Leaue nought, which their memorialls testifies; Haruest and hooke those fertill furlongs grace, VVhere vvalls and vvindowes once had royall place. King Pryams Parlour made an Hearbory, VVith Floras fauours seemes red, white, and greene; Those halles with fruits and flowers fructifie, VVhere quandam Lordings princely to be seene, Led Courtly dances in their Ladies hands, Like Thetis tripping on the siluer sands.
Honour is but a worthlesse word of grace, To sooth Ambitions praise-attending eares: Beauty but Blossomes in a flouring face; And Pleasures but delights commixt with feares; Then Honour, Beauty, and Delight are vaine, Sith in them all no Certainty doth raigne. Diogenes once passing neare to Hell Beheld Mydas, that sometime liu'd a King, Now in Infernall Beggery to dwell, Base, ragged, dispossest of eu'ry thing; And laughing said, ah ah my golden Asse, Ist possible the vvorld comes thus to passe? The Sequels of precedent Pleasures mooue Purification to relinquish drosse, And earthly approbations to disprooue, And make concealment of apparant crosse, Sith Rich are poore, and Poore are rich at last, VVhen fatall lots are on our limits cast. Lazarus midst his suts of miseries Sollicited the Gluttons carelesse gate, Diues in flames of Phlegeton now cries; Not heard of him, whom he heard no of late, The law of Talio like for like doth pay, To quite all kindnes there succeeds a day.
Sith Cornucopiae fil'd with fruitfull things To Penury by Destination turnes: Sith Riot vnexpected Domage brings, Sith ceasing Ease in ceaselesse torments burnes: Pleasures and Plenties Ile not Comforts call, But Perturbations, and forsake them all. In fack and Cinders  bee, Part of my limbs vncouerd in the cold, Ile not my body cloth beneath my knee, That earthen eies may clayen feete behold; To note (sith they resemble brittle sand) That I on Frailties weake foundation stand. That liuing man may dying mould respect; Though Power cannot Impotence preuent, It may repaire some Naturall defect, That sinfull Soule die not impenitent: Our manhood weake our matter being dust, Subiect to Death, to Mother Earth we must. Nestor suruiuing Natures common length, Nor Agamemnon with his Maiesty, Nor Polyphemus with robustous strength Can countermand the Doome of Destiny: Fire can the hardest vvood to cinders burne, And Time the strongest flesh to Ashes turne.
There shall no  be showne, But Kings and Clownes in one Condition bee; Twixt Court and Cottage no distinction knowne, Betweene the high state and the low degree: For Irus dies, and Cs doth no lesse, Wit, Beauty, Hon, VVealth must make a messe. Then ringed Fingers  with gold, Then cursed Tresses beautifide by A, Then fashions, and ruffes ranked fouresold, Then locks and lookes witnes of proudest hart, Then painted Cheekes, roling eies lures of lust, Shall perrish, ro, consume, and come to dust, Then Helen lustfull Venery shall ue; And Clytemnestra abiure homicide, vvhose murdrous hands her louing husband lue, That thought in safety with his wife to bide: And Gyant Cacus curse vnlawfull gaines, vvhen Pluto paies the stipend of his paines. And Nero shall lament midst arfull flood, VVhose Rigour lifes effusion did affect, Dayly exhausting many Millions blood, VVhich Tyrant he in Iustice should protect; Medea lothe her Necromantick spell, For Magicke Art when vvitches burne in hell.
Tell Rhodope the Harlot, how she spent Charaxus patrimony, Chattels, goods, And him forth with to Seas a Pirate sent, His fortunes to experience in the floods; And aske her, whether there will come a day, For pleasures and extortions vse to pay. One Continent must Alexander hold, VVhom many Prouinces could not containe, That wept, and weeping his Attendants told, He grieu'd least he none other World should gaine, To chronicle the Conquests of his hands, Because the whole vvorld Phillips subiect stands. Admonish thus a VVorldlings climbing minde, That Destinies doe his desires deride; Thou at his hands Ingratitude shalt find, And he will thy Directions not abide; But with the Adder stops indocile eare, Vnwilling wisest charmers voyce to heare, Folly hath got a habit on their head, This head misguides the selfe-conceited will, The liuing meditate not on the dead, But full with errours their affections fill, Yet where is safety, health, ioy, comfort, ease, Or Contentation, which can last and please?
Then blessed Patience, fortunate Content, Sitting inferiour to the lowest seate, Priuiledge from externall Accident, vvhich doth with Fortunes scourges VVorldlings beate: The Poore's but poore how euer Tempests blow, But Rich-men may strange alterations know. What Metamorphosis will then be seene, vvhen Pilgrims princelike shall inthroned stand, And shall liue Regents, which haue Vassals beene Holding a scepter in immortall hand; Then gold for drosse, and glory for disgrace. Equall to Saints the meanest shall embrace. VVhen fading Bale shall ceaselesse blessings bring Then farewell vvinter of Aduersityes, vvhen Flora with her euerflowring spring. All seasons, Sommer, Autumne dignifyes: Then particolour'd flowers, and the rose, Shall feede eyes humour, and delight the nose. Then strained Mellodie shall pierce our eare, vvhose sence from eare descendeth to the hart, vvhen songs for sighes, and mirth for mones we heare, vvho would not wish with vs to beare a part? Grieue not, though now discords of tunes abound, This iarring one day will be musick found.
Soule sequester thy thought from vanitie, vvorldly Aduauncement in dishonour hold, And doe not Angerona dignify, Although she proffer pleasures manifold: If thy Desires on earth their pleasures take, Twill cost thy life, before thou canst awake. An Oracle Protesilaus told, That what Greeke first entred the Troyan land, Should die, which danger could not him with-hold But he first takes this enterprise in hand; The prophecies accordingly succeede, For Hector kild him that perform'd that deed. Beware by this example, how thy minde Aduenture make for transitory things, For subtyle Fates the secret'st searcher finde, And finding him, ad respondendum brings. Possesse not, but passe through this earthly cell, vvhere no Contents, but misaduentures dwell. Here's nought but passions, penury, and paine, Sicknes, and sorrowes, slaunders, rumours feares, Drudgings, and grudgings, enuy, strife, disdaine, Domage, and discontents, frownes, terrours, trates, Prisonment, poyson, cauills, curse, and crosse, Seruitude, thralldoms, labours, dolours, losse.
Heer's nought but filth, and frailty, griefes, and galls, Troubles, and trauels, force, fraud, wrath, and wrong, Folly, and frensy, snares, cares, climbing, falls, Shew me a man mongst Mortalls, that's so strong, vvhich can support the burthen of one day, That doth all these loads on his shoulders lay. Atlas, that beareth Heauen on his back, Presumeth not this waight to vndertake, Invincible Sampson would sinewes lack, which for this durance might him able make: These all so insupportable appeare That Gyants would their impositions feare. Hercules toyles in number, Nature, name, Cannot with these discouragements compare, Theyr name to tasks, to twelue their number came, Theyr nature bridled with a little care; Part wrought with force, part wrought with fallacies, But these pretend impossibilities. They seeme as odious as the Gorgons head, As terrible as ping Lyons iawes, Or Cocatrice whose sight brings fatall dread, As horrible as were the Hpies clawes, That doubts before, behind misfortunes stand, Despayre aboue, dangers on eu'ry hand.
Yet Patience in a Castell of content Wincks at these Obiects, ouer-heares the sound, But waighes not words of the Impatient, Whose spirits full of Discontents abound, I smile to see the corpulent stil feede, Laugh to behold the vvealthy stand in neede. Empty-way-faring men with pencelesse purse Durst sing in thiefes presence dischar'd of feare, When full Powch doth his Misaduentures curse, And (will he, nill he) for a passe paies deare, That Pouerty returneth safer, home, Then Riches with such royalty can come. Armath'oes ride on rocks, ships sink in sands, Meet with stormes, tempests, gulfes, vnprosprous winde, VVhen safely Pinnages arriue to lands, And wished Calmes for Nauigation find; Charibdis, Scylla, Syrtes, wracks, and waue, On lowly Barkes no lofty power haue. If Adam through forbidden fruite for sooke Those Eden pleasures of felicity, If that Lots wife for one retorted looke In pillar of Salt found such misery; These Sodome apples I will not behold, That inward are but dust, though outward gold.
Vertue ioyne hand in hand with Pouerty, And we will walke socur'd from bonds of feares, Not surpris'd with preuenting misery, Till Iubile proclaime those ioyfull yeares, vvhen we in Heauen shall be resident, To reape the fruits of Patience and Content. Arthur Warren. FINIS.
