25336 99846962 11964
The English Myrror. A REGARD Wherein al estates may behold the Conquests of Enuy: Containing ruine of common weales, murther of Princes, cause of heresies, and in all ages, spoile of deuine and humane blessings, vnto which is adioyned, Enuy conquered by vertues. Publishing the peaceable victories ob∣tained by the Queenes most excellent Maiesty, against this mortall enimie of publike peace and prosperitie, and lastly A Fortris against Enuy, Builded vpon the counsels of sacred Scrip∣ture, Lawes of sage Philosophers, and pollicies of well gouerned common weales: wherein euery estate may see the dignities, the true office and cause of disgrace of his vocation. A worke safely, and necessarie to be read of euerie good subiect. By George Whetstones Gent. Malgre. Seene and allowed. AT LONDON. Printed by I. Windet for G. Seton, and are to be sold at his shop vnder Aldersgate 1586.
which are the fountaines of goodnes, from whence princes and heroycal states may receiue perfect wisedome, and the whole world besid moral instruction: to conclude, your Maiesty (as Gods ener) being setled in Salomons throne, crowned with the conquest of Enuy, the queller of Alexan∣der, Caesar, & most of the worthies: plentifully distributing deuine and earthly blessings, vppon afflicted kingdomes, against whom all traiterous practises are of the nature of the horse called Seian, whose maisters had euermore miserable ends. Most gratious Lady, admyring these great considerati∣ons, I fearefully haue armed this profitable booke, with the sheilde of your Royall protection, from whom the glory & goodnes therof is deriued. The censures of graue men which are the substance of this work, stand in place of counsels for your good subiects, and vnto me as loyall as the truest, the bare labor is onely dew. In which trembling presumption, I protest before God and your Maiestie, that my heart nor booke medleth with matter of your happie gouernment, to which no earthly pollicie may be added, neither is heauen∣ly wisdome absent: And as far is it from my thought, in name figure, or circumstance, to misnote any capitall Maiestrate, whose honorable trauels deserue much reuerence, and no lesse regard: It then followeth, most regarded Queene, that the reach of my duetie, which climeth betweene fire and frost, (the premises allowed) simply laboreth to publish these regards, that common faults may be amended in imitation of your pretious vertues, the lights of the world, and life of Englands happines. God graunt my paines a profitable successe, to which good god I zealously pray, that long may your maiesty liue, that still may your enimies fal, and those that louingly feare you, no doubt shall euer finde you a good gratious Lady. Your Maiesties loyal and humble subiect, therein happie. George Whetstones.
To the most Honorable the Nobilitie of this florishing Realme of Englande, accomplishment of ae desires. MOst Honorable, the long continuance of her Maiesties most happie gouerment, fullie witnesseth the saying of morall Diogenes, Vertue onely conquereth Enuy, for if force or fortune were antidotes against her infections, the ancient monarks had ouer∣come her venome, and (contrary to other poysons) her breath had not shroonke vp their large Empires, into the length and breadth of their Tombes. Basill in his sermon of Enuy, saith, that this passion bendeth her forces against the glorie of God, the peace of Princes, and obedience of subiects, feedeth vppon lamentable chaun∣ces, and pineth to behold the prosperitie of vertue. Basill to confirme his censure, had the subuersion of large Empires, ruine of florishing common weales, and (in former ages) the spoile of diuine and hu∣mane blessings, whose woonderfull conquests I haue set foorth for three considerations: the first, to shew the mightye prouidence of Almightie God, in defending this little Realme from sundrie the assaultes of so furious an enemie: the second, to inlarge, or rather eternize the glorie of manie her Maiesties peaceable victories a∣gainst this bloodie Enuie: the third, to counsell her good subiects by waightie examples, to arme their happinesse with vertue, the onely meane to withstand the puissance of Enuie. They may hardly pleade ignorance, hauing the commandements of sacred scripture, the lawes of sage Philosophers, and policies of good common wealthes men, to instruct euerie of them in the offices and duties of theyr vocation, Right Honorable, this is in effect the reach of my trauell, which I hope will entertaine the discreete Reader with many other perticu∣lar benefites. Vnto you most noble Lords, I reuerently direct this first part, which (some wayes) medleth with the sword, and the rest
I present according to the qualitie of the subiete: which considered by the morall substance, may (with your fauour I say it) be a Myr∣ror of gouernement for all good subiects. The further censure thereof, I humblie submit to your Lorships leysurable reading: and for your health, honor, and prosperitie, as the bewtie and strength (next vnto God and her Maiestie) of this happie gouernment, my daily prayers shall not be forgotten. At vvhose right Honorable Lordships commaundements I humblie remaine. George Whetstones.
R. B. to the Reader of this English Myrror. TO praise a thing, that no man can dispraise, Approueth zeale, yet smally doth alure, The Iuy bush, is but a needlesse gase, Before the doore, where as the wine is pure. The Authors name alone commends this booke, The Muses so, haue alwayes blest his Pen: And who so shall with iudgement thereon looke, Shall finde Regards for euery sort of men. Let Mallice swell, and Enuy shew her might, His Fame shall liue, in spight of euery spyght. FINIS. GEntle Reader, whereas by absence of M. Whetstones, some small faultes remaine (perhaps) vncorrected: if thou light of any such, I beséech thée with thy Penne to amend them, and especially such as are contained in the which are generall faults through the impression. Errata, Errata. Page 3. line 5. for fastneth, read fasten. page 4. li. 28. for nourisheth, read nourish, pa. 25. li. 27. line of Beniamen, read line of Iuda. p. 152. li. 13. vp hary, read Ap-hary or Vap Harry. pa. 237. li. 19. Gleobulus, read Cleobulus. p. 247. li. 14. from study, read from manners. pa. 248. li. 5. the neighborhood, read the neighbor. p, 249. li. 11. Maie∣strates, read Maiestrates of cities.
THE ENGLISH MIRROVR. A Regard vvherein all estates may be∣holde the Conquestes of Enuie &c. CHAP. 1. Of the Originall of Enuie, and howe farre in euill this furie passeth all other passions of the minde. THere is no defect of mind nor infirmi∣tie of bodie, but hath his originall of nature, or colour from reason, and by the benefite of the one or the other, re∣ceaueth cure: preposterous Enuie on∣ly except, who degenerateth frō kind, and masketh without vizard of excuse Touching the passions of the minde, pride is abhominable before God, ambition perillous for a Common weale, & flatterie the great deceiuer of men: yet are none of these euils without a cunning cloake, although voyde of iust excuse. The proud man saith vnto himselfe, I am formed after the image of God, I am Lord of his creatures, as wel on the earth The defences of pride. as in the sea, and (beyond the power of nature) beautified with a deuine knowledge, I prie into the qualities of the heauens, and prognosticate what they promise or threaten on earthly creatures, & therefore haue good cause to aduance my thoughts and to thinke well of my selfe. The ambitious hath this vaile or shadow: I see (qd. hc) that The defences of ambition.
vertue her selfe attyred with pouertie, is ouerblowne with light regard, her seruants, slaues to varlets in credit, so that he is an enemie to his owne prosperitie, that in bare estate, pre∣senteth any good parte, for that he is sure to incounter the ma∣lice of the ignorant, who fearing their owne fortunes, with enuie suppresse his perfections: and the good (although they embrace vertuous endeuours) at the first sight iudge by the outward habit, as the noble Titus did by his good friende Gis∣sipus, till necessitie discouered who he was. And therfore saith the ambitious, I holde authoritie the readiest ladder to ad∣uancement. The flatterer thinketh, that to reproue mens faultes, is a The defence of flatterie. meane to fire the faultie mans heart with malice, and there∣by shoulde encrease his friendes euill, and endanger his owne welfare, where the wisest are not so wise, but that they open both their eares to heare their owne prayses, and therefore (sayth he) blame he that liste, I will breath in no mans face, other then good wordes: not onely these, but all other infecti∣ons of the minde, haue such like sophisticall reasons, to giue colour to their errors: neyther are they so past cure, but that there is a hope of reformation. Now concerning the infirmities of the bodie, the pestilence Infirmities of the body. is most dangerous, the plurisie most sodaine, and the leprosie most odious: notwithstanding, if delay haue not wrought ouer much defect in nature, physicke hath a medicine for euery of these maladies. But this hiddeous Monster enuie lyeth open to all re∣proche, and as a moth in cloth, or canker rust in iron, dyeth Enuie vvithout cure. with the destruction of his follower, who burst out of the en∣trayles Originall of Enuie. of the olde serpent, to so we hatred betwéene God and man: for the enuie that the Deuill bare, at the Almightie Maiestie of God, raysed a desire in Adam and Eue, to be as their Creator in knowledge, and so brought sin vpon the face Gen. 3. Enuie the first cause of sinne. of the earth, and through sinne swadled all their posteritie in the heauie displeasure of God, with this bitter curse was she hatched, and with the sacke of Common weales and bloud of
innocentes, she hath euer since bene fostered. A man gouerned by other detestable euils, be it murther, Enuie vvorse thē murther &c. theft, periurie and so foorth: if he be not soone cut off with the sworde of Iustice, yet is he continually chastened with the scourge of his conscience: but lawe and iustice net easily faste∣neth on the enuious, for he hydeth his conspiracies, vntill he be strengthened with a multitude, whose furie breaketh forth The tes of Enuie. in the flame of faire cities, and is quenched with the bloud of many thousandes, and therefore enuie may well be compared to brandes raked vp in ashes, which are vncouered, to set mightie blockes a fire: In the conscience of the enuious, re∣morse hath no place, for that his thoughts are continually bu∣sied with diuelish imaginations as well as his forces are bent to the ruine of his neyghbours. A man without much blushing, will confesse himselfe a co∣uetous, Defces of . voluptuous or cowardly person: for that the needeful foresight of the great charge of children, the dayly harde for∣tunes which happen, and the costly cure of sickenesse, where∣vnto all men are subiect, are colours for coueteusnesse. Agayne, the blame that is layde vpon a nigarde, the con∣tempt Defences of vo∣lptuousnes. wherein men haue mecanicall liues, she hastie death that followeth care, are reasons to make men be pleasant and merrie with their owne. The perill of life, the griefe of woundes, and the daunger of lawe, are sufficient excuses for a coward. The defences of covvardlines. But if he be enuious, he dare not recyte so much as the name of enuie, the reason is, this passion is so sowle and in∣famous, None vvill confesse him∣selfe to be enuious. as it stincketh in the opinion of him that is infected therewith and good cause why, for that the others grow as langors and malladies of nature, and enuie proceedeth of a malitious and froward consent of our owne will, without any ground or reason: saue such as would make the worst infidell blush to defende, and the weakest Christian abhorre to heare, his inticementes are so farre from grace, humanitie and na∣turall pittie. All other passions of the minde may growe and spring
from such hard temptations, as they which yeelde vnto their Necessitie cause of many tres∣passes. affections, doe giue cause both of pittie and lament: as neces∣sitie may make men steale, tyrannie in Princes, may so we se∣dition among subiectes, hardnes and crueltie in parents, may cause disobedience in children, and so of others, which although the offences ought to be chastened, yet their causes may with charitie be bemoned: But this feinde enuie is onely tempted with the bountie of God, for as our sauiour saith, the eye of the enuious is for no other cause euill, but in that it beholdeth Mat. 20. that God is good, which considered, the enuious is to be con∣demned, much more then the impatient, yea when affection leades him to murmure and rage against God: for the impati∣ent, There may be cause of impa∣tiencie, but no colour for enuy may be so sharpely pressed with Gods heauie iudgement, as (charged aboue the sufferaunce of nature) reason shall be forced to giue place vnto furie, and when the hearte is at this libertie, the tongue will not let to disgorge blasphemies, suf∣ficient (if it were possible) to fire the heauens, but if the enui∣ous vnbowelleth his griefe, when he commeth to dispoyle his Blessings which grieue the en∣uious. August. contra Donat. lib. 4. cap. 8. heart, he can alleage or pretend no other cause of sorrow, but that God is too good, too mercifull, and too liberall towards his creatures. In giuing to some great authoritie, to others a∣boundance of riches, to this man store of friendes, to that man inlargement of honours, &c. On the contrary part, if he reioice, it is in beholding of most sad and lamentable chaunces, as in Causes which reioyce the en∣ous. discorde among friendes, iealousie betweene man and wife, their children disobedient, their seruants theeues, or in such like hauocke, of their neighbours prosperitie: and as among beastes, some nourisheth themselues with euill odours, some with poison, and some with filthie carrion: euen so the enuious is fatned with the curse, miserie, and death of his brethren. Basile in his sermon of enuie, compareth the enuious proper∣ly Ba. Sermone de dia. vnto flyes, which leaue the sounde partes of our body, and liteth vpon a scab or sore, the iuyce or filth whereof giueth thē a sweete and pleasant taste: euen so vertuous and good men, afflicted with exile, imprisonment, losse of goods, or such like or∣dinarie calamities, giue comfort & reioycing vnto the enuious.
Seneca rightly compareth enuy vnto a Panther, who so rageth Enuie like to a Panther. at the presence of a man, for the maiestie he presenteth, as presently he imployeth all his forces, to dismember his beau∣tifull The nature of a Panther. limmes, and not only is agrieued with the liuely coun∣tenance of man, but wheresoeuer he beholdeth his painted i∣mage, he is not in quiet vntill he hath defaced his face: euen so the enuious are not satisfied in giuing vntimely deathes vn∣to good men, but to burie the remembrance of their vertues, Enuie continu∣eth after death. (if it possible were) committe inhumane outrages, vpon their ingraued bones, and condemne their learned and necessarie bookes vnto the fire: so that it is apparaunt that there is no possibilitie, howe any other euill; should matche enuie in euill, for that their extreamest reuenge stretcheth but vnto death, when the malice of enuie searcheth the graue: which conside∣red, the enuious are more hurtfull then the Crocadile, who although she hungerly prayeth vpon a liuing man, yet if shee finde his dead carkase, she lamenteth ouer it, and with her warme teares washeth his face, yea so extreame diuelish are the qualities of the enuious, as Socrates likeneth enuie vnto a Viper, who so soone as they haue engendered the female, Enuie compa∣red to a per. The vnnaturall nature o a viper. murdereth the male, because she wil not liue as his inferiour: againe, the young ones eate themselues forth of their dammes intrayles, because they will not be bound vnto the obedience of nature. And questionlesse Socrates in the qualitie of this venimous beast, rightly figureth the condition of the enuious, who to compasse the desire of his defiled heart, treadeth vnder foote care of his countries welfare, duetifull obedience vnto his parentes, and naturall affection toward his kinffolke and friendes: yea which is most against kinde, the enuious often The en  to . A ble of Epe. times committeth wilfull outrage vpon himselfe, to beholde a greater vpon his enemie: according to the saying of morrall Esope, The enuious desired of Iupiter to be spoyled of one of his eyes, that the couetous man might lose both. To which purpose, many examples in my following discourses, shall be shewen, whereas if any other passion entiseth a man vnto euill, it flattereth him with the hope of a profitable ende.
Moreouer, though a man malice deadly, yet there may be sa∣tisfaction, or meanes of attonement: But where there is  is neuer reconciled. enuie, there is no hope of reconciliation: whereupon is set downe for infallible experiments, that there was neuer loue, but enuie betweene Cain and Abell, Isacke and Ismael, Loth and Abraham, Iacob and Esau, Ioseph and his brethren, the Kinges of Iuda and Israel, and the Apostles, the Turkes and the Persians, the Romaines and the auncient Spartians, the French men and English men, and so consequently betwéene neighbour countreyes, betweene whome there can be no per∣fect Neighbour countreyes en∣uy others glory. amitie, not for that the one is vnable to repaire ye wrongs done vnto the other: but for that the one without enuy cannot endure to beholde the glory of the other. For which cause Timon of Athens was called dogged, because he grinned at Timon of Athens. the felicitie of man: yea if we well considered their effectes, the actions of the enuious may well bee tearmed deuilishe, in that they repine▪ at the glory of God, and bend all their forces to suppres vertue and her followers, which in these following discourses, shall be more largely shewen. CHAP. 2. The originall of Paricide, and other inhumane murders by Enuie. MURDER the monster of inhuma∣nitie, Murther the byrde of enuie. was hatched by this accursed Enuie, through whose motions the re∣probate Gen. 4. Abell slayne by C. Caine slew his iust brother A∣bell, only because that Abels oblations were better regarded of God then his owne. Enuie caused Romulus to com∣mitte Enuie cause of pade and in hummane marthers. Remas slaine by Romulus. Machiuel dis. Lib. 1. the like outrage vpon nature, in slaying his brother Remus, because hee participated with him in rule and soueraignetie, which inhu∣mane fact, Machiuel doth thus excuse, It was needefull (saith he) that it shoulde be so, for that other wise the Romaine Em∣pire
might haue ended in the beginning, being at one instant gouerned by two kinges of seuerall disposition and direction. But allowe the reason to be good, the good which fell vnto the Common wealth, cannot wash away the stayne of Romulus bloudie offence, otherwise then the freedom that the Romains gayned ouer their tyrannous Kinges, cleared proude Tarqui∣nius of the rape committed on chaste Lucretia, for if any good (as oftētimes) doth come of a naughtie cause, God is to be prai∣sed for his prouidence, and the Authour is to be chastened for his euil intent. And questionlesse Romulus entente was so foule, as exceeded ye crueltie of ye rauening Wolfe which nou∣rished him, and therefore worthie to liue in this reproche. Vnkind thy Damme, thee suckerlesse did leaue, gainst kind a VVolfe thee fostered with her teate, Romulus and Rems were fostered by a wofe. VVhose kinde was thee with bloudie iawes to teare, thou most vnkinde to sit in Soueraigne seate. Vnkindly slewst Remus thy brother deare. So outragious was the enuy betwéene Polineces and Ete∣ocles, Polinec & E∣tocles broth. as old Oedipus their father scratched forth both his eies because he could not endure to behold the murthers and other deadly mischiefes, inflicted vpon the poore Thebanes, in sustai∣ning their vnnaturall quarrels, and (as some histories make mention) when they had sheathed their swordes in each others intralles, the enuy of their life appeared after death, whose heresies being ioined together, the flame of the funeral fire vio∣lently sundered thē, with ye selfesame venemous malice, which is naturally impressed betweene these vnpolitike creatures, the Eagle & the Dragon, the Cocke & the Lyon, the wild Bore and the Eliphant, & diuers other bruite creatures, who so dis∣agrée The mortall venime of envy. A necessary ex∣ample. in nature, as being dead, by no meanes their louds wil mingle together: an exāple of waight, to teach men to beware of their enuious enemies, in whose heartes disdaine & malice are so mortally enbleamed, as neyther giftes, praier, nor good vsage are of power to worke a true attonemēt. This monster enuy imboldned wicked Nero to violate the bendes of nature, Enuie caused Neo to ay s mother.
by the murdering of his mother, to see the place of his cursed conception, as in his best excuse is alleadged. But the true cause was this, he hastened her death, for that her life by the charge of nature, bounde him to a duetifull reuerence, for his thoughts raigned ouer all men, though his life deserued to be loued of no man. With this viperous childe may be coupled the vngratious Commodus, sonne of the good Emperour Marcus Aurelius, Commodus en∣uyed the remē∣brance of his fathers vertues. who encountring fouretéene or fiftéene gentlemen Romaines, vpon a bridge ouer Tiber, demanded of the gentlemen where∣vpon they so sadly deuised: the gentlemen simply answered, that they talked of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, whose life was beautified with such diuine vertues, as his death hath charged Rome with an endles sorrow. Whereupon as a mur∣therer of his fathers renowne, hee commaunded his garde to throwe them all into the riuer of Tiber, alleadging that they coulde not prayse his father, without the blaming of him. Wherein though Commodus did euill, he spake truth, for the commendation of vertue, is euermore a reproch to vice: and Vice is repro∣ched by the commendation of vertue. without doubt, as the good Emperour Aurelius inlarged the monumentes of his predecessours, in example to those that shoulde succeede him: so the vngratious Commodus exceeded all his ancestours in euill, and left no possibilitie for his heires to be worse: of whome is reported that his notorious crimes exceeded the dayes of his age: which I ouerpasse, as examples necessary for other purposes, and vnto this impious parte I will ioyne this following crueltie. Upon a day one tolde this naughtie Emperour, that his co∣sen Mamertius Antomenes resembled him in comelynesse of An other inhu∣mane murder caused by enuy in Commodus. bodie, and magnanimitie of minde: vpon which report Com∣modus pronounced death both vpon the reporter and his in∣nocent cousen, holding it for reason, that it appertained to no man, to vaunt, (lesse) to resemble him: and (in my opinion) if Antomenes resembled him in deuilish qualities, death was too easie a scourge for so lewde a life. Mulla Abdula father of Moley Mahumet, commonly called the blacke king, in whose
cause the mortall battaile, betwéene the king of Portugall, and Amoley Muluco king of Fees was fought the 5. of August 1578. as in the alteration of the latter common weales by enuy, shalbe more largely shewen, vpon an enuious suggesti∣on that his brethren by the priuity in nature and bloud, loked A horrible murder by en∣uy. to liue in greater liberty then subiectes, by the assistaunce of a noble man of the countrey called Alcatho Alley, caused the throates of a eleuen of his brethren to be cut in one morning. Now to conclude these particular tyrannies of enuye, vnto Hule, Graf∣ton, and other English Ho∣riographers which millions of notorious examples may be enserted: the monstrous murders of king Richard the third a tyrant of our nation is worthy note, in whose wretched end, yet worthy his wickednes, the happines of Englande began againe to flo∣rish, and enioyed her auncient renowne. This tyraunt at such time as he was Duke of Glocester, with an enuious eye, be∣helde King Henry the 7. ouercame this tirant and calmed the af∣flictions of En∣gland. Prince Edward slaine by Ri∣chardes handes. the soueranity of king Edwarde the 4. his brother, and yet inforced by necessity obeyed him. For annoynted kinges with weake policies are not depriued, but vnable to hold his hand from their throates, who for their dignities toke the vp∣per hand of him, against the lawes of honor with his impious handes he stabbed Prince Edward to the hart, beeing taken prisoner at the battaile of Tewksbury. Next like an Alehouse ruffen, with his dagger he slew the K. Henry the 6. slaine by Ri∣chardes handes. infortunate good king Henry the sixt in the tower of London. Then heaping murder vppon murder, he caused George, Duke of Clarence his naturall Brother to be drowned in a Duke of Cla∣rence drovvned Butte of Malmesey. And last though not the least, to rowle vp a number of noble subiectes endes, with the death of king Edward the fift, and Richard Duke of Yorke the kinges bro∣ther King Edvvard the 5. and his brother slaine. & his nephewes, whom he caused to be murthered in the Tower, and buried without honor, to infame the name of king Edward the fourth and his posterity, he pronounced his mother like a filthy harpye, to be a strumpet, and that the sayd king Edward was a Bastard, and him selfe onely legiti∣mate, (as I think) sonne of the diuel, for it séemeth wonderful that so inhumane a creature, should take life of humane séed.
CHAP. 3. Enuy originall of warre, and capitall cause of the destructi∣on of the first Monarchies. MAny yéeres after the beginning, euery king qui etly enioyed the countries in his own possession vntil Ninus king of the Asserians, enuying the soueranity of his neighbour kings, put him self st. lib. 1. in armes vnlawfully to inlarge his owne do∣minions, by deposing other frō their kingdoms. Thus byenuy frō the bottom of hell came war, & by war confusion of deuine & humaine blessings, the aduauncement of thousandes of diue∣lish Enuy the origi∣nall of warre. iniquities. For whereas lawes giue place to armes, the honor of God is wounded, his word is misprised; Iesus Christ is blasphemed, and persecuted, his Gospell is reiected, and his Sacraments are prophaned: fire is put to the house of the lord, Wolues are thruste into his stéepefolde, and wilde Bores a∣mong The miseries of vvar. his vines, truth and equity is peruerted, charity is cold, innocents and the iust are oppressed, youth bee ill instructed, publicke orders are broken, discipline and rules of good life are abolished, ignoraunce is raysed, knowledge is abased, proud, ambitious, and men of leaste estimation doe gouerne, the lear∣ned, wise, and vertuous are disofficed, as ideots, and men of no merite, countries bee vnpeopled, fayre Cities are burned, peaceable citizens are murthered, their wiues and daughters are rauished, their groundes lye vntilled, goods compassed by the trauels of a mans whole life, in one hower doe become the spoyle of a riotous souldiour. And to conclude (though short of a number of other curses, which follow warre) vice mounted in her chariot of triumph, arrogātly treadeth pore vertue vn∣der foot, & therby they that shold cry out of this outrage against God and man, are dumb, and the reformers of these enormi∣ties deafe, these vengeances by war the enuious eye, and am∣bitious hart of Ninus, bred in the worlde which died not with the destruction of Th'asserian monarchy. Notwithstanding en∣uy the erecter was the destroyer therof. For Arbactus (leifte∣nant
of the Meades) enuiyng the soueranity of Sardanapalus, a man more effeminate then a woman, by the assistaunce of o∣ther The end of the Assirin monar∣chy by enuy. Iust. lib. 1. lords gaue battaile vnto ye king. Sardanapalus discomfor∣ted led into his pallas, & there enuiyng ye fortune of Arbactus, more to reaue him of the glory of his triumph, then moued by sorrow of his own defeat, Sardanapalus set fire of his Pallas his wealth, & him selfe, & so by the prodigall spoyle of his life, recouered the reputation of a man: for manhood is most truely The tuchstone of manhood. tried, by constancy in the trembling passage of death. The like enuious part was committed by Ariathes king of Capidocia, The city of Ca∣pidoca burned through enuy. who being ouercome in battail by Perdicas one of Alexanders successors, fled into the Citye & enuiyng Perdicas good fortune more then he lamented his owne mischance, caused the city to be set on fire, & incouraged his souldiers & citizens to slay their wiues & children, holding it lesse euill to die by the violence of friends, then to liue a seruile life vnder ye controlment of their enemies. And by this means in truth he reaued Perdicas of the spoyle of his victory, but did both vnto him selfe and coun∣trey, an iniury against nature and reason: against nature in committing wilful murder vpon him selfe & posterity: against Time is able to repayre the ru∣ines of fortune. reason, in that time was able to repaire his ruines of fortune. But to kéep an order in discoursing the actions of enuy, by the victory which Arbactus had ouer Sardanapalus the empyre of The Asserian empire transla∣ted into the Meades. Th'asserians was trāslated into the Meades, which corse most conquerors & adopted Princes euer since haue taken to crown their natiue countrey with imperiall title, & to leaue the pla∣ces conquered, or by other meanes gayned, to the tyrannye of leifetenants. Well this monster enuy which mortifieth ye na∣turall Miserable are the countreis gouerned by lietenants. affection of a father, & robbeth dutifull obedience from ye son, made the one of these the cause, ye other the ouerthrow of this second empire. For Astiages the last king of the Meades, receauing answer of the Oracle, yt his daughters sonne should gouerne his empire, as it were to despight the Gods, that had fore destined this honor vnto his daughters sonne, vpon an en∣uious thought, first married her to a meane man of Persia, for that following the course of nature: the father beeing base,
the sonne should not haue a generous minde. But not so satis∣fied, he be thought him of a common speache, that the father may bequeath the sonne his liuinges, but not his vertues, nei∣ther is he sure to ingraft in him his vices. And therefore (as Astiages imagined) to make sure worke, he commaunded his familiar seruant Harpagus, so soone as his daughter was de∣liuered An impious cruelty. to murder the childe. But note by this example, how vainelye the greatest Princes striue, that striue to frustrate the determination of God. Harpagus departed with a resoluti∣on Man purposeth and God dispo∣h. to do the kinges commaundement, and ready to strike the stroke, the childe regarded him with such an affable counte∣nance, as his hart was not able to strengthen his hand to com∣mit so impious a murder, and therefore he left the vengeance of the kinges will to be executed by sauage beastes, as an of∣fice vnséeming a ciuill creature. Thus God by his wonderfull prouidēce, to rebate Harpagus sword, armed this infants face with the vertues of the two noblē Romanes, Marius & Cras∣sus, Mrius and Crus. who by the assurednes of their countenaunces, made the executioners weapons to fall from their handes, so that they forsaking their determination, the other ouer liued that hard destiny. And in aduauntage, contrary to kinde he made a shée Wolfe to nourish the child, with an affection as great, as that Cius suckled by a she vvolfe. where with the Lions intertained Daniell. And last, Cyrus hauing knowledge of his Grandfathers cruell intent, he sub∣iected him to his mery, and possessed him selfe in his empyre, who being a Persian borne changed the Empire of the Meades The empire of the Meades chaunged into Persian. Iust. lib. 1. into the empire of the Persians. During the continuaunce of which gouernement, many enuious partes were exercised a∣mong thē selues, which being the lesse I conclude in the great ouerthrow of their monarchy, which happened in the time of Alexander the great, who so enuied the glory of the Persians, as when their king Darius offered him an honorable accorde with his daughter in mariage, Alexander would graunt vnto The empire nslated into Macidonia. no peace vnlesse Darius would giue him soueranity and take him selfe the second place. Uppon which refusall the armies ioyned, Darius was defeated and the Empire translated into
Macidonia. By which fortunate battaile Alexanders power The enuy of A∣lexander. was great and his enuie greater. For he held no countrey suf∣ficiently conquered that the people were not ransomed with the mercy of his swoorde. But yet this enuy which gaue him in his life time heate, hastened his death. And he that tamed the pride of mighty kinges, was poisoned to death, by the en∣uie Alexander poysoned tho∣rough Enuy. of Antipater his familiar subiect. Who as some aucthors affirme enuying his absolute power, or rather his seuere iu∣stice, for that in heat he put Alexander of Lyncest and other of Antipaters kinse-men and friendes to death. And which wrought the greatest impression of hatred, for that his owne Thessalus a tri terous Phisition noble enterprises achieued in Greace were ouer blowne with light regard. For some of these causes, although all sufficed not to excuse so great an impietie, Antipater bribed the Phisi∣cion Theslatus, to poyson Alexander, who in the traiterous execution of his vnlawfull promise, hath left a warning to all A necessary note for Pr∣ces. Princes of two notable mischiefes: the first, to beware how in not rewarding, or regarding good seruices, they kill the lo∣uing affection of their subiects, for although, all the trauelles of a subiect, in the seruice of his king, be but duty, and the least reward of a king is liberalitie: Yet is a Prince (were he vn∣iust) Kinges for there owne sa tis, are bound, to fauour their subiects. bounde to the one for his safetye, as well as the subiect is thraull to the other of dutie: For where the subiect onely o∣beyeth through feare, the Prince cannot raigne, but in feare, and when men are in bondage, they will spare no aduantage of libertie which is the cause that few tyrauntes make peace∣able endes. Uppon which ordinary fortune, when the tyraunt Hippias, told a Philosopher of Athens, that if he liued one Hippias a ty∣rant of Athe. yeare to an ende, he would make the intrailes of dogs, the se∣pultures of an number of his fellowes. Wherevpon the Phi∣losopher boldly prophesied, that it would not bee so, for hell could not spare Hyppias so long. The second regarde, that a Prince, who alwayes hath mighty enemies, intertaine for VVhere the feare of God stayeth not, the loue of mony maketh passa for any mischief. his Phisition a man that feareth God. For if onely for re∣ward, he minister medicine, it may be feared, that for a grea∣ter gayne he will giue poyson. To which purpose, a Gentle∣man
of Vennis, one a time supping with a Phisition in Padua, marueiled that the Phisitions, who in shorte space, finde a remedie for the most violent newe disease that rai∣gneth, can not cure as well as giue ease to the Gowt an aun∣cient maladie. Which doubt, the Doctor thus pleasauntly resolued. O Sir (quoth hée) the Gowte is the proper di∣sease of the riche, and wée liue not by the poore, it maye suffice that they finde ease. But to prescribe a cure, to beg∣ger anye facultye, were great follye. Well though the Do∣ctor spake merrilye, it often times falleth out, that the riche mans wealth, is moste enemye vnto his health. And the Counsels of K. dinando. better to aucthorise this question, Ferdinando the good kinge of Aragon, among manye of his weightye preceptes, sayde it is greatly requisite, that a Prince make choyce of an ho∣nest Phisition. For (quoth hee) the strength of a Princes garde, can not defende a Phisitions treason. And certain∣lye, the negligent, couetous, or traiterous Phisition is the moste daungerous murtherer of the worlde, some one of which faultes, are so conuersaunt with moste Phisitions, as experience teacheth: that exercise cureth the moste parte of poore mens surfettes: when Phisicke killeth (by small di∣stemperatures) as often times the riche: And therefore it is necessary for all men to follow the counsell of this olde and approoued Prouerb, Honor (and vse) the Phisition, for ne∣cessities sake: Which importeth extreame daunger, and not euery trifling distemperature, which nature, exercise and or∣derly dyet will cure. But agayne to Alexander, who after he had receiued this mortall portion, the venime therof tormented him so much a∣boue his patience, yt to be eased he often times assayed to mur∣ther him selfe. Notwithstandinge in his death bedde lying in this extreametie, his friendes requiring to know who should be his heyre, he stoutly aunsweared the worthiest. So great was the courage of his hart, as he priuiledged not his sonne Hercules, his Brother Arideus, nor the infant, in his Wife Roxanes wombe, before a stranger of better desert. But
although this bequeste proceeded from the magnanimitie of Alexanders minde: yet the incertayne succession in the Em∣pyre, The misery that follovved the incertainty of Alexanders suc∣cession. coulde not but as it did, worke the ruine thereof. For wheras this liberty was giuen, the one enuyed, that another shoulde pryse his vertues at a higher rate then his. Hercu∣les claymed as heyer, Arideus as Brother, and one that coulde beste manadge the affayres of the Empyre, Perdicas challenged it by military testament, for that the king when he was spéechlesse gaue him a ring from his owne finger, as a token sayde hee, that he bequethed him the Empyre, as the moste worthiest. And to strengthen either of them in their clayme, there wanted not a Romaine Brutus to drawe his swoorde, A Florentine Pazzi to trye liberty, or an Englishe Duke of Buckingham with fiue hundred horse to demaunde what was to be done in this new world: for discontented (or rather dissentious) persons (how soeuer the power of a set∣led Prince, keepe them vnder) vppon a chaunge, will disco∣uer their seditious artes: as fyre hid in ashes, by the sprinke∣ling of Gunpowder bewrayeth the heate. To quell which cunning daungerous people though Machyuell prescribe a pollicy, vnséeming a Christian Prince, who is to referre hid∣den trespasses to the vengeaunce of God, and not to pu∣nishe with death an intent, without an attempt of euill: For vntimely death, onely appertayneth either to Gods se∣creat vengeaunce, to open and lawfull conuiction of iustice, or in lawfull wayes to the swoorde of the souldiour, for what humaine bloud is otherwise shedde, is tyrannye in a Prince, and punishable in a priuate person: yet Princes to brydle suche close enemies, of publicke peace: maye safe∣lye without reproch of tyranny, follow the counsell of a Ge∣neowe marchant, who was somtimes familiarly fauoured of Tamberlayne ye Great, surnamed flagellum dei, who worthy the name of vengeance, at what time as he after two assaults A cruell part of Tamberlane. was peaceably possessed of a fayre city, the citizens with their chiefe Magistrates, wiues and Children cloathed all in white hauing Oliue braunches in their handes, as assuraunces
of peace: vppon their knées humbly beséeching him of grace: Notwithstanding, commaunded his souldiers to kill them all like dogges. This Genowa mooued with pitty to sée this out∣rage, besought Tamberlaine, to spare his cruelty for such, as A good counsel reiected. he conquered by force. And (quoth he) if yée feare, that these dogs will another day bite, strike out their téeth. Their coun∣tenances if néed be, will helpe to scare Wolues, meaning that he should spoyle them of their armour, and if occasion serued, he might make them fight, as kinge Astiages did his cowardly souldiers, either with enemies in their faces, or friendes at their backes. Which good counsell though Tamberlaine in his fury regarded not: Yet other Princes that haue their passions more temperate, may thereby learne how to kéep vnder their owne suspected subiects without dispeopling of their realmes, to animate forraine enemies. Upon which consideration Wil∣liam the Conqueror when he entered this realme, straightly commaunded that no outrage shoulde be done vppon the com∣mon people, for (quoth he) though they obey me, I must raigne by them. Well neither Hercules, Arideus nor Perdicas wan∣ted will, or friendes, to perseuer in their clayme, and sure they had gone together by the eares for his realme, before Alexan∣der had had his funerall rites, if the tumult in the beginning had not bene pacified, and an order for the gouernment of the Empyre, bene appointed by the grauer Captaines. But as water courses stopt, will find out new passages, so enuy how so euer she be quallified, will breake foorth into mischiefe. The true euents whereof appeareth in the deuision of king Alex∣anders captaines, who as they were many in number, so were there in his Empyre, so many seuerall prouinces, as rewar∣ded euery Captaine, with a regall leiuetenantship. The names of either for the glory of the Empyre and renowne of so many famous captaines: but chiefly by the destruction both of the one and other: to shewe the bitter ende of ciuill dissen∣tion, which lightly hath beginning of enuy: I haue thoght good to set downe at large, the particuler whereof ensueth. The hugenes of Alexanders monarchie. Arideus was chosen king, Antipater was made Regent of
CHAP. 5. How the enuy of Rufin, and stilicon the one the Gouernour of the East, and the other of the West made a passage for the barbarous Gothes and Vandals to sacke the famous city of Rome, which could neuer since recouer the twenty part of her auncient beauty. THE most famous Empyre of Rome, who receiued many spoyles and in fine vtter ruine by this monster Enuy, me∣riteth a larger report, then my purpose affordes. But to draw the Reader to a great contempt of this foule passion, as well as to shew the auntient glory and present ignomy of the Romanes: I cer∣tifie, by the accorde of all histories, that there was neuer Empyre, so large as the Empyre of Rome, The greatnes of the Romane em∣pire. nor at this day (considering her auntient greatnes) none that is not vtterly destroyed, that hath fewer priuiledges: for in times past the Romane Empyre, was attyred (well neare) with the habite of all Europe, Africa, & a great part of Asia, as France, Spayne, England, Germany, with all the prouinces of Italye, the Islandes called Mediterranees, al Greace, Thracia, Maci∣donia, Pollonia, Demmarke, & as I haue said ye greater part of Affrica, as Manritania, Numidia, Carthage, Libie, with many other realmes and prouinces, Aegypt, and all her confines, in Asia, Arabia, Siria, Indie, Mesopotamia, also her segniories reached vnto the renowned Riuers of Tiger, and Euphrates, and in the time of the Emperour Traian, her bondes stretched euen vnto the East Indies, vnto whom was subdued, the pro∣uinces of Armenia, and Albanie, with all Asia minor, and ma∣ny other Regions, too tedious particularly to rehearse: whose length and breadth at this day is drawne (by the Pusilanimi∣tie of certaine emperours: or rather by the enuy and pride of the Pope of Rome, whose pageants begin to appeare) into a small part of Germany, and Italie. So that Rome some times
commaundres of the whole world is now steightly regarded: and if any of deuotion doe come to visite her shee intertaineth them with this sorrow. Quanta roma fuit, ipsa ruina docet. And well shée may vaunt of her auntient monumentes. But to describe her present estate, there is small beautye, in her buildinges, and lesse vertue in her people: and shée that was called the fountaine of the worlde, for her flowing ver∣tues, maye now be iustly named the sincke of the worlde, for her filthy corrupt vices. Well let her ruines shewe her fur∣ther reproch, which were so lamentable, as might melt her worst enemies vnto pittye, manye shrewde spoyles shée re∣ceaued, by the enuy of her owne people, especially by the ciuill contentions of Scilla, Marius, Carbo, Cinna, Pompeius, and Cesar, Brutus and Cassius, Octauius and Anthonius, in su∣staining of whose vnnaturall quarrell, by Romanes, there were more Romanes slayne, then by strangers in conquering the kingdomes of the whole worlde. With which grieuous woundes though shée were much weakened, yet by the wise∣domes of her Temporall Magistrates shée was againe cu∣red: and long might haue liued if like vnto greene Iuie that frome the Roote of a great Oke by soft embracementes ouer∣groweth the top of the Trée, the ypocrisie of the Bishoppe of Rome, had not so compassed, or rather ouercome her Empe∣rours with an ignoraunt deuotion, that to make the Cleargye mighty, they yeelded to make them selues weake: yet to re∣port a truth, shée receaued, her bane in the time of the Empe∣rours Honoreus and Arcadius. By the enuy of Ruffin and Stilicon, two temporall magistrates, but with all to approoue what I haue already sayd, the Pusalanimitie of the emperors, before that day, gaue incouragement, for the conquered Re∣gions to reuolt, and more styrred vp, the barbarous Gothes, to inuade Italy, in so much as the Emperour Theodotius, be∣holding the perrill of the Empyre, and the rather for that his
young sonnes were not capable to gouerne, as he thought, to prouide a remedye for the mischiefe, he left these two great captaines (whom he had approoued to be wise, and valiant, and with all had bound them with many greater aduancementes) to be the protectors of his children and Empyre, and to the go∣uernment of Ruffin, appointed the East parts, and to Stilicon Italy and the West, But beholde the nature of ambition, the The nature of ambition. impe of this miscreat enuy, neither the bountye, with which the deceased Emperour, had tyed them that was great, the trust which he had committed vnto them which was greater, nor the dutye which they ought vnto the yong emperors their soueraignes, which was greatest, coulde stay their vnsatiable desire to rule, by the breaches of all these duties, so that regar∣ding the emperours, with enuious eyes, they obeyed them with ruling hartes. Ruffin hungring after the Empire for him selfe, & Stilicon in the behalfe of his sonne. But as there is an old tale, of a shrewd wife, that ment to poyson her husband, and to be sure as she thought, shée put two strong poysons into One poyson re∣medy for an o∣ther. the portion, but contrary to her expectation, the one poyson so stroue with the other, as the man was preserued from death. So enuy to make a ready confusion of this famous Empire, e∣uen in the hart of her glorye made her to foster two mortall e∣nemies of her propertie, but so long as they both liued, neither could obtaine his purposes, their pollicies were so mutuallye imployed the one to suppresse the other. Ruffin too hasty of his purpose, mooued straungers to make Ruff p  death. warre vpon the Romanes, and béeing chosen Captaine, assaied to make him selfe Emperour: for which enterprise he was put to death by Honorius. Stilicon wayted a better oportu∣nitie, and to auoyd suspition married his daughter to Archadi∣us: but being alwayes mindfull of his purpose, secreatly solici∣ted, Pollisie of S∣licon. the Gothes, Vandals, and other barbarous nations to war vpon the Empire: thinking for his sufficiency to be chosen cap∣taine: by reason of ye tender yéeres of the emperors: whose pur∣pose tooke place: the Gothes entred Italy with a strong army: & Stilicon being chosen captaine: obtained many weak victories
against the Gothes, of purpose to continue the warres: Alaric king of the Gothes: béeing a man of good iudgement: found out the dalliaunce of Stilicon, and séeing small hope of successe: cer∣tified the Emperour Honorius of Stilicons drift: and desired him to accorde to a peace: protesting that he sought but some Stilicons drift discouered. small countrey for him and his people to dwell in: the Empe∣rour vpon diuers other suspicions beléeued the information of Alaric: and assented vnto his conditions of peace, & assigned a part of Gawle, for him and his people. Neuerthelesse he desembled this knowledge with Stilicon: who by the depar∣ture of the Gothes vnto their assigned habitation, fearing the ende of his authoritie, secreatlye practised, with one Sawle a Iew, a captaine of his army: vnder pretence of a priuate quar∣rell: to set vpon the Gothes: vppon an Easter daye, which the Gothes (béeing Christians) celebrated. Which practise Sawle executed, and made a great slaughter of the Gothes: but the Stilicons trea∣son punished. Gothes béeing gathered together: reuenged this outrage with the death of Sawle, and the most of his partakers: Alaric im∣boldened here with, set vppon the forces of Stilicon, who dis∣sembling a feare, fayned to fly, and sent to Honorius for more ayde. The Emperour fearing the secreat drift of Stilicon: more then the open force of Alaric: sent a strong power to the campe: by such persons as slewe both Stilicon and his sonne. Honorius by this meanes thought that he had both discharged him self of Stilicons treachery, and by his death supposed that Alaricks fury woulde be appeased: but it fell foorth, that it had bene better for the strength of the empyre that Honorius had spared Stilicon till a further time: for béeing vnfurnished of a right valiaunt and worthy Captaine, Alaric pursued the ad∣uauntage that was offered, and blamed Honorius as guilty of the matter, and with all expedition set forwardes towards Rome, and without resistaunce in his passage wasted euerye place with fire and swoorde, and finally besiedged Rome on euery side. Manye haue written the assault and taking of Rome by Alaric: but yet so briefly or darkly: that they haue giuen small light to the Reader: Peter Messire sayeth that he
hath founde it written in the Annales of Constantinople: that as Alaric marched towardes Rome: there went before him a Monke of an vnknowne place: who (notwithstanding that Alaric was a blouddy tyraunt, yet béeing a Christian) vpon audience desired him, for the loue of God to moderate his ire: and to remember that he him selfe béeing a Christian, was in duty bound to forbeare the sheading of Christian bloud: much more the destruction of Rome which had no way offen∣ded: to whom Alaric thus aunsweared: know thou, thou man of God, that of my proper desire I goe not against Rome: yea further more know thou, that I am thus dayly importuned by an vnknowne perswasion: aduaunce thy selfe against Rome, destroy it, and make it desolate: wherevpon the religious man sore amased durst not reply: and so king Alaric followed his enterprise: so that it séemeth this aduersitie of Rome, was a speciall scourge of God: Paule Osorius further sayeth that as God sent Lot foorth of Sodome: euen so hee deliuered Pope Innocent the first, from this heauy destruction of Rome: but if in that suggestion he had not beene partiall, he woulde haue compared the iniquitye of Rome, to Sodome and Go∣morrha: and so by consequence the Cardinals and rest of the Cleargy, as spotted as Labans shéepe. The truth was the Pope was gone to Rauenna, to doe his duty to the Emperor, and as it séemeth shortly after dyed: for Platinus sayeth that this aduersitie of Rome was in the time of Pope zozim. This cruell siege by Alaric lasted two yéeres: during which time the famine of Rome was no lesse then that of Ierusalem, in so much as they were driuen to eat one an other, and the mother was constrained to eat her one child: variable are the opinions touching the winning of Rome. Procopius sayth, that Alaric finding his forces too weake, was driuen to this pollicie: he conspired with thrée hundred Romane prysoners, whome he set at liberty, who béeing receaued into Rome, sodenly slewe the warders of one of the gates, and so let Alaric and his ar∣my in, some sayde by the commaundement and industrye of a great Lady this gate was open vnto the Gothes: which pro∣céeded
of pittye that shée tooke, of the miserable estate of the poore people: whome shée thought that the enemye coulde not afflict so much as the inhabitauntes of Rome: but how so e∣uer it was Alaric commaunded vpon payne of death that no man should hurt anye person that fledde to the Churches for safety, which was obserued: the rest of this Citye with an in∣numerable sorte of people were consumed with fire and swoord. The Emperour Honorius laye all this while at Rauen∣na, with out taking care for the reliefe of distressed Rome. In derision of whome the Gothes ledde a young man vp and Rome sacked by Alaric. downe a whole daye attyred lyke the Emperour, and the next daye likewise ledde him cloathed like a slaue. This was the first time, that Rome since her prosperity, fell into the handes and power of straungers: but after this sacke by the Go∣thes, the greatnes both of the city and Empyre decreased, yea manye tymes was destroyed and subiected. The successe whereof briefly to touch, I hold it necessarye, that the Reader maye vnderstande, the frailtie of kingdomes, and worldlye powers. About forty yéeres after the Gothes had thus sacked Rome, & outraged Italie, the Vandals vnder the conduct of their king Rome taken by the vandals. Genserick, entred Italie, & without any resistāce tooke Rome, the greater part of the inhabitaunts being before fledde: who for the space of foure dayes spoyled, and in manye places fired the Citye. Twentye and seuen yeeres after the conquest by the Vandals, Odoacrus king of Euryles and Toringnes, came Rome taken by Euriles and Toringnes. before Rome with a great power: whome the Citizens not able to resist, receaued louinglye and in peace: who naming him selfe king of Rome raigned foreteene yeeres: afterwards Theodoric king of the Gothes, beeing in friendship with the Romane Emperour, to recouer Rome: incountred Odoa∣crus Rome taken a∣gaine by the Gothes. with a great power: and not onelye chased Odoacrus from Rome, but also foorth of Italie. Theodoric vpon this victorye made him selfe king, and raigned thirtye yeeres in peace. After whose decease, his sonne Artalaric with his wife
Amalasonte raigned about tenne yeeres. Afterwardes the Emperour Iustinian comming to the Empyre, the Gothes returned againe into Italie: with their most cruel king Tottil: vnder the Emperour Iustinian the two moste valiaunt and hardy Captaynes Bellisarius, and Nassettus gouerned in I∣talie: who in manye moste cruell battailes foyled Tottill be∣siedging of Rome. In fine by the treason of one of the inha∣bitauntes, Tottill gat the Citie: and although at his first en∣traunce Rome taken a∣gaine by the Gothes. by the intercession of Pelasgus then Bishop of Rome Tottill moderated his furye, yet in fine vpon an vnplea∣sing aunsweare from the Emperour Iustinian: he furiouslye destroyed the greatest part of the Citye, and left not the third part of the wall standing: but to be briefe after Tottill had an other time taken Rome: by the valiauntnesse of the most worthy Captaine Narsettus: both Tottill & the whole power of the Gothes were chased out of all Italie: within a while after the Longebards came into Italie: who making them selues Lordes of Gawle Cilsapine: of whom it hath euer since beene called Lombardie: who about three yeeres after the chasing of Tottill: vnder the conduct of king Clowis besied∣ged Rome, to the great dammage of the neighbour Townes, but Rome out helde both that besiedging, and also an other most dangerous siege by Atanlfus likewise king of the Lon∣gebards: by whose furye Rome had beene leuiled with the ground: if that Pepin king of Fraunce had not succoured her distresse. Further in processe of time: in the time of the Emperour Lewis the Mores and Sarizins Disciples of Mahomet: besie∣ged Anno 830. Rome vvonne by the Sarizins. and entered Rome, who prophaning the Church of Sainct Peter, and burning a great part of the Citye with many riche spoyles retourned vnto their ships. But the moste greate ruine of Rome was in the time of Pope Gregorye the seuenth, and Henrye Emperour of Al∣maigne, betweene whome there was mortall warres, in whose quarrelles there was at one time two contrarye ar∣mies in Rome, burning and wasting the Citye. But in
fine the Normans, in the behalfe of the Pope were victors: But their conqueste made Rome almoste desolate, that where there are now Uineyardes, Gardens, and large waste places, shée was before beautified, with goodly Churches, and other sumptuous buyldinges. And for laste example, euen of late time, the Emperours armye, vnder the leading of the moste Rome won by the Duke of Burbon. worthy Prince Charles Duke of Burbon, Rome was taken, and although the Duke vpon the enteraunce was slayne, yet his souldiours as victors spoyled a great parte of the Citye. These often and sharpe punishmentes, hath Rome suffered as a wonder, and warning to the whole worlde: and which is much to be regarded, there is almoste the people of no Na∣tion, which shée here to fore had subiected: but at one time or other were at the sacking and spoyling of her beauty. For the further and necessarye inlarging of this historye, I haue ad∣ioyned this Chapter of the enuious humors of the Popes of Rome. CHAP. 6. How the Popes of Rome enuiyng the soueranityes, which the Emperours had in the election, and confirmation, of them and their successours, by sundrye shiftes wrought them selues foorth of this obedience, and by the aduantages of time grewe to vsurpe authoritye, to approoue and confirme, the election of the Emperours them selues: with a supreame power, to depose, and e∣stablishe annoynted Kinges, from and in their king∣domes. A Chapter for the varietie of the matter wor∣thy the regarde. LArge and vnreprooueable, are the testimonies, which witnes, that the bishops of Rome, vnder many tirannous emperours, truly professed, & sincerely preached the Gospell of our sauiour Iesus Christ, and to confirme the Euangelicall doctrine, patiently and constantly imbraced many sharpe per∣secutionsand
martyrdomes.: but O the venime of riches, she no sooner entered into the Church, then she poysoned her pa∣stours and ministers, with enuie, pride, ambition, heresie, i∣dolatrie, and all abhominations: the riches, liberties, and great possessions, with which Constantine the great endowed the Bishops of Rome (although they eternize his name with the tytles of a good, zealous, deuoute and christian Emperor) yet were they the causes which haue bread these soule effects, or iniquities in the greater number of the Popes of Rome. True it is, that before the Emperours were christians, the Bishops were chosen by the christian Priestes in Rome, nei∣ther did any seeke that office by other meanes then vertue: But after the Emperours became Christians, as a witnesse that the soueraigne Bishoppe of Rome was the subiect of the Emperour, the election of the Pope appertained to the clear∣gie, ioyned with the voyce and consent of the people, which done, they were driuen to send to Constantinople, to bee con∣firmed by the Emperour: this was the first order of the electi∣on of the Popes, after Constantinus the great: which appro∣ueth a souerainitie which the Emperous had ouer them, but by little and little to wind themselues out of this subiection, they first made suit to be confirmed by the Emperous deputies Policies of the Popes to wnd out of obed in Rome, after wardes Pope Pelagius the second administred this office without the confirmation of the Emperour, but be∣ing afraid of the displeasure of Maurice the Emperour of Con∣stantinople, for this vsurpation, he sent an ambassadour to ex cuse his act, giuing for reasō, ye besteging of Rome by the Lom∣bards ioyned with ye let of passage, by means of the outrage of floudes and waters, which drowned diuers places, about the time of his election: the excuse was accepted, howbeit the au∣thoritie of the Emperour concerning the confirmation of the Popes, in many following elections continued. The Pope fin∣ding no wished successe in his saucie attemptes, sought to be∣witch as the Crocadile, who by the teares of her eyes, disper∣seth the venime of her hearte, so he with hypocriticall shew of holines, purchased such reuerence of mightie kings, as in tract
time, Mahomet King of the Turkes, and great grandfather of the great Soliman, besieged the same with such a power, as Constantinus was vnable to resist, and so both himselfe, and subiectes became feelers of Mahomets vengeance, & the state∣ly Constantinople his Emperiall seate, and as sundry au∣thours witnes, the contention betwéene the Popes of Rome and the patriarches of Constantinople for supremacie, was the passage of the Turks attempt, and the greatest hope he had of good successe: and truely his aduauntage was great: for af∣ter a cruel fight betweene mastie dogges, if a Beare appeare, although they will all ioyne to wearie him, yet teir former bickering will greatly weaken their forces: euen so in ciuill contentions, although both partes will ioyne, to withstand a common enemie: yet their strength will be much abated, and their enemies courages more increased. But whether this, or lacke of magnanimitie in their Emperours were the cause, all Christendome rueth the losse of so famous a Citie, from whome all nations receiued a benefite, and by this Conquest, her riches is a scourge to all nations, which in times past for the renowne of her beautie and riches, was of Strabon cal∣led illustris, of Plinie and Iustin named noble: long was she  and same of Con∣stantinople. the chiefe seate of the Empire, in her were many generall Councilles celebrated, and an infinite number of heresies dis∣cyphered, destroyed and rooted out. This Citie is seated in Europe, in a most fertile place of Thracia, vpon the particion of the sea, betwéene Asia and Europe, at the entrie of the sea Euxinus, called the great sea, and therefore Ouid tearmeth her the port of two seas, her beautie, fertilitie & riches were such as Philip father of Alexander the great, besieged her with a mightie power, to be possessed of her, but after long assaulte in vaine, an inhabiter of the citie called Lyon, came before the King, and spake to him in this maner, Shew me Philip, what iniurie hast thou receiued of Bisance, that thou besiegest her with such anger? I am prouoked with no iniurie, (answered Philip) but for yt she seemeth to be more faire then any citie in Thracia, I am inamored of her, & am therfore come to conquer
her amorous kinges (replyed Lyon) which will be beloued, if their louers indeuour to ouercome them with sweet musicke & curtesie, and not with sharpe warre and crueltie, with this floute Philip was glad to rayse his siege, without dammage to the Bysanceans: but leaue we Constantinople, and the Em∣pire of Grecia in the possession of the Turke, the capitoll ene∣mie of Christ and Christians to declare the disposement of the Romaine Empire, as great a persecutour of either. In the yeere 1002. Othon being Emperor, and the kinse∣man of Pope Gregorie the fift, an Almaine borne, the sayde Pope made a Lawe to priuiledge the Almaines, with the e∣lection of the Emperor, to which he got the consent of Othon, which was, that from thenceforth three of the cleargie, & foure of the laitie, should be the electours of the Prince which they called Cesar, and king of the Romaines: to witte, the Archbi∣shop of Magonce, of Treues and of Colloine: the Marques of The Pri eletours. Brandebourg, the Counte Pallatine de Rhene, the Duke of Saxonie, and the King of Bohemia, and their successoures in these dignities, and after their election, with the confirmation and approuement by the Pope, the Prince elected shoulde be called Emperour Augustus, see héere a wonderfull chaunge, the Emperours of Rome, which for many hundred yéeres had the authoritie, to approue and confirme the Popes of Rome, are nowe become subiects to the approuement and confirma∣tion of their subiects, the Pope and his successours: well, with this chaunge agreeth the presagement of sainte Ierome, who saith that the Romaine Empire, which holdeth all nations in subiection, shall be abased, and then shall Antichrist arise, the fountaine of all iniquitie. That the Pope of Rome is An∣techriste, regard what is sayd of this monster in the 7. and 13. of the Apocal. Hee shall make warre with the saintes, and Apoc. 1 shall ouercome them, Item power is giuen him ouer all kin∣reds, tongues and nations, and all that dwell vpon the earth worshipped him: that the Pope of Rome warreth with the saintes, ouercommeth them, & becommeth drunke with their bloud: his persecution of the true professours of the Gospell,
through out Europe, is a memorable witnesse: of which point the reader of the Registers of the reuerende deuine, master Iohn Foxe, entituled Actes and monuments of the Church, may be liberally satisfied, that he hath had power of al kindred tongue and nations, the subiection of Emperours and Kings, witnes the worshippe and the reuerence done vnto him, may not be hid, in that he will impudently & arrogantly challenge vnto himselfe, what onely belongeth to God, for it is thus re∣gistred in the Cannons, yt he hath power to saue or to damne: Can. si Papa de stet. 42. how that by waggons full loaden, he can send soules to hell, can condemne to purgatorie, and at pleasure fetch men forth againe, where the holy scriptures in sundry places assureth vs that onely God forgiueth sinnes. That he is that struet at∣tyred in purple, scarlet, &c. mounted vpon the beast with seuen heads &c. spoke of in the 17. and 18. of the Apocal. the Angell expoundeth, that these seuen heades signifie seuen mountaines Apocal. 17. 18. or hilles, and what authour remembreth any famous City to be builded vpon seuen mountaines, or hilles, many say that Rome was so builded, but none that witnesse of any other The names of the mountaines where Rome was builded. citie: the names of which mountaines were thus registred, more then a 1600 yeeres since, the mount Palatin, the mount Capilotin, the mount Auentin, the mount Esquilin, the mount Viminal, and the mount Quirinal: in remembrance whereof, there was in auncient time, a feast day in Rome, called Sep∣timontinalia, Virgil in his Georgickes, speaking of Rome, &  2. circ . Apocal. 17. her beautie, saith, that within her walles she inuironeth 7. hils euery particular nation in Europe reuealeth her, by this large witnes: their Princes haue bene drunken with the bloud of many godly martirs, & haue insatiably drunken of the Popes poysoned cup of abomination. To be briefe, the most infirmed eyes may see, yt the Pope is that Antichrist the Apostle spea∣keth Thes. 2. 2. of, that he shall sit in the Temple of God, and be honoured as God: the Pope not only taketh that place, but will thus be called, Domine Deus noster Papa. O Lord our God the Pope they may perceiue in him a fulfilling of ye prophet Daniel, that he should place himselfe aboue all things in the worlde, that he Dan. 11.
should distribute lands & kingdoms, to such as should take him for a God, & worship him. Leauing to write further of this monsters other damnable sinnes, which being past number, shall purchase him torments wtout end. I will in his enuious tyrannies towards such Princes as were not the seruants of his will, reueale this prophecie, & continue my purpose: Mor∣rall Esope reciteth a fable of a snake, which being nie frozen to death, was by a good husbandman pitied, and brought vnto the A able moral∣zed by the Pope. fire, but when the fire had giuen strēgth to this viper, he forth∣with stung the husbandmans children: euen so this Apostata, or reuolter from Christ, did with all the venime he coulde, af∣flict & weaken the Emperiall dignitie, whose rulers gaue him first earthly promotion, and from time to time sustained him in all his troubles. Behold how Pope Benedictus the third en∣uyed the soueraintie of Emperors & anointed Kings, who con∣demned for heretiques one Okan and Dant, two persons blin∣ded with al his idolatries & superstitions, saue that they main∣tained that Emperors helde their Empires of God, and not of the Pope: this Pope might more properly haue bene adopted Maledictus then Benedictus, as one wiped out of the booke of life, which it seemeth he little read, and lesse regarded: for if he had studied the sacred Bible, the perfect mirror both of heauen∣ly grace & morrall gouernement, it is like he might haue light vpon these passages of holy scripture, By me kings raigne, and Pro. 8. Counsailours discerne iustice, by me kinges rule, and rulers VVis. 6. iudge the earth: hearken then you kinges, &c. for power is giuen you of the Lord. Dauid thus saith, The Lord teacheth Psall. 144. the kings hands to mannage armes, and his fingers to war: &c. the Lord establisheth Kings, hath power ouer kingdoms and disposeth them at his pleasure, and to whome he please. Dan. 2. 4. 5. The great King Artaxerxes acknowledgeth yt the most great Ierem. 25. 27. & good God gaue him & his forefathers their kingdom. And briefely to conclude, the excellencie of imperiall and re∣gall dignitie, there is no superiour power, but of God: well, Rom. 13. though the least of these vnreproueable authorities, suffice to condemne these tyrannous Popes to hel, no wonder yt they all
stopped not his accursed mouth, that pronounced the vniust sentence against these two innocent persons, for he (the Pope I meane) who striueth to matche the Maiestie of God, enuy∣eth the recordes of his power, and feareth not what is writte of his vengeance, much lesse can endure that Emperors, Kings and such potentates, should be Gods Lieutenantes on earth: his pride bewrayeth the one, and his enuie dayly discouereth the other. The Chronicles of euery christian common wealth are testimonies, that since Princes became the subiects of this proude Pope, their kingdomes were neuer free from curses, excommunications, nor Kinges cleare from depriuement of kingdomes, their subiects free from priuie seditions, nor their countreyes vnoutraged with open rebellions, if his worde go∣uerned not the sworde, and his will stood not in steade of law. so that it is a question, whether his hypocrisie haue wrought more mischiefe in the West, or the Turkes open tyrannies in Pride and cru∣elties of the Pope. the East. Upon some enuious suggestions, Gregory the ninth and Innocentius the fourth, Pope of Rome, did depose ye Em∣perour Fredericke the second, excommunicated and banished his faithfull and obedient subiects, & absolued the rest of their othe: and furthermore graunted great indulgences, and par∣don to such as would rebelliously rise to confound him: yea, af∣ter he had with an hundred and twentie thousand markes re∣deemed himselfe from this excommunication, he was (not∣withstanding that) once againe banished and accursed. The perfect histories of Fraunce witnesse, that Pope Vrbane the fourth, about the yeere of our Lord 1264. violently did de∣pose Conradus of his kingdome of Scicilia, being his right in∣heritance, and gaue the same to Charles Earle of Angion, and brother to Lodouicke the French king, to frustrate which gift, Pope Nicholas the thirde, about the yeere 1268. caused Peter king of Arragon, to come out of Italie, to depriue the said Charles, and to possesse him thereof, hee wrought a practise, that in one night all the French, both men, women and chil∣dren within the Iland of Scicilia, were murthered by the inha∣bitants thereof. In remembrance of which crueltie, to this
day, there is a worde called the Scicilian euensong. Pope Bo∣niface the eight, enuiyng the maiesty of the Emperour Adel∣phus de nassan, predecessor of the Prince of Orenge, for chal∣lenging to be the Popes superiour, stirred vp, Albert, the first Duke of Austriche of that name, and race, to take armes a∣gainst the Emperour, for the imperiall seate, and assisted him Looke in the Cron. of Ger∣many. with the secreat councell and strength of Gerrard Archbishop of Maience, in which battaile the Emperour was slaine, and Albert succéeded in the Empyre. In so much as puffed vp with pride, for the lucky successe of his vngodly practises, this vngratious Pope in his Iubile, caused two swoordes in tri∣umph to be carried before him, making the bearer of the one to cry, O Christ, see there, the Vicar on earth. And the other: Apol. of the prince of O∣range. O Peter, see there thy successour. In so much as the French king called Philip le Bell hating his pride, refused to acknow∣ledge him for his superiour. For which contempt he pronoun∣ced the recited Albert king both of Rome, and Fraunce, wher∣vpon the said Phillip, secreatly in the night vnder the conduct of Sarra Colomna, sent out 400. horse men & tooke the Pope, at Anagnia, and from thence ledde him prisoner to Rome. To whom the king in this scoffing maner wrote Sciat fatuitas ve∣stra, &c. and after his beastlye death, which shortlye followed his arriuall at Rome, he was long remembred with this re∣proch, Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt leo, morritur vt Canis. Epitaph of Bo∣niface the Pope Sée what large coates, Pope Gregorye the 7. cut of other mens cloath, because he could not make the Emperour Henry the fourth, the vassaile of his will, he firste excommunicated the sayde Emperour: and cursed all his adherentes, and after gaue Ralphe Duke of Swaben his kingdome with an impe∣riall crowne, bended with this trim verse. Petra dedit petro, petrus diadema Radulpho. A diadem the rocke gaue Peter and his race, And Ralph receaued a royall crowne, from Peters holy grace. But although the Pope were prodigall in his gift, yet his
holines nor power could shield the vnfortunate Ralphe from the vengeaunce due vnto traitours, who shortly after was pi∣tifully slayne, who hauing his handes first cut off, lamentablye exclaimed before the bishops, that through the Popes & their prouocations, he and his confederates were accursed, for re∣belling against his owne lord, & supreme head. Not long after this succéeded pope Paschalis the seconde, who excōmunicated the emperor a freshe, & commanded Robert Earle of Flaun∣ders, The Popes war ant or letter vvritten in the 2. booke of counsels o. 810 to destroy with fire & swoord the territories of Lueck and Camericke, because the inhabitaunts remained loyall, to their soueraigne lord the emperor, yea he gaue the imperial crowne with al the iewels of ye empire, to Henry ye 5. son vnto the sayd emperor Henry ye 4. & herein preuailed so much, as he mooued his son to persecute his lord, with such horrible and vnnatural malice: as after he had miserably sterued him, in the prison at Rob. barnes cro∣nicle. Euseb & Nanc. Lueck: he wold not receaue the Lukeners to grace, nor the pope discharge them of excommunication, vntil they had vntombed the buried carcas of the emperor, & had caste the same into the open field, as the carrion of a dog. This enuious act of Pope A∣lexander the 3. is no lesse notorious, who after manye excom∣munications, & curses, arrogantly treading vpō the neck of the emperor Fredericke Barborossa, vpon the top of the stayres of the great church of S. Marke in Vennis, before all the people, did vsurp & pronounce this saying in this Psalme, Super aspi∣cem, & basilicum equitabis, & conculcabis leonem & draco∣nem. Psal. 19. That is to say, thou shalt ride vpon the lion & the Adder: the yong lion, & the dragō thou shalt tread vnder thy foet. Pope Clement the 4. for penance inioyned Franciscus Dandalus, to creepe a long the Popes pallace, vpon his hands & knees, with a collar about his neck like a dog. Pope Alexander the 6. gaue vnto Ferdinando king of Castile, motu proprio, all the newe Indians which lie vpon the Ocean seas, west ward frō Spaine: Lopes de go∣or. in his hist. of nd. for which gift Artabaliba king of Peru (though he cursed for∣tune, for his defeat in battaile by the Spaniards) saide, that he estéemed not the pope, that woulde giue a way to an other that which was none of his owne. Leo the 10. offered Frauncis the
French king the whol empire of Constantinople: but the king giuing him harty thanks, refused his gift, vnles he would put himin possession therof as he, yt wisely fore dreaded, the fortune of the Dukes of Germany, who to conquer the kingdō of Boe∣mia, vpon this weake title, Pope Paule the 2. by sentence de∣posed George the right & lawful king, & gaue it vnto the sayd Dukes with this condition, yt they should goe, & at their owne proper charges, take it perforce: in which attēpt who lostaboue 100000. men, a horse back & a foot, & yet did preuaile very litle. These & many other outrages, the enuy which this proud by∣shop bare towards the maiesty, & royall estates of those empe∣rors & kings, which refused to giue him soueraigne place, with most extremity tirannised vpon thē selues subiects & realmes: & smal is the wonder how he came to this intelligences of for∣raine princes procéedinges, yea to the vnbowelling of the se∣crets of their harts, when the chiefe of their priuy counsels, the A daungerous policie of the pope. head rulers of their parliaments, the principall ambassadours for matters of common weale, by the cunning of this Soule queller, & vngratious college: were Cardinals, Archb. bishops & other of the cleargy, who hauing to doe in the affaires of the common weales of princes, so handled the matter, as they kept euery Christian king for the most part busied either with ene∣mies at home or abroad: ye they thereby shoulde haue little lea∣sure, to look into the smoth hipocrisie of this wicked pope, & his shameles brood of shauelings. And which is more: after yt his subtilties had set thē togeather by the eares, he so handled the matter, ye it was reputed vnto him a matter of fatherly loue & singular holines to make them friends againe: not vnlike to a knauish phisition, yt superficially poysoned a number of people, to get vnto him selfe a name & credite by the curing of them a∣gaine: in the gouerment of princes, there could be nothing ir∣reuocably done if he said not Amen. And by your leaue what other fruits might grow of the ambitious humors of his proud prelates? what wonder is it, if they enuied, that Dukes, Mar∣queses, Earles, Barrons, & all tēporal magistrats, should take their places aboue them? The seruaunt is priuiledged by the
honor of his Maister, these temporall estates, are the seruants of their princes, and the emperors them selues, are the Popes inferiours ergo the Popes sworne seruauntes are more wor∣thy then the Emperours subiects: a good argument for sooth where the maior is false, the minor foolishe, and the conclusion the scourge of common weales. Well according to the Pro∣uerb, as the olde Cocke croweth the young Cocke followeth, that the Pope will haue Emperours, and Kinges, his inferi∣ours, Anno 1070. in aduauntage of that which is reported, Pope Gregory the seuenth suffered the Emperour Henry the fourth in the dead of wynter, to stand thrée daies bare headed, and bare foot, at the gates of Gamisen, while he passed the time in daliaunce with the Dutchesse Matildes, and would not vouchsafe to loke vpon him, vntill the Dutchesse of a more generous disposition, made intercession for the receauing of the Emperour yea to shew them seruauntes, rather then inferiour companions, when the Pope is determined to ride a horse backe, the Em∣perour Cerimoniae Ec∣cles. Rom. lib. tit. . or king present must hold his styrrop, when the Pope will be carried in a chayre, the Emperour or king present, is bound to bow downe his necke, to take vp the chayre vpon his shoulders: The emperour or king present, at diner must giue the Pope water, and waite till the first course be serued. To this seruitude the Pope brought mighty Princes, and to bon∣dages more thē sufferable, his prelates inthralled right noble Péeres, yea too tedious would be the particulars of this vipers & his venemous broodes procéedings, & in their tyrannies wold instruct the tormenters of hel in vengeance with whom Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas. So I will, so I commaund For lawe, let my pleasure stand. What féend may be more gracelesse, then this hipocrite, or people so miserable, as those subiected to his power, when the law of God is no brydle to hold him from tiranny: nor the law of man a shield for the others safetye: who besides the daylye example of his workes, by the warranties of his Bull which followeth, sheweth a will to violate either.
Non obstantibus constitutionibus, & ordinationibus a∣postolicis, A presumptuons commandement caeteris{que} contrariis quibuscun{que}: In English thus, notwithstanding all constitutions, ordinances apostolicall, nor any other thing what so euer here vnto contrarye: mary sir it is no maruaile although he take vpon him to bee a God, a Creator, a disposer in heauen, earth and hell, as many substan∣tiall Doctors woulde prooue him, that will vndertake to ouer∣rule the ordinances of God, and institutions of men. A king which is the most soueraigne title, that euer God gaue vnto A good ing bound vnto the law. man, is bound vnto the law, vnlesse he be a tyraunt, that is o∣beyed for feare, yet ruling, liues neuer out of feare. With this preposterous corse of the Pope, agréeth the pleasant answer of a good Abbot, who being demaunded, Papa cuius partis oratio∣nis? A pleasant aun∣svvere. sayd that papa was participii partis, quia partem capit a clere, partem a seculari, partem ab vtroque, cum totius orbis doloris significatione, sine modis & temporibus. That is to say, this word Pope is a Participle, for he receiues of the spi∣ritualitie, he receiues of the temporalitie, and parteth stakes on both sides, without measure or ende, to the great anguishe & sorrow of all the world, may truly be sayd: somewhat I haue discoursed, and much more other nations haue felt, neither yet hath little England, which some holde not part of the worlde, bene exempt from his rauening crosses, no better then curses, but through his meane hath beene partaker of other countries calamities. King Inas made the whole lande tributary to the Pope, and further vpon suggestion, that Thomas Becket arch∣bishop of Caunterbury was slaine, by the kinges consent, the Anno 740. This taxe vvas peter pence. whole land was a great while in subiection, and at the disposi∣tion of the Pope. It is a wonder but that God would haue it so: that no worthy Prince did vnmaske the painted village Anno 1181. of this glorious Pope, in so long continuaunce of his errour: yea the continuaunce of his kingdome, is a great matter of his glory, and a colour that yet deceauesh many: but Sainct Paule sufficiently aunsweareth the matter saying that God shoulde send such an efficacie in errour, that men shoulde giue credite vnto falsehood not onely for a day: but for a long continuaunce
of time: but as there was a beginning of all that is bisiblye seene: so there shall be an ende of the greatest glorye that our eyes may behold. And although the ten kinges figured by the beast with ten hornes, in ye seuentéene of the Apocalips, which Apoc. 17. shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and that shall eat her flesh, and burne her with fire: is meant in that passage as a prophesie of the destruction of the Empire of Rome, yet graunting the same: you shall easely finde out An∣tichrist by the whore that sate vpon the seuen hilles before de∣scribed. I haue in the Chapter before touched the most of the tenne kinges which Saint Iohn speaketh of, which destroyed and spoyled Rome. But for that I haue not set them succes∣siuely done in the other chapter, but onely remembred those, that entred Rome by force, I holde it not amisse in this place breifly to remember them. Radaigasus the first king of ye Go∣thes which entred Italy with two hundred thousande Gothes, can not be reckoned for one of them, for that without doing a∣ny great damage he was ouercome, taken prisoner, and stran∣gled by Stilicon captaine of the Emperour Honorius army. 1 Alarick was then the first king of the Gothes, and straun∣ger that entred and spoyled Rome. 2 Adolphus was the seconde: who if the intercession of his wife Placida, Honorius sister, had not appeased his furye: had vtterly subuerted Rome. 3 Generick king of the Vandals was the thirde that spoyled Rome. 4 Odoacer as some say a Saxon, was the fourth king, that punished Rome: and first of all named him selfe king of Italy. 5 Theodarich king of the Gothes was the fift: who and his heyres occupied the empire 50. yeares. 6 Athalarick, Theodarich sonne was the sixt. 7 Theodat successour of Athalarick, also king of the Gothes was the seuenth. 8 Vitiges, was the 8. king: this Vitiges left Rome naked of all her beautifull buildinges, and auntient priuiledges. 9 Tottill king of the Gothes was the ninth, who destroyed
Rome more then the rest, and this wound lasted 42. moneths, as it is written in the Apoc. 13. for it was three yeere and a Apoc. 15. halfe before Bellisarius repayred Rome, after her first ruine by Tottill. 10 Telas succéeded Tottil, and was the last king of the Gothes that gouerned Rome, who in the beginning of his raigne, was vanquished, taken prisoner, and put to death, by Nasetes, chief of the Emperour Iustinians army. In this sort did God chasten this Empire of Rome: and albeit God hath appointed other then carnall weapons, to con∣found Antichrist: who being the enemy of God, is threatned to be confounded by Gods owne worde: yet to ioyne shame with his ouerthrow: visible vengeance is séene to raigne vp∣pon him. For to what nation is not his deformitie knowne? and as by peece meales he clymed to the highest degrée of worldly dignitye: euen so by a lingring consumption he is al∣most wasted to nothing, or in the best construction brought vn∣to a vile reputation: and as I haue here showne his flori∣shing pride, and pompe, euen so occasion will hereafter mini∣ster matter, in sundry places of his ruine disgrace, and daylye defeats, whose vtter confusion, God for his sonnes sake spee∣dely graunt Amen. CHAP. 7. Of the enuy of Sergius a monke of Constantinople, who be∣ing banished for heresie fledde into Arabia, vnto Maho∣met, by whose diuelish pollicies, ambitious Mahomet, forced the people to holde him for a Prophet, which damnable sect, vntil this day hath beene nourished with the bloud of many thousandes. LAmentable and most lamentable, are the bloud∣dye cruelties, manifested in my former discour∣ses, but this one act of enuy broched, the extrea∣mest venim of the diuell. For although in my
recited examples I haue published, open iniuries both against God and man, yet were they executed on those persons, whose glory the enuious beheld, or in the worst degrée, to bury the re∣membraunce of their vertues, which they imagined woulde lessen their account. But this fact of Sergius was drawne many degrees more extreame, who though he sufficiently be∣wrayed the enuie that he beare to his superiours authoritie, béeng a Monke in Constantinople: in that he raysed damna∣ble heresies, to make him selfe famous, yet the sect of Maho∣met, which his accursed head first plāted in Arabia, hath left an impossibility to Belzabub to scatter in the world, a more blas∣phemy against God, and iniury towardes men, whose opini∣ons buried millions of soules in hell, whose bodies were to forme, many hundred yéeres after his departure vnto the Di∣uell. The actions of whom, and originall of Mahomets sect en∣sueth. Sundry are the opinions, of what parentage, and countrye this false Prophet Mahomet was. Platinus sayeth that he sprong from noble line. But Pomponius Letus, a moste dili∣gent authour, in the abridgement of the Romane history, af∣firmeth that he was of a race, base, vile, and obscure, which Vnnty of Momets li∣nage. may the rather be credited, for that a man so euill, in whome was nothing worthye of memorye: but malice and iniquitie, may hardly be the issue of noble bloud. Some saye he was a Persian, some other an Arabian, and both opinions not with∣out reason, for that at that time, the Persians gouerned Ara∣bia. Touching his father, were he noble, or villayne, sure it is that he was a Gentill, and neither Iewe nor Christian: by his mothers side, the better opinion is, that he descended from Abraham, by the ligne of his sonne Ismaell, whom he had by his Chamber mayd Agar, and so as a Iewe, obserued the lawe of the Iewes. This Mahomet had a quicke spirite, and easely learned, what so euer he was taught, who in his youth was solde, as a slaue, vnto a rich marchaunt named Adimonople, who regarding the towardnes of the young man, intertayned
him as his sonne, and in no pointe as his slaue: who so well mannaged his masters affayres, that in shorte time he retur∣ned Adimonople great riches, and by reason of his great traf∣fique, both with Christians and Iewes, he was well exercised in eyther of their lawes: during this time, Mahomets ma∣ster dyed without yssue, and left Ladigua his wife very riche, who hauing before proued the sufficiencie of Mahomet, tooke him to husband, & so of a bondman, raysed him vnto the degrée of a riche Lord. In the Prime of Mahomets aduancement, the forenamed Sergius ariued in Arabia, who to be reuenged of the Cleargie that banished him Constantinople, or more properly to shew his malice, to despight God because he suffered him to prosper no better in his herestes, in euery place he tormented the poore Christians, with whose outward habite he was but lately at∣tyred: in the ende he lighted in acquaintance with Mahomet, whome Sergius founde in abilitie and power great, in witte quicke and subtill, in minde proude and ambitious, of disposi∣tion froward and enuious, a great practiser of magicke and nigromancie, and to bee shorte, that hee was ignoraunt in no vice, neither was there any lewde attempt that hee feared to enterprise: who taking his best opportunitie, counseled Maho∣met to take vpon him the name of a Prophet, and to giue him The vvicked counsel of the monek Se. the greater credit, by magicke and other diuelis practises, hee illuded the people with some false myracles, in somuch as his wife and most familiar friendes began to admire Mahomet, and to reuerence him as a holy Prophet. But were it the vengeaunce of God sent to abase his pride, or the malice of the deuill by this plague to colour his impious enterprise, Mahomet was many times stroken with the fal∣ling euill, whose straunge passions much amazed both his wife and houshold seruauntes, which Mahomet thus excused, that the Angell of God oftentimes talked with him, and vnable as a man to sustaine his diuine presence, he entered into this ago∣nie and alteration of spirit, and that by this visitation, he fore∣learned what was the almightie will and pleasure of God,
whose expresse charge he followed. By these subtil illusions & protestations, he not only seduced his familliar friendes and allies, but by his cunning and their false rumours he was admired and reputed through the grea∣ter part of Arabia, as the Prophet of God: Mahomet growing to be thus popular, and after the death of his wife, sole posses∣sed of a great masse of wealth, by the incouragement of Sergi∣us, he published abrode that he was sente from God into the worlde, to giue lawes vnto the people: and for that he was by his industrie learned in all lawes, in the beginning till he had well rooted his damnable sect, to reaue himselfe of many dangerous enemies, in parte he accorded with the Iewes, in part with the Christians, and moreouer in many thinges he Mahomet an Athist agreed with the heretiques which raigned in his time: he de∣nyed the Trinitie with the Sabellicans, with the Macedoni∣ans he denyed that the holy Ghost was God, and approued the multitude of wiues with the Nicolaites, on the other part he confessed that our Sauiour and Redeemer was a holy Pro∣phet, and that he had the spirite of God: with the Iewes he re∣ceyued circumcision, and to be short, being of no religion, hee entertained the professours of euery religion: but especially, his wicked law tollerated al carnal vices wtout controlement. Maomet being by these means strong and puissant, he made his lawe named the Alcoran: and for that he distrusted the goodnes thereof, he generally forbad all men, vpon the paine of death, not so much as to dispute of his lawe. A damnable pollicie. In the beginning of these matters, he was strengthened with the multitude, and such as were seduced with his false perswasions. Also there ioyned with him all the vicious and carnal men, which in those dayes abounded through the world by whose ayde he assaulted the confines of Arabia, and subiec∣ted a great part thereof. His beginning was about the yeere of the Lord 620. in the time of the Emperour Eraclies, who so soone as he had news of Mahomets proceedings, (as Platinus witnesseth) he prepared a remedie, & perfourmed the same in part, intertaining for this seruice wt large promises ye Scenits,
a warlike people of Arabia, so that this new sect was in a ma∣ner stifeled for a time: notwithstanding the Emperour great∣ly A matter is bet∣ter vnbegun, then not effec∣tually followed. erred, that he followed not his purpose, vntill he had cleane plucked vp this wicked roote, which brought forth such dan∣gerous and damnable seed, for in not continuing his enterprise he did much hurt in beginning of the same: for because he kept not promise with the Scenites, and payed them their accusto∣med wages, they in despight thereof, ioyned with Mahomet, & seeing that he was in great reputation & holden for the Pro∣phet of God, they chose him for their captaine, Afterwardes he and his people assailed the Empire of the ROMAINS, and entering into Syria, they conquered the noble citie of Da∣mas, wt all Egypt, Iudea, & the adioyning countries: Mahomet A pleasing per∣svvasion of Mahomet. then perswaded the Sarisens, a people of Arabia, that the land of promise belonged vnto them, as the legittimate successors, of Abraham, and hauing thus fortunate successe in his enter∣prises, he made warre vpon the Persians, by whom he was at the first vanquished, but in the ende he had the vpper hand. To conclude, after that Mahomet had compassed great and horrible matters, he was poysoned in the 40. yeere of his age, and as Sabellicus sayth, in the yeere of our Lord 6▪ 2. And for that Mahomet would often say, that after his death he should Mahomets death. ascend vp into heauen, his disciples kept him aboue the ground vntill his bodie stuncke as badde as his soule, which was then closed in iron, and by his sayde disciples was carried into the Citie of Meque in Persia, where he is worshipped of all the people of the East, yea of the greater part of the worlde. Califus succeeded Mahomet in the Empire and Hali suc∣ceeded Califus and Hali successours of Mahomet. Califus, these two greatly augmented the secte of Ma∣homet, and so from tyme to tyme, by diuers meanes and suc∣cessions, and Principally for our sinnes, and through the co∣wardlines of the Emperors of the East, this pestilence conti∣nueth vnto our age. And certaynely if Gods mercie and the diligence of the Emperour CHARLES the fifte had not stopped the passage and determination of the great Turke SOLYMAN, Italie
and all the West hadbene in daunger of this infection. God be praised for his prouidence, and when it standeth with his good will, all good people doe desire that there may bee such vnitie among Christian Princes, as ioyning their forces together, they may be able to confounde the tyrannie of this enemie of many thousand millions of mens saluation: by whose pusala∣nimitie, enuie and discorde: of a vile and abiect person, hee is growne to be a Prince, renowmed and feared through the whole worlde, the great Turke I meane, who although he be sprung vp long since Mahomet, yet his damnable secte neuer dyed, & at this day by the Turkes proceedings is wonderfully dispersed. Which almightie God for his sonne Iesu Christ his sake speedily extinguish. CHAP. 8. Of the Enuie of Simon the Magician, and other heretiques since Christ his time. THere was neuer common wealth, Ci∣tie nor people so well gouerned in vnitie, but that enuy made a passage for diuision and discorde, Among the heathen Philosophers their sects wrought much diuision. The Iewes although they obeyed one lawe, not∣withstanding the heresies (for so call the Greekes the causes of diuision in religion) of ye Pharisites, Samaritans, Nazarites, Herodians & others caused much contention & debate among ye people: but at this day the deuines onely calleth those heretiques, that in∣stituteth, findeth or followeth any sect, contrary to christian re∣ligion, whereof Simon the Samaritan called the Magitian He vvas borne in a tovvne of Samarie called Tricon. Trt. de here. with his harlot Selene, were the first, that enuying the credite of the Apostles, sought by a venemous opinion, to kill the rootes of christian faith and religion, hee and his supporters
which were called Simonaques, offered to sell the grace of the holy Ghost, he preached that our nature procéeded not of God, but of a high and supernaturall cause, with many monstrous and horrible propositions, particulared by Irenius and others, which Irenius called him father of heresies: this Simon seeing that the Apostles by laying of their handes, gaue the holie Lib. 1. cap. 0. Ghost to those whom they touched, sought to obtayne of Saint Peter, that for money, which he acquired with godlynesse and faith: but the Apostle thus answered him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou thinkest the gifte of God may bee Act. 8. obtained with money: thou hast neither part nor fellowship in this busines, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God: Simon being thus reproued by Saint Peter, euer after his e∣nemie, and enuying the miracles the Apostle did by grace, he continually studied to doe the like by magicke, and in the ende he grew so famous, as in the time of the Emperour Nero, he was so reuerenced in Rome, as betweene the two bridges o∣uer Tiber, his Images were set vp with this superscription, To Simon the holy God: Simon being drunken with this ad∣miration of the people, arrogantly offred to contend with S. S. Iustin. marty in his. Apologie. Peter in doing of myracles, and practised by his arte to rayse a kinseman of Neroes from death to life: but to a bootlesse ende he tryed his cunning: but saint Peter after hee had called vpon the name of Christ, raysed him from death to life: Simon be∣ing more deepely enraged by this miracle, purposed before the people of Rome to flie betweene the mountaine Capitolin & the mountaine Auentin, if Peter would followe him to the end it might be knowen, which of both them was best beloued of God, & there withall comforted with his diuelish artes, Simon prepared himselfe to flie: then Peter holding vp his handes to heauen, desired God that he would not suffer so great a people to be abused by his magicke: after whose prayers, Simon fell in the middest of his flight, and broke one of his legs: through griefe and shame whereof, he shortly after dyed in Africke, whether he was by his disciples carried. But out of this monstrous roote many other heresies
much dissention in the Church of God, in seeking to separate Christ from the diuine substaunce of God, (by the sharpe punishment of God, purging his very entrailes) was driuen to confesse that pride and enuie were the very groundes of his damnable heresie. If I should repeat all the heresies and dis∣sentions that enuie hath sowen in ye Church of God, it would rather containe a volume then a Chapter. The diligent rea∣ders of histories shall finde, that for the most part, if enuy ar∣med christian subiects against the peace of their countrey, she made some false prophet or heretique, with the vaile of religi∣on, to be their ringleader. The enuie of the Cleargie is the roote of al mischiefe, enuie erected the order of the Dominican friers, through enuie of the reuerence giuen vnto the Francis∣cans: the Iesuites sprang from the enuie of the Dominicans: the fall of Antichrist, hath driuen the Pope to publish the pro∣clamation of Schimeon the seditious Iewe. Who so listeth to Iose. de bel. Iud be rid of the bondage of his master, or hath receyued iniu∣rie in his countrey, all that bee in debt or stand in feare of their creditours, those that dread the Iudges for shedding of innocent bloud, and therefore haunte the mountaines and desert woodes, who so is disposed to rob, steale, murder, haunt whores, to eate and drinke at other mens costes with∣out labour of his handes, if he will make warre (sayth the Pope) with the true professours of the Gospell, him will I protect from the danger of lawes, pardon his offences, and will lade him with booties and spoyles. His intertainement armeth all the Atheists, heretiques and vnthriftie persons in The Popes souldiers. Christendome with ciuill dissention: the defence of the Pope is their colour, but enuie, ambition, necessitie and breach of law are the true causes: so that the generall quarrell of Chri∣stendome is betweene the Papists and the protestants: but I hope, and so all good Christians zealously pray, that God will alwayes giue victory to ye true professors of the Gospell: & as he hitherto hath powred his visible vengeance vpon heretikes so he will speedily confound this Archeretique the Pope, and his huge rabble of reprobates. Amen.
CHAP. 9. The mortall quarrell that enuie raised of the faction be∣tweene the two brethren, Gelphus and Gibelin. EXperience dayly approueth the old say∣ing, there is no venim so mortall, as the enuie of brethren, nor warre so cruel, as the enimitie of kindred: whereof there can be no ampler testimonie then this following historie. In the time of the Emperour Fre∣dericke the second, and Pope Gregorie the ninth, betweene whome there was great discorde: there was in the towne of Pistoye, two factions, the one named the Panciatiques, & the other the Chanciliers: it fell out that two brethren, the one named Gelphus, and the other Gibelin, in this citie helde contrary opinions, the one followed the one, & the other party followed ye other: insomuch as the fauorers of these two brethren, being men of account, began to name thē∣selues the one Gelphes, and the other Gibelins: so that the Gelphes chased the Gibelins forth of the towne, and for that it was a rare thing to see two brethren so contrary, euery one of the fastion acquired the fauour of many of their neighbours, by which meanes as a contagious pestilence, this diuision by little and little was spread ouer all Italie: in so much as the Emperour Fredericke, the capitall enemie of the Pope, being then in the citie of Pisa, Anno 1340. & not knowing which faction tooke his parte, and which the Popes, at all aduenture said and published, that he tooke the name and part of the Gi∣belines: which done, he made cruel warres vpon the Gelphes, and by meanes of this declaration all Italie was diuided into these two names: through which there was in euery city mor∣tall frayes: yea, in particular houses the sonne was armed a∣gainst the father, and brother against brother, and onely in af∣fecting the one partie of the Gelphes, and the other of the Gi∣bilenes: the one striuing to confound the other: the stronger
alwayes ouerthrowing and leuiling the houses of the weaker with the earth: in which enuious quarrell, there was neuer more crueltie showen amonst infidels, then was then among Christians, among whome no aduantage was spared. An∣thonie Archbishop of Florence writeth, that through this fac∣tion, thirtie of the most famous houses of Florence were rased and ouerthrowne: the like outrage was seene throughout all Italie. The greater part followed the Emperour, and chased the Gelphes: who againe with their vttermost power resisted thē: to conclude, the greatest part of Rome were ready to take part with the Emperor: which the Pope séeing, he forthwith set open his reliques, and made a solemne Procession, and The Pope druē . sought all the meanes that might winne the people, carrying before him (as the people supposed) the keyes of S. Peter and S. Paul, and in place of most audience, made a publique orati∣on, or more properly a sermon, declaring how great a folly it was to persecute and kill so many men, for the onely fauour of these two names, which the deuill had spread abroad, for the publique persecution of Italie: more, he affected his perswast∣on with other matters of so great waight, as hee mooued the people to commiseration, and to ioine to defend him against the Emperour, who was in good hope to haue destroied the whole partie of the Gelphes: this scourge for the sinnes of the people, lasted a long time in Italie, by meanes whereof, many thou∣sands of men were slaine, many sumptuous Pallaces were destroyed, and many faire houses were burned: the authours of this report are, Platinus in the life of Pope Gregorie the Plat. de vita Geg 9. Sab. . par. 3. ninth, Sabellicus in the thirde parte of histories, and many o∣thers of great knowledge. CHAP. 10. The enuious reuenge of Megolo Larcaro a Genowais, a∣gainst the Emperor of Tribisonde, a notable example for enuious Courtiers.
AMong all Estates and professions of men, enuy is principally entertained among Cour∣tiers, where euery man laboureth to woorke his fellowes disgrace, and aboue all enuieth his prosperitie, which haue bene the cause of many quarrels, and often times of ciuil commotion, of which there cannot be a more rare and profitable example of admo∣nition, then this which followeth. At what time the Genowaies were Lordes of certaine Ci∣ties A rerd for Cotiers. of the Leuant, in the yeere 1380, It happened that a∣mong other gentlemen of Genoway and Florence, which tra∣fiqued to Caffa, there was a Genowais of the family of Larcari named Megolo Larcaro, who for his rare qualities, and ver∣tues, was highly fauoured of the Emperour aboue all other: who obtayned satisfaction of all his demaundes, which fauour moued the chiefe of the Courte to great enuie, anger and dis∣daine: who sought by all means to abase him: it fell out in the ende, that Larcaro playing at Chests with a young Courtier, a fauorite also of the Emperour: who of set mallice with iniu∣rious words disgraced Larcaro, and inlarged the same in scan∣delizing the name and race of the Genowaies: which constrai∣ned Megolo to giue him the lye, for which lye ye other sodenly stroke him with his fiste, & such was his assistants, as Larcaro was depriued of present reuenge, and in aunswere of sundry complaintes to the Emperour, he could haue no reperation of credit: who séeing his honor in this perill, protested in his heart to be reuenged and dissembling his intention, in few dayes af∣ter he desired licence of the Emperor to depart, to order certain affayres in Genowai, which the Emperor graunted: Megolo hauing a prosperous wind, shortly after ariued at Genowai, where he was wel welcomed of all his kinsemen and friends whom he solemnely feasted, and after the banquet, from point to point he recounted the whole matter, and beséeched their aid to reuenge this outrage, which not only touched himselfe and them, but also al the Genowaies. To whom they all solemne∣ly swore, that they woulde not forsake him vntill they had
reparation of the iniurie, and preparing themselues to succour him in this enterprise, in short time they prouided two gallies well armed with souldiers, marriners and skilfull pilots, and so set forward to sea, with determination to rob and rifle all the ships of those partes, and to burne the villages and towns subiect to the Emperour vpon the sea side: but Megolo purpo∣sed not to kill a man that he tooke, but to giue them a more grieuous life then death: for euery man which fell into his handes, Larcaro caused his nose and eares to be cut, to their An ous re∣ge. continuall reproch, and although there were many vessels ar∣med against him, yet none could dammage him, his Foystes were so light, as knowing his aduantage, he shunned and es∣caped all perilles, he tooke many gallies, and with the former disgrace he curtailed a number of men: one day he went on shore to recreate himselfe, and to make prouision for fresh wa∣ter and victuall, his men going aforeraging, tooke the cattell, goods, and the men of a village (which they sacked) prisoners among the captiues there was an olde man, that had on his head and beard none but white heares: with whome were his two sonnes captiue, who seeing the mangling of his compani∣ons, and the danger of his sonnes, fell humbly at the feete of Megolo, and with many teares beseeched him, rather to put him to death, then to suffer such shame to be done to his sonnes Megolo that had a generous minde, tooke compassion of the olde mans teares, pardoned both him and his sones, and with a great Uessell full of noses and eares, he sent him to the Em∣perour, and commanded him to deliuer the same to his Prince with this message, that vntill he deliuered his enemie into his power, he would not leaue to do him al the mischiefe he could: The old man glad of his escape, did his message: The Empe∣rour considering well of the mischiefe, thought it the lesse euil to goe in proper person to the sea side, and to leade the young gentleman captiue to Megolo, then to suffer the continual py∣racies which he committed with his gallies: the young gentle∣man in forme aforesayde, with a halter about his necke, was presented before Megolo, who made humble intercession for
the pardon of his life: Megolo with his foote strooke him first on the face, & said that the Genowaies were not wont to show crueltie to women, and such effeminate persons as he, and gi∣uing his enemie an other blowe with his foote, he retourned him to the shore, not without the great reioycing of the young gentlemans friendes, who but lately bemoned him as a dead man: the Emperour made many great offers to Megolo, all which he refused, and answered him that he was not come thi∣ther for the couetousnes of goods, but for his owe, & the name of the Genowaies honour, and that he demaunded of him none other thing, then that in remembrance hereof, he would build A proud request at Trebisonde a fayre shop for the marchandise of the Geno∣waies: about which should be painted this historie, which the Emperour accomplished, and vsed the Genowaies with grea∣ter fauour then before: and so Megolo returned to Genowaie, gratified and receiued of euery man with great honour. CAAP. 11. The contention that enuie set betweene the Emperour of Constantinople, the Lord of Bulgarie, and other Princes, was the first grounde and sure foundation of the great TVRKES Empire. THe puissant kingdome of the Turkes, at this day so much renoumed and fea∣red, together with the linage and fami∣lie of their Ottomans, and kings, are of late yeeres sprung vp, as a scourge sent and suffered by God, for the sins and iniquities of the Christians. It is not yet 300. yeeres since the first beginning of their kingdome, which at this day is multi∣plied, to the terrour of the whole world: the name of the Turks are neuerthelesse auncient: but to say that they came of the an∣cient Troians, because they are called Teucres, is a manifest Originall of the Turkes. Pom. Mel. Lib. de Cosmo 1. cap. 18. errour, Plinie and Pomponius Mela, in the ende of his first
booke say, that their originall cōmeth frō the Sarmats, which are of the confines of Scythia, néere vnto the sea Caspia: who in ancient times were called Turaci, and now Turkes: these Scy∣thians or Turkes, liuing before as sauadge men came forth of Scythia into Asia Minor, which is (by reason of their name) to this day called Turkie, where they robbed and conquered cer∣taine prouinces: these (as barbarous & infidell people,) recey∣ued the damnable sect of Mahomet, as the first yt was presented vnto them, & which best agréed wt their wicked customs: these The Turkes in∣fected with Ma∣homets religion people wtout gouerner or head: but being a multitude, fiercely ioyning together, setled thēselues in the lesse Asia: in fine, they chose one Soliman of the kingdom of Cilicia for their K. whom Godfrey of Bolloine, & other christian Princes vtterly ouer∣threw, Godfrey Bul∣loyne. & so discomfited the Turkes, that of long time after they had neyther K. nor captaine of account. In the end Ottoman Ottoman. 1. (a man of base linage) got the fauor of the people, & was made their K. and by vertue & great valor somewhat inlarged their dominions, he raigned 28. yéeres, & dyed An. 1308. whose K. continueth to this day, in the ligne of the heire males. Orkan Succession of the Ottomans. Oran. 2. succéeded his father Ottoman, a man as valiant and more in∣dustrous then his father: he was a great inuenter of militarie engins, magnanimous & liberal: who after he had raigned 22. yéeres, dyed of a hurt which he receiued at the assault of a city, he had by the K. of Cilicias daughter a Christian, whō he mar∣ried, a son named Amurat, that sucéeeded him: a man farre vn∣like at. 3. his father in vertues of the mind or strength of body, & yet very ambitious & desirous to inlarge his Empire, to compasse which, enuy presented him a faire occasion: at that time the E. of Constantinople was at controuersie with certain Princes The enuie of the Emperour and nobles, first sure foundation of the Turkes Empire. his subiects, which fauoured the L. of Bulgarie, who charged the E. so hard, as he was driuen to demaūd succour of this A∣murat K. of the Turkes, who sent him 15000. chosen men, by the aid of whom, the E. vanquished his enemies, which done, he kept the greater part of the Turks in his owne dominions. Amurat vnderstanding the disposition of the coūtrie, vnder the colour to ayd the E. against his enemies, came into the domi∣nions of the E. with 60000 footemen, and a great number of
horsemen: & in despight of the E. made himselfe L. of the cities of Calipoli & Andronople, he ouercame Marke ye grandmaster of Bulgarie, and Lazarus the despos of Seruia, wt a great num∣ber of Christians, and Malgre the E. possessed himselfe of the gretest part of Thracia & Greece: in the end a slaue of Lazarus slew him when he had liued 23. yéeres, which was An. 1373. Amurat left 2. sons, Soliman & Baiazet, Baiazet slew his bro∣ther Baiazet, who slew his elder brother So. Soliman, and made himselfe King: in the beginning of his raigne, he prepared great wars against the Christians, to re∣uenge the death of his father: and with a great armie, he in∣coūtred in battaile with Marke L. of Bulgaria, and wt the grea∣test part of the nobilitie of Bulgaria and Seruia, whom he slew Victorie against the Christians. and vtterly defeated. 3. yéeres after this victorie, he returned a newe vpon the Christians in Hungarie, but chiefely in Al∣bania and Valaschia and from thence sente many Christians slaues into Turkie, and being possessed of the greatest parte of Greece, to wit, of the ancient countries of Athens, Boetia and Arcania, he laid siege vnto the great Citie of Constantinople, which draue the Emperor in proper person to desire aid of the Consta  be . westerne Princes: in which behalfe K. Charles the 7. succou∣red him with 2000. launces: among whome there were two french gentlemen of great expectation, who ioyned with Sigis∣mond K. of Hungarie & afterwards Emperour, who for the same purpose raised a great armie: with whome also ioyned the grandmaster of the Rhodes, the Despos of Seruia, and a great number of other christian Princes: whereupon Baiazet leauing his siege at Constantinople sodeinly wt 300000 men set vpon the Christians, who were about a 100000. men, be∣tweene whom there was a most bloudy battaile: in fine the Christians ouer∣come. Christians were ouerthrowne, and the greater part slaine: the King of Hungarie and the grandmaster of Rhodes hardely escaped by flight, and the Frenchmen were neere all slaine or taken: this battell was Anno 1395. vpon Michaelmas euen. After which victorie Baiazet returned againe to his former siege of Constantinople, and had surely won the same, if the newes of Tamberlaines entrie into his countrey, and that he had already gained many townes, cities and prouinces, con∣strained
him to trusse vp his baggage, and with his full power to go finde his enemie in Asia: now two of the mightiest prin∣ces of the world, encountered eache other in battaile, where Baiazet was ouercome and taken, who endured the most vile Miserie and ouerthrow of Baiazet. and hard prisonment that euer was heard of: for Tamberlain still carried him with his armie in an iron cage, and alwayes when he moūted vpon his horse, he set his foot vpon his shoul∣ders: moreouer, at meales he tyed him vnder his boorde, and like a dog fedde him with fragments: in this sorte ended this Prince his life, who had bene the most aduentrous, the most renowmed and the most feared Prince of his time. The sons of Baiazet which escaped the battaile where their father was ouerthrowne, in their flight taken vpon the seas by certaine galleis of the Christians, and certainely at that instant a faire occasion was offered the Christians, to haue kept vnder for e∣uer their capitall enemie the Turke, but their sinnes forbad so precious a blessing. The one of Baiazets sonnes named Cala∣pin Calapin. was deliuered, who seeing the incapacities and contention of Tamberlaines sonnes, and taking with al other aduantages that time offered, proclaimed himselfe Lord of his fathers Em∣pire, and by strong hand kept Greece and Thracia. The Em∣perour Sigismond, both to keepe Calapin vnder, and to be a∣uenged of the ouerthrowe which his father gaue him, offered him battalle, in which Sigismond was ouerthrowne, & nar∣rowly Christians ouer∣throwne. Mahomet. 6. escaped by flight: Calapin raigned 6. yéeres, and dyed, leauing behinde him two sonnes, the eldest named Orcan, and the other Mahomet: Orcan was slaine by his Unckle, who thought thereby to haue had his kingdome: but Mahomet be∣haued himselfe so well, as he slew the murtherer of his brother and recouered the Empire: he made cruell warres vpon the Christians ouer∣come. Christians in Valachie, and reconquered the lands and pro∣uinces, which Tamberlaine wonne from his grandfather in Turkie and Asia, in which conquest he spent 14. yeeres, and dyed in the yéere 1420. Amurat his sonne succeeded Ma∣homet, whome fortune so fauoured, as by maine force in de∣spight of the Emperour of Constantinople, who offered to
resist him, he broke vpon the Christians: and wonne certaine Townes, in Seruia, he conquered the country of Epire, at this day named Romaine, he made many courses into Hungry and Albania, he besieged Belgrade vppon Danuby, but left it a∣gaine with great losse of men. Ladislas king of Polonia, and Turkes ouer∣throvvne. Hungarye encountred, and ouerthrew one of his Captaines, and slew a huge number of the Turkes, Amurat (vpon newes that the king of Carimaine, made warres in Asia) was neuer∣thelesse driuen to be at peace with Ladislas, who (while Amu∣rat was occupied about resistaunce in Turkie) by the perswa∣sion of the Emperour brake the league, who ioyntly with the ayde of Pope Eugenius, the Venetians, and Phillip Duke of Burbon promised so to stop the passage of the Sea, betweene Europe and Asia, as Amurat shoulde not land his men to suc∣cour his landes: vpon which oportunity Ladislas might peace∣ably conquer the same: who put in execution their counselles: but Amurat made a short retourne, and in despight of the chri∣stians, passed the straight: and offered battayle to Ladislas, where the victory was so doubtfull, as Amurat was vpon the point to flye, but being stayed, by one of his Bassas, he obtained Bassa a  Lord of  Christians our∣throvvne. the victory and slew Vdislas vpon Saint Martins day An. 1440. after this victory he greatly damaged Hungary, he entred vp∣pon the Mores, where sometimes stood the auntient Cities of Lacedimonia and Corinth, he broke the wall vpon the entrie of Prouince, containing sixe miles, betweene the sea Ionigne and the sea Egea, all which he conquered saue certaine marish places, he was the first which erected the band of the Ianissai∣res, Originall of the Ianissaires. which are reuerted Christians: and now the greatest strength of Turkie: he raigned 31. yéeres and dyed An. 1450. his sonne Mahomet succéeded him in the Empire: this Ma∣homet Mahomet 8. excelled in all good quallities, saue that he was too cruell. In the beginning of his raigne, desirous to doe some ex∣ploite, aunswerable to the greatnesse of his hart, he besieged Constantinople conquered. Constantinople, with all other places subiect to this Empire. This done he besieged Belgrade, from whence he was driuen
with dishonor, besides the losse of many men, & much artillery, by that valiant Hungarian captaine Iohn Vainode, after this Io. Vaiuode. Turkes defeated he sent one of his Bassas to destroy the Mores, who rebelled in fauor of the Venetians: also to destroy the Isles of Negropont, Mitelene, & Lemnus. After he entred into ye prouince of Bossina where he took & beheaded ye king, hauing these victories against Christians ouer∣come. the christians, he passed into Asia, against Vsancusan, the migh∣ty king of Persia: with whom he fought 2. battailes, in the first he was ouerthrown, & in the 2. had the victory, after this expe∣dition, he made war vpon the emperor of Tribisonde, whō he vanquished & slewe, & so determined the siegniorie of the Chri∣stians Determination of the siegniorie of the christians in the East. in those parties. He sent a great army into Italy, passed into Carintia & Istria, euen vnto ye territories of the Venetians, discōforted the christians, & slew of the nobility of Italy. He sent a great army vnto ye Isle of Rhodes, where he was resisted: he then sent a great army into the kingdome of Naples, by one of his Bassas named Aconiat, who tooke ye city of Ottranta, which was gouerned more then a yeere, by the Turkes to the scandale & domage of al Italy: he so feared the states of Italy, as Sixtus then being pope, determined to retire into France ye old refuge Fraunce the an∣tient refuge of the pope. of the Romane church, as one out of hope to defend Rome. In fine in his iourney against the Soudan of Aegipt, hauing in his army by land 300000. men, & by sea 200. gallies & 300. armed ships, he died by the way: in the yéere 1480. by whose bloddy wars there were destroyed more then 300000. men: vppon whose death the city of Ottranta was recōquered: which was no smal comfort to al Italy: Mahomet left behind him 2. sons, the one named Baiazet, the other zizim, who contended for the empire by reason yt their eldest brother was dead: zizim was ayded by the Soudan, & certaine Bassaes: the other Bassaes & the Ianissares fauored Baiazet, with al his son named Corcut was created Grand seigniour of Constantinople, by whose renoū∣sing he attained the empire, & with spéed hasted into Turkie, & Baiazet. 9. chased his brother into Italy where he died: Baiazet being sole gouernor, made hot wars vpon the Soudan, against whome he was wroth for aiding of his brother, but the Soudan obtaining
victory cōstrained him vnto peace. Baiazet made then hot wars vpon the christians: he won the city of Duras in Albania, & Va∣lona, vpon the frontiers of Pouilla: in ye ende he so scourged the Christians ouer∣throvvne. Hungarians, as they were driuen to craue ye aid of Lewes duke of Millaine, & Lewes king of France, who (but chiefly the Duke of Sessa, a Spanish captain) so delaied Baiazets fury, as he accor ded to peace, being old & tyred with wars. In histime, in Persia began the empire of Sophy: who is to this day a bridle to the Beginning of the Sophy his empire. Turke, & a hindrer of dammage to the christians: which empire began by one Ismael, ye named him self a Prophet, & published an Alcoran contrary to Mahomets, by which meanes he assē∣bled many people, by whose aide he ouerthrew certaine Bassas of Baiazet, & made him selfe lord of Pertia & other prouinces: whose kingdom, from time to time hath bene augmented. But returning to our purpose, Baiazet had 3. sons, the eldest named Acomat, the 2. Corcut (who as is shown renoūced the empire) & the 3. Selim, who although he was the yongest yet was he ye most valiant. This Selim seing the age & decrepednes of his fa∣ther, sought how to make him self emperor: the better to cōpas which, he married the daughter of the great Tartarian. His 2. brethren perceiuing his intent, aymed likewise at the Empire Acomat because he was eldest, & Corcut, because he first put ye empire into his fathers hands: & now because of his inabilitie to gouern, he alledged yt of right he should returne it vnto him againe. The old man was greatly perplexed with these mat∣ters, especially with the disobedience of his sons: this diuision of the brethren, was the death of many of their adherents but Selim the yongest had euer ye better hand, who vnder the color to craue pardon of his father, & to defend him against his eldest brother Acomat, so won the fauor of the Ianissaires & the other men of war, as by their help he tooke the empire from his Fa∣ther: & banished him from Constantinople, & afterward poyso∣ned him An. 1512. This traitour & Paracide Selim caused him self to be crowned with great solemnitie: which don he highly Selim 10. Paracide. rewarded ye Ianissaires, & men of war, which strengthned him. Soone after he went into Turkie againste his brethren, where
he slew the Children of his brethren which were fledde before his comming: and with all so pursued his brother Corcut, as Inhumaine mur∣. (falling into his handes) he killed him: Acornat the eldest by the helpe of the Sophy, and the Soudan, gathered a great po∣wer, whome Selim ouerthrewe, and tooke prisoner, and after∣ward caused him to be strangled. This wicked Paracide hauing thus slayne all those of his loud: was rid of the ielous feare of his Empire: and disday∣ning the Soudan and the Sophy, he confirmed the league, with the Venetians, and made peace with Ladislas king of Hunga∣rie, and so with a great power he went towarde the Sophy: who nothing dismayed, abid the battayle, which was sharpe on both sides, but in the ende the Sophy was vanquished hurt, and driuen to flye, greatly to the increase of the Turkes honor This battaile vvas the 24. of August. 1514 and reputation: the yeare following, the Turke make war vp∣pon a great prince, which gouerned vpon the mountaine Tau∣rus, whome he slewe, and got possession of all his dominions: this done Selim prepared his forces againste the Soudan, and approching the coastes of Surie with his armye, he caused a brute to be spead abroad, that he would wage warre againste the Sophy. But the Soudan suspecting his pollicie, prepared a great power, vnder the colour to suppresse the rebellion of a The Soudan o∣uercome. great Lorde in Surie. In fine these two puissaunt Princes affronted each other, neare vnto the City of Damas in Surrie, and after many skyrmiges on either side, their powers ioyned the 24. of August 1516. the same two yéeres after the ouer∣throw of the Sophy. This battaile was sustained a long time valiauntly of ei∣ther partie, in the ende the Turkes had the victorye, and the Soudan was found dead, hauing neuer a wound other then by treading of the horses, beeing of the age of 76. yéeres after his victory he seased vpon all Surie, the Palestine and Iudea, those which escaped the former battail, chose for their Soudan, ye go∣uernour of Alexandria named Tamonuey: betwéene whom & Selim was fought the cruellest battaile yt euer was heard of: notwithstanding ouercharged with ye multitude of the Turkes
Tamonuey was vanquished, & in th'end betraied into ye hands of the Turk, who caused him to be slayne: after the death of Ta∣monuey, the Turk soone tooke possession of the auncient, & puis∣sant kingdom of Aegypt, where (as also in Surie) he left a good order for the gouerment, & afterward in great triumph he re∣turned vnto Constantinople, where he died of an impostume: An 1520. in ye 8. yeare of his raigne, & 46 of his age: this tirant was of so gret a courage, as he was neuer known to be afraid Soliman. 1. of any thing. Soliman his onelye sonne succéeded Selim, who was crowned Emperour. Soliman hauing subdued Gazellus that vsurped the segniorie of Tripoli, and other domestick re∣bels, Soliman his v∣tories. the yeare following in proper person, he made wars vp∣pon the Christians, and besieged Belgrade the port & strength of Hungarie: which with vaine successe, had béen attempted by manye of his predecessours. But Lewes then king, beeing very young, and gouerned by the Princes of his countrey: by negligent defence, suffred the City to be taken by the Turkes: Soliman retyred from this exployte, in proper person (contra∣ry to the mindes of his Bassas) layde siege vnto Rhodes, with an innumerable power of men and artillerie, both by land and sea: during this siege, the notable feates of armes of either parties, can not be sufficiently praised. But at the 6. monethes end, the Grand maister of Rhodes named Phillip de Villiers a French man, was driuen to yéeld the City vnto Soliman: who retourned to Constantinople, proud of so great an enterprise. Three yeeres after, which was An. 1526. he entred Hunga∣rie with a maruailous army: with whom king Lewes (ill ad∣uised) The Hung∣ans slaine. encountred with a small power betweene Buda & Bel∣grade, where the sayde Lewes was vanquished, and founde drowned in a ditch: after which the Turke tooke Buda and o∣ther bordering townes: and as a conqueror retourned.. After this Soliman came with a huge army of sixe hundred thousand men into Hungarie, and Astria, with a desire and de∣termination to conquer all Christendome: to withstande whose enterprise: Charles the 5. presented him selfe in pro∣per person, with lesse then halfe the number of the Turkes:
through feare of whome the Turke forsooke his purpose with the losse of many of his people: as he did An. 1537. when both by lande and Sea he came into Italie: and had taken certaine places in the kingdome of Naples. Sultan Selim succéeded So∣liman in the Empire. During his raigne, the Venetians loste Selim 12. the famous City Famagosta, and a great part of the Isle of Ci∣pres. In which conquest of Famagosta, there were slaine, and taken prisoners, a great number of Christian noble men and captaines: amongst the rest the tiraunt Mustafa Bassa, by the traine of fauourable vsage, intrapped the noble Bragadino, go uernour of Famagosta, and contrary to his own faith, the law of honor, and humanitye: he first caused his eares to be cut off, and then to bee cruellye stretched foorth vppon the grounde, to whome the tiraunt thus blasphemouslye spake, where is now thy Christ that he helpeth thee not, to which the patient Gen∣tle Mustafa Bassa cosen to the the vvhich honge on the left side of Christ. man made no aunswere. After this the noble Bragadino, after manye vile and spitefull disgraces, was in the market place tacked to the pillory, and fleaed a liue, whose skin béeing stuffed with straw, was hanged vpon a bowsprite of a foyste, Aurath 13. murdred 5. of his brethren. and so carried along the port Townes of Siria. Amurathe that now raigneth succéeded his father Selim, by murther of fiue of his yonger brethren: of him selfe he is afraid of the noise of ar∣mour, and therefore committed the charge of his wars to his Bassas, he is politicke and in the East wonderfully feared, the Sophy occupieth him with harde warres, and yet the king of Spaine from whom he hath won the kingdom of Tunis, nor yet the Venetians, whose seignorie he almoste possesseth, dare not but be in league with him, when he waiteth but oportunitie, to spoyle not onely them but all Christendom. I would to God his aduantage were lesse, and the swoordes that are now in Christian mens handes ready to gore one an others intrailes, were mutually bent against this tiraunt the sworne enemy of Christ, and blasphemer of his blessed word. CHAP. 12. The wonderfull conquest of Tamberlaine, reconquered and his large kingdom ouerthrowne by the enuy and discord of his two sonnes.
AMonge the illustrous Captaines Romaines, and Grecians, none of all their martiall acts, de∣serue to be proclaimed with more renown, then the conquest and millitarie disciplines of Tam∣berlaine: but such was the iniury of his fortune as no worthye writers vndertooke his historye at large: although Baptista Fulgosius in his collection Cam∣pinus florintin, in his history of the Turkes: make some men∣tion Camp. fo. de his. tu. thereof: about the yéere of the Lorde 1390. Tamberlaine being a poore labourer, or in the best degrée a meane souldiour, descended from the Partians: notwithstanding the pouertye of Originall of Tamberlaine. his parents: euen from his infancy he had a reaching & an ima∣ginatiue minde, the strength and comelinesse of his body, aun∣swered the hautines of his hart. This Tamberlaine as Fulgo∣sius reporteth, kéeping beasts among other youthes of his con∣dition his companions in a meriment chose him for their king: wherevpon Tamberlaine (hauing a ruling desire) after an othe of obedience, commanded euery man to sell his cattaile: and to contemn their meane estate, & to follow him as their captaine: Tamberlaines first attempts. & in smal time, he assembled 500. heardmen, & laborers, whose first act was to rob the marchants that passed that way: he par∣ted the spoyle continually among his companions, & intertay∣ned them with such faithfulnes & loue, as the rumour thereof dayly increased his strength: the king of Partia vnderstanding these matters, sent one of his captaines with a thousand horse to take him: but Tamberlaine so be haued him selfe, as he won this captaine to be his cōpanion & assistant with al his strength who thus ioined, did things of greater importance then before: these matters in question, enuy had owen discord betwéen the king of Persia & his brother. Tamberlaine ioyned with ye kings Enuy  of Tamberes kingdome. brother: and so valiantly behaued him self, yt he ouerthrew the king & seated his brother in the kingdom: the new king created Tamberlaine, chiefe captaine of his army: who vnder colour to inlarge his kingdom, raised many people, & found the means to make them reuolt from their obedience, & so deposed ye new king, whom he lately ayded to the kingdom: & en made him
selfe king of Persia: redeeming (by this industry and dexterity Tamberlaine king of Persia. in armes) his countrey from the seruitude of the Sarizens and kinges of Persia. Tamberlayne hauing a puissaunt armye: in Tamberlaines conquest. processe of time, conquered Siria, Armenia, Babylon, Mesopo∣tamia, Scitia, Asia, Albania, and other prouinces, with many goodly and inuincible Cities: it is pittie his pollicies and bat∣tayles be not largely written, which in these conquestes could not but be famous: but of his militarie discipline thus much Tamberlaines militarie disci∣pline. wryters commend, in his armye was neuer found mutine: he was wise, liberall, and rewarded euery souldiour with his de∣sert: there is no remembrance of a greater army then his: his gouernment and order was such, that his campe séemed a good∣ly City, wherein euery necessary office was found, marchants without feare of robbing, or spoyling repayred thither, with all maner of necessary prouision for his army: the reason was he suffered no theft vnpunished, and as louingly honored, prai∣sed, and payed the vertuous and valiaunt souldiour, which fa∣vour ioyned with iustice, made him both feared and loued: he ledde a greater army then king Darius, or Xerxes: for writers affirme, that he had foure hundred thousand horsemen, and 6. Creates of Tamberlaines army. hundred thousand foot men, the which he ledde to conquer the lesse Asia. Baiazet the great Turke (of whose worthinesse, and wonderfull prowes is sufficiently spoken in the former chap∣ter) aduertised of Tamberlaynes procéedinges: was driuen to leaue his siege to Constantinople: and with all expedition, to inlarge his power to the vttermost: to incounter with Tam∣berlayne, by estimation he had as manye horse men as Tam∣berlayne, and a great number of foot men: these two puissant captaines in whom wanted neither vallour, pollicye, nor anye Battaile be∣tvveene Bat and Tamber line. aduauntage of war, with equall courages, mutuallye consen∣ted to abide the fortune of battaile: and so incountring on the confines of Armenia: at the dawning of the daye with all their power they beganne the fiercest battaile that in any age was foughten, which by the huge number of people, and the expe∣rience of their captains may be lawfully supposed: the slaugh∣ter continued of both parties, and the victorye doubtfull all the
whole dayes. In fine the Turkes of whome two hundred thou∣sand were slaine: vanquished by the multitude of their ene∣mies tourned their backes: which Baiazet perceiuing: to in∣courage his army, with an vnappauled spirite resisted the fu∣rye Courage of B∣iazet. of his enemies. But such was Gods will, for lacke of re∣scue, by the ouercharge of foes, he was taken prisoner, and pre sented to Tamberlaine, who closed this great Emperour in an Iron cage, and as a dog fed him onely with the fragments that fell from his table (as in the former chapter is showne) a nota∣ble Baiazet ouer throvv an misery. example of the incertaintye of worldly fortunes: Baiazet, that in the morning was the mightiest Emperor on the earth, at night, and the residue of his life, was driuen to féede among A notable ex∣ample. the dogs, and which might most grieue him, he was thus aba∣sed, by one that in the beginning was but a poore shéepheard. Tamberlaine thus possessed of Asia minor, which was before in the possession of the Turke, he spéeded into Aegypt, and by the way raised all Siria, Phenice, and the Palestine, he tooke manye famous Cities, and among others Smirna, Antioch, Tripoli, Sebastian and Damas: In Aegypt he encountred with the Sou∣dan, and the king of Arabia, and ouerthrew them: he was e∣uer best at ease when he found a stout resistance in his enemy: that his pollicie and prowesse might be the better knowne: as appeared at the city of Damas, which after he had taken, the principle and most valiaunt men retyred vnto a tower, which was thought impregnable, afterwards they offered him com∣position, but he refused vnlesse they would fight, or yéelde vnto his mercy: and with diligence beyond expectation, he raysed a tower leuel with theirs: from whence he battred them in such sort as they were vnable to resist: it is sayde, that in his batte∣ries Tamberlaines order at assaults and assaultes, he vsed the firste daye to raise a white tent, which gaue knowledge that if that daye the Citizens yéelded: they should haue both their goods, liues, and liberty: the seconde daye he raysed a red tent, which signified, that if they did that day yéeld, he would saue all, but the maisters and chiefe of eue∣ry house: the third day he raised a blacke tent, which signified that the gates of compassion were closed, and all that were that
day, and afterwardes subiected, were slaine without respect of man woman or childe: it is written that Tamberlaine besieged a strong city, which with stood the 1. & 2. daies assault, the 3. day the people fed with a vaine hope of mercy, set open the gates, and with their wiues & children cloathed all in white, hauing Oliue branches in their handes, they humbly beséeched grace, but Tamberlaine in place of compassion caused his squadrons of horsemen to tread them vnder their féete, and not to leaue a A great cruelty. mothers child a liue, and afterwardes he leuiled the city with the ground. At that time there was a marchaunt of Genowa, somewhat fauored of Tamberlaine: pittying the cruelty; bold∣ly demanded why he shewed such cruelty to those, that yéelded and beséeched pardon, whō Tamberlaine (with a countenance fiered with fury) answered: thou supposest that I am a mā, but thou art deceiued, for I am no other then the ire of God, and the destruction of the world: and therfore sée thou come no more in my sight, least I chastē thy ouer proud boldnes. The marchant made spéed away, & was neuer afterwards séene in the campe. And in truth Tamberlain although he was endued with many excellencies & vertues: yet it séemed by his cruelty, ye God ray∣sed Enuy ende of Tamberlains kingdome. him to chasten the kings & proud people of the earth. In the ende this great personage, without disgrace of fortune, after sūdry great victories, by the course of nature died, & left behind him two sons, euery way far vnlike their father: betwéen whō enuy sowed such dissention, that through their incapacities to gouern the conquests of their Father, the children of Baiazet, whom they kept prisoners, stole into Asia, & so won the people to disobedience, as they recouered the goods & possessions that their father lost. The like did other kings & princes, whō Tam∣berlaine had spoyled, in so much as in small time this Empire was so abased, yt many dayes agoe, there was no remembrance left, either of him or his linage: saue yt Baptista Ignatius a great Baptis. Ignatius. searcher of antiquities saith, that ye successors of Tamberlaines sons: possessed the prouinces conquered by him about the riuer of Euphrates, vntil the time of king Vsancasan, & according to the opinion of some writers, of the heyres of this Vsancasan,
was chosen the first Sophy, who to this day (to the benefit of all christendō) maintaineth mortall wars against the great Turk. But it séemeth that their empire was cleane ended: for (as it is set down in the chapter of the great Turke) one named Ismaell a false Prophet, gathered a multitude of the cōmom people to∣gether, of whom (by continual fauor of time and fortune) the Sophy is growne, of power to incounter the great Turke. And herein although the lightnes & inconstancy of the common peo∣ple be heretofore noted: yet occasion here and in sundry places, ministreth matter to blame their enuious and froward dispo∣sitions: there was neuer inuention so fantasticke, nor captaine so wicked, yt they refused to follow: they erected the tirannous empires of the Sophy, the great Turk, & Tamberlaine, and ouer threw the famous and prudent gouernments of Athens, Lace∣demonia, Rome, &c. The Swizers enuying the authority of their nobility & gentlemen: by generall consent slew them al, & euer since haue bene gouerned, by that base gouerment, called Democratia, where mecanical people haue the only segniorie: a gouermēt, which resembleth a monster with many heads, yet they all haue neither will nor capacitie to cherish vertue, lear∣ning, & worthy enterprises, the beauties and strength of a good common wealth. Neuertheles Iosua simler of zurich in his Ios. Simler d repub. Swi booke of the Swizers common wealth, both for their militarie discipline in war, and sound administration of iustice in peace, compareth the gouerment of their Cantons, vnto the common wealth of the Venetians: time and necessity hath much refor∣med the same from their originall, and yet how be it he greatly praiseth their iustice, yet his owne report thus much testifieth of their weaknes, that to martiall and gouern their wars, they haue bene oftentimes driuen to obey and follow the direction of forraine captaines, which lamenes in a common wealth can neuer be but an open blemish, and a secret daunger. For a per∣fect common wealth resembleth a well proportioned man, wherof the military defence, resembleth his handes, which be∣ing maimed or cut off, bring misery to the whole body.
CHAP. 13. The calamitie, and seruile bondage of Portugall, vnder the gouernment of Phillip king of Castile, &c. by the aduen∣turous battaile, and death of Sebastian, king of Portugal, the 5. of August 1578. and especially by the enuious ma∣lice of Henry which succeeded, in suppressing the lawfull title of Don Anthonio the now reputed king. THe renowne of the kingdome of Por∣tugall: both for the commodities of the naturall countrey: as for the wonder∣full riches of the east and west Indies: with diuers cities and townes in Afri∣ca, subiected & annexed to the crowne: equalled of lateyéeres the fame of most christian gouernments: and certainely at this day, the calamity and bondage of the people, by the con∣quest and violent rule of the king of Spaine, requireth the com∣passion and reliefe of all true Christian princes: the groundes and causes of whose miseries follow. By succession of time, and lawful decent: Sebastian was crowned king of Portugal: whose vertues & outward giftes promised great honor vnto his king∣dom: but the inconstancy of worldly dignity is liuelye figured, in his much lamented death: king Sebastian being about ye age of 24. yéeres: vpon the earnest labour & suite of Mulei Mahu∣met, king (as he pretended) of Fez and Marocoes, who by Mu∣lei Maluco his brother was driuen foorth of the kingdome: con∣descended with a puissant army, to passe into Africa, to restore this Mulei Mahumet to his kingdome: the enterprise agréed with the magnanimity and greatnes of yong king Sebastians mind: besides to relieue and restore this expulsed king: among indifferent iudges was a matter of great honor and vertue: so that resolutely to execute his promise king Sebastian departed with his armye from Lisbone in Iune 1578. and ariued at a port in Castile called el puerto de Sancta Maria, where he tri∣ed the breach of the king of Spaine his vncles promise: which
was the ayde of 50. Gallies, and 4000. armed souldiours: ne∣uertheles the sayd king Sebastian like (as he was) a magnani∣mous prince, hauing a 1000. sayle of ships in a readines pur∣sued his voyage, & landed his army in Africa to the number of 15000. fighting men, and on the 5. of August in the same yéere in a plaine field called Alcazar, there was a most fierce battaile fought, betwéen him and the enemy: wherin the yong king Se∣bastian, and Mulei Mahumet whose part he tooke, were both ouer come and slaine in the field. Neither did Mulei Maluco the king their enemy escape: for with sicknes & wearines he died during the battaile: a battaile very vnfortunate, wherein nei∣ther party gained, and most rare and worthy of remembrance, that thrée kinges were slaine in the same, and aboue 600. of the chiefest nobility, and Gentlemen of Portugall. After the death of king Sebastian: Henry a Cardinall and a very old man, the Henry king of Portugall a Cardinall. fifth issue male of king Emanuell, was presented vnto the crowne, Don Anthonio being then prisoner in Africa: and his right vnknown: by reason that he was thought not legitimate. Within a few dayes after, by Gods prouidence Don Antho∣nio, was both deliuered forth of prison: and by probable witnes ses, was assured of his legitimation: the knowledge whereof so mooued the old and foreworne king Henry his vncle: as poy∣soned with enuy & malice: he not onely banished him the court, but stopped the course of iustice, in the pursuite of Don An∣thonioes lawfull clayme: and not finding his malicious humor satisfied: because Don Anthonio had procured the Popes inhi∣bition, to disable the sayde king Henrye to attempt anye thing preiudiciall to his right: he therefore tooke an other course to disgorge his rancour, which was vnder pretence, that Don Anthonio disobeyed his commaundement, in comming with in sixe miles of the court, he commaunded him vppon paine of A senere iudge∣ment of king Henry. death within fiftéene dayes, to depart out of his realme. How iniuriously this old king, that by course of nature coulde not liue long, dealt with his naturall countrey and kinsman, the calamities of the one and oppression of the other largely testi∣fie. This old and withered king Henry: if enuy and disdaine,
had not both mortified reason and naturall affection, vpon the certaine knowledge of Don Anthonioes right to the kingdom: had great cause to thanke God, and comfort his affections: that when the glory of Portugal lay a dying for want of linall succession of the heyre male, that so worthye a personage, as Don Anthonio: in whom there wanted no commendable ver∣tue, a naturall Portugall, and of the bloud royall, was by de∣uine prouidence, reserued to raigne and receiue the glory of the kingdome: I haue read of many aged princes, & yet more able to gouerne then this king Henry, (the estate of whose kingdom so hastely required not a sufficient and able king as Portugall) that haue voluntarily resigned their gouernment, to yong and sufficient men: but I haue seldome heard of anye, that euen at their entraunce into their graue, haue furthered the clayme of a straunger, before the right of their naturall kinsman & coun∣trey man. But whether malice or feare, or both were the cau∣ses, king Henry banished Don Anthonio, and suspended his right, and shortly after died, before anye order taken for the strength and succession of the kingdome: after whose decease, The king of Spaine his owne iudge. (who in most of all his claimes, maketh force his iudge) would not tarry the determination of the estates, but with fire and swoord made his passage to the crowne. The estates of Portu∣gall, the Cleargie, nobilitie, and comminaltie, now too late loo∣ked about them, and foorth with elected, and made Don Antho∣nio their king: they annoynted and swore him with all kingly D Anthonio de king by the 3. estates. ceremonies, but they prouided not a strength to settle him in his kingdome, which (if king Henries rancour had not banished him) his wisedome would haue foreséene: they perswaded the king of Spaine to retyre his army, vntill that iustice had deter∣mined K of Spaines greedy desire of rule. his claime. A weake perswasion where the victory was so swéet a kingdome: and the king of Spaine a party, whose de∣sire coueteth vniuersall rule. And (as Euripides saith) to gaine a kingdome, the breach of lawes are halfe priuiledged, but so, or no, he stood in awe of no iudge. The munition and Gunpou∣der, K. Anthonio put to light. by the corruption of the Gouernours of Portugall (Sede vacante) was conuaied into Castile, so that he made an easie
conquest of a rich kingdome: king Anthonio, by Gods proui∣dence miraculously hath sundry times escaped his cruelty, al∣though the kingdome dayly fele his tiranny. Out of their cala∣mities of Portugall, I speciall obserue this counsell of Gods iustice, to admonith semblable traitours to their country. Iohn Masquerannas, Francis de Sa, and Diego lopes de Sosa, thrée A good exam∣ple for traitours of the Gouernours of the realm, who by bribes, and fayre pro∣mises of promotion by the king of Spaine, solde the munition & in effect their country. Al which thrée vpō the election of Don Anthonio fledde into Spaine, where they all with griefe that they had sold their countrey, and melancoly that the king kept not his promises with them, soon after died. Iristan vazde veg∣na without any necessity yéelded the strong Castile of S. Iohn by Lisbone, to the duke of Alua, vppon the promise of a great pension during his life, who presently vpon the deliuery, with∣out other rewarde, then the iust rewarde of traitours, vpon a slender quarrell was banished into Aphryca, to serue ten yéers against the Mores: and truely therein the king did both iustly and honorably, for he that will be false to his countrey will be true to no man, neither deserueth he to haue any promise kept with him: yea (as Phalaris made Perillus to be firste executed with his owne torture and tirannicall deuise) it is sound coun∣sell, to receiue suche traitours seruice, and to hang them for their labours, or at the least to banishe them for euer. For such heades are apt to dammage more then they profite, whose mindes seldome leaue groning vntill they clymbe to the Gal∣lowes. CHAP. 14. The true report, of the chaunge of the gouernment of Flo∣rence in the yeare 1478. and the outrages and murthers, which followed the enuye which the Archbishop of Pisa, they of the howses of Saluiati and Pazzi, beare towardes the family of Medices, for the authority which they admi∣nistred in the common wealth.
SAint Paule declaring the offices of a bi∣shop among manye other duties, sayeth Tim. 2. cap. 3. that a bishop ought to be no fighter him selfe, yea to abhorre fightinges, and dis∣sentions in others, intending with all, that fighters & the sustayners of fraies, and vnnatural murders were ye sworne enemies of charity, and publicke pros∣perity, vpon whom bishops are bound to pronounce the curse and vengeaunce of God, least the Gospell which they shoulde preach, being it selfe true loue, peace, and charitye, rebuke in them selues, the sinne they might blame in others. But small is the wonder though Frauncis Saluiati archbishop of Pisa, contraried this doctrine: being the true Disciple of the Pope: and S. Paule the faithfull Apostle of our sauiour Iesus Christ, . betwéene whom there is no vnion neither in life nor doctrine. For our sauiour Christ attyred with humilitie, preached the vnmeasurable power of God, and peace vnto men, and the Pope cloathed with the riches of the worlde, proudly aduaun∣ceth his owne traditions aboue the glory of the almighty, and laboureth to so we sedition in the bowels of mightye Princes. This vngratious Archbishop, as an earnest follower of the Popes errours, or rather wilfull sinnes, beholding with an enuious eye, the estimation and authoritye of Iulian and Lau∣rence de Medices brethren, and of the people of Florence, high ly fauoured: with a malitious hart, desired the ruine of their glorye, and to giue successe to his naughty wishe, he conspired with the families of Pazzi, and his owne of the Saluiati, two of the most auntient and famous houses of Florence, to giue vntimely deathes, to Segnior Iulian, and Laurence de Me∣dices. Small perswasion néeded to incourage Segnior Iohn, and Frauncis de Pazzi, and others of the family of Saluiati to fol∣low this enterprice: so highly they enuied the rule of the Me∣dices, whose honor begunne in the vertues of Cosmus de Me∣dices their Grandfather, when they them selues of small
regard, were descended of the most auncient and noble houses of Florence: forgetting that vertue, not time made a gentle∣man, and gaue him reputation, and that more honourable was the first, then the last gent of a mans house: In so much as Cicero borne of base parentage, by the warraunt of this cog∣nizaunce,: Vertue the cog nizance of a gentleman. Ego meis maioribus virtute praeluxi: abashed not to sitte chéeke by ioule with the most auncient Romaine in Rome: but in vayne I prescribe the priuileges of vertue to restraine enuie, knowing that enuie is the mortall enemie of vertue, who can not endure the commendation, much lesse the prosperitie of the vertuous. Let King Saul be ioynt ex∣ample with these Florentine conspiratours: who reioyced not so much to sée his Capitall enemie Goliahs head vpon Dauids sword, as he sorrowed to heare the people to crowne him with this commendation, Saule hath slaine his thousand, and Da∣uid his tenne thousand: and through enuie of this renowme sought to murther Dauid, who was the safegarde of him and his people. This like reuerence giuen by the Florentine people vnto the brethren of Medices, moued the recyted Paz∣zi and Saluiati and other their confederats, to seeke the means to murther these two Medices. The fauour of the multitude towardes Segnior Iulian, and his brother, was a great let vnto their enemies: besides Policie of the Medices. their owne wisedomes many times frustrated their enterpri∣ses: for the two brethren foredreading a sodayne mischiefe, were neuer seene to walke together in the towne, knowing for certainetie, that no man would enterprise to offend the one while the other remained in safetie. The Archbishoppe of Pisa and his confederates séeing their purposes by this meanes of the Medices dayly preuented, practised to get the two brethren into the great Church vpon a feastiuall day, and about the eleuation time they agreed to murther them, perswading themselues that the priuiledge of the place, would make the Medices carelesse of their owne sa∣fetie: and vnprepared to offend their enemies, and in truth, if the successe of their attempt had answered their aduauntage
of time, their expectation had not béene deceiued. And there∣fore A necessarie counsell to be followed. the example necessarie to forewarne all estates, that are enuied by mightie enimies, to be best armed where least dan∣ger appeareth. For to stay the reuenges of Enuy, no place is a Sanctuarie, no innocencie a plea, nor praier of power. And what greater likelyhood is it, that the Church may be a San∣ctuarie for the liuing, more than the graue for the dead, let the robbing of Bucers, Paulus Phrigius, and other godly mens se∣pultures, confirme my aduise with truth, and the burning of their halfe consumed bones, condemne the Papists of tyran∣nie. In all moderne troubles, some of which rablement of helhounds are chiefe authours. Well this plot pleased the Archbishop, and the rest of the conspirators Francis de Pazzi, and Barnard Baudin vndertooke to kill Segnior Iulian de Me∣dicis, and the death of Segnior Lawrence, was committed to the execution of Anthony de Volterro, and Anthony Preaste. And the better to strengthen this treason, the Archbishop of Pisa found the meanes to draw a yong Cardinall, nephew of the Pope Sextus, from his studie at Bologna, to passe the time at Florence, to the end that his traine should be the gard of his mischiefe, without making the Cardinall priuie to his in∣tention. This determination set downe, the execution was appointed to be vpon a sonday, being the third of May 1478. vppon which day, the Cardinall went to heare Masse, and with him Seignior Lawrence de Medicis alone without his brother. The Conspirators séeing Seignior Iulian absent, Francis de Pazzi, and Barnard Baudin which had sworne his death, vnder the shadowe of courtesie went vnto hys house, and wrought the meanes that they got him vnto the  Iudas kisse. Church, and placed themselues with best aduantage to do their feate, vpon the point to dispatch their purpose, Barnard Baudin stabbed Seignior Iulian to the heart with his poyna∣do, Francis de Pazzi hasting to make him sure, hurt himselfe in the bodie with his owne dagger, notwithstanding, Segnior Iulian died in the place, and with him Frauncis Nori, with Iuian de Me∣dic ne.
the stroke of Barnard Baudin, for setting hande to hys swoord, to defend Seignior Iulian. Anthonie de Volterro, and Steuen Preaste, assayled Seignior Lawrence de Medi∣cis, but with so small dexteritie, as with the good defence that he vsed, he escaped, onely with a small hurt in the mouth. The Conspirators sought to saue themselues, and Segnior Lawrence, with certaine of hys friends, retyred in∣to the Sacristie of the Churche. Barnard Baudin who had slayne Segnior Iulian, supposing that his companions had fayled to slay Seignior Lawrence, hasted to dispatch hym, but found hym stronglie inclosed in the Sacristie. This assault was so suddaine, as the executioners were not per∣fectlie discouered. The outcrie of the people was such, as it séemed the Churche fell to the earth. The Cardinall had leysure little ynough for hys safetie to recouer the high Aulter. All the Towne were in an vproare vppon the bruite. Some sayde, the two bréethren de Medicis were slayne: others sayde no, and so put themselues in Armes. They of the house of Pazzi, and Saluiati, cryed libertie. The Segnewrie with great diligence retyred into the Pallace, where the Conphalonnier béeing arriued, they Assemblie of the Segnew. strengthened themselues with armed men. The Coun∣saylours of the Citie, and the fauourers of the Medi∣cis went to séeke Segniour Lawrence, and garded hym vnto hys house, where he found more than eyght thousand armed men. The Archbishop of Pisa following his pur∣pose, accompanyed with the Saluiati, and others of theyr lyne, went into the Pallace with hope to worke the seig∣niorie, vnto his faction, and to this ende, he placed the one halfe of hys people at the Gates of the Pallace, and with the other halfe mounted vp the Pallace, and gaue the Seigniorie to vnderstand, that he had certayne mat∣ters to propound for the benefyte of the common wealth, wherevppon, béeing admitted audience, with a few of his people, he entered, and suddainly the Pallace dore was made fast, in such wise, as he was sure from the reskewe and
succour of his souldiers. The Archbishop with a hie voice pre∣pounded many thinges so disorderly, as the Seigniorie founde out his naughtie and malicious inuention: the Conphalonier attached Iames Saluiati and Iames the son of Monsiur Poggio Fury of the mul∣titude. de Pazzi: and so great was the tumulte, as they and those which accompanied them, were slaine in the fray: so that there were more then thirtie dead bodies throwne forth of the Pal∣lace windowes. Within a while after, the Common people, who fauoured those of the Medices, in great troupes came towards the Pal∣lace, where all the Archbishop of Pisas people were taken, and without respect of persons were in the place put to the sword: touching the Archbishop himselfe, he was hanged as a fearfull The archbishop hanged. example to others. Iames de Pazzi and the rest of the conspiratours rode vp and downe the Citie, crying, Libertie, libertie: but perceyuing that none multiplied the crye, and that all in a maner in their countenaunces discouered an affection toward Seignior Law∣rence de medicis, sought to saue himselfe and his people, ex∣cept Barnard Baudin, who lay sore sicke in his bed of a wound which he gaue himselfe. The Citie in armes, in the behalfe of Seignior Lawrence de medicis: who as one very sory for the lamentable death of Segnior Iulian his brother, made great pursuite after those of this conspiracie: insomuch that an number which were but suspected of this trespasse, passed the course of their fellowes. The yong Cardinall nephew of the Pope was long detained prisoner, in the end through his innocencie was deliuered. Barnard Baudin was naked lead vnto the Pallace, and in this Equipage was hanged by the Barnard Bau∣din hanged. Archbishop. Anthony de Volterro and Steuen Preast which would haue slaine Segnior Lawrence, were themselues slaine in the furie of the people, which cryed in euery corner of the citie, Medici, medici, slaying and sacking all their houses, that were aduersaries to those of Medicis: to be briefe, it were too much to set downe in writing, the cruelties and inhumane murders committed in this furie.
Iames de Pazzi was taken as he was flying, and conuayed to Florence, where he was hanged, and after torne in pieces, and vnchristianly buried: all his goods and reuennues were ceased and confiscated vnto the Segniorie: after the malefac∣tours were thus punished, the body of Segnior Iulian was with great pompe interred. Behold the issue of this conspira∣cie, of the Pazzies, in lesse then three houres, the Lord Iulian de Medici was slaine, the Archbishop of Pisa was hanged, with many of the conspiratours, together with the sacke and ouer∣throwe of their houses. Pope Sixtus and Ferdinando King of Arigon, so stomacked this act of Florence, as they sent a great armie against the Flo∣rentines, who with the ayde of their friendes, maintained long and cruell warres, to the small aduanntage both of the King and the Pope: foule fall enuie the beginner of this fraye: the conspiratours that thought by this outrage to haue acquired honour and promotion, lost their liues, set their countrey in an vproare, and made their enemies more strong, for the Lord Lawrence de medici was chosen to be sole gouernour of Flo∣rence, and by the wisedome of his ofspring, the saide gouerne∣ment is become the hereditorie dignitie of the Medici, which before was Oligarchie, where a fewe of the mightiest bare the swaye: so that the posteritie of the Saluiati and Pazzi the auncient gentlemen of Florence, haue not onely by the enuie The ground of the Florentine dukedome. of their auncestours lost their places of authoritie, but are the subiects and abiects in fauour of the medici, who by al possible meanes will keepe them vnder. CHAP. 15. A briefe report of the calamities, of Fraunce Flaunders and Scotland, hatched by enuie and ambition, vnder the quar∣rell of Religion, relieued by the compassion of Queene Elizabeth, and prosperitie of England.
THe diligent Readers and searchers of histories, shall find in the Cronicles of all Gouernmentes, since the comming of Christ, and that the knowledge of the true God was published and receiued among the Gentiles: that the enuious and ambitious or more properly rebel∣lious people of all nations, haue made for the most part religion the colour of their vnlawfull quar∣rels: neither vntill this generall warre betwéene the Papistes and Protestants, there was almoste in anye gouernment any ciuill insurrection, but that some Monke, Friar, false Prophet, or heretique was a ring leader: and at this daye all Christen∣dome is so deuided about the maintenance of the Pope, and the defence of the Gospell, that if hell gates were set open, and all the Diuels had liberty to weare visible armour: they should be intertained to fight vnder the standard of some religion, vnder the protection and banner of the Pope, al theiues, murtherers, traitours, enuious, ambitious, and discontented persons arme them selues againste their Prince, and peace of their coun∣trey. The lamentable estate of Fraunce, Flaunders, and Scotland, our bordering neighbours, in all which countries, there hath béene no setled peace this twenty yéeres and odd, coloure all their calamities, with this quarrell of religion, when the true causes procéeded from ambition, enuy, and priuate discontent∣ment. The true reportes of the troubles of Fraunce testifie, that long before the Catholicke wars (as the Papistes tearme it) in Fraunce, where of the Popes side, the Duke of Gwyse, & Enuy of the Gwyses firste cause of the troubles of Fraunce. their friendes haue béene the chiefest Captaines, the sayde fa∣mily of the Gwyses, mortally hated the Constable of Fraunce, and the Admirall Chatillion. The causes were, that the Con∣stable, and Admirall, were high both in authoritie and fauour, while Frauncis the firste, and Henrye his sonne raigned in Fraunce, who hauing care of the honor and prosperitie of Fraunce, were (as the Gwyses thought) some lets of their am∣bitious
clyming, but especially for that the Admirall, satisfied not the expectation of the Earle of Aumale, about the furthe∣raunce of a marriage for the Marquis du Maine, with the Dal∣phines Curtesan, the Senescales Daughter. Their enuie and malice brake foorth into open fury, when Frauncis the second came to the crowne, who béeing both very young, and with also married to the Quéene of Scots their Niece, they gouerned both the king, and affayres of the realme as they listed: who now by all meanes possible, not onelye sought the disgrace of the Constable and the Admirall, and their fauourers: but also their liues: and the trouble of all Fraunce. The Cardinall of Lorraine complained of the disobe∣dience, and many misde meanours of those of the religion, and made the Admirall, and the chiefe Péeres of Fraunce, to be touched with fauouring of them. To be briefe, the Cardinall and the Duke of Gwyse then being, neuer ceased their practises vntill the Papistes and pro∣testauntes were in armes, and that ciuill warre had set all Fraunce in an vprore: which from the beginning of her trou∣ble, hath neuer entertained assured peace vntill this day, when there was no open hostilitye, there was neuerthelesse dayly newes of inhumaine massacres murders, and pollicies of bar∣barous cruelties executed by the Papistes, and there profes∣sed Captaines. The deuision of Scotland first grew from the sayd Gwyses, who sent the Bishop of Amians and other confederates into Deuision of Scotland. Scotland, who to compasse their purpose, practised the deathes of the nobility of the religion: but God that iudgeth the coun∣selles of men, frustrated their wicked purposes, and hath hi∣therto giuen the vpper hand to those of the religion: albeit since the first landing of the Frenchmen in Scotlande, in Frauncis the secondes time, the Papistes haue sundrie times attemp∣ted warre against the Lordes of the religion: and by wicked practises haue compassed the death of a great many, with all which procéedinges the Cronicles will largely acquaint the Reader.
And certainely, if outward actions of barbarous crueltie may condemne the blasphemie of the Pope, his ministers in Fraunce, Flaunders and Scotland haue already sent the same vnto hell & haue elected him to be the Archtyrant of the earth. For where was there a more sauage crueltie euer cōmitted, then the massacre of Paris, where by the traine of amitie, & the cre of Parts. celebration of a marriage, betweene the King of Nauarre, and the Kinges sister: which in outward appearaunce, promised much peace and honour to the long afflicted realme: the peeres of bloud, and nobilitie of the religion, to honour that wished ac∣corde, repaired vnto the Court, where the good Admirall was slaine, and by that stratageme or rather deuice of the Deuill, many a thousand innocent and fearelesse Protestants in Paris and other cities of Fraunce, were cruelly murthered, which monstrous massacre (although many other trecherous mur∣thers, in Fraunce reproch the Papistes, with the extreamest name of crueltie) is remembred with the blame and exclama∣tion of the cruellest Pagans in the worlde. This traiterous and butcherly warfare waspractised with Murther of the king of Scots. the murther of the King and many noble men of Scotland. The pretence of the tyrannical gouernment of ye Spaniards Tyrannie of the Spaniards in the ovve countrie. in the low Countries, and contrary to the auncient lawesof & priuiledges he said Countries, at their first entraunce, their killing and destroying of the principall nobilitie, and persons most worthie of gouernement, was coloured with the main∣tenance of the Romish religion, but what excuse by religion haue they for the destroying and dishonourable murthering of many Romaine Catholiques, among whome the right noble County of Egmond was that wayes especially affected: euen forsooth some such reason as the theefe had, who said he robbed none but Papistes, when he spared not any that had a crosse in his pursse, which crosse he tooke to be the marke of a Papist: so the Spaniardes tooke these noble men for Protestants, be∣cause A staffe is soone found to strike a dog. they were of honourable dsspositions, maintainers of their countries liberties, and louers of vertue, which are not the ordinarie markes of Papists: the riches of these countries
by common estimation aunsweared the vallew of the king of Spaines Indias, and from this root procéedeth all their ruines. The proud Spaniardes enuied the greatnesse of these Lordes, and the prosperity of the people, and to féed their owne waste∣full humours, they hungred after absolute dominion and pos∣session of their riches. In all matters of obedience, that apper∣tayned vnto the king, they serued his maiestie with all faith∣fulnesse, so that the Spaniard could pickt no quarrell of disloy∣altie. They were driuen to square about the Pope: though these people obeyed the king, they charged them with Catho∣licke disobedience, vpon this cause (as they alleadge) more then these twenty yéeres, the insolent Spaniardes, with swoorde, famine, and many other cruell maners of death, haue afflicted, and destroyed the naturall people of those countries: and haue ransacked, & spoiled, the most of their fayre and rich cities. And yet these proud Spaniardes vpon a true account, haue neither gayned honor nor profit by the ruines of these most rich coun∣tries. While the godly Prince of Orange liued, the Spaniardes had many foyles, and few honorable victories, the compassing The prince of Orange diue∣lishly murth∣red. of whose death: with the worthy destruction, of their own mur thering instruments, testifie the tiranous spirites both of the Pope, and the king of Spaine: that neither obey the lawes of God, honor nor humainitie, by working by anye meanes the deathes of their enemies. After the good Prince of Orange was traiterouslye slaine (the order whereof is vniuersallye knowne and condemned) the afflicted people of these countrys, by their increasing calamities, soone missed the benefite of his graue counsels. But God be praised for the life and happines of her sacred maiesty, euen good Quéene Elizabeth, who with a mercifull eye, and a Princely hand, hath both beheld and gi∣uen large sucker to their afflictions: to the afflictions of these appressed people of the low countries: to them I say with roy∣all defence, & publicke succour: and to the persecuted Christiās of all nations, as their calamities required: her sacred maiesty (euen her onely zeale, and vertue) hath preserued Scotlande
from forraine outrage, and ciuill destruction: the yonge kinge of Scots (whom God blesse with deuine and heroicall vertues) confesseth her maiesty to be his mother: by whom next vnder God he liueth, and raigneth, she hath giuen him a kingdome, in redéeming of it foorth of the tyranny of straungers, and disobe∣dience of awelesse subiects. Her mediation hath much pacified the furies of Fraunce, and her clemencye hath refreshed the woundes of Portugall, her mercy is the Phisition of forraine afflictions, and her holinesse the sure grounde of Englandes peace and prosperity. England at this day, and from the first hower of her maiesties blessed raigne, the wonder of nations. England I say, of absolute gouernments, onely in peace, onely in prosperity, onely free from féeling the vengeance of enuy, & many enemies: be thou thankful for this deuine protectiō. En∣glande, Admonition to England and English men. or rather Englishe men be you counceled by the ouer∣throwes of the fore recited monarchies, kingdomes and com∣mon weales. I haue presented you with these conquestes of enuy: that you may be fore warned of your worst enemy: e∣uen this monster enuy: which euer more contendeth against peace and prosperity: you are plentifully blessed, with both the blessinges, and vniuersally besieged with enuy. It is mi∣raculous, that you haue escaped the mischiefe of all her strata∣geames and dangerous war. The Athenians were ignoraunt of no pollicy, to withstād their enemy yet could find no defence against enuye, but to tame and kéepe vnder their prosperitye, Pollicy of the Athenians to dle enuy. they yéerly banished their noble men, not such as had offended the law, but those which the common people woulde haue ba∣nished, their wisedomes made the common weale to florishe: but neither their wisedomes nor force could banishe enuy out of the hartes of the people, they feared this passion more then Alexanders power, and good cause why, for her venime poyso∣ned Alexander, her pollicy murthered Caesar and quelled most of the worthies. We néede not search forraine examples, to teach vs the power of enuy, she destroyed the house of Brut: at whose gouernment we begin our Englishe cronicles, for Fer∣rex & his brother Porrex striuing for sole soueranitie, sought
each others confusion, Porrex slew Ferrex, and their mother murthered Porrex in his bedde, in whose deathes the linage of Brute was ended. Enuy was the cause of the chaunges of go∣uernment by the Saxons, Danes, Britans, and lastely the enuy betwéene Harold, and his brother, after the death of king Ed∣ward the confessor, was the meane that crowned William the conqueror, with the Diadem of England. The mischief which enuy sowed in king Richard the secondes dayes, brought forth continuall murders, ciuill warres, and deadly quarrelles du∣ring the raignes of sixe kinges that succéeded him. To be short this passion (since the conquest) hath bene the onely hurtfull e∣nemy of Englande. Yea as I haue showne the conqueror, of conquerors, and subuerter of former monarchies, whose con∣quest I haue set foorth, much to the glorye of her maiesties peaceable victories, who armed with grace only wt a Lawrell bow, in many daungerous conflicts, hath ouercome her mortal enemy enuy, whose wonderfull conquestes I haue in my se∣cond booke orderly registred: that her maiesties louing sub∣iectes may comfort them selues with this assurance, that God is her strength, and the defence of her people: and that her wic∣ked abiectes séeing their dayly confusion, may be intised by her excéeding mercy to loue, and reuerence her maiesty, or by continuance of their ouerthrowes, may be brought to feare and dread Gods vengeaunce: and so giuing honor and praise to his holy name, I end this first booke of my English mirrour, contayning the conquest of Enuie. FINIS.
¶THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE ENGLISH Mirrour, intituled Enuy, con∣quered by Vertue: Publishing the blessinges of peace: the scourge of traitours: and glory of Queene Elizabeths peaceable victories: accompanied with ma∣nie other comfortable regardes for good subiectes. A Sonnet of triumph to England. England reioyce, the foes of thy welfare, The foes, that made the former monarkes bowe, VVrath, warre, discorde, and enuy fettered are, Elizabeth, euen with a lawrell bow Hath vanquished them, that foyled Caesars band Vpon thy portes, to feare thy forraine foe, Destruction standes, with blouddy swoord in hand, VVithin thy Coast, in townes and Country goe, Plenty, and peace, armde with a hasell wande, Thy subiectes true, on mylke and hony feed, Thy abiectes false, consume like flames of reed. Malgre.
To the right reuerend Lordes, the Bi∣shops, and other the deines of England, accomplishment of all holy desires. MOst reuerend Lordes and deuines, ha∣uing composed this English mirrour, of selected counsels in sacred scripture and graue censures of morall gouer∣nours, applyed to a generall instructi∣on: where in the good, maye see the large rewards of vertue, & the bad the seuere scourges of wickednesse. The booke (with a fearefull boldnes) I haue armed with the shield of her Maiesties royall protection, who is the liuely example of Dauids righteousnesse, Salomons wisedome, Augustus clemency, and what vertue so euer is els contained in a reli∣gious gouernment: at whose feet (rather by deuine miracle, then worldly policye) enuye, and her worst enemies fall: so that (in effect) her excellency is a figure of the whole worke: and the worke, the iudgementes of religion, honor, and iustice. Religion containing the godly counsels of the Clear∣gie, honor the fortitude of the Nobility, and Iustice the wise∣dome of temporall magistrates, the three chiefe members of this blessed gouernment, whereof her Maiestie is the heade and glorye. The first part containing the conquest of Enuie (next vnder her Maiesty: who containeth the whole) I haue directed to the right honourable nobilitie, to whom apper∣taineth the swoord: the second part, containing Enuies o∣uerthrow by vertue: or more properly her Maiesties peace∣able victories, I reuerently present to your reuerende Lord∣ships, as cōquests gained by grace: The last part containing,
a fortresse, against Enuy: instructing euery estate with sacred and moral counsels, in the offices, and disgraces of their pro∣fessions, I humbly present vnto the temporall magistrates, vpon whose wisedomes all good gouernments are buylded. The part which I submit vnto your graue censors, I hope, will be well accepted, containing so holy matters, as peace, godly gouernment, deuine prouidence, &c. Peace is your vi∣sible attyre, the beauty of Gods Church, and of temporall blessinges, the most precious. Saint Paule among the offi∣ces of a Bishop, forbiddeth him fighting: yea perswadeth him to abhorre it in others: and by circumstaunce or law∣full imagination, counselleth him to protect and defende peace. I need not priuiledge my boldnes, in numbring the manifold benefites thereof, you (Reueren de deuines) dayly preach them, and by grace and your godly labours, Eng∣land possesseth them. God continue his peace (which passeth all vnderstanding) among vs. To which good God, I zea∣lously pray, for the prosperity of his church, the wel∣fare of your Lordships, and all other true prea∣chers of his word, with what title so euer they be adopted. At whose commaundement I reuerently remaine, George Whetstone.
Induction to the Reader. FRiendly Reader, the good Oratour Demosthenes, pleading the iniuries of a poore Widdowe before the Athenian Iudges, was of the sayd Iudges so lightly regarded, as he left his purpose, and told them that A pollicie of Demosthenes to get audiēce. he had a strange tale of the shaddow of an Asse to deliuer: the Iudges eares were by and by quickned, and with great earnestnesse desired Demosthenes to tell on his tale. De∣mosthenes by this pollicie hauing got full audience, openly rebu∣ked the follie and iniustice of the Iudges, who had their eares bet∣ter prepared to heare the tale of the shaddow of an Asse, then the oppression of a poore VViddowe, and so through verie shame, obtained iudgement in the VViddowes behalfe: and certainely, a Varietie de∣lightfull to the reader. pleasing enterance, and vnexpected varietie many times, causeth te∣dious tales to be fully hard, and long Bookes to be throughly read, which otherwise, how good so euer they be, the one might be smallie regarded, and the other lesse perused. But friendly Reader, I salute thee not with this following Epistle of the Athenian Senate, with this bare respect, that thou mightest with expectation of nouels bee drawne to reade out the blessings of our English peace, and the di∣uine and heroycall vertues of our most good Queene ELIZA∣BETH, when with the fulnes of thy owne benefites thou hast large cause hourely to contemplate of the one, and the admiration of the whole world to allure thee to gaze on the other, but rather writing of so diuine a subiect as Peace, I thought no commendation (the holie Scriptures reserued) so excellent, as the iudgement of the A∣thenian Senate, who set light of the verie gaine of warre, in re∣gard of peace, and by semblable iudgement arose this proue be, that vnlawfull peace, was to be preferred before lawfull warre. For one other especiall regard, I commend this graue letter vnto thy censure, which was, the high accompt that the Athenian Se∣nates made of the renowmed Philosopher, and good common∣wealthes man Euxin, that with like reuerence thou mayst honour, loue, and obeie our capitall Magistrates, and common wealthes men, placed by God and her Maiestie in Authoritie, as the pillers and strength of this happie Gouernement: for thy further instruction,
I referre thee to the letter it selfe, which, with the cause thereof fol∣loweth. Betweene the Athenians and the Lacedemonians arose a most cruell warre about a contention for certaine townes seated vpon the riuer of Milin, the day of battaile was assigned, and bloodelie fought on either part, but in the end, the Lacedemonians were de∣feated and ouercome by the Athenians. The vanquished demanded truce of the victorers, and the more easely to obtaine this grace, they sent as Ambassador the renowmed Philosopher Euxin, who before the Senate set foorth the commendations of peace, with such elo∣quence, and withall approoued his message with such grauitie, lear∣ned, and sounde reasons, as he not only obtained a truce from the Athenians, but ouercome with the power of Euxins Oration, they gratified the Lacedemonians with the gift of the confynes which they had but lately conquered, and of long challenged as their owne right: & by Euxin as assurāce of loue & amitie, returned this leter. The Senate and people of Athens, greeteth the Lacedemonians with a hartie desire of health, and peace. WE call the Gods to witnesse, that through the passed battaile we haue sustained more greefe to see you so bloodely vanquished, then we haue receiued pleasure to behold our selues conquerours, vpon iudgement that in the end the effects of war are such, that to the vanquished the dammadge is certaine, and to the vanquisher the profite doubtfull, we would haue beene right glad that you had o∣uercome vs with Euxins words, before we had vanquished you with our swords. What pleasure would it haue beene to either, if the chance had vnfortunately falne vpō vs both, sithēce the rule is infal∣lible, that all that which the Gods haue ordayned, may not be fore∣stood by mans wisedome, iudgement, or power, euen this, you shoulde haue lost much by this war, and we should haue gained no good by your losse. You demaund of vs a truce for three monthes, to this end, that during this space there may be treatise of an accord betweene vs: we answere you, that the Senate of Athens haue not accustomed to make a truce, afterwards to begin war againe, but haue an auncient law either freely to accept of cruell warre, or freely to accord to a per∣petual peace, we indeuour in the time of peace to attire our Accade∣mies
with wise men, to strengthen vs with their counsell in the time of war, and by thē are now aduised to graunt no truce vpon suspitious conditions, and it seemeth to vs that their counsell is good, for a dis∣sembling peace is much more dangerous then open war. The Philosopher Euxin your Ambassador hath so eloquēly spoken in this Senat, as it should be an vnreasonable thing to deny him what he demādeth: also a more honest graunt sealeth a peace required with words, then demanded with the launce. Now we say, and giue you to vnderstand, that our Senate accordeth vnto you Lacedemonians with a right good will, a loyall peace, deliuering you withal from the suspition of war. And to this end we do it, that the world may know that the Athenians are so strong harted against the ouerproud, and so great louers of wise men, as they know how to chasten the foolishe Captaines, and suffer themselues to be cōmanded of the wise Philoso∣phers. You know that all our contention is sprong for the possession of the townes seated vpon the borders of the flood Milin. By this letter we certify you, and by the immortall Gods sweare vnto you, that we renounce and render vnto you all the right that we haue or pretend to haue in the said confines, with charge that on the contrary part you bestow on vs Euxin your Ambassador, for the happy Athenians esteeme more of a philosopher in their Academy, then of a whole pro∣uince for their common wealth. And you Lacedemonians repute it not an act of lightnes to haue exchanged the Empire and segniory of many, for the liberty to command one only man: for this Philoso∣pher shall teach vs to liue well, where the possession of that Countrey may giue occasion to die euill. And sithence of such auncient enimies we declare our selues such perfect friends, we will not only deliuer you of this war and send you peace, but in aduantage we will giue you councel to cōserue the same: for the medicin which preserueth health, is of far more excellency then that which chaseth away sicknes, & now regard the remedy. Vvhereas you greatly desire that your yong men should be exercised in armes, so be you diligēt that your infants be in time instructed in good letters, for as the one with blooddy launces raise war, so the other with sweete words obtaine peace. Thinke not Lacedemonians that we perswade you this without cause, for in neglecting the councell of the wise, and in suffering idlenesse to grow among the people, the same engendreth seditions and ciuill warres, and so death to the one and other.
Vve would not that you should repute vs louers of much talke: for our auncient father Socrates ordayned, that the fyrst lesson A law of So∣crates. that the tutor reade to his disciple in the Academie, should be, that he should not in two yeares after dare to dispute: for it is impossible, that anie should be prudent in speach, that is not patient to holde his toong. Let it then please you that Euxin remaine with vs, and imagine you, that if we hope for profite in his presence, you may be assured, that of the counsels which he giueth vs, you shall receyue no dammage: for it is a verie auncient lawe in Athens, that the Senate may make no enterprise of warre, vnlesse the Philosophers first examine whether it be iust. No more vnto you, but that we praie the immortall Gods, yours and ours, that they will prouoke both you and vs, and that it will please them for euer to preserue vs in this peace, for that only is euerlasting, which is confirmed by the will of the Gods.
MIRROVR. Lib 2. CHAP. 1. Of the blessings of Peace, the scourge of ciuill warre, and renowne of peacemakers. PEace of the morall vertues, is the soueraigne Queene, Peace the christiline mirror is, wherin is science seen. Peace is the fountain (next Gods word) from whence doth goodnesse flowe, Peace is the holie ground, wheron, all earthly bles∣sings growe. Peace is the trompe  toong of law, peace setteth iustice vp, Peace measures right to euerie man, yet with a seuerall cup: For peace doth chastice wicked men, and cherisheth the good, Peace executes the paines of law, but suckes no guiltles blood. Peace open sets the citie gates, that plentie enter may, Peace leades and guides the traueller in safetie all the day. Peace brings the Marchants wandring ship into the wished port, Peace safety seales vpon the dores where strangers do resort. Peace hangeth armor by the wall, that men may ply the plowe, Peace doth sustaine the poore mans neede, that liues by sweat of brow. Peace bringeth victuall to the towne, for such as haue money, Peace where she raignes makes the land, to flow with milke & hony. Peace lends, releeues, and freely giues, and keepes ynough in store, Peace heapes these riches on the good, and many blessings more. Peace sheelds the wise from souldiers force, and virgins vndeflowrd, Peace lets the flocke to feed at large, and saues them vndeuowrd. The Citie of the mightie God, sackt through his peoples crime Of blessed peace was Salem cald, vntill king Iebus time. God would not haue his Temple built, but in the time of peace, Christ was not borne vntil that war, throughout the world did cease. Christ his Apostles thus doth blesse, with you be peace and loue, Christ thus the wicked Iewes doth curse, peace shall from you remoue. Christ is the authour of all peace, the sacred word doth say, (day. Christ will haue peace throughout the world, against the iudgement Much more may be said, although no man can say ynough in the commendation of peace, saue such as haue felt the worst
vengeance of warre, for as Cicero sayeth, the goodnesse of a thing is knowne by the depriuement thereof. If our neigh∣bours harmes may make vs héedfull, or our owne prosperitie make vs thankefull to God, true to her Maiesty, and obedient to her graue Ministers of publike benefite, we may beholde our countrey as a beautifull Towre, on euery side enuironed with a consuming fire, and yet miraculously preserued from the least vengeance thereof. But experience teacheth, that examples of miserie moueth many times cōmiseration in the beholders, but seldome impresseth any déepe sorrow in theyr harts. The Romaines many yeares saw the bloody vengean∣ces of war, inflicted vpon sundry kingdoms, yea many times sorrowed to sée their owne conquests. When Pompeyus was Pitty vvithout charitie. murthered, his enemy Caesar shed teares vpon his head, and Alexander gaue the mighty Darius a royall funerall. Which compassion may be more properly tearmed a motion of pitie, than any worke of charitie, for they still followed the fortune of warre, without consideration of the pretious blessings of peace. But when the stout Romaines, (whose couetousnes of rule the whole world could not glut) by ciuill and most per∣nicious factions in the triumuirate of Cesar, Crassus, and Pom∣peius, Ciuill vvarres of the Romans. and afterward in the triumuirate of Octauius, Antho∣nius, and Lepidus, felt in their owne bowels the scalding fu∣rie of war, when they saw the fathers throte a sheath for the sonnes sword, when the mother beheld the rauishment of hir daughter, and the sister mingled teares with hir brothers blood, when the Senate house was no Sanctuary for Cesar, nor Pater patriae a protection for Cicero, when the fountaines were turned from the Cities, and the chanels flowed with the best burgesses blood, when the faire buildings were fired by the houshold seruant, and the rascally maysters of the richest merchants goods, whē Iustice was painted without a mouth, and oppression with a hundred hands, when law gaue place to launces, and Orators to the braying of horsses, when vnciuill souldiers iudged Senators, and the nobilitie were suppliants vnto the vnconstant multitude, when religion was misprai∣sed,
youth ill instructed, gray heares vnreuerenced, discipline vnused, a famine with vertue, and nothing publike, but disor∣der, when the vineyards lay vnordered, & vnprofitable briers ouerran the fruitefull fieldes, whē the plow was laid in fire, and fire hurled into the husband mans barne: I say, when these proude Romaines beheld in their owne cities these ha∣uocks of diuine and humane blessings, they were in tymes past neuer so forward souldiers in following of war, as they were now humble suters for peace: they neuer attributed so much honor to Cesar for conquering of kingdoms, as they gaue reuerēce to Octauian, for determining of ye ciuil broiles. Honour giuen to peacemakers. Octauian. In perpetuall remembrance of Octauian, they added to hys name Augustus, and decréed, that all the following Emperors should be called Augusti, and after death, both Augustus, and the good Emperors succéeding, in most solemne manner, they deifyed, and placed among the number of their Gods. The great Cane of Cathaya, is so called, in honor & remembrance of their first Emperour Chanius, who (being aged, the mea∣nest Chanius. and poorest of the seauen linadges which gouerned, or ra∣ther tirannized the prouinces of this Empire as the historie saith) by the reuealement of a white Knight, tooke knowledge that the wil of God was that he should be Emperour & peace∣maker of and among the seauen linadges: vpon which com∣fort, and the faithfull obedience of the people, he obtained this blessed conquest. The mightie Emperour of Aethiopia is cal∣led Preter Iohn, and in their language beldugian, which signi∣fieth Preter Iohn. ioy and power, only in remembrance of one of his aunce∣stors, who notwithstanding he was the soueraigne of seuenty Kings, yet he established peace through his whole Empire. These glorious monuments remaine of peacemakers, & are like to liue vntill the world end, when the violēce of death, the vnconstancy of fortune, and iniurie of time haue enterred the haughtiest conquerors, returned back their conquests, and of their huge colonies haue left no signe at all. But so setled are ye vertues of peacemakers, and so precious are the blessings of A speciall ho∣nour. peace, as these heathen, that had no other guide than naturall
reason, annexed their good Princes names vnto the honour of the crowne, as men that hoped, the name would make the ver∣tue her editorie, or at ye least instruct succéeding Princes, of the worthinesse of their auncestours. And questionlesse men are greatly incouraged to weldoing when good demerites are ful∣ly rewarded, and good mens liues are faithfully registred. For albeit ye soule of man traueileth without a guyd to bring foorth that which is good, yet in as much as the corruption of fleshe is néerer our sensible motions, the deuine workes of the soule are darkned, as is the brightnesse of the Sunne by the Moone, the most inferiour Planet, being opposite betwéen the same & the earth, and therefore to helpe our infirmitie next vnto the sacred scriptures, the histories of time are the moste visible The benefite of histories. lights to shew vs the way to happines: where the names of good men liue, which taketh away a great part of our feare to dye. And truely if for the worthines of some one king of that name, the Aegiptian kinges were called Pharaoes, the Bethi∣nian Ptholomies, the Albian Siluies, the Romane emperours Augustes, the Ethiopian Preter Iohn, & the Cataian the great Caan, by farre larger warrant, the Englishe kinges ought to be called Henries. For of 8. Kings named Henrie sithens the All the kinges named Henry of Englande vvere vvorthy kinges. conquest, cronicles cōdemne no one of thē to be irreligious, no∣tably wicked, or tirannous oppressors of their subis, but as images and patterns of kinglye magnanimitie, of wnderfull prowesse, of peaceable gouernment, and of many other deuine and heroicall vertues, euerye of them hath left a rare monu∣ment of a noble gracious and good Prince, as if by heauenlye prouidence, an especiall blessing had béene ioyned vnto the name of Henry. But albeit the heathen ceremonially thus named their Princes, as the Cardinall of Rome doe newe christen their Popes, yet true Christians estéeme of this adop∣tion, as of the image of Iesus engraued in a wodden crosse, which is as full of holinesse as a painted fire of heat, and both a like. The fayrest tree that beareth no fruite is fit for the fire, and the best named Christian, without the exercise of christi∣anitie is méet for hell. So that I alleadge the examples of these
worthy persons as instructions for their posteritye, and attri∣bute no greater honor vnto them, then that they were the mi∣nisters of Gods goodnes and mercy, of peace and prosperity, to their subiects which are the greatest titles that anye monarch can possesse. And more then was due to Alexander, Caesar, Tā∣berlaine and others: who contrarywise were the rods of Gods ire, and quellers of many millions of innocentes. Cronicles expose their vertues at large: and who so euer shall ioyne re∣gard with his reading in the gouernments of these eight Hen∣ries, shall find many worthy obseruaunces, which degression this place will not beare, the summary of whose vertues con∣taining a larger volume then is determined for this subiect, so much as concerneth this purpose I am bound to report, of the two latter noble Henries, the one béeing the root, the other the trée, which brought foorth the fruites of Gods glorye, of the greatest peace, plentye, and prosperity, that euer Nation, peo∣ple, or subiects enioyed, euen the graue Henrye the seuenth Grandfather, and the victorious Henry the eight, father of our gracious soueraigne Lady, the most good Quéene Elizabeth: Upon whose vertues heauen and earth fixeth regard. A prin∣cesse I say, regarded of God with the eies of fauour, regarded of the world with the eares of enuy, and regarded of good and happy subiects with the harts of true obediēce. A Quéene, and more the visible image of God, as well in respect of the happi∣nesse and deuine giftes which her maiestie possesseth, but prin∣cipally for that mercy is chiefe of her vertues, which enuy and her maiesties worst enemies are bound to witnesse, in whose royall person the perfection of all good Princes are contained. For what may be iustly sayde of all their righteousnesse, wise∣dome, and clemency, are but wordes of her workes, and writ∣ten examples of her maiesties liuelye vertues, the which, the godly in their comfort, the wicked through selfe destruction, and enuie by continuall defeates, haue ingraued in the Capi∣tals of the whole world, the triumph of whose peaceable victo∣ries, to Gods glory, and vniuersall wonder followeth.
CHAP. 2. An introduction to the peaceable victories of the Queenes most excellent maiesty, against enuy and all her enemies. THe nobility, and commons of England impatient of the misgouernment of K. An. do. 1400. Richard the second, deposed by maine force, the saide Richard, and possessed Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Herte∣ford, with Emperiall dignity, a prince indued with many great vertues. And Henry the 4. albeit he entered vnlawfullye, he go∣uerned his subiects like a gracious and prudent Prince. But this good which followed an euill attempt acquited not the realme from the vengeaunce which God in∣flicteth vpon disloyall subiects. The father which taketh the rod to chasten his sonne, if the sonne taketh correction patiently, in hope of amendment burneth the rod. But if the sonne stub∣bornly A  for es. and violently catcheth at the rod, the father dubleth his wrath & trebeleth the sonnes punishment: euen so God which appointeth tirauntes to be the scourges of his ire, conceiued a∣gainst wicked and vnthankfull people, if in patient suffering, they acknowledge his wrath to be iustlye imposed vpon their sinnes, he dealeth with the tirant as the good father doth with the rod. But if they spurne at his vengeaunce, and offer to re∣uenge the tiranny of their princes, he causeth tirauntes to rise like Hydraes heads, which shal torment them, as in the bitter∣nes of their affliction, they shalbe driuen to pray for their worst prince, as the old Romane did for the prosperity of wicked Ne∣ro. This Nero was a most cruell emperor, he set Rome his emperiall city on fire for seuen dayes together, and commaun∣ded that the people should neither saue their goods nor quench the fire. He slew his owne mother, & put to death the husbandes of Octauia and Sabina, and tooke them for wiues, but shortly after sent them the way of their former husbands: And to shew that he passed all other in enuye, hearing one to pronounce a
Greeke verse which containeth this desire. After my death I wishe, Heauen and earth to perishe. And I quoth he rather wish the same while I liue, he so much enuied that so glorious a work should remaine after his death. Enuy of No. Upon a time Nero passing by, a poore old man hartely prayed for the life and prosperitye of Nero: Nero which knew by the accusation of his own euill, that no man had cause to wish him good, demaunded the reason why he contraried all mens de∣sires in wishing his welfare, that would nothing but mischiefe to the Romanes. The old man boldly aunswered, Tiberius thy predecessour was a cruell Emperor and him the people slew. After him succéeded Caius Caligula, a more cruell and barba∣rous Emperor, and him likewise did the people sley, and now thou most inhumaine and sauage Nero raignest, & for thy life and prosperity I pray, least if thou be likewise slaine, the diuel him selfe come and raigne ouer vs. Thus heaped God his ven∣geance vpon the stiff-necked Romanes, which would not bow vnto his yoke the more they resisted his chastisement, the more sharply he scourged their disobedience. The senators of Rome thought the emperiall authority a seuéere bondage, and therfore by their mutuall assents Iulius Caesar their first emperor was slaine in the Senate house. But when they saw Brutus & Cas∣sius that firste sette hande to the swoorde, to die likewise by the swoord, when they afterwardes saw the bloudy euentes that sprong of the contention, betwéen the Triumuirate of Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus, they most ioyfully receiued imperiall seruitude, and afterwardes how wicked so euer their Empe∣rours were, the grauer Senators tollerated their gouerment, or voluntarily banished them selues: so that they for the most part were destroyed by Gods iustice in the common peoples outrage. God by a seueere commaundement threatneth, that he will visite the sinnes of the parents vpon the children, vnto the thirde and fourth generation, of those that in their
spirituall worship, adore any other God, or the likenesse of any other creature in heauen or earth. The same God annoynteth kinges (as the visible images of him) with the semblable ma∣iestye: concerning temporall worship, he calleth them Gods, and S. Paule saith, he that resisteth the ordinaunce of the kinge resisteth the ordinaunce of God. He then that striueth to depose Rom. 13. his naturall king, and to exalt a straunger, committeth earthly idolatry, in likewise as the worshippers of false Gods commit spirituall. And therefore Princes in all gouernmentes, hea∣then and christian, the one by reuelation, the other by imitati∣on of holy scriptures haue publike lawes, to lay the trespasses of traitours vppon their children, the landes and goods of trai∣tours are forfaited, and the reputation of their posterity is cor∣rupted. The emperor Vespatian, commending the vertues of Iosephus vnto his sonne Titus, willeth him to trust him as one no wayes corrupted, saying further vpon occasion, that the son of a traitour ought not to liue. To lay violent handes vpon the Iosep. bel. Iude. Lordes annoynted is a damnable thing. Saule vniustly perse∣cuted Dauid: but Dauid hauing Saules life many times in his power, refused to offer him any violēce, saying, the Lord kéep me from laying my handes of the Lordes annoynted. Which Reg 1. 26. prooueth though subiectes may flye from the tiranny of Prin∣ces, they war without warrant that rebell against their worst kinges. Were there neither authority deuine nor prophane, to reprooue rebellion, yet in their best quarrel, destruction which is the ende of traitours, sheweth their beginning to be naught. God manye times suffereth both good and bad Princes to fall into the handes of their subiectes, but woe be vnto those sub∣iectes by whom either perishe. We need no other torment to relish our present peace and prosperity, then the remonstrati∣on of the ciuill warres, bloudshed and manye grieuous calami∣ties, which for the space of 85. yéeres, yea during the raignes of 6. kinges afflicted this small kingdome. After the violent depriuement of king Richard the second, from his crowne and dignity: but in the end the Lorde hauing compassion of our ma∣nifold miseries, séeing our priuate dissention, ready to grow to
publicke destruction, euen when his wrath séemed to be moste hot, euen then the beames of his mercy sodenlye comforted vs, by the destruction of our arch tyraunt Richard the third, who caused and committed more wicked saluadge murders, then fiftéene of the most tirannous kinges of England. But humbly confessing Gods prouidence, with this old age Nullum violen∣tum perpetuum. This tiraunt that was giltye of the death of king Henry the 6. Prince Edward his sonne, and his own na∣turall brother George Duke of Clarence, and afterwardes within the space of thrée yéeres of his vsurped raignes, caused his nephewes king Edward the 5. and Richard Duke of York his brother to be murthered in the Tower, not caring for his alleageaunce towardes the one, nor fearing to breake the sanc∣tuary for ye other, who repudiated his owne mother, & offered to marry his brothers daughter as is a fore saide. After these and many other murders without the procéeding of law, this manifest monster (the ende of Englandes ciuill misery) was slaine at Boshworth field, by that prudent Prince king Henry the 7. by Gods planting the root of Englandes happinesse, and naked like a hog was carried vpon a bare horse backe to Le∣cester, & there buried, who meriteth neither the monument of King nor Man. CHAP. 3. A sommarie of the vertues of the prudent prince King Hen∣ry the seuenth. THE fayrest buylding hath a foundati∣on, and the fruitfullest trée his root, and 1485 albeit the beuty of either be in the out∣ward attyre, yet the strength of both consisteth in the inwarde substaunce. And certainely in all discriptions the cause ought to be as well set downe, as the effect, that Anatomie is perfect, that discouereth all the inward, as well as the outward worke∣manship
of man. Uertue I grant conuayeth honor simply from a mans owne good actions, yet the same is much inlarged, if from desent, to desent honor be issued from the monumentes of his auncestours vertues. And sure the glorye of a man is much iniured or eclipsed, that is blasoned but by his owne Antiquitye a great beauty of vertue. proper regardes, when the same maye bee truely illustred, by such auncient graces. But touching my purpose, some will suggest, that as it is a needlesse labour to seeke a Diamonde with a torche which glimmereth in the darke so as bootelesse is the curiositie, to de∣riue her maiesties glorye further then from her owne sacred vertues, when her wicked enemies renowne her perfections, and wilfully pursue their owne destruction: through presump∣tion that her excellencye is composed all of grace, and mercye, I am bounde reuerentlye to acknowledge, that her maiesties perfection, is the true discouery of imperfection, and in this re∣garde absolute (that enuye and the worste sworne enemies of God assault her prosperity) yet if anye thing maye be added, to extoll her name, this meriteth regarde, that the fruites of vni∣uersall comfort, which her deuine and heroicall graces plenti∣fully distributeth, grow from the root of Englandes happines, which no priuie conspiracy could vnplant euen king Henry the seuenth. And of that gréene trée, which the stinging Locustes could by no meanes wither king Henry the eight. And doubt∣lesse who so shal zelously contemplate, how that the prouidence of God euen in our greatest destructions alwaies sustained vs, may easily perswade him selfe, that God would haue his glory to sine ouer the world (next his word) from the lights of this little Iland, seperated as some write from the world, or at the least ioyned to the outermost end thereof. How easie a praye had we béene for the ambitious desire of some bordering king, during the blouddye contention betwéene the two illustrous houses Yorke and Lancaster, for imperiall dignitye, but God would not our subuertion. The history of Richard the thirds tiranny is a most lamentable cronicle, yet the same considered A necessarye onsideration. by Gods prouidence, assureth vs by that sharpe remembrance,
a remembraunce of his mercifull goodnesse, in deliuering vs from a continuall calamity, in she wing vs through the vnlaw∣full procéedings of the tirant, a lawfull meanes to accord these two puissant houses. But before this great blessing his incom∣prehensible wisedome, so sharply scourged this realme: as all her estates suppressed their priuate desires, and hartely praied and laboured for this happy vnity, who mercifullye regarding our patient bondage, crowned king Henrie the 7. with title of both houses, by taking to wife Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to king Edward the 4. And albeit the end of our ciuill destruc∣tion, in the beginning of his prudent raigne, be sufficient alone to crowne king Henry the 7. name with euerlasting fame, yet to gouerne vs right, God indued this noble Prince with ver∣tues answerable to so great a blessing as a general peace. And certainly if Alexander surnamed Seuerus be reckoned among King Henry the 7. compared to Alexander Se∣uerus. the number of the most wise emperors: King Henry the 7. me∣riteth semblable title, as the true imitatour of Alexanders go∣uernment. King Henry the 7. entered vpon a kingdome no lesse disordered with continuall tumults, then did Alexander with the vnmeasurable voluptuousnes of Helyogabalus, the necessi∣tye of time made him a seuere executioner of his lawes, and te∣stifieth the same to be deriued from perfect iustice, he punished offences without respect of persons. Honor was no plea for the mighty, he iudged the trespasses of Lawyers, with his owne knowledge of the law, he onely pardoned ignoraunt offences, and graciously relieued his poore subiectes oppressions, he was thought somewhat too seueere in punishment. But such mur∣muringes were no lawfull complaints, to a fore that is deepe festered with corruption sharpe corsiues are to be applyed: Euen so in a disordered common wealth seueere lawes are to be ministred. He was a iust, vertuous, valiaunt, and learned Prince, a true distributour of peace, plentye, and prosperitye to his subiectes, who (in his life time) had had a moste liberall portion of happinesse, if in his dayes the Gospell of IESVS had, had a free passage. But leaue we Gods will therein, who would not haue his outward temple builded in Dauids time,
but in his sonne Salomons, and yet was Dauid a righteous man, after the Lord (in whose hand the harts of princes are) had established a setled peace in this long disquiet realme, in the 24. yéere of his raigne, he peaceably called this noble king Henry vnto his heauenly kingdome, and as a visible signe that he blessed the ioyninge of these two kingly houses in one, hee gaue vnto this noble king by Quéene Elizabeth his wife sun∣drye goodly children, of which as the vndoubted heyre of the kingdome, by both titles, was crowned the victorious king Henry the eight. CHAP. 4. A sommarie of the royall vertues of king Henry the eight. THe most victorious king Henry the 8. sonne of king Henry the 7. beganne his 1509 triumphaunt raigne the 22. of Aprill 1509. whose inuincible courage was feared and admired through al Europe. He was a moste bountefull Prince to∣wardes well descruing subiectes, the magnanimity of his countenaunce kept them in a louing obedience. In the 5. yéere of his raigne (a fore presagement, that he should clymbe aboue the Pope of Rome) The Emperour Maximilian (the Popes lawfull soueraine) and all the nobilitie of Holland, Braband, and Flaunders re∣ceaued wages vnder king Henries banner, whose puissaunce 1513 discomforted and abashed the whole power of Fraunce. This royall king besides that he was Alexander in fielde, he was a Philosopher in the Uniuersity. And in his great learning bles∣sed his subiectes with the fruites of this olde Prouerbe, happy are those people, whose king is a Philosopher. And doubtlesse where the Prince is learned, the people are peaceably gouer∣ned. Science which containeth all duties, with varietie of ex∣amples
so liberallie instructeth the louers and followers of her lore. In the thirtéenth yeare of his raigne, the King wrote 1521 with his owne hand a booke against Martin Luther, for which the Pope named him Defender of the faith, but little fore∣feared he, that God would make him the capitall offender of the Romish superstition. Saule breathing out threatnings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lorde, receiued a Acts Cap. 9. speciall charge from the high Priests, for the persecution of all sort of Christians at Damasco, but God, whose wise∣dome iudgeth the determinations of men, wrought a wonder∣full change in Saule, for of a persecutor, he made him a faith∣full Apostle, and chiefe strengthener of the Gentiles. Euen so gratiousie dealed God with this most noble King: where∣as the Pope imagined, to haue (by this title) made him the sustainer of hys Idolatrie, God by his holie spirit moued him to vse the same to the first capitall disgrace of Antichrist the Pope. But as the good Father Latimer certified his Maie∣stie, the title Defender of the faith, simplie considered, was Acts and Mo∣numents. more then was due to any earthly prince, whē his holy word deliuered by his Ministers, both fostered and defended the same. But in as much as it was Gods good will that vnder this kings and his offsprings authoritie the same should haue the most visible protection, it may be lawfully thought, that it was his will that the Pope should so intitle him, as foreséeing by his wisedome that this prince in his séed should ouerthrow the Popes vsurped authoritie, the most publike enimie of the true auncient and Apostolike faith. Many interprete this pro∣phesie of Esdras, ecce leo concitatus de sylua rugiens, &c. loe, a Es. 4. cap. 2. Lyon hastely running out of the wood roring, who with a mās voice reprooued the saucie and misproud Eagle, to figure thys noble prince Henry the 8. The rauening Eagle that had the victory ouer the foure beasts which God would haue had rai∣ned in the world that troubled the méeke, &c. is likewise in∣terpreted to be Antichrist the Bishop of Rome. The Armes of Rome which is the Eagle, and the actions of the Pope, wel approueth their interpretation. Now who is more like to be
this Lion that came roring out of the wood, and shewed the rauening Eagles villanies to all the princes of the earth, then King Henry the eight who euermore stoutly defied the Pope, who euermore plainely painted his murthers, deceits, and abhominations then King Henry the 8. nay? who first cat∣ched him by the throte but King Henry the 8. When all chri∣stian princes stood in awe of his curse, he banished all his au∣thoritie out of England: when the meanest Bishops in other realmes would checke their Kings in his cause, he caused the whole Cleargy by his learned Councell to be iudged in a pre∣munire for mainteining ye power legantine of Cardinall Wol∣sey, who being called by processe into the Kings bench, were 1530 glad by submission to pray & pay á hundred thousand pounds for remission. When other princes feared to murmur against the Pope secretly, King Henry in the name of himselfe and Vide Chro. of England. his Nobles, wrote a booke against the counsell appointed by the Pope at Mantua, signifying to the whole world, that the Pope had no more authoritie then an other Bishop, and how that the appointment of Counsels only appertained to the Emperour, and other Princes of Christendome. What Lion was euer so bold with the Eagle of Rome, as this Lion of England? What Lion is so like to come roring out of the wood, as the Lion of England? The Lion of Vennice com∣meth out of ye water. The Lion of England is proper passant: bowes and arrowes which are his strength commeth out of the wood. I would the Popes english fauourers would wey this prophelie, with the pride, enuy, & outrage both of diuine & humane blessings setled in the hart, and séene in the actions of this Emperious Pope, and then by allegorie they would per∣aduenture repute him to be this ambitious Eagle, signified by the armes of his sea, & capitol city Rome. And on the contrary part, if with the like regard they would behold the wonderful disgraces that this noble king by himselfe & princely children hath & daily giueth this enuious Pope, they should haue large cause to beléeue that our Lion, signified by the armes of Eng∣land, with his mans voice, should set this misproud Eagles head awy, should vanish his wings, weaken his kingdome, &
in fine, set his whole body of fire. If they had any sence, they might féele that our Lion in the name of the Lord thus saith, hence thou misproud Eagle, appeare thou no more, neither thy horrible wings, thy mischeuous heads, thy rauening clawes, nor thy hollow body cōpact of vanities. The cause straight foloweth, that thou once gone, the earth may be re∣freshed, that thy kingdome once fallen, men may returne to freedom, &c. I demād what reckning they cā make of ye egles 12. wings yt ouerspread ye earth by Gods appointment, since our Lion first shoke him vp, or as ye text saith, since the wind, K. Henries thūdring voice spread abrod his wickednes. Sée if Englād be not shronk frō him, Scotlād denieth him, Hol and Brabant and Flanders delieth him: Germany paints him as a mōster, Denmark is parted frō him, France is deuided, Pol∣land is indifferent: if Spaine & Italy be constant, they be well paid for their frendship. The Eagle the Pope that sometimes was capitalis dominus, as well as summus pontifex welnéere of all Italy, is cleane shut out of ye kingdom of Naples, the Duke∣dom of Florence, Ferrara, Mantua, Millaine, Parma, Vennis, the state of Genua, &c. so that to come to his segniorie of Bo∣logna, he is driuen to the lower way by Raconati, Maddona de Loreto, Ancona, and by exchange with the Duke of Vrbin patcheth a passage, so that in respect of her ancient limits, this proud Eagle is welnih brought into ye case of Platoes cocke, wt neuer a feather on her back: the end of this Eagle shall be confusion the text so saieth, the lion shal rebuke her vnrighte∣ousnes, & rent her asunder, & shal deliuer ye rest of the people of trouble, & make thē ioifull. The Lion of England, euen King Henry the 8. and his posterity, hath made a faire reuealement of this prophesie, the godly expect yt the Eagle shall vanish to nothing with ye thundering blasts that the English Lion hath & shal storme vpō her, she feareth the same, & therfore bendeth all her secret forces to disquiet the Lion. S. Augustine long a∣go, séeing certaine english boies to be sold as slaues in Rome, thus prophesied, bene vocantur angeli, quia nitent vt angeli in quo regno euangelium dei florebit, they are properly called English-men, because they shine as Angels, in which kingdome
the Gospell of Christ shall floorish. The learned Doctor E∣rasmus writing a paraphrase of the foure Euangelists, dedi∣cated the first to the Emperour, the second to the french King, the third to the noble King Henry, and the fourth to the Em∣perours brother, the Pope was wiped out of his trauell, as one not destined to haue the protection of this pretious iewell. To King Henry the eight he dedicated his paraphrase of S. Luke, and in his Epistle wrote that he had sent him Luke the Physition: & by circumstances reputed his Maiestie through his godly and religious procéedings, to be the spirituall Phy∣sition, that by the working of the holy Ghost purged the soules of many from the grosse errors of Antichrist. I leane not so much to these moderne prophises, although there be a com∣mon Prouerbe, Vox populi, vox dei, the Scriptures giueth light sufficient, that from these partes the Gospell of our Sauiour should be visibly reuiued. In the fourth Chapter of Cantica Canticorum be these words: Vp thou north wind, and blow vpon my Garden, that the smell thereof may be cari∣ed Cant. Cantico. cap. 4. on euery side, yea, then my beloued may come into his Garden, and eate of the sweete fruite that growe therein. This winde is vp at the Almighties call, his commission is well blasted abroade. This noble King Henry (as it is inter∣preted) this Lion, this winde, ordained and sent of God, first shooke the wicked tyrant of Rome, first blewe the blast that hath almost blowne his authoritie out of all Christendome. The Pope in his quarrell almost armed all Christian prin∣ces against this Lion, but they feared or failed to do him hurt. In the Popes quarrell many seditions were sowen in Eng∣land, in fearing the communaltie that the King would begger them with impositions. The Northerne men openlie rebel∣led, and the whole realme was in armes, readie bent against their proper intrailes, but God frustrated the deuisers coun∣sels, and preserued vs from the wilfull murther of our selues. When the kings power and the rebels were ready to méete, he parted the armies with a suddaine swelling of the water, while after a parle, the Rebels were willing to acknowledge
their faults, and with the kings gratious pardon, departed to their owne houses: a wonderfull prouidence of God, that would not haue the rebels perish in their ignorance, nor the good subiects murthered in so vnnaturall a battaile. The vn∣gratious Cardinal Poole stirred a great power in France, but the french were more afraid to venter, then was king Henry in his aged daies that they woulde enter into England. His mind was inuinsible, and euen of God all his procéedings were blessed, their happy successe testified no lesse, who in the 37. yeare of his triumphant raigne, ended his life in peace, whose death made England vnhappy, in that the most toward and godly prince Edward the sixt his only sonne and heire of the Crowne was of so tender age. CHAP. 5. A sommarie of the most excellent gifts of King Edward the sixt. THe godly and most toward yong Prince King Edward the sixt, being but of the age of nine 1546 yeares, began his raigne the 31. of Ianuarie 1546. This prince in his tender age was in∣dued with such towardnesse, wisedome, lear∣ning, and all goodly gifts, as Europe seldome or neuer fostered the like. By reason of his tender yeares, the Duke of Somerset his vncle was made Protector both of the King and his Realme: who, for the discretnesse of his speach, the wisedome of his behauiour, and vertue that accompanied all his actions, was worthely reputed to be better able to go∣uerne at tenne, then many princes at thirtie yeares of age. There wanted no gift of nature, learning, or education, that might renowne a good King, but that mightely grew in his yong yeares, as the vndoubted heire not only of the crowne, but of all the vertues of his most noble father. He aduanced the Gospell, to which by Gods holie spirit his godly father gaue frée passage in England, whose deuout zeale witnessed,
that this heauenly blessing was no lesse planted by his Grace, by his godly councels and wisedome. By his especiall request and letters the Citizens of London erected thrée néedefull Hospitals, viz. for the sicke and aged they erected S. Thomas Hospitall in Southwarke: for the fatherlesse child and infant they erected Christes Hospitall: and for the sturdy vagabond they erected Bridewell: by his godly meanes this charitable worke was sowne. His wonderfull victory against the Scots may not be forgotten, where was slaine 13000. Scots, and A vvonderfull victory in Scot∣land. Muskelbor∣rough feeld. but 60. Englishmen. And truly, if his subiects would haue béen imitators of his pietie, charitie, temperance, and other christian duties, their enuy, ambition, crueltie, and other grée∣uous sinnes, had not so highly moued Gods wrath, as that his vengeance would not suffer vs in any perfect yéeres to enioy this right gratious King Edward, sample of all goodnes, and by his death for a time reaued vs of the fruition of the Gos∣pell the foode of our soules, and in place of both, to further pu∣nish our vnthankefulnesse, he sent vs a prince that held a hard hand ouer vs, that not only stopped the passage of the Gospell, but persecuted the godly professors thereof, euen Quéene Mary good King Edwards sister, part of whose actions follo∣weth. CHAP. 6. An abstract out of the proceedings of Queene Mary. LADY Mary, the eldest daughter of king Henry the eight, began her raigne 1553 ouer the realme of England the sixt of Iuly. 1553. Touching her naturall disposition, she was vertuouslie and well giuen: but by reason that her bringing vp was vnder Papists, and her youth throughlie instructed in the superstitions of Papistrie, anone af∣ter that she was setled in her kingdome, by suffering the
bloodie Bishops to misuse her Emperiall sword, she in their procéedings outragiouslie tyrannised the true professors of the Gospell, which (God, her noble father, and good brother, his instruments, bée therefore praysed) had taken a sound holde in the hart of England, whose crueltie and contrarietie in Religion may no wayes slaunder her godlie father, and his off-spring. We sée the Rose trée that bringeth foorth the swéete Rose, lykewise bringeth foorth sharpe prickels: but to come more néerer the matter, the kyrnell of the best apple will growe to be a crabbe, vnlesse some good fruite bee grafted on the stocke, and looke what the Sience is, suche will be the trée: looke what is owen in youth, is euer séene in age: the following example teacheth a good pollicie, to haue an eie vnto Schoolemaisters, and the education of Pa∣pistes A godly po. children. The séede of Idolatrie, superstition, and send Ceremonies, were sowne in the heart of Ladie Mary bée∣ing a childe, which grewe to the disworship of God, and the destruction of the godlie, Ladie Mary béeing a Quéene. But God no doubt suffered thys prickle to growe of thys gréene Rosier, and thys irreligion to be grafted of thys religious stocke, to chasten the sinnes of England, who hauing a righteous Prince, peace, and plentie both of spi∣rituall and temporall blessings, neyther saluted the gi∣uer of thys goodnesse with hartie thankes, nor sought the continuance thereof, with a dutifull regarde of the Kings Maiestie, but (in some of her members) hauing an eye fix∣ed vppon the Kings tender yéeres, and not an hart set∣led vppon hys firme vertues, she began to worke mat∣ters hatefull to GOD, offensiue to the Prince, and most hurtfull to her selfe, and therefore God  Englande of the most milde, vertueus, godlie, and well disposed Prince King EDWARD the sixth, and in wrath sente vs euen suche a Prince as the Prophete speaketh of, that  Cp. . shoulde oppresse vs with most greeuous bondage, that should by taxes & great impositions take frō vs the fruites 1. Sam. Cap. . of the feeld, vineyards, & oliue trees, and should giue them
to his lords and seruants. Euen Quéene Mary that imposed many great summes of money vppon vs, to enrich strange Lords, that by committing the waightie affaires of the pub∣like weale to Bishops, almost wilfully lost Callis, an aunci∣ent ornament belonging to England, which Citie, the noto∣rious Atheist Gardener vaunted that he would kéepe with a white wand: an vnlikely matter that his courage serued him to defend Callis against the power of a puissant King with a white wand: that armed troupes to gard the vnresisting Martyrs to burning: but which stained her gouernement with euerlasting crueltie, she by her ministers in fyue yéeres tyrannouslie burned fiue times more innocent and quiet Pro∣testants, then good Quéene Elizabeth in 27. yéeres raigne by her lawes hath executed notorious Papists that committed treason: when my soule durst sweare, that there be double the number of the poore Protestants that then constantly profes∣sed the holie Gospell, that now in their harts wish her Maie∣sties depriuement both of life and crowne, and yet liue. This The protestants neuer rebelled in England. persecution made many to flée the Realme for their consci∣ences sake, but they sought not libertie by rebellion, they con∣fessed this bondage and persecution to procéed from the Lords heauie displeasure, and humblie awaighted his fauour for their deliuerance. No one hath more cause to exclaime of this hard gouernement, then our gratious Quéene Elizabeth. She was not entertained like the daughter of a mightie King, and heire apparant of a rich kingdome: Good Lady, she was em∣prisoned, her attendance small, her libertie nothing. When her innocencie disprooued publike accusations, the Cleargie sought her life by secret tyrannie: sought it do I say? yea, they had wrought it, had not God beyond mans expectation won∣derfully deliuered her Maiestie: her assured friends despai∣red of her worldly welfare: her Maiestie that behelde the bloody knife a sharpning, misdoubted not her deliuerance. Her friends trembled, because there was no measure in the Pa∣pists The Papists cruelty without measure. crueltie: her Maiestie looked chéerefully, because she knew the Diuell had no might, but such as God suffered. In
the holie Bible (the louing embracements whereof was her Maiesties persecution) her excellencie had learned these pre∣tious comforts, and in them reposed. The Lord sayeth, Who so honoreth me, him will I make honorable. In another Comfortable examples for the godly in time of perse∣cution. place Dauid sayeth, Who so dwelleth vnder the shadow of the almighty, him God couereth with his wings, and kee∣peth safe vnder his feathers. I know (saith he) the Lord hel∣peth his annointed, and euen from heauen heareth them. Some trust in chariots, some in horsses, but we in calling vpon the Lord. God can and oft times doth pine man and beast euen in the middest of plentie. God where he setteth too his hand, worketh wonders, and sturdie strength stan∣deth in no stead. God thus speaketh to Dauid, and yet by a spiritual interpretation maketh like promise to all kings and princes that hartely séeke his glorie. Because thou hast set thy loue vpon me, I will see thee rid from all thy troubles. I will defend thee: why so? it followeth, Thou hast knowen my name, thou seekest my glorie: and therefore whensoe∣uer thou callest vpon my name, I will heare thee: yea, I am with thee in all thy calamities, and will deliuer thee from them, I will set thee higher in honor, send thee long life, and shew thee thy saluation. Her Maiestie builded vpon these comforts, her soule desired and hoped to be an instrument of his wonderfull glorie, examples of Scripture told her, that those whome God had appointed to any speciall seruice, euen those he guided through mortall dangers: he preserued Ioseph from the murthering enuy of his brethren to saue old Iacob his father, his malitious brethren, and al Israel from the sharp death of famine. Against the tyranous decrée of Pharao, which was, that the Midwiues should kill all the male children of the Hebrewes, his prouidence saued Moses from drowning, and made him his instrument to leade the children of Israell out of the bondage of Pharao, vnto the land of promise. God (in the deapth of the sea) fetched Ionas the Prophet foorth of the Whales belly, to saue Niniuey from destruction. God deliue∣red Peter forth of the prison & tirannie of Herod & the Iewes,
that he might open the gates of faith, and preach the way of saluation euen vnto his enimies. God sundry waies miracu∣louslie deliuered Paule from the vengeance of death, to preach the Gospell of saluation vnto the Gentiles: at Philippos in Macedonia he caused him & Sylas to be deliuered forth of pri∣son. In Lycaonia the Iewes & the people stoned him, and drew him forth of the City as a dead man, & God raised and reuiued him againe. God againe redéemed him out of the hands of the Iewes, when as forty of them swore they would neither eate nor drinke, vntill they had slaine Paule, yea, God in his extre∣mitie stood by him, & comforted him, saying: Be of good cheere Paule, for as thou hast testified of me at Ierusalem, so must thou beare witnesse also at Rome. God had appointed him & the rest waighty charges, the execution whereof the malice of men might not withstand, examples of great comfort to the godly, & terror to the wicked. The godly may learne by them that his mercy succoureth them in the sharpest aduersitie, and the wicked may be assured that his iustice will confound their policies in the chiefest hope of successe. Her Maiesty (to whom I euery way may apply ye former examples) beset with death as dangerous as Daniel in the Lions den (as after in her own thanks-giuing may be séene) comforted her self in the strength of God, which always defended her, which good God hauing compassion both of her patient suffering, & the general afflicti∣on of his Church, mercifully burned the rod of correction, by calling away Quéene Mary, & setting of gratious Elizabeth in the emperiall chaire of England, France, and Ireland, for which excéeding mercie, his holy name be praised, Amen. CHAP. 7. Of the peaceable entrance of Queene Elizabeth our grati∣ous soueraine, vnto the crowne & diademe of England, and other obseruances of Gods especiall fauor & mercy. IT is commonly séene, that vpon the death of princes, enuy, ambition & dissentiō shew their humors, & that secret discon∣tentment
breaketh forth we publike disturbāce. And although in England hereditary succession be a great bridle vnto these passions, yet vpō such changes they many times haue foūd the meanes to shew themselues, as after the deathes both of king Edward the 4. & king Edward the 6. & vpō the death of Quéene Mary, the difference in religion was a likely cause to sow dis∣cord among the people. But almighty God that had as it were by especial miracle preserued our gratious Quéene Elizabeth the visible image of himselfe frō the spoile & malice of dange∣rous enimies aforthand prouided, that her sacred Maiestie should receiue hir crowne in peace, should gouerne hir people in peace, & my hope doth assure me where she now peaceablie raigneth, her maiesty shall long liue and die in peace: who the 17. day of Nouember, 1558. the very day of Quéene Mary her sisters death, with the sound of a trumpet, both at West∣minster and in the City of London was proclaymed by the name of Elizabeth Quéene of England, France, & Ireland, de∣fender of ye saith, &c, The newes wherof raised a suddaine ioy amōg ye people, so harty, as their louing affectiō was presently séene by publike feasting, banqueting, & benefiers in the open stréets. The 23. of Ianuary following, her Maiesty from the Tower passed through the City of London toward her Coro∣nation, but before her Chariot set forward, her Maiesty lifted her eies vp vnto heauen, and acknowledged Gods mercie in this thankes-geuing. O Lord almighty & euerlasting God, I giue thee most harty thanks Her Maiesties thankes-giuing. that thou hast been so mercifull vnto me as to spare me to behold this ioifull day: and I knowledge that thou hast dealt as wonderfully with me as thou didst with thy true & faithful seruant Daniel the prophet, whom thou deliueredst out the den frō the cruelty of the gre∣dy raging lions, euē so was I ouerwhelmed, & only by thee deliuered. To thee therefore be only thanks honor and praise for euer Amen. Her maiesty by this thanksgiuing published her sure confi∣dēce in God, the effects the tyranny of hir enimies, and the conclusion a speciall comfort to the godly. The Citizens of London to shew thei rzeale in welcome of her Maiesty, attyred the Citie with many stately shewes,
the most whereof they deriued from her proper vertues, who was the liuely substance of all their painted bewties. The first pageant shewed ye long desired vnitie (which God, & her maiesty be thanked) is knit betwene vs and the holy Gos∣pell of our Sauiour Christ. The second set foorth the seate of gouernāce which her maiesties liuely vertues bewtified more then their gorgious deuises. The third (which they applied vnto her maiesty) depainted the 8. beatitudes mentioned in the 5. of S. Mathew, & truly, if any earthly creature deserued Her Maiestie visibly blessed with the eight beatitudes in the 5. of Matth. them, they are worthely heaped vpon her maiesty. God hath blessed her humble spirit both with a spirituall and temporall kingdome. God hath dried vp ye teares of her persecution with spiritual & tēporal cōfort. God hath blessed her méekenes with large possessions on earth. God hath blessed her scarcetie for righteousnes sake with abundance. God hath blessed her mer∣cy with the fulnes of his mercy. God hath blessed her chaste & vndefiled hart with the sight of himselfe, in ye true knowledge of his holy word, God hath blessed her trauell for peace (as his proper child) with the visible image of himselfe. God hath blessed her periceution for righteousnes sake, in assuring her soule of the inheritance of his heauenly kingdome. God hath blessed her (to reuenge the reuiling and persecution of the Pa∣pists) with the disgrace & ouerthrow of the Pope. The fourth declared the ruinous state of this realme, which (as they pro∣phesied) is by her maiesty restored to the dignity of a florishing common weale. Yea, in her miraculous procéedings an old by prophesie is effected, which was, A mayden Queene should do wonders in England. The fift compared the expectation which her heroycall vertues promised, with the politike go∣uernement of the worthie Debora. Her maiestie was in Cheape side presented with the holy Bible in English, which she reuerently kissed, and thankefully receiued, as hir spiri∣tuall comfort, her temporall crosse, and godly counseller. The Maior of London presented her maiesty a thousand marks in a pursse, wt humble petition that she would cōtinue their good lady: she gaue answer, yt if néed required she would willingly
spend her blood in their defence, which magnanimious saying, all her after actions haue declared. Although this most royall entertainement, shewed the dutifull loue of her faithfull sub∣iects (which zeale God hath requited with many blessings) yet Gods wisedome (that comprehendeth all knowledge) fore∣sawe that her Maiesties clemency compared with Iulius Cae∣sar, that would not heare the accusation of his enimies: with Augustus, who gaue life to Cinna that sought his life: with King Frances the first of France, who pardoned the commoti∣on of the Rochellers: adioyning therevnto, that he chiefely reioyced that his seueritie caused no man to weare a moorning gowne: clemencie well bestowed that both inlarged the re∣nowne and safetie of these princes: for Pompeys friendes were thereby wonne to Cesar, Cinna became most faithfull to Augustus, and the Rochellers afterwards loyally obeyed King Frances: but God (I say) who knew the greatnesse of her Maiesties compassion, would rather bréede presumption then dutie in her dangerous enimies: therefore to rid her A prouidence of God, in ta∣king avvay of seditious pals roiall person, realme and good subiects (whome he determi∣ned to blesse) from continuall conspiracies, his mercy ioyned with iustice, alittle before and after the death of Quéene Ma∣ry, caused death likewise to attach the bloodie Atheist Steuen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, the seditious Cardinall Poole, and others, whose heads were alwaies occupied with authoritie or dissention. Yea, about this time, that the fall of Antichrist might be visibly séene, by the taking awaie of such Christian princes, as were his setled supporters: when (as Lodo. . Comment. lib.  Lodowicke Guiccerdine reporteth) ther was not any where either brute of pestilence, or extraordinarie disease, there died within the space of one yeare the Emperour Charles the fifth, the Quéene of Hungary, Quéene Mary of England, two Kings of Denmarke, Bona Sforza Quéene of Polonia, Hen∣ry the third king of France, Ierolme Priuli Duke of Vennice, Hercules da este Duke of Ferrara, and Paule the fourth, Pope of Rome, a change verie vniuersall, wherein Gods proui∣dence is not to be ouerpassed with a light consideration, whose
will vndoubtedly was, by the change of these princes (the most of them) drunken with Poperie, to make a ready pas∣sage through Europe for ye gospel of our sauiour Iesus Christ, which vpon this change began to florish in most of the recited gouernements. And albeit ye fall of Antichrist in many places of the scripture be liuely presaged, vpon the authority where∣of there is sure and sound building, when the prophesies and dreames of a number are but rotten foundations, yet I hope I may without iust reprehension say, that God many times acquainteth the minds of some good men with an imaginatiue knowledge of things to come, which many yéeres after falleth out according to their presagement: and for example belōging to our matter, the reformation of the Church vnder her Ma∣iesties raigne, before her noble fathers death, was set downe in this following prophesie: Post H sequetur E, post E quod mirum M, M coronabitur, & breue confundetur Post M sequetur E vel A Et tunc conuertetur ecclesia. In English. E shall follow H, next E (with wonder) M, M shall be crowned, and soone confounded Next vnto M, E or A shall raigne, Then shall the Church conuerted be againe. Noble King Henry the eight first vnmasked this proude Pope, King Edward the fixt, the parragon of yong princes helped to vncase him, Quéene Mary fauoured, but liued not to strengthen him, and now our soueraigne Elizabeth hath geuen him a mortall disgrace: his painted Church abideth not the tuch, Gods Church is vniuersally reuerenced. The mul∣titude are more delighted to reade a fewe godly sentences written vppon the Church wall, then to sée his rarest rotten reliques layde vp in a golden chest. Against her Maiestie he principally warreth, as the chosen instrument of almightie God, to abase his imperious mind, to ye wonder of the world, and comfort of all good Christians.
CHAP. 8. Of the peaceable and honorable victorie that her Maiestie had against the french forces in Scotland, which were raised with a determination for the inuasion of England the second yeare of her Maiesties raigne. AFTER the death of Henry King of France, his sonne Frances the second succéeded in the kingdome of France, a prince of the age of sixtéene yéeres, who being married vnto Mary Quéene of Scots, and néece to the Duke of Guise, suffered the affaires of the estate to be gouerned by the ambitious policy of the Duke, and family of the Guises, who hauing wished successe in their practises (in Quéene Maryes dayes) about the win∣ning of Callice, hoped and hungred after the spoile and con∣quest of England. And the better to colour their purpose, they intituled the King of France in the right of the Quéene his wife to the Crowne of England, and knowing the difference betwéene the Quéenes Maiestie of England and the Pope in matters of religion, they easily obtained of Paulus the fourth Lod. Guic.  Com.  a disablement of the Quéenes Maiestie, and an approouement of the Quéene of Scots right, but King Frances had béene well aduised if he had not accepted this gift, vntill the Pope had set him in possession of the kingdome, which would haue troubled both him and his whole Colledge of Cardinals. This depriuation by the Pope the Guises practised to moue the Papists of England to their part taking, and arming theyr purpose by degrées, to worke a feare in her Maie∣sties loyall subiects, they wrote a booke of the weakenesse & insufficiencie of feminine gouernement, and by their owne reasons, wounded the strength of their owne title, which they deriued from the Quéene of Scots. This scandale of fe∣minine gouernemente, was soundlie aunswered by an
vnnamed authour, in an english printed book at Strasbrowgh entituled, A safe harbor for good subiects. And truely, al∣though the soueraigne place of rule, the chiefe credit of know∣ledge in Artes and Mecanicall craftes, together with all o∣ther giftes of grace, nature, and education be giuen vnto man, yet there haue béene women, that in all maner of artes, qualities, and vertues, which haue equalled the perfitest of men. Innumerable are the testimonies of womens profound learning, pure chastitie, rare constancie, patient martyrdome, and a number most valiant, whereof Chawcer reciteth nine Woorthies aunswerable to the nine Woorthies of men. And touching regall gouernement (from whence this questi∣on is deriued) the Iewes recorde the sage gouernemente of Quéene Alexandra with more renowne, then they did the ty∣rannie of her husband Alexander with reproch, whose bodie they were determined to haue giuen vnto the dogs, as also to haue murthered his two sonnes, to haue rooted out Alexan∣ders name, if that her wisedome had not redéemed out either. Theodosia the Empresse of Constantinople with admired prudence ruled the whole Empire during her life. The go∣uernement of Senobia was no lesse renowmed, Dydo, the A∣mazones, and many other were absolute Quéenes. Semira∣mis enlarged the bounds of her Empire, and Quéene Tomy∣ris slewe Cyrus and his whole hoaste, &c. But if the enuy of men would suppresse and murther the worthines of women, yet the diuine vertues of our soueraigne Quéene Elizabeth, doth and will alwaies kéepe aliue their diuine memorie. Of whome Guiccerdine in his Commentaries, although all his Lib. 3. writing defendeth the pope, and reproueth Religion, thus re∣porteth. The good Queene Mary being dead without issue, Elizabeth her sister was proclaimed Queene, &c. a Princesse of great learning, and ouer and aboue the Laten and her mother toong, she is possessed of the French and Italian language, which she eloquently speaketh: a yong Lady of a hye spirit, wise, and endewed with rare and noble qualities. He might haue added the Greeke, Spanish, and some other
ordinarie tongues, with many extraordinary vertues, which may as hardly be sampled by anie other lyuing Creature, as the Sunne by the fairest of the Planets. The worthinesse, and strength of whose Gouernment, euen from the beginning, confuted the scandule of this lybell, which was grounded vp∣pon noe generall Lawe, of God or man. There haue béene priuate Lawes in some perticular Gouernments, to take a∣way, and to disable the absolute gouernment of women, when the generall Lawe possessed them with Imperiall authoritie. As in Rome the Law Voconia so called, because Voconius, Tribune of the people pronounced the same. In Fraunce the The law Voco∣nia in Rome. law Salique, which they fetch from king Pharamond, which bindeth the present gouernment of Fraunce, no otherwise avv  in Fraunce. then the auncient statutes of the Danes, Britans, or Saxons doe at this day the Gouernment of Englande. This vnnatu∣rall Lawe had a barbarous beginning, for the reporters lib. sec de A ved. 10 2 thereof confesse, that anno. 420. the Franconians hauing a∣bandoned their Countrey, inhabited along the Rhine, and e∣specially about Treues. The manners of these people being barbarous, they liued vnciuilly without Lawe. Which con∣sidered by Pharamonde their first Kinge, the sonne of their Duke Marcomir. He chose foure of the principall men of the Sicambrians, whom he authorised by their wisedomes to giue a Law vnto the people. The names of these foure were: Vsucast, Losocust, Salgast, and Visogust. These foure made the Lawe Salique, by which Lawe Emperiall gouernment (say they) is taken away from the daughters and heires of the Kinges of Fraunce. This dead Lawe, and many other to as little purpose were reuiued, to bury the true, and lawfull title of King Edwarde the 3. to the kingdome of Fraunce, in the right of Quéene Isabell his mother, the daughter & heire of King Phylip le bel. But King Edward nor his successors would not loose their right vpon such canterburie suggestions. And some of them subiected the Frenchmen to English obe∣dience. And to this day the Armes and Imperiall title of Fraunce, are ioyned to the honour of Englande. To what
purpose doth the law Mentall in Portugal forbid feminine The law Mental in Scotland. gouernment. King Philip deriueth his title from Marie the daughter of Iohn, the third of that name king of Portugal, and by that title is possessed of the kingdome. It is God that di∣sposeth kingdomes, and the works of busie heads, that vnlaw∣fully séeke to withstand the law of nature in succession. To be briefe, this inuectiue, prooued but a scare-crow: it was indiscreatly written, and negligently regarded. King Francis, or more truely the family of the Gwyses, ancored their hope vpon the Popes sentence: and in all the kings pa∣tents, and other instruments, caused to be intituled Frances, of France, Scotland, England, and Ireland king: and in his shield, quartered the Armes of England, and to conquer the kingdome (Come era apparente) as Guiccerdine reporteth: dy∣uers french forces were daily conuayed into Scotland, who Lib. 3. tooke, and by force kept the strong townes and fortrises there. The inhabitants oppressed thus with straungers, were for their owne safegard driuen to sew vnto the Quéenes maiesty of England, for aid to expel the french, who sought the spoile and subuertion of Scotland. The malicious purpose of the Guyses, ioyned with commyseration of the daungerous af∣fiction of Scotland (the Quéene whereof was married, and gouerned in France: and so barred to vse the lybertie of her Crowne) bound the Queenes Maiesty, by the vertue of ho∣nour, pollicie, and charitie, to sucker them with expedition. To accomplish which matter, her Maiestie sent a sufficient 1560. power towards Scotland by the Duke of Norfolke as gene∣rall, who remained at Barwicke, and the Lord Greay of Wil∣ton being Liuetenaunt, entred into Scotland, and with her royall power ioyned with the Scots, against the french: who were soone weary of the English-mens comming: But al∣mightie God, had set downe a more milde order, to honour her Maiesty, with the vanquishment of her enimies, then by dynt of sword, to accomplish which, her highnesse sent Syr William Cycill knight, at that time her Maiesties principall Secreatorie, and nowe Lord Treasorer of England, (for
the full knowledge, of whose excéeding worthynesse, I re∣tourne the good reader to the Athenians commendation of the Philosopher Euxin) and with him accompanied the learned and graue Gentleman Master Doctor Wotton to treat with the french, who with their wisedomes so vanquished the french, as to the quietnesse and safetie both of England and Scotland they forced them to depart with this following dishonour, as Guicherdine reporteth: who if he be pertiall it is in fauour of the french. First that the King and Quéene Articles of ac∣cord betweene Englande and Fraunce, taken out of Guicher∣dines Coment. Lib. 3. of Fraunce and Scotland, should leaue the Armes and title of the King of Englande and Irelande: and that within sixe monethes at the furthest, they shoulde cancell and re∣newe all their writings and instruments, (if there were any so made) with the former Armes and Titles. Fur∣ther that the Realme of Scotland, should be gouerned by the Counsell of twelue persons of the Nobilitie of the said king∣dome, whereof seuen shoulde bée nominated by the Sco∣tish Quéene, and siue by the thrée estates of the Parlia∣ment. That the iniuries, and trespasses committed on either part during the commotion should be forgotten: and for the better assurance should be confirmed by the said Parliament. That the Garrisons of french souldiers, should retourne into Fraunce, sauing onely in two fortes sixtie a péece, sub∣iect to the Iustice, and paie of the Parliament of Scot∣lande. That euerie man, shoulde be restred to his office in the saide Realme: and that no french man, should haue any more office, benefite, or administration what so euer in Scotland. That the french shoulde not at anie time conuay Mu∣nition of warre, or souldiers into Scotlande, without con∣sent of the saide Parliament, with sundrie other straight obseruaunces on the behalfe of the french: which Gui∣cherdine concludeth, Con grandissimo vantaggio & honore, della regina Inglese, with the greatest aduauntage and ho∣nour of the Quéene of Englande: a victorie no doubt of
great glorie and honour. Whereby her Maiestie not onelie deliuered her owne Countrey from the daunger of inuasion, but also fréeed Scotlande from the bondage of forraigne Go∣uernment: and thus her enemies hungring after an vnlaw∣full spoyle, lost the disposement of an assured benefite, which fortune befall to all those that miswish her. Amen. CHAP. 9. Of her Maiesties peaceable victorie against the rebels in the North, ioyned with her quiet vanquishing of sundry o∣ther conspiracies, to the vniuersall benefit of England. PIus Quartus, who succéeded Paulus 4. in the Popedome, finding an abasemēt of the glorie, with which his predeces∣sours 1561 were honoured: and fearing with all, that the example of England, Scotland, Denmarke and Germanie, would draw other Nations, from the obedience of the Romishe erronious Church, to the profession and receiuing of the Gospell of our sauiour Iesus Christ: the life of the soule, and destruction of this accursed Antichrist: laboured with the consent of manie Princes, to reuiue the Counsell (or more properly the con∣spiracie) of Trent. A conspiracie I may iustly say, the pollicy whereof was, to kéepe vnder the glorious merite of our saui∣our Iesus, and to aduaunce to the highest degrée of reuerence, the painted Idolatrie of the Pope. And appointing for his Legates, 5. Cardinals, who with a great number of Bi∣shops and other doctors of their Church, the eyght day after Easter, 1561. beganne this vnholy Counsell. And truely as in the intent of their assembly, was séene this saying of the Psalmist: The kinges of the earth stande vp, and the rulers take consell togither against the Lorde, and his annoynted: Psal. . So likewise in their vaine & idle successe: this continuance of the Psalme is further séene: He that dwelleth in heauen, shal
laugh them to scorne, the Lord shall haue them in derision: and where the Pope by his proude authoritie thought to haue strayghtned the passage of the Gospell, as it is set downe in the same Psalme: God gaue vnto his sonne the heathen for his inheritance, and the outmost partes of the earth for his possession. Yea he gaue visible authoritie, and reuerence vn∣to his Gospell, either by publike obedience, or priuate profes∣sion, vniuersally through the world. The counsell of the same Psalme might haue perswaded the Pope and his confederates To haue serued the Lorde in feare: but they would not kisse (but kicke against) the sonne, and so they perished from the right way. The Pope although his pompe were brused with an yron rod, and his kingdome broken like a potters vessell: Yet his pride and furie abated not: and (by Gods prouidence) knowing his capitall disgrace procéeded first from Englande, he practised by his worst mallice, the destruction, and ouer∣throwe of her prosperitie as followeth. Pius the 4. hauing no great good successe, of his counsell of Trent, Pius Quintus, who succéeded, tooke a more sharpe course against her Maie∣stie and happie gouernment his principall enemie, in whose ouerthrowe, (as he supposed) consisted the newe raysing vp of his kingdome, and in truth her prosperitie, is the visible comfort of his vniuersall enemies. He first began with her Maiestie: His roring Bull shewed his mallice, but his short hornes had small power to hurt her, which Bull is declared in these worde: Pius Quintus the greatest Bishop, of the ful∣nesse Vide, in the booke of the execut. of Iu∣stice in Engl. of the Apostolicall power, declareth Elizabeth to be bereaued or depriued of her pretended right of her king∣dome, and also of all, and whatsoeuer dominion, dignitie, and preuileadge and also the Nobles, subiectes and people of the sayd kingdome, and all others which had sworne to her any manner of wayes, to be absolued for euer from such oth, and from all debt and dutie of feealtie. Doctor Morton with a commission, or ambassage from the saide Pope Pius to the like effect, stirred the rebellion in the North. 1569. He blasted his commission, and had soone moued Thomas Persy,
Earle of Northumberland, Charles Neuel Earle of West∣merland, and other Gentlemen of account in the North, vn∣to rebellion. They began their power, by raising of men in the Quéenes name, and with all, left a warning to lessen the strength and authority of stronge papists to get fauour of the people, whereof a great part fauored the old Romish religion, they had a Crose, and a Banner of the fiue wounds, borne before them by Richard Norton: They tore the English by∣ble, the Communion booke, and such like at Dyrham, and ha∣uing gotten a strength of 4000. footemen, and 1600. horse∣men, which number they could not excéede: they in rebellious manner withstood all her maiesties procéedings. But behold good reader how peaceably these northerne rebels were van∣quished, who are naturally men of fierce courages, and howe like a bubble the Popes bull vanished, which in times past, feared mighty Emperours & Kings. Before the Noble Earle of Warwick, was come wt the Quéenes power, the stout earle of Suffex the Quéenes Maiesties Liuetenant generall in the The Northerne rebels vanqui∣shed. North (whose vertues appeared in my booke, of his life and death) armed himselfe with so many of the Quéenes friends as he could get neare vnto that seruice, and with all speede made towards the rebels. The knowledge of his comming, and the brute of the Earle of Warwicks approch with a farre greater power, so amased the rebels, as the two Earles of Northumberland and Westmerlande, with some of their principall Gentlemen, sodainly and secreatly in the night left their associates, and fledde vnto Herlan in Scotland, and thus without any resistance, the Northerne rebels were discomforted, ouerthrowne, and the greatest number of them taken, and many of the principall were executed, and the rest were saued by the Quéenes exceeding mercie: A victo∣rie that promised great happinesse and glorie to her Maiesty, in which the blood of the offenders was onely shedde, and a generall rebellion, was (as séemeth) in the beginning sup∣pressed: for the said Earles were borne in hand, by Doctour Morton, that all the Catholickes woulde assist them with
strength, as appeareth in Doctour Saunders visible Church Monarchie, particulared in a treatise, Intituled, The exe∣cution of Iustice, &c. And certainly although the heads of this rebellion escaped the present vengaunce of Iustice, yet neither of them escaped the worthy punishments dewe vn∣to traitours. The Earle of Northumberland two yeares af∣ter 1571 was peaceably deliuered into the possession of her Maie∣sties Iustice: and being by act of Parliament before attainted of treason, was beheaded at Yorke. The lingering myserie of the Earle of Westmerland, in Spaine, the low Countries and other places of his wilfull vanishment, vnto a Noble minde, could not but be more gréeuous then death: his grea∣test intertainment being scarce able to sustaine the allow∣ance of a man, and a page: and which was more gréeuous, he was driuen to beare with the arrogant disgraces of euerie rascally Spaniard: and to say the trueth, not onely the Earle, but all other the English fugitiues, labour out such a long and a myserable life, (in respect of their callings, if they had liued in the obedience of good subiectes) as they rather deserue to bée pitied then enuyed of their worst enimies. This peaceable ouerthrow in the North, touched the Pope to the quicke, and least that delay should cut him to the heart, he by his threatning Bull published open warres against her Maiestie: In May following the rebellion in the North, this terrible Bull was hanged vppon the Byshoppe of Lon∣dons gate, but the hornes which should haue gored her Ma∣iesties good subiectes, grew to a paire of gallowes, to hange his instrument Felton in the place: Felton hanged vp the Popes Bull secreatly, and as a ranke traytor, was himselfe hanged, headed, and quartered openly: the Popes holinesse 1570 could not make him walke inuisible, neither yet could his par∣don protect him at his triall: this ill successe had the Pope in his English attemps, & from the first houre of her Maiesties raigne, the wished euents followed the procéedings of her maiesty, both against the Pope, and other her enimies what∣soeuer. If her Maiesties and prudent Counsels searching
wisedome: discouered not trayterous conspiraces, while they were a bréeding: yet God euer more gaue grace to some of the confederates, to discouer the mischiefe in a seasonable time. The vengeance of Enuie was now broched, and the venime thereof swelled many busie heades, euen vnto their owne confusion. The same yeare a daungerous conspiracie in Norfolke by Throgmorton, Applearde, Brooke, Kete, Redman, and others was practised against strangers. But Kete discouered the matter, before the mischiefe was ripe. By which reuealement, an insurrection was peaceably defeated, and for example, of diuerse of the conspirators that were con∣demned, onely, Throgmorton, Broke and Redman, were hanged, drawen, and quartered. The bloudie conspiracie of Madder and Barlowe, was shortly after discouered, and they as traytors were executed. All which preuentions of daun∣ger, and publicke disturbance, may neither be attributed, to chaunce nor worldly wisedome. But aboue the rest the peace∣able vanquishing of the Duke of Norfolke, is a bye note of Gods wonderfull prouidence, and fauour showen to her Ma∣iestis, and blessed Realme: his conuiction, shewed his attempt to be most perrilous, both to her Maiestie, and many of her louing subiectes. And for to performe the same, he was the most popular subiect that liued in Englande many a daye: he was setled in the fauour of most of the chiefe peares, and ge∣nerally, he was honoured of the Commons: which vniuer∣sall loue procéedeth not alwayes from true vertue: But con∣trariwise sometimes from dissembling humilitie, the highest ladder of ambition. With a slie and hypocriticall spirite, vn∣gratious Catiline, and aspiring Caesar, bewitched the people of Rome. And although the wisedome of Cicero deliuered Rome from the daunger of Catiline (for which hee was re∣compensed with the crowne Ciuique) yet nether the graue Counselles of Cato, nor all the cloquence of Cicero, preuay∣led against the popular fauour of Caesar. Caesar with the fa∣uour of the multitude, iudged the Senate, and in the ende crowned himselfe with Emperiall Maiestie: but yet with
such myseries to the Romaines, as the Poet Lucan who part∣ly touched them, was amased fully to recite them: if God had not myraculously laid all this vengeance vpon the Dukes, the capital offenders head, manie a true English man might haue shaken the Romaines by the hand with this salutation: In miserie it is good to haue a companion. The Duke had a guiltie conscience, a mistrustfull spirit, and vngratious coun∣sell, to withstande the censure of her maiesties Lawes: but God among his wandring thoughts, directed him a happie course for Englande, although necessitie, after many mer∣cifull delayes, quieted the troubles of England with the cut∣ting off of his head. CHAP. 10. Of the wonderfull prouidence of Almightie God, in the preseruation of her Maiestie, from poysoning, and de∣struction, by Magicke, and such like diuellish practises, as also from being violently murthered: a Chapter necessa∣rie the regard, shewing Gods merciful protection of her Maiesty, and some of her chiefe Counsel, the worthy con∣fusion of the conspirators, the odiousnes of murther, and the godly iustice of England. INnumerable are the examples: that the mallice of enuie is neither vanqui∣shed with the wonders of God, nor cō∣fusion of her ministers, but still war∣reth against the prouidence of God, and safetie of her owne members. The tur∣ning of the riuers of Aegypt into blood, Exod. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 14. The plagues of Aegypt, and destruction of Pharao. the couering of the land with frogs, the biting of lice, the stinging of noisome flies, the morraine of cattel, the blaines and botches that punished man and beast, the haile that destroied the cattell, grasse, and corne of the fields: the Grashoppers that eate the fruites & gréene leaues of the trée: the darkenesse that ouershadowed the land, and the death of the first borne of Aegypt could not vanquish and
mollifie Pharaos malitious hart, but fighting against God, he wilfully ran vpon the destruction of himselfe and his whole hoast in the red sea. The Iewes when they saw that their open clamors preuailed not against Paule, that their secret vowe that they would neither eate nor drinke before they Actes 23. 24. had slaine him was frustrate, they yet wrought against Gods prouidence, and practised with the Ruler Festus, to haue him brought from Cesarea vnto Ierusalem, and by the way meant to haue slaine him, but God put otherwise in Festus head, and the Iewes pursued their mallice in vaine. I might alledge many other examples, but none I thinke more profitable, then the continuance of the mallice of the Popes and his confederates enuie (with their dayly confusions) a∣gainst the life of her sacred Maiestie, and prosperitie of her happie realme. It is showne how her Maiestie had a most honorable and peaceable victorie against Pope Paulus the fourths iudgement: the dangerous pretence of the French a∣gainst the roring Bull of Pius Quintus that made her Northerne subiectes to rebell, and how the Northerne Re∣bels (who naturally are fearce) fled before her royall po∣wer as amazed shéepe. The Pope and his confederates sée∣ing that open hostilitie preuailed no whit, they therefore vn∣bowelled their rankor, and practised with the Diuell to shorten the life of our most gratious soueraigne Elizabeth: The Queenes death practised by Negro∣mancy. they looked into the wonders of Magicke, the execrable vil∣lanies done by Negromancie, and sawe, by successe of the like practises an apparance of their diuelish purpose. Dan∣gerous instruments were found out to practise with the Di∣uell, as Prestall, Phaer, and another vnnamed English fu∣gitiue, who (as the Archtraitor Doctor Story theyr chiefe Doctor Stories confession. comforter confessed) sayd, he coulde, and woulde bring the Quéenes highnesse to death, if he were well plied by negro∣mancie: the Diuell was set a worke, the moneth, the day, and the houre were set downe when the Quéene of England should be in hazard of her life: there were right Machiuil∣lians, Atheists, and Diuels set a worke: men that would at∣tempt
any mischiefe for promotion, or (as the confession goeth) if they might not be vsed as vnderlings. These fel∣lowes looked into the auncient strength of the Diuell, how (before the comming of Christ) he made such fellowes to be generally admired as Gods: they thought to haue done wonders, but they were not wise ynough to looke into the abasement of their arte before the comming of our Sauiour Christ. God by hys Prophets reuealed manie matters vnto the Iewes, and the Diuell (by Gods sufferance) by Magiti∣ans did the like vnto the Gentiles, but when our Sauiour came, the admiration of eyther was diminished, and in a manner extinguished: he was the light, the life and glorie of the whole worlde, woonders and myracles attended only vppon hys worde and commandement. Sainct Hierome sayeth, that when the Uirgin Mary and her sonne passed through Aegypt, theyr Idols fell from the altares, and the Oracles which the Diuell caused to be made, neuer after gaue aunswere. Plutarke in hys treatise of the defectes of the Plut. de defe. orat. Oracles, sheweth many examples of the verie complaint of the Diuels, that theyr power was diminished by the byrth of our Sauiour Christ. It appeareth that the strength of Magicke was much weakened in the Apostles tyme, when Symon the great Magitian sought to buy at Sainct Peters hands the gift to do myracles. And it séemeth that the Pope and his ministers haue small confidence in the ayde of God, when they are driuen to the succour of the Diuell, well, the Diuell with them, and God be alwayes with her Maiestie, and they no doubt, as Sathan trembleth at the name of the highest, so shall hys ministers bée confoun∣ded at the féete of her Maiestie. God suffereth the Diuell to doo much mischiefe, but limits hys power. Symon Ma∣gus to disgrace Sainct Peter practised, but coulde not re∣uiue the kinse-man of Nero, no more can all the Negro∣mancers Looke the chapter of her fol. 61. of the world by Magicke kill anie one person that GOD will haue preserued. The godlye may safely saye with Dauid, I will not be afrayde of tenne thousande
of people that haue set themselues against me round about, Psalme. 4. 18. it followes in another place, for thou O Lord makest me dwell in safetie: the diuell is bound, and the hand of the Lord is vpon the magitioner: Paul stroke Elimas Bariehu the arro∣gant sorcerer blinde: the diuell aunswered the vacabond Actes 13. Iewes, & the seauen sonnes of Seua one of the chiefe priests, which did adiure him by Iesu whome Paule preached, Iesus I knowe, and Paule I knowe, but who are yee? forsooth they were vnbeléeuing Iewes, whome the spirit would not obeie: yea, he caused the man whome he tormented to runne vppon them, and to ouercome them, so that they fled out of the house naked and wounded, it is the best reward that the diuell be∣stoweth vpon them that deale with him. He many times fai∣leth Genes. 41. Exod. 8. 9. Esay. 47. Daniel 2. to performe the desire of his disciples, but he neuer faileth to bring them to confusion: yea, in the tune of the Prophets, when his strength was greatest, his ministers were alwaies confounded in matters, wherein the glory of God was to be séene, as appeareth in the passadges marked in the margent. For further example let it suffice, that Gods mercie preser∣ued her maiestie, and his iustice put the chiefe practisers of this magicke, in the possession of her vengeance. Doctor Story was miraculously brought out of Flanders, and as he notori∣ouslie deserued, by common iustice was adiudged and execu∣ted as a Traitor. Yea, he confessed at his execution, that it was God that dimmed the eyes of his vnderstanding: yea, Doctor Stories confession at his execution. it was surely God that wrought his deliuerie into the hands of her Maiesties lawes. Prestall and Phaier were both af∣ter wardes prisoners at her Maiesties mercie: her excéeding Prestall and Phaier deliue∣red foorth of the kings bench without triall. Phaer executed for coyning. mercie measured grace vnto them both, that vngratiouslie sought her destruction, they both had life and libertie, Phaier was afterwardes executed for coyning, hys head was too busie to stande vppon his shoulders: Prestall vpon speciall considerations, long after was called to the aun∣swere of his olde treasons, he had no defence but to flie to Prestall con∣demned for reason, but not executed. her Maiesties mercie, with protestation, that vppon that safeconduit he came into Englande, a presumption that
highly honoreth her Maiestie, that those subiects which offen∣ded They ors pre∣sume of her ∣iesties mer. in the highest degrée of treason, durst vpon her Maiesties bare promise venter vpon the danger of her lawes, when at this day among most princes the saying: Who knoweth not how to dissemble, knoweth not how to raigne, is holden for a principle in gouernement. But sure the counsell is much a∣gainst the honor of a prince, whose promise ought to haue the strength of a law, vnlesse in such rare cases as where the sub∣iect offendeth beyond all merit of commiseration: but to eter∣nize her Maiesties gratiousnesse, be it knowen, the law long sithence hath adiudged Prestall death, and yet he liueth by the sole vertue of her princely word, and certainly the godly iu∣stice of England deserueth vniuersall admiration and reue∣rence, where the worst and most dangerous traytors are on∣ly confounded by solemne conuiction of law, and by fauour therof a number escape that policy would haue cut short. Our eares are daily occupied with the newes of secret poysoning and vnlawfull murthering of noble personages in most go∣uernements without attainder, triall, or any other ordinarie course of iustice, but God who is therewith pleased, be there∣fore praysed, since the first day of her highnes blessed gouerne∣ment, neither her Maiesty nor her iustice is yet stained with any such politicke or rather diuelish destroying of any one of many her enimies: but yet to slander ye peaceable procéedings of her Maiesty and godly maiestrates, the notorious fugitiues in Rome, Reames, and other forraigne parts, make shew of wary looking vnto themselues, as if their liues were dayly as∣sailed, when their consciences, and her Maiesties gratiousnes assureth them that they feare without cause, albeit they giue cause of narrow vengeance, if the order of her gouerment ob∣serued the councels of their bloody practises, she might finde brauoes a number in France, and especially in Italy that for a hangmans fée would do execution of her rankest traytor a∣broad: among whom, murther is so common, as the least iniu∣rie is in a maner death by custome, the easie escape out of one iurisdiction into another, maketh them thus bold where the
feare of God is no bridle I report this vppon the knowledge of my owne obseruances, while I liued in those parts, it is ge∣nerally knowne that there are hirelings that make no more conscience to murther a man, then to kill a bird: but the acti∣ons of wicked men are no examples of imitation, but admo∣nitions of terror to the godly, for that lightly vengeance fol∣loweth such works. At my being in Italy, there was a heard∣man Murther puni∣shed. executed about Tyuoly, that had murthered more than fourescore persons, and the notable outlaw Catenea, who had slaine thréescore and tenne persons, was led prisoner vnto Rome. God may defer, but he seldome leaueth murther with∣out visible vengeance. Aboue all sinnes nature abhorreth murther. When the heathen men at Milete saw the viper to hang vpon Pauls finger, euen from the hatred of nature they murmured and sayd: No doubt this man is a murtherer, whome (though he haue escaped the sea) yet vengeance suf∣fereth Actes 28. not to liue. Nature taught the infidels to beléeue that vengeance followeth murther. Erasmus saith, that in mur∣ther the consenter is as gilty as the actor. Pylate against the sentence of his own conscience, hauing pronounced death vp∣pon our Sauiour Christ, thought to haue washed away the fact, with the washing of his hands, and this protestation: I am innocent of the blood of this iust man ye shall see, but Pylates conscience made him gilty of Christes death, whome Matth. 27. the wrath of God still followed. After this wicked iudgemēt he did nothing but iniustice, and being thereof accused, as also for prophaning the temple, & robbing the common treasure in Rome he was by ye Emperor Caligula banished vnto Lions, the place as some said of his birth: through griefe of which dis∣grace, by the iustice of God he desperatly flew himself that he might die by ye most wicked person aliue. Many other things are written of Pylats end by Ioseph in his antiquities, Euse∣bius, Ioachin, Vadian, and others, which for breuity I omit. The instructiō stretcheth euen vnto the seate of iustice, which maketh the criminall Magistrate to be gilty of murther, if for R. cap. 12. loue, feare, or gaine he vniustly pronounce death vppon any
innocent person. Yea, murther crieth for vengeance against anointed kings. Because Dauids hart murthered Vrias, God laid the reuenge of Vrias blood, many ways vpon Dauid, and although he put the sin frō Dauids person, yet ye child begotten vpō Vrias wife in adultry died for it: there sel 3. yeres dearth together in the days of Dauid, & Dauid enquired the cause, & the Lord answered: It is for Saule, and the house of blood, Reg. 2. Cap. 21. because he slew the Gibonites. It further appeareth yt mur∣ther is so odious in the sight of God, that he will not haue the very blood of murtherers shed, but either by his vengeance, or publike iustice, when he saith, Whosoeuer slaieth Kaine, it Genesis 4. shall be auenged seuen fold, yea, God set a marke vpō Caine yt it might be known yt he had reserued ye punishmēt of Caines fault vnto his own iustice. Uengeance belongeth to the Lord, & a positiue iustice is set downe vnto men. Her Maiesty kno∣weth yt she receiued her kingdome of God, & by his holy com∣mandements she gouerneth the same: she séeketh not ye life of traitors but where her own lawes are in force. If any of thē slip ouer beyond the seas as vagrāts & vagabōds vpō ye earth, she pursueth thē no further, but referreth their trespasses to Gods iustice, who cōtinually powreth cōfusion vpō thē, & yet according to ye Psalmist they stil draw their sword to sley such as are of a right cōuersatiō, but ye Lord laugheth thē to scorne, Psalme. 37. & causeth their swords to go through their own harts. Madder Madder and Barlow. & Barlow would not be counselled by other mēs harmes, they practised murther, the murther of no small personages, but e∣uen of such as by their wisdoms (next vnder God & her Maie∣stie) saue ye liues of many thousands of good English subiects, but God be praised, they cōspired their owne destruction, they were rotten we the gallowes before their mischiefe was rife. What a desperat instrumēt had the Pope of late (by his Iesu∣its alluremēt) piked out of harebraine Someruile to murder ye Somernile. Quéens maiesty: a gentlemā (though far vnworthy the name) always void of gouermēt, and in the end so far past grace, as he desperately hanged himselfe. He went resolutely about his mischiefe, but he was one of them whome God shot at
with a swift arrow that wounded him, his owne toong made Psalme. 64. him to fall, & all that heard of him laughed him to scorne: his owne toong first bewraied him, his harebraine unschiefe was without worldly iudgement, & his graceles end without spiritual remembrance, her Maiesty was thus rid of a rotten member, but not of the Popes mallice, nor of all her subiects treason. Parry came in his place, a right Orleance Doctor: of which sort of Doctors is risen this frenche prouerbe Paies Doctor Parry. argent, & passe docteur Asne, Pay your money, and procéede doctor Asse. But this right Atheist Parry, although he were not learned, yet he hauing no grace, had but too much wit by his ingenious reaches. Many yeares he carried a port aboue his calling: he disdained his fathers name vp Hary who liued by kéeping of an alehouse, & changed the same vnto Parry, but the vices of his youth, insolency, pride, riot, and a mischeuous spirit accompanied him to the gallowes. Frō this base recko∣ning by fortune in marriadge he attained the wealth, & grew to the credit of a Gentleman, but as the saying is, Goods easely gotten, are many times idlely spent. To be short, he wanted no sleight to acquire fauour, nor had any honestie to kéepe a friend. But albeit his shifts supplyed many wants, his ryot in the end outspended both his fortune and credite: and béeing pursued for debt at the sute of Hugh Hare Gentle∣man, he committed a wilfull and violent outrage vppon the sayd Hugh Hare, for which the law condemned him of Bur∣glarie, and her Maiesties onely clemencie gaue him life, a fauour that woulde haue bounde the cruellest Turke to be thankefull and carefull of her Maiesties safetie, but hée béeing an Atheist, shewed hymselfe euerie waye worsse then a Turke, who reuerenceth some forme of Religion. His guiltie conscience tooke awaye all hope of aduance∣ment, vnlesse he rose by some notable mischiefe, his vngra∣tious spirit still worked vpon this Machiuell like counsell. If thou wilt be any thing, do some thing worthy of fetters. He had put this in practise, but his desire followed not, the diuell then put him in mind that it must be matter worthie
the gallowes, and all manner of reproch, that must doe him good, euen to kill the Quéenes maiesty: who not long before had giuen him life, when the lawes of her realme had adiud∣ged him death. His owne confession sheweth, that want and mistrust of preferment first put this damnable practise in his head. The most infirmed eyes may sée by his owne demon∣stration, that he made no conscience to do it: yea that all his ceremonies, in obtaining the allowance, absolution, and ple∣narie indulgence of the Pope, was but onely to acquire cre∣dite, and more liberall aduauncement for his odious seruice, he was diswaded from the matter by many Papists, but hée sought not their opinions, to any such purpose: he saw no o∣ther meane of aduauncement: it was for liuing and promoti∣on that he sought, and without that (as he confessed) life was Parties letter to the Lord ∣sorer. not fit for him, for all his painted protestation of the holy ob∣seruaunce, both of his vowes and promises, if he had not comforted himselfe more with these words in the Cardinals letter of the Popes assurance, That his holinesse will further make himselfe debtour, to acknowledge your deseruings in the best manner that he can: then in these words, he gran∣teth vnto you his blessing, plenarie indulgence, and remis∣sion of all your sinnes: He would haue made more reckoning of ten pound, then ten such warrants: he shewed what he was neither whot, nor colde, vnfaithfull to her Maiestie, and vn∣true to the Pope: He broke his promise with the Pope, and violated his vowes in heauen, with contrary othes vppon earth. He swore to the supremacie in the beginning of the Parliament: and after he had solemnely receiued the Sacra∣ment to kill her Maiesty, he swore he neuer meant to doe it: but as there was no zeale in the first, so there is lesse credite to be giuen to the last: being contrary to a number of the assu∣rances of the execution of his wicked purposes, as appeareth in a booke of the whole order and triall of his horrible trea∣sons. To conclude the whole course of his life sheweth, that the diuell could not haue picked forth a more daungerous in∣strument for the Popes purpose, and by his execution as a Marti.
Traitour, Gods prouidence is wonderfully glorified, the Popes inhumanitie, is proclaimed: and if examples may worke amendement, a number of false harted subiectes, by the myraculous preseruation of her Maiesty may be brought to a louing obedience &c. CHAP. 11. The most fortunate, and peaceable victorie, which her Ma∣iestie had against the Spanish, and Italian forces, togither with the miserable confusion of Iames Fitz-moris, the Earle of Desmond, and Sir Iohn his brother, and other the Popes confederates in Ireland: with other considera∣tions of Gods prouidence in the defence of her maiestie, and Dominions. FEarefull are yt sayings of the Psalmist in many passages: where he Prophi∣sieth the destruction and confusion of the wicked. They saith he, shalbe like the chaffe which the winde scatereth Psalm. 1. 7. from the face of the earth: They shall 37. fall into the destruction they made for other, They shalbe cut down like 52. the grasse, and be withered like the greene hearbe. The bo∣sting 112. of the tyrant shalbe abased, and the desire of the vn∣godly shal perish. And in many other places, he heapeth ven∣gance vppon the wicked, and pronounceth confusion of their Counsels. Againe he promiseth millions of blessings vnto the godly, and safe deliuerance out of their enimies hands. Eng∣land hath plentifully tasted of all this goodnesse: and with the Psalmist may iustly say. The Lorde will be a defence for the Psalm 9. oppressed: euen a refuge in dew time of trouble. It is al∣redie reported, what sundrie seasonable victories Noble Quéene Elizabeth (where the vengance of war scarce fasti∣ned of any one person saue her enimies) hath had from the first houre of her blessed raigne, vntil anno. 1580. which yere 1580. the Pope had prouided a Challice, to drink her maiesties pre∣tious blood: the king of Spaine expected her Crowne, and the
Duke of Guise to be domine factotum in Scotland. Regard the strength of their pollicie, and easinesse of their confusion, and you shall plainly sée, that the wisedome of the world is folish∣nesse before God: The king of Spaine had prouided a mighty power (vnder pretence of some exploit in Aphrica) for the in∣uasion of England: Don Iohn should haue maried & haue done Don Iohn dyed 1580. wonders with that army, with which I purpose not to medle, but (God be praised) Don-Iohn was faire buried. The yeare was not too farre spent, for the king of Spaines purpose: who had lost al his cost, if that the old king of Portugal had not that Portugall inua∣ded by the king of Spaine. yeare dyed, with which power he inuaded that kingdom. The Duke of Guise should haue occupied Scotland, with martiall exercise: but the troubles in Piccardy and Dalphine so weak∣ned his strength, as his purpose was more then half maimed, somwhat was attempted in Scotland, but not to the expected purpose. The Pope he vndertooke the matter of Ireland, and as he thought had laid a sure foundation: he picked out a daun∣gerous instrument for his purpose, euen Iames Fitz-morice, a natural Irish: a man wise, valiant, learned, and of great ex∣perience in martial affaires: he was a great traueller, and I may safely say, to stir vp troubles, which powred destruction, vpon his own head. This Iames Fitz-moris was sent before to make a passage for the Popes power, anno. 1579. he ariued 1579 in Ireland, & soone intised the Earle of Desmond, & Sir Iohn his brother to be traitors: but as wise & as stout as this trai∣tor Iames Fitz-moris was, he was yet peaceably confounded euen in the entrance of his mischieues: for he purposing to burne the countrie of the Borkes, a noble yong Gentleman in Iames Fitzmo∣ris slaine. the defence of his fathers country, slew him before he saw any successe of his conspired treasons. The Popes malice might haue bin quailed by ye presagement of euil successe: hauing his ankor & principall Captaine Fitz-moris thus peaceably van∣quished, but he incensed more with the displeasure of his death, then restrained with the cogitations of Gods proui∣dence, armed his power, against Ireland, and comforted his souldiers, that they shoulde finde in that Countrie manie more friendes, then enimies: his Cappitaine Fitzmoris, had
seduced some of the principals, and his legate Doctor Saun∣ders had bewitched the multitude vpon a hope, which hether∣to hath deceiued him: the Pope vnder his banner sent out of Italy ders Capitaines and bands of souldiers of his owne, furnished with treasure, munition, victuals, ensignes, ban∣ners, 1580 and all other things requisite for the warre into the Realme of Ireland, where the same forces with other auxil∣lier companies out of Spaine landed, and fortified themselues very strongly vpon the sea side: and erecting the Popes ban∣ner, proclaimed open war against her Maiesty. I am bound by the duety of a true subiect, to set downe the ioy and cheere∣full behauiours of the English fugitiues in Rome, vpon the newes of the Popes forces safe landing in Ireland, to the end that those, which will beleeue a trueth, may knowe that the comming of these disguised Iesuites, was absolutely, to pra∣ctise to bring the realme into a warre, externall, and cyuill, hoping by an alteration of gouernement, to bring in a change of Religion and not simply, as they smothly pretend, to saue their Countrie mens soules, without any motion of disobedi∣ence to her Maiestie their lawfull Quéene. In the beginning of Nouember 1580. I returned from Naples to Rome, at which time the newes was freach in Rome, of the Italians & Spanyards ariual in Ireland, who promised a wonderful hope of a great victorie against her Maiestie, and truely the newes was not so quicke in the Romaines tongues, as the ioy was The reioycing of the English fugitiues, vpon newes of the Spaniards ar∣uall all &c. fresh in the English mens faces, they could not suppresse the reuealement of their traiterous hearts: their common speach was, The time drew on, that the continuance of the heretikes prosperitie (for so they termed the Protestants) would make their ouerthrow more gréeuous: they so assured themselues of the change of her Maiesties gouernment, as in a maner eue∣rie man painted out his owne office: The matter was so sure in their owne imaginations, as some few, that pretended a sorrow for Englands myserie, wished that the onely venge∣ance might light vpon her Maiestie, and some of her Maie∣strates, but they further said, that God would not haue it so:
his iustice could not but send a general subuertion, to reuenge the iniurie done vnto so many holy Catholikes, which for their Consciences were driuen forth of their countrie: with these and such like words they published the wishes of their hearts: no one, (one onely except) that in word or gesture, séemed to be sorie, that straungers should haue dominion in their natiue Countrie: wherein they shewed to haue disposi∣tions more vilanous, than the seditious Iewes, when Ierusa∣lem Ioseph. de b Iud. was beseiged by Titus: who although they continually killed one another with cyuill frayes: yet to withstande the assault of the Romaines, they would in their egerest scyrmi∣ges part themselues, and vnite their forces to withstand the forraine enimie: Nature teacheth sauage mastiues, who (how cruelly so euer they fight togeather) at the sight of a Beare they will part themselues, and fal vpon their natural enimy: but these be worse then Mastiues, and without they amend, God send them the destinie of Dogges. And now to the mat∣ter of the former newes, they ceased not to importune ye Pope to sucker his force in Ireland, with newe supplies, to which end Cardinal Forze with present Commission, all along the lower way, by Raconati, Loretto, Ancona, and so to Bolog∣na, in the Popes proper dominions, mustered & pressed soul∣diers 3000. Caliuers were in a readines, to be shipped at Ly∣gorne: but this preparation was not so spéedie, but before al things were set forward, Rome receiued newes, that the most worthy Captaine, the Lord Gray, her Maiesties depu∣tie then in Ireland, had vanquished, and put all the Italian Italians &c. pt to the sword. and Spanish souldiers to the sword, a few of the principall Captaines except: they could not vaunt that they dyed with the deathes of any of their enimies, & certainly if the forward Gentleman Master Iohn Cheeke, had not receiued his death more of voluntary, then néedful boldnesse, it had béene in rec∣koning, as well as reputation, a right mayden victory. This ouerthrow dismayed the Pope, and brake the hearts of the English fugitiues, whereupon the seconde supplie was stayed, and the souldiers were dismissed. I was in Rome,
when Rome was occupied with other news, ye first made not the Englishmen so Iocund, as the second made them pensiue: they honge downe their heads, and had not (as the prouerbe goeth) a word to speake: what mine owne eyes behelde, I boldly set downe to their shame. Thus the daungerous in∣tention of the king of Spaine, the Pope, & the Duke of Guise, her Maiesties forraine enimies, which tended to the inuasion of England, Ireland, and Scotland, 1580. to the glory of God and great honour of her Maiestie was peaceablie defeated: and since this Chapiter chiefely concerneth the action of Ire∣land, to diswade others from rebellion, I thinke it necessa∣rie to shewe the easie confusion of the Irish Traitours, that tooke the Popes part: Iames Fitzmoris death is alredie showne. Not long after this sound ouerthrowe of the Popes forces in Ireland, which was Malum omen to all his confede∣rates, The Earle of Desmond, after that he had secreatlie The Earle of Desmond. wandred a season without sucker like a myserable beggar, was in his Caben taken by one of the Irishrie, and in an I∣rish sort after his accustomed sauage manner, his head was cut from his shoulders: an ende due to such an Archrebell. Doctor Saunders, the Popes Irish legate, in the like extre∣mitie, Doctor Sanders wandring in the mountaines in Ireland without suc∣ker, dyed in a phrensie. The fourth man of singular note, was Sir Iohn of Desmond, brother to the Earle, a very bloodie faithlesse traitour, and a notable murtherer of his familyar Sir Iohn of Desmond. friends, who also wandring to séeke some pray, like a Woolfe in the woods, was taken and beheaded, after his owne vsage, being as he thought sufficiently armed, with the Popes buls, and certaine Agnus dei, and a notable ring about his necke, sent from the Popes finger (as it was said) but he saw these saued not his life. The Pope may well perswade, that there are much vertue and strength in holy presents, but his myse∣rable instruments féele, that their onely strength is in brin∣ging of themselues to confusion. This yere 1580. Iohn Stow Crownacleth, that the 17. day of Iune, in ye parish of Blams∣don A monster in Yorkehire. in Yorke-shire, after a great tempest of lightning and
thunder, a woman of the age of 80. yeares named Ales Perin was deliuered of a straunge and hidious monster, whose head was like vnto a sallet or head peece: the face like vnto a mans face, except the mouth, which was like vnto the mouth of a Mouse: the fore part of the body was like vnto a man hauing eight féete, and not one like vnto another, and a taile of halfe a yard long: which monster (saith he) brought into the world, no other newes but an admiration of the deuine workes of God: but certainly Almightie God who (since the comming of his sonne, in whose sacred Gospel, whatsoeuer is necessary for mans saluation is contained) hath left familiarly to talke with men, as in the time of the Prophets: yet he sendeth prodigious signes to acquaint the worlde with some offen∣siue matter to his diuine Maiestie, which his vengeaunce not long after, for the most part punisheth: and in my opini∣on (leauing the knowne trueth to God, and euery mans cen∣sure to himselfe) this monster is a right figure of the Popes estate, who being the Whore of Babylon, in her old age, and wane of her glorie, hath brought foorth a visible monster: The heade which resembleth a helmet, sheweth his mali∣tious desire to vpholde his kingdome by Paules sworde, synce that hée findeth no strength in Peters Keyes. His mouth that was wont to feare all Christendome with threateninges and cursing, by the symilitude of a Mouses, sheweth that for all his mallice hée hath no more might then a Mouse. His eight Legges, not one like another seweth (as I before haue showen) that his kingdome is now in the case, that Mahomets was in the beginning: sustained by the Atheist, Traitors, Murtherers, and discontented persons of all Nations: The tayle which is naturall to a beast sheweth that his Murders, and barborous impieties, declare him to bée a visible beast and monster: and that hée thus appea∣red in the North, is a faire warning, vnto those people howe they bée seduced by his painted, and hypocriticall deuises: for from those partes, hée expecteth great suc∣ker, which God defende him from: and open the eyes of
all her Maiesties subiectes vnderstanding that they may de∣serne the truth from falsehood, and then next the diuell, they shall vnderstande him to be the father of all lyes, whom shame and confusion followeth, as also those that are associ∣ates in his vnrighteousnesse. CHAP. 12. The daungerous and seditious practises, of Edmond Cam∣pion, and other English Iesuites (by Gods prouidence) frustrated: their worthy confusion, and their apparant slaunders of her Maiestie, and godly gouernement re∣proued. AMong a number whose iudgementes reach no farther then their eyes and opinion is setled, that Campion, and his fellow Iesuites, by reason of their peaceable profession, were executed with too seueere Iustice: and charged with treason, vnpossible for them to compasse: as ciuill rebellion, and for∣raigne inuasion: it is set downe in a booke published by autho∣ritie, which effectually maintaineth the Iustice of England, Of the executi∣on of Iustice &c that Persons and Campion, had faculties graunted by Pope Gregorie the 13. the 14. of Aprill 1580. That the Bul of Pius quintus should alwayes binde Queene Elizabeth and the heretikes, but the Catholikes it should by no meanes bind. Who so shal herein consideratly way the pollicy of the Pope, and the diligence of his traiterous instruments, may plaine∣ly sée a great likelyhood of rebellion, and a wonderfull daun∣ger by Gods prouidence preuented. To draw men from obe∣dience towards her Maiestie, they had this large warrant from the Pope, which figuratiuely imported a blessing to those that would strengthen their rebellion: and with this Pope holy colour, if you ioyne the hypocritical, subtill and alluring feaches of these Iesuites, you shall easily perceiue that they
came rightly armed for rebellion: and in their schollers ha∣bit, procured more daunger to her Maiesties person than could an armed Armie, with twentie thousand Launces. The multitude as Sophocles saith, is a monster with many heads and euery head gréedily followeth alteration of Gouernment. Disposicion of the multitude. If they be in prosperitie, they grow insolent, if in pouertie they murmure: a religion that pleaseth their eye, is far more welcome than that which instructeth their soule: they beare a naturall enuy vnto their superiours, and easily beléeue, all the slaunders that are raised of their Prince and principall Maiestrates. To deceiue the ignorant, with a painted holy∣nesse, some of these seditious Iesuites tooke Geneua in their way, and arrogantly offered to dispute with the Reuerend Beza, with such proud offers, as promised that the holy ghost should doe some myracle by their holinesse. But to acquaint the worlde with their hypocriticall iugling, I certifie that there is a godly priuiledge in Geneua, that strangers during thrée dayes, may haue libertie to propose controuersies of re∣ligion, grounded vppon a godly zeale, that those that doubted in any matters of faith, might be religiously instructed, and so peaceably departe: these bragging Iesuites, protected themselues with this priuiledge, and before the date was out, they vanished like bubbles, to which their Buls and waightiest reliques may bée compared. At their arriuall in England, to purchase intertainment, they blasted abrode that Difference be∣tweene the Apo∣stles and the Ie∣suites. they were come to win soules: but not as S. Paul did, whē he trauailed to conuert the Gentiles, for he in his Apostolike ha∣bite at noone dayes, in the open Cities, preached the Gospel of our sauiour Iesus Christ, and the open way of saluation: But Campion and his fellowes disguised like Russians, in secreat corners taught the traditions of the Pope, and the wide pas∣sage to damnation But sée what followed: Gods prouidence Act. 14. 16, 23. raised Paul after that he was stoned in Lycaonia; the same de∣liuered him forth of prison at Philippos, and out of the mur∣thering hands of the Iewes, who had vowed his death: on the contrarie part his iustice discouered these night Rauens, and
lawfull conuiction, quartered Campion and some of his ob∣stinate companions at the gallowes for Treason, with their Buls, defamatorie livels, and other malitious suggestions, they labored to settle an opinion in her Maiesties subiectes, that her excellency was a tyrant, a Machiuillian, and euerie way as euill as themselues, who were little better than the diuell. They scandaled her godly gouernment, and with odi∣ous names reuiled her graue Maiestrates. All which they proued) as the vicar of Croyden, did Aue Maria to be a praier) with neuer a word of scripture: for if they had béene counsel∣led by S. Paul, they would not haue reuiled their rulers, yea if they had offered them vniust violence: as appeareth when Ananias the hy priest caused him to be smitten on the mouth. Paul vpon this vyolent temptation but answered: God shall Actes. 23. smite thee, thou painted wall: and after wards knowing A∣nanias was the hye Priest, he by and by corrected his owne error, and said, I wist not brethren that he was the hie Priest: For it is written, thou shalt not cursse the ruler of the peo∣ple. These seditious Traitors, did not onely cursse and slaun∣der, Exod. 22. but moue men violently to murther their annoynted so∣ueraine, Quéene Elizabeth (whose life, as the life of Eng∣land God long continue.) The traitor Someruile confessed, that he was moued to kill her Maiestie, by the inticements Looke in the book called the Execution of Iustice. &c. of certaine of his kinsmen, and Allyes, and also by sundrie se∣ditious vile bookes lately published against her Maiestie: how wrongfully they charge her maiesty with tyranny, their own murthering attemps, and her vnappauled spirit maketh manifest. Iobe saith that fearefulnes shall afright the blood Iob. 18. thirstie on euery side. The liues of tyrants are full of hatred, and their persons are subiect to many perrils, Horror and feare, are alwayes in their eares: and although they liue in peace, yet are they in continuall dread of death. How plesant (I beseech you) was the life of Aristippus, whom the bare walles did feare: Nay how wretched was the estate of Alex∣ander Phareus who dreaded his owne wife? and was Dioni∣sius the Saracusains life any other than a liuing death? He ne∣uer
durst trust his Barbor least he should cut his throat: hée carnally accompanied not his two wiues Aristomida & Do∣rida, before he sawe them dispoyled of their garmentes: his bed was inuironed with a great mote, into which he entred by a draw bridge. Cicero describeth the fearefull estate of a Cicero se. lib. 5. tyrant, in a story betwéene the forenamed Dionisius and the Orator Damocles, the morall whereof is contained in this Sonet. There is no fort, that seemeth safe or strong There is no foode, that yeeldes a sauery tast. The sweetest Lute, and best composed song, The chirping byrds, that in the woods are plast, Sound no delight, but as a man forlorne. The silent night, doth seeme an vgly hell, The softest bedde, a thycket full of thorne, Vnto the heart, where tyranny doth dwell. VVhose mind presents, through horror, and through dread. A naked sword, still falling on his head. The estates of tyrantes are so myserable, that of them is properly saide, That Tyrants nourish feare. How little that passion troubleth her maiestie is publikely known. The Har∣gabush shotte by Appeltre, that sore wounded a water-man, 1579 within sixe foote of her Maiestie in her Bardge, sufficed to haue appauled a martiall courage, the chaunce being so rare: at the first face, could pretende no other than treason, a daun∣ger that tried her true Magnanimitie, the matter so little feared her inuincible minde, as her highnes set a part the care of her own safety, to carrie the comforting of her poore woun∣ded Barge-man. The Ambassadour Mounsieur Shemere was in honour bounde (who was there present) to report in France, that in a mortall extremitie, her Maiestie, whom the feare principally concerned, was the least amased in the company: but it may be saide that this was a casuall perrill, that was not knowne before examination, and her excéeding mercy in pardoning the offender cleared al suspition of tyran∣ny. Many a worthy prince to settle an awe in subiects, haue
suffered their Lawes to punish with death, more ignorant, (yea altogither innocent) offences, but certainly the least ty∣rant would haue adiudged Apletre, for feare that destiny had marked him to bring forth some other daungerous fruit: as the Athenians did the boy that pycked out the eyes of byrdes, whom they put to death, vppon a suggestion that he woulde proue a tyrant. But to come more neare to the shame of these slaunderous Traitors: to settle (if it were possible) a feare in her Maiestie, how diuellishly, and daungerously haue they assaulted her Maiesties life. The forenamed Someruile, kept his resolution to kil her Maiestie euen vnto death: and yet al they that are worthy to behold her princely and vnappauled countenance assuredly know, that all the murthering prac∣tises of her enimies, haue impressed no feare in her Magna∣nimous heart (for feare is euermore séene in the face) the rea∣son is, there is no crueltie harbored in her Royal brest, which passion both bréedeth, and nourisheth feare: but principally, when the Arche-traitor Parry tolde her Maiestie that hée had passed his promise to kill her: shée was so smally abashed, as the constantnesse of her countenance made him to tremble. An other time when he was fully determined to haue slaine her excellencie with his dagger, the assurednesse of her coun∣tenance (which resembled a bright sunne, shadowed with no manner of cloudes) made him to lose his resolution. The traitors owne tale, although the same were shadowed with a dissembling loyaltie sufficed to haue impressed a ielious feare in her Maiestie: but shée made so light account of her enimies threates, as shée scorned to report Parries suspitious words vnto her graue Counsell: furthermore to cléere her Maiestie from the least bleamish of Tyrannie, there néedeth no o∣ther testimonie, than the confession and records of rancke Traitours. It appeareth in Parries and Throgmortons voluntarie confessions, that her princely clemencie stayeth all sharpe courses against such Papistes, as liue like obe∣dient subiectes, when that Lawe adiudged them death, their last hope was in her excéeding mercie.
Throgmorton craued mercie with this acknowledgement, of which many haue tasted, and few haue beene depriued. Parry confessed, that the manifold vertues which shined in her Countenance, euermore made him lose his resolution to kill her maiesty. Forraine writers in their books, haue made questions, whether the greatnesse of her Maiesties mercie, were a vertue more holy in her maiestie, or daungerous for her good subiectes, because it bread presumption in those that are euill affected. I protest before God (who I knowe hea∣uily punisheth wilfull periurie) that I hearde a Papist in Rome, afore some of his companions wish (and make choise) to be her Maiesties prisoner in the Fléete, rather then (as he was) the Popes pentioner in Rome: and truely her im∣prisonment is more large than the Popes allowance, saue vnto such persons which make shewe of seditious spirites. Furthermore the long raigne, and manifolde blessings, which almightie God plentifully bestoweth of her Maie∣stie, euidently declareth that shée is no tyraunt, whose Raignes are for the most part short, and their deathes vio∣lent. Yea these Calumniers and Lybellers, with these shameles detractions slaunder their owne knowledge, which is, that her mercie giueth life to condemned Papistes, if that (their Religion safe) they will but acknowledge Ec∣clesiasticall supremacie to be one to her Maiestie, which the Pope and all his power cannot plucke from her. To conclude, no one what so euer his offence be, is put to death in case of Treason, and Felonie, except the Consciences of twelue sufficient men finde him guiltie: and this I may true∣ly say, although Englande bée small in comparison of France or Italy, yet her mercie pardoneth more, that are conuicted by the Lawe, than the king of Fraunce, and all the prin∣ces of Italy. It is a wonder to sée the wilfull stubbornesse of these vngratious Iesuites, howe they striue against their owne knowledge, howe shamelesly they slaunder the mil∣dest course of Iustice that euer ciuill pollicie administred in any common wealth: but chiefely how impudently they re∣proch
her excellent Maiestie with tyranny, when that her mercie is written in all the Capitols of the worlde: their venim sheweth that they are euen those, of whom the Psal∣mist saith. They speak lyes they are as venimous as the poy∣son of a serpent, euen like the deafe Adder that stoppeth his ears, they with their malitious, & vntrue perswasions, bring men into the snares of destruction, out of which they cannot deliuer themselues. It is the last refuge the Pope hath to vphold his wicked kingdome, to blowe into subiectes eares, slaunders of tyranny, subsidies, oppressions, and other hard impositions of their Princes: with these perswations they haue kindled many commotions, and daily settle a mortall hatred in the ignorant multitude, towards their Princes and godly procéedings, which euermore bursteth forth with the confusion of such as they seduce, for God which abhorreth Traitours seldome suffereth Treason to prosper: the dili∣gent obseruance of the euents whereof, is able to settle the duetie and obedience of a good subiect, more than the learning and Eloquence of the greatest Orators. CHAP. 13. Of the peaceable discouery of the daungerous Treasons of Frances Throgmorton Esquire, of Henry Percie Earle of Northumberlande and others, a Chapter declaring the Odiousnesse of Treason, and continuall ouerthrow of Traitors. WHosoeuer shall reade the Chronacles of time (the continuall life of vertue, and endlesse shame of vice) they shall finde that Treason is so odious to God, as his holy hande, many times myraculously hath defended the worst tyrants from the mortall Treasons of their subiectes: Comodus was a
wicked Emperour, and to kill him, his syster Lucilla had Treason of Quintianus discouered. appointed one Quintianus: The Traitour Quintianus, wayghted at the entring of the Amphitheatre, to kill Co∣modus, his dagger was readie drawne, his heart was reso∣lute, and his hand was readie to strike the stroake: but God appointed the Traytors tongue, to inflict the vengeaunce vppon himselfe: for before the Emperour came vnder his stroke, Quintianus cryed, This the Senate sendeth thee. Uppon which wordes he was taken, and Comodus no∣thing hurt. The day before Sceuinus thought to haue slaine the Archetyrant Nero, hée put an olde rustie dagger to grin∣ding, hée made his Testament, hee fraunchised his bond∣men, and got rowlers in a readinesse, to wrappe wounds in, by which tokens Milicheus his seruaunt, gathered he went about some naughtie purpose, and so accused him straight wayes to the Emperour. Sceuinus straight confes∣sed, Sceuinus dis∣couered. that his intent was to haue slaine Nero. If God pluc∣keth witte and prudencie from Traitors, that purposed to kill such notable tyrantes, as hée made the Traytours owne wordes and doings, to bée the confusion of themselues and safetie of the tyrauntes: It is assuredly to bée thought that with the shielde of his strength, hée will defende righte∣ous Princes: and especially his chosen, Quéene Elizabeth, that aboue all things seeketh to set foorth his glory, to ad∣uaunce his holy worde, to abase hypocrisie, to banish Ido∣latrie, and finally, that all her subiectes may be (as they are called) true Christians. It is assuredly thought that hée will defende her Maiestie, yea it is constantly to bée belée∣ued, that hee will, there is no feare of it, it is visibly séene that he doth. I might inlarge this Chapter with sundrie ex∣amples, of the confution of forraigne Traitors, and preser∣uation of their soueraigne Lords: But I write to Eng∣lish-men: for whose instruction English examples is most proper. It is yet within the compasse of our memorie, that since the first houre that the Noble King Henrie the
eight banished the Pope out of England, that God hath laide this cursse vpon Traitors, as the most part of them, euen in the prime of their conspiracies were discouered, and the prin∣cipals worthely punished. What became of the huge Com∣motion in Lincolne-shire, where twentie thousand rebels October. 1536 were in Armes? at the approch of the kings power they de∣sired pardon, brake vp their Armie, and departed home. The seditious heade of Cardinall Poole, within sixe dayes af∣ter, raised a newe insurrection in Yorkeshire, to the number of fortie thousande rebels: they abide the comming of the kings power, with whom a day of battaile was appointed, but God (hauing compassion, of a number of good subiectes that were like to be slaine) by his prouidence saued both the one, and the other: the night before the Armies should ioyne, he parted them with a mightie rayne, In the meane time the rebels desired pardon, it was graunted, and so the com∣motion seased. In Februarie following Nicholas Musgraue, Sir Francis Bigot, Sir Robert Constable and others, be∣gan February 3. new Commotions in Yorkeshire, which were soone ap∣peased with their confusions: the Insurrection of Somerset Aprill. 1537 shire had no better successe: but which most daungerouslie touched the kings life, and safetie of his good subiectes, this vngratious Cardinall Poole, this whirlepoole, and fire∣brand of desencion, séeing that king Henry with an easie hand appeased many, and mightie insurrections at home: labored an inuation by the power of Fraunce: but all the daunger was not in the french forces, he had drawne in the Marques of Exeter, his brother the Lord Mountacute, and Sir Gef∣fray Poole, and with them his kinsman Sir Edward Neuell 1538 to be traitors: these labored no small matters, they sought euen the change and alteration of the kings godly gouerne∣ment: they were daungerous traytors, not so much for their power, but for that they were all so bounde vnto the king, for many benefits, as common reason tooke away all occasi∣on of suspition: to condemne whose vnkindnesse, and mon∣strous ingratitude, there be many examples of vnreasonable
creatures. Lysimachus had a dog which he much estéemed, and Lysimachus dog. the dog to shew his loue, when he saw his maister dead, and cast into the fire, as the manner of buriall was then, he like∣wise leaped into the fire, and died with his maister. Plinic sheweth that Hiero King of the Syracusans had a dog which Hieroes dog. did euen the same: but the Romaine histories make mention of a more strange matter: when Titus Fabinus and his fami∣ly were slaine, there was a dog that for no stripes would de∣part from the dead carcase of his maister, and when the stan∣ders A Romaine dog. by gaue him meate, he ranne and layde it at the mouth of his maister: in fine, when the bodie was throwne into the flood of Tyber, the dog lept in after, and as long as he could he kept his maister aboue the water, much more might be said to reproche ingratitude, a vice which our vulgar worde (vnkindnesse) sheweth to be against kinde or nature: the for∣mer examples approoue as much, but enuy and ambition, the ordinarie passions of Papists are so farre from grace, dutie, The villanous nature of ambi∣tion and . and thankefulnesse, as they contend with God, and violate the bonds both of nature and frendship. The Traytor Parry in his confession, sayd, that his accusor Neuill vsually sayde, that all the aduancement that her Maiestie could giue hym, should serue but for her scourge, if euer time ministred occa∣sion: I knowe not whether he spake of mallice or no, but ex∣perience teacheth, that these persons resemble the frozen Snake, which the pitifull husbandman comforted by the fire, which in recompence stoong his children. The Marques of Exeters father was for treason committed to prison by King Henry the seuenth, King Henry the eight discharged him, and with great fauour tooke his sonne into his priuie chamber, and vsed him alwayes more like a companion then a seruant. The King helped the Lord Mountacute from the state of a poore Gentleman, to his mothers land being thrée or foure thousand markes by the yeare. Sir Edward Neuill was of the Kings priuie chamber, and in great fauour. The Pooles were of the Kings blood, and so bound with princely fauours, as when Sir Geffrey Poole was apprehended, the rest were
not so much as suspected, but God will not haue treason lye hid, nor Traitors vnpunished, though the Diuell and man la∣bour in the behalfe of either. The Diuell was héere set a worke, but he laboured in vaine against the iustice and mer∣cie of God, the giltinesse of Sir Gefferey Pooles conscience condemned him, he now only respected the safetie of the Mar∣quesse, his bréethren, and Cosen Sir Edward Neuill, hys conscience was witnesse against them all, he feared that tor∣ture would wrest out the truth, and in this doubtfull per∣plexitie he resolued desperately to kill himselfe, and in this passion vppon oportunitie, he stabbed himselfe vpon the brest with a knife, the Diuell plaied his part, now sée how God (as he oft doth) turned all the Diuels worke to his glorie, and Sir Gefferayes saluation, the knife was blunt, and as God woulde, made the wound not mortall, yet the abundance of blood which followed his wound, made him to feare God, to feare hell, and to detest the murther both of his bodie and soule, and where as before he woulde haue died to saue his bréethren and Cosen, he now desired life for no cause so much, as to bring them to that which they worthely deserued. Fi∣nallie, he accused them all, and by lawfull tryall, the Mar∣quesse, the Lord Mountacute, and Sir Edward Neuill were Ianuary. 1538 adiudged and executed as traytors: good King Henry ioyned his mercy to Gods prouidence, & so pardoned Sir Gefferey, whom God appointed to be the instrument of this discouerie, the like blessings were heaped vpon the King, and confusion vpon his enimies, the residue of his triumphāt raigne, which continued all the daies of his most blessed sonne King Ed∣ward the sixt. In the third yéere of his raigne there were al∣most generall commotions through England. The Papists tempted and mooued the commons to rebellion, with a per∣swasion 1549 to throw downe inclosier, and for themselues foysted in, to haue their old religion and Acte of sixe Articles restored, but what followed: the rebels in euerie countrey were van∣quished, slaine, and vtterly discomforted. And to continue with truth, in this report Quéene Mary had (albeit she was
superstitious) the like victories against her domesticke eni∣mies: but as it is said, as God gaue the Idolater Abias vic∣torie against Ieroboam for his great Grandfather Dauids sake, so he gaue the like to Quéene Mary for her godly father King Henries sake. To come againe vnto the peaceable vic∣tories obtained by the Quéenes Maiestie, as in the former reports it is manifest, although the Diuell gaue her enimies wit to begin treasons, he failed to giue them strength to effect them, yea, the Diuell himselfe lacketh strength, where God hath any thing to do, as appeareth especially in the preuenti∣on of the odious and desperate treasons of Someruile & Parry. To conclude, the ouerthrowe of her last knowne enimies (which happinesse I beséech God to continue many yeares, and to the last moment of her Maiesties life) the wonderfull discouerie of the dangerous treasons of Frances Frogmorton Esquire deserueth a speciall remembrance. I meane a re∣membrance Frogmorto Treason. of thanksgiuing vnto almighty God, in reuealing of such a couert mischiefe, that threatned her Maiestie with a perticular danger, and her realme and people with a generall calamitie, it was no ordinary conspiracy that Frogmorton labored, but an vnnaturall subuersion of his countrey by for∣raigne inuasion: he wrought to haue brought in the Pope, the King of Spaine, the Duke of Guise and all: he purposed her Maiesties death, to possesse he knewe not whome with the Crowne, perhaps such a one, as would all haue béene iealous of him, for those by whome they are benefited, dare hardly trust a Traitor, he was discouered in time, but yet more by Gods prouidence then mans policie, he was too subtill to lay his head vpon weake blocks: his secresie was such, as he was first desyphered by forraigne intelligence: he had Englishe confederates, but such as wéere too déepe in, to discouer him. When he could no longer withstand the accusation of his owne hand-writing, and other probabilities, but especiallie his giltie conscience, he voluntarilie accused hymselfe with manie odious Treasons, but hys malitious spirit woulde not bowe to accuse hys confederates, whiche could not but
be some great personadges: his toong going to execution, ac∣cused him of a hidden secret, when he sayd, that he was sorie for the miserie that would light vpon the people before one yeare, but God be praised the yeare is past, another draweth fast one, and manie the like I hope will followe, that her Ma∣iestie is in safetie, and her Realme in peace. Mary within the same yeare the Traytor Parry was hanged in Throgmor∣tons equipage, and Henry Earle of Northumberland (iud∣ged by the giltinesse and accusation of his owne conscience) desperately ended his life with a dagge in the Tower, with gréefe I set it downe, that a man of so great vallor and staied∣nesse should so much forget the feare of God and duty to her Maiestie (to whome he was déepely bounde) as to practise such dangerous treason, as his owne conscience perswaded him would not abide the triall: and therefore to preserue the honour and inheritance of his house, he made choise of a des∣perate death, before the tryall of his péeres, the most honou∣rable and indifferentest tryall in the world: his sonnes haue great cause to consider of this fatherly care, that thus wilful∣ly endangered his owne soule, to preserue the temporall ho∣nour of his house: yea, the redéeming of it by his voluntarie death, when the trespasse of his life had forfeited all, hath (or ought to haue) impressed such a setled zeale in his sonnes e∣uermore to vphold the same, as they and their posteritie will no doubt continuallie be remembred thereof, as Philip King of Macedon was, That he was a mortall man. God graunt that her Maiesties good subiects may be alwayes worthy of this diuine prouidence, peace, & abundance of all good things, and that those that are not yet sound may so profit (in amend∣ment) by these examples, as they may detest treason, as the assured spoile of honour, losse of life, and (in many) the dam∣nation of the soule, otherwise, (in séeking to pull downe a Prince whome God hath chosen to raigne ouer his people) in their confusion they shall declare their owne folly, and Gods excéeding goodnesse, in preseruing of those whome he loueth. These notable polititians, or more properly Atheists,
if they were simply to deale with men, they might many times happily sée the wished effects of their deuises: but they striue against God that striue against their soueraigne Prin∣ces, especially against such a one as God hath annointed to set foorth his glorie, yea, they shall preuaile no more then he that thinketh to beate down strōg rocks with a knock of his head, that striueth against those whome God protecteth. God de∣fended his seruant Elias fléeing from the wrathfull displea∣sure 3. Reg. 19. of Iezabell, yea, he sent an Angell to comfort and to re∣fresh him with foode. When Daniell was cast into a den of Daniel 6. Lions, God sent an Angell to stop the Lions mouth, so that they could not hurt him. An Angell with a drawne sword told Iosue that he was the chiefe of the Lords band. Iudeth Iosue 5. Iud. 13. had an Angell for her companion when she went to slay Ho∣lofernes. An Angell was séene to walke and preserue Sidrah, Daniel 3. Misach and Abednago in the burning ouen. I could inlarge the Chapter with many examples to like purpose: but to conclude, although Angels are not so visibly séene as in the time of the Prophets, yet they minister Gods prouidence, and all his blessings euen now as they haue done from the beginning of the world, by whome our noble Quéene Eliza∣beth is defended, her enimies are confounded, and from whome her good subiectes receiue peace, and large fruition both of spirituall and temporall riches. All which, God for his Sonnes sake alwaies continue, that when her Maiestie hath liued a long life (so long as the longest course of nature may giue leaue) that then she may die in peace euen in the place where she liueth and raigned many yeares in peace. Amen. CHAP. 14. An exhortation to the English fugitiues, vagrant in forraine Regions. I Place you héere English fugitiues at her Maiesties féete, as abiects, whome Gods iustice for your sinnes will haue foyled vnder her féete: but her excellencie, who is slow in
doing of vengeance, is more readie to succour her enimies with her hand, then to spurne them with her foote: and among many that least deserue this fauour, charitie, and commisera∣tion of your dayly ruines, moueth me to wish vnto you after vnfained reconciliation, both the fruition of this mercie, and all your Countrey blessings. The errors of your Religion are manifested by many godly Diuines, but the blindnesse of your harts will not suffer you to sée them: and small is the maruell, though you contemne the counsels of men, when you vse the visible warnings of God to strengthen your errors. The report of the souldiers vnto the high Priests of the glo∣rie of Christes resurrection, sufficed to haue conuerted the Iewes, but to their condemnation, the Diuell and money sea∣led this slaunder in their harts, that his Disciples stole him away in the night. Gods iustice stroke Mahomet with the falling sicknesse, to make him know and forsake his blasphe∣mie, but to strengthen the peoples misbeléefe, the Diuell taught him to say, that his falling proceeded of the confe∣rence with an Angell, whose diuine presence his humane shape could not endure. Uppon the principall day of the sauadge murther in Parris, according to the figure in the Reuelation, that the stinging Locusts shoulde not hurt the gréene trée, when to shewe that Gods worde should flourish mauger your crueltie, a withered trée bare gréene leaues in the Church yard, which receiued many a martired carkasse, you presently applyed that preaching, or prophesying ex∣ample, to the second florishing of your Romish Church, time proueth your exposition, but an idle suggestion. For although God suffered this cruell persecution of his Church, yet he pre∣sently shewed himselfe as a louing father, who burneth the rod when he hath corrected his sonne, God shortly sent an vn∣kindly death to the chiefe scourge in this persecution, and with the gallowes confounded the most of ye rascally Atheists his executioners: if any liue, they beare the markes of hys heauie displeasure: what honor, and to go further, what pro∣fit haue you gained by this policie of your Church? to what
purpose hath the Pope painted this persecution about his great hall at Lateran? forsooth that it may be a monument of his crueltie, and Gods mercie: of his crueltie, who dayly murthereth, and of Gods mercy, which dayly increaseth the number of true professors. If the hardnesse of your harts had not blinded your vnderstanding, you could not but perceiue the visible plagues which fall vppon your Pharao the Pope: you sée that iustice by generall iudgement hangeth notable murtherers in chaines, that they may rot & consume by péece∣meales: euen so Gods iustice promiseth semblable vengeance vpon this Archmurtherer your pope: the most infirmed eyes sée the lingring consumption of his riches, reuerence, and re∣putation: he that sometime disposed forraigne kingdomes, can not kéepe his proper lands out of ye possession of his next neigh∣bors. There is no frée state in Italy, but of late yéeres haue fléesed him, nor any Christian Prince that is his best friend, which paieth his auncient tribute. He that sometimes com∣manded the persons, goods, & roial powers of anointed kings, is now driuen to waste his substance vppon Atheists, secretly to murther his supposed enimies, whose counsels (for ye most) proue the halters, which hang his executioners: necessity con∣straineth him to be in league with all men, saue the professors of the Gospell: the Iewes haue their sinagogue, the Grecians their proper religion euen in Rome: strumpets haue good law to recouer the leacherous hire of their bodies: their La∣dies are his possessions, for they pay him rent to abuse them. Atheists, traitors, murtherers, théeues, and such as the lawes of all good gouernement would consume with the gallowes, are his souldiers, stipendaries, and pentioners: and what ser∣uice do they him? they shorten their owne daies in laboring his wicked practises, all to a bootelesse successe: seldome, (but yet sometimes) his instrumentes execute hys bloodie purposes: but hys Machiuillians neuer escape the hands of vengeance: I haue shewne the example of Fraunce. Iohn Ianregui the fyrst assayler of the godlie Prince of Orange, was presentlye slayne, and sundrye of hys
confederates were executed, the odious Atheist which wic∣kedly murthered this good prince, had a seuere death, but yet too milde for his execrable offence: but héere in England (from whence came the Lion that first plucked the prowde Eagle of Rome by the throte, &c.) what successe hath followed all his pollicies? since the noble King Henry the eight shewed his rauening to the princes of the earth, he hath vomited his poisoned enuy and mallice to the chiefe destruction, disgrace, and shame of him and his partakers, his instruments of Re∣bellion, murther, and all inhumaine mischiefes, had their for∣tune which rid the horsse Seian which was violent death: they brought buls which gored themselues, and pardons whiche turned into halters, and hatchets which hanged and quarte∣red their maisters: I néede not name Felton, Campion, Parry, and the rest: you haue canonized them for Saincts, and we haue Chronacled them for Traitors. Since the be∣ginning of her sacred Maiesties raigne, whome héere in Eng∣land haue your Popes cursses harmed? I know his blessings haue brought many Englishmen to the gallowes, from which God blesse all good men, and then I meane not you, without amendment. If you haue not learned by the councels of scrip∣ture to forbeare the laying of violent hands vppon the Lords annointed, yet the dayly experiēce of your companions falles, and their frustrate attempts, sufficeth to banish the very ima∣gination of your and our most gratious soueraignes death, which all good Christians beseech almightie God many yéeres to defer. You are not so wise as the Philosophers disciples, whiche in the water woulde followe their maister but to the chin: for you follow the Pope ouer head and eares in two dangerous seas, error, and rebellion. You may learne instruc∣tions of safetie of Mise, which runne from houses which are readie to fall: or of lice, that will leaue the bodie of a dying man: all the world séeth that your Popes kingdome leaneth vpon a few rotten props, yea, that the life of his glorie is at the point of death: why follow you then your owne destruc∣tion in susteining of him, whome vengeance will no longer
suffer to flourish. Nature counselleth you to haue care of your liues, and charitie warneth your enimies from wishing your deathes, if you would shunne the perils that vnpolitike crea∣tures auoid, but Pharao and his host would wilfully perish in the red sea, the like is your stobernesse and expected destructi∣on. Pharao was plagued, and well warned before, and you Papists lacke neither punishment to feare you, nor perswasi∣on to win you, and vnhappy are ye that neither can profit you. Mahomet to continue his irreligion by his Alcoran, forbad ye people to reason of it, a damnable policy to suppresse truth, which by disputation breaketh out of cōtrouersies, as fire out of Flint, by the striking of iron. The people to blinde all the world with ignorance, appointed the Latin toong for matters of religion, which ye multitude vnderstood not: if one language sufficed for a generall edifying, the holy Ghost in the forme of clouen and firie toongs sate vppon the Apostles in vaine, which instructed euerie one in their proper language, it was a policie almost as dangerous as Mahomets, which manie yéeres masked the hipocriticall blasphemy of the pope: when his dreames shadowed the truth, your mists of error might wel arise from ignorance: but now that truth hath vnmasked his hipocrisy, your blindnesse can be adiudged no better, than peruerse wilfulnesse. His policy forbiddeth you studiously to search the scriptures, it is then like his wil is that you should reade his own monuments. And I counsell you to reade Pla∣tinus, Aeneas Siluius, the golden Legend of the actes of popes. Plutarke reporteth that an Atheist gouernour of Cilicy, belée∣ued Plut. lib. de orat. Plut. de mor. de verit. de reb. Christ. 17. in God by an answere of the Diuell, or oracle of Mopsus which reuealed a knowne secret: and it may well be these po∣pish historiographers will let you sée paltry stuffe, that the best aduise will hardly perswade you to beléeue. There is an old saying, Orpheus can describe hell better then Aristotle, raysed vpon a fable that he fetched his wife from thence, and truly in knowledge is assurance, and in report may be error. They are Authors that write wonders of the Pope, and (if your iudgements are not blinde) matters in common sense
vnpossible: you may by grace stumble on such grose errors, as shall constraine you to looke vpon the plaine truth: but you haue a commandement, that forbids you to looke into the liues of your Popes, because it can not be denied but that they trespasse dayly as men, when in their doctrine can bee no error, because the holy Ghost waighteth vppon their ho∣linesse, it may well be of their holinesse, and yet farre ynough from the Pope. Where was I pray you the holy Ghost, when Pope Marcellus sacrificed vnto the Idols of the Pa∣gans? What office had he when Syluester the second, when Hero. in Cat. ust. . Pet. Pemist. in v. Greg. 7. & . 2. Iohn the ninetéenth, and Gregorie the seauenth were a con∣iuring? they were successors of Simon Magus, and not of Si∣mon Peter. In déede Pope Ioane the eight erred not when she fell in labor in the middest of Procession. Among your owne Authors it is reported, that the virgin Mary told S. Brigit that most of the Popes are in hell: a small signe then that the holy Ghost is very conuersant with them, S. Peter (from whome they deriue their holie vertue) erred, and de∣nied Christ, and onely by repentance, was againe receiued into grace. They excéede S. Peter in riches and pompe, but they come short of him in holines & doing of miracles. If the opinion of a Franciscan Frier be as currant as other Pope scripture: it is known vnto you yt reade ye liues of your popes, that pope Sixtus the 4. was in ye beginning a frier of S. Fran∣ces order, who being aduanced vnto the paupaltie, was often∣times visited with the brethren of his owne habite: among whome, one of his ancient companions in his friers wéede came to sée the Pope, who to set forth his pompe, shewed him his rings, & magnificent iewels, and withall said Brother, I can say now more then S. Peter who said, I haue neither gold nor siluer, it is true said the frier, but you can not say as he said to the lame & impotent arise and walke, giuing him thereby to vnderstād that the popes of Rome labor more to be rich then holy: but you may say (because you are forbid) that you must tel no man of the popes faults: do then ase did that bewraied King Mydas asses eares, tell them so lowde to the earth, that
men may heare them: iwis they be more deformed then My∣das eares, and you shall be far more praised in the reuealing of them, then profited in the concealing of them. But you will further say, that all your doings are the documents of great learned men, whose counsels ought to worke more strongly with you then all my perswasions. That same learning in déede in stubborne wits, when it vndertaketh an error, doth the diuell and all of hurt. Plato saith, small wits do little hurt in a common wealth, the great wits are they that do all the mischiefe. S. Augustine had read much, and was very cōuer∣sant in the scriptures, and yet he was a great while in the he∣resies of the Manichees, and still perswaded himselfe that scripture was of his side. Learning doth stay a man in error, rather then helpe him out of it, especially if he haue chued the sense of the scripture at his pleasure, or be dronken with iuice that his fantesie hath corrupted. Saint Paule was lear∣ned when he persecuted Christes flocke, and had read of no∣thing so much as of the scripture, and yet you sée that men could neuer turne his hart: God himselfe was faine to put to his voice, to strike his body blind, and to enlighten therewith his soule. In truth it is apparant that you stop your eares a∣gainst all the perswasions of man. It is Gods especiall grace that must vanquish your stubbernes, which grace is promi∣sed to all those that sincerely ask it in his Sonne Iesus name: speake well of Saint Thomas, Saint Gregory, and the rest, because they are dead, but pray not vnto them, for the dead can doo the liuing no good. Iesus signifyeth saluation, and Iesus alone must be your saluation. Pray then vnto Ie∣sus with a contrite heart, laye asyde your painted hypocri∣sye, and then no doubt he wyll lighten youre vnder∣standyng, and make you to vse youre learnyng to hys glorye, whyche otherwyse is lyke a swoord in a mad mans hande, whiche indangereth manie, and defendeth not hys maister: beléeue him that wisheth you no euill, if you haue a desyre to do your selues good, one moment faith∣fullye bestowed in thys Deuotion, will profyte you
more then seuen yéeres reading of controuersies. The short praier of the poore Publicane was in heauen, before the long babling of the painted Pharisie: his doctrine is nothing so dangerous as the Popes, he commandeth you to pay tribute and obedience to Princes, and not to murther or lay violent hands of the Lords annointed: if he set you about such busines, will him to teach you more fence, for he had néede to be verie skilfull that shall wound him to whom God is a buckler. It is not an enterprice to be ventured on by yong schollers, least in the striking out of their quarters their heads and all flie off. Returne your vengeance vpon this vngratious pope, who is the vengeance both of your body and soule: but now I counsel you not to strike him with carnall weapons, for the word must be his confusion, reade but the new Testament ouer with a holy conscience, & you shall find many words to wound him. Marten Luther (whose very name perplexeth the Pope) neuer fought with him with other weapons then the word of God, yet in his life he so vanquished him, as being at the very point of death, his soule beheld the triumph of his destruction, and for ioy thereof sayd: Pet is eram viuens, moriens tua mors ero papa: Liuing I was thy plague, & dying will be thy death pope. He hath prophesied truly to the purpose, for all the Iesuits in Christendome can not cure the woundes that the reuerende Marten Luther hath giuen him. Why labour you then your owne destruction to raise him whome God hath abased? his life is not long, but yours will be shorter, vnlesse you dis∣patch your harts of your odious treasons. God so hateth them, that as the Preacher saith, the birds of the aire shall bewraie your voice, and with their feathers shall betray you, so that your cunning shall be to no other end, then to leade you to the gallowes. From which, God defend you if it be his good will to giue you so much grace as to become his seruants, and her Ma∣iesties louing Sub∣iectes.
¶ THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE ENGLISH MIRROVR Entituled, A fortresse against Enuy: Builded vppon the councels of sacred Scripture, lavves of sage Philosophers, and policie, of well gouerned Common weales. Wherein euerie estate may see the true offices, the vvorthines and (by abuse) the disgrace of his vocation. A worke safely and necessarie to be read and regarded of euerie good subiect. by GEORGE WHETSTONS Gentleman. Malgre.
❧To the right Honorable and most graue personadges the temporall maiestrates of England in their waightie counsels, the assistance of Gods holie spirit. MOst honorable and graue Maiestrates, it may seeme vnto your wisedomes that I flattered my wit, with a foolish singularitie, and abu∣sed your fauors with an arrogant presump∣tion, if of my owne braine I should vnder∣take (and lay before your iudgements) thys waightie building, which containeth the true offices, the worthines, and (by abuse) the disgraces of euery mans voca∣tion: which labor I entitle A fortresse against Enuy. But (most reuerend) as I haue composed my first booke, called The Con∣quests of Enuy, of the examples and ouerthrowes of the most ancient, renowmed and florishing common weales, for En∣uy only maketh warre with things of the greatest glory, and haue continued my second booke, entituled, Enuy conquered by vertue, with the admiration of her Maiesties peaceable victories, obtained by diuine prouidence, and her highnesse pretious vertues, the one incomprehensible, and the other without sample: So right honorable, this third booke (which I reuerently submit vnto your graue censors) I (semblably) build vpon sacred, morall, and politike counsels: the admo∣nitions are set downe by holy Prophets, Apostles, learned Philosophers, and graue common wealthesmen. The collec∣tion and labor to place them, as they may serue for a gene∣rall instruction, is only due vnto me: and (with your hono∣rable fauors) I thinke the law of the Aegyptians (which I take for my platforme) is a most sure defence against Enuy: for by this lawe of King Amazis, (which was, that euerie man shoulde put his name in a common booke, and at the yeeres ende shoulde acquainte the Gouernour neere his abiding, with the trade and order of his liuing.) Idle∣nesse and excesse (the great nourishers of Enuy) were
either banished or punished, euery man entertained a setled vocation, and no man enuied the pomp of another mans calling, which he knew not how to gouerne: and certainly, if men would indifferētly consider of all vocatiōs, they should find there is no calling so base, but that the vse therof is pro∣fitable, & of honest credit in a common wealth: and withall no dignity so hye, but vnto the same is annexed a number of displeasures, and therevpon it is rightly said, That the chiefest place in the administration of iustice, is to the executioner a bondage: your wisdoms know the same better by experiēce, then I by obseruance, so that whatsoeuer the booke cōtaineth of graue gouerment, I acknowledge might better haue been deriued from your liuely vertues, then frō other mens writtē coun∣sels: but for that men can hardly praise the liuing without flattery, and the dead without an honest zeale, I haue made choise to labor more for my credit then aduantage: for al∣beit I am in a maner vnknowne to most of you graue Ma∣iestrates that liue (of which in this respect I am glad, that be∣ing vnworthy of your knowledge, for any speciall quality, I am at no time brought Coram vobis for any criminall tres∣passe) yet those worthy personages which in my time are deceased, haue had the second life of their vertues bruted by my Muse: but as my trauels heerein cōmended the dead, and instructed the liuing: with the like hope, I haue builded this fortresse against Enuy, of the counsels of the dead, ap∣plied to instruct the liuing in their proper vertues. Vertue as Diogenes saith, only withstandeth Enuy, yea, vertue conque∣reth Enuy, and vertue set apart, no pollicy preuaileth against the stratagemes of Enuy. To withstand this common foe of prosperitie, I labour (by the grauest mens directions) to ac∣quaint euery man with the vertues of his vocation: but prin∣cipally I do beseech God to blesse them with his feare, the beginning of wisedome, and confusion of Enuy and all wic∣kednesse, vnto whose gratious protection I humbly commit your right honorable Lordships, and all other godly Maie∣strates whatsoeuer: at whose commandement I faithfully remaine. George Whetstons.
Induction to the Reader. ALbeit, that peace is a most precious blessing of God, a large testimonie of a gratious Prince, and the perfect image of a well gouerned common wealth: yet the euill, which abuse whatsoeuer is good (as the Spider draweth hony from the purest flower) of these good causes, beget such foule effects, as God in reward of his blessings, is dishonored, persecuted, and blasphemed. The gratious Prince, for his or her protection, is neither dutifully reuerenced, nor truely obeyed: and what is sowen for publike benefite, groweth to the ruine of the Countries prosperi∣tie. Vpon the experience of the good gouernement of Athens and other florishing Commonwealthes corrupted, or to speake more proper∣ly confounded, by such vile persons, as their principall Cities foste∣red: warranted the graue Socrates, being demaunded what in∣creased the wealth, of a Commonwelth, to answere, that peace was the inricher thereof: being demaunded on the contrarie part, the chiefe cause of pouertie, in a Common wealth, semblablie aunswered that peace was the meane thereof. Being asked his reasons, said, that in the time of peace Armes giue place to Lawes, and good Lawes ad∣ministreth both plentie and prosperitie, to such Countries as receiue and obay them: on the other side he alledged, that wealth the blessing of peace, bread many vices in her owne bowels, of the nature of Mothes in cloath, or canker rust in yron, which by the consuming of their suckers destroy themselues: and questionles the wheele of peace painted on either side with these fiue spokes, Peace bringeth plentie, Plentie causeth pride, Pride raiseth enuie, Enuie soweth sedition, and Sedition hatcheth pouertie, is rather the deuise of some Philoso∣phers setled iudgement, than the toy of a Painters variable fancie: the Embleame, so truely portrayeth the change of all happie gouerne∣ments. But some more quicke of wit, then in discretion perfect, will suggest, that where Law hath her full voyce, these Cankers can ne∣uer grow to the consumption of the heart: to which question I thus aunswere, that Law may haue a free passage, and yet Iustice scanted of her due course: for Lawe will not, or cannot punish an apparant trespas without an open presentment: and Iustice would chasten the concealed fault, if she could commaund the Law, and such is the cun∣ning,
of pollitike Lawe breakers, that where the ignorant are han∣ged for stealing of a sheete, they will haue the Lawe to strengthen them, in the robbing of a mans inhearitance, and therefore is Lawe likened to a backe sworde, eadged and sharpe, to chasten the simple offender, and blunt when the subtill shoulde bee corrected. Vppon which reason, quoth Diogines, what auaileth it to haue profita∣ble Lawes, when the good readeth them not, and the euill cor∣rupt, or care not for them: but although Diogines spake truelie as touching the naturall humors of men, for vnto the good their Con∣sciences are in steede of Lawes, and with the lewde, no bridle is a restraint from euill: Yet grounding my reasons vppon larger authorities, I graunt Necessitie inuentris of all policies hath founde good Lawes so necessarie, as I holde those Realmes, Regions, Cities, and Townes which are not gouerned by Lawes, rather to bee forrestes of wilde beastes, than places habitable for men: for there where Lawes are musled, Iustice goeth masked, might mastereth right, Theft is reputed honest gaine, and murther lawfull reuenge: Treasou woulde enter the priuie Chamber, and to bee short the wealthie, shoulde go to wracke, and the inferiour would order, vn∣till they had disordered all good gouernement. These open outrages, are suppressed by the paines of Lawe, although the awe of chastise∣ment, cannot keepe some raskall persons from offending in secreat. Heraclites saith, absque legibus nullo pacto possit ciuitas esse incolumis, sed absque menibus possit, without Lawes a Cittie by no meanes can be in saftie, but without walles it may. And Forteskew saith, Lex est sanctio sancta Iubens honesta, & prohibens contraria. Law is an vncorrupt holines commaunding things that are honest, and forbidding those that are contrarie. Therefore I doe reuerence good Lawgiuers, and (as deuine Plato saieth) repute all Lawes, that are made for the wealth and sauegarde of mankinde, to bee of GOD, although they bee deuised by men. This onely lacketh to set foorth the glorie of good Lawes, and to possesse the Common wealth with their true benefites: The administrators of Lawes, are nothing so carefull to finde out the offender as they are readie to pro∣nounce Sentence of the offence: agreeing with an olde tale of a Viccar of Croyden, who of a peece of his Vicreage made an
Ale-house, and there kept an harlotte: for in those dayes the Lawe of the Church forbadde Priestes to marrie, and yet the awe of hell coulde not subdew their lustes: this smoge Chaplaine, mind∣full of the lesson, long before giuen vnto the Cleargie, Si non caste, tamen Caute: as hee thought to take away all suspition of his misbehauiour, made a vehement Sermon against Lecherie, and agrauated the vengeaunces of that sinne, with all the authori∣ties, which hee coulde recite in the Scripture: earnestlie exhorting his Parishioners, to cleanse the towne of that damnable and filthie iniquitie: whereuppon one of the Church-wardens (that knewe the Viccar had violated his vowe) cryed out Master Viccar if you will giue vs example, by purging of the Church-yarde, wee will bee care∣full to cleanse the rest of the Parish: the Viccar smelling the mea∣ning of the Church-warden, pleasantlie to huddle vp the matter, replied that the Church-warden spake without reason: for quoth he, the Church-yarde is the appointed place to receiue the most filthie Carrion of the worlde, and withall wished the people not to mistake him, for hee onely spake of the sinne, but medled not with the sinner. A great part of the meane officers of Iustice at this day, doe as the Viccar saide. The Penall Lawes (which are manie, and yet no more than are necessarie: Vice is growne to so great a strength) are solemnely pro∣nounced in euerie Sise, Session, and Leete, the offenders manie, and many times present at the repetition of their Trespasses, and yet seldome or neuer bee presented, that they may feele the scourge dew to their Trespasses, when the Trespasser, by his fault is as well knowne to the Iustice, Iurie, Steward, or other officer, as to his owne conscience which offendeth: and howe commeth this barre of Iustice? forsooth by this straining of curtesie: the Iudge will punish but what the Iurie findeth: the Iurie will finde but what is presented, fewe will present without inforcement: and thus good Iustice, which was wont to bee so quicke, as men portrayed her with a paire of wings, is nowe so slowe, as shee needeth a spurre. And shee that was likened vnto fire, which being naturall, both cherisheth and consumeth, by the coldnesse of mens Conscienses, may nowe bee compared to painted fire, which neither comforteth the good, nor wasteth the lewde.
But this defect is not so properly to be applyed to Iustice, as to the infirmitie of her administrators, who (as Gordian saith) ought to be so free from partialitie, as in the seruice of Iustice, they must for∣get the affection of a Father, a husband, a kinseman, and a friende. This Gordian was a graue Senatour of Rome, who in the time of the dissolute and beastly raigne of the most vicious Emperour He∣liogabalus, made sute to be discharged of the authorities which he bore in the common wealth: not for that he grew weary of the serui∣ces which he did vnto his Countrie, but in that he abhorred to slaun∣der the reuerence dew vnto a Iudge, with iniust sentenses, which the priuiledges of the wicked, would inforce him vnto. He would verie often say, that a good Common wealthes man, applyeth all the parts of a well proportioned creature, whose hands are bound behind him: his eyes are no lesse occupied to prie into the doings of the lewd, then his eares attentiue, to heare the complaints of the good: his tongue is mute neither for feare, nor fauour, and by his leagues he presenteth a continuall trauel to do his countrie seruice, his handes bound behind him, sheweth him as well bound vnto all these offices, as free from briberies: and doubtlesse the authorised Maiestrate which is thus diligent, and no lesse free from corruption, shall aswell be busied to chasten the offences which he findeth himselfe, as to pu∣nish such as be discouered by others. Truely there be a great num∣ber of right worthy Maiestrates in this happie gouernement of Eng∣lande, who with the eyes, eares, tongue, and legges of Gordi∣ans common wealthes man, both foresee the actions of naughtie persons, and prouide to frustrate their determinations, and as the Amners of Gods blessings, especially bestowed vppon this happie Realme, since the first houre of her sacred Maiesties most prosperous raigne, haue both stopped the passages of forraine practises and ciuill conspiracies, and without bloodsheading, onely armed with deuine and morall vertues, ouercommeth these enimies with their owne swordes, as a concaue Mirror daunteth the assailer with his proper weapon, so that all Nations by the impressions of their owne sor∣rowes, as well as through knowledge of our happinesse, with the spi∣rite they admyre her Maiestie and good Maiestrates prudent go∣uernement, doe enuie the peace, plentie, and protection of her in∣ferior subiects.
Now some will say, by the searching wisedomes of her Maiestie and graue senate, prosperitie, in all her dominions is administred, and the enimies thereof, of their purposes are defeated, and referre all this to a needlesse purpose. There are rare monuments, to eterise the vertues of the Queene, Counsell, and chiefe Maiestrates, and in the rest no notable vice generally to bee reprooued. But with sorrowe I reporte, and their doings approoues it: Vice is as ge∣nerally imbraced of the multitude, as vertue is especially cheri∣shed of the better sorte: since the case so standes, who will not say, that that buylding is out of order, whose spares are rotten, whose windowes are broken, and whose roofe is vncouered: although the groundworke bee stronge, and principall timbers sounde. Surelie a happie common wealth, resembleth a faire building, the foun∣dation whereof is the Prince, the principals are the chiefe Ma∣iestrates, the sparres, the Inferiour officers, the windowes, the Nobilitie and Gentilitie: the Tiles that couereth the same, are the Citisens and multitude: and the faire roomes within the buil∣ding, are the liberties of the Cleargie, who are priuiledged to blame sinne in all estates, but the punishment appertaineth to the ven∣geance of God, and sworde of the Prince: all which partes firme∣lie vnited together, doe strengthen one another, and the corruption of the least, by the sufferance of Time, will turne to the confusi∣on of the greatest, and therefore by the Lawe of Nature, the meanest person, in his vocation is sworne to trauell for the pub∣like benefite of his Countrie. It is no excuse sufficient for him that is not authorised to chasten offences, to suffer offenders to liue vnder his nose vnpresented, that the Maiestrate may pu∣nish, nor yet no good discharge of his duetie, that is authorised to leaue an offence vnpunished, vntill information bee giuen by others, when his owne knowledge is able to condemne the offen∣der: euerie man is bounde for his owne safetie to discouer an euill liuer, and euerie man that hath authoritie, is bounde both to correct the offence, and to enquire after the offender. If euerie man in his calling woulde thus truely doe the office of a good Common wealthes man: Enuie and all euill, woulde bee easilie withstoode: men woulde soone looke into the dueties of their pro∣per vocation, for feare that others looked into the abuses thereof.
I haue with the authoritie of the wise and learned, set downe what is needefull for euerie man to consider of his calling, if they will striue against vertue, and the credite of their vocations, they are worthy of double punishment, both for the fault, and for wilfulnesse, being warned of which, I hope the godly reader will be admonished.
MIRROVR. Lib. 3. CHAP. 1. Of the excellency of Royal dignities, and dueties of a good King, and of the short raignes, and violent ends of Ty∣rantes. THE dignitie Royall, is so greate and holy, as kings that are protectors and defenders of humane society, imi∣tate the prouidence of God, whose office & action is to gouerne al things, and therfore rightly and properly are they called Uicars and Ministers, of that most soueraine puissant and vni∣uersall gouerner. And he himselfe calleth them gods: figu∣ring in that sacred name two hie charges, the one that kings crowned with so glorious a name, should imitate God, whose lieuetenants they are: in their religion, Iustice and gouerne∣ment: the other that subiectes knowing the honour that God giueth vnto kings, should adore and worship them with all possible reuerence. S. Paul saith he that resisteth the ordi∣nance of the king, resisteth the ordinance of God. Looke what Rom. 13. dignitie, & instruction is giuen vnto the king, the Lord vouch∣safeth to say that he bestoweth the same himselfe, as in these passages of Scripture. By me kings raigne: Harken then Prou. 8. VVisd. 6. you kings for power is giuen you of the Lord. Dauid thus sin∣geth, the Lord teacheth the kings hands to mannage Armes, Psal. 144. and his fingers to war. And to the like effect are many other authorities. Porrus king of the Indians being taken in bat∣taile, Alexander demaunded of him how he would be inter∣tained, Porrus answered, as a king. Alexander demaunded againe if he would say any thing else: Porrus said no, for all honor is contained in this word king. This name king, was held of so great reuerence among the people of many nations, as the Indians, and the Persians worshiped their kings as de∣uine Idols, & held the incounter happie, if by chance they saw
their king The Ethiopians so reuerenced their king, as they adiudged him worthie of death, that did but spit in their kings presence: The Poets celebrated Iubiter more by the name of king, than any other title. It is wonderfull with what pa∣tience the Romanes and other Nations suffered the tyrannie of their vitious Emperors and barbarous kinges, and if by Gods Iustice any of them were cut off, the vnciuile multi∣tude were the instruments thereof: for the graue and wise se∣nators were seldome guiltie of their destructions. At this day the Turkes so reuerence their Emperors commaundements as they execute themselues, if their Emperour pronounce the sentence. Christian kings are nothing so seuere towards their subiectes, but Christian subiectes are farre lesse obedi∣ent to their kings: well, euill will fal vpon his house that re∣sisteth against the ordinance of the king, for he that resisteth receiueth vnto himselfe damnation: Yea albeit the king bée Rom. 1. a tyrant, so long as his commaundements are not to the dis∣honour of God. He that resisteth because the king is a tyrant It is not lawfull to resist a tyrant encreaseth his sinnes, and doubleth Gods wrath, who sendeth Tyrants to punish the sinnes of the wicked, who saith, I will do vengeance on my enimies, by my enimies, God (saieth Iob) maketh the hypocrite to raigne for the sinnes of the people. In O see God speaketh thus. I will giue thee a king in my furie: And in Esay, Assur is the Rodde, and staffe of my furie. By these and many other testimonyes it is appa∣rant, that God setteth kings in their kingdomes, by they good or euill, and will not haue them remoued at their subiectes pleasure. A man that placeth an euill steward ouer his house in no case will allow, that his seruaunts shall put him out of office, for that such boldnesse would lessen the authoritie of their master, who hath the prerogatiue to place and displace his officers: much more presumption is it if subiects displace their prince, who hath a greater power ouer them, than a master ouer his seruaunts: for the master in some cases shal answere the sute of his bond-man, but the king in no case de Iure shall answere a trespasse done to his subiect: for his pre∣rogatiue
is aboue the law, although many good kings suffer themselues to be gouerned by their good Lawes. God setteth them in their kingdomes, and God alone will haue the au∣thoritie to remoue them. Saul vniustly persecuted Dauid, yet Dauid hauing aduantage to slay him, said to Abisai distroy him not, for who can lay his hands of the Lords annoynted, and bee guiltlesse? And he further saide, The Lord keepe me from laying my hands of the Lords annoynted. In auncient times kings not onely gouerned the common wealth, but al∣so tooke charge of the Sacrifices and Ceremonies. The He∣brewes annointed their kings with the selfe same Oyle that they did their hie Priestes: which prooueth that kings are sacred, and who so euer layeth violent hands vppon them, cannot but bée guiltie of Irriligion. Wée sée dignitie of Roy∣all gouernement, which dependeth vppon one soueraigne heade to be liuely figured in man himselfe: in whom reason gouerneth as soueraigne Quéene. The world it selfe, where aboue our eyes, we behold infinite bodies and motions, which hindreth not one an others course: belowe we sée a Sea, that continually threateneth the earth, and yet ouerfloweth it not. The earth being verie waightie and massiue, we may perceiue to be set, or rather hanging in the aire, and yet stir∣reth not, all which would soone be out of order, if it were not gouerned by the wisedome of one onely God. Euen so a kingdome, which as Plato defineth, is composed of a mightie number of people, and as the prouerbe goeth, So manie men, so many iudgements, would soone haue come to naught, To  tot sententae through the couetous desire to raigne, and disdaine to obey, if there were not one soueraigne commaunder of these infi∣nite affections: which prooueth that Monarchia which is the gouernement of one, is far more sacred, excellent and perfite Monarchia, the most worthy go∣uernement. then Aristocratia, Democratia, Oligarchia, Laocratia, or any other compound gouernement: for it is a harder matter to finde out many, than one that is good. The contrarietie of af∣fections, where there are many heads, can hardly but bring forth enuie, deuision, and to conclude continuall dissention.
Considering then the worthines of Monarchia, and the ma∣iestie of a king, obedience is not onely required of a subiect, but the daunger that followeth, counselleth and forbiddeth so much as to murmure against princes. There is an auncient sentence, that kings haue wide eares, & out-streached hands, which is applied to this purpose, that princes heare what of∣fenders doe in secreat: and can take vengance a farre off, for the gaine of a princes fauour is so great, as men to compasse the same, giue knowledge of most hidden things: The prea∣cher saith, A byrd of the ayre shal bewray thy voice, and with her feathers she shall betray thy words, which concerne prin∣ces: all which is but a morall warning, to counsaile men to Eccles 10. say nothing, or nothing but good of princes, when their know∣ledge searcheth their subiectes wordes, and their anger is a verie death. But albeit, this prerogatiue bee giuen vnto a Royall king, to doe what he pleaseth, and the duetie of a sub∣iect, restraineth him from saying what hee thinketh. Yet where their murmuring procéeded more of oppression than malice, manie good kings, and some tyrants haue borne with the inconsiderate words of their subiectes. King Antigonus, lying in his Tent, in the deade of the night hearde a Souldier to murmure against him, of whom Antigonus tooke no other reuenge, but softly in an vn∣knowne voice willed him to goe further from the Kings tent, in the ende hée might not heare him. The Athenian Ambassadors hauing audience of king Philip of Macedone, after their Ambassage deliuered, king Philip asked if they would any thing else, yea quoth one of them named Demo∣crates (who knew that Philip hated the Athenians) we would that thou wouldest hang thy self by the throat. But king Phi∣lip contrarie to all expectation, mildely answered, You shall tell the Athenians, that he that hath indured these words is much more modest than the sages of Athens, which want discretion to gouerne their tongues. The tyrant Dennis as∣ked the Philosopher Plato, what was said of him in the Acca∣demy of Athens. Plato boldly answered, that they were not
so idle in Athens, as to talke either of him, or his doings: Den∣nis knew that Plao couertly blamed his vises, and therefore with great patiencie receiued his graue reprehension: and truely in this clemency of pardoning, the discreete libertie of the subiectes reprehension, good princes many times see the faultes that they desire to amende in themselues, the fore∣named Philip, saide it was in his power to make a man say well or euill of him: deriuing his reason from this occasion: Nycanor speaking euill of him, Philip was moued to punish him: nay quoth Philip, I know Nycanor is not the worst man in my realme, and so sent to know if Nycanor wanted any thing, and vnderstanding hée was in great pouertie, in stéede of chastisement, Philip gaue him a rich present, and presently the accusar brought the king worde, that Nycanor spake much good of him. Oppression, Pouertie, and such like temptations wil moue the tongue to blunder forth the griefes of the heart, and questionles in such ouersights, clemency be∣séemeth a king: and in remedying of his subiectes iniuries, he doubleth his renowne. Pontanus saieth, that libertie and clemencie maketh Pont. de princ. Princes to resemble God, whose propertie is to doe good vnto all, and mercifully to forgiue those that doe amisse. By liberallitie Caesar woone Pompeius souldiers to bee his friends, and by clemencie obtained such reuerence as in me∣morie Plut. de v. Ces. thereof the people erected a Temple. Mamyllus asked Caesar what thing hée had doone, wherein hee helde himselfe most honoured, I sweare vnto thee Mamillus by the immor∣tall gods (saide Caesar) that I haue done nothing whereof I holde my selfe so much honoured and happie, as for that I haue lyberallie rewarded those, that haue serued me, and mercifullie haue forgiuen such as haue offended me, words worthy of Caesar, and beséeming euerie Royal Prince: for in these two vertues greatly consist their honour and safetie. When Cicero saw Caesar set vp Pompeis Images, he saide, Beholde, Caesar setteth vp Pompeis Images, that his owne may stand the surer.
Ciceroes wisedome foresaw, that clemencie worketh loue in subiectes, and safetie in Princes: notwithstanding with this swéete and milde vsage, the maiestie of a Prince requireth a seuere grauetie, for the first without the last, giueth subiectes libertie without feare: & the last without the first, feare with∣out loue. A reuerend and assured countenance, is the chiefe Grace, and not the least vertue in a prince, for of a prince mē behold the countenance, and of a common person the apparel. The prouerbe is, that in the Face of a prince, both life and death is setled, that is seuere grauitie, with a mild amiable∣nes, to chasten and cherish as occasion serueth, which moueth a louing feare, and not a feareful loue in subiects. The people of Meroe an Iland vppon Nylus, elect him for their Prince, Pet. mes de reb. mend. lib. 4. that hath the best countenance: imagining that ye magnani∣mity of the minde is discouered in ye maiestie of the face. King Demetrius, had so honorable & swéete a presence, as no pain∣ter durst vndertake his counterfet: for in beholding of him, amiablenes, terror, and milde grauity, wrought such sodaine impressions, as the beholders at one instant were moued to loue, reuerence & feare him. The most worthy Romain Mari∣us, had such a reuerend presence, as being prisoner with his enimy Sylla, a french man was sent to kill him: who entring the prison, with a drawne sword, was so amased with Marius graue & furious countenance, as he returned and left the pri∣son dore open: and by this meanes Marius saued his life. Cras∣sus in the like daunger made the Axe to fal from the executio∣ners hand: with these we may very well sample our renow∣ned Quéene Elizabeth when ye archtraitor & desperat Athiest Parry, came wt a full determination to haue slain her maiesty with his dagger, & had place & oportunity as he wished (teste se ipso) ye maiesty of her countenāce, made him to lose his resolu∣tion. Of ye contrary part, ye deformity of coūtenāce, hath disgra∣ced ye kingly qualities of a nūber: & for example of late yeares king Ferdinando of Spaine, a prince both discret & wise, yet of shape & countenāce vgly & deformed, this king vpon a festi∣ual Pet. Mes. lib. 4. day, accompaning ye sacramēt at Barcellona, at vares
a Spanyard stroke him such a sound blow vppon the necke, with a short sword, as had it not béene for a great chaine of golde, he had beheaded him. The Spaniard was taken: and to learne if he had any confederates, he was put vnto the tor∣ture: but for all the torment they coulde lay vppon him, hee would confesse no otherwise, but that the Phisnomie and euil grace of the king, mooued him mortally to hate him. But al∣beit this be a rare, and too extreame an example, Yet sure a royall Prince resembleth the sunne, whose bright beames comforteth euery creature, and being darkened with stormie clouds, spreadeth heauinesse vpon the whole earth. Learning is a great bewtie, and a most necessarie vertue in a Prince, for learning containeth the graue censures of wise men, and wisedome is the strength, and scepter of a Prince. God bad king Salomon aske what he shoulde giue him, and Salomon Chron. 2. 1. onely asked wisedome and knowledge, that he might worthe∣lie Aul. Gel. lib. 15. 3. iudge the people. Plutarke and Aulus Gelius recite, that when Alexander was borne, king Philip his father wrote in this manner vnto Aristotle: I thanke not God so much for that I haue a sonne, as for that he is borne in the time of A∣ristotle &c. to whose instruction Philip committed him: and truely his worthy actions bewrayed the wisdome of his edu∣cation. This Alexander shewed the loue he bare to learning when hearing that Aristotle had written certaine bookes of naturall Philosophie: hee wrote vnto him in this manner. Truely Aristotle thou deceiuest my desire in publishing of this speculatiue philosophie: which I thought should pro∣perly haue honored my selfe: for know thou I had rather exceed all men in knowledge and learning, than in riches and dominions, Antigonus king of Macedone, to be instruc∣ted in wisedome & knowledge by his letter thus saluted the Philosopher Zenon. The king Anty gonus wisheth health to the Philosopher Zenon, I know well that I passe thee in riches and fauours of fortune: but I must confesse that thou farre passest me in the true felicitie, which consisteth in the knowledge, discipline,
and studie of the lyberal sciences. Alexander afore named, Plut. de vi. Alex. so loued Homers Illyads, as he appointed the magnificēt Iuel box of Darius to kéepe the same. Cesar the best Captaine that euer was, by his singular learning raised a question, whether he was more honored with the lance or the penne. Certainly they be both so necessarie as without the knowledge and vse of either a royal prince is maymed. The multitude (as So∣phocles saith) is a beast with many heads: and therefore to gouerne such a monster requireth many pollicies: in which the works of learned men will liberally instruct a prince, but to acquire perfite knowledge, the principall induction is the feare of the Lord, which (as Salomon saith) is the beginning of wisedome. The prince that will haue good subiects, ought chiefely to instruct them with the example of his owne good life: for, for the most part, the manners of the people incline to the affections of the Prince. The noble prince ought to shake the flatterer from his eare, and to raise the oppressed that fall at his féete, for the one lieth in waite to disgrace the good, and the other by opening their wrongs discouer the bad. Hard and bitter words of a prince, is the cause of much mur∣muring, & discontentment in the subiects, where the prince is noted to be temperate, no man wil be so hardy as to demand a wicked & vile request. O happy art thou Marcus Cato (saith Cicero) of whom no man dare demaund a wicked thing. He is worthy of a kingdome and soueraigne rule, and giueth hope of a good prince, that pursueth the wicked, hateth the intempe∣rate, reiecteth the lyars, & as the pestilence flieth the counsels of voluptuous persons, for who so effecteth the desires of such counsellers his infancie wilbe shameles, his youth effemina∣ted, and his age infamous. The preacher saith, wel is thée O thou land, whose king is come of nobles, & whose princes eate in due seasō, for necessity, & not for lust king Lamuels mother, Fles. 0. counsaileth to giue the king no wine, nor princes strong drink least in being drunken they forget the law, and administrati∣on of iustice. When king Alexander became a drunken Epicure, in
his drunkennesse he slewe his deare friends, and by misgo∣uernment hastened his owne death. King Balthafar in his ge∣neral Daniel. 5. banquet to his thousand Lords, when he was drunken with wine, commaunded his vessels of gold and siluer (which his father Nabuchodonosor, had taken out of the Temple at Ierusalem) to be brought vnto him, that he, his wiues & con∣cubines might drink in them, in contempt of the liuing Lord. but in the middest of his banquet the vengance of God, with a visible hand wrote his destruction vpon the wal Dronkennes containeth all vices, and the least vice is a great blemish in a prince. Temperance in dyet, bredeth sobrietie in manners: & reposed words are the glory of a Iuditial throne: The sound safetie of a king is in the cherishment of religion, and mainte∣nance of his Lawes, for the one vpon pain of damnation, kée∣peth subiectes in loyall obedience, & the other for feare of tem∣poral punishment brideleth the dispositions of the wicked: it is not ynough for the honor and maiestie of a prince, to admi∣nister the vertue of all these vertues to his subiects alone, but as Xenophon in his Cyropedia writeth, a prince well qual∣lified, ought so to vse his enimies, as his enimies may be∣come his friends. Pompey the great, hauing vanquished Tygranus king of the Armenians, hée established Tygranus Ant. Verd. lib. 4 againe in his kingdome: saying that it was as Magnani∣mous a thing, to giue a king his kingdome as to take it from him: but the magnificent clemencie of Philip Maria Duke of Mylaine, toward his vanquished enimies, deserueth more A worthy ex∣ample for prin∣ces. than mortall honour. This Philip Maria, by victorie in a battaile vppon the Sea, tooke Alfonsus king of Aragon and Sicile, with two of his brethren, Thierry king of Nauare, the Prince of Tarent, and three hundred men of great reputati∣on, all which he sent backe freely into their owne countries, and where by the Law of Armes, he might haue taken great ransomes of these Estates, such was the honour of his mind, as hée gaue vnto euerie one of them rich presents, The se∣nate of Rome deliuered, 2700. Carthagenian prisoners without ransome, I coulde resite manie of the like exam∣ples,
but small perswasions instruct the wise, the vertuous desire glorie rather by their owne Actions, than by the exam∣ples of other men: And aboue all men, a Royal Prince ought to be bewtified both with diuine and heroycall vertues: for that the names, dispositions, and doing of the meanest prin∣ces are regestred in the Capitols of the whole world: writers so narrowly search the doings of Princes, as the prudēt Em∣perour Alexander surnamed Seuerus, would oftentimes say, that he stoode in more feare of one writer, than of a hundred souldiers, for that the wound of a pen remaineth after death, when the sharpe stroke of a launce bereaueth a man but of life: it is not onely conuenient that a Prince doe exercise pie∣tie, Iustice, Temperance, and all other offices of vertue, for his honour and good renowne: but it is néedfull that he do the same for his owne safetie: for albeit there be no penall Law to chasten a Royall king, yet Tyrannie is so odious to God and man, as we seldome reade of any that raigne long, and of as few that die peaceablie. A number of whose ignominious deathes, briefely to touch I hold not impertinent, that other Princes may by the terrour thereof, be feared and warned from Tyranny. The Tyrant Abimelech slew 70. of his brethren, and in the end, a woman from a hie tower tombled a stone vpon his Tyrants ouer the Iewes. Abimelech. Saul. head: the wound being mortall, he willed his Page to runne him through with his sword, that it might not be said a wo∣man slew him. Saul that slew the Sacrificatures, to the number of 85. as al∣so the wiues and yong children of Nobe, vpon an ouerthrow in battaile slew himselfe. Athalia the mother of Ochosias, to reuenge her sons death, Athalia. Reg. 4. 11. slew al the race of the house of Iuda except Ioas, who (saued by Iehosaba) was crowned in the temple, and the wicked Atha∣lia was slaine at the entrie of the Pallace. 2. Chro. 22. 23. Achas an Idolatrer and Paricide, was deliuered vnto the Achas. hands of the king of Asiria. The like vengeance was inflicted vpon the Tyrant Manasses.
The miserable vengeance that lighted vpon the séede and people of Ieroboam, is set downe by the Prophet Abias, how Ieroboam. that the dogs should eate those that died in the Citie, and the fowles of the aire those that died in the fielde, which threat∣nings were soone executed, for Nadab succéeding both in the principallitie and tyrannie, was slaine by Baasa, who accor∣ding Nadab. Reg. 3. 15. to the words of the Prophet, rooted out the whole race of Ieroboam. Baasa was slaine by Zamri, which Zamri left not a kinse∣man Baasa. Reg. 3. 16. or knowne friend of Baasaes aliue. Zamri hauing raigned but seauen daies, was pursued as a Zamri. Reg. 3. 16. murtherer, who séeing the Citie to be taken, set fire of the roiall pallace, and so burned himselfe. Achab and his wicked wife Iesabell, (who caused Naboth Achab. Iesabell. to be slaine, to be possessed of his Uineyarde) according to the prophesie of Elia, the dogs that licked vp the blood of Na∣both, also licked vp Achabs, and of Iesabell the dogs deuou∣red flesh and all: and further, the vengeance of Ieroboam raigned vpon Achabs séede, his sonne Ocozias died of a hurt, Ocozias. Reg. 3. 21. 22. Reg. 4. 9. 10. 11 and for that he sought succour of the Diuell to be healed, Io∣ran his sonne was slaine by Iehu, who by his letters caused the princes of Israell to slay the 70. sonnes of Achab, which Iehu also rooted out the false prophets of Baal. Zacharia raigned but sixe moneths, and was slaine for hys Zacharia. tyrannie. Sellum who slew Zacharia raigned but one moneth, and Sellum. was slaine by Manahem. Pekahia the sonne of Manahem was a Tyrant, and was Pekahia. slaine by Pekah. Pekah was slaine by Hoseas, and Hoseas was lead cap∣tiue Pekah. Hoseas. Reg. 4. 15. 17. by Salmanasar into Asiria, this was the confusion of the Tyrants of Israell. The effeminate Sardanapalus by the sharpe war of two Tyrants of A∣siria. Iust. lib. 1 of his princes Belochus and Arbaces, fired his pallace, and in the same burned himselfe and his concubines.
Senacherib by the Angell of the Lord had his armie ouer∣throwne, Senacherib. and 185000. of his hoast were slaine, and he fléeing vnto Niniuy, was in the temple of his idols slaine by his two Reg. 4. 19. sonnes Adramalech, and Sarasar. Ptholomy the thunder bolt that slew Seleuchus, and maried Tyrants of Aegypt. Ptholomy the thunder bolt. his sister Arsa to sley her two sonnes, was himselfe in most reprochfull manner slaine by Brennus and the Frenchmen. Ptholomy Philopator, so called in mockerie, because he slew his father and his mother, liued and died in great slaue∣rie, Pthol. Philop. while his Curtisane Agathoclea, and the baude Oenan∣tus gouerned the affaires of his kingdome. Ptholomy Phiscon so called, because of his gluttonie, for his crueltie called the great Tyrant, who slew his brothers Pthol. Phiscon. children, and two of his owne sonnes, and in the Colledge of Alexandria burned a great number of yong schollers, as he liued he died like a beast. Ptholomy Lamirus, or the babler, and Ptholomy Auletus, Pthol. Lami. Pthol. Auletus. so called for his flatterie, were both cruell Tyrants, and had dishonorable and beastly endes. The ingratefull Ptholomy Dionisius, that stroke off the head of his Gouernour Pompeius, was for practising against Pthol. Dionis. Caesar ouerthrowne and drowned in Nylus. Esay speaking of the plagues that shoulde raigne vppon Babylon, figured how odious the Persian Tyrants were in Tyrants of Persia. Gods sighte, vppon whome hys vengeance continuallye lighted. Cyrus & his whole army were slaine by Quéene Thomiris. Cyrus. The cruel Cambises slew his brother Smirdis through en∣uy that he should raigne after him, and by his sword falling Cambises. foorth of his sheath, slew himselfe. The Tyrant Xerxes that slew his brother Masistes, was slaine by his vncle Artabanus. Xerxes. Ochus slew fourescore of his brethren, and in the end was Ochus. slaine by one of his Captaines named Bagoas, and his car∣kasse throwne to the dogs. The Monarkie of Alexander and the Gretians, together Vide.
with the tyrannie, and violent ends of his successors, is suffi∣ciently showne before in the Conquests of enuie. Nicocrates put to death most of the principall Citizens, Tyrants of Bithinia. Nicocrates. and was himselfe slaine by Leander. Leander succéeded Nicocrates both in rule and tyrannie, Leander. and therefore was put into a sacke of leather and throwne into the Sea. Zela, Prusias, and Pharaces, all Tyrants, were violentlie Zela &c. slaine. Aristotimus the Archtyrant was so odious, as the people Aristotimus. slew him in the temple of Iupiter, and by the iudgement of the people, his wife and two daughters readie to be maried, were strangled. Phraates King of the Parthians, who slewe thirtie of hys brethren, and strangled his father, had his throte cut by hys Phraates. bastard. Eucratides King of the Bactrians, slew his father, draue Bucratides. his Coach through his blood, and caused his carkasse to bée throwne vnto beasts, but by the vengeance of God in one day he lost his kingdome, his owne life, and the liues of his whole race. Archias, Philippus, Leontidas, and Hyppias, cruell Ty∣rants Archias. of Thebes, were all foure slaine by Pelopidas and hys associates. The Kings of Sicile were generally such Tyrants as they Tyrants of Sicilie. are specially thus registred, The Tyrants of Sicile, of whome, horror and cruelty continually attended, and as it appeareth in the question betwéene the Tyrant Dionisius the elder, and the Orator Damocles, the ende of a Tyrant is not only vio∣lent, but his life is wretched and miserable, so that leauing to shew the infamous ends of Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus, & other Romaine Tyrants, as also those of our age, I will con∣clude this Chapter with a summarie of Damocles historie, that princes séeing the best estate of Tyrants to be miserable, may be counselled to hate tyranny as much as they are bound to loue their honor and safetie.
Damocles on a time praised the riches of Dionisius, and Cic. de tusc. lib. 5. maintained that the sunne neuer shined vppon a more happie prince, wherevpon Dionisius to make him partaker of thys felicitie, made him to be set vpon a magnificent bed, caused the tables to be couered and furnished with vessels of golde and siluer, and in them most delicate viandes, and to attend vpon him, he appointed many beautiful pages, poudered with most comfortable perfumes, and vppon euerie side of this mignion Damocles, all manner of swéete musicke was pla∣ced, but in the middest of his glorie, Dionisius caused a naked sword with the point directly vppon Damocles head, to bée fastned only with the hayre of a horse tayle, who sodainely forgetting the felicitie that he so highly praised, humbly be∣séeched the Tyrant to deliuer him from it, which scourge of conscience, or rather liuing death neuer punisheth the good Prince, but as the Psalmist saith, He layeth him downe in peace, for he knoweth the Lord will make him dwell in Psalme. 4. safetie. CHAP. 2. Of the hye calling of the Nobilitie, the worthines of theyr seruice in the common wealth, as also the generall mise∣rie that followeth their disloyaltie. THere néedeth no other authoritie to ap∣prooue the hye calling of the Nobilitie, then the iudgement of our owne eyes. In matters that concerne not publike disturbance, or manifest breach of the lawe, they are not called to so sharpe a reckoning as inferior subiects. No pro∣ces at the common lawe (vnles in mat∣ters of the Crowne) can charge the person from the degrée of a Baron vpwards: the reason is, the law alwaies intendeth them to be actually in the seruice of their prince and countrey, and therefore necessarie that their persons be frée from par∣ticular arrests: yet for that right may be administred to all
persons, no man is created a Baron, vnlesse he may dispend Sir Thomas Smith de repub. Angl. a thousand markes by the yéere, which shall be lyable to hys debts of record (vnlesse in some speciall cases.) Uertue which laboreth to crowne her disciples with honor, hath authorised the absolute Prince to raise the meanest subiect to the highest degrée of subiects: neither ought the auntient Nobility to en∣uie the rising of an inferior subiect that well deserueth, when the originall of their owne honor was by the like creation: for Dukes, Marquises, Earles, Uicounts, and Barons, haue their beginning by creation, through the vertue and good seruice of those whome the Prince holdeth worthie of such honor: and for their worthinesse the same is hereditorie (at the least) in their heire males, which honor, neither for pouertie, or any trespasse vnder the degrée of felonie they can forfaite: their very names of honor declare, that they are created for the great strength and necessarie seruice of the common wealth. Dux a Duke signifieth a Captaine, a chiefe∣taine, and principall doer: the Uerbe Duco hath many hono∣rable significations, as to leade, to gouerne, to allure, to iudge, &c. Comes an Earle signifieth in effect imitation, as Patriae lau∣dis comites, followers of their fathers vertue and renowne. Cooper Dict. Callpin. Our English word Baron is taken from this worde Barus, which signifieth an Elephant, or of Barro a strong man, he is created to be a man of chosen strength and defence vnto his prince and countrey. These personadges are girded alwaies with a sword, to testifie that their office is to withstande the forraine and domesticke enimie. Their seruice is so necessa∣rie, as regall pollicie hath thought it conuenient to honor the eldest sonne with the fathers dignitie, that as the generall lawe possesseth him with his fathers lands, so (through a de∣sire to further aduance his house) this speciall fauour may worke in him his fathers vertues. Noble men are for the most part their princes Lieutenants in the seuerall counties and prouinces of their Realmes, and therefore the heroycall vertues specified in the former Chapter are requisite in a noble man: by their offices they are the leaders and the ru∣lers
of the common people, whose natures are to runne head∣long Dispositions of the people. with a snaffle, and to go neuer a whit with a sharpe bridle: they haue no skill, and lesse can away with the lordly lookes: gentle vsadge winneth them to loue, and discret cor∣rection driueth them to obeie: one hastie word or prowde countenance setleth more hatred among the multitude, then the hanging of tenne men by a temperate iudgement: it is therefore requisite sayeth the graue Counseller Sir Antho∣nie de Gueuarra, that the Rulers of the multitude be wise to fynde theyr variable humors, patient to beare their vnci∣uill behauiors, temperate to punish their offences, and dili∣gent to prayse theyr good demerites: for if they be gouer∣ned with libertie without chastisement, they will soone grow insolent: and againe, if with seueritie without gentlenesse, theyr mallice will be incurable. The common people are so diuers to please. As when Demosthenes was banished by the people of Athens, in his departure he turned towards the Citie, and made this exclamation: O Pallas, how is it pos∣sible that thou bearest such loue vnto these thrée beastes, the night Owle, the Dragon, and the common people: if I had knowne the enuie, the feare, the false reportes, and vniust accusations that they must susteine that gouerne the vnciuill multitude, if of two I must néedes haue done the one, I would sooner haue broken my necke, then haue had to do in the common wealth of Athens. Besides this wisedome in gouerment, a speciall valiantnesse is required in a noble man, and thrée encouragements he hath to be resolute, the first is his forwardnesse maketh the whole army to followe, the second is, he is honored with the whole glorie of the vic∣torie, and the last (which is more sharpe then death) the shame of a cowardlie ouerthrowe, principallie reprocheth the chiefe leader: the feare of thys made Caesar desperately to runne vppon the fierce Neruij, and by this little care of Plutarke de vit. Caesar. life he recouered an honorable victorie, euen when the Ro∣maines were at the poynt to runne awaie: I might adde in∣finite
of the lyke examples, but to a néedelesse purpose, for that the greatest parte of the Nobilitie are naturallye va∣liant, in so muche, as Ferdinando the prudente Kyng of Arragon woulde vsuallye saye, if Ambition and Enuie were as frée from the Nobilitie as cowardlinesse, Prin∣ces shoulde bée quiet at home, and fortunate abroade. Those two are in déede the woorst humors in the Nobi∣litie, and the mortallest pestilence in a Common wealth. Ambition and Enuie of the Nobilitie soone arme the common people to Rebellion, whose ciuill frayes fyll the graue farre faster then the hoatest plague. The Athenians had no other pollicie to withstande these venemous passi∣ons, but by a Lawe called Ostracisme, at the choise of the The Lavve of Ostracisme. people yéerely to banishe one of theyr principall Noble men for tenne yeares: by thys meanes they thought to kéepe vnder the Ambition and Enuie of the Nobilitie, but the fondnesse of the people made this lawe a scourge for the vertuous, and a ladder for the vitious, for the ingratefull people banished Themistocles the valiant, A∣ristides the iust, and Symon the most renowmed, and suffered the base Hiperbolus and others of the lyke con∣dition to steppe into theyr places, vntill they had displaced all good order. The Athenians (as the wisest of men wyll sometimes erre) were ouerséene in priuiledging the common people with thys waightye iudgemente, who loue they wote not what, and hate they wote not why. The generall Lawe of Nations is farre more indifferente, whiche measureth vnto euerie man his desart. Those whome vertue maketh worthie, let them enioye honor vppon ho∣nor, and those that bée disloyall Traytors, there can bée no punishmente seueare ynough to bée inflicted vppon them. It is thought good by generall pollicie, that the honor and reputation of Traytours shoulde bée corrupted in theyr posteritie: who render no more vnto theyr prince
to punishe their treasons, then the prince gaue their Aunce∣sters to reward their good seruices. The prince created theyr Auncesters Earles, Barons, or as their callings are, and for their vertues suffered the honor to descend vnto their heires: then they that will worke Treason, and forget God, the kindnesse of their Prince, the vertues of their Parents, and loue to theyr Countrey, it is not ynough that they them∣selues die the death, but the Emperour Vespasian in a letter to his sonne Titus sayeth, the sonne of such a Traytor ought Ioseph. de bel. Iud. not to lyue: God thought no temporall punishment suffici∣ent to chasten the rebellion of Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, he caused the earth to open her mouth and to swallow them vp and their houses, and all the men that were with Corath, Nomb. 16. and all theyr goodes, and they and all that they had went downe alyue vnto Hell, these be the words of the text: and certainely, the vengeance of God continually raigneth vppon Traytors. Chronicles make mention of millions of Trea∣sons that haue béene punished, and of a few that haue had successe. Almost in euerie nation most of the auncient Nobi∣litie are eaten vp with Treason, and noui homines as the Ro∣maines tearme them occupie their places through vertue. The learned Gentleman Mayster Morrisine, in his inuectiue against Treason, sayeth, that the Treasons of great men ought to be set foorth in theyr colours, because that blood is distained in Treason: he might also haue added, because a great deale of giltlesse blood is shead through theyr Treasons. I haue in other places sufficiently showne the falles of Trai∣tors, and therefore to withstand the temptation of ambition and enuie, the enemies of theyr Countreys peace and pros∣peritie, and vtter ouerthrowe of themselues and familie, this discouery, with praier for the assistance of Gods spirit may suffice.
CHAP. 3. Of the reuerende calling of the Cleargie, the holinesse that is required in theyr liues, and the lamentable miseries that proceede of disvnion in Religion. BOth among the Iewes and Gentiles, and generallye through the whole worlde from the beginning vnto this day, the chiefe Priests, Bishops, and generally the professors of Religion, were much reuerenced, and in hye e∣stimation among the people. The of∣fice of Aaron the Priest was of such Nomb. 16. 18. credite among the Iewes, as enuie, and desire to occupie the roome, was the principall cause of the Rebellion of Corath, Dathan, and Abyram: yea, Gods owne words greatly ho∣nored Aarons Priesthood, when he sayd, The sonnes of Leuy should waight vpon him and the Tabernacle. Among the Heathen Romaines, the office of the chiefe Byshop was of such account, as Iulius Caesar when he began to aspire, on∣ly Plu. de vi. C. laboured for that dignitie. And yet before the ambitious climing of the Pope, Chronicles make no mention that they were the head rulers of any gouerment. Among the Iewes the Prophets were priuiledged to reprehende the faultes of the Prince, but both the Prophets and Priestes were subiect vnto the sword and commaundemente of the Prince. King Iehoas appoynted Iehoiada the Bishop and the Priestes, how they shoulde imploy the money that was brought into the house of the Lord, and when they fulfylled not hys commandement, he sharpely reprehen∣ded Reg. 4. 12. them. Iehu put all the Priestes of Baal to the sworde. The Emperour Tyberius put the Priests of the Idoll Anu∣bis Reg. 4. 10. to the sworde, because they were the instruments for the wanton Knight Mundus to commit adultrey (by theyr
deceipt) with the chaste Romaine Ladie Paulina. Yea, from Antrd, lib. 4. 8. the beginning, and to be short, at thys daye it can not be de∣nyed but that the reuerence which is giuen vnto the Clear∣gie is due vnto theyr profession, and not vnto theyr person, and when theyr pompe was at the highest, the greatest Archbishop that offended in treason, had the tryall of a com∣mon subiect. Since then the holinesse of theyr profession pri∣uiledgeth the Cleargie to reprooue the faultes of Princes, and giueth them place among the chiefe Pieres, they are bound, and holie Scripture commandeth them to glorifie God with theyr holie lyues, that theyr holy words may the better edifie men. Sainct Paule setting downe the office of a Bishop (and in that dignitie containeth, the duetie of the 1. Tim. 3. whole Cleargie) sayeth that he must be blamelesse, and so goeth on with many honest vertues, which are well knowne, and I pray God they may be as well followed of the Clear∣gie. Sainct Peter commandeth them to be of so honest con∣uersation among the Gentiles, that where as they backbited Pet. . 2. them as euill doers, they might sée their good workes, and praise God in the day of visitation. A great many that would faine haue an excuse for wickednes, say, that the word of God is the life of the soule, and not the works of the Preacher, so that if the doctrine be pure, it skilleth not if the Diuell preach the same. The word I graunt remaineth pure, but the wor∣king will be to little purpose if it be deliuered by such a Mi∣nister, for the holy Ghost loueth not to accompanie the Di∣uell. I hope this small note shall worke no offence, whiche is not meant to instruct the Cleargie which amply knowe theyr dutyes, but reuerently to shewe theyr error, that are forgetfull of theyr duties. King Phillip of Macedon helde no skorne to be dayly remembred by a Page of his chamber, that he was a mortall man. Pope Sixtus the fourth, that vaunted how he passed Sainct Peter bécause he had golde, siluer, and pretious stones, was not wroath with the beg∣gerlie Frier that aunswered hym he lacked notwithstan∣ding
much of Sainct Peters holynesse: for hée coulde not saie vnto the lame and impotent arise and walke: and certaine∣ly, although the Pope were bluntly crossed, yet he was thereby charitably counselled to labour rather to become holie, then riche, whiche is a speciall dutie in the Clear∣gie: for by theyr godlinesse they please God, and instruct men, when by the abuse of riches they may dishonor the one, and be an euill example to the other. With this admo∣nition of the Frier, the blowe that a Countrey peisant gaue the Archbishop of Cullen, ought to be as patiently receiued of the Cleargie, as the hole tale of the saluage Mylo was of the Senate of Rome. Upon a daye as the Arch∣byshop trauelled accompanied (according to the custome of Germanie) with an armed troupe, a Countrey fellow en∣countred hym with a rude laughter, whiche the Archbi∣shop noting, demaunded what mooued him to laugh so, the fellowe aunswered, to sée Sainct Peter prince of the Pre∣lates, who lyued and dyed poorely, to leaue suche wonder∣full pompe and riches to hys successors: the Archbishop that was a little galled to excuse himselfe, said, my friends, I goe with thys companie, because I am a Duke, as well as a Byshop, wherevppon, the loute doubled his laughter, and boldly sayde, my Lord, I beséech you if the Duke which you speake of were in Hell, where shoulde then be the Archbi∣shop? as who woulde haue sayde, that two professions be∣come not one man, for sinning in the one, he cannot be iusti∣fied Fab. Chro. by the other. King Richard the first laughed when he had gotten a great mae of money to make Hugh Pulath the Bishop of Durham Earle of Northumberland, & chiefe Iu∣stice of England: Sée (quoth the King) what a miracle I can do, I can make of an old Bishop a yong Earle, but his my∣racle turned to the great disworship of God, and mischiefe of the whole Realme: for the prelates by buying temporall ho∣nors (for thys King for money made many prelates Uicounts & Barons) soone learned how to sell the peace and prosperitie
of the Kingdome: this was the sound waie to strengthen the Popes Empyre, and the wicked pollicy that kepte vnder the Gospell, the light and life of saluation, when ambition crept into the Church, zeale fled out of the hart of the Clear∣gie, but which hath wrought the capitoll mischiefe of all, the inequalitie of estates betwéene the highest and lowest of the Prelates, hath brought enuie into the Church, and with enuie a number of heresies and controuersies. Oc∣casion, and millions of mens deathes and damnation, haue opened the venome of thys passion sufficientlie in the Chap∣ter of heresies, and in sundrie other places in the Conquests of Enuy. Disvnion of the Church of all calamities is the most gréeuous, because it mouéth a most mortall warre among men, and eternall torment vnto the soule: God for hys Sonne Iesus sake banishe thys dangerous passion foorth of the Churche, and gyue the spirite of true know∣ledge vnto all the Cleargie, that with mutuall consentes they maye teache one sounde doctrine, to the glorie of GOD, and vniuersall peace and comforte of his people. Amen. CHAP. 4. Of the most honorable calling of the Iudiciall Maie∣strates, of the waightinesse of theyr offices, with examples of Gods heauie iustice inflicted vppon par∣tiall Iudges. IN all good gouerments, necessitie hath taught princes where vertue is found, to honor it: and questionles, so waigh∣tie are the affaires of a Common∣wealth, and so holie the iudgements of iustice, as the nobilitie or innobilitie, of the person not respected. The Ma∣gistrates or Ministers of these charges
ought to be chosen by the counsell that Iethro the Priest gaue vnto hys sonne in lawe Moyses, which was, that he shoulde Exod. 18. choose among the people vertuous men, and such as feare God, true men hating couetousnesse, and make them heads ouer the people, and let them iudge the people at all seasons, &c. The waightinesse of which charge commandeth a hye honour and reuerence to be giuen to the Magistrate, who in the place of iustice, is the image of the Prince. And in all good Gouerments, the soueraigne Magistrate hath hys place next vnto the Prince. In Rome the Senators were called the Fathers of the Common wealth, and as the Fa∣ther is honored and reuerenced of his sonne, so were they of the people. The Maiestrates or Philosophers of Greece were called Sages, whose wisedomes were so reuerenced, as nothing was done concerning warre or peace but what they allowed. The office of the Magistrate according to the Psalmist, is to defende the poore and fatherlesse, and to sée that such as Psal. 8. bée in néede and necessitie, may haue right, and as King Lamuell setteth downe, they must bée aduocates for the doombe, they must open theyr mouthes to defend the thing that is lawfull and right: and accordyng to the counsell of Aristotle, in theyr iudgementes they must bée ruled neyther by loue, hatred, or gaine. That these duties may bée truely ministred, Cicero sayeth, that Sophocles coun∣selled Offic. . Pericles to make choise of Iudges that had not onely theyr handes, but theyr eyes chaste and continent. It beho∣ueth that Iudges do not buy theyr offices, for as Alexander Seuerus sayeth, he that buieth, must néedes sell, and there∣fore Lampr. de vi Alexand. sayeth he I will suffer no Merchants of Estate, for if (quoth he) I suffer the one, I must néedes indure the other, as a matter too seuere to punish him that buyeth, although he selleth. In Fraunce all the offices of iustice are solde, in Englande they are fréely geuen: in the one, I knowe the administration is corrupt, I pray God the other be without faulte. Plato was so curious in the choise of iudiciall officers,
as he gaue counsell to giue no dignitie or offices to the am∣bitious, or to such as coueted or sought them, but vnto such as méerely refused them: and aboue all he forewarned to make choyse of none that naturally were barbarous, rude, or rusticke, but of people that were ciuill, milde, iust, and wise, the which he figuratiuely compared vnto dogs, which are ordained to defende the shéepe, and to chase awaye the Wolfe. In Calcydone there was a lawe that néedie and vnworthie persons shoulde beare no office: but contrary∣wise, A vvorthy law in Calcydone. such as contemned riches, and contented to be inri∣ched with most knowledge: and such manner of men were Curius, Fabritius, and Phocion. Alexander the Great tea∣cheth Iudges to iudge vprightly, by this obseruance, when any man complained, he stopped one of his eares to heare the aunswere of the defendant: and truely, iustice is neuer rightly administred, where the Iudge giueth hys sentence before lawfull conuiction. It is a place of much honor to be a Iudiciall Magistrate, but the temptation of money is so swéete, as when the world was nothing so corrupt in these dayes, the Poet was driuen to sing: Munera crede mihi capiunt hominesque deosque. In English. Beleeue me, giftes do catch both Gods and men. Diogenes béeing asked what thing an office was, said, it was a dangerous beast, for (quoth he) it is as hard a matter for the Iudges of the people to kéepe theyr consciences sound, as barefooted for a man to walke vpon sharpe stones vnhurt, or to thrust his hand into the fire, without the burning there∣of. In all good gouerments there euermore haue béene posi∣tiue lawes to bridle the iniustice of Iudiciall Maiestrates. The false Iudges that accused Susanna were stoned to death. Alexander Seuerus caused the corrupt Maiestrate Turinus to be smoothered with the smoke of wette stubble, during whose execution, one cryed, With fume let him dye, that fumes hath solde. Thys Alexander defrayed the charge of all the Iudges with an honorable allowance: that theyr
offence might be without excuse, and theyr punishmente without mercie, if they did iniustice for money. The sen∣tence that King Cambyses gaue vpon a corrupt Iudge, de∣serueth eternall memorie, he caused hym to be flayed, and with hys skinne he couered a iudiciall Chaire, in which he placed the Iudges sonne to occupie the office of hys Father: and to feare him from briberie and all partialitie (besides the continuall sight of his fathers skinne) Cambyses gaue hym Iohan. de proym. de sum. predi. this sharpe item: Sede sedens ista iudex inflexibilis sta. Sit tibi lucerna: lux: lex: pellisque paterna. A manibus reseces munus: ab aure preces. In English. Thou Iudge that sittest in this seate, firmely sit therein, And for thy light take thou the light: the lawe: and fathers skin. Superfluous bribes cut from thy ruling hand, And in thy eares let no intreatie stand. I néede not inlarge this Chapter with the positiue lawes of other Countreys, to hinder (as much, as pollicy may) the iniustice of Iudges, our English gouerment hath had a spe∣ciall care to kéepe the seate of iustice from the staine of iniu∣stice. For to preuent that authoritie may not outcountenance right, neyther Lord nor any other person may sit with the Iudges in open Sises, vpon paine of a great forfeiture to the 20. R. 2. 3. Quéene. To preuent that affection nor hatred may hinder iustice, no 8. R. 2. 2. 33. H. S. 24. man may be iudge of Assise in the place where he was borne or is resident, vpon the paine for euerie offence 100. pound. Iustice shall be solde, deferred, or denied to no man, and the Iustices of any bench or Court whatsoeuer shall not let to execute the common lawe for any commaundement that shall come vnto them vnder the great Seale, or priuie 9. H. 3. 29. 14. Ed. 3. 14. Seale: manye other penall charges are sette downe
vnto Iudges to binde them to the true administration of iu∣stice, and all to little purpose, if the Iudge haue not the feare of God before his eyes: for positiue lawes, as the sage Cleo∣bulus sayeth, are like vnto cobwebs, through which the her∣nets breake when the little flies are meashed. The lawe of man may stay iniustice, but the awe of God is only of force to banish it. You Iudges are Gods vpon the earth, listen then what the God of heauen sayeth vnto you: I say vnto you that you are Gods, but you shall dye like men. This was the Psal. 82. charge of Moyses: Iudge righteously betweene euery man, . . and his brother, and the stranger that is with him, so that you know no fces in iudgement, but heare the small as well as the great, and be afraid of no man, for the iudgement is the Lords. The iudgement thus being the Lords, Iudges ought to be very circumspect to administer iustice without respect of persons: for his vengeance dayly maketh it knowne, that no∣thing is more odious vnto him then iniustice, corruption, and cruelty: they are the principall causes that God repented that he euer made man, & which moued him to destroy the whole world with water. God by his Prophet saith, that he will Genes. 6. roote out the Iudge, it followeth why, because he hath solde Amos. . the righteous for money, and the poore for showes. Daniel said vnto the false Iudges that wrongfully accused & condem∣ned Susanna, The messenger of the Lord standeth waiting with the sword to cut you in peeces. I coulde recite many Daniel. 13. fearefull examples, to witnes that Gods vengeance swiftly followeth the Iudge, that by partiall iudgement either vn∣doeth the poore, or sheddeth giltles blood. Among ye rest I haue selected these speciall examples following, to admonish, or ra∣ther to assure all iudicial estates, that God neuer faileth to re∣uenge their iniuries that in the bitternes of their sorrow de∣maund his iustice. At such time as the Templers were de∣stroied, a Knight of that order, a Napolitane borne, by the Pet. mes. de cho. emo. generall iudgement of the people, was at ye pursuite of Philip le Bel King of Fraunce, vniustly put to death by the iudge∣ment of Pope Clement the fifth: the poore Templar going
to execution, behelde Pope Clement and Philip le bel at a window, who in the bitternesse of his sorrow sodainly cryed out, Most cruel Clement, since there is no worldly iudge, be∣fore whom I may appeale to reuoke thy most cruell and vn∣iust sentence pronounced against me, at the malitious pur∣suit of Philip of France, I therefore appeale thée and Philip both, as most wicked iudges, before ye iust iudge Iesus Christ, within one yeare to answere my blood which you most impi∣ously shed, before whome I oppose my cause, which shall de∣termine it without loue, gaine, or dread which blinded you: the knight was executed according to his iudgement, and about the time of his demaunde (no doubt, but by Gods iust iudgement). The Pope dyed of an extreame paine of the sto∣make, and in the like manner dyed Philip of France: sembla∣ble was the ende of Ferdinando the fourth, king of Castile, who putting to death two knights, more of displeasure than iustice, when neither teares nor prayers aided their innocen∣cie, they cited the saide king to appeare before the tribunall seate of Christ, within thirtie dayes: the last whereof king Ferdinando (attached by death) failed not to make his an∣swere. Baptista Fulgotius writeth, that a Captaine of the Gallies of Genes, who making a course vpon the seas, tooke a foist of Catelong, in which there was a Captaine that ne∣uer offered wrong vnto the Geneuoies: notwithstanding through the hatred the Geneuoyes bare vnto the Cattelans, hée commaunded that the captaine being taken prisoner, shoulde bee hanged: who in shedding manie teares, re∣quired that his euer well vsing of the Geneuoies might repeale the iniust sentence of death pronounced vppon him: but in the ende finding no grace, hee repaired to deuine iustice, and tolde the cruell Captaine, that synce he woulde procéede to execution of his bloodie iudgement, he appealed him by a certain day, before god who chastiseth vniust iudges, to render an account of his hard iudgement, at which day the Geneuoy Captaine failed not his apparance. Many other examples might be produced, but this is of most speciall me∣mory
of the Archbyshop of Magonce in Almaine, whose in∣iurie was reuenged on the whole Citie of Magonce. As the renowned Poet Gontier in the life of the Emperour Frede∣rick the first, and the the Bishop Conradus in his historie of diuers accidents, reporteth, The sum whereof followeth. In Gont. de vit. Fred. 1. the Citie of Magonce in the yeare of our Lord, 1150. or there about, there was an Archbishop, named Henry, a man bew∣tified with al maner of vertues: This Archbishop like a good shepheard, seuerely corrected al publike sins, & hauing a great care of his flocke, was very iealous of the honor of God, and of the loue of his neighbour, through enuie whereof the wic∣ked bare him a mortall grudge, and by false accusations accu∣sed him before the Pope of disabilitie, and many other grie∣uous crimes. The Pope notwithstanding that he alwayes reputed him, a holy and a iust man, neuertheles could not de∣nie his accusors audience. The Bishop hauing aduertisment of these enuious suggestions, to purge his innocency, chewsed among his friends a priest whom he had much aduanced, and especially loued, named Arnold. This Arnold being rich of spirit, Eloquence, and mony: so soone as he arryued at Rome pricked forward by the diuel, studied how to depriue his Lord of this dignitie, and to seate himselfe in the Archbishopricke. And to come by the same, he subborned two lewd Cardinals with a great sum of money: afterwards instéede of fauora∣ble speaking in his Masters behalfe, he spake much against him: saying, that he was more bounde to God, and the truth, then vnto men: and that in verie trueth the Archbyshop was guiltie of the accusation laide against him, by meanes where∣of the Pope was moued, and abused with the report: and therefore to procéede iudicially against the innocent Bishop: hée sent the two Cardinals, confederate with Arnold, into Almaine, who being ariued at Magonce, commaunded the Archbishop before them, and so partially heard the matter, but the one gaue sentence against him, by meanes whereof, he was depriued of his dignitie, and Arnold (who had solde him as Iudas did our sauiour Christ) was placed in his place:
this iudgement being pronounced, the Archbishop Henrie there present deliuered these words. God knoweth that I am vniustly condemned: neuerthelesse I haue little care to ap∣peale from your sentence, for that you shalbe sooner beléeued in your leasings, than I in deliuering of the truth: for this cause I receiue your iudgement, before the iust, and eternall Iudge which is Iesus Christ, before whom I adiorne you: The Iudges hearing the same, began to smile and bad him go before and they would follow after: This sentence was gi∣uen in the yeare of our Lord a thousand one hundred fifty sixe. The Archbishop thus depriued, sustained his iniurie with great patience, and liued the residue of his life in a Monaste∣rie, to conclude God would not suffer this wickednesse vnpu∣nished, to the ende that the innocencie of the iust might bée knowne, one yeare and a halfe afterwards, Henry died in his Monestarie, and as it is to be hoped, mounted into the glorie he so desired. The newes of his death being come to Rome, the two Cardinals vppon a day being mearie together, saide that they failed to finde the Archbishop Henrie: but within few dayes after, the one of the two was so soundly strocken, by one of his owne people, that his intrailes issued out at his fundament, and so miserablie dyed. The other grinding of his téeth, and tearing, and eating his hands, dyed mad. Touching Arnold, for his cruelties, and seditions which he intertained among the people, he was so much hated, that one day being set in a Monestarie, hée was slaine, and after left thrée dayes among the diches of the Citie, where all the people men and women, exercised vppon his bodie, all the cruelties that might be possiblie inuented. Who so that is curious of more examples touching Gods seuere punishments inflicted vppon partiall iudges, next vnto the sacred Byble, let him search the Actes and Monuments of the Church, collected by the re∣uerent deuine M. Iohn Fox, and he shalbe liberally, and pro∣fitably satisfied, and so I end this Chapter.
CHAP. 5. Of the worthy reputation, of the Iustisers (whom we com∣monly call Iustices) of Peace: and of the publike benefite of their seruice being duely administred. THere néede no other demonstration, to shew the worthinesse of their cal∣ling, that are Iustisers of Peace, then the signification of their office distri∣bution, or administration of the right pretious blessing Peace. They are numbred among the eight beatitudes that are peacemakers: For they shal∣be . E. 3. 16. called the children of God. The greatest peare of Eng∣land taketh not scorne of the office: yea by statute is chosen for that seruice, and to the intent that necessitie in such as lack liuing, may be no cause of iniustice, it is prouided that no per∣son, that cannot dispend xx. pound land by the yeare shalbe a Iustiser of Peace, vnlesse they be certain celected men: Bar∣rators, and men of euill name shall not be assigned Iusticers 18. H. 6. 11. of Peace: Trespasses committed and specified in the greatest part of the penal lawes, are committed to their examination, . E. 3. 16. and determination. M. Lambeard and others haue written learnedly and largely of the administration of this office ac∣cording to Law, but much (moreouer) may be said, of the ad∣ministration thereof, according to Christian charitie and Iu∣stice. The diligence of the Iusticers of Peace, is of power to kéepe the Iudges idle in Westminster Hall, and the plow to be alwayes occupied in the Countrie: the true admi∣nistration of Peace, is as well to appease ye discords of neigh∣bors, as to aprehend felons and euill liuers. All controuersies in Law, grow either of violent oppression, stubborne mallice, or manifest folly: if the sute procéede of violent oppression, what oppressor will be so cruell as to withstand the good me∣diation of these maiestrates, who for the most part are the
principall men of the sheare: if of stubborne mallice, the ac∣cord that they shall make, wilbe farre more godly and profi∣table, than the agréement of the Law: for Law (for the most part) endeth controuersies, and increaseth mallice, when a friendly agréement determineth both, and if the matter be of light reckoning, it wil grow to a hauie charge in Law: which a peaceable mediation would charitablie end. Almost there is no matter tried by law without this censure, It is pittie, it was not ended by friends: and truely in Christian equitie, this pittie, is a blame in the Iustisers of Peace, that they wil not looke into the discorde of neighbours, which is a breach of Christian Peace: and labour to accord them, which is a point of their duetie. The Right noble Lord, Francis late Earle of The godly ex∣ample of the late Earle of Bedford. Bedford (whose life and death, is a myrrour, of true honour, and Christian nobility) when he liued in the westerne parts, in short time, so abredged the number of Nysi prius, as the Lawers murmured against his Charitie: but so honorable was the slaunder, as I may with charitie wish, that the ex∣ample generally through England would begger their facul∣tie: The Reuerend Iudge, the late Lord Dyer, would vsually Saying of the Lord Dyer. say, if there came any controuersies of poore men to be tried at the assises, that ye parties were wilfull, or their neighbors without charitie, because their sutes were not quietly ended. I heard a question once moued, what was the cause that there were so many bad Lawiers? which was presently answered A question. because there were so few good preachers: In déede although most ministers will generally speake against discord of nigh∣bors in the Church, few of them do trauell to bring peace vn∣to their houses: their godly perswasions no doubt may profite with the honester sort, but the credite and authoritie of the other Maiestrate will preuaile against the most obstinate wrangler: I know in Bedfordshire, and in some other pla∣ces, A charitable exercise. that once a wéeke sundrie of the principall maiestrates, and of the chiefe deuines méete, the one to instruct the people in the rules of Christianitie, and the other to appease the con∣trouersies of neighbours: If the example were generall this
generall benefite would follow, the oppressor would forbeare to doe iniurie for feare of shame: and the oppressed shoulds haue ease without expence of money. I am bound reuerently to confesse, that the honour and mercie of the Chancery Law, Honour of the Chancery Law. is a fountaine of compassion and sucker, for oppressed sup∣pliants: but the court is so pestered with iniuries, as com∣mon course kéepeth a man néere hand foure yeares from iudi∣tiall hearing: in which space as the tale goeth of a condem∣ned man that vndertooke within tenne yeares to make a Ty∣rants Ape to speake, vppon this hope, that before the time were expired, the Tyrant, the Ape, or himselfe might hap∣ly die, so the opressor hopeth, by the complainants expence, toile, and lacke of friends in such a lingring sute, to bring him to the agréement of his pleasure. Necessitie maketh many of these conclusions, contrarie to the law of charitie and good conscience, which the diligence (and charge in duetie) of these popular Maiestrates, would administer, to the glorie of god, and generall peace and commoditie of men. CHAP. 6. Of the worthy reputation, of the godly Lawier, and the especiall benefite of his seruice, in the common wealth. THE enuious (that raise, mispleasing questions of the most morrall institu∣tions, as the Spider draweth poison out of the swéetest flower) are like inough to slaunder my honest intent concerning the former Chapter: with a suggestion, that I couertly reproue Lawiers, and reproch the vertue of the Law: but their reasons censured by the wise, will proue as vaine, as their heads are void of vertue: no man that hath sense, will say, that to prescribe rules of health, it is any dis∣credite to Phisicke, or dishonour to the Phisition: when the
health of man sheweth the reputation of either, as weake is his iudgement, that saieth a perswation to concorde and qui∣etnesse among neighbours, is either a reproch to Law, or blame to Lawiers, when the commendation of the one, and office of the other, is to administer publike peace and prospe∣ritie. The pollicy of this gouernement, hath made especiall choise of Lawiers, to be Iusticers of Peace: and for their profession they are abled for this commission, albeit they can∣not spende the yearely lande contained in the statute. For∣tescue 18. H. 6. 11. saieth, that humaine Lawes are no other, than rules Fort. sol. 11. that instruct men, to do Iustice: it then followeth that Law∣ers are the principall instruments and amners of iustice: yea so necessarie is the studie and knowledge of the Lawe, as a man can hardlie discharge his duetie to God, his Prince, and countrie, that is ignorant in the Lawes of the Realme: The Romaines when they had banished their Tyrannous kings, and had erected their Aristocratia or Decemuirate go∣uernement, Tit.  lib . they trusted to the strength of their Lawes, the which faire written in tenne tables, they caused to be set vp in the market place, to the intent that ignorance might be no plea for any man that trespassed against the weale publicke. In all good gouernements there is a common Maxime, Non excust ignorantia iuris. The ignorance of the Lawe excuseth not: And in this blessed gouernement, that euerie man might knowe his duetie, the greatest part of the penal lawes ought to bée plainely opened vnto the multitude, by the Iu∣sticers or Iustices of Peace at their quarter Sessions, and the like is the charge of Stewards in their Leates, that the people may knowe the Lawes which they are bound to obey, so that it were an vnexcusable folly, to reproch the Lawe which according to the iudgement of Fortescue is an vncor∣rupt holinesse, and a daungerous madnesse to enuie general∣ly Fol. 8. against Lawiers, who are honored with right reuerende dignities in the common wealth: and yet with fauour let the Trueth bee spoken, from thinges of the greatest vertue, the worst vices are growne.
Religion is the holiest of holy things, and yet Heresie of sins the most damnable, procéedeth of the wresting of holy scrip∣tures. Euen so Lawe, which in trueth containeth the verie iudgements of Iustice, vnto couetous, and naughtie persons, openeth an hundred gappes, to robbe and vndoe their poore neighbours: and truely vpon the temptation of their opressi∣ons, a man (sauing the honor of the good) may say by lawyers as Cicero did by Poets, when he alowed the sentence of Pla∣to: and yet Cicero honoured good Poets, as appeareth by his Oration for the Poet Archias, in which he perswaded the Ci∣tizens Cic. pro Archia Poeta. to receiue him, as one that would greatly honour and benifite the Citie. The like reputation and reuerence, I (and all good men ought to) giue to godly lawiers: how be it my censure is, that next vnto the heriticke, the wicked Lawier is the most daungerous person. CHAP. 7. Of the honest reputation of the Yemonry, or husbandmen, the commoditie of their seruice, their aptnesse to rebel∣lion, with a direction for their quietnesse, and commo∣ditie. WHO so shall consideratiuely looke in∣to the necessarie seruice of the Yemen and husbandmen of England, he may with the graue Cato rightly cal them Aratores, & optimos ciues in republica. Tyllers of the ground, and best Citi∣zens in a common wealth: and as their trauell and continual labor pro∣fiteth, or more properly féedeth the whole Realme: so their inconstant and seditious humors, are apt vppon euery light temptation to worke the disturbance of the whole Realme, and therefore the pollicie of our gouernment, within the com∣passe of euery foure or fiue mile, in most shires hath appointed some one of the better sort of the Gentlemen to be a Iusticer
of peace among them, who (as is before showne) is bounde to haue an eye vnto their behauiours, and an eare readie to heare and appease their murmurings: and truely if any good counsaile may take place among the stubborne multitude, besides the admonition of sacred Scripture, which in mani places commaundeth obedience, and forbiddeth rebellion: the assurednesse of their myserie, vndoing and vtter confution, forbiddeth them to runne from the motion of sedition, as swift (if it were possible) as the fearefull Hare doth from the hun∣grie Grayhounde, for their daunger is farre more apparent, the Hare many times saueth her selfe, by the recouerie of some woode, but the poore and popular rebell lyeth open to all destruction. Noble men, Gentlemen, and the better sort, if they sée themselues in perrill (as they are neuer safe that re∣bell) they haue swift horse, secreat friends, and many couerts to shrowd them: but the shiftlesse countrie men haue no suc∣ker but the princes mercie, which they neither deserue, nor yet haue friends to acquire the same: if there were not innu∣merable examples to proue that they headlong runne vppon their destruction, and swiftly flie from their safetie and pro∣fite: it were a thing almost vnpossible, that the meanest sort of men would be drawne into rebellion. I haue in many pla∣ces of my booke shewen sundrie examples of their vnconstan∣cie, and therefore heere will onely set downe what Chauser writeth of their dispositions vnder. Osterne people, vniust, and vntrue, Ay vndiscreete, and chaunging as a fane, Delyting euer in rumors that be new: For like the Moone you euer wax and wane, Your reason halteth, your iudgement is lame Your dome is false, your constance euil preueth. A ful great foole is he that on you leueth. But questionlesse this mutabilitie, and anke-ward dispo∣sition of the multitude, would be much reformed if the Maie∣strates, and godly mynisters would sufficiently remember
them, of their dueties towards God, their Prince, and coun∣trie. It is great pittie that such profitable members in a common wealth should runne into daunger of disloyaltie, for lacke of good instruction: yea it is great pittie (vnlesse in time of warre) that they should be carried farre from their labor: a poore countrie man that vseth a Lawers chamber, is in as great a daunger as a Lambe that haunteth a Foxes den: for how righteous so euer his cause be, yet the poore sutor is sure to sing before his matter be ended. Law measures right, with toyle, expence, and griefe. There are many stoppes before a matter come to iudgement and many nyce quillets to ouerthrowe a good matter, so that if the countrie man wil direct his controuersie by this follow∣ing compasse, hée shall finde more profite in the same, than in the counsell of the best Seriaunt, and first of all I wish him to way the working of giftes, by this sequele. A poore man once, a Iudge besought, to iudge aright his cause, And with a glasse of Oyle salutes, this iudger of the lawes. My friend quoth he, thy cause is good, he glad away did trudge, A non his wealthy foe did come, before this partiall iudge. A Hog well fedde, the churle presents, and craues a straine of law, The hog receiud, the poore mans right, was iudg'd not worth a straw. Therewith he cri'de O partiall iudge, thy dome hath me vndone▪ When Oyle I gaue my cause was good, but now to ruine runne. Poore man quoth he I thee forgot, and see thy cause of foile, A Hog came since into my house, and brake thy glasse of Oyle. Learne friends by this this read of me, smal helpes a righteous cause, When giftes do catch, both Gods & men, & friendship endeth laws. This example is no other than a Morrall fore-warning vnto the inferiour sort, to forbeare controuersie with men mightier than themselues, least after much expence of mony they make but a badde ende, of a good cause, we are counsel∣led in holy Scripture not to go to Lawe, with men mightier
then our selues, least we be more discomforted, with an vn∣sentence, than with an iniurious oppression. Lawe is the supporter of all well gouerned Common weales, necessarie for al men, but not behoueful, for the poore to follow: in great mens controuersies, a néedful instrument, in poore mens wrongs, a remedie too violent. Iudges and other mynisters of the Law, in the due admi∣nistration of their callings, deserue great honour, reuerence, and reputation: for that Periurie, Oppression, and all man∣ner of deceit goeth before them, that their eyes may beholde their actions of whose forfatures they are iudges: and in their footesteps, Vertue, Truth, and good Conscience, ready with the following multitude familiarly to conuerse: but sinne which with the first fall of Adam rose hath made gaine so swéete, and corruption so bolde, as now before a great num∣ber of them, vpright-dealing in vaine continually knéeleth for intertainement, and in their liueries all manner of de∣ceit squareth among the multitude. Good and profitable Lawes, were so wrested in Glebu∣lus time, a great Philosopher and one of the seuen sages, as hee saide Lawes were like vnto Copwebes, through which great Harnets broke, when the little flies were menshed. Pythagoras compareth Lawe vnto a backe sworde, which smote the greater powers with the blunt, and the mea∣ner sort with the eadge. By the wresting of Law, and other partiall workings, wee haue in Englande these by say∣ings, Might mastereth right: The Law is ended as a man Sir Thom. S  de repub. anglo is friended: A good purse, is better than a iust cause &c. The wise Cato made this aunswere to one, that woulde haue the pleading place in Rome to bee couered with Canuas, like vnto the Theators, for that the heate of the sunne was verie hurtefull for the pleaders and their Clyantes heades. Nay (quoath Cato) for my parte, I rather wishe, that all the wayes to the place of
pleading were cast ouer with Galthropes, that the féete of such as loue so well pleading, shoulde feele so much paines of those prickes in going thither, as their heades doe of the sunne in tarrying there: He meant they were but idle, whot heades, busie bodies, and troublesome men in a Common wealth that did so nourish pleading: Good labourers and quiet men, coulde bée content to ende their matters at home, by iudgement of their neighbours and kinsefolke without spending so their money vppon procurers and aduocates, whom wée call Attorneys, Counsellers, Sergeants, and ge∣nerally men of Lawe. Those hée accounteth profitable Citi∣zens, who attende their honest labour and businesse at home, and not stande wayting and gaping vppon their Rolles, and Processe in the Lawe: as for the other by his iudgement it was no matter what mischiefe they suffered. This the graue learned man Sir Thomas Smith, writeth in his booke De republica Anglorum: and further saieth, That these bu∣sie heades, and inuentours of trouble, are men euen permit∣ted of God like Flyes, Lyse, and other vermine, to disquiet them, who woulde imploy themselues vppon better busi∣nesse, and more necessarie for the common wealth. These men are hated and feared of their neighbours, loued and ai∣ded of them which gaine by Proces, and waxe fatte by the expence of others: In the blame of these make-bates (as our English phrase is) farre is it from my intent, as in sun∣drie places I protest to scandilize the most necessarie vse of Lawe, or to reproch the good Lawiers. For if necessitie in∣uentris of all Artes, Polycies, and Mecanicall craftes, giueth honour to the Phisition of our corporall bodies, no doubt shée commaundeth a more larger regarde, and reue∣rence to bée giuen to the Phisition of the politicke body, who is the Lawier. Notwithstanding as the Medicine is of more auaile that preserueth health, than that which cureth sickenesse: Euen so the meane that kéepeth neighbours in loue, peace, and Charitie, is more profitable than the authoritie that accordeth controuersies, is necessarie. For as
after the healing of a wound, there remaineth a scarre: euen so after the agréement of Law, there abideth mallice, which lying hidde like fire vnder ashes, kindleth fresh mallice, and neuer intertaineth faithfull amitie: It is then greatly to be pittied, that these simple men for the matter of fiue shillings should be vexed, arested, brought vp to Westminster Hall, and halfe vndone at the suite of troblesome persons, of the spoyles of these good men, a great number, of the swarmes of Attourneyes, and petifoggers liue. The gratious pollicie A gratious pol∣licie abused. of this Realme, for the ease of these poore men; hath appoin∣ted in euerie countie Courtes, and giueth libertie to Lords of Manners, to holde Plea of actions vnder fortie shillings debt, but the corruption of those Courts are such, and the comming of these persons so pleasing, as almost euerie sun∣day, Latitates, prie about Countrie Churches for poore men: whereof many owe not the price of the Proces, and before the sute be ended, it oftentimes falleth out, that the plain∣tife, and defendant are both losers, and that these daungerous make-bates liue vppon their goodes, and painefull labours. This mischiefe woulde bée much eased, if charitie raigned a∣mong neighbours, or a godly care among the ministers of the Church, in trauailing to appease the discords of their pa∣rissioners, but especially as I here before haue saide: If the better sort of Gentlemen, and Iusticers of Peace, woulde take paines in this godly exercise: whose perswasions no doubt might easily ouercome the most stubborne, and con∣uaie both benefite and quietnesse to either partie, and no doubt if the popular sort will be counselled for their profite and quietnesse, they shall finde these Maiestrates readie to redresse their iniuries so farre as Law and charitable per∣swation will helpe them.
CHAP. 8. Of the disposition and destruction of Atheists machiuilli∣ans and Timepleasers, with sundrie examples to the same purpose. THe Prophet shewes, the foole in heart, doth say there is no God, In truth Gods iustice proues them fooles that little feare his Rod. But God except, who sees his thoughts and spewes him from his mouth. This foole the Atheist doth beguile, old age as wel as youth. He Protew-like doth shape himselfe, according to the time. He (wretch) is neither whot nor cold, but cleaueth like to slime. To the affections of the great, if fortune change their state, He sets his foote vpon their throtes, of whom he fauned late. He knowes that gods, which rule on earth, haue humors like to men Not grosly, closely in his words, sweete flattery he doth blen. He reads, and doth regard these faults, Loue, hate, and priuate gain Through partiall domes, euen Iustice seate, with poore mens teares doth staine. He knowes lords letters beare a swinge, sic volo keepes in awe. And Munera speaks not for the poore, that makes & marreth law. He knowes as Diamonds set in brasse, haue but a slender grace, So vertue in a poore attire, sits in the meanest place. And therefore, clothed all in pride, aboue he takes his seate. And hath his tongue prepard to please the humors of the great. Where fortune smiles, he euer faunes, and strongest parts doth take, Where fortune frownes, father, brother, and friend he doth forsake. The scripture saith, this cursed wretch, is neither whot, nor cold, His conscience feeleth no remorce, in murthering yong or old. The stranger and the farthest borne, he followes to be great, And helpes, to cut his neighbours throte, his neighbors goods to get.
The widdowes teares, and Orphants spoile, he grieues not to behold, But onely seekes to please himselfe, and hath no God but gold. Religion yet to serue his turne, his cloake he still doth make: VVhen as his Zeale is like a fane, that euerie wind doth shake. This wretch, the prophet holds a foole: and so he doth him call: VVhose building grounded all on wit, vpon his shoulders fall. Examples of the miserable ends of Atheistes &c. As I haue said, the (Atheists I meane) are armed with all worldlie pollicies of wit, to strengthen their purposes, & are the instruments in the practises of great Princes, these bee they that followed Abimilech when he murthered threescore Iudges 9. and eight of his brethren: these be the firebrandes of the Pope and the two edged sword of Tyrauntes. If they bee instru∣ments of anie goodnesse, their trauell is not of zeale, if they bee vsed in anie mischiefe they outrage without pitie: people farre more accursed then Pagans, for they hold a kinde of re∣ligion, and by the working of nature deale charitablie with their neighbours. But the reprobate Atheists contemne all religion, feare no God, and although they faine to please all men, yet they trulie loue not their owne kindred: for bee it to depose their Soueraigne, to spoile their Countrie, and to murther their dearest friendes, if they see likelihood in thier Treasons, they giue consent, if hope of aduauncement, they first set hand to their sword. But you monsters of humanitie, that are drunken with the strength of your owne wittes, and are be∣witched with the hopefull successe of your pollicies, esteeme it for sound counsaile that I giue you to vnderstande, that the eternal God, whom you neither feare, loue, nor do acknow∣ledge, seeth all your wicked pollicies in his vengeance, and frustrateth them with his mercie, he searcheth the reines and Ierom. 27. Reuel. 2. heartes, and will giue to euerie man according to his works. If you dig a pit to burie the innocent, looke to fall into it your selues: if you rayse a gallowes to hang them, be you sure, that you shall suffer thereupon: if you edge your sword to pearce
their hearts: trust to it your own intrailes will be the sheath thereof. What you doe, or would doe vnto them, shalbe done vnto you. Hamon set vp a payre of gallowes to hang Mardo∣cheus the Iew, and he and his tenne sonnes, did die thereon. The false Iudges that sought the life of chast Susanna, were themselues stoned to death. Adonibezek that had cut off the thombes and great toes of thrée score and tenne kings, & had fedde them with Crombes vnder his table, being taken in battaile by Iuda chiefe of the Army of the Israelites, had his own hands & toes cut off, who confessing that God had done by him as he did by others, miserably died. If you Atheists re∣gard not these examples in scriptures because you studie not Profane exam∣ples of Atheists punished. the sacred Bible, looke into the examples of prophane Crona∣cles and histories of time, from whence you fetch you pol∣licies and cunning experiments: and you shall sée in all ages, howe God returned the mischiefes of the wicked, in∣to their owne bowels. Diomede fedde his horses with the flesh of men, and Hercules made Diomede foode for his owne Horses. Arnutius Peterculus hearing that the tyrant Amylius offered great rewards to him that coulde deuise any new kind of torture, presented the tyrant with a brasen horse, that he had inuented. Amilius iust in this cruelty, made him first to suffer the pains which he had prepared for others. The like was the rewarde of Perillus, who presented the tyrant Phalaris with a Bul, which being heate with fire, with the outcrie of the poore patients woulde bellowe like a Bull. Apius Claudius called the prisons the proper houses of the poore people, but he himselfe by the commaundement of the Tribune of the people, was throwen into prison, where hée died among théeues and murtherers. The Emperour Cali∣gula was a notable Atheist, and woulde in his vngodly acti∣ons alwayes dispight the Gods, but in the end as Sweronius testifieth, hée durst not repose in the night, he was so terrified with horrible visions, and he that so boldly misprised the gods at the smallest lightning and clap of thunder, would in the night, hide himselfe vnder bedde, and in the day, in the most
obscure corner, in fine, he was violentlie slaine by Chereus, Cornelius, Sabin, and other theyr confederates. Although the Heathen people worshipped not the true God, yet he se∣uearely punished the contemners of theyr superstitious Re∣ligion, not honoring any other. Pausanius reporteth, that in the Citie of Cabira in Boetia, Pausan. lib. 9. a mile distant from Thebes, there was a Temple dedicated to Ceres, into which all men were defended to enter saue the Cabirians, it fell out that Mardonius one of Xerxes Cap∣taines with his army entred to spoile the same of a greate quantitie of treasure, but of the suddaine Mardonius and his companie were assailed with such madnesse, as leaping from high mountaines, clifts, and rocks, they all died miserablie. The like destruction happened to the souldiers of Alexander the Great, who hauing by force taken the Citie of Thebes, as they were at the point to enter the Temple, they were sud∣dainely stroken and slaine by thunder from heauen. Phlegius King of Orchomenia not long after that he had rifled the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, and had slaine Philamon, that with a strong power came to reskew the same, had the greatest part of his Countrey destroied with an earthquake, and his people which were not slaine with strie dartes from heauen, soone after died of the pestilence: for which sacriledge and contempt of the Gods, Virgill supposeth that Phlegias is Aeneyd. 6. wonderfully tormented, and thus complayneth in Hell. — Phlegias miserimus omnes Admonet, & magna testatur voce per vmbras Discite iustitiam moniti & non temnere diuos. In English. Phlegias the most wretched of all. To all men thus with strained voice, frō shadowes dark doth rore Be counselled, true iustice vse, & Gods contemne no more. The Sabarites desirous to knowe the continuance of the felicitie both of themselues, and of their Citie, for their better knowledge counselled with the Oracle at Delphos, to whom Apollo the Pithian made aunswere, your land shall go to ruine, and your felicitie haue an ende, when you begin to
make more account of men then of the Gods. The Ambas∣sadours vppon this answere, assured the Sabarites that their felicitie was perpetual: persuading themselues, that it was a thing almost impossible, that there should be more reuerence giuen vnto men, then vnto the Gods. But it fell out not long after, that a Citizen beate his slaue neere vnto the Temple, who for his refuge fledde into the Temple, mounted the Al∣tar, Antho. Verd de diui. lect. 173. and imbraced the Idoll, from whence his master vnre∣uerentlie plucked him and gaue him many fresh blowes: the bondman escaped again, and ran for his last succour vnto the tombe of his masters father: who for the reuerence hee bare to his father, not onlie forbeare to punishe him, but cleerelie forgaue his bondman his fault: which Amyris one of the for∣mer Ambassadours seeing, gaue the Citizens warning that the time of the Oracles aunswere was accomplished: who for his labor was accounted a foole: wherupon he counterfei∣ted himselfe to be forth of his wits: and in this fained mad∣nesse hee sold all his goods in the market place: and hauing got together a great masse of monie: hee went and dwelled among the Moores, waiting still for the newes of his coun∣tries destruction: and according to his expectation the citie of Sabyra, was shortlie after leuiled with the grounde. The armie of Cambises being 50000. with outragious stormes and tempestes was destroied: whose purpose was to sacke Iustin. lib. 1. the temple of Hamon. All they that were with the Consull Q. Cepion, at the pillage of the Temples of Tholouse in Aul. gel. lib. 3 cap. 9. Fraunce, they and all their familie died in one yeere, so that there was not one that carried a peace of the treasure into his owne house. The Romanes hauing taken Carthage, one among the rest dispoiled the image of Apollo of a rich robe of gold: but ye hands of him who committed this sacriledge, were found cut of, and fast nailed to the said robe. The example of Ptolomie the thunderbolt, of Brennus and diuers other Hea∣then Atheists, and contemners of their Gods and religion, might be applied to inlarge this admonition to our christened
(for I cannot trulie say christian) Atheists (who seeing this seuere vengeance inflicted vppon these Pagan infidels: and contēners of false Gods: if their wits be not as little as their grace) may assure themselues, that God will lay a more hea∣uie vengeance vpon them, that contemne his Godhead, or at the least are carelesse of it, vsing religion as a garment, which at pleasure they put of and on: of all bads it is better to be of the worst, then of no religion, it is thus set down in the Reuelation: I know thy workes, that thou art neither colde nor hot: I would thou wart colde or hot: So then because Reue. cap. 9. thou art neither cold nor hot, but betweene both, I will spue thee out of my mouth. A miserable sentence, and yet iustly and dailie executed vpon these accursed reprobates, there is an opinion among wise and graue men, that a fourth part of christendome is inhabited by Atheists: who in the exercise of their tyrannie, ambition and reuenge outragiouslie vio∣late the lawes of God, nature, and man. But albeit as the Psalmist saith: Their throte is an open sepulchre, and that Psal. 14. the poyson of Aspes is vnder their lippes: though their feete bee swift to shed blood: though destruction and vn∣happinesse is in their waies, and the way of peace they haue not knowen, &c. Yet the saide Psalmist saith to comfort the godlie: That they were afraid where no feare was: for God Psal. 5. hath broken the bones of them that besieged them: yea they haue put them to confusion, because God hath despised them: I counsaile the Atheists, Machiuillians, & other Time∣pleasers: to examine the successe and endes of the Disciples of Simon Magus and Machiuell, that were before them: fewe or none of them but haue ridde the horse Saian: their miserable ends shew that their practises are odious to God and man: Simon Magus to disgrace the Apostles, woulde take vppon him to flie, but in the middest of his iourney hee fell downe towardes Hell: his cunning brought him to confusion: Machiuel taught the Duke of Florence a pol∣licie to cut of his owne head, and (as it is dailie seene)
theyr pollicies are the halters that strangle most of theyr fellowes: if folly (for ouerwéening wit is no better) made them not dronken, they woulde not be so mad to rayse theyr aduancement vppon the ouerthrowe of Princes and com∣mon weales. The Auncients say that they must ouercome a great manie enimies, as enuie, detraction, suspect, &c. and must step vp with oportunitie in a pleasing houre, that shall by any meanes obtaine the least fauour of a Prince. Through how many millions of dangers then must he runne, that by his single pollicie and strength laboreth to plucke a Prince from his throne? through more then the most of these A∣theists can passe by the halfe, and he that with desired opor∣tunitie arriueth vnto his purpose, by common destinic de∣parteth not without destruction. Salomon sayth, that there Prouerbs. 30. be three things that go stiffely, yea foure that be comely in going: A Lyon whiche is strongest among beastes, a Greyhound which is strong in the hynder partes, a Ramme also, and a King, against whome, no man riseth vp: experi∣ence dayly sheweth, that no man vndertaketh that bolde ad∣uenture, but he that wilfully falleth into destruction. These reprobate people for examples, haue the destruction of hun∣dred to dismay them, to the aduancement of one to encourage them, and where the oddes is so vnequall, he that aduentu∣reth vppon the perill, may be compared vnto him, that sée∣keth to darken the Sunne with a Candle. To conclude, al∣beit it were rather to be adiudged a myracle, then anie acte of humane perswasion to conuert a growne Atheist, to the feare of God, and true obedience towards hys prince, yet such as through wicked perswasiens, and want of good instructions, are but newly fallen from the feare of God, into the exercise of the damnable and disloyall practises of Atheists, may no doubt be counselled by the examples of the confusion of these vipers, to loath and hate they: vngratious wayes: and of the contrarie parte waighing the sure aduancement with which vertue honoreth her dis∣ciples, they may (which God graunt) be encouraged earnestly
to follow those courses whereby God may be honored, theyr Countrey profited, and their owne credite dignified. There are two old verses among other precepts printed at the ende of Magna Carta, of the old impression, which containe a great perswasion to the studie of vertue, the right ladder of honor and estimation, with which for the vertue they containe, I conclude this present Chapter: Vt ver dat flores, flos fructus, fructus odores, Sic studium mores, mos census, census honores. In English. Euen as the Spring doth flagrant flowers bring, Faire flowers, fruites, and fruites a pleasant tast: From studie so, doth perfect manners spring, From studie lore, in lore is honor plast. CHAP. 9. A conclusion of morall documents, concerning the duties of euery estate. THese rites men owe to thee O God, which in the heauens art, Dutyes due to God. Reuerence, honor, glory prayse, and prayer from the heart. The gratious Prince a father is, where subiectes liue in awe, Vertues of a good Prince. The good regarding with rewards, the lewde with scourge of lawe. The subiect true vnto his Prince, this homage heere doth owe, Homadge of subiectes. A faithfull heart, a feare through loue, an inward Zeale in showe. The reuerent Iudge frō doming right, whom no regard may straine, Dutyes of Iudges. Must Aristotles blames forsake, loue, hate, and priuate gaine. Th' inferior sort must reu'rence giue, vnto the higher power, Obedience of the inferiours. Obay, and listen to their lore, let fortune laugh, or lowre. These speciall vertues from a freend, still should or do proceede, Offices of a friend. Aduise, assistance, faithfull loue, and constancy in neede.
The Landlord should so lot his land, as his poore Tennant may Conscience of Landlords. Both pay his rent, sustayne his house, and for his Landlord pray. All Tennants slaues, and bondmen were, of youre records do shew, Though now not so, yet to their Lords, they Zeale and fealtie owe. Dutyes of Tenants. The neighborhood of the neighbor good, this neighborhod doth claime Good still for good, in casuall harme, a charitable blame. Claime of neyghberhood. The Wise man sayeth the child is spilt, where parents spare the rod, But cherishment with chastment ioyne, and see, they honor God. Charge of Parents. You children that long life do seeke, vnto Gods lawe giue eare, Honor Parents, sustaine their age, that for your youth did care. Obedience of Children. You that a faithfull seruant seeke, regard this charge as lawe, Office of Maysters. His wages pay, his seruice aske; and keepe him still in awe. Sometime the Romaines by their law their seruant lewde might slay, And by all lawes the maisters will the seruant must obay. Dutie of Ser∣uants. Fresh youth, whose iudgement is but greene, aboue each other vice, Forsake these three vndoing euils, women, wine, and dice. VVarning for yong men. These properties (regard them well) to you faire maydes belong, A bashfull grace, a modest eye, ioynd with a silent toong. Vertues in a Vrgen. You that haue wealth, think others want, & thus impart your store, Lend, giue, releeue▪ as neede requires, for to sustayne the poore. Rules for the riche. You that are poore, abase your thoughts, for naught agreeth worse Then this foule fault, a prowde conceipt, ioynd with a beggers purse. Item for the poore. In euery trade an honest gaine well gotten good men hight, And God will surely blesse the hand, that wayes and measures right. Counsell for Citizens.
You souldyers both by land and sea, Gods woonders still escrie, Target for Soldyers. Liue you to dye, for fearefull death is alwayes in your eye. Assure your selues you Atheists vile, that make at him a face, Caueat for Atheists. That God in vengeance is at hand, where he is farre with grace. As I began, so I conclude, let all men feare the Lord, And Preachers see that godly workes, with holy words accord. Conclusion to the Cleargie. To the Reader. FRiendly Reader, I giue thee knowledge that vpon speciall occasion I haue before printed certaine appendants to this booke, viz. one Treatise called A mirror for Maiestrates, which containeth at large in the graue orations and gouerment of the Emperour Alexander Seuerus, what is for the honor of Gentlemen, Citizens, and diuers other estates, and what is the disgrace and vndoing of themselues and their posteritie, as also a morall Treatise of the reputation, vertues and (by abuse) dishonors of a souldier, whiche I wish thee for thy further pleasure and profite to adioyne to thy generall Mirror, to which in right they belong. Thus commending vnto thee the fruites of my labour, and thee to the tuition of the highest, giuing most humble thankes to hys diuine Maie∣stie, by whose goodnes thys worke is brought to an end, I end. FINIS.
