3448 S117283 99852498 17823
TWO ORIENTALL PEARLES, GRACE AND GLORY, Published by Mr. ZACHARIE BOYD, PREACHER of GODS WORD, at GLASGOVV. Iob. 42.5. I haue heard of Thee by the hea∣ring of the eare, but now mine eyes seeth Thee. Psal. 102.6. I am like a Pelican of the Wildernesse. EDINBVRGH Printed by IOHN WRITTOUN. 1629.
TO THE NOBLE, AND POTENT LORD IAMES MARQVIS OF HAMILTOVN, EARLE OF ARANE, AND CAMBRIDGE, LORD AVEN, AND INNERDAILL, MASTER OF HIS MAIE∣STIES HORSES, AND ONE OF HIS MAIESTIES PRIVIE COVNSELL. MY most Honorable good Lord, THE Great GOD who honoureth these that ho∣nour him, hath honou∣red your Lo. with ma∣ny graces both spiritu∣ally and temporally: As for the spirituall, of the loue of the trueth, and courage for the same,
your L. hath already given a cer∣taine proofe: wee all looke for more as occasion shall serue: In whomsoever the spirit of IESVS truely is, that man will goe from grace to grace: He (said our Master,Ioh. 15.5.) that abideth in mee, and I in him, the same bringeth foorth much fruite. As for the TEMPORALL, your L. is the first of the Royall blood in this Land after his MAIESTIE: You are the Sonne of the most wise and wor∣thy Father, who in his lyfe was a most fast friend both to CHVRCH and Commoun-wealth. The Lord also hath made you the Sonne of a most Religious and Noble Lady, even of a Lady LYDIA, whose heart the LORD in great mercy hath opened, for to let in and lodge the KING of GLORY. After my six∣teene yeeres absence in Fraunce at my re∣turne I arrived at KINNEILL, where her Ladiship received mee with such courtesie, that shall never want my most heartly and humble thankes. In testimonie of my great desire to serue your L. I present you with these two mst precious ORIENTALL
PEARLES, viz. GRACE and GLO∣RY, which are from him,Luk. 1.78. whom ZA∣CHARIE in his Song calleth ORI∣ENS ab alto, the day spring from on high: In this sermon you will see whose Counsell you should cheefly seeke: All the counsell of men with the counsell of Achitophell may easily bee turned into follie;2. Sam. 15.31. but heere is the counsell that failed never, even the COVN∣SELL of GOD:Note. When ever your Lo. is for to deliberate vpon any graue and weightie matter, let this secreet ejaculation first goe before, LORD guide mee with thy Counsell, and af∣terward receiue mee to Glory. Note. The whole Church of Britaine most humbly intreats your L. to conti∣nue in your good course and courage for GODS glory: Read often these words of good MORDECAI to Ester. Thinke not with thy selfe that thou shall escape in the Kings house:Esth. 4.13.14. For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this tyme, then shall there enlarge∣ment and deliverance arise to GODS people from another place, but thou and thy Fathers house shall bee de∣stroyed:
And who knoweth whe∣ther thou art come to such honour for such a tyme as this? Your Lo. sitteth at the common-sterne; Helpe vs with your power, and wee will helpe you with our prayers. Let it please your L. to take this Ser∣mon in good part, though it be but litle. Note. At the making of the Tabernacle not only were the great and rich presents acceptable, as PVRPLE, SCARLET, and BLVE SILK, but also RAMMES SKINNES, and GOATES HAIRE, which the poorer sort was able onely to affoord. For to make an end by humble prayers to GOD for your L. I intreat the most high,1. Thess. 3.13. the God of Maiestie and mercie, to make your heart stable and vnblameable in holinesse, till hee hath in you crowned his graces with glorie. Your Lo. Most humble and obe∣dient Servant. Mr. ZACHARIE BOYD Preacher of GODS WORD, at GLASGOW. At Glasgow the 13 of Februar 1629.
GRACE AND GLORY. THE TEXT. Psal. 73.24. Thou shalt guide mee with thy counsell, and af∣terward receiue me to glory. IN my former Ser∣mon yee heard of GOD his favours bestowed vpon his servant: both in tyme present, and in tymes by past: As for the present he said, I am continually with thee: As for the tyme past, he said
Thou hast holden mee with thy right hand: In this verse his soule is riding at the anchor of hope: Hee is vpholden with the expectation of good things for times to come, Thou shalt guide mee with thy counsell and afterward re∣ceiue mee to glorie: That is, Thou shalt direct the whole course of my lyfe by thy wisedome and power, and after that thou hast brought mee thorow many tribulations and afflictions thou shalt first gloriouslie deliuer mee in this lyfe, and after this lyfe thou shalt glorifie me besides thy selfe in the Heavens for ever: Heere is both Grace and Glory. THE DIVISION OF THE TEXT IN the words we shall particularly consider these foure things 1. Who is this guider: The guider is GOD; Thou shalt guide. 2. Who is guided, it is David: Thou shalt guide me. 3. where∣with, with thy counsell, Thou shalt guide me with thy counsell. 4. Where∣vnto, even vnto glorie; And after∣ward thou shalt receiue me to Glorie: Of these in order.
THE FIRST PART. THE GVIDER. HEE who is said to guide, heere is the Lord the great Governour of the world: Hee is hee, who giues eyes to the blind and feete to the lame: He is he whoseIsa. 32.19. eyes are open vpon all the wayes of the Sonnes of men: As theExod. 14.19. Pillar of fire was Israels guide by night, and by day became a Pillar of a Clowd for their guard behind them, betweene them and the Egyptians, e∣ven so the LORD GOD is our guide & our guard; Our guid like a Pillar of fire in darknesse shewing vs the way, our guard, like a Pillar of a clowd be∣hind vs hiding vs from the cruell Pharao's, the enemies of our salvation. All that is to bee required in a guide is in him in all perfection: In a good guide these foure things are chiefly required: 1. that hee see: 2. that hee be wise. 3. that hee bee willing. 4. that he be able to direct and goe before in the way. 1. As for the first, There is none that sees so clearely as the Lord:Note. Iohn
sawe his eyes both bright and bur∣ningRevel. 1.14. as a flame of fire: He must see most clearely, who by his wordPsal. 19.8. in∣lighteneth mans eyes: This was the Psalmists reasoningPsal. 94.9. Hee that formed the eye shall he not see? All other guides are but like these Pharisees whom Christ calledMat. 23.16. Blind guides. 2. A guide had neede to be a wise man:Note. There bee many difficulties betweene vs and heaven: As the peo∣ple of God went thorowExod. 15.22. a Wilder∣nesse, before they could enter into Canaan, so must wee passeAct. 14.22, thorow many tribulations before that we can come to glory: There is no wisedome but the wisedome of GOD, which can lead vs into that land of Righ∣teousnesse. 3. As a guide must bee wise, so must hee bee willing:Note. The LORD is most willing to guide all wande∣ring sinners: His delight is to doe good to the Children of men: Hee will most lovingly say to a weari∣ed sinner, that which DAVID saith in the Psalme,Psal, 32.8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way that thou shalt goe, and I will guide thee with
mine eye. 4. As GOD is wise and willing, so is he able to make way vnto his owne; whether it bee thorow fire or water, nothing can withstand his power: In the firie fornace he made a way vnto theDan. 3.25. three Children: TheExod. 14.21. red sea hee divided for to make a passage for his owne Israel: Hee who made the2. King. 2.14. mantle of Eli∣jah to divide the Iordan, that Elisha might passe through: And Hee who can of aMark. 10.25. Camell make a threed for to passe thorow a needles eye, can easily guide his owne through all dangers and difficulties whatso∣ever, were it through thePsal. 23.4. Ʋalley of the shadow of death. The doctrine I gather heere is,The do∣ctrine. that the LORD is hee, who is the surest guide in the world: FleshPsal. 73.26. and heart may faile man, but the LORD never faileth. There bee no man so wise in guiding, but his wisedome at last, like2. Sam. 17.14. Ahitophels Counsell may bee turned into folie, but1. Cor. 1.25. the folie of GOD is wiser than all the wisedome of men.
The vse.The vse: Let this ever bee a part of our prayer, that the LORD would be our guide.Note. He who guided the two kine to2. Sam 6.9. Bethshemesh, though they lowed for the loue of their Calues, can easily find to vs an outgate in the greatest throng of all our temp∣tations, and that vnto the praise of the glory of his grace. THE SECOND PART. WHO IS GVIDED. NOW let vs see whom the LORD is said to guide heere: Thou shalt guide mee, saith the Seer.Note. Consider and weigh well I pray you, how this great man of GOD, a Prophet, a Seer, trusteth not into his owne wits, but committeth him∣selfe altogether to GODS guiding. The do∣ctrine.The doctrine I obserue is, that weake is the wit of man: All men haue neede to bee guided by the LORD: If any haue neede of a guide, fooles haue neede: wee are all but fooles by na∣ture: David in this Psalme acknow∣ledgeth his folly, So foolish, (saith
hee,) was I and ignorant, I was a beast before thee.v. 22. Note. While a man sinneth, hee is like a man runne out of his wits, while hee repenteth, hee is like one retur∣ned to his wits againe: A man once out of his right wit can never know the way to returne vnto it, vntill the LORD guide him home againe. The vse:The vse. Let none of vs all rely vpon our owne wisedome:Ier. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisedome, nor the strong man in his strength. When David both a King and a Prophet, declareth that he hath neede to be guided, who is he who by his owne wisedome can walke2. Pet. 2.21. in the way of Righteousnesse? All men are sinners: By sinne a man is misled from the right way.Note. Sinne maketh a man both like a PLANET, and a COMET, like a COMET in substance filthy, like a PLANET, in course ever wandring to and fro: All the wicked are but corruptible COMETS, and vnconstant wandering PLANETS, which wander so farre from the LORD that the spirit of GOD hath giuen
out this verdict against them,Psal. 119.155 SAL∣ƲATION is farre from the wicked: All the wicked are but wandring creatures, who can never learne that last point of GODS counsell, which isMicah 6.8. to walke with their GOD. Wee all naturally are blind like Moules, wee can not see ante pedes posita, the things which are directly before vs.Note. Our case spiritually is worse than that of the Moule; for though it see not, it is most quicke in hearing: if it bee blind it is not deafe; the least stirring of ones foot will giue it warning, and it will haste it selfe to its owne strength:Note. But wee all naturally are deprived of all our spirituall senses: The eyes and eares of our Soules, are like the eyes and eares of idoles, whichPsal. 135.16. haue eyes and see not, and eares and heare not: Wee are more deafe than thePsal. 58.4. Adder, which is wilfully, deafe a∣gainst the voice of the Charmer: Our eares are made heavy: Our eyes are Pharisaicall, full of beames: To every one of vs may bee said, as CHRIST said to the Pharisee,
ThouMath. 7.5. blind foole, cast out first that beame that is in thine eye: The sence of savoring is gone. While the word is preached, there is a2. Cor. 2.16. savour of life vnto life: Where CHRIST theCant. 2.. Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Ʋalleys is preached, there may bee feltEphes. 5.2. a sweet smelling savour, like that costlyIohn. 12.3. Spikenard of Mary, which filled the house with a sweet odour; but wee are naturally like these, who are ever amongst odoure and dung, not able to find any savour at all: Our touching and our tasting is lost: Thomas after hee hadIohn. 20.29. touched, by grace hee beleived: By grace also theMath. 9.21. bloody woman in touching was hea∣led: But all men by nature are like theseLuke. 8.45. multitudes, which in the throng touched CHRIST, but were not touched with that vertue that came out of him. As for our tasting, none by nature canHeb. 5.14. taste and see how good is the LORD: It is onely by grace that wee haue our senses exer∣cised. Note. Thus as yee see the Soule of man is naturally deprived of its fiue sen∣ses,
which are the fiue guides vnder GOD appointed, for to lead the Soule from grace to glory.Note. And which is the mischeefe of all, not onely are wee naturally deprived of all our fiue spirituall senses, but also of that Com∣moun sense, wherewith wee should judge of the other senses. Note. The blind man by no sense, but by commoun sense can know that he is blind, and so of the deafe man: But if hee while hee is deafe and blind, hee think that hee heares & sees, hee hath lost his commoun sense: This is the folie of man, while hee wants the spirituall senses, hee knows not his wants:Note. This was the dis∣ease of Laodicea, shee said that sheeRevel. 3.17. had neede of nothing; but GOD said, that shee had lost her commoun sense, because shee knew not that shee was wretched and miserable, and poore and blind, and naked: To all such the very wisedome of GOD is foly, till GOD begin to guide them. Ʋnder∣stands thou what thou readeth? said Phi∣lip to that Enuch, reading the Prophe∣cie of Isaiah:Act. 8.31. How can I (said he)
except that some guide mee? So may  say to you all, Vnderstand yee hat is your duetie both to GOD d man in this world? Know yee  way that leades to life eternall? w can wee, (may yee well say,) cept that GOD guide vs? Let vs therefore never rely vpon y wisedome of flesh and blood, r to bee guided thereby: The wis∣me of flesh is enimitie against GOD: The wisedome of GOD befooles it:Note. ee who is wisest in his owne eyes,  the greatest foole in GOD his ght. It is not the wisedome of is world, whereby the Church on rth is guided, or hath her stan∣ng: It is by him, who confundit pientiam sapientum, hath1. Cor. 1.20. made lish the wisedome of this world. His custome is to make his wis∣ome appeare in folie,Note. and to make is2. Cor. 12.9. strength to bee made perfect in  weaknesse, as he manifested himselfe y fire in the midst of water, while it t was agreed vpon by Elijah and Ba∣ls Priests, that1. King 18.24. the GOD that should nswere by fire should be GOD.
THE THIRD PART. WHEREWITH GOD GVIDETH his Servant. Ambros. Consilium bonis da∣tur, corre∣ctio erran∣tibus.NOW in this third part of our Text, wee haue to considder wherewith the man of GODS heart desireth to bee guided: It is with GODS counsell: Thou shalt guide me with thy counsell. The counsell of God is by Zacha∣rie called,Zach. 6.13. The counsell of peace; whereby man is counselled to seeke Gods peace and man's peace, accord∣ing to that of the Psalme,Psal. 34.14. seeke peace and follow after it.Note: GODS Coun∣sell Booke is the Bible: our preach∣ings tend all to this, that wee make you vnderstand the counsell of God that yee may be guided thereby: That was a great word that St. Paul said to the Elders at MiletumAct. 20.27. I haue not shunned to declare vnto you all the coun∣sell of God: our lyfe is a warrefare, and therefore wee haue great neede of Counsell; for2. King 18.20. Counsell and strength are for the warre.
Before I come to the doctrines:Facile pe∣cunia con∣sumitur, consilia ex∣hauri ne∣sciunt.  vs considder how God giueth his unsell vnto his beloued ones: The rd counselleth man after two aners especialy, 1. outwardly, 2. in∣rdly: outwardly the Lord letteth men know his minde after two ma∣ners, 1. By the workes of nature, which while a man of a sanctified ye seeth them so contriued & guided, s is wonderfull, he receiueth counsell hereby, to feare and reuerence so reat a maiestie:Rom. 1.20. The invisible things f God, saith Paul, are clearely seene, eing vnderstood by the things that re made: Behold in the things that are made, wee haue a counsell, make∣ng vs to vnderstand the invisible hings of our God, even his power & Godhead, 2. By the preaching of the word, the Lord guideth vs as by his counsell. Againe inwardly the Lord guides man, by the motions of his Spirit, which is effectuall in all the Children of election:Note. This Spirit hath diuers and very secret stirrings in the heart of man: whilesRevel. 3.20. hee knockes at the
doore of our heartes, counselling vs to open and let him in: whiles he put∣eth his finger inCant. 5.4. by the whole of the doore, letting drops of myrrhe fall downe vpon the handle of the barre, which is a sweete assureing counsell, for to make vs arise out of the bed of our securitie, for to seeke him and follow after him: sometimes he coun∣sells vs to take in good part all the chastisements of our God, from this hee is calledIohn. 16.7. the comforter: some∣times hee teacheth vs to stand in awe to offend the LORD our GOD, from this is he calledIsa. 11.2. the Spirit of the feare of the Lord: Againe while he counseleth vs to be holie, he is calledRom. 1.4. the Spirit of holines: while he counselleth vs to loue trueth, and flie from lies, he is called1. Iohn. 4.6. the spirit of trueth: while hee quickeneth our dead Soules, he is calledRevel. 11.11. the spirit of lyfe: while he inlighteneth the mind with knowledge of things to come, hee is calledReuel. 19.10. the Spirit of prophecie: In a word because hee maketh man of quick vnderstanding? hee is calledIsa. 11.3. the Spirit of wisedome
and of counsell: Because when no coun∣l is to be had, then he giueth coun∣l, he is said to beeIsa. 28.29. wounderfull in ounsell and excellent in working. The Spirit of GOD guideth men also by dreames and visions:Note. So by a dreame hee counselled Pilats Wife to counsell her husband not to trouble esus:Mat. 27.19. when he was set downe on the dgement seat, his wife sent vnto him, ying, Haue nothing to doe with that st man: for I haue suffered many hings this day in a dreame because of him: All this was from the counsell of God: IPsal. 16.7. blesse the Lord, (said David) who hath giuen mee counsell: my reines lso instruct mee in the night season: Note. While others are sleeping the godly man hath a doctour in his reines guiding him with counsell, whereby hee may bee made2 Tim. 3.15. wise to Salvation. The do∣ctrine. The chiefe doctrine I obserue heere, is, that the counsell of God is that whereby a man is guided on earth: Counsell is mine and sound wisedome, I am vnderstanding saith the LORD,Prov. 8.14. The vse, Hee that desires to be well guided,The vse. let him intreat the Lord
earnestly to guide him with his coun∣sell, outwardly by his word, and in∣wardly by his Spirit: let vs in all our affaires ever seeke counsell from the Lord: If wee seeke it, hee will not refuse it:Ier. 33.2. Call vpon mee, (said he,) and I will answere thee and shewe the great and mightie things which thou knowest not:Note. If wee would bee guided by Gods counsell, let vs first seeke earnestly theIsa. 11.3. Spirit of counsell, and therafter let vs carefully meditate night and day of that which is in the Bible, the BOOKE of COVNSEL:Note. That which theExod. 13.21. PILLAR of FIRE was in the night to Israel, that is the counsell of GOD to all Israelites indeede, yea and more; for that PILLAR of FIRE could not make the blind to see; But the Counsell of GOD Meira HenaijmPsal. 19.8. inlighteneth the eyes making wise the simple:Note. A wise man may giue a good counsell to a foole, but one∣ly GOD by his counsell can make a foole wise: seeing it is so, let vs bee earnest in all our difficulties to come & seeke the Lords counsell in his Church, in his counsell-house:Note. David could
neer vnderstand what GOD meaned i he prosperitie of the wicked, till  ame to hisPsal. 73.17. Sanctuary, his Coun∣ house, where he heard the wordes o his Counsell made plaine. Woe to him that will not bee coun∣selled by God his word:Note. This woe is very old:Isa. 29.15. woe vnto them, (id Isaiah,) that seeke deepe for ide their counsels from the Lord: eare him yet againe,Isa. 30.1: woe to the bellious Children that take counsell, ut not of mee: Of all these that will ot bee guided by GODS counsell, but walke in the counsels of their owne heart, is said, that theyIer: 7:24: goe backeward but not foreward:Note. Who ver he bee that will not bee guided y GODS counsell, the LORD shall iue him ouer to a foolish counseller, ven to himselfe: Of this we haue he practise in the PsalmePsal: 81:11: My eople would not harken to my voice, and Israel would haue none of mee, that s, they would not take my counsell: But what did ensue?Psal: 81:12: So I gaue them vp vnto their owne hearts lust, and they walked in their owne counsels:
That is they became their owne coun∣sellers: Woe to that man, who de∣pendeth vpon his owne counsell. It is written, that IsraellPsal: 106:13: would not waite for his counsell; But wha followed vpon that?v: 15: Hee sent leanness into their soule: Because theyPsal: 106:43: pro∣voked him by their counsell, hee brought them lowe for their iniqui∣tie, till theyProver: 1:31: were filled with their owne devices. Note. By this the trueth of the wise mans saying is cleare, ThePrever: 12:5: coun∣sels of the wicked are deceit, where∣by they themselues are deceiued, e∣ven then when they think most to de∣ceiue both GOD and man. It was wisely said by Solomon, ThereProver: 19:21: are many devices in a mans heart, never∣thelesse, the counsell of the LORD▪ that shall stand: Yea saith the LORD, MyIsa: 46:10: counsell shall stand, and I will doe all my pleasure. This is the coun∣sell that will never faile. It is re∣ported of a certaine godly man, that when ever hee came home to his house malecontent, hee cryed for GODS BOOKE of COVNSELL,
say,Note. Giue mee the BIBLE, for  s the Booke that never failed second vse:The 2 vse. Let this bee a re∣prooe for all these that are care∣le of the counsell of GOD: Many  not heare it at all, as many Pa∣ to whom the BIBLE, GODS NSELL BOOKE is closed, and ed:Note. Others againe are like hoboam,1: King: 12:9: who after that hee had rd the wise mens counsell, would  bee guided by it, but would also are what the young fooles could say. Many will come to the Church  to heare GODS Counsell,Note. but af∣ter that they haue heard what GODS sedome hath spoken, they will also ue eare, and heare what the world can ye, what flesh can perswade, what heir passions can speak, what their rot∣en lusts wold be at: As foolish Rehe∣boam1: King 12:13: forsooke the old Mens coun∣sell, and followed the folies of yong men; So many which bee old, and should haue beene wise long since, for∣sake the counsell of GOD, theDan: 7:9: Anci∣ent of dayes, and follow the counsell of
youth, even the folie of youth, not with standing all the LORDS coun∣sells: Of this the LORDS complaines in Ieremie,Ier: 32:33: They haue, (said hee,) turned vnto mee the backe, and not the face; though I taught them, rising vp earely, yet they haue not hearkned for to receiue instruction. The most part of men are guided by the coun∣sell, not of GOD, but of flesh and blood, whose advice is, that they breakeHos: 4:2: out by swearing and lying, & committing adulterie, till blood touch blood: Flesh and blood are but dead things:Note. These who seeke counsell from them, are like these, who in their trouble had recourse vnto Wi∣zards that peepe and mutter: Now what saith the LORD to such? ShouldIsa: 8:19: not a people seeke vnto their GOD? for the living to the dead? No not; To the lawe and to the Testimonie: This is the LORDS COVNSELL-BOOKE: If any contemne this coun∣sell,Isa: 8:20: it is because there is no murning in them;Note. That is, they are with∣out all knowledge in the blacke night of ignorance, where they haue neuer
seene the meanest light of grace, no no so much as the least glimmering of ight, which appeareth at the daw∣in or breake of day. A man that is not godly hath ma∣ny Counsellers, and they all tend vn∣to his ruine:Note: The LORD our GOD taking a speciall care of vs, discharged vs their counsell:Deut: 18:10: Let none, (saith hee,) bee found amongst you that is a regarder of times, or a arker of the flying of fowles, or a harmer,v: 11: or that counselleth with spi∣rits, or that asketh counsell at the dead.Note: See wherevnto the folie of man carieth him, that from GOD his greatest friend hee runneth away for to seeke counsell from ill spirits his greatest enemies: And againe, what a brutish folie is this, that a living man should runne to seeke counsell from the dead, who haue no counsell for themselues? The wise man said truely, ThereEccles: 9:10: is no worke, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wise∣dome in the graue:Note. That must be a slight COVNSELL-HOVSE, wherein is neither device, knowledge,
or wisedome. Woe vnto them that haue an eare for GOD, and an other for Sathan, the World, and their owne corruptions: Woe vnto them that seeke counsell, but not from the LORD, the LORD at last shall curse all suc counsels, and with the counsell of A∣hitophell hee2 Sam: 15:31: shall turne them into foolishnesse. As for you Brethren and Sisters, when ever yee finde your selues in perplexitie or anguish, be not like these of whom it is said in the PsalmePsal: 106:13 They waited not for his counsell: This is that wherewith good Moses branded Israel in his heavenly song,Deut: 32:28: They were a nation voide of counsell:Note. Many are voide of GODS Coun∣sell, who like BabylonIsa: 47:14: are weari∣ed in the multitude of their owne coun∣sels:Note. Well are the counsels of the wicked called a multitude of counsels, for such men haue no certaine re∣solution, but are whilesIsa: 28:13: on this line and whiles on that line, now on this precept and then on that precept, heere a little and there a little, like that wandring Leuite, who did goe to so∣journe
Iud: 17:9: where he might finde a place, ing sure of no place: Such in their ingsIsa: 28:13: goe, and fall backward, they  broken, and snared, and taken: f Ieremie in a muddie mind,Note: while  flesh did fret, said vnto GOD  wise counsellerIer: 20:7: O LORD thou  deceiued mee, and I haue beene eiued, O howe shall the wicked e day curse their Counsellers, the ltitudes of their counsellers, Satan, e flesh, and the world, which are t a companie of deceiuers, and a ry knot of knaues. Let vs heere againe obserue,The do∣ctrine: that eat is the prerogatiue of GODS hildren:Note: They are all GODS: ORDS of Counsell: He is indeede  LORD of counsell, that can take ODS counsell: All the children  GOD haue this honour to bee of ODS Counsell: for whom GOD ides with his counsell, these hee uts vpon his counsell:Amos: 3:7: surely, (saith mos,) the LORD GOD will doe thing, but hee reuealeth his secrets nto his servants the Prophets::Note. Hee hat is theIam: 2:23: friend of GOD, as
Abraham was, shall bee one of h PRIVIE COVNSELL: wha euer occurre, that is needefull to b knowne shall not bee concealed fro him.Gen: 18:17. shall I hide from Abraham th thing which I doe? (said the LORD)1: Cor: 2:16, wee haue the minde of CHRIS (said the Apostle:)Note. Behold how the LORD guides his owne, so wit his Counsell, that in a maner hee put∣teth his minde into them. The 1 vse.The vse: Let the children of GOD comfort themselves with this, that what ever calamities shall befall vn∣to them, the LORD shall guide them so with his counsell, that in all their temptations they shall come to a happy1: Cor: 10:13 outgate: By his counsell he shall let him knowe how they shall come out of tribulation:Note. Accor∣ding to this, the Prophet Micah said to the Church in her afflictionMicah: 4:9: now why doest thou cry out aloude? Is there no King in thee? Is thy coun∣seller perished? for pangs haue taken thee as a Woman in travell. The 2 Vse.Another vse of this doctrine is this, seeing the LORD guides the Faithfull
with his counsell, let vs beware to giue nsell or take counsell against such  Counseller:Note. Cursed are these and  their followers, of whom the Plmist speakesPsal: 83.3. they haue consulted tether with one consent: thy are con∣erate against thee: Cursed also are ese that consult against the well of s Children, like these of whom it  said, TheyPsal: 83:3: haue taken craftie coun∣l against thy people, and consulted ainst thy hidden ones: * The gyptians were neuer so foolish, as hen they said,Exod: 1:10: Come on, let vs ale wisely. The generall vse of all is, that wee e at all times earnest in prayer, that e LORD in all our businesse would ide vs by his Counsell, and also epe vs from all ill Counsell:Note. The ine of King Ahazia is imputed vn∣ this, that hee followed ill coun∣ll:1: Chron. 22.30. Hee, (saith the scripture,) alked in the wayes of the house of Ahab, for his mother was his coun∣ller to doe wickedly. Bildad speak∣g of the wicked, (saith,) hisIob. 18, 7, owne unsell shall cast him downe: Happy
then, and thrise happie is hee, whom GOD in this lyfe guideth with hi Counsell, for afterward he shall re∣ceiue him to glory: This last wee se in the last part of our Text. While my penne was heere, my deare Brother Mr. Ro∣bert Scot sleept, Anno DOM. 1629. the 27. of Ianuar, on a Weddinsday, a litle be∣fore nine houres in the mor∣ning. THE FOVRTH PART. Afterward thou shalt re∣ceiue mee to glory, THis is the last part of our Text, and this is the last of all GODS benefits:Note. This is GODS good∣nesse which crowneth all his othe mercies, when he receiueth vs to glory: when he hath done all the good that can bee done vnto vs in this lyfe, by beeing with vs continualy, and by holding vs by our right hand and guiding vs by his counsell, all ends
with this that he receiues vt to glory:  wee receiue grace, and after-ward  are receiued to glory. These ds of my Text are sweete hony des, And afterward thou shalt iue mee to glory. eere wee haue to consider two gs, 1. the time of receiuing a man glory, it is, afterward, 2. what it o bee receiued to glory. The time of receiuing man to Glory. THE time wherein GOD is said to receiue a Soule to glory,  heere set downe in the word FTERWARD: that is, after that OD hath ledde mee with his coun∣, he shall receiue mee to glory. The doctrine which breefly I  serue heere, is,The do∣ctrine: that it is the coun∣l of GOD, which guideth to glory: e way is grace, grace, from grace  grace: The end of all is glory: This is,Note. the Sea whereinto all good ngs end like riuers running to their ther the Ocean, frō whence they came.
The vse.The vse. Hee who would be re∣ceiued to glory, let him bee ledd with GOD his counsell: If thou re∣fuse to bee guided by his counsel he shall refuse to receiue thee to gloryProv, 1, 24. Because I haue called, (said wise∣dome,) and yee refused, I haue stretc∣ed out my hand and no man regarde &c.v, 26. And therefore I also will laug at your calamitie, I will mocke wh your feare commeth. The do∣ctrine.The other doctrine I obserue heer is, a doctrine of patience, for the that are in affliction: After man tribulations the LORD at last sha receiue them to glory. The vse.The vse. What ever our affliction be, let vs not be discouraged: The are but for a time, yea the time i short, that done, afterward our GOD shall receiue vs to glory: The Lor shall free vs then from all our woes. Though wee mourne now, yet after∣ward wee shall laugh, and GOD shal wipe all tears from our eyes. I intreat you Brethren to make vs of this vse: how painefull soeve your troubles bee, comfort you
selues with these most comfortable : Afterward thou shalt receiue  o glory:Note. This AFTERVVARD  faithfull mans high Tower and stroest Hold: Hee stands vpon the ho of AFTERVVARD, like a be∣s man. The Faithfull Man is bged with many temptations, but  CASTELL of AFTERVVARD  never bee battered downe. ghIob: 19.26. AFTER my skinne wormes  oy this body, (said Iob,) yet in  flesh shall I see GOD:Note. That is a ppy destruction whereby we are bght vnto the sight of GOD: O le y bodie so bee destroyed, that m Soule may see GOD, till AFTER∣VVARD both in flesh and spirit I ll see him, and none other for me: 1 Cor: 15:19: in this lyfe onely wee haue hope  CHRIST, wee are of all men most erable: All the comforts of the dly are cheefly in AFTERVVARD. This is the Martyres song in the :Note. AFTERVVARD thou shalt receiue e to Glory. Learne all the way to the strong ld, where yee may be hidde when
your enemies shall assault you. Note. Looke ever vnto AFTERVVARD. If thine enemie goe about to disgrace thee and trouble thee, it may be thou smart for a space, but it shall not be so for ever, for AFTERVVARD thou shalt bee received to glory: If thine enemies reproach thee, if the wicked despise thee, if thy flesh faile thee, and if thy freinds forsake thee, GOD his helpe is in AFTERVVARD: Heere is thy comfort O man, AFTERVVARD the LORD shall receiue thee to glory: This is a salue for all sores.Note. GOD his AFTERVVARD is like the last wine in that Banquet of Cana: At other Bankets inIohn: 2:10. the beginning men did set foorth good wine, and when men had well drunke the worst came last; but in CHRIST Banket the last was best: It is so of the life of all true Christians: ManyPsal. 33:19: are the troubles of the Righteous, it is said in a Psalme, but AFTERVVARD it is said ThePsal. 37.37. end of that man is peace. This is the great difference betwixt the Saints of GOD and the wicked, They will liue together, and lye to∣gether
inLuk. 17.34. one bed, yea; and in one elly, in one house, in oneMat. 24.41. mill;  one shall bee taken,Gen. 25.22. and the o∣r shall bee refused: They will be toether in the world: The wicked shll bee swiming in his wealth, while th Godly man shall be wearied with :Note. But tarry a litle, till the God∣ man come to his AFTERVVARD, and  wicked man to his, and then ke choise on whose side yee will : IPsal. 37.35 haue seene, (said David,)  wicked in great power, and sprea∣g himselfe like a greene bay tree:  hold not an eare, but an eye wit∣se: I haue seene him, saith hee, a braue n; but what was the end and conclu∣n of so faire a preface?v. 36. Yet hee ssed away, and loe hee was not: O David what sayest thou?Note. Loe e was not: It may bee thou sought m not: Yea I sought him, (said Da∣id,) but I could not find him: Be∣old now his AFTERVVARD: Take vp ow our greene bay tree: All is wi∣hered like thatIona. 4.7. Gourd of Ionah: utPsal. 37.37. marke the perfect man, and be∣old the vpright, for the end of that
man is peace: Though for a space the GodlyPsal. 98.13 lye amongst the Port AFTERVVARD they become as the wing of a Doue covered with silver, an her feathers with yellow gold. Note. The wicked and the Godly i this world, are like Corne & Chaff in one Barne; but AFTERVVARD the fanne shall make such a separation, that they shall never meete againe. Note. Betweene Dives and Lazarus on earth, there may be but a doore or a Curt; O but tarry till AFTERVV RD, and behold aLuk. 16.16. great GVLF fixed, wherethrough was no passage at all, ne ther from aboue nor from below: Tves in Hell lifting vp his eyes, didLuk. 16.23 see Abraham a farre of: These may well bee said to bee farre of, who shall never meete againe: So soone as the Godly and wicked are come to their AFTERVVARD, they goe con∣trarie wayes: TheseMath. 25.46. shall goe away to everlasting punishment; but the righ∣teous into life eternall. If wee could looke to this AFTER∣VVARD in our distresses, it should support vs wonderfully. A man that
knowes where to get meate, will suffer nger more patiently than hee that owes not where to dine.Note. Let these who looke not for better AFTERVVARD, fr in their present trouble: Present troubles are sore, yea vnsupportable  these that looke for future woes. The earnest of damnation is feare∣ll.Note. All the troubles of the wicked ere, are the very earnest of dam∣tion: They cry to the wicked man, Assure thy selfe, the whole summe all bee payed to thee at the terme. But as for thee,Note. who can say to GOD, as is said in the verse before,  am continually with thee, the LORD shall hold thee by thy right hand, ee shall guide thee with his coun∣ell, and in the despight of all the owers of hell, AFTERVVARD He hall receiue thee to glory. 2. The receiving of man to Glory. WEE haue heard of the time of his receiving; Now let vs
see wherevnto hee shall bee recei∣ved, Thou, (said hee,) shalt receiue mee to glory. Note. In the Hebrew it is Cauod Ti∣kacheni, that is, as Arias hath tur∣ned it, gloriam accipies me, thou shal receiue mee glory: The words though in that exposition they seeme to be difficile are of great weight: The wordes, Thou shalt receiue mee gl∣ry, import such a glory, that hee who shall bee glorified thereby shal bee in a manner, glory it selfe when in the Gospell, as in a glasse wee behold the glory of the LORD, wee are2. Cor. 3.18: changed into this same image from glory to glory; how much more shall wee all bee changed into glory, when in the Heavens with open face wee shall behold our GOD, not as in a glasse, or by represen∣tation, but face to face, and that for euermore? Note. The word glory in the origi∣nall, is Cauod, that is weighty: It is so called from its weightinesse: To this the Apostle seemes to looke, when hee saith, that2: Cor: 4.17. our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, keth for vs a farre more exceed∣ and eternall weight of glory: Such an euerlasting PONDVS wight,Note. can no more be weighed in the heart of man; then a mil∣ne or a mountaine can bee weighed  the little scale of a gold Ballance,  herein I pray you can an exceed∣g weight bee contained? if it could e contained, it should not bee ceeding: As it is infinite, exceeding l dimensions, so it is not subiect to y circumstance of time, for it is ernall.Note. By this eternitie, the ory of God is distinguished from the ory of the world, which is but n evanishing shewe:1, Pet. 1:14. All flesh is rasse: (saith the Apostle,) and all he glory of man as the flower of the rasse: The grasse withreth, so doeth ll flesh; and the flowre of the grasse asseth away, So doth all the glory f man:Note. Nay the glory of man s not so great as the glory of grasse: This the Lord declared when preach∣ng vpon the lillies, hee said, thatMat: 6, 29: Solomon in all his glory was not one
one of these: what are men and all their glory? and that of all states iPsal: 62:9: surely men of low degree are vanitie, and men of high degree are a lye, to lay them vpon a ballance they are alto∣gether lighter than vanitie:Noted. All the glory of flesh can no more bee called weightie, then a painted ma can bee called a man: It is indeede some-what like vnto it; but it hath nothing of its definition: It is but a painted glory, like a feast in print, wherein is no meate but resemblan∣ces, figures, coloures; and representa∣tions: Now let vs proceede. Afterwards thou shalt reeeiue mee to glory. Note. GLory as yee see heere, is the resting place of the Saints: There is no right rest for a Soule, till it be received there; the place is called GLORY, because GOD there ma∣nifesteth his glory: There the eyes of thy Soule O man, shall see the thinges which1: Cor: 2:9: eye never sawe: There thine eares shall heare that which eare never
heard: There bee such things that cod never enter into the heart of man. This place is called ourMat: 25:21 Ma∣sters joy, aLuk: 23:43: Paradise, or Garden of Pleasures: EverlastingLuk: 16:9: Taberna∣cles, a building2: Cor, 5:1: of GOD, & a house no made with hands, it is also called GODSHeb: 3:11. rest, signified by that Ca∣naan, which for that which it signi∣fid was called his rest. In the names of Heaven many comforts be infolded:The do∣ctrine. If while we are eere wee are crossed and tossed with much griefe and sorrow, our Com∣fort is this,Math. 25:21: that Heaven is our o Masters joy: If wee loath & abhorre the filthie stink of sinne, Heaven is aLuk: 23:43. aradise, a Garden of Heavenly owers, where is theCant: 2:1: Rose of Sa∣n, and the Lillie of the Ʋalleyes: here is the sweet savour of GOD,  whom is the savour2: Cor: 2:16: of lyfe vn∣ lyfe, of the lyfe of grace vnto he lyfe of glory: If wee bee heere  lodged, aboue are prepared for s these everlastingLuk: 16:9: tabernacles, ven a building2: Cor: 5:1: of GOD, not made ith hands: If wee bee wearied Pil∣grims
heere, there is an everlasting rest: If wee bee naked heere, there wee shall be arrayedRevel: 7:13: in white robes: If wee bee hungrie heere, there is theRevel: 22:2: Tree of lyfe: If wee bee thir∣sty heere, there is that pure, cleane, cleere, and Cristall River, whereof the streames make glad the Citie of GOD.1 Psa: 46.4. Heere let vs obserue diverse vses of this Doctrine, and that both for Comfort and for Counsell; for com∣fort wee haue both for the living and dying, The 1 Vse.This should bee a chiefe comfort for the dying: Seeing there be such commodities in that other world, wee should desire gladely to flit and remoue from this sinfull world:2. Cor. 5:2: In this wee grone earnestly, desiring to be clothed vpon with our house, which is from Heaven. While wee are at home in this body, wee are absent from the Lord: Heere is meekle toile and turmoile, meekle shame and sorrow, and which is the mis∣chiefe of all, heere is meekle sinne and iniquitie, but there, is glory,
joy, rest, peace, andPsal. 16.11. pleasures for evermore. While I think on these thinges,Psal. 42.2. my Soule thirsteth for GOD, even for the living GOD: O! When shall I come, and appeare before GOD?Note. Let all Godly men comfort them∣selues with this against the feare of death,Note. after thatIob. 14.14. the time of their changing is come, the LORD shall receiue them to glory.Note. The voice came from Heaven with a command to write, Write, (said the Spirit to Iohn. What shall I write? said Iohn Write,Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the LORD, from hencefoorth, y, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours: Such goe not away without good companie, or as the Spirit said to Iohn, their orkes doe follow them: The hearing  this should make all sanctified oules, say with the Apostle,Philip. 1.23. I de∣e to bee dissolved, and to bee with HRIST, which is meekle better or mee. O what if there were a Coun∣ey on earth,Note. which were such a nd of the Living, where death were
discharged to come, where sinne, sicknesse, sorrow, hunger, cold, and nakednesse might get no entrie? O what multitudes would swarme thi∣ther: Two2. King. 5.17. Mules burden of that earth should bee more precious than burdens of gold: All that a man hath, gladly will hee giueIob. 2.4. it for his life: How meekle then should wee thinke our selues obliged to GOD, who hath prepared a Countrey of glory for vs, a Countrey where the TreeRevel. 22.2. of life groweth, where the in∣dwellers shall liue in everlasting hap∣pinesse, which for greatnesse can not enter into the heart of man: Oh that wee had faith to beleeue this, so should wee not delight so much to wallow in the muddie mires of sinful mortalitie. Oh that wee had faith to beleeue, so should wee cry,Psal. 55.7. O who will giue vs the wings of a Doue, that wee might flie vp to that Pa∣lace ofPsal. 16, 11. Pleasures for evermore: The tongues of Angels can not expresse the least glory that is there: St. Au∣gustine hath a notable speach con∣cerning this.
Facilius possumus dicere quid non  vitâ aeternâ, quam quid ibi sit,August. Non est ibi mors, luctus, lassitudo, fas, sitis, aestus, &c. Quid autem ib sit vis nosse? Haec nec oculus vi∣di nec auris audivit, nec in cor homnis ascendit: Si in cor hominis no ascendit, cor hominis illuc a∣scendat. hat is: It is more easy to tell what  not, then what is, in eternall lyfe:  here is neither death, nor sorrow, nor wearinesse, nor hunger, nor thirst, nor heat, &c. But wilt thou know what is there? That which eye hath not seene, nor eare heard, neither th it ascended into the heart of man: If it can not ascend into the heart of man, let the heart of man scend vnto it. Againe heere is a comfort for  living, that mourne for the dead.The 2 vse. It is naturall to mourne for the absence of these whom wee haue lo∣d heere.Note. When Elisha sawe Eli∣, caught vp and caried away tho∣row the clowdes, hee cryed,2, King 2, 12, My ather my father, the chariot of Isra∣ell,
and the horsemen thereof: H lamented sore his absence, but in th was his great comfort; that he i him received to glory: Yee who  fatherlesse or motherlesse,Note. Loo not to the Church-yeard where yo fathers and mothers are rotting  rotten; comfort your selues in th GOD hath received them to glo Yee once busbands and now w∣dowes, remember your wiues wh once were your glory, (The1, Cor. 11, 7, wom is the glory of the man,) heere  your comfort, the LORD hath r∣ceived them to glory: Likewise y women, who nowe heavily regra these, whose glory once yee wer It was a great glory indeede f them to haue such subjects as yo for this cause is the woman called t glory of the man: Comfort your selue with this, the glory of your hu∣bands is greater now, they are r∣ceived to glory: So is it of you Children and dearest friends, who ar departed out of this lyfe, CHRIS hath received them all to glory, whic is the perfection of all the guifts of God
A  is doctrine serues for the com∣ oth of the living,The 3 vse. and of the , so also it serues for counsell  living: The counsell is this,  these who are guided with Go counsell, are afterward recei∣v o glory, striue yee to be guided  this counsell: If yee desire to be  after this life, if also yee desire  aue a comfort behind you to  that shall lament your absence,  well so long as yee are heere,  we may comfort your mourners  this, that CHRIST hath recei∣ you to glory. When a wicked man is dead,Note. I kw not what to say to his spouse: n a wicked wyfe is dead, I know  what to say to her husband: what uld I say to such? Such haue alrea∣ heir comforts in their bosome, that  or she is well away: Such quiely gh in their sleeue, while for shame nly they must seeme to mourne: This is the just recompence of re∣d,Note. that these who serue not GOD in ir life, shall not bee lamented at ir death.
They that serue not the LORD heere, let them goe, let them swelt in their sweate, let them burne and boile, the world is well quite of them.Note. When the Scripture speakes of that most vile traitour Iudas, it giveth him a disdain∣full Epitaph, thatAct, 1, 16, hee was guide to them that tooke IESVS: He would ne∣ver be guided with CHRISTS coun∣sell, and therefore now, like a mis∣chant traitour, he lyes hauing this Epitaph, which shall bee read so long as the world stands, Heere lyes the Traitour that was guide to them that tooke IESVS; at his death hee was not lamented: There was not one of the Apostles that ever said once, Alas1, King, 13, 30. my brother. A Prayer.Now GOD of his grace, so guide vs all by his counsell, that AFTERVVARD he may receiue vs to glory. Amen, Amen. FINIS.
LAVRVS.
