376.7 S115949 99851166 16427
THE CHRISTIANS GVIDE. For his better, and more comfortable passage through the wildernesse of this troublesome world, vnto that promised rest in that heauenly Canaan, the Kingdome of glory. Consisting of diuers holy Meditations and Prayers seruing to that purpose. PSAL. 107.43. Who is wise that he may obserue these things? PROV. 9.9. Giue admonition to the wise, and he will be wiser; teach a righteous man and he will increase in learning. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Samuel Man, and are to be sould at his Shop in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Ball. 1614.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, ROBERT, Lord RICH, Baron of Leez, &c. increase of all true honour here, and euerlasting hap∣pinesse hereafter. Right Honourable: HOW needfull it is to haue alwayes at hand diuers helps and furtherances to godlinesse, and to be of∣ten conuersant in Meditation
and Prayer, and such like ho∣ly and religious Exercises, none can be ignorant, who is eyther priuie to his owne naturall indisposition and vn∣towardnesse vnto that which is good, or otherwise a dili∣gent obseruer of the sundry occasions whereby the affe∣ctions are distracted, and with-drawne from that, on which they ought chiefely to be placed; or lastly, not for∣getfull of the subtiltie and stratagems of that old and malicious enemie, in seeking by all meanes, eyther to keepe men from entering into the right way, or else to diuert them from it, being once
entred into it, by laying many stumbling-blocks in the way, or insnaring them with the al∣luring baites of the lying and deceiueable vanities of this fading and perishing world, with which many are so strangely inchanted, that whiles they fondly thinke therein to finde felicitie, they runne on head-long vnto vt∣ter ruine and destruction. Hence it is, that many moued with the zeale of the glory of GOD, and the good of others, (the welfare of whose soules was deere vnto them) haue imployed themselues in see∣king to remedy this euill, by seasoning the affections of
men with wholesome instru∣ctions, and to preserue them from that danger, which o∣therwise they were like to fall into through the craft and malice of that deadly aduer∣sary, who desires nothing more, then to make a prey of them, and to drowne their soules in perdition, without all hope of recouery. And this indeede it was, that first induced mee (being also mo∣ued thereunto by the often and importunate request of godly & wel-disposed friends) to publish this Treatise for the benefit of others, and to proceede in the course which vpon the like considerations,
I had formerly enterprised. The Worke I acknowledge to be slender, yet such as I hope may not be without profit to those that are sin∣cerely affected; and not sicke, eyther of that euill disease of vaine and fond curiosity, which raignes among too many: or else of that spirituall sur∣fet, which is a cause of much hurt, not to a few, whose di∣stemper causeth them to loath better and more sauory dishes then this, which I here set before them, not hauing in∣deede any relish in any thing which is not fitted to their Aguish and disordered appe∣tite. Whatsoeuer it be, I
presume to send it forth into the light, vnder your Ho∣nourable Patronage. Why I should vse this boldnesse; a∣mong others, this was not the least incitement; namely, considering that your Lo: hath not onely beene a Pa∣tron of the Labours of diuers in this or the like nature: but also an Honourable and wor∣thy Instrument for the en∣trance of many into that chiefe and maine worke of the Ministerie, dealing there∣in with much sinceritie and faithfulnesse (a thing so rare in this decayed and corrup∣ted age, wherein eyther Flat∣tery or such like sinister re∣spects,
or (which is worse,) Briberie and Simonie, haue so much defiled and defaced the Lords Sanctuary, to the losse of many soules, which haue perished by meanes of such execrable and sacrilegi∣ous impietie.) I thought it my dutie, to take occasion here∣by, of ioyning with others in publishing to the world your sincere and religious care here∣in towards the Church of God (which shall no doubt in due time be more abun∣dantly recompenced1 Cor. 11.15.58. Gal. 6.9.;) not so much to stirre vp your noble and generous minde, to conti∣nue in that honourable and worthy course, vvherein I
know right well your Christi∣an and constant resolution and forwardnesse, as to prouoke others of your, or inferiour order, to whom that great and weightie businesse is com∣mitted, to follow your steps, that thereby they may parti∣cipate with you in the like de∣serued praise, and so the Church fare the better for them; which they ought to account (as it is indeed) their greatest glory: being that wherein Christian Princes and Emperours in former times haue much reioyced, & striuen who should therein exceede and surpasse others. Besides this generall respect, which to∣gether
THE CHRISTIANS GVIDE. PROVER. 19.20. Heare counsell, and receiue instruction, that thou maiest be wise in thy latter end. 2 TIM. 2.19. Let euery one that calleth on the name of Christ depart from iniquitie. What preparation and reuerence is to be vsed in Prayer and other holy and religious Exercises. IF men be to come in∣to the presence of an earthly Prince, to put vp a supplicationMal. 1.8.9
vnto him for something which they are desirous to obtaine of him, or to heare him speake vn∣to them of somewhat vvhich nearely concernes them, how carefull will they be to prepare themselues, in the best manner that can be, afore-hand? With what reuerence will they present themselues before him? O then what care, what preparation, what reuerence is to be vsed of all men, when they are to come be∣fore the King of glory,1 Tim. 1.17 Dan. 2.47. Isa. 40.15. the Lord of heauen and earth, the great God of the whole vvorld, at whose feete all Princes, and the mightiest monarchs in the world are to cast their Crownes, and their Scepters, and to humble themselues with all reuerent sub∣mission both of body and soule,Isa. 45.23. acknowledging themselues to be nothing vnto him; yea, the
brightnesse of whose glory is so great, that those glorious Crea∣tures, the Angels themselues, are faine to veyle and to couer their faces in his presence:Isay 6.2. Exod. 3.5. and 34.8. Psal. 95.6.7 Mat. 26.39 Acts 20.36 Gen. 18.27 in what a holy and reuerent manner ought they to present themselues be∣fore his Maiestie, eyther vvhen they are to speake vnto him in Prayer, or to heare him speake vnto them out of his Word, or to meditate vpon his holy and righteous wayes and workes, or to be acquainted with any part of his vvill, so as may concerne his glory or their good! They can neuer vse too much diligence when they prepare and addresse themselues vnto this great and waighty businesse. But alas (a griefe it is vnto one that hath his heart well affected) who doth not see how excee∣ding carelesse and negligent
most men are in this duetie; yea, how strangely and irreuerently they rush often into the presence of God,Eccl. 4.17. without all preparation, yea, scarce once thinking or con∣sidering with themselues, vvhat they are, before whom it is that they are to stand, and what bu∣sinesse they haue in hand; which if they did, sure it would make them to stirre vp their lumpish and drowsie affections, and to set∣tle themselues vnto it in another manner then they doe; yea, with farre more reuerence and pre∣paration then if they were to ap∣peare before the greatest Mo∣narch on earth, and that when he were in his greatest State and Royaltie, attended with all his Nobles and Peeres, in the most maiesticall manner that could be. O most mightie and most
glorious God, let me be alwayes affected vvith the consideration of thy glorious and diuine pre∣sence, as I ought to be, especi∣ally when I approach nearer vn∣to thee, eyther to offer vp my humble suites and supplications by prayer vnto thee, for the ob∣tayning of grace and mercy at thy hands, or to attend vpon thee, in that holy ordinance of thine to heare thee out of thy word, teaching me what thy will and pleasure is towards mee, or to be couersant in reading, medi∣tation, or any other holy and re∣ligious exercise, whereby I may be furthered in the wayes of grace and saluation. Farre be it from me to thrust my selfe into thy holy and sacred presence (as the manner of the prophane and vngodly ones is) without a care∣full and conscionable endeuour
to haue my heart rightly prepa∣red, and my affections truely sanctified. O Lord, this is not in my power more then in any other; it is thy grace onely: let it please thee therefore to giue it vnto me. Purge my heart, I beseech thee, from all things which cause mee to offend; free my minde from euery thing, which might be a cause of any distraction vnto me; lift vp my soule farre aboue all earthly co∣gitations and desires, and pos∣sesse mee with such an entire loue, and such a holy reuerence of thy Maiestie, that thou maiest alwayes be truely glorified of mee,Leuit. 10.3 whensoeuer I draw neare vnto thee, and enter into thy pre∣sence to performe any duetie which thou requirest of mee. Heare mee (O Lord) and that onely for the merits and media∣tion
of thy Sonne, and my bles∣sed Sauiour and Redeemer, Christ Iesus: in whose Name alone, I poure out all my suites and supplications vnto thee, and looke to obtaine grace and mer∣cy from thee. Humilitie, the way to true know∣ledge and spirituall vnderstan∣ding. MAny there be that haue taken great paines, and beene very industrious in search∣ing after many things, the know∣ledge and vnderstanding where∣of (although excellent in it selfe, and worthy the labouring for) yet they could neuer attaine vn∣to, because they sought not for it, with a meeke and humble heart, and with a purpose to vse
it to the right end, and for the greatest benefit both of them∣selues and others, but for sinister and by-respects. They that are most humble shall be best lear∣ned, and receiue the greatest blessing in the vse of the meanes which God hath appointed. The Lord reuealeth his secrets vnto them,Psal. 25.9. which are hid from the proud,Mat. 11.25 1 Cor. 2.11 12. and such as are wise in their owne eyes. They shall vn∣derstand the wonderfull things of God, the great things of his Law, those deepe Mysteries con∣tayned in his word, euen those things which the vvisest of this world, and the learnedst Scribes amongst men cannot reach vnto shall they comprehend and vn∣derstand, because the Lord hath promised to giue them the tea∣ching of his Spirit, that holy annoynting,1 Ioh. 2.27 and will send downe
that light from aboue, vvhich will so illuminate and inlighten their mindes,Ephe. 1.17 18 Ioh. 7.17. that they shall see clearely into those things which are darke and obscure vnto o∣thers. Good Lord, I humbly bowe the knee of my heart and soule before thy glorious Maie∣stie, suing vnto thee earnestly and instantly in the mediation of thy Son, for a further increase & a greater measure of that hea∣uenly grace: for this I will pray, yea, cry vnto thee daily and vn∣cessantly. Doe thou therefore vouchsafe to grant it vnto mee, and more and more to increase it in me. Giue mee a meeke spi∣rit, a lowly minde, and an hum∣ble heart, a heart which may be set, not for the seeking of my selfe (for that were wickednesse) but for the aduancement of thy glory, referring all my studyes
and endeuours to the end which thou hast appoynted that vvee should ayme at continually; and then I know that thou wilt re∣ueale thy will vnto mee, and giue mee vnderstanding of thy word as farre as is requisite and necessary for mee; yea, that thou wilt cause me to conceiue and comprehend those things which are wonderfull, and which none can search into, or finde out, but those alone that haue thy Spirit to be their teacher, which thou hast promised vnto them onely that are of a meeke spirit, and of an humble minde, which is a thing exceeding pleasing vnto thee,Iames 4.6. and wherein thou much delightest, but abhorrest all those that are of a proud heart, and deniest thy grace vnto them.
Humilitie, the fruit of true sauing knowledge. HE that knoweth things a∣right as hee ought to know them, especially if he hath attai∣ned vnto the knowledge of him∣selfe, and of his maker; the bet∣ter he knoweth and vnderstan∣deth these things, the more low∣ly, the more base and vile will hee bee in his owne eyes; and the more will hee magnifie and extoll his God, the Creator, and the Lord of all things. They are but smatterers,1 Cor. 8.2 1 Tim. 6.20. and nouices of true knowledge and vnder∣standing (whatsoeuer they may seeme to themselues or others) who haue not as yet learned to esteeme meanly of themselues,Gen. 18.27. Isai. 40.17. and verie highly of the God of glorie; the aduancement of
whom, is the chiefe end, vnto which all knowledge should tend and aime most directly. Grant O Lord, that I may vse all meanes whereby I may come vnto that knowledge which is necessarie and conuenient for me, especial∣ly that I may know my selfe a∣right, euen what I am in my self, and of my selfe; a worme of the earth, a wretched and sinfull man, dust & ashes; and thee, the migh∣tie Creator and glorious God of heauen and earth, the possessour of all things, infinite in power and maiestie, the brightnesse of whose glorie the Angels them∣selues cannot fully comprehend: that hereby I may learne alwaies to humble and abase my selfe, and to glorifie and extoll thy name for euer and euer.
The right vse and end of all know∣ledge. IT is an ordinary thing amongst men, to studie rather to know much, then to liue well; from whence it commeth (as euerie one that is of any discerning may easily see and obserue) that many, whiles they haue their heads stuf∣fed with multiplicitie and varietie of learning, yet haue their liues barren, and altogether fruitlesse and vnprofitable. How doe such deceiue themselues? whiles they professe themselues to be wise,Rom. 1.22. yet herein they shew themselues verie vaine and foolish. A strange thing: certaine it is, that men be∣ing otherwise so learned and in∣telligent, yet in this should shew themselues to bee so exceeding simple, and so grosly ignorant, as not to know the maine end of
all their knowledge; or else so ill disposed, as if they know it, yet altogether to neglect it, or little to regard it. Doubtlesse, know∣ledge is good and excellent in it selfe; a singular blessing, and both giuen and appointed of God for the great benefit of mankinde, such as without which a man is scarce a man; and by which a man commeth nearer vnto those heauenly natures; yea, doth in some sort participate of the di∣uine nature it selfe, receiuing therby a print and stampe of the image of God,2 Cor. 3.18. 1 Sam. 2.3. who is infinite in wisedome and knowledge. Know∣ledge then is excellent; who will denie it, but he that is verie sot∣tish and ignorant? and to be much desired and sought for, and that with diligence of all that haue meanes to attaine vnto it, who will, not easily grant it, that is
not depriued euen of sense and reason? But yet this wee are to know also and acknowledge (as that which is vndeniable, and to be yeelded vnto of all) that acti∣on is to be preferred before spe∣culation;1 Cor. 4.20. Mat. 7.24. Iam. 1.25. Rom. 2.13 Iohn. 8.51 the doing of things knowne before the meere no∣tion it selfe; in briefe, the pra∣ctise of a holy, a vertuous and religious life, before an idle, a bare and naked knowledge, with∣out conscience and practise: In the day of the last and generall iudgement, it shal not be so much inquired of vs, what our know∣ledge,Math. 25.35. &c. as what our works & acti∣ons haue been; how much lear∣ning we had, as how soberly, how righteously, and how religiously, wee haue liued in this present world: This is that into which then especiall inquirie shall be made, and according vnto which
we shall then chiefely be iudged. O Lord, giue me the knowledge of al those things which are meet and requisite to bee knowne of me vvhiles I liue heere below; giue me the true vnderstanding of thy word, and of thy holy and blessed vvill which thou hast therein declared & reuealed vnto vs: and as I know these things, so grant that I may bee alwaies carefull with a conscionable en∣deauor to practise and performe them; that so vsing the know∣ledge which thou shalt giue me vnto the right end vvhich thou vvouldest haue vs principally to intend & to ayme at, euen to the glory of thy name, in vvalking before thee, and before all men in the course of a holy life, and of a goodly and Christian conuersa∣tion, I may hereafter be glorified of thee in that coelestiall king∣dome
of thine, through the me∣rits of Christ my Sauiour. Amen. Another. THe more knowledge that any hath, the greater shall his condemnation bee; if he endeauour not to do those things vvhich he knoweth. If he lear∣neth not thereby to liue more holy,Iohn. 9.40 41. and to do the wil of God in all things more perfectly, he shal be sure to be beaten with more stripes,Luk. 12.47. & be more seuerely dealt with then those that are eyther al∣together ignorant, or else haue not attained vnto the like mea∣sure of knowledge that he hath. Small cause therefore haue any to be puffed vp in mind with selfe-conceit for those things vvhich hee knowes, but ra∣ther to be humbled and to feare
the greatnesse of the danger that he is in, if he be not much bet∣tered in his life, according to the measure and proportion of his knowledge. O heauenly Father, giue me to know that good, that acceptable, and that perfect will of thine; and not to know it one∣ly, but to do it also, vvith all di∣ligence, readinesse, and cheer∣fulnesse, euen as the Saints and Angels in heauen doe; that thus I may not onely auoid the curse vvhich otherwise vvould fall vp∣on mee, but also receiue that blessing vvhich thou hast pro∣mised:Ioh. 13.17 If you know these things, blessed are yee, if you do them. Diuine contemplation. AMong all creatures here be∣low, Man, onely beares the
image of God his Creator, and hath his countenance erected and lifted vp to heauen-ward, that so being giuen to a contem∣platiue life, he might thinke oft of his ascent into those heauenly places, where there is onely true peace and perfect happinesse in the fruition of that glorious pre∣sence; and in the meane time whiles he lieth here below in a strange land, as one that is in ex∣ile and banishment out of his owne countrie,2 Cor. 5.6.7.8. Heb. 11.13 be taken vp with the frequent and serious cogita∣tion of those things whereby he might euery day be more fitted and prepared for that long iour∣ney into his blessed home, those coelestiall mansions: But alas (so hath Sathan preuailed with the most, hauing great aduantage from the peruersnesse of their disordered and corrupted na∣ture)
that almost euery man (as if they had forgot themselues) neglecting or little regarding the contemplation and meditation of things spirituall and heauenly; euen from their youth vp follow their owne wayes, and in a very strange and preposterous maner peruert the end of their crea∣tion, & abode here in this world, during that short moment of time, vvhich he vvho is the rule of all time hath measured out vn∣to them;Habak. 2.6 Psal. 4.6. one addicting himselfe to base vvorldlinesse, as if there were no other riches then these fading & transitorie things which shall soone perish:Eccles. 11.9. Luk. 12.19 another to vo∣luptuousnesse, powring out him∣selfe to vaine and sinnefull plea∣sures and delights, as if there were no happinesse else-where to bee found: another to ambition,Iudg. 9.2. 2 Sam. 15.2.3. 1 Kin. 1.5. Este. 3.5. & 5.13. &c. fondly doting vpon the painted
shape of the entising & bewitch∣ing honours and preferments of this mutable and changing world, in which there is no sta∣bilitie, no stedfastnesse: and o∣thers giuing themselues ouer to more grieuous and fearefull sins; and which is worst of all, lying and continuing in them, without any sense or feeling of them, or purpose to returne, and to leaue and forsake them: and so (as if there vvere no felicitie, nor mise∣rie, but on the earth, on vvhich they tread,Iude 10. and lie groueling in a brutish sort) spend their dayes as vnprofitable burthens there∣of, and falling from the dignitie and excellent estate vvhereunto they vvere created, become like the beasts that perish, nay worse. A wofull case, and to be lamen∣ted euen vvith teares, of those that haue VVisedome and Vn∣derstanding
to see into these things, and to consider of them aright. Many there be that are wholy drowned in these outward and earthly things; few that set them∣selues to seeke after the chiefe good, and that vvhich is most to be desired of all those that are the sonnes of vvisedome. Bles∣sed Lord, keepe me from the fol∣lie and vanitie of the world, who vvalke in such blinde and dange∣rous pathes. Giue mee eyes to discerne of the true good, that vvhereunto I was created; and let my heart be wholy set vpon the same: let mee not be led as the bruite beast is, vvith those things which are sensible and carnall, but as in mercy and goodnesse thou hast stamped thine owne Image in mee; and set my face to thee-wards, so Lord, let me alwayes be looking
vp vnto thee, and meditating of those things vvhich are spiritu∣all and heauenly,Psal. 119.148. that so after a few dayes spent heere below on this sinnefull earth, in these earth∣ly cottages, where there is no∣thing but miserie and vanitie; I may liue with thee aboue in those coelestiall mansions, and en∣ioy that glory and happi∣nesse vvhich is endlesse and vnspeakeable, and that onely through the merits of thy Sonne my blessed Sauiour and Redee∣mer, who hath purchased so great things for me, & to whom vvith thee and thy gracious spi∣rit be all prayse and glory, both now and euermore. Amen. The end of the Preface.
Election. WHY the LORD hath elected vs vnto life, and suffred o∣thers to vvalke in the way vnto death and euerla∣sting perdition; there can no reason bee giuen but onely this, that it was his owne good will and pleasure:Rom. 9.11 & 11.5. Gal. 4.9. 2 Tim. 1.9 Ephes. 1.5. Iam. 1.18. it is so because it pleased him it should bee so. Oh then how infinitely are the Lords chosen bound vnto him, in that he hath taken them vnto himselfe, and let goe thousands of others, who deserued this fa∣uour at his hands as much as they did? How should their harts be inflamed towards him, for that so free & vnspeakeable loue and
kindnesse towards them? How should it euen inforce them to seeke by all meanes to testifie their vnfained loue and thanke∣fulnesse vnto him for the same?Rom. 15.36. Ephes. 1.6. Col. 1.12. O blessed Lord, how vvonder∣full is thy goodnesse towards me? how vnsearchable are the riches of thy free grace, which through thy Christ thou hast vouchsafed vnto me, denying the same vnto others, who might haue made as good claime vnto it as I. Thou hast written my name in th booke of life, when thou mightst haue suffered mee to haue my part and portion amongst those that being reiected and forsaken of thee, and cast out of thy pre∣sence, shall perish and be dam∣ned for euermore. Thou hast chosen me vnto life and saluation before all worlds, without any merits or deserts of mine; euen
because it pleased thee, O Father, and because thou hadst a loue vnto me: thou hast chosen me to be one of that small number, that little flocke of thine,Luk. 12.32 fo whom thou hast prepared a kingdome, and in whom thou wilt make the riches of thy grace and glory to appeare in most glorious manner. Oh what shall I returne vnto thee,Psa. 116.12 answerable vnto this marueilous loue and goodnesse of thine towards me? O doe thou affect my heart with it continually, & let the remem∣brance thereof constraine mee to loue thee, to reuerence thee, to sing praises vnto thee, yea to seeke by all meanes to glorifie thee, being feruent in the duties of pietie and holinesse, vvhich thou hast commanded, and fruit∣full in all those good workes vvhich thou hast prepared for
mee to walke in. Graunt this I beseech thee, for thy mercies sake, and for the merits of thy deere Sonne, my blessed Lord and Sauiour, in whom thou im∣bracedst mee from euerlasting, with so great loue and fatherly compassions: and to whom with thee and that good spirit of thine, which hath sealed the assurance hereof vnto mee, be ascribed, as due is, all honour,2 Cor. 1.22. glory, prayse, Maiestie & domini∣on, both now and for euer, Amen. Those that are elected vnto life and saluation, are elected also vnto the meanes whereby to at∣taine vnto the same. IF GOD hath ordayned mee vnto life, saith the carelesse and secure wretch, I shall be saued,
doe I what I will, or liue I how I list; and if otherwise I must needes be damned, doe I what I can, or what course soeuer I take: and therefore soule liue at ease,Eccl. 11.9. sport thy selfe in the pleasures and delights of sinne, walke in the wayes of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, let all griefe be put farre from thee, take no thought for the time to come, for howsoeuer thy life be, thou shalt surely come vnto the end which is appoynted for thee, and whereunto thou art destinated and ordayned of olde. O vaine man, how hath Sathan deluded thee? yea, how wilfully and foo∣lishly doest thou deceiue thy selfe, and beguile thine owne soule, whilest thou reasonest af∣ter such a fond and strange man∣ner; thereby laying a snare, with which, if thou bewarest not in
time, thou art sure to be intan∣gled, to thy vtter confusion?Deut. 29.19.20. See thy folly: If God hath decreed that thou shalt liue any longer, thou shalt liue till the date of that time be expired which hee hath appoynted, though thou neyther eate nor drinke, nor vse any meanes to preserue thy life: and if he hath decreed that thou shalt die shortly, thou must needs dye then, what meanes soeuer thou seekest to continue and prolong thy life: wilt thou there∣fore hereupon refuse thy meate, and neglect the meanes where∣by thy life should be maintained and preserued, reasoning with thy selfe in this wise: if God hath appointed that I shall liue, then I shall liue without the vse of these; and if otherwise, I must dye of necessitie, all the world cannot helpe mee: would not
thine owne reason conuince thee of great senslesnesse herein? and would not all that should heare of thee, condemne thee for thy simplicitie; yea, extreame folly, in that as one destitute of all vn∣derstanding, thou vvouldest through such a sottish opinion, breake in sunder the thread of thy life before the time, and euen wilfully hasten thine owne destruction, and in a desperate moode digge a pit for to bury thy selfe in before thou wert dead; yea, when as thou mightst yet see many dayes in the Land of the liuing. Good Lord, although the foo∣lish and vngodly perish in their vaine and vvicked imaginations, yet let not any of thy seruants fall into their snares, but giue true wisedome and vnderstan∣ding vnto all those that loue and
feare thy Name. Grant that as wee desire the end which vvee hope for, euen life and glory in thy Kingdome, so wee may be alwayes carefull to vse those meanes duely,Ephes. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.2. whereby vve may attaine vnto the same, working out our saluation with feare and trembling; and that as wee are desirous to escape death and de∣struction, so wee may be as care∣full to shun those things which are the cause and procurers thereof, and to auoid those paths which lead directly to the con∣gregation of the dead and dam∣ned. Thus doing vvee shall not dye, but liue and be saued eter∣nally.
The Booke of Nature. NExt vnto the Booke of Bookes, the sacred and ho∣ly Scriptures, which are written with the finger of the Spirit of God, and wherein the manifold and vnsearchable vvisedome of God, and those great and glo∣rious mysteries are most cleare∣ly reuealed to them that haue eyes to behold them:Ephe. 3.9.10. Next vn∣to this, the heauens are the clea∣rest and fayrest Booke that vve can open or reade in. Thence wee may learne what profound and excellent knowledge; yea, hee that hath skill of neuer a Letter, may herein read distinct∣ly the magnificence,b 37.23. al. 19.1. the power, the wisedome, the glory and ma∣iestie of the Almightie Lord and Creator of all things.m. 1.20 Hee is al∣together
inexcusable, that hath no skill, no desire, no endeuour, to gather instruction vnto him∣selfe out of it; or that hauing it so long open before him, shewes himselfe to be a Non-proficient, one that is nothing at all bet∣tered by it, in regard of his know∣ledge and vnderstanding of those things vvhich concerne GOD, and his Worship and Seruice. Lord, let that Booke of thine be neuer closed or sealed vnto me; neyther let mine eyes bee so dimme, that I should not bee able to reade those things which thou hast written therein in such great and Capitall Letters, and vvith such a cleare and legible hand: but giue mee the right vnderstanding of the same, and grant that from thence I may learne to feare, to loue, to praise, and extoll thy great and glo∣rious
Name, vvho art so ex∣ceeding vvonderfull in all thy workes. Gods marueilous workmanship in the frame of the world. IF thou seest a stately Palace, or some rare and exquisite frame, wrought by the hand and by the curious Art of man, thou dost presently vvonder and ad∣mire at it, and vvithall giue large commendations of him whose workemanship it was. Loe, thou beholdest euery day that most exquisite and glorious frame of heauen and earth, the worke of Gods owne hand;Psal. 8.3. and 135.6. the roofe vvhereof is bespangled and a∣dorned vvith those celestiall creatures,Eccle. 3.11 those glorious Lights, the Sunne, the Moone, and all
those bright and glittering Stars, in vvhich the wonderfull glory and vvisedome of the Creator shineth forth so clearely,Psal. 104.24. & 111.2. that euen the blinde Heathen could not but see and acknowledge it; yea, the vvhole building where∣of, euen euery part of it, is most admirable, such as that it shew∣eth plainely, that it had no other to be the Maker and builder of it then GOD himselfe;Iob 38. and yet thou neuer or seldome lookest vpon it vvith an holy admira∣tion, thou art neuer moued with the serious consideration of it, to acknowledge the great and vvondrous vvorke of God there∣in, and to magnifie the Creator of all things. O the blindnesse and senslesnesse, nay,Psal. 92.5.6. brutishnes of man! Lord, doe thou raise vp my thoughts to the due medita∣tion of thy vnspeakeable wise∣dome,
power, goodnes & mercie in those things which thou hast created and made for thine owne glorie, and for the vse and benefit of man; euen those wonders of thine in the heauen, the earth, the sea and all places:Psal. 107.12.24. Rom. 1.20 Let me in them see the inuisible things of thee who art God and Lord of all, e∣uen the infinite power and glory of thy eternall and incompre∣hensible Deitie:Iob. 26.14 Let me acknow∣ledge thy goodnesse and mercie towards mee (a worme of the earth) for whose sake thou hast made heauen and earth; yea, let mee neuer cease to praise and glorifie thee, vvhose name is so excellent in all the vvorld, who art Creator and Go∣uernour of all things, holy and blessed for euer. Amen.
The creatures prouoke man to serue his Creator. ALL creatures serue their Lord and maker. The birds of the ayre by their pleasant notes and cheereful melodie, sing praise vnto their Creator;Psal. 104. the fishes of the Sea, the beasts of the field, by seruing for the vse of man according to the ordi∣nance and appointment of God. Euen the creatures without sense and life, the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres; all these keepe their places, their motions which he hath assigned vnto them; al these declare the glorie of God their maker, and shew forth his power and wisedome.Psal. 145.10. Man only is found disobedient, vnseruiceable; nay, rebellious against his Creator,
who of all should chiefly be ser∣uiceable and obedient vnto him, since all things were made for his sake, euen to draw him to loue, to duetie and obedience, that so he might glorifie his Creator vvho had so highly honoured and ad∣uanced him.Ierem. 8.7. O blessed Lord, farre be it from me, to be more senselesse then the bruite beasts, yea, the insensible creatures themselues. O let it be farre from me, to be so vnkinde, so vnduti∣full, so ingratefull, so stubborne and disobedient towards thee my God, my Creator, my Father, my Soueraigne, to whom I owe all seruice and homage; yea, let me passe the beasts in dutie and obe∣dience, or else euen they (those dumbe and vnreasonable crea∣tures) shall be witnesses to testi∣fie against me, and cause thee to proceed in iudgement,Psal. 8.4.5. and to
giue sentence with more rigour and seueritie to my deeper con∣demnation. The greatnesse of the benefit of the redemption of mankind by Christ, and how much we are bound vn∣to God for the same. IF any one of vs were taken by his enemy, put into a darke pri∣son or deepe dungeon, where he could see no light of the Sun, or of the Moone, not any of the Starres for a long season; and be∣sides this, were laden also with many heauy chains and yrons, and no waies able to helpe him∣selfe out of that misery, yea, in regard of any meanes which him∣selfe could vse were cleane out of all hope euer to bee deliuered, sure to rot and perish; would he
not thinke himselfe much be∣holding, and greatly indebted vnto him that should freely of his owne loue and voluntary ac∣cord seeke to bring him out of that wofull estate, vnto light, life, and libertie; especially, if so bee that hee that did him this fauour were one of whom hee neuer deserued any thing: yea, to whom hee had beene a profes∣sed and open enemie?1 Tim. 1.17 Reuel. 4.10.11. O then how much more ought wee (euen all such as are the cho∣sen of God, and the redeemed of Christ Iesus) to magnifie the grace and the tender mercie of God our Sauiour towards vs? how deepely are we to acknow∣ledge our selues to be indebted vnto him for the exceeding ri∣ches of his loue and vnspeakable kindnesse towards vs? how are we to praise his name, and to extoll
his infinite goodnes and bounty, so graciously vouchsafed, and so manifestly declared vnto vs; see∣ing that no prison, no darknesse, no bondage, no miserie, is,Isai. 42.6.7. Zach. 9.11. or can be like vnto that vvherein vve were inclosed, and shut fast vp, vvithout all hope of euer enioy∣ing the light of that glorious Sunne of righteousnesse, or once beholding the bright beames of that rich grace & mercie of God, which now shine so clearely & so comfortably vpon vs in the face of Christ Iesus our Lord; & seeing that we being holden vnder sinne and Sathan, and sitting in the sha∣dow of death, vvere neuer able in any wise, by any meanes whatsoe∣uer procured by our selues or o∣thers (Angels, or any creature else) to haue recouered our selues, but should haue lyen rotting in that vvoful and damnable estate,
and so haue perished eternally, if God of his meere loue had not vouchsafed speciall grace and fa∣uour vnto vs, and that vvhen vve were his enemies,Rom. 5.10 Isay. 49.9. Luke. 1.79. and freed, and redeemed vs from that mi∣serable bondage and thraldome, yea, from the power of darknesse, euen death and destruction it selfe, and translated vs into that glorious libertie of his Saints in light; and this by no smal or or∣dinarie meanes,1 Pet. 1.18. but by the shed∣ding of the precious blood of Christ his deare son our blessed Sauiour, who loued vs, and accor∣ding to the determinate counsell and decree of God, gaue himselfe to be crucified & slaine for vs; euen for vs that had dealt most trea∣cherously and rebelliously against him, & made our selues altogether vnworthy of the least mercy and fauour of his. O mercifull God,
heauenly father, giue me to see vvhat, and how great this benefit is which I haue receiued from thee, in and through thy Christ. Let me euer be mindfull of it, and vnfainedly thankefull vnto thee for it; yea, as this bountifull and inestimable goodnesse of thine towards me (so sinfull a wretch, and so vnworthie a crea∣ture as I am, and haue beene) deserueth all praise, so let mee in∣deuour by al meanes to set forth and to publish the same, vnto the glory of thy grace, whereby in the riches of thy loue, through thy beloued, thou hast done so great and wonderfull things for me, for which I can neuer be suf∣ficiently thankefull, nor returne that praise which is most due vn∣to thee. Oh that thou wouldest draw me yet neerer vnto thee, & cause me euen to melt in loue to∣wards
thee my God and Sauiour, and with heart, voyce, and life to magnifie and extoll thy name; yea, to giue vp my selfe both bo∣dy and soule, and all that is within me, vnto thy seruice, and to the aduancement of thy glory, both now and euer, Amen. Thankefulnesse to God for all his fauours towards vs, especially that wonderfull loue of his in our redemption. IF GOD had giuen vs nothing but our being, wee ought to be stirred vp with the remembrance of that alone, to be thankeful vn∣to him, and to acknowledge his mercie and goodnesse towards vs herein. But now, seeing that hee maketh vs Lords of all these senselesse and vnreasonable crea∣tures,Psal. 8.6.
whereas hee might haue made vs bruitish, and voyd of sense and reason, like vnto them,21. (for wee were all made of the same common matter vvith them, and were in his hands as the clay in the hand of the potter to bee wrought to what forme and fashion it pleased him the Creatour of all things;42.) see∣ing he hath preferred vs before all these visible creatures, making them to serue vs, whereas he might haue subiected vs vnto them; and in euery creature both in heauen and earth, doth sparkle towards vs his loue with innu∣merable benefits: yea, (which is the summe of all,) in Christ vpon the Crosse, casts forth the flame of perfect charitie, and of his infinite & vnspeakeable mer∣cie and kindnesse towards vs; sure our hearts are frozen and euen
dead within vs, if vvee be not moued to loue him with an entire and vnfained loue. How should vvee bee affected vvith these things? O blessed LORD touch my heart with a true and liuely sense and feeling of the riches of that endlesse & incom∣prehensible loue of thine towards me: inlarge this narrow heart of mine, that I may be able in some measure with all thy Saints to comprehend the bredth,Eph. 3.18.19 length, depth and height of that won∣derfull and vnspeakeale kindnes of thine towards me in thy Christ which passeth all knowledge. Inflame my affections with the meditation thereof, and let mee be constrained thereby to loue thee with all my heart, with all my soule, with all my strength; euer to acknowledge thy free grace and marueilous goodnes
towards me, and for the same to sing prayses vnto thee continu∣ally, who onely art worthy to be praised and magnified now and for euer, Amen. Who are the redeemed of Christ. THey that are Christs are led by the spirit of Christ, that dwels in them, rules them,Rom. 8.9.14 go∣uernes & sanctifies them thorow∣out. It freeth them from the law of sinne and death, and causeth them to liue the life of grace and holinesse:Rom. 8.2. they are crucified with Christ, in regard of their corrupt and fleshly nature, and the sinnefull lusts and affections thereof;Gal. 2.19. & 5.24. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. 2 Cor. 6.16. so that they liue not now (as they did before) but Christ liueth in them, & maketh them a mansion and a holy tem∣ple,
fitted and prepared for the blessed and glorious God, to rest and to abide in for euermore. This is a truth that the Scrip∣tures of God haue sealed, and therefore cannot be denied, or once doubted of, except we will giue the lie vnto the spirit of truth it selfe, who hath spoken it. Whose then are they that are led altogether by the spirit of the vvorld (euen that vvicked spirit that worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience) by the spirit of enuie,Ephes. 2.2. malicious∣nesse, vncleannesse, prophane∣nesse, &c. walking after their owne lusts, following the sway of their owne corrupt and sinnefull nature, and delighting in fulfil∣ling the will of the flesh, and of the minde, resisting the spirit of grace, and rebelling against Christ,Luk. 19.14 and that light which hee
hath reuealed vnto them, in his word; so that they will not haue him to rule ouer them? Surely,Luk. 19.14 1 Ioh. 3.8.10. they are exceeding blinde, and marueilous full of selfe-loue and vaine presumption, if they can thinke that they are Christs, re∣deemed by his bloud, and iusti∣fied by his grace: nay, if they can once imagine themselues to be otherwise then of Satan (the god of this world) such as (if they con∣tinue in that estate wherein they are) he will cause to be slaine be∣fore his face,Luk. 19.27 Rom. 8.13 when hee shall ap∣peare in the brightnesse of his glorie; yea,Psal. 2.9. 2 Thes. 1.8 Matt. 25.46. bruise and crush them in pieces, as it vvere, with a rod of yron, and cast them into hell, where they shall be kept for euer in chaines of darkenesse with the rest of those damned spirits, because they haue taken part with Sathan against Christ,
and shewed themselues to be e∣nemies to him, in refusing to be∣leeue & obey his blessed Gospell. Let not therefore their owne hearts (which are very deceitful) nor Sathan (who hath beene a lyar & a murtherer from the be∣ginning) deceiue & delude them any longer.Iere. 17.9. Iohn 8.4. Let them know what they are, and whose they are; and let them (as they haue cause) feare and tremble, whiles they thinke of it, and labour by all meanes to dispossesse that euill spirit that heretofore hath had the rule & sway ouer them, and in stead therof to haue the holy & sanctifying spirit of God dwel∣ling and abiding in them, cruci∣fying and mortifying their wic∣ked and corrupt nature, quicke∣ning them vnto a spirituall life, and leading them forward conti∣nually to the constant and con∣scionable
practise of all the du∣ties of righteousnesse and holi∣nesse required of them, that hereby they may haue the Lords seale set vpon them,Rom. 8.14 and be mar∣ked out for the redeemed of Christ Iesus, those whom he hath bought from this world and Sathan, to liue with him in glo∣rie for euer. Gratious LORD, as it hath pleased thee of thy free and vndeserued grace to redeeme me by the bloud of Christ my Sauiour, & to vnite me to him by a true, sauing, and iustifying faith, apprehending and laying hold of his merits and absolute satis∣faction for my full reconciliation vnto thee; so vouchsafe also in the riches of thy mercies, and for thy promise and couenant sake,Ier. 32.40. Ezek. 36.26.27. made with mee in that beloued One, to indue me with the spirit of Christ vnto true sanctification
and holinesse both of heart, of life, and of conuersation: poure out those cleane waters vpon my soule, which may purge and cleanse me from all iniquitie; let me finde the flesh daily more and more crucified in mee, with the sinnefull lusts and affections thereof; and let mee feele the spirit powerfull and effectuall in mee; yea, mightily preuailing within me, to the mortifying and abolishing of the olde man of sinne, and to the subduing of euery corruption, especially those which heretofore haue bene the strongest in mee, and had the greatest hand ouer mee; as also to the quickening and increasing of euery sauing grace in mee, faith, loue, hope, ioy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, meekenesse, sobrietie, tempe∣rance, patience, godlinesse and
the rest: that so not onely liuing, but also walking in the spirit; yea, hauing the spirit of thy Christ ruling and raigning in me, I may be more assured daily, vpon good euidence, that I am not of the world, nor of Sathan, but that I am a true and liuely member of the mysticall body of the Lord Iesus, redeemed by his pretious blood, shed for mee; that I am his and he is mine,Cant. 2.16 Ioh. 17. ver. 10.23▪ 24. Ephes. 2.6 & 4.10. Ioh. 14.2.3. and that toge∣ther with him after a while, I shall be raised vp vnto those hea∣uenly places, into vvhich hee is already ascended, and where I shall enioy that blessed fellow∣ship and communion of thee the euer-liuing God, in the ful∣nesse of ioy and blessednesse, lauding and praising thee vnces∣santly with all thy chosen Saints and elect Angels for euermore, and that onely through the
merits of my blessed Sauiour, to vvhom with thee, O Father, and thy gracious Spirit, three di∣stinct persons, but one most wise d glorious God, be ascri∣bed (as due is) all honour, might, and maiestie, dignitie and domi∣nion, both now and euermore. Amen. Hypocrisie, the vanitie and dan∣ger of it. HOW great is the folly of those that chuse rather to serue God in hypocrisie then in truth and sinceritie; to seeme to be holy, then to bee so indeed? They please not God; yea, rather they are an abhomination vnto him,Psal. 5.6. his soule loaths them, be∣cause they make the outward
badge and cognizance of his children a cloake of their impie∣tie and wickednesse. They want that vvhich is the life of a Chri∣stian, true spirituall comfort, and constant and heauenly ioy.Iob 20.5. They lose that blessed reward vvhich is promised vnto them; and them onely that walke in vp∣rightnesse and singlenesse of heart before him:Gen. 17.1 Prou. 10.9 and that viz∣zard which through vanitie they haue put vpon them, to delude the world withall, shall at length be plucked off from their faces, to their shame and perpetuall reproach and infamie. For that vvhich is fained and counter∣fait cannot stand long;Mat. 21.19 and it is a true saying, Hee that begins Religion in Hypocrisie, ends in Apostasie. O blessed LORD, let my heart be alwayes vpright before thee. Let it be my de∣sire
euer rather to bee more then I seeme to bee, then to seeme to bee that vvhich I am not, (for alas what will it a∣uaile mee to dissemble before thee my God, who art of so cleer eyes that nothing can be coue∣red or hid from thee,Iob. 26.6. who art the seer and the searcher of the very heart and reines,Heb. 4.13. Pro. 15.11 and discer∣nest the secretest thoughts and intents of the minde and soule; yea, long before they are.) O farre be it from me to turne aside into crooked wayes vvith those that are workers of iniqui∣tie,Psal. 125.5 Iob. 15.34 & 27.8. Matth. 24.51. & 23.27. whom thou hatest, and to whom thou hast threatned end∣lesse and euerlasting destruction and confusion without recouery; but let it be my continuall care and endeuour to serue thee in spi∣rit and in trueth all my dayes, and to walke continually as in thy
presence, seeking to please thee, and to increase more and more in all the fruites of righteous∣nesse and perfect holinesse, that so my vvhole course may bee acceptable vnto thee, I may bee filled vvith the ioyes of thy spirit heere,Iob. 8.21. & 15.11. (those sweet and heauenly refreshings which the hypocrite may talke of, but neuer soundly tasted of) and bee crowned vvith glory heereafter in thy kingdome for euermore, Amen. God beareth with the frailties and weakenesses of his Children. PARENTS delight in their Children, not onely vvhen they are come to mans estate, but also vvhen they begin first to creepe on the ground, and
to speake some few words in an imperfect manner. And vvill GOD our heauenly Father de∣spise the poore endeuours of his vveake and little ones,Psal. 119.5 vvho cry vnto him continually for strength and abilitie to per∣forme that which hee requireth of them,Rom. 7.24. and grieue, yea, mourne vncessantly that they are not able to walke with more stedfast∣nesse and sinceritie in his wayes. Farre be it from vs, once to thinke or imagine this: for what were this else, then to make the Lord lesse pittifull,Psal. 86 15 and 145.8. lesse tenderly affected and compassionate to∣wards his, then earthly Parents are vnto theirs; the very thought whereof is no small sinne, but ex∣ceeding displeasing vnto him, whose loue towards his children doth infinitely surpasse and ex∣ceede the naturall affection of
any Parent whatsoeuer,Psal. 27.10 euen as farre as the heauens exceede the earth;Psal. 103.11.13. (their loue being but a shadow of that which is in him in an infinite and vnspeakeable manner;) yea, what were it else, then to call his truth and faith∣fulnesse into question, and to de∣ny him to be that which he hath declared and reuealed himselfe to be, and bound himselfe by promise,Exod. 34.6.7. Mal. 3.17. to shew himselfe to be vnto his, whom he hath chosen vnto himselfe, and vpon vvhom his delight is set; yea, it were to derogate from his glory, seeing he will be glorified as well in the acknowledgement of his good∣nesse and mercy towards his children that feare him,Pro. 8.31. as of his iustice and seueritie towards the vvicked and vngodly that know him not. Blessed Lord, and gracious
Father, thou knowest the desire of my heart;Psa. 119.40 thou seest vvith how many weaknesses and infir∣mities I am compassed about continually, how many lets and hinderances are cast before me in the way of godlinesse, which leadeth vnto life and saluation; thou discernest perfectly vvhat I am made of,Psa. 103.14 how fraile and fee∣ble my nature is, euen as the dust, or as the withering hay; in∣to what forme and mould I am cast, yea, that I am nothing with∣out thee, and thy quickening and strenthening grace; ready to sinne against thee euery houre, euery moment. O be thou mer∣cifull vnto me, spare me as thou hast promised, as a Father doth his little ones in vvhom hee de∣lighteth. Pardon my sinnes, heale my infirmities, accept my weake and imperfect endeuours, giue
me a continuall supply of thy heauenly grace, and a greater measure of strength and abilitie to walke before thee vvith a per∣fect heart, and to serue thee with chearefulnesse, and alacritie and in truth and sinceritie all my dayes, vntill I come at length vnto that perfection both of grace and glory, whereof I shall be made partaker in thy King∣dome for euer. Amen. Good Motions. EVery good motion arising at any time in the heart of any one, is the voyce of God him∣selfe,Isay 30.21 speaking inwardly vnto the soule and conscience of man, and therefore neuer to be lightly ac∣counted of, much lesse to be smo∣thered, or wilfully resisted and
gainsaid (for that is a most feare∣full thing,Ierem. 6.16. & 18.12. euen rebellion against God, and the voyce of his spirit vvhich speaketh in them, and vnto them) but alwaies diligent∣ly to be harkened vnto, and by all meanes to be imbraced and cherished, that so it may become effectuall, and not die and vanish away without fruit or profit, to the hardening of the heart, and the making of it the more vnca∣pable of grace and goodnesse; the ordinary and most fearefull iudgement which the Lord vsu∣ally bringeth vpon men for so great a wickednesse.Rom. 1.28 Psal. 106.15. & 81.12.13. 1 Thes. 5.19. Good Lord, suffer mee not at any time to quench thy spirit, to resist that heauenly voyce of thine spea∣king vnto me according vnto thy word, least thou giue me ouer to hardnesse of heart;Cant. 5.2. but whenso∣euer thou doest knocke at the
doore of my heart and soule,Reue. 3.20 let me be ready presently to open vnto thee, and to giue thee the best entertainment that I can, by yeelding my selfe euery-waies pliable and flexible vnto thee: vvhensoeuer thou doest inspire me with any good motion or ho∣ly desire, grant that I may vse all meanes whereby the same may be quickened and increased, that so thine owne worke may daily be more and more perfected in me. Yeelding to the wicked motions and desires of the heart. THe vaine and wicked desires of the heart can neuer be satisfied; yea,Isa. 57.20. the more that any doth feed them, the more insa∣tiable shall he find them. He can
neuer be filled, neuer haue e∣nough of them. Who seeth not this most clearly in the couetous, the voluptuous, the ambitious, yea, in all such as giue the reines vnto their owne sinfull and inor∣dinate affections. It is as it were a fire in their bones, which will ne∣uer be quenched, till the fewell which ministreth continually new matter vnto it be quite taken away. It is as it were the flame of hell, kindled by Sathan him∣selfe, to the scorching of the con∣science, which is drowned in these earthly, these sinful, & these sen∣suall delights. It is like a greedy worme which continually lies gnawing vpon the soule, and in time will eate out the very heart & intrals, if the euil be not timely preuented. O blessed Lord, with∣draw my heart I beseech thee, daily more and more from these
lying and deceitfull vanities, which can neuer yeeld me any true contentment, but rather be a cause of torment and vexation vnto me, robbing me not onely of thy grace but of my peace al∣so, seeing my minde can neuer bee satisfied with them. And grant that the desires of my heart may be set wholly vpon thee, who art the fountaine of all goodnesse, of all true blisse and happinesse, that so I may be sa∣tisfied and replenished with the plentifulnesse and abundant ri∣ches of thy grace and heauenly blessings,Rom. 2.10 Gal. 6.6. and haue thy peace and mercy resting vpon me, and abiding vvith me all my daies. Amen.
How fearefull a thing it is for a man to be left vnto himselfe, and to his owne desires. THere can no greater euill befall any man in this world, then to be left vnto himselfe,Psal. 81.12 Isai. 1.5. & 63.17. vn∣to his owne will and waies, and to the corrupt desires and affe∣ctions which are most plea∣sing to his wicked heart and vnsanctified nature. Of all iudge∣ments which the Lord doth suf∣fer to come vpon men in this life, it is the greatest and most dan∣gerous, though thorow the mar∣ueilous blindnesse and sottish∣nesse that is in men, least eyther discerned, or feared of the most. Better were it for them by any meanes to be restrained from those things which their corrupt
nature is prone vnto; yea, better were it for them to bee held downe continually with some painefull sicknesse and grieuous disease, or to be laid fast vp in close prison all their liues long, and to endure the greatest out∣ward misery that can be, vnto their dying houre. O blessed Lord, giue me not ouer vnto the waies of mine owne heart (an insensible, but of all iudge∣ments the most fearefull) leaue me not vnto my selfe, suffer me not at any time to wander and goe astray from thee by follow∣ing those things which are good in mine owne eyes, and pleasing vnto carnall and corrupt reason; O let me neuer fall into so great an euill, but be thou mercifull vnto me to order and dispose all my affections, to guide and go∣uerne me with thy spirit, and to
direct my steppes according vn∣to the rule of thy holy and bles∣sed word; that so being kept and preserued by thee from those sinnes vvhereunto of my selfe I am prone and inclinable, and established in euery good vvay and vvorke, I may glorifie theein my life, and find ioy and comfort in my death, and after death liue and raigne with thee eternally in fulnesse of all glory and hap∣pinesse, through the merits of Christ my Sauiour. The many differences betweene a naturall and a spirituall man, one that is truely sanctified. VVHat difference is there betweene a carnall and naturall man, and him that is spirituall and truely regenerate
How opposite and contrary are they in their thoughts, desires, inclinations, proiects, purposes, and practises; in briefe, in the vvhole course and carryage of their liues? It is wonderfull to obserue and see how exceeding∣ly they differ, what a marueilous contrarietie there is betweene them: the naturall man doth alwayes eye those things which are visible and temporall; the spirituall,2 Cor. 4.18 Heb. 11.1.27 those things especially which are inuisible and eternall. The naturall man doth delight altogether in the creatures, and in fulfilling the wicked lusts and vaine desires of his owne heart,Mat. 24.38 1 Pet. 4.4. Gen. 19.9 and therefore neuer grieueth more then vvhen hee is most crossed in those courses vvhich hee so much affecteth;Psal. 33.21 Psal. 37.4. and 95.1. 1 Sam. 30.6. but the spirituall mans chiefe delight is in the Creator, the fountaine of
all true pleasure and delight; and in feeding his soule vvith good thoughts,1 Pet. 1.3.6. blessed hopes, holy desires, and diuine and hea∣uenly meditations,Psa. 119.97 vvith which hee can neuer bee satiated; vvhereas for all earthly vanities hee hath a great distaste,Gal. 6.14. and a base esteeme of them, or at least, hee looketh ouer them vvith a kinde of holy disdaine; he doth not so much affect them, but that hee doth earnestly desire and endeuour to restraine his minde from the sinfull and in∣ordinate loue of them, and ne∣uer thinkes himselfe better at ease, then when hee can most weane his affections from them,Eccle. 2.17 and crucifie that corrupt nature of his, with the wicked motions and concupiscence thereof,Gal. 5.24. then which he findeth nothing more grieuous and burthensome vnto
him, or from which hee hath a greater desire to be altogether freed.Rom. 7.24 The naturall man is led vvith the spirit of Sathan,Ephes. 2.2 and of this vvorld, vvhich ruleth and raigneth; yea, rageth in him: the spirituall man is led by the Spirit of Christ and of God,Rom. 8.9.14. that holy and sanctifying Spirit of grace; vvhich dwels in him, rules, gouernes, and directeth him, and leadeth him forth into the vvayes of righteousnesse and holinesse. The naturall man doth vvholy vved himselfe to the vvorld,Hosea 2.5. Iames 4.4. and therefore sa∣uours nothing but the things of this earth,Ioh. 3.31. Rom. 8.5. dotes fondly vpon them, and lyes groueling vp∣on this slime and baser molde, like a Mucke-vvorme, vaine∣ly supposing that there can be no greater happinesse then to enioy abundantly the pleasures,
honours, preferments, profits, and commodities thereof; and therefore being foolishly ena∣moured,Phil. 3.19. 2 Pet. 2.19 or rather strangely be∣sotted, with the vvhorish loue of it, doth in a base and sordid man∣ner euen deuore himselfe to the seruice of it: But the spirituall man doth not so loue the world, but that (when hee hath his eyes in his head,) hee flyes from it, as farre as vvith conuenience hee may, knowing the vanitie, and the exceeding both danger and deceitfulnesse of it;1 Tim. 6.9 10.17. Eccles. 1.2.14. 1 Cor. 7.31 Psa. 119.19 Heb. 11.9. Phil. 3.20. Gal. 6.14. he vseth it as if hee vsed it not, maketh himselfe a stranger to it, and had rather vtterly renounce and giue it ouer, and be diuorced and quite separated from it, then bee so much yoaked vnto it as hee seeth others are, or tyed vvith so straite bonds of loue and a∣mitie as that seeketh to chaine
and fasten him vnto it, and so to draw him to a more neare and entire vnion vvith it then he de∣sires; yea, so contrary is it to his minde to be matched or ioyned in any league vvith it, that he ac∣counteth himselfe most happy vvhen he hath least to do vvith it, and most freed from the en∣cumbrances of it; that so he may soare aloft, and haue more fel∣lowship and communion with God, and greater liberty wholy to deuote himselfe to his worship and seruice, assuredly perswading himselfe, that herein and in no∣thing else consisteth true felicity and happinesse, and therefore vvisely maketh it his chiefe trea∣sure, that vvhich he esteemeth farre aboue all other things. The naturall man seeketh for comfort and contentment onely in sensible and externall things;
the spirituall,Eccl. 11.9. Luk. 12.9.29. & 16.19 Psal. 4.6.7 & 37.4. in the inward gra∣ces of Gods Spirit, and in the as∣surance of his loue and fauour, vvhich is a greater ioy and re∣freshing vnto him then all other things whatsoeuer? Yea, the sweetnesse of the world is bit∣ternesse to him in comparison of this.Phil. 2.21. The naturall man see∣keth his owne priuate good, that which may be most for thee ad∣uancement of his outward state in the world; his owne credit, ho∣nour, profit and commodity, vvithout any respect vnto o∣thers, the care of whom he thinks litle or nothing appertaineth vn∣to him, if they be not such as na∣ture hath linked and chained vn∣to him by such bonds as the ve∣rie Heathen themselues would not breake. But the spirituall and regenerate man seeketh the good of others,1 Cor. 24.33. 1 Cor. 13.5 as well as his owne,
yea, he doth rather desire (if he may conueniently do it) to bene∣fit many others then himselfe a∣lone, since he knoweth well that he was not borne for himself, but for others also, and that he is no lesse bound to others then to himselfe,Iames. 2.8. and therefore not one∣ly to wish, but, as farre as he can, to procure their good with the same affection that he doth his owne. The naturall man cares not how much, or how oft he offends or prouokes others, so that hee may please himselfe, and satisfie his owne lustes, yea, it's a pastime to him many times to grieue, disquiet, and molest o∣thers, and those especially that are most innocent and harme∣lesse,Psal. 56.5. & 97.4. Psal 59.3. & 64.4. neyther thinking nor spea∣king, much lesse working any e∣uill against him, but rather pray∣ing for him, and seeking and de∣siring
his good. The spirituall man on the contrary is very loth to giue offence vnto any, yea, to the meanest and simplest ones;2 Cor. 6.3. 1 Cor. 10.33. 1 Ioh. 2.20 Rom. 15.2 1 Cor. 8.13. 2 Cor. 6.3 2 Cor. 13.5. he seekes to please his neighbour as wel as himselfe, and had rather doe or suffer that which would be some waies inconuenient to him, then that his weake brother should be displeased or offended at him; he is very wise and wary this waies; so farre is he from de∣lighting to grieue or prouoke o∣thers, that he is much grieued when he seeth that others take occasion (where there is none gi∣uen) to be grieued and displeased with him, or by meanes of him; and seekes presently in a louing affection towards them to heale that wound, and to salue that sore which they haue rather brought vpon themselues then taken from him. The naturall man
doth scarce loue his best friends, except it be carnally & in world∣ly respects,Psal. 41.6.9. & 62.4. so farre as he may make vse of them, and receiue some benefit by them; the spiri∣tuall man doth loue, and that en∣tirely and vnfainedly euen his greatest enemies,Psal. 35.13.14. Mat. 5.44. Acts. 7.60. 2. Sam. 16.11 2. Cor. 11.30 Phil. 4.12. 2 Cor. 12.10 Acts. 5.41. those that seeke his hurt, and are most malitious∣ly bent against him. The natu∣rall man is greatly afraid of con∣tempt, disgrace, and ignominie; he cannot with patience indure to be reuiled, or abased by any meanes; the spirituall man wil∣lingly vnder-goeth this; yea, he reioyceth when he is thus hum∣bled; he accounteth it a matter of great ioy that he hath this ho∣nour vouchsafed vnto him, to suffer rebuke for Christ, and for righteousnesse sake; he estee∣meth more of it then of all the treasures of the world,Heb. 11.26 hath more
ioy whiles he suffereth, then o∣thers whiles they wrong him; or if he be any waies grieued, it is not for his owne sake so much as for theirs who are his enemies vniustly, and speake euill of him falsely to the dishonour of God, and the great hurt of their owne soules. The naturall man is ne∣uer throughly content when his estate is best,Num. 11.6 Psal. 78.18 but seekes causes of discontentment where there are none; the spirituall man is al∣waies content (euen when his estate is at the worst) or at least he desireth,2 Cor. 4.8 Phil. 4.11 and endeauou∣reth to be so. The naturall man seeketh for praise and estimation amongst men, to be in account and reputation aboue that which he deserueth, and to be honou∣red and applauded of the world;1 Sam. 15.30. Ester. 5.9 the spirituall man aymeth in all things at this especially, that
whatsouer becomes of him, or howsoeuer it fareth with him, God may be glorified by him; that he may receiue that praise and honour which is due vnto his name,1. Thes. 2.6. Phil. 1.20 2 Cor. 6.8 though himselfe suf∣fers the greatest disgrace, and be exposed to the greatest ignomi∣nie and dishonour that may be. The naturall man esteemeth death his greatest enemy; the ve∣ry remembrance of it is excee∣ding bitter vnto him; he thinks (as it is indeed) that he loseth all when that comes; the spiri∣tual man iudgeth it to be no losse, no hurt, but great gaine and ad∣uantage to him,Phil. 1.21. and therefore feares it not as an enemy (though in it selfe an enemy and some∣what fearefull to him till he loo∣keth wishly on it, and with other eyes then those of flesh and na∣ture) but addresseth himselfe wil∣lingly
to entertaine it as a wel∣come guest,Luk. 2.29. & a meanes of much good vnto him. He desires to be dislodged, and to be with Christ his Sauiour, and saith often with Dauid,Psal. 42.2. when shall I come and appeare before the presence of my God? when shall I behold his face in glory, and be satisfied with the plenty of his house? and commonly the nearer he is vnto death, the greater tast and feeling hath he of the life to come. The naturall man liues by sense,Iude. 10. and beleeues nothing but that he can see reason for, or bring vvithin the compasse of his braine; the spirituall man liues by faith, be∣leeuing things that are farre a∣boue the reach of sense and na∣turall reason,Gala. 2.20. & which the world∣ling wonders that he can beleeue and trust to. So great is the dif∣ference betweene a naturall and
spirituall man euen whiles they liue together in this world; yea, more then hath beene yet set forth vnto vs. O heauenly father, weaken I humbly pray thee, and diminish the power of corrupt nature daily more and more in me; and vouchsafe vnto me such a plentifull increase of thy grace, that I may in euery thing see a manifest difference in my estate, and in the whole conuersation of my life from that which is in those that are altogether carnall and vnregenerate; yea, that I may finde such an inward change and alteration in me, such holy mo∣tions and desires, and such sancti∣fied affections, as are in none but in those that are renewed by thy grace, and become truely spiritu∣all, hauing the liuely impression of thine owne image, which sinne had before exceedingly defaced:
that thus I may not onely haue more full assurance of the cer∣taintie of my election and salua∣tion, hauing that seale of thy spi∣rit apparantly set vpon me which is proper to thy elect & chosen, but also may be euery day better inabled to passe the rest of my time, vvhich I am to liue, in this sinnefull world, more to thy glo∣ry then I haue done heretofore, euen as it becommeth him, whom in thy infinit mercy thou hast translated from the state of nature, into the state of grace, from the power of darkenesse into the kingdome of thy deare Sonne, to whom with thee, O Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be all prayse, and thankesgi∣uing, both now and euermore, Amen.
Exhortations and Reproofes. THey that doe not, as occasi∣on serueth, and according to their places and calling, mutually exhort, rebuke and admonish one another, they haue forgot∣ten what charge the Lord hath layd vpon them,Mat. 18.15 Heb. 3.13. they neglect those necessarie duties which the lawes of friendship and charitie require of them.Leuit. 19.17. Pro. 27.5.6. They are regard∣lesse of the good estate of their neighbors; for what more whole∣some, what more profitable then a seasonable exhortation, admonition or reprehension? It is as pretious balme, of a very soueraigne nature for the curing of internall and spirituall mala∣dies, of great vse and necessitie, for being blinde in our imper∣fections,
how needfull is it for vs to borrow our friends eyes, and to lend them ours, that so wee may aduise, admonish, and cor∣rect each the other to the mu∣tuall good one of another. Nay, (that I say no more) they that are sparing, or altogether care∣lesse of this dutie, they are, or at least seeme to be, either enuious, or else quite voyd of all compas∣sion towards their poore bre∣thren, and those amongst whom they liue and conuerse; vnwil∣ling to doe so much for them, as one that hath any good nature in him, would doe for the bruite beasts.Exod. 23.4.5. For vvho would not (as the law of God also enioyneth) take vp the beast euen of his e∣nemie vvhen it went astray, and vvere ready to perish,Pro 12.10 and yet they (cruell friends and mer∣cilesse men) will not seeke to re∣forme,
and to saue the soule of their friends, yea,Iam. 5.19.20 of their bre∣thren, vvhen it wanders out of the way of life and saluation, and is in perill (for want of their hel∣ping hand) of imminent destru∣ction and vtter confusion. Farre be this from me, O Lord, forgiue me my former desert and want of the due performance of this so necessary and so profitable a du∣tie, which thou commaundest, and euen Nature it selfe calleth for at my hands; and make mee more carefull for the time to come, of the discharge thereof in a wholesome and seasonable maner. O let not that bloudy voice of Caine once proceed out of my mouth, or the least thoght of it once lodge in my breast. Am I my brothers keeper?Gen. 4.9. O let not the bowels of compassion e∣uer be so wanting in mee, that I
should (as farre as in mee lieth) suffer any of thine to perish through the neglect of that du∣tie vnto which thou hast so straitly bound mee, but let mee alwayes bee ready with all wise∣dome and Christian affection, both to exhort and admonish o∣thers,Pro. 15.31 Heb. 13.22 and to be rebuked and re∣claimed my selfe, whensoeuer I shall wander and goe astray from thee and from thy wayes. A Preseruatiue, needfull in these corrupt and infectious times. THey that liue in a bad ayre, or infectious places, will be carefull to prouide themselues of preseruatiues, that so they may not receiue that hu t there∣by, which otherwise cannot bee well auoyded. What poyson is
so infectious as sinne? vvhat ayre so corrupt and dangerous as the example of the wicked and prophane multitude? and what age more contagious then this in which wee liue, wherein vertue is become odious; yea, as a thing monstrous amongst ma∣ny,Zach. 3.8. pietie accounted simplicitie and foolishnesse, a reproach and disgrace vnto men, so that the most are halfe ashamed of the very profession of it; and vice and vngodlinesse aduanced and much made of, as though it were a speciall grace and orna∣ment vnto those that haue put it vpon them. How trulie may we say with the Wise-man in this re∣gard,Eccle. 6.7. I haue seene seruants on horse∣back, & Princes walking as seruants on the ground; bruitishnes, and base seruile courses extolled and set in great excellencie, and the most
princely and heroicall vertues and graces of the minde, deba∣sed and troden vnder the feet of the vile and contemptible. As∣suredly,Iob. 30.8.9 1 Ioh. 5.19. the world lieth in vvic∣kednes, the very dregs and sinke of former times is falne into this last and worst age, the venime whereof spreads it selfe daily more and more to the corrup∣ting of others. How needfull therefore is it for euery one in such infectious places, and in so contagious an aire to get the best preseruatiues whereby they may bee kept from that poysonous steame, with which most are cor∣rupted, and vvhich in the end will proue deadly if it bee not timely preuented. O LORD, seeing it cannot be auoyded but that I must liue for a time in this present euill world,Ier. 9.2. vvhere vertue and true godlinesse is con∣temned,
and vice and wickednes gets the vpper hand; the exam∣ples vnto goodnesse so rare, vnto vngodlinesse so many, abounding euery where: seeing there be so many occasions to infect and poyson my soule, and to draw me from that simplicitie & godly purenesse which thou requirest.Psa. 51.6. 2 Cor. 1.12. O giue mee grace by all meanes to prouide my selfe against the danger of this euill, by vvalking wisely and circumspectly; yea,Eph. 5.15. do thou so preserue mee vvith thy grace, that I may neuer be cor∣rupted as others are, nor fall from my vprightnesse and since∣ritie; but carefully auoiding all occasions of sinne, as the very bane of my soule, be free from those deadly diseases, into which others fall without recouery, and so die and perish in them.
Delight in sinne, what folly it is. I Can neuer maruell enough to see the extreame folly of the most who finde so much sweet∣nesse,Iob 20.12 13 and take so great pleasure & delight in those things which they know will be as bitter in the end as gall and wormewood; nay, as death it selfe.Pro. 20.17 Iere. 2.19. Eccl. 7.10. Poyson, though it be sweet, yet because it is dead∣ly, is carefully auoyded: but sinne which is the bane of the soule, how greedily is it swallowed,Rom. 6.23. be∣cause it is pleasant to the taste? Lord, suffer me not to eate of the dainties of the wicked, lest I pe∣rish with them, but cause thou my soule to loathe and abhorre them, that so I may liue for euer. Amen.
How dangerous it is to take liberty vnto ones selfe in any one sinne. HEe that giueth himselfe li∣bertie in any one sinne, is as one that lifteth vp the sluces, or breaketh vp the damme;2 Sam. 11.2.4.15. Matth. 26.70.71.72 euen flouds will ouer-flow and ouer-runne him; many, great, and dan∣gerous waters will breake in vp∣on him and ouer-whelme him if hee looke not to it in time. Good Lord, suffer me not vvil∣lingly to yeeld vnto any sinne at any time, but grant that I may be carefull alwaies to stoppe it at the beginning, least it get a head and preuaile against me; yea, doe thou make vp the manifold breaches of my soule, least I be drowned in perdition, and perish with the world of the vngodly.
Another. ONe rotten member vvill hazzard the whole body, if it be not in time cut off, and so the danger thereby preuented. This is true in the body, much more in the soule: one sinne will bring death and destruction both of body and soule,Ezek. 18.31. if there be not a timely preuention. Lord, if my right eye cause mee to offend,Mat. 5.29.30. let mee not spare but pluck it out, and if my right hand cause me to offend, let mee not delay to cut it off, and to cast it from mee. Let no sinne bee so deare vnto mee, as that I should be loath to be ridde of it; yea, not willing to cut it cleane off from mee, though with paine∣fulnesse, rather then thereby to perish euerlastingly.
Custome in sinne how dangerous it is. AS hard is it to plucke vp a tree by the rootes, as to cause him to leaue his sinne,Ier. 13.23. who hath a long time beene accusto∣med vnto it. Experience euery where giueth too euident proofe of this; in the vncleane person, the drunkard, the couetous worldling, &c. The longer that any hath continued in any sinfull course, the more is he daily roo∣ted and setled in it, and with the more difficultie drawne from it vnto goodnesse. His minde be∣commeth euery day more blind, his conscience more seared, his heart more hardened, his vvill more crooked, his affections more disordered, and himselfe
faster tyed and bound,Act. 8.23. as it were, vvith many cords and chaines vnto his iniquitie, so that it is impossible for him to be loosed, and to be pulled out of the snare of Sathan,2 Tim. 2.26. except the LORD vouchsafe an extraordinarie grace, and worke as it vvere a miracle vpon him. So dange∣rous a thing is custome and con∣tinuance in any sin, in any kinde of wickednes. O Lord, although through weaknesse and frailety I fall daily into sinne,Eccl. 7.22. 1 Ioh. 1.8. (and can∣not doe other-wise) yet let mee neuer lye or continue in the same, but seeke presently to re∣couer my selfe and to arise spee∣dily out of it; that so howsoeuer I am subiect vnto many sinnes, yet not one of them may at any time haue power and dominion ouer me.
Another. SEest thou how it is with him that is tumbling downe from an high and a steepe hill; how hee cannot possibly stay him∣selfe till he come vnto the bot∣tome, and by that fearefull downe-fall be quite depriued of life, so that he can rise no more, but lyeth groueling on the earth as a dead man, not able to stirre hand or foote: so is it with those that once giue themselues to the committing of any sinne, or to delight in any wicked and vn∣godly course; they fal daily more and more, and that very dange∣rously, neuer staying, till in the end (if the Lord be not the more mercifull, to holde forth his hand to keepe them from that
danger, and to saue them,) they fall right downe into the bot∣tomlesse pit, euen into the depth of hell, the place of vvoe and torment, to the endlesse perdi∣tion both of their soules and bodies. O Lord, order my wayes aright; grant that I may auoide all occasions and prouocations vnto euill, and that I may walke wisely and circumspectly all my dayes, that so I may not onely be preserued from that vvofull downe-fall of the vvicked, but also liue in peace and safetie vn∣to the end; and in the end hauing escaped the danger of this euill and sinfull world, may liue with thee in glory for euer. Amen.
Sinne committed, presently to be repented of. HEe that hath taken downe poyson, wil labour as soone as hee can possibly to cast it vp againe, or else to procure some remedie for it, least otherwise it proue his bane; and the sooner hee doth this, the better it will be for him. Euery sinne that any one committeth, is poyson to his soule: if hee seeke not to be cleare of it, hauing once drunke it downe, it vvill be his ruine, his death. How carefull therefore ought euery one to be, when he hath fallen into any sinne, to seeke for a present re∣medy against it; to purge and cleare himselfe of it, by casting it vp againe by a true and vnfained
confession of it; and to take heed that hee endeuour by all meanes to abstaine for euer after from it, least otherwise hee perish with it. Good Lord, let me alwayes con∣sider how dangerous sinne is vn∣to my soule; how that if I lye in it, if I keepe it in me vnrepented of, it must needes be my destru∣ction, and therefore whensoeuer through frailtie or infirmitie I shall be ouer-taken with any sin, and drinke downe that deadly poyson vvhich Sathan offereth vnto mee in a golden Cup, and vvhich my corrupt nature doth exceedingly desire and long af∣ter,Iob. 15.16. thinking that there is great sweetnesse in that which indeede is as bitter as death:Ier. 2.19. graunt that I may haue an inward loathing of it, and finding my soule sur∣charged with it, presently empty my selfe of it, and be more care∣ful
for euer after to refraine from it, that so I may not dye but liue and prayse thee. Sinne truely deciphered, that be∣ing once knowne, it may be euer loathed and abhorred of all. A Strange thing it is that men should delight in any sinne, yea, that they should not lothe and abhorre, & vtterly abandon it for euer; if they eyther consi∣der the vile and cursed nature of it, or the wofull and damnable fruits and effects of it. First, it is the most vile and abhominable thing in the world: the stincke and noysome smell of it hath in∣fected heauen and earth, and made all those glorious Crea∣tures, the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres, subiect vnto vanitie, so
that they must be purged by fire in that great day of the Lord.Rom. 8.20 2 Pet. 3.10 In Scripture, besides many other names which set forth vn∣to vs the filthinesse thereof,Ezek. 16. Ierem. 13.27. Psal. 51.2. it is compared to the most loath∣some disease in the world, euen the filthy and contagious Lepro∣sie, a disease so much abhorred, that hee that was infected there∣with among the Iewes, by Gods owne ordinance was to be exclu∣ded and shut out from all com∣pany,Numb. 5.2 2 Kin. 15.5 as vnmeet to liue and con∣uerse amongst men; and yet this was but a type and a shadow of the filthinesse and vncleannesse of sinne. If wee had seene the Iewes Leprosie, it vvould haue seemed very loathsome to vs, we would haue wondred at it, for the contagion of it was such, that it did not onely infect the vvhole man who was tainted with it, but
his garments also which vvere about him,Leu. 13.47. and sometimes also the very wals of his house,& 14.34.45 so that it was faine to be broken downe, and to be cast out of the Citie, into an vncleane place: But if we had eyes to see this spirituall Le∣prosie of the soule, it would seeme much more loathsome vnto vs, wee vvould vvonder at it, & at our selues, that we should once euer giue our selues in any sort to delight in it; yea, it would humble vs, and cause vs to blush,Rom. 6.21. and to hang downe our heads for shame; nay, with holy Iob,Iob 42.6. euen to abhorre our selues, and to abase our selues vnto the dust, and to thinke of our selues as most vile, and more loath∣some then any Lazar that lyeth by the way, full of blaines and sores; vnworthy euer to come into Gods presence, or to par∣take
of his holy things, who are so vnholy our selues, and so ex∣ceedingly polluted and defiled from top to toe,Isa. 1.6. from the crown of the head to the sole of our feete, with that inbred corrup∣tion and actuall pollution; yea, wee would neuer be quiet or at rest in our selues, till wee had procured that grace and mercy of the Lord, whereby we vvere washed and cleansed from the fil∣thinesse of our sinnes and ini∣quitie,Psal. 51.7.2.7. Heb. 10.22 vvith the sprinckling of the bloud of that immaculate Lambe, and the pouring out of those cleane vvaters of his san∣ctifying Spirit,Ezek. 16.25. Zach. 13.2 which flow out of that heauenly Sanctuarie, and so found the vncleane Spirit de∣parted from vs. Such is the filthy and loath∣some contagion of sinne; nay, surely, it is so ougly, so vile, and
so loathsome, that neyther I, nor any else, is able fully to de∣cipher, or to expresse the ougli∣nesse and loathsomenesse there∣of: if wee vvere able to paint it forth, or to lay it open in it true colours, there is no man but vvould euen be flaited and af∣frighted at the very sight and appearance of it; there is none but vvould hate and abhorre it more then the most loathsome Toade, the most venemous Ser∣pent, or the ougliest Creature in the vvorld. For there is no toade so loathsome, no Serpent so ve∣nemous, no creature so ougly as sinne is: nay, if a man (if it were possible) should make a confe∣ction of all the Spiders, Toades, Snakes, Adders, Serpents, Vipers, and all the most filthy things in the world, it vvould not be halfe so vile and infectious as Sinne is.
That this may appeare yet more clearely, thinke with thy selfe, what is the most detestable and execrable thing (besides sinne) that possibly can be na∣med. Is it not the Diuell? I know thou vvilt and needs must say so. For his very name doth affright men; and vvhen vvee haue named him, vvee thinke that we haue reckoned the worst, and the most loathsome & hate∣full thing that can be: yet I tell thee, that euen Sathan himselfe, that hellish Fiend, is not so fil∣thy, so loathsome, and defor∣med as sinne is. Maruell not at this, as though it could not so be, but consider throughly of the matter, and thou wilt easily perceiue and willingly acknow∣ledge it to be so. For, vvhat is it that makes the Diuell so much abhorred both of God, men, and
Angels? Is it not sinne, and sinne onely? yes doubtlesse: it cannot be denyed. For who knowes not (that knowes any thing) that those damned Spirits, euen all the Diuels in hell,Iude v. 6. were at the first, more glorious, excellent, louely, and amiable Creatures, then any mortall man whatso∣euer; yea, that they were like Starres, Angels of light, shining and glistering with puritie, ho∣linesse and righteousnesse, before they vvere stained and defiled vvith the loathsome contagion and infection of sinne and trans∣gression. Sinne onely it was that blemished that goodly beautie: Sinne onely it was that darkened that vvonderfull brightnesse and that resplendent glory, vvherein they vvere at the first created, and wherein they should for euer haue continued, had they not
sinned against the Maiestie of GOD their Creator. Sinne one∣ly it vvas that dimmed all their light, and damped all their glo∣ry, the beames vvhereof vvould haue dazeled any mortall eye. Sinne onely it vvas that of Citi∣zens of that Royall palace, that heauenly Paradise, that celestiall Ierusalem,2 Pet. 2.4. the Presence-chamber of the Lord of glory, made them wretched bond-slaues, and most miserable captiues, in that deepe dungeon and darke prison of hell, vvhere they are kept in euerlasting chaines of darknesse vnto that great damnation. Sin onely it vvas that transformed them into damned Spirits, cast them downe from the brightnes of heauenly glory, into the dark∣nesse of hellish misery, and of bright-shining Starres, as it were, made them most ougly and
loathsome Diuels. In briefe; Sin, and Sinne onely, it vvas, that made them as loathsome as euer they vvere louely; as ougly as euer they vvere amiable, as great∣ly abhorred of God and of all his holy and elect Angels, as euer they were loued of them before. And were they freed from sinne, they vvould become Angels of light, glorious creatures. Now then, if sinne doth make others, (yea, such glorious crea∣tures, as the Diuels once were) so vile and loathsome; yea, odious vnto all other creatures: oh then how vile and loathsome a thing is sin it selfe? Surely so hydeous a monster is this monstrous Monster, (I know not how to tearme it) of Sinne, that those vvhose eyes GOD hath once opened, that they are able right∣ly to discerne of the same, vvill
vnder-goe any torment,1 Ioh. 3.8. any sor∣row, any punishment whatsoe∣uer, rather then once vvillingly commit the same; as wee may see in the examples of many holy Martyrs,Heb. 11.35 36.37.38. and godly Pro∣fessors, who haue endured the losse of their goods, lands, li∣uings; yea, and life it selfe: and willingly suffered all kinde of tortures and torments that their cruell Aduersaries and bloudy Persecutors could deuise or ima∣gine, rather then they vvould be brought to that one sinne of denying the knowne truth or dissembling their profession. Notable to this purpose is the saying of that auncient and reli∣gious Father, that he would wish rather to be torne in pieces with wilde beasts then willingly and vvittingly to commit any sinne. And from a more heroicall and
diuine spirit,Anselme. was that speech of him, that professed, that if hee should haue the choyse eyther to burne in hell fire continually, or to sinne any sinne willingly, hee vvould rather choose those end∣lesse & vnspeakeable torments, then yeeld consent to the other: so vile and monstrous did sinne seeme vnto him. What should I say more? Men would bee much afrayde, if the Deuill should appeare vnto them in some shape; yea, the very naming of him strikes a deepe impression of feare into many. But could these once behold sin it selfe, which makes the deuill so odious, if they could view it, as it is indeed, they would be wonder∣fully flaited and affrighted at the very appearance of it, it vvould make their hearts to tremble within them, and their haire to
stand vpright on their heads; they would flie from it more then from the most poisonous Ser∣pent or venimous creature in the vvorld; yea, as much as from the Deuill himselfe. They would ne∣uer shake hands with it, as they haue done heretofore, they would neuer keepe company with it, they would neuer be quiet till they were freed from the dominion and slauery of it. It would bee euen death vnto them to haue any fellowshippe therewith, as no doubt it is to the godly man; who, because hee seeth he cannot be fully rid of it in this life, therefore is constrai∣ned often to crie out, as one that were stabbed at the heart, Woe is me that I remaine in Mesheth,Psal. 120. and dwell in the tents of Kedar: or as one that had the pangs of death vpon him.Rom. 7.24 O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliuer me from this body of death? So it is with the re∣ligious soule, vvhen it is ouer∣swaied with the corruption of it owne sinfull nature, or carried a∣way violently in a sort with the forcible blasts of Sathans temp∣tations: Oh so far it is from doing it willingly or from taking ful de∣light in it, that it rather com∣plaines and mournes bitterly (though secretly oftentimes) for it: It gals that man at the very heart for it; it is as it were, a pricke in his eyes, or a thorne in his side: yea, euery sinne vvhich hee commits, when hee once knowes it, is as an Awle at his heart: it stingeth and woundeth his conscience, and maketh him to mourne like a Doue, and chat∣ter like a Swallow. In a word, the very considera∣tion of this, that he should com∣mit
so filthy a fact, and so foule an offence, causeth his heart and soule euen to bleed within him. Neither hinders it any thing at all, which some might bring with some colour for the gaine-saying of this. What, is sinne so vile and loathsome a thing as you make it? How comes it to passe then that it seemes so sweet, so amiable and pleasant, as it doth vnto the most? How commeth it, that it allureth, enticeth, and draweth men vnto it, causing them to follow it, to loue, em∣brace, ioy and delight in it: yea, to serue & obey it with all greedi∣nesse, and to spend all their time, their strength, vvit and vvealth in the seruice of it? Can sinne be so vile and deformed a monster, and yet bee sought after vvith such great care and diligence, and pursued vvith so great delight
and cheerefulnesse, as if it vvere some excellent & pretious thing, vvhich might vvell cause all to be enamoured with it. To answere thee in this; be∣hold the depth of the mysterie of Sathan, here it lies; herein consists the chiefest and craftiest slight and pollicie of that wily Serpent, the Deuill, the enemie of mankinde, vvhereby he hath deceiued & deluded many thou∣sands, to their vtter ouerthrow. For he knowing wel enough that sin, if it should appeare in his own likenes, would be abhorred of all men, deales very cunningly and deceitfully, like a crafty marchant. He casteth a goodly gloze vpon it: He painteth, coloureth it, and guilds is ouer with the false co∣lours of his deceiueable pollicie, & withal, casts a mist before mens eies, making them fondly belieue
that its a goodly thing, a very pleasant, delightsome or profita∣ble thing, euen as the counterfeit and craftie Iugler maketh simple men beleeue, that an Oister-shell or a Counter is a faire peece of siluer or gold. And thus hauing trucked and trimmed vp, as it vvere, this cursed darling of his, couering it with the false shape of some seeming good, and clo∣thing it with the deceiueable cloake of pleasure, profit, delight, or one goodly outside or other, he presents it to the view of the poore seduced sinner, as some rare or pretious thing, who thinking that hee hath met with some great treasure, fals presently in loue with it, and will part with it for no good; and thereupon entertaineth and lodgeth this vile monster in the secretest closets of his heart and soule. Thus Sa∣than
dealeth with men as the Panther or Leopard deales with the beasts: For that spotted and rauenous beast (as is reported of him) knowing how the rest of the beasts flye from him, by reason of his ougly head, vvhich fraies them, hides onely his head, till they comming about him and gazing on his goodly spotted hyde, nothing suspecting, or fea∣ring the danger they are in, sud∣denly hee breaketh out and ma∣keth a prey of them: so the de∣uill, knowing well how much sin would scare men, if they should see that ougly & deformed head of it, hideth that by all means he can, & setteth out the fine colou∣red skin thereof, viz. the pleasing delights & the deceitfull profits and preferments of this vaine and transitory world;Gen. 3.5. Mat. 4.8. with the gaud & glory whereof whiles they are be∣witched
as it were, and foolishly enamored, neuer thinking of that hellish monster which cunningly shrouds it selfe vnder those good∣ly shewes & entising allurements, he thereby intangleth them vn∣awares, and hauing caught them in his clawes, preyeth vpon them, and deuoureth them with vvide & open mouth, in most fearefull manner. Oh if men could see that filthinesse, and that vile an loathsome deformitie vvhich lieth lurking vnder that vaile vvhich Sathan hath drawne ouer it to deceiue and delude men vvithall; if they could but con∣sider, that vnder those sweet and delightsome baits which are offe∣red vnto them there are most dangerous and deadly hookes, which if they be not very wary, will quickly draw them vnder the deepe waters of euerlasting de∣struction;
if they were so wise as to remember that in that golden cup of the pleasures and profits of sinne there is nothing but most ranke poyson, the venome whereof, vvill euen drinke vp the health, yea, the life of their soules; if they could behold that loath∣some tode, and that stinging ser∣pent which lieth secretly hidden vnder the greene and pleasant leaues of worldly and sinfull de∣lights; if they could thinke that in those golden apples there is such deadly poyson as was in the apple which our first parents ta∣sted of through the deuils sug∣gestion. In a word; if the eyes of their minds were opened that they might see the mystery of Sathan in this worke of iniquity, making sinne which is so vile and so de∣testable in it selfe to seeme so
sweet, so louely, and so amiable vnto men, then I verily perswade my selfe, that they should not need to be disswaded from it by so many motiues: the very sight and appearance of it would be reasons and arguments sufficient to make them quite out of loue with it, yea, to loath, hate and ab∣horre it for euer, and to be asha∣med and confounded in them∣selues, that they had so much to do with it heretofore. And that it may yet the more be detested & vtterly abandoned and forsaken of all, it is good to consider how exceeding displea∣sing it is vnto God; for being so loathsome in it selfe, it cannot but be loathed of him who is of so pure eyes, that he cannot behold wickednesse.Haback. 13. Now, how fearefull a thing is it, to delight in that which is so displeasing vnto that glori∣ous
maiestie? Euery one will be afraid to displease his Prince; how much more him who is the Prince of Princes, in compari∣son of whom all the most prince∣ly Potentates and mighty Mo∣narchs in the world, with all their glorious pompe, and shining traine are nothing; whom the Angels, the heauens, & all things in the world, besides sinfull man, and the damned spirits, do serue and obey; who with the word of his mouth made all things, and with the breath of his mouth is able in one moment to confound all things,Psal. 104. and to bring them to nought againe.Psal. 103.20. Iames. 2.19. Isai. 6.2. The Angels praise him and wonder at his greatnes; the deuils feare him & tremble at his power; al the Saints reuerence and adore him for his goodnesse. Seraphin and Cherubin continu∣ally sing laud & praise vnto him
with couered faces;Ier. 8.22. and shal man, miserable mortall man, be so shamelesse as to set so litle by him, as to do that which is such an abo∣mination vnto him,Ierem. 44.4. Iesem. 3.6.7.22. & 6.28. & 11.9. & so excee∣ding displeasing vnto his Maiesty; yea, rebellion & high treason, as it were, against him who is the Lord of glorie. Who doth not tremble when he thinkes of this? Oh me thinks the very remembrance of this should cause the most obsti∣nate & hard-hearted sinner in the world to feare, to shiuer and shake, and to be amazed and a∣stonished,Dan. 5.6. as Belshazzar was, euen in the midst of all his brauery & iollity. Me thinks it should be a forcible motiue to arrowse and to awake out of the dead sleepe of carnall security, the most secure, the most carelesse and drowsie-headed sleeper in the world. Yea, me thinkes it
should be a bridle to curbe and to restrain the most cursed Cain, the most prophane Esau, the most desperate Iudas, the greatest blas∣phemer and outragious swearer, the most licentious and lasciui∣ous person that liues vpon the earth, as surely it will if they be not blind-foulded by Sathan, so that they cannot see their great folly, and marueilous presump∣tion: For knowest thou, O man, that committest the least sinne a∣gainst God, knowest thou (I say) what thou doest? Knowest thou what a glorious maiestie thou therein offendest? No, but the deuil blindeth and imboldeneth thee to thy destruction. For, were thine eyes open thou woul∣dest not for all the world, no not for a thousand worlds, commit so great a villany against so great a God. Saint Iohn fell downe in a
swound at the very sight and ap∣pearance of him.Reuel. 1.17 Iohn 18.6. Exod. 33.20. Iudges 13.22. And no maruel: for who is able to see him & liue? who is able to behold the great∣nesse of his glory & the bright∣nesse of his Maiestie? And is it not then a great marueile that thou, vvhosoeuer thou art, darest be so bold as to set thy self against him, & euen to spit in his face as it were, by preferring euery vile creature before him, and doing that which is so displeasing and abominable in his sight, hauing had expresse charge and commaundement of him to the contrary.Ierem. 2.12. O heauens be astonished at this, be afraid, and vtterly confounded; so vve may well crie out, considering the strangenesse and vvonderful boldnesse and presumption of sinnes in this high dishonour and open contempt of God. Oh that mens eyes were open, that they
might plainly see and consider of these things.Psal. 103.14. & 104.29. O that they would cast downe their eyes, and see what they themselues are, dust, earth, weake and fraile creatures, whose breath assoone as it is ta∣ken from them they die and pe∣rish: and withall, lift vp their eyes and see what an infinite, power∣full and glorious God, what a high, mighty, and dreadfull ma∣iestie they offend and prouoke grieuously in the wilfull commis∣sion of any one sinne whatsoe∣uer. It is a wonder, yea, it is the wonderfull and vnspeakeable mercy of God that the vvhole frame of heauen and earth is not for sinne, yea, for one sinne, vt∣terly confounded and brought to nought. And it may vvell seeme marueilous and vvonder∣full in our eyes, that the Lord be∣ing of such infinite glory, power,
and maiestie, should beare with men for the committing of the least sinne that can bee, being a thing so contrary to his nature, euery way so much abhorred of him. O there∣fore that men would loue him for his goodnesse and great mercy, in hauing spared them∣selues thus long, who com∣mitted so many and so great sins against him; and that they would feare him for his power and vnspeakeable Maiestie, and bee mooued thereby neuer willingly to offend him here∣after by doing the least sinne whatsoeuer, (as men count little) but carefully shunne it; yea, hate, detest, and ab∣horre it from their hearts and soules. For this end, consider yet fur∣ther, how pleasing it is vnto Sa∣than,
as it is exceeding displea∣sing vnto God; so wonderful plea∣sing & delightsome vnto him. He delights in it, as being his owne brood and cursed of-spring; he first brought it into the world,Iohn. 8.44 and him it representeth, being the expresse image of his corrupt and monstrous nature, and therefore he must needs take pleasure in it, seeing euery thing loueth his owne, and that which doth most resemble it selfe. Besides, how pleasing it is to him, it is euident by that great desire which he hath, and that great diligence which he vseth to draw, and euen to force men vnto it. It is ney∣ther siluer, gold, iewels, pearles, or any such like pretious thing in the world vvhich he seeketh af∣ter. He cares not for all these, he regards them not at all; he is not so couetous or ambitious in this
regard as men are: But this is his care, his studie; this he laboreth for, and aymeth at continually, euen to make the soules of men spotted and defiled with sinne, that so he may see in them the re∣semblance of his loathsome vi∣sage and ougly deformity. This he continually hunteth after, a∣bout this he spendeth all his la∣bour and industrie. He seeketh continually where he may hatch this cockatrice egge, and so bring forth that loathsome monster of abhominable sinne. He com∣passeth the earth to and fro, and trauerseth ouer euery part and parcell of it, sparing for no pains, so that he may effect this. All his plots and proiects tend vnto this. It is euen meat & drinke vn∣to him to bring men hereunto. And therfore he vseth many fet∣ches, many policies & craftie de∣uises
to inueigle, to insnare, and to intangle men before they be aware of him; one while by this means, another by that. For as the Scribes and Pharisees compassed sea and land to make a Proselyte,Math. 23.15. a superstitious hypocrite, like vn∣to themselues:Iob. 2.. So Sathan seekes by all means to make others like vnto him, euen besmeared and defiled with sinne as he is. Hee makes as though hee were a friend, when he is a most deadly foe; yea, he will not sticke to giue men a view of all the plea∣sures, profits, and preferments of this life, and to say vnto them as he did vnto Christ;Math. 4.9. All these will I giue thee, if thou wilt wor∣ship me; if thou wilt obey me in the commission of any sinne. Thus he offereth continually vnto his guests a draught of most deadly poyson, in the golden
cup of sinfull and worldly plea∣sures, profits and delightes, that so with the sweet relish and pleasant sauor therof, he may in∣tise & allure them to drink deeply of it, till they be inchanted by it, and become like vnto himselfe transformed into his own image. In briefe, he seeks by all means to draw, and euen to hale men vnto the committing of it. It's his daily and vsuall trade. He neuer setteth himselfe to any other busines. He is neuer at rest, but alwaies stirring and striuing to atchieue and to bring to passe this diuelish en∣terprise; and will neuer be satis∣fied, although he hath imployed himself & his wicked instruments in this cursed worke, both night and day, almost for the space of these six thousand yeers together. With such an eager desire to ef∣fect & accomplish it, is he carried
continually; an euident proofe that he hath marueilous delight and pleasure in it. Now who would delight in that which the diuel so much delighteth in? who would take any pleasure in that which is so pleasing vnto him? What a shame & disgrace is this to any one? what a blot and staine vnto the soule of man? There is none of vs but would take it very hainously of him, that should tell him that hee did nothing else in the whole course of his life, but seeke to please the Diuell, and to satisfie his desires: & yet thus doe all they that loue sinne, and giue themselues to any kinde of ini∣quity. Fie vpon it, that any should so much forget himselfe, as to take any pleasure or delight in pleasing so foule a fiend, so dead∣ly a foe, thereby in the meane while vexing and grieuing the
good and gracious spirit of God?Rom. 6.21. Who should not blush euen to thinke of the committing of it, seeing thereby he not onely dis∣pleaseth God, whom he ought to loue aboue all things, but also exceedingly pleaseth the Diuell, making him sport and pastime, as it were, and causing him to triumph ouer him, who of all creatures ought to be most loa∣thed and abhorred of him. To please the Diuell and to displease God, what a shame is it? to ho∣nour a slaue, and to dishonour the Master, what a folly is it? to labour to serue him, and to ful∣fill his lusts with the losse of their owne soules; yea, to preferre him before the eternal and most glorious God of heauen & earth, the author of all our good; oh what a haynous and horrible fact is it? what greater abomina∣tion
can be deuised? And yet thus doth euery one that liueth in sinne willingly. He placeth the Diuell before God: hee selleth himselfe from God to the Diuel for a few transitory pleasures, profits, and preferments of this wicked world: nay, hee doth, as it vvere, put God and the Diuel together in one and the same ballance; God in the one Scale, and the Diuel in the other; and at last makes the Scale wherein the Diuell is, to weigh heauiest, pre∣ferring him before the Lord of glory. A wonder of wonders it is that any should be thus foolish, thus sottish and senslesse; and a thing vvhich one vvould thinke incredible, if we did not see thou∣sands continually thus blinded and bewitched by Sathan. Consider yet further the cur∣sed and wofull effects of sinne,
and wonder how thou canst de∣light in it any longer. It cast the vvicked Angels from heauen to hell,2 Pet. 2.4. from the height of glory to the depth of misery:Gen. 3.24. It turned our first Parents and all their po∣steritie out of Paradise; & where∣as before they were in a most blessed and happy estate, made them of all creatures (next vnto Sathan himselfe) most miserable, odious and abhorred of God, and subiect to infinite euils, in this life,Deut. 28. Leuit 26. Psal. 32.10 Pro. 24.20. Isay 6.10. and 57.20.21. Ephes. 2.2. and in the life to come: infi∣nite sorrowes, plagues, miseries, and most fearefull iudgements; blindesse of minde, hardnesse of heart, deadnesse of spirit, horror of conscience, vexation and an∣guish of soule, bondage vnder Sathan the Prince of darknesse; and banishment from God (the fountaine of all blisse)2 Thes. 1.9 and the hope of the glory of his hea∣uenly
Kingdome. It defaceth Gods Image, disfigureth the soule, and makes men monsters,Isay 1.3. worse then the bruitish creatures; All these are the fruit of sinne, besides the many and grieuous maladies and diseases with which the body and outward man by meanes hereof is afflicted and oppressed; who is able to rehearse them? or who is there that doth not often complaine of them, and grone vnder the burthen of them? And finally, it openeth a gate into hell, and setteth it wide o∣pen for men to enter in at to their eternall confusion.Mat. 7.13. The Diuell is the Porter, as it vvere, standing continually at the gate, ready to receiue them in: and sinne is the key that vnlocketh the dore,Pro. 21.1 and leadeth vnto that place of destruction, the Con∣gregation
of the dead and dam∣ned. And such is the folly and extreame madnesse of wretched and sinfull men, that they daily knocke at hell gates, and call as it were, for the Porter to let them in; yea, as though that were not e∣nough, they bring the key, and open the dore themselues, which leadeth vnto the fearefull place of endlesse desolation. Who is there so blinde, so hard-hearted, so void of Grace, yea, Reason and common vnder∣standing, vvith whom all these motiues should not be of force to cause him to lothe all man∣ner of sin, and vtterly to forsake the same, and to giue it an euer∣lasting farewell,Eph. 5.11. how pleasing and delightful soeuer it hath see∣med heretofore? yea, that should not thinke it too much that hee hath done heretofore,1 Pet. 4.3. and bee
ashamed of it,Psal. 119.106. and purpose and resolue willingly neuer to doe the like hereafter? O mercifull GOD, discouer vnto mee daily, more and more, the cursed nature, and vvofull effects of sinne and iniquitie: let the filmes and scales which Sathan seeketh to draw ouer mine eyes to blinde and delude me, be taken away from me. Let not those faire shewes and coun∣terfeit glosses of sinful pleasures, profits, honour, and the vaine and deceitfull things of this world, vvith which hee seekes to bleare mine eyes, any longer de∣ceiue me, as they doe the most. But let me see daily more cleare∣ly in the Chrystall glasse of thy Word, the ougly and deformed image of sinne, the wretched na∣ture, and fearefull and damnable effects of it; how haynous and
grieuous it is in it selfe; how ex∣ceeding offensiue vnto thee, and how pleasing and delightfull vn∣to Sathan; how it alienateth and estrangeth men from thee,Isay 59.2. defa∣ceth thy Image, and transfor∣meth them into the likenesse of Sathan,Iohn 8.44 1 Iohn 3.8 maketh them his slaues and vassals; how it depriueth them of thy grace & of all good things,Ier. 5.25. and bringeth all euill and mischiefe vpon them, both in their bodies and soules, in this life and in the life to come. Let me see these things, and wisely consider of them, and so bee brought to a true hatred, and thorow dislike and detestation of all manner of sinne and wic∣kednesse, how pleasing soeuer it hath been vnto my nature here∣tofore, and howsoeuer it seeketh with deceitfull pretences to draw me vnto it againe. O let me not
bring so great a blot, and so foule a staine vpon my soule, by doing that which is such an abhomina∣tion vnto thee, and would bee a cause of so much woe and mise∣rie vnto mee. But teach mee to auoyd it, and to flye from it, whensoeuer it first presents it selfe to me, in what shape or dis∣guised forme soeuer it seeks to inchaunt mee: yea, the more closely and couertly that it seekes to winde it selfe into me▪ and to finde intertainement within me, the more let me abandon it, and forsake it, hating it euen vvith a perfect hatred, as thou hatest it. And let my vvhole delight bee in seeking to please thee, more then euer I haue displeased thee heretofore. Let it be the ioy of my heart, to walke continually before thee, with a pure, and a sin∣cere, and vpright heart in all the
wayes of righteousnesse and ho∣linesse, and to cleaue fast vnto euery good thing vvhich thou commaundest; that so I may not onely be freed from thy wrath, and from the euils and miseries which sinne bringeth vpon the vvicked and vngodly, but also be receiued into thy loue, be made partaker of the riches of thy grace and glory; thou mayest take pleasure in mee, and reioyce ouer me thy poore creature, to doe mee good all my dayes: the Angels in Heauen,Luk. 15.10 those glo∣rious attendants of thine, may reioyce and sing to see thy name glorified by mee, and at length may translate mee into that blessed kingdome of thine, there to liue and reigne with thee, and with all thy elect and holy Ones, in fulnesse of glory and happinesse for euermore; and
that onely through the merits of Christ my Sauiour, who with thee, and thy Spirit, bee blessed, and praysed, both now and al∣wayes. Amen. Another most effectuall motiue to the leauing of all sinne, from the consideration of Christs death and Passion. COnsider O man, who hath redeemed thee, by what he hath redeemed thee; from what and vnto what hee hath redee∣med thee. Christ Iesus, the Sonne of the euerliuing God, equall vn∣to his Father in Maiestie and glo∣rie, the Heire of the world,Hebr. 1. and the Lord of all things both in Heauen, in Earth, and vnder the Earth; hee it is that hath redee∣med thee, according vnto the
good-will and gracious decree of God his Father. He hath re∣deemed thee, by becomming man for thy sake, by liuing a base and ignominious life, subiect vn∣to all the infirmities vvhereunto thou art subiect (thy sinnes only excepted) and dying a shamefull and cursed death,1 Pet. 1.19 pouring out his pretious bloud for thy sake. He vvas borne in a stable, layd in a manger (an abasement vn∣to which the basest amongst men are not vsually subiect) reiected of his owne,Ioh. 1.11. Isa. 53. despised of the most, accounted as a drie and withered branch, one in whom there was no forme, nothing to be desired; laden vvith reproaches, broken vvith sorrowes; buffeted, spit vp∣on, made to drinke gall and vi∣nigar, reuiled, scourged, made a scorne to the beholders,Mat. 27.30. &c. a spe∣ctacle to men and Angels, and a
wonderment to the world: tossed as it were, from post to pillar; from one iudgement seat to an∣other: condemned, as a vile and notorious malefactor, worse then a theefe & murtherer; and crucifi∣ed vpon the Crosse, without the gates of the Citie, in that loathed Golgotha,Heb. 13.1. where his head vvas crowned with thornes, his hands and feet pierced with nayles, and his side with a speare, so that water & bloud gushed forth abundant∣ly: and at last, when malice & en∣uie had wrought all the wicked∣nesse they could against him, layd in the graue, dead and bu∣ried, as one cut off from among the liuing: and all this for thy sake,Rom. 5.10 euen for thee who wert his enemie, a traitour and rebell a∣gainst him,Ephe. 2.3. and a childe of wrath and of the curse, heire of perdi∣tion and confusion. He was made
sinne,2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. a curse and subiect vnto death for thee, that hee might bring thee from sinne, from the curse of the law, from the wrath of God, from death, hell, and damnation, vnto righteousnesse, blessednesse, grace, glory, heauen and euerlasting happines in that celestiall kingdome, vvhich hee hath purchased and prepared for all his redeemed ones. All thi he hath done for thee, O wretch∣ed and sinnefull man, not for any merits or deserts of thine (for what was there in thee for which hee should any wayes respect thee?Tit. 3.4.) but of his owne free grace, and of the infinite and vnspeake∣able riches of his abundant mer∣cies, wherewith hee imbraced thee, vvhen he might haue iustly cast thee off for euer, as one mo vnworthy to be beloued of him, especially with so great a loue.Ephe. 3.19
All this hee hath done for thee, and for thy sake onely. O there∣fore, vvilt thou be vnmindfull of his wonderfull loue, his vnsearch∣able goodnesse and bountie to∣wards thee, and the great and maruailous things which he hath wrought for thee?1 Sam. 12.24. Wilt thou bee so vnthankefull to him? Nay, wilt thou be so vnkinde, so vn∣gratious, as to continue still in thy sinnes, and so to grieue his spirit, and to crucifie him againe?Heb. 6.6. For beleeue me, so many sinnes as thou willingly committest, so many thornes dost thou pleat on his head, so many nailes dost thou thrust into his hands, so many speares dost thou pierce his side withall, and (a fearefull thing to consider) so oft dost thou imbrue thy wicked hands with his pretious bloud, & tread it in a prophane maner vnder thyHeb. 10.29
feet, so that it may be sayd vnto thee, as Peter said vnto the Iewes, Thou hast crucified the Lord of life,Act. 2.36. & 3.14.15. thou hast murdered the king of glory, the Sonne of the euer liuing God, Christ Iesus, that iust and holy One, and preferred not Barrabas, but (which is as bad) thine owne wicked and sin∣full lusts; yea, Sathan himselfe, before thy blessed Sauiour and Redeemer. O monstrous ingratitude and treacherie! The Angels do blush at it, the heauens stand amazed and astonied at it; and worthy it is to be lothed and abhorred of all creatures. Dost thou so re∣ward the Lord, O vaine and foo∣lish man?Deut. 32.6 Is this thy kindenesse to thy friend? thy thankefulnesse to thy Sauiour? Dost thou re∣turne him euill for good, and hatred for his good-will? Be∣cause
he hath abounded in loue and kindnesse towards thee, wilt thou abound in sinne and wic∣kednesse against him? O be not so hard-hearted: O deale not so impiously, so vngraciously, so treacherously with thy best friend, thy beloued Sauiour, who hath magnified the riches of his grace so wonderfully towards thee, as that if thou hadst a thou∣sand tongues thou couldst not fully expresse the same, nor yeeld him sufficient praise and thanke∣fulnesse for it. Or if thou hadst many thousands of yeeres to liue vpon the earth, and shouldst em∣ploy them all in his seruice, with the greatest diligence and most carefull endeauour that could be, yet all were too little for him. Returne therfore, returne O thou who hast beene deceiued hereto∣fore by thine own wicked hart, &
deluded by Satan, thy most mali∣tious and deadly enemie, who is euer seeking thy destruction and vtter ouerthrow. Returne at length, behold thy louing Saui∣our, yet stretching out his hands ready to receiue thee, and to im∣brace thee with the armes of his mercie and tender compassion.Pro. 1.24 Hee calleth thee,Isa. 55.1. Ioh. 7.37. and cryeth a∣loud vnto thee; why dost thou flye from him? vvhy doest thou not cast away thy sins and come vnto him whiles the acceptable time of grace & saluation lasteth?2 Cor. 6.2 Behold, hee stands knocking at the doore of thy heart, by the motions of his Spirit, and by the voice of his word; calling vnto thee,Cant. 5.2. Reue. 3.20 that thou wouldest open vnto him, that so he might enter in to thee, and dwel with thee, and make thee partaker of all the riches and treasures of his hea∣uenly
graces, and of eternall life and saluation: Behold him yet offering himselfe vnto thee; yea,Pro. 9.5. sending forth his messengers daily, perswading thee effectually to leaue those husks and draffe which the Swine of this world delight to fill themselues withall,Luk. 15.16 and inuiting thee most gratiously to come and sit with him at his table, and to eate of the finest fare in his Fathers house, that heauenly Manna, vvhich none know but they that haue tasted of it, and which when they haue once throughly tasted of, and felt the sweetnesse of it, they will not part with it againe for all the sweetest delicates, with which the wicked glut themselues, till they surfet dangerously; no, not for all the pleasures, profits, riches and reuenues of the whole world. Behold, the base estate and con∣dition
which he tooke vpon him for thy sake: Behold the shame and reproach which he sustained for thee, and for thy sinnes: Be∣hold his face (whom the Angels,Heb. 1.6. those celestiall creatures, doe re∣uerence and adore) spitted vpon for thy cause: Behold him, who is the Authour of blessednesse, be∣come accursed for thee, that he might free thee from that curse which was due vnto thee: Behold him,Isa. 66.1. whose Throne is in the highest Heauens, the Lord of Glory and Maiestie, descended downe into the earth, and abased to the lowest degree of humilia∣tion, becomming as one of no re∣putation,Phil. 2.6.7 Psal. 22.6. a worme & not a man, that so he might exalt thee, and raise thee from shame to glory, from Hell to Heauen, from the depth of miserie and wretched∣nes, to the height of endlesse and
euerlasting blessednesse. What should I say? Behold the Lord of life, dying vpon the Crosse, that hee might bring thee from death to life, and make thee of a childe of wrath and perdition, an Heire of glory and Saluation. See his Head crowned with thornes, his body sweating drops of blood, for the anguish that he was in for thy sinnes. See the bloud streaming forth out of his side, to vvash and cleanse thee from thy wickednesse. See the fountaine of his loue, his grace, and mercie set vvide open vnto thee.Zach. 13.1 All these cry loud vnto thee, and are as a shrill voyce in thine eares, to call thee from thy sinnes, and to cause thee vtterly to abandon all thy for∣mer vvickednesse, euen that vaine conuersation vvherein heeretofore thou delightedst.
And wilt thou yet continue ther∣in? God forbid: O heart, more harder then the Adamant or flin∣tie Rocke, if these things doe not moue thee, and cause thee to relent; if nothing else will: (nei∣ther remembrance of the vile∣nesse and loathsomnes of sinne, the fearefull and wofull miserie and bondage, vvhereunto it bringeth thee; the stingings of conscience wherewith it vvound∣eth the soule, and maketh it to smart grieuously, oftentimes vvhen none perceiueth it, nor the many iudgements which it exposeth thee vnto, both here in this life, and much more in the life to come, in hel fire for euer.) If none of these will, yet let this, this I say, euen the due and seri∣ous consideration of the great and vvonderfull things that Christ hath done for thee, to
redeeme thee from thy sinnes, and to loose the bonds of thine iniquities,1 Ioh. 3.8 O let this draw thee from the same, in a forcible ma∣ner: yea, let his infinite and boundlesse loue and mercie to∣wards thee herein, euen breake thy stonie and steely heart, and cause it to melt into teares for thy sinnes past, to grieue, to sorrow, to mourne and lament for the same; and to purpose and resolue vvith thy selfe, neuer willingly to offend him hereafter, though thou mightst gaine thereby a thousand worlds. Let thy heart be sooner plucked out of thy body, then thou drawne from this godly pur∣pose and Christian resolution, vvhich vvell becommeth all that are Christs redeemed,2 Tim. 2.19. 1 Ioh. 3.9. and vvill bee in thee, if thou beest a true Christian indeed, and not
in vvord and shew onely. O blessed Lord and Sauiour, when I looke vp vnto thee, and con∣sider thy marueilous Loue and Bountie, in that great and gra∣cious vvorke of thine, in redee∣ming mee from that miserable estate, into vvhich I vvas plun∣ged as vvell as others, vnto that glorious condition of thy re∣deemed ones: how thou aba∣sedst thy selfe to become man for my sake; to be accursed, that thou mightest free me from the curse which I had brought vpon my selfe; to dye that so shame∣full a death, and to be buryed in the earth, that thou mightest raise me out of the graue of my sinnes, and bring me from sinne, death, hell and damnation, vnto grace, life, and euerlasting sal∣uation, in that blessed and glo∣rious kingdome of thine, vvhich
thou reseruest for mee in the heauens; when I looke vp vnto thee, and call to minde how won∣derfully thou hast dealt with me in these things; and on the other side, cast mine eyes vpon the vvhole course of my life past, how vile, how sinfull it hath beene; and view my estate pre∣sent, how many and grieuous the sinnes are vvhereby I haue prouoked thee daily, euen since thou calledst mee to the know∣ledge of that sauing grace of thine: my heart faileth vvithin mee, I am ashamed and con∣founded in my selfe, that I should haue beene found so vn∣kinde vnto thee, who hast beene so exceeding kinde and gracious vnto me. O doe thou cause mee daily more and more to see and be∣vvaile the greatnesse of my
sinne herein; and heale my soule in whatsoeuer I haue offended thee. O let thy loue, thy good∣nesse, thy grace, and bountie, in redeeming mee, so wretched, so vnworthy a Creature, by thine owne bloud, from so fearefull and vvofull a condition, into so blessed and glorious an estate, O let it constraine mee to loue thee vnfainedly; let it dissolue me in∣to the teares of true and vnfai∣ned repentance for all my sinnes and transgressions, vvhereby I haue displeased thee, my God and Sauiour: and let it vvorke in mee a perfect hatred and loa∣thing of all kinde of vngodlines, and a continuall desire and en∣deuour to please thee, and to shew forth my thankfulnes vnto thee, by walking carefully before thee in all the duties which thou commandest me, that so I may
be euery day more assured, that I am one of that small flocke, which thou hast redeemed with thy precious bloud, & for whom thou hast prouided that glori∣ous Kingdome in the heauens. Drawing others vnto any wicked∣nesse, a bloudy and fearefull sinne. MVrther is abhorred of all men, and that most iustly: for it is a fearefull and a crying sinne; committed,Gen. 4.10. nor approued of any but such as haue lost in a manner, the very nature of man, and become, as it were, bruite and sauage creatures, yea, mon∣sters, such as are to be driuen out from the company and societie of men, and to be depriued of this light which they doe enioy,
and are no wayes worthy of.Deu. 19.13 But yet behold (a strange thing and much to be vvondered at) to murther the soules of men, by drawing them to wickednesse by ill counsell,Pro. 18.21 or by corrupt exam∣ple of life, or otherwise, is slight∣ly accounted of, not had in that detestation among men that the other; although, as it is more common, so it may well be sor∣ted and rancked with it. Is not the soule more pretious then the bo∣dy?Mat. 16.26 the life of the soule more vvorthy, and farre more to be regarded then the life of the bo∣dy? Why then is not the mur∣thering of this accounted as wic∣ked, as haynous, as the other? why is it not as much abhorred of all men? vvhy are not such esteemed rather monsters then men? and how is it that their owne consciences doe not accuse
and vvound them for so bloudy a crime; yea, that they reioyce and glory in it, many of them, and make a sport and pastime of it? O horrible impietie!Pro. 10.23 and 14.9. How are the consciences of such sea∣red, and their hearts hardened? yea, how like are they vnto Sa∣than, their father, who was a mur∣therer from the beginning,Ioh. 8.44. and delights in nothing more then in hunting after the precious life of man, and wounding his soule vnto death, by entising and drawing him vnto wickednesse? O blessed Lord, farre be it from me at any time, to commit so great a sinne, against thee, against my neighbour, against the life and soule of any, vvhich ought alwayes to be most deare vnto me. Let me not be a meanes to wound the conscience of my brother, by giuing him any iust
offence, by walking before him in any scandalous course: let me neuer be an occasion of death vnto the soule of any, by seek∣ing to draw him to the commis∣sion of any sinne, or to the pra∣ctise of any kinde of vngodli∣nesse, by any meanes whatsoeuer. O farre be this from mee; yea, O Lord, let me be as much afraid of this, as much abhorre it, as the murthering and destroying of the body of any; which is so horrible a sinne, that euen the Heathen themselues, by the light of nature, haue seene and iudged it to be worthy of the sharpest and most cruell death. And let me seeke by all meanes rather to saue and preserue the liues and soules of men (yea,Iam. 5.20. of mine ene∣mies) by keeping them (as farre as in mee lyeth) from sin, which is the cause of destruction; and
by turning their feete out of the waies of death, and shewing them the path which leadeth vnto euerlasting life and happinesse, and walking therin before them: that so we may at length reioyce together,Luke 15.9 10. and be made partakers of that glory of thy Saints in the highest heauens. Amen. What ought to be the maine care of euery one in this life. THe Heathen Orator could say, that none is so foolish,Demosth. so sloathfull, as to neglect his owne safetie. This is true indeed of the safetie of the body. He is a mon∣ster in nature; that doth not seeke by all good meanes, the preseruation of it; there be but few that may be complained of in this regard. But the eternall
saluation of the soule, who seeth not how little it is regarded of the most; how strangely negle∣cted; how faintly sought after; yea, of many scarce thought vp∣on? O folly of follies, and de∣sperate sloathfulnesse; yea, ex∣treame madnesse of men, vvho are so sottishly carelesse of that which of all things most nearely concernes them! For, what would it aduantage them to game the vvhole vvorld,Mat. 16.26 and to hazard the losse of their owne soules; yea, of soule and body for euer? O blessed Lord, let the counsell of the vvicked seeme foolishnes vnto mee, and preserue me and all thine, from the same both now and euer. Let mee euer be most carefull of that vvhich is most necessary;Luk. 10.42 more solicitous of the eternall saluation of my soule, then of the safetie and pre∣seruation
of this mortall and cor∣ruptible body, vvhich is shortly to be turned into the dust, and made foode for the crawling wormes, or baser vermine. A∣boue all cares let mee be care∣full of this, to seeke by all means, and to vse all diligence to make my Calling and Election sure:2 Pet. 1.10 that so I may haue comfort in this, that I am ordayned to life, and shall be preserued by thy mighty power,2 Tim. 4.18 1 Pet. 1.5. vnto that glori∣ous saluation vvhich is prepared to be shewed in the last time, vvhen thou shalt be glorified in thy Saints,2 Thes. 1.10. and made marueilous in them that beleeue; yea, that so soone as the earthy house of this tabernacle is dissolued,2 Cor. 5.1. and this vveake and fraile body tur∣ned into the earth out of vvhich it vvas taken, I shall be receiued into those heauenly habitations,
those celestiall mansions, and be made partaker of that rich, that immortall, vndefiled, and neuer-fading inheritance purchased vn∣to mee by the bloud of thy Son, and reserued for mee in the highest heauens, vvhere thou raignest in endlesse and vnspeak∣able glory, blessed for euermore, Amen. Christians often ill Iudges of them∣selues and their owne estates. THe Children of God, (who are marked out by GOD himselfe vnto life and saluation) are oft-times ill Iudges of them∣selues: they discerne not aright of their owne estate, because they measure themselues by an vncertaine and deceiueable rule; viz. not by the Word of GOD,
which is of infallible trueth, but by sense and feeling, and by pre∣sent apprehension of things, offered vnto their thoughts vvithout due consideration of the wise and gracious dispen∣sation of the Lord, in his dea∣lings with his children. Some∣times hee filleth their hearts with ioy,Psal. 30.5.11 Isai. 66.11. 2 Cor. 1.3.4 1 Pet. 1.6.8. and causeth them to feele the sweetnesse of his di∣uine and heauenly consolations, that so they may haue a taste of his goodnesse, yea, of the exceeding riches of his grace and mercy, wherewith he im∣braceth them in Christ Iesus.Psal. 10.1. & 13.1. & 2. & 22.1.42.5. & 119.82.143 1 Pet. 1.6. 2 Cor. 6.10. Sometimes againe he seemeth to hide his countenance from them for a while, and vvith∣draweth those comfortable and glorious feelings vvherewith they vvere before vvonder∣fully refreshed, and wherein
their soules reioyced in vnspeak∣able manner; that thus they may be the more humbled in themselues, knowing that all is from him, and not from themselues; and become the more earnest suiters vnto him, for the enioying of that,Psal. 34.4. where∣in they see their blessednesse con∣sisteth; as also, that he might vveyne them the more from this wretched vvorld, and cause them to aspire vnto that heauenly life where these comforts shall be al∣waies present with them in more excellent manner,Psal. 16.11 6.8.9. without any intermission or alteration. O blessed Lord, teach me alwaies to iudge rightly of my estate; not according to feeling, or the present disposition of my vnset∣led minde, but according to the rule which thou hast giuen vs in thy vvord, which neuer fay∣leth.
Though thou dost not al∣waies cause me to taste of that heauenly Manna,Reuel. 2.17 vvherewith sometimes thou dost refresh me; though thou dost not alwaies looke vvith a cheerefull face, and vvith a smiling countenance vpon me, causing thy light to shine in my heart; but makest as though thou vvert angrie and much displeased vvith me, and gauest no eare to my hum∣ble supplications which I powre out in silence before thee; yea,Psal. 22.2. sufferest me to be exercised with many and grieuous temptations, and to indure many a hard and doubtful conflict with that dead∣ly enemy and aduersary of mine, who thereby seeketh to make a prey of me; yet let me alwaies lift vp my heart vnto thee,Psal. 27.14: Iames 1.2. and comfort my selfe in thee conti∣nually, knowing assuredly that
thou art present vvith me, when thou seemest to be farthest ab∣sent from me; that thy gracious hand sustaineth and vpholdeth me,Psal. 34.18 Gen. 42.7. & 45.1. and that thou louest me dearely, when thou seemest to deale most roughly vvith me, and that thou vvilt neuer leaue me, till thou hast through ma∣ny changes brought me, through the vvildernesse of this world, to the possession of that heauenly Canaan, vvhere (after I haue been exercised heere for a while, for the triall and increase of thy graces in me) I shall be satisfied vvith the pleasures of thy house,Rom. 5.3.4 Iames 1.3.4. and drinke the vvaters of com∣fort, out of the vvell of saluation, yea, vvhen I shall see thee face to face continually, and reioyce vvith that ioy before thee, which shall neuer haue any change, nor can euer be taken away from me.
Sathans pollicie in making the faithfull to distrust God in his promises. SAthan when he cannot o∣therwise preuaile with the children of God, seeketh to cast many doubts into them, of Gods mercy, goodnesse, and truth in the performance of those rich and gracious promi∣ses vvhich he hath made vnto them,2 Cor. 2.7 11. and to disquiet their consciences with restlesse feares, that so seeing hee can by no meanes depriue them of that glory and happines which here∣after they shall enioy for euer in the heauens, yet he may bereaue them of those inward spirituall comforts, and heauenly refresh∣ings wherwith their soules should
bee cherished, their hearts strengthened,2 Cor. 5.6.7. and their liues vp∣holden, vvhiles they continue here as pilgrims & strangers vp∣on earth, absent from the Lord, and in hope and expectation on∣ly of the fulnesse of that glory and blessednesse, which hereafter they should haue the fruition and possession of for euer. O mercifull and gracious Lord, sta∣blish my heart I beseech thee vvith thy grace:Iohn. 8.44 Let me neuer giue eare to Sathan, that lying spirit, who enuies at that blessed estate, vvhereunto, in the riches of thy vnspeakable mercies, thou hast freely called me; but let me beleeue thee, who art the God of trueth and faithfulnesse, and rest vpon thy word and promises, which abide sure and stedfast for euermore,1. Pet. 1.25 when all other things faile and come to nothing. Farre
be it from me, that I should re∣ceiue the witnesse of man, vvho is subiect to error and deceit, and not much more giue credit vnto that inward testimony which thou (who neuer deceiuedst any that trusted in thee)1 Iohn 5.9 scalest vnto my soule and conscience by the effectuall working and operation of thy holy and blessed spirit; yea hauing receiued so many pledges of thy loue, so many and so cleare euidences of thy goodnesse, thy trueth, thy power, and thy won∣derful prouidence, which worketh in all things (so that they that are dimme-sighted may behold the but same a farre off) let me shake off all infidelity & vnfaithfulnes, and rest euer assured of thy mer∣cie, that so my life may be com∣fortable, my death ioyfull; yea, in life and death I may be satisfied vvith the sweetnesse
of thy grace, and so at length be filled with the riches of thy glo∣ry in that heauenly kingdome of thine, which thou hast promised vnto me. Dispaire, or distrust of Gods promi∣ses, a great sinne. TO doubt of Gods promises, & to dispaire of his mercies, is a grieuous sin, and a most hai∣nous offence in the eyes of God. For therby men rob God of his glory;Rom. 4.20 they doe him great iniu∣rie, making his infinite mercy lesse then their sinnes;Psal. 51.1. & 103.11.12. & 108.4. whereas the multitude of his mercies are as a bottomlesse depth, able to swallow vp the greatest offences that are committed against him (if they be truely repented of) yea,Act. 3.19. 1 Ioh. 5.10 they call his truth and faith∣fulnesse
into question,Isai. 57.15 16. Math. 11.28. and make him a lyar, seeing he hath pro∣mised forgiuenesse to all those, that being truely humbled sue vnto him for mercy. Lo, (such is their faithlesnesse) they vvill not beleeue him of his word (who is the God of trueth) nor giue credit to the trueth vvhich he (who neuer failed any) hath sealed,Exod 34 6 Ierem. 10.10. Deut. 7.9 Iosh. 21.45 whereas they will credit a man who may deceiue them. No doubt ought once to bee made thereof, of those vvho know vvhat God is,Num. 23.19. 2 Cor. 1.20. and how firme and stable all his promises are; or if any doubt shall arise from the corruption of that euill and vnbeleeuing heart which is in man,Heb. 3.12. Luk. 9.41. or the suggestion of Sa∣than (who being a maine enemy as to all grace, so especially that of faith, which is as it were the life and the anchor of the soule,
seeketh continually to cast many doubts and vaine feares into the minde) it is not to be yeelded vnto by any meanes,Psal. 42.11 Iames 4.7. Mat. 8.26. but to be checked presently, resisted and driuen backe as it were vvith strong hand, knowing that the testmony of the Lord is true, more certainty in it, then in the warrant of any mortall man; yea, then in all the writings, Eui∣dences, Seales, Indentures, and witnesses, which al the men in the world can afford vs. O Lord, make me now and alwaies such as to whom thy promises belong, and hauing wrought this gra∣cious vvorke of thine in me, strengthen my faith, that I may haue full assurance and confi∣dence in thee through thy Christ, and apply vnto my selfe all those gracious promises vvhich thou hast made vnto
me in thy word, vvhich shall stand for euer. O keepe mee from doubting of thy trueth and faithfulnesse at any time,Ier. 17.13. Heb. 10.38.39. least it displease thee, and cause thee to vvithdraw thy selfe from mee. The small number of them that shall be saued. THat there are but few that shalbe saued, many damned, is a truth which the word of God hath sealed, yea, which Christ who is the trueth it selfe, with his owne mouth, hath ratified vnto vs,Mat. 7.13. Luk. 13.24 calling the way to life a strait gate, and narrow way, which is found but of a few; but the way to death and destruction, a wide gate and broad way, in vvhich most vvalke. VVhat neede
we other proofe? How can vve once doubt of it? How dare we euer call it into question, or enter into dspute of it? But because many through Sathans sugge∣stion, and the peruersnes of their owne wicked disposition, are hard of beleefe euen of those things vvhich in Scripture are most cleare and euident vnto vs: Loe therefore a plaine demonstration of it, that so if thou beest so faith∣lesse that thou wilt not beleeue it with thy heart, thou mayest see it in a sort with thine eyes, and confesse it with thy mouth, when thou art so manifestly conuinced of it. To calculate therefore, as it were, the number of those that walke in this narrow way to life, by ranging the whole world into certaine sections and seuerall rankes and orders. All that euer were, or now are in the world,
may be generally deuided into two sorts; called, or vncalled. Now compare these together, and we shall find that the number of the vncalled (the Apostles times on∣ly excepted) hath alwaies excee∣ded the number of the called, those I meane that were called by an outward calling, through the ministery and preaching of the word. To begin from the begin∣ning, and so to proceed and de∣scend lower. From the beginning of the world to the departue in∣to Aegypt, which was aboue two thousand yeeres, the Church was shut vp in the families, eyther of the holy fathers before the flood, or of the Patriarchs; onely they of their housholds called vpon the name of the Lord; only they made profession of religion in the true worship of the true God; the rest were Idolatrous and profane
people that cast off the Lords yoke. Afterwards, the Church beganne to be inlarged, and the bounds thereof extended; the whole people of Israel were cal∣led, and accounted the people of God (according vnto the pro∣mise made vnto Abraham) and all the rest of the world,Gen. 17.7.8. Rom. 9.4. Isay. 55.5. Hosea 1.10. Ephes. 2.12 Luk. 1.79. a people that were no people, vnto whom God did not so much as afford the outward ordinarie meanes of saluation, but suffered them to sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death (though we denie not but that some few might be ex∣traordinarily called, euen as ma∣ny as ioyned themselues vnto him) Now what was Israel to the multitude and ouerflowing of the Gentiles, which were scat∣tered ouer the face of the earth; euen as a plant among many people,Exod. 19.5 Deut. 7.6.7. & 14.2. a pearle amongst many
pebles, one grape of a cluster, or as the gleaning after the haruest. Well, to goe on to succeeding ages; after many generations, the Lord, vpon iust cause,Acts 13.46 Rom. 11.20 1 Thes. 2.16 forsaking the Iewes for a long time, (as wee see) and casting them off from being his people, as they were in former times, the Gentiles (of whom wee are) according to the promise, succeeded them,Rom. 11.17. and were planted in, in their roome. And yet, how small is the num∣ber euen of them that are called, in comparison of those that re∣maine vncalled to this present day? This will be easily perceiued if it bee dulie considered; how many thousands, yea, thousand thousands of Infidels, Pagans, barbarous Turkes, and mis-belee∣uing Iewes there be, which sit in darkenesse, and in the valley of death, without God, vvithout
Christ, & so without the meanes of Saluation; not hauing so much as the knowledge and outward profession of true Christianitie and godlinesse. For one Christian euen in outward profession, there are many, who eyther neuer heard of the name of a Christian, or else hate it, and are profest enemies vnto it: Turcisme, Iuda∣isme, & Paganisme hauing ouer∣spread most nations, like a winter floud: these things then being rightly obserued, wee see clearly that the greatest part of the world in times past hath beene, and yet now is, vncalled, and therefore out of the way of sal∣uation. To passeouer therefore those numberlsse multitudes of such as neuer had any calling, and to leaue them to te s cret counsell of the Lord (for as farre a God
hath made knowne vnto vs in his reuealed VVill, there is no meanes of saluation for them, or any of them, continuing in that estate.) Let vs come vnto that other sort; those I meane, that are outwardly called, by the preaching of the Word, which soundeth amongst them, and make an outward profession of Christ and his Gospell; within how narrow a roome are they confined, vvithin the borders of Europe, the skirts of Asia vnder Turkish bondage and tyranny, and that remote and almost vn∣knowne part of Africa, vnder that Aethiopian gouernour,Prester-Iohn. and not else-where, except it bee a sprinkling here & there of some fewe, that are scattered in the Indies, or in some other Coun∣tries. They are euen shut vp, as it were, in this Angle, and corner of
the world (as is apparent to those that are of knowledge, and cast their eie vpon this larger frame.) And yet how few euen of them that haue receiued this outward calling, are and shall bee saued? Let that saying of our Sauiour himselfe testifie;Mat. 20.16 Many are cal∣led, (by an outward calling and externall profession) but few (e∣uen of those that are so called) are chosen: to vvhich also, that holy Apostle of his,Rom. 9.27 out of the kingly Prophet doth well ac∣cord.Isa. 10.22. Though the number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the Sea, yet shall but a remnant be saued. All are not Israel which are of Israel; neither shall all that are of the Church militant be of the Church triumphant. Euen of those that are called, the fewest are saued. And this will be better conceiued of vs, if wee consider
what a multitude there are: First,Bellarm. pref. in lib. de Pont. Nisi per Petrum non perue∣nitur ad Christum. among the Papists, that Antichri∣stian Synagogue, who make in∣deed a profession of Christ, and Christian religion, haue glorious shewes to the eyes of the world, faire titles without truth, boasting strangely, that they, and none but they, are of the true Catholike & Apostolike Church,Bellar. lib. 4. de Not. Eccl. cap. 4. Con∣stat nostram solam esse veram Ec∣clesiā. vid. cap. 5.6. that they haue the keyes of Heauen in their keeping onely, and shall haue Heauen-gates hereafter set open vnto them (all other being excluded and shutCoster. Enchir. Conclusio. Absque du∣bio in aeter∣num peri∣bunt. Gal. 5.4. Iohn 16 2. Gal. 4.29. 2 The. 2.11 out) and yet indeed are cleane out of the way of saluation, yea, persecute them that walke in it, thinking that therein they doe God good ser∣uice, and walke blinde-folded in those crooked pathes of their owne inuentions, and idolatrous worship, and superstitious obser∣uances which tend vnto euerla∣sting
perdition and condemnati∣on.Reuel. 14.9.10.11. & 18.4. 2 Thes. 2.12. Yea, euen amongst vs, where the name of Christ is truely cal∣led vpon. For thousands there bee in the bosome of this our Church, vvho are called indeed Christians, (being baptized into the name of Christ, and wearing the outward badge and cogni∣sance of a Christian) vvho not∣withstanding are as farre from saluation, as hell is from heauen, as their vvicked courses and vaine conuersations doe eui∣dently vvitnesse to their faces,Isa. 3.9. and euen proclaime with loud voice to the vvhole world. For some, although they haue the name of Christians, are in truth no better then plaine Atheists, vvanting euen the outward pro∣fession of that vvhich they beare the name of, making their pleasures, their profits, their ho∣nours
and preferments, yea, their bellies their Gods,Phil. 3.19. altogether de∣uoting themselues to their ser∣uice, neuer thinking of God, nor regarding to walke in his wayes, but scorning, and hating them that seek to bring them to a holy submission vnto him,Psal. 1.1. Prou. 1.22 29. and to his blessed ordinances. Some againe, (though not so bad as they, yet bad enough) seeme to make some profession outwardly, and would be called and accounted Christians, and yet liue like Hea∣then, Pagans, Turks, Infidels, (if not worse) hauing their liues stained very fouly with many en∣ormious crimes▪ yea, such where∣of the very Heathen vvould haue beene ashamed, and which cause the sacrilegious Turks and Mahometans to blaspheme our religion, & to scorn our most ho∣ly profession in disdainful maner.
It were infinite to reckon them vp;Rom. 1.29 fornications, adulteries, mur∣thers, vsury, oppression, pride, maliciousnesse, and many such like cursed fruits, which neuer sprung from that Religion which those that practise them vniustly make profession of. Others againe, make indeede a goodly shew and a glorious profession,2 Tim. 3.5. hauing the forme of godlinesse, but denying the truth and the power thereof, viz. all glozing hipocrites and counter∣feite dissemblers, with whom the Church of God hath beene al∣wayes pestered, to the wounding and disgracing of true Profes∣sors;Mat. 23.14. their condemnation is the greater. Thus if wee goe thorow all sorts of those that are outwardly called; yea, amongst vvhom the true Religion, wherein saluation
onely is to be found, is entertay∣ned, vvee shall see that euen the number among them that shall be saued, is but small:Mat. 7.21. Not eue∣ry one that saith Lord, Lord; not euery one that is an outward professor, shall enter into the king∣dome of Glory. Now then, if the number euen of Christians and professors (who haue the way of life and salua∣tion plainely described before their eyes, and called vpon dai∣ly to walke therein, yea, encou∣raged vvith many and forcible reasons and allurements to set forward therein with all speede that may be,) if the number of them that are saued, is but small, (as it is so cleare a truth that none neede once to doubt of it; nay, cannot, except hee vvill gaine-say him vvho is the Truth it selfe) vvhat then, I beseech
you, is their number in compa∣rison of the whole vvorld, which is so vvide and spacious, and of so large extent, that it makes them that haue any discerning of it, to vvonder at it? Sure they are but euen a handfull to speake of;Luk. 12.32 a little flocke, as the shaking of an Oliue tree,Isay 24.13 or as the grapes when the Vintage is ended. The number vvhen it is cast vp, vvill be gathered into a short summe.Rom. 9.28 In a vvord, as there are more Nettles then Roses, more Weeds then Flowers, more Brambles then Vines, more Earth and ba∣ser Mettall then pure Gold or Siluer; so, the number of them that shall be damned, is farre greater then of those that shall be saued, and made partakers of the blessednesse of the Saints in glory. Oh therefore how great is the securitie of the most, that
goe on so boldly in their wicked and vngodly courses, neuer thin∣king of this narrow way to life? How is it that they are so care∣lesse of their estate, seeing so few shall be saued, so many damned? How hath Sathan bewitched and besotted them, that though they heare and know these things, yet they dare presume to goe for∣ward in that broad way, because they see so many vvalking in it, more blinde then blinde Balaam,Numb. 22.23. that saw lesse then his Asse; or if not as blinde, yet as desperate, rushing forward to their owne destruction, when God causeth though not his Angell, yet his Ministers and Messengers (vvho are also called his Angels) to stand in that broad way,Reu. 2. vvith the drawne sword of his threat∣ning sentence,Rom. 8.13 to turne them out of it, that they perish not vvith
the multitude; and to inforce them, in a manner, to take the narrow vvay vvhich is before them, telling them oft that the number of them that shall be saued is but small, in regard of them that shall be damned eter∣nally? How should this terrifie them? how should it amaze them? yea, how should it awaken all of vs, and quicken vs in the way which leadeth to life and saluation, ma∣king vs to walke wisely and cir∣cumspectly,Eph. 5.15. not once daring to set our foote in the wrong vvay? If wee were assured that all in the world should be saued except some one, how ought euery one to looke about, and to prouide so, that hee might not be that one? how much more behoo∣ueth it vs, now to bestirre our selues, whiles this soundeth in
our eares, that the fewest shall be saued, the most damned? If we vvere to goe ouer some high or steepe mountaine, where there were a narrow bridge, or a strait passage, and that very slippery and dangerous, insomuch that we saw the greatest part of them that went before vs, for want of heedfulnesse and sure footing, tumbling downe in fearfull man∣ner among the craggy rockes, vnto the bottome of that deepe gulfe that was vnder them, to their present and irrecouerable destruction, how carefull would wee be (except wee were despe∣rate and mad-men) to looke with all diligence to our footing, that we slip not, and to take the su∣rest course that possibly vvee could? How much greater care and diligence should wee vse in seeking to goe forward in the
safest manner that may bee, in this straite passage to life, espe∣cially seeing that so many thou∣sands doe miscarry therein, and that the danger of missing it, is tenne thousand times more then the falling from the toppe of an high mountaine into a deep val∣ley; (that being onely the bea∣ting out of the braines, or the bruising of the body, to a tem∣porall destruction; this, the vtter ruine and confusion both of bo∣dy and soule for euer.) Or if wee were to passe thorow a field, or a high-way, wherein many theeues lye lurking on euery side, so that few escaped vvith their liues, would we not be much afraid of the imminent danger, and there∣fore seeke to prouide for our safetie in our iourney, as much as possibly wee might? Doubt∣lesse wee would. Well then, be∣ing
now all of vs to passe thorow the vast Wildernesse of this sin∣full and dangerous world, wher∣in the Diuels, euen many thou∣sands of damned Spirits, (our most cruell and malitious ene∣mies and deadly aduersaries, the very Cut-throates of our soules, who alwayes seeke by all meanes to worke our destruction) lye continually in waite for vs, as it vvere so many troopes in se∣cret ambushment against vs, so that few escape eternall death and damnation, and come to life and saluation: ought not we much more to be afraid, and to bee carefull by all meanes to escape that great danger, and to come vnto that exceeding glo∣ry? Haue wee any cause to be carelesse and secure as the most are? Is it meete that vve should giue ouer our selues to our vaine
pleasures and sinfull courses, ea∣ting, drinking, playing, spor∣ting, (as those in the dayes of Noah,Luk. 17.26 27.28. and of Lot, did, when their destruction was at hand) and euen drowne our selues in such dangerous loosenesse and securitie (as the most doe) whiles our enemies cut our throates?1 Thes. 5.6 Is it meete (I speake to them that are of any vvisedome or vn∣derstanding to discerne vvhat I say) is it meete, that vve should be thus vaine, thus negligent, thus desperate, euen vvith the vvicked of the vvorld, letting goe the hope of life, and plun∣ging our selues into the depth of euerlasting confusion and condemnation, in so vvretched a manner? O consider of this all yee that forget God, and casting away the meanes of grace vvhich hee
offereth, runne on headlong in a violent manner (as you are led, yea, driuen by Sathan) vnto your own destruction. Thinke of this: What doe you, O men, blinded and deluded by that deceiuer, (vvho as he hath beene alwayes a murtherer, so now seeketh to murther your soules; yea,Ioh. 8.44. soules and bodies for euer.) Will you still suffer your selues to be mis∣lead by him? Will you needes barre your selues out of heauen, yea, out of all hope of heauen and happinesse? Will you needs for the sweetnesse of a fewe tran∣sitorie pleasures, profits and de∣lights, depriue your selues of so great glory, those full and euer∣flowing streames of all heauenly pleasures and delights, which if I had the tongue of men and An∣gels,1 Cor. 2.9. I were not able fully to ex∣presse? Will you needs be so foo∣lish
and vnwise as for the obtay∣ning of these fading & perishing things, in a sinnefull manner, to cast away your selues for euer? Will you needs set vpon your selues the brand of eternall per∣dition, the notes and markes of a reprobate, so that they that see you, may say, Loe, there goes one that walkes in the broad way to hell, and destruction? Or, do you thinke that walking and con∣tinuing in that broad way, it is possible for you euer to be saued, and to enter with that smal num∣ber into that glorious kingdom,Ioh. 3.3. or to escape that fearefull pit of endlesse confusion? O be not so secure, so foolish and vnwise in that which so greatly & so nearly concernes you. O bee not so great enemies to your owne soules, so cruell and mercilesse to your selues. Doe not so des∣peratly
depriue your selues of so great glory and happinesse, in comparison of which, all the things of this world (pleasures,Matt. 16.26. profits, honours, and whatso∣euer else is most highly accoun∣ted of in the world) are but draffe, drosse, & dongue, dreams and fancies, vaine and transitory things, not worth the speaking of. Doe not so vnwisely, doe not I beseech you in the feare of the Lord, and in the bowels of Christ Iesus, cast away your soules in such a carelesse manner, vvhich he came to saue with his pretious bloud; yea, and sweat drops of water and bloud, that hee might redeeme the same.2 Cor. 5.20. Christ Ie∣sus himselfe intreateth and be∣seecheth you, in the mouthes, and by the meanes of his owne Ministers, in and by whom hee speaketh to you, to leaue the
broad way,Luk. 13.24. 2 Pet. 1.10 Phil. 2.12. vvherein you walke, and to striue to enter in at the narrow gate, to giue all dili∣gence to make your calling and election sure & to work out your saluation vvith feare and trem∣bling. O therefore, heare his voice whiles it is time, and let not Sathan stoppe your eares, and delude and bewitch you, as hee hath done heretofore, and as hee doth the greatest part of the vvorld, to their vtter ruine and euerlasting confusion both of body and soule. Oh his sleights and pollicies, how many and how treacherous they are! O let him not keepe you any longer from vvalking in this narrow way to life, and cause you to walke on in that broad and crooked way, the end and issues whereof (howsoe∣uer they seeme pleasing to you)Pro. 12.15 & 14.12. are death and endlesse vvoe and
miserie. If the feare of loosing heauen & happinesse (which the enioying of all the things of this vvorld cannot recompense) will not moue you, let the danger of falling into hell and damnation amaze you, and cause you to stand at a stay, and to goe no further in so fearefull a way, but speedily to recall yourselues, and to turne out of it. The very bruit beast will not runne into a deepe pit, or any danger which it seeth before it in the way wher∣in it should goe, but vvill turne aside vvith Balaams Asse, and seeke by all meanes to escape and auoyd it: and vvill you be more vnwise then the brute and vnrea∣sonable creature, taking rather the way of death and destruction then the way of life and salua∣tion? If you will needs be so bru∣tish and senselesse, and vvill by no
meanes be reclaimed, go on (as those who are destitute of vnder∣standing and all true spirituall vvisedome) and fulfill the mea∣sure of your vvickednesse, till you perish in it, and complaine vvhen it is too late, of your great folly, in making so bad a choise, and following so vnwise and dan∣gerous a course, though you vvere often forwarned of the wretched end of it. But Lord, though others be so carelesse and secure, yet let it not be so vvith any of thine; let them shake off all slothfulnesse and negligence in so weightie a matter as concernes thy glory, and their owne euerla∣sting either wealth or vvoe; yea, let them neuer be at quiet, neuer at rest, till they know certainely and vpon good euidence that they are picked and sholed out of that great number that shall
perish and be damned for euer, to be of that little flocke that shall liue with thee eternally. And make me truely thankefull, I humbly pray thee, for this gracious worke of thine to∣wards me. O mercifull Lord, how great is thy goodnesse which thou hast vouchsafed vn∣to me herein, in that it hath plea∣sed thee in the riches of thy grace, through Christ, to make me one of that small number, for vvhom thou hast prepared a kingdome; that thou hast caused me to vvalke in the nar∣row way which leadeth to life and saluation, vvhen as thou sufferest the most to runne on headlong in that broad and croo∣ked vvay which leadeth to death & euerlasting destruction? What am I, or vvhat is there in me more then in others that perish,
that thou shouldest shew this fauour vnto me more then vnto them? It is onely thy loue, and thy vndeserued kindnesse, which it hath pleased thee of thy boun∣tie and goodnesse in thy Christ to vouchsafe vnto me. O let me neuer be vnmindful of the same. But let the oft and serious con∣sideration thereof draw my heart and all my affections vnto thee, causing, yea, euen con∣strayning me to loue thee entire∣ly and vnfainedly aboue all things, to feare thee, to stand in a holy awe and reuerence of thee continually, and to seeke by all meanes to glorifie thee. And let me neuer be discoura∣ged vvith the straitnesse of the passage or the many difficulties, which I shall meet with, vvhiles I walke in this narrow way, see∣ing that it tends to life and sal∣uation;
but let me goe forward vvithout faynting at any time, yea, with much cheerefulnesse and delight, knowing that all these light and momentary af∣flictions are no waies worthy of that glory,Rom. 8.18 vnto which through the straitnesse of this gate I shall shortly haue passage. All that are of the Church visible or militant, shall not be of the Church Inuisible and Trium∣phant. MAny haue accesse into the Princes outmost chamber, who are not admitted into the chamber of Presence, but ex∣cluded and shut out from ha∣uing entrance thereinto. In like manner; Many are brought to the fellowship of the visible
Church, which is as it were the outmost chamber of the house of God, the palace of that great King (and a fauour it is that is vouchsafed them herein, for all doe not attaine vnto it:Psal. 147.19.20.) but few are so blessed as to be led, by the spirit, further into that secret and priuie chamber, where God shewes his familiar presence,Cant. 2.4 and vnto vvhich none are admitted, but they vvho are of the com∣munion of Saints,Hebr. 12.22.23. of the court of heauen, heires of the glory of that coelestiall kingdome, where they shall alwaies attend vpon the Maiestie of the highest, the great God of the vvhole world. O Lord, it is thy mercy that thou hast called mee to haue a place in the visible Church here on earth, and to liue among thy Israel, thy Saints and chosen, to enioy thy word and Sacra∣ments,
and to looke as it vvere,Cant. 2.9. through a ceuis into the holy of Holies; (for the greatest part of the world haue not obtained thus much: How many thou∣sands of Iewes, Turkes, heathen doe we see at this day excluded and cast out from the lists and outmost bounds of thy Church?Reuel. 11.1.2.) But it is thy vvonderfull and vn∣speakeable goodnesse towards me, that thou hast admitted me into the chamber of Presence, calling me to the blessed fel∣lowship and communion with thy Saints, yea, vvith thine owne selfe, making me one of thy Israel,Iohn. 14.21.22.23. Gal 2.20. Phil. 3.10. Reue. 3.20. one of thy Saints and chosen; a true member of the Church militant heere on earth, and heire of the glorious and triumphant Church in the high∣est heauens, where I shall liue with thee for euer.Iohn. 14.2. & 17.24 O blessed be
thy name for the riches of thy loue & infinite grace vouchsafed vnto me herein, through Christ Iesus my Lord. Thou mightest iustly haue excluded me as well as others, yea, euen from the outmost courts of thy Sion; but it hath pleased thee, O Father, to magnifie thy great mercy to∣wards me thy poore and vnwor∣thy creature, that so my heart might be drawne vp the more vnto thee, and inflamed vvith an vnfained loue of thee. O therefore that thou vvouldest knit my heart and soule vnto thee, and cause me to set all the affections of my loue, ioy and delight in thee, to vvhom one∣ly they are due, and to whom alone I desire they may be gi∣uen. And teach me withall to seeke daily more and more to presse forward, and to striue to
get nearer accesse vnto thee, in∣deauouring by a holy life and godly conuersation to obtaine full and comfortable assurance that thou hast called me into the communion of thy chosen ones, admitted mee into the chamber of thy gracious pre∣sence,Iohn 8.35 and that I shall abide in thy house for euer, euen in those glorious mansions and heauenly habitations vvhere thine honour dwelleth, and where all thy Saints shall reigne and triumph vvith thee for euermore. The blessed estate of a true Chri∣stian, in regard of that spirituall and heauenly vnion that is be∣tweene Christ and him. OH how blessed a Vnion is there betweene Christ and
euery true Christian: Who is able to expresse it? who doth not admire and vvonder at it? It is a great matter for them to be accounted his friends,Ioh. 15.13 15. Mark. 3.34 Leuit. 25.25▪ Heb. 2.11.12.13 his kins∣men, his brethren, his children (as all these names and titles he giues vnto them in the Scrip∣tures.) But this is not all; it is not one halfe; for they are not onely tyed vnto him by these strait and sacred bonds of friend∣ship, kindred, and brotherhood; but they are made one with him, one flesh,Ephe. 5.31 Ephe. 5.30 1 Cor. 12.12. Hebr. 2.11 one bodie; yea, in a sort himselfe, hauing his owne name giuen vnto them (as af∣terwards.) To shadow out this vnion vnto thee by those types, as it were, and semblances by which the Scriptures haue decla∣red it vnto vs, in that maner that our fraile nature is able to con∣ceiue of it (for the vveakenesse
and shallownesse of our capacity is such, as it is not able fully to comprehend it in the excellen∣cie of it.) Seest thou not what vnion there is betweene the head and the members of the bodie? So it is betweene Christ and true Christians. They are knit vnto him as it were, by the sinewes of the spirit, and by the bond of faith, as the members of the bo∣die are vnto the head; and from him as from the head,Ephe. 1.22 & 5.23. Gal. 2.20. life flow∣eth into the whole bodie; the life of grace and spirituall motion and action is conueyed and communicated vnto the Church and all the faithfull members thereof, vvhich are the bodie of Christ.1 Cor. 12.27 Eph. 4.12 Againe this vnion betweene Christ and them is compared to that which is betweene the Vine and the branches: So,Iohn. 15 1.2. that as the stocke
and the branches grow together, so the faithfull being rooted in Christ, and set as it were into him,Rom. 6.5 as branches of that heauenly Vine receiue life and sappe from him, growth of all spirituall and heauenly graces. It is compared to a fountaine, and the waters is∣suing and steaming therefromIoh. 4.14? Likewise to the corner-stone, in a building, and the stones that are built vpon the sameEphe. 2.20.22.? For so Christ is often in Scripture com∣pared to the corner-stone, vpon which (as their manner of buil∣ding in old time in those parts was) the whole building was fa∣stened & combined, and so rea∣red vp; and the faithfull compa∣red to liuing1 Pet. 2.5. stones built vpon that sure foundation; and thence also called the temple of the holy Ghost,1 Cor. 3.16. & 6.19 Ioh. 14.23 & Reue. 3. wherein God himselfe dwelleth0., and will dwell for
euer. It is compared also to the bodie and the apparrell vvhich clothes and couers it, and shelters it from cold and raine, and from the iniury of the weather, whence the faithfull are said to put on ChristRom. 13 14 Gal. 3.27.. And lastly, to the Hus∣band and his Spouse; whence Christ is often called the Hus∣band of his Church,Ephes. 5.23. Mat. 25.6 the Bride∣groome which is preparing for his marriage solemnities; and the Church his BrideReuel. 21 2. & 22.17, his loue,Cant. 1.8. & 5.1.2. his doue, his vndefiled Spouse; a pure Virgin,Psal. 45. 2 Cor. 11 2. prepared for him, and in whom he greatly pleaseth and delightethPsal. 11.13.15 himselfe. We know how neare and strait the v∣nion is between the husband and his deere and louing Spouse; they are according to Gods owne or∣dinance but one fleshGen. 2.14. Ephe. 5.30 31.: Such is the vnion in this spirituall mariage betweene Christ and his
Church, and euery faithful mem∣ber of the same. Thus then thou seest what a neare and strait vnion and coniunction there is betweene Christ and the true Christian, euen all that are iusti∣fied by his grace, and sanctified by his spirit. They are in him, and he is in them: Hee is their head, & they are his1 Cor. 6.15. & 12.27. members, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; they are ingraffed into him, and become one with him,Iohn 17.10.21.22.23. as he is one with the Father. He dwelleth in them, and they in himEphe. 3.17 1 Cor. 6.17. Iohn. 6.56. But lest thou shouldst conceiue of this amisse, consi∣der seriously what manner of V∣nion this is, & how it is wrought. A heauenly meditation, and vvorth thy best attention. First then, know that this vnion is not carnall, but spirituall, not naturall but supernaturall and mysticall.
It is not a carnal or a corporall vnion, as if Christs body vvere turned into our bodies (as the Papists faine in that new-deuised Transubstantiation, and strange metamorphosis of theirs;) nor ioyned vnto them in a locall or bodily manner. Thou must not imagine any such matter; for that were with the CapernaitsIoh. 6.41.52. to con∣ceiue grossely of Christ our Sa∣uiour, and vvith NicodemusIoh. 3.4. to shew thy selfe altogether carnall inconceiuing these heauenly my∣steries. It is against the nature of Christs body which isEph. 1.20 & 4.10. ascended into Heauen, and there sitteth at the right hand of God in glory, & therefore cannot be vnited vnto vs in that maner, being on earth, so many thousand miles distant from him. But it is a spirituall and heauenly vnion: It is not a reall transfusion of the substance
of Christ vnto vs (as some Here∣tikes haue dreamed) but an essen∣tiall communication of himselfe and his graces vnto vs, in a spiri∣tuall manner. More distinctly. First, the faithfull are vnited vn∣to his flesh, and to his humane nature; & then by meanes hereof vnto his diuineIoh. 6.53.56.57. Hebr. 10.10.20. nature. His flesh is, as it vvere, the vaile by which they haue entrance into the holy of Holies, and became in a sort partakers of his diuine2 Pet 1.4 nature. Their whole person is vnited vn∣to Christ, whence they are sayd to be his flesh and his bones, not as they are men, but as they are Christians, and ingraffed into him, and so with him make one body, vvhereof hee is the head, they the members. Whole Christ is vnited vnto them, both his humane & his diuine nature; and they are wholy vnited vnto him;
both their soules and1 Cor. 6.15. bodies, & their whole person.  For (to giue some proofe of this, which some otherwise happily may doubt of) they are coupled to Christ, the second Adam, as Heah was ioy∣ned to the first Adam (for that vnion betweene them was a type of this spirituall vnion betweene him and his Church, his Spouse.) Now the whole person of Euah was ioyned and vnited to the per∣son of Adam; whence they are said to be no more two butGe. 2.24. Ephe. 5.31 one flesh. Againe, not the soule onely, or the body onely, of euery be∣leeuer, is redeemed and saued by Christ, but both: and therefore not one but both must needs be ioyned and vnited vnto Christ: for out of him there is no salua∣tion,Acts .12 neither for one nor other.  Moreouer, the whole person of
the Sonne of God, assumed and vnited vnto himselfe the vvhole nature of man, not his flesh only, or his soule onely, but both; and therefore by vertue of that vni∣on, the whole nature of man must be vnited vnto him.  Lastly, Christ, whole Christ, in his diuine nature, and in his humane nature, in his soule and body, euen con∣sisting of these together, ioyntly and not seperatly, is theEph. 5.23 head and and Sauiour of all his faithfull members, and therefore their whole person must of necessitie be vnited to him; otherwise how shall he be the head of both, and the Sauiour of both, euen of the whole man? Thus then there is a true, a reall, an essentiall and en∣tire vnion betweene the faithfull and Christ, if wee respect the things vnited, viz. Christ and his members; but if wee regard the
manner of this vnion, it is wholy spirituall, mysticall and superna∣turall; farre aboue the reach of the natural1 Cor. 2.14 man yea, of any man fully to conceiue and compre∣hend it; nay, it is a great and a vvonderfull mysterie, firmely to be beleeued as an article of our Faith, and not curiously in a car∣nall and sensible manner to be searched into. And therefore the Apostle shadowing it out vnto vs by the vnion which is betweene Man and Wife, coupled together in mariage-bond, breakes forth into thisEph. 5.32. speech; This is a great Secret, or a. great Mysterie, viz. this vnion beweene Christ and his Church. It is a great mystery, not to be comprehended by sense and carnall reason, but to be be∣leeued and apprehended by faith onely, which is that supernaturall light by which we see things that
areHeb. 1.11 invisible, & cannot be other∣wise seene or discerned. Happy are they that haue felt by com∣fortable experience what it is that we say. Hauing seene what this vnion betweene Christ and the faithfull is, it is next to bee considered how it is wrought in them. This vnion therefore and spirituall coniunction is wrought by the spirit on Christs part, and by faith on our part. These are the two bands of it. First, the spirit, through the effectuall ope∣ration and working thereof, knit∣teth them vnto Christ. As the nerues or sinewes being diffused from the braine into all the parts and members of the body doe ioyne and vnite them al vnto the head, from whence they receiue life and action: So the Spirit of of Christ, proceeding from him who is the head of the Church,
is diffused as it were, and com∣municated vnto his whole body, which is the Church,1 Cor. 12 27. and vnto euery member of the same, eue∣ry particuler beleeuer; and so knitteth and vniteth them vnto Christ their head, so that they haue communion with him, and receiue from him all spirituall grace,Ioh. 1.16 life and motion, accor∣ding vnto their measureRom. 12.3. 1 Cor. 12.11. Ephes. 4.7.: yea, it knitteth them vnto him in a more strait and neare vnion, then the members of the natu∣rall body are knit and vnited vn∣to the head. For they may be seperated from it, and so perish; but there is no seperation, no di∣uision, no dis-vnion possibly to be made betweeneRom. 8.39 Christ and any one of his members, much lesse the whole Church. Againe, (for I had rather bee too plentifull then too sparing
in the illustration of this so ex∣cellent and so heauenly a truth) as all the members of the body are vnited vnto the head, and quickened by one and the same soule, vvhich animates them, and conuayeth naturall life vnto euery one of them: So all the faithfull, vvhether they be in Heauen aboue, or in Earth below, of the Church militant, or triumphant, are ioyned and v∣nited vnto CHRIST, by one and the selfe-same Spirit, vvhich comming from the Head CHRIST IESVS, giueth spirituall life, quickening and motion vnto them, so that the vvhole body being coupled and knit togetherEphes. 4.16. by euery ioynt, receiueth increase of grace by degrees, and groweth vp daily more and more, till the body of CHRIST, vvhich is
his CHVRCH, bee fully per∣fected and consumated, recei∣uing theEphes. 4.13. accomplishment of all Grace and Glory in the highest heauens. This is the first meanes, whereby this vnion is made betweene CHRIST and the faithfull, euen this sa∣cred bond of the Spirit. And from this efficacie and operati∣on of the spirit, vniting vs vn∣to CHRIST, it is said by the Apostle that wee (euen all beleeuers) haue drunke into the same1 Cor. 12 13 Ephes. 4.4. Spirit. And againe, that wee are baptized into one body; that is, wee are made one Body, vvhereof Christ is the Head. Now that other bond, by vvhich they are tied and vnited vnto Christ, and that on their part, is Faith. For the Spirit of God ha∣uing begotten a true and liuely faith in vs by the preaching of
the Word, by meanes of this ex∣cellent grace we are vnited vnto Christ. For thereby we lay hold on Christ with all his merits and1 Cor. 1.30 2 Cor. 3.18. Phil. 3.21. 1 Ioh. 3.2. Gal. 2.20. benefits, and apply them in par∣ticular to our selues, and so be∣come one vvith him; all vvhich he hath done for mankinde, be∣ing made as proper vnto vs, as if it were our owne. And hence it is that Christ is said to dwell in our hearts byEphes. 3.17 Faith. Faith is the hand, as it were, whereby vvee receiue Christ being offred vnto vs in the Word; by meanes of it Christ is made ours, and we his, by an inseparable vnion. And thus wee haue at large described that spirituall and mystical vnion vvhich is betweene Christ and the faithfull, his members. So neare and so strait a vnion, that the holy Ghost in Scripture gi∣ueth sometimes (as was sayd)
the name of Christ himselfe vn∣to the Church, and calleth it by his owne name; euen as the name of the husband, by reason of that vnion betweene them, is gi∣uen vnto the Wife, and she called by his name. As1 Cor. 12 12. the body is one (saith the Apostle) & hath many members —euen so is Christ, that is, the Church of Christ. Such is the nearenesse and efficacie of that spirituall coniunction of Christ and the faithfull, that he cals them not onely Christians, (as sometimes they areActs 11.26. named) or his Spouse, his Sister, hisCant. 5.2. Loue, his Doue, his Vndefi∣led, &c. but euen Christ, his owne name: Whence also it is, that that vvhich is done to the Church, or any member thereof, he accounteth it as done to him∣selfe, whether it be good or euill. The workes of Loue and Charity
done to his poore members, in the day vvhen hee shall sit vpon his Throne to iudge the World, he will pronounce them to haue beene done vnto him∣selfe. I was a hungry,Mat. 25.35.36.40. and ye gaue ME meate: I thirsted, and yee gaue ME drinke: naked and yee clothed ME: sicke and ye visited ME, &c. In as much as ye haue done it vnto one of the least of these MY Brethren, yee haue done it vnto ME. And when Saul per∣secuted the poore Saints of God, and breathed out threatnings & slaughter against them, Christ looking downe from heauen, and beholding him, cries out vnto him with a loud voice,Acts 9.4. Heb. 4.15. Zach. 2.8. 1 Cor. 12.26. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me? The Foote is wounded on earth, and the Head feels it, and complaines of it from Heauen. The perse∣cution or wrong done to his
Church, or any member thereof, he esteemeth it as done to him∣selfe. O my soule raise vp thy selfe vnto the oft and serious consideration of this spirituall and mysticall vnion of the faith∣full with Christ their head and Sauiour? Oh how full is it of sweetnesse & much comfort and inward solace? Thinke of it, and beleeue it without all wauering and doubting. Say not, as carnall men are wont, and as Nicodemus did in a point of like nature, How can this be?Iohn 3.9. & 6.42 How can Christ being in heauen so farre distant from vs in regard of bo∣dily presence be vnited vnto vs? Reason not so, as flesh and blood will suggest vnto thee; but be∣leeue this stedfastly and assured∣ly, as if thou beest spirituall and not carnall, thou wilt, and canst not doe otherwise. The trueth
of God hath sealed it, the Scriptures in many places ra∣tifie and confirme it, and it is a great measure of infidelitie to denie it, or to doubt of it. Thou seest it not vvith the eyes of thy body: What then? vvilt thou beleeue nothing, but that which thou seest with thy bodily eyes; then thou wilt not beleeue that there is a Vnion betweene thy soule and thy body, for thou seest it not with thine eyes; and yet if it were not, thou wert a dead man, and a liuelesse carkasse. Thou wilt not denie, but that there is a Vnion betweene man and wife, though they be distant in place, yea, though the one of them be in this country, and the other in that (for it is a receiued Maxime, or rule granted of all, that distance of place dissolueth not the marriage-bond: both
Gods law, and mans law so deter∣mineth it) and wilt thou be so faithlesse as not to beleeue that there is a Vnion betweene that heauenly bridegroome Christ Ie∣sus, though he be in heauen, and his faithfull members, many of them, on earth? Shall not faith be of more efficacie then nature? Thou wilt not denie (that which experience teacheth thee, except thou beest blinde) that the sight of the eye of thy bodie in a mo∣ment of time as it vvere, and in an instant doth reach vnto the Starres in the firmament, and is in a sort vnited vnto them, though so many thousand miles distant from thee; and wilt not thou graunt much more, that faith which is the eye of the soule, and of a farre more pow∣erfull, and piercing nature, may ascend presently into heauen,
vvhere Christ sitteth in glory, and lay hold vpon Christ, and so ioyne and vnite the beleeuer vvith Christ; not onely vvith his Deitie (which is euery where) but also with his humanity, which is in heauen onely, yea, vvith vvhole Christ, God and man. Be not so carnall, so incredu∣lous. Haue faith and thou vvilt beleeue it, yea, if thou hast faith and the spirit of Christ dwel∣ling in thee, thou canst not but most assuredly beleeue it as a mayne Article of thy Christian Faith, and a principall pillar and ground-worke of thy saluation. Neyther doe thou thinke it suffi∣cient to beleeue it onely, but la∣bour to feele it by a comfortable experience of it; and withall seeke to raise vp thy selfe by the due meditation thereof to the beholding of the infinite and vn∣speakeable
loue and bounty of, Christ thy Sauiour towards thee and towards all true beleeuers. Assure thy selfe of his loue, who hath come downe from heauen, and by a spirituall marriage al∣lied, yea, linked himselfe vnto thee,Esay. 9.6 Hebr. 2.16 giuing himselfe vnto thee, clothing himselfe with thy flesh; and ioyning thee vnto himselfe, and in him vnto God his Father;Iohn 17.21 Isa. 53. and so in him, and through him made thee par∣taker of all those rich treasuries of his grace and glory, euen whatsoeuer he hath wrought for mankinde, andRom. 8.32 1 Cor. 3.21.22 Reue. 2.17 27.28. & 3.5.12.21 made promise of in the Gospell, vvherein that contract which is made betweene him and thee is published to the vvhole world, and the consum∣mation thereof by that marri∣age-feast and ioyful solemnities reserued for another world in
that glorious kingdome of his, where thou shalt liue and remaine with him for euer, inioying his loue, and the comfortable fruits and effcts of it, in vnspeakeable and glorious manner, to thy end∣lesse and euerlasting blisse and happinesse. Assure thy selfe of this; and let thy heart spring for ioy in thee; yea, with heart and voyce sing forth cheerefully with the Spouse that heauenly Ditty and marriage-song, I amCan. 2.16. & 5.4.16. & 6.2. & 8.6.7 my welbeloueds, and my wel∣beloued is mine: His mouth is as sweet things, and he is wholy dele∣ctable: My heart is altogether affectioned towards thee: Set me as a seale on thine heart, & as a signet vpon thine arme; for loue is strong, the coales thereof are fiery, and the flame vehemēt: much water cannot quench it, neyther can the flouds of persecution drown it: If any would
giue all the substance of his house, yea all the riches of the world, I wouldPhil. 3.8. contemne & despise it, rather then beRuth. 1.17 parted from thee, O my blessed Sauiour & Redeemer, who hast lo∣ued me so dearely, and giuen thy selfeGal. 2.20 1 Cor. 3 21. Reuel. 21.7 for me, yea, vnto me, that thou mighist make me one with thee, and one with thy Father, and so, heire of all things both in heauen and in earth. Assure thy selfe here∣of, and raise vp thy selfe there∣by, in a ioyfull manner to sing praises vnto him continually, who hath done so great things for thee without any deserts of thine, andRom. 8.23 long earnestly for the time wherein thou shalt in a more heauenly manner en∣ioy the benefit of that blessed v∣nion; desire to bePhil. 1.23 dissolued from this earthly bodie, and to be with thy Sauiour in the hea∣uens, which is euery way best
for thee: Sigh after him, and let him heare thee crying after him with the voyce of his Spouse. O my welbeloued, flee awayCan. 8.18 and be like vnto the swift Roe, or to the young Hart vpon the mountaines: Come riding vpon the heauens in those fiery chariots to iudge the world, and to take me vnto thy selfe, and to carry me with the voyce of triumphPsal. 45.14 and melodie in∣to that glorious palace which thou hast prepared for mee, there to dwell with thee for euer; and with the Spirit & the Bride, Come,Reue. 22 17.20 Psal. 22. Come Lord Iesus, come quickly: My soule thirsteth after thee my God & Sauiour; when shall I come and appeare before thee? when shall I see thy face, & enioy thy bles∣sed and glorious presence in those heauenly mansions which thou art gone before to prouide for me,Ioh. 14.2 and for thine with me? Thus doe thou
vnfainedly desire and long for continually that gloriousTit. 213 ap∣pearance of our Sauiour, when as hee shall be made2 Thes. 1.10 maruel∣lous in his Saints, and cause thee to see how great thy blessednesse is, in regard of that heauenly vni∣on and coniunction with him. And in the meane while rest with patience, and comfort thy selfe in all estates; for can it be but that it should be wel with the who art so nearely allied vnto Christ; his vvelbeloued Spouse vvhom he hath marriedHose. 2.19 vnto himself for euer in righteousnesse, in mercy, and in compassion; yea, for vvhom hee hath shed his owne precious bloud, that so he might cleanseEphes. 5.26 and sanctifie thee vnto himselfe; yea, vvhom he hath made flesh of his flesh? Can it bc that he should not haue a spe∣ciall care ouer thee,Rom. 8.32.33 Psal. 23.1. & 34.10. & 84.11 and prouide
euery thing for thee, vvhich he seeth to be best for thee? Can he suffer any euill to happen vn∣to thee? yea, rather will he not seeke by all meanes to cherish thee? No man euer yet hated his owne flesh, but nourisheth and che∣risheth it:Ephes. 5 29 Euen so doth the Lord his Church, which is his owne body, whereof he isEphes. 5.23 the head and Sa∣uiour. Euen nature will teach euery one to make much of his bodie, to preserue it from all e∣uill, from all hurts and dangers vvhich might befall it, or any part or member of it, and to do it all the good hee can by any meanes; how much more shall Christ (vvho is the God of na∣ture, and the fountaine of all grace, and farre more tender ouer his bodie (the Church) and all the members of it, then any man is, or possibly can be, of
his owne naturall and corrup∣tible bodie,) how much more shall he saue, defend, preserue, and prouide all things necessary and conuenient for his? It can∣not be otherwise.Eccles. 8 12 Isay. 3.10. Assuredly, it shall be well vvith thee, and with all that are his. He is Almigh∣tie and able to doe it for thee, and most louing, carefull and ten∣der ouer thee, and therefore will doe it according to his promise plighted vnto thee in this behalf.Hebr. 13 10 Comfort thy self with this; and feare not, howsoeuer Sathan and his wicked instrumentsPsal. 3.6. & 118.6. shal op∣pose themselues against thee; be not danted or dismayed thereat, yea, let them (as they haue cause) be stricken with feare, & damped in their malicious courses intēded against thee. Litle think they what they do whē they do ill vnto thee; they strike against the Rock which
will dash them in peecesIsay. 8.15; they kicke against the prickeAct. 9.5.. Touch not mine annoynted,Psal. 105 15 saith the Lord, those that are annoynted with the heauenly graces of my holy spirit; yea, (which is more) touch not, harme not, those that are vnited vnto mee, that are as neare vnto me as mine own flesh & bones, theZachar. 2 8 apple of mine eyes, most deare and tender vnto me. Christ cannot indure this, he will not suffer it to goe vnpunished: O it is a fearefull thing to be an e∣nemie to the least of Christs re∣deemed ones. FeareIsay. 8.12.13 not there∣fore the feare of any man, that in opposing thee, setteth himselfe against Christ thy Sauiour, but let them feare and tremble whiles they doe it, and trust thou in the Lord, and cleaue fast vnto him in all things. And seeing he hath linked thee vnto himselfe so
neare, making thee his Spouse, and professing himselfe to bee iealous ofExod. 20 5. Hos. 2.2.7 thy loue▪ see that thou preparest thy selfe so as thou mayest alwayes be ready to bee presented vnto him as a2 Cor. 11.2. pure Virgin, that so hee may delightProu. 8.31 Cant. 4.10 in thee, and in thy loue con∣tinually. O mercifull LORD, doe thou vvorke and frame my heart vnto these things daily more and more, I humbly beseech thee; especially inflame my frozen and benummed affections, and kindle in me the sparkes of true and vnfained loue vnto thee, who hast dealt so exceeding gra∣ciously with me aboue, all merits or deserts of mine. Oh what a vvonderfull and vnspeakeable loue is this of thee, my GOD and Sauiour, that thou shouldest picke and cull mee out of the
Gal. 1.4. vvorld, a sinnefull vvretch, a forlorne person, not worthy of the least degree of thy loue, a branch of that cursedRom. 11.17. & 5.12 17. roote, the sonne of Adam, the childe of vvrath & perdition (for so I must needs confesse I was byEphes. 2.3. Tit. 3.3. nature as well as others) and vnite me so nearelyEphes. 2.13. vnto thine owne selfe, as to bee flesh of thy flesh and bone of thy bone, one with thee, as thou art one with the Father. O the depthEphes. 3.18 of thy loue, and infinite compassions towards me! It cannot be conceiued, it cannot bee expressed, vvhat a marueilous degree of loue this is. It is vnsearchable, boundles, bottomlesse. O let the medita∣tion of it euen rauish my heart and soule, and cause me to breake forth vncessantly into praise and thankefulnesse vnto thee and to seeke by all meanes to shew my
loue vnto thee, who hast magni∣fied thy Grace & Mercy so richly towards me, in making me of so wretched a creature, so blessed and glorious, though the vaile be yet so spread before mine eyes, thatCol. 3.3.4. 1 Ioh. 3.2. I cannot perfectly see or discerne what my blessednesse and glory is; but shall haue it fully manifested both vnto my selfe and others, vvhen thou (who art my life and hope) shalt appeare in glory, and be made marueilous in2 Thes. 1.10. all them that beleeue in thee.
How Christians are to liue in re∣gard of that neere vnion that is betweene them and Christ. THE bodie of euery true beleeuer, is a member of Christs1 Cor. 6.15 body. How carefully therefore ought they alwayes to keepe them from being the in∣struments of sinne, or the wea∣ponsRom. 6.19. of vnrighteousnesse, sith Christ thereby is so greatly di∣shonoured? Shall the members of Christ be made the limmes of Sathan? Shall his tongue speake vvickednesse, his eyes see vani∣tie, his hands worke iniquitie, or any part of his mysticall body be made an instrument to com∣mit sinne and vnrighteousnesse? God forbid. Blessed Lord, seeing it hath pleased thee of thy free
grace, through faith, to vnite me vnto Christ my head and blessed Sauiour, to ingraffe me into his body, and to make euen this weake and fraile body of mine, a true member of his mysticall body; graunt I beseech thee, that I may labour continually to keep this vessell of mine, holy and vndefiled, free from all polluti∣on and defilement of sinne, and from being an instrument to commit any wickednesse, lest thereby I should dishonour my head, & shew my selfe vnworthy2 Cor. 6.14.15. to be ioyned vnto him in so neere and happy a vnion: yea, let it bee my endeauour alwayes to preserue my body in puritie and holinesse, and to giue all the parts and members thereof, ser∣uants vnto righteousnesse, yea, to serue thee continually, both in body1 Cor. 6.20. and spirit, that so honour
and glory may redound to Christ my Sauiour, who with thee, O Father, and thy Spirit, be blessed both now and for euer, Amen. How Christians are to be affected one towards another in regard of their vnion to Christ, and each to other. ALL that are true Christians, being vnited vnto Christ their head, are1 Cor. 12 members of the same body vnder Christ their head; vnited each to other, as they are all to Christ: members one of another,Ephe. 4.4 liuing by the same Spirit, and looking for the same glory,1 Pet. 1.3 Ioh. 17.24 euen that immor∣tall and neuer-fading inheritance reserued in the heauens for them, where they shall dwell vvith Christ their Sauiour for euer∣more.
How then should they enuy, hate and maligne one ano∣ther, and seeke to procure what mischiefe they can each to o∣ther? What an vnkinde and vn∣naturall thing is this? Doth one member of the body euer hate1 Cor. 12.20.21. or enuie another, yea the ba∣sest and meanest (though indeed euen the basest and vncomliest haue not onely a vse and conue∣niencie for the rest, but also a kinde of beautie and comlinesse in themselues, howsoeuer in the present estate of this sinneful life couered with the shew of inde∣cencie and morall dishonestie;) yea, doth not one care for the o∣ther,1 Cor. 12.25.26. suffer with the other, and reioyce vvith the other? So is it with all that are true Christians, naturall and liuely members of that mysticall body of Christ Ie∣sus. There is a mutuall sympa∣thy
betweene them. They are, as it were of one heart, and of oneActs 4.32. soule. They cannot but loue and affect those in whom they see euident, or likely signes to perswade them that they are true Christians, grafted vvith them into the same stocke; they can not hate them from the heart, they can not vvish or pro∣cure their euill, but desire and seeke their good in all things, and so much the more will their loue abound towards them, as they see that they are more nearely vnited vnto Christ their Head and Sauiour. Eyther therefore, shew thy entire and Christian af∣fection vnto all the Saints, the members of Christ, or else neuer deceiue1 Ioh. 4.20 thy selfe with the vaine dreames of thine owne braine, but know thy selfe, and confesse (as the trueth is) that thou art
not yet vnited vnto Christ, that thou hast no part in him, but art a stranger from him & from that life of grace and glory which flowes from him; yea, that thou art of that serpentineGen. 3.15. seed which is alwayes at enmitie with the redeemed of Christ, one of that vvicked race, and of Sathans broodIoh. 3.10, a childe of the curse and an heire of perditionPhil. 1.28., who could neuer abide the sonnes of the promisedGal. 4.29. If thou sayest thou art in the light, thou giuest God the lie1 Iohn 2.9.11.; nay, thou art couered vvith darkenesse, and walkest like one blinded, vnto thine owne de∣struction in that place of vtter darkenesse and euerlasting deso∣lation. Gracious Lord, as thou hast in the riches of thy mercies vni∣ted me vnto CHRIST, and so through him to all that are his,
making vs all members of one body, vvhereof he is the Head; so vnite my heart and soule, I humbly pray thee, in an en∣tire loue and affection vnto thee, and vnto thy Sonne, my blessed Lord and Sauiour; and in him, and for his sake, to all those in vvhom I can see any signes or euidences that they are ingraffed into that mysticall body together with me, children of the same Father, brethren of the same Sauiour, and Heires of the same grace and glory, which thou hast freely promised to all thine. O let mee neuer hate, de∣spise, or vvrong the least of them in any sort (for thereby I should shew my selfe to be very vnnaturall;) but let mee loue them, delight in themPsal. 16.3., and seeke to doeGal. 6.10 them vvhat good I can by any meanes. Let mee
root out of my heart all sinister conceits and wicked surmises, (which are the very bane of true Christian loue and Charitie) and let me bend my selfe alwayes to thinke the best of1 Cor. 13 them, and to doe the best for them, according to their necessitie, and my ability; yea, let them alwayes bee deare vnto mee, and precious in mine eyes, and so much the more as they shall appeare to be more neerely and firmely vnited vnto thee; that thus I may please thee, and haue assurance that I am a liuely member of CHRIST IESVS, the Head of his Church, and my blessed LORD and Sa∣uiour, to whom with thee and thy Spirit, be all prayse and glo∣ry, both now and euermore, Amen.
A wicked life, and the profession of Religion, how ill they a∣gree. AS is a precious Pearle in the dirt, or a Iewell of Gold in a Swines snout, so is the name of a Christian, or the profession of Religion in one of a wicked and prophane life. How vnbeseeming a thing is it? How ill doe they a∣gree? How is the glory and beau∣tie of the one stained, and blemi∣shed, by the vilenesse and basenes of the other? Either therefore, let men neuer take this honour vnto themselues to be called and accounted Christians, and to weare the badge and cognisance of Christs holy and redeemed ones, or else let them (as it is meet they should) cast away the cloaks
of shame wherewith they haue couered themselues heretofore, and abandon all their former sin∣full and euill courses wherein for∣merly they haue walked, to the dishonour of God,Rom. 2.24 the disgrace of their profession,1 Pet. 2.12 Tit. 2.5. yea, and to the increase of their owne con∣demnation, if they continue in their wickednesse.2 Pet▪  21 O blessed Lord, as it hath pleased thee in the riches of thy mercies to call me to the knowledge and the ac∣knowledgement of thee, & to the profession of thy glorious name, euen of thy Christ to be called a Christian, and to stand vpon the priuiledges and royall pre∣rogatiues which belong vnto those that are indeed his redee∣med ones, bought with his most precious bloud: so I humbly be∣seech thee, to make my life and conuersation euery way answe∣rable
to my calling and profes∣sion. Let me consider oft and se∣riously of the dignitie and excel∣lency whereunto I am aduanced aboue those that are aliants from thee, strangers from thy coue∣nant,Ephes. 2.12 without Christ, without God, and without the name of Christianity and godlinesse, chil∣dren of the night1 Thes. 1 5.5 and of darke∣nesse; and let me alway be asha∣med to doe any thing, whereby I may in any sort bring a staine vp∣on that which is and should be my glory, or a dishonour to that blessed and glorious name, after which I am called, causing others through my folly and wickednesse to speake euill of thee, and of thy grace and truth; yea, let the very thought of this, that I should be so ouertaken at any time (as Lord thou know∣est what my fraily and weaknesse
is if I be not continually streng∣thened and supported by thee) let it euen cause me to blush with∣in my selfe, and to hang downe my head with griefe and sorrow; and withall to stirre vp my selfe to walke more carefully,Ephes. 5.15 and circumspectly all my daies, stri∣uing and indeauoring, as to haue the name of a Christian, so to follow the example of Christ1 Pet. 2. to tread in his steppes, and to walke as he hath walked, setting him alwaies as a patterne and presi∣dent before me; as to haue the shew, so likewise the power of godlinesse in my whole life and conuersation, and to walke wor∣thy of the vocationEphes. 4.1. wherewith thou hast honoured mee; shi∣ning forth as a light in this sin∣full world,Phil. 2.14 1 Pet. 2.9. and shewing forth the vertues of thee my Lord and Sauiour, who hast called
me out of the darknesse of sinne and ignorance, into that maruel∣lous light of thine, both of grace and of glory; that thus they that are enemies to thy trueth, and seeke by all meanes to bring reproch vpon that glo∣rious profession, vvith vvhich thou hast graced thy seruants, hauing nothing concerning me to speake euill of iustly, thy great name may be glorified, thy Gos∣pell adorned, that worthy cal∣ling vvhereunto thou hast cal∣led me beautified, my soule and conscience comforted, and both bodie and soule eternally saued in that great day vvherein thou hast appointed to iudge the world in righteousnesse, by him vvhom thou hast ordayned Lord of all things, Christ my righteousnesse; to vvhom with thee O Father and thy blessed
Spirit be all praise and glory both now and for euermore. Amen. A Christian, eyther the best or the worst of all men; most happie or most miserable. A CHRISTIAN is eyther the most happie of all o∣ther men, or the most mise∣rable. Most happie, if he hath the trueth of that vvhich hee beareth the name of, being a Christian not onely in outward profession, but also in inward af∣fection, manifesting it selfe by action and outward conuersati∣on. Most miserable if hee vvant that vvhich cannot be vvanting in any true Christian, hauing onely the title and out∣ward badge of a Christian, and not the inward indowments of
those heauenly vertues and gra∣ces of Gods holy and sancti∣fying spirit,Galat. 5.24 nor the outward ornaments of a godly and reli∣gious life, vvherewith all that are true Christians indeed, are beautified and adorned; mise∣rable are such men of all others if they could see it. Better were it for them to be Turkes, Pa∣gans, and such as neuer heard of the name of a Christian: and easier shall it bee for the most rude and barbarous nation in the world that know not God nor Christ; yea, for those vile and monsterous people, the wic∣ked Sodomites (whom the Lord branded with a note of perpe∣tuall infamie,2 Pet. 2.6 and made spe∣ctacles of his vvrath and ven∣geance to all ensuing ages) easier I say (nay Christ himselfe hath spoken it with his owne
mouth) shall it be for that wic∣ked and cursed generation, in the day of iudgement then for them, euen those false and coun∣terfeit Christians, vvhich are the very staine of the name and pro∣fession of Christianitie and god∣linesse,Math. 11 24 causing by the vvicked∣nesse of their liues the name of Christ to bee blasphemedRom. 2.24 a∣mong the heathen, and by their vnseemely actions and shamelesse conuersations brin∣ging this honourable calling in∣to contempt and reproach a∣mong those that are strangers from God and his Christ, and iudge of the truth of our Re∣ligion, not by that vvhich is the true touchstone, and cannot de∣ceiue, (viz. the Scriptures and glorious vvord vvhich wee be∣leeue:) but by the liues and car∣riages of those that are the pro∣fessors
of it, or beare the name of Christians or Professors, con∣cluding (though falsely) that that Religion cannot bee good nor to bee embraced of any vvhich they see to bring forth no better fruits in those that are the professors of it, or haue the name of such as are professors of it (for they make no diffe∣rence) yea,Tit. 1.16. 2 Pet. 2.2. Rom. 8.9. as, or vvorse then they see in that blindnesse of Turcisme or Paganisme wherein they liue. Fearefull is the estate of such titular, and seeming Christians, or indeede rather no Christians, (although they haue a place in the Church, and liue among Christians, as the Chaffe among the Wheate,) men of wicked and corrupt hearts and liues, of which there be multitudes among vs, (the shame and reproach of the
Christian vvorld; yea, of Christ himselfe) fearefull and wretched is their estate and condition: of all, their condemnation shall be greatest; for so the Truth it selfe hath threatned against them, and will surely accomplish it in due time. This is theIoh. 3.19 condemnation, (that is, this is the cause of that great and fearefull condemna∣tion,) that light is come into the world and men loue darknesse ra∣ther then the light. Children of night and of darknesse1 Thes. 5.5.; yea, of the curse and perdition, how thinke you yee shall escape the vengeance that is to come, ex∣cept as you haue taken vpon you the name of Christians, so you liue as it becommeth Chri∣stians; except you change your liuesMat. 3.8. Acts 3.19., and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life, not thinking it to be sufficient to
say, wee haue Christ to be our Sauiour and Redeemer; except you shew your selues to be such, as are redeemed from sinne, and loosed from the bands ofIoh. 3.8. Luke 1.75 Iohn 3.36. Psal. 2.12. ini∣quitie, the vvorke of the Diuell; vvhich vvas the end of Christs comming, and which all that are redeemed by him, must finde to be wrought in them. If you be∣leeue and obey not,Iohn 3.36 2 Thes. 1.8. assuredly you shall perish, the wrath of God abideth on you, and shall be poured forth vpon you in the day of the vvrath, and of the declaration of the iust iudge∣ment of God. Christ shall no wayes profit you; hee shall not be a Sauiour to redeeme you, but a Iudge to condemne you, and to render vnto you accor∣ding to your wayesIsay 3.11. and workes that yee haue done. Heare this (you that haue the name and
shew of Christians and are not,) heare it, consider well of it, and tremble at it, and learne at length to be Christinns, not in shew and profession onely (for that vvill turne to your greater condem∣naton) but in deede and in truth, which wil bring you much peace and ioy heereRom. 2.7, and infinite and vnspeakeable happines and glo∣ry hereafter, when as Christ (that blessed hope of ours) shall ap∣peare in glory2 Thes. 1 10., and be made marueilous in all them that haue beleeued in him, and beene obe∣dient to him. Gracious Lord (who art the author and finisher of euery good gift and grace, which is vvrought in any of thine,) per∣fect I beseech thee, that vvorke of grace which of thy free mer∣cy and goodnesse it hath plea∣sed thee to beginne in mee, O
let mee neuer be of the number of them that haue a shew of godlinesse2 Tim. 3.5., but deny the power thereof; professing themselues to be Christians, and yet liue as those that are enimies to Christ, bruitish and Heathenish people. Farre be this from me; for so I should heape the greatest mea∣sure of thy vvrath vpon mee, bring my selfe to endlesse vvoe and miserie, hauing my portion among them to whom Christ in the day of his appearance, in fla∣ming fire2 Thes. 1.7.9. shall render venge∣ance, because they were not obe∣dient to thy blessed Gospell; but graunt that as thou hast vouch∣safed me the tytle and honour of a Christian, so I may walk worthy of that holy and glorious profes∣sion, endeuoring to keepe a good conscience alwayes, both before thee and before men, and to liue
righteously, iustly, and vnblame∣ably, as it becommeth one of those whom thou hast separated from this vile and sinfull world, this naughty and crooked gene∣ration, and called vnto thy king∣dome and glory, by the preach∣ing of the Gospell of thy Christ, that so being made like vnto my Sauiour in righteousnesse and holinesse here, and seeking to glorifie thee in all things, I may hereafter obtaine the glory of our Lord Iesus Christ, liuing with him in those heauenly mansions (according to that pro∣mise of his, vvho is faithfull and true in all his sayings) and being made partaker with him of that felicitie and happinesse2 The. 2 14. Ioh. 17.24 vvhich is endlesse and vnspeakable; and that only through thy mercies in Christ, in whom it hath pleased thee to accept me; and to vvhom
with thee and thy good Spirit, be all prayse now and for euer. Amen. Another to the same effect. THE sinne of Christians is the greatest of all others, and so their punishment likewise, God being alwayes iust to ren∣der vengeanceRom. 6.2 according to the qualitie of the offence. First, that their sinne is greatest, vvill easily appeare to him that right∣ly and throughly considereth of it.  For, these sinne vvith know∣ledge; others, in many things, through ignorance. Now igno∣rance of the fault we know hath some pretence; and doth, though not wholy, yet in part, excuse and lessen the fault; but where there is knowledge of the fault
and yet no conscience to shunne and auoid it, there is no pretenee, no excuse. Yea, the more light and the greater knowledge that there is of the euill forbidden, the more inexcusable doth it make the committer thereofLuk. 12.47 Ioh. 9.41., & the neerer doth it come to the fearefull sinne of Presumption, yea, of Contempt, vvhich is a sin with a high hand, a crying sinne, which calleth loud in the eares of the Lord for the fiercenesse of his wrath and vengeance to bee executed vpon the offenders therein.  Againe, the sinne of those that beare the name of Christians, is greater and more hainous then the sin of Pagans, Turkes, and such as are not Chri∣stians, because they haue not so many meanes to preserue them from the contagion of sinne as Christians haue; as reading of the
Word, hearing of the same, mu∣tuall exhortation,Hebr. 3.13. good exam∣ple of those that are true Christi∣ans, who shine as lightsPhi. 3.17 & 2.16. amongst them, so that they can not goe aside into crooked pathes vvith those that walke in darkenesse, except they vvill of purpose shut their eyes, and be willingly (if not wilfully) vvicked. And to these adde the ioynt prayers of the Church, the fruit and benefit whereof cannot bee so great to them that are without, as to these that are in the bosome thereof, and for whom more especially they are ordainedEphes. 6.18.: and therefore in this regard, their sinne is in∣creased aboue the sinne of others that want those meanes which they haue.  Besides, as others haue not so many meanes to preserue them from euill; so they haue not so many motiues to draw
them vnto good, as Christians and those that liue in the Church haue, from the feare of the iudge∣ment to come, theAct. 3.19 & 24.15.16. 2 Cor. 5.10. 2 Thes. 1.7.8.9. resurrection of theRom. 2.7 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Ioh. 3.2.3 iust and vniust, the ter∣rour of that great and dreadfull day, which is of force (one would thinke) to perswade with any one that is not altogether harde∣ned and seared, as it vvere with a hot Iron; the hope of that great and vnspeakeable glory which is promised vnto them which doe well1 Ioh. 3.5.8. in beleeuing; the end of Christs commingGal. 1.4., euen to loose the workes of the Deuill (which are sinne) and to deliuer men from this present euill World, that so they might serue him in righteousnesse and holinesse all their dayesLuk. 1.75.. And (which is the maine and chiefe of all) the infi∣nite and vnspeakeable loue of God inIoh. 3.16 1 Ioh. 4.9. giuing Christ to be a
Sauiour and Redeemer vnto them, to free them from that cursed and miserable estate into which they were fallen, and of Christ in giuing and offering himselfe to saue and redeeme them, and that with so great a price1 Pet. 1.19. Mat. 27., euen the shedding of his most pretious bloud after his grieuous Agonie, and most bitter Passion; the very remembrance and consideration whereof, doth make the heart of him that is a Christian indeed, euen to melt within him, and constraine him to burne in loue towards Christ2 Cor. 5 14.15 1 Pet. 4.1.2.23., and in loue of him to abstaine from all sinne, which he know∣eth to bee so displeasing and hatefull to him, being that which caused his head to be crowned with thornes, his hands and feete to be pierced with nayles, and his side with a speare till, vvater and
bloud gushed out. These things (which others eyther heare not of at all, or at least a far off, with∣out euident demonstration of the truth thereof to the conuincing of the iudgement, or effectuall perswasion to the mouing of the affections by particular applica∣tion) do continually sound forth in the eares of them that are Christians, and children of the Church, liuing within the bounds thereof. The Trumpet is daily blowne, as it were, among them, and with the shrill noyse thereof so pearceth their eares, that if they be not deafe, they can not but heare it; the Ministerie of the Word is ordeined for this purpose, and therefore if all these do not preuaile more with them, and cause them to be more free from sin then others, their sinne is the greater, they are altogether
inexcuseable, and vvorse then the worst of the blinde and sedu∣ced Heathen, who know not God, nor Christ.  Lastly, (to passe ouer many things) needs must their sinne be greater then the sinne of others, because it is more of∣fensiue and iniurious vnto God, and more hurtfull vnto his truth, then all the sinnes vvhich are, or can be committed by others (how many or great soeuer.) The Lord hath more wrong done vnto him by one sinne that he that hath taken vpon him the name and profession of a Chri∣stian committeth, then by twen∣tie that are committed by others that are strangers from him, and know him not; and hee is more prouoked by a little sinne (as men count little) which these commit willingly and openly, then by the great and notorious
crimes of vvhich the Heathen are guiltie and attainted in the eye of the vvorld. And, no mar∣uaile: For who is there that doth not take it more to heart when hee is ill dealt with by him that professeth himselfe to bee his friend (though it be but once, and in one matter) then if hee were oft & many wayes wronged by him, that is his open and professed enemie? Of the one he could looke for no better; of the other he had no cause to ex∣pect so bad, but better. Or, who is it that would not take it more hainously that one that were his Seruant (or in the place of a Ser∣uant vnder him) should abuse him once, and that when hee would seeme to be seruiceable vnto him, then if he that were a stranger and knew him not, should offer him many abuses,
many indignities which could not be well put vp neither: so it is betweene God and them that are Christians, at least in shew and profession, and euen when they professe loue and friendship vnto him, yet shew by their workes that they hate him; yea, whiles they seeme to be worshippers of him, yet doe indeed worship the Deuill, yeelding themselues ser∣uiceable and obedient to him in the things which hee suggesteth vnto them, and casting away the Lords Commandements behind their backes. Oh their sinne is a crying and a prouoking sinne, it maketh the Lords wrath and iealousie to burne like fire; heeAct. 17.30. winketh at the sinnes of the Heathen, in a sort, (though with dislike, not sparing them, but ex∣ecuting iudgement vpon them, according to the number and
measure of their trasgressions.) But he frowneth vpon these, and taketh notice of them with an yrefull countenance, and writes them all vvith greater lettersIer. 2.22. in his Booke of Account, that so he may call men to a more seuere reckoning for them, and in the fiercenesse of his wrath, and fury of his indignation, poure out greater vengeance vpon them, because he hath beene more di∣shonoured by them. Fotr, his is that vvhich hath turned to his greatest dishonour, for this cause hath his holy name beene blas∣phemed,Rom. 2.24. and railed vpon by the Heathen, and his Commaunde∣ments and ordinances contem∣ned and despised; euen those great things of his Law by this meanes haue beene accounted as a vaineHos. 8.12, nay as a prophane thing. For how could the Hea∣then
but open their mouths and blaspheme the Name of the Lord, and the truth of Religion which he hath established, when they see the liues of them that take the profession therof vpon them, as bad, or vvorse then theirs? O who is able to expresse how exceedingly the Lord is pro∣uoked when he beholdeth this? How his wrath doth euen burne within him till it breake forth and consume them. For it is time for him to looke to itPsa. 119.126., when he seeth that his Law is destroy∣ed by them who were betrusted with it, that through their means it might be kept and preserued from the iniurie and violence of others, that either knew not the excellencie of it, or else had no loue or regard vnto it. Thinke of these things, yee that haue taken the name and title
of Christians vnto you, but yet haue nothing of Christianity or true pietie and godlinesse in you, but the maske and vizard thereof onely: The sinne of these daies and times, this last and worst age of the world, long agoe fore∣told2 Tim. 3.5 and prophecied of; ver∣ball Christians and formall pro∣fessors (for of these onely wee speake) who haue the name of Christians, and yet liue like hea∣then the badge of Christs ser∣uants, & redeemed ones, and yet liue like the professed seruants of sinne and Sathan, being in bon∣dage vnto many lusts, chayned vnto many sinnes, laden with many iniquities, yea, shamefully polluted and defiled with many vile abhominations, prophana∣tions of the Saboth, oathes, blas∣phemies, vncleannesse, drunken∣nesse, couetousnesse, oppression,
malice, vncharitablenesse, &c. to the dishonour of God, and the disgrace of their profession.Isay. 1.4 Ah sinfull and crooked generation, a seed of the vvicked, corrupt children, children of the adul∣teresse that hath gone a whoring from God while she made shew of loue, and duetie ro him; such as haue the false Church to be your mother vvhiles you would be accounted the children of the true Church; Know you not how great your sinne and wickednesse is, and how great the punishment thereof shall be? how you are in worse estate then euen the heathen themselues? Are you so blinde that you can∣not see this; or willingly igno∣rant, that although you know it, yet you vvill not vnderstand2 Pet. 3.5.? Deceiue not your selues any longer. Thinke it not sufficient
to say we are Christians, we liue in the Church. The couenant and the promises belong vnto vs and therefore (if it shall be well with any, it shall be so with vs. No, no, euen this which should haue beene your glory and happi∣nesse, shall be the increase of your misery. As you haue beene liftedMath. 11 23 vp to heauen by your outward ptofession of Christ, and the meanes of grace and salua∣tion so plentifully offered vnto you in the ministery of the Gos∣pell, so you shall be cast downe to hell and receiue the greater condemnation, for the wicked∣nesse of your liues and conuersa∣tions in that you haue not beene answerable to the grace vouch∣safed vnto you. I tremble to thinke of your estate, though you are secure and regard it not, but thinke all is well, crying out
as the Iewes were wont to doe, the Temple of the Lord,Ier. 7.4. the Temple of the Lord, we haue the meanes of life and saluation, Christ dwelleth amongst vs, we are baptised into his name, vve beleeue in him, and hope to be saued by him. Lord doe thou at length open their eyes, that they may see themselues, and their sinne and misery, and turne them vnto thee, euen as many of them as thou hast ordained to life and glory. O doe thou cause all of vs that haue taken vpon vs the names of Christians, to liue as it becommeth Christians, to cast away the vnfruitfull workes of darkenesse, and to walke as the children of light, indeauouring alwaies to be answerable vnto the meanes of grace vvhich thou affordest vnto vs, increasing dai∣ly more and more in righteous∣nesse,
and holinesse, and in all holy conuersation and godli∣nesse, and shewing forth the ver∣tues of thee our God and Saui∣our, that so we may auoid the misery that wil come vpon them that professe thee in word, but denie thee in deed and in truth; and be approued of thee, and re∣ceiue that blessing from thee, vvhich thou hast promised, and wilt giue vnto all that call vpon thy name in trueth and faithfulnesse. God esteemeth of vs according to our affections. HOw graciously doth God deale with his children, vvhereas he might iustly require of them exact obedience to his law, euen in the rigour thereof,
yet in great mercy he doth farre otherwise. He dealeth with vs as children; not as seruants. As long as he seeth there is a sincere and vnfained desire, any intire affection in vs to doe that which he hath commanded, although we are not able to do it as it hath commanded, he beareth vvith vs, and is well pleased with vs, he accepteth our desire and in∣deuour for the deed it selfe, our affections are actions with him, who looketh chiefly at the heart, and if that be good, spareth vs, as a father his weake children that desire to please him in a better manner, then by reason of their frailtie they can. He spareth vs, and in a sort winketh at the e∣uill,Mat. 3.17 2 Co. 8.21 Heb. 10.17 Psal. 119 40 which wee commit vnwil∣lingly. Were it not that the Lord shew¦ed himselfe a father to vs in this
regard, and not a Iudge calling vs in euery thing to a strait & seuere account,Psal. 130.3. & 143.2 who were able to a∣bide it? who could hold vp his head in his presence or come before him with any comfort or confidence, as notwithstanding we ought to do,Rom. 5.2 Heb. 4.14 & 10.22. except we vvill displease him, and be disobe∣dient to his heauenly voyce, by which he calleth vs hereunto. O Lord if I had not comfort in this, how exceeding comfort∣lesse should I be? how oft, and much dismayed, and euen co∣uered with shame, & confusion of face, when in my secret thoughts and meditations I looke vp vnto thee; much more when I entred into thy presence, to performe any duety or seruice vnto thee; for loe I find my selfe to be a sin∣full man,Rom. 7.24 laden with many sins and iniquities, full of frailte
and infirmities. The good which I would,Rom 7.19 I cannot doe, and the euill which I would not, that do I. Many waies doe I continually sinne a∣gainst thee, both in omission of the good which thou hast com∣maunded, and in commission of the contrarie euill; sinne clea∣uethHeb. 12.1. Rom. 7.17 & 24 vnto me in my best acti∣ons and performances, wherein I desire most to please thee, and to approue my selfe vnto thee; yea, it compasseth me a∣bout on euery side, and holdeth me in a kinde of bondage and thraldome vnder it, so that my soule mourneth many times secretly vvithin me, and pan∣tethPsal. 119.131. after thee, desiring to bee loosed from this bodie of sinne, and to inioy that perfect libertie and freedome, and that full enlargement from this mi∣sery vvhich thou hast promi∣sed
vnto thy Saints and seruants. Haue mercy vpon me, O most mercifull Lord, haue mercy vpon me; and according vn∣to thy free and gracious pro∣mise looke downe vpon me with the eye of thy fatherly com∣passion; accept my vveake and inperfect desires, as if I vvere able to performe that perfect obedience vnto thee, vvhich thy law requireth. Deale vvith mee as thou vsest to deale with thy children. Behold I desire thy commaundements,Psal. 119 40 ac∣cept me according to that which I haue, and not according to that vvhich I haue not: Let the truth of my inward affection, be as the perfection of action before thee; my desire to serue thee as if I did tēder much better seruice to thee then I do, or can doe. Heale my infirmities, I humbly pray thee;
and quicken me euery day more and more vvith thy grace and spirit, that so I may vvalke be∣fore thee in all thy vvaies, with more cheerefulnesse and since∣ritie; and howsoeuer I haue cause to be discouraged, in re∣gard of my selfe, and my ma∣nifold imerfections, vvhen I enter into thy presence, yet ha∣uing respect to those sweet and gracious promises, vvhich thou hast made vnto me in thy Christ (in vvhom thou lookest alwaies vpon me, and in vvhose righ∣teousnesse thou wilt now and e∣uer accapt mee, couering all my infirmities vvith that per∣fect obedience of his,) Let me alwaies approach vnto the throne of thy grace with com∣for and boldnesse, being assu∣red that I shall find grace & mer∣cie of thee, vvho neuer faylest
in any thing vvhich thou hast promised: but shewest thy selfe to bee abundant in goodnesse and truth aboue that vvee are able to aske or thinke. To thee be prayse for euer. Amen. True loue of God, how it may be discerned from that which is counterfeit and hypocriticall. MAny there be, that in word professe they loue God, but few that loue him indeed, and in truth. Wilt thou know therefore, vvhether his loue be in thee or no? whether thy heart be rightly affected to∣wards him? Consider then what I shall say vnto thee, yea vvhat God himselfe (vvho is the truth it selfe) speakes vnto thee, vnto mee, vnto all of vs.
They that loue him, doe first finde that they are loued of him1 Ioh. 4.19. And this loue of his, shed into their hearts, causeth them to loue him againe; and their loue towards him, mani∣festeth it selfe,  First by a care and delight to keepe his com∣maundements. So he sayth, If ye loue mee, keepe my comman∣dementsIoh. 14.15.21.23.24. & 15.14.. And againe,1 Ioh. 5.3. This is the loue of God, that we keepe his commandements. They are not grieuous or bur∣densome vnto them, but they de∣light in them concerning the in∣ner manRom. 7.22: yea, they are an easie yoke and a light burden vnto themMath. 11 30. Although they oft faile (and cannot but faile) in the per∣formance of them, in regard of the reliques and remainders of sinne and corruption, vvhich are in them, and vvill be in them vn∣to
death,Heb. 12.1 cleauing as fast vnto them as their skinne doth vnto their flesh; yet as farre as they are regenerate, and renued by grace, their hearts are set vpon themPsal. 119 40. Hebr. 13.18.; they finde much sweetnesse in them, they desire and indeuour with all their soules, to keepe and obserue them, not one, but all of themPsal. 119.6.; yea, it is their full resolu∣tion, and their constant endeuour to yeeld themselues flexible and pliable thereunto in all things. They make holy vowes, and en∣ter into couenant vvith them∣selues; yea, they bind them∣selues, as it vvere, by a solemnePsal. 119.106. oath and promise to performe them to the vttermost of their strength and power. Their heartPsal. 119 vers. 20. breaketh in a manner for the earnest desire and feruent affcti∣on they haue thereunto; yea, like the chased and vvearied Hinde,
theyVers. 131 pant after them. Thus they that loue the Lord, delight in all his Commandements, both in knowing them, and in kee∣ping and obseruing them; and therefore they are carefull in vsing the meanes whereby they may be furthered herein, as, rea∣ding the Word, hearing the same preached, godly conference, re∣ceiuing the Sacraments, Pray∣er, &c. they ioy herein, and make much account of these and all other blessed ordinances of the Lord; they are pretious in their eyes, they esteeme more of them then of their appointed foodIob 23.12..  And hereby it doth appeare in∣deed that their hearts are toward the Lord, that they doe loue him truly and sincerely. Againe, their loue to him sheweth it selfe, by a hatredPsal. 97.10. of all euill, which they know to be hatefull and displea∣sing
vnto him aboue all things: Hauing a sense and feeling of his loue and fauour towards them, yea of the exceeding riches of his grace and kindnesse towards them in CHRIST IESVS, they burne in loue againe to∣wards him; and this loue of theirs towards him, in a speciall man∣ner restraineth them from all sinne, and draweth, yea forceth and constraineth them to the contrary vertues. For they iudge it a meet2 Cor. 5.14.15. 1 Pet. 4.1.2 and most equall thing that seeing Christ, in loue to them, hath died for their sinnes, that therefore they euen in loue towards him, should be dead vn∣to sinne for which hee died; and that as hee rose againe to mani∣fest his victory and triumph ouer sinne and Sathan, and to raise them out of the graue of sinne, to the life of righteousnesse and
holinesse; so that they also should liue no more vnto themselues and to their sinnes, but to him who so loued them that he died for them, and gaue his pretious bloud to wash and cleanseTit. 2.14 them from all sinne and iniquitie, and to make them a righteous seed,1 Pet. 2.9. a holy nation a peculiar people, that they should shew forth the vertues of him that hath cal∣led them out of the darkenesse of sinne & death, into that mar∣uailous light both of his grace here, and glory hereafter. Thus the loue of God ente∣ring into their spirits doth purge and purifie them throughout; it doth presently void out that filth and corruption both of ori∣ginall pollution & actuall trans∣gression vvhich was before in them; and smothereth vp their carnall, earthly and sensuall loue
by a greater force, at least, it stri∣ueth so to doe (for the old man will not be quite dead as long as they liue in this vvorld.) It vvorketh mightily and very for∣cibly in them, and is of maruei∣lous efficacie for the clensing of them from all sinne, and fit∣ting and preparing them both in body & soule to be temples and mansion-places for the holy Ghost, the glorious spirit of God to rest and to dwell in. What should I say? They ha∣uing tasted of the bounty, and superabundant loue of God, in Christ their Sauiour towards them, and hauing in them the holy Ghost testifyingRom. 8.16. vnto them, & assuring them that they are the sonnes of God; yea, sea∣ling this vnto their soules and consciences, haue such a sincere, entire, and pure loue kindled in
their breasts, that they doe desire vnfainedly to abstaine from all sinne which they know is so dis∣pleasing vnto him, and to please him in all things; and vvhen they are sollicited either by Sa∣than or their owne corrupt na∣ture, to the commission of any thing which is euill, they say with righteous Ioseph,Gen. 39.9. How can I doe this great wickednesse, and so sinne against God, who hath beene so good and gracious vnto mee? Hath the Lord loued mee with so great a loue, and shall I not loue him againe, and manifest my loue towards him, by a care to keepe his Commandements? This is such a flame that it cannot but breake forth out of the heart into the life. This is such a fountaine, as cannot but send foorth the streames of pure water into the actions of the life. This (in a
word) causeth them to leaue and to abhorre that which is euill, and to cleaue vnto that which is good, to desire and endeauour in trueth and sinceritie to keepe all the righteous Commandements of God. The loue of God shed abroad into their harts, kindleth & inflameth their hearts towards him, and so maketh them to hate euill, because hee hateth it, and to loue righteousnesse be∣cause hee loueth it; yea, their hearts are so heated and so in∣wardly affected with the sense of the loue of God, which the spi∣rit of grace stirreth vp in them, that they euen melt in loue and entire affection vnto God, and desire vnfainedly to please him in all things, and to shew them∣selues zealous for his glory, be∣cause hee hath so commaunded them; euen for the loue which
they beare vnto him, who hast shewed himselfe to be so louing and gracious a God, so kinde and tender a Father towards them in CHRIST IESVS: Nay, they desire that others also should haue experience of that which they haue felt, euen of the vnspeakeable loue of GOD in CHRIST towards those whom hee imbraceth in him. They desire vvith theIoh. 4.28 29 vvoman of Samaria, that euery one should taste of that which they haue had so comfortable experience of in their soules and spirits; and that others also as well as they, might abstaine from all kinde of sinne and wickednesse; & they mourne and groane within themselues, their hearts are grieued, and their eyesPsa. 119.136.139. drop down teares in abun∣dance when they see it is other∣wise. As they haue noIoh. 3.4. greater
ioy then to see God honoured by the diligent keeping of his Commandements, so there can be no greater griefe vnto them, then to see him dishonoured by the neglect and contempt there∣of. Oh, this is a vexation, and euen a torment vnto their soules, as it was vnto righteous Lot,2 Pet. 2.7. when hee beheld the abhomi∣nations of the cursed Sodomites. It is, as it were, a hell to them to be in the company of such as blaspheme the name of the Lord, and set themselues to worke wic∣kednesse, to the prouoking of his glorious Maiestie. And here∣by it doth appeare that they loue God in truth, and not in word and tongue onely, as the most doe. If it be thus with vs, we haue cause to blesse God, and to reioyce in the assurance of this that our hearts are sincere and vpright
before him, and that wee loue him, and arePro. 8.17, and shall euerIoh. 13.1 be loued of him. But if this be not in vs (at least in some measure) our loue which wee professe to∣wards him, is but a counterfait and hypocriticall loue, vvhich he hateth; yea, if we be not thus affected, if vve say that wee loue him, wee are lyars, and thee is no truth in vs; our words fight with our actions, like vnto them that strucke CHRIST, saying,Ioh. 19.3 Haile Master: wee are so farre from louing him, that vvee doe not so much as1 Ioh. 2.4. know him by an effectuall and sauing know∣ledge; neither are knowne or in any sort approued of him: yea, he loaths vs, and so much the more, as we dissemble vvith the vvorld, and make shew of that loue towards him, vvhich is not in vs.
O blessed LORD, how vn∣speakeable is thy loue, how vn∣searchable are the riches of thy grace and mercy toward mee in CHRIST IESVS, in whom thou hast imbraced mee with an infinite and an euerlasting loue before all worlds? yea, thou still louest me, and wilt loue me vnto the end (for thy loue is, as thy selfe, vnchangeableRom. 11 29..) Euery day thouLam. 3.23. renewest thy compassions vpon me. Thou vouchsafest to giue mee many pledges and sure euidences therof; yea, thou sealest the same to my soule and spirit, by the testimonyRom. 8.16 2 Cor. 8.16 of thy bles∣sed Spirit, and by that inward ioy, whereby thou causest mee to reioyce euen in the midst of mourningPsa. 94.19. 2 Cor. 1.4.. Oh that thou wouldst drawCant. 1.3 my heart vnto thee, and cause mee to loue thee againe entirely, and vnfainedly!
O that thou wouldst inflame these frozen affections of mine, and cause mee euen to melt and to burne in loue towards thee! O that it would please thee to change all that carnal, that earth∣ly and that sensuall loue and af∣fection of this vvorld and the things thereof, vvhich is yet re∣maining in mee, into a holy and spirituall loue of thee, my GOD and Sauiour, my kinde and ten∣der Father in CHRIST IESVS; that so I may loue nothing but thee; or in thee, and for thee. And let this loue of thee cause me to hate all sinne which thou hatest with so great and so infinite a ha∣tred; to hate it, to abhorre it, and vtterly to forsake it, though neuer so pleasing to my corrupt nature, neuer so profitable or gain∣full to me in any respect; and to loue all righteousnesse, vvhich
thou louest, and wherein thou de∣lightest; that thus louing thee in∣wardly in heart & soule, and ma∣nifesting my loue towards thee, by the fruits & effects of it in my life and conuersation, I may eue∣rie day haue more full assurance of thy especiall loue towards me, and comfortable experience of the ri∣ches of thy grace and mercy sea∣led vnto my soule & conscience; yea, I may see by the fruits and pledges of thy loue that thou louest me, and delightest in me, and wilt cause thy gracious countenance to shine vpon me all my daies; yea, that thou wilt refresh my soule in the midst of my troubles, and cause my fainting spirits to reuiue within me when death shalbe ready to seize vpon me; and assoone as death shall put an end to this fraile and sinfull life, wilt stretch forth thy hand to imbrace me with thy
armes, and to translate me imme∣diatly by the ministery of thy An∣gelsLuk. 16.22. into that blessed and glori∣ous kingdome of thine, where I shall enioy thy presence, see thee face to face, and haue the bright beams of thy louing coun∣tenance shining alwaies most clearely and comfortably vpon me, to thy endlesse praise and glo∣rie, and my vnspeakable felicitie and happinesse for euermore; and all this through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Sonne, my onely Sauiour and Redeemer, in whom it hath pleased thee graciously to respect me, and to whom, with thee, O Father, and the spirit of grace and loue, three persons, and one most glo∣rious God, be all praise, domi∣nion, and thanksgiuing from this time forth and for euer. Amen.
Loue of the children of God. IT is impossible to loue God, and to hate his image; to loue Christ who is the head, and to hate Christians, who are his members. Nay, the more that any one loues the one, the more must he of ne∣cessitie loue the other; and the more his affection increaseth toward God, the more also it will increase towards those that are the children of God, resembling him (in their measure) in the inward graces and vertues of their mindes, puritie, righteous∣nesse, holinesse, and the rest of those diuineMat. 5.43 perfections, where∣in he hath set himselfe as a pat∣terne and president to be imita∣ted and followed of them. He loues them intirely and vnfai∣nedly, because hee seeth that
he is nearely tied vnto them by many and strait bonds; as being members1 Cor. 12.27. of one bodie; chil∣dren of one fatherMath. 5.45. Ephe. 4.6; brethrenMat. 12 50 Heb. 2.12. of one Saour; fed1 Cor. 10 17. at one table, where they haue mutu∣all communion and fellowship in one1 Cor. 12.13 Ephes. 4.4. and the same spirit; nou∣rished with the same meat in the word and Sacrament; liuing to∣gether in one and the same fami∣lie, which is the visible Church;Heb. 11.31. 1 Pet. 2.11 stangers togither in this world, and trauelling as pilgrimes to∣wards the same countrey, that heauenly Canaan;2 Tim. 4 7. souldiours fighting together vnder the same banner, (the profession of the same faith)Ephe. 4.5. and against the same common enemie, (the deadly enemie of all mankinde) Sathan, and his complices and confede∣rates; partakers of the same grace of Gods holy and sanctify∣ing
spirit; and ioynt-heires with Christ of the same glory reser∣ued for them and all the Saints in the highest heauens. Being so nearely allied, and so straitly v∣nited mutually each to other, by so many bands, so many Obliga∣tions, how can it be but that they should loue one another with an entire and Christian affection, in truth and sincerity without vanity and flatterie? ShamelesseIohn 4.20 lyars there∣fore they are, who glory in word that they are of God, and yet shew forth by their deeds that they haue no loue to his children, but hate and despise them, or at least make little reckoning of them. If there were nothing else, this were enough to conuince them, that they are not yet admitted into this fel∣lowship, called to this brother∣hood,
but remaine still as they were bred and borne,Ioh. 8.44 1 Ioh. 3.27 the ba∣stardly brood of Sathan, vnto whom, and to his impes they are ioyned in the same league of friendship and familiaritie,Pro. 29.27 1 Pet. 4.4. hating and iniurying them who vvill not beGen. 49.5. brethren with them in iniquitie and vanitie. O Lord, knit my heart daily more vnto thee in an vnfained loue of thee my God, who hast loued me so dearely, and in an entire and Christian loue and affection vnto thy children, to whom thou hast linked and fastened me with so many bonds; let me loue them, not in tongue or in vvord onely,Iohn 3.18 but in deed and in truth, as it becommeth me, and mani∣fest my loue towards them, in seeking by all meanes, to the vt∣termost of my strength and power, to procure their good e∣uery
way: yea, the more that they doe appeare to be thine, the more thy graces doe shine in them, the more let my loue and affection increase towards them, the more let me seeke to doe them good. Hereby shall I haue a certaine proofe, and a sure euidence that I loue thee vn∣fainedly, seeing I loue thine for thy sake; yea, hereby my heart shall assure me before thee, that I1 Ioh. 3.19. am in the truth; I shall haue a comfortable assurance, that I am one of thine, one of that small number of thy adopted & chosen children, indued with thy grace, and heire together with all thy Saintes of the riches of that glory which thou reseruest for them in that heauenly kingdom, which thou hast purchased so vs by the death of thy onely Sonne, and our alone Sauiour, in whom
thou hast graciously accepted vs, and to whom with thee and thy blessed spirit of grace and com∣fort, be all praise and glory both now and euer. Amen. How the hatred of the world is to be esteemed of the godly. IF the world hate vs, what mar∣ueile is it, seeing that itIoh. 15.88. hated and persecuted him to the death by whom the world was made,Heb. 1.2. and who is the Lord of the world and all things therein, euen Christ Iesus our blessed Sauiour? Shall he that is the king of glory be content for our sakes, to in∣dure the crosse, and to bePsal. 24.7. crow∣ned with shame and dishonour,Mat. 27.29. and shall we (sinfull wretches wormes of the earth) shall we be
vnwilling to haue shame and re∣proch fastened vpon vs for his sake? yea, rather how ought wee to account it ourMat. 5.10 11. 1 Pet. 3.14 blessednesse, when men reuile vs, disgrace vs, and say all manner of euill against vs, for his sake, falsly? how ought we to reioyce and be glad, vvhen vvee suffer such things at the hands of the world, vvhich al∣wayes hath, and euer will be in irreconciliable enmitie, and in flat opposition vnto Christ our blessed Lord and Sauiour, vvho vvilleth vs to follow himMat. 10.24.25. & 38. in no other way then hee hath gone before vs, not to drinke of any other cup, then hee hath first more deepely tasted of then we euer can doe, although our af∣flictions vvere mingled vvith much more gall and bitternesse then eyther they are, or haue beene?
O mercifull Lord, let mee be ready alwayes with a willing, a patient and chearefull minde to suffer rebuke for thy sake: let it not seeme1 Pet. 4.12. strange or yrke∣some vnto mee, though for thy name, I be hatedPsal. 44. & 64 3., reuiled, slan∣dered, and laden with many re∣proches, yea, couered vvith shame and ignominie, vvhiles the enemies of thy grace and truth speake cruelly, despite∣fully, and disdainefully against mee all the day long: yea, let me reioyce herein, because here∣by in some sort, I am made con∣formable vnto theeCol. 1.24 1 Pet. 4.13 2 Cor. 4.10. When they speake bitter things against mee, (being assured of mine inno∣cence) let me take them vpon my shoulder, and binde them as a crowne vnto meeIob 31.36.. Yea, O Lord, seeing thou dost not vouchsafe that honour vnto mee, vvhich
thou hast done to many of thy deare and faithfull ones (whom thou hast made glorious by their sufferings) to vnder-goe stripes, bonds, imprisonmentPsal. 44.22. Hebr. 11.37, and death it selfe for thy names sake, and for the profession of thy holy and heauenly truth; let mee ac∣count it a part of happinesse vnto me, and a speciall fauour of thine towards mee, that I may suffer these lesser things for thee; euen the hatred, contempt, and re∣proach of the world (which al∣wayesMat. 16.24. accompanyeth those that vvill be thy Disciples,) and let mee labour by all meanes, to prepare my selfe for the en∣during of greater matters, euen the losse of all earthly commo∣dities, and the shedding of my dearest bloud, if it shall please thee (vvho art the Lord of my life and death) to aduance mee
vnto that high dignitie, and to crowne mee vvith that glory and blessednesse, to become one of thy Witnesses, and to seale vp my Profession by resisting vnto bloud.
Comforts for the afflicted: OR, A Preseruatiue against im∣patience, or discontentment in any kinde of Crosse or Afflicti∣on; consisting of diuers branches: The first drawne from the eternall decree and good prouidence of the Lord therein. I. ALL things come to passe by thePsal. 103 19. Pro. 19.21. Eccle. 3.14 Isa. 45.7. Dan. 2.21. Amos 3.6. ordi∣nance of GOD, e∣uen as he hath pur∣posed and decreed. His diuine prouidence ordereth and dispo∣seth all things. There is not any
thing which is done on the earth or happeneth vnto any man, but he foreseeeth it long before, de∣termineth of all the circum∣stances of it; both when,Gen. 45.5. Exod. 21.13. Mat. 10.29 30. by what meanes, and to what end and purpose it shall be effected; and when it is brought to passe, either is the proper and chiefe agent in the doing of it; or suffereth it to be done by others, according to the determinateAct. 4.28 Iob 30.27 counsell of his owne will. O righteous Father, the houre is come which thou didst foresee, and fore-ordaine from euerla∣sting should come; that appoynted time of thine is come, wherein, as before thou hast decreed, so now I see, it is thy will and plea∣sure, that thy Seruant should be exercised and tried with diuers temptations, and manifold af∣flictions. ThyPsal. 32.4 hand, Lord, is
vpon mee, thou hast cast mee downe, and humbled mee; thou hast suffered me to be laden and oppressed with many sorrowes and miseries. O giue mee grace euer to looke vp vnto thee, to see and acknowledge thy diuine pro∣uidence in all things which befall mee, and wholly to subiect and submit my selfe vnto thy hea∣uenly will and pleasure,1 Sam. 3.18. vvith a patient and cheerefull minde, re∣sting and staying my selfe vpon this, that thou doest all things most righteously, and with great wisedome; yea, that thou (who seest and disposest of all things that come to passe in the world) knowest that this present estate (howHebr. 12.11. grieuous soeuer vnto the flesh) is most behouefull & most pro∣fitable for me, and that the affli∣ctions vvhich are laid vpon me, are and shall be for my greatest
goodRom. 8.28., euen the weakening of the power and strength of sinne, and for the increase of the2 Cor. 4 16. gra∣ces of thy Spirit in me. Behold Lord, I am in thy hands, deale with me in mercy & goodnesse as it pleaseth thee2 Sam. 15.26.. I yeeld my selfe wholy vnto thee, to bow and bend my crooked vvill, and to rectifie and make it conformable vnto thy holy and blessed will in all things, Correct and chastise me in thy fatherly loue and com∣passion, and in such a tender care ouer mee, as I may see that thou seekest to doe me good, and that I may finde those things redres∣sed that are amisse in mee, and giue vp my selfe vvith all hum∣ble submission to walke dutifully and obediently before thee all my dayes, doing that which thou commandest, and following the rule and direction, which thou
prescribest vnto me out of thy heauenly Word. II. From comparison of the present af∣flictions with the glory to come. ALL the miseries whereunto the godly are subiect in this life (although they bePsal. 35.19. Act. 14.22 many and grieuous) are nothing in comparison of that glorie which is reserued for them in the life to come; not so much, as a drop of water is to the maine Ocean: For these, are2 Cor. 4.17.18. finite and temporall; that, infinite and eternall. How then should not any, at the Lords appointment, indure all these things patiently and cheerefully in the certaine hope and assured expectation of that excellent andGen. 15.1. 2 Cor. 4.17 exceeding great reward, that
vnspeakeable felicitie and happi∣nesse, vvhich after a while they shall be made partaker of for euer? How should they not rest well content, though their cup were farre more bitter then it is, yea, though they were to drinke nothing but gall and vinegar all their liues, and to bee fed vvith wormewood, euen the greatest and most bitter afflictions that could possibly befall a man in this life? How should they not most wil∣lingly and ioyfully vndergoe the Crosse, and beare the burthen that is laid vpon them; yea, though it were twise as heauie as it is, and did much more presse them then it doth? seeing they are shortly not onely to be eased of it, but also in stead thereof to be crowned with such glory, as the heart of man is not able to conceiue of; and the sight, yea,
the glimpse whereof, if it were now presented vnto his view, vvould wholly rauish, and ouer∣come him with the admiration of itExod. 33 20.. None know fully what it is, but onely the Saints that are already glorified, euen the Citi∣zens of that heauenly kingdome who haue the fruition of it, and waite and expect continually for the comming of those, vnto whom it is promised; that so be∣ingHeb. 11.40 consummate & the number of them fully accomplished, they may reioyce together in most glorious manner for euermore. O blessed Lord, thou seest what a heauie yoke is now vpon me; vnto how many miseries and grieuances both of body and minde I am continually subiect by reason of my sinnesPsal. 38.. I am in a strange land,Exo. 2.22 Hebr. 11.13.14 where I haue many enemies alwayes warring a∣gainst
mee, and euen seeking to oppresse mee with that bondage and seruitude which they vvould bring vpon mee. My dayes areGen. 47.9. few and euill, full of trouble and affliction, full of griefe and sor∣rowes; many feares and dangers, many distracting cares & earthly vanities doe breed me continu∣all annoyance, and great encum∣brance, and vvould make this life of mine yrkesome and bur∣densome vnto mee, if I had not hope of a better1 Cor. 15 19.. O doe thou giue me patience to vvait vpon thee, and in expectation of the ac∣complishment of thy free and gracious promise, to passe on the rest of my appointed time in this vale of miserie, cheerefully, comfortably, and contentedly. Graunt that I may set my face al∣wayes towards heauen (the place which thou hast prouided for
me) and that I may continually lift vp mine eies vnto that crown of endlesse & vnspeakeable glo∣ry, vvhich all the afflictions of this present time, are in no sort to be accounted worthy ofRom. 8.18.; and which thou (that art the righte∣ous God, infinite in mercy and truth, and vnsearchable in thy loue and kindnesse towards thy elect and chosen ones) vvilt in due time,2 The. 1 6.7 1 Pet. 5.10 euen after that I haue suffered here a while on earth, freely vouchsafe to bestow vpon me, to the praise of the glory of thy grace, through the merits of thy Sonne, and my onely Sauiour, who with thee and thy Spirit, is blessed now and euer, Amen.
III. From the benefit that comes there∣by, it being Phisicke to the Soule. VVEE vvill take downe bitter pilles, sowre and loathsome potions, for the good of our sicke and diseased bodies, and for the procuring of our de∣cayed health. Is not the soule of more vvorth then the body? Is not the health, and good estate thereof more to be respe∣cted, more regarded and sought after, then of the other? Surely, I thinke there is none so voyd of sense and reason, but will freely acknowledge it. O mercifull LORD, thou seest what a sicke and diseased Soule I haue; how exceedingly
it is distempered, euen in all the powers and faculties thereof. O then, let no affliction (though ne∣uer so bitter in it selfe, when I first taste of it) seeme grieuous vnto me, since thou sendest it for the health of my Soule, which is so corrupted with sinne; yea, let mee willingly, cheerefully, and thankefully drinke downe the bitterest cup which thou shalt offer vnto me, knowing that for the present tartnes, I shall finde much sweetnesse in the endHeb. 12.11.; yea, being assured that it, vvith all things else, shall worke together for my goodRom. 8.28., euen for the in∣crease of thy grace in me, and for the furtherance of my Saluation hereafter.
Another. IF thy Phisition cures thee of some dangerous disease, thogh he vse many sharpe medicines, and puts thee to much paine for the while, yet thou both thankest and rewardest him. Wee are all of vs by nature sicke most dange∣rouslyIsa. 1.6.; euery one of vs is disea∣sed with a most grieuous malady; the issue whereof will be deathRom. 6.21.23., if it be not looked to in time. If the Lord then (the sole and soueraigne Phisition of our sicke and diseased Soules) take the cure of thee vpon him, if hee apply many sharpe and bitter me∣dicines, which although they be grieuous & smarting for the pre∣sent, yet heale thee at length, when as thou art in so desperate
an estate that there had beene no helpe, if this remedie had not beene vsed, vvilt thou com∣plaine, saying, that hee deales hardly vvith thee, and so be∣come impatient and disconten∣ted, vvhiles thou art vnder so gracious and mercifull a hand? Is this the thankefulnesse which is due vnto the LORD for so great a benefit vvhich he vouch∣safeth vnto thee? for so great a cure vvhich he intendeth here∣by to vvorke vpon thee? Is this the recompence? is this the reward that thou giuest vnto that good Physition, who tendred thy wretched and miserable estate, and sought to heale thee of that grieuous disease, which were deadly if he should not cure it? O my God, who seest how I am sore diseased, how many and how dangerous maladies I am
continually subiect vnto, haue mercy vpon me, worke thine owne worke vpon me. Loe2 Sam. 15.26 here I am: Cut me, launce me, giue me the bitter potions of many trou∣bles and afflictions, and let me drinke daily of them, rather then that I should not be healed and cured, rather then that my disease should proue mortal and deadly. O Lord, correct me, but in mer∣cie,Iere. 10.24 not in wrath and indigna∣tion, deale graciously with me as thou art wont to doe with thy children whom thou louest; and whatsoeuer it shall please thee to doe vnto me (since I know it is and shall be for my good) let me with patience subiect and sub∣mit my selfe wholly therein vnto thy gracious and fatherly care and prouidence; yea, seeing that I cannot make any other recom∣pence vnto thee for this mercie
and goodnesse of thine towards me, grant that I may now and alwaies, returne vnto thee true praise and thankfulnesse, with faith∣full and constant obedience, which are the things thou only requirest, and which I vnfainedly desire to performe vnto thee: Lord, helpe me in my weakenesse, and streng∣then me with thy grace, whereby I may be inabled for the perfor∣mance of them: for euen this is thy gift also (who art the author and giuer of euery good thing) all is from thee, to thee be glory for euermore. Amen. A further inlargement of the be∣nefit thereof. THE benefit which Winter brings, is not perceiued till it be past and ouer, and the Spring approching and drawing on; but
then, when we see the hearbs, flowers, fruits and trees begin to reuiue and to recouer their de∣cayed life, to waxe greene, and to flourish in most pleasant and delightfull manner; then we can easily say (as the truth is) that without Winter, this had neuer beene thus; that if there had not beene such hard weather, such cold and nipping frosts we should not haue had such a goodly spring, nor that hope of a plentifull har∣uest which now the earth promi∣seth, and we with ioy expect. All see this in naturall things; few see or acknowledge it in those things which are spirituall; and yet thus it is in them; yea, much more in them then in these. Whiles affli∣ction & aduersitie, like a cold win∣ter pincheth men, they complaine much of the hardnesse and extremitie thereof, and would
gladly bee altogether freed of them forthwith; thinking that because they are for the present grieuous, therefore they are no waies profitable, but onely hurt∣full vnto them: but afterwards, when they are ouer, and the rigor and sharpnesse thereof changed into a temperate and warmer spring (if they be such as God loueth, and as indeuour to make the best vse of his dealings with them) then they finde that they haue gained much, and receiued no small benefit by them; euen that they haue caused the sweetHeb. 12.11 and quiet fruits of righteousnes, of peace and true ioy to budde, and to sprout forth in them, more then euer otherwise they would haue done, & to giue them good hope that they shall haue a ioy∣full and a more plentifull har∣uest; so that they cannot but in
the comfortable experience of the truth thereof, say with that holyPsal. 119 71 seruant of God (whom the Lord exercised much with his chastisements,Heb. 12.6 because he loued him much) that it is good for them that they were af∣flicted. O Lord, giue me grace to indure thy fatherly corrections patient∣ly and willingly: yea, to blesse thee, and to be truely thankefull vnto thee for them, seeing thou bringest them vpon me in loue, for my good; euen that being pinched with the extremity ther∣of for a while, I might thereby be the better rooted in grace and godlinesse, and hauing recei∣ued increase of spirituall sappe and moysture, bring forth e∣uer after, more abundantly, the blessed fruit of faith, of hope, and true holinesse, to the glo∣ry
of thy name, and to the peace and vnspeakeable ioy of mine owne soule and consci∣ence. Another, to the same effect. SEe the Husbandman, how great paines he taketh in til∣ling, in sowing, and in manuring his ground, and how long heIam. 5.7. waiteth, expecting the former and the later raine, hoping (how∣soeuer for the present he seeth no fruit of his labour) yet that at length, euen in the due time, and season he shall be recompenced with a large croppe, and with a plentifull haruest. Thus it is with vs that are the children of God. This life is our seed-time, our haruest in the life to come. What though now for a vvhile
(how little a whileHeb. 10.37) we sow in teares, yet are we not to faint, but to trust in those gracious promi∣ses vvhich the Lord hath made to vs, and to rest in hope with patience,Pro. 14.26 being assured that hereafter vvee shall reape in ioyPsal. 126 5, euen the fruits of righteousnesse and holinesse, to our endlesse glory and happinesse. O merci∣full Lord, doe thou teach me patiently to waitPsal. 37.1 for the accom∣plishment of those rich and sweet promises which thou hast made vnto me, and vvith full confi∣dence to depend vpon thee, al∣waies, in all things. I haue heard once and twise, yea oftentimes, of the patience of thy Saints2 Cor. 6.7 Iames 5.10.11 Heb. 11.36 37 in their miseries and distresse, and what end and issue thou gauest vnto them, how exceeding gra∣cious thou shewedst thy selfe vn∣to them, after thou hadst for a
vvhile tried and afflicted them, and found them faithfull and constant. Lord, let their exam∣ple be alwaies before mine eyes, that so following their steppes in faith, in patience and long suf∣ferance in all those afflictions wherewith it shall seeme good to thee (vvho knowest what is best for me) to trie and ex∣ercise me for a season, I may bee blessedIob. 5.17, and receiue vvith them thePro. 16.10 Lamen. 3.25.26. Iam. 1.12. Hebr. 11.38.39. promise, vvherein I know thou vvilt not fayle me, nor any of thine, that withdraw not themselues from thee.
IIII. From the goodnesse of God in deli∣ring his children out of them. INto what depthes of miseriePsal. 69.1.2. & 34.4.19 hast thou brought me, O Lord, and drawen me out of them againe, in thy due time, euen in my greatest feares? Thou hast shewed thy selfe excee∣ding gracious vnto mee, cau∣sing the lightPsal. 112.4. & 97.11 Iob. 33.28 Psal. 94.19 of thy counte∣nance to shine vpon me, and to refresh me; euen vvhen I trembled to see that fearefull darkenesse vvhich vvas readie to ouerwhelme me, did thy light, thy grace, and thy fauour breake forth, and inlighten me aboue that I could eyther expect, or desire. Thou hast suffered me to fall into many
and deepePs. 88.15 16 2 Cor. 1.8.9. waters, wherein I fea∣red that I should sinke, and rise no more, but thou hast caused me to swim out of them again2 Cor. 7.6; thy hand hath drawne me out of those deepe and raging vvaters which did euen runne ouer my soule; thou hast deliuered mee, and giuen me a ioyfull issue out of all my temptations, euen those whereby that cruell enemie and malicious aduersarie thought to haue preuailed most against me, and to haue drowned me in eter∣nall perdition. O let my Soule neuer cease to sing prayses vnto thee, who art my Sauiour and deliuerer: Let mee euer giue that glory vnto thy name, O my God, which is due vnto thee; and let me continually, in all my necessities, in all my distresses, tryals, and temptations, depend wholly and only vpon thee, who
art my Redeemer, in whom I trust, and from whom alone com∣meth saluation. Thou hast deli∣uered my soule from a great death, thou hast broken the net wherein I was taken, so that I escaped in my greatest danger; thou dost deliuerPsal. 34.19. me euery houre, euery moment; in thee I trust, that thou wilt2 Cor. 1 10. Iob 5.19. hereafter deliuer mee: yea, this I know, that thou wilt suffer no euill to come vnto meePsal. 91.10.15.16., but wilt free mee there∣from, yea, saue me, and bring me to glory and happinesse.
V. From the end and issue of them, in that they are the way to Hea∣uen. THe children of Israel could not come to Canaan, that promised Land, which flowed vvith Milke and Honie, but they must first passe thorow a deso∣lateExod. 16 & 17.1.3. Num. 14.1.2. & 21.6. and a dangerous wildernesse, where they were exercised vvith many trials and afflictions, being sometimes in perill of death by those flying and fiery Serpents; sometimes in feare, and hazzard of their liues, and ready to haue perished with thirst, & otherwise. And in like manner, it is with all the children of God, his chosen Israel. They deceiueAct. 14.22. Rom. 8.17 them∣selues, if they looke to come vn∣to
that celestiall and heauenly Canaan, and to receiue the inhe∣ritance vvhich the Lord hath promised them in so good and pleasant a Land, before they haue passed thorow the troublesome wildernesse of this euill world; where they shall bee2 Tim. 3.12. exercised with many trials & sundry kind of afflictions. Lord, sith this is the way to happinesse, since by many troubles and afflictions we are to enter into thy kingdome; let it not seeme1 Pet. 4.12. strange vnto me, though I be oft and diuersly thus exercised: let mee not faintProu. 24.10 though I be stung vvith those fiery Serpents, Sinne and Sathan, or any other aduersary enmi∣tie; but let me euer lift vp mine eyes, and looke vp vnto thee my Sauiour, that so I may be hea∣led and comforted: yea, O Lord, set mee patiently, cheere∣fully,
and thankefully suffer all those things vvhich it hath plea∣sed thee to appoint vnto me in this world for the humbling and exercising of mee, knowing that hereafter I shall receiue from thee, that exceeding great re∣ward, that most excellent and eternall weight of glory, in comparison of vvhich all these light and momentary afflictions, are to be esteemed as nothing, and no wayes worthy of it. Afflictions, from whence they come. THE LORD many times striketh, vvhen men feele indeed the rodMica. 6.9., and complaine much of the smart of it; yea, grow impatient, but neuer see nor acknowledge the hand of
Iob 5.6. Psa. 32.4. Mica. 6.9. God that smiteth them for sin; eyther in Iustice, if they bee his enemies, to scourge and punish themMica. 6.13 (those light and tempo∣rarie punishments being the be∣ginnings and fore-runners of such as are farre more grieuous and eternall,) or else in Mercy, if they be his children; either for their1 Pet. 4.12 triall, or forPsal. 119.67.71. Hebr. 12.10 Iob 33.17.29.30. amendment, or both. O mercifull Father, though my sinnes (so many and grieuous) deserue that thou shouldest deale with me in iustice and iudgement, yet I know and am perswaded (such is thy good∣nesse towards mee) that euen of Loue and Mercy thou doest cor∣rect and chastise mee, euen be∣cause thou hast a fauour vnto mee; and wilt cause all these light afflictions wherewith thou exer∣cisest mee, to worke together for the best, euen for the in∣crease
of thy grace in mee in this life, and of myRom. 8.17 glory vvith thee, in thy kingdome after this life. O therefore, let mee in all thy chastisements, in all my af∣flictions, see and acknowledge thy hand that striketh me, that so I may be obedient, patientAmos 5.13., and vnfainedly thankefull. Afflicting of the minde with need∣lesse distraction for things to come, vnknowne. MAny trouble themselues in vaine, about their future estate and condition in this world, building Castles in the Ayre, and needlesly distracting their mindes, and disquieting themselues, vvhiles they fore∣cast such things in their inten∣ded purposes and proiects, as
eyther shall neuer come to passe, or at least, not in that manner that they expected and hoped. O Lord, I know that the vvayes of man are in thyProu. 16.1.9. & 19.21. Ier. 10.23. hand; they may purpose and determine, but it is thou that rulest, or∣derest, and disposest of all things as it seemeth best vnto thy heauenly vvisedome. O let me euerPsal. 37.5. Prou. 16.3 commit my vvorkes and my vvayes vnto thee, resting vvholly vpon thee for the end and issues thereof: and then I know I shall be directed aright; I know that thou vvilt bring that to passe vvhich shall be most for thy glory, and my good.
The life of the wicked full of sor∣rowes and distractions. THose that doe swimme, and euen bathe themselues con∣tinually in their sinfull pleasures and carnall delights; haue many sorrowesPsa. 32.10 Isay 57.20 21 Eccles. 2.23 with them. Much gall and sowrenesse is mingled with their sweetest and daintiest delicates: much bitternesse vvith their sweetest and most beloued sinnes, euen those wherein they are most delighted, and vvhich they areIob 20.12 13 most loath to for∣goe. Yea, I doubt not, but that it may be truely said, that the vn∣godly haue more inward griefe, more anguish and vexation of minde oftentimes in their greatest prosperitie and chiefe delights, then the righteous haue in the greatest
of their worldly sorrowes, in the greatest of their outward miseries, and afflictions. For vnto the godly and vpright man, euen out of darkenesse, there doth arise lightPsa. 97.11; out of sorrow, ioy; out of bitternesse, sweetnesse: Sampsons RiddleIudg. 14.12. may not vnfitly be ap∣plyed vnto them: Out of their strongest afflictions there comes much sweetnesse, much comfort vnto them. Euen in sorrow their hearts are ioyfull2 Cor. 1.4 & 6.10. Psal. 94.19, and when they seeme to mourne, yea, to haue no∣thing but cause of continuall heauinesse and mourning, yet then oft-times they are very chearefull, yea, euen filled vvith inward and spirituall reioycing, such as none know, but they that haue tasted of it. But it is farre otherwise with the vngodly. EuenPro. 14.13 Eccles. 2.2. Iob 20.5. in laughter their heart is sorrowfull, and the end of their
mirth is heauinesse: and vvhilest they are tickled with the plea∣sures of sinne, and drowned in the vanities of this life, they haue many priuie and secret nips and stings vvithin them, although they seeke to conceale them, and keepe them close, as it vvere a poyson, vvhich lyes fretting in their bowels. An euill Spirit doth haunt them as it did Saul1 Sam. 16 14, wheresoeuer they goe, so that they are faine to seeke for merry company, or delightfull Musicke, or such like meanes to driue it away (if it vvere pos∣sible.) The Lord doth oft-times strike their mindes with sadnesse, with great anguish, and much heauinesse; hee sends euill An∣gels, and casts his darts, euen fearefull terrours among themPsal. 79.49 Iob 27.20, so that their consciences are sore vvounded and pierced through,
when as outwardlyIob 20.22 23 all seemeth to goe well with them; they be∣ing vnwilling that their griefe should be knowne, which they carry continually about with them, & smother in their brests, till the venime thereof drinketh vp their spirits; yea, little doe o∣thers thinke of that bitternessePro. 14.10. which they taste in their soules, and of that hellish spirit vvhich doth oft-times so vexe and mo∣lest them, that they can finde no peace, no quietnesse; yea, nothing but horror, and a dreadfull a∣mazementIob 15.20 21. & 18.11. and astonishment within themselues. I appeale to the conscience of wicked and vn∣godly men themselues, (euen those that make it their pastime and recreation to doe wickedly, and that commit sinne daily with greedinesseEphes. 4.19 and delight) whe∣ther they haue not experience
of this? whether they finde not that within them, vvhich many times is such sowre sawce vnto their sweet meat, that although it be pleasant in their mouthProu. 20 17., yet it is as bitter as gall or Worme∣wood in their belly, and causeth them to finde small comfort in their liues; yea, to become euen a burthen vnto themselues? O else whence commeth it, (which we haue both seene and heard of in the wofull experience of ma∣ny) that euen those who haue braued it out most for a while, in mirth and iollitie, with-holding themselues from nothing which their eyes desired, nor with-draw∣ing their hearts from any worldly ioy, and carnall or sensuall de∣light, haue not long after (when they could by no meanes driue away that euill Spirit which so much vexed, disquieted, and tor∣mented
them,) burst out into fearefull vvords of extreame despayre: yea, and some of them (being vveary of their liues, and feeling the Flames of Hell in their soules,) Achitophell2 Sam. 17 23 Mat. 27.5., or Iudas-like, laid violent hands vpon themselues, and in a most vnnaturall manner, became as it vvere, their owne executio∣ners. O LORD GOD, keepe my soule, I beseech thee, from ta∣king any delight in the sinne∣full pleasures of the wickedIob 21.16: let them not be sweet vnto my mouth, nor pleasant vnto my taste, lest I feele the bitternesse thereof in the end: yea rather, let mee lothe them, and delight in those things which are plea∣sing vnto thee, my GOD: that so in my greatest sorrowes I may haue much inward ioy, and finde
comfort, when as outwardly I taste of nothing but misery and affliction. The carnall and wicked man wa∣kened out of his sleepe. ALthough many vvho now lye steeping in the brine of this world, and euen soaking in their sinnes, liue for the present, (at least in outward appearanceE 1 cles. 8.11. & 11.9. Luk. 12.19) as merry and iocund as any, thin∣king all is well vvith them, and so be at rest and quiet vvithin themselues, whiles they are set∣led vpon their dregs; yet when GOD shall once let loose the cord of their consciences, and giue them a sight of their sinnes, and the multitude and haynous∣nesse thereof, and setting them all in orderPsa. 50.21 before them, write
sharpe and bitter things against them for the same; then they shall quickly finde a strange alte∣ration within themRom. 7.9 10.. They shall startle as men sodainely awaked out of a dreame, hauing most fearefull apprehensions & dread∣full obiects presented vnto their mindes, which will make them to shiuer and tremble with great perplexitie and amazement. Their day shall be turned into night, their light into darkenesse, their mirth into mourning, their ioy into heauinesse, their greatest solace into extreame woe and mi∣sery. All their sweetest pleasures, wherein they were wont to bathe and refresh themselues, shall be∣come painefull and bitter vnto them: their chiefest delights yrke∣some, and most vnpleasant, so that their soule shall refuse all comfort; yea, they shall be trou∣bled,
dismayed, amazed, terri∣fied and affrighted exceedingly vvith the view of the huge masse of their vile and abho∣minable sinnes, vvhich (though now they be hid from their eyes) yet then in most ougly manner shall lie before their faces in o∣pen sight: euen the sinnes of their youth, the sinnes of their age: the sinnes which they haue committed alone in secret, which the eye of none vvas witnesse of, and vvhich they haue com∣mitted eyther with others, or openly in the presence of others, euen all their most grieuous and haynous impieties, which euer heeretofore haue esca∣ped them, and vvhereby from time to time they haue prouoked the Maiestie of the most high, shamefully defi∣led and dishonoured them∣selues,
and many waies grie∣ued and displeased others. Then hell and destruction shall shew themselues vnto their soules, and a dreadfull and hor∣rible feare take hold of them; yea, the sound of feareIob. 15.21 shall be continually in their eares, and great astonishment in their hearts, so that they shall be rea∣die to quake at the shaking of e∣uery leafe, and to tremble at the hearing of euery sodaine noyse (as that prophane and heathen Emperour, who was so terrified vvith euery thunder-clap that he sought for corners to hide him∣selfe when he heard it comming:) and to flie vvhen none pursueth them,Pro. 28.1 but onely that euill and guilty conscience of theirs, which (being raised vp like a fierce and raging Lion, which hath beene a long time a sleepe, and is now so∣dainly
awakened by the dreadfull hand of Gods iustice) will neuer leaue following and pursuing them, till it hath brought them to their most deserued punish∣ment, euen to finall desperation in this vvorld, and to eternall perdition in that vhich is to come, where they shal drinke of the cup,Iob. 5.27. euen of the bitter cup of the fiercenesse of the vvrath of the Lord for euermore. O mercifull God, let mee neuer lye carelesly and secure∣ly in my sinnes; let me not at any time delight in any of them; let me not blesse or sooth my selfe in the least of them; but let me be alwaies carefull to keepe my selfe pure and vnspot∣ted of them, that so I may not onely auoid those terrours, and that wofull misery vvhich shall surely come vpon all the wicked
and vngodly, eyther in the time of their life, or in the houre of their death, or else in the day of iudge∣ment, and after for euermore; but also that I may haue that peace of a good and quiet conscience, vvhich may alwaies rest and a∣bide with me, and be a comfort and refreshing vnto me, both in life and in death, and in the day of thy comming, euen that blessed appearance of thy Sonne, vvhich all thy Saints daily expect and long for. Worldlinesse, a fearefull signe of one destitute of the true loue of God. SEest thou any that is very ea∣gerly set vpon any vvorldly thing, pleasure, profit, honour or whatsoeuer else it be? thou
maiest assure thy selfe that whiles he is so much addicted vnto these earthly things, the loue of God is very small, or not at all1 Ioh. 2.15 in him. He that loues God vnfainedly, sin∣cerely, and entirely (as he ought) cannot (as long as that loue of his abideth in him) be greatly af∣fected vnto any other thing, nor haue an excessiue desire and lon∣ging after the fading vanities of this world; for God will wholly possesse his soule, and satisfie him abundantly, so that he shall find contentment in himPsal. 73.25 Psal. 119.57 Lamen. 3.24, howsoe∣uer it fare otherwaies vvith him. Blessed Lord, kindle in me daily more and more, I humbly be∣seech thee, a sincere and vn∣fained loue of thy Maiestie, who hast alwaies shewed thy selfe so exceedingly gracious vnto me; doe thou euen inflame this cold and frozen heart of mine, that so
louing thee with that truth and earnestnesse of affection which ought to be in me, and hauing my desires alwayes towards thee, the loue and desire of these vaine and earthly things may be daily abated and diminished vvithin me; yea, I may banish farre from me all loue vvhich is not in thee, and for thee, vnto whom onely I am to giue my heart with all the affections thereof, and that absolutely, vvholly, and en∣tirely. The folly of the Worldling. ALL would condemne him for a foolish and vnwise man that would not exchange siluer for gold,Psal. 107.43 lead and baser mettall for pearles and precious stones. And yet loe, this is the folly of the most
in the vvorld (euen such as o∣therwise are men of vvisedome and vnderstanding;) they will by no meanes forgoe the earth, and the sinfull profits and pleasures of it which are but drosse and vanitieIsa. 55.2., for the enioying of hea∣uen and happinesse it selfe. How hath Sathan bewitched and be∣sotted them? It is marueilous strange to consider that the rea∣sonable soule of man should be so seduced and deluded through the craft and wilinesse of Sathan, who lieth in wait to deceiue and to bring men vnto confusion.2 Pet. 5.8 Bles∣sed Lord, let the things of this world be vile and base in mine eyes in comparison of the felicitie of thy Saints, and the glory of thy kingdome. Keepe me now and al∣waies from the foolishnesse of the wretched worldling; and make me wise to see the difference be∣tweene
those most excellent and glorious things, and these which are but fading, and transitory. Worldlinesse, meere dotage. VVE would wonder at him that would dote vpon a StrumpetPro. 7.7.22, that sought his life. Such a one is euery couetous worldling, or whosoeuer else is enamoured with the things here below, pleasures, profits, honors. The world, with the sinfull and deceitfull shewes thereof, doe se∣cretly fight2 Pet. 2.11 against the soule of man, yea, seeke the vtter ruine both of soule and bodie; they are the Deuils nets1 Tim. 4 6.9. and snares. And the worldling is strangely be∣sotted with this inchantresse; he very fondly doteth vpon her, and is drawne away with her allure∣ments
to his owne destruction. And though he be often warned and admonished to take heed of her baites, and to auoyd the mis∣chiefe which she (euen vvhiles she laughs and smiles vpon him) seekes to bring him vnto, yet he will not be drawne from her, nor from her adulterous loue, but runneth aHose. 2.5 Iam. 4.4. whoring after her, and is so bewitched with her, that hee will not leaue her, till shee hath wrought his vtter ouerthrow. Mercifull LORD, let not this world, nor any thing that is in this world, euer be able to pre∣uaile against me, so that I should perish with it. But be thou power∣full in me by thy Word and Spi∣rit: draw my heart euery day more and more from these fa∣ding and perishing things, and cause it to be set wholly vpon theeProu. 23.26., to whom of right it be∣longeth
Discouer vnto mee daily more and more the1 Tim. 6.17. Eccle. 1.14 deceit∣fulnesse and vanitie of all things here below. Let mee not vvith those, vvhose eyes Sathan hath blinded with the false shewes of this deceiueable world, dote vp∣on any earthly thing, but let my loue be set vpon thee, my ioy and delight be onely in thee, and those blessed and glorious things which thou hast prepared for me in the heauens; and in compari∣son of which, all the things of this earth are but meere vanitie. A Christian must not liue as one of this world. A CHRISTIAN is not a man of this vvorld; he is a soiourner and a stranger here vp∣on
earth. So haueGen. 23.4. & 47.9. 1 Chro. 29 15. Psal. 39.12 & 119.19. 2 Cor. 5.6 Heb. 11.13 Hebr. 12.22.23. Abraham, Iacob, Dauid, and other holy men of GOD, acknowledged themselues to bee. Heauen is his Country; there is his mansion and dwelling place, where he shall haue his abode for euer: there is his God and blessed Sauiour, his life and hope: there are his best friends, his neerest kinsefolke, vnto whom hee is linked with the straitest bonds of perfect loue, and amitie: there are his chiefest riches and treasures, euen thatEph 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.4. glorious inheritance, that cele∣stiall kingdome, which shal haue no end, no change. Oh then, why doe wee not vveane our hearts more from this vvorld? vvhy doe we not shew ourselues strangers here, by estranging1 Pet. 2.11 our affections from these things here below, and lifting them vp vnto the desire and contemplation of
those excellent things, vvhich are aboueCol. 3.2.? vvhy doe wee not liue as Citizens of that heauenly Countrey? If wee be Christians, heires of glory, vvhy is not ourPhil. 3.20 conuersation in heauen, but on earth, as if vvee were men of this world, to liue here for euer, and had no betterHeb. 11.16. things prouided for vs, then those which the wic∣ked of the vvorld enioy, and which shall perish with them? Is our Sauiour in the Heauens, and doe wee lye groueling on this Earth like mucke-wormes? Is our portion with the Saints in glory, and doe wee in a base and seruile manner fasten our affections vn∣to this world, which is but our prison, vvherein vve are detained till the time of our libertie and redemptionRom. 8.23. come? O blessed Lord, as in the riches of thy vn∣speakeable mercies, thou hast
called me out of this world, vnto the hope of1 Pet. 1.3 glory, giuing mee some comfortable assurance of the full possssion of those glori∣ous mansionsIoh. 14.2 prouided for mee, and all thy Saints, in the highest Heauens, so draw my heart, I be∣seech thee, daily more and more vnto thee. Raise vp my soule, and all the affections thereof, from Earth to Heauen. Let mee vse this world1 Cor. 7.31 as if I vsed it not. Let me carry my selfe as a stran∣ger, and one that is from his owne home, alwayes ready and willing to depart from hencePhil. 1.23; yea, euer in my thoughts aspi∣ring vnto that heauenly coun∣try2 Cor. 5.2., desiring and longing to bee with thee my God and Sauiour, and to haue the fruition of that glory and happinesse vvhich thou reseruest for me, and which I am no wayes worthy of; but that it
hath pleased thee graciously to respect me in the merits and wor∣thinesse of thy Sonne, in whom, and through whom, thou hast done great things for me, and to whom with thee, and thy good Spirit, bee all praise and glory, now and for euer. Amen. Another. IT ought to be the continuall and earnest desire of euery true Christian, that his heart may dai∣ly be more and more alienated and withdrawen from the things of this worldPsal. 73.25. 1 Cor. 7.31, which are but sha∣dowes and meere vanities; and more neerely vnited vnto God, in whom alone that true com∣fort and happinesse is to be found, which is not elsewhere to bee obtained. O LORD,
increase this desire in mee; and be gracious in giuing mee to see the desire of my heart therein fulfilled and accomplished vnto mee, and in mee. O draw mee from the inordinate loue of this vaine and sinnefull world, where∣vvith many are so much insna∣red; let mee finde my affections euery day more estranged and separated from the same; and graunt that I may be wholly vni∣ted vnto thee, my GOD, deligh∣ting continually in thy presence, and receiuing from thee, that plen∣tifull increase of the heauenly graces of thy blessed Spirit, whereby I may be fitted and ina∣bled in some sort to walke worthy of thee, to whom I desire wholly to deuote my selfe, and whatsoe∣uer is in me.
How to ouercome the World. HE that vvould ouercome this World, must first ouercome himselfe, bringing his sensuall ap∣petite and desire in subiection vnto his reason, and his reason vnto the will and word of God: If hee can doe this once, the vi∣ctory and conquest will be easie; otherwise impossible. Herein lies the valour and fortitude of a Christian. O most mightie Lord GOD, the GOD of my strength, without whom I can do nothing, in whom, and through whom all things; strengthen me with thy grace and effectuall power, that I may be able to sub∣due the corruption of my sinfull and rebellious nature, whensoe∣uer
it riseth vp against me, that I may lay the axe close vnto the root, and cut downe and plucke vp euery secret sinne that hath got∣ten any place in me, that so I may mortefie euery inordinate affe∣ction of my heart, which might be any hinderance to the worke of thy grace in me; that thus ha∣uing power ouer my selfe, and that inbred enemie which lieth secretly lurking in my bosome, and in the inmost parts of my soule, I may with lesse difficulty vanquish and ouercome this present euill world, and all those outward enmities vvhich at any time shall oppose themselues against mee, and the powerfull operation of thy holy & blessed spirit within me, which I humbly and earnestly desire thee, that it may be renued daily more and more, and brought vnto further perfection.
Ruling the affections, how necessary. THE affections of mans heart, are endlesse and vnsa∣tiable; they can neuer be satis∣fiedEccl. 1.8.; yea, the more that they are yeelded vnto, the more doth the inordinatenesse and di∣stemper thereof increase. VVhat a vanitie therefore is it for any one to giue libertie vnto his ro∣uing and disordered minde, and by seeking to quench that thirst, to make it the more vehement, as it is vvith those that are falne into the dropsie. LORD, giue mee vvisedome, vvhereby I may learne rightly to moderate all my affections, and not to follow the sway of them, nor to
suffer my selfe at any time to bee carried or drawne away, vvhether the inordinate motion and desire of them shall lead mee; but so to restraine and rule them, that I may liue a quiet and contented life, free from those manifolde distracti∣onsPro. 25.28. vnto vvhich they are continually subiect, vvho haue not learned to keepe them∣selues vvithin those limits vvhich thou hast prescribed and appointed to them.
Affections must bee made Ser∣uants, and not Masters. AS the Schoole-master is to his Scholler, or a Master vnto his Seruant, so ought rea∣son to be vnto the affections of euery one. It must alwayes beare rule ouer them, and haue them at commaund, or else they vvill quickly bee disordered, and quite out of frame; yea, they vvill carry away a man head∣long vvith violence into much mischiefe and miserie, as vvee see wilde and fierce horses oft times runne away vvith an vn∣guided Coach or Wagon, to the ouerthrow of them that are car∣ried in it. O LORD, thou seest vnto how many vnruly
passions and distempered affecti∣ons I am continually subiect, vvhich make mee oftentimes lesse fit for the performance of good duties and holy exercises then otherwise, through thy grace, I should be. Let it please thee to giue me the masterie and power ouer them: yea, graunt that I may alwayes subiect them to the rule of right reason, and to the directi∣on vvhich thy Word giueth, that so being well ordered and dispo∣sed, they may not bee (as they haue beene) lets and hinderances, but (as they should be) seruice∣able and conuenient helpes, and furtherances, vnto vertue, piety, and godlinesse, euen to all Chri∣stian duties which thou requirest of mee.
How dangerous it is to be giuen vn∣to the World. HE cannot be a good Seruant, that is addicted to his plea∣sures and delights, or that is gi∣uen to follow his owne businesse ouermuch, and doth not princi∣pally intend his Masters affaires. Hee can neuer be a good Disciple of Christ, nor a faithfull Seruant of God, whose minde is set vpon earthly thingsMat. 6.24; vvho is carried away with the pleasures and de∣lights of sinne, or much addicted to the profits and commodities of this vaine and transitory world, or otherwise wedded vnto his owne rouing and vnstayed affections, and doth not wholly consecrateRom. 12.1. and dedicate himselfe vnto the Lord, and to his worship and seruice,
vvith restraint from all those things, vvhich might be any hin∣derance or encumbrance vnto him in the same. O my God, how vnworthy am I to be called thy Seruant? to call thee my Lord? how vnable am I to performe that dutie and ser∣uice which thou requirest of me? O be thou mercifull vnto mee, notwithstanding my vnworthi∣nesse; pardon my great vnprofita∣blenesse heretofore: Inable mee daily more and more for the dis∣charge of the duties of thy ser∣uice, which thou hast commaun∣ded, and vvhereunto thou hast called me. Let neither the sinfull pleasures, nor the deceiueable pro∣fits & fruitles commodities of this fading1 Cor. 7.31 1 Ioh. 2.17 and decaying vvorld, cause me at any time to be slacke, slothfull, or any wayes vnfaith∣full in thy businesse, in my calling;
but giue mee grace euer to re∣nounce these things, euen what∣soeuer may at any time, in any sort, vvithdraw mee from my dutie, or be any hinderance vnto mee in the ready, vvilling, and cheer∣full performance of that seruice vvhich I owe vnto thy Maie∣stie; yea, let mee alwayes denyLuke 9.23. Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.26 my selfe, and euen hate e my deerest friends, and neerest ac∣quaintance, (if the matter stand∣eth so betweene thee and them) yea, euen my life it selfe, rather then bee found vvillingly defe∣ctiue in my dutie, or vnfaithfull in thy seruice, vvho hast euery way beene so good and gracious vnto mee, and freely promised to reward mee so f liberally,Psal. 19.11. 1 Cor. 15.58. Rom. 2.7. Ioh. 12.26. so plentifully, euen vvith the riches of glory, honour, immortalitie, and euerlasting life and happi∣nesse in thy kingdome; yet not
for the worthinesse of my workes, but for the merits of my Sauiour, for vvhose sake thou crownest what good thing soeuer it pleaseth theeHeb. 13.21 to worke in me. To him, to∣gether with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be all praise and glory, now and for euer. This world a Prison. THis World is the godly mans Prison: hee is continually laden with the chainesHeb. 12.1 of sinne and misery, which lye heauy vp∣on his soule, and cause him like a distressed captiueRom. 7.23., to sit mour∣ningPsal. 120.5. Rom. 7.24 all the day long, and with great earnestnes and vehemen∣cie to call and cryRom. 8.21 2 Cor. 5.2.4.8. for reliefe. Yea, hee is, as it were, in a darke dungeon2 Cor. 5.7 Col. 3.3.4, so that hee cannot see the ioyfull light of that glorious
Kingdome, nor enioy so fully the desired presence of his Creator, and his blessed SauiourIohn 12.26. and Re∣deemer, after whom his soule longethCan. 1.14 Phil. 3.23.. Lord, when it plea∣seth thee, ease mee of these bonds, deliuer mee out of this Prison, and set mee at libertie among thy Saints in glory, that I may behold the brightnesse of thy face, and enioy that promi∣sed saluation, the very hope and expectation vvhereof, is the stay and comfort of my life in this bondage of sinne and misery, vnto vvhich I am daily subiect, Come LordReuel. 22 17 Iesus: come quickly. Amen.
Christians in this world are vn∣knowne men. THe life of the Children of God whiles they liue in this world, is hidCol. 3.3. with Christ in God: They are not knowne1 Iohn 3. to the world, being masked, and shrow∣ded vnder the vayle ofRom. 8.3. weake & sinful flesh. Their naturall life and outward estate is not different from others. All things come alike to allEccles. 9.. Their Persons are exposed to contempt, disgraceIob 30.8.9.10., reproach, and many iniuries, which the proud and disdainfull world (who are not worthy of them1 Cor. 4.9.10.11. Heb. 11.38,) doe continually most vniustly offer vnto them, delighting euen to sport themselues of them. Their bodies are subiect to much mise∣rie2 Cor. 4.7.8.9 10. and 11.6., to ignominie and basenesse,
and for the most part to more sicknesses, weakenesses, and infir∣mities then others, and in the end to deathGen. 3.19 Heb. 9.27. as vvell as others. They dye like other men, and are couered with the same mould, taking vp their lodgings vvith the rest of the sonnes of Adam in the dust, and in the chambers of darkenesseIob 10.21.22. & 17.13.14., hauing Corrup∣tion for their Father, and the Worme for their Mother and Si∣ster. The spirituall life also of their Soules (wherein all their gloryPsal. 45.13 in this life consisteth, the redemption of their bodiesRom. 8.23. Phil. 3.21. be∣ing wholly reserued for the e∣state after this life, euen the day of the generall and glorious re∣surrection,) as it is not discerned of the world, so many times of themselues neyther, but very dimmely; and when it is in best estate it is but weake2 Cor. 12 9. Psal. 119.4, and needes
the quickning grace of Gods Spi∣rit, for the increasing and confir∣ming of it. Blessed Lord, hasten that glo∣rious appearance of thine, that so, this vayle being remoued, I may be fully restored vnto that promised light and liberty, which my soule longeth after; and liue in thy sight for euer, receiuing from thee continually that ac∣complishment of grace and glory, which thou hast reserued for me in thy Kingdome. Sabbath day; the religious obser∣uation of it how necessary. IT is not the Law of Man, but the vnchangeable decree and or∣dinance of GOD himselfe, the chiefe Law-giuer, that the Sab∣bath-day, (which in the Apostles
dayesActs 20.4.5.6.7. 1 Cor. 16.1.2., and of the Apostles them∣seluesOlim certè priscis illis hominibus, in summo precio Sab∣bathum fu∣it, quam quidem so∣lennitatem Dominus in Diem Do∣minicum transtulit. Athan. Hom. de Semente. Sabbathum est signum vt sciatur dies Creationis. Idem in Mat. 11. Aug. Epist. ad Ianuar. 119. cap. 13. Idem, lib. 22. de Ciuitate Dei. cap. 30. Chrisost. in Genes. 2. Homil. 18. Hieron. contra Pelag. lib. 3. Beza in Apocalyps. 1.10.— Spiritu sancto procul dubio, illud Apostolis di∣ctante, pro prioris seculi Sabbatho siue die septimo, as∣sumptus suit dies huius mundi primus, in quo &c. Vide Fulke Rhem. Test. in eund. loc. Sect. 6. & Iun. prae∣lect. in Gen. 2.3. & P. Mart. in Gen. 2. Bulling. in Rom. 4.5. Zanch. de operibus Dei. lib. 1. cap. 1., (no doubt) by authoritie from CHRIST, and by the direction of his SpiritIohn 14.26. Acts 1.3. 1 Cor. 11.23., guiding them therein as in all other truth, was changed, and called the Lords-day,) should be religi∣ously obserued of all, euen to the comming of Christ. Hee giues vs a speciall watch-word of remem∣brance, to stirre vp all to the greater care and diligence here∣of:Exod. 8.20 Remember the Sabbath-day
to keepe it holy, as if in no vvise hee would haue this forgotten at any time, or slightly regarded, as it is of the most. This alone hath a Preface prefixed, and both the affirmatiue and negatiue part expressed (the like to be found in no other Commandement,) as if fore-see∣ing what libertie men vvould take vnto themselues herein, he would of purpose set bounds on euery side, to fence, and to keepe vs continually within compasse of this Law. Hee doth not onely command vs, but also perswade, and yeelds a reason; yea, many and forcible rea∣sons and motiues, whereby as with so many cords wee might bee drawne vnto this dutie: from his owne example and practise, from his hallowing of it to a holy vse, from the equitie of the obserua∣tion
of it, since that hee hath giuen vs the other sixe dayes to our selues, and taken this one onely to himselfe, as his owne due, which by no meanes hee vvould haue vvith-held from him. They therefore, that make lit∣tle or no conscience of the due and diligent obseruation of this day, by absenting themselues from the publique assemblies, or by neglecting priuate duties, pray∣er, reading, conference, meditation, examination of things heard in the publique MinisterieActs 17.11; much more they that openly prophane it, by spending it eyther idly or wic∣kedly, in excessiue drinking, ga∣ming, or other vnlawfull courses; whatsoeuer outwardly they pro∣fesse in word, yet assuredly they are such as haue forgotten the Lord; they refuse to follow him:
they transgresse his law, and vio∣late his holy ordinance which he hath appointed for their owne welfare, if they could see it. They remoue the ancient bounds, within which he hath inclosed them, vvhich who so doth, shall be ac∣cursedDeut. 27.17, (yea though they were but the bounds and limits which men had established.) They cast away his yoke (a note of the sonnes of BelialDeut. 13.13.) They sinne grieuously, & very dangerously. They are enemies to their owne good, friends to Sathan; yea, they are falne into the very snare of the Deuill, who both in the infancie and prime-age of the Church, and euer since (when he could not roote out the whole Christian faith, which spread it selfe into so many nations) laboured migh∣tily the subuersion and ouer∣throw of this maine prop and pil∣lar
thereof, by raising vp men of hereticall mindes, who some, through the pretended colour of Christian libertie; others by the aspersion and false imputation of Iewish superstition and bondage, and I know not what, haue by this meanes gone about to open a wide dore to Atheisme, licen∣tiousnesse, prophanenesse, and so by little and little, in an insensible manner, to ouerturne all Religion and Pietie.Tantum abest quin decorum & ordo nisi ista politia & moderatio∣ne obser∣uari pos∣sit, vt prae∣sentissima impendeat Ecclesiae per∣turbatio & ruina si dis∣soluatur: j. In briefe. The neg∣lect of the Sabbath day is the ruine of the Church. Caluin. In∣stit. lib. 2. cap. 8. sect. 32. A notable politie of that wilie serpent. And a maruei∣lous eyther blindnes, or presumpti∣on in them who are so bewitched by him. For what God hath hal∣lowed, how should man once dare to prophane, or to accoūt common & vnhallowed? But those vvhom God (who is the light of our eyes) hath caused the light of his sauing grace to shine more clearly vnto are otherwise minded, otherwise
affected. They acknowledge it not only a iust & equal thing, that the Lord should haue one day of ma∣ny dedicated & wholy deuoted to his seruice (a shame it were that a∣ny should deale sparingly with him herin who hath bin so prodigal to them) but also they accoūt it a great argument and euidence of Gods speciall care ouer them, and sin∣gular goodnesse towards them, vvho in this estate of their fraile∣tie and weakenesse hath in mercy appointed so excellent a helpe and so necessary a meanes for them to gather spirituall strength and in∣crease of grace, vvhereby to stand out against Sathan their deadly foe, and to walke on cheerefully, comfortably, and constantly, through the wildernesse of this troublesome vvorld, to that pro∣mised rest, that heauenly Canaan; yea, they reioyce greatly in itIsai. 58.13, finde
much sweetnesse and delight in it, long for it before it comes, and when it is come, solace themselues in it exceedingly. And no mar∣ueile: for they see and finde that it is the market-day of their soules, vvherein according to Gods ap∣pointment, they gather that hea∣uenly Manna, that bread of life, vvhereby they are nourished and strengthened all the vveeke after, and increase daily in that spiritu∣all life of grace and godlinesse, till they come vnto that measure vvhich GOD hath allotted vnto them. They see, how here∣by they recouer themselues from sinnes past, arme themselues against sinne to come, grow in knowledge, increase in faith, hope, patience, and all other Christian vertues, haue the inward man re∣paired; and in a word, vvhereas on other daies their mindes are
troubled and distracted vvith worldly businesse, this day they haue libertie to recall themselues as it were, to draw neere vnto the Lord, and sweetly to repose them∣selues in him, who is their peace, rest, and happinesse; and there∣fore they ioy & reioyce herein. Againe, their Sabbath-day heere on earth, as it doth expresse,Ambros. in Psa. 119. calleth ae∣ternam vi∣tam magnū Sabbathum. & August. lib. 22. de ciuit. Dei. ca. 30. Sab∣bathum maximum: where he saith it prefigu∣reth the rest of the bodie and soule. so it doth put them in minde of that e∣ternal Sabbath which they shall celebrate for euer in the hea∣uens, that peace, that ioy, and that perfect rest and happinesse vvhich they shall shortly bee made partakers of for euer in those glorious mansions, those ce∣lestiall habitations. It is, as it were a mappe, or an Embleme to them of that Angelicall life which their soules longeth after, and the very remembrance vvhereof doth vvonderfully refresh their grie∣ued
minds, and languishing spi∣rits vvhiles they vvander in this wearisome vvildernesse, where they haue so many enemies conti∣nually assayling them, so many difficulties with vvhich they are continually incumbred. The sanctifying of this day, doth bring them, as it were, from Aegypt to Canaan, and from Babell vnto Sion.Heb. 11.10.16 It cals them home to their owne countrey, giues them a view of it (though a farre off) and af∣fords them a tast of that spirituall and heauenly life vvhich after∣wards they shall liue for euer in glorious manner. How there∣fore can it bee, but that they should reioyce in it, and in no vvise thinke it burdensome vnto them, as carnall and worldly men doe. O my God, forgiue me that I haue had no more care of this dutie heretofore, and teach me to
be more mindfull of it hereafter. As thou hast appointed this day to be wholly bestowed vpon thee and thy seruice, so I humbly pray thee, to guide me therein vvith thy grace and spirit, that it may be my delight to consecrate it asIsa 58.13. glorious vnto thee. O let me not by any meanes pollute it, by do∣ing mine owne waies, nor seeking mine owne will, no not so much as speaking a vaine word; but let me giue my selfe therein wholly to the dutiesAct. 16.13 Psal. 122. Nehe. 8.8 Act. 17.11 Psal. 92.1. & 145.5. Mal. 3.16. 1 Cor. 16.1.2 vvhich thou requi∣rest of me, both publique and priuate, as hearing thy word prea∣ched with all reuerence and care∣full attention, reading the same, prayer, meditation, and godly con∣ference, & whatsoeuer else, where∣by I may be furthered, or a means to further or helpe forward o∣thers in the wayes of grace and godlinesse; that thus being obe∣dient
vnto thy commandement, vnto which I am tied by so many bonds, thy blessing may be vpon me, thy spirit may dwell with me, I may daily more and more be built vp in sauing knowledge and true holinesse, I may grow strong in thy feare, finding the powers of sinne and Sathan euery day more and more weakened in me: and after that I haue at thy appointed times, indeuoured to keepe a holy, and religious Sabbath heere on earth, I may hereafter keepe an eternall Sabbath with thee in the heauens, praysing and mag∣nifying thee vncessantly, and en∣ioying that perfect rest and hap∣pinesse which thou hast promised, and I daily expect and hope for, & that only through the merits of thy deare Son my blessed Sa∣uiour, to whom with thee, & thy spirit be all praise now & for euer.
Prophanenesse, how fearefull the end of it will be. THe Fig-treeMath. 21 19 was accursed because it had leaues onely, but brought forth no fruit; how much more they then that haue cast away the leaues also, hauing not so much as the shew and out∣ward profession of religion and god∣linesse? It's a heauie and dreadfull sentence which is to be pronoun∣ced against the vnprofitable ser∣uant, that hath not impro∣ued the Lords talent which he gaue vnto him, and made the best vse of it for his masters ad∣uantage, so as might be most for his glory, and the good and benefit of others, amongst whom he li∣uedMath. 25 30, Cast that vnprofitable ser∣uant into vtter darkenesse; there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. O then what shall be∣come of those, that are not one∣ly fruitelesse and vnprofitable in their course, but prophane and openly euill, so as the world doth point at them, and cri shame vpon them, though they are so hardened (many of them) that they neuer blush for it,Ier. 5.3. & 6.15 nor will be ashamed, butHose. 7.10 glory in it; that doe not onely omit that which is good, setting them∣selues in no good way, but also giue themselues wholly to the pra∣ctise of wickednesseIsai. 3.8.9 Phil. 3.19. Hose. 4.1.2 Psal. 55.9.10.11 and vngodli∣nesse, lying, e swearing, drunken∣nesse, vncleanenesse, contempt of the word, and blessed ordinances of the Lord, prophanation of the Sabbath; and many execrable impieties; making euen a trade of these Iewde and vvretched courses, sportingPro. 10.23 themselues
therein, and hatingPsal. 50 17. them that go about to reclaime them from them. What shall become of them? My heart trembleth to thinke of the fearefull doome vvhich shall passe against them in that great and terrible day of the LORD, vvhen hee shall come in flaming fire2 Thes. 1.8, to giue iudgementIud. 14.15 against them, and to render vengeance vnto them, as they haue deserued. My heart trembleth to thinke how vvofull their estate and condition shall then be; and me thinkes, they should be ama∣zed and astonished vvhen they heare of it, or enter into conside∣ration of it. For if the vnprofitable ser∣uant shall bee cast into vtter darknesse, then doubtlesse they that haue not beene onely vn∣profitable, and barren of the
vvorkes of pietie and charitie, but also openly malicious, (full of vvickednesse,Rom. 1.29.30 enuie, deceit, backebiting, raylers, haters of GOD, doers of wrong, proud, inuenters of euill things, and pra∣ctisers of all kinde of mischiefe in a prophane manner) they shall bee cast into the outmost part of that vtter darkenesse, into the verie depth thereof; they shall haue the lowest part in hell, the deepe dungeon of Gods wrath. Their punishment shalbe most fearefull and dread∣full, and their end most wret∣ched and miserable. As it was said of IudasMat. 26.24, so it may be like∣wise of them.Isai. 3.9.11. & 5. It had beene good for such, that they had neuer beene borne: VVoe bee vnto their soules, or they bring euill vpon them∣selues. VVoe bee vnto them, for they shall eate the fruit of their
wayes, and of their workes, vvherin now they reioyce them∣selues. Let them know assuredly, that it shall bee gall and bitternesse toIer. 2.19 them in the end. Their sinne isIer. 2.22. marked out before the LORD, and their vengeance sleepeth not; vvhen their wic∣kednesse is come to the full growth, and ripenesse, as the Ammorites wasGen. 15.16, then the Lord in his iustice, will put to his sharpe sickle, and cut them downe vvith a dreadfull iudgement, and cast them into the VVine∣presse of the fiercenesse of his vvrath; yea, into the very bot∣tome of that bottomlesse pit of endlesse perdition and confu∣sion, vvhere they shall be tor∣mented in fiery flames for e∣uermore, without all hope of re∣couery. This shall be their lot and portion,Iob. 5.27 if they continue in that
estate, into vvhich they haue made so fearefull an entrance. Heare it,Psal. 50.22 Mat. 4.7. Heb. 3.8 all yee that forget GOD; tremble at it, and seeke in time to escape the venge∣ance to come.Mat. 24.50 1 Thes. 5.3 Harden not your hearts, neyther presume to goe on yet further, lest it be too late for you to returne, and to auoide this vvofull mise∣rie, vvhich vvill seize vpon you sooner then you are aware of. O mercifull Lord, keepe me, and all thine from the wicked∣nesse of the vvicked. Let vs neuer delight to vvalke in the vvay that pleaseth them, see∣ing the end and issue thereof is so fearefull,Pro. 14.12 how soeuer it seeme vnto them; yea, let vs bee afraid once to set one foote in it, and alwayes most carefully auoyde the occasi∣ons
vvhich might draw vs vn∣to it. Let not there bee one pro∣phane personHeb. 12.16 amongest vs that haue taken the profession of thy glorious truth vpon vs; But teach vs now and euer to abound in the fruits of righte∣ousnesse and holinesse, that so vve may not be found vnpro∣fitable, but increase daily more and more, seeking to please thee; that so vvhen that day of our accounts shall come, vvhiles the wicked shall stand trembling at the Barre, wee may lift vp our heades vvith confidence, and heare that ioy∣full sentence from theeMat. 25.23. It is well done good seruants and faithfull, you haue beene faith∣full in a little, your glory shall be vnspeakeable. Enter into your masters ioy; inherite the king∣dome
prepared for you before the foundation of the world; vn∣to vvhich bring vs in thy good time, O mercifull LORD, not for any merits or vvorthinesse of ours, but onely for thy Sonnes sake, our blessed Sauiour and Redeemer, to whom with thee and thy Spirit, be all praise and glory now and for euer. The securitie of the wicked. THou seest how it is with people that lye sleeping in a Boat, whiles they are caried down the streame; they make way apace, and come to their appoin∣ted place before they are aware thereof. So it is with the wicked and vngodly, they lye sleeping in carnall securitie, whiles Sathan
wherries them downe amaine, till hee brings them (scarce thinking of any such matter) to the bot∣tomlesse gulfe of endlesse perdi∣tion and confusion. Euery houre, euery minute, they are hastening forward to their destruction in an vnsensible manner; and at length they fall sodainly into the depth of it, without all recouery; and being awakened out of that dead sleepe into which they were cast, beginne to wonder at their for∣mer carelesnesse; yea, cry out, and send forth many fearefull shrik∣ings and grieuousLuke 16.24. clamours, be∣ing as men amazed and euen at their wits end, to see the woe and miserie, which they haue brought vpon themselues, and from which they can neuer be freed, neuer released, though they had a thousand vvorlds to giue for a ransome. Lord suffer me not to
sleepe as others doe1 Thes. 5.6., lest I perish with them. A soft and tender heart. A Soft and tender heart, as it is the giftEzek. 11.19. & 36.26. of God, so it is a singular blessing, and such as the Lord bestoweth vpon those whom he loueth best, and to whom he hath a speciall fauour, and purpose to doe them most good, both here and hereafter. Oh it is his de∣light toIsa. 57.15 Psa. 51.17 Isa. 66.1.2. dwell with them, and in them, by the abundance of his graces, and by the presence of his holy and blessed Spirit. Hee will reuiue them, and giue life vnto them, and will neuer depart from them. Their sighes, and sobs, and teares issuing from a heart con∣triteMat. 12.20. and broken for sinne, are deare and precious vnto him;
they are as sweet waters, which he keepeth, as it vvere, in his glassePsa. 56.8., in his owne closet. HappyMat. 5.4 is the man that findeth this in him: He hath it vnder the Lords hand and seale, that he will graciously respect him, and cause his soule to liue before him. But alas, how rare a thing is this? How fewe be there, that finde a fleshy and a melting heart and soule vvithin their breasts? whose consciences are bruised with the sight and re∣morse of their sinnes, vvhereby they haue displeased him, vvho hath beene so kinde, and so gra∣cious a God and Father vnto them? that haue a sonne-likeHeb. 12.28 and a reuerent feare of his displeasure, and of his correcting hand; that grieue, sorrow and complaine oft and much, for that they can be no more touched for their sinnes, nor finde that cheerefulnessePsa. 119.4 Heb. 13.1 and
delight in the duties of his seruice which he requireth; that are ve∣ry fearefull and scrupulous of do∣ing any thing whereby he might be offended, or his lawes violated; yea, is it not euen a strange and vnknowne language, as it vvere, vnto the most, o talke vnto them of a broken and contrite heart? They thanke God, they feele all vvell vvithin them; they haue not such sicke and queasie stomackes as they see some haue, nor would willingly be troubled with their maladies. They feele it indeed & complaine much, if sickenesse, pouerty, shame, or any such like outward euils seize vp∣on them, but their hearts neuer bleed vvithin them, their con∣sciences neuer strike them vvith the sight or feare, either of sinne, or of the punishment of itGal. 3.10 Rom. 8.13. Ephe. 5.5.6 threat∣ned vnto them from an angry and
wrathfull God, before whose face they neuer learned yet to trem∣ble. Yea, through custome and continuance in sinne they haue quite lost the sence of sinneEphes. 4.18.19, and are become so hardened that they neuer see, nor sorrow, nor mourne for it, nor for the iudge∣ments hanging ouer them for the same. There is a brawne, and thicke skinne, as it were, drawne ouer their hearts, they are altoge∣ther seared and obdurate. No∣thing can moue them, or at least make any deepe impression into them, piercing into their hearts, and wounding their soules. They know not what it is to beAct. 2.37 pricked for sinne, or to bee pressed and harrowed with the rake of Gods iust iudgementsPsal. 6. & 32.38., but go on care∣lesly, securely, and presumptu∣ously in the wicked wayes and vngodly courses which they haue
taken vnto themselues, and sing peace vnto their soulesLuke 12.19. 1 Thes. 5.3.. A fearefull estate, if men could see it; and yet, the most farre gone in it. Not one amongst many that complaineth of it. Not one scarce amongst a thousand, that to his owne saluation, findeth himselfe healed & cured of it, hauing his stony and flinty heart turned into a fleshy heart, into mourning and lamenting spirits, grieuing for sinne aboue all things, and long∣ing for the assurance of the par∣don of it, and the comfortable pre∣sence of God, and the riches of his sanctifying grace; desiring still to be more satisfied and re∣plenished with those pure watersEzek. 47. of life and grace, vvhich flow from his sanctuary. O LORD, giue me not ouer at any time, I humbly pray thee, vnto that fearefull euillPsa. 81.12, which thou suffe∣rest
in wrath to fall vpon the wic∣ked, & those who are reprobates and vtterly forsaken of thee. O doe thou more and more soften and mollifie my heart. Take this stony heart of mine quite from me, and giue mee a tender and a melting heart, vvhich may bleed at the least blow, with vvhich thou strikest mee, with the least pricke of thy law when it threatneth me; and cause mee to mourne for my sinnes, especially because they haue beene so displeasing vnto thee, my God, who hast beene so kinde and so gracious vnto mee. Let my minde be bruised rather with the taste and feeling of thy mercies, then with the terrour of thy iudgements; but let mee by both, be brought alwayes to walke humbly, and reuerently before thee, desirous in all things to please thee, and afraid in any
thing willingly to offend thee, and thirsting vnfainedly after a greater measure of thy heauenly graces; that so thou maist looke graciously vpon mee, both now and alwayes, and delight in doing mee good, according vnto thy promise, vvherein is my com∣fort. Wee ought to be more affected with spirituall miseries then with bo∣dily. IF men be in some bodily di∣stresse, sickenesse, pouertie, or any other outward calamitie, vvhich lyeth heauie vpon them, they sigh and euen groane in themselues, and seeke by all meanes to be released from the same. But though their Soules be in great misery and wretchednes,
Reu. 3.17 poore, blinde, naked; yea, sicke vnto the death, and exposed vnto many, and those most fearefull Iudgements, both in this life, and much more in the life to come, they complaine not, they are no wayes troubled, they sigh not, they sorrow not, they seeke not to be recouered out of that wofull estate & condition where∣in they are. Oh, how hath Sathan blinded their eyes? how hath hee wholly possessed them with a Spirit of slumberRom. 11.8, that they should be so miserable, and yet see not their misery, nor haue any sense and feeling of their greatest euils? For, did they but see the misery they are in; if they did but know how heauy a burthen lyeth vpon them, which if it be not remoued in time, will presse them downe to hell, they would then fill euery place they came
in, with their plaints and mour∣nings; they would sigh, sob, and groane in spirit, and neuer be at quietActs 16.29.30., neuer at rest in them∣selues, till they saw themselues freed from the same. O mercifull LORD, as thou hast shewed thy selfe exceeding gracious vnto mee, in shewing me my miserie and bringing me out of it, so I humbly beseech thee, toA&s 26.18 open their eyes, which are yet closed vp, and couered with that fearefull darknes, which Sinne and Sathan hath brought vpon them, that they may see their estate; and touch their hearts, euen of as many of them as thou hast ordayned to life, that seeing it, and bewayling it, they may la∣bour to come out of it. And keepe thy Seruant both now and alwayes, from that blindnesse of minde, and deadnesse of heart,
which of all euils are the most fearefull, and such as thou suffe∣rest to fall vpon the reprobate, and those that shall perish for euer. Let mee grieue more for the decay of thy graces, the want of the comfortable sense and fee∣ling of thy loue and fauour, and the miseries vnto which my soule is subiect through sinne, then for sickenesse of body, losse of goods, pouertie, or any other outward calamitie whatsoeuer, which may at any time befall me. The conuersion of others is to be sought for. HE is of a malignant nature, that hauing wandered out of the way with the rest of his com∣pany, and beene thereby toge∣ther with them, in great perill
and danger, and afterwards find∣ing the right way, walketh there∣in alone, and letteth the rest goe on to their destruction. So it is with those, that being through the grace and goodnesse of God conuerted themselues from the crooked and dangerous wayes of sinne and wickednesse, wherein before they walkedTit. 3.3. together with others, seeke not to bring others into the right vvay with them, that so they may both escape that danger which was ready to fall vpon them. Good LORD, as it hath pleased thee in the riches of thy mercies to recall me out of the by-pathes of sinne and iniquitie, wherein I haue a long time wan∣dered and gone astray, and the end and issues whereof are death and perdition; so giue me thy Spirit I humbly pray thee, where∣by
I may be stirred vp daily as to renue my conuersation and re∣pentance, so also in aIude 22.23. Psal. 51.13 compassion of others, to seeke by all meanes to winne them, and to bring them out of the wayes of destru∣ction into the wayes of life and saluation, by labouring their speedy and vnfained conuersion vnto thee, that so we may ioynt∣ly with one heart andLuke 15.31 1 Tim. 1.17 voyce praise and glorifie thee both now and euermore. Amen. The miserable estate of a wicked and vnconuerted person. O How fearefull and misera∣ble is the estate of euery wicked and vngodly man, both in life, in death, after death, and for euer? As soone as he commeth into the world, hee is as a loath∣some
Leuit. 13.45 Iob 14.4. Psal. 51.5. Ezek 16.4 5.6.8. Leper in the sight of God, striptRom. 3.23 of all righteousnesse and holinesse, and altogether stayned and defiled with the filth and contagion of originall sinne and corruption. There is noEsa. 1.6. whole part sound in him. He is borne aEzek. 16.3. Iob. 11.12 limme of the old Adam; yea, the childe ofEph. 2.3. wrath, and of the curse; subiect vnto hell, death and damnationRom. 5.12.16.. And the longer hee liues, the more he increaseth this miserie and wretchednesse of his wherein hee was borne. Euery houre addeth moment thereto, so that he becommeth at length the childe of the DiuellIoh. 8.44 & 1 Iohn 3 8. seauen∣fold more then hee was before. The curse of the Law, and the wrath of God seazeth more and more vpon himIoh. 3.36 Galat. 3.10. His person is notRom. 8.8. Psal. 5.5. ac∣cepted of God; yea, he hatesPro. 15.8 & 21.27 him; nay, his best seruices, vvhereby hee vainely thinketh that he me∣riteth
much at his hands (as his Prayers, Almes, and outward morall vertues,) are an abho∣mination vnto him; hee loaths and abhorres them; they are as stinckingEsa. 1.13.14 carrion in his nostrils, burthensome vnto him. He hath no right nor interest vno the things of thisHosea 2.9. world which hee enioyeth, but is an vsurper and intruder into other mens1 Cor. 3.21.22. pos∣sessions, and standeth indited in the Court of Heauen for theft and robbery (howsoeuer hee be free in the Courts of men;) yea, and shall one day in the presence of the whole world hold vp his hand at the Bar of Gods Iudge∣ment-seate, and answereLuk. 16.2 for the vniust vse and possession of the things that were not his owne, but others, from whom hee de∣tayned them. Hee is a drudge vn∣to the world, and a slaue and vas∣sall
Ioh. 8.34 Rom. 6.20. 2 Pet. 2.19 to sinne and Sathan. Hee (euen that cursed FiendEphe. 2.2 who ruleth in the hearts of the children of disobedience,) hath set vp his Scepter in his heart, and ruleth and swayeth him altogether as it pleaseth him; yea, in most wofull manner tyrannizeth ouer him, and layeth many and heauy bonds and fetters vpon him, vp∣on euery part of his soule and body; and so hauing dominion and power ouer him, leadeth2 Tim. 2.26. him as it were in triumph after him, as a most miserable thrall and bond∣slaue, captiuated to euery vile lust, wherewith it shall please him to insnare him, Pride, Couetousnes, Ʋncleannesse, Maliciousnesse, En∣uie, &c. Nay, there is no thral∣dome, no bondage like vnto that vnder which hee is held by Sa∣than, and by theEph. 6.12 Powers of dark∣nesse. The bondage of the Israe∣lites
of old, vnder that cruell and hard-hearted TyrantExod. 1.11. &c. & 2.2.23. & 3.7.9. Pha∣raoh, or of the poore captiuated Christians, now vnder the bar∣barous Turke, is but a shadow thereof; yea, but a dreame of a shadow in comparison of it. For here, not the body onely, but the soule also, and the whole man is bound; yea, laden and pressed downe with many heauie chaines and irons, and that (which ma∣keth his miserie so much the greater) whiles hee seethIsay 6.9.10. Rom. 11.8 Reu. 3.17. not, nor feeleth that misery and wofull estate whereinto hee is plunged, but reioyceth, andProu. 12.15. & 14.12. glorieth in it, thinking himselfe to be as1 Cor. 4.8. Iohn 8.33. free as any: yea, he thrusteth himselfe daily more & more into the very depth of bondage and miserie, and (such is his extreame sottish∣nesse, wherewith Sathan hath euen infatuated him) thinking
them to be his greatest1 Kin. 21 20 enemies, who are his best friends, seeking to pull him out of the clawes of Sathan, and to free him from the power of death and darkenesse, euen from that wretched bon∣dage and slauery into which the prince of this world (that deadly enemie of mankinde) hath brought him. Hee is a dead man whiles he liueth; dead in trespassesEph. 2.1. Col. 2.13. and sinnes, and lieth rotting and putrefying in the graue of his corruptions, neither hearing the liuely sound of the voyce of the Sonne of God, nor hauing any1 Cor. 2.14 taste or feeling of things spiri∣tuall and heauenly. Hee hath no true sound constant ioyIob 20.5 or com∣fort in his life time, noIsay 57.20.21. perfect peace, but onely flshings of carnall and worldly ioy, which is as the cracklingEccles. 7.8. of thornes vnder the pot; and theProu. 14.13. end whereof is heaui∣nesse,
and much anguish of minde and spirit, yea, terrour of soule and conscienceIob. 15.21. & 27.20., which is his hell in this life, and the fore-runner of those infernall torments, and hellish pangs which he shall en∣dure for euer in that place of woe and torment prouided for him, euen in theProu. 21.16 congregation of the dead and damned, where hee shall take vp his restlesse rest∣ing place for euermore. He lyeth open continually al to the plagues and iudgmentsProu. 24.20. Psal. 27.9.30. of GOD, and may well feare that the Lord will strike him dead euery houre, eue∣ry moment, as hee didActs 5. Ananias and Saphira; and make him a fearefull spectacle of his wrath and iust vengeance vnto others, causing eyther the waters to ouer∣flow and drowne him, as they did the oldGen. 7. world; or the Earth to open the mouth presently,
and to swallow him vp, as it did Corah, DathanNum. 16, and Abiram, and their complices and confe∣derates; or Fire and Brimstone to raine downe from heauen and to consume him, as it didGen. 19. Sodome and Gomorrha, and those other Cities vvhich the Lord made a Looking-glasse vnto the world; or the Ayre he breathes in, to poy∣son him, as it did so many thou∣sands, in those late contagious and infectious times (neuer to be forgotten) when the Arrowes of the Lord were scattered farre and neare, and drunke vp the liues of so many of all sorts with the venime thereof; or theHab. 2.11 House he dwelleth in to fall vp∣on his head, as it did vpon the PhilistimesIudg. 16.30., whiles they were sporting with Sampson; or euill AngelsPsal. 78.49. to smite him, and to wound him to death immedi∣ately,
as they did the Egyptians, whiles they oppressed the peo∣ple of GOD; or the Wormes and Lice to eate him vp, and to con∣sume him, as they didActs 12.23 Herod when hee was in the height of his pride and insolencie; or the very Meate and Drinke which hee takes for nourishment, to be come his bane euen deadly poyson vnto him (as Histories doe re∣port of some;) or a hair to choake him. Yea, hee may well feare that all the Creatures vvill band themselues together, conspire his ruine, and worke his vtter and irrecouerable ouer-throw, as doubtlesse they would (seeing they are enemies to all that are the Lords enemies, and vvithall groane vnder the weight and bur∣den of the sinnes of the wicked,) but that the LORD restraineth them for a time, that hee may
heapeGen. 15.16. vp the measure of his wic∣kednes, and so after he hathRom. 2.5. trea∣sured vp wrath against the day of wrath, bring the greater de∣struction and more fearefull de∣solation vpon him in the end, euen that which shall presse him downe into the very bottome of hell, and the lowest places of that deepe and darkesome dun∣geon, where after that dreadfull sentenceMat. 25.41 passed against him in the day of Iudgement, hee shall lye bound and fettered hand and feete in most grieuous and vn∣speakable torturesMat. 13.42 & 24.51. & 25.30.46 Mark 9.44 and torments for euermore; hauing the worme of conscience continually gnaw∣ing vpon his soule, and fretting and vexing his conscience, and the fire of Gods wrathfull indig∣nation and fury scorching him in most fearfull manner; yea, the full viols of the fiercenesse of the
wrath of the Lord continually poured vpon him, so that he shal lye yelling, roring, & crying con∣tinually, making such fearefull clamours and hydeous noyses, as would astonish the heart of the hardiest and stoutest Champion on earth to heare; yea, affright him, and cause him to be at his wits end. Nay, what shall I say? All this is but a shadow of that wofull misery, and those grie∣uous and hellish torments, which then and there hee shall endure for euer without any ease, any hope of intermission or recouery; no, not thoughIer. 15.1 Ezek. 14.14. Noah, Iob, Daniel, yea, all the Saints and Angels (which notwithstanding they shall be farre from, rather reioy∣cing in his miserie, then pittying him, or seeking to helpe or com∣fort him) though all they, I say, should in compassion of his vn∣supportable
misery, seeke and sue vnto the Lord for some re∣lease for him, though it were af∣ter many thousand yeeres. Oh, whose hart doth not euen breake within him, to thinke of this so vvretched estate and condition of the wicked and vngodlyIob. 20.29., al∣though they be so blinde that they see it not, or so secure and carelesse that they regard it not, but goe on with great boldnesse and presumption in a strange manner, till they drinke of the very dregs of that bitterPsal. 11.6 cup, which is prepared for them. It was well said of One, that he would not be in the estate of a wicked man halfe an houre, for the whole world. Who would, that knowes what it is, or wisely considereth what hath beene said of it out of those diuine testimonies vvhich the Truth it selfe hath sealed?
Blessed be thy name O Lord, that it hath pleased thee in the riches of thy grace and mercie, through Christ my Sauiour, to draw me out of that wofull mise∣rie, when I was as deeply plunged thereinto as others. O let me ne∣uer forget that vnspeakeable goodnesse of thine towards me therein; let me neuer cease to blesse and praise thy name for the same, and to testifie my vnfained thankfulnesse vnto thee by con∣tinuall and constant obedience vnto all thy holy and righteous lawes and commandements, and that euen vnto the end of my daiesPsal. 119 5. And open the eyes I be∣seech thee of those that d ct lye in that naturall and co estate of theirs, being for t present in great miserie and vvo∣full wretchednesse, and yet see not their miserie, but are couered
with darkenesse, and with the shadow of death. O let thy sa∣uing grace shine out vnto them, that so they may turne from dark∣nesse to light, and from the power of Sathan to thee their God, and in the sense and acknowledge∣ment of1 Tim. 1 16.17 the great things thou hast wrought for them, in deli∣uering them from so miserable and fearefull a condition into that blessed and glorious estate of thy chosen, together with all thy Saints and redeemed ones, returne praise and glo∣ry vnto thee, both now and e∣uermore.
Gods patience prouokes men to spee∣die▪ and vnfained repentance and conuersion. THE patience and long suf∣ferance of the Lord, should be a strong cord and forcible meanes to drawRom. 2.4 Ier. 13.27 Hosea. 6.4. & 11.8 men vnto repen∣tance; yea, it ought euen to con∣straine them presently to turne vnto him, and to cast away all their sinnes, whereby they haue heretofore offended him, and grieued his spirit vvhich hath striuenGen. 6.3 so long with them, and yet is loth to depart from them, and to leaue them to themselues and to their owne wayes, the end vvhereof would be perdition and euerlasting destruction. Oh, that gracious dealing of his vvith them in bearing with them so
long, who haue so oft and so many wayes prouoked him; that great and vnspeakable kindnesse and goodnesse of his in continu∣ing vnto them life, health, and all these outward blessings (and which is a farre greater thing) offeringProu. 1.21.22 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 3.15. 2 Pet. 3.9. vnto them from time to time the meanes of grace and saluation, and seeking to bring them to heauen and happinesse, whom he might long since haue stript and vtterly depriued of all these things, yea, cut them off from the face of the earth, and cast them into hell to receiue the wagesRom. 6.23 and due deserts of their sinnes. This, this, it should euen breake their hearts, make their soules to melt within them for their marueilous ingratitude and vndutifulnesse in dealing so vnkindly, yea, so rebelliously with him who hath shewed himselfe
once, yea, often and that many waies so kinde and gracious vnto them. Oh it should euen inforce them to comeIer. 3.22. vnto him presently with∣out all delayes; it should winne their hearts, and cause them to refuse his grace no longer, to stand out no more against him, but to bow and bend themselues vvholly to his will in all things; and to desire by all meanes to re∣compence their former vnkind∣nesse and exceeding ingrati∣tude and vnthankefulnesse to∣wards him, vvith so much the greater care and conscionable in∣deuour to walke humbly, duti∣fully and thankfully before him in time to come; studying how to please him, and to returne glory vnto him. This effect it should haue in all of vs. How sot∣tish therefore are those that thereby become the more ob∣durate
Rom. 2.7 and hard-hearted? vvho, the more kinde and gracious the Lord is in bearing with them for their sinnes past, doe become the more vnkinde and rebellious a∣gainst him, not onely continuing in their former sinnes and wicked∣nesse, but also adding thereunto new and greater sinnes daily, and so growing euery day worse and worse the more that hee exten∣deth his goodnesse and patience towards them? O faithlesse and stiffe-necked people, men of stubborne and rebellious hearts and eares? Doe you so rewardDeut. 32 6 the Lord for his great mercy towards you when you were alto∣gether vnworthy of it, yea, de∣serued nothing but that the viols of his wrath and furie should be powred out vpon you? Is this your kindnesse to your God vvho hath so exceeded in his grace,
and bounty toward you? Is this your dutifulnesse, your loyaltie, your requitall of his fatherly compassions ouer you? Doe you so answere him? O how fearefull, yea, monstrous a thing is this, that men should be made worse by the goodnesse of God? how miserable are they that will make the mer∣cies of God an occasion of their owne miserie? and how ingratefull are they, who, the more kinde the Lord is towards them, shew themselues the more wicked and rebellious against him? We would blush and be ashamed to deale so with men, and shall wee deale so with the euer-liuing and most glorious God, that great God of the whole world, who made vs when we were not, and is able pre∣sently to cast vs both body and soule into hell-fire, there to bee tormented for euermore? Farre
be it from me, O Lord, so highly to offend thy maiestie. O let me neuer abuse the riches of thy bountie and patience, least there∣by I heape vp vnto my selfe wrath against the day of wrath and ven∣geance, but let thy long-suffe∣rance be saluation2 Pet. 3.15 vnto me, euen a meanes to mollifie my heart, & to draw me daily nearer vnto thee, and to cause me to walke more humbly, dutifully, & obediently before thee, yea as thou striuest con∣tinually by thy spirit to winne me vnto thee, and euen to ouercome me with thy gracious and merci∣full dealing towards me, so let me striue and endeauour with all my strength, and with all the powers of my soule and bodie to returne all thankefulnesse vnto thee, and to testifie the vnfained thankeful∣nesse of my heart by entire and constant obedience vnto all thy
lawes and commaundements, and the more thy kindnes is inlarged towards me, the more let me in∣crease in loue and dutifulnesse vnto thee; than thus I may at length see that promised saluati∣on of thine, in the hope and ex∣pectation vvhereof, I doe and vvill rest continually. A looking Glasse, whereby to see what our estate is; whether we be true Conuerts or no. THere be many that thinke they are conuerted, vvhen indeed they are notProu. 12.15. & 14.12., but lye still in the state of sinne, of death, and of condemnation. SoIer. 17.9. deceitfull is the heart of man, and so guile∣full that arch-enemie of mankind Sathan (who in a malicious and vnsatiable manner huntethIob. 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.8 con∣tinually after the liues and soules
of men) that oft times hee blea∣reth the eyes of men, and delu∣deth them with counterfait sem∣blances, with vaine imaginations and shadowes of things that are not, that so hee may cause them to rest carelesly, and securely in that fearefull & dangerous estate wherin they are, till in the end he maketh a prey of them, so that none is able to deliuer them out of his hands, or to plucke them out of his iawes. It is good there∣fore for euery one to take sure triall of himselfeLam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5., and to see that he standeth vpon firme1 Cor. 10 12 ground, lest otherwise he perish vnawares, and fall downe sodainely into the pit of euerlasting destruction, vvhen he thought he vvas farre off from it; and finde himselfe in the depth of hell, vvhen as before hee dreamed of no such matter, but deemed himselfe to
be in as good estate as any, though now (too late) hee be∣waileth euen withLuke 16.24. Hebr. 11.42 teares his great folly and marueilous securitie vvhich hath brought him to that place of vvoe and torment, which hee thought not of till hee found himselfe in it; and out of which hee cannot now recouer himselfeLuke 16.26., though he had a thou∣sand vvorlds to giue for his ran∣some. Lest therefore, thou beest (as others haue beene, vvho now grone in hell for it) beguiled by the deceitfulnesse of thine owne corrupt heart, and the subtilties and illusions of Sathan2 Cor. 2.11., (vvho seekes nothing but thy ruine and vtter ouerthrow) looke diligently into this Glasse, which out of the Word of GOD I set before thee, whereby (if thou hast not a mist before thine eyes) thou mayest rightly discerne, vvhether thou
art yet a true Conuert or no, or else lyest still rotting, and putre∣fying in the corrupt estate of na∣ture, not hauing as yet the worke of grace vvrought in thee, how∣soeuer heretofore thou hast flat∣tered thine owne soule, and thought that the vvay wherein thou vvalkest was right, when as the end and issue of it is death and destructionProu. 16.25. First therefore, vvhere true repentance is, and vnfained conuersion, there is a true knowledgePsal. 51.3 & sight of a mans sinnefull estate, and the wretched∣nesse and miserie vvhereinto he is plunged; a knowledge of the sinne vvherein hee was conceiuedPsa. 51.5 and borne, viz. the sinne of Adam imputedRom. 5.12.18. to him as his owne, and his owne inherentRom. 7.24 and inbred cor∣ruption, together with his many and grieuous actuall transgressions of the most holy and righteous
lawes and Commandements of GOD, for vvhich the curse of God hath seized vpon him, so that he is theEph. 2.3. childe of wrath and perdition. Hee seeth himselfe (of himselfe) to be most wretched and miserable, being assoone as hee came into this vvorld as a most loathsome leper in the eyes of God, altogether stained andEzek. 16. Iob 9.30.31. de∣filed both in soule and body with the filth and contagion of that originall corruption and pollu∣tion which cleaueth fastHeb. 12.1. vnto him, and couereth him as the flesh wherewith he is couered on eue∣ry side, so that there is no sound part either in soule or body; yea, nothing but woundsIsa. 1.6., & swelling, and sores full of corruption. Hee seeth that as hee was borne thus sinnefull by nature, so that hee hath continued therein euer since he had his being in this vvorld;
yea, that he is become euery day more corrupt,Gen. 6.5. & 8.21. Iob 15.16. more vile and abho∣minable, his whole life hauing beene nothing else but a multi∣plying of sinne vpon sinne, and transgression vpon transgression, by the violating and breaking of the commaundements of God. Hee seeth himselfe heereby to bee accursedGal. 3.10 Ioh. 3.18., hauing the Law continually thundering out that fearefull sentence against him, vvhereby hee stands as a con∣demned wretch before God, sub∣iect to all plagues andDeut 28.15.16 &c. miseries in this life, and to euerlastingMat. 25.41. Ioh. 5.29. tor∣ments both of body and soule in the life to come; yea, that he is pressed downe by that fearefull & condemning sentence of that most iust and righteous law, euen to hell-gates, and that the dore is ready presently to be opened vp∣on himIob 21.13 Isa. 5.14., euen assoone as the
messenger (vvhich continually at∣tendeth vpon him, readie to exe∣cute the law of his Creatour and most iust Iudge) shall knocke at the same by death, that so he may haue entrance into that place of torment prouided for him (the congregation of the deadPro. 21.16. and damned) vvhere he shall receiue the wagesRom. 6.23. and due deserts of all his sinnes and rebellions against that infinite and glorious Maie∣stie for euermore. Being thus brought to the knowledge and sight of his sinnes, and wretched estate by the same, and that through the preachingRom. 7.7.8.9.10 of the Law, where∣by it is discouered and made cleere vnto him, as in a Glasse; hee knoweth vvithall (seeing the vvord of God, which shall stand for euer, hath sealed it)Exek. 18.4. Ioh. 8.24. that if hee die in that estate, hee must
needs perish and be damned eter∣nally, vvithout all hope of reco∣uery, and therefore is maruei∣lously humbled in himselfe, being cast downe vvith the sense and feeling of his owne wretchednes and that vvoful estate into which he is plunged, so that although heretofore hee reioyced in it, and made a mocke of itPro. 14.9, vvhen hee vvas put in remembrance of it by others, yet now hee hangeth downe his head withRom. 6.21 Ezra 9.6. shame and sorrow, like a guiltie and con∣demned person, ready to goe to the place of execution: yea, he is vvholly possessed with the spirit of bondageRom. 8.15. Isa. 66.2., which filleth and striketh his soule with much feare, anguish, and exceeding horror and amazement, so that his heart quaketh, his conscience is wounded within him, and his flesh trembleth for feareActs 16.29. & 9.6. of Gods
vvrath and vengeance, vvhich euery moment is ready to seize vpon him: yea, he groaneth vnderMatt. 11.28. the heauie burthen that lieth vpon him, and oppresseth him in most grieuous manner. It causeth him to grieue, to sigh, to sorrow, to mourne and lament for the miserie vvhich is come vpon him, and to desireAct. 2.37 & 16.30. Rom. 7.24 aboue al things in the world to be freed from it, & to be let loose, as it were, out of that hell into which in a sort hee findeth himselfe plunged, be∣ing in his owne apprehension as a forlorne and condemned wretch. Being thus broken-hearted, thus wounded and humbled vn∣der the mighty hand of GOD, and cast downe vvith the sight and sense of his sinne, and of the curse and vvrath of God, and all those horrible iudge∣ments
of his, hanging ouer him for the same, feeling himselfe to be as a damned creature, dead and lost, & both confessing itLuke 15 21. Iob 31.33 & 39.36.37. Pro. 28.13., and complaining of it vncessantly, and seriously bethinkingLuke 15.17. himselfe how hee might (if it vvere possible) come out of it; he heares by the preaching of the Gospell,Luke 2.10. of the meanes how to be deliuered from that so miserable and vvo∣ful estate and condition in which for the present he is inwrapped, and to be restored vnto full and perfect happinesse, viz.Isa 53. Matt. 3.15.17. the abso∣lute obedience and satisfaction of CHRIST IESVS, the pro∣mised Messiah, vvho being the Sonne of God, deare vnto his Fa∣ther, became ManGal. 4.4. Rom. 8.3.4 1 Pet. 2.24, subiect vnto the Law, and fully satisfied the iu∣stice of God, by taking theGal. 3.13 curse vpon him, and fulfilling the Law of God, and so deliuered the prisoner
Esa. 42.7 & 61.1. Luke 4.18 out of the prison-house, and let them that were bond goe free; by his death freeing them from sin, death, and condemnationRom. 8.1 & 3.24. & 5.19. 2 Cor. 5.21. Hebr. 9.26 28. Ioh. 1.29., and restoring them to righteousnesse, life, and euerlasting saluation and happinesse, so that nothing can euer after bee layd vnto their charge. Hauing attained to the know∣ledge of this great and glorious worke of mans redemption vvrought by CHRIST,Act. 13.38 1 Ioh. 5.9. and knowing that there is no other meanes to be sauedActs 4.12 Rom. 8.3., there is bred in him a marueilous desire and vehement longing to be made per∣taker of the same; a hungring and thirstingEsa. 55.1 Mat. 5.6. after Christ and his righteousnesse, and the redemp∣tion and saluation purchased by his death and bloudshed, euen as a man that were ready to die for thirst v would desire drinke,Iudg. 15.18 or a
man condemned to die some cruel death, would long for a par∣don; and withal a prizingMatt. 13.44.46. of it at a high rate, far aboue all other things in the vvorld whatsoeuer; yea,Phil. 3.8. a base account of all other things in comparison thereof, esteeming this the onely treasure on earth; that which if hee may obtaine, he would thinke himselfe a happy man, and can neuer rest satisfied by any meanes till hee finde that hee, as well as others, hath his portion in it; and there∣fore willingly forsaketh his sweetest sinnes, and denieth himselfeLuk 9.23 that he may obeaine it. Heereupon followes faith in Christ, in and by vvhom this great benefit is receiued; an ear∣nest seeking and suing vnto him for the obtayning of this grace and mercy at his hand; that is, knowing what the promises of the
Gospel areMatt. 9.13. Reuel. 21.6 & 22.17 Isa. 55.1. Mat. 11.28 Ioh. 7.37., how that Christ cals and inuites graciously all (that feele the heauie burthen of their sinnes and miserie, and labour and groane vnder them, sighing and desiring in themselues to be freed and deliuered from the same) to come vnto him, promising to ease and refresh them by ta∣king the burthen from their shoul∣ders, and laying it vpon his owne; hence, he is excited and stirred vp (casting away all confidence in himselfe) to flye vnto him by a true iustifying faith, resting and relying vpon his promise that he will receiue him to mercie, and ease and succour him: yea, hee cleaues fast vnto him & vnto his word; he builds vpon it, and will sooner die then let goe his holde which hee hath takenCan. 3.2.3.4. of him whom his soule loueth and longeth after aboue all things, as in whom
alone he seeth his freedome from his former misery, & all perfection of happinesse to consist, when it can no where else beActs 4.12 found. Hence proceedeth vnspeake∣able ioy and comfortActs 2.46.47. Acts 16.34 in the sence and assurance of this wonderfull benefit vvhich by this meanes he is made partaker of. His spi∣rits are refreshed, and his soule re∣ioyceth within him, as one that hath found a greatMat. 13.44. treasure which lay hid in the bowels of the earth, and could hardly be come by, and which hee would not part with for ten thousand worlds. Yea, he hath that peaceRom. 5.1 & 11. which passeth all vnderstanding, and that ioy vvhich cannot bee expressed1 Pet. 1.8., arising from this, that hee knoweth that hee is iustified,Rom. 8.33. and standeth as righteous in Gods sight, before whom he lay in former times as a vile and
loathsome leperLeuit. 13 45., that he isRom. 8.39. loued of him, vvhereas before hee was hatedRom. 8.14.17. and abhorred; that hee is his adopted childe l, deare and pre∣cious in his eyes, whereas before he vvas anEphes. 2.12. enemie, and an aliant and stranger from his couenant; and in a word, an heire of grace, and all the good blessings of God in this lifeRom. 8.17. 1 Cor. 3.21 2. Reu. 21.7., and of endlesse and vnspeakeable glory and happinesse in the life to come in that celesti∣all kingdome which is prepared for him, and which hee resteth in hope to haue the full possession of for euer, assoone as this short and fading life of his is ended, which he seeth daily winding vp apace. And lastly, hereby is kindled in his heart an vnfained loue of Christ, and of God in Christ, who hath beene so exceeding kinde and gracious vnto him aboue all
that hee could expect or desire; the coles of that affection wher∣with he burneth towards him, are fieryCant. 8.6.7., and the flame vehement; no∣thing can quench it. And this loue of his towards him causeth him2 Cor. 5.14.17. 1 Pet. 4.1.2. Luke 1.75 1 Thes. 4.1. & 5.23. 2 Cor. 7.1. Psal. 116.12. to study with himselfe how to please him in all things, by walking be∣fore him in all the duties of righ∣teousnesse and holinesse which hee requireth of him, and that with a cheerefull & willing heart and minde, reioycing when hee can doe the good hee commaun∣deth, and mourning when hee is ouertaken with the euill which he hath forbidden, grieuing with a godly and repentant sorrow when through any occasion he fals into any sinne, and striuing by all meanes to liue as it becom∣meth his redeemed Ones, to shew1 Pet. 2.9. forth the vertues of him his God and mercifull Sauiour,
who hath in so wonderfull man∣ner called him out of darkenesse into that marueilous light of his, that so (if it be possible) he may in some sort be answerable to that great mercie, and to those riches of his grace and kindnes vouch∣safed vnto him, and walke wor∣thy thereof in some acceptable measure. Hee is ashamedRom. 6.21. of his for∣mer vaine and foolish conuersa∣tion, wherein before he so much pleased himselfe, that hee won∣dered that others would not be like vnto him therein1 Pet. 4.4; yea, hee abhorres itIob. 42.6 2 Cor. 7.11., and himselfe for it, and is ready to lye downe in dust and ashes, to testifie his inward griefe and sorrow for the same. Set now this Glasse before thee, and behold thy selfe in it with an vnpartiall view and right discerning. If thou findest that
it hath beene thus with thee, that all these things, in their measure, haue beene wrought in thee, thou hast cause to reioyce, and to glo∣ry in the Lord; thou art a true conuert; SaluationLuk. 19.9 is come vnto thee; thy estate is most blessed and happy, though outwardly thou beest miserable, a despised and forlorne creature. But alas, how few be there that can say in truth, it hath beene, or is thus with them? How small is the number of such? For behold, so is it with the most. Although they vaine∣ly suppose that they haue truely repented as well as others, and are therefore in good estate, yet indeed they eyther neuer saw their sinnes, and their wretchednesse and miserie by reason of the same, but are of the Laodicean temper, thinke themselues to be rich, and increased with spirituall
goodsReu. 3.17 1 Cor. 4.8., and to haue neede of no∣thing, when as indeede they are poore, and blinde, and naked: or, if they had a sight at any time of it, they were not truly and through∣ly humbled for the same, they had not a sense of their miserable and wofull condition, they found not themselues lost, and ready to perish, they grieued not for it, mourned not, lamented not, be∣ing much perplexed and asto∣nished in themselues, their hearts were neuer pricked and wounded by the preaching of the Law. Or if they come thus farre (which yet is not sufficient) they attained not to a sound knowledge of the sauing grace offered in the Go∣spell, of the Redemption and Saluation by Christ, but remaine ignorant thereof, and rest them∣selues content in that ignorance of theirs, which hath couered their
eyes, so that they cannot see the light vvhich shineth so clearely vnto them. Or else, if they haue the knowledge hereof, yet their hearts are not so affected there∣with as they should be, they doe not so earnestly and so vnfained∣ly long after the receiuing of this benefit; they doe not hunger and thirst after the righteousnesse of CHRIST IESVS, desirous aboue all things to be satisfied therewith; they doe not so highly prize it as they should, accoun∣ting all other things as losse and dongue in comparison of it; yea, their mindes are altogether in a manner, taken vp about other matters,Psal. 4.6. pleasures, profits, ho∣nours; and this is the thing they least regard or seeke after, much lesse thirst after in such an vnsati∣able manner. And therefore they are not stirred vp to come vnto
CHRIST, to labour by Faith to lay holde on him, and to ap∣ply his merits and promises vn∣to them, and to cast their bur∣then vpon him, desirous to be vnloosed, and to finde ease, com∣fort, and refreshing in him; but their hearts are euen dead vvithin them, and they are strangers from this life of grace andGal. 2.20 faith which is in Christ Iesus. And no maruell then that there appeares in them so little, or no loue of him, so small desire to please him, and to testifie their loue and thankefulnes vnto him by their new obedience, and carefull and conscionable walking in his com∣mandements, seeing they neuer tasted fully of the sweetnesse and the exceeding ioy and comfort arising from that wonderfull be∣nefit and vnspeakable mercie which is sealed vp to the soules
and consciences of true penitent sinners, and such as haue recei∣ued Christ by a sauing faith to be their wisedome1 Cor. 1 30., their righteous∣nesse, their sanctification and re∣demption. O mercifull LORD, how great is thy goodnesse and mercy towards mee, that whereas thou sufferest many, yea, the greatest part of the world still to wander in the wayes of wickednesse, and to sit in the shadow of death and darknesse, eyther not seeing their misery, and wofull, and most wretched estate and condition; or else seeing it, to be so secure, so carelesse, and so hard-harted as not to regard it, and to labour to come out of it, being begui∣led through the deceitfulnesse of their owne harts, and the craft and delusion of Sathan, yet in the vnsearchable riches of thy abun∣dant
grace and1 Tim. 1 14.17. mercy towards mee in Christ Iesus, hast opened mine eyes, vvhich before were shut vp as well as others, and tur∣ned me from darkenesse to light, and from the power of Sathan, vnto thee my blessed Lord and Sauiour, raising mee out of the graue vvherein I was dead and buryed, deliuering me from the Kingdome of darkenesse, and translating mee into the King∣dome of thy deare Sonne, giuing me assurance of the forgiuenesse of my sinnes, and a comfortable hope and expectation of that ioyfull inheritance prouided for thy Saints and chosen ones in the highest heauens: What shall I returne vnto thee, answerable vnto so great loue, vnto such fatherly compassions and vn∣speakeable mercies of thine to∣wards me? Thou mightest haue
suffered mee to continue in my blindnesse and ignorance as well as others, to haue beene as care∣lesse, as secure, and as hard-har∣ted as any others, and so to haue perished with them, dreaming that all had beene well with me, whiles I lay rotting in my natu∣rall and corrupt estate. For what am I, or what haue I beene, that thou shouldest respect me more then others? Thou mightst for my sinnes (so many and so grie∣uous) iustly haue forsaken mee, as thou hast done them. But thou hast not so dealt with mee. Blessed be thy name both now and euermore. O touch my heart with the due meditation of this thy gracious goodnesse towards mee. And teach mee daily to la∣bour to feele this worke of thine more and more effectuall in me, by renuing my repentance for
my sinnes, whereby I haue, and doe daily and hourely displease thee in the breach of thy righ∣teous lawes and commaunde∣ments. Let me see my sinnes and transgressions, and the misery vvhereunto they make me sub∣iect; and seeing them, let me be∣waile them, yea, lament and mourne for them, and be true∣ly humbled with the considera∣tion of them. Let me freely and vnfainedly confesse them vn∣to thee, and that vvith shame and sorrow of heart: And let them cause me wholly to re∣nounce my selfe, to iudge and condemne my selfe, yea, to abhorre my selfe, and to flie vnto thee in the name of thy Sonne my bles∣sed Sauiour, in whom there is mercy and plentifull redemptionPsal. 130.7: Let me hunger and thirst after his righteousnesse more then after
any thing else vvhatsoeuer; yea, let me highly esteeme of it, and make more precious account of it then of all the riches and trea∣sures of this world, desirous (though with the losse of all o∣ther things) to winne Christ, and to be found in him clothed and couered with those precious robes of his. And let me by the hand of a true sauing faith apply vnto my selfe the merits of his death and passion, his righteous∣nesse, his obedience, and his full and perfect satisfaction, being cer∣tainly assured that all the promi∣ses of the Gospell belong vnto me. And let the knowledge and full perswasion hereof cause me to reioyce, yea, to glorie in thee, and in this vvonderfull and vn∣speakeable mercy of thine to∣wards me, euen with that ioy of thy spirit which is most glorious;
1 Pet. 1.8 and fill my heart and soule with that peace which passeth all vn∣derstanding. And with all, let it stirre me vp continually to walke before thee in all holy obedi∣ence, desiring and endeauouring in all things to please thee, and to approue my selfe and all my actions vnto thee, dying daily more and more vnto sinne, and liuing vnto righteousnesse, and labouring by all meanes to bee cleansed from all filthinesse both of flesh and spirit, and to grow vp to full holinesse2 Cor. 7 1 in thy feare, that thus I may haue good euidence that I am thine, that thou hast wrought thy gracious vvorke in me, and wilt perfect it daily more and more, till thou bringest me vnto that glory which thou hast prepared for me in thy heauenly kingdome, through the merits of thy Sonne, my blessed Lord
and Sauiour, to whom with thee and thy Spirit, be all praise, power and dominion both now and euermore. Amen. The godly man, is alwaies blessed, neuer miserable. THe godly cannot but be al∣waies blessed,Iob. 5.17. yea then when he seemes to be most miserable in the eye of the vvorld, and to sense and carnall reason. For when he is at the worst, hee hath those things vvhich hee would haue, (being contented with anyPhil. 4.11 estate, which the wise and gracious dispo∣ser of all things seeth fittest for him:) yea, he cannot haue better things (in regard of his present estate in this life) then those things vvhich he hath and en∣ioyeth, euen then when he is la∣den
and oppressed vvith many miseries. Is he humbled through afflictions? this is that which he vvould haueIer. 10.24 Iames 1.2 10; he had rather be continually vnder the Crosse, then destitute of those excellent graces ofRom. 5.3 patience & humilityMat. 11.29 Ioh. 12.26, without which he cannot be the disciple of Christ, nor approued of God,Psal. 4.6. & 119.13.5 of vvhom aboue all things he desires to be accepted and fa∣uoured. Is he poore? he is vvell contented therewith, seeing he is largely recompensed with the greater supply of those better riches,Phil. 4.19 those heauenly treasures both of grace and glory. Hee would not change his portion with the greatest and richest Monarch in the world that aboundeth in worldly wealthPsal. 4.6.7, and wanteth those spirituall and heauenly trea∣sures which he enioyeth, and which shall neuer be taken from
him, vvhereas the other shall corruptIames 5.2 and be cankered with rust and age, and consume, and come to nothing;Psal. 119 96 he reioyceth in his greatest infirmities and weakenesses, knowing that vvhen he is weakest, Christ is strongest in him; as also that his power is perfected in his weakenesse, and that his grace is sufficient for him2 Cor. 12 9. & 12.4.,2 Cor. 12 9. & 12.4. and that euen this infirmitie of his is the mother and nurse of ma∣ny graces and vertues in him. Is he basely esteemed of, vile and contemptible amongst men, or not had in that account and esti∣mation which he seeth others to be in?Psal. 131 1 Alas, of al things it is his de∣sire, he might not be ambitious or haughty minded, which he know∣eth is a thing vvhich the Lord so much abhorrethPro. 6.16, and then which nothing is more vnbe∣seeming those that are Christians.
He is willing to let go the honour of the CourtHeb. 11.25.26., and the sweetest pleasures of sin which he knoweth last but for a season, rather then to leaue following of Christ, or to follow him more faintly and hea∣uily. He seekes not for the ho∣nour that is from men,Ioh. 5.44 but that which commeth from God. He knoweth that it is his dutie to go be∣fore othersRom. 12 10 rather in giuing then in taking honour, and to esteeme better of others then of himselfe,Phil. 2.3.5 framing himselfe to that pat∣terne which Christ hath giuen vnto him in his owne example, which to imitate hee accounteth (as it is indeed) his greatest ho∣nour. Yea, he reioyceth and is ex∣ceeding glad when he is con∣temned, reuiled, hated,Math. 5. and per∣secuted of the world, because hereby he is made conformable vnto Christ his headRom. 15 2 Heb. 12.2.; blessed,
whiles others curse him, and that his reward shall be the greater in heauen, by how much the more he is contemned, despised, and molested on earth for the profes∣sion of Christ and his Gospell. What should I say? It is his vn∣feined desire, with the blessed Apostle, to be crucified vnto the world, and to haue the world cru∣cified vnto him,Gal. 2.19 20. & 6.14 that so Christ may liue the more in him,2 Cor. 13.4 whiles he liueth in this world, and he may liue for euer with Christ in the greater glorie when he shall depart out of this world. And in this regard, hee takes it not to heart, (as others doe) how it fares with him in this world. Hee as willingly vndergoeth shame, contempt, and reproach for Christ, as o∣thers eagerly seeke to fasten it vpon him. Againe, is he cast
downe with griefe and mour∣ning; he is both blessed in his mourning,Mat. 5.4 and assured of com∣fort after his mourningPsal. 126 5. & 97.11 Isai. 61.10 & 65.14 Ezech. 9.4, yea, that according vnto the measure of his griefe and mourning,Ioh. 16 20.21.22 so shal be his comfort and reioycing. The dark∣nesse of the weather, and the o∣uercasting of the clouds which hinder that comfortable light from him for a time, is but a meanes and a preparatiue for that gracious raine of Gods graces and mercies vvhich will afterwards descend and showre downe vp∣on him in more plentifull and abundant manner. To say no more: The godly and truely re∣ligious man is alwaies blessed,Psal. 1. yea, and then (many times) most blessedEccles. 8 12 Isai. 3.10. vvhen he seemes to o∣thers (yea, and to himselfe also sometimes) most miserable and furthest off from blessednesse. Lord,
this is that which thou hast re∣uealed in thy word to be the e∣state of thy chosen and holy ones. O Let me now and alwaies beleeue it, and haue comfortable experience of it; that so I may ne∣uer enuiePsal. 37.1 at the seeming-pros∣peritie of the wicked, nor be dan∣ted nor discouraged by meanes of any crosse or affliction whatso∣euer shall or may befall me, at any time, but knowing thy pro∣mises, and my priuiledges, bee comforted, when as outwardly I shall haue cause of the greatest discomfort, being assured and fully perswaded (seeing thou hast said it) that it is and shall alwaies be wellEccl. 8.12 with me; yea, that euen in mi∣serie I shalbe blessed and happie, and at length (hauing all teares wiped from mine eyes,) liue with thee in fulnesse of glory for euer in that coelestiall kingdome
of thine, where there shall be no more any of those changes, vn∣to which I am now daily subiect, and shall bee till I am perfe∣cted, and translated into that resting place of thy Saints and chosen. The wicked man is alwaies mse∣rable, neuer blessed. THe wicked is miserable when he seemeth to others to be blessed and happie: yea, then oft times, most miserable, when he seemeth to be most happie, both in his owne eyes, and in the eyes of others that haue not a right dis∣cerning of things that differ. Marueile not at this, but weigh and consider it well, and thou wilt find and canst not but acknowledge it to be most true.
For suppose he hath riches, plea∣sures, honours, friends, fauour, & all that can be desired in this world, who doubts but that hee hath great sorrowPsal. 30.10, much perplexed∣nesse and vexation (as it were sowre sauce) mingled with these delicates which his greedie ap∣petite so much longed for; and yet now that he enioyes them, cannot be satisfied therewithEccle. 1.8, nor finde contentment therein, but hath the fire of hellish & inor∣dinate lust more kindled in him then before, so that no water can quench it. A hungry and greedy worme continually lies gnawing vpon him, so that he neither hath, nor can haue any true peaceIsai. 40.22 or sound ioy. He that makes que∣stion of this, I will send him to no other to learne this lesson then to wise Solomon, who hath proclaimed itEccles. 1. to the whole world
as a most certaine and vndoub∣ted truth. Besides, these things, wherein he thinkes to finde hap∣pinesse and contentment, they become ranke poyson vnto him, bringing the curseDeut. 28 20 of God in more fearefull manner vpon him then euer before, and being the occasionHose. 2.8 & 13.6 Iames 4.3 of the increase of sinfulnesse in him, and so of wretchednesse and miserieHose. 13 7 Rom. 2.4.5 vvhich alwaies followes the same as an vnseparable com∣panion thereof. O therefore, vvho would euer delight in the estate of a wicked and vngodly man, except he were an enemy to his owne happinesse, and longed to make himselfe wretched and miserable, and that continually? O Lord, giue me a right vnderstan∣ding; cause me euery day more clearely to see, and consider the ex∣ceeding foolishnesse of the wicked, who wander from the waies of
peace and happinesse; and make me wise to withdraw my selfe more and more from the things that they delight in. Let me be careful alwaies to turne my feetePro. 4.14 from their pathes, and to walke before thee in truth and sinceritie, and in singlenesse of heart, that so whereas they shall euer be wret∣ched and miserable, I may haue assurance that I am and shall be blessed both now and euer. Amen. The godly life, the onely happie life. ALL things in this life are vaineEccle. 1.8.14 and come to no∣thing, riches, health, beautie, strength, glorie, or whatsoeuer the heart of man can desire, or which might seeme to promise vnto men
the greatest felicitie & happines. VVho is so blinde that seeth not how fading and transitorie they are, euen those that are of the greatest perfection and excellen∣cie aboue others? They haue an end and passe away as if they had neuer beeneEccle. 1.11 Psal. 119.96. But the feare of the Lord indureth for euerPsal. 19.9 Psal. 112.. True Religion and Godlinesse they abide with vs in life and in death, and for euer. This is as the tree of life in the Paradise of God, vvhich giueth lifePro. 12.28. & 22.4 & 19.23 & hap∣pinesse to them that delight not onely to tast, but also to feede and fill themselues with it. This is as it were a cleare fountaine of li∣uing watersIoh. 4.14, vvhich spring vp to euerlasting life and glory in the kingdome of God. It crownes a man vvith many gracesProu. 10 27 Deut 28.3. &c. Psal. 1.19, and blessings heere, and hereafter vvill giue him enterance into
the fulnesse and perfection of all blessednesse; when all other things shal appeare to be (as they are) vaine shadowes, dreames, and fancies, that shall satisfie the soule, with the abundance and ac∣complishment of all glorie and happinesse. Oh then, how great is the folly of those that seeke more after these fading1 Cor. 7.31 1. Ioh. 2.27 and perishing things, then after that which is farre to be preferred before them? that la∣bour more to bePsal. 4.6 rich, healthfull, strong, honourable, &c. then to be truly religious, men fearing God and such as delight to walke con∣scionably before him in his wayes; that striue more to a∣bound in the pleasures, profits, and preferments, of this world (which are but as smoke, and soone va∣nish awayPsal. 49.17.18.19.20., leauing the owner of them neuer a vvhit the better)
then in grace and godlinesse, which hath the promises of blessed∣nesse, both in this life,1 Tim. 4.8 and in the life to come? O LORD, indue mee daily more and more, with that wisedome which is from a∣boue: discouer vnto me yet more and more the vanitie of all things here below. Let me con∣sider howPsa. 82.7. & 146.3.4. Iob 21.33. Princes & the greatest men die, and how their fauour and honour fadeth with them: let me consider how one genera∣tion goeth, andEccl. 1.4. another commeth, and how euen those things which are of greatest perfectionPsal. 119.96., and in greatest account amongst men, perish & come to an end quick∣ly, though insensibly, to them especially that haue not eyes to discerne the course of them. And on the other side, cleere my dimmed sight, by the cleere shine of thy grace and blessed Spirit,
that I may behold how great the reward of true Religion and godli∣nesse is; what perfect and con∣stant, yea, euerlasting blessed∣nesse there is in walking vpright∣ly before thee in the vvayes which thou hast prescribed vnto me, that so making a choise of the better partLuke 10.42, I may be truly blessed of thee both in life and death, and for euermore. The godly life is the onely comfor∣table and contented life. MAny are afrayd to be religi∣ous for feare they should loose the comfort & content which before they enioyed in their sin∣ful vanitiesEccl. 11.9., & lead a more heauy, a dumpish, & discomfortable life, wanting those sweet morsels with vvhich they were wont to glut themselues, till they surfetted on them. O vain man, that so fondly
imaginest that thou shalt finde comfort and happinesse vvhere it is not to be foundEccle. 1.14., and that thou shouldest depriue thy selfe of it by taking that course wher∣by thou only mightst attaine vn∣to itEccl. 12.13.. Why dost thou suffer thine owne heart thus to deceiue thee; yea, Sathan with his sleights2 Cor. 2.11. thus to beguile and delude thee, causing thee to follow after shadowes, and to let goe the sub∣stance, euen that onely vvhich can make thee happy, & thy life comfortable, and full of desired sweetnesse, whereas now for want of it thou languishest in vaine hopes, & restles pursuite of that which is elsewhere to be found then thou dreamest; yea, euen by those very meanes by vvhich thou fearest thou shouldest de∣priue thy selfe of it. Know at length thine errour, and learne to
get true vnderstanding, and a right discerning of those things which concerne thyLuk. 19.42. peace & happinesse. The godly life onely it is vvhich is the truly comfortable and con∣tented life. If thou wilt not be∣leeue the Saints of GodPsal. 4.4. Rom 5.1. 1 Pet. 1. Phil. 11.12, who speake out of their owne experi∣enceIoh. 3.11., euen those things which they haue felt and tasted of, through the Spirit of grace vvhich dwels in them, hauing had proofe also of both estates, euen that wherein thou (who art yet a carnall and vnregenerate man) now art, as also of that wher∣in, through the mercy of God, they now stand, being sanctified and regenerate by the Spirit of God, and such as vvould not re∣turne to their former estate, wherin thou liuest, nor exchange ther present comforts for their former aities, though
they might haue (I say not with BalaamNum. 12.28.) a house full of Gold and Siluer, but the whole world; yea tenne thousand worlds (if it might be.) If thou wilt not I say, beleeue these, vvho notwithstanding ought to be credited, being well acquainted with those things vvhich they testifie; yet beleeue God himselfe, vvho hath sayd and sealed it in those diuine Ora∣cles for a certaine and vndoubted truth (vvhich none except hee vvill proclaime himselfe to bee a profest Atheist, one vvhich denies God and his Word, which is of infallible truth, dare euer de∣nie, or once call into question in any sort) viz. that the life of the wicked is nothing but vanitie andEccles. 1. miserie, they being like a rest∣lesse and raging SeaIsa. 57.20, vvhich casts out mire and dirt continually, their fears and sorrowesIob 15.21 being
many, and the euilsPsal. 32.10. vvhich at∣tend vpon them infinite; the godly on the other side, ful of com∣fort, heauenly solace, peace,Prou. 24 20. Rom. 5.1.14.17. Psal. 97.11 Pro. 15.15. Phil. 4.4. ioy, and much sweetnesse, such as none know, nor can conceiue of, but they that haue tasted of it1 Pet. 2.3, and which after they haue once tasted of it they account the sweetnesse and delight which they tooke in their former sinnefull pleasures to bee (as they are indeed) but bitternesse, and are ready to say vvith vvise Solomon, when hee had learned it vpon sufficient experience, I sayd of laughter thou art mad, and of ioy what is it that thou dostEccl. 2.2. Pro. 14.13 Yea, doubtlesse, there is that peace which passeth all vnderstanding; that ioy vvhich as the Apostle calleth it (a glo∣rious name indeed) is1 Pet. 1.8 vnspeake∣able and glorious; both in regard of their present glorious feelings
and apprehensions, vvhich the Spirit of the Lord by an imme∣diate hand, as it were, and by a secret inspirationLuk. 1.41 doth vvorke in them, and also in respect of those singular priuiledges, and of those sweet and blessed hopes1 Pet. 1.3 with vvhich they are continually re∣freshed, euen in the middest of mourningPsal. 94.19. & 112 4. They taste daily (except it be sometimes vvhen it pleaseth the Lord to restraine that benefit) eyther for some grie∣uous sinnePsal. 51.12.14 committed against him, or for the triall and exercise of his graces in them, Faith, Hope, Pati∣ence, &c. or for the stirring of them vp to Prayer, Inuocation, & other such holy and religious duties, vvhereby he conueieth and con∣tinueth that desired good vnto them, vvhich is the pledge and earnest penny as it vvere of the accomplishment of all those ex∣cellent
and gracious promises vvhich shalll, no doubt, in due time bee performed vnto them, and in them.) They taste daily of that hidden and Heauenly MannaReu. 2.17 vvhich giueth life to to their soules, yea, vvhen they seeme and are indeed (in regard of these sinnefull courses, where∣in others place all their felicitie) dead men to the worldGal. 2.19 20. & 6.14 and vvorldly things. Oh these are such matters as the naturall man is notProu. 14 10 acquainted with; hee wondereth at this, when hee heareth of it, being ready to say with Nicodemus, when Christ spake vnto him of Regeneration, or the new birthIoh. 3.4.9. Psal. 31.; How can these things be? how can they be so fil∣led with ioy, who seeme to be as full of miseries as any others; yea, to goe mourningEzek. 9.4 Psal. 119.136. and droo∣ping oft-times all the day long, ha∣ted
also (many times) reuiled, and persecuted in the world1 Cor. 4.12.13., yea, made as the filth of the world, the off-scouring of all things (as euen those worthies, the blessed Apo∣stles themselues were,) nay, a gazing-stocke vnto the world, vnto Angels1 Cor. 4.9, and vnto men:1 Cor. 4 10. fooles and weake and simple ones? How can such as these are, who seeme rather to be the obiect of pittie, then otherwise, dry and withered branchesIsay 53.2, wormesPsal. 22.6 Iob 25.6., and not men, how can they leade such a com∣fortable and glorious life, in comparison of which the plea∣sures and delights which wee in∣ioy, are but smoake and vanitie, of no esteeme in regard of them. Thus reasons the naturall man, who hath no other then carnall eyes, and therefore iudgeth of euery thing by the outward view and externall obiect, not being
able to discerne the things of the Spirit of God1 Cor. 2.14., neyther the gifts and graces themselues, nor the blessed fruits and effects thereof, euen those sweet and quiet fruitsHeb. 12.12 of righteousnes, which spring forth in the hearts of those that are truely religious; but is like one that is purblinde2 Pet. 1.9, which cannot behold that which is too farre remoued from his sight, as these things which are spirituall and heauenly are. Thus therefore he reasoneth and cauilleth against this manifest and experienced truth, which to others is as cleare as the beames of the Sun, when it shineth in his brightnesse. It is a strange matter to him, which will not enter into his head, be∣cause hee is vnacquainted vvith it, and thinkes there can be no better delicates then thatLuke 15.16. 2 Pet. 2.22 draffe, which with the Swine of the world
he feedeth vpon so greedily. Let not any deceiue himselfe any lon∣ger with such dreames and fan∣cies; let not Sathan (who was a lyar from theIoh. 8.44 beginning, and en∣uies that vnto others which hee cannot attaine vnto himselfe) be a meanes through his false sug∣gestions to driue thee from that which should be thy happinesse. If euer thou wouldest (as vvho would not?) liue a truely con∣tented and comfortable life, la∣bour to be truely and sincerely religious. And the more this care and indeuour shall increase in thee, the more shall that wished-for peace and comfort abound and be increased in thee. Beleeue this oncePhil. 1.25, and take tryall of it; and if thou finde it not so, yea, aboue that which I am able to expresse1 Pet. 1.8, or to declare it vnto thee, returne then vnto thy for∣mer
vomit again, which vpon this consideration thou hadst for∣merly disgorged, and fill thy selfe with the huskes and draffe where∣with before (for want of better) thou didst feede and stuffe thy selfe, and that many times, till thou wert euen weary of them, and soughtst for change, for the satisfying (if it might be) of thy restlesse and vnsatiable minde. Good LORD, fill mee daily more and more with the com∣forts of thy Spirit. Refresh my Soule with the sweetnesse of that hidden and heauenly Manna, which the world is not acquain∣ted with. Cause me with cleare eyes to behold the vanitie and vexation of spirit, which is in the life of the vngodly, their diuers and manifold distractions, with which they are oft-times euen rent and torne in pieces, and
that horrour of conscience which first or last seizeth vpon them, as the fore-runner of their future torments; and the felicitie on the other side of thy Saints, euen that heauenly solace and contentment which the godly life affordeth, and which ariseth from so ma∣ny sweet springs and pleasant fountaines, viz. certainty of their Election, whereby they know their names are vvritten in thy Booke of lifeLuke 10.20., before all worlds; sense and feeling of the forgiue∣nesseMat 9.2. Rom. 4.7. of their sinnes, which thy Spirit sealeth vnto their soules; knowledge of their Adoption into the number of thy Children, which the same Spirit ofRom. 8.16. 2 Cor. 1.22. thine testifieth vnto them; assurance of thy loueRom. 5.5 & 8.38.39, which thou sheddest into their hearts; fellowship and communion with theeReu. 3.20 who art the fountaine of all happinesse; vnion
with thy Sonne my blessed Lord and Sauiour, and in him with thine owne MaiestieIohn 17.21.23., and par∣ticipation of those diuine2 Pet. 1.4 and excellent graces wherewith their soules are decked1 Pet. 3.4 and adorned, and which are the onely desire∣able richesProu. 3.13.14. and treasures, farre aboue Siluer, Gold, Pearle, or whatsoeuer else the world can afford vnto them; and the con∣tinuall hope and expectation of that future and promised gloryEphes. 1.18., which maketh their soules to1 Pet. 1.3 blesse thee vncessantly, who art so rich in graceEph. 2.7. and mercy towards them; besides those many other priuiledges vvhich thou hast vouchsafed them, concerning their temporall life and outward estate: viz. Protection of An∣gels, (those glorious Ministers,) which thou sendest forth to be AttendantsPsal. 91.11. Heb. 11.14 on them; Promise of
thy especiall Prouidence2 Chron. 2.5.8. & 4.10. Heb. 11.13.5. ouer them, and aMat. 6.26 32.3. & 7.11. continuall and fa∣therly care for them; from whence necessarily followeth a remouallRom. 8.28. of all euill from them, and a supply of all goodPsal. 23.1 & 84.11. euen of all outward and earthly blessings vnto them, which thou in thy wisedome seest to be conuenient or necessary for them, for their comfortable and safer passage through the Wildernesse of this world, till they come to that promised rest, that heauenly Ca∣naan: that thus hauing mine eyes enlightened, to behold those things which thy word so cleare∣ly teacheth, and my heart rightly seasoned with the serious consi∣deration of them, I may daily be drawne nearer vnto thee with that sweetnesse which I finde in thee, in comparison of which all other things are bitter and
distastfull to such as haue true vnderstanding, and their senses rightly exercisedHeb. 5.14 to discerne be∣tweene good and euill. The frequent meditation of Death how necessary. HE that hath Death alwayes before his eyes, will neuer haue his thoughts set vpon any thing vvhich is base, sordide, and seruile, or desire any thing in this vvorld excessiuely and inordi∣nately. This will make him to haue a very meane esteeme of all these earthly vanities; this will cause him with an equall minde to vse prosperitie and ad∣uersitiePsal. 90.12., and to be rightly dispo∣sed in either, being neither too much lifted vp vvith the one, nor too much cast downe vvith the
other, considering how short and momentarie eyther the benefit and pleasure which is inioyed by this1 Cor. 7.29. Heb. 11.25, or the paine which is fea∣red by that, will be. This will be a bridle, to curbe and restrayne him from all things that are vn∣lawfull, and to make him vse those things which are lawfull (if right∣ly vsed) with more moderation, and with lesse excesse, wherein ma∣ny doe much offend; which I am perswaded they would not doe, if they once acquainted themselues with this wholesome and neces∣sary Meditation, whereunto ma∣ny are meere strangers, yea, ene∣miesIsa. 28.19 Amos 6.3.; they cannot abide to heare of it, or to call it to remem∣brance; nay, they shew them∣selues to be afraid to thinke on it deliberately, euen then when it puts it selfe vpon them, as being that whereby they suppose they
are brought to meete their grea∣test enemy in the face, whom they most dread and flye from, and the sight of whom (though a farre off) they imagine would be very hurtfull and dangerous vnto them, damping them in their resolued coursesLu. 12.19, and scaring them from those sinnefull and pleasing vanities, wherein they now delight themselues in exces∣siue manner. O blessed LORD, as Death is alwayes, euery where present and imminent, ready continually to seize vpon me; so grant that I may haue mine eyes open to see it standing neare vnto mee; and that I may continually present the serious meditation thereof vnto my minde and all my thoughts, that thereby I may be brought to suffer the greatest miseries vvhich shall befall mee in this
world patiently, quietly, and con∣tentedly, knowing that they will come quickly to an end;Heb. 10.37 and to make the right vse of prosperitie (if it shall please thee to send it) not being too much addicted to the profits, pleasures, and delights of this beguilefull and deceiue∣able world. Especially, let me with the due meditation hereof be wholly with drawne from the loue and liking, the affecting and desiring of all those things which are vile and sinfull, seeing the re∣membrance of these in death will be bitter, the sting painefull, the smart grieuous and intollerable.
The resurrection of the good and bad in the last day, how different it shall be. OH, how glorious will the day of the Resurrection be? how comfortable to the godly? how terrible to the wicked! The godly they shall rise by the mighty pow∣er of Christ their Sauiour1 Cor. 6.14. Hee, who is the HeadEph. 5 23 being raised, all they being his1 Cor. 6.15. Members, and vnited vnto him in a my∣sticall manner,1 Cor. 15 13.20.23. &c. 1 Thes 4.14. shall be raised with him in their appointed time, by reason of that vnion which is betweene him and them. But the wicked, they shall rise by the ter∣rible and dreadfullIohn 5.28.29. 1 Cor. 15.52. voyce of Christ their Iudge, summoning them to make their appearance before him, that sentence may be pro∣nounced
against them, like as when a Malefactor is brought out of the Iayle to the Barre that hee may receiue his deserued doome, and be hastened to his ex∣ecution. Againe, the godly they shall come out of their graues, where∣in they haue beene a long time held as prisoners and captiues vn∣der death1 Cor. 15 54.55.; they shall come forth with great ioy and triumph, loo∣king vp vnto their blessed Saui∣our, whom they haue so long expected and desiredRom. 8.23 Luke 21.28 Reu. 22.20. Oh what a comfort and refreshingAct. 3.19 shall this be vnto them? who can ex∣presse it? But the wicked on the contrary, they shall start vp like men scared, and sodainely affrigh∣ted, waking out of some fearefull dreame (but it shal be no dreame.) As soone as they beginne to looke out of their graues, they shall be∣hold
the heauens on a flaming2 Thes. 1.8. 2 Pet. 3.12 fire round about them, and Christ as a mighty GOD, and a most se∣uere and dreadfull Iudge, with a fiery eye, and a frowning counte∣nance, looking downe vpon them from aboue, euen out of that great ThroneMat. 25.31., which shall haue streames of fire issuing out from it on euery sideDan. 7.9.10., so that they shall be amazed, and euen at their wits endMat. 24.30, at the very appearance of him, and wish with all their harts that the very hils and Mountaines would fall vpon them, andReu. 6.16 couer them from his presence, and from the fiercenesse of his wrath, which shall seize vpon them in mostLuke 19.27 fearfull manner. Furthermore, (that it may yet appeare how great a diffe∣rence there shall be betweene them in that day) the godly shall rise in a glorious manner, being
made incorruptible1 Cor. 15 42.43.44.49., spirituall, heauenly, full of beautie, and ex∣cellencie (farre aboue that wee are able to conceiue or thinke) their bodies (which haue lyen in the dust, and beene subiect to much basenesseIohn 11.39. Iob 10.21 22. & 17.14.16. and loathsomnesse) being now euen like vnto the glorious body of Christ1 Cor. 15 49. Phil. 3.21. 1 Iohn 3.2 himselfe, vnto whom then they shall be made conformable, shining as the StarresDan. 12.3; yea, as theMat. 13.45. Sunne in brightnesse for euer and euer. The wicked on the other side, shall rise in a most base and igno∣minious manner, euen to shame and perpetuall contemptDan. 12.2: They that haue had the greatest beau∣tie and excellencie here (being not inferiour to proud and aspi∣ring Absolon, like vnto vvhom in all Israel there was not any for goodly feature: from the sole of the foote vnto the crowne
of the head there being no2 Sam. 14 25. blemish in him,) shall there be abhorred of GODIsa. 66.24.; and of all his Saints and Angels. There can be no greater deformitie then that wherewith their bodies shall then be couered, that they may be loathed of all, yea, of their owne selues, being altogether disfigu∣red with the vgly Image of Sa∣than, so that they shall not be able to lift vp their heads for shame, but stand likeGen. 4.6. Caine (or worse) with flaited, hellish, and deiected countenances, euen con∣founded in themselues, and wish∣ing that they were cast presently into the darkest corner of Hell, where they might not behold themselues, much lesse eyther see or be seene of others, especially of those bright eyes of that glo∣rious Iudge, who is soHab. 1.13 pure, that he cannot behold euill without great
detestation. Oh who is able to conceiue the shame and confu∣sion with which they shall then euen wholly be ouerwhelmed? And finally, whereas the god∣ly shall bee made partakers of euerlasting lifeIoh 5.29 Rom. 2.7. and happinesse, in the highest heauens, they shall bee deliuered vp to euerlasting death and condemnationMat. 25.46 Psal. 11.6 Reue. 21.8 in the lowest part of hell, where they shall be tortured with endlesse and vn∣speakeable torments for euer∣more, being banished for euer from the blessed and comfortable2 Thes. 1 9 pre∣sence of the Lord. Gracious Lord, teach me daily more seriously to consider vvith my selfe of the great difference that shall be be∣tweene thy children and those that are seruants to Sathan and corrup∣tion: Seeing that the one shall be raised vp in the last day to that ioy, glory, and happinesse which
is vnspeakeable; the other to end lesse wretchednesse and miserie. O therefore let me be stirred vp to endeauour my selfe to haue al∣waies a cleare conscience towardsAct. 24 15 16 thee, and towards men, and to a∣bound euery day more and more in the works which thou hast ap∣pointed,1 Cor. 15 58 knowing that my labour shall not be in vaine in thee. And neuer let me enuiePsal. 37.1 at the flou∣rishing estate and vaine suppo∣sed felicitie of the wicked in this world, seeing the day is comming and hasteneth on a pace1. Pet. 4.7, where∣in they shall bee cloathed with shame and dishonour, and cast out of thy presence for euermore, receiuing according to that which they haue done in their bodies1. Pet. 4.7, and eating the fruit of their owne vvaies2 Cor. 5.10, which they shall finde to be more bitter then death it selfe;Isai. 3.9.11 howsoeuer now the re∣membrance
of these things) by reason of their ignorance1 Pet. 3.5, bloc∣kishnesse, and cursed infidelity) doth little or nothing at all affect or moue them. The second death, how exceeding fearefull and dreadfull it is. MANY, eye the first death much, and are flaited and almost affrighted at the sight, yea, at the thought of it; it striketh a feare and a terror into them. But they looke but seldome, and scarce with halfe an eye vpon the second deathReue. 21 8 which begins where the other ends, and is farre more dreadfull to all those that haue a right discerning and true appre∣hension of it. Alas, that, is no∣thing to this, no more to be com∣pared to it, then a little sparke to a great flame, or a small droppe of water to the whole wide and
vast Ocean. For the first is of the bodie onely; the second both of the body and soule.Math. 10 28 The one for a short time; the other without all end of time, of as long continu∣ance as eternityMath. 25 41.46 it selfe. The one, oft-times, not so grieuous as the fits and pangs of many diseases; the other more dolorous and painefull then all the sicknesses and diseases in the world, though they were all laid together vpon one man. In briefe, the one is fi∣nite, and such as many haue su∣stained1 Sam. 15.32 with vndanted courage and resolution; the other infinite and vnsupportable, not able to be borne or indured of any crea∣ture without hellish miserie. Wilt thou behold the gastly face of this dreadfull enemy yet more clearely and fully discouered vnto thee? Heare then, hearken, and beleeue that which the word of GOD
(which shall indure for euer1 Pet. 1.25) hath sealed, and which all must beleeue that will not shew them∣selues to be no better then the heathen, and infidels. In this se∣cond death, first there is a separa∣tion of the soule, yea of the whole men, both soule and bodie, from the gracious presence2 Thes. 1.1 of that glo∣rious God, without whom there can be no true blessednesse; an vtter separation and banishment from himMath. 7.23. & 13.41. & 25.41, and from that ioy∣full and comfortable societie and fellowship of all his elect Saints and Angels; a finall depriuation of all hope of entrance into that hea∣uenly Canaan, that new and cele∣stiall Ierusalem, the Citie of the euerliuing God, of which so glo∣rious things are spoken; and the losse wherof will not lesse vexe & torment the soule of the dam∣ned (as that ancient and golden-mouthed
Father not vainely sup∣posed) then all the paines and tortures of hell.Chrysost. Be sides this, there shall be paines and torments vn∣speakeable, vnsufferable, such as may dampe the stoutest champion, and the most yron-hearted wretch in the world, if he shall but en∣ter once into a serious & through consideration of them;  if eyther he regard the place of torment vvhere that wofull miserie is to be indured;  the pangs and tor∣tures themselues;  the company with whom they are to remaine in the suffering and induring of them;  Or lastly, the time which they shall indure them. Euery one of them is enough to strike a terrour into a man, and to make his heart to quake to thinke of them.Esai. 14.9. & 34.9.10 Reue. 1.18 & 20.13.14 1 First, the place is no other then that deepe prison,Deut. 32 22 Pro. 7.27. and darke
dungeon of Gods wrath appoin∣ted for the execution of his dreadfull vengeance vpon all the children of disobedience, vvho vvould not know him, nor what should be their happinesse; that darke and dismall place, that bur∣ning lake, that fiery furnaceMat. 13.15, and bottomlesse gulfe of deepe des∣paire, the pit of hell, that To∣phet prepared of old for them, large and deepe (according to thatIsai. 30.50 propheticall description there∣of,) in briefe, a place of vnspeake∣able horrour and terrour, worse then the most stinking prison, or the most loathsome dungeon in the world (there is no compa∣rison:) the sight, yea, the very thought of it, were enough to flait a man. The darknesse of Egypt was fearefull, and full of amaze∣ment and astonishment, yet no∣thing to this.
The paines and torments there to be indured, are shadowed out vnto vs in Scripture byPsal. 11.6 Mat. 13.42 & 25.41 fire and brimstone, storme and tempest, the worme that neuer diethEsai. 66.24 Mark. 9.46, chaines of darkenesse2 Pet. 2 4 Iudde. 1 Mat. 8.12. & 22.13, and blacknesse of darkenesse. All fearefull and dis∣mall names, and yet but sem∣blances (it may be) and shadowes of those more grieuous tortures, and that dreadful and hellish mi∣serie, vvhich then shall be pow∣red out both vpon their bodies and vpon their soules, and all the seuerall parts and members there∣of in vnspeakeable and most wo∣full manner. TribulationRom. 2.9, an∣guish, and great astonishment shal seize vpon euery one of them, and wholly possesse them, yea, swallow them vp, as it vvere, with open mouth. They shall haue a hell without them, and a hell also within them, euen their owne guil∣tie
and disquieted consciences, vvhich like a wormeMark. 9.44. shall conti∣nually lye gnawing vpon their soules, vvith the remembrance of their fearefull sinnes past, the great blessednes & glory, which through their folly they haue depriued themselues of, and the extreame woe and miserie into which they are plunged; yea, their consciences shall vvound them in most feare∣full manner; the nips and pangs thereof shall be vvorse then the bitings of the venemous Cocka∣trice, or the stingings of the poi∣sonous Scorpion; yea, vvorse then death it selfe. VVee see how that euen in this life, when the Lord sometimes doth but suffer that worme to beginne to niblePro. 18.14. Esa. 57.20.21. at the soules and consciences of vvicked men, and cause them but as it vvere, a farre off, to behold the flashings of hell fire, vvith which
afterwards they shall be tormen∣ted for euer, that euen this vvhich is but the beginning and forerunner of their sorrowes, doth make them to rore out; nay, driue some of them to make away themselues, eyther by hanging their owne selues (as that great politician2 Sam. 17 23. Achitophel, and that couetous and treacherousMatt. 27.5. Iudas did,) or by drowning themselues, or cutting their owne throats, as o∣thers haue done, (as vvee haue knowne by wofull experience.) Oh then, how vvofull and how grieuous shall it bee vnto them vvhen that worme of conscience shall continually lye fretting vpon them, and biting in sunder, as it vvere, their very heart-strings; nay, gnawing in most fearefull manner vpon the most inward & tenderest parts of their soules, vvhiles they shal lye frying in the
fiery flames, being scorched on euery side with the fury of Gods wrathfull indignation which then shall be kindled against them, and burne to the bottome of hell. Then doubtles, they shall desire to die, but death shall flie far from them. They shall curse and banne themselues, and those that were companions with them in wic∣kednesse, by whose meanes a grea∣ter measure of wrath is powred out vpon them; they shall cry out against their former sottishnesse and securitie, that they had no more care to keepe themselues from comming into that place of tormentLuk. 16.28.29., though they were so oft admonished and forewarned of it by others, who had more pittie of them then themselues. O the remembrance hereof, it will cut their hearts, it will pierce their soules, it will cause them to
curse themselues, and the day and houre wherein they were borne, & the time wherin they forsooke GOD, and gaue themselues ouer to the seruice of sinne and Satan; yea, it will cause and constraine them to crie shame vpon them∣selues, and their folly and mad∣nesse, in suffering themselues to be so deluded, so deceiued through the deceitfulnesse of their crafty and deadly enemies, who now (when it is too late) they see in all those pleasing courses where∣with they delighted them, sought nothing but their vtter ruine and ouerthrow. Neuer didIob 3. Iob (in that weakenesse and ex∣tremitie of his) curse the day of his birth, as they then vvill the day of their birth and entrance in∣to the world; nay, as they shall the time wherein they liued in the world, and wherein they gaue
themselues to the seruice and slauery of sinne and Sathan, (who hath now rewarded themRom. 6.23. to the full) as they were oft before told that he should, except they loo∣ked to themselues in time, and (shaking off all societie and fel∣lowship with him) returned vvil∣lingly, speedily and vnfainedly vnto the Lord. O the depth of miserie, vvhich then shall come vpon them! Their countenances shall waxe pale and wanne, their hearts faile them, and their soules euen rend in pieces vvith horror and amazement, whiles they shall lie howling, crying, and shriking, and in vaine powring out their mournefull complaints: Woe, woe is vsEsa. 33.14; Who is able to dwell with this deuouring fire? Who is able to indure these fearefull bur∣nings? But to leade thee on yet fur∣ther
to the viewing of their companions, with whom they shall abide in that place, in those tor∣ments. Their company what shall it bee? None but hellish ghosts and damned creatures like them∣selues, who as it were so many furies, and barking hell-hounds, appearing each to other in dread∣full apparition, shall send forth such fearefull and hideous noises, such horrible outcries, such yel∣lings and rorings, as shall make that hollow vault (that infernall prison) to shake, and their hearts to tremble within them; yea, euen to breake in sunder vvith the most dreadfull apprehension of their hellish miserie. If the very appearance but of one of those damned spirits (as we haue heard of some) is sufficient to affright a man, and to scare him out of his wits: Oh then, how feare∣full,
how wofull will their estate be, when they shall be thrust into the company of Sathan, and con∣strained to dwell, remaine, and to lodge, as it were, with him, and the rest of that hellish crue and viperous brood, euen all the Deuils, reprobate, and forlorne wretches, the number of whom cannot be numbredMar. 5.9.? To this, adde the time, how long they shall indure such wofull miserie in that place of torment, euen for euer, (a feare∣full word) for euerEsa. 66.24. Matt. 25.41.46. 2 Thes. 1.9.; vvithout any intermission, any ease, or hope of recouery. It will not be for a yeere, a hundred, a thousand; no, nor a hundred thousand yeres that they shal indure those torments, but for euer; yea, for euer and euer. It swallowes vp my con∣ceipt when I thinke of it. If they might indure them but so many
yeeres as there bee sands on the shore, Fishes in the Sea, Starres in the Firmament, or grasse piles vpon the ground, it vvere some comfort, though (God knowes) very small, considering the grie∣uousnesse of the torment in that time to be suffered; the bearing of vvhich but one houre, one mo∣ment, were enough to quaile the greatest Champion that euer was, and to dampe the stoutest courage in the world, though neuer so hardie; but yet when so many thousands of yeeres and ages are passed ouer, their torments (alas) shall bee as fresh and new to beginne as euer they vvere, and as farre from an ending as at the first beginning. For there shall be no end of them, but as long as the Sunne and Moone lasteth, as long as Heauen and Hell lasteth; yea, as long as God
is God, so long shall they endure those torments in that wofull place of vvoe and torment. If it vvere not for hope (wee say) the heart would breake. Sure then, their hearts may breake vvell e∣nough, for they shall be out of all hope,: It vvill be in vaine for them euer to looke for any ease, any comfort, any succour; no, not for the least refreshing that may be, were it but so much as that rich gluttonLuke 16. desired, euen one small drop of water to coole their tongues, vvhich together vvith all the parts of their bodies and fa∣culties of their soules shall be for euer tormented in that flame. Though they should neuer cease crying,Matt. 7.22 Lord, Lord, they could not obtaine it at his hands, for then the Lord will be deafe to themProu. 1.28., hee will not heare them, he will not be intreated of them.
Nay, I say yet more; thoughEzek. 14.20 Noah, Iob, Daniel, yea, all the Saints and Angels in Heauen should with one consent put vp their earnest suite, and make con∣tinuall supplication for them, (vvhich notwithstanding they shall be farre from, ratherPsa. 58.10 & 64.9. reioy∣cing in the vengeance that shall be powred out vpon them for e∣uermore) yet if it could be ima∣gined they might be brought to doe this for them, they should nothing preuaile for the release or recouery, no not for the mi∣tigating of the paines of some one of them, in the least manner: but after thousands thousands yeres gone and past, they should still lye frying in thatMat. 13.42 fiery for∣nace, that scorching fire (in com∣parison of which our fire is but a painted fire, yea, no fire) lye bound and fettered hand and footeMat. 22.13, ha∣uing
the flames of Gods wrath∣full indignation scorching their soules, & the worme of conscience lye gnawing vpon their consci∣ences for euermore; their pangs, horror, and miserie rather increa∣sing euery day, and growing to greater extreamities, then any wise abating or diminishing in any manner. Yea, so farre shall any be from helping or succou∣ring them in that vvofull condi∣tion into which they shall be plunged, that there shall be none to pitie them, or to take any compassion of them. If children should cry to their parents, vvho whiles they liued with them on earth were most tender-hearted towards them (being no lesse af∣fected vvith their miseries then with their owne) yet then they should be moued with no pitie, towards them. And if Parents
should make their mone vnto their Children, they would not once be touched with it, they would not regard it; for1 Cor. 15 24.44. nature and all naturall affection shall then be quite taken away; there shall eyther be no knowledge, or at least no respect of Parents, Children, Brethren, Sisters, Kindred, Friends or Acquaintance, (as they are such) but Gods glory shall be one∣ly eyed and regarded of all those that shall be made partakers of his glory in the heauens. They shall haue no pitty, no compassion towards those, who though they were their friends in this world, and neare vnto them in many respects, yet now they see to be Gods enemiesLuke 19 27., such as hauing before cast him off, are now iustly separated from him, and cast out of his presence for euer, and therefore not loued, but hated of
him, and all that are his, who shall loue onely where hee loueth, and hate where hee hateth: yea, so farre shall any be from pitty∣ing them, or being affected with their misery, that they shall be laughed at on all hands. God shall laugh them to scornePsal. 2.4. Prou. 1.2, and haue them in exceeding derision. The Angels shall laugh at them. All the Saints shall laugh at them, andPsal. 58 10 reioyce in their miserie, see∣ing the glory of Gods Iustice shining forth in their iust and deserued condemnation. O feare∣full and lamentable estate and condition! And if it be so feare∣ful to heare of these things which shall befall the wicked, vvhen they shall be cast into that place of torment, prouided them in the congregation of the dead and damned; how dreadfull shall it be for euer to endure them?
Tremble at this, O yee carelesse and secure ones. Be amazed and astonished at the very remem∣brance of it O yee prophane and vngodly wretches, that liue and wallow in your lewd and sinfull courses, blasphemies, prophanati∣ons of the Sabbath, contempt of Gods ordinances, adulteries, vn∣cleannesse, or any other wicked∣nesse whatsoeuer vnrepented of. Tremble and be amazed at it, as doubtlesse yee would, if your eyes were not blinded by the de∣ceitfulnesse of SinneHeb. 3.13., and your hearts hardened through the sug∣gestions of Sathan, and your soules euen bewitched and inchanted by that euill Spirit, which driueth you on head-long to that wofull place of endlesse torments, ne∣uer letting you see the dreadful∣nesse of it, till you be plunged so deepe into it, that there is no
hope for you of any recouery out of it. What will you doe when these things shall come vpon you, yea, like a raging Sea, with great vio∣lence rush in vpon you to your euerlasting confusion? Of all the wonders in the world, this (mee thinkes) is the most strange and wonderfull, that men (men other∣wise of wisedome and vnderstand∣ing,) knowing & considering with themselues (as the word teacheth) that there are such things pro∣uided & prepared for the wicked and impenitent, liue notwithstan∣ding as if they neuer feared any such matter, but boldly and most presumptuously continue in their former vngodly vvayes, delight∣ing in sinne, and wickednesse, and euen hastening forward vnto that place, vnto those torments, the very thought of the enduring of the least of which (if it were but
but for one houre,) vvere e∣nough to amaze and astonish a man, and to make his heart to quake within him for the great∣nesse of the horrour thereof. Heare, O yee foolish, yee of stiffe neckes and stony hearts; how long vvill you be thus blinded? how long shall your owne vvicked hearts deceiue youIer. 17.9.? how long vvill you suffer your selues to be deluded by Sathan that dead∣ly enemie of yours, vvho seekes to make a prey of you for euer? how long will you suffer your selues to be so bewitched and inchanted by that enuiousMat. 13.28. and malicious Spirit, that the remem∣brance of these things should no more moue you, no more af∣fect you, vvorke no more vpon you then it doth? Are you afraid of the first death, and doe you not much more feare this
second death, which of all euils is the most fearefull, the most dread∣full; yea, in comparison of which the other is scarce a shadow of death, though a fore-runner of it, and a way and entrance vnto it, to those that shall perish? Doth that astonish you, and shall not this much more? Are you so secure, so stupid, so senslesse? Assuredly, a very strange thing it seemes vnto mee, (and may well be so esteemed of all that consider of it,) how prophane, gracelesse, and vngodly persons, when they heare, or when they thinke of these things, should not be terrified and affrighted with them, and drawne with the feare and dread thereof from all their wicked and sinfull courses, which heretofore they haue li∣ued in; the Swearer from his oathes and blasphemies, vvith
which hee hath pierced the hea∣uens, the Drunkard from his drunkennesse, (that bruitish and sottish vice,) the Prophaner of the Sabbath from his prophanations thereof; the filthy person from his filthinesse and vncleannesse, and shamefull pollutions; the coue∣tous Ʋsurer and Oppressor, from their couetousnesse, vsury, and op∣pression of their poore Brethren and neighbours, among whom God hath placed them, to the veryDeut. 5.11. Mat. 26.11 end that they should shew mercy and compassion vnto them, and not crueltie and ri∣gour: in a word, euery impenitent sinner, from the sinne and vvic∣kednes wherein they haue here∣tofore liued and delighted, and continued from time to time, carelesly, securely, boldly, and presumptuously, as if all were well, as if there were no cause of
feare, no such danger imminent or ensuing, and ready euery mo∣ment to seize vpon them (for no∣thing holds them vp from fal∣ling into the depth of that bot∣tomlesse gulfe, but onely the small twine-thread of their fading and vncertaine life, which is ready to be cut in sunder euery minute, euery breathing while. O that they were wiseDeut. 32 29. Hosea 14.10. to vnderstand and consider of these things! O mercifull LORD, (who art mighty in power, and terrible in thy Iudgements,) doe thou strike their hearts with the horror of thy wrath and vengeance to come. Smite their soules, that they may tremble before thee, and fall downe groueling vpon the earth in the apprehension of the great∣nesse of their miserie that is to come vpon them, if they doe not conuert and turne vnto thee.
Those that will not be drawne with the cords of thy mercy, pa∣tience, and long-sufferance to come vnto thee by true and vnfayned repentance, doe thou euen con∣straine and compell them, and driue them forward with that rod of iron, euen with the feare of thy most fearefull and yet most iust and righteous Iudgements. O doe thou giue them a sight of that dreadfull and vvofull miserie, which shall ouer-whelme the wicked for euer. Let them haue a right discerning and a true ap∣prehension of it: Let them beleeue it, and tremble at it, and be drawne thereby to turne out of all the wayes of wickednesse, vvherein heretofore they haue vvalked, being deceiued with the deceit∣fulnesse of sinne and Sathan: let them so feare it, that they may preuent it, flye from it, and be
preserued from perishing in that great deluge with the world of the wicked, whom thou hast or∣dainedRom. 9.22 of old vnto destruction, and euerlasting confusion. And raise vp the heart of thy seruant both now and alwayes, I hum∣bly intreate thee, to vnfayned thankefulnesse, for that thou hast in some measure touched my hart with the consideration of thy iudgements prepared for the wic∣ked, and hast caused the feare and dread of them to be2 Pet. 3.15 saluation vnto mee, humbling mee thereby, and causing mee to stand in awe of thee, and to flie from the wrath and vengeance to come, vnto the throne of thy grace and mer∣cie in Christ Iesus my Sauiour and Redeemer, who hath giuen himselfe to death for mee, to free and deliuer mee from that death and hell. O doe thou continue
still good and gracious vnto me: Let thy mercy and vnspeakeable kindnesse so freely vouchsafed vnto mee in thy beloued Sonne, be the principall motiue euen to force and constraine mee to hate all sinne, and to abandon all ini∣quitie; but let mee also be mind∣full of thy dreadfull iudgements to be inflicted, yea, powred forth vp∣on them that forget theePsal. 9.17, and are disobedient2 Thes. 7.8. vnto thee, and to that heauenly voyce ofHeb. 3.7.8. thine, whereby thou daily callest them (if they had eares to heare, or hearts to vnderstand:) let mee alwayes feare the second death, which is the death both of the body and soule, more then the first death, which is the end of this short and transitorie life: and yet let mee liue so, as I may not be in a slauish feare of eyther; not of the first death, because it
shall be no death vnto mee, but an end of my miserie, and wretched∣nesse, vnto which I am, and shall be continually subiect as long as I liue in this valley of teares, this place of mourning, as one in exile and banishment out of his owne Country; and a meanes of entrance into life and glory, euen of that glory which is endlesse and vnspeakeable: Not of the second death, because through the riches of thy grace and mercy, I am already passed from itIoh. 5.24 & 8.51. Rom. 8.1. Eph. 2.5.6.; that so howsoeuer it may shew it selfe vnto me in a dreadfull shape, yet it shall neuer haue power ouer me, being one of thy redeemed ones, to whom death1 Cor. 15.57. and Hell it selfe is subiect.
The blessednesse of the life to come, how much to be desired. THE life present how sweet doth it seeme vnto men? how much desired is it of the most? how loth are men to part vvith it? what will they not doe that they may preserue it? But the life to come, how little is it affected of the greater sort? how faintly desired? how willingly parted with for euery sinfull lust, euery fruitlesse vanitie, the de∣ceitfull pleasures and transitory profits and commodities of this fading and perishing vvorld! Oh the sottishnesse and bruitish∣nesse of men (the vvicked off∣spring of prophane EsauGen. 25.35 Heb. 12.16) that for a small portion of these tem∣porall things, sell away all their hopes vnto that eternall inheri∣tance,
those glorious possessions in that heauenly Canaan; and so that they may enioy the life present according vnto their owne de∣sires, altogether neglect the life to come, and shew themselues to be euery way regardlesse of it. How hath the world blinded them? How hath Sathan bewitched them? And who doth not euen wonder at them and at the strangenes of their folly and simplicity herein, or rather dotage and extreame madnesse? For what comparison is there be∣tweene this life and that which is to come? This, is an earthly life2 Cor. 5.1.2 1 Cor. 15.48.49, that a heauenly. This life, is fraile, momentarie, (we haue no certain∣tie, no assurance of itIames 4.14 one houre one minute:) that, euerlasting1 Pet. 1.4, and subiect to no change. This sinfullIob. 14.4. & 15.16, and full of much impu∣ritie and manifold pollutions: that, free from all kinde of con∣tagion
Ephe. 5.27 and impuritie whatsoeuer. This, painefullIob. 14.1 Mat. 6.34., and full of griefe, sorrowes, and much misery and wretchednesse; euery day brings his griefe, his burthen; griefe of bodie, of minde, from within vs, without vs, and on euery side of vs. Who is there that complaines not of it? That, not only void of all griefe, sorrow, anguish and miserieIsai. 25.8 (all teares being cleane wiped away, and the daies of mourning past and gone) but also abounding with all kinde of ioy, spirituall de∣light, heauenly solace, and end∣lesse and vnspeakeable blisse and happinesse. The night is gone, the Sunns risen, all darkenesse scat∣tered, and the former bitternesse swallowed vp with the sweetnesse of that heauenly Manna, where∣with the Saints are continually refreshed, enioying pleasuresPsal. 16.11 at the right hand of God for euermore.
Shall I set before thee more eui∣dently the brightnesse of that glory, and the full and absolute perfection of the blessednesse of that immor∣tall and neuer fading life of the Saints of God in that glorious kingdome prepared for them? Oh that we had eares to heare it, eyes to see it, mindes to vn∣derstand it, and hearts duely and rightly to consider of it. Doubt∣lesse, it would euen rauish our hearts and soules, and draw vs, as it were, out of our selues, and a∣boue our selues. It would raise vp our affections, and make vs farre more heauenly affected then we are, or vse to be; yea it would cause vs to grow wearie of this vvorld, and to aspire and long af∣ter that life of the Saints in glo∣rie; nay, euen to sighRom. 8.23 2 Cor. 5.2 4.8 and breath after it vncessantly with restlesse desires. For, vvhat is there in
this heauenly life, which may not euen wholly affect vs, and cause vs to sigh earnestly and continu∣ally after it?  First, the place in vvhich they that haue attained vnto it do liue, is most glorious and excellent; the Citie of the great God, the royall pallace of the glo∣rious king of heauen and earth, vvhere there are innumerableIoh. 14.2 mansions prepared for many thousands of elect men and An∣gels; yea, it is the glittering cham∣ber of presence where the king of glory and maiesty sits continual∣ly in his throne, accompanied and attended with the whole court of heauen. A paradise of pleasures hauing streames of water of life flowing in euery place of it, and trees of life, euer budding, euer blossoming in it (that earthly Pa∣radiseGen. 2., was but a shadow of it, and there was no meeter place
in earth to shadow it out vnto vs then that, where nothing was wanting that might be for the delight and refreshing of the in∣habitants thereof.) The streetes, gates, yea, the whole frame and and building thereof are nothing but gold, pearle and precious stones, shining and glittering in most glorious manner: Nay, so great is the glory and excellency thereof, that all the purest and finest gold (if it were that of O∣phir) the choisest pearle, and the most costly and precious stones in the world are nothing in com∣parison of it, scarce so much as a shew or a resemblance of it. For it pleaseth the Diuine spirit by speeches borrowed from things which are most glorious in the eyes of men, & of greatest esteeme in the world, to shadow out the glory of that place vnto vs, and to
teach vs thereby in this our frail∣tie, in some sort to conceiue of those excellencies which no man is able fully to conceiue or to ap∣prehend. The glory of that hea∣uenly Citie farre passeth and sur∣mounteth all such terrene and earthly things, though neuer so highly accounted of amongst men. And no marueile, for if the suburbs,Psal. 19.1 as it were, of that Citie be so specious and goodly to behold (as our eyes are daily witnesses) what then must the Ci∣tie it selfe needs be? If the worksIob. 37.14 of God which we see heere be∣low be so wonderfull and glorious (as who is there that knoweth any thing that doth not admire and and wonder at them?) what then shall we thinke of those that we see not2 Cor. 4.18, and which shall be re∣uealed onely vnto the Saints and Angels in the highest heauens,
in that heauenly mansion where the Lord dwellethPsal. 103 19 in maiestie and glory? what should I say? Glori∣rious things are spoken of thee, O thou Citie of GodPsal. 87.3. If the Psal∣mist might say that truly of that earthly Ierusalem, how much more may it be said of that hea∣uenly Ierusalem, vnto which the other (though a type and figure of it) was nothing comparable? Wonderfull and glorious things are spoken of it; and yet all that hath beene or can be spoken thereof, is not the one halfe of that glory and excellency which the Saints shall finde there, when they are once entred into it. For, as the Queene of Sheba said when she saw Solomans Court1 Kings 10.5.7; so, and much more shall they say when with their eyes they shall behold the Court of heauen, where a grea∣ter then Solomon (euen the great
God of the whole world) shall sit in his throne hauing thousands thousands ministring vnto himDan. 7.10, and ten thousand thousands of glo∣rious creatures, men and Angels waiting and attending vpon him. They shall acknowledge (and account themselues happy in the acknowledgment of it) that the report which they heard thereof, with their eares, whiles they liued heere on earth, as it were strangersHeb. 11.13 and a farre off, was inferiour vn∣to that which they now see with their eyes, and reioyce whiles they see it with ioy that cannot be vtte∣red. O how amiable are thy dwel∣ling places, O Lord of hostesPsal. 84.1? Thus did the Prophet admire at the glory of the Tabernacle of the Lord at Ierusalem. How much more may we in a holy admira∣tion and wonderment, speake the same concerning that glorious
and heauenly Pallace, vvhich is prepared for the Saints in the heauen of heauens? O how ami∣able, how excellent and glorious is that celestiall mansion, the king∣dome of glory, in the vvhich the Lord of glory dwelleth in the fulnesse of his glorie and maie∣stie. There is no night, no darke∣nesse in it, but the brightnesse and glory of the Lord doth shine con∣tinually most gloriously in it, yea, farre more brightly then the Sunne, vvhen it is in his grea∣test strength. Nay the glory and shining beauty thereof is so great, that the resplendent brightnesse thereof doth as farre excell the brightnesse of the Sunne and Moone, as they doe exceed a little candle at noone day. Our eyes (as now they are) vvere not able to behold one glimpse there∣ofExod. 40 34.35, but would be dazeled pre∣sently,
and ouercome with the shine and luster of it. We cannot see it and liue. We see how glo∣rious the outward CourtIob. 37.18 or pauement of it is, in vvhich those celestiall bodies, as so many bur∣ning lampesIob. 38.7 Psal. 148.3 doe shine forth most clearely with their glittering and radiant beames, and cause the diligent beholder to standIob. 137 14 as one amazed, vvondring at the skill and marueilous wisedome of the maker of so curious and glo∣rious a workemanship, so excel∣lently adorned and garnished in euery part, more then if it were all sprinckled with the most bright shining pearles or pre∣tious stones that the vvhole earth can affoord: how much more glorious then, (thinke you must the inward Court needs be? Besides, vvho is able to consider how large and spaci∣ous
that glorious mansion is? who can mete out the breadth, the length, or compasse of that hea∣uenly Citie? If one starre (as the learned doe in that Art af∣firme) bee many times greater then the whole earth, vvhat is the firmament, in vvhich there are so many starres, and some of them of greater magnitude? and if the firmament be so large, what (may we thinke) is the heauen of heauens, vvhich compasseth in all the other as a lesser circle? It pas∣seth mans vnderstanding, both for glory, and greatnesse. O how blessed and happie are they that shall be Citizens of such a King∣dome, that shall liue in such a glo∣rious place for euermore, euen in the presence chamber of the Lord of glory. Assuredly, this world is but a barren wilder∣nesse, a wearisome prison, yea, a
darke dungeon, in comparison of it. But to giue thee yet a further view of that heauenly life. As the place vvhere they shall liue is wonderfull glorious; so the com∣pany vvith whom they shall liue in that place, is no lesse glorious, yea, farre aboue it. It doth ex∣ceed it by many degrees. For what company shall they haue there? Euen the blessed societie of all the Saints, Patriarches, Pro∣phets, Apostles, Martyrs, A∣dam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaak, Iacob, Iob, Dauid, Daniel, &c.Heb. 11. & 12.22 Euen all those worthies and renowmed ones that haue beene from the beginning of the vvorld to this present, or shall be to the end thereof; the beholding of some one of vvhom is greatly desired of vs, and would wonder∣fully content vs. They shall bee
companions of Princes; yea, the least and meanest of their compa∣nie shall be greater then the grea∣test Prince in this world, (for they shall all be crowned KingsReue. 1.6 and triumphant Emperours, set vpon heauenly thronesEphe. 2.6 Reue. 2.26 27. & 3.21.) These are their familiars and companions; and with these, together with that innumerable multitude of the elect and chosen Angels, (those coelestiall and heauenly crea∣tures) shall they continually liue and conuerse, each ioying and de∣lighting in the company and so∣cietie of the other, as being par∣takers of the same glory; and truely louing and entirely affecting one another, more then euer Io∣nathan did Dauid (vvhose loue notwithstanding was wonderfull2 Sam. 1.26 hardly to be patterned.) Being knit among themselues by the band of one spirit into a holy communion,
they shall haue as it vvere one soule, willing the same things affecting the same things, and re, ioycing mutually and continually in him, who is the fountaine of all their ioy, glory, and happinesse. The ioy of one shall be the ioy of all, and the glory of one, the glory of all. Nay, (which is farre farre greater matter) and the thought vvhereof may euen rauish our soules) they shall enioy the sweet and heauenly company of their blessed Sauiour and RedeemerIoh. 12.26. & 17.24, Christ Iesus, the Prince of peaceIsa. 9.6. 1 Tim 6.15, the King of glory, yea, the glory of heauen and earth; the image of his FatherColoss. 1 15 Heb. 1.3. Iohn 1.9., in vvhom those things which are inuisible are seene; the brightnesse of the euerlasting light, the vndefiled mirrour of the maiesty of God; the desire of all na∣tionsHaggai. 2.8, whose name is Wonderfull, whose power vnspeakable; the be∣holding
of vvhom (euen whiles hee was heere on earth in the state of his frailty and humilitie) made good old Simeon to reioyce exceedinglyLuke 2.28, and vvould haue gladded the hearts of many Kings and ProphetsMath. 13 16.17 that were before him, who desired and longed af∣ter this, and would haue accoun∣ted themselues happy in the en∣ioying of it. They shall enioy his company, whom the Angels doe reuerence and adoreHeb. 1.6. Psal. 97.7., and the very sight and appearance of vvhom will be an exceeding re∣freshingAct. 3.19 vnto them, yea, cause their hearts to spring within them,Luke 1.41 as the babe did in Elizabeths wombe at the salutation of the blessed Virgin. Oh how shall their hearts be rauished with ioy, when they shall see the Lord of the fa∣mily, the heire of the whole world, the Prince of glory, clothed with
their nature,Luke 12.37. & 13.29 and sitting downe at the same table with them, and speaking most sweet and com∣fortable vvords vnto them. EateCan. 5.1, O friends; drinke, and make you merry, O welbeloued. They shall haue fellowship, fami∣liaritie & acquaintance with him, (as one brother vvith anotherMat. 12.49. Hebr. 2.11) to their vnspeakeable comfort, the very consideration vvhereof, makes their righteous soules now in the time of their absence2 Cor. 5.6. from him to crye out as Paul didPhil. 1.23., I desire to be dissolued and to be with Christ, for that is best of all. And vvith the Spouse in the Can∣ticles,Cant. 8.14. O my welbeloued, flee away, and be like vnto the Roe, or to the young Hart, vpon the Mountaines of spices: and vvith the Spirit and the Bride in the Reuelations,Reuel. 22 7.20. Come, come Lord Iesus, come quickly. Oh that wee may once see
thy face, and behold that brightnesse of thine, who art so wonderfull in thy Saints and redeemed ones. Here is their hope, their ioy, and their reioycing. And, vvith him they shall enioy the gratious and most comfortable presence of the blessed and glorious Spirit, yea, of the Father of SpiritsHeb. 12.9, euen the vvhole Trinitie, that great and glorious God, the splendor and brightnesse of vvhose Maiestie is so great, that the eye of no mortall creature1 Tim. 6 16 now, were able to be∣hold the same: Hence, vvhen Moses (not throughly vveigh∣ing his owne vveakenesse) be∣sought the Lord to see his glory, hee receiued this answere from the LordExod. 33.18.20., Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me and liue. But they then shall see his face, that is, the fulnesse of his glory, as farre as the nature of
man is able to comprehend the same (for neither man, nor any creature else can perfectly dis∣cerne his whole nature; for that is infinite, they finite and limited vvith certaine bonds which they cannot passe.) They shall see him, not as in a glasse1 Cor. 13.12., (as they doe in the time of this life here vpon earth) darkely, obscurely, and as it vvere a farre off; but euen as hee is1 Ioh. 3.2.: yea, they shall haue his name written vpon their foreheadsReuel. 3.12. & 22.44; they shall liue with him in that glorious mansion, hauing (as farre as their nature is capable) fellowship and commu∣nion vvith him, reioycing in his presence vvith ioy vnspeakeable and glorious; nay,Reuel. 3.20. Ioh. 14.23 dining and sup∣ping with him, in a manner, at that heauenly table, being continu∣ally fed with that pleasant Manna, the food of Angels; and refreshed
vvith those pure waters which flow vncessantly from the throne of God; wondering at the glory, the might, & Maiestie of their Crea∣tour; yea, wondering and admiring at their owne blessednesse, which is farre aboue that the heart of man1 Cor. 2 9. now is able to conceiue, or the tongue to expresse. Our vnder∣standings are too shallow to com∣prehend these things. It is a light which our dimme and weake eyes are not able to behold with∣out dazeling. All earthly things are but toyes and trifles, and dreames of imaginarie fancies, compared thereunto, yea, vaine vanitiesEccl. 1.1.. The Queene of Sheba1 Kin. 10 8 counted them happy that might stand euer in the presence of king Salomon: Oh then, how blessed and happie are they that stand continually in the presence of that glorious God, seeing and admi∣ring
his wisedome, his glory, and vnspeakeable Maiestie; yea, li∣uing, raigning, and triumphing with him in fulnesse of ioy and happinesse for euermore? who doth not wonder at their blessed∣nesse? If Peter was so rauished when hee saw Christ in his trans∣figuration on the Mount, vvith those two worthees of his, Moses and Elias attending vpon him, that he forgat his home, his wife, and familie, breaking forth into that speach, Master, it is good for vs to be heere;Mat. 17.4 Lets make this our mansion place, Let vs here builde vs Tents and Tabernacles to dwell in: How much more must all the Saints needs reioyce, yea be euen swallowed vp with ioy and admira∣tion, when they shall behold the diuine and glorious Maiestie of the Sonne of God; yea, of the whole Trinitie, the great God of Heauen
and Earth? not onely haue a glance or glimpse of his glory, but fully behold it, as much as the nature of man is able? when they shal enioy the presence of that glorious Maiestie; when they shall haue such heauenly compa∣nie and societie, euen the compa∣nie and societie of God himselfe (the Father of lightsIam. 1.17) of Christ Iesus their Sauiour, of the Holy Ghost their comforter, of all the Saints and Angels their fellow-brethrenReuel. 22 9., yea of the whole Court of Heauen, who together with them make vp one familyEphes. 3.15.? What a life is this? Who doth not admire at it? What a change is this from the estate wherein before they were? For whiles they continued here vpon earth as Pilgrims and StrangersHeb. 11.13. from their owne Countrie, they were constrained to liue amongst the
wicked of all sorts, Sathans imps, children of BeliallIudg. 19.22., who did continually vexe & molest themProu 6.12.14. 2 Pet. 2.8. vvith their prophane and vn∣godly courses, being (as the Ca∣nanites vvere to the Israelites) prickes in their sides, and thornes in their eyes, making their hearts to ake within them, and causing them to complaine with the holy man of GodPsa. 120.5. Wo is me that I dwel in Meshec, and that I haue my ha∣bitation among the tents of Kedar: Or with that other who was led by the same spiritIer. 9.2.20 Oh that I had in the Wildernesse a cottage of way∣faring men, that I might leaue this people, this naughtie and crooked generationPhi. 2.15, and be gone farre off from them. Oh, that I might once leaue this drie & barren wildernes, wherein there bee so many cruell and sauage beasts on euery side, LionsNahu. 2.11. Psal. 22.13 2 Tim. 4.17., Tygers, WoluesMat. 10.16., FoxesLuke 13.32.,
Pro. 17.12▪ Beares, &c. which are ready to prey vpon mee and to deuoure me. Thus it was with them whiles they liued in this wretched and sinnefull world1 Ioh. 5.19. Mat. 13.41 1 Cor. 5.10., where there is a mixture of all sorts. But now it is farre otherwise with them, in steade of these, they are receiued into the company and fellowship of all the Saints and Angels, yea of God himselfePsal. 16.11., in whose presence is fulnesse of ioy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for euer∣more. I might lead thee further, to a more ful & distinct view of the ma∣ner of that blessed and glorious life which the Saints together in the presence of God shall enioy in that place of glory & happines, into which they are to be recei∣ued; yea, I might euen wilder both my selfe and thee, whiles I wan∣der with thee in the varietie and
plentie of matter which here doth offer it selfe vnto me, and put me to a stand knowing better where to beginne then to end. To keepe within some limits. The life which they shall there leade is marueilous glorious in regard of the exceeding glorie which shal be put both vpon their bodies and vpon their soules. They shall bee glorified in both. First, their bodies (to let passe the fruitlesse and vncertaine spe∣culations vvhich some haue broched with more curiositie of speech then euidence of truth) their bodies no doubt shall bee very glorious, farre aboue that our hearts now are able to con∣ceiue; yea, so glorious, that if now whiles wee are in the flesh, wee should see the glorie of one of them (euen the meanest of them as it shall then be) vve could not
be able to looke vpon it, but wee would be amazed at the behold∣ing thereof, as the Israelites were at the shine vvhich was vpon Moses face, when hee came from the Mount, after that God had talked vvith himExod. 34 29.30.. For, they shall shine as the brightnesse of the Firmament,Dan. 12.3. as the Starres, yea as the Sunne it selfeMat. 13.43., when it shineth in his greatest strength, and dazeleth the eyes of all the beholders; Nay, as the Sunne of righteousnesseMal. 4.2, CHRIST IESVS himselfe. VVee know how glorious his body was in his transfiguration vpon the mountMat. 17.2, when he gaue those three Disciples but a glimpse of that resplendent brightnesse wherewith his bodie doth now shine most gloriously. Such as was then, yea, such as is now the glory of his body in the highest
heauens, such then also shal theirs be. For their bodies shall be made conformable vnto hisPhil. 3.21. Now we are the sonnes of God (saith that beloued Disciple of Christ.) Now we1 Iohn 3.2. are the sonnes of God, (euen all the faithfull) but yet it doth not appeare what wee shall be: But wee know that when hee shall appeare, we shall be like him. They shall be made like vnto him in glory, though not equall; They shall haue the same kinde of glory put vpon them, though not the same degree, and measure. As their bodies were some-wayes comformable vnto his (in his hu∣militie and abasement) in regard of their sufferings (as the Apo∣stle speakes of himselfeGal. 6.17, I beare in my body the markes of the Lord Iesus;) and in regard of their ma∣nifold weaknesses and infirmities, whereunto they are now conti∣nually
subiect: so then they shall be made conformable vnto his glo∣rious body, being beautified with the same glory, and shining with the same brightnesse. Such as is the Head, such shall be the mem∣bers. As the Sunne giueth light vn∣to all the other Lights of heauen: so shall CHRIST vnto all the Saints, by communicating his owne glory vnto them.  Or, as the Ayre being inlightned by the light of the Sunne, is so trans∣formed into the brightnes there∣of, that it seemes not so much to be lightened, as to be light it selfe: so the bodies of the Saints being inlightned with the beames of the glory of GOD, and his Sonne Christ Iesus, which shall shine vnto themIoh. 16.22 and in them, shall be euen transformed into the glorious Image of God, shi∣ning
clearely with the brightnesse of that glory which is in the Son of God himselfe. When the glory of the Lord reflected vpon Moses vvhiles hee was with him certaine dayes vpon the Mount, it made his face to shine so brightly (as it was formerly said) that the peo∣ple could not behold him, but were afraid to come neare him for the glory of hisExod. 34.33. 2 Cor. 3.7.13 countenance, so that hee was faine to put a co∣uering vpon his face, and to vaile himselfe, because otherwise they were not able to talke with him, and to heare that Message which hee had vnto them from the Lord: Oh then how glorious must not onely their faces but their whole bodies be, who shall not be certaine dayes or yeares, but continually in the presence of God in his heauenly Mountaine,
vvhere hee shall cause all the beames of that vnspeakeable brightnesse and glory of his to be euer reflecting, euer shining vp∣on them! Adams body, in his integritie, was glorious, and had a kinde of Maiestie vpon it, so that all the Creatures stood in aweGen. 2.19 20. Psal. 8.6.7. and reuerence of his pre∣sence: much more shall theirs, when liuing in that coelestiall Pa∣radise, they shall be made like not that earthly, but that heauenly Adam, CHRIST IESVS, our blessed Lord and Sauiour, whose Image they shall then1 Cor. 15 48.49. beare. The Sunne (that glorious crea∣ture) vvould not so much dazle our eyes if wee should looke full vpon it in the greatest brightnes thereof, as the bodies of euery one; yea, of the least of the Saints would, if wee should now behold them in the glory where∣with
then they shall be inuested in a wonderfull manner. What should I say more? The tongue of man is not able to expresse the greatnesse of their glory. In briefe then (to inlarge this no further:) whiles the bodies of the wicked (like loathsome carkasses,) shall be vile, contemp∣tible, inglorious, full of shame and confusion, yea, an abhorring to all fleshIsa. 66.24; theirs shall shine in that brightnesse of glory which is vn∣speakeable, and rather with com∣fort to be expected, then with words sufficiently expressed. They onely who shall be made parta∣kers of it shall know what it is. And as their bodies shall be made thus glorious, so, much more their soules. Nay, the glory hereof shall as much exceede the other, as the Soule it selfe doth excell the body (which they that
are of any vnderstanding vvill grant to be exceeding much.) Great, yea, marueilous great shall the glory thereof be. They shall be changed and renued, and of a farre more excellent condition, then they now are; changed, I say, not in regard of their essence, (for that shall remaine the same, without any difference, any al∣teration; but in regard of their qualities, which shall be refined and much altered from that they were before; of a new stampe and impression as it were; inrich∣ed with new endowments, new or∣naments; yea, the glory of them shall be wonderfull, farre aboue that wee are able to thinke or conceiue of them. More parti∣cularly: The Image of GodEph. 4.24 Col. 3.10. and of Christ, which now through sinne is much defaced in them, shall then shine forth in them, in
most glorious manner. It is be∣gunne in them here2 Cor. 3.18., it shall be perfected there. Their Ʋnderstandings shall bee inlightned to know what∣soeuer may make for their hap∣pinesse. Whereas now they are ouer-shadowed with much darke∣nesse, then they shall shine most clearely, most brightly. They shall vnderstand perfectly, the whole Mystery of1 Tim. 3.16. Godlinesse. They shall know God; yea, see him as he is, euen face to1 Cor. 13.12 face, as much as the nature of a fi∣nite and humane creature is able to comprehend the glory of so infinite and so glorious a Maiestie. There shall be no darknesse of error or ignorance in them; for they shall liue alwayes in the light; yea, where hee that is the Father of lightsIam. 1.17, shall con∣tinually cast forth his shine vp∣on
them, illuminating and in∣lightning their vnderstandings with the bright beames of his Spirit, and making them parta∣kers of the rich treasuries of all heauenly vvisedome, and true spirituall knowledge and vnderstanding. Great was the knowledge which Adam had in Paradise before his fall, when as at the first veiw hee was able to giue vnto eueryGen. 2.20 creature (both Fowles of the Ayre, and Beasts of the Field,) a name ac∣cording vnto their nature; but it was not so great as that which the Saints shall haue in Heauen. I list not here to feede the curi∣ous Reader with nice speculations of things not reuealedDeut. 29 29.; as whe∣ther the Saints in glory shall know one another, the father, the sonne; the mother, the daugh∣ter; one neighbour another, or
one friend the other, &c. So much onely I will say (hauing ground for it out of the Scriptures) that no manner of knowledge shall bee wanting vnto them, which may make for the increase of their happines; neyther shall the know∣ledge of this be wanting vnto them if it will make them the more happy. But to proceede. Their Wils also shall be per∣fectly sanctified, so that they shall will onely that which is good, that which God willeth, and not possibly be once moued or inclined vnto that which is euill, that which GOD willeth not. They shall not onely haue a will not to sinne, but also an impossi∣bilitie of willing that which is sin∣full; otherwise then it was with Adam in his greatest perfe∣ction. Their Affections shall bee
rightly ordered and tempered; yea, in an excellent frame and harmony, without any vnpleasing discord. They shall onely affect that, loue that, ioy and delight in that which is pleasing and ac∣ceptable vnto God, and making most for his glory; and so much the more ioy and delight in it, as they shall know it to be more pleasing and delightsome vnto him. Yea, they shall haue that measure of holinesse infused into them, both into their Wils and Affections, and all the faculties of their soules, that they shall be holy (according vnto the ca∣pablenesse of their nature) euen as God himselfe is holy, pure as hee is pure, righteous as hee is righteous. For, then is the time, (and not before as some foolish Heretiques haue fondly drea∣med) when the Church (that
glorious Spouse of Christ) and euery member thereof shall be without spot or wrinckleEph. 5.27, with∣out staine or blemish, as it be∣commeth the vndefiled Spouse of that heauenly Bridegroome, the Lambes wifeReu. 19.7. Their soules shall be so purified, so purged with those cleane waters which flow out of the Sanctuarie, that they shall not onely be free from all sinne; but (which is more) not so much as once subiect to the least sinne, nor any fit subiect for sinne to worke vpon. They shall be pure and Angelicall. In briefe, they shall shine most gloriously, gli∣stering with all heauenly graces of the diuine Spirit; for they shall be made partakers of the diuine nature2 Pet. 1.4, in more full manner; not, that the diuine essence shall be infused into them, but that those diuine and heauenly quali∣ties
of wisedome, glory, righteous∣nesse, holinesse, puritie, &c. (where∣in the Image of God consisteth) shall bee communicated vnto them in plentifull and abundant manner, so that if their bodies (as the Truth it selfe hath said) shall shine as the Sunne, then their Soules shall shine no doubt farre more gloriously. O how excellent shall the brightnesse thereof be? who is able to conceiue it? Bles∣sed are they that shall be parta∣kers of it. Thus the Saints shall be glorious in their bodies, glori∣ous in their soules; yea, both in body and in soule they shall bee clothed as it vvere, vvith long whiteReu. 3.4.5. & 7.13. robes of glory and dig∣nitie, hauing Palmes in their hands, in signe of victory and triumph ouer Sinne, Sathan, Death, Hell, and Damnation; and Crownes on their heads in signe
of royaltie; sitting also with Christ Iesus in his throneReu. 3.21, euen as he sitteth with his Father in his throne. They shall liue like kings; yea, raigne and triumph like Em∣perours, hauing conquered the World1 Ioh. 5.4.5., and the Prince of the WorldIohn 12.31., Sathan, and his infernall host1 Cor. 15.55.57. Rom. 16.20 Keu. 20.13. There shall be glory with∣out measure in the presence of that glorious God; yea, all the glory of the most glorious things in the world is nothing vnto it. All the pompe, royaltie, and mag∣nificence of all the most Prince∣ly Potentates, and mightie Mo∣narchs in the whole earth, with all their glorious & glittering shew (though euery one of them were as glorious, yea, more glorious then Salomon was when he was at the height of his glory) were nothing vnto that glory, but euen as dust; no more to be compa∣red
to it then brasse to the finest Siluer, or Copper to the purest Gold. To be briefe, for words cannot expresse these things to the full. Paul, when (being rapt into the third heauens) hee had a view thereof, said that hee saw things2 Cor. 12.4. that cannot be vttered; where that great Apostle is silent, who can speake? To be briefe, therefore, so glorious shall their estate then be, that in an holy ad∣miration they shall euen wonder at it; for indeede marueilous and wonderfull it shall be farre aboue that which they expected whiles they lay crawling like Wormes vpon this lower earth, and had their habitation in these baser cottages, these houses of clay; yea, as Luther (that hammer of Anti∣christ) said of Abel, so it may be said, and shall be verified of euery one of them. They shall
be in better estate and condition then if they had the possession of a thousand worlds, with all the riches and glory thereof. And hence to leade thee on yet fur∣ther with mee (for I am as one in a Maze, I know not where to get out, such varietie offereth it selfe on euery hand in this di∣uine Meditation, for the minde that is heauenly affected to exer∣cise it selfe in) Hence, I say, from the fruition and apprehension of the greatnesse of that glory and happinesse of theirs, shall arise, and spring forth vnto them and in them, abundance of peace and ioy. They shall be filled and re∣plenished vvith true peace and vvith spirituall and heauenly ioy, euen that ioy vvhich shall rauish their hearts and soules. They shall liue a heauenly and an Angelicall life, singing and re∣ioycing,
hauing that new song con∣tinually in their mouthes, which they with the rest of that celestiall quire, euen all those blessed An∣gels and glorious spirits shal con∣tinually sound forth. Haleluiah, praise and glory, and wisedome, and thankes, and honour, and power, and might be vnto our God for e∣uermore, Amen. They shall haue fulnesse of ioy in the presence of God, and be euen satisfied with those pleasures of his right hand for e∣uermorePsal. 16.11; yea, all pleasures and delights which this world can afford are but vaine shadowes, smoake, trifles for children and babes; yea, no pleasures, no de∣lights, in comparison of those sweet pleasures & delights where∣with the Saints shall be refreshed in that glorious Kingdome. They shall feed daily vpon that MannaReuel. 2.17 of diuine and heauenly
consolation, and all spirituall com∣forts which the heart of man can desire, nay more then the heart of man can thinke of. They shall drinke downe the cup of saluation and gladnesse,Isai. 12.3. and draw waters of life out of the riuer of his plea∣sures, vvhich shall flow forth a∣bundantly vnto them. Then they shall indeed tastTim. 2.3 Psa. 31.19 how sweet and how gracious the Lord is vnto his chosen and beloued ones: Their hearts shall reioyce and glory in him. And no mar∣ueile that they shall haue such peace and ioy in the presence of God. For if they finde now such inward spiritual ioy in their soules and consciences, in the place of their exile and banishment, yea, in their prison, as it were, (euen this valley of teares) when God letteth some bright beame of his gracious countenance shine vpon
them through the thicke clouds of many temptations and afflicti∣ons wherewith they are continu∣ally exercised; when by his word and spirit he giueth them but a droppe of that diuine and heauenly comfort (as they alone know what a refreshing this ioy is vnto them who haue truly tasted of itPro. 14.10, o∣thers are strangers to it) how great then must their ioy needs bee, when (being taken vp into hea∣uen, the place of their glory, those celestiall mansions) God shall cause the light of his countenance to shine fully vpon them? when he shall reueale himselfe perfectly vn∣to them; when he, (who is the God of all true comfort and conso∣lation) shall powre out himselfe vn∣to them, and open wide, as it were, all the fountaines of his rich grace and mercy towardes them in Christ Iesus, and cause them
to tast of the plenteousnesse of his housePsal. 36.1, and to drinke downe a∣bundantly the vvaters of his di∣uine and heauenly comforts? If the poore distressed Saints of God, whiles they indure many miseries and afflictions in the world, and of the world, yet notwithstanding, haue that peacePhil. 4.7 which passeth all vnderstanding, (a continual feastPro. 15.51) and reioyce with that ioy which is vnspeakeable, and glorious (as the Scripture testifieth1 Pet. 1.8) euen whiles they are absent from Christ, not seeing him with bodily sight,2 Cor. 5 7 but only belieuing in him, & looking vpon him with the eyes of faith in the promises of the Gospell; how great then and wonderfull shall their ioy be, vvhen being freed from all these miseries whereunto they are now subiect, they shall be present with Christ their Sauiour, whom so long before they expected and
desired, see him with their eyes1 Ioh. 3.2 Iob. 19.25 26, yea, liue and conuerse with him in fa∣miliar manner, and be made par∣takers with him of the same glo∣ryIoh. 17.1 22.24 into vvhich he is exalted, that in his time appointed he may draw them vp vnto himIoh. 14.3, & make their hearts to reioyce in him, and in his saluation? If their ioy where∣with they now reioyce, (euen in this valley of misery, this place of mourning) be vnspeakeable and glorious & passing all vnderstan∣ding (as the word of truth teach∣eth, and the Saints by comfortable feeling and experience doe well know, and thankefully acknowledge) what then (I beseech you con∣sider of it) what shall it be in that place of triumph, that Paradise of pleasures, that glorious and cele∣stiall kingdome, where they shall keepe a continuall Sabbath, and be∣ing clothed & arrayed with the rich
robes of holinesse, righteousnesse & glory, and shining as Starres, yea, as the Sun in the brightnesse therof, shall haue their hearts filled with reioycing, and their mouthes with himnes & ioyfull Haleluiahs, euen heauenly ditties of praise & thanks∣giuing vnto him that sitteth on the throne. O that we had harts to conceiue aright of these things. And to all these adde yet more∣ouer the time which they shal liue in so blessed an estate in that glo∣rious place. If this blessednesse and glorie of theirs were mutable and changeable (as all things here below are) it were not so great, and so much to be admired as it is; (for nothing is perfectly happy that is not permanent and euerlasting:) But it is otherwise; it admits no change, no alteration. All things which any can enioy in this life,Eccle. 1. 1 Cor. 7.31 1 Ioh. 2.17 are transitory and fading, riches,
pleasures, strength, health, beauty, honour, or whatsoeuer else in this world is most made account of, and seemeth to haue the greatest per∣fection in itPsal 119.96: but that happinesse and felicitie of the Saints in light shall neuer fade. It's an inheri∣tance immortall1 Pet. 1.4 2 Cor. 4.18, vndefiled and euer continuing in the heauens. The measure of it shall bee in a manner infinite; the continu∣ance of it infinite altogether. The time thereof shall be without time, for time then shall be no more; there shall be neyther daies, mo∣neths, nor yeares as now there are. There shall be no end of it, no de∣caying of it, no diminishing or a∣bating of it: But it shall continue as long as the heauens, yea, as long as God himself shall indure, with∣out any ceasing or intermission, any change or alteration, or the least shadow of change of the ex∣cellency
of that estate vvherein they shal at the first be. As the hell of the wicked, so the heauen of the godly shall be perpetuall. O blessed and happy estate where there shall be nothing but peace, ioy, glory, happinesse, and felicity, and that not for a time, but for euer, euen as long as eternity it selfe lasteth. O life, to be desired farre aboue this corruptible, this vaine and transitorie life, which the most doe so much make of, yea, pre∣ferre it before the other, loath to leaue this that they may attaine vnto that. O the brutishnesse and sottishnesse of the men of this vvorld, that are so strangely and so fondly affected, as to neg∣lect so great saluation, so glori∣ous a life, for the enioying of the vaine and sinnefull pleasures and profits of this life, which last but for a season. How hath the De∣uill
bewitched them? How doe their owne wicked and corrupt hearts blinde and deceiue them that they should euen preferre a dunghill of earth as it were, before the glory of that heauenly pallace? or, that they should bee vnwilling to forgoe the earth and to forsake their pleasing or gainefull trade of wickednesse, that they may enioy Heauen and the happinesse of Gods Saints and chosen ones? Oh these things are hid from their eyes1 Cor. 2.9. Luke 19.42., they perceiue no more vvhat the glo∣rious life of the Saints is, then a bruit beast discernes of the life of a man; or, if they know them in some measure, & yet are regard∣lesse to seeke after them, how great is their folly and madnesse? who vvould not wonder at them? yea, vvho is not amazed to thinke of them? Assuredly, such
as haue wisedome and vnderstan∣ding to discerne of these thing aright, and faith to beleeue them as they ought, vvill not be kept backe from them with a thousand worlds,2 Cor. 4.18. (if there were so many, & they were offered vnto them) seeing all glory, pleasures, profits and commodities of this world are nothing comparable thereunto. But, whence is it that if the estate of the life to come be so excellent and so much to be desired, that men (euen such as looke to haue a share therein as vvell as others) are so little affected with it, so loth and vnwilling to leaue this poore and wretched life of theirs to attaine vnto it? Blush and be ashamed of this, you that haue any assurance indeed of that glorious and euerlasting life, that you should once be so much o∣uertaken as to be vnwilling to de∣part
out of this world, & to go vnto the other, which is so muchEccles. 7.3. Phil. 1.23. better, to make exchange of Brasse for fine Siluer, of Copper and baser Mettals for the purest and most refined gold; in a word, of a mise∣rable, and sinnefull, and vncer∣taine life for that most blessed, incorruptible and immortall life, reserued for the Saints in the highest heauens? O the maruei∣lous infidelitie of ours, if it be thus with vs! What should I say? A wonderfull thing vndoubtedly it is, that any one that hath any vn∣derstanding to know these things any measure of Faith to beleeue them, should be so carnall, so earthly, so sensuall1 Cor. 15 19, as to regard this wretched life here vpon earth, more then that blessed life in those heauenly and glorious man∣sions. Whom should not the con∣sideration of it alienate & estrange
from this vvorld, withdraw their affections from it, and weane al∣together from the sinnefull and inordinate loue of it, and cause them as it were, with Eagles wings to soare aloft in the oft and serious contemplation of that blessed and glorious estate, and in the earnest and ardent desire to be made per∣taker of it, being taken from Earth to Heauen, from vanitie and miserie to that endlesse and vnspeakeable felicitie and happi∣nesse? O blessed LORD, forgiue mee my dulnesse in this regard, strengthen my faith, and hope, and affect my heart, I humbly pray thee, more and more daily with an vnfained desire and long∣ing after that celestiall and hea∣uenly life. Let me not be glewed to this world, nor to any thing in this world, which is but vanitie,
dreames, and fancies; but hauing mine eyes opened to see what the riches of the glorious inheritance of thy Saints is, let me sigh & breath after the same vncessantly, as thy seruants haue doneRom. 8.23. 2 Cor. 5.24.8. Phil. 1.23., and long continually for the time when with these eyes of mine I shall see the felicitie of thy chosen, and re∣ioyce vvith the ioy of thy people, in that blessed and glorious king∣dome, vvhich thou hast promised vnto mee, and wilt in due time giue vnto mee for thy mercies sake in thy welbeloued, in whom it hath pleased thee to imbrace me before all worlds. Let mee reioyce alwayes in all my afflicti∣ons wherewith thou shalt exer∣cise me, vnder the hope of that glo∣ryRom. 5.2. & 8.18. Iam. 1.2. Heb. 10.37. with which shortly thou wilt crowne me for euer; and esteeme the best things of this earth, as dung in comparison of it, and all
the glory of this world but as wi∣thering grasse. Let me be willing alwayes,Isa. 40.6.7. 1 Pet. 1.24 at thy cal, to depart hence, hauing before layd a sure founda∣tion, and indeuoured to keepe faith, and a good conscience in all things; yea, reioyce vnfainedly when thou shalt send thy messen∣gers (those heauenly Ministers) to take me into their armes,2 Tim. 4 7.8. and to conuey mee into those celestiall mansions, there to liue and raigne with thee, and all thine elect and chosen ones, in that glory which shall haue no end; and that onely through the merits and media∣tion of thy Sonne, my blessed Lord and Sauiour, to whom with thee, and the Spirit of life and grace, be all praise and glory, both now and euermore. Amen. FINIS.
DEVT. 30.19. I haue set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore chuse life. Soli Deo gloria. Faults escaped. Page. 11. line 13. of read in. p. 16. l. 22. goodly r. godly. p. 17. l. 9. holy r. holily. p. 32. l. 15. what r. most. p. 85. l. 9. desert r. defect. p. 122. l. 22. sinnes r. sinners. p. 150. l. 7. after neither, adde the. p. 176. l. him. r. them. The rest are of lesser moment.
