4298 22830399 25769
A wonder in Kent: Of the admirable stomacke of one Nicholas Wood, dwelling at Harrisom in the Coun∣ty of Kent. The like of him was neuer heard, As in this Ditty is declar'd. To the tune of, The maunding Souldier. ALL you that valiant fellwes be, I pray giue eare a while to me, I tell you of a Champion bold, That fights not for the fame of gold, but for good belly cheare, as well it doth appeare, the like wherof you nere did heare. none may with him compare, as I will here declare, the like liues not I dare to sweare. In Kent this fellow now doth liue, At Harrisom as report doth giue, His Name is called Nicholas Wood, As I for truth haue vnderstood, well knowne by men of fame, his worth and nome, that well can iustifie the same, some Gentlemen and Knights, to sfie delights, haue sent for Wood to see his sleights. e is not like these puling ones, an houre picking bones, A Shéepe or Calfe thats worth a Marke, On them héele brauely fall to worke, or if a Hogge it be, all's ne quoth he, in one houres space you  shall sée, his stomacke is so strong, nothing will doe him wrong, the Deuill  sure his guts among. What talke I of a Shéepe or Calfe, Aas these exploits are not halfe, A Hogs a thing that much will eate, Fish, Flesh, Fowles, Frogges, or such like meat, yet Wood is of such power, that he within an houre a good fat Hogge he did deuoure, his like was neuer none as plainely may be shone, not one like him was euer known. After that he had eat this Hogge, I doe not meane to lye nor cogge, Thrée pecks of Dmsons he did eat, For to digest his Swinish meat, Another time beside, he being tride: seuen dozen of Rabbets he , likewise he tooke in hand, to eat a Fleah of Browne as soone as from the Bore twas drawne, At Sir William Sidleyes house he eat, As men of credit doe repeat, As much as thorowly would suffice, Full thirty men, Oh gurmudize, but then vnto the fire, he did retire, and for some grease be did desire, thinking his belly he would breake immediately vnlesse he had speedy remedy, A quarter of a good fat , And thrée score Egges he ouercme, And rightene parts of blacke pudding, And a raw Ducke all but Bill and Wing, and after he had din'd, as I doe find, he longed for Cherries yt brauely shined then thréescore pound they brought, which he could  to nought, a thing vnpossible me thought, His mighty paunch doth harbour all, Sheepe, Hoggs or Calues,  stall, A Pakett is likewise for Deare, And Cnneyes gray, or siluer haire a  tis besides whereas he hides all kind of fruits that him besides Cheese, Buttermilke and Whey, he bringeth in that way, thus he brings all quite to decay,
The second part. To the same tune. THe Norfolke Dumpling he ore came, The Deuonshire white-pot he made ame The bag-pudding of Glocester The blackepudding of Wostershire, the Shrop-shire pan-pudding, and such gutting, and Somersetshire white-pudding, or any other Shire, their puddings héele not feare none may wt Nicholas Wood compare: The Clothiers that in Kent doe dwell, In Sussex of this man did tel, To some o'th' chiefest yeomen there, Who greatly mused when they did heare, and ofred presently that they would lay, a hundred pound of good money, that he could not deuoure, a whle calfe in an houre, they thought it was not in his power, wager thus betwixt them laid, The Sussex men grew sore afraid, od of their match they did repent, Desiring that they might recant, the kentish men did say, that they should pay, ten pounds or stand the match and day, then so they did agrée, and spent it merrily, but Wood mist of their company. A Gentleman by chance did come, Where friends of his was in the roome And they were all at diner set. But he with them eate not a bit, when the reckoning was paid, the tapster said that twelue pence more most be defraid, by him that lst come in, which had not at diner ben Whereat the Gentleman in spleene. Did pay the same and said no more, But after plagued them therefore, An other time he did come there, And brought Wood with him to a faire then to the Inne he went, whereas he spent, a shilling once by ill consent and telling Wood his mind, being thus , to call much meat & leaue Wood behind Come hostes quickly let be brought As much good meat as may be thought To satisfie a dozen men, The hastes quickly sent it in come sit downe Wood quoth he, and Ile goe sée, for some more of our company, but ere hee came agen, the tayster he came in thinking the deuill there had ben. The tapster did his Mistris call, And said the man had eat by all, Then into th' roome she came with spéed, And found the same was true indeed, then she began to sweare and pull and teare with Wood for money for his fare and he said he was willing, to pay her downe a shilling he tted her for former dealing. Two Citizens from London went, To see this Wood was their intent, And being come to Harrisom, They sent for him into the roome, for all the victuals they did call and pay, that was within the house that day, and wished goodman Wood, to fall  his food I marry quoth he that is good. These Citizens found him to be, So range the like they eu'r did see, Desiring him that he would go, To London, he resolued so, then at the last he said, he was a fraid the same to'th King should be beraid; and so he hang'd might be, therefore this thought had he, tis best staying in Kent for me. His porrige boule is full two perks, He is not of the weakest sexe, Good Ale graines some times he doth eate, For want of other sort of meat, I doe not tell no lye, those that will forther try, a booke of him likewise may buy, where much more is declared, as I haue read and heard none like to him may be compared. R. C. FINIS. Printed at London for H. G.
