5429.5 33143325 28382
Roaring Dick of Douer: OR,The Iouiall good fellow of Kent, That ne'r is willing to giue ouer, Till all his money be spent. To the tune of Fuddle, roare and swagger. HEeres a health to all good fellowes, that intend with me to ioyne, At the Tauerne, or the Ale-house, and will freely spend their quoyne. But for such as hate strong liquor, are not for my company, O it makes my wits the quicker, when I taste it thorowly. I can fuddle, roare and swagger, sing and dance in seuerall sort, And giue six peuce to a begger, in all this there's little hurt. Whilst some churle thats worth a million, will giue nought in charity, But to himselfe he proues a villaine: iudge who's better he or I. There's many men get store of treasure, yet they liue like very slaues: In this world they haue no pleasure, the more they haue, the more they . Hang such greedy-minded misers, that will ne'r contented be, I haue heard by good aduisers, that conent liues merrily. Wherefore should we liue in sorrow, since we may imbrace true ioye To day aliue, and dead to morrow, as most commonly they'll say. He is a foole that pins his carkais▪ if he haue to srue his turne, And perhaps sometimes in darkenesse, grafted is his head with horne. Hée's no right true-hearted fellow, that in company will drinke, Till such time as he is mellow, and not fréely spend his chinke. Let such sharking base companions. be kickt out of company▪ For they be but beastly hang ons; and will call, but we must pay. Come my Lads, be blythe and merry, sing and drinke and trace your ground, And let's haue a cup of Sherry; that (me think) oes kindly downe. Lets not spare whilst we haue money, for o pay for what e call, We needs must spae when we haue not any, that's the greatest plague of all. The second part, To the same tune. HOnest Hugh, Tom, Will and Harry, they will ioyne their money round, Kate, Nan, Besse and bouncing Mary, will no shrinke, but still are sound. They are Lads and honest Lasses, that to each others are kinde, They'l sing & roare, breake pots and glasses, when their heads are tipt with wine. Some mens wiues will brawle & wrangle, if their husbands spend a pot, But my selfe I will intangle, with a Lasse to pay my shot. I doe hate these base conditions of a deuillish scolding Queane, Iealous heads haue bad suspition, you may thinke o   meane. Women  let me intrea you, that you will not brawle  scold, For it makes your husbands beat you, some men will not be contrould, Therefore rest your selues contented: best I hold it so to be: In your minds be not tormented: but take part as well as he. Me thinkes it is a worldly pleasure, for to haue a wife proue kind, Tis a ioy beyond all measure▪ y  the same doe finde. If I had a scolding creature, I should neuer merry be, I many times should beat her, with her I could not agree. Tapster, come and take thy reckoning, tell me kly what's to pay, Yet Peeces in my pockets rattling, bidde me longer hr to stay, Come bring a pipe of good Tobacco, let it be the very best, Thats the thing that here we take so, then come drinke with vs thy guests. Hang vp sorrow, I can borrow money for to buy two pots, Who can say to liue to morrow? then let's neuer sit like sots. When I haue spent away my money, I will goe and worke for more, And I haue a kinde swéet hony that sometimes will pay my score. He that hath aboundant treasure, hence shall nothing beare away: Then let's take some part of pleasure, drinke and sing and fréely pay. Whilst our time and money lasteth, let's not proue Curmudgeon boores, Time indéed away it hasteth: come let's goe and pay our scores, Thus for to conclude my Ditty, héeres a health to all true blades, Remembring, Kate, Nell, Sis, and Betty, and all other kinde true Maides: I loue Meg, Nan, Alice, and Mary, Iane, and Ione, and my fine Doll, With Winifred, and my swéet Sara. Thus, kinde hearts, I leaue you all. FINIS. R. C. Printed at London for H. C.
