675A S110619 99846130 11076
¶Imprynted at London in Paules church yearde, at the sygne of the may∣dens head by Tho∣mas Petyt. M.D.XLj.
¶The Antido∣tharius, in the whiche thou mayst learne howe thou shalte make many, and dyuers noble playsters salues, oyntement, powders, hawmes, oyfes, and woūde drynkes, the whiche be very necessary, and behouefull, vtyle, and profytable, for euery Surgyan, therin to be experte, and redy at all tymes of nede. printer's device of Robert Wyer, featuring John the Evangelist (McKerrow 70)
¶Gracia dei, lyke as mayster Peter de Argelata, set in the boke of the flesshe makynge medycynes. TAke whyte Rosyn, whyte wax Arimoniacum of eche .xii. oun∣ces, Turpentyne .vi. ounces, Galbanum, Olibanum, Ma∣stycke, clere good wyne, of eche an ounce, Aristologia rotūda halfe an oūce. And weake of this that is nede to weake in wyne: therin is sodden Betonia, Veibena, Consolida maior, & minor, Sentoria, Pim∣pinella, Saynt Iohn̄s herbe, or Ipericon, Storkes bylle, or herba Rubea in latyn, of eche an handefull, & all this percelles ye shall set in the wyne tyl the wyne be almost consu¦med, & after make it with womans mylke, as it belōgeth, this playster causeth ye flesshe to growe and healeth, and it is cōmen for all woūdes and fractures of the bones. And the surgyans that nowe be prayseth it moche. ¶To make a grene wounded playster. THe good grene wounded playster that the newe surgyans occupy, yt heleth al fresshe woundes without tentes, and it is a
mundificatluum, a conglutinatiuum, and a consolidatiuū. And this playster is of many and dyuers maners of soūdrye maysters mai¦de, some take moche Rosyn, and lytel waxe. Some moche waxe, and lytell Rosyn, and some take waxe & Rosyn alyke moche, and some take no Rosyn at all. Therfore ye shall know as ye wyl that this same playster shal more heale than clense, lyke as it is nedesy in the wounde of the heed, & in a symple woun∣de, there as no substaunce is loste. If that ye take more waxe in weyght so moche ye lesser take of Rosyn in weyght, & let them twane euery tyme in his weyght, & as ye wyll that it clense more takynge to her the matter, lyke as a depe stytched wounde whiche maketh moche matter, than shall you take more Ro∣syn than waxe, as ye haue sayde. If ye wyll that the playster shal make flesshe to growe, and shall serue to all woundes, whiche som∣what hath loste of his substaunce, than take Rosyn, and waxe of eche alyke moche, or yf ye wyl that it make the skynne, and that the wounde shuld close, than take waxe alone and no Rosyn, and as in this playster is mo∣che Rosyn, and lytel waxe, then it is called a mundificatiuum, and attractiuum, that is
clensynge, and drawynge out the matter, yf there be therin moche waxe and lyter Rosyn, than it is called congfutinatiuum, that is to gyther leuynge and closynge of the woūde. And yf there be therin wax and Rosyn lyke moche: than it is called incarnatiuum that is flesshe makynge in the wounde. Or yf there be therin waxe & no Rosyn, than it is called consolidatiuum, that is helynge and skynne makynge. And this playster is made thus. ¶Take resine de pino, that is whyte rosyn, Mayden waxe, of eche two poūde, and that rosyn which is clere as turpentyn, Dere suet of eche .xii. ounces, grekes pytche .viii. oun∣ces, Sarcocolle small & great of eche .iii. oun∣ces, Turpentyne talfe a pounde, Mastyke, whyte Frankēsence of eche .iiii. oūces, Dra∣gantum, Gōmi Arabici, Galbanum, Ar∣moniacum of eche one oūce and a half. Sto∣racis calamite .ii. ounces, Storacie liquide. iiii. ounces. And take the sap of these herbes that ye can get, wynter grene small & great or Pirola magoret minor, Sanicle, or Dia∣rensta in latyn, Syndawe, Veronica maior et minor, or herba Saracenica, herba Sol∣sequii, Cōsolida minor, Moderworte, or Ar¦themesia in latyn, Planeayne small & great,
Betonia, Agremonia, Farraria, Matrisil∣ua, Balderion, Iarrowe, or Cerifolium in latyn, Sage or Saluia in latyn, Vervena, Mousere, waltrote or Ambora, of these her∣bes take sap .ix. pounde and no lesse, but ra∣ther more, bycause to eche pounde of the sub∣staūce of this playster belongeth ful .iii. poū∣de sappes. That sappe, whyte rosyn, waxe, Hartes suet, and Rosyn, and Colofonia, ye shall sethe in a kettyll ouer the fyre, without flame or smoke tyl two partes therof be con∣sumed, than do therin Turpentyn. But the gōmes as Dragantum, Gommi Arabici, Galbanū, Armoniacū. This shall be fyrste steped one nyght in vynegre of Roses, and as it is soden a walme or .iii. than shall ye the other gōmes make in powder, & do it therin and let it sethe agayne .ii. or .iii. walmes, and at the last do therin Storax liquida, & Cala∣mita, yf ye wyll haue better smellyng, than do therto Bemesym or Barotus .iii. ounces. And yf ye wyll haue it very well smellynge than do therto .ii. or .iii. oūces of oyle of spik, than strayne it through a cloth, & let it stāde a nyght, the nexte daye cut this salue in .iiii. peces, and than take it out of the ketyll, and make therof rolles with fresshe oyle of Ro∣ses,
yf ye wyl haue this playster fayre grene than do therto ye sap of Nyghtshawe, or So¦latri in latyn, and sap of Eldre, and Celido∣nia of eche .iii. pounde therwith let the salue seth agayne. but nat longe, the longer it doth seth the paler it waxeth. But these herbes be nat so holsome as the other be, neuerthelesse some maysters doth this sap therin, and they knowe nat what vertue and power they ha∣ue. The nyght shawe coleth and softeth, so doth the Elder also, and Celidonia clensyth, therfore as ye put in this salue moch Rosyn, so may ye the better this same sap do therto, and .ii. or .iii. ounces of Myrra, than clense it the more. Neuer can come a good consolida∣tiuum without a mundificatiuum, for that mundificatiuum is the key of the incarnati∣uum and consolidatiuum. ¶For to make an Apostolicum salue, af∣ter the Antidothario Nicholai. TAke Litargirium .xii. ounces, Grekes pytche, red waxe, of eche .iiii. ounces, Oken mystyndyn, with waxe of eche .ii. oū∣ces, Armoniacum, Magnete stone, whiche is called the Lodestone of eche an ounce and a halfe, Sarcocolle, Squama eris, Dyptan and Aristologia longa, Spaynysshe grene,
Appoponatum of eche .iii. dragmas, whyte Frankensence, Mastycke of eche .ii. ounces, Tutpentyne, Galbanum, Bdelium, Myr∣ra, brent Coper of eche .iii. dragma, that lita∣girium shal ye stampe in powder, and therto do .viii. ounces of oyle Olyue, and let it seth togyther on the fyre yt it be thycke as waxe, and that shall ye drope on a stone in a profe. Than do therto the Turpentyne, the whyte and red wax as yt is melted. Than do therin the Galbanum, Appoponatum, Bdellium: Sarcocolle weked one nyght in vynegre so¦den & strayned, & than put it therin togyther and than take it from the fyre and do therin the gōmes. And as it be warme, than shal ye do therin all the other parcelles, the one after the other made in powder, and styre it tyll it be colde, and than may ye make it in rolles. ¶Of the Exicrocium playster wry∣teth Nicolaus in his Antido∣thario, and this is nedefull to euery good surgyan. TAke Saffran, shyp Pytche strayned, Grekes pytch, new wax of eche .viii. ounces, Turpentyne, Galbanū, Armonia∣cū, Myrre, Mastyke, whyte Frankensence, of eche .ii. oūces & .iii. dragmes. This playster
make thus, melte the waxe, shyp Pytche, Grekes pytche, Turpentyne. And melte it togyther, when that is molten do therin gal¦banū, Armoniacum, one nyght steped in vy∣negre, sodden and strayned and do it therin. Then shall ye seth it agayne tyll the Vyne∣gre be consumed, and styre it well togyther, and than do therin the other parcelles made in powder, and styre it tyll it begyn to waxe colde, than cast it vpon a colde stone, and ye shall anoynte the stone fyrste with oyle of Bay leues (or olio Lauri in latyn) and than worke the Saffran therin, and whan ye ha∣ue so done, than may ye make rolles of it. ¶Make this Diaquison playster after the Antidothario Mesue. TAke Litargerium .xxiiii. ounces, oyle of blewe lylles, oyle of camomyll, oyle of Dell, or Anetum in latyn of eche .xiii. ounces: Lynsedes sleme, Fenegrekes sle¦me, hye Malow rotes sleme, sleme of Fyxe, sap of Yrios, sap of Mersybelen, the grece so¦den of the woll that hangeth bytwene the fegg{is} of the shepe, byrd syme (or viscus quer∣ci in latyn) of eche .xxv. ounces, Turpētyne vi. ounces, whyte Rosyn, yelowe waxe of eche .iiii. ounces, take Litargirium and make
it in powder, and dresse it with ye oyle sleme and grese, that it be thycke as waxe as it is dropped vpon a stone, than do therto that waxe, rosyn, turpentyne, and as it is mol∣ten togyther, than styre it togyther tyll it be colde, and therof make rolles with the oyle of whyte Lyllyes. ¶To make a sere cloth playster good for all membres that is out of the ioynt, and the consumynge mēbres, or whiche is gre∣uyd with colde moystnes: that consu∣myth, and bryngeth the membre agayne in his ryght power. TAke waxe .vi. oūces: rosyn .iii. ounces, mastyke .ii. ounces, armoniacū, galba∣num, whyte Frankensence of eche an ounce and a halfe, oyle of Bybergeylle (or olinin Castorii in latyn, oyle of Camomyll of eche an ounce, Fenegreke meele, meele of worm∣wode, meele of Combarte, Comyn, meele of Camomylle flowers, make all this in small powder of eche a dragma, vynegre .v. or .vi. oilc{is} meli ye rosyn, wax, & the oyle togyther, than do therin the galbanū, & armoniacū ste∣ped in vynegre & strayne it, and at the last do to ye other percelles, yt is made in small pow∣der, & styre it well togyther tyll it be colde.
¶To make a good Iewes playster to fresshe woundes. TAke whyte wax .iiii. pounde, Rasino de Pino, that is whyte Rosyn, Tur∣pentyne of eche .ii. poūde, oyle of Roses one poūde, mastyke, whyte frankensence, myrra of eche .ii. ounces, fresshe leues of Roses .iiii. ounces, red wyne one mesure of thre poūde, of al these herbes take that ye may get, wyn¦ter grene, or Pirola in latyn, Syndowe, Diapēsia, waltmaster, or Matrisisua in la∣tyn, herba serasenica, herba tunici, herba sol∣sequii, betonia, consolida minor, furnus ter∣re, Plantayne great and small, storkes byll, or herba Rubea in latyn, Valeriana, of eche a lyke moche, tyll ye haue ynough, and good wyne, tyl ye haue ynough, stāpe the herbes, and threst therout the sap, & put ye wyne on the herbes yt they maye become well moysty with the wyne, and let it well sethe with the aforesayd wyne. Than strayne it through a cloth, than do the sap & the wyne in a kettyll therin do the waxe, Turpentyne, Rosyn, & oyle, than shall you sethe the Roses with the red wyne vntyll it gyue a blewe flame, than strayne it throughe a cloth, and do it also in the kettel, and let it seth altogyther .v. or .vi.
houres longe, than take ii from the fyre, and let it be colde, & the next day melt it agayne, and do therin the Mastyke, Frankencence, & Myrre, made all in powder, and do it in the kettyll, and let it sethe togyther a walme, or twayne, & than take it of from the fyre, and lette it be colde, than ye haue a ryght Iewes playster yt all woūdes heleth without tentes. ¶Emplastrum Attractiuum, that is mundificatiuum, that is to say, a drawyng plaster, ye draweth to hym the matter, and all vnclennes of the impo∣stumacyon, vlceracy∣on, and swerynge & of all vnclene woundes. TAke whyte Rosyn a pounde, mayden waxe halfe a poūde, hartes suet .viii. ounces, turpentyne .iiii. ounces, Sarcocolle .ii. ounces, mastyke, whyte Frankencence of eche an ounce, Myrra, Aloe, Succrotini of eche halfe an ounce, melte that waxe, rosyn, and the Hartes suet togyther, and strayne it throughe a clothe, than do therto the turpen∣tyoe, and the other parcelles in powder and oyle of roses .ii. oūces, styre this togyther tyll
it be colde, wyll ye haue this red than do ther in sinopre in powder, yf ye wyl haue it fayre yelowe, than do therin a dragma of saffron in powder, yf ye wyll haue it grene, so sethe sap of ye herbes therwith, therof is sayd afore in the grene playster. ¶A playster that draweth out arowe hedes, habergoynes, maylles, and all that of yron is in the mannes body. TAke apostolicū Nicolai aforesaid two oūce, Magnete stone of Orient, that hath his power halfe an ounce, Hares grese, Hempsede oyle, of eche halfe an oūce, whyts Diptum a dragma melte that grese, and the oyle softly togyther, & do the other parcelles therin, that is made in powder, and styrre it togyther tyll it be colde. ¶A playster to take out thornes, splynt{is}, glas, bones, and other lyke thynges, that is in mannes body. TAke Diaquilon plaister out of this an¦tidothario .iii. ounces, Magnete stone halfe an ounce, the rote of Polipodium, the roote of whyte Dyptan, the rote of Rethe, called in latyn Arūdo, of eche a dragma and an halfe, Hares grese an oūce and an halfe,
oyle of Hempsede an ounce, herof make a playster as is aforesayde. ¶A soft playster yt clenseth all foule woū¦des yt is olde, they yt hath roten flesshe or maketh moche matter, & is called mūdi¦ficatinū de apiū, this hath occupyed wilhelmus, Lancfrācus, Henri∣cus de monte villa, Guido & all surgyans of Paris. TAke sap of A piū .ii. ounces Barly, or wheete meele .iii. ounces, that shall ye sethe with a softe fyre, tyl it be thycke lyke a soft playster, & as ye do therto sap of worm∣wode, it wyll let no fystyll come in the woū∣de, and the woūde aboute frete not hymselfe lyke the kancker, or yf the woūde haue any hotenes, than shall ye do therto sap of Plan∣tayne, or sap of Cresula, and ye do therto fa¦cinam, Fini greci, or Ferinam Cupinorum, that cutteth more stronger with dryinge, as Theodoriens and Brunus sayeth. ¶The maner howe ye shall make salues, and oynte∣mentes, very nedefull to all surgyans.
AVreum vnguentum after the Antidothario Mesue, that all fresshe woundes fylleth with flesshe, and healeth. ¶Take yelowe waxe .xii. oū∣ces, good oyle of olyue a poūde and an half, turpentyne .iiii. oūces, grekes pytche, whyte rosyn of eche .v. oūces, whyte Frankēcence, mastycke of eche .ii. oūces, saffran a dragma, melte the waxe and Oyle with the Grekes pytche togyther, & afterwarde do therin tur∣pentyne, and sette it then from the fyre, and make the other parselles in powder, and do this therin at the halfe colynge, and styre it than well tyll it be colde. ¶Auicenna sayth vnguentum apostolo∣cū clenseth a fystule, maketh it ryght good, and clenseth all corrupt woū∣des of the rotten flesshe without payne, & maketh that the fles∣she may growe. TAke whyte Rosyn, whyte waxe of eche an oūce, appoponati, spaynysshe grene of eche halfe an ounce, Armoniaci, mastyk, myrte, Galbani, of eche an ounce, Aristologie longa, whyte Frankencence of eche an ounce and an halfe, Litargirium,
Bdellii .ix. dragmes. Oyle Olyue in the so∣mer a pounde and a half, and in the wynter ii. poūde: stepe this in vynegre .iii. dayes lon∣ge, as is the galbanum, armoniacum, Bdel∣lium, than shall you melt & sethe it, than do therin the Rosyn & wax. And as it is melted than do therto the oyle & Turpētyne: & than do therin the other {pro}celles made in powder. ¶To make a whyte salue after the Antidothario Nicolai. TAke whyte Leade .iiii. ounces, Litur∣giriū .ii. ounces, whyte Frankencence iii. dragmes, mastyke .ii. dragmes, eche parcelles make in powder by hym selfe, and medle the whyte Leed with a lytel oyle, and do therto Litargiriū, therafter mastyke and Frankencence, and do styre it with a pestell oft tymes, and at eche tyme do therin a lytest rose water, whan it begynneth to thicke put more oyle therto, & to eche tyme a lytell rose water, and do it so longe that it be nother to thycke nor to thynne. ¶To make this whyte salue sayd Rasis, & called her vnguentū albū conferatū. TAke of oyle Olyue a pounde and a halfe, stampe whyte Leade a pounde, whyte waye halfe a pounde, Camphere .iii.
dragmes .iii. yolkes of egges. This shall ye stampe togyther in a morter, and in the leest do therin Camphere in powder. ¶Basilicon magnū Mesue set in his An∣tidothario, & is a great helper to the woū∣des there hete is in, and aboue all in the woundes of the synewes, and doth clense, and cause to growe flesshe. ANd yf you wyll make this salue after Mesue. Take whyte Rosyn, whyte waxe, Tallow of an oxe, blacke pyt∣che, byrde lyme, Myrre, of eche .iii. oūce, oyle Olyue that there be ynoughe therof, make a salue as therto belongeth. ¶This salue Dialthea make after the Antidothario Nicolai. TAke hye Malowe rotes two pounde, Lynsede, Fenygreke, of eche a poūde, Squelle halfe a pounde, ye shall was∣she it wel, then shal ye take the rotes of Lyn¦sede, Fenygreke, Squelle, stampe it and lay it in .iiii. pounde of water .iii. dayes longe, & on the .iiii. daye set it on the fyre, & let it sethe tyll it begynne to waxe thycke, and do it by lytell and lytell in a lynnen bagge, and as ye wyll wrynge it out, & than do therto a lytell hote water, that the slyme well maye come
out, and of the slyme take .iii. poūde. And do therto, oyle olyue .iiii. pounde, than let it seth tyll the slyme consumeth, than do therin wa∣xe a pounde, and as that is melted do therin Turpentyne, Galbanum, Gumi edere, of eche .iiii ounces. In the leest do therin Gre∣stes pytche, or Colofonie in latyn, Rosyn, of eche a pounde. And whan it waxeth colde, than do it lyghtly out. ¶Vnguentum defensiuū, & repercussiuum, occupyeth cōmenly all maysters to all woū∣des & bones, and impostumacions it restray∣neth & defendeth that no swerynge nor swel¦lynge, nor impostume cōmeth to woun∣des or fracturs of ye bones, as the mēbre be anoynted therwith roūde aboute. TAke Rose oyle .iiii. ounces, Bolus at menus .ii. ounces. Tarra sigillata, vy¦negre, of eche an oūce, Camfere a drag¦me, Nyghtshawe, or Solatrum in latyn, Howslyke, of eche an handefull and stampe it and threst well out the sappe, and myngle it togyther colde lyke a whyte salue. ¶Vnguentū egipciacū, lerneth Galenus, Rasis Albucasis, & is sore occupyed now in this tyme of the surgyans, it clenseth softly & taketh away all vnclēnes.
TAke Hōny a poūde, Vynegre halfe a pounde, Spanysshe grene .ii. ounces, Alume an ounce. This shall you seth all togyther on the fyre tyll it be reed. And this salue taketh thre maners of coloures in his sethynge, yf it is soden but a lytell, it se∣meth grene, is it soden well it semeth reed, is it soden to moche than it semeth blacke. ¶Vnguentum fuscum doth flesshe to growe, & clenseth and heleth. ALso take oyle Olyue a pounde, & .iiii. oūces waxe .viii. oūces, Grekes pyt∣che, Shyp pytche, whyte Rosyn of eche .iiii. ounces, Mastyke, Galbanum, whyte Fran¦kencence Turpentyne, Myrra, of eche .ii. oū¦ces, Appoponatum, Armoniacum, of eche an ounce, melt the Oyle and the waxe in a pāne. And then put therin the Shyp pytche and the Grekes pytche, and whan it is mol¦ten strayne it throughe a cloth, and stepe the Gūmes in vynegre and soften them so, and strayne it throughe a cloth, and put it therin and at the last put therin the other gūmes in powder, and the Turpentyne, and styrre it togyther tyll it be colde. ¶Now a dayes the Barbours maketh con¦trary Vnguentum Popule on Nicolai, and
otherwyse then it shuld be, for somtyme they put butter, somtyme herbes that heleth, and they lay the salue with lynt in the wounde, and that is contrary vnto the powder of the Populer salue, for ye nature of them is for to cole, and to take the payne awaye, therfore it ought not to be made none otherwyse than is here∣after folowynge. TAke Populer buddes a poūde and an halfe, Hogges grece .iiii. pounde, and stampe them togyther, and let it stande tyll ye may haue these herbes herafter folowyn∣ge. Folia Papaueris nigri, Bramble leues of the fyrste buddyng, Dolerote leues, or fo∣lia de Vua versa, Bilsem leues, or folia Ius∣quiani, Nyghtshawe leues, or folia Sola∣tri, folia de Satirion, Muerpepper leues, or Crassula in latyn, Letuse leues, Vyolette fe∣ues, Houseleke, great Burre leues, or Lapa∣tium in latyn, Grounswel leues, of eche .vi. ounces. And stampe these herbes togyther with Hogges grece, and with the buddes of Populen, and let it stande the space of .viii. dayes, and than put therto wyne .iii. poūde. Than seth it in a kettell tyl the wyne be sod∣den away, & than strayne it through a cloth.
¶For to make a salue that causeth in all complections flesshe to growe in fresshe woundes. TAke whyte frākēcence, mastyke, aloe paticū, Grekes pytche, Aristologia adusta, yreos, sarcocolle: of eche alyke moche and therof make a salue with oyle & wax. ¶A salue that causeth flesshe to growe in the woundes of yonge persones. ANd yf ye wyll make this same salue, Take Turpentyne which is not was∣shed .ii. oūces, Rose hōny a dragma, the yolke of an egge, oyle Olyue, & waxe, and loke that there he stuffe ynoughe, and than ye shall make therof a salue. ¶A salue that clenseth the woundes of yonge chyldren, and causeth the flesshe to growe. TAke whyte Turpentyne, whiche is not wasshed .iiii. oūces. The yolke of an egge, and a lytell Barlye meele, and make therof a salue. ¶A salue that clenseth and causeth the flesshe to growe in drye complections. YF ye wyll make this salue, taste shyp pytche well wasshed in good lye .vi.
oūces, reed hōny .ii. ounces, spanysshe grene halfe a dragma, The yolke of an egge, bar∣lye meele ynoughe, and make therof a salue. ¶An other salue that causeth the flesshe to growe in all ma∣ner of fresshe woundres. TAke Turpentyne .iiii. ounces, Hōny halfe an oūce, powder of the barke of whyte Frankēcence a dragma, Saffran the thyrde parte of a dragma, & take ynoughe of oyle of roses & waxe, & make therof a salue. ¶A salue which clenseth the matter, and causeth flesshe to growe. FOr to make this salue: take Turpen∣tyne, hōny of Roses strayned, of eche iiii. ounce. Myrre, Sarcocolle, of eche iii. dragmes, Barly mele an oūce. The yolke of an egge, and halfe a dragma of Saffran. And medle them togyther: and sette it on the fyre and styre it well, and when yt it is luke warme, put therto the yolke of an egge. ¶A salue that causeth the wounde to gyue matter. FOr to make this salue, take Turpen∣tyne .iii. ounces, Hartes grece, or the mary of an harte .ii. oūces, oyle of Ro∣ses an oūce, whyte frākencēce half an oūce.
¶A salue that causeth matter to come in fresshe woundes shortly after it is layde therin. YF ye wyl make this take Turpentyn iiii. ounces, oyle of Roses, and waxe, of eche .ii. ounces. Melte these togyther, and as ye wyll occupy it, make it a lytell warme and lay it with lynt vpon the wounde, and it wyll soone gyue matter. ¶An other salue for a fresshe wounde that maketh matter. TO make this salue take Hartes grece, Turpentyne, of eche .iiii. ounces, oyle of Roses, whyte Frankencence, Mastycke, of eche an ounce. ¶To make a salue for a membre yt hath ben out of the ioynte, or that hath ben wounded, & after the helynge the ioynte can not be bowed. LAnfrancus hath taken this salue out of the boke of Rasis, but he hath amen¦ded it. And he toke olde swynes grece .vi. oūces, Duckes grece, Goose grece, Hen∣nes grece, of eche .ii. ounces, olde oyle Olyue viii. oūces, fenygreke mele, fynsede mele, of eche .ii. oūces, bdellii, oppoponati, mastycke, Frankencence of eche an ounce. The gum∣mes
ye shall wete in wyne, and afterwarde ye shall medle it with oyle & grece. And put therto a lytell waxe and Turpentyne, and than put therin the other harde gūmes made in powder, & styre it togyther tyll it be colde ¶Hereafter fo∣loweth the maner to make pow∣ders necessary for surgyans. A Reed powder that dryeth sore and maketh that none euyll flesshe growe in the wounde. ¶Take the mother of Perle, Burnet, Pompolix, Litargi∣riū, Bolus armenus, Terra sigillata, Dra∣gons blode, Erugo eris of eche an oūce, Cā∣fere a dragma. And stampe theym togyther, and make a fayre powder. ¶For to make a reed powder for all woundes, and fystules clensyn∣ge from euyll flesshe, good for woūdes of the heed. TAke Grekes pytche .iii. ounces, walte rotes, or Ambora in latyn, Ematicis, Mumie, Dragons blode, of eche an ounce,
Mastyk, whyte Frankencence of eche halfe an oūce. And make therof a powder, and ye maye occupye this powder without harme, thoughe the brayne lye bare, this powder ye shall strawe vpon lynte depte in wyne, and laye that therupon. ¶And yf you wyll make a reed powder to stoppe blode, and in the wounde maketh flesshe to growe. TAke dragōs blode, white frākencēce, A loe paticū, sarco colle of eche an oūce preos half an oūce, & make therof a powder. ¶A softe powder whiche taketh out of the wounde, the superfluyte of euyll flesshe, as Canfran∣cus sayeth. ANd yf ye wys make the same powder. Take Hermadacteli, Aristologia ro∣tunda, of eche an ounce, Spanysshe grene halfe an ounce, and make therof a powder. ¶A reed powder which is profytable to the seme of the wounde, and holdeth the lyppes fast togyther and stoppeth the blode, and hea¦leth the wounde (as Albucasis and Lanfrā∣cus writteth) but for ye vnflecked lyme. Guy∣do taketh so moche Bosus armenus, And Haly abbas taketh so moche Sandali. And
I take so moche lyme of egge shelles that is wasshed and dryed agayne. TAke whyte Frankencence .ii. ounces, Dragons blode, and vnslecked lyme, of eche an ounce (and Guydo sayeth) Take for the lyme Bosus arinenne an oūce And Haly abbas sayeth, take Sandasy an ounce. And after my lernynge take an oūce of the lyme of egge shelles, and therof make a powder. ¶Wilhelmus de Saliceth maketh ano∣ther powder to lay on the same that is very good, and yt lyketh me well. ANd yf you wyll make the same pow∣der so: take Dragons blode, Dragagā¦tum, Gūmi arabici, of eche an ounce, And therof make a powder. ¶A proued powder, for stoppyng of blo∣de that the Lombardes surgyans occu∣pyeth, & this powder stoppeth the blode, and heleth also. FOr to make the same powder take Dra¦gone blode, Bolus armenus, Terre si¦gillate, of eche an ounce, Psidie, Pomegar∣nade flowers, Accacia ipoquiscidos, Cipres¦se nottes of eche an oūce, Numye, mastyke, Frankencēce with the barke of eche .ii. drag¦mes,
Mānes blode brent an oūce, watt{is} here brent .iii. dragmes & make therof a powder ¶For to make a powder, whiche stoppeth blode. TAke Cathapladis, Egge shells yt the Chekyns be come out of or mosse gro¦wyng vpon deed mēnes hedes, or gra¦ues in ye churche yarde, smal brēnīg Nettyls of eche alyke moch dryed, & made in pouder ¶A powder that dryeth, heleth, and ma∣keth skyn, & restrayneth the matter. FOr to make this powder, take Aloe paticum, Sarcocolle, of eche .ii. oūces Dragons blode, the barke of Fran∣kencence, rounde holle rotes, or Aristologia rotunda in latyn, Casmey preparati, yee of our lady of eche halfe an ounce, Pomegar¦nade flowres, Balaustie, Psidii, Tutie pre¦parate, Erugo eris, Cipresse nottes, of eche a dragma, Lynen cloth burned, halfe a drag¦ma, & make all these togyther in a powder. ¶Hereafter fo∣loweth the maner for to make Oyles, whiche be nedefull to the Surgyans.
OLium Camomille is nedefull vnto the Surgyan, for it resosueth the matter, and also it tasteth away the payne. ¶And for to make the same oyle, take Ca∣mamell flowers in the moneth of Iune a poūde, oyle Olyue strayned .iii. poūde. And put theym togyther in a glasse, & set it in the Sōne .xiiii. dayes, than strayne it, and put therin agayne a poūde of fresshe Camamell flowers, and set it agayne in the Sōne .xl. of ye dismol dayes & than strayne it agayne. ¶Oleum benedictum, that is the best Oyle to warme the colde mēbres, wherin the ma∣ry is become colde within the bone, and this oyle stoppeth the glytterynge water and he∣teth fresshe woūdes, the fistules, the cankers and dryeth the rennynge sores, & thus with great dyfygence, and good vnderstandynge ye must make this oyle. TAke oyle Olyue a pounde, Turpen∣tyne, oyle Laure of eche halfe a poun∣de, Synamon .iii. ounces, Clowes .ii. ounces, Euforbii, Galbani, Baye leues, gōmi edere, armoniaci, appoponati of eche an ounce, Laudani .viii. oūces, whyte fran∣kencence, Castorie, Spicinardi, Lignum a soes, of eche halfe an oūce. Make all this in
powder, and melte the other, and put therto fresshe tyle stones stamped in powder bren∣nynge hote a pounde, dystyle it per alembi∣cum, and so it wyll gyue or yelde .iii. maner of lycoures. The fyrste it gyueth water, the seconde tyme it gyueth oyle, and the thyrde tyme it gyueth lycoure, lyke a bawme, and kepe eche of them by hymselfe. ¶The moste best bawme artyfy∣cyal to serue to all fresshe woū∣des shall be made thus. TAke Lignum aloes .ii. ounces, Oppoponatū, Refini de pino, Bdellii, Galbani, Armonia∣ci, Masticis, Sarcocolle, Gō∣mi, Elempi, Olibani, Myrte, Bensium, Olium lauri, Olium benedictū, Laudani of eche .iii. ounces, Carpobalsami, Xilobalsami, appobalsami, in his place may be taken Olium balsami, of eche an ounce, Sanguinis draconis halfe an ounce, Casto¦rii, Spicinardi, Galgāti, Cubebe, Maces, Sinamomi, Cardemumel, Grane paradisi Corticis cyrci, of eche a dragma, Olu turpē¦tini, as moche in wayght as of all the other aforesayde, & dystyll it peralembicum. This
bawme heleth fresshe woūdes, and stoppeth shortely the glytterynge water in the ioyn∣tes, yf it be well made. ¶An other very good bawme, whiche serueth for all maner of fres∣she woundes. TO make this bawme, take Olibant, Armoniaci, Storacis calimite, Sto∣tacis liquide, of eche .iiii. ounces, Masticis, Colosonie, Dragaganti, Gommiarabici, Eōmibdellii, Gōmi elempi, of eche .ii. oun∣ces, Myrre, Euforbii, of eche halfe an oūce, Eommi edere, Serapini, Gōmi ficuum, Oppoponati, Bensium which is Gōmi ce∣dri, Visci querci, Gumi, & not the tre, San∣guinis draconis, Aloepatici, Mumie, Xilo∣balsami, Carpobalsami, Boracis, Verticis, of eche an ounce, laudani mūdati .iii. oūces. Olii rosarum .ii. pounde, Olii laurini, Tur¦pentini rubii, of eche a poūde, Olii masticis oyle of Camamyll, of eche halfe a pounde, And of the foresayd bawme, Ieneper oyle, Bramble oyle, oyle of vyolett{is}, of eche .viii. ounces, The soft gōmes wette in vynegee. And the other make theym in powder, than shall you seth this all togyther in Balneum marie, & as you se that the gōmes wyll syt
on the grounde of the glasse, than it is soden ynoughe, and yf you wyll haue the naturall colour of the bawme, ye shal put therin hal∣fe an ounce of Saffran of oryent stamped, for that causeth ye flesshe to growe. Also yf ye wyll haue it seme fayre & grene, than put therin spanysshe grenl .iii. ounces grounden small. And at the laste put therin the Tur∣pentyne, and oleum Turpentini. ¶Oyle of Castory the whiche is moche profytable and nedefull for a surgyan. TAke oyle Osyne .vii. oūces, Castory, iii. oūces, ye shal put all these togyther in a potte and seth it in Balneum marie .iii. houres longe, & than kepe it well in a glasse. ¶Oyle of Lylyes is also necessarye for the Surgyan. ANd yf ye wyll make ye oyle of lylyes. Take oyle Olyue .v. pounde, whyte Lyly leues a pounde, Rose leues halfe a poū¦de, Mastyke .iiii. ounces, Saffran .ii. oūces. And the Mastycke muste be made in pow∣der put them all togyther in a glasse, and set it in the sōne the space of .ix. dayes, and on the .x. day ye shall sethe it in Balneū marie,
and than strayne it, or els take oyle Olyue .xii. ounces, whyte Lylye leues .iiii. ounces, and make it as is aforesayde. ¶Olyum masticis must be made thus. TAke Mastyke .vi. oūces. Oleum sisa¦mini .xviii. ounces. And ye shall seth them in Balneum marie so longe tyll the thyrde parte be consumed. Or els make it thus, take oyle of Roses .xxiiii. ounces, Mastyke .vi. ounces well smellynge halfe a pounde, and seth them in Balneum marie tyll the wyne be consumed. ¶Oleum Nenufarie. ¶This oyle is to the Surgyans moste pre¦fytable, for it coleth the persones, & it must be made in lykewyse, as the oyle of Camo∣myll is. And in the stede of Camamyll, take whyte see flowres, whiche herbe hath brode leues swymmynge vpon the water, and it is called flores Nenufaris in latyn. ¶Oyle of Roses without whiche oyle no surgyan maye be, and it must be made in this maner as here∣after foloweth. TAke the sap of dust, or Origani in la∣tyn, & water that Roses be soden in,
of eche a poūde, oleum sisamini wasshed, or take oyle Olyue the grenest that ye can get .iii. poūde. Leues of Roses a poūde, and put them together in a glasse, & set it in the sōne the space of .xiiii. dayes, than shall ye seth it in Balneum marie tyll the sap and the wa∣ter be consumed, and than afterwarde stray∣ne it, and put therin agayne as moch water of Roses and sap as is before rehersed, and sette it agayne in the sōne other .xiiii. dayes, and than seth it agayne in Balneum marie as is before sayde, than strayne it and sette it in the sōne, agayne, and let it stande there the space of .xl. dayes. ¶Oyle of elder, or oyle of Vygelet, or any other oyles made of flowree, they must be made thus, as herhafter foloweth. TAke the flowers, or the herbes a poun¦de, oyle olyue .iii. pounde. And put it in a glasse, and set it in the Sōne the space of .xl. dayes, than ye shall seth it in Balne∣um marie, and than strayne it and threst it out, and the oyle of Elder shal stande in the sōne but .iii. deyes, or els it wyll be corrupte.
¶Hereafter fo∣loweth the maner for to make a drynke for all woundes, and it is nedefull for a Surgyan. A Drynke for all woundes and as a {per}sone is stryken through the body, whiche Drynke hel∣peth hym inwardly without powder or other thyng, neuer theles it is good to lay on the woūde a grene wounded playster, for it clenseth the woūde and this drynke shall be made thus. TAke yue leues or Edere arboria grow¦ynge on an oken tree .iiii. oūces, wyn∣ter grene small and great or Pirola in tatyn, Sanycle or Diapensia in latyn, syn∣dawe, herba Fortis, or Veronica, of eche .ii. ounces, herba Solsequiian ounce, chope all these herbes smal togyther and put them in a pewter pot, and put therto .iiii. pounde and an halfe of the best wyne, & a pounde and an halfe of water, & ye shall fethe them in Bal∣neū marie .iiii. houres longe without takyn∣ge
of the lyd of the pot, than on the morowe after put therto .viii. oūces of Suger. If the wounde be in the heade, than put therto Be∣ton ye .ii. ounces, Sage an ounce, Lafendell halfe an ounce. And yf the wounde be in the breste, than put therto Lycores .ii. oūces. Po∣lipodium an ounce, ysope halfe an oūce, and yf the pacyent feble sore, than put therto bu∣glosse floures, borage floures of eche an oū∣ce. Roses halfe an ounce, than yf the pacyent haue great here put therto Vyolettes .ii. oun∣ces. Flores nenufaris halfe an ounce, yf the wounde be on the lefte syde, than do therto Lyuerworte an ounce. Matrisilua halfe an oūce, also yf ye haue no goyng to ye drought than it is nedefull to put therto Sene leues, Cassie fistule, of eche .ii. ounces. And yf he be depe woūded, than put therto Celidoni rot{is} .iiii. ounces, & gyue it hym to drynke at mor∣nynge, at none, and at euenynge, & at euery tyme .iiii. ounces. ¶An other good drynke for a wounde which is of truth & hath ben proued. THis drynke is gyuen for the wounde that is not deedly, and dryueth out of the wounde all corrupcyons within .xiii. dayes, & afterwarde it heleth the woūde.
And thus this drynke must be made. Take reed Coles, Parsely sede, Abrotanum, Ta∣nasetum, Strawbery leues, leues of Rube∣tinctorum, herba Tuberti, Plantayne great and small, Appe leues, or folia apii, Hempe sede, and seth all thefe togyder in wyne, and put therto a lytellhūny, and therof shall the pacyent drynke euenynge & mornyng, and at euery tyme .iiii. ounces, & wasshe the woū¦de therwith, & lay a reed cole left therupon. ¶An other drynke that is good for a wounde. TAke Pimpinella, Sanicle, or Diare∣nia in latyn, walte rote, or ambrosia, Agrimonia, ysop, tanascetum great, Plantayne, Strawberye leues, of eche an handefull, and seth them in wyne, or in wa∣ter, & put therto a lytel vyneger & hūny, this Drynke cureth, or healeth the wounde by hymselfe. ¶An other drynke for a wounde. TAke herba Sarasenica, fyndaw, Dia¦rentia, of eche .xii. ounces, wynter gre∣ne, or Pirola in latyn, Strawbery le∣ues of eche .vi. oūces, Centimorbium, Agri∣monia,
Betonica, reed motherwort, or Arti¦musia rubea of eche .iiii. ounces, Ambrosia, Pimpinella, Repontica, Groūde wormes, yarowe, or Milefolium, of eche .iiii. ounces, Mumic powder .iiii. oūces, clere hūny a poū¦de and an halfe, and take therto .vi. poūde of good whyte wyne, and chop small these fore¦said herbes, than myngle them with the wy∣ne and hūny, and put it into a great pot and couer it with a lydde of tre, and close the pot with clay, and make aboue in the lyd a lytell hole that it maye haue ayre out, and it shall sethe tyll the thyrde parte be consumed, and than gyue the pacyent therof to drynke at mornynge, and at euenynge a sponfull, and it shall hele hym, this drynke ye shall kepe in a pewter pot, or in a close vessell. ¶A drynke that dryueth out the engyled blode throughe the vryne. TAke Syndawe, Fenell, small Sau∣ge, Persely of eche an handeful, ysop, Fenel sede, Annes sede, the rote of Mandra¦gora of eche .ii. oūces. And ye shall seth them togyther in .ii. pounde of water, & gyue the pacyent therof to drynke.
¶An other drynke for the same. TAke Celidonia, Permacete, Stercus de muris, and make therof a powder, take the rote of great Tasyl, & smal Sauge leues, of eche an handefull, & seth it in good whyte wyne tyll the thyrde parte be consu∣med, than take a lytell glasse full of the sa∣me drynke, and take of the foresayd powder to the quantyte of .iii. Hasyll nuttes & medle them togyther, & yf ye wyl haue it stronger, take Charuell water, Cycoria water of eche two oūces, Stercus de muris a lytell medle it all togyther, & gyue the pacyēt to drynke. ¶An other costly drynke, for a wounde. TAke wynter grene, or pirola, syndaw Matrisilua, musore, water cresses, or Genacium in latyn, Brunella, small plan∣ten, of eche an handefull, herba Grace, mo∣therworte, Celidonia, of eche .ii. handefull, herba Sarasenica an handefull & an halfe, Sanycle, or Diarentia in latyn, Herba tu∣nici of eche an handeful, small Sauge halfe an handful, Serpētina with diptan or Dip¦tanum album in latyn, of eche .ii. oūces, Ca∣storie, Mumie, reed Myrre, wormwode, or
Absintium in latyn of eche halfe an ounce, put al these togyther ī a pot with good why¦te wyne, and couer the pot with a lyd & close the lyd with Doughe, and in the lyd make a smal hole, and stop it with a tap of woode, and let it seth tyll the thyrde parte be consu∣med, and drawe the tappe somtyme out that ye may smel when it is ynoughe, of this gy∣ue the pacyent to drynke at mornynge, and at euenynge a sponeful, and thoughe the pa¦cient be metely in helth yet shall he not dryn∣ke the lesse, and he shall in his dayly drynke medle .iii. or .iiii. droppes of the same. ¶An other drynke for a man that hath fallen, and kroken a rybbe, whiche drynke clenseth the brest, and causeth the breth to come and go at large. TAke crefysshes iyes in powder a drag¦ma, Diapenidion an ounce, Diadras ganiū halfe an ounce, stampe all these togy∣ther in a morter tyll they be small, & than put therto water of our Lady adylstell, or aqua de tribulis Marie, aqua Cicorie, or herbe sol¦sequii, and make it thynne, and gyue it hym to drynke at euenynge and mornynge.
¶An other costly drynke for woun∣des in the heade, and also for all other woundes. TAke the mydle pyll of the walte rote, or of Ambrosia in latyn, and scrape away the blackenesse therof, take also great Sanycle, or Diarentia maior in latyn, of eche to the quantyte of an egge, and knytte them both togyther in a lynnen clothe, and lay it in a pounde of wyne & let it lye therin .vi. houres longe, then gyue the pacyent ther¦of to drynke at euenynge & mornynge, and at euery tyme a sponefull and no more, for the drynke is stronge, and stepe a lytel cloth or a cole leue in the drynke, and lay it on the wounde, whyther it be in the heed, or in any other parte or membre of the body. ¶Perditur impune Medicina homo. ¶Imprynted by me Robert Wyer / dwellyng at the sygne of saynt Iohn̄ Euangelyst, in saynt Martyns parysshe, besyde Charyn∣ge Crosse.
printer's device of Robert Wyer, featuring John the Evangelist with eagle, and Wyer's name below (McKerrow 68 and 69) ROBERT WYER.
