7007 99845442 10341
skull and crossbones with recumbent human skeleton
A RELATION Sent from ROME, OF THE PROCESSE, SENTENCE, AND EXECVTION, Done Vpon the Body, Picture, and Bookes, Of MARCVS ANTONIVS de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, after his death. Published by Command. LONDON, ¶ Printed by John Bill, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. 1624.
A RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS at Rome, Against the late Archb. of SPALATO, And the burning of his dead Body, &c. THe late Archbi∣shop of Spalato being dead, his Body was put into a well pit∣ched Coffin, and that into another greater than it; and so was
it carried to be kept in the Conuent of the Holy Apostles, and there com∣mitted to the charge of the Reue∣rend Fathers of that place, vntill such time as the Cause of the said Archbishop (still depending) should be determined by the Sacred Congregation; that according to their Sentence, whatsoeuer iustice did require might bee done vpon him. The Sentence being framed, and ready to bee put in execution, the said Body was first recognized, ac∣cording to the Forme of Law; and was taken the twentieth of this pre∣sent Moneth of December forth from the Conuent where it was kept, and caried to the Church of Minerua, and there laid vpon a Ta∣ble in an eminent place, together with his Picture, and a little sacke full
of Bookes, which He had printed: where it stood all the night. The next morning at the time appointed, the most Illustrious, and most Reuerend Lords Cardinalls Supreme Inquisitors, with many o∣thers, (to the number of sixteene, or thereabout,) being met together, after they had deliuered ouer a cer∣taine Millanois (who vnder the feig∣ned name and habit of a Greeke, not∣withstanding he had neuer beene made Priest, had presumed to cele∣brate Masse both in the Holy House of Loretto, and other where) vnto the Secular Powers the 23. of this present Moneth aforesaid, to be first hanged, and then afterwards burnt, was the Sentence of the said Archbishop read to this effect. First of all, The Manner of his Escape and going into England was
recompted; and what he had there done in preaching, and in printing; and how that vpon better aduice, and bethinking of himselfe, he pre∣ferred a Supplication vnto our Lord the Pope, shewing, that hee would willingly returne againe into the bosome of the Holy Church, if hee might be secured of his pardon; and also that he would abiure all and e∣uery heresie which he had hereto∣fore maintained. He came to Rome, He did all accordingly, He obtai∣ned grace, and pardon of his Holi∣nesse, and so continued there for a long time. But because his Conuersion was not sincere, and from his heart, but feigned only; He began at length in his familiar discourses, to breake forth into most heinous heresies, and would needs maintaine, that
what hee had said before was true. Thereupon hee was put into the Holy Inquisition; and in the Processe which was framed against him, we finde that he held the Heresies here vnder written. 1 THat the Councell of Trent had declared many things to be de fide, which were not. 2 That all the Sects of Heretickes might be reduced vnto one Church, if the Church of Rome would remit some of those things, which in processe of time she had determined to be de fide, instancing in particular in the Article of Transub∣stantiation. 3 That there might be made an vnion betweene the Church of Rome and the Protestant Heretickes, they both agree∣ing in articulis fundamentalibus. 4 That it may well be questioned, of
some Articles, and of many things defined in the Councell of Trent to be de fide, whether they were sufficiently discussed, and defined, yea or no. 5 That he who holdeth and beleeueth the Fundamentall Articles, although he doth not hold the Rest, is not therfore se∣parated from the Church, but is vnited to it in the Faith. Because that only the Fundamentall and Essential Articles, are necessary to saluation. The rest are matters of controuersie. 6 That what the Councell of Trent hath defined to be de fide in matter of Justification, of Predestination, of Grace, and of the Sacraments, that they con∣ferre grace ex opere operato, belongeth not to the Faith. 7 That he was ready to maintaine, euen with the losse of his life, that all men might abound in their owne sense (in other matters,) so that they did a∣gree
in Essentialibus fidei. 8 That the Primacie of the Pope of Rome is not de iure diuino, or at least, it may be disputed whether it be, or be not, vntill such time as the question may be decided. 9 That the Anathematismes of the Councell of Trent, are no definitions of Articles of Faith. 10 That the Hereticks were not con∣demned in the Councell of Trent for any Heresies that they taught; but only, be∣cause they taxed the Church of Rome of Heresie. 11 That to deny Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and worshipping of Jmages and Saints, is not to deny matters that belong to the substance of Faith. That therefore the Protestants haue the true Faith, and the true Church. 12 That the Church of Rome, and the Church of England are one and the
same Church, both the one, and the other, Catholike and Orthodox. 13 That it is not de fide, that a Ge∣nerall Councell, together with the Pope, is the Iudge of controuersies of the Faith. 14 That the bond of Matrimony so∣lemnized and consummated, may be dis∣solued by the adulterie of either partie. 15 That the bond of Matrimonie may be dissolued as well for other causes, as for adulterie. 16 That the Secular Prince vpon a reasonable cause may ordaine, that the bond of Matrimonie solemnized and consummated, may be dissolued. There were some other Articles be∣sides, but they fall within the compasse of these.
After these false and hereticall Propositions were read; it was re∣lated how they that were of the kindred of the said Archbishop, (or whosoeuer else would pretend to bee willing to vndertake the de∣fence of his cause) were cited; And some of them made their apparance at the time appointed them; but when they saw the Processe, toge∣ther with the Archbishops owne Confessions, they renounced him, and would doe nothing in his behalfe. Whereupon the most Illustrious and most Reuerend Lords procee∣ded vnto a definitiue Sentence. Which was, to declare him vn∣worthy of the fauour of the Holy Sea Apostolike; to depriue him of all his honour, benefit, or dignitie; to confiscate his goods, and to giue him ouer to the Secular Powers; as
De facto they then gaue him ouer, That He and his Picture, together with the Bookes he had written, should be burned. This Sentence being read, the said Coffin there present, the Picture, and the Bookes were deliuered ouer to my Lord the Gouernor of Rome, who desired, that the Corps might be reuiewed, and recognized anew; which was done accordingly. And presently the said Gouernor gaue order, that the Corps together with the other things should bee carried into Campo di Fiori, to bee there bur∣ned. But because they found no man that was willing of himselfe to carry him to the said place; therefore the Serieants tooke vp certaine Porters, whom they bound and constrained to goe along with them, and to take
vp the said Corps, Picture, and Bookes, which being caried into Campo di Fiori, were there instantly burned. And because the said Archbishop, towards the end of his life, made shew as if he had beene penitent for the heresies which hee had held de nouo, after his former abiuration, and asking pardon for them, he had the fauour done him to be made parta∣ker of the most holy Sacraments. But notwithstanding because hee had relapsed, He was therefore gi∣uen ouer to the Secular Power. Which was all that occurred in this action. INSCRIPTIO.
