7758.7 23664587 26782
A TABLE DECLARING THE TITLES of all such Proclamations, as haue beene published in England, during the Raigne of our Soueragne Lord King IAMES. Anno Primo Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation, declaring the vndoubted Right of our So∣ueraigne Lord King IAMES, to the Crowne of the Realmes of England, Fraunce and Ireland, 24. Mar∣ty fol. 1. A proclamation signifying his Maiesties pleasure. That all men being in Office of Gouernment at the death of the late Queene Elizabeth, should so continue till his Maiesties further direction, 5. Aprilis fol. 3. A proclamation, declaring at what values certaine Monies of Scot∣land, shalbe currant within England, 8. Aprilis fol. 6. A proclamation or direction, for the dispatch of Pacquets betweene London and Berwicke, for the seruice of the King, 8. Aprilis fol. 7. A proclamation for attendance on the Kings person, and for receiuing of him by the Shiriffes of the seuerall Counties, at his first comming into England, 10. Aprilis fol. 8. A proclamation for the discouery and apprehension of William Ru∣then, and Patricke Ruthen, brethren to the late Earle of Gowry, 27. Aprilis fol. 9. A forme of proclamation to be proclaimed by the Clearke of the Mar∣ket, and he to see it executed touching prises of victuals, mense Maij fol. 11. A proclamation inhibiting the vse and execution of any Charter or Graunt made by the late Queene Elizabeth, of any kind of Mono∣polies, & prohibiting the admittance of protections in suites of law, and against assignements of debts to the King without iust cause, and against the abuse of Sltpetermen, and Purueyours and Takers, and against the excessiue fees of Lawyers, Atturnies, Offiers and Clearkes in all the Kings Courts, both Ecclesiasticall and Tempo∣rall, and also against prophanation of the Sabboth day 7. Maij fol. 12. A proclamation against vnlawfull Hunting, 16. Maij. fol. 15. A proclamation charging all Actors or partners in the incursion on the Borders, to resort to the Kings Commissioners at a day limitted, Maij fol. 16. A proclamation for the vniting of England and Scotland, 19. Maij. fol. 17. A Proclamation commaunding such Gentlemen to depart the Court and City of London, as are not bound to attendance, 29. Maij fol. 18. A proclamation commaunding that no man abuse the Earle of Ty∣rone, whom the King had receiued into grace and fauour, 8. Iunij fol. 19. A proclamation concerning the surrender and auoydance of the Pat∣tents for Tinne, 16. Iunij fol. 20. A proclamation for recalling home of all warlike ships at Sea, 23. Iunij fol. 21. A proclamation for the adiournement of part of Trinitie Terme, 23. Iunij fol. 23. A proclamation for the apprehension of Anthony Copley, 2. Iulij. fol. 24. A proclamation for the reformation of the great abuses in Measures, 5. Iulij fol. 25. A proclamation signifying the Kings Maiesties pleasure, touching the resort of people to his Coronation, 6. Iulij fol. 28. A proclamation for Iustice to be indifferently ministred to the subiects of England and Scotland, 8. Iulij fol. 29. A proclamation for the deferring of S. Iames Faire for certaine daies, by reason of the Plague, and limitting how many persons shalbe at∣tendant on such as shall serue the King at his Coronation, 11. Iulij fol. 30. A proclamation for the apprehension of Sir Griffin Markham, William Watson, and William Clearke, 16. Iulij. fol. 31. A proclamation enioyning all Lieutenants, and Iustices of Peace, to repaire into their Countries, and all idle persons to depart the Court, 29. Iulij. fol. 32. A proclamation prohibiting the keeping of Bartholomew Faire, and Sturbridge Faire, and all other Faires within 50. miles of London, by reason of the Plague, 8. Augusti. fol. 33. A proclamation against Inmates and multitudes of dwellers in  Roomes and places in and about the Citie of London. And for the rasing and pulling downe of certaine new erected buildings  Septembris, fol. 34. A proclamation for the adiournement of part of Michaelmas Terms, 16. Septembris fol. 35. A proclamation and orders for the due and speedie execution of the Statute against Rogues, Vagabonds, idle and dissolute persons 7 Septembris fol. 36. A proclamation to represse all Piracies and Depredations vpon the Sea, 30. Septembris fol. 38. A proclamation for the further adiournement of part of Michaelmas Terme from Westminster to Winchester, 18. Octobris fol. 40. A proclamation concerning such as seditiously seeke reformation  Church matters, 24. Octobris fol. 42. A proclamation against the vnlawfull conueying of goods between the two Realmes of England and Scotland, whereby the King is de¦frauded of his Customes, 4. Nouembris fol. 44. A proclamation for transplantation of the Greames, 4. Decembris fol. 45. A proclamation concerning the choice of Knights and Burgesses for the Parliaments, 11. Ianuarij fol. 46. Orders conceiued by the Kings Maiesties Priuie Councell and by his Highnesse direction commaunded to bee executed, for restra  killing, eating, and dressing of Flesh in the time of Lent 17. Februa∣rij fol. 49. A proclamation commaunding all Iesuites, Seminaries, and other Priests, to depart the Realme by a day appointed, 22. Februarij fol. 51. A proclamation for the authorising and Vniformitie of the Book of Common Prayer to bee vsed throughout the Realme, 9. M fol. 53. Orders for thorow Posts, and Curriers, riding in post in the Kings Maiesties affaires, without date fol. 55. Orders for the Posts of the Kings Maiesties Realmes, and for all men to obserue and obey in the speedy carriage of packquets, directed for his Highnesse affaires, without date fol. 57. ¶ Anno Secundo Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for the true winding or folding of Woolle 18. Iunij fol. 58. A proclamation forbidding Londoners to resort to Bristoll Faire by reason of the plague there; 8. Iulij fol. 59. A proclamation for the prices of victuals within the Verge of the Cour 60. A proclaming conformitie to the forme of the service of GOD no in the Realme, 16. Iulij fol. 61. A proclamation apping the day and place for the meeting of the Commissioners of England and Scotland,  of  of the same Kingdomes, 15 Septembris fol. . A proclamation against ing of Ships, 15. Octobris fol. . A proclamation cōcerning the Kings Maiesties  Brittaine, &c. 20. Octobris fol. 65. A proclamation for the search and apprehension of certaine  Nouembris fol. 68. A proclamation for valuation of Coynes of England and Scotland, 16. Nouembris fol. 69. A proclamation for the prorogning of the  of February vnto the 3. day of October 4 Decembris. fol. A publication concerning all sorts of Gold and Silver , granted by his Maiesties L vnder  Fe¦bruarij fol. 73. A proclamation concerning  fol. 74. A proclamation for  Martij fol. 76. A proclamation for  fol. 7.
A Note of the Head-lands of England, as they beare one from ano∣ther agreeing with the plot of the description of the Countrey, with their seuerall distances, 4. Martij fol. 79. ¶ Anno Tertio Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation concerning Assart Lands, 12. Maij fol. 81. A proclamation with certaine Ordinances to be obserued by his Maiesties Subiects, toward the King of Spaine and his subiects, 8. Iulij fol. 82. A proclamation for Proroguing the Parliament, from the third day of October, vnto the fifth day of Nouember, 28. Iulij fol. 84. A proclamation to redresse the mis-imployment of Landes, Goods, and other things giuen for charitable vses, 11. Augusti fol. 85. A proclamation against certaine calumnious surmises concerning the Church gouernement of Scotland, 26. Septembris fol. 87. A proclamation for the annihilating of Commissions formerly graun∣ted for taking vp of Hounds and Dogs for the Kings vse, 27. Septem∣bris fol. 88. A proclamation for the search and apprehension of Thomas Percy, 5. Nouembris fol. 89. A proclamation denouncing Thomas Percy, Robert Catesby, Ambrose Rookewood, Thomas VVinter, Edward Graunt, Iohn VVright, Christo∣pher VVright, and Robert Ashfield, his adherents to be Traytors, 7. Nouembris fol. 90. A proclamation promising reward to him that shall apprehend Tho∣mas Percy, 8. Nouembris fol. 92. A proclamation for the searching for and apprehending of Robert VVinter, and Stephen Littleton, 18. Nouembris fol. 93. A proclamation warrenting Shiriffes to prosecute Rebels into other Counties, 19. Nouembris fol. 94. A proclamation for the apprehension and discouerie of Iohn Gerrard, Henry Garnet, and Oswald Tesmond, 15. Ianuarij fol. 96. A proclamation touching a seditious rumour suddenly raised, of some ill Accident happened to the Kinges Royall person, 22. Mar∣tij fol. 98. ¶ Anno Quarto Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation declaring what Flags South and North Britaines, snall beare at Sea, 12. Aprilis fol. 99. A proclamation for preuention of future abuses in Purueyance, 23. A∣prilis fol. 100. A proclamation charging all Iesuites, Seminaries, &c. to depart the Land, 10. Iunij fol. 103. A proclamation for the search and apprehension of certaine Pirates, 13 Iunij fol. 105. A proclamation touching Passengers, 23. Augusts fol. 106. A proclamation for the adiournement of part of Michaelmasse Terme, 23. Septembris fol. 107. A proclamation forbidding all Londoners and other Inhabitants of places infected, to resort to the Court. 1. Nouembris fol. 108. ¶ Anno Quinto Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for suppressing of persons riotously assembled in Northhamptonshire, for the laying open of Inclosures, 30. Maij fol. 109. A proclamation signifying his Maiesties pleasure, as well for suppres∣sing of riotous assemblies about Inclosures, as for reformation of Depopulations, 28. Iunij fol. 110. A proclamation to restraine the Kings Subiects from departing out of the Realme, and also concerning the transportation of Gold and Sil∣uer, 9 Iulij fol. 113. A proclamation signifying his Maiesties gracious pardon for the Offendours about Inclosures, 24. Iulij fol. 115. A publication signifying his Maiesties pleasure touching a License granted by his Maiesty to Sir Edward Hobby Knight, for buying and selling of wools, 21. Augusti fol. 116. A proclamation concerning Starch, 23. Augusti fol. 117. A proclamation for proroguing the Parliament, from the 16. of No∣uember, untill the 10. of Februarie, vlt. Septembris fol. 119. A proclamation for lurors, 5. Octobris fol. 120. A proclamation touching new buildings, diuiding of houses and In∣mates, 12. Octobris fol. 122. A proclamation for restraint of the Inhabitants of places infected, from comming to the Court, 2. Nouembris fol. 124. A proclamation touching the Earles of Tyrone and Tyrconnell, 15. No∣uembris fol. 125 A proclamation for the apprehending of the Lord Maxwell, 19. De∣cembris fol. 127. A proclamation for proroguing the Parliament, from the tenth day of February, vntill the seuen and twentieth of October, 10. Ianuary fol. 128. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuy Concell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction, commanded to bee put in exe∣cution for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating, of flesh in the Lent time, 22. Ianuarij fol. 129. ¶ Anno Sexto Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation against the Transportation of Leather, 31. Martij fol. 131. A proclamation commanding the Oath of Allegiance to bee tendred to all the Kings Subiects comming from beyond the Seas, except Marchants and men of qualitie, 29. Aprilis fol. 133. A proclamation for the preuenting and remedying of the dearth of graine and other victuals, 2. Iunij fol. 134. A proclamation against making of Starch, 5. Iulij fol. 136. A proclamation for Buildings, 25. Iulij fol. 138. A proclamation for restraint of the shipping and transporting of hor∣ses, 14. Augusts fol. 139. A proclamation for proroguing the Parliament, from the seuen and twentieth of October, vntill the ninth of Februarie, 4. Septembris fol. 140. A proclamation concerning Fines for Alienations of Landes holden in Chiefe, made without Record, 14. Octobris fol. 141. A proclamation touching Maulsters, common Brewers, & Ale-house keepers, 12. Decembris fol. 143. A proclamation fro proroguing the Parliament, from the ninth of Februarie, vntill the ninth of Nouember, 4 Ianuarij fol. 144. A proclamation against pirates, 8. Ianuarij fol. 145. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties priuie Councell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction commaunded to be put in execu∣tion, for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the time of Lent, 30. Ianuarij fol. 147. A publication of the Kings Maiesties pattents granted to Abraham Ba∣ker for the making of Smault, or blew Starch, 4. Februarij fol. 149. A proclamation for preseruation of Woods, 14. Februarij fol. 151. A proclamation giuing a further day for Fines for Alienations of Lands holden in Chiefe made without Record, 18. Februarij fol. . ¶ Anno Septimo Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for the calling in of such of the Bookes of his Ma∣iesties Apologie of the Oath of Allegiance, as were of an erro∣nious impression, 7. Aprilis fol. 154. A proclamation signifying his Maiesties pleasure, to confirme by all meanes the estates of his Subiects against all defects in their Assu∣rances, and all concealed Titles, 22. Aprilis fol. 155. A proclamation touching Fishing, 6. Maij fol. 157. Articles to be performed by vertue of the Kinges Maiesties Commissi∣on of Sale touching Forrests, Parkes, and Chases, without date fol. 159. A proclamation forbidding any person to carriepacquets, or letters to or from any Cities or Towne, by foot, or on horsebacke, except such as are allowed by authoritie, 15. Maij fol. 161. Orders decreed vpon for the furtherance of Our seruice, as well in writing, as riding in poste. specially set downe and commanded to be obserued, where Our postes are established within our Countie of Kent, 15. Maij fol. 162. A prohibition for Allome, 19. Iunij fol. 163. A proclamation against Hunters, Stealers, and killers of Deare, with in any of the Kings Maiesties Forrests, Chases, or Parkes, 9. Septem∣bris fol. 165. A proclamation for the adiornement of part of Michaelmasse Terms, 22. Septembris fol. 167. A proclamation for proroguing the parliament, for the ninth of Nouember vntill the ninth of February, 26. Septembris fol. 168. A proclamation giuing further time for the amendment of defecting Titles, vlt. Nouembris fol. 169.
A proclamation inhibiting the Importation of Pepper from forraine parts, by any other persons then those of the East Indian Company, vlt. Nouembris fol. 170. A proclamation forbidding the making of Starch, 10. Ianuarij fol. 172. A proclamation for defectiue Titles, 11. Februarij fol. 174. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuie Councel, & by his Highnesse direction commanded to be executed, for restraint of killing, eating, and dressing of Flesh in the time of Lent, 12. Februa∣rij fol. 175. ¶ Anno Octauo Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for calling in and suppressing of a Booke called the Interpreter, written by Doctor Cowell a Ciuilian, 25. Martij fol. 177. A proclamation for the due execution of all former Lawes against Re∣cusants, giuing them a day to repaire to their owne dwellings, and not afterwards to come to the Court, or within ten miles of Lon∣don, without speciall Licence, and for distraining of them as the Law requireth: And withall, that all Priests and Iesuites shall depart the Land by a day, no more to returne into the Realme: And for the ministering of the Oth of Alleagiance according to the Law, 2. Iunij fol. 178. A proclamation for the vtter abolishing of the making of Starch of any stuffe whatsoeuer within the Realme of England, and domini∣on of Wales, 22. Augusti fol. 182. A proclamation for reuocation of certaine proclamations formerly set forth by the Kings Highnesse, 24. Septembris, fol. 185. A proclamation declaring the Kings Maiesties intention to dissolue the Parliament, 31. Decembris. fol. 187. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuy Councell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction, commanded to bee put in exe∣cution for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating, of flesh in the Lent time, 29. Ianuarij fol. 188. ¶ Anno Nono Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for the Brittish Vndertakers to repaire into Ire∣land, 13. Aprilis fol. 190. A proclamation for the customing of such merchandises at the towne of Berwicke, as should be conueyed out of England into Scotland, and from Scotland to England, 17. Maij fol. 191. A proclamation prohibiting the melting and culling of coynes of gold and siluer, being currant money in England, 18. Maij fol. 193. A proclamation whereby it is commaunded that the Oath of Allegi∣ance be administred according to the Lawes, 31. Maij fol. 194 A proclamation for the apprehension of the Ladie Arabella, and her husband William Seymour, second sonne to the Lord Beauchampe, being escaped out of prison, 4 Iunij fol. 196. A proclamation for restraint of building in and about London, 3. Au∣gusti. fol. 197. A proclamation concerning building in and about London and West∣minster, 10. Septembris fol. 199. A proclamation for encreasing of the value of the coynes of gold cur∣rant in England, and commanding the execution of diuers Statutes made against transportation of gold and siluer out of the Realme, 23. Nouembris fol. 201. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuie Councell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction commanded to be put in execu∣on, for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the time of Lent, 16. Februarij fol. 204. ¶ Anno Decimo Iocobi Regis. A Proclamation for the apprehension of the Lord Sanquire, a No∣ble man of Scotland, and of Robert Carlile his seruant, for murdering of one Turnour a Fencer, 13. Maij fol. 206. A proclamation that none buy or sell any Bullion of gold or silver at higher prises then is appointed to bee paid for the same at his Mai∣sties Mine, 14. Maij fol. 208. A proclamation against the deceitfull dying silke with Slippe, or other corrupt stuffe, 17. Iulij fol. 210. The effect of certaine Letters Pattents graunted by the King to oseph Vsher, Warner Rich, and Godfrey de Vette, for the making and ∣ting of certaine engines or Waterworkes, 21. Septembri fol. 211. A proclamation against the vse of Pocket Dagges, 16. Ianuarij fol. 212. A proclamation against transportation of Corne and graine, 19. Ia∣nuarij fol. 213. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuie Councell and by his Highnesse speciall direction commanded to be put in execut¦on, for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the Lent time, 5 Februarij fol. 214. ¶ Anno Vndecimo Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for farthing Tokens, 19. Maij fol. 216. A proclamation against the vttering of light Spanish Coyne,  Maij fol. 218. The effect of his Maiesties Letters Pattents granted to Ada N Iohn Southcot, and Iohn Wood, for the vse of a new inuention of slee∣ping all kind of graine that is to be sowen for the benefit of Hus∣bandry, 5. Iunij fol. 219. A proclamation for the search and apprehension of Iohn  Esquire, 11. Iunij fol. 220. A proclamation prohibiting the vntimely bringing in of Wines, &c. 11. Septembris fol. 222. A proclamation prohibiting the publishing of any reports of ngs of duels, 15. Octobris fol. 223. A Proclamation for the prises of victualls within the Verge of the Court, with a blanke Inquisition for the prises of victualls, by the Clearke of the Market, 5. Nouembris fol. 225. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties priuie Councell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction commaunded to be put in execu∣tion, for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the time of Lent, 12. Nouembris fol. 226. A proclamation against the importation of any Felts, Hats, or Caps wrought or halfe wrought beyond the Seas, 2. Decembris. fol. 228. A proclamation for the true working and dying of Clothes, 7. Decem∣bris fol. 229. A proclamation against priuate challenges and combates, with Articles annexed for the better directions to be vsed therein, and for the more iudiciall proceeding against Offendours, 4. Februarij fol. 231. A proclamation declaring the Kinges Maiesties good opinion of the Deputie of Ireland, notwithstanding the complaints made against him by diuers Noblemen of that Kingdome, 7. Februarij fol. 237. This Proclamation was not published in England, but sent into Ireland  proclaimed. ¶ Anno Duodecimo Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for the banint out of Ireland, all  Archbishops, Bishopanes, Vicars generali, Friars and Seminarie Priests, vlt.  fol. 237. This Proclamation was sent ouer into Ireland to be proclaimed,  published in England. A proclamation containing his Maiess Royall pleasure ¦rant and continuance of the Pattent and former Proclamation con∣cerning Farthing Tokens, 21. Iunij fol. 239. A proclamation conteining the Kings Maisties pleasure concerning the apprehension of the Greames, 22. Iulij fol. 2. A proclamation against the exportation of Clothes vndyed and vn¦dressed contrary to the Law, 23. Iulij fol. 243.
A proclamation against the bringing in of Whalesinnes into his Ma∣iesties Dominions, but onely by the Muscouia Company of Mar∣chants, 11 Septembris fol. 245. A proclamation prohibiting the exportation of Sheep, Wools, Wool∣fels, and Fullers earth, 26. Septembris fol. 246. A proclamation prohibiting the importation of Allome, into any his Maiesties Dominions, 10. Octobris fol. 248. A proclamation commanding the repaire of Noblemen and Gentle∣men into their seuerall Countries at the end of the Terme, 24. Octo∣bris fol. 251. A proclamation against the transporting of Woolles, Woolfele, Ful∣lers earth, and woollen yarne, &c. 9. Nouembris fol. 252. A proclamation prohibiting the Marchant Aduenturers Charter from thenceforth to be put in practise or execution, either within the king∣dome, or beyond the Seas, 2. Decembris fol. 254. orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuie Councell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction commanded to be put in executi∣on, for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the time of Lent, 10. Ianuarij fo. 256. A proclamation against exportation of gold and siluer, 23. Martij fol. 258. A proclamation against sending ouer children, and reliefe to Semina∣ries, 23. Martij fol. 260. ¶ Anno Decimo Tertio Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation prohibiting the bringing in of any Commodities traded from the leuant, into this Kingdome, as well by subiects as strangers not free of that Company: Also containing a publicati∣on of certaine Statutes for the restraint of all his Maiesties subiects from shipping any commodities in Strangers Bottomes, either into this Kingdome, or out of the same, 17. Aprilis fol. 265. A proclamation for restraining of the seruing of Fee Decre, 22. Aprilis fol. 267. A proclamation touching Glasses, 23. Maij fol. 268. A proclamation commanding the due execution of two Statutes, a∣gainst falsifying of wooll, and woollen yarne, for the better mainte∣nance of Clothing, 31. Maij fol. 270. A proclamation for Buildings, 16. Iulij fol. 271. A proclamation for the due execution of Forrest lawes, 16. Septembris fol. 273. A proclamation extending a former proclamation (for the restraint of shipping any commodities in Strangers Bottomes, eyther into this Kingdome or out of the same) vnto the speciall case of wines of the groweth of Fraunce, to be imported into this Kingdome, either by subiect or stranger, according to a Statute in that case prouided, 2. Octobris fol. 274. A proclamation establishing the continuance of his Maiesties farthing Tokens, and prohibiting the vse of all other Tokens whatsoeuer, 26 Octobris fol. 275. A proclamation for restraining the abuses in Tynne, according to the Lawes and Ordinances of the Stanneries, 26. Octobris fol. 276. A proclamation for the conformation of all authorised orders, tending to the vniuersall publishing and teaching of a certaine Religious Treatise, compiled by Authoritie, and intituled by the name of God and the King, 8. Nouembris fol. 279. A proclamation requiring the residency of Noblemen, Gentlemen, Lieutenants and Iustices of Peace, vpon their chiefe Mansions in the Countrey, for the better maintenance of hospitalitie, and discharge of their duties, 9. Decembris fol. 280. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuie Councell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction, commaunded to bee put in exe∣cution for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the time of Lent, 29. Ianuarij fol. 282. A prohibition by the Kings Maiesties Priuie Councell, against carry∣ing of Packets and Letters to and from the parts beyond the Seas, 27 Ianuary fol. 284. ¶ Anno Decimo Quinto Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation against Steelers, Pocket Daggers, Pocket  and Pistols, 26. Martij fol. 185. A proclamation concerning the Kings Euill, 26. Martij fol. 286 A proclamation for the punishing of Vagabonds, Rogues, and  persons, 24. Iulij fol. 287. A proclamation concerning Fee Decre, 18. Ianuarij fol. 289. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuie Counc, and by his Highnesse speciall direction commanded to be put in execu¦tion, for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the time of Lent, 20. Ianuarij fol. 290. A proclamation for the prises of victualls within the Verge of the Court, with two blanke Inquisitions for the Clearke of the  24. Februarij fol. 292. A proclamation for the continuing of farthing Tokens, 17.  fol. 295. ¶ Anno Decimo Quinto Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation for remouing the Staple of wools from pr¦yond the Seas, vnto certaine principal Cities and Townes  in this our Realme, 24. Martij fol. 296. A proclamation commanding the repaire of Noblemen and Gentlemen into their seuerall Countries, during his Maiesties iourney into Scotland, 8. Aprilis fol. 299. A proclamation for restoring the auncient Marchant Aduenturers to their former trade and priuiledges, 12. Augusti fol. 300. A proclamation for the better and more peaceable gouernement of the middle Shires of Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmorland, 23. Decembris fol. 302. Orders conceiued by the Lords of his Maiesties Priuie Councell, and by his Highnesse speciall direction commanded to be put in execu∣tion, for the restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of flesh in the time of Lent, 27. Ianuarij fol. 306. An order made by the Lords of the Kings Maiesties Priuie Councell, concerning the paiment of Headmoney, 15. Martij fol. 308. A proclamation prohibiting the importation of Allome, and the buy∣ing or spending thereof in any his Maiesties Dominions, 16 Martij fol. 309. A proclamation for reforming the abuses in making of gold and siluer threed within this Realme, and for inhibiting the importation there∣of from the parts beyond the Seas, 22. Martij fol. 312. A Commission, with instructions and directions graunted by his Ma∣iestie, to the Master and Councell of the Court of Wards and ∣ries, for compounding for Wards, Ideots, and Lunatikes, 2. Fe∣bruarij fol. 316. ¶ Anno Decimo Sexto Iacobi Regis. A Proclamation commanding all Appothecaries of this Realme to follow the dispensatory lately compiled by the Colledge of Physitions of London, 26. Aprilis fol. 318. A proclamation declaring the Kinges Maiesties pleasure, concerning Sir VValter Raleigh Knight, and those that aduentured with him, 9. Iunij fol. 320. A proclamation inhibiting all persons, to vse the trade of a Ped or pettie Chapman, vnlesse they be licensed, 6. Iulij fol. 321. A proclamation to restraine the excessiue Carriages in Waggons and foure wheele Carts, to the destruction of Highway, 20 Iulij fol. 323. A proclamation for reuoking of all Licences graunted, for erecting new building within London, or two miles distance; and ∣straint for new building within the same Compasse, 20. Iulij. fol. 325 A proclamation at the sollicitation of the King of Spaines Agent for pardon of such persons as were conuicted, for making of a sedious assault vpon the house of the Spanish Ambassadour in Barbican. 20. Septembris fol. 327.
