8847 S3545 33150433 28604
English royal blazon ❧By the King. ¶A Proclamation to restraine the vnlawfull transportation of Hides and Leather. THe Kings most Excellent MAIESTIE, taking knowledge of the great scarcity and extraordinary dearenesse of Leather, lately growne within this Realme, and enquiring into the causes thereof, hath discouered, that, although there hath beene lately a greater num∣ber of raw Hides, by reason of the extraordinary prouisions for the Na∣uy, then in former yeeres; yet the Markets haue not beene serued with Hides, as they were wont to be, but the raw Hydes are secretly, and by stealth, conueyed beyond the Seas. And His Maiestie hath also beene informed, That vnder colour of a Liberty giuen heretofore, for conueying of Hydes and Leather from the Port of London vnto Hull, for seruice of the Northerne parts, there haue beene lately great quantities caryed away, which neuer arriued at the Port of Hull, but are conueyed into Scot∣land, or other Forraine parts. And further, that there being no Prohibition already, for the car∣rying of Hydes and Leather ouer Land into Scotland, great quantities are conueyed that way, especially by the City of Carlile. And also, that there are many and great Ingrossers of Leather in the City of London; By which meanes the prices are kept high, and much Leather is cut out for Bootes and Shooes, and is packed vp closely, and so transported into France the Low Countries, and other forraine places, vnder colour of other Merchandize. And further, That vnder colour of Calue-skins, permitted to be transported by Licence, great number of Skins of greater growth, are conueyed, which would bee seruiceable for making of Bootes and Shooes, and other vses. And that to colour these great abuses, (which are so generally preiudiciall to all sorts of people) either the offenders themselues, or some other ill disposed persons, doe falsly publish, that there haue beene Licences giuen by His Maiestie, contrary to the Lawes, to transport great quantities of Leather, and raw Hydes, where, in trueth, no such Licence hath beene granted to any, nor so much as thought vpon to be granted. All which, being made knowne to His Maiesty, His High∣nesse, out of His Princely care and prouidence, for the generall good of His people, hath thought fit (by the aduice of His Priuie Counsell) to publish and declare, And doth heereby publish and de∣clare His Royall Pleasure and Commandement, concerning the Premisses, in manner following. That from hencefoorth no person whatsoeuer, either naturall borne Subiect, Denizen, or stranger, doe presume to export out of this Kingdome, any raw Hydes, or any Leather, either into any Forraine parts beyond the Seas, or into Scotland, by colour of carrying Calue-skins, or o∣therwise.
And for the better preuention of the like abuses hereafter, (which otherwise cannot possibly be preuented) His Maiesty doth further straitly charge and command, That no person, vnder co∣lour of carrying or conueying of Hydes or Leather, from one part of this Kingdome to another, doe carry the same by Water, or put the same into any Ship, Barge, Boat, or other Vessell, to carry the same by Water. And further, that no Shoomaker, Currier, or other Artificer, doe buy any Leather, but such onely as he shall conuert into made Wares, and shall not bee in any sort a factor or agent, to buy any leather for any Merchant or other person, who shall after transport the same into any parts beyond the Seas, or into the Realme of Scotland. And that they, nor any of them, bee any In∣grosser of hides or leather, whereby, or by meanes or occasion whereof, the prices of hides or lea∣ther may bee enhaunced, or the Markets be vnfurnished or vnstored. All which his Maiesty doth straitly charge and Command, to bee duely obserued by all sorts of people, in their seuerall pla∣ces and degrees, vpon paine, not onely to incurre the vttermost penalties and punishments, which by the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme, may be inflicted vpon the offenders, but also vpon further paine of his Maiesties high displeasure, and such further punishment as by his Maiesties Prerogatiue Royall, or by the seuerest Censure of the Court of Starre Chamber can bee imposed vpon them, for so great a contempt. And to the end, that all others may take heede how they doe hereafter either of malice or rash∣nesse, publish such false and fained rumoures, tending so much to the slander of his Maiesties go∣uerment, His Maiestie doeth hereby straitly admonish and Command, that no person pre∣sume to publish or report such false rumours, in this or in any thing of the like kinde. And to the intent, that such as are willing to take paines to discouer the offenders and offences aforesaid, either already committed, or hereafter to bee committed in any kinde concerning the premisses, for the generall good of the Common wealth, may haue fit encouragement and recompence, His Maiestie doeth hereby promise and vndertake, That whosoeuer shall first discouer to the Lord Treasurer of England, or Barons of the Exchequer, any of the said offenders or offences, either in conueying away of any hides or leather, or engrossing the same, or in being the instruments or as∣sistants thereunto, or in raysing or publishing such false rumours or reports, as aforesaid, whereby the offenders shall or may be brought to receiue due punishment for such their offences, that euery person which shall so first discouer the same (besides such part of the fines and forfeitures as by Law shall belong vnto him) shall haue a liberall reward from his Maiestie, out of such part of the offenders fines or forfeitures which shall accrue to his Maiestie, at the good discretion of the Lord Treasurer of England, or Barons of the Exchequer, for the time being. Giuen at His Maiesties Court at White-hall, the 14. day of December, in the second yeere of his Maiesties Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland. God saue the King. ¶Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XXVI.
