9968 S4659 23708212 26821
A breuiat Cro∣nicle contaynynge all the Kinges from brute to this daye, and manye notable actes gathered oute of di∣uers Cronicles frō Wil∣lyam Conquerour vn∣to the yere of christ a. M.v.c.lii. ¶Prynted at Canterbury in Saynt Paules pa∣rysh by Iohn Mychell. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
¶To the righte worship∣ful knight syr Antony Anchor ma∣ster of the Kinges Iuel house, Iohn mychell boke Pryn∣ter wisheth helthe and prosperitie. THe knowledge of histories and cronicles, ryght worshipfull syr Antonye howe pleasaunte and necessarye it is (although part lye I perceue my selfe and learned men declare the same at large) the common vse and worldlye practise sheweth euidently, and that it is the recorde of oure forefathers lyfes, without readinge and knowledge wherof we walke in darcknes, and liue like children newe come into the world. But histories and Cro∣nicles
faithfully wrytten set before our face, as presently to loke vpon all ages, all times, all chaunges, all states, and all doinges, euen from the beginninge of the worlde to our owne time, yea, without that we knowe of no world before oure beinge. Much prayse therfore, and great thankes haue they deserued which hath truly trauailed in that sorte of laboure, as dyd that noble clarke Eusebius, and our worship¦full Contry manne master Beade, whose worthye doinges I woulde some wittie learned man would at this time folowe for an exsample. We had in our English tonge a li∣tell short Cronicle notinge manye thinges worthy of memory, whiche boke I haue by my poore laboure sumwhat augmēted, and enlarged with more matter, but oh good Lord nothing to the purpose of my good will, if I had as much know∣ledge
as I haue desire of furthe∣raunce, and because right worship¦ful syr Antony I know your good minde, toward the a vauncemente of all honest learninge I dedicate this mine endeuor and laboure to youre mastershippe moste hartelie desiringe your fauourable helpe a∣gainste the nexte Printinge of the same, by your owne examinacion, or els by the diligence of some o∣ther, by youre mastershippe to the same assigned. Requiring also and hartelye prayinge my frences and brothers of the occupacyon of prī∣ting to suffer me quietlye to enioye the benefite of these mine owne la∣bours, and to haue the aduantage of myne owne inuencion as I shal gladly suffer euery of thē to enioye the cōmodities of his, & thē we shal brotherlike liue in concorde one by another, this wishinge you good life and longe. I byd you fare wel At Cantorbury. &c.
¶To know certayne whē the .iiii. termes of the yeare concer∣nynge the lawe begynne and ende. ¶The terme next after the Nati∣uitie of our Lorde, beginneth the xxiiii. day of Ianuary, and endeth the .xii. daye of February. ¶ Easter Terme begynneth the the .xviii. daye after Easter, reke∣ninge Easter daye for one, and en∣deth the fourth daie after the Ascen¦cion of our Lorde. ¶Trinitie Terme beginneth the morowe after Corpus Christi day and endeth the wednesdaye fort∣nighte after. ¶Mighelmas Terme beginneth the ninth day of Octobre, and en∣the .xxviii. day of Nouember.
¶The Escheker is open alwaye viii. dayes before the begynninge of euery Terme. ¶ A true and perfect reke∣nīg, of the yeres and time, from Adam vnto Christ gathered out of the holy scripture. FRom Adam vnto Noes floud, are .M.vi.c.lxxxxv From Noes flude vnto the departinge of Abrahā oute of Chalde are .ccc.lxiii. and .x. daies. From the departing out of Chal∣de, vnto the departinge of the chil∣dren of Israell out of Egipte, are cccc.xxx. yeares. From the departing of the chil∣dren of Israell out of Egipt, vnto the fyrste buyldinge of the Tem∣ple,
or elles vnto the fourthe yeare of the raygne of Salomō, are .cccc.lxxx. yeares. From the fyrste building of the Temple, vnto the captiuite of Ba∣bylon are .cccc.xix. yeares and vi. moneths From the captiuite of Babylon vnto the newe buildinge againe of Ierusalem are .c.xliii. yeres. Frome that time vnto Christe are .cccc.lxxxiii. yeare.
¶ These ben the kynges that haue bene, syth Brute came in to this lande fyrste. BRute came in to thys lande, after the ma∣kynge of the worlde, iiii.M.lxxvii. yeare. And he lyued in the lande or he were crowned .lx. yeare. And after he was crowned .xx. yere Lotrine his sonne reigned .v. yere Madan his sonne xxx. yere Ebranke his sonne xl. yere. Leyly his sonne ix. yere. Bladud his sonne. xxi. yere Guentolin his wyfe xv. yere Memps his sonne xxiiii. yere Brute bremenshull xxx. yere Ludebras xiii. yere Lyre his sonne xlviii. yere Credell his doughter v. yere Conodage her sister son. xxxiii. yere
Reynolde his sonne xx. yere Gorbodyan his sonne xv. yere Denobaud wan the realme by con∣quest and reygned xl. yere Bellyn hys sonne xi. yere Cornabatrus his son xxv. yere Guentolem his sonne xxv. yere Scisille his sonne xv. yere Kymore his sonne. xix. yere Morwyche his sonne ix. yere Grandobodyan his sonne xi. yere Protegayle his sonne xvi. yere Petitur his brother v. yere Esydur his brother xiiii. yere ¶And after this Esydur, reigned xxxiii. kynges, eche after other in peace. The fyrst king of tho. xxxiii. was Borgodyan, and he reygned xii. yere. Morgan i. yere Cighnus vi. yere Io walam ✶ viii. yere Rohugo xi. yere Voghen xiii. yere
Catyll xv. yere Porrex. ii. yere Cheryn xviii. yere Coyll ✶ xii. yere. Sulgenis xiii. yere Esdad xx. yere Audragie ✶ ✶ xvii. yere Vrian v. yere Eliud ii. yere Eldadan xv. yere Claten ✶ xii. yere Ouirgunde viii. yere Mortan vi. yere Bledagh iiii. yere Caph ✶ i. yeare Gen ii. yeare Seyfell, and kyng Bled xxii. yere Gabreth xx. yere Archinall xiiii. yere Croyll xxx. yere Rodyngir ✶ ✶ xxxii. yere Hectir v. yere Harpir vi. yere Carpour vii. yere
Dygneyll iii. yere Samuel xxiiii. yere Rede ✶ ii. yere Ely vii. monthes Ludde the laste kynges sonne of the .xxxiii. reygned xi. yere Cassibalan his brother xxvii. yere Androgē Luddes first son viii. yere Kembalyn before the Incarnacion of Cryste reigned ii. yere ¶The hole summe, from the comynge of Brute, tyll the Incarnacion of Christ M.C.xxii. yere. Grynder and Armog hys .ii. son∣nes. xliiii. yere. Koyse Armog sonne xli. yere Lucy his sonne reygned an Hethē man .xi. yere, & a christen mā ii. yere And afterwarde was so greate de∣bate in the lande that the realme was without a kynge. l. yere
Coyle that made Colchester, was king then and reigned xiii. yere Constantine the Romayne, that wedded Sayncte Elyn Coyles doughter xv. yere Constantine that was Emperour, his sonne regned. xx. yere. Octauian reygned after that Con∣stantyne was gone to Rome, to be crowned Emperour. xv. yere Maximian wedded Octauians doughter and reigned. xxviii. yere In his time saint Albō was slaine. Constantine, cosyn to the kynge of litel Brytayne regned xii. yere Constantine his sonne, that was a monke at wīchester reigned v. yere Forteger that was Earle of Essex reygned xi. yere Fortymar his sonne xiiii. yere Engist of Saxony in the lande of Germany, yt was a Sarazyn: wan the land and reygned. v. yere Aurilambros Constantines sonne
slew Engyst, and droue the Sara∣zyns away, & reygned viii. yere Vter pēdragō his brother xvii. yere Arther his son reigned. xxvi. yere Cōstātine Arthers cosin. xxiiii. yere Guran for Constantyne had none heyre, reygned xxx. yere Tonagh his cosin xxiiii, yere Syryke reygned xxv. yeare Saint Ethelbert and Sebert, that were conuerted by saint Austine & his felowship reigned. l. yere Elfrede, and Cadwaller, saint Os∣walde, and Cadwalyn reygned, in this realme of Englande one after another. lxxx. yere Offa Sainte Oswaldes brother xlviii. yere. Alured the first, in his time saynte Edmunde of Bury was slayne of hūger and Hubba: the kynges bre∣thren of Denmarke. xxx. yere Edward the first his son xxv. yere Edmunde his brother xvii. yere
Adelstone xxv. yere Eldred his brother. x. yere Edwin his third brother iiii. yere Edgar his sonne xvii. yere S. Edward the martyr xii. yere Swayne that was kinge of Den∣marke reygned xv. yere Eldred s. Edwards brother .ix. yere Edmunde Irensyd, and Knowe Swayne sonne reigned xx. yere Harolde Harefote knowte sonne xiii. yere. Hardeknowt his brother. xvi. yere Saynt Edward the confessour El¦dredes sonne reigned xxiii. yere. Harolde that was Godwyn sonne, Earle of well sex reygned i. yere ¶Here endeth al the kinges that raygned before the Conquest.
Wyllyam Con∣queroure. WIlliam Duke of Normandy called conque∣rour,Of williā cōqueror duke of normādy. Nephew vnto king Ed∣ward the con∣fessoure began his dominion ouer this realme of Englande the .xv. daye of Octo∣ber in the yeare of oure Lorde .M lxvii. and reygned .xxi. yeares, one moneth with greate cruelnes to∣ward the Englyshmen chargynge them alwayes wyth greate exacti∣ons by meanes whereof he caused dyuers to flee oute of the lande, he ordayned new lawes at hys owne pleasure profitable to him self and greuous and hurtful to the people. In the second yere of thys kīges
reygne the cyty of Exeter and Nor∣thumberland,Exiter Rebelled. rebelled which bothe were subdued and after greuously punyshed. Kynge Wyllyam bylded cer∣tayne castels within thys realme and put normans to be gouerners in them who greatlye oppressed the Englyshe men.The eng∣lysh men oppressed. About thys time the kyng cau∣sed .ii.Bishops & albotes deposed. Cardynalles to come frome Rome, where by meanes of the kynge they deposed certayne, Bys∣shopes, Albottes, and Prioures, Englyshemen and in theyr place put in Normans. The coun¦tre aboue yorke de∣stroyed.In the .iii. yeare of Wyllyam Conqueroure the Danes inuaded the North countre and won yorke, but shortlye after the kynge came and droue awaye the Danes and toke such displeasure wyth the en∣habitauntes of that prouynce that he destroyed the lande from yorke
to Durham, that .ix. yeare after it laye vnlaboured and vntylled. About thys tyme was a greate debate betwene Thomas Arche∣bishop of yorke and Langfranke archbyshop of Canterbury for the Primacy of Englande,A vari∣aunce be∣twene the byshops for the primacy. but the by∣shop of Cantorbury optained, and the Byshop of yorke made to hym an othe of obeysaunce. In the .x.A conspi∣racy a∣gainst the kynge. yeare of thys kynges raigne Roger Erle of Herford and Rafe Earle of Norfolke conspy∣red agaynste kynge Wyllyam he beynge in Normandy, whych were bothe outelawed the realme, and Earle Walrefe, that vttered the conspiracy was beheaded. About the .xv.A bataile ī normādy yere of his raigne Robert curteyse the kynges eldest sone wyth the helpe of Philip the French kinge made warre against his father in Normandye where kynge Wyllyam was sore hurte
but afterwarde a peace was made betwene them. Thys kynge wyllyam made the newe forest in hamshere and there∣fore he cast downe diuers churches by the space of xxx.The ma∣kinge of new forest myles. No eng∣lishe man bare office in englād.In his time he kept the Englysh men so lowe that few of them bare any offyce of honour in England. Also in the .xix. yeare of kynge Wyllyams reygne he beynge in Normandy raysed a great trybute in England and caused to be gathe¦red of euery hyde of landes whych contayneeh .xx,A greate tribute. Acres .vi. s Shortly after the kinge made warre into Fraunce where he dyd muche hurte,The deth of williā cōqueror. but in this heate he toke suche a disease that it cost him his life, in his sekenes he made his testamente, and gaue to Wyllyam Rufus his second sonne the kyng∣dome of Englande, and to Roberd Courteise his eldest sonne the Du∣chye
of Normandy, and vnto hē∣ry hys thyrde sonne he gaue hys treasure, thus he ended his lyfe in the moneth of Iuly and lyeth bu∣ryed at Cane in Normandy. Wylliam Rufus WIllyam Rufus or wil∣lyam the Reed began his reygne ouer thys realme the .xvii. day of Septembre the yeare of Christ .m.lxxxix. Sone after wil¦lyam Rufus had taken vpon him the kyngdome, hys brother Robert Courteise came out of Normandy and landed at hamptō to thentent to haue put out his brother frome the kyngdome but the kynge sente to him ambassadours,Agremēt betwene williā ru∣fus & hys brother. so at the last they were agreed that Wyllyam Rufus should be kynge payinge to his brother yearly .iii.M. Mar∣kes
& ech of them to be others aire. A rebelliō againste the kinge.In the second yere of thys king dyuers Lordes in England rebel∣led against the kynge and assayled dyuers townes, but kyng wylliam vanquyshed the traitours and cha¦sed them out of hys realme. war with the scotesIn the .iii. yeare of Wyllyam Rufus the scottes warred on eng∣lande, wherefore kynge Wyllyam prouided an armye and wente the∣ther where after dyuers conflictes and scermyshes a peace was con∣cluded so that Malcolyn kynge of Scottes was sworne to be trew to kynge Wyllyam. A greate winde in EnglandIn the iiii. yere of wyllyam Ru∣fus there was a greate wynde, in London that blew downe v.c. hou¦ses, and the rofe of Bow churche, and did greate hurte in vynchester and other places. The king of wales slayne.In this time also the Welche∣men rebelled, but they were subdu∣ed
theyr duke or kinge called Ryse slayne whiche was accompted the laste kinge of Wales. Also Malcolin kyng of Scot∣tes rebelled and came with an ar∣my into Englande,The king of scottes slayne: but the Earle of Northumberlande encountred wyth him, and there kinge Mal∣colyn was slaine. In the .vi.a viage to Ierusalē. yeare of William Ru¦fus there was prepared throughe christendome a mightye army of thre .c.M. men to winne Ierusalē whose soueraygne capitayne was Godfrey duke of Loraine and his ii, bretheren with many other noble men of Christendome. At this time many noble menneBorowīg of money for this vyage laied their landes to morgage to prouide for the forenamed viage a¦monge whiche was Roberd Cur∣toyse Duke of normandy he layed his dukedome to pledge to his bro¦ther William kinge of Englande
for a C.M. pounde. Greate taxynge.A bought the .viii, yeare of wil∣liam Rufus bothe Englande and Normandy were greuouslye taxed, and also there was a great morta∣litie amonge menne so sharpe that tillage of the earthe was put of for that yeare whereby ensued greace hunger and scarcitie in the yeare folowinge.Greate morallity Westmin∣ster hall builded.Abought the xi. yeare of the king he builded Westminster halle. In this yeare also the christen men wan Ierusalē after they had beseged it xxxix.Ierusalē wonne by the Chri∣sten men. daies and Godfry the soueraine captaine of the chri∣sten men was proclaimed kinge of Ierusalem. The deth of williā Rufus.This kyng William had great pleasure in hunting insomuch that he pulled downe many houses of religion to enlarge the newe eorest of Winsore for wilde dere, but a Frenche knyght of his named wa∣ter
Cerel by ye glaunsynge of hys arowe vpon a braunche when he shote at a harte in the sayde forest, smot the kynge and wounded hym to deathe, whereof he shortlye dyed in the yeare of oure Lorde. M.C. wythoute anye yssue of his bodye, and he raygned .xii. yeare and .xi. monethes and is buried at west∣minster. Henry the firste. HEnry the brother of Wyllyam Ru∣fus and fyrste of that name (for hys learnynge callyd Beweclarke) and thyrd sonne to Wylliam Conque∣roure was crowned kynge of Eng¦land the .v. day of August the yere of our Lord .M.c. and .i. This Henry was a noble prince
in the fyrst yeare of his raygne he reformed the measure in England whiche of longe time were corrup∣ted he vsed the lawes of saynt Ed∣warde,Mesures restored. sone after he was kynge he toke to wyfe Maude the syster of Edgare kynge of Scottes. Thys man fauoured nothynge the vsur∣ped powre of the byshop of Rome. The king relesed of his tributIn the .iiii. yeare of this kyng Roberd curtoyse the kynges bro∣there came into englande and was well entreated of the kynge and Quene and there the duke released the kynge of his tribute of .iii.M. markes, but it was not longe after by meanes of tale bearers and yll reporters that great variaunce fell betwene the kynge,Duke Ro¦bert takē prisoner. and the Duke of Normandy hys brother, and shortlye thereupon deadlye warre was arrered in thend wherof duke Roberd was taken and kepte in perpetuall pryson at cardyffe, by
his brother, who immediatlye sea∣sed vpon the duchye of Normandy and helde it in possession. In the .vi.A rebeliō ī england yeare of kynge hen∣ry the fyrst, the Earle of shrewys∣bury, and the Earle of Cornewall rebelled againste kynge henry and after were taken and kepte in pry∣son as longe as they lyued. About this tyme also the kyng ordayned strayghte lawes agaynst theues and other that vsed vnlaw∣ful meanes, whiche were punished,Punishe∣mente for transgres¦sours. some with death, some with losse of their eyes, of their stones and other membres of man as theyr trespas requyred. By the meanes of Anselme by∣shop of Cantorbury the preestes of England were constrayned to for∣go theyr wyues whiche before was lawfull to be maryed.The pree∣stes were cōstraned to forgo their wi∣ues. Aboute the .xiii.An earthe¦quake. yeare of kynge Henries raygne was a great earth¦quake
at shrewsburye and the ry∣uer of Trent was so drye that men myght go ouer drye shode. warre be∣twene england & Fraunce.In the .xvii. yeare of king hen∣ries raygne began great varyence betwene Lewes frenche kinge and kynge henry of Englande and at the last was fought betwene them a cruell battayle where the Eng∣lyshe menne optayned the victory and the frenche king fled, but short¦ly after a peace was concluded and wylliam the eldest sonne of kynge henry dyd homage to the frenche king for the Duchy of Normandy The kin∣ges two sonnes drowned.In the .xx. yere of Henry the first Wyllyam duke of normandye the kinges eldest sonne, and Richarde his brother, and Mary theyr sister, Richard Earle of chester with hys wyfe the kynges nece, and other to the nombre of a .c. and .vi. persons passing from Normandy into Eng¦lande by ouer syghte of the shyp∣maister
were drowned and none scaped but one man. Aboute the .xxvi.A law or¦daned for preestes. yeare of thys kynge there was a counsell holden at london wher it was determined that the abominable vices of the prestes shoulde be punished by the kinges offiters. In the .xxii.maude the empresse made aire of the Realme. yeare of kyng hen∣ries raigne bycause he had none o∣ther issue male, ordayned that hys doughter Maude which had bene Empresse shoulde succede him in the kyngdome. A boughte the .xxviii.maude the empresse maryed. yeare one Geffery Plantagenet Earle of An¦geo maried the saide Maude and by her had issue henry whiche hen∣ry after kinge Steuen was kinge of Englande. This kinge henry the firste be∣yng in Normandy in the .xxv.The deth of kīg hen¦ry the fyrste. yere of his reigne the second day of De¦cember in the yere of Christe a .M
a .c.xxxv. dyed, some say of a surfet, and some writers saye it was by a fall of a horse. And his bodye was brought into England and is bu∣ried in the Abbey of Reding. Of King steuen. STeuen Earle of Boloi∣ne, the sonne of the earle of blois, and Adela wil∣liā Cōquerours dough∣ter and Nephew to Henry the first, toke on hym the gouernaunce of this realme of England throughe the counsaile of manye Lordes of Englande contrarye to theyr othe made to Maude the Empresse, and was crowned king vpon saint Ste¦uens day the yeare of Christ .M.c. and xxxv. Variance ī englandAt this time there was greate variance in Englād for king Ste∣uen was thoughte to be kinge vn∣iustlye
for manie of the Lordes of Englande fauoured Maude the Empresse, and other fauored Ste∣uen who was kinge of the whiche folowed greate warre. This kinge steuen beseiged di∣uers castels that belonged to Bis∣shops and other lordes and toke them by forse,Castelles beseged. and fortified them with his owne knightes and ser∣uauntes, to thentente to withstand the empresse whose comminge he e∣uer feared. In the seconde yeare of kinge Steuen there rose a greate rumor in Englād that king Steuen was deade whiche tales rose much va∣riaunce in England for diuers of the lordes got them to their holdes whiche after might scantly be pace¦fied or quieted.yll talles doth much hurte. Shortly after the kinge wenteA viage to nor∣mandy. into Normandye and kepte warre with the Earle of Aniowe the hus∣band
of Maude ye Empresse which was righte aire to the Crowne of England and when he had quiet∣ted that prouince he made Eustace his sonne duke of normandy. A bataile & the king taken pry¦soner.In the .vi. yeare of king Ste∣uen Maude the Empresse came in to England by the comforte of the Earle of Glocester and the Earle of Chester, and made strong warre vpon kinge Stephen in the ende whereof the kinges partie was o∣uer come, and him selfe taken pri∣soner, and was brought to the Em∣presse who sente him to Bristowe to prison. Shortlye after this bataile the kentish men and londoners rose & toke parte with the king,A bataile at wyn∣chester. & at a feld foughten at winchester they ouer∣came the Empresse, and she flede to Gloucester and Earle Roberte of Glocester was taken, but short∣lie after bothe the kynge and earle
Roberte were delyuered out of pri∣son by exchaunge. Shortly after the kynge gathe∣red a greate power,To ēpresse beseged. and the Em∣presse fled vnto Oxforde where the kynge dyd besege her, but she fled awaye by nyghte, and so wente to Walyngford, and shortlye after with a smalle companye she wente into Normandy to her husbande Geffery Plantagenet. Aboughte the .x.A childe crucified ī despyte of Christe. yeare of kynge Steuens raygne, the Iues that dwelt in England toke and cruci∣fied a chylde at Norwytch on Ea∣ster day in derision of Chryste and hys relygion. In the .xi.The deth of Gefery Planta∣ginet. yeare of kynge Ste∣uen, Geffery Plantagenet Erle of Aniowe and husbande to Maude the Empresse, after he had wonne from kynge Steuen the Duchy of Normandy ended his life, and Hē∣ry his sonne succed in that dukedō.
Henry Duke of Normandy, in the quarell of hys mother Maude the Empresse with a great pusaūce entred into Englande,Henri the second en∣tred eng∣and. and at the fyrst wan the Castell of Malmes∣bury, then the Towre of London, and afterwarde the towne of No∣tyngham, with other holdes and Castels, betwene hym and kynge Steuen were fought manye Bat∣tayles whereby thys realme was sore troubled. A peace be¦twene the Empresse and kinge Steuen.In the .xviii. yeare of kyng Ste∣uen peace was agreed betwene Maude the Empresse, her sonne, & kynge Stephen on thys condicion that Steuen should be kynge du∣ryng hys life, but for al this peace, kynge Steuen toke suche thought and care that he died in the .xv.The deth of king Steuen. day of Octobre nexte folowynge, in the yeare of Chryste .M.C.liiii. for he was in warre and trouble all the terme of hys lyfe and he was bury∣ed
at Feuershame. ✶ Henry the second. HEnry the seconde and sonne to Gef∣fery Plantagenet erle of Angeo and maude ye empresse, was crowned king the .xx. daye of Decembre the yeare of Chryste .M.c.lv. Thys kyng was a noble man,Henry the secōd gret¦ly enlar∣ged his kingdome and muche fortunate in warres, & greatlye enlarged his kyngdome. But diuers wryters whiche more dyd fauoure the doynges of Tho∣mas Becket then the truthe, wryte that in his latter daies he was vn∣fortunat, but by his great manhod and pollycy the syngnory of Eng∣land was muche augmented with the addicions of Scotlande, Ire∣lande, the yles, Orcades, Britaine.
Poytow, Gyon, and other prouince¦ces of fraunce, wherfore it may be euydent to all men that hys good wyl was to reforme in his tyme the clargie, but as then god had not a∣poynted it. Defacing of castels.In the seconde yeare of kynge Henry the seconde, the kynge caste downe diuers castels whiche were set vp in the tyme of kynge Ste∣uen to defende Maude the Em∣presse his mother. After that he went into the north partes and receyued of the kynge of Scottes,A voiage into the Northe countre. Cumberland, and Nor¦thumberland, which they sayd wer geuen to them, by Maude his mo∣ther and set an order in that coūtre A voiage ī to Wales.In the .iii. yeare of kynge Hen∣ryes reigne he wente with a strong Armye into Wales and quietted that countrey, and after buylded the stronge castel of Rutland. About the .v. yere of this kinges
reygne rose a greate Schisme at Rome for some of the Cardynals chose one octauian,A schysme at Rome. and other some woulde haue Alexander to be By∣shop, whyche Schisme continued xx. yeares and muche trouble folowed. In the .vii.The king of scottes taken pri∣soner. yeare kynge Henry kepte such warre in to Scotlande that he toke kynge Wyllyam pri∣soner whiche afterward was dely∣uered, and the kynge of Scottes dyd fealtie and homage to kynge Henrye. In the .x. yeare of thys kynge Thomas Bocket archebyshop of Cantorbury (whyche sediciouslye vnder pretence of defending the li∣berties of the churche (as he sayde)Thomas becket fled the realme spake and dyd manye thynges a∣gaynste the kynges prorogatyue royall) dyd flee out of the realme, & went to Rome to complayne vpon the kynge to the Byshop.
In the xvii. yeare of kynge Hē¦ry Thomas Becket by entreaty of the byshoppe of Rome,Thomas becket slayne. and Lewes the Frenche kynge was restored to his Byshopryke, and not longe af∣ter by certeine gentilmē was slain. more fal∣shed of the byshop of Rome.Kyng Henry in the .xviii. yeare of his reygne sent Ambassedoures to the byshop of Rome to pourge hym selfe of the false accusacion of ye death of Thomas Becket but a∣monge other thinges it was enioy∣ned the kinge in his penaunce that it shoulde be lawfull to all his sub¦iectes as often as thē list to apeale to the sea of Rome, and that no mā shoulde be accompted as king vn∣till such time as he were confirmed by the Romysh Bishop. By thys all men may perceiue that the Bis∣shoppes of Rome alway desired to haue princes and kinges readye at their becke, but this Eniuncion was neuer fulfiled of the kynge of
Englande. In thys yeare also kynge Henry went into Ireland and sub¦dued it,Irelande wonne. and anexed Irelande to his kyngdome. In the .xxii.The kyn∣ges eldest sonne crowned Kyng yeare of kinge Hen∣ry he caused Henry his eldest sonne to be crowned kynge and maryed Margeret the Frenche kynges doughter. Shortlye after kynge Henry the sone at the settyng on of the french kynge and the kynge of of scottes,warre be¦twene the father & the sonne wyth dyuers other made warre a¦gaynste kynge Henry his father where were betwene them dyuers stronge battayls but alwayes the father had the victorye, and at the laste his sonne with his alyees wer constrayne to bende, and desyre peace whiche he gentyly graunted and forgaue their tresspasse.The king of scottes takē pry∣sonner. In thys warre Wylliam king of Scottes was taken prysoner
and yelded for hys raunsome the cytie of Carlyle, the castell of Bam¦broughe, the newe castell vpon Tine, and swore for euer to be trew to the kinge, and aswel he to do ho∣mage as his successours as ofte as they should be requyred. many Iu¦es in eng∣lande.About thys tyme were manye Iues in England, which agaynst the feaste of Easter, dyd vse to cru∣cifie yonge chyldren in despyte of christian relygion. In the .xxviii. yeare, Henry the eldest sonne of Kynge Henrye of England ended his lyfe.warre re∣newed in Fraunce. Shortlye after began the warre in fraunce for kinge Philip of Fraunce desi∣red homage to be done to hym for the landes of Poytow and other, and for the castell of Gysours. The deth of kīg hen¦ry the se∣conde.In the .xxxiiii. yeare of kynge Henry the seconde Richard Earle of Poytow mayde warre a gaynst kynge Henry of England hys fa∣ther,
and takynge parte wyth the frenche king wan from hys father many townes & castels, for sorowe wherof shortly after kynge Henry ended his lyfe in the yeare of christ m.c.lxxxviii, & is beryed at founte∣uerarde in fraunce. ¶Rychard the fyrste. RIchard the firste, and se∣cond sonne of kynge Hē∣ry the seconde was crow∣ned kynge of Englande the, iii. day of September the yere of Chryste .M.c.lxxxix. This man for hys valyantnesse and corage was called Curedde lion. In the fyrst yeare of kyng Ri∣charde the Londoners obtayned two offycers to gyde theyr cytie whiche were called baylyffes.Two bay¦liffes go∣uerned lō∣don: The Iu∣es spoiled at london About this time the Iues bare themselues very bolde in London
in so muche that the people rose a∣gaynste them and dyd robbe and kyll many of them without pytie. But by cause the offendours were so manye they ascaped wythoute punyshment. The king of scottes did hōageAlso in this fyrst yeare Wylly∣am king of Scottes came to Can∣torbury and dyd homage to kynge Rycharde. A prerara¦ciō to reco¦uer Hie∣rusalem.About this time the prynces of Christendom made great prepara∣cyon to recouer Hierusalem and to ayde the Chrystyans in Asia. In the thyrd yeare of king Ri∣chard,the isle of cipres con¦quered. he with a noble army toke his Iorney toward Hierusalem & by the way he conquered the yle of Cypres, and afterward he Ioyned wyth the french kynge in Asia, and conquired Acon, but shortlye after there fell great variaunce betwene kynge Richard of Englande, and kynge Philyp of fraunce wherfor
kinge Philip returne whome in to Fraunce and inuaded Normandy, & also he counsaled Iohn the bro∣ther to kynge Rychard to take vp∣on hym the kingdome of England in his bothers absence. Shortly after kynge Rychard of England restored to the christi∣ans the citie of Ioppe,The citie Ioppe wonne, and in ma∣nye battayles put the Turkes to muche sorowe. In the .iiii.The cruel¦ty of the byshop of Elye. yeare of kyng Rich∣ard, and while he was in Assia wil∣liam byshoppe of Elye, to whome king Richarde had committed the gouernaunce of Englande, practi∣sed muche crueltie as in depreuing of byshoppes and Abbottes, and wolde ryde with a .M. horses wher¦by he greued the place where he so iourned. But at the last by strength ye lordes put hym out of the land.Kynge ri∣chard kīg of Hieru∣salem. King Richard exchaūged Cipers with Guye of Lesingham for the
kingdom of Hierusalem wherfore the kinge of Englande of a longe time after was called king of Hie∣rusalem. king Ry∣chard ta∣kē prisōerIn the .v. yeare king Richard hearing that king Philip of fraūce inuaded Normandy: & that Iohn his brother aspired to his kingdom toke peace with the Turkes for .iii. yeares and with a small company returned whomewarde by Thrace and there was trayterouslye taken prisoner by the Duke of Austrych and brought him to henry the Em∣perour, and he was kept in streight prison a yeare, and .v. monethes where it is said he slew a Lion and toke out his harte. king Ry∣chard de∣liuered out of pri∣son.In the .vi. yeare of kinge Ry∣chardes raygne he payed his ran∣some whiche was a .C.M. pounde and was deliuered, and retorned to his countre, and made sharpe warre vpon the frenche kynge, and
Iohn his brother at whiche tyme was fought diuers great batailes to the greate losse of both partyes. In the .viii.peace be∣twene eng¦land and Fraunce, yeare of kinge Ry∣chardes reygne there was a peace concluded betwene Englande and fraunce for one yeare, and Iohn submitted him selfe to his brother. In the .x.Auriculen confecion first enuē∣ted. yeare of king Richards raygne, Innocent the .iii. Byshop of Rome, he firste compelled men to Auriculer confession, and forbad the Sacrament to be ministred to the layetie vnder both kyndes. Shortlye after the warre was newe arered betwene England and fraunce wherfore kinge Richarde sailed againe into Normandy and made newe warre vpon the french kynge, in whiche warre they spede diuersly, for some time the Frenche kinge wan holdes in Normandy, and some time the kinge of Eng∣lande wan in Fraunce. But at the
last kinge Richard went to besege a Castell called Castell Gayllarde and as he rode aboute the Castell to auew it one marked him,The deth of king ri¦chard the fyrste. & smot him with a Quarrell in the heade whereof anone after he dyed with∣oute yssue of his bodye in the yeare of Christ .M.cc. and in the .xii. yere of his reigne. And is buried at Fountuerarde. ¶Kinge Iohn. IOhn brother to the aboue named Richard was crow¦ned king of England the xvii.kīg Iohn cōtēyned the bishop of rome of a frow∣ard minde daye of Iuly the yeare aboue wrytten and reigne .xvii. yeares. This kinge contemned the bishop of Romes aucthoryte, whiche if he had done of conscience and for re∣ligions sake, as he semed to do for couetousnes, and of a frowarde minde, vndoubtedlye he had bene
worthy hye commendacion. By his cowardnes and slothful necligence the signorye of Englande greatlye decayed. In the first yere of kyng Iohns raygne kinge Philyp of Fraunce (in the quarell of Arthur Duke of Brytaine whome sertaine of the lordes had named kinge of Eng∣land) made war vpon kinge Iohn and inuaded Normandy and toke from him diuers Castels and tow∣nes: but after long Scirmishes,warre be∣gā betwen England & Fraūce. to ye losse of both parties, a peace was a greed which cōtinued not longe.The king of scottes did hōage In this yere the king of Scottes came in to Englande and dyd ho∣mage, and sware to be trewe leage man to king Iohn of of England. In the second yere in yorkeshire wer sene v,A sharpe wynter. mones at ones in ye ele∣ment & the next winter after was a sharpe winter & hayle felle as byg as hennes Egges.
Arthur of Bretaine taken pri∣soner:In the .iii. yere of kinge Iohns raygne kinge Philip of fraunce in¦uaded Normandy and toke diuers castels and townes which he gaue to Arthur Duke of Bretaine. But shortly after the same Arther with many other noble men were taken prisoners by king Iohn and led in to Englande. Englande enterditedIn the .vi. yeare of this kinge the byshoppe of Rome demounced kinge Iohn with his whole realme accursed, because he would not ad∣mit steuen Laughton to the bisho∣prike of Cantorbury. But he lyttel regarded his curse nor obeyed hym nothing the rather. Norman∣dy loste.In the .vii. yere of kyng Iohns Rayne, kynge Philyp of Fraunce subdued to him the countre of Nor¦mandye, which was not vnder the dominion of Fraunce in .ccc. yea∣res before. Aboute thys tyme the Welche∣men
and Iryshmē rebelled, whom kynge Iohn constrayned to re∣deme peace with greate sommes of money.The wel∣che men & Irishe mē rebelled. Aboute this time Philip Em∣perour of Almaine was murdered by the treason of the countye Pa∣lentyne.The Em∣peroure murdered In the .ix,The first mayre of London, yere of kynge Iohns rayne was fyrste ordayned may∣res and shyriffes in London, and the fyrste mayers name was Hen∣rye Fitz Alwyn, and the fyrste shy∣riffes wer Peter Duke, and Tho∣mas Nele. Aboute the .xiii.kīg Iohn reconsiled to the by∣shoppe of Rome. yeare of kinge Iohns rayne Philippe of fraunce made sharpe warre vpō England at the settynge on the Byshop of Rome. Insomuch that kyng Iohn was fayne to submite him selfe to ye Romish bishop, who was boūde, that aswell he as his ayres should hold the crowne of the byshoppe of
Rome, and should paye yearelye a M. Marke of syluer. Iewes the frēch kin∣ges sonne entred in∣to englādIn the .xvi. yeare of king Iohn great strife and varyaunce happe∣ned in England betwene the kyng and his Lordes, and commons of his realme. Insomuche that the kynge sente into flaunders for so∣coure and the nobles sent for Lew¦es the sonne of kinge Phylyppe of fraunce, and him saluted as kinge, & mayntayned him in war against kynge Iohn to the great hurte of this realme of Englande. Duryng the tyme of this warre King Iohn ended hys lyfe and died of the flixe at Newewarke vpon Trent the .xix daye of Octobre the yere of Chryst M.cc.xvi.The deth of king Iohn. But some Authors wryte that a Monke poysoned him at Swynested, and is buryed at Worcester. ¶Henry the thirde.
HEnry the thyrd of of that name, and eldest sonne to kīg Iohn by the ayde of certayne lordes of Englande was crowned kynge at .ix. yeares of his age whiche kinge wyth his aydes kepte sharpe warre whiche Lewes the frenche kynges sonne, who by comnaunte of certayne Lordes of England claymed the crowne,Iewes re∣turned in∣to fraūce. but after certagne Skyrmyshes and battayles a peace was concluded, so that Lewes shoulde departe in∣to Fraunce and for his trauayle he had a m. Markes and so departed In the fyrst yeare of king hen∣ryes raygne were ordayned many lawes in Englande to the greate commoditie of his subiectes.Magna∣carta cō∣firmed. And the greate charter called Magna¦carta was confirmed, and diuerse articles added thereto.
In the forthe yeare Alexander kynge of Scottes maried Ioan the syster of kynge Henry of Eng∣lande.The king of scottes maried. In this yeare also there was a Proclamacion made throughe∣oute Englande to auoyde straun∣gers.Straun∣gers put out of the realme. Because one Foukes de brent held the castell of Bedford against the kinges will. The com∣mīg in of the graye friers.In the .v. yeare of kinge Hen∣ryes raygne the gray fryers of the order of Fraunces came fyrste in∣to Englande. A voiage into bre∣tayne.In the .xiii. yeare of kinge Hē∣ry the thyrd he sailed into bretayne with a noble army agaynst Lewes kynge of Fraunce, wher after spoy¦lynge of the countre a peace was concluded betwene the .ii. yonge Prynces. A vary∣aunce be∣twene the king & his lordes.In the .xvi. yeare of this Kin∣ges raygne, a variaunce kyndled betwene kyng Henry and hys lor∣des,
because he put frō his seruice Englyshe men, and trusted straun∣gers aswell in his counsell as o∣ther offices nere about him. In the .xix.The king maried. yeare kynge Henry toke to wyfe Elinour doughter of the Earle of Prouynce. Aboute the .xxi. yere of king hē∣ry the vniuersite of Parys conclu∣ded that no Preestes vnder paine of deadlye synne shoulde haue .ii.No preest ought to haue .ii. be¦nefytes. benefytes. In the .xxxi.The liber¦ties of lō∣don loste. yeare kynge Hēry seyased the Fraunchesse of the citie of London for a Iudgemente ge∣uen a gaynste a Wydowe named Margaret vyell. But shortly after they were restored. In the .xxxviii. yere prynce Ed∣warde,The fyrst prince of waies eldest sonne to kynge Hen∣ry maryed Elynour doughter to the kyng of Castell to whome king Henry gaue the principalitie of Wales, and the gouernaunce of
Gyen, and Irelande, whereof be∣gan fyrste that the kynges of Eng∣land ordayned theyr sonnes prince of Wales. The bat∣taile at ie∣wes.In the .xlviii. yeare of Kynge Henryes raygne greate varyaunce was betwene the kynge and hys Lordes and commons. In somuch that neare vnto Lewes kynge Hē∣ry and his barons fought a cruell battayle, where the kynge loste the felde where the kyng himselfe with Richarde his brother kyng of Ro∣maines, and syr Edward his sonne and other noble men to the nombre of .xxv. wer taken, of the commons were slayne .xx.M. The king delyuered oute of prison.The king and his brother wer deliuered vpon promyse made to performe certayne Actes made at Oxforde in the parliament before, for suerty wherof Prynce Edward remayned as pledge. Shortly after fell great vary∣aunce
betwene the Earle of gloce∣ster and the Earle of Leyceter and Prynce Edwarde toke parte with the Earle of Glocester,The bat∣tayle at killing∣worthe and at kyl∣lyngworthe was foughte a cruell battayle the vyctory fell on prynce Edwardes parte. Shortlye after syr Symonde mounford Earle of Leceter gathe∣red a new army and mette Prynce Edward at Euesham where Syr Symonde the Earle was slayne & dyuerse other that toke his parte.The bat∣tayle at Euesham About the .liiii,The liber¦ties of lō∣don loste. yeare of kynge Henries raygne was such dysplea∣sure taken agaynst the Londoners that the kyng seased theyr liberties into his handes. But after the citie by meanes of frendes payed a fine of .xx.M. Markes and so was re∣stored to theyr lyberty. In the .lv.A voyage into the holy land yeare of this kynge syr Edward the kinges sonne toke his iourney into the holy land, and
there he rescued the citie of Acres whiche was beseiged by the Sou∣dan of surrey.The deth of kinge henry the thyrde. Duringe which voy¦age Prynce Edward beyng in the holy land: kyng Henry hys father fell sycke at Westminster and dy∣ed the .xvi. daye of Nouember, the yeare of Christ .M.cc.lxxiii. and is buried at Westminster. ¶ Edward the fyrst. Edward the fyrst of that name and sonne to Henry the .iii. af∣ter he hard of the death of his father came from the holye lande. And was crowned kynge at West¦minster the .xix.The king of scottes did hōage to kynge Edward daye of August the yere of christ .M.cc.lxxiii. At which tyme Alexander kynge of Scottes was presente and did homage to kynge Edward. Lewellyn of wales.In the seconde yeare of kynge Edwarde the Kynge wente into
Wales and subdued Lewellyn Princes of Wales which paied to the kynge for a fine .l.m. Markes. In the .x. yeare of thys kinge Lewellyn Prince of Wales rebel∣lyd,A bataile in wales. but after they pursued so the Welchemen that Lewellin and his brother Dauid fled, but after Le∣wellyn was taken by syr Edmond Mortymer who smot of his heade and sent it to the kynge, and after that his brother was hanged, dra∣wen and quartered. In the .xiii. yeare of this kinge,The liber¦ties of lō∣dō seased. the king seased the liberties of lon∣don into his handes because the Mayre toke brybes of the bakers. And suffered them to sell breade vnder the syse. In the .xxiiii.A bataile in scotlād yere of kinge Ed∣warde the Scottes dyuers tymes rebelled wherfore kynge Edwarde beseiged the towne of Barwyke where was fought a cruell bataile,
the vyctory fell to the Englysh mē and wanne the towne where were slayne of the Scotes .xxv.M. and after warde the kynge of Scottes submitted him selfe to kynge Ed∣warde of England. A battel at fankyrke.In the .xxvi. yeare (kynge Ed∣ward being in flaunders (the Scot¦tes rebelled, and chose them a newe kynge called Wales, and entred Northumberlande. But the nexte yeare after kinge Edward gathe∣red a great power and entred scot∣lande, and at a place called Fan∣kerke, he mete with the Scottes where betwene them was foughte a cruell battayle, but at the ende the Englyshmen had the victorye, and slewe of the Scotes to the nō∣bre of .xxxii.M. and Walis theyr new chosen king fled in to the ma∣rysses, and the common people yel∣ded them to the kyng of England. About the .xxxii. yeare Edward
the kinges eldest sonne commytted dyuers ryots to the great dysplea∣sure of hys father wherefore the kynge enprysoned his sonne and other that were of his companye.The king put his sō in prisons Also a bout the .xxxiii. yeare of kynge Edwarde the fyrste Wales the Scot was taken and brought to London and there put to death.A bataile in scotlād Anone after many Lordes and bis∣shoppes of Scotlande came and yelded them selues to kynge Ed∣warde. But Robert le Bruse con∣trary to his oth rebelled agaynste kinge Edwarde, and shortlye after the kinge with a great hoste wente into Scotland where he met with Roberte le Bruse at a place nyghe saynte Iohns towne where was fought a cruell batayle, the victory fell to the Englysh men, and .vii.m Scottes were slayne, and Roberte le bruce fled to the kynge of Nor∣waye, and dyuerse lordes were ta∣ken
who were sent to London, and there put to death. The deth of kīg Ed¦ward the fyrsteIn the .xxxv. yeare kynge Ed∣warde fell syke and dyed the .vii. daye of Iulye, in the yeare of christ M.ccc.vii. and is buryed at West¦minster. ✶ Edwarde the second. EDwarde the second of that name, and sonne of the fyrst Edwarde and prince of wales, be∣ganne his Raygne ouer England the .xxiiii. day of February the yere of Chryst .M.ccc.vii. and raygned xviii. yeres thys edward was faire of body but vnstedfast of maners, and disposed to lyghtnes. For he refused the companye of hys Lor∣des and men of honoure, and haun¦ted a monge vylaynes and vyle persones, he gaue him selfe also to ouer muche drynkinge, and lyght∣lye
wold disclose thynges of great counsaile. And besides that he was geuen to these vices of nature,what yll counsayle maye doo he was much worse by the counsayle and famylyaritie of certayne euyll disposed personnes, as Pierse of Ganeston, Hughe the Spencers, & other, whose wanton counsayle he folowing gaue him selfe to the ap∣petyte and pleasure of the body, no thyng ordering his common weale by sadnesse, discresion, and Iustice, whiche thinge caused fyrste greate varience betwene him and hys no∣bles, so that shortlye he became to them odible, and in the ende was depriued of his kingdome. This kinge in the second yeare of his raygne,The king maryed, went into fraunce & maried Isabell doughter to Phi∣lip le Belle kynge of fraunce, and after with her returned īto englād. About this time Piers of Ga∣neston behaued hym selfe ylle a∣gainste
the Lordes, and waxed so proude that he would reuyle them, wherfore they sodenly rose,Piers of ganestō be headed. and be∣seiged him in the castell of Scar∣broughe, and at the last wan it and toke Piers and broughte him to a place nere to Warwike. and there stroke of his heade where with the kinge was greatly dyspleased. About ye .vi. yere of this king, Ro∣bert le Bruse heryng of the deuisi∣on betwene the king and his lords came agayne in to Scotland and there was amytted kinge,A batayle at banoc∣kes borne wherfore kinge Edwarde prepared a greate Armye and wente in to Scot∣lande, and nere to a place called Banockysbourne he mete with the Scottes where was betwene them a cruell battayle, but the Englysh∣men lost the felde, and many of the lordes and great men of England were slayne and taken, and the kīg fledde wyth greate daunger into
Barwyke. In the .ix. yeare of kynge Ed∣warde the Scottes wan Barwike,The scot∣tes won barwike. and shortly after they entered Nor∣thumberlande and slewe man wo∣man and chyld. Aboute this time there was a greate dearthe in Englande of all thinges,Great pla¦ges in England and after folowed greate Pestilence, yet all these mocions mended not the kynge of his yll liuinge. In the .xi.A bataile of mitton yeare of this king the Scottes entred Englande & at a place in yorke shire called Mitton was fought a cruell batayle where the English men lost the felde, and much people of the countrey slaine But the kinge was all ruled by Hughe Spenser the father and the sonne, and the commons had thē in great hatred. In the .xii. yeare of thys kinge
there was a Parliament holden at London,Spēcers banished. where by the entreatinge of the lordes, Hugh Spencer the fa¦ther, and Hugh Spencer the sonne were banished the Realme. But it was not longe after but the kynge contrary to that ordynaunce made in the Parlyamente sente for these Spencers agayne, and set them in hyghe aucthorytie. A batel at brough brygeShortly after the Lordes rose agaynst the kynge, and at broughe bryge the kynges Captayne called Andrew of Harkeley met wyth thē where many of the Barons of eng∣lande were slayne and taken, and afterward that the Earle of Lan∣caster and dyuers other of ye Ba∣rons and knyghtes were putte to deathe. In the .xvii. yeare of thys king the quene fearinge the tyrannye of the Spensors,The quen fled the lande. fled wyth her yonge sonne Edwarde into Fraunce to
her brother Charles where she and her sonne was gentlye receyued of her brother, which made great pro∣myse to ayde her agaynst the tyra∣ny of the Spencers. Shortly after Charles the frēch kynge (fearyng the Manassyng of the byshoppe of Rome) forsoke his systers quarell,The que∣ne and her sonne dri∣uen out of fraunce. and commaunded her to auoyde his lande. In the .xix.The que∣ne with her son en¦tered the lande. yeare of kyng Ed∣warde, quene Isabel and her sonne by the ayde and helpe of syr Iohn of Heynalde, with a small compa∣nye of Heynowayes, retourned in∣to England, to whome the nobles and commons gathered in greate nombre and pursued the kinge, the Spensers, and other enemies, so narowlye that shortlye after they toke them, and kepte the kinge in prisō at kenelworth, ye Spensours, the Earle of Arundell, Robert bal∣docke, and other Tyrantes whiche
of longe tyme had greued ye reame were put to deth. ¶ Edward the thyrd. Edward the third of that name and sonne to Edwarde the se∣cond, and of Isabell; onelye doughter of Phillip le Belle, after the deposynge of his father, was crowned kynge the second daye of February, the yeare of Christ .M.ccc.xxvi.Of kinge Edwarde the thyrde whē he was but .xv. yeres of Age. He was a man of excellent modestie and temperaunce, and ad¦uaunced suche parsons to hyghe dignities, as dyd moste passe other in integrytye, and innocencie of lyfe. In feates of armes he was ve¦rye experte, as the noble Prowes by him atchiued do well declare, as Froysart and other wryters do declare at large. Of his lyberality and clemency he shewed many gret
examples, brefelye, in all Pryn∣cely vertues he was so excellente, that few noble men before his time maye be to hym compared. At his begynnynge he was chefelye orde∣red by syr Roger Mortimer, and his mother Isabell. In the fyrst yere of his reygne,The scot∣tes ente∣red englād the Scottes entered into England and the kynge with a greate powre came to them at the Parke of stan∣hope and beset them rounde about, but by the treason of Syr Roger Mortimer the Scottes escaped without battayle wherby the king lost that voyage & al his charges. Shortly after at yorke the kinge maryed Phyllip the earles dough¦ter of Henaude.The king maryed. Then the kynge made peace with the Scottes and released to them theyr homage, and delyuered vnto them their charter or indenture called Ragman,Peace with the Scottes. as it was sayde by the counsel of the old
Quene and syr Roger Mortymer which anone after was made Earle of Marche. And the old quene & he toke vpon them the rule of ye whole realme whereby manye thynges grewe oute of order. Therle of kente be∣headed.About the thyrde yeare of this kynge the Earle of Kente, the olde kynges brother, supposyng his bro¦ther had bene alyue deuysed cer∣tayne letters for the deliueraunce of his brother, wherfore he was ac∣cused, and by aucthoryte of parly∣ament condempned and therefore was beheaded. Prince ed¦warde borne.In this yere was borne at Wed¦stocke Prynce Edwarde whiche in processe of tyme grewe to a noble and famous man, and was in his dayes counted the floure of Chi∣ualry throughoute all the worlde. Syr Ro∣ger mor∣timer be∣headed.In the fourthe yeare of kinge Edwardes raigne, syr Roger Mor¦tymer was accused for dyuerse
poyntes of treason, and namelye that he was ouer famylyar with the olde quene Isabell the kynges mother for whiche accusacions he was shortly after beheaded. In the .vi.A voiage into scot∣lande. yeare king Edward went into Scotlande with a great power, and at a place called Hal∣downe hyll, gaue the Scottes ba∣tayle wherin he optayned a tryum∣phant victory. So that he slewe of them .viii. Earles .ix.c. knyghtes and baronettes .cccc. esquiers and xxxiii.m. cōmon soudyers: And of the Englishe men were slayne one∣lye .xv. persons at the same voyage he wan the towne of Edenbrough and Barwycke with manye other castels, and gaue the gouernaunce of Scotland to Edwarde Baylol, betwene whome and the Scottes were foughten manye batayles, with greate dyuersite and chaunge of fortune.
After this time the Scottes so often rebelled,Scotland suffered muche pe∣nury. that kynge Edward made .iii. voyages into that lande within the space of .iiii. yeares. And with great manhode alwaye van∣queshed his enemies, and caused them to swere to him feautlie, and homage. In these battayles were slayne wel nere all the nobylyty of Scotlande, with infinite nombre of the common people. Warre be∣twene eng¦lande and Fraunce.In the .x. yere king Edward clay∣med tytle to the crowne of fraunce, wherfore open warre was proclay∣med betwene Englād and fraunce. good they vitels in EnglandAboute this time (as Fabyan wryteth) by reason of scarsite of Mony, was such plentie of vitay∣les in Englande that the lyke had not bene sene. For a quarter of wheat was solde for .ii. s. a fat gose for .ii. d. a pygge for a peny a fate Oxe for .vi. s. viii. d. a fat shepe for vi. d. or .viii. d. vi. Pygions a peny.
In the .xii. yeare king Edward prepared stronglye to make warre in to Fraunce,King Ed∣ward wēt to Ant∣warpe where he was pro∣claymed vicar ge∣nerall of the empire and for sure stablish¦mente of Amite betwene hym and the Holenders, Selanders, & Era∣banders, sayled to Antwarpe wher he concluded the matter with hys alies and by the consent of the Em¦perour Lewes, was proclaymed vicer geneneral of the Empyre. In the .xiii.The king held a par¦liamente. yeare kynge Ed∣ward returned into England and called his parliament at Westmin¦ster, and there by the aduyce of the whole realme, toke vpon hym the tytle to be kynge of Fraunce, and ioyned the armes of Englande to the armes of Fraunce and bare thē quarterlye as they yet continue, at which parliamente was graunted greate sommes of mony to mayn∣tayne hym in his warres. In the .xiiii.A batel on the sea. yeare of king Ed∣wardes raygne, he saylyng toward
Flaunders nye to the hauen of Scluce, met with the French kyn∣ges nauye: where was foughte a cruell batayle, whereof the kyng of England had the victory, and the frenche fleete, that was in nombre cccc. sayle, was wel nere all destroy∣ed, and the Soudiers taken, slaine, and drowned, so that of .xxxiii.M. there escaped not one. A yeare for one yeare.Shortlye after kynge Henry with a myghty army both of Eng∣lande, and of the Empyre, entered fraunce, and beseiged Torney, but shorlty after (by the meanes of the countes of Henand) mother to the Quene of Englande and syster to the french kyng, a peace was made for .xii. monethes, and kynge Ed∣ward returned into England. The scot∣tes trobe∣led Eng∣lande,In this tyme the Scottes (by the settynge on of the frenche men) recouered a great part of that land and in moste cruell wyse vexed the
Englyshe garysons. In the .xviii. yeare,The order of the gar¦ter fyrste ordained, kinge Ed∣warde enuented and ordained first the order of ye garter at Winsoure. Aboute this time the Earle of Darby was sente into Gascoyne where he wonne dyuers townes & Castels,Gascoine wonne. and before Anberoche the Earle of Darby, by polecy of syr Walter of Manni, with a .M. eng¦lishemen discomfited and slewe .x.M. frenchmē, and Gascoines, and toke prysoner the Earle of Lay, their chefe capitayne, with dyuers other nobles: & subdued the coūtre. In the .xx. yeare king Edward with his sonne Prynce Edwarde, sayled into Normandy, and ouer∣rode and spoyled the countre, euen to Paris, and gathered wonderful rychesse and prayes which he sente into Englande. Shortlye after he encountred the Frenche kynge nye to the forest of Cressy,The bat∣tayle of Cressy. wher betwen
them was foughte a cruel batayle, and kinge Edwarde obtayned the victorye. In that battayle was slayne the floure of the Chiualrye of Fraūce. That is to say the king of Boheme, with ten other greate Princes, foure score barons .xii.c. knyghtes, and mo than .xxx.M. of the common Soudiers. Callys wonne.After thys victorye the kynge wente towarde Calys and beseged the towne the space of .xi. monethes during which sege the french kyng came to rayse the sege but shortlye after he departed without battaile, wherfore they of Callys yelded vp the towne to kinge Edward. The king of scottes taken pri∣soner.In the tyme of the seige before Callys, Dauid of Scotlande by the settinge on of the french kinge, warred on the borders of England But the quene assembled a strong armye, as well of preestes as laye men, and nere to Durham toke in batayle the kinge of Scottes pry∣soner,
with manye of his greatest Lordes and earles, and slew of the common soudiers .xv.M. About the .xxii.A greate derth tho∣rough out all the worlde. yeare of kynge Edward the .iii, ther was a wonder¦ful famyn and Pestilence raygned throughout all the world. In Ita∣lye scant the .x. person of an .c. was lefte on lyue. In the citie of parys in Fraunce died .L.M. and in the citie of London (besyde the bodies buried in churches and churche∣yardes, and monasteryes, and o∣ther places of buriall) there was buryed in the charterhouse churche yerde .l.M. persons and aboue, as wryteth Fabian. In thys yeare the Captayne of Callys conspyred to betraye it agayne to the Frenchemen,calis like to be∣trayed. the historye whereof declareth won∣derfully the great manhode, polly∣cie, liberalytie, & gentylnesse of the noble kinge Edwarde, reade Fro∣sarde
the .c. and .v. Chapter of his fyrste boke. The tira∣ny of the byshop of rome. &c.Aboute this time kinge Ed∣ward was elected to be Emperour But he consyderynge the trouble & vnquietnesse of the byshop of Ro∣me, refused it. And then they chose the Marques of Messena whiche also refused it. Gines yel¦ded to the englishmēIn the, xxvii. yere of king Edwar¦des raygne the towne and castel of Gines was yelded to ye english mē. A voyage into Gas∣coyne.In the .xxix. yeare of kinge Ed¦wardes raygne Prynce Edwarde of Wales, with a stronge compa∣nye of Soudyers passed into Gas∣coyne, where he made sore warre, & destroied Castelles and townes be¦fore hym with greate successe and toke the Castell & towne of Rehe∣morentyne, with other. A voyage īto fraūceAboute this tyme king Edward sayled to Calys, & began to make war vpon fraūce but shortly after
he returned because the Scottes rose & inuaded ye Englysh borders. In the .xxx.The bat∣taile of poytiers. yeare of kynge Ed∣wardes raygne prynce Edward of Wales, nie to the citie of Poytiers ioyned batayle with king Iohn of fraunce, on whome the prynce wan a noble victory. In this conflycte kynge Iohn was taken wyth hys yonge sonne Phillippe,The fifth king takē prysoner. there were taken .ix. earles, the archebyshop of Sens, and many other greate lor∣des, Baronettes and knyghtes & mē of name to the nombre of .xvi.c and there were slayne the Duke of Burgoyne, the Duke of Athens, syr Iohn Cleremond Marshall of Fraunce, with many lordes, Baro∣netes, knyghtes, and menne of Ar∣mes to the nombre of .xvii.c. and iii.M of other meane persones. And after this felde thus wonne, the Prynce with his prysoners re∣turned to Burdeaux. And shortely
after they sayled in to Englande where they were of kinge Edwarde noblely receyued. In the, xxxiii. yeare, kynge Ed∣warde with the Prynce his sonne wetne to Calys and so in to fraūce where he made sharpe warre,A voiage īto fraūce and burned and destroyed the countre without mercye. But shortly after by great entreaty ther was a peace concluded on this condicion that kinge Edward should haue to his propre possession the countres of Gascoyne and Guyan, Poyters, Lymosyn, Beleuile, Exanctes, Ca∣lys Guines, and diuers other lord∣shyps, townes, Castels and all the landes to them belonging, without knowledge of any souerainte,The frēch king raun¦somed. obey¦saunce, homage, or subiection for the same, and that the french kyng shoulde paye for his raunsome .iii Myllons of Scutes, whiche a∣mounte to .v.c.M. li. and so kynge
Iohn was delyuered. In the .xxxvii. yeare of kinge Edwarde,The deth of the frēch king kynge Iohn of fraunce came into englande of his fre wyll to sporte hym and had greate chere. And shortly after dyed at the Sa∣uoy at London. In this yeare also Prynce Ed∣warde toke possessyon of the Du∣chie of Guyen and Acquitaine and did homage to his father for the same.Prince ed¦ward ma∣de duke of Guyen. About the .xl. yeare of king Ed∣ward Dampeter of Spayne was expulsed his realme by his basterd brother Henry, wherfore he fled to Prynce Edward whych was then at Burdeaux.A bataile ī Spaine. But this Peter by ye ayde of Prynce Edwarde fought with his brother Henry and put him to flyghte and slue .v.M. of his men. And restored Peter to dy∣uerse cities and holdes which he be¦fore had loste. But not longe after
the Prynce returned home, and hē∣ry repayred his army, and warred vpon his brother so fearselye that in the end he vtterly vanquished hī to deth, and then without resistence possessed the kingdom of Spaine. In the .xlii. yere of kyng Edward new variāce begā betwen Englād & Fraūce,A voiage īto fraūce wherfore the duke of Lā¦caster was sent with an army into fraūce & nere vnto Arde the Duke of Burgoyne lodged within a mile of the Englysh armye the space of xviii. dayes and neuer profered ba∣tayle, but at the laste stole awaye pryuelye by nyghte, and then ente∣red the Duke further into fraunce as Froysar sheweth at large. In the .xliii. yeare, syr Roberte knolles entered ye realme of fraūce with a stronge army and wasted & destroyed the countrie and passed euen by Parys ranged in batayle, and without any notable battayle
returned. About the xlv. yeare the french men made sharpe warre in Gyen,Great va¦riaunce ī Gascoine and many dyuers skyrmyshes wer betwene the frenchmē and the eng∣lysh men but most commonlye al∣wayes the englyshemen loste, and the citie of Lymoge & other cities rebelled against Prince Edward. Wherfore Prynce Edwarde per∣ceyuinge all this, & what for lacke of money, and what for sykenes & maladyes that he had, he departed into England, leuyng behynd him hys bretheren the Duke of Lanca∣ster, and the Earle of Cambryge, to rule Gascoyne, but sone after they came into Englande. In the .xlvi.A ba . yeare of kyng Ed¦wardes raygne the Earle of Pen∣broke was sent with a great army to fortefye the towne of Rochell. But he was met on the Sea, wyth a companye of Spanyardes, be∣twene
whome there was a cruell fyghte, but the Englishe men were discomfited, and the earle of Pen∣broke was there taken wyth a .c.lx. mo prisoners, and the most parte of his men slayne and drowned. And sone after the towne of Rochel was yelded to the Frenchmen. A voiage īto fraūceAlso in the .xlvii. yere the duke of Lancaster landed at Calys with a myghtye armye passed throughe fraunce robbyng and spoylyng the countre euē to Burdeaux, and wer neuer fought with saue onelye at a scirmyshe they loste .l. Speres and xx. archers. In the .l. yeare of this kynge there was suche syckenes and mor¦talite,A greate deathe. as well in Italy as in Eng∣land ye innumerable of people died The deth of Prince EdwardeIn the .li. yere Prince Edward of Englande departed out of this lyfe who was in his time the flow∣re of Chiualry and was buryed at
Canterburye. Also in the same yeare, the .xxi.The deth of kinge Edward daye of Iune, the yeare of Chryste a .M.ccc.lxxvii. kynge Edwarde dyed and is buryed at Westmin∣ster. This king Edwarde when he dyed had .iiii. sonnes, that is to say Lyonell Duke of Clarence, Iohn of Gaunte Duke of Lancaster, Edmonde of Langley Duke of yorke, and Thomas of Wedstocke Earle of Cambrege. ¶Rychard the seconde. RIchard the seconde of ye name, and son to Prince Edward eldest sonne to kyng Edward the thyrd beyng of .xi. yeres of age was crow¦ned kynge of England the .xv. day of Iuly, the yeare of Chryste a .M ccc.lxxvii. In the fyrst yeare of kyng Ry∣chardes
raygne the frenche kynge sente a great nauy to the sea,The frēch men ente∣red englād which entered in dyuers partes of thys realme and dyd moch harme wher they landed, and at the laste came into Thames, & so to graues ende, and brent parte of that towne and returned into fraunce agayne. About this tyme the Earle of Cambrege the kynges vncle was sent into fraunce with .viii.M.A voiage īto fraūce mē, and passed the water of Sōme, and so forth to Troyse and wan it, and so passed to the coūtre of Gascoine, and so into Brytayne where syr Iohn of Mounford duke of Bri∣tayne gladly receyued them. Iacke Strawe.In the .v. yeare of this kynge the commons of Englande arose and specially in Estsex and Kente, and made them capytaines of whō the chefe they called Iacke straw, which came into the towre of Lon∣don where the king was, and there
they toke the Archebyshop of Caū¦terbury, the Lorde of saynt Iohns, and a frere the kinges confessoure, and at the towre hyll smot of theyr heades, and slewe and robbed all straungers in Sothewarke, and brente the Duke of Landcasters place called the Sauoy, and dyd muche hurt, and beynge assembled in Smithfeld, vsed them selues ve¦rye proudely and vnreuerentlye a∣gainst the kynge. But by the man∣hode and wysdome of Wyllyam Waulworth mayre of London, that rude company was disceuered and theyr Capitayne Iacke straw was slayne.Iacke Strawe slayne. Aboute thys tyme was a won∣derfull great earthequake in Eng¦lande the lyke whereof was neuer sene before that day nor syns.A greate erthquak In the .vii. yeare of kynge Ry∣chard,A voyage into flaun∣ders, Henry Spenser bishoppe of Norwitche wente into Flaunders
at the commaundement of the bys∣shop of Rome with a great power, and wan Dūkyrke and grauelyn, and brente .xl. shyppes and muche goodes beyng within them, but af∣ter there fell a disease of the flickes and other dyseases among his sou∣diers, that he was fayne to returne into Englande. The king maryed.In the .viii. yeare kynge Ry∣charde Maryed the doughter of Viceslaus, Emperour of Almaine. A bataile on the seaIn the .x. yeare of this king the earle of Arundell was sente into Guyan to strengthe the soudyers there, but on the sea, he met with a flote of Flemynges laden with Ro¦chell wyne, and set vpon them and toke them. Amonge the which was taken the Admyral of fraunce. Great va¦riaūce be∣twene the king & his Lordes & commonsIn the .xi. yeare there was mar∣uaylous greate trouble and dyscē∣cyon in Englande, betwene the kinge and his counsayle and other
nobles and prelates of the realme. The commons by the ayde and comforte of the kinges vncles and other lordes of the realme (that is to saye the Duke of Glocester, the duke of yorke, ye earles of Darby, of Arundell, and of Notyngham) put to death dyuers of the kynges counsel and chefe offycers, and cha¦sed the duke of Ireland and other out of the realme, for that they cau¦sed the kynge to burden his people with exactions and could make no iust accompt of the same when they were required. In the .xv.The liber¦ties of lō¦don lost. yeare there was a ryot in London wherfore the king seased the lybertye of the citie into his handes. But shortlye after by the meanes of the quene, & doctor Grauesend bishop of London they were restored to theyr lybertyes. In the .xviii.A voiage īto Irelād yeare king Richard made a voyage into Irelād which
was more to his charge thē honor. Hēry the iiii. bany∣shed.In the, xxii. yeare Henry Boling broke duke of Hareford, and sonne to the Duke of Lancastre, and the duke of Norfolke were banyshed out of the realme. Shortly after Henry bolinbroke Duke of Herford,Kinsh Ry¦chard the ii. deposed wich was bani∣shed into fraūce, beyng sente for of the Lōdoners, came into englande with a small power, to whome the cōmons gathered in so gret multi∣tude, & forsoke their Prince, yt not longe after at ye castel of Flint, they toke king Richard, & held hī as pri¦soner in the tower of Londō, where he yelded vp & resigned to the sayd Henrie duke of Hereforde, all his power & kingly title to the crowne of england & fraunce, knowleging that he was worthilye deposed for his demerites and misgouernynge of the common weale.
¶Henry the fourthe. HEnry the fourthe, sonne to Ihon of Gaunt, late Duke of Lancaster, and thirde sonne of Edwarde the thyrde toke possessiō of his realme of England the last daye of Septembre, in the yere of oure Lorde a .M.ccc.lxxxxix. ¶Anno dn̄i .M.ccc.lxxxix. Anno primo Henrici .iiii. Thomas knol∣les Grocer mayre. William Hyde Ihon Walderne shyreffes. In this yeare dyed kynge Ry∣charde the seconde. In thys yere also certaine Dukes and Erles of England and other,A cōspira¦ci againste the kyng. were accorded to make a mūming on twelfe daye at nyghte, trayterously to kyll the kynke, than beynge at Wyndsore, whiche beynge warned therof, de∣parted sodaynelye & came to Lon∣don, & made pursute after the sayd
conspiratours, which apprehended and taken, were after by the lawe put to deathe. In this yeare kyng Hēry sent syr Thomas Persy Erle of Worsiter with a goodly crue of soudiers into Aquitayne to ayde syr Robert knowlles leuetenaunte there,A vyage into aqui¦tayne. and to parswad the people to theyr obeysaunce, who dyd greatly stomacke ye death of king Richard An act of Parlia∣mente.In this yeare was enacted by auctorite of Parliamente, that no Lorde, nor other man, myght gyue anye gownes, or lyueryes to anye of theyr tenaūtes, or other persons, onelye but to theyr household and menyall seruauntes. In this yeare also was enacted that all repyers,An other acte. & other fysshers from Rye, Wynchelsee, and other costes of the sea syde, shoulde sell theyr fysshe theyr selfe in Cornehil Chepe, & other stretes of London, to all men that woulde by theim,
Fysshemongers, and all other that woulde bye the sayd fisshe to make sale agayne of it, onely except. ¶Anno domini .M.cccc. an. ii. Hē∣rici .iiii. Ihon Fraūces goldsmith mayre, Ihon Wakele, Wyllyam Ebot, shyryffes. In this yeare the French kyng sent Lorde Iames of Burbone wt xii.C.the frēch mē made a vyoage into Eng¦lande. knyghtes & squyres to ayd Owen Glendor a squyre of wales agaynst kynge Henry, and landed at Plummouthe in Deuenshyre, who shortly after to his great losse & shame retired backe into Fraūce In thys yeare a Priour & viii. fryers were hāged at Tiburne for treason. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.i. anno tertio, henrici quarti. Ihon Shadworth Mayre, Wyllyam Fremyngham, Wylliam Venour shyreffes. In this yeare was sene in Eng∣landea blasing starre.
a comete or blasynge starre of a huge quantite. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.ii. anno quarto herici quarti. Ihon Walcot mayre Robert Chicheley, Richarde Mat∣lowe shereffes. In this yeare was the battayl of Shrowysbury. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.iii. an quinto henrici quarti. Wyllyam Askam mayre. Thomas Fawkener, Tho∣mas Pole shyreffes. A cōmoti¦ō in yorke shyreIn this yeare began a cōmocion in Yorke shere, but theyr entente was knowen, and for that treason was apprehēded Richard Scrope Archebyshop of Yorke, the Earle Marshall. Syr Ihon Lampley, and syr Robert Plumton, who in whytson weke were beheaded at Yorke. In this yere the king of Scottes
sente hys sonne the Prynce into Fraunce,The prīce of Scot∣land takē prysoner. but by violence of wether was dreuen into Englande where he cōtynued prisoner many yeares after. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.iiii. an. vi. hen∣rici iiii. Ihon Hynd draper mayre, William Louth, Steuen Spilmā shyreffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.v. an. vii. hen∣rici quarti. Ihon woodcoke mayre Henry Barton, Wyllyam Crow∣ner shyreffes. ¶Anno dom. m.cccc.vi. an. octauo henrici quarti, Rychard wittyngtō marcer mayre, Nicolas Wotton, Geffery Broke shyreffes. ¶An. do. M.cccc.vii. an. ix. hērici quarti, William Sandon mayre,
Hēry Balton, Hēry Pōfret shyref. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.viii. an. x. hen∣rici quarti, Drewe Barētine gold∣smythe Mayre, Thomas Duke, Wyllyam Norton sheryffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.ix. an. xi, henri∣ci quarti, Rychard Marlow Yrin∣mōger mayre. Ihon Law, Wylliā Chichelye shyreffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xii. anno hēri∣ci quarti. Thomas knolles grocer Mayre, Ihon Penne, Thomas Pyke shyreffes. This yeare was a byll put into the Parliament agaynst ye spiritu∣altie, for wasting of the tēporaltie. ¶Anno do. m.cccc xi. an. xiii. hen∣rici quarti. Robert Chichelye gro∣cer mayre, Ihon Reynwel, Walter Cotton shyreffes.
¶Anno do. m.cccc.xii. an. xiiii. hē∣rici quarti, Wylliam Walderne marcer Mayre, Raufe Leuynghā, Wylliam Senenoke shyreffes. In this yeare kynge Henry the fourth dyed, the .xx. daye of march,The deth of Kynge Hēry the fourthe. In the yere of our lorde a thousād cccc.xii. And whan he had reygned xiii. yeares fiue monethes, and one and twenty dayes, & lyeth buryed at Cantorbury. ¶Henry the fyfte. HEnry the fyfte began hys reigne the xxi. day of march, in the yeare of our lord next aboue mencioned. And was crowned at westmynster the nynthe daye of A∣pryll folowynge. In the yeare of oure lorde M.cccc. and xiii. In thys yeare was a generall counsel holden at Constance vpon the ryuer of Reyne,a general counsell. to the whyche councell was sente Rycharde Erle
of warwike and iii. Bishopes with dyuers doctours knyghtes & squi∣ers to ye nombre of viii.C. horses. In this coūsel were condempned to death for heresy Ihon Wicliffe, Ihon Husse, & Ieram of Prage, The lord cobhā ac∣cused of heresy.In thys yeare syr Ihon Olde∣castell lorde Cobham was accused to the Archebishop of Cantorbury for certeyne poyntes of heresy. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xiii. an. i. hē∣rici quinti, Wyllyam Walderne mayre, Raufe Leuingham, Williā Seuenoke sheyreffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xiiii. an. ii. hē∣rici quinti. Williā Crowner maire Ihon Suttō, Ihon Michel shyre. A parlia∣ment hol∣dē at Ley¦ceter.In this yeare in Apryll was hol∣den a Parliamente at Leyceter, in the which Parliament were cōclu∣ded many profitable lawes, and a∣monge other thynges was a byll
put into the Parliamente house a∣gaynst thaccesse of the spiritualtye & was lyke to take effecte, but than the Bishoppes and Abbottes mo∣ued the kynge to make warre in to Fraūce for his title there, so that in al his tyme after he had neuer leser to speake therof more. And also to∣warde that voyage was graunted by the spiritualtie such a payment as had not bene payed before. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xv. an. tertio henrici quinti, Thomas Fakener mercer mayre. Ihon Mychel, Tho¦mas Alayne shyreffes. This yere the kinge dyd prepare an armye into Fraunce of .xv.C.A cōspira¦cie agaīst the kyng. shyppes, & the day before he sholde depart from Southhāton certaine lordes dyd cōspyre ye kynges death for the whiche conspiracie was ap∣prehended Rychard Erle of Cam∣brege, the lord Scrope, & syr Tho∣mas Gray knight, who at the tyme
of theyr executiō cōfessed that they were set a worke by ye Frēch kyng. And after theyr execution the king set forwarde, & on the vigill of the assūption of our Lady he with all hys nauy landed at Kyd Caux in Normandy.The win¦nynge of Herflew. And on the next daye he beseged the towne of Herflwe, and the .xxxvii. daye after the sayd towne was yelded to the kyng. The bat∣tell of agī courte.In this yeare in Octobre was ye battell of Agyn courte whiche vic∣tory by the onely prouision of god fell to the Englishemen, for kynge Henry had in his bataile but onely two .M. horsemen and xii.M. fo∣temen of al sortes. And on ye Frēch partie were almost all the nobilitie of Fraunce with .lx.M. hortemen besyde fotemen. There were slayne on the Frenche partie aboue .x.M. persones wherof were princes and nobles bering baners .C.xxvi. and all the remnaunt sauynge .xvi C.
were knyghtes, Esquires, & gen∣tlemen. And on the Englishe parte wer slaine Edward duke of yorke, therle of Suffolke, syr Rycharde Kykeley and Dauy gāme esquyre, and of al other not aboue .v. or .vi C. persons. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xvi. an. iiii. hērici quinti, Nicolas wotton dra¦per Mayre, Wyllyam Cambridge Alayne Euarde shyreffes. This yeare in Maye the Em∣peror Sigismond came into Eng∣lande to treate of a peace betwene kynge Henry and the French king and was nobely receyued but hys labour toke small effecte.The Em¦perour ca¦me into Englāde. This yere was Harflew beseged by the Frēchemen,Harflew beseged. both by water & land, but incōtinent the kyng sent his brother the Duke of Bedforde with a noble army &,A battell on the see on the sea en∣countered the French Nauy in nū∣bre
.v.C. shyppes, whiche were by the Englishemē dyscomfyted and almoste all taken or drowned, and when the army by lande knew that the Nauy by sea was discomfited, reysed theyr sege and departed. ¶An. do. M.cccc.xvii an. quinto henrici quinti, Henry Bartō skin∣ner Mayre, Robert Whityngton, Ihon Couentre shyreffes. A voiage into Nor∣mandy.This yeare in Iuly the kynge accompanied with his brethren the Dukes of Clarēce and Gloucester with a noble armie made a voyag into Normandy and wonne Caen with the castell and in conclusyon what by force & rendering vp wan almost all ye holdes in Normandy. ¶Anno domi. M.cccc.xviii. anno vi. henrici quinti, Richarde Mor∣lowe yremōger mayre, Hēry Rede, Ihon Gedney shyrefes. In this yere syr Ihon Oldcastel
knyght lorde Cobham was hāged in cheines and after brente. In this yeare the laste daye of Iuly the cytie of Roan was bese∣ged bothe by water and by lande,The citie of Roan beseged. insomoche that by reason of famin they were cōpelled to fall to treatie and so the xix. daye of Ianuary the cytie was yelded to the kynge. And immeniatly after all Normandy yelded them selues also. ¶An. do. M.cccc.xix. an septimo henrici quinti, Wylliā Seuenoke grocer mayre, Ihon Parues, Rauf Barton, Ihon Bryan shyreffes. In the tyme of thys warre in Fraunce there was great variaūce betwene the nobles of Fraūce and specially betwene the Dolphin,variaūce betwene the lordes of fraūce the Duke of Burgon, and the Duke of Orliaunce with other, and there was a place appoynted to mete to treate for a peace and thether came
the Dolphin & the Duke of Bur∣gonne and the sayd Duke kneling on his knees tellyng his tale to the Dolphin one Tavagny du chastel smote the Duke on the heed with a hachet & so moste shamefully was mordered. A commu¦nycatyon for a pea∣ce.In this yeare there was a com∣munycatyon for a peace betwene England and Fraunce but it toke small efecte, wherfore the Kynge went forward with his conquest & sent an armie to Ponthoyse & with forse wanne it,Pōthoise wonne. to the great feare of the parisience and all Fraunce. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xx. anno viii. henrici quinti, Richard whitinghā mercer mayre, Robert whitingham Ihon Butler shyreffes. A peace concluded betwene Fraūce & EnglandIn this yeare in Maye was cō∣cluded a peace betwene the Kynge of Englande and the French kyng so that king Henry did mary lady
Katheryne the Frenche kynges doughter at Troye in Chāpaigne after which mariage kynge Henry was proclamed heyre and regente of Fraunce. In this yeare at Christmas the kyng of Englād kept such a noble house in Roan as Regē of Fraūce that to his courte all men resorted and fewe to the Frenche kynges courte, and after Christmas he or∣deaned his brother ye Duke of Cla¦rence his leuetenaūt generall both of Fraunce & Normandy, and on the morow after candelmas daye the kynge and the quene toke ship∣pyng at Calis & landed at Douer and on saynte Mathues daye fo∣lowynge the quene was crowned at westminster.the kynge returned into Eng∣lande. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xxi. an. ix. hen∣rici quinti, Wylliam Cambrydge grocer mayre, Ihon Butler, Wil∣liam weston shyreffes.
In this yere the Duke of Cla∣rence made a rode into Aniowe where by a lūbard he was betraied and so was slayne with dyuers no∣ble men more.the death of the du∣ke of cla∣rence. A voiage into fraū¦ce.Also in this yeare in Maye the kynge passed the sea with a noble army into Fraūce and pursued the dolphin on such wyse that he coude scant fynde any place to hyde him∣selfe in. In this yeare the kyng beseged the cytie of Meaux in brye during whiche syege was borne at Wyn∣sore the kynges sōne named Hēry.the byrth of Kynge Hēry the syxte. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xxii. an. x. hen∣rici quinti, Robart Chychelye gro∣cer mayre, Rychard Iostlyn, williā weston shyreffes. The deth of Kynge Hēry the fyfte.In this yeare kynge Henry the fyfte dyed the xxi. daye of August. In the yeare of oure Lorde next a∣boue mencioned whan he had reig∣ned
.ix. yeares and fyue monethes and xxiiii. dayes, and lyeth buryed at Westmynster. ¶Henry the syxt. HEnry ye vi. began his reigne the fyrst day of Septembre, in the yere of our lorde next aboue mencioned, & was crowne at West¦mynster in the eyght yeare of hys reygne, all whiche tyme before for insufficiency of age he was admit∣ted to ye rule of his vncles, the Du∣ke of Bedforde and Glocester, he was of the age of viii. monethes & odde dayes and not aboue. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.xxxiii. an∣no primo Henrici sixti. Wyllyam walderne mayre, William Estfeld Robert Tatersale shyreffes. Thys yeare was the Duke of Glocester made protectour of Eng¦lande, and the Duke of Bedforde
regēt of Fraūce which Regent like a noble capitayne maytayned the warre against ye Dolphin so longe as he lyued. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxiiii. anno secondo Henrici sixti, Wyllyam Crowner drapen Mayre, Nicolas Iames, Thomas wadford shyref. In this yere the Duke of Bed∣ford Regēt of Fraūce,The bat∣tayle of vernoyle. made warre vpon the Dolphyn of Fraūce and vnto Englishemen fell the victory at the battayle of vernoyle where were viii.M. Frenchmen slayne. Also in this yeare was Iames Steward kynge of scottes delyue∣red which was prisoner in Englād long time before,The king of scottes deliuered. who for ye realme of Scotlād did omage to the king of Englande and maryed the lady Iane doughter to the Erle of So∣merset and cosyn to the kynge. ¶Anno domini M.ccc.xxv. an.
tercio Henrici sixti, Ihon Michell Mayre, Symon Seman, Ihon Bythwater shyreffes. In this yeare the Duke of Glo∣cester protecter of Englande sente vnto hys brother the Regente of Fraunce .x.M. men to mayntayne warre agaynst the Dolphin.A voiage into fraū¦ce. In this yeare also was a bat∣tayle at vernoyle in perch betwene the Regēt & the Duke of Alaūson,The bat∣tayle of Vernocle in Perch the victory fell to the Englshe men where were slayne of Frenchmen & Scottes .ix. thousand and vii.C. and of Englyshemen xvi.C. ¶Anno domini M.cccc.xxvi. an∣no quarto Ihon couentre marcer Mayre Wyllyam Mylted, Ihon Brokeley shyreffes. In thys yeare began a greate variaunce in Englande betwene the noble men of the realme for the Byshop of wynchester dyd enuyeOf a no∣ble prelat
the lorde protector in so moch that the Lorde Regent of Fraunce was fayne to come into England to set theim at one. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxvii. anno quinto Henrici sixti. Ihon Rayn∣well fyshmonger Mayre, Roberte Arnold, Ihon Heygham shyrefes. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxviii. anno sixto Henrici sixti. Ihon Godney draper Mayre, Robert Ocle, Hēry Frowyke shyreffes. Orliance beseged.In thys yeare was Orlyaunce beseged by the thenglyshe men and as syr Ihon Fastolfe wente frome Parys towarde the army with vy∣tales ther met him an army of frē∣chemen where after longe conflicte the Englysh men optained the vic∣tory where were .xxv.C. Frenchmē slayne and .xii.C. taken prisoners.
¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxix. anno sep¦timo Henrici sixti. Henry Berton skiner Maire, Thomas Dushous Raufe Holande shyreffes. In this yeare the seage brake vp before Orliaunce and wan many townes as Geneuile, Meū, & Fort, with diuers other, and as the lorde Talbot was coming to Meū with v.M. men he was incountered with an army of Frenchmen to the nombre of xxiii.M. where was ta∣ken prisoners the Lorde Talbot & the lorde Scales with other.The lord talbot ta¦ken priso¦ner. And of Englishemen were slayne xii.C. persons to the great reioysynge of the Dolphin & other of his facte. In this yeare also after this vic∣tory the Dolphin reysed an army & wan by cōposicion Troys in Chā∣payne, & the cytie of Raynes with dyuers other townes and castelles whiche Dolphin had in his campe one Ione a stout Ramp whiche the
Frenchemen dyd call La pusell de dwe,Of Ione the witch the mayd of God. And after¦warde in thys same yeare was the Dolphin sacred kynge of Fraunce at Raynes in the presense of all the noble men of his faction,The sa∣cred king at Ray∣nes. and the Dukes of Lorayne and Barre by the name of Charles the syxte. The duke of Bed∣ford pur∣sueth the Dolphyn frō place to place.And the Duke of Bedford Regēt of Fraunce beynge at Paris hard of this doinges of the French king with an noble army of Englishmē and Normans pursued him frome place to place tyl he came to senles in Berre where both armies might se other, & after bothe armyes had lyne in eche others syght .ii. dayes, the Frenche kyng lyke a carpet ca∣pitayne in the dead of the nyghte brake vp his army & fled to Braye which when the Regent perceyued mystrustynge the waueringe Par∣ciās returned wt his armi to paris. In this yere by the procurement
of the byshop of Rone Henry Ben∣ford Cardinall of Wynchester cō∣monly called the ryche Cardinall,Mē sente into fraū¦ce. was sent into Beame with iiii.M. men to reuēge the bishop of Rome, but whē he came to Douer he was countermaunded by the lorde pro∣tector & went into Fraūce to helpe the Regent agaynst ye Frēch kyng. ¶Anno domini M.cccc.xxx. anno octauo Hērici sixti. Williā Estfeld mercer Mayre. Wyllyam Ruffe, Raufe Holande shyreffes. In this yere the Regēt of Fraūce lefte the gouernaunce of Paris to the Byshop of Ely Chaunceller of Fraunce,A parlia∣mente at Roan. and the sayd Regent held Parliament at Roan animatynge the Normans to their obeysaunce to the Kynge of Englande &.c. At which season the Frenche king sent the Duke of Alaunson and his so∣ceres Ione, the greate goddesse of
the Frenche men to scale Paris,A sealeng of parys. from the which they were beaten to theyr great losse & theyr capytayne Ione was throwne into the dykes & had much worke to saue her lyfe. In this eyght yeare kyng Henry ye sixt was crowned at wistminster. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxi. an. nono Henrici syxti. Nicolas Wauton Mayre. Water Charsy, Roberte Large shyreffes. The order of the gol¦den flece.In this yeare did Phillip Duke of Borgon mary Lady Isabell doughter to Ihon kynge of Por∣tingale and great aunt to the king of Englande, at whiche maryage the sayd Duke ordeyned the order of the golden flece. In this yeare in Decembre the Englyshmen beseged the towne of of Laigny in the whiche the pusell was capitayne with other, who is∣sued oute to skyrmyshe wyth the
Englyshemen and Burgonyons, at which skyrmishe Ione the puzel was taken and after was sente to the duke of Bedford to Roan wher¦after long examinacion was brent to asshes.Ione the puzel brēt at Roan. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxii an. desi∣mo Hērici sixti. Ihon Welles gro¦cer Mayre. Ihon Aldryle, Steuen Browne shyreffes. In this ten yeare kynge Henry the syxte was crowned at Paris,king hēry the syxte crowned Kynge of fraūce in Paris. which is ye chiefe cytie in all fraūce with great triumphe & nobilitie. After kyng Henry was crowned kynge of Fraunce he kepte a noble house fyrste at Paris and after at Roan in whiche tyme there was a peace concluded for vi. yeares be∣twene the Englyshemen and the Frenchemen,A peace cō¦cluded. whiche peace within shorte tyme by the Frenchemē was broken. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxiii. an. xi.
Henrici sixti. Ihon Perueis fyshe∣mōger Maire. Ihon Olney Ihon Paddisly shyreffes. The pea∣ce brokē.In this yere the peace in Fraūce was broken wherfore on both par∣tyes were armyes set forthe & tow∣nes fortefied, and when the French men coulde not preuayle they sente forth theyr accostmed seruaūt cal∣led mayster Treasō, and corrupted Piers Andebeuffe constable of the castle of Roan with mony, that the Marcial of Fraūce with ii.C. per∣sons disgysed dyd entre the castell of Roan but they were sone espyed & so some of them were slayne some hanged and some raūsomed at the Regentes pleasure. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxiiii. anno xii. Hērici sixti. Ihon Brokely dra¦per mayre. Thomas Challō Ihon Lynge shyreffes. In this yeare the commons of
Normandy made insurrection, by the settyng on of the Frenche kyng but thei were shortely suppressed,The com¦mons of normādy rebelled. & many of them slayne. In this yeare was Ihon Duke of Burbon delyuered out of prysō whiche had bene prysoner in Eng∣lād syns the butayle of Agyncourt xviii. yeres before,The duke of Burbō delyuered out of pri¦son. & paied for his roūsome xviii.M. pound starling. In this yeare also began a ve∣riaunce betwene ye Regēt of fraūce and the Duke of Burgoyne to the losse of Englande and no gayne to Burgony.A variaū¦ce betwe∣ne the Re¦gent & the Duke of burgoine ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xxxv anno xiii. Henrici sixti. Robert Ocley grocer Mayre. Thomas Barnewel Sy∣mon Eyre shyreffes. This yere was a great frost that endured from the feast of saint ka∣theryne vnto the feast of saynt va∣lentyne,A greate froste. so that neyther shyp might sayle nor botte be rowed on ye riuer
of Thames, & therfore all the vyn∣tage was caryed to Londō by land in Cartes. A peace be¦twene the Frēchkīg & the duke of Burgo¦yne.In this yeare was concluded a peace betwene the Frenche kyng & the duke of Burgoyn to the great dyspleasure and losse of the Eng∣lyshemen. The deth of the re∣gente of Fraunce.In this yere died the noble Duke of Bedforde Regent of Fraunce & lyeth buried in our lady churche at Roan, in whose sted was elected re∣gente of Fraunce Richarde Duke of Yorke. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxvi. an. xiiii. Henrici sixti. Henry Frowyke mer∣cer Mayre. Thomas Catworthe, Robert Clopton shyreffes. paris lostIn this yeare the Parissioners rebelled agaynst the Englishemen and so rendered vp the cytie of Pa¦ris in to the Frenchemens handes and slew many of the Englishmen
that kept the cytie. In this yeare the Duke of Bur∣goyne with an army of xl.M. mē dyd laye seage to Calys.Calis be∣seged. And du∣rynge this seage the Duke sent the lorde of Croy with a cōuenient ar¦my to laie sege to Gines,Gines be¦seged. who gote there but small gaynes. Shortly after it was noysed in the campe of the Duke, that ye lord protector of England was shipped with a great army to come to calis to rayse the seage, and sodaynly in the nyghte the Duke of Burgoyne raysed his seage & lykewyse sent to Gynes for the lorde Croy & lyke a valyante capitayne fled awaye by nyghte and on the next daye in the mornyng the lorde protector came to land & entered the campe of hys enemyes, but they were gone,The duke brake vp his seage & fled by nyght. and had left behynde them the Tentes, ordinaunce, and vitayles, and all that they had.
¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxvii. an. xv. Hērici sixti. Ihon Michell mayre, Thomas worsted, Wylliam Gre∣gore shyreffes. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxviii. an. xvi henrici sixti. William Estfeld mer¦cer Mayre. Wylliam Chapman, Wylliam Hales shyreffes. The erle of warwi¦ke made Regent.In this yere ye Erle of warwyke was made Regent of Fraunce and ye duke of Yorke discarged, which Erle after hys ariuall in Fraunce dyd many noble feates as Halle wryteth at large. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xxxix. an. xvii. Henrici sixti Steuen Browne gro¦cer Mayre. Hughe Duke, Nicolas Yeo shyreffes. A darthe in englādIn this yeare by reason of vn∣temperat wether there was a great derthe in Englande so that wheate was at .iii. shyllynges .iiii. pens a bushell, & all other graynes were
sold at an excessiue price, aboue the olde custome. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xl. an. xviii. Hērici sixti. Robert Large mercer Mayre. Robert Marshall, Philip Malpas shyreffes. In this yere the Duke of Yorke was made againe Regēt of fraūce which accompanyed with the Erle of Oxford and dyuers other noble men sayled into Normandy,the frēche kyng fled for feare. & he hearynge that the Frenche kynge laye at seage at Ponthoyse wente thether with a noble army. But the Frenche king hearing of the Eng∣lyshe mennes cōmynge breake vp his seage & went awaye by nyght. In this yeare was the Duke of Orliaunce delyuered out of prysō who had bene prysoner in Englād xxv. yeares,The duke of orlian∣ce delyue∣red oute of pryson and for his raunsome the Duke of Burgoyne paied iiii. C. M. Crownes. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xli. anno. xix.
Hērici sixti. Ihon Paddisly gold∣smyth Mayre, Ihon Sutton wil∣liam wetinghale shyreffes. In this xix. yeare many noble feates of armes was dōe in fraūce for ye Duke of Yorke lord Regent sent the lorde Wylloughby with a noble Crue of archers and men of warre into Pecardy which did va∣lyantly.Thre ar∣myes at ones in Fraunce. Also he sent the lord Tal∣bot to beseage Depe, & he himselfe accōpanied with the Duke of So∣merset set forward in to the duchye of Aniowe where he dyd many no∣table feates. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xlii. anno xx. Hērici sixti. Robert Cloptō mayre William Combra, Richarde ryche shyreffes. This yeare the steple of Paules churche in London was set on fyre by lyghtnynge. In this yere also began to kindle in Englande the fyre of malis, for
the Cardynall of Wynchester dyd enuy the gouernaunce of the lorde protector,A vari∣aunce be∣twene the Lordes of England. for which variaunce af∣terward was ye distructiō of many a noble man, as after shall be de∣clared. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xliii. anno .xxi. Henrici sixti. Ihon Atherley yron∣monger Mayre, Thomas Bemōt Rycharde Nordon shyreffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xliiii. an. xxii. Henrici sixti. Thomas Catworthe grocer mayre. Nycolas Wyfolde, Ihon Norman shyreffes. In this yeare all the prynces of christendome sent theyr Ambassa∣dors vnto Troyes in Champayne to treate for a peace betwene Eng∣lande & Fraunce,A treatie for a peas and a peace was taken for v. yeares. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xlv. an. xxiii. Henrici sixti. Henry Frawyke mer∣cer mayre. Steuen Foster, Hughe
Wyche shyreffes. This yeare Lady Margret the kynges doughter of Ceryll was maried to the kyng,The king maryed. and after crow¦ned at Westminster, whiche mari∣age was neyther profitable to the Realme, nor yet honorable to the kyng, as Halle declareth at large. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xlvi. an. xxiiii. Henrici sixti, Ihon Olney mercer Myre. Ihon Herot, Godfrey Bo∣layne shyreffes. An insur∣rection at norwitchIn this yere was a great insur∣rection in Norwyche agaynste the Prior of Christes churche for ray∣sīg of new fines of their tenaūtes, the cytezens kept the gates against the Duke of Norfolke, who came thether to appeace the matter, but in conclusiō they opened the gates & submitted them selfes. The chefe offendours were put to execution, and the Mayre dyscarged of hys
offyce, and syr Ihon Clyfton was made gouernour tyll the kyng had restored the cytezens to thyr lyber∣ties agayne. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.xlvii. an. xxv. Henrici sixti. Ihon Gidnes draper Mayre, Wylliam Abraham, Tho∣mas Scot shyreffes. This yeare dyed the good duke of Glocester, and is buried at saint Albones. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.xlviii. an. xxvi. Henrici sixti. Steuen Browne gro¦cer Mayre. Wyllyam Cantlowe, William Marow shyreffes. In this yeare the Englyshemen lost many townes in Fraunce,The begī¦nyng of le¦synge of normādy. for by cause of the varyaunce betwene the nobilitie of Englād, there was small prouydyng to send ayd into Fraunce so that the sowdiers were vnpaid to ye great losse of Englād. ¶Anno do m.cccc.xlix. an. xxvii.
Henrici sixti, Thomas Challton Mayre. Thomas Canynges wil∣liam Holyn shyreffes. Roan yel∣ded to the Frenche kynge.In this yeare was Roan yelded to the Frenche kynge by reasō that the Cytezens rebelled agaynste the capitaines and so did almost al the townes of Normādy, and for lacke of ayde the Duke of Somerset & the lorde Tolbot were fayne to ren¦dre all into the Frēch mens hādes. A voyage in to IrelandeIn this yeare also the Duke of Yorke was sent with a conuenient army into Irelande to be the kyn∣ges leuetenaunt there, and to sup∣presse the wylde yrishe who dyd thē rebell. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.l. anno xxviii. Henrici sixti. Nicolas Vyuold gro¦cer mayre. Wyllyam Dere, Ihon Myddelton shyreffes. A voyage into Fraunce.In this yeare was syr Thomas Kyriel sent into Fraūce with a M. and v.C. men, and as he with other
capitaines wēt to rescue Caen they met with a great army of Frenche men, & after longe fyght the french mē obteyned the victory, and there were slayne iiii.M. Englyshemen and viii.C. taken prisoners. This was the fyrst foughten felde that ye Frenchemen gate of the Englyshe men in many yeres before,The fyrst felde loste by thyng∣lyshmen. therfore I can not blame them though thei make moche of it, they set forth all & hyde nothyng that maye be foud to theyr glory, but they wryte not how many of them were slaine and destroyed. ¶ Anno do. m.cccc.li. Anno. xxix. Henrici sixti. Wyllyam Gregory skynner maier, Mathewe Philip, Christopher warton shyryffes. In thys yere the Englyshemen loste all the holdes and townes in normandy which were in English mens possession xxx. yeares before,Norman∣dy loste.
and where conquered by kyng Hē∣ry the fyfte. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.lii. anno xxx. hērici sixti. Gefrey Feldyng mayre Richard Lee, Richard Allay shyre. A dissimu¦ling peaceThis yeare was a metyng of a great hoost vpō brent heth in kent, betwene the Kynge and the Duke of Yorke, and other noble menne whyche was appeased for a tyme and the malyce dissimuled. Aqui∣taine was wonne by the french menne.In this yeare was the countre of Aquitayne won by the frenche∣men, which had ben Englysh .iii c yeares and odde yeares and was wonne by Henri the thyrde. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.liii. anno. xxxi. Henrici .vi. Ihon Norman draper mayre. Ihon Walden Thomas Coke shyryffes. The ba∣tel of Cha¦stelon.In thys yeare the Lorde Tal∣bot Erle of Shrewesbury recoue∣red the cytye of Burdeaux and af∣ter conquered manye townes in
Gascoyne And at the Batyle of Chastellon ye saide noble Erle was slayne and his sonne also, with dy∣uerse noble & valyante Captaines of Englande, and many taken pri∣soners. Of this noble Earle of Shrewesbury serche Halles Cro∣nycle and you shall perceyue hys vaylyaunt actes. Thys yere Mahomet the great Turke wan Constantinoble with exceadynnge greate slaughter of Chrysten people,Constan∣tinople wonne by the greate Turke. and vnto the ad∣uaūsment of the Turkysh empire. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.liiii. an. xxxii. Henrci sixti. Steuē Foster mayre. William taylont, Iohn feld shir. This yere the flambe of Enuie bruste oute betwene the Duke of Yorke, who thē claimed ye Crowne,The fyrst bataile of saynete Albons. and the Duke of Somerset, who ruled the kynge, and at Saynt Al∣bans was fought a cruell batayle
and vnto the Duke of Yorke fell the victorye, & on the kinges parte was slayne the Duke of Somer∣set, the Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Stafforde with .viii.M menne more. After this bataile the duke of yorke with gret reuerence brought ye king to London where the sayd Duke was made Protec∣toure of the realme. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.lv. an. xxxiii. Henrici .vi. Wyllyam Marlowe grocer mayre. Iohn yonge Tho∣mas oldgraue shiryffes.The duke of yorke deposed of his pro¦tectorship By meanes of the quene and her counsell the Duke of Yorke was deposed of hys protectorshyp whiche thynge was cause of a new grodge and malys. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.lvi. an. xxxiiii Henrici .vi. Thomas Chaninges mayre. Ihon Stuard, Raufe ver∣ney sheriffes. A Riot in LondōIn this yeare was a great Ri∣ot
committed in London againste the Lombardes and Italians be∣cause a Mercers seruaunte was caste in pryson for strykynge an Italyon. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.lvii. an. xxxv. Henrici sixti, Godfrey bolayne mer¦cer mayre. William Edward, Tho¦mas Reynere sheriffes. In this yeare the french menne perceyuynge the dyscorde in Eng∣lande sent .ii. nauies into englande & one of them landed in ye downes and they (hauyng knowledge that the people of Sandwitch were fled the towne for death) cam and spoy¦led the towne wyth great crueltye.Sand∣witch de∣stroied by the french¦men. In the cytye of Mens in Ger∣many was the scyence of Printing fyrst inuented by one named Io∣hanes faustius.whē and where the science of printinge was foūd ¶Anno do. M.cccc.lviii. an. xxxvi
Henrici sixti. Thomas Scot dra∣per mayre, Raufe Iosteline, Ry∣charde Nedham sheryffes. A fayned peace.In this yeare was made a fay∣ned peace betwene the kinge and ye quene and theyr counsell on the one party, and the Duke of Yorke with hys confederates on the other partie whiche agremente endured not longe. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.lix. an. xxxvii. Henrici sixiti. Wyllyam Hull fysh∣monger mayre. Iohn Stocket, Iohn Plummer shiriffes. The ba∣tel on blor Heath.In this yeare was the batayle on Blore heathe in Shropshyre betwene the Lorde Audeley on the Kynges partye, and the Earle of Sallisbury on the Duke of yor∣kes partye, where the victory fel to the Earle of Sallisburye, and the Lorde Audley was slayne, and his army dyscomfited.
¶Anno do. M.cccc.lx. an. xxxviii. Henrici sixti. Richarde Lee grocer mayre. Iohn Lambert, Rycharde Fleminge Sheryffes. In this yere the Duke of yorke assembled a great Army of northrē men and welchemen,The duke of yorke flede. and the Earle of Warwike came with a great nō¦bre from Calis, & nere vnto Lod∣lawe in the Marches of Wales they pytched theyr felde, & towarde them came the Kynge accompany∣ed with the Dukes, of Somerset and Exeter with a myghtye Army, and the nyghte before the batayle Andrew Trollop fledde frome the Duke to the Kynge, wherfore in ye nyght the Duke hym selfe fled in∣to Ireland and the Earles of Sa∣lisbury, Marche, and Warwyke, fled into Deuinshere & so to Calis. After this departing the Duke of Yorke wyth hys confederates were proclamed traytours,The duke of yorke {pro}clamed traytour and the
yonge Duke of Somerset was made Captayne of Calys but whē he came there he could not be recey¦ued bycause the erles was there be∣fore, and so he was fayne to take Gynes. The ba∣tayle of north hā∣ton.In this yere also the Earles of Marche, and Warwicke came frō Calys, and so landed at Sande∣witch, and so came to London and by the way met them dyuers noble men and so came to London wher they were gentlye receyued and af∣ter long consultinge the sayde Ear¦les with an Army of .xxv.M. men set forward to mete the kynge who hadde prouyded an Army nere to Northehamptō where was fought a cruell battayle, the victory fell to the Earle of March, and his com∣pany where were slaine on the kin∣ges partye the Duke of Bokyng∣ham and the Earle of Shrewsbu∣ry with .x.M. tall Englyshmen &
the reste fled and lefte the kynge a¦lone, and the Duke of Somerset,The king taken. ye Quene, & her sonne fled into the Bishopryke of Duram. After thys felde the Earle of March conuaied the Kinge to Lō∣don wher was a Parliament som∣moned at whiche Parlyament the Duke of Yorke was made ayre apparent and all his progenye af∣ter hym.The duke of yorke proclay∣med ayre apparent In this yere Quene Margaret in greate hast gathered a great cō∣pany of Northren mē and at wake feld in a cruell fyghte discomfited and slew the Duke of Yorke,The ba∣tayle at wakefeld with his son the Earle of Rutland, & the earle of Salisbury was takē priso¦ner, who afterward was beheded at Pomfret & his heade sent to yorke. The Quene with her retinewe nere to saynte Albons discomfited the Earle of warwike and ye Duke of Norfolke,The se∣cond ba∣tayle at sainct Al∣bons. and delyuered Kynge
Henry her husband, in this battell was slayne .xxiii.c. men and not a∣boue of whome no noble men is re∣membred but syr Iohn Gray who the day before was made Knyght. After thys battayle the kynge and the Quene (heringe of the com¦myng of the Earle of Marche and Earle of Warke with a great nom¦ber of Marchemen) toke theyr ior∣ney Norwarde and the sayd Earle came to London, where Edwarde Earle of Marche by the consent of the nobylytie and commons was proclaymed Kinge the .iiii. daye of Marche in the yeare of our Lord M.cccc.lx. by the name of kynge Edwarde the fourth.kynge Ed¦ward pro¦clamed kynge. Immediatlye after kynge Ed∣warde was proclaymed kynge he pursued Kynge Henry towarde yorke and met wyth King Henries Armye at a place called Towton wyth whome he had then a cruellThe bat∣tayle at towton
battaile but Kynge Edwarde had the victory, In the feld were slaine xxxvi.M. and .vii.c. persones and all Englyshemen. Also there was slaine the Earles of Northomber∣lande and Westtmerlande, the Lorde Clyfford, and diuerse other and Kynge Henri lost all and was fayne to flee the lande after he had raigned .xxxviii. yeares and .vi. monethes. After this cruel batayle kinge Henry fledde into Scotlande and Quene Margeret with the yonge Prynce fled to her father the duke of Anges.king Hē∣ry fled in∣to scotlād ¶Edwarde the .iiii. ANno dommini .M.cccc.lxi. anno primo Edwar∣di quarti. Hugh Wiche mayre. George Ireland, Iohn Locke sherisses.
The cro∣nation of king Ed∣warde.This yere the .xxix. daye of Iune was kinge Edwarde the .iiii. wyth great tryumphe crowned at West∣mynster. ¶ Anno do. M.cccc.lxii. anno se∣condo Edwardi quarti. Thomas Coke mayre. Bartilmewe Iames, Wylliam Hampton sheryffes. A bataile at Exhā.In thys yeare Kynge Henry and Quene Margaret hys wyfe came out of Scotlād with a great Army of Frenchemen and Scot∣tes and in Exam shyre the Lorde Mountacute (gouernoure of the Northe countre) mete hym with a noble armye where Kynge Henry was discomfyted and fled, and the Duke of Somerset (who a litle be∣fore forsoke Kynge Edward) was taken in the chase wyth dyuers o∣ther who afterward wer beheaded. ¶Anno domini .M.cccc.lxiii. an.
tercio Edwardi quarti. Mathewe Philip gold smith maire. Thomas Muscham, Robert bassed shiriffes In this yeare kyng Henry came out of Scotlande into Englande by what meanes I haue not read,Kyng hen¦ry taken prysoner. but I thyncke not well stablyshed in his wit but boldly he entred the Realme and assone as he was en∣tred he was knowen and taken by one Cantlow and brought toward the kyng whome ye Earle of War∣wyke met on ye way by the kynges commaundement & brought hym throughe London to the Towre & there he was layed in sure holde. And Quene Margret & her sonne departed out of Scotlād and say∣led into fraunce where she remay∣ned with Duke Rayner her father tyll she toke her infortunate iour∣ney into Englande agayne. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxiiii. an quar∣to
Edwardi quarti, Raufe Ioste∣lyne draper mayre, Iohn Tate, Iohn stone shiriffes, Kyng Ed¦ward ma¦ryed.This yere the Earle of War∣wyke was sent into fraūce to treat of a Mariage betwene the Lady Bona, doughter to Lewes Duke of Sauoy and syster to the French Quene, which mariage was a gre∣ed vnto, but in meane season kyng Edward maryed preuely at Graf∣ton the Lady Elizabeth, late wyfe of Syr Iohn Graye, for whyche mariage rose greate varience be∣twene the kynge and the Earle of Warwycke hys chiefe frende and maynteynoure. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxv. anno quinto Edwardi quarto. Raufe Freney mercer mayre,The que∣ne delyue¦red of a doughter Henry Wa∣ner, Wyllyam Constantine shyrif. In this yere the Quene was de∣lyuered of a fayre Ladye and was
named Elyzabeth whyche after∣ward was wife to the noble prince kynge Henry the .vii. and mother to kynge Henry the .viii. Also in thys yeare was graun∣ted a licence that certaine cotsehold shepe shoulde be transported into Spayne,A lycence graunted to carye shepe into spayne. whych haue so ther mul∣tiplied & encreased that it hath tur∣ned the commoditie of Englande muche to the spanishe profyte. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxvi. anno sexto Edwardi quarti, Iohn yong, grocer knight mayre, Iohn Brice, Iohn Browne, Iohn stotton shyr. In thys yere ye Bastard of Bur∣gon came into Englande to treate for a mariage betwne ye earle Cha∣reloyse yeyre of Borgoyne,ch betwen t  sere of burgoyn & the Lord Scales & kyng Edwardes syster whyche mariage was concluded. At whych tyme the sayde basterd chalenged the Lorde Scales for certayne feates of war
whiche were done in Smethfelde, but the lord scales had the victory. ¶ Anno domini .m.cccc.lxvii. an. septimo Edwardi quarti, Thomas Owlgraue mayre. Humfrey hey∣ford Thomas stalbroke shiriffes. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxviii, an. octauo Edwardi quarti, Willyam Taylour grocer mayre, Symon smith Wyllyam Heriot shyryffes. In thys yere began the Earle of Warke to Rebel agaynst kinge Edward and procured to hys part the Duke of Clarens brother to ye kynge,The earle of war∣wike re∣beeld. the Archebishop of yorke, & the Marques Mountacute hys brethren, whiche Earle with the Duke of Clarence wente to Calys where the sayde Duke maried the Earles doughter of warwike. Banbury helde.In thys yeare also the com∣mons of yorkeshyre made insur∣rection
at the settynge on of the Earle of Warwyke and hys adhe∣rentes and made them a Captaine called Robyn of Ryddesdale, and nere vnto Banbury the Lord Har¦bert Earle of Penbroke and hys brother syr Richarde harbert wyth an Army of .vii.m. Welchmen met the Northren men betwyxt whome was a cruell Battel where the nor∣thren men optayned the victorye, & the Earle of Penbroke & his bro∣ther Richard taken and beheaded, and .v.m. Welchmen slaine. After thys victory the Northrē men wente to Warwyke where the Earle,King Ed¦ward ta∣ken priso∣ner. and the Duke of Clarence had gathered a greate Army, and kyng Edward wyth his puissaūce came agaynst them, but sodenly in the nyght the Earle set on the kyn∣ges campe, so that kynge Edward was there taken prysoner, and so sent to Middelham castel in yorke
shyre to be kept wyth the Archbis∣shop of yorke the Earles brother. Shortely after kinge Edward (hauynge frendship of his kepers) was suffered certayne dayes in the weke to ryde a huntyng and by the meanes of syr wyllyam stanley,king Ed∣ward de∣liuered oute of pryson. syr Thomas of Borogh, and dy∣uers other hys frēdes with a great bond of men was rescued from his kepers, and so delyuered oute of Pryson. Losecote∣felde.Kynge Edwarde after he was come to Londō, gathered together hys Army, and so met wyth the Lorde Welles, with a great army, the victory fel on the kynges parte where were slayne .x.m. men at the least, where were taken and behea∣ded the Lorde welles, syr Roberd Welles his sonne,The lord welles be¦headed. syr Roberd De∣mocke wyth dyuers other, thys ba∣tayle was called Losecotefelde be∣cause
the Lyncolne shyre men dyd worle away theyr cotes and ranne awaye. This yere the Earle of War∣wyke with the Duke of Clarence perceyuyng theyr partie weakened fled into fraunce for socoure where they taryed not past .vi. monethes.Therle of warwike fled into Fraunce. The Duke of Clarence,Therle of warwike landed ye Ear¦les of Warwyke, Penbroke and Oxforthe landed at dertmoth, to whome by meanes of proclamaci∣ons made in kynge Henries name the commons gathered to them in greate nombre so that kynge Ed∣ward fearynge hys parte fled into Flaūders to ye Duke of Burgoinekynge ed∣ward fled flaūders After kynge Edwards fleing, diuers of his frendes toke saync∣tuary,Kynge ed¦ward the v. borne in sanctu¦tuarye. and in especially Quene E∣lisabeth who was porely deliuered in the sainctuary at Westminster, of a sonne named Edward. Then was Henry the .vi. set at
large and agayne proclamed king by meanes of the Earle of War∣wyke,king hen∣ry resto∣red to his kynglye estate. and other, and king Edward proclamed vsurper of the crowne but that contynued not longe. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxix. anno nono Edwardi quarti, Richarde Lee grocer mayre Robart Draper Rychard Gardener sheriffes. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxx. anno decimo Edwardi quarti. Iohn stoc¦ton mercer knyghte mayre. Iohn Crosby, Ihon Ward sheriffes. In this yere also kyng Edwarde hauynge kynge Henri in his com∣pany met with the Earle of War∣wyke on Esterdaye at Barnet .x.Barnet felde. myles frō London where betwene them was fought a cruell battayle the victory fell on kynge Edwar∣des parte where were slayne Ry∣charde
Neuel Earle of Warwike, and the Marques moūtacute his brother with .x.m. men more. Shortly after this bataile quene Margaret with her sonne landed at Waymouth in Dorsetshere, and when she heard of the death of the Earle of Warwike, she and her sonne toke saynctuary at Beweley in hamshyre, & vnto her resorted ye Duke of Somerset, and the Earle of Deuenshire with other,A bataile at Tew∣kesburye. who ga∣thered a greate Army, and kynge Edwarde with a greate Army met with them nere vnto Tewkesbury where was fought a cruel bataile, but kynge Edward had the victo∣rye where quene Margaret was ta¦ken prysoner, and Prince Edward her sonne also, who in the kynges presence was shamefully mourde∣red, this batayle was foughte the iiii. day of maye on a saterday, and on the mondaye after was behea∣ded
at Twekesburye Edmonde Duke of Somerset the Prior of saynct Iohns Ierusalem, with dy∣uers other, and the Quene sent pry¦soner to London, who afterwarde was redemed by her father, and af¦ter sent into fraunce. After this the basterd Faucon∣brydge who was made fese Admi∣rall by the Earle of Warwike be∣gan a newe commocion with ken∣tyshe men,A new cō¦mocion. and esexmen, who short∣lye was apprehendyd and put to deathe. In this yeare also vpon the As∣cencion euen nexte folowinge the dead corps of kynge Henri the .vi. was brought from the Tower of London to Poules where he laye all nyghte.The deth of kynge henry the vi. But howe this Prince came to his deathe there be dyuers sayinges, but commonly it is said that Rychard Duke of Gloceter kynge Edwardes brother slewe
hym wyth a dager. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxxi. anno xi. Edwardi quarti William Ed∣ward Grocer mayre, Iohn Aleine Iohn Shelley shiriffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxii. anno. xii. Edwardi quarti, William Hamp¦ton fyshmonger mayre. Thomas Bledlow Iohn Browne sheriffes. ¶Anno do. M.cccc.lxxiii. an. xiii. Edwardi quarti. Iohn Tate mer∣cer mayre, wylliam Stocker Ro∣bert Byllesdon shiriffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxiiii. an. xiiii. Edwardi quarti. Roberte Drope draper mayre. Edmond shaa, Tho¦mas Hyll shiriffes. This yeare kynge Edwarde wyth a noble armye wente in to fraunce but afterward, considering the vniustnes of the duke of Bour¦gone)
there was a peace concluded so that the french kyng should pay to kynge Edwarde .lxxv.M crow∣nes,A voyage into fraunce. and yearly .l.M. crownes du∣rynge kynge Edwardes lyfe. ¶Anno dom. m.cccc.lxxv. an. xv. Edwardi quarti. Roberte Basset Salter mayre. Roberte Colwyche, Hugh Bryce shiriffes. This yere were diuers Bakers of London sette vpon the Pillorye for makynge of lyghte weyghte of breade. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxxvi. an. xvi. Edwardi quarti, Raufe Io∣stelyn draper mayre, Rychard Rau¦son, Wylliam Horne sheryffes. This yere from Crypylgate to Byshopisgate, London wale was newlye repared. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxvii. anno.
xvii. Edwardi quarti. Humfrey Heyforde goldsmyth mayre, Hen∣ry Colet, Iohn Stocker sheryffes. Thys yeare George Duke of Clarens yonger brother to kynge Edwarde beynge prysoner in the tower of London was there drow∣ned in a barell of Malmesy. ¶Anno domi. m.cccc.lxxviii. an. xviii. Edwardi quarti, Rycharde Gardyner mercer Mayre Robert Harding Robert Bifelde sheryffes In this yeare was great mor∣talitie in London and throughout all England. ¶Anno domini. m.cccc.lxxix. an. xix. Edwardi quarti. Bartilmewe Iames draper mayre. Thomas Ilam, Iohn warde shyryffes. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxxx. anno xx. Edwardi .iiii. Iohn Browne
mayre, wyllyam Bacon, wyllyam Daniel shyryffes. ¶ Anno do. M.cccc.lxxxi. an. xxi. Edwardi quarti. Wyllyam Heriot draper knight mayre, Robert Ta∣te, wyllyam wykyng Richard Cau¦rie shiriffes. The king made a feaste to the maire of LondōThis yere in the moneth of Iu¦lye the kynge sente for the mayre wyth certayne of his brethren, and comeners of the cytye of London, vnto the Forest of waltham, and there cause ye game to be brought before thē, so that they sawe course after course, and manye dere bothe redde and falowe slaine. And after that the king commaunded his of∣fycers to brynge the mayre and his company vnto a pleasaunte lodge made al of grene bowes, and there set them to dyner and serued theim wyth manye denty dyshes and dy∣uers wynes good and plenty, and
ouer that caused the lorde Cham∣berlyn with other Lordes to chere the mayre and his companye sun∣drye tymes whyle they were at dy∣ner, and at theyr departynge gaue vnto them venyson greate plentye. Thys yeare also the kynge sene vnto the mayresse of London and her systers the Aldermens wifes, two hartes .vi. Buckes, & a Tonne of wyne, to make theym merye wythall. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxii. an. xxii. Edwardi quarti. Edmonde shaa goldsmith mayre, Iohn Mathew, William whyte shiriffes. In the begynnynge of the .xxiii. yeare the .ix. day of Apryl, dyed the noble kynge Edwarde the .iiii. at westminster and is buryed at win∣sor, leuinge after him two sonnes, that is to say Prince Edward his eldest sonne and Richard Duke of
yorke, & .iii. doughters, Elisabeth that after was Quene, Cycili and Katherine. ¶Edward the fyft. EDwarde the .v. beganne hys reygne ouer the realme of eng¦land the .xi. daye of Apryll in the begynnynge of the yeare of our Lorde .M.cccc.lxxxiii. the same Ed¦warde beynge of the age of .xi. yea∣res, or there aboute, this Edwarde was neuer crowned but shameful∣ly murthered by the commaunde∣mente of Rycharde the thyrd that after was kynge of englande. ¶Richard the .iii. RIchard the .iii. began hys do∣mynion ouer the Realme of England ye .xxi. day of Iune, in the yeare of oure Lord .M.cccc.
lxxxiii. and the .vi. day of Iuly the nexte folowinge, was crouned at Westeminster. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxxxiii. an. primo Richardi .iii. Robert billes∣don haberdasher mayre, Thomas Norlande, Wyllyam Martyne shyryffes. In thys yere was the Duke of Buchyngham beheaded at Sa∣lysburye.The duke of boking¦ham be∣headed, ¶Anno. do. m.cccc.lxxxiiii. anno. secondo richardi .iii. Thomas Hyl mayre. Thomas Bretayne Ry∣charde Chester, Raufe Austreye shyryffes. This yere the .xxii. day of Au∣gust in the yere of our Lorde.bosworth felde. M.cccc.lxxxv. was the Bataile of Bos¦worth nere to lecester in the which kynge Richard the .iii. in the third yeare of his reygne, was slayne by
kynge Henri the vii. the whyche in the same daye began his reigne o∣uer the Realme,King hen¦ry the .vii crowned. and the .xxx. day of Octobre next folowing was crow¦ned at Westminster. In the .xiii. daye of Septem∣ber,Two mai¦res of lon¦don in one yeare and both died of the sweate. in the yere of oure Lorde laste before mencioned dyed of ye sweate the foresaid Thomas Hille mayre in whose place the .xxiiii. day of the moneth and yere of our lorde laste before mencioned, wyllyam stocker knyght, was chosen mayre, whiche Stocker dyed the .viii. daye of the sayd moneth also of the sweate, and the .xix. day of the sayde moneth of September, was Iohn warde chosen mayre, and so conti∣nued vntyll the feaste of Symon and Iude, nexte folowing.
¶Henry the .vii. ANno dom. M.cccc.lxxxv anno primo Henrici sep∣timi. Hughe Bryce gold∣smyth knyghte mayre. Iohn Tate, Iohn Swā shiriffes. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxxxvi. an secondo henrici septimi. Henry Col¦let mercer knyghte mayre, Iohn Perceiuall Hugh Clopton shirif. This yere the kynge maryed kynge Edwards eldest doughter named Elyzabeth,The king maried. and in Septem¦ber next after was Prynce Arthur borne at wynchester.Prince Ar¦thar born ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxvii. anno. tercio henrici septimi. Wyllyam Horne mayre, wyllyam Remingtō, Iohn Fenkell Shiriffes.The que∣ne crow∣ned. In thys yeare on saynct Kathe¦rins day was the Quene crowned
at Westminster. ¶Anno do. m, cccc.lxxxviii. anno. iiii. Henrici septimi Roberte Tate Mercer mayre Wylliam Isaac, Raufe Tylney shiriffes. This yeare the commons of the North slew the Earle of Northum¦berland,Aedmoci∣on in nor∣thomber∣lande. in the same yeare was the felde of Dykesmew in Flaunders, foughten by the lorde Dawbeney where the Lorde Morlaye was slayne. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxix. anno. v. henrici septimi. Wyllyam Whyte Mayre, Wyllyam Capell, Iohn Broke shiriffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxx. anno .vi. Henrici septimi. Iohn Mathewe Mercer mayre. Henry Coke. Ro∣bert Reuil Hugh Pemperton shyr. This yere was the Lord Henry
the kinges seconde sonne,The birth of king hē¦ri the .viii borne in Grenewich in Iune. ¶Anno dom. m.cccc.lxxxxi. anno. vii. henrici septimi. Hugh Clapton mercer mayre. Thomas wod wil∣lyam Browne shiriffes. ¶Anno domi. m.cccc.lxxxxii. anno viii. henrici septimi. Willyam mar¦tyne skynner mayre, william Pur∣chate, William welbeke shiriffes. This yere in the moneth of Oc∣tobre,A fray in London. was a fraye made vpon the Esterlynges by the commons of ye citie of London, and speciallye by the mercers seruauntes. ¶Anno do. m, cccc.lxxxxiii. an. ix. henrici septimi. Raufe Austrey fish monger mayre, Roberte Fabyan, Wyllyam wynger shiriffes. This yeare was wheat at sixe pence the bushell, and baye salte at
thre pence. ob. a bushell in the cyty of London. This yeare was syr wyllyam Stanley beheaded. ¶ Anno domini .m.cccc.lxxxxiiii. anno .x. henrici septimi, Rycharde Chawry Salter mayre. Nicholas Alwyn, Iohn warner shiriffes. In this yere was good chep¦vittell in EnglandThis yere was whyte Hearing solde for thre shyllynges and iiii. pence a barell at London, and not aboue. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.lxxxxv. an. xi. Henrici septimi. Henri Collet mercer knyghte mayre, Thomas knesworth Henry Somiz Shirif. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxxvi. anno. xii. Henrici septimi. Iohn Tate mercer mayre, Iohn shaa, Richard Haddon shiriffes, This yeare the .xviii. daye of
Iune was Blackeheth felde.Blacke¦heth feld. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxxvii. an. xiii Henrici .vii. wylliā Purchase mer∣cer mayre, Bertylmewe rede Tho∣mas wyndone shiriffes. ¶Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxxviii. anno xiiii. henrici septimi. Iohn perciual marchaunt tayler mayre, Thomas Braybury, Steuen Ienyns shir. ¶An. do. M.cccc.lxxxxix. an. xv. hērici septi. Nicolas alwyne mayre Iames wyford Rychard Broude shiriffes. This yeare was the Earle of Warwyke beheaded.Therle of warwike beheaded This yeare the kinge and the Quene sayled to Callys,A triūphe at Calis. and at Saynte Peters they met with the duke of Burgoyne. ¶Anno do. M.ccccc. anno. xvi. hē∣rici .vii. william Remingtō maire,
Iohn Hawes, Wyllyam Siete shiriffes. Lady ka∣therin landed.This yere the .iiii. day of octo∣bre landed at Plummouth kathe∣rin doughter to ye kyng of Spaine ¶Anno do. M.ccccc.i. anno .xvii. henrici septimi. Iohn shaa golde∣smith mayre, Laurence Aylmer Henry hede shiriffes, Prince ar¦ther ma∣ryed.This yere vpon. S. Erkinwal¦des daye was Prince Arthur ma∣ryed to the foresayde Lady Kathe∣ryne, whiche Prynce dyed in the Easter weke folowinge. ¶Anno domini .m.ccccc.ii. anno. xviii. Henrici septimi. Bartilmewe Rede goldsmith maire, Henri keb∣bell, Nicolas Niuers Siriffes. The deth of the quene.This yere the .xi. daie of Febru∣ary dyed quene Elizabeth in the Towre of London, beyng in child bed and the .viii. daye of Auguste
was the King of Scottes maryed to Margeret the eldest doughter. ¶Anno do. m.ccccc.iii. an. xix. hen¦rici septimi. Wyllyam Capel dra∣per mayre, Chrystopher Hawes, Robert warris Thomas graunge Shiriffes. ¶Anno do. m.ccccc.iiii. an. xx. hē∣rici septimi. Iohn wynger grocer mayre, Roger Achilley Wyllyam browne shiriffes. ¶Anno domi. m.ccccc.v. anno. xxi henrici septimi. Thomas Ioys∣worth fyshmōger Mayre, Richard Shore, Roger Grouer shiriffes. In this yeare was the wether∣cocke of Poules blowne downe,The duke of burgon driuen in∣to englād by tēpest. & the duke of Burgoyne was driuen to lande in the west Countrey. ¶Anno domi. m.ccccc.vi. an. xxii.
Henriri septimi, Richarde Haddon mercer knyght mayre, wylliam Co¦pynger wylliā Fytzwylliam shir. ¶Anno domini .m.cccc.vii. anno. xxiii. Henrici septimi, Wyllyam Browne mercer, Laurence Aymer Mayres, wyllyam Butler, Iohn Kyrby shyryffes. A greate fire at nor¦wytcheThis yeare was a greate parte of the Cytie of Norwytch brente. ¶Anno domi. m.ccccc.viii. anno. xxiiii. henrici septimi, Steuen Ie∣nins marchaunte tayler Mayre, Thomas Exmew, Richarde smith Shyryffes. In this yere the .xxi. daye of A∣pryll, dyed kynge Henry the, vii, at Rychmond the .xxiiii. yeare of hys reygne & is buried at westminster. ¶Henry the eyghte.
THe most gracious prince Kynge Henry the viii. beganne hys regyne the xxii, day of Apryll in the yeere of oure Lorde .M. ccccc.ix. and was crowned at west∣mynster in the Feaste of the Nati∣uite of saynt Iohn Baptyst nexte folowinge. ¶ Anno domini. m.ccccc.ix. anno primo henrici octaui. Thomas Bradbury mercer mayre, George Monox. Iohn Dubet shyryffes, In this yere was Emsone and Dudley beheaded.Emson & dudley be¦headed. Thys yere was Syr wyllyam Fytzwyllyam disfraunchesed, by∣cause he wolde not be shyrffe. ¶ Anno do. m.ccccc.x. an secondo henrici octaui, Henri Kebell mayre Iohn mylborne, Iohn Rest shirif. This yeare Henry the kynges sonne was borne at Richmonde,The birth of king hē¦ries fyrste sonne. on
newyeres daye: and Iustes kepte at westminster, and on saynt Ma∣thewes daye the childe died. ¶Anno domini. m.ccccc.xi. anno. tercio henrici octaui, Roger Achil∣ley draper mayre, Nicolas Shel∣ton, Thomas Myrfyn shyryffes. This yeare was the lorde Dar¦sey sent into Spayne,A voyage īto spaine to ayde the kyng of Spayne against the Mo∣res, but peace was made before hys aryuynge, and so he returned home agayne. This same season was syr Ed∣warde Poynynges sente into Gel∣derlande to ayde the Prynce of Chastell.A voyage into gel∣derlande. The same tyme the lorde haw∣ard toke Andrewe berton & a C.lx Scotes, and two fayre Shyppes. ¶Anno. domini. m.ccccc.xii. anno quarto henrici octaui, wyllyam co∣pynger
Richarde haddon knyghte mayre, Roberte holderne, Roberte Fenrothern Shyryffes. Thys yeare was Edward De¦lapole beheaded.Edward delapole beheaded Thys yeare the lorde Mar∣ques dorset was sent into Spayne wyth x.M. men,A voiage īto spaine and did much hurt in Guien. and returned in wynter by reason of the flyx, and on saynct Laurence daye the Regent and the Caricke were brente,A battale on the sea whiche were two greate Spyppes. ¶Anno domi. m.ccccc.xiii. anno. quinto henrici octaui, Wyllyam browne mercer mayre. Iohn Daw¦es, Iohn Brute shyryffes. This yeare the sayde Dawes dyed within the yeare, and in hys place was chosen Roger Basford.The lorde Admirall slayne. Thys yeare syr Edward How∣arde Lorde Admyrall of England was slayne on saint Markes daye
in Bryttayne by muche hardynes. The same yeare in Iune the kinge besyeged Tyrwyn, and discomfy∣ted the power of Fraunce, at Boo∣mie,Tyrwin & Turney wonne. and toke the cyties Tyrwyn and Turney, and returned with∣out any more battayle offered du∣rynge whiche tyme the kynge of Scottes enoyed Englande,The king of Scot∣tes slayne wyth an. C.M. men and was slaine him selfe, and .xii. Earles by the earle of Surry the kinges lyefe tenaunte wherefore the kynge created hym Duke of Northfolke, and hys el∣dest sonne Earle of Surrey. ¶Anno domini. m.ccccc.xiiii. an. sexto henrici octaui, Georg monox draper Mayre, Iames yarforde, Ihon Mundy shyryffes. A peace concluded betwene England & fraunceThis yere was a peace conclu∣ded betwene England and Fraūce and on saynt Denice day the frēch kynge maryed the Lady Mary the
kynges syster, and on Newyeres day after he dyed, and therefore the kynge sente for her agayne by the Duke of Suffolke and other. In this yeare was Rycharde hunne hanged in ye Lollers TowreRicharde hun mor∣dered ī lo¦lers towre ¶Anno do. M.ccccc.xv. anno .vi. henrici octaui. Syr william But∣ler grocer mayre, henry worle, Ry∣chard Gray shyriffes. The sayde graye died within the yeare and for him was chosen wil∣liam Bayle. This yeare in Februarye, was borne at Grenewitche the Ladye Mary, the Kynges doughter. In Aprill the Frenche Quene came into England,The duke of sofolke maried the french Quene. and was ma∣ried to the lorde Charles duke of Suffolke. This yeare Margaret Quene of Scottes, sister to the kynge fled
into England and lay at Harbot∣tell,The que∣ne of scot∣tes fled in to englād and she was deliuered of a doghter called Margaret, & came to London in may, and taried there a hole yeare, before she returned. ¶Anno domine. m.ccccc.xvi. anno viii. henrici octaui. Iohn Rest gro∣cer maire, Thomas Semer, Ri∣chard Thurstone shiriffes. A great froste.This yere was suche a Froste that al men with cartes might pas betwene westminster & Lambeth. yll Maye daye.This yeare on maye euen, was an insurreccion of yong persons a∣gainst Alyens of the which diuers were put to execucion, and the rese∣due came to westminster wyth hal∣ters aboute their neckes, and were pardoned. And the .xxiiii. daye of Maye the quene of Scottes returned in∣to scotlande againe. ¶Anno do. m.ccccc.xvii. anno .ix.
henrici octaui. Syr thomas Ex∣mew goldsmith mayre, Thomas baudry Richard Simon shiriffes. In this yere was the Terme ad∣iourned to Oxford and agayne to London. In October the Admyrall of Fraunce came into Englande and Turney was delyuered to the Frenche kynge agayne.Turney geuē oure to the ¶Anno domini. m.ccccc.xviii. an, x. henrici octaui, Thomas Myrfin skynner mayre, Iohn Allē, Iames Spencer shyryffes.Charles the v. elec∣ted empe∣roure. In this yere at Frāckford Char∣les the .v. was elected Emperoure. This yeare the Earle of Sur∣rey was sent into Irelande.a vsage in to yrelad. ¶Anno dom. m.ccccc.xix. anno. xi henrici octaui, Syr Iames yox∣ford mercer mayre, Ihon wyllyam Nicholas Pheteryche shyryffes.
This yeare the kynge and the Frenche kynge met at the campe betwene Arde and Guynes,The tre∣umphe at Gynes. where were greate triumphes. After that the Kynge and the Emperoure mete,a treūphe at Callis and the kynge wente to Grauelen wyth hym, and he came to Calys wyth the kynge, and had great chere, and the kinge returned. ¶Anno domini .m.ccccc.xx. anno xii. henrici octaui. syr Iohn Bruge draper mayre. Iohn Skeuyngton Iohn Keynde shiriffes. The duke of buking¦ham be∣headed.This yere the Duke of Buc∣kyngham was beheaded the .xxii. daye of maye. In Iune the Cardinal went to Calys,The car∣dinal wēt to Callys to intreate a peace betwene the Emperour & the French kynge and taryed there tyll December with oute anye thynge concluded. ¶Anno domini .m.ccccc.xxi. anno
xiii. Henrici octa. Syr Iohn Myl borne draper mayre. Iohn Bry∣tayne, Thomas Pargetoure shyr. This yere the frydaye before Penthecost, that is to saye the .vi. daye of Iune, Charles the fyfte Emperoure was honorably recey∣ued into the citie of London of the Mayre, Aldermen,Thempe∣rour recei¦ued into London. and the Com∣munaltye, our souereigne lorde ac∣companying hym. And from Lon∣don he wente to winsoure, and sate in the stall of the Garter, and from thence to Hampton, and sayled o∣uer the sea, into Spayne,a voiage ī to fraūce. durynge whiche tyme the Earle of Surrey lorde Admirall brente Morles in Bryttayne, and after landed at Ca¦lys, and entred Picardye, & brente townes and castels, and besieged Hesding, but because of wynter he taysed hys seige & returned.The scot∣tes īuaded Englāde. Thys yeare the duke of Alba∣ny was entringe into Englande
wyth a greate armye, but when he harde that the earle of Shrowys∣bury was commyng to fyght wyth hi, he toke a truce for .vi. moneths. ¶ An. do. M.ccccc.xxii. an. xiiii. Henrici octaui. Syr Ihon mondy goldsmith mayre, Iohn Rudstone Ihon Champnies shiriffes. The king of Den∣marke cā into eng∣land for socoureThys yere Christenrne kynge of Denmarke came into England in Iune. This yere the earle of Surrey brente Iedworth,A voyage īto scotlād and many other townes in Scotlande. The Ro∣des wone by the tur¦kes.In this yeare the Turke besye¦ged the Roodes, and vpon Chryst∣mas daye he toke it. ¶Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxiii. anno. xv. Henrici octaui. Syr Thomas Baudry mercer Mayre, Myghell Englyshe, Nycolas Ienyns shir. This yeare the duke of Suf∣folke
was sente into Fraunce,A voiage īto fraūce with .x.M. menne and passed the water of Some without battayle, tooke and destroied many townes, and in december he returned. The same yeare the duke of Al¦bany besyeged the castel of warke,The scot∣tes entred england & shorly af∣ter ran a∣waye. and hearinge of the Earle of Sur∣reys commynge with a great army he cowardly fled. ¶Anno dom. m.ccccc.xxiiii. anno. xvi. Henrici octaui. Syr wylliam Bayly draper mayre. Raufe dod∣mer william Roch sheriffes. This yere came from the Em∣perour the lorde of Champere and other lordes. This yere came out of Scotlād the Bishop of Dunkell,Diuers ambassa∣dors cam ī Englād. & other as Ambassadours. This yere on saynt Mathewes daye was the French kynge taken by the Emperour.
A cōmoci¦on ī Nor∣folke and suffolke.This yeare was a metynge in Norfolke and Suffolke for pay∣ment of money. A peace concluded betwene eng∣land and fraunce. The frenche kinge was deliue∣red in Marche.The frēch king deli∣uered out of pryson This yeare was the coyne en∣haunced. ¶Anno dom. M.ccccc.xxv. anno. xvii. Henrici octaui syr Iohn A∣leyne marcer knyght mayre, Iohn Caūton, Christopher Ascue shirif. ¶Anno do. m.ccccc.xxvi. an. xviii. Henrici octaui. Syr Thoms Se∣mer mercer mayre. Steuē Pecoke, Nicholas Lambert sheryshes. This yeare the corne began to fayle. The Car¦dinal wēt īto fraūce with gret pompe.This yere the Cardinall went into Fraunce with a great pompe where he concluded a peace betwen
the kinge and the Frenche kynge, whiche both defied the Emperoure & sente an army in to Italy and in Septembre he returned. In Octobre the greate mayster of Fraunce came to London,a leage be∣twene Englād & Fraunce. with great triumphe, for conclusion of the same leage. ¶ Anno do. m.ccccc.xxvii. an. xix. henrici octaui. Syr Iames Spen¦cer vyntener mayre, Ihon Hardye, wyllyam Holles sheriffes. This yeare corne was verye deare,A dearthe of corne. and had ben dearer if ye mar∣chauntes of the Stylyard had not bene, and duche shippes restrayned and an abstinence of war betwene England and Flaunders. On Saynte Denies day a le∣gate came from Rome.A legate cam from Rome. ¶ Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxviii. an. henrici octaui. Sir Iohn Rud∣stone
draper mayre. Raufe waren, Iohn Longe sheriffes. This yeare in Iune the legates sat at the blacke freers for the kinges mariage. The car∣dynal de∣posedThis yere in Octobre the Car¦dynall was deposed of the Chaun∣celler shyp. A peace betwene the kīg of england & the Empe¦rour,This yere was a peace conclu∣ded betwene the Emperour and the kynge. ¶Anno domini. M.ccccc.xxix. an. xxi. Henrici octa. Sir Raufe Dod¦mer mercer mayre. Myghell Dor∣mer, Walter Champion shiriffes. The empe¦rour crow¦ned.This yeare the Emperour was Crowned at Bonony. ¶Anno domini. M.ccccc.xxx. an. xxii. Henrici octaui. Syr Thomas Pargetoure salter maire, wyllyam dauney, Iohn Clopynge shiriffes. This yere was the French kin∣ges
Children delyuered. One boyled in smithfelde for poi¦sonynge. This yeare dyed the Cardynalle on saynt Andrewes euen.The car∣dinal died ¶ Anno domini .m.ccccc.xxxi. an. xxiii. henrici octaui Nicholas Lā∣bert grocer mayre. Richard Greshā Edward Attam sheriffes. This yeare the kyng began to buylde his place at westminster.the pales at westmī¦ster bilded In this yeare was Griffeth Ryse beheaded. This yeare in Octobre the king went ouer the sea and met with the Frenche kynge. ¶Anno do. m.ccccc.xxxii. an. xxiiii henrici octaui. Sir steuen Pecoke haberdasher mayre. Richard Rey∣nolde. Richarde Pinthon, Ihon martyne shiriffe. This yerae the kinge was
by due proces of the law diuorsed from lady Katherine his brothers wife,The king deuorsed frō his bro¦thers wif and he maryed Lady Anne Boleine,The king maried. which was crowned Que¦ne on whitsonday. On midsomer daye died the french quene, wife vnto the Duke of Suffolke. Lady eli∣zabeth borne.This yere was borne the ladye Elizabeth at Grenewetch, on the euen of the Natiuitie of our Lady ¶Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxxiii. an. xxv. Henri octaui. Christopher As∣cue knyght draper mayre Wylly∣am Forman, Thomas Kitson Shiriffes. The holy maid of kent & her compani¦ons put to death,This yeare was a Nunne cal∣led the holy mayde of Kente, two monkes, and two frees and a preest hanged and headed for treason, blasphemy, and ypocresye. This yeare was a peace conclu¦ded with Scotlande.
This yere was the Bishop of Rome with all his false vsurped power abbolished quite out of the Realme.The by∣shoppe of Rome a∣bolished. ¶Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxxiiii. an, xxvi. Henrici octaui. Syr Iohn Chamnies skynner mayre, Nycho∣las Leueson Wyllyam Denham Shiriffes. This yere the earle of Kildare dyed in the Towre,The erle of kildare rebeled. and hys sonne rebelled and slewe the Byshop of Deuilynge, wherefore the kynge sente syr Wyllyam Skeuyngton theyther.The fyrst frute of the spiri∣tualtye graūted to the kynge. Thys yeare was graunted to the Kyng the fyrste frutes and the tenthes of all spiritual possessions. In Iune was the byshoppe of Rochester, and syr Thomas more,The bys∣shop of ro¦chester & syr tomas more be∣headed. beheaded for denyinge the kynge to be supreme heade of the Church of Englande.
And in this yere were thre mon∣kes of the Charterhouse executed for the same offence.Thre mō∣kes of cha¦ter house put to deathe. ¶ Anno do. M.ccccc.xxxv. anno. xxvii. Henrici octa. Syr Iohn Al∣lyn mercer the second tyme mayre, Humfrey Mommoth, Iohn Co∣tes shiriffes. This yere was Quene Anne, the lorde Rocheforde,Quene an beheaded. Nores, We∣ston, Brereton, and Markes behea¦ded. And the kynge maryed Lady Iane Semer. This yere in Octobre begane a folyshe commocion in Lincolne∣shire,A cōmoci∣on in lin∣colneshere and in yorkeshire, by meanes of the Lorde Dercie, the Lord Hu∣sie. syr Robert Constably, and Ro∣bert Aske, whiche by the kynges wysedome and his prudente coun∣sell were appeased wythout bloude shedynge. ¶Anno dom. m.ccccc.xxxvi. anno
xxviii. Henrici octaui, syr Raufe Warren mercer Mayre, Rycharde Paget, Wyllyam Boyer shiriffes. This yeare the kynge and the Quene rode thorow London, with a goodly company. In February was Thomas Fetzgaret and fyue of hys vncles hanged drawen and quartered. Thys yeare the Lorde Dersey, syr Fraunces Bygot, syr Roberte Constable, and other began a new conspyracy,A new cō¦mocion. whych were attaynted and put to death in Iune. This yere on saynt Edwardes euen,The birth of king ed¦ward the vi. ano. 1537 was Prynce Edward borne at Hampton Courte. This yeare the .xxiii. day of Oc∣tobre, died Quene Iane, and is bu¦ryed at wynsore. ¶Anno. dom, M.ccccc.xxxvii. an xxix. henrici octaui. Rychard Gres∣ham mayre. Iohn Gresham, Tho∣mas
Lewyn shyriffes. Thys yete begane the colletion for the poore, and a greate nombre were cured of manye greuous dis∣eases, thorowe the Charity therof. In Maye was frier Forest han¦ged,Frier fo∣rest suffe∣red. and brente in smithfelde for treason and heresy. ¶Anno dom. M.ccccc.xxxviii. an xxx. Henrici octaui. Syr Wyllyam Forman mayre, Wyllyam wylkin∣son, Nicholas Gibson shiriffes. The mar¦ques of ex¦etor behe∣ded.This yeare in Decembre was the Marques of Exceter, the lorde Montacute and syr Edwarde Ne∣uel, beheaded for hygh treason due¦ly proued. A noble muster in London.In May, the Cytezyns of Lon∣don mustred all in bryghte harnes and cotes of white sylke, wyth whit cloth, and chaynes of golde, in thre greate battaylles, to the great wō∣der of straungers.
¶Anno dom. M.ccccc.xxxix. anno xxxi. Henrici octaui, syr wyllyam Holleys mayre, Iohn Fayre, Tho∣mas Huntlowe sheriffe. This yeare in Nouembre,4. abbot∣tēs put to death for treason the Abbot of Redynge Glastenbury, & Colchester, were attaynted of hygh treason, and lyke traytours put to deathe. The .xxviii. daye of Iuly,Thomas cromwell beheaded Tho∣mas Crumwell, late before created Earle of Essex, and water Lorde Hungerford were beheaded at the Towre hyll for treason. And the .xxx. daye were Barnes, Garet, and Hierom brent for here∣sye. Also the same daye were Abell Powell, and Fetherstone, drawen, hanged, and quartered, in Smyth felde for treason. This Somer was a great heat and droughte, so that in many pla∣ces the people woulde haue gyuen one bushell, for the grendyng of a∣nother.
An exami¦nacion of byshopes.Thys yeare was the Byshop of Chychester, and Doctor wylson, delyuered oute of the towre vpon the kynges pardon. ¶Anno. dom. m.ccccc.xl. an, xxxxii Henrici octaui, syr Wyllyam Roch mayre, Wylliam Laxton, syr Mar¦tyn Bowes shyryffes. great pityThys yeare the collection for the poore people seased. In Decembre were Egerton & Harman put to execucion for coun¦terfetyng of ye kinges great Seale This yere the kinges grace begā great buildīg at Calis & Guynes. In Apryl, certaine preestes and laye men began a new commocion in yorkeshyre,A new cō∣mocion in yorkeshire whiche were shortly taken and put to death in dyuerse places, one Leghte, and two other were put to deathe at London, the xxvii. daye of Maye, and for that
offēce was syr Iohn Neuel knight draune, hanged, and quartered,Due exe∣cucion. at yorke on corpus Christi euen, and xxx. handged for robbery. This yeare the .vi. day of May, there was a proclamacion that the Byble should be had in euery pa∣rysh Churche, within this realme,Goddes word set at lyberty redye for all sortes of people, to reade and heare Goddes worde at conuenient tymes. This yere the countesse of Sa∣lisburye was beheaded the .xxviii. day of maye. The .ix. daye of Iune, were two yemē of the kinges Garde,Right iud¦gement. hanged at Grenewitch for robberye in ex∣ample of al other. And the .x. day of Iune, was sir Edmond Kneuet knighte arayned in the Kynges Hall there for ge∣uynge a blow in the kinges house, and shoulde haue loste his hand, if the kinges maiestie had not exten∣ded
hys mercy towardes him. The .xxii. daye of Iulye, there was another proclamaciō,Abrogaci¦ons of ho¦lye dayes. that no holy day shoulde be kepte (excepte) our ladies dayes, the Apostles, E∣uangelystes, S. George, S. Ma∣ry Magdalene. And ye S. Marke shal not be takē, ne kept as a fastīg day, nor S. Laurence euen. Ney∣ther that Chyldren shoulde be der∣ked, ne go aboute vpon saynt Ny∣cholas, saynt Katheryne saynt Cle∣ment, the holy Innocentes, & suche lyke dayes. Also the .xxviii. daye of Iuly, was the lord Leonard Grey behea¦ded at Towre hill for diuers trea∣sons done in Irelād while he was the kinges deputy there. The same daye were thre Gen∣tilmen, called Mantell, Roydon, & Frowes, hanged at sayncte Tho∣mas waterynges, for comminge a shameful murther, and making an
vnlawfull assemble confirmed by a sedicious oth in Sussex,A vnlaw∣ful assēble in May laste, in the companye of the Lorde Dacres of the South, which lorde Dacres was on s. Peters daye fo∣lowing led frō the Towre through London, by the Sheryffes on fote to Tyborne, and there hanged. And the first daye of Iuly, was a Welchman drawen, hanged, and quartered for prophesyinge of the noble kinge Henrye the eyghtes deathe. ¶ Anno domini. M.ccccc.xli. an. xxxiiii. henrici octaui. Syr Migh∣ell Dormer mayre, Syr Rouland Hyl, Henry Suckley shiriffes. In this yeare, the .x. daye of Marche there was a maide boyled in Smithfelde for poysonynge of diuers honest persons that she had dwelled wyth, in the Citie of londō This yeare, came in the Earle
of Desmonde and the great Oneil oute of Irelande, and did submyt theim to the kinges maiestie,yrysh men called to honoure and after their submission, the great O∣neyll was created Earle of Tyron & his sonne Baron of Doncannen. ¶ Anno domini. M.ccccc.xlii. an. xxxiiii. Henrici octaui. Iohn Cotes salter mayre Henry Hobelthorne, Henry Amcotes sheriffes. Lacke of wood in LondonIn this yeare the Frost dured so longe that many of the poore peo∣ple cried out for lacke of wode and coles, that the mayre wente to the wood wharfes, and sold to the pore people Byllet and Fagot, by the peny worth. And this yeare was an Acte of parliamente,An act for wod & cole in london for woode and cole to kepe the full syse, after the purify∣caciō of our Lady, that shuld be in the yere of our lorde. M.ccccc.xliii that no manne shuld bargayne, sel,
bringe or conuaye to be vttered or solde, vpon payne of forfiture. This yeare the .xxviii. daye of Iulye, was brente at winsore three persōs, yt is to say, one sir Anthony parsō Preest and two seculer men, & the thyrd had the kinges pardon Also this yere was proclamed in the Citie of London the thirde day of August,Opē war towarde fraunce. open war betwene our soueraigne Lorde the kynge & the Frenche kinge, so the kynges hyghnes geuinge licence and auc∣thororitie to euery of his subiectes to vse the sayde Frenche kinge and al that depēded vpon him, to their moste aduauntage and commodi∣tie, as his maiesties enemies hath in suche lyke case heretofore bene vsed and accustomed. ¶ Anno domi. M.ccccc.xliiii. an. xxxv. Henrici octaui. Syr Wylly∣am Bower draper, whiche deceased
being mayre, & after him was chosē syr Raufe warren. Iohn Rowles, Richard Dobbes shiriffes. This yere was a greate deathe in London,A greate deathe. whiche continued so longe, that ther was no terme kept at Londō at Mighelmas, but was remoued to saynt Albones, & there kepte. A voiage into scot∣lande.In the yere of our lord. M.ccccc xliii. and the .xxxvi. yere of our soue¦raygne lorde kinge Henry the .viii in the time of the mairaltie of syr Rafe Waren, the kinges maiestie sente an army into Scotlande the iiii. day of May, and landed at lith and so wente burning and destroy¦inge the countrey about, sparinge neyther Castell, towne, Pyle, ne Village. The boroughe and towne of E∣denborough, with the Abbey called Holy Rode house, and the kinges Palice adioyned to the same, were
dystroyed. The towne of Lyth al∣so, and the hauen and peyre destroi¦ed. The castell & village of Crag∣myller, the Abbey of Newbottell∣and parte of Muskel borow towne the Chapell of oure lady of Law∣ret, Preeston towne and the castell Harintwone with the Freers and nunnery, a castel of Oliuer Sāck¦lers, the towne of Dunbar, Laure∣stone with the Graunge. ¶Drilaw. Wester crag. Enderlaugh The pyle & the towne. Broughton. Chester felles. Crawned. Dudistone. Stanhouse. The Fycket, Beuerton. Tranent Shenstoue. Markle. Tarpren. Kyrlande hyll. Katherwike, Belton. East Barnes. Howlande. Buterden. Quicwod. Blacburne. Raunton. Byldy & the towre.
And manye other townes and villages brente by the fleete vpon the sea syde,A rode in to scotlād with a greate nombre of pyles and vilages which I can not name nor reherse, which he de∣stroyed and left desolate, Kyncorne S. Myners, the quenes Fery, part of Peting waies: and other diuers thinges done by the Earle of Her∣ford lyuetenant to the kinges ma∣iestye. At Lythe in Scotlande were made fyue and forty knightes. Also this yere, the kinges ma∣iesty prepared an army into fraūce and thither he wente his owne per∣sone,Buleine & mutrel be¦seged. beseiged the stronge towne of Bullen in Pycardy, as here after ye shall here. The .xiiii. day of Iuly the kin∣ges maiestye departed from douer to Callys. The .xv. daye of Iuly, his ma∣iestye remoued to Morgysen, and
there camped one night. The, xxvi. day of Iuly, his ma∣iesty remoued to hie Bulleine, and there camped on the Northest part of the towne. The .xxvii. daye of Iulye my Lord of Suffolke layde syege vn∣to hyghe Bulleyn, and there cam∣ped on the Easte parte of ye towne. The .xxviii. daye of Iulye, the watche towre otherwyse called, the Olde man was wonne. The .xxix. daye of Iulye, Base-Bullen was wonne. The .xi. day of September was made a greate Larum, and the ca∣stell was so shaken with gunpou∣dre, that the stones whiche wayed xxx. poūde wayght, dyd flye twenty score of, the which not lytell greued the inhabitours to theyr daily pai∣nes, and tormentes. The .xiii. daye of Septembre the towne was victoryouslye con∣quered
by the mooste dreade soue∣rayne Lord kinge Henry the eight, kinge of Englande Fraunce and Ireland, defender of the faith, and in earthe supreme head of ye church of Englande and Irelande,Bolleyne cōquered. which after the entreaty and humble peti∣cion made of the French men, gaue them licence to take bag and ba∣gage with them and so departe. The .xiiii. daye of Septembre, at iii. of the cloke at after none, the towne gate was opened, and the people began to come out, and they helde on vntyll .vii. of the clocke at nyghte. And there were in nomber of men wemen and chyldren .iiii. M. and of them .xv.C. able men of warre,The kyn∣ges beni∣uolence. and they had with theim as muche as they could cary both mē, women, and children, that was a∣ble to beare any thynge, and theyr horses and kyne were loded with as much stuffe as they could beare
away. And they had .lxxv, wagens laded with them, what laude and prayse oughte they to geue vnto God, what worthye salutacions ought they to render to such a mer∣cifull and valiaunte Prynce. O howe ought they to pray dayly for the prosperous reigne of this victo¦rious and puyssaunt Prince which shewed them suche mercye and fa∣uour, with safegarde of their lifes. The .xv. day of September the kinges maiestie entred into hyghe Bullen with the nobilitie of hys realme, and trumpettes blowinge,The king entred bullē like a conque∣roure. that it reioysed all the whole hoste to heare, and woulde haue comfor∣ted all true Englishe mens hartes to haue hard, and sene the victorye and conquest that was had by our mooste dread soueraygne ouer the mayden towne, for the whiche ho∣noure, prayse and glorye be gyuen to almighty God, grace and victo∣rye
frome god the father, vnto the Kynge for euer. Amen. ¶Anno domi. M.ccccc.xliiii. an. xxxvi. Henrici octaui. Williā Lax∣ton mayre, Iohn wylford, Andrew Iud sheriffes. The fyrste day of Octobre, the kinges grace departed from Bul∣len toward Douer. And at his go∣ynge he dubbed fowre knightes at the waters syde. A brag of the french meane.The .viii. daye of Octobre, the Dolphin came with a great power out of highe Fraunce and camped at Morgysen and sent his trompet with .ii.C. horsemen and men of ar¦mes towarde Bullē, and they mar∣ched on the Northeaste syde where the kinges grace camped, and the trumpetter came to Bullen gate, & blewe his trumpet to come to my Lorde Deputie, and taried at the gate from .ix. of the clocke before
noone, tyll .ii. of the clocke at after∣noone, and then he came into Bul∣len to my Lorde deputye and sayd the Dolphyn hys master had sente to somon the towne. And my Lord deputie and the Counsell gaue an∣swere to the Dolphin of defiaunce, and then the trumpet and the bush¦ment of horsmen marched backe to¦ward Morgysen. Shortly after, besyde diuerse and many sharpe skimishes,A skir∣mish at Bolleyne. made by the Frenchemen at Bullen as∣well by the Dolphyn with a great power whiche in the night season, stale vpon Base Bullein, takynge there a greate sorte of sycke per∣sones, and women in their beddes whome withoute mercy they slewe. Howbe it so manfully the Englysh men, whyche escaped oute of Base Bullein, behaued them selfes, get∣tynge weapons oute of the highe towne, that they bet the Frenche∣men
agayne out of the Base towne and after with helpe of the hyghe towne, they slewe a greate nomber of them, and so agayne possessed quietly, the sayde Base towne. And the .x. day of Octobre the Dolphin sent his trumpetter to the Lord de∣putie of Bullein to knowe what capitaines, men of Armes, and o∣ther of his men the Englyshe men had taken. The Lorde Deputye made answer and sayde he had but one. Then the Dolphins trumpe∣ter sayde, that they lacked of theyr captaines men of armes and other of theyr fote men to the nombre of vii.C. and mo. And the Lorde de∣putie deliuered the french captaine and the Dolphin deliuered oures. The .xi. day of Octobre came a∣great nauy of French shyps right before Bullein, and they remained in sighe two dayes, and then sayled forth betwene Bullein and Calis,
to heare of their master ye Dolphin This yeare was taken by the kinges shyppes of the West coun¦trey and of the English costes, the nombre of .ccc. Frēch ships & more. The .xxvi. day of Ianuary in the yeare of .xlv. there camped on ye Weste syde of Bullen beyonde the hauē an army of frenchmen to the nombre of .xviii. M. and lay there the space of .x. dayes. And the .vi. day of February they were all put to flight by the Erle of Harford & the lord Admyral, then beyng lord Deputie of Bullen with a smal cō¦pany of men, & without any blud∣sheding on ye English side, but dy∣uerse of them were slaine. And they left al their ordinaunce with bag & baggage behind them, after which victory Sir Thomas Poyninges was made Lord. This yeare in Iuly about the xx. day ye frenchmen wyth a greate
Nauy of shyppes enuaded the Ile of Wyghte,The frēch¦men enua¦ded the ile of wight. where as they wer dri¦uen backe and a greate nombre slayne. This yerae in Septembre the Church of Saynt Gyles withoute Cripilgate was brent. ¶Anno domini. M.ccccc.xlv. an. xxxvii. Henrici octa. Syr Martyn Bowes goldsmith mayre, George Barnes, Raufe Aleine shiriffes. This yere in February sholde a woman bene brente in Smith∣fmithfelde for clyppyng of Golde, but the kinges pardonne came she beynge at the stake readye to bee brente. Thys yere the Cytizyns of lon∣don leuaied in the cyty, ii. fyfienes for the conueyaunce of more wa∣ter to the citie. Thys yeare the .xiii. day of Iune beynge whytsonday, and the yeare
of our lorde God. M.ccccc.xlvi. a continuall peace was proclaymed in the citie of London betwene our most renomed Henry the eyghte on the one partye.A peace be¦twen eng¦land and Fraunce, And the ryght hygh and myghtye prynce the Frenche kynge on the other partye, with a solempne procession at the tyme of proclamacion gyuynge laude and praise to god the auctour of peace, and at nyght thorowoute the Citie greate fyers with muche ioye and gladnes. This yeare the .xxvii. daye of Iune docter Crome preached at Poules crosse,Docter crome re∣canted. and there openly con¦fessed that he had ben seduced with noughtye Bokes, contrarye to the true doctrine of Christ, and in this doyng he sayd he was not compel∣led so for to saye, neyther for feare nor by any other meanes, but one∣lye of his free and voluntary wyll. This yere was brent in smith∣felde,
Anne Ascue, and thre more for herisy, and Doctor shaxston re∣canted the same time. In the same yeare the .xxi. day of Auguste,The con∣clusion of the year. came into englande to do his duety from the french kinge Mounscure Deneball high admi∣rall of Fraunce wyth greate try∣umphe, and broughte with him the Sacre of Depe & .xii. Galeis well besene in diuers poyntes and so landed at the Towre, where as he was honorablye receyued with ma¦nie nobles and peres of the realme and with the greatest shotinge of Gunnes that euer was hearde or sene, and so broughte to the By∣shoppe of Londons place and lay there ii. nyghtes, that is to saye the xxi. & .xxii. day of August ī the yere of oure lorde. M.ccccc.xlvi. On the monday the .xxiii. day of August, he dyd ryd to Hampton courte, where as the kinges grace
lay, and before he came to Hamp∣ton Court, my Lorde the prince re∣ceyued him with the noblest com∣pany that euer was sene, to the nom¦bre of .cccc.xl. veluet cotes. And my lord Prīces leuery wer with sleues of cloth of golde, and halfe the cote imbrodred also with golde, there were to the nombre of .viii.c. horses ryally apparelled, which broughte him to the Maner of Hampton Courte to the prudent and redub∣ted Prynce his father, and Quene Katheryne, and on the morowe, the kynges grace and the said Moun∣sure Deueball brake the hooste be∣twene them, for a generall peace, & so continued in banketynge and pleasure triumphantlye wyth the noblest Maskes and mumminges that euer was sene, with diuers & sundry chaunges in so muche that the torche berers were clothed in cloth of golde, this continued .vi.
daies and so returned into Fraūce with manye sundrye gyftes gyuen him and his retynew. ¶An. do. m.ccccc.xlvi. an. xxxviii herici. viii Henri Hobelthorne mar¦chaunte Tayloure mayre, Richard Gerues, Thomas Curtes shiriffes This yeare the .xix. day of Ia∣nuary, was the Erle of Surrey be¦headed at the Towre hyl for treasō This yeare the .xxviii. daye of Ianuary departed this present life the noble king Henry the eyght of that name, whose soule God take to his infinite mercy vnder whome we his people of Englande lyued longe a ioyful and a peasable lyfe,The deth of kīg hē∣ry the .viii reduced from the errour of Idola∣try to the true knowledge of God and his worde. And was full roy∣ally buryed at Wynfore, the .xvi. day of February the same yeare.
¶Edwarde the .vi. OVre most gracious So∣ueraygne lorde kyng Ed¦ward the .vi. beganne his raygne the .xxxi. daye of Ianuary in the yere of our lord .m.ccccc.xlvi, and was proclaimed kīg in all his late fathers realmes and landes. And the .xix. day of Febru∣ary, he rode solemply with his vn∣cle syr Edward Seymer, Lord go∣uernour, and Protectour, Duke of Somerset, with the nobilitie of the realme from the towre to Westmī∣ster thorowe the citie of London, whiche was richelye hanged with couerlites, and carpettes of tapi∣stry and ares, Chepesyde being ri∣chely hanged with clothe of siluer and golde. Euery condite running wine, Pagentes of chyldren beyng rychely aparelled to receiue him at euerye place with Oracons of his
prayse. And on the Southe syde of saynt Poules churcheyard an Ar∣gosie came from the battilment of the same churche, vpon a cable be∣ynge made faste to an anker at the deanes doore, lying vpon his brest aidinge him selfe nether with hand nor fote, and after, ascēded the mid of the same cable, tūbled and play∣ed many pretye toyes, where at the kynge with other of the peres and nobles of thys Realme laughed hertelye. The tor∣nacion of king Ed∣wardeThe .xx. daye of February hys moste noble grace at Westminster was proclaymed, anoynted, & crow¦ned kynge. Thomas lord Archebi∣shop of Cantorbury and Metera∣polytane of this Realme, miny∣string the deuine Sacramentes, & ceremonies to do ryallye al thynge belonginge, and so continued in banketynge triumphantlye wyth the noblest maskes and mumme∣ries
that euer was sene, wyth dy∣uers and sundry chaunges of ap∣parell. The, xxi. and .xxii. day, syr Tho¦mas Seymer lorde Admyrall ac∣companied with Deuelox, syr An∣thony kingstone, syr Peter Care∣we, Knowles, and Shelley, were Chalengers agaynst al personnes defendaunte at the Tylte, bariers and turney, wherein they behaued themselues lyke valiaunte men of armes. And this was finished on Sonday nexte folowinge, beynge the .xxvii. day hauinge at euen ban¦kettes, at the which were suche dy∣uers and sundry playes with mas∣kes, that no tyme tongue, nor pen can expresse. In this moneth of March, syr Andrewe Dudley vise Admirall with the Paunce and the Hart, be∣ynge but synglye manned, had a great conflycte with thre Scottish
shippes beynge double manned, and trīmed with ordinaunce in the narowe Seas, and thankes be to God obteyned ye victory, and toke many prisoners, and broughte the shyppes into Orwell hauen, where they dyd remaine. For the whiche victory, let vs praise God, praying God for the prosperous raygne & longe life of oure Lord and kynge Edward the sixte, to ye victory ouer his enemyes, and for the welthe of this Realme. ¶Anno domi. M.ccccc.xlvii. an. primo Edwardi sexti. Syr Iohn Greshā knighte Mayre, Thomas White Robert Curtes shiriffes. In this yere was ordeyned the holye Communion to be receyued in both kindes. This yere the last day of Iuly Stephen Gardener byshoppe of Winchester was commaunded to
the tower of london. Tis yeare was a great morta∣litie in London, then was a com∣maundement geuen to al Curates that they shoulde burye none a fore six of the cloke in the morning nor after sixe at night, and that the bell shoulde ringe three quarters of an houre or more. ¶ Anno domi. m.ccccc.xlviii. an. seconde Edwardi sexti. Henri Amp¦cotes fishmonger Mayre, wylliam Locke, Iohn Aylufe sheriffes. In this yeare was images put downe in all churches thorowe Englande.Idolatry forbedden This yere the mariage of pree∣stes was graunted lawfullye by the lawes of God.Laufull for prestes to be ma∣ryed. This yeare doctoure Bonnar was deposed of his bishoppricke ye first day of October. In this moueth the Duke of
Somerfet was committed to the Towre. ¶Anno domini .M.ccccc.xlix. an. tercio Edwardi sexti. Syr Roland Hyl knight Mayre. Robert yorke, Iohn Turke shiriffes. A cōmoci∣on in De∣uenshyre.This yeare was a rysynge in Deuenshire and Cornewale about the myddes of the yere: which was domage to thē and other: wherfore their chiefe captanies were taken and broughte to the tower of Lon∣don: and the .xxvi. day of Ianuary after was drawen, hanged, and quartered, & thre more at tydurne. Also this yeare about the same time was an Insurrecciō in Norf∣folke and Suffolke.A cōmoci¦on in nor¦folke. And theyr chefe Captaine captaine Kyte and his brothere were shortlye after ta∣ken, and Iudged to bee hanged at Norwiche in chaynes. Also in the yeare of oure Lorde
God. M.ccccc.l. the .xix. day of Ia∣nuary captayne Gābalde: the cap∣taine of ye spainieardes, & an other captaine was slaine without New gate in an euenyng by a Fleming: whiche was taken and hanged on the euen of S. Paule, and iii. more with him in Smithfelde. The .vi. day of February came the Duke of Somerset oute of the Towre. In the same moneth went oute of Englande certayne Lordes of the counsayle to Bulleyne,A peace cōcluded. where certayne of the French counsel met with them, and after longe consul∣tacion had, and diuers metynges betwene them, there was a general peace concluded, which peace was proclaymed the .xxix. day of march folowinge. Also about the .xxv. day of Aprill folowinge,Bullē ge∣uen to the frenchmē. the towne of Bulleine with the Fortresses therunto belon¦ging,
was deliuered by the english men, into the handes of the French menne. In this yere the second day of Maye was a woman brente in Smithfeld callled Ioane Kenll o∣therwise called Ioane Bocher for the horrible herisie,one brent for heresy that Christ toke no fleshe of the vyrgyn Mary, and at her deathe dyd preache Mayster Iohn Scory a preacher of Cantor bury, shewinge vnto the people her abhomynable opinions, warnyng al mē to beware of thē & such lyke. About this tyme ther were cer∣taine lighte personnes pretended a new commocion in Kente, but they were apprehended, and on the .xiii. day of Maye was for that trespas hanged at Asheford Richard Liō, and Goddard Goram and the next day folowing was hanged at Can¦torbury Richard Irelande for the same trespace.
¶Anno dom, M.ccccc.l. anno, iiii Edwardi sexti. Syr Andrew Iud¦skīner knight mayre, Austen hinde, Iohn Lyon shyryffes. The .xxv. day of Maye was an erthquake in Sothery and in part of Medelsex.An earth∣quake. This yeare on. S. Valentines daye at feuersham in Kent was co∣mytted a shamefull mourther for one Arden a gentilman was by the consente of hys wyfe mourthered wherfore she was brent at Canter∣bury,A shāfull murther. and there was one hanged in Chaynes for that mourther, and at Feuersham was .ii. hanged in chay¦nes, and a woman brente, and in smithfelde was hanged one Mos∣by and his syster for the same mur∣ther also. This yeare was Steuen Gar∣dener Bishop of Wynchester cal∣led to iustice at Lābeth before the kynges cōmyssioners and the .xvi.Steuen gardener deposed.
daye of February for his manyfest contempte and continuall disobe∣dience or rather rebellion against the kynges maiesty, wherof he was iustly depreued of his estate of the same. Thys yeare was a duche man brent in Smithfelde for holdynge of the opinion of the Auryans. ¶Anno dom. M.ccccc.li. anno. v Edwardi sexti. Richarde Dobbes skinner mayre, Iohn Lābert Iohn Coper shiryffes. This yeare the seconde daye of Nouember the old quene of Scot¦tes came to london which was ho∣norably receiued and lodged in the Bishops palace. A hie flodIn this yeare the .xiii. daye of Ianuary the sea brake in at sand∣witche insomuche that it did ouer flowe al the Marshes thereaboute and drowned muche cattell to the
greate losse bothe of the towne and countre. Finis. Here I shoulde haue put in the notable waies from certaine cities to Londō, but some of them be not marked truely wherefore I left them out till such tyme as I haue more knowlege in these waies ¶ Imprinted at Cantorbu¦ry in saynt Paules pa∣ryshe by Iohn Mychell.
