a235 12931309 95678
AN ACCOUNT OF THE ARBITRARY, EXACTI∣ONS, TAXATIONS, IMPO∣sitions, Excises, Contributions, with other Assessements, which have been leavied in these late Warres, out of the Associate Counties; viz. Essex Suffolke Norfolke Kent Sussex Surrey Middlesex Hertfordshire. Presented to the view of all those who wish well to their Countrey. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
READER, I Present thee here with pars de toto, and will indeed serve pro toto, to a judicious man to Calculate by. I know not thy tem∣per, therefore cannot tell how thou wilt accept of this little great Accompt cast up by me, if it goes against thy stomack I shall know thee what thou art (for an honest man will embrace truth, especially when it discovers so much falsehood and injustice) to which end I tooke the paines, not caring how it disgests with thee, knowing the fault to be in thy corrupted stomack, not in the meat, for I have herein used much modestie and more truth, using the greater paines to bring it as neere truth as possible (I am cer∣taine I have not gone beyond it.) Neither would I have thee altogether ruminate upon the sums onely, but reflect a little backe to the Cause and Causers; The cause our sinnes, the causers our selves; For who is there in the whole world hath had such showers of blessings poured on them? Insomuch that our Manna was loathed by us, our godly gap-stop∣ping Preachers rejected with their Doctrine, and willingly enter∣tained and hearkned to Factious Levites, thereby becomming a Seditious people and a bewitcht generation of Vipers, wholly gi∣ven to Warre, Sedition, Strife, Heresies, Rebellions, and what not? And for the upholding of it, remember how ready wee offer'd, not onely our Estates, O but our Lives! yea, exposing (without Gods great mercy) even our Soules in it to the mercy of the mercilesse devourer of them. And now what may wee expect lesse then lately hath beene, and now is, besides what hereafter may be, if Gods mercy doe not timely prevent it? And that wee may a little discerne by a little, what and how much wee have justly drawn on us, behold and see our Oppression in this one angle (and but a small one) of this Looking-glasse (not so much to discover our owne madnesse, as the illegall procee∣dings of the Oppressors.) And now to begin with our owne County (for I would not in the least measure be thought partiall though I foule my nest) and the other seven Counties shall be rated proportionably to this.
had not setled in our climate which now wee see is and ready to o∣verwhelme our whole Kingdome. So as we see the Electors aswell as the elected are in fault, neither ignorant yet both wanting in the executing of their charge and duty. The Kingdome stands in need of Parliaments, as well for the moderating of too severe Lawes, and the strengthning of those that have not power enough, as redressing grievances and making new Lawes, and yet what infinite Petitions from the people to the Par∣liament lyes in obsurity by them, as well for particular as gene∣rall wrongs, most occasioned by themselves, and yet not any re∣dressed, and why, because lawfully they can aswell doe the one as the other, both illegall, (there Orders not being Acts, as ap∣peares by their requesting it might be so) As for those that concerne themselves their leisure (or rather their charity cannot permit their redressing of them. Could this land (nay the world) parrallell this our gracious Soveraigne for mercy and goodnesse in being as ready and willing to redresse as the people to complaine, yea, preventing as much as in His Majesty lay) the occasions of all future complaints as plainly appeares by the Acts Hee hath passed in this present Parliament, sharing His Crowne, Honour, and Prerogatives with his people, And behold notwithstanding in the possessing of this inch so freely given, how they have neer gained the whole ell by usurpation; how stiffely they stand to maintaine the least Priviledge of their owne (which hath been graciously bestowed on them by the King, and by them ac∣knowledged by a remuneration of a lawfull generall Tax, as all precedent Parliaments can witnesse) and how little regard they His Majesties Rights being so farre from remunerating as they strive as much as in them lies, to have the remainder. Acts of grace from his Majesty first enacted are so lawfull and binding till repealed, and the King must repeale as well as enact, otherwise it remaines a statute-Law, then followes the act of his subjects remuneration, and then the soveraignes free pardon. But here I must needs take notice of one thing (and I thinke worthy the hinting) that I have observed in former Parliaments; they have been so honourable that in these acts of pardon they ne∣ver moved their Soveraigne to exempt Murthers and Treasons, I be∣leeve this will have both incerted, or as the Judges use to say after ther sentence past on criminall offenders, Lord have mercy upon thee (which will stand a brand on both houses for perpetuity) from
for Parliaments should proceed nothing but Piety and Justice, o∣therwise why make wee our appeale to them, they ought to crave grace and favour from His Majestie to the people (of whom they are the representative body) of both which we have from him re∣ceaved sufficiently, were we not wholly possest with the spirit of madnesse and folly, we very well hereby see that the diminishing of the Crowns, power is augmenting of subjects bondage, we may then say with the woman of Samariah help O King, and have as comfortlesse a reply, for what redresse or remedy can he give that is wholly divested of the power to give it. The Writs (by which all Members are chosen and summoned) expresse that it is to advise and Councell with the King, and not to do or act (which by God neither the Lands Law can they) any thing without him. His Majesty cannot make a superintendent power, none, nor all more powerfull then himselfe, If there be any make themselves so, it is a surrepted, not a dele∣gated power. The Lawes declare the Title such deserve, and the punishment they ought to have; Ambition, Pride, and Covetous∣nesse hath but farthered a bloody Faction, Theft a Civill Rebel∣lion, In which I thinke, from the highest to the meanest Family in the Kingdome not one of them hath escaped from the losse of a Fa∣ther, a Son, a Brother, a Kinsman, or a deare friend, or Husband; which had not hapened, had we taken Gods Law, and the Law of our Land for our Guide; and now we do not blush to say (though with impious impudence enough) that it is for the maintenance of our established Religion, and yet we see all so byased that few or none know of what Religion they are of. We have all seen the true Protestant Religion which hath been sealed with the bloud of so many Martyrs, maintained by truly Or∣thodoxe and most Learned Divines, and established by the whole∣some Laws of our Land, Mauger the malice and rage of the Church of Rome, and all other Schismatickes and Heretickes, now most impiously supprest. And now behold the just heavy hand of God on us, never bol∣der Treasons, publique Murthers, open Sacrilege, Common Theft, and all Impiety raigning and ruling without controle, as if the way to heaven in all things were to disobey the devill and our own lusts in nothing. The Israelites could plead want of a King when every man did as it seemed good in his own eyes, we cannot plead want
