A2903 R5430 13484756 99733
A SERMON Preached at Sea. Before the Honourable Sir ROBERT ROBINSON, Knight, Principal Commander of His MAJESTIE'S Squadron of SHIPS, now Riding at Spitt-Head, November the 24th, 1678. Before the Administration of the Holy SACRAMENT, and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to the several Commanders and Officers of that SQUADRON, in Obedience to the KING's Command. By GEORGE ALSOP, M. A. Chaplain to Sir Robert Robinson. By His Majestie's Special Order. London, Printed for Langley Curtis in Goat-Court, upon Ludgate-Hill, 1679.
To the Honourable, Sir ROBERT ROBINSON, Knight, Principal Commander of His Majestie's Squadron of Ships now Riding at Spitt-Head. SIR, WHen I Consider what you are by Place, and then Consider what you are by Grace, it makes me stand Amaz'd: To see a Man whose Education springs from Noise and Tumults, Wounds and Slaughters, Religious, Upon Grounds of holy Cir∣cumstance: To see A Man whose Dealing is in Blood and Waves, becalm'd with Pious Thoughts for Churches good: To see A Man that fears not Devils if he meets them in a Fleet at Sea; To lay his Roughness by, and meekly fall upon his Knees, to Invocate his GOD for King and Kingdoms good; Bespeaks Religion in the Soul of War.
This is a Lesson you have Learn'd and Practic'd long, That none with Courage brave can serve his King, without he first with Pious Care Obey his God. Can he be fit to Fight and Die, that knowes his wicked life is such, that when he leaves this World he must to Hell. The Christian Cause though e're so good must sink, if Christians Lives be bad. Can he be trusted to subdue a Foe, that cannot subdue his Sin; and quarrel strength, that is a Slave and Captive to his Lust? Sir, Your Life proclaims you Christian, and your Courage Man: And where I see these meet in one, I may be bold to dedicate a Piece for Churches good to such a Man, without a Frown or Scorn. It was your Pious Faithful Care this Sermon should be Preached; and so it was your Zealous Care to Acquaint His Majestie with what was done, that so it might be made Publick: And now I hope your Wishes will succeed, that Heaven may be Honour'd more, and Christians Bet∣ter'd still, when e're it comes abroad, shall be the Prayers of him who with his Soul doth Love the King and Churche's Peace. Your most Obedient Servant and Chaplain, Geo. Alsop.
A SERMON Preach'd at SEA. Matth. Chap. XXII. Vers. 11. And when the King came in to see his Guests, he saw there a man which had not on a Wedding Garment. DEarly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ; these words that I have read unto you, are part of the Parable that our Saviour delivered concerning a King, who Marrying his Son, invited divers Guests unto the Wedding. The King who invited the Guests, is the In∣finite, and Eternal God above; King of all Kings, Lord of all Lords, who hath Power and Mighti∣ness
in himself to do what he pleaseth in Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell, the bottomless Pit of Eter∣nal Vengeance beneath. He is a King in Heaven by his Grandeur and Majestie; in the World by his Grace, tender Love and Goodness; in Hell among the Damned, by his Justice and Severity. Now the Bridegroom is his Blessed Son Jesus Christ, by Eternal generation the Lord and Sa∣viour of us all. The Bride that he Marrieth his Son to, is his Pure, Spotless, Holy Catholick Church. The time of the Marriage was at Christ's Incar∣nation, when the Divinity and the Humanity were United: for as we observe, the best way to reconcile two Disagreeing Families, is to make some Marriage between them; Even so the Word became Flesh and dwelt amongst us in the World, that he might hereby make our Peace, Reconci∣ling God to Man, and Man to God. The Banquet the Guests were invited to, was no Ordinary Entertainment, but Wonderful, the Precious Blood of the Lamb of God (slain from the Beginning of the World) preached in hi Word, and presented in his holy Sacraments; the next was Remission of Sins, Everlasting Life, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost; oh
Admirable! Oh Sacred! oh Comfortable Feast for poor Miserable Sinners to be invited to. The persons appointed to invite the Guests, were the Holy Patriarchs and Prophets in old time; The Blessed Evangelists and Apostles in Christ's time; The Divine Pastors and Preachers in our time; These are Messengers of the great God, who have done, and still invite poor distressed penitent Sinners, that are in the high-way to destruction, to Come and Sup with him. The Persons more particular that are Invi∣ted, are both Jews and Gentiles: for although the Jews were specially called, (these glad Ty∣dings coming first unto them, as being the Se∣lect Peculiar People of God;) yet when they re∣fused and rejected the same, one going to see his Farm, and another to try his Oxen; a third having married a Wife, and so could not come; God upon their Rude and Dis-ingenuous refu∣sal rejects them, and sends and invites the Gen∣tiles, Aliens from the Common-Wealth of Israel; Go into the High-wayes, &c. And when these, who were invited, were
come, there was one intruding Guest found at the Table without a Wedding Garment. And when the King came in to see his Guests, he saw there a man which had not on a Wedding Garment. Now these words will allow us these two Parts: First, The Author of the man's discovery; and that was the King: When the King came in, &c. Secondly, The Fault he is Charged with, is want of a Wedding Garment. First, The Author of the man's discovery, and that was the King. We read but of one among so many that was without this Wedding Gar∣ment; the Messengers let him pass for currant, but when the King came in, he makes a second Survey and Scrutiny, and finds out this one, who had not on his Wedding Garment; he discovers this Unworthy Guest, which the Messengers could find no fault with; Friend, how camest thou in hither? Beloved, so true it is, that our Eternal God that dwelleth in Light, that no man can ap∣proach,
sees not as man sees. We read in the 1st. of the Revelation, and 14 Verse, that the Eyes of the Lord are like a flame of fire; they search into the secret Apartments of the Heart; not a Corner nor part, but the Lord sees and disco∣vers it. But, alas! poor short-sighted man reacheth no further than the outward appearance; if that be regular and smooth to the eye, his search is at an end, he hath discovered as much as he can; but the Eyes of God go down deeper in∣to the very Soul, and fathom the Bottom of the Reins, View and Discover how all stands there. We read in 1 Sam. Chap. 16. Vers. 7. that the Lord Commanded Samuel not to look on his Countenance, nor on the height of his Stature: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart. We may deceive men with our Coun∣tenance, our Grave Gesture, Pageantry and Shews; but these can't deceive God, or put a trick upon the Almighty. St. Paul tells us in the 4th of the Hebrewes, 13 Verse, that all things are open and naked to the Eyes of him we have to do with; That is, God hath a full prospect upon all Men and Women in the World, let them creep under what Mask,
Disguize, Canopie of Secrecy they will: Thou may'st lye, dissemble, and cozen so closely and cunningly, that no Man nor Angel can detect thee; thou may'st commit Adultery in the dark, and no man privy to it; Thou may'st steal when no Eye sees thee: Thou may'st have Treason in thy Soul, Rebellion in thy Heart, and yet thy outward seeming Conformity may Screen this from Man. Thou may'st with Judas eat of the Sop, drink of the Cup, receive the Blessed Sacrament, swallow the Oaths of Alle∣giance and Supremacy; do all what the Law re∣quires, and yet thou may'st have corrupt Po∣pish Reservations in thy heart to betray thy Master: But all this while remember that thou standest Naked before the All-searching Eye of an Omnipresent God, who knowes what thou art, and sees what thou do'st intend. Totus Auris, &c, saith St. Ciril, &c. God he is all an Ear, all an Eye, all an Hand; He hears all, he sees all, and hath a hand that can reach all where ever we be: God Almighty the Search∣er of all hearts takes up his standing at the door of our Souls, and with his Curious All-seeing Eye views all our actions and resolutions how secret soever. Holy David saith, That God looks down
from Heaven, and beholds all the Sons of men; as well those in the deepest darkness, as those in the brightest light; Whither (saith David) can we flie from thy presence? if we take the wings of the Morning and flie to the uttermost parts of the Earth, thou art there; if we go up to Heaven, thou art there; if I go down into the thick smoak of Hell, thou art there. Is it not a madness then to say, when thou art a going about wickedness, peradven∣ture the Night shall hide me; when the day and the Night are both alike to God? God sees thee when thou goest out early in the Morning; God sees thee when thou comest home in the Evening late. God sees thee when the Candle burns; God sees thee when the Candle is out. God sees thee when thou Con∣versest with thy heart, and sittest in Council with thy thoughts: What can we do but God sees it; and whither can we go, but God will discover us? And though this Doctrine be as true as God is true, yet is it not strange, and full of Astonish∣ing wonder, to see how Adam, and all the Sons of Adam labour to hide themselves and their sins from God? Adam, after his great Transgression in Eden, hid himself behind the Bushes, and Trees of the
Garden, as if they could have secur'd him from the All-seeing Eye of his Maker; but he was soon sensible of his folly: for God in the Cool of the Evening came to the very Bush where he lay, Adam, where art thou? Alas poor wretch! nothing could hide thee from the Discovery of thy God. And did not Cain, Adam's Son, tread in the footsteps of his Father? for when he had Inhu∣manely Murdered his poor Innocent Brother Abel, how did he labour to cover the blood with the dust of the Ground, to hide and con∣ceal his wickedness! For then God called from Heaven, VVhere is thy Brother Abel? how Morose and Angry doth he answer God, as if he knew nothing of it? Am I my Brother's Keeper? Yet this would not do: God saw it when no Eye else saw it, and punished him soundly for it. Sarah thought none did see her laugh, when she seem'd to mistrust God's promising her a Son; yet God saw it, though as the Holy Text saith, She only laughed within her self. God saw Zeeb behind the Wine-Press. God saw Saul when he hid himself under the Stuff. Who would ever have thought that the Babylonish Garment, the 200 shekels of Silver and 50 shekels of Gold that Achan conveyed away, would ever have
been discovered? No Eye saw him when he brought them out of the Camp, he Intombed them under his own Tent, all safe and secure as he thought; and yet God discovers this fact of his and layes it open to all Israel. How did God openly manifest and display the Abominable Idolatry of the Israelites, together with their Idols and Images, when they had got them∣selves between two Walls from all appearance of sight? and yet see how God brings the Prophet Ezekiel to the very Entring-place of the Door that led into the Chamber of their Imagery; Ezekiel, Chap. 8. Verse 8, 9, 10. Then said he unto me, Son of Man, digg now in the wall; and when I had digged in the wall, behold, a Door. And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked Abominations that they do here. So I went in, and saw, and behold, every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the Idols of the house of Israel pourtrayed upon the wall round about. The Devillish Plotting Powder-Traytors met together in the Vault, they thought them∣selves secure; shadowed from the eye of No∣tice, and fenced from the hand of Justice: But as Dark as the Vault was, and as Close as they went to work, the All-seeing God descry'd their Abomination, and destroy'd them, and their ha∣bitation.
The Obscurity of their Cell, Thick∣ness of Walls, Closeness of Windows, with the Cloak of a holy Catholick Profession, thrown over all this, could not make their Notorious Wickedness Dark to the Eye of Heaven. Little did this late Brood of Romish Villains ever think, that their horrid Intended Treason to Butcher the King, and Subvert the whole Kingdom, should have been so manifested, and laid open, as, blessed be our Gratious God, it is at this day. How long was the Pope, the Cardinals, the Jesuits, the Monks, the Friers, Hatching this Bloody Mischief; and just when they thought to have brought forth their Inhumane Design, that God, that View'd all their Meetings, saw all their Doings, read all their Letters, Par∣dons, Bulls, Commissions; Crusht the Cocka∣trice in the shell: If Elisha, who was but a man, could espy all the Design and Contrivan∣ces of the Assyrian King, which he concluded of in his secret Chamber; what then can escape the Eye, the Ear, the Knowledg of the God of Elisha? The Use that I will make of this Point, shall be that of Saint Ber. de convers. ad Cler. C. 16. Cautè Ambula, Te Videt Angelus Malus, videt te Bonus,
videt & Bonis & Malis Major Angelis, Deus: Our Impieties are not without witness; the good Angels and the bad Angels, and he that's bet∣ter than the Angels, far above all Principali∣ties, even the great God of Heaven and Earth sees us, cautè igitur ambula. It behoveth us there∣fore to walk Circumspectly and Sincerely; for though we may seem for a time to hide our selves and our sins from God, yet at length God will find us out, as he did Adam in Eden, Cain in the Field, Zeeb behind the Wine-Press, David's Adultery and Murder, the Israelites Idolatry; as he did the Powder-Traitors; as he did the Horrid Popish Treason of late; as he did this Unworthy Guest in my Text. It was good Counsel that one of the Rabins gave unto his Scholar, Remember Three Things and thou shalt never do amiss. 1. That there is about thee a seeing Eye. 2. A hearing Ear. 3. A Book, wherein all thy works, words and thoughts are Regi∣stred. Now did we really and weightily con∣sider this, That God saw us, that God heard us, and that God Registred all that we do, and will one day bring us to an accompt for it; Cer∣tainly, there would not be so much private Murder, so much private Adultery, so much private Treason against the King, so much Hy∣pocricy,
so much self-Interest, so much Deceit, so much Couzenage acted as there is. Did we believe that God heard all our Words, saw all our Works and Doings, we should not dare to Affront God so openly, nor Commit those fre∣quent Abominations in the Dark as we do. No man will be so Impudent as to steal in the face of the Judge; no man will be so No∣torious as to be drunk, or Commit Adultery in the Eye of his Prince; and yet how often do men steal and are drunk and commit filthiness in the Eyes of the Judge of all Men, and the King of the whole Earth. A man that is truly persuaded God sees him, he will take heed what he doth, and that God hears him, he will temper his Tongue with Discretion; And that God searcheth every Cor∣ner of his heart, he will be very mindful of what he meditates and thinks on. A man who is persuaded that God beholds all his Dealings in the World, he will take heed how he Bor∣rowes, how he Lends, how he Buyes, how he Sells, how he Wrongs his Neighbour either in his Name, or in his Goods, or in his Life: Be persuaded then to live as those that have al∣wayes God before them. And now to stir you up yet further to this
holy Duty of Sincere, Holy, and Honest Walk∣ing, as in the Presence of the All-seeing God, take these Two or Three Motives and Inducements following. First, Consider, That that God that made thee, that feeds thee, cloathes thee, preserves thee, gives thee Health and Peace, and by his Mercy has kept thee out of Hell; This very God Com∣mands thee to walk before him in all honesty, and godliness of life. We read in the 17. Gen. Vers. 1. That the Lord Commanded Abraham to walk before him, and be upright; And in Abraham, he Commands all the Children of the same Faith to walk before him, and be upright. Remember this, if thou wouldest be a Saint in Glory as Abraham, thou must obey the Com∣mand of thy Maker, walking sincerely and ho∣lily upon Earth, as Abraham did. A good Sub∣ject will obey the Commands of his King, and a good Christian the Commands of his God. Secondly, As it is the Command of God, That thou should'st walk holily as in his presence, so we have the Example of God's Servants who are Renowned for the Obedience of his Com∣mandment. Holy Enoch walked with God, that is, he looked upon God as who saw his Thoughts, Cogitations, Actions; heard all his
words, and his life was answerable to such a prospect. How Holy, how Pious, how Religious, how Obedient was Abraham in Walking before God? how Exact was holy David in this way? for fear of doing ill he placed the Lord alwaies be∣fore him. Psal. 116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the Living. Let the Command therefore of God, and the Example of his holy Saints, urge thee to keep God alwaies before thee. Thirdly, As we have the Command of God, the Example of the Saints for our walking as in God's Presence; so he that walks as in the pre∣sence of God, it will certainly bring him to make a Conscienee of all Sin. When Joseph was allured by his Impudent Mistress to commit filthiness, he made her this answer, How shall I commit this Great Wickedness, and sin against God? The bridle that restrain'd Joseph, was the fear of God, in whose presence he walked. If men walked as in the presence of God, when Lust, when Covetousness, when Pride, when Drun∣kenness, when Revenge, when Treason doth tempt and allure them, they would answer, We dare not meddle with you, for that God that's in Heaven sees us; that God that's in Heaven hears
us, we dare not do this Wickedness and sin against God. Had the man in my Text propounded this to himself, he would never have Intruded as he did to his Eternal Damnation. Many don't care how they appear before God, so Man don't think amiss of them. Alas! what is it to seem good and honest before men, but in God's Esteem be a Wicked Hypocritical Reprobate? This Unworthy Guest in my Text made as fair, as honest, and as Religious a shew as the rest; and yet you see he was Condemned as an Unworthy Guest, and thrown into outer dark∣ness. Let this then be alwaies in thy thoughts, That God sees thy Soul, however outwardly fair thou do'st appear to Man. The Second Part. THe Fault the man is here charged with, is the want of a Wedding Garment; where we may Note, That it is not enough to present our Souls, our Bodies before the All-seeing Eye of God, un∣less we come prepared as we ought. The man here in my Text not being prepa∣red when he came to the Feast, was Cast into Hell. It is something indeed to come into the Con∣gregation
to hear the Word Preached, to re∣ceive the Sacrament, to bow our selves before Almighty God in Prayer; But let me tell you, these are not enough; for if we rest here, these will be but as fuel to add fire to our further Condemnation. Judas Repaired into Christ's presence, but being not prepared, he was Condemn'd as the Son of Perdition; he eat at the Lord's Table as well as the rest, but as the Sop went down, the Devil went after it; which was a dear Sa∣crament to him, To Eat and Drink his own Damnation: for want of Inward Sincerity, an honest an sound heart, he was Eternally Damn'd. All our Fathers, saith St. Paul, were under the Cloud, that is, they had the same Sacrament, in effect, with us, though not in substance; and yet how many of them did God overthrow in the Wilderness? From whence we will Note, That outward Privileges and Claims to God, without Inward San∣ctification and Holiness, profit nothing. The Foolish Virgins had oyl in their Lamps, but none in their Vessels; they had outward Profession, but wanted inward Sincerity; they wanted a supply from within; they had not
Inward Grace, as well as outward Shew. There were many that lived with Christ in the Flesh, that did not eat and drink with him; they Prophecy'd in his Name, and in his Name did cast out Devils, and did many Wonders, and yet Christ professeth he knows them not. There must be Inward Holiness and Sincerity, as well as outward Shew, or else it comes to nothing. Here then we see, that the Collusion of the Church of Rome is blown away with the sound of this Doctrine: for the Men of Rome say, That outward works are available to Salvation, though there be no Inward Conformity. When as we see this Unworthy Guest made as Glorious a shew to the eyes of the World, as the rest at the Table; and yet was rejected by him that was the Searcher of Souls. The Romanists say, The very receiving the Bread only (for the Priest drinks the Wine) doth remit sins, confer Grace, and gives us a sure Title to the Kingdom of Heaven: Contrary to the Doctrine of my Text, and that of St. Paul, who pro∣nounceth the Unworthy Receiver Guilty of the Body and Blood of Jesus. We see then, let the Romanists say what they will, 'tis as much as our Souls are worth, to come into the presence of God to eat and drink at his Table Unprepa∣red;
you know what became of this Unworthy Guest in the Text. Should God make a strict search among us, from the highest to the lowest, can you think he would find but one Unworthy Guest, but one Unworthy Officer among us? I can charge none of you with Unworthiness, but out of a tender regard to your Eternal good. I beseech you, as you value the Blood of Christ shed for you, and the Salvation of your own Immortal Souls, every man of you that is invited to this Blessed Feast of the Body and Blood of Christ, strictly to Examin himself, before he Eats of this Bread, or Drinks of this Cup. And now to prevent the Danger which the want of this Wedding Garment may bring up∣on us: First, I will shew you, what this Wedding Garment is. Secondly, The means how you may obtain it. Thirdly, How we must use it when we have obtain'd it. First, What this Wedding Garment is; There is great difference among the Fathers, what this Wedding Garment is, One saith it is the New Man.
Another, the observing the Commandements of Christ. Another, a Pure Conversation. Ano∣ther, an Upright Heart. Another, Regeneration, consisting in Faith and Repentance. Another, Faith. Another, Charity. Another, good Works. Another, Humility. But (St.) Origen saith, it is Christ, and so un∣doubtedly it is; because whoever will come unto God, or partake of any Mystery of Salva∣tion, must be Cloathed with Christ as a Gar∣ment, 1 Cor. 1.30. Who is made unto us the Faith∣ful, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Re∣demption. Christ, as the Apostle saith, covers all his as with a Garment. We see plain enough that there are spots in the Moon, but there are none in the Sun: So in the best of our Graces and Worthiness, there are stains and spots, such as God would abhor to appear before him, did not the Righteousness and Satisfaction of his Dear Son Jesus Christ, cover us and appear for us. Christ Jesus is the Wedding Garment, that makes us acceptable to the Father, without Christ, what should we do? tis his Righteous∣ness that must cover our Unrighteousness. 'Tis his Humility that must cover our Pride, 'tis his Obedience, that must cover our Disobedience, 'tis his Faith that must Cover our Diffidence,
'tis his Love that must Cover our Hatred, 'tis his Zeal that must Cover our Lukewarmness; and then being Covered with Christ as with a Garment, there can be no Condemnation un∣to us; because as the Apostle saith, we are in Christ Jesus: for without the pretious Merits of Christ, we are but Unworthy Guests. Was ever Man or Woman sav'd by their own Works, by their own Merits, no not the Vir∣gin Mary her self; My Soul doth Magnifie the Lord, and my Spirit Rejoyceth in God my Saviour, these are Holy Mary's Words. The Romanists will not allow of this Holy and Righteous Garment of Christ's Satisfaction to be sufficient; but like David concerning Saul's Armour; it is either too heavy or too long or too short, and so they strut in a Popish Coat of their own Merit and Righteousness. We read that Adam and Eve made unto them∣selves Coverings of Fig leaves to hide their Na∣kedness, but God did dislike these, and so made them Coats of Skins, and Cloathed them there∣with; teaching us, if we patch our own Satisfacti∣on, our own Works, our own Dutys, our own Me∣rits together, and cover our selves with them as with a Garment, and rely upon them as ha∣ving force and Efficacy to save and help us; then
are we no way fit to appear in the Presence of the Eternal God, who accepts of no man, but through the Merits, Works, and Satisfaction of his Son Jesus. He that looks to be sav'd by his own merits, will undoubtedly fall short of Hea∣ven through his own presumption. It is a saying of Job, My own cloaths make me abhor'd, so our own Works without Christ make us Loathsom in the Eyes of God. Let us all then be persuaded to Cast off the menstruous Rags of our former Conversation,  the old Man, which is Corrupt, according to the Deceitful Lusts, and be renewed in the Spirit of our minds, putting on the new man which after God is Created in Righteousness, and true Holiness; Labouring to be Uncloathed, that we may be Cloathed upon, that so we may be found in Christ, not having our own Righte∣ousness which is of the Law; but of that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness of God by Faith: Phil. 3. ver. 9. This is the Garment we must Labour for, this is the Garment that we must strive and En∣deavour to get, for to cover our Poor Naked and Immortal Souls. 2. Having shew'd you what this Garment is, I will now shew you how it may be ob∣tained.
A thing may be made ours by diverse means. 1. We may buy it. 2. We may earn it, or deserve it. 3. It may be given us. 4. We may have it by way of Exchange: And now that we may obtain this holy Garment of Christ's Righteousness, tis the Counsel of Christ him∣self, Rev. 3. ver. 15. Buy of me gold tryed in the Fire that thou mayest be Rich, and white Rayment that thou mayest be Cloathed, that the shame of thy Nakedness do not appear. But some will Object and say,  What must we buy Christ the Saviour of our Souls with Money as Judas sould him? Buy him we must,  though not as Judas sould him, but as the Prophet speaks in Esa. 55. ver. 1. Without Money and without Price. The rea∣son of the Term Buying, here mentioned, is; because there is a near resemblance between the Spiritual, and the Material Buying. 1. In the Buying of Material things wee see a want and need of them, before we buy them. 2. There is a Longing or Desire to be pos∣sessed of them. 3. There is a Resorting to the place where they are to be had. 4. There is a laying down of the Money, and taking up of the Ware.
The like way we may observe in our Spiri∣tual buying. 1. Before we buy a Commodity, we see the want and need of it; so before we can have this Wedding Garment of Christ's Merits and Satisfaction, we must see, know, and feel, that we want it, we must know what a dangerous State it is to be without it. 1. If we have it not, we have no Peace of Conscience in this World, nor Heaven, nor Happiness in the next. 2. If we are not covered with Christ, as with a Garment, this Judgment will lay hold on us, we shall be Condemned and thrust out of doors, with the Cursed Unworthy Guest in my Text, and have our Portion with the Hy∣pocrites, in the Lake which Burneth with Fire and Brimstone. Now till we are thoroughly persuaded of these things, That without this Garment we shall be deprived of the Joys of Heaven, and be made Eternally Miserable in Hell, we shall never see the need that we have of this Holy Wedding Garment of Christ's Righteousness; the Whole need not a Physici∣an, but the Sick, tolle vulnera, tolle opus Medici; if there be no Disease, what need is there of the Physician: He that's full, despiseth the Ho∣ney
Comb, tis the hungry that sees and feels the want of Food, that craves and seeks for it: so till wee see our own Wretchedness, Blind∣ness, Poverty, dreadful State and Danger, Sin hath brought us into, we shall never be Cloath∣ed with this Wedding Garment. 2. When a man wants a Commodity, he longs and desires after it, he is never quiet till he is possessed of it; so these that truly see the want of Christ's Righteousness, they long and thirst after it, and are ne're satisfied till they do possess it. God gives this Garment to none but those that long and earnestly desire it. God saith his Servants shall eat, but first they shall be a thirst. God pronounceth none blessed, but those that hunger and thirst after Righteous∣ness; not he that cares not whether ever he hath Christ or no, so he may be covered with his Lust, or his Pride, or his Drunkenness. 3. He that wants a Commodity, will resort to the place where 'tis to be had; as Ja∣cob's Sons, when they wanted Corn, they came down to Egypt where 'twas to be had: so if we want this Spiritual Garment, we must go where it is; that is, at Bethel, the Church and House of God; that is the Spiritual Wardrobe, where
all Heavenly Robes are laid up; there is the very place where Christ will meet you in his Word and Sacraments: Where two or three are met together in my Name, I'le be in the midst of them. Do you think they deserve to be Clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, that prefer World∣ly Affairs, Sleep, Lust, Walking abroad, before the meeting with Christ in his Holy Church about their Eternal Happiness. 4. He that wants a Commodity, when he comes to the place where it is, he prizes the same, lays down his money, and takes up the Ware; and by laying down his Money, he shews that he Esteems the Ware better than his Money; even so must we resolve to throw off all the swelling Conceit of our own Righ∣teousness, our own Worth, our own Merits, our own Excellency; Accounting all things dross and dung in comparison of Christ Jesus. Now Beloved, consider, Is not this a gainful and blessed Change for us, when we may lay down our own Unrighteousness, and take up Christ's Righteousness? our own Disobedience, and take up Christ's Obedience; our own Pride, and take up Christ's Humility? and till we do this, we are no way Clothed with Christ as with a Garment.
Thus much of the Proportion which is held between the Material and Spiritual Buying; And now I fear, if most men should examin themselves by these Points, there would be a great Defect in most men. For Proof. First, Do you see the want of Christ, the Great Necessity that you have of his Righteous∣ness, to Cloth your Naked Wretched Souls with? You can see the want of Money, the want of Friends, the necessity of Preferment; but how few are there who see the true Want and Necessity of Jesus Christ? but rather like the Prophane Duke that said, If he could have Paris, he did not care whether ever he had Paradise. Never reckon upon Christ then, till thou truly seest the want more of Christ than Gold or Sil∣ver, Preferment, Health; or what ever this World can afford. Secondly, Do you long, thirst, and hunger af∣ter Christ? And can you be no way satisfied without him? Doth all the Profit and Pleasure of this World look vain and empty without Christ? Then thou art Happy. It is observed, that most men long and covet after the things
of this life, and are never satisfied until they enjoy and possess what they long, covet and desire. Now if thou Long'st more for Christ, than for hidden Treasure; more for Christ, than for Health and Pleasure of this life, it bespeaks thee in some measure to be worthy of Christ. Thirdly, Do you resort with love and holy sincerity to the place of Worship where Christ is; And not out of a Compliance only to the Law of Man, or for fear you should be suspend∣ed from your Imployment? If you do not Con∣form, have a care of Hypocritical Jugling. You may deceive Men, but you can't deceive God; for where Man ends, God begins. The Unworthy Guest in my Text, did Conform outwardly, when he meant nothing so in∣wardly: He came as plausibly to the Table as any, when his Soul and Resolutions were found another way: But for so doing, he was Eter∣nally Damn'd. Fourthly, Do you, when you come before God, cast off all Pride, Meritorious Conceit of your own Excellencies; and with the poor Publican hang down your Heads, beat your Breasts, say∣ing, Lord have Mercy upon us Unworthy Crea∣tures? 'Tis observ'd, That most men have a Mountebank-Opinion of their own worth. Nar∣cissus
like, we are very apt to dote upon our own shadows; but let me tell you, that none wears this wedding Garment of Christ's Righteousness but he that's contrite & humble in his own eyes. Now by these you may know, whether you are fit for the Table of the Lord or no; do you see the want of Christ, do you long for Christ, do you come with Love and Zeal to meet with Christ; can you willingly lay down your own Righteousness and take up Christ's; then come in the name of God, and eat of this bread and drink of this Cup, or else it is as much as your Souls are worth to meddle with them. Now having shewed you what this Gar∣ment is, and how you may obtain it: I will now in the last place shew how you must use it and wear it. It is the Apostle's advice, Rom. 13. To put on the Lord Jesus Christ; for let me tell you, if we don't put on Christ as a Garment, Christ will one day put off you with a nonnovi vos: I know you not, go ye Cursed into Everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And now Beloved, that we use and wear this Garment aright, there are these two Offices to be performed. First, We must put off. Secondly, We must put on.
First, Before we can put on we must put off; we must put off all the filthy rags of our for∣r corruption, our sinful nature, our beast-like affections, &c. Men, when they put on new Apparel, pull off the old and throw them by; so if you would be cloathed with the Righteousness of Christ, you must cast off the filthy clouts of your Men∣struous Conversation. The Swearer must put off his swearing, the Drunkard must put off his drunkenness, the Un∣clean person must put off his filthiness, the Cove∣tous man his uncharitableness, the Envious man his hatred, the Traytor his Treason, the Idola∣ter his Superstition: for let me tell you, that you may as well perswade me that Heaven and Hell are reconciled together, as that Christ and Sin dwell together in one man; therefore if thou intend'st to be cloathed with Christ as with a Garment, thou must put off, as the A∣postle saith in the Eph. 5.3. All uncleanness, in∣ordinate affections, evil Concupiscence, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, filthy Communication, lying one to ano∣ther. Secondly, As you must put off, so you must put on; and the means to put on Christ is faith, believing, apprehending and appropriating
Christ and his Merits to our selves, we must be∣lieve all the promises of God in Christ Jesus made unto man, and particularly apply the same unto our own selves, which is only done by the Act of true Faith. Faith is as it were the hand of the Soul which doth reach Christ unto us and put him on. Would'st thou have Christ dwell in thy heart, would'st thou put him on as a Garment? believe Christ with thy mind and heart, and thou hast him. And now Beloved, that I may leave nothing wanting of my part to put you in the right way for Eternal happiness, you must know that it is not every Faith, or bare Believing of Christ will put on Christ as a Garment. No, then the Devils may put him on, for they believe all the Historical part of the Bible, from the First of Genesis to the last of the Revelations: Hypocrites believe in God and in Christ, and yet for all that they are thrown to the hottest place of Hell. Now that Faith that is saving Faith, that like a Hand reacheth Christ, and puts him on, is an Operative and working Faith. First, Faith, that's saving, as the Apostle saith, Purifieth the Conscience: so then if thy Faith
be true, it cleanseth thy Soul from sin; it clean∣seth thy Soul from Covetousness; it clean∣seth thy Soul from Lust; it cleanseth thy Soul from Pride; it cleanseth thy Soul from Re∣venge; it cleanseth thy Soul from Drunken∣ness; it cleanseth thy Soul from Hypocrisy, it cleanseth thy Soul from Rebellion; it clean∣seth thy Soul from Treason; it cleanseth thy Soul from Idolatry; it cleanseth thy Soul from Faction; it cleanseth thy Soul from all man∣ner of Wickedness. The Devils Believe, but they cannot be clean∣sed from their black Abominations; Hypo∣crites believe, and profess and make a fair shew of outward Holiness, but their hearts are not cleansed from Oppression, Lust, Murder, Trea∣son, and Rebellions. Our Saviour of old Com∣pares them to Tombs, now you know that Tombs are oft usually the most beautiful Or∣naments of the Church; but let a man digg within them, and he shall find nothing but pu∣trifaction, stink, and dead mens bones. Never say then, that thou Believest savingly, or that thou hast more Faith than Devils, Hypocrites; while Sin and Wickedness governs thy Soul. Secondly, True Saving Faith works by Love: So it produceth Works; Shew me thy Faith by thy
Works, saith St. James. Where there is true Faith in the Soul, like the Centurion, it saith to one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he come∣eth, it Commands all our Actions, our Hand to Distribute to the Poor, our Feet to Walk in the Commandments of God, our Hearts to be Upright towards our God, and towards our Neighbours, our Tongue to Declare the Lo∣ving Kindness of the Lord. Faith in the Soul of Man, is like Sap in a Tree that lies hid; but Holy Works are like Fruit that shews it self; where there is true Faith in a Man, there will be Holy Works, there will be Hope, there will be Charity, there will be Repentance, there will be Godly Zeal: The Apostle St. Paul tells us, that the Just live by Faith; That is, they live the Life of Holy∣ness; they live the Life of Religion, they live the Life of Sobriety, they live the Life of Cha∣stity, they live the Life of Humility, they live the Life of Godly Love. They do not live the life of Prophaneness, they do not live the life of Drunkenness, they do not live the life of Lust, they do not live the life of Pride, they do not live the life of Revenge and Malice; these are the Works of the De∣vil.
Labour therefore for a true Saving Faith, A Faith that cleanseth thy Soul from Sin, and worketh by Love: If a man should come and tell a Person that's Rich, that all the Writings in his Chest, that Assur'd him of his Possessions, were Forged & Counterfeit, would it not make him start and go to his Chest, take them out and have them read and considered on by the best and learned Council? and shall not we look after our Faith, to see whether that be Sound and Real, which is an Evidence of our Eternal Inheritances. Without the Garment of Christ's Righteousness to cover our Souls, we shall never go to Heaven; and there is no put∣ting this Garment on, without a true sanctifi∣ed Faith: Faith is the Hand of the Soul that puts on Christ. I can't stand no longer upon this Point, the time hath over-shot me; I will conclude all with the Blessing that Jacob gave his Sons when they went into Egypt to carry Benjamin, God Almighty Grant you favour in the eyes of the Great Man: So the Lord Grant us all Favour in the Eyes of the Great God, before whom we must appear this day at his Holy Table: And that we may have Favour, let us bring the Beloved Ben∣jamin with us, which is the Righteousness
of Christ by Faith; that this Blessed Feast we are Invited to, may not be a savour of Death unto any; but a savour of Life unto all that shall pertake of it, &c. Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant; To whom be ascribed all Honour, Power, and Glory, Adoration and Subjection, from this time forth, and for ever more. And let all the People say, Amen. Let us Pray. FINIS.
