A3129A 18811199 108373
EFFIGIES R. P. LANCELOTI ANDREWES Episcopi Wintoniensis
Holy Devotions, WITH Directions to Pray; ALSO A brief Exposition UPON The Lords Prayer, The Creed, The Ten Commandements, The 7 Penitential Psalms, The 7 Psalms of Thanksgiving. Together with a Letanie. By the right Reverend Father in God Lancelott Andrews, late Bishop of WINCHESTER. The Fifth Edition. LONDON, Printed for A. Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1663.
Christian Reader. THou art here pre∣sented with ano∣ther Manual from the Dead. I need not tell thee who it is, that being Dead, thus speaketh; For, when thou shalt have perused these Pious and Holy Institutions, this Dove with Silver Wings, and whose Feathers are gold, Thou wilt easily conclude what Hand it was, and who the Noah that sent it forth of the Ark, to find out the dry Corners of this Land, that so, there it might build a Nest, not for it self, but for others, with that Olive Branch which it carries in its Mouth.
Or if happily thou mayest not here know the Parent by the Child (because indeed the Child has been educated under a kind Foster-Father, who dressed it up in three former Editions, and might have done in a Fourth, but that he now sleepes in the Lord.) Know now; that the True Father, and primary Author of these Devotions, was the Glory of this Church, the Great and Eminent Andrewes; a Person of such Learning, Charmingness, and Sanctity, that in after-times there will bee some to make it their VVish, O that they had lived in those Dayes, when they might have seen Dr. Andrews, in the Schooles, Bp. Andrews, in the Pulpit, St. Andrews, in the Closet.
And thus the Parentage of this Book, (which like that of Cyrus) was, for divers years, conceal∣ed under a Shepheards Cottage, (a good and faithfull Shepheard he was that concealed it) comes now to be vindicated to its own Nativity; And the Child being of full Age, desires to be known abroad in the VVorld for her Fathers Daughter, the Daugh∣ter of her True, not Supposed Father. If it were not too great a Presumption for so sacred a Per∣son to be commended by so mean a Pen, I should be ready to say of our Lancelott Andrewes, as E∣rasmus said of his Ioannes Vitrari∣us, that had he lived in the In∣fancy of the Gospel, and been a known Contemporary to Saint Paul, he would (happily) have chosen Him, even be∣fore Barnabas or Timothy, to have been his Companion in
his Labours and Ministry. O the vast interest which this great Luminary had in those two Equal Sisters, Prayer and Preaching. Preaching and Prayer! I am bold to call them E∣qual Sisters, because the use of Preaching is to teach us all how to Pray; And the Be∣nefit of Prayer, is to enable some, after what manner to Preach: Though, it will here be Confessed, that as the times now stand, the best Weapons of the Church are Tearfull Prayers. And therefore, since the Press of late has grown even Wanton in the Printing of Sermons (which serve to make Plagiary-Preachers of such that never would, never could be Scholars.
So now, I shall endeavour an expiation of that Crime, by making it sweat under the Hap∣py Dew of Penitential Prayers and Devotions. And A Devout Heart and Tongue has much the Advantage of a Ravenous Ear. But Christian Reader, not to keep thee longer from being up∣on thy Knees, Know, that This Preface is no way intended as a project to advance the sale of this Edition. No, This Hallow∣ed structure is a work of more sanctity, than to allow of any Brokage. What is just Policy else∣where, would here be Simony. I now intend not my own Benefit, as Thine. Tis a work of Charity more than of Merchandise. And the Design is chiefly, that whilst our Churches are be∣come Schools of Disputation, My shop may be converted to an O∣ratory.
Wherein yet I hope, amidst the many Conditions of Persons which thou art here invited to pray for, thou wilt not leave him, whose endeavours are at thy service, Thine, Henry Seile.
Holy Devotions, OR DIRECTIONS To Pray, &c. A General Exhortation to Gods ser∣vice. THe minds of many (I will not say of most men) are so distracted with the cares of this world, and so much ad∣dicted to the pleasures thereof, and the thoughts of God and goodness are so farre from them, that they seldom or never think, either of the danger they are obnoxious to, or the loss they are like to sustain, by the neglect of those things which tend to
their Salvation. So that the saying of our Saviour to Martha, may well be applyed to them, Thou art troubled with many things, One thing is neces∣sary. And if they would take into serious consideration what they haz∣ard, nay what they lose by neglecting this unum necessarium, that one thing necessary, without doubt they would withdraw themselves from the immo∣derate cares and pleasures of this tran∣sitory world, and in due time bend their thoughts to that course, which in the end would bring rest to their Souls.Cicero. The Heathen man could say, Tempus est de illa perpetua jam, non de hac exigua vita cogitare. It is now high time, not to think of this short life, but of life eternal. And Lon∣gum illud tempus cum non ero, magis me movet, quam hoc exiguum, quod mi∣hi tamen nimiùm longum videtur. That length of time when I shall cease to be, more moveth me, than this short time, which yet seemeth too long. In our temporal estate wee are carefull enough, in the beginning of our dayes, to settle our selves in a course of life, for our maintenance and preservation. Why should we be so backward, so
remiss, in those things which concern us nearer, even the eternal good and happy estate of our souls, but look to that betimes too? For if our begin∣ning be good, there is good hope of the time succeeding. Let us therefore lay a good foundation, like wise build∣ers,Esa. 55.6. and seek the Lord while he may be found, and fix our cogitations wholly upon him, love, honour, obey him, and apply our selves wholly to his service. This we are bound to do in divers re∣spects. For the excellency of Gods Divine Perfection. Being defective in nothing. Perfect in knowledge.Job: 37. 16.11.17. Past finding out. Be perfect,Mat. 5.48. as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. Which Perfection though no Heart can comprehend, or Tongue express fully; Yet we may make some esti∣mate of it, by some of his Attributes, whereof we shall give you a brief sight. S. Augustine speaking of his per∣fection, saith, that He is immutable, yet changing in all things. Alwayes in action, ever
quiet. Filling all things, not con∣cluded in any thing. Great without quantity. Good without quality. Patet quam sit admirabilis, cum omnibus linguis sit indicibilis, omni∣bus cordibus sit incogitabilis. Excedit supereminentia Deitatis, non solum usitati eloquii, sed etiam intellegentiae facultatem. It appears how admirable it is, since no tongue can express it, nor any heart conceive it. The Transcendency of the Godhead exceeds not only the usual strength of eloquence, but of understanding like∣wise. He is Absolute or Simple. With∣out Composition. Without Body. Spiritual. He is all Eye, He is all Ear, Tert. 1.He is all Hand, Invisible. Because he seeth all things. Because he heareth all things. Because he worketh all things. He is all Foot, because he is every where,
When you hear him named, conceive him to be a substance without beginning or end. Simple without mixture. Infinite. Not to be circumscribed to time or place. Whither shall I go from thy pre∣sence, &c.Psal. 139. 6, &c. Heaven is my Throne,Esa. 66 1. &c. Where is the place of my rest? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, saith the Lord?Jer. 23. 24. The Spirit of the Lord filleth all the world.Wisd. 1.7. Deus ubique est, & totus ubique est.S. Hier. AEterna stabilitate in seipso ma∣nens,S. Aug. totus adesse rebus omnibus po∣test, & singulis totus. God is every where, and wholly every where. By eternal stability remaining in him∣self, he is wholly in all things, and wholly in every thing. Immortal. I live for ever.Deut. 31.4
Dan. 4 34.I honoured him that liveth for ever. Apoc. 4 9He only hath immortality. 1 Tim. 6. 16.Solus Deus est immortalis, quia non est per gratiam,S. Hier. sed per naturam. Eternal. Without beginning. Ps. 90. 2.Thou art God from everlasting. Without end. 102. 27.Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. Dan. 7.13.He is called the Ancient of dayes. Immutable. Not to be changed. 1. In his Nature. Ps. 102.26Thou shalt endure. Mal. 3. 6.I am the Lord, I change not. Jam. 1. 17.Every good and perfect gift cometh from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of changing. 2. In his Promises and Decrees. Pro. 19. 21The counsel of the Lord shall stand. Esa. 46. 10My counsel shall stand. Heb. 6. 17.The immutability of his counsel, saith the Apostle. Tit. 1. 2.God hath promised, who cannot lie.
Non mutatur Deus, qui unus at∣que idem est, & mutari non potest.S. Hier. God is not changed, being one and the same, uncapable of change. Wise. Nothing hid from him. The Lord knoweth the wayes of the righteous.Psal. 1. 7 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man.94. 11. His wisdom is infinite.147 5. No searching of his understanding.Esa. 40 28 Loe, thou knowest all things.Joh. 21. 17 Known unto God are all his works.Act. 15 18 O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God.Rom. 11. 33. The Spirit searcheth all things.1 Co. 2. 10 All things are naked and open to his eyes.Heb. 4. 13 God knoweth all things.1 Joh. 3. 20 Holy. No evil or iniquity in him. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, glo∣rious in holiness.Ex 15. 11. None holy as the Lord.1 Sam. 2. 2 The holy One of Iacob.Esa. 29. 23 The holy One.40. 25.
Abac. 1.13Of purer eyes, than to behold evil. Esa. 6. 3.Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts. Apoc. 4. 8. Josh. 24. 19.He is an Holy God. Lev, 11. 44.I am Holy, saith God himself. True. 1. In himself. Whatsoever is in him is Truth. Jer. 10.10.The Lord is the true God. Joh. 17.3.It is life eternal to know thee true God, &c. Rom. 3.4.Let God be true, and every man a liar. 1 Thes. 1.9Ye turned from Idols to serve the true and living God.Apoc. 15. 3. 16. 7. 2. In his works. Dan. 9.14.Iust and true are thy wayes. Psal. 119. 137. 75.Righteous in all his works. Iust art thou, O Lord, and righ∣teous are thy judgements. 3. In his words. Psal. 12 7. 117. 2.The words of the Lord are pure. The Truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Good. Absolutely. Not participating from any other. 1. In himself.
1. There is none good, but God. Thou art Good.Mat, 19. 17. 2. Author of all good to others.Ps. 119 68 2. Every good and perfect gift com∣meth from the Father of lights.Jam. 1. 17. The Earth is full of his goodness.Psal. 33. 5. Glorious. Ye shall see the glory of the Lord.Exo. 16.7. 10. The glory of the Lord appeared. The sight of his glory was like con∣suming fire.Exod. 22. 17. The glory of the Lord appeared to all the people.Lev. 9. 23. The glory of the Lord filled the House of God,2 Chro. 5. 14. The whole Earth is full of his glory.Esa. 6. 3. His glory is above the Heavens.Ps. 113.4. Powerful. Working all things in all. Almighty.Gen. 17.1. 43 14. He doth great, unsearchable, and marvellous things without number.2 Cor 6. 18. The fabrique of the Universe is the work of his hands. The Heavens beautified with Stars.Job. 5. 9. The Earth spacious and adorned.Ps. 104.24.
The Sea Full of variety of his riches, The Sea Stored with Fish, &c. Psal. 33.6. 74. 17.All made of nothing, but by his word. Thou hast prepared the Light and the Sun. 102. 25.Thou in the beginning hast laid the foundations of the Earth. Heb. 11.3.Through Faith we understaud that the World was ordained by GOD. Clem. AlexMundus hic est veluti magnus liber, divinae Majestatis & gloria opera ex∣plicans. This World may be compared to a great Volume, wherein are contained and expressed the works of the Divine Majesty and Glory. Apo. 19. 16.He is King of Kings, Lord of Lords. Upholding all the Pillars of the Earth. Moving the Heavens. Changing the Seasons. Dividing the Waters. Bringing forth the Winds, as out of his Treasury. S. August.But in this, and all other his Attri∣butes, Verius cogitatur quam dicitur, We may better couceive of them than ex∣press them: And we speak best of his worth, when with a silent admiration we hold our peace, according to that
of the Psalmist, Psal. 65. 1. which St. Hierom hath translated, Tibi silet omnis laus DEUS in Sion. Yet though the custom of the world is to respect men and things, either for the goodness in them, or for the benefit which accreweth by them; Yet the latter worketh most: For let a thing be never so good, if it bring no profit, it is the less regarded. Let us therefore take a view of some other of Gods Attributes, and consider whether we have not suffici∣ent cause to serve him, for the bene∣fits we reap by him. And first of that which cometh by him by the I. Creation. In which he made Man, and all things else for his service. 1. He made him his chief delight. He made him after his own Image.Gen. 1.27. He made him little lower than the Angels, and crowned him with glory and honour, putting all things in sub∣jection under his feet.Psal.  5, 6. This wrought admiration in David. When he was not, he made him a
Man, not a Beast, but such a Crea∣ture as may enjoy Eternity with Him. He made the Heaven and rested not. He made the Earth and rested not. . Ambr.He made the Sun and rested not. He made the Moon & and rested not. He made the Stars and rested not. But when he made Man he rested, that he might have one Creature whose sins he might remit. 2. He made all things for the ser∣vice of Man. For him The Sun riseth and goeth down. For him The Moon increaseth. For him The Stars arise. Psal. 8.For him Beasts, Fowl and Fish. For him Corn and Hearbs. For him Hills and Mountains. For him Valleys and Fields. For him Rivers and Flowers. For him Times and Seasons. For him Angels and Archangels. For him Principalities and Powers. For him Thrones and Dominions. For him Cherubim and Seraphin. If therefore every one be a debtor for that which he hath received,Arist. and that (with the Philosopher) Dii
& Parentibus nunquam reddatur aequi∣valens; A Man can never render that which is equivalent to that which he re∣ceives from GOD, or his Parents; Man ought to remember his Creator with thankfulness as often and as long as he breaths. If I be a Father, where is my honour?Mat. 1. 5. Hac conditione gignimur, ut ge∣neranti nos Deo justa & debita obse∣quia praebeamus. We are begotten up∣on this condition, to behave our selves in all due respect and observance to God who begat us. II. By his Providence and Conservation. Thou, O Man, hast no more power to subsist without him being made, than to be created before thou wert made. Thou wert but once made, but of∣tentimes preserved from Fire, from Water, from Sickness, from Enemies, &c. He defends us under the shadow of his wings.Psal. 944 He giveth his Angels charge over us,Psa. 91..
as in the example of Elizeus.2 Reg. 6. Ps. 103.13He is as careful over us, as a Fa∣ther over his Children;Esa. 49.15 a Mother over hers;Jo. 10.11. a Shepheard over his Flock.Esa. 40,11 Eze. 39. 10.He governeth all things by his Pro∣vidence. Ps. 23.1.2.Not a Sparrow falleth on the ground. Wis 14.3.He feedeth the young Ravens. Mat. 10.29He giveth us meat in due season. Ps. 147 9.Cast your care on him,Ps. 145.15 for he careth for you.1 Pet. 5 7. Act. 17.28In him we live, move, and have our being. To end this with St. Ambrose. If thou art sick, he is thy Physician. If thou art weak, he is thy strength. If thou fearest death, he is thy life. If thou desirest Heaven, he is the way. If thou shunnest darkness, he is the light. If thou wantest food, he is thy nutriment. Ps. 144.5.Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. III. By his Love. Pro. 8.17.Delighting in the works of his hands. Joh. 18.21Loving them that love him. 1 Joh. 4. 10. 19.Nay when we loved not him, he first loved us. Esa. 65.1.I am found of them which sought me not.
Nay, when we were his enemies.Ro. 58.10 And that with a perpetual and ever∣lasting love,Jer. 31. 3. especially manifested in our Redemption. Which degree of his Love, and the benefit arising by it, no tongue or pen is able to express. Saint Bernard saith,S. Bern. If I owe to God all that I am for my Creation, what shall I give further for my Re∣demption? In my Creation he gave me to my self; in my Redemption he gave himself to me, and restored me to my self. 1. And not only in respect of the Act it self. 2. But in regard of the Manner. 1. Man being fallen from blessed∣ness by our first Parents sin, God in mercy had pitty on his estate, and was reconciled to him, was content that he should be redeemed from the bon∣dage and penalty of sin, from everlast∣ing death of body and soul, and this was the Act it self. 2. The Manner of it was extraor∣dinary. Even by his Son, his only Son, God from all eternity, taking ours, and not the Angels nature upon him.
Suffering death; the worst, the most accursedst, of the Cross, even when we were his enemies. Whereby we were not only freed from what we deserved, Punishment, eternal death of Body and Soul: But made capable of what we could not expect, everlasting felicity, and life of both. Is not this love without parallel. That we that were enemies, child∣ren of wrath,Io. 3. 1. and eternal perdition, should now be called the Sons of GOD. This is a greater act of love, this manifesteth Gods love to us more than our Creation. For by his word he created us with∣out weariness; But our Redemption cost more, his only Sons dearest blood. 1 Pet. 3.18Who suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust. Isa. 53.12.And poured out his soul unto death. Gal. 3. 13.Was made a curse for us. Phil. 2.8.Humbled himself to the death of the Cross. To redeem us from the death and curse of the Law. Ps. 111.9.He sent Redemption unto his people.
He redeemeth Israel from all his sins.139. 10. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity.Tit. 2.14. IV. By his Patience toward Men daily provoking him in all ages.1 Pet. 3.20 In the dayes of Noah.Ge. 15.16. The Amorites.Ps. 95.10. The Israelites forty years.Act. 13.18 The Ninivites and many others.Jonas 3. He is Long suffering,Exo. 34.6. He is Slow to anger.Ps. 16.15. 103. 8. Joel 2.13. Jonas 4.2. V. By his Mildness. Lenity in Correcting.Neh. 9.17 Not utterly consuming those whom he correcteth.Neh. 9.31. And it is of his mercy that we are not consumed.Lam. 3.22 In his anger remembring mercy.Abac. 32. Not delighting in punishment.Ezec. 18. 23 32. 33. 11. Not utterly taking away his mercy,Ps. 89 33. 103. 10. Not dealing with us after our sins. VI. By his Mercy and Grace to Sinners. Be merciful, as your Heavenly Fa∣ther is merciful.Lu. 6. 36. The Father of mercy.2 Cor. 1.3. He was ever so.Psal. 22.4.
Eph. 24.He is tender and compassionate, rich,Rom. 5. 20 and not sparing in his mercy. Ps. 130 7.Bringing many benefits with it. Luk. 1 78.Begetting us again by it. Ps. 106.43 Preserving us from dangers and sickness. Ma. 18.27.Preserving their souls. 1 Pet. 1.3.Saving us by it, which is the chief and greatest benefit mankind can de∣sire.Ps. 97.10. Phi. 2.27.And as he is rich in mercy, by par∣doning sinners,Ps. 79.10. so in his favour too,Tit. 3. 5. promising good to his Servants. Pro. 8.12. 8. 21.I will love them that love me, I will inrich them. Ps. 97.10.The Lord will preserve the souls of his Saints. 102. 28.The Children of his Saints shall con∣tinue, and their seed stand fast in his sight. Mar. 10. 29, 30.No man that hath forsaken house, &c. for my sake, but he shall receive an hun∣dred fold. A hundred fold here, by inward graces, if not by outward dignity. For deceivable things, they shall re∣ceive true. For doubtful things, they shall re∣ceive certain. For corporal things, they shall receive spiritual.
For transitory things, they shall re∣ceive permanent. Their cares shall be turned into se∣curity. Their tears into joy. Their trouble into quiet. Their perturbations into inward peace. The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them, and delivereth them out of all their troubles.Ps. 34.16. He that toucheth them, toucheth the apple of his eye.Zac. 2. 8 Not a bone of them shall be broken.Ps. 34.19. For God rewardeth secundum, though not propter opera. And reward maketh all works seem easie; to the Husbandman in his toyl, to the Merchant in his danger. The reward of the good shall not fail.Ecclus. 2. 8. The Lord is good to them that trust in him. He sendeth health and wealth to his servants.Lam. 3.25. Pro. 5.8.9. He never faileth them that seek him.Ps. 9. 10. His reward is plentiful to them that fear him.Ps. 1. 31. Now let us take a view of all these benefits.
1. Of our Creation, and in that of all things for our use. 2. Of Gods preservation and provi∣dence over us. 3. His love to us. Before we loved him. Loving him. While we were his enemies. With an everlasting love. In such a large extent, by Our Redemption. In the act. when we were in bondage of the Devil. Sin. In the manner, by his only Son, by his death most ignominious and cruel. To free us from deserved death. To estate us in undeserved happi∣ness, even life everlasting. 4. His Patience to us daily offend∣ing him, and new crucifying his Son again. 5. His Mildness and Lenity in cor∣recting us to Amendment, not to De∣struction. 6. His Mercy, in forgiving our of∣fences, in promising protection and re∣wards to his servants. And tell me, if these be not suffici∣ent
motives to perswade us to his ser∣vice, if our hearts be not hardned? And if we ask what it is to be the servants of God? The Answer is plain and easie; for as it is in the case of a Master Tem∣poral, so is it in the Spiritual. To do the Will of our Lord and Master. This is the will of GOD, even your sanctification.1 Thes. 43 To fear & keep his Commandements.Deu. 5.29 This Commandement is double. 1. To keep innocency, and to do that which is right.Ps. 37.38. 2. And to do no evil.Eclus. 7.10. They are put both in one Verse by God himself. I have set before thee life and good, death and evil.Deut. 30. 15. And by the Prophet David. Flee evil, and do that which is good.Ps. 37.27. Now that his Precepts should be kept, there is great reason. Because they are just and holy.Rom. 7. 12 All his Commandements are just.Ps. 119.75 True and righteous are thy Iudge∣ments.Apo. 17.7. Iust art thou, O Lord, and righteous are thy Iudgements.Psal. 119.
1. For the first part of his Will. To keep that which he commandeth. To follow that which is good. Many mo∣tives there are to perswade us to it. 1. For the peace which good men have, 1. With God, They are reconciled to him. Rom. 5.1.We have peace with him. 2. With Men. When the wayes of man please the Lord,Ro. 16.7. he will make his enemies also at peace with him. 3. With our Selves. Having mortified our affections, and placed them on heavenly things, we are troubled with nothing, but all things are quiet about us. Psal. 112. 165.Great is the peace that they have which keep Gods Law. Isa. 48. 18. 32. 17.The work of Iustice shall be Peace. The Kingdom of GOD is righ∣teousness, and peace. 4.Ro. 14.17.4. In our Consciences, inward Peace. 2 Cor. 1. 12.The testimony of a good Conscience was Saint Paul's rejoycing. Pro. 15. 15 S. Hier.A good Conscience is a continual feast. It shuns no mans sight. Tully.The Heathen had some feeling of this Peace, A life well spent bringeth
such comfort, that either sickness toucheth them not, or the grief of it lit∣tle troubles them. Socrates said,Socrates. That he lived without perturbation, whose conscience reproved him not. And Byas,Byas. That he lived without fear, that had a good conscience. And though such a man have fear, it is not desperate or grievous, but re∣ligious and holy. Which kind of fear, disquieteth not, but comforteth: For the best hope is joyned with such a fear. 2. For the comfort they have in the Holy Ghost. There is sprung up a light for the righteous,Ps. 97: 11: and joyful gladness to such as be true hearted. The voice of joy and health is in the dwellings of the righteous.118. 15. They shall be satisfied with the plen∣teousness of thy house,36. 8. and thou shalt give them drink of thy pleasures, as out of the River. All vertues and graces of the Spirit assist them, as the blood of the veins do the heart. 1. Faith, whereby they discern
the good and evil of the life to come; and adhere to the promises of God made in Christ Iesus.Ro. 8. 18. 1. 20. 5 10 So that they account not the afflictions of this life wor∣thy of the glory which shall be revealed to them.Gal. 5. 5. Act. 10.43 Jer. 31.34 2. Hope, whereby they expect their reward joyfully. Rejoycing in hope. Rom. 12. 12.Who so trusteth in the Lord, mercy embraceth him on every side. Ps. 31.11. 40. 5.Blessed is the man that hath set his hope in the Lord. Esa. 30.18.Blessed are all they that wait for him. Heb. 10. 35.Cast not away your confidence, which hath great reward. 3. Love to God. Which breeds contempt of the World. Phil. 3. 8.Accounting all things dung and loss to win him. Jos. 23.11.Take good heed therefore to your selves that you love the Lord your God. Rom. 5.5.The Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy, Ghost. Ro. 8. 35.Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, &c.
4. Alacrity in Obedience to his Com∣mandements. The heart of the wise meditateth obe∣dience.Pro. 10. 8. This is better than sacrifice.1 Reg. 15 22. Wee will do all things which the Lord hath commanded us.Exo. 19.8. I have set God before me,Psal. 16. Wherefore my heart was glad.9, 10. My heart and flesh rejoyce in the li∣ving God.84. 2. 5. Humility in all their actions, which makes them acceptable in the sight of God. When we have done all we are a∣ble to doe, we are to say that we are un∣profitable servants. He hath regarded the lowliness of his Handmaiden.Luc. 1.48. He hath exalted the humble and meek.52. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.Mat. 5. 5, 6. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. He that humbleth himself shall be ex∣alted. 6. Patience in their tribulations, which are accidents common to Gods Children.
For our life is like a troubled Sea. There is nothing so unstable, and no joy in it is secure; but many dangers and sorrows attend it. But God (being a skilfull Physician, and knowing well the state of our souls) will minister no more of those bitter potions than we are able to bear, nor than are needfull; nor more than we may with patience endure. Ps. 80. 5.Though he feed us with the bread of tears, and giveth us tears to drink, yet he will give it in measure, as a token of his love, in our correction to a∣mendment, not to confusion. For tribulation polisheth the soul, it wipes off all the filth, it makes us fervent in prayer, humble in thoughts, and pure in conscience. Adversity o∣peneth the eyes, which prosperity clo∣seth up; but GOD suffereth the just, not to be overwhelmed with grief. For though many be the tribulations of the righteous, yet the Lord deliver∣eth them out of all. If their sorrowes encrease, he lend∣eth strength, whereby they not only bear them patiently, but joyfully: in∣somuch as they look not on the pain, but the reward. Not on the afflicti∣on,
but the Crown. Not on the bit∣terness of the Medicine, but the health attained by it. Nor on the smart of correction, but the Corrector. Who chasteneth whomsoever he loveth.Pro. 12, And they shall be able to say with Iob, Shall we receive good at the hands of God,2. 10. and not receive evil? Know∣ing that the punishment they receive is not equivalent to that which their sins have deserved; and withall, they consider the bitterness of Christs Pas∣sion; in comparison whereof, all their tribulations are nothing, not to be mentioned. Lastly, They have this assured con∣fidence, That the patient abiding of the meek shall not perish for ever.Psal. 9.18. And that the Lord will save them, that with patience wait on him. 7. In regard that God heareth the prayers of the just. Man by sin is become subject to many Infirmities, Wants, Necessities. And hath no remedy to cure them, nor means to relieve them, but to God by prayer.
Now this advantage the godly, and servants of GOD have of the wick∣ed, that the prayers of the ungodly are abomination unto him; but his ears are open to the prayers of the righteous. Ps. 34.14.If ye abide in me, &c. Ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. God inviteth them to call upon him. 50. 15.Call upon me in time of trouble, so will I hear thee. Mat, 7. 7.Ask, and ye shall receive. Esa. 58 9.Thou shalt call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, here I am. 65. 24.Yea, before they call I will answer and while they speak, I will hear. He will grant them whatsoever they want. O how plentiful is thy goodness, &c. Length of dayes shall be in his right hand,Pro. 3.16. and in his left hand riches and glory. Pro. 43.9. 37. 25.They that fear him lack nothing. David never saw the righteous for∣saken.Deut. 28.1 And a catalogue of blessings are promised to those which keep his Com∣mandements. He will give them in such measure as their necessity requireth; if not largely, yet with the greater quiet and content.
As having nothing, yet possessing all things.2 Cor. 6. 10. 8. Lastly, In regard of the com∣fort the servants of God feel at their death. Who so feareth the Lord, it shall go well with him at the last, and he shall find favour in the day of his death.Eccl. 1.13 The righteous hath hope in his death.Pro. 14 32 The righteous find rest in death.Sap. 4.7. They shall have peace and rest.Esa. 57.2. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord.Apoc. 14. 13. They fear not death, because they learn to dye all their life. They fear not Iudgement, because they have Christ for their Advocate. They fear not their sins, because they have Christ for their Redeemer. They tremble not at the horror of the grave, knowing, that though the body be sown earthly,1 Cor. 15, it shall rise spi∣ritually. And that it is not death, but sleep. Qui minus deliciarum novit in vita, minus timet mortem. He that is least acquainted with the pleasures of this life, is ever in least fear of Death.
But here one rub or difficulty is to be removed: For the nature of Man is deterred from good, upon any small occasion. If it be a thing to be done with Ease, we are content to give ear to it. If with labour and difficulty, we soon give out; we put our hands in our bosoms with Solomons sluggard, and say, There is a Lyon in the way. This ariseth out of the pravity of our heart, drawn from. Original sin, that is, of flesh conceived in sin. Gal. 5.17.The flesh lusteth against the spirit, which causeth us to loath goodness, as sick men do potions, for the bitterness, though profitable for health. And usually men look upon the supposed difficulties, not on the aid which com∣meth from above. But if we look into that which God commandeth, with a spiritual eye, we shall find it, 1. Profitable. 2. Sweet. 3. Easie. Ps. 19.10.1. The Statutes of the Lord are more to be desired than gold, yea than much fine gold.
King David took as much delight in them,110. 19. as in all manner of riches. A reward shall not fail to them which fear the Lord.Eccl. 2.8. Who ever abode in his fear, and was forsaken?10. He hath promised many blessings to those which serve him.Levit. 26. 2. The Statutes of the Lord are sweeter than the honey, or the honey-comb.Ps. 19.10. They are David's delight. 3. They are not hid from us,1.9. nor far off. It is very near thee, even in thy mouth, and thy heart.Deut. 30. 11. His yoke is easie.Mat. 11.30 His commands are not grievous or heavy.1 Joh. 5.3. But plain and easie.Sap. 7.22. Add all these; by Gods special as∣sistance: For God giveth strength to him that fainteth, and to him that hath no strength he encreaseth power.Esa. 40.29. They that wait upon him, shall run, and not be weary; walk, and not faint.31. Which made Saint Augustine cry out, Da Domine quod jubes, & jube quod vis. So that though his service seem hard and heavy, yet by his grace he adds
such strength to us, that it becometh light and easie. Ezec. 11. 19.He will take our stony hearts from us, and give us hearts of flesh. Deu. 30.6.He will circumcise our hearts. And though there will be some re∣liques of reluctancy, and tentations left in them, erunt quasi non sint. They shall remain but for a trial, not to destruction. To stir us up, not to ensnare us. To minister occasion for a Crown, not to make us fall. Nor to reign in and over us. Now we are to understand, that hard things are made the easier two wayes. 1. By a love and desire to attain them. 2. By a hate to that which opposeth them. 1. Saint Augustine saith, that la∣bour and pains in which a man taketh delight, is not any way grievous, but delightful; as that of the Hunter, Falconer, Fisher, and the like: For to compass that we love, either we count it no labour at all, or else we take delight in the pains: In amore ni∣bil amari.
Which may appear in a Mother, in bearing and educating of her Chil∣dren. In a Wife, in pains taking with her sick Husband. In Iacob's long service for Rachel.Gen. 19. Which made St. Paul cry out. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?Rom. 8.35 Shall tribulation, anguish, or persecution, &c. Which caused the Apostles,Act. 5.41. being beaten, to depart from the Council, Re∣joycing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his Name. This labour is also passed the easilier if we consider, The love of God to us. The great things he hath done for us. Those greater which he hath pro∣mised. The sins wherewith we have offended. The pains which Christ suffered for us. Saint Bernard saith, The sufferings of this life, are not worthy the punish∣ment remitted for sins past, the grace and comfort ministred to us for the present, or the glory to come, which is promised. 2. We are not to set our affections
on this World, but to hate it, in re∣spect of the opposition it is in to our ser∣vice of God; the love whereof (if we take not heed of it) infatuateth us, making us to take that for good, which only seemeth so. Now there are divers reasons, why we should wean our selves from the love of it. 1. It is Transitory. No happiness in it of continuance which daily experience proves. In some men preferred to honour, and others married contentedly, yet dying soon after. But admit our lives were of a thou∣sand years, what were they, being compared to eternity. Eccl. 11.8Though a man live many years, and in them all rejoyce, yet he shall remem∣ber the dayes of darkness, because they are many. All that cometh is vanity. Baruch 3. 16.Where are the Princes of the Hea∣then? &c. All are but shadows, dreams, smoke. Take Saint Hieromes Meditation on this point, Nihil puto in seculi hu∣jus confusione esse perpetuum, sed omnia praeterire & fluere. Quae qui consi∣deraverit, cadit superfaciem suam, in∣telligens
quam prcul sit à Majestate Dei, & flectet genua ad Patrem in no∣mine Iesu Christi. I conceive, that there is nothing per∣petual in this confused and disordered life, but think that all things are transi∣tory, and pass away. And whosoever duly considereth this, falls upon his face, (knowing how far he is distant from the Majesty of GOD) and will bend his knees to GOD the Father in the name of Iesus Christ, and crave to be dis∣solved. 2. It is Miserable. Besides the brevity, many miseries accompany it. No year, day, nor hour, but hath his misery. One sues thee for thine estate; ano∣ther layeth wait for thy life; a third wrongeth thy good name, Evil Children vex thee, if thou have any. If thou hast none, thou art grieved for the want. Thy Wife unchast, and unquiet, disquiets thee. Thy friends death discomforts thee. One loseth an eye; another an arm. One is slain by a fall from his horse;
Another perisheth by water or fire. So that the miseries over-ballance the joyes: Then I would know what felicity is in it; Saint Augustine describes them at large, Plena sunt omnia laqueis, plena periculis: incitant cupiditates, insidi∣antur illecebrae; blandiunt lucra, dam∣na deterrent; amarae sunt obloquentium linguae, nec semper veraecia sunt ora laudantium, &c. All things are full of snares, full of dangers: concupiscence tickleth, allure∣ments lye in wait, gain flattereth, loss terrifieth; slanderous tongues of some are bitter, and the praises of others are not alwayes true, or pleasing to us, &c. 3. It is sinful. All the actions of it, and of all that live in it being so. In it you may see the Innocents af∣flicted, the Guilty acquit; the good despised, the evil preferred. Psal. 14. 3, 4.The Lord himself looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, and found them all abominable, none to do good. Hosea 4. 1, 2.No truth, mercy, nor knowledge of GOD in the Land; but swearing,
lying, killing, and whoring. If the Devil be Prince of the world, what goodness can be expected in his Dominions? 4. Lastly, It is Deceitful. It seems to be that it is not: promi∣seth that it gives not. Out of the pleasures thereof, arise many sorrows. Children bestowed, bring cares. Honour enjoyed, brings emulation. Wealth encreased, brings fear. Offices possessed, bring envy. Unlawful pleasures used, bring di∣seases. If the World flatter thee, it is but to deceive thee. If it exalt thee, it is but to cast thee down headlong. If it make thee merry, it is but in short time after to afflict thee the more. Extrema gaudia luctus occupaet. Si spes nobis in vita non esset relicta,S. Bern quam de vita futura concipimus, non multum hic mundus ab inferno di∣staret. If we had not here some hope left to us, which we conceive of the felicity of the life to come, there were little differ∣ence
between this World, aud Hell it self. 1 Joh. 2. 15Therefore (to end this first point) love it not: for he which loves it, hath not the love of God in him. Colos. 3.2But settle your affections on high, on God alone, in whose service consists true happiness. No Creature can be fully at rest, till it attain to the end for which it was created, but is restless till then. Now God is the object of Mans happi∣ness, and the end of his felicity Nothing can satisfie Mans heart, but God, nor can it be at rest, (though it possess the whole world) till it return to him. The nearer to him the quieter. No Man hath perfect blessedness in this World. Eccles. 1. 2.Vanitas vanitatum & omnia vani∣tas, said Solomon, who had his hearts desire as much as any. Psal. 4. 1.Usque quo filii hominum? How long will ye have pleasure in vanity, in the things of this life, follow lies, in the false appearance of them. The World is a Hypocrite, covers his defects. It is a Harlot that bears her Lover
out of doors, when their money is spent. I will conclude with Saint August∣ine, Mare, terras, & omnia per∣curre, scrutare universa, & ubique misereris, nisi ad Deum refugeris. Travel over Sea and Land, and search all places, yet shalt thou be mi∣serable and wretched every where, ex∣cept thou have recourse to God. And in Gods service all good is to be found. If thou desire profit: Eye hath not seen, &c. what God hath prepared for them that love him.1 Cor. 2.9 If length of dayes: Length of dayes is in his right hand.Pro. 3, 16. If pleasures: Pleasures for evermore. If honour: The Iust shall be had in everlasting remembrance.Ps. 112 6. Them that honour me, I will honour. Blessed therefore are they which are undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of God.119. 1. Blessed are they which keep his testi∣monies, and seek after him with their whole heart.119. 2.
II. The second part of Gods service in general, is, To avoid that which he forbiddeth, that is, Sin. The difinition whereof, and how it cometh, you shall have out of St. Gregory. All sin is committed gradatim, by three degrees. 1. By Suggestion of the Devil. 2. By Delight of the Flesh. 3. By Consent of the Spirit. 1. For when the malicious Spirit suggesteth sin in the mind of Man, no delight in it follow, sin is no way acted. 2. But when the flesh beginneth to delight in it, the sin is begun to be in the birth. 3. Then; if a Man descend to con∣sent, upon deliberation, then it is plain that sin is committed. So that in the suggestion is the seed, in the delight is the nourishment, and in the consent is the full accomplish∣ment. Now as vertue and goodness is for divers respects to be followed: So sin is to be avoided for many reasons. Because God hateth sin and sinners.
The Psalmist calleth sinners Gods enemies.Ps. 37.20. The ungodly and his ungodliness are both hated alike of God.Sap. 14.9. Your iniquities have separated you from God.Jer. 5. His hate may appear by the continu∣ance of it.Esa. 59.2. He visiteth the wickedness of the Fathers upon the Children, in the third and fourth generation.Num. 14. 18. Seeing thou hast forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.Exod. 24. 7. 20. 5. Hos. 4. 6 2. By with-holding good things from them. I will hide my face from them.Deut. 32. 20. I will take away the hedge of my Vineyard.Esa. 5. 51 I will not feed you.Zac. 11.9. I will be to Ephraim as a Moth.Hos. 5.12. 3. By the severe punishment of Of∣fenders from time to time. Who gave Iacob for a spoyl, and Is∣rael to the Robbers? Did not the Lord, because we have sinned against him.Esa. 42.14. For sin God drove our first Parents out of Paradise.Gen. 3. The Angels from Heaven. Sodom and Gomorrah was consumed by fire.19.
7.The whole World by Deluge. God drowned Pharaoh, and the Egyptians. Num. 16.Destroyed Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Levit. 10. 1 Sam. 4.The two Sons of Aaron, and of Heli. Acts 5.Ananias and Saphira. Luc. 23.Ierusalem his own City; and o 600000. which went out of Egypt only two came into the Land of pro∣mise. Because God heareth not the pray∣ers of the wicked. Esa. 1.15.When they stretch out their hands, he will hide his eyes from them, and though they make many prayers, he will un∣hear them. Job 25. 9.God will not hear their cry, when trouble cometh upon them. Ps. 66.16.If I encline my heart unto wickedness the Lord will not hear me. Job 35.12They shall cry, but he heareth not. Pro. 28 9.He that turneth his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abo∣minable. Esa 59.2.Your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear. Lam. 3.44Thou hast covered thy self with a
cloud, that our prayers should not pass through.Eze. 8. 18. Though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. And therefore the hope of the wick∣ed in Gods Mercy is vain, seeing he refuseth to hear them. Their hope is but like the dust blown away with the wind. Or a thin froth driven away with a storm. Or a smoke dispersed with a tem∣pest. Or a guest that tarrieth but a day. Because the wicked live in bondage, in slavery to sin. For sin is a Tyrant, tyrannizeth over his followers. He that commit∣teth sin, is a servant to sin. To the Instigators of it. The World. The Flesh. The Devil. And the flesh serveth the two other by sensuality, Appetitus Sensitivus. By which the wicked (as the Apo∣stle saith) are sold under sin, as slaves in a Fair. And this made Solomon in∣fatuated with his Concubines.
It infatuates the Adulterer with his Adultery. The Covetous with his Ri∣ches. The Ambitious with his Ho∣nour. The Voluptuous with his Plea∣sures.Sam. 13 It made Amnon commit In∣cest. And this cometh by privation of Grace, which should bridle their Af∣fections, and by letting loose their Appetites, which are like Devouring Beasts. like Blood-Suckers. like The Pit unsatiable. Because they are in continual trou∣ble,Esa. 57.20 like the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. 21.There is no peace to them. 1. Their passions are concupiscible and Irascible. If the first cannot obtain what it would, the other is troubled. And by these two the whole man is disqui∣eted. Jam. 4 1, 2From whence are warrs and contenti∣ons amongst you? are they not hence? even of your own concupiscences, which fight in your members? for ye lust, and have not.
2. No peace in their Consciences. Conscientia Improborum improbis ip∣sis adversatur; The Conscience of the wicked is even an adversary to the wick∣ed himself. An evil Conscience makes men fear shadows where no fear is. Mala Conscientia terret vel audadi∣ssimum; An evil Conscience is terrible even to the boldest and hardest man. The witked flee where none pursueth.Pro. 28.1. The sound of fear is in his ears.Job 15.21 Timor Divina dispensatione malos comitatur. They have five thornes pricking them. 1. The enormity of their sin. 2. The offence done to others, cry∣ing like Abels blood. 3. The infamy which followeth sin. 4. The offence to God. 5. The fear of punishment. Tell me not,S. Chrysost. (saith a Father) of a wicked man, which fareth deliciously, is apparelled costly, is wealthy in substance, but discover his Conscience, and there thou shalt find fears, tem∣pests, and troubles, arraigning, and executing himself, when none but God and his own Conscience know his own deeds.
Who hath resisted God, and hath peace. S. Aug.Thou, O Lord, (saith another) hast so appointed, that the disordered soul should be his own tormentor. S. Ambr.What greater punishment (saith third) than the wound of Conscience which is more to be shunned that death or banishment. S. Isid.A Man may avoid all things (saith a fourth) but his own heart; from himself he cannot slee; wheresoever he goeth, the guilt of Conscience fol∣loweth. His Conscience is ever in pain. 3. No peace in this world. In regard of the terror of Consci∣ence, as is said. Of the infamy they receive by it. Of the fear of the pains deserved. Of the loss of temporal blessings. 4. They are without aid or comfort from God. Afflictions find them unarmed, un∣provided to withstand them. They have no footing to stay them, no hand to help them, nor no Pilot to guide them: But they are swallowed in the Sea of tribulations. So that while the good rejoyce, they mourn.
While they walk dry, these are drowned. And while they praise God, these blaspheme. By the same fire of tribulation, the gold (the just) is tryed; and the stubble (the wicked) is consumed. The Red Sea drowned the AEgyp∣tians, and saved the Israelites. Lastly, The end of the wicked is mi∣serable. Their miseries do but begin in this world. And in their death they are Heirs to Serpents,Eccles. 10. 12. Beasts, and Worms. They perish as if they had never been.44. 9. Horrible is the end of the wicked.Sip. 3. 16. Evil in loss of the world their de∣light. Worse in the separation of body and soul. Worst in the Iudgement of both. Evil in the pains of the body; in the fears of the mind; in the afflictions for loss of temporal things; in the af∣flictions for want of internal grace; in the horror of the grave; in the re∣membrance of sin committed; in the fear to render an account; in the ter∣ror
in conscience; in the terror for the sentence; in the grief for loss of time of repentance; and evil in the grief for ill-spending it. When they look back, they consi∣der a short life ill spent. When forward, a long time to suf∣fer for it. They grieve for losing the joy of eternity; for mispending that time they had to get it; for changing such unspeakable joyes, for such transitory pleasures. Their worm never dyeth, but gnaw∣eth, and vexeth for ever. S. Isid.Dost thou desire then never to be sad? Live well- for a secure Conscience passeth over sorrow lightly, and a good life hath joy ever attending it. To sum up all. Consider the Motives which per∣swade us to his Service, in doing that which is good. 1. Whereby we have peace with God, our Selves, our Consciences. 2. The Comforts in the Holy Ghost, who assisteth the good with faith, to adhere to Gods promises. With Hope, to expect the reward.
Love to GOD. Obedience to his pre∣cepts. Humility in their actions. Pa∣tience in tribulation. 3. Gods readiness to hear their Prayers. 4. Their comfortable end. Then the facility, profit, and plea∣sure to do well. By a love to goodness, and hate to the world. Because it is Transitory. Because it is Miserable. Because it is Sinful. Because it is Deceitful. Et servite Domino in laetitia.Ps. 100. Draw near to him with a pure heart,Heb. 10. 22. in assurance of Faith, our hearts being pure from an evil Conscience. And consider the Reasons why we  should detest sin. 1. For Gods hate to the wicked. 2. For Gods rejecting their Prayers. 3. The bondage of the ungodly. 4. Their troubles in the passions of the mind, their consciences in this world without comfort from GOD. 5. Their miserable end. Et Servite Domino in Timore.Psal. 2 11, Walk after God, and fear him.Deut. 13.4.
Heb. 4. 11. 16.That thou mayest go boldly to the Throne of Grace: Find mercy, and re∣ceive help in time of need. A general Exhortation to Prayer. OF all the parts of Gods service, Prayer justly challengeth the first place: For, in as much as the best of Gods children are subject to many infirmities, and even the just Man fall∣eth seven times a day, and that Mans life (by reason of sin) is exposed to many dangers, troubles and afflictions, it therefore behoveth us much, and concerneth us near, to seek out some remedy, as well to strengthen our selves from the assaults of our several enemies, that (as much as flesh and blood will permit) we fall not; as to raise us again when we are cast down and dejected, either by the sight of our sins, or the crosses and afflictions of this life. And in this distress, what
course shall we think upon to relieve us, or what means shall we find to aid and succour us. Certainly none other better than that which GOD himself of his goodness hath prescribed and com∣mended unto us,In regard of Gods Precept. and by his word hath commanded us to have recourse unto, whensoever we shall be thus afflicted, namely, Prayer, Call upon me (saith he) in the day of trouble.Ps. 50.15. Come unto me (saith Christ) all ye that labour,Mat. 12.18 and are heavy laden. Seek ye the Lord (saith the Pro∣phet) and call upon him.Esa. 55.6 Is any afflicted (saith he, by the Apostle) let him pray.Jam. 5.13. Be instant in Prayer.1 Thes. 5. 17. Continue in Prayer.Colos 4.2. And the better to stir us to this du∣ty, God hath added to this Precept a Promise also;His Pro∣mise. that we shall not lose our labours, or pray to him in vain; for,Mat. 7. 7. No sooner shall we ask, but he will give:Jo. 16.23. No sooner call, but he will an∣swer and deliver.Ps. 91.15. Nay, more, for if God perceive but our inclination to pray to him, he will prevent us, and before the petition is gone out of our
mouths;Esa. 65.24 Before we call, he will answer; and while we are speaking, he will hear. We may with confidence build upon it, that either he will give what we ask, or that which shall be more profitable to us. Example of Christ.And as we have this Precept and Promise to provoke us to pray to him: So have we the Example (not only of all the Saints of God, but) of Christ Iesus himself:Mat. 14. 23. 26. 39. who (while he was conversant in the flesh upon earth,Jo. 11 47. though he were wholly with∣out spot or blemish,Mat. 1.35. wholly inno∣cent, immaculate, and needing no∣thing, yet) often and earnestly pray∣ed, for our imitation. The Ne∣cessity.Among all the Evangelical Precepts or Counsels, there is not any one duty upon which our Saviour more ear∣nestly beateth, or to which with more fervency he inviteth his Apo∣stles or Disciples, than this of Prayer. The necessity whereof he enforceth (among other places of Scriptures) by the Parable of the unjust Iudge, and the poor importunate Widow. And indeed, Mans nature ever since the fall of Adam, being become
earthly, carnal, and wretched, it cannot keep Gods Law, which is spi∣ritual. Ego carnal is sum, saith the Apostle.Rom. 7. 14. Again, as long as we live in this vale of misery, we being compassed with cares, tentations, and afflictions, have no other means to free our selves from them, than to beg at the gates of Gods mercy, (Ego mendicus sum, & pauper, I am poor and needy, saith the Psalmist) either for grace, favour, and remission of sins; or the mortification of our affections, spiritual comfort; or lastly, for supply of tem∣poral blessings. Neither can any so well conceive the necessity of this duty, as they who (by the illumination of Gods Spirit) see the miserable condition they are brought into, by reason of sin. And what would become of miserable Man, if this help were wanting, but being carnal, be wholly transformed into flesh? The contrary effect whereto, Prayer worketh in us; for it elevateth us from earthly to heavenly thoughts, whereby the heat and af∣fections of the flesh are cooled and quenched; Prayer being as the re∣freshing
of the lungs to the heat of the heart, without which Man could not subsist. The Dig∣nity.But admit there were no necessity imposed on us to pray, yet the digni∣ty and honour we receive by Prayer should incite us to it: For Prayer (as a Father well saith (Is a familiar conference with God.Ephr. By it we talk with him (as it were) face to face. By other of his Graces (as in the Word and Sacraments) he vouchsafeth to speak to us, by this we have access and speak to him, for what we stand in need of. And what greater digni∣ty, what greater priviledge can be af∣forded to poor sinful creature: (dust and ashes as we are) than familiarly to talk with so great and powerful a God, and to have daily so free and easie admittance to his presence, to manifest our necessities to him, and to crave his supply and succour? Nay more, to become his houshold servants, (the Church being called his House) a favour, which King David esteem∣ed the fruition of one day, more than a thousand elsewhere. Benefit.Then, if we consider the profit which ariseth by the performance of
this duty, we shall be the easilier per∣swaded to undertake it: For, if no∣thing else quicken us, yet matter of benefit doth usually work with us, And assuredly, the benefit which ari∣seth by it, is, and ever hath been great; for by Prayer we do not only obtain of God all good things pertaining to the sustentation of this life, (as the necessaries thereof) and the life to come, (as the gifts and graces of the holy Spirit) but we also prevent and remove by it all the dangers and evils of both lives: as the losses and perils incident to this life, and the punish∣ment due to our sins hereafter. Pray∣er enlightneth, purgeth, and com∣forteth; maketh tribulations seem light, breeds servency, begets confi∣dence in Gods mercy, and overcometh all tentations. Take it away, and take the Sun out of the world, for without we wander in darkness. With what Me∣dicines did the Saints heal incurable diseases, cast out Devils, raise the dead to life, tame wild beasts, quench the force of fire, nay, change the course of the Elements, & powers of Heaven, but by Prayer? What should I say more? By it we may do all things, without it nothing.
If you please, you may take a short view of the wonderful effects which have been wrought, and the benefits which have been obtained, and the punishments which have been averted in former times, when recourse was had to God by Prayer. By it Exod. 17.The Iews overcame the Amalekites. 1 Sam. 7.Samuel overcame the Philistines. Judith 13.Iudith overcame Holofernes. 1 Chr. 5. 20.The Reubenites overcame the Agarens. 2 Chr. 14 20.Asa overcame the Ethiopians. Iehosaphat overcame the Ammonites. 2 Kings 19. 15.Ezechias overcame Sennacerib. 2 Chr. 33. 15.Manasses was restored to His King∣dom. By it 1 Sam. 1. 9.Hanna became fruitful. 1 Kin. 18. James 5.Elias obtaned sire from Heaven, as also rain and fair weather.
By it The rebellious Iews escaped Punishment.Exod. 32. Numbers 21. 7. The Ninivites escaped Destruction.Jonas 3. Ezechias escaped Death,2 Kin. 20. The three Chil∣dren escaped the fiery Fornace.Dan. 3. Daniel escaped the Lyons.Dan. 6. Ionas escaped the Whale.Jonas 2. The Disciples escaped Drowning.Mat. 8.25. Peter escaped Bonds.Acts 12. Paul and Silas escaped Imprisonment.Acts 16. By it David stayed the Pestilence.2 Sam. 24. The Lepers were clensed.Luc. 12. The Centurions servant was healed.Mat. 8. The blind received sight.Mat. 9 20. The Womans Daughter were delivered from the Devil.Luc. 18. The Mans Son were delivered from the Devil.Mat. 15. 17. The sick were made whole.Acts 28.
1 Kin. 18.The Widow of Sa∣repthas Son were revived. 2 Kin. 14.The Shunamites Son were revived. Mar. 9.The Rulers Daughter were revived. Acts 7.Dorcas were revived. Luc. 18. 23.The Publican obtained Remission of sins. The Thief obtained Paradise. Acts 7.S. Stephen obtained Heaven. And lastly, That it is the surest re∣medy to the godly in time of affliction, appeareth by our Saviours example, who (when he was in such straits,Mar. 26. 36. that he said, Undequaque trist is ani∣ma mea,Mat. 14. 34. usque ad mortem, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death) went aside, and fell thrice on his face, and prayed, warning his sleepy Dis∣ciples to do the like. Directions how to pray.Now, Seeing that for these re∣spects pray we must, in the next place we are to consider, How Prayer is to be made, that it turn not to sin. To God only.1. Prayer must be made to God, and to none other. 1. Because God hath so command∣ed.
For Prayer is a part of his Ser∣vice and Worship;Deu. 9.13 and his Service and Glory he will impart to none else. Him only shalt thou serve.Mat. 4.10. And What∣soever you shall ask of my Father,Joh 19.23 4. 21. not of Angels, Saints, or the like. 2. In regard of his Glory and Ma∣jesty,Psa. 24.8. 96. 6.99.2. 104. 1 wherein he excelleth all others, and ought therefore above all to be prayed unto.Luc. 11.13 3. In regard of his singular Know∣ledge;Esa. 40. 10. 12. for he knoweth our necessities better than we our selves.Psal 66.2. 4. In regard of his Power and Abi∣lity to help us.Psal. 17.6. 18.6 103. 5. In regard of his willingness and readiness to relieve us.Esa. 46.4. 6. In respect of the practice of all the Saints, and of Christ himself. Of Hanna, of David, of the Saints,1 Sam. 1. 15. of Christ. 7. In regard of the absurdity in praying to those which cannot help themselves,Psal. 25.1. 73.25.5.1. 77.1. much less us.Psal. 22.41 For to which of the Saints or Angels can be properly said,Mar. 14. 23 Our Father which art in Heaven,Esa. 43. 11. 45. 5. or Hallowed be thy Name, &c. But to GOD alone is this service to be done; for he only saveth us, and besides him is no Saviour.
In Christ.And all this must be done in Christ Iesus, without whom, though Moses and Samuel should intercede, yet GOD would not pardon, but de∣stroy; for as no work of devotion can be acceptable to God without Him, so our sins are so odious, that except our prayes be offered by the mediation of Christ Iesus, they will never be ac∣cepted by God. Heb. 4.14.We have an High Priest, that is pas∣sed into the Heavens, Iesus the Son of God, &c. In Faith.Secondly, Our Prayes ought to be made in Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith; is sin; and whosoever desi∣reth to have good success in his Pray∣ers, ought to believe, and not to pray waveringly. This Faith makes our Prayers acceptable: For (Prayer be∣ing the testimony of our Faith) how will our Faith appear, if we doubt in our Prayers?S. August. Si Fides deficit, oratio perit. Our Saviour said to the Petiti∣oner for his deaf and dumb Son If thou canst believe,Mat. 9.23. all things are possible to him that believeth. And to his Dis∣ciples, All things whatsoever you shall ask in Prayers believing you shall re∣ceive:
Which lesson St. Iames also teacheth,Jam. 2.5.6 If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, &c. But let him ask in Faith. Saint Iohn saith,1 Joh. 5.14 This is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us. Saint Paul also biddeth us,Heb. 4.16. Come with the same confidence that we may obtain mercy. Again, As Faith is the foundation of all Vertues required in Prayer,In Hope. so Hope, certain and assured, is to be fixed and setled in us (when we pray) that God will perform the promises which he hath made, and that he will hear and grant those things which we shall desire, according to his will; for the Devil is apt to perswade us, that our Prayers are in vain, either because God regardeth them not, or that it is needless to pray to Him, who know∣eth before what we want; or that (whether we pray or not) all things shall come to pass as God hath de∣creed; and in these respects, that there is no profit in our Prayers. All which are but illusions, and clearly against the rule of truth, and practice of the Saints: In te speraverunt, saith
David,Psal. 22.4. Our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou didst de∣liver them.1 Chron. 5. 20. The Reubenites cryed to God in battel, and he was intreated of them, because they put their trust in him. Indeed, as Saint Bernard saith, a sinners prayers are hindered two ways, either with too little or too much light. He hath no light which nei∣ther seeth nor confesseth his sins, and he hath too much, which seeing them, despaireth of Gods mercy. Neither of these can be said to pray. How then? The sinner ought so to temper his light, that he may not only see and confess his sins, but pray that they may, and hope that they will be forgiven. For it is in Prayer as in Repentance, Nemo potest agere poenitentiam, qui non speravit indulgentiam: No man can truly repent, that hath no hope of pardon for that he repenteth of: And none can be said to pray well, who ho∣peth not of Gods favour, in that for which he petitioneth. In Cha∣rity,And that our Prayers may the bet∣ter ascend, they are to put on the wings of Charity, which is one of the
fruits of the Holy Spirit:Gal. 5.22. For with∣out this quality, our Prayers will prove cold, heavy, and lumpish; and will return empty unto us. This Charity is two-fold; First, towards God; Secondly, towards our Neigh∣bour. 1. Towards God, in keeping his Commandements;John 14. 21, 23. for our Saviour saith, He that keepeth my Commande∣ments, is he that loveth me: And the Apostle saith,1 John 5. 22. We receive of him, be∣cause we keep his Commandements; that is, we love him so, that we are both to offend him. 2. Towards our Neighbour, which Charity is also manifested two ways. 1. In forgiving all injuries recei∣ved from him, or by his means, after our Saviours rule,Mat. 11. 25. When you stand praying, forgive, if you have ought against any; that your Father also, which is in Heaven, may forgive you our trespasses. And again,6. 14, 15. If you forgive men their trespasses, your hea∣venly Father will also forgive you: But if you forgive not men their trespasses, either will your Father forgive your trespasses, 2. Secondly, In praying for his
wants, and supplying them to o powers, according to Saint Iames direction,Tim. 5. 16. 1 Tim. . 1. Pray for one another. And to Saint Paul's, I exhort, that first Prayers, &c. be made for all men. And to encourage us to relieve them our Saviour pronounceth a blessing  all that are charitable in that kind Blessed are the merciful,Mat. 5. 7. for they shall obtain mercy. So that by this we may plainly see that if we be uncharitable, our Prayer will be barren, and unfruitful. In Hu∣mility.Fifthly, Humility must accompany these former Vertues. We must ac∣knowledge our selves unworthy to re∣ceive any thing; we are not to arro∣gate any thing for any merit of our own, but confess that we are nought but dust, pollution, and a masse of cor∣rupption; that we brought nothing into this world, nor have gathered any therein, but uncleanness. We must say with Iacob, Minor sum Domine omnibus tu is beneficiis,Gen. 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies.Luc. 18. And with the Publican (whom our Saviour commended to us for a pat∣tern) deny our own unworthy
deserve any favour. Which Humili∣ty of his (as appeareth by that Story or Parable) made his prayer more ac∣ceptable to God, than the vaunting and boasting of the proud Pharisee. And with David saith,Ps. 51.17. A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. And the Son of Syrach,Ecclus. 35. 17. The Prayer of the Humble pierceth the Clouds. And lastly,Luc. 1. 52. the Virgin Ma∣ry, He hath exalted the Humble and Meek. This Humility is likewise two-fold. 1. Of the Spirit. 2. Of the Body. 1. For by the First, we acknow∣ledge the impurity of our souls, and confess our selves wicked, miserable, and wretched in our own eyes, and that our strength is not worth the coasting of; which kind or manner of prayer hath ever wrought effectually with God. The Prophet Esay wit∣nesseth it,Esa. 66.2. To this man I look, even to him that is of a poor, and of a con∣trite spirit. And the Psalmist testifi∣eth, how propense and propitious GOD is to such kind of Petitioners. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a contrite heart,Ps. 34. 1- and will save
such as are of an humble spirit. And the blessed Virgin acknow∣ledgeth that she found the fruits of her Humility,Luc. 1.48. He hath regarded the lowsi∣ness of his Hand-maiden. Secondly, We are to use an out∣ward gesture, answerable to our in∣ward devotion: We must manifest our Humility by a reverend posture of the body too. God is as well Creator of the body (which is the souls temple) as of the soul: and therefore expect∣eth to be honoured by both. And as it is not to be denyed, that the inward affections are to be regarded in the prime place; yet it will not be unne∣cessary to observe with what postures the holy men in sacred Story powred out their petitions:Gen. 13.2. Abraham (speak∣ing to God) fell on his face, and bow∣ed to the ground.1 Ki. 8.22 Solomon, at the Dedication of the Temple, stood before the Lord, and spread forth his hands to Heaven.Lu. 18. 13. The Publican stood and smote his breast.Ex. 17.11. Moses held up his hands to Heaven.Dan. 6.01 Daniel, Stephen, Peter, and Paul kneeled.Act. 7. 60. 9. 40. David kneeled, and lifted up his eyes. Lastly,Ps. 95. 6. our Saviour Christ (every one of whose actions ought to be a rule to us) sometimes
fell on his face, sometimes kneeled,Mat. 26. 39. Lu. 22.41. and sometimes lifted up his eyes when he prayed. Not that Gods worship is absolutely or universally tyed to these outward Ceremonies,Joh. 11.41. but that they serve to stir up the inward intentions and affections, for while we kneel, and lift up our eyes and hands to Heaven, we shew our humility, and declare our ardent desire and confidence, that all our aid and help we expect from God, and none else. Therefore, the acts of humiliation, of casting dust on their heads, putting on sack-cloath, rending of garments, mentioned in holy Writ, are there set down to no other pur∣pose, but to make their Humility that used them appear, and to be a pattern for us in after times. Nei∣ther is it without reason, that Man (being a creature consisting of body and soul) should serve his Creator with both, which makes us a perfect Holo∣caust or Sacrifice. And as we have yielded our mem∣bers servants to uncleaness,Ro. 6.19 and to ini∣quity unto iniquity: so we should yield our members servants to righteousness, unto holiness.
And to this reverend gesture of the body, must be added the uncovering of the head.1 Cor. 11. 4. Our heads must be bare, and we must not pray so familiarly, as if we were speaking to our equals: For the higher and more eminent the person is whom we petition, the more reverend and submiss ought our beha∣viour be to him in our petitions. In Per∣severance.In the next place, We must re∣solve with our selves, not to be im∣patient of delayes, (as we call them) if God seem not to hear us presently. But we must pray with Perseverance. Our Saviour himself (immediately after he had prescribed to his Disciples that absolute form of prayer) taught them also (and us in them) the ef∣fects of this vertue, by the Example of the Friend which came in the night to borrow Loaves.Luc. 11.8. 18. Ps. 40. 1. Mat. 15. 28. Col. 4. 2. 1 Thes. 4. 17. And shortly after by that of the Importunate Widow. Which effects also David, and the Wo∣man of Canaan felt: Wherefore, not without good reason did St. Paul so often counsel this assiduity and ser∣vency in prayer. And though we make our conclusions by events, (which we usually take
notice only by) that God is not moved by our prayers, nor we bettered by them; we must resolve, that the fault is ours, and not Gods; For either we ask things not to be prayed for. Or coldly, not intending what we desire. Or not with due reverence and pa∣tience. Or else GOD yieldeth not, ei∣ther to inflame our zeal. Or to set an edge on our desires. Or to humble us. Or to prove us by adversity, as well as by prosperity. Or to try whether we serve him for our own ends, or his glory. Or else the time is not come which he knoweth meetest to grant what we pray for. Elias being persecuted by Iezabel,1 Ki. 19.4. prayed, that GOD would take away his life, which GOD granted not presently,2 Reg. 2. 11. yet afterward took him into Heaven. Deus multos non jam exaudiat ad voluntatem,S. Bern. sed paulo post ad salutem; God hears not many men presently accor∣ding to their desire, but after a while he
gives ear to them, to their good and sal∣vation. Therefore we must not give over at the first, second, or third time. For no doubt,Luc. 11.9. but he which said, Ask, and ye shall have, will also give what he promised, when he thinketh expe∣dient that we should receive it. Ps. 27.14.O tarry thou the Lords leisure, saith David. And let not us prescribe to God either time, place, or manner, but in all modesty, humility, patience, and perseverance, attend his good pleasure. Ferventy. Diligence, Attention.Three other Qualities there are, which seem to depend upon this last Vertue of Perseverance; for, as the difficulty to pray aright ariseth of three causes. 1. The Corruption of our Nature depraved by sin. 2. Evil custom or habit, in suffer∣ing our hearts to wander when we are at our Devotions. 3. The malice of Satan, who (out of his inveterate hate to mankind) in∣tangles our thoughts with other mat∣ters, when we should intend this act. The Remedies therefore fit to op∣pose these, are.
1. A fervent desire to the action; for what we zealously affect, we soon∣est compass. 2. That we be diligeut and couragi∣ous to overcome all difficulties; for as all Creatures have a concupiscible na∣ture, to obtain things necessary to pre∣servation, so have they an irascible, to resist all obstacles which may be to their detriment. It must not be with us as with the sluggard, Vult & non vult,Prov.  have a desire to it for the excellency, but give it over for the difficulty. 3. That we be attentive to what we are doing, and keep our hearts from vain and wandring cogitations; Omni custodia serva cor tuum, quia ex ipso vita procedit; Keep thy heart with all diligence, for there-out cometh life;Pro, 4.23. for as our heart is, so will all the acti∣ons be which proceed from it. For it is not a chill and cold Perse∣verance, or Expectation, that will serve our turns to prevail with God, but a fervent spirit to pursue the same. For God heareth not, (at least re∣gardeth not) as not loud crying, long babling, or many tautologies, or repetitions: so neither cold, faint, and drowzy prayers, (not intending,
or minding what we pray for) which proceed only from the lips: but it is the affection, and zealous desire of the devout, mixed with sighs, tears, and groans, not to be uttered,Rom. 8. 26. which move, and prevail with him, For God (being a Spirit) looketh to be worshipped in spirit. To which pur∣pose it is that our Saviour Christ ad∣viseth us, when we pray, to enter into our Closets, and to shut the door: inti∣mating to us thereby,Mat. 6. 6. that we (being alone, and private) should cast away all publique wandering, and worldly thoughts, which trouble our devoti∣ons, and hinder us from lifting up our hearts unto God: and wholly, fer∣vently, and considerately, bend our thoughts and desires unto him. And these retired Soliloquies, and private Meditations, and Conferences be∣tween God & our souls, and between our selves and our souls, have ever been much approved by the Antients. Our Prayer (saith an antient Father) ought to be in such manner as Hanna's was:Ephr. Syr. 1 Sam. 1. She wept, and prayed, and her lips only were perceived to move. Let every one hear this, and imitate it; especially they, who with extream bab∣ling,
without all modesty, yet with loudness of voice, make their prayers. Let us therefore pray with sighs and groans: But withall taking heed, (as much as we can, with Gods assistance, and our own endeavours) that in the time of our prayers, no extravagant thought steal upon us, lest happily we have one thing in our hearts, and ano∣ther in our tongues. And to this pur∣pose also speaketh S. Basil,Basil serm. in Martyr. Iulitiam. All our prayers ought to be made, not in sylla∣bles, but in the hearty affection of the soul. For how do, or can we think, that God will give us that for which we pray, when by our behaviour and gesture, our faint and weak sollicita∣tion, we seem to him, that either we do not want what we pray for, or, that he will upon every slight and cold motion, be perswaded to give us what we desire? Or how can we expect to be heard of God, when we our selves (not being serious in our devotions, but diverted with other phantasies) hear not, nor know what we do peti∣tion for? The wise man therefore, giveth us good and wholsom counsel in this matter,Ecclus. 18 23. Before thou prayest, pre∣pare thy self, and be not as one that temp∣teth the Lord.
Our prayers therefore must not pro∣ceed from the lips only; for no man can assure himself that God heareth his prayers, who is so careless, and his thoughts so wandring, that he knoweth not himself what he prayeth for. Of the Time and Place for PRAYER. The time.TAke a little taste of the Time when, and the Place where our Prayers are to be offered up to GOD. 1 Th. 5.17.For the Time in general, the Pla∣ces before-named,Col. 4. 3. do, and may di∣rect us.Eph. 6.18. Pray without ceasing. Con∣tinue in Prayer.Lu. 11.18. And pray alwayes. More particularly,Nu. 28. 3. Twice a day (that is, Morning & Evening) the Sacrifices were to be made.Ps. 55, 18. David prayed thrice, In the Evening, Morning, and at Noon-day:119.164. And seven times in a day. Daniel prayed thrice.Dan. 6.10 In the morning before day Christ prayed.Mar. 1.35. David prayed early.Ps. 63. 1. Act. 2. 15. The Apostles at the third
hour of the day.10. 9. 3. 1. At the sixth hour. The ninth hour. And David at mid∣night.Ps. 119.62 For the Place,The place. In all places saith God.Ex. 20.24. Every where, saith S. Paul.1 Tim. 2.8. Christ prayed in the Desert.Mar. 1.35. On a Mountain.Mat. 14. 23. In the Garden. Isaac in the Field. Peter prayed on the House-top, or Tarris.Mat. 26. 36. In the Congregation, saith David.Gen. 24. 63. To the Temple went S. Peter, S. Iohn, and S. Paul. And Christ bids us when we would be pri∣vate in prayer,Act 10. and not be molested,Ps. 111.1. to go to our Closets.Acts 3. 1. 22. 17. So that it appear∣eth,Mat. 6. 6. that there is no Time nor Place unseasonable, to offer up our Prayers unto God, as occasion shall be offer∣ed, though the chief Place for private Prayer is our Closet, and for publick the Temple, where one may stir up another by example, and where we ought to make publick confession of our Faith, and give publick thanks for Gods benefits.
How to pray aright. To pray aright.BUt it may come to pass (though we be prepared and fitted with all the former circumstances) that we may pray, and not be heard, if (in the last place) we do not carefully consider to pray for those things which are fit and requisite for God to give, and for us to receive. For as Saint Iames saith,Jam. 4. 3. Many time: we ask, and receive not, because we ask amiss. For our better instruction therefore, we are to consider, that there be two sorts of Blessings to be required of God: First, Spiritual; Secondly, Temporal. Spiritual Blessings.1. The first part pertains to Gods own honour, and the good of our own souls; as Faith, Hope, Charity, Thankful Hearts, Remission of Sins, and other of the same kind, which are meerly spiritual and heavenly. And these Blessings we may (without
doubt) safely and confidently beg at GODS hands, and he will not de∣ny them. 2. The Second,Temporal. are temporal and indifferent; as Riches, Honour, Health, Peace, Seasonable times, Children, and the like. And these are not to be prayed for, but (ac∣cording to Christs pattern of prayer, with thy Will be done;Mat. 6.10. or, according to Christs practice) with a Not as I will,26. 39. but as thou wilt:Mat. 8. 2. Or with the Leaper in the Gospel, Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. Saint Bernard disposeth these into three heads:S. Bern. In serm. 5. quadrag. Two, for blessings of this life, for the body, and soul, and the third, for the life to come: And in praying for these, he giveth three Cautions, with his Reasons: First, That our prayer for Temporal blessings, which the body wanteth, be restrain∣ed to things needful; because many times we pray for things superfluous, to satisfie our pleasures. Secondly, That our petition for the graces of the soul, be free from impurity, because we oftentimes desire to have them for Ostentation. Thirdly, That our request for the blessing of Eternal
Life, be in all Humility because many require it at Gods hands, as pre∣suming upon their own merits. Our Prayers being thus qualified, being preferred only to God, in Faith, Hope, Charity, with God, and our Neighbour, Humility of body and soul, Perseverance, Fervency of Spirit, our souls and bodies attending to what we pray for, and in due Time and Place, praying aright, both for temporal and spiritual blessings, we shall (no doubt) by the mercy of God, through the mediation, inter∣cession, and merits of Iesus Christ, obtain (in his good time) all things which shall be needful and expedient for us. Prayer divided into parts. DEvotions and Prayers, are either publick or private. 1. Private prayers are, whereby every particular Man prayeth to God, for those things which he wanteth. In which kind of devotion, we ought at
all times to exercise our selves, be∣cause at all times we stand in need of Gods particular assistance: and there∣fore, we are tyed or limited herein, neither to time nor place; for whether it be in the night, or morning, mid-day, or evening, at home, or abroad, in the City, or Country, in our beds, or at our work, if we call upon him faithfully, he will hear us. 2. Publick Prayers are, whereby the whole Congregation meet in a place, Dedicated to Gods honour, as well to praise his Name, as to pray for those things which shall be need∣ful. For although Christians ought to pray privately, yet ought they not in the mean time to neglect the pub∣lick worship and service of God in the Church. For from the beginning it was held and observed as a duty requi∣red; and therefore, before the ere∣ction and dedication of Temples and Churches, the Patriarchs, and holy∣men, erected Altars in certain pla∣ces, where at set times of the day, they might offer Sacrifices, and pub∣lick Prayer to God.Ex. 29.39. In the second of Ioel,Joel 2. you shall find a set and pre∣scribed Form of Prayer for the Mini∣ster
to use, together with the place, and the Congregation that were to as∣sist. In the New Testament also, our Saviour Christ himself (to en∣courage this holy duty of publick Pray∣er) hath promised his presence amongst those that shall be assembled and ga∣thered together after this manner.Mar. 18 20. Therefore, whosoever shall neglect these publick Assemblies, sheweth and discovereth thereby, how little he regardeth Christs company or pre∣sence. These Prayers are also distinguish∣ed into these parts. 1. Invocation. 2. Confession. 3. Thanksgiving. Invocation consisteth of 1. Petitions for the good of our own Souls in Spiritual things. Bodies in Temporal things. 2. Intercessions, either in praying for the good of others, or against the evil of others.
3. Deprecations against evils, Spiritual. Temporal. Confession is threesold. 1. Of our Faith. 2. Of the Glory of God. 3. Of our own Sins. Thanksgiving is either 1. For deliverance from evil. 2. For benefits re∣ceived. To these may be added Imprecation, either 1. Against the enemies of God incorrigible and irreconcile∣able. 2. Against the enemies of our Souls incorrigible and irreconcile∣able. So that these Rules be observed, 1. That it be not used for private hate, or revenge. 2. That we rejoyce not in any mans Destruction, 3. That we aim at their Correction.
The use of the Lords Prayer. BEcause that our Saviour Christ hath taught us how to pray, and hath put the very words (as it were) into our mouths, which we should use in praying, I think it necessary to be∣gin with the same, which he hath left unto us. 1. In respect of the Excellency of the Author of it, who was no less than God. 2. In respect of the Perfection of the work it self, (the Prayer) for it comprehendeth in it Petitions for all things which we stand in need of. 3. In respect of the Efficacy of this Prayer in working, for it cannot choose but prevail and work much with God; for none knew the mind and disposition of God better than he which composed it, which was God. And let it not lose any part of the
due praise which belongeth to it, in regard of the compendiousness, or shortness of it; for it deserveth the more honour, because though it be short, yet it is also copious, and plen∣tiful in matter, and therefore the more absolute and perfect. It is not therefore without cause that the Antients have given so many excellent Attributes to it. As the Abridgement of the Gospel, and our Faith. The Interpretation of our Desires and Hopes. The very Bond of Charity. And an inexhaustible Treasury. Yet let not any Man think, that our Saviour prescribed us this Prayer, as that we should use no other, but be tyed to the very words contained in it: but this we must conceive, that he made it to bridle our desires; that though we make our Petitions, and frame them according to our several necessities; yet, to keep us in compass, that we exceed not the limits, nor vary from the extent and bounds of this Prayer. The Use of it is twofold.
1. That we might be instructed by it, what is necessary in general to re∣quire of God, and not without need, seeing we (being naturally blind in spiritual things) know not what is fit to ask; and many times we crave those things (as Zebedees Children did) which are unworthy both of God,Mat. 20: 21 and our selves, and might prove hurtful also to us, if they should be granted. And therefore (under certain general heads) he hath bound∣ed the desires of the flesh, and taught us after what manner and rule we should square all our Petitions. For whatsoever we shall desire against the directions therein contained, dis-a-greeth from the will of God, and therefore is neither good, holy, nor profitable. 2. That we may be able thereby to conceive, frame, and make all our Pray∣ers according to our several necessities, and after that Petition which sitteth us, as our occasions shall alter.
The Lords Prayer Analysed. A Father, not a Lord.Our Father One being a name of love. The other of dignity. A Father not a Iudge. One being, a name of Goodness, Comfortable O , sub quo nomini desperan∣dum. The her of Power, Terrible. Who is able to resist his Power?Ro. 9. 19. It is too proud a salutation;Father For how much are we. By Nature, Dust and Ashes. By Sin, Bond-slaves to Satan.Ge. 18.27 So much are we below him. Who then durst be so bold as to call the Father, but that Christ did command it? For exceeding great is thy Majesty. And exceeding great is our Poverty.
Ps. 57.3.He is exalted above the Heavens, and his glory is above all the Earth. 113. 4.He humbleth himself, when he be∣holdeth the things in Heaven. Job. 13.25And we are but worms, and leaves, driven to and fro with the wind. Ps. 78.40.A wind that passeth away, and com∣meth not again. Yet we are bold to call thee Fa∣ther; for we come not of our selves, thy Son Christ hath taught us the form. Take notice of the words, they are thy Sons. Father1. Father of all Creatures. In their Creation. Preservation. Governing. Gen. 1.26. 9. 6.2. Of Mankind, which he formed after his own Image. Other Creatures are but as a sha∣dow to Man. For he endued him with understanding. And the Creatures not so. To him he gave precepts to order his life. To the Creatures only by blind in∣stinct. He was Created in the condition of a Son.
The rest, but as bondslaves.Eph. 1. 3. Of Christians,Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 3. 23. more especially by Grace, Regeneration, and Adoption by Iesus Christ, his Son. A Father,Father but what Father? There is no Father like unto thee. When my Father and Mother for∣sake me,Ps. 27. 12. then the Lord taketh me up. Thou art our Father,Esa. 63.16 though Abra∣ham be ignorant of us. Can a Woman forget the fruit of her womb, &c. Yea,49. 15. they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. A most indulgent Father,Lu. 15.18. Mat. 18. 26. to whom the Prodigal Son arose and went. Whom the insolvent servant besought. Though thou be a displeased Father, yet a Father thou art. Though I be a wastful and disobedient Son, yet a Son I am. Though I have lost the ingenu∣ity of a Son, yet thou hast not lost the compassion and love of a Father A Father of Mercies.Father Whom we find so to be. By his inciting us to good.2 Cor. 1.3. Confirming us in it. Pardoning our sins. Delivering us from tentations.
Reclaiming us from sin. Crowning us with blessings. 1. If then thou be our Father, in are thy Sons. 1 Joh. 3.1.How great, what manner of Lord hast thou bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God? 2. If thou be our Father, and we the Sons of God, how great is the ho∣nour, that we are as it were Gods? 3. If thou be our Father, then are we Brethren to Angels as also to Men. to Saints as also to Mean to Christ as also to men. to Himself as also to Poor menHeb. 2.12. And how great ought our love to be? Let no man therefore extoll him∣self above his brethren, nor be asha∣med to call any man his Brother, whom God hath vouchsafed to call Son. 4. If thou be our Father, how great is our Hope? what are we to expect from thee; Mat 7.11.Even all things which a Father gi∣veth to his Children. What are we to render unto thee?
Even all duty and obedience belong∣ing to Children: that thou mayest not repent thee, nor we be unworthy, either of our Creation, or Adoption. It is not without some reason from our Saviour,Our  that the words Mine, or I, are not to be found in this Prayer. Our, is a word of charity, and uni∣ty. It is not My Father, as if God were any mans peculiar, but our Fa∣ther, the Father of all, as he properly is, through, and in Christ. Our prayers are most powerful with God, when we express in them a fel∣low-feeling of the Necessities of our Neighbours, and Sympathize with them in their misery. This is Cha∣rity. Let every one of us therefore be as willing and careful to pray for others, as well, and as heartily as for himself; considering, that in so doing, he prayeth for him, whom Charity hath made as himself. Christ bare us, and all our sins in his body.1 Pet. Let us do the like to one ano∣ther in word and deed. For our Selves, Necessity compel∣leth
us to pray, My Father. For our Brethren, Charity inviteth us to pray, Our Father. In these two words, Our, and Fa∣ther, the Law and Prophets are com∣prehended. In Father, the Love of God. In Our, the Love of our Neigh∣bour. And in these two words, the sum of the Gospel is contained. In Father, our Faith. In Our, our Charity. Which are in HeavenIn these words we have a rule and direction to whom to frame our pray∣ers. Unto thee shall all flesh come. Ps. 65.2.Who have I in Heaven but thee? saith King David. He is only able to hear us, and to grant our desires. It is true, we have Earthly Fathers; but these leave and forsake us; Their hands are shortned; We call not to them, but to thee, which art in Hea∣ven. Esa. 66.1.Heaven is thy Throne. Mat. 5.34. Ps. 19.1.The Heavens declare thy Glory. Not that thou art included in the
Heavens only;1 Reg. 8. 27. for (as Solomon said) The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; but, as if that were thy Royal Palace, where the Elect shall enjoy thy blessed presence. Thou art Every where by thy Presence.Jer. 23.23. Thou art In Heaven by thy Ex∣cellence. Thou art in Earth also.Esa. 66.1 But they which come to thee, must be lifted up higher. I have lifted up mine eyes.Ps. 121.1. Ultra montes expectare. Sursum Corda. A word of Hope. For if thou be our Father and Lord, and King of Heaven,In Heaven then our Hope is, that our Inheritance is there also; that thou wilt not deny us an Inheri∣tance, that hast vouchsafed us the Ti∣tle of Sons. Let us therefore take the wings of the Eagle, and be lifted up in our Me∣ditations to Heaven, being made heirs thereof.
Let us look up to Heaven, while we are upon Earth. Ps. 25. 1. 121. 1. 123. 1. 131. 1.Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. I will lift up mine eyes to the hills, whence cometh my help. Out of the deep have I called to thee, O Lord. A word of Power. In HeavenFor thou art in that place, from whence at all times thou canst send us, Help in danger. Good things in need. Plagues for our offences. And though thou art a Father by thy Love, yet art thou in Heaven by thy Majesty and Power. Let us not therefore presume upon too much familiarity with him, as with a Father, but let his word [in Heaven] keep us in a submiss Reve∣rence: For though Father and Son be of near Relation, yet a Son of the Earth, and a Father in Heaven, are of great distance. And let us be respective of his aw∣ful Majesty, and make our petitions to him in fear and trembling; in all Humility and Reverence: And Let us not be rash with our mouths,Eccl. 5.2. nor our
hearts hasty to utter any thing before him: For GOD is in Heaven,Esa. 66.22 and we (poor Creatures) upon Earth, which is but his footstool. This Petition justly challengeth the first place.Hallowed be thy Name. For, being thus intituled and dig∣nified with the honour of Sons, we ought primarily to consider our duties what we should render back. And what should a Son desire more than the honour of his Father? By this word we understand all the Attributes,Name. by which God hath mani∣fested himself, as his Majesty, Iustice, Power, Truth, Mercy, Goodness, &c. Blessed be thou our Lord, who hast given this power to men, To Hallow Thy Name, To Magnifie Thy Name, To Glorifie Thy Name, Which in it self is Holy.Ps. 103.2. 104. 31. 145. 10. Which all thy works in general do sanctifie. Which all the unreasonable Crea∣tures do hallow and praise in their kinds.Esa. 43. 9. Ps. 97. 5, 6
Which all reasonable Creatures, as Angels and Men do glorifie. Isa. 6.2, 3.The Angels, and Hosts of Heaven. Psal. 103. 20, 21.Men that are in Heaven already (though Mat. 5. 16.In Earth) by their works. Ps. 149 1.In the Congregations. Job. 1, 20.In Afflictions. Let us therefore glorifie it also; and that not carelesly or slightly, but zealously and holily, in Thought, Word, and Profession; For the whole scope of our Actions ought to tend to the Glo∣ry of GOD only. And, Lord, let thy Name be san∣ctified by others, besides us: Dilate this power of sanctifying thy Name, communicate it more and more to the Gentiles: Make thy Gospel to spread to the end of the Earth:Exo. 9.16. From the ri∣sing of the Sun: to the going down of the same, let thy Name be great among the Gentiles.Thine. Ps. 115.1Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the glory. Rev. 4.12.Thou art worthy, O Lord, (and thou alone) to receive honour, and glory. And His Name ought to be sancti∣fied by us above all things: for all
other things are for us, and we for His glory only. Not that God shall get any thing thereby, or that He hath need of our sanctifying: but in regard of the benefit which will accrew to us by it For this honour will be an honour to him that giveth it. And this praise and glory only, is profitable to the glorifier: It is not so any where, or in any thing else. He that glorifies God, him will God glo∣rifie. Him that honours me, I will honour,1 Sa. 2.30. saith God.2 Th. 1.12. Let thy Name therefore, O Lord, be Hallowed. And thine only. Let it be Hollowed, Inwardly. By Word. By Us. Outwardly. By Profession. By all Others. Let us not only salute thee in word, but imitate thee in deed, that we may be fit to glorifie thee, and be worthy to be called thy Sons. Give us a filial affection. The Spirit of Adoption. The Grace of Contrition.Ro. 8. 15. That we may say from our hearts each one of us,Luc. 15. 18. Father, I have sinned,
I'am no more worthy to be called thy Son. And This humble Confession is one of the wayes to honour God. Jos. 7.19.My Son (said Iosuah to Achan) give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him. And let us also do it by refraining our tongue from irreverent speeches, and leading our lives carefully by the rule of Gods Laws. So shall we truly hallow his Name. So shall we truly glorifie him, and say, Psal. 8. 9.O Lord, our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the world. We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorifie thy holy Name. Rev. 4. 8.For thou only art holy, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts. Thy King∣dom come.Quaerite primum Regnum Coelorum, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Hea∣ven. GODS Name is more precious and dear to him than his Kingdom. But after his Name his Kingdom. In Name, He is alone without us, Sole and Singular.
In his Kingdom, He communicates himself, and what is his, with us. In his Will, We dedicate our selves wholly to him. And therefore in respect of Gods bounty to us, this is the chief Petition of our good and happiness. For, In it we pray, First, for the com∣ming of Gods Kingdom. That GOD may only rule over us. Secondly, For the destruction and eversion of the Kingdom of Satan. That he may have no more dominion over us. The Kingdom of GOD is three∣fold. First, of Glory. Secondly, of Grace. Thirdly, of Power. 1. Of Glory, (hereafter) which indeed should be the scope of our de∣sires: For we ought so to live here, that we may desire (without fear) the coming of this Kingdom. So to be affected at our death, that we may joyfully, and without fear say, Lord,Luc. 2.29. now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace. So to be affected in our life, that we may often say, and pray,Phil. 1.23. When shall I appear before the Lord? I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
Rev. 22. 20.Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. 2. Of Grace, in this life in us, That we be not of their minds, who said,Luc. 19. 14. We will not have this man to reign over us. But subject us, O Lord, to this Kingdom, that easie yoke of thine, that in all things we may be obedient to thee. Govern us, and reign in us, that Satan or Sin reign not in our members. If thou be pleased so to rule in us here, we shall reign with thee hereafter. Cast Satan under our feet. 3. Of Power, for there are many Rulers in this world which oppose thy Kingdom. Arise, O Lord, and take the Rule into thine own hands. Reign thou therefore only over us. Go∣vern us within and without. For as we are vexed inwardly by our selves, with civil warr: and domestick tyran∣ny, so without also, by others. Let thy Kingdom. come:And that it may come in us, let it come into our Rulers. Make them like to thee in their Government. Let them rule to thee, not to themselves. Let thy Kingdom come within them; for in thy Kingdom only are proper and fit Laws and Conditions to rule by.
And because, when this Earthly Government is at the best, it is labori∣ous and unperfect, hasten thy King∣dom of Glory, we beseech thee, wherein will be no cause of complaint, but all things will be absolute, and perfect.Ro. 8. 18. For which all the Creatures, together with us, earnestly wait, even with groans. For all the votes and desires of the Old Testament were pitched upon the first coming of Christ:Esa. 64 1. and all of the New upon the second,Lu. 10.34. 2. 19. looking for that blessed hope,2 Tit. 13. and glorious appear∣ing of the great GOD,2 Tim. 4. 18. and our Sa∣viour Iesus Christ.Re. 22.20. Let it come to us, but not upon us.Come. Certainly come it will, will we, nill we. Let it come to us, not against us. Let us feel the happiness of it (O Father) in coming, not the violence of it, in rushing upon us. In the mean time, let it come to us here, though not in the full fruition, yet in the certain hope and expectation. Say unto your souls, I am your sal∣vation.Ps. 35. 3. It is not, Let us do thy will.Thy will be done.
Nor, Do thou thy will. But, Thy will be done. Thy absolute and eternal will which none can oppose. Which will take effect though all the world resist. Which will be done, because thou wilt have it done. Ro. 9. 19.Who hath resisted his will? Acts 9. 5.It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Thy revealed will; holy and saving, which perswadeth us to be humble in Conversation, firm in Faith, just and charitable in Works, true in Words, to love thee with all our hearts, as a loving Father, to fear thee as a re∣venging God: to prefer nothing be∣fore Christ, (who preferred us be∣fore all things) and the like. This we may contradict. Let that be done as much as may be. Let both be done. Let us shew our obedience to thee here,Ps. 103.20. as the Angels do in Heaven. All other Creatures obey thy will. The Sea passeth not its bounds. The Earth alters not its station. And all things else are obedient to thy will, only Man is disobedient to it.
Thy will, and all thy will,Thy will. without contradiction. Thy will, and all thy will, without exception. Thy will,Act. 21.14. and not our will. The Lords will be done.Jam. 4.15. If the Lord will. Thy will be done in all things, as well pleasing as displeasing to us. Let not us argue or dispute what is profitable, what is unprofitable; what pleasant, what hard to flesh and blood: but what thou wilt, let it be done. Let our blind and perverse will be led by thy most holy will. Graft thy will by thy Spirit into ours, as into barren stocks. If our wills be refractory to thine, root out, dissipate ours, and establish thine; let thy will over-master ours, conform our wills to thine. Turn our Nill into thy Will. In Earth as in Heaven,In Earth as in Heaven. Hallowed be thy Name. In Earth as in Heaven, Thy Kingdom come. In Earth as in Heaven, Thy Will be done. Let Heaven be the Pattern and
Rule to Earth in all things. Let us begin to be on Earth, as we would be in Heaven hereafter. As in Heaven.1. As by thy blessed Angels. Oh that we might do thy will, and no less thy will now, than they that hope to be like them hereafter. Lu. 20.36.2. As thy Saints. Who are Heavenly, even Heaven upon Earth. 3. As the inward Man. The Spirit which is from Heaven; that professeth it self delighted in do∣ing thy will: that complaineth that it is hindred from doing it. Oh that the old Adam made of the Earth had been so ready to do it! In Earth.In Earth; in all the Earth: But especially in this part of the Earth where we live. We are Earth, and of the Earth, let thy will be done in us. As in Heaven.As in Heaven; not as much, or as well: Nor with equal proportion, but likeness: Nor in as great measure, but with like affectinn, willingly, rea∣dily, faithfully. Let us imitate, though we cannot equal.
We beg thy grace to do thy will, as thy Angels and Saints do it. But be∣cause many things hinder us, we say with Saint Augustine, Give us power and ability to do thy commands, and then command us what thou pleasest. And if our condition in this life will not admit so much, yet Lord accept our desires, which cry to thee, Thy will be done. And if our desires be un∣perfect also, yet hear our cry in the Prophets words,Psal. 119. Our souls have long∣ed to desire thy Laws, and Commande∣ments alwayes. Here we may consider, 1. First,Give us this day our daily Bread. The excellent order and method of this Prayer: For what ought a Son before all things, and with more fervency desire, than the Honour of his Father, the Prosperity of his Kingdom, and Obedience to his Will? 2. And in the next place, what is more proper to Children, than to ask Bread of their Father? or what more necessary for them? And in this Petition we are 1. To depend wholly upon his Pro∣vidence.
2. To acknowledge him the Giver of it only. 3. Lastly, We are Patiently to ex∣pect it from him. In it we consider also, 1. What he is to give, Bread. 2. What manner of Bread. Our Bread. Daily Bread. 3. To whom he is to give it. To us. 4. When to give it. To day. There is in us a double Nature or Substance, which requires two sorts of Bread. Esa. 55.2.1. The Soul hath her viands to be provided.Jer. 15.16. The Bread of Angels. Ps. 65.4. The Bread of Heaven, the Word,Heb. 5.13. 14. the Bread of Life, Christ Iesus in the Flesh. Jo. 6. 33. 35. 48.Lord give us of this Bread evermore. Jo. 6. 3,4.2. The Body also craveth its suste∣nance, its Bread, that is, all the ne∣cessaries of this life. Our Belly is a troublesome Clyent, and except it be satisfied likewise, it draweth our minds from thee. Thou, O Father, hast promised to add all things,Mat. 6.33. if we first seek thy
Kingdom. Behold we have sought it, give us therefore Bread, either fine, middle sort, or course, which of them shall seem good to thee. And give us that which may feed, and not choak us, either with the care of them, or neglect of Thee. Give us frugal, sober Bread, not dainty fare, Bread necessary, not superfluous: For we are not to take thought for the flesh,Ro. 13.14. to fulfill the lusts thereof. In this word Bread,Bread. are contained all things necessary, and conducing to the maintenance and preservation of our lives. As Breathing it self. Vescitur aura aetherea. Sleep, to refresh our weary bodies. Honest hearts, by which we get our maintenance, And a competency of estate, are all particulars of that which is contained in the word Bread. And with Bread, give us, O Lord, The Staff of Bread.Lu. 26.26 Health of Body.1 Reg. 19. 8. Wholesome Air.Psal. 6.2, 91. 16. Content of Mind. Convenient Dwelling.Pro. 15.
Peace in our Dayes, and the like. Our Bread.Ours, as proper to Children, by a double right, of Prayer, Labour. Yet so ours, as first Thine, Thine by gift, because thou wilt, not be∣cause thou art our Debtor. Ours for use. For neither Thou, nor thy Angels, need this Bread: But we, being of corporeal substance, need corporeal sustenance. We, being Travellers, need our Viands. Bread.For our necessity, not for superfluity; which may profit the soul, not hurt the body; which may nourish the soul, not destroy the body. Gen. 28. 20.If the LORD will be with me, and will keep me in the way that I shall go,Ps. 30. 7, 8, 9. and will give me Bread to eat, and Rayment to put on, so that I return in peace, then the Lord shall be my God. Pro. 30. 7, 8, 9.Two things have I required of thee, deny me not them before I dye; Remove far from me vanity and lies; Give me neither poverty, nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.
When we say Ours,Our. we speak not as if it were due to us, but of thy bounty given to us, and gotten and ac∣quired by our labour, according to thine institution. Ours by labour. For if we be droans, if unprofita∣ble burthens to the Earth, it is not ours, it belongs to others. If it be gotten by fraud, violence, or constraint, it is not ours. It is surreptitious.Pro. 20.17 And that Bread is full of gravel. Let us therefore follow our vocati∣ons, and not make thee associate in our sin, by requiring Bread, being our selves idle and sloathful, or fraudu∣lent and deceitful. So ours,Ours. as if we have more than we need, and any thing remain more than is necessary for our estate and con∣dition, we impart and communicate it to those which want. And if we shall with-hold that which is superfluous from the poor and needy, we shall be thieves of that which is our own. It is therefore ours, so, that it may be other mens, by and through our hands.
Give.Give it thou. Bless thou the labours of our hands: for there are which la∣bour, and yet want. But when it comes of thy gift, a blessing come with it; and without thy providence our labours are in vain, the rather, be∣cause we are too prone to sacrifice to our own nets,Hab. 1. 16. and ascribe the enjoying it to our own labours. Therefore open thou thy Barnes, open thou thy Treasury: For when thou openest thy hand, every thing is fil∣led with thy good.Ps. 104.28 Give.Except thou give it, we shall have no benefit by it; it will nourish no more than a stone. Give it thou, for on thee we de∣pend, to day, and to morrow, and all our life. Give it thou, not retribute, or pay. It is no Debt. Bread, and all other thy blessings are Donatives. Give.Give it Thou. Break it thou, and give it, let not us take it our selves. For if thou give it, thou wilt give it in time, place, and measure: where∣as if we take it, we shall observe none of these rules, but take it to the
destruction of our own souls and bodies. The Petitions run along still with the rule of Charity.Give us. For when we say, give us, we speak not thus, To me, and my family. This word [us] is more general: as well to our Bre∣thren, the Sons of the same Father, who want Bread, as to me, and my family. That is, This day of our life,This day. This time. Heb. 3.We are not to petition for an Age, being but of a day, and a particle of a day. For being uncertain of our dayes, why should we beg bread for uncertain times? For we are not assured of life for an age, a year, or a day. Our life is but a day, and a day is the resem∣blance of our life: Yet, Providence is not hereby forbidden, or that none should lay up with Ioseph, or the Ant:Gen. 41. But he that provides not be∣fore-hand,Pro. 6. 6. is more foolish than an Ant,1 Tim. 5.8. nay worse than an Infidel. We must gather up the fragments:Jo. 16.1. and the things we gather, provide,
and lay up, must be justly gotten. We must not put our confidence in them, and we must bestow, aud use them well. And for∣give us our Tres∣passes.Give us, O Lord, Bread conveni∣ent and meet, to serve us to day, and to morrow also. Esa. 27.9.This is all the fruit, to take away sin. This Petition tacitely implies an ac∣knowledgement that we are sinners. And indeed we are all sinners.1 Jo. 1.8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us. And therefore it is most expedient to ask forgiveness. For although God by his Omnisci∣ence is not ignorant of our sins, yet it shews well in us, to ask forgiveness for them. This benefit accrues by confessing them, that God is prone to absolve us. 1 Jo. 1. 9.If we confess our sins, God is faith∣ful and just to forgive them. And this detriment befalls if we continue in them without attonement, that they make a separation between God and us. Esa. 39.2.Our iniquities have separated between us our God: and our sins have hid his
face from us, that he will not hear us. We have great need to beg forgive∣ness for them,Jer. 5. 25. for Our iniquities have withholden good things from us. And why?Lam. 3.44 God hath set our sins as a cloud, that our prayers (for good things) might not pass through. And we know (saith Saint Iohn) that God heareth not sinners,Jo. 9. 31. that are not reconciled to him by confession. As long as our sins stand up against us, and are not remitted, we cannot hope to receive any good at Gods hands. Therefore, O Lord, not only give, but forgive also, both the guilt and punishment of them. And in this thy Mercy is manifest∣ed, that thou givest to those, who after they have received, must ask for∣giveness. Give unto us who are thine ene∣mies, and when thou hast given, for∣give us also. Forgive us,Forgive. for we confess we need forgiveness: And we have thy promises, and practice of remission, to those which confess their sins. 1. He that covereth his sins,Ps. 28.13. shall
not prosper: but whosoever confesseth, and forsaketh them, shall have mercy. Lev. 5. 5.And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in any one of these things, that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing, &c. And the Priest shall make an attonement, &c. 36. 40.If they shall confess the iniquity of their Fathers, with their trespasses which they have trespassed against me,42. &c. Then will I remember my Covenant,1 Jo. 1. 9. &c. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. 2. Thy practice is seen in divers ex∣amples. Ps. 32. 5Of David, by his own confession: I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. By the mouth of Nathan. David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord.2 Sam. 12. 13. And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin. Lu. 15.21.Of the Prodigal Son. 18. 10.Of the Publican. 7. 48.Of Mary Magdalen, and divers others.
Yet thou hast not dealt so with the Angels that fell:Jude 6. Their sins are not, will not be forgiven: Ours may in thy good pleasure. We are unworthy. Let us not be unthankful. They be Debts which we owe,Our Tres∣passes, or Debts. and pay not, but detain against the will of the Owner. We are Debtors to thy Commande∣ments, being thy Creatures, and crea∣ted to the keeping of them. As often then as we omit, and have undone those things which thou commandest us to do, and commit those things which thou forbiddest, we detain a Debt, and become Debtors or Trespassers. We see then that all men are sinners and debtors.And for∣give. That there are sins which deprive us not from the Sonship of God. That there is place and time for re∣mission after Baptism.
Now of our sins, some are committed Ignorantly, others Of knowledge. Unwillinlgy, others Willingly and greedily. Before our cal∣ling, others Being called. Against God, others Against our Neighbours and our selves. In heart, others In word and deed. By our selves alone, others With others either as authors or provokers. Of Commissi∣on, others Of Omission. Secretly, others Of which our heart re∣proveth us And in all these is the root of bitter∣ness.Deut. 29. 18. Forgive them, O Lord, retain not the offence: exact not the puunish∣ment due for them.Heb. 12. 15. Be reconciled to us, by laying aside thy just displeasure by receiving us to thy favour and grace.
Connive at them while they are doing. Bring them not into question, call them not into examination, nor us to account for them being done. And the hand writing that is a∣gainst us, Tear it. Hang it upon thy Sons Cross. Cast it behind thee. Drown it in the Sea. And as the morning Cloud, make it to vanish away, and come to nothing. Forgive them, because he that taught us thus to pray, (our Surety) hath paid, and discharged these Debts. Not only my trespasses,Forgive us but the of∣fences of my brethren. There is in this Petition a brotherly Charity also;Ro. 15.30 and as Christ transfer∣red our sins upon himself, so charity takes our brothers sins to us, and makes us pray for them. And it is but Iustice also, to pray for the sins of others, in regard many offences are committed by them by our perswasion or example. Not only my trespasses,Forgive us but the of∣fences
of mine enemies.Act. 7.66. As thou for∣givest us,2 Tim. 4. 16. so forgive our enemies also. And this is the highest pitch of cha∣rity. As we forgive, &c.Forgive, and it shall be forgiven to you, was thy Sons promise. Blessed be thy name for propounding so easie a condition to us. To forgive a mite, and be forgiven a talent. Oh happy exchange, to receive gold for dross! a pearl for stubble! Oh happy necessity, imposed on us thus to pray! For a malevolent mind can neither be lifted to God, nor quietly and peaceably conversant with men. And while he makes us like himself by this condition, that is slow to wrath, and ready to forgive, he makes us also acceptable to himself, and substitutes us as it were in his own place, gives us power to forgive offences. Blessed therefore be Thou, O Lord, for dealing thus mercifully and wonderfully with us, in teaching us daily to pray thus, and daily to for∣give, and to be forgiven. And that dost bind us by this condition of mutual forgiveness. For he that forgiveth not,
prayeth against himself, and in effect thus prayeth, Lord forgive not me, for I do not forgive. If we perform not what we say we do, we shall never be forgiven. And it is but due on our parts to forgive others. For God hath already forgiven us for Christs sake: we promise then no more than we owe to him already. Grant us therefore grace, O Lord, to follow thy example, fully and free∣ly to forgive the offence, and not to retain the punishment, or any malice to those, whom we seem to forgive. We petition well and rightly, let us do it effectually henceforth. That thou mayest not have cause to say, Ex ore tuo te judico. Thou hast not, nor shalt be forgiven. When we say [as we] we pro∣mise not a pari,As we but a simili; not so much in quantity, but the like in qua∣lity. For we (God help us miserable sinners) forgive imperfectly, but God freely and absolutely. Neither do we say it, O Lord, as challenging, or meriting any forgive∣ness by our forgiving, but to shew our conformity to Thee in forgiving.
We cannot better discover our selves to be thy Disciples, or Children, than by being pittiful, and ready to forgive and pass by offences. And lead us not into Tentation.There are two sorts of Tentation, 1. Of Tryal. 2. Of Deceit, or Se∣ducing. 1. That of Tryal is, when God doth any thing to prove the constancy and affection of his servants, and this is good.Gen. 22.1. As were the tryals of Abra∣ham, Iob,Job 1. and his People. Ex. 15.25.16.4. 10. 20.2. That of Seducing, is, when we are tempted by the Devil, his Mini∣sters, or our own Flesh,Deut. 8.2. 16. 23. 3. to forsake God, and his Commandements; and this Tentation we pray against. For what benefit shall we reap by forgi∣ving our old sins, if we contract new? O Lord, not only be pleased to pardon that which is past, but prevent and keep us from committing the like. Let us not be encouraged to sin, be∣cause of thy bounty in blotting out our former offences: but rather to thank∣fulness, for thy mercy, and to care, that we offend no more.
Deliver us from that which is past. Subvention. Keep us from that which is to come. Prevention. Lest we turn with the Dog to the vomit, or the washed Sow to the mire.2 Pet. 2.22. It is enough that we have spent the time past in the works of the flesh.1 Pet. 4 2. For the enemy is never readier or nearer to us,Mar. 20. 44. than when the house is swept clean. Therefore the danger be∣ing so near us, give us grace, O Lord, to be the more wary of him. Behold, O Lord, the roaring Ly∣on, seeking whom he may devour.1 Pet. 5.8 He is at hand to ensnare us, either with his own malice, the delights of the world, or the pleasures of the flesh. If he cannot prevail by fair means, he endeavours by force to compel us; If he cannot puff us up with delight, then he attempts to deject us with sor∣row, if thou be from us. Wherefore, O Lord, forsake us not, and by for∣saking us, lead us into tentation. For
of our selves, without Thee, we have no power to resist him, nor hath he, without Thee, any power to tempt us. Let us not flee to the Enemy, O Lord, being overcome, either by his insulting over us: nor suffer us to de∣scend to conditions of peace with him, to pacifie him with our yielding, hoping thereby to make him more mild, for that will not be. Let us rather look up to Thee, lest we yield to his violence, or give credit to his craft, presuming either upon our own strength, or destitute of thy help. Let us perceive his snares by thy light. Let us resist his assaults by thy strength and power. Let us neither do evil, or omit that which is good, by being tempted. Let no Tentation, but such as is common to Man, take hold on us.1 Cor. 10 33 Let it be as Christs Vanne, winnowing that which is evil from us, and not the Devils Sieve, casting through it that which is good. Let us come out of Tentation, as purified silver, and not be burnt as
dross. Give us a happy issue with our Tentations. Let it be to the tryal of our Faith, and the confusion of Satan. Lead us not further in, than thou wilt bring us out again. If in thy Iustice thou lead us in, yet in thy Mercy lead us out. Lead us not to leave us. Thou, O Lord, temptest no Man; thou leadest none in,Jam 1.13. but those that first led in themselves, nor hardnest any, but those who first hardned themselves. Leave not, give us not over to Satan, nor our own wills. Let us not be rebellious,Ecclus. 3. 26. and pro∣voke the Tempter; nor love danger, lest we perish therein. It is a dangerous thing to be tempt∣ed, for the uncertainty of the victory. It is Presumption to desire it, but Humility to decline it. It is joyfully to be endured, but by no means to be desired. Lead us not,Lead us not. or rather bring us not in, do not necessitate us. There is difference between tempt, and lead into tentation. The first is Satans act, the other oft-times is Gods.
GOD led Christ into the Wil∣derness, but he was tempted by the Devil. If it be thy pleasure to suffer us to be led in, yet bring us back, as thou didst our Saviour. Into Ten∣tation.The Tempter often assayles us, O Lord, do not thou deliver us into his power, to be sifted; but if thou loosest his reins for a time, as thou didst sometimes in Iob's case, yet mo∣derate the combat between us, we pray thee, and either lessen the ten∣tation, as our strength abates; or in∣crease our strength, as the tentation grows strong, that we may have a joy∣full issue from it. For if we neither overcome, nor (being vanquished) become more humble and cautious thereby, the tentation will be to our destruction, not to our tryal. Let it therefore be to our correcti∣on, not to our condemnation, we be∣seech thee. But deli∣ver us from evil.Not only Lead us not in: that is not sufficient, except thou deliver us also. If we cannot be free from tentation,
yet deliver us from the evil of it. From tentation that is evil. All things are Evil which divert us from thee;From evil but especially that evil ene∣my of thine, and for thy sake our ene∣my; for he is not our enemy, in re∣spect of our selves: we are not of such strength, as that he should desire to oppose us; but he is our enemy, be∣cause we are thy Children, and belong to thee. Deliver us, O Lord, from the evil of his bondage. Let GOD arise, and let his Ene∣mies be scattered. Let not the Enemy be able to do us violence, nor the Son of wickedness hurt us.Ps. 68. 1. 89. 23. Deliver our Souls, O Lord, From the neithermost Hell. From the power of the Dog.22. 20. 21. From the Lyons mouth, and the horns of the Unicorns. Out of the mire, that we sink not:69. 15. 16. From the deep, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon us. And deliver us, not only from him,From evil. but from his malice also. From what∣soever poyson he hath breathed on the Creatures. From the enmity of the World.
Take us not from the world, but deliver us from the evil of it. From whatsoever is evil in our flesh. Deliver us from our selves, as we are evil. From evil.Deliver us also, as from the evil of sin, so from the evil of punishment. From the evils and miseries of this life. Especially of the life to come. Esa. 38.14O Lord, we are oppressed, under∣take for us. Mat. 8. 25Lord, carest thou not that we pe∣rish. We are brought into bondage by sin, Captives to Satan, and lyable to thy wrath. We are not able to match with our enemies by our own strength. Assist us thou, and deliver us. Deliver us by thy Son, and we shall be free. He overcame the Devil, and the World. He overcame them in himself: Let him overcome them also in us. He overcame the Devil in himself, by breaking his head, dis-arming him,
and diminishing his power. Let him overcome him in us, by giving us the Armour of the Spirit, and increasing our strength and grace. Deliver us from the evil of sin,From evil. that it have no dominion over us, à parte ante. Deliver us from the evil of sin, when it hath prevailed over us, à parte post. And that presently and speedily, if that it seem good to thee: But if not so soon as we desire, yet let thy deli∣verance come certainly. Lest the pit shut her mouth upon us. Deliver us from evil,From evil. especially from that evil, that carries with it a shew of good. When the Enemy pre∣tends to condemn that which is evil, and to approve that which is good. From the Devil at Noon-day. From Satan transforming himself in∣to an Angel of light.2 Cor. 11. 14. From pleasing Errors. From sins declining and bending to the right hand: savouring of politique wisdom.
Deliver us, from evil.Deliver us, O Lords From rebellious hearts. Hos. 7. 16.From polluted lips. Esa. 6. 5.Throats like open Sepulchers. Ps. 5. 10. 144. 11.Tongues talking vanity. From evil and lustful eyes. Mat. 7. 22.From uncircumcised ears. Ps. 58. 4.Deaf like the Adder. Heb. 12. 2.From hands slow to good. Ro. 3. 15.From feet swift to evil. Jer. 3. 3From a forehead of brass; and a neck of Iron. From these, and all other evils, Deliver us, O Lord. Ps. 60. 11.Lord, be thou our help, for vain is the help of man. Deliver us so, that we may be freed, not only freed, but free. So free from sin, that we may be servants to righteousness, and so long servants to righteousness, that at length we may be adopted into Children, heirs and co-heirs with Christ. Thine is the King∣dom.Thine is the Kingdom. The Kingdom is the Lords, saith David. Ps. 22. 18.Two thing are considerable in this Conclusion.1 Chron. 29. 11. 1. The Confirmation of our Faith,
we believe that we are heard of GOD, who is able and willing to give what we desire. 2. The End whereto we ought to refer whatsoever we desire in our prayers, The Praise and Glory of GOD. Thou art a King,Thine is the King∣dom. and wilt hear thy Subjects. Thou hast right and autho∣rity to bear rule; and free command over thy creatures, the works of thy hands. By thee Kings rule,Ps. 8. 15. and unto thee must they surrender their Crowns. All Potentates are but subordinate to thee, thy Vicegerents. For though God was pleased to stile Nebuchadnezzar King of Kings,Eze. 26.7 as having many petty Kings under him,1 Tim. 6. 15. yet is he himself, and he only, the King of Kings.Re. 17. 14 For he ruleth over all,Re. 11. 15. as well Kings as others. The Kingdoms of the world are be∣come the Kingdoms of the Lord.Ps. 10.19 Thou art the great King,Mal. 1. 14 as thou speakest thy self. Thou removest,Dan. 2. 21 and sertest up Kings.
And thy Kingdom is not temporary or of short continuance, as other King∣doms are:Ps. 145. 11 Dan. 7. 27 but it is an everlasting Kingdom. Heb. 1.18Thy Throne endureth for ever. Ps. 10. 16.The Lord is King for ever aud ever. 1 Tim. 1. 17Thou art the King eternal. Power.Thou hast power and strength to ma∣nage this Kingdom.Ro. 9. 19. Thou art migh∣tier than our adversaries. Who is able to resist thy power? This power of thine hath been felt in all ages. Mic. 7. 18.Who can do like thee, or what God is like thee? Ps 66. 7.Thou rulest by thy power for ever. And this power is proper only to thee. Thou hast spoken it, and David hath heard it more than once, that power belongeth to God.62. 11. And that no small power neither. 147. 5.Great is our Lord, and of great power. Saint Paul calls it, the exceeding greatness of his power.Eph. 1. 19. His mighty power. Exo. 15 6.Moses in his Song calls it, glorious power. Col. 1. 11 2 Th. 1.9.So Saint Paul.
Therefore thou, and thou only canst give us what we ask. Great is the glory of the Lord.And Glory. Glory and honour is in his presence.Ps. 138.5. He hath set his glory above the Earth and Heavens also.1 Chron. 16. 27. He is rich in glory.Psal. 8. 1. 113. 4. 148. 13. He is the only King of glory. And therefore thou expectest of us,Ro. 9.23. Ps. 24. 10. Mat. 2. 2 that we should give glory to thee. And, O Lord, our intent is to glori∣fie thee. We ask these things, as meaning and intending to use them to thy glo∣ry, and say with the Angels, and Quire of Heaven,Luc. 2.14 Glory be to God in the highest. And with all the Crea∣tures in Heaven, and Earth, and un∣der the Earth, and such as are in the Sea. Blessing, honour, and glory, and power, be to him that sitteth on the Throne.Rev. 5.13 And this Kingdom, Power,For ever and ever. and Glory, endureth not for a season only, but for ever: there shall be no end of it. Thy Kingdom is everlasting,Ps. 10. 16. saith David.
Rev. 7.12.Thy Power everlastiug, say, and pray the Angels. 5. 13.Thy glory is ever also. Let us therefore say with those Heavenly people,19. 1. Allelujah, Salva∣tion, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, unto the Lord our God. Amen.Behold, O Father, we have (ac∣cording to thy Sons directions and form) presumed to crave those things which we want. We have made our necessities known to thee. We stedfastly believe that thou art able to supply our wants. We desire of thee, that thou wouldst grant us those things which we have craved of thee. We look up to thee, we sigh and groan, and pray thee to confirm our votes and wishes with thy Seal, Amen, So be it. Rev. 1. 5.Grant us our Petitions for his sake, that sent us to thee, and that is a true and faithful witness,2 Cor. 1. 20. and in whom all thy Promises are Yea, and Amen. Honour him in us, who deserve of our selves (without him) no good, but much evil at thy hands. And say to our Petitions, Amen, So be it.
O Almighty LORD,Our Father which art in Heaven. and our Heavenly Father, whose fa∣therly power and goodness is seen in the Creation, Preservation, and Govern∣ing of all things, and upon whom, as a Father, we wait and depend for all that is good: who art in all places by thy presence, but especially in Heaven by thy Excellency; We thy poor Chil∣dren, whom thou hast preferred be∣fore the rest of thy Creatures,Psal. 8. do, from the bottom of our hearts, wish and desire, that thy Name may be Hallowed, glorified, and magnified,Hallowed be thy Name. from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof, even through all parts of the World: And that it may the better spread from one Nation to ano∣ther,Eph. 1.4. give us grace (who have recei∣ved the Adoption of Children) so to walk before thee in holiness and righ∣teousness, that the Heathen, who have not known thy Name,Mat. 5. 16. seeing our good works, may glorifie thy Name,Thy King∣dom come. together with us. Thou seest, O Lord, that we have many Tyrants amongst us in this life; as the Devil malicious and cruel; the World vain and curious; the Flesh frail and de∣ceitful;
and our own Will vile and corrupt; all which do impetuously ty∣rannize over us, and oppose them∣selves against thy Kingdom. Arise, therefore, O Lord, and suppress these Tyrants, and rule over thine and our Enemies by thy power, and in us by thy grace, that we may here∣after be Subjects in thy Kingdom of Glory.Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Let thy Kingdom come, and govern us by thy Providence, defend us by thy Might, lead us by thy Spirit, and teach us by thy Word, Drive far from us the Prince of this World, and do thou only Rule in us. Give us grace to follow the example of thy blessed Angels, and all other thy Crea∣tures, who readily and joyfully do thy will. Let our wills follow thine in all things, and let nothing be displeasing to us, which thy Will hath decreed, either for our prosperity or adversity. Let us do nothing contrary to thy Will, but let the performance and execution of thy Will, be the whole scope and aim of our thoughts, words, and actions. And to this end, give unto us thy holy Spirit, which may direct our wills, enlighten our understandings, mollifie our hearts, and make them obedient
to thy Will. We further cry unto thee,Give us this day our daily Bread. O Lord, (who givest food to eve∣ry living creature, and feedest the young Ravens that call upon thee) and pray thee, that thou wouldst likewise give unto us this day our daily Bread. First, and above all, the Bread of Life, which may nourish us spiritual∣ly: and after that, Bread for our bo∣dies, to sustain Nature. Give us, we beseech thee, all things necessary (not superfluous) for this life: and grant that we, using thy blessings as becometh us, may be strengthned and enabled to pass this life quietly and so∣berly, and at the end of these our dayes, by the merits and intercession of our Saviour Iesus Christ, obtain life eternal. And for as much,And for∣give us our tres∣passes, as we forgive them that trespass a∣gainst us. O Lord, as we know thou hearest not unrepentant sinners, and that our sins have (long since) prevented our prayers, and ascended into thy pre∣iuce, to stop the current of thy mer∣cies, and to call for vengeauce against us: O Lord, behold, that we ear∣nestly repent us of them, and are hear∣tly sorrowful for them. Wherefore we humbly pray thee, for thy great mercies to mankind, in thy Son Christ
Iesus, that thou wouldst be pleased to be reconciled unto us, and to for∣give us our Trespasses.Psal. 130. Enter not into Iudgement with us, for if thou do, no man is able to abide the mildness of thy Iustice, much less the severity of it. Give us also grace to follow the ex∣ample of our blessed Saviour, who forgave his Enemies, and prayed for them, that we may forgive them that trespass against us: Lest, when thou comest to Judgement, thou dealest as severely with us, as thou didst with him,Mat. 18. who had much forgiven, and would not forgive a little. Thou knowest,And lead us not into Tempta∣tion. O Father, how unapt we are of our selves to think a good thought, much less to resist so great Enemies, as are hourly ready to assail us. Suffer us not therefore to be tempted above our abilities; neither (by forsaking us, or with-drawing thy hand of pro∣tection from us) Lead thou us into Tentation: but, Lord, so strengthen us, that (although it be not good for us, to be altogether free from Tenta∣tion, yet) by thy aid and grace, we may have a happy issue, and joyful de∣liverance from it: And as we have humbly prayed thee, not to lead us in:
So we further desire thee to deliver us out of all evil.But deli∣ver us from evil. For as long as we re∣main in this flesh, we shall have con∣tiuual strivings and wrestlings with di∣vers evils, but especially with the evil Spirit, the Enemy of Mankind, who omitteth no opportunity to bring us into his bondage. But we are com∣forted, O Lord, with the assurance of thy mercy, which can effect and work more to our salvation, than his Malice to our destruction. Grant therefore, O Lord, that we may be delivered from all evil, and from all our Enemies spiritual and temporal, that so,Luc. 1.15. we may serve thee ever here∣after, in holiness, and righteousness, all the dayes of our life. All these Blessings we have been the more confident to beg of thee,For thine is the Kingdom, the Power. O Lord, because we know assuredly that thou art King of Kings, none hath absolute power within thy Do∣minions but thy self, and that thou hast power also without resistance, to maintain thy right, and defend thy Subjects, being able to give those things which are necessary for those who call upon thee faithfully. And we lastly pray thee,And Glory. that see∣ing
it will be for thy glory, to grant those things which we have desired that with the bestowing of them, thou wilt also give us thy grace, that we may use and employ them to that end for which thou gavest them, even thy Honour and Glory. That so being thy true servants here,For ever and ever. we may be glorifi∣ed with thee hereafter, who art Lord of all glory to all Eternity. Having thus discovered and laid open our necessities to thee, O Lord in that form and manner which thy Son directed us, we humbly pray thee,Amen. to say Amen to all our Petitions. In his Name, and for his merits sake, we pray thee, to grant them. For though we have no deserts to chal∣lenge them, yet his merits are num∣berless, by which we plead for them. And with this Sacrifice and Oblation, we are bold to come unto thee, not only craving pardon for our sins, but supply of our necessities. We come not to thee of our selves, presuming of any thing in us; but we are sent by thy Son Iesus Christ, who hath com∣manded us, with confidence to press unto thy Throne, and in his Name to ask whatsoever we shall need, either
for this life, or the life to come. And as he hath sent us, so hath he also put into our mouths, words meet for our request. O Lord, take notice of the stile, it is his own, and for his sake, say to what we have required, Amen. So be it. And thou, O blessed Saviour, God and Man, intercede (we beseech thee) for us: for thou only art our Advocate, Mediator, and Interces∣sor to the Father. Cover our imper∣fections and nakedness, with the robes of thy righteousness, and supply our poverty with the riches of thy merits: and cast nor those from thy favour and grace, whom by Nature, thou of thy goodness, hast vouchsafed to make thy Brethren. Who livest and reign∣est, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, now, and for ever, Amen. Petitions for Spiritual Graces. OH that my wayes were directed to keep thy Statutes, O LORD.Ps. 119 51 Blessed is the man whom thou teachest out of thy Law.94. 12.
119. 18.Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonderous things of thy Law. Teach me to do thy will, for thou and my GOD, let thy good Spirit lead me into the Land of Righteousness. Give me Grace, O LORD, Rom. 7.18To know, that in me, (that is, in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing. To abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the Soul. To keep in mind alwayes, Thou the World passeth away, and the desire thereof; And that the benefit which a Man getteth by the World, is no∣thing but Destruction. Truly to say,Ps. 119.52 I have remembred thy everlasting Iudgements, and my Son receiveth comfort thereby. 1 Pet. 5.5.O thou that givest Grace to the humble, give me Grace to be humble. Give me a good heart,Luc. 8.15. which hearing thy Word, may keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Gen. 6. 8.O Lord, Let me find Grace in this eyes. Heb. 12. 17.Let me find a place and time of Re∣pentance. 2 Cor. 6.1.Let me not receive thy Grace in vain. Heb. 12. 15.Let me not fail, or fall from it.
But let me continue in it.Act. 13.43 And let me grow in it.2 Pet. 3.18 To the end of my dayes. Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Carefulness, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Defence, or clearing my self, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Indignation, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Fear, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Vehement Desire, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Zeal, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Revenge. Give me Grace to think upon and do Whatsoever things are True, Give me Grace to think upon and do Venerable,2 Cor. 7. 11. Give me Grace to think upon and do Honest, Give me Grace to think upon and do Iust, Give me Grace to think upon and do Pure, Give me Grace to think upon and do Lovely, Give me Grace to think upon and do Of Good Report. Give unto me, O LORD, Humility of Heart, Give unto me, O LORD, Charity to my neighbour Give unto me, O LORD, Patience of Mind, Give unto me, O LORD, Temperance of Life, Give unto me, O LORD, Chastity of Body, Give unto me, O LORD, Contentedness of Mind, Give unto me, O LORD, Alacrity of Spirit.
Give unto me, good Lord, Perfect knowledge of my Sins, Give unto me, good Lord, Hearty sorrow for them, Give unto me, good Lord, Perfect hatred against them, Give unto me, good Lord, Fervent love to all Goodness, Give unto me, good Lord, True obedience to thy Will. 2 Pet. 1.5.Give me Grace, O Lord, to adde To Faith, Vertue. Give me Grace, O Lord, to adde To Vertue, Knowledge. Give me Grace, O Lord, to adde To Knowledge, Tempe∣rance. Give me Grace, O Lord, to adde To Temperance, Patience. Give me Grace, O Lord, to adde To Patience, Godliness. Give me Grace, O Lord, to adde To Godliness, Brotherly Kindness. Give me Grace, O Lord, to adde To Brotherly Kindness, Charity. Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Love, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Ioy, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Peace, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Long Suffering, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Gentleness, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Goodness, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Faith, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spririt, Meckness, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Temperance.
Give unto me, good Lord, Contempt of the World. Give unto me, good Lord, Hatred of Sin. Give unto me, good Lord, Loathing of the flesh. Give unto me, good Lord, Desire of Heaven. Give unto me, ô Lord, A right Faith to live well. Give unto me, ô Lord, A sure Hope to perse∣vere well. Give unto me, ô Lord, A perfect Humility to obey well. Give unto me, ô Lord, A true Charity never to be divided from thee. Give me grace, O Lord, to be content with that which is necessary. To despise that wich is superflous. Grant, O Lord, That I may so live, that I repent not to have lived. That I may so live, that no man may know I have lived amiss. That I may so live, that I may al∣wayes live. That dying I may live, and living I may dye,Luc. 2.21. and say with a chearful Spirit, Lord, now leitest thou thy ser∣vant depart in peace.
Phil. 1.23.I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Amen. Prayers for Spiritual Graces. O Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who art my only Tutor and Instruct∣er; and from whom I have learned whatsoever I know; I beseech thee, that thou wouldst further teach me those things, whereof I am ignorant, and which are necessary for my Salva∣tion; that thou wouldst keep me in things which I have already learned, and rectifie me in those matters, wherein (as a man) I erre: Strength∣en me, and make me firm, wherein soever I waver, and am doubtful; and keep me from that which is erro∣nious and hurtful. Above all things, O Saviour, strengthen my Faith, and give me grace daily to prosit in the knowledge and understanding of thy Holy Word, and so govern all my actions by thy Holy Spirit, that my
life may be answerable to my know∣ledge; and that I may shew the fruits of whatsoever I have learned, by my good and religious conversati∣on. Give me a firm and assured hope in thee, and thy gracious promises, that in all my troubles and necessities, I may be evermore confident in thy mercy. Be unto me a strong Tower of defence, against mine Enemies; that whether the World allure me, the Devil assail me, or the Flesh rebel, I may fly unto thee for refuge. And although thou presently put not forth thy hand to help me, but defer thy comfort, according to thy good plea∣sure; yet keep me from doubting or despairing of thy aid,Ro. 4.16. because thy pro∣mises are sure.2 Cor. 1. 10. Give me a fervent Love, and perfect Charity to my Neighbour; that I may be as kind to him, and as careful of him, as of one who is a Member with me, of the same Body, whereof thou (O sweet Saviour) art the Head. Let my love to him be sincere and unfeigned, which may charitably relieve him in his wants, patiently bear with his infir∣mities; and willingly forgive him all his trespasses against me. Create in
me, I beseech thee, a pure, mild, peaceable, and humble heart, which may think harm to no man, nor re∣compense evil for evil, but good for injuries. Cleanse me from all un∣clean and earthly desires, and lift up my heart to thee, and Heavenly things: and so write thy Laws in it, that I may wholly bend my self to keep them, and please thee, persevering in the same to my lives end. Give me, O Lord, true compunction of heart, and so water it with the dew of thy Heavenly Grace, that I may, in the bitterness of my Soul, with abundance of tears, sighs, and groans, bewail and lament all my hainous and grievous transgressions against thee. Give me grace, O Lord, that I may not boast in any merits, or works of mine own, or have any confidence in them: but let me glory in this alone, that I am a Member of that Body of thine which was crucified for me, and did sufficient∣ly satisfie for all the Sins of the World. If thou, O Lord, look, or expect any merits from me, behold I tender unto thee thine own merits, the me∣rits of thy Death and Passion, which thou hast vouchsafed to make me par∣taker
of; by vertue whereof alone, I dare boldly appear before thy Tri∣bunal. These merits I set between my sins, and thy Iustice, and otherwise, or in any other manner, I dare not, I will not contend with thee. O sweet Iesu, I desire thee to offer them to the Father, as a propitiatory Sacrifice, for all my great and grievous Offences; that when my Soul shall depart from this Body, it may by the same be freed and delivered from all the judgements and punishments which are due unto it for sin, and be carried to that blessed place, where there is no sorrow, but endless felicity, where thou, together with the Father, and the blessed Spi∣rit, livest and reignest for ever. Before Prayer. O Almighty and everliving GOD, Heavenly Father, to whom it is manifestly known, how inconstant, and wandring, the minds of men are, in any good actions, and
how easily we suffer our selves to be carried away, from the contemplation of thee, by diversity of distractions, and unseasonable thoughts, which take hold of us, in the time of our Devotions and Prayers unto thee; who also, by thine only begotten Son Christ Iesus, didst prescribe unto his Disciples a Form of Prayer to be of∣fered up to thee,Mat. 6. 9. and hast derived the same from them to us. Behold me, most wretched sinner, wholly depraved and corrupt, intreating thee by the same Son, that for his sake thou wouldst infuse thy Holy Spirit into me,Eph. 1. 5. which may adopt me into the num∣ber of thine Elect: that it may teach me how I ought to pray, according to thy Holy Will; that it may allay all troublesome and wandring thoughts in me, while I offer up my prayers and praises unto thee: Suffer me not to serve thee with my lips, and be absent in heart from thee: but create a right Spirit within me, that I being sensi∣ble of all thy graces and comforts, may with joyful and holy zeal, per∣form my duty to thee: that so, my prayers and desires may appear before thee, and in thy Sons Name, I may
effectually be heard, and my petiti∣ons may be granted, to the glory and honour of thy most holy Name, and the endless comfort of mine own Soul, through the same our only Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Before a Sermon. O Most loving SAVIOUR, I most humbly intreat thee, that thou wouldst be pleased, at this time, to enlighten my understanding, and to open my inward ears, with the grace of thy Holy Spirit, that I may hear that sacred Word, with an humble heart, and rejoyce in it, in the obedi∣ence of the Spirit: That I may be fully instructed thereby, how to do good, and avoid evil; and bring forth the fruit thereof in my life and con∣versation: That thy Honour and Glory may be thereby increased, the Devil and all other the Enemies of my Soul, may be vanquished, my Soul may be saved; and at the last, I may
appear with boldness before thy Tri∣bunal, and receive the reward of a good and faithful servant, even his Masters joy,Mat. 25.25. everlasting blessedness; and that, by thy merits only, O bles∣sed Saviour. Petitions for Temporal Blessings, in which we are to desire of God, THat he would be pleased to con∣tinue unto us, The blessing of a good King, just and religious. To give unto us, Magistrates and Iustices, upright and careful to see good Laws duly ex∣ecuted. Teachers, to direct us in the Truth. That he would bless us with Length and Goodness of Dayes. Health of Body. Contentedness of Mind. Competency of Estate.
Food and Rayment. Conveniency of Dwelling. Wholesomeness of Air. Fruitfulness of Cartel. Fruitfulness of Soyl. That he would make us happy In Wedlock, In Children, In Faithful Friends, In Peaceable & loving Neighbours In Honest Servants, In Skilful Physicians. That he would preserve our Goods, Good Name, Our Senses and Understanding. That he would protect us, From Trouble, From Enemies, From Dangers, From Losses, From Sicknesses. That he would give Peace To all Nations, Peace To our Land, Peace In our private Dwellings
Rules to be observed in the Morning. WHen thou awakest in the Mor∣ning, shut and close up the entrance to thy heart, from all unclean, prophane, and evil thoughts, and let the consideration of God, and goodness en∣ter in. When thou art risen, and art ready, retire thy self to thy Closet, or other private place, and offer to God the first fruits of the Day; and in praying to him, and praising him, remember, 1. To give him Thanks, for thy quiet rest received, for delivering thee from all dangers, ghostly and bodily, and for all other his benefits to thee. 2. Offer unto him thy self, and all things that thou dost possess; and desire him, to dispose of thee and them accor∣ding to his good pleasure. 3. Crave his Grace to guide thee, and to strengthen thee from, and against all Tentations, that so thou mayest do nothing the day following contrary to his will. 4. And Lastly, Beg of him, (ac∣cording
to the Rules before prescribed) all things needful for the Soul and Body. To which purpose pray as fol∣loweth. Morning Prayer. I Thank thee, O Heavenly Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, for all thy Blessings, which I (underserved∣ly) have received from thee; that thou gavest a being from honest Pa∣rents, and in that part of the World, where thy Son Christ Iesus is purely professed; that thou didst endue me with Reason and Understanding, and didst also give me perfect Members and Senses: that thou hast preserved me ever since my birth, vouchsa∣fed me health and liberty, and a com∣petency of means, to maintain me, and those whom thou hast placed un∣der me: That thou hast Elected me in thy Love, Redeemed me by thy Son, Sanctified me by thy Spirit, and kept
me this night past from all perils of Body and Soul, and given me a sweet and comfortable rest. O Lord, I commend into thy hands my Soul and Body, thoughts, words, and actions, and humbly beseech thee, that thou wouldst guide and order them all to thy honour and glory, and my endless and eternal happiness. Enlighten my mind, that (the darkness and cloudy mists of mine offences being dispelled) I may walk before thee, in my voca∣tion,Rom. 13. 13. without offence, as in the day, clean, unspotted, and unblameable. Give unto me thy Holy Spirit, which may bridle my vain cogitations, and head-strong desires; and order thou (I beseech thee) my words, and re∣ctifie all my actions. O Lord, as thou hast of thy bounty raised up my Body from sleep, so stir up my drowzy Soul from the sleep of sin, and carnal secu∣rity. Let my Body be ever assistant to my Soul, in all good actions in this life, that they may both be partakers of life everlasting. Thou, O Lord, hast promised (to those which shall faithfully ask) all things necessary for this life: give me, I beseech thee, (if it seem good unto thee) such a competent
estate, as shall be expedient to sup∣port my life, in a civil, modest, and religious manner. Give unto me that which shall be convenient, but especially, O Lord, a heart and mind contented,1 Tim. 6. 8. with whatsoever thou shalt be pleased to allot unto me. Grant, O Lord, that in thy Name, I may cast forth my Net, into the Sea of this World, and diligently, carefully, and with an upright Conscience, follow that vocation in which thou hast pla∣ced me: that by thine aid and assist∣ance, I may prosper, and have good success in all my affairs. Bless, O Lord, the Kings Majesty, govern his heart in thy fear, and guide his un∣derstanding, to do those things which shall be acceptable to thee, and pro∣fitable to his Kingdomes. Give him loving and loyal Subjects, and suppress his open and secret Enemies. And (together with him) bless his Queen, and Royal Issue, make her as the fruitful Vine on the House-top.Ps. 128.3. Bless all the State Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the highest to the lowest. Com∣fort the comfortless and helpless. Bring all Travellers to their own beings in safety, and direct all upon the Seas to
their safe Ports. Shew the light of thy Truth to those which wander out of the right way. Give to all sinnen true and hearty repentance, strengthen those which have begun well, and give thy assisting grace, that they may per∣severe in goodness. To all my Friends, Kindred, and Enemies, and to those which pray for me, give all thy good blessings: Keep us all, from all evil, and make us to continue in thy Service to our lives end; and after the course of this miserable life ended, bring us to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Or thus. ALmighty and everlasting GOD, I praise and bless thee, from the bottom of my heart, that of thy infinite goodness, thou hast preserved me this night past, and hast (with the impregnable defence of thy Pro∣vidence) defended me from the pow∣er and malice of the Devil, and kept
me both in Soul and Body from all his devices and snares, and raised me from sleep, (the image of death) and not left me to be stifled in the dark∣ness of my sins, but hast given me a longer space to repent me of them. I humbly intreat thee, that thou wouldst not withdraw thy hand of Protection from me, but take me into thy Tuition. Watch over me with the eyes of thy mercy,Ps. 119 5. and direct me in the way of thy Commandements. Endue me with those graces of thy Holy Spi∣rit, whereby I may pass this day, and the rest of my life, to the praise and glory of thy Name, the benefit of my Neighbour, and the salvation of my sinful Soul. Keep me, O Lord, from all sin, bridle and mortifie my flesh, that I offend not, nor fall into any transgressions, which may provoke thy wrath against me. Direct my Soul and Body, my words and actions, according to the rule of thy Will. Di∣vert my heart from fastning too much upon transitory pleasures, and convert it to the delight of eternal joyes. And because I am not worthy, O Lord, that thou shouldst hear me, poor wretched sinner, for any worth in me;
behold I set before the merits of thy only Son,1 Joh. 2.2. who is the propitiation for our sins: look upon him, and for his Righteousness, pardon the offences of me thy servant, and grant to me those things, by thy mercy, which by the strict Rule of thy justice are not due to me. Defend me, O Lord, from all mine Enemies. Arm me with thy Spiritual Weapons, put on me the Cloathing of Wisdom and Strength,Ephes. 6. the Brestplate of Righteousness, the Helmet of Salvation, the Shield of Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit, that in this earthly Pilgrimage, I may manfully oppose the Enemies of my Soul, the Concupiscence of the Flesh, the Tentations of the World, and Ma∣lice of the Devil, that so having fini∣shed valiently the course of this Ter∣restial Warfare, I may hereafter praise thee in thy Celestial Kingdom. And thou, O Lord, who givest food to every living Creature, and feedest the young Ravens which call upon thee,Ps. 147.9. be merciful unto me, in the supply of those necessaries, which I daily want. Preserve me in health,1 Tim. 6.8. give me food and raiment, and sufficient to maintain me in that course of life, to which it
hath pleased thee to call me, that ha∣ving sufficient in all things,2 Cor. 9.8 I may abound in good work. And grant that I may lead a quiet life in all godly con∣versation;Jam. 3.13. That having and using thy blessings worthily, I may pass this life with joy and comfort, till it please thee to call me to a better. Give thy blessings to the Kings Majesty, the Queen, the Royal Issue, and the whole Estate of this Kingdom; and grant, that we may all bend our thoughts and studies to please thee, that at the last, by the merits and intercession of Iesus Christ, we may be received to thy Heavenly Kingdom, Amen. Or thus. O Almighty Lord God, which day after day dost minister to sinful man infinite occasions, where∣by we may be stirred up to praise thy holy Name, and art most plentiful in pitty, and favourable to those, which with pure hearts, and unfeigned faith
call upon thee; behold me, thy poor unworthy servant, with the eyes of compassion, that at this time am bold to offer up unto thee a Morning Sa∣crifice of praise and thanks for all thy blessings? and amongst the rest, for that thou hast vouchsafed, after a suf∣ficient and quiet sleep, to raise me safe from my bed again, which favour thou hast not afforded to many others, who in far greater measure have de∣served it, than my self; for which mercy of thine, I am not able (through my insufficiency and weakness) to give unto thee due praise and thanks∣giving. I pray thee therefore, in thy dear Sons Name, (in whom thou art well pleased)Mat. 3.17. to accept these poor and weak thanks; and for his sake al∣so to be further aiding and assisting unto me this day following, in what∣soever I shall take in hand. For thou knowest, O Lord, how feeble mans nature is, insomuch, that if he trust to his own strength, of necessity he must fall into many miseries, errors, and dangers. Have mercy therefore upon mine infirmities, and be propiti∣ons and helping to me, that by thy illu∣mination, I may discern and perceive
good from evil; and by thy leading and direction, may follow the one, and avoid the other. Lord, so guide me with thy holy Spirit, that I may neither do, speak, nor think any thing this day contrary to thy holy Will. Behold, O Lord, I offer my self a living Sacrifice to thee; and humbly pray thee to accept it. Good God, direct my Soul in the way of thy Com∣mandements; increase my Faith,Ps. 119.5. strengthen my Hope, enlarge my Cha∣rity, and infuse all the good Graces of thy Holy Spirit into me. Give me grace, so to remember my sins, as that thou mayest forget them; and so to forsake them, as that thou mayest for∣give them. Instruct me in all good∣ness, and give me the grace of Perse∣verance, that I fly not back from any good courses in this life, but that I may go forward, and continue in them, to the end of my dayes. O Lord, who hast promised the necessaries of this life,Mat. 6.36. to those which shall first seek thy Kingdom; I humbly intreat thee, to give unto me this day, all things necessary for my sustentation; as Food, Rayment, Health of Body, Ioy of Heart, Peace of Conscience, and a
blessing to all my endeavours; give me a mind contented with that which shall be sufficient, and not desirous of that which is superfluous; that I may pass the rest of my dayes on earth reli∣giously, honestly, and soberly, as be∣commeth thy servant, to thy honour and my endless comfort. Be gracious to the Kings most Excellent Majesty; his Royal Queen, the Royal Issue, the whole Estate, Clergy, Nobility, Gen∣try, Mastistrates, and Commons; give us all grace in our several places, to do our Duties, as in thy sight; that at the last (by the merits of Iesus Christ our Saviour) we may receive the reward thereof in thy eternal Kingdom, where thou reignest, to∣gether with the same our Lord Iesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, World without End. Morning Prayer for a Family. O Almighty Lord God, Heaven∣ly Father, we give thee most
humble and hearty thanks, in that thou hast not only of nothing created us after thine own Image,Gen. 1.26. but also hast from time to time most graciously preserved us; even to this present Morning, from all dangers and ter∣rours, and hast given us this night past sweet sleep, and comfortable rest; whereby we are refreshed and fitted to our bodily labour. We thank thee, O Lord, for all thy Spiritual Blessings, for our Regeneration, Iustification, Sanctification in some measure, and our Redemption by Iesus Christ. We praise thy Name, for thy bountiful supply of all things necessary for this life, as also for thy patient and long expectance of us in our Conversion. O Lord, we confess that we have been so far from the serious consideration of thy favours to us, and from ren∣dering due thanks unto thee for them, that in stead thereof, we have grie∣vously offended thy Majesty, with most abominable and vile sins, not∣withstanding thou hast sought to re∣duce us to thy obedience, by the good motions of thy Holy Spirit. As often, O Lord, as we look about us, either with the eyes of our bodies or
minds, so often do thy fatherly and innumerable benefits appear unto us. For all which, we tender again and again, from the bottom of our hearts, infinite thanks unto thee; and hum∣bly desire thee, for thy mercies sake in Christ Iesus, to pardon all our in∣gratitude and rebellions. Enlighten us, we pray thee, with thy holy Spi∣rit, that we may see our imperfecti∣ons; kindle our zeal towards thee rule and govern our minds, wills, af∣fections, and actions, that we may not offend thee any more. And give us Grace. that we may alwayes think, speak, and do, whatsoever shall be pleasing unto thee, and abstain from all things which shall displease or of∣send thee. It is more than enough, O Lord, that we have been hitherto so rebellious against thee: It is too much, that we have been so negligent to serve thee; and it is worst of all, that we have been so ingrateful to thee for all thy blessings. Let all evil and wickedness now depart from us, and let new manners, new affections, and new hearts be renewed in us. We commit our selves, O Lord, wholly into thy protection, this day, and the
rest of our lives; and most humbly desire thee, of thy infinite goodness, that as now thou hast put good thoughts into us, thou wilt be pleased to perfect them in us: so that being led by thy Holy Spirit, we may do that which is acceptable to thee, and love, serve, honour, and praise thy holy Name all the dayes of our lives. And for a much, O Lord, as thou hast promised to those that love thee, all things necessary for this life, we call and cry to thee, O our Father, which art in Heaven, to Give us this day our daily bread, even whatsoever is need∣ful and expedient for our sustentation. Give us, O Lord, sufficient for our maintenance, lest we take evil and in∣direct courses, or blaspheme, or mur∣mur against thee: and not too much, lest we forget from whose hands we receive it. Give not only that which shall be necessary, but contented minds also with it, Bless, O Lord, the la∣bour and work of our hands, bless us at home and abroad, and grant that every one of us may truly (as in thy sight) walk in our several vocations; and diligently and carefully intend the same; making a Conscience of all our
wayes, that by thy gracious favour; and our own endeavours, we may have prosperous success in all things that we shall undertake. Continue, O Lord, thy Gospel among us. Bless our gracious King, with the Queen, the Royal Issue, the Lady Elizabeth, with her Princely Off-spring; the whole Land, and all sorts and condi∣tions of people in it. Bless all that travel by Sea or Land, and take into thy protection all Orphans, Widows, and all that suffer wrong: Give health and strength to the sick and weak, and joy and comfort to the sorrowful and afflicted. Bless us, O Lord, with healthful and sound Bodies, keep our good Names unspotted, and unble∣mished. Bless the fruits of the Earth, and give us wholesome, peaceable, and seasonable times. These, and all other thy blessings, which thou know∣est better to give, than we to ask, vouchsafe (if it seem good to thy Majesty) to give us, for the worthi∣ness of thy Son Iesus Christ our Lord, in whose blessed Name, and absolute Prayer, we close up our imperfect Prayers, aud say as he hath taught us: Our Father, &c.
Rules for Evening and Night. AS we usually twice a day at the least, take our bodily sustenance, so should we be no less careful for the re∣freshing our Souls; but twice a day likewise (Morning and Evening, if not oftner) dispose our selves to Devo∣tion and Prayer. When thou therefore retirest thy self, (as in the Morning) remember, 1. To give God thanks that he hath delivered thee from the dangers of the day past, prospered thee in thy affairs, and given thee necessaries for thy susten∣tation. 2. Examine thy Conscience nar∣rowly, and consider wherein thou hast (the day past) offended God, either in thought, word, or deed: and ha∣ving set thine Offences before thee, con∣fess them to him, (and in the bitterness of thy Soul) repent thee, be sorry for them, and crave pardon for them, and desire his grace that thou offend no more in the like. 3. Pray to God to continue his care ever thee, the night following, and to
defend thee from all perils and dangers. So that going to thy rest with these good action: and thoughts, thou shalt do like to those, which rake up Fire in the Embers over night, that they may the more readily find it in the Morning. In the Night. VVHen thou awakest in the Night, call upon God like∣wise, (for the Night was not made wholly for sleep) praise him, contem∣plate, and meditate upon his works. Sometimes weep for thy sins, according to the practice of DAVID.Ps. 6. 6. For as the nightly dew refresheth and temper∣eth the Earth; so do our nightly tears asswage our Concupiscences. And sometimes rejoyce in the Lord, accor∣ding to that of the Psalmist,149. 5. for the great benefits thou hast received from him. By these means, keeping thy self to one holy Exercise or other, thou shalt
be sure to avoid the Devils Tentations, whose chief time of setting upon us, fit∣teth best with his works, which are usu∣ally stiled,Eph. 5.11. The works of darkness. Evening Prayer. The Lord hath granted his loving kind∣ness in the `Day,Ps. 10.4. therefore in the Night will I sing of him, and make my Prayer to the God of my life. O Lord God, Father everlasting, I yield thee most humble and hearty thanks, that thou hast not only averted thy punishments from me, which my grievous sins have deserved; but instead thereof, hast preserved me from all dangers, and supplyed me with all necessaries of this life. O Lord, I confess, that I have so highly offended thee this day, that all the punishments which may be inflicted upon vile and miserable sinners, are due to me. I confess,Repeat the sins thou canst call to mind. O Lord, that I have offend∣ed thy Majesty in — And not only
these do I acknowledge, but all the rest, which I have committed from my infancy, to this present hour, wit∣tingly, or ignorantly, in thought, word, or deed, against Thee, my Neighbour, and my Self. O Lord, I confess my weakness,Ro. 7. 19. I do not that which I should, and would do: but that which I should not, and am unwilling to do, I do: Not regarding or fearing thy incomprehensible Glory; venera∣ble Presence, terrible Power, exqui∣site Iustice, nor thy Goodness unspeak∣able; for which,Ps. 143.2. if thou shouldest en∣ter into judgement, what would be∣come of me? But, O Lord, for as much as thou art a Father of mercies,2 Cor. 1.3. and dost not desire the death of a sinner,Eze. 33. 11. if he return unto thee by unfeigned repentance: I most humbly (in the Name and Mediation of our blessed Saviour Christ Iesus) crave pardon for them. Lord I repent, help my im∣penitency, and hear my request. Be merciful to me a sinner, and pardon all my offences, whereof thou, O Lord, knowest me to be guilty. And I beseech thee, O Lord, for the time to come, to mollifie my heart, water it with the dew of thy Heaven∣ly
Grace, that I may not alwayes bring forth thornes and weeds fit for nothing but the fire.Cant. 1.4. Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted; open my eyes, direct my heart and wayes: Draw me after thee, and being con∣verted,2 Pet. 2. 22. suffer me not to return again with the Dog to his vomit. And foras∣much, O Lord, as thou hast appoint∣ed the Night to refresh our bodies, I humbly pray thee, to defend me (as well sleeping as waking) from the snares of the Devil.Psal. 31.5. O Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, which thou hast redeemed (by thy precious death and passion.) Suffer it not to sleep in sin, and in it lye languishing unto death, and so be buried in the grave of thy judgements: but watch over it, I beseech thee, and defend it under the shadow of thy wings.Psal. 17.8. Let me not be oppressed with unnecessary sleep, but raise me in due time to thy Service and Praise. Thou knowest, O Lord, that of my self I have no strength waking, much less when I sleep: I humbly therefore pray thee, to defend my Soul, Body, Goods, (and all things which thou hast be∣stowed upon me) this Night, from
all evil and damage; and so dispose of me, that I be not troubled with any terrours, terrified with any vain phan∣tasies, weakned by any sickness, or im∣poverished with any casualties or cros∣ses. Keep me, O Lord, from all evil dreams, and unclean thoughts, and compass me with a wall of thy mercies, that the Tempter approach not to my Bed: so that being preser∣ved by thy protection, and refreshed with comfortable rest, I may arise, and offer unto thee my daily bounden du∣ty and service, even praise and thanks to thy most holy Name. Or thus. O Blessed Lord Iesus Christ, to whose inexhaustible bounty we owe all honour and praise, I give thee all possible thanks, that thou hast vouchsafed to keep me this day from all evil, so that none of thy fearful judgements (to which I was justly ly∣able) have fallen upon me; but of
thy unspeakable mercy, thou hast preserved me from them, and hast al∣so liberally, and with a bountiful hand, supplyed me with the necessa∣ries of this life, notwithstanding my great and manifold sins committed against thee. O Lord, I confess, that I have wasted the time (which thou hast given me for repentance) altogether idlely, vainly, and un∣profitably, not so much as considering, or taking notice, that this day might have been the last of my life, but have added and heaped up sin upon sin, in thy All-seeing sight, as if I had stood in no fear of thee at all, daily renewing (as much as in me lay) thy torments and passions: for which I have deserved, that the Earth should open unto me, and Hell devour me: which, that it is not come to pass, I ascribe (with all thankful acknow∣ledgement) to thy infinite mercy and goodness. O Lord, I acknowledge, that it is of thy goodness alone, that I am thus preserved from all thy judge∣ments, seeing that many calamities have befallen divers others, who have less deserved them than my self. That some have therefore perished by wa∣ter,
some by fire, some by sword, others by sudden and violent death, and that I live: That some have been taken blind, some lame, some distract∣ed in their senses: That others have sustained much damage in their world∣ly estate, and I have escaped, and not been punished in any of these kinds; To what shall I ascribe and attribute the cause? surely to thy mercy alone, for which I cannot give unto thee suf∣ficient thanks. But, O sweet Savi∣our, as thy mercy exceedeth, so do our necessities increase; thou canst not want matter for thy mercy to work upon, by reason of our inabili∣ties to help our selves: Wherefore, I further pray thee, that this night fol∣lowing may be also safe and prospe∣rous unto me, that by a sweet sleep, and comfortable refreshing, I may be fitted, when I awake, to serve thee with a thankful & chearful heart. And because, O Lord, that this life hath not one certain hour, I beseech thee to Enlighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death,Psal. 13.4. and grant, that after I have rested quietly, I may, by thy grace and mercy, arise to serve thee in sin∣gleness of heart. Lighten (O Savi∣our)
my darkness, and mercifully keep me from all dangers of this night. Save me waking, and keep me sleep∣ing, that I may watch in thee, and rest in peace. There is nothing that more resembleth our Life, than the Day; nor the Grave, than our Beds: O Lord, therefore, when I am laid down, and by sleep made unable to help my self, being like unto a dead man, defend me then, by thy power, from the crafts and assaults of the Ene∣my, that he do me no harm; so that (though my Body sleep) my Soul may watch unto thee, and contemplate of the life to come. And grant, that having passed the night quietly, I may arise as well from the sleep of sin, as from my natural sleep; and with all alacrity pass the day following in thy service; and in the end of my pilgri∣mage (by thy merits) receive the Crown, which thou hast promised to those that love thee, in that day which no night shall follow, and in that Heavenly Kingdom where thou reign∣est, together with the Father, and the blessed Spirit, world without end.
Evening Prayer. Ps. 141.1.LEt my prayer, O Lord, be set forth in thy sight, as the Incense, and let the lifting up of my hands, be an Evening Sacrifice. 55. 10.In the Evening, Morning, and at Noon-day, will I pray, and that in∣stantly, and thou Lord shalt hear my prayer. . 1.Blessed be thou, O Lord, Who hast preserved me from the Arrow that fly∣eth by day, and from the Sickness that destroyeth in the noon-day. Esa. 38.1.Who hast not cut off my life like a Weaver; nor made an end of me. O Lord, I confess, that as my dayes have increased, so hath my sin multi∣plied. Pro. 24.16.The just man falleth seven times a day: But I miserable sinner, seventy times seven times. But I return to thee, O Lord, and repent:Luc. 17.4. Let not the Sun go down in thy wrath. O Lord, whatsoever good I have done this day, I acknowledge, that thou hast wrought it in me, and de∣sire
thee graciously to accept of me for it, as thy Instrument only. O Lord, whatsoever evil I have committed this day, I confess it to be the work of mine own hands, and heartily pray thee to pardon it. O Lord, which givest the sleep of health to them that love, and causest those that fear thee,Psal. 13.4. Psal. 91.5. to sleep confident∣ly, Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. Keep me from the terrours of the night, aud from the works of darkness. Lord,Cant. 5. though I sleep, yet let my heart watch to thee; and when I wake, let me be present before thee, let my thoughts ascend to thee. Grant, that I may alwayes remem∣ber, that the night is no night with thee,Ps. 139.12 and that darkness and light are to thee alike. Grant, that I may alwayes medi∣tate upon the long and last sleep, the sleep of Death, the Bed of my Grave,Esa. 14.19. and the Covering of Worms and Dust. Let my sleep be a cessation from sin, and let me not in my sleep do, or think any thing, that may offend thee, or de∣file my self. And grant, that after the sleep shall
depart from mine eyes, I may re∣member thee, search my reines, and try my heart. O Lord, I commend my self, and all that (of thy bounty) is mine, to thee.Psal. 71.1. In thee I put all my trust and confidence. Thou seest in what dangers we are, what snares the Devil layeth for us: I humbly therefore pray thee, to defend me from him. And grant me so to order and end my life, that I may sleep in peace, and take my rest with thee, for the merits of Iesus Christ, &c. Psal. 4. 9.I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that makest me dwell in safety. Evening Prayer for a Family. O Almighty and everlasting God, who hast appointed all times and seasons to succeed in their due course; and hast ordained the day for the works of the day, and bodily la∣bour;
and the night to take our quiet rest & refreshing: by whose providence and mercy, we have been preserved this day from all dangers, & have been furnished with all things necessary for this life: we humbly pray and be∣seech thee, that now, in this time of night and darkness (wherein we poor and miserable sinners stand in most need of thy help and aid) thou wouldst be pleased, to keep us from all dangers; spiritual and temporal. O Lord, we confess, that we have not deserved the least of thy favours; nay, if thou shouldst with strict eye examine our actions, how we have spent this day, and the rest of our dayes past, we should not be able to stand in thy sight,Psal. 5.5. much less beg any further blessings of thee. For (not∣withstanding thy manifold and daily favours) we have in all things been rebellious and repugnant to thy bles∣sed Will; and obedient and conform∣able to the command of our Enemies; the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: Insomuch, as we have lost our liber∣ties, and are become servants and slaves unto them. For we have whol∣ly given ourselves to serve the plea∣sures
of the Flesh, in Concupiscences and other carnal Acts: We have hearkned too much to the delights of the World, in covetous desiring that which is not our own, in abusing the Creatures thereof, which were created for our necessary use, and not for our wanton and insatiable desires: And we are become the servants of Satan, in not opposing and resisting his unclean and wicked Tentations. Our sins are infinite, and our iniqui∣ties are numberless, so that we cannot, nor are any way able to recount them unto thee. We have fled from thee, seeking us: neglected thee, loving us: stopped our ears to thee, speaking to us: turned our backs to thee, reach∣ing thy hand to us: forgotten thee, do∣ing good to us: and despised thee, correcting us. Yet, O Lord, we humbly intreat thee, to shew thy ac∣customed mercy to us, poor and miser∣able sinners, who in grief and anguish of soul, confess these our offences, and earnestly and bitterly bewail them. Look upon us with the eyes of com∣passion, not for any thing in us, but for the love and respect which thou bearest to thy Son CHRIST JESUS,
in whom we verily believe, that thou art fully reconciled unto us, Take away our sins, and the punishment due unto us for them. Let thy wrath be turned from us, and destroy us not together with our manifold transgres∣sions. Lord, thou seest our wicked∣ness, and withall, how, and in whose name, we crave thy mercy. Turn thee, O Lord, from thine anger, which thou mightest justly pour upon us, and be gracious unto us, accord∣ing to thy wonted goodness, who ab∣horrest nothing which thou hast made: Create also, we beseech thee, in us, new hearts, hearts fit to serve thee, and write thy Law in them,Jer. 31.33. with the finger of thy Holy Spirit, that all our desires and actions may be conforma∣ble to thy blessed Will. And now again, O Lord, we desire thy Ma∣jesty, to take our Souls and Bodies in∣to thy protection this night following: Suffer us not to sleep in sin, but watch over us,Psal. 17.8. and defend us under the shad∣dow of thy wings: Let not our sleep be excessive or immoderate, but raise us again in due time, that after a quiet and moderate sleep, we may arise to serve and praise thee joyfully, begin
and perfect our works justly: labour in our vocations truly; and seek thy Kingdom earnestly: that at the last, by thee, with thee, and in thee, we may come unto the same Kingdom, by the merits of our Saviour JE∣SUS CHRIST, in whose Name and Prayer we are bold to call further upon thee, saying, Our Father, &c. Prayers upon the Life and Death of our Saviour Iesus Christ. O Sweet SAVIOUR, Who for the love of Mankind, didst vouchsafe to descend from thy Royal Throne, from the bosom of thy Father, into this vale of misery, and to take on thee the form of a sinner, even humane flesh, in the sanctified womb of the most chast and pure Virgin, and be born with∣out impeachment to her Virginity; Be pleased of thy great clemency, to make my heart thy habitation, adorn it to that end with all Spiritual Graces, and be daily born in me, by
renewing in my Soul a fervent love to thee, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Lord, Who being God Almighty, didst not disdain at thy Birth, to be wrapped in swadling clouts, and to be laid in a Manger. Grant, that I may be ever in thy fight a little Infant, in Humility and Lowliness of Spirit: take from me all ambitious Thoughts, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Lord, Who at thy Birth wouldst be received into this World with the joyful Hymns of blessed Angels, and be found to the great delight and admi∣ration of poor Shepheards; Give thy Grace unto me thy poor unworthy servant, continually to persevere in thy praises: to seek thee with the Shepheards affection, by seeking, to find thee; and finding thee, alwayes to retain and enjoy thee, and Be merciful to me. O Sweet Jesu, Who wert pleased up∣on the eight day to be circumcised, and
in that most tender age of thine, didst begin to shed thy blood, meerly for the love of me and mankind. Cut off, I intreat thee, all super∣fluities from my Soul, and take from me all evil thoughts, words, and works, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Christ, Who (to the un∣speakable comfort of me, and all thine Elect) wouldst be called by the saving Name of Iesus; Grant, that the memory of this Name may ever cause a reverend re∣spect in me toward thee, and that by it I may be preserved all my life, and at the hour of death, and Be merciful to me. O Loving Lord God, Who wouldst be found in the Wise men which sought thee, with Faith and Devotion; and who) having found thee) fell before thee with Oblations of Gold, Frankin∣cense, and Myrrhe; Be pleased, I beseech thee, that I may find thee in Spirit, and wor∣ship thee in Spirit and Truth: Offer∣ing unto thee the Gold of bright
shining Charity, the Incense of pure Devotion, and the Myrrhe of perfect Mortification, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Saviour, Who to leave Mankind an example of Obedience and Humility, wouldst become subject to the Law, and be brought to the Tem∣ple, and there have offered for thee the Oblations of the Poor, and not the rich; Give me the Grace of Obedience, to subject my self willingly to my Go∣vernours: Suffer not the least thought of pride to reign in me, but quench in me all haughtiness of Spirit, with inordinate love, and conceit of my self, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Lord, Who whilst thou wert yet young and tender, wert content∣ted to suffer persecution, and flee with thy blessed Mother into AEgypt; Grant me such ability by thy grace, whereby I may not only suffer perse∣cution and affliction when it shall please thee, but also persecute and punish all wickedness within my self
before it grow too strong for me, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Jesu, Who being sought for by thy blessed Mother three dayes, wouldst be found of her in the Temple; Suffer me never to be severed from thee, give me such a devotion toward thee, that I may never be weary in serving thee, nor satisfied with prais∣ing thee, either in Church, or private Closet, and Be merciful to me. O Loving Lord, Who wouldst enter the River Jordan, and there be Bapti∣zed by thy Fore-runner John the Bap∣tist; Be pleased, that I may be purified in this life by thy merits, and thereby washed from all my sins, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Saviour, who didst con∣tinue fasting and praying forty dayes and nights together in the Desert, and after divers Tentations, didst overcome Sa∣tan; Grant, that I may chastise my flesh, and exercise my self in Fasting,
Watching, Prayer, and other Spiri∣tual Excercises, and subdue all evil Affections, which rebel against the Spirit, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Redeemer, Who for my sake didst subject thy self to many Sor∣rows and Necessities, to Heat, Cold, Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Sweat, Iourneys, Persecutions, and Tribula∣tions; Strengthen me with the aid of thy Holy Spirit, that I may willingly bear all Adversities, as coming from thy hand, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Lord, Who, while thou wert upon Earth, didst vouchsafe to comfort the Sons of Men, and heal their Infirmities; Replenish my heart with all pious Affection, that I may account the miseries of others as mine own, and supply their necessities in whatsoever I may, according to my ability, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Lord, Who, for thy
love to Mankind, didst eudure infinite Miseries, Injuries, Calumnies, Blas∣phemies, and Revilings, even of those to whom thou hast done much good; Create in me a heart pure and in∣nocent, which may forgive mine Ene∣mies, and love them, rendring good for evil, whereby I may shew my self a true follower of thy perfect Charity and Patience, and Be merciful to me. O Merciful Saviour, Who, to abro∣gate the Ceremonial Law, didst eat the Paschal Lamb with thy Disciples, and giving them an example of Humility, upon thy knees didst wash their feet; Grant, that this example may take deep impression in me; give me per∣fect Humility, true Obedience, and fervent Love, whereby I may love thee sincerely, and all others unseign∣edly, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Lord, Who, of thy great love, didst institute the blessed Sacra∣ment of thy Body and Blood, whereby thou mightest continue with us to the end of the World;
Stir up in me an earnest desire and longing after this holy Sacrament, and grant, that I may ever receive it with a chast love, deep affection, and a pure heart, and Be merciful to me. O Loving Lord, Who, when thou wert to leave this World, didst comfort thy Disciples, and with ardent and af∣fectionate prayer didst commend them to the Father, thereby shewing what love thou didst bear to them, and all others who should believe in thee; Make my heart sensible of this love, and raise in me an earnest af∣fection to thee, that I may be wholly transformed into the love of thee, and Be merciful to me. O Merciful Saviour, Who praying in the Garden, didst wholly resign thy self to thy Fathers good pleasure, desi∣ring, that not thy will, but his should be wholly done; Give me grace, that in all adversity and tribulation I may flee to thee by prayer, and ever commit my self to thy providence and good pleasure, and Be merciful to me.
O Sweet Jesu, Who didst suffer thy self to be taken and bound as a Male∣factor, neither didst lamont nor mur∣mur whilst thou wert shamefully entreat∣ed by thy Enemies, Give me strength, after thine ex∣ample, willingly and patiently to endure all adversity and tribulation, which shall at any time befall me, and Be merciful unto me. O Blessed Saviour, Who wouldst be forsaken of thine own Disciples in the midst of thy troubles and afflictions; Pardon me, thy fugitive servant, and receive me into thy favour: Suf∣fer me not to wander from thee any more, But give me such constancy and perseverance, that I may conti∣nue in thy service to the end of my dayes, and Be merciful to me. O Merciful Jesu, Who, standing in the presence of the High Priest, didst patiently endure a cruel blow; Mortifie in me all angry affecti∣ons, that I be not disquieted when I am injured, nor think of revenge,
but for thy sake may bear all things patiently, rendring good for evil, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Redeemer, Who in the night of thy Passion, wouldst be mocked, derided, and many wayes be despight∣fully handled; Help mine infirmities, lend me aid, that I faint not under Tentations or Tribulations, but give me grace to be thankful to thee for them, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Lord, Who wouldst not reply to the unjust Accusations of thine Enemies, but mildly with a deaf ear wouldst let them pass; Grant, that no Slanders may move me to impatience, but that by thine example I may patiently overcome all that any way defame or injure me, and Be merciful to me. O Loving Saviour, Who being de∣nied by thy Apostle St. Peter, didst look on him with the eye of compassion, and cause him to bewail his offence with bit∣ter tears;
Look also on me miserable sinner, with the same gracious and moving aspect, that I may wash away my sins with the tears of repentance, and ne∣ver deny thee my Lord and Saviour by word or deed, and Be merciful to me. O Sweet Jesu, Who being stripped, wouldst be bound to a Pillar, and scourg∣ed, whereby thy blessed body was torn and wounded; Heal my wounds by thy stripes, take all evil thoughts from me, and grant me patience to endure the stroakes of thy Fatherly Visitation, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Lord, Who, after so many wounds received, and so much precious blood shed, wert mooked, and crowned with a Crown of thorns; Grant, that the remembrance, thereof may be imprinted in my heart, and that I may love thee for thy exceeding Charity, and wholly think of thee, wholly contemplate on thy bitter pains, and Be merciful to me.
O Bountiful Jesu, Who wert pleased with great pain, labour, and weari∣ness, to carry thine own Cross to Mount Calvary, and there to comfort the la∣menting Women, exhorting them to weep not for thee, but themselves, and Children; Give me grace, with a chearful mind, to bear any cross thou shalt lay upon me, and to bewail with tears my sinful life past, and Be merciful to me. O Merciful Redeemer, Who didst suffer thy sacred hands and feet to be pierced with nails, and fastned to the Cross, and there didst with great effusion of blood suffer unexpressable tor∣ments; Grant, that I may alwayes with a saithful and thankful heart; bear in mind thy exceeding great love, who wouldst endure so great and grievous things for me. Purge and wash my Soul with those streams of thy most precious blood, from all uncleanness, and offer them to the Father for a full and plenary satisfaction of all my transgressions, and Be merciful to me.
O Blessed Lord, Who, in thy bitter pains, didst intercede with the Father for thine Enemies which crucified thee; saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; Give me grace, that, according to thy Precept and Practice, I may love mine Ememies, pray for them, and do good to those which do evil unto me, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Lord, Who, being cru∣cified between two Thieves, didst pro∣mise to the one of them, confessing thee the fruition of Paradise; Look upon me with the eyes of pitty, wherewith thou beheldest that good Thief, and grant, I may live so, that at the end of my dayes, I may be found worthy to hear that joyful speech, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise, and Be merciful to me. O Sweet Jesu, Who, for the grie∣vousness of torments, and exceeding loss of blood, didst faint, and cry, I thirst; and wert pleased to drink Gall and Vinegar;
Let the remembrance of this CuP extinguish in me all inordinate riot and excess. Give me the Vertue of Sobriety, that all inordinate passions being quenched in me, I may wholly thirst after thee, and Be merciful to me. O Loving Lord, Who, when thou wert so pleased, didst call for death, and bending thy head, didst com∣mend thy Spirit into the hands of thy Father; Grant, that the uncertainty of my death may be ever in my thoughts, and that I may be ever willing and ready to leave this transitory life when it shall seem good to thee, to whose blessed protection I commend my Soul, praying thee to Be merciful to me. O Blessed Saviour, Who, with great sorrow of thy friends, wert taken down from the Cross, & laid in the Sepulcher, Bury with thee all my evil desires, that I may seem dead to those things which displease thee, and be wholly delighted in thee my Redeemer, and Be merciful to me.
O Glorious Lord, Who, after three dayes, having overcome and triumphed over Death and Satan, didst rise again out of the Grave, and visit thy Disci∣ples and Friends; Revive me from the death of sin, cause me to walk in newness of life, and to seek after Heavenly things, that when thou comest again, I may appear with thee in Glory, and Be merciful to me. O Merciful Saviour, Who, forty dayes after thy Resurrectiou, didst gloriously and triumphantly ascend in∣to Heaven, in the sight of thy Di∣sciples; Let it please thy goodness, to in∣fuse a longing desire and love of thee into my Soul, that it may be elevated in affection to thee, and seek those things which are above, and Be merciful to me. O Gracious Lord, Who (according to thy Promise before thy Ascension) didst send thy Spirit upon thy Disciples, and other thy Elect Servants;
Purifie (I beseech thee) my heart, that the same Spirit finding my Soul pure and clean, may make his abode in it, and adorn it with his manifold graces, and Be merciful to me. O Blessed Saviour, Who, when thou shalt at the last day come to judge the quick and dead, wilt render to every one according to his works, either reward, or punishment; Give me grace, so to pass this Earthly Pilgrimage, according to thy Holy Will, that at that Day I may be (through thy merits) thought wor∣thy to be received into thy Heavenly Mansion, there to praise and bless thee with the Holy Company of bles∣sed Saints and Angels for evermore, and Be merciful to me. Amen.
Prayers for several Persons. For a Married Man. O Gracious Father, Maker and Preserver of Heaven and Earth, who in the beginning didst institute Matrimony, foretelling the mystical union of the Church, with our Savi∣our Christ: Who also, in the time of his being upon Earth,John 2. did honour Marriage with his first Miracle: And hast appointed it also for a means whereby Mankind is propagated, for a remedy to avoid unlawful Lust,Gen. 2. and for the mutual Comfort and Consola∣tion of thy Children: I humbly in∣treat thee, to give me the assistance of thy Divine Grace, that I may live according to thy Commandements, with my Wife, whom thou hast given for my help and comfort, in this World. Mortifie in me all unclean, dishonest, and fleshly Lusts, let not the heat of unlawful Concupiscence take hold of me, but make me to be
fully pleased, and satisfied with her love, and to love her, as Christ loved his Church, to cherish and comfort her as mine own body, and to have as great a care of her health, as of mine own. Grant, that we may live in peace, without debate; in unity, without discord; like the members of one body, equally desirous to praise thy holy Name. And as thou hast (O Lord) bestowed many Children upon us, give us discreet hearts, and understanding minds, to bring them up in thy Faith and Fear, in a religi∣ous, honest, and civil manner. Give them obedient hearts to thee, and to thy Commandements, and to all that thou requirest of them, to be per∣formed in duty, towards us their Pa∣rents: Keep them from those which are ready to seduce them, and so lead them in thy Faith, Fear, and Know∣ledge, that they prove not a curse, but a blessing unto us; and thereby at∣tain to that blessing which thou hast promised to those which honour and obey their Parents. Grant likewise, O Lord, that I may guide and instruct the Family which is under me, in thy fear, and in honest and careful man∣ner
provide as well for their bodies, as their souls. And give them the like Grace. O Lord, to perform their duties, in fear and obedience, not as eye-servers,Eph. 6. 6. but in simplicity of heart, as in thy sight.Col. 3 21. And give us (O Lord) a competency of Estate, to maintain our Selves, Children, and Family, according to that Rank or Calling, wherein thou of thy good∣ness hast placed us, without excess, riot, or vain-glory; and in single∣ness and pureness of heart, with all humility, relying upon thy blessed will, who knowest better than we our selves what is needful for us. To thee be all Honour and Glory, now, and for ever. For a Married Woman. O Merciful and Loving Lord God, who in the beginning, for the propagation of Mankind, didst take Eve out of the side of Adam,Gen. 2.22. and gave her to him as an helper. I give
thee humble thanks, that thou hast vouchsafed to call me to the honoura∣ble estate of Matrimony. Give me grace, O Lord, that I may lead a life worthy thereof, that I may love my Husband: with a pure and chast love, acknowledge him for my Head, and truly reverence and obey him, in all good things; that thereby I may please him, and live quietly with him. Grant, that I be not carried away with the vain fashions of this World, but may put on such habits as shall be agreeable and suitable with the estate of my Husband, and may become a modest Woman to wear. Help me, O Lord, that I may, under him, pru∣dently, and discreetly guide, and go∣vern his Houshold and Family; and carefully look that nothing be either carelesly lost, or wickedly commit∣ted in my House. Fit me with those good Graces,Pro. 31. which the Wise Man described in a Good Woman;1 Pet. 3. and Saint Peter, in Holy and Sanctified Ma∣trons. Give me such care concerning the Education of my Children, as be∣longeth to my part, that I may live, to see them prosper in this life, and afterwards we may all be received to
thy Eternal Kingdom, through Iesus Christ, &c. For a Child. O Almighty Lord God, to whom the Obedience of Children to their Parents is most acceptable, and all Disobedience most displeasing; who hast promised a Blessing to the Duti∣ful,Exod. 20. and threatned a Curse to the Dis∣obedient Children. I beseech thee, to put away from me the detestable Sin of Disobedience, and Rebellion against my Parents; and give me grace to observe them with all kind of Du∣ty: to obey them in all their just Com∣mands: and to be ayding and helpful to them at all time of their need. Give me grace; to bear all their re∣proofs and errours patiently, and not to grieve them, by stubborn and evil courses. Let me not be so far depri∣ved of thy Grace, that I scoff or de∣ride them, though by age, or infirmi∣ty, they shall fail in their Iudgement
or Reason: but cause me to supply their wants, lest that I having plenty, and (they being in any need or di∣stress) I not supplying it, or not succouring them, their lives, to whom I owe mine, may be in danger to be shortned. Lord, forgive all the Of∣fences which I have heretofore com∣mitted against them. Increase the number of their dayes: keep them safe in body and mind: let them see their Childrens Children,Ps. 128.6. to their Comfort, and thy Glory. Let them govern us, and the rest of their Fami∣ly, with wholesome Discipline, and good Example: that at the last, they may, in their due time, depart this life in peace, and come to thy King∣dom unspotted, through Iesus Christ. For a Woman with Child. O Blessed Lord God, who, for the Offence of the first Woman,Gen. 3.10. didst denounce, and impose an inevi∣table Curse upon all her posterity;
namely, that they should conceive in sin, and be subject to many grievous pains, and should bring forth their Children with great danger. Asswage, I beseech thee, of thy goodness, the sharpness of that Decree, and preserve me, that I may overcome and escape this great danger, and be delivered of the fruit of my body, without peril of death; and that it may safely be brought to the Sacred Font of Baptism, and be regenerated and ingrafted into the mystical Body of Christ, and made partaker of his Death and Passion. And as thou hast of thy bounty given bodily life to it, and me: so grant us both life spiritual: and so sanctifie our Bodies and Souls here, that hereafter we may live among thy blessed Saints for ever, in the life to come. For a Young Man, or Maid. O Lord, forasmuch as I am (at these years) in the heat of the flesh, and in the most dangerous time
of my life, I beseech thee, take not thy Mercy and Fatherly Providence from me: but, by how much the greater danger of Tentations I am in, with so much the more care let thy Grace preserve me, lest happily I be∣come a Prey to mine Enemies,Ps. 124.6. who go about to load me with so many sins, that if they prevail, I shall never of my self get from under the burthen of them. But, O merciful Father, (di∣strusting in mine own strength) I be∣take my self wholly to thy protection; and desire thee, both now and ever, to keep me. Let me not get that ha∣bit of sinning in my younger years, that I be forced in my age (if I be not stifled before in my Offences) to be∣wail the sins of my youth, and to say with David, Remember not, O Lord, the sins of my youth:Psal. 25.6 But rather accu∣stome me, from this time forward, to all goodness, that I may daily more and more profit therein: And that (serving thee with a pure heart now) I may in mine age say with good King Ezechias,Esa. 38.3. O Lord, remember, I be∣seech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight. Most loving Father, who ta∣kest care of all men, I commend unto thee my Soul, as a Child, that can of himself do nothing: Defend me, I pray thee, from all mine Enemies spiritual and temporal; keep my Body and Soul pure, chast, and undefiled; that I offend not, either in obscene speech, impure thought, or unclean act. My Chastity is a more precious Iewel than I can keep, without thy help: I therefore beseech thee, (who hast pronounced a blessing to the pure heart) to keep my heart pure; be thou my guide and pre∣server, lest in the heat of Concupi∣scence, I forget thee. Give me grace, O Lord, to serve and obey my Pa∣rents, and those to whose Govern∣ment I am committed, and that, in all humility. And grant, that if thou shalt be pleased to call me to the ho∣nourable estate of Wedlock, I may be matched with one, with whom I may serve thee in peace and holiness all the dayes of my life, and at the last rest with thee in thy Heavenly Kingdom, through Iesus Christ our Lord.
For a Servant. BLessed Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, who when thou wert the Son of God, and Lord of all the World, didst take upon thee the form of a Ser∣vant,Philip. 7. that by thy obedience thou mightest work the salvation of all peo∣ple as well bond as free: I pray thee that, since thou hast been pleased to call me to the state of a Servant, thou wouldst give me an humble and obe∣dient heart, and make me contented with this condition of life, as alotted to me by thy providence. Grant, that I may with gentleness of spirit, and singleness of heart; and willingness of mind, serve those under whom I am placed: and that I may not either murmure against them, or envy those that are seated in a higher estate: that I may obey them, in all their honest commands, in all fear and true respect, not with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers,Col. 3.22. but with all my heart, and the rather, because thy commandement bindeth me so to doe. Grant, that serving them diligently, faithfully and careful∣ly,
I may avoid their displeasure, and obtain thy favour and blessing, and at the end of my dayes, come to that blessed place, where Thou, with the Father and blessed Spirit, dost raign world without end. Before a Iourney. Joh. 14.6.ALmighty and everlasting God who art the Way, the Life, and the Truth, behold, I beseech thee, to how many dangers of the World, Flesh, and Devil, I am subject, so that without thy aid, I cannot safely pass through this Vale of Misery. Lead, guide, and direct me therefore (O Lord) in the high and right way, whither I would go,Gen. 28. 20. that I turn nei∣ther to the right hand, or the left, nor become a Prey to mine Enemies. O Lord, thou hast a general care over thy Creatures, I therefore (in this my Iourney) commend unto thee my Soul and Body: Defend me from all perils, I beseech thee. O Lord,
which didst send thy Angel, as a Com∣panion, or Fellow-Traveller, with the Son of Tobias,Tob. 5. and didst preserve Abraham, and all other thy Ser∣vants, in their travels; vouchsafe thy blessed Angel, to guide, and con∣duct me. Be thou my comfort in the way, and a defence in all dangers. Prosper the business which I go about, and make this enterprise successful to me. And grant, that my affairs being dispatched, I may return home safe in body and mind. Pre∣serve (in my absence) my Family, and all I possess: that I being return∣ed in safety, and they securely pre∣served, we may altogether give thanks to thy glorious Name, through Iesus, &c. After a Iourney. I Give thee thanks, O gracious Lord, for thy great mercies to me all the dayes of my Life. Thou art he, which created me, and thou art
also he, that preservest that which thou hast created. How often, O Lord, hast thou turned thine eyes from my sins, and made as though thou didst not see them? How often (and that justly) mightest thou have with∣held thy hand of preservation from me? And yet thy patience hath been so great towards me, that thou hast suf∣fered no harm to befall me. And as I owe thee many thanks for thy former preservations, so now I am further ob∣liged to thee, in that thou hast at this time not only guided me to the place whither I intended to go, but hast al∣so brought me back in safety, and in my absence hast preserved all things un∣to me. Good Lord, give me grace, to be alwayes mindful of these, and all other thy benefits to me, and to be truly thankful to thee for them. And grant, that as by thy mercy I have well ended my affairs abroad, and am safely returned to this Temporal Habitation, so my Spirit (after this Pilgrimage) may return to thy Heavenly Mansion, and there abide with thee for ever: and that, even for the merits of our only Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, Amen.
Intercession. IN which we are to pray, For all Mankind, For the conver∣sion of Iews, to the Truth. For the conver∣sion of Turks, to the Truth. For the conver∣sion of Heathen, to the Truth. For all Christians. That they may be strengthned, that stand. That they may be converted, that are in errour. For the Churches throughout the World, that they may be united in Re∣ligion. For our Church, that whatsoever is amiss in it may be amended. For the Kings Majesty, and his pro∣sperity. For all Kingdoms Christian. For Ours, and each part of it, that it may flourish in peace. For the Clergy: That they may Teach well. That they may Live well.
For Wisdom, in the Council. Integrity, in the Iudges. Strength, in our Armies. Discretion, in the Magistrates. Obedience, in the People. For the prosperity, and good success, Of Merchants. Husbandmen. Artificers. Trades-men And that they may live carefully and honestly in their vocations. For the prosperous Education of Youth, either in Universities, Schools, or Other parts of the Kingdom. For our Parents, Kindred, Friends, Neighbours, and Benefactors. For those of whom we have the charge committed to us, either in Church, Common-Wealth, or Families. For our Enemies, especially those that hate us without cause, that God would convert them. For those that commend themselves to our prayers: and those whose af∣fairs and troubles will not suffer them to pray as they ought.
For those who are in affliction of body or mind. Who are in danger, or want; in Prison, or condemned to Death. For those that Excell In qualities of the mind, Strength of body, Abundance of wealth, That they exalt not themselves above their brethren. For those who undertake any nota∣ble Action, which may redound To the Glory of God. The Peace of the Church. The Honour of the Kingdom. Deprecation. O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath.Psal. 38. . Cast me not off for ever.44. 23. Cast me not away from thy presence.51 11. Hide not thy face from me.69. 18. With-hold not thy mercy from me.40. 14. Forsake me not, O Lord.38. 21. Put me not to shame.119. 31.
Psal. 39.Turn away reproach from me. 25. 2.Let not mine Enemies triumph over me. 27. 12.Deliver me not over to their will. 64. 1.Preserve my life from them. Deliver me, O Lord, Eph. 4.19.From hardness of heart, to impenitence. Act. 28.27Grossness of heart. Pro. 7.13.Impudence of countenance, Esa. 48.4.Hardness of countenance, Tit. 1.16.From a seared conscience. 1 Joh. 5.16A reprobate mind. Sin unto death, Mat. 12. 32.Viz. Against the Holy Ghost. From all superfluity of naughtiness. J. 1. 21.The weight of sin. Heb. 12 1.The lusts of the flesh, and eyes, and pride of life.1 Joh. 2.16 All wicked and vain desires. Hurtful and unclean thoughts. Mat. 6.2.Desire of vain-glory. Ecclus. 51From a deceitful tongue. 5.Unpure lips. Hands stretched out to covetousness. Feet swift to evil.
Eyes open to Toyes. Ears open to Vanity. From blindness of heart. Inconstancy of mind. Scurrility of speech. Intemperance of the belly. From desire of riches. Reproach of my neighbours. Contempt of the poor. Oppression of the weak. Rancor of mind. Root out of me, O Lord. Prophaneness and Superstition. Pride and Undecency. Anger and Contention. Swearing and Cursing. Passion and Corruption. Fraud and Rapine. Lying and Slander. Envy and Malice. Take from me the Sin of Gluttony, Give to me the Vertue of Abstinence. Take from me the Spirit of Unclean∣ness, Give to me the Love of Chistity.
Take from me the Desire of the World, Give to me Content of Mind. Take from me the Heat of Anger, Give to me the Spirit of Meekness. Take from me the Care of this Life, Give to me thy SPIRITUAL Ioy. Take from me Haughtiness of Mind, Give to me Compunction of Heart. Deliver me, O Lord, From all evil and mischief. All noysome Diseases. All things hurtful to My Soul. My Health. My Estate. My Quiet. From all Scandal. From all Grief. From all Infamy. From all Enemies, Secret, From all Enemies, Open, From all Enemies, Crafty, From all Enemies, Potent.
From Sudden Death. From Violent Death. In all my Prayers, and Petitions. Distresses, and Dangers. Infirmities, and Need. Tentations, and Tribulations. Good Lord, deliver me, and help me. From the Terrors of Hell. Eternal Damnation. The angry Countenance of the Iudge.Apo. 6.6. The fearful Sentence.Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me into Utter Dark∣ness.8. 12. The Chains of Everlasting Dark∣ness.Jude 6. The Lake of Fire and Brimstone.Apo. 20. 10. The Smoke of the Torment which as∣cends for ever.14. 11. Good Lord, of thy great mercy, deliver me.
In Affliction. MOst merciful Redeemer; always loving to us, whether thou sendest us heaviness, or joy, for thy mercy is great, whilst by outward affli∣ctions (as by bitter pills) thou curest the inward diseased man, and by tem∣porary troubles, thou preparest us, and makest us fit for joyes eternal. Grant, O sweet Saviour, that I may drink of this Cup of adversity, and all others, as reached to me by thy hand. Thou knowest, O Lord, that they are bitter to flesh and blood; yet withall I know, that thou didst endure far great∣er things for me, and that I have de∣served to suffer much more, than thou hast laid upon me. O Lord, thou knowest also the weakness and frailty of mans nature, and therefore I do assuredly believe, that thou (the good Samaritan) wilt not only cleanse the wounds of my sins,Luc. 10.33 with the sharp wine of thy justice, but wilt also add the oyl of thy mercy, and comfort, whereby I may be strengthned again. If thou thinkest not yet sufficient, or that
enough, which thou hast laid upon me, yet add patience, I beseech thee, to my further grief: and grant, that that these thy punishments may pro∣voke me to true repentance, whereby I may (by thy merits) obtain remis∣sion of my sins. But (if thy Fatherly Clemency shall be contented with this gentle and mild chastisement) take off thy corrections, and heavy hand from me: that so I may for both thy mercies to me, praise thy holy Name: as well, that thou hast so gently dealt with me, in amending me so unprofi∣table a Servant, as, that thou hast in time taken off the bitterness of afflicti∣on, and not utterly confounded me: in the first, of thy works of mercy, re∣specting my necessity; and in the last, not forgetting my infirmity, To thee, O Saviour, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all Praise, Laud, and Glory, now, and evermore; Amen.
In time of Pestilence. O Lord God, who rejectest none, that, trusting in thy goodness, and believing in thy promises, come to thee for succour and help. Behold, we beseech thee, with the eyes of compassion and mercy, thy poor, sin∣ful, and miserable people; who now are much afflicted and visited with the Plague of Pestilence, with the scourge of thine angry hand. Our streets are full of grief, and our houses are filled with heaviness, and all our joy is turn∣ed into mourning, by reason of thy heavy wrath, and hot displeasure, which now is gone out, to destroy and consume us from the face of the Earth. We confess, O Lord, it is but just, that all thy Creatures should rebell against Man, and oppose themselves against him, who hath so desperately rebelled against thee, his Creator: For they are all obedient to thee, only Man, sinful and wretched Man, is continually stubborn and rebellious, daily abusing thy Blessings, and hourly transgressing thy Commandments, got
leaving his evil wayes for fear of thy threats, nor being allured to goodness with the hope of thy promises. We daily hear by thy Messengers, and read in thy Sacred Word, what thou hast threatned of old to thy rebellious peo∣ple, and in them, to us: How, that if they kept not thy Commandements,Levit. 26. 25. Thou wouldst send upon them the Sword, to avenge the quarrel of thy Covenant, and when they should be gathered in their Cities, thou wouldst send the Pestilence among them,Jer. 4.112. and they should be deli∣vered into the hands of the Enemy: And yet they have hitherto been so senseless thereof, that we fear not to add sin to sin, and to multiply iniquity upon iniquity. And now, O Lord, we reap the just reward of our impi∣ety, and feel (too soon) that we are justly plagued for our disobedience. O Lord, we confess,Ps. 19.9. that thy Iudge∣ments are just, and withall humbly ac∣knowledge our misdeeds, and heartily repent us of them, and earnestly beg and crave, that thou wouldest in mer∣cy pardon them, and remit the punish∣ment, which in Iustice is due unto us for them. O Lord, In thy just anger remember mercy; encline thine ear,
and hear, open thine eyes, and behold our desolations; and upon our repen∣tance and humiliation, remove this thy punishment: which in thy displea∣sure, thou hast begun to inflict upon us.1 Chr. 21. 15. Command thy destroying Angel to spare us, and not to strike us to utter desolation.Ezech. 9. Be merciful unto us, who are every hour in danger of thy Iudgements, Take away the unwhile∣someness of the air, and purifie our dwellings unto health and safety. Keep those that are well, & release those up∣on whom thou hast laid the rod of thy afflictions.2 Chro. 7. 13, 14. Thou hast promised, O Lord,1 Kings 8. That, if at any time thou send∣est the Pestilence among the People, if that people do humble themselves, and pray, and seek thy presence, and turn from their wicked wayes; thou wilt hear in Heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and heal their Land. We hum∣bly pray thee, O Lord, to make good thy promise, and ease us of our afflicti∣ons. For behold, O Lord, we hum∣ble our selves under thy mighty hand; we bewail, and lament our sinful lives past; and humbly beseech thee, to give us thy assisting grace, that we may henceforth order our wayes to
please thee, Then shall no Contagion hurt us,Dan. 19 8. but we shall live to praise thy Name; and all the World shall know, that thou art our God, and that thy Name is called upon by us. Hear us, O Lord, and be merciful un∣to us, even for Iesus Christs sake the Righteous: To whom, with thee, and the Blessed Spirit, be ascribed all honour and praise, now, and for ever, Amen. Confession of Faith. FAith in general, is a full assent to all things written in the Holy Scriptures, concerning God, his Will, and Works: not for the evidence of them, but even for Gods assertion only. Est sperantium substantia, cognitio corum quae non videntur; & tunc est fi∣des, quando expectatur in spe, quod in re nondum videtur, S. August. Faith is the substance of things ho∣ped for, and the evidence of things
not seen.Heb. 11.1. And this is Faith indeed, when a man expects that in hope, which in reality is not seen. Si vides non est fides. Faith in special, is a firm assent to the Gospel; the sum whereof is con∣tained in these three Propositions. Joh. 3.161. That Salvation is to be had by Iesus Christ. Acts 4.12.2. That there is no other way of Salvation, but by the Name of Iesus Christ. 3. That there is no Salvation to be had by Iesus Christ, but upon those terms and conditions which are revealed in the Gospel.Heb. 5.9. Mar. 1.15.He is the Author of Salvation to those that obey him. Rp. Latim, Ser. 4 & 7 coram RegeThis Faith therefore must be ushered by Repentance, and attended by good works. Jam. 2.26.Faith without works is dead, 1 Cor. 13.It must not be abstracted, but con∣crete with Hope and Charity. S. Aug.Sine Charitate fides potest esse, sed non & prodesse; Faith may be without Love, but not to do any good. We may well have Faith in us, it is true, but little good it will do us, except we have Charity also.
For Saint Paul (saying, that a man is justified by Faith without Works) is not to be understood, that though he live ill, we should call him just, though he have received the Faith.S. Aug. Quomodo ergo justificabitur homo per fidem fine operibus, respon∣deret tibi Apostolus. Propterea hoc ti∣bi dixi ô homo, ne quasi de operibus tu∣is praesumere videaris, & merito ope∣rum tuorum accepisse fidei gratiam. Si fidem quis dicat se habere, opera tamen non habeat, numquid poterit fides sal∣vare eum? The Apostle will answer you, how a man may be justified by Faith without Works. And there∣fore, O Man, whatsoever I have said, it hath been, lest thou shouldst seem to presume upon thy Works, and by the merit of them, think thou hast re∣ceived the grace of Faith. But how can that mans Faith save him, which professeth that he hath Faith, and yet hath no Works? If I had Faith to remove Moun∣tains, and have no Love, I am no∣thing.1 Cor. 13. 2. 1. This Faith is the Foundation of Gods Worship. No worshipping of God, till we are perswaded that there is one to worship.
Heb. 11.6.He that cometh to God, must believe that he is. 2. It is the first Duty that God re∣quireth of us. 1 Joh. 3 33This is his Commandement, that we should believe. Act. 16.31Believe, and thou shalt be saved, was the first Rule that Saint Paul gave the Keeper of the Prison, upon his Conversion. The people demanding of our Savi∣our,Joh. 6.29. What they should do to work the works of God? were answered with, That ye believe: as being the princi∣pal or first Degree to Salvation. S. Greg.Non virtutibus venitur ad fidem, sed per fidem pertingitur ad virtutes. We attain not to Faith by Vertue, but Vertue by Faith. The Particulars of this Faith are contained in the Apostles Creed, so called, because, 1, It containeth the sum of the Apostles Doctrine, which the Catecu∣meni were to hold and profess. 2. Or because the Apostles deliver∣ed it to their Disciples. S. Aug. Ser. 181. de tempore.Symbolum fidei nostrae tali ratione in∣stitutum majores nostri dixerunt. Tra∣dunt enim, &c. Ne localitur ab in∣vicem
discedentes, diversum vel disso∣num praedicarent i is qui ad fidem Chri∣sti invitabantur: Omnes igitur in unune positi & Spiritu Sancto repleti, breve suae praedication is judicium conferendo in unum, quod sentiebat unusquisque, computabat, at{que} hacita credentibus dandam esse regulam instituerunt. Our fore-Fathers tell us, that the Creed was made and composed by the Apostles at a meeting, before they were to be dispersed. And that, lest when they were separated, they might preach divers and several Doctrines of Faith to those whom they sought to win to the Faith of Christ. And therefore, being all assembled toge∣ther, and filled with the Holy Ghost, they made a short and summary Col∣lection of what they thought fit to preach, and appointed the same to be delivered to Believers, as a Rule and Foundation of their Faith. Symbolum breve est verbis, sed mag∣num est Sacramentis. And though it be short in words, yet is it great in Sacraments. It is to be daily repeated and pro∣fessed. 1. Because it is a mark whereby
Christians are distinguished from In∣fidels. 2. It putteth us in mind of our dai∣ly tryal, whether we continue in the Faith or not, 3. It incites us to pray, that we continue and increase in it. 4. It puts us in mind of our vow in Baptism, to believe in the Trinity. Lord, I believe. Help thou my unbelief. In God the Father. Wherein I consider, First, His personal Relation to his natural Son,Heb. 1. 5. and gracious affection to us in him. That in Christ we are all his Sons by grace and adoption. Joh. 1.12.As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God. Rom. 1.16.The Spirit beareth witness with out spirit, that we are the Sons of God. Gal. 4. 6.No more a Servant, but a Son, Ephe. 1.5.Having predestinated us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ. Almighty. Secondly, His Saving Power. That as he is a Father, willing to
do us good, so he is Omnipatent, and able to do us good. Even to your old age I am he,Esa. 46.4. &c. I will bear, I will carry, and deliver you. I am the Lord, and none else.45.6. He is Lord over all.Ro. 10.12. Upholding all things.Heb. 1. 3. Almighty.Gen. 17.1. 43. 34. Able to subdue all things unto him∣self.2 Cor. 6. 18. Maker of Heaven and Earth.Phil. 3.21. Thirdly, His Providence in dis∣posing, preserving, and governing all things. 1. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made.Gen. 1.2. He laid the Foundations of the Earth.Psal. 33.6. 104. 5. Thou Lord, which hast made Hea∣ven, and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is.Act. 4. 24. I form the Light, and create the Darkness.Esa. 45.7. He layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters.Ps. 104.3. The Spirit of the Lord hath made me,Job 33. 4. and the breath of the Almighty hath gi∣ven me life.
Job. 38. 41.2. He provideth for the Raven his food, &c. Psal. 36.7.Thou Lord shalt save both Man and Beast. Psal. 8.They shall be satisfied with the plen∣teousness, &c. Mar. 10. 39.Over Sparrows. He careth for us. 1 Pet. 5 7. Act. 17.28.In him we live, move, and have our being. 3. He ordereth the world according to equity.Sap. 9. 3. Psal. 67.4.He judgeth the folk righteously, and governeth the Nations upon the earth. Sap. 4.Thy providence, O Father, govern∣eth all things. 81.He ordereth all things sweetly. In Jesus. A Saviour. He shall save his people from their sins.Mat. 1.21. Heb. 7. 25. Joh. 3.18.He that beleeveth not in him is con∣demned. Act. 4.12.Neither is there Salvation in any o∣ther. Act. 5.19.By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
Christ. Annointed. With the Oyl of gladness above his fellows.Psal. 45.8. Heb. 1. 9. The Lord hath annointed me.Esa. 61.1. His onely Son. Of God the Father. The only begotten of the Father.Joh. 1.14 His only begotten Son.Heb. 1. 2 Our Lord.Joh. 3.16. In right of 1 Creation. 2 Redemption. 1. By whom he made the World.Heb. 1. 2. By him were all things created.Col. 1. 17. 2. In whom we have redemption,Eph. 1: 7. Redeemed with his precious Blood.Col. 1.14. Bought with a price.1 Pet. 1. 19. Conceived by the Holy Ghost.1 Co: 6. 20. Without the help of Man,7.23. to help the uncleanness of our conception. She was found with Child of the Ho∣ly Ghost.Mat. 1.18. 20. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,Luc. 1.35. and the power of the most High shall o∣vershadow thee. Angelo nunciante, & Spiritu adve∣niente,S. Greg. mox verbum in utero, mox in∣traverbum Caro.
Upon the Annuntiation or message of an Angel, and the Overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, the word pre∣sently entred into the VVomb, and with the word the flesh. Born of the Virgin Mary. Made the Sonne of Man, that we might be the Sonnes of God. To purge the uncleanness of our birth. Esa. 7.14.He did not abhor the Virgins womb. Mat. 1.21.A Virgin shall conceive. Luc. 1.30.She shall bring forth a Son. Luc. 2. 7.And she brought forth her first born Son, &c. Joh. 1.14.The word was made flesh. Gal. 4. 4.And when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, &c. S. Bern.S. Bernard saith, That God in the assumption of our nature, made three mixtures, so wonderfull without com∣parison, that never the like were, or should be to the end of the world. God and Man; a Mother and a Vir∣gin; Faith and Mans heart. Suffered under Pontius Pilate. Those things which we should have suffered.
That we might not suffer them. He powred out his soul unto death, &c.Esa. 53. 12 He bare our sins in his own body on the tree.1 Pet. 2. 24. He once suffered for sins.3. 18. Was Crucified. To take away the Curse of the Law. Christ hath redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,Gal. 3. 13 being made a Curse for us, as it is written. Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.Deut. 21. 23. He humbled himself,Phil. 28. and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross. Dead. To take away the sharpness and bondage of death. To satisfie Gods justice for us. The wages of sin is death.Rom. 6.23 That he by the grace of God should taste death for every one.Heb. 2. 9. That through death he might destroy him that had the power of death,14. that is, the Devil. And deliver them, who through the fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.
1 Cor. 15. 55.O Death, where is thy sting? Buried. To take away the corruption of the grave, that we might be assured of his death. Mat. 27. 60.All agree that he was buried in a Se∣pulcher. Mar. 15. 46.They took him from a Tree, and laid him in a Sepulcher.Lu. 23.53. Joh. 19.40.Descended into Hell. Act. 13.29.Whither we ought to have gone, that we might not go thither at all. Ps. 16.11.Thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell. S. August.Non immerito creditur; It is not without cause,Ep. 99. that we believe, saith Saint Augustine, upon this Article. And Christ, according to his Soul, was in Hell; the Scripture is plain for it, being foretold by the Prophet David, and evidently expounded by the Apostles Application of (that Text)Ps. 16.11. Thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell.Acts 2.34. And he concludeth perempto∣rily with this Question, Quis ergo ni∣si infidelis negaverit fuisse apud inferos Christum? Who therefore but an Infidel will deny that Christ was in Hell?
The third day he rose again from the dead.1 Cor. 15. 20. That he might raise with him our nature,Mar. 28.6. Mar. 16.6. being the first fruits of them which sleep.Luc. 24.4. He is risen, He is not here.Joh. 20. Christ being raised from the dead, &c.Rom. 6. 3. And was raised again for our justifi∣cation.4. 25. By the Trinity. 1. By the Father, Acts 2. 24. 3. 15. 4. 10. 5. 30. 10. 40. Ephes. . 20. 1 Pet. 1. 21. 2. By the Son, Joh. 10. 17, 18. Rom. 14. 3. By the Spirit, Rom. 8. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 18. He ascended into Heaven. To prepare us a place, whereto we had no right. To assure us, that our flesh is gone before. To send us the Holy Spirit. He was received up into Heaven.Ma. 16. 19. He was parted from them, and carri∣ed up to Heaven.Lu. 24.51. We have a High Priest,Heb. 4.1 that is Pas∣sed into the Heavens.
Eph. 4 10.He that descended is the same which ascended, far above all Heavens. Joh. 14.2.I go to prepare a place for you. Heb. 10. 19.Having boldness to enter into the Ho∣liest by the blood of Iesus. Eph. 2. 6.And hath raised us up together, and made us sit in Heavenly places toge∣ther. Joh. 14.16I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter. 16. 7.If I go not away, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I depart, I will send him to you. He sitteth at the right hand of the Father. Instantly to intercede for us, to shew himself head of the Church. Mar. 16.9.And sate at the right hand of the Fa∣ther. Col. 3.1.Seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of the Father. Ro. 8.24.Who is at the right hand of God. Heb. 7.25. 9.24.He ever liveth to make intercession for them, to appear in the presence of God for us. Joh. 14.3.Where I am, there you may be also. Eph. 5 23.CHRIST is Head of the Church.
He set him at his own right hand,Eph. 1.20 far above all principalities and powers. He shall come to judge both the quick and dead. To receive us with power & glory,Mat. 24. 30. even to the consummation of all things. I will come near to you in judgement.Mal. 3. 5. Behold the Lord cometh, &c.Jude 14. The Father hath committed all judge∣ment to the Son.Joh. 5.23. Ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power,Mat. 26. 64. and coming in the clouds of Heaven. He hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained.Act. 17.31. The dead shall arise first, &c.1 Thes. 4. 16, 17. In the Holy Ghost. I consider An hypostatical power sanctifying from above,Lu. 12.12. quickning to immortali∣ty,Joh. 14.26 16. 13 working powerfully, and invisi∣bly in us.1 Cor. 6. 11. By the illumination of knowledge.Esa. 11.2. Infusion of grace.1 Joh. 2.27 Regenerating us.Joh. 3. 5. 16. 8. Reprehending things evil in us.1 Joh. 2.27 Teaching us the truth, Joh. 14. 26.Joh. 16.13. 1 Cor. 2. 13.
Gen. 20.6With-holding us from doing evil. Rom. 8. 26Encouraging us to do good, striving for our good. Joh. 14. 16Comforting us in our necessities. Acts 9. 31.Adopting us. Rom. 8. 15 26Helping our infirmities. 2 Cor. 1.22Sealing to us our inheritance. Eph. 1.13, 14.Assuring us our inheritance. The Holy Catholique Church. Which is the mystical Body of the Head Christ Iesus, composed of all people of the World, which are cal∣led by the Spirit, to the belief of Di∣vine Truth, and Holiness of Conver∣sation. Holy. By imitation of Christs Righteous∣ness. Sanctification of the Holy Ghost. Of all these Members of his Body there is a reciprocal participation to the Joh. 14.23 6. 55, 56.Communion of Saints. 1 Joh. 1. 3. 7.In the union of the Church with Christ. Ep. 4. 4. 12.In the participation of his benefits.
Forgiveness of sins.Rom. 8 For the present.1 Cor. 1 30. To the hope of The Resurrection of the Body.Job. 19 25 To be united with the Soul.Joh. 5.28 6. 40. And Life Everlasting. hereafter.Lu 20.16. And that after this life there shall be a life wherein the Church shall be glori∣fied, and God by the members thereof praised for ever.Joh. 16 22 17. 3. Apo. 21. 4. Of which I believe my self to be one. Lord, I be∣lieve. Help the defects of my Faith. 1. That I may love thee as a Fa∣ther. Reverence thee as Almighty. Commend my self to thee, as to a Faithful Creator. 2. That I may be mindful to give thanks to Thy only Son. As to the Purger of our Nature, in his Conception and Birth. As to our Deliverer, In his Passion, Cross, and Death. As to the Triumpher over Hell.
In his Descension. Over Death, In his Resurrection. As to our Fore-rnner, In his Ascension. As to our Advocate, In his Session. As to the Establisher of our Faith, In his Second Coming. That he may be fashioned in me. That I may be made conformable to him, In Works. To his Conception, In Faith. To his Nativity, In Humility. That for his Passions, 1. I may sympathize with him, as with one that suffered for me, and be ready to suffer of him, and for him, when it shall be his good pleasure. 2. I may have an Antipathy with Sin, as being the cause of his Suffer∣ings, and be Revenged of Sin in my self. Crucifie Sin in my self. Morsifie Sin in my self. Bury Sin in my self.
3. I may conform my self, 1. To his Descension into Hell. By often descending thither in me∣ditation. 2. To his Resurrection. By rising to newness of life. 3. To his Ascension. By savouring and seeking those things which are above, and nearer to my Salvation. 4. To his Iudgement. By judging my self, lest I be con∣demned with the world. That when I am cold in Prayer, and want any Spiritual Grace or Comfort, I may remember thy Session, and In∣tercession. And when I am fervent in any evil Affection or Concupiscence, I may not forget thy fearful and terri∣ble Iudgement-Seat, and the sound of the last Trump. That for thy only Son Christs sake, I may also receive thy Uiction,1 Th. 5. 19 even thy Saving Grace,Eph. 4 30 the unspeakable Gift of the Holy Ghost,Act. 7. 51. and never extinguish, grieve, resist, or re∣proach it.Mat. 32.5. That so I may be called into thy  Catholick Church, where I may be
partaker of the Persons, Actions, Prayers; and Examples of Saints. To the assured belief of Remission of Sins. To the hope of Resurrection, and Translation to Life Everlasting. Luc. 17.6.Lord increase my Faith, as a grain of mustard-seed.Mat. 17. 20. Not Dead, Temporary, or Hypo∣critical. 1 Tim. 1. 5But pure and unfeigned, most holy, lively,Eph. 3. 11. and working by charity.Jam. 2.26. Confession of Faith. O Almighty, and Eternal Lord God, I poor, unworthy, and wretched sinner, am bold to renew that Covenant of Faith, which in my Baptism, I made unto thee. I believe and confess, that all those things which thy most beloved Son Christ Iesus did, suffered, and taught, while he was conversant in the Flesh, here upon the Earth, are most true, and cer∣tain. I profess that I believe all the
Articles of the Apostles Creed, and the Holy Gospel of our Lord and Savi∣our Iesus Christ, which is preached through all the World. To this Faith I bind my self, and purpose (Gods grace assisting me) never to depart from it; and acknowledge, that without believing thus, I cannot be saved. I am heartily glad, O Heaven∣ly Father) even in my Soul, and give thee all possible thanks, that into this Faith I was baptized: and doe most humbly pray thee, O Lord, that this Faith may not fail me, during this life, nor at the hour of death. And if I shall at any time hereafter, ei∣ther by the temptation of the Devil, imperfection of my senses, pain of any disease, weakness, or any other means speak any thing, in any other manner, than shall be agreeable to this Faith, I renounce all such words, as none of mine; and desire thee, O Lord, to forgive them; and pray all those which shall hear them, (if any such shall be) to account them as none of mine. This I protest, thy Grace aid∣ing me. To thee be all honour and praise, from this time forth, forever∣more, Amen.
Confession of Gods Glory and Praise. FOR his Great and wonderfull works.Gen. 1. Ecclus 43Of Creation. Psal. 145.Preservation. Rom. 1.20Governance. Joh. 17. 5.For his Goodness, Gen. 14.18 21. 33.The excellency of his Glory. Luc. 1.37.His Highness. Gen. 18.4.His Eternity, Jer. 23.24.His Omnipotence. Psal. 13 9.His Omnipresence. Joh. 21.17His Omniscience.2 Ki. 8.29. Ro. 11.33.The height of his Wisdom. Ps. 117.2.His Truth. Mat. 24. 35.His Exquisite Iustice. Ps. 111.3.His Great Mercy. 119. 156.His Plentifull Mercy. 130. 4.His Wonderfull Mercy. 17. 7.His Everlasting. Mercy. 13. 6.For his Promise of the Seed. Gen. 3. 15For Performance of that Promise. For sending his only Sonne out of his bosome, to work the great work of our Redemption. Eus. a. 7.In being born, in pure and humble man∣ner.
In being conversant on earth, in pain∣full manner. In suffering Death,Matthew Mark Luke John. in grievous man∣ner. For all that he did or suffered For us on Earth. For all his comfortable Parables of mercy. Of the Two Debtors.Mat. 18. 23. Of the Publican and Pharisee.Lu. 18 10 Of the lost Sheep.Luc. 15.4. 8. Of the lost Groat. Of the Prodigal Son.Lu. 15.21. Of those that were called at the ele∣venth hour.Mat. 20 9. For his comfortable sayings of Mer∣cy. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn it.Joh. 3.17. I came not to judge the World, but to save it.12. 47. The Son of Man came not to destroy mens lives, but to save them.Luc. 9. 36. I am not sent to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.Luc. 5. 32. Mat. 9.13 18. 11. The Son of Man came to save, and seek that which was lost.Luc. 19.10 Come unto me all ye that labour, &c.Mat. 11.8. Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out.Joh. 6.37.
Lu. 23. 74Father, forgive them, &c. Luc. 43.This day shalt thou be with me in Pa∣radise. For his Examples of Mercy. Mat. 15. 28.The Woman of Canaan. Joh. 4.The Woman of Samaria. Luc. 8.48.The Woman with the Bloody Issue. Joh. 8 11.The Woman taken in Adultery. Luc. 7 48. 19. 5.Mary Magdalen. 23. 43.Zacheus. 21. 62.The Thief. Acts 9.Peter. Heb. 12 3.Paul. Luc. 4 29.Sinners contradicting him. Joh. 8.19.That would have destroyed him. 10. 31.That stoned him. Mat. 27. 39.That reviled and blasphemed him. Lu. 23 34.That crucified him. Act. 2.23. 3. 15. 19.This man receiveth Sinners. Luc. 15 2.For the Holy Spirit. In the Old Testament. Gen. 1. 21.By moving on the waters. By sending it into living creatures. By inspiring it into man. By descending on the Prophets.
In the New Testament visibly. In the shape of a Dove at Christs Bap∣tisme.Mat. 3.16. By the gift of Christ to the Apostles.Joh. 20 22 In the shape of fiery tongues to them.Acts 2. 3. Invisibly. In the Virgins Conception of Christ.Luc. 1. 15. Upon the Congregation in prayer.Act. 4.31. Cornelius, and others.Act. 10 44 19. 6. The twelve Disciples at Ephesus.Joh. 14.26 16. 14. For his care over us.Lu. 12.12. For the illumination of our understand∣ing.1 Joh. 1.27 In our justification.1 Cor. 6.11 Our Regeneration.Joh. 3 5. Governing our actions.Gil. 5.22. Comforting us in Tentations.Ps. 43.10. Strengthning us in Tentations.Acts 2. 4.Rom. 8. 14 Bearing witness with us,Joh. 14. 16 20. and as∣suring us, that we are Gods Children.Ephes. 3. 13, 14. Rom. 5.5. 8. 26 Reproving us in evil actions.Acts. 9.31 Assisting us in good works.Rom. 8.1. Joh. 16.8. Putting good things into our remem∣brance.Rom. 8.26 Joh. 11.26 Interceding for us with groans unut∣terable.Rom. 6.10
Motives to Repentance. S. August,NE erubescat poenitentiam agere, qui non erubuit poenitenda committere, BLush not thou to repent, that wert not ashamed to commit things worthy to be repented of. For as much as it is beyond the compass, and out of the power of natu∣ral man not to sin at all, but that we adde dayly sin to sin, as a Fountain cast∣ing up her waters;Ps. 69 27. Jer. 6. 7. and that it hath pleased God (of his mercy to man∣kind) to promise forgiveness to those that shall truly and faithfully repent them of the same. Therefore the duty of Repentance (of all other parts of Devotion) is most necessary for us, seeing that by it God in Christ Iesus is reconciled to us. His anger toward us is appeased. We are restored to his favour.
Certainly it is a blessed act to con∣fess our own wretchedness, for who∣soever humbleth himself, and peni∣tently bewaileth his sins, shall be heard by God, and by him be delivered from the punishment due for them. A contrite heart suffereth no repulse.Origen. Repentance is a bewailing for sinsS. Greg. already committed, and avoiding for the future the sins for which we grieve: for he that mourns for his sins, and leaves them not, incurrs the greater punish∣ment. It consisteth not in the often repetition and confession of them,S. August. without forsaking them; for that is but a simple professi∣on of them, not a repenting for them. But this is true Repentance, when those things seem grievous and bitter to our souls, which in the act were sweet and delightfull: and when that ill which was formerly pleasing to us, causeth a hearty and unfeigned grief in us, and provoketh us to look more carefully to our wayes for the fu∣ture. Vera peccati confessio est sine inter∣missione temporis peonitere.S. Hilary. Peccati ve∣rò poenitentia est, ab eo quod poeniten∣dum intellexeris distitisse.
It is a true confession of sin, when we repent without intermission. But that is a true repentance of sin, when we forsake that, which we conceive we had cause to repent for. And again, Nultus id quod confes∣sus est, deinceps debet admittere, quia confessio peccati, est professio desinendi. No man ought to commit again the same sin of which he confessed, be∣cause there is no true confession of sin, without a profession to leave the same. And this is the fruit of Repentance (as St. Iohn the Baptist calleth it) to lament for sins past, and utterly forsake them for the time to come. Therefore saith one well, Agere poe∣nitentiam nihil aliud est, quàm profite∣ri & affirmare se non ulter us peccatu∣rum. To repent truly, is nothing elle, but to profess and promise, never to offend again. Seeing then what Repentance is, let us take a view how necessary it is, and for what respects. 1. In regard of Gods hate to sin, and of that God whom we offend, who being infinite, requireth infinite satis∣faction.
2. In regard of our Selves:Tertul. Homi∣nos sumus ad poenitentiam nati: We are Men, and subject to fall, and therefore (upon the matter) we are born to repent us of our sins, that we may prevent Gods Iudgements in this world, (of all which hath formerly been treated) to escape his Iudge∣ment in the world to come, Eternal Death. For as Men we shall dye, and as Christians we shall give an account. To say somewhat of this Death, for by it we shall pass to the other, except Repentance, and Gods mercies prevent it. 1. Death is Certain, it will come. 2. It is Universal or General, none shall escape it. 3. It is Terrible, especially to the wicked. 1. It is appointed for all men to dye. S. Hierome calleth it, Irrecusabi∣lis mort is necessitas. The necessity of dying is not to be avoyded. S. August. saith, That all things in this life are uncertain, but death; and Natus es? certum est quia morie∣ris.
Art thou born? as certain it is thou shalt die. Anaxag.It was the saying of the Heathen Philosopher, Sciebam me genuisse mor∣talem, I knew I had begotten no o∣ther than a mortal man, hearing of his Sons death. This point, and the certainty of it; is easily proved by experience of Former ages, Our own time. The longest liver, Methusalah, died;Ge. 49 29 The Patriarchs, Prophets, &c. died,Jud. 2.10. and were gathered to their Fa∣thers.Ezr. 3.16. Where are the Princes of the Heathen become, &c. They are vanquished, and gone down to the grave. 2. And as it is certain, so it is uni∣versal. Job 30.23It is the house appointed for all the living. Ps. 89.47.What man is he that liveth and shall not see death. Eccles. 2. 16.As well the Wise man as the Fool. Ecclus. 40 11.All things that are of the Earth shall turn to Earth again. Gen. 3. 19Thou art dust (saith God to Adam, and in him to all Mankind) and to dust shalt return.
It is the Ordinance of the Lord over all flesh.Ecclus. 41. 3. But though it be certain in it self, yet in respect of the time and manner, it is uncertain. For which cause our Saviour gave his Disciples counsel to be prepared for it. Watch, for ye know not the day nor hour.Mat. 24. 13. Be prepared,Lu. 12.40. for the Son of Man will come at an hour when ye think not, like a thief in the night. The time of our departure is uncer∣tain, whether it shall happen in our infancy, child-hood, youth, or age. All men live not while they are old, all men dye not while they are young. And many times Death cometh un∣expectedly, suddenly, in our greatest security. Dies aderit cum vives manè, vesperi autem non vives. There will come a day, when thou shalt be alive in the morning, and dead before night. God hath hid from us the certainty of our end, lest we should promise to our selves any thing for the future.
And as the time, so the manner is uncertain. Some dye in their beds, Others perish by fire, sword, wa∣ter, &c. We have but one way to enter into this world, divers to depart from it. 3. In it self it is also terrible. Aristotle. Cicero.Omnium terribilium, terribilissimum Mors. Of all terrible things, Death is most dreadful. Mar. 14. 34.Our Saviour Christ began to be hea∣vy, &c. But to mankind in divers respects it is terrible. All occasioned by the Devils ma∣lice. Either he bringeth the parties dying, 1. Into despair and fear, for Gods Judgements. 2. Into security, for their own Merits. 3. Into impatience. by anguish of their sickness. 4. Into infidelity, by causing a mistrust in Gods mercies. 5. Into worldy cogitations,
about leaving and disposing of their worldly estate. Or, 6. Vain hope, to recover their former health. Dura mente abesse mors longè credi∣tur, etiam dum sentitur. To a heart that is hardned, Death is thought to be farthest off, even when it is felt to approach. The Devil is come down to you,Apo. 12. 12. which hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time. Thus much for the temporal death, the continual remembrance whereof is so necessary, as nothing more. Nemo memoriam mortis habens potest peccare. He that thinketh continually that he must dye, doth not easily sin. 2. But to speak more properly, Death in it self were not terrible, nor evil, but a passage from this life to a better, a rest from our labours, were it not for the Accompt which is to be gi∣ven of our life past, and the Iudge∣ment which dependeth on it, and fol∣loweth it. For to fall into the hands of the living God, (in the worst sense, that is, to
hear his heavy sentence pronounced against our sins) is a fearful thing. The thought of this made the holy man Iob himself to cry, O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest keep me secret until thy wrath be past.Job 14.13 The terror of it is so great, that if we seriously consider it, Our flesh would scarce cleave to our bones.Ps. 102.7. S. Hier.Quoties diem illum confidero, tolo corpore contremisco: sive enim comedo, sive bibo, sive aliquid aliud facio, sem∣per videtur mihi tuba illa terribilis in∣sonare in auribus, surgite mortui, veni∣te ad judicium. As often as I seriously consider of the day of death, I tremble all my body over: for whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever else I do, me-thinks that terrible Trump sounds in mine ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judge∣ment. Gods judgements are fearful, as they are sometimes executed in this world. Gen. 3.Our first Parents (for their sin) were expelled Paradise. Deprived of Original Righteousness. Made lyable to Condemnation, and became Children of wrath.
Subject to divers miseries, and la∣bours. He spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, &c.2 Pet. 2 42 How did he sweep away (as it were) the Sons of Men from the face of the Earth by the Deluge?Gen. 7. How did he destroy Sodom and Gomorrah? Did not the Egyptians miserably pe∣rish in the Red Sea?Exod. 14. What Vengeance did he take on the Israelites for worshipping the Golden Calf,Num. 16. and for murmuring against Moses? The Scriptures are plentiful in this kind. But yet these judgements are not to be paralleled with those after Death. In respect of God, Omnipotent Highly Offended. Justly Punishing. Iust Highly Offended. Justly Punishing. Wise Highly Offended. Justly Punishing. Good Highly Offended. Justly Punishing. In respect of Man, Weak Offending his Creator. Suffering just Punish∣ment. Sinful Offending his Creator. Suffering just Punish∣ment. Wretched Offending his Creator. Suffering just Punish∣ment.
In respect of the Sentence it self, which inflicts a punishment; sensible for the pain and misery felt, and pre∣judicious for the glory lost. 1. He being Omnipotent, will be able to execute his vengeance on his Enemies, neither shall any deliver them from him. Job 9. 3.He is mighty in strength, who hath resisted him, and prospered. 36. 22:He is exalted by his power, no Law-giver like him. In making Laws just and holy. In exacting the due execution of them. In power to punish the breakers of them. Jer. 5. 20.Fear ye not me, will ye not tremble at my presence? Mat. 10: 28.Fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul. Deut. 32. 41.If he whet his glittering sword, and his hand take hold on judgement, Ps. 130.3.Who is able to abide it? 2 Mac. 6. 26.Though we be delivered from the judgement of Man, yet we cannot escape the hand of the Almighty. His Courts are so high, so transcen∣dent, and his Iudgements so definitive, that no appeal lyeth from them.
We must rest upon his doom, and go no further. 2. Being Iust, he will punish the Breakers of his Commandements: For though he be merciful, in abundant measure, to pardon the iniquities of penitent transgressors; yet he is just also to punish the wickedness of obsti∣nate Malefactors. Multus ad ignoscendum,S. Bern. multus ad ulcìscendum. As he is plentiful in pardon, and forgiveness, so is he as plentiful in revenge. He hateth sinners, and will repay vengeance to the ungodly.Ecclus. 12 6. He neither perverteth Iudgement,Job 8. 3. nor subverteth Iustice. Nullum bonum irreu eratum, nul∣lum malum impunium. Quanquam Sera, tamen certa Nu∣miuis vindicta. Lento gradu ad vindictam sui divi∣ra proceditira,Val. Mat. & tarditatem supplicii gravitate compensat. Nemo impunè malus. There shall no good act go unre∣warded, nor any evil unpunished. For though God be slow, yet he is sure in his revenge.
God ballanceth his slow proceed∣ing in anger, with the grievousness of his punishment. We know, that a Bow, the farther drawn, shoots farthest. And this we must hold for a firm Maxime and Conclusion, that Nemo impunè malus. There shall no wicked man escape unpunished. God will neither be made flexible by favour, nor corrupt by gifts. Pro. 11.4.Riches profit not in the day of wrath. Ecclus. 5. 4.And therefore say not, I have sinned, what harm hath happened to me? For though God be long suffering, he will in no wise let thee go unpunished. Concerning propitiation, be not with∣out fear, to add sin to sin. And say not, His mercy is great, he will be pacified for the multitude of my sins; for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation resteth upon sinners. We must all appear before his Tribu∣nal, and receive according to the thing which every one hath done. His Sentence will be so Iust, that though in this World we may say, Ve∣niet qui malè judicata rejudicabit dies. The day will come, when there will be a re-view of things ill carried.
Yet in the case between God and Man then, it will not be not be so. 3. Being Wise, Omniscient. Nothing is hid from his all-seeing eyes. He beholdeth all our actions. He is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.Heb. 4.12. All things are naked and open to his eyes.13. He knoweth our thoughts long before, our manifold transgressions, and our mighty sins. Therefore no hope of Evasion, by hiding any thing from him. 4. Being Good, He will expect our Thankfulness. He hath ever been gracious to us; heaped many benefits on us: And by how much the more beneficial he hath been to us, the longer expected our conversion, and the oftner admonished us: by so much the more rigorously will he deal with us for neglecting these benefits. Unto whom much is given,Lu. 12.48. of him much shall be required. An accompt will be exacted of our Talents received.Mat. 25. Every man shall be rewarded accor∣ding to his works.
He will exact an accompt from us. How we have used the Body and Soul given unto us. How we have employed our Na∣tural Gifts, Temporal Blessings, and the rest, The signes of his Goodness to us. Job 9. 3.And can we answer one for a thou∣sand. Our Iudgement therefore the great∣er for abusing his Goodness. Again, If we consider this Iudge∣ment in respect of the Parties lyable to it, we shall have greater cause to betake our selves to a more serious consideration of our estates. 1. In regard of the Nature and con∣dition of Man. Job. 14 2.A flower. Ps. 89 47.Of short continuance. 13. 25.A leaf. Job. 13.25.Dry stabble. 7. 7.His substance but dust. 14. 2.His life but a wind, a shadow of no continuance. Format us de terra. Conceptus in culpa. Natus ad poenam. Made of earth.
Conceived in sin. Born to suffer punishment. In regard that he is sinful and wretched.2, 3. Composed of vanity. Every man living altogether vanity.Ps. 63. 4. Lighter than vanity. Shaped in wickedness. Conceived in sin.Ps. 51. 5. Born in uncleanness.Job. 14. A child of wrath.Eph. 2. 3. A vessel of perdition,Esa. 64.6. dishonour. Unclean like a silthy clout.Job 15.16. 53.6. Drinking iniquity like water. All have erred. Agunt mala quae non licent, vana quae non expediunt. Faciles ad seducendum.S. Bern. Debiles ad operandum. Fragiles ad resistendum. They do evil, which is unlawful, and are vain, which is not meet, Easie to deceive, Weak to work, Frail to resist. So that our entrance into the world is miserable. Conversation in it Culpable. Dissolution from it Damnable. The Consideration of this unworthi∣ness
hath terrified all the Saints and Servants of God, lest they should fall under this judgement. Job 7. 20.I have sinned, what shall I doe? saith Iob. 9. 14.How shall I answer? Psal. 6.O Lord, correct me not in thine in∣dignation, saith David. Jer. 10.24.Correct me, O Lord, but yet not in thy fury, lest I be brought to nothing, saith Ieremy. In respect of the sentence it self, which will be to the good. Venite Benedicti, Come ye blessed: to the bad,Mat. 25. 34, 41. Discedite Maledicti, Depart ye cursed, which last sentence is terrible. 1. They are cast into eternal tor∣ments, a punishment sensible for the pain and misery felt. 2. They are deprived of the Beati∣fical vision of God, a punishment prejudicial for the Glory lost. The first is terrible. 1. In regard of the Suddenness and Horrour. At the time of the Iudges appear∣ance. Ps. 50. 3.A consuming fire shall goe before him, and a mighty tempest shall be stir∣red up about him.
Their visitation shall be in Thun∣der, Earthquake and great noise, storm and Tempests, and the flame of devouring fire.Esa. 29.6. The day of the Lord is very terrible, who may abide it. A day of wrath,Joel 2.11. a day of trouble and distress, &c. It shall burn as an Oven,Zeph. 1. 15. and the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble.Mal. 4. 1. They shall behold Above them, The Angry Iudge disdaining them. Under them, The Horrible Pit gaping for them. Within them, The Worm of Consci∣ence gnawing them. About them, The World burning. Near to them, The Devils accu∣sing them. Whither then shall a sinner flee. It is impossible to be hidden, and in∣sufferable to abide. If it were terrible for the Israelites to hear Gods voice delivered by an Angel, who brought no ill news. Insomuch as they said, If we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more,Deut. 5. 25. 27. we shall die.
And to Moses. Ex. 20.19.Talk thou with us, let not God, lest we die. What will it be for sinners to hear the Iudge pronounce this heavy sen∣tence, Discedite Maledicti. 2. In regard of the Accusers. Job. 20 671. The Heaven, and the Earth. Mal. 3. 142. Christ as Iudge. Jer. 29.23.Witness. Ps. 50.21.I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou hast done. Nah. 3 5.I will shew thy filthiness. Mat. 25. 42.I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, &c. 3. The Angels; Their attendants in this life, 4. The Devils; who attend them for future torments. Apo. 20.125. The Books of their Consciences. Dan. 7.10.Thine own wickedness shall correct thee,Jer. 3 19. and thy turnings back shall re∣prove thee. 6. The Creatures, whom they have abused. Ja. 5. 1.Consider this, lest ye howl and weep in your misery. Jude 6.In regard of the intollerable paines which follow the Sentence.Esa. 66.24 Mar. 9.44.1. Everlasting Chains of Dark∣ness.
Vermis corum non morietur.Judith 16 17. They shall weep for ever. 2. Sharp. Beyond the Fornace seven times heated.Dan. 3. 3. Various, of divers sorts. According to the diversity of sin∣ners offences. 4. Stinking. In the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone.Apo. 21.7. 5. Affrighting. Tormented by Devils. 6. In Bonds, not able to stir. Bind him hand and foot.Mat. 12. 23. Held with Cords of his own sin. Bind the Tares,Pro. 5 22. &c. Gathered as Prisoners into a pit.Mat. 13. 30. Chains of darkness.Esa. 24 25. 7. In horrid darkness.Jude 6. Prefigured by that of AEgypt.Exo 12, A Land of darkness.Job 10. 22 8. With Company detestable. In regard that Hell is a Place of no Order.Job. 10, 14 Esa. 5. 14. Dilatavit Infernus animam suam, & aperuit os suum abs{que} ullo termino. Hell hath enlarged it self, and hath opened his mouth without mea∣sure.
Of no Rest, or Comfort. But cries, vexation, weeping, and gnashing of teeth. Not a drop of cool water to the thirsty. Continual mourning, sorrow, with∣out intermission. HugoPlexus ardore incomparabili, dolore innumerabili, & poena interminabili. Full of incomparable heat, innu∣merable sorrowes. and endless pu∣nishments. This for Poena sensus, or the Pain and misery felt. Now for the Glory and Happiness lost, which is usually called Poena Damni. The Loss of Heavens joyes. The deprivation of sinners from Gods sight. Than which nothing more mise∣rable. The Excellency of Heaven (the place of Gods rest) may be conjectu∣red at, By the End for which it was made. 1. The glory of God here, above o∣ther places. Ps. 19. 1.The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the firmament his handy∣work.
2. The Happiness of the Elect. Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.Lu. 13 28. Blessed are they which dwell here.Ps. 84. 4. They shall be satisfied (inebriebun∣tur) with the plenty of Gods house. This Happiness we may also value. By the Price it cost to regain it when it was lost. The Pains which Martyrs endured to attain it. The Testimonies of the Prophets, &c. The Excellency of Heaven may be imagined By the Discription of it. It needs no Sun or Moon to en∣lighten it, for the glory of God makes it bright. The Lamb is the light thereof. No Night there.Apo. 21. 23. Here is that Beatifical Vision which the Fathers and Holy men so desired, and rejoyced in. Mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.Luc. 2.29. I shall be satisfied with thine Image.Ps. 17.15, Shew the light of thy Countenance, and we shall be safe.Ps. 17. 6. 80. 7. If I have found grace in thy sight (saith Moses) shew me thy face.Exod. 33: If thou desire pleasure.
Here is pleasure for evermore. If honour, Ps. 16.12. 149. 9.Such honour have all his Saints. If good company, God, and all the Elect. If musick, A quire of Angels continually praising God with their melodious songs. To conclude, here is abundance of all things, want of nothing. S. Aug.Wherefore, Si credimus futurum Iudicium, bene vivamus, ne malè moriamur. Maxima poena, metum perdidisse judicii: If we believe there will be a Judgement hereafter, let us live well, lest we dye in an ill case. It is the sign of a seared Conscience (and that is the greatest punishment can befall a man) to have lost the fear of the last Iudgement. Lay all these together. That all men are sinners. God hateth sin. It standeth us upon to prevent Gods wrath. In respect of the Iudgement of this
World, Temporal, and of the World to come, Eternal. That it will be heavy in regard of the Omnipotence of the Iudge. Iustice of the Iudge. Omniscience of the Iudge. Goodness of the Iudge. The Weakness of Man. The Imperfection of Man. The Misery of Man. The Sentence which makes the wick∣ed lyable to the sense of pain, and loss of good. And finding that there is an unevi∣table necessity to repent. Why defer we to use the means by which we may be made clean, our sins may be pardoned, and taken off. A wise Traveller takes the day be∣fore him. And a wise Builder the year before him. Optimè fit quod suo tempore fit. Stultus semper incipit vivere. It is best done, that is done timely. A Fool alway begins to live. For who hath promised thee time to repent
How many have been deceived with this vain hope? The Wise Man giveth this Rule. Eccles. 11. 10.Whatsoever good thing thy hand find∣eth to do, do it instantly, with thy might, for there is no work, &c. in the Grave. Ecclus. 5. 7.Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day: For suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed. S. August.Indulgentiam Deus tibi promisit, crastinum diem nemo promisit. Si male vixisti, bene vive, jam hodiè. And, Propter illos qui desperatione periclitantur, proposuit Deus indulgen∣tiae portum. Propter illos qui spe peri∣clitantur & dilationibus illuduntur fe∣cit diem mortis incertum. Quando ve∣nit ultimus dies nescis. Ingratus es qui hodiernum habes, in quo corrigaris. And again, Qui ab iniquitatibus su∣is recedere negliguut, & sibi de Deo in∣dulgentiam repromittunt, nonnunquam ita praeveniuntur, Dei furore, ut net conversionis tempus, nec beneficium re∣missionis inveniant. God hath promised the pardon, it is true; but no man hath promised, or
cen, that thou shalt live while to¦morrow. If thou hast formerly lived ill, live well to day. God hath been so propitious to Mankind, that for the comfort of them that are ready to perish in the Sea of desparation, he hath a Haven of mercy and pardon. And for their sakes that are illuded with hope, and delay their repentance, he hath made the day of death uncertain. Seeing thou knowest not when the last day will come, thou art an unthankful man, if thou makest not good use by repentance, of this day which God hath given thee. They which are careless to depart from iniquity, and flatter themselves with the hope of Gods pardon, are many times so prevented by the anger of God, as they neither find time to convert, nor the benefit of his par∣don. God hath reserved to himself the preheminence of lengthning aud short∣ning our dayes. The rich man promised himself ease and rest for many years,Luc. 22. but one night brought a period to his supposed feli∣city.
Saint Ierome saith, That men are worthily taken in the snare of Judge∣ment, as fish with a hook, or birds in a net; and therefore gives this counsel. Quia didicisti quòd omnia morte fi∣niuntur, & in inferno non sit poenitentia, nec aliquis ad virtutes recursus: dum in ipso saeculo es festina, contende age poenitentiam, &c. Seeing thou hast learn'd that death brings an end to all things, and that there's no repentance in Hell, nor any recourse to vertue; make hast while thou livest, strive and labour, do penance, &c. But admit that thou hadst the privi∣ledge to know thine own end. Thinkest thou, that it will be easier to repent hereafter, than presently. No certainly; For the longer thou detractest, the harder the task of repentance. 1. In respect of the habit, Custom is another nature. S. Bern.Cum aliquid in habitum abierit, dif∣ficulter expellitur, S. August.Dum servitur libidini, fit consuetu∣do, & dum consuetudini non resistitur, fit necessitas.
When a thing hath once got a ha∣bit, it is hardly expelled. While we serve and feed our lust, custom steals upon us, and not resist∣ing custom, we are necessitated to it. Therefore he gives this admonition. As no man is to despair of Gods mercy, yet he is not so to presume, but that without delay he reconcile himself to God, lest he fall into such a custom of sinning, that when he would, he be not able to get out of the Devils snares. 2. Because the farther we plunge our selves into sin, the farther God is from us. Woe unto them that have fled from me.Hos. 7.13. God will cast them off.9. 17. 3. For the ground the Devil gets of us. He is like the strong man which o∣vercometh the weaker.Lu. 11.22 4. For the corruptions of the Soul. The longer we sin, the obscurer the understanding. The weaker the Will, the more disor∣dered the desires. Who then is so void of understand∣ing or reason, that will think he can
repent, after many years, when his sins are multiplyed, and grown into a habit, and that God is farther from us? When the Devil encroacheth on us, and our faculties are corrupted; And cannot doe it in his better strength. That sins encreasing, the pardon will be easilier obtained for them. That the infirmity prevailing, the medicine will cure the easilier, know∣ing that Languor prolixior gravat me∣dicum, brevem languorem recidit medi∣cus. A long sickness or languishing dis∣ease puts the Physician to his Books, while a short grief is soon cured by him. Who can carry a great burden in his age, that groans under a little weight in his chief strength? It was a harder and more difficult act in mans consideration, to revive Lazarus being four dayes in the grave,Joh. 11. than the Rulers daughter newly dead.Luk. 8.49. Grant that thou canst repent in thine age. 1. Yet consider the time lost, which might have been spent in doing good, and avoiding evil.
Why spendest thou thy time in sow∣ing that, of which thou shalt reap nought but tears. The heathen man could say, Hee that desires to doe good while he is old,Seneca. makes a plain demon∣stration, that he hath no mind to goodness, till that time which is un∣fit for all things. And it is too late to begin to live, when we are ready to dye. S. Gregory saith, That he is little better than an Infidel, that forbear∣eth to repent till he is old. And it is to be feared, that while such a one hopeth for mercy, he shall fall into judgement. Can the infinite Majesty of God of∣fended, be satisfied with a little, a small repentance? If thou canst not satisfie him for the sins of a day, why heapest thou the sins of many years, and protractest to give satisfaction till thine age. If thou hast gathered nothing in thy youth, how canst thou find any thing in thine age.Ecclus. 25. 3. 2. Besides Repentance is the gift of God, to whom he pleaseth, and when. Every one ought to fear that it will
not be given him at the hour of death, and is therefore to work out his salva∣tion in the time of his life, with fear and trembling.Phil. 2. 12 Saint Augustine saith, That seldom or never a full conversion is seen in the end of a mans dayes, and that much doubt may be made of a late pe∣nitent. Of him that repents at the last gasp, and is reconciled (that is, by the Mi∣nister) to God, I am not certain whe∣ther he be secure or not. Saint Augustine is not confident of his salvation, though he be absolved by the Priest. Therefore let every one that would be out of doubt, repent while he is lusty and strong, and in his perfect health; for he that hath lived ill all his life, and repenteth not till the last, is certainly in great danger. Wilt thou be secure (say two Fa∣thers?) wilt thou avoid all doubt?S. Ambr. Repent while thou art well.S. Aug. And why art thou then secure? Because thou repentest, when thou mightest have sinned. 3. There are many impediments in age and sickness.
Men are then troubled with many infirmities. Cumbred with many affairs. Grieved with many thoughts, for wife and children, estate and pleasure to be left. And what kind of penitence can be expected from man in this estate? Poenitentia quae fit in extremis, raro vera est, ob magnam difficultaetem in hoc articulo. It is seldom true, being deferred till our end. 1. For the great perturbations aris∣ing by the extremity of sorrow, an∣guish, thought of death, all most vio∣lent in a dying man. They suffer him to think of nothing but that with which he is vexed. 2. True repentance ought to be volun∣tary, not of necessity. And a dying man is forced. Like to that of Shimei to David. Like to that of Mariners in a storm.2 Sam. 19. 19. 3. If he thinks not of it himself, (as it is very doubtful) his Friends seldom or never send for those who should put him in mind of it, till it be too late, till he be past all sense of it, And this is a just punishment, saith S. Gregory, for not thinking on
God while he was in ability to do it,S. Greg. So that one negligence is punished with another. Lastly, let not the examples of a sew cause protraction in thee. For though God forbare his threat∣ned judgements on the Ninivites, it was for their forty dayes repentance. And if thou canst repent forty dayes as they did, thou hast the better hope. And though the Thief (in articulo mortis, ready to dye) was saved; Yet this example ought not to give li∣berty to any, to defer so long. Besides, his salvation was no less admirable than any other of Christs miracles. And hisconversion no less wonderful than his salvation. For when Christs own Disciples had denied and forsaken him, The Thief confessed him. S. Aug.Credidit Reus, quod negavit Ele∣ctus. But trust to thy timely preparations by the example of the Wise Virgins.Mat. 25. And consider and think of thine own estate while thou hast time. Eccles. 12.Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord,
and put not off from day to day; for suddenly shall the wrath of God come forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed. Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, while the evil dayes come not. Defer not Repentance unto years unapt, testy, weak, when sin leaveth thee, and not thou it. Now the time is, when thou mayst find the Iudge propitious. Seek the Lord while he may be found,Esa. 55.6. and call upon him while he is near. Repent, and be converted,Acts 3.19 that your sins may be blotted out. Now our Repentance prevaileth chiefly by 1. Prayer. 2. Fasting. 3. Alms. 4. Tears. The prayer of humble peirceth he clouds.Ecclus. 5. 17. It was the practice of David after his fall, as may appear by the 1 Psalm.Psal. 51. It was the counsel of Saint Peter to Simon Magus, Repent of thy wicked∣ness, and pray to God, if perhaps thought of thine heart may be s thee.Act 3.22. For God is properly
if we neglect not this duty. Ps. 145.18The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him. Eccles. 2. 10.He never forsakes them that call up∣on him. But of this point more at large else∣where. Though the best fast be the fast of the soul, in abstaining from sin; yet other fast of the body is neces∣sary for us,S. Aug. as a salve for a wound. It asswageth the intemperance of the body, represseth inordinate affections, and allayeth the passions of the soul, which arise by fulness. Luc. 21.34.Let not your hearts be over-charged, saith our Saviour. All the servants of God by this hum∣bled themselves, when they set them∣selves to repentance, or to obtain any thing at his hands. Ps. 35.13. 69. 10.David humbled, and chastened him∣self by fasting. It was an antient Precept. Saint Augustine out of Saint Basil saith, that it was commanded as a Law by God to Adam in Paradise, by pro∣hibiting the Tree, And if he had fast∣ed from that Tree, we had not needed to have fasted; we are sick by sin, let us
be healed by repentance; but repentance without fasting is in vain. So he. The Flesh had need to be kept un∣der the Soul, like a servant, left it re∣bell, and to be held in with this bit;Tob. 12 for let but the reins loose, and the flesh will run headlong to perdition. Prayer is good with fasting, &c. And God saith, Turn unto me with fasting.Joel 2.12. The Prayer and Alms of Cornelius ascended to Heaven.Acts 10.. Wilt thou have thy Prayers fly to Heaven, make it two wings, Fasting and Alms. We are to give alms (saith he) in this regard,S. Aug. that we may be heard when we deprecate Gods anger for our sins past. By Mercy and Truth iniquity is purged. Who so stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor,Pro. 16 6. he also shall cry himself,Pro. 21.13. and shall not be heard. Give alms of such things as you have,Lu. 11.41. and all things shall be clean to you. Break off thine iniquities by shewing mercy on the poor,Dan 4.27. saith Daniel to Ne∣buchadnezzer. Lastly, The most powerful act of
Repentance is godly sorrow,2 Cor. 7. accompa∣nied with groans, sighs, and tears. They are the blood of a wounded soul. They ascend unto the nostrils of God, as the Odour of a sweet smelling Sacrifice. God suffereth them not to be spent in vain,Psal. 56.8. but gathereth them. David every nighe (in thought of his offences) washed his bed,6. 6. and wa∣tered his couch with them. Jer. 31 9.God promiseth, that if we come weeping, he will lead us in mercy. And therefore commandeth it as a chief demonstration of our hearty Re∣pentance.Joel 2.12. Saint Peter, after his denial of Christ,Lu. 22.62. wept bitterly, but said nothing. We find that he wept, not what he said. He made choice to repent rather with tears, and no words, than with words, and no tears. S. Ambr.Recte flevit & tacuit, quia quod de∣fleri solet, non solet excusari. Luc. 7.48.Mary Magdalen wept, but said no∣thing, yet Christ said to her, thy sins are forgiven thee. Esa. 38.5.Ezechias wept sore, The Lord said, I have heard thy prayers, and seen thy
tears, and added fifteen years to his life. Lachrymae tacitae quodammodo pre∣ces sunt,S. Aug. veniam non postulant, & merentur. Sufficit auribus Domini imber ocu∣lorum, fletus citius audit quam voces. Let the wicked therefore forsake his way,Esa. 57.5. and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord. To day if ye will hear his voice,Psal. 95.8. har∣den not your hearts. If we will not hear this voice of his, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. He will stop his ears to us when we cry, Lord, open unto us,Mar. 4.17. though we cry with tears, as Esau did for his Fathers blessing, who found no way of changing his [Fathers] mind, though he sought it with tears, careful∣ly, when it was too late. For, though tears prevail in their due time, and happy is he that can shed them; Yet when the door is shut,Heb. 12. God will say to the impenitent sinner, as he said to the foolish Virgins, I know ye not.
The Duty of Repentance. THis duty of Repentance consist∣eth of two parts. 1. Mortification of the old Man, which is the first degree of Regene∣ration. 2. Quickning of the new, which is the second. 1. Mortification, is an act of the Holy Spirit in us,Rom. 6.4, 5, 6. who doth by little and little quench and abate in our souls and bodies, the natural strength of our corruption, which was crept in∣to us,Colos. 3. partly Originally, by Adams fall (which is that we mean by the Old man) and partly that Sin, which we have actually increased by our own frailty. It consisteth. 1. In our acknowledgement of Sin. 2. In our Contrition and Sorrow. Both which are set down in one Verse of the Psalmist.Psa 38.18.
1. Our acknowledgement is either 1. Inward. 2. Outward. 1. Inward acknowledgement is when we feel the burden of our sins pressing us down,Psal, 38.5. our Consciences accusing us,Ro. 2. 15. and our thoughts testifying against us.Ps 38. 39. 2. Outward, is when we make Con∣fession of them by speech, or other outward actions. And this Confession of sin, is a publi∣cation or manifestation of our unwor∣thiness and guilt, whereby we testi∣fie and bewail, that we have sinned a∣gainst God, and have (withall) a set∣led resolution and purpose to offend him no more. Confession is either Publick. Private. Publick Confession is, when upon the Lords Day, or other dayes ap∣pointed for Gods Worship, we in the open Congregation, together, or after the Minister, do confesse our sins to God. Private is, either 1. To God in our Closets, or other private places, as Ps. 32. 5. 38. 9. 18. 41. 4. 51. 2 Sam. 24. 10. Dan. 9. 2. To men. Jam. 5. 16.
2. Contrition is a sorrow and grief of the Conscience, and mourning of the Soul, because we have offended God, having also joyned with it a displeasure against our selves, and a true humiliation both of souls and bo∣dies, as Iam. 4. 9. Esa. 66. 2. Eze. 36. 1. 41. 10. Ion. 3. 8. 2 Kings 22. 19. Matt. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11. Quickning of the new man, is when we, returning to God, live spiritual∣ly, and have a desire (for the time to come) to please Him: this is also called a Conversion to God. And this we do, 1. By avoiding evil. 2. Following that which is good. Both comprehended in Psa. 34.14. Esa. 1. 16, 17. The Benefits we receive by Repen∣tance, are,Ps. 95.10. The deferring of Gods punishments due for sin.Psal 89. 32, 33. Chron. . 8. n. 3.The mitigation of his displeasure. Ezec. 33.The averting of his judgements. Joh. 3. 10.The escaping of eternal death. 1 Ki. 21.29.The prolonging of our prosperity. Dan. 4.27.The attaining of eternal life.
Confession of Sins. VVHo will give water to my head, or tears to mins eyes,Jer. 5. that I may day and night bewail my sins and ingratitude against thee, O God, my Creator? Many things there are which terrifie mens Consciences, and bring them to the true sense of their sins, but nothing is so available thereunto, as the contemplation of the greatness of thy goodness, and the multitude of thy benefits. That there∣fore, O Lord, my poor wretched soul may the better see and consider in what state it stands, I will recount thy manifold blessings, and the number of my sins, that thereby also, I may more clearly understand who thou art, and what I am, how gracious a God thou hast been to me, and how rebel∣lious a sinner I have been to thee. There was a time, O Lord, (as thy Divine Majesty best knoweth) when I was not, and thou tookest me out of the dust of the Earth, and gavest me a being;Gen. 2. 7, 1. 26. creating in me a Soul after thine own similitude, and made it ca∣pable
of thy glory. Thou didst create my body, with all the members and senses thereof; and my soul, with all the powers and faculties thereof. And as thou didst create me, so thou didst preserve me iu my Mothers womb,Ps. 12.19 that I might come safe into this world, and receive the mark and badge of all thine, even the Sacrament of Baptism, whereby I was cleansed from the guilt of Original sin. Amongst a multitude of Infidels, dispersed over the face of the Earth, thou wouldest have me in the number of the Faithfal, even of those to whom so happy a lot hath fal∣len to be thine,Tit. 3. 5. regenerated with the water of Baptism: From which time, I was taken to be thine, and that admi∣rable and happy Contract was made between us, that thou shouldest be my Lord, and I thy Servant; thou my Father, and I thy Son: that thou shouldest perform and shew to me the love of a Father, and I to thee the duty of a Son. Further, O Lord, thou didst descend from Heaven to Earth for my sake, seeking me in all the ways wherein I had lost my self. With thy humanity thou didst ennoble my na∣ture, and by thy bonds didst deliver
me from bondage. Thou didst chal∣lenge me from the power of the De∣vil, by delivering thy self into the hands of sinners, and didst destroy sin, by taking upon thee the form of a sinner.Phil. 2.7. With what reverence shall I speak of that other blessed Sacrament, which Thou also, O Lord, hast instituted and ordained for a remedy of all the miseries which have befallen me, and the many sins I have committed since my Baptism; and for a salve and cure for all my spiritual diseases, even the Sacrament of thy most precious Body and Blood? And as thou hast bestowed on me all these divine and heavenly blessings: so likewise in plentiful manner hast thou heaped on me tem∣poral favours. Thou hast from my birth to this hour, preserved, nourish∣ed, cloathed, and fed me, in most abundant manner, giving to me the use of all thy creatures for my sustenta∣tion. Nay, what couldest thou have done more for me, than thou hast done? Or what couldest thou have given me more, than thou hast bestow∣ed upon me, either of blessings of this world, or of the world to come? Now, having received all these
mercies and favours from thee, how have I on my part behaved my self in thankfulness to thee for them? Have I returned due praise unto thy Maje∣sty for them, or carried my self, and ordered my life, like to one that might any way deserve them? O Lord, I confess that I have not; for such hath been the malice of my heart, that instead of shewing my self con∣formable to thy will, I dayly adde sin to sin, and iniquity to iniquity,Rom. 2.5. heaping up wrath for my self against the day of wrath. How can I with∣out tears remember, how often thou mightest justly have slain me, and yet (notwithstanding my sins, which call for vengeance) no e∣vil hath happened unto me? How ma∣ny souls burn in Hell fire, which have sinned far less than I, and yet I re∣main alive? What had become of me, if thou hadst taken me away with those at the same time? How strict had my Iudgement been, if thy Iu∣stice had laid hold on me, laden with so many sins? Who then, O Lord, hath bound the hands of thy Iustice, who hath deprecated for me, when I lay thus lulled asleep in the security of
my sins? What hath pleased thee in me, that thou shouldst deal more mercifully with me, than with those, who in the midst of their dayes, in the heat of their youth, are taken a∣way from amongst us? My sins cryed out against me, and thou stoppedst thine ears, my offences dayly increased against thee, yet thy mercy dayly a∣bounded towards me. I sinned, thou didst expect me, I fled from thee, and thou followedst me: I was weary in of∣fending thee, and thou not weary in expecting me. And in the midst of all my sins, I ever received many good inspirations and goodly reproofs from thy holy Spirit, which checked me in the dissolute course of my life. How often hast thou called me with the voice of Love? How often hast thou terrified me with threats and fears, laying before me the peril of death, and the rigour of thy divine Iustice? How often hast thou followed me with thy Word preached. invited me with thy blessings, chastened me with thy scourges, compassing me about, that I could by no means slee from thee? And lastly (which is not the least of thy mercies) with what patience hast
thou waited for my serious Repen∣tance? Psol. 106. 13.What then, O Lord, shall I render back to thee, for all that thou hast done unto me? In that thou hast created me, I owe thee all that I am created, in that thou hast preserved me, and thus long expected my return to thee. I owe thee life, and all that I am. But in that thou hast regenerated, sanctified, and redeemed me, and left those ex∣cellent pledges for my salvation; I know not what to render unto thee. For, if the lives of all men and Angels were in my power, and that I could offer them unto thee for a sacrifice of praise and thanks; yet were it no∣thing, being compared to the least of all thy spiritual blessings bestowed on me. Ier. 9. 1.VVho therefore will give a foun∣tain of tears to mine eyes, that I may lament my great ingratitude, and un∣just retribution for all these thy mani∣fold blessings heaped upon me? Help me thou, O Lord, and give me grace, that I may heartily confess, and grie∣vously bewail my hainous offences and transgressions, against thee; that thou mayest be reconciled to me, and in
thy abundant mercies, shew some pity to me for them. I am thy creature, O Lord, made after thine own Like∣ness and Image: acknowledge thy workmanship, for it is thine own. In taking away the soyl and filth, where∣with it is defiled and stained, thou shalt soon perceive it to be thine own han∣dy-work. Art not thou a Father of mercies, which have neither number,2 Cor. 1.3. end, nor measure? Although I have shaken off the duty and obedience of a child towards thee, yet cast not thou off the love of a Father toward me. I be∣seech thee, Although I have done ma∣ny things, whereby thou mightest justly condemn me, yet thou hast not lost the means whereby thou mayest mercifully save me. If thou forsake me, to whom shall I flee? who is there to help me besides thy self? Ac∣knowledge, G Lord, a straying sheep: Behold I come to thee all wounded, thou canst heal me. blind, thou canst enlighten me: full of leprosie, thou canst cleanse me: and spiritually dead, yet thou canst revive me. Thy mercy is greater than my sin: thy clemency, more than my wickedness: and thou canst remit, more than I can commit.
Do not then, O Lord, put me back from thee: look not so much upon my sins, as upon thy infinite meocies; who livest and reignest God of all mercies, world without end. Another. O Almighty Lord God, great in thy power, and terrible in thy judgements,Exod. 34. who madest the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, and all things in them, by thy Word, whose Power cannot be resisted, and whose Mercy is over all thy works.Ps. 145.9. All things are un∣der thy power and rule, both in Hea∣ven and Earth. Thou shewest mercy on whom thou wilt, art pitiful to whom thou pleasest, and wouldst not the death of a sinner,Eze. 33. 11. neither delight∣est in the destruction of any. O God, rich in mercy, who,Eph. 2.4. out of thy extra∣ordinary love to Mankind, even when we were thine Enemies,Rom. 5.10 didst send thine only Son into the world, that every one that believed on him might not perish,
but have life everlasting; Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, ac∣cording to thy mercy,Psal. 51. and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away my offenses.Lu. 15.18. Holy Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. I have turned from thee, and have broken all thy Commandements. I have not walked aright, but have gone after mine own lusts, choosingEsa. 65.2 those wayes, which thou hast forbid∣den me to tread in. Neither, O Lord, have I feared thine anger, but have been in all things disobedient unto thee, and have hardned my heart against thee. I have hated instruction,Pro. 5.12. and cast thy sayings behind me. Truth hath found no place in me, and my hands have been the workers of much wickedness. I have spoken vainly, idlely, and wickedly. I have brought forth deceit, and meditated the way of untruth. I have provoked thy wrath against me, by accustoming my self to do the work of the flesh, and re∣jecting the good motions of the Spirit. Woe unto me, rebellious wretch,Esa. 30.1. that I have committed these wicked acts, against thee, so loving, so good, so
gracious a God; to the utter destructi∣on of my soul, without thy mercy in Christ Iesus. In remembrance, and confidence whereof, O Lord, I come to thee, and humbly intreat thee, that thou wouldest not reject a contrite, humble, miserable, and repentant sinner, who at this time earnestly in∣vocateth thy Name.Psal. 7. 9. Return a little, O Lord, and be intreated for my ma∣nifold sins, do not unto me according to the multitude of them, neither re∣ward me according to my transgressi∣ons. Let my humble Prayers, sighs, and groans, come into thy presence, and according to thy promises, receive me again into thy favour. For, O Father, I am one of those, whom thy only Son redeemed with his most pre∣cious blood. O Lord, my soul doth loath my life, by reason of my mani∣fold sins,1 Pet.5.6. and I humble my self under thy mighty hand, because I know, that in thine anger thou shewest mercy,Aba. 3. 2. and in time of trouble thou dost forgive of∣fences: And behold, O Lord, that I confess my sins, beseeching thee, for thy goodness, to do unto me, accord∣ing to thy wonted mercy. I am con∣founded and ashamed to lift up mine
eyes unto thee, because my sins have prevented my prayers, and have as∣cended up to thee, before them. Against thee,Psal. 51. O Lord, have I sinned and done much evil in thy sight; Yet wherefore should I dye in my sins, seeing it is not thy pleasure,Exech. 18 that any sinner should dye, but turn unto thee, and live? For thou art good and gra∣cious, and savest those who are alto∣gether unworthy, out of the abundance of thy mercy in Christ Iesus the Righ∣teous. For although thine anger against sinners is unsufferable, and who may abide it? Yet thy mercy towards offenders is unsearchable, and who can find out the depth thereof, or describe it?Psal. 22. Our Fathers in their troubles cryed unto thee, and thou didst deliver them, they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. And though they, by their offences, have justly provoked thine anger, yet (upon their humi∣liation) thou didst remember thy Co∣venant, and ease them of their afflicti∣ons. O Lord, be merciful also unto me, for I am miserable and wretched. Heal my soul,Psal.41.4. 6. 3. 13. for I have sinned against thee. My soul is very much disquieted within me: How long, Lord, will it
be, ere thou look upon me, and deliver it?Psal 13.3. Lighten mine eyes, for I have (too long) slept in death, and my sins have (too long) had dominion over me. Return, O Lord, at the last, and be gracious unto me; O deliver my soul, and have mercy upon me: And all my bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee?Ps. 35.10. To thee be all Honour, Praise, and Glory, World without end. Another. O Lord Iesus Christ, the only Physician of sick souls,Gal. 4. 4. who in the fulness of God came into this World,Mat.9.13. not to call the just, but sinners to Repen∣tance. Behold me (the most wretch∣ed of all sinners, who (with as much humility as I am able in the confi∣dence of thy great goodness, cast my self before the foot-stool of thy Maje∣sty, confessing my great and grievous offences. And if the Publican in the Gospel durst not lift up his eyes to hea∣ven,
but stood a far off,Lu.18.13. and smote his brest, saying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, what shall I doe, whose sins surpass the greatest sinners offen∣ces? For all my inward and outward parts, are wholly depraved, and no∣thing that is good remaineth in me. And, when I look into the book of my conscience, I find, that I have a∣bominably polluted the garment of in∣nocency, which I received at my Bap∣tism. I have put all my strength to offend thee with all the members I have. For, my feet have been swift to evil,Ro.13.15. and flow to good:Esa. 3.16. mine eyes o∣pen to vanity, and shut to that which is truly amiable. My hands stretch∣ed to covetousness, and closed from the works of mercy: mine ears ready to hear evil, and stopped to the good motions of the Spirit: and my soul, (the noblest part in me) which hath eyes to contemplate the glory of thy Majesty: I have turned away from the consideration of thy Excellency, to the vain and transitory things of this life. I have given liberty to whatso∣ever mine eyes have desired, and have not resisted the unclean passions of my heart: so that the whole course of
my life hath been a continual warfare against the. How often have I re∣turned as a dog to the vomit, and as a sow washed, to the myre? I am that Fool which hath said in his heart there is no God. For I have lived so disso∣lutely, that I have made plain demon∣stration by my behaviour, That I be∣lieved, thou either wert not at all, or else couldst do nothing at all. Thou, O Lord, hast often called me, and I have neglected thy voice: Thou hast expe∣cted me, and I have abused thy pati∣ence. Thou hast given me the treasure of a long time to repent, and I have consumed it wastefully. Thou hast stricken me, and I have not been sen∣sible of thy hand. Thou hast afflicted me, and I have made no use of thy correction. Thou didst sweat, to make me clean, and I still remain in my pollution. I am hardned, as well with thy punishments, as with thy blessings, being rebellious to the one, and unthankful for the other. And what shall I further say? but that my heart, soul, thoughts, and body, are all impure and defiled, and that of all sinners I am the chief,1 Tim.1.9. unworthy Earth should any longer sustain me, or that
I should expect any thing from thee, but thy severest Iudgement. For if thou sparedst not Lucifer, and his An∣gels, for one only sin, Pride, but didst cast them from Heaven,Jude 6. to be reserved for everlasting chains of darknesse, unto the Iudgement of the great Day: what can I hope or look for, that have offended thee, not in one offence alone, but in all kind of transgressions? For my sins are in number, numberless, insomuch, that I hate my self, for my madness, that from so noble a liberty, I am fallen into so base a servitude: and find my self overwhelmed with the horrible dread of thy fearful Iudgements,Psal.55.5. Yet when I behold and consider that infinite mercy of thine,Ps. 145.9. which surpasseth all the rest of thy works, I am a little refresh∣ed, and my Soul is a little comforted and revived: For as by the examina∣tion of the hainousness of my sins, and the strictness of thy Iustice,Ezech. 11 I did al∣most despair:Joel 2. So, considering and weighing the testimonies of thy Ser∣vants, left upon record, for the com∣fort of poor distressed souls, I am somewhat again cheared and raised up. For, besides those places of consolati∣on,
and many more, I find, by di∣vers Parables and Similitudes of thine own, how ready and propense thou art to receive and pardon the Penitent. As,Luc. 15. by the lost Penny, the lost Sheep, and by the Prodigal Son, whose Image I find in my self, and whose life mine doth fully parallel. Wherefore, O Lord, I humbly intreat thee, to re∣store me (thy lost Son) to thy fa∣vour: and withall, to give me the true sense and knowledge of the inno∣cency I have lost. I do not desire, that thou shouldest deal so kindly with me, as that Father did with his Son: but I shall be happy and glad if thou wilt entertain me, as one of the meanest of thy hired servants. My hope and confidence is, that thou wilt pitty me, because thou art the fountain of pitty and compassion. Behold me therefore with the eyes of pitty, look on me, and ease me, who come unto thee, laden with the heavy burden of my sins;Mat. 11. 28. pardon them, and save me, for thy infinite mercy: and remember not my sins, but thine own sufferings; think not on me as a proud and rebelli∣ous Malefactor, but as an humble and penitent Convert, Look on me with
those eyes of compassion, wherewith thou didst sometime behold Mary Magdalen,Luc. 7 48. 22. 62. 23. 43. Peter, and the good Thief: Give me true knowledge of my sins, with the first; true contrition, with the second; and receive me, with the third, into thy Heavenly Paradise. Let thy obedience satisfie for my rebellions, thy innocency for my guilt, thy humility for my arrogancy, thy fasting for my intemperance, and thy justice for my iniquity. Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me whole,Mat. 26. 39. and restore me to thy former grace. Purifie, purge, and cleanse me from mine offences, and open mine eyes, that I may clearly see mine own pollution: and make me to grieve that I have not grieved for my sins as I ought to have done. And as thou hast by thy long-suffering hi∣therto expected my repentance, so, of thy infinite mercy and goodness, par∣don me repenting: and grant me grace, that I may be afraid to offend thee here∣after. Hear me, O sweet Saviour, & make intercession for me to the Fa∣ther, with whom, and the Holy Spirit, thou dost live and reign coequal and co∣eternal Lord God, world without end, Amen.
Confession of Sins. I confess, O Lord, Psal.51.5.That I was shaped in wickedness, and in sin my Mother conceived me. Job 14.4.That I was brought forth in unclean∣ness. Deut. 29. 18. 32. 32.That I am a root of bitterness. A wild vine of Sodom. Ro.11.14.A branch of the wild olive. Eph. 2. 3.The child of wrath. A vessel of dishonour and perdition. Ose.7.16.That my heart is rebellious, like a starting bow. Psal.5.10.That my throat is an open sepulcher, venting all folly. Esa. 6. 5.That I am of polluted lips. Ps.144.11That my tongue talketh nothing but vanity. Mar.7.22.That mine eyes are evil prone to lust. Psal.58.4.That mine ears are uncircumcised, and like to the deaf Adder. Jer. 3. 3.That I have a forhead of brass, and a neck of iron. He.12.12.That my hands are slow to good. Rom.3.15That my feet are swift to evil.
I have sinned against thee, O Lord, and in thy sight, not fear∣ing thy Majesty. My Sins are, In quantity, Large,Esa. 57 8 and of a great size. Of long continuance,Ps. 25.11. From my Mothers breasts. Deep.Hos. 9 9. Heavy.Psal. 38 4. Like a burden. Like lead.Zach. 5.7. Stretching to Heaven with their cry. Many in number, Like the Stars.Jer. 30. 14, 15 More than the hairs of my head.Ps. 40.12. The sands of the Sea.Oratio. Oftentimes reiterated.Manass. As a Fountain casting out water.Esa. 57.20 Till they became as a habit.Jer. 6 7. As red as scarlet and crimson.Esa. 1.18. I am sold under sin.Rom. 7.14. Till they become natural to me. Like the AEthiopians skin.1 Kings 21. 25. The Leopards spots.Jer. 13.23.
In quality, The worst of sins. Esa. 5. 18.Strong, like cords and cart-ropes. Rom. 6 21Gaining nothing thereby. Eze. 13.19For a handful of barley, a little bread. Eph. 4.19.Committing sin with greediness. Jer. 3.3.Sin upon sin. Eze. 3. 7. 6. 15.With impudence. Not being ashamed. Gal. 2.18.Knowing it to be sin. Jam. 4.17.Giving offence thereby. Mat. 18.7.Unthankfully. Rom. 8.21Like the Dog to the vomit. 2 Per. 2.2.Like the Sow to the mire. Psal. 119. 137.Therefore, O Lord, because thou art just, and thy judgements true. I reap the fruit of my foolishness. Rom. 6.21For what fruit have I in those things whereof I am ashamed? Ps. 102.3. Job 7. 11.My dayes are consumed in vanity, and my years in the bitternesse of my soul. Psal. 38.3.And now there is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin. My heart trembleth also, with re∣membrance
of thy Iudgements. I feel bitterness above the bitter∣ness of death, in that I have forsaken thee, O God, and that thou hast for∣saken me. Woe unto me, rebellious Wretch, for thus doing. See, and consider, O Lord, how vile I am become, for my Soul abhor∣reth to live. I have roared for the disquietness of my heart.Psal. 38.8. And what shall I now say, or where∣in shall I open my mouth? What shall I answer, seeing I have done these things?Job Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me out of this body of death?Rom. 7.24 When I have not what I can further say or do, this only remaineth, this is my last refuge, that I direct mine eyes to thee.2 Chron. 20. 12. Out of the deep have I called to thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice.Psal. 130. If thou Lord shouldest be extream to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it? Enter not into judgement with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. Wherefore, O Lord, I appeal from Thee, to Thee. From Thee, a just Iudge; To Thee, a merciful Father. From the Throne of thy Iustice, To the Seat of thy Mercy. O Lord, be pleased to admit of this appeal. If thou do not, I perish. Mat. 8.25.And, O Lord, carest thou not that I perish? 1 Tim. 2.4 2 Pet. 3.9.Who wouldest have all to be saved, none so perish. I am thine, O save me. Ps. 119.94. 138. 8.Despise not the work of thy hands. Wis. 11.24Who hatest nothing which thou hast made. Ps. 116.15I am thy Servant, and Son of thy Handmaid. Dan. 9 19Thy Name is called on by us. Heb. 1. 16Thou art not ashamed to be called our Lord. I am the price of thy Sons blood. O spare thy Workmanship. Thy Child. Thy Name. The price of thy Sons blood,
But I am a sinner, and God heareth not sinners.Joh. 9.30. Yet I pray thee remember of what I am made;Ps. 78.40. That I am but flesh, and a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again. Take notice of the matter of which I am made. Remember that I am but dust.103.14. Frail flesh. Light wind. Loose dust. And wilt thou, O Lord, break a leaf driven with the wind too and fro? and wilt thou pursue dry stubble?Job. 13.25 Behold, O Lord, though I have  sinned,1 Pet. 5.6. yet I humble my self under thy mighty hand. Spare the humble and contrite. David spared Shimei that railed on him.2 Sam. 19. 19. And David was a man according to thine own heart.1 Sam. 13. 14. Therefore do thou spare me. Ahab, King of Israel, forgave the King of Syria his offence,1 Kings 20. 31, upon his hu∣miliation. Was there ever King of Israel more merciful than thou? Thou forgavest the same Ahab
(who had sold himself to sin) when he humbled himself.1 Kings 11. 29. Spare me also, I beseech thee. Ps. 80. 4.O Lord, how long wilt thou be angry with thy Servant which prayeth. Job 31. 3.Surely, Lord, I hide not my sins, like Adam, but confess them. 1 Col. 11. 31.Behold, I judge my self. 2 Cor. 7. 11.Accept, O Lord, the Sacrifice of a troubled Spirit, A contrite heart, A grieved Soul, A wounded Conscience. Though I have sinned against thee. It hath ever been thy Practice to be merciful. Ps. 22. 4.Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and were not confounded. 25. 6.Thy mercies have been ever of old. 89. 49.Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses. Syr. 2.10.Look at the Generations of old, and see, did ever any trust in the Lord, and was confounded? Or whom did he ever despise, that called upon him. It is due by thy Promise. Ps. 119 49.Remember thy word unto thy servant;
upon which thou hast caused me to hope. Let thy mercy come unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according to thy word. God hath promised, which cannot lie.Tit. 1 2. He is a God of truth.Psal 36 6. And confirmed it with an Oath.Heb. 6.17. Which promise the unbelief of men cannot make void.Rom. 3.2. If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful, he cannot deny himself.2 Tim. 2. 13. There will arise no benefit by my  destruction. For what profit is there in my blood, if I go down into the pit?Psal. 30.9. For in death is no remembrance of thee, and in the grave who shall give thee thanks?6. 5. Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? Or shall the dead arise and praise thee?88. 10. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? Or thy faithfulness in de∣struction?Ps. 88.11. The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: the living, the li∣ving, he shall praise thee.Esa. 38.18. I will not dye, but live, and declare the works of the Lord.Ps. 118 17 Psal 34.8. O taste and see how gracious the Lord
is, blessed is the man that trusteth in him.1 Pet. 1. 3. Ps. 109.2. 97. 17.Thy mercies, O Lord, are Sweet. 63. 4.Comfortable. 5. 7.Better than life. 51. 1.Many. A multitude of them. 130. 6.Plentiful, Luc. 1 78.Tender. Rom. .20.Superabundant. 1 Tim. 1. 14.Wonderful. Psal. 17.7.Infinite. 71. 13.Great. 86 1.Broad. From the East to the West. 119. 156.Long. 103. 12.Deep. Eph. 3. 18, 19.High. To the Heavens. Psal. 26 5 108. 4.High. Above the Heavens. Psal. 25.5. 103. 17.Past knowledge. 136.Eternal of old. 19. 2.For ever. 79. 9.Preventing. 23. 6.Following. 32. 11.Compassing. 103. 13.Pardoning. 4.Crowning. 145. 9.Over all thy works.
Our sins.Rom. 5.20 Thy justice.Jam. 2.13. Thou art the Father of mercies.2 Cor. 1.3. Thou art patient, and slow to  anger. Thou winkest at the sins of men, be∣cause they should repent.Wis. 11.23 Sparing thy people forty years.Ps. 95.10. 78. 39. Many times thou didst turn thy wrath away, and wouldest not suffer thy whole displeasure to arise. It is of thy mercy that we are not con∣sumed.Lam. 3.21 Gentle in correcting, insomuch as  thy justice is not without mercy. I will visit their offences with the rod, and their sin with scourges: Neverthe∣less, my loving kindness will I not utter∣ly take from him.Ps. 89.21. 33. He hath not dealt with us after our sins.103. 10. How shall I smile thee, O Ephraim?Hos. 11.8. Placable, and easie to be pacified. He will not alway be chiding: nei∣ther keepeth he his anger for ever.103. 9. His wrath endureth but the twink∣ling of an eye.Psal. 30.5.
Esa. 54.7.For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I ga∣ther thee. Abac. 312.In anger he remembreth mercy. 2 Sam. 12. 13.David said, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, The Lord hath also put away thy sin, thou shalt not dye. Esa. 30.18The Lord waiteth to be gracious un∣to us. Compassionate. Luc. 1.71.Thy Compassions are called bowels of mercy. Ps. 106.43When thou didst see the misery of thy people, thou hadst compassion on them. Mt. 15. 32. 18. 27.Then the Lord of the servant, moved with compassion, loosed him, and for∣gave him the debt. Not only ready to forgive, but profuse in mercy. Ps. 130.7.With thee is plentious redemption. Lu. 15.22The Father of the Prodigal, not only pardoned him, but put on him the best Robe, and a Ring, and killed the fat Calf for him. He will have joy in Heaven, for a sinner repenting.
Thy pardon extendeth, not only  to small, but great sins, and sin∣ners. Such as Pet. who forsware thee,Lu. 26.74. Paul, who blasphemed thee.1 Tim. 1. 13. The Thief on the Cross.Lu. 23.43. The Adulteress.John 8. Mary Magdalen.Luc. 7.38. They say, If a man put away his Wife, and she go from him, and be∣come another mans, shall he return unto her again? shall not the Land be great∣ly polluted? But thou hast played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return again to me, saith the Lord.Jer. 3. 1. He is kind to the unthankful and evil.Luc. 6.35. But all these are recapitulated and  summed up in Christ Iesus. In whom he hath given us great and precious promises.1 Pet. 1.4. And in whom all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen.2 Cor. 1. 19. In naming of whom it will be suffi∣cient.Joh. 16.23 Iesus, thou Son of David, have mer∣cy on me.Mat. 15. 22. Which Name Jesus, was given un∣to him, because he saveth us from our sins.Mat. 1.21.
S. August.Lord, Do not so earnestly mark our sins, as that thereby thou forget thine own Name. 2 Sam. 19Thou Son of David (who forgave Shimei his sworn Enemy, reviling him) Forgive me. O Christ hear me. Intercede for me. Make thy Father propitious to me. Psal. 35.3.Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salva∣tion. 1 Tim. 2. 15.Let not thy Apostle comfort me in vain, when he saith, This is a faith∣ful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Rom. 5.20Where sin hath abounded, there grace hath super-abounded. 11. 32.God hath concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all. 5. 10.When we were Gods Enemies, we were reconciled to him by the death of his Son. Let not another of thy Apostles say in vain. 1 Pet. 3 18Christ once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. Let not the third.
Mercy rejoyceth above judgement.Jam. 2.13. Let not the fourth. If any man sin,1 Joh. 2.1. we have an Advo∣cate with the Father, Christ Iesus the righteous. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. Let not thine own words be spoken in vain. Come unto me all ye that labour, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.Mat. 11. 28. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.Luc. 5. 32. I came not to judge the world, but to save it.John 12. 47. These things are not cannot be spo∣ken in vain. Wherefore, in the multitude of the sorrowes that are in my Heart, thy comforts, O Lord, have refreshed my Soul.Ps. 94.19. Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.Heb: 4 16. Which be pleased to grant, For thy great and many Mercies. Thy Names sake. The Glory of thy Name.
Thy Promise sake. Thy Practice sake. My Misery. My Infirmity. Even for thy Son Iesus Christ's sake. The Seven Penitential Psalms Paraphrased. Psalm 6. O Lord my God, rebuke me not, I beseech thee, in thy fierce in∣dignation against my sins, either in this life, or at the day of judgement, neither chasten or correct me in thy hot displeasure, by condemning me to eternal death. 2 Have mercy and compassion up∣on me, according to thy accustomed goodness, O Lord, for I am weak,
and frail by nature, strengthen me therefore by thy grace, O Lord, and heal me, by curing the infirmities of my Soul, for they are multiplied so greatly upon me, that my bones, and all my inward parts are vexed and disquieted with the remembrance of them. 3 My sinful Soul, considering my manifold offences, and trembling at the thought of thy just anger against them, is also (like as is my flesh) sore troubled, and almost at the point of desparation: but thou, O Lord, that desirest not the death of a sinner, how long will it be ere thou look upon me, and bring me out of this misery? 4 Return from the rigour of thy justice, O Lord, to the sweetness of thy mercy, and deliver my Soul from the bondage of sin: O Lord, save me from the assaults of the Devil, not for any merits of mine, but for thy mercies sake, in Christ Jesus my Sa∣viour. 5 For in death there is no remem∣brance of thee, to praise and glorifie thy Name: and who, surely none there is that shall give thee thanks, or
celebrate thy goodness in the grave of Hell, where nothing is to be heard but weeping, gnashing of teeth, and blasphemies. 6 I am weary and faint, with my groaning and sighing for my transgres∣sions, every night, when I should take my rest, I wash my bed, weep∣ing for them, and I water my couch, the place of my rest, with my tears of unfeigned repentance. 7 Mine eye of reason and under∣standing is consumed, and groweth weak, because of the grief I take, fearing thy judgements: yea, it wax∣eth old, and I continue in sin, because of the united Forces of all mine Ene∣mies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. 8 Depart therefore far form me al ye mine Enemies, which are, and have been the workers and causers of mine iniquity, by your tentations, and evil examples; for henceforth I will have no more to do with you; for my Conscience assureth me, that the Lord, of his infinite goodness, hath heard and pitied the voice of my weeping: and therefore I should be unthankful to him, to return to those
sins, which he, in his mercy, hath forgiven. 9 The Lord, I cannot repeat it too often, hath graciously heard my earnest supplication for the pardon of my sins, and he, the Lord, plentiful in pity, hath not only now, but will also hereafter receive my prayer, whensoever I call faithfully upon him. 10 Let all mine Enemies therefore: who have sought my destruction, be ashamed at my Conversion, and be¦fore vexed and troubled at the consi∣deration os Gods judgements. Let them no longer delay, but repent and return to the Lord, and be ashamed, that they have so long deferred their conversion, and suddenly, without any longer delay, make their peace with him, by unfeigned repentance. Glory be to the Father, &c. Psalm 32. BLessed is he in this life, in assured hope, and thrice blessed, in full and perfect fruition, in the life to
come, whose transgression, by Gods mercy, is forgiven, in respect of the offence: and whose sin, by the impu∣tation of Christs righteousness, is so covered in this world, that it be not laid open at the day of judgement, in respect of the punishment. 2 Blessed and happy is the man, un∣to whom, in regard either of offence, or punishment, the Lord, accepting the merits of Christ, imputeth no sin, but giveth so ample a remission of them, that he taketh no notice of any sin in him: and in whose Spirit, as well as in outward shew, is no guile, but penitently, without hypocrisie, bewaileth his offences. 3 When I my self (I speak by ex∣perience) kept silence, dissembling and covering my sins, wherewith my Conscience was oppressed, my bones, and inward parts, waxed old and fee∣ble, through my roaring, which God regarded not, though I cryed all the day long, and that, because I confessed not my sins aright unto him. 4 For day and night, continually, thy hard hand of affliction was heavy upon me, to punish my obstinacy, and to reduce me to repentance; and by
reason thereof, my moisture and vi∣gour which I formerly had, is turned like to the drought of Summer, and is almost withered and dryed up. 5 My sin therefore, at the last (I being thus handled by thee) did I re∣solve to acknowledge unto thee in con∣trition of soul, and mine iniquity, which I formerly concealed, I have but any longer hid, but humbly con∣fessed unto thee. 6 I further said within my self, when thy grace began to work in me, that I will no longer continue in my rebellion, but penitently confess all my transgressions, and iniquity unto the Lord, gracious and merciful: and I had no sooner done it, but thou (of thy wonted compassion) forgavest the iniquity, and punishment of my sin, committed against thee. 7 For this remission of sin, as it was necessary for me to pray for it, so shall every one, of what condition so∣ever, that is godly, (for the just also fall) pray unto thee, O Lord, in a time when thou mayest be found, in a fit season. But in the greatest danger of floods, and swelling of the great wa∣ters of afflictions, God will so pre∣serve
serve the just man, that they shall not have power to come nigh unto him; to oppose or overwhelm him. 8 Thou, O God, art my hiding place, and refuge in all tribulations; thou (for in none other will I trust) shalt preserve me, by thy power, from trouble and adversity. Thou shalt compass me about with thy mercy, and I will sing unto thee songs of praise, for my deliverance. 9 I will instruct thee (saith God) O Man, if thou wilt be ruled by me, and teach thee in the way of righteous∣ness, which thou shalt wal in without erring. I will guide thee in the right way with mine eye of providence, that no evil shall happen unto thee. 10 Be ye not therefore, O foolish men (since I am so careful over you) without reason, as the unruly Horse, and dull Mule, which have no under∣standing, to bridle their head-strong desires: whose hard mouth must be held in with strong hand, and with bit and bridle, and you with tribulations and afflictions: if you be rebellious, then (as they must be held in lest they come near thee, and fall upon their Rider, or kick at them, so) shall you
be forced by adversity to know your selves, for opposing God your Cre∣ator. 11 Many sorrows, either in this world, or torments, in the world to come, shall be to the obstinate and un∣repentant wicked: but he that with his whole heart dependeth on, and trust∣eth in the Lord his God, the Mercy of the same God shall compass and de∣fend him on every side, from all dan∣gers. 12 Be glad then, O ye Servants of the most High, in the salvation of the Lord, and not in your own strength, and rejoyce in fervency of spirit, ye that are just and righteous: shout for joy, in the comfort of a good Conscience, all ye that are up∣right in heart. Because the Lord is gracious to those that love him, and hath delight in the prosperity of his Servants. Glory be to the Father, &c.
Psalm 38. O Lord, I do not altogether de∣cline and refuse thy correcti∣ons, only this I require of thee, that thou rebuke me not in thy fierce wrath, by condemning me with the repro∣bate: neither chasten me, poor sinner, too severely, by the extraordinary afflictions of this life, or in thy hot dis∣pleasure. 2 For it is not without cause, that I should thus deprecate thine anger, for thine arrows of grief and anguish stick fast in me, and are sore upon me already, and thy hand of present affliction presseth and troubleth me sore. 3 There is no soundness nor health in my flesh, because of the vehemency of thine anger against me: Neither is there any rest or quiet in my bones, and inward parts, when I consider, that thy displeasure ariseth towards me, because of the grievousness of my sinne. 4. For (having recollected my thoughts) I find that mine iniquities
(which hitherto I regarded not) are so many, that they are gone over my head, they are past my understand∣ing, for quantity and quality, and as a heavy burthen, for the weight of them, they are become to heavy for me to bear any longer: they press me down so much, that I cannot look up to Heaven, or heavenly things. 5 My wounds, which sin hath made in my Conscience, stink in thy nostrils, O God, and they are so abo∣minable, that now they corrupt, and putrifie in mine own sight: and all this is come upon me, because of my foolishness, that have let them go so long unsearched, (un-repented of) that they are almost past cure, or re∣medy. 6 I am troubled therefore, that I have so long put off my conversion, I am bowed and pressed down, with the weight of my transgressions, and an humbled in soul for them greatly, and crave pardon for them. I go mourning and grieving all the day long, be wailing the former time of my life mis-spend. 7 For my loyns are filled, and infe∣cted with a loathsome disease, or car∣nal
concupiscence: and there is no soundness nor goodness at all in my flesh, for that it rebelleth against the Spirit. 8 I am feeble in body, and sore bro∣ken in mind, in so much, that consi∣dering with my self, how grievously I have offended thee, I have roared and cryed bitterly, by reason of the dis∣quietness of my sinful heart: O Lord, therefore forgive my offences. 9 Lord, who knowest all things, and dost search into the hearts of all men, all my desire, to be reconciled to thee, and to lead a new life, is be∣fore thee, thou knowest it, and my groaning, and earnest prayer, mingled with sighs and tears, is not hid from thee, but (I hope) is ascended into thy presence. 10 My heart, which hath lost the peace of Conscience, panteth for fear of thy Judgements, my [wonted strength faileth me, and I am grown weak: as for the light of mine inward eyes, wherewith I was wont to di∣scern good from evil, it is also dim, and gone from me, and I am be∣come like to them that walk in dark∣nesse.
11 My lovers, and those which I took for friends, because they see me go about to forsake my evil courses, stand aloof off from my sore, and in∣stead of giving me comfort, become mine adversaries: and my kinsmen, who in my prosperity fawned on me, now stand afar off, and leave me com∣fortless. 12 They also of mine Enemies, that seek after the ruine of my life, and eternal happiness, lay snares and ten∣tations for me: and they that seek my hurt, in bereaving me of my good name, speak mischievous and false things to my reproach, and imagine deceit, how to divert me from the right way, all the day long. 13 But I, being resolved to per∣sist in the way of repentance, and to trust wholly in the mercy of God, be∣haved my self to them as a deaf man, giving no ear to their allurements, and made as though I heard them not: and I was in my behaviour to them, as a dumb man, that knew not how to speak; or, that opened not his mouth. 14 Thus careful was I, lest mine Enemies should entrap me, and I con∣tinued
still, as a man that heareth not, nor is moved with their tentations, and in whose mouth (notwithstand∣ing their evil deeds to me) are no re∣proofs. 15 For in thee, O Lord, (let them do what they can) do I hope, and put my confidence, that thou wilt keep thy promise, and hear me, when I call upon thee, O Lord, my God, and Saviour. 16 For I said in my prayer to thee, hear me, O Lord, lest, if thou for∣sake me, they should rejoyce and tri∣umph over me, for when, and as soon as my foot of Faith slippeth, never so little by infirmity, they presently imagine, that thou hast forsaken me, and magnifie themselves, as though they had obtained victory, against me. 17 For I cannot marvel, that they should so do, considering, that when I feel the weight of my sins, I my self am ready to halt and despair: and the reason of my sorrow is, because thy judgements are before me, and in my thoughts. 18 For remedy whereof, I will declare, and confess to thee, O Lord,
in the biterness of my Soul, my ini∣quity, and take revenge of my self for it: yea, I will be (as long as I live) heartily sorry, and much grie∣ved for my sin past, though it be for∣given. 19 But mine Enemies think not of forsaking their wayes, they are live∣ly, and merry, and cry peace, peace, to their Souls, and they are strong to do evil: and they also that hate me (because they see my Conversion) wrongfully, and without cause, are multiplyed, and exceedingly in∣creased. 20 They also that unthankfully ren∣der evil to me, for the good which I have done unto them, are also be∣come mine Adversaries, and do unto me all the mischief they can, and why? because they perceive my con∣version, and that I follow and love the thing that good is, which they hate. 21 Forsake me not, either in tenta∣tion, or tribulation, O Lord, the Author of my salvation: O my God, whom I desire to serve, be not far from me, by with-drawing thy grace from me.
22 Make haste (lest I faint un∣der the burthen of my sins) to help me, against my Enemies, O Lord, who art my only stay in this life, and my salvation in the life to come. Glory be to the Father, &c. Psalm 51. HAve mercy upon me, miserable sinner, O God, full of mercy and compassion, according to thy loving and infinite kindness to the Sons of men; and, as my sins are infinite, so, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, which thou hast ever shewed to peni∣tent sinners, blot out of the book of thy remembrance my innumerable trans∣gressions. 2 Wash me thorowly, with the blood of thy dear Son, from mine iniquity, whereby I have so often offended thy Majesty; and cleanse me, in the foun∣tain of thy mercies, from my sin, whereby I have also offended my Neighhour. 3 For, behold, O Lord, I hide not, nor excuse, but in the bitter
tears of repentance acknowledge and confess my horrible transgressions a∣gainst thee, and my grievous sin, in which I did for a time take delight, is grown odious to me, and is ever before me in remorse of Conscience. 4. Against thee, most mercifull Fa∣ther, only, have I sinned, and though I were ashamed to commit sin in the sight of men, yet I have done this great evil in thy all-seeing sight: yet, O Lord, be mercifull to me, and pardon it, that thou mightest be justi∣fied, and found true and faithfull, when thou speakest (as thou hast often done) of mercy and forgiveness to the penitent, and be clear from the imputation of injustice, when thou art arrogantly and falsly judged for se∣verity, thy punishments being just, though the eyes of our understanding be not so clear, as to perceive the ju∣stice of them. 5 Behold, O Lord, that I, as all man-kind, was shapen in the iniquity of original sin, from which fountain springeth my misery: and in sin, and concupiscence did my mother conceive me, from whence groweth the infir∣mity of my flesh.
6 Behold also, O Lord, I know that thou desirest Truth, Faith and in∣tegrity, in the inward parts of my con∣science: and in the hidden parts of me (my soul) Thou shalt make me, by the illumination of thy Holy Spirit, to know wisdom, to eternal life. 7. Purge me, leprous sinner, with spiritual Hisope, the blood of thy Son, instead of the Hysope, which was wont to clense the leprous, in the law; and by that blood, I shall be clean, and purified from the lepro∣sie of sin: Wash me, in the fountain of Grace, and then, by tears of repen∣tance, and the merits of my Saviour, I shall be whiter in thy sight, than Snow. 8. Make me poor wretch to hear, and sensibly feel the joy and comfort, of remission of my sins: and let me find gladness in the promise of life e∣ternal, that the spiritual bones of my soul, which thou hast broken with ten∣tations; and afflictions, may rejoyce, and give thee thanks and praise. 9 Hide and turn away thy face, and wrathfull countenance, from my sins, lay them not to my charge: and blot out of thy Register all mine ini∣quities,
that they never appear to condemn me. 10 Create in me (polluted) a clean and pure heart, O God, the Creator of all things, and renew by thy Grace, a right and sanctified Spirit in me. 11 Cast me not away, into the pit of desperation, by debarring me from thy presence, where (only) is fulness of joy, and take not for ever, thy Ho∣ly Spirit of comfort from me. 12 Restore unto me rather the un∣speakable joy of thy Salvation in Christ Jesus, which they feel in their con∣sciences, whose sins thou remittest: and when I am reinstated in thy fa∣vour, uphold and keep me, from fall∣ing again, with thy free, powerfull, and saving Spirit. 13 Then, even when I shall be re∣stored, I will, by word of exhorta∣tion, and example of conversation, teach transgressors how they shall keep thy wayes and Commandements: and by that means (thy Grace assisting) they, which now are sinners, shall for∣sake their wickedness, and shall be truly converted unto thee. 14 Deliver me, and quit me, from my former bloody offences, and keep
me henceforth, from blood-guiltiness, and carnal corruptions, O God, my Protector: Thou God, which art my Redeemer, and the Author of my Sal∣vation: and, all the dayes of my life, my tongue, for joy thereof, shall sing unto thee, and that aloud, and chear∣fully: and praise thy Name, by ex∣tolling of thy righteousness, who dost justifie sinners, and art merciful to the penitent. 15 O Lord, that givest wisdom to the simple, open thou my lips, which are closed by sin, from doing any ser∣vice unto thee: and then, with bold∣ness, my mouth shall utter, and shew forth thy praise: For to thee alone be∣longeth all Honour and Glory. 16 For thou, O God, desirest not, that I should offer the Sacrifice of Goats and Calves, to expiate my of∣fences, else would I willingly give it, and lay it on thy Altar: but thou (ha∣ving, by sending thy Son Christ Je∣sus, abrogated the Ceremonies of the Law) delightest not any longer in burnt Offerings, but in obedience to thy Commandements. 17 The Sacrifices accepted of God, and whereby we are in Christ reconci∣led
to him, are a broken and humble Spirit, dejected with the sight of sin: a broken and contrite heart, truly mor∣tified and repentant, O God, thou hast promised, that thou wilt not despise, but lovingly accept. 18 Do good, O God, in thy good pleasure, and be favourable and graci∣ous unto Sion, thy Catholick Church: Build thou, upon a sure Foundation of Religion, and establish the hearts of thy Saints and Servants, the walls of thy Church, Ierusalem. 19 Then shalt thou, in Christ Je∣sus, be pleased with us, and with the Sacrifice of Righteousness, in thy Con∣gregation. And with burnt Offerings and Oblations of our hearts. Then shall they, thy Servants thus established, offer Bullocks: the Sacrifice of praise, upon thine Altar, in thy presence, to the honour of thy most holy Name. Glory be to the Father, &c.
Psalm 102. HEar my Prayer, which, in the bitterness of my Soul, I make to thee, O Lord, whose mercy is the Sanctuary of distressed sinners: and let nothing stand between that mercy and me, which may hinder my cry to come to thee. 2 Hide not thy face, turn not away thy countenance from me, as if thou wert offended at me, but rather, in the day of adversity, when I am in trouble and sorrow, encline thine ear of pity unto me, and that right soon and speedily. 3 For my dayes, which I have mis∣spent, are consumed away like smoke, which for want of substance, dis∣solveth to nothing, and my bones, which by my broken spirit, are dryed up, are burnt up as a fire-brand. 4 My heart is dejected, and smit∣ten with the thought of thy Justice, and it is withered, with remembrance of thy Judgements, like grass, with∣out juyce or sap: so that in this anguish of Soul, I forget, and loath to eat my bread.
5 By reason of the grievous voice of my groaning, sighs, and tears, I am so consumed away, that my bones, for want of flesh, cleave to my skin, and I am nothing but skin and bone. 6 I am (for shame that I have of∣fended thee) become in condition like a Pelican, that liveth solitarily in the Wilderness: and I am like an Owl, not daring to be seen, but that avoideth the light, and is continually in the Desert, shunning the company of other Birds. 7 I watch, and sleep not, for the thought of my sins, and am as a Spar∣row, that caring for no company, sit∣teth alone, making grievous lamenta∣tion in a mournful note, upon the house-top. 8 Mine Enemies, seeing me thus pe∣nitent, reproach me, with opprobrious speeches, all the day, continually deri∣ding me: and they that (while I was their companion in sin) applauded me, are, upon my conversion, mad against me, and do combine, and are sworn to do me mischief, and to that end set themselves against me. 9 For this cause, taking no plea∣sure in this world, I have eaten ashes,
and fed upon course meat, like as it were fine bread, and dainty fare, and I have mingled my drink with tears, weeping, and lamenting for my sinnes. 10 Because of thine indignation against me for them, and thy wrath for my bad life past, all this evil and more hath befallen me, for thou hast lifted me up very high, and from thence hast cast me down, that my fall might be the greater. 11 My dayes, few and evil, are passed like a shadow upon a Sun-Dyal, that declineth toward the Evening: and I that lately seemed to flourish, am withered, and dryed up, like grass, without sap, for want of thy comfort. 12 But thou, O Lord, which wert and art, shalt continue immutable, and shalt endure for ever, while all transitory things pass, and come to nothing: and thy glorious works, shall be had in remembrance unto all genera∣tions, even unto the end of the world. 13 Thou, O Lord, who seemest to men to sleep, shalt arise in thy strength, and have mercy and compas∣sion
upon Sion, thy Church militant, now oppressed with the tyranny of Antichrist: for the time to look upon her, and favour her, is at hand, yea the set time, which thou hast decreed for her deliverance, is, or will not be long ere it come. 14 For they which be thy true and faithfull Servants take pleasure and de∣light in her stones (their fellow Ser∣vants) and are glad when they see them prosper: and favour, and pity the very dust and ruines thereof, when they see them under persecution. 15 So, that when they shall be de∣livered from their misery, the very heathen shall fear and tremble at the Name of the Lord, and be converted to him: and all the Kings and Poten∣tates on earth, which now oppose the truth, shall acknowledge thee, O Lord, to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and be afraid at the greatness of thy glory and Majesty. 16 When the Lord, by his almighty power, shall build up Sion, and re∣pair the ruines of his Church, he shall then, to the confusion of his enemies, appear in his glory, which they shall not be able to endure.
17 He will then in mercy regard, and hearken to the prayer of his poor servants, and the destitute of his help: and not any longer seem to turn away his face from them, nor despise their prayer, and earnest supplications. 18 This mercy of his, shall then be recorded and written as a remem∣brance for the generations to come, even to the end of the world, which shall attempt the like against his Church: and the people, yet unborn, that shall succeed and be created, in ages to come, shall praise and magnifie the Lord, which only doth marvellous things. 19 For he hath in mercy, by sending his Son Christ Jesus, looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, his holy place: even from Heaven, his Fathers bosom, did the Lord Jesus behold the Earth, and had compassion upon all the Sons of men. 20 To hear and pity the groaning of the Prisoners, such as did groan under the burden of the Law, and to loose, and set at liberty, by his passion and intercession, those of the posterity of Adam, that are appointed to suffer death, for not fullfiling the same.
21 To the end, that they being so delivered, may declare, and shew the power, and the Name of the Lord, which is Jesus the Saviour, in Sion, his Church: and magnifie and extol his praise in Ierusalem, his holy habi∣tation. 22 When the faithful people, which are yet dispersed over the face of the Earth, are gathered together, and made one Congregation, and the Kingdoms of the Earth, which are yet in darkness, are instructed to serve thee, the only Lord of Heaven and Earth. 23 He, even the Lord, in the time of this expectation, hath weak∣ned and abated my strength, so that I can do no good of my self, in the way of this my earthly pilgrimage: he hath shortned and cut off my dayes, by af∣flicting me for my sin. 24 I said, yet in this weakness, and anguish of my Soul, O my God, with-draw not now thy mercy from me, and take me not away out of this world in the midst of my dayes, the chief time of my strength; as for thy years, as they are from all eternity, so shall they endure, throughout all
generations, even for ever. 25 Of old, at the beginning of time, hast thou, of thine own power, laid and created the Foundations of the Earth, the visible World, and all things in it: and the Heavens, and Firmament thereof, are the on∣ly work of thy Almighty hands and power. 26 They, even Heaven and Earth; and all things in them, shall pass away and perish, from the form they now have: but thou, O Lord, the Crea∣tor of them, shalt endure immutable. Yea, without all doubt, all of them, as thou hast decreed, shall wax old, and consume with age, like a garment long worn, and as a vesture, or gar∣ment, shalt thou, by the sound of the last Trump, change and dissolve them, and they shall yield to thy power, and be changed. 27 But thou, O Lord, art the same, alwayes unchangeable: and thy years, being from all Eternity, shall have no end, but continue for ever. 28 The Children, and posterity of thy faithful Servants, begotten by the seeds-men of thy Word, shall continue
in grace in this life: and their righ∣teous seed shall stand fast, and be esta∣blished for ever, together with them in glory hereafter, and enjoy ever∣lasting happiness before thee, in thy blessed presence. Glory be to the Father, &c. Psalm 130. OUt of the depth of tentations, dangers, and sorrow for my sins, wherein my Spirit is almost overwhelmed, have I, by fervent prayer, cryed and called unto thee, O Lord, who only art able to give me relief. 2 Lord, of thy mercy haste thee, and hear my voice and petition, and deliver me from my misery, O my God, let thine ears of pity and com∣passion be attentive to consider and well weigh the lamentable voice of my hum∣ble supplications, and let not my pray∣er return unpitied or unheard of thee.
3 If thou, Lord, contrary to thy disposition, shouldest be so exact and extreme, as in the rigour of thy ju∣stice, to mark the iniquities, which we by our natural corruption daily fall into, and punish us accordingly: O good Lord, who? none, not the most upright, shall be able to answer one for a thousand, or stand before thee,Iob 3. 3. (without much horrour) at the Judgement Seat. 4 But, for the comfort of poor wretched sinners, and to keep us from utter desperation, we find it record∣ed by the holy Spirit, that there is forgiveness of sins, and mercy toward sinners repenting, with thee, by Jesus Christ, who came to save them: and yet, this mercy of thine is tyed with such conditions, that thou, who also art just, mayest be also feared, lest thy lenity be abused. 5 I, for my part, wait, and confi∣dently expect, for the Lord, to re∣ceive mercy from him: My sinful, but repentant Soul, waits to receive consolation: and in his Word (where∣by he promiseth mercy to repentant sinners) do I hope, and place my whole confidence,Heb. 10. 23. because I know, that he
which hath promised is just. 6 My sinful Soul, in this expecta∣tion, waiteth for the Lord, and tar∣ryeth his good pleasure to comfort it, more earnestly than they that, in a dis∣consolate long night, watch for the morning: Yea, (I say it again) more zealously than they that are weary of the night, and watch for the light of the morning. 7 Let Israel, and all Gods faithful people, hope still, and put their trust in the goodness of the Lord: and not without cause: for with the Lord, though he justly take vengeance on us for our sins, yet there is, ever was, and will be found, mercy towards pe∣nitent sinners: and with him, by Je∣sus Christ, is not only forgiveness for a few sins, but plenteous redemption from the captivity of the Devil and Sinne. 8 And he, even Jesus Christ, by his merits and intercession, shall redeem and save Israel, and each of his faith∣ful servants, from all his iniquities, and the punishment due for them. Glory be to the Father, &c.
Psalm 143. HEar my earnest and humble pray∣er, O Lord, which in my mi∣sery I make unto thee, Give ear, and be not deaf to my supplicatious, in the time of my distress: but in thy faith∣fulness and truth, which endureth for ever, answer me, and grant my petiti∣on, which I make, not trusting in any merits of mine own, but in thy righ∣teousness. 2 And my further petition to thee is, that thou enter not into the Throne of thy Iudgement, by strictly exami∣ning my mis-deeds, and dealing ri∣gorously with me thy poor servant, who hath mis-spent his talent: for in thy all-seeing sight, shall no man living in this vale of misery, be justified, or found innocent. 3 For, the Old Enemy of mankind, the Devil, hath by his malice persecu∣ted, and sought to entrap my Soul, to separate it from the love of thee: he hath smitten, and cast my life and Soul down to the ground, and filled me full of earthly desires, he hath made,
and caused me to dwell, and take plea∣sure in the darkness of of my sins, as those that are without sense, and have been long dead. 4 Therefore, O Lord, consider∣ing my desperate estate, is my spirit overwhelmed with grief within me, and my heart is disquieted within me, and is also desolate, and sore troubled. 5 I yet, in the midst of the sor∣rows that are in my heart, do remem∣ber what I have read and heard, what thou hast done in the dayes of old, how that thou hast been gracious to the pe∣nitent, and severe against the unre∣pentant sinner. I meditate also on all thy works, but especially on that of thy mercy, and I muse, and exercise my self in contemplating on the works of thy hands, admiring thy Power, and Wisdom, in the Creation of all things. 6 I stretch forth, and lift up my hands in my prayers unto thee, O Lord: my Soul (which is dry for want of the dew of thy grace) thirsteth after thee, for the water of life, as a thirsty land, in a time of drought.
7 Hear me, and answer me speedi∣ly, delay not, O Lord, for my spirit waxeth faint, and faileth me in my devotion: Oh hide not thy face and loving countenance from me miserable sinner, lest it come to pass, that I be like in condition unto them that go down headlong after their own inven∣tions, into the pit of destruction and perdition. 8 Cause me by thy Spirit, to hear and feel thy loving kindness and mercy in the morning speedily, lest I perish: for in thee only, and not in the help of Men or Angels, do I place my whole trust and confidence: Cause me, by thy grace, to know and learn the way of thy testimonies, wherein I should, and ought to walk, without declining to the right hand or the left: For I lift up my soul, by prayer and repen∣tance, unto thee, who only canst direct me aright. 9 Desiver me, O Lord, by thy pow∣er, from all mine Enemies, visible and invisible, for I flee, and make haste for succour unto thee, as to my Prote∣ctor, to hide and defend me from their violence. 10 Teach and instruct me (that
am ignorant) to do thy Will, and those things which thou commandest, for thou art thy God and Director: Thy Spirit is good, and all-sufficient for me: Lead me therefore by it, in∣to the right way, which bringeth into the Land of Righteousness and Truth. 11 Quicken me again, O Lord, and revive me from the death of sin, for thy Names sake, which is Jesus, and for thy Righteousness sake, and love to goodness, bring my Soul by thy grace, out of the trouble and an∣guish whereinto my sins have brought me. 12 And of thy tender mercy and compassion cut off, and kill in me mine Enemies, the concupiscences of the flesh, and destroy and confound all them, that with injuries and tenta∣tions afflict and disquiet my Soul, which is wholy devoted to thee: for I am thy servant, and Son of thy Hand∣maid, and desire to serve thee in ho∣liness and righteousness all the dayes of my life. Glory be to the Father, &c.
Directions before Receiving the Holy Communion. AS many as desire to be partakers of the holy Sacrament of the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ (as of necessity every one must be, that intendeth to re∣ceive benefit by him) ought, before the taking of it, to prepare his Soul, and fit it, for the due receiving of it, and not come to it carelesly, without due ex∣amination of himself, and respective consideration of the excellency and worth thereof. And therefore, before the time of communicating, we ought to spend some hours or dayes (the more the better) in meditating upon the great and unspeakable love and mercy of God towards us miserable sinners, in ordain∣ing so powerful a means to purge and cleanse us, and bring us to him: in believing all his promises made to us in Christ Iesus, in applying them to our
selves; in performing the works of charity; in examining in what estate our Souls do stand; in calling to mind our sins, and confessing them to God; in grieving and repenting for them, and that in all humility and godly sorrow; in returning with the Prodigal;Lu. 15.20 smite∣ing our breasts with the Publican;Lu. 18.13 weeping with Mary Magdalen;Luc. 7.58. beg∣ging mercy with the Thief on the Cross; and lastly, in promising to God, to lead a better life for the time to come. Thus if we do, no doubt, but we shall be welcome Guests to this Feast, as be∣ing of that number for whom it was prepared. For by how much the more we come prepared to take this Sacrament, so much the greater shall be the grace which we shall receive by it. There are four Duties required in every Communicant. First, Faith, to believe, that Iesus Christ did, and suffered all things, which are written of him in the Holy Scriptures, for the Redemption of Mankind. Secondly, Repentance, by which a man (con∣fessing his sins to God, with a purpose to lead a new life) is reconciled to him. Thirdly, Reverend Behaviour, that in all humility, we make our selves fit
Guests for such a Feast. Fourthly, Meditation and Attention, that we, during tht time of the administration of the Sacrament, attend no earthly thoughts, but wholly fix our Souls upon our Saviour Christ, and meditate on nothing but this great and high benefit, and thereby be enflamed with a hearty love, and thankful mind to God, not only for his infinite love, in suffering so great things for us, but also for in∣stituting this blessed Sacrament, to re∣main to the end of the World, as a sure pledge of his continuance among us, and perpetual care over us. After we have communicated, and are refreshed we ought also to be thank∣ful to God, for so great a benefit; (Thankfulness being not the least Duty of this Service; The Sacrament it self being called Eucharistia, which is Thanksgiving) and to strive to imitate him as well in life as death: to live purely, and not to defile our Souls again, being purged and cleansed by the pow∣erful operation of this blessed Sacra∣ment: that so by Examination, Me∣ditation, Thanksgiving, and constant Resolution of Amendment, We may worthily receive Christ into our Souls
and be made members of his mystical body. Meditations and Prayers before the Communion. VVHat am I, O Lord, that I should be so bold as to come near to thee? what am I? that I should attempt to receive this so great and high mystery? what is man by na∣ture, but a vessel of corruption, unapt to any good, propense and most ready to any evil? What is man, but a crea∣ture, of all others most wretched? blind in judgement, inconstant in his acti∣ons, unclean in his desires, and (though small in desert, yet) proud and great in his own conceit? Thou seest, O Lord, what I am. But thou, O Lord, art great, good, wise, and eternal: omnipotent in strength, wonderfull in wisdom, deep in thy counsells, terri∣ble in thy judgements, and absolutely perfect, in all thy works. How then dare I, that am so base and unclean a
creature,Iob. 15.15 approach to the Feast of so great a God, and a Lord of so great a Majesty? Behold the Heavens are not clean in thy sight, and the Pillars of Heaven shake and tremble at thy word. Saint Iohn the Baptist (who was san∣ctified in his Mothers Womb) pro∣fessed himself not worthy to unloose the latchet of thy shooes.Job. 1.27. Saint Peter cry∣ed out to thee, to depart from him a sinfull man, How then, can I, the chief of all sinners, but tremble at thy presence? O Lord, I fear that (being thus wretched and unfit) I shall not be admitted to this Feast,Mat. 22. 2. but rather be repelled, for want of a wedding gar∣ment, even the garment of a sanctifi∣ed Soul. For my whole life hath been so wretchedly and lewdly spent, and my dayes have been so wickedly wa∣sted, that I hourly seem to renew thy passion. Many a time I have (with Iudas) sold thee, for a small sum of pleasure or profit,Mat. 26. 22. and now in coming to receive thee unworthily,Mat. 24. 26. what doe I else, but with him, betray thee with a kiss? How then shall I dare to re∣ceive thee, in so desperate and wick∣ed estate? How canst thou abide or dwell in so loathsome a Dungeon,
wherein, there is no part, room, or corner clean? O Lord, I acknowledge mine unworthiness, and yet withall thy mercies are not hid from me: and by them, I am encouraged to come, with confidence unto thee, for by how much the unworthier I come un∣to thee, by so much the more will thy mercy be glorified, if thou do not re∣ject me. Lord, thou art not wont to put sinners back, but to call, and set them forward to repentance. Where∣fore, O Lord, animated by thy calling, and invitation I come unto thee, o∣verburthened with the weight of my sins, hoping to find ease and relief of thee. Thy custome (while thou wert upon earth) was to receive sinners, and to eat with them: and thy delight was to be with the Sons of men,Luc, 15.2 If thou, O Lord, be still pleased with such guests, behold one here at this time, of that kind, a notorious sinner. I verily believe thou tookest more pleasure in the tears of the sinfull Woman, than in the great feast of the proud Phari∣see,Luc. 7.38, 47, and for a few tears of hers, didst forgive many sins unto her. Behold, O Lord, new matter offered for thy great mercy to work upon. Here ly∣eth
a sinner who hath many more sins than she, but fewer tears by many: who though he hath more grievously offended, yet doth more carelesly be∣wayle his offences than she did. She was neither the first, nor the last, whom thou in thy mercy didst receive to favour. O Lord let me also be one of the subjects of this thy mercy, and although I have not tears sufficient to wash thy feet, yet thou hadst shed drops of blood, more than sufficient, to cleanse my sins. I read, O Lord, in the Gospel,Luc 16, 17, 18, that all that were diseased flocked to thee; and (by that vertue which came out of thee) were healed: and I verily perswade my self, that thy Nature is not changed: for in thee is, and will be to the end of the world, health and remedy for all griefs: and thou art readier to make us whole, than we are to ask health of thee. I know O Lord, that this Sacrament (which I so earnestly long after) is not only meat for those that are in health, but Physick also for the sick: and doth not only refresh the righteous, but cleans∣eth those that are sinners also. If I be weak, by it I shall be strengthned, If in health, in health by it I shall be pre∣served,
and if dead in sin, by it I shall be revived. I humbly therefore in∣treat thee, O Father, that (as as Da∣vid did admit.2 Sam. 9. Mephibosheth to his Ta∣ble for his Fathers sake: so) thou wouldest suffer me to be partaker of thy heavenly Table, for thy Sons sake, who with so great labour and sorrow, did regenerate us, by his death on the Cross, and liveth and reigneth with thee, and the Holy Spirit, for ever. Prayers before the Commu∣nion. O Almighty Lord God, Father of all mercie, and consolation, I humbly beseech thee to behold with the eye of pity, my poor and wretched soul, which though thou didst create after thine own Image, and washedst with the blood of thy dear Son, yet I have so abominably defiled and defa∣ced with the stain of sin, that it can hardly be known, O Father, I was thy sonne, whom thou didst to loving∣ly
imbrace and load with blessings, and who was in thy house in great ho∣nour and dignity: In the Sacrament of Baptisme thou didst adopt me, and gavest me the inheritance of a sonne and heir, but I unthankfully and pro∣digally, by my evil life, have wast∣ed my Patrimony: I have wickedly abused the flower and prime of my youth, and the good parts and facul∣ties of my soul and body, with the pleasures of the flesh, pride, surfet∣ting, envy, lust, covetousness, ideness, rebellion, and disobedience: and now, at the last, I find that all the tem∣poral delights of the flesh, and the World, are altogether vain, and va∣nish like smoak. For all flesh is grass, and all the Glory of man, is but like the flower of the field,Esa. 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.14. and is suddenly gone. He that is rich to day, to mor∣row becommeth poor and miserable; he that walketh in health, and strength of body to day, to morrow is (by sick∣ness) made feeble and weak; he that liveth to day, the next day dieth; and he, which to day glorieth in the great∣est pomp, to morrow is laid in his Coffin, and carried to his Grave. Therefore, O Lord, consider the weakness and
frailty of man, and turn away, I pray pray thee, thy face from my sins, and remember not them so, in thine anger, that thou forget either thine own mercy, or my weakness. By mine own fault, I confess, O Lord, and by my evil conversation, I have made my self unworthy of thy favour, and by my evil concupiscences, I have grievously wounded my conscience, I have often grieved thy holy Spirit, by not hearkning to the good motions thereof, but yeilding to my sensual lust, and beastly appetite. Yet, O mercifull Father, cast me not utterly from thy sight: for from the begin∣ning of the world, it was not heard, that thou didst reject any sinner, that with a contrite heart came unto thee. Behold I come unto thee in great ne∣cessity, and cast my self at thy feet, confessing the greatness, and multi∣tude of my sins. They have brought me into that evil state and condition, that I am not worthy to be called thy Son, yet I pray thee receive me into the num∣ber of thy hired Servants.Luc. 15. 2. Give me grace, heartily to repent me of my sins, feed and cherish me with the bread and drink of the Body and Blood of thy Son
Christ Iesus, that by thy mercy, I may be received to grace, and re∣stored to the former dignity, from which I am worthily cast, and to the inheritance of thy everlasting King∣dom, through the same our Saviour Iesus Christ. Another. O Blessed Saviour, I poor un∣worthy sinner, have a great de∣sire, and earnest longing to come to thy Table, but considering my many and grievous sins, tremble, and fear to approach unto it. For when I con∣sider thy words to thy Disciples, Ex∣cept ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you:Joh. 6.59. And on the other side,I Cor. 11. 27. the words of the Apostle, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, I am in such a streight, that I know not what to do: For gladly would I receive
this Sacrament, being desirous to live: but fearful I am to take it unworthily, trembling at thy Comination. I come therefore to thee, the Fountain of Mercy, hoping that thou wilt wash me. I come to thee, the good Sa∣maritan,Lu. 10.34 hoping that thou wilt cleanse my wounds. I open my grief, and discover my iniquities to thee; I look upon my sins, great and grievous, and thereupon tremble: yet beholding thy mercies, great and plentiful, I am therewith again refreshed. Remem∣ber, O Lord, how many drops of Sweat and Blood thou didst shed, how many Pains and Sorrows thou didst su∣stain, to expiate my sins. I intreat thee therefore by them, to purge and purifie me, that I may worthily be in∣corporated into thy body, which is thy Church, and may worthily also receive this blessed Sacrament: that so, to∣gether with thy whole Church, I may give thee praise everlastingly.
Or thus. O Merciful Lord Iesus, I con∣fess my self to be a most grie∣vous and wretched sinner, not worthy to approach into thy presence, altoge∣ther unfit and unmeet to receive thee under the roof of my Soul,Luc. 7.6, in respect of the stains and pollutions thereof, and that it is not decked and fitted with such good graces as thy Majesty and Presence requireth, and therefore am afraid to come near unto thee. Yet O Lord, considering thy comfortable saying,Eze. 33. 11. that Thou dost not desire the death of a sinner, but that he should turn unto thee, and live: and thy blessed in∣vitation, how lovingly, with the armes of thy mercy stretched out, thou hast called all, that are heavily oppres∣sed with the burden of their sins,Mat. 11. 28. to come to thee for comfort and ease. And lastly, thy usual practice, in pitying and relieving those which were cast down with the thought of their mis∣deeds; as the Thief on the Cross,Luc. 23. 7. Mary Magdalen,John 8. the Woman taken in Adultery, the Publican,Luc. 18. Peter,Luc. 26. and
Paul, (all of them grievous sinners) I am comforted, and emboldned to come unto thee, assuredly trusting, that thou wilt (of thy goodness) sup∣ply my defects, and make me a worthy receiver of the high mystery and benefit of thy blessed Sacrament, whereof of my self I am altogether unworthy. Stretch out thy right hand, O sweet Iesu, to me thy poor servant, and give out of thy rich store-house of mercy, what I want: that thereby I may be made a living Temple to thee, and an acceptable habitation for thine honour to abide in. And grant, that being cleansed by thy mercy and good∣ness, I may by thy grace and power, persevere in all godliness and holiness of conversation, to the end of my days, and attain to that blessed place, where thou reignest, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, world without end, Amen.
Meditations and Prayers after th Sacrament Received. IF all the Creatures in the world should offer themselves together with me, to praise thee, O Lord, yet is it certain, that we could not give thee sufficient thanks for the least of thy mercies: and if together we can∣not sufficiently praise thee for the least, how much less can I alone per∣form so great a duty, for such inesti∣mable blessings, as I have at this time received? for vouchsafing to vi∣sit me, comfort me, and honour me with acceptance and admittance to thy blessed Table. If Elizabeth the Mo∣ther of Iohn Baptist, (upon the Vir∣gin Maries entrance to her house) said,Luc. 1.43. Whence is it, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? What shall I say, whom the Lord himself hath visited and united to him, by his blessed Sacrament, being a vessel and receptacle of all impurity, who hath so often offended, despited, and neg∣lected him?Psal. 8.4. King David wondred why God should so esteem of, or visit
man; but I wonder much more, why he should be made man for man, abide with him, suffer death for him, and give himself to him for spiritual food. Solomon, after he had built a Temple to God, reasoned thus,1 Ki. 8.17. But will God dwell indeed on the Earth? Behold, the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, how much loss this House that I have builded? May not I much more mar∣vel, that God will not disdain to come and abide in this my poor and wretch∣ed Soul? What greater benefit of grace, what greater argument of his love is there, can there be shewed to me? Oh my Soul, if thou wouldest but throughly conceive the happiness that cometh to thee by this holy Sa∣crament, then consider, and well weigh, what benefits it bringeth with it. By it the Sons of Men are made the Sons of God, and all that is earthly or carnal in us, is mortified, that the Deity may live and abide with us. What therefore, O my Lord, shall I do? What thanks shall I render to thee? With what fervency shall I love thee? For, if thou, so mighty a Lord, hast vouchsafed to love me, poor wretched creature, how should
it be, but that I should return love again to thee? And how shall I ex∣press my love better, than in forbear∣ing those things which thou dost ab∣horr, and following those things which thou dost command? Give, O Lord, to this end, thy concomitant grace to me, whereby I may return a recipro∣cal love to thee, and love those things which are acceptable, and avoid those things which are to thee unpleasing. Give me a heart which may love thee, with so true, faithful, and constant affection, as that nothing under the Sun may separate me from the love of thee.Rom. .39 Let me not follow the love of the World, or delight in the vanities of it any longer: but give me power to kill and quench all other love and desires, and to love thee only, desire thee only, and only think of thee, and thy Commandements: that all my affections and thoughts may be fixed on thee, that in all tentations and ad∣versities, I may have recourse to thee only, and receive all comfort from thee alone, who livest and reignest, one God, world without end, Amen.
Another. I Humbly thank thee, O sweet Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, that thou hast so plentifully refreshed my drie and fainting Soul, with the holy Sacra∣ment of thy precious Body and Blood. I earnestly intreat thee further, that whatsoever is in me vicious, or con∣trary to thy blessed will, may by ver∣tue of this blessed Sacrament, be root∣ed out of me, that my Soul may be∣come a fit habitation for thy holy Spi∣rit. Let it be to me the absolution of my sins, the confirmation of my faith, and encrease of all thy graces in me, the viands of this my peregrination and pil∣grimage, the only delight of my soul; peace and joy in tribulation; health and strength in affliction and tentation. Let it be a light and guide to my actions, and my only comfort in the day of my dissolution. Let the Palate of my Soul be so changed thereby, that it may relish nothing besides thee. Grant also, that I may hunger and thirst after this bread of life, and cup of salvation, and that I may with a pure mind, and
chast affection, receive it often, that thereby my soul and body may be pre∣served to life everlasting; to thee be all praise, power, and dominion ascribed now and for ever. Or thus. I Yield thee all possible thanks, O merciful Lord, that of thy own meer goodness, and without any merit of mine, thou hast so plentifully at this time satisfied me, with the extra∣ordinary food of my Soul, thy blessed Body and Blood. O Lord, I heartily repent me of my sins past, and am heartily sorry, when I consider how unprofitably and wickedly I have spent my life hitherto: I desire, O Lord, to amend what is amiss in me: be thou ayding (I beseech thee) to me, that I may not only duly bewail and lament for that which is past, but take heed to my wayes for the time to come. And to this end, O Lord, do thou strengthen me with thy spiritual
ayd, for without thy help, and the direction of the Holy Spirit, I shall not be able to do any good thing, or perform that which is pleasing to thee. Grant, O Lord, that I may hereafter faithfully follow and serve thee, who hast at this time so lovingly vouchsa∣fed to come to me. And because (through my infirmity) I cannot fol∣low thee as I would, be pleased to assist me with thy power, aud draw me after thee: Let my Soul be so strength∣ned by vertue of this Sacrament, that it may esteem nothing pleasing or de∣lightful in comparison of thee: that it may lust after no transitory thing, nor be disquieted with any worldly cross; but, by thy assisting grace, I may overcome all the difficulties of this life, and bless thee in the life to come. Or thus. O Blessed Lord Iesus, who, of thy unspeakable Love, hast condescended to my infirmity, and
vouchsafed in these mysteries to come unto me, and hast made me partaker of thy blessed Body and Blood. I humbly intreat thee, of thy infinite goodness, not to look back upon my sinful life past, and to give me grace to obey thy Commandements, hereaf∣ter, and not to return to those for∣mer sins,2 Pet. 2. 22. as a Dog to his vomit. Grant, that this most holy Sacra∣ment may be to me life and salvation, and not turn to my greater punishment and condemnation. Grant, that it may cleanse my Soul from sin past, and strengthen me against all tentations to come. Grant, that it may be so wholesome and nourishing to me, that I may walk in the strength thereof all the dayes of my life: and at last be brought by thy merits, to that place of Glory, where thou dost reign, to∣gether with the Father, and the Blessed Spirit, forever. Psal. 103.Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his Holy Name. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits. Which forgiveth all thy sin, and
healeth all thine infirmities. Which saveth thy life from destructi∣on, and crowneth hee with mercy and living kindness. Which satisfieth thy mouth with good things, &c. Motives to Thanksgiving. IT is not the least part of the Duty of a Christian, in the sight of God, to be thankful to him for the benefits he daily bestoweth upon us. For as God is kind, merciful, and loving to us: so he expecteth that we should render back thanks to him for those blessings which we receive from him. For we have nothing else to retribute to him, but a thankful memorial of his blessings. And this King David well understood, when he said,Psal. 116. 12, 7. What shall I render to the Lord for all the benefits he hath done unto me? I will offer to thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, &c. As therefore we ought to be diligent in Prayer, for those things we want: so
ought we also to be perpetually thankful for them, when we have obtained what we desire. And when we have done al that we can, we cannot give him due praise and thanks for the least part of that which we daily receive. For if we respect that which is past, present, or to come, we shall still meet with matter enough, which expresseth his goodness and love to us, and exacteth this Duty from us. If we consider that which is past, then we shall soon per∣ceive, that but for him, we had not been at all, nor been preserved hither∣to, amongst so many dangers, without his protection: If that which is pre∣sent, we cannot but acknowledge, that by his alone goodness we live and enjoy those blessings wherewith we are load∣ed, beyond desert: If that which is to come, he is our hope, of all good things which we desire or expect, either for this life, or for the life to come. And as God accounteth Thanksgiving a Duty,Ps. 50.23. 15. so he taketh it for an Honour done unto him, if we perform it. He hath so much esteemed of it alwayes, even from the beginning, that he re∣puted and accounted it above the rest of the Sacrifices offered unto him. Besides
we may consider, that in the Law,Ose. 14.2. God himself instituted a peculiar and special Sacrifice of oblation of thanks.Mal. 1.11. For the Feast of the Paschal Lamb,Exod. 12. was no other thing but an Eucharistical, or thankful service, in remembrance of the wonderfull deliverance of the Jews from their servitude. Our Saviour also instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist,Luc. 22. for a perpetual remem∣brance, and memorial of all his bene∣fits to Mankind, especially of our Re∣demption by his death.Hest. 9. Hester esta∣blished a Feast to preserve a thankfull memory of the Jews deliverance from the plots of Haman. And in brief,Exo. 15. it was generally evermore the practice of Gods Saints, to express this Duty,Deut. 32. as may be seen by many Songs,Judges 5. Hymnes,1 Sam. 2. Psalms,Ps. 34.96. 103. 107. 111. 113. &c. and Prayers of Thanksgiving, which are left unto us in the Scriptures, as patterns for us to imitate. Of Mo∣ses and Miriam. Of Moses alone.Esa. 38.10 Of Deborah.John 23. Of Hanna.Abac. 3.2. Of David,Dan. 3. in divers places of the Psalms.Luc. 2. 19. Of good King Ezechias.1. 68. Of Jonas.1. 46. Of the Prophet Habakkuk. Of the three Chirldren. Of the Angels. Of Zacha∣ry.Acts 4.24. Of the Blessed Virgin Mary.Rev. 5.12. Of the Church. And of the Elders. And
after those examples, of necessity we must frame our selves: for be sure of this, That whensoever praise and thanks shall sail, and be wantiug on our parts towards God, then presently God will withdraw his hand of mercy and bounty from us. Thanksgiving. I Thank thee, O merciful Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, for all thy mercies and favours continually heaped upon me: for that thou hast not only created me after thine own Image and likeness,Gen. 9.6. and given to me a body with all the parts and members thereof, and a soul with all the powers and faculties thereof, that with them, and by them, I might know, love, and serve thee: but that thou hast so gra∣ciously preserved both body and soul, from time to time, from all dangers. Thou hast alwayes been my refuge in tribulations, and my defence and suc∣cour in adversities: When I went
astray, thou didst reduce me into the right away; when I offended thee, thou didst gently correct me; when I was sad, thou didst comfort me; and when (for the grievousness of my sins) I was ready to despair, thou of thy mercy and compassion didst strengthen me, and keep me from ut∣ter ruine. I acknowledge, O Lord, thy more than fatherly indulgence to∣ward me, from my birth to this pre∣sent time: for unless thou of thy good∣ness hadst upheld me, I had long ere this time been drowned and over∣whelmed in the bottomless gulf of my sins. But thou hast delivered me from the jawes of the roaring Lyon, who hath daily sought to devour me, and hast defended me from all his snares and assaults.1 Pet. 5.8. And as thou hast of thy mer∣cy preserved my soul from destruction, so thou hast oftentimes delivered my body from the gates of death, when many sicknesses and infirmities took hold of me. I thank thee also, O Lord, for all other thy temporal blessings, which thou in plentiful manner hast heaped on me, as Food, Rayment, Wealth, Possessions, and Children: For my health and liberty, for the pre∣rogative
which thou hast given me over all thy creatures, in their subjecti∣on to my service and use. I thank thee also, O sweet Saviour, for the infinite work of my Redemption, and for thy exceeding great love, in ac∣complishing that great work: that thou wouldest suffer so many tor∣ments, sorrows, labours, and griefs; yea so bitter and disgraceful a death, even the death of Malefactors, to re∣deem me from a most desperate and certain state of damnation, (which I most justly have fallen into) to a state of glory, and immortality, which I by no means could have deserved. I thank thee also, O Lord, most holy, for all other thy spiritual graces and bles∣sings, as my Regeneration, Vocation, Sanctification, for thy blessed Sacra∣ments, for my Preservation, and hope of Glorification. O Lord, I am not sufficient to render unto thee condign thanks and praises for all these thy mer∣cies: yet accept, I humbly pray thee, these poor and weak thanks, which I offer unto thee, according to my bounden duty and service, For as there is no hour of my life, wherein I do not enjoy thy favours, and taste of
thy goodness: so (if my frailty would permit) I should spend no time of my life, without remembring them, and praising and blessing thee for the same; Glory be therefore to thee, O Lord my Creator; Glory be to thee, O Iesus my Redeemer; Glory be to thee, O Holy Ghost my Sancti∣fier; Glory to the high and undivided Trinity, whose works are inseparable, and whose dominion endureth world without end. Another. ALmighty and everliving God, I humbly thank thy Heavenly Majesty, for all thy blessings which thou hast vouchsafed to me, poor and sinful creature; that thou hast created me, and given to me a body, the workmanship and excellency where∣of, when I behold, and well consi∣der, I find so many several benefits received, as I have members, veins, joynts, sinews, and nerves, all which
discover and manifest the wisdom and power of the Maker of them: The benefit of which several parts, none can so well know, as they which want any of them, or are grieved with the infirmity or weakness of them. I therefore bless thee, that thou hast not created me blind, lame, deaf, or dumb, evil-shaped, or weak in my senses; but hast given me a sound and right mind, in a healthful body. I further praise thy Name, O Lord, for that thou hast infused a soul into this my body: a work so glorious and transcendent, that if I were not alto∣gether stupid, and void of all judge∣ment, I would not by my actions ac∣count so basely of it as I seem to do, nor defile it with such impure, con∣temptible, and unclean works, as I daily commit. I thank thee, O Lord, that I was not born amongst Infidels, and amongst those who do not truly call upon thy Name; but in that part of the world, where thy Gospel is tru∣ly preached, and thy Sacraments duly administred. I thank thee also, for thy gracious preservation of me, from my birth to this present hour: I con∣fess, O Lord, that it is of thy mercy
and goodness, that I am thus preser∣ved: for if thou shouldest but with∣draw thine hand of preservation from me, it could not be, but that in the twinkling of an eye, I should miserably perish, and return to nothing. I thank thee, that thou hast of thy providence appointed all thy Creatures for my su∣stenance and service: some for health, and some for delight: Grant, O Lord, that I may use them to those ends for which thou hast created them; and that by them I may be moved truly to meditate on thy goodness, and seri∣ously praise thee for them. I further thank thee, O Father, that when, as by our first Parents fall, all mankind was in the state of damnation, it plea∣sed thee (not to deal with us, as thou didst with Lucifer, whom thou utter∣ly expelledst thy presence, but) to send thy only Son from thy bosom into this world, that by his bitter death we might be restored to our former estate. I acknowledge, O Lord, that I owe much unto thee for my Creation, but much more for my Redemption; For what would it have profited me; nay, what misery should I not have suffer∣ed, to have been born, and afterward
to be condemned for ever? I thank thee, O Lord, that thou hast also vouchsafed to call me out of the depth of darkness, and shadow of death (wherein I lay) by the admira∣ble light of thy justifying grace, to the true knowledge and love of thee. It is not the least of thy benefits, O Lord, it sheweth not the least part of thy power, that thou hast called me from so vile an estate, whereinto I had cast my self after Baptism (and in the same had continued many years rebelliously) to the estate of Salvati∣on. For it must needs be acknowled∣ged that thy mercy is great in pardon∣ing sinners their offences: but withall, it cannot be denied, but that thy power is greater, in making sinners; righteous and just. Great was the be∣nefit of my Creation, but by that act, I was not only made the Son of man: but greater is the benefit of Iustifica∣tion, for thereby (in Christ) I am made the Son of God. Great is the benefit of Redemption (and indeed the greatest of all others) but without Vocation and Iustification, it had a∣vailed me nothing. Great is the be∣nefit which ariseth by the expectation
of Glory: and no less is this of Iustifi∣cation; for it is a work of no less pow∣er to make a just man of a sinner, than to make a just man happy and blessed: for as much as the difference between sin and grace, is more than between Grace and Glory. I acknowledge therefore, O Lord, that the benefits which arise by these heavenly gifts and graces are so great, that my tongue faileth, and my heart wanteth ability, wherewith sufficiently to praise thee for them. I praise thee also, O Lord, for thy blessed Sacraments; for that of Baptism, whereby I was cleansed from the guilt of original sins, and regenerated and adopted into the num∣ber of thy Children: and for the o∣ther,, of the blessed body and blood of our Saviour Iesus Christ: the Sacra∣ment of Grace, Unity, Charity, and Remission of sins, the food of our Souls in this Pilgrimage, and the Con∣duit through which all graces are con∣veyed to our fainting Souls. Lastly, I thank thee, for thy preservation of me in thy Grace, by which I am re∣strained from returning to the mire with the washed Sow, and to the vomit with the Dog:2. Pet. 2. and by which I am strength∣ned
to doe something acceptable and pleasing unto thee. I confess, O Lord, that whatsoever good I have done, is wrought in me by thee: and whatsoever tentation or evil I escape, is meerly by thy providence. O Lord, continue, and keep me still in this grace, that I may so use all thy blessings, and so keep them in mind, that they may stir up in me, a more ardent de∣sire to magnifie thy blessed Name, and a greater care of ordering my wayes hereafter: that I may no more grieve thy troubled Spirit,Ephes. 4. 30. who with thee, and thy blessed Son, our only Saviour liveth and reigneth one God, world without end. Another. ALL praise, honour, and glory be given to thee, O Lord God, Father Almighty, for all thy inesti∣mable benefits bestowed upon me, and all mankind, whether private or pub∣lick, general or particular, spiritual
or temporal. Who is able to reck∣on up or declare the several kinds or parts of them? for creating the world, beautifying, enriching, and making it fruitful for the use of man: for giving unto us souls and bodies, and adorning them, with infinite faculties and gifts: and (which exceeds the rest of thy blessings) for delivering us from the power and servitude of sin and the Devil, for forbearing and expect∣ing our repentance so loug, preserv∣ing us from all dangers, and furnishing us with all things necessary for this life. What praise shall we render to thee, O sweet Iesus, for all that thou hast done, and suffered for us: VVee praise and bless thee, for thy Incar∣nation and Birth, for all the labours, pains, sorrows, wounds and disgra∣ces, together with the vile and igno∣minious death which thou didst suffer, to reconcile us to thy Fathers favour, from which, our sins had justly exclu∣ded us: for which thy great love to the Sons of men, blessed be thy holy Name. O holy and blessed Spirit, who in the beginning of time, didst move
upon the face of the waters at our Savi∣ours Baptism,Gen 1. 2. in the shape of a Dove:Mat. 3. 16. and on the Apostles in the shape of fiery tongues,Act. 2. 3. we praise and worship thee, for enlightning our understandings: for fitting and making us apt to con∣ceive the mysteries of life eternal; for converting us from evil conversation, to newness of life, and for sanctifying us to life everlasting: for directing us in the works of truth, and governing us in our temporal affairs. O glorious and sacred Trinity, in∣fuse into us we beseech thee, such measure of thy grace, that we may be dayly mindfull of all these thy bles∣sings. Pardon all our former ingrati∣tude and negligence, in that we have been no more zealous to love thee, nor more carefull to serve thee, and so forgetfull to thank thee, for all thy benefits and mercies. Illuminate our hearts, that we may firmly beleeve in thee, devoutly call upon thee, and o∣bediently execute thy holy Will, that at the last we may by the merits and passion of thee, O Saviour, attain to that heavenly Mansion, where thou, O blessed Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity abidest world without end.
I thank thee, O Lord, For my Creation. my being. my well being. That I am indued with Reason. That I am A civil man. A Christian. Freeborn. Ingenious. Of honest Parents. That I am sound in mind, Senses. Body. That I am well brought up. taught. I thank thee, For thy gifts of Nature. Grace. Estate. For delivering me from Danger. Infamy. Trouble. For the health of my body. A Competency of Estates. Friends. Children. Kindred. I thank thee, O Lord, For thy Redemption.
Regeneration. Instruction. Vocation. Consolation. Illumination. Iustification. Hope of glorification. For thy patience toward me. For thy Grace preventing me. For Governing me. For thy Continual care over me. For Strengthning me in tentation. For Reproving me in evil. For Assisting me in good. For the Conjunction of my heart. For the hopes of pardon for my sins. For the benefits I have received. For any good done by me. For all those that have done me good, by their Writings. Sermons. Conferences. Prayers. Examples. Reproofs. Injuries. For all, and every of these, and for all other known, or unknown, re∣membred, or forgotten.
I confess, and will confess thee. I bless, and will bless thee. I thank, and will thank thee, as the Author and Giver of them all. Seven Psalms of Thanksgiving Paraphrased. Psalm. 8. O Lord our God, Creator and Preserver of all things, how ex∣cellent, glorious, and reverend is thy great and holy Name, not in one par∣ticular Nation only, but in all the Kingdoms of the Earth, who, as thou hast magnified thy Name in the Earth so hast thou set and extolled thy glory above the Heavens also. 2 Out of the mouths and tongues of babes and sucklings, even very In∣fants,
hast thou, because men of riper years and understanding neglect thy glory, ordained strength, and given little Children ability to praise thee, because of the malice of thine Enemies, the principalities of this world: that thou mightest, by this thy great wis∣dom, and power, still the tongues, & suppress the blasphemous speeches, of the Enemy and Avenger: when he shall see, that by such weak means, thou canst effect so great matters. 3 When I consider, and duly weigh, thy Heavens, and the glorious frame thereof, the work of thy fingers, made and created only by thee: together with the Moon, and the Stars, and other beautiful Lights of Heaven, which thou at the beginning of time, hast ordained of nothing, I cannot but in the depth of admiration say. 4 What is man, for whose use and service thou hast made them, and all things in this world, and him to serve thee? That thou, so great and glori∣ous a God, art mindful of him, in so large a manner: and what is the Son of man, the posterity of sinful Adam, that thou, in such measure of mer∣cy,
visitest and regardest him? 5 For, if I look unto his Creation, and consider whose Image he beareth, I find, that thou hast made him in all respects, very little lower in degree, than the pure Angels, who are ho∣noured with thy presence: and hast, of thy bounty, and especial favour, crowned him with glory and honour, in making him so glorious a Crea∣ture. 6 Thou madest, and hast appoint∣ed him also, thy Vicegerent on Earth, to have dominion and command over thy Creatures, the works of thy hands, and Creation: thou hast subjected, and put all things which thou hast made, under his feet, to obey and serve him. 7 All Sheep and Oxen, Beasts, for his food and sustentation, yea, and not those only, but the untamed beasts of the field also, hast thou made plya∣ble and serviceable to him. 8 The Fowl of the Air, some for food, and some for pleasure and de∣light; and the Fish of the vast Sea, which is stored with variety; and whatsoever else passeth, swimmeth, or liveth through the unknown pathes of
the Sea, are also created by thee, to serve him. 9 O Lord, our Lord, when I se∣riously consider thy power and wis∣dom, in thy work of Creation, and the especial honour and favour thou shewest to Mankind, in giving him this large Commission over the rest of thy Creatures, I cannot but admire, and say, how excellent and great is thy Name, and Power, in all the King∣domes of the World! There is none, O Lord, worthy to be compared to thee. Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, &c. Psalm 30. I Will extoll thee, and praise thy Name, O Lord, as long as I live, and not without great cause, for thou, in thy mercy, hast lifted me up, and endowed me with thy blessings: and hast not made, no, nor suffered my Foes to work their will against me,
who intended, if thou hadst forsa∣ken me, to rejoyce and triumph over me. 2 O Lord, my God, and Saviour, I cryed, and made my humble suppli∣cation unto thee, in my trouble and adversity, and thou, of thy accustom∣ed goodness, didst graciously hear me, and hast healed me, of all mine infir∣mities. 3 O Lord, thou, by the power of thy grace, hast brought up, and re∣stored to life my sinful soul from the grave of perdition, whereinto my sins had well nigh cast me: Thou hast in thy love to me, kept me alive, and preserved me from many dangerous sicknesses, that I should not yet go down into the pit of death, but live, and praise thy holy Name. 4 Sing, and rejoyce unto the Lord, our God, (O ye Saints, and faithful people of his, who have, with me, felt and tasted of his mercy) and give thanks together with me, at the re∣membrance and consideration of his holiness. 5 For his anger and displeasure endureth towards sinners but a moment, and short space, if they truly turn un∣to
to him: and if we seriously consider his mercies, we shall find, that in his favour is life to those that lye despa∣rately sick in their sins, if he but touch them with his finger of grace: as for weeping, heaviness, and affliction, it may, and of necessity must, some∣time befall his servants, but yet it shall endure, and afflict them for a night, a little while only: but joy and comfort commeth again to refresh them in the morning, by sending the light of his countenance upon them. 6 And, before I fully understood, how God useth to deal with his Ser∣vants, I was so confident of my self, that in my prosperity, when I felt the grace of God abundantly in me, I said, and presumed, that I was so fully set∣led in Gods favour, that I shall never fall, or be removed from it. 7 Lord, by thy favour and good∣ness, thou hadst fixed and made my mountain of grace to stand so strong, that I conceived my self so secure, that I could not slide back, or fall a∣way: Yet after a while; I found by experience, that I was in an errour, for thou didst but hide thy face, and a
little while obscured thy grace from me, and, being left to my self, I found such an alteration, and defect in me, to do good, that I was there∣with sore troubled, and disquieted. 8 I thereupon presently recalled my self, and cryed earnestly by prayer to thee, O Lord; and betook my self unto the Lord, who never utterly for∣saketh his Servants; and to him I made my earnest supplication, never ceasing, till I obtained his return, and thus I said in my prayer. 9 What profit, O Lord, is there, can there be, in my blood, or death, when I go down into the pit, or if I dye in my sins? surely none to thee, for thou de∣lighten not in blood, or in the death of a sinner. Shall the dust, or they which are dissolved thereinto, before repentance, praise thee? or shall it declare thy truth, and shew thy glory? Nay, verily, they shall rather, in the horror of punishment, blaspheme thy Name. Suffer me not therefore, O Lord, to be of that reprobate num∣ber, of which I must needs be one, if thou absent thy self, or with-draw thy grace any longer from me. 10 Hear me therefore, O Lord,
and that right soon, for my spirit wax∣eth faint, for want of thy gracious assistance: and have mercy upon me, in this distress. O Lord, I renounce all further confidence in mine own strength: be thou my only stay and helper. Upon this petition, the Lord heard my request, and thereupon I turned my prayer into a song of praise and said. 11 Thou, O Lord, art worthy of all honour and praise, for thou hast turned for me, and for my good, my mourning for thy absence, into dan∣cing and joy for thy gracious pre∣sence: thou hast made me to put off my sad habit of sackcloath and sorrow, and instead thereof, hast girded and apparelled me with a vesture of glad∣ness, even the peace of conscience. And all these things hast thou done for me. 12 To the end, that all my sorrow being removed, and I being deliver∣ed from all fear, my glory, tongue, and heart, together, may sing praise and thanks to thee, who hast done so great things for me: and that I should not be silent, in extolling thy mercy. And therefore, O Lord, my God, as
thy goodness deserveth, and my duty requireth, I will, with all the affections and faculties of soul and body, give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Maje∣sty for ever, as the only Author and finisher of my salvation. Glory be to the Father, &c. Psalm 34. I Will bless and praise the Lord, for all that he hath done unto me, at all times; as well in adversity as pro∣sperity, and his praise, as it shall ever be in my mind and heart, so shall it be continually without intermission, in my mouth, by declaring it to others. 2 My Soul especially, shall make her boast, and glory in the Lord, and not in any thing that is in me: so the humble, and they which are any way dejected, when they shall hear thereof, how gracious God hath been to me, shall in hope of the like mercy to them, rejoyce, and be glad also.
3 O ye, whosoever hath felt Gods favour, as I have, magnifie, and extoll the mercies of the Lord with me, for his goodness: and let us joyfully with one accord, exalt, and praise his Name together. 4 I my self, when I was in trou∣ble, sought the Lord by prayer, and humiliation, and he rejected not my petition, but graciously heard me, and granted it; and he not only deli∣vered me from the danger I was in, but from all my fears also, which I con∣ceived at it. 5 They also, that lived in former ages, (our fore-Fathers) whenso∣ever they were distressed, looked up, and cryed unto him: and were relieved by his mercy, and lightned by his grace: their faces were not any whit ashamed, because they did put their trust in him. 6 This poor man (even my self) cryed (by their example) in my di∣stress: and the Lord, plentiful in compassion, graciously heard him, and saved and delivered him imme∣diately out of all his troubles and cala∣mity. 7 The good Angel of the Lord,
deputed by him for each mans prote∣ction, encampeth, and fortifieth round about them, that with an un∣feigned heart fear and serve him: which Angel preserveth them in all their wayes, and delivereth them from all the machinations of the Devil, and his Angels. 8 O taste ye therefore, and see, make experience, aud you shall soon find, that the Lord is good and loving to those that faithfully call upon him, and you will also confess with me, and say, Blessed and happy is the man that layeth aside all confidence in himself, and that in all his ne∣cessities trusteth in him, and his pro∣tection. 9 O fear, reverence, and love the Lord, all ye, that by truly be∣lieving in him, become his Saints, and observe his Commandements: for, take this as an infallible truth, that there is no want to them they shall lack nothing that is needful for them, that with an upright heart fear and serve him. 10 The young Lyons, mighty and worldly minded men, although they think themselve  do they
lack true peace of Conscience, and suffer hunger, and want that which is truly good; but they, which with a pure heart, and humble spirit, seek the Lord, and desire to please him, shall not want any good thing, when the Lord in his wisdom shall think it need∣ful for them. 11 Come therefore, O ye Child∣ren, that desire to be informed, and with attentive minds hearken, and give good ear unto me, that am expe∣rienced in the mercies of the Lord, and I will teach and instruct you in the fear of the Lord, which is the begin∣ning of wisdom. 12 What man is he, among the Sons of men, that desireth to live a good life, and loveth to spend many daye so in this life, that he may see and enjoy good and happy dayes here∣after. 13 Keep, first of all, thy tongue from speaking evil, let that member do no man wrong, and preserve thy lips from speaking guile, or that which is false, though to be to thine own prejudice: for the Lord abhoreth ly∣ing lips. 14 Depart from evil, avoid all
things which thou knowest displeasing to God, and yet think not that suffi∣cient, except thou also apply thy self to do that which is good and acceptable to him: Seek peace, between God, and thy self; thy self, and thy Con∣science; thy self, and thy Neigh∣bour; and if thou shalt find that peace in any of these particulars shall fly from thee, pursue it with all thy might, that thou mayest recover it. 15 The provident eyes of the Lord, (for thy comfort in taking this course) are ever fixed upon the righteous, to preserve them from all evil, and to confirm them in all good: and his ears of compassion are alwayes open unto their cry, to deliver them from all distress. 16 The face of displeasure, and the angry countenance of the Lord, on the contrary, is set and bent against them that forsake good, and do evil, without remorse of Consci∣ence, to cut off, and root out, not only such wicked persons themselves, but the very remembrance of them from the face of the Earth, that there shall remain no memorial of them. 17 The righteous in their affliction
cry, and flee unto God for succour and the Lord in mercy heareth their prayer; yea, and, in his good time, delivereth them out of all their troubles, either by aiding them with spiritual comfort, that they faint not under them, or by removing their afflicti∣ons from them, or them from their afflictions, by taking them into hea∣venly joyes. 18 The Lord (who hath a conti∣nual care over his Elect) is ever nigh unto them in comfort, that are of a broken and humble heart: and always saveth such (and no other) as are of a contrite and bruised spirit, that they fall not into desparation. 19 Many in number, and great in weight, are the afflictions and troubles of the righteous, for they that will live godly in Christ, must suffer perse∣cution; but the Lord, of his infinite goodness, forsaketh him not, but de∣livereth him in due time out of them all, that they shall not be able to do him harm. 20 He, even the Lord, keepeth and preserveth all his bones, which though the wicked go about to break, yet notwithstanding all their attempts,
not so much as one of them is or shall be broken by them: and not only so, but the hairs of his head are numbred also. 21 Evil, on the other side, shall slay the wicked, and turn them to de∣struction, and they, whosoever they be, that hate the righteous, whom the Lord loveth, shall be desolate, and deprived of the comfort of Gods holy Spirit. 22 The Lord by his power and goodness redeemeth and saveth the soul of every one of his servants from all evil, and none of them that put their trust and confidence in him, and his mercy, shall be left desolate, or without consolation. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, &c. Psalm 103. BLess and magnifie the Lord, thy Creator, O my Soul, for all his mercies and favours extended to thee,
and all that is within me, holy and pure, give praise unto, and bless his holy and great Name. 2 Bless the Lord, O my Soul, I say again, as well for thy Creation, as for all other his great and glorious works, and, at any hand take heed, thou be not ingrateful to him, and forget not, nor let slip out of thy re∣membrance, all, or any of his benefits, as well in forming thee after his own Image, as in his continual care, and preserving thee from many dan∣gers. 3 Who, only by his power can, and of his meer mercy and goodness forgi∣veth all thine iniquities, pardoneth all thy sins, as well actual as original, how great soever, how many soever, as often, as with a pure heart, and humble spirit, thou repentest thee of them. Who, like a good Physician, healeth all thy diseases, and thy infir∣mities, by the regeneration, and re∣newing of his holy Spirit in thee. 4 Who only redeemeth and saveth thy life from destruction, and utter ruine, and who, instead of taking of just and severe revenge of thee for thy sins, crowneth and compasseth thee
with loving kindness, many blessings, and comforteth thee with his tender mercies, which are above the rest of his works. 5 Who, in his providence, satis∣fieth, and filleth thy mouth, and de∣sire, with all good things necessary for thy sustentation: so that thy youth, by his power, is renewed like the Eagles, by curing thy weakness and infirmity, and making thee lasty and strong. 6 The Lord relieveth them that suffer wrong, and executeth righ∣teousness and judgement, without re∣spect of persons, and standeth for all that are unjustly oppressed, against those that are too mighty for them. 7 He, in former times, at the publishing of the Law, made known his wayes, and taught his Commande∣ments unto Moses, by whom he gave directions to succeeding ages, what they were to follow, and what to a∣void: and his mighty acts were well known unto the Children of Israel, by their many and great Deliver∣ances. 8 The Lord, our God, is merciful in forgiving offences, and gracious, in not imputing our sins unto us: he
is slow to anger, expecting the con∣version of sinners: and plenteous in mercy, exceeding in his love, and liberal in his benefits to those that fear him. 9 He will not alwayes chide, nor be ever displeased with his Children: neither will he remember our sins, and keep his anger against us for them for ever, but in his wrath he will ever be mindful of his mercy. 10 He hath not dealt with us, nor punished us rebellious wretches, after the quality of our sins, wherewith we have daily offended his patience, nor hath he rewarded nor retributed to us, according to the hainousness of our ini∣quities: for he knoweth, that if he should strictly enter into judgement with us, no flesh could be saved. 11 For like as the Heaven is high, as we see, and far above the Earth: so great is his mercy above his justice, toward them that fear him, and in re∣morse for their offences, truly turn unto him. 12 As far also in distance as the East part of the World is situate from the West, which by reason of their se∣paration, can never come near to
each other: so far at the least hath he removed, and put away our transgres∣sions and sins from us, that they never shall come near unto us, to do us any harm. 13 Like as a tender and compassi∣onate Father pityeth his disobedient Children, and upon submission recei∣veth them again to grace: so the Lord, who is the Father of mercies, pityeth and grieveth to see the afflictions of them, that in fear and trembling for their sins, return unto him. 14 For he, the Lord, which know∣eth all things, knoweth also our frame, that we consist of flesh and blood, subject to corruption and frailty, and he withall remembreth, and consider∣eth that we are but even dust, fashi∣oned out of the Earth, and therefore must needs partake and savour of earthly substance. 15 As for wretched and frail Man therefore, his dayes are but as grass, which is green in the morning, and before night is cut down and wither∣ed: and as a fading flower of the field: which for a while only, in the Spring time, is beautiful, and afterward in cropt or decayeth: even so, and in
no more assurance is he that in the greatest prosperity flourisheth. For after a while, in a short time, he is no more seen, nor his remembrance shall be no where found. 16 For as the wind and storms pas∣seth over it, and every flower, and presently it is gone, and withered, and the place thereof, where it grew, shall not know it, not bear it any more: So Man, after he hath a while felt the troubles and storms of this World, shall soon dye, and be forgotten, and the place of his being will be no more known. 17 But yet the mercy, and loving kindness of the Lord, to the Sons of Men, is, and was from everlasting, and shall continue to everlasting, to the end of the World: and shall ever be upon them, especially, that with unfeigned hearts, serve, love, and fear him: and his righteousness in all his promises, shall be accomplished to his servants, and unto their Childrens Children, their posterity, through many generations. 18 To such especially, as forget not his Commandements, faithfully keep, and observe his Covenant; and
to those that remember, and be mind∣ful of his Commandements, and frame themselves to do them. 19 The Lord, who commandeth the observance of his Laws, is most worthy of all honour, and not to be neglected; for he hath (before the Foundations of the World) prepared his Throne, and Seat of Majesty in the Heavens, where he is attended on by the glorious Company of Angels, and his Kingdom is not straitned or limi∣ted to one peculiar Place or Coun∣try, but he ruleth and commandeth over all People and Nations. 20 Bless therefore the Lord, that is so mighty, ye that be his holy An∣gels, magnifie, and laud his holy Name; ye, that excell in strength, and that gladly do and execute his Commandements, and that, by heark∣ning unto, and obeying the voice of his Word, willingly execute his will and pleasure. 21 Bless ye, and praise, I say, the Lord, your, and our God, all ye his Heavenly Hosts, ye blessed Angels: ye that are Ministers and Servants of his, that willingly and gladly execute and do his pleasure.
22 Bless, and praise together, with one accord, the Lord, our God, all his works, which he hath created, for the celebration of his glory, wheresover ye remain, in all places of his Dominion, even every where: And lastly, as I began with thee, O my Soul, to stir thee up to his praise, so I end with the same excitation, Bless, Praise, Laud, and Magnifie the Lord, thy God, O my Soul, to whom he hath ever been so gracious and merciful. Glory be to the Father, &c. Psalm 111. I Will praise the Lord, and give thanks unto his holy Name, with my whole heart, and that not only in my private Devotions, but in the publick Assembly and Meeting of the Upright in heart: and in the Congre∣gation of the Faithful, the Church also.
2 The wondrous works of the Lord, our God, even from the beginning, thorow all ages, even to this time, are so great and glorious, that wor∣thily he alone deserveth to be magni∣fied for them; they are sought out, and searched into, of all them that have pleasure, and delight in medita∣ting and contemplating therein. 3 His work, in the Creation and Fabrique of the Universe, is honour∣able and glorious, of all his Creatures worthily to be admired: and his Righteousness and Equity, his Care and Providence, in the preservation and government of it, is likewise to be magnified, because it is permanent, and endureth for ever. 4 He hath made and perfected his wonderful works with such wisdom and power, that they ought to be remem∣bred, and his Name to be celebrated for them: And as he is omnipotent, so the Lord is also gracious, and lo∣ving to his Servants, and full of com∣passion, plenteous in mercy to every repentant sinner. 5 He hath, of his providence and bounty, ever given meat, and all other necessaries, to them that fear
and serve him: yea, and he, as he hath formerly, so will he ever, to the end of the World be mindfull of his Covenant of Grace, to his Servants. 6 He hath shewed and manifested to his people, his elect, the power, and efficacy of his great works, not only in the creation, but in the Redemp∣tion of mankind: that he may give unto them that are in Chirst, the heri∣tage of the heathen, according to the promise made to our fore-fathers. 7 The works of his hands, all his actions are done in verity, and Iudge∣ment, and all his Commandements are sure, just, holy, and worthy to be ob∣served. 8 They stand fast, and are setled firm, for ever and ever, to the end of the world: and they are done, and commanded, upon good grounds, in truth and uprightness, as being en∣joyned by the Author of Truth and Equity. 9 He in the fulness of time, sons Redemption and Salvation unto his E∣lect People, by Jesus Christ, he hath commanded his Covenant, of the New Testament for ever to be observed by them: and it concerneth them care∣fully
to keep it, because he which commanded it, is a jealous God, and severe to transgressors and Holy reve∣rend is his Name. 10 The filial fear of the same holy and reverend Lord, is the beginning and basis of all true wisdom; which whosoever hath not attained to, is not really wise, howsoever he may be esteemed by the world: but a good and perfect understanding have they, and they are truly wise indeed, that do his Commandements, and keep his Precepts: his praise and remem∣brance endureth for-ever, and conti∣nueth throughout all generations. Glory be to the Father, &c. Psalm 138. I Will praise and blesse thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, with all my strength: yea, before the Gods, in the presence of thy holy Angels, will I sing praise, and laud unto thee.
2 I will worship in fear and reve∣rence towards thy holy Temple, dedi∣cated to thy honour and service, and I will praise thy holy and great Name, for two of thy blessings especially, namely, for thy loving kindness, in comforting distressed sinners, and for thy Truth, in performing thy promi∣ses: for thou thy self hast preferred and magnified thy Word of Truth, a∣bove all the Attributes of thy Name, else, whatsoever. 3 In the day and time of my affli∣ction, when I cryed unto thee, by earnest prayer, thou didst not stop thine ears, but graciously answeredst me: yea and strengthned me with thy Grace, and strength in my Soul. 4 All the Kings and mighty men of the earth, be they never so high in condition, shall, and may worthily praise thee, without disparagement to themselves: when they, by the preach∣ing of the Gospel, hear the words of thy mouth, which are nothing but Truth. 5 Yea, they shall sing and rejoyce, in excercising themselves in the wayes and Commandements of the Lord: for great and unutterable is the glory and
Majesty of the Lord of Hosts. 6 Though the Lord our God be high, and his Majesty be above all things, yet in his abundant mercy, hath he respect unto the lowly in their own eyes; and the more humble they are, the more he regardeth them: but as for the proud, and those which exalt themselves, he despiseth them, and knoweth them, as it were a farre off. 8 Though I walk and live in the midst of trouble and sorrow, and in the shadow of death: yet, whensoe∣ver I call upon thee faithfully, thou wilt (I know) revive and raise me up: thou shalt also stretch forth and reach unto me thy hand of power, against the wrath and malice of mine Enemies, and bridle their fury: and thy right hand of omnipotence shall save me from all their enterprizes. 8. The Lord of his goodness, will perfect and finish that which concerneth me, and my salvation: thy mercy and loving kindness, O Lord, never fail∣eth, but endureth from generation to generation, even for ever; With∣draw not therefore, that mercy of thine from me, O Lord, and for∣sake
not thou the work of thine owne hands; not made by any strange God, but by thee, the only and true God. Glory be to the Father, &c. Psalm 145. I Will extoll and praise thee, my God, and Creator, O King or Majesty and Glory: and I will blesse and mag∣nifie thy Name, O preserver of man∣kind, for ever and ever, even all the dayes of my life. 2 Every day, not a day shall passe over my head, but I will blesse thee, and be speaking of thy mercies: and I will praise and give thanks unto thee, and to thy Name, for ever and ever, as long as I live. 3 Great and glorious is the Lord, far exceeding all the false Gods of the heathen, and greatly is he to be prais∣ed for all his works: and his greatness hath neither end nor beginning, but is unsearchable, and past mans finding out.
4 One generation and age shall praise and leave the memory of thy good∣nesse, and thy works of power, wis∣dom, and mercy to another succeeding generation, and shall declare to po∣sterity, the remembrance of thy mighty acts. 5 I my self, as well as I am able; will; as I have good cause, speak of, and extoll, the glorious honour, and the exceeding greatness of thy Maje∣sty: and tell unto the people the ex∣cellency of thy wondrous works. 6 And not only I, but all other Men, shall be forced to confess, and speak of the exceeding might, and the wonderfull effects of thy terrible acts, against thine enemies: and I, ac∣cording to my poor ability, will de∣clare unto posterity thy greatness and Majesty. 7 They, even all people, which are governed by thy power, and sa∣tisfied with thy goodness, shall abun∣dantly utter, and continually with praise acknowledge, and keep the me∣mory of thy great and super-abundant goodness and mercy: and shall, in all Assemblies and Congregations, sing, and rejoyce, because of thy Righte∣ousness,
wherewith thou rulest and disposest all things. 8 The Lord, our God, notwith∣standing our grievous sins, is gracious, and loving, yea, and full of compassi∣on by nature, evermore slow and un∣willing to wreak his anger upon us, it being an act contrary to his dispositi∣on, and instead of punishing, he is of great mercy, and ready to pardon the repentant. 9 The Lord is also good and graci∣ous, not to any particular persons or people only, but to all that turn unto him, and if we shall consider his ten∣der mercies to the Sons of Men, they are over his justice, and all his other works. 10 All thy works and creatures shall therefore praise and magnifie thee, O Lord, in general: and, above the rest, thy Saints, and Ser∣vants, to whom, in particular thou extendest thy mercy, shall bless, and continually praise thee, for the same. 11 They especially shall not be si∣lent, but speak of, and declare unto those that have not known thy Name, the Glory and Majesty of thy Kingdom,
which is above all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and shall, wheresoever they come, talk of, and set forth thy mighty power, which no Potentate is able to resist. 12 To make known, and to make manifest thereby, to the Sons of Men, even all the generations to come, his mighty and wonderful acts, which he hath done in our time, and in the ages fore-going: and also the glorious Majesty, and Super-excellency of his Kingdom, and Power. 13 Thy Kingdom, O Lord, is not temporary, or of short continu∣ance, but it is an everlasting King∣dom, was without beginning, and ne∣ver shall have end: and this thy Do∣minion and Rule endureth firm and sta∣ble throughout all generations, to the end of the World. 14 The Lord in his mercy uphold∣eth, and lifteth up all those that fall by frailty and weakness: and raiseth up, by the grace of his holy Spirit, all those that be dejected, bowed, and cast down with the thought of their sinnes. 15 The eyes of all Creatures wait, and are fixed upon thee, as upon their
careful Father, for sustenance and help: and they no sooner call unto thee, but thou, of thy providence, supplyest their wants, and givest them their meat, and all things necessary for them, not only in due propor∣tion, but in due season, and time also. 16 Thou openest thy hand of boun∣ty, and satisfiest the insatiable desire of men, which nothing but thy self can satisfie, and of every other living thing besides. 17 The Lord is only righteous, just, and unreprovable in all his wayes, and actions: and it is he on∣ly that is holy, and pure in all his works. 18 The Lord is nigh, and ready at hand, unto all them; that in distress, call upon him, and seek unto him for help, Yea, to all, without respect of persons that call upon him in truth, faith, and uprightness of heart. 19 He is so gracious, that he will not only hear them, but grant their petitions, and fullfil and satisfie the desire and request of them that fear and serve him: he also will hear their cry, in time of affliction, and will save
and deliver them out of all their trouble. 20 The Lord, by his omnipotent power, preserveth and keepeth all them that love him sincerely, and obey his Commandements, but as for all the wicked, and unrepentant obstinate sinners, those will he destroy from the face of the Earth. 21 My mouth shall, as long as I have any being, speak of, and de∣clare the Praise and Majesty of the Lord, most mighty, and as I do, so let all Flesh, People, Nations, and Kindreds, from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof, bless, laud, and magnifie, together with me, his holy and great Name, even for ever and ever, from this time forth for evermore. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, &c.
Imprecation. THis part of Devotion, (or of Zeal, as I may call it) although it seem harsh, and not well to stand with the Charity of a Christian, yet in some caeses it hath been, and may be lawfully used. 1. When the Church of God, in any part of the World, lyeth (as it were) at the Stake, and groaneth under the burden of Persecution, and the Enemies thereof are incorrigible, and not to be reconciled. In this case, not only a private man in his Devoti∣ons, but the Church also in generel may use these Imprecations, to the end that the Church may by these kind of Prayers, and Gods assist∣ance, recover its former Peace and Quiet. 2. When a Christian shall perceive that his Enemies aim altogether (a∣gainst the Rules of Charity) at the
utter subversion both of his Body and Soul; In this Case also a man may (without breach of Charity) use these Imprecations. In either of which Cases, if the children of Gods or our own enemies shall joyn, assist, or persist malicious∣ly in the steps of their Parents, they are in our estimation to be accounted of no better, nay, not so well as the very Heathen who have not known the Name of God at all. And to this end, I have given you a taste only of some of the zealous wishes, and earnest desires or Impre∣cations of some holy men, Prophets and Apostles, which are set down in sa∣cred Scripture, left (no doubt) for our imitation in the several cases be∣fore mentioned.
Imprecations against the Enemies of God and, his Church. Num. 16 15.OF Moses in the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, Respect not thou their Offering. 2 Reg 19. 15.Of Ezechiah against Sonacherib, the blasphemous King of Assyria. 2 Chr. 14. 11.Of Asa against Zerah, the King of AEthiopia. 20. 6.Of Iehosaphat against the Moabites and Ammonites. Of Nehemiah against Sanballat and Tobiah. Neh. 4.4.Turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity. And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out before thee. Of David against Gods enemies in many places. Psal. 5.10.Destroy thou them, O God, let them fall by their own Counsels: cast them out in the multitude of their transgressi∣ons, for they have rebelled against thee. 10. 15.Break the arm of the wicked.
Break their teeth, O God.Psal. 58.6 68. 1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him, flee before him. Lift up thy feet,74. 4. that thou mayest utterly destroy every enemy which hath done evil in thy Sanctuary. Powr out thine indignation upon the Heathen that have not known thee.79. 6. O my God, make them like a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind.83. 13. Persecute them with thy tempest. Make their faces ashamed. Let them be confounded and vexed e∣vermore: let them be put to shame and perish. Let them be as grass upon the house top, which withereth before it groweth up.129. 6. Let not the ungodly have his desire, O Lord, let not his mischievous ima∣gination prosper, lest they be too proud.140. 8. Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon them. Let hot burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire, and into the pit, that they never rise up again. Of the Apostles against the High Priests.Act. 4. 24
Of Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 16. 22.If any man love not the Lord Iesus Christ, let him be Anathema Mara∣natha. Gal. 1. 9.If any man preach any other Gospel, &c. let him be accursed. 5. 12.I would they were even cut off that trouble you. Against the Enemies of our Souls. Psal. 35.5.LEt them be confounded, and put to shame, that seek after my Soul. Let them be as chaff before the  wind. Let the Angel of the Lord chase them. Let their way be dark and slippery. Let the Angel of the Lord persecute them. Let destruction come upon them. Let them be confounded and ashamed. 40. 14.Let them be driven backward, Let them be desolate. Let Death seize upon them.
Let them go down quickly to Hell.55. 15. Let them be covered with reproach and dishonour.71. 13. Set a wicked man over him.109. 6. Let Satan stand at his right hand. Let his prayer become sin. Let his dayes be few. Let his Children be Fatherless, and his Wife a Widow. Let his Children be Vagabonds and Beggars. Let the Extortioner catch all he hath. Let there be none to extend mercy to him, or his Children. Let his posterity be cut off. Let the iniquity of his Fathers be re∣membred. Cast forth lightening, and scalter them: shoot out thine arrows, and de∣stroy them.144. 6. And it is not to be conceived, that these Imprecations arise from a weak affection, as though the godly were glad, or rejoyced at the destruction of the wicked, nor to persecute them out of the malice of humane nature. 1. But, for as much as the love of God ought to be preferred before the love of our Neighbours, and that then
our Neighbour is truly loved, when that love respecteth the glory of God; we worthily prefer his glory before the love of his Enemies, who by their wickedness would endeavour to ob∣scure it. 2. They used these Imprecations against those Enemies, when they were out of hope (as is before said) of their amendment. 3. And Lastly, It was done, not so much to destroy the persons, as to frustrate their Counsels and Ima∣ginations. The Ten Commandements Paraphrased. Deu. 4. 13. 10. 3.THe Law of the Two Tables was written by the Finger of God,  and delivered and promulgated by the Ministry of Moses,Ex. 19.24. and Angels,Act 7 53. Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2. and contained summarily what God com∣manded
the people to observe, and what to avoid. It is divided into two Parts. Our duty toward God. Our duty towards our Neighbour. The four first Commandements en∣joyn the first duty. The six last, the last. And thus follow. God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of AEgypt, out of the house of bondage. In the Preface, by mentioning of Gods Name,God spake, &c. Jehovah. His Majesty. Spake. By his Word. The hearers were prepared to atten∣tion. The Brevity and Order of the Com∣mandements make them easie to be learned. This Preface belongeth to all the Decaloque, and containeth a descrip∣tion of the Person who gave the Law. Who being God, the Creator and Disposer of all things, is to be obey∣ed: Neither are we to make any scru∣ple or doubt, but that all things which
he commandeth us in his Law, are just and holy. I am the Lord.Who only is Omnipotent, and was from all Eternity, from whom all things that are had their beginning, and who hath absolute and sole pow∣er to command and prescribe Laws unto us. Thy God. Ps. 144.15.Happy is the people who have the Lord for their God. By these words (thy God) every one of us may receive particular com∣fort, that as he is able, so he is willing and ready (by making this Covenant to be ours) in his particular provi∣dence and care, to do good to every one of us in our need, if we keep his Commandements. God.A God, to relieve and aid us, not a severe Iudge, to condemn us, Let us therefore, With all reverence, serve him as a Lord. With earnest desire, repair to him in our need, as to a merciful God. With hearty zeal, love him for his goodness.
With trembling, fear to offend him for his justice. And let us be holy, as he is holy.Lev. 20.7. In this delivery of the Iews from their servitude,VVhich brought thee, &c. is his infinite Power de∣scribed: whereby he is declared to be as well able to save his Servants, as to confound his Enemies. And this deliverance is foretold and parallel'd by the Prophet,Esa. 52 as a Type of our deliverance from the servitude of sin. The First Commandement. Thou shalt have no other Gods before me. HAving (as it were) setled in our hearts his Authority and Pow∣er,Thou shalt have no o∣ther Gods. to prescribe and make Laws unto us, his just precept is, that We have no other Gods before him. 1. Neither by abating any rever∣ence due to him.
But to worship him with all our heart. By acknowledging him to be the on∣ly true God. By honouring, serving, and praising him above all things. By trusting and relying wholly up∣on him. By expecting all good from him. By humbling our selves before him, and patiently bearing whatsoever he shall please to lay upon us, and sub∣jecting our wills wholly to his. 2 Not by attributing any honour to other Gods or Idols, or putting any confidence in Saints or Angels, Earth∣ly Pleasures, Riches, Honour, or the like, lest we offend thereby. Gen. 30.1As Rachel did, by asking Children of Iacob. 2 Kin. 5.6.As the King of Syria, by desiring Ioram to heal Naamans leprosie. 2 Chr. 16. 12.As Asa, by too much trusting to his Physicians. Lu. 12.16.As the Fool in the Gospel, trusting to his riches. Before me.Neither secretly in thy heart. Nor in the view of God and the World openly.
Not, but that God is every where, and seeth into the secret corners of our hearts, and is Omniscient; but to set a note or brand of impudence upon us, for our indignity to him, if we shall make open profession of our Ido∣latry to any false God or Idol, in wor∣shipping it; or of our excessive love, or doting upon any Creature, by put∣ting confidence in it, & neglecting our dependance on God, who is only able, by his Omnipotency, to releive us. This Commandement enjoyneth the inward worship of God. The Second Commandement. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image. AS in the first Commandement, God requireth, that we worship him only inwardly: so in this, he for∣biddeth all undue and indirect outward worshipping of him; and enjoyneth us, not to make any resemblance, to wor∣ship
him by; because he is a Spirit, and is only to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth. It consisteth of two parts. 1. A prohibition of making any Image representing the Divine God∣head. 2. Of exhibiting any worship to any Image. And that, 1. Because he is incomprehensible, cannot be represented in any form vi∣sible. 2. Because he is able to punish the contemners of his Name. And to bless his true Worshippers. Thou shalt not, &c.1. Therefore we are not to grave, or make any Image, or resemblance of him. Deu. 4.15For when he gave the Law, (saith Moses) he appeared in no manner of similitude. Esa. 40.18To whom then will ye liken God? or to what likeness will ye compare him? 2. Neither are we to make the like∣ness of any thing, to worship it. For as we ought not to make any resemblance of him: so neither when we make the similitude of any thing
else, (the true use of making Pictures, and the like, being lawful) not to wor∣ship, or attribute any honour to it. Not that all Images are hereby for∣bidden. 1. For some in the Old Testament were Typical. The Brazen Serpent being the Type of Christ. The two Cherubins on the Ark re∣presented the Majesty of God attend∣ed by his Angels, &c. 2. Some are for Ornament; many in the fabrique of the Temple, and in the holy Vessels of it. 3. Some Historical, of stories ei∣ther out of the Scriptures, or of other Writers. 4. Some for instruction in the na∣ture of Beasts, Cities, and Countries. Saint Paul saith,Rom. 1.23 that the Gentiles changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things; wherefore God gave them up to uncleanness, &c. 1. Either by bowing the body,Thou shalt not bow down, &c. un∣covering the head, or bending the knee to them.
2. Or by setting the same in any eminent place to worship them, be∣stowing extraordinary cost on them, making Pilgrimages to them, or dedi∣cating Altars, Lamps, or the like to them. For I the Lord, &c.By this Commination, he sheweth his power to punish Offenders, and that he is able and all-sufficient to supply our wants likewise. Am a jea∣lous God.Like the jealous Husband, who will have no partner in his love. And suffereth no Corrival, Compe∣titor, or Sharer in his Service. My Son give me thy heart, thy whole heart. And visit the sins &c.Punishing them that run after false Gods, in many descents, even as long as they shall continue in their idola∣trous courses. Though the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, yet this is so odious to him, that he will take vengeance of the Idolatrous Gene∣ration. As of the Iews in general. Solomon, and others.
1. To shew how odious Idolatry is to him. 2. To force men (who naturally have a love and care to their poste∣rity) by this Commination, to ab∣stain from it, left their issue be plagued. Confounded be all they that worship carved Images,Psal. 97.7. and that delight in vain Gods. The mercy of the LORD,And shewing mercy, &c. is over all his Works.145. 9. is over his Iustice.Jam. 2.13. For whereas he punisheth Idolaters in his Iustice, but to three or four ge∣nerations: He is merciful to thou∣sands of those that worship him aright, throughout all generations. His reward is alwayes greater than his punishment.Luc. 1.50. Of his own nature more bent to shew mercy, than to execute seve∣rity. It is his proper work,Ps, 28.21. and suitable to his nature, to have mercy: but he is hardly drawn to punish, as being a
work altogether unsuitable to his dis∣position. To them that love me.With their whole heart, without hy∣pocrisie, and do not impart that worship to others, which is due to him. And keep my Com∣mande∣ments.In obedience, walking in his wayes. All his Commandements, but chiefly this concerning his worship. The Third Commandement. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that ta∣keth his Name in vain. The scope of which is, to shew what reverence is due to God in our Conversation, especially in the use or abuse of an Oath. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord in vain.THe Name of the Lord, which in it self is Holy, True, and Iust. And therefore we ought not to
prophane it, or take it in our mouths lightly, or upon every small occa∣sion. Herein we offend, When we blaspheme God, either openly, or in our hearts. When we use his holy Word to any prophane, scurrilous, or impure end. When we commit Perjury. When we murmure against him. When we leave his Providence, and consult with Witches, or the like. When we swear upon trivial and light causes. When we curse, or use unlawful Im∣precations. When we perform not that which we faithfully promise. When we (in any action of our own) detract from Gods glory, and attri∣bute and arrogate too much to our selves. An Oath is to be ministred when the glory of God is questioned, for some weighty matter urgeth it, upon the Magistrates command. And to be taken by those who are of years of dis∣cretion, and in their right senses.
For the Lord will not, &c.The Lord, and Iudge of Heaven and Earth, who seeth, and observeth all our actions, is so far from conniving at this sin, that without repentance, he will condemn every one that offend∣eth therein. 1 Sam. 14. 24.Saul, for unadvised cursing, and adjuration, lost a Victory against the Philistines. 31. 4.For consulting with a Witch, was (with his Sons) brought to untimely end. 2 Kings 19. 10.Sennacherib, for blaspheming God, was slain by his own Sons. Acts 5. 5.Ananias, for lying to the Holy Ghost, dyed suddenly. The Fourth Commandement. Remember that thou keep holy the Sab∣bath day, &c. IN this Commandement are two things contained. 1. A Precept or Declaration of the will of God.
To set apart some day. 1. To the publick worship of God. 2. In ceasing from our labours. 2. A Reason of the Commande∣ment. 1. Because God after the Creation rested on the seventh day. 2. Because he also blessed and san∣ctified it. Let not worldly cares put it out of thy mind,Remember but observe it with all Care and Religion. And not without great cause was this Precept so strictly urged. 1. Because by the neglect of it, ariseth the neglect of all spiritual duty. 2. Because in it was contained a Type or Shadow of the great and ever∣lasting Sabbath, which is our Sanctifi∣cation. 3. Because we have thereby some time to shew mercy to our Servants and Beasts, wearied with labour. In frequenting the Church,That thou keep holy &c. and there to exercise thy self. In Prayer. Hearing the Word.
Receiving the Sacrament. In pious and religious Works, as Visiting the Sick. Relieving the Poor. Meditating on Gods Works. Praising him for them. In refraining from Sin. In resting from servile Labour. And although that part of the Iews Sabbath be abrogated which respected the Seventh day Sacrifices, and other exteriour acts of Gods worship, com∣manded and enjoyned to the Iews: yet the Church hath appointed instead thereof the Lords day, or Sunday, (called the first day of the week) wherein all Christians are bound to retain and observe all the duties of the first Sabbath,Rev. 1.10. Acts 20.7 1 Cor. 16. 1. avoiding the Iewish strict and superstitious Ceremonies, Six dayes, &c.In following the Vocation appoint∣ed thee by God, wherein thou art to omit nothing necessary for the susten∣tation of thy Family. And not to spend those six dayes wholly in idleness, pleasure, or ex∣cess. Nor in the publique duties of the Sabbath, and thereby nelecting the
Care over thy Family. In that day,But the se∣venth day, neither thou, nor any of thy Family, or Cattel, shall do any servile labour, (except in case of ne∣cessity, and preservation of Gods Crea∣tures from damage or loss) but ye shall spend it in those religious duties formerly set down. In case of necessity (The Sabbath being made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath) we are to conceive, that it was ordained not to destroy, but to preserve him; and therefore all works are not forbidden that day. 1. As dressing of meat. By the example of the Priests,Num. 28. 1. who on the Sabbath killed the Beasts for Sacrifice, and dressed the rest.Mat. 12. 1 And of Christs Disciples, plucking ears of Corn. And Tertullian saith,De Coron. militis. c. 3 That the Antient and Primitive Church never fasted on the Sabbath day. 2. Ministring Physick to the Sick.Luc. 6.7. By the example of our Saviour,John 5. healing on that day. 3. Saving Corn, Hay-Houses, and the like,Mat. 12. 11. from perishing. By our Sa∣viours question to the Pharisees.
2.The Reason why God command∣ed the observation of the first Sabbath was, 1. Because, after God by his Word had created the Universe of nothing,Gen. 2.2. he rested himself from all the work that he had made. 2. Because this day was by him blessed and sanctified. And the reason why the Seventh day was changed by the Apostles, and continued by Christian Emperours, into the first day of the week, upon which the Christians Sabbath is obser∣ved, was in remembrance of our Sa∣viours Resurrection,Ioh. 22.19 (which happned on this day) as may be gathered by Christs selecting that day to appear twice to his Apostles after his Resur∣rection.
The Second Table. The Fifth Commandement. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy dayes may be long on the Land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee. AS the first Table teacheth the ho∣nour and love of God, so doth the second, the duty we owe to our Neighbour. And the first Commande∣ment of this Table enjoyneth us to ho∣nour and reverence our Parents, as be∣ing the thing which God esteemeth next in degree to his Honour. And it containeth, First, A Precept. Secondly, A Promise. 1. The Precept is General and Par∣ticular- 1. The General comprehendeth our Duty to all our Elders and Superi∣ours,
whom God hath set over us, for our government and preservation; which duty is of necessity to be per∣formed, in respect of the upholding of Politique Government, 2. The Particular Precept contain∣eth our Duty to our natural Parents, Father and Mother, of what de∣gree, estate, or condition soever they be. Whether Poor, or Rich; Good, or Bad, this Commandement layeth hold on us. Honour thy Father and Mo∣ther.That which we are enjoyned to do by these words, is to Reverence them: as from whom we received our being. Love them: for their care, sorrow, and pains, in our education, Obey them: in all lawful things, at being appointed by God to command over us. Be thankful to them: in requiting their charge and love; in ministring to their necessities. Be patient with them: in their cor∣rections, and bearing with all their in∣firmities.
That which we are forbidden to do against them, is, Not to speak evil of them, or to curse them.Ex. 21.17. Not to see them want,Lev. 20 9. Not to be ashamed of them,Mat. 15. Mat.7.11. for po∣verty, or other cause whatsoever. 2. The Promise is made to all such as shall keep this Precept,That thy dayes may &c. which is Long dayes, of life here, and happy too, else they would be no better than a curse. Long dayes hereafter, for ever in bliss, which is the highest blessing that can befall to any. It was Saint Pauls observation,Eph. 6.2. that this was the first Commandement that had a Promise annexed to it. This Promise God made, 1. To allure us to the Duty of re∣verencing and obeying our Parents and Superiours. 2. To shew how highly he esteem∣eth of it. 3. It suits with the Commande∣ments, if we honour our Parents, who gave us life, we shall be reward∣ed with long life.
The Sixth Commandement. Thou shalt not Kill. THis Commandement followeth properly, and in order in the next place: For mans life being the most precious thing in this World, and upon which all other things de∣pend, God seemeth to take care by this Commandement for peace and qui∣etness, whereby mans life may be pre∣served. The life of man ought to be preser∣ved for three respects. 1. Because God is the Iudge of man only, 2. Nature desireth nothing more than the preservation of life. 3. Murther destroyeth all society. Thou shalt not Kill.Neither thy self, nor others. Neither shalt thou have any desire to do any such act. Under this Commandement are di∣vers other particulars forbidden: For as God forbiddeth the act, so doth he command that all occasions or means to
execute that act be forborn and taken away. If God commands us not to kill, then he prohibits the affections to Slaughter. Anger. Unjust War. Quarrelling. Chiding. Hatred. And all other things of this na∣ture,Mat. 5.2. which may be as provocations to slaughter. And on the contrary he enjoyneth us, To love our Neighbours as our selves. To live peaceably and quietly with them. To do good for evil. And all this because, Man is the Image of God. Flesh of our Flesh. The thing that Christ paid so dear for.
The Seventh Commandement. Thou shalt not commit Adultery. Thou shalt not com∣mit Adul∣tery.THe chief aim and scope of this Commandement is to preserve the marriage bed inviolate. And with great reason it is placed next to the prohibiting of homicide, because that next and dearest to a man, after his own life, is the preservation and honour of his Wife;Gen. 2.24. for they two are but one flesh. And by this Commandement is also implicitely, and secretly forbidden, Ro. 1.26.Whoredom. Mar. 5.28.Incest. Sodomy. Sins against Nature. Unlawful Desires and Affections. Uncleanness. Evil Talk. Obscene Songs. And Impudent Behaviour. Uncivil Sight. Lascivious Pictures. Intemperance of Diet. Delicacy and Excess in Apparrel. And the like.
Being provocations to the Sin here forbidden. And as we are prohibited these things, so are we commanded hereby, To live Chastly. Temperately. Modestly. And purely in Heart. For by these Vertues (as our Savi∣our telleth us) we shall come to the Beatifical Vision of God,Mat. 5. 8. and enjoy that Blessedness which he hath promised to those that in pureness of heart love and serve him. The Eighth Commandement. Thou shalt not Steal. THat is, thou shalt not take from another any thing which is not thine own.Thou shalt not Steal. And against this Com∣mandement we may offend divers wayes. By committing Sacrilege, taking any thing from the Church.
By with-holding that which is due to King or Prince. By robbing on the high way, or out of houses. By deceiving any man. In bargaining. In false weights and measures. In being bankrupt without cause. By oppressing the Poor, or keeping his pledge. By encroaching upon the possessions of any other, either by violence o∣penly, or by fraud, in removing Land-marks, &c. By keeping that which is found from the true Owner. By denying or concealing a trust. By detaining the Labourers hire. By living idlely, and eating out of another mans labour. By neglecting a Masters service, and mis-spending his goods.
The Ninth Commandement. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy Neighbour. THou shalt not give false evi∣dence before a Iudge,Thou shalt not bear false wit∣ness. against any man. Whosoever doth so, is not only guilty of the breach of this Commandement, but of the Third al∣so, in committing Perjury. Neither is false Testimony with an Oath forbidden only, but also without an Oath. 1. Thou shalt not accuse thy Bro∣ther unjustly. Slander him. Revile him. Backbite him. Abuse him by uncivil jests. 2. Thou shalt not lye or equi∣vocate. Either for sport. Or to avoid danger or loss. For though some seem to approve,
Gen. 27. 19.Of Iacob, in lying to his Father, that he was Esau. Ex. 1. 19.The Midwives, to save the Chil∣dren. Josh 2.4.5Rahab the Harlot, to save the Spies. 1 Sam. 19. 14.Michol, to save David her Hus∣band. Jud. 11. 5.Iudith, to deceive Holofernes. Yet it is safer (with Saint Au∣gustine) to hold,S. August. that all lyes, being directly opposite to truth, must needs be sin. The Tenth Commandement. Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours House. Thou shalt not, &c.THis Commandement is directly against Coveteousness, or evil Con∣cupiscence, the issue of Original Sin, which was derived to all Mankind, after the fall of Adam. Not covet.No man ought to covet or desire
(no, not so much as in his heart) any thing, which belongeth to another man, and whereby he may receive any damage or detriment. Neither his House, which is his inheritance, and his defence against the heat of the Sun, and the sharpness of the cold. Nor his Wife, which is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; His Part∣ner as well in sorrow as pleasure. Nor his Servants, without whose help and labour he cannot dispatch his affairs. Nor his Cattel, which do his work. In conclusion, nothing, which may any way prejudice him. Now,Jam. 2.10. seeing that He which is guil∣ty in breaking one part of the Law, of∣fendeth in all: And that to the keep∣ing of it, the whole inward and out∣ward man is required: And that the Flesh (while we are in this world) is wholly opposite to the Spirit: It is impossible for us to fullfil the same by our own endeavours. For it is with us, as it was with Saint Paul, In our flesh dwelleth no good thing;Rom. 7.18. and the good that we would, we do not, but
the evil which we would not, that we do. And seeing also,Ro. 3.20. That by the deeds of the Law no man can be justified; Not that the Law is in fault, (being good of it self) but our own Flesh;8. 7, 8. The carnal mind being enmity with God: And they which are in the flesh, not be∣ing able to please him. For the com∣fort therefore of all, when as neither the works of the Law could justifie us, nor we were able to fullfil the same, God, of his infinite mercy, sent his Son Christ Iesus into the World,Gal. 3. 13. 14. That he suffering death for us, might redeem us from the curse of the Law, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith. For in him all the Promises, Cere∣monies, and the Law it self, were fulfilled and ended. 1. The Promises. As, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. 22. 18.In thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. 2. The Ceremonies. Ps. 110.4.The Priesthood, by his Eternal Priesthood.
The Sacrifices,Heb. 7 27. by his own Obla∣tion. Circumcision,Luc. 2.21. 3. 21. by his Circumcisiou and Baptism. Passover, by the Eucharist.Mar. 14. 22. 2. The Law. By his Satisfaction, and absolute fulfilling of it, in whom was no sin nor spot,Cant. but an absolute and perfect Righteousness; which Righteousness he hath of his free will and mercy im∣puted to us, and made ours, if with a lively Faith we apprehend him, and believe on him. And in this respect, it may be said, that he observeth and fulfilleth the Law of God, who (not trusting to himself, or his own works) commendeth him∣self wholly to the Grace of God,Ro. 8. 3. 4. and seeketh all his Righteousness by Faith in Christ Iesus.2 Cor. 5.2. So that we are to rely on those words which Saint Paul spake in his Sermon at Antioch, Be it known unto you therefore,Act. 13 38 Men and Brethren, that through this man (Christ Iesus) is preached unto you, the forgiveness of sins: And by him, all that believe, are justified from all things, from which
you could not be justified by the Law of Moses. But yet, we must take this along with us. That this Faith, whereby we believe that Christ satisfied the Law, and is become our Righteous∣ness and Perfection, is meerly by Gods grace and favour infused into our hearts by the Holy Spirit: which stirreth up in us a love and desire to keep the Law of God: which though the same desire never attaineth to perfection, while we live in these Earthly Taber∣nacles, for the frailty and indispositi∣on of the Flesh, yet God in his mercy accepteth the same for Christs sake. For the better conceiving of the drift and scope of these Commande∣ments, we are to take notice of two things. 1. Whereas, In every Commande∣ment, the grossest sin, tending to the breach of that Commandement, is only forbidden by name; yet we are to conceive, that all sins of that nature, though lesser in degree, and not na∣med, together with the provocations thereunto, are likewise inclusively contained in that prohibition.
2. And where any Vertue is com∣manded to be observed, there all the Vices and Sins contrary to that Vertue are forbidden. And where any Vice is prohibited, there all opposite Ver∣tues to it are enjoyned. Meditations of Death. THat all men must dye, being long since Enacted by Statute in the Parliament of Heaven, unrepealed: and the knowledge of the day of death being by God kept from us,Aug. in Ps. 34. Conc. 1. lest we should promise to our selves any thing for future time: I shall not need to spend many words, to prove either the absolute necessity of the one, or the uncertainty of the other. Onely give me leave to conclude this work with a few Medita∣tions and Prayers, which may serve as well for those, who feel the hand of God by sickness: as for those which are in
perfect health, to meditate and think upon, that they be not taken unprovided. And it is exercise of Meditation of Death, and resolution to dye, ought not to seem strange or hard to Christi∣ans. For the Philosopher,Plato. in his time, accounted all dayes spent, without seri∣ous consideration of our end, to be but fondly consumed; and affirmed, That the whole life of a Wise man, was no∣thing but a Meditation of Death. And therefore it hath been observed,Gen. 23.3. 19. that Abraham, when he was in the Land of Canaan, purchased no more Land, than would serve to bury his Dead. To teach us, that we should not fix, or fasten our minds upon the transitory things of this World, but have our affections bent upon another, and meditate upon the day of our Death; which bringeth two benefits with it. First, It delivereth us out of many cares and troubles. And Se∣condly, It leadeth us to joyes unspeak∣able. The First of these benefits the Heathen man could see,Artabanus to Xerxes, Herod. 17. by the light of Nature, when he said, That, No man lived in so flourishing estate, who, if not often, yet once in his life, did not desire rather to dye, than
to live. For the unavoidable cala∣mity, and grievous diseases, incident to this life, do so often disquiet and vex a man, that, notwithstanding our life is naturally short, yet, some∣time it seemeth over-long unto him. And therefore, (saith he) Death is the most acceptable and wished-for sanctuary, and place of refuge, for a life full of misery and grief. And for the Second, take (amongst many) that of Saint Cyprian,Cypr. We pass by Death to immortality, neither can we come or attain to eternal life, but by leaving this life. Nor is our corpo∣ral death to be accounted an end or period of life, but a passage to a bet∣ter; for by this temporal journey we pass to Eternity. For this separation of the Soul and Body, (commonly cal∣led Death) if we consider the true scope and aim of God in it, is not inflicted by him, as a severe Judge, to punish the Elect: but as a most merciful Father, who only calleth his Children, from a Dungeon of Misery, to a Place of all Felicity and Happiness. And this is that which hath alwayes made the Godly to leave this life with such wil∣lingness and joy, and to endure with so
great courage and constancy, all their greatest agonies. Meditations for the Sick.Esa. 38. 1. Set thy House in order, for thou shalt Dye. Job. 19 25I Know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And that I shall be again cloathed with this skin, and in my flesh I shall see God, whom I my self shall see, and  mine eyes shall behold. This hope is laid up in my breast. Ps. 39.5.Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my dayes; that I may be certified how long I have to live. Behold, Thou hast made my dayes as it were a span long, and mine age is as nothing in respect of thee, and ve∣rily every man living is altogether va∣nity. For man walketh in a vain shadow,
and disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. And now Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee. Deliver me from all mine offences, and make me not a rebuke to the fool∣ish. Take away thy stroke from me, for  I am consumed by the means of thy hea∣vy hand. When thou with rebukes dost chasten  man for sin, thou makest his beauty to consume away, like a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is but vanity. Hear my Prayer, O Lord, and with  thine ears consider my calling: hold not thy peace at my tears. For I am a stranger with thee: and  a sojourner, as all my Fathers were. O spare me a little, that I may reco∣ver  my strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen. Answer me,Job. 13: 2. O Lord, How many are mine iniquities and sins? Make me to know my transgressions, and my sinnes. Wherefore hidest thou thy face from
me, and holdest me for thine Enemy. Wilt thou break a leaf driven too and fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble? Psal. 71.1O cast me not away in my weakness, forsake me not when my strength fail∣eth me. Though I be afflicted, yet let me not be distressed: Though in want of some of thy comforts, yet not of all: Though chastned, yet not forsaken. 94. 12.Blessed is the man whom thou chast∣nest, O Lord, and teachest him in thy Law; that thou mayest give him rest in the dayes of evil. 119. 67.Before I was troubled, I went astray, but now I shall learn thy Word. 25:7.O Lord, Remember not the sins and offences of my youth: Nor judge me according to my works: For I have done nothing worthy of thy sight, but of eternal death. 51. 1, 2.Wherefore, I pray thee, Blot out all my offences, and wash me throughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. Job. 7. 10.I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Why
hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden unto my self. And why dost thou not pardon my transgressions, and take away mine ini∣quity? For now I shall sleep in the dust, and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be. Are not my dayes few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take com∣fort a little.10. 20. Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and shadow of death. A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death, with∣out any order, and where the light is as darkness. What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death, shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the grave?Ps. 89.27. The fear of death overwhelmeth me, and my heart is disquieted within me;55. 4. For that I have daily sinned, and not repented, considering, that, from the Infernal pit there is no redemp∣tion. Be thou merciful to me, O Lord, and save me for thy Names sake, and in thy strength deliver and comfort me.
Ps. 119 75I know, O Lord, that thy judge∣ments are just, and that thou of very faithfulness hast caused me to be trou∣bled. 2 Cor. 4.17.Oh let this light affliction, (which will quickly be gone) cause unto me afterward a more excellent and eternal weight of glory. Ps. 94.19.In the midst of the sorrows that are in my heart, let thy comforts, O Lord, refresh my soul. Job. 10. 8.Thy hands have made me, and fa∣shioned me round about, yet thou dost destroy me. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay, and wilt thou bring me into the dust again? Hast thou not powred me out like milk, and curdled me like a cheese. Thou hast cloathed me with skin and flesh, and fenced me with bones and sinews. Thou hast granted me life and fa∣vour, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit. 14. 16.O Lord, thou numberest my steps, and dost set a watch over my sin.
My breath is corrupt, my dayes are extinct, the grave is ready for me.17. 1. I have said to Corruption, Thou art my Father, and to the Worm, Thou art my Mother and Sister. Is there not an appointed time to man upon Earth, and are not his dayes as the dayes of an hireling.7. 1. My dayes are swifter than a Post, they flee away, and see no good.9. 25. I know thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all the living.30. 33. Woe is me therefore, O Lord, that I have sinned. What shall I do? Whither shall I flee? but to thee, O Lord, my God. Be merciful to me in the last day. My Soul is very much disquieted within me, But Lord, I re∣quire thy aid and comfort. Be mindful, O Lord, of thy Word, wherein thou hast caused me to put my trust, and let thy mercy come unto me, according to thy Promise.Ps. 119.49 For thou art my Maker, and I am the work of thy hands. Deliver me, O Lord, from eter∣nal death, in that day, wherein Hea∣ven and Earth shall be dissolved,
when thou comest to judge the Earth. I am affrighted, when I consider that day, the day of thy wrath, the day of misery, that great and exceed∣ing bitter day. O Lord, in that day where shall I hide my self from the face of thine anger? O Lord, when thou comest to Iudgement, condemn me not, I be∣seech thee, but deliver from the Gates of Hell my poor Soul, which I commend unto thee. Acknow∣ledge then, O Lord, thy Creature, not made by any strange Gods, but by thee, the true and living God. Make my Soul joyful with thy pre∣sence, and remember not my sins, but according to thy great mercy think upon me in that day, for the merits of my blessed Saviour Iesus Christ, Amen.
A Prayer for the Sick. ALmighty and most merciful Lord God, who, by the infir∣mities of this life, dost put us in mind of our mortality, and by these out∣ward afflictions, dost call us to inward Repentance: I cry unto thee with my whole heart,Psal. 6,1. Rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy displeasure. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed. Thou art He, O Lord,Job. 5 18. 1 Sam. 2.6. That woundest, and healest again: that killest, and revi∣vest: that leadest to the Gates of Hell, and bringest back again. If this my sickness, O Lord, be not unto death, help me on this my bed of infirmity, and strengthen me. If thou thinkest ex∣pedient, rather that I should dye than live, do with me according to thy good pleasure, and receive my spirit to thy peace, which I commend into thy hands, who livest and reignest God of all mercy, world without end. AMEN.
Or thus. O Merciful Lord God, who, of thy great mercy, dost forgive the offences of those who truly repent, mercifully look upon me thy poor servant, and hearken unto me, who humbly crave of thee remission of my sins. Renew, O Lord, in me what∣soever is corrupt and decayed, by the Devils malice, or mine own frail∣ty. Pity my sighs, pity my tears, pity my groans; vouchsafe to be re∣conciled to me, that have confidence in nothing, but thy meer mercy. O Lord, it grieveth me, that I have of∣fended thy Majesty, and it grieveth me much, that I can grieve no more than I do. And I humbly pray thee, by the Death, Passion, and Interces∣sion of thy Son Christ Iesus, to par∣don my offences: promising, that if I recover my former health, thy grace assisting me, to abstain from displea∣sing thy Majesty hereafter. I wil∣lingly, O Lord, and freely from my heart, for thy sake, forgive all offen∣ders and offences against me, and I
heartily desire all those, whom I have any way offended, to forgive me. O Lord, though my natural man trem∣bleth at the thought of death, yet I profess that I am willing to dye, if it be thy good pleasure. I. have recei∣ved life, and all the blessings of this life from thee; What shall I render back to thee for them? I will willingly receive this Cup of Death,Psal. 31.6 and praise thy Name. I commend into thy hands my Spirit: And whether thou dispo∣sest of me to live or dye, I resign it to thy good will and disposition; and humbly pray thee, that if thou seest it good for me, to prolong my dayes on Earth, that thou wouldest renew my conversation, by the direction of thy Holy Spirit, that I may pass those dayes in thy fear: If thou be other∣wise pleased to dispose of me, take me, I beseech thee, into the armes of thy mercy: for Iesus Christs sake, my only Saviour and Re∣deemer.
Or Thus. O God of all Consolation, who hast promised to hear all those that faithfully call upon thee, and not to reject any, that with a contrite heart, and penitent soul, shall hum∣ble himself before thee. I humbly intreat thee, in the Name and Medi∣ation of thy Son Iesus Christ, that thou wouldest be pleased to be merci∣ful to me, thy poor servant, at this time afflicted with sickness. O Lord, pardon, forget, and blot out of thy remembrance, whatsoever I have committed against thee, in the whole course of my life. Seal and confirm unto me (by thy Spirit) a pardon unto me for all my offences, that I may thereby receive such comfort in my soul, that I may with all joy and wil∣lingness depart out of this life unto thee. Let me be certified,Rom. 8.1. That there is no condemnation to those which are united and ingrafted into Iesus Christ, by Faith: That I may be confident,Rom. 32. That neither my Sins, Death, the Devil, nor ought else, can
draw me away, or separate me from thee. And that I may be assured, that thy Throne will not be to me a Barr of Severity, but a Haven of Safety, and a sure Sanctuary and Re∣fuge for me to flee unto. Strengthen this Faith in me, which may serve as a Buckler to defend me from all tenta∣tions: and that forsaking the confi∣dence or strength of all other things, I may flee wholly to thy mercy in Christ Iesus, whereby I may be pro∣tected from the terrours of thy Iudge∣ment. Grant unto me distressed sin∣ner, these graces, even for the same Iesus Christ his sake, who with thee, and the Holy Spirit, liveth and reign∣eth, for ever. Or thus. ALmighty and everlasting God, whose years fail not, and who hast determined the dayes of man, which he cannot pass, yet thy self endurest for ever, and thy Throne from gene∣ration
to generation: Remember that I am but dust, like grass, and my dayes as the flower of the field, which flouri∣sheth in the morning, and in the even∣ing is dryed up and withered. O let me know my end,Psal. 39.5. make me mindful of my mortality:14. I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my Fa∣thers were, and cannot promise my self one hour, much less any dayes or years in this my Pilgrimage. I am like a tottering wall,6. 2, 3: and a broken fence, give me grace therefore, that I trust not in the uncertainty of this life, like the rich Fool in the Gospel,Luc. 12. but I may every hour prepare my self in thy fear, to pass out of this frail mansion and to expect thee with a solid Faith, and firm Hope, waiting chearfully for the day and time of my dissolution: And looking for that blessed hope,Tit. 2. 13. and glorious appearing of our Saviour Iesus Christ. Make me (like the faithful and wise servant) ever ready and pre∣pared for the coming of my Lord,Lu. 12, 43 lest being suddenly prevented, I be taken like a Bird in the snare of the Fowler. O Lord,Pro. 7.23. thou hast by this gentle cor∣rection, put me in mind of my morta∣lity, give me also grace, that I may
make good use of it, that I may cast off all the cares of this world, and wholly betake my self to make my peace with thee. And I humbly pray thee, that thou wouldest not forget me in my pains and miseries, in all my infirmities: be not far from me, when by reason of the terrors of Death, and assaults of the Enemy, I have most need of thy help, but strengthen my soul with thy holy grace, against all sensations; that my faith fail me not, but that thy holy Spirit assisting me, I may overcome my spiritual Enemies; and at the hour of death, Lord, (I beseech thee) let thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word.Luc. 2.29. Or thus. BLessed Lord Iesus Christ, the on∣ly comfort of the living, and the eternal life of those which dye in thee; I wholly submit to thy blessed Will, whether it please thee to suffer my Soul any longer to live in this Earthly
Tabernacle to serve thee, or to have it depart out of this transitory world, being certainly assured, that it cannot perish, if committed to thy keeping. O Lord, I put off this frail Flesh with a willing mind, in hope of the Resur∣rection of it at the last day, together with my Soul, when it will become much more glorious and happy than now it is. I beseech thee, O Lord Iesu, strengthen me with thy grace against all temptations, and defend me with the shield of thy mercy against all the assaults of the Devil. I know that of my self I have no strength: where∣fore my whole confidence is in thee. I have no merits of mine own to allege, for I see many, yea too many, of my sins, to stand up against me; but by thy mercy, I trust that thou wilt repute me amongst the just. Thou wert born for me, didst hunger, thirst, fast, and pray for me; thou didst many good works, and sufferedst many bitter things for my sake. Let thy Blood wash away the spots of my Offences, let thy Iustice co∣ver my Unrighteousness, and thy Merits plead for me before the great and se∣vere Iudge. And as many sickness increa∣seth, let thy grace increase, that my
faith fail not, my hope waver not, nor my love to thee wax cold. Let me not be cast down, or dejected with the ter∣ror of death; but when death shall seize on the eyes of my body, let the eyes of my soul look to thee; and when the use of my tongue shall fail me,Psal. 31.9 let my heart cry unto thee, I commend my spirit into thy hands, O Lord, who livest and reignest, &c. Although thou kill me,Psal. 23.4 yet will I trust in thee, and though I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, yet will I not fear, because thou Lord art with me. FINIS.
A short Table of the chief Heads contained in this Book. A General Exhortation to Gods Service. Pag. 1 To Prayer. 50 In regard of Gods Precept. 51 Promise. Ibid. Christs Example. 52 The Necessity. ib. The Dignity. 54 The Benefit. ib. Directions how to Pray. 1. To God only. 58 In Christ. 60 2. Faith. ib. 3. In Hope. 61 4. In Charity. 62 5. In Humility. 64 Of Spirit. 65 Of Body. ib. 6. In Perseverance. 68 With Fervency, Diligence, and At∣tention. 70
The Time for Prayer. 74 The Place for Prayer. 75 How to Pray Ariight. 76 Prayer divided into Parts. 78 The Use of the Lords Prayer. 82 The Lords Prayer Analysed. 85 Prayers for Spiritual Graces. 142 A Prayer before Prayer. 145 Before a Sermon. 147 Petitions for Temporal Blessings. 148 Rules for the Morning. 150 Morning Prayer private. 151 For a Family. 160 Rules for the Evening, and Night. 165 Evening Prayers private. 167 For a Family. 176 Prayers upon the Life and Death of Iesus Christ. 180 Prayers for several Persons. For a Married Man. 196 For a Married Woman. 198 For a Child. 200 For a Woman with Child: 201 For a Young Man, or Maid. 202 For a Servant. 205 Before a Iourney. 206 After a Iourney. 207 Intercession. 209 Deprecation. 211
In Affliction. 216 In Time of Pestilence. 218 The Creed Analysed. 221 Confession of Gods Glory. 242 Motives to Repentance. 246 The Duty of Repentance. 284 Confession of Sins. 287 Seven Penitential Psalms Paraphra∣sed. 318 Direction before the Sacrament. 362 Meditations and Prayers Before the Sacrament. 365 Meditations and Prayers After the Sacrament. 376 Motives to Thanksgiving. 383 Thanksgivings. 386 Seven Psalms of Thanksgiving Para∣phrased. 399 Imprecation. 432 The Ten Commandementts Paraphra∣sed. 438 Meditations of Death. 469 Meditations for the Sick. 472 Prayers for the Sick. 479 FINIS.
