A3703 R15716 12255827 57453
THE SON OF GOD Walking in the Fire with the Servants of God. IN NINE SERMONS Upon DAN. III. XXV. BY That Precious and Holy Man Mr TIMOTHY ARMITAGE, Late Pastor of a Congregation gathered in the City of Norwich. Unto which is added another SERMON Preached by him, up∣on Eccles. 9. 10. At the Entrance of one of the Mayors there into his Office. LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Henry Cripps, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-Head-Alley, near Lumbard-Street, 1656.
To the Reader. THe Prophets, do they live for ever? as the holy Prophet Zechariah asks the Question; wherein he al∣so implies the Answer, Surely they do not live for ever; which dayly experience doth bear witness unto; For we see that wise and good men dye, as well as the foolish and bruitish person: And 'tis no small Mercy unto them (what ever it be to those who remain) that
they may rest from their La∣bours; yet were it not great pity that all their precious La∣bors should dye and be buried in the dust together with themselves? Now although that gracious and sweet-Spiri∣ted Man, Mr.. Timothy Armi∣tage, the late Pastor to a Congre∣gation gathered in the City of Norwich, is now gone to his blessed Rest, (of whose Death it cannot be said, as 'twas of that King Jehoram; That he de∣parted without being desired; for his absence is still very much lamented (and not without cause) unto this day: Yet through the Lords good Pro∣vidence,
some of his holy La∣bors that fell from him being taken up by the careful Hand of a Christian Brother of that Congregation, who had the Pen of a ready Writer; are here presented to the world (as some others also may, if the Lord please, in time be brought, to light) whereby such as have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, may easi∣ly perceive what a good Trea∣sure there was in the heart of that good man, whence such good things, both new and old, have been brought forth. I doubt not but such a sweet savour of a gracious Spirit, will
so evidently appear all along through the Veins of these Sermons, to such as are spiri∣tual, and can savour spiritual things, as that should I go a∣bout to write Letters of Com∣mendation of Him or Them, I suppose it might be said to me as the Samaritans sometime spake unto the Woman that perswaded them to come and see the Christ; Now we be∣lieve, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know that this was a most choice and precious Man indeed. And seeing it hath been the Lot and Portion of the Saints,
even in all Ages, more or less to meet with manifold exercises, and sharp sufferings, in one kind or other; yea sometimes even with Fiery Tryals: and what afflictions may also abide us in these latter Times, the Lord only knoweth: There∣fore I cannot but think, that the Subject of these ensuing Ser∣mons (viz) The walking of the Son of God with his Servants in the midst of the Fire) may be very seasonable and comforta∣ble to all the Servants of Christ, even in these and the after times. What this our Dear and Reverend Brother spake herein, was (as it seems) that
which he had the experience of not long before, having (as I am told) but newly come out of the Furnace; I mean a most violent hot burning Fever: so that there is the more cause to hope, that what came from his own heart, may (through the Blessing of Christ) go to the Hearts of others also. If any seeming Pleonasms, or Redundances, or deficiency in any Phrases or words may appear to any herein, let them please but to consider, that these Sermons are put forth not by the Authors own Notes, which (as it seems) are very hardly to be read, but as they
were taken from his Mouth in Preaching. I shall only crave leave to mention one passage, lest possibly any might seem to stumble or be offended at it, viz. That about the sup∣pressing of Errors, in pag. 118, 119. as if he did absolutely de∣ny the exercise of the Magi∣strates Power in any such mat∣ters, or in any case whatsoever; Whereas if his Expressions be candidly taken, as they may, viz. That the Sword or Pow∣er of the Magistrate is not to be exercised against any Person meerly for the very holding of an Error, if no more, without any manner of Civil distur∣bance
or circumstances of that Nature (for he speaks not at all of any such holding & spread∣ing of Errors) I know not any that wil, or can affirm or main∣tain the contrary, and so take any just offence at the Expres∣sion. I shall add no more, but desire that the Blessing of Christ may accompany these holy Labors. 13d. 7m. 56y. THO. ALLEN.
The Table. Shewing several things observable, in every particular Sermon in this Book. The first Sermon. SEven Wonders or seven Miracles discovered in the Text. First, That the light of the fire continued, and not the heat. Page 3 Secondly, That their number was not diminished, but encreas∣ed. 4 Thirdly, That the fire did burn their bands asunder, but did not hurt them. ibid. Fourthly, These men were seen walking in the midst of the fire. ibid. Fiftly, That the fire did remain fire, and yet not burn them. ib. Sixtly, That they should be in the midst of the fire, and have no hurt. 5 Seventhly, There was one among them like the Son of God. ib. The Observation, That the Lord doth oftentimes in a wonder∣ful manner rescue the lives of his Servants from death. 7 What restraints God lays upon the Creatures, that he might rescue the lives of his Servants. p. 7, 8, 9, 10 The first Ground of the Point. 10 How Gods Name is glorified by delivering his Servants. 11, 12, 13 The second Ground of the Point. 15 The third Ground of the Point. 16 Quest. What God requires when he works Mercies for his peo∣ple. 17 1. Take heed that we neither forget the Mercy, nor the God of the Mercy. ibid. 2. Not look with a slight eye upon great Mercies. 19 3. Give nothing to the Creature, but all to free grace. ibid. 4. Give back again to God, what God lends us. 20 5. Be willing that we lay down our lives, when God calls for them. ibid. 6. We should do something extraordinary for God. 21 7. Look upon all outward mercies in reference to some spiri∣tual mercy. 22
The second Sermon. Use 1. To teach that the lives of the Saints are very precious to God, p. 28. This is made out in four particulars. 30. Use 2. To teach, that the souls of the Saints are much more pre∣cious to God; and therefore our souls should be very precious to us. 34 Use 3. To teach us to set an high price upon our lives. 37 4. Rules how to prize our lives. 39 Use 4. To exhort the Saints to trust God for ever. 45 The third Sermon. The former Use further pressed, and directions given what to trust God for. 1. For all the comforts of their lives. 52 2. For overcomming the evils of their lives. 53 3. For the prolonging of their lives, ampli∣fied in three particulars. 54, 55 4. For spiritual Mercies. 57 Quest. When mercies received may be helps to trust God for the future; shewed in six particulars. 58 Quest. How to improve mercies so as to strengthen faith for the future, in two particulars. 62 Two things premised, and two Cautions how to rest on former experiences. 63 The fourth Sermon. Wherein is shewed who it was that bare witness to this Mira∣cle, viz. Nebuchadnezar. And a Question propounded, whether he was hereby truly converted? Arguments for the Affirmative given by some, p. 73. And determined in the Negative. 74 Doct. 2. That it is not in the power of greatest Miracles to convert a soul to God, unless the spirit of Christ step in. 75 This is cleered by Scripture-examples. ibid. By Scripture testi∣mony. 76 And by experiences in our own times. 78 First Ground of the Point, To put the greater glory on the word. 80 2. From the desperate hardness of mans heart. 81 Use 1. Take notice what a Miracle of iniquity there is in mans nature. 82
Use 2. What a Miracle it is that any soul is converted. 83 A three-fold Miracle is shewed in the conversion of every sin∣ner; Of Wisedom; Of Power; Of Mercy. 84 Use 3. Bless God for his word, and look to it more then to Miracles. 87 The fift Sermon. Doct. 3. God many times makes his peoples enemies to acknow∣ledg and confess that the Lord is with them, and that he hath dealt graciously with them. 92 The Point cleared by five Demonstrations. 1. Christ put up a petition to his father for it. 94 2. Christ hath promised it to his people. 95 3. God hath put a power into his Word to convince enemies, though it convert them not. 96 4. God makes enemies oft to be the eye and ear witnesses of his peoples mercies; and Agents therein. 97 5. God works for his people in such away, that enemies are forced to acknowledg the same, so freely, unexpectedly, suddenly, solitarily. 98 Two Reasons why God will make enemies to acknowledg this truth. 101 Use. 1. A ground of Patience and encouragement to the Saints in tribulation. 103 Use. 2. Let not wicked men look with delight on the miseries of the Saints. 104 Use. 3. Let the people of God acknowledg this as a very great mercy. ib. Use. 4. Let the people of God much more acknowledg the gra∣cious dealing of God toward them. 105 The sixt Sermon. Doct. 4. That all the persecutions which the Devil or his In∣struments raise against the Saints, shall not diminish their number, but rather increase them. 111 The point evidenced by manifold examples out of the history of the Church in all ages. 112 The first Reason, God delights to walk contrary unto men 115 2. Reason, The Lord Jesus is a mighty King, and will im∣prove his power for the Saints. ibid. 3. Reason, From the impotency of enemies to hinder Christs Kingdom. 116
Use 1. To let us see the vanity of all attempts of men against the truth and people of Christ, with an item to the Powers of the world concerning it. ibid Use 2. To give a ground of patience and comfort to the Saints, against opposition of men. 119 Doct. 5. That the Lord Jesus Christ is never nigher to his peo∣ple, then when they are in great afflictions, in fiery tryals. 121 Some instances given to prove it. ibid Quest. What presence of Christ the Saints may expect in their tryals, 121 1. His supporting presence. 2. His enlightening and teach∣ing presence. 3. His sanctifying presence. 4. His quick∣ning presence. 5. His comforting presence. A warning to the Saints to improve this Doctrine, they not knowing what tryals the Lord may ere long bring them into. 126 The further handling of this Point is in the eighth Sermon. The seventh Sermon. Wherein is considered the restraint the Lord layd upon the fire, it could not hurt them, only loosed their bonds, whence note. Doct. 6. At the command of the Lord, the fiercest of Crea∣tures, shall not only not hurt his people, but shall take part with them, and do them good. 130 Two Branches of the Point. 1. They shall not hurt them. 2. They must do them good; both illustrated from Scripture instances. 131, 132 1. Reason, The Creatures are Gods Host, they go along with him, where he is a friend, they are friends. 134 2. Reas. From the Covenant and League made with the Crea∣tures, which hath two Branches. 1. To do no hurt. 2. To take part, and do good. 137 3. Reas. God hath a special providence over his people. 139 4. Reas. The Creatures are all reconciled in Jesus Christ. 140 Use 1. Take notice of the mighty power of the Lord, what a great King he is, that hath all Creatures at his command. ibid. Use 2. What a shame to man that he should not be at the com∣mand of God. 141 Vse 3. A strong Motive to those that be strangers to God, to come in and submit to him; till then they are lyable to be harmed by the Creatures. 142 Use 4. It is not in tho Creatures power to do good without God. 143
Use 5. Comfort to the people of God, and encouragement to their faith. 145 The eighth Sermon. Wherein the fifth Doctrine is further handled, Concerning the presence of the Lord Jesus with his people in afflictions 150 1: Reason, The Lord Jesus knows they have most need of his presence then. 1. Because of the weakness of the flesh. 152 2. Because of the strength of Temptations. 154 2. Reason, The Lord Jesus remembers his Fathers kindness to him, in being near to him in his afflictions. 155 3. Reas. Christ remembers his engagement to his people. 158 1. By promise. 2. By a Law of Love written within him. 3. By the Law of friendship. 4. That he may see to his work he is doing upon his people by afflictions. Quest. By what way doth Christ communicate so much of him∣self to his people in affliction? 161 &c. Answ. 1. He raises up his peoples faith to an high pitch. 2. He pours upon them the Spirit of Supplication. 3. He draws the hearts of his people nigher to him. 4. He manifests much of himself by his word which he sends with affliction. Objections Answered of such as complain they have found lit∣tle of Christ in their Afflictions. 164. The ninth Sermon. Use 1. To shew the unparrallell'd love of Jesus Christ, who will never forsake his in afflictions, no friend on earth like him. 173 Use 2. To draw in those that be strangers to Christ, to sub∣mit to him, and get interest in him, that they may have a friend in an evil day. 174 Use 3. There is not so much evil in affliction then, as men ap∣prehend. 176 Two things may make the people of God not to fear afflictions 176 1. Because they shall certainly injoy the presence of Christ in affliction. 177 2. The presence of Christ will countervail the bitterness of af∣fliction. 180
Use 4. Let the people of Christ expect the presence of Christ in their afflictions. 183 Object. But we have no promise of it now, as the Saints had formerly. 84. Answ. 1. Though God speaks not now from Heaven, yet we have a larger word written. 2. We have the spirit given more abundantly then at that time to particularize the Promises to us. Where is shewed how we may know it is the Spirit that brings the Promises to us. 185, 186 Object. But sure Christ is not with one in affliction; Why is it so and so with me then? Answered in three particulars. Use. 5. To teach the people of God thankfulness, 1. Because God leaves them not alone in their low conditions. 2. Be∣cause he affords them his presence therein. 187 Objections of such as say they finde not Christs presence with them in afflictions, answered; and directions given in such a case. 190, &c.
THE First Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said▪ Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. THe School of Discipline, which God trains up his Children in; teemeth to have very severe Sta∣utes, and strict Orders that are not joyous to the flesh but they are exceeding profitable for the Spirit: there is no School in the world, in which there is more to be learned; the Lord Jesus himself is the head Master in this School,
who learned obedience perfectly by the things that he sufferd, and so he knew how to teach his School (s I may say) the Lord Jesus will teach his Scho∣lars all kind of weapons, that they may be fit for all assaults; he will make them good at any exer∣cise, before he leave them: In the 11. of Hebrews, you have a Role of the several exercises they were put upon, beginning at the 36. verse, Others had tryals of crul mockings and scourings, yea more∣over of bonds and imprisonments▪ thy were stoned, they wre sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, they wandred about in sheeps skins, and goats skins, being destitute, afflcted, tormented; and he teaches them how to conquer all these: The Apostle here doth speak of these as Conque∣rors through faith, in the verses foregoing, see what gloious Conquests they had: In the 33, 34. verses Who through faith, subdued Kingdomes, wrought Rigteousness, obained promises, stopped the mouths of Lyons, quenchd the violence of fire, escaped the dge of the sword; out of weakness were made strong, wxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Alins: Here are glorious victories that the Saints had through faith; over all the evil that they met with in the world: you have an instance of this in the Text. In the Chapter where the Text is, you shall read there of three Schollars of Jesus Chris, hat were put to hard execises, they were put to it, to grapple with he flames of fire; and they had all manner of disadvantage; and yet they went on Coquerors; they had to deal with the wrath of the King, He was exceeding wrath, and his coun∣tc cnged: Tey had to deal with the flames of fre, and flames tat were made seven times hot∣ter,
than ordinary: So the King gave command∣mnt (as you read in the 19. verse,) tht they should heat the Furnace seven times hotter▪ than ordinary: Again. they wre bound hand and foot; for so the King gave commandment in the 20, 21, vers. And they took them and bound them, and cast them bound into the Furnace; yet the Lord he made his ser∣vants Conquerors, notwithstanding all their dis∣advantages. You have in the Text, the confessi∣on of the very enemies themselves; te King said, Did I not cast three men bnd into the Furnace: and Lo I see your men walking? I see four men wal∣king in the mid of the fire, and they have no hurt: So then in the Text you have witness given by the mouth of an enemy, unto that great deliverance that God wrought for his three Servants: Lo said the King himself, I see four men loose, &c. where, take notice of the several wonderful things, that God wrought for these three children: See how many wonders there were in this deliverance of theirs. First of all, there was this wonder, That the The first Wonder, i the delive∣ring of the three Chil∣dren. light of the fire continued, and not the heat, iz. so as to work upon them; this seems to be a great Miracle; that light and heat should be sepe∣rated from the fire; there was light; the King saw them walking in the midst of the fire, and yet that fire did not burn: I say▪ this could not be done without a great Miracle: 'Tis true they shall be separated in Hell; light shall be separated from the flames of Hell: When God will shew and testifie the greatness, the fierceness of his wrath upon the disobedient; there will be heat, but no light,  flames there shall be burning, and yet there
shall be nothing but utter darkness: Now when God will shew a Miracle of Mercy to his Servants here upon earth, God so disposeth and orders it, that there shall be light and no heat. Secondly, There was this Miracle▪ that their number was not diminished, but increased: Lo I The Second Miracle. see four men▪ saith the King; Did we not cast in three, and lo I see four? They had thought to cut off at once, all that were disobedient to the sinful command of the King; they had thought that the flames would have consumed them all three, that there should not have been one left: behod their number is increased; since they begun to suffer, their number is increased, they have a fellow Mar∣tyr, a fellow sufferer, that is in the midst of them. Again Thirdly, Here was this Wonder, this Miracle, That the fire did burn their bones asun∣der, he Third Mirale. but did not burt them: I see four men loose, say's the King, id we not cast three men bound into the furnace, and lo I see four men loose? And what a wonderful work of God was this, that the flames that were prepared to devour them, should help them, that the flames should burn their bonds, and not hurt them? Again Fourthly, Here was yet another Mira∣cle, The Fourth Mircle. that these men were seen walking in the midst of the fire; The fire was prepared to be a Tor∣ment to them; but the Lord made it a sweet wal∣king fire: that which was pretended to torment them, it becomes a blessing to them; they were walking each with other, and lifting up the Name of the Lord; n the midst of the fire. Fiftly, Here was this Miracle, That the fire should remain fire, and yet it should not burn tem: The Fifth Miracle.
I fee four men loose walking in the midst of the fire, say's the King; So that the fire was still fire; it was not quenched; some conceive that the An∣gel did quench the heat of the fire, with some sweet dew, or by some fresh gale; but the Text saith, they were in the midst of the fire: now here is the wonder; that it should be fire, and yet not burn; the heat of the fire was not absent from the fire at this time; for the fire did burn their bonds after they were in the midst of the fire, after they were fallen down: So then it was fire, and when they were in the midst of the fire it burnt their bonds, and they had no hurt; so that the burning faculty of the fire was not taken away, but only the art of it was suspended for the pre∣sent, by the Mighty Power of God. Sixtly, Here was another Miracle, that they The Sixth Miracle. should be in the midst of the fire, and have not the least hurt, that the fire should not reach to the hair of their head, or that the smell of the burn∣ing should not be upon their clothes: I see them walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt: that fire that burnt the men that cast them into the fire, did not them the least hurt. Seventhly and Lastly, That one was among The Se∣venth Mi∣racle. them that was like the Son of God: Now what doth Nebuchadnezzar mean by thsee words? Had this King any knowledge of the Son of God, of the Incarnation of Christ? it was likely he had not, he was still an Heahen and still he worshipped his Idols; but only he was convinced thus far, that the fourth man that was among them, was was more then a man: there was some extraordi∣nary glory and splendor; some Divine Majesty
did appear in his countenance, which did convince him that he was more than a man; and so he calls him the Son of God, but yet without all doubt this was the Son of God, that was among them; it was none other but Jesu Christ, he came down to rescue, he came down to deliver, he came down to walk with his Servants in the Furnace; here he fulfilled his promise, When thou goest through the fire, I will be with thee: Object But you will sa, Jesus Christ as not yet come in the flsh, Crist had not yet taken the na∣ture of an upon him; and therfore how could this be the Son o God? Answ. I Answer 'Tis true, Christ was not then come in the flesh, he had not taken a body: that body that he did appear in, it was not the bo∣dy Jesus Christ hath now in Haven; it was not united Hypostatically unto his Person, it was not that flesh he took afterward, and in which he now appears before his Father for us: But yet the Son of God did sometime take up a body; yea many a time, in which he appeared oftentimes to the Patriarks in the old Testament; as to Abraham, and Jcob; and to Moses, and many others. Object But you will say What bodies were these tht te Son o God did assume and tak up? Whe∣ther were they the bodies of men, or no? Answ. I Answer It is most probable they were bodies that were created: The Son of God when he appeared to the Patriarks, when he appear∣ed to any of his Servants, he had power to create himself a body at any time, to make a body of nothing, and so to dissolve it in a moment to no∣thing, as to make it in a moment, so to dissolve
it in a moment; and thus did the Son of God ap∣pear in the midst of these three Children, that it might be a sign unto them, and to the Church First, That the Son of God should afterward come and take the nature of man: That he should come in the flesh to rescue the souls of his people, from the flames of the wrath of God; that he should come to deliver them from Hel & destruction. Secondly, That he would be with his people in all Furnaces of Tribulations; that when they walk through the fire, and through the water, he will be in the midst of them: And thus you see a great deal of Mercy, and a great deal of Miracle is in this Deliverance which God wrought for these his Sons: There are very many Observations that the words will afford us; but I shall not stand to name them, least the time prevent me, but shall close with one Point: And that is this, That the Lord doth oftentimes in a wonderfull Observ. ¶ What re∣straints God lays upon the creatures, that be might re∣scue the lives of his Servants. manner, rescue the lives of his Servants from death and destruction. I say the Lord doth oftentimes in a wonderful manner, rescue the lives of his Ser∣vants from death and destruction: 'Tis very evi∣dent in the Text: I shall point you to some In∣stances out of the word of the Lord that shall clear up this truth to you, and confirm it: Therefore it is that the Lord shews his wonders in the deep, that he might rescue the lives of his Servants from destruction: he hath discovered the foundations of the great Waters, and made a path in the midst First Wa∣ter. of them, for the ransomed of the Lord to go tho∣row: Thus did the Lord rescue the lives of the Is∣ralites, when the Egyptiaens pursued them; as you read in the fourth of Exod. latter end
Secondly▪ Sometimes God hath laid a restraint Secondly, Fire. upon re, as well as upon the water: He hath gi∣ven commandent to the flames not to harm his Servants; For this, you see it cleer in the Text, they waked in the midst of the fire, and they had no hurt; they were neither choaked with the smoak, nor their bodies confimed by the fire; for the Lord had laid a restraint upon the fire. Thirdly, Sometimes God hath given com∣mand Thirdly, Bruit beasts. to the ver brit ests, not to hurt his peo∣ple: He hath recued the lives of his ervants from the paw of the Bear and the mouth of the Lyon: you read in this Book of Daniel, the sixt of Dan. what Commad God gve there, con∣cerning Daniel when he was cast into the Lyons Den, in Dan 6. 22. My God, saith he, hath sent his Angel and hh sht up th Lyons mouths, tht they hav not urt me: what a wonderiu wok was this, that the ravenous Lyons should not eat the flesh, that was set before them? Again sometime e finde; That God hath Fourthly, Sea. laid a restraint upon the devouring Sa-Monser; upon the great Leviahan; and God hath given commandment to that, not to hurt his Sevants: This you have cleer in Jnh; you read in Jonah, that the Lord prepared a Whale to swallow him up; God delivered him from two deaths at once; from the Sea and fom he Wale; and in the se∣cond of Jonah, the last verse, God gave comman∣dement to set the Prisoner at libert, God spake to the Whale, and the Whale set Jonah on dry land. Again, You shall finde that Go hath laid re∣straint upon vilent men, that the have not been Fiftly, vi∣olent men.
able to take away their lives; He rebuked even Kngs for their sakes; Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Propets noarm: you know what com∣mand God gave to Laban, and what restraint he laid upon Esau, concerning Jacob in Gen▪ 31, 33. though it was in the heart of Laban to destroy him, and though Esu came out with an inten∣tion to take away his life; the Lord lad a restraint upon them. Again, Sometimes you shall finde that God Sixtly upon deadly Di∣seases. hath laid a restraint upon deady Diseases, upon violent sicknesses, such as would have been de∣structive to the bodies of his Servants, God hath laid a restraint upon them; that though volent Diseases and Dstempers, have pulled down his Servants from their strength, to great weakness, to the grave; God hath given command that they should not destroy them: And thus God dealt with David and with Hzekiah, and Da∣vid doth acknowledge it in the 30. Psalm. 3. saith he, O Lord tho hast brought up my soul from the nrave, thou hast kept me alive, that I shold got go dwn o the pit: He was at the very grave, and he Lord delivered him; and then a remark∣able instance you have of Hezekiah: at the 38. of I a at the beginning of the Chapter, there is the very sentence of death gone out against him, and a deadly Disease seizes upon Hzekian, he was gone and quite gone, by the course of nature; he could not have lived, and yet the Lord rescues his life; as you shall read in that Chapter, at the fift verse. Again, Sometimes you shall finde that God Seventhly, upon the Divel. hath laid a restraint upon the very Devil himself:
and hath given him a charge that he should not meddle, nor touch the lives of his Servants; and thus God dealth with Job as you may see in the se∣cond of Iob; there the Divel sought after nothing more then the life of Iob, fain would he have had his life; but God would not grant it, in the 6. vers. of that Chapter, in the 5. verse, saith Satan, Put forth thy hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee t thy face, vers. 6. And the Lord Answered, Behold he is in thine hand, only save his life: There is nothing the Divel thirsts more after, then the taking away the precious life; and therefore he set upon Christ with this temptation, If thou beest the Son of God cast thy self down; and so the Devil doth set upon many of the poor Ser∣vants of God many times with this Temptation, Cast thy self down; make away thy self; and take away thine own life: Yet the Lord is pleased to lay a restraint upon him, and keep up his people, notwithstanding all those stormes and temptations and they are yet in the land of the living; and thus you see what care God takes for the lives of his Servants; and in what a wonderful manner he doth sometime rescue them from death and de∣struction. But you will say, What end hath God in this? Wherefore doth God do this? First of all, and above all, in respect of his own Name; He respects his own glory in it, therefore The first ground of the Point. he suffers his people to be brought into such great straits and low conditions, as none but God can deliver thence; He suffers them to be brought down sometime, even to the very dust; that it may appear that none can deliver but God, that
doth raise from the dead, and call things that are not, as if they were: Now Gods name is glorified these 3. ways, by such kind of deliverances as these. Frst of all, God doth thereby draw forth great praises from his people: I say such deliverances How Gods Name is glorified i delivering of his Ser∣vants. draw forth great praises from his people: When God gives great mercies into the hands of his peo∣ple, he is pleased to put high praises into the mouths of his Servants; in Ps. 149. at the 5. and 6. v. Lt the Saints be oyful in glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds: Let the igh praises of God be in their mouth: Now my brethren, know this; That there is nothing on earth, that God doth more delight in, then in the praise of his people; he is pleased to account it as a glory done to him; Who so offereth prise glorifieth me, and therefore it is that God is said, to dwll in the praises of his peo∣ple: See that expression in the 22 Psalm. it is an expression of Jsus Christ in his Agony, 22 3. v. Oh thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel! To in∣habit the praises of Israel, 'tis one of the most glo∣rious Titles that is given to God; O thou that inhabitst the praises of Israel: The Lord de∣lights more in the praises of Israel, then in all the world beside; He delights there more then in Heaven, if it were not for the presence of his Son; therefore it is one of the dwellings of God, the praises of his people: Great Princes and Nobles, have their several Palaces, so hath God; some∣time they leave the City, and go into the Coun∣try, and places of Recreation: Why, thy Lord he is said sometime to come down among his peo∣ple, and he is pleased to dwell there, that he may refresh himself in the praises of his people: 'Tis a
house that God doth delight to dwell in for ever and for ever: when Faith shall cease, and Pray∣ers shall cease, the Praises of the Saints, the Halelujahs shall never cease, but the Saints shall compass the Throne round about with their Prai∣ses, with their Songs, with their Hallelujahs, and there shall God delight to dwell, there shall God delight to inhabit for ever; and therefore because that God doth thus delight in the praises of his people, he works great deliverances, that so he may greatly draw forth the praises of his people; that their hearts may be abundantly inlarged to him: He will work such deliverances, as there shall be a great deal of God in them, that so their hearts may be greatly drawn forth in praises to God. 2. Again, God gets himself the glory in the second place, by confuting the blasphemies of the enemies; and therefore 'tis that God doth carry on such works of deliverance, that he may stop the mouth of enemies, and confute all their blasphemies: When God brings his people into a low conditi∣on, many times enemies they rise high in their blasphemies against God and his people; some∣times they cry out, where is now thy God? and sometimes they condemn the generation of the righteous, and judge rashly, as those in Act. 28. did of Paul, when they saw the Viper on his hand they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he hath escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffereth him not to live: Now God many times he works great deliverance, that he may confute the enemies of the Saints, that they shall see if they will not willfully blinde their eyes:
they shall see that God was in the generation of of the righteous; in the Psalm. 126. v. 2. you may see there, God he made the very Heathen to confess, that God was with his people; and that he had done great things for them: Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord hath done great things for them; The Lord hath done great things for them. Thirdly, God brings glory to his Name, by such kinde of Deliverances; for he makes it ap∣pear that he hath the sole prerogative over the times of men, and over the lives of men; he will make it appear, that the times of his creatures, are in his hand, and not in their own hand, and not in the hand of enemies. Above all things in the world, God is said to keep this in his hand, the times of men, and the lives of men: See what Danil says to Nebuchadnezzar, in Dan. 5. 23. And the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified: See here, the breath that is in mans Nostrils, it is in Gods hand, and he can withdraw it when he please; thy breath, 'tis in his hand, and he will dispose of it, he keeps it in his hand, and he will not give it out of his hand: and therefore when any life is communicated to any creature, 'tis given him of God: Iob, he will acknowledg this, that his life was given out by way of favour, and free grace: Iob 10. 12. Thou hast granted me life and favour: See here he doth acknowledge it, that the giving out of his life, 'tis Gods prerogative: 'Tis gran∣ted of God; Princes they grant such and such a favour: so life and favour is granted of God; He will keep it in his own hand; He will not make
any Lease and Tearm to any man living, they shall have it from Moment to Moment; the creatures shall have their lives from Moment to Moment; but for any tearm, God will not, that shall be at his own disposig: and therefore the Lord hath exercised wrath and anger, when the creature hath gone about to make this their prerogative, to promise life to themselves, and grant life to them∣selves; You know what is said of the fool in the Gospel, when he had been very prodigal, he would make many promises to himself: Soul, saith he, thou hast goods laid up for many years: why how doth God take this? why he is called fool for his labour; he reckons without the Landford and therefore God he comes and turns him out of his Farm: Thou fool▪ saith God▪ th night shall thy soul be taken from thee; 'tis Gods only preroga∣tive; he makes it appear so, the giving out of life is in his hand: and therefore it is said in the Scrip∣ture, that the Issues from death, belong to God: See that place in the 68. Psal. v. 20. ▪Tis our God that is the God of salvation, and unto the Lord belong∣eth Issues from death: Issue that is the way that God leads to death and from death; The Door, the Gates of death▪ both to and fro, they be∣long to God, to the Son of God, he keepeth the door: Behold, saith he, I have the keys of Hell and death; so that the Issues to death belong to him; He shuts the door when he pleaseth; and the Issues of death belong to him: he opens the door when he pleaseth: Sometime a man hath this conceit of himself; well, I am brought lower and weaker, wasted and decayed in my strength and in my body; but there is such a means as will
surely help me: such a Friend; such a Physician, they will certainly help me: if it were not for them I should despair, there is my hope: why you are deceived, saith God, I will have you know that I keep thee door of life, and the Issues of life belong to me: if God shut the door of life, man cannot get back again, notwithstanding all his friends; Again, sometime a man is brought low, that friends give him over, and then we say he is gone; all means are used, and none effectual, and we say, surely there is no hope for him to come back again: You are mistaken, saith God, I will have you to know that the Issues of life come from me: and I will open a door for life, and say, life come back again: and thus God makes it appear, that the Issues of life belong to him, and that is for his glory: That is the first ground of the Point. Secondly, God doth work such Deliverance Second Ground of the Point. for his Servants, that so he may afford great mat∣ter of rejoicing, both to themselves and to others: I say, that he may afford great matters of rejoy∣cing, great Mercies, and great Deliverances, they commonly bring along with them great joy; 'tis not only a Mercy, but a Duty: great Mercies, call for great joy: See it was their duty, in Psal. 126. 1, 2, 3. When the Lord turned again the Cap∣tivity of Sion, we were like them that dreamed, them was our mouth filled with laughter, and our Tongue with singing: Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord hath done great things for them, the Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad, or rejoyce. The Spirit of joy, 'tis the life of Hea∣ven, 'tis the inheritance that the Saints shall have
there: Wll done good and faithful servant, enter into thy Msters joy: Now God, whilest they are upon earth, he will cause part of that joy to enter into them: that they shall have some of that joy, now have a little taste of the joy of Heaven whilest they are here upon earth: therefore God he will will work such deliverance for his people, that they may see much of the glory of God in the Mercy: much of the glory of God in the Delive∣rance, that so they may have their hearts lift up to rejoyce in God: Yea Again, God will have others to rejoice with them; and therefore some Mercies are spreading Mercies: such a Mercy as God gave to Sara; See Gen 21. 6. And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear, will laugh with me, her own ffection was too narrow to rejoyce in the goodness of God: and therefore I sa, God many times he gives out such Mercies, such Deliverance, that they shall be spreading Mercies: the joy and the sweetness of them shall spread abroad, and his people shall say, we rejoyce in the goodness of te Lord; and all the people that fear his Name, shall rejoyce with us: That's the second Ground. Thirdly, God he works uch Deliverances for his people, that so he might strengthen their con∣fidence Thir Ground of the Point. for the future, that he might encourage their hearts, and the hearts of many that trust in the Lord, that whensoever they are brought down into low conditions, they might look back and see what God did sometime for them: See what the Psalmist saith, in Psalm. 77. see what a help this was, when he was in a low condition; the 77. Ps. v. 10. Then said I; so this is my infirmity, but I
will remember the years of the right hand of the most High. I will remember the years of the right hand, of the most High: I will remember those days, those years when God did by his Mighty Hand, save and deliver me: This is an encouragement for the future, to trust in God; he saved me at such a time, at such a low condition: Oh he was there, the right hand of the Lord was stretched out to What God requires when he works such mercies for his people? and how the Servants of the Lord should ex∣press their thankful∣ness for such Mer∣cies recei∣ved. deliver; and why should we ever distrust the Lord again? surely that power of the Lord can never be nonplust, that hath wrought such great things for me; Thus you see the Grounds: Here is no time for Application. I shall adde a fourth Par∣ticular, and that is this which will yet make the Point more useful, before I leave it: What doth God require of his people, when he works such Deliverances for them? And how should the Ser∣vants of the Lord express their thankfulness for such Mercies, when God doth so and so rescue the lives of his people? First of all, Take heed that we neither forget the Mercy, nor the God of the Mercy. I say, for∣get not the Mercy, nor the God of the Mercy; we are very apt to look upon our mercies with a slight eye; we remember our wormwood and our gall, but we forget our mercies, and the good∣ness of the Lord that did shine in the Mercy: Now know, that there is a great provocation to the Lord: It was the sin of Israel, that they for∣got so soon what God had done for them: we read of this, how they provoked the Lord and they turned back, saith the Psalmist; and you shall see ow God did take it as a great provocation, and God threatens them for it: See how they forgot
what God had done for them; Psal. 106. 13. They soon forgat his works, they waited not for his Counsel, and verse 21. They forgot God their Sa∣viour which ad done great things in Egypt; and therefore the Lord was wroth with them: Brethren, so should we take heed that we do not forget our Mercies, and forget the God of the Mercie; forget not what God is, and forget not what God hath done for us: forget not what God requires of us: Did God remember us in low conditions, and shall we forget him? shall we forget him when he hath raised us up? will not this be horrible ingratitude? does the Lord re∣member us continually, and shall we forget him? Oh! we should get a remembrance of God, and a sense of God, and the goodness of the Lord, written in our hearts: Where doth God write the name of his people? Why he writes their names there, where he will not forget them: why see what the Lord says in Isa. 49. vers. 15, 16. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her wombe? they may forget▪ yet will I not forget thee; Vers 16. Behold I have graven thee upon the Palmes of my hands: See what care God takes, that he might not forget his people; and so he would have us not to forget his Mercies: Behold I have engra∣ven thee upon the palmes f my hands; When a man would not forget his friend, he will ingrave his name upon a Ring; but you will say, he will not forget, that doth not only write it upon a Ring, but upon his own flesh: And thus the Lord deals with you, Behold I have engravn you upon the plames of my hands; and doth the Lord thus take
care to remember us: Let not us forget him. Secondly, we should not look with a slight eye upon great Mercies: Oh view the Mercy, compass the Mercy, go round about it, tell the Towers, and see the Bulwarks, see what Moun∣tains of goodness and mercie shine in them! Oh see how the Attributes of God do shine in them! God cannot indure that people should despise affliction, his Chastisements; My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, he cannot abide when men are careless, when they are sleighty under affliction; and surely he will not endure that men should look sleightly upon mercies: My son de∣spise not the goodness of the Lord, the mercies of the Lord, the deliverances of the Lord; Let not them be lookt upon with a sleighty eye, look into the height of the Mercy, and the depth of the Mercy, and all the evil that would have befallen us, if we had not enjoyed the Mercy. And Thirdly, Take heed that we give nothing to creatures, but all to the free grace of God; this God he requires in thankfulness, when he gives such Deliverances; ascribe nothing to man, nothing to our selves, nothing to our prayers, no∣thing to our faith: No, give all to God, give all to free grace; look upon Ieb, take him for an in∣stance, in the 9. of Iob v. 16. If I had call'd and the Lord had Answered, if he had given me my Pe∣tition; given me what I desired, yet I would not say he hath harkened to my voice: I would not say 'tis for my prayers, or for my faith: No, I am poor dust and ashes, what's my voice in Heaven? No, sure I will give all to him: I will say, surely the Lord hath heard his own voice, the voice of his
free grace, pleading for me, he hath heard the voice of his Spirit pleading in me, and the voice of his Son, making Intercession for me: I will not say the Lord hath heard me; but that the Lord may teach his people this; he gives Mercies before they have thoughts to seek them: as in Ps. 21. 3. Yea, sometime God, he hath exceeded the faith of his people, to let them see that it was not for the worthiness of their faith, though when God would give Mercies: Many times he sets his people a praying and beleeving, but he doth not give mercies for these. And therefore God he doth prevent their faith; as you may see in Psal. 126. vers. 1. When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion, then were we like to them that dreamed; like to them that dream; as much as to say, When the Lord brought us back, we had not faith enough to believe it, we could not think that the Mercy was real; when as we came out of Babylon, we doubted whether we should believe it or no, whether it was real or a dream: It was real, but it was not for their faith; and therefore ascribe nothing to faith, nothing to means, no∣thing to prayer, but all to the free grace of God. Again Fourthly; we should give back again to God, what God lends us: That is the Fourth way to express Thankfulness: Hath God given us life; let us give it back again to him: Hath God given us strength? we should give it back again to God: we should lay out all our strength for God: Improve it for God, and be willing to suffer for God, Again Fiftly, in the fift place, We should be willing
to lay down our lives when God calls for them again: Thus should we express our thankfulness for life given us: I say, be willing to lay down life freely and voluntarily, the next time when God calls. When God hath rescued any of our lives from the grave, why all those days that are added, are freely given, and 'tis an addition of free grace, more then we thought of, more then was expected: And therefore we should freely be wil∣ling to lay it down when God calls for it: we should be willing to lay down our own lives and let them depart; and so friends should be freely willing to let that life go, that was so freely redeemed: Thus we should be Volunteers to death, we should freely and willingly submit to God, as well as dye in obedience, as in faith, and let it be our wisdom, often to look to what Christ hath done for his people, in matter of death and the grave; and set faith on work every day; to see how the sting is taken out by Christ; and the grave is made a sweet resting place: 'tis sanctified, 'tis perfumed, 'tis sanctified that it may be a sweet resting place to the Saints. Again, in the Sixt place, When God hath wonderfully saved our lives, we should seek to do something extraordinary for God; we should not content our selves with ordinary service, saith Christ, What do you more then others? in the 5. of Mat. and the latter end; if you onely love those that love you, what do you more then others? or what singular thing do you? he would have his people do some singular thing for him: and especially when God hath done some singular thing for them: and what says Hezekiah, when
God had restored his life from the grave, in Isa. 31. v. 19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: The living, the living, he shall praise thee, he that hath life once given and he that hath life restored to him again; he that hath life given from the grave: The living the living, he shall praise thee: he shall speak of thy glory▪ and testifie o thy wonders: something more then ordinary is implyed there; That the living, he should live to God. Seventhly, In the last place to conclude, Look upon all outward Mercies, in reference to some spiritual Mercy, and never take up in the out∣ward Mercy, but let it lead you to the spiritual mercy: Alas what is life if it be not in reference to spiritual Mercies? if it be not in reference to get more of God, to get more glory to God: Life, what is it? a poor empty thing: 'tis true, life it self is a mercy, a great Mercy; but yet though life be a blessing, a man may dye betimes and be blessed: Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord: And on the contrary, though life be a blessing, a man may live long, and be a cursed creature or all this: See what is said in the Prophesie of Isaiah the 65 ch. 20. v. 'tis spoken of the days of the Gospel: There shall be no more thence an Infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; For the child shall dye a hundred years old; but the sinner being a hundred years old, shall be accursed: ▪Tis a prophecy of Gospel blessings; shewing how it should be in the latter days: a child dye a hun∣dred years old: That is, the young men shall have abundance of the glory of God: those that are children in years, shall be old in grace, they shall
have as much grace as those that were a hundred years old: and the sinner a hundred years old shall be accursed; a curse, though he live a hundred years: See then, life is not desireable, but in re∣ference to spiritual Mercies: Oh then rest not in outward Mercies: if God at any time hath give▪ any of your lives; for a prey, res not in outwrd Mercies, but labour to see further Mercie in it: that mercy is given in reference to further Mer∣cy; and waite for the Communication of it: It was well when Heekiah could say that God had done it in love to hi soul, in Isa. 38. 17. Thu hast in love to my soul, delivered it from the Pit of cor∣ruption, for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy bck: He looked more to the spiritual Mercy then to the outward Mercy: Alas, it had been a poor small thing for life to be given, and my sins not pardoned; if God had given me life, and not gi∣ven it out of love; Oh it had been a curse to my soul: and tis doth David blesse the Lord for, in Psal. 23. 3. He restoreth my soul, he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness, for his name sake: It was after God delivered him from sickness, he blesse God, he restored my soul and my life, he doth not take up there, but he leads me in the pathe of righteousnes for his name sake: I have further mer∣cy my life is given for further Mercy: God he will not restore that mercy of life only, but he will convey me to further Mercy, seeing he hath given me life, he will lead me in the paths of righ∣teousness, that I may life to the praise of his name. And this should all our desires be, when God doth such great things for us.
THE Second Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. I Made entrance into the words the last Lords day, There is witness and testi∣mony given of a glorious Miracle and Wonderful Deliverance that was wrought for three servants of God. God had brought them forth to exercise their faith: And to suffer; To suffer the wrath of the King, but yet the Lord delivered them, he deli∣vered them from the wrath of the King; he wa
a violent King; from the flames of the Furnace, and the Furnace was heated seven times hotter then ordinary: they were bound hand and foot, and cast into the midst of the fire; and yet they became Conquerors: The very enemies do wit∣ness as much: The King Answered and said, lo I see fou men loose, walking in the midst of the fire: Here are many Miracles in one; here is heat and light separated one from the other: sight remains and yet the heat is taken away, and it burned not, here is the wonder of mercy; it shall be a miracle of judgment in Hell, there is fire that hath heat, but no light: the hotter the flames are, it shall be the darker, it shall be dark that day; but here when God will shew a Miracle of mercy, he takes away the heat, and the light remains: Lo, says the King, I se four men, &c. Imagine, their number is increased, as another Miracle: Whereas they thought that the flames should devour them all: and o their number is increased since they began, to suffer: there were but three cast in, and now there are four. Again, these four men were loose, And there is another Miracle, they were cast in bound, with their Cords, and Chains, and Fet∣ters, but what ever they were, they were dissol∣ved: See hear, God makes the very fire to fight for them to loose them, to set them at liber∣ty from death: Again, they were walking in the midst of the fire; there is another Miracle: The Adversaries thought it should have been a place of torment to them: but lo, it proves to them a place of pleasure: 'tis to them a sweet walking place: They walk together, and confer together, and praise the Lord together; and that's another
Wonder: Again, To walk in the fire, that the fire should be fire, and should not burn them: it was still fire, the fire was not put out, as some imagine, but the fire did remain fire; so the Text saith, they were in the midst of the fire; and the fire remained fire: and the fire did consume their bonds, they fell down in the midst of the fire, and their bonds were burned by the fire: that the fire should continue fire, and that the Lord should suspend the burning act of it, that it should not burn them; here was another Wonder: Again, they had no hurt, the flames consumed their Adversaries, and there was not so much as the smell of burning upon their clothes: besides, the Son of God was among them; there were four, and the form of the fourth was like the Son of God: It was the Son of God, Christ took a bo∣dy, he made himself a body when he pleased: He came down to walk with them, to refresh them, to deliver them: Here was held forth what Christ would be to his people, that he would deliver them; that he should come to do his Fathers work, here was the promise fulfilled, that Christ would be with his people in every fiery tryal, in every affliction, and in every Tribulation: The Son of God, he came down, and he makes a fel∣low sufferer in all their affliction: so he makes good his promise to his people, that if they goe through the fire and water, he will be with them: The Point insisted upon, is this: That God doth oftentimes in a wonderful manner, rescue the lives of his Servants from death and de∣struction: The obser∣vation insisted upon ¶ He lays a restraint sometimes upon the
waves of the Sea they shall not take away the lives of his people: You know Israel went through the red Sea; and the Lord did lay a restraint upon the fire somtime: So in the Text, and somtime the Lord did lay a restraint upon the fishes of the Sea; so in the case of Jonah: and somtime the Lord did lay a restraint upon the devouring beasts: the Lions, their mouths were shut up, they could not eat the flesh that was set before them, when Daniel was cast into their Den: He laid a restraint upon violent men in the world: He laid a restraint upon violent sicknesses and diseases; David was delivered; and so was Hezkiah, when the sentence of death was gone out: He laid a restraint upon the very Divl himself: Behold he is given into thy hand, only save his life: and God he doth this of his own ac∣cord, to be lift up, to be the praise of his people, and that it may unanswerably confute the blasphe∣mies of enemies, he delights in the praises of his people: Oh thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel: God comes many times out of Heaven to refresh himself with the praises of his people: He delights to dwell there; it is the House that God will take up into all eternity, the Saints shall compass the Throne with Hallelujhs, and there shall God be praised. Again, God he will give great matter of rejoycing to his people, and therefore he works great Deliverance many times, though they can∣not whilest they are here on earth; They cannot enter into their Masters joy, yet their Masters joy enters into them: When the Lord turned again our Captivity, then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with rejoycing. I come to the Ap∣plication of the Point: Is it so that God doth in
a wonderful manner rescue the lives of his Ser∣vants The Appli∣cation of the Point. from death and destruction: It let us see, First of all, That the lives of the Saints are pre∣cious  in the eyes of God, they are Jewels that God will not easily part with, that he might have great Incomes of glory. He will not part with them: See what is said in Psal▪ 116. v. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints, not that God delights in the death of his Saints: he means their lives are precious, and therefore their life shall not be taken from them, but upon good ground; they are very precious in his sight: the Lord knows that he hath the greatest Income of glory that way; yea all the glory that God hath in this visible world, is by the lives of his Saints: if it were not for them God should have none to lift up his name in the world, he should have none to make his name glorious here, he should have none to pay him rent for all his great Farm: the world now, that would be a great loss if God should loose all his Rent in the world: the men of the world, they pay God no Rent, they bring nothing to God, that God can accept; they deal with God, as those Husbandmen did in the Gospel, instead of paying Rent, they fall upon his Servants and beat them, when God sends and demands his Rent and Glory from them, they seize upon the Inhabitants as their own, and seize upon all as their own: so that if God should not have a portion from his people, that do from day to day bring in his Rent of Glory, he should loose all his glory in this visible world; and there∣fore it is that the Saints they have made this as an
Argument, when they have been in low conditi∣ons, when they have pleaded with God for their lives, they can tell God of the glory he shall have thereby: So Hezekiah, when he was sick unto death, in Isa. 38. v. 18, 19. For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, &c. as much as to say; Oh Lord, if thou takest me away, how wilt thou do for thy Rent of glory in the world? Thou hast Thousands of Thousands of Saints in Heaven, to lift thee up; but there are but a few, a very few, to lift thee up in the world, this visi∣ble world; and if thou takest away my life, and I go down to the dust, that dust cannot praise thee, though I shal praise thee among the Saints and An∣gels; yet I shall not praise thee here in the land of the living; nor shall I lift thee up here in the midst of the enemies, though I shall bring glory to thee another way; yet I shall not bring glory to thee in this world: And therefore Oh Lord, do this for thy servant: remember me for thine own name, and for thine own glory; and so the Psal∣mist, David did use the same Argument with God, in Psal. 30. when he▪ there was sick and ready to go down to the grave; he pleads with God in the 8. and 9. vers. What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit, as much as to say, Oh Lord, what wilt thou not look to thine own glo∣ry: What shall become of thy gain, of thy Rent, that should be brought in, here in the land of the living? if I go down to the pit, I cannot lift thee up here in this world; there is a long time indeed even for eternity, when thou shalt be lift up by the Saints in Heaven; but it is but a short time that thou shalt be glorified in the land of the li∣ving,
and thou hadst need spare the life of thy ser∣vant, to lift up thy name in the land of the living, What profit is there in my blood, if I go down to the pit? So that still you see the lives of the Saints are very precious in the eye of God: Oh that you that are the people of God, that you would believe this; it is worth the pressing it upon you, that you would fix this truth upon your heart; that your lives are very precious in Gods sight: if you be Some par∣ticulars to make out to the Saints that their lives are precious in Gods sight. not perswaded of it: I beseech you consider these particulars. First of all consider, What a charge God hath given to all his Creatures concerning the lives of his Saints: do but remember their former charge. He hath given charge to the water, and charge to the fire, and charge to the beasts in the earth and fishes in the sea; he hath given charge to the earth he hath given a charge to violent men, he hath given a charge to the Devil, to Diseases and Sick∣nesses; surely doth God take such pains and give such charges? surely the lives of his Saints must needs be precious to him: did a man go up and down in his family and give charge to every one from the greatest to the least: Take heed you do not meddle with such a Box take heed that none of you touch it: why then certainly 'tis precious, there is som precious thing in it; such a charge hah God given concerning the lives o the Saints, he hath taken pains to go up and down in all his fa∣mily: even the whole world. Heaven and Earth, is his Family; and he hath spoken to every one of his Creatures, to the highest and to the lowest: Take heed you do nothing against the lives o my servants; the very meanest of all the Creatures in
the whole family shall not say, but that they were warned; he commands the very stones in the field, as it is in Iob, making a League with the stones in the field, not to hurt his servants; doth God take such pains, and give such charges, you must needs conclude that your lives are precious in his sight. Again Secondly, Consider what a guard God hath set about the lives of his Servants: He hath set a guard of Angels about them: He shall give his Angels charge over the, that they shall keep thee in all thy ways; See what the Apostle saith in the first of the Hebrews, he speaks of the great priviledge of the Saints in the last verse, Are they not all Mi∣nistring spirits, sent forth to Minister to them? There is not one of the Angels in Heaven, but hath a charge to guard the lives of his Saints; are they not all Ministring Spirits? Why brethren, the best of them have a charge given them: from the highest to the lowest, they have all a charge given them concerning the lives of his Saints: and they are as watchful as may be: what says our Saviour Christ in Mat. 26. 53. do you think (says he) that man can take my life from me whether I will or no? I go according as it is written of me. I go because my father ath decreed it, no man can take my life from me, if I would rescue my self, I could pray to my father, and he should send a Le∣gion of Angels to rescue me, rather then my life should be taken away from me before my time be come. And so the like may be said of all the Saints: God would send more then twelve Legions of An∣gels to rescue the lives of his servants out of every danger, and out of the hand of every enemy, ra∣ther
then their lives should be taken from them, before it was determined of God: certainly the lives of his servants are precious to him, he hath set such a guard about them: a guard of Angels, that God should be pleased rather to want atten∣dance in Heaven, then hi Sains lives on earth, should be in jeopardy: God he will spare them all out of Heaven, for to rescue the lives of his Saints before they shall be cut off, before his time appointed e come. Yea further in the third place, Consider that the Lord himself takes a special care of the lives of his children; he will not trust the lives of the Saints with the Angels; though the Angels be watchful, and as faithful as can be desired in crea∣tures; yet God himself he will have to do with the lives of his Servants; his eye shall be upon them, and his hand under them; there is never a moment in which God doth not watch over them, and himself take a special care of them; what he says of his Vineyard in Isa. 27. 3. may be said of every particular Saint; I the Lord will kep it. I will water it every momt, least any hurt it, I will kep it night and day: See here, is a gracious promise; I will keep it, and I will water it, and this shall be every moment this shall be night and day: there is not a moment in the night, nor a moment in the day, in which God hath not spe∣cial care of his people, from first to last; from the womb he hath a care of them, and so the Psal∣mist doth confess in Psalm 22. speaking of the watchful care of the Lord, of the goodness of the Lord, Ps. 22. 9, 10. Thou art he that took me out of the womb, thou didst make me hope when upon
my Mothers breasts, I was cast upon thee from the wombe, thou art my God from my mothers belly: See here, from the very womb, from the very begin∣ning, God begins to take the care of his people; he brings this to strengthen his faith on God for the future, to uphold his soul now in his suffering: 'tis spoken of Christ, surely the Lord he can do it he hath not left me, he took care of me: when I was in the womb, he began then to take the care of me, he delivered me when I was in such straits, when I was almost dead, strugling to get into this world, the hand of the Lord was helping of me: The hand of the Lord was more to me then all crea∣tures, he helped me: See at the beginning, from first to last, God takes a special care of the lives of his Saints. Fourthly, It will further appear, this great love of God; this great care of God, will further ap∣pear; if we consider what a rate he makes men pay for the lives of his Saints, when they take their lives away by violence: He will make them know they have stolen precious Jewels from him: and he will make them pay dear for it; you know what it cost Jerusalem, there was found the blood of the Prophets slain, there was a great deal of blood lay upon them; the blood of Abel, and the blood of Zacharias; and they shed the blood of the Prophets, and Servants of God, and that blood became their overthrow; the blood of them did throw down the Walls and Temple of the Ci∣ty; the streams of blood did sweep away all the Inhabitants thereof: whensoever the life of a Saint is stolen and taken away, God presently sends Hue and Cry after it, and wheresoever God
hath found the blood of his people, he hath de∣clared his wrath against them; he hath prosecuted the Law to the umost against them: See what is prophesied of Babylon; how doth the Lord deal with her in the 18. of Revelation, when God came to make inquisition after the blood of the Saints, 'tis said. And in her was found the blood of the Saints, There God found his stolen Jewels, the blood of his Saints: See how God doth prosecute the Law against her in tha 18. Chapter you read of most fearful judgments that came upon Babylon: God seizes upon all her Riches, all her Glory, and they were all brought down in a day; she her self was brought to execution, she was cast down, as a Milstone, cast down into the bottom of the Sea, never to to rise again: what was the cause of all this wrath and dipleasure, and fearful judge∣ments that was to come upon Babylon? Why this was given as the reason, In her was found the blood of the Prophets; So then still you see, and I beseech you beleeve it; there is nothing in all the world more precious to the Lord, then the lives of his Servants. Well 2ly. If the lives of the Servants of God  be so precious, how precious are the souls of his Servants; the life is more then rayment, saith Christ; the life is more then all creatures, and the soul is more then life: the life of Christ in the soul it must needs be a hundred times more precious, a thousand times more precious: Oh what a high account hath God of the souls of his people? what will not God part with rather then he will loose the souls of his people? he will part with the Jewel of Heaven, the great Jewel of Heaven, to ransome
the souls of his people: he was content that his Son should come out of his bosome, rather then he would loose one of the souls of his people; the Son was infinitely dear to the Father, more dear to him then all the world; yea ten thousand worlds, and yet he will part with his son, that he may rescue the souls of his people from destructi∣on: Oh how precious was the soul in the eye of Christ, what did he do? what did he suffer to re∣deem the precious soul? how far did he come to fetch them? a mighty journey the Lord Christ took from Heaven to Earth, that he might bring back poor souls that were taken captive by the Divel, and rescue them from death and destructi∣on; what great hazard did the Lord Christ run when he was upon Earth? Oh what mighty Ar∣mies? what Troops did Jesus Christ break through? Armies of sins, and Armies of Divels, that was in his way; and yet he brake through them all, to rescue the souls of his Servants: when he had broke through those Troops, what depths did he descend into, that he might fetch up the souls of his Servants? He was content to go into the depths of the Sea, the red Sea, the Sea of blood; yea, into the depths of the Sea of his Fa∣thers wrath and indignation, that so he might fetch up the souls of his Servants, the depth of the wrath of God, the depth of the infinite wrath of God, it is a Sea that hath no bottom, a Sea of wrath, that men and Angels should never have found the bottom; they shall be descending low∣er and lower still, and never find the bottom; and yet the Son of God was content to go to the bot∣tome of wrath, of all the billows of his Fathers
wrath and displeasure▪ that so be might fetch up the souls of his servants that lay under wrath; they could never have lift up their heads above the bil∣lows of the displaure of the Almighty; if Christ had not fetcht them up, if he had not upon his own back carryed them over: Oh how precious were the souls of his Saints in the eye of God! The life of the Son of God was precious to him, and yet his life was nothing to him in comparison that he might save the souls of his people; if he had a thousand lives, he would have layd them all down. Now I beseech you think of this, you that have a mean account of your souls: O how precious is the soul in the account of the Son of God? how great was the price that Christ paid for thy soul? and why dost thou undervalue thy soul, and art wil∣ling to part with this most precious treasure in the world: it cost the life of the Son of God to pur∣chase thy soul, and wouldst thou be content to sell thy soul for a trifle; and yet how many thousands in the world do value a thousand things in the world above their souls? and many they will part with their souls for a lust, for vanity, for nothing, for a bag of earth, for an empty cloud of honour for a little pleasure: Oh what undervaluing is this of thy poor soul: I beseech you remember the worth of the soul; do but consider how precious it was in the eye of God, you that do slight your precious souls: If  ed your body, you care not if the soul starve: Oh that you would remem∣ber, you wil make a hard bargain, though you win all te world and loose your own soul; what shall a man ge in exchange for his soul? I be∣seech you for the Lords sake, have more care of
your souls, let your souls be precious in your eyes; 'tis more worth then all the world, if you loose the things of the world, you may find them again, you may gain them again; if you loose all the friends in the world, you may finde them all in the Son of God▪ he stands in all relations to his peo∣ple; nay, if you loose this life it self, yet thou maist finde life in Christ, thou mayst finde thy life again in the Son of God; but if thou loosest thy soul, thou art lost for ever and thou art undone for ever; and thy soul once lost, cannot be found again: Oh that men would account of their souls to be as precious as Christ accounts of them! do not prefer the body, do not prefer the things of this world before thy soul, and the glorious things that are concerning Eternity: thy soul is more pre∣cious then thy life, would'st thou not put off thy life for a trifle? and would'st thou put off thy soul for a trifle? life is precious but the soul is more precious: Thirdly, If life be so precious to God, the life  of his Saints; Then this should teach us to prize our lives: I say, It should teach us to prize our lives, to look upon them as precious, to look up∣on them as the most precious Jewel of nature; for 'tis the will of God that we should so look upon them: remember there is nothing in the world that God takes more care of next to the soul, then he doth of the lives of his Saints; and so there is nothing that God is more careful to preserve, so there is nothing that the Devil is more diligent to seek after then life: next to the soul he seeks the life, the precious life; I say, life 'tis the most preci∣ous thing in nature: See what Solomon says in that 9. of Eccles. v. 4. For to him that is joyned to all
the liing thereis hope, for a living dog is better then dead Lyon. He knew there was nohing more ex∣cellent then life; speaking of natural life, there i nothing more excellent then life: A living dog i better ten a dead Lyn; a living dog, that is,  man in a vile condition: a living dog, a man though he lives and be in a vile condition, in a bad condition in a most desperate condition; looked upon from God as a dead creature, that man be∣cause he lives is better then a dead Lion; better then Princes and Potentates of the earth, though they did live never so gloriously: Indeed if you look beyond nature, if you look to that condition that is after life, why then their condition is no precious to the Saints; for their condition is bet∣ter then the condition of the greatest worldly men in the world; and one that dies in the Lord Christ were he a dog, yet he is better then the greatest Lion on the earth: but in naturall things the wise mn would have you to know that life is the greatest treasure in nature; and therefore when as the greatest love is expressed, 'tis expressed by lay∣ing down of life: Here is love indeed, that a man lay down h life: When Christ did express his greatest love that possibly he could, unto his Saints he expressed it by laying down of his life: I lay down my life for my shep, saith Christ, and Here is love ideed, here God commendeth his love to us, that whilst we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us; Here is the commendation of love, to lay down life; nothing better then life to be given: and there∣fore you shal find that God hath given it as the greatest outward mercy: he reckons it as the great∣est outward mercy in times of distress; God some∣time
hath promised to do this to his Servants, that their lives, shal be given for a prey: that was pro∣mised to Baruck, Jer. 45. vers. 4, 5. God tells him, the whole land shal be layd waste, and evil shal come upon all flesh; yet this was the mercy promised, the greatest outward mercy, He should hav h life for a prey; but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey: as the greatest mercy that God could give him for his faithfulness; his life should be given him for a prey: God would rescue his life from danger, when it should seem to be taken away, God would rescue it as a prey, out of the hand of danger, out of the hand of enemies: he would give Baruck the greatest outward blessing that can be bestowed: and therefore I beseech you prize your lives: I wil tel you briefly how you should prize your lives. First, Take heed that you speak nothing against your lives: Oh that men and women would re∣member Rules how to prize our lives. what a precious thing life is: speak no∣thing against thy life; how common a thing is this in the world? if a man meet with matter of discontentment, presently they cast sad thoughts against their lives; and oh that God would take me away; and oh that there were an end of my life: that I were in the grave; and such kind of expressions: Poor creatures, do you know what you say? is life so precious? and is it such a pre∣cious treasure? and does God make such an ac∣count of it? and do you undervalue it? wil you throw away your lives upon every discontentment? wil you part with such a Jewel? Oh the folly and the madness of mens hearts; suppose that God should take you at your word; you say, Oh that
the Lord would take away my life; suppose now, that God should come and say, Oh thou vile crea∣ture, have I given thee such a precious Jewel as life is, that thou may'st improve it for precious ends, for glorious ends, that thou may'st gain a portion in my self and son, which should make thee happy for ever? have I trusted thee with sucha Jewel as life is? and dost thou upon every discon∣tentment, throw life at thy foot? dost thou come and throw it into my hand, before I call for it? Well I wil tke thee at thy word; this night shall thy life be taken from thee; if God should be in good earnest, I doubt you would call your words back again. Elijah, he spoke in a passionate way, against his life, in the first of Kings and v. 19. but when God would have taken him at his word, he went back again: See how he desires God to take away his life, at the fourth verse, and He requested for himsel that he might die, and sid it is enough now Oh Lord, take away my life▪ for I am not better tn my fathers, for a little affliction; he is per∣secuted and driven into the wilderness; in discon∣tentment he sits down, and speaks words against his life; take away my life, why should I live? why, God he takes him at his word, and Jezebel shal take away his life from him; but at the tenth verse, the Propet goes back again, and there 'tis his greatest complaint that he makes: and they seek to take aay wy life; and yet before in his passion, he would needs dye: Lord take away my life I am o bttr ten my Fathers: Now 'tis a most grievous sin thus to slght that which God hath set such a igh pre upon: O what care hath God of life? and what charge hath God given all the Creatures in
Heaven and Eearth? Oh take not away the lives of my Servants; and God hath set Angels over them to keep their lives? and dost thou account so meanly of thy life? wilt thou put away thy life for a trifle, for every cross and discontentment that thou meetest with in this world? what dishonour is this to God? and what undervaluing of that which God counts so highly of? But Secondly, Take heed that you act nothing against your lives take heed thou dost not go about to shorten thine own life; take heed thou dost not go about to cut off thine own life; this is a grie∣vous sin, and high provocation: there is nothing that the Devil seeks more then this, and this many times is a very urging temptation, a pressing temp∣tation: Oh take away thy life. Now I beseech you remember how precious life is, what a pre∣cious Jewel 'tis in the sight of God; and will you cast it away for nothing? will you cast it away to gratifie the Devil at his request? But Oh I live a mierable life, say some, my life is a burden, nothing but crosses, nothing but troubles in the world; it were a thousand times better for me to dye then to live. I say, Should'st thou rid thy self of thy affliction? or shouldst thou not rather wait till God opon a door unto thee? what wilt thou break chains? wilt thou break Gods chains? wilt thou break pri∣son to be gon, before God hath set thee at liberty? Oh know God hath worse chains: chains of dark∣ness. But suppose thou livest in the greatest affliction; why wilt thou sin to rid thy self of affliction? is not the least sin worse then the greatest evil? to
sin against God, an infinite God? and if the least sin be worse then the greatest evil, shouldst thou sin to rid thy self of affliction? Object. Ay but, I live to sin against God, that makes my life a burden to me; Oh I bear about me a body of death, and I drag it about with me every day so long as I live; it makes me weary of my life, and, I desire to dye rather then to live: Well, suppose it; Suppose thou livest in sin, and suppose by taking away thy life, thou dost free thy self from sin: yet should'st thou have an eye to the word of God; hast thou any such rule that God hath prescribed to free thy self this way? Oh, why dost thou not look to Christ, and fetch it from his righteousness, from his blood, and from his death? should'st thou not go thither to be free from sin? is there not pardoning mercy, and healing grace, and washing for all kind of spots to the utmost? thou talkest of freeing thy self from sin, and thou sinnest the greatest sin that thou canst sin, if thou takest away thy life. I tell thee, thou had'st better live a thousand years and sin all thy time against God, then sin this sin; and go about to do any thing aginst thy life; why this is the greatest thou canst do to God; thou givest God the lye: God holds forth grace and mercy in the Gospel, and thou givest him the lye: he tells thee in his word, that he is able to save to the utmost, and thou givest him the lye: and therefore I beseech you, remember your lives are precious Jewels, remem∣ber what account God hath of them, and do not act any thing against them; do nothing against your lives. Thirdly, If you would improve life; then gain
as much of God as possibly you can in the time of life, this is the way to gain by life; labour to gain the knowledge of God, and of his Son; labour to get insight into the Mysteries of the Gospel, the great Mysteries of Christ manifested in the flesh: Oh there is an Infinite depth; 'tis worth the seeking after: Oh the pecious Mines of grace in the Gospel; truly you cannot improve life better then this way; seek the knowledge of God and of his Son; seek communion with God, and ac∣quaintance with him; get more grace from him more strength; more spiritual good things, this is a rich improvement of a mans life; and will you not make the best improvement of such a Jewel as life is? you will make the best improvements of your estates, put off any commodity for the best advantage, and will you not put off your lives for the best advantage? I tell you, 'tis a Stock, a precious Stock, that God hath given you to use: Oh why should you let the Stock lye dead by you, and do nothing that may advantage your souls another day? Consider again: this kind of improvement of life, makes a mans life more glorious; if a man be not thus exercised, and thus lay out life, to seek after God, and to get more acquaintance with him, get more communion with him, more fel∣lowship of the Spirit, more knowledge of Christ, more grace, more assurance of his love; why it will make him scarce a man without this: Oh this makes a mans life, a noble life, an Evangelical life; when as he is exercised in such glorious things as these; but when a man doth spend his life, and doth nothing this way, and does not give more
of God and Christ, he lives like a beast; more then like a man: a poor low, carnal, senceless drossie life, though he be never so high and excellent in the world, though he be in the greatest outward ho∣nour, that man lives a low life, and he will not continue in his honour, but in the conclusion, be∣comes as he beasts that perish. Fourthly▪ If you would prize your lives, labour to act as much as you can for God in the time of life: this is a prizing of life, an improving of life: know that life is given you for action; and when a man is dead, he doth not act for God: Oh therefore remember, that there is something that God hath given every one of you to do in this tearm of life: thereis some service, some work in your generation that God expects at your hand, even in this life: and I beseech you take the wisemans council that he gives you in the 9. of Eccls. v. 10. Whatsoever ty hand findeth to do, do, it with all thy migh, fo there is no working, no device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, wither thou art a going; Improve your lives, saith he, and what ever you do, do it with all your might: consider what is the work you have to do for God in your generation: what work you have to do for God, and what your hand findeth to do, do it with all your might; do not neglect but do what your hand finds to do, do with all your might: life is very short, the work is long; and life is very short, you need work while you have time, you need work while the day last: the night cometh upon every one of you when there is no time for to work, there is no device, no know∣ledge nor wisedom in the grave, whither thou art
going: Oh labour to be for God every one of you in your places: Oh lay out your selves with all your might, to do something for God; though the service you are to perform in your generation may be tedious, may be laborious and toilesome to the flesh; yet be willing to lay out your selves for God, lay down strength for God, and lay down life for God; Why consider, there is a long rest that is prepared for the people of God; this is the day time, and here you must work for God; there shall come a time of rest, ye they shall rest in their grave; there is sleeping time enough, and they shall rest in Heaven; and there they shall rest e∣nough, they shall rest for ever and for ever; and therefore be content to do for God, and lay down all your strength for God: Oh there is a resting time, a long resting time that is prepared for you; I have glorifid thee on earth, saith Christ to his Fa∣ther, and now Oh Father glorifie me in Haven: labour every one of you in your places▪ in your callings, to exalt the name of God, to glorifie God on earth: I would not have you glorifie God▪ that God may glorifie you, that is not the end of your work; but glorifie God, because he will glorifie you: because he hath declared that there is rest for you that are his people, and there is an eternal rest in which he will glorifie you with himself: Oh glorifie him therefore with your lives, with your strength, with your abilities, with your parts, with your riches, with all you have, glorifie God in your lives. I shall conclude all with one word of Exhorta∣tion; doth God rescue the lives of his servants in such a wonderful manner? why, let his servants
for ever trust him: as great mercies do call for great thankfulnes, so they call for great faith in the Lord, expect a great deal of future confidence in him: when he hath declared his name to his peo∣ple, when he hath once made his goodness and mercy, and power, and faithfulness, and truth to pass by before them in some special providence, he expects then that they should trust him in the lowest condition, in the faddest condition; that you should take hold of him, and live upon him, he expects that you should reason upon former experiences; and remember the years of the right hand of the most high: remember such and such yeers when the right hand of the most High was declared, when God wrought such works of de∣liverance, such and such wonderful mercies: the Lord expects that such kind of deliverances should be ingagements to trust in him; to trust in him at all times. Many times we will not beleeve unless we see signes and wonders; and the Lord he is pleased to condescend to our weakness; and Christ he shews us a Miracle, yea he shews many wonderful works, mercies and deliverances that he works for his people: and now God he may wonder at the weakness of our faith, if after all these wonders we shall distrust him: See what the Psalmist saith, in Psalm 96. 10. Be still, and know that I am God: why, in all your afflictions, in all your temptations, in all your crosses: in all sad conditions God would have you to be still and know that he is God; and when ever we have re∣ceived any special mercy from God, we should urge this upon our ow souls; if at any time we are ready to distrust God, and repine at any of the
dealings of God: Oh my soul be still and know that God is Jehovah; remember the years of his right hand; remember what he did for such and such of his servants: and for thee in such a condi∣tion; how he made his power and mercy, and truth, and faithfulness to pass before thee, and wilt thou again murmur, and repine, and distrust him? Oh my soul be still, and know that he is God▪ know that he is Jehovah, and that he gives existence to his promises; know that he is as good as his word, know that he is better then his word: when ever any rebellious lust doth rise up in thy heart after we have received mercies (which is a great ingagement, yet still beat it back with this, know that the Lord is Jehovah: the Lord hath a mighty Arm, and as he hath done, so he will do, and he will not leave his people: the power and the goodness of the Lord, it should sound in our ears when ever we are in any strait: this is a glo∣rifying of God for mercies received: And Bre∣thren, upon all occasions, Remember the years of the mercy of the most High: See what the Psalmist saith (with which I will conclude all) Psal 62. 11. God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this, that power belongeth unto God: God hath spoken, how hath he spoken? in some glorious deliverance he hath spoken, in some great mercy: for God speaks in his providence as well as in his words, and when God speaks in his mercy, he expects that we should hear him: nay, that we should not only hear him, but that we should hear him often; he expects that we should hear; what should we hear! we should hear this, That power belongeth to God, When e∣ver God worketh any glori∣ous delive∣rance, this should sound in our ears, That pow∣er belong∣eth to God. and mercy belongeth to God, and loving
kindness and free grace belong to God; and so loving kindness it belongs to God: The Attributes of God, that do found in evry mercy, in every deliverance, and in some special mercies, we should not hear it once but twice: God spoke once, and I heard it twice, that is, often 'tis an allusion to an Eccho; a man speaks sometime that it raises an Eccho; and the words will be re∣peated again, he shall hear it round about him, the words sound again; he speaks once and it sounds twice, often, so there is such a voice in ma∣ny mercies, many deliverances; and many special providences, they sound lovd as the Eccho of a man doth: The Lord speaks once we should hear twice, that power belongs to God. Well, re∣member that the Lord expects that thou should'st hear it often: and when ever thou art brought into a low condition, remember this, what thou hearest in thy former low condition, that power belongs to God: and mercy belongs to God: And thus should we trust the Lord in straites: former mercies are ingagements for the future; and this is part of the glory the Lord expects, this is part of the In-come that he desires for mercy, for deliverance: poor crea∣tures that have seen much in it▪ they should never forget the loving kindness of God, when they are in straits, in great straits, still to make use of former experiences, and to remember the years of the right hand of the most High. Thus you hear what improvement there should be of our afflictions.
THE Third Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. YOu know what Proposition was raised the last day, viz. That God doth often times in a wonderful manner, rescue the lives of his Servants from death and destruction: You had then the Doctrinal part; I have since that, in another place, made some Application, which I shall finish, God willing, at this time time:
we learned by way of Instruction. First, That the lives of his Servants are precious in Gods sight; All the Income of glory that God hath brought in from this world, it comes in this way from the lives of his Servants: if it were not for them, God should loose all his Rent; and therefore the Psal∣mist doth plead with God, when his life was brought nigh to the grave: In Psalm 30. Lord, saith he, what profit is there in my blod, if I go down to the pit? as if he should say, Lord thou art like to loose thy Profit, thy Rent; if I go down to the grave I shall not bring thee in that Rent of glory; Though I shall glorifie thee in another way; yet I shall not lift thee up here in this world; I shall not make thy name glorious before the eyes of the sons of men, & in the midst of thy adversaries: ther∣fore Lord look to thine own Profit, saith he: The lives of the Servants of God are very precious to him, and therefore he hath given such charges con∣cerning their lives: He hath laid a charge upon all his creatures: Fire, Water, Wild beasts, upon Fishes of the Sea, upon violent men upon vio∣lent Diseases, Sicknesses, upon the Divels them∣selves; he hath chrged them all concerning his Servants; that they are not able to lift up a hand against them: and therefore God hath set such a guard about the lives of his Servants; are they not all Ministring Spirits? so 'tis said of the Angels, Hebrews . Are they not all miistring Spirits sent forth for the good of the Saints? God will spare all his Angels out of Heaven, rather then the lives of any of his Servants should be lost; yea the Lord he wil not trust the Angels themselves, but he takes special care of the lives of his Servants. I the Lord
do keep it, I watch over it every moment; And therefore also you find that men have paid dear for his Jewels, when they have taken away the lives of his Servants; he hath always made Hue and Cry after them, and where ever he hath found the blood of his Servants, he hath made them to pay dear for it. It is said of Babylon, That when God made search for blood, he found the blood of his Prophets there; and how suddenly was Baby∣ln brought down? all Babylons goods were for∣feited presently, they were seized upon as elons goods, and he was brought down with all vio∣lence, and she was cast down as a Milstone, into the bottome of the Sea: Now if life be so precious to God, how precious is the soul to God? Oh, the care that God takes of the souls of his people! Oh the pains that Jesus Christ took to fetch the souls of his people! What a journey did he come? And what a Sea of blood did he pass through? What an Ocean of his Fathers wrath did he dive in∣to? He was content to go to the bottome, when all the billows of his Fathers wrath lay upon him; that so he might ftch up the souls of his peo∣ple; and therefore if the soul be precious unto God and Christ, it should be precious unto you; What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to loose his soul: and therefore what ever you do, neglect not those great Matters of Eternity, those matters that concern the soul. Again, If life be so precious with God, why then you should prize your lives? It is the wil of God that you should look upon your life as preci∣ous: take heed that you speak not against your lives; It was the Prophets failing, he would needs dye in
a passion; Lord, I am no better then my Fathers: and take heed that you act nothing against your lives, it is the greatest sin that you can sin: Im∣prove your lives to the utmost, gain as much know∣ledge of God, and communion with God in this tearm of life, as possibly you may; do as much for God, act as much for God in the tearm of life▪ as possibly you may: This is the way to put o your lives for the best advantage. Though man hath never so much of the world, never so much o outward honour yet if his life be not spent in this, in seeking after God in acting for God, he looseth all his honor at last, & become as the beasts that perish. In the last place, We should trust God for the future; and I shall now press this Use of Exhorta∣tion more fully upon Gods people: When eve you have seen God in a way of deliverance, you should trust God for the future; 'tis part of the Rent that God doth expect for mercy, that they that have received mercy, should for ever cleave unto God, and in all conditions put their trust in him, Psal. 62. v. 11, 12. God hath spoken once, an twice have I heard this, saith the Psalmist, tha power belongs to Gd. he hath spoken once, and I have heard it twice: When God speaks in some remarkable providence, why this is the voice o God, That power belongs to God, and free grace be∣longs to God. 1. Trust God first of all, for all the comforts o What we should trust God for. life, for whatsoever may make your lives comfor∣table; and that because that life is more then al the comforts of it; and God that gives the grea∣ter, will not deny the lesser; it is our Saviour Argument to his Disciples, in Mat. 6. 25. There∣fore
I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink; nor yt for your body, what you shall put on; is not the life more then meat, and the body then raiment? Is not life more then meat? Is not the life of greater v∣lue then meat, drink, and clothing? more then a the comforts of life? it is more in the eye of God, the life of one Saint, is more unto God, then all the creatures in the world. Now where God gives life, he takes care for life, he takes care for the comforts of life: See what provision God did make for the beasts in the old Law; there was a Law given in the 25. of Deut. v. 4. That they should not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the con, and the Apostle does apply it; doth the Lord take care for Oxen? and so doth he not abundantly care for men? and so our Saviour he tells us, the Lord takes care of the Ravens, and he feeds them: Does the Lord take care of Ravens, and will he not take care of his Saints? Certainly those that fear the Lord, he will fulfil his Promise, they shall want nothing, that is his Promise. Psal. 34. 10. They shall want nothing that is good for them: they may want something of that they desire, be∣cause we desire, like children, that which may be hurtful to us; but it is not possible that Gods people should want any thing that is good for them: Why God is engaged to maintain the lives of his people, and life is more then all the comforts of life. Secondly, Trust God for the overcoming of all the evils of this life: 'Tis true, Gods people may meet with a great deal of evil in their way, there is many Tribulations to go through; Now
trust God, I say, for the overcoming of them all; for they come all under the providence of your Father; what ever evil thou fearest should come upon thee, it comes under the providence of thy Father: Now he hath promised to be a Shield and a Buckler to his people, it is part of his Covenant, to be their defence against all the evil of life; in Gen. 15. v. 1. Fear not, there saith God to Abra∣ham, For I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great reward; Fear not, I am thy Shield, and there∣fore I am able to defend thee, to proect thee, to deliver thee from all the evil that thou fearest; though there lay never so many evils in thy way, believe that God will and can, notwithstandig them all, make your lives comfortable. Thirdly, Let Gods people trust him for the prolonging of life, for the preservation of their lives; though there is nothing that meets wih more enemies, with more danger, then the life of man: and there is nothing so unable to resist the evil that it meets with, as the life of man; 'tis true, 'tis very easily taken away, as a vapour oon blown away; as a candle it is soon blown out with every puff of wind, with the least affliction when God is pleased to permit it: You know how soon King Asa his life was taken away, how easily was his life taken from him, in Chron. 16. it is said He had a disease in his feet, and one would have thought it had been far enough from the heart, that he might have lived long enough for all that disease, and yet it turn'd him into the grave, it threw his life down to the dust: There is nothing I say, more in jeopardy, then the life of Man; and no mans life more in jeopardy then the life of a Christian;
and yet believe it, notwithstanding all this, your lives shall be prolonged. First of all till the determined time be come; They shal not be taken from you the least moment before Gods determined time be come: our Savi∣our, he was often in Jeopardy of his life; he was often in the hands of his enemies, and yet when he was in the midst of them, they were not able to lay hold on him, and this he gives as the reason, because his tim was not yet come, his hour was not yet come. Secondly, Nay believe further, you that are Gods people, Your lives shall not be taken away, till you have done that work that God hath sent you into the world for: So that you need not fear untimely death: I ay, your work shall be finish∣ed before God cut off the Thed of your lives; 'tis said in Revel. 11. see what is spoken there, con∣cerning the two Witnesses, vers. 7. And when they have finished their Testimony, the beast that ascend∣eth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them: 'Tis possible the beast that ascendeth out of the bot∣tomless pit, may make war against the Saints, and overcome them, and kill them; but that shall not be till they have finished their Testimony, till they they have done that work which God put into their hand, and they were sent into the world for to do. Thirdly, Nay further believe it for your com∣fort, that you shall not be cut off till you be ripe in grace: Many of the Saints they are apt to fear untimely death. I tell you, You that are in Christ, you may be confident of it, that you shall not be cut down till you are ully ripe, see that Promise that is
made in Job 5. v. 26. Thou shalt come to thy grav in a full age, like as a shock of corn commeth in hi season; 'tis a promise that is made to the righte∣ous, Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, as a shock of corn that cometh in its season: The Hus∣bandman brings not in his corn till fully ripe, no more will God take away his people til they be ful∣ly ripe; very thing is beautiful in its sason; 'tis beautiful when it is fully ripe; God plucks his fruit when they are most beautiful; it may be it is possi∣ble Gods people may be cut off young; aye but yet they are fully ripe, it shal not be before they are ripe; God will either ripen them betimes, or else he will ripen them in the very plucking; for this, see another Promise that is made, in Ia 65. 20. There shal b no more thence an Infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days, for the child shall dye an hundred yeers old; but the sinner being a hundred yeers old shal be accursed: There shall not be an Infant in days, there shall not be an old man that hath not filled up his days. An Infant of days, that is, one that is a child in grace, while he is young: Well, the time is coming the time of the Gospel, where there shall not be an Infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: a man fills his days when as he is full of grace, full of the Image of God, when he is full of the fruits of Righte∣ousness, then hath a man fill'd his days; when a man fulfils that which he lives for, then he hath filled his days: Why now God hath made this promise to his people, That they shall all fill their days; they shall be full of grac, they shall be full of righteousness: So that before God pluck them, they shall be fully ripe. Trust
God therefore with your days, and with your lives; be confident that God he will hold the candle of your life light; though there be many blasts, yet God he will hold, he will maintain the candle of his peoples life: Be not you negligent in your work, but let it be a spur to you, make all hast for there are many blasts that seek to blow out the candle of your life; make all hast you can to do your work; but do not distrust, the Lord will hold the candle-light, till his peoples work be done. That is the third particular. Fourthly, Trust God for spiritual mercies; even outward mercies should strengthen our confidence to trust God for spiritual mercies; Truly Brethren, this is the best improvement that you can make of mercies and deliverances, when as you can see so much of God as should draw forth your hearts for ever, in all conditions, to put your trust in God; Now know, that the outward mercies were given for this end: It is one end I say, wherefore God gives mercie, that so he might ingage his people, for the future to trust in him; it would be a great discredit to God, if his people after all experiences, he hath given them shall not trust in him for the future, and there is nothing that doth provoke God more then this. If Israel after all the expe∣riences that God hath given them, after all the wonders they had seen in the Land of Aegypt, and in the red Sea, and after all this shall distrust God through unbelief, God does look upon it as a great provocation: See what God says in Ps. 78. about the 19 20 verses, 'tis said in v. 18 That they tempt∣ed God, yea they spake against God, in the 19. vers. They said; can God furnish a Table in the wilderness?
behold he smote the Rock, and the water gushed out, and the streams overflowed, can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? Now 'tis said in the next verse, therefore was the anger of the Lord kindled against them, therefore was the anger of the Lord kindled, because they had seen his won∣ders at the red Sea, and his wonders at the Rock, yet they distrusted him; can God prepare a Table in the wilderness? this was a limiting of God, and this their unbelief, it cost them dear: Therefore the Lord sware in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest. Object. But you will say, Whether can any mer∣cies or deiverances that a man hath received, be any help unto him for the future? Answ. I answer they may; and I will shew you when; When mercies received, or deliverances How mer∣cies may be helps to the soul for the future. are helps unto the soul, concerning his confidence and trusting in the Lord for the future. First of all, when the soul is careful to lay up the experiences of mercy; when a man is careful to remember the goodness of God, a man may re∣ceive a thousand mercies, a thousand deliverances, such as he might make experience of, for his own benefit and for the help of others, and yet be ne∣ver the beter: I say, if they be not carefully laid up, if they be not carefully treasured up, a man looseth all the sweetness of them; for there are two things that God doth intend in every mercy. First of all, There is present comfort and refresh∣ment that he presently gives out, and then there is something in the mercy to be laid up for the future; there is something in every mercy that God would have his people lay up, something that
will stand them in stead another day; now when a man does not remember the mercy that the Lord dispenceth to him, though he may take some com∣fort in them, yet he looseth the greater comfort of them, that which he should lay hold on is the fruit of experience, or else all the mercy is lost. Secondly, Mercies become helpful when as the soul can see the love of God in the present rcy; when the soul sees the love of God in every present mercy, this puts life into the mercy; when the soul receives mercy, and doth not eye love in it, that mercy, it proves a dead mercy; or if there be any sence it will not last long, because there was not special love seen in it: Now when the soul can eye the love of God in the mercy, then is the heart af∣fected with the mercy, and then is the sence of the mercy most like to be continued: When a man can look at every mercy, as the off spring of love, he will be careful to nourish the sence, the remem∣brance of that mercy: one mercy that the soul can see love in, is more dear, more precious, then many mercies: See it in Hezekiah, he saw special love of God to him in that mercy, Is. 38. part v. 17. But thou hast in love to my soul delivred it from the pit of corrupion; for thou hast cast all my sis behind thy back. Hezekiah was taken with the mercy, why? because he saw the love of God in the mer∣cy: Thou in love to my soul hast do it; and there∣fore he set a high price upon the mercy. Those fifteen yeers that God added to his life, was more then all his life before, because he saw a special hand of God here, and he saw the love of God here; and therefore this was a long-lived mercy, it was remembred, it continued, it remained in Hezekiahs heart so long as Hzekah lived.
Thirdly, Again Thirdly, present mercies b∣come helpful to the soul for the future, when as the heart is fully convinced of the unchangeableness of the love of God to his people: When he is fully perswaded of this truth, That where God loves he loves to the end, and where he begins in a way of mercy, he goes on in a way of mercy, he goes all ang in free grace, saith the Psalmist, All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto his peo∣ple. When a soul is once convinced, this will help much to turn mercies into experiences; and there∣fore that Doctrine which doth teach falling away from grace, that a man may be beloved to day, and cast off to morrow: 'Tis a most uncomfor∣table Doctrine; and 'tis impossible then that a man should make any experience at all of the mer∣cies that he hath received: If God be changable in his love, if he cast off his people that he hath re∣ceived in his free grace; why then though a man hath never so much of God to day, and know ne∣ver so much, and have never so much of the pre∣sence of God in the mercy, he can have no expe∣rience; and therefore that which concerns the soul, it is to be grounded in the unchangeableness of Gods love to his people. Fourthly, Again Fourthly, A man may make use of present mercies to be helpful for the future, if he be careful to keep faith in action, if he be careful to keep faith upon the wings: To act faith in every condition upon the free grace of God, and the mighty Righteousness of Jesus Christ; it is faith that puts a lustre upon all mercies; and if faith be down, a man cannot see the goodness of God in any mercy that he hath received; if saith be
dead then the sense of the mercy is lost, precious mercies, they become useless, they are as a treasure locked up, that a man cannot come by to make use of a treasure buried in the earth, that will do a man little good; and therefore it concerns the people of God to keep faith upon the wings; act faith and keep that fresh and lively; and then all mercies and all deliverances that you have received, they will be fresh in your eye; for faith puts a varnish upon the mercy, and though they be old, yet faith will make them present as things new to come. Fiftly, Mercies become helpful for the future. When the soul is careful to keep up his Communi∣on with God, when a man is careful to walk with God continually, to fix his eye upon God, and to follow God fully in every thing, to follow God wheresoever he leads him; so long as God and the mercy is kept together, there will be abundance of lustre and beauty in every mercy; but when the soul is careless in maintaining his Communion with God, it looseth then the sense of all his goodness that formerly he tasted in every mercy, and they become useless; even grace it self cannot comfort a man if God be not nigh, if God by his spirit do not shine upon it: and therefore mercies much less though they be never so great and precious mer∣cies that a man hath received; yet they can afford no present comfort nor be a support to him, nor incouragement to wait upon God for the future: but if so be God and the mercy be kept together, then mercies become useful, and an help to the soul to trust in God for the future. Sixtly, Mercies are helps for the future, when as the soul is inabled by the Spirit of prayer, to urge
God with former mercies, and to lay them before the Lord as ingagements to help for the future; there is such an improvement to be made of former mercies: When God doth pour a Spirit of pray∣er upon his people; and then, and then only do mercies that are past become a help to the soul or the future: you shall see so the Saints have urged this with God, they have pleaded with God, and put him in mind of his former kindness; so you may see in the 51. of Isaiah about v. 9. Awake awake, put on strength. Oh Am of the Lord, awake as in the ancient days, &c. And so in the 22. Psal. The Psalmist there doth use the right Argument wit God, he turns former mercies into Arguments, to igage God for the future: in the 9 & 10. verses, But thou art he that took me out of the womb, thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mothers breasts, I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers belly: Thou art he that took care of me, when I could not take care of my self, and when the care of creatures could do me no good, without the care of the Lord: and seeing thou hast done this for me, I am still incouraged to wait upon thee, to trust in thee for future mercies Thus you see when mercies and deliverances may be incouragements for the future; and how the soul may make experiences of them. Quest But you will say further, how should we look upon our mercies so as to make the best improve∣ment of them to strengthen our faith in the Lord, for the future. I Answer briefly. First, Look upon them all, as the first fruits which God hath promised to you; this will migh∣tily
help to strengthen the faith of the soul for the How to make the best im∣provement of mercies, to strength∣en our faith in the Lord for the fu∣ture. future: look upon all as beginnings of that which God doth intend to do for his people; as a spark of that flame of love that is in the bosome of God towards his people, as drops of the Ocean of love, drops of those Rivers that run at Gods right Hand, which he hath reserved for his people. I say, look upon all mercies that you have received as fruits of that which God hath reserved in glory for his people; and this will mightily help to strengthen faith for the future. Secondly, Look upon them all, as staies that God hath given, staffs to hold in your hands for the pre∣sent; all mercies, all deliverances, all sights of od all manifestations of his love, all experiences of his goodness: I say, look upon them as staies and crutches that God hath given into your hand for the present, to lean upon while you are in this your Pilgrimage; do not build upon them, you cannot build upon the best of your experiences, do not lay them as the foundation, but only look upon them as helps in your way, and so use them as helps for the present that God gives you, that you may Two things premised, and a Cau∣tion how to rest upon former ex∣periences. more cheerfully go on to his self, and to his son to the rest in him, where there is everlasting peace. And therefore here will I premise two things, and give you a Caution how to rest upon former expe∣riences; and so I shall end the Point. 1. Know this, that it is possible that the soul may loose the sight of all his experiences, they may be all out of sight; 'tis possible that a man may call them all in question, the soul may be brought into such a sad condition, into such a dark condi∣tion, that it may call in question all that ever it
hath seen of God, and those very things that he did take as some special Tokens of love, all mani∣festations given forth of himself, all communicati∣ons of his presence, of his grace; I say, all these they may be darkened out of sight. Or, Secondly, Though they may be in sight yet God doth many times bring his people into such conditions as their former experiences cannot reach them; God may come still with further and further tryals, and such tryals, I say, that all a mans former experiences cannot reach them: his tryal and temptations may be above them all: And therefore here take these two Cautions when as you are thus to follow experiences, and to make use of experiences. First of all, Take heed that you do not make your own experience the first ground of your trust: Make not, I say, any experience that you have had the first ground of your trust, or confidence; I said before, experiences are good helps, good Crutch∣es, but they will make no foundation for the soul to build upon: They are not the first foundation that is to be laid: No, you must learn to trust God when you see him not, you must trust God be∣fore your tryals; for that is the most blessed thing. See what our Saviour Christ says concerning Tho∣mas, in that 20. of Joh. 29. Jesus said to him Tho∣mas, because thou hast seen thou hast believed, but blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have be∣leeved. The heart is so backward to faith, that it is well if it be by any means at last brought off to beleeve; and therefore the Lord hath condescen∣ded to reveal himself to his people by experiences; but yet our Saviour, he saith, it is more blessed to
beleeve and not to see. Blessed are they that be∣leve and have not seen: This kind of faith is that which brings most glory to God; to beleeve a man before he try him, 'tis a great trusting of him and so 'tis an honour put upon him; now to be∣leeve in God before the soul hath tryed him, be∣fore he hath had experience, this is an honour, a great honour that is done to God; and this is the faith that wil hold out, this wil last; this kinde of faith it will uphold the soul in the greatest straits, in the lowest condition, when sense fails and when experiences are gone out of sight, why then this kinde of Faith wil hold up the soul: when the soul can trust the Lord though he had not tryed him, trust him, though God had not given experience; trust him first of all because of his word, because of the word of his grace, that is given forth to the soul, as a foundation to build upon, this is an honour Indeed to God. Secondly, Be careful throughout all your Caution 2. whole course of life, that you rely more upon the word of the Lord, then upon your experien∣ces; throughout the whole course of your life, you will find this more beneficial to rely upon the word of the Lord: and here I beseech you to re∣member, that this life it is the life of Faith, it is the life of Faith, and not the life of sense; in He∣ven the Saints shall live by sence, they shall have no need of Faith, the life of Faith is not proper for them; but the life of Faith is proper to Gods people on earth, to beleeve and not see: Faith is the evidence of things nt seen; it is taken up with things not seen: I say, this life it should be a life of Faith unto the Saints 'tis not a life of sence:
And consider moreover if God do give any spiri∣tual sence, or if he do give any experiences of his love, it is given for this end, that so he might help the Faith of his people, that he might help their Faith, and strengthen their Faith, that so he might encourage them for the future to trust in him; to trust in him when they see him not, when all is dark and sad, when God seems to be out of sight; I say, God gives incouragements for this end, that so he might incourage them to beleeve; and therefore it is that oftentimes he trains up his people in this way; he will strike the Crutches out of their hands, he will put them to it, they shall walk alone by Faith; that all the sence of Gods dealings with them shall be out of sight, they shall have nothing to rely upon; God will put them to it, to rely upon him alone, upon a naked word of promise, upon the word of grace, to rely upon him though they have nothing in the world to rely upon, 2. Consider, though it be great mercy that the Lord is pleased to condescend so far to the Creature to give spiritual sence, and many times experiences, by which he will seal up his word and his grace to them, yet it is a greater mercy that God hath given a word of promise to rely upon, that is the greatest mercy in the world; a∣surer foundation of hope, and that which will stand a poor creature in stead when 'tis in the dark, when all the sence will be in the dark, and experiences out of sight; but then the word o the Lord wil endure for ever; and so then to have a word of grace to rely upon, a word of promise; this is the greatest mercy that God can
shew to poor Creatures: My Brethren, if it were not for this, it were not possible that the soul should be at any certainty; though God had gi∣ven never so many experiences of his love, though the soul had seen, and though it had felt, and ta∣sted of love, and though it had layen in the bo∣some of Jesus Christ, and been refresht with his ove; yet if the Lord had not given a word of grace to rely upon, aword of promise to rely upon; It would be impossible but that t some time or other they would call all in question, for 'tis not possible that otherwise the soul should be supported in dark conditions, for why? when the soul begins to look towards God, why it is fill'd with the sense of his own vileness, with the sence of his own unworthiness: Oh that s one of the greatest discoveries that the Lord makes: shew the soul how vile it is in it self: and therefore I say, the soul is ready to question all: all that God hath done for it, though it hath seen God walk in a way of love to him; yet still, Oh 'tis too good for me, too good for such a ile Creature as I am! Again, The desire of the soul is carryed migh∣ily after God, when God comes once to set his Face towards Heaven, it is fill'd with vast desires to God, that it can never have enough, never be satisfied; and though God do come and manifest himselfe by gracious Experiences; yet still it desires more of God: It is apt to question, Have I any thing of God or no? Have I seen God or no? it is very solicitous when it is once set towards Heaven, God makes it very solicitous concerning the great matters of Eternity: 'tis
fill'd with the weighty thingsof Eternity, and the weighty business of Eternity; so though God hath come and hath spoke, and the soul hath seen God, and experiences of God; yet because it apprehends such great weighty matters con∣cerning the soul for eternity; all experiences are called in question of Gods love and his fa∣vour to him: A man is so careful in this case, that he will scarce beleeve himself: nay, though he have seen Christ, and though he have felt him, and seen his goings, still he will hardly be∣leeve himself, whether he hath seen him or no? you know Mary Magdalu, she was very soli∣citous, she stood weeping; she saw him and she would not beleeve her own sence; and so 'tis with a poor Child of God; Oh 'tis so solicitous that though it have seen Christ, and experiences of his goodnesse, and his favour and love; yet it will scarcely beleeve his own sence, and he is apt to call all in question whether he hath seen the Lord or no: So that still, I say, after all experiences and the manifestations of love, the soul would call all in question many, and many a time, if i had not a word of Grace to trust to; and therefore the Saints are more beholden to the Lord for his Word of Gruce to them then for all experiences: And remem∣ber this, That though God hath done uever so much for you, and you have seen hi goings in your hearts; yet doe not you make your experience the first Ground o your trust, and do not trust to your expe∣riences so; but look to the Promises as th
Promises, as the onely Foundation that will ear up your heart for ever, through all dark conditions; And so for Experiences, look up∣on them as Crutches to lead you to the word of his Grace; but they are not to be rested in.
THE Fourth Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. I Have spoken out of these words. We have finished one Proposition: Namely, That God doth oftentimes in a wonderful manner rescue the lives of his servants from death and de∣struction. I prest you the last day, that Christi∣ans should therefore trust in God; such as have
seen his goings; should trust him for the future, upon former experiences; when God speaks once in a remarkable providence, he expects we should hear twice, again and again; In every low condition we should hear, That power belongs to God. Trust him for the comforts of life, and trust him for the preventing the evil of life; trust him for the upholding of you in life, till his time be come, and your work be filled; only be not you negligent, make hast in your work; work the works of God while the day lasts: but yet you may be confident the Lord he will not suffer the Candle to be blown out till your work be filled: The righteous shall come to his grave as a shock of Corn that commeth in, in his season; I shewed how far we may make use of former mer∣cies for the future to become great helps of Faith; when the soul is careful to lay up the remem∣brance of them, when the soul can eye the love of God, special love; when the soul is once convinced of that truth, of the unchangeableness of the love of God; when the soul keeps up the wing of Faith, and holds up its communion with God, can go and lay before God former mercies, and use them as Arguments to plead with God for the future; as Gods people have done; then do mercies become helpful for the future. But how far should we trust Experinces? Why look upon them as Earnests of that which God doth intend to give, and look upon them as Crutches, as helps in the way; so though all the experiences of God may be out of fight, for God may bring his people into some condition that may be above Experience, Experience cannot
reach them: And therefore do not make your own Experience the first ground of your trust; but trust first in the Lord, and the word of his grace trust them more then all your experiences; the life of a Christian, 'tis the life of Faith, and not of sence; the life of sence is in Heaven; but the life of Faith is most proper here. Blessed are they that beleeve, and have not seen: and if God do give Experience, and manifest his love and goodness to thee, it is for this end that he might strengthen Faith; he will learn his children to go alone: and therefore God many times hath struck the Crutches out of their hands, and all sights of God shall be gone, and God will make them to trust in his naked word: Great use may be made of Experience; but yet I say, lay the word of the Lord as your foundation, and trust that, for that will hold in all conditions, in the greatest darkness, when Experience may be out of sight, and you can see nothing. We proceed. He answerd and said: Lo, I see four en looe, &c. Who is it here that bears witness of this Miracle of deliverance? 'Tis Nebuchadnezzer the King: it was one that was a proud insolent Monarch; one that scorned God, and defied the most High, in the 15. verse of this 3. Chap. that commanded the people to fall down and worship his Image, that he had set up; and in the latte end, Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hand? a persecutor of the Saints, one that was filled with wrath against them: The King was xceeding wrath, and commnded the Furnace to be heated seven times httr then ordinary: Yet here Nebu-Nebuchadnezzer
himself is forced to bear witness A Que∣stion pro∣pounded by Inteapre∣ters. of the goodness of God to his people; He con∣fesses it before all men: Did we not cast in three? and loe I see four men loose walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt: There is a questi∣on propounded by Intereters, neither Nebu∣chadnezzer was truely converted or no? It seems there is much does make for his conversion. First of all; Here was a strong work of con∣viction that past upon him, he was convinced of his sin, he was convinced of the glorious Majesty of God, to shine in this Miracle: His conviction makes him cry out before all the world, before all that were about him. 2. There is Secondly, A confession of his Er∣ror, and an acknowledgment of his sin: Now he knows there is no God▪ but the true God: There was also in the 3. Third place, A rejoycing in his own disappoint∣ment, he rejoyced in that the Lord had prevent∣ed him in the evil that he intended, that he was not able to bring it to pass, his mischievous de∣vice against the Saints: as you may see in vers 28 Then Nebuchadnezzer spake and said, blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, who hath sent his Angels, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, &c. There is a rejoycing here that they were delivered, and that he was disapointed, that he did not succeed according to his will: Now this seems to be a great measure of self-deni∣al: What did not Nebucadnezzar do as much in this as David did when he was disappointed? in the first book of Samuel 25. when David had an intention to cut off Nabal: Abigal she comes to
prswade him, and in the 32 v. David said to Abi∣gail, blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to me. Nebuchadnezzar did seem to do as much as David did here; he blesseth God for his own disappointment. Fourthly, this seems to make for him▪ that he did rejoyce in the goodnesse of God to his people, he does rejoyce in their grace; as you may see in the 28. verse, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, who sendeth his Angels and delivereth his servants that trust in him: He seems to rejoyce here in their grace, in that constancy of theirs that they did not yeild to his command, and serve no God but their own God; and he rejoiceth in the deliverance of the Saints: Blessed be the Lord that delivereth his servants; yea further, he seems to give the glory to God: He does eye God in the deliverance; he takes notice of it as from God, and blessed the Lord: Blessed be the Lord that sendeth his An∣gell, and delivereth his servants: Nay further, he takes care of true Religion, and of Gods Name to be exalted; he makes Decrees, and sends it to all people, and whosoever does act any thing against God, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses thrown down and made a jakes: Thus you see what a great way he went, and what a great deal Nebuchad∣nezzer did seemingly for God upon this his con∣viction; and yet it may be it was but a convicti∣on; and that there was not a thorow work of grace at this time wrought upon his heart. Many works he did, but yet they seem to be effects of a temporary faith. Nebuchadnezzer notwithstan∣ding all this, he fell back again to his old way of supposition; for in the fourth Chapter, you shall
read there of his Superstitious ways: He dreams a Dream, and he fends for the Sorcerers to tell his dream, and he would have cut them off be∣cause they could not tell him his dream, and re∣veal it to him, which belongs to God to reveal secrets: So that though great conviction, I say, post upon him, which did rise from the present sight of the Miracle that was wrought, yet Ne∣buchadnezzer at that time, he was no truly brought home to God: So then we may observe this Proposition of Doctrine, The second Proposition of Doctrine That it is not in the power of the greatest Mi∣racles to convert a soul to God, unless the Spirit of Je∣sus Christ step in: I say, it is not in the power of the greatest Miracle, to convert a Soul to God. Neither Miracles of Judgment, nor Miracles of Mercy will do it: Pharaoh, King of the Aegyp∣tians, Instances to clear it. he saw as many Miracles of judgment, as one would have thought, would have broken the most stoniest heart, and made the most obstinat wretch to submit to God; and yet notwithstan∣ding Pharohs heart was not softened, but hard∣ned. And all those Miraculous works of Judg∣ment, they made him harder: The people of Is∣rael, they saw Miracles both of judgment and mercy, and yet for the most part, they were se∣cure, hard hearted, unbelieving people, they were a burden to God, and a provocation to his Spirit: All the time they were in the Wilderness, what Miracles of judgmement did they see? God smote some of them with fire from Heaven, and consumed them: God smote Miriam with Le∣prosie, in the 12. of Numbers, for her murmuring:
And the Lord consumed Corah, Dathan, and Abi∣ram, in Numbers 16. they were consumed, and yet the people rebelled against God; he sent fiery Serpents amongst them, in the 21. of Numbers: another Miracle of judgment, and yet notwith∣standing for all that, they rebelled against the Lord; They saw Miracles of Mercy also; What won∣drous works did God do for them in the Land of Aegypt? What wonders at the red Sea, in divi∣ding the waters, and made a path of life and death to go through? life to the Israelites, and death to the Aegyptians: they saw his wonders in the Wilderness; God led them in the day time by a pillar of light, and in the night time by a pillar of fire; He rained Manna from Heaven, they eat Angels food, he gave them water out of the Rock, Moses smote the Rock, and the water came out: He rained feathered foul into their Camp that they all eat and wre full: And many other Miracles of Mercy they saw: many Mercies which are expres∣sed in the 78. Psalm; but notwithstanding for all this, you may see what this people was, at the 8. verse of the 78. Psalm, A stuborn and rebellious generation, a generation that sets not their hearts aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God: This is the description that is given of their fore-Fathers, They were a stubborn generaion, rebellious a generation, that set not their hearts aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God: Secondly, As we have instances to prove it, so we have the word of Christ to prove it, to make it evident that it is not in the greatest Miracles of the world to convert a soul to God: See what our Saviour saith, in that 16. of Luke, and the 31.
'Tis the word of Abraham in the Parable; he said unto them, if you hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will you be perswaded, though one rose from the dead: The rich man in Hell, he desires that one may be sent from the dead to give them war∣ning; why Abraham tells them they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, and if they hear not Moses & the Prophets, nither wil they be perswa∣ded though, one rose from the dead: The great∣est Miracle in the world what ever, it wil no turn the heart to God, it wil not make them to believe in his name; though one should come from the dead thou God should send an Angel, a Saint from Heaven, that should be as a flying Angel, to fly up and down in the world, to speak the voice and tongue of an Angel, though he should de∣clare this to all the world, that the glory of Hea∣ven is unspeakable, incomprehensible, eternal, the joy is everlasting, they shall never be able to declare it; though he should declare one hours injoyment of the presence of God and the Lamb, it is more worth then ten thousand injoyments of all the pleasures of the world; though he should declare it, that there is but one way to Heaven, there is but one door o enter in at, and that's only by Jesus Christ and his Righteousness, and should tel you of ten thousands that shal not come there, that sought to enter in their own way, and by their own works, and their own righteousness, and they are all shut out: though he should further declare, that God hath now set Heaven doors wide open, and that he is willing that poor sinners, the worst of sinners, should come to him by his Son, and they shall be accepted, and all their for∣mer
iniquities shall be no block, no rub in the way, he will embrace them as freely as if they had never sinned against him; I say, if such a thing should be, it would be a Miracle of Mercy; but yet for all this, it would not perswade the heart of one sinner to submit to God. This could not overcome the heart of man to Jesus Christ. And again, on the other side, if one should come from the dead, God should send one from the pit of destruction to declare, to bear witness of the un∣speakable Torments that are there; and should declare, that way is broad, and many walk in the way to destruction, and that unbelief it is the rea∣diest way: Though he should declare that every man and woman living; that seek not after Jesus Christ, and hath not an interest in him, are like, sooner or later, to come into the same Lake of condemnation: It would be a tirrable Miracle of judgment; but yet all this would not work upon the heart of one sinner: no, our Saviour says to such men and women that sit under the Gospel, and hear what I speak from day to day, and there∣by are not wonted to submit to God: Why, nei∣ther would they beleeve though one should come from the dead. Thirdly, The Point may be further cleered, by our own Experiences. I say, by experiences of our own days; are there not many poor Crea∣tures that have seen Miracles of Mercy, that have seen God, many times in wonderful way of deliverance towards them? at such a time they were in danger, eminent danger, at such a time they were nigh to death, and what great promi∣ses, and what great purposes came into their
hearts and mouths: and yet notwithstanding all that God hath done for them, they have turned again to folly; nay, sometime they have seen and tasted as it were of the power of the world to come, that God hath convinced them many times of the excellency of the way, and the necessity of walking with him, and the happy condition of the Saints, & they it may be, have had some tasts, some drops to cool their tongue; and though they have had that Miracle of Mercy, yet notwithstand∣ing their hearts have gone back again; and they have not bin converted and perswaded to come to Christ, after a hearty draught of his love and good ness, which might abundantly satisfie them: others that have seen even Miracles of judgment; God many many times hath wrought strong con∣viction in their conscience, they have been as it were for the present, hung over the flames of Hell, and great thoughts have been darted into their spirits; convincing thoughts of the necessi∣ty of seeking after faith, they have seen as it were the mighty consequence of the soul, the mighty consequence of the things of Eternity, and yet have worn out all hints that have been made upon conscience, and soon returned to their former ways of folly; to folly & desperate madnes; others taken up in vanity, taken up in the world, others taken up in their own righteousness, and think themselves whole, and need no Physician; notwithstanding all these Miracles of judgment; how many are there that have seen them, and have felt them, and have not been brought home savingly by them? But you will say, how come this to pass! what
cannot miracles of works bring home a soul to God? what then? what miracles? I answer first of all, God would have it so that he might put a great glory upon his word, he will  have it known what the word of the Lord is, he will make known the power and efficacy of it; his word is more dear to him then his work, more then all his works of Creation, of Providence, or Mi∣racles; though all perish, yet the word of the Lord that endures, that abides; God will put a great deal of glory upon his word; and therefore he hath chosen his word rather then Miracles; though men think, Oh Miracles are glorious; and surely, if God shew miracles that will convert, that will bring home the soul to God; but Gods thoughts are not our thoughts, his waies are not our waies, he knows that miracles cannot do it: therefore he hath chosen his word, he will make that glorious in the Conversion of sinners; for the most part God works by his word; it is true, the word it self neither cannot do it, the word with∣out the Spirit is a dead letter; but God is pleased to send his spirit along with his word; when hee intends this work the spirit of the Lord shall come with some word from heaven that shall be effectu∣al to turn the heart of a sinner, when Miracles of judgment or mercy cannot do it; it seems a weak thing to men, but the word of the Lord is mighty and powerful: When God is intended to catch any soul to bring it home, commonly this is his Net, he takes his word, and throws that over them, and that shall catch them. When he is intended to beat down strong holds, mighty Towers of lusts, sinful imaginations that do exalt themselves
against Himself, and his Son, and his Gospel; why, God is pleased to use his word as the battery which will do this great and glorious work. Secondly, It comes to pass from the desperate  hardness that is in mans heart; that aversness that is in the soul naturally to God: it is the hardest matter in the world to bring God and the soul to∣gether: Oh what striving is there in the graci∣ous heart, before it is brought to God? it flies off from God; and the soul is forced to put Ar∣guments upon himself, it may be again and again; Why, art thou cast down Oh my soul, why art thou disquieted? why, trust in God; Why trust in God. He repeets it again, and again, and all too little to trust in God, and to have confidence in God; but there is much more aversness in a natural mans heart to God; there is an infinite distance, there is a contrariety; and 'tis a hard matter to bring off a soul to close with God, to submit to him: the greatest Miracle in the world cannot do it: why, when there is much peace in Gods heart, there is war in the sinners heart; yea, when there is peace in Gods mouth too, there is war in the sinners mouth: when God doth call upon them, come and behold the face of my Son, and behold the face of my righteousnes, I give thee leave to look to either me, so thou look to me through my Son: yet still he will have his heart draw back, and he wil look to God through his own righteousness, that of a creature, or else run away from God, hide himself in his own shame and confusion, and dare not come to God: And truly 'tis a very hard thing to overcome the heart in this cause, to trust God, to rely upon him; the heart is fille'd with
slvery, and 'tis a very hard matter to overcome that slavery that is in the heart: I tell you, Mira∣cles will not do it; though it should see never so many Miracles when it is in that condition; Mi∣racles would not overcome the heart to trust in God to beleeve in God: Miracles, they declare te power of God and the glory of God, hold forth the beams of his Majesty; ay but there must be a declaration of the love of God and the mer∣cy or God in Christ; there must be a discovery of this to the soul, before he can come in and sub∣mit to God, and trust in him, before the slavery can be overcome that is in the heart. I tell you, you must have a word, a sure word, to go upon; for the soul dare not go to God, he looking up∣on himself as stubble, and upon God as a consu∣ming fire; and still he keeps off from God: and therefore nothing but the word of the Lord can perswade the heart to come in, and to trust, and Applica∣tion of the Point. rely upon God. Now let us make some Application: Is it so, that the greatest Miracle cannot convert a soul to God▪ Why then First of all, take notice what a Miracle of ini∣quity,  of sin, is in every mans heart! a stage thing that the heart of a man should be so hadned against God and his own good; who would think it, that there should be so much stoutness in such a poor thing as the heart of man? so small a pece of flesh, to be so stout, and so hard against God? that no sword should be able to pierce it; it should not be only Musquet proof but Cannon proof; stand out not only agaist afflictions, lesser judgments, but stands out against great judg∣ments;
many times against miraculous judgments: why here is a strange stoutness, and hardness in every mans heart: Oh what a dead sleep is every man by nature cast into! you will say that man is in a dead sleep, that though he be shot at, it can∣not wake him, that he should sleep secure when the house is on fire about his ears; truly, this is the condition of every man by nature▪ though God do lay Cannon shot against him, and though God set on fire the world about his ears, yet still he sleeps; what a strange condition is the state of nature? Let us all take notice of it, and set us all bewail it in the presence of God, seeing how wo∣ful it is, and what we are like. Secondly, If Miracles cannot convert a soul,  then what a Miracle is it that any soul is conver∣ted? truly we may stand and wonder that any soul should be brought home to God; how ma∣ny Mracles is in this work of convesion? to con∣vert a soul to God; 'tis a greater Miracle then to open the eyes of the blind, to give strength to lame to give life to the dead; a greater Miracle then to turn darkness into light, a greater Mira∣cle then to beat down strong Cities with seven Rms horns, 'tis a greater Miracle then to make the world; he spake, and it was done, it was made, he spake his word, and the world was created: but God speaks again, and again, once and twice, and often, before the new creature is formed, be∣fore Many Mi∣racles in the conver∣sion of a soul to God. faith is created in the heart of man: and tru∣ly Brethren, you need not wonder that so few are brought home to God; that's not the Mira∣cle: but stand and wonder that any should be brought home to God; there are many Miracles
in the conversion of the soul to God; I beseech you take notice of them: there is a Miracle of First Mi∣racl of wisdm. of wisdome; there is a Miracle of wisdom, I say, in the conversion of a soul, that God should find out a way to reconcile himself to a sinner, and then reoncile the sinner to himself; here is infi∣nite wisdom to finde out a way to reconcile him∣self to the sinner, to find out a way to satisfie both justice and mercy, that they should meet each other and kiss each other, and both be satis∣fied; that justice should say, I have enough, and Mercy should say, I am well pleased, and both be glorified in Christ: Brethren, here is a way that men and Angels could never have found out, here is a Miracle of wisdome to reconcile the sin∣ner to God; also here is abundance of the wis∣dom of God, that God should finde out a way to make a rebellious sinner, come in and submit when he had stood out long, and stood many bat∣teries, that God had layd against him; that the Lord should bring him in by a word of his grace; that God should come and catch a poor soul, and take him before the soul be aware: here is abun∣dance of holy wisdom, truly none could do this, but only God. And as there is a Miracle of wisdom, so there Secondly, Ther is a Mirle of Power. is a Miracle of power in every souls conversion: Oh wonderful power hath God put forth to overome the creature, and to overcome him∣sel: To overcome the creature, to make a stub∣born, stout hearted sinner relent, to shake the Oaks of Bashan, and make the Cedars of Leba∣non to stoop: Yet truly this is the work of God, he put abundance of power into a word of his;
and when an obstinate sinner hath stood out boh the allurements of Mercy, and hath out stood all the batteries of Judgment that God hath laid against him, God hath sent out many Armies of judgments, to bring him in, and they have re∣turned back again, and have not done their work; and that yet the Lord at last, should be pleased to arme a word of his, a poor naked word of his with so much power, o give such authority, and to give such commission, as to go and bring in the stout hearted sinner, and make him fall down at the footstole of Jesus Christ; here is a Miracle of pow∣er; and then that God should overcome all his wrath, and all his fury and indignation, and say, it is not in me, I give thee leave to draw nigh to me, in my Son, fury is not in me; that God should overcome himself to stoop to the creature that the Majesty of Heaven should first stoop to the creature, that the Prince should come and be∣seech the Rebel to accept of mercy offer the first tearms of peace, and not looking to the infi∣nite distance that is between him and the creature; but lay that aside, and beseech a poor creature to accept of mercy; here is a Miracle of power. And then there is a Miracle of goodness, a Mi∣racle of mercy in every souls conversion; a Mira∣cle of mercy, that God should pardon the sin of his people from Eternity; Oh the Miracles of mercy, writes the pardon, gives the pardon into the Sons hand; that he should work it over by Covenant, and make all sure for his people in Christ, even from Eternity, even to give Christ a pardon for his peoples sins, many thousand years before the sins are committed; I do not
say the pardon is given out to them, before they are brought in to submit to Christ, but it is given out into the hand of Christ; that if they come and submit to Christ 'tis in his hand to give it out, 'tis already written and Sealed; here is a Miracle of Mercy. Again, that the Lord should so freely, and so fully bot out transgressions; that he should make the sins committed to be as if they had not been committed; there shall no more remain of them as if they had never been acted; to bury them, to cast them behind his behind his back, to throw them into the depth of the Sea, to carry them into the wilderness, into a land of forgetfulness, that when they are sought for, they shal not be found, they shall be as if they had never been; what a Miracle of mercy is this? that God should bear no old grudge to a poor sinner, a Rebel, one that have stood out against him▪ and yet that God should retain no grudge in his heart, but re∣ceive a poor soul into his Bosom, as if he had ne∣ver been defiled; to receive him into his own bo∣els, into intimate communion and acquaintance with himself in love▪ as if he had never bin a Rbel; to bear no old grudg: here's wonderful rich mercy! Again, for God to account the soul righteous, to look upon him as righteous, when he is unrigh∣teous; to look upon him as righteous in Christ, when he is full of spots and polutions, and deor∣mity in himself; at that very time to look upon him in Christ, and behold him as righteous, as if he had no spot, no defilement in him: Brethren, all these are Miacles of mercy. Again, that God should pour out his spirit up∣on
a poor lump of flesh; that his spirit should work upon a poor creature, and take a poor crea∣ture into union with himself, and communion with himself; that he should be working in the heart, and cleanse a poor creature from pollution, both of flesh and spirit; all these are Miracles: Mira∣racles of Wisdom: Miracles of Power: and Mira∣cles of Mercy, that doth shine in the bringing home of a soul to God: And therefore to con∣clude all; in the last place, Let us bless God for his Word, and look more  to the word of God, then to Miracles; seeing what power God hath put into his word, and how he s pleased to accompany his word with his spi∣rit▪ and do great things; and now why should we look to Miracles? and why should we stand upon miracles? truly, if you will not beleeve the Word of the Lord without Miracles; neither would you beleeve though God should work Mi∣racles; why there is more power in the word to perswade the heart, that it is indeed the word of God, and so to overcome the soul to beleeve, to rest on it, then there is in all Miracles that can be shewed; and therefore in this case, if any look for a Miracle, they may hear Christ say, no Mi∣racle shall be given to such a generation; He that beleeves nt the word, he will not beleeve, though one rose from the dead: Nebuchadnezzar, he saw three men that had a resurrection from the dead, they were dead in all their accounts, they hought that they had been all consumed; they have an unexpected life, they are all loose, walk∣ng in the midst of the fire; and yet I say, Nebu∣hadnezzars heart was not firmly wrought upon
by this Miracle; but he returned again to hi own folly: And therefore, Oh praise the Lord for his word, bless the Lord for his word; if it had not been for the word of his grace, how should a poor creature have been brought in, and what should poor creatures have relyed upon? what foundation to build upon? what can give bold∣ness and confidence to a poor soul to draw nigh to God? truly it could not be, it is impossible that the heart should be overcome, to submit to God, without the word of his grace: Oh bless the Lord for his Word: we are more beholden to the Lord for his Word, then for all Miracles that possibly can be shewed.
THE Fifth Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. THere is witness given to a Miraculous deliverance, that God wrought for his three Servants, who through their faith, overcame the violence of the fire: Nebuchadnezzar makes a large confession here. I propounded this question the last time; Whether Nebucadnezzar was truly
brought home to God or no; he did a great deal, he spake a great deal; there was a great work of conviction past upon his spirit, he doth acknow∣ledge his Error, and sin, he doth rejoyce in his own disappointment, that God did not suffer him to have his will; he doth reoyce in the goodness of God that was shewed to his Servants; he re∣joyces in their constancy, that they did not obey the Kings command, worship his Gods: he did rejoyce in their deliverances; he doth acknow∣ledge that it was God that delivered them; he takes care of the worship of God, to promote it, he makes a penal Statute▪ That whosoever did profane the name of God, should be cut in pieces; and yet notwithstanding for all this, we concluded probably, That Nebuchadnezzar was not con∣verted; for in the next Chapter, he eturned to his old way of sin, of superstition; he dreams a dream, and he sends for the Sorcerers, to tell im his dream, which belongs to God to reveal secrets, as Daniel told him: So then we observed, that It is not in the poer of the greatest Miracle, to con∣vert Observat. a soul to God. Nebuchadnezzar saw great Miracles, Miracles of mercy and Miracles of judg∣ment: We told you Paraoh saw Miracles, and Israel saw Miracles in Aegypt, and at the red Sea. in the Wilderness; Miracles of mercy, and Mira∣cles of judgment; sometimes their plagues were wonderfull, stung with fiery Serpents: and Mira∣cles of mercy, God he fed them with Man a and water out of the Rock; and notwithstanding for all this, they were a stubborn Generation, and dwelt in unbelief: our Saviour tells us in that Pa∣rable, in the 16. of Luke, but they are the words
of Abraham. They have Moses and the Prophets, and if they will not hear them and bleeve, neithr would hey beleeve though one rose from the dead: Though God should shew the greatest Miracle, yet that would not convince them, that would not bring off their hearts to believe in the Son of God: 'tis the hardest matter in the world to bring God and the heart together, they are at such a great dstance, Infinite distance; and the heart of the creature is filled with such slavery, and lay under bondage▪ that it dares not go to God, when God calls to behold his face in his Son, but run to the bush, as Adam did; but though Miracles will not do it; it hath a word of grace, a sure word of grace, to draw nigh to God; and therefore we should look upon that Miracle of iniquity that is in the heart of all the sons of Adam; it is a strange thing that the heart of man should out-stand so many blows, that so small a piece of flesh as the heart of man is, should withstand those great bat∣teries that God many times is pleased to make by judgments, wonderful judgments, when he de∣clares his wrath from Heaven to sinners; and con∣sider what a Miracle of mercy it is, that any soul should be converted, and brought home to God; seeing Conversion is so hard a thing, and Miracles will not do it? What a Miracle it is for a soul to be brought home to God! I shew how many Mi∣racles were in this work: Miracles of wisdom; Miracles of power: Miracles of mercy: Oh we should bless the Lord that hath given us his word: we should prefer the word before Miracles; we should not look to Miracles, but we should look to the word of the Lord; God hath made that to
bring home souls; and therefore we are infinitely beholden to the Lord for the word of his grace, that we have the word of his grace to trust in. We proceed, Consider who it is that bare witness to the Mi∣racle: 'Tis Nebuchadnezzar that was an enemy to the Saints, a persecutor, a scorner, a contemner of God. Who is that God that shall deliver out of my hand? and yet the Lord makes him to bear witness of that good he did his people: We shall observe then this: Proposition: God many times makes his peoples Enemies to ac∣knowledge and confess that the Lord is with them, Observat. 3. and that he hath dealt graciously with them: God makes very enemies to confess oftentimes, that he deals wonderfully, and graciously with his peo∣ple: The Church was confident of this in her af∣fliction; therefore she was supported: See that 7 of Mich. 9. 10. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned agains him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me; he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness, verse 10. Then she that is my Ene∣my shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her, now shall she be troden down as the mire in the streets: Then she that is my enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which saith, where is the Lord thy God: The Church was confident that she should not only see the footsteps of mer∣cy, but that God would make the very enemies to see it; She that sayd, where is the Lord your God! she that sometimes insulted over me, and blas∣phemed the name of my God; that said, where
is your God? time is coming when she shall see it▪ and I shall say, Loe here is my God, I waited for him, and he will save me, and she shall see the de∣liverance, so as shame shall cover her; she shall be ashamed that ever she opened her mouth against God: And the Church did not loose her expectation, this was fulfilled to the Church; in the 126. Psalm, you shall see the fulfilling there of this promise, that she took hold of the 126. 1. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing; then said they among the Hea∣then, the Lord hath done great things for them: When God turned again Sions Captivity, when he brought them out of the grave—Babylon; the work was so wonderful, that enemies could not but see that the hand of the Lord was in it, to give poor Captives so much favour in the eye of Prin∣ces, that they should release them, send them home, countenance them, help them in all they could, help them to build the Temple of the Lord; this could not be if the Lord had not wrought wonderfully for them: The Heathen were con∣vinced, They said amongst the Heathen, the Lord hath dous great things for them. God makes the very enemies to acknowledge his power and glory, and that he was with his people; in the 8. Chapter of Exodus verse 19. God wrought a Miracle by Mo∣ses, and the Aegyptians stood out long, but they say in the 19. verse, Sure this is the finger of God: Lo they had hardened their hearts, and would not be converted, at last God works a Miracle, and makes them to cry out, sure this is the finger of God; look into the new Testament, and you shall finde
that the Lord Jesus Christ did extort confession from the mouths of his enemies; he made them to acknowledge that he was the Son of God, and that God was with him in those mighty works that he wrought: See the 6. of John and the 14. verse. There the multitude followed Christ, when as they had seen the Miracles Christ wrought; then they said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should com: into the world; and so in the 7 of John, verse 47. When the Officers were to bring Christ to the chief Priests, they returned with their conviction, and they answered, never man spake like this man; yea, when he was upon the Cross, in his greatest Eclipse; seemed to be forsaken of all men, even his very friends forsook him, they all forsook him and fled, and he was lookt upon as a scorn to all the people; yet even then did the Lord Jesus ex∣tort confession from their mouths; See the 27. of Matth. and the 54. For the further cleering of the Point by De∣monstration: The Point leared by Demn∣strations. God makes sometimes the very ene∣mies to confess that he is with his people, and that he hath dealt wonderously, graciously with them. First of all you shall finde for this, that Jesus Christ hath put up a Petition to his Father, he hath Demonst. 1 made it his request to his Father that his Father would manifest so much of himself to his people, that the very men of the world might be convinced that hi Father did love him, that the world might be convinced that they were one with God, and one with the Father and one with the Son; for this Christ prays in the 17. of John, and the 21 v. That they all may be one as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that th world may bleeve that thou hast sent me, vers. 22. And the glory which thu gavest me, I have given thm, that they may be one, even as we are one, vers. 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may b made prfct in one, and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them as tho hast loved me that the world may know that tou hast sent me, and hst loved them as thou hat lovd me: Christ he would manifest so much of himself, and of his good∣ness unto his people, that not only they may see it, but that the very world may be convinced when they see what God hath done for his people, and what excellent Spirit God hath put upon them, that they may be convinced that God loves them as he loves the Son, that they are one with the Father, as the Son is made one with the Father, Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ hath promised this to his people▪ h was confident that because Demonst. 2 he prayed for it, it should be given out: he was ne∣ver denyed any of his requests, and therefore he hath made a promise to h Churche, hat he wi do such great things for the, that the world shall be convinced that God is with them: See the 3. of the Revlations and the 9. verse: Behold I will make them of the Syngogu of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lye; behold I will make them to come and worship before ty feet, and to now that I have loved thee: He makes this pro∣mise to them, as a recompence to them for their faithfulness, because they had kept close to the word in time of persecution; now as a recompence of their faithfulness and love, Christ makes this promise to them: Well, because thou hast ven∣tured
all for me, because thou hast ventured thy name for me, thou hast suffered reproach for me; I will give thee a name, thou shalt have a name in all places, where thou hast been put to shame; those enemies that hated thee, that made a scorn of thee; I will make them to come and fall down and worship thee; I will make them to acknow∣ledge that God is with thee: this is a promise that Christ hath given out, and he will fulfil it to his Churches, those that have kept the word of Christ; those that are faithful to the truth of Christ, to the ways of Christ, in the worst times, though they may suffer reproach for a time, yet at last he wil make the very enemies to confess that he was with them: That's the second Demonstra∣tion. Thirdly, Therfore it is that God hath put so much power into his word, to convince the men of the Demonst. 3. world, and to force them to make them acknow∣ledge that the Lord is with his people, and that he hath loved them, and that he deals graciously with them; I say, for this end the Lord hath made his word powerful, he hath made it sharper then a two edged sword, that it shall serve not only for the conversion of some, but for the conviction of many that are not really brought home to God; The Gospel where it comes, it shall lay chains up∣on men, it shall lay a restraint upon men; See what is spoken of the power of the word of God, in the first Epistle of the Corinthi∣ans, and the 14. 24. 25. verses. But if all Prophe∣cie, and there come in one that beleeveth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. Verse 25. And thus are the secrets of his
heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. See the power that God hath put into his word for the convincing of the hearts of wicked men, that God is in his word, and that God is with his people; the secrets of his heart shall be made manifest, when he comes in, he shall fall down on his face, and say God is in you of a truth: It may be, before he came, he had hard thoughts of the people of God; it may be, he was ready to say, that folly was in them, and madness was in them; nay, they were ready to say, that the De∣vil was in them: Ay but when his conscience lay before the word; when he comes and sees your way, when he hears that God speak in you, such a pow∣er shall go along with the word, that it shall lay chains upon him; and it shall make him to fall down and say I was deceived, I was wrong in that I did judge amiss of the people of God; Now I see that God is in you of a truth. Fourthly, Therefore it is that when God hath dealt graciously with his people, when he hath given out great mercies; or great deliverances, he hath ordered it so, that their greatest enemies should be eye witnesses, and sometimes Agents against their will, in doing good to his servants; you shall finde it so, that when God hath so order∣ed to do great things for his people, he hath made his peoples enemies to be great eye witnesses, and ear witnesses: You see here in the Text, how God doth order the King Nebuchadnezzar, that he should be present to see this Miracle, that so a work of conviction should pass upon his conscience; it is a wonder that the King should be present, and
would have thought it should not have stood with the State of the King, to be with three poor Cap∣tives, he might ave left them to his Officers; but God did o order it, that he should see, that he should be present; and therefore in the 6. of Dan. There you may see the Lord made him to be an eye-witness: After Danil was cst into the Lions Den, he could not sleep nor rst that night, and he rose betimes in the morning to see the Miracle, to see the wondrous deliverance that God wroght for his Servants. Yea, God makes his peoples enemies to be Agents sometimes, in doing good to his Servants, though agaist their wills, that so he might con∣vince them, and exort confession from them, that he is with his people: In the promotion of Mordecai, which you read in the 6 o ster; God did order it so, that the King did command that Haman (Mordecais great enemy) should be an Agent in his promotion; He was Arrayed by Ha∣man with Royal Apparrel; Hman was one that sought Mordicais life, and God orders it, that this man Haman should be an Agent in his promotion, that h should Array him, that he should lead his Horse, and he should cry Thus shal it b done to the man whom the Kng will dlight to honour. Fiftly, Therefore it is that God many times Demonst. 5 works deliverance for his peole, because he God works for his people in such away, that Ene∣mies mustt needs confes that Go is with his people. works it in such a manner, and in such a way as must needs leave convction upon the hearts of the men of the world, if they be not given up to that fear∣ful judgment of hardness of heart: I say, if they be not given up to hardness of heart; God works in such a way, that they must needs confess hat God is with his people.
First, The Lord he works freely for his people he works freely for his name sake; when there is nothing at all in them, that might deserve the least mercy: God many times gives out great mercies when they can apprehend nothing in themselves: Nay, when the men of the world of look upon them and see nothing in them; they themselves through their grace and humility, see nothing in themselves, and the men of the world see nothing in them; why God should do them good; yet the Lord then ma∣ny times he gives out great mercies, and works great deliverances for his people. Secondly, As God works freely, so he works un∣rxectedly; and this helps to work conviction in mens hearts, when God works unexpectedly for his servants, when he gives out mercies contrary to expectation; when enemies conclude, Oh they are brought down into such a condition, that it is impossible that ever they should be brought up; yet the Lord he works unexpectedly, that so he might work conviction in mens hearts: See that fourth of Micah, you shall see how God works contrary to mens thoughts. Verse 11. Now also many Nations are gathered against thee, that say, let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Sion. Vers. 12. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they ais Counsel for he shall gather them as the sheaves into his floor. And v. 13. Arise, &c. When they say, let her be defiled, and let our eyes look upon Sion; Why? she is utterly undone, she is brought down; she is destroyed, she lay in her blood, she lay in her heaps, she lay in her ru∣ins; why you are deceived, say's God; I will
work unexpectedly, above your thoughts, you know not the thoughts of the Lord; you say, let your eye look upon Sion, you say her destruction is come already; but you know not the thought of the thoughts of the Lord; I will work unex∣pectdly. Thirdly, God he works sometimes suddenly, that he might give convction to men; when God gives mercies, he doe it sudnly; when God brings judgements upon the wicked o the world, he doth it suddenly, their destuction is lie warlewnde; it shall not come like oher windes that o rise by de∣grees; but as a whirlewind it shall come suddainly, and carry them away before they think of it; ad so sometime he compares the judgments that he brings upon wicked men as the bach or a wall that cometh suddainly, See the 30 of aih, and the 13. verse, Therfore this iiquity shall be to you as a breach edy o fll sweling ot in a high wali, whose breaking comth sdanly, at an instant. And so when God works deiverance for his people many times God works it in a sudden way; look into the 1: 6. Pslm you shall see how sud∣dainl God wrought for his people, how suddain∣ly he brought them forth from Bblon. Verse 1. Wn the Lrd tured again our Cap∣tivity we were like to them ta dreamed. Verse 2. Thn was our mouth filled with lughter, and our ngue with singing; then said they among the Heathen, the Lor hath done great thngs for them. Verse 4. Turn again our Captivity O Lord, as the streams in the south. He prays and beeeves that God would turn
again their Captivity as the streams in the souh; the streams of the South, they come suddenly; the streams there, they do not arise as other Rivers, they come from several Heads, and so they increase ad come broader and broader, that when the rain falls mightily, then the land floods come down suddainly; Why, in such a way doth God work for his people, their deliverances shall be as the Rivers in the South as streams in the south, that shall come suddainly, in a moment, before enemies are aware; And thus doth God many times work conviction. Fourthly, God he works soliarily, he doth it by his own Arme; when eemies can see none to roule away the stone, none to open a door of deliverance, why then God him∣self he stretches out his Ame; when there is none to bring salvation his own Am shall bring salvti∣on, he will role away the stone, he will open a door of deliverance; and when God doth thus work; this tends mightily to the conviction of those that are by-standers. Quest. If you ask but wherefore doth God thus work? Wherefore doth God make very enemies to confess that he deals graciously with his people? Why should they be eye-witnesses o it? Answ First of all, because their eye looks upon the afflictions of the Servants of God; and there∣fore God, he will make them to look upon their mercies; they look upon the msery of the Saints, and they look upon them with delight; and there∣fore God he will  them to look upon their mercies, and see the eliverances: They say, et ur eye look upon Sion, and let her he defled: Let our eye look upon her, that is, let us behold her ruin-in,
let us glut our sense, and say, thus we would have it: Let our eye look upon Sion: so in the 22. Psalm, you shall finde how the wicked do look up∣on the affliction of Jesus Christ; for 'tis spoken of Christ, Psalm 22. vers. 17. I may tll all my bones, they stare upon me; they look and stare upon me: When Christ was upon the Cross, they stood look∣ing upon him, and did stare upon him; the word signifies, they looked with delight, to stand gaze∣ing insatiably. When a man looks upon an object that pleaseth him, he thinks he never looks enough, he doth enlarge his sense, to take in the specious∣ness of the thing, and he thinks he never sees enough; the same word is used by the Propet Isai∣ah, 53. verse 11. He shall see the travel of is soul and be satisfied: He shall see the travel of his soul; he shall look upon it with delight, he shall gaze greedily upon it; it shews his wonderful affection, that Chrit looks upon his Spouse with wonderful desire; that he looks upon the travel of his soul, to see the fruit of his righteousness, to see the benefit of his death; he shall look upon the travel of his soul, he shall gaze upon it with delight; and so do enemies, they look upon the affliction of his peo∣ple, and gaze upon it with delight: and therefore God makes them to look upon the mercies of his people, the deliverances of his people; they shall see their glory, God will make them eye-witnesses, God will make them to confess that he hath dealt graciously with his people. Secondly, God doth  mercy to the sons of men; God would do even wicked men good, and doth them good even by this; while he works such conviction upon their heart, by eyeing the
mercies and deliverances that he doth give out to his people: God by this he would allure them he would make them to stand and wonder, while God not only in word, but in his providence doth pro∣claim before them, Thus shall b done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour: At least, God doth this out of pitty to men that they might not go on to contemn the Gospel; God he will give a check for this; and therefore he works glorious deliverances, that he might restrain them in the ways of persecution; and thus doth the Lord pitty his very enemies: he is better to them then they are to themselves: God he would lay rubs in their way, that they might not go leaping and jumping to Hell: God he will not let wicked men dne themselves as they would, if God should leave them to themselves: And thus doth the Lord pitty his ene∣mies. A word for Application; And so I conclude. First of all, Here is ground of patience, and incouragement to the Saints in all tribulations, in all adversities, in the midst of your greatest afflictions, in the midst of all the persecution you meet with for Christs sake, for his Gospel sake; for his truths sake; though the world cast shame upon you; tim is a coming that the Lord will roul away reproach, and he will make your very enemies to see it, and they that have stood looking upon your misery, with de∣light they shall be forced to look upon your mercy and therefore here is a ground of patience to you in al daversity & what ever you suffer from the world for Christs sake; time is coming that God will make them to condemn themselves, and to acquit you, they shall see your mercy, and they shall say of a truth, God is with his people: 'Tis a ground of
great comfort to the Churches of Christ in the midst of all the opposition that they meet with, for the keeping of the word of his patience: Oh see the promise that is made to the Churches, in t 12. of Zachariah, verse 5. And the Gouernours of Judah shall say in hir hearts▪ the Inhabitants of Jerusa∣lem shall be my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God, I will put glory upon my people, saith God, and I will mae their Governours to acknowledge it, and they shall say, The Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength; they are the Pillars, they are those that bear up the Land; they are our Chari∣ots, they are our Bulwarks, the Lord Jehozah is with them, they shall be my strength. Secondly, Let it be an Item to the men of the world; Oh take heed how you look with delight upon the miseries of the Saints, upon the afflictions of the Saints! I tell you, God will not bear with it, he will punish you for it: how did God threa∣ten Edom, because he stood and looked upon his brother in the day of adversity; he stood in the high-way gazeing upon his brothers misery, and delighted in it: I tell you, you that laugh at the misery of the Saints, God he will make you lament and they shall not only rejoyce, but they shall shout for joy; the time is a coming, that he will make you to see the mercy, and that he is with them, and deals graciously with them; Thirdly, Let Gods people acknowledge this as a great mercy, that God should work conviction many times in the hearts of the wicked, that he should deal in such a way with them that might convince the hardest heart, that God is with his peo∣ple;
I tell you, 'tis a great mercy, 'tis no ordinary mercy; admire God in it, bless God for it, that God should thus reprove men, and convince men for your sakes: The Jews did look upon it as a great mercy, in the 126. Psalm: When God turned again our Captivity our mouth was filled with laugh∣ter and our tongue with singing; Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord hath done great things for them. They looked upon it as a great mercy that the Lord should thus convince the Heathen; 'tis a mercy, for they writ it, they pen'd it as a great mercy, worth the singing, worth the glorifying of God for: that God should work so powerfully upon the hearts of men, and make the Heathen say, The Lord hath done great things for them. In the last place, to conclude all. Doth God make enemies confess that he hath done great things for his people? why then the people of God should much more confess that the Lord hath done great things for them: if enemies say it, you may well say it, you have more cause to say it, that 126. Psalm, verse 2. They say among the Heathen, the Lord hath done great things for them; and what say the people of God? will not they say so? yes, in the very next words; The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad: shall the Heathen say it, and shall not we say it? yes, we are bound to say it, and to acknowledge, The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad: Remember, I beseech you: remember, God cannot endure his mercies should be slighted; he loves that you should have great thoughts of him and of his mercies, that you should say, he hath done great things: When God works deliverance
for you, he will make the very Heathen to say so, he will make by standers to say so; and shall not we honour him for the mercy, who are the recei∣vers of the mercy? shall not we say so The Lord hath don great things for us: shall Nebuchadnzzar say. The Lord hah don great things for thm; and shall not the three children say so? yes sure, they will lift up the name of God in their song: And therefore I beseech you all, you that have re∣ceived mercy from God, you should aggravate the mercy as much as you can, though not compulsive∣ly, you should freely say, The Lod hath done great things for us; you shall find this always hath been the frame of Gods people, to aggravate the mer∣cy, to aggravate the deliverance that God hath wrought for them: See the 40. Psalm and te 5. verse. Many O Lord my God are thy wonderful works which tou hast done an thy thoughts which are to us ward they cannot b reckoned up in order un∣to the, if I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered. See what an aggravation there is of the mercy received, they are many, and they are wonderul, and very many, more then can be numbred, they cannot be reckoned up in order: and so Ezra, when he and the people received mercies, see how they do aggavate it, how they do acknowledge it, in the 9. Chap. verse 13. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great tres∣pass, seeing thou ur God hast punished us lss thn our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandmet? He knows not how to speak it; Oh 'tis a great mercy, he stands and wonders at such a deliverance,
such a mercy; and so aggravate all our mercies, we should say with Ezra, seeing thou hast wrought such deliverance, such salvation, seeing thou hast wrought in such and such a way; this is a great ingagement to God, when mercies are thus eyed and reviewed, when a man looks into the depth of them, and eye the mercies; seeing thou hast given such deliverance, should we again sin against thee? he looks upon it as an ingagement to stand close, seeing it was great mercy: And Oh so should we in all our mercies, as Ezra saith, so we should say, Seeing thou hast wrought such deliverance for us, should we again sin against thee: Oh no, let thine mercies be an ingagement us to, to love thee, and serve thee, and for ever to cleave to thee.
THE Sixth Sermon, on DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. I Have made some further progress in the words: We considered who it was that gave testimony unto this miraculous Deliverance that God wrought for his servants; It was Nebuchadnezzar, a proud and an insolent man, an enemy to God and his people, and so he continues still in his heart; for 'tis probable,
he was not converted, not really brought home to God, for in the next Chapter you may se he did return to his very old ways of Idolatry; he sent for the Magicians to interpret his dream; and yet God makes him here bear witness what he hath done for his people. So then we observed this Proposition, That God sometimes works such deliverances for his people, as he makes his very enemies, and their very enemies to ac∣knowledge that God hath done great things for them: It was aid among the Heathen, in the 126. Psalm, Whn God turned again the Captivity of Sion, They sad amongst the Heathen, the Lord hath done great things for them. The Lord Jesus many times did extort confession from the mouths of his greatest enemies; Nevar man spake like this man: And of a truh this was the Son of God: And then for this thing did Christ pray, in the 17. of John, that his Father would manifest so much of himself unto us his people, and pour out so much of his Spirit up∣on them, that the very world might know that he hath sent the Son; and that he hath loved his people with the same love that the Son is loved: and this did Christ promise unto his people, to the Church of Philadelphia, in the 2. of the Revelations and the 9. verse: Behold I will make them of the Syna∣gogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lye; behold I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee: Therefore hath Christ put so much power in∣to his word: that at least it might lay chains upon wicked men and convince men many times that God is in his word▪ and that God is in his people; When you Prophesie, saith the Apostle, and there
comes in one that is unlearned; the secrets of his heart is made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. Therefore it is also that when God works great deliverances, he doth so order it in his providence, that his peoples enemies should be eye-witnesses, and ear-witnesses, of what God hath done for them, yea sometimes Agents, against their wills, in doing good to the Saints: So Haman was an Instrument in the promotion of Mordecai: Yea, Therefore it is that God works in such a glorious manner, as must needs convince; he works freely; He works suddenly, he works unexpectedly; and he works solitarily: Now Gods very manner of working de∣liverance for his people, doth carry a great deal of conviction along with it: As, First of all, wicked men they look upon the af∣flictions of the Saints; they say, Let our eye look upon Sion, and let her be defiled; Therefore doth the Lord make them to look with astonishment up∣on their mercies and deliverances; God hath gra∣cious ends, even towards wicked men, he would convince them by this, he would lay blocks in their way, tht they might not take the running leap in∣to Hell, that they might not go on in their vio∣lence, and persecution of the Saints. I proceed to what remains: Loe I see four men, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. There were three cast in, and now there are four: Now before we come to consider who this fourth man was; By way, take notice of the wonderful providence of God, that a fourth man should be added to them; that while they were in the midst
of the siery Furnace, while they were bearing wit∣ness against the Idolatry of Nebuchadnezzar and his peope; while they were suffering Martyrdome for the Truth, and for the Name or God; here is a fourth added to them: Certainly, their enemies supposed that fire would soon have devoured them all, that there should not be one of the three left to bear witness any longer against their wickedness and idolatry; but how contrary doth God work to the expectation of them? their number is not dimi∣nished; but Loe there were three cast in, and now thre is four four men loose walking in the midst of the fire: Therefore we shall consider this Proposi∣tion by the way, before we come to the Main. Observat. 4. That all persecutions that the Devil, or his In∣struments, do raise against the Saints, shall not di∣minish their number, but shall rather increase them. I say, all the opposition and persecution that the people of God meet with, for the name and cause of Christ shall not diminish their number, but shall rather increase them. I shall make it evident to you; Look upon Isra∣els oppression by the Aegypian, which you read of in the 1 of Exodus, 10. 11, 12▪ 13. Come say they let us deal wisey with them, let us increase their task, let us lay heavy burdens vpon thm, &c. Thus they thought to have weakened their strength, and to have brought them low, but did this stratagem prevail? no; you shall read in the 12. verse, That the more they afflicted them the more thy encreased: And therefore God did appear to that Church unto Moses, in the 3. of Exodus: God shews Moses there, the vision of a Bush that was not consumed:
this did hold forth the state of Israel then: a Bush all on fire, and was not consumed; such Bushes are all the Churches of Christ, that men of the world may set them on fire many times. but though they burn, they shall not be consume; yea the hot∣ter any fire of persecution be against the Saints, the more green shall this Bush be, the more shall it flourish, take root and grow, and spread abroad her branches till it fill the whole earth: This was represented unto Daniel in a vision, in the third of Daniel: The Kingdom of Christ is set forth there by a little stone cut out of the Mountains without hnds, the stone was a growing stone, and although there were many hammers at work to break this stone in pieces, yet they have not, nor shall not prevail, but the stone grew more and more, and became a Mountain, and filled the whole earth. Under the Gospel I shall give you some instances of of it: To begin First with Jesus Christ: It was a main design that the Pharisees had to keep men from beleeving in Christ, therefore they resolved that they would take some course to lessen the number of Believers; to lessen the number of his followers; See in John, 11. what they feared, and what course they resol∣ved to set upon: 11. 48. verse, Oh say they, if we let him alon all men will beleeve in him, and the Romans will come & take away our place; Therefore you shall read in the 52. verse that they gave counsel to put him to death: to smite the Shepheard, and the Sheep shall be scatered: they would put him to death that they might not beleeve on him; Behold how con∣trary doth God work to the imaginations of these foolish men? for by that very thing, by the death
of Jesus Christ, is so many thousand, thousand, brought in to believe in him; they would put the Lord of life to death, that they might not believe in him; and it was the Fathers way to make men beleeve in him, if I be lifted up, Ioh. 12. 32. And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men to me: And they say, if he be lifted up, there shall be none drawn to him; ay but If I be lifted up, I will draw all men: if I be lifted up upon the Cross, if I be Crucified, by this means will I draw all men to me. For, First, Christ became a suitable object for a poor sinner; a poor guilty sinner could never have looked upon a glorious Saviour but Jesus Christ he is clothed with garments of blood, that so by that means he became a reconciler: Without shedding of blood there is no remssion: Here is encourage∣ment given to poor guilty sinners, that apprehend nothing due unto them but wrath; yet by the blood of Jesus Christ, by that new and living way they come in; and then God the Father too he made a promise to the Son, that because he laid down his life, he should have a multitudinous off∣spring: in that 53. of Isaiah, In the day that he pours out his soul to death, he should see the travel of his soul, and he should have a large portion; because he poured out his soul to death for transgressors; so you see that the killing of Jesus Christ, and put∣ting him to death, is so far from lessening be∣lievers, that this is the way to draw in all those multitudes of souls that were gven to Christ of his Father. Secondly, Again, If you look upon the primi∣tive Churches, you shall finde that the worlds
persecution had the same effect upon them; there wa a great persecution, a mighty storm, which you rea of in the 8. of Acts, persecution begun fist a Jrusalem; and by that means the Church∣es were scattered: Well, did this tend to the hin∣drance of the Gospel, and lessen the number of Beleevers? No▪ you shall read in that Chapter, tha God made this a means to carry the Gospel to many, other Countries were brought in to be∣beleeve in Christ: the great City of Samaria; you read in the 6. vers. Pilip went down and Preach∣ed to Samaria; and this did tend to the further∣ance o the Gospel: in the 8. verse, They gave all heed, ad there ws great joy in that City: If you look upon te Churches in those Ages, for the first thee hundred years after Christ, there was a most errible persecution, there were ten perse∣cuos, ten bloody Emperours that sought to root out the Name or Chist, and to destoy the Saint; and therefore those that write of Ecclesiastical History, they tell us, they devised all manner of torments; some speak of about twenty seven deaths they devised to torment the poor Christi∣an; Many thouands, many millions, suffered in the time of thoe persecutions; and yet this was so far from iminishng the number of Bleevers, tat they were encreaed: the more they were oppressed and persecuted, the more they encrea∣sed; and thereore sme of them did observe that Julin he used all means to uppresse them; shut up all their Schools that they might not have lear∣ning; ad yet never had they more learning then then: He devised all manner of torments to terri∣fi them, and yet he saw they encreased and mul∣tiplied
so fast, that he thought at last, his best course was to give over his persecution, not out of love but out of envy, because that through his persecution they encreased. And thus you see the Point cleared, That the persecution of the Saints shall not diminish the number of them, but shall encrease them: For the Grounds of it, Biefly, Fist of all, God delights to walk contrary to The Grounds of the Point. men; therefore he will have it thus. He loves to cross the imaginations of the hearts of men of the world; and to set his ways against their toughts and their ways; in the fourth of Micah, the latter end; they say, Let our eye look upon Sin; but what saith God in the next verse? They know not th thoughts of the Lord, neither understand  counsel: When men dream that such a way▪ it shall be the utter rooting out of the Gospel, they ae might ly mistaken, saith God, my thoughes are abve yours, my ways above yours: You know not the thoughts of the Lord, for this very way shall encrease multitudes: God delights to walk contrary to men, and to oppose his gracious thoughts, to their cursed imaginations. Secondly, The Lord Jesus is a mighty King, all 2. Ground. power is given into his hand, both in Heaven and earth; and all this power he will improve for the Kingdom of Saints: all is given to him, and e will give all to them: Neither life nor death, things present, nor things to come, they are all yours: He hath given all to them, and all shall make for their advantage: In this the power of the Lord Jesus, King of Saints, is mightily seen, that he can turn al opposition to advantage: the greatest perse∣cution
that the Devils can raise, shall all turn to the advantage of Christs Kingdom: It is so with particular souls, all is yours, all is yours to do you good; life and death is yours, all given you to serve you, and they shall work together for your good, for your best good, for your eternal good; the Lord makes an advantage of all unto his peo∣ple; the Devil casts blocks in their way to hinder them; he turns it to their advantage, and so they are helped nigher to himself. all the evil of the world, yea all the evil of sin, and the Devil him∣self, shall (though against their wills) help for∣ward the salvation of Gods people; and so Christ cause all to be for the good of his Church, for the good of his Kingdom all opposition and perse∣cutions which are raised to blow down the King∣dom of Jesus Christ shall but establish it; for 'tis rooted, 'tis a Kingdom that cannot be shaken: And then Thirdly, Men cannot hinder the increase of Christs Kingdom, for there is no man able to hin∣der the work of the Spirit of Christ from work∣ing; 3. Ground. The wind blows where it lists and so the Spi∣rit of God, that breaths where it lists, and where ever he please to breath; It is not possible for man to resist his work: The work of Christ by his Spirit upon mens hearts, is a mighty work, an ir∣resistable work; and all the powers of Hell shall not be able to hinder the work, 'tis a mighty work, and none shall let it. To apply this briefly; First of all, It lets us see the vanity of all the Applicati∣on. attempts of men against the truth of Christ, and the people of Christ, they are but vain imagi∣nations
; men do but imagine a mischiefous de∣vice, that they shall never be able to bring to pass; it is a vain thing for a man to go about to silence the truth of Christ, or to destroy the Saints of Christ; I tell you, the more the truth is troden on, the more it shall shine; and as it goes with truth, so it goes with Saints, the more troden on in the world, the more loved of God; all the winde of opposition that the Devils can raise from the world, it shall never be able to shake them, though it may shake some particular grains and ears, that they may fall to the earth, but yet they shall rise again, every grain that falls, shall bring forth fruit, some thirty, and some a hun∣dred fold, the more thy are opposed, the more they encrease; persecution shall but sow the blood of Christ the thicker, and sow the ashes of the Saints the thicker, and out of their very ashes shall new converts arise. And therefore Oh that this might be an Item to An Item to the Powers of the world the Powers of the world to the men of the world that they seek not to suppress either the truth or the people of Jesus Christ. For truly, the more they endeavour it, the more they shall encrease; if they cast three of them into the Furnace, a fourth shall be presently added to them. Object. But you will say, God forbid any should suppress truth, there is none goes about such a work, but only to suppress error: and you will not say that that is persecution; but that it is rather zeal for God. My Brethren, To suppress error, 'tis a good work, 'tis a blessed work; but men must be care∣ful to do it in Gods way. Error in judgment
wil a great deal sooner be suppressed by the sword of the spirit, then by any sword of man: I tell you God hath appointed a means for the suppres∣sing of error, and men that stray in their judg∣ments, and that is to be convinced by the word of God, in matters of faith men must be convinced by Gods word: Our weapons saith Paul▪ are not carnal but they are mighty through God, to cst down strong holds, and sinful imaginations: Paul did not use carnal weapons to bring down sinfu imaginations in the hearts of men; he had used those weapons before he was brought home to God, you know he went for power from the High Priests, to perse∣cute all those that beleeued in Christ; he went to authority to silence them, to stop their mouths and all that he could do, because they pleaded error contrary to the Law of Moses; but you do not read that Paul after his conversion, did use such weapons, he does not call the help of Men, no says he, the Lord he hath given us weapons: Our weapons they re not crnal, but spiritual, and so they are mighty through God: Brethren, I am perswaded it glads the Devil much, when he sees men so violent against error, by drawing the sword against them: I say, it glads the Devil to see men seek this way to suppress them, not that the Devil hates error, or that he loves the truth, for he hates the truth, and loves error; but he knows God will hardly bless that way of men, when men shall neglect Gods Institution, and shall cleave to their own wayes, and to their own in∣ventions; God will hardly blesse that way of men, when his own way is neglected. Besides, Let men consider, that 'tis possible,
that while men go about to suppress error, they may suppress the truth for error; unless you will say any man hath an infallible spirit, or that any company of men hath an infallible spirit; if they have not an infallible spirit, then with what right can they force anothers judgment, anothers con∣science? men may, and do many times suppress truth, under the notion of error; we know in the times of Popery, that truth was persecuted that we now see to be truth; out great tuth, our main truth of justification by the free grace of God, and the blood of Jesus Christ without work, without merits: I say, how was this truth perse∣cuted? and how did men seek to persecute this truth as error? many things have been persecuted as error, which now we see to be truth; and why may it not be so now? does all truth come into the world at once? and may not we persecute that which afterwards may appear to be a truth? Well let it be an Item to men, and let them not suppress the truth of Christ: it is a vain imagination, and men shall not be able to bring it to pass, but the more it is supprest, the more it shall shine, and the more the people of God are opposed the more they shall multiply. Secondly, Here is a ground of Patience and strong consolation to the Saints in the midst of all opposition and persecution, that they meet with, and may meet with for the name, and truth, and way of Jesus Christ: Hear what Christ saith to you; fear not little flock; you think you are but a small number, there is but a few that profess the name of Christ; and Oh if persecution arise it will lessen the number: I tell you, fear not; that
persecution shall not lessen the number, but  shall increase the number: though the men of th world may strike at the Tree, and they may beat off many of the branches yet the Lord Jesus he will make use of every branch that is broke off, he will slift it and ingraft it, and so all shall tend to the furtherance of the Gospel and of the truth and of the way of God. But to Proceed. I shall make some entrance into the main Do∣ctrine: Here you see three cast into the fiery Furnace, and Nebuchadnezzar saw four: Let us consider then who this fourth man was: Nebu∣chadnezzar could not tell who it was; but he per∣ceived some glorious majesty, and therefore though he was ignorant of Christ: Yet saith he, The fourth is like the Son of God: the form of the fourth is like the Son of God; that's sure, he is more then a man; God hath sent his Angel and delivered them, but this was in truth the Son of God. This Companion that is added to the Saints in Tribulation, it was Jesus Christ, who did at this time create himself a body, and came down visibly amongst men, that so he might support them, and comfort them, and deliver them, that it might hold forth this unto us, that he would come in his appointed time, to rescue his poor people, that lay under wrath, from all the flames of his fathers indignation, and that he would be present with his people in every conditi∣on: when they went through fire and water, in the midst of every Tribulation they should enjoy him; so then here is another main Proposition offers it self; and I shall but bring you unto it, and leave the further prosecution of it:
The Proposition is this; Observat. 5. That the Lord Jesus is never nigher to his people, then when they are in great affliction, in fiery tryals I say, Christ is never nigher to his people, then when they are in the greatest affliction: they ne∣ver in joy more of the presence of Christ, then in sad conditions. The three Children, they never saw Christ so visibly as here they did, when as they lay in the flames; The children of Israel, they never saw so much of God among them, as when they were in the Wilderness, in the barren Wilderness, where there was neither meat nor drink, nor clothing, for they had a great deal of the special presence of God, and abundance of the power and good∣ness and faithfulness of God, was manifested to them in a special manner, while they were in that condition: Jacob he never saw such vision of God as at that time when he was driven from his fathers House, when he was forced to fly to save his life; he was in a sad conditihn, he had not a bed to lye on, he had not a pillow to lay his head upon, but took a heap of stones to lay his head upon; and yet in that condition did God come and manifest himself most gloriously to him: he dreamed a Dream, and saw a Vision of the Ladder set up to Heaven, and of the Angel Ascending and De∣scending, God was there in a special manner; so he saith, The Lord was there, and he was not aware; never did he enjoy more of God, then in that con∣dition. Stephen, the first Martyr, never enjoyed more of God, he never enjoyed more glorious Visions
of Jesus Christ, then when he looked through a showr of stones that came about his ears, and took away his life; he saw the arme of the Lord Jesus ready to receive him, to embrace him in the ever∣lasting armes of his love he had heard much of Christ in his everlasting Gospel; but he never saw him before with his eye. John the Evangelist, there is another instance, if you look into the first Chapter of the Revelation of John, about the 9. vers. you shall see; there where he was, and in what condition he was in, when he received those glo∣riou Revelations; he said he was banisht into the Isle of Patmos for bearing witness to the Name of Christ, and the truth of Christ: he was a Mar∣tyr and fellow sufferer, and when he was banish∣ed from all friends and comforts, and left naked and destitute of all comforts, the Lord Jesus doth draw nigh, and doth reveal the most glorious Mysteries concerning his Churches to John: The primitive Churches never enjoyed more of God, then at that time when they were most persecuted by men; in the times of those 10. bloody prsecu∣tion, the Churches had abundance of the presence of Christ, abundance of the Spirit of Christ, and abundance of the grace of Christ, abundance of holy zeal, and abundance of activity for God; it was poured out upon them, the Lord Jesus never took so much delight to walk among them, as when they were in the midst of the fiery persecution. What pre∣sence of Christ the people of God enjoy in prsecu∣tion? Quest. If you ask me, But what presence of Christ is it that the people of God do enjoy in their great afflictions, and in the midst of their fiery tryals? Answ 1. First of all, they have most of the supporting presence of Christ; never more of the
supporting presence of Christ, then in sad conditi∣ons; he supports the inward man, and he sup∣ports the outward man; he upholds the spirits of his people in sad conditions, and he makes their spirits able to bear their infirmity: Now here is a wonderful work of the Lord, that he should strengthen the spirit of a poor creature with such mighty power, as to resist, and to keep out the violence of such mighty tryals, such great afflictions: There is nothing that the Devil seeks more, then to drive affliction home to the spirit, that so he might crush the spirit and conquer the spirit, when he can get in, and ceaze upon the spirit, then he becomes master, and creats a deal of smrt and vexation: Now the power of the Lord Jesus is seen, in that he doth support and strengthen the spirits of his people; that when they have but a little strength, no strength, and yet are able to hold out, notwithstanding they are so strongly besieged, and so straitly girt many times round about with afflictions; yet he makes that little strength to hold out at that time, that so he is pleased to renew their strength, to give fresh supplies, and to remove the disease, and so the power of Christ is seen in supporting the out∣ward man; many times in the midst of great afflictions: when the Saints meet with great afflictions; afflictions of the body, crosses, such afflictions as might even overwhelm the outward man, and they have but little strength many times, yet the Lord doth so blesse that little strength, that though they meet with crosses, that little strength shall not fail, till such time as the Lord do bring deliverance to them.
Secondly, As they have the supporting presence of Christ in the affliction, so they have the inlight∣ening presence of Christ; and that's a great mercy: commonly the Lord never teaches his people more then in affliction; when Christ gets them into the School of affliction then he instructs them, there he doth open mens ears, and he doth seal up mens instruction to them, when Christ draws nigh in affliction: I know afflictions in themselves, can∣not teach, but when Christ draws nigh▪ they learn a great deal in affliction; they never see more of God, and of themselves, never more of their cor∣ruptions, and vileness that is within them; never see more of the power and way of God, and the mysteries of Christ at that time, when Jesus Christ draws nigh with his enlightening presence: Thirdly; Jesus Christ draws nigh with his sanctifying presence, his people have more of his sanctifying presence in their greatest tryals, when Christ draws nigh to sanctifie their afflictions, to subdue their corruptions, and to strengthen their graces: the fruit of their affliction, shall be to purge them from sin; afflictions themselves cannot do it, afflictions themselves harden; but when the Lord Jesus Christ draws nigh in affliction, the Saints do enjoy abundance of the sanctifying presence: and through their afflictions they are made partakers of the Divine Nature; their corruptions are sub∣dued and mortified. Again fourthly, They never injoy more of the quickening presence of Christ, then in affliction: I say, the quickening presence of Christ: many times dead hearts, how are they raised up, when
Christ draws nigh to them? how are they eleva∣ted above themselves and their own strength, be∣cause they are mightily acted by the Spirit of Christ? in the fifth of Hosea, you may see there, how God doth promise his quickening presence in the time of their affliction; Hosea 5 last verse, I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their offence, and seek my face: in their afflictions they will seek me early: They were dead-hearted peo∣ple, and they had lost all activity for God, they were not carryed out with desire after God, they would not stir up themselves to take hold of him: Well, says God, I will make them prize me, I will fling them into affliction, and then in their affliction I will draw nigh to them with my quickening presence; and in their afflictions, they will seek me early. Again fiftly and lastly, The Saints never injoy more of the comftoring presence of Christ, then they do in the time of their great affliction: in the 2. of the Song of Solomon, vers 6. what says the Spouse there in her greatest afflictions? His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth em∣brace me, As Christ doth support in affliction, so he doth embrace in affliction; he commonly ne∣ver reveas more of himself, never gives out more glorious manifestations of himself, then in the time of affliction: I will bring her into the Wilder∣ness, see that place, Hosea 2. 14. I will bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her: she shall have my comfortable presence in the Wilderness, I will speak comfortably to her; and so David, he had experience of it, in Psalm 23.
Thou art with me, and I will fear none ill, though I walk in the midst of the shadow of death: I will fear none ill, thy rod, thy staff doth comfort me: ne∣ver more consolations of Christ are given out to poor creatures then when the Lord brings the into great tryals: he deals as an indulgent Mother with her child, never manifests more love then when the child is sick; though a Parent does re∣strain love before; yet then she maniests her love the child shall know that the Parents love it, and then she shall bring out all her sweet meats, in the time of sickness: and so doth the Lord bring out a great deal of sweet meats, they have more sweet meats, and sweet drinks that the world knows not of, then in the day of tribulation, in the day of affliction; when it is sad and dark with the out∣ward man, they have meat to eat that the world knows not of, they have the comfortable presence of Christ that the world knows not of: they have never more of the comfotable peence of Christ then when they are brought into great straits, and low conditions. I shall have no time to come to the Applicati∣on; but only let me say this to you: You kow not what use you may have of this before another Sabbath, the Lord may bring you into afflictions; and therefore remember this truth, hide it in your heart, that so upon all occasions, you may make use of it; and if God do bring you into afflictions submit willingly and readily to him, submit to low conditions, submit to tryals, submit to persecuti∣ons; know this, that Jesus Christ manifests his presence; and this is the way to manifest his pre∣sence,
I will abundantly comfort you in all your afflictions you lay under, and that you meet with for his names sake; and let it help to strengthen your faith; and truly you had need to streagthen your faith in times of affliction, there is no time in which the heart of men, good men are more ready to faint and give over, then in times of tryal; how did David cry out? and how did Christ cry out in his great afliction? Oh my God my God, why hast thou forsaken me? In affliction we are apt to think that God hath forsaken us; Sion sid in her affliction, the Lord hath forsaken me: in her affliction she said, the Lord hath forsaken me: and thus an unbeleiving heart is apt to questi∣on in times of affliction, Oh is God amongst us? as Israel said when they were in wants and great straits; Oh then their unbelieving hearts were discovered; though they had seen his Miracles, they tempted God, and said, is God amongst us? And the best of Gods people in time of tempta∣tion and affliction, may be apt to question, is the Lord with us? Now therefore strengthen your faith in the day of adversity, that so you may not faint and dishonour God, and look unto the Lord Jesus Christ, that beholding the Lord Jesus Christ, your faith may be strengthened; remember that it is his way to give out much of himself to his people in times of affliction; and therefore never say, is the Lord wih us? but ex∣pect to meet with God; conclude the Lord is with you, and he will be with you in the time of affliction; and remember you shall never have more of his supporting presence of his enlighten∣ing
presence; his comforting presence; his sancti∣fying presence; and of his quickening presence: I say, you shall never have more of the presence of Christ, then in such sad conditions: strength∣en the feeble hands and knees, and look to the Lord, that your faith may be strengthened.
THE Seventh Sermon On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. The han∣dling of the Do∣ctrine last∣ly named, is put off to the next Sermon, this not be∣ing preach∣ed in the same place with it. FRom Nebuchadnezzars Testimony of this Miraculous Deliverance that God wrought for his Servants: This Proposition was handled the last day: God often times works such de∣liverance for his people, as he makes their very enemies to confess, that he hath done great things for them: He made the very Heathen to
confess that God hath done great things for his people: When God did turn again our Captivi∣ty, in the 126. Psalm, They said among the Hea∣then, the Lord hath done great things for them. I will make them o the Synagogue o Satan (saith Christ) which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee: but this Pnt is concluded; and therefore I shall proceed; For I desire to keep time, and to be short in these morning Exercises: Well then, let us go on, and look upon the Restraint that God layd upon the fire: Consider the effect of Gods command, and the effect of his prohibition; God had given command that the fire should not burn them, that the fire shoul burn and dissolve their chains, and their fetters that were upon them; they were cast in bound, bound hand and foot; but God had commanded, and the fire obeys; it takes part with the three Children, to loose their fetters, and set them at liberty; they were cast in bound: And low, now says Nebuchadnezzar, I see four men loose, God had layd a prohibition upon the fire, and it obeys the commandment, that it should not burn them, that it should not touch their, bo∣dies it should not stop their breath, that it should not so much as singe one hair of their head, or scorch their garments, and the fire is obedient to the word of the Lord; they were walking in the midst of the fire, and they had no hurt: I shall put the particulars together, because I would make hast, they hold forth this Proposition. Observat. 6. That at the Commandment of the Lord, the fierce∣est of Creatures shall not only not hurt his people,
but shall take part with them, and do them good. I say, At the command of the Lord, the fiercest of Creatures, shall not only not hurt them, but shall side with his people, to take their part, and do them good: The fire cannot hurt, nay the fire takes part with them, nay the fire sets them at liberty. First of all, I shall shew you that the Creatures▪ cannot hurt. And then secondly, That they must of necessi∣ty take part with the Saints, and do them good. First of all, they cannot hurt; The water of the Red Sea, it could not destroy the Israelites; The Lyons, though fierce creatures, yet they could not open their mouths against Daniel: The most violent men of the world cannot hurt, when God lays a restraint upon them; you know Laban was not able to speak so much as a hurtful word to Ja∣cob▪ because God met him, and layd a restraint upon him; Take heed that thou speak to Jacob nei∣ter good nor evil: God would perswade his peo∣ple of this, in that 54. of Isaiah, verse, 15, 16. God would let them know that they were not able to lift up a weapon without him; nay, they could not so much as make a weapon without him; the Smith could not so much as blow the fire to form a weapon without the Lord; Thus saith God, I have power over all creatures, and over all the actions of creatures; a weapon cannot be lifted up, for the workman cannot so much as lift up his hand to blow the fire, unless God permit him;  Dog cannot bark against a man, unless God give leave, the barking of a Dog will do little urt; yet a Dog could not so much as bark
against Israel, when the Lord lay a restraint upon them; God would carry them quite out of the land of Aegypt, and not one Dog should move his Tongue at them; as you may see in the 11. of Exodus, vers. 7. you see the creature cannot do the least hurt; for a Dog cannot do so much as bark, he cannot do so much as move his Tongue, when God lays a restraint upon them. Secondly, The creature cannot hurt, but they must do good to Gods people, at his command; if the Lord will make choice of any creature to do his people good, he will effect his own design, it cannot be hindered, he will do them good by any thing he will do them good by any creature; by the most violent creature: Who would have thought that the fire should have done these three children good? that the fire should take their part? and yet the fire at the command of the Lord, does loose their bonds, and sets them at li∣berty: Who would have thought that the waters at the red Sea should have done the Israelites good? and yet they were abundantly useful to them in their passage through the red Sea; you shall read in the 14 of Exodus, vers. 22. that the children of Israel walked through the Sea, and the waters were a wall to them on the right hand, and on the left; the creature that might have been their destruction, became security to them; their way was made strait to them, they could not go out of their way, for the Sea was a wall to them on the right hand, and on the left: Who would have thought that the Ravens should have done Elia so much good? that the hungry Ravens, creatur that are of so greedy an appetite, should spar
meat out of their own bodies, to feed the Prophet? yet so it was, as you may read in the first book of Kings, 17. vers. 6. God makes the very Ravens to be careful Nurses to Elias; when he was in the Wilderness they brought him his meat in the mor∣ning, and in the evening: Who would have bin thought that the belly of the Whale should have a protecting place to Johah? that it should save him from destruction? yet God he made use of it, and he made the belly of the Whale to be a place of safety to Jonah, the Whale kept him safe till she carryed him and set him on shore: So that you see God can do his people good by any crea∣ture, he can make them all to be useful. Some∣times he works by improbable means, and some∣times by impossible means: I say, sometimes God doth his people good by improbable means; to have Honey out of the Rock, and Oyl out of the Rock; you will say this is improbable, and yet this is his promise that is made to Israel in the 32. of Deuteronomy. vers. 13. And he made him to suck Honey out of the Rock, and Oyl out of the flinty Rock: He speaks of the fruitfulness of the Land of Cana∣an God made the barren places fruitful, and he made the very Rocks to bring forth, yea the very flinty Rocks to be fruitful; the Rocks gave them Honey, and the Rocks gave them Oyl: That is, (as I conceive) God made the very Rocks to bring forth trees, and trees brought forth pleasant fruit, the Rocks brought forth the Olive Trees and the Date Trees, and so they had Honey out of the Rock, and Oyl out of the Rock. You know that it was impossible that Israel being carryed into Babylon, they should be carryed again into their
own Country, and while they were in Babylon, they seem to be in the grave: What a mercy was it that God should stir up their enemies to be a de∣fence to them? and to have them to be assisting of them? and to stir them up to the work of the Lord, to work in the Temple? you know God wrought by that means: And so how improbable was it, that Josephs accusation by his Mistress, that his fetters, his chains should be his advancement? and you know God wrought that way, and he made Joseph to be lift up, and made the second man of Pharaohs Kingdom. Yea God works sometimes by Impossible means; you see it was impossible that the fire should have been a protection to these three Children, to loose their bands, and set them at liberty, and be a place to walk in; and yet it was at the command of the Lord. He can turn the very stones into bread; He can send bread out of Heaven, as to Israel; and give water out of the Rock, as to them in the Wilderness; He cannot only work without means, but by impossible means: And thus you see at the command of the Lord, all creatures must obey; He can do his people good by Improbable means, and by Impossible means; For the Grounds of the Point; Why creatures The Grounds of the Point. cannot hurt, but they must do good to the people of God? First of all, Because they must all go along with God; and where God is a friend, they must be a freind; where God will not hurt, they will not hurt, for they all go along with him: Balaam could not go against the word of the Lord: If Ba∣lack would have given him his house full of Gold and
Silver, he could not go against the word of the Lord: and therefore when he would have had him cursed the people: Oh says Balaam, How should I curse, when God hath not cursed, and defie whn God hath not defied? This is the voice of all Creatures; how shall we curse, when God hath not cursed? and how shall we hurt, when God hath not hurt? they are all obedient to the word of the Lord, to the com∣mand of the Lord; all creatures obey that word of the Lord that he gave them when he first crea∣ted them; see the 148. Psalm, what is spoken there of all the Creatures of God, they obey that Law he gave them. Verse 6. Who hath also estdblished them for ever and ever, he hath made a Decree which shall not pass. Verse 7. Praise the Lord from the earth you Dragons and dep waters: And so in the 8. verse, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapours, stormy winds, fulfilling hs word: They all obey that Law of God that God gave them, they all keep their bounds, they willingly obey the Word, the Command, of their Creator; and therefore it is that the Sun does rise and set, that so might fulfil the word of the Lord; the Sea that ebbs and flows, and so all creatures they keek their Motion and their Station that so they may fulfil the word of the Lord; and keep that Law that God gave them at the first Creation, when he put them in order, and set them in their bounds. Yea, sometime God doth give another word to them, he doth alter the Law that he made at their Creation; and he gives a new word of command, which is contrary to na∣ture, and then also the creatures they obey that
word of the Lord; See what God commanded in the second Book of Kings. 20. 9. 10. verses. Verse 9 And Isaiah said, this signe shalt thou hav of the Lord, that the Lord will do the thing that he hath spoken; shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go backward ten degrees? Vers. 10. And Hezekiah answered, it is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten degrees; nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees. Vers. 11. And Isaiah cryed unto the Lord; and he broughe the shadow tne degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the Dial of Ahaz. See, God he can alter the Law of nature, and at his command, the Sun shall not only go for∣ward, but it shall go backward; if God say, Sun stand still, it shall not move; and if God say, Sun go back, it goeh back ten degrees: Thus you see that all the creatures, they obey the word of the Lord, they fulfill every command of God; if he say to the winde, winde arise, arise and blow, it presently fulfills his word; if he send them about any work, and he say, go and carry destruction upon your wings, to such a party, to such an ene∣my, they presently fulfill the word of the Lord; and then if he say, go and blow such a man profit, carry blessings in your wings, the winde that pre∣sently fulfills the word of the Lord; they are all his creatures; therefore they must go along with the Lord; they are all his servants, and therefore they attend him; they are all the Army of the Lord; and all the Host in Heaven and earth are his Army, and therefore they must obey the word of their General; they must obey his word of Command, they are all at his Command: And
therefore I say, where God is a freind, the crea∣tures they must needs be freinds, they cannot do hurt, for they all go along with God. Secondly, The creatures they cannot hurt, but they must do good to the people of God, for God hath made a Covenant with all the creatures for his people; There is a League made with all the creatures, even with the meanest of creatures; God hath not left one out of the League: See the 5. of Job, verse 23. For thou shalt be in league with the stones in the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Now because God hath made a league with them▪ therefore of ne∣cessity, Fist of all they must do no hurt, for that is one end of their League and Covenant: When there was a League made between Laban and Ja∣cob; see what is the end of it, Gen. 32. 52. and that thou shalt nt pass over this heap, and this pillar unto me for harm: that's the end of the League and Co∣venant, that so they that are in League and Cove∣nant, may not harm one another: Now God hath made a Covenant for his people, with all the Creatures; that is, God he hath layd an Injuncti∣on upon them, that they shall not do the least harm to his Servants. Object. But you will say, may not Creatures be hurtful to the Servants of God? May they not pe∣rish by fire and water, and have their lives taken away by Creatures? Was not Stephens life taken away by stones? how then does God make a League with the stons in the field? Answ. I Answer, 'Tis true they may, when God commands them to take away the life of his own people; but still I say, they cannot do them
hurt, they do but take away their lives, if they could send them to the torments of Hell, send them to the pit of destruction, that would hurt them indeed; but they cannot hurt them, though they be instruments to take away the lives of the Saints, yet they do them no hurt; for they do but send tem to their Fathers house, they help them the sooner to God, to rest in the Arms of Jesus Christ, where they shall rest for evermore. Secondly. Because there is a League with the Creatures, they shal do them good When Jehosa∣phat entred into Covenant with Ahab, there was an ingaging to do all the good he could, my men are as thy men, my horses as thy horses, and all that's mine as thine: And so saith God to the Creatures, I have put so many particular good things, good qualities into your nature, that so you may con∣vey them to my servants; and therefore I charge you be serviceable to them, give out all the good you can, let them enjoy all the good that I have given to you, for I made you for their sakes: and therefore of necessity they must give out the good that God hath given them, they must do the peo∣ple of God all the good they can, because God hath made a Covenant with the Creature: And this Covenant that God hath made with the crea∣ture, is grounded upon the great Covenant, the everlasting Covenant that he hath made with his people in Jesus Christ, there comes in all the good that we receive by creatures; God hath made an everlasting Covenant with his Son, in which he hath promised to be their God; to take them in∣to Union and Communion with himself, to be their portion, and to give himself to them: And
therefore because God hath given himself to them, all creatures also are given to be useful and bene∣ficial to them. Thirdly, The Third Ground of the Point, The Creatures must needs do good, they cannot hurt, but they must do good to the people of God, be∣cause of Gods watchful eye over them; the more hurtful and violent any creature is, the more doth the Lord set a watch over them, his providential eye is over his people; I say, the Lord doth watch over them with a special, providential eye: See what is said in the Prophesie of Isaiah, concern∣ing his Vineyard; I the Lord will keep it, I will watch over it every moment, least any hurt it: I will keep it night and day, least any hurt it: I will keep it night and day: See then there is a special eye of providence over the Saints that are the Lords Vineyard; and therefore 'tis not possible the Creatures should hurt it. God he watches over his Vineyard for this end, least any hurt should befall it; I will watch over it every moment; 'tis true other wicked men, they are kept from harm by a common providence of God, they have rheir lives preserved; but still 'tis but a common providence: But there is a special eye, and a spe∣cial providence of God over his people, least any hurt should befall them; there is no time, no moment, that God doth lay aside his watchful eye, and not watch over his people; And there∣fore there is no time that any harmful creature can step in to his people to do them hurt; they all come under the providence of God, every crea∣ture comes under the providence of God; and therefore the Lord he is able to prevent the harm.
Fourthly, The Creatures they are all given to Jesus Christ, as he is King, as he is the great King: All power is given to him in Heaven and earth: Now Christ he hath reconciled the Creatures, and therefore the creaures cannot be hurtful to the Saints; the Lord Jesus Christ hath reconciled the creature: He hath reconciled all things in Heaven and Earth, and made them all friends; and there∣fore the creature shall not do harm to the people of God: See the Promise that is made to the Church, in a special manner it shall be fulfilled in the latter Ages; Hosea 2. 18. And in that day will I make a Covenant for hem with the beasts of the field, ad with the fouls of Heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground; and I will break the Bow, and the Sword, and the Battle cut of the arth, and I will make them to lye don safely: This Promise is made to the Churches in the latter days. When they shall enjoy abundance of Jesus Christ, when they shall shall enjoy abundance of Jesus Christ, when they shall have abundance of the Spirit of Christ; why then shall those promises be fulfilled in a great measure, they shall enjoy peace with the Creatures: In that day I will make a Co∣venant with them, in a special manner, with the beasts of the field, and with the fouls of Heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground; and I will break the bow, and sword; and there shall be no hurt in all my holy Mountain: we are all recon∣ciled to God by the blood of Jesus Christ; And therefore they cannot hurt the Saints, but do them good. Briefly to make Application, and so conclude. If the fiercest of Creatures you see cannot hurt; Applicati∣on. The fire it cannot hurt, but it must do good, when
God commands; take notice then of the mighty power of the Lord: Oh know that he is a great King, and his name is dreadful over all the world; do but look upon the powerful command of God, what effect it hath upon the Creatures: 'Tis im∣possible they should transgress, he hath set them bounds that they cannot pass; they are all ready to obey his Command; if he say go, they go; and if he say come, they come; why this will make it evident. That God is a God of infinite power, to command so many Creatures, so many thousand thousand Creatures, as God doth order every day; and that God should make them obedient to eve∣ry command of his, that none can transgress the least command; but they must fulfill his word; when he sets them about it; Oh this declares that God is a God of infinite power, and doth what he pleaseth. Secondly, What a shame is it to the sons of men that they will not submit to the Lord? Will not the Creatures rise up in judgment against men? When the Creatures fulfil the word of the Lord, and you disobey the word of the Lord; shall God have more service from senceless Creatures, then from the sons of men, that was made Lord over them? Certainly this will be their iniquity ano∣ther day, and the very creatures will condemn them: See what God says to that fire; fire, burn not: it cannot so much as touch the hair of the head: If God say to the fire, fire, burn their bands asunder; set my children at liberty, the fire it burns their bands and fetters, and sets them loose, that they were able to walk in the midst of the fire.
And so all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, they all keep their bounds; Hitherto shalt thou go, and no further; the Sea, a raging Element, it obeys the word of the Lord: The Lord says to the Sun, Sun run thy race, it obeys; stand still, it stands still, and is obedient: Now shall all Creatures in their places obey the word of the Lord, and shall not man? Oh what a shame is this to the sons of men, that they should diso∣bey the word of the Lord? That God should speak but one word to the Creatures, and they should obey, and that he should speak so many to the sons of men, and they not obey: That God comes again, and again, and speaks in his Ordi∣nances, and still man walks contrary to God: when he lays a command upon them; this is the command, That you beleeve in Jesus Christ, and renounce all your own righteousness, and rely upon the Righteousness of the Son of God, and still men disobey: What a shame is it, for man to disobey, and all the Creatures that the Lord hath given to him, to obey? Thirdly, Here is a great Incouragement, and strong Motive, to those that are strangers to God, to come in and submit to him: Oh that the Lord would perswade your hearts to come in and sub∣mit to him! So long as you are strangers to God, see the danger you are in; you are liable to be harmed by all Creatures in Heaven and Earth; they are all at the command of the Lord; they all obey his word; If God say to the least of Creatures go and take away the life of man; avenge my quarrel upon such a Rebel, the Creatures obey: The Lord can arm the least of his Creatures: a
fly, he can make that take way the life of man; And therefore 'tis a miserable condition, to be a stranger to God and Christ, to be out of Cove∣nant with God; you have no Covenant made for you and therefore you are left to harm of the Creatures every day: Oh that the Lord would perswade you to come in, to cast away your own righteousness, and to submit to the righte∣ousness of the Son of God, and to make a close with him, and with his Son, and then all Creatures, will take his part: and if God be your freind, they will be your freind; and if God will not curse, they will not curse; and if God will not hurt you they will not hurt you; for they are all obedient to the command of their Maker. Again in the fourth place, To make haste; This may let us see, that it is not in Creatures to do us good without: I say, 'tis not in the power of Crea∣tures to us the least good without God: We are apt to look too much upon Creatures; you ex∣pect too much from Creatures, and too little from God; and therefore it is that oftentimes we are disappointed: I tell you, they cannot do us the least good, without the command of God; the very meat you eat, it cannot refresh you, unless it have a command from God, and a blessing from God, and the very clothes that you wear, cannot warm you, unless they have a command from God; there is no creature can do you good unless it have a command from God, and a blessing fom God: I beseech you take notice of it: Oh we are apt to propound such and such things to our selves if we had such a portion of the creature: men think, Oh if they had such an Estate, so much
riches; and if they were in such places of honour, and if they had so much wealth, and such and such a creature, such and such freinds and relations: such meat to eat, and such drink to drink; and such clothing to put on; then they should be sa∣tisfied, and their lives made comfortable; I tell you, my Brethren, 'tis a great mistake; if you had those very creatures you would have, still they could not satisfie you, nor make your lives com∣fortable: If God do not come along with the Creature, the Creature cannot satisfie you: God he can make your lives comfortable in the want of Creatures; 'tis as God will come in; and 'tis as God will bless: See what Job propounded to himself, in that 7. of Job, vers. 1. When I said, my bed shall comfort me, my Couch shall ease my complaint: Though Creatures be never so likely of themselves to comfort a man, if God will not make use of them, they cannot comfort: What more likely to give Job ease, then his Couch, then his Bed? he had wearied his body; and his Bed and his Couch is a place of ease; but I cannot finde it so, saith Job, I expected that it should ease me, I will lay my head upon my Pillow, and take my rest, but I could not finde it; no, it terrified my thoughts: and truly freinds, you may think of all the Creatures you enjoy, you may think that the Creatures will comfort, but if God doth not make use of it, it cannot comfort you; and if God will make use of any Creature, it shall com∣fort you: If God make use of imprisonments, bonds and fetters, they shall be ingagements to you, and make you sing in the Stocks at midnight; God can say to the Creatures go and comfort:
You know when God commanded the heaps of stones that Jacob layd his head upon, to give him comfortable sleep, he slept well that night, he slept better upon his heap of stones, then he did upon his pillow, when God makes use of the Crea∣ture to comfort: and therefore do not think you have comfort from Creatures, as Creatures; 'tis God that must come in and bring comfort to you, for God can make every Creature comfortable; and the best of Creatures cannot comfort, if God do not come in. To Conclude all. Fiftly, Here is matter of great comfort to the people of God; it may be a Prop to their faith, to their confidence; if they consider this, that all the Creatures are at Gods command, and God can make use of any Creature to do them good; he an make use of their Bonds; it is a mighty com∣fort to you that are the people of God, to re∣member this upon all occasions, where ever you ar, in your way, in your journey, in your voy∣ages, whether you be at Sea or Land; still remem∣ber, that all the Creatures they are your Fathers Host, they all fulfil his Command, they cannot disobey his Law, they cannot hurt you without commission: Nay, though they be hurtful, yet he can do you good by them: Oh how quietly may Gods people walk in the midst of all Crea∣tures, when they are at Sea, and when they are on land? in the midst of dreadful Creatures, they may wall safely, for why? they are at your Fa∣thers command, and they cannot do you the least hurt, though they be hurtful in themselves in their own nature; and therefore upon all occasions
strengthen your faith in the Lord: What shall we say to these things, saith the Apostle in the 8. of the Romans, the latter end: If God be for us, who can be against us? I tell you, you may challenge all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, if God be with you; if he be your portion, if he hath re∣ceived you into Covenant, and you have made a close with God: And therefore in all places and dangers, walk by faith; strengthen your faith in the mighty power and goodness of God, that hath the Command and Rule over all Creatures.
THE Eighth Sermon On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said, Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. I Have handled many Propositions out of these words; The last day, we considered that Addition that God made unto these Martyrs while they were suffering for his Name sake: There were but three cast into the fire, where as their enemies looked that they should have been all consumed, and
none left to bear witness any longer against their Idolatrous ways, the Lord makes an addition to them; there is a fourth that joyns himself to them to bear witness with them unto the truth of God, which they suffered for. Hence we raised this Proposition. That all the opposition & persecution that the peopl of God meet with for the Name and Truh of Christ, shall not diminish thir number, but shal increase them I shewed how the children of Isral were multi∣ply'd by those oppressions, and heavy burdens hat wer layd upon them in Aegypt; the more they oppressed them, the more they encreased, saith the Text: I gave you an instance in Christ; what counsel did the Scribes and Pharasees use, in the 11. of John, to hinder the number of beleevers: If we let him alone, all men will beleeve in him; Now they thought they would take a sure course that none should beleeve in Christ; They put the Lord of life to death; smite the Shepheard and the sheep will soon be scattered; but this did not dimi∣nish the number of Believers; no, God did out reach them, and made this the way to bring in men to believe in Christ: If I be lifted up, saith Christ, I will draw all men to me; The Lord Je∣sus by dying, becomes a suitable Object to poor guilty, unclean sinners, which durst not else have drawn nigh to the glorious Fathers: and Be∣cause he pured out his soul as an offring for sin: his Father gave him a portion with the great and mighty, so that the number of Beleevers were increased, and not diminished by this mischievous device against im. The Primitive Churches persecution that was raised in Jerusalem; it did help to the
increase of the Gospel, and number of Believers; The Apostles and Brethren were scattered, in the eighth of the Acts, so they carryed the word up and down, and by their means many were brought in to God: Samaria, a great City, many in it were converted; They with one accord gave heed to what Philip spake, and there was great joy in that City. I shewed you out of Ecclesiastical story, that all the persecutions, those bloody persecuti∣ons the Church me with, did not diminish, but did increase the number of Believers: The Lord delights to walk contrary to wicked men; to cross the corrupt imaginations of the men of the world; In those things wherein their deal proudly, he will be above them; he will let them know, that his thoughts are above thy thoughts, and his ways above thir way. When they say concerning Sion, Let her be defiled, and let our eyes ook upo her, let us see her desolation. They know no the thoughts of the Lord, nor understand his Counsel: for the event shall be quite contrary their expectations. The Lord Jesus is a great King; and therefore it shall be so; All power is given into his hand in Heaven and in Earth, and he will order all for the advance∣ment of his own Kingdom: all is his, and he hath given all to the Saints: All is yours, all shall do them good, all shall further and increase their graces, and the increase of his Kindom; There is none can hinder the Lord from pouring out of his spirit, there is none can hinder the Spirit from wor∣king; and therfore all opposition cannot hinder the increase of Believers: The wind blows where it lists, and so the Spirit of the Lord, breaths where it it pleaseth: Man may as well stop the Sun in the
Firmament, or hinder the Sun from shining▪ and the winde from blowing, as the Spirit of the Lord from working grace; he darts in beams of light, beams of conviction, to the hearts of Creatures; and his work is an irresistable work, all the pow∣ers of Hell and darkness shall not be able to hin∣der his work; Therefore I conclude this Point, with an Item to the men of the world; To take heed how they seek to oppose the truth of Christ, and the people of Christ; this is not the way to diminish their number, no▪ the Lord he will out reach them in all their design of persecution; the hottest pesecution shall but increase the umber of the Saints; they shall but sow the blood of Christ and their ashes, the thicker, and if one fall to the ground, a hundred shall rise up in their stead. But I entred into a second Point; in which I shall proceed: After we considered who this fourth man was; Nebchadnezzr saw four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and tey have no hurt, and the form of the forth is like th Son of God, it was indeed the Son of God: It was the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord Jesus, who did assume a body at this time, and came down to re∣fresh his Servants in the fire: It holds forth this, That he would in time come to deliver poor ser∣vants from the flame; of his Fathers wrath; That he would be present with his people in all afflicti∣ons, in the midst of all their fiery tryals: The Proposition then entred into is this. That the people of God never enjoy more of the pre∣sence of Christ, then in their lowest conditions. When they are in great afflictions and fiery try∣als,
the Son of God is with them. Here you see it in this fiery tryal; Israel never saw more of God, then when they were in the barren Wilder∣ness: Jacob never had such glorious visions, as when he was driven from his house and home, when he was separated from all creature comforts, had not so much as a Bed to ly on, nor a Pillow to lay his head upon, but layd him down upon a heap of stones; then had he those glorious Visions of the Ladder set up to Heaven, and of the Angels ascending and descending. Stephen never saw such glorious Visions of Jesus Christ, but when he was vnder a showre of stones that took away his life; He looked up, then and he saw the Heavens opened and the Son of God at the right hand of the Father, ready to recieve him. The Apostle John never had so glorious Visions, as when he was bnished to the Isle of Pamos, then did Christ reveal those glorious Mysteries, written in the Book of Revelations, concerning the Churches, to the end of the world. The Primitive Churches enjoyed most of Christ in the times of persecution they enjoyed most of the presence of Christ, and most of the mind of Christ, most purity, and most holiness, they had most of the supporting presence of Christ, then his left hand is put under to support a poor Creature, when it is in a low con∣dition, in a sinking condition, in an afflicted con∣dition: He supports the inward man, and he sup∣ports the outward man; he makes a little strength to go a great way, as the Oyl in the widows cruse, till such time as he sends deliverance unto his peo∣ple: They have never more of the enlightening presence, of the teaching presence of Christ, then
in such conditions: Affliction is Christs School, in which he teaches his people many precious Les∣sons; they have never more of the quickening pre∣sence of Christ, then in such conditions: never more of the Sanctifying presence of Christ, he is pleased to make use of affliction, to knock off that unevenness many times that is upon their Spirits, and make them partake  of his own nature. They have never more of the comforting presence than in such conditions; he brings his people into the Wilderness there he allures them and there he speaks to them; then he puts under his left hand to support them, and then his right hand embra∣ces them: But, What are the grounds of the Point? Why doth Jesus Christ manifest most of himself to his people in their afflicted conditi∣ons. The Grounds of the Point. First of all he knows that then they have most need of his presence. If ever they have need of comfort; if ever they have need of strength, of teaching, quickening, guiding; 'tis then when they are in afflicted and low conditions, then is a mercy sweet, when 'tis in seaon; and then 'tis seasonable, when a poor creature stands in need of it: The Lord Jesus knows that they have need of his presence in low conditions. First because of the weakness of the flesh; And, Secondly, Because of the strength of tempta∣tion. 1. Because of the weakness of the flesh: He knows his peopes fram, and remembers that they are but dust; and therefore he pities them; He knows how unable they are to bear, and how little time they are able to hold out; and there∣fore
somtimes the Lord Jesus hath spoken comfort∣able words to his people, when they have expressed a great deal of weakness in them: See in Mat. 26. when the Disciples could not watch with him; at the 41 verse, they could not watch with him one houre, though he was in great extremity, and they might have expected a sharp reproof from him: the Lord Jesus he looks upon them, and he pities them, he rather excuses them, and comforts them. Oh The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: He knows what the weakness of flesh is, for he was partaker of our flesh and blood, he remembers it since he was in the days of his flesh how weak the flesh is; he is partaker of our flesh and blod, saith the Apostle; he knows what it is for a poor creature to grapple with fears, with inward fears, ever since he poured out his strong cries un∣to his Father, with tears: none in the world are so sensible of afflction, as they that have gone under the same affliction themselves; the Lord Jesus he is sensible of all the weakness, of all the sorrow of his people; he knows by experience what they mean; he knows what it is to be weak, and he knows what it is to be in fear; he knows what it is to grapple with the wrath of his Father; he knows what it is to want his Fathers Counte∣nance; he knows what it is to be acquainted with sorrow, with grief; there was none so acquaint∣ed with them as he: See what the Prophet Isaiah says of him, in Isaiah 53. vers. 3. He was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrow, and acquain∣ted with grief; and we hid, as it were, our face from him: A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: grief and sorrow were his greatest acquain∣tance,
when he was upon earth; they were his ac∣quaintance from the beginning of his life; and they were his companions, from first to last, from the wombe to the Cross, they were the acquaintance that Christ could never shake off; his old acquain∣tance, when all his friends lest him, when his Di∣sciples let him; in affliction did they leave him; but his grief did not leave him, he was always ac∣quainted with it, and he was acquainted with all sorrows, with all grief, grief of all sorts; he knows what spiritual sorrows are; and therfore he wil pity people his under them: a natural man cannot pity a poor creature that groans under spiritual sorrow, he knows not what they mean, what it is for a poor creature to groan under corruption, and cry out of the want of a believing heart, and of the want of Gods presence; but now the Lord Je∣sus is acquainted with these sorrows also he had experience of them in his own person. The wo∣man that hath been in Travel, pities another that is in the same case; the Lord Jesus, he newly come out of Travel, he remembers his pangs still; and therefore he pities door creatures when they groan under grief and sorrows, for he was acquain∣ted with them himself. 2. Again secondly, He knows they have most need of his presence, in afflicted conditions, be∣cause they are most nigh to temptations; and he knows what temptations are; he knows the strength of Temptions; he knows that it is the Divils policy, to drive home temptation to the spirit of a poor creature at that time when it groans under affliction; and therefore he knows that then a poor creature, if ever, stands in need
of the presence of the Lord Jesus; when Sat stands at the left hand to resist, Christ had need to stand at the right hand to comfort and support, and strengthen; and therefore the Apostle saith; that he was tempted in the days of his flesh; in that 2 of Hebrews, vers. 18. Being tempted, he  able to succour those that are tempted: he knows by experience what it is for a poor creature to b tempted; he knows that temptations are most grievous to a gracious heart: Temptations are worse then afflictions, and therefore though a poor creature stands in need of succour in afflicti∣on, yet much more in temptation; When tem∣ptation goes along with affliction, Oh then the Lord Jesus knows that there is need of his pr∣sence: When a City is besieged, and the Inha∣bitants within it be disquieted, and the enemie hath raised their Batteries, and makes breat s up∣on the Walls, and their Provision grows low, Then, if ever, they have need of relief: Truly so it is with a pour tempted soul; when it is afflicted Batteries are made against the Spirit; provision, strength, is little, knows not how to hold out; then the Lord Jesus, he is their friend; and there∣fore in such conditions, he usually makes hast to afford his presence: That the first Grond of the Point. The Lord Jesus knows, if ever, then they have need of his presence▪ when they are in low con∣ditions, for then the flesh is weak, and then tem∣ptations are strong. Again secondly, The Lord Jesus manifests most of himself to his people in low conditions, because he remembers the kindness of his Father, when he
was in the same condition; I say, he remembers the kindness of his Father unto him, when he was in low conditions; now he will requite this kind∣ness upon them, that kindness that God the Fa∣ther did shew to Jesus Christ when he was in af∣fliction, and in low conditions; I say, be will requite it upon his people, it makes deep impressions upon the heart of Christ; the love that his Father shewed him when he was here in the days of his flesh, when he was in weakness, and was in perplexity, and was in distress, he can not forget it: You know what impression Jona∣nathans kindnesse made upon David, because Jo∣nathan shewed him kindnesse when he was in di∣stress; his kindness made impression upon his heart, tha he could not forget it; he inquired for some of his children, that he might requite the love of their Father, which he shewed to him when he was in low conditions; Jonathan shewed him kindness; when Saul persecuted David, Jo∣nathan stept between David and him, and was as a faithful friend to David: and therefore saith Da∣vid, I will requite his kindnesse; if I can finde but one poor Mephibosheth, that calls himself a dead Dog; yet David shews a great deal of kindnesse to him, to requite the kindnesse of Jonathan: And so doth Jesus Christ, he goes up and down to in∣quire in the world, where is the Seed of God, the Sons and Daughters of the most High, that I might shew them kindness for my Fathers sake: Oh he shew'd me kindnesse when I was in distress, and therefore I will do the like to them, when they ere in affliction and low conditions: Oh saith the Lord Jesus, I remember since your Fa∣ther
and my Father, took care of me when I was helpless; he formed me in the womb, and he took me out of the womb; he guarded me all my life log, Thirty years and upward, when I was in the midst of the world, with Bears and Tygers; I re∣member how he sent his Angels to comfort me when I was wearied out by Satans temptations; Nay, I remember when he stood by me, when all left me and fled; when all left me, that I had none in the world to stand by me, the Fathe stood by me; and therefore I will lay all this kindness upon you his seed: The last kindnes that the Father shewed to the Son, it took migh∣ty impression upon him; that his Father did not leve him alone, but was always with him; And therefore Christ he often makes mention of it, i that 16 of John, vers. 32. The Father hath not lef me alone, but he is with me all my life long; he never left him alone: yea, when he was in his affliction and low conditions, the Father did not leave him alone; See that 16. of John, vers. 32. Bhold the hour comes, yea is now come, that ye sha be scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone; and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me: This made deep impression upon the heart of Christ; that the Father did not leave him alone, when he was in his affliction, when he was persecuted, when all his freinds upon earth fled from him, then the Father did not leave him▪ And therefore the Lord Jesus Christ, he did often retain this Kindnesse; and he will not le th Sons and Daughters of God alone in low condi∣tions, but he will be present with them; though they be in the fire and water, he will be sure to
comfort them with the same consolation, where∣with his Father comforted hm, when he was in the same distress; That's the second Ground of the Point. Thirdly, Christ will shew most of his presence i afflicted conditions, because he remembers his Ingagement, he is ingaged then to manifest most of himself. First of all He is ingaged by his Promise and Cvenant; He hath promised to be with them al∣ways; he hath promised never to leave them nor forsake them: as the Father promised to be with him in trouble, so he hath promised to be with them: You may see his Fathers promise to him, in Psalm 91. 15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honour him. Now as the Fa∣ther made a promise to be with the Son in trouble, so hath he made a promise to be with his people in trouble: See that promise in the 43. of Isaiah, vers. 1. 2. how he hath promised to be with his people in all Tribulations, in the midst of the fire and water, and fiery try als; nothing shall sepa∣rate betwixt him and them, he is always making good his Promise; and therefore he will fulfill it to them. Secondly▪ He is ingaged by a Law of Love: There is a Law of Love written in the heart of Christ; he takes delight in his people, they are e joy of his soul: in the 16. Psalm. at the b∣ginning of it. it is spoken there of Christ; All my delight is in the Saints, saith Jesus Christ, and these that are excellent upon Earth; All my delight is in them, next to the delight that Christ hath in his
Father; to that Infinite, Incomprehensible Light; his delight is in his Saints, in his people; and there∣fore because he loves them, because he delights in them, he will be present with them; he loves their presence; whereever they are he loves to be with them, though their condition be never so sad; though they be in prison, it shall be a Heaven to Christ, because he bears dear love to them, he loves to see their face; he loves to hear their voice, he loves to injoy Communion with them; he loves to be gi∣ving out of himself to them: and therefore be made it his great request before he went to Hea∣ven that his Father would make room for his people, as you may see in John 14. beginning of the third verse: And if I go and prepare a place for you; I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also: he tells them, he would have them with him in the same place; they shall enjoy the same glory. and they shal have no worse room then he: And he besought his Father, John 17. 24. That those who were gi∣ven him of his Father, might be with him: Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me; for thou o est me before the foundations of the world. Father, I desire that they may be with me; I desire thou shouldst bid them as welcome to Hea∣ven as thou bidst me; and that they may ptake of the same glory as I do, that they may e in the same place that they may always see y ▪ and I may see their faces, for my delight is in them: Heaven could not content Christ with
the presence of his Saints: and it is a second, Hea∣ven unto Christ, to be present with them here upon earth; wherever they are, or whatever their condi∣tion, though be never so low; though they be in pri∣son, in chains, in the stocks, the Lord Jesus loves to be with them; he carries them about in his heart, and therefore he cannot be absent from them. Again Thirdly, He is ingaged by a Law of Friendship, to be most of all present with them in their low conditions; the Law of friendship binds him to it. Affliction is a Touch-stone, it disco∣vers fained friends, and real friends; it shews whether a friend be Cordial or no: By the Law of Friendship, a man is bound to stick to a friend in the midst of all his adversity, and then there is most need of a friend: It was a reproof unto Hushai, that Absalom gave him in that second of Samuel, 16. 17. Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why went you not along with your friend? Da∣vid was a friend to Hushai, and saith Absolom to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not along with thy friend? This shall never be said of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he broke the Law of friendship: It shall never be said of Christ, is this thy kindness to thy friend? Why wentest thou not along with thy friend? Thov wentest not along with thy friend, but thou forsookest thy friend, when thy friend had most need of thee; no, the Law of Friendship is i Christs heart, and he will keep it; and therefore he will stick close, and most close to his people, when they are in low conditions. Again Fourthly, There is a fourth ingagement. He is present with his people most of all in low
conditions; in afflicted conditions, because he is ingaged to lok after hs work, 'tis the work of Christs own hand; he sends afflictions for that end, to work something in the heart of his peo∣ple: and therefore he is ingaged to see what be∣comes of his labour and pains, that he may not loose his cost and labour: When a Physician gives a Purge to a Ptient, he is ingaged to see what be∣comes of his Physick, how it works; So the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Physician, he never gives any bitter Purge, any bitter Pill of affliction to his servants; but he looks upon himself as ingaged to look after it, that he may look after his Physick, and see how it works: the very presence of Jesus Christ will help the Physick, if it work too much, or too little; if the soul dispise, the cha∣stening of the Lord, or faint under the chastening of the Lord; the Lord Jesus can by his presence hep: When the Gold Smith pus his Gold into the Furnace, then he is ingaged to be present to look after his Gold; and so is Jesus Christ when he duts his people into the Furnace of affliction; he is ingaged to look after his precious Gold, that so none may be lost and consumed in the fire: You see the Grounds of the Point. Quest. If you ask me, how doth Christ give out much of himself in affliction? By what way or means doth Christ communicate much of himself in affliction: Briefly for answer: Answ. First of all, he doth raise up his peoples faith unto a high pitch; many times, I say, he rai∣seth up their faith to a more then ordinary pitch, he clears the eye of faith, and strengthens the eye of faith: Now the more the eye of faith is clear∣ed
and strengthened, the more it sees of Jesus Christ: Now the Lore he doth mightily strength∣en faith; many times in affliction faith is strengthened, for faith is left alone many times, and then it works best; all props are taken away, God takes away all sence, many times, and leaves faith to work alone; now faith never works bet∣ter then when 'tis alone; it meets with a great deal of opposition; and faith is strengthened by opposition; the nature of faith doth take his rise by opposition; the more opposition it meets with, the higher it rises: The woman of Canaan, what opposition did her faith meet with? that wich was a discouragement to her, yet from that discouragement, her faith takes a rise; and because Christ says; she is a dog, therefore she is confident that she shall have Crumbs of mercy before she goes away: When faith is put to ex∣tremity, then it becomes strong: When faith is exercised in extremity; I having wavered a long time, at last it sees that it must either beleeve or perish, beleeve or sink; it fares in such a condi∣tion, as with a man that is to pass over a River, he being afraid that the Bridge should not bear him, stays long before he dare venture; at last he sees the River swell higher and higher, he goes to make an offer, and puls back his foot; he dare not venture; at last the water swels up to the neck of the Bridge, and he sees there is no way but one with him, either he must venture upon the Bridge, or else perish in the water; and then he considers, that many have gone over that way, and many have been saved that way, and it hath born up many, thousands have gone over before,
well he ventures: and so doth many a poor soul waver many times, draw back his foot, dares not venture upon Christ, can he bare me up? and will he bear me up? may I venture? God he puts faith many times to it, puts it to such a strait that the soul must venture or perish, believe in Christ alone, or perish; faith here many times takes a rise; that's the first way whereby Christ doth coummunicate much of himself in affliction, he many times lifts up faith, and strengthens faith; Now the more strong faith is, the more it sees, the more it apprehends of God. Secondly, He pours out the Spirit of Supplica∣tion many times upon his people when they are in low conditions; he makes them to cry out, to cry a main to him, as he cryed to his Father in his distress, he puts up his cries; He puts up his re∣qusts with strong cries and tears, and he was heard of his fathr; And so the Lord Jesus he doth pour out of his spirit upon his people, that he may stir up their souls in such a way as Christ is taken with; Lt me see thy face, and let me hear thy voice, saith he, for sweet is shy voice, and thy countenance is comely, 'tis melody to Christ; Christ draws nigh to hear the melody; and the nigher Christ draws the more evidently the soul sees him. Thirdly, The Lord Jesus by affliction, or in affliction he draws the hearts of his people nigher; Then he doth bring them back many times from their wandrings, from their straglings: Before I was afflicted I went astray, saith David. The Lord Jesus by affliction, he brings them nigher to him∣self, he causes them to wait more upon him, to
eye him more, to keep closer unto him, and to take heed of stragling: Now the nigher the soul is brought to Christ, the more it sees of him, though it be not for our waiting not for our be∣leeving, our walking, that Christ doth manifests himself: Commonly when Jesus Christ manifests much of himself, he will draw his peoples heart to look towards him, and wait upon him. Fourthly, He manifests most of himself in af∣fliction, by his word which be snds along with af∣fliction: Commonly, I say, when Christ doth afflict his people, he sends his word along with affliction, some word of instruction, or some word of promise, or some word of Counsel; there is some word or other that goes along with affliction, that so Christ may teach them before they go out of that stig: Now the word of grace the word of Promise, it is the Chariot on which Christ rides; he doth by them draw nigh, by his word he draws nigh to the soul: and therefore when the word comes with evidence, Christ comes along with the word, and then the soul sees most of Christ, because Christ sends such a word to the soul in affliction; which word he comes along with & in which word he conveys himself to them. Quest. It may be some of God people will say, Alas if this be true, that Christ manifests most of himself in affliction, what shall become of me? I have had no such experience, I cannot say that I have had most of God in affliction, I have not enjoyed the presence of Christ in many afflictions. Answ, Why art thou one that hast closed with Christ, and received the mercy of the Gospel?
Why then certainly it cannot be, but that thou hast seen something, or thou mightest have seen something of Christ in affliction; do not say thou seest nothing of Christ in affliction; do not say thou hast not enjoyed any of the presence of Christ in affliction; hast not been supported by Christ in affliction; and is that nothing, saist thou to support a poor creature under affliction? Hast thou not been supped by the strength of Christ or by some word  Christ in affliction? And hast thou not said as David said, I had perished in my affliction, if thy word had not been my stay? hath not Christ given thee some secret Refresh∣ment in affliction? surely he hath been nigh to thee and thou wett not aware; he hath fed thee in affliction, and thou didst not take notice of it; Joseph he sed his Brethren and they did not know it was Joseph; And so Christ he doth give sweet re∣freshments to his people, and they do not take notice of it; they do not consider that it is Christ that supports them: Oh thy Spirit had sunk un∣der affliction, if it had not been Christ that had upheld thee! Object. Ay, But if it had been Christ that had supported me in my affliction, I should hve gained by my affliction, I should have seen the benefit of my affliction; but I see nothing at all, affliction is come and gone, and left nothing behind. Answ Hast thou seen nothing, no, benefit? Why resolve again to walk through, though thou hast not seen, thou maist see; and these afflicti∣ons that have been layd upon thee, though they be gone, the fruit of them may be to come: When
man takes Physick, you cannot expect that he should have health the same day, strength the same day, he must wait some days after; and see how his strength comes in, and then afterward he perceives the benefit of his Physick; and so it is with affliction, God may, and doth do his people good by affliction, though they saw little bene∣fit while they were under affliction: The rain doth make the earth fruitl: but the growth of the corn 'tis not seen presently; wait a while, stay a Week or a Fortnight, and then look into the Field and you shall see the rain was beneficial to the Field, and so 'tis with afflictions, they are as rain, when the Lord Jesus comes along with them he makes them very beneficial to his people; Ay▪ but the growth is not discerned presently: No, stay a while; But do not thou say in unbelief, I shall get no good by my affliction; no thou hast got good by thy affliction; The Lord hath said it, he hath said That All things shall work together for their good; he hath said, that He will purge away their sins; he hath said, that We are made partakers of his Divine Nature, by affliction: and therefore give not way to unbelief; do not by unbeief, shut out the blessing; but beleeve that it shall be as God hath spoken; and though thou hast not seen the accomplishment of the promise, go and wait upon God, watch over thine own heart; look to thy self, the Weeds grow as well as the Corn: you know how it was with He∣zekiah, and therefore we had to need watch
over our own hearts, and know thou shalt get good by affliction; for God hath spoken it, and it shall be accomplished unto thee in the Lords due time; for the Lord wll fulfill his word.
THE Ninth Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV. He answered and said▪ Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. YOu may remember the Proposition in hand; Namely, That Christ is never rigler his people thn when they are in great afflictions, in firy tryals: He entred into the Furnace here; into the fiery Fur∣nace, that he might save his people harmless: I gave you the Grounds the last day; why Christ draws nigh to his people, and why he doth communicate
most of himself in their afflicted & lowconditions. First of all, he knows that they have most need of him, they have most need of him because of the weakness of the flesh; and because of the strength of temptation; he knows the flesh is weak; and therefore he expresseth pity and com∣passion to his Disciples, when they could expect nothing but fury from him, they could not watch one hour, when he stood in need of them; and yet the Lord Jesus pities them; The flesh is weak, but the Spirit is strong; he knows what the weak∣ness of the flesh is; and he himself was partaker of our flesh, that he might know experimentally what the weakness of the flesh is; and therefore well might Isaiah say, He was a man of sorrow; a man of sorrow, and acquanted with grief; he was a man of sorrow all his days, and he had no other acquaitance almost but grief and sorrow when all his acquaintance left him, his grief and sorrow fol∣lowed him, even to the very grave; and therefore there is no grief, no sorrow, but the Lord Jesus had experience of it, that he might know how to pity his people in their weakness, and when they lye under their burdens. Again, He knows the strength of temptation, he knows what it is for a poor creature to be tem∣pred, for he was in all things tempted like unto us, saith the Apostle: He had experience of all man∣ner of temptations; he knows how to releeve his people under temptation, he knows, their straits, when they are besieged; he knows how the force of Satans Batteries are; he knows that in their weaknesses the Devil takes advantage against them, and then above all other times in∣deavour
to drive home the darts of his temptation into their Spirits; and therefore the Lord Jesus because they have most need of him, he pities them, and relieves them at that time. Again, He remembers the kindness of his Fa∣ther to him in his low condition, and therefore will shew the like kindness to his people in their low conditions; he remembers that his Father did not leave him in his straits, and therefore he will not leave them in their straits: The kindness that God the Father shewed to his Son when he was upon earth, took such an impression, made such an impression upon the heart of Christ that he can never forget it; but he will always labour to requite it, by shewing the like kindness to the people of God in their distress: Oh how was he taken with that kindness, that The Father would not leave him alone? how often doth he make mention of it; I am not alone, but the Father is with me? and therefore he enquires for some of the Saints of God, that he may shew the like kind∣ness unto them: David remembers the kindness that Jonathan shewed him, when he was in his low condition; and therefore David enquires for some of his children; Is there none left of the house of Soul, that I may shew kindness to for Jona∣thans sake? though there be but one poor lame Mephibosheth, one that is lame of his feet, that is no fit companion for a King; yet for Jonathans sake, and for the kindness Jonathan shewed to David: David shews great kindness to Jonathans son, took him, and set him at his Table: so doth Jesus Christ deal, he remembers the kindness of his Father, the kindness the Father shewed him in
his low condition; says he, is there none of the seed of God? are there none of the children of the most high, that I may shew kindness to, for the fathers sake? Because he shewed kindness to me in my low condition; and though he can hear of none but poor lame Mephibosheth, yet he shews kindness to them, takes them into commu∣nion with himself, sets them at Table with him, and in the midst of their low conditions will afford his presence▪ because his Father & their Father did not leave him alone when he was in low conditi∣ons. Again, The Lord Jesus he is bound unto this by many ingagements; I say, he is bound to be present with his people in low conditions; He is bound by his Word, by his Promise, by the Law of love that is in his heart: All my delight is in the Saints, and those that be excellent; it is a second Heaven to him, next to the presence of the Fa∣ther, he delights to be in the presence of his Saints, and therefore because he delights in them he will be present with them, though they be in the pri∣son, in chains and fetters, though they be in the fiery Furnace; yet it is a Heaven unto Christ to be with them; for all his delight is in his Saints; He is bound also by the Law of friendship, to be with them in low conditions; a friend is tryed in adversity; it was a reproof to Hushai, when he left David in straits; and therefore says Absolom, is this thy kindness to thy friend that thou wouldst not go along with thy friend? It shall never be said so of the Lord Jesus, it shall never be said of him, Why didst thou not go along with thy friend? for he will go along with his friend in the greatest adversity: he will not leave them, but afford them his presence.
Again, He is bound because his work is in hand; A Physician is bound to look after his Patient, because he hath given him a Purge: And so the The Lord Jesus is bound to look after his Pati∣ent when he hath given him a Purge: Gold-Smith is bound to look after his Gold when he hath put it▪ into the Furnace: And so the Lord Jesus is bound to look after his Gold when 'tis in the Furnace of affliction. But I come to the Application. First of all for Instruction: This lets us see the wonderful unparalel love of Jsus Christ; I be∣seech  you take notice of it, and get your hearts affected with it: here is such love as creatures can∣not shew, a friend that will never leave one; a friend that will always afford his presence, in the greatest straits; afford his presence, that's a friend indeed; a man may be brought into such conditions, as all his friends may forsake him, all men upon earth may leave him; David was left of his best friends; Father and Mother forsook him: and Jesus Christ was left of his best frsends, they all forsook him and fled; and truly this may be the condition of any man upon earth, cast out and forsaken of friends, of most friends, of best friends: will a friend venture his own life for a friend? will a man keep his friend, when some deadly infectious disease is upon him? when he hath a plage sore upon him? will he hen lye down in the bosome of his friend? when a man is condemned to the flames of fire, when a man is cast into the fire, will a friend follow him into that condition? Truly such friends you will hard∣ly finde upon earth; but this is the friendship of
Jesus Christ to his people: when he first lookt upon them he saw how many plague sores, in∣fectious diseases were upon them, and yet that could not hinder him from drawing nigh, and affording his presence, and from working migh∣tily by his spirit, upon their hearts: Nay, when they are brought to fiery tryals, to great afflicti∣ons; yet even then he will not leave them, and he will not forsake them; and this makes the love of Christ the more remarkable, that he should thus condescend when he was at the highest, for he is now advanced above the Heavens, he sits down at the right hand of the Father, he is at the high∣est condition, and yet he is pleased to condescend to the lowest condition, he is pleased to come down when they are in the depths, in the great∣est straits that possibly can be; what love was that the Spouse speaks of in the 5. of Canticles, and the last verse: she speaks a great deal of the beauty of Christ, and in the last words she makes her boast of her Beloved: This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend, Oh Daughters of Jerusalem: I will compare with you all; I will compare my friend to all the friends in the world; This is my Belovd; and this is my friend; she compares him for for his beauty; and so you may compare him for his love; you may make your boast of the Lord Jesus; you may say, This is my Beloved, and this is my friend. Secondly, What a strong Motive may this Doctrine be unto such as are strangers unto Jesus  Christ, to come in and submit unto him? What glorious Benefits may you be partakers of? What a desireable thing is it to have such a friend as
Christ is, which will be present with his friends in their lowest conditions? Oh that every man would set down and consider that which Solomon speaks of, to remember the days of darknesse, which will be many; many days of darknesse may come upon the earth, what a favour will it be to have a friend in the darknesse? a friend that will stick by thee when thou art in the dark a friend that thou mayst take hold of his skirts when thou art in the dark Entry; a friend that will hold thee fast when thou art in the dark: such a friend is Jesus Christ to all that do embrace him: Oh what a favour, what a mercy will it be, to have a friend stand by thee, that is both able and willing to help thee, when all Creature-comforts shall fail, when the very strength of body shall fail? to have a friend stand by to help and succour? and truly such a friend is the Lord Jesus: what saith the Psalmist, in the 73. Psalm, vers. 26. My flesh and my heart faileth, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: heart and flesh fail, and then there is a strength above na∣ture; the Lord then is the strength of my heart, and of my flesh and blood: What a mercy will it be, to have one stand by you, when you go through the valley of the shadow of death, a friend then to comfort, a friend then to uphold? such a friend is the Lord to his people; David was confident of this, therefore you see how his faith triumpheth in the consideration of it, in Psal. 23, vers. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill; Why? For thou art with me; see what a mighty confidence was raised up in Davids heart; and what was the
ground of it? The presence of the Lord? Though I walk in the vally of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill: why? For thou art with me; he doth put cases of the most uncomfortablest con∣dition that may befall him; valley of the shadow of death, though I be brought down from the Moun∣tain, and walk in the valley; and though this valley be a dark way, though it be a shadow of death, that is, though it be never so dreadful; and though it be so nigh that all the world cannot save you, even then, when I am in such a condi∣tion, and walk in the valley of death, I will fear none ill, for thou art with me; so long as I have thy presence, my soul is upholden: you read in the 4. of Revelations, at the 6. verse, that the world is like a sea of Glass: I saw before the Throne a sea of glass: there the world is shadow∣ed out unto you, and the condition of men that are in the world, the world is like to a sea of glass: and Oh that men would remember this; if it be a Sea of Glass, what need have you of a friend to stand by you? you that are Travelers in the world, you walk upon a Sea of Glass; Oh what need have you of a friend to take you by the right hand; to uphold you? there is none but Jesus Christ, none but his presence can uphold you in this Sea of Glass: and if this world be a Sea of Glass; Oh what need have we to take Jesus Christ into the Ship, into the heart, that so he may be our Pi∣lot, and he may guide you safe? Oh do but think in what steed Jesus Christ will stand you, when the storms arise, and the waves shall beat when it may be the body of the Ship shall be split, in pieces; Oh what will it be then for a Saviour
to uphold the Spirit, to bear up the spirit, and take the soul upon his own shoulder, to bear it above wrath and amazement? Now do you ap∣prehend this to be desireable? Oh that the Lord would make your hearts to close with Christ, to ac∣cept of Christ, and the tenders of mercy now held forth in these days of grace! I tell you, the time is coming, when you shall see weaknesse written upon the tops of the Mountains; they will say, look to your selves, for we cannot help you; now will not the presence of Jesus Christ be de∣sireable to you in such a condition? Oh then I say, accept of him, he freely tenders himself to you now in this day of grace; and Oh that the day of grace might not be slighted! his presence is de∣sireable in such a strait; and is he not now desirea∣ble, that so you may have him in such a time of need? But Thirdly, This let's us see, that there is not such great evil in affliction as men apprehend; men fear affliction, and flee from affliction as from Toads and Serpents, and connot endure to think of affliction, cannot endure to think of the day of darknesse: I say, there is not so great an evil in affliction as men apprehend, for the Lord Jesus is present with his people in affliction; and there is no reason why you that are the people of God should inordinately fear affliction, and why you should inordinately seek to be delivered from affliction; seeing you may possibly enjoy more of the presence of Jesus Christ in affliction, then ever you did in other conditions? would  loving wife be afraid to go into a dark place when she shall meet with her Beloved? Why should
you be afraid to go into a dark place when you shall meet with the presence of Christ? Remem∣ber that Expression of te Martyr, when he was ready to suffer death, he breaks forth into this expression. Come fire, and come wild beasts; Come rack of the body; Come breaking of the bones; Come all the torments in Hell, that all the Divels in Hell can afflict with, I care not so I can meet with the presence of Jsus Christ: Remember how many of the Mar∣tyrs have ventured into the flames to meet with Christ? they have willingly sacrificed their lives that they might meet with Christ: shall Peter ven∣ture into the water, and shall the Martyrs ven∣ture into the fire, and shall you be afraid to en∣ter into an afflicted condition, where you may meet with the presence of Jesus Christ. There are two things that make the people of 2 Things that make the people of God to fear afflic∣tion. God to fear affliction inordinately: 1. First of all, Either they do not beleeve that they shall meet with the presence of Christ in an afflicted condition. Or 2. Secondly, They do not beleeve that the pre∣sence of Christ will countervail the bitterness of affliction. Now I shall endeavour to clear both these, and to perswade you that are the people of God: First of all, that you shall certainly meet with Christ in affliction: And then that his presence will countervail the bitterness of affliction. First I say, You shall certainly meet with Christ in your affliction; for first of all▪ he hath spoke it, he hath promised it, he hath set a part the time and place of his own appointment; he hath given out the word, the word is out of his
mouth, and 'tis under his own hand written, 'tis under his hand and seal, that he will meet with his people in afflicted conditions, he hath said in the 5. of Job vers. 19. that he will deliver thee in six troubles, and in seven; and every Promise is under the Hand and Seal of Christ: and so in the 43. of Isaiah, God promiseth there, to be with his people in all their afflicted conditions; in their greatest afflictions: In the 43. of Isaiah, and the second verse, When thou passest through the water, I will be with thee, and through the Rvers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou passest through the fire thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: the fire, that is in the greatest straits: in thy greatest affliction, when the waters are ready to overwhelm thee, I will be with thee, and lift up thy head; I will be with thee in fiery tryals, when flames are ready to consume thee, I will be with thee: I say, you may be confident of it, because the Lord Christ hath given it under his hand and seal, that he will give your souls a meeting in such a condition; is there any thing that can hinder Christ from performing this his promise; he cannot forget his word, he cannot mistake the time and place, he cannot be hindred by any outward impediment: I say, 1. First of all, He cannot forget his Promise, though he hath spoken many years ago, yet the Lord he cannot forget his promise; he is always mindful of his promise: See in the first of Chron. and the 16. Chapter, and the 15. verse, He is mindful always of his Covenant, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations: though the promise▪ be given out never so long ago, suppose
it be a thousand generations, yet the Lord he is always mindful of his promise, always mindful of his Covenant, to a thousand generations; a man may promise his friend to meet with him, but it is possible a man may forget his promise, but so cannot God, he is ever mindful of his promise. Again, He cannot mistake the time, happily a man though he hath promised, yet he may mi∣stake the time, he knows not how the time passes, and so may be deceived; but it cannot be so with God, he knows all times, all creatures; Fore∣know unto God are all his works, from the begin∣ning of the world, Acts 15. 18. Nay, he cannot be hindred by any impediment; his Father will not hinder him; he was willing to spare him out of Heaven for many years together, that so he might be present with his people, and all crea∣tures cannot hinder him from performing his pro∣mise; see the 27. of Isaiah, verse 4. Fury is not in me, who would set the Bryars and Thornes against me in battel? I would go through them, I would urn them together; The greatest opposition was bryars and thorns to Jesus Christ; bryars and thorns before devouring fire, will soon be burnt; and therefore upon this you may be confident, seeing the Lord Jesus hath given out his word, he will keep time and place with you. Again Secondly, You may be confident of his presence in affliction, because affliction is, for this end, it is the main end that Christ in affliction may meet with his people, that he may draw them into igher communion with himself, that they may see more of him, & that they may enjoy more of him, and he enjoy more of them; that he may
make use of affliction to remove that which is in the way between him and the soul, to subdue cor∣ruption, and to strengthen faith, and to draw forth grace, to heighten the holiness, and the grace of the soul; and to comfort the heart, and all that the soul may enjoy more communion with Christ; he doth take his people into a by-Lane, as I may say, in every affliction that he may speak unto them; he took the Spouse into the wilderness that he might speak to her; and so doth Jesus Christ when he takes his people into a by-way, it is, that he may speak something more to them, that he may speak freely, and speak some∣thing that may be for their good; he doth not speak in affliction, because he delights in afflicti∣on, he doth not delight in their afflictions; he doth not afflict that he may be satisfied: no, af∣flictions they are not their punishments, for God hath satisfaction at the hand of Jesus Christ, and therefore it relates to something to come, that he may with this Chastisement draw the soul more nigh, and see more of him, and enjoy more of him, more of his presence, of his love, more communion with him, that he may comfort, strengthen and support, and sanctifie: and there∣fore seeing it is the end, the main end of afflicti∣on, that Jesus Christ and his people may meet and converse together; certainly Gods people must not slight this his afflicting them, must not slight this main end of God. Object. But if Christ do meet with his people in affliction, the presence of Christ cannot countervail the bitterness of the affliction. Answ. But it will to the full, for there is that
in the presence of Christ, which may supply the wants of all creatures: I say, there is all good∣nesse, all sweetnesse gathered together in the Son of God, which is scattered up and down in Crea∣tures, and therefore in Heaven the Saints need no creature comforts, they need not the light of the Sun, nor the light of the Moon; and there all re∣comfortable relations are broken a pieces, there is no husband, nor wife, nor child, Master, nor servant; why? because the good of ll these lations do meet in Christ, and the good of all these relations shall be supplied by the presence of Christ, and therefore Christ tells his Disciples in Mat 22. 30. In the Resurrection, (saith he) they neither marry nor are given in Marriage, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven: they neither marry nor are given in Marriage; that which is the most comfortable relation in earth there is no need of in Heaven, 'tis too poor, too needy for Heaven, there shall be no marrying nor giving in Marriage; and o the comfort of all other relati∣ons shall be found in Christ. In him there is a perfection of all goodnesse, of all sweetnesse; now you cannot meet with the fulnesse of these in any condition; there is a fulnesse of joy in Christ, a fulnesse of good in Christ; what says the Psal∣mist in Psalm 16. v. last. In thy presence is fulnesse of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. there is a fulnesse of joy in the presence of Christ, there is not a fulnesse of sorrow in any condition, no, there is a mixture of Mercy in every conditi∣on; the evil that a Soul meets with is not infinite, there is not a fulnesse of sorrow, but in the pre∣sence of Christ there is a fulnesse of joy, there is
that which can abundantly countervail the evil that is met with in any condition; if all the evil un∣der the Sun were met together in one condition, and a Soul brought into it, yet it might find in the presence of Christ that which may answer that condition, the presence of Christ will comfort, and support, and raise up a Soul in that evil con∣dition; and therefore you shall find that the pre∣sence of Christ hath made the Saints to rejoyce in Tribulations, to joy abundantly. The Apostles rejoyced that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of the Lord Christ: it doth fill the Soul with holy joy, heavenly Raptures, yea the presence of Christ hath been astonishment to the Soul many times when it hath been in a sad condi∣tion: see what Paul saith of himself in 2 Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in Christ about 14 years ago, whe∣ther in the Boy I canno tll, or whether out of the Body I cannot tell, (God knows) such a man whe∣ther in the Body, or out of the Body was caught up into the third Heaven: some think this vision of Paul▪ was when he was in a sad condition, it was immediately after his conversion, when the light of his Body was taken away by blindnesse: Now it is supposed when Paul was blind in hi Body he had this Vision of Christ; you may see what a∣bundance of sweetnesse he found in Christ, it car∣ried him beyond himself, he ws carred out with holy Raptures; I knew not where I was, (saith he) whether I was in the body, or was taken out of the body, I cannot test, the Lord he knows! and therefore still I say there is no cause why any of Gods people should inordinately fear affliction seeing you may meet with the presence of Christ
in that condition, and the presence of Jesus Christ, will countervail the loss of all Creature comforts, and the sweetness of it will be equi∣valent to the bitterness of it, let thy condition be never so low: That's the third Use. Fourthly, Let the people of God expect the presence of Christ in their affliction, in their low condition; seeing Christ hath promised his pre∣sence, do you expect his presence, look for his presence: Oh that we might labour to improve our affliction for this end, that we may meet with more of Christ, that we may enjoy more of the presence of Christ in our affliction; truly there is a great deal lost, Gods people loose abundance of sweetness which they might enjoy both in Ordinances and in afflction, if their hearts were raised up to look for the perform∣ance of that which Christ hath promised; if we would believe that Jesus Christ will be as good as his word: did our souls expect the fulfilling of this word, that e shall see the presence of Christ in affliction; why then should we be so loth to suffer for Christ, and be unwilling to sub∣mit to low conditons, seeing it is the will of God that we should suffer? Therefore I be∣seech you, you that are the people of God, get your hearts enlarged in affliction, that so you may get above your ffliction, if that you shall certainly meet with the presence of Jesus Christ in your afflicted conditions; he hath spoken it, he hath given out the word, and therefore he will fulfill it; what confidence had the people of God in their affliction, when they remem∣bred this? I will fear▪ none ill; though I walk in
the valley of the shadow of death; And see what David saith, in the 27. Psalm, the beginning of it, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom should I fear, the Lord is the strength of my lie, of whom should I be afraid? I cannot tell who the enemy is, who is it? he looks and he fides none in all the world, whom should I fear▪ and be afraid of? so long as the Lord is with me, I see no such enemy; and therefore I beseech you that you would look after the presence of Christ expect the presence of Christ in all your afflicti∣ons that you meet with. Object. But you will say, I have no such word as David had, David might well beleve that the Lord would uphold him; for David had a parti∣cular word God spake to David, he ware to Da∣vid, He swore by his Holiness that he would not fail David; and so others of the Sains, they had a particular word▪ the Lord spake to Joshua, Fear not, I will not leave thee, be couragious, but we have no such word, and therefore how should we expect to meet with Christ in afflicted conditi∣ons. Answ. I Answer first of all, Though God does not speak now from Heaven by Visions, he doth not reveal himself by Ʋrim and Thumim. as unto David▪ yet we have a larger word then David had, and Joshuah had; the Scrip∣ture is larger now, we have abundance of the word; there was but little of the Scripture writ in Daids time, and less in Joshuahs time, there was none of the written word, but only the Book of Moses; but now we have the word of God compleat, we have a sure word, a large word,
and 'tis full of gracious invitations and incourage∣ments; and therefore the Saints now may be incou∣raged as well as they to whom God spake. Secondly, Yea Secondly I say, God hath sent forth more of his spirit now in a Gospel way, in a way of Gospel dispensation, there is a great deal more of the Spirit of Christ poured out. Now 'tis the work of the Spirit, the Office of the Spirit, to particula∣rize those promises to the soul, to take th promises and bring them home to this and that particular soul: Now where the Spirit of God comes,  comes with evidence, and he brings home the word of grace to th soul, that the soul cannot gainsay it, nor re∣sist it. Object. But you will say, How shall I know 'tis the Spirit of God that doth speak to me? Answ. I Answer, The Spirit of God always speaks according to the word of God; I say, it speaks according to the written word that is given to us, it speaks according to the word of grace, for the spirit and the word do bear mutual testimony one of another. But I Answer, 'Tis in the power of the Spirit to resolve the soul; the Lord Jesus sends forth the Spi∣rit with so much evidence, s to convince the heart that it is the spirit that speaks; the Lord Jesus he is able to perswade the soul that it is not a delusion; but speaking according to the word of grace, it is in∣deed the voice of the Father, the voice of the Spirit that speaks. Objct. But you will object further; If the Lord Jesus be present with m according to his promise; if the Lord were present with me in affliction; why how is it possible that it should be thus with me as it is? How is
it possible that there should be so much deadness, and so much of the world, and unbelief? Surèly the presence of Christ is not with me in my affliction. Answ. I Answer to such a poor soul, that looks after the presence of Christ, and fain would enjoy the pre∣sence of Christ, but cannot see him in affliction; I say first of all, Undoubtedly there is the presence of Christ with thee, and thou canst not but thou mayst see something, if unthankfulnesse doth not lye before thine eyes; he is there, the Lord Jesus is there, and he will make good his word; certainly if he hath promised to be with his people in afflicted conditions, he will make good his word; an he is with thee at the door, though he may be behind the Curtain, and undoubtedly he is not far; as I said be∣fore, Joseph was with his Brethren when they did not know him; and so the Lord Jesus is present with his people, and they do not see him, he doth feed them, support them, and maintain their lives, and they not know it. Secondly, Yea I say secondly, That if thou dost not see more of the presence of Christ, the fault is in thee, 'tis not in the Lord, not in the word of the Lord, he is present according to the word that he hath spoke; and therefore Christ may be present and thou seest him not because through negligence thou dost not stir up thy self to take hold of him, thou givest way to a slothful spirit, and so thou dost not stir up thy self to take hold of him, or else thou dost not exercise faith in thy afflicted condition, and then no wonder though Christ be with thee, and thou seest him not: Faith is the eye of the soul, and if that be shut Christ may stand at the right hand and the soul not discern him: and therefore I say, stir
up thy faith, go to the Lord to strengthen thy faith, and stir up thy faith, Faith shews Christ, represents Christ to the soul; Faith takes hold of Christ, and brings the sweetness and the comfort of his presence to your souls. Or it may may be 'tis through unthankfulnesse, that thou dost not see the presence of Christ, thank thine unthankful heart; I tell thee, thou hst a great deal of thanks to give, and thou sayst Chist i not with thee: who is it that supported thee? who is it that put under his hand? was there more strngth in thee then in others? Surely there was an ever∣lasting Arm put under to support thee in thine af∣fliction; and is not here matter of thankfulnesse? And this you may be sure, all yee people of God, the heart of God is always towards you; though his face is not towards you, his hand may seem to be against you, yet his heart is always towards you; and therefore still, I say, the people of God ought to expect that they shall see and enjoy the presence of Christ▪ and shall meet with him in every afflicti∣on. Fiftly and Lastly, What cause of thankfulnes is here? What cause hath the people of God to be thankful to Christ that hath made this comfortable provision for them (as this?) that he is pleased to walk in such a gracious way, and to afford them most of his presence at that time that they stand most in need of it? Here is matter of thankfuln that the Lord should not leave you alone, but aord you his presence; Here is matter of double thankfulness that the Lord Jesus should not leave you alone in your afflicted condition: Oh 'tis n uncomfortable condition to be left alone; Wo to him hat is alone;
saith the wise man, if a man fall and be alone who shall help him up? and how miserable had it been if we had been left alone in such conditions, in af∣flicted conditions, when we were fallen low? but the Lord hath not left his people alone. Nay, here is further matter of Thankfulness, that he should afford his own presence to his people; If the Lord had sent a Messenger to comfort a poor af∣flicted Creature, we should have thought it a great mercy; but that he should afford his own presence in affliction, that he should come himself to support and strengthen, what a double mercy is this? This is more then if he had sent twelve Legions of Angels to comfort in afflicted conditions: Oh what is the presence of Christ? 'tis the greatest good in the world, 'tis life eternal, 'tis the beginning of Heaven, and shall be the fulness of Heaven hereafter; the fulness of joy, is the presence of Christ, it shall be the great∣est misery to loose the presence of Christ; and there∣fore that is a most dreadful threatning, when God doth threaten to depart from a people; see how God doth threaten Jerusalem, in Jeremiah 6. 8. Be thou instructed Oh Jerusalem, least my soul depart from thee, least I make thee a desolate land, not inhbited, Least my soul depart fom thee: Now when God departs, what follows? nothing but desolation; So in the Prophet Hosea, see there what a dreadful threatning 'tis for God to depart, in Hosea 9. 12. Though they bring up their children yet well I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left; yea w also to them when I depart from them: There is all threatnings summd up in this, and more cannot be said (w unto them when I depart from them.) You see it will be the great∣est evil in the world to be shut out from the presence
of God it shall be the Torment in Hell so depart from Christ: Why then 'tis the greatest mercy to en∣joy the presence of Christ; if God go away, all bles∣sings go away with him; Wo to them if I depart, now on the contrary, when the Lord Jesus comes unto a soul, all blessings come along with him; when Christ comes to a poor afflicted creature, Oh what sweet∣ness comes along with Christ? there is comfort, and there is refreshment, there is grace, and there is ho∣liness, and there is support, there is life and light, all come along with the presence of Christ. Object. Ay but if I could finde the effects of these, may some soul say, I shall labour to thirst after Christ, if I could finde these effects of Christs presence, why then I may be comforted, but alass I finde not the effect of his presence, and how then should I think it to be his pre∣sence that is with me? Answ. I say Believe; Believe that Christ is present with thee; I speak to every soul that hath made a close with Jesus Christ in the tenders of grace; I say, 'tis thy duty to believe that he is with thee in thy af∣flicted condition: Believe it, though thou seest not the effects of his presence, and that is the way to see; believe that he is present according to his word, and through the grace of God, thou shalt see the effect of his presence; only Christ would have us to believe his word, Christ would have thee believe that he keeps time and place with them, and that he is with them in afflicted conditions; yea he deals with his people as Jobs friends dealt with him, they came to visit Job in his affliction, but sate them down seven days, and spake not a word unto Job, and at last they found an oportunity to speak; even so doth Jesus Christ, it may be he may sit seven days and not speak
a word to his people, he may come to the soul, and not speak a word to the foul in an afflicted condition; all the time he sits by them, and looks on them, and his heart is toward them, and his bowels relent, and he will break out at last, and he will speak unto them; it was long ere Joseph did reveal himself to his bre∣thren, when they were in straits, but at last he breaks out, and says he, I am your brother; and so the Lord Jesus he may sit long before he speaks a word; O but at last he will break out, and then shalt thou see that Christ was present with thee; and therefore 'tis thy duty to believe that the Lord Christ is with thee in thy affliction, though thou seest him not, though he be behind the Curtain; and believe that thou shalt see the effect of his presence, he will not go away and leave no blessing behind him; surely where he comes he brings a gift with him, he does not come empty; and therefore believe that thou shalt see a blessing left behind; it may be thou mayst not see e gracious effects of the presence of Christ in thee, but believe the time is coming when thou shalt see; a friend may come with a Present to a friend, but no presently give it him, it may be he will sit with him a long time, and when he is ready to go away he will give the gift to him; and so the Lord Jesus Christ, he never comes empty, and he comes and sits long be∣fore he gives out that grace, that strength, that com∣fort, that is in his hand ready to give, but undoubt∣edly Christ will give it before he goes away; and therefore 'tis the duty of all his people to wait upon him for the giving of that grace that he hath promi∣sed to their ouls; and therefore when Christ comes to a soul, manifesting of himself is expressed to the soul by his supping with the soul, see Revel. 20. Be∣hold
I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will com in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me: If any man open the door, I will come in and sup with him; he doth not say, I will come in and break-fast with him, or Dine with him, no, he shall have my comforts be∣fore I go away, though I be at the last Meal, I will be sure to sup with him, though he break his fast with sowre herbs and dine with sowre herbs, yet I will be sure to sup with him, and he with me; before I go away I will open my Bottels, and pour out my Flagons of Wine, and he shall taste of my Dties before I go; and therefore the Martyrs cryed out, He is come, he is come, meaning the gracio pre∣sence of Christ to their souls; the Lord Jesus will at last manifest himself to his people, and will be pre∣sent with them in their afflicted conditions, accord∣ing to his word: and 'tis the Lord Jesus his will, that his people should expect his presence, though he do not give it out to them presently, yet wait for it, and he will abundantly satisfie your souls before he go away. FINIS.
A SERMON Preached in Norwich, upon the day of the Mayors entring into his Office. ECCLES. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdome in the grave, whither thou goest. WE shall not seek far for the sence of the words, we shall finde the sence in themselves: Some conceive that Solomon spake in the person of the natural man, or the Atheist, who keep this Counsel; Follow after the world, enjoy thy pleasure and thy profit, and do it with all thy might, for thou hast no long time to en∣joy them in; there is nothing in the grave, and therefore now take thy fill. But I rather conceive that Solomon spake here as a Prophet, in the person of a Prophet, and spiritual man, and gives better Counsel then this, from the seventh verse, unto the end of the
Chapter. He gives advice in the seventh verse, to take the comforts of those things that God hath given: And upon this Account, Because the Lord accepts thy works: Goe thy way, eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy works: And so in the ninth verse: Live joyfully with thy Wife whom thou lovest, all the days of the life of thy vanity; not with the Har∣lot, as the Atheist would have spoken; but with the wife whom thou lovest: And so also this Coun∣sel in the Text, seems to be given by Solomon, in the person of a spiritual man: Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, for there is no working in the Grave, &c. The wise man here gives counsel unto all men to improve the time of life, he calls all men to activi∣ty in the time of life: And first he declares where∣in men ought to be active, Whatsoever thy hand findes to do: Whatsoever is in thine hand to do (as some read it) Whatsoever God puts into thy hand to do, in thy general or particular Calling, more especially in the great Affairs that do concern the world to come, whatsoever thy hand finde to do in relation unto the state of Eternity, whatsoever thy hand finde to do; a man finds that sometime which he seeketh, and sometimes that which he seeketh not: After thou hast sought out the mind of God, and dost know what is his will concerning thee; when thy hand hath found out what to do, then do it with thy might; or if the Lord shall pre∣vent thee with his goodnesse, and shall discover his will to thee, when thou soughtest not after it; Oh then give up thy self to work the work of God, and do it with all thy might: And then he shews in
the second place, how men must work these works of God; do it with all thy might, with all diligence, with all faithfulness; lay forth thy self to the very utmost for God; do it with thy might: This he presseth with two Arguments. First, There is no work in the grave, there is no work to be done there, that is the place of rest, tere is no possibility of working; if thou wouldst work afterward, thou canst not, thou shalt not be able to work, there is no possibility of working for God, and for thy soul, when once in the grave; there is no beleeving, there is no repenting, there is no turning to God, when once in the grave; if it be not done before thou comest there, it is like to be undone for ever; There is no work in the Grave. And secondly, as there is no work in the grave, so there is no device, nor knowledge, nor wisdome, there is no means to accomplish work; if there were any work to be done in the grave; there is no means to accomplish this work, there is no know∣ledge in the grave. This Argument is further backed by the consideration of the hastening of that estate of death, where there shall be no possibility of working; there is no work in the grave whither thou goest: He doth not say there is no work in the in the grave whither thou shalt go; but whither thou goest, thou hadst need make hast; for thou art going Thou, and Thou, and every one, thou goest to the grave, thou art making post hast thither, thou art going every moment, thou art every moment stepping over the Threshold of Eternity: And therefore the Result of all is this. Whatsoever God shall lay before thee to be thy
work, whatsoever thou hast to do for God, or for thy soul, in the great business of Eternity, do not dally with it, do not defer it, do not put it off, there is no work in the grave, there is no possibility of working there: If thou wouldst, there is no means to accomplish work there: And this condition is hastning upon thee, thou art stepping into the grave every moment, thither thou goest; there∣fore he saith, what thou doest, do it with thy might. I shall fasten upon this one consideration to pro∣secute at this time. Observat. That it concerns every living man to do with his might, whatsoever he hath to do for God, or for his own soul, in that great business that doth con∣cern Eternity. It concernes every living man and woman, to do with all their might, what ever they have to do with all their might, whatever they have to do for God, or for their own souls in the great business that doth concern Eternity. I shall here shew you, First, what it is for a man to do with his might. Secondly what are those things that God re∣quires of every one of you to be done with your might; And that will make way for the Applica∣tion. First of all, What is to do with thy might? To do with thy might; First, is to do with dili∣gence, to do diligently, to take all opportunities of doing for God; yea seek opportunities, not only embrace opportunities, but seek opportunities of doing for God: Our Lord Jesus Christ went up and down doing good, in the days of his flesh;
he sought opportunities to serve his Father, and to serve the sons of men. The Sun carries his light up and down the world, and visits poor Creatures that are in darkness; when a man is faithful in taking opportunities to do for God, in seeking opportunities, when a man works with diligence, then he works with his might. Again secondly, To do with thy might; to do with a mans might, is to do or work resolutely; to do with resolution, not to be beaten back by dis∣couragements, and by opposition, that doth lye in the way; never did any work meet with so much opposition, as the great work of our Redemption by Christ; But he brake through Divels and all the powers of darkness that were in his way, he did with his might the work of his Father, for he did it with resolution: To go on notwithstanding all storms, all winds that blow, though never so many dangers lay in a mans way, though there seem to be Lions in the way, great enemies, great perse∣cutions, losse of name, losse of estate, losse of friends, to go through evil report, as well as good, to break through the strife of Tongues, and the strife of hands: This is to work Resolutely, this is to do with a mans might. Again thirdly, to do with a mans might, is to do faithfully; when a man works faithfully, and sincerely, when he doth not warp nor turn aside; when he is not byassed nor drawn by the allure∣ments of the world: In the 33. of Deut. it is said that Levi did not know his own Father, nor his own Mother, nor his children: he did the work of God with all his might, for he did it faithfully: And
when the cause of God was in hand, he knew no friend, he knew not his Father, he knew not his children; Get thee behind me Satan, saith Christ to Peter, a dear friend, a chosen Disciple; yet when Peter will disswade Christ from doing the work of his Father, Peter is a Satan, he is an adversary; get the behind me Satan▪ And so, what do you mean to vex my heart? saith Paul, when his friends disswa∣ded him, I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of Christ. When a man works faithfully, then he works with his might. Fourthly, when a man works spiritually, then he works with his might: When his heart goes into the work, when the spirit goes into the work, when a man is content not only to give God the outside, but his heart shall be engaged, and that shall bow to God, and submit to Christ: If he do not find that his heart and spirit is engaged in the work; he cannot be satisfied: It is said of good Josiah, in the 2 of Kings, 23. vers. 25. there was none like to him, there was none like before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his might: He turned with his heart and soul, his heart and Spirit was engaged in it; and therefore now he did it with his might. Fiftly, when a man works with his might he works speedily; I say speedily: Our Lord Jesus did the work of his Father with his migh, and he be∣gan betimes, in the morning; he was called the Hind in the morning; he was hunted betimes in the morning; He began betimes to work the works of his Father: when he was thirteen years of age, he was found disputing among the Doctors, and saith he, Wist you not that I must do the work of my
Father? To begin betimes in the day of youth, to take the best season, the fittest opportunity to do for God; when a man doth speedily, then he doth with his might. Sixthly, When a man doth strenuously, when he doth with all his strength, with all those abili∣ties God hath given him; when he is content that God should have all that he hath; that God should serve himself of the best he hath, and re∣joyce that he hath any thing for God; when a man lays down himself, and lays down all at the foot-stool of God, & saith, Lord take me, and take mine, and improve me to the utmost of thy self; it mat∣ters not what become of the Creature, so God may be glorified; when a man works thus, he works strenuously and with all his might. Seventhly and lastly, when a man works con∣stantly: When a man holds out unto the end, when he is willing to abide with Jesus Christ, yea to abide with Christ in his tribulation; when he is willing to serve the Lord all the six days of his life; when he is content that his works and his life should be finished together, and not one before the other: Thus it was with our Lord Jesus Christ when he was upon the Cross, his work and his life were fi∣nished together▪ when a man works thus to the end, this man works with his might. That is the first Particular, we hasten to the second: You have heard what it is for a man to work with his might. The second follows: What those things are that every man ought to do with his might. I shall speak first to Sinners, and then to Belie∣vers, and shew both their works: Something the
Lord requires of both to be done thus, with all their might. If Sinners ask what is their work? I answer; What the work of sinners is to be done with their might. First, their work is to know themselves: To know that they are poor and miserable, blind and naked, that they are lost and undone; that they are with∣out light, and without life, and without strength, and without hope for eternity; that they have sinned, and cannot satisfie; that they have lost themselves, and cannot return of themselves; that they have done evil, and cannot do better of them∣selves: If free-grace do not prevent them, they are as poor wandring sheep upon the Mountains; they are like to wander, and wander, and wander for ever, till they be separated everlastingly from the Lord, if the good Shepherd of souls do not go forth to seek and save them: That is the first thing that doth concern them to know, seek after this know∣ledg, and that speedily, with all your might. Secondly to know the Lord Jesus; it concerns the sinner to search after the knowledg of Christ, to know that he is the only Mediator between God and man; to know that all pardon, all peace, and all grace, and all strength, and all holinesse, it must come in through the blood of Jesus Christ; that this Lord Jesus is freely held forth to lost sin∣ners; he is tendred by free promise, or Covenant of grace: and that men are invited every where to return to the Lord, to deny themselves, their own works, their own righteousness, their own wor∣thinesse, and to submit to the righteousnesse of the Son of God, that everlasting righteousness that Jesus Christ hath brought in by his blood. To seek after this knowledg of Jesus Christ, is the second
great work that sinners have to do. Thirdly, To beleeve in Jesus Christ; this is an other work: To believe in the name of Jesus Christ, Oh this is the great work! when poor sinners came to Christ, and askt him what work they should do: How they should work the works of God? he tells them, that this is the work of God, To beleeve in the Name of Jesus Christ, Joh. 6. 29. this is the work of God, this is the great work, the first work, all other works are not accepted, till this be done: This is the first born of graces, this is the begin∣ning of the souls strength; and till this be done, all other works are lost, because, without faith, it is not possible to please God; All the time of their continu∣ance in unbelief in the wildernesse, it was a time of temptation and provocation; this is the great work, the work of God, which meets with most opposition; all within a man, and all the powers of darknesse do make against it; and therefore it concerns poor sinners to seek after this great work of God, with all their might; they can never be∣gin too soon, never begin too speedily; it is a migh∣ty work, if you had hundreds of years to live, you would finde time little enough to beleeve in, to ex∣ercise faith in. I shall go no further with sinners, for till this work is done, nothing is accepted. And therefore, Oh that God would perswade the hearts of poor sinners to know that this is their work, To know themselves, and to know Christ, and to be∣leeve in his Name! Oh that the Lord would stir them up to seek after it with their might! But what is the work of Beleevers? What must What Be∣leevers must do with their might. they do with their might? First of all, To seek after further knowledge of
their God, and Communion with him, acquain∣tance with him, fellowship with him; to know more of him in his Attributes, in his Son, in his Word, the mysteries of his Kingdome; to know the truth of the Times, the will of God concern∣ing you. Oh, this is a great work, it concerns you to seek after this with all your might: to wait up∣on God in all means for it. To wait at wisdoms Posts, to climbe upon every Sycamore Tree, where Jesus Christ is wont to pass by; to set your souls under every Golden-Pipe, where there is saving knowledge of Christ to be Communicated to you, or further acquaintance with God; Breath more after him, thus did Da∣vid, in Psal. 63. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh long∣eth for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is; He doth not only thirst; but he longs: Now longing is a mighty strong desire; How dangerous is it to the Creature, if longing be not satisfied? With this desire of longing was Davids soul carried after further acquaintance with God, further en∣joyment of him; That's the first. Secondly, The second work that you have to do with your might, you that have interest in Christ, is to get your hearts fully rooted, and fully esta∣blished upon the promises, that you may not be left at uncertainties in the great matters of your everlasting welfares; to get your hearts built, I say, establihed upon the Promises, rooted in Christ, to get your Acquittance cleered up to you, cleerly written, and wait till the Lord shall teach you to read it; that you may be able to say as the Apo∣stle, in Rom. 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifieth, it is Christ that dyed, and is risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us; I say, you had need be perfect in your evidence for Heaven; there may come a time of darkness, black clouds may come over all your comforts, and pre∣sent enjoyments: a black night of temptation may be upon you, the Divel may cast a mist before your eyes; and therefore you had need be perfect to read your evidence for Heaven, that you may be able to read, and to know your interest in Christ, in such a condition as that is: Oh do this, make hast to do this, do it with your might. Third▪ To serve God in your generation, is another work you have to do with your might; to serve God in your generation is that you have to do, and Oh that you would do it with all your might, to honour and lift up God upon earth, to make him glorious, to lift him up by your praises, to lift him up by your conversations, by your obedience, by your shining in the midst of a crooked and sinful generation: The Lord he hath put his Name upon you Christians for this end; he put his Spirit into you to inable you to this: He expects more from you then from others; the eyes of the world are upon you, and God shall either reap honour, or dishonour by you; therefore it concerns you, I say, to do the work of your generation with all your might, to seek wherein you may be serviceable to the Lord how you may advance his Name: That is the third work, to lift up God by the service of your Generation. Fourthly, It concerns you to get your hearts made sensible of the perishing condition of the
Creature, of the fading condition of all things under the Sun, that you are fading Creatures, your life fades, and comforts fade: The Lord would have you seek with all your might, to have such impressions as these made upon your spirits: 'tis a hard matter to receive them; and therefore God bids the Prophet cry, in Isa. 40. The voice says cry, What shall I cry? all flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the flower in the field, the grass withereth, and the flower fadeth. The Prophet must cry, and cry again, before men will hear this, before this im∣pression will be made upon the spirits of men, That they are fading men, and their comforts are fading; That they are as grass, and their comforts as the grass: You had need live in a continual converse with your fading condition, dye daily, see death at a distance, and grapple with death at a distance: Put your selves into a dying condition, and say of∣ten, Oh! what if this were my last? What if I were now to breath forth my soul? What if now to shoot the Gulf of Eternity? What have I now to rely upon? What have I to carry me through? How shall death be conquered? How shall the sting be taken out for me? You had need I say, converse with death at a distance, and live conti∣nually in the sence of your dying condition; that so death may not be terrible when it comes, that you may know before hand how to conquer it, and that it is conquered by the blood of the Lamb. Fiftly, Another work that you have to do with your might, is to do good to your friends, and to your Relations. Christians, give out the good things to your Relations, and do it speedily, do it with all your might: Impart the knowledge of
God to your Relations, Christ finds Andrew, and Andrew finds Simon Peter; Christ finds Philip, and Philip finds Nathaniel; Oh come, saith he, we have found the Saviour, the Messias, 1 Joh. 41. 45. You have but a little while to be with your Relati∣ons, and they are gone, they are taken from you, and you from them; and therefore with all your might work this work, and do them good, and give out good to your Relations. That is the fifth work that you have to do with all your might. Sixthly, In all your waitings upon God, see that you do there with your might; I say, when ever you wait upon God in every Duty, in every Ordinance, whensoever you draw nigh to God, the Lord re∣quires you should do it with your might. In the second of Samuel, the 13. it is said there, that Da∣vid when he danced before the Ark, he did it with all his might: And so in the second of Chron. 28. It is said there, that David when he offered unto the Lord, he offered with all his might. And so that place, in 2 King. 23. and 25. It is said that King Josiah turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his might; what ever you do in the mat∣ters of God, do it not lazily: If you pray, do it with your might, and if you hear, let it not be done, but with all your might; and if you speak, do with your might; because these are mighty things, and they have relation to the business of Eternity. Seventhly and Lastly; To mortifie your corrup∣tions, to get your lusts mortified, subdued, cast out, your souls more conformable to Christ; this is an other work, and the last work that I shall name, that you Christians and Beleevers have to do, and
that with your might: To get your lusts mortified and subdued; Do it with your might, do not look upon it as an easie matter, as a frivolous business; Do not go out against such Giants with straw and Bulrush: But Oh! get the compleat Armour of God, go forth in the name of Christ, in the strength of Christ, with the blood of Christ, with with the promises of Christ, it is a work of great concernment; and therefore I beseech you do it in good earnest, go out in the Name of the Lord, and do this great work in good earnest, that your corruptions may be mortified, and more of the Image and likenesse of Christ may be imprinted up∣on your Spirits. And thus have I shewed you (my Brethren) what it is for a man to do with his might, and what are those works the Lord puts into your hands to do with all your might: You have heard what works are put into the hands of sinners, and what works are put into the hands of Beleevers: And now I shall make some short Application, and I have two words to speak. First, The one a word of Caution and Directi∣on. The other a word of Exhortation. First in the first place, a word of Caution and Direction is needful; and let this be the first Cau∣tion. That though God call upon you to work with your might, yet he doth not put you upon it, to work to pay your debt, To discharge that great debt of ten thousand Talents of transgressions: My Brethren, if you had a thousand hands to work with, if you could work as much as the very An∣gels, it is not possible you should work so much as should discharge the debt: for you could not pay
the least farthing of that which is owing to God: No, know my Brethren, the Father of mercies hath pittyed poor Creatures, he sent his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ for this end, to marry poor Wid∣dow-souls, that were left in an infinite debt, and could not discharge it; he hath sent his Son to to pay the debt of every widdow-soul, that is con∣tent to be espoused to Christ; he came from Hea∣ven for this end, he wrought with his hands, he had no other way to pay the debt, he left him∣self poor; The Lrd Jesus was rich, but for your sakes he became poor; he had no way to pay the debt, but by working with his hands; he wrought hard, he wrought till he sweat, he wrought till he sweat drops of water and blood; he wrought three and thirty years together, that he might pay this great debt that was owing, that his people did owe to the Father. And therefore take heed you do not go about, to work to discharge your own debt: do not work to pay your debt; but work because your debt is paid and discharged by Jesus Christ. Secondly, Take heed you do not work for your living; God calls upon you to work with your might, but he does not put you upon it to work for your living: Life is not from your works, neither should Christians live upon their works; The life of your joy, and the life of your peace; the life of your comforts, the life of your righte∣ousness, it is not from your works; the Lord never put you upon it, to work for this end: no, Christ hath wrought enough for his people, that they might live as his people: he hath provided for their maintenance, to fill their cup; he hath provided for their cloathing; he put mighty righteousness,
everlasting righteousness upon you; It is not now to do, and live, this is not the Covenant. But the Covenant of grace is, live and do: fetch life from Christ, and then do, and do with all your might, because life is given freely by Christ. Thirdly, God doth not put you upon it to work to purchase love, to purchase favour, or to purchase Heaven: I say, you are not to work to purchase the favour of God by your works, to purchase Hea∣ven by the works of your hands; Alas Adam in innocency could not do it: he could not yearn life by working: And how shall poor Creatures in a fallen estate be able to purchase, and yearn life by their own works? No▪ if you will seek salvation by works, you rest upon your works; and if you rest upon your works, you break your works, and both you and your works are like to be lost for ever: and therefore know my Brethren, you are to do your utmost for God; if you could do ten thou∣sand times more, all is too little for God: But know, that life and salvation is not purchased by your doing; work as much, and do as much for God, be as diligent in doing the work of God as if life were to be purchased by works; but when you have done your utmost, renounce all, and know, that by your own works you are no more nigh to Heaven then the very Publicans and Harlots; It is by the door of grace only, that you must enter in∣to life: That is the third. Fourthly, When God calls you to work with your might, he does not call you to work with your own strength: I beseech you take this Caution along with you, that poor Creatures may not think that they are able to do that which they are called
upon to do: I say, the Lord does not call you to work in your own strength; And therefore know, that without Christ you can do nothing; you are not fit for the least work, for the least duty: All your sufficiency must come down from Heaven: you cannot beleeve, you cannot re∣pent, you cannot obey, you cannot give glory to God, unless this power be given you from on high, you cannot move towards God in any gra∣cious action, unless the Lord comes in with strength: O therefore, when ever you are to work for God, go and set your selves under the promise; the promise of strength and assistance, Go and look for strength to Christ; do not act in your own strength: Oh let your souls open to the breathings of the Spirit of Jesus Christ: The soul never acts graciously, but when it is acted by the Spirit of Christ: Oh know that you are as a Ship becalmed upon the Sea, and you can∣not sayl, till the spirit breath upon you, and fill the sayle of your affections, and carry you God-ward, and Heaven-ward; and therefore let Christ be your strength, wait for his strength, that you may say, Now I live, and yet not I, but it is Christ that liveth in me: I act, and yet not I, it is the Spirit of Christ that acts in me: I pray, and yet not I: I beleeve, and yet not I: I obey, and yet not I, it is the Spirit of Christ that acts in me, it is his strength that helps me. This is the fourth Cau∣tion: I beseech you take heed you do not work in your own strength; you will spoil your works. Fiftly, Take this Caution, do not present your works your selves to God: When you
have done your work, go to Jesus Christ, and desire him to carry your works home: Christi∣ans know, it is not for you to carry your work home, it is the Office of Christ; and there∣fore make use of Christ, and say, Lord present this Sacrifice, this Duty; do thou wash it with thine own blood, and cover it with thine own righteousness: I tell you, your works are not pleasing, unless they come out of the hands of Jesus Christ; Christ must wash your works, and perfume your works, and sweeten your works, and present your works with acceptation to the Father; and therefore when you have wrought with all your might, let Jesus Christ present it to God your Father, and his Father. Sixtly, Take heed that when you work with all your might, you work not for your own end: I tell you, good works may be spoiled if you work for your own end, if self come in: a man may work the work of a Magistrate, or the work of a Minister, but if self come in, if vain glory be his end, if the praise of men, if his own profit: If the glory of God be not the end he propounds to himself, that man will be called by Christ another day, a worker of iniquity: We have cast out Devils in thy name, and yet saith Christ to them, I know you not, depart from me, ye workers of iniquity Oh this is the dead fly that spoils the Box of Ointment, when a man does it for vain glory, to be seen of men, to get a name in the world, and to raise their estates in the world, when they do publique works for private ends; how ever it seems to be glorious, it is ab∣hominable;
and therefore when ever you work for God, make God your principal: Begin in his strength, and end for his glory. The second word, is a word of Exhortation, and I will conclude with that; let me speak in my former order, first to Sinners, and then to Be∣leevers, and I will be but short. First to Sinners, You that have not yet wrought the work of God; you that have not given up your names to Christ, in whose heart the great work of faith is not yet wrought, You that are found this day working the works of darkness, the works of iniquity; Let me speak a word to you, let me reason with you thus, in the name of the Lord Jesus, my Master, and yours: What do you think of it my dear friends? does it not concern you? Is not this a work put into your hands, to seek after an interest in Jesus Christ? to beleeve in his name, to give up your selves unto him? is not this work that is put into your hands, that God hath given you to do in this moment of your life? Doth it not concern you to beleeve in the name of Christ, think you? Without faith it is not possible to please God: If you be found in a way of unbelief, you are found in the way of wrath: It is said the wrath of the Lord does hang over the heads of unbeleevers: If in a state of unbelief, you are in an estate of wrath; if in an estate of unbelief, you are lost, and your works are lost; whatsoever you do without faith, your works cannot be accepted; without faith you cannot please God, without faith you cannot enter into life: And now what think
you my dear friends, is it not a work that con∣cerns you, to seek after faith in Jesus Christ? If you grant it, let me further urge it upon you; Oh if this be your work, then do it with your might: Oh that the Lord would stir up your hearts to do it with your might; There is but a moment to seek faith in, there is but a moment to seek after an interest in Christ; and if this be not done now, O when shal it be done? If it be not done now, it is like to be undone for ever: there is no work in this kind in the grave; there is no repenting in the grave, no beleeving in the grave; there is no turning to God in the grave: Oh that the Lord would perswade your hearts of a necessity of seeking after Christ, and getting an interest in him; and do it I beseech you speedily, and diligently; the Lord hath put it into your hand, and therefore now seek after an interest in Christ with all your might. To you that have an interest in Christ, I shall say no more, but what I said before: I laid you your work before you, get more acquaintance with God; get your hearts established upon the truth of the promises, that you may not be left at uncertainties; and lift up God in your gene∣rations; and get your hearts made sensible of your frailty, to dye daily, to wait upon God with all your might in Ordinances; to get your hearts subdued, and your corruptions mortified: This is your work; and Oh that the Lord would help you to do it with all your might. To you that are the Fathers of the City: I have one word to you from the Father of
Heaven: Oh that the Lord would make you wil∣ling to receive it, and to do it with all your might: There is something that is your work, that the Lord requires you should do with all your might: I shall but briefly give you a few hints, and shal leave it to the blessing of the Lord. First of all, There is a work of Judgment and Justice that the Lord hath put into your hands: I say, the first work that God hath put into your hands, it is a work of Justice, to punish sin; to punish sin is the work that is in your hand to do, to puish the breaches of the moral Law, and the contempts thereof: that Law of nature which is written in the heart of all men, the Lord hath put it into your hand to punish the breach of this Law: What ever your hand finds to do in this case, I beseech you do it faithfully, do it with your might: God requires it of you, that you should do it with your might; yea let your hand find out sinners, let your hand do this work of the Lord, to punish the drunkards, and the swearers, and the prophane persons, the decei∣ver, the lyar, and the stealer, and all other wor∣kers of iniquity: here is no fear of smiting Christ; smite here and spare not; where there is no dan∣ger of smiting Christ, smite on and spare not, do it with all your might; the Lord lays it before you as your duty. Secondly, There is a work of Righteousness and Equity, that the Lord puts into your hands to do: and Oh that you would do this also with all your might: to judge betwixt man and man; do it faithfully, to accept no mans person, to know
no friend in the matter of Justice, but to decide every mans cause with wisedom, and with faith∣fulnesse, and with sincerity; not to know Father, nor Brother, nor Son, nor Daughter, as Levi did not in the cause of God: That so Justice and Righteousness may run down as a mighty stream: That there may be no oppression, that there may be no complaining in our streets; This is the second work that the Lord puts into your hand: And Oh that you would do it with your might. The third work is a work of Mercy; There is a work of mercy; the Lord puts into your hands to relieve the poor, and the needy, and the fa∣therless, to take care that the poor be provided for, that they may have work, that they may have employment, and that they may have main∣tenance; this is a work of mercy, that the Lord puts into your hands to do: Oh it is one of the crying sins of England; it is the sin of the whole Land; and Oh that it were not the sin of this City, that the poor are not yet imployed and provided for; that God would put it into your hearts to do it: Oh that some blessed hand might find out this way to employ the poor; this would be an acceptable work of mercy: Know that the Lord hath given you something for the poor, though I think every man hath a propriety in his estate, yet I also think that God hath given every man something for the poor: and truly before God, the poor hath a right in it, though not to take, yet it is your duty to give, and to provide for them: And I fear if this work do not go through the whole land, that there be not
some provision made for the work of the poor, and for the relief of the poor; That God will le∣vel this Land, and that God will bring down all the pomp and pride, and stain the glory of all flesh in it; this is a work of mercy. There is a fourth work; and that is a work of Piety that God puts into your hand, to seek the good of poor souls; to provide that all that are under your power in this City, may be instruct∣ed in the knowledg of the Lord Jesus, to send in∣to the dark corners, (the Suburbs of this City, and not only to confine men to the heart of the City) but send to them that will not come out for it: The Lord Jesus came to seek as well as to save; and therefore send forth to seek them; they know not what they do in rejecting the means of life: But Oh send to seek them, and instruct them in the knowledge of the Lord, that they may not perish for want of provision: And what though (my Fathers and Brethren) every man cannot see his way clear to take a Pastoral charge of such a people, where he knows there is but little of Christ, yet if he do the work, what though he do it not under that notion: If he preach Christ to them, if he bleed for them; If his desires be to instruct them, and be willing to instruct them in publique and private, and to pray for them, that the Lord would give them re∣pentance, and bring them into the number of Christs Sheep-fold: I say, if this work be done, what though it be not done under that notion? why should the work of the Gospel be hindred? If in all other things men be conscientious, and
able, and fit to teach and instruct the people in the knowledg of Jesus Christ, this will be a work of Piety,, to send into the dark corners of the City, that there may be no place in which the word of the Lord shall not be heard. There is a work of Love to Christ, and of wise∣dome to your selves, and I will name no more; I commend this to you, as the last; And Oh that your hand would finde to do it, a work of love to Christ, and of wisedom to your selves; And that is to protect the Saints, and those that have an interest in Christ, and desire to walk unblama∣bly before you, if they be such as walk according to the Law of God, and not disobey the Law of Magistracy, it is the work of the Magistrates to protect them: The Magistrate is set up to be a praise to them that do well; What though they may differ from you in particular opinions? I am prswaded it will not excuse before Christ, not to have protected them: If you be convinced that they are such as fear the Lord, and desire to walk conscientiously, It is your work to be a wall to them, and to protect them, so they walk regu∣larly, and in the fear of the Lord: The people of God, they are the strength of the Land, who ever they be, they are the strength of the Land, they are the strength of a City; They protect you, and therefore it is your work to protect them. The godly in a City, they protect the City, they are the safety of the City; God said he could not destroy Sodom, so long as Lot was there, and could do nothing so long as righteous Lot was among them; they are the strength of a
City: I beseech you see what is said in the second of Zechariah, verse 5. And the Governours of Ju∣dah shall say in their hearts, the inhabitants of Jeru∣salem shall be my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God: Such as fear the Lord of all ranks, they are the strength of the City, and the time is a com∣ing, when the Governours of Judah shall say so, The inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God; they have great in∣terest in God, and therefore they are my strength, they are the strength of the Governours, and they are the strength of the City: And now let me say to you as Paul said to Agrippa, Beleeve you this? (Oh you Fathers of the City) do you be∣leeve this, that the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, they are your strength, and the strength of the City in the Lord of Hosts their God? do  beleeve this? I know you beleeve it,  the Lord will cause you all to beleeve  people of God, what ever they be, they are  strength of the City: you shall say it one day, all the Governors of Judah shal say That the Inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem are my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God: And now I have humbly pre∣sented this Counsel, as from the Lord: I have laid before you what is your work, 1. There is a Work of Justice. 2. A Work of Equity. 3. A Work of Mercy. 4. A Work of Piety. 5. A Work of Love to Christ in the protecti∣on of his people; And a work of Wisedom to your selves, which will be your strength.
And now let me say to all Christians, and Christian Magistrates; Let me say to you all, what ever is your work, what ever is in your hand to do: Oh that the Lord would help you to do it with all your might: What is in your hand to do as Christians, as Magistrates; Oh that the Lord would help you to do it with all your might! I shall not need to press it further upon you both, as Christians: The Devil worketh with all his might, and shall not Christians work with their might, and Magistrates work with their might? He goes about night and day seeking whom he may devour, and shall not you go about night and day, seeking whom you may save? And seeking whom you may punish, for contemning the Law of the Lord your God? The Divel com∣passes the earth, (Whence comest thou? I come from assing the earth) And Oh shall not Christians  ith all their might, when Satan doth with all his might? sinners do with all their might, and shall not Christians do with their might? It is said of sinners, That they draw iniquity as with Cart-ropes; It is the expression of the Prophet, and in the seventh of Micah, it is said, they sin with both hands; they do evil with both hands, aye, earnestly, and they do it with both hands; and if they sin with both hands, shall not Christi∣ans do good with both hands? Shall they sin with all their might, and shall not you do the work of God with all your might? Let me say further to you, Christ did the work of the Father with all his might, and your work with all his might, (the work of your salvation)
he wrought three and thirty years together, he sweat hard: And Oh! shall not you in a way of love, in a way of obedience, labour to do for God with all your might, seeing Christ hath done for you with all his might? Let me say to you, you are not put upon it, to work for life, and righ∣teousness, or for Heaven: but only to express your thankfulnesse, your love, and obedience; and therefore well may you work for God, you have a great deal of work, and you have but a little time to do it: Sinners you are hastning to the grave: Oh work for God with all your might. Christians you are hastning to the grave: Ma∣gistrates, you are hastning to the grave; Oh then do what ever you find to do for God, with all your might: There is no work as a Magistrate nor as a Minister, nor as a Christian, in the grae, whither thou art going; here is all the working time that you shall have for eternity, you have six days to work in: And you that are Beleevers, shall have a long rest, you may well work a while, though you sweat hard for it; there is no more time to work in, but a long time to rest in▪ an everlasting Rest, eternity of Rest, that shall ne∣ver have an end: your rest is long; And Oh make hast, there is no possibility of working more for God hereafter: If you do not finish your work now, you cannot finish it in the grave: You had need work, the Candle is set up, and you have but little of the Candle left: Oh if you do not finish this work of God before this Can∣dles end be out, there is▪ nothing but darknesse
in the grave: There is no wisedom, no device, &c. If there were work, you could not see: But there is no beleeving, no repenting, no doing for God, no further time to be serviceable to God; but a time of receiving for the Saints, and a time for the wicked to be punished: And there∣fore, What ever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor wisedom, in the grave, whither thou goest. And so much for this time. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge 1. line 12. read seemeth. p. 4. l. 17. r. bonds. p. 5. l. 15. r. act p. 6. l. 10. r. was. p. 9. l. 22. r. grave. p. 11. l. 31. r. the. p. 16. l. 5. r, they, for now. p. 17. l. 28. r. this. p. 21. l. 15. blot out as, r. in as dye. p. 41. l. 26. r. open. p. 43. last. v. r. get. p. 49. last v. blot out time. p. 68. l. 27. r. grace p. 73. l. 6. r. whether. p. 74. last v. r. superstition. p. 75. l. 7. r. past. and l. 9. r. not. p. 77. l. 13. r. though, and l. 25. r. to. p. 78. l. 18. r. terrible. and l. 30, r. in a. p. 81. l. 27. blot out either. p. 93. l. 25. r. done. p. 99. l. 6. r. off. and l. 28. r. his. p. 100. l. 3 and 4. blot out the thought of. p. 101. l. 5. r. but for that. p. 103. l. 30. r, adversity. p. 107, last line but one, r. to us. p. 115. l. 29. r. whether. p. 119. l. 10. r. our. p. 121. l. 22. r. condition. p. 125. l. 19. r. comforting. p. 130. l. 22. r. Lo, for Low. p. 132. l. 2. r. quiet. p. 133. l. 6. blot out been, and put it into the end of the next line, and l. 8. r. Jonah, last line but one, r. impro∣bable for impossible. p. 135. l. 24. r. so it might. and l. 26. r. keep. p. 143. l. 18. r. without God. p. 144. l. 32. r. encou∣ragements. p. 148. l. 28. r. Father. p. 149. l. 14. r. they, for their. and l. 16. r. their for thy. and l. 21. r. contrary to their. p. 150. l. 27. r. deliver his poor. p. 154. l. 23. r. poor. p. 156. last line but one, r. are. p. 160. l. 4. r. be though. p. 161. l. 22. r. puts. p. 162. l. 2. r. Lord. p. 164. l. 26. r. Gods p. 165. l. 17. r. fed. p. 166. last line, r. need to. p. 173. l. 5. A Goldsmith. p. 181. l. 11. r. relations.
