B1320 11687548 48167
NOW OR NEVER, The Holy, Serious, Diligent Believer Justified, Encoura∣ged, Excited and Directed: And the Opposers and Neglecters Convinced by the Light of Scripture and Reason. By Richard Baxter. To be Communicated by such as want ability or opportunity them∣selves to plead the Cause of Serious Holiness for mens Conviction. Luk. 7. 35. But wisdom is justified of all her children. Nihil est ad defendendum Puritate tutius: nihil ad dicendum Veritate facilius. Ambros. LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1662.
The Contents. IN the Preface: the Question resolved, Whether a Man may be saved in any Re∣ligion, that is serious in practising it? No Religion will save a man that is not true to it, & serious & diligent in practising it. Why the Author rather publisheth such com∣mon necessary things, than confutation of the many calumnies publisht against himself. His expectations from men: And answer with Tertullian about sufferings. An Advertisement about a passage cited out of the Homilies. His Justification for opposing scorners & ene∣mies of Holiness, out of the Church Homilies. A Passage about Philip Nerius, the Father of the Oratorians. The Text opened. Doct. 1. The work of this life cannot be done when this life is ended. Doct. 2. Therefore while we have time, we must do the work of this present life, with vigour and diligenee. 1. Time cannot be recalled. 2. Life shall never be here restored. 3. There is no doing this work in the life to come. What it is to [do it with our Might] some cautions. Instances of the work to be done with our might. Obj. What Might have we? Answered. How to rouse up our selves to seriousness. What to think of them that oppose a holy se∣rious diligence in the service of God.
The greatness of the sin. Especially if they are Preachers. What it is in Religion that Hypocrites hate. Seneca's testimony for seriousness. A terrible passage in our Homilies against Scorners at godliness. The greatness of their sin. Obj It is not Godliness, but humour, faction, disobedience, hypocrisie, &c. Answered. Advice to the flocks. Obj. Be not righteous overmuch, Answered. Exhortation to serious diligence. Obj. 1. I have lost my Time, Answered. Obj. 2. I have opposition and hinderances. Obj. 3. I am dull and cold. Directions and Cautions. Reasons for pleading this cause with Ministers. The Exhortation re-inforced. The Devils designe to make use of Differen∣ces in smaller matters against Christianity and Godliness it self. Such differences, sects, divisions, shall be no excuse to the ungodly, but aggravate their sin, as being against that which all Sects and Parties were agreed in. What that Religion is that we call men to be serious and diligent in. 1. To live ac∣cording to the Principles of Faith that among Christians are past controversie: Ten named. 2. To do that Materially that all are agreed of: Ten duties named. 3. To do that in the very Manner of Gods service that all are agreed in. Ten par∣ticulars mentioned.
Obj. I will never believe that God delights in long and earnest prayers, or is moved by the words of man. Answered. Obj. Is not your strict observation of the Lords Day a Controversie? Answered. The Conclusion exhortatory. The Preface. IT is a question more boldly than accurately de∣bated by many; [Whether a man may not be saved in any Religion, that is faithful to the principles of it by serious diligent practice?] The true Solution is this: Religion is that which men hold and do to serve and please God. 1. If men make themselves a Religion of serving Idols or Devils instead of God. 2. Or if they place their ser∣vice to God himself in things that are evil (as what evil is there that some men have not brought into their Religion, and fathered upon God?) the more diligent such men are in their Religion, the more they sin. 3. Or if they make themselves a Religion of irrational ludicrous ceremonies, their greatest diligence in this will not save them. 4. Or if they hold all the Essentials of the true Religion, except some one, it cannot save them while one thing is wanting, which is Essential to that Reli∣gion, and so necessary to salvation (which is the case of real Hereticks:) For they are not indeed of that Religion, if they want that which is Es∣sential to it. 5. Or if they hold all that is Essen∣tial to the true Religion only Notionally, and hold any thing with it practically, which is contradi∣ctory and inconsistent with it, the soundness of
their Notional belief will not save them from the mortal poison of their practical Heresie or Error. But 1. Whosoever holdeth all that is necessary to salvation, and is serious and diligent in living according thereunto shall be saved, whatever er∣ror he holdeth with it. For if he be serious and di∣ligent in the Practice of all things necessary to salvation, he hath all that is necessary to salva∣tion; viz. in Belief and Practice: And it must needs follow, that his Errors are either not con∣contradictory to the things necessary which he holdeth and practiseth, or that he holdeth not those Errors practically, but notionally, as an opinion, or uneffectual cogitation in a dream, which provokes not to action; and in such a case the error keeps no man from salvation. What is necessary to be believed by them that never hear the Gospel, it so little concerneth us to know, that God hath not thought meet to make it so plain to us, as things that more concern our selves. But as it is certain, that without the Atone∣ments, Satisfaction, and Reconciliation made by Christ, and without new terms of Grace to be judged by, and without his Grace for the perform∣ance of their part, no man can be saved (that hath the use of reason,) so there is so much knowledge necessary to salvation, as is necessary [to engage the heart to love God above all, and sincerely to obey his revealed will, and to prefer the life to come before the transitory pleasures of this life.] Now if any man can prove to me, that those that never heard the Gospel, can thus love God, and the life to come, and obey sincerely, without the knowledge of the person, life, death, resurrecti∣on
of Jesus Christ, and the Declaration of the at∣tractive Love and Goodness of God in him, and in the work of our Redemption, then I should be∣lieve that such Negative Infidels may be saved: For God cannot damn a sanctified soul, that sin∣cerely loveth him. But if the discovery of the Love of God in our Redemption be so necessary a moral means to ingage the heart (now corrupted by sin and creature-love) to the true Love of God, that this cannot be wrought without it; or if Christ give not his Spirit to produce the love of God in any but those that hear the Gospel, and believe in him, then no such persons can be saved by their Religion. For Christ is the way to the Father, and no man cometh to the Father but by him; and and the Love of God is absolutely and of its self necessary to salvation; and Faith in Christ is so far necessary to salvation, as it is necessary to bring men to the love of God, as pardoning sin and reconciled to them. But if any should never so confidently conclude, that some that hear not of Christ may be saved, yet he must needs confess that the want of this clear and great discovery of the love and goodness of God, in his pardoning grace, and of the glori∣ous life which he hath prepared for us, must needs make the love of God a very rare and difficult thing, and consequently their salvation rare and difficult in comparison of ours. The Christian Faith, is [The believing an e∣verlasting life of happiness to be given by God (with the pardon of all sin) as procured by the sufferings and merits of Jesus Christ, to all that are sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and do persevere
in love to God, and to each other, and in a holy and heavenly conversation.] This is saving Faith and Christianity, if we Consent as well as Assent. All that was necessary to salvation to be believed, was formerly thought to be contained in the Creed, and that was the test or symbol of the Christian Faith; and Christian Religion is the same, and hath the same rule, and test, & symbol in all Ages. But since Faction and Tyranny, Pride &. Covetous∣ness became the masters of the Religion of too ma∣ny vice and selfish interest hath commanded them to change the Rule of Faith by their additions, & to make so much necessary to salvation, as is neces∣sary to their affected Vniversal Dominion, and to their Commodity and carnal ends. And since Fa∣ction entred, and hath torn the Church into many Sects (the Greek, the Roman, the Armenian, the Jacobites, the Abassine, and many more) it seemeth meet to the more tyrannical Sect to call these several Religions, and to say that every man that differeth from them in any of their opi∣nions or additions, which they please to call Arti∣cles of Faith, is of another Religion. And if the Word Reli∣gion be taken in this sense, and if all that agree in One Christian Re∣ligion, are said to be of as many Religi∣ons, as differ∣ent opinions, in points that some call ne∣cessary, then I answer the Question thus. And yet when they have divided the Church, and dam∣ned the greatest part of Chri∣stians, and raged with fire and sword against their bre∣thren, they confess themselves that it is no point of faith at all, that it is of Divine right that the Bishop of Rome is St. Peters Successor, and not only of humane right.
And must the Church be divi∣ded, and most be damned for not believing or submitting to a humane Ordinance? If we be of many Religions, is not Popery then a humane Religion? The very words of Smith Bishop of Chalcedon, the chiefest of the English Popish Clergy, are these, Survey c. 5. To us it sufficeth that the Bishop of Rome is St. Peters Successor, and this all the Fathers testifie, and all the Catholick Church believeth, but whether it be jure divino, or humano, is no point of faith.] And how do their Laicks here know what is a point of faith, but by the testimony of their Priests? He is the true Catholick Christian that hath but One, even the Christian Religion: And this is the case of the Protestants, who casting off the additi∣ons of Popery, adhere to the Primitive simplicity & unity: If Papists, or any others, corrupt this Reli∣gion with humane additions and innovations, the great danger of these Corruptions, is, lest they draw them from the sound belief and serious pra∣ctice, of that antient Christianity which we are all agreed in: And (among Papists, or any other Sect) where their corruptions do not thus corrupt their Faith and Practice in the true Essentials, it is certain that those corruptions shall not damn them. For he that truly believeth all things that are essential to Christianity, and liv∣eth accordingly with serious diligence, hath the promise of salvation: And it is certain
that what error that man holdeth, it is either not inconsistent with true Christianity, or not pra∣ctically, but notionally held, and so not inconsist∣ent as held by him: For how can that he inconsist∣ent which actually doth consist with it? If a Papist or any other Sectay do seriously love God, and his Brother, and set his heart upon the life to come, and give up himself to the me∣rits and Grace of Jesus Christ, and the sanctifi∣cation of the holy Spirit, to be fitted for that glo∣ry, and liveth by faith above the world, and mor∣tifieth the desires of the flesh, and liveth wilfully in no known sin, but presseth after further degrees of holiness, I doubt not of the salvation of that person: No more then of the life of him that hath taken poison but into his mouth and spit it out a∣gain, or let down so little as nature and antidotes do expel. But I will not therefore plead for poi∣son, nor take it, because men may live that thus take it. Having answered this great Question Reader, I am now come up to the subject of my following discourse, and to tell thee that though it be a great question whether serious diligence in a corrupt Religion will save a man, it is past all question, and agreed on by all sides, that no Religion will save a man that is not serious, sincere and diligent in it. If thou be of the truest Religion in the world, and art not true thy self to that Religion, the Re∣ligion is good, but it is none of thine. Objectively thou art of a true and good Religion, the things in themselves are true and good; but subjectively, thou art sincerely of no Religion at all; for if thou art not serious, hearty and diligent in it, it is cer∣tain
that thou dost not truly entertain it, and make it thine; but it is thy Books that have the true Religion, or thy tongue or fantasie, or brain, but not thy heart, and the best meat on thy table, or that goeth no further then thy mouth, will never feed thee, or preserve thy life. So certain is the salvation of every holy mortified Christian, and so certain the damnation of every ungodly, world∣ly, fleshly sensualist that I had a thousand fold ra∣ther have my soul in the case of a godly Anabap∣tist, yea or a Monk or Fryar among the Papists that liveth a truly heavenly life, in the love of God and man, and in a serious diligent obedience to God according to his knowledge, then in the case of a Protestant, or whomsoever you can imagine to be rightest in his opinions, that is worldly, and sensual, and a stranger (if not an enemy) to the power and serious practice of his own profest Re∣ligion, and void of a Holy and Heavenly heart and life. If ever such a man be saved, the princi∣ples of all Religion do deceive us. And certainly such mens hypocrisie doth aggra∣vate their sin, and will encrease their misery. So many as there be in the world, that profess them∣selves Christians, and yet are not serious and di∣ligent in their Religion, but are ungodly negle∣cters or enemies of a holy life, so many Hypocrites are in the world. And I wonder that their con∣sciences call them not Hypocrites, when they stand up at the Creed, or profess themselves Be∣lievers: though the Congregation seeth not [hy∣pocrite] written in their foreheads, God seeth i written on their hearts, and those that converse with them may see it written in their lives. And
yet these men are the forwardest to cry out a∣gainst Hypocrites: The Devil hath taught it them to stop the suspition and the chase of consci∣ence, as he hath taught the greatest Schismaticks or Church-dividers the Papists) to cry out most a∣gainst Schism and division, and pretend to unity. But these shifts do blind none but fools, and for∣saken consciences; and the cheat that is now de∣tected by the wife, will quickly by God be detect∣ed before all the world. Till then lt them make merry in their deceits: who would envy the drunk∣ard the pleasure of an hours swinish sick delight? This is their portion, and this is their time: As we have chosen and covenanted for another portion, we are content to stay the time assigned, till God shall tell them & all the world, who was sincere & who the hypocrite. For our parts, we believe that he is most or least sincere, that is most or least se∣rious in the practice of his own profest Religion. For my part, I must profess that (by the mercy of God) I have made it the work of many a year, to look about me and think wherein the feli∣city of man doth indeed consist: And I have long been past doubt (as much as I am that I am a man) that it is not in transitory sensual delights; and that these are such lean and dry commodities, and pittiful pleasures, leaving men so speedily in a forlorn state, that I am contented that my greatest enemy have my part of them. I have renounced them to God (as any part of my felicity) and I renounce them to men: Let them do with me about these things as God will give them leave. I will have a portion after death, or Ie have none.
And the case is so palpable, that it is my admi∣ration that the contrary deceit is consistant with the nature and reason of a man; and that so ma∣ny Gentlemen and Scholars and persons of an ingenuous education, can no better distinguish, and can possibly conquer their reason so easily with the presence or sensual delights, and so easily make nothing of that which will be to morrow and for ever, meerly because it is not to day. Well. I must say the Wisdom and Justice of God is abun∣dantly seen in the Government of the world with the Liberty of the will, and determining that all men should speed as they choose. It may be the Reader will say, be expected that instead of writing such popular discourses, I should have vindicated my self against the accusations, that in multitudes of Libels and Pamphlets are scattered abroad against me. But doth he think that man is seriously a Christian that is not more zealous for God and Religion, and the souls of men, then for himself? Have I nothing else to do with my time & labour, but plead cause of my own which God will so speedily and effectually plead? Will it not be time enough to be justified at the Bar and day of God? I am content that they carry it as they desire till then (were it not more for their own and other mens sakes then mine) Am I like to for∣sake my life & all for Christ, & endure torments if I were called to it, if I cannot endure to be re∣viled and slandered by passionate men? Was it for nothing that our Lord would not answer for himself when he was accused before Pilate? Shall they be able to calumniate under the threat∣nings of the Revenge of Heaven? and shall
I not be able to be silent under such a promise, as Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12. The servant of the Lord must not strive! Our Lord gave us an example of not reviling again, when he was reviled: He made himself of no reputation, but endured the cross and contradiction of sinners, despi∣sing the shame. I confess I think when Gods interest, and the good of others doth require it, a man should not be wanting to his own defence, and I have long ago written that which will satisfie the impartial: But when I saw that it is like to tend to heats, and set more on work, I had rather let men call me all the names they can devise, and voluminously accuse me of any thing that malice shall suggest, then do any thing to foment conten∣tions in the Church. But if God convince me that it is my duty to detect the calumnies of man, it is a work soon done. But what good will it do the world for me to o∣pen the numerous untruths, that other men have published, or to confute every Script; when all that I converse with are satisfied already, and believe not the reproaches; and all the evidence in the world will not satisfied those that will not read it, or are resolved by their malice or inte∣rest never to be satisfied? For my part, I doubt not but God and their con∣sciences will give them such a Confutation as shall be sufficient to them and me to end the con∣troversie. My work is to plead the Cause of God and ho∣liness against the profane and sensual world, and no further to plead any Cause of my own, then is necessary to that. If I must bear the effects of
mens displeasure, I had an hundred times rather it were for pleading for Holiness, and Love, and Peace, and Concord, against impiety, uncharita∣bleness, and divisions, then for defending my self, or upon the account of Ceremonies or smaller mat∣ters. And if for these I bear it, I doubt not of more comfort at the present, much less do I doubt of a better issue then false accusers can expect. We shall be shortly upon even ground: The time is short: The pleasures of sin, the triumphs of ma∣lice, the sufferings of innocency, are but for a moment. I envy them not so short and dark day: The Judge is at the door that will judge all a∣gain, and set all strait, and judge in righteousness. When I am afraid of leaving a noisom and un∣righteous world, and ending all my pain and trouble, and being beyond the reach of malice, then I will fear what man can do. Let them keep me out of heaven, or deprive me of my peace and comfort if they can: If they fear not the threat∣nings of God against the malicious and unjust; surely I have less reason to fear their threat∣nings. When they have done their worst to others, let them save themselves from death if they can: I am devoted to God, and I never yet found cause to repent it: I am resolved to use the utmost of my power for the interest of Holiness, Charity and Peace, and for loyalty to the King, and obedience or patient submission to Superiors: And if yet I bear the fruits of fury, let those that insult over sufferers, as if they were therefore guilty or miserable, remember that we could have avoided it if we would, and could have found the way of applause and prosperity as
well as they; and that no man takes that for his misery which he chooseth! If this kind of preach∣ing or writing offend, could not I have avoided it? I am not in love with sufferings from men, nor will I escape them at the rates of Gods displeasure. I never think my self in the highest form of christi∣ans, till I am more conform to the sufferings of Christ, and have endured more then yet I have. It is the Christians old Apology in Tertul∣lian: Quasi non totum quod in nos potest∣is nostrum si Arbitrium Certe si velim Christianus sum tunc ergo me damnabis: si damnari velim: Quum vero quod in me potes, nisi velim non potes jam meae voluntatis est quod potes, non tuae potestatis: Proinde & vulgus vane de nostra vexatione gaudet. Proinde & nostrum est gaudium quod sibi vendicant, qui malumus damnari quam a Deo excidere. Contra, illi qui nos oderunt, dolere non gaudere debebant, consecutis nobis quod eligimus.] Tert. Apologet. cap. 39. That is, As if all that you can do against us were not our own choice! (or will) Certainly it is because I will that I am a Christian, there∣fore if I will be condemned, then thou wilt condemn me. And when that which thou canst do against me, thou canst not do, unless I will; it is not now from thy power that thou canst do it, but from my will: And therefore the vulgar do in vain rejoyce at our vexation. And therefore it is our joy, which they challenge to themselves, while we had rather be condemned then fall from God. On the contrary they that hate
us should grieve and not rejoyce while we attain but what we choose. For my part, if the world will needs be mad, I think both the laughing and the weeping Philo∣sopher are more excusable then he that would be over-angry at them, or over-busie in disputing with them; saith Seneca [Quare fers aegri rabiem & phrenetici verba? nempe quia videntur nescere quid faciunt. Quid interest quo quis∣que, vitio fiat imprudens? Sen. de Ira. l. 3. c. 26. Anger and phrensie are but several wayes of a mans losing his wit; and therefore he that can bear with one, should somewhat bear with the other: (Though indeed voluntariness, or in∣voluntariness maketh a great difference.) It is not worth a man's time and labour and cost to be over solicitous in his own vindication, let the world say of him what they please. [Multum temporis ultio absumit. Multis se injuriis objicit, dum unam dolet. Diutius irascimur omnes quam laedimur.] Sen. de Ira. l. 3. c. 27. Revenge takes up a deal of time: He that com∣plaineth of one injury, objects himself to many. We are all angry longer thn we ae hurt. I have truly given you now the Reasons, why I rather choose to speak these common necessary things, against the Devils party, the ungodly, the enemies, or neglecters of serious Holiness, (agreeable to the subject of his Majesties Chri∣stian and excellent Declaration against Debau∣chery at his entrance upon his Royal Goverment) then to meddle with any of the contending parties of these times (who are so angry because in obedi∣ence to authority I once endeavoured to re∣concile
them) or to be unseasonable in pleading any cause that is my own. And now referring the Reader to this short Discourse, I must first desire that he misunderstand me not in one or two passa∣ges. 1. That my citation of the passage in the Ho∣miles, be not taken as if I spoke a word against it, though I say, I dare not my self subscribe it: For though I think my self, that seeing a perse∣cutor like Saul may repent, and be pardoned; a mocker at Godliness may Repent and be forgiven also: Yet I am resolved still to suspect my own understanding, rather then to speak against the doctrine of the Church. 2. Think it not strange that I reprehend even Ministers that are secret, or open opposers of a holy diligence: For our foresaid Homily tel∣leth us, as followeth: Hom. for Inform, &c, part 2. p. 150, 251. [Examples of such scorners, we read in 2 Chron. When the good King Hezekiah in the beginning of his Reign had destroyed Idolatry, purged the Temple, and Re∣formed Religion in his Realm, he sent Mes∣sengers into every City to gather the people to Jerusalem to solemnize the feast of Easter in such sort as God hath appointed. The Posts went from City to City—And what did the people think ye? Did they laud and praise the name of the Lord that had given them so so good a King, so zealous a Prince to abolish Idolatry, and to restore again Gods true Reli∣gion? No, no; the Scripture saith, the people laughed them to scorn, and mocked the Kings messengers. And in the last Chap. of the same Book it is written, that Almighty God having
compassion on his people sent his Messengers the Prophets to them, to call them from their abo∣minable Idolatry and wicked kind of living: But they mocked his Messengers, they despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there was no remedy.]—The wicked peo∣ple that were in the dayes of Noah made but a mock at the Word of God, when Noah told them that God would take vengeance on them for their sins—Lot preached to the Sodomites, that except they repented, both they and their City should be destroyed; They thought his say∣ings impossible to be true; they scorned and mocked his admonitions, and reputed him as an old doting fool: But God—burnt up those scorners and mockers of his holy Word. And what estimation had Christs doctrine among the Scribes and Pharisees? What reward had he among them?—The Pharisees? which were covetous, did scorn him in his Doctrine. O then you see that worldly rich men do scorn the do∣ctrine of their salvation; the worldly wise men scorn the Doctrine of Christ as foolishness to their understandings. These scorners have ever been, and ever shall be to the worlds end. For St▪ Peter prophesied, that such scorners should be in the end before the latter day. Take heed therefore my brethren, take heed: be ye not scorners of Gods most Holy Word: provoke him not to pour out his wrath upon you, as he did upon those Gibers and Mockers: Be not wil∣ful murderers of your own souls.] Thus far the Homily.
And no marvel if Priests may be guilty as well as people, if it be true that is said by the Church in Hom. 3. against peril of idolatry, p. 56, 57. [But a true Preacher to stay this mis∣chief, is in very many places scarcely heard once in the whole year, and somewhere not once in seven year, as is evident to be proved. Further it appeareth not by any story of credit, that true and sincere preaching hath endured in any one place above an hundred years.] But it is evi∣dent that Images, superstition, and worshipping of Images, and idolatry have continued many hundred years.—For preaching of Gods Word (most sincere in the beginning) by process of time waxed less and less pure, and after cor∣rupt, and last of all altogether laid down and left off, and other inventions of men crept in place of it.—So that Laity and Clergy, lear∣ned and unlearned, all ages, sects, and degrees of men, women and children of all Christendom (a most horrible and dreadfull thing to think) have been at once drowned in abomiable Idola∣try, of all other vices most detested of God, and most damnable to man, and that by the space of eight hundred years. So far the Church of England. And though I am far from crediting the many fabulous stories in that and such other Books; yet I shall recite one instance in the life of Philip Nerius, the Father of the Oratorians, which shall shew you, that even among the Papists, holy seri∣ous diligence where it is, hath the same usage from the prophane both Clergy and Laity, as in o∣ther places, and so that every where Holiness is
persecuted by men, professing the same Religion with those they persecute. The meetings of the Oratorians, and their ex∣ercises, so like those now abhorr'd by many, are by Baronius (that was one of them) thus described, as you may see in the life of Nerius, p. 45. Certainly by the Divine wisdom was it brought to pass, that in our times—Assemblies were in∣stituted in the City, much what after the form of those Apostolical Conventions, such especially as by the Apostle were oppointed for discour∣sing of divine matters, both for edifying the hearers, and for propogating the Church. It was agreed that the zealous Christians should meet a days at St. Hieroms Oratory, and there a Religious meeting should be held after this manner. First, silence being made, they began with prayer, and one of the bro∣thers reads some pious lesson. At the read∣ing of which, the Father used to interpose upon occasion, explaining more fully, enlarging and vehemently inculcating on the minds of the Auditors, the things read, continuing his discourse sometime a whole hour (to the great satisfaction of the hearers) dialogue-wise, asking some of the company their opinions about such a thing. Afterward by his appointment, one of them went up into the Desk, raised upon steps, and made an Oration without flou∣rishes, or varnish of Language, composed out of the approved and choice lives of Saints, sa∣cred Writ, and sentences of Holy Fathers. He that succeeded him, discoursed after the same manner, but on a differing matter. Then followed
the third, who related some part of the Church story in the order of its several Ages. Every of these had his half hour allotted him, and per∣formed all with marvellous delight and appro∣bation: Then singing some Hymn, and going to prayers again, the company broke up. All things thus ordered, and ratified by the Pope, as far as the times would suffer, the beautiful face of the Primitive Apostolical assembling, seemed to be revived again, whereat all good men rejoycing, and many taking their Model from them, the like exercises of piety were set up and practised in other places.] So far Baronius. If any say that this long and zealous exercise was not in private houses; I Answer, Allow us an Oratory, as the Pope himself allowed them, and we had rather far be there then in private houses: But if any that hinder such from being publick, shall then reproach it for being in a less publick place, they scarce play fair. The Church of England, in the third part of the Serm. against the peril of idolatry, p. 66, 67. saith. In Maximinian and Constantius the Emperours Proclamation, the places where Christians re∣sorted to publick Prayer, were called Conven∣ticles.] See further. But how were the Oratorians esteemed and used? In Chap. 16. of Nerius's persecutions, after the mention of mens rancor and railing that ma∣ligned him, it follows, p. 56. that The Prelate that was Deputy of the City, moved by the re∣ports of them that bore a spleen to Philip, sent for him, and reprehended him sharply: Is it not a shame (saith he) that you who profess a con∣tempt
of the world, should hunt for popular applause, and walk through the City guarded with troops, with such nets as these, fishing for Church-preferments?] When having shrewdly taunted him with such like expressions, he pro∣hibits him the hearing of Confessions for fifteen dayes, and to use the customes of the Oratory, but by leave first obtained, or to lead about with him any companies of men, threatning imprisonment upon his disobedience: Neither would he let him depart, till he put in security for his appearance, saying—Come, you do all this, not for the glory of God, but to make a party for your self.—Mean time, while the good man was commending himself to God, having in∣treated divers religious persons to be in∣stant in Prayer about this business, one ap∣peareth and saith—This trouble shall be quick∣ly over, and the work that is begun be more strongly oonfirmed; they who resist now, shall assist hereafter; and if any one shall dare to oppose it any longer, God shall speedily avenge it on him; the Prelate, that is your chiefest adversary, shall certainly dye with 15. dayes.] And it fell out precisely as he foretold: for the Prelate (the Popes Deputy) relating the proceedings to his Holiness somewhat partially, died suddenly.—No sooner was this blaze of persecution out, but a much fiercer was kindled against the Order: For under pretext of Piety and Religion, some possessed the Pope that the Preachers of St. Hieroms many times deli∣vered things ridiculous and unsound, which ar∣gued high indiscretion or ignorance, and must needs endanger their hearers.]
I would not have troubled you with any of these citations, but to let those know that are offended at my reproof of impious Ministers, that in all places and parties in the world where there is any serious diligence for salvation, there are al∣wayes enemies of the same Profession, even a∣mong the Clergy as well as others. The hindering of Holy Diligence and Seriousness, is the work of the Devil and his Instruments in the world. The promoting it is the work of Christ, and of his ser∣vants. The great actions of the World are but the conflictings of these two armies, the salvation of the Conquerors, and the damnation of the con∣quered being the end. By this contending for Faith and Holiness, and bearing the Cross, I take my self bound to perform my Covenant of [pro∣fessing the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully fighting under his Banner against the Devil, the World and the Flesh, to my lives end.] Reader, thou art engaged to the like as well as I, and shalt be judged accordingly, and reap as thou hast sowed. CHOOSE and DO as thou wilt SPEED.
Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wis∣dom in the grave whither thou goest. THe mortality of man be∣ing the principal subject of Solomon in this Chap∣ter, and observing that wisdom and piety ex∣empt not men from death, he first hence infers, that Gods love or hatred to one man above another, is not to be gathered by his dealing with them here, where all things in the common course of providence do come alike to all. The common sin hath introduced death as a common punishment, which levelleth all, & endeth all the contri∣vances, businesses and enjoyments of this life, to good and bad; and the discriminating justice is not ordinarily manifested here: An Epicure or Infi∣del
would think Solomon were here pleading their unmanly impious cause: But it is not the cessation of the life, or operations, or enjoyments of the soul that he is speaking of, as if there were no life to come, or the soul of man were not immortal; But it is the ces∣sation of all the actions, and honors, and pleasures of this life, which to good or bad shall be no more. Here they have no more reward, the memory of them will be here forgotten. They have no more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun, vers. 5, 6. From hence he further inferreth, that the comforts of life are but short and transitory, and therefore that what the creature can afford, must be presently taken; And as the wicked shall have no more but present plea∣sures, so the faithful may take their lawful comforts in the present mode∣rate use of creatures; For if their de∣lightful goodness be of right and use to any, it is to them; And therefore,
though they may not use them to their hurt, to the pampering of their flesh, and strengthening their lusts, and hindering spiritual duties benefits, & salvation; yet must they serve the Lord with joyfulness, & with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things, which he giveth them, Deut. 28. 47. Next, he inferreth from the brevity of mans life, the necessity of speed, and Diligence in his duty. And this is in the words of my Text: where you have 1. The duty commanded. 2. The reason or motive to enforce it. The Duty is in the first part; [What∣soever thy hand findeth to do] that is, whatever work is assigned thee by God to do in this thy transitory life [do it with thy might] (that is, 1. Speedily, without delay; 2. Diligently, and as well as thou art able; and not with sloathfulness, or by the halves.) 2. The Motive is in the last part [For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledg, nor wisdom in the grave whi∣ther thou goest] (that is, It must be
now or never: The grave, where thy work cannot be done, will quickly end thy opportunities.) The Caldee Pa∣raphrase appropriates the sense too narrowly to works of charity, or Alms; [whatsoever good and almsgiving thou findest to do]: and the moving reason they read accordingly [for nothing but thy works of righteousness and mer∣cy follow thee.] But the words are more general, & the sense is obvious, contained in these two Propositions. Doct. 1. The work of this life cannot be done, when this life is ended. Or, There is no working in the grave, to which we are all making haste. Doct. 2. Therefore while we have time, we must do our best: or do the work of this present life with vigour and diligence. It is from an unquestionable and commonly-acknowledged truth, that Solomon here urgeth us to diligence in duty; and therefore to prove it would be but loss of time. As there are two worlds for man to live in and so two
lives for man to live; so each of these lives hath its peculiar employment. This is the life of preparation: the next is the life of our Reward or Punishment: We are now but in the womb of eterni∣ty, and must live hereafter in the open world. We are now but set to school to learn the work that we must do for e∣ver: This is the time of our appren∣tiship: we are learning the trade that we must live upon in Heaven. We run now, that we may then receive the Crown: we fight now, that we may then triumph in victory. The Grave hath no work: but Heaven hath work, and Hell hath suffering. There is no Repentance unto life hereafter: but there is Repentance unto torment, and to desperation. There is no Believing of a happiness unseen in order to the obtaining of it: or of a misery unseen in order to the escaping of it; nor be∣lieving in a Saviour in order to these ends: But there is the fruition of the happiness which was here believed; & feeling of the misery that men would
not believe; and suffering from him as a righteous Judge, whom they reject∣ed as a merciful Saviour. So that it is not all work that ceaseth at our death: but only the work of this present life. And indeed no reason can shew us the least probability of doing our work when our time is done that was given us to do it in. If it can be done, it must be, 1. by the recalling of our Time; 2. by the return of life; 3. or by opportunity in another life: But there is no hope of any of these. 1. Who knoweth not that Time cannot be recalled? That which once Was, will be no more. Yesterday will never come again. To day is passing, and will not return. You may work while it is day: but when you have lost that day, it will not return for you to work in. While your candle burn∣eth, you may make use of its light: but when it is done, it is too late to use it. No force of Medicine, no Orators ele∣gant perswasions, no worldlings wealth, no Princes power, can call
back one day or hour of time. If they could, what endeavours would there be used, when extremity hath taught them to value what they now despise? what chaffering would there be at last, if time could be purchased, for any thing that man can give. Then Misers would bring out their wealth, and say, All this will I give for one days time of Repentance more: And Lords and Knights would lay down their Honours, and say, Take all, and let us be the basest Beggars, if we may but have one year of the Time that we mispent! Then Kings would lay down their Crowns, and say, Let us be equal with the lowest Subjects, so we may but have the Time again that we wasted in the Cares and Pleasures of the world. Kingdoms would then seem a con∣temptible price for the recovery of Time. The Time that is now idled & talkt away: The Time that is now feasted and complemented away, that is unnecessarily sported & slept away; that is wickedly & presumptuously
sin'd away; how precious will it one day seem to all? How happy a bar∣gain would they think that they had made, if at the dearest rates they could redeem it? The prophanest Mariner fals a praying, when he fears his Time is at an end. If importunity would then prevail, how earnestly would they pray for the recovery of time, that formerly derided praying, or minded it not, or could not have while, or mocked God with lip-ser∣vice, and customary forms, & feign∣ed words instead of praying? what a Liturgy would death teach the tri∣fling Time despising Gallants, the idle, busie, dreaming-active, ambiti∣ous, covetous Lovers of this world, if time could be intreated to return! How passionately then would they roar out their requests! [O that we might once see the dayes of Hopes, and Means, and Mercy, which once we saw, and would not see! O that we had those dayes to spend in penitential tears and prayers, and holy preparations for an
endless life, which we spent at Cards, in needless recreations, in idle talk, in hu∣mouring others, in the pleasing of our flesh, or in the inordinate cares and busi∣nesses of the world! O that our youthful vigour might return! that our years might be renewed! that the dayes we spent in vanity might be recalled! that Ministers might again be sent to us pub∣lickly and privately, with the message of Grace which we once made light of! that the Sun would once more shine upon us! and patience & mercy would once more re-assume their work!] If cries or tears, or price or pains, would bring back lost-abused Time, how happy were the now-distracted, dreaming, dead-hearted, and impenitent world! If it would then serve their turn to say to the vigilant believers [Give us of your oyl, for our lamps are gone out] or to cry [Lord, Lord, open to us] when the door is shut, the foolish would be sa∣ved as well as the wise. Mat. 25. 8, 10, 11. But this is the day of Salvation! this is the accepted Time, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
While it is called To day, hearken, and harden not your hearts, Psal. 95. 8. Awake thou that sleepest, and stand up from thy sloathful wilful death, and use the light that's afford∣ed thee by Christ, Ephes. 5. 14. or else the everlasting utter darkness will shortly end thy Time and Hope. 2. And as Time can never be re∣called, so Life shall never be here resto∣red: Job 14. 14. [If a man die, shall he live (here) again? All the dayes of our appointed time we must therefore wait (in faith and diligence) till our change shall come] One Life is appoin∣ted us on earth, to dispatch the work that our everlasting life dependeth on: And we shall have but One. Lose that and all is lost for ever: Yet you may hear, and read, and learn, and pray: but when this Life is ended, it shall be so no more. You shall rise from the dead indeed to Judgement, and to the Life that now you are pre∣paring for, but never to such a Life as this on earth: your life is as the
fighting of a Battel, that must be won or lost at once. There is no coming hither again to mend what is done amiss. Oversights must be presently corrected by Repentance, or else they are everlastingly past remedy. Now if you be not truly converted, you may be: If you find that you are carnal & miserable, you may be healed: If you are unpardoned, you may be par∣doned: If you are Enemies, you may be reconciled to God: But when once the thread of life is cut, your opportunities are at an end. Now you may enquire of your Friends and Teachers, what a poor soul must do that he may be saved, and you may receive particular in∣structions and exhortations, and God may bless them to the illuminating, renewing and saving of your souls: But when life is past, it will be so no more. O then, if desperate souls might but return, and once more be tryed with the means of life, what joyful tidings would it be! How
welcome would the Messenger be that bringeth it! Had Hell but such an offer as this, and would any cryes procure it from their righteous Judge, O what a change would be among them! How importunately would they cry to God, [O send us once again unto the earth? Once more let us see the face of Mercy, and hear the tenders of Christ & of Sal∣vation? Once more let the Ministers offer us their helps, and teach us in season and out of season, in publick and in private, and we will refuse their help and exhortation no more, we will hate them, and drive them away from our Houses & Towns no more: Once more let us have thy Word and Ordinances, and try whe∣ther we will not believe them, and use them better then we did: Once more let us have the help and com∣pany of thy Saints, and we will scorn them, and abuse them, and persecute them no more. O for the great un∣valuable Mercy of such a Life as once
we had! O try us once more with such a Life, and see whether we will not contemn the world, and cloze with Christ, and live as strictly, and pray as earnestly, as those that we ha∣ted and abused for so doing: O that we might once more be admitted in∣to the holy Assemblies, and have the Lords Days to spend in the business of our Salvation! We would plead no more against the power & purity of the Ordinances; We would no more call that day a burden, nor hate them that spent it in works of Holi∣ness, nor plead for the liberty of the flesh therein. I makes my heart even shake with∣in me, to think with what cries those damned souls would strive with God, and how they would roar out [O try us once again,] if they had but the least encouragement of Hope! But it will not be, It must not be! They had their Day, and would not know it: They cannot lose their time, and have it. They had faithful Guides, and
would not follow them: Teachers they had, but would not learn. The dust of their feet must witness against them, because their entertained obeyed message, cannot witness for them. Long did Christ wait with the patient tenders of his blood and spirit; His Grace was long and ear∣nestly offered, but could not be re∣garded and received: And they can∣not finally refuse a Christ, and yet have a Christ; Or refuse his mercy, and yet be saved by it. He that would have Lazarus sent from the dead, to warn his unbelieving Brethren on Earth, no doubt would have strongly purposed himself on a reformation, if he might once more have been tried: And how earnestly would he have beg'd for such a Trial, that beg'd so hard for a drop of water? Luk. 16. 24, 27, 28. But alas, such mouths must be stopt for ever with a [Re∣member that thou in thy life time re∣ceivedst thy good things] vers. 25. So that it is appointed for all men once
to dye, and after that the Judgement, Heb. 9. 27. But there's no return to earth again: The places of your a∣bode, imployment and delight, shall know you no more. You must see these faces of your friends, and con∣verse in flesh with men no more! This world, these houses, that wealth and honour, as to any fruition, must be to you as if you had never known them. You must assemble here but a little while! yet a little longer, and we must preach, and you must hear it no more for ever. That therefore which you will do, must presently be done, or it will be too late. If ever you will repent and Believe, it must be Now. If ever you will be conver∣ted and sanctified it must be Now. If ever you will be pardoned & recon∣ciled to God, it must be Now. If ever you will reign, its now that you must fight and conquer. O that you were wise, that you understood this, and that you would consider your latter end, Deut. 32. 29. And that
you would let those words sink down into your hearts, which came from the heart of the Redeemer, as was wit∣nessed by his tears, Luke 19. 41, 42. [If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace. But now they are hidden from thine eyes.] And that these war∣nings may not be the less regarded, because you have so often heard them, when often hearing increaseth your obligation, and diminisheth not the truth, or your danger. 3. And as there is no Return to Earth, so is there no doing this work hereafter. Heaven and Hell are for other work. If the Infant be dead born, the open world will not revive him; That which is generated, and born a beast, or serpent, will not by all the influences of the Heavens, or all the powers of Sun or Earth, become a Man. The second and third concoxi∣on presuppose the first; The harvest doth presuppose the seed time, & the labour of the husbandman. Its now
that you must sow, and hereafter that you must reap. Its now that you must work, and then that you must receive your wages. Is this believed and considered by the sleepy world? Alas sirs, do you live as men that must live here no more? Do your work as men that must work no more, and pray as men that must pray no more, when once the time of work is ended? What thinkest thou, poor besotted sinner! will God command the Sun to stand still, while thou rebellest or forgettest thy work and him? Dost thou look he should pervert the course of nature, & continue the spring and seed-time till thou hast a mind to sow? or that he will return the dead-born or mis∣shapen Infant into the womb, that it may be better formed or quickned? Will he renew thy age, and make the young again, and call back the hours that thou prodigally wastedst on thy lusts and idleness? Canst thou look for this at the hand of God,
when Nature and Scripture assure thee of the contrary? If not, why hast thou not yet done with thy beloved sins? Why hast thou not yet begun to live? Why sittest thou still, while thy soul is un-renewed? and all thy pre∣paration for death and judgement is yet to make? How fain would Satan find thee thus at death? How fain would he have leave to blow out thy candle, before thou hast entred in the way of life? Dost thou look to have Preachers sent after thee, to bring thee the mercy which thy con∣tempt here left behind? Wilt thou hear and be converted in the Grave and Hell? or wilt thou be saved without holiness? that is, In de∣spight of God that hath resolved. it shall not be. O ye sons of sleep, of death, of darkness, awake, and live, and hear the Lord, before the Grave and Hell have shut their mouths upon you! Hear now, least hearing be too late! Hear now, if you will ever hear. Hear now, if you have ears to hear! And O
ye sons of Light, that see what sleep∣ing sinners see not, call to them, and ring them such a peal of lamentations, tears and compassionate intreaties, as is suited to such a dead and dole∣ful state; Who knows but God may bless it to awake them? If any of you be so far awakened, as to ask me what I am calling you to do; My Text tells you in general, Up and be Doing: Look about you, and see what you have to do, and Do it with your might. 1. [Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do] That is, whatsoever is a Duty imposed by the Lord, whatsoever is a Means conducing to thy own or o∣thers welfare; Whatsoever Necessity calleth thee to do, and Opportunity al∣loweth thee to do. [Thy hand findeth] that is, Thy executive powers by the conduct of thy understanding, is now to do. [Do it with thy Might: Do thy best in it. 1. Trifle not, but do it presently, without unnecessary Delay. 2. Do it
Resolutely: Remain not doubtful, un∣resolved, in suspense, as if it were yet a question with thee whether thou shouldest do it, or not. 3. Do it with thy most awakned af∣fections, and serious intention of the powers of thy soul. Sleepiness and in∣sensibility are most unsuitable to such works. It is a peculiar people zealous of good works, that Christ hath purchas∣ed to himself, Tit. 2. 14. 4. Do it with all necessary forecast and contrivance: Not with a distract∣ing, hindering Care; but with such a Care as may shew that you despise not your Master, and are not regard∣less of his work: And with such a care as is suited to the difficulties & na∣ture of the thing, and as is necessary to the due accomplishment. 5. Do it not sloathfully, but vigo∣rously and with diligence. Stick not at thy labour: Lest thou hear [Thou wicked and sloathful servant, Mat. 25. 26. Hide not thy hand in thy bosom with the sloathful, & say not, There is a Li∣on
in the way, Prov. 26. 13, 14. The neg∣ligent and the vicious, the waster and the sloathful, differ but as one brother from another, Prov. 18. 9. As the self-murder of the wilfully ungodly, so al∣so the desire of the sloathful killeth him, because his hands refuse to la∣bour, Prov. 21. 25. The soul of the sluggard desireth, & hath nothing; but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat, Prov. 13 4. Be not sloathful in busi∣ness, but be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Rom. 12. 11. 6. Do it with Constancy, & not with destructive pawses and intermissions, or with weariness and turning back. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that is of clean hands shall be stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. Be stedfast, un∣movable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord forasmuch as you know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Be not weary of well-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6. 9. These six par∣ticulars are necessary, if you will ob∣serve
serve the precept in my Text. But that misunderstanding hinder not the performance, I shall acquaint you further with the sense, by these few explicatory cautions. 1. The Might and Diligence here required, excludeth not the necessity of Deliberation and Prudent conduct. Otherwise, the faster▪ you go, the fur∣ther you may go out of the way; and mis-guided zeal may spoil all the work, and make it but an injury to others or your selves. A little im∣prudence in the season, and order and manner of a Duty, sometimes may spoil it, and hinder the success, & make it do more hurt then good. How many a Sermon, or Prayer, or reproof, is made the matter of deri∣sion, and contempt, for some impru∣dent passages or deportment? God sendeth not his servants to be jesters of the world, or to play the mad-men, as David in his fears: We must be wise and innocent, as well as resolute and valiant: Though fleshly and world∣ly
wisdom be not desirable, as being but foolishness with God; yet the wis∣dom which is from above, & is first pure, and then peaceable, and is acquainted with the high and hidden mysteries, and is justified of her children, must be the Guide of all our holy actions. Ho∣liness is not blind: Illumination is the first part of Sanctification. Believers are Children of the light. Nothing re∣quireth so much wisdom as the mat∣ters of God, and of our Salvation. Folly is most unsuitable to such ex∣cellent imployments, and most un∣beseeming the sons of the most High. It is a spirit of wisdom that animateth all the Saints, 1 Cor. 3. 19. & 2. 6, 7. Ephes. 1. 8, 17. Col. 3. 16. It is the treasures of wisdom that dwell in Christ, & are communicated to his members, Col. 2. 3. We must walk in wisdom toward them that are without, Col. 4. 5. And our works must be shewn out of a good Conversation, with meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3. 13. Yet I must needs say, that its more in great
things then in small, in the substance then the circumstances; in a sound judgement and estimate of things, and suitable choire & prosecution, then in fine expressions, or deportment an∣swering proud mens expectations. 2. Though you must work with your might, yet with a diversity agree∣able to the quality of your several works. Some works must be prefer∣red before others: All cannot be done at once. Thats a sin out of sea∣son, which in season is a duty. The greatest, & the most urgent work must be preferred. And some works must be done with double fervour & resoluti∣on, and some with less. Buying, and selling, and marrying, and possessing, and using the world, must be done with a fear of over-doing, and in a sort as if we did them not, though they also must have a necessary diligence, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Gods Kingdom and its Righteousness must be first sought, Mat. 6. 33. And our labour for the meat that perisheth, must be comparatively as none, John 6. 27.
3. Lastly, it is not an irregular, nor a self-disturbing, vexatious violence that is required of us: but a sweet well-setled resolution, and a delightful expeditious diligence, that makes the wheels go merrily on, and the more easily get over those rubs and difficulties, that clog and stop a sloathful soul. And now will you lend me the assistance of your Consciences, for the transcribing of this command of God upon your hearts, and taking out a Copy of this order, for the regula∣ting of your lives? [Whatsoever] is not a word so comprehensive as to in∣clude any vanity or sin; but so compre∣hensive as to include all your Duty. 1. (To begin with the lowest;) The very works of your bodily callings, must have diligence. In the sweat of your brows you must eat your bread, Gen. 3. 19. Six dayes shalt thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do, Exod. 20. 9. He that will not work, let him not eat, 2 Thess. 3. 10. Disorderly walkers, busie-bodies, that wil not work with qui∣etness,
and eat their own bread, are to be avoided & shamed by the Church, 2 Thess. 3. 6, 11, 12, 14. Lazy servants are unfaithful to men, and disobedi∣ent to God, who commandeth them to obey their Masters according to the flesh (unbelieving, ungodly Masters) in all things (that concerns their ser∣vice) and that not with eye-service as man-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, and in the fear of God, doing what soever they do as to the Lord, and not unto men; knowing th of the Lord (even for this) they shall receive the reward of the inhe∣ritance, Col. 3. 22, 23, 24. But he that doth wrong (by sloathfulness, or un∣faithfulness) shall receive for the wrong which he hath done, vers. 25. Success is Gods ordinary temporal reward of diligence, Prov. 10. 4 & 12. 24, 27. And diseases, poverty, shame, disappointment, or self-tormenting melancholy, are his usual punish∣ments of sloath. Hard labour redeem∣eth Time: you will have the more to lay out on greater works: The sloathful is still behind hand, & therefore must
leave much of his work undone. 2. Are you Parents or Governours of Families! you have work to do for God, and for your childrens and ser∣vants souls: Do it with your might: Deal wisely, but seriously & frequently with them about their sin, their du∣ty, and their hopes of Heaven; Tell them whither they are going, and which way they must go: Make them understand that they have a higher Father and Master that must be first serve, and greater work to do then yours. Waken them from their natu∣ral insensibility and sloath: Turn not all your family duties into lifeless custo∣mary form (whether extemporate, or by rote) speak about God, & Heaven, and Hell, and Holiness, with that se∣riousness as beseems men that believe what they say, and would have those they speak to, to believe it. Talk not either drowsily, or lightly, or jeastingly of such dreadful, or joy∣ful, unexpressible things. Remem∣ber, that your families and you, are go∣ing to the grave, and to the world
where there is no more room for your exhortations. There is no Ca∣techising, examining; or serious in∣structing them in the grave whither they and you are going. It must be now or never: And therefore do it with your might. The words of God must be in your hearts, and you must dili∣gently teach them to your children, talk∣ing of them when you sit in your houses, when you walk by the way, when you lie down, and when you rise up, Deut. 6. 6, 7, 8. & 11. 18, 19, 20. 3. Have you ignorant or ungodly neighbors, whose misery calls for your compassion, and relief? Speak to them and help them with prudent di∣ligence. Lose not your opportuni∣ties: Stay not till Death hath stopt your mouths, or stopt their ears. Stay not till they are out of hearing, and taken from your converse. Stay not till they are in Hell, before you warn them of it, or till Heaven be lost, be∣fore you have seriously called to them to remember it. Go to their houses: take all opportunities: stoop
to their infirmities: bear with un∣thankful frowardness: It is for mens salvation. Remember there is no place for your instructions or exhor∣tations in the Grave or Hell. Your dust cannot speak, and their dust can∣not hear: Up therefore and be doing with all your might. 4. Hath God intrsusted you with the Riches of this world; with many ta∣lents or with few, by which he look∣eth you should relieve the needy, and especially should promote those works of piety which are the greatest charity? Give (prudently, but wil∣lingly and liberally) while you have to give. It is your Gain: The time of market for your souls: and of lay∣ing up a treasure in Heaven; and set∣ting your money to the most gainful Usury▪ and of making you friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; & further∣ing your salvation, by that which hindereth other mens, & occasioneth their perdition. [As you have opportu∣nity, do good to all men, but especially to them of the houshold of faith] Gal. 6. 6,
7, 8, 9, 12. [Cast thy bread upon the waters; for thou shalt find it after many dayes. Give a portion to seven and to eight; for thou knowest not what evil may be upon the earth] Eccles. 11. 1, 2. [In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good] v. 6. [Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it: say not to thy neigh∣bour, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou hast it by thee] Prov. 3. 27, 28. Lay up a foundation for the time to come: do good before thy heart be hardened, thy riches blasted & consu∣med, thy opportunities taken away; part with it before it part with thee. Re∣member, it must be Now or Never: There is no working in the Grave. 5. Hath God intrusted you with Power or Interest, by which you may promote his honour in the world, & relieve the oppressed, & restrain the rage of impious malice? Hath he made you Governours, and put the sword of
Justice into your hands? up then, and be doing with your might. Defend the innocent, protect the servants of the Lord, cherish them that do well, be a terror to the wicked, encourage the strictest obedience to the universal Governor, discountenance the brea∣kers of his Laws: Look not to be re∣verenced or obeyed before him, or more carefully then he: openly main∣tain his Truth and worship without fear or shame: Deal gently and ten∣derly with his lambs and little ones: Search after vice that you may suc∣cesfully suppress it. Hate those temp∣tations that would draw you to man-pleasing, temporizing, remisness, or countenancing sin; but especially those that would ensnare you in a controver∣sie with Heaven, & in quarrels against the ways of Holiness; or in that selfcon∣founding sin of abusing and opposing the people that are most careful to please the Lord. Your trust is great, & so is your advantage to do good; And how great will be your account, & how dreadful, if you be unfaith∣ful?
As you signifie more then hun∣dreds or thousands of the meaner sort, and your actions do most good or hurt; so you must expect to be accor∣dingly dealt with, when you come to the impartial, final judgement. Be∣friend the Gospel as the Charter of your everlasting priviledges; Own those that Christ hath told you he will own. Use them as men that are ready to hear, [Inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my Brethren, you did it unto me] Mat. 25. Know not a wick∣ed person: but let your eyes be on the faithful of the land, that they may dwel therein, and lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, Psal. 101. 1. Tim. 2. 2. [Let those that work the work of the Lord, be with you without fear] 1 Cor. 16. 10. Remember▪ that it is the Character of a Pharisee and Hypocrite, to see the mote of the non-observance of a Ceremony, or tradition, or smaller matter of difference in Religi∣on, in their Brothers eye, and not to see the beam of hypocrisie, injustice, and malicious cruel opposition of Christ
and his Disciples, in their own eyes: And that its the brand of them that please not God, that are filling up their sins, on whom Gods wrath is coming to the utmost, to persecute the servants of the Lord, forbidding them to Preach to the people that they might be saved, 1 Thess. 2. 15, 16. Learn well the second, and the hun∣dred and first Psalm: And write these sentences on your walls and doors, as an Antidote against that self-undoing sin: Mat. 18. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.] Zach. 2. 8. [He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of his eye] Rom. 14. 1, 2. and 15. 1. [Him that is weak in the faith, receive you but not to doubt∣ful disputations.—For God hath re∣ceived him] Mat. 10. 40, 41, 42. [He that receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me. He that receiveth a righ∣teous man in the name of a righteous
man, shall receive a righteous mans reward; And whoso shall give to drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, Verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.] If you love not the Godly, love your selves (so far as to such self-love is possible) wound not your own hearts, to make their fingers bleed. Damn not your souls, (and that by the surest, nearest way) that you may hurt their bodies. Pro∣voke not God to thrust you from his presence, and deny your suits, by your dealing so with them: stop not your own mouths, when your misery will bespeak your lowdest cryes for mercy by your stopping the mouths of the servants of the Lord, and refusing to hear their requests for justice. If you have the Serpents enmity against the womans seed, you must expect the Serpents doom: Your heads will be bruised, when you have bruised their heels, Gen. 3. 15. Kick not against the pricks, Acts 9. Let not bryars and thorns set them∣selves
in battel against the Lord, lest he go therefore through them, & burn them together, Isa. 27. 4. I speak not any of this by way of accusation, or dishonorable reflexion on the Magistrate. Blessed be God that hath given us the comfort of your de∣fence. But knowing what the Temp∣ter aimeth at, and where it is that your danger lieth, & by what means the rulers of the earth have been un∣done, faithfulness commandeth me to tell you of the snare, and to set be∣fore you good & evil, as ever I would escape the guilt of betraying you by flattery, or cruel and cowardly si∣lence. And especially when your Magi∣stracy is but annual, or for a short time, it concerneth you to be doing with your might. It is but this year, or short space of time, that you have to do this special service in; Lose this and lose all. By what men on earth should God be eminently served & honoured, if not by Magistrates, whom he hath eminently advanced,
impowred, and intrusted? With considerate foresight, seriously ask your selves the question, Are you willing to hear, at the day of your accounts, that you had but one year, or a few, to do God special service in, and that you knew this, and yet would not do it? Can your hearts bear it then, to hear and think, that you lost, & wilfully lost such an opportunity? Look about you then, and see what is to be done. Are there not Ale-houses to be supprest, and drunkards & rio∣tous persons to be restrained; Prea∣ching and Piety to be promoted? Do it with your might: For it must be Now or Never. 6. To come yet a little nearer you, and speak of the work that is yet to be done in your own souls; Are any of you yet in the state of unrenewed na∣ture, born only of the flesh, and not of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6. mind∣ing the things of the flesh, and not the things of the Spirit? Rom. 8. 1, 5, 7, 9, 13. & consequently yet in the power of Satan, taken captive by him at his
will, Act. 26. 18. 2 Tim. 2. 26, 27. Vp and be doing, if thou love thy soul. If thou care whether thou be in Joy or misery for ever, bewail thy sin and spi∣ritual distress: Make out to Christ, cry mightily to him for his renewing and reconciling pardoning grace: plead his sactisfaction, his merits & his promises: Away with thy re∣bellion, & thy beloved sin; Deliver up thy soul entirely to Christ, to be sanctified, governed and saved by him. Make no more demurs about it; it is not a matter to be question∣ed, or trifled in. Let the earth be acquainted with thy bended knees, and the air with thy complaints and cries, & men with thy confessions and enquiries after the way of life; and heaven with thy sorrows, desires and resolutions, till thy soul be acquain∣ted with the Spirit of Christ, (Rom. 8. 9.) and with the new, the holy and heavenly nature; and thy heart have received the transcript of Gods Law, the impress of the Gospel, and so the Image of thy Creator and Redeemer.
Ply this work with all thy might: For there is no Conversion, Renovation, or Repentance unto life in the grace whi∣ther thou goest. It must be Now, or Never. And Never saved, if Never sanctified, Heb. 12. 14. 7. Hast thou any prevailing sin to mortifie, that either reigneth in thee, or woundeth thee and keepeth thy soul in darkness and unacquainted∣ness with God? Assault it resolutely, Reject it speedily: Abhor the mo∣tions of it: Turn away from the persons or things that would entice thee. Hate the doors of the Harlot, and of the Alehouse, or the gaming house: and go not as the Ox to the slaughter, and as a bird to the fowlers snare, and as a fool to the correction of the stocks, as if thou knewest not that it is for thy life,] Prov. 7. 22, 23. Why thou befooled stupid soul! wilt thou be tasting of the poysoned cup? wilt thou be glutting thee with the bait? Hast thou no where to walk or play thee, but at the brink of Hell? Must not the flesh be crucified with its affecti∣ons
and lusts? Gal. 5. 24. Must it not be tamed and mortified, or thy soul condemned? Rom. 8. 13. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Run not therefore as at uncertainty: fight not as one that beats the air, ver. 26. seeing this must be done, or thou art undone, delay and dally with sin no longer: Let this be the day: resolve, and resist it with thy might: It must be Now or Never; when death comes, it is too late. It will be then no reward to leave thy sinne, which thou canst keep no longer: No part of Holiness or happiness, that thou art not drunk, or proud, or lustful in the grave or hell. As thou art wise therefore know and take thy Time. 8. Art thou in a declined lapsed state? decayed in grace? Hast thou lost thy first desires and love? do thy first works, and do them with thy might. Delay not, but remember from whence thou art fallen, and what thou hast lost by it, and into how sad a case thy folly and negli∣gence hath brought thee: say, I will go and return to my first husband; for
then was it better with me then now, Hos. 2. 7. Cry out with Job 29. 2, 3. 4, 5. [O that I were as in moneths past! as in the dayes when God preser∣ved me! when his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walk∣ed through darkness. As I was in the dayes of my youth, when the secret of God was on my Tabernacle, when the Almighty was yet with me.—] Return while thou hast day, lest the night surprize thee: Loyter and de∣lay no more; thou hast lost by it already: thou art far behind hand. Bestir thee therefore with all thy Might. 9. Art thou in the darknesse of uncertainty concerning thy conversion, and thy everlasting state? Dost thou not know whether thou be in a state of life or death? and what should become of thee, if this were the day or hour of thy change? If thou art careful about it, and enquirest, and usest the means that God hath ap∣pointed thee for assurance: I have then no more to say to thee now,
but, wait on God, and thou shalt not be disappointed or ashamed! Thou shalt have assurance in due time, or be saved before thou wouldst believe thou should be sa∣ved. Be patient and obedient, and the light of Christ will shine upon thee, and yet thou shalt see the days of peace. But if thou art careless in thy uncertainty, and mindest not so great a business, be awakened and call thy soul to its account; Search and examine thy heart and life: Read, and consider, and take advice of faithful Guides. Canst thou carelesly sleep, and laugh, and sport, and follow thy lesser busi∣ness as if thy Salvation were made sure, when thou knowest not where thou must dwell for ever? Examine your selves whether you be in the faith; prove your selves; know ye not your own selves, that Christ is in you except you are reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. Give all diligence (in time) to make your calling and e∣lection sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. In the Grave
and Hell there is no making sure of Heaven: you are then past enquiries and self-examinations, in order to any recovery or hope. Another kind of tryal will finally resolve you. Up therefore and dili∣gently ply the work: it must be Now or Never. 10. In all the duties of thy Profes∣sion of Piety, Justice, or Charity, to God, thy self, or others, up and be do∣ing with thy might. Art thou seek∣ing to inflame thy soul with love to God? plunge thy self in the Ocean of his love; admire his mercies; gaze upon the representations of his transcendent goodness; O taste and see that the Lord is gracious! Remember that he must be loved with all thy heart, and soul and might, canst thou pour out thy love upon a creature, and give but a few bar∣ren drops to God? When thou art Fearing him, let his Fear command thy soul, and con∣quer all the fear of man. When thou art Trusting him, do
it without distrust, and cast all thy care and thy self upon him: Trust him as a creature should trust his God, and the members of Christ should trust their Head and dear Redeemer. When thou art making mention of his great and dreadful name, O do it with Reverence, and awe, and admiration: And take not the name of God in vain. When thou art Reading his Word, let the Majesty of the Author, and the greatness of the matter, and the Gravity of the stile, possess thee with an obediential fear. Love it, and let it be sweeter to thee then the honey-comb, and preciouser then thousands of Gold and Silver. Resolve to do what there thou fin∣dest to be the will of God. When thou art praying in secret, or in thy family, Do it with thy might: Cry mightily to God, as a soul under sin, and wants, and danger, that is stepping into an endless life, should do. Let the reverence and the
fervour of thy prayers shew that its God himself that thou art spea∣king to: that its Heaven it self that thou art praying for; Hell it self that thou art praying to be saved from. Wilt thou be dull and sensless on such an errand to the Living God? Remember what lieth upon thy failing or prevailing: and that it must be Now or Ne∣ver. Art thou a Preacher of the Gospel, and takest charge of the souls of men? Take heed to thy self and to the whole flock, over which the Holy Ghost hath made thee an Overseer, to feed the Church of God, which he hath pur∣chased with his own blood. Let not the blood of souls, and the blood that purchased them, be required at thy hands, Acts 20. 28. Ezek. 3. 18, 20. Thou art charged before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his ap∣pearing and his Kingdom, that thou preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke,
and exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Tim. 4. 1, 2. Teach every man, and exhort every man, Col. 1. 28. Even night and day with tears, Acts 20. 31. Save men with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Jud. Cry aloud: lift vp thy voice like a trumpet; tell them of their trans∣gressions, Isa. 58. 1. Yet thou art alive, and they alive: yet thou hast a tongue, and they have ears: The final sentence hath not yet cut off their hopes. Preach therefore, and Preach with all thy Might. Exhort them privately and personally with all the seriousness thou canst. Quick∣ly, or it will be too late. Prudently, or Satan will over-reach thee: Fer∣vently, or thy words are like to be disregarded: Remember when thou lookest them in the faces, when thou beholdest the Assemblies, that They must be Converted or Condem∣ned; sanctified on Earth, or tormen∣ted in Hell; and that this is the Day, It must be Now or Never. In a word, Apply this quickening
precept to all the duties of thy Chri∣stian course. Be Religious and Just, and Charitable in good sadness, if you would be taken for such when you look for the reward. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many shall seek to enter and shall not be able, Mat. 7. 13. Luk. 12. 24. Many run, but few re∣ceive the prize: so run that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. If the Righte∣ous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4. 18. Let the doting world deride your diligence, and set themselves to hinder and afflict you: It will be but a little while before expe∣rience change their minds, and make them sing another song. Fol∣low Christ fully: Ply your work, and lose no time. The Judge is coming. Let not words nor any thing that man can do, prevail with you to sit down, or stop you in a journey of such importance. Please God, though flesh, and friends,
and all the world should be dis∣pleased. Whatever come of your reputation, or Estates, or Li∣berties, or Lives, be sure you look to Life Eternal, and cast not that on any hazard, for a wi∣thering flower, or a pleasant dream, or a picture of commodity, or any vanity that the Deceiver can pre∣sent. For what shall it profit you to win the world, and lose your soul? Mat. 16. 26. Or to have been honoured and obeyed on earth, when you are un∣der the wrath of God in Hell? Or that your flesh was once provided with variety of delights, when its turned to rottenness, and must be raised to torments? Hold on there∣fore in Faith, and Holiness, and Hope, though Earth and Hell should rage against you; though all the world by force or flattery, should do the worst they can to hinder you: This is your trial: your warfare, is the resisting of deceit, and of all that would tempt you to consent to the means of your own destruction:
consent not, and you conquer: con∣quer, and you are crowned. The combat is all about your Wills; Yield, and you have lost the day. If the prating of ungodly fools, or the contemptuous jears of hardned sin∣ners, or the frowns of unsanctified Superiours could prevail against the Spirit of Christ, and the workings of an enlightened mind, then what man would be saved? You deserve damnation, if you will run into it to avoid a mock, or the loss of any thing that man can take from you. You are unmeet for Heaven if you can part with it to save your purses. Fear not them that can kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: but fear him that can destroy both soul and body in Hell, Mat. 10. 28. Luk. 12. 4, 5. Obey God, though all the world forbid you. No power can save you from his Justice: And none of them can deprive you of his Reward. Though you lose your Heads, you shall save your Crowns: You no way save your lives so cer∣tainly,
as by such losing them, Mat. 10. 39. One thing is necessary: Do that with speed, and care, and diligence, which Must be done, or you are lost for ever. They that are now against your much and earnest praying, will shortly cry as loud themselves in vain; When it is too late, how fer∣vently will they beg for mercy, that now deride you for valuing & seek∣ing it in time! But then they shall call upon God but he will not answer: they shall seek him early, but shall not find him: For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: They would none of his counsel, but dis∣pised all his reproof.] Prov. 1. 24. to the end. Up therefore & work with all thy might. Let unbelievers trifle, that know not that the righteous God stands over them, and know not that they are now to work for everlasting, and know not that Heaven or Hell is at the end. Let them delay, & laugh, & play, & dream away their Time, that are drunk with prosperity, and mad
with fleshly lusts and pleasures, and have lost their reason in the cares, and delusions, and vain glory of the world. But shall it be so with thee whose eyes are opened, who seest the God, the Heaven, the Hell, which they do but hear of as unlikely things? Wilt thou live awake, as they that are asleep? Wilt thou do in the day-light, as they do in the dark? shall Freemen live as Satans slaves? shall the living lie as still & useless as the dead? Work then while it is day, for the night is coming when none can work, John 9. 4. It is not the works of the Mosaical Law, nor works that are conceited for their proper value to deserve any thing at the hands of God, that I am all this while perswading you to: But it is the works prescribed you by Christ in the Gospel, according to which you shall be shortly judged to joy or misery by Christ himself, that will call you to account These must be done with all your Might. Object. But (you'l say perhaps) alas, what Might have we? We have
no sufficiency of our selves; without Christ we can do nothing! And this we find when it comes to the trial. Ans. 1. It is not a might that is O∣rignally thine Own, that I am calling thee to exercise: but that which thou hast already received from God, and that which he is ready to bestow. Use well but all the Might thou hast, and thou shalt find thy labour is not in vain. Even the strength of nature, and of common Grace, are Talents which thou must improve. 2. Art thou willing to use the Might thou hast, and to have more, and use it if thou hadst it? If thou art, thou hast then the strength of Christ: Thou standest not, and workest not by thy own strength: His promise is engaged to thee, and his strength is sufficient for thee. But if thou art not willing, thou art without excus, when thou hadst Heaven and Hell set open in the word of God, to make thee willing, God will distinguish thy wilfulness from unwilling weakness.
3. There is more Power in all of you then you use, or then you are well aware of. It wanteth but awake∣ning to bring it into act. Do you not find in your Repentings, that the change is more in your Will then in your Power? and in the awaking of your Will and Reason into act, then in the addition of meer abilities? and that therefore you befool your selves for your sins & your neglects, & wonder that you had no more use of your understandings? Let but a storm at Sea, or violent sickness, or approaching death, rowse up and waken the powers which you have, and you will find there was much more asleep in you then you used. I shall therefore next endeavour to awaken your abilities, or tell you how you should awaken them. When your souls are drowsie, and you are forgetting your God, and your latter end, and the matters of Eternity have little force and savour with you; when you grow lazie and
superficial, and religion seems a life∣less thing; and you do your duty as if it were in vain or against our wils, when you can lose your time, and delay repentance, and friends, and profit, and reputation, and plea∣sure can be heard against the Word of God, and take you off when you do all by the halves, and languish in your Christian course, as near to death; Stir up your souls with the ur∣gency of such Questions as these. Qu. 1. Can I do no more then this for God! Who gave me all? Who deserveth all? Who seeth me in my duties and my sins? When he puts me purposely on the trial, what I can do for his sake and service, Can I do no more? Can I love him no more? and obey, and watch, and work no more? Qu. 2. Can I do no more then this for Christ? For him that did so much for me? that lived so exactly; obey∣ed so perfectly; walked so inoffen∣sively and meekly; despising all the baits, and honours, and riches of the
World? that loved me to the death; and offereth me freely all his bene∣nefits, and would bring me to eter∣nal Glory, Are these careless, cold and dull endeavors my best return for all this mercy? Qu. 3. Can I do no more, when my salvation is the prize? when Heaven or Hell depend much on it? when I know this before-hand, and may see in the glasse of the holy Scriptures, what is prepared for the diligent and the negligent, and what work there is and will be for ever in Heaven and Hell on these accounts? Could I not do more, if my house were on fire, or my estate, or life, or friend in danger, then I do for my salvation? Qu. 4. Can I do no more for the souls of men? when they are undone for ever if they be not speedily de∣livered? Is this my love and com∣passion to my neighbour, my ser∣vant, freind or child? Qu. 5. Can I do no more for the Church of God? for the publick good? for the peace and welfare of
the Nation and our prosperity? in suppressing sin? in praying for de∣liverance? or in promoting Works of publick benefit? Qu. 6. Can I do no more, that have loytered so long? and go no faster, that have slept till the evening of my daies, when Diligence must be the discovery of my Repentance? Qu. 7. Can I do no more, that know not now but I am doing my last? That see how fast my Time makes haste, and know I must be quickly gone? that know it must be now or never: and that this is all the time I shall have, on which an endless life de∣pendeth? Qu. 8. Can I do no better, when I know before hand, what different as∣pects diligence and negligence will have, to the awakened soul in the review? What a comfort it will be at death and judgement, to be able to say, I did my best, or loytered not away the time I had? And what a vexa∣tious and heart-disquieting thing it will then be to look back on time as
irrecoverably lost, and on a life of tryal, as cast away upon imperti∣nences, while the work that we li∣ved for lay undone? shall I now by trifling prepare such griping and tormenting thoughts, for my awake∣ned conscience? Qu. 9. Can I do no more, when I am sure I cannot do too much, and am sure there is nothing else to be prefer∣red? and that its this I live for: and that life is for action, and disposeth thereunto; (and holy life for holy action) and that its better not live, then not attain the ends of living; when I have so many and unwea∣ried enemies; when sloath is my danger, and the advantage of my enemy; when I know that Resolu∣tion and Vigorous diligence, is so necessary that all is lost without it; will temptations be resisted, and self denied, and concupiscence mortifi∣ed, and fleshly desires tamed and subdued, and sin cast out, and a holy communion with Heaven maintain∣ed with idleness and sloath? will fa∣milies
be well ordered, and Church, or City, or Country well governed? will the careless sinners that I am bound to help, be converted and saved, with sitting still, and with some heartless cold endeavours? Qu. 10. Can I do no more that have so much help? that have mer∣cies of all sorts encouraging me, and creatures attending me; that have health to enable me, or affliction to remember and excite me; that have such a master, such a work, such a reward as better cannot be desired; who is lesse excusable for neglect then I? Qu. 11. Could I do no more, if I were sure that my salvation lay on this one duty? that according to this prayer, it should go with me for ever; or if the soul of my child, or servant, or neighbour must speed for ever, as my endeavours speed with them now for their conversion? for ought I know it may be thus. Qu. 12. Would I have God to come with the spur and rod? How
do I complain when affliction is up-me? And will I neither endure it, nor be quickened without it? Is it not better mend my pace, and work on easier tearms? I would not have distressed souls to use these considerations meerly to disquiet themselves for their in∣firmities, and so live in heaviness and self-vexation, because they cannot be as good as they desire, or do as much and as well as they should do: It is not despair that will mend the matter, but make it worse: But I would wish the lazie sloathful soul to plead these Questions with it self, and try whether they have no quick∣ning power, if closely urged, and seriously considered. Believe it, Sirs, it is the deceit∣fulness of prosperity that keeps up the reputation of a slathful life, and makes holy diligence seem unnecessary. When affliction comes, awakened reason is ashamed of this, and seeth it as an odious thing.
BY this time you may see, what difference there is, between the judgement of God, and of the world; and what to think of the under∣standings of those men, (be they high or low, learned or unlearned) that hate or oppose this holy dili∣gence. God bids us love, and seek and serve him, with all our heart, and soul, and might: And these men call them Zealots, and Preci∣sians, and Puritans that endeavour it; though, alas, they fall exceeding short, when they have done their best. It is one of the most wonder∣full monstrosities and deformities that ever befel the nature of man, that men, that learned men, that men that in other things are wise, should seriously think that the utmost dili∣gence to obey the Lord and save our souls, is needless; and that ever they should take it for a crime, and make it a matter of reproach: That the serious▪ diligent obeying of Gods Laws, should be the matter of the com∣mon
disdain and hatred of the world; that no men are more gene∣rally abhorred, and tost up and down by impatient men; that great and small, the Rulers and the vulgar rab∣ble, in most places of the earth can∣not endure them: To think how the first man that ever was born in∣to the world, did hate his own brother till he had proceeded to murder him, because he served God better then himself, [Because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous,] 1 Joh. 3. 12. And how constantly this horrid unnatural madness, hath suc∣ceeded and raged in the world from Cain until this day! It is not in vain that the Holy Ghost addeth, in the next words, 1 Joh. 3. 13. [Marvail not my brethren, if the world hate you] implying that we art apt to marvail at it; as I confesse I have oft and greatly done. Methinks, it is so won∣derful a plague and stain in Nature, that it doth very much to confirm me of the truth of Scripture; of the doctrine of mans fall, and original
sin, and the necessity of a Reconciler, and of renewing grace. Distracted miserable souls! is it not enough for you to refuse your own salvation; but you must be an∣gry withal that will not imitate you! Is it not mad enough, and bad e∣nough to choose damnation, but you must be offended withal that are not of your mind! If you will not be∣lieve God, that without Regenera∣tion, Conversion, Holiness, and a Heavenly Spiritual life, there is no Salvation to be hoped for (John 3. 3, 5, 6. Mat. 18. 3. Heb. 12. 14. Rom. 8. 9, 13. 2 Cor. 5. 17.) mnst we all be unbelievers with you? if you will laugh at Hell till you are in it, must we do so too? if God and glory seem less worth to you, then your fleshly pleasure for a time, must we renounce our Christianity and our Reason for fear of differing from you? if you dare differ from your Maker, and the Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost, and all the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, and all that ever came
to Heaven, might not we be bold to differ from you? If you will needs be ungodly, and choose your ever∣lasting wo, be patient with them that have more understanding, and dare not be so hardy, as to leap af∣ter you in the unquenchable fire: Mock not at Holiness if you have no mind of it. Hinder not them that strive to enter in at the strait gate, if you refuse your selves. Be not so de∣sirous of company in Hell: It will prove no comfort to you, or abate∣ment of your pain. But because you have the faces to contradict the God of Truth, and to reproach that work which he commandeth, and to say, what needs so much ado? when he bids us do it with all our might; I will briefly tell you what you are doing, and shew you the ugly face of the scorner, and the filthy hearts of the enemies of Holiness, that if it may be, you may loath your selves. 1. These enemies of Holy diligence, deny God with their works and lives,
and are practical Atheists; and it seems are so near of kin to [that wicked one] (see 1 Joh. 3. 12.) that they would have all others do so too. And then how soon would earth be turned into Hell! The case is plain: If God deserve not to be loved and served with all thy heart, and soul, and might, he is not God. And if thy wealth, or honour, or flesh, or friend, deserveth more of thy love, and care, and diligence then God, then that is thy God that deserveth best. See now what these deriders of pu∣rity and obedience do think of God, and of the world. 2. These Cainites do blaspheme the Governour of the world: When he hath given Laws to the Creatures, that he made of nothing; These wretches deride and hate men for obeying them. If God have not com∣manded that which you oppose, con∣tradict it, and spare not: I would you were much more against that pre∣tended Religion which he command∣eth not. But if he have commanded
it, and yet you dare revile them as too pure and precise that would o∣bey it, what do you but charge the King of Saints with making Laws that are not to be obeyed? which must needs imply that they are Fool∣ish, or Bad, though made by the most wise and Good. 3. These Enemies of Holiness, op∣pose the practice of the very first prin∣ciples of all Religion. For Heb 11. 6. [He that commeth to God must believe that God is, and that he is the Re∣warder of them that diligently seek him.] And its diligent seeking him, that they hate and set themselves a∣gainst. 4. Do not they not judge Heaven to be less worth then Earth; when they will do less for it, and would have o∣thers to do so too? 5. They would have us all unchristen and unman our selves, as if there were no life to come▪ or as if our reason and all our faculties were given us in vain. For if they are not given us for greater matters then all the honours
and pleasures of the world, they are in vain, or worse; and the life of man is but a dream and misery. Were not a beast less miserable, if this were all? 6. How base a price do these Cain∣ites set on the immortal soul of man, that think it not worth so much ado, as the careful obedience of the Laws of Christ? Not worth so much as they do themselves for their filthy sins and perishing flesh? But would have us so mad as to sell Heaven and our Souls, for a little sinful sloath and ease. 7. These enemies of holiness would have men take their Mercies for their Hurt, and their greatest Blessings for a Burden or a Plague, and to run into Hell to be delivered from them. Why man, dost thou know what Holiness is? and what it is to have access to God? I tell thee it is the foretaste of Heaven on Earth. It is the highest Glory, and sweetest delight, and chiefest commodity to the soul. And art thou afraid of having too much
of this? What, thou that haste none (which should make thee tremble) art thou afraid of having too much? Thou that never fearest too much mo∣ney, nor too much honour, nor too much health, art thou afraid of too much spiritual health and holiness? what shall be thy desire, if thou loath and fly from thy felicity? 8. You that are loyal subjects, take heed of these ungodly scor∣ners: For by consequence they would tempt you to despise your King, and make a mock at the obeying of his Commands and Laws. For if a man perswade you to despise a Judge, he implieth that you may despise a Constable. No King is so great in com∣parison of God, as a fly or worm is to that King. He therefore that would relax the Laws of God, and make it seem a needlss thing to obey him di∣ligently and exactly, implieth that o∣bedience to any of the sons of men is much more needless. And you that are children or ser∣vants, take heed of the doctrine of
these men: Masters, admit it not in∣to your Families. If he be worthy to be scorned as a Puritan or Preci∣sian, that is careful to please and o∣bey the Lord, what scorn do your children and servants deserve, if they will be obedient and pleasing to such as you? 9. All you that are poor Trades∣men, take heed of the consequences of the Cainitès scorns, lest it make you give over the labours of your Cal∣ling, and turn your selves and Fa∣milies into beggery. For if Heaven be not worth your greatest labour, your bodies are not worth the least. 10. These Cainites speak against the awakened Consciences, and the confessions of all the world. Whatsoe∣ver they may say in the dream of their blind presumption and securi∣ty, at last, when Death hath opened their eyes, they all cry, O that we had been Saints! O that we might die the death of the righteous, and that our last end might be as his! O that we had spent that Time, and
Care, and Labour for our souls, which we spent on that which now is gall to our remembrance! And yet these men will take no warning, but now oppose and deride that course that all the world do wish at last they had been as zealous for as any. 11. The enemy himself hath a con∣science within him, that either grudgeth against his malicious im∣piety, and witnesseth that he abus∣eth them that are far better then himself; or at least will shortly call him to a reckoning, and tell him better what he did, and make him change his face and tune, and wish himself in the case of those that he did oppose. 12. To conclude the Cainite is of the wicked one, 1 Joh. 3. 12. of his Father the Devil, Joh. 8. 42, 44. and is his walking, speaking instrument on Earth, saying what he himself would say: He is the open enemy of God. For who are his enemies, but the Enemies of Holiness, of his Laws, of our Obedience, of his Image, and
of his Saints? And how will Christ deal at last with his Enemies? Luk. 19. 27. O that they knew, that fore∣seeing, they might escape! This is the true, the ugly picture of a Cainite, or Enemy of a holy life, that re∣proacheth serious diligence as a pre∣cise and needless thing, when God commandeth us, and death, and the Grave, and Eternity admonish us to do his work with all our might. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psal. 50. 22. BUt of all the opposers of serious Holiness in the world, there are none more unexcusable and deplo∣rably miserable, then those that pro∣fess themselves Ministers of Christ. Would one believe that had not known them, that there are such men in the world! Alas, there are too many. Though Education, and the Laws of the Land engage them to preach true doctrine, yet are they false Teachers in the Application. For
they never well learned the holy and heavenly doctrine which they preach, nor digested it, or received the power and impress of it upon their hearts; and therefore retain∣ing their natural corruptions, im∣piety and enmity to the Life, and Power, and practice of that Do∣ctrine, they indirectly destroy what directly they would seem to build; and preach both for God, and a∣gainst him; for Christ and the Holy Spirit, and against them; for Godli∣ness, and against it, both in the same Sermon. In General, they must needs speak for the word of God, and a holy life: But when they come to the particulars, they secret∣ly reproach it, and condemn the parts, while they commend the whole. In General they speak well of Religious, Godly, Holy people; But when they meet with them, they hate them, and make them Precisi∣ans, a Sect that is every where spoken against, pestilent fellows, and movers of sedition, as the Apostles were accu∣sed,
Acts 24. 5. & 28. 22. and any thing that malice can invent to make them odious: And what they cannot prove, they will closely intimate in the false application of their do∣ctrines, describing them so as may induce the hearers to believe that they are a company of self-conceit∣ed Hypocrites, factious, proud, dis∣obedient, turbulent, peevish, affe∣cting singularity, desiring to ingross the reputation of Godliness to themselves, but secretly as bad as others. And when they have thus represented them to the ignorant sort of people, they have made the way of Godliness odious, and suf∣ficiently furnished miserable souls with prejudice and dislike; so that because the persons are thus made hateful to them, all serous dili∣gence for Heaven, all tenderness of Conscience, and fear of sinning, all heavenly discourse, and serious preaching, reading, or praying, are also made odious for their sakes: For hearing so ill of the persons,
and seeing that these are the things wherein they differ from others, they reduce their judgement of their practices to their foresetled judgement of the persons. When their diligence in their Families in prayer and instructions, in reading, and fruitful improvement of the Lords day, or any other actions of strictness and holy industry are men∣tioned, these ungodly Ministers are ready to blot them with some open calumnies, or secret reproaches, or words of suspicion, to vindicate their own unholy lives, & make peo∣ple believe that serious piety is facti∣on & hypocrise. The black tincture of their minds, and the design and drift of their preaching may be per∣ceived in the jeers, and girds, and slanderous intimations against the most diligent servants of the Lord. The controverted truths that such maintain, they represent as errours: Their unavoidable errours they repre∣sent as heresie: Their duties they re∣present as faults: and their humane
frailties as enormous crimes: They feign them to be guilty of the things that never entred into their thoughts. And if some that have professed god∣liness, be guilty of greater crimes, they would make men believe that the rest are such, and that the fami∣ly of Christ is to be judged of by a Judas, and the scope is to intimate that either their Profession is culpa∣ble, or needless, and less commenda∣ble. Regeneration they would make to be but the entrance into the Church by Baptism, and any fur∣ther conversion, then the leaving off some gross sins, and taking up some heartless forms of duty, to be but a fancy or unnecessary thing: And they would draw poor people to believe, that if they be born a∣gain Sacramentally of water, they may be saved, though they be not born again by the renewing of the Holy Spirit. Being strangers them∣selves to the mystery of Regenerati∣on, and to the life of Faith, and a
heavenly Conversation, and to the loving and serving God with all their Soul and Might, They first en∣deavour to quiet themselves with a belief that these are but fancies or unnecessary; and then to deceive the people with that by which they have first deceived them elves. And it is worthy your observati∣on, what it is in Religion that these formal Hypocrites are against. There are scarce any words so sound or ho∣ly but they can bear them, if they be but deprived of their Life: Nor scarce any duty, if it be but morti∣fied, but they can endure. But it is the Spirit and Life of all Religion which they cannot bear. As a Body differeth from a Carkass, not by the parts, but by the life; so there is a certain life in preaching, and pray∣er, and all other acts of worship, which is perceived by several sorts of hearers. The Godly perceive it to their edification and delight: For here it is that they are quickned
and encouraged. Life begetteth life, as fire kindleth fire. The ungodly often perceive it to their vexation, if not to their conviction and con∣version; This life in preaching, pray∣ing, discipline, reproof, and con∣ference, is it which biteth, and gal∣leth, and disquieteth their consci∣ences. And this they kick and rail against; This is the thing that will not let them sleep quietly in their sin and misery; but is calling and jogging them to awake, and will not let them sin in peace, but will either convert them or torment them be∣fore the time. It is the Life of Reli∣gion that the hypocrite wants; and the life that he is most against. A pain∣ted fire burneth not. A dead Lion biteth not. The Carkass of an Enemy is not formidable. Let the words of that Sermon that most offendeth them, be separated from the life, and put in∣to a Homily, and said or read in a for∣mal drowsie, or a School-boys tone, and they can bear it and commend it. Let
the same words of prayer which now they like not, be said over as a life∣less customary form, and they can like it well. I speak not against the use of forms, but the abuse of them: Not against the Body, but the Carkass. Let forms themselves be used by a spiritual serious man, in a spiritual serious manner, with the inter positi∣on of any quickening exhortations, or occasional passages, that tend to keep them waken and attentive, and make them feel what you mean and are about, and you shall see they love not such animated forms. It is the living Christian, and lively worship, and serious spiritual Religion, which they hate: kill it and they can bear it: Let the picture of my enemy be nearer and comelier then his person was, and I can endure it in my bed∣chamber, better then himself in the meanest dress. It is the living Christi∣ans that in all parts of the world are chiefly persecuted: Let them be once dead, and dead-hearted hypocrites
themselves will honour them, espe∣cially at a sufficient distance: They will destroy the living Saints, and keep Holy dayes for the dead ones. Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees hy∣pocrites, because ye build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Se∣pulchers of the Righteous, and say, if we had been in the days of our Fathers; we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets: Wherefore be ye witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the children of them which killed the Prophets: Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers; ye serpents; ye generation of vipers, how can ye e∣scape the damnation of Hell! Matth. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. The dog that will not meddle with the dead crea∣ture, will pursue the living; and when he sees it stir no more, will leave it. Christianity without seriousness is not Christianity; and therefore not lyable to the hatred of its ene∣mies as such. Say any thing, and do any thing how strict so ever, if
you will but act it as a player on the stage, or do it coldly, slightly, & as if you were but in jeast, you may have their approbation. But it is this life, and seriousness, and worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, that con∣vinceth them that they themselves are lifeless, and therefore troubleth their deceitful peace, and therefore must not have their friendship. If it were the meer bulk of duty that they are weary of, how comes it to pass that a Papist, at his Psalter, Beads, and Mass-books, can spend more hours without much weariness or opposition, then we can do in seri∣ous worship? Turn all but into words, and beads, and canonical hours and dayes, and shews, and ceremony, and you may be as religious as you will, and be Righteous overmuch, and few will hate, or reproach, or per∣secute you among them, as too pre∣cise or strict. But living Christians and worship, come among them like fire, that burneth them, and makes
them smart, with a word that is quick, powerful, sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, joynts and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and in∣tents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. And the enmity of the Cainites may teach the Christian, what he should be, and wherein his excellen∣cy lieth. It is life, and seriousness that your enemies hate: and therefore it is life and seriousness that you must above all maintain; though dead-hearted hypocrites never so much oppose and contradict you. O sirs, they are no trifles, but the greatest things that God hath set before you in his Word, and called you out to prosecute and possesse: and your time of seeking them is short; and therefore you have no time fortrifles, nor any to lose in idleness and sloath. And of all men, Preachers should be most sen∣sible of this. If they were not against serious holiness in others, it is dou∣ble
wickedness for such as they, to be against it in themselves. It is great things that they have to study and to speak of; and such as call for the greatest seriousness, and reverence and gravity in the speaker, and condemn all trifling in matter or in manner. A man that is sent to Christ to run for an immortal crown, or to direct others in such a race, to save his own, or other mens souls, from endless misery, should be a∣shamed to fill up his time with tri∣fles, or to be slight and cold about such great and weighty things. All the heart, and soul, and might, is little enough for matters of such un∣speakable importance. When I hear Preachers or people spend time, in little impertinent fruitless things, that do but divert them from the great business of their lives, or to dally with the greatest matters, rather then to use them, and treat of them with a seriousness suitable to their importance, I oft think of the words
of Seneca, the serious Moralin, as shaming the hypocrisie of such tri∣fling Preachers and Professors of the Christian faith; [Verba copiosa componis, & interrogans vincula nectis, & dicis, Acuta sunt ista: Nihil acu∣tius aristâ; & in quo est utilis? Quae∣dam inutilia & inefficacia ipsa subtili∣tas reddit.] that is [You compose co∣pious words, and tye hard knots by cu∣rious questions; and you say, O these are acute things! what is more acute then the peal of corn? and yet what is it good for? subtilty it self makes some things unprofitable and uneffe∣ctual.] [Istae ineptiae Poetis relinquantur, quibus aures oblectare propositum est & dulcem fabulam nectere; sed qui inge∣nia sanare, & fidem in rebus humanis retinere, ac memoriam, officiorum ani∣mis ingerere volunt, serio loquantur, & inagnis viribus rem agant;] that is, [Leave these toyes or fooleries to Poets, whose business is to delight the ear, and to compose a pleasant fable.
But they that mean to heal mens un∣derstandings, and retain credibility among men, and to bring into mens minds the remembrance of their du∣ties, must speak seriously, and do their business with all their might.] Demens omnibus merito videret— He would justly by all be taken for a mad man, that when the Town ex∣pecteth to be stormed by the enemies, and others are busie at work for their defence, will sit idle, proposing some cu∣rious questions]—Nunquid tibi de∣mens videtur, si istis impendero operam, & nunc obsideor? quid agam? mors me sequitur; vit a fugit; Adversus haec me doce aliquid: effice ut ego mortem non timeam, & vita me non effugiat.] [And shall I not be taken for a mad man, if I should busie my self about such things that am now besieged? what shall I do? death pursueth me: teach me something against these; make death not dreadful to me, or life not to fly from me.] Si multum esset aetatis, parce dispensandum erit, ut sufficeret
necessariis: nunc quae dementia est su∣pervacua discere in tanta temporis ege∣state!] [If we had much time, we should sparingly lay it out, that it might suffice for necessary things: But now what a madness is it, to learn things needless or superfluous in so great a scarcity of time!] [Metire ergo aeta∣tem tuam: tam multa non capit. Mea∣sure thy age: Its not enough for so ma∣ny things.] [Relinque istum ludum li∣terarum Philosophis Rem magnificam! ad syllabas vocant qui animum minuta discendo diminuunt & conterunt, & id agunt, ut Philosophia potius difficilis quam magna videatur: Socrates, qui totam Philosophiam revocavit ad mores hanc summam dixit esse sapientiam, bona malaque distinguere] [Leave this learned play to Philosophers: A gallant business! They call us to syllables; and debase, and depress the mind by learn∣ing such little trivial things, and make Philosophy rather to seem a matter of difficulty then great. Socrates; that re∣voked all Philosophy to manners,
call this the highest wisdom, to distin∣guish good and evil.] Did a Seneca see by the light of nature, so much of the necessity of seriousness and diligence, about the matters of the soul? and so much of the madness of spending words and time on trifles? And yet shall there be found a man among professed Christians, and among the Preachers of Faith and Holiness, that plead for trifling, and scorn at seriousness, and count them moderate and wise that a Heathen brands as toyish and distra∣cted? What is it that cloudeth the glory of Christianity, and keepeth so great a part of the world in Heathenism and Infidelity: but this, that among Christians there are so few that are Christians indeed? and those few are so obscured by the multitude of formal trifling hypocrites, that Chri∣stianity is measured and judged of by the lives of those that are no Christi∣ans? Religion is a thing to be de∣monstrated
and honoured and com∣mended by practice: words alone are ineffectual to represent its excellen∣cy to so blind a world, that must know by feeling, having lost their sight. In our professed faith we mount unto the Heavens, and leave poor unbelievers wallowing in the dirt. O what a transcendent, unconceiv∣able glory, do we profess to expect with God unto eternity! And what manner of persons should they be, in holy conversation and godliness, that look for such a life as this? How basely should they esteem those transitory things, that are the food and felicity of the sensual world? How patiently should they undergo contempt and scorn, and whatsoe∣ver man can inflict upon them? How studiously should they devote and refer all their time, and strength, and wealth, and interest, to this their glorious blessed end? How se∣riously should they speak of, and how industriously should they seek,
such sure, such near, such endless joyes? Did professed Christians more exactly conform their hearts and lives to their profession and ho∣ly rule, their lives would confute the reproaches of their enemies, and command a reverent and awful esti∣mation from the observers, and do more to convince the unbelieving world of the truth and dignity of the Christian faith, then all the words of the most subtile dispu∣tant Christianity being an affect∣ing practical Science, must practi∣cally and affectionately be decla∣red according to its nature: Argu∣ments do but paint it out: And pi∣ctures do no more make known its excellency, then the picture of meat and drink makes known its sweetness. When a doctrine so holy, is visibly ex∣emplified, and liveth, and walketh, and worketh in serious Christians be∣fore the world: Either this or no∣thing will convince them and con∣strain them, to glorify our Lord,
and say, that God is among us or in us of a truth, Mat. 5. 16. 1 Cor. 14. 25. But it is unchristian lives that dark∣neth the glory of the Christian Faith. When men that profess such glorious hopes, shall be as sordidly earthly, and sensual, and ambiti∣ous, and impotent, and impatient as other men, they seem but fanta∣stical dissembles. And yet shall there be found such a perfidious wretch under the hea∣vens of God, as a professed Minister of Christ, that shall subtilly or openly labour to make an exact, and holy, and heavenly conversation a mat∣ter of reproach and scorn, and that under pretence of reproving the sins of Hypocrites and Schismaticks, shall make the exactest conformity to the Christian rule, and faithfullest obedience to the Almighty Sove∣raign, to seem to be but hypocrisie or self-conceitedness, or needless trouble, if not the way to sedition, and publick trouble, and turning
all things upside down? that can∣not reprove sin, without malicious insinuating slanders or suspitions against the holy law and holy life; that are most contrary to sin, as life to death, as health to sickness, and as light to darkness? For any man, especially any pro∣fessed Christian, any where to oppose or scorn at godliness, is a dreadful sign, as well as a heinous sin: But for a Preacher of Godliness to oppose and scorn at Godliness, and that in the Pvlpit, while he pretendeth to promote it, and plead for it in the name of Christ, is a sin that should strike the heart of man with hor∣rour to conceive of. Though I cannot subscribe my self to that passage in the second part of the tenth Homily, Tom. 2. pag. 150. (however I very much love and honour the book of Homi∣lies) yet for their sakes that not on∣ly can subscribe to it, but would have all kept out of the Ministry
that cannot, and that take it for that Doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land which they will believe and Preach, I will recite it to the terror of the guilty, not to drive to des∣pair, but to awake them or to shame them for their opposition to the wayes of godliness. Expounding Psal. 1. 1. Blessed is the man that hath not walked after the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful] having shewed who are the [ungodly] and [the sinners] it ad∣deth these words. [The third sort he calleth scor∣ners; that is, a sort of men whose hearts are so stuffed with malice, that they are not contented to dwell in sin, and to lead their lives in all kind of wickedness, but also they do contemn and scorn in others all godliness, true Religion, all honesty and vertue. Of the two first sorts of men, I will not say, but they may take
Repentance, and he converted unto God. Of the third sort, I think I may without danger of Gods judgement pronounce, that never any yet were converted un∣to God by Repentance, but con∣tinued still in their abominable wickedness, heaping up to them∣selves damnation against the day of Gods inevitable judgement. Though I dare not say but some such have Repented, yet let the scorners that believe this, remem∣ber, that they subscribe the sentence of their own condemnation. Though I look upon this sort of the enemies of Holiness as those that are as unlikely to be recovered and saved, as almost any people in the world, except Apostates and Malicious Blasphemers of the Holy Ghost; yet in compassion to the peo∣ple and themselves. I shall plead the cause of God with their con∣sciences, and try what Light can do with their understandings, and the
terrours of the Lord with their hardened hearts. 1. A Preacher of the Gospel should much excel the people in understand∣ing: And therefore this sin is grea∣ter in them then other men: what means, what light do they sin against? Either thou knowest the necessity of serving for salvation with the grea∣test diligence, or thou dost not. If not, what a sin and shame is it to undertake the sacred Office of the Ministry, while thou knowest not the things that are necessary to sal∣vation, and that which every Infant in the Faith doth know? But if thou dost know it, how dost thou make shift maliciously to oppose it, with∣out feeling the beginnings of Hell upon thy Conscience? When it is thy work to read the Scriptures, and meditate on them, dost thou not read thy doom, and meditate ter∣rour? How canst thou choose but perceive that the scope of the word of God is contrary to the bent of
thy affections and suggestions? Yea what is more evident by the Light of Nature, then that God and our salvation cannot be regarded with too much holy seriousness, exact∣ness and industry? Should not the best things be best loved? and the greatest matters have our greatest care? And is there any thing to be compared with God and our eter∣nal state? O what overwhelming sub∣jects are these to a sober and consi∣derate mind! what toyes are all things in comparison of them! And yet dost thou make light of them, and also teach men so to do! As if there were something else that bet∣ter deserved mens greatest care and diligence then they. What a Preach∣er, and not a Believer! Or a Believer, and yet not see enough in the mat∣ters of Eternity to engage all our powers of soul and body, against all the world that should stand in com∣petition? 2. Is it not sinful and terrible e∣nough,
to be thy self in a carnal unre∣newed state! (Rom. 1. 13.) and to be without the Spirit and life of Christ (v. 9.) but thou must be so cruel as to make others miserable also? Psal. 50. 16, 17. [But to the wicked saith God, What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes? or that thou shouldest take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee?] Matth. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of the least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: But whosoever shall do and teach the same, shall be called great in the Kingdom of Hea∣ven.] 3. What an aggravation is it of thy impiety and soul-murder, that thou art bound by office to teach men that life of holiness which thou oppo∣posest, and to perswade them to that with all thy might, which thou en∣deavourest closely and cunningly to disgrace! And wilt thou be a
Traytor to Christ, in the name of a Messenger and Preacher of the Gos∣pel? Wilt thou engage thy self to promote his interest, and to use all thy skill and power to build men up in holiness and obedience; and when thou hast done this, wilt thou disgrace and hinder it? Dost thou take on thee to go on the message of Christ, and then speak against him? We do not find that Judas dealt thus with him: when he sent him as he did other Preachers, we read not that he preacht against him. O let not my soul be numbered with such men in the day of the Lord! It will be easier for Sodom and Gomorah, then for the refusers of the Word and Grace of Christ. What then will be the doom of the opposers? And above all of those treacherous opposers, that pretend themselves to propagate and promote them. If the wit and malice of Satans instruments were sharpened against the wayes and servants of the Lord,
it belongs to you to plead Christs cause, and shame these absur'd unreasona∣ble gainsayers, and stop the mouth of impious contradiction: And will you joyne with the gainsayers, and secretly or openly say as they? Who should confound the d¦ders of a holy life but you? Who should lay open the excellencies of Christ, the Glory of Heaven, the terrours of the Lord, and all other obligations to the most serious Re∣ligiousness, but you that have un∣dertaken it as your calling and em∣ployment? If any man in the Parish were so Atheistical and brutish, as to think God unworthy of our dear∣est Love, our most exact obedience, and most laborious service, who should display this Atheists folly, but you that are doubly (as Chri∣stians, and as Ministers) obliged to defend the honour of your Lord If any of the people should fall into such a dream or dotage, as to questi∣on the necessity of our utmost dili∣gence
in our preparations for eter∣nal life, who should awake them by lifting up their voices as a trumpet, and help to recover their under∣standings, but you that are the watchmen, and know their blood will be required at your hands, if you give them not loud and timely warning? if any subtile malici∣ous servant of the Devil, should plead against the Necessity of Holy∣ness, and disswade the people from serving God with all their might, who should be ready to confirm the weak, and strenghten and encourage them that are thus assaulted, and help to keep up their zeal and for∣wardness, but you that are leaders in the Army of the Lord? is it not a Holy God that you are engaged to serve? And a Holy Church in which you have your station? And a Com∣munion of Saints in which you have undertaken to administer the Holy things of God? Have you not read what was done to Nadab and Abihu,
when Moses told Aaron [This is it that the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before the people I will be glori∣fied] Lev. 10. 3. Is it not a Holy Law and Gospel which you publish? You have undertaken to warn the sloathful, the sensual, the worldly and the prophane, that they strive to enter in at the straight gate, and seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, Luke 13. 24. Matth. 6. 33. and to give diligence to make sure their calling and election, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and to give all diligence in adding vertue to their faith, &c. 2 Pet. 1. 5. and with all diligence to keep their hearts, Prov. 4. 23. And are you the men that would quench their zeal, and destroy the holy di∣ligence which you should Preach? The Lord touch your hearts, and recover you in time, or how wo∣ful will it be with such hardened Hy∣pocrites, that in the Light, and in his Family and Livery, and under his
Standard and Colours, dare prove Traitors and Enemies to the Lord? 4. And what an addition is it to your guilt, that you speak against God in his own Name? By Office you are to deliver his Message, and speak to the people in his Name, and in his stead, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. And dare you before the Sun, and under the Heavens of God, and in his Hearing, perswade men that the most Holy God is against Holi∣ness? and the King of Saints is an adversary to sanctity? and that he that made his holy Law, is against the most exact obeying of it? Dare you prefix a [Thus saith the Lord] to so impious a speech as [It is in vain to serve the Lord? what needs there so much ado for your salvation? dare you go to men as from the Lord, & say [You are too careful & diligent in his service? Less ado may serve the turn! What needs this fervour, and redeeming time! This is but Puri∣tanism or Preciseness. Its better do as the most, and venture your souls without
so much ado.] Who could at last hold up his face, or stand before the dread∣ful Tribunal, that should be found in the guilt of such a Crime! What, to put God into the similitude of Satan, and describe the most Holy, as the ene∣my of Holiness! and make him plead against himself, and disgrace his own Image, and disswade men from that which he himself hath made of ne∣cessity to their Salvation! What vi∣ler Blasphemy can be uttered! 5. And it aggravateth your sin, that your Relation obligeth you to the most tender affections to your people. And yet that you should seduce them to dam∣nation. For the Nurse to poison them; for the parents to cut the childrens throats, is worse then for an enemy to do it. If the Devil our professed ene∣my, should himself appear to us, and say, [Prepare not so seriously for death: Be not so strict, and diligent, and holy] it were not, in many respects, so bad, as for you to do it, that should help to save us from his snares. You that
profess your selves their Fathers! that should travail in birth till Christ be formed in your peoples hearts! that should love your peo∣ple as your own bowels, and tender the weak, and pitty the wicked, and stick at no labour, suffering or cost, that might advance their holiness, and further their Salvation; For you to tempt men into a careless life, and turn them out of the ho∣ly way, is an aggravated cruelty. Its worse for the Shepherd to de∣stroy us then the Wolf. Read Ezek. 34. & 33. 6. Are you not ashamed thus to contradict your selves? What can you find to Preach from the Word of God, that tendeth not to this ho∣ly diligence which you are against? How can you make shift to Preach an hour, and not acquaint men with the Duty and Necessity of seek∣ing God with all their Might? Do you not tell them, that except they be converted and new born, they shall
not enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3, 5. Mat. 18. 3. And that without holiness none shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. And that if they live after the flesh, they shall die, Rom. 8. 13. And that except their righteousness exceed the righteous∣ness of the Scribes and Pharisees they shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 20. And will you in your Application, or private dis∣courses, unsay all this again, and give God and your selves the Lye? And let people see, that the Pulpit is to you but as a Stage, and that you believe not what you speak? 7. Consider, that your place and calling, maketh you the most success∣full servants of the Devil, and so the most bloody murderers of Souls, while you give your judgement a∣gainst a strict and Heavenly life. For a Drunkaod in an Ale-house to mock the Minister, and rail at se∣rious Religion, is less regarded by sober men, and small advantage to
his Masters cause; nay the wicked∣ness of his life, is so great a shame to his judgement, that it inclineth many to think well of those that he speaks against. But when a man that pretendeth to learning and understanding, and to be himself a Pastor of the Church, and Preach∣er of the Misteries of Christ, shall make them odious, that are most careful for their Souls, and most exact in pleasing God, and shall make all serious diligence for Heaven to seem but intemperate zeal and selfconceitedness: and shall describe a Saint as if the formal lifeless Hy∣pocrite, that giveth God but the leavings of the world, and never set his heart on Heaven, were in∣deed the man: what a snare is here for the perdition of the ignorant! They that are naturally averse from holiness, and are easily perswaded to think that to be unnecessary or bad, which seems so much above them, and against them, will be
much confirmed in their mistakes and misery, when they hear their Teachers speak without them, the fame that Satan by his suggestions doth within them. This turneth a trembling sinner, into a hardened scorner: he that before went under the daily correction of his consci∣ence, for neglecting God, and o∣mitting holy duties, and living to the flesh, grows bold and fearless, when he hears the Preacher dis∣grace the stricter purer way. By that time he hath heard a while the fear of God derided as preciseness, and a tender conscience reproach∣ed as a scrupulous foolish thing, his conscience grows more plyable to his lusts, and hath little more to say against them. When Gods own professed Ministers, that should be wiser and better then the people, are against this zeal, and industry for Heaven, the people will soon think, that at least it is tolerable in them. And they will sooner learn
to deride a Saint from a Sermon, or discourse of a Preacher or a learn∣ed man, then from the scorns or talk of hundreds of the ignorant. And wilt thou teach them to hate Godliness, who hast undertaken be∣fore the Righteous God, to teach them to practice it? He that dis∣praiseth it, though under other names, and representeth it as odi∣ous, though masked with the title of some odious vice, doth indeed en∣deavour to make men hate it. And what a terrible account wilt thou have to make, when the seduction and transgression of all these sinners shall be charged upon thee? When Christ shall say to the haters, deri∣ders and opposers of his holy wayes and servants [In as much as you did it to one of the least of these my Bre∣thren, you did it unto me.] How durst you scorn the image of your Maker? and hate the Saints whose Commu∣nion you professed to believe; and deride or oppose that serious holi∣ness,
without which you had no hope of being saved? If then the sinners become your accusers, and say, [Lord, we thought it had been but unnecessary preciseness, and that seri∣ous Christians had been but self-con∣ceited factious hypocrites, and that lip service with a common worldly life might have served the turn; We heard our Preachers represent such strict and zealous men, as turbulent, seditious, and refractory, as odious and not as imitable: Their application was a∣gainst them: Their discourse derided them: Of them we learnt it. We thought they were wiser and better then we: Of whom should we learn but of our teachers!] Wo to the Teach∣ers that ever they were born, that must be then found guilty of this crime. If Adam's excuse was Eve's accu∣sation, [The woman which thou ga∣vest to be with me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat.] And the womans excuse did charge the Serpent [The
Serpent begulled me and I did eat] Gen. 3. 12, 13. though it freed not the excusers) How will it load you, when your people shall say [The Teachers that we thought thou gavest us, did teach us & go before us in setting against this holy diligence; and we did but learn of them, and follow them! 8. Are not the people backward enough to the serving of God with all their might, unless you hinder them? Is not the corrupted heart of lapsed man averse enough to the matters of salvation, but you must make them worse? If you had to do with the best and holiest person in the world, that walketh with God in the most heavenly conversation, he would tell you that his dull and backward heart hath no need of clogs, and pull-backs, and discouragements, but of all the help that can be affor∣ded him, to quicken him up to greater diligence. The most zealous lament that they are so cold: The
most heavenly lament that they are so earthly, and so strange to heaven: The most laborious lament that they are so sloathful; and the fruitfullest believers that they are so unprofita∣ble; and those that are most watch∣ful of their words and deeds, that they are so careless; and those that most diligently redeem their time, lament it that they lose so much; and those that walk most accurately and exactly, that they are so loose, and keep no closer to the Rule. And yet darest thou increase the back∣wardness of the ungodly! will not their carnal interests and lusts serve turn to keep them from a holy life! Is not Satan strong enough of him∣self? will not the comon distaste of Godliness in the world, sufficiently prejudice and avert them without thy helps? Do you see your people so forward to do too much for Heaven, that you must pull them back? Can∣not souls be damned without your furtherance? or is it a desirable work?
and will it pay you for your cost and labour? The way is up hill; The best of us are weak, and frequently ready to sit down! A thousand im∣pediments are cast before us by Sa∣tan and the world, to make us lin∣ger till the time be past; and many a charm of pleasure and diversion to make us sleep till the door be shut. And Ministers are sent to keep us waking, and take us by the hand, and lead us on, and remove impe∣diments: and shall they set in with the enemy, and be our chiefest hin∣derers? O treacherous guides! O miserable helps! Are not our dark understandings, our earthly, dull and backward hearts, our passions and troubled affections, our appe∣tites & sensual inclinations, our na∣tural strangeness and averseness to God, and heaven, and holiness, e∣nough to hinder us without you? Are not all the temptations of the De∣vil, the allurements of the flesh, and world, the impediments of poverty
and riches, of flattery, and of frowns, or friends and foes, in our callings and in our divertisements, are not all these enough to cool and dull us, and keep us from serving God too much, and being too careful and dili∣gent for our souls, but Preachers themselves must be our impediments and snares? Now the Lord deliver our souls from such impediments, and his Church from such unhappy guides! 9. Consider whom thou imitatest in this. Is it Christ, or Satan? Christ calleth men to strive, to labour, to seek first, to watch, to pray alwayes, and not waxfaint, Luk. 12. 24. John 6. 27. Mat. 6. 33. & 25. 13. Luke 18. 1. The Apostles call men to be [fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; to be a pe∣culiar people, zealous of good works; to pray continually; to be  osen ge∣neration, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People to shew forth the praises of him that hath called us, and offer up spiritual sacrifices accept∣able
to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. 1 Thes. 5. 17. Tit. 2. 14. Rom. 12. 11. To fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold upon eternal life, 1 Tim. 6. 12. To serve God accepta∣bly (being as a consuming fire) with re∣verence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28, 29. To be stedfast, unmoveable, alwayes a∣bounding in the work of the Lord, for∣asmuch as we know that our labour is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.] And dare you gainsay the Lord and his Apostles, and concur with Satan, and the Pharisees and e∣nemies of Christ? 10. You do your worst to make the sacred office of the Ministry to become contemptible, as Eli's sons did: Poor people that cannot sufficiently di∣stinguish the Doctrine from the Ap∣plication, the office from the person, the use f the abuse, will be tem∣pted to run from the Ordinances of God, and think the worse of others for your sakes, and suspect all their food, because you mix such poyson in
it. And the more Holy and Neces∣sary the office and work is, the grea∣ter is your sin in corrupting it, or making it suspected or abhorr'd. Consider soberly of these things, and then go on and speak against a Life of Holy diligence if you dare. I know you'l say, It is not Godli∣ness, but singularity, or humour, or disobedience, or hypocrisie, or faction that you oppose: and perhaps you'l instance in some that are guilty of some of these, or seem so at the least. But 1. I do here solomnly profess that I hate these crimes as well as you: and that it is not any part of my intention to plead for intempe∣rance, disobedience in lawful things, for schisms, or faction, or any irregu∣larity: And this I here put in against those that are disposed to misun∣derstand and misreport us, and leave it as on record to prove them slanderers, that shall accuse me of defending any such thing. And I do protest against those on the other
side, that will fetch encouragement for any transgression from my neces∣sary plea for the holy industry & vigi∣lancy of believers. And moreover, I do profess that it is only the opposers of Holiness that I mean in this Defence, and have not the least intent to inti∣mate that any others are guilty of that crime that are not. But having pre∣mised this protestation, to prevent mistakes and false reports, I answer now to the guilty. 2. If it be crimes only that you are against, deliver your self so, as may not lay reproach or suspicion on Godliness, which is most opposite to all crimes. Cannot you preach a∣gainst divisions, disobedience, or any other sin, without any scornful in∣timations or reflections against mens diligent serving of the Lord? 3. Why do not you commend those that are not liable to your accusati∣ons, and encourage them in holiness, and draw others to imitate them? And why do you not commend the
Good where you discommend the evil that is commixt? 4. Shall Health and Life be made a scorn, because there are few but have some distemper or disease? Shall Christianity and Holiness be secretly reproached, because all Christians have some fault to be accused of? If men be faulty, you should perswade them to be more strict and diligent, and not less: It is for want of watch∣fulness and strictness that they sin. Nothing is more contrary to their faults, then Holiness. There is no other way for their full reformation. And therefore all true humbled Christians are ready to confess their faultiness themselves; but so far are they from thinking the worse of piety for it, that its one great rea∣son that moveth them to go on, and to read, and hear, and pray, and meditate, and do so much that they may get more strength against their faults. Must they think ill of food, and physick, and exercise, because
they are infirm? All faithful Mini∣sters tell their people plainly of their sins (so far as they are ac∣quainted with them) as well as you: But they do it not in a way re∣proachful to their holy diligence; They do not therefore call them off from Godliness, nor tempt them to be less in the use of means, but more by how much their need is greater. A holy heart, and a malignant heart, will shew their difference in the reproving of the same fault. The one layeth all the odium on the vice, & honoureth the holy obedience of the Saints. The other fasteneth his sting upon the Godly, and under pretence of dishonouring their faults, doth seek to fasten-the dis∣honour on their holiness. And those that are so minded, will never want ccasion or pretence, for the worst that Satan would have them say. The Church will never be without some hypocrites, and scandals, nor the best without some faults and passions; nor
the holiest action without some mix∣ture of humane frailty and infirmi∣ty▪ nor will the very goodness and holiness of the act on, be free from plausible calumnies and scorns, while there is the wit and venom of the serpent in the heads and hearts of wicked men. How easi is it to put a name of ignominy upon every person, and every duty? To charge any man with Hypocrisie or Pride? To take the wisest man for self-conceited, because he is not of the accusers mind? To call our obedience to God, by the name of disobedience unto man, when man for∣bids it, as they used the three wit∣nesses, Dan. 3. and Daniel himself for praying in his house, Dan. 6. though they confessed they had no∣thing else against him? To call Gods Truth by the name of Heresie, and Heresie by the name of Truth, To charge all with Schism, that dare not subject their souls to the usurpa∣tion and arrogant impositions of
the sons of Pride, that have neither Authority nor Ability to Govern us, as the Papists deal by the great∣est part of the Christian World? To lay snares for mens Conscien∣ces, and then accuse them for fal∣ling into those snares? To make new Articles of faith, till they have transcended the capaity of Divine and Rational belief, and then con∣demn us for not believing them? To make Laws for the Church, unnecessary in their own opinion, and sinful in other mens, and com∣mand things which they know that others think the Lord forbids, and then load them with the sufferings and reproaches of the disobedient, turbulent, heretical, schismatical, or seditious? To call men factious, if they will not be of their faction? and Sectaries, if they will not un∣reasonably subject their Souls to them, and joyn with an imperious Sect, against the Catholick Vnity and Simplicity? All which the Ro∣manists
practice upon the Church of Christ. How easie, but how un∣reasonable, and yet how unresistible is all this? How easie is it to call a meeting of sober Christians, for pray∣er and mutual edification, such as that was, Acts 12. 12. by the name of a Factious Schismatical Conventi∣cle, and a meeting of Drunkards, or Gamesters, by a more gentle less disgraceful name? To say a man becomes a Preacher, when he mo∣destly reproveth another for his sinnes, or charitable exhorteth him in order to his Salvation, or giveth any necessary plain instruction to his Family, for whom he must give account? Believe it, it will be a poor excuse to any man, that be∣comes an enemy to the diligence of a Saint, that he could thus cloak his malice, and cloath a Saint with the vizer of an Hypocrite, and the rags of any odious Sect. If the Pharisees were to be be∣lieved, it was not they, but Christ
that was the Hypocrite: nor was it the Son of God, but an Enemy to Caesar, and a Blasphemer that they put to death. But will not Christ know his sheep, though he find them torn in a wolks skin? You say it is turbulent Preisians that you strike, but what if Christ find but one of the least of his Brethren bleeding by it? It is but Hypocrites or Schismaticks that you reproach; but if Christ find an humble serious Christian suf∣fering by your abuse, and you to answer it, I would not be in your coats for all the greatness, and honour that you shall have be∣fore your everlasting shame. If Tertullus accuse a pestilent fellow, and a mover of Sedition, and Christ find an holy laborious Apostle in Bonds and suffering by it, it is not his names that will excuse him, and make an Apostle or Persecution to be another thing.
TO return to the endangered Flocks: Look upward sirs▪ and think whether Heaven be worth your labour! Look down∣wards, and think whether Earth be more worthy of it! Lay up your treasures where you must dwell for ever. If that be here, then scrape, and flatter, and get all that you can; But if it be not here, but in another life, then hearken to your Lord, and lay up for your selves a treasure in Heaven, and there let your very hearts be set, Matth. 6. 20, 21. And upon the peril of e∣verlasting misery, hearken not to any man that wil tempt you from a diligent holy life. It is a serious businesse, deal seriously in it; and be not laught or mockt out of Heaven, by the flouts of a di∣stracted sensual Atheist. If any of them will pretend to sobriety and wisdom, and undertake to prove
that God should not be loved and ser∣ved, and your Salvation sought with all your might, and with greater care and diligence then any earth∣ly thing, procure me a sober con∣ference with that man, and try whether I shall not prove him to be a befoold servant of the Devil, and a mischievous enemy of your Salvation, and his own. O that we might have but sober debates, instead of jeers, and scorns, and railings with this sort of men! how quickly should we shew you, that they must renounce the Scri∣pture, and renounce Christianity, and (if that be nothing with them) that they must renounce God, and renounce right Reason, and unman themselves, if they will renounce a holy Heavenly life, and blame them that make it their principal business in the world, to prepare for the world to come. But if they will not be entreat∣ed to such a sober conference, will
you that hear them, (if you care what becomes of you) but come to us, and hear what we can say for a Holy life, before you heark∣en to them; and let your souls have fair play, and shew that you have so much love to your selves, as not to cast away Salvation at the derision of a fool, before you have heard the other side. If I make not good the strictest Laws of God Almighty, against the most subtil cavils of any of the in∣struments of Satan, then tell me that Infidels or Epicures are in the right. Compare their words with the words of God. Consider well but that one Text, 2 Pet. 3. 11. and tell me whether it suit with their Opinions, [Seeing all these things must be dissolved, what man∣ner of persons ought we to be in all manner of holy Conversation and God∣liness; looking for, and hasting to the coming of the Day of God!] Did these words but sink into your
hearts, the next time you heard any man reproach a Holy Heaven∣ly life, it would perhaps make you think of the words of Paul to such another, Acts 13, 10. O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all Righ∣teousness, wilt thou not cease to per∣vert the right wayes of the Lord?] And if holiness be evil spoken of by them that never tried it, what wonder! Christ hath foretold us that it must be so, Matth. 5. 11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsly for my sake. Rejoyce and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.] John 15. 19, 20. [If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you, &c.] 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5, 14. They think it
strange that they run not with them to the same excess of riot, speak∣ing evil of you, who shall give ac∣count to him that is ready to judge the quick and dead—If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God resteth upon you; On their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.] Seneca him∣self oft telleth us, that among the Heathen, Vertue was a derision, so far is the nature of man degenera∣ted. The question is not what you are called or taken to be, but what you are. [Intus teipsum considera (in∣quit Sen.) non qualis sis aliis credas; Plerunque boni inepti & inertes vocan∣tur. Mihi contingat iste derisus: Aequo animo audienda sunt imperitorum con∣vitia; & ad honesta vadendi contemnen∣dus est iste contemptus.] that is, [In∣wardly consider of thy self, and judge not what thou art by the words of o∣thers: For the most part good men are called fools and dullards: Let me be so
derided: The reproaches of the igno∣rant (or unskilful) must be patiently heard; and this contempt of one that followeth vertue, must be contemned.] Yea it is the highest honour to be content to be accounted bad, that we may not be so; and the greatest tryal whether we be indeed sincere, to be put to it, to be either accounted Hypo∣crites, or to be such. Me thinks I can scarce too oft recite that excellent saying of Seneca, Epist. 72. Nemo plus videtur aestimare virtutem, nemo magis illi esse devotus, quam qui beni viri fa∣mam perdidit, non conscientiam perde∣ret] that is [No man seems to set a higher price on vertue; no man seems to be more devoted to it, then he that hath lost the reputation of being a good man, lest he should lose his conscience.] But perhaps you'l ask, May not a man be righteous over-mmch? as is in∣timated, Eccl. 7. 16. I answer, it is making a mans self over-wise or righteous, that is ther reppoved. And no doubt but 1. many
take on them, or make themselves more wise and righteous then they are: that is, are hypocrites. 2. As righ∣teousness is taken materially and in common estimation, so a man may be too Righteous. He may be too rigo∣rous, which is called Justice; and too much in grief, or fear, or trouble, & too much in any outward act that goeth under the name of duty. But it is not then truly and formally duty and righteousness, but sin. As to fast to the disabling the body for Gods service. To pray when we should hear: To hear when we should be about some greater work of mercy or neces∣sity: To neglect our outward labour and calling on pretence of Religion: To set up sacrifice against or before mercy: To sorrow when we should re∣joyce: To meditate, and fear, and grieve, beyond what the brain can bear, till it distract us: This is called, being righteous over-much: As also to make us a Religion of our own inven∣tions, and to over-do with will-wor∣ship
and the traditions of men, as the Pharisees and Papists. But indeed this is not Righteousness, but sin: To be formally over-much righteous, is a contradiction, and impossible. For to go beyond the Rule is unrighteousness: And to do too much, is to go beyond the Rule. Unless you dare imagine that God hath erred, and the Rule it self is over-strict, and the Law is unrighteous: But then how shall God judge the world? saith the Apostle, Rom. 3. 6. Shall not the judge of all the world do righteously? Gen. 18. 25. Nay how then shall he be God? And is there any thing now left but Ignorance or Wickedness to stand up against thy speedy diligence? Away then with thy delayes and sloathful∣ness. If thou wilt serve God with all thy might, let it be seen; If thou wilt be a Christian indeed, let deeds de∣clare it. Christianity is not a dead Opinion. If really thou live in hope of heaven, such hopes will make thee stir for the attainment. Why
standest thou idle, when thou art born for work, and all thy faculties are gi∣ven thee for work, and thou art re∣deemed for work? (for Evangelical work.) If thou be sanctisied, thou hast the Spirit of Christ, a quickning working principle within thee; which way canst thou look, but thou mayst see that which would shame a sloathful soul, and fire a cold and frozen heart, and call thee up to a speedy industry? what quickning words shalt thou find in Scripture, if thou wilt but bring thy heart thi∣ther as one that is willing to be quickened? what powerful commands, what promises, what threatnings, what holy examples of exceeding diligence of Christ and his Apostles? See how the Godly about thee are at work, though the world oppose them and deride them! how earnestly they pray! how carefully they walk! how sadly they complain that they are no better! And hast thou not an im∣mortal soul to save or lose as well as
they? See what a stir the proud am∣bitious person makes for less then no∣thing? what a stir the covetous and the voluptuous make for a sweetned draught of mortal poyson? And shall, we be idle that are engaged for Heaven? Is it reason that we should do less for God & our salvation, then they do for sinful pleasure to damna∣tion? You cannot mock them out of their Pride and Covetuousness: And shall they mock thee out of thy Re∣ligion, and thy hopes of Heaven? All the commands, and promises, and threatnings of God, the most po∣werful preaching, that, as it were, sets open Heaven and Hell to them, doth not prevail with fleshly men, to leave the most sordid and un∣manly sin▪ And shall the words or frowns of creeping dust prevail with thee against the work for which thou livest in the world, when thou hast still at hand unanswerable arguments from God, from thy self, from Heaven and Hell, to put thee
on? Were it but for thy Life, or the Life of thy children, friend, yea or enemy, or for the quenching of a fire in thy house, or in the Town, wouldst thou not stir and do thy best? And wilt thou be idle when e∣ternal life ies on it? Let Satan bawl against thee by his instruments. Let sensless sinners talk awhile of they know not what, till God have made them change their note. Let what will be the consequent to thy flesh. These are not matters for a man much to observe, that is engaged for an endless life. O what are these to the thing that thou art called to prosecute! Hold on then Christians in the work that you have begun. Do it prudently, and do it universal∣ly. Take it together, both works of Piety, Justice, and Charity: But do it now without delay, and do it serious∣ly with your might. I know not what cloud of darkness hath seized on those mens minds that speak against this; or what deadly damp hath
seized on their hearts, that hath so benummed and unmanned them. For my own part; though I have long lived in a sense of the precious∣ness of time, and have not been wholly idle in the world; yet when I have the deepest thoughts of the great everlasting consequents of my work, and of the uncertainty and shortness of my time, I am even a∣mazed to think that my heart can be so slow and sensless, as to do no more in such a case. The Lord knows, and my accusing wounded Consci∣ence knows, that my sloathfulness is so much my shame and admiration, that I am astonished to think that my resolutions are no stronger, my af∣fections no livelier, and my labour and diligence no greater, when God is the Commander, and hiis Love the encou∣rager, and his wrath the spur, and Heaven or Hell must be the issue. O what lives should all of us live, that have things of such unspeakable consequence on our hands, if our
hearts were not almost dead within us! Let who will speak against such a life, it shall be my daily grief and moan, that I am so dull, & do so little. I know that our works do not profit the Almighty, nor bear any propor∣tion with his reward; nor can they stand in his sight, but as accepted in the Lord our Righteousness, & per∣fumed by the odour of his merits. But I know they are neessary, & they are sweet. Without the holy imploy∣ment of our faculties, this life will be but a burden or a dream, and the next an unexpressible misery. O therefore that I had more of the Love of God, that my soul could get but nearer to him, and swiftlier move upward by Faith and Love! O that I had more of that Life, and active diligence, which the serpentine Cainish nature doth abhor, though I had with it the scorns of all about me, and though they made me as they once did bet∣ter men, as the filth of the world, & the off-scowring of all things! 1 Cor.
14. 13. O that I had more of this de∣rided diligence, and holy converse with the Lord, though my name were cast out as an evil-doer, Luk. 6. 22. and I were spit at, and buffetted by those that do now but secretly reproach! Might I nearly follow Christ in holiness, why should I grudge to bear his Cross, and to be used as he was used? Mat. 26. 27. Luke 18. 32. knowing that if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; and the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glo∣ry which shall be revealed in us, Rom. 8. 17, 18. If when we have done all, we are but unprofitable Servants, and must say, we have done but our duty, Luke 17. 10. have we not all more need of monitors to humble us for doing so much lesse then our duty, then to be reprehended for being too diligent and exact? I again protest, that it is not any works of Supererogation, or humane
invention, superstition, or self-ap∣pointment that I am defending, but only the accurate obeying of the Laws of God, and the utmost dili∣gence in such obedience, for the ob∣taining of everlasting life. Either God hath commanded these works of Holiness, Justice, and Charity, or not. If he have not then I have done, and yeild the cause; It is only what he hath commanded that I plead for. O that before you either speak a∣gainst any Holy duty, or your selves neglect it, you would but come to us, and soberly joyn in searching the Holy Scriptures, to see whether it be required there or not; and resolve but to obey it, if we prove it thence: and if it be but matter of humane imposition, we leave you to your selves, and should desire that you may be much left to your liberty in such things; and that you place not too much of your Religion therein. But if indeed it be commanded in the word of God, I beseech you, as you are
Christians, & as you are men, remem∣ber that when ever you blame or scorn a holy duty, it is God himself that you blame or scorn. If it be naught, it is long of him that did command it. The Subject must obey; should not such worms as we, obey the infinite God that made us? If it be a fault to obey, it is a duty to rebel, or disobey; and that must be because that God hath no authority to command, & that must be because he is not God. See whether you bring your opposition to a holy life; And dare not you stand to this? Dare you as openly mock God for making these strict and holy Laws, as you do men for obeying them? None but a professed Atheist dare. Alas Sirs, it is nothing but intoxi∣cating prosperity, and sensual delights, and worldly diversions, that turn your brains, and leave you not the sober use of Reason, that makes you think well of ungodly sloathfulness, and makes you think so contemptuously or senselesly of a heavenly life. I tell
you (& remember another day that you were told of it) that there is not the boldest Infidel in the world, nor the bitterest enemy to holiness in this Assembly, but shortly would wish they had rather been Saints in rags, with all the scorn and cruelty that malice can inflict on such, then to have braved it out in pride and gal∣lantry, with the neglect of the great everlasting things. I tell you again, there is not an ungodly wretch that heareth me, but ee long would give a world if he were owner of a holy heart and life, that he had spent his days in holy watchful preparations for his change, which he spent for that which will deceive him and forsake him. Methinks I even see how you will passionately rage against your selves▪ and tear your hearts with self-re∣venge, (if grace prevent it not by a more safe repentance) when you think too late how you lived on earth, and what golden times of
grace you lost, and vilisied all that would not lose them as folishly as you. If Repentance unto life made Paul so call himself foolish, disobedient, deceived and exceeding mad, Tit. 3. 3. Acts 26. 11.) you may imagine how tormenting Repentance will make you call your selves too late. O Sirs, you cannot now conceive, while you sit here in health, and ease, and honour, what different thoughts will then possess you of a holy and an unholy life! How mad you will think them that had but one lifes time of preparation for eter∣nal life▪ and despeately neglected it: And how ensibe you will then be of the wisdom of believers, that knew their Time, & used it while they had it! Now wisdom is iuified of all her children: but then how sensibly will it be justified of all its enemies! O with what gripe, will undone souls look back on a life of mercy and oppor∣tunities, thus basely undervalued, and slept away in dreaming idleness,
& fooled away for things of nought. The language of that damned rich man, Luk. 16. may help you in your predictions. O how you wil won∣der at your selves, that ever you could be so blind and senslesse, as to be no more affected with the warn∣ings of the Lord, and with the fore∣thoughts of everlasting joy or mise∣ry! To have but one one small part of time to do all that ever must be done by you for Eternity, and say all that ever you must say for your own or o∣thers souls, and that this was spent in worse then nothing! To have but One uncertain life, in which you must run the race that wins or loseth Heaven for ever; & that you should be tempted by a thing of nought, to lose that one irrecoverable opportu∣nity, and to fit still, or run another way, when you should have been ma∣king hast with all your might! O sirs, the thoughts of this will be other-kind of thoughts another day then now you feel them; you cannot now
think how the thoughts of this will then affect you! That you had a time in which you might have pray'd, with promise of acceptance, and had not hearts to take that time! That Christ was offered you as well as he was offered them that entertained him; that you were called on and warn'd as well as they, but obstinate∣ly despised and neglected all! That Life and Death were set before you, and the everlasting joyes were offer∣ed to your choice, against the charms of sinful Pleasures, and you might, have freely had them if you would, and were told that Holiness was the only way, and that it must be Now or Never, and yet that you chose your own destruction! These thoughts will be part of Hell to the ungodly. They will wonder that Reason could be so unreasonable, and they that had the common wit of man in other matters, should be so far beside themselves in that which is the only thing that its commen∣dable
to be wise for; that such sot∣tish Reasonings should prevail with them against the clearest light, and nothing should be preferred before all things, and arguments fetcht from chaff and dung, should conquer those that were fetcht from Heaen! O what heart-renting thoughts will these be, when Eternity shall afford them leisure for an impartial re∣view! Yea that they should deceive others also with such a gross deceit, and scorn at all that would not be as mad as they: that being drun∣ken with the worlds delusion, they should abuse all that were truly so∣ber; that the one thing needfull, should seem to them a needless thing! That their tongues should plead for these delusions of their wicked hearts, and they should be enemies to those that would not be enemies to God, and to themselves, and cast away their Time and Souls as they did! They will wonder with self-in∣dignation, what could bewitch
them into so great unreasonableness, below a man, against the light of na∣ture, as well as of supernatural re∣velation. Honourable and beloved Hearers, I beseech you do not take it ill, that I speak so much of these matters that are so unpleasant and unwel∣come to unbelieving, careless, car∣nal hearts: It is that I may prevent all this in time, by the awakenings of true Repentance: And O that this might be the success! That I might hear by your penitent Con∣fessions, and see by your universal speedy reformation, that God hath so great Mercy for you, & that these perswasions might be the means of so much Happinesse to you, and comfort unto me! However this Assembly shall be witnesses that you were warned: and Conscience shall be witness, that if you wast the rest of your dayes in the pleasures and vanities of this deceitful world, it was not because you could have no
better, and were not called to high∣er things. That if you yet stand idle, it is not because you could not be hired. For in the name of Christ I have called you into his vineyard, and told you of your work and wages, and ashamed your excuses and objections this day. Come away then speedily from the snares of sin∣ners, and the Company of decei∣ved hardened men, and cast away the works of darknesse! Heaven is before you! Death is at hand: The Eternal God hath sent to call you! Mercy doth yet stretch forth its arms! You have staid too long, and abused Patience too much already: Stay no longer! O now please God, and comfort us, and save your selves by Resolving that this shall be the Day: and faithfully performing of this your Resolution, Vp and be do∣ing: Believe, Repent, Desire, Obey, and do all this with all your Might. Love him that you must Love for ever, and Love him with all your
Soul and Might; seek that which is truly worth the seeking, and it will pay for all your cost and pains: And seek it first with all your Might: Remembring still it must be Now or Never. BEfore I conclude, I have two messages yet to deliver to the servants of the Lord: The One is of Encouragement: The Other of Direction. I know that many of you have a threefold trouble, which requireth a threefold comfort and encourage∣ment. One is, that you have done so little of your work; but lost so much of your time already: An∣other is, that you are so opposed and hindred. And the greatest of all is, that you are yet so dull and slow: The cure of which must be the matter of my Dire∣ctions.
1. For the first: That you have lost your Time, must be the matter of your Humiliation: But that all is not lost, before you see your sin and duty; but yet the patience and mercy of the Lord are attending you, and continu∣ing your hope; this is the matter of your comfort and encouragement. Repent therefore that you came no sooner home: But rejoyce that you are come home at last: and now be more diligent in redeem∣ing your time, in remembrance of the time already lost; And though it must be your grief, that your Master hath been de∣prived of so much as his service, and others of so much good which you should have done them, and that time is lost that cannot be recalled; yet it is your comfort, that your own Reward may be equal with them that have born the burthen and heat of the day: For many that are last (in the
time of their coming in) shall be first (in receiving their reward.) This is the meaning of that Pa∣rable in Mat. 20. which was spo∣ken to encourage them that had stood out too long, and to rebuke the envie, and high expectations of them that came in sooner: and it is no whit contradictory to those passages in Matth. 25. which intimate a different degree of glory to be given to them that have different degrees of Grace upon their industrious improve∣ment. The one Parable Matth. 20. shews that men shall not be rewarded differently for their lon∣ger or shorter continuance in the work, but that those that came in late, and yet are found with equal holiness, shall be reward∣ed equally with the first: And more, if their holiness be more, which the second Parable expres∣seth, declaring Gods purpose to give them the greatest Glory,
that have improved their Holi∣ness to the greatest Measure. O therefore that the sense of your former unkindness might pro∣voke you the more resolvedly to give up your selves in fervent love, and full obedience! and then you will find that your Time is Redeemed, though it cannot be recalled; and that Mercy hath secured your full re∣ward. O what an unspeakable▪ Mercy is this! that if yet you will devote your selves entirely to Christ, and serve him with your might, the little time that yet remains, he will take it as if you had come in at the first hour of the day! 2. And as for the Opposition and hinderances in your way, they are no other then what your Lord foretold. He hath gone before you, and conquered much more then ever you will en∣counter from without (though he
had not a body of sin to conquer: and in that respect the con∣quest of his Spirit in his mem∣bers, hath the preheminence of his personal conquest.) He hath bid you Be of good chear, because he hath overcome the World. If you will not take up your cross and follow him, you can∣not be his Disciples, Joh. 16. 33. Luk. 14. 27, 33. Would you be soldiers on condition you may not fight; or fight, and yet have no op∣position? Follow the Captain of your salvation. If mocking, or buffeting, or spitting in his face, or hanging him upon a Cross, or piercing his side, would have made him give up the work of your Re∣demption, you had been left to utter desperation. The oppositi∣on that is conquerable, should serve but to excite your courage and re∣solution, in a case of such necessity where you must prevail, or perish. Have you God himself on your
side, Rom. 8. 31. and Christ your Captain, and the Spirit of Christ to give you courage, and the Pro∣mise to invite you, and Heaven be∣fore you, and Hell behind you, and the examples of such an Army of conquering Believers: and shall the scorns or threats of a crawling Worm prevail against all these for your discourage∣ment? You are not afraid lest a∣ny man should pull down the Sun, or dry up the Sea, or overturn the Earth: And are you afraid that Man should conquer God? Rom. 8. 37. or take you out of the hands of Christ? Joh. 10. 28. 39. Mark how they used David, Psal. 56. 3, 4, 5, 6. Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil: They gather themselves together: they hide themselves: they mark my steps when they wait for my soul.] But what did he therefore fear or fly from God? No, [What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee: In God will I
praise his word; In God have I put my trust; I will not fear what flesh can do unto me] Isa. 51. 7, 8. [Hearken to me; ye that know righ∣teousness, the people in whose heart is the Law; Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their re∣vilings; For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my Righte∣ousness shall be for ever, and my Sal∣vation from generation to generation.] You deserve to be shut out of Hea∣ven, if you will not bear the breath of a fools derision for it. 3. But (saith the self-accusing soul) I am convinced that I ought to be la∣borious for my salvation, and that all this is too little that I can do: but I am dull, and cold, and negligent in all: I am far from doing it with my might: I hear, and read, and pray, as if I did it not, and as if I were half asleep, or my heart were away upon somewhat else. I fear I am but a lazy hypocrite.]
Answ. I shall first speak to thy doubt, and then to direct thee against thy sin. And first, you must be resolved whether your sloath be such as is pre∣dominant, or Mortifi'd: such as proveth that you are dead in sin, or onely such as proveth you but dis∣eased and infirm. And to know this, you must di∣stinguish 1. Between the dulness and coldness of the Affections, and the unresolvednesse and Disobedience of the soul. 2. Between a sloathfulness that keepeth men from a godly life in a life of wickedness, and that which only keepeth them from some parti∣cular act of duty, or abateth the de∣gree of their sincere affection and o∣bedience. 3. Between that sloath that is the vicious habit of the Will; and that which is the effect of age, or sickness, or melancholy, or other di∣stemper of the body. And so the case lieth plain before you. 1. If it be not only your affecti∣ons
that are dull, but your will through sloath is unresolved; and this not only in a temptation to the a∣batement of some degrees, and the neglect of some particular duty, but against a holy life, and against the forsaking of your reigning sin; and this be not only through some bodily distemper, disabling your Reason, but from the vicious Habit of your Wills: then is your sloath a mortal sign, and proves you in a graceless state: But if the sloath which you complain of, be onely the dulness of your affections, and the backward∣ness of your wills, to some high degrees, or particular duties, and the effect of some bodily distemper, or the weakness of your spiritual life, while your wills are habitually re∣solved for God, and a holy life, against a worldly fleshly life. This is your infirmity, and a sin to be lamented, but not a mark of death and grace∣lessness. You will have a backward sloath∣full
heart to strive with while you live; but bless God that you are offended with it, and would fain be delivered. This was Paul's evidence, Rom. 7. 24. You will have flesh, and flesh will plead for its interest, and will be striving against the Spirit; but bless God that you have also the Spirit to strive against the flesh. Be thankfull that you have life to feel your sickness, though you languish under it, and cannot work as healthfull men; and that you are in the way to Heaven, though you go not so fast as you should and would. 2. But yet, though you have Life, it is so grievous to be diseased, and languish under such an infir∣mity as sloath, that I advise you to stir up your selves to the utmost, and give not way to a lazie temper; and that you may serve the Lord with all your might, I recommend these few Directions to your ob∣servation.
Dir. 1. When you would be quickened up to seriousnesse and diligence, Have ready at hand such quickning Considerations, as are here before propounded to you, and set them before you, and labour to work them upon your hearts. Powerful truths would have some power upon your souls, if you will but sober∣ly apply your reasons to them and plead them with your selves, as you would do with another, in any of your reproofs or exhorta∣tions. Dir. 2. Take heed lest any worldly design or interest, or any lust or sen∣sual delight, divert your minds from God and duty. For all the powers of your soul will languish, when you should set them on work on spiritual things, and your hearts will be abroad, when you should be wholly taken up with God, if once they be entangled with worldly things. Watch therefore over them in your Callings, lest
the creature steal too deep into your affections: For if you be alive to the world, you will be in that measure dead to God. Dir. 3. If it be possible, live under a lively Ministry, that when your hearts go cold and dull unto the As∣semblies, they may come warm and quickned home. Life cherisheth life, as fire kindleth fire. The Word and Ordinances of God are quick, powerful, and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the hearts, Heb. 4. 12. and therefore it may do much to make you feel. Many a thousand hath it pricked at the heart, and sent them home alive, that before were dead, Acts 2. 37. Much more may you expect that it should excite the principles which you have already. Dir. 4. If it may be, converse with
lively, active, stirring Christians; but especially have one such for a bosome Friend, that will warm you when you are cold, and help to awake you when you drop a sleep, and will not comply with you in a declining, lazie, and unpro∣fitable course, Eccles. 4. 9, 10, 11. Two are better then one, because they have a good reward for their labour: For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him that is alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to help him up. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one alone be warm? And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not easily broken. Dir. 5. Put not away from you the day of death. Look not for long life. It is the life to come that must be the life of all your duties here: and distant things do lose their force. Set death, and judgment,
and eternall life continually as near at hand; live in a watchfull expectation of your change, do all as dying men, and as passing to receive the recompence of endlesse joy or woe; and this will quicken you. To this end, go often to the house of mourning, and be not un∣seasonably or immoderately in the House of Mirth. When you ob∣serve what is the end of all men, the heart will be made better by it, Eccles. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. But ex∣cess of carnal mirth doth infatuate men, and destroy their wisdom, se∣riousness and sobriety. Keep always a sense of the brevity of Life, and of the preciousness of Time, and remember that it is posting on whe∣ther you work or play. Methinks, if you forget any of the rest, this one consideration that we have in hand, should make you bestir you with your Might, that, It must be now or Never.
I shall only add two needful Cau∣tions, lest while we cure one disease, we cause another (as knowing that corrupted-nature is used to run from extream into extream. 1. Desire and labour more for an high estimation of things spiritual and eternal, and a fixed resolution, and an even and diligent endeavour, then for passionate feelings and affe∣ctions. For these latter are more un∣constant in the best, and depend much on the temper of the body, & are not of so great necessity as the former, though excellent in a just degree and season. For its possible that passions even about good things may be too much, when Estimation, Resolution, and regular Endeavours, cannot.) 2. Be suspicious when you have the warmest and liveliest Affections, lest your judgments should be pervert∣ed by following when they should lead. It's very common for Zeal
and strong Affections, even to that which is good, to occasion the mi∣stakes of the understanding, and make men look all on one side, and think they can never go far enough from some particular sins, till igno∣rantly they are carried into some perhaps as great on the other hand. Be warned by the sad experience of these times, to suspect your judge∣ments in the fervour of your affe∣ctions. And observing these cautions, let nothing abate your Zeal and Dili∣gence, but whatever Duty is set be∣fore you, do it with your Might: for it must be Now or Never. THough I know that the enmi∣ty to a holy, heavenly life is so radicated in corrupted nature, that all that I have said is necessary and too little; yet some I know will think it strange that I should intimate, that any that preach the Gospel are guil∣ty
of any measure of this sin, and will think that I intend by it to re∣flect upon some parties above the rest. But again I profess, that it is no party but the Devills party, and the ungodly party, that I mean and its hard if you will not beleve me concerning my own sense. Nor is it my desire that any of the odiousness of Schism, Sedition, Re∣bellion, or disobedience to Authori∣ty, should be so much as diminished by any mens profession of godliness. No, I beseech you, by how much the more godly you are, by so much the more detest all these; godlinesse tendeth to shame & condemn these odious sins, and not to be a cloak for them or any extenuation. Nay, what can more aggravate them, then that they should be found in the pro∣fessors of godliness? I again pro∣fess that I have no design but to plead for serious diligence in the Religion which we are all agreed in, and to
stop the mouth of those that wick∣edly speak against it. But alas! it is too evident that I have too many to speak to that are not innocent; why else doth Scrip∣ture tell us that such there will be still to the end of the world? and that there is some that preach Christ of strife and envy, to add affliction to the bonds of the afflicted! And how came holy Mr. Bolton to find so much work for these rebukes so late∣ly in his time, as in his books you find? And can we already forget what abundance of Antinomian Teachers were among us, that turn∣ed out the very doctrine of practical diligence, and crying it down as a setting up our selves and our own works, and as injurious to free grace; and under pretence of exalting Christ did set up an heartless, life∣less doctrine, that tended to turn out the life of a Christianity, and take men off their necessary dili-
as a legal dangerous thing? And what Ordinance of God hath not been cast out by Preachers them∣selves upon Religious pretences, Family-Duties, Catechising, Sing∣ing of Psalms, Baptism, the Lords Supper, and which not? And if all these were down, wherein should the practice of Religion consist? And what abundance of Pamphlets had we that laboured to make the Orthodox, faithfull Ministry a very scorn, and deride them for their faithful service of God, and their faithfulness to their Superiors, inop∣position to their unrighteous ways? I am loath to blot my papers, and trouble your ears with the names of the Martin-mar-priests, and a multitude of such others which I mean. And let no Papist, or any enemy of our Church, reproach us, because such enemies to Holiness are found among us. Can it be expected that
our Church should be better than the Family of Adam, that had a Cain? or of Noah, that had a Cham? or of Christ, that had a Judas? And are there not far more enemies to serious godliness among the Papists themselves, then among us? One instance out of the Life of Philip Nerius, the Father of the Oratori∣ans, I will put into the Preface, be∣cause it is too long to be here insert∣ed. There is no place, nor rank of men in the world, where some of the enemies of an holy life are not to be found, even among those that profess the same Religion in Doctri∣nals, with those whom they oppose. Christ and the Devil have their se∣veral Armies; and if once the De∣vil disband his Souldiers, and have none to oppose a holy life, then tell me that its a needless thing to de∣fend it, and to confute them. But I am listed under Christ, & will never give over pleading for him, till his
adversaries give over pleading a∣gainst him, and his cause, as long as he continueth my liberty and duty. And blessed be the Lord, that if an Hypocritical Preacher be found a∣mong us, that secretly or openly dis∣graceth a diligent holy life, there are more able, holy faithful ones to con∣fute him both by Doctrine, and by their Lives, then are to be found in any other Kingdom in the world proportionally, that ever I could hear of. And that the faithful Disci∣ples are so many, and the Judas'es so few, how great a blessing is it to this Land, and how great an honour to his Majesties Government, and to the Church in his Dominions? The Lord teach this sinful Nation to be thankful, and pardon their ingrati∣tude, and never deprive them of this forfeited mercy. The Lord teach them to hearken to the Friends, and not to the Enemies of Holiness, and never to receive a wound at the
heart of their Religion, however they hear their smaller differences about things circumstantial. And now I should conclude, I am loth to end, for fear lest I have not yet prevailed with you: What are you now resolved to do from this day forward? It is work that we have been speaking of, and necessary work of endless consequence, which must be done, and quickly done, and throughly done. Are you not con∣vinced that it is so? that plowing and sowing are not more necessary to your harvest, then the work of ho∣liness, in this day of grace, is neces∣sary to your salvation? You are blind if you see not this: you are dead if you feel it not: what then will you do? For Gods sake, and for your own sake, stand not demurring till time be gone. It is all that the Devil desireth, if he can but find you one thing or other to be thinking, and talking, and doing about, to keep
you from this till time be gone; and then he will insult over you, & then he that kept you from seeing and feeing, will help you to see and feel to your calamity: Then the Devil will make you feel that which Preach¦ers could not make you feel: and he will make you think of that, and lay it close enough to your hearts, which we could not get you to lay to heart. Now we study and preach to you in hope, but then (alas it breaks our hearts to think of it) we have done with you for ever, because all hope is gone. Then the Devil may challenge a Minisr: [Now do thy worst to bring this sinner to re∣pentance; Now call to him to con∣sider, and believe, and come to Christ; Now offer him mercy, and intreat him to accept it; Now cry to him to take heed of sin and of temptations, that he comes not to this place of torments; Now tell him of the beauty or necessity of
holiness, and call upon him to Turn and Live; Now do thy worst to rescue him from my power, and to save his soul.] Alas poor sinner! will you stop your ears, and go on in sin, and damn your selves, and break our hearts to fore-see that day! Must we see the Devil go away with such a prey, and shall we not rescue your captivated souls, because you will not hear, you will not stir, you will not consent! Oh hear the God of Heaven if you will not hear us, who calleth to you, Return and Live! Oh hear him that shed his blood for souls and tendereth you now salvation by his blood! O hear without any more delay, before all is gone, and you are gone, and he that now deceiveth you, torment you! Yet hold on a little longer in a carnal, earthly, un∣sanctified state, and it is too late to hope, to pray, or strive for your salvation: Yet a little longer, and mercy will have done with you for
ever; and Christ will never invite you more, nor never offer to cleanse you by his Blood, or sanctifie you by his Spirit! Yet a little longer, and you shall never hear a Sermon more, and never more be troubled with those Preachers that were in good sadness with you, and longed once for your conversion and salvation! O sleepy dead-hearted sinners, what should I do to show you how near you stand to Eternity, and what is now doing in the world that you are going to, & how these things are thought on there! What should I do to make you know how Time is va∣lued, how sin and holinesse are estee∣med in the world where you must live for ever! What should I do to make you know those things to day, which I will not thank you to know when you are gone hence! O that the Lord would open your eyes in time! Could I but make you know these things as believers should
know them, I say not as those that see them, nor yet as dreamers, that do not regard them, but as those that believe that they must shortly see them; what a joyfull hours work should I esteem this! how happy would it be to you and me, if every word were accompanied with tears! If I followed you home and beg'd your Consideration on my bear knees, or as a beggar begs an alms at your doors, If this Sermon cost me as many censures or slanders as ever Sermon did, I should not think it too dear, if I could but help you to such a sight of the things we speak of, that you might truly understand them as they are: that you had but a true awakned apprehension of the shortnesse of your day, of the near∣less of eternity, and of the endless consequence of your present work; and what holy labour and sinful loy∣tering will be thought of in the world to come for ever! But when
we see you sin, and trifle, and no more regard your endless life, and see also what haste your Time is making, and yet cannot make you understand these things; when we know our selves as sure as we speak to you, that you will shortly be asto∣nished at the review of your present sloth and folly, and when we know that these matters are not thought of in another world, as they are among the sleepy or the bedlam sin∣ners here, and yet know not how to make you know it, whom it doth so exceeding much concern; this a∣mazeth us, and almost breaks our hearts! Yea, when we tell you of things that are past doubt, and can be no further matter of contro∣versie, then men have sold their un∣derstandings, & betrayed their rea∣son to their sordid lusts, and yet we cannot get reasonable men to know that which they cannot choose but know, to know that seriously
and practically, which alwayes hath a witness in their breasts, and which none but the profligate dare deny: I tell you sinners, this, even this is worse then a prison to us; it is you that are our persecutors; it is you that are the daily sorrow of our hearts; its you that disappoint us of our hopes, and make us lose so much of the labour of our lives! And if all others did as some do by us, alas how sad an employment should we have! and how little would it trou∣ble us to be silenced and laid aside! If we were sick of the ambitious or covetous thirst, we should then say that it is they that deny us wealth and honour that disappoint us. But if we are Christians, this is not our case, but it is the thirst after your conversion and salvation which af∣fecteth us: and therefore it is you, even you that linger in your sins and delay repentance, and forget your home, and neglect your souls, it is
you that disappoint us, and you that are our afflicters; and as much as you think you befriend us when you plead our cause against men of vio∣lence and rage, it is you that shall answer for the loss of our time, and labour, and hope, and for the griev∣ing of your Teachers hearts. Sinners, what ever the Devil and raging passion may say against a holy life, God and your own consciences shall be our witnesses, that we desi∣red nothing unreasonable, or unne∣cessary at your hands. I know it is the master-piece of the Devils craft, when he cannot keep all Religion in contempt, to raise up a dust of con∣troversie in the world about names, and forms, and circumstances in Re∣ligion, that he may keep men busily striving about these, while Religion it self is neglected or unknown; and that he may make men believe that they have some Religion, be∣cause they are for one side or other
in these controversies: and especially that he may entice men to num∣ber the substantials of Religion it self among these lesser doubtful points, and make sinners believe that it is but the precise opinion of one party that they reject, while they reject the serious practice of all true Religion. And so the De∣vil gets more by these petty quar∣rels and controversies, occasioned by contentious empty men, then he could have done by the open op∣position of Infidels, Heathens, or the prophane: So that neither I, nor any man that opinionative men have a mind to quarrel with, can tell how to exhort you to the very practice of Christianity it self, but you are pre∣sently casting your thoughts upon some points wherein we are report∣ed to differ from you, or remembring some clamours of malicious men, that prejudice against the person of the speaker, make keep your souls
from profiting to salvation by the do∣ctrine which even your selvs profess. If this be the case of any one of you, I do not mean your consciences shall so scape the power or evidence of the truth. Dost thou talk of our differences about Forms and Cere∣monies? Alas man! what's that to the message which we come about to thee, what is that to the busi∣ness that we are preaching of? The question that I am putting to you, is not whether you will be for this form of Church-Govern∣ment or for that, for a Ceremony or against it; but it is, whether you will hearken in time to God and conscience, and be as busie to pro∣vide for Heaven as ever you have been to provide for Earth? and whether you will set your selves to do the work that you are Created and Redeemed for? This is the business that I am sent to call you to; what say you? will you do it, and do it seriously without delay? You shall
not be able to say, that I called you to a party, a faction, or some opi∣nion of my own, or laid your salva∣tion upon some doubtful controver∣sie. No sinner, thy conscience shall have no such shift for its deceit: It is godlinesse, serious and practical godliness that thou art called to. It is nothing but what all christians in the world, both Papists & Greeks, & Pro∣testants, and all the parties among those that are true christians, are a∣greed in the profession of. That I may not leave thee in any darkness which I can deliver thee from, Ile tell thee dis∣tinctly, though succinctly, what it is that thou art thus importuned to; and tell me then whether it be that which any christian can make doubt of. 1. That which I intreat of thee is, but to live as one, that verily believeth there is a God, and that this God is the Creator, the Lord, and Ruler of the world; and that it is incomparably more of our busi∣ness
to understand and obey his Laws, and as faithful Subjects to be conformed to them, then to observe or be conformed to the Laws of Man: And to live as men that do believe, that this God is Almighty, and the greatest of men are less then crawling worms to him; and that he is infinitely wise, and the wisdom of man is foolishness to him; and that he is infinitely good and amiable, and the best of creatures is dung and filth in comparison of him; and that his love is the only felicity of man, and that none are happy but those that do enjoy it, and none that do enjoy it can be mi∣serable; and that riches, and ho∣nors, and fleshly delights are bru∣tish vanities in comparison of the eternal love of God. Live but as men that heartily believeth all this, and I have that I come for. And is any of this a matter of
controversie or doubt? not among Christians I am sure: not among wise men. It is no doubt to those in heaven, nor to those in hell, not to those that have not lost under∣standing upon earth, they Live then according to these truths. 2. Live as men that verily be∣lieve, that Mankind is fallen into sinne and misery, and that all men are corrupted, and under the condem∣nation of the Law of God, till they are delivered, pardoned, reconciled to God, and made new creatures by a renewing, restoring sanctify∣ing change. Live but as men that believe that this cure must be wrought, and this great restoring change must be made upon your selves, if it be not done already. Live as men that have so great a work to look after. And is this a matter of any doubt or controversie? sure it is not to a Christian: and me-thinks it should not be to any man else
that knoweth himself, any more then to a man in a dropsy, whether he be diseased, when he feels the thirst, and sees the swelling. Did you but know what cures and changes are neces∣sarily to be made upon your disea∣sed miserable souls; if you care what becomes of them, you would soon see cause to look about you. 3. Live but as men that verily believe that you are Redeemed by the Son of God, who hath suffered for your sins, and brought you the tidings of pardon & salvation, which you may have if you will give up your selves to him, who is the physitian of souls, to be healed by him. Live as men that believe, that the infinite love of God reveal∣ed to lost mankind in the Redeemer, doth bind us to love him with all our hearts, and serve him with all our re∣stored faculties, and to work as those that have the greatest thankfulness to shew, as well as the greatest mercies to receive, and miserie to escape: &
as those that believe, that if sinners that without Christ had no hope, shall now love their sins, & refuse to leave them, and to repent and be conver∣ted, and unthankfully reject the mer∣cie of salvation so dearly bought, and so freely offered them, their damnation will be doubled as their sin is dou∣bled. Live but as men that have such Redemption to admire, such mer∣cie to entertain, and such a salvati∣on to attain, and that are sure they can never scape if they continne to neglect so great salvation, Heb. 2. 3. And is there any controversie among Christians in any of this? There is not certainly. 4. Live but as men that believe, that the holy Ghost is given by Jesus Christ to convert, to quic∣ken, to sanctifie all that he will save: & that except you be born of the Spirit, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Joh. 3. 5, 6. Rom. 8. 9. And
that without this, no patching or mending of your lives by any com∣mon principles wil serve the turn for your salvation, or make you accept∣able to God, Heb. 11. 6. Live as men that believe that this Spirit is given by the hearing of the word of God, and must be prayed for, and obeyed, & not resisted, quench'd, and griev'd. And is there any controversie a∣mong Christians in any of this? Ask those that make a mock at Holinesse, Sanctification, and the Spirit, whe∣ther they be not baptized into the Name of the Holy Ghost, and profess to believe in him as their Sanctifi∣er, as well as in the Son as their Re∣deemer? And then ask them whether it be not a thing that should make even a devil to tremble, to come so near the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, as to mock at his Office and Sanctifying work, and at the holines, without which no man shall see the Lord! Heb. 12. 14. and this after they
are baptized, and profess to believe in the holy Ghost as their Sanctifier? 5. Live but as men that believe that sin is the greatest evil, the thing which the Holy Ghost abhorreth; and then you will never make a mock of it, as Solomon saith the foolish do, Pro. 14. 9. nor say, What harm is in it? 6. Live but as men that believe no sin is par∣doned without Repentance, and that Repentance is the loathing and for∣saking of sin; and if that it be true, it will not suffer you to live wilfully in any gross sin, nor to desire to keep the least infirmity, nor to be loth to know your unknown sins. 7. Live as those that believe that you are to be members of the Holy Catholick Church, and therein to hold the Communion of Saints. And then you will know, that it is not as a member of any Sect or Party, but as a holy member of this holy Church, that you must be saved: and that it is the name of a Christian which is more honoura∣ble
then the name of any division, or sub-division among Christians, whe∣ther Greek, or Papist, or Potestant, or Prelatist, or Presbyterian, or In∣dependent, or Anabaptist. It is easie to be of any one of these parties; but to be a Christian, which all pretend to, is not so easie. It is easie to have a burn∣ing zeal for any divided party or cause, but the common zeal for Chri∣stian Religion, is not so easie to be kindled, or kept alive, but requireth as much diligence to maintain it, as dividing zeal requireth to quench it. It is easie to love a party as a party; but to keep up Catholick charity to all Christians, & to live in that holy love & converse, which is requisite to [a Christian communion of Saints] is not so easie. Satan and corrupted nature befriend the love and zeal of faction, which is confined to a party on a controverted cause: but they are enemies to the love of Saints, and to the zeal for holiness, and to the
chatholick charity, which is from the spirit of Christ. You see I call you not to division, not to side with Sects, but to live as members of a holy Catho∣lick Church, which consisteth of all that be holy in the world: and to live as those that believe the Commu∣nion of Saints. 8. Live as those that believe that there is a life everlast∣ing, where the Sanctified shall live in endless joy, and the unsanctified in endless punishment and woe: live but as men that verily believe a Heaven and a Hell, and a day of Judgment, in which all the actions of this life must be revised, & all men judged to their endless state. Believe these things heartily, and then think a holy dili∣gence needless if you can: Then be of the mind of the deriders & enemies of godliness if you can! If one sight of Heaven or Hell would serve with∣out any more ado, instead of other arguments to confute all the cavils of the distracted world, & to justifie the
most diligent Saints in the judgment of those that now abhor them, why should not a sound belief of the same thing in its measure do the same? 9. Live but as those that believe this life is given us as the only Time to make preparation for eternal life: and that all that ever shall be done for your salvation, must be Now, just Now, be∣fore your time is ended: Live as those that know (and need not faith to tell them) that this time is short, and almost at an end already, and stayeth for no man, but as a post doth haste away: It will not stay while you are trimming you or sporting you: it will not stay while you are taken up in Stage-plays, in complements, in idleness, or any impertinent needless thing; It wil not tarry while you spend yet the other year, or month, or day, in your worldliness or ambition, or in your lusts and sensual delights, & put off your Repentance to another time. O sirs, for the Lords
sake do but live as men that must shortly be buried in a grave, & their souls appear before the Lord, and as men that have but this little Time to do all for their everlasting life, that ever must be done. O live as men that are sure to die, and are not sure to live till to morrow. And let not the noise of pleasure or wordly busi∣ness, or the chat or scorns of misera∣ble fools, bear down your reason, and make you live as if you knew not what you know, or as if there were any doubt about these things. Who is the man, and what is his name, that dare contradict them, and can make it good? O do not sin a∣gainst your knowledg: do not stand still and see your glass running, and Time making such hast, and yet make no more haste your selves, then if you were not concerned in it: Do not, O do not slumber, when Time and Judgment never slumber; nor sit still when you have so much to do, &
know all that is now left undone must be undone for ever! Alas, sirs, how many questions of exceeding weight have you yet to be resolved in? whether you are truly sanctified? whether your sins be pardoned? whe∣ther you shall be saved when you die? whether you are ready to leave this world, and enter upon another? I tell you, the answering of these, and many more such questions, is a matter of no small difficulty or concernment. And all these must be done in this little and uncertain time. It must be Now or Never. Live but as men that be∣lieve and consider these certain un∣questionable things. 10. Lastly, Will you but live as men that believe that the world and the flesh are the deadly enemies of your Salvation; and that believe; that if any man love the world, (so far) the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Joh. 2. 15, 16. And as men that believe, that if ye live after flesh, ye
shall die, but if by the spirit ye mor∣tifie the deeds of the bodie, ye shall live, Rom. 8. 13. and that those that are in Christ Jesus, and are freed from condemnation, are such as walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8. 1. And that we must make no provision for the flesh, to satisfie the will or lusts thereof, Rom. 13. 10. and must not walk in gluttonie & drun∣kenness, in chambering and wanton∣ness, in strife and envying, v. 13. but must have our hearts where our trea∣sure is, Mat. 6. 21. and converse in Heaven, Phil. 3. 18, 19, 20. and being risen with Christ, must seek the things that are above, and set our af∣fections on them, and not on the things that are on earth, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Sirs, will you say that any of this is our singular opinion, or matter of con∣troversie & doubt? Are not all Chri∣stians agreed in it? Do you not your selves profess that you believe it? Live then but as those that do believe it, &
condemn not your selves in the things that you confess. I tell thee, if now thou wilt refuse to live according to these common ac∣knowledged truths, thou shalt never be able to say before the Lord, that mens controversie about a Ceremony or Church-Government, of the manner or worship, were the things that hin∣dred thee! but all sorts & sects shall be witnesses against thee, and condemn thee, for they all agreed in these things even the bloodiest sect, that imprison, and torment and kill others for their differences in smaller matters, are yet agreed with those that they persecute, and murder, about these things: Pa∣pists are agreed in them, and Prote∣stants are agreed in them: All the sects that are now quarrelling among us, & in the world, are agreed in them, who are but meet for the name of Christi∣ans. All these will be ready to bear witness against the prophane, the sen∣sual, the sloathful neglecter of God and
his Salvation, and to say, we all con∣fessed, notwithstanding our other differences, that all these things were certain truths, and that mens lives should be ordered according unto these. But if yet you pretend controver∣sie to cover your malignity or un∣godliness, I will go a little further, and tell you, that in the matter as well as in the principles, it is things that we are all agreed in, which I call you to, and which the ungodly do refuse: Ile briefly name them. 1. One part of your work which we urge you to do with all your might is, seriously & soberly to con∣sider often of all these truths before mentioned, which you say you do be∣lieve: And is it any controversie with reasonable men whether they should use their reason? or with believers whe∣ther they should consider and lay to heart the weight & use of the things which they believe? 2. Another part of your work is to
love God with all your soul & might and to make him your delight, & to seek first his Kingdom and the right∣ousness thereof; and to set your affe∣ctions on things above, and to live on earth as the heirs of heaven: And is there any controversie among Protestants, Papists, or any about this? 3. Another part of your work, is, to see the honouring of God in the world, the promoting of his King∣dom and Government in your selves and others, the doing of his will and obeying of his Laws: And is there a∣ny controversie in this? 4. Another part of your work, is, to to mortifie the flesh, & to reject its conceits, and desires, and lusts, which resist the foresaid obedience to God; and to cast out the inordinate love and care of worldly things: to refuse the counsels, the commands, the will, the enticements and perswasions of man, which contradict the commands & will of God: & to forsake all that you have
in the world rather then forsake your dear Redeemer, and hazard your salvation by any wilful sin: To take up your Cross and follow Christ through a life of suffering to glory; I know there is difficulty enough in all this, and that flesh will repine a∣gainst it and abhor it: But is there a∣ny controversie about it among any true believers? Is not all this the ex∣press Command of God, and ne∣cessary to salvation? 5. Another part of your work, is, to avoid temptations, and fly from the occasions and appearances of evil, and not only to avoid that which is direct∣ly evil it self, but that also which would draw you into evil (as far as you can) and to keep as far as may be from the brink of hell and danger, & to have no fellowship with the un∣fruitful works of darknes, nor be com∣panions with them, but reprove them, and mourn for the unclean and wicked conversation of the world. This is it that we intreat of you: & is there any mat∣ter of controversie in all this?
6. Another part of the work which we call you to, is, to redeem this little Time that is allotted you; To make the best of it, and improve it to the greatest furtherance of your salvation: To lose none of it upon unprofitable things: to spend it in those works wch will comfort you most when time is gone; If it will be more comforta∣ble to you in the day of Judgment, that you have spent your Time in playes, & sports, and idleness, & worldly cares, & pleasures, then in serving God, & preparing for another life, then hold on, and do so to the end: But if it will not, then do what you would hear of, seeing you must hear of it: spend none of your time in idleness & un∣fruitful things, till you have no better and more necessary things to spend it in, & till you have Time to spare from more important work. This is our request to you, that you would not lose one hour of your pretious Time, but spend it as those that have lost too
much, and have but a little more to spend in preparation for eternity. And is this any Schismatical or fa∣ctious motion? Is there any thing controvertible, or which any Christi∣an can speak against, in any of this? 7. Another part of your work, is, to search the Scripture as that wch con∣taineth your directions for eternal life, Joh. 5. 39. To love the Word of God more then thousands of gold & silver, & perfer it before your necessary food, Psal. 119. 72. Job 23. 12. and to medi∣tate in it day & night, as that which is your pleasure and delight, Psa. 1. 2. & as that which is able to make you wise unto Salvation, 2 Tim. 3. 15. and to build you up, & give you an inhe∣ritance among the sanctified, Acts 20. 32. That you lay up the word of God in your hearts, and teach them dili∣gently to your children, and talk of them when you sit in your houses, and when you walk by the way, & when you lie down, and when you rise up,
Deut. 6. 6, 7. & 11. 18, 19. that so you & your houshoulds may serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. This is the work that we call you to: And is there any thing that a christian can make a controver∣sie of in all this? Is there any thing that Protestants are not agreed of? 8. Another part of your work, is, that you guard your tongues, and take not the name of God in vain, and speak no reproaches or slanders against your brethren, & that no corrupt communi∣cation proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, & that it may minister grace unto the hearers, Eph. 4. 29. and that fornication, uncleanness, and covetous∣ness be not once named among you, as becometh Saints: neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks, Eph. 5. 3, 4. And is there any thing of doubt or controversie in this? 9. Another part of the work which we perswade you to, is,
to pray continually, 1 Thes. 5. 17. and not to wax faint, Luke 18. 1. to be fervent and importunate with God, as those that know the great∣nesse of their necessity, Luke 18. 6, 7. Jam. 5. 16. That you pray with all prayer and supplication in the Spi∣rit, Eph. 6. 18. and in every thing by prayer and supplication to make known your requests to God, Phil. 4. 6. that you pray for Kings and all in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all god∣linesse and honestie, 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. And is there any thing in all this that any Christian can deny? 10. Lastly, the work we call you to, is, to love your neighbours as your selves, and to do to others as you would have them (arbitrio sa∣no) do to you. To scorn, deride, molest, imprison, slander, or hurt no man, till you would be so used your selves on the like occasion. To rejoyce in other mens profit and re∣putation as your own. To envy
none, to hate no man; to wrong none in their persons, estates, or names: To preserve the chastity, honour and estate of your neigh∣bour as your own. To love your ene∣mies, and forgive them that wrong you, and pray for them that hate, and hurt, and persecute you. This is your work: And is there any thing of faction, Schism or contro∣versie in this? No, you shall short∣ly be convinced, that the differen∣ces and controversies of believers, and the many opinions about Re∣ligion, were a wretched hypocrital pretence for your neglect and con∣tempt of the substance of Religion, about which there was no diffe∣rence, but all parties were agreed in the confession of the truth, how∣ever hypocrites would not live ac∣cording to their own professions. But perhaps you'l say, that there is such difference in the Manner yet among them that agree in the Principles and the Matter, that you
know not which way God is to be worshipped? In answer, 1. Do you practise as aforesaid, according to the Princi∣ples and matter agreed on, or not? If you do not, it is but gross hypo∣crisie to pretend disagreements in the Manner, as an excuse for your contempt or omission of the Mat∣ter, which all agree in. Forsooth your families shall be prayerless, and you will make a jeast of serious pray∣er, because some pray on a book, and some without, and some that are wisest, think that either way is law∣ful. Will God be deceived by such siilly reasonings as these? 2. But this shall not hide the nakedness of your impiety. Will you also in the Manner of your obedi∣ence, but go so far as all Christians are agreed in? I will breifly then give you some particular instances. 1. The work of God must be done with reverence, in his fear: not like the common works of men, with
a common carelesse frame of mind: God will be sanctified of all that draw near him, Lev. 10. 3. He will be served as God, and not as man: He will not be prayed to with a regard∣lesse mind, as those do that can di∣vide their tongues from their hearts, and say over some customary words while they think of something else. Is a dreadful thing for dust to speak to God Almighty; and a dange∣rous thing to speak to him as slight∣ly and regardlesly, as if we were talking to one of our companions. It beseemeth a believer to have more of the fear of God upon his heart, in his ordinary converse in the world, then hypocrites and forma∣lists have in their most solemn pray∣ers. Knowest thou the difference between God and man? Put then such a difference between God and man in thy addresses, as his Majesty requireth. And see also that thy fa∣mily compose themselves to a reve∣rent behaviour, when they joyn with
thee in the worshipping of God. What have you to say now against this reverent manner of behaviour? Is there any thing controvertible in this? 2. It also requisite that you be serious and sober in all the service you perform to God. Do it not lu∣dicruously, and with half a heart! Be as much more fervent and seri∣ous in seeking God and your salva∣tion, then you are in seeking world∣ly things, as God and your Salvati∣on is better then any thing in the world: Or if that be beyond your reach (though else there is reason for it) at least let the greatest things have the greatest power upon your hearts. You cannot pray more fer∣vently for heaven then heaven de∣serveth. O let but the excellency and greatnesse of your work appear in the serious manner of your perform∣ance. I hope you cannot say that his is any point of controversie, unlesse it be a controversie whether a man
should be an hypocrite, or be serious in the Religion which he doth pro∣fess. 3. It is requisite that your ser∣vice of God be performed under∣standingly, Psal. 47. 7. 1 Cor. 14, 15. God delighteth not in the blind de∣votion of men that know not what they do. Prayers not understood are indeed no prayers: For no mans desire goeth further then his know∣ledge, and he expresseth not his de∣sires that knoweth not what he ex∣presseth himself. Nor can he expect the concurrence of another mans desires, that speaketh what another understandeth not. The word that is not understood, cannot sink into the heart and sanctifie it: or if it be not well and soundlie understood, its easily stoln away by the tempter, Mat. 13. 19, 23. If understanding be necessarie in our common conversa∣tions, much more in our holy ad∣dresses to the Almighty, Prov. 17. 27. A man of understanding is of an ex∣cellent
Spirit: but God hath no plea∣sure in fools, or in their Sacrifices, Eceles. 5. 1, 4. nor is pleased with a Parrot-like lip-service, which is not understood. He saith in detestation of the Hypocrites, This people draw∣eth near unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, Mat. 15. 8, 9. I hope then when we call you to serve God in judgment, & with understan∣ding, we call you to nothing that a Christian should make question of. 4. God is a Spirit, and they that serve him must serve him in Spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. 24. The Father seeketh such to worship him, ver. 23. He calleth for the heart: he looketh for the inward desires of the soul: He converseth with minds that are abstracted from vanity, and are seri∣ously taken up in attending him, and are intent upon the work they do: The carkass of a Prayer separated from the Life of it, stinketh before the holy God. As he will be loved,
so will he be served with all the heart and soul and might. And do we call you then to any thing that is doubt∣ful, when we call you to the Spiri∣tual worshipping of God. 5. Yet we maintain that the body hath its part in the service of God as well as the soul, and the body must expresse the inward reverence and devotion of the soul; though not in a way of hypocritical ostentation, yet in a way of serious adoration. The bowing of the knee, the uncovering of the head, and reverent deport∣ment, and whatsoever nature, or common use, and holy institution hath made an expression of holy af∣fections, and a decent and grave be∣haviour of our selves, should be care∣fully observed in the presence of the most High, and the holy things of God more reverently to be respect∣ed then the presence of any mortal man. And the rather because that a grave, and reverent, and holy man∣ner of deportment in Gods worship,
reflecteth upon the heart, and help∣eth us in our inward and spiritual devotion: & it helpeth the behold∣ers, and awakeneth them to reve∣rent thoughts of God, and holy things; which a regardless and com∣mon manner of deportment would extinguish. And its no dishonour to reverent behaviour, that it is the use of Hypocrites, but rather an honour to it; For it is something that is good that the Hypocrite useth for the cloak of his secret emptiness or evil. If there were nothing good in reve∣rent behaviour before God, it would not serve the Hypocrites turn. As it is a commendation to long-prayer, that the Pharisees made it their pre∣tence for the devouring of widdows houses: And those that call them hypocrites that are much in holy ex∣ercises and speeches, should consider, that if holy exercises and speeches were not good, they were not fit for the hypocrites design; evil will not be a fit cloak for evil: that which the
hypocrite thinks necessary to the covering of his sin, we must think more necessary to the cure of our sin and the saving of our souls; The way to avoid hypocrisie is not by run∣ning into impiety and prophaness: we must do more then the hypocrite, and not less, else he will rise up in judgement against you, and con∣demn you, if he would do more to seem good, then you will do to be good, and to please your Maker: if a Pharisee will pray longer to colour his oppression, then you will do to attain salvation. The mischief of hy∣pocrisie is, that the soul of Religion is wanting, while the corps is pre∣sent: And will you cast away both soul and body: both inside and outside, in opposition to hypocrisie? If others do seem to love God when they do not, will you therefore not so much as seem to do it? So here about re∣verence in the service of God: The hypocrite should not exceed the sincere in any thing that is truly good. This
is the manner of Gods service that I perswade you to, and to no other: And is there any thing of contro∣versie in this? Prefer but the spiri∣tual part, and know but what that meaneth, [I will have mercy, and not sacrifice] that so you may not con∣demn the innocent, and you shall ne∣ver say that we will be more back∣ward then you to decency, and reve∣rent behaviour in Gods service. 6. God will be served in Purity and Holiness, with cleansed hearts and hands, and not with such as re∣main defiled with the guilt of any wilful sin. He abhorreth the sacri∣fice of the wicked and disobedient. He that turneth away his ear from hearing the Law, his prayers are abo∣minable, Prov. 28. 9. and 15. 8. & 21. 27. Isa. 1. 13. Eccles. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. [To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord, (to oppressing wicked men) Isa. 1. 11. When you come to appear before me, who hath required this at
your hand to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain oblations: incense is an abomination to me: the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assem∣blies I cannot away with: it is iniqui∣ty, even the solemn meeting, &c. ver. 12, 13. And when you spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when you make many prayers I will not hear; your hands are full of blood: Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from be∣fore mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgement, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widdow; Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord.] To play the glutton, or drunkard, or filthy fornicator in the day time & then to come to God at night, as if it were to make him amends by an hypocritical prayer; to blaspheme Gods Name, and oppose his Kingdom and Government in your selves and others, and to do your own will, and hate and scorn them that do his will,
and study his will that they may do it, and then to pray that Gods Name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his Will be done] is an abusing God, and not a serving or pleasing him. Live according to your pray∣ers, and let your lives shew as well as your words what it is that you desire. This is the service of God that we call you to: And can you say that there is any thing controvertible in all this? Are there any men of any party among Christians, or sober Infidels that dare contradict it? 7. God will be served entirely and universally: in all his Commands; and with all your faculties, in works of Piety, Justice, and Charity, which must never be separated: You must not pretend your Charity against duties of Piety; for God is to be preferred in your estimation, love and service; and all that is done for man, must be done for his sake. You must not set up duties of Piety against duties of Justice, Cha∣rity
and Sobriety: It is not true Pie∣ty that will not bring forth these. God must be loved above all, and our neighbours as our selves; and these two sorts of love are inseparable. Do all the good you can to all while you have opportunity; especially to them of the houshold of faith, Gal. 6. 10. What good you would hear of in the day of your accounts, that do now, spee∣dily, diligently, and sincerely, ac∣cording to your power. Say not, I may come to want my self, but [cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shalt find it after many dayes; give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou knowest not what evil shall be up∣on the earth, Eccles. 11. 1, 2.] and whether all may not quickly be ta∣ken from thee; and then thou wilt wish thou hadst done good with it whilst thou hadst it, and lent it to the Lord, and trusted him with thy remainder, who entrusted thee with his blessings; and hadst made thee friends of the Mammon of unrighte∣ousness,
that when all fail they might receive thee into the everlasting habi∣tations. Drop not now and then a scant and grudging alms, as if thou were a loser by it, and God must be be beholden to thee; but believe, that the greatest gain is to thy self, and look after such bargains, and do good as readily, and gladly, & libe∣rally, as one that verily expecteth a ful reward in Heaven. This is part of the service of God that we exhort you to, even to visit, and relieve, and love Christ in his members and brethren (Mat. 25.) and is there any thing of doubt or controversie in all this? 8. Moreover, God will be served with Love, and willingness, and delight: It is the most gainful, honourable, blessed, and pleasant work in the world, which he hath appointed you, and not a toilsome task or sla∣very: And therefore it is not a Me∣lancholy, pining, troublesom course of life that we perswade you to, un∣der
the name of Godliness; but it is to rejoyce in the Lord, and to live in the joyful expectations of Eternal Life, and in the sense and assurance of the Love of God. If you could shew us any probability of a more pleasant and joyful life on Earth, then that which serious Ho∣liness doth afford, I should be glad with all my heart to hearken to you. I am ready to tell you what is the ground of our comforts, which faith revealeth: If you will come, and soberly debate the case, and shew us the matter and ground of your com∣forts, which you have or hope for in any other way: if yours prove greater, and better, and surer then the joys of faith, we will hearken to you, and be of your mind and side. The matter of the joyes of a Be∣liever is, that all his sins are pardon∣ed; that God is reconciled to him in Christ; that he hath the promise of God, that all things, even the greatest sufferings, shall work toge∣ther
for his good; that he is always in the love, and care, and hands of God; that he hath leave to draw near him by holy prayer, and open his heart to him in all his straits and wants; that he may solace himself in his Praises and Thanksgiving, and in other parts of holy worship; that he may read and hear his holy Word, the sure discovery of the will of God, and revelation of the things unseen, and the Charter of his Inheritance; that he may exer∣cise his soul in the serious believing thoughts of the Love of God re∣vealed in the wonderful work of our Redemption, and of the per∣son, and office, and grace of Jesus Christ our Redeemer; and that he may love that God that hath so wonderfully loved him; that he hath the Spirit of God to quicken and actuate his soul, to supply his spiri∣tual defects, and kill his sins, and help him to Believe, to Love, to Re∣joyce, to Pray: that this Spirit is
Gods Seal upon him, and the earn∣est of everlasting life; that Death shall not kill his hopes, nor end his happiness, but that his felicity and fullest joy beginneth, when that of worldlings hath an end, and their endless misery begins; that he is de∣livered from everlasting torment by the redemption of Christ, and the sanctification of the spirit; that An∣gels will attend his departing soul into the presence of his Father; that he shall be with his glorified Redeemer, and behold his Glory; that his body shall be raised to ever∣lasting life: that he shall be justified by Christ from all the accusations of the Devil, and all the slanders of the malicious world; that he shall live with God in endless Glory, and see and enjoy the Glory of his Creator, and shall never more be troubled with enemies, with sin or sorrow, but among his holy ones, shall perfectly and most joyfully love and praise the Lord for ever.
These are the matter of a Belie∣vers joy: These, purchased by Christ, revealed in his Word, sealed by his Miracles, his Blood, his Sacraments, and his Spirit, are our comfort. This is the Religion, the labour that we in∣vite you to: It is not to despair, nor to some dry unprofitable toil, nor to self-troubling, grieving, miserable melancholy, nor to costly Sacrifices, or idle Ceremonies, or irrational Service, such as the Heathens offer∣ed to their Idols; it is not to cast a∣way all mirth and comfort, and to turn unsociable, and morose, and sower: but it is to the greatest joys that the world alloweth, and nature is here capable of, and reason can discern and own: It is to begin a truly merry sociable life: It is to fly from fear & sorrow, in flying from sin and Hell, and from the consum∣ing wrath of God: It is to the fore∣tastes of everlasting joys, and to the beginnings of eternal life. This the labour, the Religion, which we would
have you follow with all your might. If you have better things to seek, and follow, and find, let us see them, that we may be as wise as you. If you have not, for your souls sake, make not choice of vanity, which will de∣ceive you in the day of your necessity. But you must not think to make us believe that a great house, or a horse or a whore, or a feast, or a flatterer, or fine cloaths, or any childish toys, or brutish filthiness, are more comfor∣table things then Christ, and Ever∣lasting Life, or that it is sweeter and better to love a harlot, or lands, or mony, then to love God, and Grace, and Glory: nor that any thing that will go no further then the Grave with you, is as good as that which will endure to Eternity; nor that any pleasure which a dog or swine hath, is equal to the delights of the Angels of Heaven: If you would have us of your mind, you must not be of this mind, nor perswade us to such horrible things as these. But
we profess to you and all the world, that we are not so in love with sor∣rows or sowrness, nor so fallen out with joy and pleasures, as co choose a life of miserable sadness, or refuse a life of true delight. If we could hear from any man, or find by the most diligent inquiry, that there is a more full, and sweet, and rational, and satisfactory, and durable delight to be had in any other way, then that of serious faith and holinesse, which Christ in Scripture hath re∣vealed to us, we were like enough to hearken after it. But can the distracted sensual world believe that its sweeter and happier to ruffle it out in fleshly gal∣lantry and sport, and to rage against the godly for a while, till the ven∣geance of God lay hold upon them, and give them their reward, then to live in the love of God, and wait in patience for the performance of Gods promise of everlasting joy? Oh what a thing is fleshly passion,
and raging sensuality, and blind un∣belief! The Lord have mercy upon poor deluded sinners; the Devils bu∣siness is to turn the world into a Bed∣lam; and alas, how strangely hath he prevail'd! That so many men can take their greatest misery for their happiness, and the only happiness for an intollerable life! Yea, and be so angry with all that are not of their mind, and will not set as much by filth and foolery, and as little by God and Glory as they! Like the Noble man that was Lunatick, or mad by fits, and when ever he was mad, he would swear all were mad that said not as he said, and would make all his servants be sent to Bed∣lam that would not immitate him, and there they must lie as mad men till their Lord was recovered from his madness. So are Gods servants used, and talkt of in the world, as if they were beside themselves, as long as the world is uncured of its mad∣ness. As the Man is, so is his judge∣ment,
and such is his relish, and de∣sire, and delight: When I was a child, I had far more desire to fill my pin-box, then now I have to fill my purse, and accounted it a great∣er treasure, and had much more de∣light and contentment in it. And alas, we may remember since we were strangers to the relish of Hea∣venly things, that we found more pleasure in that of which we are now ashamed, then we did in the most high and excellent things. Let us therefore pitty and pray for those that are distempered with the same disease. I have been longer on this then I thought to have been, because men think that we call them from all Mirth, & Joy, & pleasure, to a sowre heavy, melancholy life, when we call them to serious diligence for their sal∣vation. As if levity & folly were the only freinds to Pleasure, and it were only to be found in childish, worth∣less, transitory things. And as if the
greatest everlasting Happiness were no matter of true Delight, nor Seri∣ousness, or Diligence of a friend to Joy. 9. Moreover, as to the manner, God will be served with absolute self-resignation, without Exceptions, Limitations or Reserves: Not with the leavings of the flesh, nor with a Proviso that you may not suffer by your Religion, or be poor, or despis∣ed, or abused by the world: But with self-denyal you must lay down all the fleshes interest at his feet; and you must take up your Cross, and follow a suffering Christ to Glory. You must serve him as those that are wholly His, and not your own, and have nothing but what is his, and therefore nothing to be excepted, re∣served or saved from him; but must be content that you and all your in∣terest be in his hands, and saved by him, if saved at all. I know these tearms seem hard to flesh and blood (and should Heaven be the Crown and reward to them, that have un∣dergone
no tryal for it?) But here is nothing but what is past all con∣troversy, and all Christians do con∣fess is the Word of Christ. 10. Lastly, God will be served re∣solvedly and constantly: If you will raign, you must conquer and endure to the end. Opposition you must expect; and overcome it, if you would not be overcome. It is not good begin∣nings that will serve turn, unlesse you also persevere, and fight out the good fight of faith, and finish your course, and patiently wait to the last breath, for the Crown of Righ∣teousness, which the Righteous Judge will give the Conquerours, when the unbelieving world shall say of all their Delight and Hope [Its past and gone, we shall never see or tast it more] but must now tast of that endlesse wrath of God which we were treasuring up, when we should have workt out our salvation. Well sirs, I have all this while been describing to you, both as to
the Principles, the Matter and the Manner, what that Religion and Service of God is, in which you must labour with all your might: that you may see that it is no factious or private opinions or practices that we call you to; and that your con∣sciences may no longer be deluded with the pretences of mens diffe∣rent opinions in Religion; and that the names of Prelatical, Presbyte∣rian, Puritan, Papist, nor any other sounding in your ears, may not so distract and doat you, as to make you forget the name of Christian which you have all undertaken, nor what the Christian Religion is. You see now that it is nothing (no not a syllable or tittle) which all sober Christians are not agreed in, that we perswade you to do as the work of your Religion: And therefore I tell you again here, before that God that shall be your Judge, and that Conscience that shall be as a thou∣sand witnesses, that if you will go
on in ungodly worldly lives, and refuse the serious diligence of Chri∣stians in this Religion which your selves profess, it shall be so far from being any excuse or ease to you, that there were Hypocrites, or Hereticks, or Schismaticks, or different opinions in Religion in the world, that this very thing shall aggravate your sin and condemnation, that all these Hypocrites, Schismaticks, or diffe∣ing parties in the Church, did agree in the confession of all these things, and yet for all that you would not practice them: no nor practice what your selves confessed: All these Par∣ties or Sects shall rise up against the sensual and prophane ungodly sin∣ner, and say, [Though we were ig∣norant or doubtful of many other things, yet we are all agreed in these: we gave our concurrent te∣stimony for them: we tempted no man to doubt of these, or to deny them.] If you will erre more then an Hypocrite, or a Schismatick, and be
far worse then those that are such, or you account such, and think to excuse it, because they erred in lesser things, it is as if the devil should excuse his sin by saying; [Lord, thy Saints did none of them love thee as they should, and Hypocrites did but seem to love thee, and therefore I thought I might hate thee and set against thy wayes.] BVT (saith the ungodly sensu∣alist) I will never believe that God de∣lighteth in long and earnest prayers: or that he is moved by the passions or the words of men; and therefore I take this but for babling, which you call the serious diligence of Believers, in their serving God.] To this impious objection, I re∣turn these several answers. 1. I suppose this were true as you imagine, what's this to you that serve God no way at all with any se∣rious diligence? that live in sensuali∣ty, and wilful disobedience to his Laws, and do more for your bodies
then for your souls, and for tempo∣ral things, then for eternal? 2. Who do you think is likest to understand Gods mind, and what is pleasing to him? Himself or you? Is any thing more plainly comman∣ded in Gods Word then praying with frequency, fervency, and impor∣tunity? Luk. 18. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Thes. 5. 17. Jam 5. 16. And will you tell God that he hath but dissembled with you, and told you that he is pleased with that which is not plea∣sing to him? 3. And what is the reason of your unbelief? forsooth, because God is not moved with humane words or passions! I grant he is not. But what of that? Hath prayer no other use but to move God? It is enough, 1. That it moveth us, and fiteth us to receive his mercies. 2. And that God hath made it necessary to the effect, and a means or condition without which he will not give thee the blessing. Do you think (if you
judge but by natural reason) that a person is as fit for a mercy that knoweth not the want or worth of it, and would not be thankful for it if he had it, as one that valueth it, and is disposed to thankfulness and improvement? And do you not know that holy prayer is nothing but the actuating of holy desires, and the exercise of all those graces which are suited to the due esti∣mation and improvement of the mercy. And is it not the way when we would draw the boat to the bank, to lay hold of the bank and pull, as if we would draw it to the boat? If God be not moved and drawn to us, it is enough that we are moved and drawn to God: And with all that God may give his own blessings to whom and upon what terms he please, and that he hath assured us he will give them but to those that value, desire, and seek them, and that with faith, and fervency, and importunity.
And yet I may add, that God is so far above us, as that his incom∣prehensible essence, and blessed na∣ture is very little known to us; and therefore though we know and con∣fess that he hath no humane passions or imperfections, yet if he assume to himself the title of such a thing as love, desire, joy or wrath, we must in reason believe, that though these are not in God as they are in man, with any imperfection, yet there is something in God that cannot fit∣lier be represented to man, nor be understood by man, then by the Images of such expressions as God himself is pleased to use. 3. But I beseech you hearken to Nature it self. Doth it not teach all rational creatures in necessity to pray to God? A storm will teach the prophanest Sea-man to pray, and that with continuance and ferven∣cy. The Mariners could say to Jo∣nah in their danger [What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy
God; if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.] And they themselves cryed every man unto his God, Jon. 1. 5, 6. When thou comest to dye, and seest there is no more de∣lay, nor any more hope from the pleasures of sin, or from any of thy companions or old deceits, then tell me whether nature teach thee not to cry, and cry mightily for pardon, and mercy, and help to God? Then we shall hear thee crying [O Mercy, mercy Lord, upon a miserable sin∣ner] though now thou wilt not be∣lieve that prayer doth any good. Ile say no more to thee of this. If Nature be not conquered, and Grace have not forsaken thee, thou wilt be taught at home to answer this objection. Sure thou canst not easily so far conquer reason, as to believe that there is no God. And if thou believe that there is a God, thou canst not believe that he is not to be worshipped, and that with the great∣est seriousness and diligence! Nor
that he is not the giver of all that thou dost want! Or that the Go∣vernour of the world regardeth not the dispositions and actions of his subjects, but will equally reward the good and bad, and give to all alike, and have no respect to mens prepa∣rations for his reward. What Hea∣then that believeth that there is a God, doth not believe that Prayer to him is a necessary part of his worship? Obj. But is not your strict observation of the Lords day a controverted thing? Answ. In this also I will strip thee of this excuse. 1. Spend the Lords day but according to the common principles of Christiani∣ty and reason, and it shall suffice: Spend it but as one that loveth God better then any thing in the world, and that taketh more pleasure in his service then in sin and vanity: Spend it but as the necessities of thy own soul, and thy families require; as one that's glad of so honourable,
gainful, and delightful an imploy∣ment, as the publick and private worshipping of God, and the seri∣ous contemplation of the life to come: As one that knoweth the need and benefit of having stated times for the service of God; and what would come of all Religion, if the Time were left to each ones will? Spend it as men that put a just difference between the common business of this world, and the things that concern your endless state, and that have considered the proporti∣on of one day in seven, in reference to this different consequence of the work: Spend it as men that have lost as much time as you have done, and have need to make the best of the little that is left,; and that are behind hand so far in the matters of your salvation, and have need to work with all your might, and should be gladder of the helps of such a day, then of thousands of gold and silver: Spend it as those
that believe that we owe God as much service as the Jews did: Spend it as the Ancient Christians spent it, that were wont to stay together al∣most from morning till night in publick worship and Communion: Spend it as the Kings Declaration requireth, which saith [Our purpose and resolution is, and shall be, to take care that the Lords day be applied to holy exercises, without unnecessary di∣vertisements.] 2. And if yet there be any doubt in this, I refer you to the judgment of the Church of England, expressed in the Homily of the Time and Place of Prayer. And for the Time, the Name, the Antiquity, the Authority, & the Work it self, I desire you but to receive what is there delivered, not by any factious persons, but by the Church. Do this, and we are agreed and satisfied. And I make it my re∣quest to the Reader, to peruse both Parts of that Homily, that he may know how far the Church of Eng∣land
is from the loose conceits of the enemies of Godliness: And if also you will read over the Homilies a∣gainst the peril of Idolatry, you will the fuller know the Judgement of the Church about the manner of Gods worship. (Indeed the whole Book is such as the people should be acquainted with.) I Have done my part to open to you the Necessity of SERI∣OVS DILIGENCE, and to call up the sluggish souls of sinners to mind the work of their salvation, and to do it SPEEDILY, and with all their MIGHT. I must now leave the success to God and you. What use you will make of it, and what you will be and do for the time to come, is a matter that more concerneth your selves then me. If long speaking, or multitude of words, were the way to prevail with you, I should willingly speak here
while my strength would endure, and lengthen out my exhortations yet seven-fold. But that's not the way: A little wearieth you: You love long feasts, and long visits, and plays, and sports, much better then long Sermons, or Books, or Pray∣ers. But it is no small grief to us, to leave you in a case of such im∣portance, without some considera∣ble hopes of your deliverance. Sirs, the matter is now laid be∣fore you, and much in your own hands; it will not be so long! What will ye now do? Have I convinced you now, that God and your salva∣tion are to be sought with all your might? If I have not, it is not for want of evidence in what is said, but for want of willingness in your selves to know the truth: I have proved to you, that it is a matter out of controversie, unless your lusts, and passions, and carnal interest will make a controversie of it. I beseech you tell me, if you be of any Reli∣gion
at all, why are you not strict, serious, and diligent, and mortified, and Heavenly in that Religion which you are of? Sure you will not so far shame your own Religion, whatever it be, as to say that your Religion is not for mortification, holinesse, heavenliness, self-denial, or that your Religion alloweth you to be ambitious, covetous, gluttonous, drunken, to curse, and swear, and whore, and raile, and oppress the innocent; It is not Religion, but Diabolical serpentine malignity that is for any of this. Its wonderful to think, that learn∣ed men, and Gentlemen, and men that pretend to reason and ingenui∣ty, can quietly betray their souls to the Devil upon such silly grounds, and do the evil that they have no more to say for, and neglect that duty that they have no more to say against, when they know they must do it NOW or NEVER! That while they confesse that there is a
God, and a life to come, a Heaven and a Hell, and that this life is pur∣posely given us for preparation for Eternity, while they confess that God is most wise, and holy, and good, and just, and that sin is the greatest evil, and that the Word of God is true, they can yet make shift to quiet themselves in an unholy, sensual, careless life: And that while they honour the Apostles and Martyrs, and Saints that are dead and gone, they hate their successors and imitators, and the lives that they lived, and are inclined to make more Martyrs by their malicious cruelty. Alas, all this comes from the want of a sound belief of the things which they never saw; and the di∣stance of those things, & the power of passion, and sensual objects and inclinations, that hurry them away after present vanities, and conquer reason, and rob them of their hu∣manity; and by the noise of the
company of sensual sinners, that harden and deaffen one another, and by the just judgement of God, forsaking those that would not know him, and leaving them to the blind∣ness and hardness of their hearts. But is there no remedy! O thou the fountain of mercy and relief, vouchsafe these miserable sinners a remedy! O thou the Saviour of lost mankind, have mercy upon these sinners in the depth of their securi∣ty, presumption, and misery! O thou the Illuminater and Sanctifier of souls, apply the remedy so dear∣ly purchased! We are constrained oft to fear lest it be much long of us, that should more seriously preach the awakening truths of God unto mens hearts. And verily our con∣sciences cannot but accuse us, that when we are most lively and serious, alas, we seem but almost to trifle, considering on what a message we come, and of what transcendent things we speak. But Satan hath
got his advantage upon our hearts that should be instrumental to kin∣dle theirs, as well as on theirs that should receive the truth. O that we could thirst more after their salva∣tion! O that we could pray harder for it; and entreat them more earn∣estly; as those that were loath to take a denial from God or man; I must confess to you all with shame and sorrow, that I am even amazed to think of the hardness of my own heart, that melteth no more in com∣passion to the miserable, and is no more earnest and importunate with sinners, when I am upon such a sub∣ject as this; and am telling them that it must be NOW or NEVER; and when the messengers of Death within, and the fame of mens displea∣sure from without, doth tell me how likely it is that my Time shall be but short, and that if I will say any thing that may reach the hearts of sin∣ners, for ought I know, it must be NOW or NEVER. O what an ob∣stinate,
what a lamentable disease is this insensibility and hardness of heart! If I were sure this were the last Sermon that ever I should preach, I find now my heart would shew its sluggishness, and rob poor souls of the serious fervour which is suitable to the subject and their case, and needful to the desired success. But yet poor sleepy sinners, hear us: Though we speak not to you as men would do that had seen Heaven and Hell, and were them∣selves in a perfectly awakned frame, yet hear us while we speak to you the words of truth with some seri∣ousness, and compassionate desire of your Salvation. O look up to your God! Look out unto eternity: Look inwardly upon your souls: Look wisely upon your short and hasty Time: and then bethink you how the little remnant of your Time should be employed: and what it is that most concerneth you to dispatch and secure before you
die. Now you have Sermons, and Books, and Warnings: It will not be so long: Preachers must have done: God threatneth them, and death threatneth them, and men threaten them, and its you, its you that are most severely threatned, and that are called on by Gods warnings, [If any man have an ear to hear, let him hear.] Now you have an abun∣dance of private helps, you have a∣bundance of understanding gracious companions; you have the Lords dayes to spend in holy exercises, for the edification and solace of your souls; you have choice of sound and serious Books: and bles∣sed be God, you have the Pro∣tection of a Christian and a Pro∣testant King and Magistracy: O what unvaluable mercies are all these! O know your time, and use these with industry, and im∣prove this harvest for your souls! For it will not be thus alwayes: It must be NOW or NEVER.
You have yet time and leave to Pray and cry to God in hope: Yet if you have hearts and tongues, he hath an hearing ear: The Spirit of grace is ready to assist you: It will not be thus alwayes: The time is coming when the loudest cries will do no good: O pray, pray, pray poor needy miserable sinners; for it must be NOW or NEVER. You have yet health and strength, and bodies fit to serve your souls: It will not be so alwayes: Lan∣guishing and paines and death are coming. O use your health and strength for God: For it must be NOW or NEVER. Yet there are some stirrings of conviction in your Consciences: You find that all is not well with you: and you have some thoughts or purposes to repent, and be new creatures▪ There is some hope in this, that yet God hath not quite forsaken you. O trifle not, and
stifle not the conviction of your consciences, but hearken to the witnesse of God within you: It must be NOW or NEVER. Would you not be loath to be left to the despairing case of many poor distressed souls, that cry out, O it is now too late! I fear my day of grace is past; God will not hear me now if I should call vpon him: he hath forsaken me, and given me over to my self. It is too late to repent, too late to pray, too late to think of a new life; all is too late. This case is sad: But yet many of these are in a safer and better case then they ima∣gine, and are but frightened by the tempter, and it is not too late, while they cry out, It is too late: But if you are left to cry in hell [It is too late] alas, how long and how doleful a cry and lamentation will it be! O consider poor sinner, that God knoweth the Time and Season of thy mercies: He giveth thee Spring and Harvest in their Season: and all his
mercies in their Season, and wilt thou not know thy Time and Season, for love, and duty, and thanks to him? Consider that God who hath commanded thee thy work, hath al∣so appointed thee thy time: And this is his appointed time. To day therefore hearken to his voice, and see that thou harden not thy heart: He that bids thee Repent and work out thy Salvation with fear and tremb∣ling, doth also bid thee do it Now: Obey him in the time, if thou wilt be indeed obedient: He best understand∣eth the fittest time. One would think to men that have lost so much time already, and loitered so long, & are so lamentably behind hand, and stand so near the bar of God, and their everlasting state, there should be no need to say any more, to per∣swade them to be up and doing. I shall add but this: You are never like to have a better time. Take this or the work will grow more difficult, more doubtful, if through the just
judgement of God, it become not desperate. If all this will not serve, but still you will loiter till time be gone, what can your poor friends do but lament your misery! The Lord knowes, if we knew what words, what pains, what cost would tend to your awakening, and conversion and salvation, we should be glad to submit to it: and we hope we should not think our labours, or liberties, or our lives too dear to promote so blessed and so necessary a work. But if when all is done that we can do, you will leave us nothing but our tears and moans for self-destroyers, the sin is yours, and the suffering shall be yours: If I can do no more, I shall leave this upon record, that we took our time to tell you home, that SERIOUS DILIGENCE is nessary to your Salvation, and that God is the Rewarder of them that di∣ligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. and that this was your day, your only day: It must be NOW or NEVER. FINIS.
