B4089 R37451 16958768 105460
A CONFUTATION of the DUTCH-ARMINIAN TENENT, of Universal Redemption. With Relation in special, unto certain Sectaries, in ENGLAND. By name, the Morians, or Revelators, with others tracing them; who hold, That Christ died for all men, good and bad. By THEOPH. BRABOURN. Matth. 7.6. Give ye not that which is holy, to dogs; neither cast ye your pearls, before swine. LONDON, Printed by WILL. BENTLEY, Anno Domini 1651.
To the READER. THis ensuing Dis∣cource (Christi∣an Reader) lying by me, and fitted for the Press; but with thoughts, never to have it Printed so long as I live: my mind is now altered, very lately, upon this occation: Finding by sad experience, that this Dutch-ARMI∣NIAN Tenent, of Uni∣versal Redemption, hath of
late invaded our English Nation, and infected the minds, and perverted the judgement of many, who pre∣tend highest for God and godliness; I could not but alter my thoughts, and re∣solve to publish this Dis∣cource, if it may be, to pre∣vent the further growth and spreading of it. There is a Sect of Revelators, or Manifestators, called Mori∣ans; of one MORE dwel∣ling near Wisbech, who with his Disciples, about eight or nine years since, were orthodox in this point with us; but since, finding this new light, of Univer∣sal Redemption, to be a no∣table
means to further an other and more ancient new light, which formerly he had received and taught; namely, his doctrine of Free-grace, as he calls it, presently he set abroach this Universal Re∣demption among his Disci∣ples: of and from whom (as I suppose) our Inde∣pendents of later time, have borrowed this light: for of late, some of them are not ashamed to teach and preach it publickly, offering Christ and the benefits of his death, to dogs and swine, to the worst of men, saying, Come Whoremaster, come Drunk∣ard, the work is wrought for you, believe it, &c. and they
may as well say, Come Ras∣cal, come Rogue, come Tag and Rag, believe it, Christ died for you all. Thus they fear not, to give Christ that Pearl and Holy thing, unto dogs and swine. Their new Arminian light hath taught them, to give the Childrens bread to dogs. Not long since, some of the Bishops were tainted with this Error, and how odious were they for it in the eyes of these very men? but now themselves are in∣fected with the same Error, and it is become a lovely Truth: and what have these men to say for this Error more than the Bishops had? surely, if so much, yet no∣thing
more, unless it be this, that it is a bright beam of new light arisen to them of late; and notably tending to their new doctrine of Free grace, as they call it; and that the spirit hath taught it them: but remem∣ber, that there is a Spirit of Truth, and a spirit of Error, 1. John 4.6. and so I end. THEO. BRABOURN.
A CONFUTATION of the ARMINIAN Tenent, of Universal Redemption. IN handling this Con∣troversie, I shall first propound sundrie Ar∣guments against it. Secondly, I shall make answer unto the Texts alleadged by Arminians, for proof of their Tenent. Thirdly, I shall con∣fute a common Answer of theirs, gi∣ven to a notable Objection of ours. And Fourthly, I shall confute their distinction of Impetration and Appli∣cation. I begin with the first of these: and these are my Arguments against it.
ARGUM. I. If Christ forbade his ministers, to give, or deliver his Word and Sacrament concerning his death, unto all men, as unto unbelieving, impenitent, scanda∣lous, and wicked men; Then Christ did not give or deliver himself to death for all men: or, then Christ died not for all men. The reason hereof is this; If Christ had given himself to death for all men, good and bad, then would he have his ministers to do so too, in delivering the Word and Sacrament; and it is against reason to think, that Christ should give himself for all men, and forbid his ministers to give him to all men, or to some men: so there is the same reason of both: Now if he forbade his ministers, to deliver his Word and Sacrament unto all men, unto wicked and impenitent men, then surely, he did not deliver himself to death for all men. For 1. It is absurd to think, that a ministers Commission, in delivering the Word and Sacrament concerning Christs death, should be of less extent than Christ his death is of; as, that his Cōmission should extend but to some men onely, when Christ his death ex∣tends
to all men: wherefore if his Commission be but unto some men onely, then Christ his death is not to, or for all men, but to and for some men onely. 2. The Word and Sa∣crament concerning Christ his death, are signs representing Christs death unto us; now the sign and the thing signified by it, must be of equal ex∣tent; as, if the sign belong but unto some men onely, then Christ his death, the thing signified by it, be∣longs not unto all men, but unto some men onely. 3. If Christ would not permit his ministers, to give the bread and wine in the Sacrament (which is the lesser) unto all men, then much less would he give himself which is the greater) unto all men: If he forbade his ministers, to give his bread and wine unto all men, much∣less would he give his life, his own bodie and bloud for all men: if he denied the Sign unto wicked and im∣penitent persons, then much more would he denie there the thing signi∣fied, which is, his pretious bodie and bloud: so much for my proposi∣tion. But Christ forbade his ministers, to
give, or deliver his Word and Sacrament concerning his death unto all men, as unto unbelieving, impenitent, scanda∣lous and wicked men. This my assum∣ption I thus prove, first concerning the Sacrament. 1. It is the doctrine, both of our own and other reformed Churches, that Christ would not have the Sacra∣ment of the Lords supper, given by the minister unto unbelievers, impeni∣tent, scandalous, and wicked men. 2. Philip would not give the Sacra∣ment of Baptism unto the Eunuch, but upon the condition of his faith first, Acts 8.37. S. Paul would not have the Lords supper given unto the incestuous person, 1. Corinth. 5.1, 5, 13. nor unto impenitent wicked men, as not unto fornicatours, idolaters, drunkards, railers, nor extortioners, 1. Cor. 5.11. and see Matth. 18.17. So much for the Sacrament, next for the Word. 2. Concerning the Word: Christ would not have the word concerning his death, given or delivered by his ministers unto unbelievers, impeni∣tent, scandalous, and wicked men; which I thus prove:
In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Minister delivers the bread, with these words of Christ, This is my bodie, which is broken for thee: the which words, are according to Christs institution, 1. Cor. 11.24. Luke 22.19. now forasmuch as Christ would not have impenitent wicked persons admitted to the Lords Sup∣per, he would not have his ministers deliver unto them, this his word con∣cerning his death, This is my bodie: which is broken for thee: so Christs mi∣nister may not say to a wicked man, Christ died for thee. Yet if Armini∣ans doctrine be true, that Christ died for all men, then a minister may say to the vilest impenitent person, were he a Judas or worse, Christ died for thee. And by the way, I wonder that Independents can hold forth Christ to all men in a Sermon, saying, Come whore-master, drunkard, &c. Christ died for thee; and yet refuse to give the Lords supper to scandalous per∣sons, saying to them; Christ died for thee. 2. Our Saviour would not have holy things given to dogs, nor pearls to swine, Matth. 7.6. now wicked and impenitent persons, appearing incor∣rigible,
are dogs and swine; & Christ, whether given in the word or in the sacrament, is an holy thing, and a pearl: wherefore a minister may not give Christ to an incorrigible wicked man, saying, Christ died for thee. 3. S. Paul preached the word con∣cerning Christs death at Antioch, Acts 13.14, 16, 27, 38. where being a mixt multitude, of sheep and goats, of wheat and tares, he directs his speech unto the sheep and wheat, not unto the goats and tares; for he spake as he said, To those that fear God, Acts 13.16, 26. and so soon as some of his Auditours appeared to be goats and tares, and such as feared not God, he turned away from them, and carried away the Gospel unto the Gentiles, refusing to preach the word of Christ unto them, Acts 13.45, 46. and see Acts 19.9. whereby you see, S. Paul a minister of Christ, would not de∣liver the word concerning Christs death, unto wicked men, and such as feared not God. It may be objected, that S. Paul saith, It was necessarie, that this word should first be preached unto them, that is, unto those goats and tares, the ob∣stinate
Jews Acts 13.46. and so Paul preached of Christs death, as well to wicked men as to the godly. Here∣unto I answer, 1. As the Husband-man bestoweth the same pains, upon the tares as upon the wheat, before the tares appear to him to be tares; so the Apostle might preach Christ to the wicked, as well as to the god∣ly, they being together in a mixt as∣sembly, before the wicked appeared to him to be wicked: but yet as the husband-man takes pains for the wheats sake, and not for the tares sake; so Paul might preach Christ, for the godly's sake, and not for the wic∣ked's sake: and it is evident in the Text to be so: for Paul directs his speech unto the godly in the Assem∣bly, to those that feared God, Acts 13.16.26. excluding the wicked: for when in an Assembly, there are both godly and wicked, if the minister di∣rects his speech to the godly, he ex∣cludes the wicked; or if he directs an use to the wicked, he excludes the godly. 2. So soon as these tares, the obstinate Jews, appeared to Paul to be tares, as you see, he refused to preach Christ unto them, Acts 13.45,
46. and for the same cause, had he known them at the first to be tares, and if he could have separated them from the assembly of the godly, he would not have preached Christ unto them at the first. True it is, Paul saith, It was necessarie that the Word should be preached vnto them: for it could not be avoided, being they were mixed with the godly, and did not at first appear to be tares: it was there∣fore necessarie for Paul to preach un∣to them, with the godly at the first, though he intended not his doctrine to be for them. Thus I have proved my Assumption: and so the conclusi∣on follows thus, Therefore Christ did not give or deli∣ver himself to death for all men: or, Christ died not for all men. So much for my first Argument. ARGUM. II. If Christ would not pray for all men, then Christ would not die for all men. The reason thereof is this; If Christ would not do the lesser for all men, then he would not do the greater for all men: If Christ would not offer to God, the calves of his lips for all men,
then he would not offer to God the sacrifice of his pretious bodie and bloud for all men: If Christ would not bestow so much love upon all men as to pray for them, then would he not bestow so much love upon all men as to die, and to shed his heart bloud for them: In a word, If Christ would exclude some men from his prayers, surely he meant to exclude them from his bitter death and passi∣on. So much for my proposition. But Christ would not pray for all men. For proof hereof see John 17.8, 9. where believers are distinguished from the world, that is, from the world of unbelievers; and for these men who then did believe, Christ prayed, saying, I pray for them, vers. 9. and Christ prayed also for those men, who should afterwards to the worlds end believe in him vers. 20. but for the world, that is, for the world of unbelievers, Christ would not vouchsafe so much as to pray to God for them, saying, I pray not for the world, vers. 9. So much for proof of my Assumption, and so my Conclusion follows. Therefore Christ would not die for all
men. And by consequence, Christ did not die for all men: for look what Christ would not do, that he did not do: un∣less we should imagine, that Christ his will, and his actions, were contra∣ry one to the other: or, that he did do that, which he did not first will to do. Arminians in their Acta Synodalia, de Morte Christi, pag. 319. do answer to my Assumption, and to my Text brought to prove it, thus; Christ saith not, that he would not pray for the world, that is, that he would never af∣terwards pray for them; but thus he saith, that he doth not pray for the world, that is, that he doth not for that present time pray for them; or that he doth not in this particular prayer, John 17.9. pray for them. Hereunto I thus reply. 1. Though I shall prove by and by, that there is more in Christs words, than Arminians do grant, yet this which they do grant, is sufficient to make good my argument: for this is in the Text, and they grant it, that Christ said, He did not pray for the world, that is, at that time and in that particular prayer, he did not pray
for them: from which it doth unde∣niably follow, that as he did not then pray for them, so he would not then pray for them; or it was his will, at that time and in that prayer, not to pray for them, but to exclude them from his prayer, and from the be∣nefit thereof. This I thus make good. A wise mans actions and words, do flow from his understanding and his will; and his words and deeds, are re∣gulated and governed by his will; so as what he doth or speaketh, the same he first willed; and what he refuseth to do or to speak, the same he willeth, or willeth not to do or speak, I say, being a mans actions and words are regulated by his will, both in his speech, and in his silence refusing to speak, whensoever, he is so silent, as that he refuseth to speak, it is mani∣fest that it is his will to be silent, and to refuse to speak: wherefore when Christ said, I pray not, or I do not now in this prayer pray for the world; hereby it is evident, that at that time his will, was not to pray for them; but that his will was against it, or his will was against praying for them at that
time: because he willed silence at this time, and refused to pray for them in this prayer. When a father having ten sons, saith, I give unto my nine elder sons, an hundred pounds apeece, but is si∣lent saying nothing of his tenth or youngest son; suppose it will not hence follow, that the fathers mind and will was to denie him, and to re∣fuse to give him an hundred pounds; yet it is otherwise in this case: for when the father saith, I give an hun∣dred pounds apeece to my nine elder sons, but as for my tenth and young∣est son, who is a wicked man, a riotous and prodigal son, I give him nothing; here it is manifest, that the fathers will was, to exclude the youngest son, and to be unwilling at that time that he should have an hundred pounds: so our Saviour, having ma∣ny good and godly followers of him, who were believers, saith, I pray for them John 17.9. and for all them, John 17.20. but as for the world, that is, for impenitent and unbelieving men, I pray not for them, John 17.9. here it is clear, that as he did not then pray for them, so he would not
at that time pray for them: for he vo∣luntarily excluded them from his prayer, when he prayed for others. Such negative speeches as this in John 17.9. are voluntary denials, re∣fusals, or exclusions; not onely signi∣fying a thing not done, but also a will not to do it, as you may see John 8.11, 50. and 13.18. Gal. 2.2. Thus it is proved, that as Christ did not in that prayer pray for the world, so it was not his will but a∣gainst his will, then to pray for them: now hence it followeth, That if at any time Christ did voluntarily refuse to pray for any men, then he would not die for them, or then he would refuse to die for them: and so you see, that from what Arminians do grant, my argument is made good: but I shall further prove, more to be in Christs words, than what they grant, and thus I prove it. 2. As Christ did not pray for the world, and also as is proved, Christ would not at that time and in that prayer pray for them; so it is gathera∣ble from the Text and context, that Christ would never afterwards pray for them; the which Arminians deny,
and this I here prove: Christ his pray∣er, though uttered and made then, yet the virtue and extent of it lasted after, or unto the death of that pre∣sent world of impenitent wicked men: for as Christs prayer, once made for the godly, extends it self for their good, unto their death, John 17.9, 11, 15, 21, 24. so Christs ex∣clusion of that wicked world, from the benefit of his prayer once, must be an exclusion of them for ever af∣ter: unless it could be shown, that after Christs prayer, that wicked world converted and believed, which cannot be shown. Now if this wicked world were ever after the same, why should Christ alter his mind towards them? why should he pray for them afterwards, more than he did before? and I can but marvel, that Arminians should grant, that once Christ did not pray for that world, and yet suppose that afterwards he did pray for them; and yet have no ground for this sup∣posed thing. 2 The ground and reason of Christ his prayer, will clear it up, that as he did not for the present pray for the world, so he would not for the future
pray for them; or so he would never after pray for them. The reason why Christ prayed for believers, was be∣cause they believed in him, John 17.8, 9, 20. and because they were Gods people, for they are thine, John 17.9. and because God the Father had gi∣ven them to Christ, John 17.9. On the contrary, the reason why Christ prayed not for the world, must needs be, because they were worldlings, wicked and impenitent persons, un∣believers, and were none of Gods people, nor given to Christ: now this being the cause, why Christ refused to pray for them at that present time, John 17.9. for the same cause, Christ could never pray for them after∣wards: for many of that wicked world, lived and died impenitently, and in unbelief, Luke 7.30. John 3.19. Acts 13.45, 46, 50. Luke 19.41, 42. Rom. 9.27, 31, 32. 2. Cor. 3.14, 15. Mark 4.11, 12. If their unbelief hindered Christs prayer at that time, John 17.9. it must for ever after hin∣der his prayer: because many of them were ever after unbelievers, and the very same men as before, when Christ refused to pray for them.
So much for my second Argu∣ment. ARGUM. III. If Christ so loved all men, as to give himself and die for all men; then would he have caused the Gospel to be preach∣ed to all men; by means whereof, they should have knowledge of his death, and might believe in him, so as to be the bet∣ter for his death. This I thus prove. 1 He that willeth the End, he wil∣leth the means tending unto it, and whereby it must be obtained: the end and the proper or necessary means cannot be separated: Christs death for men, is the End, the preaching of Christs death in the Gospel, is the means for men to know it, and to be∣lieve in him, so as to be the better for it: wherefore, if Christ so loved all men, as to die and give himself for them, he could not but out of the same his love, have given them know∣ledge of it by preaching, which is the means of faith, that so they might partake of the benefit of his death. 2 If Christ out of his love John 3.16. and 15.13. died for all men, then if he would not give all men know∣ledge
of it, whereby they might ap∣ply it to themselves, or believe in him, that so they might be the better for his death; then he is like a Phy∣sician, pretending the greatest love possible to cure his friend, by prepa∣ring and making a most soveraign po∣tion for him; but sets it behind or un∣der the bed, or in some secret corner of the chamber, where it is impossi∣ble for the sick man to find it: all this is but a pretence of love: for if it were true love, he would have set it where the sick man should have had knowledge of it, or he would have given him knowledge of it, that so he might make use of it for his health: so if Christ had died for all men, all men should have known it, and must have had it preached unto them, that so they might make use of it for salva∣tion. 3 They may as well say, God in∣tendeth by ordinary means, to save a mans natural life, and yet denie him food, as to say, Christ intended to die for the salvation of all men, and yet denie them the knowledge of it by the Gospel preached. So much for my Major.
But Christ neither would nor hath caused the Gospel to be preached to all men; whereby they should be brought to faith, and be the better for his death. This I thus prove, 1. The Gospel is not in these days preached to ma∣ny Indians, and barbarous nations. 2. In old time before us, the Gos∣pel, or any thing of Christ, was not preached to millions of Gentiles, Psal. 147.19, 20. Acts 10.12, 28. and 16.6, 7. Ephes 2.11, 12, 13, 14. 3. Christ preached to some men in parables, and darkly, to this end, that they should not obtain remission of sins, and be the better for his death, Mark 4.11, 12. So much for my Mi∣nor; and the conclusion follows. Therefore Christ did not so love all men, as to give himself, and to die for all men. Before I have done with this Ar∣gument, I must answer an Objection, which my Reader may make; and confute an Answer, which the Armi∣nians do make: the Objection is this you said in your first Argument, that Christ would not have the word con∣cerning his death (which is Gospel) to be preached to wicked, impenitent,
and unbelieving men: and here in this third Argument, you say, that the Gospel ought to be preached to all men; and among all men, are many wicked men, &c. Hereunto I an∣swer, that this is no contradiction: for in my first Argument, I spake abso∣lutely and as the truth is; but here in my third Argument, I speak not abso∣lutely, but conditionally, with an if: as, If Christ died for all men, then the Gospel must be preached to all men, be they godly or wicked: so this I speak but upon a supposition of the truth of the Arminian tenent, which if it be true, then this follows, that Gospel must be preached to all men, good and bad. So much of this Ob∣jection: and now I come to the an∣swer of Arminians, which is this. The Arminians in their Acta Syno∣dalia, de Morte Christi, pag. 327, 328. do answer this my third Argument thus: that a limitation is to be added to my Major, and then my Minor will be false: thus therefore they frame it a new, and limit it: If Christ so lo∣ved all men, as to die for all men; then would he have caused the Gospel to be actually preached to all men; or else
be prepared and in a readinesse to have it preached, so soon as men be fitted to receive it. The better to colour this limitati∣on, they make a twofold calling, a common or general calling, and a spe∣cial calling: by the general calling, they understand the law and light of nature, as the natural knowledge that there is a God, and of the law of God, to which men ow obedience: now to him that useth this aright, God is pre∣pared to communicate unto him his special calling, which is, the preaching of the Gospel: so the well using of that, is a fitting and preparing of men for this: and the reason why many men are denied the Gospel, is their own fault, because they do abuse the light of nature, or the general calling: so then Gods will is, to have the Go∣spel preached actually to all men that are fitted for it; and is prepared to have it preached to others, so soon as they be fitted for it, and so be they do not put a bar in the way to hinder God, by their evil deserts, and unfit∣edness. Hereunto I thus reply, I will not contend about this order and method
of God, that first he willeth all men, to make good use of the law and light of nature; and then and not before to vouchsafe the Gospel to them; be this true or false, I will not question it, but rather grant it for argument sake: but yet this I denie, (though it be never so true in it self) that this limitation shall be added to my Ma∣jor, That God is prepared to have the Gospel preached to men, so soon as men be fitted for it and not before; for this is an absurd limitation: and it is to maintain one Errour by another, the which I make thus appear, 1 They say, as it is, implied in the antecedent part of my Major, That Christ died for all men: and then they would add to it this, That some of those men are not fit to know it, or not fitted to hear of it and receive it (for this is implied in their limitati∣on:) now is not this an absurd thing to be added? as first to hold, that Christ died for all men, and then to add to this, that some of those men are not fit to hear of it, or to know it? This wer erable, if it were held, that though men be unfit to know it at some one time of their lives,
yet they should be fit at some other time before death; but forasmuch as men abuse the light of nature all their lives long, and so die impeni∣tently, therefore they must hold, that many men are never fit, to hear of or know, what Christ hath done for them: and is it not absurd to say, Christ died for many men, who nor are, nor ever shall be fit to know it? or Christ died for many, who shall ne∣ver be fit to know what he hath done for them? are they fitted for Christ to die for them, and not fitted to know he died for them? This conceit is like unto this; A man pays a ransom, to redeem one from captivitie or prison, but the pri∣soner or captive is not fit to hear or know of it, so long as he liveth: or like unto this, A Physitian, makes an excellent and healthfull potion or cordial for his sick patient, but adds this, saying, He shall know of it so soon as he is fit to know of it and to receive it, when as he knows the pa∣tient shall never be fit so long as he lives; is not this absurd: refore, if they will hold, that Christ died for all men, they must hold also, that they
are fit to know and hear of it: which being so, this is a frivolous and ab∣surd limitation, to add saying, or else God and Christ be prepared, to cause the Gospel to be preached to men, so soon as they be fitted for it, or be fit to receive it. 2 Christ foresaw, that many men in the world, would never make a good use of the law and light of na∣ture, whereby to be fitted to know of his death. If therefore this was no hinderance for Christ to die for them, then this is no hinderance for the Gospel to be preached to them: for there is as good reason for the one as the other: yea the reason is stronger, to think mens unfitness should rather hinder Christ to die for them, than to hinder a sermon of Christs death to be preached to them: for Christ his bloud is of more value, than a mini∣sters words and breath: wherefore, if Christ died for all men, then are all men fit to hear of it: and so this limitation of fitness is frivolous. Furthermore, those whom Christ died for, those he loved infinitely, and unspeakably, John 3.16. and 15.13. now if it be true, as Arminians
say, that Christ died for all men, then he infinitely and unspeakably loved all men, even those who abused the general call, the light of nature, albeit he foresaw they would live and die in in the abuse of it: and was his love so hot and strong to those men, as to pass by this abuse, when he shed his hearts bloud for them; and was it be∣come so cold and weak to them after∣ward, as to stick at it and not pass it by, when he thought of causing a ser∣mon of his death to be preached to them, whereby they might be the better for his death? was Christs love so hot, as to require no fitness in them, when he died for them, and was it become so cold afterward, as to stick at these mens unfitness to hear a sermon of his death? surely, if nothing in these men, could hinder Christ to die for them; then nothing in them, can hinder a sermon of Christ to be preached to them: if there needed no qualification in them, to render them fit for Christ to die for them; then there needs no qualifica∣tion in them, to fit them to hear a sermon of Christ: unless you suppose more virtue or dignitie to be in a
sermon of Christ, than is in the bloud of Christ: so you see, this limitation of fitness is vain. 3 To say, Christ died for all men; and then to add this unto it, That they shall not have the Gospel (which is a necessary means of obtaining the end of Christs death) preached unto them, unless they be fit for it, or untill they be fitted to receive it, is a very absurd addition and limitation as you have seen: so it is also as ab∣surd, to say, God or Christ is prepared and in a readiness, to have the Gospel preached so soon as men be fitted for it: for there be thousands of Indians and others, who live and die in the abuse of the law and light of nature, and so are never fit for the Gospel, and who never heard the Gospel: now can it be truly said, that God or Christ hath prepared himself, to use and apply means unto such, as never will be capable of the means? and unto such, as he well knows and fore-sees will never be capable of it? did ever any wise man prepare himself, to do any thing, the which he fore-sees shall never be done? and yet such a preparation Arminians do ascribe un∣to
the wise God. Will a Physitian pre∣pare himself, to give phisick to a dead man, or to one whom he knows will never be fit to take it? Moreover, If this fitness be pre-required, then thus I reason: God not onely fore-sees that many will never be fit for the Gospel, but also is re∣solved in himself, that the Gospel shall never be preached to them; be∣cause he fore-sees, they shall and will live and die unfitted; now can it be said, that God is prepared to do that thing, which he is resolved in himself shall never be done? you may as well say, God is prepared to save the repro∣bate angels and devils. Thus you see, there is cause enough for me to reject this limitation and addition to my Major: wherefore my Argument must stand as I framed it; without this their addition: and then it is strong and good to prove, that Christ died not for all men: and it is unan∣swerable, their answer being con∣futed. So far of my third Argu∣ment. ARGUM. IV. If God the Son, died for the sins of
all men; then God the Father, will justi∣fie the persons, and pardon the sins of all men. But God the Father, will not justifie the persons, and pardon the sins of all men: for if he should, then all men should be saved, Mark 16.16. Luke 13.3. Revel. 21.8. Therefore God the Son, did not die for the sins of all men. As for my Major, thus I prove it. 1 Arminians say, that by the word world, John 3.16. we are to under∣stand, all men in the world: now if God the Father so exceedingly loved all men, as to give his onely begotten Son to die for them, John 3.16. then he can do no less than justifie the persons, and pardon the sins of all men: because, 1. He loved all men: and he gave his Son for none other end, but for all men to obtain justifi∣cation, and pardon of sin: now sure∣ly, God will not loose his love, nor fail of his end, nor waste and spill in vain, the bloud of his onely Son: all which he should do, if he should not justifie all men, after he had given his Son for them, and to justifie them. If it be in his power, will any wise
man loose his love, be frustrated of his end, and spend all his labour and cost in vain? 2 Christ is the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world, John 1.29. now if Christ hath taken away by his death, the sins of the world, that is, (as Arminians say) of all men; then God the Father, cannot retain their sins: those mens sins, which are removed or taken away, can∣not be unpardoned or remain upon them: wherefore if Christ died for all men, and hath taken away the sins of all men, then surely God the Fa∣ther, hath or will justifie and pardon the sins of all men, or else, Christ that Lamb hath not taken away their sins. 3 If God the Father, gave Christ his Son, to die and pacifie his wrath for the sins of all men, John 3.16. then God the Father, cannot but ac∣cept of his sons death; it being ac∣cording to his own will, and being his own gift: and if he accepts of it, then his wrath must needs be pacified for the sins of all men, and so he can∣not denie to justifie all men, and par∣don their sins.
4 God the Father, in giving his Son; and God the Son, in giving him∣self, both aimed at one and the same end, namely justification and pardon of sin; and both aimed at the same persons for obtaining this end: or else, God the Father, and God the Son, were not both of one mind, but of diverse or contrary minds: where∣fore, if God the Son died to obtain pardon of sins for all men, then God the Father, will vouchsafe pardon of sins to all men. 5 If God should not justifie all those men, for whom Christ died, he should be unjust: for Christ gave himself to death, as  a ransom for all men, as Arminians say, 1. Tim. 2.6. a ransom, is the full price for the redemption of a prisoner or captive: now when a king takes a ransom for a thousand captives, if he deliver not them all and every one, he is unjust: so God the Father, having taken and received at the hands of Christ, a full price and ransom, for the sins of all men, as Arminians say, he should be unjust, if he should not set free from sin, all and every man in the world. Furthermore, if God shall not justifie
and set free all men, there will be fraud and folly imputed to God and Christ: for where there is fair and honest dealing, the buyer and the sel∣ler are agreed upon the same terms, as if the buyer intendeth to have so many in number, be it ten, twentie, an hundred, or a thousand, the seller intendeth the same number also, and the same persons: or else there is fraud in the one, and folly in the o∣ther: now Christ is the purchaser, and if he intended by his death to ransom all men, then God the Father, must intend the same, and must justifie and deliver from wrath even all men: He must in justice deliver as many as Christ bought, and the same persons, that is, all men in the world: or else, you impute fraud and folly to God and to Christ. I shall inlarge my self upon this last Argument, by descending to some particulars, as thus; If God shall not justifie and save eternally Judas, Pharaoh, Cain, Corah and his wicked company, for whom Christ died, as say Arminians; then he shall be very un∣just: this I thus prove: If Christ di∣ed for Judas, Pharaoh, and other a∣bominable
wicked men; then have they suffered in this life, the full wrath of God for all their sins, and have made a sufficient and perfect satisfa∣ction to Gods justice already here: for though they suffered not in this life in their own persons; yet if it be true, that Christ died for them, then they suffered in the person of Christ, when in this life he died on the Cross for them, which is to be reckoned as their own death and suffering. This I thus prove; Look what a mans surety per∣forms for him, that is reckoned as done by himself: as, in case my surety payeth my debt, it is reckoned as my payment: for thereby I am dischar∣ged. So if Christ paid the debt of Ju∣das, Pharaoh and the rest, it is as if they had paid it in their own persons: and so they must be discharged. Hence it follows, That since Judas and others, have suffered in the person of Christ, which is to be reckoned as their own suffer∣ing, 1. That Judas and Pharaoh, have made a full and perfect satisfaction to Gods justice for all their sins, having suffered in this life the second death, and hell with the pains thereof, or
what is equivalent thereunto. 2. That God must in justice, justifie and save this wicked crue eternally: or else he will be an unjust Judge: for he shall punish one sin twice, once in Christ the suretie, and once again in Judas the principal. So much for proof of my Major: as for my Minor, it needs no proof, it being so clear. Answer. Arminians do answer thus to my Major: That it followeth not, that if Christ died for all men, then God must justifie and save all men: for God may interpose the condition of faith, to go between Christs death for Judas and others, and the act of Gods justification: and so as though Christ died for all men, yet God will not justifie any of them, unless they first believe. Reply. 1 It is absurd to suppose, that God would put in a condition, after he hath taken a ransom and payment of a full price. Conditions are always made before the price is payd; but never after the price is paid and re∣ceived: what man that selleth house
or land doth put in a condition, after he hath received his money? Where∣fore, since Arminians will not have the condition of Faith, to go before Christs death, it is too late to put in this condition after Christs death: for by his death, the ransom and price is fully paid and received; paid by Christ, and received by God the Fa∣ther. 2 If Christ died for Judas and all men, considered absolutely as sinners and without faith, as Arminians hold; then God the Father, must justifie Judas and all men, considered abso∣lutely as sinners and without Faith, and so the condition of Faith cannot be interposed: for the Buyer and Sel∣ler (if there be fair dealings between them, so as one doth not over-reach the other,) are both agreed upon the same terms; so as if the Buyer pur∣chaseth and payeth the price without any condition, then the Seller that takes the price, must give up the thing bought and paid for, without any condition: and so God cannot be said, to put in the condition of Faith, between Christs death and the act of justification.
3 Since Arminians hold, that Christ died for all men as sinners, and without the condition of Faith; God cannot in justice require the conditi∣on of Faith, before he will justifie them: for if he shall require it, then many thousands for whom Christ di∣ed, dying without Faith, must be damned, and suffer for their sins eter∣nally in the next life: now if Christ died for them in this life, and suffered for them, and in their room, stead and place, then God shall be unjust to pu∣nish these men for their sins in the next life, though they die without faith: for so he shall punish one sin twice, once in Christ their suretie, and once in themselves the principal. Since Judas hath suffered for his sins, in the person of Christ in this life, God shall be an unjust Judge, to punish Judas for his sins in the next life, though he hath no faith: for God hath (as they say) punished Judas his sins in the person of Christ, and there∣fore he shall be unjust to punish him also in his own person. It is extream injustice, to require a debt both of the suretie, and also of the principal: wherefore Judas his debt, being paid
to God by Christ, God cannot in ju∣stice require the condition of Faith of him, so as for want of it to damn him, and to cause him to suffer for his sins in the next life, and so to pay his own debt in his own person: for so God should require one debt to be twice paid: and so you see, that the condi∣tion of faith, cannot be interposed betwixt Christs death, and justificati∣on; being that God in justice must justifie and set free from the debt of punishment, all those men whose debt Christ hath paid, whether they believe or not believe: when God looks up∣on Judas, as having suffered in the person of Christ, he cannot but see his justice fully satisfied, and there∣fore cannot but justifie and free him, believing or not believing: where∣fore, to interpose the condition of Faith, is to make God an unjust Judge. 4 I shall here add one thing, which will both strengthen my Major, and also confute their answer. They say, Christ died for all men; and therefore they must so generally understand the Text, 2. Cor. 5.15. which saith, He di∣ed for all, &c. now all those who Christ
died for, those he reconciled to God his father. He is the reconciliation not for our sins onely, but also for the sins if the whole world. 1. John. 2.2. And all those who Christ died for, 2. Cor. 5.15. God the Father reconciled unto him∣self. 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself; that is, God was in Christ, when he died on the Cross for the sins of all men, and reconciled them unto himself: now as God reconciled all men or the world, so he justified them all: for the Text saith, He did not impute their sins unto them; 2. Cor. 5.19. Furthermore, re∣conciliation, doth presuppose justifica∣tion to go before: for the partie of∣fended, is not said to be reconciled, untill he hath first forgiven the of∣fence and the offender. So then the world which Christ died for, the same world God justified: thus you see my Major confirmed. Next to confute their answer: Faith cannot be interposed betwixt Christs death, and Gods justification, so as to hinder any man for whom Christ died from justification: because those whom Christ died for, 1. John 2.2. 2. Cor. 5.15. those God justified, not imputing
their sins unto them, 2. Cor. 5.19. and those God reconciled unto himself, 2. Cor. 5.19. so Faith cannot be any condition, so as to hinder any man by want of it, for whom Christ died, from justification: because all those Christ died for, all those God reconciled and justified: if Christ died for Judas, then God justified Judas; yet Judas had no faith interposed betwixt Im∣petration and Application, for he was no believer. If Arminians say, Christ died for all men; then Paul saith, God justified all men; and I may say, God justifieth them whether they believe or not believe: for faith cannot be interposed. So much for my fourth Argument. ARGUM. V. If Christ died for all men, then God the Father loved all men, and that with a special and incomparable love. My reason here is; Because God the Fa∣ther gave his Son, yea his onely Son to death for them: now for a Father to deliver up to death his Son, yea his onely Son, for a man; this bewrays love to that man, yea matches love. See a text for it, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his onely
begotten Son, &c. What greater love than this did ever God shew to the world, than when he gave his onely begotten Son to die for them? But God the Father did not love all men, with a special and incomparable love. This I thus prove: Because there are, and ever were many unbe∣lieving wicked and impenitent men in the world, who lived and died in Gods hatred: I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau, Rom. 9.13. and see Rom. 9.22. The wicked, and him that loveth iniquitie, doth his soul hate, Psal. 11.5. Thou hatest them that work ini∣quitie, Psal. 5.5, 6. Therefore Christ did not die for all men. To avoid the strength of this Ar∣gument, Arminians, perhaps, will an∣swer thus, That God loved all men as sinners, but hateth them as impeni∣tent sinners, &c. Hereunto I reply, That this is a distinction unheard of, and no where grounded in the Scri∣ptures that I know of, and therefore it is to be rejected. That God loveth all men, as his creatures, may pass as a sound position; but that God loveth all men, as sinners, and that with an
incomparable and matchles love, is to me most unsound: for a thing consi∣dered as evil, is no object of love, but of hatred: and so much for my fifth Argument. Thus I have by five Arguments proved, That Christ died not for all men: and so I have finished the first thing propounded at the beginning: and now I come to the second, which is to make answer unto the Texts of Scripture, brought by Arminians to prove, That Christ died for all men. An Answer unto the Texts alleadged by Arminians, to prove an Universal Redemption. JOHN 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gaue his onely begotten Son, &c. BY this Text Arminians would prove, that Christ died for all men: and for this end, they urge the word world in the Text; which they will needs have generally and univer∣sally taken, so as to signifie all men in the world, whether good or bad, be∣lievers
or unbelievers: and so as Christ should die for all men in the largest sense. Answer. 1 I take it for a great weakness in Arminians, to build so confidently upon the word world, urging, that it must be generally taken here, for all men in the world: who knoweth not, that knows any thing in Scripture, that general words are very often used by holy pen-men particularly? The general word all, is often used particularly for some, or for many, as in Matth. 3.5. 1. Cor. 1.5. and 13.2, 7. and 9.25. and 6.12. and 10.23, 33. many examples may be given for o∣ther words also; but passing by them, I shall instance in the word in question. The word world, is sometime taken for all men in the world, as in Rom. 5.12. and sometime it is taken for all men in the world, excepting eight persons, as in 2. Pet. 3.6. 1. Pet. 3.20. The world that then was perish∣ed, over-flowed with water: and some∣time it is taken for the most men in the world, as in 2. Cor. 4.4. John 15.18, 19. and 17.9. The God of this world hath blinded the minds, &c. and some∣time it is taken for the lesser number
of men in the world, as in Acts 17.6. John 12.19. These are they which have subverted the state of the world. And, Behold the world goeth after him. Now since this word is so variously used, how can they be so confident as to averr, that it must be taken in the largest sense? My answer therefore is, that as the word world, is sometime taken for the lesser number of men in the world, which are Disciples and followers of Christ, as in John 12.19. so it may be taken also in their Text alleadged, John 3.16. for believers, who are the lesser number of this world: and this is my first Answer. 2 I shall prove, that the word world, is used for believers onely: and then it will follow, that as there is a world of the wicked, so there is a world of be∣lievers also: for this end, See John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world. Though Arminians say, that Christ, this Lamb of God, died for the sins of the world, and for all men, by way of Impetration; yet they hold, that Christ hath not justified, or pro∣cured justification for all men in the
world, by way of Application; nor for any men but for believers onely: now this Text speaks of Taking away the sins of the world, which is no less, than to procure Justification, and to make Application of Christs death, by free∣ing men from their sins: and therefore this text is not to be understood, of the world of all men, but of believers onely, and of the world of believers: for no mens sins are Taken away, but believers onely, see 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them. Here the world that were recon∣ciled, & justified, their sins being not imputed, was not the world of all men, but of believers onely; it was the world of believers only, unles you will say, all men in the world are justified. See Rom. 11.12, 15. If the fall of them, be the riches of the world, &c. Again, If the casting away of them, be the reconciling of the world, &c. Here by the world, is not meant all men in the world, but the Gentiles onely: for the Jews are not compri∣sed in the word: nor are all the Gen∣tiles comprised therein, but onely the believing Gentiles: for the fall of the
Jews, was no riches to unbelieving Gentiles; nor was the casting away of the Jews, the reconciling of unbelie∣ving Gentiles: and that it is spoken of believing Gentiles, may further ap∣pear by these words in the Chapter Rom. 11.11. Through their fall, sal∣vation unto the Gentiles, Rom. 11, 17. Some of the branches be broken off, and thou a wild olive tree, was grafted in, and partaker of the root and fat∣ness of the olive tree, Rom. 11.20. Through unbelief they are broken off, and thou standest by faith. See John 6.33. The bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world. Here by the word world, we must understand, be∣lievers, and the world of believers: for Christ giveth not life to unbelievers. Thus by four Texts I have proved, that the word world, is often used for believers, and for the world of be∣lievers: now from hence my answer is this, that since the word world is often used for believers, & for the world of believers; therefore this their allead∣ged text Jo. 3.16. may be understood of believers onely, and of the world of believers: and this is my 2d Answer.
3 I shall here prove, not onely (as before) that by the word world, be∣lievers, and the believing world may be meant; but that they are and must of necessitie be meant, and this is evi∣dent by the Text and context. For this is a Rule, that general words are to be restrained according to the matter in hand: now the mat∣ter in hand, or the persons handled and spoken of, are believers; this you may see clearly expressed, in John 3.15, 16. That whosoever believeth in him, &c. vers. 15. God so loved the world, &c. that whosoever believeth in him, &c. vers. 16. wherefore be∣lievers, being the persons spoken of, the general word world, is to be re∣strained to believers. The question or main thing labour∣ed to be proved and cleared, is, That believers shall not perish, but have life eternal, as you may see John 3.15. to prove and amplifie this, S. John brings a reason in the next verse, John 3.16. as you may see by the particle (for, or because.) For, God so loved the world, that he hath given his onely Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have life eter∣nal;
which is as if he had said, Belie∣vers shall not perish, as the question is in verse 15. For, God so loved belie∣vers, or the world of believers, as to give his onely son for them, that who∣soever doth, will, or shall hereafter believe in him, shall not perish, as it is in the reason alleadged in verse 16. I confess, the word believeth, or ac∣cording to the Original believing, is in the present tense or time, but it must be understood of all tenses and times, past, present, and to come: so as Gods love in Christ, was to them that did believe before Christs time, to them that do believe in Christs time, and to them that shall or will believe after Christs time: this is added, to prevent an Arminian objection, say∣ing, if by world, believers be meant, then the word whosoever, implies a distinction, as if there were two sorts of believers, one believing, the other not believing at one and the same time: but the word whosoever, may be understood distributively or distinctively, of believers before Christs time, of believers in Christs time, and of believers after Christs time, to the worlds end. But to re∣turn,
for as much as the question and thing to be amplified, was the salva∣tion of believers verse 15. it is not reasonable, to understand the reason and amplification brought to confirm it in verse 16. of any other persons than believers. It were impertinent to argue thus, Believers shall not pe∣rish; for, or because God loved the world of all men, and gave Christ his Son for all men: this is to prove a spe∣cial and peculiar mercy belonging unto some men onely, by an argu∣ment which is general, and belongs to all men. Now by the same Argument, it may as soundly be proved, that not onely Believers shall not perish, but also that no man in the world shall perish; for, or because God loved the world of all men, and gave Christ his Son for all men: and so you see, that by the word world, believers and the world of believers onely, must of ne∣cessitie be meant. The Text saith, God so loved the world: now it is clear, that God doth not love all men in the world, with such a peculiar, matchless, & incompa∣rable kind of love, as the Text speak∣eth of: for there are many thousands
of men in the world, which God is so far off from loving, as that the Scri∣pture saith expresly, God hateth them: Esau have I hated Rom. 9.13, 22. Prov. 16.5. and 6.16, 17, 18, 19. Psal. 5.5, 6. and 11.5. wherefore, since God loveth not all men in the world with an incomparable love, therefore by the word world in John 3.16. can∣not be meant, all men in the world: nor any besides believers: for God so loved them onely. 4 Arminians may as well say and hold, that all men in the world shall be justified and saved eternally; as to say and hold, that Christ died for all men in the world: for it is said, 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, and recon∣ciled the world to himself, not impu∣ting their sins. If here the word world be largely taken, after the fashion of Arminians, then all the men in the world, are reconciled to God, and their sins forgiven, or not imputed unto them; and then they must be eter∣nally saved. And see Rom. 11.15. The casting away of the Jews, was the reconciling of the world. And see 1. John 2.2. He is the reconciliation for our sins; and not for ours onely, but
also for the sins of the whole world. And see John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world: so if by the word world, they will understand all men, then they must hold also, that all men in the world are reconciled to God, ju∣stified, and their sins taken away: and this is my last Answer to their Text John 3.16. and so I come to answer another of their Texts. 1. John 2.2. And he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours onely, but also for the sins of the whole world. Here again they urge the word world: and say it must be taken in the largest sense, for all men in the world: for the Text saith, not onely the world, as in John 3.16. but the whole world, to note the universalitie. 2 The Text saith, not for our sins onely, that is, not for our sins onely who are believers; but also for the sins of the whole world, that is, for the sins of unbelievers as well as believers: and so all men in the world, both be∣lievers and unbelievers, even the whole world are here meant.
Answer. Enough hath been said in my for∣mer answer, touching the word World; shewing that it is often taken, not for all men, but for some, and for many men in the world, and for the world of believers; and so in this last sense it may be taken in this Text, 1. John 2.2. But whereas they urge us in this Text, with the word whole, in that S. Iohn saith the whole World, this will nothing mend their cause: for as the word World, is often used for some, or for many men in the world, so are these words, the whole World: for this end note. 1. That other expressions, equivalent to this, and of as large extent as this, yet are not to be ta∣ken in the largest sense, but are used for many in the world, as in Isa. 23.17. and 34.1. Lament. 4.12. Col. 1.6. Mark. 16.15. Secondly, these very words in question, namely the whole World, are used for many in the world: as in Rom. 1.8. your faith is publish∣ed throughout the whole World: it is not credible, that every particular man and woman, in the whole World, had heard of the faith of these Rmans.
And see 1. Ioh. 5.19. we know that we are of God, and this whole World lieth in wickednesse. If the whole World here mentioned, so taken in the Ar∣minian sense, for all and every man in the world, how could S. Iohn exempt himself and other godly persons li∣ving then with him, from lying in wickedness? so you see, that by these words the whole World, is not always meant, all and every particular man & woman in the world. Arminians may as well say, that S. John saith, Ioh. 5.19. that all men then living were wicked men, & none godly; as to say, that the same Apostle in 1. Ioh. 2.2. saith, that Christ died for all men in the whole World, none excepted: for S. Iohn mentions the whole World, in both Texts. So much for answer to their first inference from the Text. As for their second inference from this Text, it is built upon a needless and groundless exposition of the Text: for thus they expound it. He is the reconciliation for our sins; that is, for the sins of us believers now living in the world: and not for ours onely, but also for the sins of the whole World; that is, not for our sins onely who are be∣lievers
now living in the world, but also for the sins of unbelievers now living in the world: and so he is a re∣conciliation for the sins of the whole World now living, both believers and unbelievers. To this I thus answer. 1 For them to expound the Text, as belonging to wicked ungodly men and unbelievers, must needs be a false exposition: for it maketh God and Christ, to express their singular, matchless, and incomparable love, unto such men, as they foresaw would live and die in their wickedness, hatred of God, impenitency, and unbelief: now the Scriptures inform us, that God is so far off from loving such men, as that he hateth and abhorreth them, Psal. 5.5▪6. Psal. 11.5. where∣fore the Text must not be enlarged unto unbelievers. 2 The enlargement of Christs death and reconciliation, at the end of the verse, may very well and safely be understood of believers onely, after this manner: He is the reconciliation not onely for our sins, who are be∣lieving Iews; but also for the sins of the whole world of believers, both Iews and Gentiles: or thus, He is the
reconciliation not onely for our sins, who are believers now living; but al∣so for the sins of the whole World of believers, living before our time, in our time, or that shall believe here∣after. The death and reconciliation of Christ, is to be extended unto all times, past, present, and to come: Jesus Christ, is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8. Thus you see, how this Text may well be understood, not of all men, but of believers onely: and this sense suiteth well with the context, and matter in hand, or with the persons spoken of, who are believers onely, as you may see 1. Ioh. 2.1, 3. So much for answer to their second Text, 1. Ioh. 2.2. and so I come to their third Text. 1. TIM. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all men, &c. Lo, here say they, it is clear∣ly expressed, that Christ died, and gave himself to death, not for some men onely, but for all men: and it is evident also by the context, that this word all, must be universally taken and in the largest sense: for so it is ta∣ken vers. 1. I exhort that prayers be made for all men, vers. 2. and for all
that are in authority, vers. 4. who will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the acknowledging of the truth. Answer. Here again, you see the weakness of Arminians, in that they build so confidently upon the word all; as if they had never read or heard, that this word all is very often used in Scrip∣ture particularly, for some, or for ma∣ny: as in Matt. 3.5. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region about Jordan, and were baptized, &c. Matt. 4.23. Jesus, &c. healed all or every sickness, all or eve∣ry disease, &c. Rom. 15.13. The God of hope fill you with all joy, &c. but carnal joy is not prayed for here, and see 1. Cor. 1.5. and 13.7. and 9.25. and 10.33, 23. and 6.12. Phil. 2.21. 3. John 12. Thus you see, how the word all, in 1. Tim. 2.6. may be un∣derstood of all that are believers; who are not all men in the world, but some onely, or many. Whereas they endeavour to prove by the context, that the word all must be taken in the largest sense; because it is so taken in the former verses: my
answer is, that the matter in the first six verses is not one and the same, but diverse. In vers. 1, 2. the matter is about good government, but in vers. 4, 5, 6. the matter is about mans salva∣tion: now being the matter is diverse, therefore the word all may be diversly understood, as universally in vers. 1, 2. and particularly for some, in vers. 4, 5, 6. and this is usual in expounding of Scripture, to take the word all ge∣nerally in some matter treated of, and particularly in some other matter treated of. Whereas they urge the fourth vers. who will that all men shall be saved; my answer is, that here the word all must not be taken in the largest sense: for God will not have all and every man to be saved: for he willeth not the salvation of reprobates, impeni∣tent, and unbelieving persons, as you may see in Rom. 9.11, 13, 18, 21, 22, 27. Rom. 11.8, 9, 10. 1. Pet. 2.8. 2. Thes. 2.10, 11, 12. Ioh. 3.18. Mark. 16.16. Re∣vel. 21.8. Mark. 4.11, 12. To conclude, as the Text saith, He will that all men shall be saved: so it saith, that they shall all come to the knowledge of the truth, vers. 4. now
this cannot be understood of all men in the largest sense: for God doth not vouchsafe the Gospel and know∣ledge of the truth in our time unto many Indians and wild savages: and before our time, the Apostle Paul was forbidden of the holy Ghost, to preach the word in Asia and Bythinia, Act. 16.6, 7. and further see these Texts Mark 4.11, 12. Mat. 11.25. Ioh. 12.39, 40. Psal. 79.6. so you see, the word all is not universally to be taken: and so much for answer to their third Text. ROM. 14.15. and 1. COR. 8.11. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Rom. 14.15. Through thy knowledge shall the weak brother pe∣rish, for whom Christ died. 1. Cor. 8.11. From both these Texts they gather, that Christ died for those that perish, as well as for those that perish not, but are saved: and if he died for those that perish, and for those that perish not; then he died for all men. Answer. 1 That Christ died for those that pe∣rish not, but are saved: this they say, we grant: and that Christ died also for those that perish, and are not sa∣ved:
this they prove by these two Texts, Rom. 14.15. 1. Cor. 8.11. To this their proof I thus answer, To de∣stroy is one thing, and to occation or hazard destruction is another. To pe∣rish is one thing, and to occation or hazard perdition is another. Now these two Texts may be understood of the latter onely, namely of the oc∣cation and hazard of perdition and destruction: for those strong Christi∣ans, did by their unseasonable use of meats offend the weak, and did there∣by give them an occation of falling, of perdition and destruction: this sense the contexts give light unto, both in Rom. 14.13. and in 1. Cor. 8.9. and me think, Arminians cannot think, that the strong Christians, did by their unseasonable use of meats, re∣ally and actually destroy all those weak Christians, who saw them eat these meats, or who by their example, were emboldened to eat them: now if they did not perish and were indeed de∣stroyed, how can Arminians say, Christ died for those that perish? 2 I answer, Whereas they under∣take to prove, that some perished for whom Christ died: this is false, and
cannot be proved by these two Texts: for admit, that by example of the strong, the weak Christians did eat meats against their conscience, and so sinned; yet it will not follow, that they were therefore destroyed, and perished eternally: unless Armi∣nians will say, that by repentance of that sin, they could not be saved; or will be so uncharitable, as without a ground for it, to say, they lived and died in this sin without repentance. Sure I am, repentance is a salve for greater sins than this, Acts 11.18. So it cannot be proved, that those weak Christians perished; and therefore it cannot be proved, that Christ died for those that perished. So much for an∣swer to these two Texts, Rom. 14.15. and 1. Cor. 8.11. HEBR. 10.29. Of how much soever punishment sup∣pose ye shall he be worthy, which tread∣eth under foot the Son of God, & count∣eth the bloud of the Testament as an un∣holy thing, wherewith he was sanctified. Here say they, are some men for whom Christ died, being that they were sanctified by Christs bloud; and yet
became apostates, and shall be sorely punished: so then Christ died for those that perish, as well as for those that perish not: and if he died for both, then he died for all men. Answer. Whereas they collect from this Text, that some believers and sancti∣fied by the bloud of Christ, did in∣deed make apostasie, and so as they perished; this collection is groundless: for the Text may be understood con∣ditionally, or as a supposition; as if the Apostle had said, If a believer, and one sanctified by the bloud of Christ, shall make apostasie and tread under foot the bloud of Christ, he shall pe∣rish, or be surely punished. Or thus, Of how much sorer punishment shall a man be worthy, if he treads under foot the Son of God, &c. Now a con∣ditional speech, or a supposition, doth not affirm and assert the thing to be done indeed, but onely it supposeth a thing, or puts a case, as in Hebr. 10.26, 38. so this Text doth not assert and affirm, that some believers either did or should make apostasie, and so perish: that the Text may be under∣stood
conditionally, as a supposition, and as a case put, I make it thus ap∣pear. 1 These are equivalent propositi∣ons; He that doth such a thing, and, If one doth such a thing: for exam∣ple, He that sheds mans bloud, by man shall his bloud be shed, Gen. 9.6. the which is equivalent to this, If one sheds mans bloud, by man shall his bloud be shed. So in like manner, He that apostatizeth and treads under foot the bloud of Christ, shall perish or be sorely punished, Heb. 10.29. the which is equivalent to this, If one apostatizeth and treads under foot the bloud of Christ, he shall perish or be sorely punished, so it is indifferent to take either of the two expressions: and further note, that neither of the two do assert and affirm the thing to be indeed done; as it is not affirmed, that any have shed mans bloud, so it is not affirmed, that any believer hath apostatized, and troden under foot the bloud of Christ: it is onely said, He that doth it, &c. or, If one doth it, &c. 2 In Heb. 10.26. our translators render it thus, If we sin willingly, &c.
the which in the Original is in the participle thus, We sinning willingly, &c. now since this latter, may be rendered conditionally, (so it must be rendered, unless we make belie∣vers guilty of wilfull sinning,) why may it not be so too, three verses after? for in Heb. 10.29. in the Original it is in the participle thus, Treading under foot, &c. which may be rendered thus, If he tread under foot, &c. and so the Apostle doth not assert or af∣firm, that any man doth or hath in∣deed, troden under foot the bloud of Christ, or made apostasie. Note fur∣ther, that in vers. 26.27. you have the question: in vers. 28. you have the argument: and in vers. 29. is the ap∣plication of it to the question. Now where the question is conditional, the application must not be absolute: and therefore the 29. vers. must be con∣ditionally understood. 3 The Apostle saith in the last vers. save one, Heb. 10.38. If any with∣draw himself, &c. In which words, he speaks of apostasie and withdrawing conditionally: wherefore the apostasie and treading under foot Christs bloud, mentioned before in Heb. 10.29. ma
be understood conditionally also: and so nothing is asserted as done. 4 In the last vers. Heb. 10.39. the Apostle speaking of believers, as he doth also in Heb. 10.26, 29. saith, we are not they which withdraw our selves. Whereby he plainly signifieth, that the believers of whom he wrote in Heb. 10.29. had not, or did not with∣draw themselves, or make apostasie: wherefore the apostacy, in treading Christs bloud under foot, mentioned Heb. 10.29. is not asserted or affirm∣ed, as a thing indeed done by be∣lievers; but as a supposition, as if in case a believer should do such a thing, then he should perish or be sorely punished. So much for answer to this Text, Heb. 10.29. 2. PET. 2.1. There shall be false teachers among you, &c. denying the Lord that bought them, and bring on themselves swift damnation. Here say they, S. Peter af∣firms, that some men bought by the bloud of Christ, shall be false teach∣ers, bring in damnable Heresies, de∣ny the Lord Christ, and shall bring on themselves damnation: whence they argue as before, that Christ
bought or died for those that perish and are damned; and consequently for all men: for we say, Christ died for those that perish not, but are saved: and they prove by this Text, that Christ died for those that do perish, and are damned: so if Christ died for those that perish, and for those that perish not, then he died for all men: of this see their Acta Synodalia de morte Christi, pag. 346. Answer. 1 It cannot be proved by this Text, that Christ bought those that did pe∣rish and are damned: for the Text doth not expresly say or intimate, that these false teachers, did ever af∣ter live and die in impenitency: for be it so, that they taught false Doctrine, brought in damnable Heresies, and denied the Lord Christ Jesus; yet they might repent of all these sins be∣fore they died, and so be eternally saved: Paul when he was a Saul, was a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an op∣pressor; and yet he was upon his re∣Pentance received to mercy, 1. Tim. 1.13, 16. and he thought he was bound to do, many contrary things against the
name of Jesus Christ, Act. 26.9, 10, 11. whereby he denied the Lord that bought him, and yet he was not damned. But perhaps they will urge the last words of the Text, that they shall bring on themselves swift damnation. To which I answer, that from these words it cannot be proved, that they were damned: for these words must be understood with an exception, un∣less they repent: as Mat. 3.10. every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, that is, unless they repent. Re∣vel. 21.8. But the fearfull, and the unbelieving, &c. shall have their part in the lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone, that is, if they repent not, but go on still in their sins till death: so, they shall bring on them∣selves swift damnation, unless they repent, and this is my first answer. 2 Whereas Arminians understand by the word [Lord] in the Text, the Lord Christ Jesus: and by the word [bought] in the Text, the redempti∣on from sin and eternal wrath by the bloud of Christ: I deny both these senses of the words; and shall shew,
that they may be well and safely ta∣ken in other senses, which will no∣thing further their cause. First, for the word Lord: it may be understood of God the Father, or of God in general: for the clearing up of this, note, that in the new Testa∣ment, the word whereby Christ is no∣ted usually is  translated Lord; but in this Text of Peter, we have an other word, which is , and translated Lord: and being an other word, and not usual to note Christ, it is likely enough to be of an other sense: we find this word  translated Lord, and usually applied to God the Father, or to God in ge∣neral, or to earthly and fleshly Lords and Masters, not unto Christ as Me∣diator, as in these Texts, Luke 2.29. Act. 4.24. 2. Tim. 2.21. Jude 4. 1. Tim. 6.1, 2. Tit. 2.9. 1. Pet. 2.18. wherefore since this word is usually, speaking of God, understood of God the Father, why may it not be so understood also in this their Text, 2. Pet. 2.1. and since it is seldom, or rather never un∣derstood of Christ as Redeemer, why should it be so understood in this Text, 2. Pet. 2.1.
Secondly, for the word bought: this may be understood of Gods buy∣ing and redeeming his people, from their bondage in Egypt, or from some other slavery, servitude, and bondage to their enemies; of which you may read in Deut. 9.26. 2. Sam. 7.23. Psal. 10.7.2, 3. Jer. 15.21. Mich. 4.10. Jer. 31.10, 11. And then the words of S. Peter, may be understood as an agravation of the sin of those false teachers, for that they should bring into the Church, such damnable He∣resies, as whereby they should deny even the Lord their God, who bought and redeemed them from servitude and slavery, unto their oppressing enemies in the flesh. And the rather this sense may stand, because it so well suites with the other word  Lord, the which is taken for God the Father, but seldom or ra∣ther never for Christ the Redeemer, and this is my second answer. 3 As touching the word , translated bought them: it may be rendered taught them: it may be translated taught: see Crispine and Scapula, who say, that the Noun , hath (besides an other signifi∣cation)
this for one, it signifieth an oration or sermon: & the Verbs , and , signifie to preach or teach: yea the word , signifies not onely to buy, but also to consult, and to give counsel: wherefore the Text may be thus translated: Deny∣ing the Lord that taught them, or gave them counsel. Now this makes no∣thing for proof that the Lord bought them, or redeemed them: and this is my third Answer. 4 If for all this, they will press the Text, and understand it of the Lord Christ, and that he hath bought and redeemed wicked persons and unbelie∣vers, 2. Pet. 2.1. they may as well say also, that God justified the world of wicked men and unbelievers, 2. Cor. 5.19. and that God justifieth the ungod∣ly, as ungodly, Rom. 4.5. which is contrary to Prov. 17.15. and so much for answer to this their Text, 2. Pet. 2.1. ROM. 5.6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. Lo here say they, is it not said expresly, that Christ died for the ungodly? If therefore Christ died as
well for the ungodly, as for the god∣ly, then Christ died for all men, for good and bad. Answer. There is another Text of like kind, 1. Pet. 3.18. Christ hath once suffered, the Just for the unjust, &c. Wherefore one Answer shall serve to both. True it is, that Christ died for the ungodly, and for the unjust: and had he not died for such, it had been wo to all godly persons: for as Paul saith of the godly and believing Corinthi∣ans, that there was a time, when they were ungodly and unjust, as idolaters, adulterers, drunkards, and extortioners, &c. 1. Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. so may I say, there was a time before our conversi∣on, when we were ungodly and un∣just: if therefore Christ had not died for ungodly and unjust persons, no godly man now living could possibly be saved. Wherefore we must distinguish of ungodly persons thus: There are some ungodly persons, who are be∣come believing and penitent godly persons: and for these ungodly per∣sons Christ died, as the Text saith:
and of such the Text speaketh, as is plain Rom. 5.6, 8, 10. but there are o∣ther ungodly persons, who persist still even unto death in their ungodliness, refusing to repent and believe: now I denie that Christ died for these; or that the Text is to be understood of these. These are dogs and swine, where∣fore Christ the pearl is not to be given to these, Matth. 7.6. Christ would not vouchsafe to pray for these, John 17.9. and therefore he would not die for them: and this is my Answer to this Text. Thus I have made answer, to all the Texts of Scripture, which seem to have any weight in them, for the Ar∣minian cause: they have also some ar∣guments, as two or three, but the one of them onely deserves an answer, so passing by the other, I shall here pro∣pound it, and make answer to it: you shall find it in their Acta Synodalia pag. 337. de Morte Christi ARGUMENT. Whosoever are bound to believe in Christ Jesus, for them Christ died. But all men are bound to believe in Christ Jesus.
Therefore for all men Christ died. As for the Major they prove it by this reason: because if it be not true, some men, as those for whom Christ died not, are bound to believe a lye or a falshood: which is very absurd. The Minor they prove by this Text, John 3.19, 36. Answer. I denie their Major: for it is not true, that Christ died for all those men who are bound to believe in him: that is, to believe in him, that he is the Son of God, and Saviour of the world, which is the right object of faith. And as for the reason, whereby they labour to prove their Major, it is un∣sound: for it leans upon an unsound (though common) description of ju∣stifying faith: for they describe it thus: Faith in Christ, is a certain & full or plerophorie perswation of the mind, whereby we embrace Christ, with this confidence, that he died not onely for o∣thers, but also for us, or for me and my sins in particular. This description however common, yet is it unsound: for it cannot be proved in Scripture: for I no where find in the Scripture,
that the object of faith, is to believe that Christ died for us, or for thee and me in particular, as they suppose in their Argument: this I deny, and they must prove it if they can, and when they can. The object of justifying and saving faith is, to believe that Christ is the Son of God, the Messias, the Saviour of the world, and the like: and this is the current of the Scri∣ptures every where: in particular see John 20.31. These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is that Christ the Son of God: and that in or so believing, ye might have life, &c. All men may be bound to believe this, and yet not bound to believe a lye: or those for whom Christ died not, may be bound to believe all this, and yet not be bound to believe a lye or a falshood. Now that the Scriptures do every where make this the object of faith, that Christ is the Son of God, the Mes∣sias, the Saviour of the world, and the like; beside the Text alleadged John 20.31. See also these Texts, Matth. 16.16. the object of S. Peters faith, whereof he made confession unto, and before Christ, was this, Thou art Christ,
the Son of the living God. Acts 8.37. The object of the Eunuch's faith was the same, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Acts 9.20. the sum of Pauls preaching, to beget saving faith in men, was this, That Christ was that Son of God. Acts 2.36. the sum of Peters sermon, as touching Faith, whereby he converted three thou∣sand souls unto the faith, was this, That he whom they had crucified, God had made him both Lord and Christ. 1. John 5.5. who is he that overcometh the world, but he who believeth, that Jesus is that Son of God? So you see, the victorious faith is, to believe, that Christ is the Son of God. Acts 17.3, 4. Paul preached, that Christ died and rose again; and that this is Jesus Christ. And by this sermon of Christ, he won many to the faith, as you may see in the fourth verse. Acts 18.5. here you have another sermon of Pauls, that Jesus was the Christ; and this is the object of faith. John 1.29, 34. S. Johns sermon was this, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world, &c. and This is that Son of God. John 1.49, 50. Nathanaels confession of faith, was this, Thou art that Son of
God. John 4.7, 25, 29, 39, 42. The faith of the woman of Samaria, and of o∣ther the Samaritanes, was this, that Jesus was the Messias, and the Christ: and that Jesus was that Christ, the Sa∣viour of the world. John 11.27. the faith of Martha was, that Christ was the Son of God. Thus you see, that ac∣cording to the current of the Scri∣ptures, the object of faith is, To be∣lieve that Christ is the Son of God, the Saviour, with the like: now all men may be bound to believe these things of Christ, and yet not be bound to believe a lye, or those for whom Christ died not, may be bound to believe these things of Christ, and yet are not bound to believe a fals∣hood: nor hence will it follow, that Christ died for them that are bound to believe this. But I no where read, that Christ required, or that the Apo∣stles preached for such a particular applicatorie faith as this, That Christ is mine, or that Christ died for our sins, or that Christ died for thee, or for me in particular. I confess I read of Thomas his faith, Iohn 20.28. saying, Thou art my Lord and my God. And of Pauls faith, Gal.
2.20. saying, Who hath loved me, and given himself for me. These indeed were acts of the two Apostles faith; but I no where read, that Christ re∣quired of every man this faith, as ne∣cessary to salvation; nor do I read, that the Apostles or any one of them, did preach this faith to the people, when in their sermons they preached to beget men unto the faith: where∣fore I judge, 1. That this kind of faith is proper unto Apostles, and un∣to Christians of the highest form in the school of Christ; and not common to every weak Christian: for how then should they be saved? since many hundreds of weak Christians, neither can nor dare say, Christ is mine: or Christ died for me in particular. 2. I judge, that this act or kind of faith, is a consequent of justifying faith, and may safely and comfortably be con∣cluded and collected, by strong Chri∣stians from it, thus; He that hath justi∣fying faith, Christ is his, and Christ died for him. But I in particular have justifying faith: for I believe, that Christ is the Son of God, and the Sa∣viour of the world; and my faith is accompanied with good works, as
Sanctification and Mortification, &c. Therefore Christ is mine, and Christ died for me in particular. So much for clearing of my Answer: and so much also for answer to their argu∣ment. By this time we have finished these things propounded to be handled; First we have by sundrie Arguments proved, That Christ died not for all men. Secondly, we have answered all their Texts of Scripture, and their Argument, whereby they would prove the contrary. Now in the third place, we confute a common answer of Arminians, which they give to a notable objection of ours.
The Confutation of a com∣mon Answer of Arminians, which they give to a notable Obje∣ction of ours. FIrst I shall propound our Objecti∣on. Secondly I shall give you the Arminian answer. And Thirdly I shall confute it in my Reply. Objection. If Christ died for Judas, and all o∣ther wicked and ungodly men, why are they not all saved? how can any be damned, for whom Christ died? for if Christ died for them, then have they suffered in this life in the person of Christ their suretie, the torments of the next life, which Christ upon the Cross bore for them, and in their room and place: now God having pu∣nished Judas and the rest, in the per∣son of Christ on the Cross in this life, with the punishment due to the next life; he cannot punish them again in the next life, unless he be an unjust Judge, punishing the same men for the same sins twice: once in this life, and once more in the next life: and
therefore Iudas and all other men, must be saved, if Christ died for all men. Answer. Hereunto Dutch and English Armi∣nians both, make this answer, Iudas and the rest will not believe: they re∣fuse to believe in Christ, and so to ap∣ply him: and therefore God may just∣ly damn them, Joh. 3.18. Mark. 16.16. see their Acta Synodalia, de Morte Christi, pag. 320. and this they en∣deavour to clear by some similitudes: If a Physician tenders a potion to a patient, he is not to be blamed, if the patient will not receive it and ap∣ply it; but the fault and blame is onely in the patient. So if God of∣fers Christ, to Iudas and all other wicked men; but they will not be∣lieve in him and apply him, then the blame is theirs, and so God is free of injustice, though he damn them. An other simily is this; A King having many subjects in captivity under a for∣reign King, payes a full and sufficient ransom for every one of them; now many of those captives despise their liberty, and chuse to live in captivi∣ty and bondage; In this case there is
no blame in the King, but in the cap∣tives onely: So God and Christ have ransomed all men, but many men de∣spise this ransom, by refusing to be∣lieve, and so choose to live in captivi∣ty and thraldom still; wherefore if God keep them under everlasting thraldom, he is not unjust or blame∣able, but these despisers onely are blameable. Reply. I shall first deal with their answer, and then with their similitudes: I be∣gin with their answer. 1 Be it so, that Judas doth not and will not believe, but obstinate∣ly refuseth to believe; yet this freeth not God of injustice if he damn Judas; supposing that Christ died for Judas: for clearing of this, I ask Arminians, whether Christ died for men, considered as believers, or as sinners and unbelievers? Hereunto they will not say, as believers: for so they should justifie our Doctrine, which is, that Christ died for belie∣vers, and for them onely: wherefore they must answer, that Christ died for men considered as sinners and with∣out belief; and so faith is no conditi∣on
of impetration, or of Christs death and ransom paid for men: now if Christ impetrating, and paying a ran∣som for men, did it absolutely and without any condition or considera∣tion of faith in them; then for appli∣cation, God the Father cannot re∣quire faith in men before application, or before he will apply Christ his death unto them in justification: un∣less they will absurdly think, that Christ and God were not of one and the same mind, but were at odds and difference in the work of Redempti∣on: as if Christ should buy and pur∣chase us absolutely without a condi∣tion, but God should sell us upon a condition; so absurdly they should think, the buyer and seller should be at odds, and not agreed both upon the same terms: now since it must follow, that if Christ died for Iudas without respect to faith in him, then God cannot but justifie and save Iu∣das without regard to faith in him; then though Judas doth not believe, and wilfully refuseth to believe, yet God cannot in justice damn him for his not believing: because when Christ bought Iudas of God the Fa∣ther,
and God the Father sold Iu∣das to Christ, there was no conditi∣on of faith intended betwixt them: and therefore Iudas must be saved. If you say, that Christ died for Iudas, then God cannot require faith of him, so as he should for his infidelity, in justice damn & punish him in the next life; God cannot be so unjust, as to punish one man twice for his sins, as once in Christ his surety, and once again in himself the principal; one debt must not be twice payed: where∣fore to alleadge a reason from Iudas his unbelief, why God may damn him in the next life, is to alleadge a reason, why God may deal unjustly in the next life. Now what they should say to this I cannot devise, unless they will di∣stinguish of Iudas his sins, and so make an hotchpotch of the work of Redemption, saying, that Christ died for some of Iudas his sins, but not for all, as not for his unbelief: and then it will follow, that Christ is made an half Saviour, or a partial Saviour: and Christ died for some of Iudas his sins, and Iudas dieth for other some of his sins: and, Christ died for all Iudas his
sins save that one of unbelief, and Iudas is now in Hell for no sins com∣mitted, but suffers onely for one sin, namely his unbelief: these are ab∣surd and groundless fantasies, never broched by any Christian man, un∣less Arminians will be the first. 2. So saying, they contradict themselves: For if Christ died not for unbelief, then he died not for all men: for ma∣ny men are unbelievers, 2. Thes. 3.2. Christs death was for believers, or for unbelievers: we say, it was for be∣lievers, ergo they must hold, that it was for unbelievers. So much touch∣ing their answer; and now I come to their similitudes, and first to that of a Physician. 1 This simily of a Physician, is al∣together impertinent to their pur∣pose; for by this simily it is cleared, that God in justice may damn Judas once, because he refuseth to believe; but it doth not clear that which is in question, which is, that God in justice may damn Judas twice for his sin of unbelief; that is, once in his surety Christ, and once more in his own person: this is high injustice: no simi∣litudes may or can make God to be unjust.
If the patient refuseth to receive and apply the potion, he is to bear the blame; but it is not so in Judas, if he refuseth to believe and apply Christ: because if Christ died for Ju∣das absolutely, and without respect to his belief or unbelief, as Armi∣nians say, then he is not bound to believe in Christ, as a means to free him from damnation; for Christ hath already suffered his damnation for him, before God the Father required any faith in him, when he died for him, considered as a sinner or unbe∣liever: so Judas is not to be blamed for not believing; since Christ in dy∣ing for him and in his room, required or respected no faith in him; and it is too late for God the Father, to require the condition of faith in him, after he hath punished him and his sin in Christ. Further, though in Physick, the patient is to apply the potion to avoid death, yet it is not so in the potion of Christs death, to free us from death: for here man is to do nothing, but to be passive, if Christ died for all un∣believers; but it is God who is to make application, & to apply Christs
death to men, whether they believe or believe not: because he received and accepted Christs death for all men, believers or not believers: in what condition Christ gave himself for men, in such condition God received Christ for men. 1 Though a Physician tenders a potion to his patient, so as he refuseth to apply it he must die; yet it is not so to be applied, as if God tendered Christ upon the condition of faith, so as if they refuse to believe they must be damned: for it is absurd to think or say, that after God had re∣ceived and accepted of Christ and his death for men, without any conditi∣on at all, be it faith or any other; he should afterwards require a conditi∣on, or tender Christ upon a condition of faith. God having received Christs death for men without condition, he hath no tender to make unto men now, but to tender them justificati∣on, glorification, and freedom from condemnation; this or nothing is to be tendered: for after God hath pu∣nished and damned a man in Christ, it is most absurd to think, he should then require of him, faith as a condi∣tion
and means to free him from damnation. Thus much for the simi∣le of a Physicia. 2 As for the other simile of a King and the Captives, this is also imperti∣nent: for 1. Be it so, that Judas and other captives do despise Christs ran∣som, and faith the means of it, yet this will not clear God of injustice, if he punish Judas twice; once in Christ his suretie, and once again in his own person: no simile can make God un∣just, or to punish one man or one sin twice: God in justice may punish Ju∣das his dispising once, as in Christ, or in Judas; but not twice, as in Christ and in Judas both. 2. This simile is unfit for the purpose, and therefore to be rejected: if it were fitted to our question, it should be thus framed: A King having many subjects in captivity to a forreign King, pays their ransom by his son, who is put into captivitie for them, and lies there in their room; but they despise their libertie, choose to live in captivitie still; wherefore the forreign King, may keep both the Kings son, and the captives also in pri∣son and captivitie: can the forreign King do this injustice? So much
for their second similitude. I cannot imagine what Arminians should say to evade these things, unless they will coyn a new distinction, and strange to Christian ears, and so make a hotchpotch of the work of Redempti∣on, saying, that Christ died for some of a mans sins, but not for all his sins, as not for his final unbelief, or new infi∣delitie, or infidelitie unrepented of, as they express it: and then they think to evade all by this answer, that God punished Christ for all Judas his sins, excepting his infidelitie, and pu∣nished Judas for his infidelitie; and so God punisheth no sin twice, nor is he unjust. But to this new distinction I thus reply. 1 It maketh Christ to be but a par∣tial Saviour, or an half Saviour: for by this distinction they say, Christ died for some, or many of a mans sins, but not for all; for not for unbelief. 2. It maketh Christ to die for some of Ju∣das his sins, and Judas himself to die for other some of his sins. 3. It ma∣keth Judas and other wicked men and unbelievers, to suffer hell tor∣ments, for none of all their horrible and abominable sins committed in
their life time; but onely for their fi∣nal unbelief: for they say, Christ di∣ed and suffered for all their other sins. Now to say that wicked men do not suffer in hell, for their other horrible sins besides infidelitie, is not onely absurd, but manifestly false: as is to be seen Matth. 25.41, 42, 43. John 5.29. Rom. 2.6, 8, 9. Jude 7. Revel. 21.8. where we see, that wicked men suffer in hell, for their unmercifulness, contention, unrighteousness, fornication, murther, sorcerie, idolatrie, and lyes: so you see, they can make no evasion, but by coyning of a new distinction, which makes an hotchpotch of the work of Redemption, and is not one∣ly absurd, but also manifestly false, as is proved. 2. If Christ died not for new infidelitie, then he died not for all men: for many believe not after invitation by the Gospel preached, which they call, new infidelitie, Iohn 12.37. So much for confutation of the Arminian answer, saying to us, that therefore God may justly damn Ju∣das, because he will not believe. Now their answer being confuted, our obje∣ction remains good, namely, that if Christ died for all men, then it fol∣lows,
that no man shall be damned, but that Judas and all men shall be saved. And so I come to the fourth and last thing propounded to be handled, which is, A Confutation of their distinction of Impetration and Application. The distinction of Impetra∣tion and Application confuted. FIrst we must know what Armini∣ans understand by these terms. By impetration, they understand the death and passion of Christ, whereby he me∣rited remission of sins and justification for all men. By application, they un∣derstand the fruit and benefit of Christs death and passion; which is (as I conceive it must be) the real and actual remission of sins and justificati∣on, applied unto the faithfull. The former, namely Impetration, is proper to God the Son: the latter, namely Application, is proper unto God the Father. Furthermore, they place Faith, between Impetration and Ap∣plication;
so as though Christ died and impetrated for all men, yet God justifies, and makes application of Christs death unto believers onely: now the better to help on the matter, they say, that these being acts of grace and favour, God may according to his infinite wisdom, order them according to his most free will: the which words, as I take it, are spoken in relation to Faith, that God may place it before or after impetration, as it pleaseth his wisdom. Having thus opened their meaning, I thus proceed. As for this distinction of Impetrati∣on and Application, I acknowledge it: for as it is Christ that died or im∣petrated for us, so it is God that justi∣fieth us, and makes application of Christs death unto us, Rom. 8.33. And I am content, that they call what Christ did for us on the Cross, Impe∣tration; and what God doth for us in relation to it, and by virtue of it, Ap∣plication: but I mislike of their divi∣sion, that they should divide the works of Christ and God; so as if Christ should impetrate and die for many men, to whom God makes no appli∣cation of Christs death: for they say,
Christ impetrated for all men, belie∣vers and unbelievers, but God applies Christs death for justification to be∣lievers onely: now thus the Works of Christ and God, do not concurr in the same persons, but are divided: for God makes no application unto many men, for whom Christ made impetra∣tion. On the contrary we hold, that the works of God the Father, and God the Son, are undivided: distinguished they may be, but divided they may not be: they always concurr as touch∣ing the same persons; to whomsoever God makes application, to and for those and none other Christ made im∣petrations; and for whomsoever Christ impetrated, to those and to all those God makes application. And as touch∣ing faith, we hold, that as God re∣specteth faith in application, so Christ respecteth faith in impetration, so as faith is precedent in both: and so God and Christ, had respect unto the same persons, and unto the same qualifica∣tion of the persons: but that faith is to come between impetration and application, is but an Arminian devise; dividing the consideration and re∣spects of God and Christ, of the Father
and the Son, about one and the same work of Redemption: and so I come to the Confutation. 1 For the absurdnes of this distinctiō of impetration and application; & the Arminian devise, of faith coming be∣tween them, as a condition of the lat∣ter onely: put case, that a King, having subjects in thraldom and captivity un∣der a forreign King, and to ransom & redeem them, he sends his onely Son, to lay in bondage and captivity for them and in their stead and place; and this the King doth without any condi∣tion at all, to be performed by his sub∣jects: If now the forreign King, refu∣seth to deliver & set free the subjects, unless they will perform some condi∣tion first, which he imposeth upon them, and which their own King never required of them in sending his Son, nor did his Son go into captivity for them upon any such condition: is it not absurd to imagine, that the for∣reign King should require a condition to be performed by the subjects, be∣fore he will apply the ransom to them, and set them free? it must needs be absurd, for you must imagine, folly & ignorance in the one King, or fraud
and deceit in the other King, in that they were not first agreed both on the same terms, before the son was put in∣to captivity. So is the case, if Faith goeth between impetration and appli∣cation; and if Christ died for men ab∣solutely without the condition of Faith, and yet God will require the condition of Faith, before he will make application & set men free from their sins and condemnation. I know nothing they have to say, to free themselves of this absurdity but this, that both the Kings, Christ and God, were at the first agreed on the same terms, as thus: they both agreed, that Christ should impetrate and die for all men absolutely, without consi∣deration of any faith in them; but that God should apply Christs death to none but believers, or to such as did first believe: To this I reply, that this occasion is guilty of these absurdities. 1 That the King should put his one∣ly son, to live in thraldom and bond∣age; and his son should willingly en∣dure all this misery, for millions, even the greater number of his subjects in captivity, whom he foresaw and knew well, should not be a rush the better
for it, because they would not keep the condition agreed on. Will any wise man, give and pay a certain price cer∣tainly, for an uncertain possession, be it of house or land? much less will any pay aforehand, for that land or house, which he foresees he shall never en∣joy? yet such a purchaser they make Christ to be by this agreement. The absurdness also of this may ap∣pear by this simile: Abraham bought of the Hittites, for 400 shekels of sil∣ver, a field to bury his wife in; and up∣on the payment of the mony, the field was delivered to him for a possession, Gen. 23.16, &c. now is it not absurd to imagine, that Abraham and the Hit∣tites, should both be agreed, that A∣braham should buy and pay for the field absolutely without any conditi∣on, but yet the Hittites should require a condition to go between paying and possession, and before Abraham should have possession? and without it, no possession? where a condition is re∣quired, it always goes before pay∣ment; never after, or between pay∣ment and possession: so though they in words ascribe wisdom to God, say∣ing, that God may according to his in∣finite
wisdom, order Faith to go be∣fore or after impetration, yet in this case indeed, they impute absurdness and folly to God, in puting the condi∣tion of Faith after the price of Christs death. (The case is the same, in buy∣ing a thing, as Abraham did for him∣self, or for a mans friend or friends, as Christ did.) 1 They say, Christs intention was by his death to save all men, even unbe∣lievers in Acta Synodalia, pag. 344. now for Christ to agree with God, to put in a condition of Faith after im∣petration, is a contradiction and cros∣sing of his intension: for by his death, he intended to save unbelievers, but by agreeing to require Faith of unbe∣lievers, or they to be denied salvati∣on, he (foreseing they would not and should not believe) intended not to have them saved: for he agreed to a condition which barred them from salvation: so much for the absurdity of this agreement. 2 An other absurdity in the distin∣ction is this: It maketh God to be an unjust Judge: for Christ by his impe∣tration and dying for the sins of unbe∣lievers, hath born the punishment of
their sins for them in this life; now for God to punish unbelievers for their sins in the next life (as he will Mark 16.16.) is to punish twice o∣ver for the same sins, which is an act of injustice in God: now this must be so, if you distinguish of impetration and application in such sort, as they concurr not in the same persons, but are divided, so as impetration belongs unto unbelievers, but application be∣longs not to them: for if application and justification belongs not to them, then they must suffer punishment for their sins in the next life, and so God shall be unjust: for after he hath pu∣nished unbelievers in Christ their sure∣tie, he shall punish them again, in their own persons: so you see, impetration and application are not to be distin∣guished in respect of persons, as if the one belonged to some persons, but not the other, unless you will make God to be an unjust Judge. 3 I shall confute this distinction by a Text of Scripture, understanding it in the Arminian sence: see 2. Cor. 5.15, 19. In verse 15. speaking of Christ and his death, it saith, one died for all, &c. Here I understand the
word all, in the Arminian sense: and then in verse 19. it speaketh again of Christ and his death, saying, God was in Christ, (that is, in Christ upon the Cross, when he died for all) and recon∣ciled the world unto himself, not impu∣ting their sins unto them. So here you have the impetration of Christs death; and the application of it, in reconci∣liation and not imputation of sins: now here application, is made as large as impetration, and to belong unto the same persons, without distinction or division: for those [all] which Christ died for, were all of them reconciled to God, and justified, their sins not be∣ing imputed unto them: the same world which Christ died for, John 3.16. the same was reconciled and had no sins imputed to them. So S. Paul did not allow of this Arminian distinction and division, of impetration and applica∣tion, in the Arminian sense, so as im∣petration should be understood more largely for persons than application; or as if impetration had been for all men, and application but for some men. 4 This distinction is guiltie yet of another absurditie, for it makes the
means of faith, to be used altogether too late, and so to become an unpro∣fitable and frivolous means: for Armi∣nians make faith to be a means to a∣void an evil, after the evil is past. They say, Christ by his impetration, suffered the evil of death for unbelievers: now in as much as Christ suffered death, and bore the evil of punishment of unbelievers, for them and in their stead and room, they themselves have suffered death, and bore the evil of punishment in the person of Christ: now after unbelievers have born the evil of punishment, it is too late to use faith as a means to obtain appli∣cation, and justification, and a freedom from the evil of punishment: for thus they should use a means to avoid an evil, after the evil is past, and so the means of faith is made unprofitable and frivolous: wherefore should I use any means to avoid imprisonment, when my Suretie hath suffered impri∣sonment for me? were not means in this case frivolous? If Christ did impe∣trate and die for Iudas and in his stead, then Iudas hath suffered death by his Suretie Christ; what need then is there of faith in Judas, as a means to
obtain application and freedom from death, after he hath suffered death, as by his Suretie? This is as if a Judge should hang a man for his offence, and then require him to use means to free himself from death. And so much for confutation of this distinction, of Impetration and Application. FINIS.
