B4436 R1656 13070018 97109
A LETTER TO THE PARISHIONERS OF St. B.— A.— SHEWING The Use and Necessity of paying Easter-Offerings, now restored to the Parish Mi∣nister. LONDON, Printed for Geo. Strahan, at the Golde Ball, over-against the Ryal-Exchange, in Cornhill. 1700.
A LETTER To the Parishioners of St. B.— A.— Shewing the Ʋse and Neces∣sity of Paying Easter-Offer∣ings. SIRS, THE Feast of Easter is now approaching, wherein our Holy Church Commemorates the great Mercies of God, in ac∣complishing
our Redemption by the Death and Resurre∣ction of our Blessed Saviour. 'Tis at this time, especially, that we ought to express our Thankfulness to God, by acts of Piety, and there are no actions so worthy our thoughts as those which immediately concern the Honour and Ser∣vice of God. I think it all times my Duty to promote the Interest of Religion and the good of your Parish, and have therefore, upon your late Vacancy, endeavour'd to make the best choice I could of a Minister, to instruct you for your Soul's Health: I am verily perswaded, that I have placed one among you, who is both able and willing to discharge the Duty of his
Place; and who, I doubt not, will be careful to watch over you, as becomes a faithful Pa∣stor. My next Care is to pro∣vide him a more sufficient sup∣port, thereby to encourage his Labours, and to enable him to maintain such Assi∣stance; as will be needful to perform the great Business of your Parish. I am willing to forego my right to some part of that Revenue, to which I am legal∣ly Intitul'd, and to apply the same for promoting the Ho∣nour of God and Interest of his Church; therefore I have authoriz'd Mr Kennet, your Mi∣nister, to collect and take to his own use, the Offerings due at Easter; and do earnestly recom∣mend it to you, as your Du∣ty,
to pay the same, justly and conscientiously, which, I hope, you will do, when I have informed you, 1. Of the Nature of Offe∣rings. 2. The use and necessity of paying them. 1st, The Nature of Offerings. By Offerings are usually un∣derstood those Gifts which are given, by devout Men, to God and the Church, which Gifts were commonly Offered with Solemnity and Devotion, at the Altar; some upon cer∣tain Festival Days, and others upon occasion of particular Mercies receiv'd by particu∣lar Persons: Those which were offered upon Festival
Days, were on Sundays, the general Days of Christians Assembling themselves, or on certain Feast-Days, appointed by the Church to be kept Holy, in remembrance of the great Favours receiv'd from God, in completing our Redemption by the Conception, Nativity, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, of our Blessed Saviour. These Offerings were at first the Free-will Sacrifices of Pious Christians; but when Piety and Zeal grew cold, and Men began to fail of their Duty, then the Laws provi∣ded a Means of ascertaining every Man's Offerings, there∣by to reserve a competent Livelihood to the Parish Mi∣nister; and now the Offerings due by the Laws of the Realm
are two Pence for every Com∣municant, Note, That at the time the Offerings were setled at that rate, two Pence was equi∣valent to a Shilling at this Day. or of every Pa∣rishioner a∣bove the Age of 16, payable at the Feast of Easter, by the Master of every Family, for himself, his Wife, Children, and Servants: And now hav∣ing inform'd you of the Na∣ture of Offerings, I am, in the next place, to acquaint you with, 2dly, The Ʋse and Neces∣sity of paying Offerings. The chief use and design of paying Offerings, is, That we may Honour God with our Substance, as well as our Bodies; for as he made us,
so he gives us all that we possess; and 'tis reasonable, that we should pay him some portion of what we enjoy, in token of his Dominion over us, and of our Subjection to him; 'tis the advice of the Wise Man, Honour God with thy Substance, and with the first fruits of all thy in∣crease, Prov. 3.9. And it has been always accounted a part of our Worship, To bring Pre∣sents unto him that ought to be feared, Psal. 76.11. Almigh∣ty God took special Care in the Modelling of the Jewish Worship, that none should appear before him empty, Exod. 23.15. That so he might be honour'd with a tribute from the Hands as well as the Hearts of his People.
The reason why God com∣manded the Jews to dedi∣cate part of their Wealth, was, for the Maintenance of the Jewish Clergy, a set of Men appointed to be free from Se∣cular Employments, that they might offer up Prayers and Sacrifices for that People. The same Care hath God ta∣ken of a more Royal Priest∣hood, that of the Christian Church; for, as by the par∣ticular command of God, Those who served at the Altar, were partakers of the Altar, so, under the Christian Dispen∣sation, Christ has ordained, That those who Preach the Gos∣pel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. and great reason it is, That those who dispense to us Spiritual Com∣forts,
should be supplyed, by us, with Temporal Conveni∣encies. I take the liberty to pre∣scribe you two short Rules for your more faithful dis∣charge of this Duty; they are, 1. Justice. 2. Chearfulness. 1. JUSTICE. All Persons whatsoever, as well Adversaries as Friends, have a right to our Just Dea∣ling; but more especially they are intitul'd to it, who may be truly termed our Benefa∣ctors; such are the Ministers of Christ, whose Business and Care it is to instruct us and inform us in all things neces∣sary
to Salvation; they are those who by wholsom Do∣ctrines and Advice, do keep us from degenerating into wild and savage Creatures; for such were the Inhabi∣tants of this Island, before the Glorious Light of the Gospel spread its bright Beams upon this Land. The Er∣rand of those who Preach the Gospel, is not to make us an offer of short and tran∣sient Pleasures, but to lead us into that way which will bring us to a durable and e∣verlasting Happiness: And surely, those who teach us Devotion towards God, and upright Dealing towards others, have deservedly a right to our Justice.
I have no reason to doubt your Justice to your Mini∣ster, when I consider with what Zeal you are promot∣ing some good Works in your Parish, towards the support of the Poor, and the propa∣gating Christian Knowledge among the younger sort; but give me leave, in a few words, to acquaint you what Offerings you are obliged to pay. The Offerings then that you are legally obliged to pay Mr. Kennet, are two Pence a Head, according to the Num∣ber of your Families, as I have before informed you; but seeing I have, for your sake, and for the Honour of Religion, restor'd them to their first Religious Use, I
rather wish that you would think your selves obliged to do as did the Primitive Chri∣stians, those Pious Souls, who began to Honour God with their Substance, as soon as they had embrac'd the hap∣piness of the Christian Faith; for they thought themselves oblig'd to offer according to their Ability, and thought nothing too much for them who Preached the glad tid∣ings of the Gospel; but alas, many in this Age are arriv'd to that heinous de∣gree of Impiety, as not only to grudge the giving a little of their abundance, but even to wrong and deprive their Ministers of what they can clandestinely conceal from them.
I would therefore exhort you, for your own sakes, as well as that of your Minister, in the making your Offerings, to con∣sider your own Abilities; and if you intend to act the parts of good Christians, and are resolved to manifest your selves true Servants of God, to pay your Offerings not barely according to the Rules prescrib'd by the Laws of the Land, but according to the Reason and Dictates of a good Conscience, and according as God hath bles∣sed you; 'tis true, that ac∣cording to the Laws and Sta∣tutes of this Realm, no other Offerings can be exacted than what are prescrib'd by Law, but a good Christian will not think he has done his
Duty, when he has done all that the Laws oblige him; thus, for example, a conscien∣tious Person will think him∣self bound to serve God eve∣ry day, tho' the Laws com∣pel him only to Worship God on Sundays. You will also think your selves obliged to offer accor∣ding to your Ability, if you consider, when you make your Offering, that God is not plea∣sed with a mean and sordid Service; for he has discou∣raged the Offering of those who Offer the Price of a Dog, or the hire of a Harlot, Deut. 23.18. That is an Oblation which is mean and nothing worth, or that which is got by Wickedness and Injustice; but he has encourag'd those
to hope for a plentiful Har∣vest, who sow their seed plenti∣fully; but they that sow spa∣ringly, shall also reap sparing∣ly. Now that your Offering may truly become a Religious Per∣formance, I shall further di∣rect you in the other Rule I propos'd, and that is, 2. CHEARFULNESS. Chearfulness is at all times the Duty of a Christian, but then especially, when he is about to exercise a Religi∣ous act, such as is the payment of Offerings towards the Main∣tenance of our Ministers, those Embassadors of Christ; for whether we distribute Alms, or make an Oblation, we
ought to do it chearfully and not grudgingly or of neces∣sity, because God loveth a chearful giver, 2 Cor. 9, 6, 7. I am not desirous to boast of my good intention to∣wards you, in bestowing those legal Dues of mine upon your well-deserving Minister, but this I desire to assure you, that I have done it chear∣fully, with a prospect of pro∣moting your Good, and there∣in the Glory of God, and Ho∣nour of Religion. I intreat you also to re∣member, That as the just and conscientious payment of your Offerings will be a well-plea∣sing Sacrifice to God, for the Reasons before-mention'd, so it is the highest Indignity and Affront to Almighty God, to
withhold whatsoever is De∣dicated to the Service of his Ministers; for he counts it no less than Sacriledge, Mal. 3.8. the worst sort of Rob∣bery, and which was one great cause of God's inflict∣ing heavy Judgments upon the Jews; for you may ob∣serve a severe Doom pro∣nounced by the Prophet Ma∣lachi for this very Sin, Mal. 3.9. which may serve as a sufficient Warning for all those who boast themselves in their Cunning of defraud∣ing their Minister, and con∣cealing his Dues: But let such remember, That tho' they escape Vengeance here, yet they are heaping up to themselves Wrath against the
Day of Wrath; which, that you may escape, shall be the hum∣ble and fervent Prayer of, Your Christian Friend and Brother, S. B. FINIS.
