B513 12010486 52391
Theatrum Redivivum, OR THE THEATRE Vindicated BY Sir RICHARD BAKER IN ANSWER to Mr. PRYN'S HISTRIO-MASTIX: Wherein his groundless Assertions against Stage-Plays are discovered, his miss-taken Allegations of the Fathers manifested, as also what he calls his Reasons, to be nothing but his Passions. Comici finis est humanos mores nôsse, atque describere, Hierom. ad Furiam. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold in St. Paul's Churchyard. 166.
To the READER. Courteous Reader, AT length thou art presented with a small Piece, which for many years hath been buied with its Renowned Authour. It appeared not till now, knowing very well, that this late World hath been fit∣ter for Bedlam, then for sober, and Rational Discourses. The Authour wants not evidence for what he speaks, (though speak what he would; if he named a Stage Play, he was sure to meet with a Momus in every corner)
but some things have the ill luck to be condemned, before they are heard. Well (Reader) seeing we are (by the provi∣dence of Heaven) so happy, as to be al∣lowed the use of our own Eyes, and Rea∣son again; Be as thou oughtest to be, a Reader, before a Judge. For to con∣demn the innocent, is equally to be con∣demned, with acquitting the guilty. The noble Authour of this Book seems fair∣ly to design nothing more, then Truth, and especially in clearing the Sense of those two great Luminaries of the Church, Saint Cyprian, and Tertul∣lian, his Master, in his Book De Spe∣ctaculis, wherein his principal drift onely is, to cry out against, and severy to condemn the mixtures of Idolatry with their publick Shews: some in∣tentions there were of annexing the
Treaties of Tertullian, and Saint Cy∣prian, both to this Discourse; that every man might see, what the Au∣thour of this Book saw in them: But, for some reasons, that labour is respited. It is very well known what Satyrical Invctives are thundred out against the heatre, but their just Reasons are not yet produced; it may be, they are reserved for the second Volume of Hitrio Mastix: Inded some may be sen against the abuses of it, from which to reason against the thing it self would ingender a consequence of such large extent, that we must eat our words, or be weary of our ives. For if we sit down by such a Con∣clusion, that things are unlawfull in their use, because unlawfully abu∣sed, we must neither eat, nor drink,
nor sleep, nor wear Cloaths, becau in all these, and many more, the badness of mankinde is such, that it prompt them to unexcusable exorbitancies, an debacheries. Good men have founded much of their Rhetorick, and th loudest Declamations against Stage Plays, upon what others had formerl said against them, rather out of a sequatious credulity corresponding with wha others have Magisterially determined then a due attendency either to the Prnciples of right Reason or Scripu Authority, which ought to cast t scales, and put greater obligements up∣on the Consciences of reasonable Cra¦tures, then the Conjctures o Opi∣nions of the gravest Mortals. But  must not forget my self, and enter upon Apologies for this learned Auhours
undertaking (who hath sober∣y, and judiciously acquitted himslf) I ave taken upon me, onely to speak the rologue, and to tell you upon what cene he lays his Discourse: he needs o Epilogue to plead excuse for the cting of his Part: And I make o doubt, Reader, if thou wilt but vouchsafe him a patient perusal, but he shall aso have thy Plaudite.
THE THEATRE VINDICATED, OR AN ANSWER To Mr. PRINS HISTRIO-MASTIX. WHo hath not heard of Sr. Francis Walsingham, an Emi∣nent Councellour in Queen ELIZABETH'S Time, fa∣mous for his Wisdom in mat∣ters of State; and more for his Piety in advancing the Gospel? yet this was the Man, that procured the Queen to enter∣tain
Players for her Servants; and t give them Wages, as in a just Vocation. And would he ever have don this, being so religious a Man, if he ha thought Plays to be prophane; being s great a States-man, if inconvenient to th State? And now, me thinks, I hav said enough in defence of Plays. But because not onely the Wisest Me are sometimes mistaken, and the Truth may be found amongst the meanest (Saepe etiam est Olitor valde opportuna lo∣quutus) It will be fit to lay aside all consi∣deration of the Persons, that speak; and onely to take into consideration, and weigh the Reasons, that are delivered. It is true, Mr. Prin is Plaintiff; and it is a great advantage, that an Accuser hath over a Defender: not onely in that, he speaks first, which gets a pos∣session, as it were, of the hearer's Hearts; but because he hath commonly the pre∣tense of some notorious Crime for his Foundation, upon which every man natu∣rally is apt to cast a Stone: where the Defender must himself alone not onely
pull down the Building, and rase the Foundation; but vindicate also both the Natural, and the acquired Inclinati∣on, and prejudice of the Hearers. And especially, the Accuser hath this advan∣tage, when he meets with a Common Place of some Vice to run upon: for then he goes away amain with it; and bears down all before him, with O Tempora! O Mores! But most especially, if the pretended Vice may seem to trench upon Religion: for then the Defender is scarce heard speak for the multitude of voices, that are crying out even in Heathenish Devotions; Great is Diana of the Ephesians: that whatsoever can be alledged, in defence, out of Reason, is presently beaten back without reason. But, leaving these disadvantages to take their fortunes, and having a clear conscience, that I no way encroach up∣on the Bounds of true Religion, I am the bolder to enter the Lists: yet not so mch taking upon me to be a Champion of the Cause; as onely undertaking to
be a Wrestler with the Writer. And this I willingly profess, that I wrestle not with him, as he is in his own Person, for I know him not; and he may be better, then he seems to me: but I wrestle with him, onely as he appears in his Book; which cannot be fuller of words, and emptier of reason, then it is. And I think it fit to tell, how far his Book hath wrough upon me; that where, before the read∣ing it, I took Plays onely de bene esse, as being in use; after the reading it, I found Plays Bene esse, and fit to be in use. For his Arguments being taken all up upon trust; and not so much as weighed, when he took them; now that he comes to put them off again, are found not onely not to be weight, but not to be Silver; and so, where he in∣tended, by his Book, to bring into de∣testation the seeing of Plays: he hath rather brought into estimation the acting of them. For when a man takes upon him to prove a Matter; and then eithe cannot, or doth not prove it sufficiently it leaves not onely a vehement suspici∣on;
but a strong conceit in the Hearers minds, that his Cause is not good. And as the onely Itch of Vain-Glory made many in Old Time go out of the Church, and become Hereticks in Divinity: so the like Itch of Vain-Glory makes other men go out of Humane Society, and be∣come Hereticks in Morality. Like Ero∣stratus, who burnt the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, for no other cause, but to be talked-of in the World. His very beginning is very suspicious. For he begins not à Iove (as yet Poets, whom he taxeth so much, use to do) but à Diabolo. He takes his First Reason from the Devil: (Fol. 9.) He therefore thinks Plays unlawfull; because they were invented by the Devil: wherein he shews himself to be better acquainted with the Devil, then we are for we know nothing of it, whether they were of his inventing, or no: and we may marvel how he comes to know it, unless the Devil himself have told him so; and then it is the more unlikely to be so, see∣ing The Devil is a Liar, and the Father
of Lies. He will say, perhaps, he had it from Tertullian; who tells also, tha the Angels were cast out of Heaven for inventing Astrologie: as true in the one as in the other. It seems, Tertullian had no true Inventory of the Devil's Inventi∣ons: yet this man would make us as very Fools, as himself, to take all for current, that he hears him say. But what, if we should say, that many things have been discovered, and made known to Men, even by the Devil; which yet are profitable to be known, and lawful to be used? Doth not Lodovicus Vives affirm, that the Devil invented Logick? Yet will any man, that hath Reason, af∣firm Logick to be unlawful? The Devil confessed Christ to be the Son of God; when the Iews knew it not, or would not know it: and is this man so very a Iew, to think it therefore unlawful to confess Christ? And why is it any better Argumnt to say, The Devil invented it; therefore it is Impious: then to say, God invented it; therefore it is Pious? And yet who knows not of things invented
by God, which, for their abuse, have been rejected? Which he cannot be so forgetful, as to deny, if he do but re∣member the Brazen Serpent. If then a thing Invented, and Instituted by God, might, being abused, be rejected; why may not a thing Invented, and Instituted by the Devil, the Evil being removed, be retained? For it is not the Inventour, that makes a thing to be good, or evil; but it is the Conformity, or Opposition to the Rule, and Will of God. Indeed by the Paw of this first Argument we may see what a kind of Lyon we are like to finde in the sequel of his Discourse. For where Tertullian, and other Fathers, prove the Plays of the Heathen to be all naught, and execrable; because Idolatrous, and full of Superstition: and thereupon infers, that they were Inventa Diabolorum, In∣vention of Devils, as from whom all Evil originally doth flow: this man, like a Crab, goes backward with their Reason, and saith, Plays were invented by the De∣vil; therefore are execrable, and unlaw∣ful: so making that the Medius Termi¦nus,
or Proof of his Argument, which the spake onely by way of Exaggeration and making that his Foundation, whic they laid on as onely a Superstructur And even for the guiltiness of this, yo shall see in his next Argument, with wha a trick he seeks to put it off again; an yet is willing to hold it still. For [Fol. 16.] Though he cannot perhaps punctually say, that Plays were immdiately invented by the Devil; yet he ma truly say, they were invented by Idolatrou Heathen People, as the Devils Instrument which comes much to One. But see th Judgment of this man; that sees no what a Fall he hath taken by raising th Argument; to fall from the Devil to Heathen People: but well, Quod dat accipimu we take what he lays down. Plays wer not invented by the Devil, but by Heathen People: so his First Argument is cas out of Doors by himself; and will hi second be served with any better Sawce For can nothing be lawfully used, tha hath been invented by Heathen People Let him look in Polydore Virgil, and see
ow many things of our daily use have een invented by them; even the Let∣ers he writes his Book withall. Then e were best go quickly, and blot out all his Book; lest being written with Letters, invented by the Heathen, the Devil should come, and challenge it to be of his inventing. Here he thinks to mend the matter with saying; that [Fol. 18.] good things, invented by the Heathen, may lawfully be used, but not bad things, as Plays are: but must he not first prove Plays to be bad, before this Reason will do him any good? And if he can prove them to be bad; they shall then be un∣lawful as bad, but not as invented by the Heathen: and so this Reason would do him no good, though he could make it good. But though he can fetch no Argument against Plays from the Devils Invention; yet he hath an Invention to fetch an Argument from him; and this it is: [Fol. 28.] Plays were at first ordained, and destinated to the immediate Worship, and gratification of Devil-Gods: therefore un∣lawful;
but he hath no sooner made this Argument, but he finds fault with it himself; for [Fol. 37.] so were many of our Churches, which now are converted to Christian uses. Upon this he replyes, and then again rejoyns, and plays at fast and loose, goes in and out so often in it, that it were but to run a Wilde-Goose Chase, to offer to follow him. Yet I cannot let pass one subtile part, he plays at parting; where he saith, [Fol. 40] that He for his part thinks it impossible, that ever Plays should be rformed; for who should do it? Good men will not; they ra∣ther wish their ruine, then their useless wel∣fare: Bad men will not, because they delight in their pleasing Corruptions. And so he concludes them to be desperate, and past all hope of Reformation. But may we not better apply his Argument to himself; and say, We, for our parts, think it impossible, that this man's Malice should ever be Reformed; for who should do it? God's Holy Spirit will not, so long as he is resolved to ontinue in his Malice; the Devil will not, who
would have him be more malicious then e is, if possibly it might be effected by im: and so conclude his Case to be esperate, and that he must be fain to o on in the rage of his Malice still, or want of One to mend him. But his Fourth Reason comes in most tately: where he makes [Fol. 42.] Plays the Pomps of the Devil, and Vanities of this wicked World; which every Chri∣tian man hath renounced in his Baptism. But this Reason comes not more vaunt∣ngly in, then we shall see it go sneakingly out; as having no Credit for want of being known. For who ever took the Pomps of the Devil to be meant of Plays, and not rather of Pride, Vain∣glory, Luxury, Idolatry especially, and such like? For, if one Man go to a Play, and another, in the mean time, be luxurious, arrogant, and proud; in which of these Two shall the Devil be said to be in his Pomps? Certainly, not in him, that is at a Play; for he may be there, and (the rather perhaps for being there) have Thoughts, and Medi∣tations
full of Humility; whilest in t other, wheresoever he be found, we asure, there cannot be found an humb or a sober Thought: and where Humili and Sobriety are wanting, there is t Devil properly in his Pomps, and Iolli This Argument indeed is used by Tetullian, and some of the Fathers; wh speaking of the Plays of the Heathen,  them the Pomps of the Devil, by reaso of their Idolatries, and Superstition which justly get the name of Pom of the Devil from all other Vices; as b which the Devil is most of all magnified and exalted. And, it seems, this Ma coming to spy it in their Books, takes th Argument as he finds it; and, withou ever examining the Matter, claps it  here, as fitly as the Painter in the Poet who put a Horse's Neek to a Man Head; Humano capiti cervicem Pictor equinam. For what is this to our Plays? Not un∣like what Cicero spake of Piso; (who, ou of opinion of his Ancestour's Virtues, was by the People of Rome made Edile:)
so was made Edile; not this Piso: uid enim simile habet, praeter Nomen? For hat likeness, but in the Name? So e may say; (though in a contrary ay) Plays are the Pomps of the Devil; ot our Plays: Quid nim simile habent, aeter Nomen? And one would think, ertullian had taught him plainly e∣ough, that the Pomps of the Devil are herefore onely affirmed of Plays, be∣ause of their Idolatries; where he saith: Si igitur ex Idololatria universam Specta∣ulorum paraturam constare constiterit; in∣dbitatè praejudicatum erit, etiam ad Spe∣tacula pertinere Renuntiationis nostrae testi∣menium in Lavacro quae Diabolo, & Pompae, & Angelis ejus sunt mancipata, scilicet per Idololatriam: i quid autm ex his non ad Idolum pertinuerit; id neque ad Idololatriam, neque ad nostram Ejerationem pertinebit. Thus in English. If therefore it shall be made manifest, that all the Ma∣terials, and Furniture of Plays be meerly Idolatrous: it will be an undoubted Preju∣dice, that the renouncing we make in Ba∣ptism belongs, and reacheth unto Plays;
which are dedicated to the Devil, his Pomp and Angels, by reson of their Idolatries but, if there be any thing in a Play, tha belongs not to an Idol; neither shall  belong to Idolatry, nor yet reach to th Renouncing we make in Baptism. Wha could have been spoken more plainly to have made him understand, if hi Zeal had not blinded his Vnderstanding? or to have made him go right, if he had not been wilfully bent to go astray? If he would now at last but take this Distinction along with him, in surveying his Book once again; and apply it where there is occasion: it might do him no small ease in disburthening the Body of his Book of many peccant, and gross Humours, which make it swell into this huge Bulk. It seems he can do no good against Plays with his Arguments from the Devil; and therefore now he means to give the Devil over: and it is Time; for we may marvel, what pleasure he could take, to keep him company so long. Yet he cannot leave the Devil so quite,
but he must have a Trick from him still, nd be tearing mens cloaths from off ir Backs; as the Devil did, Luke viii. 7. For his dislike of Plays now (though ith interposition of some extravagant onceits, which he calls Reasons; and will tter take their places afterward) is because of their Cloaths (Fol. 179.) He thinks it not lawfull for Men to wear Womens cloaths, or for Women to wear Mens; and, bcause this is often done in Plays, and Masques, he utterly condemns them. Yet this is well; there is some moderation in this: for this Reason puts not Plays to death; but onely confines them. For, notwithstanding this Rea∣son, they may be lawfull enough a∣mongst the Indians, who go naked; and, not to go so far, they may be lawfull enough too amongst the Irish, where one kinde of Garment serves Men, and Women. But, though we can be con∣tent to cross the Water to the Bank's-Side; yet we should be loth to cross the Irish-Seas to see a Play: and can we not see one here, because of their Cloaths?
Indeed, he cites a Text of Scripture for  Deut. xxii. 5. The Woman shall not we that, which pertaineth to the Man; neithe shall a Man put on Womens rayment.  pregnant place indeed: but where finde he this Precept? even in the same place where he findes also, that we must no wear cloaths of Linsey-Woolsey: and seeing we lawfully now wear Cloaths of Lsy-Woolsey; why may it not be as lawfu for Men to put on Womens Garments But, if he will have this Precept to stan in force, though it be no part of th Moral Law, yet because it may have  Moral construction; how will he then defend his own eating of Black-Puddin against the Precept for eating of Blood For this Precept against eating of bloo hath a stronger Tie, then that for wearin of Garments. For that, as given onel by Moses, may, with just probability, b thought to end with Moses: but this a∣gainst eating of blood is continued afte Moses Time by the Apostles themselves And why then should it trouble Mr. Prin's conscience to see a Boy wear Womens Gar∣ments,
against the Precept of Moses; hen it troubles not his conscience to t Black-puddings against the Precept  the Apostles? But, howsoever it ouble his conscience, it need not trou∣e any bodies else; seeing his Reason oves it no more unlawfull to see a Play, en to eat a Pudding, and so, upon the atter, is not worth a Pudding. But, if  be so great a sin for Men to put on Wo∣ens Garments; what is it for Men to put n Womens Conditions? which is perhaps deed the very Moral of this Precept: as Clemens Alexandrinus, and St. Cyril, of old, and of late, amongst others, Macchabaeus Alpinas (a VVriter, whom Melancthon exceedingly commends) ex∣ound it. And if it be so, then is this Man the true breaker of the Precept; and ot Players: at least, if we may call it Womens conditions, to do nothing else, but scould, and rail: for what is all his Book, but a bundle of scoulding Inve∣ctives, and railing, instead of reasoning? But, to give a full Answer to this Argu∣ment, do but hear what eminent Di∣vines
conceive of this Precept. And, th I may not do, as this man useth to do  shew a Bee, bring in the whole Swarm will name you one of many, yet  unum è multis, Martin Luther: who words upon this place are these;  non prohibetur, quin ad vitandum peri lum, aut ludendum joco, vel ad sallend hostes, Muier possit gerere arma Viri,  Vir uti veste muliebri: sed ut seriò, & usit habitu talia non fiant; ut decora utriq sexui servetur dignitas. It is not (saith he forbidden by this Precept; but that  avoid danger, or to play, and sport,  to deceive an Enemy, a Woman may  a Man's apparel, and a Man a Woman but that it be not done in earnest, and as th usual Habit; that so a decent comelin in both Sexes may be observed. And wh knows not, that Luther, when time wa did greater matters in the World, the making good the Exposition of a sing Text. But, lest you should think it  Lutheran Opinion, or that Luther herei were singular by himself, I will joy one with him, that had as lieve die, as b
yned with him, if he could otherwise oose, the learned Iesuite, Lorinuse; who, eciting great variety of Interpretations pon this Text, makes choice of this, as he soundest; that Dissimulatio vestis potest terdum sine peccato fieri, vel ad represen∣andam Comicè Tragicéve personam; vel ad ffugiendum periculum; vel in casu simili: or representing a Person in Comedie, or Tragedie; or for avoiding of danger, or n such like Cases, a woman may lawfully ut on a man's apparel; and a man a wo∣man's. Thus these men allow that in Plays, for which this man allows not Plays. And is it not strange, that Mr. Prin, with all his great Reading, should never meet with any of these? For [folio 199.] he professeth, he never met with any, that was of this Opinion: that either his knowledge must be very little, if not knowing it; or his Profession very naught, if, knowing it, he dissemble it. But, that this Precept is not intend∣ed literally, as any part of the Moral Law, is not onely the Opinion of most Writers; but appeareth also by the thir∣teenth
Canon of the Councel at Gang (which this man cites to the contrary for, upon that Canon, the old Interpret Balsamon delivers it, not onely as tolerble, but, in some Cases, as very commendable, for Women to go in Mens apparel; as St. Melane, and St. Eugenia and other Holy Women, are there said to have done. There is here offered us a answer; that, though it may be tolerate being done to honest intents: yet it cann be tolerated, being done to lewd purposes as Players do it. But this Answer, lik Mephibosheth, is lame of both the Feet for neither do Players use it to le purposes; neither, if it were a branch o the Moral Law, ought it to be done for any purpose. But (Fol. 156) Hypocrisie is a notoriou sn; and Players are in this notorious Hypocrites; and therfore the Greeks have but one word for an Hypocrite, and a Player; as if they took them both for one. A very goodly Argument! as though, be∣cause the Latines have but one word for an Host, and a Guest: (Non Hospes ab
Hospite tutus) therefore an Host, and a uest should be all one: which if he ould go about to prove, I doubt he ould be found to reckon without his Host. Howsoever, by this reason, we may claim as much difference between an Hypocrite, and a Player; as is between an Host, and a Guest: and tha's difference enough. But what is it, wherein Play∣ers are such Hypocrites? Forsooth! be∣cause men wear womens Apparel, and coun∣terfeit the gestures, and behaviours of wo∣men; and so appear to be women, when they are men: and to appear other then they are, is plain Hypocrisie. It is plain Hypocrisie, no doubt; but it is not plain, that it is unlawfull Hypocrisie. Is it not said, that some Zeal is not good, if it be without Knowledg? and may we not as truly say; that some Hypocrisie is no evil, if it be without Deceit? For the evil of Hy∣pocrisie is not in the Act, but in the End: and though Players may be guil∣ty of the Act; yet certainly of the End they are not. For, seeing that, which they do, is not done to Circumvent, but
to Represent; not to Deceive others, bu to make others Conceive: though it may without question be called Hypocrisie, ye it is not Hypocrisie, that can be called in question. It is not Hypocrisie in ma∣lam partem. Was it Hypocrisie in the Thre Angels, that appeared to Abraham? ye they appeared other, then they were they seemed Men; they were Angels they put on Bodies; they were but Spi∣rits. And is there not as much Hypocri∣sie in putting on other's Bodies, as in putting on others Garments? Did no the Angel Raphael, when he conducte young Tobias in his Iourney, both take upon him the Name, and Person, and counterfeit the speech, and behaviour of Azarias? And will he say, that this also was no Hypocrisie? If then Angels might be such Hypocrites, and yet not sin; why may not Players be such Hypo∣crites, yet come to be as Angels? I had thought I should have gotten them leave to Play, if they would but go handsomely, and wear good cloaths: but this makes worse for them then before.
For (Fol. 216.) he dislikes Plays now, ecause Players wear such costly cloaths: and represent Kings, and Queens in such sumptuous obes. He thinks, perhaps, that Kings, and Queens should wear no cloaths, but made of Leather; because it was of that stuff, that God made cloaths for Adam, and Eve; who being the greatest Princes, that ever were in the world, it were Presumption for any to wear better cloaths, then they did. But I think it best to let alone the Answering of this Argument untill we meet a Am∣sterdam: onely I may have leave to say this; that he should do Players as great wrong, to hinder them from wearing of rich cloaths, as he should do a Gold∣smith, to restrain him from selling of rich Plate: for what do Players, but sell their Cloaths, as often as they shew them? All, that hitherto hath been said, hath been but accidental, and I may say his outside Arguments: he never came to the substance till now; but now he comes, and therefore now we may look
for very substantial matter; and thu he begins. (Fol. 63.) The subject, mater, and style of Plays is lascivious, scrilous, and filthy: Therefore Plays are ulawfull. But not so unlawfull as this Ar∣gument: for mark the faults of it. If he mean it thus; The subject, matter, an stile of some Plays is scurrilous, and fil∣thy; Therefore all Plays are unlawfull who sees not the unlawfulness of thi kinde of reasoning, from a particular to conclude a general? But, if he mean i thus; The subject, matter, and style of all Plays is scurrilous, and filthy: this is more unlawfull, then the other; seeing it is directly false: for who knows not, that Tragedies are not capable of scurrility? Although therefore Tragedies cannot get his leave; yet, it seems, they have his Argument's leave, to hold up their heads, and live. But how then will the Title of his Book hold up his Head, to be called Histrio-Mastix? have a general Name, if it be not general? Will he say, that Tra∣gedi be not Histriones; Actours of Trage∣dies no Players? He should, if he were
ell served, be made eithr to abridge is Title, or to enlarge his Argument. But perhaps, because Tragedies are the Gentry, I may say, of Plays, he is so ge∣erous as to spare them for their Gen∣ry's sake; but then Comedies, which are ut the Commonalty of Plays, ar like to pay for it. But I doubt, he hath not so much Generosity in him, but rather, that for Tragedies he hath oher Tragical Arguments in store, othr Rods in Piss for them; and that this Argument is wholly imployed upon the defeat of Comedies: and therefoe onely upon them it beats. But is thre no means to save them from beating? Are there not wards to keep of his Blow even from these also? May we not, first, flatly deny it, and say, that in Plays no such scurrility can be found? Or, may we not, next, divert it, and say; that, if any such scur∣rility be, it is the Poet's fault, and not the Players? Or, may we not, third∣ly, excuse it, and say; If any such be, it is an abuse, at least done in such man∣nerly manner, that it is not offensive to
modest Ears? Or, may we not, lastly, justi∣fie it, and say; that some scurrility ma be, and sometimes must be in Plays, yet serving always to pious Vses? I any of these Sayings he hath his Answer and may take home his Argument with him again, to teach it better manners then to slander Plays. But let us exa∣mine these wards, to see if we can make them good, that we take no more upon us, then we are able to per∣form. For this Argument, though he make it but one, yet is, in truth, his Flood∣gate, which lets in th most, or the most substantial of all his Arguments: that, if this be once well stop'd, he will not have  drop of Water, either of the Spring-Wate of Reasons, or of the Pond-Water of Au∣thorities, to turn his Mill. But in do∣ing this there is no necessity of using Method; for why should I be tied to keep order in answering, when he tak a Liberty to keep none in objecting? He is none of the Methodicals him∣self, and therefore cannot look, that others should be. To speak then, prou
buccam venerit, as matters come to hand: Is there in Plays such Scurrility, and Obscenity, as he pretends? Let him then blame the Poets, whose fault it is; for Players do but act that, which Poets in∣ent? And what is he the nearer now for condemning of Plays? Is it not a proper Argument to say; Choerilus makes naughty Verses: Therefore there must no more Verses be made? Poets make scurrilous plays; Therefore Tolli tota Theatra jube, Throw down all Theatres. If all things must be cast away, that may be, and oftentimes are abused, why doth not this man pull out his Eyes with Democritus? or geld himslf with Origen? or wish with Nero, Vtinam nescirem Lite∣ras! Would I had been an Ignoramus! But this Sophistry, ab Abusu ad usum, is so well known now, even Lippis, & Tonso∣ribus, to the meanest sort; that one would wonder, how he could stumble upon it, but much more, how he could stumble at it. But we are, perhaps, more provident, then we need: we blame Po∣ets, when, perhaps, there is no cause.
For can he charge Plays directly wi any such obscenity? He urgeth indeed certain general Invectives, and Dolus versat in generalibus, Deceit lies in generals, but h instanceth in none: and we doubt not but, if he could, he would; but, since h does not, we believe he cannot. Th Stoicks, a Sect of Philosophers, the near∣est of any to Christianity, were yet o this Opinion; that nothing is unhonest, o obscene to be spoken, which is honest, o lawfull to be done; and therefore they called all parts of the Body, and all acti∣ons of Life (which Modesty in us sup∣presseth) in their common talk, by the proper Names, in the broadest Terms; that we may truly say of Stoicks, Non were more severe in the Rules of Virtuous Life, yet none more obscene in the usage of filthy Talk. If then Obscenity of speech was no Disparagement in a Stoick to the reputation of his Virtue; why should it be accompted so great a Disparagement to the reputation of a Player? And yet I will allow him this: if any such Stoical Obscenity can be found in Plays;
t him speak as bitterly against them, as e can, I will never call it Rayling; but ill take his part my self: and such, it ems, was the Obscenity of Plays in old me, as appears by Salvianus, Tanta cum, ac verborum obscoenitates, ut vel re∣tionem sui interdicant; that is, So obscene ere their Words, and Speeches, as not to e named. And this is the Obscenity, hich the Antient Fathers so much cry ut against in Plays, as pudicis auribus on ferenda, not to be heard by modest ears, hich I would have this man to note, hat he may be brought to lay the Saddle n the right Horse: for in the Plays of our imes he shall never be able to shew any uch Obscenity. There are sometimes perhaps, when Necessity compells it, for representing of some scurrilous person, some secret strains, in ambiguous terms, like the voices of Oracles, as it were an Obscenity under Covert: (the Obscenity, to make appear the condition of the per∣son; the Covert, to express the modesty of the Player) and this is so far from of∣fending the Ears, that it is not sensible,
till it have passed the sence, as not unde stood, till examined by the Understaning: and being once there, it com to be but Obscenity in Abstracto, whic was in the world before ever Plays wer and would be still, though Plays shoul be no more. And in this they do b imitate Nature her self, quae partes e quae aspectum essent deformem habiturae, co texit, & abdidit: who covers the part which would have no pleasing aspect; no took them clean away, (as this m would have it) but placed them so, th as they offend not, being seen, th Eyes; no more do these speeches, bein heard, the Ears: and would he ha more modesty in Players, then there  in Nature? To expect therefore, tha Plays should be altogether withou obscene Passages, were it not to expect that Nature should make Bodies altoge∣ther without Privy parts? And the hear∣ing of those ought no more to offend the Ears of any, then the seeing of these offended the Eys of Adam, and Eve: of which, though naked, they were not
a whit ashamed. Obscene sights did never rouble them, till they had made them selves Obscene Hearts. For as long as all is clean, that should be clean, the foul∣ness of that, which should be foul, will never offend. Have not the neatest Cities their Sinks, and Chanels? yet who takes offence to look upon them? They are necessary for our use, but not necessary for us to use. They are therefore made foul, that we may walk clean. Indeed, it is not so much the Player, that makes the Obscenity, as the Spectatour himself: as it is not so much the Juyce of the Herb, that makes the Honey, or Poyson, as the Bee, or Spider, that sucks the Juyce. Let this man therefore bring a modest heart to a Play, and he shall never take hurt by immodest Speeches: but, if he come as a Spider to it, what marvel, if he suck Poyson, though the Herbs be never so sovereign. How many Questions of Aristotle's Problemes? how many Cha∣pters in Books of Physick may be found more guilty of such Obscenity, then
any Plays? And if such passages in the Books be still suffered, and not to out; why may not the like passages b suffered in Plays, and yet be born ou For as there is good use of such Treatses in the Schole of Nature, so there  good use of such speeches in the Schol of Manners: and as in those it is th Reader's fault, and not the Writer's;  in these it is the Spectatour's fault, an not the Player's, if any evil, or corrupton be contracted by them. And he that should forbear to go see a Play; because, perchance, he might hear som scurrilous speeches, may he not perhap tarry away, and hear worse at home For indeed this whole world is a a common Stage, where men an beasts do play their parts, and where men many times play the parts of beasts And I would know of this man, wha day he ever lived, that he did not both hear, and see as great Enormities really committed upon this great Stage, as are heard, or seen, but feignedly re∣presented, on these lesser Stages? And
there not as great danger in seeing ces really acted, as in seeing them onely ignedly represented? in seeing them done  arnest, as in seeing them but done in st? When vices are really acted, they  and as Copis, and Examples, which men e apt to follow; but when they are on∣ feigned on a Stage, they stand as Rocks, ewed onely to be shunned. When sins re actually committed, they are as Pitch hich toucheth us, and must needs de∣le us; but when they are onely repre∣ented, they are but as Pitch seen in a lass, which cannot defile us, because ot touch us. Where vices are really cted, there men may be said to stand in he way of Sinners; but where they are onely feignedly shewed, there, men may be rather said, to sit, and hear their Ar∣raignment, and Condemnation. But (Fol. 48. and 948.) he would make us believe; That all the attractive power in Plays, to draw Beholders, is meerly from scurrility: as if it were no Play; at least no pleasing Pla, without it. Where∣in, besides his prejudice, he may be
made to confess his ignorance: for l him try it when he will, and com himself upon the Stage, with all the scurrili of the Wife of Bath, with all the ribald of Poggius, or Boccace, yet I dare affirm he shall never give that contentment t Beholders, as honest Tarlton did, thoug he said never a word. And what scur∣rility was ever heard to come from the mouths of the best Actours of our Time Allen, and Bourbidge? yet, what Plays were ever so pleasing, as where their Parts had the greatest part? For, it is not the scurrility, and ribaldry, that gives the contentmunt, as he foolishly ima∣gines, and falsly suggests; but it is the Ingeniousness of the Speech, when it is fit∣ted to the Person; and the Gracefulness of the Action, when it is fitted to the Speech; and therefore, a lay read, hath not half the pleasure of a Play Acted: for though it have the pleasure of ingeni∣ous Speeches; yet it wants the pleasure of Gracefull action and we may well ac∣knowledg that Gracefulness of action, is the greatest pleasure of a Play, seing it
s the greatest pleasure of (the Art of pleasure) Rhetorick: in which we may e bold to say; there never had been so good Oratours, if there had not first been Players: seeing the best Oratours that ever were, account it no shame, to have learned the gracefulness of their Action, even from Players: Demosthenes from Satyrus; and Cicero from Roscius. Let him therefore keep his scurrility to himself, and send his Proselytes to sit with his Hostess at Oxford; whose Apoph∣thegm was, No mirth without Bawdrie: as for us, we are contented, to see Plays in their best Garments, and not in their foul cloaths, in their graces, and not in their faults. But who are they in Plays, that use such scurrilous, and obscene speeches? Hath not a Poet said well; Tristia maestum Vultum verba decent, Iratū plena minarum, Ludentem, lasciva; feverum, seria dictu. Indeed, if they were put into the mouths of Princes, or Persons of gra∣vity,
there were just cause of dislike but to be put into the mouths of scur∣rilous, and base persons, What hurt ca they do? None to the Actours; fo the decorum takes away their fault, and makes that faultless, which is decen, and less to the Spectatours: for how can  infect them, to imitate the scurrility, whe they see it, comely for none, but scur∣rilous persons? It rather teacheth the to avoid and loath such speeches, seeing they cannot but loath to be such per∣sons. For doth this man think, tha goers to Plays are such simple Ideots that when they see a beastly, or pro∣phane part acted before them, they take it to be done for imitation? The were the Lacedaemonians very fools; who to make their children abhor Drunken∣ness, would make their Slaves drunk of purpose; and act the vice before them; that seeing in others a deformity so hatefull, they might learn, in themselves to hate the deformity. Sic teneros animos aliena opprobria saepe Absterrent vitiis:
The man had an Itch to be writing a Book; and because he had not matter to make it good, he was desirous at least to make it great; he would have a great Club, hough never so hollow. Greatness, he knew makes a shew, and shews carry all in the Eye of the world; Substance is but seldom understood, and therefore not often much stood upon. And it may be some pleasure, to observe, with what winds he blows up the bladder of his Book; and what pretty tricks he useth, to furnish his Table of Vain-glory with variety of Dishes. He hath one trick, which he useth in his Text; and seems to have learned it from Egge-Saturday in Oxford, to make diversity of meats, with diversity of dressing: As for ex∣ample; Take the word Effeminate, this one word shall furnish him with four, or five severall Dishes of Arguments against Plays: as first, (Fol. 546.) Plays effemi∣nate mens minds and bodies, therefore Plays are unlawfull. This is one of his Dishes. (Fol. 167.) The very action of plays is effeminate; therefore plays are unlawfull.
This you must take for another Dish (Fol. 220.) Plays are ever attended with effeminate, and amorous Dancing; therefore Plays are unlawfull. This is another; and I should cloy your stomacks too much, if I should serve in all his Dishes of this kinde. He hath another Trick, which he useth in his citing of Authours; and seems to have learned it from atho in Terrence, where he counselleth, Vbi nominabit Phaedriam, tu continuo Pamphilam; for where his Ar∣gument calls for Ludos in Theatro; he thereupon brings in, Ludos in circo; Ldos in foro, Ludos in septis, where the matter requires Testimonies, against Tragedies, and Comedies, he presently brings in pla∣ces of Fathers, and others, against spe∣ctacles of Fencing, against Bear-bait∣ing, against Horse-Races, and such other Games; as like to Plays, as Chalk is to Cheese; and by these, and such like means, he hath made a great bellied Book, as if there were some goodly childe within it; when being ript up, and look'd into, there is nothing to be
ound, but a very Timpany of wind, and ater. For, after all his bustling, and tir; after all the Crambees of his (Fol. 65.) four and fourty Tautological Ar∣uments, it comes all but to this; that n Plays are often used Speeches, and other Circumstances, effeminate, idle, scur∣ilous, obscene, prophane, and Heathenish; nd therefore (Fol. 447.) corrupt mens manners, infect their affections, debauch heir dispositions; and (Fol. 321.) general∣ly indispose them to all goodness; which is all nothing, but either his miss-taking through ignorance, or his enforcing through malice; for though such Speeches are sometimes, perhaps used; yet the decorum in the Speaker, the in∣tent of the Speech, the nature of the Ex∣ample, make them all warrantable; and are so far from working the effects he speaks of, that they rather rectifie the Iudgment, qualifie the Affections, moderate the Passions, and generally dispose them to all Virtue: that where we meant but onely to defend Plays, he hath brought us now, that we are forced to praise
them; and where we thought but onely to keep them from taking wrongfu disgrace; we cannot keep our selve now, from giving them deserved commendations. For, what can be mo worthy our embracing, then that, whic both intends our good, and worketh  us, the good it intends? and what d Players intend, by bringing in a Tyran with words of death, and hands imbrue in blood, but to shew the deformity o Tyranny, to make us detest it? And d they intend this good to us; and d they not as well work it in us? Certainly, even this as forcibly, as that, ap∣parently; for seeing there are two prin∣cipall Motives to Virtue, Praise, and Rward; and two things likewise that de∣terr from Vice, Shame, and Punishment what can be more forcible, either to draw us to Goodness, or to withdraw us from Vitiousness, then where the ex∣amples of all these are most lively shew∣ed, and represented to us? Certainly, un∣less men be stark fools; rather wilfully to run into Pudles, and Quagmires, then
take a fair way when it is shewed em; they cannot choose by such ex∣mples, but be drawn to walk in the aths of Virtue. And let him not say, as ome have said; that scurrilous and pro∣hane speeches are very dangerous for fecting the hearers; because Assuescen∣o audire, discunt facere, By enring them∣elves, they learn to practise; for this were ikely to be true, if they onely heard uch speeches, and ended there, which s the fashion indeed of the common ctions in our life; but here, where we no sooner hear the words spoken, but presently withall, we see the shame, and punishment that attends them; cer∣tainly, it would be very strange, that by often hearing such speeches, we should get a custom of following them; and not rather, by often seeing their disgra∣ces, get a custom of avoiding them. And to this purpose, there is in Seneca, a pretty tale of the Poet Euripides, who, in one of his Plays, having made a Speech of a high strain, in magnifying of Riches, the people grew so tumultu∣ously
angrie at it, (fearing least suc speeches, should make men in love wit riches, and prone to covetousness) that that they were ready to run upon th stage, and tear the Actour in pieces that had spoken it; till Euripides was faine himself, to come out amongst them, and intreat them, to have patience, and see the end: for they should presently see, the riches he so exacted, to have such a down-fall in the miseries of his rich man Belerophon; that it should leave but little list in any man, ever af∣ter to desire their company. For the speech (saith he) was but to shew the Spectatours their own Errour; but the event in Fact, was to shew them, the Truth it self. When an Actour presents himself up∣on the Stage, untill he speak, he is but a picture, and when he speaks, he is but a Storie; (and therefore perhaps a Play∣er is called Histrio, quasi Historio) for as one sayd well, that a Judg is lex loquens, a speaking law: so we may say as truly, that a Player, is a speaking Picture: or
Historie in person; and seeing we ow no hurt, by a Picture; and cannot  commend Historie: why should Plays  condemned, which are but a compo∣on made of these two? A Historie is t condemned, if recording the life of lian; it set down, his cruelty against ristians, and his Blasphemies against rist. And if an Historian may law∣lly write it, may not we as lawfully d it? and if we may lawfully read it; ay not a Player as lawfully pronounce  and what doth a Player else, but ely say that without book, which we ay read within Book? A Player Acts e part of Solomon; but is never the iser for acting his part: why should he e thought the wickeder for acting the art of Nero, or the more blasphemous or acting the part of Porphyrie? Can here be a greater Blasphemy, then to urse God? yet Iobe's Wife perswaded im to do so; and this is written, where t may be read: shall we therefore think t unlawfull, to read the Story of Iob? Can there be a more blasphemous
speech, then that which the Iews spa of Christ; that he had a Devil,  wrought his miracles, by Belzebub Pri of the Devils? yet the holy Evangel have recorded this speech: shall  therefore think it unlawfull, to re their Gospells? Can there be a mo prophane Speech, then that of the Po Ede, lude, Bibe: Post mortem nulla Vptas? Yet Solomon in his Ecclesias hath some such speeches; shall  therefore think it unlawfull, to read  Book of the Preacher? And w then (if we may Parvis Componere mag shall Players be thought, either Blaphemous, or prophane: if sometime they utter such speeches under the peson of another? and indeed to spea it plainly, they cannot avoid the using and uttering such speeches, if they wi be Players For as he, who would live pourtray a Devil, or a deformed Monster must needs draw some gastly lines, and us some sordid colours; so he, who will deli∣niate to the life, the notorious lewdness of people in the world, is necessarily enforce
sch immodest phrases, as may present it ts native uglyness; else he should but con∣le, or masque their horrid wickedness, that e may behold it: not rip it open, that all y abhor it: and this is the onely reason, of se more uncivil, or seemingly immodest ssages, that are here, and there, scattered  this Discourse. But in what Discourse ink ye? even in this very Discourse  Histrio-Mastix. For these last eight  nine lines, are his own very words,  his Preface to the Reader; to justify e Obscenity, of his own very speech∣, which he useth in his book. But  this possible? Hath he then, a Mono∣olie of Obscene phrases; and immo∣est speeches, that none may lawfully se any, but only himself? may not layers claime the priviledg of subjects, o the English Tongue, and use them pon occasion, as well as he? No, he seth them onely upon necessity, to ex∣ress the Obscenity of Players, and do ot Players use them onely upon neces∣ity, to express the Obscenity of people? But what necessity have Players to med∣dle
with the Obscenity of people? T same necessity which he hath, to med with the Obscenity of Players. But  could not otherwise diswade men, fro seeing sch Obscene Plays; and Plaers cannot otherwise disswade me from being such Obsene persons.  may thus go on, as far as he will,  when all is said; it will ever be foun either a voluntary Obscenity in hi self, or a necessary in Players: th every schole-boy, that hath but learne his Cato, will be upon his jacket wi this. Turpe est Doctori quum Culpa redarg ipsu But (Fol. 100.) he seemes here, t please himself with a Reason; that i Plays were good Scholes of Virtue, ho should it happen, that (Fol. 102.) Players and the (Fol. 143.) Frequenters of Plays are commonly the worst, and most vitious men? As though there were not many as honest, and wise as himself, that go to see Plays? I may justly say as honest, seeing no dishonestie is greater, the
o condemne men, whom he doth not now; and I may as justly say as wise, eeing no Follie, is greater, then to be o busie, where he hath nothing to do; nd to be so Censorious, where he hath o Authority. But is he so foolish as e makes himself, to think that good choles must always produce good cholers? Were there ever better chole-masters in Humane Scholes, hen those which the Emperour Nero, nd Commodus had? Yet they both pro∣ed Monsters of men, the one in Lasci∣iousness and Cruelty: The other in Cruel∣y, and Lasciviousness. Were there ver better Schole-masters in Divine choles, then those which Gebezi, and udas had? Yet they both proved no∣orious Examples to all Posterity; the one of incredulous Bribery, the other of Bribing Incredulity. But though we keep no Register, of such men, as have profited in virtue by this Schole of Plays: yet we are not altogether de∣stitute of Examples. For hath not Lucian Recorded one Lesbonax, an ho∣nest
man of Mytilene, who being a gre Frequenter of Plays, was wont to say  himself; that he never saw a Play, but  returned home, a better man then he  out? And what hath Cicero recorded  Roscius; who was a famous Play himself; and yet no less a famous hnest man; Vt cum dignissimus esset Sc propter Artificium; tiam dignissimus e curia propter abstinentiam. That his ry Adversary durst not speak of him the Barr, without this Addition, Qu honoris causa Nomino. And lest  should say, that the Schole of Play Degenerated, and grown worse, sin that time; have we not seen in our o time, a famous Scholer come out of th Schole: Edward Allen a Player himsel Famous as well for his Honesty, as for  Acting: and who hath left behind hi a worthy Testimony of his Christian Chrity, to all posterity? And who doubt but amongst the Spectatours of Play we may finde many, like to Lesbonax and amongst Players themselves, some like to Rosius? and even to go no furer
then his own Authours, whom he rings in for witnesses against going to ays; (and we doubt not but he takes em for honest men; as Cicero, Seneca, linie, and a number of such besides) et were they all Frequenters of Plays,  their own confession in their wri∣ings: and how then, is he not ashamed o say, that none but Infamous, Vnchast, rophane, and Graceless persons are fre∣uenters of Plays: when all his worthy rites, who he cites for his witnesses, ere themselves frequenters of them? f their honesties were sufficient, to make them sufficient witnesses, against he lawfullness of going to Plays; why are not their Honesties as sufficient, to make their Examples sufficient Warrants for going to Plays? and so, I may say in their Defence, as Cicero said in Defence of Roscius; Nisi osdem, & Adversarios, & Testes habeant, nolo vincant: that there never was poor Book made he Instru∣ment of so impudentaly; so ntorious a scandal, as this Histrio-astix. But (Fol. 142.) will you know, how
it happens, that Players, in this Man's  count, re most excessively vitious, unha prophane, and dissolute men? marry, cause most of them (as he is credibly infored) are professed Papists. A very necessa Consequence: as though to be a profess Papit, were to be a professed Atheist for what but Atheism could bring for all such excessively vitious men as  would make them? Yet this makes we for Plays, though it makes ill for Player for Players, though the most excessively vitious men, yet are not so, becaus Players, but because Papists. Let hi take heed, he pull not an old house up∣on his head; for though Papists diffe from Protestants, in some points of Mo∣ral, and Theological Doctrine, yet they differ not from them in the necessity of Moral, and Theological Virtues. Although therefore we do not question his cre∣dible Information, yet we justly question his incredible Consequence: as being in∣deed a very inconsequent incredibili∣ty. If he had onely said, Some Papists are excessively vitious men; though
is had been a busie impertinent Asser∣ yt I presume, no Papists them∣vs uld much have gain-said it: for  Religion was ever known, that had  some Professors of it excessively vi∣ous? But, when he saith, Players must eeds be excessively vitious, because ey are Papists, this lays a taint upon  generality; and makes a Papist, and  honest man, to be Disparata, and In∣ible; as never possible to meet to∣her in one Person. In which opini∣n (what Puritans may do, I know not, ut) I verily think, scarce one Protestant ill e found to take his part. But we may leave Papists to defend their ho∣sties, as they can themselves: and his man, as he can, to oppugn it; we meddle no further with them, on ei∣ther side; but, Ipsi viderint, Ips viderit. Sufficient hath been spoken in behalf of Players obscene speeches; but these are scarce one half of their obscenity: for besides these, (Fol. 374.) There are in Plays wanton gestures, amorous kisses, and ; and these are the obscene sights,
and the great provocations to lust, for whi he specially condemns Plays. Grave crime Caie Caesar: Kisses, and amorous kisse very obscene sights, and great provoctions to lust: but why more being do upon the Stage, then done in his ow house? Why more done in fiction, the in reality? Why more used in Iests, the used in earnest? Why more seen seldom then seen continually? For who sees no every stranger that comes to his hous to kiss both his own, and other me wives before their faces? yet all don with Vestal modesty; and no man eve heard to complain, but onely this man as born, it should seem, under some very lustfull, and jealous Constellation. And will not even Nature her self, by this Reason, be found guilty of immo∣desty? for making Pigeons to bill open∣ly, and Cocks to tread their Hens before mens faces? a sight, it seems, a Brother cannot see, but it presently sets his teeth a water, to be doing the like. But must we not think his inclination then a very dry Tinder, and very apt to take fire;
at can be enflamed to lust with so cold rovocations? However it be, this equi∣ cannot justly be denied to Players; at, either this man may not be allowed  kiss, and use amorous Complements, hen he goes a Wooing; or they may e allowed to do as much, when they epresent him a wooing. But there is yet in Plays a worse mat∣er then all these; for, (Fol. 390) they re the very places of meetings, where lasci∣ious matches are oftentimes made, and metimes acted. But should not lascivi∣us persons have very ill harbours, if hey had not better Ports to arrive t, then to meet at a Play-house? And why Plays more then Fairs, and Mar∣kets? why Plays, more then confluence at Marriages, and other Festivals? why Plays more, then frequenting of one an∣other's Houses? and what saith a Poët; Why Plas more, then even goings to Church it self? Qi locus est Templis augustior? hoec quoque vitet, In culpam si qua est ingeniosa suam. And, it seems indeed, where Play-houses
were so bad, that Temples wer no better; as Minutius Felix saith: Vmagìs à Sacerdotibus, quàm inter Aras,  Delbra, condicuntur stupra? tractantur  nocinia? Adulteria meditantur? Frequtiùs denique in Aedituorum Cellulis, quàm i ipsis Lupanaribus, flagrans libido defungtur. And what marvel, if the Heath used in Plays such Obscenities, who ac∣counted such Obscenities to be but Plays as little caring in such things to see honest, as to be; but this is not the Case of Christians, who, though never so irre∣gular, will yet observe this Rule; Si  castè, tamen cautè, If not chastly, yet charily. And what caution were in this, to offer lascivious speeches, where all mens Ears; or lascivious acts, where all mens Eyes are continually upon them? as if a Thief should steal in the open street, where all men see him? (Fol. 387.) He tells of Heliogabalus, that he commanded Stage-Players, to commit Adulteries, real∣ly, and openly upon the Stage: he tells of Tiberius, that he caused others to de∣file themselves before his face. And
tells e these filthy tales, but onely  the pleasure he takes in telling them? or else, how far are they from the Mat∣er, in speaking of our Plays? when he ees any such acts committed upon our tages, let him not spare to tell us of it: ill then, he may leave his gabling of Heligabalus, and keep his filthy Stories n store for the private delight of his own meditation. He hath hitherto maintaied himself with the Obscenity of Plays; but now, that the Patrimony of that Argument is spent, and gone, you shall presently see how bare, and beggarly he will grow, and for very necessity fall a pilfering. For, his very next Argument is directly stolen, where he makes (Fol. 72.) Plays unlawfull, because they are bloody, and ty∣nical, breathing nothing but Malice, Anger, and Revenge; for this belongs properly to the Spectacles of Gladia∣tos, and Fencers, and not to Plays; un∣less perhaps, to Heathen Plays, where men, and sometimes Christian men, were cast in amongst wilde Beasts to be de∣voured;
but, what is this to our Play where never any wilde Beast was see upon the Stage, unless perhaps suc wilde Beasts as David speaks of, wh are like to Horse, and Mule, that hav no Vnderstanding. He hath another very Thrifty Rea∣son; by which he would make us think him a good husband for us; (Fol. 30. and 310.) where he condemns Plays, be∣cause they make their Spectatours spend s much money, and time in seeing them. But what will French-men say in defence of their Recreation? Who spend more mony, and time in one day at Tennis; then these Spectatours do in many weeks at Plays? and how comes it, that seeing he aimes onely at cheap recre∣ations, he forgets the Emperour Domi∣tian's Recreations; who made it his sport, to spend an hour in the After∣noon, in catching of Flies? For as for those, which he allowes of, Fishing, and Fowling; Hunting, and Hawking: the very Fable of Actaeon would make him see his Errour, if he had the will
understand the Moral. But how an we think him a good husband for s: who is so bad a husband for him∣elf? for what a deal of mony, and ime hath he spent in Transcribing of Authours, and Printing his Book: which, if  man should say, had been better spent t Plays, though he perhaps would be ngry: yet as wise men as himself, I verily think, would be of that opinion. He hath another Argument, which he seems to have borrowed from the Heathens Bacchanalia: where (Fol. 508.) he makes Plays unlawfull; because they are an immediate ocasion of Drunkenness, and Ex∣cess. It was indeed usual at those Feasts, to Surfet, and be Drunk; or rather Surfeting, and Drunkenness were the Feast it self: but who ever saw a man Surfet, or be Drunk at a Play? and how can that be an occasion of Drunken∣ness, which neither ministers Example, nor Means of Drinking? No Example; unless perhaps in Fiction: and then not so much, to represent men Drunk with Wine, as this man with Errour.
He hath an other Argument, which he seems to have been looking in a Glas when he made it: It reflects so directly upon himself: (Fol. 501:) where h makes Plays Vnlawfull: because they ar the constant cause of much Sloth, and Idl∣ness. For what greater Idleness, then to sit all day, transcribing of Authours; which is but Actum Agere? But should he not by this Argument have conclud∣ed rather the Gowt to be unlawfull? of which when one was asked, what Idle∣ness was the wort, he answered: Poda∣grici Pedes, the Gout in the Feet? Indeed to see a Play as he (it seems, reads Books, to look onely in their Tables) it might not be much better; but to see a Play, with that due observation, which the true use of Plays requires, he will finde it, as farr from Idleness to be at a Play, as to be at Schole: and Scholers would take it in great dudgeon, if he should say, they were Idle, when they are at their Books. But what saith Attilius in Pliny: Praestat otiosum esse quàm Nihil agere: as much as to say, It were
ttr to be  a Play, and be Idle: then to sit cribling out of Authours, and do nothing. He hath another Argument, with hich, it seems, he seeks to cheat us; here (Fol. 515.) he makes Plays unlaw∣ull; because Play-houses are the Scholes, nd Plays the Lectures, to teach men, how to heat, and Steal. For, Who knows not, hat Theevs, and Cheatours, can have their Scholing for nothing; and need not to pay for it, by going to Plays! Indeed,  farr cunninger Schole-master they have to teach them the Craft, then Players; one that is in Earnest; and would take it ill at their hands, that they should take any ill in hand, which they had not from him. But doth not this Reason, through the sides of Plays, give greater wounds, to Assizes, and Sessions? For there indeed, the plots, and pra∣ctizes of Theevery, the tricks, and con∣veyances of Cheatours, are openly laid open, and publikly made known: that if he call it a Schole, certainly they are Free-Scholes: or rather Academies in comparison of Plays, But who knows
not, that both Plays, and Sessions, discover Thefts, and Cheatings indeed, bu not as this man would cheat us; and make us think, to the end, they may be used, but as Logick teaches fallacies, to the end to avoid them. We may justly there∣fore for this reason, binde him over to the Sessions, both for the implicite asper∣sion he lays upon them, and for the ex∣plicite cheating, he seeks to put upon us. He hath another Argument, which we may call his Rain-bow, seeing there are as many Vices in it, as there are Co∣lours in the Rain-bow; (Fol. 551.) where he makes Plays unlawfull; because they occasion an apparent breach of all the ten Commandments, of which we may say, Decem mundi facti sunt; sed ubi sunt illi novem? for some sins are incompatible; that where one is familiar, the other will always be a stranger, unless he mean it as St. Iames speaks; that he which is guil∣ty of one sin, is guilty of all: and in that sense, we may say as much of him, when he doth but onely tell a Lie. This man, with a little help, would bring it about,
hat the very sin of our first Parent Eve as nothing else, but her being a Player, where she and the Serpent were the Actours, and Adam the Spectatour; and not onely that all Players are damned, ut that none else are damned but they. For, if Players break all God's Com∣mandments, then he, who is no Player, breaks none of the Commandments: as when Aesop's fellow, being asked what he cold do, answered, He could do all things; then faith Aesop, If he can do all things, there is nothing left for me to do. You will say, This is not to an∣swer, but to trifle; and hath not Solomon advised us, Answer not a fool in his folly, lest thou be like unto him? yet, seeing we have answered his Arguments before, where he charged Plays with the Vices in particular, it may well enough serve for an answer to this Argument, where he chargeth them in general: and so we observe also the other Precept of Solo∣mon, (fellow to the former) Answer a fool in his folly, lest he be wise in his own coni
You have heard many grave Argument you shall hear one now, to make you laugh, (Fol. 291.) where he makes Plays unlawfull, because they provoke oftentimes profuse laughter, as though he knew not, that to be risible is onely proper to men and no excess in this can tain them with aspersion of any beastlike quality, or make them, as all vices do, and this should, if it were a vice, to be like a Beast. And especially he is not well advised in this, in his own behalf; for if it were not for this Risible, we should hardly, perhaps, finde any thing in himself, to know him to be a man. But why should he blame Plays for pro∣voking of Laughter, when he makes an Argument here himself, that provokes more laughter then ever any Play did? that we may truly say, Omnes qui audiunt risi emori. For what was ever heard more ridiculous, then to make it an Argu∣ment against Plays, (f. 714.) because Noah, Melchisedech, Abraham, and the Patri∣archs are never read in Scripture, to hav approved Plays? Or, as his Elegancy
pesseth it, t have been experimentally equaited with them? As absurdly, as if ne would prove, that Guns are no good weapons in the Wars, because Ioshua, Gi∣eon, David, and the antient Warriours are never read in Scripture, to have used Guns, or to have been experimentally ac∣quainted with them; much like the oolishness, which Livie notes in a Roman Tribune, who threatned the people, he would hinder their levying of Souldiers, when there was no War toward; and, Is there not in this, as just cause to set Mrous Crassus a laughing, as when he saw an Asseat Thistles? He hath another Reason, as vain, and ridiculous as this; (Fol. 127.) where he makes it a Reason to condemn Plays, because they are at the best, but vain, and ridiculous. As though any thing of this world, even the best things that are, when they are at the best, were any other, then vain, and ridiculous; and let him not distin∣guish of things, and say, that some are srious; for the more serious, the more riilous: for what is this, but the very
Argument, at which Democritus could no forbear laughing, all his life time. But these are but the small Fry of h great Pool; he hath three Reason which, like the great Pikes, may be sai to contain in their Bellies all his othe Gudgin-Reasons: and in the taking o them consists, in effect, the taking awa of all the other. And may we not admit them all to be true, and yet, as o case is, take no Disparagement, by admitting them? seeing, as he urge them against Plays: so we may urg them as well against no worse a thin then Riches. For his first Reason ma be this; (Fol. 327.) that Plays are a pr∣vocation unto Lust: and is it not said  Riches, that they are Irritamenta malrum? His second: that Plays (Fol. 521. Indispose men to all Religious Duties: and is it not said of Riches; that we cann serve God, and Mammon? His third: tha (Fol. 565.) they bring Damnation, upo mens Souls, and Bodies; and, Is it not said of a Rich man, that he cannot Enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? and why
en should he think to fright us with s Thundring phrases, from seeing of lays, and is not himself frighted with em, from seeking of Riches? Cer∣inly, seeing all his Reasons are as rong against Riches, as against Plays, nd yet Riches we doubt not, may be ad, and held by good men; why may ot Plays also be Acted, and be beheld y good men, notwithstanding his rea∣sons? For, as there may be Bonus usus Divitiarum, which makes void all the reasons against Riches; so there may be Bonus usus Ludorum, which may a∣void all his Reasons against Plays: that unless he can prove it is not lawful to be Rich, we shall never admit his proofs, that it is not lawfull to see a Play; let him therefore, either allow men to see a Play, as well s to be Rich: or, if he will perswade men not to see Plays; let him then write another Book, and perswade all men to be Beggars. Plutarch writ a ook De Vtilitate ab Inimicis Capienda, and if this man had
the good meaning of Plutarch, and had written his Book, de Vtilitate à Spectaclis Capienda; we might then perhap have thought him, as Charitable, as no we think him Malicious. But if he be not a Manichee, he is, at least, very like one; who seems he could finde in his Heart, to blame God for Creating of Vipers, and such other Venemous Beasts; because his gross Head is not able to conceive, how the soveraign Antidote of Treacle should be extracted from them. And now, to make a Recapitulation of his Arguments, to see, how he hath laboured all this while, De lana caprina; about a matter of nothing, and how easily his main blows may be avoided with one ward, he saith, Plays are bloody and Tyrannical. It may be true of Hea∣then Plays, it is false of ours: He saith they are a provocation to Lust; It may be true of Heathen Plays, it is false of ours: He saith they are Ordained, and Dedi∣cated to the Worship of Devil-Gods; it is true of Heathen Plays, it is false
of ours. He saith, they are the Pomps of the Devil, renounced by Christians in their Baptism: It may be true of Hea∣then Plays, it is false of ours. He saith, they are fraught with bitter Scoffings at Religion, and Religious men; it may be true of Heathen Plays, it is false of ours. He saith, they cause a prodigal Expence of Time, and Mony; it may be true of Heathen Plays (which lasted many times, many daies together, and were set forth at Infinite charges) it is false of ours. He saith, they are an im∣mediate occasion of much Actual Adul∣tery; it may be true of Heathen Plays, it is false of ours. He saith, they occasi∣on much Drunkenness, and Excess; it may be true of Heathen Plays, it is fal of ours. And thus, to his Diversis Nodis, Vnus Cunes, many arguments, as he calls them, one answer, as a wedg, may serve sufficiently, to cleave them all asunder. Yet he hath one passage, that stands barking in a Corner, but dares not come out in the likeness of an Argument, where he calls (Fol. 329.) Playhouses,
the Seminaries of Vices; the Temples of Venery; the Scholes of Bawdery; the Dens of Lewdness; and all the Vile names he could get together, by raking Hel, and Billings-gate. But will it not be a Sop to stop Cerberus his mouth: if we do but examine the Common-Wealths, in which Plays have been most usual; whether, after Plays admitted, they have grown in their manners, either not worse, or perhaps better; for so it may appear, that Plays have been no such corruptions, no such corrupters of the times, as he would make them. Examine the Roman State; and, not to wander about, take the times under the Emperour Augustus, in which, Plays where in their heighth: he Reigned six and Fifty years; a reasonable time to make a tryal: and were not his times, more quiet, more civil, and more virtu∣ous, then ever they had been before? So quiet, that all the world was quiet, and the Temple of Ianus shut up twice in his time? So civil, and virtuous, that as himself was call Augustus; so his times
were called Augustum Saeculum. Come to our own Contry, which is better known to us; take the Time from the beginning of our late famous Queen Elizabeth, to the present, almost fourscore years, a large time likewise for probation; and were ever any Times known in this State more Civil, or more Virtuous? so civil, that no civil Arms; so virtuous, that Iustice, never more duly administred; Semons never more Preached, more frequented; Virtues in Princes never more transcendent, Loyaltie, and Love in Subjects never more eminent; that if Virgil might say it of Augustus Times; certainly, we much more justly may say it of these of ours; Iam redit, & virgo; redeunt Saturnia Regna, As if the Golden-Age, of which the Poets talk such wonders, were come in∣to the world again. And how then are Plays such Seminaries of Vices, as he talks of? He must find better Semi∣naries then Plays, or he is like to have but a slender crop. That we may know
these Phrases of his, to be nothing but the Fictions of the Devil's Poetry, or the Flowers of his Rhetorick. He will say, they are the very words of Tertullian, and other of the Fathers; but will he ne∣ver learn this one lesson so often taught him; They may be true of Heathen Plays, they are false of ours. He will lastly say, that we have spoken indeed of general, and publike Virtues, but they are the Vices of private men, that he complains of; as though the publick were any thing, but the uniting of the private; or the generall any thing, but the meet∣ing of particulars: and who doubts, but there will be a Cham in the Ark; though Noah the Preacher of Righteous∣ness be continually in presence? there will be a Iudas amongst the Apostles, though Christ himself be doing his Miracles con∣tinually before them? But should not this man consider rather, from whence these men took their infection (which from Plays, we are sure they did not) then to stand baiting at Plays, which is at most, but Cum capiti medendum est, Re∣duviam
curare; for, to think to mend ens Vices by taking away Plays, is as dle, as that one should think to mend  Faces, by taking away Glasses. He hath yet one Argument behinde; hich is, I may say, his Palmarium; and hich he hath kept for a final Argu∣ent, because it must serve to give a final low to beat down Plays: namely, Fol. 552.) The fearfull judgments of God, hich have been shewed upon them. A final Argument indeed, able to beat down, not onely Plays, but all mens Hearts from seeing of Plays. But where is his Commission, to make the Application? It is, no doubt, good counsel, when any extraordinary fearfull accident happens, to call our selves to account, and to enter into a due consideration of all our miss-do∣ings; acknowledging, that such things are oftentimes sent of God, as gracious warnings to draw us to Repentance; but yet, when such things happen, to cen∣sure them presently, as Judgments of God upon any particular Sin and to determine upon what particular Sin, or
Sinner they are sent; this is more then this man hath warrant for, either from Scripture, or Fathers, or from Discretion When God reveals the reason of his doing, we may safely then take notice of it, and rest our selves upon it; as when the Earth opened, and swallowed up Korah, and Dathan; there was mani∣festly known, both the particular Sin, and the particular Sinners: Likewise when Fire fell down from Heaven upon S∣dom, and Gomorrha. But when the Tower of Shilo fell, and with the fall, slew eigh∣teen men, who could make the applica∣tion? seeing Christ saith They were not the worst men, upon whom the Tower of Shilo fell. When a childe was born dumb, and blinde, this man would pre∣sently, it seems, have censured it, as a Judgment of God, upon the Childe, or Parent; yet Christ told his Disciples, It neither came for any Sin of the Childe, nor of the Parents. For the Iudgments of God, are as secret, as fearfull; they are an Abyss, till he give them a bottom; and where God keeps silence, ther men
an have no science. For, what man is he, hat can know the counsel of God; or, who can think what his Will is? He ells us of Play-houses, both publick, and private; some suddenly fallen down, some burnt up with fire, without any apparent cause preceding? And what great wonder is this; if in so many hun∣dred years, in so many thousand places, some few such accidents have sometimes happened? Have not the like happened even to Churches, and Chappels; and pri∣vate places of Religious meetings? Will he therefore say, they were Iudgments of God against the use of Churches, and Chappels? he tells us of some Players, and some Spectatours of Plays, that have died at the very Play, both suddenly, and strangely; and what great wonder is this, if in so many hundred years, in so many thousand places, amongst so many millions of people, some few such chances have sometimes fallen out? Have not the like happened to some Preachers in the Pulpit; and to some devout persons, even at their
prayers? Will he therefore say, they were Judgments of God, against the use of Preaching, and Praying? How much better, is that censure in Minutius Foelix: Fulmina passim cadunt; sine delectu tangunt loca sacra, & prophana: homines noxios fe∣riunt, saepe & Religiosos: Thunder-bolts fall down indifferently; they light upon places prophane, and sacred, without any choice; they strike good men, and bad, both alike. His Inference therefore of these Iudgments, shews he hath no Iudgment, being as idle as busie, and proceeding rather, from a malice to the cause, then from any un∣derstanding of these effects, and as little from any Charitie at all to the Reader. Thus this final Argument, which should hve made a final End of Plays, hath made a final End of all his Reasons, and of all his Reason: and yet he hath one Argument more, though not one Reason more, but a kind of prognostica∣tion rather, for he tells, before hand, (Fol. 565.) what entertainment, both Play∣ers, and Spectatours of Plays, are like to finde in another world, even without Re∣pentance,
Eternal Damnation. And this  calls an Argument, with a witness: and  is so indeed, for it is a witness to us  his rashness, and irreligion. For, he efies being a Papist, and he denies eing a Puritan; and now this Argu∣ent, is a witness against him, that he  no Protestant. For by aggravating e sin (as he accompts it) of seeing a lay, being not Repented, with Eternal amnation: he shews himself to think, at every Sin not Repented, deserves ot so much: for if he thought Eternal amnation, the common punishment, f every sin, why should he lay it, as an ggravating punishment upon this n? and if he think, Some sin not Re∣ented, not to be Mortal, we think him, or so thinking, not to be a Protestant. f then, neither Protestant, nor Puritan, or Papist: what Religion should he be of, hat we may not justly leave the Damna∣ion of this Argument, upon himself? And thus it befalls men, transported with malice, that whilest they make, their own threatning, the measure of others
suffering; they fall them selves to fer that, which they threatned to oth Thus you have seen his Fore-pa which are his Reasons; you may now  pleased to see his Back-parts, which  his Testimonies, and Authorities; and y shall finde him no better to follow th he was to meet; yet it makes a bett shew; for he began his Reasons fro the Devil, but he begins his Authorit from God: for (Fol. 545) he begi with the Scriptures, the word of God:  doubt, a most powerfull evidence, not  be spoken of without honour; not  be thought of, without reverence: an indeed, if he could alledg but onely th name of Plays, or Players, as spoken o in the Scriptures, we should have a won∣derfull respect, and be wouderfull ci∣cumspect how we medled with them but seeing he cannot do this, we ma justy suspect him to be no better a ma in his Authorities, then he was in his Rea∣sons, great pretences, but no proofs, fair colours, but no substance; all he can say, is but onely to say, he hath nothing bu
ords, and words are but winde, and ay well enough be blown over. For,  for his Inferences, and Collections, and eductions, we may demur upon them at asure, and take time to consider. But st any man should think we waved his estimonies of Scripture, as being con∣ncing, and such as cannot be answer∣d; let us, for the reverence we bear em, hear him at large, and see what he ath to say out of these sacred Records. nd he seems to bewray the weakness f his Cause at the very first: for, (Fol. 45.) he grants that Scripture speaks no∣hing against Plays in precise terms; and hy then will he condemn them in pre∣ise terms, if the Scripture do not? Is ot this to incur the reprehension of S∣omon, Noli esse nimium justus? be not oo precise; for to condemn a thing n precise terms, which the Scriptures do not, what is this, but to be ni∣mium justus; more precise then needs? But if the Scriptures condemn them not in precise terms, in what terms then? In∣deed onely in Hilary Trm; for it would
make a man merrie; or rather it woul make a Hrse break his halter to see th strange Antick faces of applications h makes, to wring out a condemnatio of Plays from places of Scripture; an when he hath all done, we might mak as good an Argument and say; This ma speaks scarce a wise word in all his book; Therefore Plays are unlawfull: For wheresoever he findes any place against Idolatry, and Altars, against Adultery, or Murther, aganst wantonness, or prophanene, he presently applies them as spoken a∣gainst Plays, & never considers how idle, and simple he is, to stand picking, and culling out some certain Texts of Scri∣pture; when if these applications, would serve, he might have said it in a word, that all the whole Scripture is nothing else, but a very arraignment, & condemnati∣on of Plays. But thus he fetches it abou; he confesseth that no Scripture con∣demns Plays, in precise terms; but that (Fol. 546.) they positively prohibit, and censure them, under the names of Idolatry, of things consecrated to Idols, of the Cp, and
Table of Devils; of the Customs, Rites, and delights of Idolaters; of the way and fashi∣n of the Heathen; of the will of the Gen∣iles, and such like; under which, Plays are s really, and absolutely comprised, as any art is under the whole, or any Species un∣der its proper Genus. A very fine device, o make Quidlibet, ex Quolibet. He seems one of that mans Scholers, who de∣duceth, and findes comprised, all Natu∣ral, and Moral Philosophie in the first Chapter of Genesis; but will any man be∣ieve him? The Fathers said this of Hea∣hen Plays, and he, good man, thinks he may say it of ours; will not therefore his device suit better with himself, and give us leave to say; No Scripture in∣deed condemns this man in precise terms; but they condemn, and censure him under the names of a false Prophet, of a perverter of Scriptures; of one, Zealous without knowledge; of a Syco∣hant, a Busie-body, a Slanderer, and such like; under which names, this man is as really and absolutely comprised, as any part is under the whole, or any indivi∣duum
under its proper species. And whe we say this, can any man say, but tha our application of these to him, is fa more just, then his to Plays? Certainly the Heathen, have more colour of rea∣son, to worship the Sun, out of the Te Et Domino Soli servies; then this man hath to condemne Plays, out of any Text, against the Idolatrie of the H∣then. For they at least, have the am∣biguity of the word Soli, to stand upon; but this man hath nothing Intus or  Cute, neither Ambiguitie nor perspicuity of word, neither letter nor tittle of letter, to Countenance his Exposition. There are indeed some Rules, by which, one vice may be comprised under the name of another; as when lesser vices are for∣bidden, it shews the greater are forbid∣den also: so incest, and Sodomitry under the name of Adultery, so Atheism, un∣der the name of Heathenism: or whe a General vice is prohibited, it shews the particular kinds are prohibited also so poisoning under the name of Murther so Bribery, and Fraud, under the name
Stealing; but can he shew, that Plays  by any such Rules comprised under e names of the vices he alledgeth? No∣ing less: if he had done, or could do is, he had spoken to some purpose, d with some reason; but since he ath not, nor cannot do this, what can e say of him, but that he hath shewed ore Malice then Wit, more Zeal then Knowledg, more Boldness, or Imprudence, hen either Iudgment, or Vnderstanding. e had read perhaps in some Authours ome strange applications of places of cripture; and he, like a true Pythagore∣n, takes all upon the Credit of Ipse ixit: and thereupon grows confi∣ent at last to be a Coyner of Applica∣ions himself: he thinks he hath as much Zeal as they; and knows, he ath less Knowledg: and these two joyn∣ed together, much Zeal, and little Know∣edg, are the true Parents of all these false himerical Applications. Would any man hink, that these words of David; Blessed is the man, that hath not walked in the council of the ungodly: and hath not stood in the way of
sinners: and hath not sate in the chair of Scners, were spoken by him, as against goin to Plays? Yet Tertullian fetcheth it abou and takes advantages of some Circumstces, to make it seem probable. But ma not Tertullian be as well mistaken in applying places of Scripture against Plays as he was in applying them to maintain th Errour of the Millenaries: or the Corporeit of the Soul? Although for this place per∣haps we may excuse him; seeing he seem to apply it, by way of Allusion, and Ex∣ageration onely, and not by way of Ar∣gumentation: in which sence, while this man mistakes it; it is one of the Seeds he takes to set in the Wilderness of his Brains: and from this, and such other mistaken Seeds is grown at last this huge Forest of Confusion, which he presents you with in this his Volumi∣nous Rhapsodie: Voluminous indeed, if you look on the bulk; but a very Pamphlet, if on the substance. But is it not strange to see, how con∣fidently he goes to Moses to fetch Texts, as it were Warrants against Plays; as i
e were sure, that Plays were then in use, n Moss his time? For if they were not, e would make Moses a very hastie Iudg, to condemn them before they were born. And indeed unless where e learned, that the Devil invented them, e can learn also, at what time he In∣ventd them; I will never believe, but e is much mistaken in the time of their Nativity. Especially seeing his Rabbi Tertullian fetcheth the greatest Anti∣quity of Plays but from the coming of Tyrhenus, and the Lydians, into Italie: (for when they were called Ludi  Lydis) and Tyrrhenus came into Italie some distance of time, after the Trojane War; and the Trojane War was four hundred years, and more, after Moses Death. Now, seeing the places, which this man citeth out of Moses, were Exhortations to the people, to avoid the Idolatries, and Customes of the Hea∣then, that were at that time; how can they be taken as intended against Plays, which had no being in the world till many hundred years after?
But this may pass among, his Venial faults: he thinks, perhaps, that God will never charge him with Errours in Chr∣nologie; so they exceed not a Thousand years: because a Thousand years with him are but as one day. Yet it were not enough neither to say, that Plays were then in use; but he must prove also, they were then in use, in such manner as now they are; for, if since that time they have mended their manners, it were no rea∣son, that, having lived so long, they should now be put to death in their Age for faults committed so long since in their Infancie. But if they be of so great Antiquity, it is very probable they are of as great Innocency; for having had many Accusations, they have pass'd many Trials: and though often Arraigned, yet never Convicted: and they should have very hard fortune, if, having stood the blows of so many axes, they should now be felled with the cut of a pen-knife. But, seeing he will needs be going to Moses for Proofs, let him go, and let us see what he can make of them; and
that every Reader may be a Iudge, I will cite you some of his places, which he takes to be positively spoken of Plays; and I will cite them, as he Quotes them, lest you should think I take advan∣tage; the rest I will Quote onely, that you may read them at leisure; and laugh, if you can, for anger, or be angry, if you can, for laughing. (Fol 545.) Levit. xviii.30. Therefore ye shall keep mine Or∣dinances (namely, against Incests, and So∣domitries) that ye do not any of the abomi∣nable customs, which have been done before you, and that ye defile not your selves therein. This is the first of his places, which he alledgeth as positively con∣demning Plays. Would any man think he were in earnest? But hear another, Deut. vii.2. And the LORD thy God shall give the Nations before thee, then thou shalt smite them; thou shalt make no Co∣venant with them, nor take compassion on them. This is another of his places, that positively condemns Plays. And about some ten (Deut. xii.3. & xx.16. Iosh. vii.12. & xi.12. Iudg. ii.2. Num∣bers
xxxii.52. Psal. xvi.4. Ierem. x.2.) more he hath of like scantling; and come no narer to touch Plays, o Players, then these do. But these are out of the Old Testament: no doubt, he hath better out of the New hear therefore some of them too. Acts xvi.20. But that we write unto them, that they abstain from filthiness of Idols, and Fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood. And i not this still worse, and worse? Yet hear another, Rom. xii.2. And fashion not your selves like unto the world; but be ye changed by the renewing of your mindes, that ye may prove what is the good will of God: and about some twenty places more of like pregnancie against Plays. Would any man think he were well in his Wits, to alledge these places as spoken against Plays? But what should he do? he must either take these, or none; that we may justly say, The Devil certainly owed him a Shame, that put into his head, to take upon him the handling of this Ar∣gument; and it is indeed, as a most learn'd man, and most reverend Divine of our
Time writes, that this man, and such s e, make the Scripture speak what hey please; deriving strange Positions, nd Pradoxes thence; when they, and thir Bibles are alone in corners. But it is lain enough to see his crafty dealing; or he Quotes indeed these places, but e cites not one of them: for he well knew, if he had brought them to the Bar as witnsses against Plays, they must have stood mute; for not one of them could have spoken a word in disparage∣ment of Plays. But you may hear him crying out, that he alledgeth these places, but as others have alledged them before; and have we not heard Cicero long since crying out, that no Opinion is so absurd, which hath n some Philosopher for a Patron? But he hath consent, as though there were not as well Fratres in Errore, as Fratres in Mal. But he hath consent of Times, as though the stream of Invectives set once a running, upon just cause, may not continue running a long time after the Cause removed? And that which reach∣eth
to them all, as though places o Scripture may not by way of Allusion, and Exaggeration, be applied to many purposes; to which yet, by way of di∣rect Argumentation, they cannot be ap∣plied? Well, he hath now done with Scripture, but he had done better, if he had never begun: for is it not a shame, he should make them a stale, and bring them in for witnesses, when they have nothing to say; or rather indeed should suborn them to become false witnesses; and make them say that they never in∣tended? But though you take his Bible from him, yet he hath other very strong Re∣cords, that are able of themselves to carry it. (Fol. 570.) he hath fifty four Councels, whereof every one hath divers Canons, all to be discharged in the very faces of Plays, and cannot choose, but shiver them all in pieces. No doubt, the Engines are strong; but doth he not miss-take the Mark? for, if we mark it, we shall finde them not levelled at our kinde of Plays, but at Pagan Idola∣trous
Plays, (wherein, as Balsamon saith, here were Maledicta, & Blasphemiae, be∣ides many Superstitions) and addressed chiefly to restraint of: them upon Sun∣days, for the time; (so the sixty fourth Canon of the Council of Carthage) In Churches, for the place; (so Concilium Tre∣cense) to Church-men, for the Persons; (so the five and twentieth Canon of the Apostles) But here he would take upon him to be an Interpreter by himself; and (Fol. 647.) make us believe; that, though the Canon speak onely of Church-men; yet the equity of the Canon reacheth to all other men. But what saith the old In∣terpreter Balsamon? By forbiding them to Church-men, it shews, they allowed them to Lay-men. By forbidding them in Churches, it shews, they allowed them in Convenient places. By forbidding them on Sundaies, it shews, they allowed them on Working-daies: and so he hath made a fair hand with himself: Charg∣ed Canons, to be all Discharged, and shot in his own face But is this a wise, or a wise man's Argument? Plays were for∣bidden
by Councils heretofore; therfore they ought to be forbidden by the Church now? For how many things have been decreed by Councils, which now are clean left off, and abrogated? Did not the Council of Antisiodore decree it unlawfull to give New-years Gifts at Christmas? Yet who sees it not now an Anual custome; and without offence? Did not the same Council decree it un∣lawfull to deck houses with Lawrel, or green Boughs? Yet who sees it not now an usual fashion, and counted a Decency? Did not the Synod in Trullo decree it unlawfull for Gossips at a Christening to marry together ever after? Yet what Marriages now more lawfull, more fre∣quent? Did not the same Council in Trullo decree all eating of Blood to be unlawfull, and subject to Excommu∣nication? Yet who eats it not now fa∣miliarly, and without scandal? Infinite the like. For indeed the Constitutions of the Church have ever had regard to the time: and the time to the circum∣stances of occasion; which not being
nown, no man can Judg of the great tness of Decrees, as they might be en; and yet of the great unfitness of he same Decrees, if they should be ow. And therefore, though this man eem to produce Councels, yet, in truth, e produceth them not, he delivers the ords as a Parrat, that pronounceth the yllables, but not as a man, that under∣tands the meaning; and not to deliver hem in their full sense, is in true sense, ot to deliver them at all; as Cicero saith, The shall a man be said to say the same hing, when he saith it in the same sens, and with the same intent. But how can this man do this, when he knows not the intent, nor the circumstances of it? or, if he do, yet he dissembles it, and will not know it, which is a worse ignorance, then the other. And if we should allow him the levelling of his Canons, as he pretends, though we are not willing to lay any taint upon such reverend Assem∣blies, yet this we may be bold to say, that oftentimes Major pars meliorem vicit; and that sometimes one Paphntius
hath been more worth, then all th Council besides. And (Fol. 668.) as for his Squadro of seventy one Fathers, and his one hun∣dred and fifty other Writers, whom he brags to have gotten on his side, though it make a great shew, yet it is no great matter, if we consider he hath been fifteen hundred years in getting them; and especially, if we consider, that all those, whom he cannot get on his side, we may justly challenge to be on our side, and will make a greater troop, then his can make an army. But, lest it should be thought that all these Trumpets, which he pretends to be for him, be so for him, that they be against us, let us a little hearken to their sounding, whether it hath been always upon a true Alarm, or no; for if it have not, we may justly ex∣cept against them, and bar their voices from our Scrutiny. Some therefore of his Trumpets, and those of the best, and ancientest, are such as sound onely at Pagan Plays, whereas our Plays are no more like
hem, then Helene the Mother of Con∣antine was like Helene the Wife of enelaus; and are as different from hem, as we our selves are differing from agans: and of this, both Tertullian, and t. Cyprian, (the two most earnest of all he Fathers against Plays) may be wit∣esses; and indeed witnesses instar omni∣m: and whereupon do they ground heir condemnation of Plays? Do they not both onely upon Idolatry? Hear Tertullian first, If there be no Idol in the Play, that Idolatrie be not committed in it, hen I charge it not with any renouncing, which we have made in Baptism. Next ear St. Cyprian, Quod spectaculum sine Ido∣o? Quis ludus sine sacrificio? If there∣ore this man can finde in our Plays, ei∣her Idols, or Sacrifice, he may justly re∣quire our voices in crying down of Plays; but, if they be as clean from eprosies, as Naaman was from his, ha∣ving washed in Iordan, then hath this man need to be down on his knees, and to ask these Fathers, and us forgiveness, them for miss-reporting, and miss-en∣forcing
them; us, for miss-enforming and miss-perswading su. Because Miri was excluded from the Camp, when sh was leprous; shall we therefore not ad∣mit her into the Camp, when she i cleansed? Indeed, when this man be∣fore brought poor, and simple reason to prove his Cause, we could not much blame him, (for you can have no more of a man then his Talent) but now, that he wrests Scriptures, traduceth Councils, falsifieth Fathers, miss-interprets all; this most needs have some thing voluntary in it, and hath therefore no Mean in the evil, because a meaning to be evil. The onely excuse is to say; that he seems onely spere ex Indice, to have all his learning from the Tables of Books: for they be these indeed, that make so ma∣ny Mountebanks of Scholars, as swarm in the world. For, when a Theme is pro∣pounded, they run presenty to the Tables, and pick Authours pockets of what serves their turns, but never once offer to look the Authours in the face and so, not knowing the Antecedents, and
Suseqts, they neither understand what they read, nor this man, what he writes. And that you may know him to be such an one, you shall find it by this one cast of his Scholar-ship, (Fol. 546.) where he saith, That Cyprian was seconded by Tertullian, in his Opinion against Plays: as though Tertullian had lived after Cy∣prian: for that a man, who goes before, and begins an Opinion, may be seconded by him that follows, there is reason; but to say, that a man, which follows, and continues an Opinion, is seconded by him that went before, and began it, was never heard of, till he hath brought it into Being. And may we not here say, that this one Answer alone, is it self a full discharge to his whole Book, with∣out any more ado; seeing all the Ar∣guments he brings in his Book, either drawn from Reason, or from Authorities, either of Councels, or Fathers, or other Writers; they are true enough against the Plays of the Heathen; but, as Plays are now in use amongst Christians, not a
true word in any of them; and therefore where he hath entituled his Book, A Tra∣gedie of Actours; he should, if he had done right, have entituled it, A Comedie of Errours. It is true indeed, Tertullian con∣demneth Plays by places of Scripture, not onely against Idolatry, and Superstiti∣on, but against Sensuality also, and Con∣cupiscence; but doth he not by the same places condemn also second Marriages; when either a man marrieth a second wife, or a woman a second husband? yet he is condemned for applying the pla∣ces against these; and why not then as well, for applying them against Plays? for who doubts, but there is more Con∣cupiscence, and Sensuality in marrying a second wife, or husband, then in seeing a Play? There is yet another Sense, in which these holy Fathers do sometimes speak of Plays, though neither Idolatrous, nor Superstitious, as things unworthy of a Christian man: but is it not in the sense, that Christ spake of the providence for earthly things, of caring for food, and
yment; after all which, saith he, the ntils sek? And doth not Saint Paul  the same sense, though in another egree, viifie also the best works, that e can do, even the good works f the Law; accounting them to be o better then very Dung: then which e could not have used a more con∣emptible, and disgracefull Term. But who knows not, that these things are poken by way of comparison? If there∣ore that, which is comparatively spoken,  man shall take as spoken positively, shall e not shew himself a superlative false Expositour? For, setting aside Idolatry, and open Obscenity, which our Plays de∣est as much as this man, neither Ter∣ullian, nor any of the Fathers, did ever any otherwise condemn Plays, but as they condemned all artificial delights of the world, aspiring onely to that per∣fection, of which St. Iohn speaks; Love not the world, neither the things of the world: f any man love the world, the love of God is not in him. I speak this the rather for prvention; lest the man, vouchsafing
perhaps to read this Discourse, shoul think he had found here a just ground for a Reply, and vex us again with trans∣scribing of Authours, and heaping up Mountains of Authorities, like Pelion up∣on Ossa, to this purpose: which now, he may hereby know, will serve him to no purpose; for we seek to justifie Plays, as fit recreations for an honest Natural, or Moral man, but no ways to be matched with the high mysterious Contem∣plations of a Christian in Divinity. And, I doubt not, but all the Sentences of the Fathers, spoken against Plays in this kinde, will take this for an Answer; and this may be sufficient to shew, that these mens sounding is insufficient, & nihil ad Rhombum. Others there are, of whom we may be bold to say, seeing the Proverb saith it, that The greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men. Bring them to a Matter, that is not meerly Logical, and you shall finde them oftentimes to be meerly Irrational. Plays therefore being Practical, and their chief use consisting in Action;
these mens soundings will prove no other, then as the barking of Dogs at Monshine in the Water. Others there are, that sound out of zeal, but their zeal being without know∣ledge, though we may commend their zeal, yet we cannot commend their igno∣rance; and we may truly apply another Proverb to these, that With too much haste they outrun the Constable: for though they had the Alarm in their ears, yet they have lost it by the way; and have so fast fixed their eyes upon the abuse of Plays, that they never cast a look upon the right use, but are like one Gobryas, whom Plutarch speaks of, who fallen down, and strugling with Magus, bid Darius thrust his sword though through them both. But these are no fit men to make Iudges of, who ought rather to spare the guilty, then to condemn the innocent; and rather to venture a doubtfull danger, then to destroy a manifest benefit: for the hurt of Plays, though seen, may be avoided; the benefit of Plays, if not seen, cannot be obtained. And thus, by
that time these mens soundings are all supprest, there will be as few left to sound their Trumpets against Plays, as were left to cast stones at the Adulteress in the Gospel. And lastly, when the Fathers, and other devout Writers, inveigh so bitter∣ly against Plays, and apply to them such heavie styles, may they not be un∣derstood to do it , by way of Exaggeration, in majorem cautelam: that there be not so much as the appear∣ance of evil amongst Christians, as St. Paul acknowledgeth? And when Players use Speeches sometimes, and Actions, a little swerving from the strict Rules of Puri∣tie, may they not be understood to do it , by way of Illustration, in majorem suadelam; as a Player in Terence professeth his intent to be, Vt, cùm cognû∣rint, perpetuò oderint? Although there∣fore there may seem to be between them a Diametrical opposition; yet, seeing they agree in the Principal intent, that is, in Moral erudition, why may they not be brought to some indifferent reconcile∣ment,
and not continue in the deadly fewd, which this man professeth: if a Spi∣rit of Charity, which covereth faults, and not a Spirit of Malice, which maketh faults where none is, were the Vmpire be∣tween them, and had the hearing, and handling of the matter? After his Canons of fifty four Councils, and his seventy one pieces of Ordinance of the Fathers, and his hundred and fifty Musket-shot of other Writers, he comes at last (Fol. 702.) with his Squibs of fourty Heathen Writers, and Philosophers; but hath he not utterly disgraced his whole Army, by having such Scare-crows to march in the Rear? Hath he not ex∣tremely overshot himself, to bring his Cause before Heathenish Moral Writers? Whilest he kept himself in Foro Divino, and Foro Ecclesiastico, though he had not much to say against Plays, yet Plays had not much to say for themselves; (for we must not look, that the Scriptures will perswade us to go to Plays, no more then they perswade us to seek to be rich) if he had kept himself within his
compass, and gone no further then his Name professeth, to be onely Histri∣mstix, which is, in his own interpreta∣tion, a Beadle of Beggars, he might with some indifferency have been tolerated; but, having once gotten the Whip into his hand, he lays about him like a Bed∣lam-man, and strikes at every man he meets, not onely his professed Duellists, the Players, that act the Plays, but the Poets, that make them, the Spectatours, that see them, the Magistrates, that al∣low them, the Musick, that abets them, the Dancing, that graces them; nay, he spares not Sovereign Majesty, even Kings, and Princes: that we must needs now take his Whip from him, and if he shew not himself more reasonable with his Tongue, then he hath done with his Pen, even send him to Bdlam for a mad man. But for Musick, and Dancing, we will talk with him hereafter: now we will onely question him about the other, and begin with Poets, because they are the Beginners of Plays And what can he say, why he should offer to whip
hem? Were they not highly esteemed, when they lived? Are they not highly valued now they are dead? Is there any Library, where their Books are want∣ing? Is there any Learned man, that cites not their Sentences? Nay so much did Plato esteem of Sophron's Books, who was, as Quintilian saith, but Mimorum sriptor, as it were a writer of Ballads, that he was found to have them under his Pillow when he died. If then he cannot for very shame condemn Poets, how can he with any face condemn Players? As if he should allow a Song to be set in Mu∣sick, and not allow it to be sung? or an Oration to be penned, and not to be pro∣nounced? But which are the Players he would whip? If onely the bad Actours, we are contented; let him not spare them: for to be a bad Actour is no more the part of a Player, then his Book is the Work of a Scholar. But will e therefore whip Roscius too? He were best take heed what he does: for, if Roscius bring him once upon the Stage, he will make him more ridiculous by
playing the Beadle, then once he made Chaerea, (whom Cicero speaks of) by play∣ing the Bawd. Brutus, that glorious Ty∣rannicide, was not only a great favourer, and furtherer of Plays, but he writ to Cicero, that he should not intermit to see them, even presently after Caesar's death; and will he whip Cicero too, if he take him at a Play? He were best take heed what he doeth; for Cicero can write Orationes Prinnianas, as well as Phil∣ippicas, that will live to his disgrace, as long as Letters shall live in grace Pompey the Great built a Theatre on purpose for seeing of Plays; and will he whip Brutus, and Pompey too, for dissolute Magistrates in allowing of Plays? He were best take heed what he doeth; for Brutus hath a penknife died in blood, and Pompey can lead him as a Slave in his Triumphs: and it is not for a simple Gown-man to meddle with them, who were the Princes of the Gens Togata. Au∣gustus Caesar thought so modestly of Plays, that he allowed Vestal Virgins to go unto them, assigning them a place
in the Theatre, where they should sit, and see them; and will he whip Vestal Virgins too, if he catch them at a Play? He were best take heed what he doeth; for they sit there by the Emperour's al∣lowance; and Non est tutam in eum scri∣bere, qui potest proscribere, It is not safe wri∣ting against him, who hath power to banish you. If Plays then have Roscius for an Actour, Cicero for a Spectatour, Brutus for an Abettour, Pompey for a Benefactour, and Augustus for a Patron, where is he, that scandals Plays, as if they durst not shew their faces in any good Company? Let him bring me five such men in Foro Mo∣rali, in disgrace of Plays, as I have brought him five here in their commen∣dation, and I will confess the Game lost; if he cannot, let him then leave his facing, and his bragging, which do but set him aloft, to make him a Spectacle; and though with the Credulous they get him Credit, yet with the Iudicious they shew he hath no Iudgment. But where are (Fol. 702.) his fourty Heathenish Moral Writers, and Philoso∣phers
all this while? Socrates, Plato, Ari∣stotle, Cicero, Seneca, Tacitus, Pliny, Ma∣erobius, Marcus Aurelius, and the rest? Indeed he hath made them his Execu∣tours, but they refuse to administer; and we may say of them, as Augustus said of his Ajax, (a Tragedie he had written) In spongiam incubuit, they are shrunk in the wetting. And he makes me think of a Mad man of Athens, who, in all other points a sensible man, onely in this one point distracted, that, standing by the Sea-side, what Ships soever he saw pass by, he presently thought them to be his own, and would exceedingly rejoyce, as if they were his Ships, newly come home with rich prizes: so this man, in other mat∣ters, for any thing I know, well enough in his wits, seems yet to have one corner of his Brains possessed with this mad∣ness; that standing in his Library amongst his Books, what good Authours soever he sees there, he presently thinks them to be of his Opinion, against Plays, when, Good man there is no more to e found of his Opinion in any of their
ooks, then was found of this mad Athe∣ian's, goods in any of the Ships. It were edious to examine them all; if I shew ou his faults in some, you may believe e in the rest: but what need I require ou to believe me, when you may turn o the places, and take him tripping our selves. For in the places he cites ither ye shall finde nothing at all of that e speks, or nothing at all to the pur∣pose he speaks of. Try him in Seneca, because he is likeliest to be next at hand. He cites his one hundred and twenty se∣cond, and one hundred and twenty third Epistles: but in these two long Epistles there is not a word to be found con∣cerning Plays. He cites his seventh Epistle, and there indeed he speaks of Spectacula; but what? not Plays, but Earnest; of which he saith, Manè, Leo∣nibus, & Vrsis homines; meridie, spectato∣ribus suis objiciuntur. He cites his Proeme to his Controversies: there he hath a Line, or two, of the Effeminateness of young men in his Time; but concerning Plays Nè verbum quidem. He cites his twelfth
Chapter De brevitate Vitae, a place rather against himself; for Seneca, having there spoken of the Luxury of his Tim, concludeth thu; I nunc, & Mimes mult mentiri ad exprobrandam luxuriam put: plura mehercule praetereunt, quàm fingunt. He cites the one and thirtieth, and two and thirtieth Chapters of the seventh Book of his Natural Questions, wherein is not a word, that makes against Plays, onely he complains, that Plays were then in more request, then the study of Philosophy. He cites the twelfth, thir∣teenth, and fourteenth Chapters De vita beata, but in all them, of Plays, Altum silentium. And is not this man now the very mad man of Athens? I might say here, Et crimine ab uno disce omnes. But try another; take Macrobius. He cites his first, and seventh Chapters of his Sa∣turnalia: but in the first not a word of Plays; in the other he shews how won∣derfully Augustus Caesar graced certain Players of his Time, Laberius, and Publius, Pylades, and Hylas, as if he should Quote us a place on purpose, to give himself the
ie. He cites Valerius Maximus, who tells ndeed of Sempronius Sophus, that he put way his Wife for going to Plays with∣ut his privitie: but this was not for oing to Plays, but for going without is privitie, and is thus far rather for the eputation of Plays, that it was not un∣ommendable for women to go to Plays, so they went with their husbands, or in other good company, with their rivitie. And is not this man still the mad man of Athens? He cites the two and twentieth Epistle of the fourth Book of Plinie, but there a Judgment only s passed against an Agon Gymnicus, an Exercise of naked Wrestlers, and what is this to Plays? He cites Socrates, and thinks he hath wisdome on his side, be∣cause he was judged the wisest man by the Delphian Oracle: but was Socrates a fit man to condemn Plays for Obsceni∣ty; who (as Salvianus relates) would have no Man to have any Wife of his own, but all Women to be in common: and what were this, but to betray the City, whilst he defends the Suburbs?
For, where this Opinion is held lawfull what obscenity can be held unlawfull He must therefore either renounce Sal∣vianus his Testimony; and so he shall lose the blessing of one of his Fathers, or else renounce Socrates his Iudgment, and so he shall lose the Ring-leader of one of his Squadrons. He cites Plato, but he is taken from him by one, that will hold him in spight of his great words, the thrice Worthy Sidney, who proves plainly, that Plato banish'd not Players out of his Com∣mon-wealth for any of the reasons by this man alledged; but because the Poet of his Time filled the world with a wrong Opinion of the Gods, and he would not have the Youth depraved with such Opinions, whereof now, with∣out further Law, Christianity hath taken away all the hurtfull belief. And so he can have no help from any of these, but he must be the mad man of Athens still. And as for Cicero, and the learned Em∣perour, Marcus Aurelius, you shall hea them presently speak so much to hi face; that, if none else would prove him
to be the mad man of Athens, yet they themselves will be the men shall do it. But these are but single, and private men, (Fol. 713.) He can shew whole Cities, and Nations, that banished Players. And did they not Physicians also, and Philo∣sophers, and Mathematicians? Yet in ma∣ny Cities they were kindly entertained; they were Civitate donati, enfranchised, and made Free Citizens: and some of them grew to that wealth, that is incre∣dible; as it is recorded of one Aesop, an Actour of Tragedies, that he left his Son so rich, that he fed upon Pearl, and was served at his Table in Silver Dishes. But mark how this man can play the am∣bidexter. At first, it was a good Argu∣ment against Plays, because they were the Customs, and delights of Heathen People: now it must serve for an Argu∣ment against them, because they were re∣jected, and banished by Heathen People, that we need not wonder, how his Book comes to be so vast, and voluminous, seeing with the same breath he can boh kindle, and blow out the fire; the
same thing, both affimed, and denied, he can equally make to serve his turn. And where he tells us of great Prin∣ces, and mighty Emperours, both Hea∣then, and Christian, that are on his side; what should we speak of any Heathen Emperours after him, who had none before him, the great Augustus, as wor∣thy to shut up the leaves of this contenti∣ous Discourse, as he was to shut up the doors of the Temple of Peace. And him we have already shewed, by places of the man's own directing, to be direct∣ly against him: but, to leave no place of doubt, how firmly Augustus is on our side, hear what Suetonius Tranquillus saith of him, Spectaculorum & assiduit∣te, & varietate, & magnificentiâ omnes antecessit; In the daily frequenting, and in the variety, and magnificence of setting forth Plays, he exceeded all men. Indeed the man (Fol. 459.) labours much to get Augustus from us, and we cannot blame him: yet in this we blame him, that he seeks to get him from us by a trick; he would make us believe, that Augustus
id not favour Plays, or Players, because e punished two excellent Players, Hylas, nd Pilades, the one with Whipping, the ther with Banishment. As though any man thought Augustus so far to favour Plays, as to grant Players an Immunity of committing faults without controll∣ment? For he punished them not meer∣y for Playing, but for playing the Knaves, and for their Misdemeanours. And now, that I may Coronidem imponere, conclude all with one, that wore a Christi∣an Crown, and wore it so worthily, that he was called Pater Patriae; did not Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, com∣mand Plays to be used, and to be used after the old maner, with liberty to tax mens Vices, and not to spare even scoffing at himself, if he deserved it? And how can we forget a Queen of our own, (of late famous Memory) whose Virtues we shall remember longer, then our own Names: who would never have given allowance to Plays, all the time of her Reign, and been her self oftentimes a Spectatrix of them if she
had either been informed by her Con∣fessours, or had conceived in her own excellent Judgment, that they could be any either Scandal to Religion, or Disparagement to Modestie. And it may be a President of no small mo∣ment for the countenancing of Plays, that a great Prelate of our time, Emi∣nent as well for his Piety, as his Learn∣ing, yet seldome passed a Christmass, that he had not Plays Acted at his house before him. But what cares this man for either Princes, or Prelates? for what (Fol. 734.) saith he: Too many great ones (he knows not out of what respects) have vouchsafed to honour Plays, (or rather dishonour them∣selves) with their presence: and (Fol. 735.) were degenerating Princes: this is, that he stands (Fol. 719.) upon, and will maintain, that not one, either Heathen, or Christian writer of any Note, can be alledged in defence of Plays. A bold challenge, but, if there be no fallacie in his Writers of Note, a challenge, that is presently like to fall to the ground
For what thinks he of Marcus Tullius Cicero? was not he a Writer of Note? Who, though he have not written a Book on purpose, yet hath inserted in his Books many notable Sentences in behalf of Plays; which if we should collect, would make a just Volum. But what need we, when he hath one sentence, that seems as a Verdict on their side, where he saith, Comoedia est Imitatio vitae; Speculum consutudinis, & Imago Veritatis: (a short, but a full De∣scription of the Nature of Plays:) a Comedy is the resemblance of Life, the mirrour of Custome, the image of Truth: in which not a word, that speaks not, if not in their Praise, at least in their Commen∣dation. And not to stand piling up of Authours; what thinks he of one, that may be Instar multorum, the Emperour, and Philosopher, Marcus Aurelius? Was not he a Writer of Note? Who in his excellent Book of Morality (for which we are beholding to our engraffed Country-man, a learned Issue of a most Learned Parent) hath so briefly, and
yet so fully expressed the profit of Plays, that you must not think it tedious, if I set down his own words. Tragedies (saith he) were at first brought in, and Insti∣tuted, to put men in minde of worldly Chan∣ces, and Casualties, that these things in the ordinary course of Nature did so happen, that men, that were much pleased, and delighted by such accidents upon this Stage, would not by the same things, in a greater Stage, be grieved, and afflicted. After the Tragedie, the Comoedia Vetus, or antient Comedie was brought in; which had the liberty to inveigh against Personal Vices; being therefore, through this their Freedom, and li∣berty of speech, of very good use, and effect, to restrain men from pride, and arrogancie. After these, what were either the Media, or Nova Comaedia admitted for, but meerly, or for the most part, for the delight, and plea∣sure of curious, and excellent Imitation? Thus writes Marcus Aurelius: and what could he have spoken in so few words to a greater praise of Plays? And this he writes in his Book, I may say, of Mortified Moralitie; that one may be
sure, he speaks as he thinks: and can∣not be suspected to flatter Sensuality. And what will the man say now to Hea∣then Writers? What? but that, which we may say for him; that sure their Books had no Tables, and so he could not come to see what they said of Plays. Or perhaps for all his saying, he cares not much whether Heathen Writers be of his side, or no: but for Christian Writers, he is sure enough of them, to make his challenge good. But is not this Impu∣dence past all patience, when (Fol. 763.) he hath named himself two Writers of Note, Molanus, and Lindanus; the one a Divinity Professour the other a reve∣rend Bishop, who have both of them written in ustification of Plays? But you must allow him to except these, he meant so when he made his challenge. Well, be it so: what thinks he then of the Glory of our Nation, the Incompa∣rable Sir Philip Sidney? Was not he a Christian, and a Writer of Note? Who in his general Defence of Poetry hath in∣serted also a particular defence of Plays,
and you may well hear his words with∣out altering, because they are not capa∣able of bettering. Comedie (saith he) is an Imitation of the common Errours of our life, which the Comedian representeth in the most ridiculous, and scornfull sort, that may be, so as it is impossible, that any Be∣holder can be content to be such an one. Now, as, in Geometrie, the Oblique must be known as well as the Right; and, in Arithmetick, the Odd as well as the Even: so, in the Acti∣ons of our Life, who seeth not the filthy∣ness of Evil wanteth a great foil to per∣ceive the beauty of Virtue. This doth the Comedie handle so, in our private, and do∣mestical matters, that with hearing it we get as it were an Experience: what is to be looked for of a niggardly Demea, of a craf∣ty Davus, of a flattering Gnatho, of a Vain-glorious Thraso, and not onely to know what effects are to be expected, but to know, who be such, by the signifying badg given them by the Comedian. And little reason hath any man to say, that men learn the Evil, by seeing it so set out; since (as I said before) there is no man living, but by
the force truth hath in Nature no sooner seeth these men play their parts, but he wish∣eth them in Pistrinum. Although per∣chance, the sack of his own faults lie so be∣hinde his back, that he seeth not himself to dance the same measure: whereto nothing an more open his Eies, then to see his own Actions contemptibly set forth. So that, the right use of Comedie will, I think, by no body be blamed: and much less of the high, and excellent Tragedie, that open∣eth the greatest Wounds, and sheweth forth the Vlcers, that are covered with Tissue; that maketh Kings fear to be Tyrants, and Tyrants to manifest their Tyrannical hu∣mours; that, with stirring the Effects of Ad∣miration, and Commiseration, teacheth the uncertainty of this world, and upon how weak Foundations Gilden roofs are builded. It were therefore too absurd to cast out so ex∣cellent a representation of whatsoever is worthy to be learned. Thus the excellent Sidney: and what more could he have said, if he would have sought to flatter Plays? Yet there is an Exception a∣gainst him to, because (Fol. 913.) he
hath written an Arcadia, one of the Books in this man's Index Expurgatorius. But perhaps he will admit of no English Testimonies: take one then in France, and what thinks he of the Ingnious, and Learned Michael de Montaigne; was not he a Christian, and a Writer of Note? And hear what he writes in the five and twentieth Chapter of his First book of Essaies: I have ever (saith he) accused them of Impertinencie, that condemn, and disallow such kinde of Recreation, and blamed those of In-justice, that refuse good, and honest Comedians, or (as we call them) Players, to enter our good Towns, and grudg the common people such publique sports, Politick, and well-ordered Common Wealths endeavour rather carefully to unite, and as∣semble their Citizens together, as in serious Offices of Devotion; so in honest Exercises of Recreation. Common society, and loving Friend-ship is thereby cherished, and encrea∣sed: and besides, they cannot have more For∣mal, and Regular Pastimes allowed them, then such, as are Acted, and Represented in open view of all, and in the presence of the
Magistrates themselves. And, if I might  sway, I would think it reasonable, that in populous Cities there should be Theatres appointed for such Spectacles. Thus Mon∣taigne: and where is the man's challenge now, as though there were none, that either did, or durst oppose him? Cer∣tainly we may truly say; the Saying is verified of him, Scientia non habet Ini∣micum praeter Ignorantm: Verecundia non habet Inimicum praeter Impudentem. But when all is said, that can be: this is his Murus Aheneus, that he saith no more, then what Tertullian, and Saint Cyprian, and many other most Zea∣lous, and Learned men, have said be∣fore. It is true indeed, Tertullian, and Saint Cyprian, two shining Lighs in the Church of God, have both of them writ∣ten Treatises De spectaculis, concerning Shews, and Plays; and I could wish they were in English, that the world might see a strange thing to wonder at: which is, that this man saith almost nothing mate∣rial of Plays, which he hath not from them, and yet, where they write most
learnedly, he saith the same thing, and yet writes most ignorantly: where they write exceeding devoutly, he saith the same thing, and yet writes exceeding malitiously: where they shew in their writing great judgment, and discretion he saith the same thing, and yet shews nothing but Vanity, and gross simpli∣city. One would wonder how this should happen, but this is the matter: Circumstances in matters Moral enter common often times with the substance it self, or rather indeed become very parts of the substance; which these Fa∣thers have most duly observed: but this man goes away with the substance, as Sampson with the Gates of Azzah, and leaves the Circumstances all behinde him: and so, whilst he thinks he hath the substance of the matter; he hath not indeed the matter of the Substance. A few words will make it plain. Tertulli∣an lived in the time of Septimius Severus Emperour of Rome: under whom was the Fifth, or Sixth Persecution against
Christians: in the twelfth year of his Empire were proclaimed Secular Plays (so called, because they were solemni∣zed but semel in saeculo, once in an hun∣dred years) and were dedicated to the honour of some of their Heathen Gods. Tertullian (conceiving it might breed great scandal to the Christian Religion, if Christians should resort unto them: and the Heathen being apt to insult, as though Christians had no pleasures in their own Religion, but were fain to come for pleasures to them) writes a Treatise, exhorting all Christians to for∣bear these Plays; and useth indeed ma∣ny Excellent, and weighty Reasons, that these Plays were full of Idolatrie, and Superstition, and therefore they could not go to see them, but they must be∣come as Accessaries, and partakers with them in their Idolatrie: that they were full of licentious Beastliness, as where∣in men, and women were brought in, naked upon the Stage, using many Libidinous, and Immodest gestures; that themselves were now in Persecuti∣on,
fitter to mourn, then to be merry, fitter to wring their hands with compunction, then to clap their hands at a Plaudite; that they might bethink themselves of great∣er pleasures in their own Religion, their Reconcilemeut with God, their Redemption by Christ, their Hope of Heaven, and such like. Now, what man of our Mi∣nisters, if he had been in Tertullian's place would not have written of these Plays, as Tertullian did: yet what man of our Ministers, as our Plays are now, would once have offered to open his mouth a∣gainst them? They were Idolatrous; ours, meerly Moral: they, dedicated to Heathen Gods; ours, dedicated only to honest Recreation: they, full of impi∣ous, and prophane Obscenity; ours, full only of civil Mirth: they, full of cruelty, and blood; ours, friendly, and quiet, lovingly maintaining mutual so∣ciety: they, in time of persecution; ours, in time (for which we have cause to praise God) of Peace, and Iubile: they, Acted by Heathen, and amongst Heathen; ours, Acted by Christians, and
amongst Christians. And now, let the world judg, whether there be no just cause to commend this Father for wri∣ing as he did, and yet to condemn this man for writing as he doth? For he du∣ly observed all due Circumstances, but this man observes none; but is meerly a confused Lump, as if he were a man made out of the first Chaos, and were never descended from Adam, made of the Earth, when it was a distinct Ele∣ment. Although therefore he could say, that he saith nothing, but what others have said before, yet would this be no Apologie for him; seing he saith it not in the same Times, nor amongst the same Per∣sons, nor upon the same Occasions, nor with regard of any due Circumstance. And yet, this is not all; for is not his Book full of severe Censurings? of uncharitable Invectives? of far-fetch'd Applications? of opprobrious Lan∣guage? of blemishing Imputations? But, suppose it were not, Is it nothing to gather the errours of former times,
and to cast them upon the Reformation of the present time? Is it nothing to suck the Vlcers of Diseased persons, and then spit them all in the face of his Countrey? Is it nothing to obtrude his own mistakings for truths; and that to the scandal of the whole nation? Is it no∣thing to perswade the world, that (Fol. 1, & 568.) we profess to be Christians, but are none, as maintaining Heathenish, and Idolatrous Customes? Is it nothing (Fol. 149.) to sow seeds of Suspicion, and Iealousies in the peoples hearts, as if all were out of order, both in Church, and Common-wealth? Is it nothing for a pri∣vate man, to take upon him to be Censor morum, in matters both Civil, and Eccle∣siastical? If these things should be suf∣fered, every Korah, and Dathan would be controlling of Moses, and Aaron; every Iack Straw would be giving aws to his Prince; every Dreamer would be an Enthusiast, as if another Montanus were come amongst us: but I forbear to aggravate faults already censured, Quas meruit poenas, jam dedit illud opus.
Onely add this as a Corollary to all, that hath been said, If Plays be neither guilty of Idolatry, nor obscenity, then is his Book guilty both of malice, and slander; but they are neither Idolatrous in any sort, as all men will acknowledge, nor Obscene in the sort he would make them, as no man can deny; and therefore what is his Book but a very unmannerly surmise for the maner, and a very filthy Im∣postume for the matter. And now, that you have heard this Negative Argument to absolve Plays; you may be pleased to hear one Affirmative Argument, to make them absolute, and it shall be cut after his own fashion, if that will please him. That exercise is most worthy to be frequented, in which both profit, and pleasure may be had together: but such are Plays, therefore most worthy to be frequented. The Major is proved thus, Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit tile dulci. The Minor thus, Et prodesse volunt, & delectare Poëtae. There remains onely a short Para∣phrase
upon this Argument, and then Dixi. For should we not wrong Plays, if we did onely defend them, and did not com∣mend them? To leave them non Lauda∣tos, were to leave them Illaudatos: and they deserve not onely an Apologie, but an Encomium. As therefore it is said of Images, that they are the Books of such as cannot read; so we may say of Plays, that they are the Scholes of such as can∣not studie, and teach that with ease and delight, which in other courses can∣not be attained without much pain, and labour. And let not the Name abuse you, as if you were at play, when you are at a Play; for though the Name be but a Iest, yet is there in good earnest much earnest good to be learned from thence by due observation. Certainly, the very scope of Plays in Christian times, hath ever been addressed to the magnifying of Virtue; or to make notorious the foulness, and deformity of Vice; wherein indeed they have an ability, then any other course far more enforcing. For where∣as
the common man is drawn to love Virtue, not so much by the love of Vir∣tue, as by the love of Happiness, which grows out of Virtue; and to hate Vice, not so much for the hate of Vice, as for the hate of Miseries, that flow out of Vice: it must necessarily follow, that what doth most manifest such happi∣ness, or such miseries, must needs, to Virtue, or from Vice, be most enforcing; but this effect is far better wrought by Plays, the Representation of life, then by the life it self: seeing life, being casual, and tedious, doth neither always answer to desert; nor yet is eaie to be observed, where the Play no sooner shews you the Vice, but it inflicts the punishment; no sooner the Virtue, but it bestoweth the reward. Besides, where Laws suppress faults, by making the faulty, punishable: Plays reclaim the faulty, by making the faults, if small, ridiculous if great, odious. Indeed, the Passages of the world are excellent Glasses, if they be had within reasonable distance, which, as it is the purpose of Histories to do by Re∣lation;
so it is the purpose of Plays to do it by Representation, as Cicero saith, Haec consicta arbitror à Poetis esse, ut ef∣fictos mores nostros, expressámque imaginem nostrae quotidianae vitae videamus: Plays, I conceive, were devised by Poets for this purpose; that in them, as in a Glass, we might see the maners, and very Image of our daily life. Plays indeed are Glasses of the Passages, and Actions of the world: and it is unhappy for Glasses, when they fall into the hands of Ill-fa∣voured faces; for they may chance to lay the Ill favouredness of their faces upon the Glasses: and just so it is with this man; for he lays all the blame of the world's bad actions upon Plays, where he ought rather to lay all the blame of Plays bad actions upon the world: for, if the world were good, Plays would be good; but, if the world be bad, Plays are but the Glasses, they do but their kinde to represent it as it is; and therefore no fault of theirs, if they be bad too. But he cannot abide to hear talk of Representations, he finds no difference be∣tween
real committing a Sin, and repre∣senting it. But have we not even in Scri∣pture some Examples, (which we may apply with reverence) that things which cannot without indecency be done, may yet without indecency be represented? Can there be a more beastly, a more shamefull act, then to shew one's self stark naked before all people? yet the Prophet Esay did so; and did so three years together: and though in it self it were a shamefull act yet in him it was not so; because he did it for representa∣tion. Can there be a more foul, or foolish act, then for a man purposely to marry a Whoor, and to have children of Fornications? yet the Prophet Hosea did so: and, though in it self it were a most foolish act; yet in him it was not so, because he did it for representation. And may we not then draw from hence not only an Apologie for Plays, by reason of their lawfulness, but an Encomium al∣so, by reason of their forcibleness? And for this cause the great Schole-man, Tho∣mas Aquinas, saith, and saith it in this
very case. Poeticae Fabulae idcirco inventae sunt, ut mortales adducerent ad virtutis ad∣eptionem, ac Vitii fugam, ad quoe simplices homines meliùs repraesentationibus, quàm ra∣tionibus inducuntur. Plays were invented to this purpose, that men might the better be drawn to embrace Virtue, and to flie Vice; to which they are much better drawn by re∣presentations, then by reasons. But he would be thought very devout; he stands upon it, that we have other, far better, more Crystalline Glasses then Plays, even Scriptures, the Word of God, and Preachers, the Ministers of the Word of God, &c. As though, because the Sun is a glorious Light of God's making, we might not use a Torch of our own making, when the Sun is down? The Scriptures indeed are Divine Rules, God's Word is a Lanthrn to our feet, and a Light to our paths, and Preachers are sublime Schole-masters, who sit in Moses Chair to instruct us; and I could wish with this man, that Prayers, & Sermons were more frequented, and Plays less; but yet not with this man's minde, as though every
one, that goes to a Play, were damned: but because Plays are but of Humane in∣vention, and may miscarry in that they intend; Sermons are of Divine institution, and have a promise of Grace annexed; and of which it is said, That Faith comes by hearing. We see Plays but to refresh our Spirits; but we hear Sermons to sanctifie our Spirits: we see Plays but as a bodily recreation; but we hear Ser∣mons as a spiritual edification; which yet I speak not to make comparison, but to shew there is no comparison to be made. They are non eodm nominanda die. But yet they are no lasses; he can never make a Glass of a Pulpit, as we may do of a Stage; that may teach us to know our selves, but it cannot shew us to see our selves: this is onely done by repre∣sentation, which is the proper Office, and work of Plays. If therefore we could make true use of Plays, as Plays do their parts to offer it unto us, we should not onely in them see our faults, but by them learn to amend our faults; and though we attribute not unto them a
power of working spiritual Grace, which is proper to the Pulpit; yet we may at∣tribute to them a means of working Moral Virtue, which may be common to the Stage. Here he falls to exclaiming, (for he is excellent at loud exclamati∣ons) [Fol. 733.] Oh, let it never be heard of in Gath, nor published in Askelon; [Fol. 101.] for who can be so rossly stupid, to think to learn any Grace, or Virtue from a Play-house? Who ever sought for Pearls in Dirt; or for a Crystal Spring in filthy Mire? with many such, no less imperti∣nent, then Pathetical Interrogatories; which he would use, if he were but speaking of a Goose's going bare-foot. Indeed he bears himself very hgh; as if he were the onely Atlas to bear up the Firmament of Virtue; and that we are all children of the Giants, that fight against God, and all goodness: but we let him know, (if at least he will learn) that we honour Virtue as much sincerely, as he would seem to do, and we seek to ad∣vance Virtue by more ways, then he di∣rects how to do. We acknowledge
Prayer the most sovereign means; then reading of Scriptures; then hearing of Sermons; then conferring with learned Ministers; then conversing with Religious Persons: but yet we exclude not infe∣riour helps; for seeing all the means we can use is little enough, why should we neglect any means, though never so mean? And indeed, as Seneca said of Epi∣curus, Malè audit, infamis est, sed imme∣ritó: He hath an ill report, and is infa∣mous, yet undeservedly: (for though he made Pleasure the Summum Bonum, yet he meant a Pleasure flowing out of Vir∣tue) so we may say of Plays; Malè au∣diunt, infames sunt, sed immeritó: They have an ill Name, and are infamous, but un∣deservedly: for though they be in shew but Pleasures, yet they bring a profit with them, and conduce to Virtue. And seeing Heathen men might have, and oftentimes had in great eminency Mo∣ral Virtues, to what may we impute it more, then to their seeing of Plays? For, though Philosophy gave them the Rules, and Histories told them the Tales,
yet Plays onely shewed them the Ex∣amples, which gave the life to both the other. For Rules of Philosophy are but dead Lessons, and Tales of Histories make but light impression; the Viva vox, and Action of the Player, is as a Leson in Musick, played unto us by the Master; and as a Seal upon both Sense, and Understanding, the Print whereof is reciprocally carried from one to the other with infinite repercussions. Rules of Philosophy, though they be good Di∣rections, yet they want one to lead us by the hand; they bring us onely to Video meliora, probóque, and then leave us to Deteriora sequor: where Plays do not onely shew us the Right, but lead us in it; not onely tell us the way, but tread it out before us. Reading of Histories, though it be pleasing to the Understand∣ing, yet it is wearisome to the Sense; neither is the Understanding it self so much wrought upon by that we read, as by what we hear, and see; and this makes Plays to be of far more use, and profit then Histories; because in them
we have absolutely the help of one Sense more, and the help of the other Sense with far more force, and greater con∣tentment. And as for the Understand∣ing, it is not onely sooner, and better In∣formed, but is Dilated also, and made both more capable, and more capacious, by seeing of Plays, then by reading of Histories: seeing in these the Phantasie, receiving it onely from the dead Book, and doing it all, it self alone, can be but faint in delivering it to the Under∣standing: where, in Plays, the Seeing prompts the Hearing, and the Hearing prompts the Seeing, and they both joyn together, to present it to the Fantasie, which, receiving it with vigour, with vi∣gour transmits it to the Understanding. I might quickly here grow tedious, if I should follow the Matter, and not ob∣serve Form, but seeing too long Walk, though never so pleasant, may be weari∣some, I will make a stand here; onely shewing, what an Hill is behinde to be a∣scended, if, after private profis, I should proceed to speak of publick Be∣nefits:
proving how necessary it is, that the multitude, who live by their labours should have Recreations allowed them to sweeten their pains: and that of all Recreations, hitherto invented, there is not any, for many Considerations, so worthy the embracing, as this of Plays: it is a general delight, general to Sex, to Age, to Quality; it is an innocent delight, innocent in Deed, and in Occasion; it is a cheap delight, it ventures nothing, and spends but little; it is a sociable delight, many do at once enjoy it, and all equal∣ly; it is a ready delight, without wast of time, or trouble of waiting; it is a refresh∣ing delight, it becalms the Spirits, where most other delights make the Pulses beat; it is a delight both to Sense, and Reason: and, of the Senses, more then one more then one way do at once partake it: and as for the Reasons, we may truly say of Plays, that they enlarge it by Di∣scourses, quicken it by Conceits, and direct it by Examples. These are some reasons of many, to shew there is just cause, why Plays should, and may delight us:
but to shew, that they do indeed de∣light us, what can be alledged better then that, which Cicero saith, Quid ego dicam populum, ac vulgus imperitorum ludis magnoper delectari? quanquam id huic causae satis est; sunt enim populi, ac multi∣tudinis Comitia: What should I speak of the delight, which common people take in Plays? of which we need seek no further reason then this, that they are the Marts of the people. And lest you should think it a base delight, as delighting onely the base multitude: hear what he saith further, and saith it not onely as a Wit∣ness, but as a Party, making it a delight even of States-men: Et nosmetipsi, qui ab delectatione omni negotiis impedimur; & in ipsa occupatione delectationes alias multas habere possumus, ludis tamen oblectamur, & ducimur: Even we our selves, who by reason of imployments are hindred from taking of any delight, and in the imployments them∣selves may have many other delights; yet are we also affected, and taken with the delight of Plays. And what will you say, if this man himself, who hath spoken so re∣proachfully
all this while of Plays, and would make us believe (Fol. 724.) that none but lewd people are delighted with them, even he also can be proved to delight in Plays? You would think it strange: yet hear what Cicero saith to this point too, and that upon his cre∣dit: Delectant homines, mihi crede, ludi, non eos solùm, qui fatentur, sed illos etiam, qui dissimulant: Plays, believe me, delight all; not them onely that confess it, but even them that would deny it, and do dissemble it. And who doubts, but that we shall finde this man amongst the Oratour's Dissemblers? But to make an End with him, that never makes an end; seeing Scriptures in no kinde, antient Fathers, and Coun∣cils, not in our kinde, have ever con∣demned Plays; seeing no Reasons of any force can be brought against them, and many may be alledged for them; seeing they rather deserve Commendati∣on, then need Defence, I hope to finde none either in Iudgment so weak, or so strong in Passion, as to set his hand
o this man's pen, or to lend his voyce o this man's throat, in making Outcrys against Plays; but that he will be con∣ent, as to see the wide world drawn n a Map, and a large History in an Abridgment; so to see, and favour Plays, which are nothing, but Epitomes of the World's behaviour. FINIS.
