C1958 R6128 13501536 99771
THE USE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE Gravely and Methodically DISCOURSED: By WILLIAM CHAPPEL Bishop of Corke, sometimes Fellow of Christs Colledg In CAMBRIDGE. A Work of singular benefit to Divines, and all men, to establish themselves, and others in the Perfection, Perspicuity, and Efficacie of Gods Word, against Atheists, Heathens, Romanists, Enthusiasts, and all other Ʋnbeleevers and Misbeleevers, &c. TO WHICH Is prefixed a Preface, by a friend to the Author, as an Introduction to the TREATISE. London, Printed by E.C. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Pauls Churchyard, 1653.
The Preface. THE following Treatise thus undressed, was put into mine hands neare Twenty yeares since (by the very Reverend, Learned, and grave Author) to be privately used by mee, as by some other of his friends, of whom he was not ashamed to be seen thus: and to whose ca∣pacity he yeelded so to lisp. So exemplarily modest, and yet so dis∣creetly exact hee was, that hee liked not to be much in sight of a censorious world, though he merited as little ill from any, as he meant, which is no other than love and all Christian offices. If notwithstanding hee pleased to bee publick, hee would come forth (never in
phantasticall affectation, but) in substan∣tiall comelinesse. And thus should these bones of his have appeared, if hee had pleased to fulfill them; and happily more, or fewer. Yet as they are, they may be known to whom they once belonged: And very many will call him gladly to minde, though I name him not. Shortly, though the excellent Author intended it (perhaps) never to see the wide world, the Atheisticall wicked world, the world that scorns the Theme of his Notes, the H. Scripture, and by scattering words [that men doe, or may make it an Idol] exposeth it, and God withall, to the vulgar, hate, contempt, and worse: Yet it were, I suppofe, some injustice to the dead, great injurie to the living, and a spice of Sacriledge (besides ungratefulnesse) in me, to steal, in a sort, by concealing to my self this thing, but thus much devoted to the Church, or bestowed upon Church-men. I have therefore (with Gods approba∣tion, and motion, I hope) endeavoured to do the Author and posterity this right, after my small ability, as not to deprive them of the great fruit they may, with me,
and some others, reap from this labour; nor Him of the publick improvement of this his Talent, as it is. And I have the rather been so rude with my once very reverend friend, lest some other should (for I hear that his papers are enquired for abroad, to benefit the publick, as they are) put this scorn upon me, that any man should be readyer than my self, to bear blame for so deserving a friend. One thing onely seemed to remain of the Text, the ground of the Discourse, though nothing of the Work designed by the Author; who in declaring the every good use of holy Scripture according to Art and Method, in usefull Notes, ob∣tained the hither-end of that, whereof the further end is, Gods glory (whose Word he so commends) joyned with our neighbour-mans salvation. That of the Text which seemed to me presupposed by the Author, and not dis∣cussed, I thought was left for some other, and (since none other will) it seems for mee. The H. Apostle in the former part of the Chapter 2 Tim. 3. describeth the im∣piety of the last times, propounding him∣self,
his doctrine, manners, and sufferings to Timothy, and all that would live godly in Christs Jesus, for an example; in the 14 v. exhorts Timothy to continue in the things which he had learned, and was assured of; and that from his knowledge both of the person from whom hee learned them, viz. the Apostle, a man inspired by God, and of the holy Scriptures which are commended v. 15. from their ability or power of making a man wise unto salvation through faith in Christ. Which his knowledge of the Scriptures, is illu∣strated from its duration in partie to Timothy's age. From a child (saith the Apostle) thou hast knowne the holy Scriptures. In these two last verses 16, & 17. hee ascends from the hypothesis, or speciall, to the thesis, or generall, commending the H. Scrip. From their Author God, who gave them by inspiration: and from their pro∣fit or usefulnesse in the rest of the text, the 16 v. (which is the matter of the follow∣ing Treatise, as is the former of this Pre∣face) which profit is illustrated from a certain end thereof, 17. v. that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished to all good works.
But ere I proceed it is requisite that it be shewed what is their cohaerence and use in the Body of Divinity, the Truth, 1 Tim 6 3 Tit. 1.1. or Doctrine, according to godlinesse. And thus it seems to mee to stand. That God our Lord decreed from all aeternity to exert and communicate his goodnesse abroad, and in the fulnesse of time according thereunto hee performed his determination. Quaecunque voluit fecit, Psa. 135.6. Whatsoever the LORD would, he did, in the Heavens, in the Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep places, saith the Psalmist. That most single, pure, incorporeall act the LORD resolved to make a Creature like (not equall) to himselfe. Therefore the first Creature he is beleeved to have made, was after his own image, spirituall, to wit, the Angels; and so last, the soul of man; which at first hee breathed into our Grandfather Adam, and still goes on, working hitherto, by a con-naturall act, to increate, or con∣generate into bodies, receptacles prepared for it. God and man propagate mankinde, who are one part the Image of God, that is, in the soul, the other part the body, in the Image of Man.
To give to Adam and to us his race only being without activity or power of work∣ing, had been to small purpose; therefore he made us active creatures, and that with an higher extent of activity then the Horse and Mule who have no understanding, even Reason and Will: though man being in honour understood not (as hee might,) but became (through his fault) like the beast that perisheth. Now this Reason and Will had been in vain, if it had no end to aim at, nei∣ther God, his Creatours glory, nor its own happinesse. Power of choise had been rather a burthen, yea, a curse, than an ease or blessing, had there been no rule, no good means leading to this end, which means men ought to choose, refusing the contrary: Therefore God prescribed a Religion, or manner of Service, whereby hee would bee beleeved and worshipped. This Service or Religion had been in vain, unlesse it had been either written, and imprinted in our hearts, as it was in Adams, or else written and printed in vi∣sible, and legible characters to be read of every man, as (the Lord be blessed) it is in our Bibles, propagated and continued by good hands, through the power and
goodnesse of God, from Father to Son, from Predecessors to Posterity, to our time, and wee trust will be to the worlds end. More fully and distinctly, take it, if you please, thus. Wee have received from God a reasona∣ble soul, after his image, and capable of him. An understanding fit to reflect upon our Creatour, and, in our measure, behold his glorious Nature, a naturall and inbred desire of enjoying God, and restlesse (if not some way besotted till it come unto him. Now if God (as Heathen Philosophers could observe) have, even in inferiour Creatures put no power, ability, or na∣turall desire in vain; how then shall wee imagine that in man, the abridgment or brief module of the world, the lively Image of God, for whose Creation there was, as it were, a Councell called in Heaven, Come let us make Man; Gen. 1. God should in vain place a nature not perfectible without Him? But all this have we received in vain, if God shall not reveal himself, and the things of God unto us.
For it is impossible God should bee known or enjoyed by any, but to whom he shall manifest himself, (who, as he is the beatificall object, so is hee the sole Author of the acts of seeing and injoying himself, and all other in order thereun∣to) or any thing be effectually beleeved concerning him, whereof himself, who onely knowes himselfe, hath not testi∣fied. And howsoever by the Creation of the World, God hath somewhat manifested himself; yet could that never have satisfied mans soul in innocency, much lesse now after the Fall; since when, unlesse God had graciously given Revelation, wee were prone to abuse that of him, which shineth in his works, as may appear by the Hea∣thens foolish conceits of God, and more in the Treatise following. Moreover, alas! we could never have thought of Redemption by Christ, nor of Grace to be had, and obedience to bee yeelded here, nor of Glory to be inherited hereafter, no not by the help of all the Angels, had not God himself, who only knows his own will, revealed them. Of which you will find solid discourse in the Book following.
And indeed it did not bseem the na∣ture of God, nor befit our condition, that we should be the devisers of worship for God: His wisdome knows best what worship may beseem us to doe unto him, and how to devise and prescribe the same. It beseems his Justice to be the Rule of that Worship, and his Will the enjoyner of it: seeing the very formality, or being of worship consists in conformity or suta∣blenesse to the Justice and Will of the party worshipped, and his goodnesse alone is to be the rewarder of it. Good reason hee should reveal this, who is to punish omission, and reward obedience. And though we were bound by the act of Creation, much more of Redemption, to worship him; yet did it not benefit us to pay this debt, till he should pre∣scribe wherein. No though we could have devised fit worship: Much lesse since the Fall, whereby we are so infatuated, and besotted, and the worship now required challenging such an height of knowledge, as Men and Angels never could have aspi∣red unto. Finally, a man could never have peace of conscience in any duty hee performed, except his Maker and Redeemers good
pleasure had been revealed unto him, and unless all the H. Scripture had been given by inspiration from God; the Author gi∣ving it the Authority it justly chal∣lengeth. The Holy Gods words penned by his in∣spired Apostle, or Man of God, here, are [] , Scripture] I am resolved not to dispute, whether only the sense of Gods Word were inspired, or the words also. I never yet met with those arguments of the former assertion, which I conceive, a man of not so strong and excellent parts as the Learned Defenders thereof, might not reasonably solve, and yet acknow∣ledge the divers readings consonantly enough. My sense is (with reverence to greater judgment, and readinesse to submit to better reasons than yet I see, if it shall be thought wholesome and seasonable to produce them) that the word [Scripture] in this place is wrapped in two Tropes or Figurative expressions: First, by a
Synecdoche, of the generall for the more speciall, Scripture is put for holy Scrip∣ture,  as is very plain in the verse next be∣fore this text. Again, Scripture in La∣tine, writing in English, is either used by a Metonymie of the subject for the ad∣junct; so we call the Works or Books of men, their Writings, Scriptures; but I think, rather  than : Or else it's used in the proper and most usuall sense, for the act of scribing, penning, writing. I see not cause enough to doubt of this, That both Holy writ it self, that is, the holy things written in the Canonical Scripture of the Bible; as also the scrip∣tion, penning, or writing of those holy Books at first, are both of them given by inspiration of God. , All] But of one kind, all (as I shall touch ere we part) all that Scripture, the holy Scripture in the verse next fore∣going mentioned. , The whole Scripture of this kinde, Eph. 2 21. 1 Joh. 2.2. of the Pro∣phets, Evangelists, Apostles, and the like to them, is Canonicall, not passively, as if it could not be a Rule or Canon, un∣lesse
men would authorise it for one, but actively, because it gives, or is a Rule to man, of right, even to him that indeed will not be ruled by it. And it seems, there is some  excellency in the singular number  implyed, as if it excelled Plato, Aristotle, and all mens writings. The Scripture of scriptures is the holy Scrip∣ture, and that because , given by inspiration of God] Breathed or inspired by God] this is the word. But what's the thing? The Divine Writer to the Hebrews af∣firms, That God spake unto our Fathers by the Prophets , Heb. 1.1. at sundry times, and in divers manners, whereof this was one. Speaking is taken largely sometimes for all manner of wayes of Revelation. Sometimes hee spake to their outward senses, as to their sight and hearing in particular. To their Hearing, either by a voyce created for that purpose, This is my beloved Son, Mat. 3.17. in whom I am well-pleased:
Or by a voyce framed by the ministery of an Angell in an assumed body. Gen. 19.1.15. &c. Thus the Angels spake to Lot to remove out of So∣dom. Or lastly, properly by a voyce uttered by the mouth of his Son, , and of holy men of God who spake as they were carried or acted by the holy Ghost. He spake (in a borrowed large sense) likewise to their eyes, either by appariti∣ons, or especially by the written Word of God: and this manifestation was part∣ly called Vision, and perhaps from hence the Prophets of old, were called Videntes Seers. God hath also revealed himself to men by speaking to them inwardly, sometimes to their phansie by dreams, 33 Job 14.5, Numb. 12.6, 8. 6. verses. Lastly, after a manner unspeakable, God hath manifested himself to the minds of men, by dictating his Mind, and Will, and Word, to men chosen by him for that end. And this way of Revelation is called Inspiration. Thus all holy Scripture is given by in∣spiration of God, as we beleeve. And that upon such arguments as are incomparably beyond all, brought in for
evidence to beget belief of any other Reli∣gion; and such as to which nothing can be opposed to make them not to bee very credible. Which alone, if true, is a suffi∣cient act on the proposers part to beget (not knowledge which requires scientifi∣call, and the more artificiall arguments, but) such a Faith as the Motives or argu∣ments thereof, are fit to perswade, those arguments coming in their severall proper powers. This is a work which divers have had in hand, and brought to good passe, and it had succeeded better towards its high end but that the envious man will not endure any thing shall passe for an argu∣ment here, but one, the testimony of man, and that of none of the best friends of holy Scripture. Had not some of our own Divines decryed the Works of those other learned men of ours, which they cannot assent to, because their Interest sayes they shall not, and herein assisted the adversary brought on his knees in the conflict, Gods word had found a freer pas∣sage, and more belief upon the same, and better grounds. The arguments made use of in this matter, are not all of one nature, some of
them more directly tending to win be∣lief, that these are the writings derived to us by hands of very great note from the holy pen men thereof, & the purest times: Others to gain and beget, with the holy Spirits efficacy in and with them such a Faith, as (Interests, self-love, Gal. 5.6. Heb. 11.33 Rom. 13.8. &c. Gal. 5.14. Acts 15.9.26.18. and such other prejudices laid aside) will work by love, will, in acceptable measure, work righteousness, keep the Commande∣ments. Lastly, purifying, and sanctifying the heart (as holy Scripture speakes) and overcoming the world is accompanied with Justification and Salvation, 1 Joh. 5.4. Rom. 5.1. Mar. 16.16. Heb. 11.1, 33. so ob∣taining the promises. Between which two considerations there is wide distance, which, well considered, will solve the Grand Difficulties in these Cases ob∣jected. An argument that will pass among many Christians, is the holy Scriptures Testimony concerning it self, or properly Gods Testimony in holy Scripture con∣cerning it. L. 3. de Gubernat Dei. All sayings besides (saith Salvian) need arguments and witnesses to confirm them, Dei autem sermo ipse sibi testis est, quia necesse est, quicquid incorrupta veri∣tas loquitur, incorruptum sit testimonium. Men
may, 1 Iohn 5.9. God cannot lye. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. Our Saviour speaking perhaps by concession, according to the vulgar opinion, perhaps otherwise, saith, If I bear witness of my self, Iohn 5.31. (haply, [and have no other witness] is understood) my witness is not true, it will not pass, or let it not. But speaking according to their Law, and directly, he saies, Yet if I judge, my judgment is true; for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. It is also written in your Law, that the testimonie of two men is true, (i.e. must pass) I am one that beareth witness of my self, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me. That God the Father, and J. Christ the Son, and holy Ghost, all bear record to holy Scripture, hath been substantially proved by others; and the same in effect lately, Dr. Ham. Reason. of Christ. Rel. by a very pious, diligent, and learned Writer of our own, who doth all things like himselfe. This proof, me thinks, cannot reason∣ably be refused by the Church of Rome. For why should not the Scripture be be∣lieved testifying it self to be Gods Word, at least as well as they who (the greatest
part of the world denying it) affirme themselves the only true Catholick and Apostolick Church of Christ, and only people of God? I desire the Reader to peruse these Texts and compare them, and I shall adde no more to this head. Rom. 9. v. 17. Exod 9. v. 16. Gen. 12. v. 3. Gal. 3. v. 8. Rom. 11. v. 32. Gal. 3. v. 22. Exod. 17. v. 5. Jer. 1. v. 2, 4, 7, 9, 11. &c. Acts 28. v. 25. &c. Mat. 11. v. 4. 2 Cor. 13. v. 3. Eph. 2. v. 17. 2 Pet. 1. v. 20, 21. & 3. v. 15, 16. Heb. 1. v. 1, 2. 2 Tim. 3. v. 15. &c. 4. v. 6, 7. But if the Atheist will (as his irreligion ingages him) not accept this for a proof, since he cannot without manifest contra∣diction to himselse, both denie that God is, and affirm that he speaks: Yet are we not destitute of such proofs, as some apart, but more all together, will either convince him, or prove him a fool. These tend either to beget humane or divine belief, according as they are. The former sort spring from the wit∣ness of man, which though it cannot be∣get divine belief, because nor Faith, nor
any other effect can rise higher than the cause whence it proceeds, and in which it is founded; yet may it by Gods Order and Dispensation prepare a man to divine belief. And without doubt the Testimony of the Church was so evident authority to S. Austin, no fool, that he must upon the credit of so many honest, knowing, wel∣meaning men, beleeve this (or be fit to be hissed for an incredulous fool) that those Scriptures on which they preached, and which they professed, were the Ori∣ginals, or else Copies of the holy Scrip∣ture, or Writings of Inspired men, most of them bearing their proper Authors name in their Front. Of which their Testimony they were able and ready to give exact account out of their Archives and Registers: so their predecessors upward till the Apostles. There are some witnesses to part, (as Jews and Turks our professed enemies, and therefore willingly testifying no∣thing for us) and to all of it many thou∣sands Saints and Martyrs, no atrabiliary male-contents, but advisedly resolved, sober Christians, who have sealed to the divine Truth in hand, and the conse∣quents
thereof otherwise, or with their dearest bloud: and some of them so un∣interessed in the world, and wholly de∣voted to Gods glory and the peoples good; Exod. 32.32. Rom. 9.3. that they could therefore have been content to have lost their lives at least, yea and their souls. This argument indeed from humane Testimony, can but prove that Jesus our Saviour, the holy Apostles, &c. spake or wrote these words; as some of them knew, the rest beleeved. The other prove the Divinity thereof, and are together fit and sufficient to be∣get divine belief, and they are such as with divine authority have influence into the Heart of Man, and do build our Faith more immediately on Gods Truth, into which only, the best Faith must be analy∣sed; no principle, to him that confesseth this to be truly affirmed of God (that he is a Spirit infinite in all perfection, and therefore in truth) being in it self more evident than this conclusion is, (it is therefore surely true, because God saies it.) Now Divine arguments are of two sorts: Such as have power publick of convincing all men; or such an one as
hath strength to convince and assure pri∣vately, and that savingly, such as resist it not. Those of the former sort, are either such outward actions of God about the holy Scriptures, as do strongly argue that they came from him, as his signs, miracles and apparitions wonderfull, either significa∣tive of his presence, or representative of his person. The strange light, the thick darkness, a private and publick, loud and still voice, in a humane shape by his An∣gels, if not by his own Son as a Praeludium to his humanitie, which after he took in the truth of Incarnation. These strange things either were wrought by God (and then holy Scripture is his Word, who is so just and holy, that he would never have used them to confirm a doctrine false, or none of his) or else not wrought by him, and then 'tis the greatest miracle of all, that the world without miracles should believe a Doctrine so contrary to self-love and worldly interest, that the wisest Heathens, as they were short in the degree of teaching and urging vertue, so they could in no kind once think of the proper Tenents and Institutes of Christi∣anity.
Or moreover, God hath done other deeds to prove the H. Scriptures to be gi∣ven of himself. These are either con∣cerning it, or by it. Concerning it: He hath kept it in all necessary particulars, both sense and words unaltered, unmixt; so as his Ju∣stice, Wisdome, and Power, so as his just Titles of Law-giver, King, Lord, Father, Just, mercifull Judge, require of him, be∣sides our necessity. And to doubt hereof, were so far forth to doubt whether we should love and serve him, or indeed be∣lieve that he is God, that is, infinite in all perfections. He hath kept it against so many great inroads and invasions of the Devil and his instruments, a wicked per∣secuting world, and false Brethren, Tra∣ditores Traitors against it, in such alter∣ation of times, and vicissitude of affairs; though it crossed the corrupt reason and affection of people soaked in Idolatry and sinfull lusts, living at ease; whereas this Book, and Doctrine thereof was attended with the Cross, and persecution. By it God hath done strange deeds; overthrown the kingdome of Satan so long and strongly founded in the world,
standing on the two main pillars of De∣vils Oracles, and Daemons Idolatrie; and established his own in the hearts of many millions, so deeply, as that they dare die for't; in so short a time, that though Gods Word, without the efficacie of the holy Ghost, be a cross to the mind, and flesh, or sensuall appetite of man; and the Ministers few, inferiour, infirm, (yet of undaunted courage) opposed by Ad∣versaries subtile, powerfull, in authority, of contrary practice and profession; and withall exasperated with calamities which they imputed to Christians and to the change of Religion: yet the work of their Conversion, and the fall of Satan was as quick as lightning. Now those arguments proving the holy Scriptures divinity which God set or implanted therein, are considered ei∣ther Simply, or Comparatively one part with another. In the former are to be considered the kind of the Doctrine, and the phrase of H. Writ. The Doctrine is propounded to man
in Precepts, wherein not only the mat∣ter and substance of duties, in themselves holy, are injoyned (which argues the holinesse of that God who commands them for our good) and are confidently prescribed to be done by man, though crosse to his flesh and bloud, (which ar∣gues Gods omnipotence) but also the manner of their performance is required to be out of conscience, and love to God and our neighbours, without hypocrisie or impurity of the heart, which is known to God alone. Hence appears in the scrip∣ture (as the former attributes of holiness and omnipotence, so) omniscience also. It comes to man moreover in promises and threats, which are so many Motives to man to observe the precepts to doe them, and can be fulfilled or executed on∣ly by God, and available to move no man but the conscience of such as acknowledg the precepts to come from God. The au∣thority of mans bare commandement depends upon the proveableness of its justice and equity: but the authority of Gods commands depends upon their power from God. Neither is it only propounded to man,
but also otherwise exerciseth it self about him, as in declaring and tendring se∣verity to the wicked, mercie to the Just, and the fit temperature of them both in Christ; so that although God dearly love his Creature, yet he will not be reconci∣led without a Mediatour, and him be∣sprinkled with his owne life-bloud, though he be his Son: whom indeed, having suffered, he will raise up, place at his right hand, make a King and Saviour to the sons of men, Author of Salvation to all that obey him. Yea though God would have all men to be saved; yet he applyes powerfully the efficacie of his obedience and suffer∣ings to Beleevers and poenitent Sinners only, and to such as by their obedience and sufferings are, or are ready to be con∣formed to the Image of his Son: And unto them he imparts a greater measure of glory than ever Adam in his best integrity was capable of, viz. to sit on Christs own Throne with him, as Members with the Head. By the phrase of Scripture, I mean not the concinnitic, and elegancie, and bravery of the flourish of the style, (though there want not some who dare with the Song
of Moses, the Psalm of David, Deut. 33. Psal. 104. and the be∣ginning of the Prophet Isaiah, challenge the loftiest wing of Homer to soar a pitch, and the Prince of Latine Poets to sing a strain) But the attributes of perfection given it, which God its Author claims to himself, as to be the searcher of the heart, and trier of the reins, Almighty in a sort, &c. which it acts in a strange manner, whether you consider the persons to whom Kings as well as Peasants, nay the Prince of darkness, and the whole world without exemption of any; or the man∣ner of denouncing and commanding in expressions of Majesty (which in any but God, were insufferable, being to all men) I am the LORD thy God, no other Preface. I the LORD have spoken it, this is the Con∣clusion. Thou shalt, thou shalt not, upon pain of evils here and in hell, or in hope of the promises of the life that now is, and (in heaven) that is to come. Here's the style. The Harmonie of one part with ano∣ther, is found by comparing the Do∣ctrines uttered and penned in such di∣stance of times and places by so many Writers: Of whom in the old Testament Isaiah was sawen to pieces by Manassch,
Jeremy, Zech. 1.1. Mat. 23.35 Ezekiel, Amos, slain, and Zechariah the son of Berachiah between the Temple and the Altar; and divers writers of the New Testament, and all this for the only profession of that truth which they spake and wrote, and would not recant. Moreover, by comparing the Figures wth their Antitype, the shadow with its body. How fit a body was our Jesus to their Isaac, Heb. 11.19. whom Abraham received from the dead in a figure; to Sampson, to the Pro∣phet Jonah, and his other shadows! Adde hereto predictions or prophesies with their conform or answerable event, even in things most contingent, and often to mans reason, next impossible, and that long before. Is. 41.21, 22, 23.44.7. Here is the finger of God without doubt. Which of the Heathen Gods ever yet answered the Prophet Isaiah's challenge? Compare onely Gen. 15. v. 13, 14. with Exod. 12. v. 40, 41. and wonder. The antiquity of H. Scripture above the writings of the Heathen is not no∣thing; But I pass it, and end this Dis∣quisition with that argument, which serves not so to convince other men, as savingly to ascertaine some few, such namely as resist not, but receive it. This
is the Testimonie of the holy Ghost wit∣nessing this truth [that holy Scripture is given by inspiration of God] which he doth by inlightning the mind to conceive it; by inlivening and strengthening the heart with abilities to perform the commands therein contained, in expectation of the pretious promises, which the same holy Spirit convinceth the mind to be faithfull and true, and converts the will to count them good, worthy of all acceptation, and by his most powerfull grace (God only knows how) makes us (all worldly self∣love laid aside) relye upon the Lord Je∣sus only for righteousness and life; in the promises whereof the said holy Spirit confirms and establisheth us, Eph. 4.36.1.13, 14. sealing us to the day of Redemption, with the holy Spirit of promise, the earnest of our in∣inheritance , till Godfetch out, by compleat Redemption, his sealed; and they injoy the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory. Note here, that we speak of the Spirit of Christ (no other Spirit) that takes of Christs Gospel, Ioh. 16.14. Gal. 1.8.9 Ioh. 14 26, (no other Gospel) and thus causeth the praise of his glory, or glorifies him. Brings Christs sayings to their remembrance, and not the Devils or
Mans Enthusiasms, or conceits of Infalli∣bility. This holy Spirit of God, we may, must follow, not fearing any giddyness in a round objected to this part. For neither is it all one (as I have said) to beleeve such a Chapter and verse to be Canonical; and to beleeve it when it appears to be so: Nor do we offer to prove to them by this argument, that holy Scripture is Gods Word; only we say, Gods Spirit proves it unto us. Of this infinite favour, giving holy Scripture by inspiration, Gods goodness to weak forgetfull man, and his Ju∣stice, that he might judge the world righ∣teously, and his wisdome, who knew what was best for us; were the proper sources or Originals; 2 Pet. 1.19. That we might have a more sure word of Prophecie, (be∣cause written) then that which came by unwritten Tradition, ready to be for∣gotten, even that word of God to become Scripture, or that holy Doctrine, written by holy men of God in the Church, which was before the Church was, by, and to which the Church and every live Member thereof was called from the beginning. Psal. 93.5. That these sure testimonies which were
written afore-time might be for our Lear∣ning, even a Lamp to our Feet, Psal. 119.105. Rom. 15.4. 2 Pet. 1.19. and a Light to our Paths, a light shining in a dark place (ma∣king obscurities plain) that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: For our example, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11. for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come. That it might be the rule of that worship required of us by God. It is written, Mat. 4.10. thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. That we may learn, 1 Cor. 4.6. 1 Pet. 4.11. not to thinke above that which is written, and if we speak, to speak as the Oracles of God. Ioh. 5.39. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Acts 17.11. Acts 5.29. Ioh. 10.4, 8, 16. Mat. 7.15. That we may try the Spirits whether they bt of God or no, and that by searching the Scriptures (as the noble Bereans did.) That we may learne to heare and obey Christs voice, not the voice of a stranger, to obey God more then men, to know the true Shepheard from such as come in Sheeps cloathing, and are ravenous Wolves. In a word, 2 Tim. 3.15. for all those ends and uses in the verse before the text, That a man may be wise to salvation through faith in Christ, answerable to that of Saint John, Ioh. 20.31. These things are witten that ye might believe, and believing, might have life
through his name. In the verse following the Text, 2 Tim. 3.17. that the Man of God may be perfect throughly furnished unto all good works: V. 16. and in the Text, All H. Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, (or confutation) for correction, and for instruction in righteous∣ness; which ends comprehensive of all other, are the Subject of the Discourse following. Now what cause have we poore men (justly deprived of original righteousnes living as without God in the world, not having him in all our thoughts) to bless Gods Holy Name, who gave us this New Light, the last Revelation of his whole Counsell, his entire last Will and Testa∣ment, Rev. 22.18, 19. to which nothing is to be added, from which nothing to be diminished, un∣der the highest plagues and forfeitures, expressed in most terrible words by the dreadfull God who gave them by inspira∣tion, even the holy Scripture! Which therefore is . A word faithfull in it self, worthily beleeved, worthy of all ac∣ceptation. So truth it self, that it only is fit to be standard and rule of all saving truth, a perfect Canon, a never failing Touch-stone to try all spirits.
And can receive no authority or strength from man, as if the Churches definition made it a  or Rule, who found it as it is (for we hope they added or substra∣cted nothing) But from God it hath to be a rule to man in order to his happiness, from whom it hath to be. Let the 20. Article of our English Con∣fession, to which we formerly subscri∣bed, speak its mind. The Church hath power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in Controversies of Faith; And yet it is not lawfull for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods word written; neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although the Church be a wit∣nesse and keeper of holy Writ, yet (as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so) besides the same ought it not to inforce any thing to be believed for ne∣cessity of salvation. The 21. Article sayes thus, Generall Councels mvy erre, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unlesse it may be declared that they be ta∣ken out of holy Scripture. To these we heartily subscribed as to points about the chief foundation of Re∣formation in Religion: The contrary assertion being the strongest Hold and Castle of the errors we forsook. Who, after all this, dare dispense with any standing and fundamentall Canon in H. Writ? Who dare say, I man am above Gods word? when none but the Author can give authority of this sort, as is some∣what too clear to need proving. And for my part, I dare not ascribe such , authentickness and infal∣libilitie to the judgment of any men, be he preacher or private person (though ne∣ver so wise or honest) as to give away the H. Scriptures prerogative, which it could receive from none but Gods In∣spiration. If I should believe any thing in Religi∣on to be true or false (whoever spoke it) upon a mans bare word, without express Scripture, or good consequence rightly deducible therefrom; I should have cause to think, I had exchanged my Nature of
Man for that of Beasts, who follow the Herd, not alwayes qua eundum, which way they should, but qua itur, after the gang: or else good Religion for bad, to believe in man in stead of God: or else my reason with a Fool, to trust another mans eyes, rather than mine own, in things I can well see. Never was there mere man alwaies free from error, God and his Word only are so true, as infallible. But all men are liers (so far as that possibly they may erre, and doe) saith the man inspired by God; and that very sentence was given by in∣spiration. It remains that I humbly desire my coun∣try-men to doe themselves a favour or two. One is, to be as willing every word of Scripture should be true and good, as men are, that the stories thereof (which little concern them) be true; and the promises thereof (which please them well) should be good. Or I make it mine hearty re∣quest, that they be wel-pleased to believe the same of the precepts and threatnings of Divine Inspiration in holy Scripture,
that they doe of the promises. i.e. That the thing in every of them propounded is good, therefore to be consented to and imbraced, as well as the proposition that carries it, is true, and to be firmly assen∣ted unto. This were a complete be∣leeving. And all cause in the world, why I should prevail. For God is , The only wise (sayes the Apostle) whose understanding is infinite. Therefore knows perfectly what he saies. Psa. 147.5. Is. 49.7. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18. He is faith∣full, and the Holy One of Israel  who cannot lie, not possibly. Besides that we highly honour God the Author in believing his Word, thereby giving him the glory of his veracitie, the contrary whereof makes, i.e. counts him a lyar, or behaves it self, as if it did. We shall reap the sweet comfort thereof in the evill day, amidst all assaults, and sing, I know whom I trusted, God in his Word; God that cannot lie, who is faithfull and righteous in all his wayes and Chasiadh good, kinde, holy in all his works, and in none more than this worke, his holy Word. And for my part, if I were certain any implicit Faith would serve my turne in
all points, I durst not venture on the Col∣liers round Faith, Quid credis? Fidem Ec∣clesiae. Quid Ecclesia? Meam Fidem. But would dare to trust my soul upon the H. Scripture, and believe most firmly that to be highly true and good, which God the Author had inspired as the sense of it, whatever that sense should fall out to be. To this H. Scripture we must submit our selves as to the high Law of the King of Kings, and Lord of all, even Lords. In so doing, God will reap the honour, we the benefit. There is one only request to make to Scholars, Divines, who have their senses exercised in the Scriptures. It is, that some one or more would ga∣ther up the fragments, the jods and tittles of this inspired Word, that nothing be lost, and compile them in a Work to∣gether. Plainly, Very many have taken great good pains in Commentaries, Glosses, Annotations. And of this last sort (dis∣paraging none) Erasmus, Beza, and Grotius, men of vast parts, all. These, here and there, have gathered up the Adverbs, Con∣junctions and Prepositions, &c. and hap∣pily
oftentimes rendred them to their proper sense. But have laid their gather∣ings so far off, in such distant repositories, that it's farre more labour to put them thence into a basket, then from H. Scrip∣ture where they are, and whereof they are part. That I may give an instance of my meaning, I put these few Quaeries, and they are no more, neither would I be mi∣staken, as if I at all intended to dog∣matise. I. Quaere, about the particles , quia, &c. ideo, &c. Nam, sed, &c. because, therefore, &c. for, &c. Quaere, Whether the word [because] in 1 Sam. 2.25. [They (Elies sons) hearkened not to the voice of their Father because the LORD would slay them] might not as Grammatically, and Theologically, be rendered (in stead of that causall) by this illative conjunction [therefore?] As Theo∣logically, because as well (at least) clea∣ring God from all aspersion of causing or authorising mans sin, and the destruction thereby intentionally caused; that the
blame of their destruction may be laid upon themselves, where it ought. Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou hast destroyed thy self. I know the ordinary reading may have good sense, but is it so good? And as Grammatically, since the He∣brew Conjunction  there used, is so rendred by the same our Translatours, I believed, therefore have I spoken: Psal. 116.10. and so ought to be, as is evident from Saint Paul, who citing these words, following the Lxx, renders them by , 2 Cor. 4.13. which  is translated ideo in the Text, and propter quod by Arias Montanus in the Margine of his Interlinear Translation of the place in the Greek. By Castellio and his adversary Beza, ideo: By Tremelius in his Latine out of the Syriac, and before him, by Erasmus, propter quod, and so before them all by the vulgar Latine, and by Erasmus in his Annotations on the place, quaprop∣ter, and propterea quod. And if it be better read in that place of Sam. [therefore] than [because] may it not also be so in that place, Jer. 4. v. 18. This is thy wickedness because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart, which beares a hard construction; when by reading therefore, therefore, all is clear, and runnes
currently after the immediately foregoing words in the same verse, Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; This is thy wickedness, therefore, &c. And indeed Buxt. Lex voce.  in both these texts tran∣slates the Conjunction igitur, ideo, idcirco. But especially, doth not this give much light and clearness to that difficult pas∣sage in the Parable, dangerously, by some misinterpreted? Her sinnes which are many, are forgiven [for] she loved much. Seing  is by the LXX rendered , Luk. 7.47. which our last English renders [that] the Latine quod, Num. 24.1. and the same  Grammari∣ans and Translators yeild by quia, quoniam &c. And since the Greek in that famous place of Saint Luke, named, hath () which answers no more to  than  doth; why should we rather translate it quoniam, with the vulgar and others, or quia, or nam, &c. with others, than ideo, idcirco, igitur, therefore, as I have shewed the particle  to bedivers times used, and perhaps as often illatively as causally? Then all is clear in the Parable. To whom most is forgiven he will love most (as St. Peter answered with our B. Saviours ap∣probation, ver. 42, 43.) Our Saviours ap∣plication or assumption followes, and it
must be answerable to the sense of the proposition he approved, v. 47. Her sins which are many are forgiven, then he concludes, therefore she loved much. Perhaps therefore this word were bet∣ter exchanged in the Translation. The learned Grotius on the 12. c. of St. Iohn v. 39. (where our Translatours read [because] though v. 49. [for] in stead of ) notes thus, Malim hoc  per [nam] vertere, quam per [quia,] so Trem. renders it, v. 49. Now consider, Why should not that [for] so rendred, 1 Thes. 2.16. be rather read [therefore] at least, so interpreted? For the first abovenamed reason, To clear God from suspicion, that any effect of his wrath (in this life) should cause them to fill up their sins alwayes. When the sense would be presently clear if the words were read thus. They (the Jewes) are forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, (to the end) that they might be saved, to fill (or hereby filling) up their sins always, therefore the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. Though the word rendered as it is, may bear a good sense elsewhere, but I know not whether there or no. The word here rendered [for] by which I would understand [therefore] is [,
autem, sed, vero, but] yet by the vulgar 'tis there translated [enim] so by Beza. Now that  signifies also the same with enim, viz. Nam, Buxtorf. in the word will tell you and no more. Thus  is used Psal. 1. v. 4. rendred by Arias Mon∣tanus, quinimo; by Iunius and Tremelius, sed; the proper signification of  in the Text to the Thessalonians now be∣fore us. That  in other places signifies [there∣fore] is plain; that it is translated [sed and but] is as plain. May it not then, at least signifie (if it be not to be translated) [therefore] in this place? All this while I am not afraid of [be∣cause] but like it very well where it should be, and know that it is a rationall con∣junction, and a ratio or argument may be from other Topicks beside the cause, yea, from the effects; even then when we may handsomely say [because] yea even from such as are inartificiall, and utterly extraneous to the thing testified. I will but adde on this head, what St. Chrysostome on Iohn 12.37, 38, 39. saith of this []  [] (here again ) , is not causal, he saith, , but eventuall, or illative. ,
&c. For not because Isaias said, did they therefore not believe; but , Be∣cause it would be that they beleeved not, therefore Isaias said so. He addes a reason, which is to shew , that holy Scripture cannot lie, and that things are not one way spoken, and come to passe another; &c. They would come to pass, so that the Prophet foresaw them, , because, or being the men were incurable,  [] [they could not] stands for  []  [they would not.] Soon after, . Where is more to this purpose. This the father cals , the Scriptures Idi∣om. By which he saith, is understood no more, but that the Prophet of God here∣in could not lie, &c. If they should have beleeved, the Prophet would have truly said so.
II. Quaere, about the signs shall, will, let, &c. do, do ye, ye do,  that, lest, &c. Quaere, whether in that famous place Psal. 95. v. 7, 8. repeated in the Epistle to the Hebrews c. 3. v. 7, 8. & c. 4. it should be read, See 2 Tim. 3.12. Iam. 4.4. To day if ye will, or rather, ye shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts? Since it is not  by [] in the Indicative Mood, the first future; but  by [n] in the first Aorist of the Subjunctive; si [audieritis] not [audietis.] May not the Aorist  as well referre to time past as to the future, as audiveritis is in both Tenses, If ye have, or if ye shall? that the sense may be, If at any time or whensoever, or if To day, by Gods pro∣vidence, ye have heard, or shall hear, Gods voice: then 'tis your part to beware of hardening your hearts, that which is chiefly intended being not-hardening, and not the hearing: whereas if we read [wil] it will hardly be, or Divinity, or sense, perhaps. May we harden our hearts, if we will not hear? Consider it. Note moreover, that [audio] if taken for [obedio] as 1 Sam. 15.22, governe a Dative
case, as dicto audiens; but here the Latine hath it vocem audieritis in the places na∣med. See Vulg. Jun. & Trem. Beza, Arias Montanus, &c. not to name that  here governs (as a verb of sense) the Ge∣nitive . Now then, why should not, by like reason, [shall] be translated [will,] and contrariwise [wil] be exchanged for [shal] or [let] and others notes of commanding for [shall] as [shall,] or [shalt] for a word of command? yea and for [will] some∣times? and so their conjugates? Especi∣ally if, for want of such interchanging, severall places of holy Scriptures be in danger to be misinterpreted to the favou∣ring of some great error, at least by obvi∣ous consequence. And quaere, whether it be not likely that such mistakes, are sometimes, and in some, not so much in voluntary, as wil∣full and upon design, to force and writhe holy Scripture to patronise some preju∣dice of a beloved opinion? In the 13. c. of S. Mat. v. 14. consider, Mat. 13.14. whe∣ther it were not as wel translated, By hea∣ring ye wil as ye shal hear, and wil not (ha∣ving will to evill) rather then shall not understand; and seeing ye will or shall see,
and rather will not, then shall not perceive. Especially because in the next verse this is said to happen to them by their evill self-will: Ver. 15. For, &c. and their eyes they have closed, lest they should (that will be the success thereof that they can∣not, perhaps, loving their lust they will not) see, hear, understand, be converted and healed. Quaere also, If it be not an Hebraism re∣ciprocum pro passivo, noting no more, but indefinitely, their eies are closed. This place is taken out of Isa. 6.9, 10. where that, which is in S. Matthew expres∣sed in the future tense, as prediction of sin, punishment, or both, by [shall] or [will] is Imperative and Minatorie. Hear ye indeed, but understand not, see ye indeed but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see, hear, under∣stand, convert and be healed. The reason of which seems to be clear from the manner of the Hebrews using the first Future Tense, with its signs shall or will for the Imperative Mood, with its signes, [let it] do, be, &c. for a good reason; Because the thing commanded is future, or to be done. Which is likewise con∣firmed
from a very real argument, even by all the Imperative forms in the Decalogue expressed in the Future, Thou shalt, Thou shalt; Thou shalt not, Thou shalt not, &c. i. do, do, do not, do not, do not, &c. This way will make short work con∣cerning those cursing forms, Iudg. 5.23. Curse ye Me∣roz, if it signifie no more than Meroz will or shall be cursed: and Psalm. 109. from the 6. to the 21. v. inclusively; which per∣haps may be wondered they should be curses from the mouth of that holy Man of God who (as often elsewhere, so) just before in the 4. & 5. v. said he loved them, prayed for them, did them good, and again loved them. This will hamstring that kind of unchristian Oratorie of rash cursing, if either that reason that hath been now used, or St. Aug. be heard, De Serm. Domini in Monte. say∣ing, Propheta per imprecationem, quid esset futurum cecinit, non optantis voto, sed spiritu providentis: These things the Prophet spake in cursing forms, not that he wished they should be so, but foresaw by the Spi∣rit of Prophecy that they would be so. Where you may read much more to this purpose. Let, let, let, &c. by this way be∣ing nothing else then shall or will, shall, shall, &c.
To the same sense the Author of Quest. and Answers, Resp. ad Quaest. 125 under the name of Justin the Martyr, where he saith, S. Paul (in say∣ing to the High-priest, God shall smite thee, &c. and to Alexander the Copper∣smith, 2 Tim. 4.14. who had done him much evill, The Lord reward him according to his works) did neither curse them, nor re∣vile them, his words were neither  nor  but predicti∣ons foretelling what would and should befall them, beseeming the man, the Apo∣stle, who revenged not himself, but gave place to wrath. The like may be said of some praying formes. To name only that of the Apostle for Onesiphorus supposed to be then dead: (for he salntes his familie not him, contrary to his use in such cases) which is urged by some, 2 Tim. 1.18. of no mean note, for the law∣fullness of praying for the dead: The Lord grant to him (in the Imperative sense) that he may finde mercy of the Lord in that day! Why may not it (up∣on the former grounds) be rendred, at least expounded, The Lord will grant him to finde mercy then? One thing more, It would be observed
that some words, as , &c. used in Holy Scripture, may indif∣ferently (if nothing else hinder) be ren∣dred Indicatively, or Imperatively, Eph 5 5. Do ye, or ye do, For this ye know, v. 8. , Walk ye, or ye walk. or know ye, either sëitis or scitote, v. 8. , Walk ye, or ye walk. v. 15. Marc. 4.12. Luc 8.10. Ioh. 12.39, 40. Rom. 11.8 if ye knew it not before know it now. And see ye, or ye see how ye walk circumspectly, videtis or videtote, both. By this little, those pla∣ces parallel (to that first named in this Quaere out of S. Matthew) may be under∣stood perhaps. In the three first of which places [, ut] is used to signifie (as some think) not the intendment, but suc∣cesse or event, Mat. 13.14, 15. Acts 28.26, 27. Ioh. 5.34, 40. as they say appears by that place aforenamed, and by another parallel to that, and to all those last na∣med. Though in S. John c. 5. v. 34.  seem to signifie, contrariwise, the intend∣ment, without (or not the) successe, as they say, seems to be apparent, from v. 40. But ye will not come, &c. III. Quaere, about , &, etiam, and, even, &c. Quaere, Whether in the Prophet, Zech 99. of those words, [Thy King cometh, &c. riding
upon an Asse, [and] upon a colt the foal of an Asse] (cited verbatim in the Gospel) it be not plainly determined by S. Mat. 21.5. Ioh. 12.15. John, That he rode but on one, viz. an Asses colt, not on an Asse besides? Also whether it be well read, Gal. 1.4. Col. 1.3. 1 Thes. 2.3. God and our Father, Thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. God and our Father again; and in other places. Or whether [even] were not better pla∣ced there, 2 Cor. 1.3. in stead of [and] as our Tran∣slatours have sometimes done, God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Se∣ing  notes indifferently & and etiam, and & even; and since if it be read and, it must be interpreted [even] lest we commit absurditie in placing our Saviour (sup∣posing his riding to be but once) on two beasts together: and erre dangerously in Divinitie (as some have done) by ima∣gining God to be another from (and not the same with the) Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our Father there spo∣ken of. I will adde but one place, where  by us rendred [both] seems rather to be, of right, translated [and]. , Rom. 11.33. &c. O the depth of the riches, both of the
wisdome, and, &c. where Theodoret first gave me advice to read [and] in stead of [both;] and quaere, whether it be not the Apostles intent, as may seem to appear from the two next verses, which are an , a particular rehearsall in words interpretative of the former. For who hath known the minde of the Lord? O the depth of his knowledge! Or who hath been his Counsellour? O the depth of his wisedome! Or who hath first gi∣ven to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? O the depth of his riches! Of this minde are Origen and S Chryso∣stome, that I know, of the Ancient, Illyricus. Bucer. Aretius. Corn. a Lap. and many learned Neoteries of our own and the Roman Confession. IV. Quaere, about the Praeposition [For] signified by , &c. Ad, ob, propter, pro, in. To, the sign of the Dative case. To, the sign of the In∣finitive Mood, in the active and passive sense, &c. Quaere, 2 Tim. 3.16. Whether the particle  (four times used in the text) the Theme or this Work, and alwayes translated by us [For]
do not expresse the Latine Translations which constantly use [ad] in the place. And if so, whether these particles [to and for]  &  had not need to be diligent∣ly expressed in the severall Texts where they are found: seeing it is manifest that in many places they are not used to signi∣fie the same? In what sense doth the Psalmist, twice in one verse, use the word [For] doth it not in effect signifie the same that [against] by reason of its noting the Dative case, and the Infinitive signification? The place is [For] that is a conjunction signifying [because] Without cause (saith David) have they hid for me their net in a pit, Psal. 35.7. which without cause they have digged for my soul. As men dig pits, and lay snares there, for beasts falling into those pits [for] to take them, [for to] &c. for their flesh, for their skins; out of their coveting appetite to have them, out of their angry appetite to rid the Country of them; So Saul &c. behaved themselves toward David, as if it were [for my hurt.] And in a sense agreeing to (though differing also from) this, the Preposition  signifies pro & contra, (though pro be [for] or [in stead of] there) in the word
Antichrist, as some Divines contend. And sometimes [for] ones good, is [against] his harm. It would be well in∣quired how the shepherd is [for] the sheep and they for him. The greater [for] the lesse, and back again. What  an∣swers to in the notion when applyed to praying for Peter, for others, &c. The truth is, this one word [For] this little preposition, if not soundly stated, will (as it hath in the Socinian Contro∣versie) so far trouble our Divinitie, as a great deal of sense, and multitude of rea∣sons, besides good words wil not appease, if it be not timely undertaken (by some able pen) to be prosecuted where very able ones of our own have left it, being prevented by death or otherwise. Men skilful in this knowledg, know wel what I say, and I doubt not, prove it too true. It were well worth good labour to finde out the true importance of the par∣ticle  twice repeated (in two severall clauses, and to severall purposes) in one Text, and twice translated [for.] Who was delivered [for] our offences, and was raised [for] our justification. Rom 4.25 May not [, for] in the former clause signifie the impulsive cause, in the latter
the finall? Yes (saith Crellius, granting that here to Grotius readily, Crell. con∣tra Grotale satisfactio∣ne Resp. ad cap. 1. par∣tic. 117. which elsewhere he is more difficult in yeilding.) In priori loci membro causam impulsivā, in posteriori fina∣lem significare vocem propter; quod quo minus fiat nos non pugnamus. Ill agreeing to his Master Socin. who affirms that instead of pro, prop∣ter, Socin. prae∣lect. cap. 20 reponi potuisse, and presently, dictio autem pro significare causam tantum modo finalem. Much more he hath to that purpose; of which the very learned Vossius (in his smart defence of the no lesse learned Grotius against Ravenspergerus, J. Ger. Vos. Resp. ad judicium Raveal per∣gori cap. 16. Leg eun∣dem cap. 17.18. of whom Grotius had deserved better then to be so tradu∣ced by him) takes a particular account. It is wonderful to observe what a coil is kept by Crellius (as by Socinus before him) about , and the rest of the prepo∣sitions controverted, how loath they are to find, Crell. ubi sup. Rlp. ad cap. 9. par∣tio. 2. in  commutation, or surro∣gation of one in anothers stead, and yet will not deny but it may be so. Here is good work for Criticks that have leiture to exercise their senses and their pens. How  signifies the instrumental cause or manner of doing, Mr. Medes Apost. of the latter times, part. 2. see our learned Country man Mc. Mede and others; how near the sense of it is to  with a
genitive case. Consider also whether  applyed to our Saviour in the Genitive case may not be rendred propter, aswell as per. And how  is the same with  in sundrie Scriptures. Large is the field, great wil be the crop, of much profit, though seeming little, if this work by some able and diligent hand be undertaken and performed. There are besides these, sundry little particles, as , & many more, the interpretation where∣of hath strangely exercised great men in other Controversies of very weighty Di∣vinitie; I could heartily wish the proper importance of them, and such other, were impartially stated in their severall places where they are found, such vast weight being laid by men on these little props. Reader, I have thus far deteined you. Pardon my boldnesse, I have done so per∣haps for thee in like cases. The good Lord teach us all what we should do; and enable us to do what he teacheth, making us throughly furnished, by his holy Word, to every good work, and wise unto salvation is the heartie prayer of Thy servant in the Lord PHILO-BIBLIUS.
OF THE HOLY SCRIPTƲRE: OR SERMON-NOTES ON II TIMOTHIE III. 16. Being the Theologicall Ground of another Treatise of the Author extant under the title of METHO∣DUS CONCIONANDI, Contai∣ning a learned and brief exemplifi∣cation of the same Method. Translated (a great part) out of his La∣tine Copie.
OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE. 2 Tim. III. 16. . All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for cor∣rection, for instruction in righteousnesse. AXIOM. I. . Holy Scripture is profitable for doctrine. Explic. [] is in holy Scripture used two wayes: For The DOCTRINE wherewith the minde is informed. Marc. 7.7. teaching for doctrines (by way of object) the commandments of men
The INFORMATION of the minde with doctrine. Or it notes the Action of the Agent, or Reception in the patient. 1 Tim. 4.13. Give attendance to ex∣hortation, to doctrine. It is taken here for the act, properly; because, 1. Scripture is said to be profitable to it. Now it is not profitable for it self, it self being the Doctrine (by way of object) but profitable for information of the mind. 2. The other words here used are ta∣ken actively. Yet Synecdochically it is here taken for information of the minde with holy doctrine. [Profitable] a thing is said to be Either from the Manner, and that Immediately & ultimate∣ly or lastly, so the chief good. Mediately in order to the chief nearer, or, further off.
or Degree, either Absolutely necessarie, or So as without it, all may be well with us. Abso∣lutely neces∣sarie is The chief good, And All that, without which the chief cannot be attained, neces∣sarie by necessitie of the end. Necessarie by this necessitie of the end, or without which the end cannot be at all atttained, may be conceived thus, either That Although without it the chief good cannot be had, yet the said chiefe good may be missed, though it be there: of this sort is knowledge of God. With it, the chief good cannot but be attained, or cannot be missed.
And this latter admits of a two-fold consideration, Of Adaequate, or even commensuration to the chief good: or, Such a commensuration or fitnesse, as whereby, by concomitance with other, it brings in the chief. Such is Faith. Now as a subordinate in respect of the chief, behaves it self For Manner Mediately, or Immediately. Degree Absolutely, so as either The subordinate being denied or absent, so is the chief; but not being present, so is the chief.
The subordinate being present, so is the chief or, Not either Adaequately, or, By concom∣mitance. So may one subordinate be distingui∣shed in respect of another subordinate. The result is this. The Scripture is pro∣fitable to inform the mind by way of an adaequate object in order to salvation, and that, for the manner, immediately; hence it is said to be engraffed, to dwell in &c. For the degree, it is absolutely necessarie, as conteining those divine senses concerning God, concerning Christ, of whom it saith, There is none other name whereby we can be saved, and of all those things which God in Christ doth either Gratifie us with, or Require of us. Yet not in that degree, that it being present so is the saving information of
our minde, unlesse the illumination of the holy Ghost be added, not so as that he inspires new senses not comprehended in the Scriptures (as Familists dream) but so as he imprints the senses of holy Scripture, and perswades them to the minde to beget true faith. . This truth may be seen a hundred times in the 119. . Psal. From the H. Scriptures Sufficiencie, or perfection. Perspicuitie, plainnesse, together with its efficacie by the Holy Spirit flowing with it into the Soul. The sufficiencie or perfection, is argued 1 From the Efficient thereof God The Father 1. Anointed his Son, Ps. 45.7. Thy God hath anointed thee. 2. Said by voice from Heaven; This is my beloved Son, Mat. 3.17.17.5. Hear ye him.
3. Wrought by him miracles, by which he confirmed the words he spake, Joh. 8.18. The Father that sent me, beareth witnesse of me. The Son who is in the bosome of the Father, Joh. 1.18. witnesseth that he hath heard and seen, Joh. 3.32. All that I have heard of my Father, have I made knowne to you (as friends) Joh. 15.15. The Holy Ghost, The Spirit who search∣eth all things, even the deepe things of God, hath revealed to us the things which God hath prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.10. Hee shall teach you all things which I have spoke to you, Joh. 14.26. Shall lead you in∣to all truth, Joh. 16.13.
Truth wherewith the Church is to bee sanctified to the end, Joh. 17.17.20. 2. The Instrumentall Causes, the A∣postles, Prophets, Evangelists. These Are made Ministers of the Spirit 2 Cor. 3.6. Of righteousnesse, vers. 9. Of the word of Salvation, Act. 13.26. The power of God to Salvati∣on to every beleever, Rom. 1.16. Of the immortall seed whereof we are born again, 1 Pet. 1.23. Reveiled all by Preaching, I have not shunned to declare unto you all the the counsell of God, Act. 20.27. Writing, Luk. 1.3.20. Joh. 3.31. These things are written, &c. 3. The End. I write unto you, that ye may know, ye have eternall life, and that ye may be∣lieve
in the name of the Sonne of God, 1 Joh. 5.13. These things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. 1 Joh. 1.4. That thou mayst know the certainty Luk. 1.4. 4. The Effect. Making wise unto salvation, in the verse before the Text. Keeping from the place of torment, Luk. 16.29. Send Laza∣rus, (saith the rich man) to my Fathers house, For I have five brethren, that hee may testifie to them, lest they also come into this place of torment. They have Moses and the Prophets (saith Ahraham) Let them hear them (viz. to keep them∣selves out of the place of torment). And if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be perswaded, though one rise from the dead. 5. The Object. The Holy Scriptures contain that truth which is according to godlinesse, Tit. 1.1. The doctrine of Faith, Hope, and Chari∣ty, 1 Joh. 5.13. 1 Co. 13. Which contain our whole duty, and have for their object, Gods bounty.
6. The Adjunct. A prohibition of adding to, or dimi∣nishing, Deut. 4.4. Ye shall not add to the Word, which I command you, nor shall you diminish ought from it. Not to thinke above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. 7. The Simile. It is styled, The Scripture of the Old and New Testament. Now to a Testa∣ment as nothing may be added, so (if it be the Testament of a wise man, much more, if Gods) it containes the whole Will of the Testator, according whereunto, it is his pleasure or will, his Goods should be dispensed: Heires should live. Perspicuity of Holy Scriptures followeth. The Testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple, Psal. 19.7. Pure, en∣lightning the eyes, vers. 8. Thy word is alan∣thorn to my feet, and a light unto my path, Psal. 119.105. The entrance of thy Word giveth light, it giveth wisdome to the simple, v. 130.
For God knowes perfectly to utter the senses of his minde plainly: Our ne∣cessity requires he should, seeing without the knowledge of those senses of holy Scripture we cannot be saved. Ye erre, not knowing the Scriptures. Now for the Efficacy thereof by the Holy Ghost. The Scripture by the Holy Ghost is made powerfull. 1 Thes. 1.5. Hence it is called, The power of God to salvation, Rom. 1.16. The Ministery of the Spirit, , 2 Cor. 3.8. His Ministers, Mi∣nisters of the Spirit, the 6. vers. The wise∣dome which God ordained before the world, praefinierat, God hath revealed to us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.7. & 10. Hereupon the Sons of the Church are called , taught of God, 1 Thes. 4.9. The Holy Spirit writes Gods Law in our hearts. Heb. 8.10. By enabling the principle of action. The same Holy Spirit confirmes and seals. He who stablisheth us, and hath anointed us, he sealeth us, 2 Cor. 1.22. and giveth us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
The result is. That which containeth all things ne∣cessary to Salvation, and that plainly, and hath the Holy Ghost impowering it, en∣lightning the minde to perceive or un∣derstand it, enabling the heart to perform it, sealing to ascertain it; that, sure∣ly, is profitable, , for do∣ctrine. But Holy Scripture is such. There∣fore, &c. The Vse of this is for Instructions. 1. Whatsoever cannot be manifestly proved out of the Holy Scriptures, is not necessary to salva∣tion. 2. Doctrine or Information is a thing most excellent, as being that unto which Holy Scripture was ordained, or is in order: Even the Scripture inspired by the Holy Ghost, preached by the Son of God, confirmed by so many signes and miracles, preserved by so many acts of providence, by which also it was defen∣ded and propagated; adorned of God with so many titles of attributes proper to himself, fraught with so many inbred
arguments breathing the divinity there∣of, accompanyed, and actuated by the holy Ghost. 3 What thanks owe we to God for his giving us the holy Scriptures. 4 That the neglect of holy Scripture is the cause of that vast ignorance (of matters divine, and which concern salva∣tion) which every where abounds, in so much that (though it be a shame it should bespoken) we may bespeak many among us very justly in the words of the H. Apo∣stle, Heb. 5.12. For when, for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God. 5 That all persons enjoying, (and ca∣pable of understanding) holy Scripture, thus profitable for Information, are left utterly without excuse and pretext of their ig∣norance. Refutation 1. Of Papists, who pretend some Axioms not contained in H. Script. to be necessary to salvation, as &c. 2. Familists, who pretend other sen∣ses (besides those of the Scripture) to be inspired into them by the H. Ghost.
Reprehension of Papists Who hide in an unknowne tongue H. Scripture thus pro∣fitable for Information; and Thrust upon us (in their room) doctrines of Men, rotten Legends &c. All who neglect H. Scripture profita∣ble for Information Whose sin is aggravated from The H. Scriptures Excel∣lence, with which it's considered in It self & its own Nature Proper work. Its influ∣ence on other Arts Works. The Persons Condition Private Publick In disposi∣tion. Actually Magi∣strates. Deu. 17 Prov. 8. Mini∣sters.
Act, as Simple omission, or worse Prefer∣ring o∣ther do∣ctrines, chiefly if wicked ones. Con∣tempt of H. Scrip∣ture. Exhortation 1. To Ministers, that their care be to in∣struct the people out of holy Scriptures. Motives. 1 God requires it of them, and will exact it. Hereupon S. Paul adjures Timo∣thie: I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his kingdom; Preach the Word.
2 The co-operation of the Holy Ghost will prosper this work in their hands. Take heed to thy self and to the doctrine, conti∣nue in them: For in doing this thou shalt both save thy self and them that heart thee. Means are Indirect. Remove self-seeking in Other businesses, hinderan∣ces to this work; This, stu∣dying to please others, Gal. 1. boast thy self. Direct. Concerning Thy self Inform thy self that thou mayest be able to inform others. Inflame thy self in love toward them, that thou mayest be willing to do it to others.
Holy Scripture; Explain it, in Words, which thou mayest in∣terpret out of Phraseologies, and the idiom or peculiar manner of expression in the language and those words Severall and single; or, Conjoined. Sense. Find out that intended by the holy Ghost whether it be Literall; or, Mysticall. Where especiall care must be had that it agree to the form of sound words. Be fitted to the scope of the place, which is done by
Comparing pla∣ces like unlike. Diligent viewing the context, in which the Occasion End. the Circumstan∣ces; as Persons or Time Place Connexion of before and after. Applie
Exhortation II. Let the people be perswaded to receive hence (from H. Scripture) their informa∣tion. Motive hereunto, Is the excellencie thereof, as that therein is contained all mans Office or Duty, Benefit or Reward. Means, 1. Remove Prejudice, which, as a coloured glasse, pre∣sents every thing like it self. Impuritie or foulnesse of heart, which makes the mind averse from H. Scriptures which are so opposite to that impuritie. 2. Bring Ingenuous, or welbred docilitie (teachable∣nesse) and the fear of God, Psal. 25.14.
Practise of those things thou hast lear∣ned from H. Scrip∣ture, and a resolved (firm) purpose to do what thou hast lear∣ned thence. 3. Implore or beg help of The Holy Ghost, who may teach and lead thee into all truth. Them who have their senses exercised in H. Scripture.
AXIOM. II. , ad refutationem. Holy Scripture (inspired of God) is profitable for Confutation. Explication of the Word:  is taken, Largely, for argus, manifesto, &c. to argue or clear somewhat: or Specifiedly, or as it receives its kind from the object Good. Hence Heb. 11.1. Faith is called , the evidence of things not seen. Evill of Error: 1 Tit. 9. , to convince, the gain∣sayers. Vice or sin; Herod, Luc. 3.19.  being reproved by him.
Here confutation seems to be sig∣nified, because it is specified from the object understood; Information goeth be∣fore, to which confuta∣tion of Errour being ad∣ded, perfects the minde. Correction followes, which seems to be the same with Reprehension. Thing. For understanding whereof, we must know 1 What erroneous is, or what is errone∣ous. 2 How H. Scripture is said to confute it.
1 That erroneous may be known We must know truth, which either is Necessarie to salvation, or, Not ne∣cessarie; Convenient, of which as being revealed in Holy Scripture, a holy use may be made in order to salva∣tion. Indifferent, in re∣spect of salvati∣on, as are all truths no way comprised in H. Scripture, which are found in o∣ther sciences Liberall Mechanick
Hence that is to be esteemed errone∣ous which (that we mention not truth indifferent) is so called Simply, when it crosseth truth Necessary to salvation, or, Convenient, as being by God revealed. Modificately, or after a sort (whether it be erroneous Simply or, Not:) As when that is said Necessary to salvati∣on which is not, Not neces∣sary there∣to, which is as, The Pope is head &c. S. Peter was at Rome. and Other of con∣trary nature.
2 The H. Scripture is said to confute Directly and Postive∣ly Whatsoever it denies. Whatsoever is contrary to that which it affirms. And both these it doth by Discourse or Reasoning: Bare Affirmation Deniall. Oblique∣ly & Ne∣gatively; for either It is not found in Scrip∣ture, and yet is boasted to be necessary to salva∣tion; If it be found in the Scripture, yet not in the rank of Necessaries. The sense of this Axiom is, That the H. Scripture is so profitable, as that it is also so far necessarie, that without it deadly errours cannot be confuted: but by it (ac∣companied with the illumination of the H. Ghost) all errours that war against our salvation may be confuted abun∣dantly.
Tit 1.9. A Bishop must hold fast  fidelem illum Sermonem, qui ad doctrinam facit, (we read the faithful Word, as he hath been taught) that he may be able, by sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsayers. So our Saviour Christ convinced the Sadduces. It is said of Apollos, that he mightily convinced () the Iews, shewing by the Scripture that Jesus was the Christ. Acts 18.28. This might be proved by Induction of Errours Contemplative Practicall. If any shall, Contem∣plative. with many Contra-Remon∣strants, Manichees, or Stoicks, say, That God is the Author of sin, That all things are chained with unalterable destinie, (or bound by fatall necessity) and that they flow from Gods unchangeable Decree: The holy Scripture confutes them. Tues Deus non volens iniquitatem, Jam. 1.13. Ps. 5.4. Joh. 8.44. 1 Joh. 3.8. Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickednesse, neither shall evill dwell with thee. He that committeth sin is of the Devill. If any shal with the Pelagians, say, That
we can by our naturall strength fulfill Gods Law: Holy Scripture confutes him by saying, Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. Phil. 2.13. God gi∣veth both to will and to doe. If any with the Familists deny that there shall be a resurrection of the body: The Scripture confutes him * 1 Cor. 15 2 Tim. 2.17; 18.. If any think he may safely do as the most do; Practical. the Scripture confutes him: Wide is the gate, Mat. 7.13. Exod. 2 2. Prov. 11.21. and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many go in thereat. Thou shalt not follow a multitude to doe evill. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished. If any think he may goe on in ungod∣linesse, unjustice, intemperance, because the mercie of God is so magnified, and grace hath abounded under the Gospell; The Scripture confutes it, saying: Tit. 2.11. The grace of God hath appeared, teaching us to deny ungod∣linesse, &c. Luc. 1.69.74, 75. He hath raised up a born of sal∣vation, &c. that we might serve him in holi∣nesse, &c. If any think, he may spend his youth in pleasure, and safely put off repentance till age; The Scripture confutes it, Eccl. 12.1. Luc. 12.20 Psal. 95 Heb. 3.15.4.7. saying, Remember now thy Creatour in the dayes of thy youth. Thou fool, this night may thy foul be taken from thee. To day if ye will hear
his voice, Prov. 1. &c. I will laugh at their calamitie, and mock when their fear cometh. Because I purged thee, Ezck. 24.13. and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy sin any more, till my fury rest upon thee. The reason of this is founded in the former, the profitablenesse of Gods Word for Information. For if the Scripture be abso∣lutely, and adaequately necessarie for in∣formation of the mind with saving knowledge; then is it likewise for confu∣tation of all errours that are opposite to saving knowledge; seeing that Verum est index sui & obliqui, & verum salutare index sui, & oppositi saluti: truth or right shews (or is the declarer of) it self, and that which is wrong or crooked; and saving truth of it self, and of that which is op∣posite to salvation. Having therefore de∣monstrated formerly the Scriptures pro∣fitablenesse for saving information, from the sufficiencie and perspicuitie thereof: I may thence argue, that it is in the same manner and degree profitable  for confutation. The Heathen Philosophers,  as Socrates and others, could confute the , (or opinion of many Gods) of the peo∣ple,
and some other deadly errours, with∣out the help of Scriptures, and therefore they may seem not to be profitable, ade∣quately, for confutation. 1 As one may be opposite to another,  so one errour to another; and yet as the opposite vices are both opposite to ver∣tue, so the errors unto truth; and though they knew somewhat what God is, yet not ordinarily who he is in trinitie of Persons: and so not detecting the error by the truth, which is index obliqui, may be said not properly to confute the errour, in the opposite whereof themselves erred. 2 So much of the truth as they had, they may be said not to have it so firmly and clearly as might suffice for the saving confutation of the opposite errour. 3 So far forth as they had any divine truth upon firm ground, they had it from the raies of that essentiall truth wch shined out unto them in the more general acts of his providence, who leaveth not himself without witnesse among them. And this truth being no other then that wch is (and that far more clearly) in the Scriptures, they did by that divine sense which is in the Scriptures, confute those errours; And therefore the proprietie of confutation
remains firm to the divine sense contein∣ed in the Scriptures primely and emi∣nently; and so, though not by the letter (which they knew not) yet by the sense (which is the soul of the Scriptures) though otherwise revealed to them, they were able to confute some errours. 1   Seeing that Scriptures given by di∣vine inspiration have this end among o∣thers, to confute errours; we may learn, That errours in Divinity are dangerous, and of great consequence to be freed from them. 2 That opinion which cannot be con∣futed by the Scripture, either is not er∣roneous, or if it be, yet it is no dangerous errour; nor the truth opposite thereto, necessary to salvation. 3 Here we may see the reason why so many errours swarm every where, even among Christians; it is because they do not in humilitie, and self-deniall, and laying away prejudice attend unto the holy Scripture. For this is profitable for confutation. 4 Here we may see the unexcusable∣nesse of those who live in errour, and yet have the Scripture among them, which is profitable for confutation of errour. What
will they pretend, when an answer fuller then that of our Saviour to the rich man shall be given them? They have Moses and the Prophets, yea, and the holy Evange∣lists, and the holy Epistles, &c. This divine truth which tels us,  The Scripture is profitable for confutation, may exercise its power against the Papists who hold, that the Scripture should not be made known to the people, because it tends to breed errours in them; directly contrary to the Apostle, who here saith, It is profitable to confute errours. 1 Those that confute errours,  and censure men as erroneous, for dissenting from the dictates and devises of some men whom they fancie. Wherein, as the im∣putation is grievous, so if the confuter be not skilfull, (as few such are) both of that he confutes, and their opinion whereby he thinks to confute it; who sees not the unreasonablenesse thereof? Especially if the little skill shall be ac∣companied with a great deal of heat: there being nothing more furious then igno∣rant zeal, as appeared in S. Paul before his conversion. If the party be skilfull in both, who refutes the one by the other: either he doth this for the humane autho∣rity
on the one part; and then he sets the Creature in Gods Throne whose Word it is that is profitable to confute: or for the resplendencie of Gods Word in that opinion; then doth he ill in concealing God, whom in his mind he acknowledg∣eth; and magnifying man, on whom he depends not. But if this be done by a man for an ill end, as for victories sake to beat down that by voices of men which Gods Word confutes not, or because it is more crosse to corrupt nature, or leaveth fewer pretences and shifts for a licentious life to palliate it withal; Then as Solomon saith of the sacrifice of the wicked, Prov. 21.27. It is abomi∣nation to God, and how much more when he brings it with an ill mind? So I may of such doing, It is ill, but how much more when it is done for these ends? 2 Those that bring errours to confute Gods word, though not eo nomine, (pro∣fessing so much) yet in effect. Thus did the Pharisees when they said: Which of the Priests and Rulers beleeve in him? He in whom, &c. So say too many, That which most do, That which brings profit, plea∣sure, credit among men, that must be done though the Scripture say con∣trary. I say no more to such, but that I
wish them not to contend with Gods Word, which is profitable to confute all their errours. Comfort to him that is accused  of being of another then the recei∣ved opinion, yet not confuted out of H. Consola∣tion. Scripture. That we would apply to our judg∣ments, or minds, Exhorta∣tion. the Word of God to confute our errours therewith. Motives from the Nature of Error Hard to be dealt with. Evill. Excellencie of the holy Scripture to confute it.
AXIOM. III. . Holy Scripture is profitable for correction, or rectifying and restoring. I Find not this word used in all the New Testament excepting this place, nor yet in the Verb in this composition, whence it is derived; nor yet either of them by the LXX. in their Translation of the Old Testament. In the Apocrypha I find the one of them twice, the other four times, but scarce once in Theologicall sense in order to the soul. The word properly signifies a rectifying, or setting streight again, or repairing that which is de∣cayed: , It is as much work to rectifie a policie or government, as to make a new one. Here the word is used in Theologicall sense, and therefore to be determined by the object, as being an act of Gods Word in the hand of the man of God, for the rectifying of men in order to God and salvation.
That we may the better find out the meaning of this Axiom, and likewise give some light to that which follows, we must take our rise the higher, and en∣quire in the object hereof, and the forma∣lis ratio (formall nature) thereof. The object of Gods Word to be wrought up∣on by it, is the mind and heart of man. The mind as the Counsellour to the heart is to be both Informed, that it may inform or present the heart with right objects; and Freed from errour, that it may not inform erroncously. And hither tended the two former The heart also is the object of Gods word, and that principally, which, as it is terminus actionum ad intra (the bound of those actions that look inward) the senses reporting to the minde, and it
counselling the heart; so it is fons actio∣num ad extra, (the well-spring of those actions that look outward to the life. Prov 4 23. Mat. 15.19. 1 Sam. 16.7. Prov. 23.26. Prov. 4.4.21. With all diligence keep thy heart, for there-out are the issues of life. Out of the heart proceed murthers, adulte∣ries, &c. saith our Saviour. And accor∣ding to the heart God esteems of man. Hence he saith, My son, give me thy heart. Elsewhere, Let thy heart keep my precepts. Let thy heart receive (retain) my words. Keep them in the midst of thy heart. The formalis ratio of the heart of man, as it is the object of these acts of holy Scripture, is the capablenesse of it thereby to be raised up to supernaturall action, and fruition of God. But we may more distinctly conceive the heart of man as it is the object of Scripture in regard of the present, as under some present evill, or in regard of the future, as in order to some future good, or liable to some future evill; and this distinction notes the whole formalis ratio thereof: but being various, draws us to prosecute it, till we have setled the severall acts. The heart in regard of the present, as under some present ill, calls for this act of the Scripture which the Apostle here mentioneth, . Needs recti∣fying
or restoring, an act peculiar to a distemper or decay; and here, of the heart, the object of that act. Yet must we goe one step further before we can settle. This formalis ratio, or present ill upon the heart, is two-fold. 1 When the ill of sin is indeed upon the heart, and it not at all, or not aright affected therewith. 2 When the ill whether of sin or pain, is not indeed upon it, but in conceit, and yet the heart affected as though it were indeed; or if it be upon it, yet not in so great degree, or such manner as it is con∣ceived, and as the heart is affected. Which two respects in the object are so different as must needs distract this act into two, seeing the same act cannot both rectifie that which requires beating down, and that which requires raising up. The for∣mer being by reproof, the latter by com∣fort. Whereby appears that this word , contains in it two acts answer∣ing two distempers of the soul to be rectified or restored, Reprehension and Consolation: the difference of which is so great, that I cannot handle them at once, but must divide this Axiom into two.
I. Branch or former, The Scripture is profitable for Reprehension. II. The Scripture is profitable for Consola∣tion. For the first of these; The Scripture is profitable for Reprehen∣sion. 1. What and how manifold Reprehen∣sion is. Explica∣tion. 2. How the Scripture is profitable for it. For the first we must know: 1 What it is for which one is repre∣hensible, or the formall object of Repre∣hension. And that is sin unrepented of. Thine own wickednesse shall correct thee, Jer. 2.19. and thy back-sliding shall reprove thee. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of dark∣nesse, Eph. 5.11. Tit. 1.12, 13. but reprove them rather. The Cretians are ever lyers, evill beasts, slow-bellies, there∣fore reprove them sharply. Quest. 1. Whether a man may be re∣prehended for nothing but sin.
Answ. He may for some effect or ill of punishment which by his sin he hath brought upon himself, but so as it is resolved into sin as the proper cause of it. Quest. 2. Whether one may be repre∣hended for sin, after he hath heartily re∣pented of it. Answ. If sin be compleatly repented of, and absolutely pardoned by God, I see not how it can be a ground of reprehensi∣on to the partie: Yet in some cases I think it may be reprehensible, after it is truly repented of. 1 If it be of that nature as requires an explicate repentance upon occasion all a mans life. Thus God did more then re∣prehend David after his repentance, when he killed the child, and made the sword not to depart from his house. But thus reprehension may be said to look at those future acts of repentance, by which the sin past is not yet repented of. 2 If the act have been very scandalous, and satisfaction not yet given, it may be reprehended to give satisfaction, that at∣tendant being not yet added to the re∣pentance; and so in some sense it may be said not to be so repented of, as that
satisfaction is given. Thus our Saviour may seem to have given Peter a secret re∣prehension for his thrice denying him, by urging him (till he was grieved, saith the Text) to a threefold profession of his love to him. Joh. 21. Other cases may, perhaps, be thought of, and yet stand with that, That sin unrepented of, is the formalis ratio of the object of reprehension. 2. We must know what act, or affe∣ction in the heart Reprehension tends to excite and work upon. There be four passions in the soul of man, which be called by the School the Cardinales passiones, because thewhole frame of mans heart moves upon them; the two first looking at the present; the two latter at the future; and these are grief, joy, hope, and fear: the two first in the conceupiscible; the two latter in the irasci∣ble. Upon the two former of these doth the Apostles  here act, for the rectifying of the distempered soul: and in this act of Reprehension, upon the affe∣ction of grief, to excite that to exercise it self about the thing for which it repre∣hends. This is manifest, where S. Paul. reprehends the Corinthians, and then addes, Ye are puffed up, 1 Cor. 5. and have not rather mourned.
And speaking of the same matter, 2 Cor. 7. Ye were made sorry by my Epistle after a godly manner, and godly sorrow leadeth unto repentance not to be repented of. Now the formalis ratio of the object of Re∣prehension being sin unrepented of; Gods word by stirring up this affection of grief, or working godly sorrow for it, makes it to be no longer sin unrepented of, and repentance causeth the sinner to forsake his sin (as Solomon saith, He that confesseth and forsakes his sin shall find mercy:) and God, in mercie, takes away the sin (as Nathan said to David) God hath taken away thy sin. And thus the formalis ratio of the ob∣ject of Reprehension being gone, the soul is rectified, or restored from the distemper arising from the presence of sin unrepen∣ted of, by exciting godly sorrow for sin in the heart. 3 How Reprehension excites sorrow for sin unrepented of. This may be un∣derstood from the nature of grief, whose object being malum praesens, it is excited (as all affections are by their proper object in its proprietie presented) by setting before it the evilnesse of sin, and pre∣sence thereof to the heart. So that Reprehen∣sion works by these two acts. 1 Of laying
sin to the guiltie heart in the evilnesse of it. 2 Shewing that it is present to it, or lies upon it, as committed, and not removed. First, the laying of sin to the heart in the ilnesse of it is done two wayes. 1 By shewing the inhonestum (dishonesty or dishonour) of the sin, in the crosseness of it to Gods holy will and rule, with the severall heads of aggravations (well worthy the studie of a Divine, and the practicall consideration of all.) 2 The inutile (unprofitablenesse and mischief) of it, in crosseness to mans true good: where comes in to Reprehension the act of Commination, if need be, either in regard of the sin, or radication of it in the partie. The latter, to wit, the presentnesse of this evill, if need be, is to be manifested by such Notes as argue the presence of it. As Samuel reprehending Saul, shewed him the ilnesse of his sin; 1 Sam. 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornnesse is as iniquity and idolatry. So when Saul would not take notice of the presence of his disobedience upon him, he gives him a note of it, What means this bleating of sheep, v. 14. and lowing of Oxen which I hear?
Quest. How then can a man be repre∣hended for sins past, seeing they cannot now be malum praesens to the heart, to stir up grief, in that long since they issued thence? Answ. Though the transient act exter∣nall passed away, yet all the sins that ever a man did, and hath not truly repented of, are still present unto him in the stain, in the disposition of the soul to further sins, as likewise in regard of God, in the guilt and curse that lies from God upon the head of the impenitent sinner, where∣by he stands as liable to punishment every moment, and especially at the great day of Account, as if they were all at that instant committed. From these three things explained, ye may gather a description of Reprehensi∣on here spoken of. It is an  or rectifying of the heart distempered through sin unrepented of, by laynig to it the evilnesse and presence of such sin upon it, for the exciting of godly sorrow, whereby the sin is repented of, and forsaken on mans part, and gratiously pardoned, and taken away on Gods part. How manifold is it? I find Reprehen∣sion
in Scripture diversly distinguished. 1 In regard of the efficient, by One in authority. Tit. 2.15. A neighbour, Lev. 19.17 or in collateralitie. 2 In regard of the degree, Vehement. Tit. 1.13. Reprove than , praecisè, or sharply. Mild. The Apostle otherwhere commends the spirit of meeknes. 3 In regard of the manner of laying open the sin, Plainly, Covertly, in Action; as Example to the contrary, or Otherwise fig∣nificative acti∣on. Covert speech, as parabolically.
4 In regard of the parties occupate therein, the parties repro∣ved alone, private, Mat. 18.15, 16. &c. repro∣ving some with them, publick: Mat. 18.15, 16. &c. Some other perhaps may be found, &c. II. How the Scripture is profitable for Reprehension? I answer, as before, for Information and Confutation, it is necessarie in such degree and manner, as no saving repre∣hension can be without it, but by it, with the work of Gods Spirit, may the soul be rectified. The example of our Saviour repre∣hending by the Scripture, Ye Hypocrites, Mat. 15.7. well did Isaiah prophesie of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their lips, &c. I might likewise prove this by indu∣ction of severall vices, and shew how the Scripture reprehends them. Solomon re∣prehending an idle person, layes his sin to him, Thou sluggard; aggravates it from
the example of the Ant, far inferiour to him in abilitie and obligation, but far above him in performance, having no guide, ruler, or overseer, provides her meat in the Summer, gathers her food in the harvest. Then from the adjunct duration of it, How long? When wilt thou arise? Yet a little sleep! Then layes a threatning in the neck of it; So shall thy poverty come as one that travaileth, that is, unexpectedly; and as an armed man, i.e. unresistibly. This truth, . as the last, is founded in the demonstration of that concerning the Scriptures profitablenesse for Infor∣mation. If the Scriptures contain all things necessarie to salvation both fully and plainly, as was there demonstrated, then doth it also, as in the last Axiom, confute all errours, so here detect all vices oppo∣site to salvation. Sin being that which Reprehension is founded on, and sin be∣ing nothing else but  so called from dissenting with Gods Law or Rule, and this Rule being nothing else but the Scripture, it must needs be that the Scrip∣ture is profitable for the reprehension of sin, which is an omission of that which the
Scripture injoins, or a commission of that which the Scripture forbids, of which it contains the aggravations, and against which it contains fearfull threatnings. A man is reprehensible for disobedience to humane Laws,  which are not contai∣ned in Scripture, and therefore the Scrip∣ture not adaequately profitable for Re∣prehension. Disobedience to the lawfull Laws of men,  is resolved into disobedience to Gods rule, which commands Every soul to be subject to the Superiour Powers, and that for conscience sake to God, and his word which commands obedience to their commands in him. The Scripture is profitable for Reprehension. 1 That there alwayes have been, are, Instruct. and will be some whom a man may re∣prehend. Which followeth not from hence by necessitie of the consequent, as if therefore there should (would) be some, who are to be reprehended, because the Scripture is for reprehension, but of the consequence. For God in the infinity of his Being, and understanding foreseeing this,
furnished his Word with this act. The truth of this matter past ages have given too sufficient proof of. In the same day whereon our first parent was created, and that about dinner time (as Divines, not improbably, judge) he made himself reprehensible by eating the for∣bidden fruit. We read of the second ADAM deli∣vered for the sins of the first, and of his posteritie, somewhat in the Evangelist answering (agreeable) thereto. Joh. 19.14. It was about the sixth hour (of the sixth day) (noon to us) when Pilate delivered Christ to be crucified. Luc. 23.44 And from the 6. hour to the 9. there was a darknesse over all the carth. So earlie was a foundation of re∣prehensiblenesse layd, whereupon his first-born Cain built fratricide, and poste∣ritie raised an huge pile reaching up to heaven that called down most severe reprehensions. He that sees not the reprehensiblenesse of the present age, must needs be blinde exceedingly: Both the miseries of the Church, and the eminent evills speak it too plainly. Yea those happier times which men expect (if Laodicea be the shadow of them) will not want their reprehension.
If Scripture be &c. Then Reprehensi∣on, sure, is of great worth, as that to which Scripture, the pure and holy image of God, so like himself, is in order: that David might well sing, Psal. 141. Let the righte∣ous smite me, it shall be a kindnesse: let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil which shall not break mine head. 3 Wretched are those men who have so far broke out into wickednesse, that God will not reprehend them; consi∣dering that only Scripture is the power of God to salvation, and in this act to rectifie the heart infected with the evill of sin. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee (saith Solomon.) Cast not your pearls before Swine (saith our Saviour) lest they trample them, and rend you. These men are in the case of one deadly sick, and deprived of the only remedy that should cure him. 4 They who live in known sins are inexcusable, in as much as they enjoy the Scripture profitable for Reprehension. Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there not a Physitian here? Yes sure ther is: The Scrip∣ture is profitable to restore the heart de∣filed with him. Why then are they not healed? They will have no pretence at that day, but either with him in the
Gospel, they will be speechlesse: or with the young man in desperation, crie out: How have I hated instruction, Prov. 5.12, 13. and my heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me? Let this part of Gods word which af∣firms the Scripture to be profitable for Reprehension, Repre∣hension. accomplish its work there∣in, in the reprehension of divers sorts; 1 Either such as are simply hereby re∣prehensible 2 Or reprehensible as touching the use of Reprehension. 1 It reproves those who having need of Reprehension (as who hath not?) do not desire nor seek for reprehension from Gods Word. This is a fault almost as ge∣nerall as the object of Reprehension. For where is the man that desires to be repro∣ved when he deserves? That layes Gods Word impartially to his heart for the re∣ctifying of it, and intreats this as a special benefit at his friends hand to tell him plainly, and lay Gods Word home unto him, when he sees any thing amisse with him? There is not the poorest in the
company, but will be at cost to buy a Looking-glasse to see a spot in his face, that he may wipe it off; and none so carelesse of his outward man, but will thank his friend that tells him of that which would make him be derided of men when he should come among them. God offers a glasse for our soul to detect the spots thereof, which make men odious to him, his holy Angels, and Saints; yet can we sustain to come into his presence with spotted souls, yea even such spots as rest not in the heart only, but come sub signo, (some manifestation thereof) to be viewed by Angels and Devils, to the joy of Satan, and grief of our Guardians the holy Angels, (if those can joy, or these grieve:) yea, such as eat through the veil of our bodie (as I may see) and appear to the eyes of men. Yet is a spot in the soul so much worse, by how much the soul is better then the body. Et pretium pars haee corpore majus habet. And it is of greater price (could the Heathen man say) and so much more care to be had for the wiping it off, by how much the censure of God, and his holy Angels is more to be feared, then of all the men in the world. 2 Those who when reprehension
comes home to them from God in his Word, will not receive it home, and let it have its whole work upon them for their reformation, will not totum telum in corpus recipere (as the accusation was of Scaevola); They will do somewhat with Saul, reform some things with Herod at Johns preaching, but if it tends to rectifie their darling corruptions, stop it there. The nature of a remedy or medicine is aut prodesse, aut obesse, (either to doe good or harm) but if a man takes but part of the dosis which a skilfull Physitian pre∣scribes, the essence of the medicine con∣sisting in that indivisible he prescribes, and the operation following the essence; what can be expected but that it should only irritate the humour, and not being able to expel it, leave nature weaker and the disease stronger. Thus will their case be who deal thus with that pretious re∣medy of the soul, which God the most wise Physitian of the soul prescribes in his word for the cure thereof. 3 Yet more, those that pretend to re∣ceive Gods word in this act of reprehen∣sion, but let it not enter into their heart. Like as some of our Church-papists deal
with the Communion, make shew of eat∣ing the bread, but with their handkerchief conveigh it: or of drinking, but kiss the cup with closed lips, or spit out what they receive. Thus to receive a reprehension is so far from rectifying the soul, that it provokes Gods anger the more against it, &c. 4 Those that hate reprehension and Gods Messenger that brings it. 1 King. 22. I hate him (saith Abab) for he doth not prophesie good concerning me, but evill, i. e. he reproved. He should have hated himself to whom no good could be prophesied. This was Ahab who had sold himself to work wicked∣nesse. What such entertainers of this act of Gods word may expect, you may see; God sent a Prophet to Amaziah, and it came to passe as he talked with him, that the King said unto him, 2 Chron. 25.16. Art thou made of the Kings Councell? forbear, why shouldst thou be smitten? Then the Prophet forbare, and said, I know God hath determined to destroy thee, be∣cause thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsell. 5 Those that contemn or despise re∣proof. I was thinking whether to reserve this, or the other of hating reproof, for the last and highest degree of those who
are here to be reprehended; considering, 1 That the object of contempt is a little evill, which we account not so great as to draw our hatred or fear upon it: and 2 Those that hate reproof, doe labour more to hinder the sincere preaching of Gods Word, and to vex the Ministers thereof, then those who only contemn it, and with Gallio, care for none of these things. But I find that an evill may be counted little two wayes: 1 In its nature and crosseness to our affection. 2 In the power that goes with it to prevail against us: and so the contemner may inly hate the ill as much, but con∣ceiving it to have no power to enter up∣on him, contemns it. Thus Goliah could not but conceive that David desired to kill him, as well as if a Giant had come out against him; but in his pride he saw not how he could hurt him, and so (saith the Text) despi∣sed him. So that to despise reproof from Gods word, may involve hatred in it, as it lies crosse to a mans lusts, and superadde athe∣isme, as if Gods reproof were not able,
either to deprive him of his lusts, or con∣demn him for them. And thus is con∣tempt of reproof, in the nature of it, a higher sin against God, and where re∣proofe comes with power to crosse it, will appear in the greatest hatred. Those that despise reproof I send to the Wise man, Prov. 1.24, 25, 26. Because ye set at nought all my counsell, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamitie, &c. Against this 5. degree,  That scorners are not to be reproved. 1 One or a few acts of despising re∣proof,  do not presently make a man a scorner. 2 To reprove in thesi differs from the personall application of reproof. 3 For the personall reproving of a scorner, we may consider. The Agent Word, that will reprove and condemn him. Person reproving Wanting power, and so liable to have his person hurt, jewels trodden &c. and of such our Saviour and Solomon may seem to speak: God tendring his servants safety, and abi∣litie
of doing good other∣where, more then a scor∣ners salvation by his means, and with his danger. Having power to quell the scorners insolencie, and if not thereby to amend him, yet to terrifie others from his courses, Prov. 22.10. Cast out the Scorner, and 19.25. Smite a scor∣ner, and the Simple will be∣ware. Scorner. Though he testified his scorn upon one, or two, or three sundrie wayes of reproof, and that fearfully, and so as we have no hope those wayes: yet perhaps some other way, reproof may settle on him, or by some other, or after some passages of providence have befallen him which had not then. While God rich in mercie lets a
man live, and it appear not to us that he sins against the H. Ghost, we may not absolutely despair, or wholly give him over for lost. A second sort to be reprehended by this doctrine are such as have to do with this act, and 1 Do not reprehend where the Scrip∣ture doth. Have no fellowship with the un∣fruitfull works of darknesse, but reprove them: as if one could not escape fellowship with them, unlesse he reproved them. This is to detain Gods truth in unrighteousnesse, and to diminish from Gods word, as if it did not reprove such a sin. 2 If Gods word &c. then are they to be reproved who reprove those whom the Scripture doth not. This is to adde to Gods Word, and make the way to hea∣ven straighter then our Lord hath made it. 3 Those that reprove where the Scripture commends. This is as Judas dealt with the Woman that brought the box of ointment to our Saviour: which is aggravable
from the Excellen∣cie of Scripture, which is the testimony of the infi∣nitely wise, just, and good God. Man, who behaves him∣self so as to be com∣mended by it. Indigni∣tie of the Act, which puts upon that which the Scrip∣ture commends, the ratio (notion) of sin unrepented of. Agent, sinfull dust who dare censure that which God commends. 4 That reprove those who reprove according to Scripture. Such an one was Amaziah the Priest of Bethel: Amos 7.10. and by reproving him who reproved according to Scripture, he turned the edge of the reproof upon himself in a fearfull threat∣ning. v. 17.
This comforts those who are reproved by men where the Scripture reproves them not, Consola∣tion. whether for Evills, whereof they are not guilty Per se, (considering them in themselves) Per accidens, (by accident) either In aiming at by ends Failing in the manner. Good. In both they invade Gods chair, and the prerogative of his word, and in both play the Devill: in the Former, by slandering the righte∣ous person. Later, the righteousnesse of the person.
1 That seeing Gods word is profita∣ble for Reprehension to rectifie the soul thereby,   we would bring our souls to Gods word, and lay it home impartially to the same. The matter is of as great concernment (moment) as our souls, and everlasting happinesse to be begun here, and consum∣mate hereafter. No unclean thing can enter there. And we have all sin, and con∣tracted upon us by nature; sin the only evill opposite to Gods justice, to Christs merit and intercession for us, and example to us; to the work and motions of his holy Spirit, and to our own happinesse. Unlesse this be repented of and amended, there is no hope left us in that great sal∣vation; and no repentance or amend∣ment but by this act of Gods word upon our souls. Jer. 17. Our hearts are deceitfull above all things: There is no trusting to our own phansies and dictates of nature. We seek to our selves plurima ratiocinia, many in∣ventions wherewith to deceive our souls with distinctions and evasions, even against Gods word it self, unlesse it be laid home unto us impartially. Satan lies at all advantages to deceive us; the world and the flesh flatter til they have destroyed
us: We can trust no friend safely in this point. Many a soul now in torment might have escaped, if he had not trusted others, and neglected to lay Gods word home unto his heart. Only the Scrip∣ture is no respecter of persons, as is not the Author of it. This will lay open, this will cure the distemper of our soul. This is , profita∣ble for reprehension. Means. 1 Utterly deny our selves, bring no conclusions with us to seek Premises out of Gods word, no desire that any thing should be otherwise then Gods word wil have it. The cause of all deadly misunder∣standing of Scripture. 2 Come to it with prayer, with hu∣mility, with resolution to pluck out eyes, cut off right hand, deny what ever it's against, do whatsoever it injoyns. When any reprehension comes unto us in the Ministerie of the Word,  in the private admonition of a friend therefrom, in any act of providence whereby Gods Spirit stirs up any motion in our soul,
moving to amendment agreeing to Gods Word; lay it home, and let it have its full work: So shall we honour God therein, encourage and chear his instru∣ment, get a precious balm to our souls. 3 To use Gods Word in this act of it upon others: Exhorta∣tion III. This the Magistrate may do uncontrollably, yea though there be no hope of amending the party, yet the smiting of a scorner will make others beware. Prov. 19.25. The Minister so far, as his pearls be not trampled, and he rent by swine, for whom he hath the keys to shut them out, or the dust of his feet to shake off against them, and so leave them; or pa∣tience to bear for Christs sake what in his cause shall befall him. A private man may likewise exercise this. Lev. 19.17 Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shalt in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him. For him that is to be reproved, if a slow-belly, there is a sharp reprehension; if otherwise, Tit. 1.12, 23. a spirit of meeknesse: if once, there is a private; if iterated &c. publick: direct, where it agrees, where not, oblique. By practising the contrary, retiring, si∣lence, gesture, all may reprehend all.
BRANCH II. The Scripture is profitable , for Consolation. There is a two-sold distemper of the heart to be rectified by Gods word, Explica∣tion. (as I shewed before,) The former rectified by reprehension; of that before: The other by Consolation; Of this now. The word not used otherwhere in Scripture, yet in the Maccab. 2 Maccab. 15, 17. goes not far from this sense , animi juvenum confortati (saith S. Hierome) The young mens minds were comforted. For the meaning of this we must en∣quire, 1 What is meant by comfort. Comfort taken Improperly for the Cause. Effect. Properly.
2 How the Scripture is profitable thereto. 1. For the former we must find out 1 The object of comfort. 2 The affection which it works upon to excite it. 3 How it doth that. 1 The object of this act is a Mourner, or man under the rest of mourning, or dejection of mind. Isa. 61.3. 2 Thess. 5.13. 2 Cor. 7.12. To bind up the broken hearted, to comfort the mourners, the mourners in Sion. Comfort the feeble-minded. Mourning is for present evill, evill pre∣sent being the object of Grief. But if we will find out the object of comfort more particularly, we must distinguish of the severall terms, [Man] [Mourning] [Evill] [the presence of it.] Man may be considered as Beleever. Unbeleever Impious. In disposition to conversion.
Grief or mourning may be distinguished from the Root, and so it may be considered Morally; as Good out of love of God: our∣selves. under both which comes Love of our Neigh∣bour; Under the former, as we look at that of God in him. Under the later, as we look at that some∣what of our selves in him. Ill, when it proceeds from love of our corruptions. Naturally.
Quantitie Even object. Odde Greater Lesse. Evill may be considered 1 As Apparent, which whether it be, or be not in rerum natura, is not in its nature evill. Real, which whether it be actu or potentia, (in act or not) is in its nature evill. 2 As the Evill of Sin Pain which is In its nature ill, but over∣powered by God, and made good, and an object of joy to the party to whom it is sent, Tryall, Martyrdome.
Both ill in its nature, and to the party the object of grief Punishment, Chastisement. Now Chastisement is either of the Wicked, tending to conversion, Godly to the Renewing of repen∣tance, as a testimony of Gods displeasure, yet with difference. Taking better heed for the time to come. Present Both in deed, and in apprehension, Only in the one respect, as In deed only, and not appre∣hended. In apprehension only, and not in deed.
If in a Beleever Unbeleever evill apparent reall of sin pain present In deed, In appre∣hension only, be not grieved for, there properly is no object of comfort, as being no grief, which in general is the object of comfort. Yet is there great difference under this. Ile name the two most opposite particulars in their greatest generality. If, whether in beleever or unbeleever, the evill of sin, apparent or reall, present indeed or apprehended only, be not grie∣ved for; there is work for Reprehension. If the reall evill of pain, but of that sort which, though in its nature ill, is by an over-powering of God made good, as of probatio, or , be not entertained
with grief; there is thereupon no ground of Reprehension. Jam. 1.2. Mat. 5.12. Count it all joy, my bre∣thren, when ye fall into divers trialls. When men revile and persecute you, and speak all ill of you falsly for my sake, , Rejoyce, and skip for joy. Yea though such need not comfort in actu secundo (actually) in that for which they rejoice; yet the Word of God goes along with them in fitnesse to comfort them, if they should at any time be dejected, and in the mean while, speaks all good to their souls. If an apparent ill, whether of sin,  or pain, present indeed, or apprehended only, be grieved for lesse, more, or equal to the appearance, out of an ill root, as neglect of God, and love of our own cor∣ruption; as that a man hath omitted an idolatrous act, Gal. 5. which is a work of the flesh; cannot be revenged on him whom he hates; may not vie drinking in the Colledge hall, or the like: here, though there be grief, is no object of comfort. Thus sinned those in the Prophet, who grieved the Sabbaths were so long. Amos 8.5. When wil they be over? said they. Thus Ahab, that he could not tell how to get Naboths vineyard.
Yea, here may be a sin of the highest degree. I know not whether the Devill hath a greater sin then this, that he so grieves, he can do God no greater disho∣nour. Yet if a beleever out of weaknesse of judgment, and tendernesse of conscience should grieve for some act which was not ill; here would be place for true comfort: yea, if one yet an unbeleever, but in fieri, and under the hand of Gods Spirit preparing him for his conversion should grieve for somewhat, as a sin which was none, he might so far receive comfort, as to take away his grief in re∣gard of that object. So if out of the love of himself subordinated to the love of God, he should grieve for some apparent ill of pain, whether present indeed, or apprehended only; here is a subject of comfort. If the evill of sin reall be present in∣deed,  and grieved for, out of a good root; but 1 lesse then the nature of it requires in beleever or unbeleever: here is yet no work for comfort. Augendus est iste dolor, The man must grieve more, saith Hem∣mingius. 2 If more in either, there is work for
comfort, yet with difference. The belee∣ver doing so with that ingenuous grief that looks at God as his father by him offended; Christ as his Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit, who hath formerly spo∣ken peace to his conscience: there Gods Word gives present comfort. But the unbeleever, and by this work disposed to conversion, however he may over∣grieve in regard of the punishment, or with some ingenuous grief according to such apprehension as he may have of God, and so far may be comforted, as that the sin is pardonable, and he in the way to obtain pardon, yet must he be brought to the sight of plenteous redemption which is with Christ, and his grief made thereby more ingenuous, that upon his saith in him who takes away the sins of the World, he may receive the great com∣forts of heaven, which the Word affords to them who come weary and heavy-laden unto Christ. 3 If equall, here is matter of joy. Poeni∣tens semper doleat (saith S. Austin) & de isthoe dolore gaudeat; The penitent must always grieve, and rejoice for that grief. And no sinfull distemper of the soul of fallen man in via (while he lives here) but
an unagreeablenesse to the commands of the Gospell. Yet because sin is the ante∣cedent to all grief, and had it not been, man should not have grieved; and the soul under godly sorrow is not where it would be; here is an object of com∣fort. If reall evill of pain (except that ill of absolute punishment which hath no intention of good from God with it to the party) be indeed present,  and grieved for lesse, more or equally to the nature of it; and not from an ill root, as crosse to our lusts, or corrupt desires: the graci∣ous God who hates nothing that he hath made, preserves man and beast, and in spe∣ciall, Lam. 3 33. afflicts not the sons of men  from his heart, (or willingly) hath a word of comfort for them that are in di∣stresse, so far forth for all, that the cause being removed, he will take away, or over-ballance with good the ill of pain: yet with this difference, that his speciall comforts are for the beleever, whom he pities as a father his son that fears him, and most especially those, who undergo sometriall, or suffer for righteousnesse sake, with whom his love is most present, and their reward great in the kingdom of heaven.
If the evil of sin be present in apprehen∣sion only,  and grieved for from a good root, though the grief lesse, then the ap∣prehension deserves a check, in that, if sin were there indeed, it would not be grie∣ved for sufficiently; yet he who pities his Creatures errour in grieving where there is no cause, hath a word of comfort for the rectifying of the heart, by remo∣ving the errour; As also in the evill of pain so present. From all these particulars we may gather thus much in generall, That though the object of comfort, properly, be one that mourns, yet some mourners are excepted herefrom. 1 Those that mourn because they can∣not satisfie their corrupt desires. 2 Those that mourn under pain which is absolute punishment, without any in∣tention of saving good to them from God. Such is the mourning of the dam∣ned in hell, for whom there is no com∣fort. And such would be the mourning of one that had sinned against the holy Ghost, if he were under some ill of pain, Otherwise, I think, there is no punish∣ment to a man in this life under which he can mourn, but carries some intention of good with it from God.
3 Those that mourn for sin in some sort, but are not throughly hum∣bled. The first and last of these are capable of comfort in sensu diviso, (when they and their ill ends, or wants are divided) the second of none. So much for the object of comfort, the variety and perplexednesse whereof as it hath been troublesome to me, so, I fear, it hath been tedi∣ous to you. 2 What affection Comfort aims to excite and set a working: that is Joy, as oppositely Reprehension aimed at Grief. I will comfort them, Jer. 31.13. Isa. 61.2, 3 and make them rejoice for their sorrows. To comfort all that mourn, to give them the oil of joy for mourning. 3 This it doth by presenting the heart with some good, wherewith it being not before affected, or not in that measure, was dejected. The object of Joy being Good present, and no affection stirred but by that which
brings the formalis ratio of its object with it, Nihil lenit dolorem nisi aliqua boni ratio in eo conspiciatur, (saith Melancthon) There is no asswaging of grief without some spice of good appear in the remedy. The ratio (nature) of good may be con∣ceived in that Good. which is a positive good. hath the respect of a less ill. The former is plain. Of the later our Saviour speaks, Mat. 26.24 It were good for that man he had never been. And I doubt not but it would carry a great respect of good, and much comfort to a soul in hell, to be assured that after ten thousand thousand years it should be annihilated. Not to be, hath no enti∣tie, therefore no good, yet carries respect of good in comparison of greater ill. Whence, removing ill de tanto or toto, (in part or whole) hath the rationem (or re∣spect) of good. Good may be said to be present in divers degrees, in possibility, probabilitie,  cer∣tainty, in actuall union, in immediate for the
fulnesse, and unseparable for the perpetuity of the union. According to the differences of the Good, and degrees of the presence which the comfort brings, so is the joy more or lesse. To a soul despairing, and sunk down under the impossibile (conceit of im∣possibility) of deliverance, the possibility is comfort, and perhaps sufficient for the present. The highest degree of comfort in this life, 1 Pet. 1.8. is the communion a beleever hath through faith with Christ: Wherein he rejoiceth with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Salvation apprehended in the cer∣taintie of Faith to the praise of Mercy; which is then consummated, when accor∣ding to the Word of God, by the act of Omnipotencie, the object beatificall shall be immediately and unseparably injoyed. Hence may appear how comfort acts upon the dejected heart, viz. by affecting it with some joy upon the good present, either in the removall of the ill partly or wholly, under which it lies: or else by bringing in positive good, which may ei∣ther sustain the heart against the ill, if it remain, or possesse the heart with liquid joy, if it be removed.
Hence we may thus describe comfort. What is Comfort? It is an  or rectifying of the heart, (by grief arising from some moral∣ly, or naturally good principle) dejected under some ill, present in apprehension only, or in deed; by affecting it with some present good, comparative or positive, whereby the ill is removed in part, or wholly: or the heart by Good sustained against the Ill, or possessed upon the re∣movall of the Ill. Hitherto of this first part of Explication. 2 The Scripture  profitable for Comfort, as for the former acts of Instruction, Refutation, Reprehension. It is necessarie in such degree and man∣ner, as no saving Comfort can be with∣out it, but by it, by the work of Gods Spirit may the dejected soul be recti∣fied. Whatsoever things were written in old time, were writ for our learning, . that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope. Rom. 15.4 Ps. 119.50 This is my comfort in my affliction, thy Word quick∣neth me.
I might for the further proof hereof bring an induction of severall griefs, and how the word is profitable for comfort against them, but I will name only two, which Hemmingius counts the chief. Gra∣vissimus animi cruciatus, &c. The most grie∣vous torment of the mind is desperation, with which, whosoever laboureth, feels the sorrowes of hell. And this ariseth from either An imagination of parti∣cularity, The consideration of ones unworthinesse by reason of often falling. 1 If the tentation ariseth from a Stoi∣call imagination, The testimony of the Lord is true (saith he) and it saith thus: 1 Tim. 2.4 2 Pet. 3.9. God would have all men to be saved and none to perish. Let this Word be oppo∣sed to all Stoicall imaginations. 2 The universall promise of Grace, Come unto me all ye that labour, Mat. 11.28 Joh. 3.16. Mat. 28. &c. So God loved the World, &c. Go teach, &c. He that beleeveth, shall be saved, &c. 3 There is no respect of persons with God.
According to this unmoveable (sure) Rule, He receives all penitents, rejects all impenitents. II Against the thought of our own unworthinesse, are 1 The glorious and large promises. 2 The excellencie of the Sacrifice, The Lamb of God, yea the Lamb God, &c. 3 Grace abounds above sin. 4 The bloud of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. 5 The examples of them who have sinned grievously, and yet have obtained mercie. Founded in the former. . If the Scrip∣ture contain all things fully and plainly that are necessary to salvation, then like∣wise for comfort, whereby the dejected soul is raised up, and carryed on against all that might presse it down, or discou∣rage it in the way to salvation. The former was proved in the act of Infor∣mation. 1 The Heathen have places of comfort in their Treatises,  and therefore the Scripture not adequately. Against the ill of sin, cold comfort,
who knew not him that takes away the sins of the world. Against Gods anger no saving comfort, seeing in his Son alone he is well-pleased, and loves none to salvation but as considered in him. He hath made us acceptable to himself in his be∣loved. Eph. 1.6. 2 Cor. 5.19. In him he is reconciling the world to himself. Against affliction their comfort but weak. Sin the sting of affliction they knew not how to pluck out, or how sa∣vingly to pacifie Gods anger. The righ∣teousnesse of the cause (which was their greatest comfort) is nothing where there is not the righteousnesse of the person, the person reconciled to God, and ina∣bled with grace to bear it. Non meriti paenam pateris, sed numinis iram; Est aliquid magnis crimen abesse malis. Thou sufferest not the punishment of thy fault, but only the anger of a deitie: And this is something. Thus Ovid comforts his friend. But what he gives with one hand, he takes away with the other, for if the deities anger be there, his something is nothing. In a word, We may answer here as be∣fore
in Confutation; If there be any comfort in their Philosophie it is derived from the fountain of comfort, who leaveth not himself without witnesse, is eminently in the Scripture, not saving comfort, unlesse perfected by the Scripture, wherein the mysterie of Salvation is alone con∣tained. 1 God is said to be the Father of mer∣cies, and God of all comfort,  who com∣forteth us in all our afflictions; therefore not the Scripture adequately. The subordinate is not taken away by the principall; God comforts,  1 by the Scripture, when he presents the good to our faith, and thereby chears us up against the ill. 2 He comforts according to the Scripture when he brings the reall good actually upon us, or removes the ill; having if not in speciall, yet at least in generall promised us that good in Scripture, and now doth but actually make present by his power what the Scripture makes effectually present to the beleever: and likewise makes this actual good comfortable when it comes, by shewing us Gods providence, and his love therein.
2 Angels and Men are said to comfort. By and according to the Scripture, which assures us, that he hath made his An∣gels ministring Spirits for the good of the Elect; and given them charge over us to keep us in our wayes. The same may be said of men who comfort us, Using this word; Doing what it contains to be done to us. III We were comforted by your faith, saith the Apostle. 1 That faith was the work of Gods Word in them. 2 This word told the Apostle what a good thing it was to see them beleeve to whom he had preached: how acceptable a work to God, a crown to him, which might over-ballance the afflictions atten∣ding his Ministerie. 1 Here we see what is the condition viatoris (of one on his journey travelling to heaven,   ) to stand in need of comfort. 2 The admirable goodnesse of God,
who hath afforded us his Word, the Word of comfort. 3 The reason why any dye in despair is not because there is no comfort for them, but because either it is not applyed unto them, or regarded by them: for it is profitable for comfort. 4 See the miserable condition of those who want Gods Word. 5 The unjust pretense of some, who say, they would betake themselves to a godly course of life, but that they see no comfort in it. Sure they place comfort in the pleasures of sin: Otherwise the Rule of a godly mans life, is the Word profitable for comfort. 1 Those that flye to the best Philoso∣phers for Comfort, Repre∣hension. leaving Gods Word. It is true they have some excellent say∣ings, materials of comfort. The chief Tullie names, Conscientia recte facti, The Conscience of a good deed: Conscientia officiorum meorum, The Conscience of my duties: Conscientia rectae voluntatis, The Conscience of a good purpose or inten∣tion, Est maxima consolatio rerum incommoda∣rum, Is the most soveraign comfort I find in my troubles.
S. Paul speaks to the same effect, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. Gods Word gives comfort enough to such an one as by the Apostle is here described. But alas the Philosophers conscience had not the Synteresis informed out of Gods Word,  having their dianoetic or discoursing, Eph. 4.18. (reasoning) fa∣culty darkened. Heb. 9.14. They had not the bloud of Christ to cleanse their consciences from dead Works to serve the living God. 2 Those that flie to Stoick destiny for comfort against sin or pain; Fatalis quaedam calamitas incidit (say they) my misery is fatall. What is that but to lay their sins to God, or (as the Phrase is in Job) to impute follie to God? The sin by this means remaining unpardoned, yea infinitely augmented by making the H. God who is Deus non volens iniquitatem, Psal. 5.4. God that hath no pleasure in wickednesse, to be the author of it. How shall not the pain re∣coil with far more strength to their utter confusion? 3 Those that run to Epicurisme for
comfort against grief. Sigravis, brevis, (say they) si longus, levis: If heavy, it will be short; if long, light. But this is one of their speculative comforts. When the grief comes and proves heavie, but not short, long and not light, what's then to be done? Gods Prophet denounced his judgments against them, and they said, Let us eat and drinke, Isa. 22.14. to morrow we shall dye. A sin which the Lord said he would never pardon. This is their father Epi∣cure said to have done, —Qui Stygias ebrius hausit aquas: who went down drunke to drinke o'th' Stygian Lake. I suppose one draught of that Lake would waken his drunkennesse, and then it would be too late to call for a drop of that liquor to cool his tongue, wherewith he had so oft enflamed and intoxicated his brain. Such are those that drown their griefs and stings of conscience in their cups, till they have brought an habitual stupiditie upon themselves: which though it may be void of grief for the present, yet is as far from true comfort which Gods Word affords, as dark∣nesse
from light, Hell from Heaven. 4 Those who seek to the Devil for com∣fort by Witches and Magicall Arts. What comfort Saul found in this the Scripture tels us. And if any find more, let them know that the Devill that Murderer would do them no benefit, but upon bi∣ting interest; And God who removes his hand for the present in displeasure, doth it but to raise it the higher, to give them a greater blow. To those who cleave to Gods Word, Consola∣tion. and build themselves thereon, and have it dwelling plentisully in them. It is a word profitable for Comfort. His Word who is the Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort. His Word who is the Con∣solation of Israel. His Word who is the Comforter. That Word which contains in it all the good which the universall God hath in store for the sons of men. That Word which is accompanied with the Holy Spirit, who searcheth the depth of God, most wise and able to apply it, and seal it to the heart of man, for the dispelling of all those terrours and griefs; which otherwise when they shall indeed be let loose upon a man, and by Satan,
and conscience aggravated, would make him by untimely death to flie from them to hell, as lesse grievous, till felt, then those actually lying upon him. That Word which is accompanyed with the immutable will and omnipotencie of God to accomplish the recompense of re∣ward upon all those to whom it speaks saving comfort. If Grief for sin lie heavy upon thee; this will say, Behold the Lamb of God which ta∣keth away the sin of the World. Joh. 1.29. He that con∣fesseth his sinne, and forsakes it, shall finde mercie. If reproach and disparagement, by Sa∣tans Ministers or Messengers, be cast upon thee in thy calling; This is indeed  a dart or crosse to flesh and bloud, and able to bring S. Paul upon his knees. But this Word will tell thee, That the Grace of God is sufficient for thee, yea that thou mayest rejoice in that against which thou prayedst. If thou shouldst lye upon thy bed of sicknesse, this Word wil tell thee, Thy Saviours left hand was under thy head, and his right hand did embrace thee. If death was now seifing upon thee, and the grave opening her mouth for thy body, This would make thee say of death,
Oh death where is thy sting! Oh grave where is thy victory! This would say unto thy soul, Come you blessed of the Father, inherit the kingdome. 1 To those that are betrusted with this Word, Exhorta∣tion I. that they would comfort others therewith. It is the Gospell of Peace, Eph. 6.17.1.13. the Gospell of our salvation. He gives it and gifts with it for this end. Isa. 50.4. God hath given me, &c. He calls for this, Isa. 40.1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people. Complains for want of it, The diseased have ye not healed, Ezek. 34.4. nor strengthened that which was sicke, nor bound up that which was broken. 2 To all, Exhorta∣tion II. to flie to Gods Word for Comfort in all our distresses. To desire comfort I need not exhort: And that it is no where else, hath been proved. 1 Lay away impietie. There is no peace to the wicked, saith my God. 2 Look our grief come not from the love of our lusts. 3 If for sin, look it be cordiall, and the wound searched to the bottome, be∣fore this precious medicine be applyed. They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people sleightly, Jer. 6.14. saying, Peace, peace, when &c.
To keep a thankfull remembrance of those whom God hath stirred up to be means of bringing us to the knowledge of this Word, Exhorta∣tion III. &c. AXIOM IV. . Ad disciplinam quae est in justitia. Holy Scripture is profitable for Instruction in righteousnesse. FOr the Explication of this part of Scripture, Explica∣tion. we must first shew what act of Scripture is contained in these words: And then explain that. That the word implies a practicall act looking at good and ill, Suidas affirms, saying, : I take right  or instruction to be, not a trim ryming or gingling of words and tongue or language; but , true senses, or opinions, or doctrines, concerning good and bad, honest and fil∣thy.
1 properly notes that act wherein men are conversant about chil∣dren, informing their mind and manners, for the prosecuting of good and avoiding of ill. Wherein the first distinct act seems to be Exhortation and Dehortation: in that after some confused act of knowledge of the thing, the will is to be excited to pro∣secute, or refuse it, and that will com∣mand both the mind to learn and the hand to practise. Hence it seems to be brought in as the first act of a child capable of institution. Isa. 7.16. Before the child shall know to refuse the ill and choose the good: which is done by exhor∣tation and dehortation. I was my fathers son, Prov. 4.4. tender, he taught me, and said—. What was this teaching but a manifold exhortation which there fol∣lowes, and chiefly to learn instruction? Hence Socrates was wont to say, that he had done halfe his work, when he had obtained that his scholars were willing to learn. Which he got by Exhortation and Dehortation. So that this act is a mean to bring on that of instruction in the distinctnesse thereof. 2 After institution, and exhortation
and dehortation, the word signifies cha∣stisement, as needfull in speciall for that age. My son despise not  the chastnings of the Lord: Heb. 12.5. For whom the Lord loveth  he chastiseth. From this prime signification of the word in reference to children, it is raised up Synecdochically, in all these signifi∣cations, to note at large, Institution, Ex∣hortation, Dehortation, or Castigation of all sorts, indifferently, old or young. And thus in this place, where the Apostle speaks of an act of Gods Word belong∣ing to all. But in which of these senses, remains to be inquired; and that will appear to be Exhortation and Dehor∣tation. That the word is so used may appear in Rev. 3.19. In the 15, 16, and 17. . verses our Saviour severally reprehends the La∣odiceans, not without threatning added thereto: in the 18. verse he exhorts, using a Motive from the End; then re∣collecting what he had said in the 19. ver. he saith, Ego quoscunque amo, , whomsoever I love, I rebuke or reprehend, and chasten; or rather, ex∣hort; Reprehend, as v. 15, 16, 17. Exhort, as v. 18.
The grace of God hath appeared , Tit. 2.12. that is, dehorting us from ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and exhorting to live sober∣ly, righteously, and godlily (or religi∣ously) in this present world. For this place the Context requires this sense. That the Apostle here intended to set down all the acts of Gods Word, where∣by it is effectuall, appears from the end, in the next verse, That the man of God may be perfect,  throughly furnished (made absolute) to every good work. Instruction we had in the word , Correction (so far forth as an act of Gods Word) in the word : so that there remains only that sense of this word which contains Exhortation to good, and Dehortation from ill. This may further appear by the words here added, , which seem to be added for distinction, or specifica∣tion of the  here named, which our Translation doth not so fully ex∣presse: But Beza thus renders it ad disci∣plinam quae est in justitia: and Tremelius out of the Syriac, ad eruditionem quae est in ju∣stitia, to the discipline, to the good nur∣turing
(or making unrude) which is in righteousnes. In the Syriac is the Pronoun  which answers in that tongue to  in the Hebrew. It seems to adde a double distinction to the word . 1 To difference the word from the two other senses of In∣struction and Castigation: and therefore he saith not , nor , which is in knowledge, which is in affli∣ction; not that which is in knowledge by instruction, or in affliction by castigation: but , which is in Exhor∣tation and Dehortation. 2 To difference  from that wicked Exhortation and Dehortation which Satan and his in∣struments use, not  that which is in wickednesse, which the holy Scriptures abhor, but . Righteousnesse is the conformity of man unto Gods rule or commands, which being two-fold, Bidding, Forbidding, there are two parts of righteousnesse; do∣ing good, which answers to the affirma∣tive
command, and eschewing ill, which answers to the negative. Psal. 34.14 David compre∣hends both in one verse, Eschew evill and doe good: and then addes in the next verse by way of motive, The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous; intimating that that is righteousnesse to eschew evill and doe good. We are brought to do good by Exhortation, which tends to excite us unto good; and therefore  contains Exhortation. We are brought to eschew ill by Dehortation, and therefore that is also contained in  which is . So that as the word  implyed the acts of Reprehension and Consolati∣on, there being a two-fold rectification needfull; so  implies two acts of Gods word, the one for the prosecution of good, the other to deterre from ill. We have then two Axioms in these words. I. The Scripture is profitable for Exhorta∣tion to good. II. For Dehortation from ill.
For the former. I.  The Scripture is profitable for Exhor∣tation. 1 What is meant by Exhortation. 2 How Gods word is profitable for it. 1 For the former. We will consi∣der it, 1 In it self. 2 In its difference from a Precept. 1 In it self. 1 What respect it lookes at in the object. 2 What affection it tends to excite. 3 How it doth that. 1 Exhortation looks at man indifferent∣ly considered, and not under any deter∣mined qualification of present good or ill, as the former acts of  did. To the unconverted it saith, Turn ye, Ezek. 18. turnye, why will ye die? To the converted, Exhort one another dayly. 3.3. Only it looks at man in reference to some future good to be done.
2 The affection which Exhortation aims at, is Hope, or efficax desiderium; whence is in man, the prosecution of good. Love looks at good abstractly in the connaturality or conveniencie which it hath unto the man, and is indeed, as it were, the life and soul of all the affecti∣ons, whereby they act. Hate, the prime affection wherein are founded all the rest that are conversant about ill, is it self not collateral, but subordinate to love, and founded therein. Therefore do I hate a thing, because opposite to somewhat which I love. If the good loved be future, Love takes the wings of Desire to move unto it: If possible to be had, Love stirs up the soul to use the means, whereby it may be had; and to conquer the diffi∣culties, and so animates this cardinall passion of Hope, whereby we prosecute good whether officii or beneficii, of dutie, or benefit, honest, or profitable. Both which God hath so united, that we cannot fol∣low that which is honest, but true profit will attend it; we cannot follow aright that which is truly profitable, but ho∣nesty is the way wherein, and the last end whereto that prosecution tends. Gods Rule being the way, his Honour the last end.
3 That you may see how Exhortati∣on excites this affection of hope, ye must know, 1 What the formalis ratio of the object of this affection is, 2 And then how exhortation brings an object thus cloathed. 1 The formalis ratio of the object of hope, is bonum, absens, arduum, possibile. Bonum is lovely, bonum absens desireable, bonum absens possbile, superaddes the proper respect of Hopes object, and arduum may seem to be, by accident, of the object of Hope; in that, God hath so ordered, that in this life  are : but the more difficulty, the lesse Hope, and the lesse difficulty, the more hope. Yet hence it is placed in the iraseible, which riseth up against the arduum. 2 An Exhortation in the compleat∣nesse of it, brings in this whole for∣malis ratio. In the Motives the Bonum,  these being taken from the honestum or utile, or both, of the thing exhorted to; and so much the stronger by how much the good is grea∣ter, and more necessarily subordinate to the chief good. To which may also be added the threatning of ill to them who
prosecute not the good, the escaping of it having also the reason or nature of good. By the Notes which Exhortation ad∣deth,  may be discerned whether it be ab∣sent or no. And therefore these are to be taken chiefly from the proper effects or adjuncts of it; which if absent, necessarily argue the absence of that whereto they are inseparably agreeing: As likewise Notes may be taken from the incompati∣ble dissentanie, which if present, argue the bonum to be absent. The arduum of it will be made appear by shewing the hinderers of us: The aversenesse of our corrupt nature from it. Satan and his instruments labou∣ring to Intice us anotherway, Deter us from it; and without difference.
The possible is manifested by the means of obtaining it,  which are such as Remove what might hinder us. Bring on the good directly. These four make an exhortation com∣pleat, for the exciting of hope, or stirring up the heart for the prosecution of Good. If ye exhort to any thing, the first question the heart makes, will be this, Is it good? Hereto the Motives answer. Secondly, it will say (as we are prone to flatter our selves) It is with me alrea∣dy. This the Notes will discover. Thirdly, it will say, There is no haste, I can have it with no adoe when I list. Hereto the expounding of the arduum wil answer. Nothing more can the heart say, why it should not follow it, but that Fourthly, It is impossible, at least se∣cundum quid, or in regard of us. To this the Means will answer, which shew how it may be gotten. And hence we may gather what divine Exhortation is, viz.
wherein by presenting the heart with some great good, the want of it, and the possibilitie of obtaining it, hope is exci∣ted, and the heart set on work, for the prosecution of that good. 2 For the explication of Exhortation in difference from a Precept; How a Pre∣cept and Exhoreation differ. A precept is an authoritative expression of the Commanders serious will to have somewhat done or omitted. Implies three things. 1 Jus, right to command. 2 Seriam volitionem, a willing in good earnest. 3 Manifestationem volitionis, an expressi∣on of that willing. Precept is Bidding. Forbidding. Forbidding and Exhortation do much differ, the one having for its object evill, the other good. Bidding and Exhortation not so much. Yet these may be considered 1 Abstractly in their natures, or 2 In the use of Scripture.
1 Considered at large in their natures they differ really. The former perem∣ptorily injoining the duty by virtue of authority over the partie in order to that. The latter perswading and exciting the heart, out of respect to the goodnesse of the thing. He may command that doth not ex∣hort, he may exhort that doth not, yea cannot command. 2 In Scripture-use, precept and exhor∣tation do not really differ. God might, by his authority over us, resulting from creation of us, and much more from Re∣demption, have peremptorily comman∣ded; but the gracious God would not use his authority in commanding, before he made a Covenant with us, and therein propounded his command by way of sti∣pulation or exhortation to that he would have us doe, to move us to free and ingenuous obedience. God so com∣mands, as he perswades to the thing from the goodnesse of it to us: he so exhorts or perswades, as not forgoing his au∣thority to punish the neglect of his per∣swasions. His command, as tending to our good, and attended with his promise
upon obedience, is an Exhortation; as coming in his name and authority, and attended with a threatning upon disobe∣dience, retains the nature of a Com∣mand. 2 How Gods word is profitable to Exhortation. As to the former acts in the same de∣gree and manner.  So as no saving Ex∣hortation can be without it; but by it, by the work of Gods holy Spirit, the heart of man may be excited, and carryed on in the saving prosecution, and attain∣ment of salvation, and all good things necessary thereto. A Bishop must not be given to wine, . nor filthy lucre; but sober, just, holy, temperate; holding fast the faithfull word, Tit. 1.9. that he may be able, by sound doctrine to exhort. These things speak and exhort (saith the Apostle) having for∣merly laid down the sum of the Gospel) Hence is preaching called The word of Ex∣hortation, c. 2. v. 15. Acts 13.15. eminently. If the Scripture contain all things per∣fectly, and perspicuously, which are necessarie to duty and salvation, then is it adae∣quately,
and necessarily profitable for Ex∣hortation. But the Scripture contains, &c. Therefore &c. Here the proper adjunct, profitablenesse for Exhortation, is demonstrated of the proper subject, the Scripture, by the proper cause, the sufficiencie and perspicuitie of the Scripture, to duty and salvation. The Minor hath been proved at large in the profitablenesse of it for instruction. The Major may appear in that, Exhor∣tation, in all the parts of it, is founded in that which conduceth to dutie attended with salvation. The thing exhorted to, or the keeping of the precept, is life, Prov. 4.4. The Motives urge it in that name. If ab honesto, that is to Gods honour, 1 Sam. 2.30. and those that honour him he will honour. If ab utili, that is truly profitable which is in order to salvation. What shall it pro∣fit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul? The triall whether we have the good or no, looks at duty attended with sal∣vation. Examine your selves, prove your selves, 1 Cor. 13.5. know ye not your selves, that Christ Jesus is in you except ye be reprobates? The difficulty of the thing exhorted to,
is considered in order to life. Enter in at the straight gate, narrow is the way to life. So like wise the Means in order to sal∣vation. If by any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the dead. That therefore which contains all things whereto man need be exhorted, all Motives whereby, all Notes of Triall, expressions of difficultie, Means of pre∣vailing; must needs be profitable for Ex∣hortation. Such is the Scripture, as containing all things fully and plainly necessary for sal∣vation, which all divine exhortation more nighly or remotely looks at. There∣fore, &c. 1  Here seems to be implyed, that there is a , Instruct. Exhor∣tation not that in righteousnesse. And I would to God it were not so frequent, especially here (in the Universitie.) The Prophet Laiah affords us an excellent example of such  in the Clergy of his dayes. Isa. 56 10, 11.12. The Watchmen are blind, yet they are greedy; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter. Come ye (say they) I will fetch wine, and we will fill our
selves with sirong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more aboundant. And I would to God men destinated in speciall for that  which is in righ∣teousnesse, could not exemplifie the con∣trary, not only in the scandalous practise, but also in perswasions to luxurie and impietie! But this, God and his holy Word do abominate. The Scripture in∣deed is profitable , but . 2 Here we may see, That while we here live, we have need of exhortation, so averse or back ward are we from good: Which certainly, had not our good and provident God seen, he had never put in∣to his Word, the Rule of our life, this act of Exhortation. 3 That we are not carryed to good by necessitie, or an Enthusiasm not to be withstood, for then no place would re∣main for Exhortations, which operate on our heart by Motives and perswasions; as hath already appeared from the nature of them. 4 See the goodnesse of God, who not content to send his son to puchase or ob∣tain our Redemption, to instruct us con∣cerning it now obtained, to confute er∣rours
opposite thereto, to reprehend straglers from Gods wayes, to comfort the dejected; is pleased also to superadde Exhortation which might strive with us, and draw us with the bands of a man, and the cords of love, most sweetly, to the pro∣secution of good. 5 Happy is their condition who enjoy the Word of God profitable for Exhor∣tation. If they were happy who heard Solomon discourse of naturall and politick wisdome; how much happier are they who hear God exhorting to supernatu∣rall and beatifying or blissefull good? 6 The condition of those is miserable who are destitute of Gods word. Who shall exhort them to good? 7 They are inexcusable who having Gods Word, follow not that which is good. Where will they (poor men!) lay the fault? Upon the want of Exhor∣tation to good? They cannot, for Gods word is profitable for Exhortation. Reprehension of them that neglect Exhortation To take it out of Gods word. I will aggravate this but with this one consideration. If they were such as were im∣perswasible,
and would not at all be exhorted (though the case were desperate) it was a lesse sin: but to be easily perswaded by Sa∣tan, and not to yeeld to God, makes it exceeding sinfull. By Satan exhorting to uncleanness, and not by God to holinesse. By Satan to that which is hurtfull to others, not by God to that which is good for them. By Sa∣tan to that is damnable, not by God to that is salvation. To give it. Take the like aggra∣vation here. Have Gods word, and detain that in unrighteous∣nesse, yet bring out rotten prin∣ciples. It is a comfort to us against the evill of our aversenesse from good, Consola∣tion. that we have Gods word profitable for exhortation. 1 That since the word of God is pro∣fitable for exhortation, Exhorta∣tion. we would attend to the exhortations of it.
Motives from the good of Exhortation in its Cause Bringing it out, The Son out of the bosome of the Father. Assisting, The Holy Ghost. Nature Holy. Profitable. Attention to it. The Father conceived it. The Son brought it forth. The H. Ghost assists and actuates it. The mighty God, Psal. 50 1. even the LORD hath spoken. I. The good of Exhortation appears in that, 1 The every way perfection of God, together with his glory, render him to us worthy to be attended to, in his Ex∣hortations: He being of infinite wisdom, justice, goodnesse, power, &c. So that it may well beseem, and be no prejudice to us to hear him. 2 His Actions and relations thence re∣sulting have deserved our attention. The
actions of Creation, Providence; First Covenanting with us: of Redemption, Second Covenant, in which there is the preparation of Grace. Glory. Creation gave him dominion over us, The Fa∣ther. Providence continues it; The first Cove∣nanting with us augmented it, Redompti∣on infinitely enlarged it; The second covenanting perfects it; The rest of his actions have made him an absolute Lord: Foederation or Covenanting with us, makes him a King and Father. He might, as an absolute Lord, peremptorily com∣mand, without proposing any promise, and punish with eternall torments the least neglect of his command; yet he ex∣horts as a King and Father. And to an Exhorter so excellent, so deserving of us, shall we not attend? Divine exhortations are from the Son of God, The Son. that logos essentialis who is Pro∣phet and King of his Church, who brought these exhortations out of the bosome of his Father, and in the dayes of his flesh, urged them with all vehemency and lovingnesse of expression, spending
whole nights in prayer for successe: with tears bewailing the want thereof. O Je∣rusalem, Jerusalem, how oft? O that thou hadst known this thy day! When we lay under the curse and never sued to him, he undertook our Redemption: when he had revealed so much by his Spirit be∣fore his Incarnation, and wrought in us a sense of our want, we did but intreat, O that thou wouldst rend the heavens & come down to us! He came at our request, emptied him∣self of glory, and took the shame due to us upon him, indured such contradiction of sinners, poured out his hearts bloud and soul in a most cursed and cruell death, under the weight of all our sins for an atonement; and now at the right hand of his Father, intreats for us, and listens to all our intreaties; yea perfumes them with his own precious merit to make them acceptable: and shall we not attend to him in his exhortations to us? The holy Spirit assists and acts divine exhortation. The Holy Spirit. 1 He inlightens the understanding by the Word of God and perswades the truth thereto; he heals the Wil by an action im∣mediate unto, and into it, that it may will good supernaturall: and by this illumi∣nation
of the Minde, and infusion of strength into the will, doth he in some sort also correct the affections, whose objects the understanding inlightened by the Spirit shews; whose actions the will healed by the Spirit commands. By grace he prevents or comes before the act, by inabling to it, he excites by inviting, and by, as it were, striving patiently, he operates in a man that puts not a barre against him. 2 By Grace subsequent to, or follow∣ing the former, he helps the will in the act, concurs effectually with it, and co∣operates to consummate the act brought forth by him. And shall we not attend to the exhortations of Gods word so power∣fully, so patiently, so lovingly applyed by the Holy Ghost? For the object rei or thing whereto they exhort, They are perfect, sure, right, Psal. 19. pure, clean, enduring for ever, true, and righteous altogether. For the benefit of them, They are con∣verting the soul, making wise the simple, rejoicing the heart, enlightning the eyes; more to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then ho∣nie and the hony-comb. By them is Gods ser∣vant
warned, and in keeping of them there is great reward. In a word, Godlinesse is the thing they contain, wherein stands the glory of man, and his conformitie with God. 1 Tim. 4.8. And God∣linesse is profitable for all things, hath the pro∣mises of this life, and that life to come. And shall we not listen to such exhor∣tations as contain the things we should sue for, though we were not exhorted to things that contain our perfection and beatitude both viae and patriae, here and hereafter? 2 By listening to them we honour God who sends them, our Saviour who brought them, and his Holy Spirit our Comforter and Sanctifier, who strives with us, and works our good by them. Hereby we receive the benefit of his pre∣venting grace, the help and co-operation of his subsequent grace. Hereby we are made perfect, firm, right, pure, clean, enduring for ever, true, and righteous, transformed into their nature, and there∣by made partakers of the divine nature. Here∣by we obtain conversion, wisdom, joy, illumination, the treasures of heaven, the great reward, the promises of this life, and that to come.
If we neglect these we dishonour God, despise Christ, resist the Holy Ghost, frustrating his preventing grace, never obtaining his co-operating grace. If we neglect these, we listen to Satans ex∣hortations and are transformed into their nature and his image, becomming corrupt, deceitfull, crooked, impure, unclean, false and unrighteous. All the benefit hereof will be perver∣sion of our souls, sottishnesse, horror of Conscience, darknesse, the losse of the great Reward, and curses of this life, and that to come. Yea by how much the Exhortations of the Scripture come with greater autho∣rity, love, and power, perfection, and profit, by so much the more heavy and fearfull shall be the condemnation of those who will not listen unto them. Prov. 1.22. Be∣cause I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, I will laugh at your calamitie, &c. Many other Motives might be added, if I listed to goe out of my text for them. Notes. I. From the effect. If any one shall say, That he doth attend to divine exhortati∣on, I will give him this note of Triall,
Which is, 1 To practise that whereto the Scripture exhorts. 2 All that. And 3 Because the Scripture, or God there∣in, exhorts thereto. 1 For the first branch, our Saviour tells us. Mat. 7.24. Whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doth them, I will liken him to a wise man that built his house upon the rock: v. 26. But eve∣ry one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doth them not, shall be likened to a foolish man that built his house upon the sand. For the second, S. James tels us, That if a man should keep the whole law, and yet of∣fend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he that saith, Do not commit adultery, saith also, Do not kill. 3 For the third, It is hence that the Scripture saith so often, The things that I command you. Whatsoever ye doe, doe to the glory of God. Zech. 7.5. Did ye at all fast to me, even to me? First, if he attend not that doth not practise according, in vain do they pre∣tend attention to the exhortations of Scripture, who think it snfficient to hear Gods word read or preached, though they make no conscience to practise what they hear. Such our Saviour likens to
a fool, Prov. 1.7. and a fool is said to despise wisdome and instruction. The second, Of obeying all, discovers those to be no attenders, who reserve to themselves some sin pleasing to corrupt nature, and think because they listen to the Scripture-exhortations in many other things, all is well, God must be mercifull to them in that: but such a Saint was Herod, who is said to have listened to John in many things. Thirdly, to obey eo nomine, because, &c. shews them not to attend indeed, who in that they do for the materiall of the action according to divine exhortation, aim at their own ends, and make not God the ground and end of their doing what he ex∣horts to. II. From the dissentany. To listen to Satan and his Instruments. No man can serve two Masters (saith our Saviour) so can no man attend to Gods word, and theirs who perswade the contrary. Whence Solomon makes it one end of di∣vine Exhortation, to keep us from listen∣ing to the Exhortation of Satans instru∣ments, Prov. 7.5. That they may keep thee from the strange woman; whose perswasions ye have there at large.
This shews those to be no listeners to divine exhortation, who are led away with ill company to sinfull practises. By these two Notes (to adde no more) I fear many will have just cause to think, that though they hear, yet they do not indeed attend to Scripture-exhortations. If any one shall say, that he can attend when he will, and his time is before him: Let me tell him, That God opened the heart of Lydia, and man hath not Gods power in his hand when pleaseth him. To day if ye will hear his voice, Psal. 95. harden not your hearts, saith David. The heart grows hard, the habits of sin strong, the interest that the Devill and ill company have got in a man, potent; and the decree may every moment come forth, which ye have in Ezekiel. Ezek. 24.13. Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthinesse any more. And what more vain and uncertain then mans life? Psal. 39.5. Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity, or, All Adam is all Abel setled.
Means. 1 Remove self-conceit,  There is more hope of a fool then of one that is wise in his own eyes. 2 Mortifie our desires of the pleasures, profits, and honours of this world. Here lies the strength of Satans Motives. If this be highly prized by us, we shall never re∣sist his perswasions, and consequently never attend unto the Scripture, or choak (we shall) what we receive. The cares of this world choaked the seed. Mat. 13. Gal. 6.14. But if we be crucified to the world and the world to us, (as the Apostle speaks) then are we fit to attend to the Scripture-exhorta∣tions. 3 Avoid ill company, and the occasi∣ons of sin. This Solomon appoints as a Mean, Take fast hold of Instruction, Prov. 4.14, 15. she is thy life. Means hereto, Enter not into the path of the wicked, and goe not in the way of evill men; avoid it, passe not by it, turn from it, and passe away. 1 Serious desire of salvation. Where∣to make the Motives to divine Exhor∣tation. 2 Serious desire to honour God,
which is the thing exhorted to, or the matter of divine exhortation. 3 Resolution to practise what he ex∣horts to, and bring forth the fruits there∣of, which is the good ground. 4 Prayer to God for his holy Spirit to lay home his Exhortations effectually to us. 5 Cherishing the motions of his holy Spirit, which by divine exhortations he stirs up in our hearts. 2 To those to whom God hath in speciall committed his word,  that they would, seeing it is profitable for Exhor∣tation, use it in this kinde, and be fre∣quent in exhortation by it. . Holy Scripture is profitable for Dehortation. Explication What is the nature of Dehortation considered in It self, where consider What Respect is in the object Person.
Affection it stirres up, and how. Its difference from a Pre∣cept. How the Scripture is profitable for it. 1 The Nature of Dehortation. 1 Dehortation (as Exhortation) looks not at its object as determined by any pre∣sent qualification of good or ill, (as Pre∣prehension and Consolation did) but in∣differently. To the regenerate it saith, Heb. 3.18. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evill heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. To the unregenerate, Sirs, Acts. 14.15.why do ye these things? We are also men and preach unto you, that you turn from these vanities. Only it looks at the object in relation to the future, (as Exhortation doth) but with this difference; That exhortation respects the Object as capable of some fu∣ture good, that it may excite thereto: De∣hortation
as liable to some future ill, that it may deter from it. May we not then dehort him,  to whom evill is present? If the evill be of pain,  there is need ra∣ther of Consolation: If of sin, of Repre∣hension: If of both, in vain do we de∣hort him from what cannot be avoided: Yet may we dehort him to whom evill is present, not from the evill as it is pre∣sent, but as it may hereafter be present; and thus far forth it is future. 2 The affection which Dehortation intends to stir up, is fear, opposed affir∣matively unto hope. For seeing Dehorta∣tion is from evill that we may flye it, and fear is the flight from ill, or the affection whereby we eschew evill; necessary it is, that Dehortation stir up the act of fear. 3 How doth Dehortation stir up this affection. For this we must understand what is the object of Fear, and how Dehortation presents to the affection its object clothed with that formalis ratio. The object of Fear, is malum magnum, imminens, vitabile: A great ill, imminent, possibly to be avoided.
If the evill be not great in it self, Jer. 49.15. we despise it. Imminent, imports absens, propinquum, ar∣duum, a thing absent, yet near, and diffi∣cult. If it be present, we grieve. Job 14.22. If we apprehend it under a conceit of distance, it affects us little or not at all. They that put far away the evill day, Amos 6.3, 5, 6. chant to the Viall, and drinke wine in bowls. If it be near, and not difficult, it makes us not very solicitous. The Rulers of the people in Jerusalem said, Isa. 28.15. When the overflowing scourge shall passe through, it shall not come unto us, for we have made lies our re∣fuge, and under falshood have we hid our selves. Hence in the former verse he calls them scornful men. They scorned the threatnings of the Prophet, because they thought they could shift well enough, and easily avoid the ill when it came, though they lived in the sin that caused it. If Dehortation for the most part be from sin,  and sin cannot properly be fea∣red, seeing it lies under our will and power, and so is not difficult, hence it seems to follow, that either Dehortation shall not stir up fear, or arduum, hard, difficult, shalbe shut out from the object of
Fear. That Dehortation is most from sin, appears throughout the whole Scripture. That sin cannot properly be feared in the decision of Aquinas. 1a. 2x. 43. Qu. Therefore either shut out difficult, or seek a new affection. That Dehortation is oft from sin,  yea al∣ways either from sin, or the causes, or con∣sequents of it, or somewhat that hath refe∣rence to it, cannot be denyed, Gods word is plain. That sin cannot properly be feared is the Schoolmans saying, and therefore we will examine it. In the body of the Article ye have this decision, with the reason of it, and a pro∣lepsis or anticipation of somewhat that might seem to crosse the former. The decision,  Sin cannot be feared. Peccatum subjacet voluntati, & potestati nostrae, Sin's in our wil & power. Therefore, &c. That al sin is voluntary,  is S. Austins saying. Understand it of actuall sin, and I think it may go for current. For that which God affords, or is ready to afford no power to avoid, I think he wil not condemn a man. But to answer to his reason. Sin is in our power, or rather impo∣tencie, and will, to commit it, (as wo∣full experience teacheth) but suvingly to
avoid it, is not in our power or will, fur∣ther then we have power from Gods free Grace, and our will be acted thereby: and if we oppose contumacie to his pre∣venting grace, we shall never obtain his co-operating & subsequent grace, which he affords not but to those who yeeld up themselves to the former, causing them alone savingly to avoid sin, who pray, and watch, and mortifie their lusts, and avoid occasions of sinnings. So that from this one thing, That God gives both to wil and to do, the Apostle argues, That we should work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.13, 14. The Schoolmans Prolepsis stands thus, Voluntas, &c. The wil may by an outward cause be inclined to sin: If that inclinant have great power to incline a man, in this regard there may be fear of sin, in as much as it is from an outward cause: as for the purpose, when a man's afraid to stay in wicked mens company, lest by them he be drawn into sin. Whereto he answers in these words, Sed propriè loquendo, &c. But to speak pro∣perly, a man in this condition, fears seduction more then the sin in its proper nature, or ratio. Where, by the way you may see, the Contemplator in his Cell could see (which few well take notice of)
that ill company hath great power to incline to sin. But for his answer, It may thus be re∣torted against himself; If seduction may be feared, seeing it is feared only in regard of sin, as it tends to bring on sin; it must needs follow, That sin it self may be feared, which makes seduction to be feared. If any be of his mind, let him shew it in not sinning, seeing so easily avoided. Let us hear what the Scripture saith to this point. Rom 6.23. Joh. 15.5. Eph 4.22. Heb. 12.1. 2 Pet. 2.20 1 Pet. 5.8. Prov 1.10. The wages of sin is death. With∣out me ye can do nothing. The heart is deceitful, Jer. 17. Lust is deceitfull. Sin easily besets us. The world (which we must needs be conversant in) tends to pollute us. Satan goes about to devour us, (viz. by making us to sin) III company to intice us. Whence and from many the like places we may reason thus a priori. That which unavoided is deadly, can∣not be savingly avoided but by Gods grace, hath a lustfull and deceitfull heart from within to incline to it, the World, Satan and his Instruments from without; that is justly to be feared. Such is sin: Therefore, &c.
Again, our Saviour commands, Mat. 26.41 Watch and pray that ye enter not into tentation. Take heed, Brethren, Heb. 3.12, 13. lest there be in any of you an evill heart to depart from the living God. Keep back (prayes David) thy servant also from presumptuous sins, Psal. 19. let them not have domi∣nion over me. I made a Covenant with mine eyes &c. Job. 31 1. 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body and bring it into sub∣jection. I might adde yet many examples. The whore alone, she hath cast down many wounded, yea, many strong men have been slain by her. David, Solomon, Peter, were overthrown by sin. Whence we may reason thus, a posteriori. That which God commands us to watch and pray against, bids us take heed of, and exhort one another dayly that we be not hardened by it; That which the strongest of Gods servants pray they may avoid; keep under their body, make a covenant for avoiding occasions of; That which overthrows so many thousands, and hath conquered Gods worthies; that sure is justly to be feared. Such is sin: Therefore, &c. I have stood the longer in clearing this doubt about the arduum, in the object of
Dehortation, which is principally sin, because, if it were not to be feared, we need not be dehorted from it, and so this act of Gods word should be in vain. The last thing in the object of Fear, is possibile vitatu. When there is no hope of avoiding the ill, there it's apprehended as present, Rhet. 2 5. and so causeth grief rather then fear.  (saith Aristotle) There must be something of Hope under Fear. He gives a reason, , For fear makes men take counsell or advise, and no man takes counsell concerning things hopelesse or impos∣sible. The Dehortation propounds the object under this formalitie. It expounds the evill in Motives, which evill because it is best judged by the opposite good, is either dishonest or unseemly, or unprofitable and unpleasant. And according to the de∣grees of good, so are those of evill, in de∣ordination from good, and subordination to the highest evill that can be given. Hence the fundamentals of Dehortati∣on are to be fetched. The Arduum or imminens is declared, either from Our inward corruption. Outward Incliners. Deficients. The Vitabile is explained in the Means, by way of Removing what would bring it on. Bringing in what would keep it out. II. How Dehortation differs from a Precept. It differs much from an affirmative or Bidding one: That having for its object Good, this Ill; from a negative, or For∣bidding, little. However they agree in the object, only a Precept in the authority of the commander forbids Ill: Dehorta∣tion disswades from it, from the nature of the thing. They are used promiscuously in Scrip∣tures, where God forbids nothing which either hath not the ratio of sin in its own nature, and therefore is forbidden; or from the precept backed with the threat∣ning, by which it is made ill to us
though in its own nature indifferent. III. How is the Scripture profitable for Dehortation? In the same manner and degree, as in the other acts thereof, so that without it no saving Dehortation can be made, but thereby through the grace of the H. Ghost, our heart may be savingly restrained from evill. By an induction of those dehortations which are every where in Scripture. To instance in one. Dehortation from drunkennesse, Eph. 5.18. Be not drunk, &c. Motives. 1 A sin of a high nature, Ab inho∣nesto. so that he is a son of Belial that commits it; and Be∣lial in the New Testament is put for the Devill, as in the Old alway in very ill sense. Count not thine hand-maid a daughter of Belial, said Hanna, when Eli accused her of drunkennesse. A sin that cannot stand with the state of grace. Gal. 5.21. Envying, Murthers, drunkennesse, revellings, and such like; of the which I tell you before, and I have told you in times past, that they which do such things have no inheritance, or shall not inherit the kingdom of God. He that cannot inherit the kingdom of
God, cannot be the Son of God; Rom. 8. For if Sons, then Heirs. 2 It disposeth to It self. Prov. 23.35. Other sins, Negatively, by taking away what would prevent them. 1 Wisdom. Prov. 20.1. Whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. 2 The Heart. Hos. 4.11. Wheredome, and wine, and new wine take away thine heart. 3 Discerning between good and ill. Lev. 10.9, 10. 4 Consideration of Gods works. Isa. 5.12. They regard not the works of the Lord, nor con∣sider the operation of his hands 5 Judgment for managing of their calling. Isa. 28.7. They are out of the way through strong drinke, they erre in vision, stumble in judgment. 6 Common sense, so as they become sots. Prov. 23.35. They have struck me shalt thou say, and I was not sick, they have beaten me and I felt it not. Psal. 69.12. The drunkards have made
songs of me. They pursue drink till it pursues them, They swal∣low down it, till it swallow them up. Isa. 28.7. They are swallowed up of wine. Positisely, it disposeth to other sins; Whoredome. Prov. 23.33. Thine eyes shall behold strange women. Wicked speaking. Ibid. Thine heart shall speak perverse things. Mocking and railing. Prov. 20.1 Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging. Contention and babling. Prov. 23.29. Who hath contentions? Who hath hablings? They that tar∣rie long at the wine. Injustice. Prov. 31.4, 5. Lest they drinke and forget the Law, and per∣vert judgment. Yea there is no sin that drunkennesse disposeth not to, unlesse it requires more wit (and command abstemiousnesse) then drunkennesse leaves a man.
It makes a man a slave to a senslesse creature. , Indeco∣rum Tit. 2.3. and so takes away the Image of God, wherein man was made Lord of the Creatures. All tables are full of vomit, and filthinesse, Isa. 28 8. so that there is no place clean. In one word, but often applyed, Inutile. Isa. 2.1. the Scripture sayes, Wo to them, Wo to the Drunkards of Ephraim! And lest a man with a side paunch, and melancholy dull temper, who could stand when others fell, might think him∣self exempted from the Wo: Isa. 5.22. Wo unto them (saith the Lord) that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink. The particular evils to the body, Prov. 21.17. estate temporall, spirituall, would be long to recite. Take that for all, which S. Paul tells the Galatians, and had told them in times past; Gal. 5.21. That a Drunkard cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Bites like a serpent, and stings like an Adder. Injucun∣dum. Pro. 23.29. Thus we see how the Scripture furni∣sheth with motives to Dehortation from the great evill of this sin. The Scripture likewise layes down the arduwn both Arduum.
from Within. I will seek it yet again, Prov 23.35. Without. Come ye (say they) I will fetch wine, &c. Isa. 56.12. Means. Per mo∣dum re∣movendi illativa. Prov. 23.31 v. 20. Luc. 21 34 Per mo∣dum infe∣rendi pro∣hibitiva. Looke not upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his colour in the cup. Be not among wine-bibers. Take heed that at no time your heart be made heavie with drunkennesse. Watch and pray. Be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves with Psalms and Hymns, and spirituall Songs, making melodie in your hearts to the Lord. This will keep out drunken catches, and braying out the hot fumes (that wine hath bred within) in brutish roarings. As in the former Branch, . where the proper adjunct was demonstrated of the proper subject, by the proper cause. 1  That there is a Dehortation which is not in righteousnesse. 2 So propense we are to evill that we stand in need to be dehorted from it.
3 The goodnesse of God that gives it us in his Word. 4 That we are not fatally kept back from evill, but by Dehortation or dis∣swasion. 5 Happy is their estate who injoy Gods word thus Dehortatorie from evil. 6 Wretched is theirs who want it. 7 The unexcusablenesse of those that eschew not evill, when Gods own word dehorts them. Reprehension of 1 Those that submit not themselves to the dehortations fetched from Gods word. The aggravation of their sin, is, For that they will sub∣mit to other dehortations. 2 Those that dehort not others from evill. Their sin is aggravated by this, That they will dehort, or disswade from other things, especi∣ally from Good. Consolation against evils is, We have the Scripture fit to disswade us from evil. To submit our selvs to the dehortations of the Scripture. Exhorta∣tion. Thou hast laid up thy word in mine heart, that I should not sin against thee. THE END.
