C3172 R35499 15345628 103453
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH, Together with the Lord Chancellors, To Both Houses of Parliament. To which is added, His Lordships several SPEECHES; As also, those of Sir JOB CHARLETON, At his admission of Speaker to the Honourable HOUSE of COMMONS. Delivered at the Opening of the Parliament, on Tuesday February 4. And Wednesday February 5. 1672/3. By His Majesties special Command. royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT LONDON, Printed by the Assign of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1672/3. CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
His MAJESTIES Gracious Speech To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Wednesday Febr. 5. 1672. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Am glad to see you here this day; I would have called you together sooner, but that I was willing to Ease you and the Countrey, till there were an abso∣lute necessity. Since you were last here, I have been forced to a most important, necessary, and expensive War, and I make no doubt, but you will give Me suit∣able and effectual Assistance to go through with it. I refer you to My Declaration for the Causes, and in∣deed the Necessity of this War; and shall now onely tell you, That I might have digested the Indignities to My Own Person, rather then have brought it to this Extremi∣ty, if the Interest, as well as the Honour of the whole Kingdom had not been at stake: And if I had omitted this Conjuncture, perhaps I had not again ever met with the like Advantage. You will find that the last Supply you gave Me, did not answer Expectation for the Ends you gave it, The payment of My Debts. Therefore I must in the next place recommend them again to your especial Care. Some few days before I Declared the War, I put forth My Declaration for Indulgence to Dissenters, and have hitherto found a good Effect of it, by securing Peace at Home, when I had War Abroad. There is one part in it
that hath been subject to Misconstruction, which is that concerning the Papists; as if more Liberty were granted them, then to the other Recusants; hen it is plain there is less? For the Others have Publick places allowed them, and I never intended that they should have any, but onely have the Freedom of their Religion in their own houses, without any Concourse of others. And I could not Grant them less then this, when I had extended so much more Grace to others, most of them having been Loyal and in the Service of Me, and of the King my Father; And in the whole Course of this Indulgence, I do not in∣tend that it shall any way Prejudice the Church, but I will Support its Rights, and It in its full Power. Having said this, I shall take it very ill to receive Contradiction in what I have done. And I will deal plainly with you, I am resolved to stick to my Declaration. There is one Jealousie more that is maliciously spread abroad, and yet so weak and frivolous, that I once thought it not of moment enough to mention; but it may have gotten some ground with some well minded people, and that is, That the Forces I have raised in this War, were designed to Control Law and Property; I wish I had had more Forces the last Summer, the want of them then, convinces me I must raise more against this next Spring; And I do not doubt but you will Consider the Charge of them in your Supplies. I will Conclude with this assurance to you, That I will preserve the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and the Church as it is now Established in this Kingdom, and that no mans Property or Liberty shall ever be invaded. I leave the rest to the Chancellor.
THE Lord Chancellor's SPEECH. My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons. THe King hath spoken so fully, so excellently well, and so like Him∣self, that you are not to expect much from me. There is not a word in His Speech that hath not its full weight: And, I dare with assurance say, will have its effect with you. His Majesty had called you sooner, and His Affairs required it, but that He was resolved to give you all the ease, and vacancy to your own private Concerns; and the People as much respit from Payments and Taxes, as the ne∣cessity of His Business, or their Preser∣vation would permit. And yet (which I cannot but here mention to you) by the Crafty insinuations of some ill
affected persons, there have been spread strange and desperate rumours, which your Meeting together this day, hath sufficiently proved both malicious, and false. His Majesty hath told you, that He is now engaged in an important, very expensive, and indeed a War absolute∣ly necessary, and unavoidable. He hath referred you to His Declaration, where you will find the Personal indignities by Pictures, and Medals, and other publique affronts, His Majesty hath re∣ceived from the States, their breach of Treaties both in the Surinam, and East-India business: and at last they came to that height of insolence, as to deny the honour and right of the Flag, though an undoubted Jewel of this Crown, never to be parted with, and by them particularly owned, in the late Treaty of Breda, and never contested in any age. And whilest the King first long expected, and then solemnly de∣manded Satisfaction, they disputed His title to it in all the Courts of Chri∣stendom, and made great offers to the French King, if he would stand by them
against us. But the most Christian King too well remembred what they did at Munster, contrary to so many Treaties, and solemn Ingagements; and how dangerous a neighbour they were to all Crowned heads. The King and His Ministers had here a hard time, and lay every day un∣der new obloquies. Sometimes they were represented as selling all to France for money, to make this War: Ports∣mouth, Plimouth, and Hull, were to be given into the French hands for Caution. The next day news came, that France, and Holland were agreed. Then the obloquy was turned from treachery to folly: The ministers were now Fools, that some days before were Villains. And indeed the Coffee-houses were not to be blamed for their last ap∣prehensions; since if that Conjunction had taken effect, then England had been in a far worse case then now it is, and the War had been turned upon us. But both Kings, knowing their Interests, resolved to Joyn against them, who were the Common Enemies to all Monarchies, and I may say, especially
to ours, their onely Competitor for trade, and power at Sea; and who one∣ly stand in their way to an universal Empire, as great as Rome. This the States understood so well, and had swallowed so deep, that under all their present distress, and danger, they are so intoxicated with that vast ambition, that they slight a Treaty, and refuse a Ces∣sation. All this you, and the whole Nation saw before the last War; but it could not then be so well timed, or our allian∣ces so well made. But you judged a∣right, that at any rate, Delenda est Car∣thago, That Government was to be brought down. And therfore the King may well say to you, Tis your War. He took His measures from you, and they were just, and right ones: and He expects a suitable assistance to so neces∣sary, and expensive an action, which He has hitherto maintained at His own charge, and was unwilling either to trouble you, or burden the Country, un∣til it came to an inevitable necessity. And His Majesty commands me to tell you, that unless it be a certain Sum, and
speedily raised, it can never answer the Occasion. My Lords and Gentlemen, Reputation is the great support of War or Peace. This War had never begun, nor had the States ever slighted the King, or ever refused Him Satis∣faction, neither had this War continued to this day, or subsisted now, but that the States were deceived in their mea∣sures, and apprehended His Majesty in that great want of money, that He must sit down under any affronts, and was not able to begin, or carry on a War. Nay, at this day the States sup∣port themselves amongst their people by this only falshood, that they are assu∣red of the temper of England, and of the Parliament, and that You will not supply the King in this War: And that if they can hold out till your meeting, they will have new life, and may take new measures. There are lately taken, two of their principal Agents, with their Credentials and Instructions to this purpose, who are now in the Tow∣er, and shall be proceeded against accor∣ding to the Law of Nations. But the
King is sufficiently assured of His peo∣ple: Knows you better: and can never doubt His Parliament. This had not been mentioned, but to shew you of what importance the frankness, and sea∣sonableness of this Supply is, as well as the fulness of it. Let me say, the King has brought the States to that conditi∣on, that your hearty conjunction, at this time, in supplying His Majesty, will make them never more formidable to Kings, or dangerous to England. And if after this you suffer them to get up, let this be remembred, The States of Holland are Englands eternal Enemy both by interest, and inclination. In the next place, to the supply for the carrying on of the War, His Ma∣jesty recommends to you the taking care of His Debts. What you gave the last Session did not near answer your own expectation. Besides, an other consi∣derable Aid you designed His Majesty, was unfortunately lost in the birth; so that the King was forced for the carry∣ing on of His affairs, much against His will, to put a stop to the payments out of the Exchequer. He saw the pres∣sures
upon himself, and growing incon∣veniencies to His people by great inte∣rest; and the difference through all His Business between Ready money, and Orders. This gave the King the neces∣sity of that proceeding; to make use of His own Revenue, which hath been of so great effect in this War. But though he hath put a stop to the trade, and gain of the Bankers, yet he would be unwil∣ling to ruine them, and oppress so ma∣ny Families, as are concerned in those debts; Besides, it were too dispropor∣tionable a burden upon many of His good Subjects. But neither the Bank∣ers, nor they, have reason to complain, if you now take them into your care, and they have paid them, what was due to them, when the Stop was made, with Six per Cent. interest from that time. The King is very much concerned both in Honour, and Interest to see this done. And yet he desires you not to mis-time it: but that it may have only the second place, and that you will first settle, what you intend about the Sup∣ply. His Majesty has so fully vindicated
His Declaration from that Calumny concerning the Papists, that no reasona∣ble scruple can be made by any good man. He has sufficiently justified it by the time it was published in, and the effects He hath had from it; and might have done it more, from the agreeable∣ness of it, to His own natural disposition, which no good English man can wish other then it is. He loves not bloud, or rigorous severities; but where mild, or gentle wayes may be used by a wise Prince, He is certain to choose them. The Church of England, and all good Protestants have reason to rejoyce in such a Head, and such a Defender. His Majesty doth declare His care, and con∣cerns for the Church, and will maintain them in all their rights and priviledges, equal, if not beyond any of His Prede∣cessors: He was born, and bred up in it: It was that His Father died for: We all know how great temptations and offers He resisted abroad, when He was in His lowest condition: And He thinks it the honour of His reign, that He hath been the Restorer of the Church: 'Tis that He will ever maintain, and hopes to
leave to posteritie, in greater lustre, and upon surer grounds, then our ancestors ever saw it. But His Majesty is not con∣vinced that violent ways are the interest of Religion or the Church. There is one thing more, that I am commanded to speak to you of, Which is the jealousie, that hath been foolishly spread abroad, of the forces the King hath raised in this War. Wherein the King hath opened himself freely to you, and confessed the fault on the other hand. For if this last Summer had not proved a miracle of storms, and tempests, such as secured their East-India Fleet, and protected their Sea-coast from a discent, nothing but the true reason (want of Money) could have justified the defect in the number of our forces. 'Tis that His Majesty is providing for against the next Spring, having given out Orders for the raising of seven or eight Regiments more of Foot, under the Command of Persons of the great∣est Fortunes and Quality. And I am earnestly to recommend to you, that in your Supplies, you will take into your consideration this necessary addition of charge
And after His Majesties conclusion of His Speech, let me conclude, nay let us all conclude with blessing God, and the King. Let us bless God, that he hath gi∣ven us such a King to be the repairer of our breaches both in Church and State: and the restorer of our paths to dwell in: That in the midst of War and Mise∣ry, which rages in our neighbour Countries, our garners are full, and there is no complaining in our streets: And a man can hardly know that there is a War. Let us bless God, that hath given this King signally the hearts of His people, and most particularly of this Parliament, who in their affection and loyaltie to their Prince, have exceeded all their predecessors. A Parliament with whom the King hath many years lived with all the Caresses of a happy Mariage. Has the King had a concern? You have wedded it. Has His Maje∣sty wanted Supplies? You have readi∣ly, cheerfully, and fully provided for them. You have relied upon the Wis∣dom and Conduct of His Majestie in all His affairs: so that you have never at∣tempted to exceed your bounds, or to
impose upon Him: whilest the King on the other hand, hath made Your Coun∣sels the foundations of all His proceed∣ings; and hath been so tender of you, that He hath upon His own revenue and credit endeavoured to support even fo∣reign Wars, that he might be least unea∣sie to you, or burdensom to His people. And let me say, that though this Mar∣riage be according to Moses's Law, where the husband can give a bill of di∣vorce, put her away, and take another: Yet I can assure you, it is as impossible for the King to part with this Parlia∣ment, as it is for you to depart from that loyaltie, affection, and dutiful behavi∣our, you have hitherto shewed towards Him. Let us bless the King for taking a∣way all our fears, and leaving no room for jealousies: For those assurances, and promises He hath made us. Let us bless God and the King, that our Re∣ligion is safe: That the Church of England is the care of our Prince: That Parliaments are safe: That our
Properties and Liberties are safe. What more hath a good English man to ask, but that this King may long reign, and that this Triple-alliance, of King, Parliament, and People, may never be dissolved? LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christo∣pher Barker, Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1672,/3
THE LORD CHANCELLORS SPEECH. Feb. 4. 1672. My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons. HIs Majesty hath commanded me to tell you, that he hath many things to say to you, but he thinks not this a proper time, but will defer it till the House of Commons be compleated with a new Speaker. For his Majesty hath since the last Session, as a mark of his Favour to his House of Commons, and that he might reward so good a Servant, taken their late Speaker, Sr. Edward Turner, to be Lord Chief Ba∣ron of the Exchequer, and called him by Writ to be an assistant to this House. I am therefore com∣manded to acquaint you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, that it is the Kings pleasure you repair to your House, and Elect a Discreet, Wise, and Learned man, who after he hath been by you Pre∣sented, and that presentation by His Majesty admit∣ted, shall then possess the office of your common Mouth and Speaker. And the King is pleased to be here to Morrow in the Afternoon, to receive the Presentment of him accordingly.
Sir JOB CHARLTON'S SPEECH, February 5. 1672. Most Gracious Sovereign, THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, in Obedience to Your Royal Command, have proceed∣ed to the Choice of a Speaker. They have among them many wor∣thy Persons, Eminently qualified for so great a Trust; yet with too favour∣able an eye have cast it upon me, who am really conscious to my self of many infirmities, rendring me much unfit for so great an Imployment: And al∣though my endeavours of excusing my self before them, have not been suc∣cessful, yet they have been so Indul∣gent, as to permit me to continue my endeavours therein before Your Ma∣jesties most piercing and discerning Judgment.
The Veneration due to Majesty, which lodgeth in every Loyal Breast, makes it not an easie matter to speak before Your Majesty, at any time, or in any capacity; But to speak before Your Majesty in Your Exaltation, thus gloriously supported and attended, and that as Speaker of Your House of Cm∣mons, requires greater abilities then I can pretend to own; I am not also without fear, That the Publick Af∣fairs, wherein Your Majesty and Your Kingdom, in this juncture of time, are so highly concerned, may receive de∣triment through my weakness. I therefore with a plain humble heart, prostrate at Your Royal feet, beseech, That You will Command them to review what they have done, and to proceed to another Election.
The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Feb. 5. 1672. Mr. Serjeant Charleton, THe King hath very attentively heard your discreet and handsome Discourse, whereby you endeavour to excuse and disable your self for the place of Spea∣ker; In answer whereof, his Majesty hath com∣manded me to say to you, That he doth in no sort admit of the same; For his Majesty hath had long experience of your Abilities, good Affection, In∣tegrity and Resolution in several employments of great Trust and Weight: He knows you have been long a Parliament-man, and therefore every way fit∣ted and qualified for the Employment: Besides, he cannot disapprove the Election of this house of Com∣mons, especially where they have expressed so much duty in choosing one worthy and acceptable to him, And therefore the King doth allow of the Election, and admits you for Speaker.
Mr. Speakers Speech, Feb. 5. 1672. Great SIR, SInce it is Your Gracious Pleasure not to accept of my humble Excuse, but by Your Royal Approbation to fix me under this Great, though Honourable Weight, and to think me fit to be invested with a Trust of so high a nature as this is. I take it in the first place to be incumbent upon me, that I render Your Majesty all possible thanks, which I now humbly do with a heart full of all Duty, and affected with a deeper sense of Grati∣tude then I can find words to express. Next, from Your Royal Determination in this Affair, whereby you have imprinted a new Cha∣racter upon me, I take courage against my own diidence, and chearfully bend my self with such strength and abilities as God shall give to the Ser∣vice so graciously designed me; no way doubting, that Your Majesty will please to pardon my Frail∣ties, to accept of my faithful Endeavours, and al∣ways to look favourably on the Work of Your own ands. And now Sir, my first Entrance upon this Ser∣vice, obliges me to make a few necessary, but hum∣ble Petitions on the behalf of Your most Loyal and Dutiful House of Commons.
1. That for our better Attendance on the Publick Service, we and our Ser∣vants may be free in our Persons and Estates from Arrests and other Di∣sturbances. 2. That in our Debates, Liberty and Freedom of Speech be allowed us. 3. That as occasions shall require, Your Majesty upon our humble suit, and at such times as Your Majesty shall judge seasonable, will vouchsafe us access to Your Royal Person. 4. That all our Proceedings may re∣ceive a favourable Construction. That God, who hath brought You back to the Throne of Your Fathers, and with You all our Comforts, grant You a long and a prosperous Reign, and send You Victory over all Your Ene∣mies, and every good mans heart will say, Amen.
The Lord Chancellors SPEECH, Feb. 5. 1672. Mr. Speaker, THe Kings Majesty hath heard and well weighed your short and Eloquent O∣ration; And in the first place much approves that you have with so much advantage, introduced a shorter way of speaking upon this occasion: His Majesty doth well accept of all those dutiful and affectionate expressions in which you have delivered your Submission to his Royal pleasure; And looks upon it as a good Omen to his affairs, and as an Evidence that the House of Com∣mons have still the same Heart, that have chosen such a Mouth. The conjuncture of time, and the King and Kingdoms affairs require such a House of Com∣mons, such a Speaker; for with reverence to the ho∣ly Scripture upon this occasion the King may say, He that is not with me is against me; for he that doth not now put his Hand and Heart to Support the King in the common cause of this Kingdom, can hardly ever hope for such another opportunity, or find a time to make satisfaction for the Omission of this. Next, I am commanded by his Majesty to answer your four Petitions, whereof the first being; The freedom of you and your Servants in your Persons and
Estates, without arrest or other disturbance, the King is graciously pleased to grant it as full as to any of your Predecessors. The Second for Liberty and Freedom of Speech, the Third for access to his Royal person. And the Fourth, that your proceedings may receive a Favoura∣ble construction, are all freely and fully granted by his Majesty. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Chri∣stopher Barker, Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1672.
