C4151 12394966 61105
A FORM OF PRAYER To be Used on Wednesday the Fifth day of June next ensuing, within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Ten Miles distance of the same. And on Wednes∣day the Nineteenth of the same June through the rest of the whole Kingdom; Being the Fast-Day appointed by the King and Queen's Proclamati∣on to Implore the Blessing of Almighty God up∣on Their Majesties Forces by Sea and Land, and Success in the WAR now Declared against the French King. By Their Majesties Special Command. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesties MDCLXXXIX.
WHITEHALL, May 28. 1689. IT is His Majesties Pleasure That this Form of Prayer be forthwith Printed and Publish∣ed. SHREWSBURY.
The Order for Morning Prayer. ¶ Let him that ministreth read with a loud voice these Senten∣ces of Scripture, and after them the Exhortation following. COrrect us, O Lord,Jer. x. 24. but with judg∣ment; not in thine anger: lest thou bring us to nothing. O our God, encline thine ear and hear;Dan. ix.18. open thine eyes, and behold: for we do not present our supplicati∣ons unto thee for our righteousnes∣ses, but for thy great mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken,19. and do, and defer not for thine own sake, and for thy people that are called by thy name. DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in sundry places, to acknowledge and con∣sess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end, that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most
holy Word, and to ask those things which are requi∣site and necessary, as well for the body as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me. ¶ The Confession to be said of the whole Congregation after the Minister, all kneeling. ALmighty and most merciful Father; We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts. We have offended against thy holy laws. We have left undone those things which we ought to have done; And we have done those things which we ought not to have done; And there is no health in us. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults. Restore thou them that are penitent; According to thy promises declared un∣to mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake; That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of thy holy Name. Amen. ¶ The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone, stand∣ing; the People still kneeling. ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live; and hath given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true re∣pentance and his holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that
at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Iesus Christ our Lord. ¶ The People shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen. ¶ Then the Minister shall kneel, and say the Lords Prayer; the People also kneeling and repeating it with him. OUr Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. ¶ Then likewise he shall say, O Lord open thou our lips. Ans. And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Priest. O God make speed to save us. Ans. O Lord make haste to help us. ¶ Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost; Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and e∣ver shall be: world without end. Amen. Priest. Praise ye the Lord. Answer. The Lords name be praised. ¶ Instead of the Venite, exultemus, shall be said this Hymn fol∣lowing; one Verse by the Priest, another by the Clerk and People. LEt God arise, and let his enemies be scattered:Psal. lxviii. 1. let them also that hate him flee before him. Like as the smoke vanisheth, so shalt thou drive them away:2. and like as the wax melteth at the fire, so let the ungodly perish at the presence of God. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of the people:Psal iii 5. that have set themselves against me round about.
Destroy thou them,Ps. v. 10. O God, let them fall by their own coun∣sels: cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebelled against thee. The Lord will abhor the blood-thirsty and deceitful man. 6. But let all those that trust in thee rejoyce:11. Let them ever shout for joy. For thou Lord, 12. wilt bless the righteous: with thy favour wilt thou compass him as with a shield. Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed:Ps. vi. 10. let them return and be ashamed suddenly. O Lord my God,Ps. vii. 1. in thee do I put my trust: Save me from all them that persecute me and deliver me. Arise,6. O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine enemies, and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast commanded. So shall the Congregation of the people compass thee about:7. For their sakes therefore return thou on high. Through God we shall do valiantly:Ps. cviii.13. for it is he that shall tread down our enemies. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. ¶ Instead of the Psalms for the Day, shall these proper Psalms be used, . IX. X. ¶ The first Lesson, 2 Chron. Chap. 20. to v. 31. ¶ After the first Lesson, shall follow Te Deum Laudamus in En∣glish. WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. All the earth doth worship thee: the Father everlast∣ing. To thee all angels cry aloud: the heavens, and all the powers therein. To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry,
Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabaoth. Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty: of thy glory. The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee. The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee. The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee. The holy Church throughout all the world: doth acknowledge thee; The Father: of an infinite Majesty; Thine honourable, true: and only Son; Also the holy Ghost: the Comforter. Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ. Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father. When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou didst not abhor the Virgins womb. When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death: thou didst open the Kingdom of heaven to all belie∣vers. Thou sittest at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father. We believe that thou shalt come: to be our Iudge. We therefore pray thee, help thy servants: whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious blood. Make them to be numbred with thy Saints: in glory everlasting. O Lord, save thy people: and bless thine heritage. Govern them: and lift them up for ever. Day by day: we magnifie thee; And we worship thy Name: ever world without end. Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin. O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us. O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee. O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.
¶ The second Lesson, Heb. XI. Jubilate Deo. Psal. C. O Be joyful in the Lord all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his presence with a song. Be ye sure, that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we our selves, we are his peo∣ple, and the sheep of his pasture. O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his Name. For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endureth from generation to genera∣tion. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. ¶ Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the People standing. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Iesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, He descended into hell; The third day he rose again from the dead, He ascended into heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Al∣mighty; From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost; The holy Catholick Church; The Communion of Saints; The forgive∣ness of sins; The resurrection of the body, And the life everlasting. Amen. ¶ And after that, these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice, The Lord be with you. Answer. And with thy Spirit.
Minister. ¶ Let us pray. Lord, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. ¶ Then the Minister, Clerks and People shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud voice. OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest standing, shall say, O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us. Answ. And grant us thy salvation. Priest. O Lord, save the King and Queen. Answ. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee. Priest. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness. Answ. And make thy chosen people joyful. Priest. O Lord, save thy people. Answ. And bless thine inheritance. Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord. Answ. Because there is none other that fighteth for us, but only thou, O God. Priest. O Lord, save thy servants, Answ. Who do put their trust in thee. Priest. Send us help from thy holy place. Answ. And evermore mightily defend us. Priest. Let the enemy have no advantage against us: Answ. Nor the wicked approach to hurt us. Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong tower, Answ. From the face of our enemies. Priest. O Lord hear our Prayer, Answ. And let our cry come unto thee.
¶ Instead of the Collect for the Day, shall be used these which fol∣low, both in Morning and Evening Prayer, and in the Com∣munion Service. O God our refuge and strength, whose power no Creature is able to resist, who teachest our hands to War, and our fingers to fight, and without whom the Horse and Chariot is in vain prepared against the day of Battel; defend us we beseech thee with thy mighty power, and save us with thy out stretched arm, that our Forces may be preserved, and become Victorious by Sea and Land, evermore serving un∣der his glorious Banner who is the Lord of Hosts, God blessed for ever. Amen. O most glorious and gracious God, whose Iudg∣ments against obstinate offenders are most severe and terrible, But whose Mercies are infinite to all them that with hearty Repentance and true Faith turn unto thee; We the sinful People of this Land, do acknowledge before thee, to thy glory and our own shame, that never any Nation had greater experi∣ence of thy goodness, nor ever did any more unthank∣fully abuse it. When thou gavest us great and long Prosperity, we like Jesurun wared fat and kicked a∣gainst thee; when thou didst thrust us into those Confu∣sions, out of which we saw little hopes of arising, even in the time of that distress did we trespass yet more against thee. When by miracles of mercy thou hadst turn'd our Captivity, we soon forgot thee our Savi∣our, and return'd again to our folly; And even while thou hast of late appeared for us, by delivering us out of the hands of our implacable Enemies of the Romish Faction, we have by our sins been fighting against heaven and against thee; And now we are no more worthy to be called thy Sons or thy Servants, whom neither thy fear hath driven to repentance, nor thy goodness led to it. In mercy, O God, awaken us all; beget in us a holy dread of thy Iudgments, and a deep sense of our manifold and repeated provocations,
pardon the great offences of us thy servants, and the crying sins of the whole Nation, remove the evils we still lie under, avert those we have just cause to fear; and howsoever thou mayest think fit to Correct us for our sins, yet never deliver us up into the hands of those men whose mercies are cruel; pour out thy a∣bundant blessings upon our Gracious King and Queen, and their great Council now Assembled in Parliament, keep them as the apple of thy eye, hide them under the shadow of thy wings, direct and bless them in all their Consultations. And more particu∣larly we now prostrate our selves before thee to implore thy blessing upon this their great undertaking for the necessary defence of thy people; Go forth with their Fleets and Armies, compass them with thy Fa∣vour as with a Shield, let it appear that thou the Lord our God art with us to help us, and to fight our Bat∣tels, bless us with Victory and Success, and in thy own good time with such a Peace as may tend to the glory of thy great Name, and the Preservation of thy Church and true Religion among us, the Honour and Safety of Their Majesties, and the Security, Peace and Prosperity of these Kingdoms; All which we humbly beg in the Name and through the Mediation of thy Son Iesus Christ our Saviour. Amen. ¶ The Collect for Peace. O God who art the author of Peace, and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; Defend us thy humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy defence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ The Collect for Grace. O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and ever∣lasting God, who hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day; defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into
no sin, neither run into any kind of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that is righteous in thy sight, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Here followeth the Litany. O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. Remember not Lord our offences, nor the offences of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed with thy most precious bloud, and be not angry with us for ever. Spare us, good Lord. From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good Lord, deliver us. From all blindness of heart; from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisie; from envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness, Good Lord, deliver us. From Fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the de∣vil, Good Lord, deliver us.
From lightning, and tempest; from plague, pesti∣lence, and famine; from battel, and murder, and from sudden death, Good Lord, deliver us. From all sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebellion; from all false doctrine, heresie, and schism; from hard∣ness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and Com∣mandment, Good Lord, deliver us. By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision; by thy Baptism, Fasting and Temptation, Good Lord, deliver us. By thine Agony and bloudy Sweat; by the Cross and Passion; by thy precious Death and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the coming of the Holy Ghost, Good Lord, deliver us. In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of death, and in the day of judg∣ment, Good Lord, deliver us. We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee, in righteousness and holi∣ness of life, thy servants William and Mary, our most gracious King and Queen; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to rule their hearts in thy faith, fear, and love, and that they may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honour and glory; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to be their defender and keeper, giving them the victory over all their enemies; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and preserve Ca∣therine
the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests and Deacons, with true knowledge and un∣derstanding of thy Word, and that both by their preach∣ing and living, they may set it forth, and sheld it ac∣cordingly; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and keep the Ma∣gistrates, giving them grace to execute Iustice, and to maintain Truth; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give to all Nations, V∣nity, Peace, and Concord; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and diligently to live after thy Com∣mandments; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give to all thy people in∣crease of grace, to hear meekly thy Word, and to re∣ecive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred and are deceived; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and help the weak hearted, and
to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down Satan under our feet; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to succour, help, and com∣fort all that are in danger, necessity, and tribulation; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all women labouring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to shew thy pity upon all prisoners and captives; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and widows, and all that are deso∣late and oppressed; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, per∣secutors, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us. Son of God: we beseech thee o hear us. O Lamb of God: that takest away the sins of the world; Grant us thy peace. O Lamb of God: that takest away the sins of the world; Have mercy upon us. O Christ, hear us. O Christ, hear us.
Lord, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdome come. Thy will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen. Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins. Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities. ¶ Let us pray. O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sigh∣ing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowful; mercifully assist our Prayers that we make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whensoever they oppress us; and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the de∣vil or man worketh against us be brought to nought, and by the providence of thy goodness they may be dis∣persed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no perse∣cutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake. O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fa∣thers have declared unto us, the noble works that thou didst in their days, and in the old time before them. O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honour. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost.
Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. From our enemies defend us, O Christ. Graciously look upon our afflictions. Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts. Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people. Favourably with mercy hear our Prayers. O Son of David, have mercy upon us. Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ. Graciously hear us, O Christ; graciously hear us, O Lord Christ. Priest. O Lord, let thy mercy be shewed upon us. Answer. As we do put our trust in thee. Let us pray. WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and for the glo∣ry of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that we most righteously have deserved; and grant that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confi∣dence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holi∣ness and pureness of living, to thy honour and glory, through our only Mediatour and Advocate, Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ALmighty and everlasting God, who hatest nothing that thou hast made, and dost forgive the sins of all them that are penitent; Create and make in us new and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen. O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who hast compassion upon all men, and hatest nothing that thou hast made, who wouldest not the death of a sin∣ner, but that he should rather turn from his sin, and be saved; Mercifully forgive us our trespasses; re∣ceive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the burthen of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it appertaineth to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy peo∣ple whom thou hast redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are vile earth, and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meek∣ly acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make hast to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then shall the people say this that followeth after the Minister. TUrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favourable, O Lord, be favourable to thy people, who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. For thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath thinkest upon mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, and let not thine heritage be brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, and after the multitude of thy mercies look upon us, through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Son, Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for all the Reformed Churches. O God the Father of mercies, who of thy great goodness hast united us into the mystical body of Christ (that is his Church) we as living members thereof, mourning with them that mourn, and rejoy∣cing with them that rejoyce, do now present our Sup∣plications and Prayers at the Throne of Grace, in be∣half
of all the Reformed Churches, beseeching thee to look down with an eye of mercy and pity, upon the sad and mournful estate of such of them whom thou hast delivered over to the hands of superstitious and merciless men, who have compell'd so many of them to defile themselves with their Idolatrous Worship; stretch out thy Arm against those deceitful and bloody men, suffer them not still to triumph over thy Heri∣tage. How long, Lord, shall thy anger burn for ever! How long wilt thou forget thy People, that prayeth! Oh let the cry of the Blood of thy Saints, and the sighing of the Prisoners, come before thee! Deliver thou those that are as Sheep appointed for the slaugh∣ter. Hear us, O God, for thy mercy's sake, and for the honour of thy great Name. Plead thy Cause with them that blaspheme thy Truth and persecute thy People, that so all men may say, Verily there is a God that judgeth in the Earth. Purge all thy Churches from their dregs, and make them meet for a glorious Deliverance, that so all the world may see the Salva∣tion of our God; and that though he hides his face from his People for a season, yet he will not cast them off utterly. Grant that thy true Religion may so shine, as to become the Ioy of the whole Earth, and that all Antichristian Idolatry, Superstition, and Cruelty, being cast out of thy House, all that name the Name of Christ, may depart from iniquity, and walk worthy of their holy profession, that the Kingdom of thy dear Son may come quickly; and that all his enemies being made his foot-stool, he who is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, may reign to all the ends of the Earth: To whom, with thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory for ever∣more. Amen. ¶ A Prayer of St. Chrysostom. ALmighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one accord to make our common sup∣plications unto thee, and dost promise, that when
two or three are gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt grant their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and Petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen. 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. The Communion-Service. ¶ The Priest standing at the North-side of the Lords Table shall say, OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen. ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid; cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspi∣ration of thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnifie thy holy Name, through Christ our Lord. Amen. Minister. GOd spake these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shalt have none other gods but me. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Minister. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above,
or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath-day. Six days shalt thou labour and do all that thou hast to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, thy cattel, and the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Minister. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Minister. Thou shalt do no murther. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.
Minister. Thou shalt not commit adultery. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Minister. Thou shalt not steal. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Minister. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neigh∣bour. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Minister. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy Laws in our hearts, we beseech thee. Let us pray. ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting and power infinite; Have mercy upon the whole Church, and so rule the hearts of thy chosen servants William and Mary our King and Queen, that they (knowing whose Ministers they are) may above all things seek thy honour and glory; And that we and all their Subjects (duly considering whose Authori∣ty they have) may faithfully serve, honour and hum∣bly obey them, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance, through Iesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth ever one God, world without end. Amen. O God our refuge and strength, whose power no Creature is able to resist, who teachest our hands to War, and our fingers to fight, and without whom the Horse and Chariot is in vain prepared against the day of Battel; defend us we beseech thee with thy
mighty power, and save us with thy out-stretched arm, that our Forces may be preserved, and become Victorious by Sea and Land, evermore serving un∣der his glorious Banner who is the Lord of Hosts, God blessed for ever. Amen. O Most glorious and gracious God, whose Iudg∣ments against obstinate offenders are most severe and terrible, But whose Mercies are infinite to all them that with hearty Repentance and true Faith turn unto thee; We the sinful People of this Land, do acknowledge before thee, to thy glory, and our own shame, that never any Nation had greater experi∣ence of thy goodness, nor ever did any more unthank∣fully abuse it. When thou gavest us great and long Prosperity, we like Jesurun waxed fat and kicked a∣gainst thee; when thou didst thrust us into those Confu∣sions, out of which we saw little hopes of arising, even in the time of that distress did we trespass yet more against thee. When by miracles of mercy thou hadst turn'd our Captivity, we soon forgot thee our Sa∣viour, and return'd again to our folly; And even while thou hast of late appeared for us, by delivering us out of the hands of our implacable Enemies of the Romish Faction, we have by our sins been fighting against heaven and against thee; And now we are no more worthy to be called thy Sons or thy Servants, whom neither thy fear hath driven to repentance, nor thy goodness led to it. In mercy O God awaken us all; beget in us a holy dread of thy Iudgments, and a deep sense of our manifold and repeated provocations, pardon the great offences of us thy servants, and the crying sins of the whole Nation, remove the evils we still lie under, avert those we have just cause to fear; and howsoever thou mayest think fit to Correct us for our sins, yet never deliver us up into the hands of those men whose mercies are cruel; pour out thy a∣bundant blessings upon our Gracious King and
Queen, and Their great Council now Assembled in Parliament, keep them as the apple of thy eye, hide them under the shadow of thy wings, direct and bless them in all their Consultations. And more particu∣larly we now prostrate our selves before thee to implore thy blessing upon this their great undertaking for the necessary defence of thy people; Go forth with their Fleets and Armies, compass them with thy Fa∣vour as with a Shield, let it appear that thou the Lord our God art with us to help us, and to fight our Bat∣tels; bless us with Victory and Success, and in thy own good time with such a Peace as may tend to the glory of thy great Name, and the Preservation of thy Church and true Religion among us, the Honour and Safety of Their Majesties, and the Security, Peace and Prosperity of these Kingdoms; All which we humbly beg in the Name and through the Mediation of thy Son Iesus Christ our Saviour. Amen. For the Epistle, Deut. 20. v. 1. to v. 5. When thou goest out to battel against thine ene∣mies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a peo∣ple more then thou, be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the battel, that the priest shall ap∣proach, and speak unto the people, And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, you approach this day unto battel against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terri∣fied because of them. For the Lord your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your ene∣mies, to save you. The Gospel, St. Matth. 24. v. 4. to v. 14. JEsus said unto his disciples, Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ: and shall deceive many.
And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earth∣quakes in divers places. All these are the beginning of sorrows. Then shall they deliver you up to be af∣flicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my names sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another. And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall en∣dure unto the end, the same shall be saved. I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, And of all things visible and in∣visible: And in one Lord Iesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, Begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very God, Begotten, not made, Being of one substance with the Father, By whom all things were made: Who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from hea∣ven, And was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Vir∣gin Mary, And was made man, And was crucified al∣so for us under Pontius Pilate. He suffered and was buried, And the third day he rose again according to the Scriptures, And ascended into heaven, And sit∣teth on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick and the dead: Whose kingdom shall have no end. And I believe in the holy Ghost, The Lord and giver of life, Who proceedeth from the Father and the Son, Who with the Father and the Son together is wor∣shipped and glorified, Who spake by the prophets. And I believe one Catholick and Apostolick Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins, And I look for the Resurrection of the dead, And the life of the world to come. Amen.
¶ Then followeth the Sermon; and after that shall be said, Let your light so shine before men,S. Mat. v.16. that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven. As we have therefore opportunity,Gal. vi. 10: let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the houshold of faith. Let us pray for the whole state of Christs Church militant here in earth. ALmighty and everliving God, who by thy holy A∣postle hast taught us to make prayers and sup∣plications, and to give thanks for all men; We hum∣bly beseech thee most mercifully [to accept our alms and oblations,If there be no alms or oblati∣ons, then shall the words [of accepting our alms and obla∣tions] be left out unsaid. and] to receive these our prayers, which we offer unto thy divine Majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually the universal Church with the spi∣rit of truth, unity, and concord: and grant that all they that do confess thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in unity and godly love. We beseech thee also to save and defend all Christian kings, princes and governours; and espe∣cially thy servants WILLIAM and MARY our King and Queen, that under them we may be godly and quietly governed: and grant unto their whole Council, and to all that are put in authority under them, that they may truly and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of thy true religion and vertue. Give grace, O heavenly Father, to all Bishops, and Curates, that they may both by their life and doctrine set forth thy true and lively word, and rightly and du∣ly administer thy holy Sacraments: And to all thy people give thy heavenly grace; and especially to this Congregation here present, that with meek heart and due reverence, they may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in holiness and righteous∣ness
all the days of their life. And we most humbly beseech thee of thy goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succour all them who in this transitory life, are in trou∣ble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity, And we also bless thy holy Name, for all thy servants departed this life in thy faith and fear; beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow their good examples, that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly King∣dom. Grant this, O Father, for Iesus Christs sake, our only Mediatour and Advocate. Amen. O God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ our only Saviour, the Prince of Peace, look down in much pity and compassion upon this Church and Nation, now seeking unto thee in Fasting and Prayer, stir up, we beseech thee, every soul among us, to cast forth the accursed thing, to root out of our hearts all pride, and all wrath and bitterness, all unjust prejudice and cause∣less jealousie, all hatred, and malice, and desire of re∣venge, and whatsoever may hinder us from discern∣ing the things that belong unto our peace. And by the power of thy holy Spirit do thou dispose all our hearts to such meekness of wisdom, lowliness of mind, patience, gentleness, and long-suffering, and forbearance of one another in love, and such Honour and Reverence of those whom thou hast set over us, as becomes the Sons of Peace, that so the God of Peace may be with us. Give us grace, O Lord, se∣rioufly to lay to heart the great Dangers we are in, by our unhappy Divisions, and the great Obligations which lie upon us to godly Vnion and Concord: That as there is but one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Bap∣tism, one God and Father of us all; so we may hence∣forth be all of one Heart and of one Soul, united in one holy Bond of Truth and Peace, of Faith and Charity, and may with one mind and one mouth glo∣rifie thee, O Lord; who with thy Father and holy Spi∣rit,
livest and reignest, one God, world without end. Amen. ALmighty God, who hast promised to hear the peti∣tions of them that ask in thy Sons Name; We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have made now our prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those things which we have faith∣fully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the set∣ting forth of thy glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest (or Bishop, if he be present) shall let them depart with this Blessing. THe peace of God which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Iesus Christ our Lord: And the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and re∣main with you always. Amen.
The Order for Evening Prayer. ¶ Let him that ministreth read with a loud voice these Senten∣ces of Scripture, and after them the Exhortation following. COrrect us, O Lord,Jer. x. 24. but with judg∣ment; not in thine anger: least thou bring us to nothing. O our God,Dan. ix. encline thine ear and hear; open thine eyes, and behold: for we do not present our Supplica∣tions unto thee for our righteousnes∣ses, but for thy great mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken, and do, and defer not for thine own sake, and for thy people that are called by thy Name. DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in sundry places, to acknowledge and con∣fess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of almighty God our heavenly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end, that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most
holy Word, and to ask those things which are requi∣site and necessary, as well for the body as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me. ¶ The Confession to be said of the whole Congregation after the Minister, all kneeling. ALmighty and most merciful Father; We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts. We have offended against thy holy laws. We have left undone those things which we ought to have done; And we have done those things which we ought not to have done; And there is no health in us. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults. Restore thou them that are penitent; According to thy promises declared un∣to mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake; That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of thy holy Name. Amen. ¶ The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone, stand∣ing; the People still kneeling. ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live; and hath given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true re∣pentance and his holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that
at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then the Minister shall kneel, and say the Lords Prayer; the People also kneeling, and repeating it with him. OUr Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. ¶ Then likewise he shall say, O Lord, open thou our lips. Answer. And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Priest. O God, make speed to save us. Answer. O Lord, make haste to help us. ¶ Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost; Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. Priest. Praise ye the Lord. Answer. The Lords name be praised. ¶ Proper Psalms are, XI. XXVII. LXIII. ¶ The First Lesson I. Sam. VII. to v. 16. Magnificat. S. Luke I. 46. MY soul doth magnifie the Lord: and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour. For he hath regarded: the lowliness of his hand∣maiden. For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed. For he that is mighty hath magnified me: and holy is his Name.
And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations. He hath shewed strength with his arm: he hath scat∣tered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. He hath put down the mighty from their seat: and hath eralted the humble and meek. He hath filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he hath sent empty away. He remembring his mercy hath holpen his servant Israel: as he promised to our forefathers, Abraham and his seed for ever. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. ¶ The second Lesson, 1 Cor. X. to v. 15. ¶ Deus Misereatur. Psal. 67. GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and shew us the light of his countenance, and be merciful un∣to us. That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations. Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee. O let the nations rejoyce and be glad: for thou shalt judge the folk righteously, and govern the nations up∣on earth. Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee. Then shall the earth bring forth her increase and God, even our own God, shall give us his blessing. God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c.
¶ Then shall be said the Apostles Creed by the Minister, and the people standing. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Iesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, dead, and buried, He descended into hell; The third day he rose again from the dead, He ascen∣ded into heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost; The holy Catholick Church; The Communion of Saints; The forgive∣ness of sins; The resurrection of the body, And the life everlasting. Amen. ¶ And after that, these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice, The Lord be with you. Answer. And with thy Spirit. Minister. ¶ Let us pray. Lord, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. ¶ Then the Minister, Clerks, and people, shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud voice. OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we for∣give them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest standing up, shall say, O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us. Answer. And grant us thy salvation. Priest. O Lord, save the King and Queen. Answ. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.
Priest. Indue thy Ministers with righteousness. Answ. And make thy chosen people joyful. Priest. O Lord, save thy people. Answ. And bless thine inheritance. Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord. Answ. Because there is none other that fighteth for us, but only thou, O God. Priest. O Lord, save thy servants, Answ. Who do put their trust in thee. Priest. Send us help from thy holy place, Answ. And evermore mightily defend us. Priest. Let the enemy have no advantage against us: Answ. Nor the wicked approach to hurt us. Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong tower, Answ. From the face of our enemies. Priest. O Lord, hear our prayer, Answ. And let our cry come unto thee. ¶ Instead of the Collect for the day, shall be used these which follow. O God our refuge and strength, whose power no Creature is able to resist, who teachest our hands to War, and our fingers to fight, and without whom the Horse and Chariot is in vain prepared against the day of Battel; defend us, we beseech thee, with thy mighty power, and save us with thy out-stretched arm, that our Forces may be preserved, and become Victo∣rious by Sea and Land, evermore serving under his glorious Banner who is the Lord of Hosts, God bles∣sed for ever. Amen. O most glorious and gracious God, whose Iudg∣ments against obstinate offenders are most severe and terrible, But whose Mercies are infinite to all them, that with hearty Repentance and true Faith turn unto thee; We the sinful People of this Land, do acknowledge before thee, to thy glory and our own shame, that never any Nation had greater experi∣ence of thy goodness, nor ever did any more unthank∣fully
abuse it. When thou gavest us great and long Prosperity, we like Jesurun waxed fat and kicked a∣gainst thee; when thou didst thrust us into those Confu∣sions, out of which we saw little hopes of arising, even in the time of that distress did we trespass yet more against thee. When by miracles of mercy thou hadst turn'd our Captivity, we soon forgot thee our Savi∣our, and return'd again to our folly; And even while thou hast of late appeared for us, by delivering us out of the hands of our implacable Enemies of the Romish Faction, we have by our sins been fighting against heaven and against thee; And now we are no more worthy to be called thy Sons or thy Servants, whom neither thy Fear hath driven to repentance, nor thy Goodness led to it. In mercy, O God, awaken us all; beget in us a holy dread of thy Iudgments, and a deep sense of our manifold and repeated provocations, pardon the great offences of us thy servants, and the crying sins of the whole Nation, remove the evils we still lie under, avert those we have just cause to fear; and howsoever thou mayest think fit to Correct us for our sins, yet never deliver us up into the hands of those men whose mercies are cruel. Pour out thy a∣bundant Blessings upon our Gracious King and Queen, and their great Council now Assembled in Parliament, keep them as the apple of thy eye, hide them under the shadow of thy wings, direct and bless them in all their Consultations. And more particu∣larly we now prostrate our selves before thee to implore thy blessing upon this their great undertaking for the necessary defence of thy people; Go forth with their Fleets and Armies, compass them with thy Fa∣vour as with a Shield, let it appear that thou the Lord our God art with us to help us, and to fight our Ba∣tels, bless us with Victory and Success, and in thy own good time with such a Peace as may tend to the glory of thy great Name, and the Preservation of thy Church and true Religion among us, the Honour and
Safety of their Majesties, and the Security, Peace and Prosperity of these Kingdoms; All which we humbly beg in the Name, and through the Medation of thy Son Iesus Christ our Saviour. Amen. O God, from whom all holy desires, all good coun∣sels, and all just works do proceed; Give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy Command∣ments, and also that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness, through the merits of Iesus Christ our Sa∣viour. Amen. LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son, our Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our pray∣ers, and spare all those who confess their sins un∣to thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accu∣sed, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen. O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who hast compassion upon all men, and hatest nothing that thou hast made, who wouldest not the death of a sinner, but that he should rather turn from his sin, and be sa∣ved; Mercifully forgive us our trespasses; receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the burden of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it appertaineth to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed; enter not into Iudgment with thy servants, who are vile earth, and miserable sin∣ners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meekly acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make haste to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
¶ Then shall the people say this that followeth, after the Mi∣nister. TVrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be tur∣ned. Be favourable, O Lord, be favourable to thy people, who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. For thou art a merciful God, full of compas∣sion, long suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest when we deferve punishment, and in thy wrath think∣est upon mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, and let not thine heritage be brought to confu∣sion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, and af∣ter the multitude of thy mercies look upon us, through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Son Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the Kings Majesty. O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty King of kings, Lord of lords, the only Ruler of Prin∣ces, who dost from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon earth; most heartily we beseech thee with thy favour to behold our most gracious Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, and so re∣plenish them with the grace of thy Holy Spirit, that they may alway incline to thy will, and walk in thy way; endue them plenteously with heavenly gifts; grant them in health and wealth long to live; strength∣en them that they may vanquish and overcome all their enemies, and finally after this life they may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the Royal Family. ALmighty God, the fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee to bless Catherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family: Endue them with thy holy Spirit; enrich them with thy heavenly grace; prosper them with all happiness; and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
¶ A Prayer for the Clergy and People. ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; Send down upon our Bishops, and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honour of our Advocate and Mediatour, Iesus Christ. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the High Court of Parliament. MOst gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, as for this kingdom in general, so especially for the High Court of Parliament, under our most religious and gracious King and Queen at this time assem∣bled: That thou wouldest be pleased to direct and prosper all their consultations to the advancement of thy glory, the good of thy Church, the safety, honour and welfare of their Majesties and their Kingdoms; that all things may be so ordered and settled by their endeavours upon the best and surest foundations, that peace and happiness, truth and justice, religion and piety may be established among us for all gene∣tations. These and all other necessaries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we humbly beg in the Name and Mediation of Iesus Christ our most blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for all the Reformed Churches. O God the Father of mercies, who of thy great goodness hast united us into the mystical body of Christ (that is his Church;) We as living members thereof, mourning with them that mourn, and rejoy∣cing with them that rejoyce, do now present our Sup∣plications and Prayers at the Throne of Grace, in be∣half of all the Reformed Churches; beseeching thee to look down with an eye of Mercy and Pity upon the sad and mournful estate of such of them, whom thou hast delivered over to the hands of superstitious and merciless men, who have compell'd so many of them
to defile themselves with their Idolatrous Worship; stretch out thy Arm against those deceitful and bloody men, suffer them not still to triumph over thy Heri∣tage. How long, Lord, shall thy anger burn for ever! How long wilt thou forget thy People, that prayeth! Oh let the cry of the Blood of thy Saints, and the sighing of the Prisoners, come before thee! Deliver thou those that are as Sheep appointed for the slaugh∣ter: Hear us, O God, for thy mercies sake, and for the honour of thy great Name. Plead thy Cause with them that blaspheme thy Truth and prosecute thy People, that so all men may say, Verily there is a God that judgeth in the Earth. Purge all thy Churches from their dregs, and make them meet for a glorious Deliverance, that so all the world may see the Salva∣tion of our God; and that though he hides his face from his People for a season, yet he will not cast them off utterly. Grant that thy true Religion may so shine, as to become the Ioy of the whole earth, and that all Antichristian Idolatry, Superstition, and Cruelty, being cast out of thy House, all that name the Name of Christ, may depart from iniquity, and walk worthy of their holy profession, that the Kingdom of thy dear Son may come quickly; and that all his enemies being made his foot-stool, he who is the Lord of lords, and King of kings, may reign to all the ends of the Earth: To whom, with thee, O Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory for ever∣more. Amen. O God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ our only Saviour, the Prince of Peace, look down in much Pity and Compassion upon this Church and Nation now seeking unto thee in Fasting and Prayer; Stir up, we beseech thee, every Soul among us to cast forth the Accursed Thing, to Root out of our hearts all Pride, and all Wrath and Bitterness, all unjust Prejudice and causeless Iealousie, all Hatred and
Malice, and desire of Revenge, and whatsoever may hinder us from discerning the things that belong un∣to our Peace: And by the power of thy Holy Spirit do thou dispose all our hearts to such meekness of Wisdom, lowliness of Mind, Patience, Gentleness, and Long-suffering and forbearance of one another in love, and such honour and reverence of those whom thou hast set over us as becomes the sons of Peace, that so the God of Peace may be with us. Give us grace, O Lord, seriously to lay to heart the great Dangers we are in by our unhappy Divisions, and the great Obligations which lie upon us to godly Vnion and Concord, that as there is but one Body and one Spirit, and one hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of us all; so we may henceforth be all of one heart, and of one Soul, Vnited in one holy Bond of Truth and Peace, of Faith and Charity, and may with one Mind and one Mouth glorifie thee, O Lord, who with thy Father, and Holy Spirit livest and reignest one God world without end Amen. ¶ A Prayer of S. Chrysostom. ALmighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one accord, to make our common sup∣plications unto thee, and dost promise, that when two or three are gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt grant their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expe∣dient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life ever lasting. Amen. 2 Cor. 13.14. THe grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. FINIS.
