d2638 12574759 63542
LVTHERS ALCORAN Being A Treatise first written in French by the Learned Cardinall Peron, of famous memory, against the Hugenots of France. And translated into English by N. N. P. The Page following sheweth the particular Contents of the Booke. Which consisteth of Symbolismes. Parallells. Identities. Prophet ciu vesam, Vir  Sophon. cap. 3. Imprinted with Licence MDC.X.
This Treatise is deuied into two Parts. IN the first Part is shewed, that Lutheranisme agreeth with Mahumetisme, or Turcisme, in Fourty points, concerning Fayth and Religion: which here are called, so many Symbolismes. In the second Part, are compared twenty Points of fayth, and other Accessories thereof, differently belieued by the Mahumetans or Turks, and the Lutherans. In the which it is proued, that Lutheranisme (which is the Religion of the Hu∣genots in France) semees to be no more (if not lesse) warrantable and iustifiable, then Mahume∣tisme: and these Comparisons are called, Paral∣lels. Hereunto is adioyned a short Appendix, cal∣led the Hugenots second Looking Glasse, wherein is demonstrated, that threescore Articles touching Fayth, and other Circumstances thereof were condemned for Heresyes, in the ancient Here∣tikes, by the Primitiue Church. All which 60. Points without any difference, are now belieued by the Lutherans and Caluinists of these dayes, for Euangelicall doctrine. And these (as varying in no sort from those former condemned) are heere termed, Jdentities. Tam inuitus Turcam gladio inuaderem quàm Christianum fratrem. Luther. inconfut. Doctorum Paris. Plustost Tures, que Papaux. This was the French Mot, insculpted in the Hollanders Ensignes of Warre, at their first Re∣bellion: They meaning therby, that they ha rather become Turks, then Papists.
The Epistle of the Translatour, to the Puritan Reader. YOv, who are vul∣garly called Puri∣tans, may heere see, that I haue taken some paines in trās∣lating a Treatise, first written in French, by the learned Cardinal Peron (a man of worthy Memory) against the Huge∣nots of his owne Country, entituled Luthers Alcoran. The reason of my translating it, is the Affinity, or ra∣ther Identity of the Religion of the Hugenots in France, with the Religion of the English Puritans. Therfore if this Treatise do iustly condemne the Hugenots of France, I referre to the iudgment of the learned, whether it may not seeme to inuolue within the like Censure, the Puritans of England,
Such English Protestants, as be more moderate, and learned, this Worke in no sort concernes; For it is knowne & confessed, that the more sober, lear∣ned, and retired English Protestant, doth hould (among others) these Points, and Articles following with vs Catholiks, & against the Puritans: To wit, He houlds the Churches euer Vi∣sibility; That, Christians dying in the Church and fayth of Rome, may be saued: He houldeth that Christ descended into Hell: He houldeth Freewill, Vniuersality of Grace; That Christs bodily death (with∣out his suffering in Soule) is sufficient for the Redemption of mankind: He houl∣deth, That God doth not decree sinne, but only suffereth it; That temporall punish∣ment is to be inflicted by God (to satisfy his Iustice) after the sinne is remitted; That the Pope is not Antichrist; That Bi∣shops are not Antichristian; That Eccle∣siasticall Ministers do truly forgiue sin∣nes, and not only pronounce the forgiue∣nesse of them: That Baptisme may be per∣formed by Lay Persons in tyme of Neces∣sity▪ That there is no extraordinary Voca∣tion to the Ministry in these dayes: That in case of Adultery, the innocent Party may not marry againe: Finally (to om
some others), He houldeth Confirma∣tion, the lawfull Vse of the Crosse in Bap∣tisme, and doth defend the Honour of the Immae Virgin, the Mother of God: Diuers of which Points (main∣tayned by the more moderate and ∣terate Protestants wih vs Catholikes) are in this enuing Treastise defended by the Cardinall, against the Hugenots of France. Thus we see, that this Trea∣tise, neither through its owne Con∣tents, not through the suspicious and wrongfull surmise of others, can take iust hould of such learned, and graue English Protestants. But to returne more particularly to the Booke. This Treatise of Cardinall Peron, was printed in French, not ma∣ny moneths before the death of the said Cardinall, during which short time (I thē being in France) some few Co∣pies were spread abroad. Presently vpon his death (as it was for certaine reported) some Hugenot Ministers of Rochell, & the places neere adioyning, through the Beneuolence of their fol∣lowers, did buy vp all the Presse then left vndiuulged, and burned the co∣pies. Whether it hath been reprinted since, I know not: But if it hath not
beene, I cannot, but blame the want of zeale in the French Catholicks, as to suffer a Worke of so eminent a man of their owne Country, to lye wholy buried. Thus ceasing to enlarge my selfe any further, but thinking it con∣uenient to acquaint the Reader with these Particulars, I remit this small Booke to the diligent perusall of You English Precisians, and rest Your Christian friend, N. N. P.
The Preface of the Authour. CHAP. I. MY Deare Countreymen of France. You, who vauntingly style your selues, De la Religion re∣formée, and, De la way Eglise de Iesus Christ; of the reformed Religion, and of the true Church of Iesus Christ, (thus laying for your owne Honour, such specious and fayre colours vpon the foule graine of your owne Fayth:) You (I say) cannot be ignorant (I presume) how I haue endeuored by my particular congresse with diuers of your Religion, as also by my seuerall Writing (according to my abi∣lity) to pull you out of the myre of your present Errours (too myld a word) your present Heresies (yet ouer languide) your presen Blasphemies; but all in vayne. For when I drew forth my proofes from the orce of Reason (bearing in Mans soule the stamp of Gods owneGenes. i aciamus bo∣minm ad imainem nostram. Seale) from the authorities of the Ancient Fathers, from Ocuicall Councells, from the long hand of tyme, and vnnitermittee. Apostolicall
Tradition, from the stupendious miracles exhibited for greater confusion of your In∣nouations; and lastly from the most sacred, and inuiolable authority of Gods holy Writ∣ten Word; You to all this giue vs this yaw∣ning, and heedles answere: To wit, that the priuate Spirit of och of the Faythfull (a∣mong which number, you ambitiously range your selues) is to ballance and poyse the waight of all the forsaid proofes; and euen to Oracle forth the meaning of the holy Ghost in the said Venerable Scriptu∣res. O Circulation strange, and incredible! For you hereby do aduance the priuat iudg∣ment of Monsieur Plessis Mornay (heretofore my Antagonist, and a great Arche of your Church) of Monsieur Casanbon, Monsieur de Mo∣in, or some other such obscure Terrae filius, aboue all authorities, aboue all Tribunlls, aboue all seates of Iudicature: Which Pri∣uate spirit. & preiudice of iudgment in you, are the Remor's, or lets, staying and flow∣ing you from further sayling into the dee∣pest Mysteries of Christianity. Therefore seeing this former Course of disputing can preuayle nothing with you, am at this tyme forced to proceede ano∣ther way, and to imitate that Generall in the Warrs, who bendeth his forces, not to strengthen and fortify his owne Cittyes, Castells, and Forts (as not standing in need of any such defence) but to demolish and uine the Rampiers, Fortress, and Holds of the Enemy. Now the Course here to be
hldn by me, shall be this. We obserue, that if a Man be tould, that he hath some spos vpon his face, occasio∣ned by any vnexpected meanes, he present∣ly hiteth to a Glass, to see himselfe hrin  And if he find the blemishe to appeare i the Gasse, he then acknowledgeth the truth thereof, and instantly seeketh to dry, and wype them away. The like I hr counsel you to doe (O you Hagens of France.) You are by me in this Treatise ged wi dues oales, and spos of Trcism; Glasse your selues in the Turkish Aoran (for so i the Booke called, wherein the Articles of the Turkish Fayth were first at downe.) Y you find therein your owne blemis to be exhibited to your sight; I meane, if yo find thereby, that you do part with  Turks, in belieng with them di po of their owne fayth, diffeenly from a other Christians (as by paing your Fayth with theirs you shall nd,) then ∣bou to aberge all such deformity from the face of your Christian reon? And thus you may make the Turkish la, in part, the Gasse of your present Religion. The labour I here vndertake will ( suppose) appeare in your dg to  ore then an Here bour; and mo difficult to wi, to proue  who you Mayters feare  to Apolog. Angli. God to eg the WorldThe Booke stiled, Antichristus, ss Progno∣sticon sis Mudi. fore  the Scriptures, and a.  a also  chiefe Senod, , and
others (so much magnified by you) to haue in many points of their fayth, wholy ioy∣ned themselues with Mahumet, Christs mor∣tall, yea immortal Enemy. Now, if I do as∣sume more in these words, then I shall per∣forme (for I do expect this Treatise will he ouerlooked with many Aristarchian, and censuring Eyes) then let me become infa∣mous to my owne Country, and euen to the Professours of my owne Religion, in∣glorious, and despicable. For the more cleare accomplishment of my vndertaken Scene. I will not insist in the authority of Gods holy Writ, (as vn∣worthily, and irreligiously deorted by the pryde of ech of your Priuat spirit;) neither in any other kynd of proofes aboue rehear∣sed (all which you behould with the eye of scorne, and contempt,) but I will rest only in your chiefe Maisters owne words, yet ex∣tant to be read in their Writings: So as I may here say with our Sauiour, De oreLu. 9. tu e iudico, Srunequaem. For, but read their Sentences by me alledged, and compare them with the words of the Alcoran, and with the words of diuers Authours, recor∣ding the doctrine of the Turkish Alcoran & Fayth, you shall find them in many dogma∣ticall points (for I say not in all) most con∣spiringly to agree: Non facies vn, nec diuers amn — And thus your Religion may with some shew of reason be called, Tur∣kish Hugenotiss, or Hugenotish Trcisme. Now whiles you ad their words in
their Bookes, remember, that the Penn is the soules secondary Tonque▪ deliuering without voyce, or sound, its mentall Lan∣guage: Thus you shall rest assured, that it is most true, that so they did write, though most false what they did write. And thus I referre you to the impartiall Witnesses of your owne Eyes. And in regard of this great consociation and affinity of Luthers doctrine with Turcisme, it is lesse to be won∣dered, that the great Turk▪ (as ManliusIn loc. com. pag. 16. the Protestant relateth) demaunding of the Christian Eperours Embassadour, of what yeares Luther was, wished he had beene yonger, and promised him to be his good Lord. In retaliation of which proffered kyndnes we may presume, that Luther was more easily inuited to write thus in the Turks fauour: To warreLuther, tom. . Wit∣tenb. in aers. damnas. per Loem. Art, 34. fol. 100. where we thus read: Praeliari ad∣uersus Tur∣cas est re∣pugare D∣vistati ii, quitates no∣stras e illos. against the Turke is to resist Gods visiting our Iniquities And more:Luth. in Explicat. Art. 4. He that hath eares, let him heare, and abstaine from the Turkish Warrs, whi the Popes name preuaileth vnder Heauen. O sacred and holy friendship, contracted betweene the Turke and Luther: And thus by allusion we may here say: FactiLuc. 3. sunt atic, Herdes & Pi∣lats. But to returne to the Treatise. I haue en∣titued it, Luthers Alcoran; not because Luther did particularly first dogmatize all the points, wherein the Nouellists of these ty∣mes conspire with the Turke, and Mt; but in that he did first broach many of them▪ And the rt were after taught by
Swinglius, Caluin, Beza, and others, all Lu∣thers Proselys and schollers; and all descen∣ding originally from the Ioynes of Luther. Now the denomination of a thing is com∣monly taken à praestantior: And according hereto, throughout this Treatise, I take the words, Lutheran, and Lutheransme in a gene∣rall sense, as comprehending all the fol∣lowers of Luther, and such doctrines, as were first taught by Luther, or after by his fol∣lowers; though I grant the forsaid words in a strict acceptance haue reference only to those men, who more peculiarly sweare fealty to Luther, and to Luthers doctrine, in some points different from that or the Swin∣gians, and the Caluinists. Here I will demand after your diligent perusall of this small Worke; is Turcisme  false religion? How then can Hugenotisme be true? Is Hugenotisme a true Religion? How then can Turcisme be false? Such an indisso∣luble knot of doctrine shall you find in many points betweene these two sects▪ Therefore you must be forced either to a∣bandon Lutherranisme, or by imbracing of it, withall to imbace Turcisme, and Mahuine∣tisme. What griefe then is it, that our noble Country should be conaminated, and de∣filed with such pitch of Blasphemies, in this Treatise discouered? O Blessed Lewis, once King of France; Great eretofore in Empire, and Domination; Greater in Vertue and deoo; but now Greatest in thy fruition of the light of the
Allmighty; since thou now be houldest him, Non tanquam1. Cor. 293 Speculum in enigmars, b facie ad scieno; and him all things lntui∣tiuely; Looke vpon France thy deare Coun∣try (where thou didst once ow the care of Soueraingty;) See, how it is torne asunder touching matters of fayth, with Apostasy, and through a most strict combination in sayth, with Mahumet, Christs open Enemy▪ I know well, that the felicity of thy present State stand not compatible with any griefe, or sorrow, in regard of the Confor∣mity of thy Will, to the Diuine Will, and per∣mission of the Highest; neuerthelesse since Thou, and all other Saints now reigning with thee in Heauen, through your Scraphi∣call Charity are become Aduocats for vs poore miserable Wormes, during our exile in this Vale of Misery, forbeare not the to powre out daily thy Vills of Iucense (A meane thy Prayers) before his diuine Ma∣iesty; Besiege his eates with thy vninter∣rupted Oraisons, that so he would be plea∣sed to withdraw his scourne from this one most deare Country; and that he would mollify the obdurate Hates of those men therein, who introduce Nouelty, vnder the tecture of Truth, and change Christ his Gos∣pell into the Turkish Alcoran. Pray (O pray) most glorious Saint, that his our famous Idation may be wholy induced & brought backe to that Apostolicall and Prim Eayth, which then reigned in it when tho ignedst ouer it; it th  in the
Moone (as it were) of its owne resplendent Honour. But to recall my selfe: It seemes to me, I perceaue some of you (Hugenos) who are plus fiues, que religueux, more subtill, then re∣ligious, looking vpon these leaues with the eye of liuour and malignity; saying, the indignity and wrong, by comparing our reformed Religion with Mahumetisme, or Turcisme is infusble; since we belieue in Christ, in the Trinity, the Writings of the New Testament, that there are the Sacraments of Baptisme, and the Lords supper &c. from all which the Turks do disclaime. To this I answere seuerall Wayes. First I compare you with the Turks in some Points only of your sayth, not in all: Therefore the comparison here made is no further to be extended, then is by me inten∣ded. Secondly, I grant, you belieue these su∣preme Points in generall, but you haue cōmonly annexed in your beliefe of them so much poyson, touching some Circum∣stances of the said Mysteries, as that it hath vitiated, and corrupted the whole Mate of your Beliefe, and then that saying, here houldeth: , False beliefe is plainly worse, then misbeliefe, or Infidelity. Thirdly, I make a Comparison in this Trea∣tise, only of Hugenotisme or Protestancy, with Turcisme: But the former sublime Articles of Christian Religion you do not belieue, as you are Hugents, or Protestants, but only as
Catholiks, or at the most as Christians; since from our Catholike Church only you re∣ceaue your beliefe of them. For thus Luther acknowledgeth: WeLuther contra A∣nabaptist. confesse, that vnder the Papacy there is most of the Christian Good, yea rather all the Christian Good, and that from thence it came to vs. And Whitakerus (a Protestant Doctour of England) sayth no lesse in these his Words: TheDe Ec∣cles. p. 36. Papists haue the Scriptures, and Baptisme &c. And these came to vs from them. Now, these former Points (I say) you belieue not as Protestants, or as Professours of your reformed Religion. The reason hereof being, because you are Protestants in respect (and not otherwise) of your Deniall of the affirmatiue Catholike Points, where∣by you deuide your selfes from the Catho∣like Roman Church; as in denying the Sa∣crifice of the Altar, Prayer for the dead, praying to Saints, Peters Supremacy, and his Successours &c. Finally in denying other positiue, and affir∣matiue Articles of our Catholike Religion, wherein by such your deniall you dissent from vs; And in regard of your first Mai∣sters protesting to deny the said Points, ac∣cording to their Confession of Fayth exhibited at Augusta, they were then first stiled Prote∣stants, as your owne SleidanSleidan. l. c. fol. 8. and other ProtestantOian∣der in Epit. C. 10. pag. Historie graphers haue re∣corded. And thus far in solution of your former suggested Crimination (if any of you should suggest it) and in further war∣rant of my vndertaken Mothed in this Treatise.
It may by further viged by some of you (especially of such as be illiterate) that you do not giue your consent, and beliefe to such blasphemous doctrines, wherein your Grand-marster do agre with Mahumet, and the Turke; yea that you do not, as much as heare of some of these their agreements, or of the wicked Positions, where with Lu∣ther, Swinglius, Caluin, and such others stand charged in this Treatise; and that therefore it is iniustide and wrong in me, to in simu∣late you within the beliefe of such impious doctrines, I take away this your poore E∣uasion in this sort: I grant it may be true, that you haue not heard of many wicked Tenets of your owne Brethren, produced hereafter by me; neuerthelesse you with an inuolued, and implicit Fayth do belieue them to be e. The reason hereof is, because you giue in grosse such affiance and credit to Luther, Swingliues &c. as that what Religion they haue taught to be true, the sme you belieus to be true: But these men did diuulge with the same authority, the blasphemies and wicked assertions here related, with the which authority they did teach such other points of Protestancy and Hugenetisme, to the which you give an sse, and explicit affent. And thus whiles you belieue other Protestanticall points to be true, only by reason of the authority of your st Maisters teaching them you are therefore by force of the same authority, to belieue what false
doctrines soeuer your foresaid Instructours haue disgorged out in the it Writings; since they were warranted with the pretext of equall security of not erring in all their writings. And therefore hence I conclude, that euery one of you, who do acknow∣ledge Luther, and the rest here alledged, for your prime Catechizers or Doctours in your sayth, doth stand guilty of all their blasphe∣mies vented out by them, in that by force of the reason aboue deliuered, you poten∣tially, and implicitly belieue the said Blas∣phemyes. Thus farte hereof. Well I will draw to an end of this my Fieface (which shall serue in place of a for∣mall Epistle Dedicatory) putting you in mind, that your Progeitours haue so comported themselues in their first stamping the Prin∣ciples of their fayth as that they may be said partly to stand in competency with Mahumet, and Sergius (Mahumets Scribe, or Penman) whether should transcend, and surpasse the one the other in impiety of do∣ctrine. A miserable Emulation! One thing yet before I end, I will adde; which is, if it can be proued, that you of the Reformed Religion do partake but in any one point only (as I will make it euident; that you do in fourty) with the Turks, dif∣ferently from the beliefe of all true Chri∣stians, and of Gods Vniuerfall Church, (you by this meanes declyning, le grand chemin battu de la foy Catholique, & Orthodoxe, the high beaten way of the Catholike, and or∣thodoxall
sayth) then it clerely followeth that your fayth cannot be perfect, and suffi∣cient to Saluation. For fayth is supernatu∣rall; and infallible; But who erreth in any one point of fayth (since such a Man re∣lyeth not vpon God reuealing, and the Church propounding, the two necessary Meanes for the obtayning of a true & profitable fayth:) This man (I say) may possibly erre in any other point; and then by necessary infe∣rence he cannot be a Member of the true Church; for to speake in S. Cyprians Dialect:Cyprian. lib. do Vnita. te Ecclesiae. Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi; incor∣rūpta est & pudica. Now with this I referre you to the peru∣sall of this discourse, wherein I do apply to the diseases of your soule, Paracelsian Physick (as I may say) since the Ingredients thereof will either (perhaps) presently cure you, or presently dispatch you; for vpon your reading and serious pondering of it, it may be, you will shake of your present fayth of Hugenotisme, or els (which God preuent) wilbe more corroborated in Mahumetisme; so precipitating your selues into the infer∣nall Abysme of miscreancy, and Infidelity. Ia. Card. Peron▪
Of the Method houlden in this Treatise. CHAP. II. THe prescribed Method, which I intend to take in these ensuing leaues, is first, to exemplify in ma∣ny particular Articles of Beliefe, wherein Mahumet and the Turks do agree with Luther and the Lutherans; concerning which I am to prefixe this Caution. To wit, that as by Luther, and the word Luthe∣ran, I vnderstand also the Swinglians, and the Caluinists, (though I grant , and abusiue) seing they all originally were be∣got by Luther, though now through tract or tyme they be branched forth into seuerall distinct families: So in like manner I take these words following promiscuously; I meane, Mahumet, Sergius, the Mahumetaus, the Saracens, the Turks, Mahumetisme, Saracensme, and Turcisme; all comprehending one and the same Religion, first sprung by Mahumet and Sergius, and only varying in appella∣tion through diuersity of Places, & Tymes. Well then to proceed. This Agreements of Mahumetisme and Lutheraisme, I call Sym∣bolisme. This Word Symbolisme is taken from naturall Philosophy, where it is peculiarly applyed to the agreements of seuerall Ele∣ments in seuerall qualities: Thus the Ayre (for example) in its heate Syholizeth, and
agreeth with the fire; in its moysture, with the Water. After I haue displayed fourty Points (most of them Articles of fayth, and the rest necessary Circumstances, attending the Turkish, and Lutheran Religion) where∣in these two Religions do conspire and a∣gree, I then in the second Part of this Trea∣tise do particularize twenty Points of fayth, and inferences, or deductions from thence, in which I compare the Lutherans with the Mahumetans, or Turks; wherein it is made euident, that the Positions, and Articles of the Lutherans, and their answerable practise of them are at least equall, if not more wic∣ked, and lesse iustifiable by force of all Rea∣son, then the contrary Tenets of the Mahume∣tans, and Turks. These my librations and waighings of these seuerall Points I terme Parallels; because I compare togeather the said Points or Articles, as seuerally maintai∣ned by them; as also I compare togeather the seuerall first Inuentours of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme. After the end of both these two Parts of this Treatise, I subnect (as an Appendix) a Discourse, which may serue, as a Second Glasse to you of the Reformed Religion, wherin you may behould threescore of your owne Posi∣tions or dogmaticall Points of faith, and o∣ther Accessories thereof, to haue been who∣ly condemned for Heresies, by the ancient Fathers of Christs Primitiue Church; and the maintayners of them to haue been anded, and anathematized for cursed He∣retiks.
These wicked Positions I call in this place, so many Identitio; seing they are the same erroneous doctrines without any va∣riation, heretofore exploded for old Here∣sies, and now imbraced of new, and reuiued by our Sectmaisters of these dayes. Now by all these seuerall Passages of this litle Work, we may obserue, that although the true Church of Christ hath been forced to be embroyled with Mahumetisme; and antient∣ly condemned Heresies; yet she neuer par∣taked with Mahumetisme, or the said Here∣sies in any one point of their Wicked Para∣doxes; no more then Eternity, though it co∣existeth with the tyme past, and the tyme fu∣ture, is neither the tyme past, nor the Tyme future. Thus much touching the method by me holden; Only I end with this premonition once for all; That whereas I do mention (by way of Reprouall) often the words, Protestancy, and Protestant, in this discourse, and Appendix, my meaning is, that therby I vnderstand, and take Protestancy only for such points of fayth, which the more ear∣nest, violent, and fiery Protestants and Calai∣nists maintayne (this their doctrine being the same with Hugenotisme, and the belieuers of it, the same with you Hugenots) not ex∣tending these two former words to such Articles of fayth, or to the Professours ther∣of, which the more learned, graue, and sober Protestants do hould and belieue.
The Particular Passages of the Alcoran, alledged in this Treatise, according to the Order, as they do occurre in this Booke: Of which Passages diuers are se∣uerall tymes vpon seuerall occasions re∣peated, and urged. And heere we are to note, that the different Passages of the Alcoran are distinguished (as by so many Sections, or Paragraphs) by the word, Azoara 1.2.3. &c. CHAP. III. Azoara 5. DEus pius, & misericors, priùs Testamen∣tum Vetus (videlicet legem Moysis & Psalterium) demceps Euangelium, re∣ctas Vias hominibus tradidit. Azoara 13. Increduli, & minime Deum (videlicet absque Filio & Spiritu Sancto) adorantes, cum postulan∣tur praeceptis à Deo positis, suo{que} legate (Mahu∣meti) fidem adhibere; Aiunt se nolle quicquam mutari, nisi quod Patres imitati sunt. Quibus ta∣men fit Obiectio: Vtrum Patres semper non nisi re∣ctam sidem tenuerunt? Azoara 1. Sciendum est geueraliter, quoniam omnis rectè iuens, beni{que} gestor; Iudaeus, seu Christianus, seu lge sua relicta in aliam tendens; Omnis scilicet
Deum adorans, indubitanter diuinum amorem assequetur. Azoara 61.62. & seqq. Per Ventos inflantes, & Nubes, & Naues ae∣quore currentes, & Angelos Nuncios; per montem Synai, & domum superné aedificatam; per stellam respertinam; per stellas retrogradas, & combustas; per noctem, & auroram iuro, quod non sum Daemo∣niacus, aut Magus, sed Dei Opermi nuncius, qui nihil erre nihil ex proprio velle loquor, nisi tantùm quod est mihi diumitus mandatum. Azoara 12. Increduli sunt qui lesum silium Mariae, Deum esse dicunt, cum ipse Dominus dicat; In Dominum Deum meum, & vestrum credite. Azoara 19. Confundat Deus Christianos  qui Mariae filium loco Dei venerantur; cùm ipsis praeceptum sit, non nisi vnum Deum venerari. Azoara 12. & 20. Iudaei Mariae blasphemiam, & immoderatam contumeliam inferunt, dum eius filium, Christum Dei nuncium se interemisse perhibē: Eum enim ne∣ququam, sed alterum ei similem interfecerunt; quia Deus incomprehensibilis & sapiens, cum ad se migrare fecit. Azoara 27.28. Deus est substantia necessario existens, cui im∣possibile est, vt naturam aliunde natuetur. Azoara 4.9. & 53. Constanter dic illis Christianis, Deum vnum esse necessariò omnibus, qui nec genuit, nec genera∣tus est; nec habet quicquam simile.
Azoara 13. O Iesis fili Mariae, tu persuades hominibus, ni te, matrem{que}tuam, duos Deos habeant, & vene∣rentur. Azoara 8. Vnore quotiescumque placuerit, duas scilicet, tres, aut quatuor ducite &c nisi timueritis eas nul∣latenus pacificare posse; Cum contingerit vobis eas non diligere, vnam pro alia mutare licet. Azoara 5.11. Iesus Mariae filius, fuit Dei Nuncius, & Spiri∣tus, & verbum Dei caelitus immissum; Cui Dei le∣gato omnes debent credere. Azoara 12. Iesus fuit Sapientia, & Verbum Patris, & Messias, & Princeps; Fuit Dei Spiritus, & mens, principumque, & Capus ommum honum. Azoara 31. Omnium mulierum optimae Mariae, abomnibus intactae, animam suam Deus insufflauit. Azoara 31. Spiritus Dei intrauit Mariam, & Iesum ex ca genuit. Azoara 76. Maria aliquid inali, siue malitiae non operatae est. Azoara 5. Maria fuit omnibus vtris, & mulieribus splen∣didior, & mundior, & purior; soli{que} Deo perseue∣ranter student. Azoara 4. Angelui Gabriel ad Virginem Mariam a Deo missus est, narraturus am (quamquam Virginem)
Dei tamn Omnipotentia filium concepturam. Azoara 43.Omnes mulieres tuae manui per emptionem sup∣positas, & Amitae tuae▪ Matertera{que} filias;  Omnes item bonas mulieres tibi volenti gratis succumberé cupientes, licitas constituimus. Azoara 10.De Dei promissionibus in Lege, & Euangeli propositis, non est disputandum. Azoara 20.Emina, mater Mahumetis, testabatur filium Mahumetem nec in vtero, nec in partu vlli sibi dolorem fecisse. Azoara 74.Nuntium vobis affero, de Nuntio post me ventu∣ro, cui nomen Mahumetus. Azoara 63.Tanti spatij interuallo, quantum sagitta his discurreret. Azoara 54.65.66.In Paradiso fideles habebunt hortos, & fontes, vestientur sericis & purpura; puellas habebunt cum oculis claris & immensis, quorum lbugines candi∣dissimae, & pupillae nigerrimae. Thus far of these passages of the Alcoran; where it is to be obserued, that one and the same Azoara, is vpon different occasions se∣uerall times alledged, as aboue I aduertized. And it is to be further obserued, that besides the forsaid Passages of the Alcoran aboue alledged, there are also produced many Te∣stimonies, and Authorities of seuerall graue Writers, whose Bookes treat of the Alcoran,
or of the Religion, Manners, and Customs of the Turks or Mahumetans, whose sentences are here alledged against the Lutherans, ei∣ther by way of Symbolisms, or Parallels. The names of which Authours I haue thought conuenient here to set downe. 1. Theodorus Bibliander in Praefatione Alcorani. 2. Cusanus in Cribratione Alcorani. 3. Richardus Ordinis Praedicatorum in confu∣tatione legis Saracenae. 4. Septem-castrensis de fide, & Religione Tur∣carum. 5. Christopherus Richerius, de moribus Turca∣rum, ad Franciscum Galliae Regem. 6. Cuspinianus de Religione Turcarum. 7. Postille de la Republique des Tures. 8. Bellanius des singularités. 9. Chronica Saracenorum. 10. Munsteri Cosmographia. 11. Georgensis de Turcarum Moribus. 12. Theueti Cosmographia. 13. Literae Constantinopoli scriptae ad quendam Venetum Patricium. Extant in fine libri, de furoribus Galliae. Of Symbolismes in generall. CHAP. IV. BEfore we come to dissect the parti∣culars, wherein our Reformists, and the Turks do cōspire, I hold it much conducing to our purpose (thus ob∣seruing Method perhaps in breach of Me∣thod)
to shew what agreements they haue in Generalities; Some of which Generalities are hereafter discoursed of more particu∣larly. The 1. Symbolisme. First then we find, that he who first com∣posed the Turkish Alcoran, was Sergius, an Apostata Monke; for though by the authority and commandement of Mahumet (a tempo∣rall Prince) yet by the peculiar industry, wit, and labour of Sergius, the Alcoran (al∣most a thousand yeares since) was framed & deuised. In like sort, the First dogmatizer of the Reformed Religion was Luther; first a Monke, but after forsaking his Religion, coyned your Ghospell. Thus both of them were first Votaryes; and both of them after be∣came forsakers of their first imbraced Ca∣tholike Religion, and burst out into open Renegado's, or Apostata's. The 2. Symbolisme. The second generall Course, wherein Sergius, and Luther do interleague, is their mutuall condemning of the Church of Christ for the former ages. And this their condemnation is Lapis angularis in the edi∣fice both of the Alcoran, and of your Gospell; the which stone except it had beene first placed, Sergius and Luther could neuer haue raised the walls of their future buildings, nor could haue declined the confessed
Note, and Marke of Heretiks. Now accor∣ding to this my Assertion Mahumet liuing in the age of S. Gregory the Great, or presently after, charged those tymes with Incredu∣lity, and want of true Beliefe; and therfore gaue out,Septem∣castrensis, and others. That he was sent by God to restore the Church to its purity in doctrine: And ans∣wearably some twenty yeares after the death of the said S. Gregory: he began his re∣stauration of the former supposing erring Fayth. The very same tymes of S. Gregory, your chiefe Sectaries do condemne of Antichri∣stianisme, and Idolatry (so conspiringly they agree with Mahumet, touching the tymes of the first imaginary decay of true Christiani∣ty.) For doth not Hospinian the Protestant thus write: GregorijHosp. hi∣stor. Sacram. l 2. p. 157. Magni aetate &c. In the age of Gregory the Great, all kind of superstition & Idolatry did (as a Sea) ouerflow, and ouerwhelme the Christian World? And Symon de VoyonIn his discourse v∣pon the Cata∣logue of Do∣ctours. (our Countriman) sortably auerreth, that when Bonifacius (who succeded Gregory) was stalled in the Papall Chayre, then was the whole world ouerwhelmed in the dreggs of Anti∣christian filthines, abominable superstition, and traditions of the Pope. With these former Se∣ctaries. IuniusIunius in Apocalyp. in cp. 10. the remarkable Nouellist, and Bullingerin his Treat con∣cerning An∣tichrist pag. 110. agree. Finally Hutterus the Protestant placeth the first decay of the fayth in the same tymes, saying: LibenterHutterus, de Sacrif. Missatico. pag. 377. concedo Idolomaniam &c. I freely grant, that the Popish Idolatry hath inuaded almost the whole earth, for these last thousand yeares. Thus we
see, that Mahumet, and the Professours of your Gospell do vnanimously iumpe in the tyme, when (according to their conceits) the Church of God began to decay, through the professing in its members of a false Re∣ligion. The 3. Symbolisme. The third point, wherein I will insist here, is that as Sergius, without any calling, or Vocation, laboured to ouerthrow the Chri∣stian Religion then professed: Euen so your Predecessours scorning all ordinary Mission, and Vocation, assumed the charge of refor∣ming the Church of Christ. And accordin∣gly heretoIn loc. com. lo 63. pag. 198. Aretius, andDanaeus in Isagog. Christian. part. 4. l. 2. pag 36. Duneus (two Protestants) maintaine; That Luthers Cal∣ling was extraordinary. In like manner Cal∣uin discoursing of this point, thus confes∣seth: QuiaLascitius the Prote∣stant so re∣lateth Caluin to say, in his Booke, de Russorum,  Moscouita∣rum religio∣us. Papa tyrannils &c. Because through the tyranny of the Pope, the true Course of Ordination was dissolued, therfore we needed a new help; and therefore this function, which the Lord hath imposed vpon vs, was altogether extraordi∣nary. In the same dialect speaketh your Pa∣triarch of our neighboring Towne of Ge∣ne (BezaBeza i his Confe∣rence at Poys▪ I meane) for being expostu∣lated of his owne, and other (his Associats) Calling, for their reforming of the Roman Church, and planting of their Innovations, peremptorily he affirmed, their Calling to be Extraordinary. So fully do Mahumet, and Sergius sympa∣ with our still Gospellers, in maintay∣ning
the Church of God to begin to be Erroneous, about the tyme of Gregory the Great, and in promiscuously vendicating to themselues (with contempt of all lawfull Vocation, and Mission) an extraordinary peculiar calling, for their first sowing of their Blesphemies, and Heresyes. This was the proceeding of your first chiefe Maisters, whome their owne learning (for that they were learned it cannot be denied) thus em∣bouldened to stampe their Errours, by am∣bitiously pretending a Miraculous Vocation. But we are the lesse to meruaile thereat, since Learning oftentimes makes men proud, and Pryde begets Heresy: and this is the vnex∣pected, and lamentable Gradation, bet∣wene Learning and Heresy. But to proceed in this vngratefull com∣bination and Coniunction; In which who had the aduantage ouer the other, I referre to the iudicious; seing where the Ballance is eauen, there the least graine doth cast it. Mahumet after he had by the industry & policy of Sergius, inuented, and pretended a reformation of the Roman Church, did instantly thereuponSo rela∣teth Cuspini∣anus in Ma∣humets. shake off the yoake of Obedience and Loyalty towards Is∣clius the Emperour, and did draw diuers Prouinces from him, euen by force and o∣pen Rebellion, subiugating them to his owne power. In all which said Prouinces he after planted his misbeliefe, and Infide∣lity. Thus did Sergius become Mahumets De∣dalus, in making him Wings for his high
soaring. And did not Luther treade (accor∣ding to his power) in the same tract with Mahumet? For after he had seasoned the Germans with his Nouellisme, he presently Foedere Smalcaldico, taught his Proselyts and followers, to rise in rebellion against Char∣les their Emperour. And wheras the Ger∣mans were obliged by Oath to the Obe∣dience of the Emperour, Luther and the Lu∣theran Deuines (to free them of all such feares and scruples) decreed by solemne Sentence, that, QuiaSleidan the Prote∣stant, lib. 1. Caesar Religioni &c. Because Cesar did threaten an overthrow to Reli∣gion, and the liberty thereof; therefore he gaue iust cause, why the Lutherans did visg against him with safe and good Consciences. And thus Luther first planting his Religion by the sword, and open Rebellion, no lesse then Mahumet did, caused such combustions, insurrections, and bloudy warrs throughout all Germany, as that himselfe thus vauntingly speaketh thereof; VideorLuther in loc. com. class. 4. c. 30. mihi. videre Germaniam in sanguine nature &c. Christus us viuit & reg∣nat, & ego viuo, & regnabo. But touching the Warrs waged by the Lutherans and the No∣uellists of this age, originally for the ad∣uancement of their Heresies, I cease here further to discourse of; since in a more con∣uenient place hereafter, I will more fully enlarge my selfe. Thus far now to shew the great associa∣tion, and affinity, which the Turks & your Ghospellers haue in the foundation, and enlarging of both your Religions. To wit,
First, that the Broachers of Turcisme, and Hugenotisuse were Apostata Monkes. Secondly, that they mutually agreed in equally con∣demning the Vniuersall Church of Christ, euen from such a peculiar Age, or Century. Thirdly, that the sowers of both their Reli∣gions did promiscuously enallege to them∣selues an extraordinary Vocation. Finally, that they maintayned, and increased both their Religions (once disseminated) by the sword and trayterous rebellions. And thus did these former Wretches thinke good to stampe their wicked doctrines (though to their owne eternall damnation) chiefly (a∣mong other allectiues) that they might be spoken of in after tymes. Madmen! who couet at so high a pryce to enioy a little Ayre, after they cease breathing: LandantusAugust. vbi non sunt, torquentur vbi sunt. You will I hope (O You my Countrimen) disclayme (at least in words) from Mahu∣metisme; and can you then imbrace your owne Ghospell as diuine, since it is impos∣sible, that Truth and Faisbood should indiffe∣rently be seated vpon the same Beginning. Basis, Ground worke, and Foundations?
The 4. Symbolysme, touching the writings of the Apostles. CHAP. V. HAuing laid downe aboue the ge∣nerall foundations, whereupon Sergous & Luther raised the Mount of their promiscuous Errours; It remaynes now to descend to the particular Heresyes by them indifferently maintay∣ned, which they wrought vpon the Anuile of their owne priuate Iudgments. And first, though Mahumet in his Alcoran admitted the Old Testament, and the Gospells; yet as making no mention of the Epistles of the Aposties, or of the Apocalyps, he wholy discā∣noneth, and excldeth them. For thus Ma∣humet writeth in his Alcoran:Azoar Deus pius & misericors pils Testamentum Vetus, (videlicet le∣gem Moysis & Psalterium) deinceps Euangelium, rectas vias hominsbus tradidit: God being pious and mercifull, first deliuered to men (as the right wayes) the Old Testamen (to wit, the Law of Moyses and the Psalter) then he af∣ter deliuered the Ghospell; From whence we see, that he pretermitteth all the other Writings of the Apostles. Now in this point our new Euangelists do ioyne with Mahu∣met and Sergius, by their expunging, and o∣bliterating most parts of the writings of the Apostles. To begin with Father Luther, who spea∣king
of the Epistle of S. Iames, betrampleth it in these Words: The Epistile of Iames isIn Prae∣faan Epist. Iacobi, in edi∣tione Ienesi. con∣tentions swelling strawy, and vnmorthy an Apo∣stolicall spirit. In like sort. Luther recteth as Apocryphall the booke of the Apocalyps euen by the udgment of Bullinger the Protestant, thus writing MartinBulling. vpon the A∣pocalys cap. 1. serm. 1. Luther hath (as it were) wounded this booke (meaning the Apo∣calyps) with a sharp Preface set before his Edition of the New Testament in Dutch; For which his course taken therem, graue and literate men are displèased with him. To proceed further:Kempnit. in Enchirid. pag. 6 Kempnitius (a chiefe Lutheran) peremptorals hudateth, & con∣demneth the second Epistle of Peter, the se∣cond, and third Epittle of Iohn, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of Iames, the Epi∣stle of Iude, & the Apocalyps; stiling all these Apocryphall: further assirming, That these BookesKempuit. in examen part. . p. 56. haue not testimony for their authori∣ty. With Kempuitius, Adamus Francisci (the Protestant) thus agreeth saying: ApocryphiIn Mar∣garete Theo∣log. pag. 48. libri &c. The Apocryphall Bookes of the New Te∣stament, are the Epistle to the Hebrews the Epistle of Imaes, the second and third of Iohn, the second of Peter, the Epistle of Iude, and the Apocalyps. Thus much to demonstrate, that Luther and diuers of his schollars agree with Mahu∣met, in denying most (at least) of the Epi∣stles of the Apostles. And therefore we haue lesse reason to be amazed at that prophane saying of Caluin, in dishonour of the Apo∣stles in generall. His words are these: Aposto∣liCaluin . Instit. 4. c. l. 9.4. non debent garrire quicquid illis collibitum
fuerit &c. The Apostles ought not to babble, and speake idly of things, as it pleaseth them; but they are to relate the Commandements of God sincerely. We are indeed to belieue the Apostles; but this only as they speake out of the Word of God, not as they speake from themselues, but from the precept and speciall commandement of their Legation. Thus Caluin. O wonderfull procacity, and inso∣lency of Heresy. As if the Apostles did som∣times babble, and talke idly, did speake only of themselues, and not as instructed and di∣rected by God. The 5. Symbolisme, Touching the erring of the Apostles. CHAP. VI. THe Turks, or Mahumetans, as they do not belieue the writings of the Apostles; So they hould the Apo∣sties to haue erred in diuers of their Actions; since they maintaine that the A∣postles had not greater warrant for their not erring in their Actions, then they had for their not erring in their Writings. The same point is maintayned by seue∣rall of your first Instructours (so great is your conformity with them herein.) For according hereto Luther sayth of S. Iames speaking of Extreme Vnction: I say,Luther de Captiuit. Babylon. cap. de extrema Vnction. thaeth in any place Iames erred, in this place especiall. be erred &c. For it is not lawfull for an Apostle  is owne authority to institute a Sacrament. As
the Apostle would, or dared to ordayne a Sacrament, without the authority, & com∣mand of Christ our Sauiour. In like manner, Brentius (the Lutheran) thus boldly writeth: PeterIn Apo∣log. Confess. cap. de Conci∣liss. the Chiefe of the Apostles and also Barnabas (after the Holy Ghost receaued) togeather with the Church of Ierusalem erred. The Magdeburgians thus pro∣secute this Point: Paul dothCent. . l. . c. 800 une to Iames the Apostle, and a Councell of the Presbyters being celebrated, he is induced by Iames and theest, that for the offended Iewes, he should parisy himselfe in the Temple, to which Paulyieldeth, which without doubt was no small slip in so eminent a Doctour. Finally to o the like condemnation, giuen by our Reformist, Whitaker (the En∣glish Sectary) thus hath left written: ItDe Ec∣cles. contra Bellar. con∣trou. . q. 4. is manifest, that after the descending of the Holy Ghost, the Apostles erred in the Vocation of the Gentills; And that Peter in like sort erred in man∣ners, touching the abrogation of the Ceremall Law. Now where can we find any Mahu∣metan or Turke (all who condemne the A∣postles) to speake more vnworthily, and debasing of them, then these alledged Ghospellers haue done? The 6. Symbolisme, touching the Ghospells. CHAP. VII. TO proceed: Touching the Scrip∣tures, which the Mahumetans, and our new Gospellers do admit as pure, and sacred, the Saracens, or
Turks (I euer meane the Mahumetans) agree with the Lutherans in the manner, reason, and custome of Proceeding with the said Scriptures. The sole Reason, why the Ma∣humetans do not admit the New Testament, as now it is (though they allow of it, they say, as it was first giuen, by, Iesus) pretending that it hath been corrupted, i, becauseCuspin. de relig. Tur∣carum. Sep∣tem-Castren∣sis de relig. Turca. the Sentences and authorities of the New Testement touching Christ are repugnant to their fayth, first intiued by Sergius in the Alcoran; so as they make their Mahumetan fayth to be a square, where with to measure the Truth, or falshood of the New Testament. And do not out Euangelists runne in one and the same liue of proceeding? According to this it is, that Luther in the balancing of the foure Euangelists thus wri∣teth: QuiLuth. tom. 3. p. aefat in epist. Petri. potismū & maiort prae cateris studio docent &c. Such Euangelists are the chiefest, who more carefully teach (then other Euangetists doe) that fayth in Christ only without our works doth make vs iust, and in state of Saluation. Thus Lu∣ther lesning the worth of the Euangelists, according as they seeme more to impugne his conceyted doctrine of Iustification by fayth only. Againe the Centurists in reiecting with Luther the Epistle of Iames, giue this reason, saying: The Epistle of Iames is countrary to the do∣ctrine of the Apostles, becauseCent. 2. c. 4. p. 6 it maketh A∣braham to be iustifyed not by fayth only, but by Works. In like manner Beza reiecteth those words, as surreptitious, in Luke 22. This is
the Chalice, the New Testament in my Bloud, which shalbe shed for you;Beza in annotat. in a, Lucae. because as Beza sayth, The words in the Greeke Copyes confirme the Reall Presence in the Sacrament. Thus we obserue, that both the Mahume∣tans. and the Lutherans do iointly make the Religion, which they professe the founda∣tion o ground-work, why they do disau∣thorize such, or such Bookes of Scripture, not reputing them to be the Word of God. A strange, and retrograde proceeding: for since fayth, and Religion is to receaue its approbation from Scripture, here with he Mahumetans, and the Lutherans, the Scripture is to take its force, and authority from fayth it selfe; that fayth I meane, which euery particular Sectary (whether Mahumetan, or Lutheran) shall in his owne priuat iudg∣ment hould to be true. The 7. Symbolisme, Touching the Ancient Fathers. CHAP. VIII. FRom the authority of the Scrip∣ture, let vs descend to the authority of the anciēt Fathers of the Church of God. All whom we shall fynd to be equally reiected and contemned by the Mahumetans, and the Lutherans. Yea Luther & his Offpring, before they will lend a fauo∣rable eare to those Sentinalls of Gods Church for the good of their owne soules,
will soner endanger their owne Saluation; they bearing themselues therein with such desperate resolution, wherewith Cato did, of whom it is recorded: Occidii se Cato, ne di∣ceretur, Caesar me seruauit. And first touching the Fathers. We find Mahumet in his Alcorans thus to disualew them:Azoara 13. Increduli & minime adoranies, &c. The Christians are incredulous, not worshipping God, when they are required to giue credit to the Commandements of God, and to his Legate, or Mesienger (videlicet Mahumet) for they say, se nolle imita quicquam, nisi quod Patres imitati sunt; They will not intate others in any thing, but in what the Fathers haue imitated. But to this is obiected: Virum Patres non nisi veram fidem sem∣per euerunt, Whether the Fathers did euer hould the true faych? Thus Mahumet in his Alcoran. But now let vs see, how Luther, and the Lutherans euen tread vpon the ancient Fa∣thers with greater contempt of Words, and contumelies, then euer Mahumet did. To be∣gin with Luther, who in these words dis∣chargeth his shot against the Fathers in ge∣nerall: TheLuth tom. 2. Wittenb. an 1551. lib. de seruo arbi∣trio. Fathers of so many Centuries haue beene blind, and most vnskilfull in the Scrip∣tures, and if they did not correct and alter themsel∣ues before they dyed, they were neither Holy men, nor belonging to the Church. But Luther com∣ming to censure particular Fathers, even shooteth hayle-shot against them in this manner: In the writingsLuther in colloquijs mensalibus, cap de Patri∣bus Ecclesia. of Ierome there is not a word of true Fayth in Iesu Christ, and per fect Religion. Tertullian is very superstirious. I am
persuaded, that Origen was long since accursed. I make small rekoning of Chrysostome. Basill is not to be much regarded; he is wholy, and meerely  Monke; I prize him not of a barre. Cyprian is but a shallow and weake deuine. Finally, against Austin, and Cyprian he thus vaunteth: ILuther∣m 1. contra Rege An∣gliafol. 344. care not, if a thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians opposed themselues against me. With Luther (to omit the like censures of other Lutherans) Melancton runneth in full chase, thus baking: PresentlyMelanth. in 1. Cor. c. 3. from the In∣fancy of the Church, the ancient Fathers obscured the doctrine concerting Iustification by fayth, aug∣triented Ceremonyes and coyned peculiar Worships. O how distant in the iudgment of these Nouelists (who haue bouche ouuerie & gorge desployàe, an open mouch, and full of gause) from the iudgment of S. Austin, deliueredin this his Sentence: QuodAug. to. J. contra I∣lian. l. 1. c. 5. (Patres, credunt, credo; quod tenent, teneo; acquiesce istis, & re∣quiesce à me. The 8. Symbolisme, Touching generall Councells. CHAP. IX. AS Mahumet reiected the Fathers in particular, so also he reiected the authority of the ancient Coū∣cells, consisting of many hundred Fathers, gathered together in one place, for the disquisition and search of Truth in mat∣ter of Religion. According to this my As∣sertion,
we find no mention of any autho∣rity, ascribed to Generall Councells to be made in the Alcorans. Neither would Mahu∣met admit the authority of any one Coun∣cell celebrated either before, or in his dayes; euen betrampling with contempt the first CouncellSeptem∣castrens. defi∣de & relig. Turcarum. of Nice, which was about some three hundred yeares before the being of Mahumet, since by that Councell, his blas∣phemy of denying Christ (who is God be∣fore all time, but Man in tyme) to be God, & the Sonne of God, was particularly con∣demned. How do our Aduersaries compart with Mahumet in contemning all Councells? For doth notBrent. in Apol. Con∣fes. Wittem. cap. de Conci∣lijs. Brentius charge euen the said Councell of Nice with seuerall Errours? In like sort Caluin a ftirmed, that the Fathers of that Councell wereCaluin de verae Eccles∣reformat. in∣ter opuscul. pag. 480. fanaticall: & Mus∣culus, that they wereMusculus in loc com de Ministrs. p. 19. à Satana in stigati. But Vbanus Regius (the Protestant) insimulateth all generall Councells within this his Cen∣sute: Quod omniaVrb. Reg. 1. part oper in inter pret. loc. com. de Eccle∣sia. fol. 51. Concilia parni lapsa sunt▪ luce clarius est: It is more cear then the sunne, that all Councells haue most fowly erred. And Beza sortably maintayneth, that, PrimisBeza in his preface of the New Te∣stam. anno 1587. isque optimis Ecclesia temporibus, Satan E∣piscoporum coebus praefuit; Euen in the very first and best times, Satan did gouerne and preside ouer the Councells, and Bishops. But Peter Martyr, to the end he would not be short to his for∣mer Brethren in so pious a worke, thus sharpeneth his rafory tongue, against all Councells in generall:Peter Mar. l de votis, pag. 47. At long, as we insist in
generall Councells, so long we shall continue in the Papists Errours. Did euer any Child beare greater resem∣blance in face to his Father, then our Euan∣gelists do carry to Mahumet in doctrine herein? Thus we find, that though the Er∣rour of contemning Generall Councells in these our tymes, be not properly Luthers, yet it is of Luther; I meane, defended by those, who are the descendents of Luther: So litle do these New Brethren regard the words of the Euangelist, recorded of the Councell of the Apostles, and implicitly of all other lawfull Generall Councells: VisumAct. 15. est spiritui Sancto, & Nobis. The 9. Symbolisme, Concerning Traditions. CHAP. X. MAhumet, and his followers ascribe such perfection to the Alcoran, as that theyCusantis in cribatione Alcorain. l. 1. & 2. & Ri∣chardus Ordi∣is Praedicat. in confutat. legis Saracen. made it the bounda∣y of their Religion; belieuing or giuing credit to nothing, which was not found expresly set downe therein; not per∣forming any thing not written therein; So much they sleighted the force of all Tradi∣tions, though most ancient. And hereupon we find an Authour in these patricular words to discourse of this point: Est in Tur∣carumBeinbus slor, Vgnet. l. 4. legibus, vt quae sua lingua scripta non sunt, ea praestari non est necesse.
And do not our New Euangelists so ad∣mirt the written Word of God (and yet but that of the written Word, which them∣selues hould for his Word) at that they euen spit at all Traditions, which haue not their expresse warrant from the said. Word? Vpon this ground their maine Throrame is, That nothing is to be belieued, but what the Scripture euidently teacheth. And therefore whereas S. Basill sayth: SomeBasil de spiritu San∣cto c. 27. things we haue from Scripture, other things from the Apo∣stles Traditions, both which haue like force to god∣lines; as also whereas Epiphanius writeth: WeEpiphan. haeres. 61. must vse. Traditions, for the Scripture hath not all things; and therefore the Apostles deliuered certaine things by wryting, and certaine by Tradi∣tion: Now I say, these Sentences are so dis∣pleasing to Reynoldus (an English Prote∣stant) as that he thus speaketh of these two foresaid Fathers: IReynoldus in his Conclu∣sions, or Thesibus. take not vpon me to cor∣rect them, but let the Church iudge, if they haue weighed this point with aduice, and consideration. In like manner whereas Chrysostome most clearely speaketh in defence of Traditions in this sort; TheIn 2. Thessl. Ho∣mil. 4. Apostles did not deliuer all things by Wryting, but many things without wri∣ting; and these later are to be as much credited, as the former; doth not Whitakerus condemne this sentence in the dialect of his said bro∣ther, and Countriman Reynoldus, saying: IWhitak. de sara Scriptura, pag. 678. reply, that this is an indiscret and rash speech, and not worthy so great a Father? A point so euident, that the said WhitakerusWhitak▪ de sacrascrip. p. 678.681.683.685.690.695. & seq. doth in∣simulate (and with all reprehend) these
ensuing Fathers, within his supposed er∣rour of maintayning Traditions; to wit, Da∣mascene, Eusebius, Leo, Basill. Austin, Cyprian, Tertullian, Chrysostome, and Epiphanius. How can these Protestants decline the force of that sacred Testimony of the Apostle: Tene∣te. Thess 1. Traditiones &c. Hould fact the Traditions which you haue receaued, either by Word, or by Epistle? The 10. Symbolisme, Touching the not Necessity of Fayth in Christ. CHAP. XI. THough the Turks do reuerence Christ, as a holy Brophet, sent by God to reforme the world in do∣ctrine yet doth their Alcoran teach, that a man not belieuing in Christ may ob∣taine Saluation; Thus doth Mahumet and his followers deny the Necessity of Christs byrth; whose corporall byrth begot our spi∣rituall byrth, and his being borne in body, procureth vs to be borne in Soule; & thus is his Incarnation the cause (as I may terme it) of our Spiritulization. But to proceede. This is one of the Azoaraes in the Alcoran: SciendumAzoara 1. est generaliter, quoniam omnis recte piuens, Iudaeus, se Christianus, seu iege suâ relict inaliam tendent, omnis scilicet Deum adoram in∣dubitanter diuinumtamorem assequotur: It is ge∣nerally to be knowne, that euery man li∣uing well, whether Iew, or Christian, or
leauing his owne law and religion, imbra∣ceth another; that is, euery Man adoring God, shall infallibly obtaine the Loue of God, and consequent∣ly Saluation. Diuers markable Forefathers of yours do teach the same; for according to this do∣ctrine Swinglius thus writeth: Ego certéSwingl. de Prouident. c. . malim si optio detur, Socratis, and Senerae sartem eligere &c. I had rather cause (if is were put to my election) the fortune and lot of Socrates, or Seneca, then of any Roman Bishop, or Papisticall Empe∣rour King, or Prince. And hereupon Swinglius (that malheureux Heretique, ou plustost Atheiste) concludeth in particular, thatSwingl. tom. 2. fol. 118. & 339. Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Aristides &c. are now in Heauen. Neither is Swinglius alone full in this his blasphemy, but Gualterus, Bullingerus, Simlerus, the Tigarine Deuines (all Proteltants) do iointly teach with Swinglius. the Salua∣tion of Heathens, dying Heathens. Which point appeareth not only from their owneGualte∣rus in Apol∣sol 27. Bul∣ling. in his Preface of allowance to Swinglius his exposit? ficei d Regem, fol. 55 Simlerus in vita Bulling. Sentences hereof, but also by the ac∣knowledgment of Eucharius, a Protestant, whose words are these: QuodEucharius in his Pasci∣culus Contro∣uers. printed Lipfi anno 609. c. 19. Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus. Hercules, Scipiones, Catones, & aly Gentile comparticipes sunt viae aternae, scribit quidem Swinglius ad Regem Gal∣liae, quem defendunt Tigurini, Bullingerus, Gual∣terus. Hardenburgius &c. Now the ground-worke & foundation whereupon Swinglius, and the rest do rely; is coincident and the same with the Reason of Mahumet, deliuered aboue in his Alco∣ran; And is expressed by Swinglius in these
words: Ethnicus,Swingl. in l. Epistoarum Swingl. & Oecolampadij l. 1. pag. 30. si piam mentem domi foue∣rit. Christianus est, etiamsi Christum ignoret; A Heathen, if he haue a good mynd or Conscience, is a Christian, though he be wholy ignorant of Christ. I en in further displaying this blasphemy, being desirous to know, how Swinglius and his Associats can breake through that most strong and inuincible Sentence of the E∣uangelist: ThereAct. 4. is not anyother name vnder Heauen (meaning the name of I sus Christ) giuen to men wherein we must be saued. But now giue me leaue (my Countrimen) to expatiate a litle in my discourse. I here demaund, Are they Christians, who affoard Saluation to such as are not Christians? If such as belieue not in Christ, can be saued, in vaine then was the second Person of the most B. Trinity incarnated; In vaine did the Ar∣changell Gabriell salute the holy Virgin; in vaine did Christ Iesus spend diuers yeares in reconciling sinners to God; Finally in vaine was he whipped crownd with thorns, buf∣feted vpon the face, suffered many Indig∣nities, and lastly most bitter death vpon the Crosse, by the hands of the wicked Iewes. But alas, are any who professe thē∣selues to be Christians, arriued to that ascent of impiety, as with their misbeliefe & mis∣creancy euen to Crucify Christ againe? When the Iewes did crucify Christ (which originally did spring from their misbeliefe in him) God to manifest that their flagi∣tions impiety, did worke diuers and stu∣pendious Miracles; for (among other pro∣digious
signes) there was a sudden Darknes made throughtout the whole earth, to a∣dumbrate the spirituall darknes of the Iewes. Then also, there was a Concussion of the Earth, and Scission of the stones, which did imply, that through the Passion and death of Christ (who is cloathed with essentiall Maiesty) men ought to be moued to pen∣nance, and the stony harts of the obdurate to be (as it were) clouen, and cut asunder. Then the Sepulchers did open; signifiing thereby the glorious resurrection of the dead to be wrought by the death of Christ. Finally then the Veyle was rent asunder, by which meanes the Sancta Sanctorum did ap∣peare; intimating therein, that through the Merits, and sufferings of Iesus Christ, all the Saints were after to be admitted, to be∣hould the face of Christ. Such of you of the reformed Beligion, who by your giuing assent to the former do∣ctrine of Swinglius, do not belieue in Christ, and by your not belieuing in Him (who is the only Authour of Mans Saluation) do crucify him againe, and verify in your sel∣ues the words of the Apostle: RunsumHebr. 6. cru∣cifigentes sibimetipsis filium Dei: crucifiing againe to themselues the sonne of God; is it any won∣der then, if in this second crucifixion of Christ, a horrible darknes do ouercloud the powers of your Soules? O how truly did Esay prophecy of you, and all such others: EcceEsay. 60. teuebrae operient terram, & caligo popu∣los: behould darknes shall couer the earth, and a mist the People?
And haue you not iust reason to suffer a knocking, and renting asunder of your flinty harts, that so through penitency you may say with those, returning from the Passion, PercutienteLue. 23. pectora sua? Or how can you hope for a happy resurrection of your Bo∣dies, if you do not confesse, that the most happy resurrection of the dead is the effect of Christ his death? Of lastly, when shall you be admitted to the sight of him, (in whom there is lux1. Ti∣moth. c. 6. inaccessibilis) if you will not withdraw the Veyle of your igno∣rance, and pertinacy, which yet remaines interposed betweene your sight, & things most sacred and holy? But let me recall my selfe; I grant the Honour, I beare to my Deare Sauiour, and the atrocity of the former Protestants Blasphemy haue thus far trans∣ported my Penne. The 11. Symbolisme, That Mahumetisme and Lutheranisme are ingendred of ancient Heresyes. CHAP. XII. TO passe further:Melanth. l. 3. Illyric. in Apolog. Melancthon, Illy∣ricus, Bibliander, and others affirme thus in expresse Words: Alcoranus ex veteribus Haeresibus consuitur: The Turkish Alcoran is wouen, or sewed toge∣ther of the Old Heresies. This these Prote∣stants did affirme, because they perceaued,
that Mahumes and Sergius did hould certaine opinions, condemned for Heresyes by a∣thanasius Austin. Ierome, Gregory, and other an∣cient Orthodoxall Fathers. Thus the Alcoran de∣nieth the Trinity withPrateol∣n  Blench. Haeresil. 11 c. 3 Sabellius; It rea∣cheth with Arius, and Eunomias, that Christ was a mere Creature; With Carpocrates, and Nestorius, that Christ was not God, but only a holy and diuine Prophets with the Mani∣chees, that Christ was not crucified, & with the Donatists it denieth many Sacraments and the Church. Now the reason, why Melan∣cthon, Illyricus, & Bibliander, and others hould these opinions of the former men to be He∣resyes, is, in that they were condemned for Heresies by Athanasius, Austin, Ierome, Grego∣ry, and finally by the consent of the whole Primitiue Church of those dayes. Here then I say, that it is an inexpugna∣ble Truth, that many Article of Fayth, be∣lieued at this day by Protestants, were in like fort condemned for explorate Heresies (& accordingly ranged in the Catalogue of Heresies) by the foresaid Fathers, I meane, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Austin, erome, Gregory, and other pious, and learned Fathers of those Ages. From hence then I irrepliably euict, that Mahumets Alcoran, and the new Gospellers do conspire and agree together in this point; to wit, that the Religion of Mahumes, and our Innouatours are engen∣dred and compounded of diuers ancient comdemned Heresies, though not altoge∣ther of the same Heresies. If then Mahume∣tisme,
and Lutheranisme do agree in this one Commons point, must not their affinity & assotiation be great, since that saying is true: Quae conueniunt in vno tertio, conueniunt in∣crse? I meane, that they do agree in this par∣ticular thing, though in some other points different; for I grant▪ that two faces may be a like to a third face, yet dislike in seuerall proportions in themselues. But now to proue, that diuers Positions maintained by Luther, Swinglius, Caluin, Beza, and other Sectaries of this Age, were ana∣thematized by the former ancient and lear∣ned Fathers, is so easily accomplished; as that seing the proofe thereof ought to pre∣uaile much with any Man, not blinded with Preiudice; I haue therefore seposed a short Appendix, annexed to this Treatise for the demōstrating of the same; In the which the Reader▪ shall find the former ancient Fathers, and others of the same tymes, to be most luxuriant (as I may say) and riotous in condemning many (yea very many) points of Lutheranisme, for most hatefull, & execrable Heresyes. And thus as this Treatise (as I expressed in the beginning) is the Glasse, wherein you Hugenots of France may behould diuers of your impious Opinions, conspiring alto∣gether with the fayth of the Mahumetans, Sa∣racens, and Turks, so this subsequent Appen∣dix I may well terme your Second Glasse (as I haue intimated elswhere) which will exhi∣bite to you the face of the ancient Here∣syes,
condemned by the Church of God for such, and yet the same Heresies are now en∣tertayned, and belieued by you of the refor∣med Religion. Thus I will furnish you with a double Glasse to see your blemishes the rein. I cannot say with the wise Man, that it is SpeculumWisdom c. 7. sine macula, seing it is fraught with deformities, partly of the Turks, and partly of the Old Heretiks; all which said scarrs, and sedities do remaine at this day v∣pon the face of your New presumed Ghospell. The 12. Symbolisme; Touching the Planta∣tion of Mahumetisme and Luthe∣ranisme, is warranted by Scripture. CHAP. XIII. BVt to goe on forward in shewing your Symbolizing, and agreement with Mahumet, and Sergrus. The next point then, which I will vrge is, that Mahumet and his followers (though this resemblance hath in part been vnfoulded aboue, but in a different māner) do proceed after one and the same way in plantation of their Religions. And First, for the greater honoring (forsooth) of both their Com∣mings and Vocations, there must be cer∣taine Passages of Holy Scripture detored, as though both their Missions to plant the
True Fayth, had been prophesyed in the same Texts of Gods Word. Thus we findVide Azoara 58. Sergius, and the Mahumetans to expound a great part of the twenty eight Chapter of Deuteronomy, of Mahumet, wherin are ex∣pressed the benedictions giuen to good men. They also expound that PassageMath. 13. Marc. 4. in the Gospell, where the graint of seede being cast into the earth, did multiply, & bring forth great store of increase of the spirituall fruit, which Mahumet should cause by planting his Religion. And are the Lutherans slow (thinke you) in ennobling the breaking out of that ince∣stuous Monke (Luther I meane) by misap∣plication of certaine texts of Scripture? For IllyricusIllyric. in Apoc. 14. maintayneth, that Luther was prophesied in that place of the Apocalyps; to wit▪ of the three Angells flying through the mid∣dest of the Heauens, and prophesying. And otherCouradus Schlusselb. in Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 124. Lutherans are not afraid to auerre, that Luther was the chiefe Angell flying through the middest of the Heauens, hauing the e∣ternall Ghospell, of which we reade in the Apocalyps. Thus do the Professours of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme indifferently alledge Scripture, to the dishonour of him, who first instituted the Scripture. The 13. Symbolisme; Touching the further Plantation of Mahumetisme and Lutheranisme. The next point, wherein they both con∣spired in planting of the Ghospell, was
their mutuall maintayning (as aboue is said) that the true Fayth and Religion of God was wholy decayed, at both their first Commings. For CuspinianusCuspiu▪ de Religion Turcarum. writeth, that Mahumat (as himselfe said)▪ was sent by God, Vt doctrinam ab Apostolorun discipulis cor∣rupam alcorano sue emndart; That he hould reforme in his Alcoran the Euangelicall doctrine, corrupted by the Disciples of the Apostles. And certaine it is, that Luther proceeds in the same manner. For hauing condemned all the Fathers of the Primitie Church, for superstitious (as aboue I shewed,) Il fur si effronté, & esbonté▪ he was so impudent, and shamelesse, as that he assumeth the corre∣cting of their Errours, and replanting the true fayth of Christ to himselfe, in this man∣ner speaking most ambitiously. Non sinamLuther tom. 2. contr Regem. A∣ fol. 344. Angelo de mea doctria iudicare: I will not suffer the Angells to iudge of my doctrine. And a∣gaine: GodsLuther i∣dem Work maketh for me, in so much that I regard not if a thousand Aus a thousand Cyprians stood against me. Luther vaunteth himselfe to be Christ disciple; But where do we find Christs words to be in the lowest degree verified in him, MitisMath. ▪ sa, & umilis cerde?
The 14. Symbolisme, Touching the want of Miracles. CHAP. XIV. TO proceede: It is confessed, that Mahumet, and Luther so far agreed, that both of them acknowledge, they neuer performed any Miracle for the warranting of their doctrines. And first touching Mahumet, he plainly sayth in his Alcoran, That he neuerAzoare 7. wrought any Miracle in confirmation of his Religion. And the like defect of Miracles is acknow∣ledged by the Lutherans, to wit, That nei∣ther Luther, nor any other of our Nouellists wrought euer any one Miracle, for the grea∣ter fortifying of their late appearing Fayth. Sorribly hereto diuers Protestant Deuines thus ingenuously speak of Luther:Theologi Casiniriani in eduonit, sua de lib. Con∣cordiae Ber∣gensis  Mir∣culum, quod Lutherus edulit, nall nudis; We haue not heard that Luther did euer exhibite one Miracle. And if it should be vrged (as a Mi∣racle) the speedy spreading of Eutheranisme in so short a tyme, ouer so many places and Countries; this is acknowledged for no Mi∣racle both byMelāncth. Cron. l. 3. à pag. 11. ed pag. 317. Melancthon, and Illyricus;Illyric. in Abocalyp. cap. . who maintaine, that Mahumetisme was from no lesse small a beginning, and yet was more generally for the tyme dispersed, then euer Lutheranisme was I.
The 15. Symbolisme; Concerning the like Protestation of Mahumet and the Lu∣therans, for the proofe of their Reli∣gious. CHAP. XV. TO conclude, Mahumet and Buther being in extreme want of Mira∣cles in defence of their Religions, were both indifferently forded to fly to their owne pricat Spirtis, and vehe∣ment Protestations, that they were sent by God to correct the Errours of their Tymes. To this (end (as to supply) the want of all Miracles) Mahumet vseth in his Alor these Protestations and asseuerations: PeIn Azoar 61.62.68.1.50. & seq.  sufftnces, & nubes, & naues aquere curreles, & Angelos nunio permontem Syna, & donium superne adificatam &c. I sweare by the blouing ds and Cloudes, and by the shipps say∣ling vpon the Sea, by the Angels Gods Mesnger by the Mount Syn &c. That I am not, Demo∣niacus, possessed with the Deuill, or a Magitian, but the Mssger of the best and highest God; that I do not erre in any thing, nor speake out of my proper Will but that only I deler what is com∣manded me to say from abou. This is Mahumets vehement, (and withall ridiculous) Prote∣station of the Infallibility and Truth of his Doctrine Now let vs see how Luther (for his like
want of Miracles) beareth himselfe herein, who thus boasteth of the doubtlesse cer∣tainty of his Innouations: ScireLuth. tom.  Wittem∣berg contra Regem Ano Gliae. fol. 333. vos vlo &c. I will haue you all to know, that hereafter I will not vouchsafe you this Honour, as to suffer you or the Angells of Heauen, to iudge of my do∣ctrins; for seing I am certaine of it, I will therefore through force of it, be both your Iudge, and Iudge of the Angells. And further: CertusLuth. vbi suprà. sum dog∣a this habere de Caelo; I am assured, that I haue ay opinions from Heauen; and my Opinions shall stand, &c. In like sort Caluin (the chiefe Resiner of Luther) for the like assurance of his do∣ctrine, maketh this vehement Appeale to Christ (see how Heresy masketh it selfe vn∣der the cture of confident zeale) in this for TCaluin Vltime admo∣nit. ad West∣phalum pag. 1140. Christum silium Dei appello, vt nuns, & in trema die facias &c. I appeale to thee Christ being the sonne of God, that thou wouldest make it cleare, both at this time, and at the last day, if euer so great a fury inuaded my iudgment & will, as to infect thy doctrine with any one lye, or imposture. And if thou seest me free and innocent of so hocrible a Cryme, then be thou to me a fayth∣full Witnes, that I haue sincerely, and vnfeignedly professed that doctrine, the which I haue earned out of thy most sacred Ghospell &c. Thus we see, how Luther boasteth of the inexpugnable Truth of his Fayth; as also how Caluin forgeth his feruerous Appeale to Christ, for the security of his doctrine; and how these Prime Sect maisters ioyne hands with Mahumēt, in making their owne
prestigious, and deceitfull Protestations, &c iurations, a sufficient Warram for the first duulging of their most impious Heresyes and Blalphemies. So firmely and without the least deuiation, do these and other our Ghospellers, trace the stept of Mahumet herein. The 16. Symbolisme; Touching the deniall of the Blessed Trinity. CHAP. XVI. HItherto we haue discoursed chie∣fly of certaine Generalities; wherein Mahumet, Sergius, and the Turks do conspire with Luther, the Luthe∣ran, and such Nouiste of these dayes: We will now descend more punctually to di∣uers dogmatical Christian Mysteries, wher∣in we shall find their like Concordance, & Sympathy. The first of these shall concerne the most Blessed Trinty. That Mahumet (and in him the Turks) absolutly deny the most sacred, and vndeuided Trinity  is euident from their fayth professed in the Alcoran: Behold here, les execrables blasphemes, qu'il auoit vony in son Alcoran, for thus Mahumet the dog matizeth: IncrediAzoara 12. sunt qui sum fi Mar De esse dim, cum ipse Christ dcat in dominumIohn 0. Deum mem & vestra credite, They are incre∣dulous, who say, that Iesus the sonne of Mary is God, seing that Christ himselfe sayth: belieue in my
God, and your God. And its another passage of the Alcoran Mahumet vseth this wicked de∣precation: ConfundatAzoara 19. Deus Christanos, qui Mariae filium loco Dei venerantur, cum ipsis pra∣ceptumsit, non nisi vnum Deum venerare: Let God: confound those Christians, who worship the Sonne of Mary in place of God, seing they are comman∣ded, that they shall worship but one God. A point so euident, that Bibliander thus speaketh her∣of: PrimusBiblian. in praefac. Al∣cor. 3. & maximus rror Turcarum est, quòd Trinitatem in Vuitate negant: The chiefe and greatest Erro of the Turks is, that they deny the Trinity in the Vnity. And hereupon another Authour writing in confutation of cise thus sayth: PrincipalisRicardus Ordinis Prae∣dict. in con∣futat. legis Saraci, ca. 8. intentio Mahumts est▪ persuadere Christum neque Deum esse neq filium Dei. Now let vs see, how Luther and other Gospellers do accord with Mahumet in the deniall of this suprame Mystery of Christian Religion. We first find Luther to put our of the Letany those words: HolyVide En∣chirid. Pre cum anno 153. Trinity one very God, haue mercy vpon us. Ad also he further sayth: The WordLuth. in Postill. maio∣re, Basiee aud Herua∣gium in euar∣rat. Euang. Dom. Trinity is but an hune In∣uention, and soundeth coldly. And hereupon it is, thatCalu. epist. 2. ad Polonos extat. in his tract. Theol. pag. 796. Caluin following Luther he in, thus writeth: Precatio vulgè trita est, Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus misérere nostr & mihi non placei, That Prayer Holy Trinity &c. is very vulgar, and plea∣seth me not. And in egard of this former do∣ctrine, and as not acknowledging Christ to be Consubstantiall to his Father. Luther bel∣cheth out these blasphuous words: AnimaLuth. in lib. contra Iacob La∣co ons. 2. Wittem∣berg. edit. an∣to 351. mea odit? Omusion, & optimè exigerunt A∣iani
nevocem illem prophanant & noam, regu∣lis fidei statut liceret: My Soul hateth the word Homousis or Consubstantialis, and the Arians de∣seruedly insisted vpon, that this Word should not be inserted in the rules of fayth. Finally from hence it riseth, that Luther expungeth out of his duch Bibler that mar∣kable passage of sacred Scripture, in proofe of the Trinity: There1. Ioan. 5. are three, which giue witnes in Heauen, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One. And accor∣ding to this doctrine of Luther it procee∣ded, that the Protestant DeuinesIn Synod. Vilnae habis. anno 1589. of Li∣tuania enacted by Synodicall authority, that the Word, Trinity thould not be vsed any longer. So crosse these men are in doctrine to the ancient Apostolike Fayth, teaching Christ to be God, and Consubstantiall with his Father, and that the diuine MaiestyBernard. did send the Word into the World, and yet re∣tayned with him the Word. Concerning Caluins dislike (besides what is aboue said) of the doctrine of the Trinity, and consequently of Christ being God. it is more fully discouered by his interpreting of all chiefe places of Scripture, produced by all Antiquity in proofe of the Trinity with the Ariahs, and against all other Christians: He thus by his false commenting of them, main yping, that they are wrongfully al∣ledged in defence of the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. I will here insist in some few parti∣culars. And first that markable place lIohn. 10. and the Father are Vnum, one thing, this stigma∣ticall
Aposta thus paraphrazeth: Abusi sunt hoc loco Veteres, vt prbarent Christaine esse Patri : The antient Doctoure haue abusiue∣ly alledged this place, to proue Christ to be Consub∣stantiall to his Father. Neque enim Christus de Vnitate substantia disputat, sed de Consensis. For heare Christ disputeth not of the Vnity of sub∣stance, but of Consent. Againe, where it is said. The LordGenes. c. 19. rayned vpon So dome and Gomor∣, fire, from the Lord; Caluin thus anoideth this restimony by saying:Caluin in Gones. c. 19. Quod Veteres Christs diuinitatem hoc testimonie probare conati sunt, minimé firmumest It is noc solid and firme to proue from this Testemony, the diuinity of Christ, as the Fathers attempted to haue done. In like sort. Where it is said: ThouHebr. 1. & Psalm. 2. are my somne (hodie) this day I haue begotten thee, Which place is produced not only by the Fathers, but euen by theHeb. 1. Apostle. to proue Christs diuinity: yet Caluin thus shifteth it of, saying: ScioCaluin in Psalm. 2., hunc locum de aetorna genera∣tione Christs &c. I know well, that this place is ex∣pounded by many of the eternall Generation of Christ, who, touching the Word. (Hodie) in this te haue uer subtily disputed. To oit diuers otherTou∣ching the word Eloim, in Gnes. c. 1. and out of the Psalm. 33. passages of Scripture, vrged by the Fathers in proufe of the Trinity, where we read that most uining Text: There be three1. Iohn c. . which giue testimony in Heauen, the Father the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three be One; Caluin thus auoydeth the force thereof by saying: Quòd dicit. Tras ese Vnum ad Essentiānon referturCaluin in 8. Ioan. c. 5. sed ad Cōsensum poiūs, Where the Apostle sayth that. Three are One,
these words are not to be referrad to the Essence. but rather to Consent. Thus we see, how Caluin, thereby to conspire with Mahumet, the Turks, and the Arians in denying the Blessed Trinity, & Christ to be God, hath poysoned the chiefest, and most forcing passages of Gods Word, euer anciently produced for proofe of that su∣preme Mystery, with his most wicked ex∣positions of them: A Point so cleare, that AegidiusHunius in his books entituled, Caluinus I∣daiza. Huunius (the Protestant) char∣geth Caluin with Iudaisme, for such his pesti∣lent deprauing of the former sacred Texts of Scripture. O Impiety scarsly piacular, since he, who created the World, is here not ac∣knowledged by the World: MundusIohn 1. per ipsum factut est. & mundus euni non cognouit. The 17. Symbolisme, Concerning the suffering of Christ. CHAP. XVII. TO proceed further: Mahumet affir∣meth, that Christ did not suffer for Mākind, since he sayth, that Christ did not suffer death at al. Thus did Mahumet euen wound, and crucify Christ of new, in teaching with Eutiches, that Christ was not wounded, or crucified at all. For thus we read in the Alcoran: iudaeiAzo 1. & . Mariae blasphemiam. & immoderatam contumeliam infe∣runt, dum eius filium Christu. Dei nuncium. se interemisse peribent; Euns im equaquam, sed
alterum et milem interfecerunt, quia Deut incen∣prehensibilis & sapens eum ad se migrare fecit. The Iewes do offer blasphemy, and immoderate contumely to Mary, whiles they say they did put to death Christ her sonne being the Messenger of God; for him they killed not, but another like to him; for God being incomprehensible and wise, caused him to leaue the World, and remooue to him. From whence we infer, that since Christ (according to Mahumets doctrine) did not dye at all, that therefore in his iudgment, he dyed not for the Redemption of Mankind. Luther, and his followers do (at least in words) grant that Christ did corporally dye. But they further teach, that his death of Body could not, nor did redeeme the World, ex∣cept his Diuinity had also suffered. Thus they: annexing this Impossibility of Christs suffe∣ring according to his Godhead (since true Diuinity is impassible.) And thus potentially they teach with Mahumet, that Christ did not redeeme the World; contrary to the Sen∣tence of Gods Vniuersall Church, maintay∣ning, that Christ, who had no sinne, became a Sacrifice for sinne. Now that Luther tea∣cheth, that Christ suffered (besides his Cor∣porall death) according to his diuinity, is euident out of Luthers owne words, which are these: CumLuther in Confess. ma∣iore, de caena Domini. credo, quòd sola humana na∣tura prome passa est &c. When I do belieue, that only the Humane Nature suffered for me, Christ is a Sauiour of a vile and small account, and needeth also a Sauiour for himselfe: an execrable Blas∣phemy, since in Christ his Passion, through
the coniunction of the Diuinity with the Humanity, an infinit debs was discharged by a finit payment; and yet only infinity of sa∣tisfaction doth truly expiate infinity of sinne. The same Luther in another place thus writeth: PertinacissimeLuther. l. de Concil. par. 2. contra me pugabant, quod diuinitas Christi pati non posset. They conten∣ded most pertinaciously with me, for that they maintained the diuinity of Christ could not suffer. And Musculus (a great Lutheran) agreeth with Luther herein, of whom Siluester Che∣canorius (a Protestant) thus writeth: an∣draas Musculus non veritus fuit palàm dicere &c. AndrewIn dialog. de corruptis moribus v triusque par∣tis. Art. 3. fol. 5. Musculus was not afraid opēly to say, That the Diuine Nature of Christ (which is God) was dead together with the humane Nature vpon the Crosse. Thus did Luther and his scholler conspire with Mahumet, in frustrating the Redemption of the world by Christ, seing Luther would not grant his Corporall death preuayled any thing except his Diui∣nity (which was impossible to doe) did suf∣fer also. O how forgetfull was Luther (with Mahumet) of the words of the Apostle: Re∣conciliatiRom. 5. sumus Deo per mortē filij eius: We are reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne? And how far distant was his iudgment from S. Austins iudgment herein, who writing of Heresies in generall, particularly recordeth this opinion of Luther in these words: ThereAugust. com. . de Hae∣resi, ad Quod∣vult Deum. Haeres. 73. is an Heresy, which teacheth, that Christs di∣uinity suffered, when his flesh was fastaned vpon the Crosse?
The 18. Symbolisme; Touching the second Person in the B. Trinity. CHAP. XVIII. TO passe yet further touching the Second Person of the most Sacred Trinity. This is an Azoara, in the Alcoran: DeusAzoara, 27.28. est substantia necessa∣rio existens, eui impossibile est, vt naturam aliunde mutuetur: God is a necessary substance, to whome it is impossible to take, or borrow his Nature from another. And againe in another part of the Alcoran, we thus find set downe: ConstanterAzoara, 40. & 53. dic illis Christianis, Deum vnum essecessariò omnibus, qui nec genuit, nec generatus est, nec ha∣bet quidquam simile. Mantaine constantly to those Christians, that God is but one to All; who hath neither begot, or is begotten, and who hath not like to him. From these passages of the Alcoran, we fynd, that (according to Mahumet) God can∣not borrow his Nature from another. Now to apply this: The Protestants teach, that Christ hath his diuine nature from him∣selfe, and not of his Father: So teach CaluinCaluin in examin. persi∣diae Valentini Geneilis, ex∣ta in eract. Theolog. pag. 77. and Beza,Beza contra H∣chusium. besides many others. And the mayne Reason, why these Protestants teach, that Christ hath not his Essence of his Father, but of himselfe, is taken our of the former Azoara in the Alcoran, and in that respect borrowed from Mahumet. To wit, because God cannot borrow, or take his
Nature from another. And thus we see how our Ghospellers conioyne with Mahumet, in denying Christ, as God, to haue his di∣uine Essence from his Father; and by con∣sequence, admitting Mahumets ground to be true (which also is their ground) that Christ is not God. Which Blasphemy of theirs is wholy repugnant to the Nic Councell, and Athanasius his Creed▪ Both which teach, that Christ taketh his Diuine Nature from his Father, and that he is God of God. Behould here (O you my Countrimen) how these Blasphemies haue begun, a pulluler, & 'enracener entrerous; and how your chiefe Doctours by way of necessary Inference (grounded vpon Mahumets Alcoran) do deny Christ to be God, and therein do deny (with Mahumet) the most Blessed & rudeuided Tri∣nity; in which most Reuerend Mystery (to speake in the Churches Idiome) God re∣mained that, which afore he was, and assumed that, which afore he was not suffering neither com∣mixture, nor diuesion. But to returne: According to what is aboue deliuered, Osiander the Protestant had iust reason thus to exprobrat the Reformed Arians of these dayes in Poloni, which Men are Protestants refined, or sublimated: IlliOsiander C. 6. pag. 26. aiu Deum vnum in Essentia, tri in Personi, esse commentum Antichristi &c. These reformed Arians teach, that to say, God is One in Essence, but three in Person, is a fiction of Antichrist: And that it is the three headed Crbs, the God
Baal, Moluch &c. Did euer Mahumet, or Ser∣gius eructate out of their impure breasts such poyson, as the Arions of these tymes (com∣parting with Mahumet) and all originally Protestanis, haue done? The 19. Symbolisme, Touching the ouer∣throw, and implicite deniall of Christ his Passion. CHAP. XIX. YEt further to discourse touching the supreme Mysteries of Christ. Mahumet in his Alcoran teacheth (as aboue is shewed) that Christ did not suffer death vpon the Crosse,Azoara . but one like vnto him did suffer. Well Luther,Luther. lib. quod Ver∣be Domini firmiter stant. and the LutheransKempni∣ius 2. part. Examin. c. 4..13. Illyricus, lib. de mystica, Sacramentali, & extrema praesentia Corporis Do∣mini in Caena. with ioint consent maintaine, that the Body of Christ (through its hypostaticall, and inseparable Vnion with the Diuinity, is in all Places. True it is, that the Deity is euery where; yet no where, but in it selfe; And that Gods immensity is such, as that it includeth in it selfe euery thing, and yet is included in euery thing. But howsoe∣uer this he, notwithstanding certaine it is, that the doctrine of the Vbiquity of Christs bo∣dy and humanity, maintained violently by Luther and others, doth vtterly ouerthrow all the mysteries of Christ, and particularly of his Death and Passion; and thereby it makes our Nouellists to ioyne hands with
Mahumet, in Vertually denying the said My∣steries. For once granting that Christs body is in all places, then followeth it, that it was in the Virgins wombe after its byrth, or death; That it was in the graue before Christs death, and after his Resurrection; Finally, that it was vpon the Crosse after it was taken downe, and in Heauen before its Ascension. Thus we obserue, that this doctrine of Vbiquity taught by Luther, whol∣ly destroyeth, and frustrateth the Mistery of our Sauiours death, and Passion. Therefore I conclude, that Luther, and the Vbiquitaryes do ioyne and agree (by ineuitable dedu∣ctions taken from their owne doctrine) with Mahumet, in implicitly denying, that Christ did really, and truly suffer death for the Saluation of Man. And thus though the Deity be finite (to speake in a reserued sense) only in Infinity; so contrarywise by force of this absurd doctrine of Vbiquity, the body of Christ is become infinite, though really and truly but finite, and limitable. Here now I will giue a parse to my Pen (for the present) in vnfoulding, How Mahumet, and Luther with his brood (with equall forces) labour to annihilate the chiefe Articles touching the Trinity. Only with this I will conclude: That if Matta∣thias, and his sonnes (as is recorded in the1. Ma∣chab. c. 2. Machabees) so much lamented to see the Mysteries of their Law prophaned; How much then more ought euery zea∣lous Christian, euen with disconsolate
sighs, and suspirations to mourne, whe they behould the Carcinall Articles of Christianity (of which the former were but Types, and adumbrations) to be by Mis∣creants, and Heretiks promiscuosly betram∣pled vpon, contemned, yea denied? VideteThren. 1. si est dolor, sicut dolor iste. The 20 Symbolisme, Touching the particu∣lar Motius of Mahumets, and Luthers Apostasy. CHAP. XX. IN this next place, we will take into our Consideration, what Articles of Christian Fayth were the particular Motiues of Mahumets Apostasy; and ob∣serue, whether your spirituall Progenitours do run in the same Tract with Mahumet, or noe. In the Alcoran, we reade, that Mahumet thus by supposal demaunded: O IesuAzoar 3. fili Maria tu persuades hominibus, vi te, Matrem{que} tuam, duos Deos habeant, & venerentur? O Iesus, Sonne of Mary dost thou perswade men, that they may haue, and worshippe thee, and thy Mother, a two Gods? Vpon which Azoara. Bibliander maketh this Annotation:Bibliand. in Margino Aleorani. ad Azohram. . Mariam pro Deo co∣li obijcit Mahumetes; Mahumet doth obiect, that Mary is worshipped for a God: Bibliander in the same place more plainly speaking in this sort: ConstabatBibliand. bi suprà Diuam Virginem superstitios à multis Chriteaxis celi, quod hodie quògus fi.
dum eius opem superstioe implerani: It wareui∣dent that the Holy Virgin was than superstitiously worshipped by many Christians, as also at this day the is, whyles men superstitiously implore her help. The second Cause or Mahumets Reuolt from Christianity, is deliuered by the fore∣said Bibliander in these words: Quod simulacra venerantur Christiant: Because Christian do worshipBibliand▪ ibidem. images. The dislike of Mahumet concerning the doctrine of Images, is further witnessed by Septem-castrensis, thus writing: SaraceniSepteme. defide & re lig. Yurc∣rum & Turcae imprimis Imagines om∣nes seu pictas, se sculptas, sic detestantur &c. The Saracens, and Turks do so hate all Images, whether they be pictured, or engrauen, that there∣fore they call Christians, Idolaters; Yea they will not seale their Letters with any graum print, or Image. And are not these two points great stum∣bling Blocks for mens reuolting from the ancient Christian Fayth in these dayes? So firmely do our Innouatours compart with Mahumet, the Saracens, and the Turks in the Causes and Motiues of forsaking the Chri∣stian Fayth. And to begin with the first. LutherLuth. in serus, de N ali . Ma∣ri., and PeterPeter Mart▪ in Comment ad cap. . prioris ad Cor▪ Martyr charge the Catholiks with Idolatry, committed in saying the Antiphona, beginning thus: Sal Regina, Mater Misericordiae &c. mantayning. that the Catholiks do ascribe heereby that honour to the B. Virgin, which is proper on∣ly to God. In like manner the Protestants through Ignorance, and Malignity insimu∣late the Catholiks within the forsaid crime
of superstition, for their saying the Hymne, directed to the Mother of God▪ which thus beginneth: Aue MarisIn offieio B. Mariae. stella, Dei mater Al∣ma &c. To come to Images. WhereasVide Co∣chlaeum in Vita Lutheri. Carelo∣stadius (the Heretike) was the first in this Age, who ouerthrew Images in the Chur∣ches; we find Luther to approue this his fact; only he was displeased, in that for the per∣petrating thereof, Carolostadius did not de∣maund authority, and warrant from him. MelancthonMolanct. in oc. cont in explicat. De∣casògi. in like sort reprehendeth the worship of Images, as superstitious. The MagdeburgensesMagde∣burg. Cent. 8. passim. and CaluinCalu. In∣stic. l. 2 c. 11. & lib.  c. 9. proceed herein with the same pertinacy. and fro∣wardnes. And answerably to this their do∣ctrine of Images (carleur Theorique, & Pra∣ctique 'accordent) the custome of such of our times, who did cast of the Roman Religion, was euer most violent and impetuous vpon their first imbracing of Protestancy against Images. For to turne our eye vpon Flanders, We find Osiander (the Protestant) thus to re∣cord:Osiander Epitom. Cent. . pag. 491. The Low-Countrimen by publiqe writing renounced all Subiection, and Obedience to Philip their Lord and King; And when aboue foure hundred of them of good ranke, had sued for liber∣ty of Religion, and did not obtains their motion, the impatient people moued with fury and rage, at Antwerp, and other places of Holland, Zeland, & Flanders, brake downs Images &c. And France (my deare Country) I would to God▪ I could not say so much of thee; But it is
otherwise, since diuers Iconemachyes in thee, at their first abandoning of our Catholike Religion practized the like sacriledge. Wit∣nes hereof is the History of France written by a Protestant, who thus relateth:The Hi∣story of France i entituled: The generall Iuuentory of the History of France, writ∣ten by Iohn d Serres. The Protestants did grow eager, and violent in all pla∣ces where they had power; They tooke reueng vpon Churches, Images &c. Witnesses also hereof is the Towne of Rochell, and all other places in thee, possessed by the Hugenots, who through their (more then Vatinian) fury haue leaft no Images vnbroken, nor Crosse (the remembrance of our Sauiours death for Mankind) vncast downe, and not shiue∣red in peeces. But to expatiate no further in Examples, and to wynd vp the seuerall threeds of this Paragraph; I conclude, that our Sergius of Saxony (I meane Luther) and his pidrmi, or Followers, did wholy conioyne with Mahumeticall Sergius▪ in making the doctrine of the Honour exhibited to the Mother of God, and of the Worship giuen vnto Images to be (among others) two strong induce∣ments for their abtenunciation of their most Ancient, Catholike, Apotolicall, and Romā Religion: May we not inke then, that the punishment of these two Apostati∣call Monkes for such their flagitious pro∣ceedings, are at this present all One?
The 21. Symbolisme; That the Turkish, and Protestant Clorgy do marry. CHAP. XXI. BVt let vs goe to other points, Who write of the Religion of the Turks, affirms, that the Turkish Priests do marry, & take wyues. For thus one of their Historians sayth: SacerdotesSept∣a. d fide & relig. Tur∣m, pag. 9. Tur∣cici habent xors, & vxori liberis, & familia va∣cant. The Turkith Priest haue wyues, and all their care and imployment, as about their wyfe, their Children, and family. Yea the Turks are so great enemyes to Virginity, as that the for∣merSeptem∣castr. c. 3. Historian, and othersRicherius lib. d moribus Tercerum, dediated 10 Francis, king of France. thus re∣cord of Mahumet: Mahumetes multum vrget. ne quis maturâ atate eutra matrimonium degat: Mahumet much presseth, that not any of full and ripe ago, should liue out of the stace of Matri∣mony. Mahumet further teacheth (as ano∣ther Historian recordeth) That, VeluptateCuspin do Religione Turearum. corperis futarae faelicitati minime obsunt; The pleasures of the Bedy are  hinderances to future felicity; whi is included in the eight Azoa∣ra of the Alran, touching multiplicity of wiues. Well now my deare Countrimen of France. Is not all this good Hugentis, or Prote∣tancy? Let vs examine the Particulars. And first touching Marying of Priests, or of Mini∣sters among those or that Reformed Religion; What Minister among them almost (& this
souble protexte, & vaile de la gloir d Die (vn∣der the recture (forsooth) of Gods glory) who is not matried? And how ready are they wrongfully to detor in defence of their Mariage those Words of the Apostle, HonorabileHebr. 1. Connubium in omnibu? A wife indeed is so inseparable a Character of our new Ministers, as that a Minister without a Woman, is but Halfe himselfe, and wanteth that which conduceth to the . or per∣fect accomplishment of his function. So much doth the Flash dominere in these good men, who vaunt themselues to be All-spirit▪ who indeed liuing in flesh, do also liu af∣ter the flesh. Now touching the aduancement of ma∣riage in all persons without exception, and depressing of Virginity with Mahumet, and Sergius, I is most strange to obserue, what the pens of your chiefe Professours haue left written. The first broaches of the vnsa∣very Vessell of your Religion, thus balan∣ceth Matrimony with Virginity saying: If weLuther tom. . Wi∣temberg. ad cap 7.1. Cor∣fol. 107. weigh the Nature of Matrimony, and single  vnmaried lyfe in themselues; Matrimony is  Gould, and the spirituall state of single lyfe, as Dunge. To whome subscribeth Whitakerus, saying: VirginityWhita contra Comp. rat. 8. is not absolutly good, but on∣ly in some respect and manner. And hence it is, that the forsaid Luther more fully thus ex∣presseth himselfe He thatLuther▪ tom. 7. Epist. ad Wolf∣gengum, fol 0. determineth to be without a Woman, let him lea of the name of a man and become a plaine Angell, or spirit. A goa∣tish assertion!
Concerning the other point aboue men∣tioned, where Mahumet decreed, that (if we will belieue the Alcoran) the Pleasures of the Body are no lets to future felicity; It is the very doctrine of Luther, inuested in other words, who ascribeth so much to Fayth, as that no corporall Pleasure (how vnlawfull soeuer) or any other sinne can preiudice a Mans Saluation. His words are these: TamLuther com. 1. Wit∣temb. de Cap∣tiuie, Babyl. fol. 74. diust est Christianus &c A Christian is so ith, as that though otherwise he would, notwith∣standing he cannot loose his Saluation, by any snne how great seeuer, except he will not belieue. And hereupon Luther further thus catechizeth his Schollers: NoLuther in his Sermons. worke is dirallowed of God, except the authour, and worker thereof be disallowed. With whom the fornamed Whi∣takers accordeth in these words, full of in∣cirement to sinnet SiWhitak, de Eccles. con∣tra Bellarm. controuer. 2. quaest. 5. quis actum fidei, ba∣bet, i peccatae non nocent: Thus fortably to these mens Ghospell, no pleasure, or sinne (as Mahumet toucheth) can hinder mans fu∣ture Happines: Thus much of these formes Points: And of this last point more fully hereafter.
The 22. Symbolisme; Concerning the con∣iunction of Ecclesiasticall supreme Authority, with temporall Authority. CHAP. XXII. TO come to other Symbolysms and Agreements, betweene Mahumet & your Grand-Maisters▪ Mahumet to his temporall Authority adioyned spirituall Authority, making himselfe su∣premeCuspin. in Mahumeto. Head of his Church, (if so I may call it) and by force and violence of such his authority, proposed to his subiect and vassas only such point of fayth (nd not any others) to be belieued, which he had caused to be set downe in the Alcra▪ Thus making his sword his Myses, or some new Euangeist, to ordaine, what was to be belieued, and what not. And do not most of our Protestant wri∣ters maintaine the same spirituall Authori∣ty in secular Princes? And do not the said secular Princes put the same in execution? True it is, that diuers of your Religion teach, That the first Popes were but as Tu▪ tours only (so to speake) of the stte of th Church, during the time other Infancy: But to the Temporall Prince they affoard at most absolute Primacy, and Soueraigys ouer the Church: Heare, what Musculr (who seemeth, that, il abi prin tincture de
Mahumet, he hath receaued some dye from Mahumet herein) writeth of this point, say∣ing: ConfidenterMscul. in loc. com de Magistrat. pag. 570. & 520. asserimus omnens eam potesta∣tem &c We confidently auer, that all that Power, by the which Authenticall Lawes bynding the Con∣sciences of subiects, are constituted whether they be called Ciuill, or Ecclesiasticall Lawes) do neither belong to the Church (that is, to the Multitude of the faythfull) neither to the Ministers of the Word of God, but only to the Magistrate, to whom is gi∣uen Soueraingty, and Command ouer the subiects. And according to this doctrine, almost all Protestant Princes in most Coūtter where they reigne, do challenge to themselues an vnappealable soueraingty & supremacy in all Ecclesiasticall Causes. The first example whereof they tooke of King Henry the eight of that Name, King of England; Who was the first (as elswhere is shewed in this Treatise) that dared to vendicate to him∣selfe Supreme spirituall authority; prescri∣bing what Articles of fayth should be be∣lieued, and what not, as is auered by some Catholike WritersSanderus de Schismate Auglicano. of that Nation. And here we are to obserue, that as Mahu∣met, and temporall Protestant Princes did indifferently erect themselues Heades of the Church, within their owne Ditions, & dominiōs; So also what places of Scripture Protestant Princes (by misconstruing of them) may alledge in warrant of this their assumed Exoticall authority; the very same Text of holy Writ may Mahumet (with as much reason) produce with them in defence
of his pretended Ecclesiasticall Primacy. Thu for example, Mahumet may alledg in behalfe of himselfe (through the same con∣struction of them, which the Protestants giue) these Texts (besides others) follow∣ing: OmnisRm.  Anima Potestati sublimiri sub∣dita esse debet; id{que} non propter iram, sed propter conscientiam. Euery soule ought to be subiect to hi∣gher Powers, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake. And againe: Propter1. Petr.  Deu Regi parn∣dum est, tanquam praecellents: The King is to b obayed, as excelling. Thus we see, that Mahu∣met, and our New Gospellers agree in do∣ctrine, of this strange kind of Supremacy, in the practize of it, and in their proofes, and supposed warrant thereof, out of their mu∣tuall false wresting, and racking of God Holy Word. But to the rest. The 23. Symbolisme; Touching the deniall of Originall sinne. CHAP. XXIII. THe next Point, in which I will al∣ledg Mahumet, and out New Euan∣gelists fraternal combination, shall concerne their mutuall denying of Originall sinne. We thus reade in the WritersCuspi. de religions Turcium, Septem ca∣strsts, R∣cherius de  de moribus Trcrum. of the Turkish History: In Alcoran pra∣cipitur Circumcisio, quanquam um a expiationem peccati Originalis, quod nullum sse arbitrantur Mahumetani. In the Alcoran Circumcision is com∣manded, though not for expiation of Originall sinne,
the which the Mahumetās do not Delieue to be &c. Now let vs see, if our lte apearing Gos∣pellers do not iampe in doctrine herein with Mahumet. Swinglius doth thus dictate of this point: QuidSwingl. l. c. Epist. fol. 2. breutus aut clarius dici potuit, quam Originale Peccatum non esse Pecca∣tum, sed Morbum; & Christianorum liberos propter illum morbum non addici aeterno supplicio? What can be spoken more briefly and clearely, then that which we call Originall sinne, to be no sinne, but a disease, & that the Children of Christians through this disease, are not adiudged to eternall punish∣ment? And furthe: MorbusSwingl. tom 1. de Baptism. fol. 90. hic damnatio∣nem nobis afferre nequit; This disease (meaning of Originall sinne) cannot bring damnation to vs. And yet more: TheologiSwingl. de Baptism. vbi suprà. nostri Originalem illum morbum peccatum esse dixerunt, sed toto cae∣lo errant. Those our deuines, which call this Origi∣nall disease a sinne, do extremely erre. Finally to omit many other such like sayings of Swinglius, he concludeth thus: Culpa OriginalisSwingl. tom. 2. de Peccato Ori∣ginali. fol. 110. non vere, sed Metonymice culpa vocatur. Originall sinne is called a sinne, not truly, but only by the figure Metonymia: So great an assotiation there is betwene Mahumet, & Swinglius herein: Whome notwithstanding Beza honoreth with this Eucomion:Beza de Hoereticis puniendis, pag. 175. Swin∣glius, insignit ille nostris temporibus Christi Aposto∣lus; The which commendation Beza neuer would haue ascribed to Swinglius, if Beza himselfes had been of a different doctrine from Swinglius in this most weighty point of fayth.
The 24. Symbolisme; That Baptisme is not Necessary. CHAP. XXIV. AS Mahumet did not belieue, there was any Originall sinne; so also h did not thinke, there was any ne∣cessity of Baptisme, so far forth, as it should conduce to the taking away of Originall sinne: the reason being (as is here im∣plied) because Mahumet did belieue, that there was no Originall sinne to be taken away, either by Baptisme, or Circumcision. Now, do not our New Maisters beat the same Path in their Writings with Mahumet▪ Marke (my deare Countrimen) how contem∣ptuously they pronounce of Baptisme, & be ashamed of their Mahumetan Infidelity. I will begin at the source with Luther; And, Si la fountaine est corrupu, que deuien∣dront les ruisseaux: Yf the fountaine be corrupted, much more then are the small riuers thence des∣cending. Luther thus instructeth his Neophyts: SiLuther lib. de Cap∣tiuit. Babylon. habeas, bene; sin careas, nihil damni; crede, & saluus eris, antequam abluare. Yf thou hast Baptisme, it is well with thee; if thou wantest it, thou sufferest no losse thereby; beleue, and thou art saued, before thou be baptized, Swinglius in like sort stretcheth forth his hand, for the sup∣pressing the dignity of Baptisme, saying: BaptismusTom. 2. l. de Baptism. fol. 96. paruulorum externum quiddam, & caeremoniale est &c. Baptisme of Infants is a cer∣taine
externall and Ceremoniall thing, the which (as other externall things) the Church may either worthily and iustly retayne, or omit, & take away. With these two forteth in doctrine Cal∣uin, thus muttering: At (Calu. Iu∣stis. l. 4. c. 15. . 2. dicum quidam, qui Baptismi necessitatem vrgns, periculum esse, ne Infans, qui aegrotat, si absque baptismo decesserit, Regenerationis gratiâ priuetur▪ Mimime vero &c. But such say who vrge the Necessity of Baptisme, that there is danger, if the Child, who is sicke do dye without Baptisme, that he is depriued of the Grace of Regeneration. Not so truly, seing God doth pro∣nounce ouer Infants, euen afore they be borne to be adopted into his partage: Wherefore it follloweth not, that the Children of the faythfull▪ are bapi∣zed, that thereby they should be first made the Son∣nes of God &c. Thus far Calum. Finally to pretermit many other like sayings, Whi∣takerus thus sleighteth Baptisme: WeWhitak Controu. 4..M... pag. 710. may abstaine from Baptisme with this caution, that no contempt, or scandall do follow thereby. Can any Mahumetan, or Saracene speake more vnworthily, and depressingly of Baptisme, then all these former Euangelists haue done? Whose iudgments herein ad∣mitting for true, away then with that ad∣monition of our Sauiour: NisiIohn 3. quis rena∣tus fuerit &c. Vnlesse a Man be borne againe of Water, and the spirit, he cannot uter into the kingdome of God; As also away with that Sentence of Austin: BaptismeAustin, o. 7. contra duas epit. g l. 3. c. 3. washeth one all sinnes, either deeds, Words, thoughts, or Origi∣nall. Thus we find, that Baptisme is, out of
Gods good Prouidence towards vs, one Chiefe preordayned means of mans Salua∣tion, euen feeding the soule with Grace; for as Gods Creation doth (as it were) mother∣ly beare vs, so his Prouidence doth nurse vs. The 25. Symbolisme; That Polygamy i iointly taught by Mahumet, and the Lutherans. CHAP. XXV. WE thus reade in the Alcoran: VxoresAzoar 8. quotiescumque placue∣rit, duas scilicet, tres, aut quatuor ducite &c. canisi timuritis eas nulla∣tenus pacificare posse; Cum contingerit vobis eas non diligere. vnam pro alta mutare licet. Take as many wiues, as you will; to wit two, three, or foure &c. except you feare they will not liue peaceably togeather; And if it shall chance, that you loue not your Wife, it then is lawfull for you, to change one for another. This point is partly touched els where, by shewing Luthers like doctrine therein. Now in this place I will shew, that Polygamy, or hauing many wyfes at once, is grounded vpon your Gospellers owne Principles; & consequently that the doctrine of Polygamy is iointly taught by them, with Mahumet. And first, our New Gospellers do teach, that Matrimony is not a Sacrament, but only an Office, or Function of Nature, ordained
for the Conseruation, or perpetuating of Mankind; In respect of which Office or End, it is nor repugnant, but rather conso∣nant, and sutable to Polygamy. For in this sense Matrimony is but a Ciuil Contract; but euery Ciuill Contract by the ioint Con∣sent of the Contractors may be dissolued, and the same, or a like Contract (without any Iniustice to any) may be made againe with others. Secondly, the Protestants gene∣rall doctrine of the Necessity of hauing the Vse of a Woman, most strongly induceth the doctrine of Polygamy. Now touching the Necessity of the Act of Copulation betwene man and Wo∣man, obserue I pray (besides that aboue said of this point) what your Parent (from whose loynes all you Hugenors are pro∣seminated) speakes hereof Luther then, your first Apostle, thus  heth: QuàmLuther tom. 5 de Ma∣trimon fol. 19. non est in meis viribus, vt Vir  sim; tam non est mei iuris, vt absque muliere sim. As it is not in my power not to be a Man; so it is not in my power, to liue without a Woman. And againe in the same place: Verbum hoc, Crescite, & multiplica∣mini, non est praeceptum, sed plus quàm Praecep∣tum. That Sentence; Increase, and multiply, is not a Precept, but more then a Precept, being a diuine Worke, which is not in our power to be hindered, or omitted; but is as necessary, as that I am a Man, & more necessary, then to eate, to drinke, to sleepe, to walke &c. And speaking in the same place to wo∣men, Luther thus indoctrinateth them: Vt in
manu tua non est vt fmina non sis; sic nec in te es vt absque viro degas. As it is not in thy choice, not to be a Woman; so it is not in thy power, that thou thouldest liue without a Man. For the Counsell or Election is not heere free, but it is Necessary? For Marem feminae, feminam mari sociari oportet, Now then dreaming Luthers doctrine here∣in to be true, doth it not vnauoidably in∣uolue in it selfe the doctrine of Polygamy, if the parties maried, through impotency, or some casuall disease cannot performe the duty of Mariage; or should for a long time be separated in place, the one from the o∣ther; since it is taught (we see) as true, That A Man cannot liue without the vse of a Woman, nor a Woman without the vse of a Man? The third Ground of our Euangelists, im∣plying the doctrne of Polygamy, is the Ordi∣nary doctrine of Diuorce (euen for any small occasion) taught by them, and most fully by Bucer, who much enlargeth himselfe herein. Sortably hereto Bucer alloweth the liberty of diuorce, and marying againe, in case of departureBucer in Script. An∣glic. de regn Christi. l 2. c. 16. of the one party from the other; In case of Homicide,Bucer ibidem cap. 37. or Theft; Or of the Incurable InfirmityBucer, ibidem c. 4. of the Woman, by Childbirth; Or if the Man proue Lunatike; Or when either party is become vnable to render nup∣tiall duty; In all which cases BucerBucer ibi∣dem cap. 124. con∣cludeth, lawfulnes of diuorce and Mariage againe; maintayning the same to be, VerboBucer, ibidem, cap. 124. Dei consentiens; agreable to the Word of God. Now according to this doctrine of B∣cer, Luther thus adiudgeth: TheLuther, tom. 5. Wit∣temberg. Ser∣mon. de Ma∣trimonio, fol. 123. Magistrats
duty (if the myfe be froward, and will refuse er Husbands bed) is to curbe the wyfe, yea to put her to death. This if the Magistrate omit, the Hus∣band must imagine, that his wyfe is stolne away by heau, or dead; and let him consider how to marry another. Thus Luther, And thus we obserue, that from the former Principles, and Theo∣s of your owne Teachers (to wit, that Mariage is no Sacrament; That it is not possible for a Man to liue without a Wo∣man, or a Woman without a man; & lastly that Diuorce vpon seuerall Cases, and to marry againe is most lawfull) the doctrine of Polygamy is warrantable, and is to be put in practise. From all which it is necessarily euicted, that Luther, and the Lutherans con∣sent with Mahumet and the Turkes, in main∣tenance or defence of Polygamy, or hauing many Wiues at one, and the same tyme. Who obserueth then not here, that the spi∣rit of our Gospellers (of which they do so much glory) like to those things which beget meere Contraries, ingenders corpo∣rall, and fleshly desires? The 26. Symbolisme; Touching the con∣tempt of the Crosse. CHAP. XXVI. IN the AlcoranAzr∣. we thus read: Iuda Maria blasphemiam immoderatam &c. The Iewes do offer great contumely to Mary, when they say, they put to death her sonne Christ
Iesus; for him they did not kill, but another like to him. Now vpon this ground Mahomet, and the Turks, did extremely hate the Crosse no enduring the signe thereof, or suffering  Crosse to stand in any place or Nation sub∣iect to them. Our Reformists (though vpon another ground) do no lesse hate the Cross then the Turks doe, as the whole World knoweth, and is aboue in part I haue shewed. Thus Mahumet, and our Reformists do conspire and agree, in presecuting the Crosse with an intestime hatred, though the Reason of this their Hatred be different to them both. And thus the Crosse is despised, as being the remembrance of Christs Cha∣rity, dying vpon it; whose graue after the taking downe of his sacred Body from the Crosse, became (as it were) that wombe, from whence, the lyfe of our Saluation did rise. The 27. Symbolisme; Thing other seuerall points of Fayth. CHAP. XXVII. I Haue been long in giuing  to the Concordences, or Harmony, tuned by Mahumet or Turks, and the Prote∣stants; in touch of the strings therof, we can find small iarring, but rather a perfect agrement; I meane, I haue spent many leaues in laying open the particular Symbo∣lismes between them: Therfore for greater
expedition, I will make here a coacetu∣tion, or heaping together of diuers other Points of Religion, equally defended, taught, and practized by the Turks, and our new Euangelists. 28. First then the flery Protestants do teach that. Christ did not descend after his death vnto Limbus statrum. 29. That, we ought not to bowe at the Name of Iesue. 30. That, Christ did not leaue in the Sacrament his true and yeall Body, to be receiued by faythfull Christians. 31. That, Seauen Sacraments were not insti∣tuted by Christ. 32. That, not any Sacrament doth conferre Grace. 33. That, the Church of God it not free from Errour in fayth. 34. That, there is not any Vniuersality of Grace proceeding from Christs Passion. 35. That we ought not to pray to Saincts. 36. That Priests haue not true Power to remit sinnes. 37. They in lyke manner teach, that there are not any Euangelicall Councells. 38. That the Church of Rome was, and is a false Church. 39. That there is no implicit Fayth; but that all things, which are to be belieued, ought to be expresly knowne by the fayth∣full. 40. That there is no Sacrifice in the New Testament, according to the Order of Melchisedech. 41. That the Church of God is not euer Visible. Now all thse points (besides some o∣thers) are tought by our late more refined Euangelists: And in like sort, are they taught by Mahumes, and Sergius. From whence it necessarily resulteth, that Mahumet, Sergins, the Turks, and your new Reformers of Re∣ligion in this age, do wholy agree in be∣liefe,
touching the said Points. Whereupon we are to obserue, that all these Point thus taught by the Protestants, are in themselues but Negatiue, as denying the contrary affir∣matiue Articles to them, taught and belieued by the present Church of Rome. Now that Mahumet, and Sergius taught the said Negatiue Points with the Protestants. I thus irrepliably proue: Mahumet, and Ser∣gius do maintaine, That the AlcoranCusoinia∣nus de Relig. Turcaum. Septem. ca∣strnfis, Bi∣bliander, in praefat. Al∣cor. is the true rule of fayth, or the boundary contay∣ning (within its owne cancells, & limits) the expresse beliefe of all such articles of fayth, which are to be belieued; Yea Mahu∣met ascribes such perfection, and fulnes to his Alcorn, as that he dareth (by it) to correct the Christian Ghospell it selfe, as supposing it was corrupted by the Disciples of the A∣postles: For thus do some writers record of him: EuangelicamRicherius de moribus Turcarum. Cuspin. de re∣ligione Tur∣carum. &c. doctrinam, quam alioqu laudabat Mahumetus, ab Apostlorum discipulis corruptam, Alcorano suo se emendeturum promi∣tebat. Mahument did commend the Euangelicall do∣ctrine; notwithstanding he promised to purge i of its faults by his Alcoran; which faults, or Errors he said, the Disciples of the Apostles had afore brought in. Well then, since the Affirmatiue Posi∣tions, contrary to the forsaid Negatiue Points belieued by the Protestants, are not found to be set downe in the Alcoran (for the Alcoran passeth them ouer altogether in si∣lence, as making no mention of them at al:) Therefore euen , and demon∣stratiuely,
it may be inferred, that Mahum and Sergius did not belieue our Catholike Affirmatiue points or Articles; but wholy comparted with our New Euangelists, in belieuing, and dogmatizing the said Nega∣tiue points aboue rehearsed. Adde hereto, that it is euident, that the Turks at this day, agree in beliefe with the precise Lutherans in all those Points. Now, if it be replyed a∣gainst what heere is deliuered, that seing the Catholike, and Affirmatiue beliefe of most of the said Points, doth euer presup∣pose beliefe in Christ, seing they are groun∣ded thereon; That therefore Mahum (as not beliening in Christ) cānot consequently be∣lieue the said affirmatiue Articles, but hould only the Negatiue part in them. This Answere I auerre to be most defe∣ctiue. For I rest not heere in the Motiue, or Reason, why Mahumet belieueth not the foresaid Affirmatiue Catholike Tenets (since this is impertinent in this place;) but I on∣ly insist in the Conclusion, as the thing hereby chiefly intended (let the reason ther∣of be what it will) to wit, that Mahumat, and our new Euangelists do wholy agree in their Negatiue beliefe of them. Againe, I perceau no reason, seeing the Protestants do be∣lieue (at lest, they say, they do belieue) in Christ, but that they might he well pleased (were it not, their Serpentine Malice a∣gainst our Catholike Church, is the chiefe Hinderance) also to belieue the affirmati Articles to their Negatiues; since most of
them haue their foundation, or Basis vpon our Beliefe in Christ, as our Redeemer. Thus far now of these seuerall fourty Points of fayth, and other Circumstances conducing thereto; In the beliefe of all which it is made most euident, that the Turks, and your Reformed Religion do sympa∣thize, and agree togeather▪ In so indissolu∣ble a knot of Amity, and Association haue Sergius, and Luther (two Apostat Monk) tyed themselues togeather. Here now (O you Hugens of Frace) I de∣maund of you; Do you meane to perseuer in your Reformed Religion (as you stile it) and yet not to be reputed Turks, in many Points of fayth? With as much probability may a man desire to be an Ethiopian, and yet not to be black; or couet to put his nked hand in∣to a oat fyer, and withall count to auoyd burning: For it is our uident, out of the Premisses, that concerning seuerall Passage of Religion, your Beliefe consists in Mith∣liefe. your Fayth in Infidelity, and your Ced in Miscreancy; you making the Turkish Al∣ran your Catechisme, for your instruction in many Points thereof. O lssed Imy, we eer want thee, to deliu this gicall and mournfull subiect, i thy accustome Thrs, and Lamenrations?
An Answere to an Obiection, That the Catholiks do agree with the Turks in the doctrines of Sacrifice, and Vowes. CHAP. XXVIII. MY presaging thoughts do proba∣bly foretell; that some of your Chiefe Ministers of France, rea∣ding this Treatise, with a scorne∣full, or subriding Eye, and suspended nose, will instantly shape an Answere thereto. Or if nor any of them, yet (perhaps) some spiritualized Sectary of Genena (through the conformity of their language with France, and proximity of place) houlding himselfe to be, vn grand Theologien, will vndertake that taske. And in like sort, it well may be, that the Answeater will endeuour to wype away this spot, caused through his Bre∣threns agreement with the Turks in mat∣ter of fayth, by laboring to insimulate vs Catholiks within the said danger, in retor∣ting; That the Papists (as in the foame of their malicious dialect they terme vs) stand no lesse chargeable with maintaining cer∣taine Points of Beliefe with the Turks, then themselues doe: To wit, that there ought to be in the Church of God, a true and reall Sa∣crifice (besides the spirituall Sacrifice of Prayer.) Also, that Religious Vowes are law∣full;
both which points, as we Catholike, so Mahumet at his first rising, and the Turke of these tymes de teach, and practize as pious, and most warrantable. Heere I say, if any of our Aduersaries, (whosoeuer, or from whencesoeuer) shall endeuour hereby to wound vs, (themsel∣ues being allready wounded) or to hurt vs by the recoyle of out owne Bullet, against this recrimination I thus reply. And first, ad∣mit as true, that we belieue the former in generall Articles with the Turks; yet what is the agreement of the Catholiks, in two or three Points of fayth with this Turks, to be compared to the Reformists agreement with the Turks in fourty Points of Religion and Collaterall dependencies thereon? Secondly, to speake of Sacrifice, and Vowes in particu∣lar, I auer, that euery Religion (either false, or true) in euery place and tyme, had, and haue their Sacrifice, and Vowes annexed to their Woship o God. From whence we ga∣ther, that Sacrifice, and Vowes proceed from the instinct and light of Nature; and that to haue Sacrifice, and Vowes is a mayne Princi∣ple implanted in Man by God; and conse∣quently is in it selfe most religious, and warrantable▪ Neither will it auyle, to auoyde the force of this Answere, to say withK in  parts, Exa∣min. p. 741. Kep∣nies, That this Instinct of Nature, is the in∣stinct of Nature as corrupted, which is the source, or tooe or all Blindns, and Supe∣stition. This aduantageth nothing; For al∣though
Nature corrupted is, and hath been the fountaine of Blindnes & Superstition; Nelesse, whereas all Countries do agree in one common Principle, this Agre∣ment doublesly eameth not from the Corruption of Nature, but from the Good o Nure; That is, i risth out of that light, which God hath engrafted, and sowed in Natu. For what things proceede from Corruption, those are various, and not the sam, among all mn. Therefore that God is t be worshipped, to be inuocated, to haue Sacrifices (so truly called) and Vowes offe∣red to him, and the like, which were in ge∣nerall among all People, and euer were the same; do rise from the good of Nature. But that there should be many Gods, that Ido hold be worshipped that men should b sacrified, that Vowes should be made to False Gods, and such like, which are diuersly varied, all these do spring from the Corrup∣tion of Nature. Thirdly, I say, Sacrifice is congenite, & borne (as I may say) with Religion, as ap∣peareth from the Examples of the first son∣nsGenes. 4. of Adam; and after from Nee;Genes. 8. and  fr the Prophets. Therefore their Coniunction is most Necessary. Fourthly, Sacrifice (so properly called) and Vowes are worships inoninicable, and peculiar to God, That i, they are due only to God; for other kinds of Honours are (in some sort) to be imparted to Creatures; Therefore no Religion  subsist without Sifice, and
Vowes. And though Vowes in a secondary manner may be said to be made to Saints, we are to conceaue hereby, that this is but only the subiect of a Vow; wheras the Vow formally, and really is made only to God, as the ChiefeS. The∣mas 2.2. qu. 88. ar. 5. Schoolemen do teach. Thu much in clearing this retortion, made a∣gainst vs Catholiks. Now from hence, (to apply it to our Purpose) the iudicious and learned Rea∣der may gather, that we Catholike is hol∣ding the doctrine of Sacrifice, and Vowes, do indeed agree with the Turks herein; but not with them as they are Turks, but as they are men indued with Reason; in whose Soules (as in the Soules of all other Men) God euen by the instinct of Nature, and light of Reason, hath indifferently infused the beliefe of the said former Points. And thus if we Catholiks be blynd, and superstitious in these doctrines, (as Kempnitis suggesteth) yet are we warranted with the like blind∣nes and superstition, not only of Christs primitiue Church (the which point here to shew would be ouer tedious) but euen of all Mankind, as it is incorrupted.
Of the coniunction of the Turkes, and some temporall Christian Stater, against Catholike Princes. CHAP. XXIX. NOw after I haue sufficiently dis∣played the great Coniunction in doctrine, which our New deuines do beare to Mahumet, and to his of∣spring, the Turks; I hold it conducing to our subiect in hand, in part to lay open to the world (and particularly to you, my Coun∣trimen) the secret combination of mynds both of some Protestant States, and Prote∣stant Ministers, banding with the Turke, a∣gainst the Pope, the Emperour, and other Ca∣tholike Princes, and all originally for matter of Religion; the which motiue most of them make the cementation of their Ami∣ty: So much in these mens peruerted Iudg∣ments, doth the Turkish Religion ouerbal∣lance, and weigh downe in Worth, & dig∣nity the Roman Catholike Religion. By which their Heathnish Proceeding may not our Sauiour (the Institutour of our Re∣ligion) say with Moyses: CuiIsay. 40. compara∣stis me? To begin. It is euident and knowne to the whole World, that when they of Hol∣land, for Religion, did first rise against the King of Spayne, diuers Troopes, and Com∣panyes
of their souldiers did beare in their Ensignes, a siluar figure, or stamp of the Moone increasing (being the Armes of the Turkish Emperour) with these French Words insculpted therin: Plusost Turcs, qu Papaux; That is, We will rather be Turks, then Papists. In like manner, Erasmus recordeth, that when the Emperour Charles was to wage Warre with the Turkish Emperour, leuelling forces throughout seuerall parts of Germa∣ny; the Lutheran Party, and faction was so far from yealding any help, and succur∣rency thereto, as that they openly proclay∣med their dislike and disaffection of that Action in these word: MalleErasmus, in Epist ad Fratres Ger∣mania Inf∣rioris. se pro Turca non baptizato pugnare, quàm pro Turca baptiza∣to; They had rather fight in defence of a Turke not baptized, then for a Turke bap∣tized, thereby meaning the Emperour of Germany, and thus preferring only for cause of Religion the Turkish Emperour, before the Christian Catholike Emperour. So deepe an impression had these ensuing Words of Luther (their Proto-pater) made in the Ger∣mans minds; ReligioLuther in Genes. cap. 48. Romana magis est Ido∣lolatrica, quam Turcica; Et Pontifex ille magis est periculosus Christi hostis, quàm est Magnus Turca. The Roman Religion is more idolatrous, then the Turkish Religion: & that Pope or Bishop of Rome, is a more dangerous Enemy to Christ, then the Great Turke is. The lesse wounder their it is, that we find Luther (as aboue is shewed) in one of
his Bookes thus writing: PraeliariLuther, om. . Wit∣tembrg. Ar∣tic. danat. per Leonem 0. Art. 34. aduer∣su Turcas &c. To fight against the Turks, is it withstand God chastizing our sinnes by them. And more. Let vsLuth. in explice. Art. 34. abstaine from the Turkish War as long as the Popes Name preuailes vnder Heauen. And further: OreLuther in Epist. contra uo mandeta Imperialia. cunctos pios Christianos no vilo modo vel in militiam cant, vel dent aliquid, contra Turcas, quandoquidet Turca deces pru∣dentior probior{que} est quàm Principes nostri. And yet the said Luther more fully vnbreasteth his Loue and affection towards the Turke, saying:Luther in confutat Do∣ctorum Paris.impress. Neo∣brgi. Vi liberé animum meum aperam; Hoc aperie de me praedico, quòd tam inuitus Tr∣cam gladio inuaderem, quam Christianum fra∣trem. To open my mind freely, I openly confesse, that I would as vnwillingly assault with my sword, a Turke, as any other that is my Christian Brother. Thus Luther, in affection fully equalling a Turke with a Christian. O the monstruous∣nesse of Apostasy! But to proceed further. The Prince of CondyMatth. de Lanoy en s replique. l. . chap. 13. in France in the yeare 1570. being banished France, and retiring himselfe to Basill, and consulting there, how to raise Rebellion against the King of France; The Protestant Ministers of that City perswaded him, to be subiect himselfe to the Turkish Emperour, and craue assistance of him. In like sort we Frenchmen, or rather, we Franco-Turca in the Rebellion to the yeare 1568. made a Petition to the Turke for ayde, a∣gainst our owne Soueraigne King, and Country; giuing our reasons thereof to the Turkish Embassadour in these Wordes?
QuiaIn literii Constanti∣nop. scriptis ad Venetum Patricium, in fine libri de furoribus Gallisis, fides Protestantiam, Turcicae erat quàm simillima. Because the fayth of the Protestants, was most lyke to the Turkish fayth: As also in that, the Protestant Princes of Germany fauouring the Tur∣kish Emperour, might hinder all the designes of the Roman Emperour. These were the Reasons in particular. Which said French Men did thus promise the Turke in the forsaid Petition: SeforeIn lit. Constas. b. suprd▪ sem∣per paratissimos, ad turbas in Galia, Germania{que} concitandas &c. That they would euer be most ready to cause Combustions and Troubles, by in∣censing the Communalty in France, and Germany whensoeuer the Turkish Emperour should hould is conuenient. Such is the diabolicall, and Hel∣lish malice of Heresy, thus taking part with Misbeliefe, Infidelity, and Miscreancy, against our most ancient, and Apostolicall Roman Fayth. Which course must needs seeme the more deplorable, if we call to mynd, that our Kings through their piety, & constant professing of the true Religion haue most deseruedly purchased the Title, of Reges Christianissimi: Why then should not their subiects in imitation of their Vertue, be sti∣led, Subditi Christianissimi? But (alas) their state is far different from this. For how can those men be truly called Christianissimi, who are scarse (at least imperfectly) Chri∣stiani? For doth Nature euer afford a Su∣perlatiue without a Positiue?
The Reasons of the frienshippe betweene the Turke, and some Lutheran States. CHAP. XXX. IN this place, we will penetrate a little into the Reasons and Grounds, why our New Gospellers. & the Chiefe Lay-Professours of the Reformed Religion do beare such a fauorable Aspect to the Turks, and their Princes. This we shall find to proceede from Certaine Principles of the Protestants doctrine (of which some a∣boue are briefly touched.) Which being be∣lieued, do euen dispose the mynd for the full entertayning of Turcisme in generall; and consequently do beget in their Wils, a well-wishing to the Turke in temporall Affaires, against all Professours of the Catholike & Roman Fayth. For our New Brethren do so corrupt, and disualew the Articles of the most B. Trinity, of the Incarnation of Christ, of his Passion, and merit thereof (in all which Mysterious Passages, Mercy did draw God from Heauen to Earth, that he might ther∣by draw man from Earth to Heauen) with their pernicious, false, and pestilent Scholia's, as that the next step is vtterly to deny those supreme dogmaticall Articles and Posi∣tions of fayth; and so by imbracing Mis∣creancy, to rise vp absolute Turks, or Iewes. And according to this my assertion, we find AEgidius Hunnius (a most forward, and
eminent Lutheran) to confesse no lesse▪ Which Hunnius did write a booke against Caluin bearing this Title: Caluinus Iudaizans; Hoc est, Iudaica Glossae & corruptelae quibus Ioan∣nes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca & testimonia, de gloriosa Trinitate, deitate Christi, & Spiritus sancti; cum primis autem vaticinia Pro∣phetarum, de Aduentu Mesiae, Natiuitate eius. Pasion, Resurrectione, Ascensione ad Caelos, & Sessione ad dextram Dei, detestandum in modum corrumpere non abhorruit, Wittembergae, anno 1593. Thus in English. Caluin playing the Iews that is, The Iudaicall Glosses & Cor∣ruptions, by the which Iohn Caluin hath not been afraid, detestably to corrupt the most cleare places and testimonies of the Holy Scripture, touching the glorious Trinity, the Deity of Christ, & of the Ho∣ly Ghost, and particularly the Prophecies concerning the Aduent and Comming of the Messias, his Natiuity, Passion, Resurre∣ction, Ascension to Heauen, and sitting at the right hand of God. Another Protestant writeth in like sort a booke entituled: Antiparaeus; Hoc est, Refuta∣tio venenati scripti à Daude Paraeo editi, in defensionem stropharum & corruptelarum, quibus loannes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae Te∣stimonia, de Mysterio Trinitatis, nec non Oracul Prophet arum de Chrsto, detestandum in modum corrupit. Francosurti, Anno 1598. Thus: Anti∣paraeus; that is, A Refutation of the virulent writing, made by Dauid Paraeus in the de∣fence of the impostures and Corruptions,
by the which Iohn Caluin derestably dep∣neth the most euident Testimonies of the Scripture, touching the Mystery of the Tri∣nity, as also the Oracles of the Prophets, concerning Christ. A third Protestant thus stileth his booke written against Calin: Alberti Graueri, Bel∣luns Ioannis Caluini & Iesu Christi; That is, the Warrs betweene Caluin and Iesus Christ, written by Alberius Grauerus, printed at Brapta. 1598. To be short a Fourth Protestant writeth a Treatise, bearing this Inscription: Oratio de Incarnatione filij Dei, contr impos, & blasphe∣mos Errores Swinghanorum, & Galuinistarum, Tubingae, 1586. An Oration, or discourse of the Incarnation of the Sonne of God, a∣gainst the wicked and blasphemeus Er∣rours of the Swinglians and Caluinists. Now the Swinglians. and Caluinists thus writing against the most supreme Articles of the Trinity. the Incarnation, the Passion &c. do they not open a sluce to their Readers, for the absolute deniall of the said sacred Mysteries? And once denying them, what then remaineth for the last tincture & dye of their sayth, but to become a Turke, a Ie, or an Atheist? This former point is made no lesse eui∣dent, by the seuerall Testimonies of the more sober and temperate Protestants. For Yacobus Andraeas thus complaineth: Minime mirandum est ex Caluinianis &c. WeAndraas in raefas. vefucat. A∣polog. Danaei. are not to wonder; that of the Caluinists in Poland, Trans∣siluanis,
Hungary, and in other places, some im∣brace Arianisme, others Mahumiisme; to whose impiety the doctrine of Caluin prepareth the way. Thus this Protestant. And Pelrgus a Prote∣stant thus writeth: NonPelargus in Admonis do Arians. tis Caluinim, & Caluinianos in plurinis Scripturae expositionibus , &  labrtose tendam: I will not spend much tyme, in hewing, bow Cal∣uin and the Cluinists, in many positious of Scri∣pture do play the Iewes, and the Arians. Now from this former source it srin∣gen, that a booke was written by a Scho∣ler of Luther, the Argument, or Subiect whereof was in the frontispisce deliuered in these words: Admonitie ex Verbo Dei, quòd Caluinistae non sunt Christiant, sed cantum In∣daei, & Mahumetani baptizata. An Admoni∣tion out of the Word of God, that the Caluinists are nos Christians, but only Iewes, and Mahunis∣tans Christened. And an other famous Lutheran (being Supeintendent of the Church of Raceburg) thus fully pronounceth of this point: Calui∣nistaeIn lib en∣tituled, Dae Theologi Caluinist. li∣britres. Fran∣coforts anno 15. alunt in pectore impietatem Arianam, & Turcicam, quae non rarò suo tempora palam se pro∣dit, & quod Caluinistae hominibus ad Arianismum, & Mahumetismum fenestram & ianuam ape∣riunt, nostri Theologi publicis libris demonstra∣runt. Vz. Our Deuines haue demonstrated in their publike writings, that the Caluinists do nou∣rish in their breast the Arian, and Turkish Impie∣ty, which often vpon fit occasion discouers it selfe. And that the Caluinists do open the Window, and Dore to Arianisme, and Mahutisme, our de∣uines
haue demonstrated also in their publike Wey∣ings. But inough of this point. Of certaine Eminent Caluinists, who for∣saking their Christianity, became open, and blasphemous Turkes. CHAP. XXXI. AS in this first Part of this Trea∣tise, I haue shewed, first, That the Turks, and our New Gospellers, who haue been (Préscheurs sedi∣tieux, & dignes d'vn chastiment tres-rigoreux) seditious fellowes against the Church of God, and worthy of seuere punishment, do a∣gree in forty points touching fayth, and the necessary Attendants therof. Secondy, how the chiefe Protestants by deprauing the do∣ctrine of the Trinity, and the Incarnation, haue in their Writings playned the way to Turcisme, or Mahumetisme: So now for the closure and shutting vp of this first part, I will produce the Examples of seuerall most eminēt Protestants, who haue in their owne persons actually incorporated (not some, but) all the Blasphemies of Mahumetisme, openly professing themselues in fayth, and externall Practize thereof, to be Turks; re∣nouncing and disclayming from all Chri∣stianity. ObstupesciteIerem. . caeli super hoc. And to begin. The first of these Mon∣sters (Monstrum horrendum, ingens, cui lumen
ademptum) which I will name; shalbe Ber∣nardinus Ochinus, a man much commended byL 9. fol. 297. Sleidan, and by BullingerSilerus Vita Bullin∣geri, fol. 28. both Protestants, and whose prayse Caluin cele∣brateth in these Words: WhomCaluin, l. de Secondalis, extat in eract. Theo∣log. p. 111. can I truly oppose against Bernardinus Ochinus? Now this presumed worthy Protestant, in the end became an impious Apostata, entertayning Turcisme: of whose fall Beza thus writeth: Polygamium nemo vnquam callidius, velimpuden∣tius defendit quam ille impurus Aposta, Bernar∣dinus Ochinus. His Apostaly is in lyke sort recorded by ConradusIn Theo∣log. Calis. l. 1. fol. 8. Schlusenburg. Yea Beza in the place aboue alledged, sayth, that Ochinus was, omnium, Christianae Religionis dogmatum irrisor: A mocker or scoffer of all the Ar∣ticles of Christian Religion. In like manner, Adam Neuserus (no vul∣gar Protestant) became a Turke, of whom Osiander the Protestant, thus speaketh: AdamOfiand. in Epitom. Cent. 19. pare. 2. pag. 818. Neuserus, Pastor Heidelbergenlis, prolapsus est in Turcismum, Constantinopoli circumcisus. Adam Neuserus, Pastour of Heidelberg, did fall into Turcisine, and was circumcised as Constantinople. Of this Neuserus the foresaid Schlussenberg (the Lutheran) thus speaketh: AdamSchlus∣senb. in Theo∣log. Caeluinist. l. 1. Ar. 2. fol. . Neuserus elim Heidelbergensis Ecclesiae primarius Pastor, ex Swinglianismo, per Arianismum ad Mahumetismum, cum alijs non paucis Caluinistis gressus est. Adam Neuserus, heretofore chiefe Pastour of Heidelberg, with many other Calui∣nists, proceeded from Swinglianisme, through A∣rianisme, vnto Mahumetisme, In which testimony of Schlussenb. we may
obserue two things. First, that Neuserus (as not being content to be defiled alone) did draw many others with him to Turcisme. Secondly, that Swinglianisme, and Arianisme are the two subordinate Passages, or Wayes to Turcisme. And therefore a German Prote∣stant DoctourIoqunes Schutz in l. 50. causa∣rum, cousa. 41. calleth Swinglianisme, A∣rianisme, and Mahumetisme, tres fratres vel soro∣res, vel tres caliga eiusdem panni. Three brethren, or three sisters, or three payre of hose made of the same cloath. A truth so euident, that he for∣said Neuserus writeth of this point in this sort, being then at Constantinople: NullusSo Ste∣phenus Ger∣latius recor∣deth these words, as spoken by Neuserus. nostro tempore mihi notus, factus est Arianus, nisi antea suit Caluinista &c. No man in our dayes, that I know, became an Arian (which is the next step to Turcisme) except he was first a Caluinst, as Seruetus, Blandrata, Alciatus, Franciscus Da∣uid, Gentilis, Gribaldus, Siluanus, and others. Igi∣tur, qui timet sibi ne incidat in Arianismum ca∣ueat Caluinismum. Therefore who is fearefull of himselfe to fall into Arianisme, let him take heede of Caluinisme. Thus Neuserus speaketh of his owne, and diuers others experience. The next shalbe Asams, of whom the foresaid Schlussenburg thus speaketh: A∣lamannusCourad. Schlussenb. vbi suprà, fol. 9. & 10. Bezae fannliarissimus, & stre∣nuus Caluinista, Religioni Christiana Congum Vale dixit, & factus est Apostata, & Iudus blasp∣mus. Alamannus being a most fathliar friend of Beza, and an earnest Caluinist, hath gi∣uen his last fare well to the Chistian fayth; and is become an Apostata, and a blasphe∣mous Iew. Of whom euen Beza himselfe
thus complaineth; AlamannusBeza in Epist. Epist. 5. affirmant ad Iudaismum defecisse; though some authours constantly affirme, that he became a Turke. But howsoeuer the difference is but small, since a Iew, and a Turke do mutually agree in denying the most Blessed Trinity, the Incar∣nation of Christ, and in denying all other Articles of Christian Fayth, proceeding from these two former. In like manner Dauid Georgius, who li∣ued a long tyme at Basill, much esteemed by the Protestants of that City; of whom O∣siander thus writeth;Osiand. epit. cent. 16. part. 2. pag. 647. Vbatur publico Vir De ministerio Basillensi. Dauid George, being a man of God, vsed the publike Ministery at Basill. Now I say, this Dauid George became a most blasphemous Turke, or Iew, as the DeuineIn bisto∣ria Georgij Dauidis prin∣ted Ane∣wer. anno 1568. and ple∣shed by the Deuines of Basil. themselues of Basill haue published, and recorded. Paulus Alciatus (an Italian) being afore a Protestant, much labored to plante the eds of Mahumetisme, in Polonia, and finally became a Turke; as BezaBeza in l. Epist. Theol. Epist 65.66. witnesseth. Andraeas Velanus (an eminent Caluinist) not only became a Turke, but withall cor∣rupted diuers others with his pestilent WritingsIn Pa∣renesi. against the B. Trinity. alius Socinus (once brought vp in the Schoole of Geneua) forsooke his Christian∣ty, and did write against the most Sucred Trinity, of whom Beza thus peaketh: T∣liusBeza, Epist. Theo∣log. Epist. 8. Socinus mihi quidem videtur, omns ruptores longé superasse. I a of mynd, that lius Socinus hath surpassed all other corrupt Writers.
I here passe ouer the Examples of other Caluinists, who shaking of the Christian Re∣ligion (as Waterdogs do water, when they haue no further need thereof) entertained Mahumetisme, and so became open, and exe∣crable Turks; to wit, PetrusVide Simlerum de aeterno Dei filio. Sartorius, Georgius Paulus, Franciscus Lismanus, all who cooperated with the forenamed Alciatus, in disseminating Turcisme in Polonia. And thus far of the Apostasies of diuers Markable Protestants, who made shew in the beginning to professe the name & fayth of Christ; and accordingly receiued their Baptisme in that fayth, and Religion; And yet before their deaths. spurning at all the Mysteries of Christianity, they entertayned and openly professed the doctrine, and Re∣ligion of Mahumet, and Sergius, two most capitall Enemies of Christ, our Redeemer, Thus ranging themselues among those, who circa. Ti∣moth. 1. fidem naufragauerunt. And in∣deed, it deserues obseruation, that by expe∣rience we find (as is partly aboue touched) that Protestancy, first resolues it selfe into Caluinisme; Caluinisme into Anabaptisme; Ana∣baptisme into Arianisme; and Arianisme for its last change into Turcisme, or Tudaisme. Now it is a principle in Alchimy, that the last su∣blimation of Metalls (as purging and refi∣ning away the drosse, and refuse matter a∣fore remayning) is euer the purest. Will you admit (O you Hugenots) this Theoreme, or Axiome, as true? Well now, what can we iustly conclude
out of the Contents of this Chapter? It is prophesied of the Church of Christ, that she shall conuert Heathens vnto her, according to those words of Esay spoken of and to the Church: Thou shaltIsa. 60. suck the milke of the Gentills? And the Regall Prophet sayth to the Church, in the person of God; I will giuePsalm. 18. thee the Heathens for thy inheritance? To be short, the foresaid Prophet Esay is comman∣ded and directed by God, to speake thus to the Church of Christ: EnlargeIsa. 54. the place of thy Tents; spread out the Curas of thy habi∣tation &c. Thy seede shall posssse the Gentills. If now the true Church of Christs shalbe honored, and enriched with this most wor∣thy priuiledge of conuerting Heathens, and Gentills vnto it. What Church then may we repute the Synagogue of the more fiery Protestants to be; of which many most re∣markable Professours, who are Christians (in lieu of conuerting of Heaths) after become Mahumetans, Turks, and Miscreants, litle infe∣riour in Misbeliefe to the very▪ Heathens, and Gentills? Is not this to change Christ for Mahumet, his sacred Gospell for the Alcoran, & to turne light into darknes? And with this I impose an end vnto the first Part of this Treatise.
THE SECOND PART. Wherein is demonstrated, that in twenty Points of fayth, and other accessory Cir∣cumstances thereof, Mahumet and the Turks do in their beliefe and practise of them, seeme lesse to derogate from the honour of Christianity, then Luther and his Schollers doe, in belieuing the contrary. And these Comparisons made betweene the Turks, and the Luthe∣rans, are heere stiled, Parallels. CHAP. I. IN the precedent Part, I haue layd open to your fight (My deare Countrimen) the many Symbolismes, & Agreements of doctrine betweene Mahumet, and your Progenitours. Heere now I vn∣dertake a more vnexpected Prouince, and Charge; which is, to shew, that your first Maisters (and in them implicitly your sel∣ues) do equall, if not transcend in impiety of Misbeliefe, and practise thereof, the said Mahumet and his Followers, touching seue∣rall
Points of fayth, & other accessory Cir∣cumstances thereof. We read in Holy Writ, that, CredersHebr. . pertt accedet ad Deum. And the same Holy Writ teacheth vs, that God is Truth: Eg sum Via, & Varitas. And can then man arriue to Truth, by belieuing what is false? It is a thing miserable,Iohn 1 for a Man to be a true Belieuer, but a bad liuer: It is more miserable to be an Heretike, not belieuing rightly the Articles of Christian Fayth: It is more then miserable, to be so absorpt in misbeliefe, as to consociate in Miscreancy with Mahumet, and the Turk: But what it is, to exceede, and surpasse in atrocity of misbeliefe the very Mahumetans, Sarans, & Turks, cannot be expressed in Words, and therefore a horrid and silent astonishment must be the Dialect, or Tongue to pro∣claime it. O my Natiue Countrey, in which are bred many guilty of so high a Treason against their Creatour How vnlike art thou to thy former selfe! And how litle of France is now found in France? Art thou weary, and asha∣med of thy former Vertue? In ancient tymes thou wast able to equall (yea to ouerstip) other Nations in the profession of the Chri∣stian fayth; which fayth is a supernaturall light, giuen to man to fyn out the Eternall light. Art thou then now so degenerated from this former purity in fayth, as not on∣ly to Symbolize with Infidells, but euen to exceeds them in their Infidelity? But par∣don
me (O you of the Reformed Religion) & suffer me to breath out my Griefe, through these my laments, and inconsolable Words▪ since I cannot, but (grandement ressentir d'n crime si enorne) haue a feeling, and sensible touch of your so enormous a Crime. But to turne my Pen to that, which I haue voluntarily imposed vpon it; and the rather since a discouery of Errours is here an establishment of the Truth: I say, I do vndertake in these ensuing leaues to mani∣fest, that in diuers points of fayth, and pra∣ctice thereof, and other Collaterall acces∣sions, Mahumet and his Sect in their beliefe, and execution of them, do far lesse derogate from the Honour of the Christian fayth, then your Grand-Maisters, or most of you yet doe. These my Comparisons touching the said Points, differently belieued and practi∣zed by Mahumet, and your Maysters, I call so many Parallels (as in the beginning of this Treatise I insinuated) seing they consist in comparing, & balancing the said points, as they are seuerally maintayned by Mahu∣met, and by your Party; The proofe where∣of I draw from the Sentences deliuered by Mahumet, or by such, as haue written of the Mahumetan Religion, compared with that, which your Doctours haue leaf recorded in their owne Bookes.
The I. Parallel; Betwene Mahumet, and Henry the Eight, King of England. CHAP. II. NOw before I approach to com∣pare Things together, I will com∣pare Persons together, & will make two Parallels. The first Parallell shalbe betwene Mahumet himselfe, and Hen∣ry the Eight of that name, king of England; The second betweene Sergius, and Luther; the one inuenting first the Law of Mahu∣met, the other stamping his Innouations in this our Age. All which men, being origi∣nally Christians (yea Catholiks) by aban∣doning their former Religion, did find darknes in Light; whereas such as be either Infidells or Heretiks, by imbracing the truth of fayth, fynd light in darknes. Now in the trutination of these mens liues, & actions, I cannot say with the Apostle; Spiritualibus1. Cor. ▪ spiritualia comparens, but only Carnalibus carnalia, & viijs vitia. To begin with Mahumet, and Henry the eigh. It is well, that Mahumet and Henry li∣ued not in the dayes of Plutarch the Philo∣sopher; For if they had, he would perhaps haue paralleled them together, not as among the Worthies of the Romans, and the Gre∣cians, but among the Vnworthies and Monsters of Mankind, registring, and mutually con∣ferring, not their faults (for in so tearming
them I speake ouer indulgently) but their Enormous Crimes, and flagitious liues: But seing they both crept into the World long after the former learned Historiographer. I will therefore be content to take the pai∣nes, as to place them in the scales of a stee∣dy, and impartiall iudgment. First then Mahumet erectedBiblian∣der in prae∣s, Alcor∣. himselfe by subelty and treachery, a great Prince, subiecting to his gouerment, no small part of Asia Syria, Arabia, Aegypt, and Afrike; in which places he first caused his blasphe∣mies to be planted. He at the first of his presumed correction, and emendation of the then Church of God, made it an ArticleBiblian∣der vbi suprà. of the Mahumetan Religion, that him∣selfe was the Supreme Head of the Church of God; so he depriuing the Successours of S. Peter of that dignity, and Prerogatiue. Thus to his Princly Authority did he ioyne the Pontificall Authority, so making him∣selfe Caliphas, that is, King, and supreme Prelate; and ordayning by his sword, and Regall soueraignty, what should be belie∣ued touching fayth, and that the contrary Points should not be questioned; and puni∣shing with death such, as would not sub∣missiuely yeild, and giue their appiobation to his wicked doctrines. Henry the eight was by byrth King of En∣gland, and Ireland (a great Monarchy) and did runne in the same line with Mahumet. For he was the first Christian Prince, who either in those Nations, or throughout all
urpe, assumed to himselfe the Title of HeadVide Sand. de Schis∣mats Agli. of the Church, and decread by a Parla∣ment or (generall meeting togeath of all the States of the Realme) that all Cno of the Church, and Councells, formerly nacted, should be wholy ieced and dis∣nulled; those only excepted, which him∣selfe vouchsafed to appou. And accordin∣gly such Canons and decrees, which him∣selfe, and some few, others substiured by him, did make, wer to be reputed as sin∣cere and Euangelicall, being warranted vnder his Letters Patents, and Regall Seale. It is said aboue, that Mahumet did punish (yea sometymes with death) such, as were refractory to his Will, and would not al∣low the doctrine, published in his Alcoran. The like Course did this Engli Antiochus (to the dishonour of all Kingly Soueraign∣ty) take for did he not (besides many reue∣rend Abbots, and other Religion, men) put to cruell death that Payre of Martys (the Pryde, & Honour of that Nation) I meane the Bishop ossensis, and Thomas ore  his Chancellour, for their not subscribing to the wicked Aricle of Supremay, first esta∣blished by that vnfortunate King? Mahumet had diurs wiu, and Ci∣nes together, and at the same time: Whereas Henry of England (who otherwise,  doubt, wanted not his Seraglio) had indeed (in compare.) but few wyues, ye when  was wey of one Wyfe, his accustomed
stratageme was commonly to accuse her of some forged disloyalty, and so force them (one after an other) either to diuorce, or to loose their heades; thus making Cruelty & murther, a stuking horse (as it were) for his next Mariage. An impiety neuer practized by Mahumet. Henry had in all six wiues, of which the first was Catharine, daughter of Ferdinand the six, King of Spaine, who was his wyfe twenty yeares; But then through his dis∣like towards her, or desire of hauing ano∣ther, he caused a sentence of diuorce to be giuen against her, by the Archbishop of Canterbury▪ Anne, his second wife, was the daughter of Syr Thomas Bullen, who was not his Wife aboue three yeares, but she was condemned of disloyalty of Body, whereupon she lost her Head. The immediate day after the death of Anne (so impatient his lst was of delay) he maried his third wyfe Iane, who was daughter of Iohn Seamer Knight. She was his wife but one yeare, and fiue months. She died in Childbed; but who knoweth if of child-byrth, seing easily he might take the oportunity of the tyme? Anne his fourth wife, being sister to Wil∣lam Duke of Cleue, was his wife for six Months; but after (for he could not feede of one dish any long tyme) she was diuorced from him by Act of Parlament. Catherine, his fyfth wyfe was necento
Thomas Howard Duke of Suffolk; yet within one yeare, and six Months, the must also be condemned of vnchastnes, and was be∣headed. His last Wyfe was Catherine, daughter of Syr Thomas Parre; She was his wyfe three yeares, and had the priuiledge neither to be diuorced, nor beheaded, but suruiued him. And thus his death was in likelyhood the occasion of prolonging her life. But now in one kind of Wickednes Henry surpassed Mahumet. We reade that Mahumet (after his planting or his Blasphe∣mies) did exeruct diuersPostili. de Repub. de Turcis. Monasteries, and Hospitalls in Constantinople it selfe; as the like did Baiaze & Selymus, his Successours, euen in that Citty. We further reade, that Mahumet did not destroy any one Reli∣gious house, or Monastery exected before his tyme. But how great then is the dispa∣rity herein? For euen all Europe hath trum∣peted forth the irreligious proceeding of King Henry in this Case; Who did ouer∣throw all the Monasteryes, and Religions Houses in England, (in the abundāce wher∣of, no Nation, by the record of Historyes, was able to compare with it.) This flagi∣tious King (whose All, was Luxury, Murther, and Sacriledge) prostrating euen with the ground, so many Religious Houses, & bu∣chering so many Religious Persons of the said Monasteries, did lastly confiscate all the Lands and benefits belonging to them (which were almost of incredible Opu∣lency
& riches) to himselfe; partly to spend in all sensuality, and dissolution of lyfe, & partly to maintaine his flattering Atten∣dants, and Followers. Now then (to encircle the seuerall Pas∣sages of this King, displayed in this Chap∣ter, or Parallell,) we may from hence gather, that the afore mentioned Ecclesiasticall Primacy of the Church, was neuer chal∣lenged, or assumed (during this last nyne hundred yeares) by any temporall Prince, confessing the name of Christ vntill this Mahumetan Henry, through more then a Netrodianns. 10. Auarice, had demolished se∣uerall thousands of Religious Houses; and through an vnheard Homicidy, had made himselfe Husbād successiuely of six Wyues: O blemish, and dishonour to Nature! With this I end this Parallell betweene King Henry, & Mahumet the great Prophet, as vuulgarly the Turks and Saracens do stile him; And yet I see no iust cause (to be some∣what pleasant with you, my Countrimen) but that this Henry might be reputed as great a Prophet, as euer Mahumet was. My reason is this; we do not read of any thing particularly prophesied by Mahumet; wher∣as this our Propheticall King was able (su∣pernaturally forsooth) to foretell, diuers Moneths before, of what kind of death, for what cause, and at what tyme his present liuing Wyfe (though then being in good health) must after dye. A stupendious Vati∣cinatour Thus whiles England is England, so
long shall the memory of the Actions of this baroarous King continue; And heere may well take place that Sentence of Cice∣ro: Salamina shalbe soouer forgotten, before the shings done in Salamina be forgotten. The 2. Parallell; Betwene Sergius and Luther. CHAP. III. I Will in this next place ballance Ser∣gius, and Luther togeather. In discour∣sing whereof I will more fully spread & enlarge my selfe, that so the implety of Luther being in part layd open to the eye of others, they may the more willingly be induced to haue a loathing, and hatred of the Heresyes, first in our Age ventilated by him. For if the Conduite or Pipe be foule and muddy, can the water, which streames through it, be cleare and sweet? And to begin. Sergius, and Luther were the first Apostles (so to stile them) of their Religions; The first of Mahumetisme, or Turcisme; the second of Lutheranisme, or Hu∣genotisme. They both (as aboue is touched briefly were Monks, leauing (with breach of solemne Vow) their Monasteries, though in a different manner. For Sergius through his miscariage was cast out of it; But Luther voluntarily (and therefore with greater impiety) did relinquish his Monastery; and thereupon yoaked himselfe with a profes∣sed
Nunne; so vshering his Vocation with the sinne of Sacrilegious Adultery. Both of them secured their molitions & had Attempts, vnder the Wings and safe∣gard of temporall Princes; Sergius vnder Mahumet, and Luther vnder the Duke of Saxony. Both of them had for their Maister and Instructour in planting their seuerall Fayth, the Deuill; so as the words of our Sa∣uiour might truly take place in either of their plantations: QuiMath. 11. seminauit ea, est dia∣bolus▪ Sergius had him originally, but not immediatly; since humane respects of plea∣sure, and the like were to him a forcible al∣lectiue▪ inuiting him to his after Apostasy: But Luther had the honour and fauour (for∣sooth) to be instructed by the Deuill both originally, and immediatly; TheThis disputation betweene Luther and the Deuill, is confessed by Hospinian, the Prote∣ctant, in Hist. Sacram. part. altera, fol. 131. As also by Manlius Lu∣thers Schol∣ler in loc. com. and by Morton, in Apolog. Ca∣thol. part. 1. l. 9. c. 21. Deuill by that meanes Catechizing this his Prose∣lyte, to abandon his Catholike Religion; & by telling him, that by saying daily Masse, he committed Idolatry. To which, and other of the Deuills arguments he yealded. This his Conference with the Deuill is so certaine, and vndoubted, as that Luther himselfe (as not being ashamed of enioying such a Maister) very solemnly deliuereth it in these his owne Words; ItLuther, tom. 7. Wit∣tenberg. anno 158. de Missa ngulari. fortuned, that at a certaine tyme about Midnight, I was sud∣denly awaked from sleepe; then Sathan began this dispute with me, saying: Hearken, right Reuerend Doctour Luther; Thou knowest, thou hast for the space of fifteene yeares celebrated priuate Masses euery day; but now what saist thou, if such Masses
were horrible Idolatry? Haec illo dicute: The De∣uill thus speaking, did vse voce forti, & grani, a strong, and base Voyce. I did burst forth into a sweate, and my hart began to beate, and tremble. Thus Luther himselfe hereof; and through force of this colluctation, and dispute with the Deuill he renounced his Priesthood, and instantly began to stamp from the same ori∣gin, the rest of his Heresies; but this, (auet vne impudence effrenêe, & trop audacicuse arro∣gance.) most shamlesly, and bouldly. Here then I demaund, Who first denyed the doctrine of PriuateLuth. de abrogand Missa priua∣tu. Masse, and Priest∣hood? The Deuill, and Luther. Who first de∣nyedSo Sley∣dn witnes∣seth of Lu∣ther, l. 26. fol. 232. Pardons? The Deuill & Luther. Who first denyed PapallLuther in captiuit. Ba∣bil. tom. 2. fol. 68. Iurisdiction, and Mona∣sticallLuther de Votis Mona∣in tom. 2. Wittenberg. lyfe? The Deuill, and Luther. Who first denyed FoureLuth. tam. 2. fol. 63. Sacraments? The Deuill, and Luther. Finally, who first denied Free∣will,Luther, de seruo arbi∣trio, i tom. 2. fol. 424. Iustification by Works, and seuerall Parts of CanonicallLuther, in praefat in Euist, lacobi, Scripture? The Deuill, & Luther. Since than the Deuill. & Luther were so intrinsicall and in ward friends, and that Luther became so seruiceable an Achates to the Deuill, as publikly to preach and main∣taine, whatsoeuer the Deuill did dictate vn∣to him; I leaue to your owne iudgments (my Countrymen of the Reformed Religion) what hope you can haue of your soules Saluation, in imbracing, and belieuing the damnable doctrines, first inuented by the Deuill, and Luther, in their afore mentioned solemne. Conference. But to returne. Sergius, and Luther did
vnanimously contemne the ancient Fathers of Christ his Church, that therby (as presti∣ming the Errours of those Fathers) they both vpon this ground with greater consi∣dency, might vrge a Reformation of the supposed Errours in our Catholike Reli∣gion, as is aboue said. Sergius his dislike of the Fathers is discouered in the thirteenth Azoara, aboue set downe. Luther (to omit many other vnworthy aspersions, and re∣proaches cast vpon them by him) thus wri∣teth: The FathersLath tom. . Wionb∣o 1991  seruo arbi∣rie, . ▪ of so many Ages, or Centu∣rios haue been wholy blynd, and most vnskilfull in the Scriptures, and haue erred during all their lyse tyme; and except they were amended before they dyed they were not to be accounted Sainis, nor be∣longed to the Church. In which Censure Lu∣ther deliuereth his mynd in farre greater a∣cerbity of speach, then we find Sergius in writing the Alcoran to haue done. To passe on. Sergius, and Luther did ioint∣ly write lasciuiously, and ustully. Sergius thus decreeth in his Alcoran: MuheresAzoara 8. quo∣trescunque placuerit, duas scices ant tres, aut quae∣tuor ducite &c. But is Luther any whit short to Sergius herein? Read what followeth: Si nonLuth. Jn de M∣riio. vult Vxer, aus non possit, veniat Ancilla. If the wyfe either will not, or by impotency cannot, let the mayd come in her roome. He further tea∣cheth, That a Man may mary another woman, if his owne Wyfe be fled from him; And then vpon this ground Luther thus concludeth: A manLuth. tom. ▪ Wian. berg▪ fol. . may haue ten, or more wises sl from him & and all yet liuing. Luther further proceedeth,
thus teaching: PolygamyLuth. in Propofit. de bigamia.  158. propes. 2, 65. . is no more disa∣nulled or abiegated then is the rest f Mayses Law. And it is free, as being neither commanded, nor for∣bidden? Thus far of Luthers doctrine (agreeing with Sergius) touching the firme of Carna∣licy. Now wheras Sergius, and Luther aboue thus write only speculatiuely, and by way of Instruction: Yet here we find a differēce betweene Sergius, and Luther. For touching the personall Incontinency of Sergius, we find but litle, or nothing written; Whereas Luther, as willing to incorportie his former doctrine in himselfe, (besides his espousing of a Votall Nunne) thus speaketh of him∣selfe, and of his owne incontinency? QuamLuth tom. Wittenb. de Matrimon. fol. 119. non est in meis vitibus &c. It is no more in my power to be without a Woman, then not to be as, Man. He further thus confesseth of himselfe: I haueLuth. in colloq. Men∣sal. ol. 526. been almost furious, through the rage of lust and desire of a Woman. And yet more par∣ticularly: I am burnedLuther, tom 1. Epist, Latin. fol. 334. ad Phi∣lippum. with the great sire of my vntamed flesh; &c. Eight dayes are past, during which tyme, I did neither write pray or study; be∣ing vexed partly with temptations of the flesh &c. Did euer Sergius disgorge such fifth, tou∣ching his owne sensuality? To proceed. Sergius as not belieuing in Christ, cōtemned the Sacraments of Christ; and therefore maketh litle, or no mention of them in the Alcoran. Luther admitteth some Sacraments, yet writeth so hearth mi∣shly and irreuerently of them, as that his sinne is litle lesse in wrongfully reaching
of them, then is the sinne of Sergius in not belieuing them at all. For Hospinian thus speaketh of Luther: Lutherus cous{que}Hospin. 1. histor. Sa∣crament. pars. aliera. fol 14. progre∣ditur, vt diceret Sacramentum verum futurum, etiamsi à Diabolo conficeretur. Luther proceeded so far, as that he maintayned, a Sacrament to be true, and effectuall, although it were celebrated, and ministred by the Deuill-Would Sergius haue euer vttered such blas∣phemous Words against any Sacrament, if he had been perswaded, they had been first instituted, and ordayned by God? The next point, of which we will dis∣course is, how Sergius esteemeth of the Old Law, and of Moyses; and what Luther deliue∣reth of Moyses. First then, we find Sergius thus to write in the Alcoran: DeusAzoara . pius & misericors prius Testamentum vetus, deinde Euan∣gelium rectas vias hominibus tradidit. God being holy and mercifull, did first deliuer to men (as two right wayes) the Old Testament, and then after, the Ghospell. And according hereto a writer of the Turkish Religion, thus spea∣keth: NullumCusanus in cribratione Alcorani, l. 8. c. 2. & l. 2. c. 24, & l. 3. c. , Prophetarum contradicit, sed approbat libros à Deo fidelibus traditos, scilicet le∣gem Moysis &c. Sergius, and the Alcoran, do not contradict any of the Prophets, but ap∣proue the Law of Moyses, the Pentateu∣chus &c. But doth not Luther (your I doll) speake of Moyses in another dialect, and of diuers parts of the Old Testament? For first you know, that Luther with his faction impug∣neth the writings of diuers Prophets of the
Old Testament. Hence it is, that Luther holds many Bookes thereof not to be Scri∣pture, but Apocry phall; to wit, the first and second of Esdras, Toby. the Booke of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the Machabees, and some others. Now touching Luthers acerbity of writing against Moyses, obserue what followeth: HabuitLuther, tom 3. Wit∣tenberg. in Psalm. 45. fol. 42. fol. 412. & tom. 3. German. fol. 40, & 41. Moyses labia, sed in facunda, impedi∣ta; irata, in quibus non est Verbum Gratiae. Moyses had his lipps vnpleasant, stopped, and angry, in the which there is not one Word of Grace, but of An∣gar, death, and sinne &c. If you collect all the wisdome of Moyses &c. you shall sind it to be in the sight of God, either Idolatry, or Hypocriticall Wisdome, or at most, the Wisdome of Wrath. A∣gaine: Moyses habuit labia diffusa felle. & ira. Moyses had his lipps full of Gall, and anger. Away therefore with Moyses. Blush you not hereat, (My Countrimen) to see how vnworthily & prophanely Luther (with reference to Ser∣gius) censureth of a great Part of the Old Testament, and particularly of Moyses? I will conclude this Parallell betweene Sergius and Luther, that dreaming for a tyme, that the doctrine of Gods Church was cor∣rupted, at Sergius first breaking out, and also at Luthers reuolt (as Sergius, and Luther do teach, auerring their owne Mission, or Vo∣cation to haue been in regard of the refor∣mation of the supposed corrupted fayth of God in those tymes:) I say, imagine all this as true, I then auerre, that Sergius broached his Religion in a more conuonient time, and place, then Luther did. For first touching the
tyme, whereas Sergius, and Luther do iointly teach (as abous is intimated) that at the tyme of Gregory the Greas (being a thousand yeares since) all the true Religion of God was corrupted, or rather exiled out of all Countries, Now Sergius at that very time by the appointment of Mahumet did first re∣store the Church of God (as he presumed) to its primitiue fayth: Therefore (I say) it ine∣uitably followeth vpon Mahumet Princi∣ples, that Sergius reformed the Church in a more conuenient and profitable time, then Luther did; who some ne hundred yeares after Sergius began his Reformation; during all which ages the Church of Christ (accor∣ding to Luthere doctrine) wanted this re∣lauration to its former Purity. Now touching the Places, which recea∣ued the presumed benefit by both their ri∣sings, and appearance to the World; Sergius planted his Religion (by the strength of Mahumet) in many most vast Natiōs, which at his first spreading of his doctrine, were infected with diuers Heresyes of the Arians, Nouatians, Manichees, Eunomians, Eutichians, Nestorians, the which (besides some other Heresies) had inuaded at that tyme Asia, Sy∣vin, Arabis, Egypt, and Affrike: Whereas by the comming of Luther (admitting, he had in∣stituted a true Religion) only England, Scotland, some parts of Germany, and of France haue receaned benefit thereby: So great a difference there is, touching this imaginary benefit to the Church of God, procured by
the seuerall Commings and preachings of Sergius, and Luther, Thus far I haue thought good to proceed, in the libration of Luther with Sergius; where we see, that in diuers points of Impiety Luther equalls Sergius, in others much transcends him. The 3. Parallell; Touching the dignity of Christ. CHAP. IV. WE will in this place touch the worth and dignity of Christ, and will observe how diffe∣rently Mahumet, and Luther with his Attendents do speake of Christ, whereby we may lament the Vnforate and Caicuar dayes, in which we liue, to see Mahumet and his Sect, not belieuing in Christ, surpasse in prayses of Christ, our Gospellers, who say they belieue in Christ, True it is, that Mahumet did not belieue in Christ, as in his Redeemer, yet marke how reuerently he writeth of Christ, and com∣pare his words with the Words of your first Instructours. Thus then we find Mahumet to teach of Christ in his Alcoran: Iesus MariaAzoara 5. &  & 12. Thus fuis Dei Nuncius, & Spiritus & Virbum, Dei calis Immisum; Cui Dei legato omnis deent credera. And againe in another place of the Alcoran: Iesus uit Sapienita & Verbum Patris & Me∣tas, & Princeps, Fuit Des Speritus, & mens grince∣pium{que},
& caput omnium bominum. Iesus the sonne of Mary, was the Messinger and spi∣rit, and Word of God. He was sent from Heauen; and him (as the Legate of God) all men ought to belieue. Againe: Iesus was the Wisdome and Word of the Father; and the very spirit and mynd of God; and the beginning, & head of all Men. Now according to these Passages of the Alcoran, Theodorus Bibliander (the Protestat) thus writeth of the doctrine of the Turkes: PrimusBiblian∣der in praefas. Alcoran. pag. 3. & maximus eror Turcarum est quod Trinitatem in Vnitate negt &c. Christium, ec Dei filum, c Deum esse credunt, sed Propheam bonum, veracissimum, omns meudacij alque pec∣cati immunem. The chiefest, and greatest er∣rour of the Turks is, that they deny the Tri∣nity in the Vnity; They belieue, that Christ is neither the Sonne of God, nor God; but that he was a good, and most true Prophet, and free from all lyes, and sinne. Thus we se, how honorably and magnifically Mahu∣met did teach of Christ, and so accordingly the Turkes do belieue of him, euen at this day. But now let vs obserue in what contra∣ry Idiome of speach, (altogether depressing the dignity of Christ) our Aduersaries do speake. And to passe ouer (as aboue tou∣ched) how Luther and his Schollers will not acknowledg their Redemption from Christ; except his diuine Nature suffered, in which their phantasticall, and conceated dognea they much dispretiate, and vnderua∣lew
the worth of the Humanty of Christ. First then whereas Mahumet aboue stileth Christ to be Supientia, & Verbum Patris, & Dei Spiritus, & Mens; And all this Mahumet did vnderstand of Christ, as he was Man (for as we read in the former Azoara's, he did not acknowledge Christ to be God.) Now Christ being in the iudgment of Mahumet & the Turkes, the Wisdome, and the Word of the Father, as also the Spirit, and Mynd of God, it vnauoydably followeth, that Christ (as Man) in the iudgmēt of Mahumet did know all things, and was free from all Ignorance; as also did not stand subiect to any sudden vngouerned perturbations of the Mynd, & such, as after ought to be corrected (which correction vertually implyeth in it selfe a former sinne;) since otherwise we should be forced to grant a thing most absurd, and no lesse derogatory from the Maiesty of God) that the Wisdome, the Word, the Spirit, and Mynd of God, and, He, whom God com∣mandeth all men to heare (as aboue we noted out of theAzoar 11. & 18. Alcoran) did stand ob∣noxious to Ignorance, to disordered Pas∣sions, yea to sinne it selfe. Now this inference being ineuitable, let vs see, how your Forefathers in opposition hereto, stand guilty in charging Christ; as man, with Ignorance. Thus then we find one of them to teach: ChristasBucerus in Luc. . So Calu. s Hrm. c. 11. b infantia non fuit gratia consummatus, sed anii doth us, relui cateri homies, adoleuit, vsu factas quidi sa∣pientior,  vs puerulus igorauia lberis.
Christ from his Infancy was not consuen∣mate with Grace, but did increase (a other men doe) in the guilts of the Soule. He was made by vse daily more wise, so that he la∣bored with Ignorance as a litle Child. The same doctrine is taught by Beza,Baze in respons ad act. colloq. Montisbelg. part. 1. p 147. & 148. and by one WillettusWillet in Synops pag. 599. & 600. an English Doctour; All which Inouatours sucked their poyson touching the supposed ignorance of Christ, from Luther (their Great Cham) who thu writeth in one place: Christus sicut nonLuther, in Concion. de Natali Do∣mint, tractans locum Marci, 5. de illo die. quoliet tempore omne vidis audius gue sens  itaetiam corde non omnia smper gnu &c. As Christ at all times did not see heare. & vn∣derstand all things▪ so did he not know all things in his Hart, but so much only, as the Lord vouchsafed him to know. To proceed fuher▪ When Christ prayed in the Garden, Marloretus (the Protestant) sayth; VoceusMarloret. in Math. 2. edidit sine rations, sine spiriti. With whom Caluin agreeth in these Words. Christus metuCaluin in cap. . Mat∣that. perculsus &c. Christ being stre∣ken with feare, did wauer among seuerall flouds of. Temprations, with change, or vicistude of desires; And this is the reason, why he praying in the Garden against death Moxsib fraenum in∣icit, Putris, imper subjciens, votum illud subi∣tè el, sum castiguit & rocauit; did presently bridle that his desire, and submitting him∣selfe in the Will of his Father, did instantly correct land recall that his Petition, or de∣sire as suddenly falling from bim. And further Caluin in the same plae more enlargeth himselfe, saying; Non fuit
hac meditat Christi Oratia, sd vis & imp∣loris subitam ei vacem torsie, cur statim addita fuit correctio; Eadem whementia praesentem cale∣stis decreti memoriam illi abstulit. This prayer of Christ (meaning, If  be possible, let this Cup passe from me) was not premeditate, but force and violence of Griefe did extort this sudden Word from him, the which he pre∣sently corrected; The same vehemency of dolour did take from Christ the present re∣membrance of the Celestiall decree. Thus far Caluin. Where we may gather from those former words in him: Subit clapsum castga∣uit, & recouauit; As also those other; Non fuit meditata oratio, cui statim addita, suit Correctio; And againe; eadem veementia praesentem ale∣stis decreti memoriam ei abstulis, tha Caluin doth charge Christ not only with Ignorance, and Forgetfulnes, or Inconsideration; but euen with Sinne, since that is only a sinne, which stan∣deth in neede of Correction, and reuoca∣tion. But to close vp with Caluin. ThisSee the Records of Noyon, in France, and Sblusenbur. Theol Calu. 2. fol. 7. Sodomiticall Fugitiue (for my Pen cannot at this present affoard him better termes) en∣tred in to that height of Blasphemy, as that he thus taught: ChristusCaluin.  2. Instie. c. 16. §. 10. dires in nima orucietus damnati, & perditi hoinis pertul: Christ did suffer in his soule the earefull o∣xations of a damned, and lost Man. And thereupon Caluin teacheth, that ChristCaluin. vbi suprà.  11. was not secue of his one Saluation; reprehen∣ding the Catholike for teaching the Con∣trary, in this manner,Caluin vbi suprà .1. ic
quidam indocts clamitant me atrocem facere Chris∣sto iniurtam, quia minime consentaneum fuerat, Christum de antmae salute timere. Here now rise vp certaine ignorant lewd fellowes, ex∣clayming against me, that I offer to Christ an atrocious iniury; seing (they say) it is not agreable to him to feare the Saluation of his owne Soule. The said Caluin, the more to depresse the power and dignity of Christ, and to debase the worth of those, who first belieued in Christ, thus censureth of his Disciples: ChristusCaluin, in Luc. cap. 7. discipulos, non nisi ex face populi, & quisquilij sibi colligere po∣tust Christ could not gather to him any dis∣ciples, but such as were of the dregs, or refuse of the People: Thus Caluin charging Christ with want of Power herein. Now here I demaund of any indifferent Man, who with an impartiall eye, shall ob∣serue (cerenormes indagnitez commises cozire Ie∣sus Christ) how those former words of Mahu∣met in his Alcoran, deliuered of Christ (to re∣capitulate some of them) That Christ, is Sa∣pientia, & Verbum Patris; Messias, Spiritus. & Mens Dei, & cui Deilegato omnos credere debent: that he is Propheta veracissimus, & omnis pec∣catiimmunis, and the like Encomia; Heere, I say, I demaund how these Prayses can stand with the Ignominy and Dishonour, which your Maysters in their former alledged Sentences, haue offered to Christ, in ma∣king him to become thrall to Ignorance. Impotency, Passion. Forgetfulnes, Sinne, & doubtfulnes of his owne Saluation? Him
(I meane) who was absolutly eatus, when he was but Viator heere vpon earth; and whiles he was sayling vpon the seas of worldly Misery, was arriued to the port & Hauen of Rest; briefly who was (so to speake) intuiniuely discursiue, in regard of dif∣ferent respects? The 4. Parallell; Concerning the . Virgin Mary. CHAP. V. FRom the Sonne, we will descendin∣gly ascend to the Mother; I meane from our most Blessed Siur to the Blessed Virgin Mary; and see, whether Mahumet, or our Gospellers do write with more reuerence, and Honour of that most Intemerate, and Sacred Virgin▪ Mother of God, and chiefe Patronesse of all true and vertuous belieuers. And to recurre (for triall hereof) to Ma∣humet his Altran; We read these following Elogi, and Prayses of the Virgin Mary thei (notwithstanding that he was perswaded, as our Aduersaries are at this Present, that too much honour was exhibited to her, by the Christians of his dayes.) Thus then the Alcoran celebrateth her Worth. saying: Om∣niumAz muleri opia Mari, ab omnibus in∣tactae, aniam suam Deus insuffis, & ill ∣liu, suum anifestu Geni Macl pu. God did breath the soule into Mary,
being defiled by no man, & being the best of all Women; and made her, & her Sonne an euident Miracle to the Gentills. And more: Maria fuitAzoar  omnibus viris & mulieri∣bus splendidior, & mundeor, atque purior, soli D∣perseueranter studens. Mary was more fayre, more cleane, and more pure then all Men and Women, euer perseuering, & studying to please God. And further: SpiritusAzoar 1, Dei intrauit Mariam, & Iesum ex ea genui. The spi∣rit of God entred into Mary, and begot of her (being an immaculate Virgin) Iesus. A∣gaine: MariaAzoar 76. aliquid mali, siue Malitae non operta est. Mary did neuer cōmit any Euill, or Act of Malice. These, and the like prayses an giuen by Mahumet to the B. Virgin; yea one Authour hath left thus recorded of Mahumet, saying: NullusLyra in tract. contra quendam Iu∣daeum, in fine Noui Testa∣mnti. de fiijs Adam nasciur, quem non tan∣gat Satan, praeter Mariam, & filium eius. There is not any borne of the Children of Adam. whom Sathan hath not touched, or assaul∣ted, excepting Mary, and her Sonne. And according to these Prayses, we find that Mahumet in his Alcoran vsually giueth her, the title of A Virgin. For example (to omit other such like passages.) Angelus GabrieAzoara . ad Virginem Mariam à Deo missus est, narra∣grus eam (qumquam Virginem) Dei tamen om∣nipotentiâ filium concepuram. The Angell Ga∣briell was sent from God to the Virgin Ma∣ry, to relate vnto her, that though she was a Virgin, neuerthelesse through the omni∣ency of God, she was to conau a Sonne,
And concordantly hereto Bi repor∣teth the doctrine of the Turks herein,Biblia∣der in Prae∣fat. Alcoran. pag. 3 say∣ing: Credant Turci, quod Maa  Pa genitus et. Now out of the mer Passa∣ge of Mahumet, and the Turks, deliuered in the honour of the Mother of ou Saiar, we collect first, that in the Iudgment of Ma∣humet, and the Turks, she was and euer con∣tinued a Virgin. Secondly that e was mor perfect, and pure, then any Man; or Wo∣man; Christ only excepted. Thirdly, which is partly coincident with the former, that she neuer committed any sinne, and was free from the Temptations of the Deuill. Let vs oppose to these Passges the W∣tings of our first Innouatours, and obserue the great disparity betweene them, and Mahumet. And first let vs take into our Con∣sideration, how they uere, that the B. Vir∣gin by the byrth of her Sonne lost her Vir∣ginity. Mlinan (a great Protestant) thus writeth here inMolina in vnion qutuor E∣uangeliorum part. 3. Concepion quidem l∣lo ds fui visrus Mariae aperus, id s in ∣iuilate. In the Conception or Christ, the Wombe of Mary was not opened, but it was in the Naiuity. And more in the same place: Virge supernaturalier pregnans, naturali∣ter peperit, which could not be without breach of her Virginity, according to those words of S. Austins Sivel per Christum nasce∣te cramperu si Mati inegrias &c. If the integrity of Mary the mother  be corrup∣ted by Christ, in the time of his bil, then follow∣eth i, that he was  bor of a Virgin; and th
consequently (which God forbid) the whole Church should erre in belieuing, and confesing, that Christ was born of a Virgin. Thus S. Austin. To proceed further. Your Grandmai∣sters are not content to each, t not only in the byrth of Christ, the most Blessed Virgin lost her Virginity; but they write most doubtfully (contrary to those words of Mahumet aboue mentioned, Mulier ab omni∣sus intact,) that she had the company of Ioseph after the byrth of Christ, and perhaps might haue some other child: Yea they blush not to alledge Scripture in warrant of this horrible blasphemy. According to this, that refined Heretike (Caluin I meane) thus writeth: NonCalu in Harmonis, fuit passrae Virgo &c. Th Virgin did not suffer herselfe to be marted to Io∣seph, thereby to delude him; and certainly it would haue been a perfidy in her, deseruing great reprae∣hension, if she should thus continue the duty of Ma∣riage; and this not without mocking of God; Thus intimating, that the Blessed Virgin did corpo∣rally know Ioseph, after the birth of Christ. And from this puddle it springeth, that the Nouellists of these dayes cannot endur to heare, that the Mother of God euer vowed Virginity. For thus we find that Psde-Martyr to reprehend S. Austin: S. AustinPeter Martyr. de Eucharist & Votis, col. 6. i his booke of holy Virginity belieued, that B. Mary vowed Virginity; which allmo easely know, how absurd this Sentence i. Yea out Aduers, are so full of this sensuall blasphemy, as that they are ready to presse with Iian, and Hel∣di (two old Heretiks, branded therefore
by the censure of the Primitiue Church) that place of Scripture, against the perseue∣rance of our B. Lady in her future Virginity: Et nonMath 1. cogsceba cam, donec &c. Whose detorted, and Hereticall Scholia of this place (chiefly resting in the word donec) is auoy∣ded by other passages ofV  Psalm. 109. Math. 18. Math 5. Scripture, wherein we find the said Particle, donec. The Bethsamites (weRegum 1. read) were se∣uerely punished, only for vnworthily be∣houlding of the Arke, wherein the Tables of the Typicall Law were kept and reserued: What Punishments, what tortures, what torments then are prepared for those, who do by their enuenomed Pens, and rasoy tongues, violate the inuiolate dignity of the Sacred Virgin; within whose chast Wombe for the space of nyne Months the most Ve∣nerable Body of Christ was (as I may say) nchased; of him I meane, whose Aduent and Comming was shadowed in the Typicall Law, and whose byrth did abrogate and cancell it? O sacrilegious Impiety! Now where the former Azoars in Ma∣humet auerr, that God did breath the Soule into the Virgin; that he was more pr, and cleans, then any mn or wom; incessntly sting to pleas God; Finally, that she neuer committed any Act that was euill, or proceeding of malice: How dis∣sonant this doctrine is from the doctrine of our Innouatours, shall appeare, from th Opinion of some of them, who will not af∣foard to her the title of being Blessed; Yea they are not afraid to introduce euen her
owne sonne (an offence, which surpasseth the nature of sinne) o deny her to be Blessed. According to this my Assertion, we find Caluin himselfe to vige certaine words of Christ, where we read, that when vpon those words spoken by a Woman to our Sauiour, BeatusLuc. 11. venter uite portauit &c. Our. Lord answered: Quimimo beai, qui au∣diunt Verbum Dei, & sustodiunt iud, This ans∣were (I say) of our Lord, CuluinCaluin in Mmonia. tor∣tures and racks to depriue the B. Virgin of being (euen o her sonnes iudgment) Bles∣sed. O good God! Are they Christians, who thus conuiate with their Styticall Inue∣ctiues the Mother of Christ? Or hope they to find fauour with the Sauiour of the World▪ who thu eae a sunder the Moour of her▪ who is the Mother of the Sauiour of the World? An Aduertisment of the Translatour. ☞ Seing the Cardinall (as not vnderstan∣ding our English tongue) could not pro∣duce the authority following therfore the Translatour hath thought good to insert it (as being most pertine to this matter▪  T i; the  onny (an English Mini∣ster) of great niency, in his Treatise of Pacification feareth not to chargeous Bles∣sed Lady (I haue a horrour partly but to relate his Words) with sour mortall, sin∣nes, committed at one tyme; for he sayth She did breake the first Comandement, the fift he sixt, and the nynth Commandement, because he defended not her Sonne vpon the Cosse. Would euer any Mahumetan speake that
Thus far (or rather to much) of this di∣statfull subiect. Only I refer to the Cen∣sure euen of your selues, my Countrymen; (for I do not feare partiality in so cleare a point) whether after you haue persect diligently all the Premisses you be perswaded, that Mahumet, or your Prime Maisters, haue borne greater veneration, and reuerence to the Mother of Christ, our Redeemer: yet before my Pen here cease, let it turne it selfe parti∣cularly to thee, O B. Virgin, and by deceping some Panegyricks out of the ancien Fathers, and other Doctours, deliuered vpon thee, celebrate in part thy praiser. Thou art then bothGregory Nyssene Orat. . de Natiuit. Christi. Mother, and a Virgin, Neither did thy Virginity take away thy Chilbyrth, no thy Child∣bi  thy Virginity. OnlyIerom. l. . contra Pe∣lag. c. 2. Christ did open the closed gate of thy Virgin ombe, which neuerthelesse euer continued soul. Thou art theProclu Constantin. rat. de Na∣iuit, Christi. Temple of God hou art the Mansion of Hea∣uen and earth. Thou art the WinourFulgen∣tius, serm. de laud. B Virg. of Hea∣uen, because through thee. God did send forth true light to all Ages: Thou in tyme diMetho∣dius orat. in Hypag. This Father liued in the second age after Christ. bring fore him, who was coneued before all tyme. Thou art theMetho∣dius ibid. circumscription of him, who cannot be circumscribed; the comprehension of him, who com∣prehendeth all things. ThouProclus Constant. Homil. de Natiuit. Christi. art the shop, wherein the two Natures are vnited; the Bed∣chamber,Proclus vbi suprd wherein the Word espoused human flesh: or the Bridge by which God descended from heauen. Thou art Higher,Athauasius in Euang de Beate Virgine. then the Blessed of Heauen, more honorable, then the Cherubims, more
holy then the Seraphims, more glorious then all the Hosts of Heauen. Finally. As Euaeuus contr Hae∣res. circa ∣dium. was sedu∣ced. that thereby the might fly from God; So thou (Mary) art perswaded to obey God, that so Mary (being a Virgin) might be an Aduocate for Eua a Virgin. Since then most Holy rgin, thou art an Aduocate, pleade for me (thy suppliant, and Client) who with all humble gratfulnesse, do acknowledg thy seuerall corporall, and spirituall Benefits bestowed allready vpon me. Besiege the eares of thy B. Sonne, with seruerous Prayer in my behalfe, that during my peregrination here vpon earth, and say∣ling in the Sea, and waues of humane Mi∣sery, my poore Soule may escape the Rocks, and sands of mortall sinne; making Heauen my Pole-starre, and thy Sonne, my Pilot; that so after my troublesome voyage is ended, I may arriue to the Hauen of interminable selicity, there to enioy those Ioyes, qua1. Cor. 2. oculus non vidit, nec auris audiuit, nec in cor bomi∣nis ascendit. But to remember my selfe, and to proceed to other Parallels, or Compa∣ratiues.
The 5. Parallell; Concerning the Anti∣quity of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme. CHAP. VI. I Will in some ensuing Comparatiues in∣sist in certaine Prerogatiues, which may seeme to agree to Mahumetisme; of which Prerogatiues Lutheranisme is wholy, depriued, and consequently infe∣riour therein to Mahumetisme. I will not call these the Marks of the true Church, since a false Church; (and such is the Church of Mahumet) is in some sort, and comparatiue∣ly capable of them. And thus though euery Religion, or Church enioying them, is not a true Religion (for they are not absolutly conuerrible with a true Church) notwith∣standing that Church, which wanteth them, is doubtlesly a false Church, or Reli∣gion. The first then of these shalbe Antiquity, which is farre greater in Mahumetisme, then in Lutheranisme. For aboutCuspi ad Mahumet. some nyne hundred yeares since or more (to wit, with∣in some fifty, or more yeares after S. Grogery the Great) Mahumet first appeared to the World, and planted his Religion: Which his Religion hath euer from that time con∣tinued euen to this day, without any In∣terruption.
Now Lutheranisme in compare hereof is of so late a date, as that being first broached by Luther, it is not past one hundred yeares since it was first heard off. According to which my speaches, we find▪ that Bucer (the Protestant) doth stile Luther, PrimumBucer in Epistan to 1536. ad Epis∣cop. Hereford. Apo∣stolum purioris Euligeli the first Apostle of the Reformed Religion. Another Lutheran thus writeth Georgius Milutus in Augustan, Confess. expli∣cat. art. 7. ntecess Lutherus in f∣ficiabersset &c. If Luther had any Predeces∣so  and function then there had been  of uthers. Reformation. In like manner, a thir confesseth in this sort: It is impudencySchussen∣berg in Theo∣log. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 10. tomaintaine that any learned men did bld the doctrine of the Ghospell in Germany, before Luthers dayes. A fourth thus writeth: I is ridiculousBernard, Morgenstern. Erect. de Ec∣cles. pag. 145. to thinke, that before Luthers dayes; any had the purity of the Ghospell; conside∣ring it is euidenhe whole World, that before Luthers time all Churches were drowned in more then a ymtri darknes. To contract this point Luther himselfe thus boasteth h of i  à  primò gain audemus gloriari. We dare vaunt, that Christ was first .
The 6. Parallell; Touching Vniuersality of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme. CHAP. VI. ANother Prerogatiue is, to be dis∣persed through many Nation & Countries: For this respect also is Mahumetisme superiour to Luthera∣nisme. For Mahumetisme possessed in former Ages, as also at this present (as aboue I haue declared) a part of Persi. Tartaria, India, Asia Minor, Arabia, Mauritania, Bathory &c. Wheras Lutheranisme is confined, and circumscribed (as it were) within most narrow Precincts of England, Scotland, some small parts of France, some parts of Flanders, some parts of Germany, of Denmarke, of Sweueland, of Trasiluania. Which Religion as yet neuer did set foote our of Europe. The 7. Parallell; Concerning Vnity of do∣ctrine in Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme. CHAP. VIII. THe third Prerogate, shalbe Vnity in Doctrine: Certaine it is, that in the Turks dominions, Wherein Mahu∣metisme hath been first planted, and in which the same Religion at this day reigneth, there hath been and still is, Great
Vnity in that Religion. And hence it pro∣ceedeth, that in those Nations subiect to the Turke, there are very few, or no Bookes written among themselues, wherein any diuersity of Fayth, or Points in religion is maintayned and defended; for if any such were written, the Historiographers of their Countryes, Nature, and Religion, would make some relation of them, & would not passe so great a matter ouer in silence. Ther∣fore it followeth, that the Mahumetans, and Turks with a ioynt consent for the most part preach, and practize the same points of Religion, without difference, or contradi∣ction among themselues. Now, how far distant our New Ghos∣pell is from Vnity, it is a world to obserue, into how many Sects, Lutteranisme is deui∣ded and distracted. The first disagrement a∣mong them is, their Account ofTouching the retecting of these bookes, See Luther, in Prafat in Epist. Iacobi &c. Kemp∣nitius, in Eu∣chiridio p. . Adanius Praucis. in Margarita Theol. p. 448. The Centu∣vists, cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. Bullinger v∣pon the Apo∣calyp. c. 1. Canoni∣call Scripture. Luther, and such as are most lin∣ked to him in obseruācy, do reiect (as Apo∣cryphall) the booke of Wisdome, the second Epistle of Peter (as els where I haue noted) the second, and third of Iohn, the Episle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of Iames, the Epistle of Iude, and the Apocalyps: All which Bookes are commonly acknowledged for Canoni∣call Scripture by the Swingliani, & Caluinists. Their disagrementsTouching their mutual reprehensions herein, see Osian∣der his reprehensions, mentioned by Luther, in Colloq. Mensal. idis. Germ. sol. 145. So also Beza in respons. ad defl. & respon Cast allouis Also Beza in Testam. 1556. in prafas. Hospinta in istoria 8. cram. part.  tera. fol. 183. Moliaus in ua Transla∣tione noui Testam. part. 12. fol. 110. Castatio in defens. Trans∣lt. pag 170. Secondly are, touching the Translation of such Bookes of
Scripture, which they all acknowledge for Canonicall. The Translators of it, to wit, Luther, Swinglius, Ocolampadius, Caluin, Biza, Castalo in great acerity of Words, do reci∣procally charge one anothers Translation with sacriledge, corrupting the sense of the Holy Ghost, with making the Tent to leapvy & downe, with actually changing the Tent; sinal∣ly with sacrilegious (for all these are their owne Words) Ethuicall, and wicked proceeding therein. Their next disagreement consists among those, who in a more restrained sense, are calledOf this poins see Ni∣colaus Galiu in Thesibus, & Hypothe∣sibus. Lutherans, for their main tayning of the Reall Presence. Of these men, some are called Osiandrians, others, Mairists, others, Placcians, others, Adiaphorists, others agains Phiquitaries; ech of these holding all the rest for Heretikes. Another disagreement is betwene the Lutherans (so called in a limited sense) and the Caluinists. Concerning which point we may aduertize you, that the Bookes written by the Protestants, against the Protestants, in matter of fayth only and Religion, do a∣mount to seuerall Hundreds, as may be ga∣thered out of Idocus Coccius his Thesaurus, out of Hospinian in his historia Sacramentaria, part. altera; and finally from the Catalogues of Bookes returned for many yeares past, from Franckford. Thus farre I hould it conuenient to dis∣course (in generall) of the disagreements, & Vant of Vnity in Fayth mong our New
Brethren, And now I referre to your owne iudgment (My Countrimen) whether a grea∣terble mish resteth vpon the face of Luthera∣nisms, or of Mehumetisme (to recapitulate a lie) if we respect, touching fayth and Re∣ligion, either Antiquity, Multitude of Belieuers, or Veity in Doctrine. The 8. Parallell; Whether Mahumet, or the Lutherans stand more chargeable, in teaching God to be the Authour of Sinne? CHAP. IX. I Will now descend to parallell, and waigh the particular Opinions, or Ar∣ticles maintained seuerall wayes by Mahumet, and Luther and his Schollers; and so by conferring them together we may obserue, whether Sentence is lesse iu∣stifiable. I wil begin with the Questions Whether God be the Authour of sinne, or not's Mahumet teacheth, That God is not the Authour of sinne; Your first Maysters teach, That he is the Authour of sinne. That Mahumet, or Sergiu did not teach God to be the Authour of sinne, I thus prous. First we find no such Tenet, or Article there∣of in the Alcoran. But if they had taught this Doctrine, that God were the Authour of sinne, they would infallibly haue placed is in their Alcorans Which Books they made (
it were) to become the Catechisme of all their Mahumetan fayth. Secondly, the Alcoran necessarily im∣plyeth, that God is not the Authour of sinne; and this in seuerall passages thereof. For exam∣ple; In one of the Azoara's Mahume calleth God, PiusAzoard . & Misericors. Againe, in ano∣ther Azoara, he thus teacheth: OmnisAzoard 1. recté viuens boni{que} gestor indubitanter diuinum amorem consequetur: Euery one liuing well, and do∣ing Good, shall infallibly obtaine the di∣uine Loue. Now here I demaund; If God be pious and thercifull in the iudgment of Mahu∣met; how can then Mahumet be induced to belieue, that God should irresistably force a Man to sinne, thereby without any Mercy to punish him after, with eternall forments for the same? Againe in this later Azoara, Mahumet, tea∣cheth, that the meanes to obtaine the Di∣uine Loue (as he calleth it) meaning the Loue of God, is to liue well, and to per∣forme works accordingly; therefore it fol∣loweth, that Mahumet thought not, that God would forcibly impell man to sinne, and to do wickedly, or liue badly; seing by this course, a Man was to purchase not the Loue of God (to which this Azoara exhorteth) but his wrath, and indignation. But now to come to your Progenitors, and to see, how they dogmatize herein▪ Your Grand-Father Luther thus teacheth▪ QumodoLuther, in Assert. dam∣nat per Leo∣nem, Art. 3. potest homo se  onum prepard∣re &c. How can a Man dispose himselfe to goodnes,
seing it is not in his ability to make his wayes wic∣ked, or euill: Nam mala opera in impijs Deus ope∣ratur? for God doth worke the euill workes in the wicked? And againe, the said Luther auerreth: NulliusLuther, vbi suprà. est in manu &c; It is not in any Mans power to thinke Good, or Euill, since all things haue their proceeding from absolute Neces∣sity. To descend to Luthers descendents. Swin∣glius thus sayth: MouetTom. rde Prouidentia. Deus Latronem, ad occidendum: God moueth the chiefe to kill; And more: Latro coactusSwinglius vbi suprà. est ad peccandum; The theife is constrayned to sinne. Aretius (a Prote∣stant) in like manner thus writed: DeusAretius in loc. com. loc. 41. pag. 179. excaecat mentes hominum & obiturat corda &c. God doth blynd the mynds of Men &, harden their harts; not only by his sufferance, for this is ouer weake to expresse the force of Obduration. Final∣ly to omit many others Melancthon thus con∣spireth with his former Brethren: The Adul∣teryMolancth. in Rom. 8. of Dauid was the peculiar Worke of God, no lesse then the Conuersion of Paul. Now, let any dispassionate Man in his most retired, and impartiall thoughts, giue vp his Cēsure, whether Mahumet be not far from accusing God to be the Authour of sinne; and whether our Gospellers rest tru∣ly chargeable with so pernicious a do∣ctrine, who ascribe the fource of all sinne to him, who became Man for the expiating of sinne, and whose very Essence is Goodnes it selfe. Can a Well send forth at once, Water which is pure, and Water which is muddy? No more can Sinne, and Goodnes take their
emanation, and flowing from one source or fountaine. Therefore it is no small im∣piety to charge God with impiety; And it is as much as to maintaine, that Light can produce Darknes, and Fire Couldnes; yea it is to transforme God into the Deuill, since sin proceedeth from the deuill. Qui1. Ioan. 3. facit peccatum ex diabolo est. But let vs hasten to o∣ther matters. The 9 Parallel; Concerning the Paschall supper of the Turke, and the Com∣munion of the Caluinists. CHAP. X. THe next shall concerne the Paschall Supper of the Turks, and the Com∣munion among the Caluinists, or Hu∣genois: And let vs see, whether be kept with shew of Greater Reuerence. Touching the Celebration of the Paschal supper with the Turks, we thus reade: The Turks.See hereof Munster Cosmogr. l. 4. pag. 973. Theuet, Cos∣mogh l. 2. c. 26 Postist de la religion des Turcs. pag. 64.65. after they haue kept their Quadragesi∣mall Fast with their accustomed abstinence, begin their Paschall Feast; aforehand purifying their minds of all hate, and maleuolence; euery man that is wronged, remitting the offence, and the party of fending humbly craueth Pardon; That done, They goe vnto their Temples, and supplicate God; Their Prayers being ended, they do kisse the Cheeke of one another, in shew of Charity; They then re∣turne to their Howses; and such, as be of richest
sort, giue Almes to the Poore. Now let vs obserue the custome of our New brethren, in the Celebration of their Communion. They chiefly communicate at Easter, and very seldome at other tymes of the yeare. Which custome, and manner of their Communicating I will set downe in Caluins owne Words, he thus writing ther∣of: Vbi finemCaluin, in vat. celebran∣dae Coenae, pag. 609 dicendi Concronator fecit &c. After the Preacher hath finished his Sermon, then the Ministers of the Word, do giue the bread to the People; and the Elders of the Church (who are the Ouerseers of Mens manners) do distribute the Cuppe to the People; Some few words being spoken, that euery Man shall come thither, in an honest and de∣cent manner. In the meane tyme a Psalme is song, or some Part of Scripture sorting to the Sacrament is pronounced, with a high Voyce. This is the description of celebrating the Communion, prescribed by Caluin himselfe. Now the disparity of these two Paschall Feasts of the Turks, and the Caluinists (so far forth only, as may concerne reuerence, and preparation in performing of them, though both of them be in themselues otherwise most wicked) I referre to the Reader.
The 10. Parallell; Whether the Turks, or the Lutherans are by their Reli∣gion, more obliged to Prayer? CHAP. XI. TOuching Prayer (though their Prayers be most sacrilegious, and prophane) the Turks are more de∣uoted to it, then the Lutherans, and Calumists are. For we find recorded, that Mahumet hath appointed in his Alcoran (only to maske his prophane, and impious reli∣gion, vnder the tecture of deuotion) that fiue times a day, the MahumetansOf the praving of the Turkes Vide Cuspin. de religion Turcarum. shall pray at appointed, and designed times. The first Prayer is to be made, at the rising of the sunne. The second Prayer, about the middle of the day. The third towards night. The Fourth, at the setting of the Sunne; The fyft, some houre after Supper. Now touching Prayer among you Huge∣nots, I referre to ech of your priuate Con∣sciences, how litle it is practized by you. Yea in regard of your seldome vsing of prayer some of you Satyrically terme vs Ca∣tholiks, Superstitious, and dorish Papists, for our prolixity in Prayer. Well, howsoeuer; I refer to the Reader, I meane to such a Man. who hath much been conuersant with you, Whether the Mahumetans (supposing they prayed in a right manner) do come more
neere, then you Hugenots, in accomplishing that precept of our Lord: OportetLuc. 18. semper orare & non desinere. Now in lieu of true and holy Prayer (which is the Embassadour betweene God, and Man, treating for reconcilement to his diuine Maiesty; or the very Pen, wherwith Man cancelleth out his spirituall debts, re∣corded in the Booke of God Iustice:) you Hugenots of France, yea the very Women, and Children among you, can cry out, Allons à la Presche, à la Presche: Let vs goe to the Sermon, to the Sermon. The which after you haue heard (it being ordinarily but a virulent Inue∣ctiue against the Church of Rome, deliuered by an ignorant, and malignant fellow,) Yf your Women (I say) can but repeate some Words of the Text, they repute themselues to be learned, and much conuersant in the holy Scriptures. Poore Soules! how is their Credulity abused? And what punishment are your spirituall Maisters to vndergoe, for their impoysoning of them with their pesti∣ferous doctrines, occasioned through their misunderstanding of Gods most holy Bi∣ble? and giuing to them Liberty, promis∣cuously, and at their owne freedome, to read the sacred Scriptures? In regard of our Salique Law heere in France, (which excludeth Women from all supreme Soueraignty) you know, we haue a saying: La Churone ne tombe passoubs la que∣ouille: The Crowne falleth not vpon the distaffe; I cold wish this sentence might be exten∣ded
also to Gods holy Written Word: My mea∣ning is, that euery silly Woman, (who is sitter rather for a distaffe to span, or with the nedle to pricke a cloath) should be restray∣ned from their priuate reading of the Scri∣ptures; from whence through their falsly vnderstanding of it, they sucke their Soules poyson; their iudgments resembling vn∣proportioned Instruments, not sorting to worke vpon any curious Matter. But to returne backe. Therefore tou∣ching Prayer (my Countrimen) so little vsed by you, and your greedines of hearing an illiterate Companion to spit out nothing, but declamatory Philippicks in the Pulpit, & sacrilegiously to detort Gods holy Word; I may iustly conclude, That the greatest part (it not all) of the practize of your Reli∣gion resteth in your eares, the least in your tongue, as most of your Mortification lyeth in casting vp the white of your Byes. The 11. Parallell; Touching the Proceedings of the Turks against Christians, and of the Protestants, against other Prote∣stants and Catholiks. CHAP. XII. THe next Comparatiue hath refe∣rence to the Proceeding of the Turks against Christians and of Pro∣testants against other Protestants, & against Catholiks. True it is, that Mahumet did
put toCusanus vbi sub à Semptem∣str. & alij. death such Christians (through most wicked cruelty) in Arabia, and other borde∣ring Countries thereto, who would not im∣brace his Religion, and also most sacrile∣giously killed diuers holy Hermites, and others, at the first plantation of Mahume∣tisme. Now the better to obserue the Com∣parison heere made, let vs looke into the comporement of our prime Ghospellers, & some of our Euangelicall Princes. But in discoursing of this subiect, let vs ascend by degrees, and first obserue in part the cariage of Protestant Writers, euen against other Protestant writers. I will not here insist in their dissentions in Fayth (as partly aboue layed open) but I will rest only in their outward proceeding among themseluer. First then, they brand one another with the name of being Heretiks. Thus for some tast hereof, we reade, that Luther vomiteth out these words against the Swinglians, and Sacramentaries. WeLuther contra artic. Louamens thes 27 tom. 2. Wittenb. fol 3. in earnest condemne the Swinglians, and Sacramentaries to be Heretiks. & estranged from the Church of God. Which chari∣table Censure the Tygurine Deuines (all Swinglians, and Caluinists) do thus kindly re∣taliate: Luther termeth vsTyzurini tractcontra suprmm Luthert Con∣fess ag. 1. Condemnat ans & execrablem Sectam &c. Acobdemned, and exe∣crable Sect; but let him beware that he doth not dis∣couer himselfe to be an Arch-Heretike, since he will not nor can brooke to haue any society with the Confessours of Christ. And according hereto Swinglius thus sayth of Luther: En vtSwinglius i tom.  res∣pos ad con∣fess Luthi fol. 78. totum istum hommem Sathan occupare netur. Behould
how Sathan endeauoreth wholy to possesse this Man. To proceed: Our Euangelists do prohibit the sale and reading of ech others Bookes, as HospinianHospinian in histor. Sa∣cramentepart. altera fol. 39. the Protestant confesseth. Yea they ap∣proueHospi∣nian, vbi su∣prà. Articles of Visitation, and enqui∣ry of ech others Aduersaries though all call themselues by the name of Protestants. And which is more, they commit (6) one ano∣ther to prison, and restraine the giuing (7) common entertainment, due to trauaillers and strangers. And which is yet more; They enter into open Armes among themselues, as the foresaid HospinianHospi∣nian vbi su∣prà, fol. 195. & 197. recordeth. But now, it is no less strange to obserue how ready and prompt those of the Refor∣med Religion haue been, in raysing seditious tumults, and entring into open hostility a∣gainst their Soueraigne Catholike Princes. The former Proceedings of this kind in Scotland, the Lomcountries, Germany, Bohemia, Denmarke &c. do proclaime the outrage ous∣nesse of them to the whole World. There∣fore pretermitting them, I wil infist in brie∣fly displaying (as most pertinent to vs) the insurrections, and rebellions heere in my owne Country of France, and all originally for Matter of Religion. Thus shall my Pen reueale (but with intention to preuent the like hereafter) the scars of my owne noble Country; as the Surgeon makes a deep and rough incision in his Patients Wounds, thereby to cure them. First then it is ourr euident, that out Country of France hath been infested with
Ciuill Warrs, begun by them of the Refor∣med Religion (for the maintenance of their said Religion) during the full space of forty yeares and more, vntill Henry the fourth, our late King (the very Prototypon of a valiant, and most worthy Monarch) became Ca∣tholike. for answearably hereto OsianderOsiander Epit. Cent. 10. pag. 688. & 804. relateth, that the French Protestants vnder shew of exhibiting a Confession of their Fayth, came armed vnto the Kings Pallace. That Ciuill Warrs for Religion were re∣newed; and that the Constable of France (be∣ing the Kings Generall) was slaine, and v∣pon his death the Kings Brother entred in∣to his place. In like sort Crispinus thus wri∣teth▪ AfterCrespinus de stat. Ec∣cles. diuers messages sent to the Prote∣stant Princes from the King, but all in vaine; the Warrs had a second beginning, and the Prince of Condy rose vp in armes; vnder whose solemne Pro∣testation these words were subscribed: Deo, & vi∣ctricibus armis. Another ProtestantIn the history of France, writ∣ten by Ioan Serres. writer relateth thus: The Protestants grow earnest, and in all pla∣ces, where they are of Power, they take reuenge of Churches, Images, Priests, and Religions Howses. In like manner, FayusAnto∣nius Fayus de vita, & obitu Claris∣simi Viri, Theodori Bezae the Protestant, recordeth the battaile of Druce, and sayth, that Bez was there present, euen armed with weapons, encoraging the souldiers to fight for the defence of their Religion. We further may reade, how it is registred, that theIn the History of France, writ∣ten by Iohn de Serres. Protestants of France treated touching peace, partly as humble subiects, partly as armed men, lyke to such, who beg an Almes, with their
naked swords in their Hands. Now to shew, who were the Battefeu's in all these Rebellions, and Insurrections, I will produce the Words of the French Mini∣sters themselues, who in their Assembly, did see forth certaine Canons, printed at Berna, Anno 1572. where we thus read in the third Canon: In euery Citty all shall sweare, that they, and their Posterity shall not violate, but ob∣serue the Points following, Canon. 40. Vntill it shall please God (in whose hands are the Harts of Kings) to change the hart of the French Tyrant &c. In the meane time let euery Citty chuse an an∣cient Magistrate to gouerne them, as wel in warre, as in peace &c. Let all Captaines and Leaders ne∣uer lay downe their weapons, as long as they shall see their Aduersaries, to persecute the doctrine of Saluation &c. And yet further: If God shall vouchsafe to raise another Prince, to take reuenge of our Aduersaries Sinnes, and to deliuer his Peo∣ple, they are then to subiect themselues to that Prince, as to another Cyrus, sent to them from God &c. Thus we see, how our French Ministers do indoctrinate their Proselytes in the myste∣ry of Rebellion, and Treason, against their lawfull and naturall Princes; and this only in maintenance of their innouations in Fayth, first disseminated by Luther, and his Schollers. But here let me vse an introuer∣sion, and reflex vpon my owne Country. How much then, O France, art thou depar∣ted from thy selfe? In former times our owne forces vnited with a true coniun∣ction
of mynds, made vs not only formida∣ble to other Nations, but also aduanced our state to that largenes of Empire, which at this day it enioyeth. But since your Gospell (My Countrimen) first got on wing, what se∣cret molitions, what proditious, what euis∣ceration, and disbowelling of your owne deare Country hath this viperous brood of your Reformed Religion attempted? But I will stay my selfe, in discoursing of my owne Country any further. I am loath to be offensiue to neighboring Princes, either aliue, or dead; Neuerthelesse before I end this Parallel, I cannot but in few words touch vpon one Act of immanity, perpetrated by Elizabeth heretofore Queene of England, vpon the Queene of Scots, Mother to Iames, at this present King of England, a peacefull, mercifull, and learned Prince. This foresaid Queene (to whom Nature and Fortune had contributed much, but Grace and Vertue nothing:) This English Semira∣mis (a fitting branch of such a Stemme) exercized an vnheard vnhumanesse and fe∣rocity by putting to cruell death the for∣said most worthy Catholike Princesse; who in her youth, was maried to our Prince Dol∣phine of France. Concerning whom, only Vertue, and Doscent came in not to plead for (for that must not be admitted) but to ac∣cuse her: In which most barbarous Act, a Woman did butcher a Woman; The Regnant, her next Successour; The annointed, Gods annointed; finally a Queene, a Queene.
But as vn willing to soule my Pen any further in this most dishonorable subiect, I will passe to the next Paralle, Only I here referre the Reader, to obserue the cruell, & barbarous proceedings of Mihumet against Christians; and of those of the reformed Re∣ligion, against their owne Brthren, against their Catholike Princes, as also against their Catholike Neighbours; which done, I hope it will appeare, that our New Ghospellers, though (perhaps) they do not fully equall Mahumet in immanity and cruelty, yet are not many degrees short to him therein. And heere I would not be reputed to be of that seuere iudgment, as to charge all the French Protestants with disloyall minds a∣gainst their Catholike Princes. No, God forbid. For I do hould diuers of them tru∣sty and faythfull, though not for such ack∣nowledged by all other Catholiks: So, ma∣ny counterfeite Iewells make the true sus∣pected. The 12. Parallel; Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme more inclines their Belieuers to Vice and Sinne? CHAP. XIII. IN this place I will compare the do∣ctrine of Mahumet, with the doctrine of Luther and his Ospring; And so see, whether of them stand more chan∣geable
in lesning of Vice and sinne, as not reputing it hurtfull to mans Saluation. To begin then with Mahumet; We find him (as aboue I haue shewed) thus to teach in his Alcoran: Vores quotiescunqueAzoera 8. placuerit, duas scilicet, tres, aut quatuor ducite, Et cum con∣tingerit ea non diligere, vnam pro alia mutare li∣cet. Take as many wiues as you will, either two, or three, or foure; And if it happen, that any of them you shall not loue, it is lawfull to change her for another. Wherein Mahumet (I freely confesse) warranteth the perpetrating of sinne; though he might make a shew (though falsly) of securing this his wicked Position, by his owne vn∣lawfull doctrine of Polygamy; to which do∣ctrine Brentius (the Protestant) affoardeth great liberty, as elswhere is made manifest. The like lustfull doctrine Mahumet tea∣cheth in another passage of his Alcoran, say∣ing: OmnesAzoare 43. mulieres iua manui per emptie∣nem suppositas; & amitaetuae, materierae{que} filias, omnes item bonas mulieres tibi volenti gratis suc∣cumbere captentes, licitas constituimus. We or∣daine, that it shall be lawfull for thee, to lye with all such bond slaue women, which thou shalt redeeme by bying; also it shalbe lawfull for thee, to haue the vse of the bo∣dy of the daughters of thy Aunts, either by the Fathers syde, or the Mother syde; yea of all sayre Women, which couer to prosti∣tute themselues to thee willingly. These two, are the two chiefest, passages in the Alcoran, for the patronizing of sinne.
Now let vs looke into the doctrine of our New Gospellers, & obserue, how they teach, that Sinne (as if it were, but an inten∣tionall Notion of the Mynd) is in no sort preiudiciall to the Soule. First then, Luther doth thus strangely oracle in defence of sinne: AsLuther,  loc. com. class. 5. pag. 27. nothing doth iustify: but fayth; so nothing sinneth, but vnbeliefe. Againe; A Chri∣stianLuther. tom. 2. Wit∣tenb. de Capti∣uit. Babilon. fol. 74. or baptized Man is so rich, as that he can∣not loose his Saluation, by any Sinne (how great soeuer) vnlesse he will not belieue. And Luther yet more: NoLuth. in sermonibus. worke is disallowed or condemned by God, except the Authour thereof be disallowed. According to which most licentious do∣ctrine Beza thus writeth: DauidBeza, in respons. ad Act. colloq. Montisbelg pag. 44. & 48. by his adul∣tery, and neurther did not loose the Holy Ghost, and fall from his Fayth. And semblably hereto Whitaker us sayth: Si quisWhitak. de Eccles. controu. . quast. 5. certum fidei &c. If a Man enioy an Act of Fayth, to that Man sinne cannot be preiudiciall, or hurtfull. Thus far for a tast of our Lutherans do∣ctrine touching sinne; where this difference seemes to be betweene Mahumet, and them; that Mahumet alloweth only the sinne of the flesh (to the which a Man is prone by Nature:) Whereas Luther, and the rest aboue alledged, giue the reynea to all kind of Sinne in generall; whether it be the sinne of Carnality with Mahumet, Theft, Homicide, Sodomy, or any other flagitious Crimes whatsoeuer; maintayning, that the com∣mitting of any, or all of them, can bring no hurt or losse to the soule. InterrogateI. .18. gen∣tes, quis audiuit talia herribilia? nough hereof,
seeing much of this matter is deliuered be∣fore vpon other occasions, and respects. The 13. Parallel, Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme do more depresse, and visify Vertue, and good Works? CHAP. XIV. AS we haue ballanced the Senten∣ces of Mabuinet, and Luther, tou∣ching the extenuation and lesse∣ning of Sinne; So in this place we will take into our consideration, whether Mahumet, or Luther with his Pareners do more depresse and vility Good Works, as in no sort conducing to Mans Saluation. And first we find, that Mahumet thus teacheth in his Alcoran, as aboue is alledged: Omnis (1) rectè viuens boni{que} gestor, indubitanter diuinum amorem consequentur Euery man liuing well, and doing Good, shall doubtlesly obtaine the diuine loue; then consequētly his owne Saluation. Thus in this Azoara Mahumet seemes to exact two things to be performed for the gayning of Heauen. One, that a Man shold liue well, and commit no sinne; The other, that he should do good, and practize works of Piety, which is signified in those former Words: Bom{que} gestor. The first Point we haue briefly examined touching Mahumet, and Luther. Now to the second. Let vs see, how
litle Luther and his Sect regard Good Works, and the practice or exercise of them, & ow with all contempt in their writings they tread the worth of them vnder their feete. To come then first to Luther himselfe: He thus teacheth: ItLuther, vpon the Ga∣lathius is wickednes to mai ; that Fayth not beautified with good Works, doth not iustify. And further Luther thus auerreth: ides,Luther, com 1 Pro∣pos. 3. nisi sit &c Excop fayth be without good Works, it doth not iustify; nay it is hot Fayth. So he. And Illyricus, Luthers Scholler, thus treadeth his Maysters steps: It isIllyricus in praefat. ad Romanos. a Papisti∣call Errour to say, That good Works are many respect necessary to Saluation Conradus Schlus∣selburg (so often aboue alledged) writeth. That GoodIn Cata∣log. Haretici in Epist. Do∣dict. Workes are not necessary to Sal∣uation, only necessitate praesentiae. Finally to contract this point Amsdorphius (a remarka∣ble Nouellist) was not ashamed to write a booke bearing this Title: Quòd bona opera per∣niciosa suns ad salut; That good Works are p∣nicious, or hurtfull to Saluation. Thus far now hereof. And here Idem and of you (My Countrimen, Whether you thinke Mahumet) or Luther was more precipitious▪ and headlong in extenuating of sinne and dislowing of pious, and good Works? If you say that Luther and his Party were in∣seriour to Mahumet herein; then I will you to shew, where in the Alcoran, or in any bookes written of the Religion of Mahumet and the Turks, you can find such virulent sayings for the lessning of fine, & depres∣sing of good Worker, as here from ,
and his Schollers I haue produced? Thus to conclude: According to these Mens Principles, the Fayth of our Nouel∣list in respect of Good Workes, may be fitly compared to Mare mortuum, which neuer bringeth forth any thing with lyfe. And so commonly the Soule of such a Man may be termed, Paralytisks, seing it doth not per∣forme the faculty, and operations of a good Christian Soule. The 14. Parallell; Whether Mahume∣tisme, or Lutheranisme seeke more to frustrate the Promises of God, made for reward of Good Works, in the holy Scripture? CHAP. XV. I Will next briefly lay downe the Sen∣tences of Mahumet, and of some of our Great Ghospellers; and see, whether doth more wrong the holy Scriptures, for the vilifying and dishonoring of Good Works: I meane only so far forth, as the Scripture promiseth most immense, & ho∣norable Rewards to such, as practize good Works. Mahumet discouereth his judgment hereof in his Alcoran in these Words: De DAzoara 0. promissionibus in lege, & Euangelio propositis, non est dubitandum: We are not to doubt of the Promises of God, proposed in the Law, and the Gospell. His meaning is touching, A good Lyfe.
Thus Mahumet encourageth his followers to the performance of Good Works, and imbra∣cing of Vertue. But to confront this, and to disanimate men from practizing of Vertuous Works, and liuing piously, Swinglius (see here how In∣fidelity, and misbeliefe masketh it selfe vn∣der the veile of the Gospell) teacheth:Singl. tom. 1. de pro∣uidensia Dei. fol. 371. Si ris ad vitam ingredi. serua mandata &c. He, & quaecunque alia promissa operbus nostrisfacta, sunt Hyperocha, atque Hyperbolae &c. When it is said in the Gospell, Tf thou wilt enterMach. 1. into lyfe, keepe the Commandements &c. this, and all other like promises, made in the Scripture to good Works, are but Hyperbolicall speeches, surpassing the Truth of the mat∣ter, or intention of God, or of our Sauiour speaking them. Here you see the difference betweene Mahumet, and Swinglius herein. The 15. Parallel: Whether the doctrines of Predestination, and Reprobation, diffe∣rently taught by Mahumet, and the Lutherans, induce man more to sinne? CHAP. XVI. THe next Parallell shall touch other Doctrines, differently maintained by Mahumet, and Luther, and accor∣ding to which doctrines, it will appeare, whether Mahumet, or Luther do more or lesse exhort a man to liue a Ver∣tuous
lyfe, and to auoid sinne. These do∣ctrines respect Predestination, and Reprobation. Mahumet teacheth, that these points of Predestination, and Reprobation depend of a Mans beliefe, and of a Vertuous of Wicked lyfe, according to the Azoara so often abou recited: OmnisAzoara . recte viuens, boni{que} gestor in∣dubtanter diuinum amorem assequotur. A Prin∣ciple so much insisted vpon by Mahumet, as that he maketh it his first Azoara in the Alco∣ran: He thus perswading men, that the ob∣taining of diuine Loue, and purchasing of Heauen doth depend of practng of Vor∣, and auoyding of Sinne. Contrary hereto our Prim Gospellers oach, that Predestination, which hath refe∣rence to Heauen, and Reprobation to Hell, proceed only from Gods Secret Will, with∣out any relation, or respect to a Good, or Wicked Life, or to vertuous, or impious Actions; thus they then further catechising their Schollers: That let a man who is predesti∣nated to Heauen, perpetrate neuer so many atro∣cious sinnes, he cannot thereby loose Heauen, or be damned: As on the other syde, if a Man be re∣orobated, though he regulate all his actions in all Vertue and Godlines, yet he cannot es∣cape Hell, and Damnation. According hereto we find Luther (as abou we shewed) thus to dogmaize:(2) Luther, in ssere. damnat. per Leonem. Ar. 3. It is not in ns per to inke good or ill, but all things proceede from alute Nssity. If all things, then Predestination &c Reprobation (which are the chiefest things) proceede from the lyke obsole Necessity.
But Caluin deliuereth this doctrine, more articulately, and in more expresse words, saying: Consilio,Calu. In∣stit. l 3. c. 23. sect. 6. nuiu{que}ue suo &c. God doth ordaine by his Counsell, and decre, that among men some be borne ordained to certaine damna∣tion from their Mothers Wonibe, who by their per∣dition may glorify God &c. And Beza teacheth the same, affirming,Beza  respons. ad act. Colloq. Moutisbelg. part. 2. p. 23. That God decreeth some men to perdition, and createth to damnation PeterPeter Martyr in his loc. Com. Martyr, and others iointly affirme the same: A doctrine most derogatory to Gods Iustice, and which strongly inuiteth man to sinne, and deadeth all Vertuous at∣tempts. Thus we see, that Mahumet is not so large in his Alcoran for perswading man to sinne, as these Protestanticall seuerall do∣ctrines of Reprobation, and Prestination do impell him thereto. The 16. Parallel; Whether the first Compo∣ser of Mahumetisme, was of a more flagitious lyf, and conuersation in man∣ners, then the chiefe disseminatours of Protestancy? CHAP. XVII. IN this place I will descend from the Theory to the Praxis, I meane, from the different doctrines of Mahumet and Lu∣ther with his broode, to the putting in execution the said doctrines; That is, whe∣ther, He, who first compiled the Alcoran,
was of greater exorbitancy in course of life (according to the speculation of their seue∣rall doctrines) then such, as were the Head∣men, in enlarging of Protestancy. To begin then. It is euident, that Sergius by the authority of Mahumet composed the Religion of Mahumetisme; I do heere preter∣mit the ballancing of Sergius with Luther. (as already performed) & will briefly com∣pare, concerning manners and life, Sergius with Luthers chiefe descendents: I meane, with Swinglius, Caluin, and Beza. Touching Sergius his personall sinnes (though I pre∣sume he was a most prophane, and spicked apostata) we reade litle; But that through procacity, and disobedience, he was cast out of his Monastery; and thereupon through liuour, and discontent, ventilated his most blasphemous doctrines. Now first touching Swinglius: His owne Writings do indite, and accuse him of Car∣nality, and raging lust: For he thus confes∣seth of himselfe, and other Ministers his As∣sociates: HocSwin∣glius, ow. 1. fol. 15. verò sunimis precibus contendi∣mus &c We humbly intreate that the Vse of Ma∣trimony be not denied vs, who perceaning the weak∣nes of our owne fleh, obserue, that the out of Cha∣stity is not giuen to vs by God &c. That lustfull de∣sires of the flesh do burne in vs, we cannot deny; se∣ing by reason therof we are become infamous in the sight of our Congregations. And more: CarnisSwingl. Ibid. fol. 110. nostra infirmitatem experti sutuus &c. We haue made tri ill that the weaknes of our flesh hath been (O the griefe!) the cause of our often thamefull.
fall. And yet further: ArsimusSwingl. ibid fol. 12. proh puder  &c. We haue so burned (O the hame!) as that we haue commuted many things very indecently. To come to Caliun, who besides his o∣ther lesse sinful pleasures, was charged with the execrable Crime of Sedoy, committed in Noyon, a Citty heere in our own Coun∣trey for which his said Crime he was bur∣ned vpon the shoulder with a Hoat-iron, as the publike Records of Neyo yet extant, do witnes. A point so cleare and confessed that Couradus Schlusselburg (the often aboue alledged Lutheran) thus discourseth hereof, as also of Caluins most miserable death, oc∣casioned through his slagitious lyfe: DeutSchlussel∣burg. in Theolog. Caluinst. l. 2. fol. 7. manu sua potenti &c. God by his powerfull hand, did so strike Caluin, as that desparing of his Saluation, he called vpon he Deuill, and swearing and blaspheming be rendred vp his wicked Soule. And then further: Haec publicis scripits Caluina objctuntur; videlices de ipsius flagiujs & Sodomi∣ticis lib dinibus ob quas stigma ferio candenti der∣so Caluini impressum suerat à Magistratis &c. These matters are obiected to Caluin by publique writinges to wit of his enormous crymes & Sodo∣mitis all Lusts, for which the Magistrate did seare Caluins back with a burning Iron; de quo dum vixit horrenda narran u Of whime whiles he liued, horrible things are related. Thus far this Protestant discourseth of Caluin. To come to Beza, who, as he was conso∣ciate with Caluin in spreading of Protestan∣cy; so was he also consociate with him, in the abominable sinne of Sedemy. Who, be∣sides
that he kept his strumpet Candida se∣uerall yeares before he espoused her, did al∣so through vnnaturall lust, abuse the body of a fayre Yong boy, called Andebertus, and in compare of his different pleasures, with Candida, and Andeber, he made certaine beastly Verses (of which most of Christen∣dome tooke notice) and in the end of the said Verses, preferreth for lustfull pleasure his Ganimeda Andebert, before his Quene Candida. The Verses thus begin: Abest Candida, Beza quid moraris? Andebertus abost, quid hâc morares? &c. Beza his keeping (as Concubine) Candida before his marying of her; as also his wri∣ting these Verses vpon this occasion, is so vndoub edly true as that the forsaid Prote∣stant Schlusselburge thus writeth of both these points: ConstatSchlusselb. in Theolog. Caluinet. c. 1. fol. 18. Bezam cum Candida qua∣tuor annos consueuisse, ea Concubina viende ante∣quam illam vrorem duxerit &c. It is cleare, that Beza did accompany his Candida as his Con∣hine, foure yeares before he maried her. And con∣cerning Beza his Verses, the said Protestant thus speaketh: Constat BezamSchlusselb. Vbi jupro fol. . obscanesii∣mos versus ad Andebertum Aurelis electum; & cundem tanquam Adonidem à Beza factum esse. It is euedent that Beza did write most obscene Verses to Andebertus, huing at Orleans, whom Beza (by abusing the boyes body) made his adonis. In like manner Hesihusius. (the Protestant) re∣cordeth the same of Beza in these words BezaHesshu∣sius in his booke called Verae & sacae Coutessiours . nefandos amores, illicior concabtur, foornes, food aduloris, sacrilego carna de∣antaui
Orbi. Beza did publish to the whole wor in his sacrilegious Verses his owne a recrable lust, his vnlawfull vse of pleasures, his woring, and fil∣thy adulteryes. Thus far in ballncing these three sublimatours, and refiners of Prote∣stancy concerning wickednes of life, with Sergius the Authout of the Turkish Alcoran. But now to turne my Pen vpon the Premisses, and to you, my deate Countrimen of the Reformed Religion: Such is the de∣formity of this your Reformation as that not∣withstanding you see, that Protestancy doth consist of doctrines, which euen euaporate and ath forth all Libettinisme, and im∣purity of manners; and this in a more full degree, and excesse, then Mahumetisme doth; and that your first diuulgers thereof, perso∣nating in themselues their owne doctrines, do surpasse in liberty of life, the first mper of Turcisme: and yet neuerthelesse you will stil perunaciously insist in your present In∣nouations, with all scorne and neglect of our Roman Catholike layth. Why will you thus cease to be your selues; I meane, why will you abandon the vse of Reason, the Character imprinited in your soules by gods owne hand: FecitGenes. 1. mim ad ima∣ginem suam? You are men, therefore pro∣ceede in your Actions, as men God hath euen setled this priuiledge in Mans Soule, that according to the last diamen of his Vnderstanding he euer those to in his ele∣ction of things that which is best, at least which  bo Why then is the choice
of your Religion will you prefer Protestan∣cy, and Hugenotisme, which in a cleare iudg∣ment is neither good (much lesse the best) not but apparently good, before our an∣cient, and Roman Religion? Must mixed and compounded Miscreancy he aduanced by you, before pure, and true Christianity? Must a Religion, whose Center is nothing but Sensuality (extending its lines to all sorts of seuerall sinnes whatsoe∣uer) be by you still professed, & that sacred Religion of ours, which is LexPsalm. 18. Domini immaculata, be betrampled vnder your feete with all Indignity? Or did God inuest him∣selfe with mans flesh, & suffer a most cruell and opprobrious death for the cancelling of all sinne, and yet would institute a Religion for the sauing of Mans soule, most forcibly (yea irresistably) impelling Man to sinne? Yf you thinke this to be a secure course, & if you will needes still giue assent to these your Thearems, and Speculations of sayth; then my best Counsell is, that you cease to be men; then expung, and obliterate in your Soules the print of Reason; Finally then (d'vne belle gentillesse d'esprit) out of a gallan∣try of resolution, contemne and sleight that admonition of the Prophet: NolitePsalm. 31. fieri sicut equus▪ & mulus &c. And as spurning thereat, say ch of you freely to your selues, Volumus fieri secut equus, & mulus, quibus non  eellectus. But then withall in recompence of this your spirituall madnes, let me intreat you to interest your selues, in that most
dreadfull relegation of our Sauiour:(11) Math. . Discedita à me maledicti in ignem aternum, qui parasus est▪ Diabolo, & Augelis suis. The 17. Parallel; Whether Mahumetisme; or Lutheranisme consist of more an∣cient condeaned Heresies? CHAP. XVIII. TO goe on in my vndertaken Me∣thod. My next Parallel shal shew, whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheris∣me doth consist of more explorate, & condēned Heresies. In the former part of this Treatise, I made a Symbolisme betweene Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme, shewing that both of then did conspire and agree herein; To wit, that both of them were engendred of ancient Heresies: Now here I presuppo∣sing the foresaid combination, betweene them, do by way of parallelling them to∣geather, euidently proue, that Lutheranisme is engendred incomparably of far more old damned Heresies, then Mahumetisme euer was, though I still grant, that in reference to the atrocity of his blasphemies, Mahumet (as laying battery to the chiefe Mysteries of Christianity) did infinitly surpasse our No∣uellists. It is shewed aboue, that Mahumet did bor∣row his blasphemous doctrines (though in respect but few in number▪ yet in waight
and importance most execrable) from Sa∣bellius, arius, Eomius, Nestor, Manichus, and the Donatists. Now in liue hereof. I will demonstrate, that at least sixty Articles and Circumstances of those of our New Gospell, or Hugentisme, are but the same Arti∣cles or Circumstances (and therefore I call them so many Identities) condemned in the firster tymes of the Church, by Epiphanius, Athanasius, Theodoretus, Iereme; Austin, and other Orthodozall Fathers. But because the discouery and vnfoulding of this Point wil require some prolixity of discourse. I haue therefore purposely seposed (as I intimated aboue in the first part) the ensuing Appendix to that end, which I do style, The Hugenots second Glasse; wherein I hope (My Countre∣) you may more clearely see your owne faces. The 18 Parallel; The different respect giuen by Mahumet, and Luther to the New Testament, and to the Euangelists, CHAP. XIX. THe next Parallel shall ballance to∣gether the different respect, which Mahumet, and Luther do giue to the New Testament, and the Euange∣lists, though this in generall by way of Symbole hath been in pat touched. We find then Mahumet (as aboue is said) to
speake thus honorably of the New Testa∣ment: DeusAzoara 5. ius & mseris, prius Testamen∣tum Vetus▪ dces Euaugel  rectas ia ∣ibus tradidi▪ God being prou and rcifull, did first giue the Old Testament, and then after▪ the Gospell, as direct wayes for men  follow. Accor∣ding to which Sentence Csanus discour∣sing of the Alcor, thus speaketh: MahumetCusonus in cri Alcoran.   c. 1. & 14. & l 3. c. 2. approbat Euangelium tradi Iesu Christ, filio Mariae Virgines. Mahumet approveth the Gos∣pell deliuered to Iesus Christ, the Sonne of Mary the Virgin. Thus we see, that Mahumet acknowled∣geth, as sacred, the Gospell,  it was first gi∣uen. But the reason, why the Turks do not admit the Gospell, as they find it now writ∣ten, is deliuered by iblnder in these words, wherein he sheweth the pretext of Mahumet at his first appearing: Christians,Bibliender in praea. Alcor, pag. 3. qui iam à longe tempre Legem, atqu Euang∣lium perdiderum, ū propter discessum Christi,  iam propter mortem Apostolorum, atque discip∣larum, legem suum perfectè doceit Mahumetus, Mahumet vndertaketh, that he will perfe∣ctly teach Christians his Law, the which Christians had for a long tyme lost, oth the Law, and the Gospell, partly through the departure of Christ, and partly through the death of his Apostles, and Disciples. Thus we see the reason to be, why Mahu∣met did not allow, the Gospell, as now it is written; because he presumed (though falsly) that it was corrupted▪ in processe of time. But the Case heere is different with
Luther and his Seede; for Luther Categorically. and positiuely disualeweth three Gospells of loure, euen as they were, and are, first written by the Euangelists themselues; Thus he not transferring the Cause of the suppo∣sed Errours in them, through the corrup∣tion or deprauation of the Originalls of the Gospells (as Mahumet did) but vpon the E∣uangelisti themselues as committing Errouts in them, in their first writing, and penning; so far was Luther from thinking, that the E∣uangelists in writing of the Gospells were assisted infallibly by the Holy Ghost. But let vs for the more particular disse∣cting herof, recurre to Luthers owne Words, who first preferring the Epistles of S. Pau much before the first three Gospells, doth finally in the libration of the foure Gos∣pells in themselues, thus pronounce: TheLuther in serm. de Pha∣vis. & Publi∣canis. Gospell of Iohn is to be aduanced in worth & dig∣mity (as faire, pure, and chiefe) aboue the other three; thus implicitly, and couertly charging the first three Euangelists with errours, and faults in writing their Gospells. In like sort the said Luther thus speaketh in other of his Writings (a testimony vpon other occasion aboue alledged, in the first part of this Trea∣tise.) QuiLuther. in praefat. Epist. Petri. potissimum, & maiore pracateri studio &c. Such Euangelists are the chie, who more carefully teach (then other Euangelists) that fayth in Christ only without our Works, doth make to Iust, and in state of Salization; insinuating in these Words, that some of the Euangelists did tench erroneously, touching the doctrine of
good Works, and Iustification. And thus much for some touch, to make it euident, that Luther had a far more vn∣worthy conceyte of some of the Gospells, then euer Mahumet had; Since Mahumet ad∣mitted them all, so far forth (as aboue is said) as they were first penned by the E∣uangelists, & remayned incorrupted; Wher∣as Luther misprizeth, and reiecteth three of them, as they were first written by the E∣uangelists, presuming (and that truly) that they were not corrupted. The 9 Parallel; Concerning the Mahu∣metane Clergy, and the Lutherane Clergy. CHAP. XX. HEre I will treate of the Turkish Clergy, and of the Prolystants Clergy, and will in part obserue the dis∣parity betweene them; since we shall find, that the Clergy of Mahumet en∣ioyeth seuerall priuiledges▪ which  wan∣ting in the other. For example▪ First weThu. Cosmgraph. Versal. l. 6. c. 8. reade, that the Turks in honour of their Re∣ligion, cannot brooke, that such strongers as do not professe their Religion▪ should en∣ter into their Temples, or be present at their Seruice; much lesse, that they should mini∣ster the Mysteries of their Religion: Where∣ our New Gospellers wil admit such men
as are created Priests by the Bishop of R (whom they teach to be Antichrist) with∣out any new Creation of them, to exercise the rites of the Protestants Religion. And herein it is euident, that the Turkish practi in this point is more conformable to the practice of Christs Primitiue Church▪ (he the Practise of our New brethren are: Since in those times, one, that was Catechimnu only (that is, who was of the number of the faythfull but not as yet baptized) should not be suffered to see, and be present at the celebration of the Mystryes of Christian Religion; much lesse to preach the Word, & to dispence the Sacraments, as S. AustinAustin, tract. 11. in Ioan. relateth, and BezaBeza, in Epist. Theo∣log, p 8. acknowledgeth. Secondly, the Turkish Priests are obliged by their ProfessionSeptem. castrensis de religione Turcarum, cap. 1. Ri∣cherius, l. 1. de moribus Turcorum. to spend more time in prayer, both for themselues, & for the Peo∣ple, then our Euangelicall Ministers either are bound to doe; or actually doe. For the Turkish Pries▪ (as aboue is shewed) are te by Mahumets rule) to pray fiue times euer day. Now how litle our late illuminated Ministers are giuen to prayer; I refer to ch Mans experience herein; seing that among them, akiling Inuectiue (which they ge with haritie of Preaching) must for the most par supply all want of Prayer. Lastly, the Mahumetan and Turkish Priests haue wiues, and such Women are reputed, and taken of their lawfull Wines  like sort the Children begotten on their Wiuer▪ are accounted the lawfull issue of their Fa∣thers,
& may inherit lands, & other goods of their Parents; and all this by the first In∣stitution of Mahumetisme: Whereas if the booke stiled, Schisma Anglicanm, relate the Truth, the Ministers, who in England do marry, are in that respect reputed Adulterer: In proofe whereof, the Children are ac∣counted Bastards by their Municipal Law, still remayning in force in England, and vn∣recalled; So as they are wholy depriued in rigour of Law, from all title of Inheritance. Thus we see, with what Prerogatiues (to pretermit some others for breuity) the Tur∣kish Clergy is honoured, the which in the Lutheran Clergy we find most wanting. The 20. Parallell; Whether the Turks, or the Lutherans may seeme to haue mere erred in their different Beliefe of some inferiour Points of Fayth; and conse∣quently, whether may seeme more to be punished for such their Misbeliefe? CHAP. XXI. THis twentith, & last Parallell shall consist in a Perisma, resulting from the due obseruation of seuerallSee tou∣ching the contents of this Chapter, Chronica S∣rceorum. Parallells aboue expressed; And it shalbe this, to wit, That in regard of diuers of the former Parallells (abstracting only their deniall of the Blessed Trinity, of the In∣carnation, and Passion of Christ; blasphemies, I
most willingly acknowledg infinitly trās∣cending any Errours, belieued by the Lu∣therans;) the Turks may seeme to haue lesse erred, then the Lutherans, and consequently may seeme to be lesse punished for such their Heresies, then the Lutherans, and our Euangelicall Brethren are to be. For it is to be belieued, that such men, who labour (more then others) to depresse in their Writings the dignity of Iesus Christ; who conuitiate in words the Mother of the Redeemer of the World; Whose Religion is ingendred of more old condemned Heresies; Final∣ly, whose doctrines, do more vilify good Works and vertuous lyfe, and do more exte∣nuate Vice and Impiety, then the doctrine of others doth; It is necessarily to be belieued (I say) that these men so more offending in all these points, do sinne more greuously, then other men, who do not in such mea∣sure offend in the same points; and therein may seeme to be worthy of greater Punish∣ments. Now it is clearely euicted out of diuers of these former Parallells, that Luther, and the Lutherans do belieue and write of these Pas∣sages in greater estuation and heate of ma∣lice, and with lesse reuerence, then Mahu∣met, and the Turks haue done. How pro∣bable then at lest is it, that Luther and his Sect, as hauing more erred herein, are for such their Errours to be punished with greater seuerity of paines, then Mahumet & the Turks in that particular respect are? Heere I (say) I ballance the punishments
due to Luther and his party, only for such their wicked proceedings, and not with re∣ference to the torments allotted to Mahu∣met, and the Turks (which no doubt are, and shalbe infinitly greater, and more grieuous) for their deniall of the most Sacred Trinity, and reiecting Christ, not acknowledging him for the Redeemer of the World. To the fortifying of this Parallell, I add, that Luther, and his followers haue impug∣ned (in hostile manner) the authority of Gods Vniuersall Church, teaching that it hath wholy erred in doctrine for the space of sixteene hundred yeares, as may be ga∣thered by his and their charging of all the Fathers since the Apostles dayes with su∣perstition and Errours, (as aboue we haue shewed. Mahumet first contemned the Au∣thority of the Church, but for six hundred yeares at the most: Is not then Luthers sinne far greater, and are not his punishments to be proportionably more intollerable ther∣fore? Againe, certaine it is, that such men, who haue receaued from God greater meanes of finding out the true Religion (if so they ne∣glect, & contemne those Meanes) do stand in a far higher degree of Gods indignation and wrath, then others doe, to whom the like meanes of searching the Truth haue not beene afforded. Well then, not only in seuerall ages before Luthers bursting out but euen after his appearing, God hath vouch∣safed to worke many most stupendious mi∣racles,
in confirmation of ou Catholie Religion. Witnesses hereof (to omit former Ages)So this point con∣fessed of for∣mer ages by the Centu∣rist, Cent. . c. 11. & Cent. 0. c. 13. Ber∣ard. in Visa Malachiae, See Also the History of Mathew Pa∣ris, printed at Tyguro 1589, tou∣ching the great Mira∣cles of S. Francis. are the Miracles exhibited at Lo∣reto in Italy, and but the last day at Sichem in the Low Countryes, in the Prouince of Brabant; The truth of which Miracles done in both those two places, Impudency it selfe hath not the forehead to deny. Which Mi∣racles haue no doubt come to the eares of our Euangelicall men, according to the dif∣ference of the tymes wherein they were wrought. And yet the Consideration of these Miracles (though often exhibited in proofe of our Catholike Religion) is so far from winning ground vpon our Aduersa∣ries iudgments therein, as that the Luthera (acknowledging them, as truly done) commonly stile them, AntichristianOsiander, Cent. 10.11. & sequentib. Won∣ders, and lying signes, as also, prestigiousPeter Martyr, l. contra Gardi∣um. sleights of the Deuill. Now I say, the report of these Miracles as being wrought here at home, were neuer made knowne to the Turks, through the great distermination of Countries. And if they had come to the intelligence of the Turks, in all likelyhood they would haue wrought more efficaciously (for lesse they cold not) with them, then they haue done with Luther, and his Sectaries: So as perhaps that saying of our Lord (with reference to the Turks, and our New Euangelists) might here haue been iustifyed: If inLuc. c. 10. Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the Miracles, which haue been wrought in you, they had done pennance in
sackcloath, and ashes long agoe. From hence then I conclude, that Luther and his Sectaries, as contemning all such true Miracles, stand far more culpable for such their neglect of them, and consequently are with greater seuerity to be punished, then the Turks, who had no perfect Notion of the said true sig∣nes, and astonishing Effects; they being of that force for proofe of what they were wrought, as that we may say of them in the words of the Prophet Dauid: MirabiliaPsal. 91. tua credibilia facta sunt nimis. And thus farre of the Parallels betweene Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme; where we euidently discerne, euen by force of all true Iudgment, and strength of Reason, that se∣uerall chiefe Persons of Luthers Religion haue been far more wicked (at lest as wic∣ked) in their deportment, then the first broachers of Turcisme haue been; And that many doctrines, ventilated and introduced first by Luther, and his false Coapostles, are more pernicious in their owne Nature, and more exiciall to the Belieuers, then are the different doctrines, and Positions to them, maintayned by Mahumet, and the Turks.
That Mahumetisme, or the Turkish Re∣ligion, is first, most foolish or ridiculous; Secondly, that it warranteth all sensua∣lity, and vnlawfull Pleasures; Lastly, that it is most horrid, blasphemous, and damnable. CHAP. XXII. TRue it is, that Protestancy, or Huge∣notisme seemes to stand in a higher degree more chargeable, and in∣iustifiable in the Points aboue pa∣ralleled, then Mahumetisme doth: Neuerthe∣lesse, my proiect in discoursing of the said Comparatiues, is to lay open the deformity of Lutheranisme, or Hugenotisme, and not in any sort to aduance a good opinion to be had of Mahumetisme. For although this later be in some points lesse▪ Euill, yet followeth it not, that therefore it is in any sort Good; since there is a great disparity or difference betweens a Positiue and reall Good, and a tesser de∣gree of Euill. Now therefore for feare, that men should in any fort worthily conceaue of Mahume∣tisme, I haue thought good to reserue this Chapter, for the preuenting of such a spiri∣rituall Mischiefe, wherein the Vglines of Mahumetisme shall summarily and briesly be dismanteled, and laid naked. And for the more perspicuous and methodicill accom∣plishment
of this my designe, I will reduce what heere followeth, to these seuerall Heads. First, I will insist in the fabulous & ridiculou fooleries, which Mahumet and the Turks do maintaine as true. Secondly, I wil shw, that Mahumetisme in doctrine princi∣pally tendeth to the patronizing of Lust, & sensuality, which Mahumet tastes to be no sinne. Lastly, and chiefly I will lay open how Mahumet and the Turks greatest atrocity and blaesphemy consists in the deniall of the most Bles∣sed Trinity, and of Mans Redemption by Christ Iesus. To begin with the first branch, and to gather but dispersedly here and there. First then weCuspin. in Mahumeto pag. 514 Thenet Cos∣mographia. l. . c. 3 Codrenus Chronograph. Zonaras. read, that the spirit of God did descend vpon Mahumet in the forme of a Doue, dictating vnto him, what to write in his Alcoran. The which doctrine while it was promulgated, a fierce and vntamed Bull did run to Mahumet, prostrating himselfe before his knees, and kissing and sicking his Hand. The Mahumetans further report, that the Angell Gabriell accompained with seauenty thousand Angells (so prodigious is this fi∣ction) descēded from Heauen to visit Mahu∣met, being then but foure yeares of Age; mo∣uing the minds of men to giue Credit to that, which Mahumet should after teach, tou∣ching his doctrine and Religion. In like manner Mahumet thus writeth in his Alcoran: EminaAzoara 0. mater Mahumetis, testa∣batur filium Mahumetum nec in vter nec in parto vllum sibi dolorem fecisse. Emina the Mother of
Mahumet did witnes, that her sonne Mahumet cau∣sed no griefe to her, remayning either in her wombe, or at his byrth. See here how this am∣bitious Impostour (emulous of our Sauiours Honour) thought good (to ennoble him∣selfe the more) partly by prestigious forge∣ries, partly by force, to assume to himselfe the like credit and dignity in some of these former relations, which we find the holy Scriptures, & the authority of the Church of God do ascribe and giue to our Sauiour, Iesus Christ. But to proceede. Mahumet further teacheth, that Christ in the New Testament did admonish the Iewes of Mahumets after comming into the World; For thus he introduceth Christ say∣ing: NntiumAroara 4. vobis affero, de Nuncio post  venturo, cui nomen Mahumetus. In like manner the AloranAzoara 71. reporteth, how in the Old Testament also the Natiuity and Birth of Mahumet was foretould. To passe on further; It isGeorgen∣sis de Turca. m moribus. recorded (such are the Portentiue sables touching Mahumet) that at Mahumets prayer, God com∣manded euery Mountaine, or great Hill neere to Mecha, to bring a certaine heape of stones for the building of the Temple of Mecha. And whereas one Mountaine (called Araphat) was more slow in comming then the rest, and seing the Temple to be alrea∣dy finished, the Mountaine did abundantly weep, that it was not present at so great, & fayre a worke; But Mahumet did compas∣sionate the Mountaine, and willed it to lay
downe its heape of stones in a fayre place neere to Mecha; the which stones Mahumet had no sooner gently strooke with his foot, but presently there did rise vp a most large, and sweet fountaine of Water from out of the stones. Is not this strange fooling? But let vs relate yet more. The writersVide Bellonium des singulari∣tes. l. 3. c. 7. of the manners of the Turks record this ensuing fictitious Narra∣tion; To wit, that Mahumet being accompa∣nied with the Angell Gabriell, did once ride vp to Heauen, for the approbation of his Alcoran; being carried vpon a learned beast called, Alborach, (de la grandeur d'en Ausne) of the greatnes, and shape of an Asse (an Asse indeed was Mahumet for forging this, and Asses are the Turks for belieuing it:) The which Beast would not suffer Mahu∣met to ride vpon him, till before he had gra∣uely disputed with Mahumet, and till Mahu∣met had seriously promised the Beast, that he should not be left at the Gae of Heauen, but should enter into Heauen with Mahu∣met. And thereupon Mahumet entred Hea∣uen, and passing through fayre spatious Halls, hanged with Tapestry and Arras, he was at the last brought to the sight of God, who sate in a Chayre of Estate; and yet as the Alcoran sayth, he stood, TantiAzoara . (spatij interuallo, quantum, sagita bis transcurreret) so far distant from God, as an Arrow might be shot at twyce. The foresaid AuthourBellonius vbi suprà. relates, that the Porter, or dorekeper of Heauen would not
open the dore to the Angell Gabriell, vntil he heard the name of Mahumet pronounced. But Mahumet comming into Heauen, he saw seuerall Great Halls; wherein were many kinds of Angells, some bearing the shapes of men, others of Beasts, Horses, Oxen, and Byrds. But inough (if not too much) of these commentitious and incredi∣ble phantasies, which are sufficient alone to discouer the futility and Vanity of Mahu∣mets owne Religion. From whence we may further gather, that Mahumet (contrary to all Philosophy, and Diuinity) supposeth, and dreameth, that God, and the Angells are corporeall, and haue Bodies. In like manner, we may infer now incompatible these Vntruths are with true Fayth, & how displeasing they are to God, since we reade:Iob. 13. Numquid Deus indiged vestro mendacio? Finally I refer the Reader to that madd, and phantasticall Protestation of Mahumet aboue related, in warrant of the Truth of his doctrine: PerAzoara 61.6. & se∣quentibus. ventos inflantes & nu∣bes, & naues aquore currentes; per montem Synai, per stellam vespertinam, per stellas retrogradas & combustas quod non sum damomacus aut Magus; sed Dei Optiminuncius &c. So certaine it is, that Mahumet was a man, wholy made of Sophi∣stications, and imposturs. To descend to the second Point; Which is, that the doctrine of Mahumet wholy tends to Pleasure, sensuality, and Lust, with all warrant of Impunity to the Practizers thereof. For first touching his doctrine, euen
steaming forth lust during a man life in this World, we haue aboue shewed, that Mahumet thus ordaineth in his Alcoran: WeAzoara 43. constitute and decree, that it shalbe lawfull for thee, to haue the Company of all Women which as bondslaues thou buyest, & subiectest to thy hand; as also the doughters of thy Fathers sisters, or thy Mothers sisters; and to haue the company of all fayre Women, who are willing thereto. According to which his doctrine, it will not be imperti∣nent to repeate that other passage of his Al∣coran, aboue related, teaching the same: Vx∣resAzoara 8. quotiescunque placuerit duas, tres, ant quatuor ducite &c. Take as many wifes, as you will, either two, three, or foure; except you feare, that they cannot liue quietly together; And when it shall so chance, that you cease to loue any of them, then it shalbe lawfull for you to make exchange of such an one, for any other. And Mahumet for the greater warrant of his sensuall doctrine, doth vaunt of himselfe in his Alcoran,Azoara 43. that he had a speciall power and ability of body, conferred vpon him from Heauen, (see what bestiality, & filth this miscreant disgorgeth) for the exer∣cise of his lust, as that (said he) he was able to deflowre forty Virgins in one night. O! can that be the Religion of God, which is first inuented by him, whose brutish Anima∣lity (so to call it) transgresseth all limits and bonds of humane Verecundy, and shame? Animalis1. Cor. 2. homo non percipit ea, quae sunt spi∣ritus Dei. We haue heard, how Mahumet alloweth
to man in this lyfe all pleasure of the body, exing all chastity and purity. Now here∣after the Reader shal take notice, that Mahu∣met placeth the ioyes of the future lyfe, in like corporall pleasures, and sensuality; for thus he writeth in his Alcoran: InAzoara 54.65.0. paradi∣so sideles habebant hortos, & fonts, vestientur seri∣is, & purpuâ; puellas habebunt cum oculis claris & immensis quorum albugmes candidssima, & pu∣pilla nigerrimae. In Paradise (he meaning here∣by Heauen) the faythfull shall haue Gardens & fountaines being cloathed in Silke and Purples they shall also haue yong Women with cleave and great Eyes, the brightnes whereof is most whit, and the pupill, or sight of the Eye most black. The Turks further belieue,Bello∣nius, vbi su∣pra, cap. 9. that when they shall arriue to Heauen, they shall pre∣sently be entertayned with a most exquisite banquet; and there shall most fayre yong Women come forth, ech one to imbrace her Turke, and shall accompany him to his bed, and shall enioy the pleasure of ech others body, for the space of fifty yeares, without intermission. How nauseous and displea∣sing is but the thought of this doctrine to chast eares; and how farre discosted, and estranged is this luxurious Course from the Words of Christ? NoGalat. . foruicatours shall inheris the kingdome of Heauen; since the way of pleasure is theMath. 7. broad Way leading to destru∣ction, provising1. Peer. 3. Libery, and transferringIude. v. . the Grace of God into wantounes. Now to come to the third & last branch, which infinitly exceedeth (in impiety and
Horrour) the former two Heads; since this woundeth Christianity in its Mayster-veyne; for it consisteth in the absolute denyall of the most sacred and vndeuided Trinity, and of the Incarnation of God for the Redemption of Mankind. For to recapitulate that, which (touching this point) we haue aboue in this Treatise shewed Mahumet to haue taught in his Alcoran; He there thus further teacheth: IndredulAzoara 12. sunt, qui Iesum Maria filium, D dicunt esse. They are incredulous, who say, that Iesus, the Sonne of Mary, is God. AndAzoara 49 & 3. more: Constanter dic ultis Christianis,  nec genuit, nec genitus. Speake constantly to those Christians, that God did neither be∣get, nor is begotten; thus speaking against Christ the Sonne of God. And further a∣gainst the death and Pasion of Christ: IudaiAzoara 1. Christum Dei uncium nequaquam interfe∣cerunt, sed alterum ei similm. The Iewes did not put to death, Christ the Messenger of God, but one like vnto him. To conclude, Mahumet thus execrateth most blasphe∣mously in his Alcoran: ConfundatAzoara 10. Deus Christianos, qui Maria filium, loco Dei venerantur. Let God confound the Christians, who worship the sonne of Mary, in place of God. And hereupon it is. that (as aboue I noted) Bibliander sayth: PrimsBiblian∣der in praesat▪ Alcoran. p. 3. & mani∣mus error Turcarum est, quòd Trinitatem in V∣tate negant. In like for: Cusaus.Cusanus no cribation Alcoran. l. . c. . & l. 2 c. 14. Richardo in conflegis Sar. and Richardus Ordinis Pradicatrum do thus write: Principalis intentie Mahumet jst persadere, Chri∣tum aque Deum▪ neque . Both
which authorities are (vpon other occa∣sion) aboue expressed. O the Incredulity of Mahumet & his Sect, who will not acknowledg him, whose li∣neaments (as I may say) of body, I meane, whose seuerall Passages of his Birth, Lyfe and Passion are most liuely drawne, and pourtrayted by the pensills of the Prophets in the Old Law. To insist only in some few points. His byrth of a Virgin was prophe∣sied in Esay c. 7. The Place of his birth, in Mi∣chaeas 5. The death of the Innocents killed by Herod, in Ieremy 31. His Miracles, in Esay 35. His betraying by his owne disciple, in Psalm. 41. His preaching, in Esay, 61. That he should suffer diuers Kinds of Tormentes, in Esay. 53. That he was to suffer for our sakes, in Esay. 53. His foure Euangelists, in Ezechiel, 1. His Crueisixion, in Psalm 22. His Resurrection, Psalm. 15. His Ascension into Heauen, Psalm. 14. The sending of the Holy Ghost, Ioel, 2. Thus Mahumet by disclaiming from Christ, as his Redeemer, disclaymeth withall from the authority of the Old Testament; and with like contempt sleighteth the dignity of the New Testament, vnder pretext, that both the Old and the New were corrupted from their originall Purity. In a serious perusall of which New Testament, our Soule is of power to lance forth into an Ocean of My∣steries touching Christ; but our Vnderstanding through the gloriousnes of his worth, is not able to aprehend them (so the stars are darkened through ouer much light) and
our eyes are too weake to behould those radiant beames of his diuine Maiesty. For we therein read, that it is He, who being the comfort of Angells, vouchsafedMath. 4. to receaue comfort from Angells; Who was nourishedMath. 20. with meate, & yet first gaue to meate the Vertue of nourishing; so as when he did eate, or drinke, then did the Earth after an vnaccustomed manner, nou∣rish the Heauens. It is He, in whose Incar∣nation the CelestiallMath. 17. sunne receaued its light from the Earth: (OrieturMalach. 4. Sol Iustitiae) (to wit, from the B. Virgin:) and thus did the Earth powre out its influence vpon the Heauens. It is He (O happy Sinicon!) who, when thouLuc. 2. inoudes him within thy Armes, did infould within his Armes the whole Vniuerse. It is He, who being Lapis Angularis,Act. 4. became Petrail Petr. 2. scandali; And who being HumilisMath. 11. corde, was filiusMarc. 9. Alussimi. It is He. who being PuerLuc.  was before All tyme, (inIohn 1. principio crat Verbum) and but proficiensLuc 1. Sapientia. then enioyed omnes thesaurosColoss. . sapientiae Dei. It is He, Who conuersing heer vpon Earth, did suspend for the tyme his owne Greatnes, thereby the more easily to accom∣modate himselfe to Man; and who ruling the whole frame of this World, subiecteth himselfe (in the patration of Miracles) to the Voice of Man: Obediente DeoIesus. c. 10. voci bo∣minis; Who also being PlenusIohn 1. gratia, & veritatit, semetipsumPhilip. 2. exinaniuit. It is He▪ who being the Light made, Ego sumIohn . lux
mundi, was deriued from the Light vnmade. It is He, who through the mist, or cloude of his Humanity, darted forth beames of his splendour, and brightness Lux in tenebris lu∣cet,Iohn 1. & tenebra cam non comprehenderum; Whose glory was really the glory of the only begotten Sonne of the Father, & yet recorded to be but, quasi VnigentiiIohn 1. à Patre. To conclude, It is He, who inuested him∣selfe with our Humanity, that through an opprobrious death he might saue mankind. O how many Christians haue shed their bloud, in defence, that Christ for them did sheed his bloud▪ Since then the sacred Scriptures do fur∣ther most largly celebrate the incompre∣hensiblenes of thy Mercy (Most Blessed Redee∣mer) for therein we read, that God the Fa∣ther said: PropterEsay, 3. scelus populi mei percusii cum: For the wickednes of my People I haue stro∣ken him; That Christ for our sake was made obedientPhilip. 2. vnto death, euen the death of the Crosse; That Christ loued vs, andEphes. 9. deliue∣red himselfe for vs, an Oblation and Host to God, in an odour of swetnes; That Christ is the1. Ioan. . Propitiation for our sinnes, and not for Ours only. but for the whole world: Finally (to omit infi∣nit other texts of lyke Nature) that God1. Iohn. . hath sent his Sonne, a Propitiation for our sinnes. Seing then I say (Most Blessed Iesus) so many Passages of thy Diuine Word, do euen proclaime forth thy Mercy, I (poore wretch) most humbly beseech thee, not to suffer my sinnes to ouerthrow that in my
Soule, which thy goodnes hath builtt ther∣in: Acknowledge in me what is thine, but absterge and wipe away what is not thine. Thou once didst take mercy on the Wo∣man of Canaan, of Mary Magdelen, of the Pu∣blican, of Peter thy Apostle, and of the Good these hanging vpon the Crosse with thee. Vouchsafe (I humbly beg of thee in all prostration of Body, & Soule) to make me partaker of thy like ineffable commiseration and goodnes. I do acknowledg I haue sin∣ned more highly, then any of these former: For I grant with the Woman of Canaan, my daughter (my poore Soule, I meane) hath been vexed with the Temptations of the Deuill; say then to me (Good Lord) through the intercession of the intemerate Virgin, thy Mother and my Patronesse (and with all make it good) that which thou saidst to the Canaan: O Woman,Math. 15. great is thy fayth, be it done vnto thee, as thou wilt. I haue committed vncleanes; let thy words spo∣ken to Magdelene; that Blessed sinner (though blessednes be incompatible with sinne) be also spoken to me: Thy sinnesLuc. 71 are forgi∣uen thee. I pray with the Publican: God beLuc. 18. mercifull to me, a sinner; Vouchsafe then to pronounce of me, as thou didest of that Publican: This Man departeth home Iustifyed. I haue denied thee with Peter, in my works, and badnes of lyfe: O let it be said of me with Peter, through the force of thy Grace, causing in me a most feeling Contrition:Math. 2. Pleuis amar: To conclude, I haue com∣mitted
theft with the Fuangelicall thiefe (and yet the Euangell brooketh no thiefe) in robbing thee (by committing of sinne) of the Honour due vnto thee; Say vnto me vpon my true confession of thy goodnes, in my last sicknes, and at the point of my dissolution, as thou said, to him: This dayLuc. 24. thou shalt be with me in Paradise. O most mer∣cifull Redeemer, euen by the merits of thy fiue most Dolorous wounds, and bitter Passion, accomplish all this in me, poore sinner. And now before I close vp this short dis∣course, giue leaue (You of the reformed Religion) to my Penne to take more roome to turne it selfe in; and to direct its words to your Country, and myne. Then (O France) who hast begot, and nourished vs all: Blushest thou not, that thou, who heretofore hast brought forth Kings, who for their Piety, haue been honoured with the Title of the most Christian Kings, should now produce men, who are Enemyes to all true Christia∣nity; contracting a most strait combination with that Hellish Mahumet, in misbelieuing most points of fayth, and Religion; As also in maintayning with their owne Prime-Maysters, diuers other points of fayth, and circumstances thereof (both for the specula∣tion, and the Practise) in a more pernicious and wicked degree, then either Mahumet, or his Sect haue donne? Alas is thy Flower de▪ Luce thus turned into a Bryar? Is thy former glory thus ouerclouded with the mist of Miscreancy▪ O what disparity is there bet∣weene
the King, and the Subiect? But pardon (O my Country) this my sud∣den Rapt. There is a nere Coniunction bet∣weene thee and me; It is no weake twyne wherewith I am tyed to thee: Thou hast begot, and brought me forth; Thou hast nourished. & sed me; Thou hast euē shewred down dignities, and Honours vpon me: How then can I suddenly cease to euaporate out my griefe (in thy behalfe) into disconso∣late sighes? Therefore my deare Mother, my Nurse, my Mecanas, giue care to what I shall now say. Are these of the Reformed Religion in thee (I meane the Hugenotes) true French Men, who sweare fealty to such their first Do∣ctours, who thus compart with Mahumet in Religion, or otherwise do exceede him in malice against Christ, and his Church? Noe, they are not; They are Gallo-mahumetani, but spurious, and adulterate Embrio's, wanting the true french shape. Thou dealest most li∣berally with them, in not denying them to breath thy wholsome Ayre; in not with∣drawing thy hand, from affoarding them thy Naturall Benefits; and in not suffering them to statue in thy fecundity: Thou dost charitably, and well herein with them (O my Country) since thou art Mother to them All, howsoeuer they become but Moles, & blemishes to the face of thy Honour. And with this I here end, and giue a full Pause to this Treatise.
AN APPENDIX INTITVLED, The Hugenots second Looking-glasse. Wherein is demonstrated, that threescore Points of Fayth, and Accessories there∣vnto, maintained, and first inuented by the old Heretiks, were condemned by the ancient Fathers of Christ his Pri∣mitiue Church, for explorate, and dam∣ned Heresies; and the Inuentours of them for Hereticks: And yet the same doctrines are belieued at this day, by the Lutherans and Caluinists, as most true, and Euangelicall. And in this res∣pect (as being without any difference) they are heere called so many Identities. YOv haue seene (My Countrimen) how in the former discourse, you may take a picture of your owne Religion out of the Turkish Alco∣ran; glassing your fayth (I meane, with refe∣rence to very many points) therein. Now
in this Appendix. I present to your View, A second Mirrour, or Looking-Glasse of your said Religion: vnderstanding herby, the ancient Heresyes condemned by Gods Church in those Primitiue tymes. In those Heresyes (I say) you shall behould your owne Arti∣cles of fayth; they being coincident, and the same with the said Heresies, only reuiued in these our vnfortunat dayes, by the first broachers of Lutheranisme, or Hugenotisme. By this then we may gather, that what may seeme defectiue and wanting in Mahu∣metisme, to the , and fulnes of an Erroneous Religion in the highest degree, that is supplied and made vp, by the acces∣sion of beliese of many old Condemned He∣resyes. And thus Mahumet, and the Old Here∣tikes haue iointly contributed much to your Reformed Religion; each of them as being rea∣dy to bring seuerall stones for the raysing of the Walls of your false Euangelicall Church. But before we particularize the Heresyes reuiued by your men (in the number of which you shall find (as I said in the for∣mer Treatise) that Hugenotisme doth great∣ly, or rather incomparably, surpasse Mahu∣metisme;) I hould it conuenient to prefixe this ensuing Prolegomenon; In the which I will briefly insist in these Points follow∣ing, to the end, that the said Heresies, (n'ayent pouuoir d'esbranler autres hommes,) may be of lesse force to shake the vnsteedy iudgements of other men.
First, we will take into our Considera∣tion, What Heresy is in its owne Nature. Se∣condly, how Heresy is condemned both in Holy Writ, & by the ancient Orthodoxall Fathers, as being incompatible with mans Saluation. Thirdly, I will shew, that the O∣pinions, or Paradoxes hereafter set downe, were condemned in those Primitiue times, for most explorate Heresyes, and now are renewed by the first Planters of Prote∣stancy. To begin with the first▪ Heresy in its owne Nature, is of that Vility, and Irreali∣ty, as that it is but a denyall of a Truth (and consequently, it is but a Priuation (as blynd∣nes is of sight.) Now, in that Heresy is but a Priuation, it therefore in it selfe hath no Rea∣lity, Entity, or subsistence; but only Is (in respect of its Nature) in that, it Is not: And in regard hereof, as hauing no Efficient, but only a deficient Cause, it proceedeth not from God, whoGs. 1. made all things; For Gods Word was Gods hand, wherewith he created the whole World. From this ground then it resulteth, that Euery Heresy is in it selfe false, and not true, according to that Principle in Schoole di∣uinity: FalsunsS. Thomas part. 1 quaest. 17. est id quod non est apprehen∣dere, Vt esse; & quod est, Non esse. That is false, which is not to be apprehended▪ as it is a thing, but as it is not. And againe: VerumS Thomas vhi suprà, Durandus l. 1. distinct. 80. quaest. 6. non potest apprehendi, nisi apprehendatur sub ratio∣ne Emis. Truth cannot be apprehended, but as it is apprehended as a thing, which
hath a Reall Being. Now from all this the ineuitable in erence is, that euery Heresy (as being a Priuation) resting only in the de∣niall of what is true, is therefore false, and proceedeth not from God, who is Truth it selfe: Ego sumIoan. 14. Veritas. And though per∣haps some Heresyes may be deliuered in Positiue termes; yet they are bu Negatiue af∣firmatiues (as I may call them) since poten∣tially they euer include the deniall of some affirmatiue Truth. To come to the Second Point, which is, to shew the Atrocity of Heresy, both from Gods Holy Word, as also from the learned Monuments of the ancient Fathers; from both which it appeareth, that Heresy, and mans eternall felicity cannot stand togea∣ther; but that Euery Heretick, in that he is an Heretike, is subiect and obnoxious to sempiternall damnation. O then (My Bre∣thren of France) why will you by imbracing of Heresyes, euen espouse your Soules to Hell, since by force of your Creation, that which is the Circumference to your Bodies (Heauen I meane) ought to be the Center to your Soules? First then may occurre that Sentence, or rather commination of the Apostle: Haereti∣cum bominemAd Ti∣tum 3. post vnam & alteram correptio∣nem deuita, sciens quia subuersus est qui eiusmodi est; & delinquit, cum sit proprio iualicio condemna∣tus. A man that is an Heretike, after the first and second admonition, auoyd, knowing that he, who it such, is subuerted: and sin∣neth,
being condemned by his owne iudg∣ment. Thus the Apostle precludeth the Gate of Saluation from all Heretiks. Againe, we find the same Apostle thus to preach to the Galathians: Thead Gol. 8. works of the flesh be manifest; which are Fornication, Vncloanes, Sects &c. They which do such things, shall not obtaine the king∣dome of God. Now, if Sects in profession of fayth do exclude man from Heauen, much more then, Heresies (as being in their owne Nature more pernicious, and exitiall to the Soule) exclude man from Heauen. Hence therefore it is, that S. Paul, speaking of cer∣taine Heretiks, sayth: Quidam1. Timoth. c. 1. circa fidem naufragauerunt; Certaine men haue suffered ship wrack touching fayth; meaning there∣by. that through their maintayning of He∣resies repugnant to the true fayth of Christ, they were not to arriue to the Hauen, and Port of Saluation. To descend to the Fathers. They are most luxuriant in this subiect; but I will content my selfe at this tyme, by retayling some few of their Authorities. S Cyprian thus writeth: Cum DominusCyprian, l. 1. Epist. 6. ad lagnum. noster Iesus Christus &c. Where our Lord Iesus Christ did testify in the Gospell, that those were his Enemyes, who were not with him; He noted not any one Heresy, but manifestly sheweth, that all Heretiks whosoeuer, are his Ene∣mies, saying: He that is not with me, is against me; and he, that doth not gather with me, disperseth. S. Ambrose sayth: NegatAmbros. l. 6. in Luc. c. 9. Christum qui non omnia, quae Christi sunt, confitetur. He disclay∣meth from Christ, who doth not confesse
and hould all the points of fayth, concer∣ning Christ. S. Austin: ImagineAu. l. 4. contra Do∣natist. c. 8. a man be chast continent, ministring hospitality to the poore and needy &c. Yet it he be an Heretike, no man doubteth, but in this alone (that he is an Heretike) he shall not possesse the kingdome of God. I wil pretermit many other Fathers (to auoyd prolixity) and will conclude with Fulgentius, who thus pronounceth of Here∣tikes: FirmissimèFulgent. l. de side ad Petrum, c. 38. & 39. tone &c. Belieue firmly, & wauer not; that not only Pagans, but also Iewes, Heretiks, and Schismatiks who dye out of the Church, are to goe to euerlasting, and inextinguish∣ble fyre. Thus you of the Reformed Religion, do see, in what dreadfull manner both the Holy Scriptures, as also the ancient, and learned Fathers do thunder out their threats against Heretiks; depriuing them of the hope of Eternall Saluation, and mancipa∣ting them to the interminable, & Horrible torments of Hell. Now I will come to the third and last poin; to wit, to demonstrate, and make cleare, that those Opinions, which hereafter I am to recite in this discourse, truly and de∣seuedly were condemned for Heresyes by the Doctors of the Primitiue Church; and now of new are entertayned and imbra∣ced by Luther, Swinglius, Caelui &c. and your selues. For the proofe of so illustrious a Ve∣rity, I will vse seuerall Media, of which the first shalbe this. Vincentius Lymensis, Iene, Ierome, Epiphanius, Philastrius, Austin, Theodo∣ret, and others most eminent and Learned
Watchmen of Christs Church, according to that of the Apostle: Christ hathEphes. 4. placed in his Church, Pastours and Doctours to the consumma∣tion of Saints &c. These former Fathers (I say) by seuerall wayes of writing, much laboured and toyled to condemne and re∣cord for acknowledged Heresies these en∣suing Positions; in which their different cour∣ses they alwayes had their Eyes fixed vpon the conformity of the Heauenly Fayth, first planted by the Apostles: so the Cele∣stiall Orbs are euer changing their places, but neuer change their Center. Now, we reade not, that any other an∣cient Orthodox all Fathers, either in those ages, or in the Ages succeeding, reprehen∣ded these Fathers for their ranging the said Opinions in the Caralogue of Heresie; Ther∣fore it followeth, that the whole Church of God did conspire, and agree with the said Fathers in such their proceeding. For if o∣ther Orthodox all Writers, either of the then present times, or of subsequent ages, had dis∣liked the Condemnation of the said Opi∣nions, they would instantly haue sharpened their Pennes against the registring of the said Opinions; as we find the succeeding Fa∣thers did write against the confessed Er∣rours of Origen, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian. Secondly, Vincentius Lyrinensis, Irenaeus, & the rest aboue specified, were most literate, and most godly religious men; Can any man then of a cleare iudgment be perswa∣ded, that through Ignorance they could
mistake true doctrine, for false and er∣roneous doctrine; or through want of Charity, they would iniustly insimu∣late men within the compasse of belieuing presumed Heresies, they not being He∣resies? Thirdly, those Fathers, who first registred the ensuing Opinions for Heresies, with other Fathers not contradicting or impugning (and therein silently agreeing with them,) did in those times represent the face of the whole Church, as being the Principall Members thereof; Whereas these other men making choyce of doctrines different from the whole Church, did thereby manifestly discouer themselues to be Heretiks, accor∣ding to the Etymology of the word. Haere∣sis, as comming of the Greeke Verbe, , Eligo: And thus they, by their Election; and Choice of strang Opinions, did range them∣selues in the number of those, of whome S. Iohn writeth: Exierunt1. Iohn . ex nobis, sed non erant exnobis. Now then if these former learned and pious Fathers should haue erd in the con∣demning the said Doctrines for Heresies, and in wrongfully anathematizing the broachers of them; then might it be inferred, that the whole Visible, and Primitiue Church of God could erre, and then actuall did erre: Which granted, how then could the Apo∣stles words stand inuiolate, and immo∣ueable, he stiling the Church: Colua,1. Tim. 3. & Firinamētum Veritatis? Or could the praises
giuen, euen by our Aduersaries, touching the Infallibility of the Vniuersall Primitiue Church in matters of fayth, be true? For thus we reade in these alleged writers follow∣ing▪ all being remarkable Protestants:Sarauta in defens. tract. de di∣uersis Mini∣stroum gra∣dibus. pag. 8. Sarauta sayth: Spiritus Sanctus, qui in Ecclesia praeside &c. The Holy Ghost, who presideth ouer the Church, is the true Interpreter of the Scrip∣tures, Therefore it is not a thing reasonable to reiect the authority of that spirit, which presided ouer the primitiue Church, and gouerned the sams by its Bi∣shops. Thus this writer. Kempnitius (thus a∣ueeth:Kempni∣tius in Exam. Concil. Tri∣dent. part. 1. pag. 74. We doubt not, but that the Primitiue Church receaued from the Apostles, and Apostolicall men, not only the Text and Words of Scripture, but also the right and Natie sense, and interpretation theref. To be short, and to pretermit others, In the Confession of BohemiaConfes∣sion of Bohe∣mia, in the Harmony of Confessions, pag. 400. we thus reade: The ancient Church is the true and best Mi∣stresse of Posterīty, and she going before, leadeth vs theway. Thus much of the Protestants Con∣fessions in this point. Fourthly, and lastly, diuers Theorems or Speculations of fayth, and the professours of them (by me vrged) did take their deno∣mination and names, from the Authors of them (being but illiterate, ignoble, & obs∣cure man) the very impression, or indeleble stamp of Heresy. according to those words of S. Chrysostomes ProutChrysost. omil. 3 in Act. Apost. Haerestarcha no∣monita sec vocatur: As the name of the He∣retike is, so is the Sect, or Heresy called. These Names (being imposed vpon the men so belieuing, after the beginning and
first rising of the said Heresies, and taken from the first Coyners of them) were in∣uented out of Necessity, and constraint; that by such their Appellation, they might be distinguished, and deuided from the true, & Orthodoxall Professours of the Christian Fayth. Thus the Manichees, the Arians, the Eutichians, and the like, do borrow their Ap∣pellation from Manichaus, Arius, Eutiches, and accordingly their Heresies are called, Mai∣chenism, Arianisme, Eutichianisme &c. Here now I will pause, & stay my selfe; and as prefixing this short Prolegomenon (as afore I called it) I will hasten to the Parti∣cular Heresies, in those pure times condem∣ned for such, by many famous and worthy Fathers of Gods Church, and now in this Iron Age reuiued with a most strong bent, and endeuour by Luther, Swinglius, Caluin, & others of the later brood; in all whome are iustified the words of an ancient Father: HaeresesTertul. l. do praescript. apud eos mulum valen, qui in fide parùm valent. Now, in reading hereof I would intreat you (My Countrimen) casting of your former sluggish security (touching the presumed certainty of your fayth) to re∣cur in a secret reflexe of mynd to the for∣mer Aduertisments of this Prolegmn, and to what here followeth; and withall to ob∣serue by application of what is deliuered in the first Part of the former Treatise, that the Catastrophe, or Closure of all is, that ug∣tiss is ingendred betweene Mahs, and old condened. Heresier. O how much is
the deformity of that Child to be bewayled, which is begotten of such vgly Parents? Identity 1. But to begin with these Heresies. The first Heresy shalbe of certaine men, who de∣nied the Eucharist to be the true flesh of Christ; teaching, that it was but only a Fi∣gure thereof. These Heretiks were condem∣ned in those ancient tymes by Ignatius (as TheodoretTheodor. in Dialog. qui dicitur Im∣patibilis, Dial. 3. relateth) in these Words: Eu∣charistias, & oblationes non admittunt, quòd non confiteantur Eucharistiam esse carnem Saluatoris, quae pro peccatis nostris passa est &c. These He∣retiks do not admit Eucharisties and Obla∣tions, because they acknowledg not the Eu∣charist to be the flesh of our Sauiour, which flesh suffered for our sinnes. These men were in like sort condemned in the sea∣uenth Synod: So hardly could such men (being immersed in sense) belieue, that the Eye of fayth seeth things inuisible. Identity 2. Simon Magus taught, that God was the Authour of sinne, of whom VincentiusVincent. Lyr. l. aduers. Haeres. post med. Liri∣nensis thus sayth: Who before Simon Magus was bold to affirme God, to be the Authour of our wic∣kednes and deeds? And S. Austin: Detestanda &c.Austin, ad artic. sibi falso imposi∣tis, Art. 10. It is a detestable opinion, to belieue, that God is the Authour of any ill will, or works. Finally the Heretike Florinus taught the same doctrine, of which Irenaeus thus speaketh: ThisApud Eusebium, l. 5. histor. c. 80. O∣pinion is more, then an Heresy.
Identity 3. The Heretike Aerias taught, as EpiphaniusEpiph. Haeres 7. & S. AustinAust. Haersae. 33. record, That Orare vel offerre pro mortuis oblationem non oportet: We ought not to pray, or offer Sacrifice for the dead. Identity 4. The Manichees denied Freewill, according to those words of S. Ierome:Ierom. im praefat. 1. log. contra Pelag. Manichaet damnant hominum naturam, & liberum auferunt arbitrium. The Manichees do condemne the Nature of Man, and do take away free will. And S. Austin;Aug. Haeres. c. 4. Peccatorum originem non tribuunt Manichaet libero arbitrio. The Mani∣chees do not ascribe the origin of sinne to Free will. Identity 5. The Heretike Xenaias, was the first, who denied the Due worship to Images; Of whom Nicephorus thus writes: XenarasNice∣phor. in hist. Eccles. l. 16..27. iste primus (O acem animam, & os impudens!) vocem il∣lam euomuit, Christi, & illorum qui illi placuere, imagines renerandas non esse. This Xenaias was the first (O shamles, and impudent Man!) who belched out, that the Images of Christ, & of those that pleased him, are not to be worshipped. This point Functius (the Protestant) confesseth in these Wordes: XendiasInl. 7. Comment. in praced. Chronolog. it anno, Christi, 494. primus in Ecclesia bellum contra imagines excitauit.
Identity 6. Deniall of Voluntary Pouerty, and mona∣sticall Profession is raught by Vigilantius, of which Iereme sayth: Quòdrou. contr Vigi∣lantiuna pro∣pofine. asseres cos me∣bles facre, qui viuntur rebus suis &c. Where thou (Vigilanus) affirmest, that it is better for a man to vse his owne riches, and by degrees to giue part of them to the poore then to sell all his Posses∣sions, and to part with them allat one tyme: Thou thalt receaue an answere hereof not from me but from our Lord, who sayth, IfMath. 19. thou will be perfect gee, and sell all that thou hast, and giue to the Poore, and come, and follow me In like sort the Heretike Ianuarius is condemned for this doctrine by S.Aust. serm. 49 ex uersis, cap. 1. Austin. Identity 7. In like manner the said Vigilantius is con∣demned for denying Worship to the bodies of Mantyrs, and their Relicks, by S. Austin, thus writing: SanctorumAustin. de Eccles. ogme. 73. Corpora & pracipuè beatorum Marryru resiquias, csi Christs membra sincerisume honoranda credimussi quis contra haue sententiam venerit non Christianus, sed Eunom∣nus, & Vigilantius creditur. We do beliene, that the bodyes of Saincts, but especially the Relicks of the Martyrs, are most sincore∣ly to be honoured, as the mēbers of Christ; Yf any one shall impugne this doctrine, he is to be accounted not a Christian, buran Eunemian, and Vigilantian.
Identity 8. The deniall of the Necessity of Childrent Baptisme, is recorded of the Pelogians, by Inne∣centius in these words: Illud veroInnocen. in rescript, ad Milcuitan. Concil. post med. quod vo∣stra Fraternitat cos asserit praeditare, paruales aeternae vitae praemijs, absque Baptismatis gratia posse donari perfatuum est. That is most simply spoken, which your Brotherhood affirmes the Pelagians to teach, that litle Children may be on dued with the rewards of Eter∣nall Life, without the Grace of Baptisme. The same is in like sort condemned in those Heretiks, byAugust. Haeres. 88. &, contra Iu∣lian. Plag. l. 6. c. 7. S. Austin. Identity 9. The deniall of Remission of sinnes by Bap∣tisme, is condemned in the Manichees, as ap∣peareth from the Confession of the Prote∣stant writer Whitakerus, thus saying: PeccataeWhita. l. contra Du∣raeum. p. 883. remini & gratiam conferri in Baptisme, ne∣gare soliti sunt Manichat. The Manichees are accustomed to deny, that sinnes are remit∣ted, and Grace conferred in Baptisme. Now how the Protestants (though not all) are interessed in this doctrine of the Manichees, may appeare from the small account they make of Baptisme: of which point peruse the former Treatise. Identity 10. The deniall of our ability in keeping the Commandement, was taught by certaine He∣reti of hose dayes, but in pgned by S.
Ierome, who thus writeth hereof: ExceramerIerom, in explanat. Symbol. ad Damasum. blasphemiam corum, qui dicunt impossibile aliquid hoturni à Des prace ptumsesse. We accurse the blasphemy of those Heretikes, who reach, that any thing, which is impossible, is commanded to man by God. Identity 11. The deniall of the B. Sacraments reserua∣tion for some dayes after, was taught by the Authropomorphyts, of whom Cyrill thus spea∣keth:Cyril ad Cerosyrium. I here say, they say (meaning these Heretiks) that the Misticall blessing is vnprofi∣table to sanctification, if any remnants thereof be reserued, till the day following; But they dote in affirming so; for Christis not made another, neither shall his Body be changed; but the Vertue of Bene∣diction, and liuely Grace doth ouer cominue in it. Identity 12. Diuersity of merit of works, was denyed by the Heretike Iouinian, whom S. Austin bran∣deth in these words: Iouiniam damnamusAust. do Temp. ser. 198. errorem, qui dicit unllain in futuro meritorum di∣stantiam. We condemne the Errour of Ioui∣nian, who affirmes, that there is no dispari∣ty of merits, in the tyme to come S. IeromeIorom l. 1. aduers. Ioui∣nian. c. . also chargeth Iouinian with the same Heresy. Identity 13. The deniall of enioyned times of Pen∣unce, was taught by the Heretike Alldinn, of whome TheoderetTheod. l. 4. bared. Pab. de Au∣nis. thus speaketh din∣de
Confessis &c. They (Andians) giue remission to such, as are confessed, without prescribing tyme for Pennancé, as the Law of the Church comman∣deth. Thus Theodoret. Identity 14. The deniall of Single and vnaried lyfe in the Clergy is taught by the Heretike Vigi∣lantius, whom S. Ierome condemneth in this sort: Quid faciuntIerom. contra Vigi∣lant. c. 1. Orientis Ecclesiae? Quod Aegipts, & sedis Apostolica? Quae aus Virgines Cle∣ricos accipiunt, aut continentes; aut si vxeres hahue∣rint, maritesse desinunt. What do the Chur∣ches of the East herein? What the Churches of Egypt, and of the Apostolicall Sea? The which do take and allow to be of the Cler∣gy, those, who are Virgins, or at lest conti∣nent; or if they haue wyues, do neuerthe∣les cease to liue as maried men. Identity 15. That Concupiscence is a sinne, and not taken away by Baptisme, but as it were cast a sleepe by fayth, is condemned in Proclus, whom Epiphanius introduceth thus speaking: Con∣statEpiphan. haeres. 14. contrahi quidem, ac sopiri per fidem nunc peccatum Concupiscentiae, vine frectus noxtos pro∣ducat, non tamen radicis us tollitur. It is euident, that the sinne of Concupiscence still remay∣neth, being cast a sleepe by sayth, yet so, as that it is not pulled vp by the roote. Thus Proclus: Which very doctrine is renewed byMelath. in loc. com. Melacho, andCalu. l. 4. Instit. c. 15. , 10. Caluin.
Identity 16. Ouerthrowing of Altars, is condemned in Donatus by Optatus; who writing against the Donatists, thus sayth:Optatus l. 6. contra Donatistas. Quid est tans sacrile∣gum, quàm Altarin Des (in quibus vos aliquando obtlistis) frangere, raders, remouere? What is so sacrilegious, as to breake, to cast downe, & remoue the Altars of God, vpon which you (Donatists) haue sometimes offered vp sa∣crifice? &c. Quid est enim Altare &c. For what is an Altar, but the Scate of the Body and bloud of Christ? Quid vos offenderit Christus, &c. In what hath Christ offended you, whose body and bloud do remnine vpon the Altar for a certaine Season? Identity 17. Denial of Chrisme, or Confirmation by a Bi∣shop, to the Baptized, was condemned in the Nouatians; For Eusebius thus speaketh of Nouatus, being baptized: NequeEuseb. ist. l. 6. c. 35. caetera, quibus post baptismum (secundum Ecclesiae Cano∣nem) imbui opertuerat, acquisiuit; neque Domini sigillo b Episcopo obsignatus fuerit: quo quidem neuti quam potitus, quoodo quaeso, spiritum san∣ctum adeptus est? Neither did Nouatus seeke to haue those things, which (according to the Canon of the Church) he ought to haue af∣ter Baptisme; Neither was he signed with the seale of our Lord by a Bishop; the which he not enioying, how could he ob∣taine the Holy-Ghost? TheodreTheod. l. 3. Haret. b. also chargeth the Nouatians herewith.
Identity 18. Exorcisms, and exafflation, was denyed by Iulianus the Pelagian, of whom S. Austin thus relateth: IulianusAug. de nupt & Con∣cupis. l. 2. c. 2. antiquissiman  Traditionem nefariscrimine aspget, qu exer∣cizantur, & vidixi, exufflantur parul. Iulanus doth cast a wicked aspersion vpon the most ancient Tradition of the Church, by force wherof litle Infants are exorized, and (as I haue said) eathed vpon. Thus S. Austin. Identity 19. That Adam lost the Image of God, was maintayned by the Origenists, but condem∣ned by Epiphanius, thus writing: AtEpiph. hoeres. 64. vero quòd secundum Imaginem est. Adam peridisse di∣cit. Origen affirmeth, that Adam did loose that, which was according to the Image. And againe: EtEpiph. Haeres. 70. Vide. quòd corr se corum qui dicnt Adam id, qu secndm I∣ginem Dei, perdidisse. Benold, ow the words of those men (he meaning the Origents) fall away, who maintayne, that Adam did loose that, which was according to the I∣mage of God. Now this Heresy of the Ori∣genists is reuiued by Caluin. who thus ex∣presly writes of Adam: OblterataCalu. l. . Instit. c. . sect. 1. fuis in o calestis Image: as also by IllyricusLib. de orig, Pcat. Identity 20. The Visibility of the Church was denied by the Donatists, whom S. Austin reproued as being Hereticall, in that they labored to
certaine texts of Scripture: Vt ea (sayth this Father) detorquereAust. de Vnitat. Ec∣clesiae c. 1. in Ecclesiam Dei, vt tanquam defecisse & perijsse de too orbe videa∣tur: to the end, to misapply them against the Church of God, that it might be thought to haue suffered a defection, and to haue pe∣rished out of the whole world. And accor∣ding hereto this Father alledged the Dona∣tists owne words (the very dialect of the Protestants of these tymes,) which are these: ApostatquitS. Aug. repeateth this saying of the Dona∣tists, in Psal. 101. con. 2. & perijt Ecclesia de ommbus Gentibus. The Church of Christ hath apo∣statated, & perished away out of all Coun∣tryes. To the which words S. Austin thus answereth presently: Hoc dicunt quim illa non sunt. O impudentem vocem! They speake this, who are not in the Church. O shamelesse tongue of theirs! Thus far I haue proceeded in shewing, that twenty mayne Articles of Protestancy were condemned in the Primitiue Church by the ancient, learned, pious and Ortho∣doxall Fathers of those tymes; Which Fa∣thers stood as so many Centinells to discouer the approach of any new arising Heresy; and being discouered, were as many Spiri∣tuall Captaines, ready with their Pennes to encounter the same. I haue thought good (you see) in the former Instances, (though with some tediousnes) to set downe the Fathers condemnation of those Heresyes in the Fathers owne Words, thereby to assure you (My Countrimen) of my Candour, and Integrity herein; for I hope to proue none
of those. Qui mendaciorum funiculisHester c. 16. o∣nautur subuecriere. Heere now shall follow Faury more Points of Protestancy and other circumstan∣ces concerning Protestancy, in like manner professed by the Heretiks of those ancient tymes, and registred for Heresyes & Errours by the said former lights of Gods Church. In setting these fourty downe, I will only rest (for greater expedition) in the refe∣rences of the Fathers Books and Writings, wherin they are for such condemned, with∣out expressing their particular words of condemning them. I hope you, or any iudi∣cious Reader, will rest assured, that I vse no fraud, or calumny herein. And if any man shall thinke otherwise, him I prouoke her∣by to recurre to the Fathers bookes them∣selues, for the greater triall of my plaine and vpright deportment. But I should presume this Admonition of myne to be lesse need∣full, considering, that in the former twenty Protestant Articles, being more weighty, then most of these following, he may see, how fully I haue displayed the condem∣ning of them, euen from the Fathers owne Sentences. Identity 21. Well then, the one and twentith Article shalbe, the deniall of the Diuills to be really cormented at the Relicks, & monumēts of Mar∣tyrs; This point was condēned in Vigilātius, as S. Ambrose,Ambr. serm. 93. de initent. Cor. Geruas & Protasij, & S. IeromeIerom. contra Vigi∣lantium. do testify.
Identity 22. The referring of the Churches Miracles to Witchoraft, was condemned in the Arians, asVictor in persecus. Vandal. Victor recordeth. And do not the Cen∣turists.Cent. 4. col. 1445. &Osiander. Cent 10.11.12. &c. Osiander (all Protestants) seeke also to auoyd the force of Miracles performed in our Catholike Church, by sti∣ling them, Antichristian, and lying Wonders? Identity 23. The deniall of the Deuills flying away at pronouncing of the Name of Iesus; and at the signe of the Crosse, was condemned in the seduced of those times, by the Fathers, as TheodoretTheod. hist l. 3. c. 3., & ArnobiusArno∣bius contra gentes, l. 10. do witnesse. Indentity 24. The affirming, that the Godhead of Christ did suffer in his Passion, was condemned in Eutiches. The same doth Luther, and his schollers teach, as appeareth in the former Treatise. And MusculusAs Che∣cauorius a Protestant, witnesseth. in like manner teacheth the same. Identity 25. The deniall of the Reuerence to the holy Crosse, condemned in Probianus, as the Tripar∣tite HistoryHistor. Tripere. l. 8..89. witnesseth. Identity 26. The affirming of the Ignorance in Christ, was condemned in Themistius, and in the
Agneites Herotils (who tooke their Name vpon this their Heresy) as we read in S. AmbroseAm. l. 5. de fide. cap. 8., andGrag. l. 8. Epist. 42. S. Gregory. Identity 27. The deniall of Visible Sacrifice, was con∣demned in the Manichees by S. AustinAugust. tom. 6. cont. Auers. leg. & Proph. c. 19. & Tom. 6 cont Fau∣stum. Ma∣nich. l. 20. c. 18. as himselfe witnesseth. Identity 28. The Appointed fasts vpon Sunday, was con∣demned in the Arians; of which point seeEpiphau. Haros. 75. Epiphanius; and the first Councell of Car∣thageC. 64.. And do not many of our more Precise Caluinists chuse to make their firsts vpon Sundayes, rather then vpon any other dayes? Identity 29. The deniall of the Mixture of Wine and water in the Chalice, was condemned in certaine Heretiks, who would not allow such mixture in the Celebration of the Eu∣charist, asTheoph. in Iohn. 1. Theophlac witnesseth. Identity 30. Absolute Reprobation was houlden by certaine Heretiks, and condemned by Vin∣centiusVin. Lyrin. aduer. Haeres c. 34. Lytinensis, and S. AustinAug. ad artic. fibi fals imposis. art. 10.. The same condēned in Florinus, byEuseb. hist. l. 5. c. 3. Eusebius. Identity 31. That there is  Originati inne, especial∣ly in the children of the faythfull, was
taught by PelagiusSo af∣firmeth S. Aug. l. . con∣tra lulia. (as in the former Treatise is shewed) do teach the same. Identity 32. The Arians taught, as EpiphaniusEih. Idaeros. 69. rela∣teth, that the Sonne of God was lesser then his Fa∣ther; The New Arians in Polonia, Transiluania, and other Prouinces (who are all Protestants, or rather Caluinists) teach the same. Identity 33. The Ciuill Magistrats Clayming of Eccle∣si isticall Primacy, was condemned in the Emperours Coistantius and Valentinianus; see S. AthanasiusAthan.  Epist ed foliear. hereof, andAmbr. Epist. 32. & 3. S. Ambros. Identity 34. The Assembling of Councells without the Sentence and Authority of the Roman Bi∣shops, was condemned in the Arians, and Dioscorus. See Histor. Tripart.Tripart. l. 4. c. 9., andSocrates, l. . c. 5. Socrates. Identity 35. The demolishing and impropriating of Mo∣nasteryes to secular vses, was condemned by theCahon. 3. Councell of Chalcedon. Identity 36. The pretented sufficiency of only Fayth. was condemned in Eunomius, and Simon
Magus. See hereof TrenausIren. ad∣uer. Haeres. l. 1. c. 20., TheodoTheod. de Haeres. Faballs, l. 1. c de Simons., and S.Aust. haeress. 54. Austin. Identity 37. The eating of the flesh in , was con∣demned in the Aerians, and others, as Epipha∣niusEpiph. haeres. 75. S. AmbroseAmbr. serm. 25.34.36., and the eight of CouncellCan. 9. and the Lao∣diceā Councell C. 0. of Toledo do witnesse. Identity 38. The affirming of our Iusties, not to be an inherent Grace, or Quality, but extrinsicall, and consisting only in remission of sinne, was condemned in the Pelagians, and others, as CelestinusEp. 1. c. 10., ChrysostomeChrys. hom. 3. de po∣nit., S. AustinAust. Epist. 100. act Bonifacium., and the MileuitanCanon 3. Councell do re∣cord. Identity 39. The deniall of Christs descording into Hell was condemned in certaine ancient Here∣tiks, as S. AustinsAust. Epist. 57. ad∣ord. & ep. 99. ad Euno∣ditim. teacheth. Identity 40. The allowing of Mariage againe, in ease of diuorce vpon Adultery, was condemned in cer∣taine ancient Heretiks, by the old Councell of EliberisElib. Ca∣non. 9., by the Councell Milnit anumMileuit. c. 17., at which S. Austi was present, and by S.Ierom in epist. ad Ocea∣num de obi∣tu Fabiolae. Ierome. Identity 41. The Reiecting of ancient Fathers, and Anti∣quity,
was condemned in the ancient Here∣tiks, by S.Aust. om. 7. contra, Il, Pel. l. 2. c.  l. 1. c. 2. Austin. Identity 42. The denying of the Bookes of Sapieutid, the Machaeas, and certaine Parts of Dael, to  Canonicall, was condemned in certaine ancient Heretikes, as S. AustinAug. l. . de praedest. Sact. c. 14. witnes∣seth. And touching Daniell being reiected, see S.Ior.  Apol. . ad. rs. Russinis. Ierome. Identity 43. The Vrging of 1. T. 4. against Absti∣nence, and singl lyfe of the Clergy, and of ac∣counting the same to be Manichisme, was condemed by S.Tou∣ching Absti∣nence, see S. Austin, con∣demning the deniall of it in Faustus▪ the Mani∣ee▪ l. 3. c. . con. Pst. and touching single lyfe, see S. Austin contra das, Epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2. Austin. Identity 44. The expounding of that Text: I and the Father, are One, Ioah. 10. to be one in Will▪ and not in Substance, was condemned by all an∣cient Fathers, who ha commented vpon that place; yet receaued by CaluinCaluin, in Ioa. c. 10. Whi∣takerusWhi contra amp∣a. 8., and most oier Caluinists. Identity 45. The Condemning of the ancient Prima∣ of the  Church▪ was condemned in Iohn Bishop, of Constanti, as S. GregoryEpist. . ad Eus∣iuin. witnesseth. Identity 46. The affirming, that the Clergy is to be ordayned by popular Election, Was condem∣ned
by the ancient Fathers of the LadiceanCan. . Councell. Identity 47. The Vndertaking of Ecclesiasticall sanction, without Ordination by a Bishop, was condem∣ned in certaine Old Heratiks, as SocratesHist. l. . c. 10. relateth, as also by TheodoretTheod. l. 2. c. 8., and S.Cypr. l. 1. Epist. . ad Magnum. Cyprian. Identity 48. The insisting vpon Only Scripture without Tradition, was condēned in the ancient He∣retiks, by S. AustinAust. contra Maxi∣min.. & TheodoretTheodor. Dialog l. 3. c. . & 4.. This point was further partienlarly con∣demned in Nestorius, and Dioscorus, as the second Councell of NiceConcil. Nic. Act 1. witnesseth. Identity 49. The denial of a Triple Immersion in Bap∣tisme, was condemned in Eunomius, as Theo∣doretIn Hae∣ret. Fab. l 4. de  &c. witnesseth. Identity 50. The neglect of Kneeling at time of Prayer. in the Church, and at the Priests benediction, was condemned by S.Chrysost. homil. 40. ad Popul. Au∣tioch. & in Act. Apost. homi. . Chrysostome. Identity 51. The Prophaning, and contempt of San∣ctuaryes was condemned in Bonifacius, as S. AustinAuct. to. 2. Epist. 17. ad ∣fac. & dec∣uit. Dei. l. 2. c. 4. relateth.Socra. hist. l. 6. c. 5. The like doth Secrates (98) witnes, and ConciliumCan. 29. Agathense.
Identity 52. The forbidding to disinherit our selues, of our Posterity, for the Churches vse, was condemned in the wicked Tyrants, byPru∣dent. in bym. de S. Leuren∣. Prudentius. Identity 53. The obiecting of the Epistle to the Hebrews (cap. 10.) against Sacrifice, is condemned by S. Chrysostome, S. Ambrose, Occumenius, and Theophilact, in their Commentaries in Hebr. c. 10. And yet are some Texts produced out of this Chapter by the Caluinists at this day, against Sacrifice. Identity 54. The affirming of Pharo's Induration, was condemned in some ancient Hereticks, byPhilast. l. de Haeresib. Haeres. 77. Philastrius. Identity 55. The restrayning of the Text in Genesis, Cap. 4. touching Cains dominion ouer sinne, was condemned by PhilastriusThilast. de Haeresib. Hae∣res. 80., and S.Aust. de ci∣uitat. Dei. l. 85. c. 7. Austin. Identity 56. The deniall of. the Epistle to the Hebrews, was anciently condemned by PhilastriusHaeres. . Which Epistle is in like sort reiected at this present, by many Lutherans, as is shewed aboue in the former Treatise.
Identity 57. The deniall of the Apocalyp by the He∣retiks Alogiani, was condemned by S. AustinAust. de Haer. Haeres 30., and EpiphaniusEpiphan. Haeres. 3. The same booke is not accounted Canonicall by Luther, and some other Lutherans, as may appeare in the former discourse. Identity 58. The obiecting (in respect of the Sacra∣ment) the grosse, and Carnall ating of hu∣mane flesh (the which Obiection the Sacra∣mentaries make at this present) was con∣demned by IustinusIustinus, in colloq. cu Triphone. Martyr, TertullianTertull. in Apolog. c. 7., OrigenOrigen. l.  contra Cl∣sum., EusebiusEusebius Histor. l. 5. cap. 1., PrudentiusPruden∣tius, in Hy∣no oe S. L∣rentio., and others. Identity 59. Appearing Innouation, without comming out from of an Elder Society, was condemned in the ancient Heretikes, by VincentiusVincent▪ aduers. Haer. c.  c. & . & 34. Ly∣rinensis, S.Aug. l. 3. de Baptism. con∣tra Donat. Austin, and S.Ierom. contra Lu▪ in fine. Ierome: And yet the Lutherans (though late appea∣ring) cannot proue, that they came out (touching doctrine) from any elder So∣ciety. Identity 60. Lastly, which heere I will alledg; The obiecting of many Parts of our Christian Reli∣gion to be taken from the Gills (the which KemptiusKemp∣tius, in Exa. Con. Trid∣prt. 3. pag. . & 8., and Repids (an English
In his booke de Ro∣men. Eccles. Idolas. pa. 10.24.. &c. Writer) do obiect against vs Catholiks) is condemned by S. AustinS. Austin condemneth this in the Manichees, contra Faust. Maniech l. 0 . & . and de Ciuitate Dei, l. 10. c. 19. and Epist. 49., TertullianTertull. l. de Praescrip. cap. 40., S. IeromeIerom. l. . contra Iouin. post medium., and OrigenOrigen, l.  contra Celsum, ante medium.. Loe here (My Countrimen) I haue presen∣ted to your eye, a large Glasse, to behould your fayth in, made of threescore Protestan∣ticall Points, (formees sur le moul des anciens Heretiques) wrought vpon the Anuise of the old Heretiks, and condemned for Here∣sies by the Church of Christ in those dayes. What can you say hereto? Will you vrge, that howsoeuer this be, yet this proueth your Religion to be ancient? Yf any of you be of such transparency of iudgment, as thus to reply; let him remember, that as these his doctrines were ancient; so also that they were anciently condemned. And we ought to haue as great a loathing of an∣cient? Heresies, as of but yesterdayes Nouel∣lismes. Secondly, we are to obserue, that Prote∣stancy was not nre in being in its full Orbe in those dayes; Because only this, or that point thereof, was houlden by this, or that Anonymus, or obscure Fellow: Whereas now all the former Points aboue rehearsed are become (as it were) so many seurall In∣gredients, of all which the Compand of your Reformed Religion is made. And the men be∣lieuing in those firster dayes the said Points, were in compare of the worth, and celsi∣tude of the Fathers condemning them, but as Bow thrubs,  to be moden vpon by euery on, in respect of  high Cedi of .
Well, heere I am to acquain yet, that some of our more learned Aduersaries, who are not a litle moued through the great scandall risen against them, for their owne knowne Opinions, so condemned by the Primitiue Church, haue therefore, not as in clearing of themselues(which they can∣not) but by way of recrimination, endea∣uored to returne the like vpon vs; thinking insufficient honour, if they can be able, but to leaue things perplexed, and doubtfull▪ They hearing themselus herein like to that man, who in a Duellism, or single Combat, doth not so much expect to get an absolute Victory ouer his Enemy; but holds it glo∣ry inough, if he can come off with giuing as many, and as dangerous wounds, as him∣selfe receaued. O Weaknes of iudgment▪ since Truth consisteth in a fe establish∣ment of it selfe, and not in a seeming redar∣gution of the Contrary Doctrine. Accor∣ding to this Method some of our Aduersa∣ries haue pretended, that many of our now Catholike. Opinions were in like manner condemned by the ancient Fathers of the Primitiue Church. I will particularly insist in the writings of one Willetts, a Prote∣stant of England, making choice of some few of his Instances of this nature, thereby to shew the impost, pesidy, and want of all Ingenuity, and vprightes in such his proceedings. This Authour then in hi booke cati∣led: Intrastyln Papism, giueth an example
of a Woman, saying: Harcellina (the companion of Carpocrates) was noted of Heresy, in that the vsed worship to the Images of Iesus and of Paul, as S.August. Haeref. 7. Augustine witnesseth. I answere, that this Authour vseth fraud herein; For S Au∣stins words are: Colebat Imagines Iesu, & Pauli & Homeri, & Pythagorae, adorando incensum{que} ponendo. She did worship the Images of Iesus, of Paul, of Homer, and Pythagoras, and she offered in∣cense vnto them. Which point Epiphanius fur∣ther exployneth, saying of this Carpcrates, and his followers: InsuperEpiphan. Haeref. 27. Philosophe∣ quorundam &c. They placed the Image of Ie∣sus, with the Images of the Philosophers, Pithago∣ras, Aristotle &c. and, did afterwards keepe the tes of the Pagans. Now what is this to vs Catholiks? Do we worship the Images of the Philosophers? Or do we obserue the rytes of the Pagans? Or do we offer incense to any Image? He secondly produceth the Heretiks, cal∣led, Heraclionitae, who (he sayth) after a new custome purged, and redeemed those that were dead by annointing their bodies with Oyle, and Balme. S. AustinHaeref. 1. witnesseth also this. Now how impertinently is this obiected against vs? S. Austins words are these: Feruntur, suos morieutes nouo tuedo redimere; id est, pet Oleum, belsamum, & aquam, & inuocationes, quas Hae∣aicis verbis dicunt super capita eoum &c. But we Catholiks do neither annoint, nor bap∣tise the dead; neither do we pray, by vsing such Innocations ouer the heads of the dead: such strange detortion of S. Austins
words is here vsed. Thirdly he insimulates the Catholiks  the Heresies of the Taani, who (sayth he) did condemne Mariage, and accounted it no better then Fornication; and did not receaue any married Persons (in suorum numerum) into their number. S. AustinAustin so witnesseth, Haeres. 24. How can this touch vs? For we do not equall Mariage with Fornication; We know all our Ancestours were maried; and we teach, that Mariage is a Sacrament. Fourthly, he sayth: The Pepusiani allow Wo∣men to be Priests; In like manner, the Papists do suffer their Women to conferre Baptisme. Austin witnesseth this of the Heretiks Pepusiani.Austin, Haeres. 27. To this I answere, that the Pepusians Errour consisted in making Women the ordina∣ry Ministers of Baptisme, and of all o∣ther Priestly functions. Now, this is im∣pertinent to the Ministring of Baptisme by Women, or Laymen, in the only Case of Necessity. Fiftly, he proceedeth further, saying: The Hereticks called Apostolici, did not admit into their Society and Communion those, that had wines, or proper Possessions. AustinAust. Haeres. 40. And further, Those Apostolici would not in any sort suffer those, which had vowed single lyfe, to marry, as Epipha∣niusEpiph. Haeres. 6. sayth. To the authority of S. Austin I first answere; S. Austins words are these; The Apostolici receaue not into their Communion, those that haue wiues, or Possessions, Quales habet Catholica Ecclesia, & Monaches, & Clericos pl∣rimos: Which the Catholike Church hath, and (be∣sides
these) he also hath Monks & Clergy men▪ Now these Apostolici are Heretiks (sayth S. Austin) for that they thinke those to haue no hope of Saluation, who vse these things, which themsel∣ues do want. Thus S. Austin. But this toucheth vs nothing at all. For do not our maried mon, & such as haue Possessions liue with∣in the Vnity of our Church? Touching the produced words of Epi∣phanius, this Father is mightily wronged by this Protestant; For Epiphanius deliuereth not prohibition of Votaries to marry, as being the doctrine of the Heretiks Apostolici them∣selues; for Epiphanius his Words following are these: Tradidorunt Sancti Dei Apostoli pecca∣rum esse, post decretam Virginitateni ad Nuptias veneri: The Holy Apostles of God deliuered it to be a Suine, to marry after one hath vowed Virginity. Thus what Epiphanius spake in the name of the Apostles, this Authour fraudulently pro∣duceth in the name of the Heretiks, called Apostolici. Belike this man is of a short sight, not being able to distinguish betweene these two words, Apostoli, and Apostolici. But to proceed. Sixtly, he alledgeth the Hierarchites (being Heretiks) saying: The Hierarchites admit only Monks, and Nuns to their society AustinAust. Haeref. 47.. But what is this to vs? Doth our Church admit only Monks, and Nunns into its Society? How rouingly is this testimony alledged? Seauently, This Authour sayth: There is an Heresy, of which the Professours walke with bare seete; because God said to MoysekExod. 3.▪ Put off thy
thees. Austin. Thus this writer glanceth at such of our Religious men, who goe barefoote. But S. AustinAu∣gust. Haeref. 68. in the very place alledged, thus presently addeth: Inde ergo Harests est, quia non propter corporis afflictionem sic ambulabani, sed quia testimoniae taliter intelligunt. But this is an Heresy,  that they did walke bare foote, not thereby to punih their bodies; but because they did vnderstand the testi∣mony of the Scripture in their owne sense; So vnto∣wardly doth this Protestant alledge S. Austin, against his owne true, and euident meaning. He further enlargeth himselfe, saying: There were certaine Heretiks, who belieued, that by Christs descending into Hell, the Vnbelieuers belieued; and that all Scales were deliuered out of Hell, at Christ his comming thither AustinHae∣res. 79.. This example is al∣ledged against the Catholike doctrine of Lim∣bus Patrum. But what doth this Instance con∣cerne vs? Do we thinke, that Christ by his des∣cending into Hell, deliuered the damned from thence, or any offers, but such as were fayth∣full? This Testimony is so idly and imperti∣nently extended to vs Catholiks, thatDa∣nius de Haeres. 79. Da∣nius (a learned Protestant) confesseth most plainly. That these Heretiks Errour concerned only the damned. The foresaid Authour alledgeth, that the Heretikes, Coluthians affirmed: Deum non facer mat That no euill was wrought by God, ex∣presly repagnant to that saying of the Scripture: Ego u creani mal; as AustinAu∣gust. Haeres. 15. Witnesseth. From this Heresy the Papists are not cleare, sayth he. Thus far this Writer; vnderstanding plainly in this place by the Word; Eui, not the at of punishment
(which he knoweth, we grant is from God) but the Euill of sinne,Da∣naeus in his Com∣mentaries vpon S. Austin & Haere. ib. Hae∣ref. 61. whereof indeed we deny that God is the Authour. I answere herto with the foresaid Protestant Danaus; That, Coluthia∣in Deum poenas, & supplicia sceleratis hominibus im∣mittere & irrogare negarunt. The Coluthians de∣nied, that God did inflict any paynes or Pu∣nishment vpon wicked men &c. And then Danaeus further sayth: Est malum duplex, quem ad∣modum ipse Augustinus docet; Aliud malum Culpae, aliud Poenae: Mali Culpae non est Authour Deus; Poenae Deus est Author. There is a twoofould Euill, as Austin teacheth; To wit the Euill of the Fault, and the Euill of Punishment▪ God is not the Au∣thour of the Euill of the Offence, or Fault, but he is authour of the euill of Punishment. Thus this Protestant, with whome we Catholiks agree herein. So ignorantly (at least maliciously) is the Heresy of the Coluthianes obiected to vs by this Willettus. He goeth yet forward, and sayth: The An∣thropomorphites (being Heretiks) did imagine, that God was in shape and proportion like to a man; As AustinAu∣gust. Haeres. 50. recordeth: So the Rhemists do teach, that God may be pictured like an old man. Hereto I answere, that this no more proueth vs to hould with these Heretiks, that God is in proportion, lyke to a Man, then our picturing of the Holy Ghost in the forme of a Doue, or of the Angells in forme of yong Men, that therfore we thinke the Holy Ghos to be a Doue, or Angells, yong Men. And we hould it no more vnlawfull to paynt these so, as they visibly and corporally appeared, then it was vndecent for them to appeare in such for∣mes;
or, then it was vnlawfull for the Scrip∣tures so to report the same. He after insimulats vs Catholiks within the Heresy of the Pelagians; saying: The Pelagian He∣retiks did hould; That a Man may be perfect in that lyfe, and keep all the Commandements  Austin wit∣nesseth. The like do the Papists hould: But how can this touch v? For the Pelagians affirmed, that their natural hability for the performance her∣of, without God assisting them with his Grace, was sufficient. For thus S. Austin speaketh of them: PelagianiAu∣gust. Ep. 20. ad Aseli∣cum. ipsi Gratiae Christi su aduer∣santur. vt se humanis Viribus diuina existiment imple∣re mandata The Pelagians were such Enemies to the Grace of Christ, as that they thought themselues able to keep the diuine Comman∣dements by human strength. But do we teach this? No, we acknowledg it to be a blasphemy against Christ. I will conclude, with this same Authours imputing to vs the Heresy of the Manichees. Who (as he sayth) condemned the eating of flesh, as being vncleane, and impure: SeeAu∣gust. Hares. 4. Austin hereof. How can this example endanger vs Catholik? Do we cōdemne the Creature, for impure? Do we not also eate flesh? Therefore what is the Manichees doctrine of euer abstayning frō flesh (as impure by Creation) to our obserued absti∣nence, vpon appointed dayes, without con∣demning of the Creature? Thus farre now for some tast of the impurity of this Authour; Out of whose booke I haue insisted only in a dozen of his immateriall, and froathy Instances. Of these I haue made choice
in particular, as seeming more conducing, then the rest, though they conduce nothing ar all▪ As for some other few examples in him (by me heere omitted) they are so grosly impertinent; as that I will not abuse your longer Patience with recitall of them. Only I say, by this al∣ready set downe, ye may consecture, what the rest of his Booke is. A Book (barren of matter) is commonly tearmed, Vn liure set, A dry Booke; yet perhaps I might be thought to wrōg this his Booke, in calling it so; for you see it is still of Froath, and Frosth is moyst. Well, hauing thus answered the chiefe obie∣cted Examples of our Aduersaries (all which, or any other by thē obiected, are so pregnant∣ly oenting, and different from our doctrine, that not so much as any one of them can be aamed, which being holden, as it was by the Heretiks of those times, and for such in them condemned, is not as yet to this day by vs in like manner condemned;) I further answere, as in further Explication, and Preuention in ge∣nerall, that Heresy is not (in some sort) an open Aneay to Religion; But is a subtill Corrupcy therof, by absitacting from it, or adding toh: So as Truth, and Errour hauing one Materiall ob∣iect or ground worke, are deuided (though euer really) oftentymes (as to the conceauing of the vnlearned) but in a seeming slender icity, or difference of Words, or in a poynt (to common Vnderstanding) sarce diuisible. In which res∣pect he, that will obiect pertinently in this ynd, must obiect not any neerenes, resem∣blance, or lykelyhood, but an Identity of Opi∣nion
(as I haue done in my obiecting of the Sixty Articles of Protestancy, maintayned by the Did Heretiks, and in those dayes condemned for Heresyes by the Church of Christ;) Since o∣therwise the now wicked Obiecting by the New Arins (both against but Aduersaries, & vs) of the Heresy of the Tru, as a stiming three Gods, might, in regard that both of vs hold three seuerall Persons, (euery of which is God) be more insisted vpon, against both of vs, and with more colour, then any of the former al∣ledged Examples be. And with this I nd this Appendi. The Conclusion. IT is an accustomed Dact of many of your Prime-Maysters both in the Pulpit, and in their writings, to vocirate & try out, That the Catholike Roman Reli∣gion is Antichristian, and the Pope Awitst, & in proofe hereof they produce certaine Tats, put of the second of the Thesnians1. Thess. 2., and theAv pocal. 8. & 12. Apocalyps, which they ench and dis∣iynt (as it were) with their stayned, & vio∣lent. Constructions. But if they were able to set downe thirty or fourty Articles of sayes, which Antichrist hall teach; and these to be ac∣knowledged his particular actines, by the consent both of You Protestants, and V Ca∣tholike; as also could alledg so many old ∣restes condemned by the Prmitiue Church of God: And withall, if further they could pro∣duce out of our Catholike wllets, that we Catholiks do each, and be the said Anti∣christian
Articles, and the said anathematized Heresies: I say, if your Men (O you Hugenots) cold effect thus much, how would they insult? What words euen of brasse, would they yell ou? What Prophies of Victory, and Triumphan Arches wold their Pens haue erected before this day, and all in memory of our ouerthrow, and dishonour of the Roman Religion, and its Profes∣sour? But the Case here (God be praised) is farre otherwise▪ for they are your Writters (My Coun∣trimen) who stand at this tyme chargeable. I haue (you see) set downe fourty Articles, touching the Turkish Religion, and diuers Cir∣cumstances thereof, chiefly out of the Turkish Alcoran (the Booke (as aboue I said) wherein that Law was first written) as also out of war∣rantable Authours, hoth Catholiks, & Prote∣stants, who haue written of the Religion and Manners of the Turks: So as, it is acknowled∣ged  all sydes, that the Turkish Articles pro∣duced by me, are indeed the Articles at this day belieued by them. I haue in like sort insi∣sted in threescore Old Heresies, condemned by the Church of God in ancient tymes, and for Here∣syes at this day acknowledged; by vs Catho∣liks, & by the more learned & moderate Pro∣testants. I haue further proued, euen from the expresse Testimonies, taken out of the first & chiefe Lutherans, that themselues haue taught in their Writings (articularly, and punctually) the said Mathemetan; or Turkish Articles, and in lieu of some others, Articles more pernicious, euen by the light of Nature; as also that they haue pertinaciously defended (and their Fol∣lowers
do at this day defend) the said expl∣rate Heresies for Good Lutheranisius, and Euan∣gelical doctrine. Now then what remaineth for vs to doc I Not vnkindly, and vncharitably to insult o∣uer you, and in virulent and gaulfull termes to exprobate you there with, but in all Chri∣stian zeale, to pitty your poore distressed sta∣tes, and to pray, for your abandoning those most wicked Turkih Doctrines, and other Helli Heresyes; and for your future in corporating in∣to our Catholike Church; To him (I say) who vpon mans true repentance, hath pronoun∣ced: NumquidEze∣ch. 18. Voluntatis meaest mrs impi And againe: NoloIbi∣dem. mortem morientes, conueru∣mini & viuite. Well then (My Countrimen of France) to re∣peate what aboue I haue faith (that thereby my Words may more intensly, and forcibly srike your Memory,) since you haue seene, how your owne chiefe Doctours in Fourty Points of their Religion, do commilitate and serue vnder the Colours of Mahumet; Since also it hath been made plaine, that in twenty passa∣ges of Fayth, or necessary Circumstances ther∣of, Protestancy is lesse warrantable, then Mahu∣metisme: Lastly, since it is demonstrated, that in Sixty Positions of Fayth, and other collaterall points thereof, Protestancy, or Hugenotisme com∣parts with the ancient Heresyes, or rather is iden∣tifyed with them; what then may seeme to be inferred (O pardon me for speaking that with griefe, which you are to heare with shame!) but that a Mahumetan, and an Old branded Here∣tyke,
and a French Hugenis, are (In part) word Syoymons? Now therefore, if notwithstanding all this, you will stil prefer your owne Religion be∣fore oe encient Roman Fayth, (which euen by yar owne BrethrensWhi∣tak ad respons. Cam. ra. 7. Hutte∣vus de Sacris. missatieo p. 377. besid di∣uers o∣thers: acknowledgments hath bren perpetuted from hand to hand, from the Apostles, and in which (by their likeHum fidus Iesuit. part. 2. rat. 2. Osined, Cnt. 12. pag. 30. Luther in colle. Germ. c. de Miss. Confessions) men dying, may be saued;) Yf (I say) by your peseuering therein you will violently and desperatly run vpon the Hykes of your owne damnation I cannot but commiserate your forlorne Soules, & (though with inconsolable sorrow) close vp my spea∣cks, with the Aclamation of the Apostle; OGalas. 30 O insensati Galata (siue Gall) quis vos ss∣c u on obedire verinat! O sansis French Huge∣nois, who hath bewitched you not to hy the Truth? aus Deo, & Beat Virgini Mariae.
A Table of the Contents of this Treatise. First Part, consisting of Symbols. THe Preface of the Author. Chap. 1. pag. 7. The Method hld in this Treatise. Ch. 2. p. 19. The particular passages (or Azoara's) of the Alcoran, alledgd in his Treatise. Chap. 3. pag. 12. Of Symbolisms in generall, Chap. 4. pag. 26. Touching the wings of the Apostle, Chap.  pag. 33. Touching the rring of the Apostles, Chap. 6. pag. 35. Touching the holy Ghospell. Chap. 7. pag. 36. Touching the Ancient Fathers. Chap. 8. pag. 38. Touching Generall Councells. Chap. 9. pag. 40. Concerning Traditions. Chap. 10. pag. 42. Touching the Necessity of Fayth in Christ. Ch. 11. p. 44. That Mahumetisme and Lutheranisme are engendred of old Heresies. Chap. 12. pag. 48. Touching the Plantation of Mahumetisme and Luth∣ranisme. Chap. 13. pag. 51. Touching the want of Miracle. Chap. 14. pag. 54. Conceining Mahumets and Luthers prtetati for proofe of their Religion. Chap. 15. pag. 55. Touching the defall of the B. Trty. Chap. 16. p. 57. Concerning the suffering of Christ. Chap. 17. pag. 61. Touching the second Person of B. Trty. Ch. 8. p. 64.
Touching the deniall of Christs Passion. Ch. 19. p. 66. The particular Moiues of Mahumets and Luthers Apostasy. Chap. 20. pag. 68. That the Turkish, and Protestant Clergy do marry. Chap. 21. pag. 72. Coniunction of Ecclesiasticall, with Temporall Au∣thority. Chap. 22. pag. 75. Touching the deniall of Originall Sinne. Ch. 23. p. 77. That Baptisme is not necessary. Chap. 24. pag. 79. Polygamy iintly taught by Mahumet, and the Lu∣therans. Chap. 25. pag. 81. Touching the Contempt of the Crosse. Chap. 26. p. 84. Touching other seuerall points of Fayth. Chap. 27. p. 85. That Catholiks and Turkes agree in the doctrine of Sacrifice, and Vovves. Chap. 28. pag. 90. The Coniunction of Turkes, and some temporall States, against Catholike Princes. Chap. 29. pag. 94. Reasons of friendship betweens the Turkes, and some Lutheran States. Chap. 30. pag. 98. Of diuers Caluinistes, that became Turkes. Chap. 31. pag. 102. Second Part, consisting of Parallels. A Demonstration, wherein Mahumet is paralleled with Luther. Chap. 1. pag. 108. Mahumet paralleled with K. Henry the Eight of En∣gland. Chap. 2. pag. 111. Sergius the Monke, & Luther paralleled. Ch. 3. p. 117. Touching the dignity of Christ. Chap. 4. pag. 125. Concerning the B. Virgin Mary. Chap. 5. pag. 131. The Antiquity of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme. Chap. 6. pag. 139.
The Vniuersality of Mahumetism and Luther Chap. 7. pag. 141. The Vnity in doctrine betweene Mahumetisme, & Lu∣theranisme. Chap. 8. pag. 141. Whether Mahumet or Luther d were teach God  be Author of Sinne. Chap. 9. pag. 144. Of the Paschall Supper of the Turkes, and the Comu∣nion of the Caluinists. Chap. 10. pag. 147. Whether Turkes, or Lutherans pray more. Chap. 11. pag. 149. Proceeding of Turkes against Christians, and of Prote∣stants against Catholikes. Chap. 12. pag. 151. Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme inclies more to Vice and Sinne. Chap. 13. pag. 157. Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme do more depresse Vertue, and Good workes. Chap. 14. pag. 160. Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme seeke more to frustrate the Promises of God. Chap. 15. pag. 16. Of Predestination, & Reprobtion differently taught by Mahumet, and the Lutherans. Ch. 16. p. 163. Whether the deuisers of Mahumetisme, or Protestan∣cy, were of more flagitious line. Chap. 17. pa. 165. Whether Mahumetisme or Lutheranisme consist more of old condemned Heresies. Chap. 18. pag. 17. The different respect giuen to the New Testament by Mahumet and Luther. Chap. 19. pag. 172. Concerning the Mahumetan, and the Lutheran Clergy. Chap. 20. pag. 175. Whether the Turkes, or Lutherans haue re erred in their Beliefe. Chap. 21. pag. 177. The ridiculousnes of the Turkish Religion &c. Chap. 22. pag. 182.
An Appndix, thugh that threefore Points  Fayth, and Accessories therto, which a thirday are be∣lieued by the Lutherns and Caluinist, more first inuented by the old Heretickes, and condemned by the Fathers of the tions Church; and for this respet, they be termed so many Identiti. pag. 199. The Conclusion of the whle Treatise. pag. 233. FINIS.
