D902 R9589 11987816 51968
DELIGHTFUL and INGENIOUS NOVELLS: Being Choice and Excellent STORIES of AMOURS, Tragical and Comical. Lately Related by the most Refin'd Wits. Under Borrowed Names. With INTERLUDES between each Novel. VIZ. I. The Lucky Throw, Or, A Wife by Chance II. The Frustrated In∣tentions. Or L Martyrdom. III. The distressed Tra∣veller. Or, Fortue at last. IV. The Generous Gal∣lant, Or, The Intrigues of Love. V. The Unhappy Coun∣terfeit. Or, Fortunate Gipsy. VI. The Champion of Honour. Or, Vertue Preserv'd. Entred according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Crayle at the Lamb in Fleetstreet, next White-Friers Gate. 1685.
The BOOKSELLER to the READER. Courteous Reader, THou art here presented with a Novell Banquet, which in the pleasantness and Variety of the Subject, and the several Comical and sur∣prizing Circumstances, I am confident will be no less Grateful to Thee than I intend it. I must confess, the Cri∣tical Palats of the Age have been too much Nauseated with lean and Jejune Discourses of this Nature, especially when the Regalio has been prepared by unskilful Hands; But this being both the Business and Diversion of a Person eminent at Court for Wit and Parts; I dare Promise Thee that Polynant Relish, which will not Cloy but satisfie the most Curious or the
severest Judge. These ensuing Hi∣stories were writ by a Worthy and Learned Pen, at the Request of some Gentlemen and Ladies, and now Publish'd from his own Manuscript, that the more Ingenious Part of the World may share in that Recreation, which was at first design'd for the pri∣vate Entertainment of some Persons of Honour. The Stories are here told under feigned Names, that we might preserve that Respect and Reverence due to their Title and Grandeur. But I shall no farther inhance thy Expectation of the following Treatise; An Invitation is Civil and Modish, and so far I only offer it, though I do not Question but every Guest will meet with a Dish will give him some ob∣liging Gusto. B. C.
THE INTRODUCTION THe Noble Melintus, whose Arms abroad had been no less Successful than his Amours at Court, the one Rendring his Name equally terrible to his Foes, as the other did his Person, Lovely to those Beau∣teous Ladies his Generous Addresses had Acquainted him with; On a sudden for∣sook the Court, and Sigh'd away his bitter Hours in a Solitary Retirement. When the News was Spread, the Noble Melintus was withdrawn, it Rais'd a Wonder in all; His own Merits having Gain'd him more then Ordinary favour from his Prince, and his Courtly presence, and Obliging Mean, Won a respect from all that knew him. The Count his Ʋncle more particularly Enquired the Reason of his present discontent, from whom at length with much difficulty, he Forced a dis∣covery.
I must, my Lord, (says Melintus) Bless that Happy Minute when first I saw the Matchless Corinna, and Curse the Severity of my Stars whose kinder Infence ought to have given Her more constancy, or me less concern, for that Loss, I now but in vain Lament, Shee's gone! My Lord, Shee's lost to Me for ever! My hated Rival now Surfeits with delights in those Curling Armes I once thought mine; Every kiss he takes is a Blessing stoln from Me, nor has He Honour enough to pity, but Scorns, laughs at my Miseries, and with the Me∣mory of my sufferings, where his Cloyd Appetite to fresh Enjoyments, Melintus would have proceeded, but the Count having now the true Cause of his Melancholy, chose rather to divert his Passion then Encourage it by a further discourse upon the same Ʋn∣happy Subject; And like a subtle Rhetori∣tian with undiscerned Charms, led his heedless Auditor wide from his present Theme of Sorrow, to a more Soft and Comi∣cal
Entertainment: And when he took leave promis'd to send Geronto, his old witty Companion, and some others of his Friends, both Gentlemen and Ladies, the next Af∣ternoon to Visit him; Whose facetious Hu∣mours, and pleasant Conversation would divert his Melanchely, and prove the most powerful Cordial to recover a dispairing Lo∣ver. Accordingly the next day, Geronto, Lysander, Florimel and Aurelia, went over to Barn-Elms, where Melintus had for some days past Conceal'd himself, that he might more luxuriously Indulge his discontented thoughts free from the Trouble of Ceremonious Visitants. No sooner had they saluted Melintus, whose Cloudy Fore∣head spoke the present Anguish of his Soul; But in came Parmenio and Philotas, each leading his Mistress, the fair Evadne and Beautifull Theodosia. Melintus was not a little Surpriz'd to see his Friends Crowd in so fast upon him, when Geronto (their Mutual Civilities being past) began to Rally Melintus with such sharp Excursions as his
great Wit had alwayes priviledg'd him to at Court, and his Intimate acquaintance might now more freely Challenge from his Friend, the little bickerings with Repartees being over, in which the Ladies, especially Florimel, lost no advantage, they fell upon more Composd Discourses, and as nothing could be more agreeable to the Company, nor any Subject more proper then that of Love, Geronto whose Talent was great that way, first broke the Ice, and began with this Harangue,
NOVEL the First. By GERONTO. A Gentleman, younger Brother of a very good Family in the West of England, ha∣ving had the advantage of a Liberal Education at the University of Cambridge, left those happy Walls, esteeming that sort of Collegiate Im∣prisonment too narrow for his more aspiring and ambitious Thoughts, which now began to feel the heats of Love, and Warmer desires of attaining that pitch of Honour and Reputation his Ancestors had Arrived to. Having thus taken leave of his Studies, he return'd into the Countrey to receive the plentiful provision his Father had by Will assgned him, which amounted to 4000 li. on which foundation (tho' Inconsiderable to what his elder Brother en∣joy'd) he doubted not to raise as Substantial a fortune by his Industrious Improvement as his Birth-right had deny'd him: With this Inten∣tion, knowing the Barren Soyl of a Countrey
Life, was not so fit to accomplish his designs as the more fruitful emploiments that attended a Court and City, he repaired to London: But bringing with him a Temper too Generous to Flatter, and too Gentile to Cozen, he quickly found without the first he must expect no pre∣ferment at Court, and wanting the Second it was Impossible to advantage himself amdst a Crowd, whose only patrimony was their craft. In the midst of these Thoughts he had often re∣solv'd to return to the more innocent diversions of the Countrey; But finding himself intangled in his Affairs, and engaged in the acquaintance of the Town Gallants, who at first had insensibly wrought him into their Society, by those Nts and Subtletys they Spread to catch the heedless and Unwary; And being softned by the charms and allurements of the fairer Sex, to whose Visits he was every day enticed, he found it impossible to discharge himself of these Inconveniences, tho' he had before his Eyes the most dismal prospect of misery, and inevitable Ruine of his Fortunes which now began to con∣sume apace, and in three years time the whole Treasure was quite Exhausted. His Compani∣on, who had so often been reliev'd by his Gene∣rous kindness were so far from pitying or Assist∣ing him in these distresses, that like the Summer
Birds, they left his Winter'd Quarters to seek a Spring in some warmer Climate, without the least Gratitude or kind remembrance of those Lavish kindnesses with which they had been so often refresh'd? In this Condition, Repen∣tance, the usual Comerade of distress, presented her wrinkled Face to the poor undone Youth, and brought into his Thoughts his former mis∣carriges, but with all lest him destitut of any obliging Clue to Extricate himself from the La∣byrinth his follies and Misfortunes had Insnar'd him in. How ready he then was to curse the Influence of those Starrs that frown'd at his Birth, and Rais'd in his own Breast an Enemy against himself; To blame his past Improvidence, and all the Obliquityes of his former Conduct; They can best Judge who have seen and known how few Friends adversity affords, and how the pleasures of former prosperity are the bitter∣est Ingredients of present Calamity. In this deplorable Estate after that by renew'd sollicitations he had wearied all his Friends, Poverty began to grow Shamefull, his wonted Embroider yes were now worn into Rags, the Treats and Regalios' with which he had tired out the day, and Stole from the Hours of Rest to Solace himself with, now Tantaliz'd his present Hunger; His Beds of Down and softer
Companions of Nightly Amours, were now no more, a Numerous concourse of Dunns with their Loud Alarms broke his Rest, and like Hornets with their Stinging Demands, perpetu∣ally tormented him, and he who but a little be∣fore was the Court and admiration of every Flattering Sycophant, is now their Scorn and Laughter. Instead of his Livery'd Attendants, the Staff Officers watch his Steps, and nothing but the infamy of a Prison and the Gripes of penury, are the thoughts with which he En∣tertains himself; So that being forc'd to the utmost Extremity, he resolv'd rather with the Prodigal, to return to his Fathers House, than feed upon Husks amongst the London Swine; To which End, having Rais'd as much Money as the remains of his Moveables would pledge for, he began his Journey for the West, hoping his Friends would Commiserate his indigent Condition, however one Blessing he was sure of, to be out of the Noise and Clamour of his Ravenous Creditours. His Money being short he was forc'd to Travel on Foot, nor had he hopes it could carry him to his Journey End, but resolving to trust his better fortune he set for ward; And having Travelled three dayes saw the last penny disposed of. The Evening now drew on apace, and he found himself Ex∣treamly
wearied, no prospect of a Town to lodge at, or Money to pay for't, or other ne∣cessaries he had occasion for, going heavily on under so great a load of trouble and discontent, and pondering with himself, if it was altogether impossible for the wit of Man to find out a Re∣medy for these present Evils, lifting up his eyes, at a distance espied a Countrey Village half a Mile before him, which as soon as he had over∣taken, he sate down under a Hedge which be∣long'd to a Neighbouring House, to consider what course to take to relieve his present want: Upon this Hedge there were several pieces of Linnen hung out to dry, and tho' it was now late in the Evening, yet such was their Security and so great the Honesty of those Countrey Hobs, that they fear'd no filching hand to Thieve them away; the full Moon which with her Silver Beams supplyed the Brightness of the Golden day, discover'd the Temptation to him, nor could he observe any Person near to Guard the Hedge: But being never us'd to Steal, he was very loth to begin now, nor was he less Averse to Beg; But urg'd by his extremities he was about to bear away some of the Linnen, when putting his Hand into his Pocket he found a pair of Dice; Are you here still? Said he, here still? To tormen, but not assist Me! Oh
base and bewitching Tools, the Wisemans scorn Charms to the fool, and Panders to the Knave! here still; To refresh my Memory how you Ruin'd and deceiv'd Me! I have heard amongst your friends you have been Stil'd, the substance of hope, the miserable Mans last relief, and is it possible to find one fitter to receive your favors then my self; Assist me then, and Umpire be∣tween my necessity and Honesty, whilst I pursue my Intentions to play fairly with this Hedge for the Linnen it is Cloathed with, and less needs then my distressed Shoulders, which want a Covering. Yet am I resolved, if you cross my hopes, I will yet be Just to my Losses and pay what you decree against me, and if you strip me I shall then forswear your Assistance for the Future, and trust my self Naked to the Charity of well disposed Christians, from whom I will hope for that good fortune and Reasonable re∣lief which you deny me. Come then and lets try the Chances; Here Mr. Hedge, my Hat against that shirt: 7 is the Main, have at it; 12, Pox ont', out at the first Throw! There't goes again, my Coat against those two Handkerchiefs and four Aprons, 6 is the Main, now 12 good Dice, or I'm undone, ha! 5 to 6, I've the worst on't, bt away, now Cater Ace, Tra Due, what are you? Cater
Duce, the Devils in the Dice, then I must strip. Curse on ill Luck! But ne're be faint hearted; come, nay Breeches you must go to, 9 is the main, have at it: what now, Duce Ace? The Devil take all ill Luck, well, heres stockings and Shooes yet, whats there 8? Now good sweet Honey. Dice be kind, Pox on't, (4) to 8, its two to one against me humph! Sice Duce, Iv'e lost it, there's no hopes, Ruine is my porti∣on, well I have nothing left now but my Shirt, and so farewell ail; Here the Dice began to Re∣pent, and the Spark won back his Clothes, and as much Linnen from the Hedge as was necessa∣ry to supply his present Occasions, nor was he covetous of more, which he Pack'd up into a Bundle and Trudg'd forward, thanking his Stars for his good Success. But not many paces was he gone before he was pursu'd by the Owner, (who standing undiscover'd behind a Tree was an Eye witness of this strange Adventure,) and easily overtaken, by whom being question'd a∣bout the Linnen, he no wayes Endeavour'd to Conceal but Justified himself in the Fact, telling him he came honestly, by them, and would keep them, and make good his Title before any Magistrate in England. Enrag'd with this An∣swer, the Countryman with Loud Out cryes rai'd the Neighbourhood, who pass'd their Cen∣sure,
and with words and blows both threatned and punished him: In so much that he was forc'd to desire a ruce and entreat a hearing, but had he spoke loud as the North wind the Women would have Silenc'd him; O Rogue, sayes One, I'm glad we have found you, now I know how my Poultrey went, which I charg'd on the more innocent Fox, 'tis you Sirrah had them, and you shall pay for them. Well said, Neighbour, says another, let's make an example of him, this is the Rascal, I believe, came a begging t'other day, and whilst I was gathering sticks Stole the Beef out of my Pot, and had like to have Ravish'd my Daughter. Hang him: Hang him, Thief: Scolds the Chorus. He endeavour'd to lay this Storm by mild excuses, telling them he was a Gentleman and ought to Answer what he had done before a Magistrate, all which did but the more incense the Rabble, who had certainly torn him in pieces, had not a Farmers Daughter, taken with his Shape and port, perswaded her Sweet-heart Richard to use his Oratory for the Gentlemans safety, which he not at all Curious in, did it to this effect. Fy, Neighbours, I think the Devil's in you, won't you hear a man speak, let Me tell you, it doth not become us to be Executioners to a
Thief, that's the Hangmans Work. If he has been a Rogue let the Jaylor have him, and the Rope Throttle him, but why should our Hands save them a labour, our Landlord's a Wise Man and a Justice, let's carry him thither, and I warrant you Mr. George his Clerk will quickly take Care to send him where he best deserves. Away with him, Away with him reply'd the rest, which was no Unwelcome News to Hono∣riu, (for so let us henceforth call the Unfortu∣nate Youth) hoping he should find a Gentle∣man of those Generous Sentiments, who upon the Relation of all Circumstances would Com∣misrate his Condition and assist his necessities, they carried him to the House of a very Worthy Gentleman, to whom they represented the Crime with all the complaints and aggravations their Country Rhetorique could advance, en∣treating his Worship to make a publick example of so Notorious an Offender. To which Accu∣fation, the Justice demanded of Honorins what he had to say for himself; Who Replyed, I shall not Worthy Sir, go about to deny or Evade what I am Charged with, as to the taking away the Goods my Accusers Claim,
but as a Stranger and a Gentleman (how∣ever I appear under this disguise of habit) I humbly Entreat your Favour to hear me a few words in private, and I do not doubt but your Worship will then think me not so hainously Guilty as my Accusers would per∣swade you to. The Port and demeanour of Honorius, to ge∣ther with the gracefulness of his Elocution, so far wrought upon the Justice as to disniss the Crowd, Restoring to the party his Goods, and giving them his promises that he would take care of the Criminal. No sooner were they departed, but Honoriu proceeded to acquaint the Justice with his con∣dition in every point, and how, urg'd to what he did by the force of irresistable Necessity, which he hop'd his goodness and Charity would ra∣ther pity, then punish with the Severity of Law. The Justice extreamly taken with the pleasant∣ness of the Relation, told Honorius he was fal'n into such Hands as would not Injure him, rather Contribute to his Relief: But fince, pursues he, you are Charg'd with a Crime of this Na∣ture, think not but I will Inflict a punishment o you, and as your Crime is Venial, your punish∣shall not exceed it.
All that I require of you is that you lye in my House this Night, and take that Accom∣modations the same can afford you, as to my Table and Cellar, or what else you please to Command; Yet your Lodging must be in a Chamber which has been haunted for these three years past with the Apparition of a Ghost, and so frighted those who have seen it, that no Person yet was ever so hardy to speak to it. If on these Conditions you like to be my Guest, you shall find a hearty Wellcome and a supply to carry you to the place you determine. Ho∣norius with a grateful acknowledgement re∣ceiv'd the offer, and humbly thank'd the Gen∣tleman for his great favour to him, Telling him he was now doubly Oblig'd to his Misfor∣tunes, as well that he had the Honour of know∣ing so Worthy a Person, as by this Adventure he might possibly make an Improvement in the Experimental part of Spectresm, which in his younger years he had only Read at the Univer∣fity; hese and other Complyments much pleas'd the Justice, who led him into the Par∣lour, where wa his Wife and Daughter, a Per∣son of Incomparable Beauty and richly Furnish'd with all the Ornaments of Body and Mind, to whom after he had recounted how the Gentle∣man,
had promised him to ye in the Haunted Room, and speak to the Ghost if it did appear; He order'd his Servants to prepare Supper, and in the Interim call'd for Wine to entertain the stranger who thought himself extreamly happy; The time pass'd a way in a very agreeable Con∣versation, and the Justice was not a little pleas'd with the Modest behaviour of Honerius, nor did the young Lady his Daughter less admire his person, the vivacity of his Wit and the quaintness of his discourse, which tho' she endeavor'd to hide, plainly appear'd in her kind and Obliging Glances, which Honorius soon perceiv'd, and had taken further Incouragement had not the meaness of his present appearance dampt his as∣piring Thoughts. But to shorten the Relation, Supper was ended, and the Ladies withdrew to their Chambers, at such time as the old Gentle∣man conducted Honorius to an excellent Room well Furnished with all things convenient and Ornamental, telling him Jocosely. That must be his Prison for this Night, and as many more as he Thought fi. And wishing him good Night, Withdrew. The Complyment was returned by Honorius who was well provided with Fire and Candle, and Bottles of Wine, that the Devil might have the less power over him. Being now alone he had leasure to confider his present
Circumstances, when reflecting on the Beauty of the young Lady, and the kind looks she be∣stowed on him, he began to hope they might be the presages of his better fortune, which now seem'd once again to Smile upon him. With these Thoughts he went to Bed not much Con∣cern'd with the apprehensions of what had been told him, yet not altogether slighting the dan∣ger he might be in, kept his Candle burning; and being ready to take the Sweets of Rest the Clock struck one, at which time the whole House was very quiet, and not the least Noise to disturb him. Musing with himself about his present for∣tune, he thought h heard something Trip along the Gallery before his Chamber, whilst more regardfully attending he saw his Chamber door open, and in a Night dress he perceiv'd a Per∣son as he thought enter and take two or three Rounds about the Room, and at length open a Closet door. This Apparition tho' it seem'd not so dismally frightful, yet struck him with a present horrour, which whilst he was more se∣riously considering, came out of the Closet and took a Second walk in the Chamber, and by de∣grees came nearer and nearer to his Bed side, which he diligently observing, his apprehensions of the danger grew stronger upon him, but ta∣king
courage was resolv'd to speak to it. With this intent looking sted fastly upon it, he thought he beheld the same face of the Young Lady he had seen but some few hours before, this abated his fears and Encourag'd his Resolution. Rising out of his Bed he approached it, which seem'd nothing Shy of his advance, and drawing near∣er took it by the hand, which he found oft and warm, and as true Flesh and Blood as his own, and more curionsly viewing the Face saw it to be the real Person of the Young Lady, whose Body wak't whilst all her Senses were fast lockt up in the profoundest Sleep. His thoughts were now again at the same puzzle between his own desires and the Ladies Honour, as before they had been between his necessity and Honesty, but the Temptation prov'd too strong for the ten∣der Virtue of Vigorous Youth to withstand. Leading her to his Bed-side he Softly laid her down and plac'd himself by her. But here should I recount the bold Trespass of his Hands, which found nothing of a Ghost about her, or the more daring attempts of his succeeding pleasures, my own Cheeks would blush at the Confidence of my Tongue; Nor is it possible to speak the Transports Honorius felt, I hope your kinder Imagination will supply the defects of my Ex∣pression. It is enough, that whilst Honorius was
Revelling in the midst of that Garden of plea∣sure and stealing the forbidden fruit, the Lady Awaked. She had now been sensible of those delights from the obliging Embraces of her New Bedfellow, and those kind Caresses her waking fancy had presented her with, which she had never found from the Cold Arms of her con∣fident Sylvia; Whilst she lay thus considering what this strange Dream should be, or if a truth, what it meant; Her Senses being now more per∣fectly her own, she discover'd her self in another Bed, when hearing her Lovers excuses and the many pardons he beg'd, She was ready to Swoon away at so strange a Surprizal, Oh Heavens! Sayes Shee, what hast thou done? Oh Ravisher base and Unworthy Guest; Are these thy ac∣knowledgements of my Fathers kindness: With Charms and Philtres to bewitch my Innocency, hadst thou no more regard to myspotless honour then thus betray me to perpetual Shame and Ig∣nominy; Dearest Madam, replyed Honorius, if the Arraigned have leave to offer ought to arrest their Sentence, by the powers of Love, by all that's Sacred to you, Fly not from me before you hear my Defence. Think not, sweet Lady, that to Satisfie the rage of my burning lust, or to Grasp such infinite happiness I would use wor thy means; Twas fortune gave you to my
Arms, and as well might the Sun diselose his Summer Beams, and the Earth refuse his Bounty, as I Shut my eyes against those glorious Beautyes, whose Charms fir'd my heart, and ra∣vish'd all my Senses, I saw you, Madam, walking in your Sleep, I saw your Naked Beautyes, whose powers even Age it self tho' proud of its boasted abstinence could not resist, and may not youth be pardon'd? If not, Let loose your anger, wrinkle your brow into a Frown, and assure your self it shall be as mortal as the most venom'd or poin∣ted weapon death it self makes use of to destroy the guilty; or if this punishment be too flow for your fleet Revnge, plung a Dagger in my Breast, which I had ratherfeel then once hear the dismal found of that single word, Farewel; Yours Madam, let me Live for ever, or fall this minute a wolcome Sacrifice to your unjur'd Fame, 'tis I, Madam, I confess it, that Violated your unspotted Inno∣cence, pure as the Mountains Snow, & Chast as the Winters Ice, whom if your Mercy cannot pardon, let your Severest Justice Carve a Satisfaction from this offending Breast. With these and many other the like expressions did the Amorous Youth sooth the disconsolate Lady, till at last, overcome with his Importunities, with Tears of Joy She embrac'd the gladded Lover, and consented he Should live: Live then, sayes She, and let the same bright wit∣nesser,
of your Trespass and my dishonour; hear our Marriage Vows, and see this Sacred Tye by which I am ever yours. — Honorius his best Expressions were now too poor to speak the Raptures of his Soul, nor certainly was ever Bridal Night pass'd over with greater pleasure and delight then this between the two Enamo∣rists, in so much that the Shrill Messenger of the Morn had given Notice of its approach e're their thoughts stray'd from their Enjoyments: But being apprehensive of a discovery, which was not yet ripe for the Fathers Ear with apart∣ing kiss they took leave of each other, she En∣gaging Honorius to make some excuse to pro∣long his stay, promis'd to return the next night to his Bed; which he receiv'd with all the Gra∣titude he could express for so great a favour. The Lady was now gone to her own Chamber, and Honorius was at leasure to consider the present state of his affairs, how his Shatter'd fortunes were now repair'd, by an Extraordi∣nary providence, beyond all hope or Expecta∣tion. This Lady was the only Child of her Parents, and Heiress to a very considerable Estate, and as Valuable for her Vertue, Beauty and all other accomplishments that might Com∣pleat the Happiness of a Lover, as any of her Sex. Whilst his thoughts were imploy'd in these ra∣vishing
Contem plations, his Senses began to tre, and he fell afleep at the same time when the Justice and his Lady came into his Chamber, to Enquire how he had pass'd the Night, hearing the door open he Awakened, and after he had feign'd himself discompos'd, he aquainted them it was a real truth the Room was haunt∣ed, and that he had seen a Spirit, but he suppo∣sede same so far from Evil, that if ever An∣gels left their Heavenly abodes to come upon Earth such was this and no worse; for tho' he had seen and Conversed with it, yet was he not in the least affrighted, nor did its discourse im∣port any thing of harm to himself or the family, but what it had said he had been by Sacred Vow oblig'd not to discover, till such time as he had seen it again, for the too early Cock had Sum∣mon'd it back to its unknown Mansions e're it had finished the Secret it came to discover. The gladded Justice embrac'd his Welcom Guest, and with the kindest words he could expres himself, entreated his stay the following Night & that he woud make him happy in his far the Acquaintance; Less powerful Oratory woul have perswaded Honorius to accept of that h so much coveted; however thankfully return n the Justices Complements he soon after Ros and Spent the day in the Conversation of h
New Friends. Nor was the Lad yever from his thoughts, or her blushes from her Cheeks, when∣ever she Surpriz'd his Strolling Eyes, catching Glances from hers at a distance. In short, the Second Night came, and the long expected hour of Meeting brought ou Lovers to each others Arms; the Happy Minutes fled fast in their Mutual Embraces, whilst the Lazy Inter∣valls were Spent in contrivance how theyshould Gain her Parents consent to finish their Vow'd Espousals. This the Lady undertook: It was now day break when Aemilia retir'd to Her Chamber, and taking a convenient opportunity that Morning in private, discover'd to her Mo∣ther the whole Intrigue of her fortunes, and told her, it being usual with Her to repair to that Chamber in the day time to dress her self, and having often Spent her Hours in Reading in the Closet, being more particularly delighted with the prospect, she beleiv'd it had been Custo∣mary with Her for several years to walk this ther in her Sleep, tho' it was never known till this Lucky Stranger had made the discovery. Nor did she Conceal the Important truth with all the Naked Circumstances, then praising the Generou; Education and Endearing Carriage of Honorius beg'd her Mother with all the Pa∣thetical Expressions of Love and tenderness, to
intercede with her Father on his behalf; which she at last promised. The old Gentleman was much Surpriz'd at the Relation and severely blam'd her unlawful Loves, but at the same time considering the Violence of his Daugh∣ters affection, and the Honour of his Family; consented to Her Wishes, and went with them to Honorius his Chamber, whom he Saluted his Son in Law, and soon after Ordered the Con∣summation of their Nuptials, which were Cele∣brated with all Imaginable Joy and Splendour. About a Month after, Honorius and his Lady in a Coach and six Horses went down to Visit his Relations, who all Congratulated his Happy fortunes, which were soon after increas'd to a very great Estate by the unexpected Death of hs Elder Brother. Geronto having thus Finish'd his Rela∣tion the whole Company, especially Florimel, seem'd extreamly pleased with it; For in∣deed it was hardly possible for him to speak to any Subject, tho' never so mean and Tri∣vial, but what his great Wit would always Beautify with those Charming Graces which won the constant Applause of his Auditors,
an Excellence peculiar to himself in which few could ever Tollerably Imitate him. Melintus Thank'd him for his pleasant Fancy as be call'd it, and told him a dis∣course of so much Mirth and Humour might have been better bestow'd for his part, Me∣lanchely had of late so prevail'd upon him that all Comedy was as Harsh to his Ears, as the Clicking of a Death Watch to a Hoor∣ding Miser. But Madam says he to Aurelia, if you please to Circulate the discourse as of Right it be∣longs to you, I remember a Story I have for∣merly had the Honour to hear you tell, which if I mistake not was Tragically Ʋnhappy, but as it then pleas'd with the Sadness of it, I am sure it would much more now, since my Vitiated Palat Relishes nething but what is Compounded of the bitterest Ingre∣dients. Sir says Aurelia, I presume you meant the Story of Amasius and Ortelia, but I am afraid I shall unpardonably Transgress the
Commands of my Lord your Ʋncle, and the passion of the Relation will affect you too erly; Tho' who knows but Melancholy, which is only a more Natural poyson, may be easiest Expell'd by an Application of its own Temperament, however, Sir, your Com∣mands will Apologize for me, which I thus Obey. NOVEL the Second. By AURELIA. A Young Gentleman whose Name was Ama∣sius, the only Son of an Opulent and well known Merchant of the City of London, after he had been furnish'd with a Competent Shart of Learning, to Qualifie him for the study of the Law, was plac'd at the Inns of Court, where the Advantages of his Fortunes and his own Mo∣dest behaviour gave him a Welcom reception amongst all his fellow Students. However
after he had Spent two years there, his mind inclin'd to Travel, and Communicating his de∣sign to his Father, easily obtain'd his consent. After he had seen Fraence and Italy he came to Brussels, and Spent about four Months in Flan∣ders, and then remov'd to Amsterdam, where Liv'd a Gentleman who was his Fathers cor∣respondent, and an Eminent Merchant, at whose House he was invited to Lodge during his Re∣fidence there. This Gentleman who was of considerable Estate and quality, had great Re∣fort of Company to his House, with whom Ama∣sius soon acquainted himself, his Generous con∣versation and affable Temper rendred him Courted and belov'd by all: He was likewise the Happy Father of three Daughters of so Incom∣parable Beauty that the whole Countrey could not produce their equals, nor were they less prais'd for a prudent Conduct, and Vertuous Education. With the youngest of these call'd Ortelia, it was the fortune of Amasius to fall in Love, and as if the same Loadstone had Attra∣cted both their Hearts, the same passionate de∣sires, warmed Ortelia's Breast, and tho both of them were Shy of discovering their affections to one another, yet no opportunity was miss'd in which by all the little Arts of Obligation and
kindness they strove to advance themselves in each others favour, his Courtship was most par∣ticularly to her, and her regards and Eye al∣wayes upon him. If Amasius happen'd to sigh, Ortelia would turn her Face to hide her reply in the same Note; In this Condition for some Months did they live, whlst by degrees all the diversions of the Countrey, the Visits of Friends, Balls and Entertainments grew Nauseous to the Lover, and a setled Melancholy seiz'd his Spirits. This was Observ'd by all his Acquaintance, but particularly by the compassionate Eyes of tender Ortelia, who seem'd very much concern'd east the same (probably) might be for some more Happy Mistress he had left in England. Under this anxiety and disquietude she had suffer'd some Weeks, which perhaps had wrought more effectual to her disadvantage, had not Amasius one day took an opportunity when she was alone in her Chamber, employ'd upon a piece of curious Needlework, wherein she had drawn the little God smiling at a disconsolate Lady whose Heart he had, newly struck with one of his Feather'd Weapon, prostrate at his Feet, as if she seem'd by her tears and piteous looks to beg his Mercy. Taking notice of the fancy.
Is it possible my dearest Ortelia, says he, you should be such an Artist in your Draughts of this God of Love, and never feel a Dart from his quiver? How know you Sir, reply'd the Fair One, but what you have seen may have a nearer Relation to Me then you are pleas'd to Imagin, and that this wounded Lady may be a proper device to represent my Ʋnfortunate self; That Ma∣dam is Impossible (pursues Amasius) for then should I view you in another posture, I should see you Seated on a Throne with Growns and Scepters at your Feet, an Im∣perial Canopy above your Head, supported by admiring Angels, disposing of bleeding hearts and my own amongst the Fatal Number. Oh Fylreply'd she, you Complement me Amasius, as if I were that Object of your happiest de∣sires the Seas now part you from, and I can∣not but believe at the same time you address your Commendations to Ortelia, you intend them to one more Lovely in your Esteem. I did not think Madam, replyes Amasius, you was so much a Siranger to your own
perfections, to believe these Eyes could be so much deceiv'd, as to place my respects on any other Object; Oh no, assure your self that if Amasius must not be admitted to admire his Ortelia to steal a kiss and Imprint his Lips on those fair Hands, to Languish at your Feet, and beg your Compassion, the grave shall have my Couriship, and for ever will I bid Adieu to all the empty pleasures on this side the Dust. With these and such like Courtly Expressions as opportunity would give leave, did our Ena∣mor'd Pair pass away the Hours, and give each other the assurance of as strong and lasting an Affection as Love it self could implant in the minds of the most passionate; Nor was the same so secretly caution'd, but that the Parents of Ortelia took Notice of its Growth, which as they saw no reason to discourage, so neither would they give License to the continuance of it, till such time as Amasius his Father was ac∣quainted with it, and they had obtain'd his con∣sent. To which purpose the Dutch Merchant discours'd Amasius, telling him, that he was on his part ready to give Ortelia a proportionable fortune to what his Father should settle on him,
and was no wayes averse to his Marriage with his Daughter. Amasius with tears of Joy re∣turn'd his acknowledgements, and Entreated him by all the Endearments Imaginable, by the next Pacquet to acquaint his Father with it, and beg his leave that it might be forthwith Con∣summated, this he promifed, and accordingly did; This Letter Amasius, Seconded with one of his own, wherein he described the Vertues and agreeable sweetness of Ortelia's temper, beg∣ging pardon that without his leave his thoughts had been fixt upon her, which he believ'd were directed by the Hand of providence, and design'd by Heaven for the Establishment of his future happiness. The Father was well pleased with the proposals made by his Correspondent, and in a short time after return'd his consent. This was certainly welcom'd with no inconsiderable Joy by the Lovers, who had Spent the last month in fear that some cross accident might Obviate their expectations, or at least procrastinate their Nuptials, which they so earnestly wished for, But having now the Consent of their Parents Concurrent with their own desires, the day of Marriage was agreed upon to be within a fort∣night, and all necessary preparations taken care of, to render it as Splendid as publick. The pulses of our Lovers be at nothing but desire, and
the Minutes seem'd to Travel on Crutches and the Hours with a snails pace followed after. Ten dayes were now past and the Eleventh had shewed his Face, when early in the Morning a Letter came by a particular Hand to Amasius from his Father, the Contents were in these words. My Dear Amasius, If ever thon intendest to see thy Living Fa∣ther, and as thou tenderest my Blessing upon Sigt of this, without any delay make all possible hast to Thy Loving and Dying Father. R. A. Never did the young Swain with greater Horrour see the Enlightned Sky Dart out a growing Thunder bolt amidst his harmless flock, then did Amasius receive this killing Message which struck his Enlivened Joy into Mortal ap∣prehensions. A Command so peremptory ad∣mited no excuse nor can I relate with how great a discontent, he was forced to obey the Mandate, or in the least proportion express the sad Fare∣well, he was constrain'd to take of his weeping Ortelia. The tears they Shed or the Sighs that
broke prison from their Breasts, were as innu∣merable as the tears of Autumn, or the drop that fill the Oecan, yet obedience was indispu∣table, and his dolatory and unwilling departure Criminal; in short, he Sigh'd and vow'd Eternal Love, promis'd his return, & almost dying on her Lips in his last salute, took leave & repaired to his Ship which waited for him. The willing winds wafted him unwillingly from the Joy of his Soul, and in a few Hours he lost fight of shore, where he had continually fixt his Eyes, and lest his dearest treasure; In every blast he thought he heard Ortelias lamentation, and grew angry with the Churlish winds that they would not do him the same kind Office and return his Sighs to Her. His Voyage was but too prosperous in Conveying him thence, though in some mea∣sure he was pleased therewith in that it gave him hopes he should be the less while from the Mistress of his affections, with whom he had left his heart the pledge of his resolv'd return. In a few days he arrived at London where he found his Father upon recovery from a dangerous sick∣ness in which his Physicians had dispaired of his Life. The old Gentleman welcom'd his beloved Amasius with the hearty affections of an Indul∣gent Father, whilst he Congratulated his escape from the Grave with all the Transports of a du∣tiful
Son; After a little time he recover'd a good state of health, and receiv'd the Visits of his Friends and Neighbours. The General Ac∣complishments of Amasius his affable discourse and Courteous behaviour were observ'd by all, who Commended him for the most compleat Gentleman they had ever seen, amongst others an Antient Gentleman, Master of a great Estate and Father of our only Daughter to inherit it; propos'd her to Amasius his Father as a conve∣nient Match for his Son, at such time as he had procur'd his leave to depart and Consummate his Bliss with the Beauteous Ortelia. This old Fox knowing that her fortune would treble what was offer'd with Orealia, greedily devour'd the bait, and Commanded Amasius to forget his first, and apply his Addresses to this Second My∣stress, which tho' he refused with all the prayers and Gentle Arguments Love could Muster on his behalf, by the recital of those many and Sa∣cred Vowes he had pass'd, and the miseryes he must certainly meet in the Violation of that Troth which Heaven it self had been witness to, yet the passionate Father, wholly devoted to his Interest, would by no means be prevail'd upon, but injoyn'd him by his Paternal Authority and as he hop'd to Heyr his Favour and fortunes, to obey his Command wretchedly miserable was
the Condition of Amasius, but complaints were in Vain, the old Men were agreed and he must submit or incurr his Fathers utmost displeasure. However not all their Art or Industry could ever alienate his thoughts from his dear Ortelia. She was constantly in his Eye and the Subject of every Melancholy Soliloquy that he repated to the careless winds and unanswering, Groves, where he Sigh'd away his tedious Hours. In Memory of her the tender Trees were wounded to Carve her Name, and every kind Turf that used to be his Couch was Nourish'd by the dew that fell from his Eyes; The Birds for got their Notes, and learn't to Sympathize with him, and Eccho it self repeated nothing but Ortelia's Name. Every one Compassionated the unhap∣py Youth; but the Cruel Father, who seeing all things in the Mirror of his own Sordid Interest forc'd Amastus to Visit his design'd Wise; but how Cold and unlike a Lover his Addresses were, the young Lady quickly took Notice of, and acquainted her Parents with it, which was not long before it came to his Fathers ears, who the more he found him Averse to his Hu∣mour, the more did he press the same, and charged him as undutifull and Rebellious to his Commands, which by all that was Sacred he Vow'd he should perform. To this end he forth∣with
with enjoyn'd a Second Visit which disconsolate Amsius obeyed and having the opportunity of private discourse with the young ady, who was a Person of equal discretion and Beauty, he resolv'd to deal generously with her, and lay his present Condition naked before her. To this end after some short discourse leading to his purpose, he told her he was infinitely troubled that he had not a heart that he could intirely devote to her Service, but that the same was possessed by another whose Charms not long be∣fore had made an absolute Conquest over him, and to whom by all the Vowes and promises that Lovers make, he was in the strictest sort obliged; So that should he go about to deceive her by Counterfeiting a passion that could never be real, he should play the Traytor with a Lady, who had for her Vertues and Incomparable de∣sert so much of his esteem, that he could never pardon himself so great a crime. The young Lady was extreamly pleased with his Ingenious Con∣fession, and promised she would on her part ne∣ver go about to make him guilty of the breath of those Vow, she look'd upon above all others, to have some thing more awful and Religious in them and exacted the most sincere observance: But on the contrary she would endeavour what lay in her power to divert her Father from his design. Ah Madam! replyed the gladded An a∣sius,
and can you be so kind, so forgetful of my faults, and give me your pardon, then may I hope once more to be happy. You have it Sir, sayes the Lady, and an Esteem with it Suitable to your Merits, for surely there is none who knows your Circum∣stances but must Commend you, and to E∣vince to the World, I am one of that Number, the blame shall be mine; and if you please, in Obedience to your Fathers Commands, to pursue your Courtship, the Breach shall ap∣pear on my part. Its Heaven! Heaven Madam! Replyed the overjoy'd Amsius, that must repay this favour, which all my Stock of Gratitude is too poor to Answer in the least degree. These and such like discourses were the Entertainment of the Second Meeting wherein it was resolv'd Ama∣sius should carry on his seeming Addresses, and the refusal to be on the Ladies side, this he so lively personated, that in the eye of the World, he was look'd upon as absolutely Enamor'd of her excelleneyes as if the same had been real, upon which his Father receiv'd him with a dou∣ble return of his respect and kindness to him. The old Gentleman having setled the whole
affair between themselves, agreed the time and place to finish the Espousals, under which ap∣prehension, let us change the Scene to Holland, where during the time of Amasius absence, the disconsolate Ortelia like the Mourning Turtle on her Melancholy perch, Sigh'd out her Sor∣rows in the longing expectation of her Dean Amasius his return, but having by the miscarri∣age of his Letter for two Months heard nothing from him, began to think him unkind and for∣getful of his Vowes; when it happened an English Gentleman Travelling into those parts, and invited to her Fathers House with other Friends one day to Dinner, amongst the variety of their discourse of England, and of their severa acquaintance there, it was ask'd if he kne Amasius his Father, how he did, and if perfectly recover'd from his late Sickness, which he told them he was, and that his Son, the young Gen∣tleman, was to be suddenly Married with a La∣dy to whom he had been some time Engaged. This unexpected News Surpriz'd the whole Family, but especially Ortelia, who trembled and chang'd Colour at it; the question was renew' by Ortelias Father, Sir, says he, I have som knowledge of the young Gentleman, and shoul be very glad to hear of his prosperity, and entreat you, Sir, if you can to tell me more pa∣ticularly
the Person to whom, and the Grounds of your assurance that he is so soon to Change his Condition. In answer to which, the Gentle∣man told him her Name, described her Person and fortune, and withal gave her a very advan∣tageous Character, as to her Vertues, her Beau∣ty and excellent Temper, adding that before he left England the day had been appointed; which he suppos'd would happen two days following, that he was with Amasius, and his Father when the Wedding Clothes were bought, and other provisions made for the Solemnity. And is, pursues one of Ortelias Sisters, Amasius as accom∣plished a Lover as he seems a Gentleman; Doubtless Madam, sayes the stranger, he wants nothing to Commend him to the World in all respects, and I have observ'd, (for I live near him) his Visits to be very assiduous, his mean and address Vigorous and Courtly; The day I came for Holland he waited upon her in a New Chariot Richly guilt, in which they both went to a play together. Persidious Wretch! sayes Ortelia to her self, am I so soon forgotten! — Oh Amasias! and blush'd and could scarce re∣rain her Eyes from expressing the Violence of er passion, which her Friends taking Notice of, iverted the discourse and Dinner being ended; he slipt from the Company to her Chamber,
where after she had given her passion its full rage against the false Amasius, she flung he self down upon the Bed, where she lay till he Sisters came up to comfort her. But alas! to late, for the Torrent of her Griefs had already put a ftal period to her life, and her Soul wa fled to those Mansions of Bliss which she miss'd of here, so strange were their Surprize at so sudden a Difaster, that they could scarce beleiv their eyes, their loud shrieks and cryes call'd u the House, and so excessive was the general La mentation that it is beyond the power of m expression to describe it. I will now leave thi House of Mourning and return to Amasis, who all this time had liv'd upon the Rack, and wa against his will oblig'd to Act a part so direct contrary to his Inclinations and the ingenuity o his Temper; But this being at the Ldies re∣quest and known to her, it did the less concern him: On the other Hand the young Lady ha used all her endeavours with her Father to pu off the Match, alledging in her self a present in disposition of health, and unwillingness so hasti∣ly to change her Condition, nor could she d∣cover, (whatever the world might see,) tho Graces in Amasius his Person, or that agree ab humour in his conservation, that should tm her to Marry him, and Hazard her future
piness in the Choice of a Husband she could ne∣ver intirely Love. But all her arguments were in Vain, her perverse Father would permit no disputes, but sharply reprov'd her, Saying, not her Eyes should be the guide of her Choice, that should depend on his pleasure, that he was very well satisfied in Amasius, and did expect nothing from her but a due Complyance to his Will. In this state their affairs stood till the very Night was come which preceeded the Morning of their Nuptialls, on which as they were discoursing together, Amaesis on his knees beg'd her pardon that he must unwillingly take some other course to avoid that, which to any other man in the World would be the greatest Blessing his Soul could wish to enjoy on this side Heaven; But what the same should be he was not yet determined, but impossible it was, that he could be ever forc't to betray his vows to Ortclia. The good Lady pityed his Condi∣tion, and beg'd him by no desperate Act to urge his Fate, telling him she would be ready to share his misfortunes, & equally suffer with him. The Evening grew on a pace and Amasius with a Thousand thanks to the Generous Lady took leave, no wayes resolv'd what to do, his wandring thoughts fell upon several Stra∣tagems to defer the Wedding, but none of them
pleased him, the Obstinacy of his Father was not to be removed by all his prayers and Intreaties. At last he resign'd himself to his Pillow, and recommended the success of this great affair to the care and Conduct of his better Genius; however this point he fixt, that rather then break his Vowes he would Venture the displea∣sure of his Father, and if no Mediation would reconcile him, he resolved for Holland to lve and dye with his Dear Ortilia. Often did he endeavour to Compose himself to rest, but the Troubles of his mind kept his Eyes open, nor had he slept a wink when the clock struck two, the Moon shone full upon the Window and his Melancholy fancy was shaping the several Shadows into various representations and fi∣gures, when he thought he heard his door open, and turning his Eye he saw the Appearance of a Woman with a Mournful and pale look, en∣ter his Chambers, startled at the Phantasm as he at first supposed it to be, after a little time he recover'd himself & observing the figure more nearly, he thought he beheld the very Person of Ortelia, Clad all in white with her Hair dis∣shrevell'd, and at the End of every Lock a drop of Blood, which hung round her Shoulders like a Chain of Rubyes; On her head she seem'd to have a Crown of Gold set round with diamonds,
Emeralds Saphires, and other precious Stones of different Colours whose Dazling rayes his weaker eyes could no more behold then the Sun in his Meridian Glory, this surprizing Vi∣sion struck a sacred horror through every part, tho' the strangeness of the Apparition did not so much assright as the Majestick Port and radi∣ant Graces pleas'd his admiring fancy: It mo∣ved in a gentle pace toward, the Bed, and draw∣ing the Curtains in a pleasing but hollow voice, spoke to him. Fear not, Amasius, for I am now too late satisfied of thy Fidelity to the Mistaken Ortelia, nor do I come from the Shades of Death, to reproach thy unconstant Love, it hath been the Misfortune of my Credulity, not thy Disloyalty, too late I knew it, to Re∣medy the dissolution I suffer'd; but the pow∣ers amongst whom I am, have since reveal'd the truth and tho' I can never be thine. Not mine, replyed the trembling Amasius, not mine, Ortelia? Think not those Shades shall ever hide thee, no Ortelia; if really thou art my Ortelia, surely thou couldst not think so hardly of me, but even amidst those dark Shadess below Amasius would seek thee out;
and since our Destinyes have forbid us to abide on Earth, is there no Seciety beneath it? thi∣ther I will follow thee, and Trace every step of thine till I have wearied thy Fleeting Manes and forc'd thee to repose, where I will rest in thy osom and enjoy the happiness of being ever with thee, Alas Amasius! Reply'd the Mournfull Shade, little art thou learnt in what we know, nor dare I tell thee what we are Sub∣ject to, who Travel in that great Abyss. Live therefore, Amasius, 'tis Heaven enjoyns it, Heaven (to which in a short time my an∣dring spirit must take its everlasting flight) bids thee not shake the Sands of life which in a short time will of themselves run out, much less break the precious Christall that contains them; long it will not he e're we shall meet again and be for ever joyn'd by Tyes more Sacred then Flesh and Blood can admit of here. Oh Amasius, we shall be infi∣nitely happy, but we must wait the leasure of Heaven to make us so. May that time quickly come, cryes the pas∣sionate Amasius, move faster, O ye Sluggish
Hours and huddle into days, ye days into years to accomplish that Happy period. 'Twill not be long first, said Ortelia, but in the mean time observe my Request, and do no Violence to your self, nor ever consent to Marry the Person design'd nor any other, and if you can possibly pre∣vent it, never reveal one Syllable of this discourse, nor let the World know I have now appear'd to you, for if you do, my rest∣less Ghost will ever haunt you. I dare promise any thing thy Blessed Shade desires me, Reply'd Amasius, but to live is a pu∣nishment too intolerable for frail Mortality to bear, I'le cast off my hated Life with all the Gildd vanities that attend it, to be Blest a∣mongst the Number of the dead, with the Sight of my Ortelia We must not, said She, Carve out our own desires, if we should, our unskilful Hand would oft mistake the Poison for the Antidote, but as thou Tenderest the Prayers and Entreatyes of dead Ortelia, patiently attend thy Fate. At which word the Shrill Harbinger of the
Morn gave Notice of the approach of day, and Summon'd all wandring Ghosts to their dark abode; when Ortelia contracting her scatter'd Rayes into one Glorious Beam of Light, cryed Farewell! Farewell! My Dear Amasius, and vanish'd in a Minute. Amasius, seeing that Or∣telia was now gone beyond recall, fell into these passionate Complaints, Oh kind Death, if ever thou had'st pity for the Miserable suffer thy self this once to be entreated, discharge me from this Clog of earth which still sinks my aspiring Soul; See here a Resistless breast which begs but one single Shaft, and hast thou none at leasure? Insulting Tyrant to keep the wretched in Chains, and like the Conquer'd Bjazet make me the Gazing Stock of Fools, whilst I am im∣prison'd in this Cage of Flesh, but Oh! that like him, I could dash out life, against those Bars that hold me! Oh sad parting, Oh Dear Ortelia! and art thou gone so soon from me, who perhaps may never see thee more? Come death and ease me, Oh cruel fate obey! No! no! I am con∣demn'd to Linger out a miserable life in pains, more Exquisite then the sharpest Martyrdoms, but thou dear Soul hast told me it shall not be long. Oh remember but thy last promise, and I will ask no more to compleat me happy; with these and other dolorous Expressions did the
Unhappy Amasius Vent his sorrows, whilst ex∣cess of passion had thrown him into a Violent Feaver. In the Morning early, his Friends came Crowding to his Chamber to bid good Morrow to the Bridegroom, and finding him in Bed yet, one of them began to Rally his Sluggishness, who on a Wedding day when all the prepara∣tions for the Nuptials waited for him, and his Friends were Met to welcom the Happy Hour, was the greatest Loyterer himself: To whom Amasius only answer'd with a deep Sigh, which wa followed by Showers of Tears, the most pa∣thetick Oratory of a troubled Mind: what weeping, Amasius? sayes another, sye for shame, let the old and impotent who have worn out Youth, and are now curst with the miseries of Age bewail the loss of those pleasures they once did Revel in; but thou art now in full possession of those riper Joys, and thy happier fortune speaks nothing but Mirth and Jollity. Pray forbear Sir, your unwelcom Jests and spare your Railery, at this time said Amasius, the Grave must be my Mar∣riage Bed, and Oh that I were now to dress my self, and be there undrest at Night, with what chearfulness should you then fee me consummate those wish'd for Espousals. But Gentlemen, as you are my Friends let me beg of you to give me no farther disturbance, my thoughts are
oherways disposed of then you imagine, and the greatest kindness you can do me is to leave me to my own Mditations. In so disconsolate at one did Amasius deliver himself, that he strangely Surpriz'd the hearers with pity for his Conditi∣on, the reason of which they could not possibly imagine. His Father was immediately acquain∣ted with it, who coming to his Bed side found him extreamly ill, and fitter for the Advice of the Physitians then the Entertainment of his Friends, or the intended Solemnity. The Doctors were sent for to consult of his present Distemper, who all agreed he was in a High Feaver, but that the cause thereof was not Ex∣ternal, but from some extraordinary grief which opprest his Spirits, and was not to be remov'd by all their Learned prescriptions, nor could they advise a more proper Cure then what they endeavour'd to prevent his Death. For some weeks in this miserable Condition, did he linger out the tedious Hours, to the great trouble and discomfort of his Relations, who daily Visited him, and as often prest to know the cause of his present affliction, which he the more carefully strove to hide, nor could they Guess at any pro∣bable cause, but as they observ'd his deep Sighs, and then of a sudden his passionate and abrupt expressions of O dear Ortelia, happy Ortilia, but
soft, but gone for ever O miserable wretch, mise∣rable Amusius, I come, I come, my Joy, my Dear Saint, I com, from whence they all concluded no∣thing but the Hand of Heaven could work a Cure on his Distemper'd mind, whilst his Body only Smpathiz'd with the anguish of his Soul; in the mean time, his Father heard from his Dutch cor∣respondent, how fatal his unkindness had been to his Family, who now began to fee his own Errour, and blame himself as the only cause of those Misfortunes in which they had both so great a Share; and that by crossing the Esta∣blish'd Loves of Amasius and Ortelia (which re∣ceiv'd their Life and vigour from his encourage∣ment) he had occasion'd the death of Beautifull Ortelia, and reduc'd his Son into those miseries and discontents from which he had but small hopes to recover him. However after six weeks Languishing under his illness, he began to grow into a better State of health, but his Melancholy increased upon him; Though his Father endea∣vour'd by all imagineable diversions to drive it from his wounded mind, and supposing he yet knew nothing of Ortelia's Death, resolv'd to Conceal it from him, till he had in some mea∣sure Estrang'd his Affections from her, which he hoped in time to Effect▪ But after two Months were pass'd, and Amasius was rather
worse then better, he began to think that if his Son, knew of Ortelia's death and the impossi∣bility of ever enjoying her, it might by degrees quiet his troubled mind, and put him upon some thoughts of perfecting the Match he had design'd him with much advantage. Accordingly one Evening he took an opportunity to disclose Or∣telia's Death to him omiting those Circumstan∣ces that more particularly concern'd her love to him, which would rather aggravate then al∣lay his passion. Alas Sir! said Amasius, I have long since known more of that affair then you are pleas'd to Communicate to me now; I know that Ortelia is dead, and that Amasius can never be happy till he is so too; But for this I must blame the weakness of my Love, that what a Woman could do for me, I cannot for her, nor dare not, Since I am forbid all violent Remedies, which adds to my afflicti∣on, and prevents that Cure, which otherwise I would soon accomplish. His Father was strangely Surpriz'd to see himself prevented in his discovery, and com∣manded Amasius to tell him how he came by his Intelligence, supposing that contrary to his or∣der
some of his Friends had acquainted him with it. Amasius humbly beg'd his Pardon, and assur'd him, it was not from his Relations or any Person else he had Entrusted with the Secret, that he came by the knowledge of it, and earnestly pray'd him not to press that question any farther, which if in Obedience to his Commands he should be oblig'd to An∣swer, would yet add more to that weight of sorrow he so miserably labour'd under. This made the old Gentleman his Father the more Inquisiive, who conjur'd him by that re∣spect and duty he ow'd him as his Father, to give him a plain and Satisfactory account, which without any excuse he immediately expected from him. Well Sir, said Amasius, since you will extort a Secret from me, which of all things can only make me more Ʋnhappy, take it, and Judge if my Duty to you is not above all regard to my self — Here Amasius ac∣quainted his Father how he had sen Or∣telia, and the discourse he had with her, the Night before his intended Nuptials, Ad∣ding
withal, that in declaring what he had forc'd him to, he should be the most mise∣rable of Men, as the Sequel of his Ʋnhappy Life approv'd him to be. Some time after his Father by the Advice of his Friends, remov'd Amasius into the Countrey, and having several Relations and acquaintance near York, that place was fixt upon, hoping that Change of Air and variety of Company might be of advantage to his Health, and a diversion to his Melancholy. But Alas! He never En∣joy'd a Minute free from the thoughts of his fair deceas'd Ortelia, the only Intervals of plea∣sure he had, were when the kind Ghost of Orte∣telia came to visit him, which she was often wont to do, or at least his deluded Fancy Imagined so, from that time (when by the Severity of his Fa∣ther he was forc't to discover that he had both seen and discoursed with her the Night before the intended Marriage.) At several times would he start upon a sudden from his Company, say∣ing, do you not hear Ortelia's voice? I come, I come, my Dear, Ah there she is, pray do but observe how kindly the poor Ortelia looks on her Amasius, see how Melancholy and pale she is, how beautifully sorrowful she Glances at me, Oh my Dear I come, but when shall I come, never
to part from thee more? Oh that this was that blessed Hour that would make me for ever hap∣py with thee! And then retireing into the next Room, would talk with the same passionate Ex∣pressions of Love and tenderness to her, as if he did really Conversc with her in the visible form of Flesh and Blood. Thus did he pass away about half a year, when one Night after he had been walking and discoursing with her for at least two Hour, (tho' at all these several times she was never seen by any Person but himself, fometimes indeed they could distinguish two several Voices) when returning to his Friends more pleasant and Merry then ever he had been before, I thank Heaven, sayes he, my sorrows have now found a period; I have but sew nights more to repose on Earth, and then shall I live with my Ortelia, and enjoy Eternal Rest of Bo∣dy and Tranquillity of mind. That Night he Slept heartily and next Morning arose early in a most Serene and Compos'd Temper, at which his Friends were extreamly pleased, and tho' they were much Surpriz'd at the discourse of his ap∣proaching Death, yet seeing him continue so well for three dayes, they began to forget their fears, and please themselves with the vain hopes of his perfect recovery. The next day being Thursday, and Bowling-day, it was agreed they
should take their Horses and Ride to the Green, and there Dine with other Gentlemen who usu∣ally Met there once a Week: Amasius chear∣fully consented to it, which was the more taken Notice of, it being the first time they could ever prevail with him to go into a publick Company, or divert himself with any Sociable Recreation. After Dinner they Bowl'd again, when a dispute arising about a Cast, Amasius took his friends part, at which his Adversary was so Incensed (being a Cholerick Person) that he struck him with his fist, but the Gentlemen who were pre∣sent interposeing they prevented any farther Mischeif. Amasius, who disdain'd to receive so publick an Injury with the patience of a coward, withdrew into the Garden, and privately sent a note to the Gentleman to let him know, he there expected with his Sword in his Hand Satifacti∣on for the Affront he had put upon him. His ad∣versary came, and after some few passes ran Amasius through the heart, of which he imme∣diately dyed, and went with Joy to meet his Dear Ortelia in the Shades below, to the great Grief of his Father and all his friends who had known his Vertuous and Honourable Accom∣plishments.
Aurelia having thus Finish'd her Tragi∣call Relation, Melintus paid her his more particular acknowledgements, nor did the Rest of the Company forget their Respects, tho' all thought it an unreasonable Enter∣tainment for a Gentleman, whose present Di∣stemper had too much affinity to Honorius his Melancholy passion, and were not a lit∣tle apprehensive of the ill Effects it might produce. However to prevent his being too serious and considerate upon it, Lysan∣der, who was next in the Rota, took his turn and thus address'd to the Company. NOVEL the Third. By LYSANDER. IT was the unhappiness of Cratander, whose Ge∣nerosity very often out-stript his prudence, and his Natural Bounty the Narrow Confines
of his Estate, to be at last reduc'd to great ne∣cessity, his Friends Commiserating his Condi∣tion advised how they might best assist his pre∣sent distress and prevent his own and the disho∣nour of his family. They resolv'd at last upon a friendly Contribution to raise some Moneys, and present him with a good Gelding, and pro∣pos'd to him the going up to London, where he might put himself into some employ and par∣ticularly that of the Kings Guards, which would afford him a Gentile and competent Support. Cratander was easily perswaded to embrace the Councel of his friends, and not long after left the North his Native Countrey, and took his Journey to London. After he had spent some Months there in vain, either through his own ill Conduct, the Modesty of his Temper which could not Sue for favours with that Confidence which others succeed by, or that his Stars had design'd him for some greater end, having al∣most Spent the little Stock he had, he saw he should be soon forc't to Sell his Horse to buy Hay, and to Live longer there at so great Ex∣pence, would most certainly involve him in Debt and Misery. In the midst of these distract∣ed thoughts he resolved to quit the Town, and make a Visit to an old Acquaintance who was Master of a plentifull Estate, and lived in the
West of England, and accordingly did so. The next Morning he set out early, and Travell'd al∣most fifty Miles, when Night coming upon him hastily he lost his way upon a great Common, and not knowing the Coast of the Countrey wandred up and down, till at last he spy'd a Candle at a Shepherds Cott about half a Mile, distance, which he steer'd up to. Hallowing to know who liv'd there, the Shepherd came out, of whom he Enquired the way to the Town he intended to Lodge at that Night, the Shep∣herd told him he was five Miles off, and the way difficult to find, if he was a stranger in the Countrey, Cratander told him he was, and had already lost his way and tired his Horse, and If he would be so kind to give him Accommo∣dation for that night, he would gratifie him to his Content. The Shepherd told him his was a House but of one Room, tho' plentifully Furnish'd with Inhabitants, that besides his Wife and himself he had Six Children, and but one Bed, and a Matress, and not so much as a Hovell to put his Horse in. Cratander then enquired if there was no neighbouring Village could give him a Recep∣tion for one night, the Shepherd told him a
mile off there was one, and if he pleas'd he would be his Guide, which Cratander accepted of when they were Arrived at it, they found but one Ale-house in the Town, and that afforded no better Accommodation then the Shepherds Hutt; Cra∣tander in this distress, ask'd if there was no Gen∣tleman or Farmer in the Town would be so kind to Entertain him for a Night, the Shep∣herd told him it was a very poor Village, but there was a Mannor House in it, at which a Gentlewoman now liv'd who was Daughter to the Lord of the Mannor, who died six Months ago, that she probably might be so kind to him as a stranger, when others for the same reason would distrust and refuse him so Charitable a favour. Cratander, with the directions of the Shepherd, went up to the Hall, the Shepherd knock'd at the gate, and told the servant a Gen∣tleman defir'd to speak with her Mistress, who immediately sent to Invite him in, Cratander excus'd himself, that it would be too great a boldness in him who was a stranger to the Lady, but he would wait as a beggar at her Gate to intreat a Boon from her Hands. The Maid carried back this answer, which surpriz'd the Young Lady, especially when her Ser∣vant told her he was a Gentleman on Horse∣back well accotred, and Robin who was her Shepherd was with him, the Lady came present∣ly
to the Gate to whom Cratander with all Mo∣desty and respect address'd himself. I am, Madam, tho' a Stranger to you, forc't to presume upon your Favour, that you will please to give leave to a Traveller who has lost his way to beg a Lodging for himself and Horse, the same Stable shall Entertain us both, nor should any thing but down-right necessity oblige me to this Confident Petition. The Lady who was of a most affable and sweet Temper told him readily he was most heartily Welcom, and she only wish'd her present Hos∣pitality could answer the Merits of her Guest; upon this invitation Cratander alighted, whom the Lady Conducted into the House and order'd his Horse to the Stable. He was Entertain'd in the principal Room with a plentiful Supper, which being ended, Cratander in the most Ob∣liging Expressions paid his thanks to the Ge∣nerous Lady, and taking up his Sword and Pistols which lay upon the Table, now Madam if you please, I will walk into the Stable and repose my felf by my Horse, for this days Jour∣ney has made me both weary and Sleepy; The Lady at these words seem'd extreamly Sur∣priz'd, and with a graceful sharpness told him, She was very sorry that the Cordial Welcom
She better design'd him, then was able to express upon so sudden an Occasion should be so far mistaken; That she hop'd her House, how mean∣ly soever Furnish'd, might afford him a better Lodging then her Stable, which she desir'd he would believe by accepting of it. Cratander was much out of Countenance at this repri∣mand, but recovering himself, Modestly reply'd, Dear Madam, you have already so infinitely oblig'd me that I had not Confidence enough to Trespass farther upon so Generous a Temper, especially when at the same time I consider my self an absolute stranger to you, which perhaps may create some fears and Jealousyes in your Family, though your Noble Breast which knows no Guilt in it self, can Harbor no suspition of others. The Lady Blusht and told him, She saw too much Honour in his Person and demean to Judge so unworthily of him, and desir'd he would please to take his Chair and pass away half an Hour, till his Chamber was prepar'd for him. Cratander had observ'd that both before and at Supper the Maid that waited had her eye constantly fixt upon him, and with a look that spoke Horror and Consternation, as if she sus∣pected him for a Person who had some Villai∣nous design brooding in his heart, which his being so well Arm'd gave occasion for, Nor
was he mistaken for she had several times prest her Mistress that the stranger might lye in the Stable with his Horse as he himself requested, That it happen'd out very odly that this stran∣ger should come this very Night upon those pretentions when no such accident ever was be∣fore, a Night when all the Men-Servants, had leave to be abroad at a Countrey Wake and none but Women and a poor Boy who belong'd to the Stables left at home, her Mistress heard her reasons and inclin'd to her Opinion, but considering what a reflection it would be upon her, if this stranger was really that worthy Gen∣tleman he appear'd to be, she resolv'd to run all risques rather then be guilty of so base and degenerous an Action. The Gentleman and Lady had pass'd away the time in variety of discourse, by which she was now fixt in a good Opinion of him, and had fully banish'd those fears and apprehensions her Maid had whisper'd in her Ear, when the Servant came down and told her the Chamber was ready, if the Gentle∣man pleas'd to go to Bed, upon which her Mistress order'd her to take the Candle and wait upon him to his Lodging. The Lady at∣tended him to his Chamber, and smilingly told him, Sir, pray Command whatever you want, and my house afford, I wish you good Rest and
hope your Lodging will be as pleasant here as in the Stable — Cratander would have reply'd, but the Lady was gone, The Maid having left the Gentleman to his rest, went to her Mistresses Chamber, where she began a fresh to discourse her formr Suspitions, but the Lady with a frown bid her be Silent and make hast to Bed; those Jealousyes were idle fancies only, and should never discompose her rest whatever should be the issue of them. The Maid went to her Chamber, put out the Candle and lay'd herself upon the Bed, wishing for the Morning, which would dispell those Melancholy thoughts that now opprest her mind. Her present fears banish'd all Sleep from her Eyes, and the Clock had now struck One, when she heard a Noise in the Court-yard, starting up she ran to the win∣dow, where she saw four Men at the door, who first Tryed the Latch to see if it was open, and finding it fast Bolted and Lockt, they endea∣vour'd by main strength to force their Entrance, the Maid frighted out of her wits, ran to her Mistresse, Chamber, where with her passionate Out cryes, She awaken'd her, and told her, There were four Robbers in the yard breaking into the House, who would certain∣ly Murder them all, and the Person She had
Entertain'd was no doubt of their Gang? The Lady Alarm'd at this unexpected News, half distracted flew to Cratanders Chamber; who was fast asleep and loudly Snoreing, but she soon awakened him with her loud complaints, and upon her Knees with all the passion, and moving Rhetorick her fears could inspire her with. Beg'd her Life and Honour of him, and the preservation of her Family, and She would immediately deliver him all her Mo∣ney, Plate, Jewels, or whatever else he thought worth his acceptance; And in the same Breath repeated, but pray Sir Spare my Life, Spare my Honour, and I shall think my self indebted to you for whatever I part with besides. Cratander, whose thoughts at the lowest Ebb of fortune could never Entertain a base design, was no lefs Surpriz'd then the Lady, and told her. Madam, I understand not your meaning, but if you please to be plain in your Expressi∣ons, I will defend both your Life and Ho∣nour with the utmost hazard of my own. Oh Sir, sayes the Lady, there are Theives
breaking into my House, and pardon me if I mistake you for one of their Confederates. Il's convince you presently, reply'd Cra∣tander, and leaping out of Bed Slipt on his Clothes, and with his Sword and Pistols, by the Maids direction, made to that part of the House they first attempted, Cratander had the fortune to have just got to the door, when they forc't it open, and discharging one of his Pistols amongst them, he saw a Person drop, upon which they gave back; but he with his Sword in Hand, advanced two or three Steps, and by the opposition he met with, from one of them receiv'd a Slight Wound upon his Breast, which he reveng'd by another upon his Adversaries right Arm, which so disabled him that he gave back, and Cratander retreated to the door for fear their odds might oppress him, whose safety depended only on his single Courage. The Thieves seem'd to go off, and lest one of their Companions bleeding upon the Ground, which Cratander by the Groans suppos'd to be dying, but not knowing what
reserve of strength they might have, he made fast the door and went up to his Chamber, where he had left the Lady half dead with fear. Madam, says he, was it not for what your Ladyship has suffer'd in the affright I am hear∣tily glad of this opportunity, which has I hope in some measure made me Serviceable to your Ladyship, and given a Testimony of that Ho∣nour and Justice which before as a stranger might be question'd in me. The Lady with tears in her Eyes, which stood ready to sally out either with Joy or sorrow, return'd her thanks in the most grateful Sense her words could ex∣press, call'd him the Preserver of her Life, Ho∣nour and Fortune, who certainly was snt from Heaven, like a Guardian Angel, to defend her from the rapine and Violence of Theives and Murderers. After some care taken of his wound, which was not deep, they resolv'd not to go to Bed for fear of a Second Ataque; but in Cratanders Chamber spent the remainder of the Night, wishing for the Morning light, that they might safely discover the Person who was left behind dead upon the Spot; Assoon as the day appear'd, Cratander, the Lady, and the rest of the Family open'd the door, and in the yard found
a great quantity of blood spilt upon the Ground, but the Body was convey'd away, which they could trace no farther then the out-ward Gate, which was left open, and the lock broke off; Cratander stayed two days till his wound was Clos'd, and the Lady recover'd from that Con∣sternation she was under, when ready on the third day to take his leave against all those ar∣guments of kindness and respect the Lady could press upon him, a Servant came over to invite her to the Funeral of her Uncle a Gentleman of Competent Estate who liv'd ten miles off. The Lady was very much Surpriz'd to hear of her Uncles so sudden death, whom she had not known to be ill, and particularly enquir'd the cause, to whom the Servant could give no other Answer, but that going to Bed something indispos'd, he was found dead in the Morning, the Lady was now Furnish'd with fresh occasion of Grief, which she made use of as a powerful reason to perswade Cratander to stay one day longer, and particularly desir'd him to bear her Company to that mournfull Solemnity. Cratander told her he was extreamly sorry for her loss of so near a Relation — Alas Sir, says she, it is not that alone, I have a second loss in a good Friend, to whose Care and Advice my dying Father re∣commended me and I have been sufficiently
sensible of his kindness in the management of those worldly affairs Women are generally born strangers to. The next day being that of his Funeral, Cratander promis'd to wait upon her, and in the Interim endeavor'd to chear up her drooping Spirits with a Suitable Conversation to her Solemn grief. Being arrived at the House the Lady was earnest to know what sudden Di∣stemper was the cause of her Uncles death, her Aunt told her she suppos'd an Apoplexy, but desiring to see the Corps, she answer'd that be∣ing a Corpulent Fat Man the Coffin was nail'd up early in the Morning for fear the Body, which began already to Corrupt, should be offensive to the Company. The Lady was very well Satis∣fied with the answer, and led by Cratander, at∣tended the Corps to the Grave. At their re∣turn home discoursing of the Funeral, Cratander ask'd who that Gentleman was in the Brown Periwig that assisted at the Interment, The La∣dy told him, he was a Gentleman of intimate acquaintance with her Uncle, who had former∣ly a fair Estate, but his too lavish Hand had now forc'd him to receive his Support from the kindness of his more familiar and Charitable Friends. Madam, sayes Cratander, did you not observe a black Ribbon tyed about the wrist of his Right Hand; yes Sir, sayes she, I did so, he is
a Gentleman who drinks high and is often in Broyls, I wish Madam, says Crataer, he was guilty of no other fault, tho' I cannot commend a quarrelsom Temper in my best Friends; but proceeds he, would you please to Seal my par∣don before-hand, I would make one step farther, which I shall do with all respect to the Memory or reputation of any Gentleman alive or dead. Sir, sayes she, I am altogether in the dark, and cannot Guess at your meaning, but assure your self it is not in your power to disoblige me: Ma∣dam says Craetandr, when 'twas my good fortune the other Night to engage the Thieves who had broke into your House, after the fall of one of them, I prest foward with my Sword & receiv'd the hurt upon my Breast from another, which by that glimmering light of the Moon we then had, bore the perfect Shape and lsikeness of this Gen∣tleman, who at the same time receiv'd a hurt on his right Hand, which this Person seems to have; Sir, what sayes the Lady, a little warmly, pray do you infer, Madam, sayes he, I do suspect this Gentleman to have been in the Company, and I should be very glad to be satisfied in it Sir, says she you seem to hint something more then I am willing to believe you do. Madam, reply'd Cra∣tander, I shall make no reserves in your Lady∣ships Company, but I heartily wish this Hand
did not Contribute more to your Uncles death then I ever design'd it should. Sir, sayes she, 'tis impossible I dare ac∣quit you, and do at this Minute, and pray let us discourse no farther on so unpleasant a Subject. Madam, sayes he, I will Trespass but in one word more, my Suspition commenc'd when I first saw that Gentleman at the House, before I ever knew he had any hurt on his Hand, for I observ'd I could never fix my Eye upon him but either through shame or Guilt he avoided the Test of my looks, and either chang'd Coun∣tenance, or Show'd some inward emotion of Spirit, which they who are better Read in the lines of Nature, and more Critically observe her Rules, would Construe in the same Sense that I do. Sir, sayes the Lady, I am no wayes averse to your Satisfaction in that point, but I would at the same time have a due regard to my Name and Family. Madam, reply'd Cratander, I will proceed by such wary Methods as you your self shall approve of, I will go to some Chirurgion there∣abouts, and complain the wound I receiv'd on my Breast Festers within, and advise with him
for the Cure, and so from one to another; and if this Gentlemans wound appears to be so, and no strain, in all probability he applyed himself to some Neighbouring Chirurgion, and by him may receive some leading Circumstances to con∣firm or abate my Suspition. Sir, sayes the Lady, upon the Terms I be∣fore mentioned, you may use your pleasure. Cratander accordingly the next day took his Horse, and at a publick Inn near the Town where the Uncle liv'd, desir'd to know if there was ever a Chirurgion in that part of the Coun∣try, whom he might safely intrust. The Land∣lord directed him to one at the next Town, to whom Cratander Show'd his wound, which was not perfectly Cured, and in discourse, was asking if he had much practice in the Country for green Wounds, the Chirurgion told him every tittle, and that by accident the other day, a Gentle∣man who had been engag'd in a quarrel, receiv'd a Cut on his Right Hand, whom he now had under Cure, which had it not slanted a little had certainly Cut all his Muscles in two and for ever disabled him. The Person & Circumstance of time he more particularly urg'd, but at that distance, as if rather for discourse sake then Enquiry, and found them all Correspond with his first Suspition. At Night he acquainted the
Lady with the particulars, and prevail'd with her, that he might get a Justice of Peaces War∣rant to apprehend him, and oblige him upon his Examination to give a Satisfactory account where and when he receiv'd that wound. This was done and the Gentleman taken into Custo∣dy, who giving only Evasive Answers, was told if he would not be more positive and direct, they should be forc'd to charge him more Cri∣minally, which an ingenious Confession might prevent or in some measure attone. The Gen∣tleman was in great confusion what to say, but at last fully Confest the whole matter, that he with two more whom he Named, were won by the Uncle upon the promise of a Considerable reward to assist him in this Enterprize, that they pitch'd upon that Night rather then any other, because the Men-Servants would be abroad, and the House defenceless, that they had resolv'd to Murther the Young Lady and all the Family, for fear they should hereafter tell any Tales, that the Uncle was Shot at the door where he receiv'd his hurt by Cratander, and afterwards they came back and brought of his Body for fear of a discovery. Upon this the Gentleman was committed to Winchester Gaol, the other Two having some Notice of it fled. The Body of the Uncle was taken up, and found to be Shot in∣to
the Heart with a Pistol Bullet which was there found, the Motive to so bloody and barbarous a design, (besides the instigation of the Devil and his own Covetousness) was generally suppos'd to be the Estate of the Young Lady which de∣scended to him, who was her Fathers Younger Brother, and she the only Child he left behind. The Young Lady considering how miraculously she had been preserv'd, and that next to Heaven she ow'd her Life to the Courage and Gallantry of Cratander, Franckly told him. Sir, I never yet Enquired whether you was Married or no, nor was it a question ever in my Thoughts before, if you are not and will accept of my Person with the For∣tune that attends it, I hope to be Happy in your Embraces. Cratande, who little Expected that Fortune who had been alwayes a niggard to him, should now pour down her Blessings with so Lavish a Hand, in a Rapture of Bliss, cry'd out, O happy Cratander, for ever happy. Dear Madam I am yours for ever, and let the declining Sun tell the other part of the Globe how happy his Fel∣low Traveller is made to day; which she rea∣dily consented to, and they were immediately Married, within a Month after the Aunt dy∣ed
for grief, and that Estate fell to Cratander in Right of his wife who was next Heyr at Law; Thus Lives he Master of a fair Estate which his courage and generosity most worthily deserves. Lysander ended his Story with the ap∣plause of the whole Company, and Melintus himself Smiled at the Close, and said the Lady could do no less then Crown her Cham∣pion with the full Enjoyment of her Estate and Person. Florimel whose turn it was to lead, de∣sir'd to be Excusd, that she had never a Story fit for such sober Company, but Me∣lintus told her he would admit no Excuse, She was not so Airy, but She had some more serious Intervals, and he hop'd this was one of them. Well Sir says Florimel, I'le take my Course and you must take your Chance. NOVEL the Fourth, By FLORIMEL. CHarilus, (for under that Title I intend to disguise his proper English Name, out of
respect to his Person and quality) was the Eldest Son of a Worthy Gentleman in Oxfordshire, and Heir to a fair Estate. His Father took parti∣cular care in his Education, to furnish him with all the Accomplishments Suitable to his parts and Character, for Nature had been prodigal to him in all the gifts of mind, which she inchas'd in a Body of Elegant Composure and perfect Symmetry. After he was arriv'd to more Na∣tural years, his Father brought him up to Lon∣don, and enter'd him into the Society of Grayes-Inn, where he not so much design'd him for a profound Lawyer, as to be Capable to serve his Country in that Station and Quality he was born in. For the first two years he was observ'd by all, for a Sedulous Student, and knew no other pleasures or diversions of the Town, then those of the play-House or Dancing-School, both which he rarely frequented, and then ra∣ther out of Complaisance to his Friends then Inclination in himself. It fortun'd one day he was Invited abroad by some of his acquaintance to an Entertainment of the Spring-Gardens, where they were Engag'd to Meet some Ladies, to whom the last Night they had lost a Collati∣on at a Game at Crds. Charilus who knew nothing of the design, was very ready to accept the Treat, and promis'd his Company, The
Gentlemen and Ladies met accordingly, the En∣tertainment was Noble and Costly, the Gentle∣men Generous and Frank, and the Ladies fair and Obliging. Charilus whose heart was yet a stran∣ger to Love, began of a sudden to feel its war∣mer powers, and himself discompos'd that he resolv'd all happiness into that of Love, and Condemned the ignorance of his past Life, who had only Studyed Men and Books to know the worst half of Mankind, and neglected the fairer Sex, the Beauty and Glory of the whole Creati∣on. Having thus but dipt his Foot in the water he found it so refreshing he resolv'd to wade farther and plunge himself into that Abyss of pleasures his Thirsty Soul so eagerly Coveted. These Ladies brought him into the Acquain∣tance of others, which they inlarg'd to their own Friends, till in a short time the day was not long enough for him to pay his Visits (which he punctually observ'd) to each expecting Mistress. About this time his Father dyed and left him a plentifull Estate with a considerable Sum of ready Money, which he improv'd to the better Conduct and more easy Management of his Amorous Intrigues, Numerous were the Fe∣male Clients of this young Lawyer, and the rather because he gave, but receiv'd no Fees, except those in Tail, besides the great advan∣tage
he had of other Gentlemen in his comely personage and courteous behaviour, that he wounded more hearts in a week then he could Cure in a Month with his best perfor∣mances. It Chanced one Evening being at a Rall in Leicester-Feilds he saw the Beauteous Bel∣linda, whose powerful Charms would have Con∣quer'd a more stubborn heart then Charilus wore, which by its frequent wounds was now grown soft and tender, and easily received the lightest Impression. Bellinda was now the only game Charilus purfu'd, which he did so Vigorously, that he lost no opportunity he could improve, to render himself respected by her; He danced with her, and afterwards obtain'd the favour to wait upon her home in his own Coach, which he look'd upon as a promising earnest of a more ample reward in future. But after several Visits made with all passion and diligence as the Devil would have it, Bellinda prov'd of a different mould from other Ladies of her Sex, and Vertue had been Regent at her Nativity, above Beauty or pleasure. Charilus who had never met a re∣pulse like this in the whole Career of his hot desires; Intreated, Treated, presented, which the Lady still accepted upon honourable terms. When h found these Baits would not take, he offer'd Marriage as the last and most prevailing ument.
Bellnda told him, She was under no Vow to a single Lise, but could dispose of her Person and Fortune as best pleas'd her self. Charilus told her that was the only hap∣piness he aim'd at, and would compleat im∣mediately, but that he was under a Sacred Obligation not to Marry for some time which was now Expired to Six Months, that he did believe a contract in the Eye of Heaven, was as Obliging as the publick Solemniza∣tion of the Wedding, which was only re∣quir'd by Law for the more known and cer∣tain descent of Estates, that if she pleas'd to consent to a Contract now he would most assuredly Consummate the Marriage Six Months after. With these and other arguments and the most Solemn protestations his quick Invention, could Furnish his Expressions with, he won the credulous Bellinda, who without any tedious or formal Ceremony of contract, took his word Charilus immediatly order'd private Lodgings for himself and Bellinda, where they liv'd with the highest content and Satisfaction, the six Months being expir'd, Bellinda remembred him of his promise; which he excused at that
time, as a thing that might be done any day, for that he was engaged in some Affairs of great Importance. Thus from time to time he had alwayes some Studied Answer to divert the discourse, which at last she found had no place in his intentions, and prest no farther. However no Persons liv'd more amicably and Friendly together, that I much question (were there not other more Substantial reasons to be given) whether an indissolveable Tye of two Persons, does not render their Converse more uneasy, and their whole Lives more querulous, then if it was only a Knot which each Person. might unloose at pleasure. Charilas who was alwayes of a Generous and Noble Temper (nor was Bellinda parcemonious) having one day an Occasion for two hundred pounds, began to consider his present Circumstances and inspect his accompts for the last seven years, when first his Acquaintance commenc'd with Bellinda; He found his Estate much impair'd by the neg∣ligence of Tenants, his Rents fallen one third, and the Body of the Estate sunk under a weighty Mortgage, which still prey'd upon the Vitals, besides several Debts abroad, which would grow Clamorous and disreputable to him, and fifteen Hundred pounds, which he had receiv'd as Bel∣linda's Portion, was sometime since spent and forgotten, the Unwelcome prospect he now had
of his Shatter'd Fortunes, rais'd different passi∣ons in his Labouring Breast, which after he had singly examin'd, he found himself only to blame, who either by his own Inadvertency or too much Confidence in others, had suffer'd his Estate to steal from him, without that prudent observance which might only preserve it. At last he resolv'd to disintangle himself from the trou∣ble of Lands and Mortgages and part with all for a valuable consideration in Mony over which he would keep a strick Eye, This he resolv'd and in part perform'd. He sold the whole Estate paid all his Debts, preserv'd his Reputation with the world, and had two Thousand pounds Overplus, to lay the foundation of a New for∣tune, which he promil'd himself might be easily done. But being naturally averse to business, & unwilling to descend below his former Gran∣deur, he so long defer'd it, that there was not Room left for that consideration, and Calling Bellinda one Morning into his Closet he shew'd her a draught of his present Misfortunes and withall told her there was but Three hundred left of the last two Thousand pounds, that tho' he never was Ceremoniously Married to her, yet he look'd upon himself as oblig'd to provide for her; and not for that respect only, but as he ever had a most Sincere Love for her and that whatever distresse; should befall him,
her Share should be the least in them. She be∣gan to Lament her great Unhappiness, who must shortly be Expos'd to the Injuryes of the World, and theinclemency of Friends, when Charilus pray'd her patience to hear him a few words. My Dear Bellinda, sayes Charilus, that my Affections have been hearty and un∣feign'd you your self shall Judge, and think not that those vigorous Flames, which were first inkindled between us, shall ever know decay or Period. Distress if rightly us'd, is but a poignant Sawce to whet our Cloy'd Ap∣petites; Loves fire may be as intense in the heat, 'tho the Flames are not so active, but affliction Rowzes up the Sleeping Embers and seems to give New Life and heat. But this I only speak as Consolatory, now to the poynt I intend; There is but one way to retrieve our drooping fortunes, and that with you approbation, I am resolv'd to pro∣secute, which is this, I have an Aequain∣tance in the City, a Person of Eminent Reputation, and my particular Friend, whse Assistance I am affur'd of in this
affair; You shall take two hundred and fifty pounds of this Money, a Footman and Two Maids to wait upon you, and assume a Name both honourable and well known in the West of England, and pass for a Gen∣tle woman of the same Name, of a very con∣siderable Fortune and at her own disposal. My Friend I spoke of, shall take you fair Lodgings in a Merchants House, give you the Character I mention'd, and assist you in the whole Conduct of this design. Very well, sayes Bellinda, now you have reduc'd me to nothing, you intend to set me up for a For∣tune, like a Gilt of the Town— Soft! sayes Charilus, you are too quick upon Me and overshoot the mark, this being done I'le go down into the Country, and reconcile my self to my Ʋncle, (who has a fair Estate, which I am next Heyr at Law to, if he don't Cut of the Entail) and make use of my Court∣ship to you, and the hopes I have of your Favour to Cement the difference between us, and Engage his Interest for the obtaining your Love, of which I know how to make good Advantage.
Well then, and what must be the Issue of this? Why nothing Child but an Establish'd Feli∣city to us both in Matrimony, and the Se∣cureing my Ʋncles Estate, when ever Heaven shall call him into a better World. I know not how (sayes Bellinda) to trust any affair where there is Matrimony in it, it is a word so abusd upon all Occasions, and I my self have had some litttle Experi∣rience of it—but I forbear, that's a tender part. But doe what you please you shall al∣ways find me of the same obsequious hu∣mour. Charilus having fixt this point, and seen Bellinda placed at a Merchants House, (where she had the Reputation of a Fortune of Eight Thousand pounds, and five Hundred li. per An.) and made some Vifits to her, he went down in∣to the Country where his Uncle receiv'd him as a Gentleman and a stranger, of whom he had not heard a word this seven years, but as Com∣mon fame reported him to his disadvantage. After he had Spent two dayes there, his Uncle∣came to a more easy familiarity, and enquir'd of his affairs blameing his Imprudent manage∣ment
of his Estate and Riotous Expences, which Charilus in part Confess'd, and laid his finger where he thought his Uncles Eye had not yet discover'd the blemish. This he thought a proper Season to discourse him, of his Court∣ship to Bellinda (whose Name we will preserve tho' her Character's alter'd) he assur'd him of her fortune and his Interest with her, and that if he would please to afford him, the least Um∣brage of his favour he did not question Success, and that he should be not only able to repair the Breaches in his Estate, but considerably ad∣vance it by this plentifull Addition. His Un∣cle told him he had in so high a Measure for∣feited his Esteem with him, that he might rea∣sonably imagine he suffer'd as much in the Opi∣nion of others; That this would be a work of great difficulty, and beside fortunes now a days were grown so common and Cunning, that very often the most Judicious Eye, could not distin∣guish the real from the Counterfeit. After other reasonings on both sides the Uncle seem'd to be satisfied with Charilus his discourse of the fortune, and told him that if he would stay with him till Term which was not long, he would consider farther of it, and then he had buisness at London. During his stay in the Country, he wrote two Letters to Bellinda, which he Show'd
his Uncle and the Answers he receiv'd, by which he abated the difficulty of the Courtship so that now the great Quaere was the certainty of the Estate and Money. At the beginning of Easter Term they both came up to London, and Cha∣rilus would have made a Visit the next After∣noon to his Mistress, but his Uncle told him the Taylor had been with him in the Morning, and promis'd him to bring his Clothes by twelve the next day, and that he had a mind to go along with him, if he would defer it to th next Afe∣ternoon, which Charilus consented to, and they accordingly went together. At the door he met with one of Bellinda's Maids, and ask'd if her Ldy was within, who Answered, yes, pray Sweet heart, sayes he Present my very humble Service to her, and let her Ladyship know my Name is Charisus, who beg the Honour to kiss her Hand. The Maid went up with the Message, and pre∣sently down came her Woman with this An∣swer. Sir, my Lady presents her Service to you, She's something indispos'd at this time and begs your pardon. Upon which Charilus and his Uncle return'd
to their Lodging. Where the Uncle Umph'd, and Umph'd! And told Charilus, this was a Sort of a cold indifferent Complement, which he excus'd, that Ladies of that quality and fortune did of∣ten put on State to give a greater value and Esteem to their Character. However the Un∣cle was much disatisfied to see his Nephew thus Slighted and urg'd, that they should make a Second Visit by Nine next Morning, which he Excus'd as not the Mode of the Town to Visit Ladies, but in the Afternoon. Next day he was Impatient till the Clock had struck Three, that he might have a Sight of this Lady, after three they made a Second attempt to a Visit, and sent up the same Message as before, but the Un∣cle for fear of some excuse pull'd Charilus by the Sleeve and followed the Servant up stairs, where they met her returning to Invite them up. At their entrance into the Dining Room, they saw the Lady at the Table talking with a Gen∣tleman, and a great heap of writings and parch∣ments before them, upon which Charilu stept bck, but the Lady very familiarly call'd him in, and desir'd his Friend would please to walk in too, which Invitation the Uncle had already prevented out of his great Curiosity to see the Lady; Charilus saluted her with all imaginable respect and ask'd pardon for interrupting of
her in the midst of Buiness. Se answer'd, it was no great Buisness, this Gentleman was her Lawyer, and they had been looking over some loose papers, at which she turn'd the Carpet gently over them, and told the Gentleman if he pleas'd to come at Ten in the Morning they would Inspect the rest, upon which he took his Ieave. Then she particularly apologiz'd for yesterdays rudeness as she pleased to call it, that indeed she had been busie all day wih her Law∣yer, was undrest, and understanding there was a stranger with you Sir, to Charilus, I was forc't to use the frequent excuse of our Sex, which I beg this Gentlemans pardon for — to the Uncle. which Complement after he had taken care to Answer — She invited them to sit down, and put on a most facetious and obliging Countenance. Amongst other discourse Charilus ask'd if the Painter had finished her Ladyships Picture yet, yes Sir, sayes she, it hangs in the withdrawing Room — and rising up, pray Sir, sayes she, give me your Opinion, whether it is like or No, with that Charilus waited upon her into the Room, and the Uncle (thinking it but common manners to let the Lovers be pri∣vate at their first Enterview after so long a Va∣cation) stayed ehind; Charilus gently putting the door too, which the Uncle observing bgan
to peep under the Carpet, whre he saw several Bonds, Letters, and one Mortgage for four Thousand pounds. After half an Hours stay the Lovers return'd, and the Lady afresh ex∣cused the incivility of her absence, to a Gen∣tleman of his quality, whom she now under∣stood to be a near Relation to this Worthy Gentleman her Friend; Mutual Complements having pass'd between the Uncle and Lady they sat down, and fell upon other discourses. After half an Hours flay longer Charilus and his Un∣cle took leave of the Lady, and in the next street parted; his Uncle telling him he would make a particular Enquiry for his own Satisfaction, and within two dayes he would resolve him what he would do. Two days after he came early into his Chamber with a Letter in his Hand and told him he had weigh'd all Circum∣stances of Truth and improbability, had made a most particular Scrutiny into the Ladies for∣tune, her Relations, and whatever was to be consider'd upon that point, and did agree with him, that she was a most Beautifull Vertuous Lady and Mistress of the same Estate in Money and Land (if not more) as he first reported to him. That he was withall very sensible that she had more than ordinary Respect for him by those familiar kindnesses she Expressed, that de∣lay
was the greatest Enemy he could have in this affair, and whatever was resolv'd must be with Expedition. I do withall think it proper, sayes he, you should make her some Handsom present as either a Locket of Diamonds, a fair Necklace of Pearl, or what you think is most Modish and acceptable, Sir, says Charilus, I humbly thank you, you certainly advise the best Method that can be; yes, says the Uncle, interru∣pting of him, and you ought likewise to appear in a fine Gilt Chariot drawn by two Flander's, these are very taking with Young Ladies, they were so in my time, yes Sir, sayes Charilus, but my present Stock of Money will not reach so far, and I am unwilling to run in debt to Tradesmen it may prove a disadvantage to me, if known, you are in the right says his Uncle, and I did fear as much, and for that reason I have here writ a Letter to Badley my Steward, to furnish you with Eight Hundred, or a Thousand pounds, which you would rather have, and do you take it, and go down into the Country with all speed, if he has not so much in his Hands let him raise it of the Tenants, but I expect, Nephew, you shall return it to me Six Months after Marriage: which Charitus submissively promised to do, and to take Post immediately into the Country. Charilus overjoy'd at this great
Blessing of fortune beyond his utmost Expecta∣tion, Stole a Visit first to Bellinda, and told her all his Uncle had said, shewed the Letter, and after they had Congratulated each other in this happy Success, took leave for the Countrey pro∣mising all speed in his return. In the Afternoon the Uncle made a Visit to the Lady, and talking Joosely of Marriage, made his address to her, & told her, if she could comply with a little dispro∣portion of Age, no Person had more Vigorous Flames, or a more passionate affection to her Service then himself, that as for his Nephew, to whom he believ'd she had some respect, he was a wild Extravagant Young Man, that he who had already ruin'd his own fortnne, would be unsafely trusted with anothers, and an Empire in the Cup of a Voluptuary would be assoon quaft of, as that Narrow Spot left by paternal care, which his Riotous humour had already Spent, and yet not quench'd his Thirst. The Lady was very much Surpriz'd at his discourse, and told him she rather expected he would have been an Advocate in his Nephews behalf, then have Furnish'd her with such powerfull Argu∣ments of disesteem. The Uncle made his Attaqus so close and quick, that she began seriously to consider of her own Circumstances, and at last told him, it was a matter of so great Moment he
could not reasonably expect a present Answer. After some other discourses to the same purpose the Uncle took his leave, prom. sing to wait upon her the next day. Upon the Second visit he pre∣sented her with a Necklace of Pearl, and a Gold Watch studded with diamonds, which he beg'd of her to accept, and in the close of all told her he had a clear Estate of a Thousand pounds per Aunum besides Mony abroad, that he would settle Six Hundred pounds a year in Joynture, and what more she pleas'd of her own fortune. The Lady thank'd him for his great Respects to her, and those Generous offers he was pleas'd to make, that was she determined, as she was yet no wayes inclin'd to Marry; She should En∣tertain as worthy and deserving thoughts of himself as of any other Gentleman in England. The Esquire, for to that Title his Character is now grown up, looking upon this last Answer to be as absolute a Surrender as would Consist with her Modesty, told her that from the first Minute he had the happiness to see her, he was struck with Love and admiration, that he de∣signedly sent his Nephew into the Country upon an April Errand, that he might have the freer access to her Person, and then earnestly prest the Wedding might be over before his return.
At last She told him, within two dayes He should have the Result of her more seri∣ous Consideration. Bellinda was now more pos'd then ever which way to Steer, the Uncles great kind∣ness to Charilus was but Counterfeit, but to her reall, that it was much better to save one, then that they both should perish, nay, this might preserve both for upon this Marriage she hop'd to be in a Condition to serve him; Nor was she so much too blame who had been ruin'd by ne Branch of the Family, if she prudently En∣deavour'd her safety by another, and the Un∣le repair those Breaches the Nephew had made, Thus she ponder'd he Morning before he expected his return, and at last resolv'd to Marry him, but first secure the Joynture. In the Afternoon came the Esquire, and after a Cun∣ing Harangue of reason all in his own Com∣endation why she should Marry him, she decla∣ed her consent, That as to matter of Joynture, he was well satisfied with the six Hundred ounds a year at present, and what part of her wn fortune he would put into her Hands, hould be as he pleas'd at his own time. Thus he Bargain was made, and her Lawyer who was repar'd before Hand, sent for and order'd to ake the Joynture upon such particulars and  be ready upon Thursday Morning by Eight,
when the Joynture was Seal'd and the Espousals Consummated. Charilus came late to Town the same Night to his Uncles Lodgings, with a return of Eight Hundred pounds, and waiting his coming in till it grew late, went to Bed, in the Mornng early he ask'd what time his Uncle came in, and if he was yet stirring. The Servant told him he did not come in all Night, nor had he seen or heard from him since he last went out the Morning before. Charilus was very much troubled at this, fearing some Misfortune had befallen him (which was true enough, tho' not in his Sense) but not knowing where rea∣dily to find him, he went first to give Bellinda a Visit, and acquaint her with the Joyfull News of the Eight Hundred pounds, when offering to go into the Bed-Chamber her Maid would have stopped him, which be took little Notice of, but prest in, and saw some Body in Bed with the Lady, Upon which in the greatest rage and fury he drew his Sword, and Swore he would be the death of that Villain who had thus abus'd him. The Uncle crept under the sheet for fear expecting the Sword either in his heart or Guts at each Oath he Swore, Bellinda was strange∣ly Surpriz'd, and Shriek'd out for help, whilst Charilus discharg'd whole Valleys of Oaths and Curses on those two miserable Wretches, and
violently pulling down the Cloaths, discovered his own Dear Uncle in Bed with his Mistress. Charilus at this was no less astonished, then they affrighted, when Bellinda interpos'd, and de∣fired his patience but for two words; Sir, says she, I beseech you Compose your self, and be not angry with this Gentleman or my self, for we are Man and Wife. This was so amazing a Story he did not know what to answer to it, but after a little pause, considering it as a truth, there might be a good improvement made of it, he fell into a violent passion with his Uncle, call'd him all the infamous Names he could invent, and with the point of his Sword threatned immediate Vengeance upon that false Heart, which had so basely and Treacherously supplanted him; After his passion was grown more cool, the Uncle offered terms of reconci∣liation, and acknowledged the hainousness of his crime in betraying that trust he had repos'd in him and Robbing him of a Mistress of so considerable a Fortune, for all which he was ready to make present Satisfaction. The terms agreed upon were these, that Charilus should have the Eight Hundred pounds now in his Hands, and his Uncle make over to him four Hundred pounds a year out of his Estate, and put him into immediate possession of it,
n consideration of the Injury he had done him in the loss of his Mistress, all which the Uncle performed that day according to the Tenor of the Articles. Within a Month after he disco∣ver'd some part of his own Errour, as to the mistake of the Fortune, but nothing farther, however they went down into Oxfordshire toge∣ther, where in less then a Twelve-Month he dyed, and Bellinda's Joynture being an En∣tail'd Estate came into Charilus his Hands, who in Memory of former kindnesses was highly Ge∣nerous and Noble to her. Here Sir, sayes Florimel, should I con∣clude with my Story, but that I have some∣thing to say by way of Consolation to you Melintus, and therefore beg leave to carry on Bellinda's Character one step farther. This Lady Sir, after the death of her Husband came up to London, and 'tho sh had for some years of her acquaintance with Charilus resided here, yet was she seldo abroad, and not at all known to the Gallant of the Town, so that upon her return sh pass'd for a New Face, and was general thought to be a Maid. Amongst other Sparks who made sear up and down for fresh Beauties, th
Matchless piece of Chivalry, Sir — was one, you all know, who was the Per∣son that first discover'd that Notable way of affronting Ladies of Quality by breaking their Windowes with Crown pieces; It was his fortune to Meet with this Lady and after some necessary Treats to intro∣duce a more familiar acquaintance, he fell Smart upon her, but all in vain, her Honour was Lodg'd in an impregnable Fortress; when that would not do, he betook himself to his last Remedy, Marriage; Offer'd a fair Joynture and whatever else should be thought convenient, this at last was appro∣ved of, but the Knight was mistaken in his Measures she would yeild up no part of the premises till the Joynture was Seal'd, and the Marriage compleated; which, rather then lose his longing he consented to. A short time after the Wedding, he ask'd her what reason she imagin'd more particularly In∣fluenced him to Love her, when she could not Guess, he told her, it was for her strict Vertue and Chastity, for he had made a Re∣solution never to Marry any whom he could
prevail upon without it, and that is the reason that tho' I have Courted Hundreds I was never Married till now; Why look you Sir sayes she, I had that Trick put upon me once too, but I was resolv'd I would never be Catch'd Twice with the same Bait. Now Sir, as to the application, why should you be in the Dumps and Melancho∣ly; hide your self from your Friends, and call those Stars, you ought to Bless by all the Naughty Names you can think of, when who knows but that beloved she might have prov'd another Bellinda, and take her at the best — but with your permission I have done Sir. The Company all Laugh'd heartily, and Melintus could not forbear a publick Smile, I knew sayes he, we should have one Roguish Story or another, I expected it Flo∣rimel, but above all commend me to your close, where you come off with a Rellish in∣deed — Parmenio, sayes Melintus, I think it now falls into your division, pray will you oblige us with a Story that may
Temper the heat and passion of Florimels, and Compose us to our wonted Gravity. NOVEL the Fifth, By PARMENIO. A Gentleman who had been formerly a Mer∣chant in the City of London, and acquir'd a considerable Estate, withdrew into the Coun∣try, having Spent his younger years in the Noise and hurry of Business, resolved now to enjoy the fruits of his Labours in quiet, and Gratifie himself with Solitude and Retirement; having a fair House in Hartfordsire, he in∣clined to fix there, where he was eminently hos∣pitable to the Gentry, and Charitable to the poor. But that he might not be out of all con∣cern of business in the world like an idle person, he still kept some Ventures a broad, which he called the poors Stock, in which and all other his endeavours, providence blest his Industry with that constant fuccess, that he used famili∣arly
to say he grew Rich in spight of his Teeth, for if he shut Money out at the door, it would come in at the Window. This Gentleman at his death left only one Child a Daughter call'd Joanna, to whom he gave a very great Fortune, and committed the care of her Person and ma∣nagement of her Estate to two Gentlemen her Guardians. She was now about Eight years old when she desir'd she might (as she usually did once a year) go see her Uncle, a Gentleman of fair Reputation and good Estate in Essex, which they granted, and sent her over attended with two Servants. After she had been there a Month, her Uncle who was a passionate Man, catching her in some fault threatned to whip her; She farther provoking him with some Scurvy reply, he did so, at which time as she cryed out, was heard to say by some of the Neighbours, O pray Ʋncle don't kill Me, which neither he or any of the Family took much No∣tice of at that time. The next Morning early she stole out of the House, and after she had wander'd some Hours not knowing whether to go, met with a Company of Gipsies who took her up, made much of her, changing her Cloths and staining her Complexion, brought her with them in few dayes to Lodon, and from thence went their Rounds into Hampshire,
Wiltshire, and about the Country. The Uncle missing his Neece next day, made all possible Enquiry after her, sent to all the Neighbouring Viliages, search'd all the publick Roads, but could not receive any account of her. He next sent into Hartfordshire to her Guardians to know if she was return'd home, but meeting with no satisfaction, concluded that some young Gentleman who knew she would be a great for∣tune had Stole her, and carried her far away to some distant County where she lay conceal'd. This the Guardians believed too, till some of the Neighbors at their Gossipping, were prat∣ling what they heard others say, and began to wish seriously that it was not too true, especial∣ly when they consider'd that if the Child dye in her Minority, the whole Estate would de∣scend to the Uncle. This was buzz'd about till at last it reach'd the Guardians Ears, who making more particular enquiry into the truth of it, were inform'd by some of the Neighbours that the Night before the Child was missing, they heard her cry out most lamentably, pray Ʋncle don't kill Me, this they considered as an odd Circumstance to happen just the Night be∣fore, and asked the Persons who thus informed, if they could safely take their Oaths of it, and would do so before a Magistrate, who said, yes,
it was all true and nothing but the truth. After some deliberation they acquainted the Uncle what the Neighbours said, and how nearly it did touch his Reputation now, and might his Life hereafter, if his Neece was not found. He told them he was altogether innocent of any Injury done to her, nor did he remember that ever she said so, tho' he own'd he whipt her se∣verely, which was for telling a notorious Lye, and using some other indecent expressions, which he thought she deserved to be Corrected for. Upon this all the ponds and Rivers were search'd, and a considerable reward promis'd to any Person, who could give an account of her alive or dead. No News being heard of her, the Neighbours began to Grumble and said, that the Guardians and Uncle had Com∣plotted to Murder the Child and Share her Estate: This being now grown a publick dis∣course in the Country to the great disadvantage of their Reputation, who before were Esteem'd as Gentlemen of Honour and integrity; They resolved to probe the bottom of this cause, and prosecute the Uncle as far as the Law directed them. Accordingly they went over into Essex, and sent for him to a Gentlemans House who was his Neighbour, and a Justice of the peace. Being altogether, the Guardians complain'd
to the Justice of this report, and desir'd him that he would take Cognizance of it as far as the Law required, that ipossible their Reputati∣ons, and the Gentlemans might be preserved free from such an undeserved calumny. The Justice sent for the witnesses, who Swore positively that on such a Night, which was the immediate Night before she was missing, they heard her cry out with a lamentable voice, pray Ʋncle don't kill Me. Upon which the Justice bound the Uncle in a Recognizance of two Thousand pounds to appear at the next Assize, and the Guardians in a bond of five Hundred to prose∣cute the Uncle. In this Interval the Uncle ha∣ving used all the probable means for a discove∣ry that humane Wit could imagine, but not be∣ing able to make any, began to think what was to be done, the time of the Assize drew on, and then he should certainly be Indicted for the Murder of Joanna, nor had he any way to clear his Innocence against such Circumstantial E∣vidence, but by a down-right Negation, which though some of his Friends might Credit, would yet take no place in a Court of Judicature. Ha∣ving thus confidered the difficulty of his Case, he at last resolved thus. In his search after Jo∣anna, he had found a poor Mans Daughter in another County, who both in Age, Features,
and Complexion, so much resembled her that a first sight he thought she had been the real same, now sayes he to himself, if I can get this Girle of her Parents, and dress her up in the same ha∣bit, Joanna wore, the very Guardians shall not distinguish her from their own Pupil, she will appear so like the very same, nor have I any other course but this to preferve my self, he accordingly did so, and for a Sum of Money bought the Girl of her poor Relations, dili∣gently instructed her in the part she was to act, who being of a ripe Wit and very apprehensive had her Lesson to a hair. A day or two before the Assize, he gave out he had by great fortune found his Neece, brings her home to his House with her real Father and Mother, who gave a Satisfactory account to all persons how acci∣dently they found her in a wood almost Starv'd, and She not remembring from whence She had wandred they Entertained her amongst their own Children. The Girl own'd how she Stole away for fear her Uncle should whip her again as he threatned, all which Romance hung so well together, that the Guardians believ'd her the same, and no body question'd the truth. At the Assize he was calld to appear which accord∣ingly he did, the Judge asked him for his Neece  if she was found yet, Yes, my Lord, sayes
the Gentleman, she is in Court, Very well, say s my Lord, produce her, and bid the Guarians appear, accordingly they did, and the Counter∣feit Joanna, Are you satisfied, to the Guardians sayes the Judge, that this is your Pupil, the Daughter of Mr. — with whom you were left in trust? Yes, my Lord, said the Guardians, After a farther account how she was found the Judge order'd their Recognizance should be withdrawn, and the Uncle discharged. It hap∣pened that an old Woman who was in Court about other business, hearing what a Bustle had been made about her young Mistress, and that she was found again, as they came out of Court crowded to see her, and looking full up∣on her, believed it to be the same, but the Girl not taking Notice of her, She cryed out, O Mistress you don't know Me, upon which She answer'd presently, no, what sayes she don't you know old Nurse? I am sure you are not the same then, upon this the Girl was startled, the Guardians made a stop and asked her how she came to forget Nurse so soon, she not give∣ing a present answer, they began to suspect something and brought her again into Court and Nurse with her. The old Woman said, She did believe
it had been the same at first, but upon re∣view she much question'd it, that she her self had Nurst her till she was almost four years old, and if it was her Mistress she had a Scar upon her left Arm above the Elbow. The Judge ordered they should look upon her Arm, which they did, and reported there was no Scar above but one below the Elbow, upon this it was generally believ'd she was the same, and all things set right again. However the Judge seem'd more disatisfied then be∣fore, ordered the Uncle to withdraw, and examined the Girl, Afterwards the Man apart, who said he had found her in a Wood, and then the woman, and here he found they all disagreed in one point or other, at length by crossing the account of the Man and Wife, and then considering that both the Guar∣dians and Nurse agreed the true Joanna, must needs have remembred her Nurse, since it was not a Twelve-Month ago since she saw and par∣ticularly knew her, they agreed it was yet a Cheat, which the Woman for fear of punish∣ment, first Confest, and then her husband own'd it, and lastly the Girl; They proved the Receit of so much Money at such a time, proved by several neighbours, who had known this Girl
for five or six years together, that she alwayes was look'd upon and reputed as their own Child and alwayes liv'd with them. Upon this dis∣covery an Indictment was preferr'd against the Uncle, for the Murder of his Neece Joanna, but he having no proof to clear himself by, and this appearing with so foul a Face against him, he was Condemn'd to be hang'd, and was within a Week after Executed. It fortuned about nine years after at the Summer Assize at Notting∣ham, two young Gentlemen who were lately call'd to the Bar, whereof the Judges Son was one, walking out early one Morning in the fields they saw a whole Covie of Gipsies under a Hedge, when they came near, two of them stept out, and in their Cant told them a great deal of good fortune by looking into their Hands, and viewing the lines of the Face as they pre∣tend, upon which one Gentleman threw them a Shilling, the other call'd them idle Whores, and said they deserv'd to be whipt for publick Cheats, upon which one of them a tall black Girl told him, he ought not to despise a Gipsie for he should Marry one before he was Three Months older, at this the Gentlemen fell a laughing and entertain'd them with other like discourse; when they came home one of them mist his gold Watch, and another had lost all
his Money. They began to grow angry to be thus Cheated, and getting a Constable very luckily, met with these two going off another way; They charg'd them with the Watch and Money, which they as peremptorily denyed, upon which the Constable brought them along into open Court which was then sitting, upon Examination they denyed the Fact, nor could they upon search find either about them. How∣ever, the Judge ordered them to be soundly lash'd for Vagrants, and sent out of Town, as the Constable was taking them away, the Gen∣tleman who was the Judges Son, call'd out Jo∣cosely to the Constable, pray favour the black-woman, for she tells me, I shall Marry a Gipsie within these three Months; which his Father overhearing call'd them back again, and ask'd them How long they had pretended to telling of Fortunes, I had thought, sayes the Judge, all your Trade had been Picking of Pockets; No, and please you my Lord sayes the black-Woman, my profession is only tel∣ling of Fortunes, I never understood nor practised such unlawfull Arts, at which the Court laugh'd — My Lord then
ask'd (seeing her a good favour'd young Woman, and so quick in her Answers) what Country Woman she was, to which she said, she thought Hartfordshire. Then he askt, if she was born a Gipsy; She said No, but She was as good, for She had been Nine years Apprentice to a Gipsy. At which he ask'd her, if she had e're a Christian Name, yes, my Lord, sayes she, I think so, for my Name is Joanna, the Judge hearing the Name Joanna recol∣lected himself, and remembred the Sto∣ry of the Essex Gentleman, who was by him Condemn'd for Murdering his Neece of that Name. He then asked her, if she had ever been in Essex, or had any Re∣lations there; She said, not since she was very Young, which was at the time she met with the Gipsys first, and then She had an Ʋncle there, who used her very hardly, and so she ran away from him, and was never there since, nor never Enquired after him. Upon this he concluded her to be the same Person, and call'd to the Con∣stable
and told him, he should not let them be whipt, but carry them home to his own House and Entertain them there, till the Court was up, and then he should receive farther Orders. The whole Court at this began to Wonder, and believe one or both of them to be Gentlewomen of good Families, nor did they spare telling the young Gentleman that for ought they knew it might be his Fortune indeed to Marry a Gipsy, if this Young Woman should prove to be a Person of Quality and Estate, which fell out even so, for the Assizes being over, the Judge who had a Seat in Hartfordshire, and had known her Father formerly, brought her up in his Coach, and presented her to the Guardians who own'd her to be the same Person, which the Nurse and all her Surviving Relations Confirm'd. At the same time his Lordship, who knew her to be a very great Fortune, propos'd a Match between his Son and her which she Franckly consented to,
and was presently after Solemniz'd. Thus ended Parmenio when the whole Company Bow'd their respects, and were all extreamly pleasd with the fortune of the Gipsy, But Sir, sayes Melintus, I could have wish'd you had carried a lighter Hand over the hard fate of the Ʋncle, whom I pity with all my Heart. Sir, sayes Parmenio, I could have wish'd it had not been true, but as it is so under unquestionable Evidence, I durst not give my Hand the Liberty of one Sweetning Stroke. Now, Madam, sayes Melintus to Evadne, we must beg the next favour from your fair Hands, No Sir, said she, your power with me alwayes Commands.
NOVEL the Sixth By EVADNE. Rithia the Beauty of her Sex and Glory of her Age, was the Daugh∣ter of an English Earl, of an Antient Family, whose Noble Acts in Chivalry stands first upon Record in our most ear∣ly Histories, Her great Wit and Excel∣lent Sweetness of Temper obliged all who had the Honour of her Acquain∣tance, which every Gentleman both Courted, and admir'd. And if amongst those Thousands who were ready to Sa∣crifice their bleeding hearts to the fair Orithia, any was thought to have a more particular interest in her Favour, it was the Lovely Philanthus, who was only
able to make a Reprisall of Hearts amongst the Ladies, for those Orithia Captivated from the Men. Philanthus his Family was somewhat inferiour, but much more Opulent, he being the El∣dest Branch of it, who for the great Ser∣vice of his Father, (who lost his Life in the Wars against the French) had the Honour of Knight-hood Confer'd up∣on him, whilst yet a School boy, by his Gracious Prince. The Assiduous Ad∣dress of Philanthus, his kind Reception, and more intimate familiarity oblig'd us all to believe he would be that happy Conquerour, who should carry off this Noble prize from the Rest of the des∣pairing world. But amongst those Stars which influence the great affairs of Love, some are kind and propitious, whilst others infect their good intents by their poysonous Neighbourhood, some such unhappy Conjunction there was which suddenly blasted Philanthus his blooming hopes, rob'd him of all his
Glorious Expectations and left him the Pity or the Scorn of his Rivals. The Count de Montallo who was Ambassadour from the Duke of Savoy, at the English Court, being shortly to return, and having often admired the Beautifull Orithia, as the most lovely Creature his Eyes yet beheld, made his private Addresses to her, and without the knowledge or Consent of her Re∣lations was Married to her. My Lord, her Father, and all her Friends were extreamly concern'd at it, there not being any but who gave Phi∣lanthus the Encouragement to hope he should be that happy Person, nor had he any reason to question Orithia's Fa∣vour, till the Count made his applicati∣ons, and then the Ambition of being so great a Countess soon prevail'd over the more easy powers of Love. Within four days after, Orithia went along with the Count her Husband for Savoy, with∣out seeing or taking leave of any of he
Friends or Relations. This sudden Mar∣riage with the Count had at first ex∣treamly incensed my Lord her Father, but considering she had Honourably disposed her self, without the Charge of a weighty portion, which his Circum∣stances could not so conveniently spare, he now called that prudence and discretion, which before he thought a rash and inconsiderable Action. After her Arrival at Savoy, for three years she liv'd as happy & as great as heart could wish, the Count her Husband lov'd her above all the World, and his Estate, which was very considerable, was abso∣lutely at her Command. No Empress, tho' she might have more large Domi∣nions, was better belov'd, or more wil∣lingly obeyed then she was. It happened that the Duke of Savoy making Wars upon some of the Neighbouring Princes appointed the Count de Montallo Gene∣ral of his Army, which was an Honour he could not refuse, though with some
regret he parted from the Arms of his beloved Orithia. That he might leave the affairs of his Family under the better Government, he appointed three of his Friends as Commissioners to take an account of his Rents, assist the Countess upon all occasion with their Advice, and manage all his business to his great∣est advantage and reputation. To these he added one more, who was the honest Sabrino as he used to call him, a Gentleman of some Relation to the Count, but his intimate Friend and Confident. The Duke being now with his Army, and not expected back till a peace was concluded, which was yet but uncertainly discours'd; Sabrino, who had the largest Commission of any of the rest, and much more respected, considered that this was the only oppor∣tunity his heart could wish for, to com∣pleat those desires he had so long lan∣guished under. Accordingly one day coming up to the Countess, as if upon
some Urgent business, he found her alone in her Closet, where without any regard to the Honour of the Count, the Vertue of the Lady, which he had no reason to suspect, or to the Modesty and good manners in himself, of which he ought to have had some share, he dis∣cover'd his unlawfull passion, which she received with that abhorrence and de∣testation that he was well assured he was now undone for ever if he did not pre∣serve himself by being the first Accuser, tho' he had nothing to Charge the spot∣less Orithia with, but what was false as Hell or Devils could invent. However envenom'd malice will want neither Instruments or Methods to perfect its Revenge; tho' what wrong had Sabrino received? He first gives the affront, and then demands Satisfaction, and first Tempts the Lady with his lascivious address, then calls himself injur'd, so great a Crime is it to be good and Vertuous in the prospect of those who
are wicked and debauch'd. Sabrino, that he might lose no opportunity, sent pre∣sently to the three Commissioners to meet him at his own Chamber, where he told them, He had a secret of that importance to communicate to them and of that strange Surprize, that he wanted words to express the present Horrour of his thoughts; I have for some time suspected, and I wish I could say I did yet but suspect, Oh shall I speak it! The Fidelity and Chastity of the Coun∣tess— upon which one of them told him, Sir, I will as soon believe, the Glorious Cherubins may be tainted in their pure Angelic Natures, as that any Temptati∣on of dishonesty hath or ever shall assoil the Vertue of that immaculate Lady. Oh Sir, sayes Sabrino, be not too forward I once thought so too, but I am afraid I shall be able to convince you sooner then you or I could wish for. In the Interim pray make your own Observations, and let this pass no farther.
Sabrino had a Nephew a proper young Gentleman, who had been Page to the Count in England, and since his return, was prefer'd to be Gentleman Usher to the Countess; This Gentleman he sent for privately to his Chamber, and told him he understood what a particular kindness the Countess had for him, and that now was the time for him to make his fortunes in the absence of his Lord The young Gentleman told him, he did not understand his meaning, O Nephew said he, are you so short sighted, why the Countess is in love with you above all the World, and wants nothing but an opportunity, to compleat yours and her own happiness in Bed, which I have promised her this Night. Wherefore you must in the Evening pretend to go Sick to Bed, and then undress to your Gown, and Steal into the Countess's Chamber, and lye under the Bed, till she gives you Notice to come forth, but be sure no Body sees you enter her
Chamber, if they do, make some excuse and go out again and so wait till you have an opportunity, pray Uncle, sayes the young Gentleman, did the Countess her self bid you tell me thus? I, I, She her self bid me, and said, that very sud∣denly she would make you Gentleman of the Horse. The innocent Gentleman discovered not the Snares his Uncle had laid for him but in the Evening accord∣ingly did so, after Sabrino had been at his Chamber and found him not there nor about the House, he concluded he was then safely Lodg'd under the Bed, and a little before the Countess went to her Chamber, sent for the Commissioners, and told them, he was inform'd that the Countess's Gallant was to be with her that Night, but who he was that he could not tell, Sabrino and the rest concluded to pre∣tend some extraordinary business, to be dispatched that Night and to desire to speak with her as soon as her Women had left her, and then if there was any
Gallant, they should certainly discover him, if not give the Countess no reason to suspect their design, Accordingly they did so, and coming softly up stairs knock'd at her Chamber door, an old Gentlewoman who had formerly been her Nurse, lay in the Chamber with her, and was going into Bed, when she heard some Body knock at the Chamber door, She asked who was there? And their business, to which one of them an∣swered, we are the Commissioners and want to speak one word with her Ho∣nour upon Urgent business, which was forgot before, and must be dispatched this Night. She acquainted the Coun∣tess with what they said, who ordered her to let them in. As they were by her Bed-side discoursing with her, Sabrino cryes out, I, here he is, here's the Rogue, and pulls his Nephew by the heels from un∣der the Bed, and calling him Rogue, Villain and Traytor to abuse se good a Lord, struck him through the heart with his Sword,
before he could speak one word to Vin∣dicate himself or his Ladies Honour. It was now in vain for the Countess to En∣deavour to purge her self from a Crime which appeared against her by so Noto∣rious an Evidence, tho' she did in the presence of several Worthy persons take the Sacrament upon it, that as she never had been Guilty against her Hus∣bands Bed, so she knew nothing of that Persons being there; that it was all the malicious Contrivance of Sabrino (whose unlawful desires she had refused with Scorn and contempt) that had now plot∣ted this Revenge to Rob her of her life and Honour at the same time. This some believ'd, who thought the Coun∣tess to be as uncorrupt as Vertue it self. But others said here's plain demonstrati∣on against her, and she who dares com∣mit Adultery, will not stick to a lye to defend her Guilt. The Commissio∣ners writ a Letter to the Count to ac∣quaint him with this unhappy News, in
which they gave a most particular ac∣count, and in the Close highly Com∣mended the Fidelity and Justice of Sa∣brino, who seeing his Honour abused, would not spare his nearest Relation. The Count was astonished at the News above any Misfortune that could have happened, and notwithstanding this de∣monstration, as they call'd it in their Letter, he put a greater Confidence in the Justice and integrity of the Coun∣tess, then in all their Solemn protestati∣ons. And as he sent them word He was extreamly troubled for the Countess that she should lye under so heavy an Aspersion, which if he did not believe the World would, and therefore with pray∣ers for her deliverance (if Innocent) did resign her up to the Law, so he should have been much better Satisfied in the Guilt of his Wife, if Sabrino had Spar'd his Kins∣mans Life, in that Transport of rage in which he kill'd him. Upon the Receipt of this Letter th
Commissioners, (as the Custom is there) disposed the Countess into a Nunnery, where She is to continue a year and a day, and if in that time no Champion appears to justifie her Innocence against her Accuser, She is upon the last day brought into the List appointed for the Combatants (if there be any) and there burnt at a Stake, which death she Legally suffers if her Champion has the worst of it. The Countess was highly sensible of this as the greatest affliction that ever befell her, yet her own Innocence, and the Satisfaction that arose from thence made the distress much more easy and supportable. The Count was still En∣gag'd in the Wars, and the Countess had now been three quarters of a year a Pri∣soner in the Nunnery, and no Person ap∣pear'd in her behalf to Vindicate her Honour and Virtue. She now consider∣ed that the small remainder of her Life would soon be gone, and unless some Centleman would Entertain such Ho∣nourable
thoughts of her, as to believe her Guiltless, and Engage his Life to preserve hers, she must certainly suffer, and as no Person had yet offer'd himself, so was she altogether at a loss where to find that Gallant Friend. At last amongst other English Gentlemen who had been formerly her Friends and Ac∣quaintance, She fixt upon Philanthus, but at the same time Corrected her Er∣rour in thinking that he who believed himself the most disobliged of all Man∣kind, should now hazard his Life to Vindicate her Reputation, No, certain∣ly he would be pleas'd to hear of her Mi∣series, and rejoyce to see her proud heart now humbled under the deepest afflicti∣ons, but on the other Hand considering him as a Gentleman, a Person of un∣questionable Courage and Gallantry, and one whose former affections were most sincerely devoted to her Service, he would rather Court such an opportunity to lay an everlasting obligation on her
which all her Treasury of thanks and Gratitude should be too poor to recom∣pence. And this took place in her re∣solution; Accordingly She writ a Let∣ter to Philanthus and sent it by a Gentle∣man who had been formerly her Ser∣vant, with orders where to find or En∣quire for him at London, and to deliver him that Letter, receive his Answer and return with all speed. Philanthus who had still the same respect and love for Orithia as would consist with Honour, having read the Letter, was extreamly troubled at it, but at the same time be∣ing Ruin'd himself in his Fortunes, his mind sunk under the load of miseries which opprest him, writ back a most passionate Letter of excuse, with which she was no less affected as well for his as her own sake. Orithia Spent her short time (which now wanted but a week of the fatal day) in recommending her Soul to Heaven, wholly despairing of any relief on Earth. Philanthus having
since seriously considered the present distress of the Countess, and that she must for ever suffer in her Memory, which to all Noble Spirits is Ten times worse then a Thousand deaths, and that though in his excuse to her he had not put his own interest or business into the Scale to ballance against her Life and Honour; But that strange and un∣expected disasters had reduced him to that mean degree of want that he was not able to Equip himself for the Ser∣vice; Yet this from a Generous Spirit was mean and pitifull, that however his Friends would not assist him here, he could want nothing there of Horse or Arms a Cavalier could ask. After he had ponder'd a while on this thought he went to a Gentleman of his intimate acquaintance, show'd him the Letter, and beg'd of him to furnish him with Moneys for that design which he did, and Philanhus a short time after went privately over to Savoy. Being arrived
at Turenne he Enquired at what Nunnery the Countess de Montallo was, and what the general opinion were eoncerning her Guilt or Innocence; Understand∣ing the Nunnery was Thirty Miles from Turenne, and that all Persons spoke well of her & did believe her falsely accused, he went directly thither Being come within Four Miles of the Nunnery, by the side of a great Wood, he spyed a Hermits Cell, at which alighting, he ask'd of the Holy Father, what the dis∣course was about the Countess, he told him that in a fair Plain before the Nunnery, She was to suffer to Morrow Morning before Eleven of the Clock, if there was no Person found so hardy to fight her Accuser, nor did he yet hear of any Champion who had ap∣pear'd in her behalf. Upon which he told him, he had a very great desire to see her before she suffer'd, but he suppos'd it would be very difficult to obtain that Favour un∣less he had on a Religious habit, and if he would do him that kindness to lend him his
Weeds, he would walk over that Afternoon and return in the Evening, and leave his Horse and Armour there till he came back, the Hermit very readily agreed to it, then Philanthus who spoke Italian well, put on his Weeds, and in all Respects appear'd to be a grave Religious Hermit, having a long Beard and all things answerable, He was now Arriv'd at the Nunnery, and out of Respect to his habit (for Hermits are there had in great Veneration) was immediately conducted into the Countesses Cham∣ber, where entring, those Nunns who were attending upon her withdrew, that she might have the more freedom of dis∣course with this Religious Father. He stayed with her three Hours, and was as well satisfi'd of her Innocency and Sabrino's Roguery as his heart could wish. Asking her, if she had no hopes of any Friend to appear in the Lists to Morrow on her behalf, She said, No, She never sent but to One English Gentleman, and his Mis∣fortunes
happen'd at the same time to be al∣most as great as her own. When he took his leave of the Countess, she pull'd off a Diamond Ring from her Finger, and told him, Holy Father, I am oblig'd to you above what I am able to Express for your Prayers, and good Advice, I have nothing of Worldly Goods-left Me to dispose of but this Ring, which was given Me by my Bro∣ther in England, a little before I Married into this Country, I pray accept it, and keep it for my sake. The Hermit receiv'd it with all Thankfulness, and taking his leave, burst out into tears to see so great a Beauty reduc'd to those thin meagre looks, and that Vertue of which she had so large a portion should be Triumph'd over by wickedness and Villainy. At parting the Countess shook him by the Hand and chearfully bid him not weep, this was the last day she could be mise∣rable. Philanthus return'd to the Cell where he again put on his own Habit, and told the Hermit what he thought of
the Innocency of the Countess. The next Morning at Nine of the Clock the Countess all in white, was brought from the Nunnery into a fair adjacent plain, in the middle of which was sixt a Stake, with a great deal of dryed Wood and other Combustible Matter. On a large Scaffold on one side was a Chair plac'd for the Countess, and at the other end a Tribunal Erected for those who were appointed to see the Execution per∣form'd, and if there should happen to be any Combatants, to determine any mat∣ter of difference that should arise. The Judges being Seated on the Tribunal and the Countess in the Chair, Procla∣mation was made, that if any Person would Venture to Wage War in defence of the Coun∣tess de Montallo's Innocency, Seignior Sabrino the Accuser was ready to Answer him at single Combat. Before this Procla∣mation was made, all the Drums, Trum∣pets, Clarions and Instruments of field Musick first sounded, & then the principal
of the Judges gave order for the first Proclamation, and so for the Second, when being ready to give the last Sum∣mons, at a distance appear'd a Champion who by the waving of his Sword, gave Notice what he intended, he was Mount∣ed on a Milk white Courser in black Mourning Armour, his Beaver fast lock't down, his Device, the Sun Shining glori∣ously from a Cloud upon distressed Inno∣cence, which was a Virgin habited all in white. As soon as this strange Champion was Enter'd the Lists, a Herald demanded of him who he was that came thus Arm'd? he told him, he came to loso his Life or Vin∣dicate the Honour of the Countess of Mon∣tallo, who was unjustly accus'd by a Rogue a Lyar and a Vilain; and that he would prove him to be. Upon this the Herald demanded of the Countess, if she was willing to Venture her Life and Honour upon the Success of her Champion, to which she answer'd, yes, I pray God pros∣per him. Immediately after upon the
Sound of the Trumpets, the two War∣riours set Spurrs to their Horses, and in the first Career, the Ladies Champion had the worst, and lost one of his Stir∣rups, when recovering himself he re∣doubled that disadvantage upon his Enemy, having broke their Spears they fell to their Swords, when Philanthus lent him such a blow on the Helmet, that ohe half of it fell down upon his Shoul∣ders upon which followed whole streams of Blood; At this the whole Cirque which consisted of Thousands of Spectators gave a loud Shout, Sabrino being Cut deep into the Scull, and having lost a great quantity of Blood in the middle of the next Course fell headlong from his Horse. Philanthus lept readily down and putting the point of his Sword to his Throat, bid him ask his Life, 'tis to late, sayes Sabrino, But I'le clear my Soul from all filthy Sin before I dye, Upon which a Confesor was call'd, to whom he publickly Confest his unjust Accusation
of the Countese, and the reason that put him upon such a Bloody Revenge, so long as he had Breath he call'd often upon her to for∣give him, which was not long, for his Wound was past Cure, and in less then half an Hour he dyed. I shall forber to mention the loud shouts and acclmations of the people, for the Countesses deliverance, and that her Innocency was clear'd in the Face of the whole World; In the midst of all this Joy and Triumph, Philanthus stole pri∣vately away without being known by any Person who he was, and came over to England, where he never discover'd the least Syllable of what he had done to any of her own Relations. The Countess was now led back in Tri∣umph, and Complemented with the Visits of all Persons of Quality, and Congratulations of all her Friends, when every one Enquir'd of her, this Gentlemans Name and Coun∣try who was her Champion, She told them, at the place of death she expected
none, nor knew of any, that as he came from Heaven for ought She knew he was return'd thither again, for notwith∣standing the strictest Enquiry She could make, she heard no account of him. A Courier was immediately dispatch'd with Letters to give the Count a Relation of this great News, who was so extreamly Tran∣sported with it, that being but lately reco∣cover'd from a dangerous Feaver, it threw him into a Relapse of which within few dayes he dyed. But before his death, in his Cooler fits he order'd his Secretary to write a most kind and passionate Letter to the Countess to rejoyce with her for her Mi∣raculous Preservation, which afterwards she receiv'd, he made his Will and left her all his whole Estate for Life, besides Jewels Plate and Money to a very great Value. Soon after his death she parted with all the Land to the next Heyr, for a Valuable con∣sideration in Money, and return'd to Eng∣land after She had been five years and three Months absent. Philanthus went as other
Gentlemen and Ladies did to give their Service and Welcom to Orithia, and For∣tun'd to sind ber in the Dining Room all alone, who receiv'd him with all Respects, but upon discourse of the Letters extreamly blam'd his unkindness and degenerous Spirit, that could value any thing to the World above the Honour and Life of a La∣dy for whom once he had some regard. Phi∣lanthus endeavor'd to Excuse himself from the great necessity and distress he was then under, that tho' when her Ladyship left England he was Master of a fair Estate, yet since by some extraordinary Losses he had receiv'd, and Charges in Law-Suits he was at this preseut reduc'd to down-Right poverty and want. She told him she was heartily sorry for it, but that Fate and Chance ran through the whole World. Com∣pany coming in, Dinner was plac'd upon the Table, and when it was almost over, Philanthus put on the Ring and presented his Service to the Countess in a Glass of Wine, She presently saw the Ring and
chang'd Colour, which was taken Notice of by my Lord her Brother and all the Company, who ask'd if she was not well, at that she blush'd again and said, yes my Lord indiffe∣rent, however they perceiv'd some sudden alteration which they could not Guess the reason of. After Dinner was done she stept to Philanthus, and taking him on one side dsir'd to know from whence he had that Ring. Madam, sayes he I had it from a Lady for whose sake I will never part with it. Sir said she, I presume I know it, yes Madam you do so and gave it to a Hermit on the Even∣ing before you was to suffer. I, Madam, was that Hermit and next day your Champion. Ʋpon which the Countess gave the whole Relation of it to the Compa∣ny, and promised Philanthus in Gratitude to him, she would make him Master of her self and all her Fortune next Morning, which was accordingly done, and the Mar∣riage Celebrated with all pomp and Solem∣nity.
As Evadne had concluded her Story, in came Count Melintus his Ʋncle, and some other Persons of Honour from Court to give him a Vi∣sit, upon which the Company broke up; Melintus paying his more par∣ticular Thanks to Evadne for her most pleasant and Divertive Story, which was Seconded by all the Gen∣tlemen and Ladies; And as they took leave, Melintus told Philots & The∣odosia, they stood in arrears which he did not question but they would discharge to the great Satisfaction of the Company at their next Meeting. FINIS. ERRATA In the Preace to the Reader, Page 1 line 16 read poignant for polynant; in the Book, p. 18 l. 12. r. walk't for wak't, p. 37 l. ult. r. Gen∣tlemen for Gentlem in, p. 44 l, 13 r. wandring for adring p. 84 l. 3. Quare for Quate.
Advertisement of some Books lately Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Crayle, at the Lamb in Fleet street next White Fryers-Gate. THe Beauty of Holiness, writ∣ten by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, &c. to which is added Holy Devotions upon se∣veral Occasions, fitted to the main Uses of a Christian Life, The Fourth Impression in Octavo. The Christians Companion, or a Guide to the Holy Scriptures. dis∣covering the hidden Treasures, contained in the New Testament, and Explaining the difficult and Intricate Texts throughout every Chapter, together with Family-Devotions, by a Reverend Divine of the Church of England, in Octavo
Quintus Valerius Maximus his Collections of the Memorable Acts and Sayings of Orators, Phi∣losophers, States-Men, and other Illustrious Persons of the Antient Romans, and other Foreign Nations, upon Various Subjects, together with the Life of that Famous Hi∣storian, Newly Translated into English, in Octavo. The Queens Closet opened, com∣prehending several Hundreds of Experienced Receipts, and Incom∣parable Secrets in Physick, Chirur∣gery, Preserving, Cookery, &c. Which were presented to the Queen, by the most eminent Doctors in Physick, Chyrurgions, Oculists, and divers Persons of
Honour, whose Names are fixed to their several Receipts, The last Edition Corrected and Enlarg∣ed with many New and late Ad∣ditions 120. 5. Delightful and Ingenious Novels, being Choice and excellent Stories of Amours, Tragical and Comical, lately Related, by the most Re∣fined Wits, with Interludes between each Novel, Price Bound 1 s. Where is Likewise Sold Dr. Barkers Famous Gout Plai∣ster, which infallibly takes away the pain in Twelve Hours time, with the Paroxysm of the Distem∣per, and in time may effect a perfect Cure, Price each Roll, 5 s.
