F2453 11223658 46896
PERFECTION AND PEACE: Delivered in a SERMON By THO. FVLLER B. D. LONDON Printed by Roger Norton for Iohn Williams at the Crown in S. Pauls Church-yard, 1653.
TO The Honoble and truly Religious GEORGE BERKELEY Sole Son and Heir to the Right Honourable GEORGE Lord BERKELEY, &c. SIR, WHen I look on the Crest of your ancient Arms, (A Mitre powdered Wth Cros∣ses) I read therein an abridgment
of the Devotion of those darker dayes: the Mitre shewing your Ancestors actions in Peace; the Cross, their atchievements in the Holy War: the Mitre, their doings at home; the Cross, their darings abroad. Yea I fancie to my self each an∣cient Lord Berkly, like one of the Israelites at the walling of Jerusa∣lem, Neh. 4. 17. With a Trowel in one hand, and a Sword in the other. We alwayes find him ei∣ther fighting or founding, either in a Battel or at the building of some Religious Fabrick, as (besides others) the intire Abbey at Bri∣stol, (afterwards converted into a
Cathedral) was solely founded by one of that Family. This was the Devotion of those dayes, wherein the world knew no better, and scarce any other. Since the Reformation, your Noble House hath not had less heat for having more light. Your Charity hath not been extinguished, but re∣gulated, not drained dry, but de∣rived in righter channels; and flowing with a clearer stream free from the mud of superstition. As for your particular, that your ancient Crest is worthily born by you, the Mitre speaking you a Patron of Learning; the Crosses, a Practicer of Religion. Qualities
which encouraged me to present this small Treatise unto you. Acceptance is more then it can ex∣pect, pardon being as much as it doth deserve, being so long in coming, so short when come. But because it had its first Being by your Com∣mand, it hopes to have its well∣being by your Countenance. Should I desire so many Lords of your Family hereafter, as here∣tofore have flourished in a direct line, by desiring a particular Hap∣piness to your House, I should wish a general mischief to mankind; that men should live so many years in sin & sorrow before the coming of the necessary and comfortable day
of Judgment. My prayer there∣fore shall be, That the lustre of your House may continue with the last∣ing of the World, (so long as God will permit the badness thereof) in that honourable Equipage of your Ancestors: May Perfection here, and Peace hereafter light on you, your vertuous Lady, and hopeful issue; which is the daily desire of Your Honours most bounden Servant THO. FULLER.
PERFECTION AND PEACE. PSAL. 37. 37. Mark the Perfect, behold the Vpright; for the end of that man is Peace. THIS and the 73. Psalm are of the same subject, wherein David endeavours to cure an Epidemical disease, with which the best Saints and servants of God are often distempered: Observe in this Disease, the nature, danger, cause and cure thereof.
The Nature, namely fretting fits of the soul, at the consideration of the constant peace, plenty and prosperity of wicked men. The Danger thereof, It causeth the Con∣sumption of the spirit, and is destructive to the health of the soul. Yea, when this disease comes to the Paroxism, the height and heat thereof, it becometh dishonourable to God; aspersing and be-libelling him, as if he wanted Goodness, and would not; or Power, and could not; or Justice, and doth not order matters better then they are. The Cause thereof it proceedeth from a double defect in men: 1 Want of Faith to trust in God. 2 Want of Patience to wait on God. This is the reason why the practice of these two graces is so often inculcated by David in this Psalm. The Cure thereof: David applyes many Cordials, (for less then Cordials will not do the deed) seeing by his own confession, Ps. 73. 21. His heart was grieved with his fretting fits. We will onely instance on the two last. One is a serious consideration, ver. 35 of the short pleasure and certain pain of the wicked. It was a good prayer of a good man, Lord keep me from a temporal heaven here, and an eternal
hell hereafter. True it is, Psalm 73. 4. that to the wicked, there are no bands in their death: and no wonder, when they have all bands af∣ter death. The second is a studious observation of the perfect Mans condition, who though meeting with many intermediate broils and brunts, and bickerings in this life: yet all at last winds up with him in a comfortable close, and hap∣py conclusion, Mark the Perfect, behold the Vpright, for the end of that man is peace. Observe in the words two general parts: 1 The description of the Dead. 2 The direction to the Living. In the description of the Dead, we have two particulars: 1 What he was. A practicer of Perfection and Uprightness. 2 What he is. A possessour of a peaceable end. In the direction to the Living we have an invitation, or rather an injunction to mark and behold. 1 What was done by the man, when living: his Holiness. 2 What was done to the man, when dead: his Happiness. This our Sermon being now preached in the juncture of the old and new Year: What
better subject to end the old, then to speak of the description of the dead? What fitter matter to begin the new, then to treat of the direction to the living? Mark the Perfect, be∣hold the Vpright: for the end of that man is peace. Before we enter on the words, it will be a charitable work to reconcile the seeming va∣riance betwixt the two Translations: I mean that which is commonly prefixed at the be∣ginning, and what is constantly inserted in the middle of our Bibles. The Old Translation.Keep innocency, and take heed unto the thing that is right, for that shall bring a man peace at the last. The New Translation.Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Vpright, for the end of that man is peace. See here a vast difference betwixt the di∣vers rendring of the words: If the Trumpet, 1 Cor. 14. 8. give an uncertain sound, who shall be prepared for the battel? But where shall the unlearned, though honest hearted Reader
dispose of his belief and practice, when there be such irreconcileable differences in the Translation of Gods Word. I answer, the seeming difference ariseth from the latitude of the Hebrew words, so extensive in their signification: for Shemor which in my text is translated, Mark, accord∣ing to the first and most frequent acception thereof: signifieth also in a secondary sense, to Keep, seeing those things which we mark, we also keep, at the least for some short time in our memorie. The same may be said, that the word Behold, in my Text, is rendered in the Old Translation, take heed, seeing the Hebrew wil bear both: Tham and Iaschar, most commonly and constantly denote the Concrete, Perfect, Vp∣right, Righteous, and Innocent: But sometimes signifieth the abstract also, Perfection, Up∣rightness, Innocencie Let not therefore the two Translations fall out, for they are Bre∣thren, and both the sons of the same Parent, the Original: Though give me leave to say the youngest child is most like the father, and the newest Translation herein, most naturally expresseth the sense of the Hebrew. Let none cavil that such laxity in the He∣brew words occasions uncertainty in the meaning of the Scripture: For God on pur∣pose uses such words importing several sen∣ses;
not to distract our heads, but dilate our hearts, and to make us Rechoboh, Room for our practice in the full extent thereof, Psal. 119. 92. Thy commandement is exceeding broad, and is penned in words and phrases, accep∣tive of several senses, but all excellent for us to practice: So that both Translations may be happily compounded in our endeavours, Mark the perfect, keep innocency, and behold the upright, and take heed to the thing that is right; for the end of that man is peace: and that shall bring a man peace at the last. Begin we with the description of the dead, Perfect, and what is a good Comment there∣on. Vpright. Object. It is impossible this world should afford a perfect man. What saith David, Psal. 14. 2. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men▪ to see if there were any that did understand and seek after God. They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that doth good, no not one. But what saith Solomon, Eccles. 2. 12. For what can the man do, who commeth after the King, even that which hath been done already. But what shall he do that cometh after the King of Heaven? can Subjects hope that their discoveries will be clearer then their Soveraigns? shall man living on earth see more then God looking from hea∣ven?
he could not meet with one good, where then shall we mark a perfect man? Answ. David in the place alledged, de∣scribes the general corruption ad prae varicatio∣nem of all mankind by nature; in the latitude whereof we confess the perfect man in my Text was involved. As all Metals when they are first taken out of the earth, have much dross and oar, but by art and industrie may afterwards be refined: so the man in my text was equally evil with all others by nature, till defecated by grace, and by Gods goodness re∣fined to such a height of puritie as in some de∣gree will endure the touch, and become per∣fect. In a four fold respect may a servant of God be pronounced Perfect in this life. 1 Comparatively, in reference to wicked men, who have not the least degree or desire of goodness in them. Measure a servant of God by such a dwarf, and he will seem a pro∣per person, yea, comparatively perfect. 2 Intentionally: The drift, scope, and pur∣pose of such a mans life, is to desire perfecti∣on, which his desires are seconded with all the strength of his weak endeavours: He draw∣eth his bow with all his might, and Perfecti∣on is the mark he aimeth at, though too of∣ten his hand shakes, his bow starts, and his arrow misses.
3 Inchoatively: We have here the begin∣ing and the earnest as of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22. So of all spiritual graces, expecting the full (not payment, because a meer gift, but) re∣ceipt of the rest hereafter. In this world we are a perfecting, and in the next, Heb. 12. 23. we shall come to the spirits of just men made per∣fect. But blame me not, Beloved, if I be brief in these three kinds of Perfections, rather touch∣ing then landing at them, in our discourse; seeing I am partly affraid, partly ashamed to lay too much stress and weight on such slight and slender foundations. I hasten with all convenient speed to the fourth, which one is worth all the rest. A servant of God in this life is perfect. 4 Imputatively: Christs perfections through Gods mercy being impued unto him. If I be worsted in my front, and beaten in my main Battel, I am sure I can safely retreat to this my invincible Ree: In the agonie of temptation we must quit comparative perfection. Alass, Relation is rather a shadow then a sub∣stance: quit intentional perfection, being con∣scious to our selves how oft our actions cross our intentions. Quit inchoative perfection; for whilest a servant of God compareth the little
goodness he hath with that great proportion which by Gods law he ought to have, he con∣ceiveth thereof as the pious Jews did of the Foundation of the second Temple, Haggai 2. 3. Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as no∣thing? But stick we may and must to impu∣tative perfection, which indeed is Gods act, cloathing us with the Righteousness of Iesus Christ. This is the reason the Saints are unwilling to own any other perfection: for though God Iob 1. 1. is pleased to stile Iob a perfect man, yet see what he saith of himself, Iob 9. 20. If I say that I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. God might say it, Iob durst not for fear of pride and presumption. Indeed Noah is the first person, who is pronounced perfect in Scripture, Gen. 6. 9. But mark I pray what went in the verse before: But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. Not that his finding grace is to be confined to his particular preservation from the Deluge, (which was but one branch or sprig of Gods grace unto him.) But his whole person was by Gods goodness accepted of, Noahs perfection more consisting in that ac∣ceptance then his own amiableness, approved not so much because God found goodness in Noah, but because Noah found grace in God.
Come we now in the description of the Dead, to what he is, The end of that man is peace. Object. Some will object that daily expe∣rience confutes the truth of this Doctrine, what more usual then to see Gods servants tossed, tumbled, tortured, tormented, often ending their painful lives with shameful deaths. Cushi being demanded by David to give an account of Absaloms condition, 2 Sam. 18. 32. made this mannerly and politique re∣turn: The enemies of my Lord the King, and all that rise up against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is. But some will say, if this be a peaceable end, to lead an afflicted life, and have an ignominious death, may the enemies of God and all goodness, the infringers of our Laws and Liberties, the haters of Learning and Re∣ligion, the destroyers of Unity and order, have their souls surfet of such a peaceable end. Resp. In answer hereunto we must make use of our Saviours distinction, the same for substance and effect, though in words there be variation thereof. Being taxed by Pilate for treason against Caesar; he pleaded for him∣self, Ioh. 18. 36. My kingdom is not of this world: So say we, to salve all objections, our peace,
that is the peace in our Text, (and God make it ours, not only to treat and hear, but partake thereof,) is not of this world, consisteth not in temporal or corporal prosperity; but is of a more high and heavenly nature. Indeed this peace is in this world, but not of this world; begun here in the calm of a clear and quiet conscience, and finished hereafter in the Ha∣ven of endless happiness. When the man in my Text, becomes perfectly perfect, he shall then become perfectly peaceable. However we may see that sometimes (I say not alwayes) God sets a signal character of his favour on some of his servants, enjoy∣ing at their end a generall calm, and univer∣sal tranquillity towards all to whom they are related. Amongst the many priviledges of Saints reckoned up Iob 5. none more remark∣able then that verse 23. For the Stones of the field shall be at league with thee, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Have we here a Dichotomy of all wicked men, or a sorting of them all into two sides. Some are Stones, like Nabal 1 Sam. 25. 37. stupid, sottish, senseless; no Rhetorick with its expanded hand, no Logick with its contracted fist, no Scripture, no reason, no practice, no precedent can make any im∣pression upon them, so that the best of men
may even despair to get their good will. Well the way to do it, and procure a perfect peace with them, is to please God. Others are beasts like the Cretians, Tit. 1. 12. , so fierce, so furious, so craf∣ty, so cruel, no medling with them without danger. As the former could not conceive, so these will not abide any rational debate with them. The former were too low and silly, too much beneath: these high and haughty, too much above perswasion to peace; mention but the name thereof, and they psal. 112. prepare themselves to bat∣tel. The art then to make these friends with a man, is only this, to endeavour to please the high God of heaven; and then Solomons words will come to pass, Prov. 16. 7. When a mans wayes please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him. It once came to pass in England (and but once it came to pass in England) namely, when See his life lately printed. Sir Thomas Moor was Lord Chan∣cellor, that the Cryer in Chancery being commanded to call the next cause, returned this answer, there were no more causes to be heard. Not that there was no more on the file for that day (which is ordi∣nary and usual) but, which is strange, that
then there was no more sutes depending in the whole Court of Chancery, but that all ripened for Trial, were decided. Then was Ianus his Temple shut clean throughout England, in Cases betwixt Plaintiff and De∣fendant, relating to equity and conscience. Whether this proceeded from the peacea∣bleness of people in that age, not so quarrel∣some and litigious as in ours: or from the goodness of the Judge, either, happy, pri∣vately to compound differences without any sute; or dextrous, publickly to decide them with all expedition. But when some good man hath lyen on his death bed, though having many sutes in his life, all then are ended and composed. Call the sute betwixt this man and his God, long since it is attoned, and both made friends in Christ. Cal the sute betwixt this man and his conscience, it is compremised, and both of them fully agreed. Cal the sute betwixt this man and his enemies, Stones, and Beasts, it is compound∣ed, and they at peace with him. Call the sute betwixt this man and all other Creatures, it is taken up, and he and they fully reconci∣led. Thus I say sometimes, not alwayes, God graceth some of his servants that they depart in an universal peace, a personal fa∣vour indulged to some select Saints. But ge∣nerally
and universally all the true servants of God, whatever their outward condition be, go from peace to peace; from the first fruits of peace in their conscience, to the full fruiti∣on thereof in heaven. Mark the perfect, be∣hold the upright: for the end of that man is peace. Come we now to the direction of the Li∣ving: Mark the Perfect, behold the Vp∣right. It is not said, Gaze on the Perfect, Stare on the Vpright, this men of themselves are too prone to do without any bidding: nay, con∣trary to Gods positive command, Heb. 10. 33. Whilest ye were made a gazing stock by re∣proaches and afflictions. And David in the person of Christ complains, Psal. 22. 17. they look and stare upon me: partly with eyes of wonder, as on so many Monsters and Prodi∣gies, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess of Riot: partly with the eyes of scorn, as on so many miserable wretches. Indeed God and wicked men agree in this point, that good men are not worthy to live here. But upon different, yea, contrary accounts, God esteems them too good to live here, Heb. 11. 38. Of whom the world was not worthy. Wicked men conceive them too bad to live here, Act. 22. 22. Away
with such a fellow from off the earth, for it is not fit that he should live. Which makes them to behold the perfect and upright, with scorn and contempt. However mark the Iust, behold the Vpright, do it solemnly, do it seriously, not with a cur∣sory look, fix thy sight, and for some time; let it dwell on so eminent an Object. Mark the perfect, as a Schollar marks his copie to write after it. Then will it come to pass with thee as with Moses, Exod. 34. 29. He so long had seen the back-parts or Suburbs of Gods glory, that the skin of his face shone, guilded with the reflexion thereof. So those who mark the Perfect and behold the Vpright, not only with a fore-cast, but chiefly with a reflex∣ed look, cannot but be gainers thereby. For the godly, who, as S. Paul saith, Phil. 2. 15. shine as lights among a crooked and perverse Na∣tion in the world, will make such as effectual∣ly mark them, become like unto them, and shine accordingly. We see that such who look on Bleer-eyes, have their own sight in∣fected therewith; and those who diligently mark, and stedfastly fasten the eyes of their souls, on the perfect and upright man, will in process of time, partake of their perfection. Vse. 1. It serveth to confute such, who, though living long in this world, and conver∣sing
with varietie of persons, yet mark and observe nothing at all. If a privy inspection might be made into the Diaries and Journals of such mens lives, how would they be found filled with empty cyphers, whose total sum amounts to just nothing. When Messengers and Trumpeters come into the Castles and Garrisons of their enemies, commonly they are brought blindfolded, that they may make no dangerous discoveries to report to their Party at their return. What out of Po∣licie is done to them, that many out of idle∣ness and ignorance do to themselves, mask and hood-wink their souls, do take notice of nothing in their passage through this world. Others mark but only such things which are not remarkable. Dina marks, but what? Gen. 34. 1. The fancie-ful fashions of the daugh∣ters of Canaan: and we may generally observe, that all observations follow the humour of the Observers, so that what vice or vertue in him is predominant, plainly appears in their discoveries. The Covetous man marks, but whom? those who are rich and wealthy. The ambitious man, but whom? those that are high and honourable. The lascivious man marks, but whom? such as are beautiful and wanton: few there be of Davids devout dis∣position, who mark the Perfect, behold
the Vpright; for the end of that man is peace. 2 Vse. Let all who desire this peaceable end, labour whilest living to list themselves in the number of those who are perfect and upright. King Ahaaz coming to Damascus, was so highly affected with an Idolatrous Altar which he there beheld, that he needs would have that Original Copyed out, 2 King. 16. 10. And the like made at Ierusalem, according to the fashion of it, and all the workmanship there∣of. Fool, to preferre the pattern of the infer∣nal pit, before the pattern in the Mount. But this his prophane action will afford us a pious application. You that have marked the Just and beheld the Upright, ought to be affected with the piety of his life, cannot but be contented with the peaceableness of his end. This therefore do; Such who are pleased with the pattern of his perfection and uprightness, go home, and raise the like fabrick, erect the like structure for all considerable particulars in your own soul. Vain and wicked was the wish of Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Let me dye the death of the righ∣teous, and let my last end be like his. He would commence per saltum, take the Degree of Hap∣piness, without that of Holiness; like those
who will live Papists, that they may sin the more freely; and dye Protestants, that they may be saved the more certainly. But know that it is an impossibility to graft a peaceable death upon any other stock, but that of a pi∣ous life. 3. Vse. Let it retrenoh our censuring of the final estate of those whom we know led god∣ly lives, and we see had shameful deaths. Let us expound what seems doubtful at their death, by what was clear in their life. A true conclusion may sometimes be inferred from false premises: but from true premises the conclusion must ever be true. Possibly a good life in the next world, may follow a bad one in this; namely, where (though late) sin∣cere repentance interposeth. But most certain and necessary it is▪ that a good life here must be crowned with a good condition hereafter. What then though Iohn Baptist lost his head by Herods cruelty, he still held his head in the Apostles phrase, Col. 2. 19. By a lively faith con∣tinuing his dependance on, and deriving life and comfort from Jesus Christ, in which re∣spect he may be said to have dyed in peace. There is a sharp and bitter passage in Scrip∣ture, Luk. 9. 23. And yet if the same be sweet∣ned with a word or two in my Text, it may not only easily be swallowed, but also will
certainly be digested into wholsome nourish∣ment: the words are these, and let him take up his Cross daily and follow me. His Cross; some will say, I could comfortably comport my self to carry such a mans Cross, his is a slight▪ a light, and easie; mine a high, a huge and heavy Cross. Oh but children must not be choosers of that rod wherewith they are to be corrected; that is to be let alone unto the discretion of their father. Men may fit cloaths, but God doth fit Crosses for our backs: no Cross will please him for thee to take up, but thy Cross, only that which his providence hath made thee the proprietarie thereof. Well take it up, on this assurance, that the end there∣of shall be peace. Take up thy Cross. Is it not enough that I be passive, and patiently carry it when it is laid upon me? What a Tyranny is this for me to cross my self by taking up my own cross? But God will have it so, thou must take it up: that is, First thou must freely confess that nothing hath befaln thee by chance or fortune, but by Gods all-ordering Providence. Secondly, Thou must acknowledge that all afflictions imposed upon thee▪ are the just punishment of thy sins deserved by thee; if inflicted more heavily, seeing all things is mercy which is on this side of hel fire. This it is to take up thy cross
do it willingly, for it will be peace at the last. The last is the worst word, Daily. Not that God every day sends us a new affliction, but he requires that every day we should put on a habit of patience, to undergo whatsoever cross is laid upon us. This I conceive to be Da∣vids meaning, Psal. 73. 14. and chastened eve∣ry morning. Daily, superstitious Fryers never esteem themselves ready till they have put on their Crucifix, and religious Protestants must never accompt themselves ready till they have put on their cross. The Papists have besprinkled their Calen∣dar with many festivals, having no foundati∣on in Scripture, or ancient Church History. One day they call the Exaltation of the Cross, which is May 3. another the Invention of the Cross, which is September 14. But we must know there is one day of the Cross more, Day which continueth from the beginning to the end of the year, namely, the Assumption of the Cross; every one must take it up daily, do it, & do it willingly, for the end thereof wil be peace. And yet there is a fourth thing remaining in the Text, when we have took up our Cross we must follow Christ it is not enough to take it up, and then stand still, as if suffering gave us a supersedeas for doing; but God at the same time will have our hands, back, and feet
of our soul exercised; hands to take up, back to bear our Cross, and feet to follow him; and happy it is for us, though we cannot go the same pace, if we go the same path with our Saviour; for the end thereof will be peace. O the amiableness of the word Peace! oh the extensiveness of the word End! Peace? what can be finer ware? End? what can be larger measure? The amiableness of Peace, especially to us, who so long have prayed for it, and payed for it, and sought for it, and fought for it, and yet as yet in England have not attained it. For the Tragoedy of our war is not ended, but the scene thereof removed, and the Element only altered from earth unto water. Surely had we practised Davids precept, Psal. 34. 14. Eschew evil and do good▪ seek peace and ensue it, before this time we had obtained our desire. It is to be feared we have been too earnest prosecu∣tors of the last, and too slow performers of the first part of the verse: great have been our desires, but small our deeds for peace. Had we eschewed evil and done good, God ere this time, would have crowned our wishes with the fruition of peace. The Marriners Act. 27. 30. (men skilful to shift for themselves at Sea) had a private pro∣ject for their own safety, namely, to quit their
crazie ship, (with the souldiers and passengers therein,) and secretly to convey themselves into the boat. But their design miscarried be∣ing discovered by S. Paul to the souldiers, who cut the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off. All men ought to have a publick spirit for the general good of our Nation, the success where of we leave to the al-managing providence of the God of heaven and earth. But I hope it wil be no treason against our State, and I am sure it wil be safe for us, who are but private persons to provide for the securing of our souls, and to build a little Cock-boat, or smal Vessel of a quiet conscience in our own hearts▪ thereby to escape to the Haven of our own Happiness? We wish well to the great Ship of our whole Nation, and will never desert it so, but that our best prayers and desires shall go with it. But however providence shall dispose thereof we will stick to the petty Pinnace of Peace in our own consciences. Sure I am, no souldiers shall be able to cut the Cables, I mean no for∣cible impression from without, shall disturb or discompose the peace which is within us. O the extensiveness of the word End! It is like the widows oyl, 2 King. 4. 6. Which mul∣tiplyed to fill the number and bigness of all Vessels brought unto it, so here bring dayes weeks, months, years, myriads, millions of
years end will fill them all, yet it self is never filled, as being the endless end of eternity. We will conclude all with a passage of Co∣lumbus, when he first went to make discove∣rie of the new world. Long time had he sail∣ed and seen nothing but Sea, insomuch as the men and Marriners with him begun to muti∣ny resolving to go no further, but return home again. Here Columbus with good words and fair language pacified them for the pre∣sent, perswading them to sail forward for one month more. That month elapsed, he over∣intreated them to hold out but 3 weeks lon∣ger: that three weeks expired, he humbly and heartily sued unto them, that for his sake they would sail on but 3 dayes more, promi∣sing to comply with the Resolutions of re∣turning, in case that within those 3 dayes, no encouragement to their contrary was disco∣vered. Before the ending whereof they de∣scryed fire, which was to them a demonstra∣tion that it was not subjected on water, and w invited them for the finding out of those Islands, whereby others afterwards discover∣ed the whole Continent. Whilest we live here below in our bodies, and sail towards another world in our souls and desires, we must expect to meet with much disturbance in our distempered passi∣ons:
yea, such as sometimes in the hour of temptation will amount to a mutiny; and much dishearten us when tost with the tempest of afflictions we can make no land, discover no hope of happiness. It must then be our work to still and calm our passions, perswading them to persevere▪ and patiently to proceed though little hope appear for the present. Not tha with Columbus we should indent with our souls to expect any set-time of years, months or dayes, (this were unlawful, and with the wicked, Psal. 78. 41. To limit the Holy One of Israel) but indefinitely without any notation of time: Let us till on our souls by degrees, a while, a little while, yet a very little while to depend on God, and go on in goodness. Then at last a pillar of fire, a comfortable light of a conscience cleared through the blood an merits of Christ will appear unto us, not only contenting us for the present, but directing us for the future to that bliss and happiness en∣joyed by the Subject of my Text, Mark the Perfect, behold the Vpright; for the end of that man is Peace. AMEN. FINIS. PAg. 7. l. 4. for  r. and prevarication, p. 12. l. 5. for , r. .
