G684_pt1 R18589 12661863 65439
A General Epistle Given forth in OBEDIENCE TO THE God of Peace. For the Preservation and Increase of CHARITY and UNITY a∣mongst the Professors of Christ Jesus, and the Teachings of his Divine Light within. By a Servant of Christ, a True Lover of Christian-Charity Peace and Unity WILLIAM GIBSON. Blessed are the Peace-makers, for they shall be called the Children of God, Mat. 5. 9. Put on Charity, which is the bod of perfectness, Col. 3. 14. He that saith he abideth in Christ, ought himself even to walk so as he walked, 1 John 2. 6. Let your Conversation be as it becometh the Gospel of Christ,—Phil. 1. 27. LONDON Printed, and sold by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in Grac-Church street near Cornhil, 1682.
REader, notwithstanding the Authors great care to prevent. Errors in the following matter, yet several Errors have escaped the Press, which thou art desired to take notice of; as the mistake of the Printers. Those which are most material to hurt the Sense, I have collected in this Errata, some other small literal Faults and Errors in pointing and transposing or misplacing of words there are, all which may be discerned in reading, by such who are skilful and diligent therein, and by such corrected so far as may be, for the help of those who are less skilful in reading and correcting; the two greatest Errors take particular notice of, the first is in the In∣troduction page the 5. line the 16. where speaking of the Spirit of the Creature Man or Woman, it is there rendred the Spirit of the Creator; the second great error is in p. 107. l. 15. where the word sensually is put instead of the word sensi∣bly.
ERRATA. INtroduction page 3. line 10. for Light read Spirit; p. 5. l. 16. f. Cre∣ator r. Creature; p. 6. l. 17. f. were read was; p. 12. l. 14. f. word r. words; p. 10. l. 3. blot out some of. First PART. IN Margin, p. 52. r. God commanded the Light to be and appear, and separated it from the Darkness in the First days work; p. 59. l. the 8. add the word (one) p. 76. l. 18. add the word (same) p. 78. l. 12. f. nember r. member; p. 95. l. 21. add the word (the) p. 102. l. 23. f. Chrisi r. Christ; p. 105. l. 7. f. Justifying r. Justifie; p. 107. l. 15 f. sensually r. sensibly; p. 109. l. 10. next after the word you make a full stop; p. 126. l. 22 and 23. read, O all ye ends of the Earth; p. 160. l, 19. dele and fear; l. 14. dele or.
Second PART. PAge the 2. l. 5. blot out and; p. the 6. l. 13, 14. r. thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall; p. 19. l. 5. r. the verse 9 and 10, &c. l. 23. blot out (him;) l. 29 f. careful r. careful; p. 20. l. 11. f. fevere r. severe; p. 24. l. 7. add (spoken of) p. 28. l. 20. f. understanding r. under∣stand; p. 29. l. 12. r. 1 Cor. 13. p. 45. l. 24. next after and, add (have) p. 56. l. 12. f. soberly r. sober; p. 65. l. 31. f. o r. to; p. 80. l. 25. blot out (to;) p. 93. l. 22. f. sowed r. soweth; p. 96. l. 6. f. seal∣ed r. seal, p. 99. l. 8. f. comended r. com∣mended. Several Scriptures which should have been in the Italick Letter are omitted, particularly the First Chapter of Gene∣sis, &c. in p. 52, 53, 54, 55.
Note, this Book being printed by several Men, occasioneth it to be in two Parts, only beca of the begin∣ning anew of the Figures upon the top of the pages, and that which is called the Second Part begins with the figure 1 at the top of the page or leaf. There is also some part of the Book put in Black Letter, which had been most properly in the Roman: these improprieties of the different form of Letters, doth no way hurt the matter as to the sense thereof.
THE CONTENTS. AN Exhortation to the Professors of the Light within, to live and walk in the same; and the Walker in the Light distn∣guished from the Talker of it, who walk in Darkness, Page. 1 Concerning good Conscience, 21. Concerning evil Conscience, 23. Concerning them that are weak in the Faith, 28. Concerning days, 30. Something concerning Christian Order, or Order in the Church of Christ, 42. Something more concerning the Order of the Works of God in Heaven and Earth, and particularly in his People, 52. Something more particularly concerning the Order of Christ in his Church, 72. Concerning the Form of the true Apostles Doctrine, 95. Concerning the Commands of the Apostles of Christ, which they gave, not of themselves, or by their own power, but by and in his Power, VVisdom, Strength and Authority; for they were his Ambassadors, over them he reigned, in them he spake and gave com∣mands, who is the Head of his Church, and
one in the Male and Female, 97 Concerning the Honour that God gives unto his People, 130. Concerning Rule and Government in the Church of Christ, 133. Concerning the Living Faith with its Fruits and Works, 142. Something concerning Self-Separation, 155. The Second PART. COncerning falling from God, 1. Concerning just Judgment amongst Gods People, given or committed to them, or spoken by or through them (in whom God dwells ccording to his promise) against the Devil and his works, sin and wickedness, 9. Concerning the Just and Righteous Judgment of God in and by his People under the Dis∣pensation of the Gospel, 13. Concerning the Mercy of God, and of his Peo∣ple, 17. Something concerning true Love, or Charity, 28. Something concerning the Ʋnity and Fellow∣sip of true Christians, 53. Something concerning the Seven hurches in Asia, who were gathered into the Profession of Christ Jesus, 57. Something concerning Marig, 78. Concerning pure Religion, 83.
A General Epistle TO FRIENDS, &c. An Exhortation to the Professors of the Light Within, to LIVE and WALK in the same; and the WALKER in the Light distinguished from the TALKER of it who walks in Darkness. ALL you who profess Christ Jesus, the Prince of Life and Peace, to be your Prince, Captain of your Sal∣vation, and Bishop of your Souls, who profess to be Taught, Led, and Govern∣ed by his Spiritual Light within you: See that you all Live and Walk in the same, that you may all possess that which you do profess; and it is most certain, if we walk in
the light, (wherewith God in Christ hath en∣lightened us) then have we fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanseth us from all Sin: But if there be not a Walking in this precious Divine Light (which shines from God the Fountain of it) then there can be no Fellowship with God the Father, nor with his beloved Son, nor true Fellowship one with another: No cleansing from Sin then, but the sin of all such who on∣ly Talk of the Light (Walking contra∣ry to it) remaineth and encreaseth: There∣fore all be very careful in this great weighty Concern, wherein the Glory of the great God, and the Salvation of your Souls are so very greatly concerned. O Friends! Be all as wil∣ling to follow and obey this Spiritual Divine Light, as you are to profess it, and talk of it; for if there be not a Walking in it, the Profession of it will be in vain: For after the Light of Christ Within be known, and Good and Evil made known by it, if the Creature do not yield Obedience to it, in for∣saking the Evil, and embracing, following, and doing that which is Good, then his sin becomes more grievous to Almighty God than before; for as 'tis written, In the time of Ignorance God winked; but after the Gospel, the Power of God is preached to, and in, the Creature (which hath been subjected by Satan under sin, in the Bondage of Corruption) and
by which the Creatures Heart and Soul is, in some degree, quickened and opened to know what God requireth of it: If then it do not deny Self, take up its Cross against the Devil and Self, then its Opposition and Disobedience to the Divine Gospel-Light, God accounts the Sin of stebellion, which is as Witchcraft, from which the Lord God of all our Mercies and Blessings deliver and preserve you. Into this State of Misery were the foolish Galati∣ans faln, to whom the Apostle Paul wrote, and after he had sharply reprehended them for their Backsliding and Unfaithfulness, he travelled again on their behalf, that Christ might be formed in them. And as their Backsliding became matter of great Sorrow and deep Exercise to him, the like hath befaln the ancient and faithful Labourers in the peace∣able Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in our age for some; for as he was sent to turn the People from Darkness to the Divine Spiritual Light of God and Christ, from the Power of Satan (who had imbondaged them in sin) to God, whose Power is Almighty, break∣ing the Power of Satan down, and delivering the Creature, by its powerful working, out of the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God: Even so hath the Lord God Almighty and Merciful, sent his faithful Servants, in this Age, to turn People from Darkness unto Light, from the Power
o Satan unto God, that through the working of the glorious Power of God in their In ward Man, they might receive true Faith and Repentance, and so might receive the Forgiveness of their Sins past, in the name of Jesus Christ, through the forbearance of God; and not only so, but also by the same power, to know Redempti∣on out of Sin, from the Power of Satan, who led them into it, and so come into the glori∣ous Liberty of the Sons of God. This glori∣ous work of Restauration hath the Lord in his tender Mercy begun, and effectually carried on in Thousands, Glory be given unto him for the same, and for all his tender Mercies; for he is worthy. But as it was in the Apo∣stles days, so is it in ours; there were some then, who, after they had tasted of the Hea∣venly Gift and power of the World to come, and thereby had known the beginning of the work of true Faith and Repentance, and the Exercise of a good Conscience, yet through their Slothtulness, Negligence, and multiplied Disobedience & Rebellion, they came to make Shipwrack of the Faith which God had given them, and to put away a good Conscience which God by his powerful Spirit had wrought in them: Of this sort the Apostle Peter writ, saying, It had been better they had never known the way of Truth, than after they have known it to depart from the holy Com∣mandment
delivered to them: But (saith he) it is come to pass according to the true Proverb, The Dog is returned to his own Do∣mit, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. Jude & Peter writ of these and such like salse Apostles & deceitful Workers, saying, They are Wells without Water, Clouds without Rain, carried about of Tempests, wandring Stars, to whom is reserved the Mist of darkness for ever; Trees whose. Fruit is witherd, without Fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the sots. Such were they whom the Apostle Paul writ of, saying, (Acts 20. 30. and 2 Pet. 2. 2.) Men shall arise among your selves, speaking per∣verse things, and shall draw Disciples after them, through whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of. I say, as it is was then, so is it come to pass in our days; diverse Persons, who have come among us in a Profession of the Pure, Unchangeable, Divine Light of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, for some time, did in some Measure know it, and obeyed it, they have turned into Rebellion against it; and such have, and do now make War against the Children of it, who walk in it, in whom the pure, peaceable Fruits of it do appear. And this some Men have done, and do, under the Profession of it, and a specieus pretence of Love to it; this is abominable Deceit, yea, the deceivableness of Unrighteousness, which
worketh in them, which hath been wrought in them by Satan, because they have not kept in true Love and Obedience unto the Spiritual Light of Christ the Son of God, to which they were turned. They have not kept in the Godly Fear, not in true Humility, therefore hath Satan (the Prince of Darkness, and King over all the Children of Pride) dark∣ned their Understandings, adulterated their Affections, and corrupted their Wills: Thus by him they are prepared and used as Instruments for him, against the Lord and his Divine Light, Grace, and Spirit, under the Profession of the same. Such by professing and using the words of Truth, have, and do deceive the Hearts of the Simple. God Al∣mighty hath Confounded the work of such, in our Age we have seen it, and do give Glory to him for the same. We do believe that he will confound such Evil works, and that the Instruments thereof will be eternally miserable, if they do not find a place of Repentance, which to see them find would be matter of great Comfort to us. Several Persons have gone out of the Truth under specious Pretences of Greater Manifestations of God, and Attainments, and Growth in the way of Righteousness, than they were come to, whom they turned against. And through those false Pretences they have drawn some tender-hearted, well mean∣ing
Persons from the Divine Light and Fellowship in it, into evil Imaginations and unrighteous Jealousies, concerning the faith∣ful Ministers of Christ, and their Labour of Love for the Glory of God, and the Peace, Unity, Preservation, and Eternal Good of his People. But the Lord God in Mercy hath given several who were thus hurt, to see how the hurt came upon them, and hath recovered them out of the Snare wherein they were sub∣tilly taken, blessed be his holy Name for the same; and we hope that he will visit and re∣store such well-meaning Persons, who are ta∣ken, and yet held in such like Snares, though some who are turned aside after Satan, may grow worse and worse, as others have done before them, until God cut them off in his An∣ger, as he hath done such like already. My dear Friends, you who have ancient∣ly been turned to the Divine Light of Christ, who have and do walk in it, you know what I have here briefly touched at is true, and you in this divine Light, may see the Old Enemy of our Peace & pure Christian Fellowship & Unity at work against the same, under a Profession of the Light, to darken and draw persons from it, into the works of Darkness. And thus, as in the Apostles days, he hath, and doth transform himself as like an Angel of Light, as he can: how should he appear like an
Angel of Light, if he should in words deny the Light of Christ Within Man and Woman? The Apostle writing of false Apostles, saith thus, viz. For such False A∣postles are deceitful Workers, and fashion them∣selves like unto the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is changed into the fashion of an Angel of Light: Therefore is it no great thing, though his Ministers fashion themselves as though they were the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their Deeds. Thus 'tis rendered in 2 Cor. 10. Old Translation, Printed in 1566. O con∣sider of it all such whom it concerns! And how should the False Apostles in the True A∣postles days, have transformed themselves like unto them, if they should have in Words denied the Light of Christ Within (though in Works they did?) Seeing Christ's Command was, and is, to believe in the Light and walk in at, that Men and Women might then, & may now, and hereafter be Children of the Light, as the faithful Followers of the Light then were, and now are. The great Message and Work of John Baptist, and the Apostles Paul, John, Peter, and the rest, was to bear witness of the Light, and to turn People to it, that they might all believe in it, and obey and walk therein, that they might be saved. Now for Satan to send his Apostles, or Preachers [a∣mogst us] to seek, to deceive us, if they
should come blaspheming against the Light of Christ Within, mocking and scoffing at it, as many dark Preachers and Professors of this Age do, (who have been bred up in Darkness and Ignorance from their Youth, who yet ne∣ver understood what the Light of Christ With∣in is) he were not like to prevail upon those who have been turned to it, and have had their Hearts tendered, and in some measure o∣pened by it: But if he come under a Profes∣sion of it, and his Ministers confessing it, and in words owning of it, professing to be taught and led by it in their talking of it, and in the rest of their Conversation, especially if they do keep out of the common, gross Debau∣cheries that are in the World, then they are like to prevail upon such, who do not faithfully watch in the Light which maketh all things manifest as they are. Christ hath command∣ed us to Watch and pray, lest we fall into the Temptation (of the Devil). He said to his Dis∣ciples, What I say unto one, I say unto all, watch. The holy Prophet said, I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak Peace to his People, and to his Saints; but let them not turn again to folly. O blessed are all they who so do, they are the Children of the Wis∣dom that comes down from above; their Eye being kept single to God, they are kept by his mighty Power through Faith, so that they shall not stumble, nor walk in the crooked ways
of Satan, which leads to the Chambers of Death, even to take hold on Hell. My Friends, you, who are ancient∣ly convinced of the blessed Truth, as 'tis in Christ Jesus our Lord, and have kept your Ha∣bitations therein, some of you may remember what great Evils some run into, when they made a Profession of the Light of Christ Within, and when they had so done and were reproved for it, and admonished to re∣pent and reform, they would tell us, We must leave them to their own Measures of the Light of Christ, and what they did they were justified therein by it: And such would say, The Light Within is suf∣ficient to teach us, (will not you leave us to it?) And when some had acted things which were evil and scandalous, they would say, That they were justified by the Light in them. They would have persua∣ded us that the Light of Christ Within did lead them into those evil and confused, dis∣orderly Practices which they run into: But the Lord Jesus Christ by his Light shew∣ed us plainly, that those things which they said the Light Within taught them, led them into, and justified them in, were the Works and Fruits of Darkness, proceeding (through them) from Satan, who had betray∣ed and deceived them, as he did Eve. And as we then withstood those who blasphemed
against the Divine Light of Christ Within, by seeking to father their Works of Darkness up∣on it, by rendering it the Author thereof; so in the Light of Christ we do withstand those vain Talkers of the Light at this time, whose Walking and Works are in Darkness; and in the Light of Christ we testifie to the sufficiency of it, against all Priests and Professors whatsoever who blas∣pheme against it, calling it a Natural Insuffici∣ent Light, &c. Take notice, Oh my Friends! That Satan the Prince of Darkness, and his dark, wicked, prophane, Generation or Offspring, long have, and at this day do profess the great, true, and living God, & Christ Jesus, whom he hath sent, in Words but in Works they do deny both the Father and the Son. And although Satan, the Prince of Darkness, may, in some of his confused, dark Instruments, confess to, and profess the Light of Christ Within, yet he is still Satan, the Adversary, the Prince of Darkness, and his Professing and Talking of the Light is only with de∣sign the more readily to prevail upon, and de∣stroy those who through Love to the Light, delight to hear it spoken of and commended. And Satan and his dark Instruments have done more harm to some such in their false feigned Profession & Com∣mendation of the Light than ever they
did, or could do, by their direct oppo∣sition to it, and blasphemous words against it. My dear Friends, Consider what our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles have testified, con∣cerning the only true God, and left the same upon Record in the Scriptures of Truth; Christs Testimony is, That God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in the Spirit, and in the Truth. The Apostle John's Testimony is, That God is Light, and in him there is no darkness at all: If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lye, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another, &c. Observe that this living true God, who is a Spirit, and Light, is one God; his Light and Spirit in his People is one in its kind or Nature with himself, he being the Fountain of it, and it of himself, it can∣not contradict him, or itself, in the seve∣ral Measures, Manifestations & Dis∣pensations of it, in those who receive it, believe, and obey it: For if it should, or could do so, then God by it would be render∣ed the Author of Confusion [and not of Peace,] in all the Churches of the Saints; which to believe or suppose, is very highly blas∣phemous against him, and directly contrary to the holy Apostles Doctrine, who saith, God is not
the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, in all the Churches of the Saints. The same Apostle saith, The Fruit of the Spi∣rit is in all goodness, Righteousness, und Truth, proving what is acceptable unto the Lrd: And he exhorted the Saints, saying, Have no Fel∣lowship with the unfruitful works of Dark∣ness, but rather reprove them. To those who walked in the Spirit and Light of God, he said, Walk in Love as Christ also hath loved us: To these also he said, Ye were sometimes Dark∣ness, but now are ye Lighi in the Lord, walk as Children of the Light. See Eph. 5. A∣gain he saith, The Fruits of the Spirit is Love, Joy, and Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; a∣gainst such there is no Law; and they that are Christs have crucified the Flesh, with its Af∣fections and Lusts: If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit; let us not be desi∣rous of vain Glory, provoking one another, envying one another. Again he saith, The Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are A∣dultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lascivious∣ness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Darance, Emu∣lations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, He∣resies; Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. Again the holy A∣postle
John in the Holy Ghost saith, He that saith he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness even until now; he that loveth his Brother abideth in the Light, and there is none occasion of Stumbling in him: But he that hateth his Brother is in Darkness, and walketh in Darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that Darkness hath blinded his Eyes. If a man say I love God, and ha∣teth his Brother, he is a Lyar; this Command∣ment have we from him, that he who loveth God loveth his Brother also. See 1 John 4. My dear Friends, Observe, That where the Fruits of the Spirit and Light of God and Christ are wanting, in those who profess the same to be their Teach∣er, Ruler, and Orderer, and contra∣riwise, the Fruits or Works of the Flesh do appear, this is a plain proof, that their saying they are taught, ld, and governed by the Spirit and Light of God and Christ, is very notoriously false, yea blasphemous against God, Christ, and his Divine Light and Spi∣rit: For when Christ told his Disciples, that false Prophets, Anti-Christs, Deceivers, &c. should come, saying, Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps Cloathing, but in∣wardly they are ravening Wolves, he said, Ye shall know them by their Fruits. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles?
Even so every good Tree bringeth forth good Fruit, but a corrupt Tree bringeth forth e∣vil Fruit. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit: Every Tree that bringeth not forth good Fruit is hewn down and cast into the Fire: Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the King∣dom of Heaven, but he that doth the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. See Math. 7. 15. and 24. Again he saith, Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many: And be∣cause Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold; But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. There shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and Wonders, insomuch that if it were possible, they shall deceive the ve∣ry Elect. See Matth. 24. 11, 12, 13, 24. & see Mark 13. 22. he repeating the same words of Christ, and there he saith, Take heed, I have told you before. Observe Christ's Promise to the faithful cho∣sen Elect, notwithstanding all the deceiveable∣ness of unrighteousness, which then did, now doth, or hereafter may work in the Instru∣ments of Satan, (by feigned Words, or fair, or flattering Speeches, false signs, or lying wonders, whereby he lieth in wait to betray and deceive, by which he hath prevailed upon
some unstable, unwatchful, unfaithful, and therefore unskilful Souls, who are not ac∣quainted with the depths of Satan, speaking in his Agents) yet can he not in his Agents, de∣ceive the Elect, the chosen of God. Observe, all that are convinced of the truth, and come to some degree of Obedience to it, are not come to the settled State of Elec∣tion, (although they are come to a sight and feeling of the Spirit of Christ, in whom the Election stands) in which State it is im∣possible to be deceived. Let not the weakest amongst the Believers in, and Obeyers of the Light of Christ Within, be discouraged at these sayings; for as they keep to the Light, God the Fountain of it will keep them from falling. God set Adam in a State of Inno∣cency, in which it was possible for him to stand, yet it was not impossible for him to fall; for we both read, and believe, he did fall; he could not stand in his own strength, but in the strength of the Lord his Maker, through want of his diligent attendance, and waiting upon God his Maker for preservation, he fell under the power of the Deceiver. But Christ who never fell spake of a State, & brings those who continue diligent & watchful into it, which is beyond that, as his forecited words do plainly imply. The Apostles writ unto the Belie∣vers in the Light of Christ thus: viz. Where∣fore Brethren give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure; for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Read the Chapter through, &c. Again he saith, Beware, lest ye being led away with the Errour of the wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness: But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Christ, to him be Glory, now and for ever, Amen. Chap. 3. 17, 18. Again Jue writes thus: Now to him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you fault∣less before the presence of his Glory, with exceed∣ing joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen. Jude 24, 25. read the Epistle throughout. Observe further, that the Settled State of Election, where deceit cannot enter, is not a State above, or beyond Watchfulness, and the holy Fear of God (the Son of God himself in the daies of his Flesh, watched and prayed, and was heard in that he feared, as the Author to the Hebrews writes, Heb. 5. 7.) but in this State, of Watchfulness, and the holy Fear of God, they continually abiding sted∣fast in, to such it is become Natural to dwell and abide there, being rooted and settled in the Godly, or Divine Nature, of which they are made partakers; as the Apostle writ; see 1 Pet. 1. 4. See how Fulks renders this place in his Confutation of the Popish Translation at Rhmes; he renders the words Divine Nature, Godly Nature.
Eternal Glory to him for the preservation of his People, who daily wait upon him; he gives them Wisdom, Strength and Preserva∣tion; he who keeps them never lubrs nor sleeps; holy and mighy is his Wisdom and Strength, by which he redeems, preserves, and up his People, in doing that which is well pleasing in his sight. Blessed are all those who diligently wait to be made partakers of the same, they shall be upheld thereby through all Temptations, Trials, and the Buffetings, and Winnowings of Satan, out of his snares, and over him, (in Christ the Elect Seed, which bruiseth his Head) and over all his several sorts of Agents; for as the Apostle saith, Greater is he that is in us than he that is in the World, by whom we over∣come the World. O my dear Friends! All diligently wait on God in the Divine Light and Spirit of his Son, that you may grow in the Grace and know∣ledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ more and more, that you may be all firmly rooted and grounded in him; as Trees or Branches of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord God, that you may bring forth much Fruit to the Praise and Glory of his name. Christ the living true Vine said unto his Dis∣ciples of old, I am the true Vine, and my Fa∣ther is the Husbandman; every Branch that beareth not fruit in me, he taketh away; and
every Branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit—Abide in me, and I in you: As the branch cannot bring forth of itself, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered. Joh. 15. 1, 2, 4, 5. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love. If ye keep my Commandments ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. This is my Commandment, that ye love one a∣nother as I have loved you. See John 15. 5, &c. O my Friends! These are the sweet and comfortable Sayings of our Lord Jesus Christ, our Prince of Life, Love, and Peace. Let them be duly weighed, faithfully regarded and followed by you all who profess to be his Disciples, (that is) Learners of him; for as he saith, Without him we can do nothing, except we be joined to his gracious Spirit of Light, Life, and Peace, we cannot please God, but being joined to it, it worketh in us to will and to do that which is well pleasing in the sight of the Lord God. So we become
his workmanship in Christ, created in him unto those good Works which God hath or∣dained we should walk in, that our Light may shine before men, that they may behold our good Conversation in Christ, constantly coupled with that godly fear, wherein there is not only a hating of, but also a coming out of, and preservation from, Pride, Arro∣gancy, and every evil way—O my Friends! This is that which is to be desired, sought of God, and diligently waited for; this is the durable Riches that far excels all that can be mentioned besides it; this is the Treasure that is to be laid up in Heaven, according to Christs Command, where neither Moth can corrupt, nor Thief break through and steal. Blessed are all they who diligently wait for the Increase and Security of this Trea∣sure, they shall never be forsaken of the Lord; he whose the Earth is, and the fulness of it, who feeds the Ravens, cloaths the Grass, and takes care for Sparrows, will take care and provide for them. So all wait, that your Faith and Confidence may be preserved, con∣firmed and increased to his eternal honour, and your enduring Peace and Comfort; even so be it, Amen.
Concerning good Conscience. MY dear Friends, something lies up∣on me to write to you in the ten∣der Bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of our Christian Peace, Fellowship, and Unity. The matter before me is this: I find that there are some persons professing Truth amongst us, (who not being faithful to the gracious Spirit and Light of our Lord Je∣sus Christ, which they make profession of) that are offended with the Method, Man∣ner and Form in which Friends Care of Gods Glory, and the good one of another, is mani∣fest; these persons talk much of Liberty of Conscience: To which I say, Liberty of Conscience (rightly understood) hath ever since we were a People, been, and still is owned a∣mongst us; but for any who profess to be fol∣lowers of the Light, Members of the Church which is in God, to plead Liber∣ty of Conscience for themselves, without put∣ting a difference betwixt good Conscience and evil, this is an Unsound and Unchristian Plea (for the Apostles of Christ distinguisheth betwixt good and evil Conscience) yea, shews that they are separated and divided the one from the other, for they proceed from contrary Causes. The Apostle said, My
Conscience beareth me witness in the Holy Ghost, Rom. 9. 1. And again, I have lived in all good Conscience unto this day: For our re∣joycing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World, and more abundantly to you-wards. See 2 Cor. 1. 12. He who had believed and received the Holy Ghost, was made of a good Understand∣ing by it, his Will and Affections also being purified from Corruption thereby, so that he did not only understand what was right and wrong, but he also willed and took pleasure to act and do that which was and is well plea∣sing in the sight of the Lord: And this he was enabled to do by the Power of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of Truth, which (according to the Promise of Christ) leads his faithful Subjects by Degrees from Glory to Glory, from one degree of Grace to another) into all Truth: And so are the faithful followers of Christ Jesus led in this our day. Paul writing to Timothy saith, Now the end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, from which some having swerved, have turned aside unto vain jangling. 1 Tim. 1. 5, 6. Again ver. 18, 19. he chargeth. Ti∣mothy to hold Faith and a good Consci∣ence, which sme having put away,
concerning Faith have made shipwrack. Again, Chap. 3. ver. 9. The Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience. The Apostle Peter writes to the Believers thus, (viz.) Ha∣ving a good Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of Evil-doers, they may be ashamed that falsly accuse your good Conversation in Christ. 1 Pet. 3. 16. Concerning evil Conscience. THE Apostle writes thus: Now the Spi∣rit speaketh expresly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, gi∣ving heed to the seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lyes in Hypocrisie, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron. 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2. Now the Prince that begets and up∣holds this evil Conscience, hardened and seared, is the Devil, who abode not in the truth, in whom there is no truth, he is that Prince of the power of the Air, who works in the hearts of the Children of Disobedience, as the Apostle saith. This is he who leads into the fleshly Liberty from the Cross of Christ, into the fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul, and drowns such men in predition, who become Enemies to the Cross of Christ. This Liberty is not to be given way unto, nor to be pleaded for by any true Christian; this
is not the Liberty of the Sons of God, which he hath promised to restore them into, who believe in Jesus Christ, and take up their daily Cross and follow him, giving and taking Liberty to this evil Conscience brings into corruptible Bondage, yea, it vassalizeth the Creature, Soul and Body to Satan; and if this Liberty be continued in, it brings everlasting destruction both upon Man and Woman. Paul writ to Titus, saying, Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their Mind and Consciences defiled; they profess that they know God, but in Works they deny him. See Tit. 1. 15, 16. Again, the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, saith, Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, &c. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering; for he is faithful that promised; and let us consider one another to provoke unto Love and to good Works, not forsaking the Assembling our selves together as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another, &c. See Heb. 10. 22, 23, 24, 25. Oh my dear Friends! All tenderly consi∣der, that the great work of God in, and through Christ, is to put away this evil Con∣science, and to work in man a good one, yea, to redeem out of all corrupt, sinful, fleshly Liberty, which Liberty embondageth the
Creature under Satans power, as I said before. Now Christ the patient and innocent Lamb of God, was sent by the Father to take away the Sins of the World, which John Baptist in his Eternal Light saw, and testified of, and in the same Divine Spirit and Light of Christ Daniel the Prophet saw, and testified of, say∣ing, He shall finish Sin and Transgression, and shall bring in everlasting Righteousness: Blessed are all they who in Faith and Patience wait to see this great Work carried on, and finished in the appointed season of the Father. O my Friends! Seriously consider how en∣clinabe, apt, and prone. Men and Wo∣men are (after they are come to some degree of the knowledge of God, and of Christ, and of the daily Cross) to hearken to the Serpents voice, (who deceived Eve) who leads into this ungodly Liberty, who by his Transfor∣mations hath deceived some in our Age after they knew God and Christ, as aforesaid; and he has promised them Liberty and great things, as he did Eve, and has brought them into misery as he did her; and through this his accursed work, a Root of Bitterness is sprung up in some, which is in danger to defile many, which God through his tender Mercy put a stop unto, confound, and drive backward: This is the earnest desire of my Soul. The Apostle Peter writes against the flesh∣ly
Libertines, with which the Church was exercised in his day, which became matter of much Travel and Grief to the faithful Apo∣stles; of them he thus writes, viz. These are Wells without Water, Clouds that are carried with a Tempest, to whom the mist of Darkness is reserved for ever; for when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live in errour: While they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the servants of Corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in∣to Bondage, &c. See 2 Pet. 2. 16. to the end. Dear Friends, Something more is upon me to write concerning Conscience. The Apo∣stle writing to the Church at Corinth, speak∣eth of the Idolatry of the Gentiles, (viz.) As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto Idols, we know that an Idol is nothing in the World; for though there be that are called Gods, whether in Hea∣ven or in Earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many) But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him; howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge; for some with Conscience of the Idol unto this hour, eat it
as a thing offered unto an Idol, and their Con∣sciences being weak are defiled. But meat com∣mendeth us not to God; for neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse. But take heed, lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak; for if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are sacrificed to Idols? &c. Read 1 Cor. 8. 4. to the end of the chap. Observe here, that some with Conscience of the Idol did eat things sacrificed unto it, and their Consciences therein and thereby were defiled. The Christians, who knew there was no other God but one, were warn∣ed by the Apostle, that they should not sit in the Idols Temple at Meat, with those who eat their meat unto the Idol, lest their so do∣ing should embolden those ignorant Idolaters to persist in their Ignorance and Idolatry; for though some might say, they did not eat it to the Idol as the Idolaters did, but for strength and sustenance to the outward man; yet this would not answer the Counsel of the Lord in the Apostle, nor the Light of Christ in their own Souls; but they were to abstain from eating with them at such Sacrifices, thereby to prevent emboldening them therein. And in chap. 10. ver. 20. take his Testimony a∣gainst
this sort of Idolatry in these words, viz But I say that the things which the Gentiles sa∣crifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. (See Acts 15. 28.) And I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils. My Friends, these Testimonies I bring, not only to shew good Conscience from evil Conscience, and weak from strong, but also to shew how careful the Apostle was, that those believing Gentiles (who had received the knowledge of the one true God) should walk in faithfulness to him, according to the know∣ledge which he had given them, that by their good conversation, in Christ as well as by their, preaching of the word and Doctrine of the Gospel, those Idolaters might be turn∣ed from their dumb Idols to serve the living God. Concerning them that are weak in the Faith. YET something further concerning them that are weak in the Faith. The A∣postle writing to the believing Romans, writes thus, viz. Him that is weak in the Faith re∣ceive you; But not to doubtful disputations; for one believeth that he may eat all things, another who is weak eateth hearbs: Let not him that
eateth despise him that eateth not, and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth; for God hath received him.—One man esteem∣eth one day above another; another esteem∣eth every day alike; Let every man be fully persuaded in his own Mind, &c. See Rom. 8. 1, 5, &c. My Friends, some unruly, and some un∣skilful persons of our time, who would be ac∣counted strong, faithful, and wise, under the Profession of the Light of Christ Within, have endeavoured to strain and wrest this last cited Scripture, thereby to justifie and cover them∣selves, in the practising of some things which are contrary to the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus; as also in the omitting and neglecting of some things, which the Light of Jesus hath led the faithful into, not only the Elders or aged in Christ, but the younger also. In bear∣ing with weakness we are of the Apo∣stles mind and concerning eating of Hearbs, or any sort of Food or Meat; we would have all who profess the Light of Christ Jesus, to wait diligently in it, that by it their Under∣standings may be cleared, that they may see as the Apostle did, and be persuaded as he and many more were, and are, that there is no∣thing unclean of it self; that so out of weakness they may grow strong in the Lord. The same Apostle who took this care, that they might not judge one another about Meats,
Drinks, and Days. Hear what he further saith concerning these things, when some among the Christians would, or did command to ab∣stain from Meats, and would have it received as a Principle or Doctrine of Christ in his Church, then the Apostle judged it, and ranks it as one of the Doctrines of Devils. See Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3. Observe whilst the abstaining from Meats, in the before mentioned sense, was practised as a Weakness (which it really was) through shortness of Understanding, he bore with it and exhorted others so to do, saying, We who are strong ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak: Rom. 15. 1. But when some did account themselves strong and wise in Chri∣stianity, (but were not so) would have en∣joined it as a Command, that he judged, as a∣foresaid. Concerning Days. AGain concerning Days hear what he saith, (viz.) Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service to them which by nature are no Gods. But now after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggerly Ele∣ments, whereunto ye desire again to be in Bon∣dage.
Ye observe Days and Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed on you Labour in vain: Brethren, I beseech you to be as I am. Gal. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. Again hear what he saith, viz. Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant that you be like minded one towards another, accord∣ing to Christ Jesus, that you may with one Mind, and one Mouth glorifie God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Rom. 15. 5, 6. Again, hear what the Apostle saith concern∣ing these things, writing to the believing Colossians, viz. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come; But the body is of Christ, &c. Col. 2. 16, 17. Observe, That the Apostles and Primitive faithful Christians, who bore with the weak∣nesses of some, in their observation of Days, and limiting themselves to eating of Hearbs, they were not to be judged in their eating or drinking, who eat and drank in the Faith and Counsel of God; neither were they to be judged, because they did not observe the Jews Holy-days (so called,) neither because they did not observe the Jews New Moons, or Sabbath days, which are a shadow; for they were come to Christ, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness sake, to every one that believes, as its written.
Again, hear what Christ saith, And he called the Multitude together & said, Hear and under∣stand, Not that which goeth into the Mouth de∣fileth the Man, but that which cometh out of the Mouth defileth the Man. Do not you understand; that whatsoever entereth in at the Mouth goeth into the Belly and is cast out into the Draught? but those things that proceed out of the Mouth, cometh forth from the Heart, and they define the Man; For out of the heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False Witness, Blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man. Matth. 15. 10, 11, 17, 18, 19, 20. And concerning the Jews Sabbath hear what Christ saith, And he said unto them, The Sabbath was made for Man, and not man for the Sabbath; therefore the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath, Mark 2. 27, 28. Observe, this he said unto the Pharisees, who judged his Disciples for plucking the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, who said unto him, Behold, why do they on the Sabbath day that which is not lawful? Upon which he brought them an Instance what David did, in eating the Shew-bread, &c. But Christ by offering up himself through the Eternal Spirit, hath since that put an end to these shadows; so that the Apostles and Primitive Christians were not to be judged for their refusing to practise them when Christ had ended them. And
though the Apostles and Christians did bear with the Practice of these things in some, after they came to make some profession of Christ, yet they bore with it as weak∣ness which it was, which the strong in Christ knew they would outgrow, as they diligently did follow on to know the Lord, through obeying him in what they did al∣ready know; for that is the way for every one to know what is needful for them to know, which they yet know not, even to be obedient to God in what they do already know: For he is faithful who hath promi∣sed, saying, He that is faithful in a little, I will make him Ruler over much. The Path of the Just is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day, as 'tis written. And again, The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of se∣ven days, &c. Now if those weak ones, with whom the Primitive Christians bore in these things, should have called them A∣states and Innovaors, and have called their Epistles, rotten Orders, Mns Prescriptions and Edicts, and have judged them in their Christian freedom, because they did not continue with them in Bon∣dage, in Eating Herbs, Observation of Days, Years, and Times, and should have cryed
up their Jewish bondage to have been Chri∣stian Liberty, and themselves to be strong Christians, and the others to be weak, or darkned and Apostatized; Would the Apo∣stles and Primitive Christians have owned them as Brethren in Ʋnity, and have had Fellowship with them in their so doing? Yea or Nay? Let Gods faithful Witness in all that know it, answer this Question. Oh! my Friends, I am grieved in Spirit, because of the hardness, wilfulness, and self∣conceitedness of some, whose work, at this day, is to unsettle the minds of Gods peo∣ple, by drawing them from their diligent attendance unto the Spirit, Light, and Voice of God in their own hearts and souls, and in the mouths of his faithful Servants, (which Spirit, Light, and Voice in their hearts, and in the mouths of his Servants, is not contradictory to it self in the one or the other) after them, into ungodly jealou∣sies, evil surmises, thoughts and imaginati∣ons, words and actions, by which evil work several persons, whom the Lord in mercy had gathered near to himself, have been drawn out from the simplicity, which is in Christ, into prejudice, evil jealousies, and also into some practices, which are incon∣sistent with the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus, divers of whom the Lord hath in mercy gi∣ven the sense thereof, and through his righ∣teous
Judgments upon the evil, hath resto∣red them into Unity with himself and with his tender people, who in his tender bow∣els have travelled for their restauration, who now greatly rejoyce in their return. Glory, yea, Glory to his Eternal Name for the same, and that for evermore. 'Tis my Faith, that God will disintangle some who are yet held by the aforesaid Snares, for whose return my Soul travels in Prayers and Supplications to God: Faith∣ful is that saying of the Apostle, Rom. 14. 22. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in the thing which he alloweth. Again he saith, Now I beseech you, Brethren, by our Lord Je∣sus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no division among you; but that you be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgment: For it hath been declared unto me of you, my Brethren, by them which are of the House of Cloe, that there are Contentions among you. Now this I say, that every one of you saith, that I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: Is Christ divided? Was Paul Crucified for you? Or were you Baptized in the name of Paul? Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; not with wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect: For the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, foolishness; but
unto us which are saved, it is the power of God: For it is written, I w  he wisdom of the wise, &c. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a Stumbling Block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, &c. 1 Cor. 1. 10, to 19. Oh! my dear Friends, and all you who profess the Divine Light of Christ to be your Teacher; seriously consider of these things: My earnest desire for you all is, that you may all diligently wait in the Light of Christ, therein to receive a right under∣standing thereof; for if you therein dili∣gently wait, you will see that it was not the Apostles desire or pleasure, that they should contend, or be in strife for Apollo, or Cephas, or Him, or for them one a∣gainst another; but that they should all exalt and magnifie Christ, who died for them, and rose again to govern and lead them in righteousness, and to uphold and justifie them in the same: And also consider, that he Preached not the Gospel with the wisdom of words, or the words which mans wisdom teacheth, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect; but he Preached the Gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, in the words which it taught him; that their Faith, who heard
him might not stand in the wisdom of those words, which mans wisdom teacheth; but in the power of God; for, as he saith in 1 Cor. 4. 19, 20. I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will; and will know, not the peeh (or words) of them which are puffed up, but the Power; for the Kingdom of God is not in , but in por; neither doth it stand in meats or drinks, but in righteousness and peace, and y in the Holy Ghost, into which Kingdom God hath gathered and is ga∣thering them that have or yet do, or here∣after may, in sincerity Hunger and Thurst after it. Again, consider the Apostle took great Care in his Preaching, that the Cross of Christ might Not be made of none Effect, that those who were come to bear it, might Not be weary of it, and Cast it off, because of the offence taken by the wicked at them, for their Obedience thereunto (nor for any other cause); for it is true as he writ, the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness, but un∣to us it is the power of God; and as it was then, so it is now, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit; and they that live godlike (on in the like∣ness of God in Christ Jesus) shall suffer perse∣cution; but evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being decei∣ved.
Again Consider, oh my friends, and all you who profess the Light of Christ within to be your Teacher, Ruler, and Guide, what is the cause that some professing the Light within make such a Noyse against that wholsome Method or Order which the God of Order hath brought forth amongst us, in taking Care of his Glory, and the good one of another; that the professors of the Gospel and its Light may walk Orderly in the Light as becomes the same, that their Light might so shine before men, that they might see their good works, and glorifie their Father which is in Heaven, according to Christs Command. Is it not obvious and plain that their Noise and Clamour is, be∣cause they seek a Liberty which Christ and the bearing of the Cross Admits not, nor allowes of? Oh Consider the sayings of Christ, Strait is the Gate, and Narrow is the Way that Leads to life, &c. and broad is the Gate, and wide is the Way that Lead∣eth unto destruction, and many there be that go in thereat, but Labour ye, To Enter in at the strait gate. Many Ancient Faithful friends, who have kept their habitations in the Light, and their first Love therein to God (the fountain of it) and one to another, have not forgotten what Exercis was gone through Twenty Years ago and upward, through the unsound Notions, Doctrin and
Practices of some, who not only professed the Light within, but Largly talked and Preached in Commendation of it when they were out of it, and in their works Enemies to it: Oh how were some at un∣awars beguiled through their fair words & fine speeches in their feigned Commendation of, and in words Magnifying the Light within! they told us in those dayes, They were come to a greater Dispensation and Glory, then we were in, and they told us, that we were in the form without the power; and told us, God would break our form and scatter us; but they proved false Prophets▪ for God hath broken them, and scattered them, but reserved and kept his People, who have been kept by his Mighty power through Faith in the true form of Godliness, while divers of them, with their high and vain pretentions, have not only been e∣stranged from the Life and Power of Godlyness, but also from the very form thereof, turning into the Liberty and Lusts of the flesh, and so became Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose minds went downward, into the Earth and Earthly things, from the Heavenly; the Latter∣end of such we have seen to be worse than their beginning, though many that were so subtly prevailed upon and hurt in those days, came (through the tender Mercy of
God) to see the snare in which they were taken, and came out of it; and as it was then, so will it be with respect to divers who through utlty and at unawars (for want of watchfulness in the Holy fear of God) have been of late years, and yet are ensnared and entangled, as others were be∣fore them; tho some whom Satan hath made use of to ensnare them, may not re∣turn to the Lord by Repentance, but be cut off in his displeasure. And oh my friends, and all you that pro∣fess the Light within to be your Teacher, Consider; doth not some at this time who profess the same Light within to be their Teacher, pay Tithes to a Priest or riests, go to a P to be married, or be married by him, use the unchristian Customs and fashons of the People of the Nation, in their unsound speech and vain Comply∣ments, and some in their superfluous and needs appar, and some in swearing, and some in seeking to, and complying with, and trusting in the Arm of flesh for their securi∣ty; and do not these Cry, we must be left to ur Liberty in these things, We must hav Liberty of Concience? and have Not some of them presumptuously said, that the spirit or Light of God might allow them to do so? and to cover and justifie themselves in this unchristian Liberty, have not some of them
sought, to strain and wrest the afore ci∣ted sayings of the Apostles Concerning eat∣ing of Herbs, Meats, and the Observation of days, and other parts of the Scripture of Truth? Would not some stra and orest these Scriptures in our time to cover themselves in the aforesaid unchristian practices? let Gods faithful witness in their own hearts speak in this Matter, and let the words that have falen from the Mouthes of some of the professors of the Light within (made publick) of late, Witness against them in this matter. The Lord God said by the mouth of his Prophet, Wo to the Rebellious Children, that take Councell, but not of me; and that Cover with a Covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin unto sin, Isa. 30. 1. My tender de∣sires are for all that profess the Light & Spi∣rit of God withtin, that they may walk in it, & be covered by it, that the woes of God they may Escape; but the unruly, loose and disorderly professors of it, will not E∣cape the woes and wrath of God, if they do not unfeignedly Repent, and amend their doings; and Cease from their un∣christian deeds, which they have done, and words, which they have spoken against the Lord God, Christ, and his tender faithful servants, who have Anciently and to this day do labour in the Word and Doctrine
of the Gospel, in turning many from dark∣ness to Light, from the power of Satan unto God, and for their Preservation, Con∣firmation and Establishment therein. Something concerning Christian Order, or, Order in the Church of Christ. THe Apostle writes thus, God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace, in all the Churches of the Saints. Again, he exhorts or commands, saying: Let all things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40. The Apostle James writes thus, Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you, let him shew, out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom: But if ye have bitter Endyings and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth: This wisdom descend∣eth not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish; for where Envy and Strife is, there is Confusion and every evil work; but the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easie to be in∣treated; full of Mercy and of good Fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisie;
and the fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace, James 3. 13. to the end. Again, Paul saith, Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ: Now I praise you, Brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them unto you, &c. and the rest will I set in or∣der when I come, 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2, 3, 4. And again, writing to Titus, he saith: For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are want∣ing, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee, Titus 1. 5. read it through. Again, the Apostle writing to the Church at Corinth, saith: Now concerning the Colle∣ction for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye, 1 Cor. 16. 1. Observe here, that all things were not set in order at once by the Apostles, amongst the Believers and Professors of Christ, but as the work of Faith, Repentance, and Re∣generation was wrought in order by degrees, even so good outward Order and Govern∣ment they grew into gradually, or by de∣grees; so hath it been and is in our day, with those who to the light of Christ are turned, who therein wait, and more and more follow on to know the Lord; such do not build again the things which the
Truth in them hath destroyed: They do not pay Tythes, mary by a est, or turn back into the sinful customs and vain glory of the world; but they stand in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made them free, and hold fast the Truth, which is their Crown, that no man take it from them, or them from it. Now all you that are young in Truth, and all others whom it concerns, take no∣tice, that those whom God first turned from darkness to light in this our Age, who be∣came lovers and followers of it, they there∣by were led in the very morning or Infan∣cy of their knowledge of the Light, and the teachings of it, to deny being Married by a Hriest, and to deny paying of Tythes, and to deny Swaring, to deny Envyings and Strife, Wars and Fighting, which are the fruits of the Flesh, proceeding from the Lusts thereof, and to deny the vain customs, sinful Lus, and glory of the world; to continue in the denyal of these, is well plea∣sing to God: And as it was with the faith∣ful in the beginning, or breaking out of the Gospel day amongst us; so it is with the faithful now, as with respect to their testi∣mony in the denial of these things; and God hath given great Increa of his spiritual Treasures, Riches, and Blessings, to those that have continued faithful since that time;
so that they are now nearer to the Lord, than they were in the morning of the day, and Infancy of their knowledge of him, Glory to his Name for the same. And thus it was with the Primitive Believers and Walk∣ers in the Light, as the Scriptures of Truth declare. Now to such as say, Things amongst us (who profess the Light of Christ to be our Teacher) are not as they were in the beginning; I say, ay, as with respect to a Persons professing the Light, as aforesaid; they are not, nor yet with respect to divers things practised by the professors of the Light; for the Faithful have grown from one degree of Grace to another, and so from the pra∣ctice of some good thing, to the practice of more good things, having walked in the Light, they have held what they had, and gained more, according to Christs promise, who said, He that is faithful in a little, I will make him Ruler over much: And there is to be a growing from strength to strength, and from Glory to Glory, from one degree of Grace to another, till there be an appear∣ing in Sion in perfect beauty, till there be a coming to the measure of the Stature of the fulness of Christ, to a perfect man in Christ Jesus. This is accordiog to the A∣postles Doctrine: Who thus goes on gra∣dually towards perfection, are no A∣sates,
Backsliders, or Drawers back to perdition; but pressers forward for the com∣plete Redemption of their Souls: So these are in a better condition than they were in the beginning of their profession of the Spirit, Truth, and Light of Christ within; As he saith, very Scribe that is taught or instructed unto the Kingdom of God, is like unto a Man that is an Housholder, which bringeth out of his Treasure things new and old. All that come to this State, walking in the light, as aforesaid, they increase in good Order in the Power of God. And again, Christ saith: Take heed what you hear, &c. And he said, Whereunto shall we liken the Kingdom of God? Or with what comparison shall we compare it? It is like a Grain of Mustard-seed, which when it is sown in the Earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the Earth: but when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all Herbs, and shooteth out great Branches, see Mark 4. v. 24. to 32. Oserve here the Parables that Christ spoke concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Increase of it: Now as the Grain of Mustardseed is small, but being sown in the Earth groweth gradually, and in due season brings forth great increase
of its own Nature and Kind, even so the Heavenly spark or seed of life, being be∣lieved in by man, it takes root in his heart, and grows gradually, and in the Appointed season of the Father brings forth fruit, first a little, and afterwards more; for Christ the living Vine said, In this is my Father gloryfied, that you bring forth much fruit: I am the true vine, my father is the husbandman. Every branch that bringeth not forth fruit (in me) he taketh away; and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth, that it may bring forth more fruit, Joh. 15. And again, he said, So is the Kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and the seed should spring and grow up, &c. for the earth bringeth forth fruit of her self, first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear, Mark. 4. v. 26. to 32. Again, the Prophet Isaiah Prophesying of Christs Government and Kingdom, writes thus, For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, the Government shall be on his shoulder, and his name shall be called wonderful Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his Government and Peace, there shall be no end; upon the Throne of Da∣vid, and upon his Kingdom to Order it, and to Establish it with Judgment, and with Iu∣stice,
from henceforth even for ever: The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this, see Isa. 9. 6, 7. Observe here the Parable of the Grain of Wheat cast into the Earth, it first springs to the Blade; secondly to the Ear; thirdly to the full or ripe Corn in the Ear. Now it may be truly said, that when the Grain of Wheat is sprung up to the Ear, it is not as it was in the beginning of its growth into the Blade, as with respect to the stature and growth of it; for the second is greater than the first. Again, it may be said, when it is grown to full ripe Corn in the Ear, it is not as it was in the beginning of its growth into the Blade, nor as it was when it was grown to the Ear, but not ripe, full, or perfect Corn; for the third degree of its growth was greater than the first or second, though they proceeded of one seed and were of one kind, and all good and beautiful in the order of their growth. Now this Grain of Wheat, and the fruit and product of it, in the several degrees of the growth thereof to its perfection, being made by Christ a Parable of the Heavenly Seed of God in the Hearts of his People, and of the several degrees of its work and appearance in them, and of thir several degrees of growth in it from their Infancy therein, to their
compleatness or ripe Age in Christ. All you that profess to be the Generation or Off-spring of this Heavenly Seed, Try and prove your selves in this matter, be retired in the Spirit of your minds, and with the Light (you make profession of) take a view of your States and Conditions, and see whether your growth and prosperity in the Truth doth answer this parable, Yea or Nay. And observe what Isaiah Prophesied con∣cerning Christs Kingdom and Government, He saith, Of the Increase of His Govern∣ment and Peace there shal be no End. Now they, who under the profession of the Light within, are against this pure Govern∣ment of Christ, and the increase of it, in the particuler, and in his Church in generall, who are for bringing in and Practising a corrupt fleshly Liberty, Contrary to Christ, these are the Apostates and Innovaors, with such the Faithful Christian Apostles and Elders, &c. were Exercised and greved in the Primitive times, as the Epistles of Paul, Peter, John, Jude, &c. do shew. Hear what Peter saith Concerning this matter, viz. The Lord knoweth how to de∣liver the Godly out of Temptations, and to re∣serve the unjust unto the day of Judgment, to be punisht; but Chiefly them that walk af∣ter
the flesh in the Last of Ʋncleanness, and dispise Government; presumtuous are they, self-willed,—having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from Sin, beguiling un∣stable Souls—These are wells without Water, Clouds that are Carryed with a Tempest, to whom the mist of Darkness is reserved for ever; for when they speake great swelling words of vanity, they alure through the Lust of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were Clean Escaped from them who live in Errour: while they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the Servants of Cor∣ruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought into bondage, 2 Peter 2. 9, 10, 14, 17, 18. 19. read the Chapter through. And as it was in their dayes, so is it in ours; some fell away then from the faith and Obedience to the Cross of Christ, who had been Enlightened, and tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and of the power of the World to Come; who while they therein abode, were as Stars in the Firmament of the power of God, and as the Clouds that are filled with rain, and as the Trees of the Lords Planting, which brought forth some fruit to him; but when they fell away from Christ, the root, seed, Light and fountain of life, then their fruit withered, and so they came
to be without fruit, as Jude writeth; Trees twice dead, pluckt up by the Roots, &c. and could not grow any more. Now observe, it is not with these as it was in the beginning, when they were first turned to the Light of Christ, by which they come to see their Sins, and to be led to Repent of them, and to forsake them; the latter End of these is, and will be, worse than their beginning, as the Apostle Peter writes concerning such; for saith he, It had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment de∣livered to them; but it is come to pass according to the true Proverb, the dog is returned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the Mire, 2 Peter 21. 22. such, in former time, became the Agents of Sathan to seduce and draw others from the Faith and Obedience of the Cross of Christ; some such have been and are in our day. All you that Love the Light of our Lord Jesus Christ, which makes Manifest all things as they are, and re∣proves that which is Evil, wait dilligently in the Light, that therein you may see all the Mysterious workings of Sathan and his Agents, that therein waiting and a biding stedfast, you may Escape all their Snares.
Something more Concerning the order of the works of God in Heaven and Earth, and particularly in his Peo∣ple. THE great God, who made Heaven and Earth; and the fountains of Water, who made all things good in the beginning, he is the great God of Order, he works his works in Order. In the be∣gining God Created the Heaven and the Earth, and the Earth was without form and void, and Darkness was upon the face of the Deep, and the spirit of God Moved upon the Face of the Waters, and God said, let there be Note, God Commanded the Light to be and appear the first day. Light, and there was Light, and God saw the Light that it was Good, and God divided the Light from the Darkness, and God called the Light Day, and the Darkness he called Night, and the Evening and the morning were the first day: and God said let there be a Fir∣mament in the midst of the Waters, and let it divide the Waters from the Waters, and God made the Firmament, and divided the Waters which were under the Firma∣ment,
from the Waters which were above the Firmament, and it was so, and God called the Firmament Heaven, and the Evening and the Morning were the second day; and God said let the waters under the Heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry Land appear, and it was so; and God called the dry Land earth, and the gathering together of the waters called he seas, and God saw that it was good; and God said, Let the Earth bring forth grass, the Herb yeilding seed, and the fruit∣tree yeilding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self upon the Earth, and it was so, and the Earth brought forth grass, and Herb yeilding seed, after his kind, and the tree yeilding fruit, whose seed was in it self after his kind, and God saw that it was good, and the Evening and the morning were the Third day: and God said, let there be Lights in the Firmament of the Heaven to divide the Day from the Night, and let them be for Signes and for Seaous, and for Dayes and Years, and let them be for Lights in the Firmament of Heaven, to give Light upon the Earth, and it was so, and God made two great Lights, the greater Light to Rule the day, and the lesser Light to Rule the Night, he made the Stars also, and God set them in the Firmament of the Heaven, to give Light upon the Earth, and
to Rule over the Day, and over the Night, and to divide the Light from the Darkness, and God saw that it was good, and the Evening and the Morning were the Fourth day: and God said, let the waters bring forth aboundantly the moving Creature that hath life, and Foul that may fly above the Earth in the open Firmament of Hea∣ven, and God Created great Whales, and every living Creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth aboundantly af∣ter their kind, and every winged Foul af∣ter his kind, and God saw that it was good, and God blessed them, saying, be fruitful and Multiply, and fill the waters in the Seas, and let Foul Multiply, in the Earth, and the Evening and the Morning were the Fifth day: and God said, let the Earth bring forth the Living Creature after his kind, Cattle and Creeping thing, and Beast of the Earth, after his kind, and it was so, and God made the Beast of the Earth after his kind, and Cattle after their kind, and every thing that Creepeth up∣on the Earth after his kind, and God saw that it was good; and God said, let us make Man in our own Image, after our Likeness, and let them have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every Creeping thing that Creep∣eth
upon the Earth; so God Created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God Created he him, Male and Female Created he them; and God blessed them; and God said unto them, be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the Air, and over every Living thing that moveth upon the Earth; and God said, behold I have Given you every Herb, bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the Earth, and every Tree in the which is the fruit of a tree yeilding seed, to you it shall be for ever, and to every beast of the Earth, and to every Foul of the Air, and to every thing that Creepeth up∣on the Earth wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat, and it was so, and God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, & the Evening and the Morning were the Sixth day. Thus the Heaven and the Earth were finished, and all the host of them, and on the Seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and he rested on the Seventh day from all his work which he had made, &c. These are the generations of the Heavens and of the Earth when they were Created. Read the whole first Chap∣ter of Genesis, and the beginning of the se∣cond, &c.
Observe here the Beautiful and Lowly order of the work of the great God of Order, in bringing forth his Beautiul Creation of Heaven and Earth, and all things in them; behold he did not make Heaven and Earth and all things that are in them at once, or in one day; you may here Read what he made the First day, and what he made the Second day, and what he made the Third day, and what he made the Fourth day, and what he made the Fifth day, and what he made the Sixth day, and that he finished and ended his work on the Seventh day. Reader, here thou mayest see how the works of God were Carried on by de∣grees, to their Compleatness; Likewise thou mayest observe the Ignorance of some in our day, who say, Things among us (who profess to be Taught and led by the Light of Christ within) are not as they were in the beginning, when we were first turned to the Light, but here is new Order or Orders set up amongst us, several Meetings and Practices, which we are afraid, will bring in Apostacy. Such Ignorant, Dark talk as this have I heard from some who account themselves Children of Light, Ancient in Truth, Grown, Wise, &c. Observe from what God has spoken by the Mouth of Moses, as aforesaid, that from
the First day to the Seventh day, in which God ended his work, he brought forth New things every day, This glorious work he Carried on by degrees, till he had Com∣pleated it according to the Counsell of his own will. Again, observe, Man, who was at the first made in the likeness of his Maker, holy, Just, and good, being seduced, deceived by the Serpent, who abode not in the Truth, in whom there is no Truth, he is become a degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto God, by taking, eating, and doing, that which the great God from the first hath forbidden, he died the Death according to the word of the Lord, and in this dege∣nerate fallen State is dead in trespasses and sins, his Spirit, mind, will, and affections, dead from God, from Purity, from Holy∣ness, Righteousness and Innocency, in this State of Death he doth not Rightly seek after the Living God, in this State he is not rightly affected towards him, he doth not behold his goodness, his glory and Mighty power, he doth not Reverence and fear him as he ought, neither doth he hunger and thirst after him and his Righteousness, Purity, Justice, Love, &c. but on the Con∣trary, his dead mind, will, and affections, all dead from God, are Imployed and E∣ercsed by Satan in that which is Evil,
and that continually, as the Lord hath spo∣ken by the mouth of Moses, viz. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only Evil continual∣ly; and it repented the Lord that he had made man on the Earth, and it grieved him, &c. Genesis 6. 5, 6. Observe the great and merciful Crea∣tor, and God of the whole Earth, hath promised the Redemption of his Creature Man, yea, both the Male and Female out of the Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons and Daugh∣ters of God; this he hath spoken by the mouths of his Servants, as it is written in the Scriptures of Truth, when God gave his just and righteous Sentence of Judg∣ment upon the Serpent, for his Cursed work of deceiving the Man and the Wo∣man, he said unto the Serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art Cursed above all Cat∣tle, and above every Beast of the Field, upon thy Belly shalt thou go, and Dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy Life; and I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed, and it shall bruise thy Head, &c. Genesis 3. 14, 15. The Apostle writing concerning this Seed, saith, Now to Abraham and his Seed were the promises made; he saith not, and to Seeds,
as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ, Gala. 3. 16. This Seed Christ was Glorified with the Father before the World began; as he said, Glorifie thou me with thine own self, with the Glory that I had with thee before the World began, Joh. 17. he is that Eternal Divine Word, by whom all things were made, who lighteth every that cometh into the World, who, in the days of his Flesh, commanded man, saying, Believe in the Light, walk in the Light, &c. The Apostle writing of him to the Saints, said, He was Ordained from of old, but manifest for you in the last time, &c. made of the Seed of David and Abraham, according to the Flesh, ut de∣clared to be the Son of God with Power, by the Resurrection from the Dead; he was made in due time of a Woman under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law; he went up and down doing good, healing all manner of Diseases, Ma∣ladies and Sicknesses; yea, he raised the Dead unto life; after which he offered up himself through the Eternal Spirit, as a Lamb without spot and blemish, an accep∣table Sacrifice to God for the remission of the sins of the Transgressors, (who believe in him, and come to the obedience of the Faith,) he rose from the Dead the Third Day, and appeared to his Disciples, and
gave them many things in Charge, parti∣cularly to feed his Lambs and Sheep, (and to love one another, and love Enemies, &c.) after which he ascended according to the Scriptures, and is on the right-hand of the Majesty on High, from whence be shall proceed to Judg the World in righte∣ousness, the man Christ Iesus; this is he who was with the Church in the Wilder∣ness, the spiritual Rock; for saith the A∣postle, He was with the Church in the Wil∣derness; for saith he, They all eat the same spiritual meat; they all drink the same spiritu∣al drink; they eat and drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ; this is h of whom John in the Revelations testifies, saying, He rides upon a White Horse, his Vesture is dipt in blood, his Name is cal∣led the Word of God, and the Armies which are in Heaven follow him. This is he that was dead and is alive, and lives for ever∣more, who hath the Keys of Hell and of Death, who slays the Dragon that plays in the Sea, who destroys Death, and him that hath the Power of Death, which is the Devil; this is he who is the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the Living; this is he who said, He that believeth on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and said, he that liveth and believeth, shall never dye; Martha, believest thou this? this is he of whom the A∣postle
writ to the Saints, saying, Ye, that some time were dead in trespasses and sins, hath he quickened; by Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves; for it is the gift of God. Again, this is he of whom the Apostle writ, saying, We have all been gone astray, as Sheep without a Shep∣herd; but now we are returned to the Cap∣tain of our Salvation, and Bishop of our Souls: this is he of whom tis written, That there is no Name given under Heaven, by which man can be saved, but by the name of Jesus Christ; it is also written of him, That there is not Salvation in any other; he him∣self hath said, I am the way to the Father; no man can come to the Father but by me; I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; I am the Door, he that enters in by me the Door, shall go in and find Pasture; I am the good Shep∣herd; I lay down my Life for my Sheep; all that came before me, they are Thieves and Robbers. The Apostle saith, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Rom. 8. 9. they who Preach the Words of God, spoken by his Spirit, in, and by his Son, or in & by his Prophets or Apostles, without the Spirit of God and Christ, they steal, the Lord is against them, see Jer. 23. Ezekel 13, 1. to the end. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. 1 Pet. 1. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
Observe, This is he by whom God brings forth his New Creation in man, who was fallen dead in Trespasses and Sins; the A∣postle saith, If any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; old things are passed away, behold all things are become New; and all things are of God; and he writ to the Saints, saying, We are Gods workmanship, Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God before Ordained that we should walk in them. Observe, This is he that burns up the old Heavens, and the old Earth, which Satan hath filled with Sin and Wickedness; this is he that Baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, who burns up all the false Joy, false Pleasure, which is as a false Heaven; for as the Kingdom of God the true Heaven, consists in true Joy and Peace, so Satan transforms himself in his dark King∣dom, in fallen man, which he has filled with sin, and gives him, for a short time, a false Joy and Peace in Evil doing; this is that Joy that must be turned into Sorrow; this is that Peace which is not the Peace of God, therefore God will destroy it. Hea∣ven and Earth, and all things, were good in the beginning, and man was good, yea very good, his Spirit, Soul and Body; but being fallen from God, degenerated into a Plant of a strange Vine, his Heart, Mind, Spi∣rit,
Will and Affections, all Corrupted, Poi∣soned, Slain, Dead, from God, he is now become as the corrupt Earth, which brings forth Bryers and Thorns, whose end is to be burned. Mankind in the fall is ac∣counted by the Prophet as a Forest or Wilderness, overgrown with Bryers and Thorns, and he Prophesies of the day of the Lord that shall come upon this Wil∣derness, Bryers and Thorns, Sin and Wick∣edness, and shall burn them up. And a∣gain, the Prophet of the Lord saith, The day of the Lord shall come, which shall burn as an Oven, and the Proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and it shall burn them up, and leave them neither Root nor Branch. All have sinned and come short of the glory of God; Sin brought Death and Se∣paration from God; God saith by the Prophet, Your Sins separate betwixt you and your God, your sins with-hold good things from you; wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes, and then draw near, and let us reason together; though your sins were as Crimson, I will make them as Snow, though they were as blood, I will make them as Wool; I will carry them into a Land of forgetfulness, and Will re∣move them as far from you, as the East is from the West. Again, God commands
by the Apostle, saying, Cleanse your hands you sinners, purifie your hearts ye double mind∣ed, be afflicted and mourn, let your laughter be turned into heaviness, and your joy into mourning; humble your selves under the migh∣ty hand of God, and he shall exalt you in due time. And the Apostle saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light, Ephes. 5. 14. Observe, That all the fallen dead sons and daughters of Adam, who come to be made alive to God, to become a genera∣tion to him, to bring forth fruit to his Glory, they must come to be Awakened by the Spirit and Voice of God, sounding an alarum in their own Hearts and Souls, to have their ears opened to his voice, the eyes of their unberstandings opened to see him a God nigh at hand, they must know the Revelation of the Righteous Judgments of God upon the head of the Serpent in their own Hearts, Minds, Wills, and Affections, and through his Righteous Judgments to know the old man with his deeds which are Cor∣rupt, according to the deceitful Lusts of the flesh put off, and so to know the ful∣filling of the Apostles words, who said, They that are Christs have Crucified the flesh, with the Affections and Lusts; He that is in Christ is a New Creature.
Again, observe, this work of Redemp∣tion of the Creature out of the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the sons and daughters of God, is a work that is carried on by Degrees, as Christ hath shewed and set it forth in many Parables, shewing the smalness of its be∣ginning, as to the sence and apprehen∣sion of the Creature in whom it is begun; The Kingdom of God in the unregenerate is Compared to a grain of Wheat cast into the Earth, which first suffers, or dyes▪ but in its suffering or dying brings forth the fruit of its own kind, first the blade, then the ear, then the full, or ipe Corn, in the Ear, It is also Compared to a grain of Musard Seed cast into the Earth, which being small, yet in the Appointed season of him that gives the increase, brings forth fruit plentifully: Again, it is Compared to Leaven put in three measures of Meal, till the whole was Levened: Again, it is Compa∣red to a Net cast into the Sea, which gather good and bad to the shore, and gathers the good into Vessels, but casts the bad away. Observe still, here is a glorious Order in the work of mans Regeneration and Restoration to God; Man, who is turned from Darkness to Light, from Sathans po∣wer to God, with the Light he is come to see his sin: Now he is to wait to know
God, (who is a Consuming fire to sin and wickedness,) to appear in him, to burn up and Consume his Sins, to Slay that Dra∣gon or Serpent in him, who has led him in∣to Sin, and hath kept him in it, and cau∣sed him to take pleasure in the same. Now he is to wait to know the Mighty, Live∣ing, Dreadful God, to appear in him as a refiners fire, and as Fullers soap; Now he is patiently to bear the Indignation of the Lord, because he hath sinned, untill he hath Mercy on him; for he will not Contend forever with the Repenting, be∣lieving Penitent ones, because he delights in Mercy. Now he that thus believes, waits, and submits to the Chastising hand of the Lord, doth not always Continue under his rebukes, Chastisement or Judg∣ment; in the midest of Judgment he remem∣bers Mercy to such; under Judgment he supports the Spirits of these Contrite ones; he strengthens them in this Winter season, and he Leads them through it, as a man of God hath written, Behold the Winter is over and gone, the time of Rejoycing is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. Thus they that have set their faces Sion-wards; and are travelling with their faces thither-wards, go on and grow from glory to glory, from strength to strength, from one degree in the grace of Christ Jesus un∣to
another, untill they appear in Sion in perfect beauty; so these are not like a Dwarff, that doth not grow; for a Dwarff was by the Law of God forbiden to be a Priest, and so was a Lepor; but such who be∣lieve, wait, and grow, as aforesaid, are not as the Dwarff or Lepor, and Diseased, who are all Corrupt, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, and who hath no Health in them as they say; but these are come to Christ the Physician of Value, yea the saving Health of all Nati∣ons, as its written of him; though these can do nothing of themselves, yet they can do all things through Christ that strengthens them, which the Apostle knew and writ of; These have put on the Lord Jesus Christ; These make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lust thereof; these are strengthened by Christ (who is Gods glorious power and wisdom) in their Inward man, as its written; these grow strong in the Lord; by degrees, these put on the whole Armor of God, by which they are defended from all the fiery Darts of the Devil, these are made Conquerors in Christ, who Destroys the Devil, and his works in them; To these is given the Spirit of Praise instead of that of heaviness; these are returned to Sion with songs of diliverance, and Everlasting joy; amongst
these God reigns, in and through them he shines, to enlighten the dark World, which lyes in wickedness; Thus its writ∣ten, Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined. Again, the Apostle writing of the Beauti∣ful Order of the work of God in Heaven & Earth, saith, There is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars, for one Star differeth from a∣nother Star in Glory, so also is the Resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42. Observe here, what the Apostle hath written concerning the Different Order of the Sun, Moon, and Stars in Heaven, & saith, so is the Resurrection of the dead; shew∣ing that the several States and Conditions of those whom Christ hath Quickened or raised in some degree from death to life, do also differ in their several degrees of growth in Life, Stature, and Strength, and accordingly do differ in their gifts and places, and glory and beauty, in the Re∣surrection from Death to Life. Christ said to them whom he had Quick∣ened, I am come that you might have life, and that you may have it more abundantly. Againe, The Psalmist, who was Anoint∣ed by God and his appointment, both Pro∣phet and King, writ thus, Praise ye the Lord; Praise the Lord from the Heavens; Praise
him in the heights; Praise ye him all ye his Angels; Praise ye him, all ye his hosts; Praise ye him, Sun and Moon; Praise ye him all ye Stars of Light; Praise him, ye Heavens of Heavens, and ye Waters, that be above the Heavens, Let them praise the Name of Lord; for he commanded, and they were Created; he hath also Established them forever and ever, he hath made a decree which shall not pass; Praise the Lord from the Earth ye Dragons and all deeps, Fire, and Haile, Snow and Vapour, Stormy Wind, fulfilling his word, Moun∣tains and all Hills, fruitfull trees and all Cedars, Beasts and all Cattle, Creeping things and flying Fouls, Kings of the Earth and all People, Princes and all Judges of the Earth, both young Men and Maidens, old Men and Children, let them Praise the Name of the Lord; for his name alone is Excellent, his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven, &c. Pal. 148. read it through. Here again Observe, the great God of Order, who in the beginning Created all things in Order, and placed them in their Order in Heaven and Earth, all which was very good; he calls of them in Order, by the mouth of his Prophet, to praise, Magnifie and Glorifie him, for whose glory and honour they all were Created good in the beginning; Oh vain Man! who under the Dark power of Satan, has been
bred up in thy Transgression as a Wild Asses Colt, or as a Wild Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, (or thou that hast known the yoke of Christ and cast it off) wouldest thou in thy folly limit the Holy one of Israel in the beginning, Carrying on and Compleating of his Creating anew in Christ Jesus, the fallen degenerated and dead Sons and Daughters of Adam who have believ∣ed in his divine Spirit and Light, and there∣in waits upon him in it, he will not be Li∣mited by thee, but will rebuke and Judge thee for thy presumptuous attempt: behold the beautiful Creation, the works of God in Heaven and Earth, and the Or∣der thereof, and these will Teach thee bet∣ter; it is true what the Apostle hath writ, The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God hath shew∣ed it unto them, for the Invisible things of the Creation are clearly soon, by the things that are made, even his Eternal power and Godhead, so that they are with out excuse Rom. 1. 18, 19, 20, see the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, to the end of the Chapter. Observe here, Gods Creation, Heaven and Earth, and the things therein are as a book, wherein man and woman may read the wonderful works of God, and the
Glorious Order and Beauty of them, all People being enlightened by Christ the di∣vine word, by whom God the Father made them all, they believing in the Light of him, in it they may see his wonderful po∣wer and wisdom in the bringing forth, up∣holding and beautiful Order thereof, God having enlightened all by his Word and Spirit, which are one, Calls all the Ends of the Earth to Look unto him; he saith, Look unto me O all ye ends of the Earth and be ye saved; for I am God, and there is None Else,  Mighty God and a Saviour: they who believe in his Light, and therein wait, they come therein to see and have Unity with his glorious works in Heaven and in Earth, and in their own Hearts and Souls, and therein come to be made sen∣sible of his bounty and kindness unto man∣kind in the Creating of them, and setting them in their Beautiful Order, and up∣holding them in the same, and in the deep sence of these things, Mans Heart becomes tender, broken, and humble within him, and in this tender subjected humble frame of heart and mind, he returns the Praise, Honour, Glory, Dominion, and Thanks un∣to him, the great God and Creator, of all things, who is worthy of Glory, Honour, Obedience and Praise over all Heaven and Earth, now and forever more, Amen.
Something more particularly concerning the Order of Christ in his Church. THE Apostle writing to the Church at Corinth writes thus, viz. ye are the body of Christ, and Members in particular: and God hath set some in the Church; first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets; thirdly, Tea∣chers, &c. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? &c. see 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28, 29. Again, he writes to the Church at Ephesus thus, viz. And he gave some Apo∣stles, and some Prophets, and some Evange∣lists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the Measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, Ephess. 4. 10, 11, 12. Observe here, the Apostle shews the order particularly of the several gifts of God to the several Members of his Church, which he gave them by the one Spirit, in which gifts the several Members were ap∣pointed to serve him, and ech other, and as they all kept in their proper Gifts, they
did therein serve him and each other, and the weakest Members of the Church also, for whose service they received their Gifts, (The weak had and have the most need of the help and service of these gifts) and as they all kept in the Exercise of their seve∣ral gifts in the motion, leading and guidance of Gods holy Spirit, the root and fountain of them all, they had all Unity therein one with another, although their gifts did dif∣fer, both in the manner of their working, and in the measure or greatness of them, so that there was an Harmony and Unity amongst them, though they were many Members, yet were but one body, all in Subjection unto Christ the one head. Secondly, Observe the Apostles question, are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? &c. He doth not say, they are; the contrary is manifest; neither are all the Members in the Church of Christ in this Age called, appointed, or ordained (In their presant State) to be Prophets, Apostles, or Teachers; for these are peculiar or pro∣per gifts, given by the Lord God, as, and when, he pleaseth, according to the Counsel of his own will. Thirdly, Observe, that by what I have said in this matter, I only intend all the Members of the Church of Christ in their present State, are not sent forth publickly
with a message of Salvation to Preach to the Nations, nor to Prophesie or Preach pub∣lickly in words the Doctrine of the Truth or Gospel of Christ, nor are they all appointed of God to Prophesie and foretel things to come, nor are they all made Teachers in a publick Ministry in Doctrine, or Exhor∣tation; for these are peculiar or proper gifts, given according to the Heavenly will and Counsell of God (in his own time and season) as I said before. Fourthly, Observe that though all the Members of the Body of Christ, have not all or some of the aforesaid places in the body, yet evry Member hath a place in the body, and it is a precious and blessed thing, for every Member to know its place, and keep in it, in its proper service, whereto its cal∣led of God; but when any Member goes out of the Counsel of God, and looks at anothers gift, and goes out of his own proper place from his gift and service in the body, striving in a wrong mind or zeal after others gifts; Immitating them in words, voice, or sound, or other vi∣sible or udabe Motion or Action of the Creature, or through a zeal without know∣ledge, or by any other means whatsoever, then such a Member hurts it self, and grieves or offends the other more discern∣ing Members of the body, who sees and
feels the out-going of the said Member. Fifthly, Observe, it is the place and duty of the discerning Members of the body, who see such out-goings, tenderly in the Love and wisdom of God, to speak to such, in or∣der to bring them to a sence of their out∣going, and to restore them into their place again (if possible) and to watch over them in Love, for their preservation in it. Sixthly, Observe, it is the duty of such who have been mistaken, and gone out of their place, as aforesaid, to hear and receive Counsell of those who freely tender it to them, in the Love of God, several such in our day, have had Counsell so given to them, who have received it in the same Love, which have tended greatly to their profit, even to their settlement and Estab∣lishment with God, and Unity with his Peo∣ple, praised be the Lord God for the same. Seventhly, Observe, that some who have had a place in the Church of Christ, through want of watchfulness in the holy fear of God, have been drawn out of it, by the subtill Adversary of their Souls; and when some of the Members of the body, (who kept their habitation in the Light, in which they have a right sence, sight, savour and discerning of Spirits, words and Actions) have spoken to them, in the Wisdom and Love of God, in Order to have Restored
them, into their places, that they might therein have been preserved in Unity with God and his People, they have not recei∣ved in Love, that which in Love was spo∣ken to them, for the good End aforesaid; but on the Contrary have rejected the same, and have let up prejudice, hard thoughts and evil will against their friends, who sought their good, and so these evils given way to by them, have eaten out the Love, gantiness tenderness, Meakness, and pati∣ence, that once in some Measure appeared in them, and a raging scornful, bitter, reviling Spirit, hath entered some, as also from the same root, faigned Humiliy, faigned words and flattery hath appeared in some, these latter mentioned fruits proceeding from the Evil root, is more Dangerous to deceive than the former, therefore all you who Love your own Souls, be warned to fly from the Spirit of dissimulation and flat∣tery, as also from the rude, railing, boy∣sterous, quarelsome, perverse, Crooked, self-revengful and scornful, Stubborne, self∣willful, and self-Exalting Spirit. Eightly, Observe, that the same God, who by his Spirit, and in his own Order set some in the Church; First, Apostles. Se∣condly, Prophets. Thirdly, Teachers, &c. by the same Spirit, he gives proper or pe∣culiar gifts to some, that are not Apostles,
Prophets, or publick Teachers, according to the aforesaid difinition of them, viz. he sets some in the Church, helpers in Go∣vernment, which last mentioned Members are of great service in their places, in the body of Christ, they being kept by him in true Humility. [O friends, all keep low in your Minds, let nothing be done amongst you in highmindedness or vain glory, for that God Accepts not; but the Meek he Guides in Judgment, but the Proud are an abomination to him. This is the Testamony of the Lord Jesus Christ to you, viz. The more Persons grow in Christ, the Root, Foundation, and Head of his Church, the more Meek, Humble, and Patient they grow.] Ninthly, Observe, that though all the Members of the body have not all or any of the before mentioned services in the bo∣dy, yet have they all a place in the Body, as I said before, and they are blessed who know their place and keep in it, though it be the place of one of the least of the Members of the Body; for that is to be desired, which the good man made choyce of in his days, who said, I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of the Lord, than to dwell in the Tents of wickedness, for the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give grace, no good thing will he withhold, from them that walk uprightly, Psalm 84. 10, 11.
Tenthly, Observe, that as every Mem∣ber hath a place in the Body, so it hath a service therein, though not the place of an Apostle, or Propher, or helper in Govern∣ment; yet all they who are properly and truly of the body, do Preach, witness and testitie of God and Christ, his Kingdom and Glory, (and against the Kingdom of Satan, Sin, Wickedness, and the vain Glory and Lusts that are in the World,) In their Christian Lives and Conversations; and every Nember that abides in its place and service, in the fear of the Lord, and true Humility, hath Peace and Comfort with the Lord, and Unity with all their fellow-Members, who keep in their places and ser∣vices; and all who keep their places and services, as aforesaid, therein, are in a pre∣paredness for whatsoever the Lord God pleaseth to call them further unto, and when any is called to further or other ser∣vice, than what God hath already called them unto, their Peace with God and Unity with his People, will be continued in their obedience to God that calls them. Again, the Apostle writeth thus of Christ, viz. he that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, and he gave some Apo∣stles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfect∣ing
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fulness of Christ, that we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and Carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the slight of men and cunning Craftyness, whereby they lye in waite to deceive, but speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole body fily Joyned together and compacted, by that which every Joynt sup∣plieth according to the Effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh Increase of the body unto the Edifying of it self in Love, Ephess. 4. 10, 11. to the 17. First Observe, that the gifts of the A∣postles, Prophets, Teachers, Evangelists, &c. were not given only to convince People of the Truth and way of Righteousness, but also to build them up in it gradually from strength to strength, to a Rpe Age in Christ. Secondly Observe, that those who were turned to the Light and Spirit of Truth by those whom God sent to turn them to it, could not in the Light and Spirit gainsay or oppose them who therein Laboured in their writing and speaking to them to
build them up in it; from strength to strength, for the Light is not Contradictory to it self in the Preacher or the Nearer, or in any of the Children of it, for that which the Light or Spirit of Truth speaks or dic∣tates to write in one of its Children it doth nor reject, oppose or gainsay in any other of its Children; for if it could do so, then should it be the Author of Confusion a∣mongst 's Children, which is most false and blasphemous to say; for God by this Spirit and Light is not the Author of Con∣fusion, but of good, profitable, and Com∣fortable order and peace in all the Church∣es of the Saints. The Apostle in this di∣vine Light saw, and by Experience knew that which he writ concerning it, viz. God is Light, in him is no Darkness at all, if we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness we lie, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son Cleans∣eth us from all sin, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. Thirdly, Observe, that they who pro∣fess the Light of Christ within, whether they be old or young professors of it, that gain∣say, oppose, reject, slight and contemn that which the Light or Spirit of Truth hath spoken and dictated to write in its ser∣vants and Children for the Profit, Edifi∣cation,
Confirmation, Establishment, & com∣fort of the Body, (which Thousands being Children of the Light, have gladly received, and finds the great comfort and profit of) These are not the Lights Children, these do not walk in it, though they talk of it, and though some of them may be full of self-confidence, that they walk in it, and that they are discerning Persons, Wise, Strong, &c. yet this is their great mistake, herein they shew their spiritual darkness, blindness, nakedness, miserableness, Lao∣dician like. Fourthly, Again Observe, That the A∣postles who had turned the people to the Light and Spirit of Truth within, who were thereby gathered into Congregations or Churches, did afterward write the se∣veral Epistles to the several Churches, and therein gave to them Commands, Do∣ctrines, Instructions, Exhortations, Ad∣monitions, and sometimes sharp Reproofs, and Rebukes, as the Lord by his Light and Spirit moved in them, according to the several States and Conditions of those they writ to; the Apostle Exhorts Timothy, viz. them that sin, rebuke before all, that o∣thers also may fear, 1 Tim. 5. 20. Again, Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort with all long suf∣fering and Doctrine, 2 Tim. 4. 2. Again,
he writ to Titus, viz. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke, with all Authority, let no man dispise thee, Titus 2. 15. And a∣gain, Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith, it is render∣ed out of the Greek, in the Margent, Cut∣ingly, touching to the quick, Titus 1. 13. Here take notice, that Reproofs and Re∣bukes are commanded of the Lord, and profitable in their season, though it some∣times comes to pass, that those who are seasonably reprooved and rebuked, do not seasonably and rightly receive the same, but turns against it, in Self-justification, and into Enmity against those, who in the Councel of God, give it unto them for their good, in some such is that Proverb ve∣rified, Reprove a fool, and he will hate thee; but a wise man, and he will love thee. Fifthly, Observe, Timothy and Titus were Overseers, made so by the Holy Ghost, Spirit and Light, therein to watch over the Saints for their good, to Minister to them from time to time, whether by Word or Epistle, what was needful and profitable for them; we do not read in the Scripture of Truth, nor believe that these two Overseers did reject Paul's Epistles, written to them, or call them Man's E∣dicts,
Man's Decrees, Prescriptions, or put any such contemptable names upon them; but on the contrary, we believe they received them in Love, and obeyed the good Counsel, Charge and Exhortati∣ons therein given them; we do not read, nor believe, that these two Ministers of Christ did plead their Place and Office in the Body and Church of Christ, to Ex∣clude and Reject Paul's Epistles to them, which he gave forth in the Light and moti∣on of the Holy Ghost; we do not read, nor believe, that they said to Paul, we deny thy Forms, Ddes Prescriptions, &c. we are Ministers of the Gospel as well as thee; thy Epistles are of no use or ser∣vice to us, why dost thou seek to impose them upon us? the Holy Ghost, and Light within, by which we are made Overseers, is sufficient for us, away with thy Orders. The Apostle Paul writ thus to Timothy, viz. These things write I unto thee, being to come to thee shortly, but if I carry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Tim. 3. 14, 15. Behold here Paul in this Epistle Instructs Timothy, (who was an Overseer in the Church) how to behave himself in it;
we do not read, nor believe, that this O∣verseer in the Church did Reject Paul's Instruction herein; or that he pleaded the Sufficiency of the Light within, in opposi∣tion to Paul's Advice and Instruction, but we do believe that he saw in the Light, the Instruction given to be good and pro∣fitable for him, and therefore gladly re∣ceived the same. Now if these Overseers in the Holy Ghost could see a Service to them in Paul's Epistles, which certainly they did, then there certainly was a Service in his other Epistles to the No∣vices, Paul, who in the Light and Holy Ghost, taught the Elders by his Epistles to them; he also taught the Younger by his other Epistles, though both of them knew and obeyed the Light with∣in; in it they saw the good use, profit and comfort of them, and therefore did not con∣tend against them, but chearfully received them, and obeyed the Councel of the Lord therein given. or young Schollars, weak in the Faith, feeble minded, &c. Upon all which, Observe, That neither these strong men, Over∣seers in the Church∣es, nor the younger, who walked in the Light of Christ, did plead their being
taught by the Light of Christ, or Holy Ghost within, in opposition to their being Taught, Exhorted, and Instructed, by the Instrumental helps of those Epistles which Paul and other of the Apostles writ to them as they were moved by the Ho∣ly Ghost. I do Advise and Exhort those professors of the Light within, who are offended at some profitable and wholsome Epistles, given forth by some of the most ancient and faithful of the Children of Light in this Age, (concerning good Or∣der and Government in the Church of Christ,) to read the two Epistles to Timo∣thy, and that to Titus, and Peter's Exhor∣tations to the Elders (or Overseers) to fed the Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, which take as followeth, viz. The Elders which are among you I Exhort, who am also an Elder and a Witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also partaker of the Glory that shall be revealed; feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Examples to the Flock, and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fadeth not away; likewise ye
Younger subm't your selves unto the Elder, yea all of you be subject one to another, and be cloathed with Humility; for God resisteth the Proud, and giveth grace to the Humble; humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may Exalt you in due time, casting all your care upon him, for he careth for you. Be sober, be ; (or watchful,) because your Adversary the De∣vil, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist stedfast in the Faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accom∣plished in your Brethren that are in the World. But the God of all Grace, who hath called us into his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you per∣fect, stabtish, strengthen settle you. To him be Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 1 Pet. 5. 1, to the 12. Again, hear his sweet Exhortation, Finally, be all of one mind, having compassion one of another; love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing,—For he that will love life, and see good oas, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no Guile. Let hm eschew, or fly from Evil, and do good, let him seek peace, and ensue it, (that is follow it) for the Eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears
are open unto their prayers, but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil. 1 Pet. 3. 8, to the 13. Sixthly, Observe here Peter that faithful Apostle of Christ, in his general Epistle, Exhorts the Elders who were among the Churches, to feed the Flock; we do not read nor believe, that those Elders took it  of Peter that he so Exhorted them; we neither read, nor believe, that they pleaded their Gifts and Places in the Church, or their being led by the Light, or Holy Ghost, within, in opposition to his Christian Councel and Exhortation in the same Holy Ghost, Light and Spirit, given them by his Epistle; but on the contrary, we believe that in the Light they saw the same to be good and profitable for them, and therein gladly received and obeyed the same, and also we believe, that the younger who walked in the Light, did submit themselves nto the Elder there∣in, and that they who obeyed the Light were thereby led into Humility and Low∣liness, and therein to submit themselves one to another, in the Fear and Councel of God. Again, Paul writing to the Colossians, writ thus, viz. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read in
the Church of the Laodicians—And say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry, which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou ful∣fil it. Observe two things in the foregoing words, first, that he did not only charge or enjoin them to read his Epistle amongst them, but also to take care, that it was read to the Laodicearis. Secondly, He writ to them, to say to Archippus, take heed to thy Ministry, &c. We do not read, or believe, that the believing Colos∣sians did reject this Epistle of Paul's, or neglect their duty in reading it, and causing it to be read according to his Ex∣hortation, or that they pleaded the suffici∣ency of the Light within, in opposition to his Eistles, and councel therein given un∣them, but that in the light, they had Uni∣ty with it, and therefore gladly received it, and had benefit by it, neither do we read or believe, that Archippus was of∣fended with what Paul writ concerning him, nor that he pleaded his Gift and Mi∣nistry, and the Light within, against Paul's councel, in the matter relating to him, but that he had Unity therewith in the Light. Again, Paul writ to Timothy thus, viz. I charge thee before God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall Judg the quick and dead, at his appearing, and his Kingdom, Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke; exhort, with all long suffer∣ing and doctrine, for the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts, shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, and they shall turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Favles; but watch thou in all things, endure afflistions, do the work of an Evangalist, make full proof of thy Ministry, 2 Tim. 4. 1, to the 6th. Observe, Have not some professors of the Light within now, itching Ears which cannot endure sound Doctrine, and are not some such for setting up Teachers, which with unsound Doctrine, for a wrong Liberty, against the Cross of Christ, can, or do please their itching Ears. The Apostle said, we speak not as plea∣sing men, but God, who tryeth our hearts, 1 Thess. 2. 4. Again, to the Ga∣latians he writ, saying, For do I now per∣swade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 9, 10. Paul charges Timothy before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, to Preach the Word,
to Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, &c. and to make full proof of his Ministry; we do not read, nor believe, that Timothy was offended with this Fatherly Charge, or Exhortation in this matter; or that he ex∣cepted against, or opposed this Charge, or pleaded his Gift or Place in the Church, or the Holy Ghost, or Light of Christ, in op∣sition to it, or that he said, he had no need of it, or that it was of no use or service to him, but on the contrary, we believe that this faithful young man, whom Paul had begotten to God, (through the power of the Gospel) did gladly receive; and pro∣fitably prove, the Charge, Exhortation and Councel of Paul the Aged, his Elder in the Truth. Again, Christ after he was risen from the dead, said unto Simon Peter, Lovest thou me, more then these? he saith unto him, Yea Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my Lambs. He saith to him again the Second time, Simon Son of Jonas, Lovest thou me? he saith unto him, Yea Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my Sheep. He said un∣to him the Third time, Simon Son of Jonas? Lovest thou me?—And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest
that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep, John 21. 15, 16, 17. First, Observe, How Christ put the Question before Recited, upon Peter Three times, designing thereby to settle, and revet or fasten, the sence and care of this great Duty, of feeding his Lambs and Sheep, upon him, which command of his Masters he faithfully performed, and Ex∣horted the other Elders to perform their duty in this matter, of so great weight, as is shewed before. The like did Paul, James and John, and the rest of the faith∣ful Apostles and Elders. Secondly, Observe, How these Holy men of God did fed the Lambs and Sheep of Christ, in Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God unto them, which they Preached in the Power of the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven. Thirdly, Observe, We do not read in the Scriptures of Truth, nor believe, that these Lambs or Sheep of Christ, did pro∣fess the Teachings of the Light within, in opposition to its teaching of them through these Apostles and El∣ders, who were com∣manded Note, The Light of Christ within, is not contradictory to it self, in any of the Children of it, nor in any others.
and empower'd from Heaven to feed them, they did not plead the sufficiency of the Light of Christ within themselves, a∣gainst its Teaching them in these Apostles, for as I said before, the Light in him, that is Taught, cannot oppose the Light in him that Teacheth, neither is the Light contradictory to it self in any of its Chil∣dren but walking in it therein is their fel∣lowship one with another. Fourthly, Observe, Christ calls those that were to be fed, Lambs and Sheep, which signifies, they were not of a Woolf∣ish or Dogish Nature or Spirit, that is, Bitter, Cruel and Ravenous, but as Lambs and Sheep, they were meek and uet; Oh that all the professors of the Light of Christ within, were such, then would not some of them cause such dishonour to the Lord as they do, neither would they cause such grief and travel to the faithful Labourers in the Gospel of Peace, as they do. Again, Paul writ to Timothy thus, viz. take heed unto thy self and unto thy Doctrine, continue in them, for in doeing this thou shalt both save thy self and them that hear thee, 1 Tim. 16. read the Chapter throughout. The same Apostle to the Church of the Thessalonians writ thus, viz. Now we
Command you Bretheren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the Tradition which ye received of us, &c. 2 Thess. 3. 6. Again, he writ thus, viz. We Exhort you Brethren, warn them that are unruly (or disorderly) Comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient towards all men, I Charge you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the holy Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all A∣men; 1 Thess. 5. 14, to the end, And to the Thessalonians again, he saith in his se∣cond Epistle, viz. for we hear that there are some among you which walk Disorder∣ly, working not at all, but are busi-bodies, Now them that are such we Command and Exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with Quietness they Work and Eat their own Bread, but ye Brethren be not Weary in well Doing; and if any man o∣bey not our word by this Epistle, Note that man and have no Company with him that he may be ashamed; yet count him not as an Enemy, but Admonish him as a Bro∣ther; Now the Lord of Peace, himself give you peace always, by all meanes, the Lord be with you all, 2 Thess. 3. 11, to the End.
Observe here if any of these to whom Paul wrote, and to whom he Charges his Epistle to be Read, should have called his Epistle his rotten Orders, his Edicts, mans Prescriptions, Imposition upon Con∣science, Innovations or Apostacy, and such like; could he or any other of the faith∣ful in Christ Jesus have owned such there∣in to be Brethren in the Unity and fellow∣ship of the Gospel, or could he or they have owned such words and sayings a these to be the fruit of the Divine Light and Spirit of Christ within, as applyed t the faithful in Christ Jesus) Oh Certainly Nay.
Concerning the form of the Apostles Doctrine, &c. The Apostle writ thus to the beleiving Obedient Romans, viz. But God be thanked ye have obeyed from the heart that forme of Doctrine, which was delivered unto you; Note here, that it was the Apostles Joy that they obeyed that forme of sound Doctrine which was delivered to them, for this he thanked God, he was not of the mind of some who, formerly as also some of late were and have been, who under the profession of the Light within, and its teaching, have spoken, preached, or written, that the way of Gods People must, or ought, or may be as the way of a Serpent upon a rock, or as the way of a ship on the Sea, which leaves noe form or Impression behind them, this neither was nor is the way of Gods People either under his Law or Gospel, but the way of an Adulterous woman as it is written, Prov. 30. 19, 20. And further observe, Sted∣fastness of the true Christians in the A∣postles Doctrine, viz. And they Continu∣ed Stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, Acts 2. 42. Moses the man of God, and the holy Prophets, Christ and his holy Apostles left good forms of
Doctrine in sound words behind them, under the several Dispensations of God, in which they Lived, which is contained in the holy Scriptures of Truth, which form of sound Words and Doctrines are both Comfortable and Profitable to the man of God in this day, and will be to the People of God in Ages to come, and it is gross Darkness and Spiritual Blind∣ness, that is come upon them who have spoken, Preach or believe that the way of Gods People must be as the way of a Ser∣pent on a Rock, or as the way of a Ship in the Sea, which leaves now Impresion or form behind it, It were to be desired ineed that the Devil and Wicked men might leave  form or Impression of their wick∣edness behind them, seeing their wick∣ed formes others are Apt to follow them in to their own hurt and danger of Eter∣nal Ruine, God Almighty in his own Ap∣pointed time will root out and destroy all the wicked formes of Imaging, speaking, and Acting wickedly, which the Devil, in whom there is no Truth, hath led men and women into, by which he hath led them to destroy themselves and each other.
Concerning the Commands of the Apo∣stles of Christ, whih they gave not of Themselves, or by their own Pow∣er; but by and in His Power, Wis∣dom, Strength, and Authority; for they were His Ambassadors, over them He Reigned, in them He spake, and gave Commands; who is Head of His Church, and One in the Male and Female. THe Apostle Paul, writing to the Church at Corinth, concerning the Things that were Not in good Order amongst them, writing of many things in his First Epistle to them, in the 14 Chapter, concludes thus: If any Man thinks himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him know, that the things That I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. Let all Things be done Honestly, De∣sently, and in Order; vers. 7. and 40. Again, the Apostle writing to the Church of the Thessalonians, writ thus, viz. We beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as you have Recei∣ved
of us, how you ought to walk, and please God; so you would abound more and more; for you know what Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus: for this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification—That every one of you should know how to pos∣sess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honour, Not in the Lusts of Concupiscence, as other Gentiles, that know not God; that No Man go beyond, and defraud his Brother in any matter; because the Lord is the Avenger of such, as we have forewarned and testified: for God hath not called us unto Ʋncleanness, but unto Holiness; He therefore who despi∣seth, despiseth not Man, but God, who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit; 1 Thess. 4. 1. to the 9th. Again, the Apostle Paul writes thus to the Thessalonians, viz. We have Confidence in the Lord, touching you, that you both do, and will do the things which we Command you. Now we Command you Brethren, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother, that walketh Disorderly; and not after the Traditions, or Ordinances, which ye received of us. Again, the Apostle saith, Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditi∣ons which ye have been taught, whether By Word, or our Epistles, 2 Thess. 2. 15. See 2 Thess. 3. 4, 5.
Again, he writes to Timothy thus; These things Command, and teach; let no Man dispise thy Youth, but be thou an Ex∣ample of the Believers in Word, in Conver∣sation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity: See 1 Tim. 4. 11, 12. read the Chapter through. Again, hear what the Apostle Peter saith unto the Saints in Light, viz. This Second Epistle, Beloved, I now write unto you; in both which, I stir up your pure minds, by way of Remembrance, that ye may be mind∣ful of the Words, which were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the Command∣ment of us, the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour; knowing this first, that there shall come in the Last days Scoffers, walking af∣ter their own Lusts, &c. Again,—Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the Errour of the Wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness; but grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ: To Him be Glo∣ry, both now and forever, Amen. 2 Peter 3. 1, 2, 3, and 17, 18. Reader, who ever thou art, this I say to thee, in the Presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all Hearts, before whom all things are naked and bare, who judg∣eth righteously, That I do Not bring
the Commands, Ordinances, or Doctrines given and spoken by the Apostles of Christ, with Any Design to wrong, strein, or wrest them, or any of them; to exlt any Friend, Brother or Brethren, Sister or Sisters, above or out of their Place, in which Christ, the one Head, hath set them in his Body, his Church, or in anywise to exalt them, or any oe of them, as Lords, over Gods Peoples Faith, which our Lord Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of; by which Faith they live to God, and please Him. But my design there∣in, is to Exalt Christ the Head, n them All, and over them All, who is One in the Male and Female: He hath given us a Command, to Learn of Him, saying, Ln of me, I am meek, and Low in heat, and ye sll find rest to your Souls: f him we have learned Humility, tue  of Mind; in this we have found abundance o Peace, Joy, Comfort, and Rest to our Sls. This to us is of much more value, thn all the Riches and Glory of this World: ere is the Pleasant and comfor∣table Dwelling Place, here we desire to dwell forever. The Humble God doth teach; he guides the Meek in Judgment, and cloaths them with Salvation: Eternal lory be given to Him for the same. My Design in bringing these things to thy
View, is, to shew that the Apostles, who preach't the Gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven (as it's written), did in the Movings and Authority of the same, give forth those Commands, Ordi∣nances, and Doctrines unto the Believers, in the same Holy Ghost, Spirit, or Light; by which Light they saw and understood the Truth, Soundness, and Serviceable∣ness of them: and by the same were they led; Not to Oppose them, and speak Evil of them, but to Obey, and practise them. Now, those that profess to be governed by the same Holy Ghost, Spirit, or Light within, if they possess what they profess therein, they will see, that the same Holy Ghost is, In some measure, given to some in our Day; and that by it, Some are made Able Ministers, and thereby have been Moved to give out So Commands, Not in their own Name, but in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the chief Shep∣herd, and Bishop of our Souls: and such Professors of the Light, who Poess what they Profess, and dilligently attend upon God in the same, they will herein See, and thereby be Led to Obey, and practise those things, Not as the Precepts, Tradi∣tions, or Doctrines of Men; But as the Commands, Precepts, and Doctrines of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he gives, and
speaks by the Mouths of his Servants; which answers that Light of Christ, in the Consciences of his People. And such who reject them, they therein reject God, and Christ. These things so Command∣ed, are Not contrary to the Commands of Christ and his Apostles, recorded in the Scriptures of Truth; but Agreeable to them, in the fulfilling the precious Pro∣mises of God, spoken by the Mouths of his Holy Prophets; who said, I will pour forth my Spirit upon all Flesh, &c. For Christ said to his Disciples, When they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no thought before hand what you shall speak, neither do you pre∣meditate; but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: For it is Not you that speak, but the Holy Ghost; Mark 31. 11. In the Apostles and Primitive Christi∣ans, observe the Holy Ghost that spake to the Magistrates and Rulers, that per∣secuted them; the same spake in them to the Church of Christ, and gave forth Com∣mands, Precepts, Ordinances, &c. And the Believers, unto whom they wrote, having a measure of the same Holy Ghost, were thereby given to understand the same, and thereby led to the Obedience thereof. Again, the Apostle Paul said unto the Saints, You know how we Exhorted, and Com∣forted, and Charged every one of you (as a
Father doth his Children) that you would walk worthy Of God, who hath called you unto his Kingdom and Glory; for this Cause, also, thank we God, without ceasing; because, when ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it Not as the Word of Men, but as it is in Truth the Word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe; 1 Thess. 2. 11, 12, 13. Observe here, the Apostle commends the Saints for receiving the Word, or Testimony of God by him and others, not as the Word of Man, or Men; but as it was indeed the Word and Testimony of the Lord, which wrought Effectually in them, as he saith: And as t was then, so is it now; God having given (by his Ser∣vants) his Word, his Commands, and Doctrines; he hath by his powerful, en∣lightning Spirit of Life, opened many to receive the same, Not as the Word, Do∣ctrines, Precepts, Decrees, Edicts, or Orders of One Man, Many Men, or Any Men; but as the Word, Commands, and Precepts, and Doctrines of the Great God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Glory, yea glory to the Lord God, and the Lamb, for the same. The Objection that some make concer∣ning the practice of some things in the
Church of Christ, at this day, is, because they were not practised when we were first turned to the Light, and came into the belief and profession of it. This Objection is fully answered before in this Epistle, where the divers growths and statures of Gods people are writ∣ten of. But the great Objection that is used by some at this day, is, That they An Objection answered. do not see those things requi∣red of them, or believe them to be their duty; and because they do not see the practice of those things to be their duty, or required of them, there∣fore they oppose (Friends) in the pra∣ctice of them. What these things are, these Opposers know; and the Faithful who are opposed by them therein, know them also. They are not things which are evil or scandalous, or of evil same or report amongst serious sober persons; we are not afraid to bring them to the Light; they are practised by many thou∣sands in Unity, to their comfort, and tends to preserve both young and old, sweet and orderly in their Marriages, and in the rest of their Conversations, and is for the Relief of the Poor, Widows, and Fatherless Children. Some have done
hurt in their selfish and wilful striving a∣gainst these things; and when they have done the hurt, they would lay the blame upon the things which they strive against: and the Instruments who have and do incourage those things. And thus they judge unrighteously the Innocent, and justifying themselves who are guilty. Again, the Apostle exhorted, saying, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, what∣soever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatso∣ever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; If there be any Vertue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things. These things which you have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you, Philip. 4. 8, 9. Observe, that Meeting together in the Love & Fear of Almighty God, to take care of his glory, in providing for the Poor, Wi∣dows, and Fatherless Children, and others who have need of help & assistance among us in their bodily Weakness, Temptati∣ons, Trials, and Exercises; is good, is ho∣nest, is Just, is lovely, is of good report, and is worthy of praise. These things are done in our Meetings, both by Male and Female. Such Meetings have the vertuous Presence of the Lord God,
them: Such Meetings God doth gather, own, uphold, and justifie by his powerful presence in the midst of them. Again, In those Meetings care is taken, that such who profess the truth, as it is in Christ Jesus, (and walk amongst us) do proceed in their Marriages sweetly, in good order, according to the example of holy men and women of God, in former time (and in our days) those proceedings are brief∣ly, though plainly touched at in the Scri∣ptures of Truth. Again, In those Mee∣tings care is taken, that those whose pro∣ceedings in relation to Marriage, are not as they ought to be, that such be admoni∣shed, that they may come into a right sense of the dishonour they bring to God thereby, that they may repent and con∣demn the same, and give glory to God therein, that they may obtain forgiveness at his hand; and that his People whom they have grieved by their unfaithfulness therein, may be comforted in seeing this good Work of God wrought in them. Again, In these Meetings care is taken, that those who profess the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus, (and walk amongst us) do in their Conversations walk orderly, as becomes the Gospel, that no Professor thereof wrong another, or any other per∣son whomsoever, in any matter or thing
whatsoever. This is endeavoured by the faithful Children of God, Children of Light, both Male and Female, in their particular and distinct, and also in their more general Meeting, as much as in them lieth. And where any professing the Truth amongst us, do or have done the contrary, care hath been and is to labour with them in the love of God, and Meek∣ness, and Patience, which Christ Jesus, the meek and lowly Lamb of God, hath taught us, to bring them into a right sense of the dishonour, they have brought to God by their evil doings; and that they might repent of, and sensually judge themselves for the same; that so through unfeigned Repentance, and forsaking the same, they might obtain Forgiveness of their sins at the hand of God: for the Lord God who is merciful, delighteth not in the destru∣ction of the sinner, but rather that he should repent, and turn from the evil of his ways, and live, and so come into unity with his tender People. Again, In these Meetings the faithful in Christ Jesus do watch one over another in Love, to be helpful one to another in their Tempta∣tions, Tryals, and Afflictions, labouring to build up each other in the holy Faith, (which works by Love, as the Apostle saith) herein they manifest their love one
to another, according to Christs com∣mand: Their love is without dissimula∣tion; by which they are known to be the Disciples of Christ, in fulfilling the Royal Law of Love in his Divine Light, according the Scriptures of Truth. Again, in those Meetings care is taken, that the Professors of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Teachings of his Divine Light within, do walk in the Light which they make profession of that according to Christs command, their Light may so shine before men, that they may see their good works in Christ Jesus, and glorifie our Father which is in Heaven; that as the Salt of the Earth, we may always keep that heavenly avour which God in Christ hath given us, and that we may grow in it more and more, that therein we may be a good savour both in them that are saved, and in them that perish, even as the Apostle exhorted. All the before mentioned things are true, honest, just, good, virtuous, lovely, and of good report, worthy of praise. Hereby God is honoured, and his children profited, benefited, comforted, edified, and built up in unfeigned Love, Peace, and sweet Unity, to his praise and glory, who is over all Heaven and Earth, worthy of Honour, Glory, Dominion, and Praise,
now and for ever more. Amen. Observe, that which opposeth, con∣demneth, and orneth the faithful in Christ Jesus, in these their services and labour of love, is neither true, just, honest, lovely, virtuous, or o good report; neither is it worthy of praise, but the contrary: Therefore all you who profess to be led and guided by the Light of Christ within; you in the Light of Christ Jesus, I tell you, that his Light in you, will not lead any of you to oppose any of the good things before mentioned. And where a∣ny person professing to be led by the Light of Christ within, do oppose any of the before-mentioned Meetings, or the aforesaid good services in them, it is Darkness, and not the Light of Christ, which so leads and perswades them: He that was a Liar from the beginning, hath deceived such. Oh that they might see his Snare, and come out of it! this is our ten∣der desire for them for their eternal good. The Lord God, who is Light, in whom there is no Darkness at all, said by the mouth of his holy Prophet, Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness! Wo unto them that are wise in their own eyes! Isai. 5. 20, 21. Christ said, If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? See Mat. 6. 22, 23. See Luke 11. 34, 35, 36. See Joh. 12. 35. Observe, it is No Proof, that these good things are not their duty, because they do not see them to be so: for it is undeniable, that it is the duty of all Men & Women to believe in the one Eternal God; but some were of old, and now are so blinded by the God of this world, their minds so darkned, and they so hardened in the practice and love of sin, that they did not, nor do see or be∣lieve that there is a God; as it's written, The Fool hath said in his heart, there is no God: And again, Christ said to the great professing Jews, High Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, who were as the whited Walls, Graves, and painted Sepulchres, (but within were full of rot∣tenness, hypocrisie and deceit) Ye neither know Me, nor my Father; ye neither know the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Again, it is the duty of every man and woman to believe in the true Light of Christ, that lighteneth every man that cometh into the World; but it's known by lamentable Experience, that even many of the Professors of Christianity, are far from believing in it; who on the contrary are Blaspheming against it, Mocking and Scoffing at it, persecuting and oppres∣sing the Children of it, and opposing the
Testimony of it. Now, if these do say, We do Not see or believe it to be our Du∣ty to believe in and obey the Light; it doth Not therefore follow, that it is not their Duty: and if they say, We see & be∣lieve it is our Duty to speak and write a∣gainst the Light, and to punish you who profess and obey it; Their so saying will Not prove that these their. Evil Works are their Duty to God and Christ, no not at all, but the Contrary. But to come closer to the Professors of the Light with∣in, hear what Christ and the Prophet saith, viz. This Peoples Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and their Eyes they have closed, lest at any Time they should see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and should understand with their Heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. See Math. 13. 14, 15. Acts 28. 26, 27. The Author to the Hebrews writ thus concerning Christ, viz. And he became the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, called of God an high Priest, after the Order of Mel∣chisedeck, of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered; seeing Ye are Dull of hearing, or as it is rendered in the Margin out of the Greek, Hath no Experience; for when for the Time ye ought to be Teachers, Ye have Need that
one teach you again, which be the first Principles of the Word or Oracles of God. See Heb. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. Again, Christ speaking a Parable con∣cerning the Kingdom of God, saith, For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that hath not, shall be taken away even that which he hath; and cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, &c. See Math. 25. 29, 30. Observe, the sloathful Servant who had not improved his Lords Talent, was and is to be cast into utter darkness, his Talent being taken from him: Such an one in Darkness may talk of Light, as Job saith, Death and Destruction saith, We have heard of the fame of Wisdom; such an one may talk of the Light, who in his dark Works Denies it, and opposeth it, and contends against the Children of it, in their pure Obedience to it, and Such an one may say to the Children of the Light, I do not see that to be my Duty which you practise: I say, how should he see who is shut up in utter darkness, whose wilful disobedience has brought him to be like the deaf Adder, which stoppeth his Ears, which will not hear, as it's written. Again, Jesus said unto them, Yet a lit∣tle while is the Light with you, walk while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you;
for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth; while ye have the Light be∣lieve in the Light, that you may be the Chil∣dren of Light, John 12. 35, 36. Observe, They who believe in the Light, as Christ commands, and obey it in its first and smallest Manifestations, they in that Light Cannot oppose what the Light brings forth In others; for though Some who are turned to the Light, and have believed in it, and in some measure obeyed it, Do not see so Much or so Far into the things of God, as some others who are more grown and Established, and have received a greater Measure of Divine Wisdom; yet Cannot these Weak or Young ones, by the motion or teaching of the Light, contradict, oppose, or con∣tend against what the same Light brings forth in others of the Children of it; fo if this Could be, then God (whose gift to Man and Woman, the Light is) would thereby be the Author of Confusion, and not of Peace, in the Churches of the Saints, as is observed before in this Epistle; but God Is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints, as the Apostle hath writ, which is observed before. It is true as the Prophet writ, O Lord in thy Light we shall see more Light, &c. The Path of the Just is as the shining Light,
which shines more & more unto the perfect day. It is certainly true, that we find it harder in this Age to perswade some people, to keep and walk in the Light, than it was to turn them to it; and some like Balaam having been opened by it, to see the blessed end of the Righteous, do still retain a Pro∣fession of it (though they rebel against it) and desire to die the death of the Righteous, as Balaam did; but refuseth to live that Self-denying Christian life, which leads to that good End. Christ saith, Loe I come, and my reward is with me, to give unto every one according as his works shall be. And the Apostle saith, Such as every one sows, such shall he reap: he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit mortifie the deeds of the body (or flesh) then shall ye live. The Apostle Paul writ thus to the Children of the Light, Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall re∣veal even this unto you. Nevertheless, where∣to we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an ensample. See Philip. 3. 15, 16, 17.
Observe here, It was the Apostles be∣lief, that if any among the Believers in the Light, were of another mind than he was, in any thing that he in the Light practised, God would reveal the same un∣to them also, they abiding stedfast with the Light to which they were turn'd; and as he believed, so do we believe in this matter. 'Tis possible, that some persons, who are turned to the Light of Christ within, who have believed, and in some measure obeyed the same, who in many things have Unity with the most antient grown and establish'd of the Children of the Light, yet in some things, may not be so opened and clear in their Understan∣dings, as to see them, and joyn in Faith in the practice of them. We believe, and therefore say, That if such abide in the Light, faithful to what they know, God will reveal these things unto them. And we believe, and therefore say, They kee∣ping in the Light, it will keep them from contending against or opposing others, in the practice of that which God has re∣vealed to them, and required of them. What is not of Faith is sin, as saith the Apostle; Such therefore that are weak in the Faith, we ought not to reject, but to re∣ceive, though not to doubtful Disputati∣ons, but to hear their infirmities or weak∣nesses,
to be good Examples to them, and to make intercession to God for them, and to hold forth Truth to them in sound Doctrine, that they may be strengthened with his glorious power in their Inward man; and that he may increase their Faith, and more and more fill them with that Wisdom and Knowledge, which is pure and peaceable from above. But observe, where persons have been long convinced, and are become Teachers of others, and by their so doing would be look'd upon to be Elders, wise and strong, shall under the profession of the Light oppose, and teach others to oppose the faithful Followers of Christ, in things which they practise in the Faith of Christ, accompanied with his Power and a good Understanding, This Case is greatly dif∣fering from the before-mentioned: For these will not grant, that their refusing the practice of some things, and the opposing the Practisers thereof, proceeds from weak∣ness, or short-sightedness through their In∣fancy in the knowledge of the Truth; Much less that it proceeds from Apostacy and Rebellion, the latter of which is true upon some in our Age; but these give out reviling Speeches against the Faithful, calling them Apostates, and many other evil names, which I here omit to mention,
having no pleasure to repeat them. Observe, we are of the Apostles Faith and Judgment, who writ thus to the Church at Galatia; Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted: Bear ye one anothers burthens, and so fulfil the Law of Christ. See Gal. 6. 1, 2. read the Chapter through. Christ, our Souls Bi∣shop, hath taught us how to seek to re∣store those that commit Offences against him and his People; and several hath been so sought, and recovered out of the Snare, in which they were taken; and o∣thers so sought, have not been gained, but have persisted in their evil doing, until God has ceased any longer to strive with them through his Servants, and then his Servants have witnessed against them, and declared their disunion with them, according to Christs command; and some such being declared against, as afore∣said, have appeared in great wrath against us, like the raging Waves of the Sea, fo∣ming out their own shame; but we pity them, and should greatly rejoyce on their behalf, if they could yet find a place of repentance and return: for 'tis true which Christ saith, Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, &c.
Again, it is true which the Apostle James writ, Brethren, if any of you do erre from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the errour of his way, shall save a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins, Jam. 5. 19, 20. Again, to them that say, they do not see, as aforesaid, hear what Christ saith by his Angel to the Church in Laodicea, viz. Because thou sayest, I am rich and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and knowest not that thou art wretched and mi∣serable, and poor, and blind, and naked: I counsel thee to buy of me gold tryed in the fire, that thou mayest be rich, and white rayment that thou mayest be cloathed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and a∣noint thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou mayest see: as many as I love, I rebuke & cha∣sten. Be zealous therefore and repent: behold I stand at the door and knock, If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me, &c. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the Churches, Rev. 3. 14. to the end. 1. Observe, this Church or Congrega∣tion was gathered into the Profession of Christ and his Light within.
2. Observe how greatly they were mista∣ken concerning their own state and conditi∣on; a most gross and lamentable Errour were they in, as the before-cited words of Christ do plainly shew, They were puffed up with Self-conceit, that they wanted no∣thing, when in reality and truth, they Wanted all things, that should have ren∣dered them to be that which they profes∣sed to be; Namely, such who were Com∣pleat in Christ Jesus, the Head of His Church; who is the fulness; who Cloaths his Members with the Robes of his own Righteousness, and fills them with the bright Beams of his Divine Light, so that they see clearly; and he fills their Hearts with the Riches of his Grace, in the a∣bundance of which, their Hearts and Souls pour forth Praises and Thanksgiving to the Lord God, and the Lamb who is Wor∣thy for evermore. 3. Observe, Though their State was so miserable; yet in his tender Mercy, he calls them to Repentance. Oh, consider this, thou Back-slider, whoever thou art, and let the sence thereof seize upon thee, and break thy Heart. Repent, and Turn to the Lord, with whom is forgiveness! 4. Observe, How Christ charges this Congregation to be blind, and being blind they could not see their State as it was;
but in their blind Self-conceit, said, It was What it was not. 5. Observe, That these blind Self-con∣ceited ones, while they remained such, could not see that to be their Duty, which the Children of Light saw to be theirs. 6. Observe, That we do not here read, that these blind self-conceited Laodi∣ceans, did so oppose the Children of Light, in their Faithful Obedience to it; as some do oppose in our day we do not read they called them Apostates. 7. Observe, That some blind Self-con∣ceited ones in our Age, have appeared worse than they, who are not contented with that ungodly fleshly Liberty, and un∣christian Loosness in which they are; but therein do oppose, & War against the chil∣dren of the Light, because they will not joyn and walk, and have Unity with them, in their dark Words & Works: But in the Councel of God, Witness against the same. 8. Observe, If these blind Self-conceit∣ed ones do not take Christ's Councel, viz. Anoynt their Eyes with Eye-Salve, that they may see and repent; then their Latter End will be Miserable, much worse than their Beginning was. Oh, that such might yet seek, and find a Place of Repentance! This would be matter of great rejoycing to the Children of Light, who are cal∣luminated,
reviled, opposed, and great∣ly abused by them. Again, the Apostle Peter writ to the Saints in Light, viz. Giving all Diligence, Add to your Faith Vertue, and to Vertue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness brotherly Kind∣ness, Charity; for if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that you shall nei∣ther be barrennor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; but he that lack∣eth these Things is blind, and cannot see far off; and hath forgotten, that he was purged from his old Sins. Wherefore the rather, Bre∣thren, give All diligence to make your Cal∣ling and Election sure; for if you do these things, ye shall never fall, &c. 2. Pet. 1. 5. to the 11. Read the Chapter through. 1. Observe, All you that profess the Light of Christ within, what things you are to be found in, Which will render you, that you are not barren, nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 2. Observe, That he that professes to be plentiful in the Knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, And is not found in the Possession and Practice of those be∣fore-mentioned Christian fruits, he is blind, as the Apostle saith, and too like
the self-conceited blind Laodiceans. 3. Observe, That there are some at this day, who do profess themselves to be followers of the Light of Christ with∣in, Who do lack these before-mentioned good Things; and so, according to the Apostles saying, These are blind, and the blind cannot see till their Eyes be opened; So they cannot see their Duty, nor the Du∣ty of the Children of Light, till their Eyes be open'd. Such of them, who Have not yet sin∣ned out the Day of Gods Uisitation, to them I Exhort and warn to retire, out of the Self∣conceit, and vain Imaginations, to the pure Divine Light of Christ within, and there∣unto diligently attend, that thereby the Eyes of their Understandings may be a∣nointed and opened, that therein they may see their Duty, and by vertue of the same, be led into it, and kept in it; and also may see the Duty of the Children of Light, and have Unity with them therein. Again, Hear what the Apostle Paul saith concerning Blindness, viz. But if our Gospel be hid, It is hid in them that are lost, in whom the God of this World hath blind∣ed the minds of them which believe not, lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them; for we Preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Ser∣vants
for Jesus sake; for God, who command∣ed the Light to shine out of Darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; but we have this Treasure in the Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power, may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4. 3. to 8. 1. Observe, That it is the God of the World, who blinds the Minds of Peo∣ple, designing thereby to hinder them of the Benefit of the Light; that so they might be kept blind, and in Blindness, Conceit themselves to be wise and know∣ing in the Things of God, and Gospel of his Kingdom, and in their Blindness to oppose and contend against those, whom God hath made Wise unto Salvation, in op∣posing their Christian Counsel, Advice, and Conversation. 2. Observe, That the Apostles of Christ did not Preach Themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and Themselves their Servants for Jesus sake; and so doth the faithful Ministers of Christ, in this day, praisEd be the Lord for the same; and the Excellency of the Power by which they are enabled to serve God, and each other, is of God, and not of Themselves. Therefore the Glory belongs to him forever. Again, Hear what the Apostle Paul
saith concerning the darkened and blind∣ed, viz. For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven Against all Ungodlyness and Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Ʋnrighteousness; because that which may be known of God, Is Manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them,—Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were they thankful; but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkned; professing themselves to be Wise, they became Fools, Rom. 1. 18, 19, to 23. 1. Observe, That the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all Ungod∣lyness and Unrighteousness of Men, for holding the Truth in Unrighteousness; That is, holding a Profession of it Without Subjection and Obedience to it, because they do not obey the Truth, in forsaking that which it shews them to be evil, & chusing & doing that which it shews them to be good. 2. Observe, That when they through their Negligence and Slothfulness, conti∣nued and multiplied Disobedience and Re∣bellion, are come to be darkned, and made Spiritually blind; so that they neither see, know, or desire to Know their Duty, or to do it; yet this their Darkness and Blind∣ness doth not render them Excusable, or uncondemnable either in the sight of God,
or his Faithful People; but on the contra∣ry, Inexcusable and condemnable in the sight of God, and also in the sight of his Faithful People.. 3. Observe, The cause why they be∣came so darkned and blinded was, that when they knew God, they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful; there∣fore they became Vain in their Imagina∣tions, and their foolish Hearts were dark∣ned; professing themselvee to be Wise, they became Fools. 4. Observe, What it is to Glorifie God as God, when Man knows Him; for there are several Degrees of the Knowledge of God, all proceeding from one Cause, and are of one kind, though Not all of One Quantity or Largeness. Certain it is, that to Glorifie God as God, is not only to believe that He is a Mighty, Powerful, Just, and Holy God; but also to Reverence, fear, and stand in awe of Him, and to obey Him, according to that Knowledge re∣ceived of him. His Blessing is upon, & will continue and increase upon all those, who do so Glorifie Him; for He hath promised, who cannot lie, That he that is Faithful in a little, shall be made Ruler over much, and shall enter into the Joy of his Lord. Again, The same Apostle writ to the believing Gentiles at Ephesus, viz. This I
say therefore, and testifie in the Lord, That ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the Vanity of their Minds, having the Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the Igno∣rance that is in them, because of the Blind∣ness of their Heart, who being past feeling, have given themselves over to Lascivious∣ness, to work all Uncleanness with greedi∣ness, Ephes. 4. 17, 18, 19. Observe here, the woful and miserable Effects of Disobedience to God; what Darkness, Spiritual Blindness, Benum∣medness, and Insensibility it brings them into, who are given up thereto, alie∣nating them from the Life, Power, and Spirit of God; yet this Blindness and In∣sensibility, Doth not render them excusa∣ble, in the Sight of the Lord God, who hath sent his Son, a true Light, who lights every Man that comes into the World; who therefore saith, Look unto Me all, O ye Ends of the Earth, and be ye saved; for I am God, and there is none else; a mighty God, and a Saviour, Isa. 45. 22. And again, The Apostle in his Light, Spirit, and Power saw, and therefore said, God's Will is, that all Men should know the Truth, and he Saved, 1 Tim. 2. 4. They therefore who believe in the Divine Light of Christ, and walk in and obey the same,
are therein saved, preserved, and justifi∣ed; but they that know this Light, pro∣fess, and talk of it, but do not obey, and walk in it, they are justly by the Lord God condemned, and their Disobedience justly Witnessed against by his Faithful People, who walk in his Light, and bring forth the pure peaceable Fruits of it; and if such disobedient, unfaithful Profes∣sors of the Light do not unfeignedly re∣pent of their Evil Sayings and Doings a∣gainst God, and his People, and walk in Obedience to the Light they make Pro∣fession of; then will the Wrath of God fall heavy upon them in the End. Again, Hear what the Apostle Peter saith to the Faithful Children of Light, viz. But ye are a chosen Generation, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should shew forth the Praise of him, that hath called you Out of Darkness into his Marvellous Light. Dearly Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, Abstain from Fleshly Lust, which War against the Soul, having your Conversations Honest amongst the Gentiles; that whereas they speak against you as Evil Doers, they may By your Good Works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of Visitation. 1 Pet. 2. 9, to the 13. Observe, This Doctrine of the Apo∣stle, is according to the Command of
Christ to his Disciples. He said, Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and Glorify your Fa∣ther which is in Heaven, Math. 5. 16. Again, Christ saith, The Light of the Bo∣dy is the Eye, If therefore thine Eye be sin∣gle, thy whole Body shall be full of Light; but if thine Eye be Evil, thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness; If therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? See Math. 6. 22, 23. Again, Christ saith, Out of the Heart pro∣ceedeth an Evil Eye, Mark. 7. 22. Luke 11. 34. 1. Observe, That the Children of Light are a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Na∣tion, a Peculiar People, called out of Darkness into Gods marvellous Light; They walking therein are as Lights in the World, their Light so shines before Men in the good Works, or good Conversation in Christ, this brings Glory to God the Father, which is in Heaven; they neither Need nor Do plead Ignorance, of their duty to God, or Man; or of the Commands of Christ; For they do both know, obey and do their Duty to God and Man, praised be the Lord God for the same. 2. Observe, That Christ saith, The Light of the Body, is the Eye; wherefore if thine Eye be single, thy whole Body is full of
Light; but when thine Eye is Evil, thy whole body also is full of darkness. Here are 'two Eyes spoken of; the good one and the evil one, he that hath the good Eye open in him, with it Christ saith, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch, Mat. 15. 14. sees right, sees good things, and is af∣fected therewith, embraceth and hold∣eth fast the same; he sees his duty to God and Man, and by Gods help doth the same, and therein is blessed; but he that hath the Evil Eye open in him (which Eye proceeds out of the Heart, as Christ saith, with this his Evil Eye he seeketh and watcheth for Evil, and therewith sees Evil things, and hath pleasure in them, and therefore embraces them, pra∣ctiseth them, pleads for them, and holds them fast. This is the Man, whose Good Eye is blinded, and his evil one open; therefore he calls Good Evil, and Evil Good. Here Darkness and its fruits, are put for Light and its fruits, and Light and its fruits, are put for Darkness and its fruits. The Person that doth this, hath changed the Truth of God for a Lie. Oh, this is a miserable State, which some fell into in Ages past, and some are fallen into in our Age! Out of which, God Almighty preserve all, who to his Light are turned, who believe in,
and love the same! And the Lord be merciful unto all, who, though they be Darkned and Intangled in the Snares of their Souls Enemy, through want of Watchfulness in the pure Light of Christ, and holy fear of God; yet have not sinned out the day of his tender Visitation to them. Oh that they may seek and find a place of unfeigned Repentance, and so return unto the Lord God, before the Harvest, or Gathering, or Restoring time, to them be ended. Concerning the Honour which God gives unto his People, &c. THe fear of the Lord is the Instruction of Wisdom, and before Honour is Humility, Proverbs 15. 33. And Christ saith, If any man honour me, him will my Father ho∣nour, John 12. 26. And the Apostle Pe∣ter Exhorted the Saints, saying, Honour all men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, &c. 1. Pet. 2. 17. The Apostle Paul Exhorted the believing Romans to be kindly Affecti∣onated one towards another with brotherly Love in Honour preferring one another,
Rom. 12. 10. Again he writ to them, viz. But Glory, Honour, and Peace, to every man that worketh good, &c. Rom. 2. 10. Again, hear what the Lord saith by the mouth of Samuel the Prophet, viz. Them that honour me, I will honour, and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteem'd, 1 Sam. 2. 30. And again, Paul writing to Timothy saith, Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Tim 5. 17. Observe, All the Children of God who are taught by his gracious Spirit of Life, Light, Love and Peace, who walk therein, they Glorifie and Honour him, with their Spirits and Bodies, which are his, and with his good Creatures, which he hath made them Stewards over, which is their reasonable Service, and all such he honours, with the honour that is from above, which comes from himself, and all these do honour each other, and prefer each other, according to the Order of the Work of God a∣mongst them in their several Gifts and Services in the Body of Christ, his Church; All keeping to, and walking in the Divine Light of Christ, all will be kept in Humility (and in Unity) yea
cloathed with it according to the Apostles Exhortation, and according to the Com∣mand and Example of Christ the Chief Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, who said, Learn of me, I am meek and low∣ly in Heart, and ye shall find rest to your Souls. A Remnant hath learned Humi∣lity of him in this Age, and he hath given us rest to our Souls, which to us far ex∣cels all the Riches and Glory of this World, Praises to the Lord God and the Lamb for the same. Blessed are all they that walk in his Light, they find the fruit of it in them, to be unfeigned Love to Friends, and al∣so to Enemies, and Meekness, Patience, Gentleness, Justice, Equity, and Righ∣teousness towards all Men, and a good Understanding, and holy right Zeal for the honour of the Lord, and the good of his People; who walks here will not be puffed up with self conceit, or self wilfulness, or be filled with Wrath, Ma∣lice, Strife, nor strive to Honour or Ex∣alt themselves, as Lords over Gods Peo∣ple; such are not Lords over that Faith which God hath wrought in his People, but in the Love of God, Meekness and Hu∣mility of Christ Jesus, these build up one another in their most Holy Faith, and are
Fellow helpers of one anothers Joy in the Lord, as the Apostle hath writ and Ex∣horted. And as the Primitive true Chri∣stians practised. Concerning Rule and Government in the Church of Christ. CHrist Jesus after he arose from the Dead spake unto his Disciples, saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, go ye therefore and teach all Na∣tions, Baptizing them into the Name (for so the Greek renders it) of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teach∣ing them to observe all things whatsoever I have comanded you, and lo I am with you always, &c. Matt. 28. 18, 19, 20. First Observe, Christ who was always spiritually present with those whom he sent to preach the Gospel, gave them many things in Charge to teach the Peo∣ple to observe; those who believed, re∣ceived and obeyed the Gospel preach'd by the Apostles, did obey the Commands and Doctrines of Christ given by, or
through the Apostles, who were his Embassadors, those who did continue stedfast unto the end, were (by degrees) Taught and inabled by the powerful Spirit and Light of Christ in the Apostles and in their own hearts, to observe & do all things that Christ commanded them. 2. Observe, Christ in and by the Apostles did command and teach those who be∣lieved and received the Gospel, and walk∣ed in the Light of it, and those who did believe and obey those Commands and Doctrines, were not (therein) subject or obedient to the Traditions, Doctrines, or Commandments of men (who were without the Spiritual Presence and Au∣thority of Christ.) But they were obedi∣ent unto the Commandements and Do∣ctrines of Christ, delivered in and by the Faithful Apostles, those holy Men of God. 3. Observe, Here is Order and Rule in the Work of God, they that are No∣vices or young Scholars in the Faith and Doctrine of Christianity, are Learners, others Elders or Teachers; these are to be Taught and watch'd over, by those to whom God hath given an oversight of them in his power and wisdom for the Salvation, Preservation, and everlasting good of their Souls; these Stewards of
God, who labour for, and watch over Souls for the good end aforesaid God, re∣quires them to be faithful in this great Charge which he hath laid upon them; for they must give an account to him of their stewardship, and blessed are all those who have believed the Gospel, who obey and walk in the Light of the same, receiving and obeying the Commands, Doctrines, and Precepts of the Lord Jesus Christ, gi∣ven unto them by his Light and Spirit in his Stewards and Embassadors, which they see and receive in the same Light & Spirit of Christ in their own Hearts and Souls. An account will be given of them with joy, unto Christ the chief Shepherd and great Overseer of Souls. 4. Observe, They who after they have believed in the Spirit and Light of God, and Christ within, and have partaken of the vertue and power thereof, fall away when Temptations and Tryals come up∣on them for Christ and the Gospel's sake; these become like the stony ground, which Christ speaks of in the Parables of the Kingdom, that young and tender Blade, which appeared, in them being withered; an account cannot be given of these with joy, but with sorrow, though they who have laboured faith∣fully
with them for their good are clear of their Fall and Misery. 5. Observe, Those who have come to a farther growth and knowledg of the Truth than those last mentioned, who have come not only to know the Truth, but also further to obey it and suffer for it, yet they after they have thus done and suffered, have fallen away from their first love and obedience to the Cross of Christ, by rejecting and slight∣ing the Counsel of God by his Light and Spirit in their own hearts, and in the hearts and mouths of his Servants; and these having cast off the Yoke of Christ, are become as Sons of Belial without Yoke; gone into the World, into the Cumbersom Cares of it, and the De∣ceitfulness of the Riches, Lusts, and Glory of it, such has made ill use of the grace or favour of God given unto them, such in their works (whatever their Words be) deny the only true God and our Lord Jesus Christ; such are the de∣spisers of the Government of Christ in his Church, who though they retain yet something of the Christian form of God∣liness, yet are out of the life and power thereof, and Enemies to it, as by their Evil Works and Words do and will appear.
The Stewards and Embassadors of Christ cannot give a joyous account of these, though having faithfully laboured with them for their preservation and well be∣ing, are therefore cleer of their blood, or of being in any wise guilty of their Fall and Ruin. Observe further what the Apostle saith concerning Rule and Government in the Church of Christ, he writing to the believing Hebrews, writes thus, Remem∣ber them which have the Rule over you, who hath spoken unto you the Word of God, whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation, obey them that hath the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you:—Salute all them that have the Rule over you, and all the Saints; they of Italy salute you, Grace be with you all Amen. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24, 25. Observe, Though the many sorts of false Teachers have and do falsly pretend to watch for the Soul; who watch only for their own corrupt earthly Ends, as by their Fruits have and doth appear; yet God did of old and now doth send faith∣ful Labourers into his Vineyard, who
have and do labour and watch for the Salvation of the Souls of the Sons and Daughters of Men, glory be given to him for the same: These faithful Watch∣ers are known by their Fruits, they covet no Mans Gold, Silver, or Apparel; they do not watch for Earthly gain; they do not take the oversight of the Flock for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind; they are not Lords over Gods Heritage, but good Examples to the Flock; they are not Lords over the Faith of the People of God. But they are Fellow-helpers of their Joy, Peace, Comfort, and Establishment in the way of Righteousness. They Preach and give freely, according to Christs Command, they walk in Love to Friends and Enemies, witnessing against that which is Evil, in all, without Parti∣ality and without Hypocrisie, and the Fruits of Righteousness is sown by them in peace; they have peace with God, and live in Love and Peace one with another. They have learned of Christ Jesus, true Humility, true Lowliness of Mind and Heart, in which they Preach in their good Example as well as Doctrine, to the honour of God and the good of his Peo∣ple; they labour in the Word and Do∣ctrine of the Gospel, and in a good
Conversation (in Christ) that he may be Exalted in all, both Male and Fe∣male, to Rule in all, whose Right it is. These do not seek their own glory, or exalt themselves; but in humility they glorifie God with their Souls and Bo∣dies, which are his, and faithfully and unweariedly serve God and his People in patience, possessing their Souls in all their Tryals and Afflictions. Again Paul writ to Timothy, saying, An Over∣seer or Bishop in the Church of God, must not be an Novice (that is a young Scholar, one lately begotten to the Faith of Christ, or one that is Raw and unskilful in the word of Righteousness) lest being lifted up with pride, he falls into the Condemnation of the Devil; see 1 Tim. 3. 6. Again he writ to him, viz. Let the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the Word and Doctrine, Chap. 5. v. 17. Again, he writ to the believing Romans, thus: viz. For I say through the Grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, according as God hath det to every man the measure of Faith; for as we have many Members in one Body, and all Members
have not the same Office, so we being many are one Body in Christ, and every one Mem∣bers one of another; having then Gifts dif∣fering, according to the Grace that is given to us, whether Prophesie, let us Prophesie according to the proportion of Faith, or Ministry let us wait on our Ministrying, or he that Teacheth on Teaching, or he that Exhorteth on Exhortation; he that giveth let him do it with Simplicity, he that Ru∣leth with diligence, he that sheweth Mer∣cy with cheerfulness; let Love be without Dissimulation, abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good, be kindly af∣fectionated one to another, with Brotherly love in Honour, preferring one another, &c. Rom. 12. 3. to 11. My Friends, all you that Profess to be Members of the Church of Christ, and taught by his Spirit and Light within you; by what is here written (given forth by the Apostle as he was moved by the Ho∣ly Ghost) you may understand that there is a Rule and Government in the Church of God, in his Power, Wisdom and Strength, for his Glory, who is the Head of it: And you may also understand hereby, that Christ the Head, hath given Gifts differing by the same Spirit, for the Pre∣servation, Edification, and well Order∣ing
and Governing his Church, and every one is to attend on his Gift in the Church, and to improve the same, which being done, is to the Increase of the Body, for the Edification of it in Love: Moreover by what is before writ∣ten, you may understand that the A∣postle through the Grace of God given to him, did warn every Man amongst the believing Romans, not to think of him∣self more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly according as God had dealt to every man the measure of Faith. Observe, If every one which profess the Light and Spirit of Christ within to be their Guide and Teacher, did obey and walk in it, it would teach them all not to think too highly of themselves, or of their States and Conditions in the Truth (which some do) and if such of the aforesaid Professors were so Taught, then would they not think nor speak so highly of themselves or of their Sights, Know∣ledg, and Growth in the Truth as they do (far beyond what they really are) then would they not be so puffed up, self-conceited and unruly as they are; then would they live quietly, peaceably, and harmlesly among the People of God
to his Glory, and the Comfort of his People, and their own peace and rest, which some do not, but are contenti∣ous, unruly and disorderly, self conceit∣ed, fretful, and clamorous with Tongues and Pens. Oh that they could seek and find a place of unfeigned Repentance, it would much rejoyce my Soul to see it. Concerning the Living Faith, with its fruits and works. COncerning Faith, the Apostle thus writ (viz.) Now the just shall live by Faith; but if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him (saith the Lord God) but we are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that be∣lieve to the saving of the Soul.—By Faith the Elders obtained a good report.—Through Faith we understand the World was framed by the Word of God—By Faith Abel of∣fered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain.—By Faith Enoch was Tran∣slated, that he should not see death;—but without Faith it is impossible to please God,
for he that cometh to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. By Faith Noah was warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear prepared an Ark.—By Faith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac.—By Faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, chusing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season, esteeming the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt; for he had respect unto the Recompence of Reward; by Faith he kept the Passover, &c. I may say with this faithful Author, What shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Baruck, and of Sampson, of Jephtha, and of David also, and of Samuel, and of the Prophets, &c. see Heb. 10. 38, 39. Read the 11 Chap∣ter through: Habbakkuk 2. 4. Rom. 1. 17. Again, the Apostle Peter writ to the Saints concerning Faith, vz. Who are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, see 1 Pet. 1. 5. Again, the Au∣thor to the Hebrews saith, Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without wave∣ring, Heb. 10. 23. Now the Apostle James
who writ of this Faith, writ also of the works and fruits of it (which the rest also did) hear what he saith in this mat∣ter, viz. What doth it prfit, my Brethren, though a Man say he hath Faith? can Faith save him? If a Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of dayly Food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not thse things which are needful to the Body; what doth it profit? Even so Faith, if it hath not works is dead being alone, yea a man may say, Thou hast Faith, and I have works, shew me thy Faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my Fath by my works. Thou believest there is one God, &c.—But wilt thou know, oh vain man, that Faith without works is dead. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works.—seest thou how Faith wrought with his Works and by works was Faith made perfect, and the Scripture was fulfilled which saith Abra∣ham believed God, and was imputed to him for Righteousness, and he was called the friend of God; ye see then how that by works a Man is justified and not by Faith only—for as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also, James 2. 14 to the end. Again the Apostle John writ to the
Children of Light concerning this Faith viz. For whatsoever is born of God, over∣cometh the World, and this is the Victory that overcometh the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5. 4. Again Peter Exhorts those who were come to some degree of this Faith, saying, Give all diligence; add to your Faith Vertue, and to Vertue Know∣ledg, and to Knowledg Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly Kind∣ness, and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity; for if these things be in you and abound, they make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the Knowledg of our Lord Jesus Christ; but he that laketh these things, is blind, &c. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Cal∣ling and Election sure; for if you do these things, you shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 4, 11. Again, the Apostle Paul writing to the believing Thessalonians, said unto them, We are bound to thank God always for you, Brethren, as it is meet, because that your Faith groweth exceedingly, and the Charity of e∣very one of you all towards each other abound∣eth, 2 Thess. 1. 3. Again, Paul writ to the Galatians, viz. Knowing that a Man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of
Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Je∣sus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified; but if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are found sinners; is Christ therefore the Minister of sin? God forbid; for if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor; for I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God; I am Crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh; I live by the Faith of the on of God, &c. Gal. 2. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Again, he writ thus to the believing Ephesians, viz. We are Gods kman∣ship, Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God hath before ordained we should walk in them, Ephesians 2. 10. The same Apostle writing to the be∣lieving Philipians, writ thus, viz. For it is God which worketh in you th to will and to do, of his own good pleasure; do all things without murmuring and dispu∣ting, that you may be blameless and harm∣less the Sons of God; without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Na∣tion,
among whom ye shine as Lights in the World, Philip. 2. 13, 14, 15. Again, he writ to the Ephesians, thus (viz.) Unto him that is able to do ex∣ceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, unto him be Glory, in the Church throughout all Ages, world without end, Amen. Eph. 3. 20, 21. Again, the Author to the Hebrews writing to them, saith, viz. Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for; ever and ever; Amen. Heb. 13. 20, 21. O all you who profess your selves to be Christians, and to be led and guided by the Spirit and Light of Christ within; seriously consider of the faithful say∣ings of these faithful Apostles and Ser∣vants of Christ, concerning Faith in God, and Christ, and the Gospel, and Chri∣stian works, which God in Christ works in all those who comes to the Baptized by Christ with the Holy Ghost and Fire, which burns up the works of Satan, to
with, Sin, who destroys the old man with his deeds, which are corrupt, and which renews and restores man again into the likness or image of God who created him. All who come to drink into the one Spirit, and be Baptized by it into the one Body, come thereby to be made of one Heart and Soul, and to Worship and Serve God with one consent; these have not Faith without Works, which is dead; but they have the living Faith which God hath wrought in them, which by the A∣postle is called the Faith of the Opera∣tion or Work of God, and with this li∣ving Faith they have the living Works and Fruits, which Faith and Works, prove them to be the generation and living off-spring of God. Further observe, How sweetly all the be∣fore-mentioned Apostles in their sayings, are in Harmony and Unity, concerning this living Faith and its living Works or Fruits. Again observe, Where many Profes∣sors of Faith and Christianity have been grosly mistaken concerning Faith and Works. The Apostle Paul in some of his Epistles, writing much against the up∣holding of the shadowy works of the Law, after Christ had ended them by his
one offering, many Professors of Christi∣anity of latter times have been willing to exclude all works, as with respect to Salvation or Acceptance with God, under the Gospel dispensation; though the holy Apostle Exhorted the Believers in Christ, to work out their Salvation with fear and trembling, saying, It is God that worketh in you to will and to do of his own good pleasure. Now the Words which I have here brought out of Paul's Epistles, with much more of the like nature that may be found in them (which for brevity I here omit) doth and will plainly shew that he did never intend in his writing against the shadowy works of the Law, to exclude, deny, or make void the substantial, good and living Works of God in Christ, in his People, under the Gospel dispensation; so that he was of the same mind concerning Faith and Works with James, Peter and John; so here are four faithful and ho∣nourable Witnesses linked together, in Testimony to the living Faith which God works in his People, and the li∣ving Works and Fruits which accompa∣ny it, Glory to the Lord God for the same: and those Four faithful Witnesses to the living Faith, its Fruits and Works
as aforesaid, are also faithful Witnesses against the dead Faith and dead Works of the Professors of Christianity in our Age, who notwithstanding their high Notions and talk of Faith, Election, Redempti∣on, Salvation, &c. are yet dead in their Trespasses and in their Sins. The Apo∣stle John writ to the Saints, saying, This is the Victory over the World, even your Faith. And Christ saith, If you have Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, if you shall say unto this Mountain be thou re∣moved, and to this Hill be thou cast into the Sea, they shall obey you.—But they that are yet (dead) in their Trespasses and Sins, pleading they must continue therein all their days upon Earth. Their dead Faith hath not given them Victory over the World, neither can it; for as they are taught by the Serpent to believe, that they must live in sin all their days, according to this ungodly belief, they submit themselves to him, and he leads them into sin, and they multiply their sin daily, as they say; and such are not in the strait and narrow way they talk of, but in the broad way, that leads to destruction. Oh! that they would turn in their minds to the Light of Christ Jesus, and believe in it, and di∣ligently
seek a place of Repentance; that they might find it, and so return to God from Satan and their Sins, which while they abide in subjection to, holds them in a Separation from God, from peace and rest with him, and from Unity with his chosen; whatsoever they do or may imagine or say to the contrary, they will find this true at last. Again, these in their dead Faith and works of Sin have not known Gods won∣drous and miraculous works yet wrought in them, to throw down the Hills and Mountains of Sin and Wicked∣ness, which the Devil, who abode not in the Truth, in whom there is no Truth, hath raised up in them, to wit, Pride, self-Exaltation, vain, freshly, earthly Glory, &c. for as the Apostle saith, All that's in the World, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of this World, and this World passeth away, and the Lusts thereof; but he that doth the Will of God abideth for ever; except a man be regenerate and born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, and the blind who doth never see it, is never like to inherit it. Now all you who do not only profess
Christ as the before-mentioned Professors do, but also profess his Spirit and Light within to be your Teacher (which they do not) who profess according to John Baptists Testimony, and the Testimony of Daniel the Prophet, that Christ the Lamb of God, is the sent One of the Fa∣ther, and is come to take away the sins of the World, to put an end to sin, to finish transgression, to bring in everlasting Righteousness; all be retired in the spirit of your Minds, to the Divine Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith you are lighted, and therein wait to receive and keep a right sense of your Conditions; see how you have taken up your Cross, and how you bear it, and what the fruits and ef∣fects of your bearing of it are; see that the hills and mountains of sin be over∣turned in you, and the rough places made smooth in you, and the Valley exalted in you; for who have not known these wonderful works of God, wrought in them, they are yet short of the posses∣sion or sitting down in the Inheritance of the Kingdom of God and of his Christ, which consists or stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; for through the Righteous and Fiery Judg∣ments of God inwardly must sinful Man
come, before he can draw neer to God, see his Kingdom, or have a place in it; this fiery Baptism they must come through wherewith Christ Jesus the power and wisdom of God Baptizeth all who believe in him, and in his Di∣vine Light patiently and constantly wait to be made new Creatures by him. It is true what the Apostle hath writ, If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are done away, and all things are become new, and all things are of God; for as he also saith, They that are Christs, have Cru∣cified the flesh with the Affections and Lusts. Again observe, That if any person pro∣fessing to be led and guided by the Di∣vine Light of Christ within, and that he or she believes the before-mentioned Te∣stimonies concerning Christ, viz. That he is come to put an end to sin, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, to enable his People to perfect Holiness in his Fear, according to what God hath promised, and his Servants have writ and spoken, if such person or persons so pro∣fessing, continue in a loose and sinful Conversation, whether they be called Quakers, or by what other name so∣ever,
their Sin is not less but much more grievous to Almighty God, than the sins of the before-mentioned, who have not yet come to be opened so far as to understand what the Light of Christ with∣in is: Therefore do not make profession to be taught and guided by it: but those loose and sinful Professors of the Light of Christ within, if they did ever really come to the Light they make profession of, and in any measure obey it, then were their hearts opened thereby to un∣derstand and know sin, and the displea∣sure of God against it more than the be∣fore-mentioned; and so the Judgment of God will fall more heavy on them (if they repent not, and come not to walk orderly, as becomes the Gospel) than upon others who have not known so much as they have known, and therefore are not guilty of the sin of Re∣bellion, so much as they are; for Rebel∣lion is as the sin of Witcheraft, as 'tis writ∣ten: And he that knows his Masters will, and doth it not, he shall be beaten with many stripes, as 'tis also written. Again observe, such loose Professors of the Light of Christ within, may boast and talk of their Faith in God, and Christ, and the Divine Light within, of li∣ving
without Sin, of Perfection, or of perfecting Holiness in Gods Fear, yet being out of the Light and Life of Christ in Death and Darkness, and the Works and Fruits thereof, It is but Death and Darkness in them, which talks of Light, and Life, and Faith, Holiness, Perfecti∣on, &c. Their talk of these good things with their Mouths, is an Abomination to God Almighty, while their hearts are far away from him, while they are not in the Love and Obedience to God and Christ, and his Divine Light they make profession of; such profession without Subjection and Obedience, God doth reject, it is loathsome to him, neither can his tender people whom he hath san∣ctified by his Spirit of Judgment and Burning, have unity with these dead talkers, nor their dead words and works for Light hath no communion with Darkness, though Darkness talk of Light. Something concerning Self Separation. JƲDE the Servant of Christ writ con∣cerning the Self-Separated ones, thus, viz. they are the RAging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, to whom
is reserved the mist of Darkness for ever, and Enoch also the seventh from Adam, pro∣phesied of those, saying, Behold the Lord cmeth in Ten thousands of his Saints (mark so it is rendred from the Greek, and is so in some English Translations) to execute Judg∣ment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches, which un∣godlily they have spoken against him, &c. these be they who separate themselves, sensu∣al, having not the Spirit.—But ye, Beloved, building up your selves in your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life, and of some have compassion, making a difference, and others save with fear, hating even the Gar∣ment spotted by the Flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen. Jude 13 and 19 to the end, see also 1 Tim. 4. 1. 2 Tim. 3. 1. 2 Pet 3. 3. Oh my dear Friends, seriously consi∣der that as in the Primitive Gospel days, there were such Self-separated ones,
makers of Sects or Parties, which caused great grief and deep Exercise to the Faithful in Christ Jesus; some such like have been in our Age, and some such like yet are, who having been con∣vinced of the Truth, have come amongst us under the Christian Profession of the Spirit and Light of Christ within, who for some time did in some measure follow and obey the Teachings of it, but have since turned from it, yet keep in a Pro∣fession of it; these are they who sepa∣rate themselves without it, in oppositi∣on to it, and the Children of it, blessed be God that their number is but small; but a∣las! they are too many, for we have received the mind of God, and Christ (and his A∣postles) whose will was, and is, that all Men might know the Truth, and not only know it, but obey it, that so they might be saved; but alas! a few rest∣less spirited Instruments of Satan, who under the pretence of the Spirit and Light of Christ, make War against the God of Peace, against Christ the Prince of Peace, and against the Subjects of his Peaceable Kingdom; these are in danger to deceive others, and bring them to be restless like themselves; the Lord in Mercy stop these evil Works and Workers.
Oh that there might be a place of Repen∣tance yet found by them! Oh that they could yet see from whence they are fal∣len, and Repent, and come into that simplicity and loving and peaceable frame of mind, into which the Truth had once in some measure drawn them Oh! this would be matter of great joy to those whom they in their darkness ac∣count their Enemies; as some loting dark Notionists did the faithful Apostle Paul, for his faithful and stedfast Testi∣mony against their Looseness, Confusi∣on and Disorder. It is my stedfast be∣lief in God, that he will not long suffer this Evil Work to go on to the grief of his People, and the indangering the loss of Souls, but he will plead with these Evil Workers, these Serpentine wise and self-conceited, he will stop and drive them backward, and woe will be to them if they cannot find a place of Repentance, which will be hard for some of them to find; they have so highly magnified them∣selves against God, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; but as Jude the Servant of Christ, well observed in his Epistle, that there was a difference to be put betwixt them who were so gone out into disorder, loosness, or confusion in
his time; some no doubt of those, were unwarily, through the subtilty of Sa∣tans Agents, drawn from the simplici∣ty, honest mindedness, and good inten∣tion, which the Spirit of Truth had wrought in them, into ungodly Jea∣lousies and a wrong liberty from their obedience to the Cross of Christ. Jude saw there was a Compassion to such, and therefore wisely in the Wisdom of God put the Churches in mind of it, and we are sensible such there hath been in our day, who hath been betrayed and pre∣vailed upon by Satan and his Agents, as aforesaid; these have been sought in the Love of God and Bowels of Jesus Christ, their Advocate with the Father, travel∣ling for them in his Faithful ones, who hath kept their Habitation in God, and we have seen the travels and desires of our Souls answered, in their returning into Unity with God and his People, through their unfeigned Repentance and Condemnation upon the Spirit of Dark∣ness (which led them from God) and upon the evil Words and Works it led them into, and we believe that there are divers that yet remain in the same Snare, for whose return to God we travelin Spir it, and Hope that we shall see the Fruit of
the Travel of our Souls in the Love and Power of God, for their good, and shall have cause to rejoyce and praise God for the same. Wherefore, oh my dear and well beloved Friends, who are exercised by these sorts of Evil Agents, and their Evil Works, un∣der a spacious profession of the Light, Grace, and Spirit of Christ, and the Teach∣ings of it, All keep in the love of God, and in the patience of Jesus Christ: let Pati∣ence have its perfect work in those your deep Tribulations and sorrowful Exercises: fret not because of evil Men, nor their evil Works, for behold the Judg of Heaven and Earth, he sees them and you; he will not suffer you to be tryed by them above what he will give you Ability to travel through without hurt, and fear, with∣out loss or disadvantage to your Eternal Estates, if you diligently wait upon him, and move, speak, and act in his Council. It is true which was anciently written by an Experienced Man of God, Tribulation worketh Patience, and Patience Experi∣ence, and Experience Hope, and the living Hope is as an Anchor which is sure and stedfast; so keep this living Hope, that none of you may faint in'this or any other Exercise which you undergo for Christs
and the Gospels sake, but all wait diligen∣tly upon the living God, who daily renew the strength of his People, so that they can truly say, Sufficient is the day to the Evil thereof; and can truly say, The Lord is our Rock and our Salvation, and we cannot fear what man can do unto us, he is an Ever∣lasting Sun unto us, who gives us his Light to walk in, in which there is no occasion of stumbling; which Light shines in the Diligent, Watchful, and Obedi∣ent ones more and more, unto the per∣fect day, our God is a Shield unto his Peo∣ple, to defend them against the Arrows of the Destroer; he Arms his Lambs and Children with his ight and Power, where∣by the Fiery Darts of Satan are quenched. Eternal Glory to his honourable and pow∣erful Name, for evermore, Amen, Amen. Oh my dear Friends, keep close to the powerful Spirit of Truth in all your Ex∣ercises, and particularly when you are Exercised with this sort of Evil Agents; keep close to the power of God, that in that you may feel that you have the command of your own Spirits, that no wrong or unnatural heats, sharpness or false fire may be kindled by you or any of you, but that your Minds and Spi∣rits may be kept steady and cool in the Lambs patience; for that will lead to
run the race to the end, and will give the Victory: take heed and keep out of too many words, with restless discon∣tented persons, under the Profession of the Truth, whose evil life and strength stands in multiplying words, wilfully striving for Victory or Mastery in a fretful, lofty, and impatient frame of mind; and also beware of such who are smooth and subtle in their contending a∣gainst Truth and its Children, lest any of you be drawn out thereby to the dis∣advantage of Truth, hurting of your own Souls, and strengthening the Un∣righteous in their way; but all be steady in your Testimony, against deceit in all things: and all Friends Male and Female, keep your Meetings in the Light and Pow∣er of God, and in them serve God and each other faithfully; be tender and wise in your carriage one towards another, at all times, particularly in your Meetings; hear one another tenderly, in a right frame of mind and in good order; and if weakness appear in those who intend well in their speaking about Truths concerns in your Meetings, or that weakly manage any thing of Truths concerns, either in your Meetings or at other times, let them be tenderly spoken to in the Order of Truth, at seasonable times, that such may
be helped, and Peace and Unity pre∣served, and all that avoided that tends to bring forth contrary Effects; and cherish and encourage one another in your seve∣ral Service, that ye may be mutually re∣freshed together therein, and that your precious unity and fellowship may be pre∣served without breach, and grow and flourish more and more, that the fruits of Righteousness may be more and more plentifully sown and reaped amongst you, to the Glory and Praise of the great God, whose building and husbandry you are; and living Branches in Christ the Heaven∣ly Vine, bringing forh more and more Fruit in him, to the Glory of God the Fa∣ther, who is worthy of Glory over all Heaven and Earth for evermore. Amen. And my dear Friends, be very careful that none of you go into too many words in Dispute or Argument for, or in the De∣fence, or Commendation of those good things which God hath led you into (in which you are opposed by some who pro∣fess the Light of Christ within to be their Guide and Teacher, and by them reproach∣ed and derided for your obedience to God therein:) but let those good things speak forth their own worth and praise, in their good Fruits and Effects in and by you, to the Glory of God, and to your
Profit, Comfort and Justification; and to the cutting off occasion from those who watch for, and seek occasion against you. And to the Convincement of such Gain∣sayers, who have not sinned out the day of Gods tender Visitation to them; and for the staying, preserving, and effectually convincing such who are not clear in their understandings concerning those things, but are in some degree hurt and darkned by the Evil Example, Words, and Actions, of some Evil Agents, whom Satan hath made Instruments of Evil to them; yet do they not wilfully, scornfully, or ma∣liciously oppose, or strive against Friends in those good things God hath led them into; but being short in their understand∣ings and wrong, jealousies and doubts having entred them, they do not freely joyn with Friends in some things which God hath led them into, wherein he is honoured and his People profitted. Oh my dear Friends, he who wins Souls to God, is wise in the Wisdom of God, which is Pure and Peaceable. God Almighty inrich his People every where more & more with his pre∣cious Heavenly Wisdom, that in it they may serve him and each other in unfeigned Love, that therein their Peace and Unity may remain and increase daily more and more to his Eternal ho∣nour and our everlasting profit and comfort; even so Amen, saith my Soul.
