H2378 99827195 31611
A LETTER written by Mr. Henry Holden Doctor of the faculty at Paris, touching the prohibition at Rome of Mr. Blacklow's Book, inti∣tuled, Tabulae suffragiales. To the Reader, HAving had the advantage and honour of a long ac∣quaintance with Mr. Black∣low, whom I take to be one of the learnedst men of our Nation, I received some scandal at the hea∣ring his Book was condemned at Rome, in which I was the more concerned through the censures given thereon by several of my acquaintance, more knowing then my self in such matters; yet out of my love and esteem of his per∣son very unwilling to believe
there was just cause for this cen∣sure, I thought fit to enquire of Doctor Holden, from whom I re∣ceived this following Answer; which as it hath rectified my ig∣norance, so may it perhaps doe the like of others, who as I are ac∣quainted with Mr. Blacklow; and may be worth the reading of all men who care to inform them∣selves of such prohibitions, and actions of that nature, proceeding from the Inquisition at Rome, wherefore I have caused it to be printed. Sir, I received your long Letter of the 10th. of October 657. and whereas amongst other things you ask me what do I now say to Mr. Blacklow's doctrine since the Pope's last Decree against it? why, Sir I say, I am still of the same o∣pinion I was, specified in my last
unto you of the first of Aug. And that you are mistaken in the na∣ture of these Decrees from Rome, I have seen the Prohibition, and it is of several smal treatises named in it, dated the 6. of September last, by the way of an addition to the Index of forbidden books. And the very last of those flying sheets there mentioned is the name of one of M. Blacklow's works, enti∣tuled, Tabulae suffragiales. Now Sir, That you may not be too easily carried away with the vulgar ignorant, and take a Prohi∣bition for a condemnation of here∣sie; And a Decree of the Congrega∣tion of Cardinals and others, cal∣led, the Inquisition, for a Bull of the Pope himself, I will tell you as a friend, and as (I suppose) not versed in these businesses, what understanding and truly Learned men do think of these Prohibiti∣ons. With this Caveat neverthe∣less,
that however easie a thing it is to get any private man's writ∣ings put into the Index of forbid∣den books amongst others: Yet ought not any Catholike to con∣temn or slight these Decrees, since they bear the name of a supreme Superiour. I will therefore inform you in a word what these Prohibitions are, and upon what grounds they are generally given. First, they are only acts of a particular Court or Congregation in Rome, Though put out in the Pope's name, as all other acts of the several Courts of that City u∣sually are. And therefore do not oblige, nor are commonly held to be of any force out of the Pope's territories; unlesse some other State or Bishop receive and pub∣lish them. Nor are these kind of Decrees ever admitted in France, but often rejected by the Parlia∣ment of this Town, the most fa∣mous
and learned Seat of Judi∣cary in the Christian world. Secondly, we see these Decrees proceed from two causes, or ra∣ther in two cases. First, when the forbidden book contains any thing contrary to the common, though only tolerated, custome of the Church; or to the ordina∣ry practise and pretentions of the Court of Rome. 2. When such books are of that nature, as that the more ignorant or weaker sort of men; or the more irreligious and looser liv'd, may there find, or thence easily gather whereat to be much scandalized. Which to prevent belongs to the zealous solicitude of a general Pastour and common Father. Not that such forbidden books do always contain something contrary to our Catholike faith (which then are particularly specified as such, and branded with the censure of
heresie) but that they are judged by the Inquisition to be obnoxi∣ous and apt to beget evil conceits and opinions in the peoples fan∣sies; or at least prejudicial to some greater good then their di∣vulging could produce. Hence we see many books for∣bidden (as in this very Decree) nothing relating to the revealed points of our Christian belief; Yea some undoubtedly contain∣ing the true grounds of all Chri∣stianity, as the Bible it self in vul∣gar tongues. So that the Inqui∣sition doth principally attend in these Prohibitions, what may be the effect of such books through the ignorance or malice of their readers, without examining what the particular doctrin of the book may be in it self. And here I must confess, that M. Blacklow's unusual expressions & his exotick opinions are not fit in my judgment to be
expos'd to the view of every ordi∣nary man, or envious malevolent. For his doctrine, being both pro∣found and obscure, is beyond the reach of every common reader. Who, if he chance to be proud and self-conceited (as it often happens) and have a tooth a∣gainst the Author, he forgeth as many heresies in his own brain, as there be passages he under∣stands not. Experienced and learned men know how many fa∣mous books written by the R. R. f. f. of the society of Jesus, of se∣veral Nations, have been forbid∣den in this kind. And some of our French Jesuits volums highly condemned by the Inquisition of heresie; others for maintaining the Gallican priviledges prejudi∣cial to the Pope and Court of Rome's pretentions: which not∣withstanding the Authors them∣selves have caus'd to be reprinted
in this Town the year immedi∣ately following their Prohibition. And of the Spanish Jesuits books some have been cleared and ap∣proved by the Inquisition of Spain, after they had been censured and condemned by the Inquisition of Rome. This I say not, as either disrespecting the Inquisition's De∣crees, or disapproving these R. R. f. fa. proceedings. Who am I? that I should doe either? every man defends his own right. I only aym to let you understand the nature of these Roman Prohi∣bitions. And not only they, but even the Pope's own personal Bulls are not held to be of any obligation in France, until they be allow'd of by the King, verified in Parliament, received by our Bishops, and published by our Pa∣rish Churches. It is true, we see that now and then some factious spirits make use of these Decrees
of the Inquisition to cry down with clamours their Adversary's reputation amongst the credu∣lous vnlgar, and procure them to this effect. Which were it done out of pure zeal, though indis∣creet and without knowledge, yet were it pardonable. And therefore you must not always condemn such as may perhaps out of an innocent respect to this Prohibition, blame Mr. Blacklow's doctrine. If you come to the sight of this Decree, you will clearly see the Inquisition's intention is to take away an occasion of scandal to the weak and ignorant. Think∣ing it better to suppresse those bold and contentious, though ne∣ver so learned, pieces, then to expose many thousands of infirm and unlearned men to the danger of being disedified. First, you will see forbidden
the 18 Provincials Letters (whereof I doubt not but you have heard) in which there is not a word of any Doctrine proposed by the Author himself, being meer cita∣tions of many licentious and scandalous opinions, taught and published (as he says) by the R. R. f. f. of the society of Jesus. And you may wel think, the Inquisition might justly fear it would be a scandal to the Church, if belie∣ved, that such a considerable member of it as that company is, should maintain and practise such wicked Tenets. And therefore thought fit to forbid those Let∣ters. In the next place there is for∣bidden a slight leaf of a sheet of paper, called, Lettre d'un Advocat touchant la Bulle d' Allexandre 7. Which is only concerning a poli∣tical point of the Priviledges and liberties of France, against the In∣troducing
of the Inquisition or o∣ther subjection into the King∣dome: Which seemed offensive to the Court of Rome, and there∣fore forbidden. In the third place there are for∣bidden divers small scholastical Treatises of the famous Monsieur Arnauld's. Whereof one is his Epistle to me. In all which works his chief drift is to shew that his opinion, concerning efficacious Grace, is nothing different from the doctrine of the antient Fa∣thers, particularly of St. Austin, and St. Thomas of Aquin. Re∣nouncing what ever he may seem to affirm dissonant from them. And sure it would be a scandal to have it thought that the doctrine of those Fathers, honoured and approved by the Church for so many hundred years together, should now come to be censured and condemned. And therefore
the Inquisition judged it fit to suppresse those treatises as endea∣vouring to prove it. In the last place is thrust into this Catalogue of these forbidden books, Mr. Blacklow's treatise, cal∣led, Tabulae suffragiales, with it's Appendix, testerae Romanae evulga∣tio. Wherein the Author's prin∣cipal design is to prove that great truth, and essential rule of all Christianity, to wit, that our Ca∣tholike faith is to be resolved in∣to universal tradition. As also to demonstrate the antient opini∣on of our faculty at Paris, That the Pope is not unerrable and in∣fallible in his own singular per∣son. But indeed he goes some∣what farther, and condemns the contrary opinion as improbable, Heretical and Archiheretical. And therefore you need not wonder if the Inquisition have forbidden his book, without specifying his do∣ctrine,
being so opposite to their pretentions, though the opinion it self (not censuring the contra∣ry) be a common Tenet of many both of our antient and modern Doctors of Paris. In fine, the Decree forbids the kee∣ping or reading of any of these or other books written in defense of Jansenius. Yea and of printing any thing (without the inquisiti∣on's leave) about the matter of Grace. Which I understand not how they could ever imagine should be observed, at least be∣yond the limits of the Ecclesiasti∣cal state. Can they think that all the learned Divines of Europe, as well Readers and Professours, as others, shall daily study, write, discusse, and teach publickly and privately the hard and ever-dis∣puted Questions of Grace and free will, and none shall print any of that subject? Believe it that
will, I am sure it will be other∣wise. There is one word, which per∣haps unexperienced men may stumble at, And which the Ad∣versaries to these forbidden Au∣thors will alledge in an evil sense, That is, damnat; Which is an usual word in the style and form of these Decrees, And here signifies not, nor doth the Inquisition in∣tend it should, to condemn of he∣resie the books they forbid. It were ridiculous to think it, being the greater half of these prohibi∣ted books (though the word damnat be common to them all) have nothing in them concerning any point of our Christian faith; but are only matters of morality and discipline, and therefore it is to be taken, for to disallow, dis∣prove, and blame. Now Sir, as we abroad, versed in the great continent, and living
in the open profession of our Ca∣tholike Religion, take no notice of these Decrees, I say, in relation to the approving or disapproving of any point of our Christian and Catholike faith; so I conceive the Catholikes of your Island, though now hidden and obscu∣red, living under the yoke of persecution, will in time come to know more exactly the several degrees of respect which may be due to the See and Congregations of Rome. And then at least, they will forbear, as we doe, to censure, upon slight grounds, any particular learned man's singular opinion; wherein if these lines may in the interim prevaile with you, I shall ob∣taine my desire. Let others doe as God shall inspire them; To whose heavenly Protecti∣on I heartily commend both
them and you, Resting as ever, Your most humble and truly affectio∣nate servant, H. HOLDEN. Paris Novemb. 19. 1657. FINIS.
