H3446 R6804 13506387 99814
The humble PETITION And RESOLVTION Of the COUNTIE Of KENT, Presented and Read to the Right Honourable the Lords assembled in Parliament, August 30, 1642. With the Answer of the Lords thereunto Annexed. August 30, 1642. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, that this Peti∣tion together with the Answer thereunto, shall bee forthwith Printed and published. John Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. September 1, Printed for John Wright. 1642.
To the Right Honourable the Lords Assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition and Re∣solution of the Gentlement, Freehol∣ders, and other Inhabitants of the County of Kent. WE your humble and faithfull Petitio∣ners, inhabiting the County of Kent, be∣ing deepely sensible of the many mise∣ries which these ca∣lamitous times (not∣withstanding your great care and vigi∣lence to prevent the same) are likely to produce, wherein his gracious Maiesty seduced by the malevolent counsell of an ill affected party of
malignants and Cavaliers; The Protestant Religion, his Royall person, and Honour, the priviledge of Parliament, and the Subiect, Li∣berty, are threatned with too too apparent hazard and ruine, Towards the support of which your Petitioners, according to the duty of Loyall Subiects, and good Christians, are not onely willing to contribute their best wishes and votes, but even the vtmost of their endeavours, both with their lives and fortunes for the redee∣ming of his Maiesty from such hands, and our Religion and Liberty from such perill and danger: But may it please this Honourable House to consider that the Petitioners apprehend themselves in a condition and posture no∣thing sutable to this their Resolution being de∣prived, and left naked by the taking our Armes from us in the late Expedition for Scotland: we therefore beseech your provident care to impower us with such a proportion of Ammuni∣tion and Armes to be magazined in these parts, whereby we may be inabled to manifest our Af∣fections and obedience to the command of King and Parliament, both for the persuance of the
aforesaid Intentions, and opposition of all Ille∣gall Infringements of our Lawes and Liberties, such as the Comission of Array, wherewith we are at this time threatned, and what other of the like Nature and condition soever shall be here∣after obtruded upon us. And your Petitioners shall be bound, &c.
The Answer of the Lords, to the aforesaid Petition. MY Lords have ta∣ken your Petiti∣on into conside∣ration, and can∣not but with great content ob∣serve the constancy of your good affections to the King and Parli∣ament, which as well formerly as at this present you have expres∣sed by your Petitions to this House, and disclaiming and op∣posing with so much industrie and fidelity, the sedicious de∣signes
and endeavours of some Malignant and ill-affected per∣sons within your County, to sup∣presse whose malicious practizes and to preserve that County in peace; care hath already bin taken by the Parliament with good successe, and as they inten∣ded it, and doe beleeve to your content, safety and satisfaction. And their Lordships doe fur∣ther assure you that they will al∣wayes continue the like care, as for the good, safety, and peace of the whole Kingdome, so in par∣ticular of that County, being encouraged thereunto by this seasonable Petition, of your Re∣solutions and good affections, for the manifestation whereof, of
the whole Kingdome, and of their Lordships kind acceptation and thankes for the same. Their Lordships have commanded your petition and their Answer, to be forthwith printed and published. August 30, 1642. ORdered by the Lords assembled in Par∣liament, that this Petition and An∣swer shall be forthwith Printed and Publi∣shed. John Browne Cleric. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
