H3528 R16104 12159538 55258
The Humble PETITION Of the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of Sussex: Presented to both Houses on Wednesday, June. 7. 1648. Together, with the Answer of both Houses to the same, June, 9. 1648. To which are added SOME OBSERVATIONS, Vpon the Answer of both Houses to the sayd Petition; being of generall use for all Petitions of this kinde. Printed in the Yeare, 1648.
To the Right Honourable the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament at Westminster. The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and commonalty of the County of Sussex: Presented to both Houses upon Wednesday, June 7. 1648. Sheweth: THAT the miserable effects of this civill Warre under which our Country, and three Kingdoms have long and heavily groaned, are the onely motives of these our humble and servent desires hereby propounded to your Honours. 1. That our most gracious Soveraigne Lord King Charles may be speedily and honourably received to a safe Treaty with the two Houses of Parliament, for the firme setling of a well-grounded Peace, both in Church and Common∣wealth, as also of his owne just Rights, and of the Rights of Parliament. 2. That the Arrears of the Army under the command of the Lord Fairfax may be payd, and the Army with all ex∣pedition disbanded.
3. That according to the fundamentall constitutions of this Kingdome, we may be governed by the known Laws of this Kingdome, and not otherwise. 4. That from henceforth our estates and goods may be freed from all Taxes and Impositions. 5. That no garisons within the said County be any lon∣ger continued, and that the Ordinance and Ammunition taken fom the Sea Townes may be returned, for the better efence of them and the whole County from forraigne In∣vasions. We therefore (as the well-affected Counties have already) do humbly pray you to yeeld a pre∣sent cndescention to our humble desires, that so our differences and divisions may be happily compo∣sed, all mis-understandings betweene Prince and People timely removed, his Majesty (according to our solemne Engagement) rendred glorious, both King and Kingdom; returned to their pristine dig∣nity and splendor at home and abroad; and your selves thereby merit the gratefull and universall ac∣clamations of good and faithful Patriots. And your Petitioners shall pray, &c.
The Answer of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parlia¦ment, to the Petition of the Knights Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of Sussex. Die Veneris 9. Iunii, 1648. THe Lords have commanded me to returne thankes to the County of Sussx for the good affections which they have expressed to the Parliament and Kingdome and they take notice, and are well satisfied with the com∣plyance of that County to the directions of Parliament, in the way of the delivery of this their Petition They have already made some proceedings, which they hope may bring his Majesty to a safe Treaty with the two Houses of Parliament, for the stling of a secure and well grounded peace, the which they will prosecute with all care and diligence. And they desire you to be assured, that they will use their utmost endeavours, that our sad differences and divisions may be speedily and happily composed; that so the Lawes and Fundmentall Consti∣tutions of this Kingdome may have their free course and full vigour: Neither will they be wanting to contribute their utmost helpe for the freeing that County and the whole Kingdome from all those Taxes and Impositions, that the necessity of the late Wars have occasioned, as soone as the safety of the Kingdome shall permit. John Brown Cler. Parl.
Die Veneris 9. Junii, 1648. THE House being informed that divers Gentlemen of the County of Sussex were at the doore, they were called in, and Sir William Celopepper Barromet, presented a Petition in the name of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy and Commonalty of the said County; and after they were withdrawne, the Petition entituled The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy and Commonalty of the County of Sussex, was read. The Petitioners were againe called in, and Mr. Speaker by the com∣mand of the House, gave them this Answer. Gentlemen, This House takes notice, and approves of the Petitioners conformity to their Declaration, in the peaceable manner of their addresses, and have under consideration such meanes as are most conduceable to the speedy settlement of the peace of the Kingdome, and easing the Burdens of the people, and had (by Gods assistance) made a further progresse therein, had not some late Tumults and Commotions unhappi∣ly interrupted their proceedings. Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Short Observations upon the Answers of the two Houses to the Sussex Petition. IN generall the answers are dilatory and delusory, as ap∣peares by the particulars, for. 1. They say, they have already made some proceedings which they hope may bring his Majestie to a safe treaty with the two Houses. That is, they have resolved on three Propositions to be sent to, and to be assented unto by his Majesty, before they treat personally with Him. 1. That the Militia be settled upon the two Houses of Parliament to raise money and men upon us at plea∣sure, both which are destructive to the liberty and pro∣priety of the Subject. 2. For setling Religion as the two Houses shall think fit; whereby as Sects and Schismes are already grown nu∣merous; so heereafter they are like to be established a∣mong us by a Law. 3. That their proceedings in the late war be justified. That is, that their usurpations upon the Crowne, the Lawes, and the Subjects be made by such an Act a prece∣dent to all Posterity. 2. They say, that they will use their utmost endeavours that our sad differences and divisions may be speedily composed, that so the Laws and fundamentall constitutions of the Kingdome may have their free course and full vigour; whereby it is evident that they take upon them an authority over our Lawes and fundamentall constitutions; and hence are risen those sad differences and divisions amongst us, by reason of their law∣lesse, and arbitrary proceedings. 3. They say, they will contribute their help for the freeing of the Kingdome from all those taxes, and impositions that the ne∣cessities
of the late warres have occasioned, assoon at the safety of the Kingdome shall permit: and why was the late war un∣dertaken, and yet prosecuted, but meerely for overthrow∣ing Law, King, and Kingdome, and for these reasons have they imposed, and doe to this day impose and continue these heavy Taxes upon us? and all this they doe in truth, not for saving the Kingdome, but for preserving and in∣riching themselves. 4. They say, They had made a further progresse in setling the Kingdome, had not some late Tumults and Commotions unhap∣pily interrupted their proceedings. That is they had settled it in their owne way, viz. according to their owne Votes, and the votes of the Army, a Kingdome without a King, had not they been interrupted by the severall Petitions from Es∣sex, Surry, Kent, and Sussex, who now are stiled Tumultuous, and their Addesses called Commotions; whereas heereto∣fore Tumults indeed, have been raised and countenanced by them, and the Authors of them stiled their friends, because they spake their sence The summe of the Houses answers to all Counties Pe∣titions. The summe of all is this, our Taxes and Impositions must continue, so long as the war continues; and their illegall proceedings, so long as our Divisions and Differences con∣tinue; and our Divisions till there be a Personall Treaty: which Treaty the two Houses never intend; if they did, they would not obstruct it with Propositions as they doe derogatory to the Crowne, prejudiciall to the Kings cause, destructive to Religion, to the liberty and propriety of the Subject. By this summe of all it appeares, what all Counties who petition in this kinde are to trust to. Counties to ptition no more. Wherefore the people of this Kingdome are so to be∣have themselves, that they be neither delayed nor deluded, any longer; but are forthwith vigorously to proceed to rescue their captivated King, whose life is every minute in danger by bloudy villaines and assassinates, and thereby restore and establish their owne lost Lawes, Liberties, Reli∣gion, and Properties.
FINIS.
