I70a R36011 15586443 103982
AN IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE Late Discovery of the Persons TAKEN WITH FIRE-BALLS, IN SOUTHWARK. AND THE Circumstances attending what materially happened during their being in Custody, and Confession before the Justice of Peace, with many other Matters relating to that dreadful Occasion. STrange have been the Projects and Contrivances of malicious and ill-meaning People, to study such ways and things as may contribute to the Ruine of such as little suspect the Treachery that they may build or ground their Advantage upon their Loss; And certain it is, if we may believe the many credible Reports, there are a sort of Villainous, Persons, who, according to the Scripture Phrase, Sell themselves to do mischief. But in this Case, few, are so inexcusable, as those who undertake or resolve upon so desperate a Wickedness as the Firing of Houses; which we have the Charity to imagine rather proceeds from a desire of private Gain, by way of Plunder, or Robbery, during the Consternation, Harry and Confusion the dismal Com∣bustion and Conflagration occasion then from any Publick Design. However, so great a Wick∣edness is not thereby extenuated, for the raging Element of Fire getting Scope, makes no distinguishment between Poor and Rich; nor is it in the power of the Incendiaries to limit or confine its Progress, as many sad Experiences have manifested to the World. But, not to be tedious in Commenting upon so dreadful a Business, seeing frequent Experiences have but too evidently made it known by sad Effects to the City of London, and the ad∣jacent Part, I proceed to that which occasioned this Preamble, which, to be brief, is the following Relation. On the 27th of this Instant November, 1688. a German Boy of be∣tween 14 and 15 years of age, being discovered to have some Balls about him of a very dark blewish colour, or between blew and black, of the bigness of large Wash-Balls, which he had exposed at unawares to
some persons, who, as it fell out, were well acquainted with their forcible Effects; thereupon it was thought fit to secure him, whereby to oblige him to give a further Account of himself, and how he came by those mis∣chievous Implements. But giving no satisfactory Answers, and making many frivolous Pretences, it was thought fit, for his stricter Ex∣amination, he might be carried before a Publick Magistrate; which be∣ing concluded on on all hands to be in the Custody of a Constable, was carried to a Justice of Peace near the place where he was Apprehended; but he being out of the way, or detained by other business, the Officer who had him in Custody brought him to Mr Justice Evans living in the Bridgehouse Yard in the Parish of St. Olaves Southwark: But the Justice being absent from home, and at an adjacent Tavern, viz. the Bull∣head in Southwark, the Officer carried the Prisoner thither, who up∣on Examination, confessed he had those Balls, which, upon Tryal, appeared to be capable of Firing any Combustible Matter from a French Man, who pretended himself to be an Engineer: Upon which an Order was issued to seize the principal Person, who accordingly, with some unwillingness, was brought before the said Justice, endea∣vouring by the way to injure those that had him in Custody: And being before Mr. Justice Evans, he confessed he had given those Fire-Balls to the Boy, as being useless and cumbersom to him, but that they were only the Remains of some late publick Fireworks, &c. Upon which, and further Consideration, the Justice thought fit to discharge the Pri∣soners; and to pacifie those that were gathered about the Door, to ex∣pect the issue of this important Affair, several pieces of the Balls so taken were distributed, which being tryed as well by the Writer of this Narration, as by divers persons more qualified in the understanding of these Affairs, appear to be effectually for the purpose of Firing any Com∣bustible Matter, &c. by their as well flaming on every side as upward, and burning downward with far more violence than white Powder. We since hear, and take it upon credible Report, That on the 28th Instant, another Person was surprized with the like mischievous Compo∣sition, and that he is in safe Custody; but to what this surprizing Matters tend, we are yet to learn. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for J. C. 1688.
