I943 R213871 99826130 30522
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the other BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL. ORMONDE. WHereas there hath been a Notorious and unnatural Rebellion lately raised in Scot∣land, by several Traiterous and disloyal persons, who did in great numbers take up Arms against His Majesty, and gave Battel to His Majesties Forces there, which by the Success that it hath pleased God to give to His Majesties Army there, is now suppressed, and many of the said Re∣bels killed and taken, and the rest dispersed; And wheras many of the persons who were guilty of the said Rebellion, may, to avoid the just punishment which they deserve, endeavour to fly into this King∣dom of Ireland, and conceal themselves here. We have thought fit hereby to require all Mayors, Sheriffs, Iustices of Peace, and other His Majesties Officers and Ministers both Civil and Military, that they make diligent search after all such persons, as lately have come, or here∣after shall come out of Scotland into this Kingdom, and to seiz and secure all such of them as shall not give a sufficient Account of their Loyalty, or whom they shall find just cause to suspect to have been concerned in
the said Rebellion, and all His Majesties other Loving Subjects in the several Sea-Port Towns, and other places of this Kingdom, are hereby also required to make strict and diligent search after such persons, and to bring them before one of His Majesties Iustices of Peace, in such County where they shall be seised on, and the said Iustices of Peace are from time to time to give Vs an account of what persons shall be so brought before them, and secured by them; And We do hereby also strictly Charge and Command all His Majesties subjects in this Kingdom, that they do forbear either Harboring or Relieving any of the said Re∣bels so comeing out of Scotland, And that they forthwith make Discovery of such of them, as they shall at any time know to be residing in this Kingdom unto any of His Majesties Iustices of the Peace, under pain of their utmost perils, and of being looked upon as persons guilty of the same Traiterous Designs with them. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 30h day of June. 1679. Mich: Armach: C. Jo: Dublin. Arran. Blesinton: Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Ca: Dillon. Ro: Booth. John Keating. Jo: Bysse. Jo: Davys. Ol: St. George. Theo: Jones. Wm: Flower. Tho: Newcomn. Tho: Radcliffe. God Save the King. DUBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Tooke and John Crook, Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty; and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesties Printing-house in Sknner-Rew.
