L1444 R36319 15651630 104292
A LETTER From an Eminent Merchant in OSTEND, Containing an ACCOUNT Of a Strange and Monstrous Birth hapned there, A Woman being brought to Bed of two Children, which are joined together by the Crowns of their Heads. He being an Eye-Witness thereof. Dated May 7. Old Stile. HAving for some Days resided in this City, I came to understand that there happened a Strange and wonderful Birth, about an hour and a half, or a Dutch Mile, from this place, in a Dorp called Clems, or rather Clements Church. Yesterday I walked thither in Company with several others, and found it answerable to the Relation I heard, viz. That they are two Daughters, well Shap'd and perfect in all their Members, onely they are joyned together, at the top of the head, and so fast that it seems to be but one head.
Yet it is apparent both heads have their perfect faculties: and a partition may be easily selt, which I felt my self yester∣day: But yet several Doctors and Chyrurgeons from Bridges, haveing been there, to see whether the Children might be parted without danger of death, find no probability. The Father is called Roelan Voyoen, being by Trade a Wagonmaker, of about 23 Years of age: The Mothers name is Maria Castelmans, about 19 Years old. She was delivered of these two Children (being her first-born on the sixth of this Moneth, being Ascension day (so called) about two a Clock in the Morning: they are both baptized, and the one named Pieternella, the other Barbara. That they are distinct in life, soul and brains, appear plainly from the actions which they have, both together, and sometimes apart: for the one often sleeps, while the other is awake, Cryes and eats: and they are ofenttimes both awake, and both eating: I have seen them both asleep, and both awake, and one asleep, and the other a∣wake. The Heads are so united together, that when that which is awake turns it self, the Neck of the other turns also: They will never be able to go, sit, or stand: for if the one should sit, or stand upright, the other must stand on her Head, with the Heels upward: Their Face, Nose, and Eyes, are not directly opposite to one another, but somewhat sideways, so as that one looks toward you, and the other from you. Many People come daily to see them, and give 3 Stivers apiece: Their Parents are offered a great Sum of Money for them to be carried about: They told us, they did intend (after the Holy Days, so called) to carry their Children to Bridges, and it may be from thence to the Cities of Holland. London, Printed for J. Stans, and Sold by R. Janeway, 1682.
