L1522 R36342 15666658 104315
A LETTER FROM THE Grand-Iury of Oxford TO THE London-Grand-Jury, Relating to the CASE of the Protestant-Joyner. Gentlemne, WE the Grand-Jury for the County of Oxon, send you Greeting, &c. It is of very great trouble to us, to find our selves imposed upon by your neglect of Law and Justice; For had you duly and righteously considered your Oath, and the present Danger of the Kingdom. You could not have found Ignoramus to a Bill so fully proved against the Protestant Joyner, and consequently saved us Gentlemen the trouble to convince the World of your wilful mistake. For our parts, we do really believe from our Consciences, that Treasonable words tho' spoken by a Protestant Joyner, is Treason, tho' countenanced by all the True Protestants (so called) in the King∣dom; But how (dear Friends) could you so mistake your selves? Why surely the Evidence that will hang a Popish Traytor, may serve well enough for a Prote∣stant One; For 'tis not unknown to Us, that there are as deep Protestant Traytors, as Popish Ones, and the Danger to the King, and the Establish'd Government, are equally the same from them both; So that we much admite how you could salve the Reason and Dictates of your Consciences, in acquitting a notorious Tray∣tor in a publick Court of Judicature; that had so abominably affronted Our Ex∣cellent King, by such Words and Actions, in so many Seditious Coffee-houses, as would make any old Protestants heart to tremble; Yea, the very mentioning of his Trayterous Speeches stinks in the Nostrils of all Loyal and honest Christians. Truth is, we much pity the late Lord Chief Justice Scroggs for the hard mea∣sure he met with in the Case of Wakeman, what outcries was there then against him from your Zealous selves, because he faithfully sum'd up the Evidence to the Ju∣ry, and directed them, that by Law no Man ought to die for Treason upon a single Testimony, Oh a Portugal Embassadour with Cuineys, Oh he was with the King such a day at Windsor, &c. a fellow not fit to Live, what not hang such a Villain as Wakeman? and we well remember how the Good man was bespatter'd by the Zealous, and the Ignorant, and persecuted even to the door of the Commons House for doing Justice; And then again what a pother did you True Protestants make in the Case of Fitz-Harris? Why, he was to bring all to Light, yea, the very foundation of the Plot, and that when we remember took mightily with you, because he had not only accused King, Duke, and Queen of Treason a∣gainst
themselves (pleasing things to the Mobile) but also could prove the death of Godfrey to a hairs breath; And yet after all this, the poor Rogue did not learn his Lesson so perfect during the conversation he had with his Protestant Visitants in Newgate, as to give satisfaction to any reasonable man at his Death, but rather the contrary; that what he had offer'd in Evidence, was the imper∣fect information of his Zealous Visitants. But Gentlmen, after this rate of proceeding, what do ye think will become of us, what settlement either in Church or State can there be expected? when professed Protestants shall thus prevaricate from the truth, and seem to be deli∣vered over to believe lies; for our parts, we are persons of Fortunes and Estates, and hate to be byass'd by Opinion, or Party, but according to our Power and Knowledge have acted in the Case of this Villain, as becomes men of Honour and Conscience; so that we stand amazed at your proceeding in this Case; if you were congregated together by the great pollicy and contrivance of your Famous Northern Sheriff (for he is a man knows a black Sheep amongst 100 white ones) on purpose to acquit this poor Rascall, that's another matter; then indeed, the taking the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy for the first course, the Covenant Engagment, Renunciaton of the Family of the Stuarts, and some other smaller Oaths for the second; and an Oath to oblige a Grand Jury to find acording to Evidence, &c. for the third and last, may pass pretty well, in setting free a Treasonable Protestant Joyner; And 'tis all the reason in the World that such a Jury proceed according to their ancient and fundamental Principles. Now Gentlemen, let us a little reason together; and herein we propose Three things to you. 1. Whether it were not much better for us all to unite in Brotherly Love and unity, then to seperate from each other, by Divisions, and Opinions and Parties▪ 2. Whether the peace and quiet of the Kingdom, the preservation of his Majesties Person, and Establish'd Religion and Government do not depend upon our obe∣dience to the Laws of our Country, Love to our King, and maintaining the Establish'd Religion thereof? 3. Whether there be more danger to the Crown and Government from Pa∣pists, or Sectaries united, is a question easily decided: for both agree, and as it were hand in hand, drive on furiously, to destroy the Murchy, and the Church; This we are sensible of, and would have you well consider on't, a∣gainst the next Sessions; And we assure you, if you send us down again any such Protestant Trayterous Joyners, we will mark them with the same Carracter we have done the first. Consider well Gentlemen, 'twas not many years since we smarted under a Hydra of Tyrants, let us not again delight in our Fetters and Chains, we live under a Government so gentle, and Laws so good, and a King so Indulgent to his Subjects, that 'tis a shame and reproach to our Nation, that any one Subject should have the least thought to seek after alterations; let no discon∣tented old little weather-beaten Politians once more trepan you out of your peace and liberty; Let not the ill and nauseous scent of Protestant Coffee-houses, and Tavern Clubs, poyson your affections to the Establish'd Government; but with us lay your heads and hearts to work; put your helping hand to the support of thy Monarchy and Church, or else we Conclude it will all end in confusion, and evere evil work. Oxon the 25 July, 1681. Your old Protestant Friends, the Grand Jury of Oxford. LONDON: Printed for Al. Banks, 1681.
