n221 12244756 56897
A NARRATIVE Of the Progress Of his most CHRISTIAN MAJESTIES ARMES AGAINST THE DUTCH, WITH The Names of the severall Places taken. Likewise A LETTER from his said Majesty TO THE Queen of France, Giving an Account of his passing the Rhine at Tolhuys: With a LIST Of the French Nobility Killed and Wounded in that ACTION. In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1672.
A Narrative of His most Christian Majesties Conquests obtained over the Dutch; with the Names of the several Places taken. Likewise a Letter from His said Majesty to the Queen of France. YOu have with too much impatience, ex∣pected the opening of this Campagne, to be any longer deprived of the Account of those prosperous beginnings which have already signalized it, wherein the Success of the King hath evidenced and asserted the Justice of his Arms. How∣ever Historians must acknowledge they are obliged to a more then ordinary diligence, to be able to keep pace with that swift course of Victory that attends his Majesty. We scarce had heard, that this glorious Monarch was preparing to undertake an action of the highest reputation to his designs, but that we were immediately told he had gone through with it, with all the advantage imaginable; but I fear I do too long provoke your appetite, it is now time to satisfie it. I shall enter upon the matter with the particulars of the de∣feat of a considerable part of the Garrison of Rhineberg, which was but a praeludium to the rest. The Vicount de Turenne (being arrived the Twenty ninth of May with a Body of Horse, at a small Place scituate upon the Rhine, within a League of Keiserwart, belonging to the E∣lector of Cologne, which they began to fortifie towards the River) went to see part of the Kings Troops, to the number of 10000 Men, who lay intrenched near the Head of a great Bridge of Boats which they had fitted up in that Place, be∣sides another built over the Rhine, which is of a particular make, and is defended by a Floating Redoubt, that bears both Men and Artillery.
After having well viewed these Troops, which he found in excellent order, he appointed the Count Montal (that commanded them) to go the next night and discover the Coun∣trey, in order to the Armies marching securely by Rhineberg, and Burick, up to Wesel. The Count set out to execute this Com∣mand with 200 Horse, belonging to His Majesties Guards, under the Command of the Sieur Mombrun, Captain Lieute∣nant of the second Company of the Kings Muskettiers, with the like number of Light-Horsmen under the Command of the Marquess of S. Gelais, Colonel of the Regiment of Dau∣phine, and Thirty Dragoons. After having marched all night, he arrived next morning by break of day at Abbaye de Camp, within a League of Rhine∣berg, where he heard, That the Garrison of that Town went out very often to cut Wood, in the adjoyning Forest which belongs to the Elector of Cologne, for the making of their Pa∣lisadoes, and desiring to make his advantage of it for the Kings service, he resolved to lay an Ambush for them about a League and an half from the Abbey. To that end, he went to a place which was shewed him by his Guides, but not find∣ing that convenient, he would chuse one nearer to Rhineberg: so leaving his Troops there, he onely took with him three of the Guard, as many Muskettiers, and six Dragoons, with whom were the said Sieur de Mombrun the Count de Druy, the Chevalier de Bethune; these two serving as Adjutants, and the Sieur de Bois aid Major of Charle Roy. Being come into a close Road, he discovered 150 Mus∣quettiers which came from Rhineberg; whereupon (Fortune seeming so to favor his Design) he sent back the said Sieur de Mombrun in all hast to his Troops, to bring him a 100 Horsmen and the Dragoons, hiding himself in the mean while from be∣ing seen. But the Enemy continuing their march on that side where he was, he commanded the three Muskettiers and six Dragoons that were with him to light off their Horses, and go in to a Ditch, hard by the way. But the Vantguard of the enemy, which marched near fifty paces distance from their Body, perceiving them, and crying out, Who are you for? they fired at them. The Enemy immediately filled all the way, and discovered the Count of Montal, who was forced to charge them with those few people he had with him, who bravely broke through them, after having received great part of their shot, and got between two Hedges very thick, set with Bushes that grow all along on the sides of the Ditches. The noise hastned forward the Sieur de Mombrun, with the
Troop of Gensdarms, consisting of Fifty Men, who set up∣on the Hollanders; but they (without being any way disorder∣ed) going into the Ditches, shot so thick, that he was forced to cause all his Dragoons, Gensdarms, and the Kings Musket∣tiers to light off their Horses. The Enemy seeing that, and that the other Troop of Light-Horsmen came on, began to think of taking the safest course, which was to retreat cross a Corn Field, to other Hedges which were yet stronger; by the means of which, they might get into Rhineberg, not imagining that our people should have been able to pass a Ditch ten foot deep. But Fortune presented a Passage to the Count of Mon∣tal, which he leaped over with his Horse, being followed but by a few by reason of its difficulty; and those that were on foot, getting over in other places, the Hollanders saw the way was intercepted, and so were forced to return to their old post, whence they continued their shooting; but were imme∣diately set upon by those that were on foot, and by the Fifty Light Horsmen, at the Head of which, was the Sieur St. Ge∣lays, and at the same time the Count de Montal fell upon them in the way, where every one behaved himself so gallantly, that they came up to one another, till at last the Hollanders were forced to call for Quarter, after having had Fifty of their number killed. So the rest were made Prisoners, the greatest part of which were wounded, in which number were a Lieu∣tenant, two Ensigns, a Lieutenant-Colonel, that commanded the party; the Governor of Rhineberg's Son in Law, who was wounded in the Body with two Musket shots. The Count de Montal, brought them that night to the Camp, where he found the Vicount de Turenne, and the Marquess de Louvoy, who were extreamly satisfied with the success they had against the Ene∣my, who were almost equal in number to the Assailants, and had besides an unquestionable advantage of the Ground. And one may justly say, That never did Soldiers fight with greater courage then these did on this occasion, as if they had represented to themselves, That it was the first exploit of the Campagne, and were thence encouraged to signalize in a par∣ticular manner their Zeal and Valor. But the Sieur de Mombrun, the Marquess of St. Gelays, the Chevaliers de Bethune and de Mar∣sillac, and several others, were prodigal of their persons, in imitation of the Count de Montal, who hath merited the great∣er share of glory, by his wise conduct and forward valor in this Action: Which is so much the more memorable, in that there was killed on our side but two Private Soldiers, three of the Kings Muskettiers, one Guarde du Corps some
Horsemen, and three Horses. There were two Dragoons wounded and the Chevalier de Marsillac Cornet of Light-horse, who was shot in the Body with a Pistol, but if he escape, we shall obtain a Victory an a very easie mate, and teach our Enemies not to dare to venture our while our Troops are abroad. But I shall leave this for to give an Account of the Conquest of Four Towns, which were almost as soon taken as attempted. I here send you the first Advices from the Camp, still expecting the farther particulars. The King having resolved the 30th past to form these four Sieges, arrived the 2d. Instant about Nine in the Morning before Orsoy; that day being spent in observing the Scituati∣on of the place, it was Resolved, to begin the Siege the night following: Which was put in execution about Ten at Night, according to the Orders of the Duke of Orleans, to whose care his Majesty had committed the Conduct of this Attack, whilst the Prince of Condé Besieged Wesel, the Viscount Tu∣renne Burick, and the rest of the Troops Rhineberg, whither His Majesty was gone Himself to the Cavalry, Commanded to in∣vest that place, and their several Posts, afterwards returned to Orsoy. It was Order'd to make two Reall, and two False Attacks, the former to be Commanded by the Duke of Roanez, Lieutenant-General, the Chevalier de Lorraine, Maistre de Camp, and the Marquis de Beringhen, Collonell; and the False Attacks to be made by Two Companies of the Kings Regi∣ment, under the Conduct of the Count de St. Geran, and the Marquis de Moussy. The Assault was made with so much vi∣gor and bravery, that they began to lodge their Men at the foot of the Counterscharpe, the Breach having been made at the head of it. His Majesty, who no more spares Himself, than the least Of∣ficer or Soldier of his Troops, Resolved, being accompany∣ed by Monsieur, to observe Himself the Opening of this Breach, behind a small Battery, to preserve Him from the Canon of the Enemy, though with so little security, that the Chevalier d' Arquien was killed there upon the place. As well the Besiegers as the Besieged, continued shooting very furiously all Night; the besieged not being wanting to make some Resistance to favour the Humour of the French, to whom no Action seems to Merit any Honor that is not accom∣panyed with some Difficulty. About Nine next Morning, Monsieur sent a Trumpetter with the Count of Grammont to Summon the Town, but not∣withstanding that, he assured the Governor, that they could not hold out two dayes longer, and in case he deferred to
Surrender the Place, that all the Garrison should be put to the Sword, and the Town left to the Pillage of the Soldiers: The said Governor answered with all the Courage possible, That the States-General had not entrusted to him that Post, to quit it so easily. But, notwithstanding this Dutch Bravado, he quickly cooled, and was obliged to surrender the Place, upon no other Termes, then that he and his Garrison should remaine Prisoners of War. All those that were employed in this Attack, strove to out-doe each the other in performing wonders; The Count de Grancé, and the Sieur de St. Hilaire, were dangerously wounded with Musket-shot, the one in the Knee, and the other in the Reines. The Sieur de Beauviré Captain in the Dolphins Regiment was mortally wounded, the Count de Valin was killed, with a Lieutenant, and about Eight common Sol∣diers, there having been onely Five wounded. The Fourth Instant, the Viscount Turenne, who had opened the Trenches before Buricke the day before came early in the morning to acquaint His Majesty with the taking of that Place, on the same Conditions that Orsoy was; The same day the Prince of Condé sent likewise to give His Majesty an Ac∣count of the Surrender of Wesel upon the first Attack they had made on the Fort on the Lippe, not farr from the said Place. So that onely Rhynbergh remained untaken, where it was resolved to open the Trenches the next day, at night, but the loss of these three other places had so disheartened the Garrison of this, that not daring to expect an Attack, they Implored the Kings Mercy, who accordingly permitted the Garrison to draw out the next morning with Drums beating, Colours flying, and with their Baggage, having ordered a Con∣voy to conduct them to Maestricht. Thus Victory and Glory delight to heap their Crowns up∣on the head of this great Monarch, who with so much ardor undergoes the Toiles of the Warr, that the seemes to Merit the Favors of the one and the other, having subjected under his Power Four Places, in so small a time, and with the Loss onely of 100 Men, who have been killed in these Actions.
From the Rhine near Wesel, June 9. THe Eighth Instant His Most Christian Majesty ar∣rived at Ossembergh, where he received advice from the Viscount de Turenne, That Rees had Surren∣dred upon the first approach of the French Troops, without making the least resistance; And the same day the Prince of Condé sent to acquaint His Majesty with the taking of Emmericke. From the Camp at Rees, June 10. HIs Most Christian Majesty arrived here, having received Advice, That the Sieur de Beauviré with 600 Horse, and 100 Dragoons had taken Doete∣chem, and that on the other side the Sieur de Choiseul had taken the Castle of Ʋlme, and in it 150 Soldi∣ers, whom he made Prisoners.
His Most Christian Majesties LETTER to the QUEEN of France. From the Rhvne near Tolhuys. YEsterday before Night I receiv'd the News of the taking of Groll by the Bishop of Munster, who Besieged it in Person with the Forces of the Elector of Cologne and his own, Commanded by Monsieur de Luxembourg, 'tis one of the best places the Hollanders had, it held out but four dayes. The Prince having given me an Account of the Fords and Passa∣ges that I had ordered him to discover along the Rhine, from Schenck as far as Arnheim; I passed through Rees with my Gensdarmes, and came into his Camp near Emmerick where I supp'd; and, as soon as I rose from Table, took bse toge∣ther with him, after I had given Orders for the drawing out a Thousand of his Foot, and the Marching of a body of Horse and Dragoons with some Artillery, and the Boats for Transportation, and arrived this morning before day. I had with me a Guide that knew exactly all the Fords of this River, upon whose Information I Commanded the Count de Guiche to discover a part of it over against a place called Tolhuys, which upon triall he found Fordable. I planted two Batteries upon the Banck of the Rhine, to play upon them that should offer to oppose the Horse I intended to send over on the Right and Left of the Batteries, while I was making a Bridge of Boats in the mean time to pass over the Foot upon; upon the Information brought me by the Count de Guiche, I commanded Two Thou∣sand Horse of the Left Wing to pass the River under the Com∣mand of the said Count, at the Ford which he had discovered over against Tolhuys; The Regiment of Cuirassiers was to pass first, of which ten or twelve commanded men to pass over, sometimes by Fording it, and sometimes by Swimming, espy'd Three Squadrons advancing towards them from be∣hind the Hedges and Willowes, and were at first briskly charg∣ed by the Officers of the First Squadron, they Drawing back some few steps in the River, till those that followed to second them could come up, made their way afterwards with their Swords in their hands so bravely and resolutely, that the Se∣cond and Third Squadron (with the fright of it) discharged at random in the Air, and ran. The First, which hitherto had set a good face upon it, gave back as well as the others to which the continual Fire of our Canon did not a little con∣tribute; and now the rest of the Horse were all passed over at the Ford, one party of them advanced towards the Enemy
under the Command of the Count de Guiche, and the rest stood in Battalia on the Bank of the River. This Action was accompanyed with all the Success and Glo∣ry we could desire, having lost very few Horse in the Passage. Nogent being the onely Person of Note that was drowned: But afterwards, as ill Fortune would have it, the Prince, to whom I had sent, not to pass the River, was already gone, before my Orders reach'd him, in a small Boat, to see what Men we should put into the Castle of Tolhuys, and to informe himself better of what passed on the other side of the Water; so that not knowing any thing of my Design, and seeing the Prince of Condé and Duke de Longueville advance upon the Spur towards a Barricade, where the Three Squadrons I mention'd before had joyn'd themselves with some other Horse and Foot, he made all the hast he could thither, and was follow'd by several others, who now began to keep no Measures, af∣ter such an Example. At first, the Prince, and those other Gentlemen astonished the Enemy with their Threatnings, and their Presence, and besides the Count de Guiche surprising them in the Reare with some Squadrons, had pressed them so close, that they put themselves in a posture of yielding, on Condition they might have Fair Quarter; But, Monsieur de Longueville having passed the Barricade, and crying, Kill, kill, No Quarter; and, as some say, discharged a Pistoll upon them; out of pure despair they made one Volley more, in which the Prince of Condé had the bone of his left Wrist broken, Monsieur de Longueville and Guitry were killed upon the Spot, and several others were killed and wounded, which you will see in the following List. If we had had a little patience, not one of those men had es∣caped our hands, the Comte de Guiche had begirt them close on one side, and should have faln upon them on the other with the other Squadrons, and the Foot which by this time were almost all passed in their Boats; whereas through our own precipi∣tation, the routing them has cost us very dear; this excepted, all things are in a very good condition as to the Bettaw, and I have much cause to praise God for the happy Success of this Enterprize, and to promise my self great advantages by it.
Dead and Wounded. Dead. Monsieur de Longueville. Monsieur de Guitry. De Nogent, drowned. Daubusson. Marq. de Teobon. Brouilly mortally wounded. Some Gentlemen wounded. The Chevalier des Essars, dead of his Wounds. Wounded. The Prince his Wrist broken. Mons. de Marsillac his Shoul∣der-Bone broken. Mons. de Vivonne lost his Hand. The Comte de Sault, wounded in the Chin. De Beringhen through the Body. The Duke de Coaslin his Hand broken. Termes cut cross the Face. La Salle Ayde de Camp Five Wounds with a Sword. Renelle, of the Cuirassiers, wounded in three places. Du Mesnil Montauban, wound∣ed with a Partizan. The Marq. D'Aubeterre. The Marq. de Maurevert, Five wounds. Beauvau, Ayde de Camp to Mons. de Rochefort, wounded in the Face. FINIS.
