P2887 12006090 52335
Poor Robins Opinion of the Present Blazing Star, Appearing in the North-East Part OF THE HEAVENS, This Present Year, 1677. Which is far more Remarkable then any before of that NATURE, By Reason of the strangeness of its POSITION. LONDON, Printed for D. W. in the Year 1677.
Poor Robins Opinion of the present Blazing-Star appearing in the North-East part of the Heavens. I Think I need not fear Credit from the world, since they are so sensible of my Judgment in Judicial Astrology, which I think is equal to any that have writ before me, or since; For I think I have had as good a guess at things, and spoke as much Astrological Truth as Lilly or Booker of black Monday. I'le warrant you upon this occasion if any Sadness or Mis∣chief should fall out, which God divert, though with Reverence and fear I speak it. How they would tell ye they foresaw it a hundered years since, as they did the burning of London by Nostre Dame, Mr. Lillies Hierogliphicks, &c. which was never heard of before. But for my part as I have always told truth, and was less mistaken then any of my function, so I desire to continue. For 'twas always my saying, if a Winter proved cold, warme Cloaths, a good Fire, and good Provision was the best remedy. I Confess Mr. L—had the good Luck to get a Meddel from the King of Sweden, but for all that he could not tell the Coun∣try man who S—at his door. Like Gipsies we tell people their fortunes, or as People at a Lottery get money. I hope the people will have more wit then to believe us, and to have more discretion then to be frighted. However Since from General observation that things of this Nature does not happen without Relation to further E∣vents, and that they are Messengers from common experience of the most High, it ought to be the care of every person to pre∣vent the Probable sad consequence, for by common experience we find that after these occasions hath hapned, National miseries.
VVhich to effect is for every man to sweep his won door, ac∣cording to the English Proverb. For we find it usual when Men have Committed any enor∣mity, and are discovered, they would feign ease themselves of the burthen of their follies, and either extenuate it in themselves, or unjustly lay it upon anothers shoulders. VVhen a general Calamily happens (or severe Judgment) though before our Vanities were not regarded, the great and Righteous Judge by his Ambassadour, Conscience, the accusing faculty doth truly inform us it is from the occasion of sin (from which we cannot receede nor deny,) yet forsooth we would feign make some body else the Author of our own infirmities, and wickedly lay them at other doors. The great danger of which, if Men did but rightly consider (they would shun with dilligence Immaginable) for whilst I charge my fault upon another, I do not purge my self, and therefore my Sin remains, and the cause not being taken away, the effects consequently must continue. And with great amazement I find for the most part they would lay at their Princes door, not only foolishly to hope to quiet their own uneasie conscience, but make him to bear the Scandal of their Infirmities. But let such Men have a care, for if Kings and Queens, ac∣cording to the Opinion of our Divines, be the Nursing Fathers and Mothers of their Countries, we must have a great regard to their Persons and Honours (and above all things) to take a Reverend care of exposing their infirmities, for whatever evil we should here of them, if it prove false, to convey it to others, is a most damnable Crime. But should it prove true, we should like Shem and Japheth take a Garment and lay it upon our Shoulders, and go back∣wards and cover the Nakedness of our Father, for fear like Ham on the contrary, we should Merit a curse, which may be intal'd upon our posterity to the end of the VVorld. The Common indignities and affronts done to their Royal Persons being not the Least occasion of our usual disappointments and Judgments. VVe have a common saying in England to our Children, for faults repeated before we correct them, you had fair warning.
God Almighty never Punishes or afflicts without being highly Provoked, and before he puts it in execution, trys us by all means to avoid his chastisements (if Possible) and to that end often times intimates to us his displeasure by some extraordi∣nary occasion, because he will not deal with us according to our sins, nor Reward us after our iniquities knowing us to be but dust. VVhich may be taken from the present Meteor or appear∣ance, and therefore 'tis great Prudence in us all by a holy habit and disposition to oppose and overcome those threatning calamities which we may reasonably expect as the sad effects of our present condition. This commet or Blazing-Stars first appearance or rising is in the North-East Part of the Heavens, it is in Colour Red and bloody, But the Position different from any that this Age hath produced, The extremity or tayle being erect or upwards. VVhich may signifie that by lifting up our hands▪ and hearts to God in devont Prayer and repentance we may avoid those evils it portends, which to effect, Let us fear God and honour the King. FINIS.
