P3725 12246907 56976
PROPOSALS FOR A National Reformation, OF MANNERS, Humbly offered to the Consideration of our MAGISTRATES & CLERGY. To which is added, I. The Instrument for Reformation. II. An Account of several Murders, &c. and particularly A Bloody Slaughter-house discover'd in Rosemary-lane, by some of the Society for Reformation, as the same hath been Sworn before two of Their Majesties Justices of the Peace. AS ALSO The Black Roll. CONTAINING The Names and Crimes of several hundreds Persons, who have been prosecuted by the Society, for Whoring, Drun∣kenness, Sabbath-breaking, &c. Published by the Society for Reformation. LICENSED, Feb. 12th. 1693/. D. POPLAR. LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry. MDCXCIV.
THE PREFACE ALL men agree, That Atheism and Profaneness never got such an high Ascendant as at this day. A thick gloomi∣ness hath overspread our Horizon, and our Light looks like the Evening of the World. Insomuch that all those great Works and Wonders which God hath wrought out for us, appear but like Walking-Trees; although the eyes of the Blind, and the Ears of the Deaf have been miraculously opend thereby, and that the Lame hath been made to Arise and Walk. Yet for all this, Impiety abounds, even after our angry God hath shaken the foundation of the Earth; and that he hath hereby, so loudly called on the Christian World, (to this Nation and City also, in a more especial manner) to awake from deep Slumber, and to a∣mend our ways, by an Universal Reformation, of our Lives and Manners, and not to imagine Jamaica and Sicily, were greater sinners than others, for unless we repent we shall all likewise perish. These sad considerations, have compelled us to appear in the publick face of so many discouragements on every hand. We believe no unprejudiced person, (which considers aright) will mistake our end herein, or suggest what never entred into our thoughts: For we are not so opinionated of our selves; as presumptuously and arrogently to Dictate to our Honourable Magistrates and Clergy in the Administration of the Civil and Ecclesiastick Government, which God hath entrusted unto their consciencious Care and Managment, by those methods which their mature Judgment and Wisdom can Dirct. But our intention in this publick appearance, is, in the first place, to represent some of those Fountain-heads which are the Scourse or Ori∣ginal (more especially) of those most palpable Evils, which have in∣fected all places, and corncers of the Land and City with an Univer∣sal Contagion: That from this Prospect, many Mourners may be raised up in our Jerusalem, to wrestle with the Almighty, to remove those Tre∣mendous Judgments hanging over our heads, and wherein every pri∣vate Christian may become a publick Blessing to the Nation.
In the next place, we only Propose (in all becoming humility) some such Ways or Methods, for suppressing the daily growth of Wick∣edness, as may yet more and more excite and new-animate our Ho∣nourable MAGISTRATES and CLERGY to find out some better ex∣pedient for Universal Reformation of Manners. However, our hearty attempts unto the aforesaid End [in pursu∣ance of those several Declarations and Proclamations of the KING and QƲEEN's Most Ecclent Majesty, commanding and encourag∣ing all Dutyful and Loyal Subjects thereunto, according to their several Capacities] hath met with a wonderful Blessing and Success from small beginnings, even beyond many persons expectations, by which it appear, God hath not despised the day of small things. FOR, who would have imagined that four or five persons only (who at first began this Work, in the sight and opposition of so many professed adversaries, would have met with so early encouragement, as namely from the Right Reverend BISHOPS my Lord Lucas, the Honourable Bench of Justices at Hicks's-Hall: Afterwards from the Right Honoura∣ble Lord MAYOR and Court of Aldermen; The honourable Sheriffs and Recorder, and from several other Persons of Eminent Quality for whose great Zeal and Piety herein, all good mens thanks are due. Wherefore that Posterity may rise up and Bless Their Memory (when they lye down in the Dust) the last Act of Justice and Gra∣titude we can shew, to perpetuate their Name, is to present the World with these humble Proposals, for an Universal Reformation of Man∣ners: Annexing thereunto this strange Relation of barbarous Mur∣ders, and particularly of a bloody SLAUGHTER-HOUSE: Affixing also, our BLACK-ROLL of the Names and Crimes of No∣torious Offenders (taken out of the Records of several of the Courts, &c.) which this Society hath detected and brought to condigne Pu∣nishment: Who when we were but an Embryo, yet then began to Quicken by that Benigne Aspect, which these our most Honourable PATRONS were pleased to cast upon us. This alone, (if there had been no other Arguments) might have given us sufficient encouragement to make an humble Dedication of these Leaves unto THEM, but that we considered the implacable Adver∣saries unto Reformation would be labouring to misrepresent both the Subject-matter, and our End. To conculde, let all good Christians pray, that God alone may have the Honour and Glory of his own Work, unto whom be all Praises, Thanksgivings, Worship and Obedience, throughout all his Dominions, World without end. Amen.
THE NECESSITY Of a Present National Reformation. SHall the Lyon roar and the beasts of the Forest not tremble? Shall God Shake this and other Cities and Nations of Eu∣rope all at once, and shall our obdurate hearts remain un∣broken, and unshaken after all this? Doth not the late Tremendous EARTH-QUAKE in several parts of England and London (which had such influence on the English Court beyond the Seas, &c.) speak a loud unto this Nation, and these Kingdoms, and to this City? especially since it falls out in so few Weeks after that great Catastrophe in Jamaica? As on the one hand, these things tell us that God's anger is not yet turned away, and that his Arm is stretched out still, so on the other hand, this gentle warning (after many disregarded Mercies and Judgments) seems as if God was speaking to Ʋs, as of old unto Ephraim. How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I make thee as Admah and as Zeboim? &c. The Church of the Jews sinned not against such alluring Mo∣tives to Love and Obedience as we have done. It's true they sin∣ned greatly in the Wilderness, and afterwards also when they were in their Promised Land, (though followed with miraculous mercies and deliverances) so long grieving his Spirit, untill God did greatly abhor his own Inheritance, and forsook Shilo (his Ark,) which he had placed among them. (Ps. 87.) And afterward gave the be∣loved of his soul into the hands of her Enemies: (then when he suffered the Babylonians, (or Chaldeans) to burn Jerusalem and his Temple.) They sinned still more and more after them return
from Captivity, and that the Temple was rebuilt, their spirits be∣ing so inveterately incensed against one another, that one Church (or Temple-worship at Jerusalem) was not sufficient to preserve Union and Communion. Afterwards (in Christs time) his de∣generated Church was arrived to a higher degree of sin, even under that Plenary Administration of the Covenant (or Gospel of Salvation (in the person of the blessed Massias [Emanuel, or God-Man, made flesh and dwelling amongst them] tho attended with extraordinary Signs and Miracles. Which became the ground of that Wo denounced by our Saviour against Bethsaida, and Corazin, and drew Tears from his Eyes, and Sighs from his tender heart, when he wept over Jerusalem for their obduracy, who for his dear labour of astonishing Love (in his bloody Sweats, Sighs, Agonies, Tears, Conflicts, &c.) returned him no other recompen∣ces but the hight of Contempt and Scorn, together with a most publick ignominious and cruel Death, and from whom they hid their faces, and against whom they hardened their hearts, even at the same time when he was pouring out his soul even to the death, and making his Body a Sacrifice unto his Fathers wrath, which was kindled against him for their sakes. Yet all this mon∣strous ingratitude was excusable in them, comparatively to what our sins are against the Gospel-light, who had their Eyes blinded (by judicial anger of the Almighty,) their Ears stopt, their Hearts hardened; and yet St. Paul bears them witness that they had a zeal for God, though not according to knowledge: And that they ignorantly crucified the Lord of Life and Glory. However, this impiety cost them very dear at last, for after in∣finite Goodness and Patience slighted and affronted; their City and Temple were destroyed, and their whole Nation rooted out, in such wise, that they have been from that time a disregarded People, scattred throughout the whole Earth, who were once his dearly be∣loved and honoured, his peculiar Treasure and Inheritance above all other Nations in the World. What Jerusalem was of old unto Judea, and Judea unto other Nations, in like manner London is unto England, and England unto CHRISTENDOM. A City and Nation more favoured of God, (and more envied by the common Adversary) there is not to be found under the whole heavens: A City and Kingdom more honoured with the Presence of CHRIST in the Gospel, and its ordinances of worship, and the powerful operations of his Spirit in his word, (for Conviction and Conversion) is not to be found. Never such a Sunshine of the Gospel brake forth up∣on any Kingdom (or at least on any City) as upon England and
London, since the Great Reformation (begun near 200 years ago) a greater priviledge than if we had enjoyed Christs Presence in the flesh, without the quickning, illuminating, regenerating, san∣ctifying, sealing testimonies of the Spirit. The first fruits whereof blessed ENGLAND brought forth unto God (even the first ripe fruits of the Gospel, since the grand Reformation) beyond all other Nations and People in the Christian World, viz. A holy Seed-Corn sown in the precious Blood of those Martyrs in the Ma∣rian Persecution, an Oblation of such sweet savour unto God, that (perhaps) for the sakes of these famous Worthies of the Church, God hath blessed our Nation with such continual encrease of the Bread of Life; and also with so many burning and shining Lights of the Gospel, and eminent Labourers in his Harvest, that our Land may properly be called a Goshen, in comparison of all other parts of the Christian World. And may not this precious Seed of the Church have been the chief reason of those many great and wonderful Mercies and Deliverances, which God hath ever since wrought out for ENGLAND, so obvious unto all other people, from Age to Age, that it seems to tell the World (in capital Letters) that we are a Nation of his peculier love and pro∣tection; the Vineyard which his own right hand hath planted, and watred, and fenced, and preserved both by Night and Day, his Jedidiah, his Hopthiziba, and Beula, the Signet on his right hand, and the labour of his endearing love. If otherwise, what means our miraculous deliverance from the Spanish Armada: The Gunpowder Plot: The Massacree and Deso∣lation no doubt intended on all the Protestants of this Kingdom at the Fire of London (in 66) and how mercyfull was God to us, that the same East Wind which carried on the raging Flames, did also at the same moment keep off the French Fleet from landing upon us? and how soon was our Ci∣ty Rebuilt in greater Splendor, even to the painful grief and regret of the Common Enemy? (gnashing their teeth thereat, and opening their mouths wide against heaven, in contempt of God himself.) Also our great deliverance from that (more) Hor∣rid Conspiracy of theirs (in 77 and 78) to root out that which they call'd the Northern Heresie (this blessed sunshine of the Gospel in these Three Nations). And what else may we learn from the late most famous REVOLUTION (in 88)? What wonderful Wheele within the Wheele? The great Abomination of Desolation was ready to be perpetrated in these Kingdoms and in this City, to lay the Church of Christ and his Sanctuary in heaps, &c. and to make the same bloody destruction in these
Lands as was made in France a year or two before; the dregs of that Cup were reserved for us: This was a deliverance (in all respects considered) more miraculous than that which God wrought out for his oppressed Church in Egypt, and at the Red-Sea; and for which astonishing goodness, all our most grateful acknowledgments of Praises, Thanksgivings, and Obedience are continually due, to God in the first place, and in the next, unto those great favorites of Heaven, (our most Illustrious KING and QUEEN) whose happy Government God Almighty long con∣tinue among us, and grant that from their Reign, a new Meri∣dian of encreasing Glory may be erected throughout the Earth. Now, as our Mercies and Deliverances have been extraordina∣ry great, Publick, and National, most seasonable also and obvious unto all, and astonishing to our very Adversaries themselves, as well as unto others. [Insomuch that we are all constrained to cry out with surprizing wonder — Lo! this is the finger of GOD! Behold! what salvation hath he wrought out for us, in the midst of the Earth? — Surely there is no Inchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against Israel.] So in like manner God expects from England and London a Publick or National Reformation, and no∣thing less than this, will be esteemed by him a walking worthy of these great mercys in all-becoming thankfulness: Good Heze∣kiah rendred praises unto God in humility and acts of new-o∣bedience, yet God took it amiss from him, that he walked not stable unto such a great miracle of love and mercy shewn him, in his recovery from that Sentence of Death which had passed on him: (having caused the Sun to go back 15 degrees, as an extraordi∣nary token of Gods endearing affection unto him, above all o∣thers). Nothing therefore less than a National Reformation will be acceptable in God's sight, after Englands wonderful mercies and deliverances; this therefore is that which we have great reason to conclude, is the thing God looks for from us at this day, and without which we have too great cause to fear that after all, his infinite goodness and patience (abused) will turn into fury against us, and that his anger for all this will not turn away from us, unless we bring forth such fruits as are meet for repen∣tance; you have I known of all families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for your iniquities: [that is to say, unless you bring forth the Publick or National fruits for these National mercies I have shewn you from time to time].
But what shall we all say? who will plead for us, or mollify and bind up our wounds? What cause have we to fear least our iniqui∣ty is marked out before the Lord? O how dreadful it is to relate our deplorable case? Where are the Mourners? Would to God England (England more especially) could weep day and night, and be in bitterness of grief; and that all our eyes might send forth streams like many Rivers, and make our barren unfruitfull Earth a Bochim. We have been planted a noble Vine, a Vineyard of God's own watering, and defence from Age to Age: But how have we degenerated into the Plant of a strange Vine, even since our late miraculous EXODUS? Have we not brought forth Apples of Sodom, and sour Grapes of Gomorah? Thorns and Thistles instead of Figs? What monstrous ingratitude and forgetful∣ness of all our eminent mercies? What high discontents, complaints, murmurings, seditions, blasphemies, yea, and Rebellions against the LORD himself: We are looking unto Egypt again (as it were in contempt of the most high God, (who hath wrought out our great salvation) and appointing us a King under whom to return back into greater bondage and misery than what was felt under the Iron Furnace, from whence we came forth; Plenty of heavenly Manna we have now scattered round our Tents, but do we not loath it; and are we not always filled with complaints, and sinful reflections on God himself? The History of the Jews in the Wilderness, exactly resembles us at this day. Are we not a generation of backsliders, presumptuous and self-willed people? And have we not turned the grace and love of God (who hath redeemed us out of the house of Bondage) into sinful wantonness? Are we not Jeshuron like, and do we not kick against the Lord? Do we not harden our selves against the Almighty, and set up our Thorns and Bryers, to oppose him in the footsteps of those eminent Provi∣dences wherein he hath been walking in the midst of us, in an extraordinary manner and waiting on us, to compleat our deli∣verance (whither we desire to be saved or no). But instead of a thorough amendment of our ways, and turning to our provoked Father, who in this gentle manner warns us out of his tender love, because he is loath to destroy us, not so much for our sakes as for his own Glory, and the honour of his great Name, least that should be profaned by the adversaries of the Gospel, (the Heathen who are called by his name, (as Amos 12.9.) yet instead of returning unto. God with our whole heart and soul, May it not be taken up for a lamentation against us, that we grow worse and worse, and have sinned as we could; and have hardened our selves yet more and more against the many judgments and mercies wherewith God hath
been dealing with us from time to time? May it not be complai∣ned of against our Christian Judah and Jerusalem, as of old the Prophet did against the Church of the Jews, under their great De∣generacy, viz. That Prophaneness is gone forth through the whole Land? Look we on Professors in general, How do the Vitals of Religion languish? What Wounds hath She received even amongst Her Friends? Universal Corruption and Degeneracy overspread the Church even in this Age, altogether as much as in Jeremiah's days. The Prophet was in a great strait what to do, and whither or no he had not best withdraw himself, and leave them, Jer. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. O that my head were waters, and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night. O that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them: for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. They bend their tongue like their bow, for lies; they are not valiant for the truth. Take ye heed, every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders. They will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth, &c. Compared with Micah 7.4, 5, 6. The best of them is as a bryar; the most upright is sharper than a thorn-hedge. —Trust ye not in a friend, &c. Is not the quickning, illumina∣ting, converting, sanctifying Presence of the Spirit driven away from us? How many Hundred Sermons are preached, and not one Soul turned from the power of Sin and Satan unto God, even throughout the whole Land, nay, throughout this professing City? Several indeed are thereby brought into this and the other Party or Sect, and espoused to Opinions, &c. [especially of those who were the Means of awakening their benumbed Consciences into a serious frame, taking up with their External Way or Mode of Religion, as in a most safe Sanctuary; when Strangers (perhaps) to the Founda∣tion-Principles of true Godliness, and almost totally negligent of the true Power and Practice of Christianity.] Hence so many are of Paul, and of Cephas and Apollos; and hence such vain offensive wranglings (and scandalous janglings) in Matters of lesser moment; whilst Re∣ligion hereby hath received almost her mortal Wound, at the Heart, (with respect to the pure and holy Principles thereof, or that practi∣cal Piety wherein all true Christians are agreed) and Her languishing Vitals are in a manner giving up the Ghost. And the Spirit of God being hereby grieved, and vexed, and quenched, hath in a great mea∣sure left us to our own distemper'd Minds, and a Spirit of Giddiness hath seized many Heads; and we may read ICHABOD on the Doors of almost all our Churches and Assemblies, (whether
publick or more private) and The Glory of God is departed from us. Little is left us besides the Mantle of Elijah, and that also much rent (like the Vail of the Wounded Spouse, Cant. 5. ver. 7.) And were it not for the Common Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, the exter∣nal Form of Godliness would in a great measure vanish out of our sight. And instead of the Presence of the Angel moving the Waters of the Sanctuary, hath not a great smonk filled the Temple? (Isa. 6.4. compared with Apoc. 15.8.) And are not the Word, and Sacra∣ments, (Sabbaths and Ordinances, &c.) become to many [God for∣bid it should be to All, we now speak only of the generality of De∣generate Professors] the savour of Death unto Death? And are we not daily growing worse and worse? — That holy and honou∣rable Communion of Saints, wherein the brightness of true Christiani∣ty (in the encreasing lustre of the Gospel) was so greatly preserved amongst the Primitive Churches; and whereby so venerable an Esteem unto Piety was begat and nourished in the Heathens them∣selves, (beholding the Order, Love, Peace, Ʋnion, and Communion of the Professors of Religion in those days) and that which is become one great Article of our Faith, [The Communion of Saints] how greatly is it misunderstood by the generality of (nominal) Christians? an Universal Decay of Religion amongst us hath caused so little Conscience to be made of frequenting the Publick Assemblies and Prayers of the Church? Yet suppose all this were duly and regularly performed, how little Communion hath one Christian with another, in their Bodily Presence, assembling together as if to see each others Faces, once a week or month, within the Church-walls, and keeping altogether at adistance from one another, as to Soul Converse? What strange Communion of Saints is this, when those Visits which are given tend but rather to promote greater Licentiousness, and Vanity of Mind, and Idle Talk, nay, amongst many of the Chief Professors also; or, at best, tend to no greater good, than to a How do ye? and, What News? Or, if there be an intimacy of Acquaintance, the un∣profitable Discourses are interlaid with some fattening Provision for the Belly, &c. (Though Leanness is enter'd into the Soul, and Rottenness in the very Heart.) Psal. 12.1. Help, Lord, for the god∣ly man ceaseth, the faithful fail from amongst the children of men: they speak vanity every one with his neighbour; with flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak. These, and many such symptoms (like grey Hairs) are not the things chiefly intended to be mentio∣ned with reference unto the National Reformation, which to recti∣fie must be the immediate Work of God, and his Spirit (in its pourings out hereafter expected) but they are thus represented be∣fore us, to convince how greatly our whole Head is sick, and our Heart faint. The same Complaint which Isaiah makes against
Judah and Jerusalem, (even under that Divine Service in their Temple-Worship) and also under the Government of pious Jotham, (of whom it is said, That he prepared his ways before the Lord, and did that which was right in his sight, 2 Chron. 27.) On the other hand, if we cast our Eye on the looser sort of Pro∣fessors (or Baptized Christians) of a more publick and scandalous life, in our Nation, or within this City, what shall we say? Are not all their places full of Vomit? What Scornings and contemptible Derisi∣ons against the Holy Spirit, and its Quicknings, Illuminations, Con∣victions, Woundings, Conversions, Sealings, &c. do they profanely manifest? What Revilings do they cast (with all the Odium and Backbitings they are able) upon Religion it self, and every thing that looks like Sobriety and Godliness? What a Spirit of Bitterness, Gall, and Wormwood is there in them against the faint Shadows of Practical Holiness or Reformation? With what Reluctancy do they set themselves to oppose it in every part or beginning of it, If possible, to stifle the very empty Sound thereof? The Name of REFORMATION is become almost as dreadful as the sound of that Drum made of a victorious Barbarian's Skin, &c. These sort of Men had rather have the Devil and his Vicegerents (if in human shape) to Rule in the high places of the Earth, than any Potentate, that shall heartily endeavour to reclaim the Reign of Vice and Debauchery throughout their Dominions. Swearing, Cursing, Drun∣kenness, Revilings, Lasciviousness, Whoredoms, Riot, Gluttony, Blasphe∣mies, Gamestring, and such-like Wickednesses; are not only their daily Practice, but that for which they plead earnestly, and use all their Endeavour to corrupt the Age wherein they live, into a like of and compliance with all these Wickednesses. As if God had deliver'd these Three Kingdoms from the desolating Judgments that hanged over our Heads, on purpose that they might commit all these Abominations, and proceed from Evil to Evil, growing worse and worse, and corrupting themselves more and more. As if God had given Them over to a Reprobate Mind (with those Ʋnthankful Romans) for their monstrous Ingratitude unto GOD, (to say no∣thing of the Blessed Instrument of our Deliverance, &c.) that Augean Stable, from whence such a multitude of (Serpentine) Hydra's breed: Rom. 1. from ver. 21. to the end. And as this is now be∣come an epidemical Disease, and a Contagion universally overspread∣ing it self, so we have reason to believe, that God expects from us all a National Reformation, before his Anger be pacified towards us. Otherwise we may conclude, that Tyre and Zidn, Nineveh, yea, Sodom and Gomorrah, (who never were partakers of our ex∣traordinary Mercies and Deliverances, will rise up in judgment
against this Land and City. And we shall certainly (without Re∣pentance) meet with a more fiery Judgment and fearful Indignation, than what befel them, who never sinned against that Gospel Grace, Light, and Love, nor yet against the many Warnings and Threat∣nings, which we have done. God hath once more (of late) spo∣ken aloud to all sorts amongst us (from the highest to the lowest throughout this Land, and in a special manner to this City) by sha∣king the Earth and the Sea; but are we made broken and contrite in spirit thereby? Have we not rather hardned our selves more and more since that Angry voice? Hath that dreadful EARTHQUAKE in Jamaica (a few months ago) which swallowed up so many hundreds alive, &c. unsetled us, and shook us off from our Lees? Or hath that Tremendous Desolation rather perswaded us, that We are not so great Sinners as They were, foolishly concluding, That they on whom the Tower of Shilo fell, had sinned to a higher degree than others? Our Saviour tells us, Nay, but except we repent, we shall all in like manner perish. Which God Almighty of his great Goodness prevent, and give us all true Repentance, lest a seven times worse Calamity befall our Land. No Reflections are hereby intended to be made against any Person or Persons, who Rule in the Civil or Ecclesiastical Orbs of Government. As on the one hand we have great reason to bless God, that in this day there are several who do Worthily in our Ephrata, and deserve Double Honour; [particularly His GRACE the Most Reverend ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury, and several of the Right Reverend BISHOPS, together with other Persons of Quality, acting in any other publick Sphere; ALL whose reoy∣cing, we doubt not but it would be more and more to see Piety flourish; and Vice, Debauchery, and Prophaneness decay and wither throughout this City, and these Kingdoms. So likewise on the other hand, we have great ground for much Grief and Lamenta∣tion, to consider how little Their Personol and Relative Goodness and Vertues are of Influence, so as thereby to effect an Ʋniversal or National Reformation, without some other measures to put a stop unto that wide Floodgate of Atheistical Vice and Prophaneness, which (like the Poet's Dust from Pandora's Box) hath so overspread all Places and Persons (for the generality thereof) as with an Epide∣mical Contagion infecting the whole Land. Wherefore from the afflicting sence of these things, as likewise from the Apprehensions of that Great Duty lying on us, to detect Vice, and promote a Reformation of Manners, according to our seve∣ral Opportunities and Capacities; we can do no less than apply our
selves to these our Magistrates and Clergy; and we do it in most humble manner, and with what setiousness and importunity we are able, entreating, — That as they All have a due regard unto the Name and Glory of GOD, the Good of his Church, the Sasety and Honour of the KING and QUEEN, and the Establishment of their Excellent Government, the Peace, Happiness, and Prospe∣rity of these three Kingdoms, and particularly of this great, populous and flourishing City: And likewise, as ever they regard the con∣scientious discharge of that weighty and incumbent Duty, lying on them in their publick Places of eminent Trust: — On the account of all these most weighty and serious Considerations, we most hum∣bly and earnestly beseech and entreat, That THEY would forthwith more and more improve their utmost Interest and Endeavour to promote a National Reformation, without which it is greatly fea∣red we shall not prevail with God for the Blessing which our Na∣tion hath been strugling and wrestling for, in the midst of those affrightful Prospects which we have yet before us. This Publick Reformation is the great thing (or seems to be) which God at this time is earnestly expecting from us, and without which who dare presume to conclude, that He will yet deliver us? and that his Hand will not still continue to be stretched out against us? and that Tremendous Desolation will not yet overtake us, like a Whirl∣wind from the Almighty? (Nah. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) We are not so vainly conceited of our selves, as to take upon us to dictate or prescribe the several Paths, Steps, and Measures, &c. wherein a National Reformation (of Manners) ought to be effected, leaving this unto the Wisdom of our Superiours to determine and manage as they think best: But we do only, in all becoming Humility, propose these following Considerations, all or most of them being of great importance in the Apprehensions of se∣veral of the most Pious and Reverend Divines, both of the Church of England and of the Dissenting Brethren, (with other persons also of eminency for Religion, &c.) who, after a mature deliberation, have concluded, That the Considerations following are almost of in∣dispensible Necessity unto the Essential Constitutive of a National Reformation, unless we resolve to content our selves with the Name or Shadow thereof. I. CONSIDERATION. That there be a most solemn Fast, without any appearance of Orna∣ments amongst us, from the highest to the lowest; (and if we came in our
rusty threadbare Garments, so much the better.) This we find in some extraordinary Cases (1.) Commanded, Exod. 33.5. (2.) ex∣pected by God from Professors in a day of Universal Degeneracy, then, when the Church lay under very severe Threatnings, (Isa. 3. from Ver. 16. to the end of the Chapter.) And (3.) practised in the most solemn Fasts both of the Church, (as Exod. 33.6. Esth. 4.1, 2, 3, 14, 16.) and of Heathens, (Jonah 3.6, 7, 8, 9.) The Internal Acts necessary at such most solemn Times, are, 1. Afflicting of our Souls in good earnest, (and not hanging down our Heads for a day, like a bulrush; as Isa. 58.5.) In that great and only Fast in all the Jewish Year, (at the Day of Atonement on the 10th of the Seventh Month, Lev. 10.) God expresly threatens, That what Soul soever did not Afflict it self at that extraordinary time, should be cut off. And the King of Nineveh's Edict seemed in a manner as severe, Jonah 3.8. 2. A particular Confession of the Sins of our Magistrates and Mini∣sters, and the Aggravations thereof, with respect unto the Relation wherein they stand as Publick Persons. This we find in Ezra 9.7 compared with Neh. 9.34, 35. 3. A full and particular Confession of the most publick and scandalous Sins of Professors, above all others; of such in an especial manner as have, in the visible Church of God, openly professed their deli∣berate Resolution to perform their Baptismal Vow, and are thereby admitted unto the Holy Communion, as visible Saints; and who also make a greater Profession of Religion and Sobriety than many [of the looser sort, who walk as if they had Renounced their Ba∣ptism] for These are they who more provoke God than the openly Prophane, (Ezra 9.10.) and for which we ought in a most parti∣cular manner to murn, and lye covered with shame, &c. 4. A due sense of the most Rampant Sins and Atheistical Impieties of the most prophane Debauchees of our Age, with a particular Con∣fession and Mourning for them: and without which, God may justly charge Us as guilty in the furtherance of their Sin (in some sense). 5. A particular enumeration of our several extraordinary National Mercies, [with great Thankfulness and Praises unto God, and great Self-abhorrence for our Forgetfulness thereof, and ungrateful Returns.] And likewise of the many Judgments God hath inflicted on our Nation and City from time to time; that hereby we may learn to consider and admire God's Infinite Patience, in not utter∣ly consuming us; and may be taught rightly to mourn over our own and others Sins: and likewise to maintain a continual godly Fear
and Jealousie, lest after all the multitude of mercies shewn the Kingdoms, God be provoked even at last, to spew us out of his mouth, Neh. 9. from ver. 7. to ver. 32. and Ezra 9.13, 14. And after all that is come on us for our evil deeds and for our great tres∣pass, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less than our sins de∣serve, and hast given us such deliverance as this. Should we again break thy commandments, wouldest thou not be angry with us till thou hast consumed us, so that there should be no escaping? 6. A forsaking of our sins, and a most scrious and solemn renewal of Covenant with God, to walk in all the duties of new Obedience. (Neh. 9. vers. the last). II. CONSIDERATION. That there be effectual care taken to establish Justice and Judgment unto the Poor and Needy, the Destitute, the Oppressed and Afflicted in the Gate. That hereby Truth and Righteousness may flow down as a mighty Stream, and Violence be removed throughout the Land. Oppression and Violence (both going hand in hand) were one great (or the greatest) reason for the Flood on the old World (Gen. 6. there twice observed). And this crying sin is threatned above all or most others throughout the Scripture. The wise Man takes a particuliar observation of the place of Judgment & Righ∣teousness, (or where Justice and Righteousness ought to be found in a most eminent manner) and beheld that wickedness and ini∣quity was there; (Eccl. 3.16.) to denote that of all the sins that are in the World, this seems most obvious in the sight of God, and of all others, soonest exposeth a Nation to his just indigna∣tion. Hence Daniel's Counsel to Nebuchadnezzar as that which was the most prevalent remedy to divert God's Tremendous Judg∣ment, hanging over his head, was to break off his sins by righteousness and his iniquities, byshewing mercy to the Poor (Daniel 4. v. 27.) And this is the effect of an acceptable Fast with God, viz. to loose the bands of wickedness; to undo the heavy burden; to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke. This is to bring the poor that are cast out, into our house, and not to hide our selves from our own flesh. Isa. 58.6, 7. No reflections are here intended against the Reverend Judges in the Courts of Judicature, but with respect to that universal corruption of the several Practitioners, or Ʋnder-Officers thereof in the Causes of the Poor, (whether of Widows, Fatherless, Orphans, or others) either through an almost total neglect of their Just Right, (for want of Monies to prosecute the same)
or else by such tedious prolonging of their Sutes, from Term to Term, and from Year to Year, that they had better suffer the wrong, and the violence of their Oppressors, (though never so unjust) than by seeking such an uneasie remedy (as that of Law) to run themselves on the very Precipice of Ruin and Destructi∣on, whilst their little All is hereby exhausted in defence of their own Just Right; which occasions no small Cry in the Ears of God from these distressed Abjects throughout this Land? We do not entreat impossibilities, or expect the removal of those many mountains of difficulties which seem to lie in the way: And least of all do we desire the displacing of any from their se∣veral respective Offices, and Imployments; nor yet the diminishing of any Fees, &c. which the Law allows; but only thus much we humbly and importunately solicit, viz. That there may be a cer∣tain number of select persons (for Councellors, Solicitors, Atturneys, &c.) Men of known Integrity and Ability, who are wholly to attend on all the just and righteous Causes of the poor and needy only, and that they may be Sworn to make all the dispatch they can, in the effe∣ctual management and carrying on of their Causes, that they may all be brought to a most speedy Issue and Determination, without taking any Money or Monies worth from them or theirs, upon any account or pre∣tence at any time whatsoever: And that there may be a settled Allowance established by Law, for these selected Persons, who are to undertake no other Cause or Causes whatsoever, but these of the poor and needy; (Widows, Fatherless, Orphans, and such like Objects) among whom also all wronged and afflicted Strangers, who are ignorant of our Laws, and are otherwise destitute of help or means to vindicate their Just Rights. And if this might be esta∣blished so as to become effectual unto the great End a∣foresaid: O what Rich blessings might this bring down on these Kingdoms, and render us a praise and Glory to all Nations of the Earth? Perhaps under 1000 l. per Annum would be sufficient for this good Work: and if all those Gentlemen who keep so many devouring expencefull Hounds in this Nation, were to pay but 2 d. for each of their Dogs-heads, it would answer this high and noble End. Besides that great influence these select Practitioners would have over many others in the several Courts.
III. CONSIDERATION. That there be a settled Allowance or Yearly Income, established for defraying the necessary expences in carrying on of this Work of RE∣FORMATION of Manners, (or such like) which by Gods blessing hath been so happily begun amongst us; and which at present is brought unto such a good issue, even from very small beginnings [as may be more fully understood by perusing the late Instrument at the close of this Book]. Herein our pious Magistrates may yet more and more express their great zeal for the glory of God, in doing some singular good thing toward the more effectual execution of those many excellent Laws against the Profaneness and Debauchery, which so much abounds in these three Nations, and in this City. And whereas divers of the Right Reverend BISHOPS, together with the Publick MAGISTRATES of this City, have already given all good Men reason to bless God for such ample proofs of their Zeal and Piety, in countenancing this Reformation, (as it is now begun) and for which our humble thanks and ac∣knowledgments are always due (first unto Almighty GOD, and next unto THEM). So likewise we all have the same en∣couraging ground to hope that they who have thus far set their helping hand, to a Work of such Ʋniversal Acceptance with all Men, [other Persons of Quality also having honoured it, to say no more] will likewise improve their utmost interest to Estab∣lish this Reformation on the same Foundation (before named) as whereby their Majesties most happy Government may yet more and more resemble the Bright-morning Star (that wellcome Har∣binger of our approaching DAY). IV. CONSIDERATION. To supplicate their Majesties, That the publick Play-Houses may be suppressed. It is not denyed but that private Balls, and such like interludes may be lawful for Princes and Nobles, to recreate them∣selses therewith (at fit times and seasons); yet with respect to the publick Play-Houses, these following Arguments are in all becoming humility presented to Their Majesties serious and mature consideration, as their Piety and Wisdom shall think fit to determine; leaving the issue unto God, who turneth the
hearts of Kings, as wonderfully as the great River of Water, and the Chanels of the Deep, whenever he pleases. 1. It is the opinion of every individual person that makes any serious Profession of Religion, and is of a sober life and con∣versation, that the Publick Play-Houses have a direct tendency (in their sad Effects) to corrupt and vitiate the minds of the ge∣nerality of all sorts, more or less, though more immediately of all who frequent them; and by consequence also of those who converse with such, (though they do not attend on these Houses, through that vain and irreligious spirit that so dangerously infects those of their acquiantance, with whom they associate (being of such an assimulating nature, as we too sadly find it). They all agree (who make any serious profession of Godliness) that in these Houses, Piety is strangely ridiculed, the holy reverend and dreadful Name of GOD profaned, and his Glory and Interest rendred contemptible or vile; and the City (and all others who frequent these places, especially the Youth) allured hereby in∣to the love of, and delight in Idleness, excessive Vanity, Revellings, Luxury, Wantonness Lasciviousness, Whoredoms, and such Debauche∣ries (by Oaths, looseness of conversation, corrupt Atheistical principles, touching God and Religion, and almost a total neglect of any thing that may be truly termed practical Piety) through these Nurse∣ries and Seminaries of Vice. [Yet sometimes also under a Vizard-Mask, or pretence of exalting and dignifying Vertue, and dis∣honouring Vice, for the Devil will want none to plead for his School] Not that it follows, that every person who sees Plays, is in this degree corrupted by them: but, that it is the universal opini∣on of all truly Sober and Godly Men, That nothing in the world hath a greater tendency to corrupt the generallity of those who fre∣quent these Publick Houses, than attendance from time to time upon their interludes, and is one great reason why the sins before named (to which others might be added also) are be∣come so deeply Radicated, and now Habitual (for these 30 years last past) unto the Constitution of our English Nation; as whereby not only our Bodies become a Prey to many Diseases, but our very Minds also are corrupted, and the natural Vigour and Manliness, Prowess and Valour of our Kingdom (for which Britany formerly was in so much Renown among all Nations) is hereby in a manner wholly (or very much) lost, and effe∣minate Pusillanimity bred and cherished hereby. 2. It is more than a little suspected, that it hath been and still is one grand design of those Priests and Jesuits, who adhere unto the French Interest, to introduce and keep up these Publick Play-Houses on purpose.
1. To obudrate the Conscience of Professors, and cast such a mist before their Eyes that they may thereby be prepared to entertain those Principles which so much tolerate and encourage these Vices that are so destructive to a Nation. 2. To Mollifie and Esseminate the English Valour, that we may be broken in pieces when our Martial Neighbour Nation shall Invade us. 3. The Devil actually appeared amongst them, when that sad Tra∣gedy of Faustus (the Conjurer) was acted, (a dreadful token of God's highly provoked Wrath.) then when the unquenchable Fire of Hell and Everlasting Burnings were represented to the Spectators, (together with the external Appearance of Mock Devils) as a Jest only to raise Sport and Laughter at those Realities, that if felt, will create the tremendous Worm in Conscience that never dyes; as if the generality of obdurate Sinners had a design hereby to render the Damnation of precious Souls either a Figment, or a matter of no such formidable consequence, as a meer Scarecrow seems to be amongst the Fowls. The amazing Horror and Consternation that was then amongst the Spectators startled them at that moment, but it soon went off (as a Thunderclap, that affects but in the moment only.) Where could the Devil better shew himself, than either in the most remote parts of the Infidel-World, where he is worshipped in Bodily Shape, or else on this most prophane Spot here in London, which he may too reasonably take for his own Ground, since the Heathen, who are called by God's Name, (even in this Metropolis of Great Bri∣tain) invoke this Hellish Fiend, and provoke him thus to appear amongst them. 4. God hath, in his most justly incensed Anger and judicial Wrath, suffered divers of the Actors on these publick Stages of Wickedness to harden their own Hearts, to a most desperate de∣gree of Seared Conscience; as whereby they have offered (like persons possessed with Diabolism) the highest Affront that can be at present thought or devised, both unto God's Goodness, Merciful Patience, and Long-suffering, Meekness, Gentleness, and Forbearance, (which is intended to lead all sorts unto Repentance) and also unto his Severity of Justice and provoked Indignation. A most notorious Instance we have had in the late K. Charles's Reign, before whom the Comedians brought the Holy Bible on the Stage, as if they had intended to dress up the Scriptures in a ridiculous disguise, (together with the truly Conscientious Christian, who professeth, before God and his Church, to live up according to the plain in∣telligible Rules and Precepts therein contained) as surely as ever the Jews put on the Purple Robe and Crown of Thorns on Our
Saviour, on purpose to expose his Sacred Person an Object of most publick Ignominy and Reproach; and had not that King forbid them such an Act of Villany, it is not to be questioned but they had long e're this exploded the common Principles of a Deity, whose express Image (written with the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit, called the Finger of GOD) is this Sacred Word of His, the mighty power of God, through Faith unto Salvation in all who be∣lieve. Another notorious Instance, how far they are left of God and his Spirit unto a Reprobate Mind, we have lately had amongst us, when the Comedians in Bartholomew Fair were going to Act that Tremendous Tragedy which a few months since hapned at Jamaica, by that dreadful EARTHQUAKE, which swallowed up so many Hundreds alive into their Grave: And we have been credibly in∣formed, That some of them, or such-like Brethren in Iniquity, (far worse than Devils Incarnate, who believe and tremble at the consideration of GOD and his Righteous Judgments) have drank a Health to the next Earthquake! an Impiety almost beyond a Mi∣racle, and not to be mentioned without greatest abhorrence and detestation. Thus we see to what superlative degree of Atheistical Prophane∣ness the Antecedents, Concomitants, and Consequences of these publick Plays and Comedies do lead Men, and how dangerous it may be to a City or Nation to tolerate or countenance such Places, where GOD, and Man's Salvation, His WORD, His Judgments, Hea∣ven, Hell, and Danmation, &c. (those great and weighty Concerns of the whole Intellectual Creation) are in such a prophane man∣ner exposed and prostituted unto Contempt, Shame, and Ridicule. And whereas the numerous Attendants upon, and Spectators of, these Publick Interludes (who are of all Sorts and Ranks) may for a while stifle their own Convictions, and skin over their secret Wounds, by objecting, That they are not the Actors, and that others would fill up the Places if they did absent themselves, and many such-like Evasions, which are but Fig-leaves, to cover over their own Nakedness; yet they would do well to consider that clear Text, (Rom. 1. and the last Verse) where taking delight in those who commit open and scandalous Sins, is looked upon by God as a greater degree (or, at least, as great a height) of Sin, as if They were the Criminals themselves,—Who knowing the Judg∣ments of God, that they who commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.
V. CONSIDERATION. That great Care be taken to put a Difference between the Clean and the Ʋnclean Members (the Vile and the Honourable) in the Visible Church; and not to admit all sorts of loose Professors unto the Holy Communion, or Supper of the Lord. Having in a more special manner hitherto address'd our selves unto the Publick Magistrates, we close up the wholewith an hum∣ble and importunate Request and Entreaty, That the several MINISTERS of the Church (or Churches) of Christ, who have the Charge, Care, and Inspection over their whole Flock, committed unto them by Christ (whether those of the Church of England, or other Congregations) would yet make more and more Conscience of suspending from the Lord's Table all such Members of theirs, who are notoriously known and observed to be of a scan∣dalous Life and Conversation, [viz. Common Swearers, Cursers, Drunkards, Revellers, Haunters of Publick-Houses of common Infamy, Prophaners of the Lord's day, common Gamesters, Riotous, and such-like, and all who are notoriously suspected to be such, or to be guilty of Adultery or Fornication, secretly lived in, and not openly repenting thereof.] We all know, That the Orthodox Doctrin of the Church of England, and the Rules (or Canons) of her Disci∣pline, (as likewise of all other Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, do positively and expresly forbid all such scandalous persons from coming to the Sacrament, and strictly enjoyns them All to forbear that Sacred Ordinance whilst they continue in their Sins, lest hereby they prophane the Holy Mysteries of the Communion of the Body and Blood of our Lord Christ, without a scrious and impar∣tial Examination of themselves, and a visible manifestation of Re∣pentance, in case any are guilty of those or the like open and sean∣dalous Sins. And we are obliged in Charity to believe, that all the pious Ministers of the Church do take a consciencious care here∣in: But what shall we say? In this debauched Age, wherein Sin hath got such an universal rooting, how many loose Pastors or Mi∣nisters are there throughout this City, (shall we say, or rather throughout the whole Nation?) who are regardless in this mat∣ter of so great consequence? And we all may appeal to any sober understanding Person, whether this he not one of the great Causes or Grounds of that Offence, which many have taken at the Church of England, and by reason whereof there hath been such a number of Dissenters, as we see are at this day. And this is cer∣tainly
true, that many young Persons, who have been loosely educated, and scarce know the Principles of Christianity and Church-Communion, &c. yet have long since, and even at this day, imbibed (of their own accord, without any Document from others) a real Disrelish and Disesteem of the Church of England, and that for no other reason than this palpable Corruption of many of the Ministers thereof in this neglect of their Discipline, so con∣trary to the Canons of the Church. And when they see such an Epidemical Distemper overspreading it self, (without Redress) the consequence thereof may be such, as is not difficult for any conside∣ring persons to conjecture. And it must needs be for a daily La∣mentation, that the Complexion of the Christian Church (though Anti-Roman) looks so like that of the highly degenerated Church of the Jews, of which the Prophets so greatly complained, even of old, under their Temple-Worship at Jerusalem, Ezek. 22. v. 25. They have devoured Souls.—Ver. 26. Her Priests have violated my law they have prophaned my holy things; they have put no difference be, tween the holy and prophane, nor between the unclean and the clean — and I am prophaned amongst them. Compared with Mal. 1.6, 7: Ye offer polluted Bread upon my Altar, &c. Many Mountains of Objections and Difficulties seem to lye in the way: None that we know do intend to propose the Removal of These Ministers, &c. but must leave that to the Wisdom of those who better understand their Duty, than we may presume to be the Judge thereof: But all that we humbly entreat, is, That there may be some such Way or Medium put into practice, as may re∣dress this Corruption in the Discipline of several Parochial Chur∣ches, (or other Congregations) who need this, or some such-like Way or Method, whereby, if possible, to prevent the further spreading of this Malady in the Church. Wherefore till the Wis∣dom of our Superiours shall think fit to find out some better Mea∣sures, We humbly propose the following Way or Method, as a present Expedient only, and this also in becoming Modesty, in or∣der to the aforesaid Necessary End. Supposing therefore that the several Ministers, who have the im∣mediate Care and Charge of their respective Parishes or Congrega∣tions, chuse out amongst some of their Flock, divers Persons of known Piety and Integrity, unto whose Care and Fidelity to com∣mit the Trust of Inspecting into the Lives and Conversations of Those, within their own Parish, or Congregation, who are most known or suspected for more open and seandalous Vice and Debauchery, that so they may be Ear and Eye-witnesses thereof, and of their frequent Relapse or Continuance therein, [no persons being to know who
these Inspecters are but the Minister and themselves] and so accor∣dingly to inform the Minister with Particulats, which their own Eves, and Ears, and Observation can and shall attest: And that the Minister, every Lord's-day, after Evening Sermon, in the pre∣sence of the Congregation, cause the Names and Crimes to be distinct∣ly read (as they stand upon this Record) declaring, That these persons are to be Suspended from the Lord's Table, till they purge themselves by open Confession, and visible Tokens of Repentance; and if they do not by a limited time prefixed, after they have had Notice of their Crime; then to be proceeded against according to the Legal Comminations and Censures of the Church, (their Silence to be taken for a tacite Confession, and Token of their obstinate per∣sistance in their Sins.) To close up the whole of this Discourse in a word, If it shall please God to put it into the Hearts of our pious Magistrates and Ministers, to use their utmost Interest and Endeavour to promote a National Reformation in the Particulars before mentioned, or in any other adequate unto all or some of the great Ends, so necessary to be accomplished. This may be the most effectual Means to answer GOD's Expectations from these Nations, (and more especially from England and London) and thereby to prevent those Judg∣ments which we have yet all so much reason to fear and expect. Then we need not be too sollicitous what any Man can do unto us, or that Arm of Flesh, Strength, or Policy of our Common Alver∣sary; for GOD will then be on our side, and perfect those wondrous Mercies and Deliverances He hath begun to work out for us. Then will THE LORD OF HOSTS go before us, and Fight all our Battels, and make our way smooth and prospe∣rous before our Face, and guide us by his Ʋnerring Counsel, and di∣rect all our Steps, and lead us into the Way of Peace, Safety, Honour and Renown. Then will He delight to do greater and greater things for us, whilst He puts a Fear and Dread on our Enemies. Then will He make our walls Salvation, and our gates Praise. This Blessed Reformation will be a greater Security to our KING and QUEEN, and to Their Excellent Government, and to their King∣doms and Dominions (in particular also unto this Great and Popu∣lous City) and to the Church of Christ, and his Interest and Gospel, than all our Warlike Preparations, of Stores and Magazines, or than all our Treasury of Gold and Silver, or than all our Coun∣cils, Wisdom, Policy, and Excellent Conduct, Prowess and Mangifi∣cence of our Most Illustrious Monarch, or than all our Armies, and Confederate Forces by Land or Sea.
And who can tell, but GOD may denounce that Woe against All who shall attempt to obstruct this National Reformation, in most humble manner thus presented to the Higher Powers [our Supreme Magistrates and Ministers, the pious Governours of the Civil and Ecclesiastick State?] —Woe be unto that man, by whom this offence shall come: It had been better for him that a mill-stone were hung about his neck, and that he was cast into the bottom of the sea.
THE INSTRUMENT FOR Reformation. WHEREAS His Majesty, in his Letter to the Bishops, hath declared his most earnest desire of a General Reformation of the Lives and Manners of all his Subjects: And the Queen's Majesty in her Letter to the Justices of the Peace, of the County of Middlesex at their Sessions at Hicks's-Hall, hath Charged and Required Them to use the most effectual Methods for putting the Laws in Execution against all manner of Profaneness and Wickedness: Whereas also, both Their Majesties have lately Issued out Their Proclamation a∣gainst Vitious, Debauched and Profane Persons; wherein they declare the deep Sense of the Goodness and Mercy of Almighty God (by whom Kings Reign) in giving so happy Successes to their Endeavours for the Rescuing of these Kingdoms from Po∣pish Tyranny and Superstition, &c. So also they are not less touched with a Resentment, that notwithstanding these great. De∣liverances, Impiety and Vice still abounds in this Kingdom: And that the Execution ofmanygood Laws that have been made for the Suppressing and Punishing thereof, hath been grosly neg∣lected, to the great Dishonour of God and Religion. Where∣fore they further declare their Princely Resolution to discoun∣tenance all manner of Vice; and for that purpose they straitly Charge, Require and Command all Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and all other Officers Ecclesiastical and Civil, in their respective Stations, to Execute the Laws against Blasphemy, profane Swearing and Cursing, Drunkenness, Lewd∣ness, Profanation of the Lord's Day, or any other dissolute, immoral or disorderly Practice, as they will answer it to Al∣mighty God, and upon pain of their Majesties highest Displeasure. And for the more effectual Proceedings herein. They direct and command Judges and Justices of the Peace, to give strict Charges at the respective Assizes and Sessions, for the due Prosecution and Punishment of all Persons that shall presume to offend in any the Kinds aforesaid; and also of all Persons that, contrary to their Duty, shall be remiss or negligent in putting the said Laws in Exe∣cution; as may be seen more at large in the said Royal Proclama∣tion, given at their Majesties Court at White-Hall, Jan. 21. 1691/2, in the third Year of their Reign.—In pursuance hereof, ma∣ny excellent Orders have been given out, particularly by the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor of the City of London: The Bench of Justices at their General Quarter-Sessions held forthe County of Middlesex, and also by the Justices at their General Quarter-Sessions held for the County of Surry. Wherein they Charge and Command all Counstables, Headboroughs, Church∣wardens, &c. to use their utmost Endeavours to bring all Offen∣ders against the Laws aforesaid to condign Punishment, severe∣ly meancing their Negligence, but promising to their Dili∣gence herein all Encouragement. Yet notwithstanding all this, Vice and Wickedness abound in every place, Lord's Days are still profaned; Drunkenness and Lewdness escape unpunished; our Ears in most Companies are filled with Imprecasions of Dam∣nation, the Corners of our Streets every where echo the hor∣rible Sounds of Oaths, Curses, and blasphemous Execrations. The blame of all this lies undoubtedly (for the most part) at the doors of Inferiour Officers; Authority (both Supream and Subordinate) having sufficiently acquitted it self, and worthily acted its part, in giving forth strict Commands as aforesaid: But these (though they are intrusted to be the only immediate Executors of the Laws) have neglected to put them in Executi∣on. Now as Execution is the life of Laws; so their Non-execution (being equivalent to an actual Repeal) renders them useless, or as if they never had a Being: Hence it is that Wickedness grows rampant, and Profaneness rides triumphant, trampling upon all the Zeal and Piety of Virtuous Governours and Legislators, making all their Religious Intentions and Resolutions void and of none effect. How much the said Officers are concerned in
this Guilt, and which of them are most faulty, we may easily see, if we divide them into two Ranks, and take a view, first, of those that will not do their Duties; being conscious of their own wicked Inclinations and Actions, they will not punish that Impiety in others, which they allow of in themselves. There are other Officers that are more conscientious: Of these, some are Tradesmen, which willingly would, but cannot spare time to give that Attendance that is requisite for the full discharge of their Offices, without a manifest neglect of their Shops, Trades and other Business. And thus the best Laws for punishing and suppressing of Vice and Wickedness, that are already, or for the future can be made and enforced, though by a thousand Pro∣clamations and subordinate Orders, will all prove ineffectual, unless put in Execution by Under-Officers: Of these (as afore-mentioned) some are profane, and will not; others would, (and something they do towards it) but have not time to do to the full of what is required of them. To remedy these great Inconveniencies, and to answer the Great and Noble Ends of our Governours, in making good Laws, and pressing their Executi∣on, the Expedient, (as drawn up in the following Form,) is most humbly proposed. We who are Inhabitants of the Cities of London and Westmin∣ster, and Parishes adjacent, both in the Counties of Middlesex and Surry, having an Eye to the Honour of God and the King, and the publick Benefit of the Nation: And being encouraged by the late happy Success that hath attended the industrious Endeavours of the Tower-Hamlets; whereby [according to a Method mentioned in their printed Paper, or Instrument, That declaring honest and joynt design for the general suppressing of Bawdy-houses, &c.] they have with more than ordinary Dili∣gence, and great expence of their Time and Money, in the space of two or three Years, (as lately Affidavit hath been made before the Bench of Justices at Hicks's Hall,) not only brought to due Punishment, according to Law, seven or eight hundred Criminals; but also generally routed those naughty Houses, which formerly abounded amongst them.] And being fluenced by that good old Principle or Axiom, Bonum quo communius, eo melius, resolve to use our hearty Endeavours, that so good a Work may no longer be consined within such narrow Limits, but be farther promoted for more general Advantage. WHEREFORE we agree, upon our own Costs and Charges to imploy and maintain a competent Num∣ber
of such fitting Persons, as we shall choose, to assist the se∣veral Constable and other Officers, in the Wards of the said City of London, and in other of the said adjacent Parishes, in putting in Execution those good Laws aforesaid; viz. by observing and taking notice of all those, that for the time to come, shall impudently dare, in Rebellion against the Laws of God and Man, to Swear and Curse, to profane the Lord's day, or be guilty of the loathsom Sin of Drunkenness; also by searching out the lurking Holes of Bawds, Whores, and other filthy Miscreants, in order to their Conviction and Punishment according to Law. We promise to take care [what in us lies] that none shall be connived at or Favour or Affection, and none prosecuted out of Malice or Hatred. And to the end that nothing may be done illegally, we will have frequent Recourse to those that are Learned in the Law, in order to act by their advice, Counsel and Direction. In our contending against those Abominations that threaten the Destruction of the whole Kingdom. An angry Look of God not long since made the Earth Tremble. And may we not fear, without Reformation, the next Look may be to our Ruine and Destruction; What are we better than the Cities of Naples, Smyrna, Inspruck, Sicily, and Jamaica who lately thus perished? one great Reason why Wicked∣ness so abounds in this Nation, is, because no more private Hands are engaged against it; all is left to have or six Officers in a Parish, though it may be one half, if not two thirds of them, for the generality, instead of being Suppressers, are rather Supporters and Encouragers of it, either by neglect of Duty, or by giving bad Example. To conclude, what dreadful Judg∣ments may we not fear, if we continue unreformed? But if this blessed Work of Reformation [as we have great hopes] prospers, what Blessings may we not expect? The Refor∣mation we are endeavouring in this great City and Suburbs by the continuance of God's Blessing, and of our Magistrates favourable Countenance, effectually to accomplish we hope will influence the whole Nation, (with Scotland and Ireland) in such wise, that we all with one Heart, one Mind, one Soul, might fear God, honour the King, and live in Love, Unity Peace and Concord one with another. Amen, and Amen.
A true Relation of several Barbarous Villanies and Mur∣ders detected in and about London, by some Constables and other Officers, assisted by some of the Society for Reformation. Whereunto is Added an Account of a Bloody SLAUGHTER-HOUSE in Rosemary Lane, near East-Smithfield: Discovered by A. M. (one of the Constables) belonging to the Society. The whole having been Sworn before Two of his Majesties Justices of the Peace for London and Middlesex. A Long Harangue is not here intended, but only a Short (yet  and true) Narrative of such Matters of Fact, &c. as may not on∣ for up All Persons of common Morality and Sobriety, to Abomi∣nate the frightful Appearance of VICE (dress'd up in the black Spos of Loosness and Debaucherie) but likewise to Mourn and La∣ment by reason of that Universal Contagion of Sin and Wicked∣ness, which hath so dangerously Overspread this City (and Nation also) and Infected so many persons of all Ranks, both young and old; each Sex also, and almost every Place and corner of the Land: Hoping that this Relation may have some Influence on all Good Men, to Excite their ardent Sighs and Prayers to GOD that he would New-animate our Pious Magistrates, and Clergie in a more espe∣cial manner, to improve their great Interest to Promote and Encou∣rage such a Society, (or Societies) as shall conscienciously regard the Glory and Honour of GOD, the safety and preeservation of the Government, under which we so happily Live, wherein the Publique Good of these Kingdoms doth so eminently consist) by their hearty and loyal endeavours to discover all such like Notorious Criminals, and to bring them unto condign Punishment. It were greatly to be wisht, that every of these Monstrous Vil∣lains had not thus escaped the Sword of the Magistrate: But see∣ing the Devil hath thus secured several of them from a present Ap∣prehension or Execution, as his Hellish Favourites, thereby to further them in all such Wickednesses, as may make them fully Ripe for a more heavy Condemnation hereafter: (without Repentance) it is not to be doubted, but the All-seeing Eye and Hand of the most Just and Righteous God, will sooner or later reach them. Ʋnto Whom Vengeance belongs, and who will Recompenence it them in his own due time.
The Account is as follows. THe Queen Dowager's Butler was Murdered in Anno 1689. by keeping company with Sarah Hodges living in the Hamlets of Wappen-Stepney, (at the Sign of the Bird in Hand) who main∣tained a (reputed) Bawdy-House. Several great Evidences were produced in order to her Conviction, but all ineffectual. A little after, it hapned one night that the Neighbours ob∣served the said Sarah Hodges's Maid frequently sent out upon Errands, and this till Ten or Eleven a Clock at night. The next morning the doors being fast, several Neighbours knock'd, but no person opening, at last they found the door open, and searched the low room narrowly, but could discover nothing. But going up one pair of Stairs, into the fore-Chamber, a sad and lamentable Spectacle presented it self. A Young Woman was found in bed having her Throat Cut: On the floor of the same Chamber the Servant-Maid of the House lay with her Throat cut also. In the back Chamber of the same floor, the Mistriss of the House (the aforesaid Sarah Hodges) was found in bed with her Throat Cut also; and both her Ears slit, to take out her gold Ear-rings. In this dreadful manner all Three lay waltering in their blood, and the House was found rifled. Not long after, another Woman in Goodmans-fields, that kept a reputed Bawdy-House, had her Throat cut also, by one Selbey, who was afterwards Executed near the same House. And at the same time another Womans Throat was cut in the said House: but not being cut through the Windpipe, she recovered, and dis∣covered the Murder. But who murdered the former Women, is not yet known. But above all the Relations which have been given the World of matters of this nature, although some of them have been very strange and surprising, yet this following Account seems to all who have heard thereof, most Wonderful and Amazing; Giving all of us great ground to conclude that many horrid Murders have been perpetrated from time to time in this place; Insomuch, that it may not unfitly be called — The Strange Discovery of a New and bloody SLAUGHTER-HOUSE. Which is as followeth. In the year 1692. Mr Anthony Miles (one of the Society being then Constable, and walking his rounds, it hapned that in Rosemany-Lane near East-Smithfield, at the House of one Mistriss Smith [who was known to entertain Whores and Theives] he heard a great Re∣vel
rout, with many Oaths and Cursings, and making a stand to hearken and inform himself, he heard several Persons in that House thrusting one another down Stairs, (who seem'd to him to be naked by the found of their feet) One of them suddenly un∣bolted the door, whereupon the said Constable thrust in his Staff to keep it open, and entring in, with diverse Persons attending him, he found three naked Men, and three naked Women (who had been Dancing and Revelling) whom they apprehended and carryed to the Watch house, and in the morning they were com∣mitted to Bridewel by Justice Ʋnderhill, and were whipt, with one more, who came to vindicate them. About three months after this, the said Constable (walking again the same Rounds, and) passing by this House, heard a great outcry about— of the clock in the night, with much Swear∣ing and Cursing, who begg'd of one another, that for the Lord's sake they would all be quiet. The Constable thereupon waited without, till they at last made a loud Outcry of Murder! Murder! Murder! Whereupon, he Commanded the door to be opened: They re∣fusing, the said Constable forced it open (with others of the Watch attending) in the ground-room he could make no discovery, but going up the Stairs, he observed they were sprinkled with blood; and forcing his way into the Chamber (of the second floor) after he had broke open the door, he found blood in a Bowl, and al∣so in a Chamber-pot, and a great quantity of blood lying in a hol∣low place in the midst of the floor, and Two Women in bed: No∣thing would they confess, but pretended the blood came by a cut of one of their fingers: And going up into the Garaet, (the Con∣stable observing those Stairs were also sprinkled and smear'd with blood) they found blood sprinkled on the Ceiling and Walls, and the floor was so full of congealed blood, that it cover'd their soles, and squasht under foot, as if they had been in an Old SLAƲGHTER HOƲSE that wanted cleansing; being so slippry they could scarce stand [Which seems plainly to discover, that blood had been there for some consideaable time, &c.] Here they found Two young men upon a Bed in their Cloaths; and in the said Garret there lay the Cloaths of another Man: viz. his Coat, Breeches, Doublet, Stockings, Shoes, Hat, Wig. Craver, but his Shirt was wanting. The Constable and other Officers searched the House from the top of the tiles and downward, and in every place and room, even to the bottom, three several times, and could make no further discovery, more then what was so Notorious, Obvious, and Tremendious to behold: Nor would any of the Persons in
the House Confess any thing (more than a cut of one of their fingers) whereupon they were committed to the Watch-house, and a Gaurd set on the House, and the next morning brought before Justice Constable and examined, but confessed nothing, and he sent them to Bridewell, where they were Whipt severely, and de∣tained for sometime, till further Evidence came in against them: At last none Appearing, they were discharged. God grant these Extraordinary Providences may be seriously attended, as (no doubt it is intended to be for) a Loud Warning from Heaven to the Licentious Youth in and about This City, (more especially) to take heed what Company they frequent, as being no small Temptation to draw forth their Corruption, and to betray them into the most dangerous Snares of Death and Hell. To pre∣vent which, Let every good Christian Pray (with David) — LORD Order and direct my Steps in thy Paths, that I may run all the ways of thy Precepts with delight; then shall I not be a∣shamed when I shall have respect to All thy Commandements. And we make no small Progress herein, when we maintain such a con∣stant fear and jealousie over our own Hearts and Lives, as makes us daily (with that Blessed Man) to have our recourse to God by prayer. Hold thou up my Steps in thy Paths, that my feet slide not; And when we fall, LORD! seek thy Servant that is gone A∣stray, for I have not forgotten Thy Commandements.
A Black Roll, Containing the real (or reputed) Names and Crimes of several Hundred Per∣sons that have been Prosecuted by the Society, this last Year, for Whoring, Drunkenness, Thefts, Sabbath-breaking, &c. as Delivered unto Them by their Clerk: And been published for the satisfaction of many who have been desirous to know what progress we have made in this Reformation of Manners. Some or these Persons have kept Bawdy-Houses; some of whom have been In∣dicted and some Fined. Mary Adams Mary Arrundell Sasah Allin Mary Abbitt Mary Anderson Jane Armstrong Elizabeth-Avem James and Sarah Ayres Elizabeth Ealy Elixabeth Earle Margaret Earen Mary Ev'nall Amey Eliot Sarah Edwards Alice Jones Christian King Mary Ann Charity Squish Elizabeth Shift Mary Smith Rebecca Trimmer Mary Thorogood Jane Winchcomb Sarah Whitaker Mary Wilden Elizabeti Ealy Thousas Bowater Tho. and Sarah Burton Elizabeth Brown ane Bricksteck Henry Body Mrrtha Blefford Elizabeth Bushell Ann Bradbery Ann Brewrick Mary Bone Mary Banfield Joan Horsnaile Mary Hughes Mary Harrissen Dorothy Howell Elizabeih Faugh Elizabeth Jones Elizabeth King Susanna Lewis Sarah Moor Samuell Parker John & Mary Packer Mary Quarles Elizabeth Raice John & Sarah Rigway Alice Sprinkfield Susanna Stanley Sarah Scoot Margaret Seale Sarah Thompson Richard and Mary Thomas Alice Wilson Elizabeth Wheler Hannah Ware John and Eliz. Hedger Margaret Tillara George Codd Bridget Cotion Elizabeth Chettham Mary Cole Mary Copinger Mary Chetham Ann Chandler John and Ann Coleman Mary Dawson William Harper John & Elizabeth Hedges Mary Hill Ann Holbrook Dorothy Howes Gatherine Flower Elizabeth Johnson Sarah Keah Elizabeth Leek Elizabeth Michel. Tho. and Jane Pettit Elizabeth Fartree Ann Raye Temperance Reed Mary Reves William and Eliz. Smith Susanna Stuobs Millicent Sll Mary Swan Elizabeth Watts Mary Vincent Ann Watte Elizabeth White Mary White John and Mary Pannell And some Cred, Viz Dorithy Furlon John and Judith Frost Mary Fairfax Thomas & Alice Gibbons William Groves Sarah Gorry Mary Gayrish Mary Garret John Durnhil John Hix Alias Hurst Many Harris Mary Hall John and Mary Hind Geo. and Mary Harrel Mary Jones Peter & Elizabeth King Mary Knight John & Elizabeth Long Mary Moor Mary Pamer Ann Mack Alice Randoll Sarah Rose Mary Randford Elizabeth Star Susan Spritgfield Arrundel Turner Elizabeth Topta Elizabeth Taylor Dorothy Williams Elizabeth Williams Elizabeth Whores Ann Winchcomb James Delafoy
Night Walkers and Plyers in Bawdy Houses, all or most of whom have been Whipt in Bridewell this Year. Elizabeth Bates Elizabeth Bissel Elizabeth Brown Lidia Buckler Martha Bolt Mary Carr Mary Carroll Jane Desow Susann Edwards Elizabeth Elliot Dorothy Flander Ann Goulding Elizabeth Harris Sarah Hilliard Margaret Heger Elizabeth Hedger Elizabeth Heath Ann Kettle Mary Kempe Katherine Lewis Elizabeth Mills Jane Peters Ann Preston Ann Palmer Elizabeth Sammon Mary Turner Martha Tucker Ann Vickar Catherine Chilver Hannah Ribbey Mary White Elizabeth Thome Hannah Powell Elizabeth Lee Mary Madson Jane Glover Mary Jenkins Susanna Yates Jane Bayley Ann Bonuss Mary Bennet Mary Baker Katherine Dodd Mary Dupper Martha Davis Mercy Dickenson Jane Gloves Elizabeth Green Elizabeth Ginney Aun Harress Derothy Hall Marcha Harison Hannab Jackson Alice Jones Martha Morgan Elizabeth Messenger Ann Pearce Elizabeth Partre Elizabeth Poor Ann Sheldrick Elizabeth Smith Sarah Slaughter Mary Tanner Judith Trumbold Mary Trvelove Sarah Ʋarrey Susadna Wilson Mary West Mary Osborne Frances Haughting Frances Palmes Patience Webbes Mary Jeffreys Elizabeth Prince Alice Springfield — Phendal Mary Gibbs Alice Gibbs — Stanley Mary Peach Isabel Goodin Elizabeth Bird Mary Haughton Alias Haughtry Thomys Newton John Stow Ann Green Sarah Moon Alias Thompson Mary Downing Katherine Lewis Wid. Wing Tho. Gibbon Ann Morris Alias Haber John Lockyer Edward Newby — Wynn Margaret Tylard Mary Kinde Mrs Oram Mary Clark — Gatton Mary Raughby Alias Haughton Alice Gobbons William Monday George Peter Katherine Moor Ann Worball Mary Long Mary Summers Ann Worrel Isabel Perry Alice Springfield Hugh Wilkinsou Lucy Michel Mrs. Arran Mary Tauner Mary D. George Peacock Samuel Jones Ann Jones Ann Newman Elizabeth Pierce Sarah Jefferis Hugh Wilkinson Ann Londay Jobe Laud Margaret Smith Hanna Lewis. Ann Reed January 1612/3; Sarah Ellis Wm. Griffeth Thomas Bowater Ann Worrel Martha Flitcher Mary White Johanna Playshad Mary Osbourne Rainshorow Mary Kempe Mary Stevens Mary Baker Mary Alderman Alice Fendal Mary Clark Ann Slaughter Elizabeth Gouge Mary Reed Rebecca Bowman Lucy Basly Martha Griffen Rebecca Foster Jane Bluit Elizabeth Prince Sarah Cook Sarah Lacy FINIS.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton. THE First Volume of the French Book of Martyrs, Published with her Maje∣sties Royal Priviledge: The Second Volume is already in the Press, and the Third and Fourth preparing for it, those that expect any advantage by the Propo∣sals made concerning this Work, must send in there Subscriptions by the 10th of next March, or otherwise 'twill he to late: Proposals are to be had of the Under∣taker, John Dunton, and of most Booksellers in London and the Country. Bishop Barlow's Remains: Containing near an hundred distinct Subjects, Theolo∣gical, Philosophical, Historical, &c. in Letters to several persons of Honour and Quality. To which is added the Resolution of many abstruce points: As also directions to a Young Divine for his Study of Divinity, and Choice of his Library, Published from his Lordships Original Papers. The Orders of the Helvetian Church, &c. Translated into English, by John Conrad Werndly, Minister of Wrasbury, and recommended to the Publick by Six Re∣verend Bishops. The Tragedies of Sin, by Stephen Jay, late Rector of Chinner. Casuistical Morning Exercises, the 4th Volume, by several Ministers in and about London. Heads of agreement assented to by the United Ministers. The Life of the Reverend Mr Brand, by D. Samuel Annesley. Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery, by Timothy Rogers M. A. The Life and Death of Mr. Eliot, the First Preacher of the Gospel to the In∣dians in America, the 3d Edition. An earnest Call to Family Reformation. Price 6 d. or 50 of them for 10 s. to those Gentlemen that bye them to Disperse. A Narrative of the extraordinary Cure of Mrs. Savages crocked Hand, Published by consent of her Husband, and attested by him and several other credible Witnesses. Funeral Discourses in several Texts, by John Shower. Books in the Press, and designed for it, printed for John Dunton. THE Lord Faulklands Works, Secretary of State to King Charles I. Mr. Will. Leiburns new Mathematical Tracts in Follo. A continuation of Morning Exercise, Questions and Cases of Conscience the Second Edition. A Discourse of the Trinity, by John Mauduit. Minister at Tooring.
