P987 13799093 101909
THE State of Northampton From the beginning of the FIRE, Sept. 20th 1675. to Nov. 5th. Represeed in a Letter to a FRIEND in LONDON; And now recommen∣ded to all well disposed Persons, in order to Christian-Charity, and spee∣dy Relief for the said distressed Town and People. By a Country Minister. Licensed, Nov. 22. 1675. Roger L'estrange. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Pauls Churchyard, and William Cookeraine Book∣seller in NORTHAMPTON. 1675.
THE State of Northamton FROM The beginning of the Fire, Sept. 20th. 1675. to Nov. the 5th. &c. SIR, IF I had not expected a true and full Ac∣count of the beginning and Progress of the dreadful Fire at Northampton, as also of the Losses, State, and Relief of that distressed People, from a faith∣ful and able hand, I should have labou∣red to have prepared this, such as it is, sooner for your satisfaction. I do not pretend to inform you with every Circumstance and Accident, that's not to be looked for; Because I know none that had so much leisure from their own or other Mens Concenments, as to observe and trace the Motions of that terrible Ele∣ment, which was that day carried up and down upon the Wings of a strong and violent Wind. And in∣deed, I find in mine own diligent enquiry, even of un∣derstanding Men, that it is as impossible for a Man who imploys all his endeavours to save his own Goods and Life in one part of a Street, to tell me when and in what House the Fire brake out in another place di∣stant
from him, as it is for a Soldier, whose Life is en∣gaged in a narrow particular Station, to relate what was out of his sight, done in every Wing, in every Regi∣ment, Troop or Company, much more in every Rank and File of the whole Army, at once engaged and spread over all the Field, as this Fire was spread over the Body, and all parts of the Town. The All-see∣ing Eye of the Lord of these mighty Hosts of Fire and Wind, can give an exact and perfect Story of e∣very particular Action of that fatal Day. No one Man can, nor many Men apart, because they were not in every place, nor observed all things, but as each one gives in his Observation; which must be gathered together to make a Story, so it must be taken up. And this I assure you, that I gathered these following pas∣sages, as well as I was able, and from persons as able to inform me, and as distinctly related, as can be ex∣pected from persons under the disorders of Care, Fear, and Amazement at the same time. That I may represent Northampton in its Ruines, it may not be amiss to present the Figure and Scituation of it as it stood and flourished;A Description of the Town. because some may peruse these lines, that knew it not, and the better conceive the course of the Fire, which I shall shew you, and the great alteration of it, from a Beautiful Town, to Pitts and Rubbish. Northampton might well contend with the best Inland-City or Town, that is not seated upon a Navigable River, for sweet and wholsom Air, pleasantness of Scituation, plenty and cheapness of Corn and Butchers Meat, good ancient Buildings, dry and commodious Cellarages broad and cleanly Streets, a spacious Market-Hill, fine and pro∣fitable Gardens and Orchards, within the Walls (while it was Beautified and honoured with their standing.)
The Prospect of it was very delightful from Queens-Cross, which stands upon a Hill in London-Road, with∣in a Mile distance from it. You come down from that Cross to a Bottom, called Gotton-end, and from thence,Of which se Mr. Cambde passing a fair Stone-Bridg over the River Nen or Nine, you entred the Town on a flat, till you come within the South-Gate, and thence keeping the Northern-Road, you went out at the North-Gate, overcoming three Ascents. The first in the Bridg-street, as some∣what steep, but was made easie by the diverting sight of good Buildings on either hand, and a neat Front on the top of that Street. You might observe the Town divided into East and West; to the West-Gate through the Gold-Street by St. Peters Church, to the East-Gate fetching a little compass by All-Hallows Church, through Abingdon-Street near St. Giles's Church. From the top of the first Ascent, leaving on the right hand that great and well-built Church, All-Hallows, the chief in the Town, you come into the Drapery, a broad, and for the most part a well-built Street, and finely fronted with graceful Houses; on the Right-hand of which, was one of the best open-Market-pla∣ces in England. This second Ascent was more easy and leisurely than the former, and turning a little on the Left-hand, you went through the Sheep-Street, up a moderate Ascent to the North-Gate, having St. Se∣pulchres Church on the Right-hand. By this Descrip∣tion of the Town, you imagine that it stood on a side of a Hill, facing the South-Sun, and that the middle, and lowest part was sheltered from the North-Wind: That it was divided into four Quarters, had four great Gates, East, West, North and South, and had a Church in every Quarter, only All-Hallows stood Southward, and near the heart of the Town. The civil Division
of it was into five Wards, distinguished from the four Winds or Quarters, and the fifth was the Chequer-Ward in the middle. And now I may say what, and more than the Men of Jericho said to Elisha; The Scituation is pleasant, but the Water is naught and the Ground barren. Nor∣thampton was Beautiful for the Scituation, the Water good, and the Ground about it rich. It stood above the River, which ran in the South, beating on both sides upon very rich Meadow down quite to Peterbo∣row: And at which Gate soever you went out, you went out of a sweet Town into a rich and noble Cham∣pion. But now (alas!) the Glory and Beauty of it,overthrow. is more than scorched with Fire, it is vanished into Smoak. The great and goodly Church is become its own Se∣pulchre, and the Cellars the Graves and Pits into which the best contrived Dwellings are tumbled and hurried. It was a City upon a Hill, but now God hath turned it into a burning Beacon, to give warning to Towns and Cities of Judgments that may sudden∣ly invade them, and break in upon them, except they receive and obey his Laws, and cease to provoke him, by their tolerated Disobedience. God began with London, is come as far as Northampton to execure his Judgments, who knows whither he will Ride next in a Burning Charior, and where he will make an end? Were those Citizens and these Townsmen sinners above all Men? I tell you, Nay, but except you repent, &c. Have not you your sins also! yea, London sins as rife as Fashions! Nothing hath happened to them but what may be common to you, when ever God's forbearance is come up to an end. The Heart of London, and the Heart of Northampton, were Burnt out in the same
Month▪ who can secure themselves till September come about again from the same, or as great a Judg∣ment, if you slight these Warnings? God who hath set the Bounds of our Habitations, hath set down with himself the Term of our Possession of them. Every Man hath his appointed time, which takes in Means and Ways of coming to his stated Pe∣riod; so have Societies and Corporations of Men their appointed times; a time to Grow, and a time to De∣cay, (they are subject to Consumptions and Feavers); thus strong and high they shall grow in numbers of Men, and Prosperity; thus long they shall continue, and no longer. And what time soever God speaks concerning a Nation, a City, a Palace, yea, a Cot∣tage, to pluck up and pull down; he speaks to the Fire, Burn, to the Wind, Blow, and carry it whither I will: Here it shall take, there burn, and here it shall stop. The utmost term that God would grant for Northamp∣ton to continue as it was,The Day. was the Twentieth day of Sep∣tember, 1675. Hundreds of Inhabitants were turned out of their Houses, upon a little or no Warning at all. To some the Sovereign Lord would not grant so much as leave to remove their Goods off his Ground; not so much as a Bed to lie on, or a Garment to shift them, not a Stool to sit on, nor a Dish to eat in. To others he was pleased to allow a few Hours (of Terror and Distraction) to remove and be gone; but he would not be entreated to give his dearest Servants, not another Day, not that Night, no not that Afternoon. Means and Instruments, and Place where the Fire began.God called for a strong West-wind to be ready at his Command, to carry a dreadful Fire whither he would have it. The unhappy Instrument of that Destructi∣on was said to be an infamous and common Woman, who lived in the end of St. Maries-street, next the
Castle (in the West.) The manner (thus, as I am in∣formed upon the place) she had something boyling on a Fire, and left the Fire carelesly, and went to the next House; when she had been there a little while, she said to her Companion, I will go and fetch my Child, and in a moment, finding her House on fire, it seems took up her Bastard, and ran out, and away, crying, I shall be Hang'd, I shall be Hang'd. She is not yet re∣turned, nor found, to tell us what she did. That Street was full upon the Wind, far from help, and the Prin∣cipal part of the Town, which was to be the Theatre of Judgment, and consisted of the poorer sort of Houses, Thatcht with Straw, fit matter to kindle a consuming Fire. The time of he Day.The Fire brake out about half an hour past Eleven, came on directly to the back part of the Horse-Market, strengthening it self with Ricks of Corn and Maltings, it spread out its Wing to the South, and lower end of that Market.The Progress of it. The hideous Cry of Fire, Fire, came up post to Town: but when some heard it was so far off, and in meaner Dwellings, they made the lighter of it, and others hoped it might spend it self and go out, in a large Cherry-Ground, and other Orchards in the way. All-hallows Bells jangled their last and doleful Knell, presently after the Chimes had gone Twelve in a more pleasant Tune: And soon after the Wind which did flie swifter than Horse-men, carried the Fire near the Dern-Gate, at least half a Mile from the place where it began, and into St. Giles-street in the East, and consumed every House therein, save one (formerly a Gate-House) whose end-Walls were higher than the Roof, and by them preserved. When some that were strong and active, saw the streams of Fire driven be∣fore
an impetuous Wind, seeing that nothing was like to stand before it, they made all haste to shift for them∣selves, and to save their Goods. All hands and arms were full, all busie in laying out, and mislaying what they shall never see again. Some active Men did la∣bour all they could to save some Houses; But what could be done in such a sudden Surprize? when so many Places were on Fire at once, and so many Tim∣ber Buildings were as fuel dried, and laid in for this dreadful Fire. The Violence of the Fire.Some that consider not the confounding Circum∣stances that People were under, have been apt to cast upon them the blame of Dispair and Negligence: but they must be silent, when they believe upon the word of all I spake with, that all that's Burnt, was irresi∣stibly gone in three Hours time; although I know that every House was not Burnt in that time, for some few did not begin to Burn till Six a Clock at Night, but it was too strong to be with-stood, and past hope of be∣ing saved by that time. Had it been a leisurely Fire, proceeding in order of Houses and Streets, then Buc∣kets might have quencht the Thirst of a dry and greedy Element; then one House might have been Blown up in Sacrifice, to have saved a Street: but this Fire would have scorned an Engine, nothing less than the open∣ing of Windows in Heaven could have quencht its Rage. Houses were casually Blown up by Barrels of Powder, laid up for Sale, but the Fire kept up its Fury and its Way for all that. To talk now of Engins, and Blowing up of Houses, are but Suppositions, which could not then preserve a House any more than now Rebuild one. We may as wisely say, had it Rained all that day, the Town might have been saved from Burning.
Distracted People! How busie were they in empty∣ing out their Goods, labouring to be before hand with the swift Destroyer, that came upon some of them, before their Fears had notice of it. The Fire was fled over the Town, but did not forget what it had to do, and therefore brake over the spacious planted Grounds, seised upon the Colledg-Lane, and finding there great quantities of Oyl and Tallow, and other combustible Matter, brake upon the back-side of the Drapery in a little time.Care of Goods, but to little purpose. Some threw their Goods into their Cel∣lars; there or no where; some into the Church (that had more time and leisure than the former) in which they were consumed with it; Others into the Church∣yard, and were there turned to Ashes. The spacious Market-Hill was covered with all sorts of Wares and Goods, these the affrighted Owners were forced to leave one among another, when they were enclosed with a Wall of Fire, and only one little Door of E∣seape left them to run out at, by Dr. Danver's House, the only House that stands in all that Row, having no Neighbour-dwelling to bear it company, nor Out-offices to serve its necessities, they being burnt, and it self hard∣ly preserved. Some had better help, better coveni∣ences of Orchards and Closses than others had; some more time than others, or else the Loss had been vastly greater. And although the Fire spoiled and consumed many Goods (it spared neither Cross nor Pump, nor Timber drawn into the Market-place for the Sessions-House); yet what the Fire spared in that and other Pla∣ces, cruel Thieves, that come in to spoil the Spoiled, were more Merciless than a merciless Fire. May the stolen Sugars, Fruit, Spices, Linnen, Clothes, Bed∣ding, or what ever else these Men of Prey took by Fraud, be bitter, hot, cold, and uneasie to them, till they
have eased their Consciences of so great a Guilt. But Divine Justice will take a Course with them, in a more dreadful Day than that was, except they Repent, Re∣store, give Satisfaction, or be Forgiven. The Destracti∣ons and Dan∣gers of a help∣less People de∣scribed.Sir, I know you can understand without my telling you, that this miserable People were loth to leave their convenient and comfortable Dwellings, but more loth to lose their Wares and Goods; but they were forced to leave the one to a Fire that would have them; and at last forced to leave both House, and Shop, and Goods, to save their Lives. Give me leave to try, if I can make you sensible of their Condition, in a Dull and Misty and Cold representation of it: For a lively Image I cannot draw, because my Bosom cannot hold their Passions, nor my Pen weep out their Tears. No words can report the Cries, Fears, Dangers, Distra∣ctions, Carefulness, and Amazedness of Young and Old, that doleful Day. Oh! the Roaring of Fire and Wind, what a Thunder in the Air! What Clouds of Smoak! What tearing cracks of Timber! Ancient Couples, Beams and Walls keeping close to one an∣other, till forced to part, suffering themselves to be burnt Inch by Inch before they could be separated! But what were these to the more sensible Out-crys of a People decreed to Ruine? If you will carry Wind and Flames and Burning-Houses up and down to shew them, then and not before, will I undertake to relate what a di∣stracted Multitude thought, speak, and did, who could not tell what to Think Speak or Do that might prove Succesful. There were old Men and Women, Children and Infants, Women lying-In, others full of the Small-Pox (which had been much in Town) Mo∣thers that gave Suck. What could this helpless Mul∣titude do? Whither could they creep or run?— The
consuming Fire it self brought certain News that it was coming. The Fire and Wind, cried Fire, and did drown the Peoples Cries, and the hideous sound of Bells.— Oh the confusion of Language, Thoughts, and Actions of a surprized People! how quiet and secure were they but a little while before? Some were calling upon God, sanctifying themselves and all they had, committing Themselves and their Affairs to Him; some preparing their Goods for London, others ready to sit down to Dinner, and behold a Cry, Fire, Fire: Clouds of Smoak, Pillars and Sheets of Fire covering the Face of Heaven! Fire in the West, that had left but few Houses or Pieces to stand; Fire in the East that carried all before it, and in every Quarter, and the Body of the Town hemn'd in with Fire; and the stately Tower of the great Church turned into a Chim∣ney, sucking and drawing up the Fire and Smoak from within it, and discharging them out again in a mighty Body. What a sight was this to have pleased a Nero? or such as must be Roman, or think they are not Chri∣stian? What a Change was here by five, by four, yea, by three and two of the Clock? How long are many Hands in rearing and adorning one House? Northampton was raised to its late Perfection at the Expence of many Generations, one adding to another; but if the Great God speak to the Fire, Burn, and to the Wind, Blow it a few Hours are time enough to Demolish it; How ter∣rible is God in his Judgments? How impossible is it for me to feel my self in the condition of a People ba∣nished, Ab Aris & Focis, turned out of Doors, and as it were Excommunicated their Church? But whither were they gone? Into the Fields, and whither else they could, some one way, and some another. Great
was the care of People over little ones, and such as could not well escape themselves; and the waky Pro∣vidence had disposed of them in safety, though they knew not where to find one another. When the worst was come, the Wife's Jointure, and the Child's Portion, and the Estate which was wont to maintain them, was exhausted that Expensive Day: how hastily did they weave up and down, making inquiries after one another; some wanting words to tell you who they sought for, and others at the same loss to tell them tidings! How they looked and wrung their hands they themselves cannot tell us now. What rest could Parents take that Night, missing their Children? Some had wandred into neighbouring Villages, where they had never been before, and were not heard of till next day. Who can conceive the sadness till they found out their Relations? And when they met, who can express the Joy that they were alive? although many had not left them wherewith to refresh them, feed them, cloath them, or wherein to lodg that Night. But God remembred Mercy! The Gentry who were preserved in the Town, and near it, and others to their power, turned their Houses into Inns and Hospitals and Ware-Houses, to refresh and comfort their distressed Neighbours. And now after that God had Smoaked them out, he was pleased to Hive them in, many Fa∣milies crouded into one House; and eating that lit∣tle the Fire had left of their stocks, till the compassi∣onate Neighbourhood could send in Provisions. And now having followed them from their own, into strange and uneasy Lodgings, I shut up my discourse, and lead you to view the condition of that ruin'd Town as it was found next day.
How the Town looked next day.Sir, had you seen the dreadful Fire that Night, you might have guessed what a place you were like to find it next Morning; but really, I could not have imagin∣ed it to be so soon reduced so unlike it self! Next Morning you might have seen the late Dwellers come to see what was left them. Oh! how strangely were they changed! Poor frighted, tired and amazed Men, how were their Faces changed! They looked as if they had come from under-Ground, out of Mines and Cole-Pits. They looked not only like Men that had lost their Rest, but spent with Cares and Fasting, scorch∣ed with Heat, and broken with Distractions! Dirty Faces, scalded Eyes, and their Eye-lashes hung with Mortar made of Tears and Dust blown into them. In the Afternoon you might see neither Town nor Towns-Men scarce, but Ruines instead of orderly Piles and Streets, and Strangers come into view them. The Inhabitants were gone, some to search suspitious Houses for lost Goods, others to get together some ends of something that was left, or to seek out new Lodging for their afflicted Families; Others watching their Goods, till help could come to carry them away. Very few could tell me what was left, besides their Lives, and a Charge to maintain. The first Observation I made, was upon the Beha∣viour of Men, and I found them apt to Tears, sensible of the Hand of God, Calm, and thankful for their Lives. My next Observation was upon the Ruines, and when I have said all I can say of them, 'tis this, that they were Ruines. Nothing standing above the Cel∣lars that was combustible, which was not either burnt or burning down to Ashes. No Timber left, from great Beams, even to Cheeks of Doors and and Lin∣tels,
When God compared his People to an useless Vine— Behold it is cast into the Fire for Fuel,Ezek 15. the Fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burnt: is it meet for any work? Even so did he use hundreds of Houses, and the best in the principal Streets of Northampton: I hope he will deal gracious∣ly with the Men, and make them a fruitful Vine, ha∣ving prun'd and purg'd them. What was to be seen above Ground, but a few Fronts of Stone, Particion-Walls, and Chimnies? If you had no sense but Eyes, you might think them to be Ruines of an ancient Date, but other Senses would perswade you they were but new, the Walls and Streets being glowing hot, &c. And this was noted to them on Michaelmas day (when the Mayor and Magistrates, as many as had a Gown, were in a colour suitable to their present condition, and not former State) that the upper Lintels were not left for the Cormorant and Bittern to lodg in, Zeph. 2. And for several reasons, they who saw that Fire whose Epithite is, The Dreadful Fire of London! and this, do say, this was the more furious and destructive in its Proportion. Thus, Sir, in general, you may believe the Fire, and losses were very great: but if you will give me leave, I will shew you what made both so great. First,What made the loss so great. First, the former years being bad for Carriage, and Fuel dear, they were almost out of Stock, till this good Sum∣mer came, and great plenty, at moderate Rates. This was a time to provide for this and another Winter. It was one part of the providence of Northampton Men, to lay in something towards a wet and dear time, in a good Summer. They were cram'd full; and now what was laid up for future time, was consumed in one day, before they had tam'd their Heaps.
Secondly, As the Town was ful of Fuel, so Trades∣men were full of Goods. They had newly furnish∣ed themselves with the Commodities of Sturbridg-Fair. Besides that, some had taken the advantages of the cheapness of all sorts of Wares and Goods, and of Carriage, and laid out as far as their Stocks would reach, in hopes of a stirring Market: and many, if not all or most, had stored themselves for their Winter-Trade. And as the Shopkeeper could not be fuller, so neither the Innkeeper, nor Husbandman: and such as laid in their Crops for Malt, were very full; and none had any time to make returns. From this Consideration some may readily infer, that others that gave them Credit must lose, or hazard with then. This is not unlikely. But it will be found that the loss is heavy upon them alone, and apart. For, 1. As few of them traded upon Credit, as any Town can be found to do. 2. Their Trade was but a home-Trade, (I except the Shoomaker and Hosier) and wary and prudent Men could guess at the compass of it, and their prudence told them that the more Credit they had, the less profit they made. 3. As few Men failed and broke in Northampton, as in any Town of its Dimensions, (and consequently as few lost by dealing with them.) A good argument of their dexterity, in ordering comparative∣ly a small Trade; to live so decently and plentifully as they did. 4. Many of them had plentiful Estates in Houses, that brought in good Rent, and many li∣ved in their own, whereby their Losses fall heavily up∣on themselves: but the wise God thought no less e∣nough. Thirdly, The Instrumental causes of this sad Deso∣lation, were the Driness of the Weather, the violence of the Wind, which was a swift Chariot for the All-subduing
Fire, and it's to be noted, that God planted (pardon the impropriety) the Wind to blow up the heart of the Town, to which St. Maries Street stood level. And of that vehement Wind, 'tis to be observed, be∣side that it whirled the Fire at its pleasure up and down; that it did also beat down the Smoak, and raise up the Dust, which was a great discouragement of all endeavours to save the Town; and afflicted People▪ They had Dust to blind them, Smoak to stifle them, and Fire that sindged and scorched them as they passed up and down. Sometimes it gave some hopes of spa∣ring, by turning two points North (as one Scholar tells me) but dashed all again; by vereing to the West. Another ingenious observer (who took care to save a Neighbour's House near his own) tells me that the Fire fell upon the Thatch, struck upon it, took it and danced for six minutes at least, and by a sudden turn the Wind carried it away, and with a little labour the House escaped. Sir, If I have been too large in generals, I will re∣ward your patience, by giving you satisfaction in the following particulars. 1. The greatness of the Loss, as given in▪ 2. The number of Houses totally destroyed. 3. The influ∣ence of this loss. 4. The relief. 5. The disposal of it. Conclude with some few remarks. The Dammage.1. The Loss, as given in amounts to one hundred two thousand and eight pounds odd mony, besides the Church, &c. to the value of about fifty thousand pound; a vast loss, if we consider how long an inland Town, that hath no manufacture in it, that drives none of the quickest Trades, is growing up, and how long they must needs be in regaining some part of it. To lose the product of 20. or 30. years care and pains,
both what was left them, and added by them, is a very great affliction. But the Lord gave before he took away. Hereby many in the middle part of their Lives, or the very latter end of their days, are sent back to begin the World anew, or driven to end it in a low Estate. It may be an injury to others that some few are suspected to give in their losses with a Cypher perhaps too much: if there be any such, I heartily wish they would blot it out, lest such a Cypher eat out the Fi∣gure: but again, it's verily thought, that others have been very scrupulous and sparing. If Men cannot be disproved, we ought to suspend our Censures. 2. The number of Houses to tally consumed, beside Out-Houses &c. is about 600. wherein above 700. Families did dwell.Numbers of Houses. And these Monuments of spa∣ring Mercy stand in the four Quarters of the Town, as the Arms and Legs drawn out in Torture, cut off from the Body; and it is as great a Wonder that here and there a House should escape, as that the rest should be brought to ruine in so short a time. Some few Houses remain near the Church, and only one Tene∣ment in the Drapery, from the Street, hardly seen to the Street at this time. The chief Church in Town only burnt, the rest untouched. 3. The Influence and effects of this sweeping Judg∣ment fall upon many beside the immediate Sufferers.Effects. 1. upon the Poor, which stood All-Hallows Parish in ten pound the Month, the Roll would have been raised to eleven pound this Winter. But now the Poor are multiplied, who, since the Fire fell into their Quar∣ters (poor Creatures) lay within the Walls to the open Heavens (till now of late) except such as got in∣to Churches. Thither the Fire forced them, whither
God's Commands, nor Mercy nor Exhortations could invite them. A Judgment fitted to the sin, a Judgment all Voice, as in other Instances. Secondly, the Citizens will lose their Customers, the Country∣man will lose his Market, and the Landlord must fall his Rent, if Northampton be not relieved: yea more, many a Man must go further to seek for an honest Man to teach his Child a Trade; and many a one will want a service, that cannot well be kept and maintained at home. Relief sent in.4. The Relief was considerable, as it was seasonable to this im∣poverished people. Many have told me, they found ten∣der Mercy and Compassion, and that they found more Friends, than ever they thought they had. The goodness of God and Men was admired. The kindness of a Nights Lodging, of a small benevolence was magnified. The noble Earl of Northamp∣ton, who came that fatal Evening to see the Fire, was affected with the sight, and sent great store of Provisions the next day. many other persons of Quality, Neighbour-Towns and Villages were very forward and generous. The bold and raking Poor had a glut, but the modest House-Keeper looked pale and thin, till necessity overcame their modesty, and then they were re∣spected. The Mayor sent Messengers with Letters to intreat the Noble-Men and Gentlemen t  in the Town-Hall, to take their distressed condition into Consideration. There appeared the Saturday following the dreadful Fire, the Right Honourable the Earl of Northampton; Recorder of the Town:Relief sent in. A Consultation of the Noble-Men and Gen∣tlemen. three Lords; Sir Richard Rainsford, one of the Judges of the Kings-Bench. Seven or eight Baronets and Knights, and many Justices of the Peace and Gentlemen. The Meeting was principally managed by the Earl. The Result of all their Discourses, was a Subscrip∣tion to two Papers, to this purpose. We the Noble-Men and Gentlemen do promise to pay the several sums set down over against, our Names, &c. The one was to∣wards the Re-building of the Town, and the other was for the payment of Dr. Conant's Salary (which was 100 l. per Annum) and for the Relief of the Poor, and other uses of the Town. They named Robert Haslerig, William Tate, Henry Edmonds, Richard Rinsford Esquines, Receivers and Treasurers.
Several Summs were gathered speedily, upon the News of the Dreadful Fire, in several Corporations, by the Uni∣versity of Cambridg, and already gathered, but not received, by the University of Oxon, Towns, Villages, and private Persons: all which come to about 3000. Pound. A distribution made.These several Sums of Mony were paid into the Hands of Robert Haslerig Esq living in Town. Who with the o∣ther Gentlemens consent, made a very seasonable Distribution of a great Sum among the Sufferers, wherein they had a re∣spect to their Losses, to their Trades, and to their Condi∣tions and disability to go on. This was a timely Assistance given men, that were hard put to it to strike up Sheds and Shops, and to take in some Winter-Provisions. In this Di∣stribution they designed to preserve the Road, to bring in the Markes, to set Trade on Foot, to help the inferior Tradesmen. Besides, they took Order to lay in a great Stock of Coal, to be served out to the Inhabitants at their need in the approaching Winter. They disbursed Mony to the Officers of the Parish to pay their Poor. And lastly, they have, and are fitting up Houses for the Poor to live in, who had nothing left but bare Walls without a Roof. The Care, and Pains, and tenderness of these worthy Gen∣tlemen deserve the grateful acknowledgment of the distres∣sed Sufferers; and indeed they s o me to have an hum∣ble sense, of the Mercy and Favour. I have been the more punctual in these things, as to re∣ctify the Reporte of vast Sums said to be flowing in, and be∣sides many other Reasons, to encourage liberal Souls to ge∣nerous Acts of Charity, when they see the Treasury so well dispensed; both deposited into, and disposed by the hands of Persons of Quality, Estate, and Integrity. There was about sixty pound sent from several Persons of Quality, and others, to Dr. Conant, which was carefully distributed according to the intention of the Donors. The forward and noble beneficence of particular Persons, and the kind and Christian Expression of Love made by Corporati∣ons and Villages to Northampton brought low, though but a small beginning to a great many,Gracious pro∣vidences to∣wards the Town. (nor the whole exceeding the loss of some one or two Men) hath raised the Minds of ma∣ny, so that there is hope in Northampton, but yet there
are many discouragements, that threaten the Life of it in some, and keep it from being over-joyful in the most chearful Temper. Besides these kindnesses from Men. There are some eminent Providences which have brought kind Remembrances from Hea∣ven, to a People under a displeasure. The first is, that this ca∣lamity is fallen upon them in a year of Plenty. Had it fallen upon them in one of the years past, many that were glad of a piece of Bread, must have perished for want of Bread. Lon∣don Fire consumed it, after a Plague, in a time of War, the Nation under Taxes: Northampton hath the odds in this, that she is fallen, when a Nation may the better raise her up. The second sweet and reviving providence is, that second Sum∣mer which God was pleased to give us, He said to an approach∣ing Winter, Keep off a while. He hath given a Midsummer-time after Michaelmas. He said to the Sun, shine thou still. What a Mercy hath this been to poor Northampton! By the favour of the Weather abundance of Coal came in, (even as far as Wedgbury, above fourty Miles) and as cheap as in Summer. A dreadful Fire had done enough to Starve them, consuming their Stacks and Heaps; but the Sun continuing in its strength relieved them, by bringing Firing to them, which I hope will be better spent. What the Fire destroyed, the Sun restored. Thus God doth correct and take into his Arms! Ju∣stice and Fury made quick riddance, but Mercy made haste after them. Through the goodness of the Season all sorts of Mate∣rials for Buildings came whistling in (the Carter meeting with no Ruts nor Sloughs to put him out of Tune.) Yea, Deal scame down from London at as low or lower Rates than Country-Ash. By this means Workmen came in, go on, not being beaten off with Weather. By this means raw Walls, new-Sawn and unseason'd Boards, have been aired and seasoned: by this means full Markets have come in, and the Market-Man hath not felt the inconvenience of a bad Standing for himself and Horses. And Lastly, by this means Northampton is brought up a little above its Ruines, and her New-Buildings to imitate Bartholomew-Fair. And in this Posture I shall leave it, pray∣ing heartily, that God would speak to Northampton, It shall be built; and take pleasure in the now distressed People, and their Posterity.
Observations upon the Fire.And now, Sir, there remains but the last part of this Trouble, and I will relieve your Patience by a Conclusion, namely some Observations upon, or rather drawn from this Severe, but Righteous Providence, which speaks to other Places with a loud Voice. 1. It hath pleased God to strike at all Conditions of Persons, and all the Sins of the Town. He hath in great Mercy passed over the Houses of many of the Gentry, who lived there for their own Pleasure or Conveniency, which hath proved a great Relief to many of the Distressed▪ Neighbours, but many of that Quality do also bear their share of Loss and Trouble: I desire not to be Critical or Censorious. God took in all toge∣ther, the Righteous and the Wicked fare alike, though for dif∣ferent Ends: It hath happened to the Good, to make them bet∣ter, with a gracious Design, no doubt: And to the Wicked God saith, Why will you Die? He stretcheth out his Hand to them; but if they turn not, he hath whet his Sword, &c. The Long-suffering of God, which waited but till the Flood, doth wait for their Repentance after the Fire. O that they would flie from Wrath to come! There were and are in Nor∣thampton good Figs, very good: (Such as obey every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether the King as Supreme, &c. Such as feared God and wrought Righteousness). But as the good Figs were to go to Captivity, so ow these shall pass through a Burning Furnace. And there were very naughty Figs, evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten. And so much the worse, because God came long expecting Fruit, having long been a Husbandman to it, and more especially to that Parish, that is almost totally destroyed. God hath diminished two other Parishes, (St. Peter's (Is it not a little one?) is spared entire) there was Iniquity in those Skirts: But why God should stretch out his Hand with a flaming Sword over All-hallows, more than others,mo 3.2. I can give no other Reason, but that of the Prophet; You have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I Punish you for your Iniquities. They have been better Taught than others, and made the chief Parish in Town. God sent to them Prophets, and Wise-Men, and Scribes, he hath been a Reprover of them all. Few Parishes perhaps (I am sure I know but few) that have had such Labourers as they for Five Successions. Security, Luke-warmness, and bearing them that are Evil, are the Sins that God took worse from Magistrates and
People, than from other Towns. How hath the Spirit of God stri∣ven with them, and within this Year? They know the occasion. And Fools that make a mock of Sin, may now believe, that God can be in Earnest.— O Lord, Laugh not at their Calamity, who have set at naught thy Counsel, and would none of thy Reproof; and let them not be as Dross in the Furnace.— 2. God hath dealt with Northampton in this Fire, mixing Mercy with Judgment, as in other Providences: Here is Mercy and Judgment, Patience and Fury. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? &c. He hath made their Houses like Adma; but to the People, he saith, Yet how shall I give thee up? Some that were fallen into Fellowship with gross works of Darkness, had a long time of Languishing and Repentance, and gave Signs of it, discovered and warned others. But their Companions went on. How then? Have some escaped? What Execution hath God done in the Face of the World, in open Streets? Night-walking, boldness in Sin, Swearing and Drunkenness punished in open Streets, by sudden Death. Remember Lots Wife. Re∣member S's. F's. O's. Wife. There was Mercy, and here Judg∣ment. Of Consorts and Companions, that Grind in the same Mill of Sin, one shall be taken, and another left. 3. From the unhappy Hand that kindled this Dreadful Fire, I observe, that they who escape deserved Punishments, may be justly made the unhappy Instruments of punishing those that should have been justly severe with them. And it may give no∣tice to Magistrates, to look after the Skirts, the Back Lanes of their Towns, that Iniquity lodg not there.— The Cages of unclean Birds may bring whole Towns to Ruine. 4. It is Marvellous that a Fire breaking out at Noon-day should get so much strength in so short a time, consume so many Goods and Houses; yea, take away so many Lives,Eight Persons Burnt: Be∣sides two Wo∣men and a young Youth Killed by the fall of a stack of Chimneys since.as Eight Persons. And on the contrary, it seems to me a wonderful Mer∣cy, that so few perished in the Fire, when I consider with what a mighty stream and force the Fire and Wind came on in some narrow Passages; that many People were Spent and Faint, their Spirits spent, their Eyes dazeled, or blinded with Dust and Smoak; that some Houses fell down when Persons were run∣ning by for Life; and that many had no other Passage open to fly for their Lives, but by venturing close by raging Fire. And here I may add, what I received from a very worthy Friend, that he saw a Country-Fellow bring up a Barrel of Gun-pow∣der
out of an Apothecaries Cellar, when the Gold was Burn∣ing, and covering it with his Coat, went away with it in his Arms, which might have been his own Death, and the Death of many others. 5. Whereas some may look upon this as casually begun, and grown to so great a Mischief by Over-sights and Neglects of People, I cannot but see a great Plot of many conspiring Cir∣cumstances, and all laid by the Holy, Just, Wise, and Absolute Lord, both for Punishment, Correction, and Trial. I will Sum those that readily occur. That the Wind should fit so full upon that part of the Town, that the Fire should kindle in a Street so combustible, far from Help speedily to Suppress it, so Level upon the principal Places of the Town: That it should flie so far as the East in a very little while; that the Heart of the Town should be Environed, and Barricado'd with Flames, that there was no getting in no getting out for Teams, when they would have done most good, when the Shops and Houses were most Emptied, and laid out of Doors, ready to be carried away. How easily might Teams have cleared the Market-Hill, and Church-yard, if the Four great Avenues and Passages had been passable? How little did many Towns think Northampton to stand in so much need of Help? These and more being put to∣gether make me Conclude, Is there Evil in the City, and the Lord hath not done it? God is known by the Judgments which he Executeth. Selah. Go ye now unto my Place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my People Israel, Jer. 7.12. And now, Sir, because I said I will conclude, I will instead of making an Apologie for my self, Why so late? Why so long? Or to others why so short? Or why I? I will only say, that I have some feeling of the Sufferings of my worthy and dear Ac∣quaintance, pray it may rise higher and better, that I hope your Interest and Endeavours may do good, that I have endeavoured to make their deplorable Condition to speak for them, and that I owe you a far greater Service, when you shall command it, if I can perform it. For I am Sir, Your most Obliged Servant. E. P. FINIS.
