S1857 13698808 101452
A PROCLAMATION, For Citing Ministers vvho have have not Prayed for Their Majesties. Edinburgh, August 22. 1689. WHEREAS by an Act of Council, of the sirth of this Istant, in Pursuance of an Act of the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, of the thirteenth of April last, the Parochioners and Hearers of such Ministers as have neglected and slighted the Reading of the Proclamation therein mentioned, and the Praying for King William and Queen Marry, are invited and allowed to Cite such Ministers before the Privy Council, which Act of Council grants Warrand for Citing and Adducing Ministers; And forasmuch as the Design of the said Act, is, that such Ministers who have Disobeyed the said Act of the Meeting of the Estates, may conform thereto by a Legal Sentence be Deprived; Therefore that the said Act of the Meeting of the Estates, and the Act of Council pursuat thereof, may attain there intended Design, and Effect with the greater Expedition, and least Expenses to the Leidges, The Lords of his Majesties Privy Council, in Their Majesties flame and Authority. Do invite and allow, not only the Parochioners and hearers of such Ministers as have Disobey∣ed; but also the heretors of these Parochins, and the Sheriffs or their Deputs, and Magistrats of Burghs Respective, and the Members of this Currant Parliament, within there Respective Bounds, to cause Cite such Ministers before the Privy Council, and hereby grants War∣rand to Messengers at Arms, for Citing them, and such Witnesses as are necessary, they de∣livering a Copy of these Presents, either in Print or in Writ, Signed by their hand, to each Minister that shall be Cited by them to any Tuesday or Thursday, six dayes after the Citation, for all on this side the River Tay, and fifteen days for all beyond the said River, That such Ministers who have not given Obedience to the said Act of the Meeting of the Estates, may be a Legal Sentence be Deprived according thereto; and Appoints the Returns of these Executions to be Inrolled by the Clerk of Privy Council, and Called before the Lords at their respective dayes of Compearance; Declaring that these Present are but prejudice of any Citations already gi∣ven, or to be given, either upon the former Act of Council, or upon Warrands from the Coun∣cil-Board. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published by the Officers of Prive Council at the Mercat-Crosse of Edinburgh, that none may pretend Ignorance. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of His Majesties Privy Council, Anno Dom. 1689.
