s3102a 99832488 36961
CERTAINE PROPOSALS FOR Regulating the Law, to make the same more plaine and easie to bee understood, and lesse Charge∣able and expensive then heretofore. FIrst, I take for an undeniable principle, that the Law which so much concernes every man, ought not to bee a Mysterie, but as much as possible be made most prosicu∣ous and evident to the meanest capacitie, nothing be∣ing more unjust then for a man to be judged by a law of which hee was unavoydably ignorant. For if wee consider the rise and originall of all Lawes, be∣cause men knew not when they did well, when they did evill, what was theirs what not theirs; they in∣stituted Lawes to the end every man might know his Duty and the penalty of transgressing. Moreover, it is a maxime in our own Law, that ignorance thereof excuseth no man, but every man is presumed to bee
conusant thereof. And it is a true saying, Misera est servitus ubi jus est vagum aut incognitum, It is a miserable slavery where the Law is incertain or un∣knowne; a wonder it was to all wise men even to the ingenuous of the Professors of the Law themselves, that the Law should bee kept so close lockt up in an unknowne tongue, when the reason why the Lawes were first written in that brackish French, was because that Language was then best understood of those whom those lawes most concern'd (viz.) the Normans. Therefore blessed be God, it hath been and still is the Wisdome and Integritie of the PARLIAMENT, to make the Lawes so plain and obvious to every un∣derstanding, that every man might know his duty and his property. The Lawes of this Land are eyther Criminall or Civill; as for the criminall Lawes they are not so many or mysterious, but with a little study a man may attaine to a competent knowledge thereof; but for the Civill lawes, especially those which concerne Lands, they are infinitly Intricate, mysticall, and ex∣pensive. Now because when a Disease is knowne it is halfe cured, that which I conceive is the cause thereof, is multiplicity and diversity of Tenures, and Conveyances, together with the secret and clande∣stine making of Conveyances. There are not so lit∣tle as Ten severall wayes whereby men may convey estates of Inheritance, upon every of which depends such innumerable quirkes and intricacies, all of them having severall operations, that men which make it their whole studies all their lives long, can hardly if at all come to some reasonable knowledge thereof.
Now that which I propose for the Remedy of this evill is — 1. THat all Estates of Inheritances as well Free-hold as Copy-hold, might bee but of one Tenure, to wit, Fee simple. Entailes, my L. Cooke being Judge, having so fetter'd and intangled mens Estates, that in∣finite are the controversies which do arie thereupon. And to the end no man might be a looser hereby nor any mans Property destroyed, certain Commissioners not of the same County might be authorised to As∣signe and apportion to every Lord of Mannor, some part of the Tenancy in liew of his chief Rents, Heri∣ots, and proquisites of Courts, &c. in case the Lord and Tenant did not agree between themselves. 2. That there might bee but one kind of Convey∣ance for all Estates of Inheritance (viz.) a Feofment in fee executed with Livery and Seisin, or atturnment and intolement in the proper County. 3. That every Lease longer then for Seven yeares, and all Wills that concerne Lands, should be by wri∣ting to be inrolled likewise as aforesaid. If this were done, I am perswaded the Law — 1. Would be reduced into one considerable volume, which now a small Library doth not containe; and there being but one Tenure and one kind of Convey∣ance, every man almost without Herculaean labour might attaine to some competent knowledge thereof. And I would gladly know, why there should bee so many sorts of Conveyances when one will serve the turne; unlesse it be to make the Law more mysticall. Frustra fit per pura quod fieri possit per paucora.
2. The excessive expence and chargeable ceremo∣nies of Fines and Recoveries, would be saved. If in like manner all Conveyances were inrolled, then would there be plain dealing above-boord, the Common-wealth (1.) should bee sure of their Es∣cheats and forfeitures upon any Treason committed or otherwise. 2. Purchasers should deale upon sure grounds, and not purchase a multitude of suites and troubles, in stead of an estate. 3. Farmers should be sure of their bargaines, when they are sure their Landlords have good estates. 4. Creditors should be sure of their Debts, whereas now men of very great estates in Lands, so convey and intangle them, that a Creditor can take no ad∣vantage against them. 5. Men upon Marriages of their Daughters shall be much more sure of Joinctures; and in generall, in all Contracts and bargaines there would bee much more certainty, which is the mother of quiet and re∣pose; whereas now who sees not the innumerable controversies doe arise upon secret and clandestine Conveyances: also what abundance of Suites are commenced upon supposition that they have right but cannot come to know the certainty, because they can not come to sight of Evidence. How many poore Widowes, Orphans, and others loose their right by reason their Evidences are imbezeled. These and many more mischiefes would be remedied by inrole∣ment of Conveyances in the County.
Now next of all let us consider what may bee the Incon∣veniencies which may arise hereupon. And first it may be objected, that for Copy-holds the alte∣ration would bee very great; and that all Copie-holds passe by Surrender which doe amount to asmuch as the Inrolement mentioned. For answer thereunto it is confessed, That Copie-hold E∣states by reason thereof, are not lyable to fraudulent Convey∣ances, and therefore there doe not so many suites arise concer∣ning Copie-holds as of Free-hold. Yet notwithstanding, they being not extendible for Debts (which is a thing very unreaso∣nable in my judgement, that a man should have any Estate not lyable to the payment of his Debts) but chiefly, because they retaine in them as yet more of Villenage and slavery, by rea∣son of the arbitrary Fines, Herriots, Oathes, and suites of Court due to the Lord then is well consistent with the Freedome and liberty of English-men. And to the end the Law might bee the more easie and plaine to be understood, and all occasions of Controversies asmuch as possible might be removed. J suppose it best that as aforesaid, all Estates of Inheritance of Copie-hold might bee made free, and all lesser Estates made onely lyable to certaine Rents, as of Free-hold lands. 2. It may bee objected, That it would be inconvenient to take away Entailes, whereby some would loose the benefit of Reversions after those estates ended. As to that wee know eve∣ry Tenant intayl at this day may at his pleasure make it Fee-simple. And for any thing else may bee sayd therein, my Lord Cooke in his first Institutes, fol. 19. b. shall answer for me in these words. (When all Estates were Fee-simple, then were Purchasers sure of their Purchases, Farmers of their Leases, Creditors of their Debts, the King and Lords had their Es∣cheates, Forfeitures, Wardships, and other profits of their Seig∣niories; and for these and for other like causes, by the wisdome of the Common-law, all Estates of inheritance were Fee-simple; and what Contentions and mischtefes have crept into the quiet of the Law by these fettered Inheritances, daily
Experience teacheth vs.) So that for this change there is a suffi∣cient President, the ancient Common-law of this Land, and the advice of him who knew the Lawes of this land aswell as most that ever studied the same, (viz.) the Lord Cooke. Then also concerning the Inrolments aforesaid, — 1. It may be objected, That a man cannot borrow money upon a Morgage without letting the Countrey know thereof; now as for that J conceive it no great matter, if hee that is rich bee so esteemed, and hee that is poore be so reputed. 2. But then the maine objection will bee, There be many Conveyances which if examined would be found defective, whereby Estates which have long continued in a Family might bee carried away to others. which in stead of ending Contro∣versies would beget new. For answer to which, that admit it were so, yet that would be but onely for the present, and after the first Suit it would be setled for Posterity. Moreover, it would but helpe those to possession to whom the Law had given most right. But for remedy of such like Inconveniencies, was a profita∣ble Statute made in the 21. yeare of King James, (viz.) That after 20. yeares quiet Possession, no action should bee com∣menced, unlesse in case of Infancie, Coverture, or the like; which Statute if it were inlarged and put in execution would salve that sore sufficiently. The next Proposall for to remedy delayes in Suites▪ and to take away excessive Charge; is to take away Arrests in the beginning of suites. It would require a volume of it selfe to shew the excessive expence▪ the great delayes of Justice, the briberies and extortion by Sheriffes and Bayliffes, the batteries, barbarous cruelties, and many times Murthers, and many other inconveniencies which doe flow from this wicked fountaine of Arrests. As for Example; a Noble-man or Great man, owes me 10, or 20. l. perhaps for wages or some other thing, for twice it
may beeten times my debt, J cannot get him arrested, and un∣till hee be arrested J can never so much as proceed in my suite; and if after disbursement of a great summe, J get him appre∣hended I shall have some five shillings allowed towards it by the Court. So if a man live in some Priviledged places, or ra∣ther which usurp such priviledges there they secure themselves, and bee their Estates never so great can by no meanes be layd hold on to pay their just debts. It would be too tedious to give instances of sculking wandring persons, and of some that se∣cure themselves by the company of lewd and desperate fellows, that they can not be apprehended without abundance of charge and oftentimes danger of life; these Mischiefes are so well knowne that I need not further set them forth. I appeale to many mens experience, whether if the arrest of divers persons would not cost them more then all the charges of Suite besides, nay and their proper Debts to boot; and how many yeares men may wait through the corruption of under-Sheriffes and their Bayliffes, before they can get a Debtor arrested, when if they were once taken the suite would come to Execution in three quarters of a yeare at most without much charge. Now for remedy hereof, J suppose a sufficient Summons might serve turne well enough, and so in default of not An∣swering, the Plaintiffe upon proofe and evidence-given might proceed to Judgement and Execution. For my owne part I confesse. I see no satisfactory reason but that every man, aswell as Tradesmen, might bee brought within the Statute of Banck∣rupts. All that ever a Tradesman hath must be sold to pay his Debts; and why other mens Estates who are as justly indebt∣ed, as they, should not; in true reason I doe not understand. The Law seemes to me, too mild and remisse against the estates of Debtors, and against their persons as much too rigid and severe.
Another Proposall is, that Experience doth shew what very great delayes and intollerable charges arise, from being tossed from Court to Court, (viz.) from Chancery to Common-law, and so back againe; nay, J am perswaded that not one cause of tenne, especially if of any consequence, but first or last comes into the Chancery meerly for delayes; by which meanes peaceable minded men, will rather give away halfe their right then be troubled to sue for it. Now the remedy hereof, I suppose might bee to impower the Common-law Courts with equitable Jurisdiction, that the same Court might aswell determine the Equity, as the Law of every case. Another thing very necessary would bee, That the Act for reliefe of Debtors might extend to persons which now are, or hereafter shall be Imprisoned. Lastly, it were to bee wished, That the Committee for the Regulating of the Law, would procure some learned in the Lawes who might be well Fee'd for their paines, to argue and set forth before them the Inconveniencies on the one side with the profit, and commodity on the other which may arise on these or the like Alterations their worke would be much more easie, and they themselves the better able to ponder and judge what is fit to be done; it would not bee Time, labour, or mo∣ney ill spent, to procure good and wholsome Lawes for our selves and Posterity. Finis.
