T1025 12761614 93508
A LETTER Sent to Mr. Henry Stubbe, WHEREIN The Galenical METHOD & MEDICAMENTS, As likewise BLOUD-LETTING in particular, Are offered to be proved ineffectual, or destructive to Mankinde; by Experimental Demonstrations. Also his ANSWER thereunto by Letter; On which Animadversions are made By GEO. THOMSON, Dr. of Physick, By whom is added A Vindication of his STOMACK-ESSENCE, or ALEXI-STOMACHON, And other really-powerful REMEDIES, From the malicious Slanders and active Ignorance of the GALENISTS. LONDON: Printed for Nath. Crouch, in Exchange-alley, over against the Royal Exchange. 1672.
A LETTER Sent to Mr. Henry Stubbe. SIR, HAd not one Affliction upon the neck of another (like Waves of the Sea) rushed in of late upon me, to the obscuration, yea even almost subversion of the Intellectual Faculties of my Soul; I had ere this retorted to your Reply, and by a Chymical tryal disco∣vered your malicious, scurrilous, false aspersions, cast upon this noble Science of Curing Directly, and the true Profes∣sors thereof. Now sith it hath pleased the Omnipotent to give me an extraordinary Evasion out of the greatest Calamities I ever yet sustained, being restored in some measure to my former Health, and a more composed Minde: I am firmly resolved, if you stand not to the Test, as to make good practically what you have divulged against me in your Epistolary Discourse, to publish your sophistical, impertinent, frivo∣lous Arguments of Bloud-Letting: Your distortion of the solid genuine sence of those Reasons I have declared against it: Your omission of answering to pur∣pose that which I most insist upon, for the Confutation of the Galenical Hypotheses in the Radical Cure of Diseases: Your implicite concessions, or subtile com∣pliance, with some Objections I bring against Phlebotomy, yet a wrangling oppo∣sition made by you against the same: Your useless cavlis about punctilio's or words, when you neglect the reality of the main matter in Controversie. Lastly, your raillery and abusive language against those whose actions deserve not the least opprobrious speech from you.
1. Be assured 'tis not your artificial, wily Disputations, the copious citation of Authors of the same opinion with your self, your Rhetorical Terms, your Philo∣logie, or rather much babbling, to the confusion of the thoughts of those who de∣sire to be duly informed concerning the Nature of Things; your confident mer∣cenary scribling undertakings in the behalf of a company of disingenious Galenists, shall ever run me down (as you brag) or dispossess me of the Truth of that Sci∣ence, in which my own and multitude of others senses have experimentally in∣structed me. Till you convince me this way by Medicinal Actions deliberately entred upon, performed judiciously, you will never prevail with upright understanding Persons so far as to harbour any other belief, but that you and your Abettors aim at your own unworthy interest, rather then the fundamental Cure of Diseases. Wherefore, if in this particular ye desire to cleer your selves (of what is yet de∣servedly laid to your charge) let me supplicate you and the Incensors of your hired Pen (as ye have any kindness for your King and Country) to give me leave practically to exhibite before your eyes the legitimate sincere way of Curing, by having regard to efficient central Causes of all Diseases, without this circumcising Bloud-letting, as I have stated it. If then you will vouchsafe candidly to see what may be done solidly beyond your botching method, by those whose Souls after they were taught better things (by a plain search into Nature) abhorred to commit the facture of Remedies (which principally belongs to the Physitian) to meer lucrifick Apothecaries, we may have great hopes there will be an end put to these Heats and Animosities between us. For 'tis not your Malignant Accusation you lay to the Lord Bacon as Flagitious, can invalidate his experimental Philosophy; nor that effeminate or childish alle∣gation against Van Helmont, to wit, that his Neighbours in the same Street knew him not, when he was enquired after by Dr Kraft, (perhaps such a crafty — as your self) will move any one intuitively intelligent, to disesteem so noble a Philo∣sopher, beloved of Heaven above others; to whom was granted the greatest in∣spection into Nature, above any we are this day acquainted with, as I can make evident if need be. In truth, these Hypochondriack flatuous outrages of yours do not at all obscure these Heroes, yet they much Eclipse your own parts. Indeed you are herein to be pittyed, that you should suffer your self thus willingly to be hurried away by your pestilent inordinate Passions, to the prejudice of your better part, the disparage∣ment of Learning, and the evil contagion of others. This alone was a sufficient Testimony to me, that you was obstinately bent to oppose me (right or wrong) as soon as I heard (some months before the Editi∣on of your Papers) by a faithful friend (having expostulated this Matter, withal reproved you for calling me Mountebank, as likewise reprehended your designe to write against my Physical Assertions) what your excuse was (your own heart be∣ing
conscious of unhandsome dealing in the thing) that you were put upon it to gratifie your (Hyperbolically extolled) Patron, and so could not avoid it. Is this worthy of a Philalethes to become a Mercenary, to betary the most precious things existent, in hope for this obedience to acquire some Secular preferment or recompence? Certainly Mr. Stubbe, you cannot but know your large Talent was concredited to you for more illustrious Ends, then chiefly to gain a Temporary felicity here. However, although you have adventured upon an unjust Cause (as I conceive) by the Instigation of some Misochymists, yet admit but a Pyrotechnical Tryal, that the most ingenious of men may be assured who of us is mistaken: I'll en∣gage (should you be worsted) to pass by all your Obloquies, yea, to sollicite those whom you have wronged by your virulent Tongue, to do the same upon your serious Resipiscence, which will infallibly bring you in a greater reward then your Patron will ever purchase for you, how specious soever pretences may be made. Neither let your inconsiderable thoughts you entertain of me, take you off from the direct experimental Indagation after sanative verity; sith you who have bestowed so much time and study in the Theory for the verbally refelling my Ar∣guments (so that you are forced to confess ridiculously (pretending your self not able to comprehend my language) you never under-went a more difficult Task in your life) should not methinks shrink back in driving home and making good all your Reasons really by matter of Fact to my final Destruction, which might (if your abilities do permit) be effected with far less Reluctancie, Constraint or Pe∣nance, then the late Work you undertook, considering till then the wiser sort will look upon you as a company of onely wording Physicians, destitute of whole∣some Works. One thing is very observable through your whole Discourse, that whensoever you are every way beset by solid Truths, in so much that no way is left to get out; then you fall into scurrilous, abusive terms, as Baconface, Ignoramus, Mounte∣bank, Quack-salver, Canting, and the like Sarcasmical expressions; as if to call one all to naught, were enough to make me guilty, though never so innocent: I wish these rude Appellations were onely fastned on them who most properly may lay claim to them. But among all your malicious Obloquies, I wonder with what face you can pro∣nounce me a pretender to Physick and Chymistry, or illiterate, sith none unless some abominable slanderer, could ever justly tax me of serious premeditated dis∣simulation in my Religion, Profession, Manners, or Conversation. This candor and charity of spirit hath been not a little disadvantagious to me, as to a secular profit, which the Galenists prefer before all. This one of the Society (if he would confess it) knows to be true (i. e. Dr. Tern) who was pleased sixteen years retrograde from this time, to applaud me publickly for a very Able Physician; although now he seeks closely to discredit me, and declaim against my Remedies
as too Hot and Strong. Notwithstanding, thus much I must be bold to tell him, that this weak, frigid opinion of his concerning my Medicaments, arises from an imbecility of his sight, not able to penetrate into the Causes of Natural Things; which infirmity (his beloved interest will hardly ever suffer to be cured. Thus the blinde leads the blinde, and so the people will have it (as they say.) Moreover, my grand enemy your Patron (in obedience to whom you wrote this Polylogical Treatise, without any proportionable improvement of the Rea∣ders Intellectuals) testified of me to his Apothecary above thirty years past, that I was a very good Scholar for my time: for having not long before left the com∣mon Schools, finding an inclination to the studie of Physick, led by Divine Pro∣vidence, I directly pitched upon this most eminent Art, having neither before nor after affected any other Vocation. Thus making some progress in this Medicinal Studie, Mr. Dowtie (in whose house we had Winter-lodgings) willing to oblige my Father, told him that (see∣ing I was desirous to acquire knowledge in Physick) he doubted not but his Bro∣ther-in-Law, your new Protector, would for his sake instruct me to that end. But alas, I came short of what my friend intended: for I found this Phoenix of a Doctor (as you proclaim him) endued with such a haughty minde, that I could not by any means endure his imperious deportment a little above a Fort∣night. Wherefore according to Dr. Read's advice, who then lay Bedrid in the same house, I betook my self to private studies: The troublesome times, and my Fathers death, not permitting me to go to our Universities at that present; yet afterwards coming out of France, I steered my course for Weymouth, intending for Oxford, but by the transverse Marching of the Earl of Essex, I was driven the quite con∣trary way into Cornwal; from whence returning after the Victory there obtain∣ed by that good King, I was (according to Fate) taken Prisoner at the last fight at Newbery by the Parliament-Forces; afterwards I was brought up to Lon∣don, and clapt up in the Fleet, where I continued immur'd up some Months, five Weeks of which I was dangerously sick. All this while I in no wise neglected to follow my Study in Physick, as opportunities would permit. At length having attained a competent knowledge in Physiologie, I addressed my self above twenty three years ago, to be examined by the Colledge of London-Physicians, Dr. Clark being then ordained President, Dr. Prujean, Dr. Hamey, Dr. Micklethwait, Censors; who approving my abilities to practise, told me that they would confer upon me a Testimony thereof, if I paid such a sum of money de∣manded by them for my License: which excessive demand, when I saw them so rid∣gidly insist upon to the utmost farthing, considering what little advantage I should reap by this Commission from them; I entertained the counsel of one of their Seniors and so with all speed betook my self, according to his advice, to Leyden, where I had been formerly conversant (where my Friend and divers Collegiates had been graduated) to obtain a Degree ex condigno, purchased upon better
terms then many of our Philosophasters and Medicasters acquire it here. Thus performing all things decently, and in order, for the credit of my Profes∣sion (so far as my ability would allow) still keeping within my breast a loyal and honest Soul in the height of temptations, giving every one his due without constraint, abhorring to joyn with any Faction to magnifie or depend upon a re∣bellious politick Patron for my own base ends, to the injury of my King and Country: I made a constant proceedure in that Philosophy I conceived most useful or beneficial for mans life, without applying my self to the gratifying those Praeco's, who measure the worth of Physicians, according to the numbers and length of Bills prescribed. In this manner I lived obscure fourteen or fifteen years, always detesting to prostitute my self or the Art to those Sollicitors or Procurers of Practice, whom I knew, if I would feed often with a long Bill (as other Practitioners did) they would cry up my name aloud; neither should I then be in danger of incurring the fate of Van Helmont, not to be known where in what street soever I lived: Nei∣ther could I dispence with time-serving Humors, as most of the Galenists did for their sordid gain. However, I was always sedulous to observe the kindely effects of Galenical and Chymical Remedies, some of which I made with my own hands, before I entred upon publick practice, others were recommended unto me by an honest sufficient Physician, my very loving friend, formerly an accurate Apothecary; but at length forced to give over his Trade, by reason of the persecution which the Collegiates brought upon him for making Lac Sulphuris, a safe Prevalent Me∣dicament, as he ordered it. Having made many repeated Experiments concerning the vertue of the Gale∣nical and Chymical preparations, weighing all circumstances belonging to each indifferently; I was satisfactorily convinced that the last, though of the ordina∣ry Class, did far surpass the former in all Contumacious Diseases. I ingeniously confess, I had great kindness (upon my first Hiatrick onset) for Bloud-letting, esteeming it most powerful to rid away the Morbifick Matter, ac∣cording to that Doctrine (but false) of the Schools I had imbibed. At length, being clearly convinced by experiment often made upon my self and others of its treacherous effects, I totally rejected it upon the account of Evacuation and Re∣vulsion. Hereupon I was strongly induced, through the importunate Dictates of my Soul, to disswade others from this fallacious, yea, pernicious way of Curing; also to excite those who are cordially sollicitous for mans health, to put out themselves to the utmost in the search after better means, far more able to extirpate Maladies then Sanguimission, without any considerable imparing the strength (as I can indicate.) For this Reason you unworthily detract from me, reviling me with taunting language, without any further scrutiny into matter of Fact; which I must court
or urge you to, that I may cleer my self, and certifie who is illiterate (as to the knowledge of things) conducible to our better State (for that's the principal end of Language) or who of us is the pretender to the Art of Physick or Chymistry, that ingenious men may understand the meaning of those terms, which you (like a cunning Gipsie, hoping thereby to suggest to the Reader, that no matter of Moment is contained in the whole Tenour of my words) call Canting: The Ef∣ficacie or Inefficacie, the Innocence or Nocence of the Stom. Esse. alias, stiled by you Pepper-drops, which you maliciously, ignorantly vilifie, to gratifie the Apotheca∣ries, and their poor-spirited Doctors, who are forced in this Exigence to truckle, to close in, and to carry fair with those whom I am certain they cordially hate. Neither shall I at present use better Arguments to instigate you to this laudable Galeno-Chymical tryal, then those proceeding from your own mouth; thus de∣claring: It is a saying in the Civil Law, Plus valet umbra Experti Senis quàm E∣loquentia Juvenis; and those Philosophers which would upon certain prejudicate O∣pinions and pretences of Reason determine of Medicinal cases, are exploded even by Galen. Nothing is firm in Physick, but what is confirmed by a happy experience. And 'tis an Imbecillity in judgement (saith the great Stagyrite) to desert Experience, and adhere to Reason. I assure you, Sir, if you lay aside your Multiloquie, your boasting of particulars, rarely happening instances or examples of Cures past; if you wave your mustering and summoning in Authors like to like, insignificant as to confute any sagacious Philosophers senses: If you forbear your raillery, (which I fear will hardly be done, being so natural to you) and adhere to several equal Experiments which you or my self shall propose; I protest I will kiss your hand, and altogether expunge out of my thoughts any Animosities you have given me cause to harbour against you. Wherefore I shall endeavour what possible to stop all your starting holes, leaving but one passage, which will undoubtedly lead us in the direct way of Truth, and speedily decide our Controversies. In the first place, I courteously offer to you some Essaies, tending to the discovery of the Efficacie or Inefficacie of Bloud-letting, according to those suppositions you have set down in your Episto∣lary Discourse. Chuse you one of a full Athletick habit of Body, afflicted with an Acute or Chronick Disease; order him according to your Method, by a previous Sanguimissi∣on: Let us hear before your first attempt of a hopeful Cure, what immediate so∣lace or real asswagement introductory to a sound future recovery from this or that sickness (barring Opium) you can promise, in what time you can judiciously engage the danger of the Disease to be past, likewise secure (seldom erring) the Pa∣tient from any tedious infirmity, as Ague, Dropsie, Scurvy, Consumption, com∣monly ensuing an Accute Grief. Be pleased in like manner to destinate to my share one equally Plethorick also, every way affected as your aforesaid sick person, so nigh as we can deem, whom I shall undertake to handle (without the emission of Bloud) so as to give you
some speedy Alleviation to a purpose (without offering him any Papaverous preparation.) I shall also deliver a satisfactory prediction concerning the event of the Mala∣dy; then let indifferent Judges censure us according to the performances of such, who takes the right Method of Curing by moving the Cause of the Disease radi∣cally, and by preserving the strength proportionally. Thus will we proceed to reiterated Probations. I once again earnestly press you to accept of the just and strict division of the Hospital sick wretches into two parts (the priviledge of the Election of one half being allowed to you) then will we fall to our Work, demonstrating who ac∣cording to your great Stagyrite is guilty of imbecility of judgement. Moreover I conjure you, if you have any Piety, Honesty or Sobriety in your Actions, to entertain some of those equitable experimental Proposals, described in Haematias. Pag. 117, 118, 119, 120, 121. Thus omitting an empty noise of vain-glorious bragging of those Experiments we have perhaps, like good old Women, atchieved in reference to the Cure of poor Mortals; we will conclude to be tryed judiciously whether we are able to undertake and accomplish our Cures, with as much certainty as an expert Mecha∣nick can oblige to make a good Watch, or the like Engine, being seldom mista∣ken therein. By this means it will be detected, whether Bloud-letting doth for the most part, hit the mark of Sanation according to Election and Discretion; or whe∣ther it be introductory (as you have asserted) for the extirpation of Diseases, which in despight of all Opponents I can maintain to be generally seated in the Stomack, Spleen, or parts adjacent. Hence it will appear whether it be any whit proper to let out the Vital Juyce in the Plague; which that you, or any late Fugitives, should stand up for being al∣together a stranger sensibly to its Nature, argues transcendent Ignorance, and su∣perlative Impudence. Hence we shall finally discuss, whether letting out the Bloud in the Small Pox be not far more dangerous and less effectual for a fundamental Cure, then the keeping it in; and so rather to trust to excellent Medicaments, which may safely discharge the Stomack of Impurities, sweeten Acidities, allay a super-Fer∣mentation or Ebullition of the Bloud, hinder its Coagulation, mortifie the Ma∣lignity, scatter a great part of the Peccant Matter insensibly, keep up strongly the Vital Spirits, withal cause the less Scars to ensue in the Skin. I hope I shall hereby vindicate my Remedies from your virulent Slanders, in particular, the Stomack-Essence, scoffingly called by you Pepper-drops, which be∣ing full of Salt, the unsavory Galenists stand in great need of (although their pride will not suffer them to make use of it) for the preservation of their suspected Fame from an ill Odour. This Remedy I question not to protect, maugre all oppositions, as the most in∣nocent,
prevalent Remedy in Healing, above any preparation which may be pur∣chased at so easie a rate in England. In this civil, most commendable, reasonable, useful, practical Contest, it will come to light whether the Galenists can in any Adequate Measure overcome those Atrocious Calamities of Body, which at this day rage among us, without the help of Chymical Medicaments; the Oblation of which they oftentimes make secretly to their Patients, attributing the happy success coming upon them, to their feculent Galenical Mixtures (yet railing against publickly, and condemning the former, being the best flower in their Garden, ready to help them at a dead lift.) By this means it will be made evident what a vast difference there is between Olum Vitrioli, Sulphuris, Mercur. Dulc. Praecipi. Rub. & Abb. Turb. Miner. Croc. Metallo. Spiri. Sal. vulg. the use whereof I have many years ago quite left off, for as much as they are justly suspected as hazardous, in compari∣son of others Philosophically handled, as Essent. Stomachi, Pil. Polycre. nost. Pul. Pestifug. Tinctur. Emetic. Pulv. Emeto. Cathar. Pil. Emeto. Cathar. Tinctur. Po∣lyace, Potio nostra Cardia. Tinctur. Alexiter. &c. We shall hereby detect whether Van Helmont ought to be esteemed an Intel∣ligent person in Physick, a person of credit, or a man of practice; although you rash∣ly impeach him of the contrary. Adde to this, whether I can make an Experiment (against which your bare Negative will never prevail) that you are a most egregious notorious — Lastly, it will be disclosed, who (the Galenists, or true Philosophical Chymists) properly deserve the scurrilous names you throw upon us, as Mountebanks, Quack-salvers, &c. If you fly to poor shifts, or trivial excuses, obstinately refusing these prudential, sober, serious and candid wayes of informing our selves and others experimentally for the ease of their Griefs: If you Apostatize from what you have positively expressed in Pag. 22. before recited, and several other places of your Discourse; I have advisedly determined to put your Reply into a Retort, severly to prove what Metal the Brethren of the Good Old Cause are made of, whether they be not over-valu'd by opinionated persons, who oftentimes respect a glittering gilded outside, rather then an intrinsecal value. Hereupon I shall make known if so be multitude of Patients be any solid Argument (as you would have it) that Ergo the Galenists must needs be the best Practitioners in Physick, sith then Sir Richard Barker and others such like, frequented by a numerous com∣pany of all sorts of sick people, must by necessity of the same Reason be reckon∣ed amongst the best Physicians. In conclusion, we shall by the Magical Power of this Pyrotechnie finde out who are worthily censured Pretenders to this excellent Art. Farewel, may you so pro∣sper as you favour this Heroick Experimental Enterprise.
The POSTSCRIPT. SIR, IF you please to forbear your Viperous words till an opportune season of procuring Vipers, and then to admit that we fall to our Work of making Experiments, who of us can most skilfully and expeditely Cure himself bitten by a Viper; afterwards to proceed to Essayes in the like manner upon others: wherein if you get the Victory after frequent repetition of this kinde, I shall freely acknowledge your relation of the Effects of the biting of a Viper, and the Cure thereof, to be taken notice of as Strange; otherwise I shall esteem it so vulgar, that an old Woman, any whit versed herein, would scorn to have suffer∣ed the sad symptoms (of this poysoned Poor Man to continue so long) or new and strange ones to appear some days after. From Dukes-place in Shoomakers-row nigh Algae. Geo. Thomson. An inclosed Note sent with the Letter. SIR, I Expect a speedy Answer from your voluble Pen, either that you will retract your falsities you have venditated against this Noble Chymical Science, & the faithful Assertors thereof, or that you will give way that I may demonstrate by real performances the verity of our Philosophical Tenents: And look what measure of Ingenuity, Candor, Sincerity, or Civility I receive from any Ga∣lenists, the same I shall endeavour to retribute to him duplicated: If you deny me this becoming modest request, then blame me not if I seek for a Remedie where I can best finde it. Yours G. T.
Mr. Stubbe's Answer. SIR, SInce I have been so happy as to meet with your Letter as soon as it arrived, and that my present leisure is such that I may read it over, and imploy an hour in answering it, lest my self should create in you an opinion of my incivili∣ty, or furnish your arrogance with materials for an imaginary triumph; If you consider the language you have used indefinitely against those Physici∣ans, called Galenists, and that method of practice which the Edicts of so many Emperours assure us to have been heretofore beneficial, and which the happy experience of so many judicious persons during so many Ages, and the successfulness whereof in my own practice hath endear'd unto me, under the Character of the prosperous as well as rational: If you consider this, you cannot complain of any incivility in my Wri∣tings, nor complain of any indignity put upon you, since your general deportment, and particular contumelies against me, do sufficiently vindicate me to any indifferent persons. If Mr. Dover told you, that he expostulated with, or reproved me for any thing in relation to you; I conceive our discourse is represented otherwise then it really was: I remember no such passages; nor did he express himself as your friend, but as your acquaintance. I did tell him (though I cannot set down the particular words) that I would not have written against you now, but that I was importuned thereunto by some eminent Physicians of the Colledge, who had rendred me so considerable a sup∣port against the malice of those most disingenuous and barbarous Vertuosi, that I ought not to refuse them so small and inconsiderable an acknowledgement: He might have told you with what contempt I look'd on your book against me; I thought my self un∣concern'd in that Rhapsody made up of Ignorance, Impertinence, and Vntruth: As little did I value your Treatise of Phlebotomy, wherein as I was not particularly in∣teressed, so I thought the publick Method of Physick could receive no prejudice by such a despicable Pamphlet, the language whereof was not to be comprehended by the illite∣rate, nor the sense by any mortal. Vpon this account it was that I expressed my un∣willingness to meddle with you, and no other: But the judgement of more intelligent persons did over-sway me; they told me of the growth of the Helmontian principles amongst the ignorant and indiscreet Novellists; that some Vertuosi did abet the opini∣on which disswades Phlebotomy, and that even Truth was sometimes over-born by noise and a crowd: and I my self thought it an illegal and intolerable procedure, for
you to advance the Baconical Ignoramus's to a Iudicature wherein our Law hath placed the prudent and learned Colledge of Physicians. You see now that there is little of advantage to be derived unto you from my un∣willingness to encounter you: and I must tell you, that I was no way hired or merce∣narily engaged to do what I did: All that know me, can ascertain you that I am not a man of such principles: and this is an untruth, which if Glanvile, or any other Virtuoso suggested unto you, you did ill to believe so notorious Lyers. It is also necessary that I tell you, that Sir Alexander Frasier neither incited me against you, nor knew of the under∣taking, nor understood of the Dedication, until he saw the printed Book: the Episto∣lary Treatise was writ unto another, though afterwards entitled unto that excellent and learned Physician. What Truth there is in the account you give of your self, I know not: all that I can collect from the Character my learned Patron gave you, is, that you were once a profici∣ent in Literature, during your being at School; and if Dr. Terne, or any of the Col∣ledge had ever any favourable opinion of your abilities, as I know not the grounds they went upon, so I may be excused from concurring with them in that Iudgement, when I am certain they must have changed it, or have other motives to continue it, then what your writings do suggest; and till I be acquainted with them, I must be excused for adhering to my present convictions. What is meant at Leyden by a Doctorate ex condigno, I do not comprehend: 'tis enough to justifie all I say, that you purchased it, whatever it be: If it be more then a Diploma, you did your self wrong, not to inform the World better: and let the thing import what you please, you do not acquaint me yet, that you performed any Exercise for it: As little doth it appear that ever you were competently acquainted with the Galenical way; 'tis not a practice to be learned out of one or two Books, e∣specially such as are in vogue: I know not whether you were sufficiently instructed in that Physiology whereon our Practice is established: I know not, if you understood our Diagnosticks, Prognosticks, and Method: and if you did not (as I dare presume you ne∣ver did) your censures of the Galenical way, your desertion of it, and your adhe∣rence to the Helmontians, signifie nothing, except when you harangue it amongst the Populace. I pass by how you were mistaken in your defence of the Lord Bacon, whose ignorance in many subjects whereupon he descanted, and whose falshood in relations and experi∣ments, I could demonstrate by a thousand instances. In the point of Phlebotomy, you cannot with any confidence say but that you understood not what were the effects of Phlebotomy, and what we designed in that Operation; except you likewise grant that you were false to your own thoughts: for your Writings are full of palpable mistakes upon this subject. I have not injured you in the repeating of any Argument of yours, to my knowledge: I am sure I never intended it: and I think my Replies are so full and plain, that none can except against them, but such as are swayed by their Will, not Reason: I have taken up no precarious principles against you, nor supported weak Argu∣mentations with Authorities: I justifie matter of fact, by the depositions of unblameable
Witnesses, the truth of whose Testimonies is warranted by all judicious Practitioners of this Age; and which you may see verified in the Hospitals at Padua, Auspurgh, Paris, and wheresoever the true Galenists do act. If I thought there were any higher degree of Moral Assurance then I deduce from the Principles I lay down, I would re∣linquish my present sentiments: but I speak it upon tryal of both Methods, and upon the use of as generous Medicaments as most of the Chymists do boast of, that the most secure and beneficial course to the Patient, is that which the Galenical Physicians pursue, and which the Laws encourage. I add this last Clause, to let you know the danger you run in your Arcana; for if you do not adhere in your Cures to the Traditi∣ones Artis, it is as certain that you must answer with your life according to Law for the death of any expiring Patient, as 'tis certain that Chymistry, and that your Chymistry hath no Traditiones Artis; nor hath the practice of your Predecessors been so successful as to give that Immethodical rash procedure the name of an Art. Inform your self from the determination of the Civil Magistrates in all Europe, what repute your Chymists are in: Are they not prscribed in Denmark, and Germany, as Impo∣stors, and persons of a most unhappy practice? If you will have but patience till Spring, I hope to finde leisure, so as to write the History of the Galenical Physitians, and their renown; and the History of Mountebanks and bold Experimentators, with their infamy: you shall there see how unfortunate Paracelsus and Phaedro, nay, even Hartman and Severinus Danus were: and even the modern Decrees against such as had a better Laboratory, then Mr. Johnson found yours to be. You understand not your own Writers, what they have taught; and must be your own Author: and I am not a∣ble to distinguish betwixt the Testimony you give of your self, and what Odowde or any such of your fraternity▪ do aver in their behalf. I shall conclude with this asseveration, that I have writ nothing in reference to the Plague, Small-Pox, &c. but what I am perswaded in my conscience to be true: and I will inform you now more then I had opportunity to learn before, that Phlebotomy in the Small-pox, even after they are come out, is the old English practice, directed by Johannes Anglicus de Gadesden in his Rosa Medicinae, and Gilbertus Anglicus, almost three hundred years ago; and their directions are as positive and ample, as those I cite out of Avicenna▪ and I have spoken lately with many that have been blouded in the Small-pox with an immediate alleviation thereupon, and have been, as you would phrase it, radically cured. You are mightily pleased with your way of challenging us to a publick essay of Skill; but in that you render your self ridiculous, since you are so inconsiderable: For my part, I accept no more thereof, then I would do of a challenge from an Idiot, or an inmate of Bedlam: and certainly you would think I had little wit, to make a journey to London from Warwick; or little to do, to answer you in such a Quarrel. We are in possession of our repute, our patients depose for our happy cures; and if you at∣chieve any, you cannot evince that they which recover are more radically cured, or lon∣ger-lived, then others under us. Were things as you represent them, we could not con∣tinue in vogue; the advantages your Patients would have over ours, would reduce the
most obstinate and prejudicate persons to your party; the Court, City and Country would be your Theatre, and not a Stage in Smith-field or Tower-hill: your party hath not been out-talked, but out-done: and the Cures of Erastus in the most difficult Diseases, transcended▪ those of Paracelsus. Things certain and unquestionable are not to be brought to a tryal; and the petitions or demands of infamous lying Chymists are not to be listned unto: and the Laws for ensuring the lives of the Kings liege-people when they are sick, are not to be infringed publickly: since you practice by Arcana, and illegal Methods, the Coroner or the Civil Iudge ought to sit upon you; and you must expect such a sentence, as is conformable to the sence of those who are legally to approve or condemn your Method and Medicaments: and to them I leave you. I hope to see all our Faculty under a prudent regulation ere long; but you must never hope to see me tempt God Almighty, by enraging an Adder, and suffering him to bite me: I wonder with what conscience you should invite me to such a tryal: besides, you may inform your self that Adders do not bite so dangerously after they are taken, much less when they have been kept, as when they are free and wilde abroad: But I finde my self wearied with the length of this Letter, and so dull an entertainment as your pa∣pers give me: if you have any occasion for them again, you may command them at a∣ny time from me, who shall be to that purpose Warwick, Nov. 4. 1671. Your humble servant, Henry Stubbe.
Animadversions on Mr. Stubbe's Answer. IF any ingenious candid person please considerately to peruse without any partiality the solid contents of my Letter, and this Sophisters slight An∣swer thereto; I have reason to expect this Verdict from him, that my Adversary is no other then an empty Tub, or sounding-Brass. Those ungrateful disingenuous Galenists (who always resisting the truth, set this Brazenface on work deceitfully to oppose Haematias.) con∣trived heretofore a scurrilous Pamphlet against a veriloquous Treatise of mine, (namely A Chymical tryal of the Galenists) and injoyned Iohnson their Pseudo-Chymist to patronize it. However that stratagem would not take: for the great Defender of Truth destroyed both that Setter or Trapanner, and the Spiritus Antiloimoides published every week in the News-papers by those Mountebank-like Runaways in time of that most raging Plague. Next they procured Dr. Knap, an able Scholar, but as precious — as Eng∣land affords, one of the Galenical-Tribe, to contest with me experimentally. For his part, he cheated the Impostors who imployed him, not daring so much as to appear before me, though expected by a throng of Apothecaries and others, till after he had recovered of the Plague by my Remedies (ex confesso, according to his Letter now in my custody) he came to give me thanks for the Food (Physick) I sent him in his great distress: Notwithstanding I still suspected this wretched Galenical Sycophant (relieved by me upon the account of Christianity) would hard∣ly change his treacherous nature implanted in most of that Sect (although he asser∣ted quite otherwise, as his Epistle imports) which, according as my minde gave me, fell out, to the shame of that party. Lastly, now in this great exigence of theirs (having been disappointed hi∣therto by their former Emissaries (not able to run me down) they have raked up and down to finde out this clamorous Tub, who makes a great noise to no true purpose, yet sufficient (as they think) to amaze and disturb vulgar Heads. This is one of the Serpentine Generation, worse then that in his Relation, &c. either al∣ways closely supplanting the Truth, or openly resisting it: One of Iohn Lil∣burns Pedigree or Race, who would quarrel even with himself, for want of an Opponent; perhaps the spawn of some Jesuit; for such an one he should be, if we may judge by his hot, restless, litigious, sophistical, cavilling, wily Brain.
I confess it hath pleased the Donor of all things to bestow upon him notable endowments; but it had been better he had never enjoyed them, rather then thus to have resigned the use of them to the Father of lyes. 'Tis pity but that the circulation of his evil designes (even to the secret ani∣mating and justifying Regicides) had ere this according to Justice been maturely stopt, by virtue of that Plant duly prepared, which infallibly cures such Botches, Blains and Soars of the Nation. Regium est cum benefeceris male audire. Is it likely his Asp-like tongue should afford a good word for any virtuous a∣ction, that could utter no language of elaudation for so gracious a King? Although he seems to be a Convert now, we have reason to think 'tis onely out of a Syco∣phantical temporizing designe: Aegrotat daemon Monachus, &c. Well, let him be as he is: I shall now make some Animadversions on his impertinent Answer, no whit satisfactory to that principal thing I insist upon, for the vindication of Physical Truth. — Stubbe upbraids me in limine, as guilty of Arrogance and imaginary Triumph; of which that I may acquit my self, I shall condescend submissively to any equal proposals made by him or his Impulsors, tending to the solid and real detection of Medicinal Truth, without the least phantastical boasting therein; incident to all Dogmatists. The Arguments — Subbe infers signifies nothing to bear me down, that I should not complain of any incivility in his Writings: If, saith he, you con∣sider the language you have used against the Galenists, and method of Physick approved by the Edicts of Emperours, the experience of judicious Persons, and successfulness in my own practice, &c. Indeed I confess I have been downright in my expressions (quatenus veridical in the principal) to the Galenists, for which they hate me mortally; Veritas odi∣um parit: However, I am ready to maintain the Truth thereof demonstratively; which Stubbe like a Tergiversator refuses, using the liberty of his slanderous Tongue unworthily against the Art and my self. If I have called him, or any o∣ther of that Society—, and offer to make it perspicuous practically (that 'tis no improper language I use) neither will they admit the evidence for the be∣nefit of King and Subjects, I ought not to be reputed as guilty of contumelies ei∣ther general or particular. Yet if they use scurrilous terms against me and the Science, neither will vouchsafe to prove that we deserve them; I have good cause to complain of their incivility or indignity. 'Tis the unhappiness of Emperours to be deceived by these Sophistical Wits, and too much to countenance them, frequently to the shortning the thread of their Lives. For all this, Rodolphus the Emperour had a greater inspection then ordi∣nary into Physical Truth; for he invited Van Helmont to be his Physician, likewise
gave him a rich Wife. Also Lully was for good reason highly favoured by Edw. 3. Moreover, Butler the Author of that rare Stone was exceedingly va∣lued by King Iames. Likewise our present Soveraign hath to his glory counte∣nanced Chymists, and will, I hope still, for the preservation and prolongation of his own life, encourage and protect the true Helmontian, which if ever he stand in need, must be the Physicians can succour him, not the Galeno-Chymists, meer Calophants, Mimicks or mock-Chymists. The success he vaunts of is not worth a rush, unless he can make it good for the future, which he rejects. Careat successibus opto quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat: Were they really experienced Physicians, they would give us some proof of their Skill; which when I allure or urge them to, they presently fall into abusive language, conscious to themselves of their own weakness. The name of the Author — (perhaps forged) Stubbe cites, is not the per∣son that expostulated and reproved him in relation to me; therefore his extravagant discourse tends nothing to what I aim at in predicting what fell out. As for the contempt of my Book (Misochymiae Elenchus) directed against him, calling it a Rhapsodie made up of Ignorance, impertinence and untruth; also his vile esteem of Haematiasis as a Pamphlet (though licensed) is no more a conviction that it is so, then the bare saying of the Countryman, Thou lyest, was a sufficient con∣futation of Bellarmine. One comfort is, that black tongue of this Brazen-face is with discreet persons accounted no slander. As despicable as that Pamplet is (thus nicknamed by this Scurra) all the Nerves that — Willis or his Associates can exert, shall never be able to in∣validate the experimental verity of that Book, which shall endure, when his trimly polished Writings (the Fundamentals whereof were filched out of Para∣celsus, and Van Helmont, without the least acknowledgement of the Authors) shall become reprobate, and vanish into nothing. Note what Serpentine undermining Wits, and eminent ones too, as I foresaw, the Vertuosi have fomented in their Bosoms. These are the cunning Dogmatists that I verily thought would supplant and put attick upon the Royal Society, by spitting in the foul mouth of that —, and clapping him on the back, that he might open more wide in his raillery against them. Those Helmontian Principles shall in despight of Vatinian Malice flourish, when the Name and Writings of the Galenists shall perish; although their Study hath been, and still is, to deprive the World of such brave Souls by infernal devices, ex∣ercised by slanders, persecutions, poysons, &c. which to report exactly, will require a large History hereafter to be set forth. I'll depose— Stubbe is unawares in the right, as to this particular, That Truth is sometimes overborn by a noise and a crowd; otherwise the Galenists, and their destructive errours, had ere this been troden under-foot, never to rise again. Those Baconical Ignoramus's, if they catch this Brazen-face within their Pre∣cincts,
will make him know they are no such men, and pump more civil language from him, yea Stercorate such a durty person, that he may fructifie the better hereafter. The Epithet Prudent is ill appropriated by him to the Colledge: for had they not been Improvident and shallow in the knowledge of the issue of things, Physick had never been thus prostituted by that illegal Method (severely to be cen∣sured by the Magistrate, if the sad effects and products thereof were but clearly discovered) and intolerable fraud of prescribing. — Stubbe affirms, he was no way hired nor mercenarily engaged to do what he did, yet in the words foregoing he confesses, he was oversway'd, and could not refuse them so small and inconsiderable an acknowledgement. So then we may aptly collect, that he underwent the most difficult Task in his life (as he confesses in his Discourse) and laboured for a dead horse, having received his reward before∣hand. This negation of his, and what follows, doth not cohere, neither is this Scene handsomely laid by him, therefore of ten times less credit then the account I give of my self; which if he please, he shall receive from the mouth of honest Witnesses: Neither do I desire this perfideous enemy of Truth to believe any Writings of mine, farther then my works testifie of me. What a quoil doth this silly Thraso keep about a Doctorship! Let those Asini Phalerati septum Artium, call me what they please: For I had rather hear Good morrow Thomson cum Arte, then Salve Doctor sine Scientia Medendi. I wish the World could but see some of our grand Doctors uncased, 'twere as good as an excellent Comedie to behold what pitiful, simple, empty, ridiculous things (in re∣lation to the Art of Healing) they would appear. Notwithstanding, I am so far for Degrees, Orders and Titles, where they are rightly placed, that to establish them, I have been a greater sufferer then most of our Galenical Doxosophists: yea, if any of them had been plundered, imprisoned, and left naked as I was, I que∣stion whether ever they could (having so small assistance from without) pur∣chased a Degree ex condiguo, according to the merit of that exercise I under-went. Whereby, if this Infidel-like Stubbe please, he may be satisfied by my Theses (now to be seen) de Apoplexia, printed, published, and disputed pro & con, An. 1648. Iul. 14. hora loco{que} solito, that I very well then understood the Galenical Physiolo∣gie, Diagnosticks, Prognosticks and Method, to the injury of Mankinde, my own repentance, and difficulty of unlearning the same. Although 'tis true, I was enforced to know the Wrong before I could comprehend the right way of cutting; yet by my damage others will receive advantage, when they shall be ascertained that the Galenical course is plainly fallacious, so far from deserving an Universal survey, that it ought in the very Preface to be exploded. My adherence to the legitimate Helmontians, placed upon the Stable founda∣tion of cleer experience, is so firm, that the Father of lyes, and his beloved dar∣lings, shall never be able to separate me therefrom till death.
Moreover, I must plainly declare, that Van Helmont (whom these stupendiously-ungrateful Galenists do vilifie and disown) hath taught them a far more effectual Method of curing (which some of them in a clandestine manner put in practice, yet will they not acknowledge it (which aggravates their unworthiness to the highest pitch expressible) then that useless bulk of innumerable antiquated Au∣thors. For the maintenance of whose reputation this Sophister minces, mitigates and allays those their mortiferous Actions of Bloud-letting, by certain exceptions, cautions, and provisions never intended by his ancient Predecessors. Upon that account this Terentian Davus would make the World believe that I understand not the effects of Phlebotomy, and what they designed in that Operation; intimating as if they had some Areanum therein (yet generally they renounce any such thing in their practice) if so, then I may very well be excused, as mistaken concerning the effects of Phlebotomy: Sith I cannot possibly be acquainted with their secret implicite intentions in that Operation, which they have enrolled so politically in the Treasury of the Monuments of their invisible Cures. I am sure I have, according to those Traditiones Artis, as he calls them, pub∣lished by their Authors, stated the Case so justly, that let him do his best to ward my Arguments, I shall demonstrate that Bloud-letting, as to the scope of evacuation or revulsion, is either palliative, injurious, or destructive to Man∣kinde. For his Petulant, taunting, reflection upon so worthy, really honorable a Per∣son, the Lord Bacon, he ought severely to be animadverted: And herein he shews his graduated impudence with his profound ignorance, in offering to demonstrate by a thousand instances (as he delivers) the falshood in the relation and experiments of that intelligent Philosopher, eternally separated from us; yet will not vouchsafe to accept of by me, here present, any one determinating sensible Essay or demon∣stration for the conviction of him and his abettors, that this perspicacious Lord was in the right Conception concerning the nature of the Sweating-sickness. Thus a Cynick Genius dare insult over a dead Lyon, whose vain fear of tempting God, and a pretence of conscience, or rather a base Pusillanimous spirit, will not suf∣fer him to touch experimentally a living Viper; whether wilde or more tamed, that's not pertinent. What follows this Thrasonical language against this noble Lord, is abominably false, as I shall instance in one particular (omitting the rest, to avoid Prolixity). I justifie (saith he) matter of fact, yet flies from it when I present it to him, as the Galenists from the Plague, or himself from a Viper. What Hocus pocus equivocati∣on is this? he will, and he will not: notwithstanding all this is not to be ad∣mired as strange, sith this Satyrist can breath hot and cold at the same time, af∣firm and deny the same thing in a Moment, with applause of a Galenical Colledge. , if you please, farther; then will you finde his matter of fact turned into
matter of faith: For this Mountebank-like  now for the defence of a bad Cause upon the depositions of unblameable-Witnesses (whose cre∣dit is valued no more by me then a Knight of the Post, till I see something done prudently) the truth (quoth he) of whose Testimonies is warranted by all judicious Pra∣ctitioners of this Age. 'Tis strange I should not in so many years Physical Occurrences meet with these judicious Galenical Practitioners, who are able to warrant what they undertake for the life of the Patient. For my part, I cannot be otherwise perswaded by my senses, that they are any other then Good Guessers in Physick (as that vertu∣ous King of late denominated them) So far are they from being judicious, as to the Prognosticks or prescience of the exit of Diseases, that 'tis very rare  they aim and hit the mark right in their predictions or promises how the Disease will terminate, or whether they are able to cure it or no in such a space: If they at any time touch the scope, 'tis rather by hap then any good cunning; witness their judicious Medicinal carriage towards Mr. Colvile a Gold smith (attended constantly by three of their most eminent Physicians, from nigh the very first rising of his Disease, to the setting of it and his life together) who was pro∣nounced by them to be past all danger upon the fourteenth day of his sickness, whereas he dyed the next. Their judgement is also notoriously appparent by two of their eminent Col∣leagues, one whereof frequents Lime-street, who kept their Sister-in-law, Mrs. Hill, about a year and half in a languishing condition, by means of their Fecu∣lent, Fraudulent Medicaments and flat Liquors; then at length (when they were mistaken, both in the kinde of her Grief, as likewise the direct prediction of the conclusion thereof) she was in her great distress forced to send for me, to hear my Advice; who after a due examination of the nature of her sickness, forthwith promised (upon an engagement of the loss of the price of those Remedies I should exhibite, of no reward for my labour, and the hazard of my credit) to re∣store her perfect Health, if she would condescend to be ruled. Upon this she listned to me in a tractable manner, till when I offered, among other Chymical prepa∣ration, a Vomit, she then seemed to refuse it, saying. Her Brothers did not dare to give her one for an 100 l. To which I replyed, If you will not trust my experience, follow your course. Whereupon she assented to take several of my Vomits, with ease and congratulation of her Friends. Now wanting nothing but a convenient space to compleat the Cure, I was prevented; a discovery of my person being made (for want of a watch-word from the servants) by one of the Brothers, who presently thereupon caused such a disturbance and discord in the Family (for admitting me (a Physician so Hostile to them) in this deplorable condition) that she was constrained to renounce my self and Medicaments, as too hot and strong. Hence she remains uncured to this day, three years past; but had, undoubtedly ere this perished, had she not according to my counsel betaken her self to the drinking of strong Liquors; by means of which, as she acknowledgeth,
she receiveth comfort. The History, as very remarkable, I may hereafter set down more amply, but here I must study conciseness. To justifie how judicious these Galenists are, one of them living not far from Leaden-hall-street, got into his clutches (by means of one of their ignorant Ple∣beian advocates swarming in every place) a Patient, continuing in my hands less than forty eight hours, one Mr. Viner, a Gentleman of the age of twenty eight years, endued with a most singular constitution, then lying sick of an Acute ill-conditioned Feaver at Stepney, in the House belonging to the Bowling-Green, whom I ingaged to restore to his former strength, if he would have been ruled by me. At the same time within the same Walls lay also sick another Gentleman, Captain Catesby, forty years old, tyred out with adversity, sorely afflicted with a malignant Feaver, and a Patient of the aforesaid Galenists for the continuance of four or five days, who not daring to give him a Vomit, in his great straits im∣plored my help, which I refused till his Physician could in no wise relieve him, apprehending him in a most dangerous, if not mortal, state. In this difficult case I obliged my reputation for his recovery from his Pestilent Feaver, withal pro∣mised, if he would be governed by me, to preserve him from relapse, or subse∣quent infirmities; which I brought to pass judiciously in deed. The other Gen∣tleman, kept to fulsome Cacostomachical Doses, and flat dull Liquors, mouldred and dwindled away about three quarters of a year after; which had never been (as I can undertake, also effect in the like form of sickness twenty times) if he had listned obediently to me. Note this slie Galenist was so effront to attri∣bute (as I heard) the death of his Patient to my hot Remedies given him at first. A Servant of a Noble Person had his Leg destinated to be cut off by these judi∣cious Galenists, which by my Chymical Remedies was preserved with the whole. An ingenious Citizen tyred out by a long and a grievous Disease for the space of a year and half, having spent nigh fourscore pounds upon these judicious Physi∣cians, who put him to run the circle of their tedious, fruitless method, again and again to no purpose, was in a short space restored by Remedies Philosophically prepared, as Mr. Stringer the Apothecary knows. One of those Doctors gravelled in the aforesaid long malady, bled a Pleuriti∣cal person twice in four or five days, without either judgement or mercy upon the poor Gentlewoman: when he attempted to let out the vital Juyce the third time, I intercepted him, warranting upon solid grounds to cure her Chymi∣cally, which was done effectually. Multitude of such instances of their weak judgement I could produce, which I must defer to a more happy opportunity, lest I incur prolixity. 'Tis well known to some who have an eye upon my Method and Medicaments, that I every year cure with discretion those whom the Galenical Judgement can in no wise alleviate. If they have atchieved, or can do the like for the future, let them declare it practi∣cally with sober and serious prognosticks.
How Mountebank-like doth — Stubbe boast of his generous Medicaments, yet dares not bring them to light, that we may see the probation of them judi∣ciously; which I offer and frequently tender to them, but am still repulsed: Ve∣ritas non quaerit Angulos. Although the Galenists are not such open Mounte∣banks as those frequenting Smith-field or Tower-hill, yet are they as close slie ones as any in the World: and had I time and leisure, I should manifestly shew how they are coincident, and directly suit one with the other in divers accidents and circumstances. I hope some brave Zealot for truth will publish a Narrative of the Galenical Mountebanks, and their infamous disingenuous ways, about the same time when —Stubbe writes a History of Chymical Mountebanks and bold Experimentors, as he threatens. For my part, I am equally disaffected to both (there being in neither Barrel better Herring.) Touching this lying Brazen-face his twitting me with the impudent actions of Mr. Odowd, I do protest that I never approved his illiterate rash presumptuous undertakings; neither did I ever countenance or favour him in any company, otherwise then civilly in relation to his Majesty, who was pleased to give him a kinde aspect, from a consideration of some notable Cures (as was reported) attained by him, which those eminent Galenists could not ac∣complish. Dr. Sermons had (for such a Reason) his Majesties Serene influence, and Sir Richard Barker was perhaps honoured upon the same score. If the King is pleased to cast an eye of Grace upon those vulgar inferiour Chymists, who have sometime Out-done the Galenists; what would he do (if he were rightly in∣formed) for the Chymical Philosopher, who can and hath (if opportunity be not lost) opened a passage for relief, when the best of the Galenists were in a straight, knowing not what to do more? Witness the Cure, not long ago, of a great Lady of the Court, performed by Dr. Godhard (I mean not that Ambidexter, or Affectator of Chymistry) who in all likelihood lost his own life to save his Patients. How the Galenical course can be secure and beneficial, if we may judge of a Tree by its Fruits, I do not in the least understand: forasmuch as I can make evident before any Judicature whatsoever, that the Method and Medicaments of these opinionated Galenists, are either positively or privatively dangerous. If I make good this (as I doubt not) then the obstinate Professors of such a false Tra∣ditional Art, contrary to the institutions of Nature, ought to be indited, and re∣ceive suitably a condigne mulct. For according to the Law of God, he who doth venture, ludere cum Corio Humano, sporting and applauding himself, as if he had done a brave exploit, to kill a man with the best Method in the World, is bound to make good skin for skin. Assuredly, seeing the Law of man either is or should be grounded upon the Law of God, and an execution thereof ought to be made on those who often violate the same; how severely will a wise, righteous Judge or Jury censure those, who plead innocence ex dicto, but dare not justifie it ex facto, respecting the future as well as what is past? If any repute (as this Brazen-face affirms) Chymistry no Art, he ought to be
looked upon as one of a crasie brain, or desperately malicious, who will say any thing for his own interest▪ a meer terrae filius, who onely applies his studie to the Art of Imposture of getting money, preferring Traditiones hujus Artis, be∣fore the Institutiones Dei & Natura. Those Anomalous Methodists (who declaim against this Mistress of Arts) exercising an Art to make and spin out Diseases for their lucre, ought legally to be proscribed, as the Romans once did for five hundred years; and the true Methodical Chymist, who observes a speedy order (without sordid respects) in Healing, deserves to be entertained, encouraged and cherished. We hope Princes will not reject that Art, and the legitimate Pro∣fessors thereof, which is the best support of their life. If any abuse this Pro∣fession, I readily subscribe that they may be punished: but let not those be Judges, who ought of all first to be reformed, and animadverted: for Iustum ab Injustis petere insipientia est. Neither let paucity or scarcity of able Professors damnifie the truth of this Science. The Laboratorie I then had, which that Emissary and Trappanner Iohnson represented in a disguised contemptible manner to his Masters, I avow he never saw. Albeit, granting what he related should pass for currant, any sober man of knowledge will commend me, rather for offering and executing greater things by so contemptible Instruments, then those who boast of their Magnifi∣cent Elaboratory, yet fall off from vindicating the happy Fruits and Products thereof Experimentally. Concerning what he meaneth, that we shall see how unfortunate Paracelsus, Se∣verinus Davus and others were, I confidently presage will be most gross Lies. Against his silly moth-eaten Authors he cites of three hundred years standing, I object that in this particular their Authority is out of date, neither are the ol∣dest always the wisest. Moreover, the Scene of our truculent Diseases act dif∣ferent to what they did in former times, being much more graduated, in their virulencie complicated, become degenerate into others of a mixt Nature, and confounded in their Symptoms, able to deceive even the very Helmontians. As to his pitiful story of those who have been blouded (as he reports) in the Small-pox, with immediate alleviation: I reply as he did, who viewing the Mo∣numents of those in the Temple of Neptune having escaped shipwrack, demanded where the Monuments of those were, who were cast away. Were it possible those three illustrious Souls could come from the intelligible World, and appear here unto us, they would tell Stibe another Story quite different from the former. The Injunction I have from Divine Writ to contend for the Truth, doth please me (I confess) to challenge those Thraso's to an Essay of Skill, who coming off with so pitiful an evasion that I am Inconsiderable, makes them plain∣ly ridiculous, worthy to be hissed at. For let my self be never so inconsiderable, yet any Sage Sceptick will allow Truth to be never the worse, though cloathed in rags. Saepe sub attita latita sapienia Veste. A wise humble man will not think it amiss to be instructed from his very enemy never so mean; Fas est ab
Hoste doceri. All things duly considered, Invitatus ad haec aliquis de Ponte nega∣bit; none but one of the Spirit of a Beggars brat, would flight what I offer for an universal benefit. These poor excuses run directly parallel with a braving Hector, denying a Challenge into the Field, sent him from a modest wise man abused by him. Although the Philosophical Chymist can work no miracles (as some foolishly fancie and expect from him) yet it may be reckoned one of the Wonders of the World, that the Chymical Art should get so much ground on its Adversaries in so few years, meerly by its own worth; considering what a Vogue the Miso∣chymists have had formerly among the multitude; also what an infinite number of all sorts, if interested persons, have contumaciously pleaded and defended their unjust Cause: so that Divisum Imperium cum Iove Daemon habet. For all that, 'tis plain they have lost a great part of the former possession of their Coemeteries; and many intelligent persons daily fall off from them; yea, I question not, but at length they will quite be thrown out of all, although they pretend to have eleven points of the Law on their side. What Stubbe describes that our Party hath been, not onely out-talked, but out-done by theirs; as likewise, that the Cures of Erastus transcend those of Paracelsus, is Decumanum Mendacium. For as to his first assertion, I am ready to offer to contradict and out-do them; which they dare not put to tryal. Touching the second, the Bishop of Salisbury hath sufficiently informed us by an Epitaph of a Catalogue of Diseases (reputed by the Galenists incurable) o∣vercome by Paracelsus Arcana. Stubbe threatens a prudent Regulation of their Faculty; I wish I could see it, but I suppose it must be done (if ever) by the Authentick Chymist. I also hear a rumour of a new Dispensatory coming to light; I hope some Culpeper will not be wanting to correct and comment upon it. I wish their new Fabrick be laid upon the Basis of Righteousness; which I much doubt, sith the ground∣work thereof is too much placed upon Galenical principles, a most sandy foun∣dation. Pardon me, courteous Reader, that I have insisted so long upon the sharp re∣proof of the vanities and untruths of this Adversary of the Chymical Science. I should not question to have made you amends, could we but have drawn this Mountebank-like or Quacksalvering-Galenist to an experimental Sake. It would make rare sport to see how the Chymical Mountebanks and Quacks would hate him, if he could not make good his Hypotheses for Bloud-letting. Wherefore seeing I cannot, at present, bring him to any handsome terms, so that a Specimen of his activity of Curing (he glories in) might be manifested: I leave him to those like himself. So let them fight Dog, fight Bear, when they meet one with another.
I shall onely add this Caution, that those Plagiaries would desist for the future, to steal useful verities out of Paracelsus and Van Helmont, yet ungratefully and disingenuously to detract from, and disown them, neglecting to commend the Stile or Bridge they pass over. For 'tis an infallible truth, No fixed great Disease can be cured, but by the Method and Medicaments proportionable to what that great Philosopher hath delivered.
A Vindication of the Authors Stomack-Essence, and other effectual Remedies, from the slanders and active igno∣rance of the Galenists. THat the greatest enemies (which have hitherto calumniated, yea, at this day do defame, supplant, and hinder the advancement of this beneficial most useful Chymical Science, as likewise eclipse the credit of the true Philosophical Defenders of the same) are the meerly interested, obstinate and wilfully blinde Galenists, is a truth as clear as the beams of the Sun no way intercepted. The pretty pranks these sophistical Wits have play'd out of a designment to suppress the happy progress of the Helmontian Doctrine, would make a man some∣times laugh with Democritus: To look no farther then their ridiculous Apologies, Excuses and Pretences, if at any time they are provoked to fair Tryals for ma∣king good the Axioms of their Art: To contemplate their childish evasions, when they are Non-plust in their natural Philosophy, not able to satisfie any Intelligent person: To observe their Vulpone-like windings, intrigues and nimble diversions, when physical Truth follows them closely at the heels: To hear them chatter like Magpies, without any savory, solid, practical information to the Hearers: To discover their Stellionated and counterfeit Devices, in making the World believe, that they are the onely true Chymists; yet they renounce and rail against the best endowed Artists: To hear them magnifie their Bleeding and Pharmacie, yet to leave the City in Plague-time to shift for themselves; would make any Splenetick Person break forth into a profuse laughter. But to weigh seri∣ously their Mortiferous Bloud-letting, their Poysonous Purgations (melting and reducing poor Mortals too soon to their first Principles, whereby their very souls are sometimes damnified): Their way of weakning Nature, and strengthning Diseases: their crucifying, torturing, Butchering, yet ineffectual course, by Issues, Bli∣sterings, Scarifications, &c. their endeavours to stifle any good Remedie, if it square not with their own particular vile respects: To apprehend affectuously how many thousand poor Orphans and Widows are yearly made by these perverse Secta∣ries of Galen, one who I believe was far more ingenuous than his Disciples: to ponder, I say, these things from the very bottom of the intellectual part, were sufficient to cause one to lament and weep bitterly with Heraclitus. How these Misochymists have opposed all virtuous actions in Healing, how
they have still kept down, by their usurped authority, those who would willing∣ly and up for the health of the miserable sons of Adam, is not easily to be ex∣pressed by the tongue of any Mortal. All their study hath principally been, to defame, detract and traduce those Worthies, Paracelsus, Van Helmont, the Lord Bacon, &c. to wrangle with them, to pick holes in their coat; to examine with strict inspection their humane failings, but slightly to pass by and disregard their extraordinary gifts, and manifestation of Arcana's zealously communicated to posterity; by which these ungratefull Persecutors of this Science are enabled to do something extraordi∣nary covertly, for the keeping up their tottering Credit. Yea, so malicious are the haters of physical ingenuity, that they would, if possible, stifle any generous Medicament (not squaring with their filthy lucre, laziness and grandeur) which the Wise Disposer of all things hath bestowed, as he pleaseth, upon those inconsi∣derable (in their Blear-eyes) and contemptible Chymists, for greater benefit to man∣kinde, then the huge Pile of an ignoble insufficient Dispensatory, contrived by vulgarly admired, over-valued Doctors. So full of rancour and malice are the Galenists against the upright Pyrotechnists, that a Iew never hated a Samaritan more then they do these; yea such hath been the desperate ill-favoured designes of a Dogmatist against a Chymist, that () ma∣ny a generous Philosopher hath for the stable avouching the Virtues of Chymi∣cal Remedies made of Tartar, &c. been in danger to be sent packing to the Tar∣tarean-shades: Yea, so Cynick-like envious are they, that imitating the Dog in the Manger, they will neither labour to do good themselves, nor suffer others. If an honest Mr. Iob Weal, a singular Physician, and accurate Apothecary, have by his industry acquired the knowledge of an efficacious preparation, (as Lac Sulphuris) they presently cry out of it as Poyson, fitting to be thrown into the Kennel. If Dr. Godhard, one of their former Sociates, obtained the happiness to have revealed to him the powerful Operation of some Volatile Alkalies, which Cure beyond their weak non-sensical Method and Medicaments, they presently excom∣municate and endeavour to out-law him. If a Learned Dr. Starkey prepare an Anodyne Pill, or any Arcanum to lenifie poor Mortals grief, they and all their Clients are presently in an uproar with Oc∣clamitations, that he is a dangerous Physician, either quickly killing or curing. Now it hath pleased the Omnipotent Philanthropos to impart to the meanest of his Servants the knowledg of this helpful Remedy, the Stomach Essence (and several other not vulgar Medicines) they are ready in ambush upon all occasions to backbite, disesteem, carp, cavil and condemn them, as too hot, strong, dan∣gerous and violent. All which they will have simply believed, without farther probation: In the same manner, as if one of the same Trade should depretiate, vilifie, or debase another Shop-keepers Commodities, yet refuse to justifie, by the Touch-stone of sensible examination, before a lawful Magistrate, the disre∣pute
falsly brought upon anothers Wares; certainly none ought to deny, but that he who doth deal so unworthily in this kinde, deserves to be forced in a le∣gal way, to give satisfaction to the wronged party. This is all in chief I expostulate and demand of the Galenists, that they would forbear unhandsomely to impeach my Medicaments according to their own per∣verse Opinions, Suppositions or Phansies, and crazie Conceits of their Populars, without a right, judicious, visible, legitimate proof: That whensoever they injuri∣ously call me Mountebank, or Quacksalver, or animate the more ignoble sort of Apo∣thecaries, (for some of the gentlest, ablest, best Artists, are more civil and handsome towards me) so to do, they would in earnest reflect upon themselves, deliberately pondering who hath most aptly purchased these scoffs and taunts? They who in time of the Plague ran away, leaving Spiritus Antiloimoides (to which they did not dare to trust themselves) (a very insufficient Medicament, as I am ready to demonstrate, against such an Atrocious Disease) (as it plainly appeared by its effects, upon their Mock-Chymist, Iohnson and others) to be published in the Weekly In∣telligence, as if it were some rare Arcanum working Miracles; whereas it was but a meer Meteor, so vanished away, never to be heard of by them, or seen to this day: Or this inconsiderable Baconist, who with confidence, and utmost care, at∣tended all infected persons that came or sent unto me, poor as well as rich; ad∣ministring with my own fingers such appropriate Remedies (without hanging out a Bush, or setting any one to make an out-cry of their Hyperbolical Virtues) which at this day I patronize (as they are described in Loimotomia, or Pest dis∣sected) ready to produce them for their vindication experimentally from the ma∣lice or ignorance of all Opponents. Let those also who have got the best of their practice by means of a Theatri∣cal concourse of Vulgars, make a query in cooler Bloud, when at any time in their furious passion they vent against me the foresaid invective undecent language, an de Ipsismet fabula narretur, whether they may not rather take themselves by the Nose, setting the Saddle upon the right Horse, then mount —, get up and ride openly into Smithfield or Tower-hill, and forbear to go any more into A — Corner. Let them moreover canvase who of us have been the truest friend to the sick man, keeping up the honour and reputation of Physick; the Doctors, who have vilely venditated it by their prophane prescriptions; yea, have suffered to be put into a Frame, or pasted up, and to be publickly exposed to all Passengers, Medicaments (perhaps so trivial and mean, as the foresaid Spirit. Antiloimoid.) approved and li∣censed under their Seal; Or G.T. who hath always been prudently tender to bring any such Infamy upon Physick. All things thus duly premeditated, I know no reason but I may without scan∣dal to this eminent Science, bring to light decently for the solid benefit of my distressed Country-men, some noble Remedies, especially this comfortable Stomach-Essence, declaring sincerely the singular endowments thereof for the health of man, as I have by manifold repetitions of tryals found to be true.
The Vertues hereof I shall transcribe out of Haematiasis; setting them down here more plainly, that meaner capacities may understand the use or application of this Remedy, which although one of my lowest rank, is able explicately to baf∣fle divers of H. S. Quacking generous Medicaments. Notwithstanding, first I must give warning to all intelligent men, that the ignorant, rash, envious censures delivered by — Stubbe, and the rest of the Ga∣lenical Tribe, with all their Sticklers, to wit, that Ess. St. is Preternatural, or ef∣fectively too hot, strong, dangerous and violent; are absolute untruths, to be disco∣vered by the Test of offered experience. If then they refuse the probation of its innocence, the Father of Lyes ought to be believed as soon as such his Disciples. Wherefore I signifie that it exceedingly strengthens the Stomack, helps its Di∣gestion, encreaseth and makes active the Vital Spirits, and their instruments by which they work (called Ferments) rectifies the Spleen, scatters and expels Wind, Vapours, or any wandring wilde Spirit, which flies in a moment from one place to another, vexing the parts. It sweetens in some measure the sharpness of the thin liquors in the body, which oftentimes causes pains, fevers, &c. It subtilly enters the Veins and Arteries, being carryed about with the Bloud, which it very much cleanses. It carries off to the outside whatsoever is impure, causing a kindely breathing in the skin. It also causeth Urine, conveying Gravel from the Kid∣neys, hindring that it may not be engendred and fixed. It is helpful in diffi∣culty and pain of making Water, coming forth sometimes by drops. 'Tis of great service against pains of the side; the Colick; Griping of the Guts. It is a very great Cordial, preserving from fainting, and restoring those who are sur∣prized with loss of Vital Spirits. It is very effectual to keep one from, and to cure Surfeits. It is very powerfully good against the Scurvy, or any poysonous ill-conditioned infectious evils. It prevents and helps to cure all kinde of Fevers. It quencheth the thirst to an admiration, above all supposed cooling things what∣soever: (So that a Gentleman, Mr. Sa. Wainwright in York-shire, hath given it under his hand, that he was perfectly cured by means of this Stomack-Essence of a strange preposterous thirst, troubling him twenty five years after Meat; which he could never before conquer, for that it came Hereditary from his Father and Grand-father, afflicted therewith all their lives time, especially towards night.) It bringeth Preternatural heat or coldness to a due moderation, by removing the efficient Cause thereof, reducing the parts to their former strength. It is avail∣able against Fits of the Mother; the Whites. It dissolves congealed, curdled Matter; ripeneth Raw Juyces, bringing them either to a better condition for the use of Nature, or preparing them to be sent packing out of the body, by conve∣nient ways and medicaments. It abates a nauseous Disposition or Vomiting, by confirming the Membranes of the Stomack, and by promoting the throwing off that which disturbs it. It cutteth and cleanseth away slimy Birdlime-like Flegme, giving ease in difficulty of breathing, mitigating the violence of the Tissick. It is admirably useful against Melancholy imaginations, passions from the Spleen, &c.
called Hypochondriack: an evil state of body arising for want of proportiona∣ble Nutriment, or from Galenical Medicaments. It availeth against the Dropsie, or Consumptions. The frequent use thereof strengthens the Brain, Sinews, Loyns, Memory, and all the Senses. Stom. Ess. outwardly applyed, challengeth noble effects: For 'tis very Healing, Balsamical, curing green Wounds and plain Soars, being often touched therewith. I have hitherto found it constant in happily curing Burnings, Scorchings or Scald∣ings; some drops being frequently distilled thereon, and forced inward by the bottom of a smooth Glass. I cannot but experimentally commend it as one of the best asswagers of the pain of the Teeth, I have hitherto met with. It is also of great force to preserve them from corruption, likewise in part to restore them; resisting the putrifacti∣on of the Gums. Neither is it be contemned for the mitigation of the pains of any part, strengthning and quickning the Vital Spirit thereof. With many more laudable properties is Stom. Ess. or Alexi-stomachon endued, which the frequent use thereof, and a longer strict observation, will bring to light. One odd Operation I have found in this Stom. Ess. that by accident it some∣times causeth Vomiting, &c. upon an account that it powerfully corroborates Nature to discharge foul matter, which before kept it under subjection. A Patient of Quality did within a few days hence relate to me, the strange ef∣fects in this kinde it had upon him: Being brought to the Gates of death, and tyred out with a Galenical course of Dyet-drinks, Salt of Steel, purging Medi∣caments of Mercury, &c. he took some few drops of this Alexis. six or twelve hours after which, he was freed from abundance of filthy Excrements, both by Stool and Vomit. Thus continuing to take more freely of the same Medicine, producing for many days the same effect, he was in great measure restored from the sad impressions of those Cacostomachical preparations. The quantity to be given, is measured by the greatness and stubbornness of the Disease: for sometimes ten or twenty times as much as the common portion, ought to be offered: neither is it to be feared that any hurt will arise therefrom. The ordinary Dose, or extent of giving it, is twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty drops in a draught of any strong Liquor, as Beer, Ale, separate or mixt; sometimes Wine, as Sack, or whatsoever doth best relish with the person. It may be taken at any time when the Stomack is out of order, troubled with Indigestion, Wind, Pains, Gripes, or any of the foresaid vexations; then let them take liberally thereof. He that constantly takes every morning thirty or forty drops, shall pre∣vent many mischiefs in reference to his Health. I doubt not but the Galeno-Chymists or Pseudo-Chymists will like Apes en∣deavour to imitate and counterfeit this experienced Essence (which before I am convinced by Fact, I shall presume to prefer before any Medicament of its rank, yet visibly extant among us). Of such I shall advise my Countrymen to beware,
for these Adulteraters will but disgrace and degrade it; for I am sure none can finde out the true way of making it, unless he be a knowing Philosopher, working with his own hands, and taking Preparations into his own Stomack. Thus much I advertise; He that dextrously can volatilize Salt of Tartar, may do something tending to this purpose, otherwise not. He that desires to be farther instructed concerning the defence of the Virtues of this Essence, and the disproving of what is spoken against it by Malevolents; let him read with integrity the just commendation of it in Haematiasis, &c. Indefatigable perseverance in opening Bodies by the Fire, and the repeated Assumption of what was thence produced, hath brought me to the knowledge of a Pill I call Polychrest, which consists of three Golden Sulphurs from Minerals well purified, and friendly to Nature; whose in∣nocence, as well as effectual Operation, is remarkable, and upon tryal to be justified by any who understands a good Remedy. They are conducible in most Diseases. They act by cleansing, opening, corroborating and purifying the Bloud, without leaving the least ill impress behinde, for they contain no laxative so noxious as Sena or Rewbarb. They are of great force to conquer the Scurvie: also prevalent against the Dropsie. They prevent the Stone, and carry off Gravel. They sweeten sharp Liquors in the Bodie. They overcome the Venereal or foul Disease, if taken a considerable time: neither is it to be suspected, that one may be weakned by the long fre∣quent use of them; for they, contrary to other purging Concretes, make one more lusty and vigorous, as I have found in my having taken above a thousand of them with an advancement of my strength. They reform the Spleen; help to cure Feavers, prevent Relapses and long Maladies. They may be swallowed at any time of the day or night; neither will they cause injury, but rather benefit, if they loosen not the body in twenty four hours, which is rare, for usually they give a stool or two in that space. The Dose is two or three Pills a little before Supper, or early in the Morning. The Patient proceeding thu for three or four days, and resting a day or two, and then repeating them. Tinctur. nost. Emetica, is profitable in all Malignant Feavers, in the griping or loosness of the Belly, difficulty of Breathing, pain of the Sides, Headach, Diseases of the Stomack and Spleen. It leaves the Vitals more cheerful and active. It matters not whether it work or no by vomit or stool; however, it will do good by breathing sweat, or causing urine, if the party be capable. It may be given a week together, at any time of the day or night. I often give it in bed. Pul. Emeto Catharticus is profitable in many Diseases (as Emetica Tinctur.) It searches out the Morbifick matter, leaving wholesome Juyces untouched: when other Vomits are given in vain, this profiteth. Pil. Emeto Cathart. are useful for the same Diseases, as Pulvis Emeto, Cathar. Polyacea, Tinctura Solaris or Balsamica, are great supporters of Nature, and tamers of Malignant Fevers; they go into all parts, illuminate and augment their Archeus or Vitals. They carry off by Sweat, Urine and Expectoration. There are few Diseases which will not somewhat yeild to these Cordials, if exhibited in a just proportion. Elixir. Proprietat. nost. resists Putrifaction, opens the Spleen, helps Digestion, purifies the Bloud: It is very cordial, expels the Menstrua stopped, and gives a check to them flowing ex∣cessively. It is most efficacious to cause an easie and speedy delivery in difficult labour of Women. Its Dose is from ten to an hundred drops or more in strong Liquor. With several other salutary Remedies could I acquaint the World; but now I must desist, hoping God may spare my life till the Edition of my Physical Observations: the History, Cause, and Cure of three Cholick-stones, of a vast unwonted magnitude: also the History of the Exction of the Spleen out of a Dog, that lived two years and a quarter after very lively and well; with sufficient reasons to back the experiment: The Diseases of the Spleen, with preservative and Curatory Instructions of the same. Lastly, a Synopsis, or Abridgement of Loimotomia, the dis∣section of a Pestilential Body; all in Latine, wherein Materia Medica and its Philosophical management shall be more amply examined. I intend likewise, when I have vacant hours, to put— Stubbe his Reply into a Retort, &c. and if he put me to it, to write a Narra∣tive of the tedious and absurd Method, Medicaments, and Imposterous Cures of the Galenical Mountebanks. From Queens-street, formerly called Soper-lane, nigh Cheapside, in Well-court; being lately removed from Dukes-place.
