T2517 R33854 13584889 100512
A True and Particular RELATION OF THE VICTORY Obtained by the Christian Armies against the Turks, At Barkan, the Ninth of October, 1683. THE King of Poland and the Duke of Lorrain having made a Meen of Attacking Newheusel, in which the Turks have a very strong Garison, they on the suddain repassed the Danube near Comorra, resolving to possess themselves of Barkan, Pest, Agria, and other important Posts, thereby to secure their Winter-Quarters in the Ʋpper Hun∣gary. The King of Poland advanced with his Forces on the seventh of October; and being arrived near Barkan, immediately Attacked that Fort, which se∣cures the Bridge of Gran. The Turks defended it with the greater Cou∣rage, for that they were supported by a very considerable Body of chosen Men; a great Detachement whereof, whiles the Poles were engaged in the Attack of the Fort, passed undiscovered, and fell upon the Christians in their Rear, and their Flank, and put them into great disorder. The King performed the part of a great General, and the most daring Soldier, mingling himself with the young Prince his Son among the thickest of the Enemy; who with great fury pushed on the advantage they had, and pressed the Poles very hard, of whom 14 or 1500 were killed upon the Place; and among these, the Palatine of Pomerelle, and several brave Officers. The Duke of Lorrain having understood the danger the King was in, advanced with the Imperial Horse and Dragoons with all the speed he was able, and came very opportunely to his Assistance; and the Turks seeing the Imperialists appear, presently retired. On the Eighth, the Imperial Infantry came up, and the next day the King and the Duke resolved again to Attack Barkan. The Armies being drawn up in Batallia accordingly advanced, the Imperialists having the Right Wing. A Body of between 12 and 15000 Turks, all chosen Men, encamped in the Neighbourhood; They seeing the Christians come on, advanced with a full
speed, and most hideous Cries, being encouraged with the Advantage they had had on the Poles two days before. The Christians kept themselves close and firm as a Wall, the Turks were not able to break in upon them, but were vigorously repulsed; and then, leaving the Imperialists, they turned towards the Poles, and made an Attack upon them: But here they were likewise very well received, and many of them fell, the Poles with great Bravery re∣venging the loss they suffered on the Seventh; and they were seconded by the Imperialists, and particularly by the Regiment of Caprara. The Turks being now hard pressed upon, and two of their Bassa's being slain, and another taken Prisoner, they fled. The Christians pursued them; some threw themselves into Barkan, and others got over the Danube, but the Bridge break∣ing, those that remained behind were most of them slain, some drowned, and the rest taken prisoners, so that of the whole Body not above 3 or 4000 escaped; And at the same time the Regiment of Castelli and some other com∣manded Troops made themselves Masters of the Outworks of Barkan with their Swords in their hands, and put all the Turks that were in the Counterscarp and in the Ditch to the Sword, but gave Quarter to 500 Janisaries which were in the place, and who yeilded on discretion. The plunder which the Christi∣ans had in Barkan, and in the Camp of this Body of Turks, appointed by the Grand Visier to Cover Gran, as well as Barkan, was very great; 20 Pieces of Cannon were taken with great quantities of Ammunition and Provisions, and many fine Horses, with very rich Furniture; And the Prisoners declare that the Turks, who were before in a great consternation, will not after this fresh disgrace be able to make any considerable resistance in any place. During the Action the Turks in Barkan were not wanting to employ their Cannon against the Christians, notwithstanding which, and the continual fire of their Musketeers, the Imperial Foot and Dragoons, being commanded by the Count de Staremberg, forced the Counterscarp, which was very well pa∣lisadoed, and slew a great many of the Turks, who escaping out of the Field, took shelter there. They in Gran likewise fired upon the Christians, but did them little harm, and could not hinder their ruining entirely their bridge. The 10, the Bridge of Boats, which the Christians made use of in their passing the Danube near Comorra arrived, and that day, and the follow∣ing, the Imperial and Polish Troops passed the River to besiege Gran, the principal Fortifications whereof are it's said in a very ill condition, and the place badly provided with Ammunition and Cannon, the Grand Visier having sup∣plyed himself from thence for the Siege of Vienna. This Victory as it is very considerable in it self, the Turks having here the Flower of their Army, so will in all likelihood be greater in its consequences, for the Courage as well as Forces of the Enemy being broken, Gran will not be able to make any great defence; and being taken, Newheusel will be deprived of all communication with the Turkish Territories, and be in a manner blockt up. And several other places will probably without any great opposition, fall into the hands of the Christians. It is said that 10000 Germans and Croats, being reinforced with the Troops of the Count de Budiani and others, which assembled on the Frontiers of Stiria, have attacked Canisa, in which, they had advice, were but 800 men, and those in want of Ammunition and Provisions; but this will need a Confirmation. London, Printed for Samuel Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. 1683.
