U48 09435957 43086
The Undutiful Daughter of Devonshire: OR, The careful Kind indulgent Fathers Entreaties for her to forsake her Lover a Spend-thrift, and to Embrace a Farmers hopeful Son. The Tune is, How can I be Merry or Glad. Licensed according to Order. BEhold I am an Aged Man, who have one Youthful Daughter dear; And yet let me take what care I can, she'll not to my Counsel once give ear. I love her as I do my Life, for her I take a Constant Care; Therefore I'd not have her mae a Wife, for him that should bring her to Dispair. Having one Daughter, and no more, she should a Loving Father find; I'll give her both Gold and Silver store, if she would but marry to my mind. But she has set her Love on one, who is a Man of mean degree: And tho I have School'd her still alone, she'll not in the least be rul'd by me. He is a Spend-thrift Gaming Blade, that Roams abroad both far and near; And therfore as I have often said, there's nothing but ruine does appear. I tell her this with melting Eyes, and beg of her to take good heed; Yet she does my Counsel still despise, which causes my Aged heart to bleed. I tell her of the Pains and Care, which I have took for what I have; And therefore I think it is not fair, to Spend it upon a Crafty Knave. In Taverns will he Rant and Roar, and e'ry lew'd Companion feast; And when he has quite Consum'd her store, he'll never regard her in the least. She knows that he delights to Game, and does of folly take his fill; Yet this will not in the least reclaim, her obstinate Disobdient will. Alas! she is my Darting dear, this day alive I have no more; Therefore I would have her flourish here, and live as her Mother has done before. She is I find so stubborn grown. that what have she will not Prize; For I declare I will hold my own, she Values not that in the least she cryes. Nay, was he but an honest Man, in whom I might some hope behold; I'd never deny him for I can give with her three Hundred Pounds in Gold. 'Tis true, three Hundred Pounds, they may be thought a portion mean and small Yet I think it too much to throw away on one that will Piss it against the Wall. Besides when I this world shall leave, her Lot will then full larger be: The rest of my Treasure she'll then receive, for why I can give it to none but she. Again I'll to my Daughter go, where like a Father and a Friend. I'll Court her to let this Spend-thrift go, why should she with sorrow my heart offend. And if she does my Counsel take, I have a Farmers Son in store Who will a kind loving Husband make, and does her fair beautiful Charms adore. Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare and
