W3049 99830555 35008
The New Law OF RIGHTEOUSNES Budding forth, in restoring the whole Creation from the bondage of the curse. OR A Glimpse of the new Heaven, and new Earth, wherein dwels Righteousnes. GIVING An Alarm to silence all that preach or speak from hear-say, or imagination. By GERRARD WINSTANLEY. Out of the despised poor people, which are the stones and dust of the earth, man-kind, upon whom the children of the flesh treads, shall the blessing rise up, that shall restore all things. This is Sion whom no man regards, in whom the Father delights to dwell: This is Sion out of whom we are to expect the deliverer to come, that shall turn ungodli∣nesse from Jacob. You learned and great men of the earth, take notice of this, and remember you have been told. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle at the west end of Pauls. 1649.
TO The twelve Tribes of Israel that are circumcised in heart, and scattered through all the Nations of the Earth. Dear Brethren, THough you have been, and yet are the despised ones of the world, yet the blessing of the most High (your King of Righteousnesse) is in you, and shall spread forth of you to fill the earth. You are the field wherein the treasure hath lien hide; all the dark and cloudy dayes of the Beasts time, times and dividing of time now expiring. Though dark clouds of inward bondage, and outward persecution have over-spread you; yet you are the firmament, in whom the Son of righte∣ousnesse will rise up, and from you will declare himself to the whole Creation; for you are Sion
whom no man regards, out of whom salvation shall come. That blessing (which is the seed of Abra∣ham) lies hid in you, that is and must be the alone Saviour and joy of all men, from inward and outward bondage, and the restorer of the whole Creation from the curse it groans under. He lies hid in you, he is hated, persecuted and despised in you, he is Jacob in you, that is and hath been a servant to Esau a long time; but though this Jacob be very low, yet his time is uow come, that he must rise, and he will rise up in you that are trod under foot like dust of the earth; he will glorifie himself oth in you and from you, to the shame and downfall of Eau. The report of this blessed promised seed, shall go through the Earth in this ministration of the Spirit that is now rising up, as well as that mini∣stration of the flesh and letter, that now begins to draw back, and his dominion, when he begins to rule the Nations, shall reach from one end of heaven to the other; the whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and of his Dominion there shall be no end. This is the consolation of Israel, it draws near to be made manifest, wait for it with patience. You whom I writ to are the seed of Abra∣ham, and the blessing of Isaac and Jacob; but me tell you, not the seed of Abraham after
the flesh: for Ishmael and Esau, are not to share in this portion; Their portions was of the earth, and they have received tem, and spent them already by their unrighteousnesse; your portion is the Lord himself which endures for ever. The powers of the flesh are to be made servants unto the promised seed; and now comes the time that the elder sons, that are born after the flesh, shall serve the younger sons, in whom the blessing lies; this is the fall of Esau, and the ri∣sing of Jacob, and shall be really done in the sight of the whole Creation as the other was. You are the Abrahamites in whom the bles∣sing remaines, that lives not now in the type, but enjoyes the substance of circumcision; For he is not a Jew, that is one outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew, that is one inward, whose circumcision is of the heart: Whe∣ther he be born of the Nation of the Jews extant in the world, or whether he be one born of other Nations in whom the blessing remains; it is A∣brahams promised seed that makes a Jew; and these are they of whom it is said, Salvation is of the Jews. What was that seed of Abraham, that is cal∣led the blessing? It is the Law and power of righteousnesse, which made Abraham to forsake his Isaac, his dearest relations in the flesh, rather then he would
refuse the way of his Maker; and herein Abra∣ham found peace: So that this King of righte∣ousnesse, and this Prince of peace that ruled in Abraham, is the blessing of all Nations, for this shall save his people from their sins, and free them from all distempers of the unrighteous flesh. This is the one spreading power that shall remove the curse, and restore all things from the bondage every thing groans under. This is called Abrahams seed, because Abra∣ham sprang from him, as a tree grows from the seed, which gave the tree its being and its name: And the Law of righteousnesse and peace, dwelling and ruling in any one is the seed of Abraham, and the severall branches of men and women in whom that power rests, are children and of the fa∣mily of Abraham. For it was not the man of the flesh that was called Abraham, but the Law of righteousnesse and peace, that did rule and govern in that body, he was the Abraham; the flesh is honoured with such a name by him that dwelt therein; the name of the flesh before this righteous power was mani∣fest in it, was Abram. As the humane body called Christ, was not the anointing, but the Spirit in that body, was the Christ, or the spreading power of righteousnesse, which was to fill the earth with himself. That body was but a house or temple for the present work, which was to draw down Moses Law,
and become the substance of his types, and lambs, and sacrifices; for that body was the lamb, that did fulfill the righteous will, by his voluntary and free-will offering up of himself, without forcing. So then: This Law of righteousnesse and peace, is Abrahams seed; nay that manifestation in that humane body, was Abraham himself; for Abraham is known to the Creation, by acting in or from that power that ruled the flesh. And every man or woman, born of Jew or Gentile, in whom this power rules and breaks forth, are the children of Abraham, and the man Abra∣ham in whom the spirit dwelt in a lesse measure; for he hath failings, was a type of the Man Christ Jesus, in whom the Law of righteousnesse and peace dwelt bodily, for there was no sin or un∣righteousnesse in that body. Therefore Christ hath the honour above his bre∣thren, to be called the spreading power, because he fils all with himself; And because this power did appear to the Creation first in Abraham of all men we hear of, therefore every one that fol∣lows after him, and that are ruled by the same Law, are called children of Abraham, or chil∣dren of that seed. But Christ the anointing he hath the prehemi∣nence, for Abraham sprang from him, and all Abrahamits are but a tree or vine that did spring from that one seed: for indeed the spirit
of life, lies in the bottom, which lifted up both Abraham and his children, and is the one seed of righteousnesse and life, from which every one springs, what name soever any righteous body is called. Now this seed doth promise himself to be the blessing of all Nations, and the restorer of all things from bondage; but the Nations of the earth, since that report was made, never yet enjoyed the benefit of it; for the curse hath still rested upon the Creation, and hath been rather multiplied from year to year; so that at this very day, those in whom the first fruits of restauration appears, do see darknesse, nay thick darknesse do cover man-kind: And the curse doth rest mightily in the fire, water, earth and air; all places stinks with the abomination of the curse; So that a man can go into no place, but he shall see the curse and enmity is that power that rules the creatures, that makes them jar one against another. Likewise miserry breaks forth upon man-kind, from these four Elements of which his body is made, and the curse rests within him, and the curse dwels round about him; But Abrahams seed, is and must be the blessing of all Nati∣ons, and shall spread as far as the curse hat spread, to take it off. And this seed (Dear Brethren) hath lien hid in you, all the time appointed, and now is break∣ing forth. And the Nations shall know, That
salvation or restauration rather, is of the Jews, that King of righteousnesse and Prince of peace, that removes the curse, and becomes himself the blessing, arises up in you, and from you, and fils, and will fill the earth, both man-kind, and the whole Creation, Fire, Water, Earth and Air, for the blessing shall be every where. And though the seed of the flesh have cast you out for evil, and you have been the despised ones of the earth, and the children of the flesh re∣fuses to buy and sell with you, yet now your glo∣ry is rising. And the ancient prophesie of Ze∣charie shall be fulfilled, That ten men shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, Let us go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. This new Law of righteousnesse and peace, which is rising up, is David your King, which you have been seeking a long time, and now shall find him coming again the second time in the per∣sonall appearance of sons and daughters; he will be a true Davider indeed, between flesh and spirit, between bondage and libertie, between oppressours and the oppressed; he is and will be the righteous Judge; he will lead your captivitie captive, and set you down in peace. He is now coming to raign, and the Isles and Nations of the earth shall all come in unto him; he will rest every where, for this blessing will fill all places: All parts of the Creation in whom
the curse remains shall be shaken and moved, and the seed of the flesh shall find peace no where: He will throw down the mountaines of the flesh, fill up the low valleys of the spi∣rit, he will make rough wayes smooth, and crooked wayes strait, he will make the earth fruitfull, and the winds and the weather season∣able; he will throw all the powers of the earth at your feet, and himself will be your governour and teacher, and your habitations on earth shall be in peace, that so you that are the Citie of the Lord, New Jerusalem, the place of his rest, may be the praise of the whole earth. If any one say: The glory of Jerusalem is to be seen hereafter, after the ody is laid in the dust; it matters not to me what they say, they speak their imagination, they know not what. I know that the glory of the Lord shall be seen and known within the Creation, and the blessing shall spread in all Nations; and Jerusalem in∣deed which is Abrahams children, sprituall Is∣rael gathered together, shall be the praise and glory of the whole earth; and the restauration of all things is to be seen within the Creation of Fire, Water, Earth and Air. And all bodies that are made of the compound of these four Ele∣ments, are to be purged and delivered from the curse; and all shall know that this almighty King
of righteousnesse is our Saviour, and besides hi there is none. The swords and counsels of flesh shall not be seen in this work, the arm of the Lord onely shall bring these mighty things to passe, in this day of his power; and the hearts of men shall tremble and fail them with fear to see the misery that is coming upon the world, for the glory and riches of men shall be brought low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. Therefore all that I shall say is this; Though the world, even the seed of the flesh despise you, and call you by reprochfull names at their pleasure; yet wait patiently upon your King, he is coming, he is rising, the Son is up, and his glory will fill the earth. And when you see the Doves flock to the win∣dows (not to your Church-windows) but to the teachings of the Father, for his discoveries are the windows that lets the light of the Father shine into the soul: and these are dreams, voices and revelations immediatly from the Father him∣self, his own inward teaching, without which the soul is hungry, and flocks unto the in∣ward discoveries and teaching of the Fa∣ther for satisfaction, forsaking all other in point of inward rest. When you see or hear of the risings up of Is∣rael, like the noise of mighty waters, car∣rying
all before them, then rejoyce and say, Your redemption draws near, and the reports from the Lord are true: wait with a meek and quiet spirit for the consolation of Israel, even the coming forth of the deliverer, That shall turn ungodlinesse from Jacob. Then shall Ja∣cob rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. So I rest January 26. 1648. A waiter for the consolation of Israel JERRARD WINSTANLEY.
The New Law OF RIGHTEOVSNES Budding forth, to restore the whole Creation from bon∣dage of the curse. CHAP. I. THere is nothing more sweet and sa∣tisfactory to a man, then this: to know and feel that spirituall po∣wer of righteousnesse to rule in him, which he cals God. For while the flesh through hasty and vio∣lent lusts, doth rebell against the spirit, it hath no true peace, but is still pulling mise∣ry upon himself. But when the created flesh is made subject to the law of righteousnesse, and walks up∣rightly in the Creation, in the light of that spirit, then it lies down in rest.
In other writings I have declared what I know, That Almighty power & ever living Spirit is, which rules and preserves the whole Creation; fire, water earth and air, and of every creature in these elements; or that is made up of all these in a compound matter as all flesh is. And something I shall here add to the rest, which I only hold orth to my fellow creature, man; not customarily to make a trade of it, for fleshly ends, but occasionally as the Light is pleased to manifest himself in me;1 Joh. 1. 3, 4. that others from me, and I from them may be witnesses each to other, of our Maker how he shines forth in his own light, through each other to the profit of the Creation. In the beginning of time the whole Creation lived in man, and man lived in his Maker, the spirit of Righteousnesse and peace, for every creature walked evenly with man, and delighted in man, and was ruled by him; there was no opposition between him and the beast, sowls, fishes, or any creature in the earth: so that it is truely said, The whole Creation was in man, one within, and walked even with him; for no creature appeared to be a visible enemy to him: for every creature gave forth it self, either for pleasure or profit of man, who was Lord of all: And man lived in his Maker the Spirit, and delighted in no other; there was an evennes between man and all creatures, and an evennesse between man and his Maker the Lord, the Spirit. But when man began to all out of his Maker, and to leave his joy and rest which he had in the spi∣rit of Righteousnesse, and sought content from crea∣tures and outward objects, then he lost his domini∣on, and the creature fell out of him, and became enemies and apposers of him, and then rise up mountaines, and valleys, and hils, and all uneven∣nesse, both in mans heart, and in mans actions. And as the man is become selfish; so are all the beasts
and creatures become selfish; and man and beast act like each other, by pushing with their horns of power, and devouring one another to preserve self. And truly as man might see all creatures lived at rest in him in the beginning, so he may see all crea∣tures in him now, but in a rest-lesse condition, groan∣ing under bondage, waiting for a restauration. The covetousnesse, the subtilty, the cruelty, the pride, the envy, the devouring power that is in the flesh of man are the very distempers that are in such and such beasts and fowls: So that while man is ruled by such powers, and declares no other actions but what is in the beast; he indeed goes in the shape of a man, but properly he is a beast of such and such a ravenous principle. And this now is the Curse, Man is gone out of his Maker, to live upon objects; and the creatures are gone out of man, to seek delight in pushing and devouring one another, and the whole Creation of fire, and water, earth and air; and all bodies made of these are put out of order, through mans rejecting the Spirit to live upon objects. But now the time is come, that the Spirit will draw all things into man againe, to live and be at rest in him, as their Governour, as their Lord, and man and the Creation shall become even againe, and so man returning to his Maker, to rest in peace in none but him. The whole Creation shall be go∣verned, preserved & comforted by the one spirit, the King of Righteousnesse, and all bondage, curse and tears shall be done away: And this is that I wait for, being assured it shall be accomplished, having re∣ceived a taste. But as the state of the world is, in the generality, I am made to see, That in times past and times pre∣sent, the branches of man-kind have acted like the beast or swine; And though they have called one
another, men and women, yet they have been but the shadows of men and women. As the Moone is the shadow of the Sun,Rom, 8, 13 in regard they have been led by the powers of the curse in flesh, which is the Feminine part; not by the power of the righteous Spirit which is Christ,Epbes. 2. 2. the Masculine power. But when they come to see the spirituall Light that is in every ceature, and in that power and light do walk righteously towards other creatures, as well beasts as man-kinde, that the creation as much as in them lies one by one,Psal. 36. 9. may be upheld and pre∣served in its glory; then they begin to appear and act like men; and rise up from the low earth of a beastly and swinish nature, to acknowledge and honour their Maker in the light of himself. Experience shews us That every beast doth act in oppression and cruelty, towards such creatures, as he can master at advantage. And thus doth the flesh of man,Rev. 13. 4 which is the King of beast: For when the wisdome and power of the flesh raigns, which in deed is Adam, that man that appeared first to rule the earth, man-kinde, and by his unrighteousnesse makes it a land of barrennesse: For this first Adam is such a selfish power, that he seeks to compasse all the creatures of the earth into his own covetous hands, to make himself a lord, and all other his slaves. And though he gets lands, moneys, honours, go∣vernment into his hands, yet he gives the King of righteousnesse,Rom. 8. 21 2. but a company of sawning words of love and obedience; for he makes unrighteousnesse to dwell in heaven and earth, that is, in the whole Creation, by his unrighteous government, and so he becomes the chief Rebell, the Serpent, the Devil, the Murderer, oppressing the Creation, setting him∣self above all in tyranny: And this power is the curse which the whole Creation groans under,
waiting for a restoration by Christ the King and law of rigteousnesse, who is the restorer of all things. And here first I shall declare what Adam the first man is, who to me appears to be the wisdome and power of the flesh, carrying along the Creation, man, to live upon creature objects, and to loath and de∣spise the Spirit that made all, and that dwels in all things according to the capacity of every single crea∣ture: and all that Adam doth is to advance himself to be, The one power; he gets riches and gover∣ment into his hands, that he may lift up himself, and suppresse the universall liberty, which is Christ. And if he preach, or pray, or performe any service rela∣ting to the Spirit, it is for this end, that he may get peace thereby, and so seeks to honour flesh by pro∣curing his own peace, by his own wit and pollicy if that would doe. So that this Adam appears first in every man and woman; but he sits down in the chair of Magistra∣cy, in some above others; for though this climb∣ing power of self-love be in all, yet it rises not to its height in all; but every one that gets an au∣thority into his hands, tyrannizes over others; as many husbands, parents, masters, magistrates, that lives after the flesh, doe carry themselves like op∣pressing Lords over such as are under them; not knowing that their wives, children, servants, subjects are their fellow creatures, and hath an equall privi∣ledge to share with them in the blessing of liberty. And this first Adam is to be seen and known in a two-fold sense. First, He is the wisdome and power of the flesh in every man, who indeed is the beast, and he spreads himself within the Creation, man, into di∣vers branches; As into ignorance of the Creatour of all things, into covetousnesse after objects, into pride and envy, lifting up himself above others, and
seeking revenge upon all that crosses his selfish ho∣nours; and into hypocrisie, subtilty, lying imagina∣tion, self-love; from whence proceeds all unrighte∣ous outward acting. This is the first Adam lying, rul∣ing ad dwelling within man-kinde. And this is he within every man and woman, which makes whole man-kinde, being a prisoner to him, to wonder af∣ter the beast, which is no other but self, or upon every thing whereupon self is samped. Secondly, The first Adam is the wisdome and po∣wer of flesh broke out and sate down in the chair of rule and dominion, in one part of man-kind over another. And this is the beginner of particular in∣terest, buying and selling the earth from one parti∣cular hand to another, saying, This is mine, uphold∣ing this particular propriety by a law of government of his own making, and thereby restraining other fellow creatures from seeking nourishment from their mother earth. So that though a man was bred up in a Land, yet he must not worke for himself where he would sit down. But from Adam; that is, for such a one that had bought part of the Land, or came to it by inheritance of his deceased parents, and called it his own Land: So that he that had no Land, was to work for those for small wages, that called the Land theirs; and thereby some are lifted up into the chair of tyranny, and others trod under the foot-stool of misery, as if the earth were made for a few, no for all men. For truly the common-people by their labours, from the first rise of Adam, this particular imterest upheld by the fleshes law to this day, they have lift∣ed up their Land-lords and others to rule in tyran∣ny and oppression over them. And let all men say what they will, so long as such are Rulers as cals the Land theirs, upholding this particular propriety of Mine and Thine; the common-people shall never have
their liberty, nor the Land ever freed from troubles, oppressions and complainings; by reason whereof the Creatour of all things is continually provoked. O thou proud selfish governing Adam, in this Land cal∣led England! Know that the cries of the poor, whom thou laieth heavy oppressions upon, is head. This is unrighteous Adam, that dammed up the water springs of universall liberty, and brought the Creation under the curse of bondage, sorrow and tears: But when the earth becomes a common treasury as it was in the beginning, and the King of Righteousnesse comes to rule in every ones heart, then he kils the first Adam; for covetousnesse there∣by is killed. A man shall have meat, and drinke and clothes by his labour in freedome, and what can be desired more in earth. Pride and envy likewise is killed thereby, for every one shall look upon each other as equall in the Creation; every man indeed being a parfect Creation of himself. And so this se∣cond Adam Christ, the restorer, stops or dammes up the runnings of those stinking waters of self-interest, and causes the waters of life and liberty to run plentifully, in, and through the Creation, making the earth one store-house, and every man and wo∣man to live in the law of Righteousnesse and peace as members of one houshold. And in the next place I shall declare the my∣stery of the Spirit in a two-fold way: First, he makes the Creation, man-kinde, to see, loah and forsake this Adam, this fleshly man▪ This devil or power of darknesse that rules in the creatures, and leads them into waies that brings misery, pain and death, which is hell, a condition of uncomfortable darknesse of the curse. Secondly, He makes man-kinde to see, to love and delight in the Spirit Reason, which is the law of Righteousnesse, that made them, and stles them
in peace; when in the light and power thereof, they are made to forsake the flesh with all his wayes of bondage; for truly when the flesh is made subject to Reason, that light that inlightens every thing, then it hath peace and liberty, and is freed from those heart-aking pressures and sorrows, which the flesh puls upon himself by his violent, rash, unrighteous, and unreasonable actings. The Almighty hath declared three methods in discovering this mystery in the compasse of six dayes, or 6000 years near hand expired; in every one of which he draws man-kind higher and higher into himself, out of the power of the Serpent or bondage. And when he alone is advanced, he draws all men after him, which is the finishing up of the mystery. The first Method is this: He was pleased to call forth Moses to be his servant, and in, by and through him, he reveals himself to lie under types, shadows, sacrifices; that man-kind by them might be led to see his Maker; And this was the Covenant of an outward testimony, which Moses, a man that was mixed with flesh and spirit, was Mediatour of. And this Secondly did point out the Apostolical testimony which was to be manifested in aftertimes; and that was to acknowledge honour, and bear witnesse of the Lamb Jesus Christ, that was the substance of Mo∣ses. For the Apostles declare themselves to be wit∣nesses of Christ, the great Prophet, that Moses said should come after him,Act. 3. 22. to whom every man should hearken, and then leave the teachings of shadows, which they receive from him. Therefore say they, We eat and drank in his pre∣sence, we heard him speak, and saw his miracles, and bear testimony to the world, that the Rulers of the Jews slew him, and that he was raised from the dead by the Almighty power. And this single appearance of the
man Christ Jesus (for herein the righteous Law dwelt bodily) was a more spirituall declaration then the former. And this types out The third Method of Divine discovery,Eph. 4. 6. which in∣deed doth finish the mystery; and herein the Lord takes up all into himself, even into the Spirit that governs the Creation; for he is in all, and acts through all. And all power of righteousnesse that appears in any subject is still but the Lord, in such or such a discovery; for as the man Christ Jesus swal∣lowed up Moses; and so the Spirit dwelt bodily in that Lamb, which was spread abroad in the types; And man-kind is to behold the Law of Righte∣ousnesse, in none,Rom. 8. 22 23. but in that his wel-beloved Son. Even so that single body is a type:1 Cor. 12. 13. That the same Spirit that filled every member of that one body, should in these last dayes be sent into whole man-kind,Act. 2. 17. and every branch shall be a joint or mem∣ber of the mysticall body,Jer. 31. 34 or severall spreadings forth of the vine, being all filled with the one Spirit, Christ the anointing, who fils all with himself, and so he be∣comes the alone King of Righteousnesse and peace that rules in man. And the powers of the flesh which is the Serpent or curse, shall be subdued under him, and man-kind shall be made onely subject to this one Spirit, which shall dwell bodily in every one, as he dwelt bodily in the man Christ Jesus, who was the Son of man. Now as Moses declared, That the Lamb Jesus Christ should be that great Prophet to whom every one should give ear, & delivered it in general termes, leaving the particular discoveries of his new doctrine to the Lamb himself when he came; and so did not go about to imagine matters that was above his cir∣cle; and we see the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, when he came, far exceeded the Doctrine of Moses; the
one being the substance of the other, and so mo spiritual makings forth then the other. Even so, the man Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, declared in general termes what should be in later times,Joh. 7. 38. leaving it to every son and daughter, to de∣clare their particular experiences, when the Spirit doth rise up in them, and manifests himself to them. For they that believe (saith he) out of their bellies shall flow rivers (or plentifull discoveries) of the water of life. Therefore as Moses gave way to Christ; for when Christ appeared in flesh,Luke▪ 9▪ 33 36. Moses administration began to be silent and drew back, and set Jesus Christ in the chair to be the great Prophet that should be the teacher in types after him. And the ministration of these discoveries were to raign in the world, their appointed times. Even so the Lamb Christ Jesus,Joh. 16. 7. or that single bo∣dy, gives way to the holy Ghost, or spreading Spirit; If I go not away,oh. 17. 21 the Comforter cannot come to you; for he that dwels bodily in me, is to spread himself in you, that as the Father in me, and I in him are one: even so I in you, and you in me, may become one wit the Father. And the testimony of the Apostles declares as much:2 Cor. 16. Though we have known Christ after the flesh, (in one single body) yet now henceforth know we him no more so;Col. 1. 27. but we look after that mystery, which hath been kept secret from ages and generations past, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. And therefore I must tell you that yet live in dipping, in water and observation of Gospel-forms and types; you live yet under the ministration of Jesus Christ after the flesh, declaring the Lamb Christ to remain as yet in one single person. But know you, that as the ministration of Moses gave way to this; so this ministration is to give way
to the inward teachings of Christ, and the spreading of the Spirit,Joh. 14. in sons and daughters, which will more excellently declare the glory of the mystery. The man Christ Jesus himself, told the woman of Sama∣ria; Woman the time is coming that neither in Jeru∣salem, nor in this mountain shall men worship the Fa∣ther, but they that worship him shall worship him in Spirit and in Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. By these words, The Son of man declares, that both outward forms, customs and types of Moses wor∣ship under that ministration at Jerusalem,Luke 17. 21. likewise all forms and customs, and types of this ministration of himself,Joh. 6. 45 as the Lamb held forth at a distance to be our Mediatour, should all cease and give way to the spirituall worship of the Father in the latter dayes; or to the spreading of the Divine power in men, the one Law of Righteousnesse, being the teacher of all. So that upon the rising up of Christ in sons and daughters,Joh. 16 7 which is his second comming, the mini∣stration of Christ in one single person is to be silent and draw back, and set the spreading power of Righteousnesse and wisdom in the chair, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end.Dan. 3. 44. So as all things were gone out from the Spirit, and were gone astray and corrupted. The Spirit in this great mystery of truth being manifested in flesh, burns up that drosse out of the Creation, and draws in all things back a∣gain into himself, and declares himself to be the alone wisdom and power of Righteousnesse, that rules, dwels, that governs and preserves both in and over the whole Creation.2 Cor. 5. 19 And now the Son deli∣vers up the Kingdom unto the Father;1 Cor. 5. 24 And he that is the spreading power, not one single person, be∣come all in all in every person; that is, the one King of Righteousnesse in every one.
Here we may see what the dividing of time is, which is the last period in which the Beast is to reign for now every ministration pleads his priviledge,Dan. 7. 25. till the Law of Righteousnesse drown up all in himself. Moses yet pleads a priviledge in the practice of the Jews after the flesh. The Son of man, or Christ in one single person pleds a priviledge, and not onely the true ministration of the Son of man according to the Apostles declaration; But likewise many false forms, customs and observations of Divine worship are raised up, through a wrong understanding of those Scriptures, all plead a priviledge. And lastly, the ministration of the Spirit, forsaking all types and ormes,Ioh. 4. 23. worshipping the Father in the substance of truth. This now pleads his priviledge, as his due right by course. So that you see here is the dividing of time. But this last ministration is the sufferer for the present, as being denied his right by the former, that ought to give way. And as the worshippers in Moses ministration, envied and killed such as worshipped the Son of man, the Lamb: So now, those that worship Christ at a distance in their severall Congregations and forms, and are most zealous therein, are in these dayes the most bitterest enemies to the ministration of Christ in Spirit and in truth. But when this ministration of the Spirit spreads himself, he will make the greatest separation that e∣ver was. For though Israels separation out of Egypt amazed the world, and the separation of gathered Congregations out of Parish Churches (so called) did trouble the earth, though it is no more but going out of one form into another, not into the unitie of the one Spirit. Yet this ministration of the Spirit now rising up by right of inheritance, will take peace from the world much more: for he hath begun, and he will and shall go on, to gather the scattered
of Isreal together, out of all Aegytian bondages, and self-seeking oppressing government, and out of all forms and customes of the Beast, to worship the Father in spirit and truth, being made to be all of one heart and one minde: And this shall more and more appear, as the earth grows up to be a com∣mon treasury for all. Therefore let me tell you, That all your enmity will not uphold your orms, your imprisoning, and reviving, and making law to suppresse such as e contrary to you, will never work your will, but pull miseries and shame upon your selves; as the zealous Scribes and Pharisees did in killing of Christ the Sonne of man: Therefore be patient, look up for teaching in this dividing of time, when the Law of Righteousnesse arises up; and makes himself more manifest, he will reconcile all, make every one to be of one heart and one minde; and no other pow∣er must be the restorer, but this King of Righte∣ousnesse and Peace:Acts 4. 32. for this is he that makes men doe as they would be done unto,Isa: 60. 16 And then envie and bitternes dies. Now search the Scriptnres, you that stand up to be Teachers, that say I deny the Scriptures, and let them judge me,Joh: 5 45. whether I deny them or no; but one thing you shall finde to your shame, that those Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, which you seeme to preserve with such love and zealous tendernesse, shall cast the first stone at you, to stone you out of your Pulpits; for you doe not professe those Scriptures in love to them,Joe: 2. 15. but in zealous covetousnesse to uphold your trade. For now when Christ begins to arise up in sons and daughters, whereby the Scriptures are honour∣ed and proved true Prophecies, Promises, Visions, and Revelations; you deny their testimony, and cry out Visions and Revelations are ceased; and so
you will ever have people to be hearing you speak the declaration, because you live by it; but if any receive the power from on high, you cry out upon it, It is self-conceit, errour and blasphemy: Well, he is at worke that will discover your shame; Wickednes shall slay the wicked, though no mans hand be upon him. CHAP. II. THere are three more discoveries of Christ, to make the mystery of the Spirit shine in its excellency. As Frst, The great world, wherein are variety of creatures, as Sunne, Moon, Stars, Earth, Grasse, Plants, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, and Man, the Lord over the lower Creatures, all sweetly conjoyned to preserve each other, is no other but Christ spread forth in the Creation; and so upholding the Crea∣tion by hi own wisdome and power; for he is the maker, the preserver and restoring Spirit, Therefore his name is called, I, and I am, The Lord, and besides me there is no Saviour; But this is Christ very remote; for though he rule in the whole Creation, yet no single creature could dis∣cern o spie him out, he is in every one, and yet that single one knew him not. And therefore this one Almighty power began to make forth himself in visible descriptions before the creature causing every creature to hold forth the light and power that is in them, that so the mighty Creatour may at length be known,Ih. 14. 17 in the clear sight∣ed experience of one single creature, man, by seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling, This one power of Righteousnesse, as he rests in the
Creation, that man may be the mouth that shall make a clear discovery of Christ to others from the testimony that is in himself; for hee is to see Christ within himself, before hee can see him in other creatures. And therefore, Secondly, The Sripture in their severall declara∣tion, types, prophecies, visions, voyces, revela∣tions, actings of men, in patient doing and suffer∣ing in righteousnesse, is no other but Christ in the letter, lying under the experimentall words of those Pen-men, setting forth the one Almighty, in his severall actings,Col. 2. 9. and his severall conditions, wherein he hath appeared to the view of the whole Creati∣on; but seen and known only, by the one creature, man, in whom hee is purposed to dwell bodily. But still here is a large distance between Christ and the bulk of man kinde; for though some few particular ones have seen him, and could declare him, yet others are ignorant of him: So that the universalitie of man-kinde may see these two dis∣criptions of Christ, that is in the Creation, and in the Scriptures, both without themselves. And when any attains to see Christ in these out∣ward discoveries, it is full of sweet delight, but this settles no true peace; for that delight that is fetching in from things at a distance from us, may be lost againe, and return into its proper seat againe: As the pleasant beames is of the Sun, which refresh∣es the outward man, may be lost, for when the Clouds come between, the beames returne into the Sun again, which is their proper seat, and men loseth, the refreshing, wramth and hear. And therefore, Thirdly, Christ or the spreading power of light, is drawing the knowledge of himself,Ier. 31. 34. as he lies in all things,Ioh. 8. 22. into the clear experience of man, in∣to whole man, yea, into every brench of man-kinde and he the Sonne of Righteousnesse will not only
shine into, but fix hinself in every one. So that perfect man shall be no other but God manifest in flesh: for every manifestation of this power in any creature,Rom. 8. 22 shall be seen, known, rejoyced in, and be declared of by man. The light, and heat, and Spirit of the Sunne, shall be declared by the Sonne of Righteousnesse in man: The sweet compliance of love in one creature towards another; as the clouds to waer the earth, the earth to send forth the fruits to preserve the li∣ving creatures, that feeds thereupon, shall be decla∣red by that living power, Love and Righteousnesse, that is seated in man towards any creature. So that, though this one Almighty power be spread in the whole Creation, yet it will appear to have his chief residence in man,Eph. 1. 23. that in, by and through man,1 Joh. 2. 12 that one spirit may rule and govern the works of his own hands in Righteousnesse. Every declaration of Christ in the Scriptures, shal be seen and known in the clear experience of every sonne and daughter (when this mystery is finished) for Christ, who indeed is the anointing, shall fill all, and all shall be the fulnesse of the anointing: So that whatsoever a condition a man is in,Isa. 21. 13. it is one or other condition that the childe Jesus was in, growing upwards towards man-hood; there is child hood, youth and oldage in the anointing. For the wisdome and power of truth, that was poured upon the head of the Son of man, grows upwards towards perfection in sons and daughters: Even as wee see any tree, corn or cattell, grows up in the eye of man by degrees; for as these creatures doe not attaine to perfectson on a sudden; neither doth the spirit of Righteousnesse rise up on a sud∣den perfection, but by degrees And therefore, He that beleeves makes not hast; The hastie flesh would have all content on a sudden,
but the spirit is moderate and rises up patiently, its powerfull and quick, and yet slow; its slow, but yet sure; it will sit down in peace in a man, though it run thorow many thorns and briars first. Yea, I say, whatsoever condition you are in Christ or the anointing being in you,Isa. 53. 3. appears in that condition in you. If you be in a condition of pover∣ty, so was Christ the Son of man, he had not where∣on to lay his head. If you be hated for Rigteousnesse sake, so was he, nay it is the anointing in you that is hated. If angry, proud and tyrant-ruling flesh seek to imprison you and kill you, so they dealt with him, and it is still the righteous man in you that is opposed. If you be made to joy in the Father, the Spirit of truth; it is he within you that rejoyces in himself; if you feel a waiting,Ioh. 14. meek spirit in you, it is still Christ in you, who is meek and lowly. If you feel the power of love dwell within you, leading you to love enimies, and to do as you would be done unto, it is Christ in you, who is the law of love and Righteousnesse, And in every condition you are in, this law of the Spirit meets with the powers of your own flesh fetting and fighting against him: For envy, fro∣wardnesse, self-love, covetousnesse are the power of darknesse in you, that fights against the Spirit, that sweetly seeks the preservation and peace of all. But that opposing power in you is the devil, serpent and power of darknesse, which Christ the power of light, rising up in you; will destroy; and so mor∣tality shall be swallowed up of life. And Christ will not sit down in peace,Ier. 2. 3. 5, 6 rejoycing in you, till he hath subdued all these inward and outward enemies under his feet, and himself become the alone King of Righteousnesse in you; for he is that mighty King, that shall be established upon the
holy hill of Sion; that is, He shall be only King, unto whom every man & woman shal be made a subject; This King shall raigne for ever and ever: Thes. 2. 7 And this is he you would call God; but indeed the power of darknesse is the god that rules in most men and wo∣men, both professours and others: and they will subject to this their god of darknesse, till the power of light Christ take him away. So that whatsoever estate a son or daughter is in,1 Co. 15. 27 it is still but Christ combating with his ene∣mies, in that estate, drawing all into himself, and destroying all oppsing powers, that himself may remain to be the one alone Almighty power, spread forth every where, and so doing the will of the Father, brusing the Sarpents head in you; and that he himself, who is the divine, may grow up, flourish, remaine and bring orth aboundance of fruit in you, when your created flesh is purged from bondage, and made subject to him. But if Christ and the Father be all one power and wisdome, why do you make a distinction, as if they were two? I answer, The Father is the universall power, that hath spread himself in the whole globe; The Sonne is the same power drawn into, and appear∣ing in one single person, making that person subject to the one Spirit, and to know him that dwels every where. There is not a person or creature within the compasse of the globe, but he is a sonne of the of the Father; or the breakings forth of that power in one body; now every small creature is the light of the Faher, though it be a dark one; but man living in the light of the Father, is called The wel-beloved Sonne, because that one power of Rigteousnesse dwels bodily in him, and the whole Creation is drawn up into that one centre, man.
And now the Lord a lone is exalted in this day of his power; for now the Serpent is cast out of hea∣ven, al powers of darknesse are subdued, and the Spirit remaines conquerour in man, yet in single man; and so filling the living earth, man-kinde in all his branches with himself, the one Spirit. This spreading power is the Fathers house, in which there are many mansions, or dwelling places; every crerture lives herein: for in and by him every one lives, and moves, and hath his being: This is to speak truth as it is in Jesus. This is Sion that is above, where the Father dwels in his glory. Sinai is the mountaine of flesh, that is to be burn∣ed with fire,Ephes. 1. 6. that is, the Spirit of Righteousnesse is the fire, that will burn-up all unrighteous powers in the flesh. And to see this power of Righteousnesse spread∣ing himself every where, destroying death, and preserving the Creation, is to see him you would call God, with open face; and you can never see him plainly and nakedly, till you come thus to see him; therefore you Priests and zealous ptofessors, learne hereafter ro know what power it is you call God: for the word God, signifies a Governour, and it may as well be attributed to the devil, as to the law of Righteousnesse; for assure your selves, if covetousnesse, pride and bitter envy doe rule you, as it is apparent this dark power rules most of you, then the devil is that god you worship; and you are strangers and enemies to the Spirit of Truth that dwels every where, which you seem to call your God or Ruler.
CHAP. III. ANd this is no new Gospel, but the old one; It is the same report that the Pen-men of Scriptures gave for the everlasting Gospel, God with us, or God manifest in flesh. The Father exalted above all, and in all; for the Prophets and Apostles declare these two things. First, the Spirit spreads himself abroad in sacri∣fices and types, as in Moses time, and then takes all into himself againe; the Spirit manifest in▪ one person, as in the son of man; For all the writings of old and new Testament, are all centered in Christ,Ioh. 16. 7. and are swallowed up into him: And this Christ is not only confined to the Lamb Jesus anointed, but is the enlarging of the same anointing, in the particular persons of sonnes and daughters, in whom the same spirit of truth the comforter, is to be manifest in after times. And this power shall not only fill man-kinde, and be all in all therein, but all other creatures, of all kinde according to their severall degrees, shall be filled with this one spirit,Rom. 3. 22 anointing: As Pauls testimony reports, that the whole Creation of all kindes of creatures, in whom the curse is spread through mans unrighteousnesse, doth all groan and travell, waiting for the manifestation of the sonnes of God. When man-kinde shall be restored, and de∣livered from the curse, and all spirited with this one power, then other creatures shall be restored likewise, and freed from their burdens: as the Earth, from thorns, and briars, and barrennesse; the Air and winds from unseasonable storms and distempers; the Cattle from bitternesse and rage one against another. And the law of righteousnesse
and love shall be seated in the whole Creatton, from the lowest to the highest creature. And this is the work of restoration. So that all the glory and content that man takes in other creatures of the earth, it is but a rejoycing in himself; or that spirit that is within him being more and more filled with peace to see, feel, taste, smell and hear, the power of the whole Creation, to have a sweet complyancy of love in him, and with him. For now all jarring, rashnesse, violent storms, barrennesse of the earth, corruption in fire and water, enmity in cattles, oppressing principles in one man over another, are all kept and swept away like locusts, by this strong East winde, the Lord himself at his coming. And every creature in his kinde sings in Righteousnesse, and man lives and rules in the strength of that Law, by reason whereof all teares and are wiped away. And when this glory is finished, as it must be; for it is begun to be made manifest, for the poor they doe receive the Go∣spel: and it is yet hid from the learned ones, the teachers and the rulers of the world. Then those writings are made good,Psa. 110. 1 That all enemies are subdued under the eet of the anointing, who is this spreading power of Righteousnesse, and there is no opposite power remaining. For the power that shall now appear, is no other but the Lord himself, dwelling every where: And the whole Creation is his gaden wherein he walks and delights himself, And now the Kingdome is deli∣vered up ino the Fathers hand,1 Cor. 1. 24. the one Spirit that fils all, and is in all. And the distinction of dominion in one single person over all, shall cease▪1 Cor. 12. 13. and no distinction shall be owned, but King of Righteousnesse, dwelling in every one, and in the whole body of the Creation▪
all being sweetly and quietly subject to him, and he sweetly and quietly ruling in them: And this shall be that City Sion, of which glorious things are spoken. And now in this new heaven and new earth, he himself who is the King of Righteousnesse doth dwel and rule; and this is the excellency of the work; when a man shall be made to see Christ in other creatures, as well as in himself; every one rejoy∣cing each in other,Rev. 5. 13. and all rejoycing in their King. O ye hear say Preachers, deceive not the poeple any longer, by telling them that this glory shal not be known and seen, til the body is laid in the dust. I tel you, this great mystery is begun to appear, and it must be seen by the material eyes of the flesh: And those five senses that is in man, shall partake of this glory. This is Christ rising up and drawing al things into himself. This is the Spirits entrance into the Fa∣ther; which is heavenly glory which rises, and shal rise higher and higer in Israel, He that hath part in the first Resurrection, the second death, of the bo∣dies laying down in the dust, shal have no power, to break their peace, or hinder their glory, but shall further the increase of it. But now that power of unrighteousnesse, that rules and fights in man kinde against this, shall be destroyed, subdued, and shall never be reconciled to, nor partake of this glory. My eaning is this, The power of pride, and the power of humility, shal never dwel quietly in one heart together. The power of love, tendernesse and righteous∣nesse, and the power of envy, hardnesse of heart, and covetous unrighteousnesse, shall never dwel quietly in one heart together. Uncleannesse and chasticy shal not dwel in peace together: The son of the bond-woman, rebelli∣ous
flesh, shal not be heir with the son of the free-woman, flesh made subject to the Law of Righte∣ousnesse within himself. There is no quiet peace in a man, til the King∣dome of darknesse be conquered, and the Serpent be cast out and so the heart made a fit temple or house for the Spirit to dwel bodily in. A man is not counted a man from the bulk of his body of flesh,Mat. 12. 29. but the power that dwels in that body of flesh, is the man, either the righteous man or the wicked: And if the wicked power rule in the body of the flesh, this is he that must be burned up, subdued, destroyed, and never enter into rest. This is Christs enemy. But if the righteous power doe rule, or being weak,Isa. 6. 10. and so is kept under by the other dark power doth hunger and thirst after righteotsnesse, that he might be King. This power is to be redeemed from bondage, and set at libety, and sit down in rest and peace. This is Christ rising out of the dust, and hee shall wholly be raised up to live and dwel in the Father, and the Father in him, and all opposite powers of bondage, that now afflicts, shal be trod un∣der his feet. Therefore now yon zealous Preachers and Pro∣fessors in al forms, if you have eyes look within your selves, and see what power rules within the bodies of your flesh; If you finde that the inward power is envy, rash anger, covetousnesse, self-honour∣ing, secret pride, uncleannesse of flesh, close dis∣simulation, and the like;1 Cor. 4▪ 4. know you, that that pow∣er is your self, your very self, a devil, the serpent, the subtil, and yet strong power of darknesse, that would fain be counted an Angle of Light. And though you be called by the name of such a man, or such a woman, yet you are but the father of lies, and of the power of bondage that must be
destroyed and perish: And that humane flesh, that you dwell in, being part of the Creation, shall be cleansed off you, by the spirit of burning, till it be freed from you, that are the curse, the bondage of it under whom it groans. And when you are cast out, who is the serpent, it shall be a temple for the Fa∣ther himself to dwell in, a garden wherein he him∣self will take delight. For it is thou, O thou wick∣ed power that is the curse, I say, The thorns and bri∣ars that troubles the Creation, and thou must be rooted out, and sorrow, and everlasting weeping shall be thy potion, for thou shalt never find the prince of peace. Well, I know yon that would be Angels of light and are not, will count this which I speak madnesse, but you shall find these words true. For all powers that are opposite to the power of Righteousnesse, must, and shall be dstroyed, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in this day of his power,Jerem. 23. 6. and this power of Righteousnesse shall be exalted in flesh, as well as o∣ver flesh. Who was it that put the Son of man to death? Was it he humane flesh? or the power of darkness, that ruled in flesh? Surely that power of darknesse in the flesh did it; and that cursed power, was the Scribes and Phari∣sees; And so now that power of enmity, that rules in those bodies of yours, making your bodies of the flesh slaves to its lusts and will, is still the Scribes and Pharisees, or devil, that fights against Christ, and would not suffer him to rise up in flesh; but cals his power blasphemy, because he crosses you; for if he rise flesh, you must fall in flesh; If he be King, as he must be, you must be his foot stool. Well, mind what power rules in you, whether it be a particular, confining, selfish power, which is the Devil, the Scribes and Pharisees.
Or whether it be a universall spreading power, that delights in the liberty of the whole Creation, which is Christ in you. The particular selfish power, when it is either crossed or shamed, it grows mad and bitter spirited, and endeavours either to kill that body it dwels in, or some others that angers it. But the Power of Christ, the Law of Righteous∣nesse ruling within, is not moved to any such rash∣nesse, it is patient, meek and loving; and doth act righteously both to his own body, and to others, though they be his enemies. CHAP. IV. ANd truly here lies the chiefest knowledge of a man, to know these two powers which strives for government in him, and to see and know them distinctly one from the other, that he may be able to say, This is the name and power of the flesh, and this is the name and power of the Lord. For these two powers are the two Adams in man-kind; they are Iacob and Esau, striving who shall rule in the Kingdom, the flesh first. Or these are the Son of the bond-woman, viz. The powers of the flesh, which is the serpent, Devil, or power of darknesse. Or the Son of the free woman, which is Christ, the wisdom and power of Righteousnesse, ruling in flesh, and making it free from the others bondage. And here I shall declare, what I know the first A∣dam or son of bondage is. And secondly, What the second Adam, or son of the free-woman is; both which Powers I have seen and felt manifested in this body of my flesh.
First, I shall shew, how the first Adam in his time of rule, hath suppressed and kept under the second man, the anointing. And then secondly, how this second man in the time appointed of his rising, doth kill and crucifie the first Adam daily, with all his lusts, and freeth me from that slavery. The first Adam kils and crucifies Christ in me, when I consent and make provision to satisfie my pride over humility, covetousnesse over contented∣nesse, envy over love, lust before chasticy, esteeming the power of an humble, loving and righteous spirit, towards the poorest creatute, but a low and contem∣ptible thing, or the like. Now Christ is crucified in me, he rules not, he acts not in a lively power; but the first man of the flesh he governs the King∣dom, my body in unrighteousnesse. And Christ lies buried in this earthly tabernacle, under those cursed powers in my enslaved body. But then secondly, When the fulnesse of time comes, that it is the Fathers will, that Christ the spi∣rit of truth shal arise above the power of unrighteous∣nesse in me; that is, humility arises above pride, love above envy, a meek and quiet spirit above hasty rash anger, chastity above unclean lusts, and light a∣bove darknesse. Now the second Adam Christ, hath taken the Kingdom my body, and rules in it; He makes it a new heaven,Isa. 65. 17. and a new earth, wherein dwels Righteousnesse. I shall explain these two Adams a little more: First then, The first Adam, or man of the flesh, branches himself forth into divers particulars, to fetch peace into himself, from objects without him∣self. As for example, covetousnesse is a branch of the flesh or first man, that seeks after creature enjoyment or riches; to have peace from them.
Pride looks abroad for honour; Envy seeks the revenge of such as crosses his fleshy ends, by reproch, oppression, or murder. Unclean lusts seeks to em∣brace strange flesh. Imagination flies abroad, to devise wayes to satis∣fie the flesh in these desires: Hypocrisie turns him∣self into divers shapes; ye sometimes into an Angel of light, a zealous Professour to compasse these ends. And self-love (which is ignorant of the universal power) lies couching in the bottom, sending those six several powers of darknesse abroad to fetch in peace to delight self, that lies at home in the fleshy heart. And all these powers make up but one perfect bo∣dy of sin and death, one Devil, or one compleat power of darknesse; or that whorish power, called the Beast with seven heads. And it is called the Beast,Rev. 13. 1. because all those seven discoveries are of the flesh; and flesh is no other, but a beast; and the wise flesh of man, is said to be the beast, the King of beasts, that was to raign fourty two moths, or for a time, times, and dividing of time, and then he should be destroyed by the man of Righte∣ousnesse, Christ. And truly upon every head there is ten horns,Revel. 12. 14. that is, there are many branchings forth of powers from every head to satisfie self; which are Kings indeed. And they are called ten horns every head, encoun∣tering against the five senses of the left hand man, and against the five senses of the right hand man of righteousnesse, and so fights against every particular spreading forth of Christ So that these Kings are not to be restrained to the Kings of the Nations;Revel. 11. 18. though that is true, such powers are enemies to Christ, and they must yield up their Kingdoms unto him, and those that are angry a∣gainst Christ are to be destroyed.
But these ten horns are Kingly powers of the flesh, that rules within every man, leading him captive un∣der the body of the power of darknesse; for there is not the branching forth of evil in any kind to de∣light self, but it springs forth from one or other of those seven heads, all joyning to honour and advance the Beast. The man of Righteousnesse Christ, he is the second Adam, and he spreads himself as far as the other, to undermine him, and to take the Kingdom (that is, the created flesh, or the living earth man-kind) out of that Devils hand. For Christ is the spreading power of Righteous∣nesse;1 Ioh 2. 7. and therefore he is called, The anointing, which was poured upon that humane body, called by the name Iesus, the Son of man, and dwelt bodily there for a time; but afterward was to spread in sons and daughters, many bodies. As the oyl upon Aarons head,Luke 17. 1. ranne down to the skirts of his garments; if any one find rest and peace in this precious Alabaster, which is the wisdome and power of the spirit, he finds it not by looking upon him at a distance from him, but by seeing and feeling that power, ruling within the body of his flesh. As thus contentednesse in all straits or poverty, to live upon providence, is this second Adam in thee, killing thy discontented covetousnesse. Humility and meeknesse is the same anointing which kils pride and loftines. Love to enemies; yea, the law of love flowing forth to every creature, is Christ in you, which kils envy and rash anger. Chastitie in the flesh, kils uncleannesse; wisdom that is pure and plain down right, kils a subtil over∣reaching Imagination. Sincerity and singlenesse of heart (the same anoin∣ting) kils hypocrisie; and love to others, doing as a
man would be done unto; and so respecting the pub∣lick preservation of all creatures, doth kill self-love. And all these seven branchings forth of the pure spirit, makes but one body Christ, or one Almighty power or Mercie and Justice, the holy breathing, or Emanuel, God in us. And every one of these seven eyes,Rev. 5. 6. or seven attri∣butes of the Divine, branches themselves forth into several horns of power, to destroy the man of the flesh, and to deliver man-kind from his bondage. For let the first Adam run out in what shape he will; the second Adam follows after to trip up his heels; to subdue him, and to take the Kingdom from him; that so, when all enemies are subdued, the Almighty power of righteousnesse, which is the Father, may become all in all. And this now declares the meaning of that speech, That Christ saves his people from their sins; not on∣ly in pardoning evil Actions, and removing the evil of sorrow from them, but principally to kill and sub∣due the powers of the flesh, and to make a man sub∣ject to the spirit; and now a man is saved from his sins, and not till now. And this is to be made a new creature, in whom old corrupt lusts are passed away, and every power in him is a new power. Now there is no man or woman needs go to Rome, nor hell below ground, as some talke, to find the Pope, Devil, Beast or Power of darknesse; neither to go up into heaven above the skies to find Christ the word of life. For both these powers are to be felt within a man, fighting against each other. And in that soul wherein Christ prevails, they know that this is truth, for they find peace hi the salvation that comes out of Sion.
CHAP. V. THis first man is he,Rom. 5. 19. by whose disobedience many are made sinners, or by whom the whole Crea∣tion is corrupred; Therefore you Preachers, do not you tell the people any more, That a man called Adam, that disobeyed about 6000 years ago, was the man that filled every man with sin and filth, by eating an apple. For assure your selves, this Adam is within every man and woman; and it is the first power that ap∣pears to act and rule in every man. It is the Lord Esau that stepped before Iacob, and got the birth-right, by the Law of equity was more properly Ia∣cobs. Though Iacob, who is the power and wisdom that made flesh did draw back, and gave way▪ that the wisdom and power of flesh should possesse the King∣dom, and rule first; till Esau, by delighting in un∣righteous pleasures, lost both birth-right and bles∣sing; and left both in the hand of Iacob the King, that rules in righteousnesse, that is to rise up next. The Apple that the first man eats, is not a single fruit called an Apple, or such like fruit; but it is the objects of the Creation; which is the fruit that came out of the Seed, which is the Spirit himself that made all things: As riches, honours, pleasures, upon which the powers of the flesh feeds to delight himself. And this is the messe of pottage which he prefers before righteousnesse, or before righteous walking in the Creation towards every creature, which is Christ, that power that appears in the fulnesse of time to take the Kingdom and rule next. Therefore when a man fals, let him not blame a man that died 6000 years ago, but blame himself, even the powers of his own flesh, which lead him a∣stray;
for this is Adam that brings a man to misery, which is the man flesh, or the strong man within that keeps the house, till the man of Righteousnesse arise and cast him out, who is the second Adam. And this second man is he,Isa. 43. 11. By whose obedience many are made righteous; that is, by the power of Christ, man-kind is purged from its drosse; and this second man, I say, which is the righteous power, doth cast the other man (which is the unrighteous power) out of the house, even the heart, and makes it a temple for himself to dwell in. Now these two powers did the Father ordain should have their course to rule in the earth man-kinde: And this is that day and night, the light and darknesse, Winter and Summer, heat and cold, Moon and Sun, that is typed out by the Fabrick of the great world; for within these two powers is the mystery of all divine workings wrapped up. The first power,Gal. 4. 29. that is of darknesse, or the Chaos of confusion proves selfish and hurtfull to others, tearing its own and the orher mans children, especially to pieces, by cruelty, covetousnesse and op∣pression; For he that is after the flesh, persecutes him that is born after the spirit. And in the fulnesse of time; that is, When the first man hath filled the Creation full of his filthinesse, and all places stinks with unrighteousnesse, as it doth at this day; then it pleaseth the Father, that his own wisdome and power should arise up next to rule in man-kind in rigteousnesse,Rom. 8. 22 and take the Kingdome out of the others hand, and restore all things, and establish the Creation in peace, and declare himself to be the alone Saviour of the world, and to be the most excellent, nay the almighty power. The first man Adam, is called, The Son of God, a power that the Almighty was pleased should be ma∣nifest; but this is the son of disobedience, the son
that goes astray, a son causing sorrow and shame, and so becomes the serpent, the Devil, the power of darknesse, the Beast, the Whore, the father of lies, the murder of man-kind, and the bottomlesse pit, out of which all unrighteousnesse and misery rises up.Rev. 19. 2. But the second Adam is called, His wel-beloved Son; the Son of his delight, the Son bringing ho∣nour and peace; Why? Because by him the oppo∣sing power is cast out, and the wisdome and power of Righteousnesse, which is the Lord,1 Cor. 1. 24 is that wisdom and power that rules in and over man-kind, and the flesh is made subject hereunto without grumbling; and so all things becomes the Lords. And this Son or second Adam is called, The Lord, The King of righteousnesse, The Prince of Peace, The Saviour, The mighty God, The Restorer of all things, The Salvation, The Consolation of Israel, The Blessing of all Nations of the Earth, The Power of Light or Reason. And thus we see the Father hath ordained,Phil. 2. 7. 2 Thes. 2. 4▪ that the powers of dark flesh should rule over him that made him for a time, and he who is the Father of all things would be a servant, and that dark flesh should be the mystery of iniquity, or Antichrist, that should oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God, till by the other greater power, the Father himself arising up in the Creation, he be taken out of the way. This teaches every son and daughter, to wait with patience and quietnesse of spirit under all tempta∣tions, till the Fathers turn come, according to his own appointment to rule in flesh; And then their sorrows shall be turned into joy,Ephes. 1. 5. and their mourning in∣to laughter:Joh. 16. 20 All tears shall be wiped away, and they shall be delivered from the bondage,Rev. 21. 23. and live in free∣dom and peace.
These two powers, I say, are typed out by Iacob and Esau; Iacob put forth his arm first, and it is mar∣ked by the midwife, and then he draws if in again: then Esau comes fully forth, and is called the elder brother. Iacob is Christ,Isa. 44. 1, and Chap. 42. 1. the elect or chosen one, or the Al∣mighty power and wisdome, that first put forth his arm of strength in making man-kind; but the powers of the flesh, which, is Esau, or the rejected one, the re∣probate, steps before (by permission) and gets the government of the Kingdom, (man-kind) first; and he is suffered to raign, till Christ supplant him, and takes both birth-right and blessing from him. Or rather takes possession of his own Right and Kingdom, man-kind; for he appeared first, and so by the law of equity and reason, he is the elder bro∣ther; though Esau or the powers of the flesh got the dominion to rule in the Creation, by a violence, which the wisdom and power of the spirit, suffered and ordained to be. This second man is the spirituall man,Cor. 2. 15. that judges all things according to the law of equity and reason, in moderation and love to all, he is not a talker, but an actour of Righteousnesse. But the man of the flesh, which would be count∣ed an Angel of light, cannot judge any thing in righteousnesse; for all his judgement and justice is selfish, and confined to particular ends, not to the publick safety and preservation; he is a great Preach∣er and talker of righteous things, but no actour of righteousnesse, or if he do, it is, very slowly, it is when Iacob over-powers him, his judgement is hasty, un∣advised rashnesse, at randome, hap hazard, right or wrong, he knows not. And sometime he is mo∣derate, for by ends to himself; and sometimes full of bitter censures to hurt others.
CHAP. VI. THe man of the flesh, judges it a righteous thing, That some men that are cloathed with the ob∣jects of the earth, and so called rich men, whether it be got by right or wrong, should be Magistrates to rule over the poor; and that the poor should be servants nay rather slaves to the rich. But the spiritual man, which is Christ, doth judge according to the light of equity and reason, That al man-kinde ought to have a quiet substance and freedome, to live upon earth; and that there shal be no bond-man nor begger in all his holy mountaine. Man-kinde was made to live in the freedome of the spirit,Gen. 1. 28. not under the bondage of the flesh, though the lordly flesh hath got a power for a time, as I said before; for every one was made to be a Lord over the Creation of the Earth, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Grasse, Trees, not any one to be a bond-slave and a beggar under the Creation of his own, kinde. That so every one living in freedome and love in the strength of the Law of Righteousnesse in him; not under straits of poverty, nor bondage of tyranny one to another, might al rejoyce to∣gether in Righteousnesse, and so glorifiie their Ma∣ker; for suerly this much dishnoured the Maker of all men, that some men should be oppressing tyrants, imprisoning, whipping, hanging thier fellow crea∣tures, men, for those very things which those very men themselves are giulty of; let mens eyes be o∣pened, and it appears clear enough, That the pu∣nishers have and doe break the law of equity and reason, more, or as much as those that are punish∣ed by them.
None will be offended at this, but the children of Lord Esau, the first man flesh, which must pe∣rish for his unrighteous government, for thereby he hath lost himself, sold or passed over his birth-right and blessing unto Iacob, the King of Righte∣ousnesse that is now rising up, to urle according to the pure law of equity and reason. And when this King raigns, the city that is, the heart of every one in whom truth dwels, wil re∣joyce; but while the man of unrighteosunesse raigns in and over man-kinde, truly every body wee see is filled with sorrow and complainings, and it is not without cause. As the powers and wisdome of the flesh hath fil∣led the earth with injustice, oppression and com∣plainings, by mowing the earth into the hands of a few covetous, unrighteous men, who assumes a lordship over others,Dan. 4. 17 declaring themselves thereby to be men of the basest spirits. Even so, when the spreading power of wisdome and truth, fils the earth man-kinde, hee wil take off that bondage, and gives a universall liberty, and there shal be no more complainings against oppre∣ssion, poverty, or injustice. When every son and daughter shall be made com∣fortable to that one body,Phil. 3. 2 of Jesus the anointed, and the same power rules in them, as in him, every one according to their measure, the oppression, shall cease, and the rising up of this universal pow∣er, shal destroy and subdue the selfish power. But this is not done by the hands of a few, or by unrighteous men, that would pul the tyrannical government out of other mens hands, and keep it in their own heart, as we feel this to be a burden of our age. But it is done by the universall spread∣ing of the divine power, which is Christ in mankind making them all to act in one spirit, and in and af∣ter
one law of reason and equity. And when this universall power of Righteousnesse is spread in the earth,Rev. 18. 8 it shall destroy Babylon the great City of fleshy confusion in one hour; that is he will pull the Kingdome and Government of the world out of the hands of tyrannicall, unseasonable acting flesh, and give the lands and riches that covetous, unrighteous men hath hoarded up within their own selfish power,Ps. 105. 45 into the hands of spirituall Israel; that so there may be no complainings, no burdens, nor no poor in Canaan, but that it may be a Land flowing with milke and honey, plenty of all things, every one walking righteously in the Crea∣tion one to another, according to the law of equity and reason, as it was in the beginning, And as Babylon measured out to others, so that it shall be, measured to him again. And suerly as the Scriptures threaten misery to rich men, bidding them Howl and weep, for their gold and silver is cankered, and the rust thereof cries unto heaven for vengeance against them, and the like. Suerly all those threatnings shal be materially full∣filed, for they shall be turned out of all, and their riches given to a people that wil bring forth better fuit, and such as they have oppressed shall inherit the Land. The rich man tels the poor, that they ofend Rea∣sons law, if they take forth the rich; I am sure it is a breach in that Law in the rich to have plenty by them, and yet wil see their fellow creatures men and women to strave for want; Reason requires that every man should live upon the increase of the earth comfortably, though covetousnesse ights against Reasons law. The rich doth lock up the treasures of the earth, and hardens their hearts against the poor. The poor are those in whom the blessing lies, for they first re∣ceive
the Gospel, and their gifts of love and tender∣nesse one to preserve another, shall be the condem∣nation of the rich: And secondly, the inheritances of the rich shall be given to those poor, and there shall be no beggar in Israel. And there is equity and Reason in it, for the King of Righteousnesse, did not make some men to be ty∣rants, and others to be slaves, at the beginning, for this burden riseth up afterwards, Esau stepped into the birth-right before Iacob, till the time come that he shall be taken away again. In the first enterance into the Creation,Gen. 1. 28. every man had an equall freedom given him of his Maker to till the earth, and to have dominion over the beasts of the field,Rom. 8. 22 &c. the owls of heaven, and fish in the Seas. But this freedom is broke to pieces by the power of covetousnesse, and pride, and self-love, not by the law of Righteousnesse. And this free∣dom will not be restored, till the spreading power of Righteousnesse and peace rise up in the earth, making all men and women to be of one heart, and one mind, which must come to passe, for that Scri∣pture was never fulfilled yet. The powers of flesh shall never partake of this priviledge, for he is the curse that must be removed; Selfish Councellours, Selfish Governours, Selfish Souldiers, shall never be honoured in setling this restoration; The Lord himself will do this great work, without either sword or weapon; weapons and swords shall destroy, and cut the powers of the earth asunder, but they shall never build up. For the Law-giver in righteousnesse shall come out of Sion, that shall turn covetous oppressing ungodliness from Jacob. For surely the Father will give as large a liberty to his children to inherit the earth, as he gives to the beast of the field; though they break over hedges,
and eat in any pasture, they do not imprison and hang one another, the earth is a common livelyhood for them, the restraint ariseth from selfish covetous∣nesse, and lordly proud flesh, that hath got the go∣vernment, and saith, The spirit hath given it him. In∣deed thou hast it for a time, not by right of blessing, but by permission, that through thy unrighteousness thou maist fall and never rise again: And that righte∣ous Jacob may arise, who hath been thy servant, and never fall again; and then the elder shall serve the younger. I do not speak that any particular men shall go and take their neighbours goods by violence, or rob∣bery (I abhor it) as the condition of the men of the Nations are ready to do in this fleshly setled govern∣ment of the world, but every one is to wait, till the Lord Christ do spread himself in multiplicities of bodies, making them all of one heart and one mind, acting in the righteousnesse one to another. It must be one power in all, making all to give their con∣sent to confirm this law of righteousnesse and reason. For when the work is made manifest,Revel. 11. 15. it shall be a universall Power that shall rise up in the earth (man-kind) to pull the Kingdom and outward government of the world out of the hands of the tenant Esau, king-flesh; and this shall be made manifest in all the Nations of the earth; For the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord Christ. And this universall power of a righteous law, shall be so plainly writ in every ones heart, that none shall desire to have more then another,Heb. 8. 10. or to be Lord over other,Act. 4. 32. or to lay claim to any thing as his; this phrase of Mine and Thine shall be swallowed up in the law of righteous actions one to another,Jam. 2. 13 for they shall all live as brethren,1 Ioh. 3. 17 every one doing as they would be done by; and he that sees his brother in wants, and doth not help, shall smart for his iniquity,
from the hand of the Lord, the righteous Judge that will fit upon the throne in every mans heart. There shall be no need of Lawyers, prisons, or engines of punshment one over another, for all shall walk and act righteously in the Creation, and there shall be no beggar,Hos. 3. 18. nor cause of complaining in all this holy Mountain. Therefere I say to all,Rev 6. 11 wait, be patient in your present bondage, till our brethren be brought in likewise; Forsake the way of Babylon, and commit your cause to him that judgeth righteously; The work of freedom is in the hand of Christ, and he is the righteous freedom; he hath begun to spread him∣self, and he goes on mightily, and will go on. The poor receives the Gospel daily; Christ is drawing all men after him, he is calling in the Isles and Nations of the world, to come to this great Battell, even to deliver the oppressed, and o destroy the oppressour, to spoil him that spoiled, and yet was never spoiled himself; And so to lead captivity captive, and let the prisoners of hope go free. CHAP. VII. WHen this universall law of equity rises up in every man and woman, then none shall lay claim to any creature, and say, This is mine, and that is yours, This is my work, that is yours; but every one shall put to their hands to till the earth, and bring up cattle, and the blesting of the earth shall be common to all; when a man hath need of any corn or cattle,Act. 4. 32. take from the next store-house he meets with. There shall be no buying nor selling, no fairs nor markets, but the whole earth shall be a common trea∣sury
for every man, for the earth is the Lords. And man-kind thus drawn up to live and act in the Law of love, equity and onenesse, is but the great house wherein the Lord himself dwels,Eph. 4. 5, 6 and every particu∣lar one a severall mansion: and as one spirit of righte∣ousnesse is common to all, so the earth and the bles∣sings of the earth shall be common to all; for now all is but the Lord, and the Lord is all in all. When a man hath meat, and drink, and cloathes, he hath enough, and all shall cheerfully put to their hands to make these things that are needfull, one helping another; there shall be none Lords over others, but every one shall be a Lord of him∣self, subject to the law of righteousnesse, reason and equity, which shall dwell and rule in him, which is the Lord;Zech. 14. 9 For now the Lord is one, and his name and power one, in all and among all. Their rejoycings and glory shall be continually in eying and speaking of what breakings forth of love they receive from the Father, singing Sions songs one to another; to the glory of him that sits upon the throne, for evermore. This universall freedom hath never filled the earth, though it hath been fore-told by most of the Pro∣phets. This is the glory of Jerusalem, which never yet hath been the praise of the whole earth. And this will be no troublesome businesse,Rev. 12. 9 when cove∣tousnesse, and the selfish power is killed and cast out of heaven, and every one is made willing to honour the King of Righteousnesse in action, being all of one heart and one mind: Truly we may well call this a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells righte∣ousnesse. And that prophesie will not generally be fulfilled till this time. If it be thus, then saith the scoffer, mens wives shall be common too? or a man may have as many wives as he please?
I answer, The Law of Righteousnesse and Reason saith no: For when man was made, he was made male and female, one man and one woman conjoyn∣ed together by the law of love, makes the Creation of humane flesh perfect in that particular; Therefore a man shall forsake father and mother, and cleave on∣ly to his wife, for they twain are but one flesh. Reason did not make one man and many women, or one woman and many men to joyn together, to make the Creation perfect, but male and female in the singular number, this is enough to encrease seed. And he or she that requires more wives, or more husbands then one, walks contrary to the Law of Righteous∣nesse, and shall bear their shame: Though this im∣moderate lust after strange flesh, rule in the bodies of men now, while the first Adam is King, yet it shall not be so when the second man rises to raign, for then chastitie is one glory of the Kingdom. But what if a man break that law of Righteousnes, as many do under this fleshly government which is yet extant? I answer, He shall then become servant to others, and be as a fool in Israel; the wrath of the Lord shall be upon him, and lose the priviledge of Sonship, till the law of righteousnesse in him become his King. And those that loses that priviledge, shall know they have lost a blessing. The proud, covetous and unrighteous men, ere many years wheel about, will tell the world by their lamentation and torment, what it is to lose the blessing of son-ship. The manifestation of a righteous heart shall be known, not by his words, but by his actions; for this multitude of talk, and heaping up of words a∣mongst professours shall die and cease,Ier. 31. 34. this way of preaching shall cease, and verbal worship shall cease, and they that do worship the Father, shall worship him by walking righteously in the Creation, in the
strenghth of the Law of Love and equity one to an∣other.Joh. 4. 23. And the time is now coming on, that men shall not talk of righteousnesse, but act righteous∣nesse. And they that in these times, will not observe this Rule, to walk righteously in the Creation, wait∣ing quietly till Christ come to restore all things, he shall have sorrows, troubles and discontents of heart within, vexing, grudging, rash passions, he shall have no true peace, but be filled with confusion, and be a slave to his lusts. The Father now is rising up a people to himself out of the dust,Matth. 11. 25. that is, out of the lowest and despi∣sed sort of people,1 Cor. 1. 27. that are counted the dust of the earth, man-kind, that are trod under foot. In these, and from these shall the Law of Righteousnesse break orth first, for the poor they begin to receive the Go∣spel, and plentifull discoveries of the Fathers love flows from them, and the waters of the learned and great men of the world, begins to dry up like the brooks in Summer. When this restoration breaks forth in righteous action, the curse then shall be removed from the Creation, Fire, Water, Earth and Air. And Christ the spreading forth of Righteousnesse, shall be the onely Saviour, that shall make Jacob to rejoyce, and Israel to be glad. There shall be no barrennesse in the earth or cattle,Zach. 3. 4, &c. for they shall bring forth fruit abundantly. Un∣seasonable storms of weather shall cease, for all the curse shall be removed from all, and every creature shall rejoyce in Righteousnesse one in another throughout the whole Creation. Thomas Dydimus, that is, the unbelief of your hearts cries out, When will these things be? not in our time? I cannot believe such things till I see them?
Well, lay aside your doubtfull questioning, and let every one set himself to walk righteously in the Law of love one towards another, and wait the Lords time; this work is to be done upon flesh, not by flesh. The Lord will have none of your flesh wit, policy or strength to setle this work, for he alone will be honoured in this day of his power, it must be his own handy work, that must bring this resto∣ration to passe, yea, and he will hasten this work, as speedily, as the Midianites Army was destroyed, and Sodom and Gomorrah burned, and as speedily, and as unlooked for,Isa. 60. 22. as plenty came into Samaia; mens unbelief cannot hinder this work of Righte∣ousnesse. The Lord will do this work speedily, Babylon shall fall in one hour, Israel shall rise in one hour; O when thi righteous Law shall rule in every one, there will be springings up of joy and peace,Joh 7. 38. and the blessing of the Lord shall rest every where. The whole earth we see is corrupt, and it cannot be purged by the hand of creatures, for all creatures lies under the curse, and groans to be delivered, and the more they strive, the more they entangle them∣selves in the mud; therefore it must be the hand of the Lord alone that must do it. None can remove the curse from fire, water, earth and air, but the Almighty power himself. And this work is called, the Restoration of all things; for all things groan and travel in pain under bondage, wait∣ing for this manifestation. And seeing every creature that is burdened waits for the coming in of the blessing,Gen. 18. 18. then surely no flesh can settle this work, for all flesh is corrupt; this work shall not be done by sword, or weapon, or wit of the flesh, but by the power of the Lord, killing covetous∣nesse, and making man-kind generally to be of one heart and one mind.
But why hath not the Lord done this all this time that is past? I answer, Covetous, wise arid lordly flesh would raign in the Kingdom, man-kind first, and would be counted the onely power to govern the Creation, in an excellent order. And the Lord gave this domi∣nion into his hand, bur withall told him, that if he governed the Creation unrighteously, he and all the Creation should die and fall under the curse. Well, the powers of the flesh, Lord Esau was ad∣vanced, and hath ruled with such self-seeking ends,Rom. 8. 21 &c. that he hath made all creatures weary of his govern∣ment, and the whole earth to stink and to groan un∣der the burden of it, longing to be delivered. For first, they that stand up to teach others, they teach for gain, and preach for hire, and fils people with division and confusion, through their pride and envy, and they do this by the Authority of the go∣verning power, by which they have ingrossed the earth into their hands. A man must not take a wife, but the Priest must give her him. If he have a child, the Priest must give the name. If any die, the Priest must see it laid in the earth. If any man want know∣ledge or comfort, they teach him to go to the Priest for it; and what is the end of all this, but to get money: if a man labour in the earth to eat his bread, the Priests must have the tenths of his encrease, or else some oppressing impropriatour, that shares the tithes between himself and the Priest; which Law was brought in by the Pope, and still upheld by such as call themselves, the Christian Protestants. All which is high treason and mighty dishonoura∣ble to Christ the great Prophet, whom they seem to shew love to; here the earth stinks, because this hath been established by a compulsive binding power, whereby the Creation is held under bondage: this is the fruit of imagination.
Secondly, For matter of buying and selling, the earth stinks with such unrighteousnesse, that for my part, though I was bred a tradesmen, yet it is so hard a thing to pick out a poor living, that a man shall sooner be cheated of his bread, then get bread by trading among men, if by plain dealing he put trust in any. And truly the whole earth of trading, is general∣ly become the neat art of thieving and oppressing fellow-creatures, and so laies burdens, upon the Crea∣tion, but when the earth becomes a common trea∣sury this burden will be taken off. Thirdly, For Justices and Officers of State, that should relieve people in their wrongs, and preserve peace, they multiply wrongs, and many, if not most times oppresses the poor, and lets the effending rich go free, by laying aside the letter of their laws, as the Priests doth the Scriptures; and acts by subtil covetousnesse and smooth words to get money, or else ruling by their own wills, through envy to im∣prison and oppresse others, letting poor people lie in prison half a year many times, and never bring them to trial at all. And thus the people have been and are oppressed by false imprisonments and punishments; not for the breach of any known law, but to satisfie the will of the Justice, Bailiffs or Officer, against all reason and equity, as if the people made Officers to be their Aegyrtian task-masters: Nay, let all men speak open∣ly as they find, and I am sure they will say that the Justices and most state Officers, doth more oppresse, then deliver from oppression. And thus I see that the whole earth stinks, by the first Adams corrupt Government; therefore it is the fulness of time, for Jacob to arise, extream necessity cals for the great work of restoration, and when the restorer of the earth hath a little more mani∣fested
himself, he wi make the earth a common treasury, and sweep away all the refuge of lies, and All oppressions, by making all people to be of one heart and one minde, and then the Law of Righte∣ousnesse and peace, shal be the King that shal rule in every man, and over every man, who indeed is the Lord himself, who is and wil be all, and in all. And now seeing there is nothing found but com∣plainings and tears under his oppressions, it is the ful∣nesse or fittest time now for Iacob to arise, & restore all things, who indeed is Christ: And for David to raigne, who indeed is Christ the great devider be∣tween flesh and spirit, & the great law-giver of peace and truth, For besides him there is no Saviour; He indeed is the blessing of all Nations, and the joy of the whole earth. Therefore tremble thou Lord Esau, thou proud and covetous flesh, thou art condemned to die, the sentence is begun to be put in execution, for the poor begins to receive the Gospel; thou shalt wast, decay and grow weaker and weaker, til thy place be no where found in earth, and Christ the blessing of the Creation, shal rise up and spread, and fil the earth, and all creatures shall rejoyce under his sha∣dow. Therefore you Tribes of Israel, that are now in sackcloth, every man with his hands upon his loins, like a woman in travel, stand stil and see the salvation of David your King; this is called the time of Iacobs trouble;Ier. 30. 6 for indeed the Spirit that is in you, is oppressed under the burden of cursed flesh, But he shall be delivered, the time of his resurrection is come, and his rising shal be your glory, his light shal desperse your darknesse, and cover the earth with the knowledge of himself, for the blessing shal be every where. Iacobs troubles formerly was two-fold,
First, His kindred and friends endeavoured to hinder him of his temporal lively-hood, and to make the earth to become a burden to him, by changing his cattell, and taking those earthly blessings from him, which the Lord had given him. Secondly, when Iacob had a liberty to take wives, children, and cattell, and to goe live free of him∣self; his kindred runs after him, and tels him, he had stolen away their gods; and for that, begins a fresh to trouble him. And the same troubles are the portion of those in whom Iacobs spirit rests. For, First, Their kindred and neighbours endeavours to make them poor in the world, and to oppresse them with the burden of poverty and straits. Secondly, Now the Father is drawing Iacob out of Babylon, and makes his children to forsake the forms and customs of the National worship, to worship the Father in Spirit and Truth. Now kindred and neighbours in the flesh cries our, O these men steals away our gods, and by reproaches, imprison∣ments or wrong dealing, seeks to oppresse and sup∣presse them. Wel this is but stil the time of Iacobs troubles, but he shall be delivered out. Wel let the lordly flesh scoffe and laugh and cry, O when shal this be! and say with the Lord of Sa∣maria, it is impossible, for it is madnesse thus to speak; wel, such may live to see it, but shal not enjoyne the blessing; for when Iacob arises, that is now very low, and be must rise, then Esau shal be his servant, The elder shall serve the younger, and thy portion shal be wraped up in Jacobs lap, for all is his. For now he Father is raissing up a people to him∣self out of the dust, and of the stones, that is, poor despised people, that are trod upon like dust and
stones, shal be now raised up, and be made the blessing of the earth, and the high mountaines shall be laid low, the lofty looks of men shal be pulled down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in this day of his power. CHAP. VIII. AS I was in a trance not long since, divers mat∣ters were present to my sight, which here must not be related. Likewise I heard these words, Worke together. Eat bread together; declare this all a∣broad. Likewise I heard these words. Whosoever it is that labours in the earth, for any person or persons, that lifts up themselves as Lords & Rulers over others, and that doth not look upon themselves equal to others in the Creation, The hand of the Lord shall be upon that labouror: I the Lord have spoke it and I will do it; Declare this all abroad. After I was raised up, I was made to remember very fresh what I had seen and heard, & did declare al things to them that were with me, and I was filled with abundance of quiet peace and secret joy. And since that time those words have been like very fruitfull seed, that have brough forth increase in my heart, which I am much prest in spirit in declare all abroad. The poor people by their labours in this time of the first Adams government, have made the buyers and sellers of land, or rich men, to become tytants and oppressours over them. But in the time of Israels restoration, now begin∣ing,Ier. 23. 5. 6 when the King of Righteousnesse himself shall be Governor in every man; none then shall work for hire, neither shal any give hire, but every one work in love: one with, and for another; and
eat bread together, as being members of one hou∣shold; the Creation in whom Reason rules King in perfect glory. He that cals any part of the Creation his own in particular,Act. 4. 32 in this time of Israels return from the mi∣stery of Aegyptian bondage, is a destroyer of the Crea∣tion, a lifter up of the proud covetous flesh againe, a bringer in of the curse againe, and a mortal enemy, to the Spirit. For upon Israels returne from captivity,Ier. 35. 38 the Lord himself wil burn up the curse,Isa. 29. 20. 21. and restore the Creation,Rom. 8. 21. fire, water, earth and air from that slave∣ry, and make the earth to be a common treasury to them all;Iob. 6. 45. for they are but one house of Israel still, though twelve Tribes; And they have but one King, one Law-giver one teacher amongst them all, even the Lord himself, who is Reason. The King of Righteousnesse, they are all filled with one spirit, and they shall all live comfortably upon one earth; and so the whole earth is the Lords. And this is the inward and outward liberty,Zech. 8. 3 which the Lord wil give to Sion. And this work is begun, the foundation of this spiritual building is laid, and the spreading of this one spirit in every sonne and daughter, and the lifting up the earth to be a common treasury, wil make Jerusalem a praise in the whole earth,Isa. 62. 17 and the glory of the earth indeed, and so the Father of all things shall be honoured in the works of his own hands. No man shal have any more land, then he can labour himself, or have others to labour with him in love, working together, and eating bread toge∣ther, as one of the Tribes of families of Israel, nei∣ther giving hire, not taking hire. He that is now a possessour of lands and riches, and cannot labour, if he say to others, you are may fellow creatures, and the Lord is now making the
earth common amongst us; therefore take my land only let me eat bread with you, that man shall be, preserved by the lobours of others. But it any man have Land, and neither can work nor wil work,2 Tes. 3. 10. Gen. 3. 19. but wil strive to rule as a tyrant, bur∣dening the Creation, the hand of the Lord shall fal upon him, either to destruction or torment; and if his life be given for a prey, he shall be made to work and eat his bread with the sweat of his own brows, not of others, til he know himself to be a member, not a lord over the Creation; and thus he shall be dealt with, that hath lost the benefit of Sonship. All the punishment that any one shall re∣ceive for any unrighteous act, whereby he begins to bring the cause againe upon the Creation, he sahll only be made a Gibeonite to work in the earth, not in a prison, and the eyes of all shall be upon him; and the greatset offence will be this; for any to en∣deavour to raise up some few to rule over others, & so to set up particular interest againe, and to bring in buying and selling of land againe, the sore dis∣pleasure of the Lord shall be such a peoples portion. Israel is not to imprison or torment and by death or smaller punishments, but only to cause them to work and eat their own bread▪ for he or they that inflicts any other punishment, upon fellow creatures, is an unrighteous actour in the Creation, and shall himself be made a servant to all, till he by the spi∣rit in him, is made to know himself to be equal to every man, not a Lord over any, for all men look∣ed upon in the bulk are but the Creation, the living earth. This imprisoning,Mat. 7. 12. punishing and killing, which is the practice of the first Adam, ye visible to the world, is the curse. And it is a mighty dishonour to our maker, that one part of the Creation should
destroy another, it was not so from the beginning, but it is an honour to our maker that every part of the Creation should lend a mutual help of love in action to preserve the whole. But is not this the old rule, He that sheds man bloud by man shall his bloud be shed? I answer,Rev. 11. 8 It is true, but not as usually it is ob∣served; for first know,Dan 7. 25 2 Cor. 4. 4 That the Spirit is the man who hath determined to suffer himself to be killed, and lie dead in the streets or under the several forms of Babylon government, three daies or times and a half. The serpent is he, or the wicked man that kils the man of Righteousnesse, or sheds his bloud, for that space of time, which is indeed the wisdome and power of the flesh, killing the wisdom and pow∣er of the Spirit, and ruling in the Spirits, own house, the heart, for a time. Therefore now it is declared, that the Serpent or beastly power of flesh,Gen. 3. 15 that kils the Spirit, shall himself be killed by the Spirit, when the Spirit be∣gins to rise; and I can tell you that the resurrecti∣on is begun, for all the great fightings is between flesh and Spirit; The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. It is not for one creature called man to kill ano∣ther, for this is abominable to the Spirit,Exe 20. 13 and it is the curse which hath made the Creation to groan under bondage; for if I kill you I am a murderrer, if a third come, and hang or kill me for murdering you, he is a murderer of me; and so by the government of the first Adam, murder hath been cal∣led Justice when it is but the curse. Besides none can call himself a man,Luk. 6. 56 till the man Christ or Spirit rule in him,Rev. 12. 4. for til then; the great∣est Lord of all, is but a Beast and one Beast kils ano∣ther; for a man wil never kill a man; therefore said the man Christ Jesus I came not to destroy but to
save; therefore such as kill are farr from being Saints or children of Christ, for they are the chil∣dren of the Serpent, whose delight and work is to kill the man-child; but he that sheds this mans blouds, by the same man shall his bloud be shed, in the resurrection: Therefore O thou proud flesh, that dares hang and kil thy fellow creatures, that is equall to thee in the Creation, Know this, that none hath the power of life and death, but the Spirit, and al punishmens that are to be inflicted amongst creatures called men, are only such as to make the offender to know his maker, and to live in the community of the righteous Law of love one with another. For talking of love is no love,Mat. 7. 12 it is acting of love in righteousnesse, which the Spirit Reason, our Father delights in. And this is to relieve the oppres∣sed, to let goe the prisoner, to open bags and barns that the earth may be a common treasury to preserve all without complainings; for uhe earth was not made for a few to live at ease upon, and to kil such as did not observe the Law of their own making, but it was made for all to live comfortably upon, and the power of life and death is reserved in the hand of the Spirit, not in the hand of flesh: None ought to kil, but such as can make alive; therefore let every one walk righteously in the Creation, and trust the Spirit for protection. He that makes a zealous profession of the Spirit, as all professours doe, and yet doth not act this uni∣versall power of Righteousnesse, in labouring the earth for a common treasury, is a meer self-lover, and he professes but himself, and is a complementing enemy to Reason the King of Righteousnesse: and if stil thou saist, it is the Spirit, whom thou doest worship, then make it manifest to the world, what spirit this is that rules every where besids Reason.
And futher he that denies this community,Act. 4. 32 denies the Scriptures Likewise, whether the Preachers, prosessours, or rich men, that upholds this unrighte∣ous power of particular propriety. Therefore you dust of the earth, that are trod un∣der foot, you poor people, that makes both schollars and rich men, your oppressours by your labours. Take notice of your priviledge, the Law of Righteousnesse is now declared. If you labour the earth, and work for others that lives at ease, and follows the waies of the flesh by your labours, eating the bread which you get by the sweat of your brows, not their own: Know this, that the hand of the Lord shal break out upon every such hireling labourer, and you shal perish with the covetous rich men, that have held, and yet doth hold the Creation under the bondage of the curse. This voice of the Lord, work together and eat bread together, doth advance the law of Reason and Righteousnesse; the rising of this is the fall of mistical Babylon, the oppressing flesh: the living in the practice of this Lav of love, declares the Scrip∣tures of the Prophets and Apostles, to be a true declaration of the Spirit, and no lie. He that denies the practice of this, lives in a continual de∣nial of those Scriptures. Therefore your selfish tyth-taking Preachers, and all others that preaches for hire, with all covetous professours, take notice that you are the Judahs that betraid Christ, and the Pharisees that put him to death, and you stil persue the murder, by standing up to hinder Christ from rising and com∣ing in sons and daughters, his second time in flesh. I have now obeyed the command of the Spirit that bid me declare this all abroad, I have declared
it, and I wil declare it by word of mouth, I have now declared it by my pen. And when the Lord doth shew unto me the place and manner, how he wil have us that are called common-people, to ma∣nure and work upon the common Lands, I wil then go forth and declare it in my action, to eat my bread with the sweat of my brows, without either giving or taking hire, looking upon the Land as freely mine as anothers; I have now peace in the Spirit, and I have an inward perswasion that the spirit of the poor, shal be drawn forth ere long, to act materially this Law of Righteousnesse. If man-kinde knew their liberty, which their Creatour Reason, hath given us; none would be offended at this new Law, that is to be writ in eve∣ry mans heart, and acted by every mans hand. They that submit in love, and offers what they have freely to further this work, shal prosper and finde peace, for they honour our Maker, by lifting up the Creation in Righteousnesse. They that wil not submit freely, the hand of the Lord shal be as sure upon them as it was upon Pharaoh, who is their type. O you great Adams of the earth, that cals the earth yours, and looks upon others as servants and slaves to you, as if the earth were made only for you to live at ease and honour upon it, while others starved for want of bread at your feet, and under your oppressing government. Behold the King the Lord of Hosts hath sent his servants, to bid you let Israel goe free, that they may serve him together, in community off spirit, and in community of the earthly treasure. Be not you more proud and hard hearted, then Pharaoh your type, if you be, as it is like you wil, for the anti-type oft times is more powerfull then the type; then assure your selves, plagues shal,
multyply, and Israel shal be pulled from under your burdens with a strong hand,Heb. 2. 7, 8, &c. and stretched out arm, and you, and all your company shal perish to∣gether. The Lord hath spoke it, and he will doe it. All the men and women in England, are al children of this Land, and the earth is the Lords, not particular mens that claims a proper interest in it above others, which is the devils power. But be it so, that some wil say, This is my Land, and cal such and such a parcel of Land his own in∣terest; Then saith the Lord, let such an one labour that parcel of Land by his own hands, none help∣ing him: for whosoever shal help that man to la∣bour his proper earth, as he cals it for wages, the hand of the Lord shal be upon such labourers; for they lift up flesh above the spirit, by their labours, and so hold the Creation stil under bondage. Therefore if the rich wil stil hold fast this pro∣priety of Mine and thine. let them labour their own Land with their own hands. And let the common-People, that are the gatherings together of Israel from under that bondage, and that say the earth is ours, not mine, let them labour together, and eat bread together upon the Commons, Mountains, and Hils. For as the inclosures are called such a mans Land, and such a mans Land; so the Commons and Heath, are called the common-peoples,Isa. 62. 8, 9 and let the world see who labours the earth in righteousnesse, and those to whom the Lord gives the blessing, let them be the people that shal inherit the earth. Whether they that hold a civil propriety, saying, This is mine. which is selfish, devilish and destructive to the Creation, or those that hold a common right, saying, The earth is ours, which lifts up the Creati∣on from bondage.
Was the earth made for to preserve a few covet∣ous, proud men, to live at ease, and for them to bag and barn up the treasures of the earth from o∣thers, that they might beg or starve in a fruitful Land, or was it made to preserve all her children, Let Reason, and the Prophets and Apostles wri∣tings be Judge, the earth is the Lords, it is not to be confined to particular interest. None can say, Their right is taken from them; for let the rich work alone by themselves, and let the poor work together by themselves; the rich in their inclosures, saying, This is mnie; The poor upon their Commons, saying This is ours, the earth and fruits are common. And who can be offended at the poor for doing this? None but covetous, proud, lazy, pamper'd flesh, that would have the poor stil to work for that devil (particular interest) to maintain his greatnesse that he may live at ease. What doe we get by our labour in the earth,Isa. 62. 8. but that we may eat bread and live together in love and community of righteousnesse, This shall be the blessing of Israel. But as Esau hath setled his Kingdome, they that work, live in straits; They that live idle surfet with fulnesse. and makes all places stink with unrighteous envious oppression. Wel, when the Lord cals forth Israel to live in tents, which I believe wil be within a short time, he wil protect them; This Trumpet is stil sounding in me,Ier. 25. 47 38 Work together, Eat bread together, declare this all abroad. Suerly the Lord hath not revealed this in vain; for I shal see the fruit of righteousnesse follow after it, which wil be the beginning of the great day of veangence to the Oppessour, that hath held the earth
under the bondage of civil propriety: ruling a Ty∣rant over others: forcing the poor to work for hire: But in the day of restoration of Israel is not to eat the bread of a hireling in no kind; he is neither to give hire, nor take hire. Did the light of Reason make the earth for some men to ingrosse up into bags and barns, that others might be opprest with poverty? Did the light of Reason make this law, that if one man have not such abundance of the earth as to give to others he borrowed of; that he that did lend should imprison the other, and starve his body in a close room? Did the light of Reason make this law, that some part of man-kinde should kil and hang another part of man-kinde, that could not walk in their steps? Surely Reason was not the God chat made that law; for this is to make one part of the Creation alwaies to be quarrelling against another part; which is mighty dishonour to our Maker. But covetousnesse,2 Cor. 4. 4. that murdering God of the world, was that Law-maker, And that is the God, or ruling power, which all men that claim a particu∣lar interest in the earth, do worship. For the Earth is the Lords; that is, the spread∣ing power of righteousnes, not the Inheritance of covetous, proud flesh that dies. If any man can say that he makes Corn or Cattle, he may say, That is mine: But if the Lord make these for the use of his Creation, suerly then the earth was made by the Lord, to be a common Treasury for all, not a particular Treasury for some. If any man can say, he can give life, then he hath power to take away life: But if the power of life and death be only in the hand of the Lord; then surely he is a murderer of the Creation,Ex. 20. 13 that takes away the life of his fellow Creature man, by any law whatsoever: For all laws that are made by any man
to take away the life of man, is the upholder of the curse. But what if some steal or whore, or become idle, and wil not work, but live upon others labours, as rich men do, that cal the land theirs? I answer; If any manifest such a Achanish or Serpents power, as to endeavour to bring in the curse againe upon the Creation, he shal not be im∣prisoned, hanged or killed; for that is the worke of the Midianites to kil one another; to preserve themselves, and self-interest, But the pu∣nishment of such shal be this, he shal be set to work, and have land oppointed him to work upon, and none shal help him: he shal have a mark set upon him al this time, that every ones eie may be upon him, as upon a fool in Israel: he shal be a servant to every one; til such time as the spirit in him, make him know himself to be equal to others in the Creation. If any do steal, what wil they do with it? None shal buy or sel, and al the while that every one shal have meat, and drink, and cloaths, what need have they to steal? Their stealing shal get them nothing, but to lose the benefit of Sonship; And that is to be set alone, to eat his own bread, none having communion with him. For every one shal know the Law, and every one, shal obey the Law; for it shal be writ in every ones heart; and every one that is subject to Reasons law, shal enjoy the benefit of Sonship.Act. 4. 32 And that is in re∣spect of outward community, to work together, and eat bread together; and by so doing, lift up the creation from the bondage of self interest, or parti∣cular propriety of mine and thine; which is the Devil and Satan, even the God of this world, that hath blinded the eies of covetous, proud flesh, and hath bound them up in chains of darknesse. The universal spirit of righteousnesse hath been
slain by covetous, proud flesh; this 1649 years ago: But now that spirit begins to arise againe from the dead, and the same Beast seeks to hinder his rising; or else watches to kil the Manchild after he is brought forth. Covetous proud flesh wil kil a Ty∣rant, but hold fast the same Tyrannie and slaverie over others in his own hand;Rev. 12. 4 2 King. 20 16 he wil kil the Traitor, but liks wel the Treason, when he may be honour∣ed or lifted up by it. Look upon the mountaines and little hils of the earth, and see if these prickling thorns and briars, the bitter curse does, not grow there: Truly Tyran∣nie is Tyrannie in one as wel as in another; in a poor man lifted up by his valour, as in a rich man lifted up by his lands: And where Tyrannie sits, he is an enemy to Christ, the spreading spirit of righteousnesse: He wil use the bare name, Christ, that he may the more secretly persecute, and kil his power. Tyrannie is a subtile, proud and envious Beast; his nature is selfish, and ful of murder; he promises fair things for the publique; but all must be made to center within self, or self interest not the uni∣versal libertie. Wel, to be short, Let every one know, if they wait upon their Maker they wil know, That the universal power of righteous Communitie, as I have declared, is Canaan, the land of rest and libertie, which flows with milk and honey,Zach. 8. 3. to 12. with abundance of joy and peace in our Maker, and one in another. But the condition of the world, that upholds ci∣vill interests of mine and thine: Is Egypt the house of bondage; and truly Pharoahs task-masters are very many, both Teachers and Rulers. Therefore thus said the voyce of the spirit in me, guiding my eie to the powers of the earth three times, Let Israel go free: Let Israel go free: Let
Israel go free: Work all together, Eat bread alto∣gether: Whosoever labours the earth for any one, that wil be a burdning Ruler over others, and does not look upon himself as equal to others in the Crea∣tion, the hand of the Lord shal be upon that labourer: I the Lord have spoken it, and I wil doe it: Declare this all abroad, Israel shal neither give hire, nor take hire. Surely this is both ful of reason and equity; for the earth was not made for some, but for al to live comfortably upon the fruits of it: And there can∣not be a universal libertie, til this universal commu∣nitie be established. All tears, occasioned through bondage, cannot be wiped away, til the earth become in use to all a common Treasurie: And then Jerusalem wil be∣come a praise to the whole earth, and not til then. At this time the barren land shal be made fruit∣full;Zach. 8. 11, 13. for the Lord wil take off the curse: And if any grumble and say, The Heaths and Commons are barren, and the like, and so draw against the work: All that I say, let them go their way; their porti∣on is not here; they live in the low flesh, not in the height of the spirit: And they know not the mysterie of the Lord, who is now restoring Israel from bondage, and fetching them out of all lands where they were scattered, into one place, where they shal live and feed together in peace. And then there shal be no more pricking briar in all the holy Mountain,Hos. 2. 15. This shal be the glory of all,Isa. 60 21 they shal lie down in rest: This is the Branch; This is Israel; This is Christ spread in sons and daughters; This is Jerusalem the glory of the whole earth: Where then will be the railing, persecuting Priest, or the Tyrant Professour, that sucks after the blod and miserie of those, that wil not joyn his forms?
But indeed as yet, as the state of the world is while the first Adam yet sits in the Chair, and cor∣rupts the Creation by his unrighteous wisdome and power; I say at this time, the feirce wrath of the King of Righteousnesse is threatned over this Land called England, and indeed over all the whole earth, where particular interest bears rule, and enslaves the Creation. And if covetous, proud flesh stil uphold this self-propriety, which is the curse aud burden which the Creation groans under: Then O thou covetous earth, expect the multyplying of plagues, and the fulfilling of all threatning prophesies and visions for thy downfal in miserie. But if thou wouldst find mercie, then open thy barns and treasuries of the earth, which thou hast heaped together, and detains from the poor, thy fellow creatures: This is the only remedy to escape wrath: and the door of acceptance to mercie is yet open, if thou do this: The Judge of Truth and Right waits yet upon thy comming into him. Therefore, O thou first Adam, take notice, that the Lord hath set before thee life and death, now chuse whether thou wilt, for the time is near at hand that buying and selling of land shall cease, and every son of the land shal live of it. Divide England into three parts, scarce one part is manured: So that here is land enough to main∣tain all her children, and many die for want, or live under a heavy burden of povertie all their daies: And this miserie the poor people have brought up∣on themselves, by lifting up particular interest, by their labours. There are yet three doors of hope for England to escape destroying plagues: First, let every one leave off running after o∣thers for knowledge and comfort, and wait upon
the spirit Reason, til he break forth out of the Clouds of your heart,Luke 24. 49. and manifest himself within you. This is to cast off the shadow of Learning, and to reject covetous, subtile proud flesh that deceives all the world by their hearsay, and traditional preaching of words,Mat. 15. 14. letters and sillables, without the spirit: And to make choyce of the Lord, the true Teacher of every one in their own inward expe, rience, The mysterie of the spirit, and the mystrie of Babylon. Secondly, Let every one open his bags and barns, that al may feed upon the crops of the earth, that the burden of povertie may be removed: Leave of this buying and selling of Land,Act. 4. 32. or of the fruits of the earth; and as it was in the light of Reason first made, so let it be in action, amongst all a common Treasurie; none inclosing or hedging in any part of earth, saying, this is mine; which is rebellion and high treason against the King of Righteousnesse: And let this word of the Lord be acted amongst all; work together, eat bread together. Thirdly. Leave off dominion and Lordship one over another, for the whole bulk of man-kinde are but one living earth. Leave off imprisoning, whip∣ing and killing; which are but the actings of the curse: And let those that hitherto have had no Land and have been forced to rob and steal through po∣vertie; hearafter let them quietly enjoy Land to work upon, that every one may enjoy the benefit of his Creation, and eat his own bread with the sweat of his own brows: For surely this particular propri∣ety of mine and thine, hath brought in all mise∣rie upon people. For first, it hath occasioned people to steal one from another. Secondly, it hath made Laws to hang those that did steal: It tempts peo∣ple to doe an evil action, and then kils them or doing of it: Let all judge if this be not a great devil.
Well: If every one would speedily set about the doing of these three particulars I have mentioned, the Creation would thereby be lift up out of bon∣dage, and our Maker would have the glory of the works of his own hands. They that offer themselves, and what treasure they have,1. P. 5. 3. Iudge. 5. 2. 9. freely, to further this work, shal find mercy, and the blessing of all Nations shal be his Comfortor: They that hinder this common interest of earthly community, and wil keep up the tyran∣nical government of old Adam stil, the hand of the Lord shal be upon that person, whosoever he be. Thus saith the Lord to all the great ones, that are cloathed with objects, and are lifted up flesh with honours in the government of the world: Let Israel go quietly out of your bondage that they may serve me; If you wil not let him go, I wil not come with 10 plagues, as upon Egyptian Pharoah of old, but I wil multiply my plagues upon thee, thou stout-hearted Pharoah, that makes shew of love to me, and yet all is but like Jehu, to lift up thy self over the remnant in the Land. Adam is the commer in of bondage, and is the curse that hath taken hold of the Creation: And he may wel be called A-dam, for indeed he does dam and stop up the streams of the waters of life and libertie. When slaverie began to creep in upon the Creati∣on, the Spirit might wel cry out in Lamentation, Ah-dam, A-dam, which draws together; a head of corrupted waters, of covetous, proud and ima∣ginary flesh, to stop the streams of the waters of life and libertie. But saith the Spirit our Maker, The seed from whence the Creation sprang, shall bruise that Ser¦pents head, and open the dam againe, and cause the waters of the Spirit which is Life and Libertie
to run free againe without any stoppage. This A-dam stops up the waters or Life and Liber∣tie in a two-fold way. Fir, he ties up the Creation, man, in chains of darknesse within it self: For there is not a man and womon ound, since Adam's rise (but the man Christ Jesus, in whom the seed ruled in power) but they were bound up in bondage to coveteousnesse, pride, imagination, and to all the powers of the flesh: So that the free running streams of the Spirit of life were stopped, that they could not run; which hath made every one cry, O wretched man that I am, who shal deliver me from this body of sin or death? Here you see that knowledge, libertie and comfort hath been stopped or dammed up within the Ceation, ma. Secondly, this A-dam, being the power of co∣veous, proud flesh, he sets up one part of the Crea∣tion, man, to rule over another, and makes Laws to kil and hang thal part of the Creation, that wil not submit to the ruling part And so he is become a God, ruling in the spirits own house, not preserving the Creation, but does set the Creation together by the ears, to kl it self, to the mighty dishonour of our Maker: Therefore when the people would have Saul to rule them; the Spirit declared, that that outward ruling power was the curse; and he set him up in his wrath to be a scourge, not a bles∣sing. Now whereas the Creation, man, should live in equalitie one towards another; this A-dam hath lifted up mountaines and hils of oppressing powers, and there by that, dammed and stopped up that uni∣versal communitie: Therefore at the first rising up of this serpentine power to enslave the Creation, he might wel be declared by way of Lamenattion, A-dam Adam.
Covetousnesse, or self-love; is the dam; the letter A: before, declares, that he is a preparer to miserie, and is delivered by way of Lamentation, Ah: or A-dam. Dovetousnesse, or self-love, is the man of sin, that appears first. The imagination arising from that couetous power is the woman, or Eve, which like the Ivie, clings about the tree; and so covetousnesse and imagination, does beget between them a sup∣posed joy, pleasure and delight; but it proves a lie. These two, Covetousnesse and Imagination, the man and the woman of sin, or A-dam, and his Eve, or Ivie, does beget fruit or children, like both Fa∣ther and Mother; as pride, and envy, hypocrisie, crueltie, and all unclean lusts pleasing the flesh. And now the dam-head is made up strong, to stop the streams of waters of life and universal libertie: But in the fulnesse of time, the Spirit wil break down this dam-head againe, and cause the waters of the Spirit of life to flow again plentifully. And herein you may see, how the publique Preachers have cheated the whole world, by telling us of a single man, called Adam, that kiled us al by eating a single fruit, called an Apple. Alas, this Adam is the dam that hath stopped up the freedome of the Spirit within and without; so that while he rules, a man can have no community with the spirit within himself, nor community of love with fellow creatures, he does so puff them up with covetousnesse, and pride, and desire of Lordly rule one over another. Do but look into every mean and woman, and in∣to al the actions of the world, and tel me whether that first Adam be one single man, as the publique Preachers tel you; or is not more truly that covet∣ous, proud and imginary power in flesh, that hath
dammed and stopped up the way of the spirit of life, and universal libertie; and so he is that Father of lies, and Satan, that holds the Creation under bon∣dage, til the Son, which is the light in the Creati∣on, shine forth, and sets us at libertie: And if the Son set you free, you are free indeed. This Son is the second Adam, which is A-dam in∣deed, that stops the streams of bondage from run∣ing and sets the Creation at libertie again. CHAP. IX. WHat I have spoken, I have not received from books, nor study, but freely I have recei∣ved, and freely I have declared what I have received: And the Declarations of the Lord through his ser∣vant shal not be in vain, The beholding and feeling of the Law of righte∣ousnesse within me,Amos. 6. 7. 2 fils my whole soul with preci∣ous peace, the favour of the sweet ointment; and I know as this power of love spreads in al mens hearts, as it wil spread, for Jacob must rise: Then there shall be no begger, no tears, no complaining, no oppression: but the blessing of the Lord shal fil the earth: Then our swords shall be beaten into plow irons,Mic 4. 3. add our spears into pruning hooks, and then shall the Lord be known to be the salvation of Israel, and the restoration of the whole Creation. I any man be offended here, let him know, I have obeyed my Maker herein, and I have peace in him. When the Man, Jesus Christ, was one earth, there was a sweet communitie of love between all the members of that humane body: For the spirit that was within, made every member a servant to the
other, and so preserved the whole body in peace; one member did not raign over another in tyra∣nie. Even so,Luk. 24. 49 when the humane body was laid in the earth, the Spirit, which indeed is Christ, came again the second time upon the Apostles and Bre∣thren, while they were waiting for that promise at Jerusalem. And as Christ then began to spread himself in sons and daughters,Act. 4. 32. which are members of his my∣stical body, they did not rule in slavery one over another; neither did the rich suffer the poor to beg and starve, and imprison them as now they do: But the rich sold their possessions, and gave equality to the poor, and no man said, that any thing that he possessed was his own, for they had all things com∣mon. But this community was a vexation to Esau,Rev. 11. 2 9. the covetous proud flesh, and he strove to suppresse this commnuity:Rev. 12. 14. And the Lord he gives this Beast a to∣leration to rule 42 months, or a time, times, and dividing of time; and in that time to kil the two Witnesses, that is, Christ in one body, and Christ in many bodies; or Christ in his first and second comming in flesh, which is Justice and Jugement ruling in man. I, but now the 42 months are expiring, we are under the half day of the Beast, or the dividing of time, and Christ, or the two Witnesses, are arising and spreading himself again in the earth: And when he hath spread himself abroad amongst his Sons and daughters, the members of his mystical body, then this community of love and righteousnesse, making all to use the blessings of the earth as a com∣mon Treasurie amongst them, shal break forth a∣gain in his glory, and fil the earth, and shal be no more supprest: And none shal say, this is mine,
but every one shal preserve each other in love. As Christ does thus rise and spread, those that have riches, gold and silver, and the like, and are taken into the onenesse of this Spirit, they shall come, and offer up their treasures willingly, not daring to keep it:Exo. 25. 2. That those that have nothing may have part,Ezra 7. 16 and enjoy the blessing of the earth with themselves,Mat. 2. 11 being all members of that one body, unto whom the Kings of the East, called the Wise men, offered gifts, gold frankinsense and myrrhe while he was the Child Jesus. But those that do not come in and offer what they have, willingly, to the work of the Lord, they shal be stripped naked of all, and shal either be destroyed by the blagues that shal come upon the earth; or at best if their lives be given them, they shal be servants, and not enjoy the benefit of Son∣ship, til the Spirit of the Son rise up in them, and make them free. So that this work is not done by wars councels,Ioh 8. 32 or hands of men, for I abhor it; though by those the government of Esau shal be beaten down,Dan. 8. 25 and the enemy shal destroy one another. But the Lord alone wil be the healer, the restorer, & the giver of the new law of righteousnes, by spread∣ing himself every where and so drawing al things up into himself. And the declaration of this law of righteousnesse shal rise out of the dust, out of the poor people that are trod under foot: For, as the declaration of the Son of man was first declared by Fisher-men, & men that the learned, covetous Scholars despised: so the declaration of the righteous law shal spring up from the poor, the base and despised ones, and fools of the world; and humane learning, and such as love the oppression of exacting Tyths, shal not be honoured in his businesse: For they that stand up
to be publique Teachers are Iudas, that come to the Magistrates, and covenants with them for the tenths of every mans encrease, and they wil hinder Christ from rising, and betray him into their hands; that so the covetous and proud flesh may rule in op∣pression over their fellow Creature quietly.Mat. 23. 16 And assure your selves it wil appear, that the publique Preachers,1 Ioh. 2. 27 that stand up customarily to make a living by their teaching others,Ioh. 6. 45. as they cal it: these are the curse, and the spreaders of that cuse, and the hinderers of Christ from rising; and the bitter Scribes and Pharisees to suppresse Christ where he rises, calling him a Blasphemer. For the Father wil have all men to look up to him for teaching, and to acknowledge no other teacher and ruler but himself: but these men wil have al people to look for knowledge to come through them; and that none can have knowledge but such as are taught by such Preachers as they: But covetousnesse after a temporal living, and secret pride sets them to work, and they shal be ashamed; for the Lord alone now shal be exalted, and he him∣self wil darw up al things into himself.Ioh. 10. 13 And al this great chang, or seting up of this new law of righteousnesse, ruling in every one, and ma∣king every one to consent and act thus in love, is but the lfilling of Prophesies, and Visions, and Reports of the Scriptures: Let the Record be searched, and let the publique Preachers deny it if they can. Wel: this wil be a great day of Judgment; the Righteous Judge wil sit upon the Throne in every man and woman: And that saying of the prophet, that he saw every man with his hands upon his loyns, like a woman in travel, is now fulfilling; every cevetous, unrighteous heart shal smart with sorrow and shal be ready to fail them to see the miserie that is comming upon the earth: This day of Judgment
wil be sharp and short, shortned for the Elects sake. The man of the flesh, or King Esau, wil strug∣gle hard, before he give up the body of his Army; he wil put forth all the subtil wit, and opprssing unrighteousnesse that he hath, before he deliver up the Kingdom to Iacob: But truly, Gaffer Dragon, you had better yeild at first; for the longer thou stand it out, the sorer shal thy torment be; for down thou must, and Christ must rise. Do what thou wilt, speak what then wilt against Christ the Anointing, thou shalt come off a loser: threaten, reproach, imprison, whip, work hypo∣critically, oppresse, kil and stay, fawn and frown, do things out of fear, or do things out of heavy rashnesse, or out of a watchful moderation, as thou thinks, stil thou shalt lose ground; for all thou doest,Dan. 11 36 is to advance self, and thou must perish, the Judg∣ment is sealed, the things that are determined a∣gainst thee, are comming upon thee. Thou shalt find it shal not be as it hath been, while the forty two months where in being, thou prospered and encrease in strength.Rev. 11. 2 But now it is done, it is done, it is done, time shal be no more to thee; for now the man of righteousnesse shal take the Kingdom, and rule for ever and ever, and of his dominion shal be no end; he hath made himself manifest, he is in the head of his Army al∣ready, gathering in the Isles and Nations of the earth to himself. Justice and Judgment are his witnesses, and that Standard, which he wil maintain, and wil tread al proud flesh under his feet, For the poor recei∣ves the Gospel; He hath opened the salt-mines already,Mat. 5. 13. the streams thereof runs apace, and begins to over-run the banks of rotten stinking oppressing injustice, they wil purge out corruption and bring the earth (man∣kind) into a pleasant savour.
The windows of heaven are opening, and the light of the Son of Sighteousnes, sends forth of him self, delightful beams, and sweet discoveries of truth, that wil quite put out the covetous traditional blear-eyes; but wil mightily refresh the single eyed Na∣thaneels: Light must put out darknesse; the warm Sun wil thaw the frost, and make the sap o bud out of every tender plant, that hath been hid within, and lain like dead trees all the dark cold cloudy daies of the Beast that are past, and silence every imaginary speaker, and declare their hypocrisie, and deceit openly, Now the tender grasse wil cover the earth, the Spirit wil cover al places with the abundance of fruit, that flows from himself, young and old shal al ho∣nour the Lord, and be taught of no other but him; the wheat fields which is the best grain (the Fathers own people) shal flourish abundantly; the bean∣ge of beastly Ceremonies, forms, customs, abomi∣nable actings in unrighteousnesse shal cease, there shal be lesse talking, preaching and prating, and more righteous acting, The voice of mourning shall be heard no more, the birds shall sing merrily on eve∣ry bough. O rejoyce, rejoyce, for the time, that the Lord God omnipotent wil raign in al the earth is beginn∣ing, and he wil be servant to the Dragon, Beast, and man of the flesh no longer, but wil tread down that murdering power, and make him his foot∣stool. This is the work of the Lord, that wil stop the the mouths of all hearsay and imaginary Preachers;Rev. 12. 9 &c. All mouths shall be silent, and not dare to speak, till the power of the Lord within give words to the mouth to utter. And when men that are ful of wast words, are made to see, they speak they know not what; when they shal see they speak other mens words
(like Parots) not their own, and sometimes they speak words from their imagination, which may be false as wel as true for ought they know, for they have had neither voice, vision, nor revelation to warrant their words, when they see this, Then they shal be ashamed and confounded in themselves. For now lip service is to be judged to death, and every one shal be fetched in to worship the Father in Spirit and in truth, or else they shal perish; for mens words shal grow fewer and fewer, their acti∣ons of Righteousness one to another more and more, and there shal no love be esteemed of, but what is manifest in righteous actions. And this shal be the ruler that every one shal ob∣serve, to walk righteously in the Creation, towards all Creatures, according to the Law of equity and Reason; and this Law shal be writ in every ones heart; and he that hath this law in his heart is marked for a son or daughter: they that have it not are marked for enemies and rebels to the Father,Rev. 11. 15. 18. And such a one is a Cain. The Kingdoms of the whole world must become the Kingdoms of the Lord Christ; and this the Nations are angry at; Therefore count it no strang thing to see wars and rumours of wars, to see men that are put in trust to act for publike good, to prove fals, to see commotions of people every where like flouds of water stirred up, raedy to devour and overflow one another; To see Kings storm against the people; To see rich men and gentry most vio∣lent against the poor, oppressing the and treading them like mire in the street, Why is all this anger? But because the man of the flesh is to die, his day of judgment is come, he must give up the Kingdom and Government of the earth (man-kind) into the hand of his neighbour that is more righteous then he, For Jacob now must have the blessing, he is
blessed, yea and shal be blessed, and Esau shal be∣come his servant; The poor shal inherit the earth. CHAP. X. ANd here now is made plain, That the first shall be last, and the last first; The powers of the flesh or Adam in me, he appeared first, and tram∣pled the man-child, the power of righteousnesse and peace under foot. I, but when the man-child begins to rise up to rule, the other fals and becomes the tail, the last, nay must be destroyed. Two Kings that claimes interest in one Kingdom, can never live quietly together, Light and darknesse will be fighting, till the one be conquered. And surely the man of Righteousnesse, or that last man that appears, shal be the first, that shal be honoured, and become the preserving and restoring power the great Law-giver, that shall rule in the new hea∣ven and in the new earth in righteousnesse. Of further, The first, that is, the worshipping of God in types, ceremonies, formes and customs, in set times and places, which are the invention of the first man, which doth slight and loath the way of inward Righteousnesse; for they that live in esta∣blished forms, are filled with dislike, and willingly would either buy nor sell, with those whom the Lord hath drawn up to live in him, they cannot in∣dure the way of the Spirit,Gen. 4. 5. Rev. 13. 17. let them say and professe what they wil; for he that is strict in a formal custo∣marily way of worship, knows not what it is to wor∣ship in spirit and truth, or to walk righteously in the Creation,Rom. 9. 31▪ 32. but is bitter spirited and merely selfish.
And this power appears first in a man, and makes people very zealous professours of God and Christ,Rom. 10. 2 in preaching, praying and hearing. But without know∣ledge, what God and Christ is, and they know not what they do, nor the end wherefore they do so. And their teachers in the same forms, are blind guides, and poor hearts, both shall fall into the ditch, and be mired in their own inventions most pittiful∣ly. And when you come to see your selves stick in confusion, and disorder, and knowing that your tea∣chers have deceived you. Then you will remember these words, That the first must be last.Deu. 34. 4 Moses though he was a good man, yet he was not to enter into the lad of Canaan, which types out this to me, That the first man of the flesh shall never enter into the Fathers rest. Then likewise you shall see, that your zeal, was but zeal without knowledge, and that heat in you, did but carry you along to advance self, not to ad∣vance the Lord. And that covetousness was the Lord, chief Ruler in you, which being crossed grew impa∣tient, and that impatiency you called, it, The zeal of the Lord, when experience teacheth you silence, you will not be offended at these words, but asha∣med of your self. And here likewise you may see, what it is to make a Sermon; for a Sermon is a speech made from the man-seer, which is Chaist within; for this anointing sees the Father in every thing. And therefore Christ in that one body, The Lamb, was called a great Prophet or Seer, Now that man or woman that sees the Spirit,Joh. 1 9. within themselves, how he enlightens,Joh. 3. 11. how he kils the motions of the flesh, and makes the flesh subject to Righteousnesse, and so can see light in his light; this man or woman is able to make a Sermon, because they can speak by ex∣perience of the light and power of Christ with∣in
them, who is indeed the man Seer. But now he that speaks from imagination, or from tradition (and not from experience of what he sees) cannot make a Sermon, as the publike Preachers ge∣nerally do, and so he is a deceiver, or false Christ, and false Prophet, that runs before he be sent, put for∣ward by secret pride and covetousnes, to get a tem∣poral living. Therfore let none speak so discontentedly against Adam, the first man by Creation, that they say li∣ved on earth about 6000 years ago, as though he brought in the misery upon all; for the Scriptures seem to declare, that there were men in the world before that time. For when Cain had killed his brother Abel, which in one verse Moses seems to say, was the third man in the world, yet in a few verses following, writing of Cains punishment, declares Cains own words, Thou hast set a mark upon me,Gen. 4. 14 and every one that sees me, wil kil me: And yet by the story before, there were no more men in the world, but his Father A∣dam and he, now Abel being dead. Therefore certainly this Adam, or first man that is spoken of, is he that is within, as I have spoke of, which kils or surpresses Abel, who is the anointing; I am sure I have sound him the cause of my misery, and I can lay the blame of no man, but my self. The first power that appears and draws my body into dis∣obedience. And this is he that is the causer of all your sorrow and tears, he is Adam within, it is your self, your ve∣ry fleshly self, be angry at none but your self. The Self is the first Adam that fals from the Spirit; he is those branching powers in created flesh that leads you from your maker; therfore blame not Adam with∣out you, but blame Adam the first man within you; he within hath disobeyed, and forsaken Reasons Law of Righteousnesse.
You are the man and woman that hath eaten the forbidden fruit, by delighting your self more in the objects of the Creation, then in the Spirit; for the Spirit is the seed, the Creation is the fruit. As the Apple is the fruit from the root of the Apple-tree,Gen. 3. 15. so selfishdesse is the fruit of the fruit, it arises up (not from the Spirit) but from the Crea∣tion. And this is the Serpent whose head must be briused, that so the great maker of all things, may de∣light in the worke of his own hands; when all the branchings forth of selfishnesse is destroyed, and the Creation made subject only to the will of the Crea∣tour. And this wil be the winding up of the great my∣stery spoken of, God manifest in the flesh (nor selfish∣nesse manifested in flesh) for this I say is the Serpent whose head must be bruised. Now if you delight more in the objects of the earth, to please selfe, then in the spirit that made all things, then you eat of the forbidden fruit, you take the Apple, and become naked and ashamed, and is made afraid to own the spirit, least you despise fel∣low creatures. And likewise being ashamed and afraid of the law of righteousnesse, because it doth restifie of you, that your deeds are evil; and so begets sorrow and trou∣ble in your heart; you presently run and hide your self from him amongst the creatures, & runs preach∣ing, and praying, and sheltering your self in a Con∣gregation, as a member, and so doth sow the figge∣leaves of your own observing forms, and customary invented Righteousnesse together, to hide your soul from the face of displeasure, that you may not see your self; for the sight of your self is your hell. Whereas indeed you should flie to the Law of Righteousnesse, and act righteously within the Crea∣tion, and so honour the Spirit by owning of him, and
wait upon him til he speak peace. For nothing, wil hide you from his presence: Reasons Law wil shine forth & torment your unrigh∣teous self-seeking power, and bruise that Serpents head, all his hidings wil not save himself, for you must come to the fire, and that drosse must be burned up, before a Reconciliation can be wrought between him and his Creation. Adams innocency is the time of child-hood; and there is a time in the entering in of the understand∣ing age, wherein every branch of man-kinde is put to his choice, whether he wil follow the Law of Righteousnesse, according to the Creation, to ho∣nour the Spirit. Or whether he wil delight self, in glorying in the objects of the earth unrighteously. Now if he chuse to satisfie his lusts and his self-wil, and for∣sake Reasons Law, he shal fal downwards into bondage, and lie under the powers of darknesse, and live no higher then within the circle of dark flesh, that hath no peace within it self, but what he fetches from creatures without him. But if he chuse the way of Righteousnesse, and follow the light of Reasons Law, then he shal partake of rest, peace and libertie of the Spirit, as if there were no creature objects at all; for he that hath peace within, uses the world as though he used it not, and hath content and joy, though he have no creature to have communion with. But seeing that the man of the flesh wil and must appear to rule in the Kingdome of man-kinde first; All men are gone astray, and all flesh have corrupt∣ed their waies, and the curse is spread abroad thorow the Creation: And therefore the whole Creation wait for a Restoration, or for the rising up of Christ the second man, the blessing, who must bruise the head of bondage, and reconcile al men to peace and
liberty.Gen. 18. 18. And as the curse is seen and felt within, so the blessing of freedom and life, must rise up, and be seen and felt within. Therefore let not your blind guides deceive you any longer; Doe not look beyond your selves to Adam, a man that died 6000 years agoe, though they bid you; but look upon Adam within your-self, who hath wrought your woe. And for the time to come, wait upon the rising of the second Adam, the Law of Righteousnesse within you, to deliver you from the bondage of the first power. And here you may see the deceit of imagination and fleshly wisdom and learning; it teaches you to look altogether upon a history without you, of things that were done 6000 years agoe, and of things that were done 1649 years agoe, of the carriage of the Scribes and Pharisees then against the son of man. And so carrying you first to one age of the world, then to another age of the world, travelling Sea and Land to find rest; and the more that hu∣man learning and his professours travels abroad, the further off from rest they are, for they meet with nothing but confusion and starits, and no true peace: And why? Because that which a man seeks for, whereby he might have peace, is within the heart, not with∣out. The word of life, Christ the restoring spirit, is to be found within you, even in your mouth, and in your heart: The Kingdome of heaven (which is) Christ is within you, and disobedient Adam is within you; for this is Esau that strives with Jacob in the womb of your heart to come forth first. And this let me tel you,Isa 32. 9. to 16. and you shal find it true, Goe read all the books in your Universitie, that tels yon what hath been formerly, and though you can make speeches of a day long from those readings yet you shall have no peace, but your hearts still
shal be a barren wildernesse, and encrease in sorrow till your eyes return into your selves, and the spirit come from on high to make you read in your own book your heart. Wherein you shall find the mystery of iniquity, The man of sinne, that first Adam, that made you a sinner. And the mystery of godlinesse, the second Adam Christ, who, when he arises up therein, he makes you righteous and restores you again to life. And hence it is, that many a poor despised man and woman,Phil. 3. 10▪ 11. that are counted blasphemers, by the understanding Pharisees of our age, as the learned Pharisees of old called Christ, and people are afraid to buy and sell them, but casts out their names for evil; yet these have more sweet peace, more true experience of the Father, and walks more righ∣teously in the Creation, in spirit and truth, then those that cal themselves teachers and zealous Professours. And why? Because these single hearted ones are made to look into themselves, wherein they can read the work of the whole Creation, and see that History seated within themselves; they can see the mystery of Righteousnesse, and are acquainted every one according to his measure, with that spirit of truth that is to be the blessing of the whole earth, and that enlightens al that come into the world; these are the dust and stones so the earth, that are trod under foot: But out of this Sion whom no man regards, shal the Deliverer come. But now those that are called Preachers, and great professours that runs a hearing, seeks for knowledge abroad in Sermons, in books and Uuniversities, and buyes it for money, as Simon Magus would have done, and than delivers it out again for money, for a 100 l. or 200 l. a year. And those men that speak from an inward testimony of what they have seen
and heard from the Lord, are celled by these buy∣ers and sellers, Locusts, actions, blasphemers, and what not, as the language of Pulpits runs, but the Lord wil whip such traders out of his Temple. And truly the whole world wanders after the Beast, and though the people many of them, doe see that their Prheachers are blinde guides, bitter spirited: proud and covetous, yet they are ashamed and afraid to disown them, O great bondage under the devils. And hence it is that they think they are wise and learned, and the only men sent of God to preach the Gospel, til the power of Righteousnesse come and declare before all the world, that they are enemies to the Gospel, and knows him not, for the anointing is the glad tidings, which are ma∣nifest within the heart, not a distance from men. And so Christ takes these wise and learned in their own crafty covetousnes and pride, and declares them to be very silly men, the most ignorant of all, blinde guides, painted sepulchers, Prophets that run before they be sent, and the great fooles of the world, and troublers of▪ Israel, and the Scribes and Phari∣sees that stand up to hinder Christ from rising, or to cast reproachfull dirt upon him, where he rises, as much as they can to keep him down, and hold him under as a servant still; and this they will doe till they be swept away amongst the refuge of lies, as part of that treasure, for that must be your por∣tion. Nay let me tel you, That the poorest man, that sees his maker, and lives in the light, though he could never read a letter in the book, dares throw the glove to al the humane learning in the world, and de∣clare the deceit of it, how it doth bewitch & delude man-kinde in spiritual things, yet it is that great Dra∣gon, that hath deceived all the world, for it draws
men from knowing the Spirit, to own bare letters, words and histories for spirit: The light and life of Christ within the heart, discovers all darknesse, and delivers mankind from bondage; And besides him there is no Saviour. CHAP. XI. WEll, in the next place, I must declare to you, that all that which you call the history, and have doted upon it, and made it your idol, is all to be seen and felt witin you, before you cast oft true peace. Adam and Christ you have heard are both to be seen within the heart,Col. 1. 27. Cain and Abel is to be seen within: Abraham (a power that prefers the honour of Righteousnesse, before a beloved Isaac) is to be seen within Meek spirited Moses, that rules your bo∣dies by an outward Law of Righteousnesse, is to be seen within you; killing of Sacrifices, and offering them up, is to be seen within you. Israel, or one that is a wrestler is to be seen within you. And this is Christ the elect one that fights against your lusts. The Canaanites, Amalekites, Philistines, and all those armies of the Nations, even troops of untigh∣teous powers, one following another, are to be seen within you, making war with Israel, Christ within you. The Land of Canaan, the habitation of rest, is to be seen within you, travelling and drudging in the wildernesse, and then comming to rest upon the se∣venth day, is to be seen within you. Judas, a treacherous self-loving and covetous spirit. The Commanders of the Jews (the chief powers that are within the flesh) first condemning,
then killing, then buying Christ, is to be seen with∣in you. Christ lieing in the grave, like a corn of wheat buried under the clods of the earth for a time, and Christ rising up from the powers of your flesh, above that corruption and above those clouds, treading the curse under his feet, is to be seen within. The stone that lies at the mouth of the sepulcher, your unbelief, the removing of that stone, setting you at libertie, is to be seen withing you. Heaven and hell, light and darknesse, sorrow and comforts is all to be seen within, the power of darknesse, and the power of light and life is to be seen within you. Good Angels (which are di∣vine discoveries or sparks of that glory) And bad Angels (which are the powers of the flesh let loose out of the bottomlesse pitselfishnesse, and so work∣ing its own miserie) are to be seen within. For man-kind is that Creation, in which the great Creatour of all things wil declare and mani∣fest himself; Therefore it was said, That God was in Christ. That one anointed humane body, reconciling or drawing all things into himself, and so making peace. For while al things are out of that one power of Righteousnesse, jarring and flashing against him; there is no peace in the Creation, but sorrow, tears and vexation; but when all things are made to lie down quiet in him, and acknowledge him in all, and are subject to him, the alone King of Righte∣ousnesse, now there is rest and peace every where. Therefore if you look for heaven, or for mani∣festation the Fathers love in you in any place, but within your selves, you are deceived; for what glory soever you shal be capable of to see with your eyes or hear with your ears, it is but the breakings forth of that glorious power that is seated within for
the glory of the Father is not without him, but it is all within himself, or rises up from within, & is mani∣fested abroad; The Kings daughter is all glorious within: All that glory which declares heaven, is seen within that spirit, that rules within the Crea∣tion man-kind. And further, if you look for any other hell or sor∣rows in any other place, then what shall be made manifest within the bottomlesse pit, your very flesh∣ly self, you are deceived, and you shall find that when this bottomlesse pit is opened to your view, it will be a torment sufficient, for from hence, doth the curse spread, and all that misery you are or may be capable of, it is but the breakings forth of that stinking dunghill, that is seated within you, & is that power of darkness, that rules within the Creation, your body. If the power of Righteousnesse & peace take pos∣session and rule in you,Rev. 21. 23. then you shall live in rest, and be free from hell and sorrow, death and bond∣age, If the Lamb be the light of your heart, all tears shall be wiped away, and you shall be in peace. But if the selfish power rule your heart; then as you live now upon uncertainties, in confusion and vexation: so this manifestation of hell, darknesse and sorrows, shall multiply within you; and when your body goes to the Earth, you multiply the curse upon the Creation, and so you enter into the body of the Serpent, that must be burned and consumed by the power of the Lord. Hell and the curse doth rule within ceated flesh in every family of the earth, and will rule till the feed of Abraham (the blessing of the Lord come) and burn up that serpent, and deliver the Creation from that burden. And let me tell you, That this seed, This blessing of the Lord is rising up in every family that lives af∣ter
the flesh; Whether Parents, brethren or sisters, they do hate, grudge and persecute those in whom the blessing begins to rise up, and tramples upon them like dust; but out of that dust of the earth (man-kind) shall the deliverer come that shall turn ungodlinesse from Jacob. A few years now will dis∣cover more, and then that prophecy shall be mate∣rially fulfilled, Then ten men shall take hold of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you, Zech. 8. 23. The heart of man is the place wherein heaven and hell, for nature and kind are both to be seen, that is, when the Law of Righteousnesse rules, there is Christ or the Kingdom of heaven within, even the manife∣stations of the Father appears in glory to the sweet rest and peace of that soul. But when the power of unrighteousnesse rules in the heart, which is the Serpent, Dragon or God of this world; this is hell or kingdom of darknesse; for first the man sees and feels himself in bondage to his lusts, and to the powers of his flesh. This is death, and the curse that he lies under. And then secondly, The man sees himself under bondage of sorrows and torment, and the increase of this sensiblenesse, is & will be an intolerable misery. As it is said, That the King of Righteousnes takes delight in nothing, but what is within himself, and what proceeds out of himself: So the Heaven of an enlivened heart is not a local place of glory at a di∣stance from him, but the seeing and feeling the Fa∣ther within, dwelling and ruling there; and to be∣hold the glory of that power proceeding forth of himself, to which he is made subject, through which he walks righteously in the Creation, and in which he rests in peace. Even so, the souls that are lost and ashamed in their work, are not tormented by any terrour with∣out
them in any local place, but their hell or place of torment is within themselves, seeing and feeling themselves chained up in bondage, to fears, terrours: rrows, afrightments, intolerable vexations, and powers of lust, and under all that cursed darknesse, till the judgement of the great day. And what misery or torment doth or shall appear m outward objects, it is but the breakings forth of their own cursednesse, that creates misery to him∣self, and so goes forth to fetch in torment from with∣out. For he that hath a troubled conscience, turns every thing into gall and worm-wood to terrifie himself, thinking every bush to be a devil to torment him, he saies, he sees fearfull shapes without; but they arise from the anguish of his tormenting conscience with∣in, for they be the shapes and apparitions of his own caused flesh that is presented to him, which comes not from any other but out of the bottomlesse pit, the Serpents powr, but rules and dwels within him, and the sight of this is like the misery of tender flesh burning in the fire. Let a man lie upon his sick bed, and to the view or others the chamber is quiet, yet he saith, he seeth devils, and flames, and misery, and torments. Well, this is but the rising up of his own unrighteous heart, the flames of the bottomlesse it that appear to himself. For certainly unrighteous flesh is hell, the ap∣pearance or risings up of unighteous flesh to its own view, is the torments of hell, Pride, lust, envy, covetousnesse, hypocrisie, self-love, and the like, being crossed by the spirit of Light, are the particu∣lar devils that torment the soul in hell, or in that dark condition. Or if so be a man be tormented by visible bodies of fry, and ugly shapes, as he apprehends, they be
all the creatures of his own making, and rods which the flesh hath made to whip and punish himself with∣all; for a man suffers by no other but by the work of his own hands. And as he hath acted envy, venome and poison in strange wayes of oppression, walking unrighteously in the Creation: Even so, when his soul comes to be judged, he shall apprehend snakes, scorpions, toads, devils in bodily shapes, and flames of fire and dire∣full noises, and pits of darknesse, which are creatures of his own making, or the shapes and fashion of those unrighteous turnings, and windings, and a∣ctings of his unrigheous soul, that now appear in their own colours to his own torment, and this is ell. For if the flesh be righteous within, there is no∣thing without can trouble it When the bodies of men are laid in the grave, we have a word, That he is either in heaven or hell: Now the senses of the bo∣dy are not sensible of either such. But now the power that ruled in that body righteously or unrighteously, is fully manifested to it felt, if the power of Righte∣ousnesse did rule. Now it enters into the Spirit, the great Ocean of glory, the Father himself: If the power of unrighteousnesse did rule, now it enters into the curse, & encreases the body of death, corruption and enmity, and becomes the bondage and Burden of the Creation, that st be purged out by fire. If there be a local place of hell, as the Preachers say there is, besides this I speak of, time will make it manifest but as yet none ever came from the dead to tell men on earth, and till then, men ought to speak no more then they know; whe I speak, I speak from what I have in some measure seen within me, and as I have received from the Lord in clear light within my self. But is not hell the execution of Justice? And is
not God the Authour of that wrath? As  is said, Is there any evil in the Citie, and the Lord hath not done it? I answer, This is warily to be understood, left we dishonour the Lord, in making him the Authour of the creatures misery, as one of late in his Pulpit, an U∣niversitie man in my hearing did relate, and by his multitude of words, darkned knowledge mightily; therefore I shall deliver what I have received con∣cerning this. First know, that there is mention of three Gods in the Scriptures. 1. The Magistrate, I said ye are gods. 2. The Devil, The god of this world hath blinded your eyes. 3. The King of Righteousnesse is called God, The Lord God omnipotent reigns. Now the Magistracie is ruling power, called God, by their righteous Government a Kingdom may be kept in peace, but by their unrighteous Government, they trouble every body, and the people may say, Thou, O our God, hast destroyed us. Secondly, The devil or the powers of the flesh in every man and woman is a ruling power, called god, that brings misery to every body, and corrupts the whole Creation, fire, water, earth and air. 1. By drawing the Creature into unreasonable wayes: which wayes and works. 2. Becomes the creatures own tormentours, when by the light of the Sun of Righteousnesse, man is made to see himself; for all mens sorrows are but the risings up of their own works against themselves. Therefore people may say to the devil, or their un∣righteous flesh. O thou, our God, thou hast destroyed , thou hast deceived us, O god, thou promisedst peace, and afterwards writest bitter things against us. Our own works are our tormenting devils.
Then thirdly, The King of Righteousnesse is the ruling power, called God; but he is not the Authour of the creatures misery, for his dealing with un∣righteous flesh, is two-fold, which is the righteous Justice and Judgement of the King. First, he suffers man to take his own course and to act his own will, and to follow his own lsts, letting him alone, and permitting him a time to do what he will, for wise, proud and covetous flesh thinks him∣self to be a god, or an Angel of light, and that his wisdom and power is the onely power. And now if the righteous King should not give him this liber∣tie, he would say he had wrong done him, therefore Reason lets him have his will to act his principles, that when the time comes that he shall be made to see himself and his works, he may be left without excuse. This declares the Almighty power of patience, love and meekness in the King towards his creature, that he can suffer himself to be a servant to that cursed power in the flesh to this end, that he may take that fleshly wisdom in his craft, destroy that curse, and save his creature, man, from that bondage; That after that man hath had trial of his own wisdom and power of his flesh and finds it a devil, and that there is no blessing in it; he may then come to lie down in the wisdom and power of the King of Righteousnesse in rest and peace. Secondly, In the solnesse of time; that is, when all flesh hath corrupted his wayes; then the King or Sun of Righteousnesse arises up, and lets man in his light to see himself to be a devil. The King layes no hand upon him, but lets him see himself; and the mans own works become the devils that torment him. If a man have sore eyes, and look in the Sun, his eyes smart; now that smart comes not from the Sun, but the venome of the eyes rises up & torments
it self, when the Sun cause it to see or feel it self. This declares the wisdom, power, Justice and holi∣nesse of the King, that when he rises he can make flesh to see it self, and needs do no more, but shine forth and burn in his brightnesse, by whom that curse or drosse in the flesh is consumed and cannot stand; therefore if flesh were righteous it would stand be∣fore the righteous Law; but seeing it cannot stand, it appears unrighteous, to be a devil and no Angel of light. And this method of the Father brings glo∣ry to his own name, that he alone is the one almighty power and wisdom. This is Justice in the righteous Judge, and shews, him to be the pure Law, and flesh kils and torments it self. I but when the waters drowned the world, and the fire burned Sodom, this was a Judgement more then letting flesh see his own unrighteousnesse. I answer, The overflowings of the water in that man∣ner to drown, and the breakings forth of the fire in that manner to burn waste and consume, were the ri∣sing up of the curse that was in the water and fire, to destroy the unrighteous flesh of man, that caused it. For when the Father made the Creation, he made all Elements to uphold one another in Righteous∣nesse, and one creature to preserve another; there∣fore it was all very good. But this rising up of crea∣tures to destroy one another, is the curse; which un∣righteous man, that is, the Lord of the creatures hath brought upon the Creation. I but how comes the fire and water to break forth to destroy at some times more then another? I answer, When the fulnesse of time comes, that earth begins to stink with the abominations of man, then the Father arises up and shews himself with∣in the Creation of fire, water, earth and air. And
the curse that is brought upon this by man cannot abide the presence of the Lord, but rises up and runs together into a head to oppose the Lord; but in∣deed it destroyes man that was the cause of it. So that the risings up of waters, and the breakings forth of fire to waste and destroy, are but that curse, or the works of mans own hands, that rise up and run to∣gether to destroy their Maker, and torment him that brought the curse sorth. While water and fire are useful, the blessing of the Creation lies in them, and comes from them to pre∣serve the Creation for the glory of the Maker. But when they break forth to waste and destroy, this is the curse, the burden of the Creation, that breaks forth to destroy unrighteous man that caused it. And it doth break forth when the Lord appears in the Creation; as I said, when the Sun shines the venome in sore eyes rises up and smarts: So when righteous power begins to move in the fire, and up∣on the water, the curse that is in these Elements a∣rises up and disturbs the Creation, to the destruction of man whose work it is. I but one man kils another by wars, and such like, Is not this the wrath of God upon them? I answer in the same manner as I did before; for as the cursed flesh in one body torments it self, when he sees himself a devil. So multitudes of bodies of men, are still but one flesh, or one earth: And when the Sun of Righte∣ousnesse begins to shine into this earth, the veni∣mous parts rise up to kill and destroy light, but in the end the flesh destroyes it self. Let the power of humility and Righteousnesse ap∣pear to a proud, unrighteous, covetous man, and shew him his evil, as in these dayes it doth, he swels
presently, and rises up to make war to maintain him∣self to be an Angel of light; and pride being dispersed into divers bodies, cannot yield one to another, to preserve one another, but rise up to destroy each other in the light of the Sun: The Sun shines, and the dunghill casts up his stinking smell: The Lord he shines, and proud flesh kils one ano∣ther; flesh kils but it self. And truly I must tell you, That all these wars, and killing one another, are but the rising up of the curse: destroying Armies of men, are but the curse, the burden which the Creation groans under: For in the beginning, all was very good, and the Creation at first was made to preserve it self; and this rising up to destroy the Creation, is the curse. And the Spirit of the Father, that dwels in any humane body that is killed, doth run into the O∣cean of life, and purifies the Creation from the curse. But did not God send the Chaldeans and Sabeans to punish Job? Yes, the god Devil did; but not the God or Righteousnesse: For the Devil desired a libertie to try Iob, and the righteous power, Rea∣son, gave him leave; onely told him, he should not touch his life; and then the Devil sends these ene∣mies, and burns his house, and kils his children; give but libertie to the curse, and he doth much mis∣chief. Who was it that the god Devil did afflict? Not an enemy to the King of Righteousnesse, but a body in whom he dwelt: Yea, the Father did but suffer himself to be persecuted by the Devil, in that hu∣mane body Iob: That at last, that power of dark∣nesse, which is the Accuser of the Brethren, and the bondage of the Creation, might be made manifest in the light of the Sun, and so be cast out justly. Now the end of all is this, that unrighteous flesh that thinks himself an Angel of light, and the onely
power, may be proved to be a Devil, and so be cast out of the Creation and perish: That Jacob, the King of Righteousnesse, the blessing of peace, might arise up and reign for ever in the Creation, when all enemies are subdued under his seet. There is a time appointed of the righteous Judge, that all flesh shall see it self in its own colours; and when the flesh doth see it self in his own beastly shapes, he will appear so deformed, so piteous a confused Chaos of miserie and shame, that the sight thereof shall be a great torment to himself. Therefore take notice of this, you proud, envious, covetous, bitter-spirited, and unrighteous men and women; this self-satisfying glory in which you live, and seem to have rest, shall become your hell-tor∣ment, when you are made to see your unrighteous, treacherous self, as you must when the Judge sits up∣on the Throne. You that are now ashamed to own the righteous spirit, and fear to offend men, lest they should either reproch you, or injure you: And so will do any thing, thogh unrighteous, to preserve the good words of devilish men; you shall then see you are not men, not Saints, but Devils and cursed enemies, even the Serpents power, that must be burned. CHAP. XII ALl these declare the half hours silence, that is to be in Heaven;Rev. 8. 1. for all mouths are to be stop∣ped, by the power of Reasons Law shining within the heart:er. 31. 34. And this abundance of talk that is amongst people, by Arguments, by disputes, by declaring ex∣positions upon others word and writing, by long dis∣course, called preaching, shall all cease.
Some shal not be able to speak, they shal be struck silent wit shame, by seeing themselves in a losse, and in confusion: Neither shal they dare to speak, til they know by experience within themselves what to speak; but wait with a quiet silence upon the Lord, til he break forth within their hearts, and give them words and power to speak. And this shal be a mark of a covetous, proud and close Hypocrite, to be ful of words, preaching by arguments and expositions, putting a meaning upon other mens words and writings, telling stories by hear-say of what they have read and heard from men, as the fashion is now in publique work. For none shal dare to speak (unlesse it be those that are sealed to destruction) but what they un∣derstand in pure experience; every one speaking his own words, not another mans, as the Preachers do, to make a trade of it; for he that speaks from tradition and imagination, and makes a trade of his preaching to others, to get a living by, is a child of the curse, and covetousnesse is his Lord, Men must leave off teaching one another, and the eies of all shal look upwards to the Father,1 loh. 2. 27▪ to be taught of him: And at this time, silence shal be a mans rest and libertie, it is the gathering time, the souls receiving time, it is the forerunner of pure language. None shal be offended at this, but the covetous and proud Serpent; and he wil vex and fret, if the people wil not heare him preach; and think: he hath much wrong done him, if he be slighted. Wel Judas, thou must be slighted, thy preaching stinks before the Father, and he wil draw his people out of thy confusion, and leave thee naked and bare, and thy shame shall be made manifest to the whole Creation, for indeed thou art the curse. While a man is buying his head in studying what
hath been done in Moses time, in the Prophets time, in the Apostles, and in the Son of mans time▪ called Jesus the Anointed, and doth not wait to find light and power of righteousnesse to arise up within his heart. This man is a pireous, barren creature, though he have all the learning of Arts and Sciences under the Sun; for the knowledge of Arts is but to speak methodically of what hath been; and conjecture what shal be; both which are uncertain to the Spea∣ker: But he that speaks from the original light with∣in, can truly say, I know what I say and I know whom I worship. This silence shal be both particular in every son and daughter, and general in the practice of all before their eies; and loking upwards and wait∣ing for teaching from the great and only Teacher, Christ, the great Prophet; for truly the time is come, that all flesh shal be made silent, and leave off multiplying of words without knowledge before the Lord, both in peaching and praying. And your Preachers shal be all the objects of the Creation through wich the Father wil convey himself into you, and manifest himself before you: these shal be your outward Preachers. And the same word of power speaking in, and to your hearts, causing your hearts to open to his voyce, shall be your Teacher within: And that mouth that stands up to teach others, and doth not declare the Lord in a pure language, shall bear his shame, who soever he be. None shall need to turn over books and writings (for indeed all these shal cease too) to get know∣ledge; but every one shal be taken off from seek∣ing knowledge from without, and with an humble, quiet heart, wait upon the Lord, til he manifest him∣self; for he is a great king, and worthy to be waited upon.
His testimony within, fils the soul with joy and singing; he gives first experience: and then pow∣er to speak forth those experiences, And hence you shal speak to the rejoycing one of another, and to the praise of him that declares his power in you; he that speaks his thoughts, studies and imagina∣tion, and stands up to be a Teacher of others, shal be judged for his unrighteousnesse, because he seeks to honour flesh,2 Cor. 12. 13. and does not honour the Lord. Behold the Anointing that is to teach all things, is comming to create new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein Righteousness dwels; and there shal not be a vessel of humane earth, but it shal be filled with Christ. If you were possible to have so many buckets as would contain the whole Ocean, every one is filled with the Ocean, and perfect. water is in all; and being put all together, make up the perfect Ocean, which filled them all. Even so, Christ, who is the spreading power, is now beginning,Eph, 1. 23. to fil every man and woman with himself;Ch. 4. 5. 6. he wil dwel and rule in every one, and the law of reason & equitie shal be Christ in them; every single body is a star shining forth of him, or rather a body in and out of whom he shines; and he is the Ocean of power that fils all.Ro. 8. 23. And so the words are true, the Creation man∣kinde, shal be the fulnesse of him that fils all in all: This is the Church, the great Congregation, that when the mysterie is compleated, shal be the my∣stical body of Christ all set at libertie from inward and outward straits and bondage: And this is call∣ed the holy breathing, that hath made all new by himself, and for himself. Before this truth be believed in by mankinde, you shal see much troubles in the great world; the first Adam wil strive mightily before he loose his
Kingdom; he can pretty quietly hear, that Christ will role in sons and daughters that are scattered a∣broad. But to hear that the Kingdoms of the world shal be Christ's Dominions likewise, and that the material earth shall be his possession, as well as the earth man∣kind; O this cus Adam to the heart; all the world will storm and be angry,Rev. 11. 15. 18. when this is made known. Wars and rumours of wars will multiply; Father will be against Son, and Son against Father, the love of many shall wax cold; and zealous professours, that live without the spirit, shall become the most bit∣ter enemies to Christ, and prove very treacherous, self-seeking, self-loving, ful of subtil policy to waste and wear out every one that seeks to advance Christ, by their bitternesse and oppression: But all in vain, for Christ must rise, and the powers of the flesh must fall. CHAP. XIII. FRom what hath been hitherto spoken, if there were no experience to prove it, it appears, that the first Adam or fleshly man, seeks life, peace and glory to himself, from creatures and things that are without him.1 Cor. 3. 12 As first, he seeks content and peace from wife, children, friends, riches, places of dominion over others, and from such like: But that peace that is built upon such hay and stubble-foun∣dations, will fall and come to nothing. Secondly, the fleshly man seeks content and peace from Sermons, Prayers, Studies, Books, Church-fel∣lowship, and from outward Forms and Customs
in Divine Worship: But that peace that is built upon this foundation of gold, silver and pre∣tious stones,Ro. 9. 31. will fall and come to nothing like∣wise.Isa. 28. 9. All creatures teats are to be dried up, that the soul can suck no refreshing milk from them, before the Lord teach it knowledge. Some there are, nay almost every one, wonders after the Beast, or fleshly man; they seek for new Jerusalem, the City of Sion, or Heaven, to be above the skies, in a locall place, wherein there is all glory, and the beholding of all excellent beauty, like the seeing of a show or a mask before a man: And this not to be seen neither by the eies of the body till the body be dead: A strange conceit. But, poor Creatures, you are deceived; this ex∣pectation of glory without you, will vanish, you shall never see it; this outward heaven is not the durable Heaven; this is a fancy which your false Teachers put into your heads to please you with, while they pick your purses, and betray your Christ into the hands of flesh, and hold Jacob under to be a servant still to Lord Esau. Wel, what a man sees or hears to day, may be gone to morrow; all outward glory that is at a distance from the five senses, and taken in by a representation, is of a transient nature; and so is the Heaven that your Preachers tell you of. But when the second Adam rises up in the heart, he makes a man to see Heaven within himself, and to judge all things that are below him: He makes many bodies to be the declarers of him, who is the one power of righteousnesse that rules therein: And this is Heaven that will not fail us, endurable riches, treasures that shall not wax old, and where moth and rust cannot corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal: This Christ is within you, your everlasting rest and glory.
And as the man of the flesh fetches in comforts from without, seeking content in and from Crea∣tures, and Creature-objects; so he envies every one that crosses his desires; crosse him in his pride, co∣vetousnesse and uncleannesse, and he grows extream angry at every body; tell him that his formall and customary preaching and praying, is but self-seeking, not setting up the Lord, and he is filled with rage a∣gainst those that tel him so. But he never looks within to check himself, he takes no remedy there at all, and lets those Devils lie quiet within; and if any be sent, I say, from the Lord, to disturb those his lusts, he will disturb that messenger, if he can; but he will cherish himself within: He thinks that whatsoever he doth is good, and that whatsoever crosses that power that is in his heart, doth crosse the Lord. But truly it is no other but the Serpents power, which must be destroyed; he fetches in content from the Creatures that are without him; and his envy and discontent runs after things and Creatures that are without, which crosses his fleshly desires. But now the man of righteousnesse, Christ, when he rises up in the heart, he loves all that are without him; and he envies none but the Serpent within, which troubles the Creation; and so is quite diffe∣rent to the other. For as soon as Christ is rose up in a man, the first thing he doth, he takes, revenge of the pride, lust, envy, covetousnesse, which ruled within the flesh, and casts that Serpent and Dragon out of Heaven: That is, out of that part of the Creation; and makes a man to cry out upon himself, and to hate and ab∣hor his cursed lusts, which lead him captive. He makes a man to look abroad with the eie of pitty and compassion to fellow-Creatures; but to look with the eie of hatred and loathing upon the
Serpent, his unclean lusts, desiring nothing so much as the death of the body of sin within.Zach 4. 7 So that the law of righteousnesse may reigne in peace in his soul: O thou cursed envy, cursed rash anger, cursed un∣cleannesse: O cursed Devil, cursed Father of lies, that will not suffer Christ to rise up and reign: O thou enemy of all rightousnesse, thou wicked one, thou curse, thou power of darknesse, thou fleshly power, thou shalt be destroyed and subdued under Christ's feet, whom thou fightest against. The greatest combate is within a man, when the King sits upon the Throne, judging unrighteous flesh, and bruising that Serpents head, And though this be trouble and torment for a time to the Creature,Rev. 4. 2. yet Christ at last will sit down in him, who is Prince of peace, and King of righteousnesse. The created flesh of man is the Beast, the King of Beasts; the same principles as are in other Creatures, are in humane flesh: The difference between man and other beasts, is this, The flesh of man is made an understanding Soul, capable to know Reason, and to walk in his light: Other beasts cannot. Now the wise flesh is meerly selfish, he seeks him∣self in every thing he doth, and would be a Lord and Ruler, not only over the Beasts of the field, but over creatures of his own kind, whom his Maker made equall to himself; and so strives to fetch in all other Creatures, to advance his content, though it be to the losse and misery of other men. This is the Beast, Lord Esau, the wise and cove∣tons, self-seeking flesh, that hath sold his birth∣right and blessing to Jacob, for the pleasure of un∣righteousnesse a small time: And now he must be turned out, and deliver all up to Jacob, and he is extreamly vext, and will not yield quier possession, but stand out stifly, till he be cast out, by the uni∣versall power of Reasons law.
Now the rule and dominion of Jacob doth not bring losse and misery to any;Gen. 18. 18. his law is so established in love, that the whole Creation finds peace under it, sorrow and tears, beggary and oppression shall be done away, and the blessing of the Lord Jacob shall fill the earth. So then we see,Rev. 19. 19. that the great battell of God Al∣mighty, is between thi selfish power, the Beast and fleshy man; and the universall power, Chirist, the man of righteousnesse; for the flesh would be wiser then its Maker: for though his Maker would have the whole Creation, and every creature to enjoy the be∣nefit of their Creation, and no live free from straits comfortably: Yet the wise and converous flesh seeks to live free in honour and quiet in himself, & makes laws to imprison, kill and waste every one, that will not conforme to his selfish Government. Now the Father wil destroy the Beast in the open field by fair play, and hath given him all advan∣tages as may be; for he hath given the Beast the∣dominion, and himself is a Servant under his do∣minion, and will undermine the wise and cove∣tous Beast, by righteons susterings, and action as a Servant: And the Father encounters with the Beast or Dragon, in a three-fold posture of war. As First, by the Sacrifices under the Law, the Spi∣rit thereby declared the destruction of the Beast; and the Spirit lay hid under those types and sha∣dows, fighting against the Beast; and the wise flesh in those daies sought against his Maker; This is a distance of Cannon shot. Secondly, In the prison of Jesus Christ, the Lamb, the Father fought against the Beast: and killed him; for the Dragon was cast out of that Heaven or Crea∣tion, in whom the Father dwelt bodily; for that flesh was wholly made subject to the Spitit; this was at a closer distance closing in the Front: But
the wise flesh hath many strong holds, even the multitudes of men and women, which he fortifies a∣gainst the Spirit. And therefore in the third posture, which is now begun, the Father encounters, and wil en∣counter with the Beast every where: that is, with the wise but covetous, unrighteous flesh, in every son and daughter, and so bruise that Serpents head in the whole body of his Army. And before he hath done, he wil fire all the strong-holds of this murder, so that he shall not have a place to keep garrison in; for the Father will subdue the whole bulk of man-kind, and make all that living earth subject to him self, and all with holy breathing: This is the spreading of the Anoint∣ing: This is the glory of the Elect One; glorious things are spoken of thee, O though City of God. This holy breathing is the Kingdom of Heaven within you, when he rules within you, and the Kingdom of Heaven without you likewise, when you see the same glory rule in others, in which you rejoyce: And this is the last encounter the Father wil have with the Dragon. This is the great day of Judgment (judging and condemning, and putting the Serpent to death every where) This is the day of Christ power, in which he wil subdue all his enemies under his seet, & deliver up the Kingdom to his Father Therefore marvel not to see the people turn from one way of worship to another; for the Father is driving this people through al the waies, and forms, and customs, and reformation, and governments of the Beast, to weary them out in all; that so they may find rest for the soles of their feet no where, in no outward form of worship; til they come to lye down in him (forsaking all forms) to worship the Fa∣ther in spirit and trurh; that is, to walk righteously in the Creation.
And this restlesnesse of people, running from one form and custome to another, meeting with con∣fusion and curse every where, is no other but the dividing of time, the half day or image of the Beast, which is the last period of his time: Then faith the Angel, It is done, time to the Beast shal be no more. And while it is thus,Psa. 40. 2. poor Creatures they are in bondage within, for they know not what to do; the way to Sion is not yet cleare, and they are filled with sighings and secret mournings, to see themselves in confussion and losses to stick in the mire, but cannot come out: This is inward slave∣rie, under which they lie. Then, poor Creatures, they are under an out∣ward bondage, under the hand of Tyrant flesh, that rules the Kingdom, and that divises the seve∣ral fleshy forms and waies of government, to which if any refuse to conform, then they must be impri∣soned, reproached or tortured by punishments, in what kind or other, by the hands of fellow Creatures, that are the oppressing Task masters un∣der the Tyrant flesh; so that weak spirits are kept under in awe, either by fear or shame: And thus Iacob hath been very, low but he must rise. For the Antichristian Captivitie is expiring, ma∣ny have attained to inward freedom already, they wait upon the Lord for outward freedom, that the yoke may be taken off their backs: Israel's Captivitie in the 70 years in the Bahylon was but a type of this Antichristian slavery under L. Esau, the pow∣ers of the flesh, that compasses mankind about with many straits & dangers, for acknowledging his Maker. But as every thing hath his growth, his raign and end, so must this slavery have an end; The proud and covetous hearts cry, what slavery is this? we know not what he speaks: It is true you do not know;
but they who have lesse or more attained to the re∣surrection of the dead know what I say; and shall rejoyce in the declaration of this power, waiting the Lords leisure with a calm silence, til he hath gathered together our brethren that must partake of the blessing with us. CHAP. XIV. TO see the Divine power in the Creation-objects is sweet; but to see him ruling in the heart is sweeter: The first sight is at distance far off, as to see him in mear, drink, cloaths, friends, victories, riches, prosperity, to see him in the Sun, Moon, Stars, Clouds, Grasse, Trees, Cattle, and all the Earth, how he hath sweetly cause every one of these to give in assistance to preserve each other Creature: Or rather how he himself in these gives forth pre∣servation and protection from one another, and so unites the whole Creation together, by the unity of himself. Or further, to see the Divine power in prayer, in Discourse, in Communion of Saints, in Reading, in every sweet; and refreshnigs that a man meets within all these, is the Almightly Comforter: But this is to behold that glory abroad, to see and meet him from home, to behold him in Creatures without us: which sight and enjoyment is often, and may be totally lost and the soul left alone again, and so filled with mourning in his absence, O when shall I see my beloved, whom my soul loves. The Spouse had seen Christ in the manner afore∣said, but she had lost him again; for if she had ne∣ver seen him, she could not have called him her Beloved, and mourn in his absence. Let a man
eat never so hearty a dinner, yet within a few hours he wil be empty again and ready to languish; and thus all comforts that are taken in from any creature without us, may be, nay wil be, must be lost, that so a man may come to know the Lord. But now to see the King sitting in his banquet∣ing-houses, to see the Law of Righteousnesse and peace ruling and dwelling in the heart, and to be refreshed with thoe sweet smelling spices, the discoveries of the Fathers love within; This is the Word of God; This is sweeter then the honey or the honey-comb, for this is to see him near at hand, even within the heart ruling and resting there. This is the Kingdome of heaven within you; This is the city of refuge that wil not sail a man; This is the Rock of defence and offence; This the power that makes a man bold as a Lion; If a man be cast into any straits, his heart dies not like Nabals the man of the flesh; but he feels peace and content within, and so is at rest. Let come what wil come, the man knows it is the wil of the Father it shal be so, and he feels a quiet peace compasse his heart, so that he seeth and feeleth peace within; and rejoyceth in the excellency of it, he seeth and feeleth love and patience within, and rejoyceth in the glory of that sweet ointment, that doth cast a delightful favour all his soul over. Now though this man be in prison, be in straits, be forsaken of all his friends in the flesh, none wil buy nor sell with him, because they count him a man of strange opinions and blasphemies, call him an Atheist, a sot, a Papist, a blasphemer that hath for∣saken God and goodnesse, because he wil neither preach nor pray, nor say grace when he sitteth down to meat, as the custome of Professours are. Yet this man is not alone, for his Father is with
him, The Father lives in him, and he lives in the Father. The Father wil have his people, whom he draws up to worship him in spirit and truth, to be secret and silent; to be flow of speech for a little season, yet quick-sighted and Eagle-eyed, though they be silent, they are not sottish drones, they shall discern and judge others righteously, though o∣thers shall not discern and judge them, but by rash censure, which is not righteous. The righteous actions and patient silence, of those that are drawn up to wait upon the Lord, shall be the greatest shame and condemnation to the igno∣rant professours, and talking people that ever broke out. The wise flesh that would be an Angel of light, is full of towords, but dead to the Law of Righteous∣nesse, The Saints must die to waste words, but he made alive to Righteousnesse, walking uprightly in the Creation, to the glory of the Maker of all things; hereby Lord Esau will be under-mined, and his house and Kingdon wil fall about his ears. For though the man of the flesh be altogether for outward preaching, praying, observation of forms and customs, and knows not how to worship, if these be taken away: he hath no peace if these be gone. But now the man of Righteousnesse sees death in all outward forms, if the inward power be wanting; therfore his eye is stil inward, to see the Law of Righ∣teousnesse ruling there, and guiding the body to be a profitable member in the Creation. And this is the most excellent sight, to see the divine power in ones self, ruling, dwelling and living within; which if it doe, that body wherein it dwels, shal be wholly subject in al his to that Law of Rightenesse. They that know what the power of love and the Law of Righteousnesse is, they know what I say, and
can understand me; but to others these reports sound strangely, and may draw words of reproach and slander from them; but it matters not, they cannot hurt. They that live in the light, they see the Lord a∣broad, and they see him at home, they see him in other creatures, and they see and feel him in their own hearts, in patient and quiet submitting, to what is his will; so that there is a sweet agreement be∣tween the disposing hand of God without, and his power within. He that thus sees the Lord, the antient of daies, the one Almighty power, doth mightily honour him; when nothing can be done abroad, either in adversity or prosparity, but the divine power that rules in the heart, consents, rejoices and grudges not. And now the Lord is one, and his name or power one, every where. The sight of the King of Glory within, lies not in the strength of memory, calling to mind what a man hath read and heard, being able by a humane capaci∣ty to joyn things together into a method; & through the power of free utterance, to hold it forth before others, as the fashion of Students are in their Sermon work; which a plough man that was never bread in their Universities may do as much; nay, they do more in kind (as experience shews us) then they that take Tyshes to tell a story. But the sight of the King within, lies in the be∣holding of light arising up from an inward power of seeling experience, filling the soul with the glory of the Law of Righteousnesse, which doth not vanish like the taking in of words and comfort from the mouth of a hear say Preacher, or strength of memo∣ry. But it continues like the Sunne in the firma∣ment shining forth, from that established power
of the divine within, and the enlivened heart shall as soon be seperated from glorying in the Law of Righteousnesse that dwels in him; then the heat and light of the Sunne, can be seperated from the Sunne. And truly let me tell you, That as a man finds abundance of sweet peace in his heart, when he is made to live in the Kingdome of heaven: So the words hat this man speaks from this power within, are very profitable to others, & are good seed, where∣soever they are sown, they will spring up and bring forth fruit, for words spoken from the light of ex∣perience, have a two-fold operation upon the heart of the hearers. For first, if I lie under straits and bondage in my spirit, by reason of some inward and outward trou∣bles, but especially by reason of the enthraldome to my own lusts that over powers me, so that I cannot do what I would. Then the words of experience from the mouth of one that hath been in that condition, and is passed thorow it, sounds liberty and life to my weary soul; I speak what I have felt in this particular. Secondly, If I delight in any way of the flesh, as to seek peace in creatures abroad without me, or to seek satisfaction to my envy, self-will and lust; and in the midst of this my folly I do occasionally hear the words of experience from some other, declaring such actions and motions to be the powers of the flesh and devil, and not of the spirit of righteous∣nesse. Presently those words take peace from the earth; that is, from proud flesh; and fill the whole soul with anger, distemper, grudging, and torment. And this is another operation that pure language produces, which is a launcing of the dead flesh that the disease may be cured.
For this wounding is nor to the mine of the crea∣ture, but it is a medicine sent from the Lord to heal him; to take away the evil peace from the flesh, that so the created part may lie down in rest, and be at peace in Christ, which cannot be moved. For every comfort that is of the flesh shall be sha∣ken and removed, but Christ the one power of Righteousnesse and peace, shall not be shaken nor moved, but stand firm for ever. And by this you may see the difference between the kingdom of the flesh and devil, which must be shaken to pieces and fall: And the kingdom of heaven or of God, that endures for ever, and is that Rock due cannot be moved. CHAP. XV. WHat do you mean by the kingdom devil or flesh? I answer, Covetousnesse, the selfish power ruling in a man, is the kingdome of darknesse in that man: And as this power hath corrupted the Creation (man∣kind) so it rules, or hath ruled in every single one more or lesse; but is the curse. And every one that hath lain under the bondage of this selfish power, and is in any measure delivered, he can from that ex∣perience declare, what the power of darknesse is in whole mankind, as I have shewed how secretly and closely this selfish power branches himself forth in every one, till by the right of Reasons Law shining within, he is discovered and cast out. But what is it for a man to live in the kingdom of hell, devil or darknesse? I answer, when a man takes delight in nothing, but in satisfying of the lusts of his own heart; when
the way of the flesh is pleasing, and the way of the spirit of Righteousnesse is a burden to him; when he glories in himself, and feeds with delight upon his covetousnesse, pride, envy, lust, self-will, and in eve∣ry thing that pleaseth flesh. And if he can but overcome that power that checks or crosses his will, O then this man is in his Kingdome, he rejoyecs and is very well pleased, but it is the kingdome of the flesh, that must be shaken and removed; This is no other but the glorying in that which is a mans shame. What is the kingdom of Heaven, or of Christ? Answ. The Law of Righteousnesse and peace, ru∣ling and dwelling in, mankind, is the kingdom of heaven, this is the universall power bearing rule, treading the flesh-power under his feet. What is it for a man to live in the kingdom of hea∣ven? Ans. When mankind or any single person is so made subject to the King of righteousnesse, that all his de∣light is to walk according to that law towards every creature in the Creation, through love to the Fathers honour that made al. He glories in that law of righte∣ousness, which he finds seated in his heart, & finds con∣tent no where else; and when the Spirit is honour∣ed, this man is in his kingdom, he hath what he would have. While the kingdom of darknesse rules in a man, if he knows it not, his sin is the lesse, but when he comes to know the lusts of his flesh, and delight therein, in opposition to the righteous Law which he sees some light in also; this makes the man exceed∣ing sinfull, for now he sins against the law of light shining in him, and causing him to see himself. Even so when the divine power rules in a man, and he knows it nor, as it may be in some mea∣sure, this mans joy is but small; for a man may act
from the power of love and righteousnesse, and yet not see nor know the excellency of that power which guides  him. But when a man is made to see and know the law of love and righteousnesse within him, and delights to act from that power of life and liberty, which he seeth and feeleth seated in him. Now this man is carried on with much joy and sweet calmness, meek∣nesse and moderation, and is full of glory. This is the excellency of the work of Christ, not onely to make flesh subject to rigeteousnesse, but to know himself made subject, & to rejoyce in the sweet en∣joyment of that prince of peace, to make a man re∣joyce, & to know the groun  of his joy is unmovebale. What do you mean by divine, and divine power? I anwer, The divine is the spreadinq power of righteousnesse, which is Christ that filleth the whole Creation with himself. And he is called a tree or a vine, because he doth not lie in one single person, but spreads himself in mankind, and every single body in whom he breaths, is but a bough or bud of the vine. So that look upon all together in whom Christ is spread, and they make up but one vine, knit toge∣ther by that one spirit, into one body; whe∣ther they be poor or rich; learned or unlearned; and therefore those rich men that despise the poor; and those learned University men that despise the unlearned, are pricks of the thorn-bush, not bran∣ches of the vine; they be the curse that is now near to burning. And every single one alone in whom Christ breaths, is but a parcel of the vine, in whom the divine power dwels and rests Even as every branch of an Apple∣tree, is filled with the sap, which is the life of the whole tree. Christ is said to be the divine, because he grows
and flourishes in the time of light; he is the Sonne himself; he is a vine or tree that grows by day in the heat of light, and so brings forth abundance of fruit to the glory of the Father; Trees that grow in the heat of the Sun bring sorth pleasant fruit. So those that are branches of this vine, that grows in the heat and life of one spirit the King of Bighte∣ousnesse, bring forth abundance of the fruit of Righ∣teousnesse, according to the nature of the vine they grow from. Therefore the Saints are called, Children of the day, not of the night; for they speak what they know in experience, and what they have received feelingly from the Lord; and their actions and words are not at random, for they act Righteousness within the Creation, from the law of Reason and Righteous∣nesse, which they feel seated within. Every one that doth act or speak from the light and power of the day-vine within himself, can give an account of his words and actions: But this is the glory, that Adam, the man of the flesh hides himself from: This is the Law of Righteousnesse, which fleshly Israel could not behold: This is the new Covenant which our Clergie is unacquainted with. Now opposite to this Divine, which is Christ, there is a night-vine, which is the power of selfish∣nesse, or the bottom esse pit spread abroad in man∣kind; And every man and woman that is guided by this selfish power of darknesse, are but branches of the night-vine. And this nigt-vine which I called Lord Esau, or fleshly man, hath filled the whole earth with dark∣nesse (under pretence of his learning and fleshly Go∣vernment) so that he is a spread tree. But he is cal∣led by the Spirit, the Thorn-bush. The fruit that he brings forth is sour and bitter, and good for nothing but the dunghill; for trees that
grow alwayes in the shade or place of darknesse, where the heat and light of the Sun doth not coope∣rate, brings forth unpleasant fruit. Now this night-vine (but rather Thorn-bush) is the branching forth of the wisdom and power of selfish flesh, every bud from it, is a sharp prickle: treache∣rous & covetous Judas, is one branch from that root, and he hath risen up to a mighty great tree; for e∣very treacherous and covetous heart, is but the bud∣dings forth of Judas. So envious Scribes & Pharisees, are other branches from the same root, & these have risen up into migh∣ty spreading trees; for every one that is zealous with∣out knowledge, making a profession of the spirit of righteousnesse, & yet grudging and aring the way of the spirit, are but the buddings forth of the Scribes & Pharisees, that killed Christ after the flesh, and now is spread in every Land and Family, to hinder Christ from rising, or else to suppresse and kill him againe if they could after he is risen up in sons and daugh∣ters. So covetous Demas, proud Simon Mugus, fro∣ward Nabal, unrighteous Elimas, and such like, are all the buddings forth of the thorn-bush, and have covered the earth with their branches, to keep it in darknesse, and to hide the Sun of Righteousnesse from it. And all these are centred in the Clergy, the Uni∣versities are the standing ponds of stinking waters, that make those trees grow, the curse of ignorance, consusion and bondage spreads from hence all the Nations over. The paying of tythes, the greatest sin of oppres∣sion, is upheld by them; pride, covetousnesse, idle∣nesse, bitternesse of spirit, despising and treading all under-foot; in whom the spirit of the Lamb appears, is upheld by them; these are the standing enemies against Christ.
Their Churches are the successours of the Jews Synagogues, and are houses of bondage, their Uni∣versiies are successours of the Scribes and Pharisees houses of learning. And though they persecuted Christ and the Apostles, and would own none of their Do∣ctrines; yet when they found that Christs Doctrines began to fill the earth, and to make the way of the Law odious, and their trade began to fail. Then did those houses of learning begin to take in and own the writings of the Apostles, and to own that doctrine, prevailing with the Magistracy through the deceit of their subtilety, to establish tythes in their hands still for their maintainance (though Christs doctrine threw down that oppres∣sion.) And then from legall Sacrificers, they became hearsay-Preachers of the Gospel, not from any te∣stimony of light within themselves, but from the writings of the Apostles, which they professe great love to, and keep charily, for their tythes sake; and by the one they deceive the souls of people, for they preach the letter for the Spirit, and by the other they pick their purses. And this is very manifest by their carriage; for though those writings which they live by, were not writings that proceeded from any Schollars, accor∣ding to humane art, but from Fishermen, Shepherds, Husband men, and the Carpenters son, who spake and writ as the Spirit gave them utterance, from an inward testimony. Yet now these learned schollars have got the wri∣tings of these inferior men of the world so called, do now slight, despise and trample them under feet, pressing upon the powers of the earth, to make laws to hold them under bondage, and that lay-people, trades-men, and such as are not bred in schools, may have no liberty to speak or write of the Spirit. And why so? Because out of these despised ones,
doth the spirit rise up more and more to clearer light, making them to speak from experience; and every fresh discovery of the Father, shines more glo∣rious then the old, till at last the creature is made to see the Father face to face in his own light. But now the learned schollars having no inward testimony of their own to uphold their trade by a customary practice, they hold fast the old letter, get∣ting their living by telling the people, the meanings of those trades-mens words and writings; but alas, they mightily corrupt their meaning, by their mul∣titude of false expositions and interpretations; for no man knows the meaning of the spirit, but he that hath the spirit. And if the- Father send forth any of these trades∣men, to declare the testimony which is in them, as in these dayes he sends forth many. And these true labourers shall encrease, let the Universitie men do the worst they can; yet the Schollars seek to sup∣presse them, calling them new-lights, factious, erro∣neou, blasphemers, and the like. And why do they all this? Because the light of truth that springs up out of this earth, which the schollars tread under feet, will shine so clear, as it will put out the candle of those wicked learned de∣ceivers. And therefore many of them that are more inge∣nnous or subtile then the rest, seeing light arises much amongst the people, begin to comply with the people, and give people their liberty to speak as well as they, and denie the tithes upon this condi∣tion, the people will give them a free contribution, and own them as the chief Preachers and Prophets sent of God, and to look upon themselves as under∣lings to the schollars. And therefore stir up people to gather into Con∣gregations, and to make choice of one man to be
their Preacher, though they shall have a liberty to speak in the Congregation as well as he. But, all this is but deceit of the flesh, to draw people under a new bondage, and to uphold the hearsay-preaching, that in time matters may be wheeled about again, to advance the schollars, and give them the supremacy in teaching. And what is the end of all this; but onely to hin∣der Christ the great Prophet from rising, and where∣as people should all look up to him for teaching, and acknowledge no other teacher and ruler but Christ, the Law of Righteousnesse dwelling in every mans heart; the schollars would have the people to look up to them for teaching; and truly let me speak what I find, the more that you look upon them, or any men for teaching, the more you shall be wrapped up in confusion and bondage. And therefore the upshot of all your Universities and publick Preachers, and men-teachers, is onely to hinder Christ from rising, and to keep Jacob un∣der, and make him a servant and a slave to the man of the flesh. So that all this do in the world about, hear-say preaching and setled forms of worship, is no other but the spreadings forth of the thorn-bush, the flesh∣ly man, to hinder the worship of the Father in spirit and truth: And all those strict and zealous. Preachers and Professours of other mens words and writings, and upholders of forms and customs, are no other but the Scribes, Pharisees and Judas, that still pur∣sue Christ in enmity. And this is the Reason, why man-kind are so igno∣rant, and cold-spirited, in the acknowledgment of the Father; because the night-Vine, or blanches of the Thorn-bush, are so mighty great and thick, that they hide the light and heat of the Sun of Righte∣ousnesse from it.
This is the man of sin, the mysterie of iniquity, that lets and must let, till he be taken out of the way: Indeed this Thorn-bush doth so prick, that none dares meddle with it, unlesse he be well cloath∣ed with Christ. This Thorn-bush or night-Vine grows in the cold time of the night, while the Sun of Righteousnesse is under the Clouds; and the fruit it brings forth is unpleasant, as pride, covetousnesse, envy, self-love, hypocrisie, confusion, bondage, and all the misery under the power of darknesse, to make Lord Esau a compleat Tyrant; and they that act from this Vine, are called children of the night. Now from hence it appears, what horrible proud men the Clergie are, that call themselves Divines; or Christ that grows in the light of the Father, when alas their light is but a candle stoln from the Apo∣stles and Prophets writings, it is not their own light, it is but hear-say in them. Surely their pride and covetousnesse declares them to be the false Christs and false Prophers, and that they are branches of the Thorn-bush, that are full of sharp pricks, in regard they endeavour to uphold a forced maintenance from the people, whether they will or no; and force the people to be silent, to hear them preach hear-say: and not to gainsay or question what they say under pain of punishment, or being counted factious, or sowers of sedition. This is the bondage the people are under, by these publique Preachers: First, they are filled with con∣fusion, by their saying and unsaying, for they know not what they say, they darken knowledge by their words. Secondly, they are like to be crushed in their estates, by the power of corrupt Magistrates, if they oppose these Preachers. Doth not their shame almost appear to all men? f it do not, it will do ere long; assure yourselve,
you Priests, you must fall, and be turned out as ludas, Simon Magus, and the Scribes and Pha∣risees, that are the greatest enemies to Christ, the spreading power of righteousnesse. The Father doth not send hear-say men, to be Labourers in his Vineyard, but such as he first fils with the Divine power, and then sends them to work in his Vineyard: So that still it is but Christ in them, that is, the one man that is sent of the Fa∣ther; for the Father sends none but his beloved Son. who is the law of righteousnesse and peace, the spreading power. And you shall find, you proud and covetous Priests ere long, that poor despised ones of the world, that have this law in their hearts, are the labourers than are sent forth; and you that call your selves Divines, and Labourers, you are Trai∣tors and Enemies to the spirit; you have had warn∣ing enough, you are left without excuse; you are the men whose mouths must be stopped; not by the hand of Tyrannicall, humane power, as you have stopped the mouths of others, I abhor it; for the Lord himself, whom you dishonour by your hypocrasie, will stop your mouth with shame and sorrow, when he makes you to see your selves to be Devils, Deceivers, Scribes and Pharisees Simon Magaus's, Demas's, and Judas's, that are Traitors to the spirit. But if you say? you do not assume the name of Day-vines, but of Divines, as you whrite your selves, you are as bad under this description, of Divines, or Diviners, are witches sorcerers, deceivers, as Balaam was; and as the maid that got her Masters much gain by divination. Suerly you are no other but Witches and Deceivers, for you hold forth letter for spirit, make people believe that your words of hear-say are
the testimony and experience of the spirit within you; and you pick their purses extremly by this divination and sorcerie. Well, your word Divinity darkens knowledge; you talk of a body of Divinity, and of Anatomyz∣ing Divinity: O fine languague! But when it comes to triall, it is but a husk without the kernall; words without life; the spirit is in the hearts of the people vvhom you despise and tread under foot: You go on selling vvords for money to the blind people whom you have deceived; and the spirit is not in your service, for your publique service stinks before him; your preaching, praying, and yours and the peoples joyning in your publique Worship, is abomination to the Lord: For you are the men and people that draw igh God vvith your lips; but your hearts are removed: Love and righteous acting within the Creation, is not to be found in your hands. And therefore to conclude; seeing the alone peace of the heart lies in seeing and feeling Christ the Divine povver, to arise up and rule vvithin; and every foul is in confusion, bondage and sorrovv, till he have true light and feeling hereof, as I have declared my own experience. Then suerly it commands all mouths to be silent, that speak fom hear-say, and to wait for the resur∣rection of Christ within; for he that speaks from hear-say, and yet saith, Thus saith the Lord, he lies, and he dishonours the Lord: And Secondly, he wrongs the soul of the heater, by deceiving them, and so walks unprofitably in the Creation, by mak∣ing them believe, that his divination are words of knowledge spoke from a pure testimony. Suerly if the Lord himself did not become the Teacher of his poor despised people, we should have been overspread with the Egyptian darkness, as
the Universitie men are by whom the earth is corru∣pted, and overspread with thick darknesse. Well, you have prophesies and promises in the writings of Prophets and Apostles, wait upon the Lord till you see the fulfilling of them within your selves, or to your clear experience: And leave off your much talk about words and sillables for by this nultitude of waste discourse, people are blinded, that they neither mind the Prophesies of Scriptures, nor wait for their fulfilling. Truly I can speak in expevience, that while I was a blind Professour to a strict goer to Church, as they call it, and a hearer of Sermons, and never questio∣ned what they spake, but believed as the learned Clergy (the Church) believed; and still forgot what I heard; though the words they spake were like a pleasant song to me, while I was hearing; And this I know is the condition of all your publipue zealous Professours, let them say what they will, for they live in cenfusion, ignorance and bondage to the flesh∣ly man. While I was such a one, I say, I was counted by some of the Priests, a good Christian, and a godly man, though all that was in me, was but zealous ignorance: But since it pleased the Father to reveal his Son in me, and cause me to speak what I know from an in∣ward light and power of life within. Now both the same Priests, and the Professours, whom they have deceived; my former acquaintance now begin to be afraid of me, and call me a blasphe∣mer, and a man of errors, and look upon me as a man of a nother world; for my own particular, my portion is fallen to me in a good ground; I have the Lord, I have enough. I look upon them with the eye of pitty and love, seeing them as yet to lie under those strong delusi∣ous, and powers of darknesse, which I my self did lie
under, waiting upon the great restorer of all things, till he manifest himself in them, and then we shall be∣come one againe, and never be divided. O my dear friends in the flesh, despise not this word I speak; wait upon the Lord for teaching; you will never have rest in your souls, till he speak in you: run after men for teaching, follow your forms with strictnesse, as you know I have done, you shall still be at losse, and be more and more wrapped up in confusion and sorrow of heart: I speak what I have found. But when once your heart is made subject to Christ, the law of righteousnesse, looking up to him for in∣struction, waiting with a meek and quiet spirit, till he appear in you: then you shall have peace, then you shall know the trurh, and the truth shall make you free; then you shall know that I speake truth. Well, I wil conclude, and leave this writing in the hand of the world; Some may be offended at it, if they be, I care not: Some may have their joy fullfilled in seeing a conjuncture of experience between me and them: Though my words may seem sharp to some, yet I do not write them out of any envy to any man, but out of love to all; and so doing to my fellow creatures, as I would they should do to me; walking (in this particular, as my endeavour is in all other) uprightly and righte∣ously in the Creation; speaking the truth as it is in Jesus; that is, speaking my own words, what I see and feel in my own experience, from that light of Christ within, and not by hear-say or imagina∣tion, whereby humane learning in matters of Di∣vine things, deceives all the world, and laps every man up in darknesse: So I rest. FINIS.
