W3143 99825023 29388
BRITISH APPEALS, WITH GODS Mercifull Replies, On the behalfe of the Common-wealth of England. Contained in A Briefe Commemorative Poem, Composed for a Memorial of some of those many signall Mercies, lately vouchsafed to this Rebublike; especially, for those deliverances upon the appeales of the Parliaments, and Royall Forces at Naseby; of the English and Sccottish Armies neer Dunbar in Scotland, and for the late Surrender of Edenburgh-Castle, &c. By GEO. WITHER, Esquire. Febr. 1. 1650. Let this Poem, entituled the British Appeals, &c. be speedily Printed. William Lenthall, Speaker. Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Nathaniel Brooks, at the Angel in Corn-hill, 1651.
BOUND BY J.MACKENZIE BOOKBINDER TO THE KING
To the Soveraigne MAIESTY OF THE Parliament of the English Republike, (by the grace of God) Keepers of the Liberties of England; Protectors of the true Christian Faith, and (within their Territories) Assertors of all the just Priviledges of the Humane Nature, against the Usurpations of Domestick and For∣raigne Tyrants, &c. AND, ALSO, To the Right Honourable Councell of STATE, established by their Authority. THe praise of God, and of praise-worthy Men▪ Are proper subjects of the Poets pen; And they, of old (though disesteem'd of late) Had power heroick-titles to create; Or, Attributes of Honor, to confer Where, Worth, most eminently, did appear; And, none, have been more glorious under Heaven, Then those, which they, deservedly, have given: No, not those high-priz'd Attributes, with which The Pope his Royall-Vassalls did enrich: For, this Power, they enjoyed, long before Popes were; so shall, when they must be no m And, of their Holinesse, had thus much odd That, ere they could
Such as they were; and heretofore great Kings Ambitious were, of their Canonizings. But though impostors use to make a shew, With counterfeited Jewells, mine, are true; And this, now being a Triumphall-day, Expecting all things in their best array, My Muse, in her Addresses you salutes, With such New-titles, and high attributes, As none have yet ascrib'd; that, I may shew To others, what I know to be your due. For (though your Justice, and your Mercie be The Essence of your Glorie) Wisemen, see, That, these are accidents which do belong To Power; and, which, may help to make it strong, And, should not be refus'd, when they are brought By other men, and by your selves unsought: Nor, will they judged be, to overswell A modest height to him that heedeth well, What is, in Petty-States, ascrib'd to them, Who are invested with a Power-Supream. But these, are but a Preface to my gift, Which, I present, out of a nobler drift, Than by these Circumstances can appear; For they meer Harbengers, or Ushers are Unto that Trophie wherewith I assay To imp, the Publick-duties of this day: And help to magnfie his glorious Name, To whom, your Piety devotes the same. Y, these high Titles are not fixed here, To make you great, in your own eyes, appear; But, honourable, in the sight of those whom your just commands you shall impose: to be viewed as Remembrancers, hat high trust, which God on you coners. to serve sinister ends you take them, titles of dishonour make them.
As largely, and as well, as my weak-wit, (My leasure and the short time) would permit, I offer, here, a brief commem'rative, Of those things, for which, Thanks, this day we give: That, to Gods praise, they may be thought upon, When this our short Solemnity is done: That, unborn chlidren, may commemorate His Mercies in the birth, of this new State, When they shall read, by what throws, rent and torn The mother was, before it could be born: And, that, by knowing, what their Freedoms cost, They may not let them carelesly, be lost: Or, be unthankfull, as now many are, And, thereby, in that blessing, lose their share. In lofty strains, I do not strive to sing, But, in a plain song, humbly forth to bring Such Charmes, as profitably may be read, By those, who of my Counsell, have most need; And, such, as may be usefull, to expell Those evill spirits which amongst us dwell, To interrupt the setting of that Peace, Which brings an universall happiness. I owe a thanks to God; and thanks to you; And though I cannot pay the half that's due, Where least I owe; I, truly, have assaid That, of a great debt, somewhat might be paid. Despise it not, therefore, though much it lacks Of what should be. Quench not the smoking flax; Break not the bruised Reed. But, acceptation Vouchsafe, to this imperfect Presentation; And, as I shall deserve it; so, let me Preserved in your good opinion be. anry 30. 1650. Geo. Wi
TO The VVel-affected of the Com∣mon-wealth of ENGLAND. VVHen the late Act of Parliament came forth, commanding the ce∣lebration of a publick Thanksgi∣ving, upon the 30. of January last, for Gods manifold mercies to this Republick; and for those especially in the said Act expressed: though my own affairs were at that time in their crisis, and my urgent necessities required their immediate pro∣secution: yet my heart being moved with a strong desire to prepare somewhat (according to my facul∣ty) which migh help stir up this Nation▪ to glorifie almighty God for our manifold and great Delive∣rances; as was piously enjoyned by Supreme Autho∣rity: I resolved to trust him with my own businesse; and, wholly to set apart the remainder of that Moneth to compose a Commemorative Poem toward the illustration of his extraordinary favours to this Common-wealth, in his glorious goings forth with our Armies; and in such other manifestations of his gra∣cious Providence, as have conduced to the accom∣plishing of our just, and reasonable hopes. And, though I have not therein answered what may per∣haps be expected in such an undertaking; yet having done what my ability and the shortnesse of the time (made shorter by many accidentall obstructi∣ons) would permit; I hope you will favourably ex∣ me, in regard it may neverthelesse, be in some  usefull to the better performance of the Du∣  after the Day is past, by bringing to re∣ many of those mercies which occasioned
that dayes solemnization; and I presume, it wi will find good acceptation with you, whose eye God hath opened to see his wonderfull loving kind¦nesse, and, whose hearts are not hardened to the destruction, or shame, for shutting their eyes, wilful¦ly against the light, which heretofore shined up on them. I have no hope to prevail upon such, as are per∣verse: for like Jannes and Jambres, they have obsti∣nately opposed our deliverers, and have  the Egyptians in resisting God. They have sometimes acknowledged his Finger in the miracles, wrought for us; as that people did, and yet persist in then ob∣duracy. They, have seen the Rods of power and disci∣pline, turned into, Serpents; and that which was in the hand of lawfull authority, to devour those, which were grasped by impostors. They have seen, as the E∣gyptians did, their Lakes, ponds, and Rivers, turned into blood: and all their fields, waters, and habitati∣tations filled with those, which were hieroglyphi∣cally signified by Frogs, Lice, Flyes and Locusts. God, in like manner, hath proved them, by his judgements, and by plagues, upon their beasts, their fruits, their treasures, their persons, and their hopes of posterity: he hath punished them, as well with a gross darknes, and other privations, as by arming against them, all the Elements. They have seen their late King (for conti∣nuing in his hardnesse of heart) like Pharaoh, drown∣ed (as it were) in the Red Sea, even in that sea of blood, which by his wisfullnesse hath overflow∣ed these Islands. Yea they see those waters which gave passage for his people, to escape their ry, stand on both hands ready to swallow  up; yet they being more blind and mad  Pharaoh and the Egyptians (because, they  for examples) the
purposes, as in despight of God, and will not ac∣knowledge his Actings, though they see them; nor his Voice, though they bear it, nor his hand though they feel it: Now, if all these things have not soft∣ned their hearts; and if neither the Pillar of fire which they see going daily before us, nor the Cloud, out of which God looks often very terrbly upon them, can move them to praise God with us, in our publick acknowledgements of his mercies; I must not think my charmes will operate much upon them: and, therefore, to Gods good pleasure, I will leave them, and you, who are better affected, to the en∣joyment of his mercies; whereof I humbly expect and confidently believe to be a partaker. Your faithfull, and ancient Remembrancer, GEO. WITHER.
The British Appeales, with Gods mercifull Replies, on the be∣half of the Commonwealth of England, &c. The Argument. The Muse, begins, with filiall fear, To raise a joyfull trophie, here. The differences, doth express 'Twixt formall, and true thankfulnesse. Brings out those mercies to your view, For which our praisefull thanks are due. Warns, all men, timely, to take heed, What, God hath done; and may succeed, To those, that will not understand The work which he hath now in hand. Then after some thanksgiving-songs, Informs, what further, yet belongs To thankfulnesse, and open layes Th' event, of right and left-hand wayes MY soul, in honour of th' Eternall King, Of Judgement, and of Mercy now shal sing: Of Mercies, and of Judgements, and, again, Of Mercies, that they may not be in vain. And that out of my poverty, I may Add to the publick offrings of this Day, A supplement, to fill up vacant places; To fill up, extraordinary Graces. To make us mindfull, what is further due, To keep sheedfull, what may else ensue, And perfect that, which others have begun, Concerning what, the Lord of Hosts, hath, done.
I sing, the breaking of that Brazen yoke, Which, from our gauled necks, was lately broke; The gracious Verdicts which the Court of heaven, To our Appellant-combatants, hath given; The thrusting of the Proud out of the Throne; The setting up, of humble men, thereon; The malice, craft, and wilfulnesse, of those, Who were our open, or our secret Foes; And, therewithall, the matchlesse love, of him, Who from their Tyrannies did us redeem, Shall be my Song: and I desire it may Be set and tuned, unto such a Key, As, that, my Readers, may perceive, thereby, The usefull power of hallow'd-Poesie, In raising, Gods neglected mercies, from Forgetfulnesse, to shine through times to come. My Structure therefore, shall be rather strong, Then Lofty; that, it may continue long: And though my Weaknesse, may not reach to that, Which my Intentions have been aiming at; Yet, I am hopefull, that I shall be able, To offer an Oblation acceptable: For, God in willingnesse, takes much delight, (Although, it can but set a stone upright, As Iacob did) vouchsafing acceptation, To ev'ry Faithfull-Offrers free oblation; And equalling the raising of one stone, Eve'n with the Temple, of great Solomon. I, Voices hear, of wondrous things abroad; Of multitudes of Mercies, from our God; Mercies, too great, for Scorners to believe; Too good, for men unthankfull, to receive: Such Blessings, as no former Age had greater; Such, as no time ensuing shall have better Yet, every day almost brings forth new matter Of exultation, both by land, and water.
Good newes, employeth almost every month; Yea, weekly from the East, the West, the South [come) (And thence, from whence 'twas said no good can Even from the North, Glad tidings are brought home. To those, who for their own escapes, have mourn'd, With Zions Ruines, God, hath back return'd Those Signal Victories, which, you have heard, In Publick, by a Publick Act declar'd; With their dependent-Mercies: now, I'le add What from my private notions may be had; O give attentive heed, to what is said; And let it with doe seriousnesse, be weigh'd: For, I shall mention, (if time fail me not) Things neither to be sleighted, or forgot. But whence comes this? alas! now I am ready To write, I find my shaking hand unsteady. A shivering doth surprise me; and a fear, As if som Apparition, did appear, Obstructing my Designs, and, to assay The turning of my thoughts, another way. What ails my heart! that in this uncouth fashion, There strives in me, a Contradicting Passion? Which like the twins, within Rebeccas Womb, eem to be strugling, which may overcome. Why is my heart, (which hath enough to do, Wih one at once) thus overcharg'd with two? Two Passions, as destructive to each other, As fire and water, closd uptogether: And so divided, that, it hardly knowes, To whether, most reluctancy, it owes. This, is a day of triumph; wherin, they Who, have atchiev'd them, set us Trophies may ouward Ioy and such as could not win Externalis, may keep Holyday within, heretofore, they so good husbands were, o store up ought, for entertainment there,
It is a day, wherein, I ought to sing, A Song of praise; and purposed to bring Expressions forth, which might be to this Nation, A lengthening out of Thanks, and exultation, By making Gods free mercies, thought upon, When all this generation, shall be gone: Yet, now I should perform, what I decreed; I, am unable, further to proceed. Of glorious victories, the Guns, the Bells, And this dayes due solemnization tells, To make us with more seriousnesse, to heed Gods owning of our Armies, at their need; And those glad tidings, which divulged are, Invite to mirth; yet somewhat, bids me fear; Yea, though my lips are tempting of a smile, Mine eyes (I know not why) drop tears the while, Seeming to tell me with a silent voice, That we with trembling should this day Rejoyce: Yea, though I feel my heart is truly glad, Of what I hear; it is as truly sad, For what I know, for what I daily see; For what hath been; or may hereafter, be. Distempred, thus, I very seldom grow; And, therefore, it, the more affects me, now, With Jealousies, and Fear, left, somewhat may Ere long befall us, to beeloud this day. With me 'twas never thus, but when from Spain Our late unhappy King, return'd again, Depraved and made giddy by that Cup Of Poyson, whereof there he took a sup. And, then, I felt these Passions. I confesse My joy was then, as great, my fear no lesse; Though neither much appeared to the eye, Or to the ear of any stander by. It fareth, now with me, as on that morning Which, first, inform'd us, of his safe returning;
For, when the voice of his arrivall came, The City Bon-fires, blaz'd into a flame Which menaced the Clouds; the Clouds powr'd down A floud, as if the City they would drown. The Common people, were transported so, (As 'tis their guise) that wisemen could not know Whether they might be thought, exceeding glad, Or, rather, to be somewhat less than mad. The Earth seem'd joyfull of his safe return; The heav'ns for something hidden seem'd to mourn. And, as in those, there then appear'd to be A diffring Passion, so, it was, with me. Though, none more wish'd the Kings returning Though I was truly glad, to see him come, (home, And for this safe arivall shewed, then, My joy, as much, as other sober men, Yet, joy and sorrow strove in me together, As if they labour'd to supplant each other: And, long time kept me, in a doubtfull pause, Of whether His Return would give most cause; And by what hath succeeded, it appears, My joyes were far more causlesse than my fears. The same distempers, are, this day in me, Great, are my joyes and hopes, great also, be My griefs and fears: God render them, successe, And consequences, of more happiness, Then, followed after that; and take away Th' effects, and causes, of my fears, this day. God, turn all to the best; and give us grace To cleave to him, what ever come to passe. God, give us Will, those Achans to remove, Which, to the publick Peace, destructive prove. God, grant my hopes, hereafter may be truer, The causes of my fear, much lesse, and fewer: And, that, the Councells, Charles did then neglect, May be received, now with more respect;
Left his example, that should make us better, May make us worse, and our damnation greater. For God will not be mockt; nor will he spare For ever, though a while he doth forbear. Where greatest Mercie, he, vouchsafes to shew, The greatest of his Judgements will ensue. He that improves not, ev'ry gift God gives, (According to the measure he receives) Shall lose the Talent upon him bestown, And into utter darknesse too be thrown. Then much more, they who shall Gods Grace requi With willfull disobedience or despight: And for that cause, it hath been said, the Lord Is mercifull, and therefore should be fear'd. This being true, what Realms, or Nations be Obliged more to fear him now, than we? If, mercies, be inducements to his fear, (As all men well informed, know they are) What people, now, inhabits on the earth, That, hath more cause of trembling, in their mirth, Or, of more filial dread, when they draw nigh, The holy name, of God to sanctifie? For whom hath he so many wonders wrought Since out of Aegypt, Jacobs God was brought, As for this Isle, if we reflect upon Those things aright, which, he for us for us hath don? And, who can blame me, if I sing with fear, This day, when we consider, what we are? What, God is? what, they seemed, who have been, Destroyed for our sakes? what we, have seen Done, for us? by what means, at, what a season? In what great streights? how farre, beyond our reasons Or our deserts? (Deserts said I? nay, when, We had deserved worse than other men) What passed bondage, we are freed from? What likely slaveries, for time to come? And what a heap of blessings we have had
howr'd down, to make us, in his favour glad? Who, can? (these things consider'd) who I say, Can blame me, if, I am afraid, this day, Amidst our Triumphs? and aloud should cry, On other men, to fear as much as I? For such a fear, no portion doth destroy, Of ought which is essentiall to our joy: But helps to keep it, from an overcasting, By future clouds, yea makes it everlasting; Rather preventing harm, than harm portending, And, from a dull security, defending. Already, I discover, that this fear, Which, at the first, destructive did appear, To my Design, (by making up a Medley, Which, on a day of joy, lookt somewhat sadly) Proves usefull to my purpose, and makes way, To render that, which I intend to say, Much more effectuall, than it would have been, Unlesse it had been thereby usher'd in. To make impression of a joyfull fear, In those, who shall of Gods protections, hear. I feel my spirit on a sudden freed, From all Distempers: therefore Ile proceed, With what I purpos'd, and enumerate Some of those Mercies, which we celebrate Thidy, in hope to represent them so, That, out of them a filiall fear may flow, So tempring ev'ry Reader, that none shall, Neither presume, nor by despairing, fall: Yea, so to set them forth, I will assay, That, in Remembrance, they continue may: That I, who write them, and that they who read them, May with more seriousnesse, hereafter, heed them, More ofte meditate them, to encrease Our Joy into a perfect thankfulnesse, And, that, as in a glasse, our eyes may see, How worthlesse, how unthankfull, yet, we be;
How these good things, which, God, in mercy, ga To save mens lives, oft send them to their grave, If not to Hell: how likewise to improve Gods judgements, and, the Pledges of his love, To our best benifits, and how to raise, Such Monuments, and trophies, to his praise, As, answer their intents, who set aside This day, to be, in publick, sanctifi'd. Without those ends, the formall observation, Of one set-day is but a profanation; Or, meer hypocrisie: It, makes men think They offer incense, when they offer stink: It makes them dream that they have somthing give To God; when, they have but affronted heaven: It proves like that Peace-offering of the Whore, Which made her sin more boldly than before; And to return again, to her offence, With lesse reluctance, and more impudence: To fast a meal or twain, and to put on A sadnesse, for a day, is cheaper done, Than, to deny our selves; or, to supresse, Our Avarice, or our ambitiousness. To say, the Lord be thanked; or to sing, A song of praises; is, an easier thing, Than to expresse a hearty thankfulnesse, By works of mercie, and of righteousnes: As, giving to the poore, or, taking care Of those that under great oppressions are: And, 'tis alas! with us, too frequent, seen, That some who formally dispos'd have been To outward duties, acting joy, and sorrow, This day (with seeming zeal) come forth, to morrow, And prosecute their avarice, their pride, (With whatsoe'r, they seem'd to lay asid The former day) and, entertain as bad, If not worse spirits, than, before they had:
Pursuing wilfully, Distructive wayes. What e're the Preacher, or, the Charmer says. He, that could finde expedients to prevent These Prophanations, Well his time had spent; And, thanks might merit, for so having done; (Although, he peradventure shall have none,) I, therefore, to that purpose, will assay To set my Meditations, for this day, To such a Tune, as may have likelihood, Of those effects, if rightly understood; For (though it move, but two or three, to dance True measures) my Designe it shall advance: And, he, that doth accept a willing heart, More, then the best performances of Art, Will, perfect his own work, in me, begun, Though, that, which I perform, be weakly done. It is not my intention to begin Where, Gods or'eflowing mercie, first broke in, Upon this Nation; For, that, would appear, A work not for a day, or for a year, But, for an Age: and, my poor Snuffe of Light, Would leave me, in an everlasting night, E're I could half those Mercies overlook, Whereof, in few years, I have notice took: Nay, in each Circumstance, should I display Those, onely which, of this Thankesgiving-day Occasions were: I, might dilate thereon, Till three such lives, as I have liv'd were gone. I, therefore, will but offer up a Beam, Out of the Sun; a drop, out of a Stream; One Grain, out of that golden-mine, by which, Our God, hath made us, in his Favours, rich: Or, make a brief Collection, at the most, Of so much, that, this day, may not be lost; But give thereby a Longer lasting motion To real Thankefulness, and true devotion.
Should I suppose a Tripled Golden chain, One fold whereof sufficed to contain, These British Isles, with all those Seas inclos'd, Which, may be in a, Circle so suppos'd; And, that, as many Links, thereon were found, As there are half-half Inches, in that Round Of Land, and Water: therewith, should I think, I saw enamel'd, upon ev'ry Link, Ten hundred Thousand mercies; I, might read All those Inscriptions thereon Character'd, As possibly, as make a full relation, Of, Gods proceedings, in our preservation. I, therefore, will but set forth, here, and there, Such Links of Providence, as do appear To most mens view; that, somewhat may remain Still visible, of Mercies Golden Chain: Looking, no further back, in my designe, Then, to the year Six hundred thirty nine Beyond a Thousand; and, I will relate But, onely, an Epitomy, of what Hath been vouchsaf'd since then; For, by the Pa You may conceive, what Lyon I could draw: And, if the whole proportion I should Lymn, I could not do my work, within the time. About, that year, The Tyrant (who now lies Beneath our feet) with over weening eyes, Had view'd himself; and Puffed up with Pride, Began, to think, of being Dei fide; Or, at the least, of being somewhat more Then Man, or King; or, then what heretofore He was esteem'd: and, much endeavoured, too, That, we (if possible) should think him so. His Tripple-Kingdom, upon him bestown, For, others; he, usurped as his own; Inchroching by undue Prerogatives, As well, upon his Loyal Subjects lives,
As on their Free-born Persons, and Estates; With what else, to their Liberties relates: Nay, upon that, which is more dear then these, (Upon the freedome of our Consciences,) He made assaults; well knowing, that would bes Procure him (and secure him) all the rest: And, how to prosecute it, he, was taught, By them, who knew the way, to what he sought. A Councel, he had pick'd up, who might well Be called his; and, with Achitophel, Be judged Peers; but, that, of him, in Wit, They came far short; and, have not so well, yet, Their houses Order'd; nor, secured so Their Persons, as, he had the hap to do. His Flattering Priests, and Poets, urg'd him on, To what, they found him willing to have done: For, by the first, there seem'd to be infus'd, A Conscience fitting him, to be abus'd: And, by the last, He, and his Queen became So often represented by the name Of Heath'nish Deities; that, they, at last, Became (ev'n when their Mummeries were past) Like those they represented; and, did move, Within their Sphears like, Venus, Mars, and Jove▪ And, had they onely failed, but, in thus Themselves befooling; Gods, delivering us From being Vassals, to such Mimick-Players, Had merited our publike Thanks, and Prayers. For, when the Roman-Emperours begun To fill the Stage, they, Vilify'd the Throne; And, those oppressions, quickly follow'd there; Which, on the like beginnings, entred, here. He, being thus transform'd, into a thing, No Longer worthy to be call'd a King. (Tho, fairly painted, and well varnish'd over, The wickedness of his Designes to Cover)
A Deep foundation Laid, for such a Throne, As, he, Ambitious was to sit upon; And, had so couch'd his Plots, (as he suppos'd) And, so with pow'r and Policie, inclos'd, His Interest (ere heed thereof was taken) That, few believ'd the Structure could be shaken; Or, that, a possibility had been, Of those Events, which we have lately seen: Nor were they Possible untill, Gods hand, Did shake the Rock, whereon the Pile did stand. For, that, secure his Actings might become, Himself, as well abroad, as here at home, He fortifi'd; and Engineers did keep, To render his Designes, as large, as Deep; Neglecting little, which by right or wrong, Might, in his undertakings, make him strong. With Forain Princes, and each neighbouring State, (To whom, himself he might ingratiate) He secretly comply'd; (by whatsoere Relations, they might opposites appear.) At home, himself, he strengthned many ways, With what concerns him, who the Tyrant plays: As, by depressing them, who might be foes To his designes; by, high Advancing those Who might promote them; by, disabling much The one, and making of the other Rich: By projects, and Employments, which might add To them, and, take from others, what they had; And, by all practices, which might mantain This Cursed Principle, Divide and Reign His ends he follow'd, whatsoere it cost, In Treasure, or in blood, by others Lost. Witness, the late Inhumane Massacre, In Ireland: when, in few days murthere were Hundreds of Thousands; and as many mo, Soon after, by Abetters thereunto,
A Massacre, beyond (without compare) Those, which in Sicily and Paris were, Though both united; yet, it is believ'd (Upon good grounds) to be at first, contriv'd By him, or with his knowledge: But of this, There is an Hoast, or Cloud of Witnesses, That, he did palliate, and look thereon Without Compassion, when the Deed was done; And, hath occasioned that Sea of blood, Whereby since then these Isles have been o'erflow'd; Ev'n by abusing these unhappy Nations With vain pretences, and false Protestations. Yet, much more great, the deluge would have been, Had not God's mercy interpos'd between, His Cruelty, and us, when, he assayd To tempt the Scotish Nation to give ayd To his Designes; by promising, to add Four English Counties, to the bounds they had. When, likewise with the Armies, in the North, He tamper'd, bloody mischiefs to bring forth, Ofing them largely; when, moreover, that Was in designment, which, he aymed at, In Scotland, where, (about the self-same time) A Bloody Banquet, was prepar'd, by him. Before these things (and, e're we felt those harms Which followed) he, found means to seize our Arms; And by meer power, ingrost into his hand, The stores of Powder, throughout all the Land. He, likewise had contrived, how, to draw To serve his ends, the Masters of the Law, By placing, or displacing; and, thereby, Had, almost, fixt, a Legal Tyranny. By maskings, and loose Revellings, at Court: He, closely wrought upon the yonger sort Of wanton Students; and allur'd thereby, The flower, of all the yong Nobilitie
And Gentry of his Kingdoms to encline To him, in whatsoere, he should design. His Councel-Table, was bespread with snares, To catch, and hamper those, at unawares, Who stood for Liberty; his Courts, were made Both Instrumental to the Bribing Trade, And Bawdes, to help advance unjust designes, By false decrees, wrong Judgments, mulcts, or Fines: For, Justice, was afforded, there, to few Save such, as to his Interests were true: And, most of those (without attending long) Had what they su'd for, whether, right or wrong. His overgrown Prerogative, Laid hold On our Proprieties; and, scarcely should Ere long, a Natural-action to this nation, Allow'd have been, without a dispensation, Or Fine, First paid: No; not, to eat, or drink, To go, or come; to speak, or safely think, Should we have been permitted; had not God, To his usurpings, put a Period. For, many, to Accompt. not for deeds done Have called been, or, for bare-words, alone; But otherwhile, to Question, some were brought For those things, also, which, to have in thought They were suspected: yea, such was the Rage, Of Tyranny, that, Children under age, For Childish words (spoke without ill intent) Were, not alone, to severe Chastisement Made Lyable; but, forc'd to suffer, too, That painful death, which wilful Traytors do: As (by a cruel act, of all abhor'd) Appears at Sarum, yet, upon record. No marvel then, if neither Sope nor Fir Nor Raking rotten Rags, out of the Me; Or Freedom, in such poor and Trivial things, As are Tobacco-Pipes, and Fiddle-strings,
Could be allowed in this Common-weal, Without a Fine, or Patent under Seal. His Peerage (some excepted) was indow'd, With Priviledges, but, to make them Proud, And fit, them to oppress or to enslave The people, unto him, from whom they have Their empty Titles. Upon some of these He did Confer the highest Offices, By great sums, purchased; that, so, they mought By selling dear (because they dearly bought) Ingaged be, to share in his oppressions; And, strengthen by in Justice, their possessions: To make them still, have need of his protection; And, eave to him through Fear, if not Affection. To this Intention, they had also share: In those Base Projects, which injurious were, To publike-right; and, they employ'd their power To begger, to disgrace, or quite devour, All those, who did not readily befriend, His purpose; or, else, freely give, or Lend, Or stand engag'd, to Answer his desire, In whatsoe're he pleased to require: And, he, that sought a remedy, by Law, For these Intrusions, did but onely draw, More mischiefs on himself: For, 'twas a flower, Slipt from the Crown; and, by the Royal power, Deriv'd; that, they should be secur'd, by might, From wrongs receiving, and, from doing right. But, God, for this Injustice, now hath broke, That Spter: From their heads; their Crowns hath took And, shall destroy all those who will not see, That want of Justice, and of Mercy, be The Signal causes, of those desolations, That fa on private-Persons, Kings, or Nations. And, they, who for Gods Justice, upon these, (Together with, the great deliverances
Thereby, vouchsafed) cannot, yet perceive Just causes, of the Publike thanks we give; Of their concernments, take so little heed, That, to awaken them, I will proceed. The Tyrant, had some other Instruments, (To further him, in his unjust intents) In order to our Bondage: among whom, None did more mischievous to us become, (Nor, any, for him, play their Prizes better) Then, his proud Priests: nor, was he more a debter To any, then to them: and, I dare say, So dearly for it, he, to none did pay. His Prelates, and their Ʋnderlings, he bought To serve his ends, (by giving what they sought And what he had in Guift) or, else perchance, He might in Vain, have piped them a dance. Instead of Preaching Christ, they Preach'd us down To Slavery; and Idoliz'd the Crown: Then, to require what they had done, for him; He, fool'd away three Royal-Crowns, for them: They (seeming confident he should prevail) Upon his Kingly Person did intail, Divinity; that, arrogate he might His Ʋsurpations, by a Sacred right: He, to retaliate what they bestow'd With Temporal possessions, them endow'd: And these by their false Doctrines did besot The Vulger so; that, in them it begot, Idolatry; and therein they hold on, Their Dotage, though their Deity is gone: Yea, though their Idol, quite destroy'd they see, And, Dagon-like, without a head to be. To make his Clerick Engines serviceable. (Yet further) he, did strongly them enable With Pow'r Canonical; which would have brought More mischiefs on us, then most had in thought;
And, such, as might at length, have entrance made For all, that superstition, would have had; (Althought 'twas Cloked with a formal zeal, Of Piety, their purpose to conceal;) And, when these preparations, had unhallow'd Our Churches; Popery, would soon have follow'd: The People, should have been, once more, an Ass, For Prelates to have ridden as it was; Kings should have been but Blocks to help them on, And, Emperours, their Stirrups wait upon. But, mark Gods, Justice, and retaliation, To these; for, it is worth your observation: The Prelates, justly, lost their tempralties, For smooth 'ring Truth, and Preaching vanities. For seizing that, which Legally is known, The Peoples right, the King hath lost his own: And King and Prelates, joyning both together, In Tyranny, have ruined each other. Thus far, you see Gods mercies; and, thereby May see, his Justice, too, with half an eye, And what must have succeeded ere this day, If these, had tved their wicked way; And, we are graceless, if we praise not him, By whom, We had deliverance from them: For, by those Hydra's heads, not yet berest, (And by that Poyson, which is in them left) It is apparant, We should scarfe have had, A day of rest until our Graves were made. On us, by his Assistants, he had brought Such Slavery, that, we had scarcely ought T call our own; Or, at the least, left Free From those Intrusions, which were like to be: Yet, worse it would have been; as, might appear Beyond dispute, should I make mention, here, What, I have known, and seen, in preparation, To bring a further Bondage; on this Nation.
Most, are forgetful of what's past; and, some By never heeding it, are now become Unthankful Murmurers, repining at Their present Contributions, to the State: Because, the Payments, yet impos'd, are more, By much (as they conceive) then heretofore: (Considering, neither what necessities Now are; nor, from whose Faults, they do arise. There is, indeed, a very Large expence, Occasioned to make our Just-defence, Against the many practices of those Who, settlement of Peace do still oppose: And by long lasting Wars, at Sea, and Land. (In several Kingdoms) thereby, to withstand, Our present enemies (and to prevent Their future purposes) vast sums, are spent: But, this, was by Constraint; and, we have hope These Issues of expence, will quickly stop; If we with Patience, for a while, could bear With those Disbursments which Compelled are: And, would consider, at how much more cost, We were, that, all our Freedoms might be Lost. As, also, what great Burthens, it would bring, To readmit a Tyrannizing King, With all those swarms of Locusts, and of Flyes, Which are begot, and fed by Tyrannies: With what must be exacted to maintain The boundless Cravings, of his hungry Train. We like the Sons of Jacob, were opprest; And, God, is making us, a Path to Rest, As, he did them, so, he, doth lead us through Much Hardship, and great difficulties, now: And some of us, like them, (nay, worse then they) Ev'n almost at the Period of our way, Would back return; and, brutishly Complain As if our Ease, were sharper then our pain.
Now therefore, I will here insert a Note Expressing part, of what we have forgot; That, when our former Burthens we review, We may, more thankfully, our Peace pursue. We were oppressed by his vain expence, Of Large Revenues, which, for our defence, And for the Nations honour, were with him, Intrusted; For, by his consuming them Upon vain Lusts; constrain'd we were, to add Supplies, oft-times; for which, Returns we had Of many new occasions, to increase Our Burthens, rather then to make them Less: And still whatever was on him bestown He took without Thanksgiving, as his own. Great Subsidies, which such like payments gain'd By false pretences (as by dangers fain'd. Or some like that,) by him, were, also, spent In prosecutions, to the detriment. Of all the Nation; and so, all that Cost Was, thereby (as to us) much worse then Lost. By many, other wayes, he did inlarge Our Burthens, and this Nation over-charge. By Ʋniversal Loans; with an Intent, Never, to render back, the money Lent. By Privy Seals; which, he did seldom pay Except, for other borrowings, to make way. By Contributions, termed Free; altho, We paid them, whether, we did List, or no. By houshould-Compositions, (for the Table, The Kitchin, Sellar, and the Royal Stable) Which, of themselves, (if we consider shall What, Officers exacted, therewithall) Might have maintain'd a King, much better than All Scotlands Royal patrimony can. Yet, this too, (as I finde, by Inquisition), Was taken, by a forced Composition.
To these, may added be, what he encroach'd By Projects, and by Offices new Broach'd By selling-places, by dround Lands, and Fenns; By Fines, for Cottages of other mens; By wrong pretended right, to Lands conceal'd; By Ʋlnage, and by cloaths, and Drapries seald; By Patents, Corporations, Fees, and Toll; By sev'ral Writs and money by the Poll: By Coate and, Conduct-money; and, by that For Ships, which, was extreamly Grumbled at. By Tunnage, Poundage, Customes, both in use, And pretermitted; to the great abuse Of Trade and Merchants; who, tho paying of these To be secur'd from Pyrates on the Seas, VVere left unguarded; to the frequent spoil, Of Private men, and weakning of this Isle. Moreover, out of our Estates, he made Large profit, by the forfeitures, he had; By Bonds Recognizances, and, by Suits; By Tenths, by Lycences, and by First-fruits, Escheats, Amercements, Mulcts of several sorts, In sev'ral Causes; and in sev'ral Courts. By Wards, and Marriages; by suing forth Of Liveries (which now are nothing worth) By Honorary Titles, Sould to such As were not thereby honoured so much, As honor was disgrac't; by great sums paid For Corronation-Knights; by Coynage, Aid; And, by a multitude of wayes beside, (Too many, hereby, to be specifi'd) This Nation was opprest. All which, though now Of their late Griefs, forgetful, many grow, (More notice taking, of what Lies upon Their backs, at present, then, of what is ge) VVould, if sum'd up, a greater Burthen prove Then VVe have born, our Bondage to remove
Considering his vast Incomes, needlesly VVere wasted, on his Lusts; or, that thereby He might Inslave us: whereas, all we spent VVas by Constraint, or, that, VVe might prevent Bell, and the Dragons, ravenous designes: And, therefore, whosoe're, thereat repines, Doth neither his own welfare, understand, Nor, that great work, which God, hath now in hand. But, if our Citizens, who have forgot Their former Pressures (and, begin to dote Upon an Idol-Majeslie) would take, More heed; they doubtless, more esteem would make Of Gods late Mercies; and, an offring Bring To expiate their cursed Murmuring. If, they would mind, at what uncertainties, They did possess their goods, and Liberties; What Interruptions, formerly they had; What Innovations, as concerning Trade: How oft, their Charters, upon slight pretence, Were questioned, to put them to expence: What Presents, they have been Constrain'd to give, For Favours, which, they never could receive; What Bribes, to get their grievances remov'd; And how unfruitful, Nay-the-less they prov'd; What Scorns, and What disgraces, in time past, On them, have undeservedly been cast; How oft, when Legally, they sought their own, They were abus'd, and into Prisons thrown, Till they were glad, to quit a long-due-debt, Lest, else, a greater mischief they might get. Would they remember, their late sad Condition. Occasion'd, by the Cruel Inquisition Set up at Lambeth; by the merciless Starchamber Court; and by th'Imperiousness Of his Court-Marshal; where their Innocence, Was rack't and tortur'd, by the Insolence,
Of Officers; of Clarks; Apparators; Of Pursuivants; and Cut-throat Messengers. Were it remembred more, how they, complain'd, Of grievances by their late King sustain'd, And his ill Councellors: (whom we now see Not half so worthy, of our blame as he) They would not in their Courage, be so poor; Nor, so unlike, to what they were before. Yea, would they but recal, how furiously They Acted (ev'n almost to mutiny) Against the King; and to th' incouragement Of this (then, Highly honour'd) Parliament; How zealously, Horse, money, Arms, and Plate, They, then, Contributed, to Vindicate, Their nigh-Lost Liberties; how oft, they fought, To bring to Pass what, now to Pass is brought; And, therewithall, would seriously take heed, That whatsoere did thereupon succeed, Beyond their first aym, was, Gods work (not our) They would confess his Justice, with his Power, And Mercy: For, all these were manifest, When, of his Throne, the King, he dispossest; And took away both Crown, and Life from him, That, our, and his long-sufferings, did contemn. These things, could they consider somewhat more, They would more thankful be, then heretofore; And, not so irreligiously persever To murmur, that, God blest their own endeavour; Nor, be so mad, to Ayd those, underhand, Who, Gods, declared purposes, withstand; Lest, their Ingratitude, he should repay With greater Plagues, then, he hath took away: And, give them, in his anger, such a thing, As they deserve, another, Tyrant King. If, Likewise, they, who in the Country-sng Thanksgivings backward, (and with murmuring
Require Gods mercies) would, by looking back, On what is past, more heedful notice take VVhat, yearly, out of their Estates was taken, In Lamb, Veal, Butter, Poultery, Eggs, and Bacon; In Wheat, Oats, Hay, and such like things as these, (From which exactions, they are now at ease) How oft their Teemes, and Carts, were forced from Their husbandries, and Harvest-works at home: To their great detriment, for hyre, but small, And, many times, for no reward, at all: How oft, their Saddle-Horses, as his own, Were, by his Courtiers. Posted up and down As for the Publike, upon Publike Warrants, When, they were, onely, sent on Private arrants: How, by the multiplying of his Game, Oppressed, and inslaved, they became, To their great Detriment; yea, many times, To their undoing, for suspected Crimes: And, how, their Nimrods (or chief Foresters) VVith their insulting Ʋnder-Officers, Compelled many, for their preservations, Quite to forsake, their Ancient Habitations, Or leave their Fields, or Woods, unto the spoyl Of Ʋseless Beasts, and Beastly-men, the while. VVould they, these things Consider; and, that those Taxations, which the State doth now impose; VVith all their late oppressive Plunderings, Large Contributions, and Free Quarterings, VVere first occasion'd, by his Tyranies; (Or, their own False-hood, or Neutralities) They would not, like the murmuring Israelites, Render abuse, Reproaches, and despights, To their Deliverers; because, a few, Among them, to their trust, have prov'd untrue; And, to their own loss, by their selfishness, Defer that Peace, which, else, they might Possess.
Nor would they, so unthankfully, desire To their Aegyptian Thraldom, to retire, And to their Garlick; when there feet, were brought So neer, unto that Rest, which, long they fought: Muchless, when they had (as it were) been fed With Manna. and, Mirac'lously been led Through many Streights (for wonderment, no les Then, Israel Passed, in the Wilderness) VVould they, by Stagg'ring, in a Good-proceed, Both re-inslave themselves, and all their seed. Now, if (as other Voluntary preachers Presume to do) I, may to teach my Teachers Take boldness: I would seriously advise Some, of our Clergie, to become more wise: Ev'n those, who, by a peevish frowardness, Neglect, not onely, that due Thankfulness, VVhich is commanded; but, make others too Prevaricate, from what they ought to do; By slighting what Authority injoyns, And prosecuting of their own Designes. Oh, God! VVhat bold, what strange Apostacie Is this? And from a Christian Ministry, How disagrees it, that they should profess Or, teach, or sooth up an Ʋnthankfulness? And, whence, proceeds it, but from their old vice, Of Selfishness, or Pride, or Averice? VVhich, (as it hath, well near, already, done) VVill loose them all, that, they insist upon; If, they proceed to prosecute those ends VVhich they and their Fraternitie intends, God, bears me witness, I envy them not The least Advantages which to their Lot, By right, pertain; But, rather, would improve, My Vote, (with real heartiness, and Love) To give them double-honour, and advanc VVhat is thier due, by sacred Ordinance:
For they who serve him without By-Respects▪ Had never cause to say, that God neglects Their service; though he sometime sends them forth, Neither with money, or with money worth: As, every one observes, who taketh heed, How plentifully at all times of need, He them supplies, that, his allowance take With thankfulness, and work, for Conscience sake, Without Capitulating, whether they In Pensions, or, in Tithes, shall have their pay. What is it Angers them? Are they displeas'd, (Though, of their former Grievances, now eas'd) That, they, themselves impow'red do not finde To Act the Prelates, in another kinde? And, to succeed them in their vast Possessions, Which was the chiefe end of their Oppositions?] Are they, again desirous of a King? How so? Since, they are those, who, first did bring Those things to controversie, whereupon, That Justice, which they murmur at, was done? What, can they hope, by bringing back again That Power, whereof, they lately did complain? But, greater mischiess, and a heavier yoke, Then that, which from their Necks, was lately broke? Considering, what Confed'rates, they now have This Nation, and Themselves, to re-inslave? Are they afraid those Tithe-pigs may be lost, VVhich have so many Tracts and Sermons cost To prove them sacred? That's, a needless fear, As, yet; For, by our Laws confirm'd they are: And, till supream power, shall by Law revoke them, They, may receive them, as they lately took them: And without question, all such due supplies VVill still vouchsafed be, as many suffice. Nor have they cause to murmur, though it may Provided, for them be, some other way
Since, by their Scotish Discipline, they find Their claimed Tithes, are seldom paid in kind. Is it, their zeal against New-Heresies, The Ranters Tenents, or the Blasphemies, VVhereof the Scot injuriously avers Our State, and Army to be favorers, VVhich makes them discontent? I think not so, VVhat er'e they may pretend: for, they well know, The Parliament hath lately made a Law, To keep Blasphemous Libertines in aw; And to correct their Manners, who transgress Against the Rules of Moral Righteousness; And, from our Armies frequently they hear, That such, by them severely punish'd are. Let them take heed, lest their Endeavour flows From Causes which may prove much worse then those There mentioned; ev'n from an Interest▪ Pursu'd, to raise the throne of Antichrist A new found way: or else, from some vain hope, In every parish to erect a Pope. Let them take heed, lest er'e they be aware, Their Carnal policie may them ensnare: For by that power, whereat their Parties aim, They seem to be affected with his Claim VVho, to Gods throne aspires: or else, to that VVhich will produce a double-headed State. Or, that, at least, from thence, this may redound; That, (if the Royallists can cure their wound By what, is now design'd; They, and their Friends The Romanists may thereby gain some ends Obstructive to our Peace; though totally Destructive to their New Presbytery; VVhich they seditiously have preach'd and praid, To build up by their Ground-works, lately said. Oh! therefore, let them speedily return To their lost Path; for their backslidings, mourn;
Observe Gods Providence, approve his waies, And joyn with us, in singing of his Praise. Let them stir up their Flocks to Thankfulness, Like others of their Calling, who profess The self-same Faith; and help us, to redeem The losses of Advantages, and Time, Occasion'd by their Schism; that, we and they May friendlike walk together in one way, Partakers, of that happy peaceful being, Which is deferred, by our disagreeing. For, were all well consider'd, all men would, Without the least obscurity, behold, What cause we have, to sing Gods Praise, this day, For taking of our Slaveries away: And, in the first place, for removing Him, Who, wore, unworthily, the Diadem, Of Supreme Government. But, least, some, yet, May our fore-past-condition so forget, As to believe, we might have been secur'd, From that, which under Kingship we endur'd, By regulating it (which, I once thought, Till, I by Providence, was better taught) Let them, with me, take notice, and, well weigh How many hundred years, we did assay This Remedy in vain; and, heretofore Spend all our pains, to wash a Blackamore. Let them look back, and heed, how oft we Fought, And by fair-means, and humble Prayer, sought A firm establishment, of what, we knew, (And had oft prov'd) to be our proper-due: How many Charters, and, how many Laws, Were made, by Kings, in favour of our Cause: How many Curses, and sad Imprecations, Were laid upon their wilful Violations: How many times, their Royal words, we had; How many Oaths, and Vows, were sworn, and made;
Yet, faithlesly, still, broken, afterward, Without remorse of Conscience, or, regard Of God, or Men; and, still, revok'd, as soon As opportunities were fastned on, To prosecute, again, their Tyranny. And, let us likewise, heed impartially, How much, our late King, labour'd to make void His free Donations; and, to have destroy'd His own Concessions: what dire Imprecations He likewise, ventred on; what Protestations, He dared, with a purpose to deceive; And, with a hope of making us believe, He, meant us well; when, he did all the while, Intend his Own-advantage, and, our Spoil: Improving, still, (what, er'e, he did pretend) All our Indulgences, to his first end, Ev'n to his Death: witness, his, laying Plots To make a Rent, betwixt us, and the Scots; Yea, and, among our selves, that very time, In which, we Treating were, of Peace, with him. Hoping, at last, by one device or other, To make us, do his work▪ and fall together. And, of those Juglings, now, the fruits appear, In Ireland, Scotland, Holland, France, and here. What could, we have, expected, from a King, So wilful, and so false, in every thing? Or, from the Off-spring, of a Generation, So long time, rooted in Prevarication? So long, irreconcileably profest An enemy, to Publick Interest? And, claiming, so Imperiously, to be, From all the Bands of Law, and Reason, free? What hopes could we have had, that, we should ever Have tam'd this Leon, by our best endeavour? Or, any of his Whelps? or, means have found, Whereby, they might have been, securely bound,
From Crushing all our bones; if, they again, Should slip, their Collers, or else break their Chain? For my part, I so well found, what he was; That, though I had large offers of his Grace, And studied his chief good; yet, still I found, His Heart so hard, so double, and unfound, (Ev'n to his last breath) that, I must confess It was Gods mercie, and, our Happiness That, he so fell; and, 'twill be to the Glory Of this our Nation, in their future Story, That, whereas others have Clandestinely, By Poyson, or by Murther, secretly, Remov'd their Tyrants; we, with open face; By Publick Justice; in a Publick place; In presence, of his friends, and, in despight Of all our foes, and ev'ry opposite, Try'd, Judg'd, and Executed, without fear; The greatest Tyrant, ever reigning here. Take Then, Gamaliels counsel, and submit, To that, which Providence, adjudgeth fit Should come to pass; left else, perhaps, you may Be found resisters of your God, this day. Halt not 'twixt two opinions, as ye do; But, heed his walkings, and, conform thereto. if, to this Government, you do adhere, Let, it, by your Obedience, now appear: If, you Dissent; make publick your Protest, As we have done; unite your Interest, To Him, whom you desirous are should Reign: And, if you dare, come, and appeal again To God, That, he may quickly send you thither, Where, you may perish, or repent together: For, we are confident, the work begun Our God, will prosper, still, as he hath done; And, that when such as you, are in your place, We, shall behold the fulness of his Grace.
But er'e you grow so mad to run that way, Be pleas'd to hear, what I have more to say. What profit will you get at last by that, Which you have indiscreetly aimed at, Tho it should thrive; and, you, should hither bring VVith all his Rabblement, the Scotish King? Should they with all their strength unite together, And like an Inundation, flow in hither; Set your Fair Towns, and Villages on fire, (As you, in probability, desire) VVhich would be done, (though you desir'd it not) If, there to your assistance they had got: If, with a Lousie Army they should cover Your fruitful fields; spread your fair Meadows over VVith their Devouring-Troops; your houses fill VVith Nasty sluts, and Grooms against your will; Making your Parlours, and your Halls to stink VVith sluttery, like a dunghill, or a sink: If you should see your hardly-gotten-stores, Devour'd by loose Commanders, and their whores; Their Brutish followers rudely take the bread, VVith which, your Little-children should be fed, Out of their hands; and keep you so in aw, That you should scarcely dare to lodge in straw, (Although your own) whilst those bold guests did lie In your soft beds; and some stand emptie by: Should you behold them, proudly domineer, VVhere you this day, both Lords, and Masters are: Should you, who may, in peace enjoy your lives, See your estates, your Children, and your Wives, Incroach'd upon; the first of them possest By those, who faigned friendship had profest; The other, ev'n before your face, mis-us'd; The last, perhaps, immodestly abus'd: And you your self, if that appear dislik'd) Disgracefully, both flouted at, and kickt.
Should you bel ol  such things, which (if they come Upon those terms that are desir'd by some) VVould surely follow; what should you then gain By that, whereof you seem to be so fain? Think you, the most Malignant Cavaliers, The worst of Papists, and of Presbyters (United in a Trinity together) VVill bring you puritie of worship hither? Or, can the wisest man alive conceive, VVhat Linsey-woolsey-stuff the Kirk must weave, To make a Garment, which will fit and please, A body, made up of such Crooks as these? Or frame a discipline that will agree, VVith such dissenting parties as those three? Can you be so imprudent to suppose, That your New feigned friends, and Ancient foes, (Disgraced and engrag'd as now they are) VVith any good intentions will draw near? Or give you precious things, to make you brave? Or better Fields and Gardens, then you have? Or that your entertainment, whilst they stay, VVill cost you less then what we monthly pay Unto our Army, which by that expence Is yet maintained, for our just defence? Or can you dream (if at their choice it stand) That, having found the sweetness of this Land, The Scots, will be so mad, as thence to go To feed on Thistles, and to lie in Snow? Or think you, they, had lately, gone away So quietly, but to obtain their pay, To render them more able to come back, When more it might for their advantage make? Do you believe that, they intend to bring Their lately Crown'd, and new-converted King, To vindicate the justness of our Cause? Our ancient Freedoms, and our English Laws?
Or, that, they (having little of their own, To keep him) so much cost would have bestown, But, that, they are made hopeful to advance As well their own wealth, as his maintenance From your Estates? Can your Dull brains, admit, That, he, or his, for ever, will forget, His Fathers head? his own deserv'd disgrace? And, on what Terms, you forc'd him to embrace A loathed Covenant, which, he did take, More for a Kingdom, then for Conscience sake? Or can you be so blinde, as not to see That, all things, which in your possession be, VVill scarce suffice to make full recompence, For Damages, and losses, ever since These wars began; when, he makes Computation Thereof, and shall demand a Reparation? Especially, when all his needy-Train, And Greedy-party, shall to him complain For satisfaction, of their Vast Arrears? Losses, and Expectations, like to theirs? Believe it, E're that debt, will quite be paid, They, who are yet, of no such thing afraid, VVill finde, that most (or all of them) shall be Contributers thereto, as well as we, VVho are proscrib'd: And, that, if they are rich, It will not then, consider'd be so much, How they affected stood, as what they have, To satisfie the lusts, of those that crave: And, all they, who are Neuters, now, or Friends In secret, unto that, which he intends, Shall, finde small means, to help distinguish them From those, whom he, for Traytors, will condemn. And, their false friends, will then retaliate Their former hate, and falshood to this State. Oh! left, this come to pass, more thankful be To him, who hath begun, to set you free,
From former Bondage; and, from what you may, Occasion, by an Ill-advised way. Observe well, whether that, which God hath wrought, or this poor Nation, could to pass be brought, strength, or Wit of men; had he not been, Our helper; and, assistances brought in. How, had so many, been so oft, by few, Defeated else? how, had the Foes they flew And took, so often, more then doubled those, Whom, they in open Battle, did oppose? ow, else, had we so often saved been bringing of one Single-vote, between Our spoil, and us? how, having had, a Foe strong, so Craftie (and, a Party too Of his, within our bosomes) had we thus, Prevailed, and escap'd, what threatned us? Yea, and, among so, many murmurings; Among so many disencouragings, As we have had? and, (which is worse then so) Amidst, A People, not so wise, to know, Who, seeks their Weal? how, had we stood so long But, that, God gave us hearts, and made us strong: Had I, a memory, and time to spare, But half those Evidences to declare, Which, of Gods Providence, my observation Hath taken heed of, by the dispensation, Of mercies, to this Land, since, he begun, prosecute, what he for us hath done, Order to our Peace; you, would behold chain of Graces, richer, then of Gold, Pearls, Diamonds, and Rubies; and, believe o other Nations ever did receive, More tokens of his love. Could I disclose, Mischievous and deep Designes of those, Who laid the first foundation of this War; , how far on, their Projects carried were,
In England, and in Ireland, ere our eyes, Observ'd the chief ends of their Policies: How, first, the Lawyers and Ambitious Priests, Were woo'd and won to serve his Interests; And, active to become, In making void The Just proprieties, that we injoy'd, In Civil things; and, render our condition More flavish by inducing Superstition. How, next he wrought upon, those Hypocrites, Who, seeming Patrons, of the peoples rights, Became, at last to be the worst of those, Who to the Publike-Liberties, are foes. Could, I expression make, How, God improv'd, His mercies to this Isle when he remov'd Strafford, and Canterbury; how, their Plot, To ruine us, by ayming at the Scot, (As their first mark) was made the means of Which we were hopeless of arriving at, (By such a far-fetcht Compass) and, brought on What we did never purpose to have done. Should I, at full, illustrate here, how, they Came, first, to do their own work; then, took To Further ours; and, by meer standing still, Enabled us, to do (against their Will) What they pretended, with no true intents; As hath been manifested by th' events. Such, as their fraudful Juggling, in receiving The King neer Newark; thereby, us hereaving: Of those Advantages, for which we Fought: And, for which, we their help had dearly bought. Such, as their wresting, that, which they profest Four our Joynt Good, to private-Interest; Making the Covenant, seem a just occasion, Of Prosecuting an unjust Invasion. Such, as their Practices when, here they Lay Like Snakes within our bosoms, to betray
ruine us; by working upon those, Who were too Credulous, of their fair-shows, Piety, and Love; For, whilst they were With kindness, entertain'd amongst us, here, They were but Spies and Agents to promote Their own designes; And, doubtless, had it not God prevented been we had been more this by them inslav'd, them heretofore, by those Actings, which we saw by them Pursu'd when they, were weakned from the dream Which they pretended, (and which we did take truth, till we, from dreamings did awake) All men may evidently now perceive What, we, of their Intentions may believe. If, I, could make you apprehend the grace, Which God vouchsafed when he pleased was To move the King a Parliament to call, That should be made destructive unto all His own Designes; permitting, that he should his Fine-Devices, be so fool'd, As to restore, (of that Just-power it had) much, as that, It could not be un-made, Without it own Assent; you would believe, That, Mercie, was a visible reprieve From our undoing. For, that made the way, To other Priviledges which long lay, Unheeded, or unpractised; because, Prerogative, had swallowed up the Laws, Or, seis'd upon the Power, by which, we might Regain possession, of our Ancient-Right. But, having, thereby, got that Power again, Which, we are hopeful, they shall still retain) They (for abusing Kingship, heretofore) Enacted, that, we should have, Kings, no more. Should I, sum up, what dangers did appear, And, what, Gods open, and close mercies were,
When Glocester was besieg'd; when, many thought, They, other habitations must have fought; And, sent the Goods, and Treasure, they could spare To Amsterdam, to be secured there. VVhen, Bristol was resign'd; and, all the Land (Save one poor Corner) in the Tyrants hand. When, in the West, one General, began To grow afraid, and from his Army ran, When, by another, somthing was was misdone, Of no mean consequence, at Dennington. When, other Chiefs, (by rambling up and down) With their Brigades, their Credits had, or'e thrown: And, did begin to Act destructively. To them, whose good success, they did envy. When, they, who for our Succour, feign'd to come, Conspir'd against us, here, and, then went home To prosecute their mischiefs,. When, the Foe, Became so strong, and, We, so weak did grow, That, for our Re-enforcement, we were fain To take all comers; and, some to constrain; In whom, we could but sorily confide. VVhen, in our Houses false friends did reside, More to our cost, and to the hazarding Of all; then all, the Armies, of the King. VVhen, Our first Champions (who did over-ween Their own deserts) swoln bigg with Pride, and Spleen, Jeer'd our New-Model'd-Army, as if none Could do such wond'rous feats, as they had done, VVhen, from the Parliament, by shameless lyes, VVeekly perpetuated by supplies) The peoples hearts, were woo'd away, to those, That were, and are, and will be, still their Foes▪ VVhen Fury had possessed many so, That, like a sudden Torrent, they did flow Impetuously, up to the Senate-dore; Yea, break in thither, and, there foam, and ro
Should I proceed on further, and, with these Make mention of Gods great deliverances, When, he at Hull, the first and second time, Did Nullifie a Royal Stratagem. When likewise, there appear'd a dang'rous Rent, City, Army, and in Parliament; Not onely, those dividing from each other, ut from themselves, to ruine altogether. When, both the Armies unto God appeal'd, As to their Soveraign Judge, at Naasby-field: When, all things, that were dear unto us, lay, Upon the doubtful Tryal of one day. When God, at Brainford, by a poor mans wit, And Vallour, (which none hath consider'd yet) our Chief-city. For, had not, He, been, The King, had then surpriz'd it, by design, VVith all our Train (left for him in the way Hammersmith) whilst, our Commanders lay cure at London; who, did, little fear, great a danger, had been, then so near. , should I tell, with every Circumstance, God's mercie shewn in our Deliverance, VVhen (after quenching of the Gen'ral flame) fested, with new, Mischiefs, we became. VVhen Wales revolted; when, with Surrey, Kent, And, Essex follow'd that bad president. VVhen, Scotland (their confederate) came in second, what their falshood did begin; , after all their great hopes, and vain Braggs, Were glad, to begg the saving of their Craggs. When, our perfideous Seamen, did betray Their trust; and with our Sea-guard stole away. When, our unfriendly Neighbours, looked on, The Treason, as well pleas'd with what was done; , did, encrease our hazard, by supplying Foes wants; and, by under-hand-complying▪
VVhen, all our Ports, upon the Irish Coast, (VVith every Inland Town) save two, were lost. VVhen our sick Army, likewise, near Dunbar Inclosed by their Adversaries were, VVithout the least, Reserve, in their distress; Weak Weary, Wounded, Hungry, Harbourless, Wet, Cold, and Straightned so, that in their Power (Both by the Foes opinion, and by Our,) They seem'd to bee; till, God look't through the cloud And, then, the Lowly, trampled on the Proud. And, lastly; when, Surrender up was made Of Edenborough Castle; which, we had, At such a season as much more then doubles The Benefit; considering, what troubles, (VVhat dangers) might have follow'd; had So opportunely, that Strong-Fortress got: And this great mercie, was the Just occasion, Of this days meeting and Solemnization. VVhen these Deliv'rances, and of this kinde, Some others, I do fully call to minde; VVith all the Circumstances, too, whereby VVe might illustrate every Victory, To Gods due praise; and, to th' annihilating Of our Endeavours; therewith Meditating, VVhat, we have gain'd; and what it might have cost Had any of our hopes, in these, been lost; (Or, his Assistances with-holden been During those straights, which, we were sometimes I cannot, but unfainedly confess, His Goodness, with a hearty thankfulness; And, for the Honour of his Name, assay, To keep, an Everlasting Holyday. To these Considerations, I might add, How many are displeas'd, and almost mad, VVith Rage, to see that, still, in their dispignt. God looks upon our Thrivings, with delight,
, still, makes void their Malice; still, unknots, From time to time) and Nullifies their Plots. Constantly, He, Leads our Armies on VVith Victories; as if, the Work were done Before they came; and, left them nothing else do; but, take the pris'ners, and the Spoyls. strangely. He, in Ireland, did begin make us Room; when, we had scarce, therein of Landing, wherein, we might say could have been secured, for one day. swiftly, he hath prosecuted there, vengements, for the bloody Massacre, our dear Brethren; and, what fair hopes, he Vouchsafes, that fully it aveng'd will be. great a Mercie, t'was that now the Scot, Re-invading us prevented not making, in their Land the feat of War; Which, they intended should be setled here: , what this Blessing is, they truely see, feel, this day, where, now, both Armies be. But, over and above all this, there's, yet Mercie, which, if we forget mention, to God's praise, we do amiss: , much it will avail us; and, 'tis this. Bloody Irish, whose chief interest, Depends upon the, ten horns of the Beast, And, Sea of Rome) have with all diligence, Endeavour'd for assistances from thence: was there want, in them, of Willingness, second their desires; yet, nay-the-less, They have obtained, hitherto, thereby, Aid, considerable, or supply: , God, who, our Avenger is become, cast on that Leviathan of Rome, Chain; and, Fastned in his Nostrils too, Hook which hinders what he fain would do.
God, likewise, ever since, our wars begun, (As if, to finde them Work, till his were done) Hath so distracted ev'ry Christian King, And ev'ry▪ Commonwealth, near neigh'bouring, With Jealousies, and discontents at home; With Wars abroad; Or, with Invasions from Their forraign foes; that, what they would have do They dar'd not: but, stood, onely, looking on, To see our Fall; to watch, how we did play Our Game; and, where, their best Advantage lay, What, but a Providence, and, such a one, As may ascribed be to God alone, Could so have tim'd, and Order'd every thing, That, they, advantages to us might bring? What, Denmark would have done, their foe, the Swed Did, by an Act unlooked for, impede. What, France intended, was made also vain, By their Domostique Jars, and, wars with Spain. What, Spain, could have been highly pleas'd with Was hinder'd, both by France, and Portugal. The Powerful, and wary Netherlanders, Were grown so jealous, of their own Commanders, That, though they were unfreindly, at the first, (And, Countenanc'd our Foes, in what they durst) Yet, peradventure, seeing (or else fearing) A mischief, over their own heads, appearing; They, have not put opon us, worse conditions, Then, very well became such Polititians. But, had not God, in season, took from thence, That rash, and over-much intrusted Prince, Who had almost inslav'd them; we, and they, Or, both of us, had (probably) this day, Been much imbroyl'd: and, therefore, they, and we Should, for that timely favour, thankful be. The Portugal, hath had his bridles too, Restraining him, from, what, he fain wuld do
Hollander, and Spaniard daily keep hands in action, and his eyes from sleep; that which he hath done in opposition, us, will but accelerate perdition, those whom he secur'd, against our State; bring them, to repent, when 'tis too late: 'twill but keep our  abroad, a while, shew the world, Gods favour to this Isle; make it heed, what work, he hath begun; make them know, that, what is left undone, but for triall of their faith, and our; , to illustrate so, his boundless power, they may be assured to confess, love, his wisdome and his righteousnesse. And for assurance, that, it shall be thus, what earnest, God hath given us, , we had long time, controverted, here, interest; and made the same appear, humble pleadings, and by hearty cries, God against our late Kings tyrannies; saw no good success: we brought our cause, According to our ancient English Lawes) Before him by appeals. And by the sword, last decision, which those Lawes affoord) the same, to proof; both parties being, ntented, and in that appeal agreeing. orthwith, both Drums, and Trumpets thereupon, unded a Charge; the battells join'd, fell on; , God before whose throne our cause was tri'd, victory, gave sentence on our side. This Judgement (not by all, approv'd at first) me traytors, and some friends would have revers'd, And fought to wave it, as a doubtfull triall; Although throughout the world, without deniall, And throughout all times) even to this day, disputes, decided are, this way.
But to assure us, that the sentence came From God; he, hath, again, confirm'd the same By seconding that act of providence, And, making us, victorious, ever since. Thereto, therefore, adhering; we have thrown With confidence, the tyrant from his Throne: Making him also, pay the forfeiture Of life, our present title, to secure. And, therein, not alone our Consciences, Do warrant us, and, all those witnesses Of providence, which have therein appear'd: But, to the world, the same is, likewise, clear'd, By all those pow'rfull Kings, and neighbouring States Who, have observed, how God vindicates Our cause; and they have now pronounc'd us free▪ As we of right, and by Gods verdict be. For, their Ambassadours, who now reside, With us, our liberty have justifi'd, By their acknowledgements; and, witnesse bear Thereby, to what Gods sentence did declare: Yea, by their free concession of the same, They make themselves as liable to blame As we; for, if our Nation justly may Be counted Murtherers; now so must they: At least, as accessaries to that deed, By which we from our servitude, were freed. If, Righteously, our winnings we possesse; They, are partakers of our righteousnesse, By those acknowledgements; and, God, shall them Reward, for their so justifying him: If they by no sinister actings mar That blessing, whereto, way, it may appear. However; we, obliged are to praise Gods mercie, that we see in our own daye Such blossoms of the fruits, which we expect That, our endeavours have so good effect;
As, that the pow'rfullst Princes of all those Whom we suspected Neuters (if not foes) Are so convinced as to mediate An amicable Juncture, with our State, In time sincerenesse; or, dissemblers are: Which, were an evidence of greater fear, And basenesse, then, we either can detect; Or, shall, without some future cause, suspect. Oh! what a blindnesse, what a frowardnesse, Doth some of our own Nation, yet possess, That, other men can so farre off, discern What, God, hath done for us; and thereby learn Both to be wise in time, and kisse the son Before his burning anger is begun, And yet they, still, continue obstinate: Grumble at providence, bark at the State, Like dogs against the moon, and snarl at all Who will not as they do, good things, miscall. It may be, such as these, when they shall see VVhat's here expressed, will be mad at me: Menace, defame and hate, revile, and curse, Or, peradventure, mean me, what is worse) Yea, some who wish me well, may think I might Have wiser been, than, to provoke despight, Or, needlesly, (as they suppose) engage Against the violence of brutish rage. But, I defie that wisdome, which perswades A private heed, which publick right, invades. never yet, an ease, or safety, found ought, which to my Conscience, gave a wound. Already too too many such, now are, VVho either seem ashamed, or, else fear o own Gods Mercies, or, the publick causes, VVithout some reservations, blinds, or pauses, o save that interest, which to enjoy, neas'bly, themselves, they may destroy.
By this self-love are miseries begun: Within this channell, hitherto, they run; By this, we lose Gods love; by this, we make Our courage feeble, and from other; take That confidence in us which might engage Their faithfullnesse; and, them to us oblige, With willingnesse, to help establish that, Which for the Publick-weal, is aimed at. For my part I intend a resolution, To further what we have in prosecution. I see Gods mercies, and I understand His purpose, in the works he hath in hand: And therefore, whosoe're displeas'd shall grow, Will publish forth, what of his love I know. It is my duty, 'tis my proper call; (If I have any in this world, at all.) Yea born I was, (if born I were for ought) To do the work, which, I to do have fought: And, if my Faculty (such as it is) Was given me for ought, it was for this Which I am doing, and I will employ it This way, as long, as I with health enjoy it. What ever, I have publickly profest, Was really intended; not in jest. Neither for praise, or profit, or to please, (Except what frailty doth inject of these) Nor out of contradiction unto those Who shall dislike it, do I this compose: And, therefore neither, carnall hopes, or fear Shall make, me, my known duty, to forbear. For no respect, to Parliament or King, Or to my self, have Im any thing Diffe blingly, spoke hitherto my thought; Although much mischief on me it hath brought▪ And I hope never to be frighted from A  expression, whatsoever come.
But to declare the truth, and speak my mind, As often as, I just occasion find; n spight of all the spitefull world can do, And all the rage of Powers Infernall too. And whence springs this my confidence? not from Those grounds, whereby, most men, do now become Couragious in their actings: nor from our Prevailings hitherto: nor from that power We have acquir'd: or those advantages, Whereby we are made hopefull to possesse Our wished ends: nor trust I to th' events Of our endeavours, or our best intents: For, all these things, although they promise fair, May find a change, and leave us in despair: n this alone my boldnesse doth consist: see Gods presence, and his interest, n all that's done: I have a glimmering, too, Of that, which he designs e're long, to do, Though yet delay'd: and, therefore, whatsoe're efalls me, am resolv'd to persevere n driving on his work, though I should see As great a change, as may supposed be. Yea should I perish in this Cause, and knew, When I were dying not one, thereto true; should, even then believe, that, God, alone Would finish that, which he hath now begun; And make his glorie, be the better seen By those Obstructions, which will intervene. Thus, having added somewhat to prevent The prejudice, which threatens my intent: And sum'd up also, (as my weaknesse could) A part of that for which we render should Our thanks this day; I pupose to compose Some formall Odes of thanfullnesse, for those o  desirous be, when they rejoyce, To witnesse their intentions, by the voice.
This, prudent men, thought very pertinent (And an inseparable complement) For such a duty: though, fanatick fools, Who have nor wit, nor musick in their souls, Perceive not, with, what good effects we may Use them in our devotions, at this day. Gods, Prophets, who, knew best what did belong To praises; did expresse them, oft, in Song, And, left them written, as the best Records, To memorize, what present time affoords, Worth recommending to Posterity: Or, of safe keeping it in memorie: For, seeing Hymnes beget no expectation Of ought proceeding from an inspiration, Upon emergent cause; but are a story, Expressing, briefly, to th' almighties Glory, Matter, of fact, (as that which hath been done, Lately for us, or many ages gone, For, others, whose well-being did relate, To us) those Odes continue still in date; And should sometimes, repeated be, to show What, God hath done; that, hopefull we might gro Of like Protection: and, be comforted By those examples, when our hopes are dead. And necessary 'tis, that, those Records Should be preserved, still, in their first words, That, future times, a certainty may see In those things, which commemorated be. And out of question, (to the end of dayes) He, who sincerely sings the, to Gods praise, Shall feel within him (being so dispos'd) That spirit move, by which they were compos'd. Therfore, though Scorners, & those dull soul'd things Whose judgement knows not, whether better The Nightingall or Cuckow, flout me shall, And in contempt, these Hymnes my Ballads ll;
will not be discouraged by these; From saying, or, from singing, what I please; But, in an awfull, Joyfull strain, begin A song, to usher this dayes praises in. Yea, in those forms, which are by them abhor'd; , and my houshold, thus, will praise the Lord. Sing this as the 100. Psalm. 1. WIth aweful Joy, and joyful Fear, To sanctifie, O Lord, this day, Before thy Foot-stool we appear; And, our Thank-offrings here to pay: Which though it be no other thing, Then thy Free-mercies to confesse; Or, Songs, unto thy praise to sing; Vouchsafe acceptance, nay-the-lesse. 2. Within our selves, we are so poor, That, we have nothing of our own, But, what we had from thee, before; Which, by our sins impair'd is grown: For, our wit, beauty, strength, and health, (The goods of body, and of mind) Our time, our honours, and our wealth, To serve our lusts, have been resign'd. 3. And, therefore, till thou shalt renew Thine Image, by our fault defac'd, We, and our Offrings, from thy view, Deservedly, may forth be cast. There is no musick in our Songs, That's worthy to be heard of thee; Because, our hearts, eyes, ears, and tongues, Prophaned, and untuned be. 4. Yet by those favours, heartned on, Wch were on us bestown, of late,
A Hymn, we joyntly have begun, To sing this Day, at Mercies gate. Lord! those eternall doores unclose, Through which thy speciall graces flow; The cords of our Corruption lose, And, let thy Spirit on us blow. 5. Then, ev'ry word, we hear, or say, With ev'rything, that's done, or thought (In celebrating of this Day) Shall do thee honour, as it ought: And, they that study publike harms, Or, flout, what we are doing here, Shall be so bound up, by these Charms, That when they flout us, they shall fear. Thus, having by an humble preparation, Made, first our way to God, for acceptation Of our intended praises; and, that done, A little meditated thereupon; Or, exercis'd our thoughts, on other Notions, Which may be pertinent, to these devotions; We, in a second Canto, will relate Some heads of that which we commemorate: And, thus, expresse our thankefulnesse to God, In exultations, of a higher Mode. Sing this as the 113. Psalm. 1. OH God! how good! how kind art thou! What help, what grace, dost thou bestow On us, in our distrest estate! Our tears to triumphs, thou hast turn'd, We now do sing, who lately mourn'd, And, by our Foes, were jeered at. When we were weak, poor and forlorn, Expos'd to dangers, fears and scorn, Our Comforter, thou didst become:
And, when we dreaded shame of face; Spoils, death, or wounds, joyn'd with disgrace; Those fears, we were deliver'd from. As thou, from base and servile bands, And out of cruel Pharoahs hands, Thine Heritage redeemd'st of old: Ev'n so, from those, who fought our harm, Thou broughtst us off, with out-stretch'd arm, With signs and wonders manifold. They so, were blinded, Lord, by thee, Who, might have seen, but vvould not see; Nor hear when they were counsell'd well: And He that fraud, and force imploy;d, To make our Lavvs, and Freedomes void; In our own view, like Pharoah, fell. This is the Day, whereon our Yoke Of Norman Bondage, first was broke; And, England from her chains made free▪ This is the Day, vvhereon the Lord, Did manumit us by the sword, And, 'tis novv signall, by decree. Slaves, they deserve to be, therefore, And to be bar'd for evermore, The Freedoms of this Commonweal, Who shall not thankfull, now appear, And vindicate with sword and spear, Gods just Replies, to our Appeal. By thee, our Freedoms, Lord, vve got; Oh! to our keeping, leave them not: But, still their Guardianship retain. And, let not those, vvho under thee, Subers, of those Freedoms be, our ins, forfeit them, again: On thse alone, that are unjust
Or shall be traytours in their trust, To this Republike, or to Thee, Let thy avenging justice fall; And, on all those who hinder shall, That Peace, with Truth, may setled be: 5. Write in our hearts, thy sacred Law; And, let no future failings, draw Our former cursed bondage back: But, our depraved wills renew, And, to thy service, keep us true; Which, wil our Freedoms perfect make. The Kingdom, Power, and Praise be thine As long as Moon, and Sun shall shine: Be, likewise, thou our Heritage: And, in this Nation, let there be No other King, or GOD, but thee, What e're they are, who thereat rage. Warm'd by these Charmes, I do begin to feel Another motion, in an higher wheel, Inclining my invention, to indite Expressions, raised to a loftier height; That (if it can be done) I may awake Some other, in my praises to partake. Be silent then; For, I intend a strain, That shall reach heaven, and, eccho, down again Such repercussions, hither, through the ayre, As will within our Foes beget despaire, Of their designes; and, those, to us, unite In praises, who, in Englands peace, delight: Sing this as the 148. Psalm, doubling the last strain of the Tune. 1. ALl you, that present are, Come, let our hearts, and tongues, The Praise of God declare,
In new-Thanksgiving songs; Come, let us sing trains, that may make the walls to shake, The Roofs to ring: Still sounding higher, ill thereby, we, with Angells, be Joyn'd in one Quire. Related, we have heard, What he, for us, hath done; With how much disregard, Our Foes, he looks upon: And, we have seen, ow, he befriends, when righteous ends Pursu'd have been: VVe, likewise vievv VVhat will befall, to those that shall Their lust pursue. We see, or may behold, That, he our Armies leads; And (as in times of old) His Banner o're them spreads, And for our sakes, hrough threats and spights, through depths and heights, Their passage makes, VVhilst, to his praise Their Foes to nought, are justly brought, In plainer waies. He, made both Seas and Wind, To them assistance lend; And, what they had design'd, Sun, Moon, and Clouds befriend. Frce, he repells; them bold, to march where cold, hunger dwells:
And, when their fear Did most abound, they mercy found, And Victors were. 5. To him doth Praise belong: For, he did them subdue, Who num'rous were, and strong, When we were weak, and few; And, when our Foes Came bragging on, and thought all won, They all did lose. Still, be it thus; Lord! alway, so, them overthrow VVho malice us. 6. His wise-foresight prevents, The Politicians wiles: He, crosses their intents, He, at their Projects smiles: In his due time, He still unknots, all hidden plots, Contriv'd by them: And, in that snare, VVhich, for our feet, they closely set, Still caught they are. 7. Vain sons of men, therefore, Your bruitish grumbling cease; Pursue false-hopes no more, But follow after peace. More prudent grow; Reform your waies, and sing his Praise As now we do: Oh! whilst you may In God rejoyce, and hear his Voice VVhile 'tis to day. 8. Let all men do the same,
Of whatsoe're degree; And magnifie his Name, As all obliged be. His Righteousnesse, Power and Grace, in ev'ry place Let all confesse: And lay aside heir own deserts, their selfish hearts, Their stinking pride. Your strength to him submit, You, that have conquests won: Wise men ascribe your wit, To him, ev'n him alone. For, he supplies he Fool with skill, and, when he will Be fools the wise. And, certainly, nto to your Foes, he, gives the blows By which they die. 10. Rich-men, your precious things Bring forth, your Thanks to show; Before him, (Oh ye Kings) Your Heads, and Scepters bow; And, as 'tis meet, ome from your Thrones, and cast your Crowns Beneath his feet: For, Kingdomes all o him pertain, and he again Resume them shall. 11. Oh! let all things that were, That are, or shall ensue; (Or, but in thought appear) The Praise, O God, forth-shew; ill Times last bound: And, let it run, when time is done, An endlesse Round;
Where, needs not be Privations Night, that we true Light May better see. 12. Mean time, let not his praise Be meerly, in our Voice, As if vve thought to raise A Trophy, out of Noise: But, let us more Our Thanks expresse, in Righteousnesse, Then heretofore: Els (this is plain) False shows we make, and, do but take GODS Name in vain. These Hymns I offer up, to be instead Of some short Chronicle, for them to read, Who have not means to get a larger Book, Or leisure-time, long Tracts to overlook. And many, peradventure, who should els Never have heard a word, of what this tells, Shall thereby know it, and thence, take occasion To magnifie Gods Mercies, to this Nation. Here I had made an end, but that I find Another Christian duty, which to mind I must present. All these, forepast Expressions Of Gods great mercies, and our fair Professions Of thankfuinesse, but words, or actions be, Which hypocrites may do, as well as we, (As to the outward man) and, many times, By them, that service, best performed seems. These, are but offrings of our lips, and tongues, Or exercises of the breath, and lungs, In which, we formally may act a part, With little fervor, and without a heart. If we upon inquiry find it thus, In those Thanksgivings offred now by us,
verball, and meer corporall oblation ll be to God, but an abomination. We, therefore shall do well, when we have ended e publike duties, unto us commended, Power supreme) in private, to retire to our selves, and of our hearts inquire w things are there, and whether all be so earnest, as it ought to be, or no. we perceive a failing, let us, then, nfesse it, as becomes repentant men: d take occasion, thence, to magnifie ods love the more, and humbly vilifie r wayes before him, for the favours done, ill, then, most thankfully be thought upon, hen we consider, that, the Grace bestown, as not, without our self-desert, alone: t, when we rather merited his wrath. ercie, by guileinesse, more lustre hath, nd Gods commiseration will appear ice greater, when 'tis known, how vile we are. Oh! let us therefore, take more care to see, th what we are, and, what we ought to be, hom, God, hath so much favour'd: let us know, at we our thankfullnesse are bound to show well with other members, as with tongues, d, with what, ever else to us belongs. e ought to bring a circumcised ear, ot deaf to truth, or, readier to hear false report, then, that which represents he grievances, and wrongs of innocents. pitifull, and an impartiall eye, look upon, the poore mans miserie, nd turn from vanities: well cleansed hands: tive, in executing, Gods Commands: , not to bloodshed swift, but, ordered he paths of Christian holinesse, to tread;
And ev'ry other Member, serving to Those duties, which they were ordain'd to do. Let ev'ry man consider, what, he was; What, he at this time is; unto what place God, hath preferred him: unto what end: What, he hath done; and, what, he doth intend: Whether, to other men, he hath done so, As, he would others, unto him should do. Whether his Power be faithfully employ'd, To further that, for which it is enjoy'd; Or, to enrich himself. Whether, his wealth, His reputation, wisdome, strength, and health, Have been improv'd aright; and, whether, he Is really the same, he seems to be, By those externall actings, which expresse His Justice, Piety, and Thankefulnesse. For, 'tis not our conformity, to that Which is this day, commanded by the State, (Or, other like performances) alone, That, maketh acceptable what is done. 'Tis not Religion, stew'd into a vapour; Taking, of Notes, at Sermons, in a paper; Or, giving sixpence, or perhaps, a shilling, Wherein, consists a laudable fulfilling Of this daies-duty: no, beloved Nation, 'Tis Justice, Justice; Bowells of compassion; Sincerenesse in your deeds; truth in your hearts; And, purifying of your inward parts; Which makes a Sacrifice to be approv'd, Or Sacrificer perfectly belov'd: And, 'tis the want of these, that, most estranges From GOD; and brings the most destructive chang Which, being true; all men (in what they may) Should to perform the duty of this day, Be diligent: But most conduce, it shall Unto the Publike-good, in generall;
That such as have chief Power, in either Nation Should take themselves into Examination, And search, what in them wanteth, to expresse A hearty, and unfained thankfulnesse: Let, therfore those, on whom, at this time, lies The greatest Trust, reflect, a while, their eyes Upon themselves; to make enquirie, whether There be not in their publike-actings, either Some falshood, or some failings, which may need A Reformation, and a better heed: Whether, they have not swallow'd, what may choke Themselves, at last; Gods, righteous wrath provoke; And, frustrate all our former Preservations; Our present Joys, and future expectations. Let them examine, how much, yet, they want Of making good their vowed Covenant, Not in the Scottish, but the English sense) Which hath relation to our just defence, And, to that mutuall aid, which, to each other We vow'd; when, we were thereby joyn'd together. Let them examine, whether, they have not That part, of their Ingagement, so forgot, As, to desert their friends, in th' executions Of their just Vow, and, made their Prosecutions More mischievous to them, then unto those That, were appaently our guilty Foes: And, whether, whilst this Lot, on them attends, Men, may not cheaper, be truth's foes, then friends. Let them examine, if there be not some, Who to their Counsells, and Committees come, eldome, or never; but, to set those free From Prosecution, who, most guilty be: And, whether, many of them, do not know Who, these men are, and often, find it so, Much to their grief; because, they are unable To hinder, what they know unwarrantable.
Let, them consider, whether, some effects Of partiall, and of personall respects, Have not oft times, destroy'd an Innocent, The just dooms, of the guilty, to prevent: Whether, this Lord, that kinsman, or their friend; (Or, he, that can promote their private end) This Lady, with the fair bespotted face; That gallant, in the suit bedawb'd with Lace; Or, seeming Converts, who, perhaps, are come To Fine, for means, to mischief us, at home; Let them I say, consider whether, these Are not receiv'd with more civilitis, And, with much more respect, then many are, Who, from the first beginning of this war, Have served faithfully; and ever stood Firm, in all Trialls, for the Publike-good. Let them examine, whether, they and we, Partakers, of one Common-Justice be, According to our right: Or, whether they Allow not to themselves, what they deny To some of us, who, have the self-same Cause; And, claim the self-same equity, and Laws. Let them examine, whether, none of them, Seek opportunities, and watch for time How, to surprize their House, to gain a Vote, Which, in a full Court, never had been got; Because, their motions, had been, then, gainsaid, By many, and, their purpose, better weigh'd. Let them examine, how, they do pursue Their self-denying Votes, which, gave a shew Of honorable, and of good intentions; Though frustrate, by unlooked for preventions. Let them examine, if these Common-weals Can hope for benefit, by just Appeals, Against Oppressors, who shall Office bear, When in Supreme Authority they are,
And while they shall be priviledged so, That, they may Judges be; and Parties, too, In those Appeals; and, how, their bribery, Or other injuries, can possibly Be prov'd; where, all Appellants, against these, Shall find so many disadvantages To struggle through; and while those they impeach, Are in a Sanctuary, out of reach. Let them examine, if the distributions Of places, gainfull by their executions, Are equally divided; or, bestown So frequently, for any merit, known, As, for some nigh relation, unto those Who get the power, such places to dispose: And, whether, one, may five, or six, deserve, Whilst, many of our friends, are like to starve, Who, might have been reliev'd; yea, made our debter; And, serv'd the Common wealth, perhaps much better. Let them examine, whether, they, who lent And, freely gave, till all they had, was spent, The Publike to secure; are car'd for, so, As they have been, who, fought our overthrow: Whether, they see not many more arise To speak for them, upon emergencies; To represent their seeming-sad conditions; To offer, and to second, their Petitions; To get Provisoes, pardons, or Reprieves, (And, means to keep their children, and their wives) Then do for those, when their distresse appears, Who, freely, spent their bloud, to save our tears. Let them examine, whether, some of them Do not by their proceedings, both condemn And, help destroy themselves; when, in their Choises Of Publike-Ministers, they give in Voices, Or Names, for by-respects, or kindreds sake; Enabling them, Confed'racies to make,
For private interest: let them, together Take consultation, and examine whether They favour not, among them, such as drive Those actings on, whereby, they may contrive The ruine of our Cause. Let them, moreover, Examine, whether, none they can discover Who constantly endeavour, to bring in Those, who most worthily, depriv'd have been Of their late trust; that, they might them assist In strengthening their corrupted interest: And, whether, an indulgency to these, May not procure some disadvantages To that Militia, which, hath been, of late, Established, to fortifie the State: And, let them, if they find it to be so, Prevent the mischiefe, e're it further go. Let them examine, whether, Avarice, Ambition, malice, pride, or some such Vice, Hath not been so indulg'd, as, that it may Deprive us of the comforts, which this day We have hope: yea, let us all, apart, And, joyntly, seek true Peace, with perfect heart. These memorandums, I am bold to add, That, our Thanksgivings, may be thereby made More perfect; and, more acceptable, too, By minding, what, we further have to do: That, by these Observations, I may keep My friends, from singing of themselves asleep, In that security, which will destroy The truest sweetnesse, of our present joy: That, we might save Supreme Authority, From that contempt, that blame, and obloquy, Which, may be cast upon it, by our Foes, Or, by the secret faithlesnesse, of those, Who (by pretending for it) have much wronged Their Actings, and our miseries prolonged:
d that we may not by our heedlesnesse those things, which will mar our happinesse, wle Elegies, and roar out Lamentations, ead of songs of praise, and Exultations, Lord! give thou hereunto, those good events Which, may, in somwhat, answer my intents: nd, take with acceptation, I, thee pray, is my imperfect, this may weak assay. sten thy work, and bring it to conclusion; aw us, out of that chaos-like confusion, which we are: As, in our preservation ou hast appear'd, so in our restauration unity, please, likewise, to appear; at, Peace and truth, may keep their dwellings here. Let Parliament, and people, from this day, ise thee, by Reformation of their way. City, Countrey, and both poore and rich, deavour with sincerity, as much. t our victorious Armie, do the same; tributing unto thy glorious Name their prevailings; persevering, still, faithfull executing of thy will, d seeking publick-peace without design ought, which may to selfishnesse incline. nd, make us all, with as much willingnesse, forth thy praises, for the righteousnesse thy severest Judgements; as, to sing anks, for those blessings, which thy mercies bring. And, my dear countreymen, let me not pray r you in vain: nor sing my songs, this day Beasts, and Rocks, and Mountains, to be heard, As they have often been) without regard: st, I have cause to change my joyfull Odes, mournfull Epicedes, and Palinodes. ill presaging Raven to this Nation, would not be (croaking of desolation
And sad events) I, rather with the Dove, My winged Contemplations, would improve To bring such Olive-leaves, as may declare Your overflowings, quite abated are: But, all that is allow'd by my Commissions, Is, only to declare, on what conditions, We may have Peace; and, what events, God hath Design'd, both to the right, and left hand path. Let me not, therefore, whistle to the wind, And, emptinesse, in my good wishes find. For, why should this day of our visitation Be overpassed by this generation? Why do the Gentry rage? why murmur so The brutish Common people, as they do? New Vanities, why do they still devise? Themselves befooling every day with lies? Though, every dayes, experience doth declare, How false their hopes and expectations are: If they would learn to love, and to believe, God, thereunto, a blest Event should give; And make them know, and see (with comfort too) What, he is doing, and intends to do. But I begin to feel within my breast, A Rapture, pressing on to be exprest. Oh! hear me therefore, and let none despise To heed it: for I'le now sing Prophecies, Which (whatsoe're you think) shall be as true, As if a wiser man had told them you. If you shall (oh ye Brittains) reunite, In love, and, but, according to your might, Add your endeavours, chearfully, to do, What Grace and Reason, will invite you to, Your way shall prosper: and, (my soul for yours) Neither all earthlies nor Infernall powers, Shall able be to make a future rent, Betwixt you; or to shake that governme
Which God will settle here: but it shall stand s long, as there is, either sea or land: nd be renown'd among all other Nations, hroughout the world, and through all Generations. This Island, then, the Darling shall become, ot only, of all States in Christendome; ut, likewise, of all those within the sound f everie wind, that blows within this Round. shall be made the Magazine of all hose things on earth, which men do precious call: nd, of all vertues, morall and divine, hat may be found, where Sun and Moon do shine: or, God shall take delight, to multiply is blessings on it, and to beautifie ut cities, fields, and persons, with each thing, hat honour, ornament or peace may bring. But, if against the Light you shut your eyes; ood counsel, if you frowardly despise: you from God, shall turn away your heart; he way of Justice, and of truth pervert: , timely mercies you neglect to shew o those that need (God, having unto you ouchsaf'd so many favours, and, protections, your great straights, and manifold afflictions) r, shall abuse the powre or trust bestown, o set up vain devices of your own, stead of what concerns the throne of Christ; r, this free Nations, lawfull interest; r, shall maliciously pursue a course, hat, leads away, from better things, to worse: hen, know your doom, for, here I'le tell it you, nd speak it out, without Aenigmaes too. God, with a black-sad cloud shall overcast our hopes; and, on you, breath a sudden blast hat will shrink up, (before you are aware ll those fair bloomings, which this day appear;
Set back your Dialls, nip your forward Spring, Which promised rich harvest fruits, to bring: And, as his mercies, have exceeding been, So shall his Judgements, when they do begin. Yea, should you conquer, till, you did not know Abroad, or, here at home, one able foe. Should all those Princes, and those powrfull Sta Who court you now, prove firm confederates; Or, should you stand possest of all their powrs, Of whom, you are, or may be Con querours; Yet, mark well this (unlesse, we shall with speed, Reform some things, which Reformation need: And with more Courage, with more verity, More self-deniall, and sincerity, Witnesse our thankfullnesse (which, by Gods grace, I hope, will in due time, be brought to passe) A thing, which no man yet, knows what to call, (Or whence 'twill come) our hopes endanger shall Yea, such a thing, as is not yet in thought, (And which most men will sleight and set at nough When first it shall appear) will overthrow Our Glorie, and lay all our honour low, Till we repent: but, then, we shall arise From our disgrace again, to be more wise: And they who in their hearts abide sincere, Shall see this change, without much harm, or fear▪ More, I might say, but, my set time is gone. Take this, among you; and, Gods will be done, FINIS. In the last page of the Epistle l.21.r. setling. p.6.l..r. J seed. p.7.l.29. r. either and or.
