26094 99855483 20978
MVSICA TRANSALPINA. CANTVS. Madrigales translated of foure, fiue and sixe partes, chosen out of diuers excellent Authors, vvith the first and second part of La Verginella, made by Maister Byrd, vpon tvvo Stanza's of Ariosto, and brought to speake English vvith the rest. Published by N. Yonge, in fauour of such as take pleasure in Musicke of voices. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas East, the assigné of William Byrd▪ 1588. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
To the right honourable Gilbert Lord Talbot, sonne and heire to the right noble and puissant George Earle of Shrevvesbury, Washford and Wa∣terford, Earle Marshall of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of Blackmeere, one of her Maiesties most honourable priuie councell, Iustice of the forrestes and chases by north the riuer of Trent, and knight of the most honourable order of the garter. Ni∣cholas Yonge vvisheth increase of honour, vvith all happinesse. RIght honourable, since I first began to keepe house in this Citie, it hath been no small comfort vnto mee, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants of good accompt (as well of this realme as of forreine nations) haue taken in good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poore abilitie was able to afford them, both by the exercise of Mu∣sicke daily vsed in my house, and by furnishing them with Bookes of that kinde yeerly sent me out of Italy and other places, which beeing for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetnes of Aire, verie well liked of all, but most in account with them that vnderstand that language. As for the rest, they doe either not sing them at all, or at the least with litle delight. And albeit there be some English songes lately set forth by a great Maister of Musicke, which for skill and sweetnes may content the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with varietie haue wi∣shed more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I endeuoured to get into my hands all such English Songes as were praise worthie, and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good friends, certaine Italian Madrigales translated most of them fiue yeeres agoe by a Gentleman for his priuate delight, (as not long before cer∣taine Napolitans had been englished by a verie honourable personage, and now a Coun∣cellour of estate, whereof I haue seene some, but neuer possessed any). And finding the same to bee singulerly well liked, not onely of those for whose cause I gathered them, but of many skilfull Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed the accent of the words to be well mainteined, the descant not hindred, (though some fewe notes altred) and in euerie place the due decorum kept: I was so bold (beeing well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat the rest, who willingly gaue me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some other more lately done at the request of his par∣ticular friends. Now when the same were seene to arise to a iust number, sufficient to furnish a great sett of Bookes, diuers of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to haue them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could neuer obtaine the Gentlemans consent, though I sought it by many great meanes. For his answere was euer, that those trifles beeing but an idle mans exercise, of an idle subiect, written onely for priuate recreation, would blush to be seene otherwise then by twilight, much more to bee brought into the common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he tooke his
penne, and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Bookes these verses of the Poet Martial. Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas, Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus, Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli, Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones. Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by mee, not presuming to put my sickle in an other mans corne, till such time as I heard, that the same beeing dispersed into many mens hands, were by some persons altogither vnknowen to the ow∣ner, like to be published in Print. Which made mee aduenture to set this worke in hand, hee beeing neither priuie nor present, nor so neere this place as by any reasonable meanes I could giue him notice. Wherin though he may take a iust offence, that I haue laid open his labours without his licence: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by straun∣gers, lame and vnperfect by meanes of false Copies, I hope that this which I haue done to auoide a greater ill, shall deserue a more fauourable excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to offer my selfe and my bold attempt to the defence and protection of your Lordship, to whose honourable hands I present the same. Assuring my selfe, that so great is the loue and affection which hee beareth to your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Bookes, will take away all displeasure and vnkindnes from mee. And although this may bee thought a greater boldnes then the first (I beeing not any way able to doe your L. such a seruice, as may de∣serue so great a fauour) yet I hope these Songes beeing hitherto well esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for themselues, shall not be thought vnwor∣thie of your honourable defence. With which hope I humbly commit your L. to the pro∣tection of the Almightie: wishing to the same, that encrease of honour which your true vertue deriued from so noble and renowmed Ancestors doeth worthely deserue. From London the first of October. 1588. Your Lordship's most humble at commandement, N. Yonge.
Of 4. I. Noe Faignient. THese that be certaine signes of my tormenting, no sighes, {repeat} no sighes be they, no sighes, nor any sigh so show-eth, those haue their truce sometime, these no relenting, these no relen-ting, not so exhales the heat that in me gloweth, fierce Loue, fierce Loue that burnes my hart, makes all this venting, fierce Loue that burnes my hart, makes all this venting, while with his wings the raging fyre he bloweth, while with his wings the raging fyre he bloweth, say Loue, say Loue with what deuise thou canst for euer, keepe it in flames & yet consume it ne-uer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, and yet consume it neuer.
II. Giouan di Macque. THe faire Diana neuer more reuiued, the faire Diana, the faire Diana neuer more reuiued, {repeat} her louers hart that spied her in the fountaine, while she her naked lims, her naked lims in wa-ter dy-ued, then me the coūtry wench set by the mountaine, washing a vayle to cloth the locks re-fy-ned, washing a vayle to cloth the locks refyned, to cloth the locks re-fy-ned, that on fayre Laura's head the gold resemble, which made me quake, although the Sunne then shined, though the Sunne then shyned, & euery ioynt {repeat} & euery ioynt with louing frost to tremble, and euery ioynt with louing frost to tremble.
III. G.P.A. Prenestino. IOye so delights my hart and so relieues me, and so re-lieues me, when I behold the face of my beloued, beloued, that any hard mischaūce or pang that grieues me, that grieues me, is quite exil'd & presently remoued, & if I might to perfite vp my plea-sure, to perfite vp my pleasure, without controul-ment, bestow myne eyes where I re-pose, repose my trea-sure, for a crowne & a kingdome sure possessed, I would not change my state so sweete & bles-sed. I would not change my state so sweete & bles-sed, for a crowne & a kingdome, sure possessed, I would not chaunge my state so sweete and bles-sed.
IIII. G.P.A. Prenestino. FAlse Loue now shoote & spare not, false Loue, false Loue now do thy worst I care not, and to dispatch me, vse all thine art & all thy craft to catch me, and all thy craft to catch me, for youth amisse bestow'd, I now repent me, and for my faults I languish, which brought me nothing else but griefe & an-guish, & now at last haue vowed, at libertie to liue, since to assayle me, both thy bowe & thy brand nought doth a-uayle thee, for from thee good nor ill, comfort nor sorow, comfort nor sorow, I will not hope nor feare now nor to morow, I will not hope nor feare, now nor to morow.
V. Baldessar Donato. O Griefe if yet my griefe be not beleeued, O Griefe, {repeat} if yet my griefe be not beleeued, crye with thy voyce out-stretched, that her dispightful hart & eares disdayning, may heare my iust complayning. may heare my iust complaining. And when thou hast her told my state most wretched, & when thou hast her told my state most wret-ched, tell her, that though my hart be thus tormented, I could be well con-tented, if she that now doth grieue me, had but the least desire, once to relieue me. once to relieue me. had but the least desire, once to relieue me. once to relieue me.
VI. Baldessar Donato. AS in the night we see the sparckes re-ui-ued, & quite extinct so soone, so soone as day ap-peareth, so when I am of my sweet sonne depri-ued, new feares approch & Ioy my hart forbeareth, but not so soone she is againe arriued, as feare re-tireth, & present hope me cheareth, O sacred light, oh turne againe to blesse me, and driue away this feare, {repeat} that doth oppresse me. O sacred light, oh turne againe to blesse me, & driue away this feare {repeat} that doth op-presse me. & driue a-way this feare, & driue away this feare, that doth op-presse me.
VII. Filippo de Monte. IN vayne he seekes for beautye that excelleth, that hath not sene her eyes wher Loue seiorneth, how sweetly-here and there the same she tur-neth, he knowes not how Loue healeth, he knowes not how Loue healeth, and how he quelleth, he knowes not how Loue heales and how he quelleth, that knowes not how she sighes and sweet be-guileth, that knowes not how she sighes and sweet beguileth, and how she sweetly speakes and sweetly smy-leth, and how she swetely speakes and sweetly smy-leth. and sweetely smyleth.
VIII. G.P.A. Prenestino. WHat meaneth Loue to nest him, in the fayre eyes, with louely grace and heauen-ly spryte inspyred, in-spy-red, of my mistres delightfull, of my mistres delightfull, enuious dames confesse and be not spite-full, enuious dames confesse & be not spite-full, ah fooles do you not mind it, that Loue hath sought (and neuer yet could find it) from Sunne arysing, till where he goes to rest him, till where he goes to rest him, a brauer place, thē in her eyes to nest him▪ a brauer place, then in her eyes to nest him▪ a brauer place, then in her eyes to nest him.
IX. G.P.A. Prenestino. SWeet Loue when hope was flow-ring, with fruites of recompence for my deser-uing, for my deser-uing, rest was the price of all my faithfull ser-uing. Oh spitefull death accur-sed, Oh lyfe most cru-ell, the first by wrong doth paine me, and all my hope hath turned to lamen-ting, the last against my will here doth detaine me, fayne would I find my Iuell, but death to spite me more, yet with a mild relen-ting, me thinkes within my hart her place she hol-deth, & what my torment is plainely beholdeth, & what my tormēt is plainly beholdeth, plainely behol-deth, plainly be-holdeth.
X. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. LAdy that hand of plenty, lady that hand of plenty, that gaue vnto the needefull, did steale my hart vnheedefull, sweet these of Loue so dainty, sweet these of Loue so dainty, that robbe when you are geuing, are geuing, but you do giue, {repeat} so surely, that you may robbe and steale, {repeat} the more securely, that my poore hart be eased, {repeat} you do it not to Ioye me, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me. but still by fresh assaults quite to de-stroye me.
XI. Giaches de Vuert. WHo will ascend to heauen & there obtaine me, my witts forlorne & sil-ly sence decay-ed? for since I tooke my woūd that sore doth paine me, frō your faire eyes my sprites are all dismay-ed. Nor of so great a losse I do complayne me, if it encrease not, {repeat} {repeat} but in some boundes be stayed, but if I still growe worse, I shal-be lot-ted, to▪ wander through the world fond & assot-ted, to wāder through the world fond & assot-ted. but if I still growe worse I shalbe lot-ted, to wāder through the world fond & assot-ted. to wāder through the world fond & assot-ted.
XII. Cornelio Verdonch. LAdy your looke so gentle so to my hart deepe sinketh, so to my hart deepe sinketh, that of none other, nor of my selfe it thincketh, why thē do you constraine me (Cruell) to liue in plaint in paine & sad-nes, when one sweet word may gaine me, {repeat} peace to my thoughts, {repeat} & euer-lasting gladnes, peace to my thoughts, {repeat} & e-uer-lasting glad-nes, peace to my thoughts, & euerlast-ing gladnes, peace to my thoughs, & euerlasting gladnes, peace to my thoughts, {repeat} & e-uer-lasting gladnesse.
Of 5. XIII. Filippo di Monte. FRom what part of the heauen, from what example brought was the mould whence nature hath deri-ued, that sweet face full of beautie, that sweet face full of beau-tie, in which she striued, to prooue in earth her powre aboue, her powre aboue was ample? nor syluane queene adored, that so daintie fine locks in ayre displaied, nor hart diuine with so great vertue stored, yet by her lookes my lyfe is all betrayed.
XIIII. The second part. IN vayne he seekes for beautie that excel-leth, that hath not seene her eyes where Loue seiourneth, how sweetly here and there the same she tur-neth, he knowes not how Loue heales & how she quel-leth, that knows not how she sighes, she sighes & sweet beguileth, & how she sweetly speakes & sweetly smy-leth, he knowes not how Loue heales, & how he quel-leth, that knowes not how she sighes, she sighes & sweet beguileth, & how she sweetly speakes & sweetly smy-leth, and how she sweetly speakes and sweetly smy-leth.
XV. IN euery place I finde my griefe & an-guish, saue where I see, saue where I see those beames, those beames that me haue burned, & eke myne eyes to flouds of teares haue turned, to flouds of teares haue turned, thus in extreamest pangs, extreamest pangs, eche houre I lan-guish, O me, O me, my shining starre▪ so sweet & sacred, cause of all comfort, of this world the Iuel, for want of thee my lyfe I haue in hatred, my lyfe I haue in ha-tred, was neuer griefe so great, nor death so cru-ell, was neuer griefe so great, nor death so cru-ell.
XVI. Luca Marenzio. THirsis to dye desired, Thirsis to dye desired, marking her eyes that to his hart was nearest, and she that with his flame no lesse was fyred, sayd to him, Oh hart's loue dearest, Oh hart's loue dearest, alas forbeare to dye now, {repeat} by thee I lyue, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too, by thee I lyue, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too, to dye too.
XVII. The second part. THirsis that heate refrayned, wherewith in hast to dye he dyd betake him, thinking it death yet, and while his looke ful fixed he re-tained, on her eyes ful of plesure, & louely Nectar sweet frō thē he tasted, his daintie Nymphe that now at hand es-pyed, the haruest of Loues treasure, sayd thus with eyes all trembling faint & wasted, I dye now, {repeat} the shepherd then replyed, & I sweet lyfe do dye too, {repeat} & I sweet lyfe too, and I sweete lyfe do dye too.
XVIII. The third part. THus these two louers, {repeat} fortunately dy-ed, of death so sweete, so happy, & so desi-red, that to dye so againe, {repeat} their lyfe retyred, that to dye so a-gaine, {repeat} their lyfe retyred.
XIX. Alfonso Ferabosco. SVsanna faire sometime of loue reque-sted, sometime of loue requested, by two old men whome her sweete lookes allur'd, was in was in her hart full sad & sore molested, seing the force her chastitie endur'd, to them she sayd, if I by craft procur'd, do yeld to you my bo-dy to abuse it, I kill my soule, I kill my soule, & if I shal refuse it, you wil me iudge {repeat} to death reprochfully, but better it is, {repeat} in in-nocēce to chuse it, in innocēce to chuse it, then by my fault, thē by my fault, {repeat} t'offēd my God on hye, then by my fault, {repeat} t'offēd my God on hye.
XX. Orlando di Lasso. SVsanna fayre sometime of loue requested, Susanna fayre sometime of loue reque-sted, by two old men whome her sweete lookes al-lur'd, was in her hart full sad & sore molested, {repeat} full sad & sore mole-sted, seing the force her cha-stitie en-dur'd, to them she sayd, if I by craft procur'd, do yeld to you my body to abuse it, I lose my soule, {repeat} & if I shal refuse it, you wil me iudge to death reprochful-ly, but better it is in innocence to chuse it, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault, {repeat} t'offend my God on hye.
XXI. Noe Faignient. WHen shall I cease lamenting, lamenting, lamenting, when shall I cease lamen-ting, lamenting, when shall I cease, {repeat} lamēting? whē shall my plaint & moning, to tunes of Ioy be turned? whē shall my plaint & moning, to tunes of Ioy be turned? good Loue, {repeat} good Loue leaue thy tormenting, {repeat} good Loue leaue thy tor-mēting, too long thy flames within my hart haue burned. O graunt alas with quicknes, {repeat} O graunt alas with quicknes, {repeat} some litle comfort, {repeat} after so long a sicknes. Some litle com-fort, {repeat} Some litle comfort, for so long a sicknes.
XXII. Luca Marentzio. I Must depart all haples, {repeat} I must de-part al haples, so that if I liue hartles, if I liue hart-les, Loue doth a worke miraculus and blessed, If I liue hartles {repeat} Loue doth a worke miraculous and blessed, but so great paine assaile me, that sure ere it be long, {repeat} my life will fayle me. {repeat} that sure ere it be long {repeat} my life will fayle me. {repeat} my life will fayle me. will fayle me.
XXIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Saw my Lady wee-ping, & Loue did lan-guish, & of their plaint ensued so rare consen-ting, that neuer yet was heard more sweet lamen-ting, that neuer yet was heard more sweet lamenting, made all of tender pitty & mournfull anguish, & morunful ang-guish, the floodes forsaking their delightfull swelling, the floodes forsaking their delight-full swel-ling, stayd to at-tend their plaint, the windes enraged, the windes enra-ged, still & con-tent to quyet calme assuaged, their wonted stor-ming, their wonted stor-ming, and euery blast rebelling.
XXIIII. The second part. LIke as from heauen the dew full softly showring, doth fall, & so refresh both fields and clo-ses, both fields & clo-ses, filling the parched flowers with sappe & sauour? so while she bath'd the violetts & the roses, vpon her louely cheekes, her loue-ly cheekes, so freshly flowring, the spring renued his force with her sweet fauour, with her sweet fa-uour. so while she bath'd the violetts and the roses, vpon her louely cheekes, her loue-ly cheekes, so freshly flowring, the spring renu'd his force with her sweet fauour, with her sweet fa-uour, with her sweete fa-uour.
XXV. Giouan Feretti. SO gratious is thy sweete selfe, so gratious is thy selfe, so fayre so framed, so gratious is thy sweete selfe, so gratious is thy selfe, so fayre, so framed, that who so sees thee, {repeat} with-out a hart enflamed, either he lyues not, either he lyues not, or loues delight he knowes not, either he liues not, {repeat} or loues delight he knowes not.
XXVI. Giouan Ferretti. CRuell vnkinde, my hart thou hast bereft me, my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} Cruell vnkinde, my hart thou hast bereft me, my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} & wilt not leaue yet, and wilt not leaue while any lyfe is left me, while any lyfe is left me, and yet, and yet, and yet still will I loue thee, and yet, and yet, and yet still will I loue thee.
XXVII. Luca Marenzio. WHat doth my pretie dearling, my pretie dear-ling, what doth my pretie dear-ling? what doth {repeat} what doth my song & chaūting, that they sing not of her, {repeat} the prayse and vaunting? to her I giue my violets, to her I giue my violets, & garland sweetly smelling, for to crowne her sweet lockes pure gold excellng, to her I giue my violetts, {repeat} & garland sweetly smelling, for to crowne her sweet locks pure gold excelling, for to crowne her sweet locks pure gold excelling.
XXVIII. Stephano Felis. SLeepe Sleepe, mine onely Iu-ell, mine one-ly Iu-ell, mine onely Iuell, Sleepe Sleepe mine onely Iu-ell, mine onely Iuell, mine one-ly Iuell, {repeat} much more thou didst de-light me, then my belou'd too cruell, that hid her face, that hid her face to spyte me. her face to spyte me. that hyd her face to spyte me. to spyte me. that hid her face to spyte me. much more thou didst delight me, then my beloued too cru-ell, that hid her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, that hid her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, that hid her face to spyte me, to spyte me.
XXIX. The second part. THou bringst her home ful nye me, while she so fast dyd flye me, while she so fast dyd flye me, by thy meanes I behold those eyes so shining, long time absented, {repeat} that looke so myld appeased, thus is my griefe decly-ning, thou in thy dreames dost make desire well pleased, Sleepe, if thou be lyke death as thou art fay-ned, as thou art fayned, {repeat} a happy lyfe by such a death were gayned, a happy lyfe by such a death were gay-ned, a happy lyfe by such a death were gained.
XXX. Gianetto Palestina. SOund out my voyce with pleasant tunnes recording, recor-ding, the new delight that Loue to me inspireth, {repeat} pleasd & content with that my minde de-sireth, my minde desireth, thanked be Loue so heauenly Ioyes affording, she that my plaints with rigor long reiected, reiec-ted, bynding my hart with those her golden tresses, {repeat} In recompence of all my long distresses, Said with a sigh thy griefe hath me infected. Sayd with a sigh thy griefe hath me infec-ted.
XXXI. Luca Marenzio. LIquide and wa-trye perles Loue wept full kindly, Liquide and watry pearles, {repeat} Loue wept full kindly, to quench my hart enfla-med, but he alas, {repeat} alas, alas vnfriendly so great a fire had framed, as, as were enough to burne me. {repeat} as were enough to burne me, without recomfort; {repeat} and into ashes turne me.
XXXII. Orlando di Lasso. THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, {repeat} in greenewood groues, in greenewood groues delights to make his dwel-ling, in fieldes to flye chanting his roundelay, {repeat} at liberty, at liberty against the cage rebel-ling, but my poore hart, {repeat} with sorowes ouerswelling, through bondage vyle, bynding my freedome short, bynding my freedome short, no pleasure takes, no pleasure takes in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receiueth no comfort. nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his song, nor of his song receyueth no comfort.
XXXIII. Giouan Feretti. WIth in a greene wood, {repeat} sweete of myrtle sauour, when as the earth was with fayre flowres reuested, I saw a shepeherd with his Nymph that rested, thus spake the Nymph with sugred words of fauour, say (sweete Loue) to thy loue, tell me my dearling, the shepeherd answered then with a deepe sighing, all full of sweetnes, {repeat} & of sorow mixed, on thee daintie deare lyfe my loue is fixed, my loue is fixed, with that the gentle Nymph full sweetly smy-ling, with kynde words of delight & flattering gloses, she kindly kist his cheeke, {repeat} with lippes of roses, {repeat} she kindely kist his cheeke with lippes of roses, {repeat} with lippes of roses.
XXXIIII. Rinaldo del Melle. SOmetime when hope relyu'd me, I was cōtented to see my starre so sightly, that shines so cleare & brightly, to see my starre so sightly, that shines so cleare & brightly, that shines so cleare & brightly, O since shee first consented to leaue the world all earthly Ioy defy-ing, to leaue the world all earthly ioy defying, all earthly ioy defying, in vaine lament I, since a vayle now hideth the rarest beautie that on earth abydeth, the rarest beauty that on earth abydeth, the rarest beautie that on earth abydeth, that on the earth abydeth.
XXXV. Alfonso Ferabosco. RVbyes and perles & treasure, kingdomes, renowne & glo-ry, kingdomes, renowne and glo-ry, please the delightfull mynde, and cheare the so-ry, please the de-lightfull mynde, & cheare the so-ry, but much the greater measure of true delight he gay-neth, that for the fruits of loue, {repeat} sues & ob-tay-neth, but much the greater measure, {repeat} of true delight he gayneth, that for the fruits of Loue, {repeat} sues & obtay-neth, sues and obtay-neth.
XXXVI. Alfonso Ferabosco. O Sweet kisse full of comfort, {repeat} O Ioy to me enuy-ed, so often sought, so oft to me de-nyed, to me denyed, deny-ed. Yet thee I neuer tas-ted, O lippes so false and wyly, so false and wy-ly, that me to kisse prouo-ked, and shrounck so slyly, O lookes empoysned, O face well may I feare thee, that kilst who thee beholdes & comes not neare thee, I dye a death most pain-full, {repeat} kild with vnkindnes, farewell sweete lippes dis-dayn-full, kild with vnkindnes, fare well sweet lippes disdayne-full, I dye now farewell sweet lyppes disdaynfull.
XXXVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SOme time my hope full weak-ly, went on by lyne & lea-sure, but now it growes to do my hart some plea-sure, some time my hope full weak-ly went on by lyne and lea-sure, but now it growes to do my hart some pleasure, to do my hart some pleasure, but now it growes to do my hart some plea-sure. Yet that my hope decay not by ouer much contenting, Loue wil not giue my Ioyes their full augmenting, their full augmenting, their full augmenting, allayes my blisse that hope may be the fas-ter, but still with some desas-ter, allayes my blisse that hope may be the faster, the faster, allayes my blesse that hope may be the fas-ter.
XXXVIII. Lelio Bertani. LAdy that hand of plenty, {repeat} which gaue vnto the needefull, Lady that hand of plenty, which gaue vnto the neede-full, did steale my hart vnheedfull. did steale my hart vnheede-full, sweet theefe of loue so daynty, what will you do by theeuing, that rob whē you are giuing? but you do giue so surely, that you may rob & steale the more secure-ly, that you may rob & steale the more securely, that my poore hart be eased, {repeat} you do not that to ioy me, but stil by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, you do not that to ioy me, {repeat} but stil by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me; quite to destroy me.
XXXIX. Gironimo Conuersi. MY hart, my hart alas why dost thou Loue, my hart alas why dost thou loue thine enemy, why dost thou loue thine enemy, thine enemy, laughing so merely she goes, {repeat} laughing so merely she goes with glad-nes, with gladnes, {repeat} to see thy griefe and sad-nes, Cruell disdaine, cruell dis-dayne, merely does she goe with gladnes, merely does she goe, merely does she goe, {repeat} with gladnes, to see thy griefe & sad-nes, cruell disdayne, {repeat} lasting paine no remedy, {repeat} saue most singuler beauty, {repeat} & litle pitye, & litle litle pi-ty, saue most singuler beauty, {repeat} & litle pitty, & litle litle pi-ty.
XL. Alfonso Ferabosco. LAdy if you so spight me, if you so spight me, {repeat} if you so spight me, wherfore do you so oft kisse & delight me, kisse and delight me, wherefore do you so oft kisse and delight me, sure that my hart opprest and ouer-ioy-ed, & o-uerioyed, may breake and be destroy-ed, destroyed. If you seeke so to spill me, if you seeke so to spil me, come kisse me sweete & kill me, {repeat} so shall your hart be eased, and I shall rest content, {repeat} shall rest content and dye well pleased▪ shall
rest content, and dye well plea-sed. So shall your hart be ea-sed, and I shall rest content, {repeat} and dye well plea-sed, and dye well pleased.
XLI. Cantio rustica. Giouan Battista Pinello. WHen I would thee embrace, when I, when I would thee embrace, {repeat} when I would thee embrace, thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, thou dost but mock me. When I would thee embrace, when I, when I would thee embrace, {repeat} when I would thee embrace thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me {repeat} and when I lament, and when I lament my case, and when I lament, when I lament my case thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, {repeat}
thou cryest ty hy, and no no no no, still sayth my piggs nye, and no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no, so sayth my piggs nye, and no, and no, and no, still sayth my piggs nye.
XLII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THirsis enioyd the gra-ces, Thirsis enioyd the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet embraces, sweet embraces, yet both their ioyes were scanted, for darke it was and can-dle light they wanted, & candle light they wan-ted, where with kinde Cinthia in the heauen that shined, her nightly vayle resigned, and that fayre face disclosed, and that fayre face disclosed, then eche from others lookes such ioy deriued, then eche from others lookes such ioy de-ryued, such ioy deriued, that both with meere delight, dyed and reuyued, that both with meere delight dyed and reui-ued, reuiued.
LXIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THe Nightingale so plea-sant and so gay, the Nightingale, the Nightingale so plea-sant and so gay, in greenwood groues, in greenwood groues delights, delights to make his dwel-ling, in fields to flye chaunting his roundelay, in fields to flye, {repeat} chaunting his roun-de-lay, at liberty against the cage rebel-ling, but my poore hart, with sorowes o-uer-swel-ling, through bondage vyle, binding my {repeat} fre-dome short, no pleasure takes {repeat} in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receiueth no com-fort, {repeat} receiueth no com-fort, nor of his song receiueth no com-fort, {repeat} receiueth no com-fort.
XLIIII. The first part. William Byrd. THe fayre yong Virgin is lyke the rose vn-tayn-ted, in garden fayre while tender stalke doth beare it, sole and vntoucht, with no resort acquainted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock doth once come neare it, th'ayre full of sweetnesse, the morning fresh de-painted▪ the earth, the water, with all theyr fauours cheare it, daintie yong gal-lants, and ladyes most desi-red, delight to haue there-with, delight to haue there-with their heads and breasts attyred, daintie yong gal-
lants, and ladies most desi-red, delight to haue there-with, {repeat} their heads and breastes attyred.
XLV. The second part. BVt not so soone, from greene stock where it grow-ed, the same is pluckt, {repeat} and from the braunch remoued, as lost is all from heauen and earth that flow-ed, both fauour grace & beauty best beloued. The virgen fayre, {repeat} that hath the flowre bestow-ed, which more then life to gard it her behoued, loseth her prayse & is no more desired, of those that late vnto her loue aspired. of those that late vnto her loue as-pi-red, loseth her praise & is no more de-sired, of those that late vnto her loue aspired. of those that late vnto her loue as-pired. Heere endeth the songs of fiue parts.
Of 6. XLVI. Luca Marenzio. I Will goe dye for pure loue, except rage & disdaine come to recure loue, since in reward of all my faithfull ser-uing, my lady giues disgrace for well deseruing, and in my flames sans measure takes her disport and pleasure, takes her disporting, takes her disport & pleasure, vnlesse some frost, vnlesse some frost assuage this heate and cure loue, I will go dye for pure loue, I will go dye for pure loue.
XLVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THese that be certaine signes of my tormenting, of my tormenting, sighes they be none, no, nor any sigh so shew-eth, those haue some truce, but these haue no relen-ting, not so exhales the heate that in me gloweth, the heate that in me gloweth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this venting, makes all this venting, fierce Loue that burnes my hart, makes all this ven-ting, while with his winges the ra-ging fyre he bloweth, say Loue, say Loue with what deuise thou canst for euer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, and yet consume it neuer, keepe it in
flames still and yet consume it neuer, & yet consume it neuer, say Loue with what deuise thou canst for euer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, keepe it in flames still and yet consume it neuer, and yet consume it neuer.
XLVIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SO farre from my delight, what cares torment me, what cares torment me, what cares torment me, fieldes do record it, and vallyes and woods and mountaines, and woods and moun-taynes, and running ryuers and repo-sed foun-taynes, where I crye out, and to the heauens lament me, none other sounds but tunes of my complay-ning, Nymph of the groues or pleasant byrd once heareth, still recount I my griefe, {repeat} & her dis-dayning, to euery plant that groweth, to euery plant that groweth, or blossome beareth, or blossome bea-reth.
XLIX. The second part. SHe onely doth not feele it, {repeat} O fields, O mountaines, {repeat} O mountaines, O woods, O vallyes, O floodes and foun-taines, Oh stay no more, oh stay no more to heare a wretch appealing, oh stay no more to heare a wretch appealing, O that some one this lyfe and soule would se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed, and these myne eyes opprest would cloze for e-uer, for best were me to dye so, for best were me to dye my loue concealing, for best were me to dye so, for best were me to dye, my loue concea-ling.
L. LOe here my hart in ke-ping, I leaue with her that laughes to see me we-ping, to see me weping, oh what comfort or treasure, oh what comfort, is lyfe with her dis-pleasure? that shee which still doth payne me, may liue the more content whē griefe hath slayne me, may liue the more cōtent whē griefe hath slayne me, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slayne me, that she which still doth paine me, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne me, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slayne me, when griefe hath slayne me, may lyue the more contented, when griefe hath slayne me.
LI. Luca Marenzio. NOw must I part, now must I part my dear-ling, of lyfe and soule, and soule disseised, and Loue, oh oh what a death is parting, {repeat} is parting? but if the fates ordaine it, who can refrayne it? oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needes be packing. farewell, farewell, farewell sweet hart vnfayned, I dye to part constray-ned, but if the fates ordayne it who can refrayne it? oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needes be packing, farewell {repeat} farewell sweet hart vn-fayned, I dye to part constrayned, farewell, I dye to part constrayned.
LII. The first part. Gironimo Conuersi. ZEphirus brings the time that sweetely senteth, {repeat} with flowres & herbes & winters frost exi-leth, {repeat} Progne now chirpeth, & Philomele lamēteth, Flora the garlāds white & read com-pileth, Flora the garlands white & read compileth, {repeat} fieldes do reioyce, the frowning skye relenteth, {repeat} Ioue, to be-hold his dearest daughter smyleth, {repeat} th'ayre, th'ayre the water the earth to Ioy consen-teth, eche creature now to loue him reconcyleth, th'ayre th'ayre the water the earth to Ioy consen-teth, eche creature now to loue him reconcyleth.
LIII. The second part. BVt with me wretch the storms of woe perseuer, & heauy sighes, but with me wretch the storms of woe perseuer, & heauy sighes, but with me wretch the stormes of woe perseuer, & hea-uy sighes, which frō my hart she straineth, {repeat} that tooke the kay thereof to heauen for euer, {repeat} so that sing-ing, so that sing-ing of birds & spring time flow-ring, so that sing-ing of birds & spring time flowring, & ladies loue that mens af-fection gayn-eth, {repeat} are like a desert, {repeat} and cruell beastes deuouring, and ladies loue that mens affection gayn-eth, {repeat} are lyke a desert, {repeat} & cruell beastes deuouring.
LIIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. I was full neere my fall, & hardly scaped, & hard-ly sca-ped, & hard-ly scaped, through fond desire that headlong me transpor-ted, that Loue him selfe for me deuis'd and sha-ped, and if my reason but a whyle had stayed, to rule my sence misled and vnadui-sed, to my mishappe I had no noubt assay-ed, what a death is to lyue with loue surprised, what a death is to lyue with loue surpri-sed, what a death is to lyue with loue surpri-sed.
LV. The second part. BVt as the byrd that in due time espy-ing, that in due time espying the secret snares and deadly bush en-lymed, quick to the heauen doth mount with song and plea-sure, with song and pleasure: traynes of false lookes and faith-les wordes defying, mounting the hill so hard for to be clymed, so hard for to be clymed, I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure, I sing for Ioye of liberty the treasure, I sing, I sing for Ioy of li-berty the trea-sure.
LVI. Luca Marenzio. I Soung sometime, I soung, I soung sometime the freedome of my fan-cye, the fire extinct, the yoke and bonds subdu-ed, with hart congealed, {repeat} with hart congealed, I quencht the burning phransye, and with dis-dayne, {repeat} and with disdaine, the harmefull bayte eschewed, but now I wayle my bondage and my enchayning, all naked vnarmed, in louely netts engaged, nor by teares, nor by teares can I finde, nor by complay-ning, mercy, mercy, mercy, nor comfort nor comfort, nor yet my griefe assuaged.
LVII.The second part. BEcause my Loue too lofty and too dispightfull, & too dispight-full, while I with sighes do sound her name delightfull, doth smyle when as the flame my lyfe depri-ueth: my life depriueth: if I seek to breake of, if I seeke to breake of the strings, the strings, that bynd me, the more I flye, {repeat} the faster, I the faster, I {repeat} do find me, like a byrd in the snare in vaine that stri-ueth, in vaine that striueth, lyke a byrd in the snare in vaine that stry-ueth.
The Table of all the madrigales conteyned in these bookes, with the names of their seuerall authors, and originalles. Of 4. THese that be certaine signes. I Questi ch' inditio. Noë: Faignient. The faire Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Ioy so delights my hart. III Gioia s'abond' al cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Loue now shoot. IIII Amor ben puoi. O griefe, if yet my griefe. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donate. In vayne he seekes for beau∣tie. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What meaneth Loue to nest him. VIII Perche s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Loue when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your looke so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch. Of 5. From what part of the hea∣uen. XIII In qual parte del ciel. Filippo di Monte. The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza. 2. pars.   In euery place. XV Ogni luogo.   Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second part. XVII Frenò Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi morirò. 3. pars. Susanna fayre. Sing this for the 20. song. Alfonso Fe. XX Susann' vn iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. Susanna fayre. Sing this for the 19. song. Orlando di Las. XIX Susann' vn iour. Orlando di Lasso. When shall I cease. XXI to the note of Chi per voi non. Noë: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I saw my lady weping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. XXIIII. Come dal ciel.   So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa. Giouan Ferretti. Cruell vnkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What doth my prety dear∣ling. XXVII Che fa hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleepe myne onely iewell. XXVIII Sonno scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis.
The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2. pars.   Sound out my voyce. XXX to the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina. Liquide & watry perls. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale. XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di Lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In vn Boschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope re∣lieu'd me. XXXIIII Gia fu ch' io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini. Alfonso Ferabosco. O sweet kisse. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fù mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertani. My hart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spight me. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee em∣brace. XLI Quand' io volena. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enioyed the gra∣ces. XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alfonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol, The faire yoūg virgin. XLIIII La verginella. 1. pars. William Byrd. The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars. Of 6. I will go dye for pure loue. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that be certaine signes. XLVII Questi ch'inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far frō my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi no'l sentite. 2. pars. Loe here my hart. L Ecco ch'io lasso.   Now must I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzo. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1. pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was full neere my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my loue. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars. ¶FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA. ALTVS. Madrigales translated of foure, fiue and sixe partes, chosen out of diuers excellent Authors, vvith the first and second part of La Verginella, made by Maister Byrd, vpon tvvo Stanza's of Ariosto, and brought to speake English vvith the rest. Published by N. Yonge, in fauour of such as take pleasure in Musicke of voices. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas East, the assigné of William Byrd▪ 1588. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
To the right honourable Gilbert Lord Talbot, sonne and heire to the right noble and puissant George Earle of Shrevvesbury, Washford and Wa∣terford, Earle Marshall of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of Blackmeere, one of her Maiesties most honourable priuie councell, Iustice of the forrestes and chases by north the riuer of Trent, and knight of the most honourable order of the garter. Ni∣cholas Yonge vvisheth increase of honour, vvith all happinesse. RIght honourable, since I first began to keepe house in this Citie, it hath been no small comfort vnto mee, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants of good accompt (as well of this realme as of forreine nations) haue taken in good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poore abilitie was able to afford them, both by the exercise of Mu∣sicke daily vsed in my house, and by furnishing them with Bookes of that kinde yeerly sent me out of Italy and other places, which beeing for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetnes of Aire, verie well liked of all, but most in account with them that vnderstand that language. As for the rest, they doe either not sing them at all, or at the least with litle delight. And albeit there be some English songes lately set forth by a great Maister of Musicke, which for skill and sweetnes may content the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with varietie haue wi∣shed more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I endeuoured to get into my hands all such English Songes as were praise worthie, and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good friends, certaine Italian Madrigales translated most of them fiue yeeres agoe by a Gentleman for his priuate delight, (as not long before cer∣taine Napolitans had been englished by a verie honourable personage, and now a Coun∣cellour of estate, whereof I haue seene some, but neuer possessed any). And finding the same to bee singulerly well liked, not onely of those for whose cause I gathered them, but of many skilfull Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed the accent of the words to be well mainteined, the descant not hindred, (though some fewe notes altred) and in euerie place the due decorum kept: I was so bold (beeing well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat the rest, who willingly gaue me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some other more lately done at the request of his par∣ticular friends. Now when the same were seene to arise to a iust number, sufficient to furnish a great sett of Bookes, diuers of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to haue them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could neuer obtaine the Gentlemans consent, though I sought it by many great meanes. For his answere was euer, that those trifles beeing but an idle mans exercise, of an idle subiect, written onely for priuate recreation, would blush to be seene otherwise then by twilight, much more to bee brought into the common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he tooke his
penne, and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Bookes these verses of the Poet Martial. Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas, Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus, Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli, Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones. Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by mee, not presuming to put my sickle in an other mans corne, till such time as I heard, that the same beeing dispersed into many mens hands, were by some persons altogither vnknowen to the ow∣ner▪ like to be published in Print. Which made mee aduenture to set this worke in hand, hee beeing neither priuie nor present, nor so neere this place as by any reasonable meanes I could giue him notice. Wherin though he may take a iust offence, that I haue laid open his labours without his licence: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by straun∣gers, lame and vnperfect by meanes of false Copies, I hope that this which I haue done to auoide a greater ill, shall deserue a more fauourable excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to offer my selfe and my bold attempt to the defence and protection of your Lordship, to whose honourable hands I present the same. Assuring my selfe, that so great is the loue and affection which hee beareth to your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Bookes, will take away all displeasure and vnkindnes from mee. And although this may bee thought a greater boldnes then the first (I beeing not any way able to doe your L. such a seruice, as may de∣serue so great a fauour) yet I hope these Songes beeing hitherto well esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for themselues, shall not be thought vnwor∣thie of your honourable defence. With which hope I humbly commit your L. to the pro∣tection of the Almightie: wishing to the same, that encrease of honour which your true vertue deriued from so noble and renowmed Ancestors doeth worthely deserue. From London the first of October. 1588. Your Lordship's most humble at commandement, N. Yonge.
Of 4. I. Noe Faignient. THese that be certaine signes of my tormen-ting, no sighes, no sighes they be, nor any sigh so showeth, those haue their truce sometime, those haue their truce sometime, these no relēting, these no relenting, these no relenting, not so exhales the heate that in me gloweth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this venting, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this venting, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this ven-ting, while with his wings the raging fire he bloweth▪ say Loue, with what de-uise thou canst for euer, for euer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, & yet cōsume it neuer, keepe it in flames & yet cōsume it neuer, & yet cōsume it neuer.
II. Giouan di Macque. THe fayre Diana neuer more reuiued, the fayre Diana neuer more re-uiued, the fayre Diana neuer more reuiued, her louers hart that spyed her, her louers hart that spyed her in the foūtayne, whyle she her naked lyms in wa-ter dy-ued, then me the countrey wench sett by the mountayne, wasshing a vayle to cloth the locks refyned, {repeat} to cloth the locks refyned, that on fayre Laura's head the gold resemble, which made me quake although the Sunne then shined, though the Sunne then shyned, and euery ioynt with louing frost, and euery ioynt with louing frost to tremble, & euery ioynt with louing frost, with louing frost to tremble.
III. G.P.A. Prenestino. IOy so delights my hart & so reliues me, whē I be-hold the fayre face of my beloued, that any hard mis-chaunce or pang that griues me, that griues me is quite exild, and presently remo-ued, & if I might to perfect, & if I might to perfect vp my plea-sure, with-out controul-ment bestowe mine eyes where I repose my treasure, where I repose my trea-sure, for a crowne and a kingdome, sure posses-sed, I would not chaūge my state so sweet and bles-sed, I would not chaunge my state so sweet and blessed, for a crowne and a kingdome sure posses-sed, I would not chaunge my state so sweet & bles-sed, my state so sweet and bles-sed.
IIII. G.P.A. Prenestino. FAlse Loue now shoot & spare not, false Loue, now do thy worst I care not, & to dispatch me, vse all thine art & all thy craft to catch me, vse all thine art & all thy craft to catch me, for yeares a-misse bestowed & time consu-med, in vaine pursutes I languish, I languish, that brought me nothing else, that brought me nothing else but griefe & anguish, & now at length haue vowed at libertie to lyue, since to assayle me, both thy bow & thy brand nought doth auaile thee, for from thee good nor ill, {repeat} com-fort nor sorow, I will not hope nor feare now nor to morow, I will not hope, I will not hope nor feare now nor to morow.
V. Baldessar Donato. O griefe if yet my griefe be not bele-ued, O griefe, {repeat} if yet my griefe be not belee-ued, crye with thy voyce outstretched, may heare my iust complaining, {repeat} my iust com-playning. And when thou hast her told, {repeat} my state most wret-ched, tell her that though my hart be thus tormen-ted, I could be well contented, if she that now doth grieue me, had but the least desire, once to relieue me, once to relieue me, once to relieue me, had but the least desire, once to relieue me, once to relieue me, once to relieue me.
VI. Baldessar Donato. AS in the night wee see the sparks, we see the sparks reui-ued, & quite extinct, so soone as day appe-areth, so whē I am of my sweet sonne depriued, new feares approch & ioy my hart forbea-reth, but not so soone, but not so soone she is againe ariued, as feare retyreth, & present hope me cheareth, O sacred light, O re-turne, O turne againe to blesse me, & driue away this feare that doth op-presse me. And driue away this feare that doth oppresse me. O sacred light, O re-turnne, O turne againe to blesse me, & driue away this feare that doth op-presse me, & driue away this feare that me oppresseth & driue away this feare that doth oppresse me, & driue away this feare, that doth oppress me.
VII. Filippo di Monte. IN vayne he seekes for beautie that excelleth, that hath not seene her eyes where Loue seiorneth, how sweetly heere and there the same she turneth, he knowes not how Loue healeth, he knowes not how Loue healeth, and how he quelleth, he knowes not how Loue heales & how he quelleth, that knowes not how she sighs & sweet be-guyleth, that knowes not how she sighes and sweet beguyleth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smy-leth, and how she sweetly speaks & sweetly smy-leth, and sweetly smy-leth.
VIII. G.P.A. Prenestino. WHat meaneth Loue to nest him, in the fayre eyes ad-mi-red, with louely grace & heauenly spryt in-spi red, inspi-red, of my mystres delightfull, of my mys-tres delightfull, enuious dames confesse & be not spytefull, enuious dames con-fesse & be not spite-full, Oh fooles do you not mynd it, that Loue hath sought & neuer yet could finde it, from Sunne arysing, from Sunne arysing till where he goes, where he goes to rest him, a brauer place then in her eyes to nest him. A brauer place then in her eyes to nest him▪ a brauer place then in her eyes to nest him.
IX. G.P.A. Prenestino. SWeet Loue when hope was flow-ring, {repeat} with fruits of recōpence for my deser-uing, for my deser-uing, rest was the price of all my faithfull ser-uing, oh spitefull death accursed, oh lyfe most cruell, the first by wrong, the first by wrong doth paine me, and all my hope hath turned, and all my hope hath turned to lamen-ting, the last against my will doth here detayne me, fayne would I finde my Iuell, but death to spite me, yet with a sweet relen-ting, me thincks within my hart, her place she holdeth, her place she holdeth, and what my torment is, plainly be-holdeth. & what my torment is, playnly beholdeth, plainly beholdeth.
X. Marc' Antonio Pordenone▪ LAdy that hand of plenty, {repeat} which gaue vnto, which gaue to them the needefull, did steale my hart vnheedefull, sweet these of Loue so dainty, {repeat} that rob when you are geuing? but you do giue so surely, but you do giue so surely, {repeat} that you may robbe and steale {repeat} the more securely, If you sometime be pleased, {repeat} that my poore hart be eased, you do it not to Ioy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me. but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me.
XI. Giaches de Vuert. WHo will ascend to heauen & there obtayne me, my witts Madame and silly sence decayed? for since I tooke my wound that sore doth payne me, from your faire eyes, my sprites are al dismayed. Nor of so great a losse I do complayne me, if it encrease not, {repeat} {repeat} but in some boundes be stayed, but if I still grow worse, I shall be lotted, I shalbe lot-ted, to wander through the world fond & assot-ted. {repeat} but if I still grow worse I shalbe lot-ted, I shalbe lot-ted, to wander through the world, {repeat} fond & assot-ted. to wander through the world fond & assotted.
XII. Cornelio Verdonch. LAdy your looke so gentle so to my hart deepe sincketh, {repeat} that of none other, nor of my selfe it thinck-eth, why then do you constrayne me, (cruel) to liue complayning, in paine & sadnes, when one sweet word may gayne me, when one sweet word may gayne me, peace to my thoughts and euerlasting glad-nes▪ peace to my thoughts peace to my thoughts, and euerlasting glad-nes, and euerlas-ting gladnes, and euer las-ting, gladnes, and euerlasting glad-nes, peace to my thoughts and euerlasting glad-nes. Heere endeth the songs of foure parts.
Of 5. XIII. The first part. Filippo di Monte. FRom what part of the heauen, from what example brought was the mould whence Nature hath deriued that sweet face full of beautie, that sweet face full of beau-tie, in which she striued to proue in earth her powre aboue was am-ple, was neuer Nymph nor syluane queene a-dored, that so daintie fine locks in ayre display-ed, nor hart diuine with so great vertue sto-red, yet by her lookes my lyfe is all betrayed.
XIIII. The second part. Filippo di Monte. IN vaine he seeketh for beautie that excel-leth, that hath not seene her eyes where Loue seiour-neth, he knowes not how Loue heales & how he quelleth, that knowes not how she sighes & sweete beguileth, & how she sweetly speakes & sweetly smy-leth, he knowes not how Loue hea-leth, nor how he quelleth, that knowes not how she sighes, & sweet beguyleth, & how she sweetly speaketh, & how she sweetly speakes & sweetly smy-leth.
XV. IN euery place I finde my griefe & an-guish, saue where I see those beames, those beames that me haue bur-ned, & eke myne eyes to floods of teares haue turned, haue turned, to floods of teares haue tur-ned, thus in extreamest pangs, extreamest pangs each houre I languish, each houre I languish, I languish, O me, O me, my shining starre so sweet & sacred, cause of all comfort & of this world the Iew-ell, for want of thee my lyfe, my lyfe I haue in hatred, my lyfe I haue in hatred, was neuer griefe so great, {repeat} nor death so cru-ell. was neuer griefe so great, {repeat} nor death so cruell.
XVI. The first part. Luca Marenzio. THirsis to dye desired, Thirsis to dye desired, marking her eyes that to his hart was nea-rest, no lesse was fyred, sayd to him, Oh harts loue dearest, {repeat} alas forbeare to dye now, {repeat} by thee I lyue, with thee I wish to dye too. by thee I lyue, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too, by thee I lyue, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too,
XVII. The second part. THirsis that heat refrayned wherewith in hast to dye he did betake him, thinking it death yet that lyfe wold not forsake him, and whyle his eyes full fixed he retayned on her eyes full of plea-sure and louely Nectar sweet from them he tasted, his dainty Nymph that now the haruest of Loues treasure, sayd thus with eyes all trembling faint and wasted, I dye now, {repeat} the shephard then replyed, and I sweet lyfe too, and I sweet lyfe do dye too, and I sweet lyfe do dye too. {repeat}
XVIII. The third part. THus these two louers so fortunately dyed, of death so sweete so happy & so de-syred, & so de-syred, that to dye so againe, {repeat} theyr lyfe retyred. that to dye so a-gaine, {repeat} their lyfe retyred, retyred.
XIX. Orlando di Lasso. SVsanna fayre, {repeat} sometime of loue requested, {repeat} sometyme of loue requested, by two old men whome her sweete lookes allur'd, was in her hart {repeat} full sad & sore molested, {repeat} ful sad & sore molested, seing the force her chastitie endur'd, to them she said, if I by craft procur'd do yeld, do yeld to you my body to abuse it, I kill my soule, & if I do refuse it, you will me iudge to death reproch-fully, but better it is {repeat} in innocence to chuse it, in innocence to chuse it, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye. then by my fault, {repeat} t'offend my God on hye.
XX. Alfonso Ferabosco. SVsanna fayre sometime of loue requested, by two old men, {repeat} whome her sweet lookes al-lur'd, was in her hart full sad and sore molested, full sad and sore moles-ted, seeing the force, seeing the force her chastitie endur'd, to them she sayd, if I by craft procur'd, If I by craft pro-cur'd, do yeld to you my bodie to abuse it, I lose my soule, and if I do refuse it, you will me iudge to death, {repeat} reprochfully, but better it is in innocence to chuse it, in innocence to chuse
it. then by my fault, then by my fault, {repeat} t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault, {repeat} {repeat} t'offend my God on hye, my God on hye.
XXI. Noe Faignient. WHen shall I cease lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting, lamen-ting, lamenting, lamenting, whē shall I cease lamen-ting, when, shall I cease, {repeat} whē shall I cease lamēting, whē shall I cease lamenting? whē shall my plaint & moning, to tunes of Ioy be, to tunes of Ioy be turned, {repeat} to tunes of Ioy be turned, good Loue, {repeat} leaue thy tormēting, good Loue leaue thy tor-menting, good Loue leaue thy tormēting, to long thy flames within my hart haue bur-ned, {repeat} within my hart haue burned. O graūt alas with quicknes, {repeat} some litle cōfort, {repeat} some little cōfort, {repeat} for so long a sicknes some litle cōfort, some litle cōfort, some litle cōfort for so long a sicknes.
XXII. Luca Marenzio. I Must: Oh haples, all haples, I must depart all haples, but leaue to you my careful hart oppressed, so that if I liue hartles, if I liue hartles, Loue doth a worke miraculous & blessed, if I lyue hartles, if I lyue hartles, Loue doth a worke miracu-lous and blessed, but so great paynes assayle me, that sure ere it be long, {repeat} my lyfe will fayle me, {repeat} that sure ere it be long, {repeat} my life will fayle me. {repeat}
XXIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Saw my lady wee-ping, I saw my lady wee-ping, & Loue did languish, & of their playnt ensued so rare concen-ting, that neuer yet was heard more sweet la-menting, that neuer yet was heard more sweet lamen-ting, was heard more sweet lamenting, made all of tender pity and mournfull an-guish, & mournfull anguish, & mournfull an-guish, the floods forsa-king their delightful swel-ling, their swelling, the floods forsaking their delightfull swelling, their [old] delightfull swel-ling, stayd to attend their playnt, the wyndes enraged, the
windes enrag-ed, still & content to quiet calme assuaged, still & content to quiet calme assuaged, their wonted storming, their wonted storming. {repeat} and euery blast rebelling, and euery blast rebelling.
XXIIII. The second part. LIke as from heauen, the dew full softly showring, doth fall, the dew so softly showring, doth fall, and so refresh and so refresh both fieldes and clo-ses, both fieldes and clo-ses, filling the parched flowres with sappe and sauor: so while she bath'd the violets & the roses, vpon her louely cheekes, vpon her louely cheekes so freshly flowring, so freshly flow-ring, the spring renu'd his force with her sweete fauour, the spring reneu'd his force with her sweete fauour, the spring reneu'd his forces with her sweete fa-uour, so while she bath'd the violetts & the
roses vpon her louely cheekes, vpon her louely cheekes so freshly flowring, so freshly flow-ring, the spring renu'd his force with her sweete fauour, the spring renu'd his force with her sweete fauour, the spring renu'd his for-ces with her sweete fa-uour.
XXV. Giouan Ferretti. SO gratious is thy selfe, so faire so framed, so gracious is thy selfe, so fayre so framed. So gratious is thy selfe, so fayre so framed, {repeat} so faire so framed, that who so sees thee, {repeat} without a hart enflamed, either he liues not, {repeat} eyther he lyues not, or loues delight he knowes not, eyther he lyues not, {repeat} either he lyues not, or loues delight he knowes not.
XXVI. Giouan Ferretti. CRuell vnkinde, my hart thou hast bereft me, my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, Cruell vnkinde, my hart thou hast bereft me, my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, and wilt not leaue yet, and wilt not leaue while any lyfe is left me, while any lyfe is left me, and yet, and yet, and yet still will I loue thee, and yet, and yet, and yet still will I loue thee.
XXVII. Luca Marenzio. WHat doth my prety dear-ling? what doth my pre-ty dearling? what doth, what doth my song & chaun-ting? that they sing not of her, {repeat} the prayse and vaun-ting? to her I giue my violets and garland sweetly smelling, for to crowne her sweet locks pure gold ex-celling, to her I giue my violets and garland sweetly smelling, for to crowne her sweet locks pure gold ex-celling, for to crowne her sweet locks pure gold excel-ling.
XXVIII. The first part. Stephano Felis. SLeepe Sleepe, mine onely Iuell, mine onely Iuell, Sleepe Sleepe, mine onely Iuell, Sleepe Sleepe, myne onely Iu-ell, myne one-ly Iuell, much more thou didst delight me, much more thou didst delight me, then my belou'd too cruell, that hid her face to spyte me, that hid, that hid her face to spyte me, that hid, that hid her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, much more thou didst delight me, much more thou didst delight me, then my belou'd too cruell, that hid her face to spyte me, that hid, that hid her face to spyte me, that hid, that hid her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me.
XXIX. The second part. THou bringst her home full nye me, whyle she so fast did flye me, whyle she so fast did flye me, so fast did flye me, while she so fast did flye me, by thy meanes I be-hold those eyes so shy-ning, long time absen-ted, long time ab-sented, that looke so mylde appeased, thus is my griefe declyning, {repeat} thou in thy dreames dost make desire well pleased, Sleepe if thou be lyke death as thou art fayned, as thou art fayned, as thou art fay-ned, a happy lyfe by such a death were gayned. {repeat} a happy lyfe by such a death were gayned. {repeat}
XXX. Gianetto Palestina. SOund out my voyce with pleasant tunes recording, re-cor-ding, the new delight that Loue to me inspy-reth, that Loue to me in-spyreth, pleas'd & content, content with that my mynde desi-reth, thanked be Loue so heauenly Ioyes affor-ding, she that my plaints with rigor long reiected, reiec-ted, binding my hart with those her golden tresses, with those her golden tres-ses, In recompence of all my long distres-ses, sayd with a sigh, thy griefe hath me in-fec-ted, sayd with a sigh, thy griefe hath me infec-ted, hath me in-fected.
XXXI. Luca Marenzio. LIquid and watry perles, {repeat} Loue wept full kindely, Loue wept full kinde-ly, to quēch my hart enflamed, but he alas, {repeat} alas, {repeat} a-las vnfriendly so great a fyre had framed, as were ynough to burne me, {repeat} without recomfort, as were ynough to burne me, without recomfort, and into ashes turne me.
XXXII. Orlando di Lasso. THe Nightingale so pleasant & so gay, the Nightingale so pleasant & so gay, {repeat} in grenewood groues delights to make his dwelling, in fields to flye chaunting his roundelay, in fieldes to flye, chaunting his roundelay, {repeat} at libertie against the cage rebelling but my poore hart, {repeat} with sorowes ouerswelling, {repeat} through bondage vyle bynding my free-dome short, bynding my freedome short, no pleasure takes, {repeat} no pleasure takes in these his sports excel-ling, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, re-ceiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort.
XXXIII. Giouan Ferretti. WIthin a greenwood sweet of myrtle sauor, whē as the earth was with faire flowres reuested, I saw a shepherd with his Nymph that rested, thus spake the Nymph then, say (sweet Loue) to thy loue, tell me my dearling wher is thy hart bestowed, where is thy lyking? the shepherd answer'd thē with a deep sighing all full of sweetnes & of sorow mixed, {repeat} on thee daintie deare lyfe, my hart is fix-ed, my hart is fixed, with that the gentle Nymph full sweetly smy-ling, with kinde words of delight & flatring glo-ses, she kindly kist his cheeke, {repeat} with lips of roses, with lips, with lips of roses she kindly kist his cheek, {repeat} with lyps of roses, with lyps, {repeat} with lyps of roses.
XXXIIII. Rinaldo del Melle. SOmetime: To see my starre so sightly, sometime whē hope relieu'd me, I was cō-tented, to see my starre so sightly, that shines so cleare and bright-ly, O since she first consented, to leaue the world all earthly Ioy defying, to leaue the world all earthly Ioy defying, clouds of care all about my hart are fly-ing, in vaine lament I, since a vayle now hy-deth, the rarest beauty that on earth abydeth, the rarest beauty that on earth aby-deth, the rarest beauty that on earth aby-death, the rarest beauty that on earth abydeth.
XXXV. Alfonso Ferabosco. RVbyes and▪ pearles & treasure, rubyes and pearles & trea-sure, kingdomes renowne and glory, kingdomes renowne and glory, please the delightfull mind and cheare the sory, please the de-lightfull mind & cheare the sory, & much do cheare the so-ry, but much the greater measure, but much the greater mea-sure, of true delight he gayneth, that for the fruites of Loue sues and obtay-neth, sues and obtayneth, but much the greater measure, the greater measure, of true delights he gayneth, that for the fruits of Loue, that for the fruits of Loue, sues and ob-tay-neth, obtayneth.
XXXVI. Alfonso Ferabosco. O Sweet kisse ful of cōfort, O sweet kisse ful of com-fort, O sweet kysse ful of cōfort, O ioy to me enuied {repeat} so oftē sought, so oftē, so oftē sought, so oft to me denyed. For thee my life is wasted yet thee I neuer tasted, O lippes so false & wyly, so false & wyly {repeat} that me to kisse prouok'd & shroūck so slyly, O looks empoysned {repeat} O face wel may I feare thee, {repeat} that kilst who thee beholds, & cōes not neare thee, I dye a death most painfull I dye now, kild with vnkindnes, {repeat} farewell sweet lippes disdainfull, kild with vn-kyndnes, I dye now, kild with vnkindnes, farewell sweet lyppes disdaynfull, kild with vnkindnes, farewell sweet lippes disdaynfull, I dye now, farewel sweet lips disdainfull.
XXXVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SOmetime my hope full weakly wēt on by lyne & leasure, but now it growes to do my hart some pleasure, sometime my hope full weak-ly, {repeat} went on by lyne & leasure, but now it growes to do my hart, to do my hart some pleasure. Yet that my hope decay not, my hope decay not, by ouer much contēting, Loue will not giue my Ioyes their full augmen-ting, Loue will not giue my ioyes their ful augmē-ting, but still with some desaster, allayes my blisse that hope may be the fas-ter, but still with some desaster, allayes my blisse that hope may be the faster, allayes my blisse, that hope may be the fas-ter, that hope may be the fas-ter.
XXXVIII. Lelio Bertani. LAdy that hād of plē-ty, which gaue vnto the needfull, Lady that hād of plēty, which gaue vnto the needfull, did steale my hart vnheedful, did steale my hart vnheedfull, sweet these of Loue so dainty, what will you do by theuing, that rob whē you are geuing? but you do giue so surely, so surely, that you may rob & steale the more secure-ly, the more secure-ly, If you sometime be plea-sed, that my poore hart be eased, be ea-sed, you do not that to ioye me, quite to destroy me, you do not that to ioy me, but stil by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me but stil by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me.
XXXIX. Gironimo Conuersi. MY hart alas why dost thou loue, {repeat} why dost thou loue thine enemy, my hart alas why dost thou loue thine enemy, thy mortall enemy, laughing so merely she goes, merely with gladnes, merely, laughing so merely does she go with gladnes, to see thy griefe & sadnes, cruell disdayne, merely does she go with gladnes, with gladnes, merely does she goe with glad-nes, with gladnes, to see thy griefe & sadnes, cruell disdayne, las-ting payn no remedy, {repeat} lasting payne no remedy, saue most singuler beauty, {repeat} & litle pitty, and little litle pity, saue most singuler beauty {repeat} and litle pitty, and litle little pitty.
XL. Alfonso Ferabosco. LAdy if you so spight me, if you so spight me, so spight me, wherfore do you so oft kisse & delight me, wherfore do you so oft kisse & delight me? sure that my hart opprest & ouer ioy-ed, may breake and be destroyed. sure that my hart opprest, may break & be destroyed, de-stroyed, may break & be destroyed. If you seeke so to spill me, if you seeke so to spill me, come kisse me sweet & kill me, come kisse me sweet & kill me, so shal your hart be eased, and I, {repeat} shal rest cōtent, {repeat} & dye well pleased. & dye wel pleased, {repeat} wel pleased▪ so shal your hart be eased, & I, shal rest cō-tent {repeat} & dye wel pleased, {repeat} & dye wel pleased, wel pleased.
XLI. Cantio rustica. Giouan Battista Pinello. WHen I would thee embrace, {repeat} whē I would thee embrace, when I would thee embrace, thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me {repeat} thou dost but mock me, when I would thee embrace {repeat} whē I would thee embrace, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, {repeat} & when I lament my case, & when I lament my case, thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, {repeat} and no no no no no no no no no so sayth my piggs nye, and no no no no no no no no no no no no no, and no, & no, so sayth my piggs nye, and no no no no no no no no, still sayth my piggs nye.
XLII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THirsis enioy'd the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet embraces, of Clori's sweet embraces, embra-ces, yet both their ioyes, {repeat} were scanted, for dark it was & candle light they wan-ted, for dark it was & candle light, & candle light they wanted, wherwith kinde Cinthia in the heauen that shi-ned, her nightly vayle resigned, resig-ned, and that fayre face disclosed, faire face disclosed, wher Loue & Ioy were met & both reposed, thē eche from others looke such ioy deriued, that both with meere delight died & reui-ued, died & reuiued, thē eche frō o-ther, thē eche frō others lookes such ioy deriued, that both of meere delight died & reuiued, {repeat} died & reui-ued.
LXIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THe Nightingale so plea-sant and so gay, the Nightingale so plea-sant and so gaye, and so gaye, and so gaye▪ in grenewood groues delights to make his dwelling, delights, delights to make his dwelling, to make his dwelling, in fields to flye chaunting his roun-delay, in fieldes to flye chaunting his roundelay, chaunting his roundelay, at liberty against the cage rebelling, rebelling, but my poore hart, {repeat} with sorrowes ouerswelling through bondage vyle, bynding my freedome short▪ {repeat} no pleasure takes, {repeat} in
these his sports excelling, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, receiueth no comfort, no com-fort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, receiueth no comfort, no comfort.
XLIIII. William Byrd. THe fayre yong virgin, the fayre yong vir-gin is like the rose vn-tain-ted in garden faire while tēder stalke doth beare it, sole & vntoucht with no resort acquainted, with no resort acquainted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock, doth once come nere it, th'ayre full of sweetnes, the morning fresh depainted, the earth the water, {repeat} with all their fa-uors cheere it, daintie yong gal-lants, yong galāts & ladies most desi-red, de-light to haue ther-with, to {repeat} their heads & brests, their heads & brests at-ty-red, daintie {repeat} yong gallāts, & ladies most desi-red, de-light to haue ther-with, to haue ther-with, their heads & brests, their heds & brests atty-red.
XLV. The second patt. BVt not so soone, {repeat} {repeat} frō greene stock, {repeat} wher it growed, the same is pluckt, {repeat} & frō the braūch re-moued, remo-ued, as lost is all frō heauē & earth, {repeat} that flow-ed, both fauor grace & beauty best belo-ued. The virgin fayre, {repeat} that hath the flowre bestowed, the flowre bestowed, which more thē life to gard it her behoued, loseth her praise & is no more desired, of those that late vnto her loue aspi-red. of those that late vnto her loue aspired. loseth her praise & is no more desired, of those that late vnto her loue aspi-red. of those that late, vnto her loue aspired. Heere endeth the songs of fiue parts.
Of 6 XLVI. Luca Marenzio. I Will goe dye for pure loue, except rage and disdayne come to recure loue, since in reward of all my faythful seruing, my lady giues disgrace for well deseruing, & in my flame sans measure, takes her disport and pleasure, takes her disporting, takes her disport and plea-sure, vnles some frost, vnles some frost assuage this heate & cure loue, I will goe dye for pure loue, I will goe dye for pure loue.
XLVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THese that be certaine signes of my tormēting, of my tormēting, sighes be they none no, nor any sigh so showeth, nor any sigh so show-eth, haue no re-len-ting, not so exhales the heat that in me glow-eth, not so exhales the heat that in me gloweth, the heat that in me glow-eth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes al this vēting, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes al this vēting, {repeat} while with his wings the raging fire he blow-eth, say Loue, {repeat} with what deuise thou eāst for euer, kepe it in flames & yet cōsume it neuer, {repeat} kepe it in flames still & yet cōsume it neuer, {repeat} say loue, say loue with what deuise thou cāst for euer, kepe it in flames stil & yet cōsume it neuer, & yet {repeat}
XLVIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. SO farre from my delight what cares tormēt me, what cares torment me, what cares torment me, fieldes do record it, and vallyes, and vallyes, & woods and mountaines, and running ryuers, & running ryuers, & repo-sed foūtaines, where I crye out, and to the heauens lament me, lament me, none other sounds but tunes of my complayning, Nymph of the groues or pleasant byrd once heareth, still recount I my grieues and her disday-ning, to euery plant that grow-eth, to euery plant that grow-eth, or blossome beareth, or blossome bea-reth.
XLIX. The second part. SHe onely doth not feele it, {repeat} she onely doth not feele it, O sweete fieldes, O fieldes O mountaines, O mountaines, O floods O fountaines, O floods O foun-taines, O stay no more, O stay no more, to heare a wretch appealing, O staye no more to heare a wretch appealing, to heare a wretch appealing, O that some one this lyfe and soule would seuer, O that some one this lyfe and soule would se-uer, and these myne eyes op-pressed, {repeat} would close for e-uer, for best were me to dye so, for best were me to dye my loue concea-ling, for best were me to dye so, my loue concealing, for best were me to dye my loue concealing.
L. LOe here my hart in keeping I leaue with her that laughes, {repeat} to see me wee-ping, to see me we-ping, Oh what comfort or treasure, {repeat} breake hart & dye then, that she that still doth payne me, that she that still doth paine me, may lyue the more content when grief hath slain me, may lyue the more content when grief hath slaine me, may liue the more con-tent when griefe hath slaine me, that she that stil doth paine me, that she that stil doth payne me, may lyue the more content when griefe hath slaine me, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne me, may lyue the more content when griefe hath slayne me.
LI. Luca Marenzio. NOw must I part, {repeat} now must I part my dear-ling, of lyfe & soule dis-sei-sed, & Loue therwith is pleased, oh what a death is parting? is parting? oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needes be packing, fare-well, fare-well, {repeat} sweet hart vnfay-ned, I dye to part constrained. Oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needes be packing, farewell, farewell, {repeat} sweet hart vnfayned, I dye to part constrayned, fare-well sweet hart vnfayned, I dye to part constrayned.
LII. Gironimo Conuersi. ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, Zephirus bringeth, Zephirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, with flowres & herbes & winters frost ex-ileth, Progne now chirpeth & Philomele lamenteth, Flora the garlands white & red compileth, {repeat} Flora the garlands, white and red com-pileth, fieldes do reioyce the frowning skye re-lenteth, Ioue to behold his dearest daughter smyleth, {repeat} th'ayre the water, th'ayre the water, the earth to Ioy consenteth, eche creature now to Loue, eche creature now to Loue him reconcyleth, th'ayre the water, th'ayre the water the erth to ioy cōsēteth, ech creature now to loue, {repeat} him recōcy-leth.
LIII. The second part. BVt with me wretch the stormes of woe perseuer & hea-uy sighs, stormes of woe perseuer & heauy sighs, but with me wretch the stormes of woe perseuer and heauy sighes, stormes of woe perseuer & heau-uy sighes, which frō my hart she strayneth, {repeat} that tooke the kay thereof to heauen for euer, that took the kay therof to heauen for euer, so that sing-ing, of birdes & spring time flouring, so that sing-ing of birdes, so that sing-ing of birdes & spring time flowring, & {repeat} & Ladies loue that mēs affectiō gayneth, are lyke a desert, are like a de-sert, & cruel beast deuouring, & ladies loue that mēs affecti-on gaineth, are like a desert, are lyke a de-sert▪ & cruell beastes deuouring.
LIIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Was: And hardly scaped, I was ful neare my fall, & hardly scaped, through fond desyre that hedlong me trans-ported, and with the darts, and with the netts I sported, which Loue him selfe for me deuis'd and sha-ped, and if my reason but a whyle had stayed, but a while had stayed, to rule my sence misled and vnadui-sed, I had no doubt assay-ed, what a death is to liue, by Loue surprised, by Loue surpri-sed, what a death is to lyue by Loue surpri-sed.
LV. The second part. BVt as the byrd that in due time espying, that in due time espying, the secret snare and deadly bush enly-med, the secret snare and deadly bush enlymed, quick to the heauen doth mount, {repeat} with song and pleasure: traynes of false looks & faythles words defying, mounting the hill so hard for to be clymed, I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure, I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure, I sing for Ioy of liberty the trea-sure, I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure.
LVI. The first part. Luca Marenzio. I Soung sometime I Soung, the fyre extinct the yoke & bonds subdued, with hart con-gealed, {repeat} I quencht the burning phrensie, & with disdaine, & with dis-dayne the harmefull bayte eschued, but now I wayle my bonds & my enchai-ning, vnarmed, in louely nettes engaged, nor by teares, nor by teares, nor by teares can I finde, nor by complayning, mercie nor comfort, mercie nor comfort, nor my griefe assuaged, assuaged.
LVII. The second part. BEcause my Loue too loftie & dispightfull, and too dis-pightfull, while I with sighes resound her name de-lightfull, doth smyle when as the flame my lyfe depri-ueth, my lyfe depriueth: If I seeke to breake of from the strings that bynde me, if I seeke to breake of the strings that bynde me, like the byrd in the snare in vayne that stri-ueth. in the snare in vaine that striueth, lyke the byrd in the snare in vayne that stri-ueth. ¶FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales conteyned in these bookes, with the names of their seuerall authors, and originalles. Of 4. THese that be certaine signes. I Questi ch' inditio. Noë: Faignient. The faire Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Ioy so delights my hart. III Gioia s'abond' al'cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Loue now shoot. IIII Amor ben puoi. O griefe, if yet my griefe. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donate. In vayne he seekes for beau∣tie. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What meaneth Loue to nest him. VIII Perche s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Loue when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your looke so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch. Of 5. From what part of the hea∣uen. XIII In qual parte del ciel. Filippo di Monte. The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza. 2. pars.   In euery place. XV Ogni luogo.   Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second part. XVII Frenò Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi morirò. 3. pars. Susanna fayre. XIX Susann' vn iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fayre. XX Susann' vn cour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI to the note of Chi per voi non. Noë: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I saw my lady weping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. XXIIII Come dal ciel.   So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa Giouan Ferretti. Cruell vnkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What doth my prety dear∣ling. XXVII Che fa▪ hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleepe myne onely iewell. XXVIII Sonno scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2. pars. Sound out my voyce. XXX to the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide & watry perls. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale. XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di Lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In vn Boschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope re∣lieu'd me. XXXIIII Gia fu ch' io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini. Alfonso Ferabosco. O sweet kisse. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fù mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertani. My hart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spight me. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee em∣brace. XLI Quand'io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enioyed the gra∣ces. XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alfonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol, The faire yoūg virgin. XLIIII La verginella. 1. pars. William Byrd. The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars. Of 6. I will go dye for pure loue. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that be certaine signes. XLVII Questi ch'inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far frō my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi no'l sentite. 2. pars. Loe here my hart. L Ecco ch'io lasso.   Now must I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzo. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1. pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was full neere my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my loue. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars. ¶FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA. TENOR. Madrigales translated of foure, fiue and sixe parts, chosen out of diuers excellent Authors, vvith the first and second part of La Verginella, made by Maister Byrd, vpon two Stanz's of Ariosto, and brought to speake English with the rest. Published by N. Yonge, in fauour of such as take pleasure in Musick of voices. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas East, the assignè of William Byrd. 1588. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
To the right honourable Gilbert Lord Talbot, sonne and heire to the right noble & puissant George Earle of Shrewesbury, Washford and Wa∣terford, Earle Marshal of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, & Strange of Blackmeere, one of hir Maiesties most honorable priuie councel, Iustice of the forrests and chases by north the riuer of Trent, and knight of the most honourable order of the garter. Ni∣cholas Yong wisheth increase of honour, with all happinesse. RIght honourable, since I first began to keepe house in this Citie, it hath been no small comfort vnto mee, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants of good accompt (as well of this realme as of forreine nations) haue taken in good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poore abilitie was able to affoord them, both by the exercise of Mu∣sicke daily vsed in my house, and by furnishing them with Bookes of that kinde yeerely sent me out of Italy and other places, which beeing for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetnes of Aire, verie well liked of all, but most in account with them that vnderstand that language. As for the rest, they doe either not sing them at all, or at the least with litle delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set forth by a great Maister of Musicke, which for skill and sweetnes may content the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with varietie, haue wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I endeuoured to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthie, and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good friends, certaine Italian Madrigales translated most of them fiue yeeres agoe by a Gentleman for his priuate delight, (as not long before cer∣taine Napolitans had been englished by a verie honourable personage, and now a Coun∣cellour of estate, whereof I haue seene some, but neuer possessed any.) And finding the same to be singulerly well liked, not onely of those for whose cause I gathered them, but of many skilfull Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed the accent of the words to be well mainteined, the descant not hindred, (though some fewe notes altred) and in euerie place the due decorum kept: I was so bolde (beeing well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreate the rest, who willingly gaue me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some other more lately done at the request of his parti∣cular friends. Now when the same were seene to arise to a iust number, sufficient to furnish a great set of Books, diuers of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to haue them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could neuer obtaine the Gentlemans consent, though I sought it by many great meanes. For his answer was euer, that those trifles being but an idle mans exercise, of an idle subiect, written onely for priuate recreation, would blush to be seene otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he tooke his
penne, and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Bookes these verses of the Poet Martial. Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas, Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus, Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli, Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones. Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by mee, not presuming to put my sickle in an other mans corne, till such time as I heard, that the same beeing dispersed into many mens hands, were by some persons altogither vnknowen to the ow∣ner, like to be published in Print. Which made mee aduenture to set this worke in hand, he beeing neither priuie nor present, nor so neere this place as by any reasonable meanes I could giue him notice. Wherein though he may take a iust offence, that I haue laid open his labours without his licence: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by straun∣gers, lame and vnperfect by meanes of false Copies, I hope that this which I haue done to auoide a greater ill, shall deserue a more fauourable excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to offer my selfe and my bold attempt to the defence and protection of your Lordship, to whose honourable hands I present the same. Assuring my selfe, that so great is the loue and affection which hee beareth to your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Bookes, will take away all displeasure and vnkindnes from mee. And although this may be thought a greater boldnes then the first (I being not any way able to doe your L. such a seruice, as may de∣serue so great a fauour) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well esteemed of all, shalbe so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for themselues, shall not be thought vnwor∣thie of your honourable defence. With which hope I humbly commit your L. to the pro∣tection of the Almightie: wishing to the same, that encrease of honour which your true vertue deriued from so noble and renowmed Ancestors doeth worthely deserue. From London the first of October. 1588. Your Lordshp's most humble at commandement, N. Yonge.
Of 4. I. Noe Faignient. THese that be certaine signes of my tormēting, no sighes, {repeat} no sighes they be nor a-ny sigh, nor a-ny sigh, so showeth, those haue their truce somtime, those haue their truce somtime, these no relēting, these no relenting, not so exhales the heate that in me glow-eth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this vēting, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this vēting, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this vēting, while with his wings the raging fire he bloweth, while with his wings the raging fire he blow-eth, say Loue with what deuise thou cāst for euer, with what deuise thou canst for e-uer, keepe it in flames & yet cōsume it neuer, & yet cōsume it neuer, keepe it in flames & yet consume it neuer & yet consume it neuer.
II. Giouan di Macque. THe faire Diana neuer more reuiued, the faire Diana neuer more reuiued, neuer more reuiued, hir louers hart that spied hir {repeat} in the fountaine, while she hir naked lymmes in wa-ter dy-ued, then me the coūtry wench set by the moun-tayne, washing a vale, {repeat} to cloth the lockes refy-ned, washing a vale to cloth the lockes refined, that on faire Laura's head the gold resemble, which made me quake although the sunne thē shined, though the sunne thē shined, & euery ioynt with louing frost to tremble, and euery ioynt with louing frost to tremble, with louing frost to tremble.
III. G.P.A. Prenestino. IOY so delights my hart {repeat} & so relieues mee, whē I behold ye face of my beloued, belo-ued, that a-ny hard mischance or pang that grieues mee, mischance or pang that grieues mee, is quite exiled, & presently remo-ued, & if, & if I might to perfite vp my pleasure, without controulment, bestow myne eyes where I repose, where I repose my trea-sure, for a crowne & a kingdome sure possessed, sure possessed, I would not change my state so sweet, I would not change my state so sweet & blessed for a crowne & a kingdome, sure possest to bee possessed, I would not change my state so sweet, I would not change my state so sweet & blessed.
IIII. G.P.A. Prenestino. FAlse loue now shoot & spare not, now doe thy worst I care not, & to dispatch mee, vse all thyne art & all thy craft to catch mee▪ and all thy craft to catch mee, for yeeres amisse bestow'd, for yeeres amisse bestow-ed, and time consumed, in vaine pursuites I lan-guish, that brought mee nothing else, but griefe & anguish, & now at length haue vowed, at li-ber-ty to liue, since to assaile mee both thy bow & thy brand nought doth auaile thee, for from thee good nor ill, for from thee good nor ill, comfort nor sorrow, {repeat} I wil not hope nor feare now nor to mo-row, I wil not hope nor feare now nor yet to mo-row.
V. Baldesser Donato. O Griefe if yet my griefe be not bele-ued, O griefe, {repeat} if yet my griefe, be not bele-ued, cry with thy voice outstretched, that hir despightful heart and eares disday-ning, may heare my iust complayning, my iust complayning, may heare my iust complay-ning. And when thou hast hir told my state most wretched, my state most wret-ched, tell hir that though my hart bee thus tormented, I could be well con-ten-ted, if shee that now doth grieue mee, had but the least desire, had but the least desire, once to relieue mee. once to relieue mee, had but the least desire, had but the least desire, once to relieue mee, once to relieue mee.
VI. Baldessar Donato. AS in the night we see the sparks reui-ued, & quite extinct so soone as day appeareth, so when I am of my sweet sonne depriued, new feares ap-proch & ioy my hart forbereth, but not so soone, but not so soone she is againe ar-riued, as feare re-tires, & present hope mee chea-reth, O sacred light, O turne, oh turne againe to blesse mee, & driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee, & driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee, O sacred light, O turne, O turne, againe to blesse mee, & driue away this feare yt doth oppresse mee, & driue away this feare yt doth oppresse mee, & driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee, & driue {repeat}
VII. Fillippo de Monte. IN vayne he seekes for beautie that excelleth, that hath not seene hir eyes where Loue seiourneth, how sweet-ly here & ther the same she turneth, he knowes not, he knowes not how Loue healeth, he knowes not how Loue healeth, & how he quelleth, he knowes not how Loue healeth & how he quelleth, that knowes not how she sighes & sweet beguileth, that knowes not how she sighes & sweet beguileth, & how she sweetly speakes & sweetly smyleth, & sweetly smyleth & how she sweetly speakes & sweetly smileth & sweetly smileth, & sweetly smy-leth.
VIII. G.P.A. Prenestino. WHat meaneth Loue to nest him in the fayre eyes, ad-my-red, with louely grace and heauenly sprite inspyred, of my mistris delightfull, of my mistris delightfull, enuious dames confesse & be not spitefull, en-ui-ous dames confesse & be not spitefull. Oh fooles doe you not mind it, that Loue hath sought & neuer yet could find it, from the Sunne ry-sing, till where he goes to rest him, a brauer place then in hir eyes to nest him, a brauer place then▪ in hir eyes to nest him, a brauer place then in hir eyes to nest him.
IX. G.P.A. Prenestino. SWeet Loue when hope was flowring, with fruits of recompence with fruits of recompence for my deseruing, rest was the price of all my faithfull seruing, Oh, oh spitfull death ac-cursed, O life most cruell, the first by wrong doth paine mee, & all my hope hath turned to lamen-ting, the last against my will, heere doth detaine mee, but death to griue mee more is not consen-ting, yet with a mylde relen-ting, mee thincks with-in my hart hir place shee holdeth, hir place shee holdeth, and what my torment is, and what my torment is plainly beeholdeth, and what my torment is plainly beehol-deth, plainly beeholdeth.
X. Marc' Antonio Pordeuone. LAdy that hand of plenty that gaue vnto, {repeat} the needefull, dyd steale, dyd steale my heart vnheedefull, sweet theefe of Loue so dainty, {repeat} what will you doe by theeuing, that rob when you are ge-uing, but you doe giue so surely, {repeat} but you doe giue so surely, that you may robbe and steale, {repeat} the more se-cure-ly, that my poore hart be eased, that my poore hart be eased, you doe it not to ioy mee, but stil by fresh assaults quite to destroy mee, quite to de-stroy mee, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy mee.
XI. Giaches de Vuert. WHO will ascend to heauen & there obtaine me, my wittes forlorne and silly sence decay-ed? for since I tooke my wound that sore doth payne mee, from your fayre eyes, {repeat} my sprites are all dismayed, nor of so great a losse I doe cōplaine mee, if it encrease not {repeat} {repeat} but in some bounds be stayed, but if I still grow worse, I shalbe lot-ted, to wander through the world fond and assotted, {repeat} but if I still grow worse I shalbe lot-ted, to wander through the world fond & assotted, to wander through the world fond & assotted.
XII. Cornelio Verdonch. LAdy your looke so gentle so to my hart deepe sinck-eth, that of none other, nor of my selfe it thincketh, why thē doe you constrain mee, cruell to liue in playnt, in paine & sadnesse, when one sweet word may gaine mee, whē one sweet word may gaine mee, peace to my thoughts, my thoughts and euerlasting gladnes, peace to my thoughts, peace to my thoughts with euerlasting gladnesse, with euerlasting glad-nesse, peace to my thoughts with euerlasting gladnesse, peace to my thoughts, {repeat} my thoughts peace to my thoughts with euerlasting glad-nesse. Heere endeth the songs of foure parts.
Of 5. XIII. The first part. Fillippo de Monte. FRom what part of the heauen, from what ex-ample brought was the mould whence Nature hath de-ri-ued, that sweet face full of beautie, yt sweet face full of beautie, in which shee striued to proue in earth hir powre aboue was am-ple, was neuer Nymph yet, nor hart de-uine with so great vertue stored, yet by hir lookes my lyfe is all beetrayed.
XIIII. The second part. IN vaine: That hath not seene hir eyes wher Loue seiorneth, how sweetly heere and there the same shee turneth, hee knowes not how loue heales and how he quel-leth, that knowes not how sweet shee sighes, & sweet beguileth, and how shee sweetly speakes and sweetly smi-leth, he knowes not how loue heales & how he quel-leth, that knowes not how sweet shee sighes & sweet beguileth, & how shee sweetly speakes & sweetly smi-leth, & how shee sweetly speakes & sweetly smi-leth.
XV. IN euery place: Saue wher I see those beames, those beames that me haue bur-ned, & eke mine eyes to flouds, to flouds of teares haue turned, thus in extreamest pangs, extremest pāgs ech howre I languish, eche howre I lan-guish, ech houre I languish, O mee, O mee, my shining starre so sweet & sacred, cause of all comfort, and of this world the Iew-ell, of this world the Iewell, for want of thee my lyfe I haue in hatred, my life I haue in hatred, was neuer griefe so great, {repeat} nor death so cruell, {repeat} was neuer griefe so great, nor death so cruell.
XVI. The first part. Luca Maranzio. THirsis Thir-sis to die desired, marking hir faire eyes that to his hart was nearest, and she that with his flame, Oh harts loue dearest, oh harts loue dearest, alas forbeare to dye now, ij. by thee I liue, with the I wish to dye too, {repeat} to dye too, {repeat} by thee I liue, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too, to dye too.
XVII. The second part. THirsis that heat refrayned, where with in hast to dye he did betake him, thinking it death yet that lyfe would not for-sake him, and whyle his looke full fix-ed he retayned on hir eyes full of pleasure, his dainty Nimph that now, the haruest of Loues treasure, sayd with eyes trembling, dye now sweet hart, I dye now, the shepherd then replied, & I sweet life doe dye to, {repeat} and I sweet lyfe doe dye too.
XVIII. The third part. THus these two louers of death so sweet so hap-pie, that to dye so againe, their life retyred, that to dye so againe, their lyfe retyred.
XIX. Orlando di Lasso. SV-san-na faire, sometime of loue requested, sometime of loue requested, {repeat} by two old men whom hir sweet looks allur'd, was in hir hart, full sad & sore mole-sted, full sad & sore molested, seeing the force, {repeat} hir chastitie endur'd, to them she said, if I by craft procur'd, doe yeld to you my body to abuse it, I kill my soule, & if I shall refuse it, you will mee iudge to death reprochfully, but better it is, in innocence to chuse it, then by my fault to'ffend my God no hye.
XX. Alfonso Ferabosco. SV-san-na faire {repeat} sometime of loue reque-sted, of loue reque-sted, by two olde men whom hir sweet looks allur'd, was in hir hart full sad and sore mole-sted, full sad and sore mole-sted full sad and sore mole-sted, seeing the force hir chastitie endur'd, to them she sayd, if I by craft procur'd, if I by craft procur'd doe yeeld to you my body to abuse it, I kill my soule, and if I doe refuse it, I doe refuse it, you will mee iudge, {repeat} to death, {repeat} reproch-ful-ly, but better it is, {repeat} but better it is, in innocence to chuse
it, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by my faulte, then by my fault, offend my God no hye, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault t'offend my God, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye.
XXI. Noe Faignient. WHen shall I cease lamenting, lamenting, lamēting, lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting, {repeat} when shall I cease, whē shall I cease lamenting? when shall my plaint & moning to tunes of ioy bee turned, when shall my plaint and moning to tunes of Ioye bee turned, to tunes of Ioy be turned, good Loue leaue thy tormenting, good Loue leaue thy tormenting, too long thy flames within my hart haue burned, {repeat} O graūt a-las with quicknesse, {repeat} graūt with quicknesse, {repeat} some litle comfort, {repeat} some litle comfort, {repeat} some litle comfort, some litle comfort for so long a sicknesse.
XXII. Luca Marenzio. I Must: All haples, I must depart all haples, but leaue to you my carefull hart oppressed, so that if I liue hartles if I liue hartles, Loue doth a worke miraculous and blessed, if I liue hartles, if I liue hartles, Loue doth a worke miraculous and blessed, miraculous and blessed, but so great paines assayle me, that sure ere it be long, my life will faile me. {repeat} that sure ere it be long, {repeat} my life will fayle mee, {repeat} my life will fayle me.
XXIII. The first part, Alfonso Ferabosco. I Saw my Lady weeping, my Lady weeping, my: {repeat} & Loue did languish, & of their plaint ensued so rare consenting, so rare consenting, that neuer yet was heard, was heard more sweet lamen-ting, made all of ten-der pittie, and mornefull anguish, and mournfull anguish, the flouds forsaking their delightfull swelling, the flouds forsaking their (old) delightfull swelling, the floods forsaking, their delight-ful swelling, stood to attend their plaint, ye winds enraged, {repeat} still & cōtent to quiet calme asswaged, still and content to quiet calme asswa-ged, their wonted storming, their wonted stormes, & euery blast rebelling, & euery blast rebelling.
XXIIII. The second part. LIke as from heauen the dew full softly showring, doth fall, & so refresh both fields and clo-ses, both fields & clo-ses, filling the parched flowers with sappe and sa-uour, with sappe & sa-uour, so while shee bath'd the violets & the roses, vpon hir fayre and louely cheeks, so freshly flowring, so freshly flowring, the spring his force renued, ye spring his force renued, with hir sweet fauour, with hir sweet fa-uour. so while she bath'd the violetts and the roses, vpon hir louely cheeks, hir loue-ly cheeks, so freshly flowring, so flowring, ye spring renu'd his force with hir sweet fa-uour, with hir sweet fauour, ye spring renu'd his force with hir sweet fauour, with hir sweet fauour.
XXV. Giouan Ferretti. SO gratious is thy selfe, so faire, so framed, So gratious is thy sweet selfe, so faire so framed, So gratious is thy selfe so faire so framed, so gratious is thy sweet selfe so faire so framed, that who so sees thee, with out a hart enflamed, either he liues not, {repeat} ey-ther he liues not, or Loues delight he knowes not, either he liues not, {repeat} either he liues not, or Loues, delight he knowes not.
XXVI. Giouan Ferretti. CRuell vnkind, my hart thou hast bereft mee, my hart thou hast bereft mee, Cruell vnkind, my hart thou hast be-reft mee, my hart thou hast bereft mee, & wilt not leaue yet, {repeat} whyle any lyfe is left mee. and yet, and yet, still will I loue thee. {repeat}
XXVII. Luca Marenzio. WHat doth, what doth my pretie dearling? what doth what doth my song and chaunting? that they sing not of hir the praise and vaunting? To hir I giue my violets, to hir I giue my violets and garland sweetely smelling, for to crowne hir sweete locks pure gold excelling. to hir I giue my violets {repeat} for to crowne hir sweet locks pure gold excelling, for to crowne hir sweet locks pure gold excelling.
XXVIII. The first part. Stephano Felis. SLeepe mine onely Iuell, Sleepe Sleepe mine onely Iu-ell, {repeat} mine onely Iuell, mine one-ly Iuell, much more thou didst de-light mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, hir face to spite mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, {repeat} that hid hir face to spite mee, much more thou didst de-light mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, hir face to spite mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, {repeat} that hyd hir face to spite mee, to spite mee.
XXIX. The second part. THou bringest hir home full nye mee, while shee so fast did flye mee, while shee so fast did flye mee, while shee so fast did flye mee, by thy means I behold those eyes so shining, long time absen-ted, that looke so mild appeased, that looke so mild appeased, thus is my griefe decly-ning, sleepe if thou bee like death as thou art fayned, as thou art fay-ned, as thou art fay-ned, a happy lyfe by such a death were gay-ned, a happy life by such a death were gayned, a happie life by such a death were gayned.
XXX. Gianetto Palestina. SOund out my voice, with pleasant tunes recording, recor-ding, the new delight that Loue to mee inspi-reth, pleasd and content with that my mind de-si-reth, my mind de-si-reth, thanked bee Loue so heauenly Ioyes affoording, shee that my plaints with rigor lōg reiec-ted, reiec-ted, bynding my heart with those hir golden tresses, in recompence of all my long distresses, my long distres-ses, said with a sigh, thy griefe hath mee infected, said with a sigh, thy griefe hath, sayd with a sigh thy griefe hath mee in-fec-ted.
XXXI. Luca Marenzio. LIquid and wa-try pearles, Loue wept full kindely, {repeat} Liquide and wa-try pearls, Loue wept full kindly, to quench my hart enflamed, but hee a-las, {repeat} {repeat} a-las a-las vn-friendly, so great a fire had framed, as, as were enough to burne mee, {repeat} without recomfort, as were enough to burne mee, without recomfort, and in-to ashes turne mee.
XXXII. Orlando di Lasso. THe Nightingale so pleasant & so gay, {repeat} so pleasant & so gay, in greenewood groues delights to make his dwelling, to make his dwel-ling, delights to make his dwelling, in fields to flye chaunting his roundelay, {repeat} at liberty, at libertie against the cage rebelling, but my poore hart, {repeat} with sorrowes ouerswelling, with sorrowes ouerswel-ling, through bondage vyle, binding my freedome short, no pleasure takes, no pleasure takes in these, no pleasure takes in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receueth no comfort. {repeat} {repeat} nor of his song receueth no comfort.
XXXIII. Giouan Ferretti. WIthin a greenewood sweet of mirtle sauor, when as the earth was with fayre flowers reuested, I saw a shepherd, with his Nymph that rested, thus spake the Nymph with sugred words of fauor, say (sweet loue) to thy loue, tell mee my dearling, where is thy heart beestowd, wher is thy li-king? all full of sweetnesse, all full of sweetnes & of sorow mixed, & of sorow mixed, on thee daintie deare lyfe, my hart is fix-ed, with that the gentle Nimph full sweetly smy-ling, full sweetly smy-ling, with kind words of delight & flattring glo-ses, & flattring glo-ses, shee kindly kist his cheeke, with lippes of ro-ses, {repeat} shee kindly kist his cheek, with lipps of ro-ses, {repeat} with lipps of ro-ses,
XXXIIII. Rinaldo del Melel. SOmetime: that shines so cleere & brightly, sometime when hope reliu'd mee, I was contented, that shines so cleere & brightly, O since she first cōsented to leaue ye world all earthly Ioye defying, to leaue the world all earthly Ioy defy-ing, all earthly Ioye defying, cloudes of care all about my hart are flye-ing, in vaine lament I, since a vaile now hydeth, the rarest beautie that on earth aby-deth. that on earth adydeth, the rarest beautie that on earth abydeth, the rarest beautie that on earth aby-deth, abydeth.
XXXV. Alfonso Ferabosco. RVbies and perles and trea-sure, Rubies and perles & trea-sure, kingdomes renowne & glo-ry, please ye de-lightfull mind & cheere the so-ry, & much do cheere the sory, but much ye greater measure, of true delight he gayneth, he gayneth, sues and obtaineth, but much ye greater measure, ye greater measure of true delight hee gayneth, hee gayneth, that for the fruits of loue, {repeat} sues and obtai-neth.
XXXVI. Alfonso Ferabosco. O Sweet kisse ful of comfort, {repeat} O sweet kis ful of comfort, O ioy to mee enuied, O Ioy, O ioy to mee en-ui-ed, so often sought, so oft to mee denied, so oft to mee denyed. Yet thee I neuer ta-sted, O lipps so false & wy-ly, so false & wy-ly, {repeat} & shronke so slyly, O looke empoysned, O face well may I feare thee, that kilst who thee beholds & comes not neere thee, I dye now, I dye a death most painefull, I dye a death most paine-full, I dye now, fare-well sweet lippes disdainfull, kild with vnkindnesse, fare-well sweet lippes disdainfull, kild with vnkindnes, fare-well sweet lippes disdainfull.
XXXVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SOmetime my hope full weakly, went on by line & leasure, but now it growes to doe my hart some pleasure, but now it grows to do my hart some plesure. But that my hope decay not, my hope decay not by ouer much contenting, Loue will not giue my Ioyes their full augmenting, Loue will not giue my ioyes their full augmenting, augmen-ting, but still with some desaster, allayes my blisse that hope may be the fa-ster, but still with some desa-ster, allayes my blisse that hope may be the faster, that hope may be the faster, allayes my blisse that hope may be the faster.
XXXVIII. Lelio Bertani. LAdy that hand of plenty, which gaue vn-to the need-full. Lady yt hand of plenty, which gaue vn-to the needfull, La-dy yt hand of plenty, which gaue vn-to the needful, dyd steale my heart vn-heedfull, did steale my hart vnheedfull, but you doe giue so surely, you giue so surely, that you may rob and steale the more securely, If you some-time be pleased, that my poore hart bee eased, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy mee, you doe not that to ioy mee, but stil by fresh asaults quite to destroy mee, quite to destroy mee, destroy mee. but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy mee. quite to destroy mee.
XXXIX. Gironimo Conuersi. MY hart a-las why dost yu loue, why dost yu loue, why dost thou loue thine e-ne-my, my hart a-las why dost thou loue, why dost thou loue thine e-ne-mie, why dost thou loue thine e-ne-my, thine e-ne-mie? laughing so me-re-ly she goes with glad-nes, {repeat} laughing so me-re-ly shee goes with gladnes, with glad-nes {repeat} to see thy griefe and sad-nes, cruell disdaine, {repeat} me-re-ly does shee goe with gladnes, {repeat} with gladnes, to see thy griefe and sad-nes, cruell disdaine, {repeat} lasting pain no remedy, lastīg pain, lasting paine no remedy, saue most singuler beuty, {repeat} & litle pitie, & lit-le litle pitie, saue most singuler beautie, {repeat} & litle pitie, & lit-tle lit-tle pitie.
XL. Alfonso Ferabosco. LAdy if you so spight mee, will spight mee, wherfore do you so oft, {repeat} kisse & de-light mee? sure that my hart opprest, opprest & ouer-ioyed may breake & bee destroy-ed. may breake & bee destroy-ed, destroyed, may breake & be destroyed. {repeat} If you seeke so to spill mee, if you seeke so to spill mee, to spill mee, come kisse mee sweet & kill mee, {repeat} so shall your hart be eased, {repeat} & I shall rest con-tent {repeat} shall rest content, {repeat} & dye well pleased, {repeat} so shall your hart bee eased, {repeat} & I shall rest content, {repeat} shall rest con-tent, {repeat} and dye well pleased▪ and dye well pleased.
XLI. Cantio rustica. Giouan Battista Pinello. WHen I would thee embrace, {repeat} whē I wold thee em-brace, {repeat} thou dost but mock mee, {repeat} thou dost but mock mee, {repeat} thou dost, thou dost but mock mee, when I would thee em-brace, {repeat} when I would thee embrace, when I, when I would thee em-brace, yu dost but mock mee, {repeat} thou dost but mock mee, {repeat} thou dost but mock mee, & whē I lamēt, {repeat} lament my case, yu cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, {repeat} thou criest ty hy hy hy hy hy, and no no no no no no no no, so saith my piggs nie, and no, and no no no no no, and no, and no, and no no no still saith my piggs nie.
XLII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THirsis enioyd the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet embraces, yet both their ioyes, yet both their ioyes were scanted, for darke it was and candell light and candle light they wanted, wherewith kind Cinthia in the heauen that shyned, hir nightly vaile resig-ned, and that faire face disclosed, where Loue and Ioy were mett & both repo-sed, then ech from others looks such ioy deryued, dyed & re-ui-ued, then each from others lookes such Ioy deriued, such ioy de-riued, that both with meere delight, {repeat} that both with meere de-light, dyed and re-uiued.
XLIII. Alfonso Ferabsoco. THe Nightingale so pleasāt & so gay, so plea-sant and so gay, the Nightingale so plea-sant and so gaye, so plea-sant and so gaye, in greene wood groues delights, delights to make his dwel-ling, delights, {repeat} {repeat} to make his dwel-ling, in fields to flye, in fields to flye chaunting his roundelay, chaunting his roundelay, at liber-ty, {repeat} against the cage rebelling, but my poore hart, but my poore hart, with sorrowes o-uerswelling, through bon-dage vyle, bynding my binding my freedome short, no pleasure takes,
{repeat} in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receiueth no com-fort. receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his snog receiueth no comfort, receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort.
XLIIII. The first part. William Byrd. THe faire young virgin, the fayre young vir-gin is like the Rose vntainted, vntainted, in garden faire while tender stalck doth beare it, sole and all vntoucht, sole and vntoucht, with no resort acquainted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock doth once come neere it, th'ayre full of sweetnes, {repeat} the morning fresh depainted, depain-ted, the earth the wa-ter, with all their fauors doe cheare it, doe cheare it, doe cheare it, daintie young gallants, daintie yong gal-lants & ladyes most desired, and ladies most de-si-red,
delight to haue therwith their heads and breasts atty-red, their heads and breasts atty-red. daintie yong gallants, {repeat} and ladies most desired, {repeat} delight to haue therewith their heads and breasts attyred, their heads and breasts at-ty-red.
XLV. The second part. BVT not so soone, {repeat} frō greene stock, frō greene stock wher it grow-ed, wher it growed, the same is pluckt & from ye branch re-mo-ued, as lost is all frō heauen & earth yt flowed, frō heauē & earth that flowed, both fauor grace & beauty, and beauty, best be-loued. The virgin faire {repeat} that hath ye flower bestowed, ye flower bestowed, which more thē life to gard, to gard it hir behoued, loseth hir praise, & is no more desired, loseth hir praise, hir praise, & is no more desired, of those yt late vn-to hir, vn-to hir loue aspired, vnto: ij. loseth hir praise & is no more desired, loseth hir praise, hir praise & is no more desired, of those yt late vnto hir, vnto hir loue aspired, vnto hir loue aspired. Heere endeth the songs of fiue parts.
Of 6. XLVI. Luca Marenzio. I Will go die for pure loue, come to recure loue, since in re-ward of all my faithful seruing, my La-dy giues disgrace for well deseruing, and in my flame sans measure, takes hir disporting, takes hir disporting, takes hir disporting, vnles some frost, vnles some frost assuage this heate & cure loue. I will goe die for pure loue, I will goe die for pure loue.
XLVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THese that bee certaine signes of my tormenting, of my tormenting, nor a-ny sigh so showeth, no sigh so show-eth, those haue some truce, but these haue no relenting, not so exhales, the heate that in mee gloweth, that in mee gloweth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this venting, makes all this ven-ting, {repeat} while with his wings the ra-ging fyre hee bloweth, Saye Loue, {repeat} with what deuise thou canst for e-uer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, and yet consume it ne-uer. say loue {repeat} with what deuise thou canst for e-uer, keepe it in flames and yet con-sume it ne-uer, keepe it in flames still, and yet consume it ne-uer,
XLVIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. SO far from my delight, {repeat} what cares tor-ment mee, tormēt mee, fieldes do record it, and vallyes, and vallyes, and woods and mountaines, and wods and moun-taynes, and running ryuers, and still reposed fountaines, wher I cry out & to the heauens, ye heauens lament mee, none other sounds but tunes of my complayning, Nymph of the groues or pleasant bird once hea-reth, Nymph of the groues or pleasant byrd once heareth, still recount I my griefe, and hir disday-ning, and hir disdayning, to euery plant that groweth, to euery plant that grow-eth, {repeat} or blossome bea-reth.
XLIX. The second part. Alfonso Ferabosco. SHE onely doth not feele it, {repeat} O fields, O mountaines, O mountaines, O woods, O vallyes, O floods and fountaines, O floods and foun-taines, O stay no more, to heare a wretch appealing, (oh) to heare a wretch appealing, to heare a wretch appealing, appealing, O that some one this life and soule wold se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed, and these mine eyes opprest would cloze for e-uer, wold choze for e-uer, for best were me to die so, for best were me to die my loue concealing, my loue concealing, for best were mee to die so, my loue concealing, my loue concealing.
L. LOE heere my hart in keeping, I leaue with hir yt laughes to see mee wee-ping, to see mee weeping, Oh what comfort or treasure, Oh what comfort or treasure, is lyfe with hir displea-sure, break hart & die then, that she which stil doth payn me, that she which still doth paine mee, may liue ye more content, when grief hath slayn me, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slayn mee, that she which still doth payn me, may liue ye more con-tent when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue ye more conten-ted, may liue the more content when griefe hath slaine mee.
LI. Luca Marenzio. NOW must I part my dear-ling, of lyfe & soule too, of life and soule disseised, of life and soule disseised, oh what a death is, oh what a death is parting? but if the fates ordaine it, who can refraine it? yet must I needes bee packing, farewell, {repeat} fare-well sweet hart vnfayned, but if the fates ordaine it, who can refraine it? yet must I needs bee packing, farewell, {repeat} farewell sweet hart vnfayned, farewell, sweet hart vnfayned, I dye to part constrayned.
LII. The first part Gironimo Conuersi. ZE-phirus bringeth, Zephirus brings ye time that sweetly senteth, with flowrs & (greene) herbs, with flowres & herbes & winters frost ex-ileth, Progne now chirpeth, and Philomele la-menteth, Flo-ra the garlandes white and read compi-leth, {repeat} white & red compileth, fields doe reioyce, the frowning Skye relenteth, Ioue to beehold his dearest daughter smyleth, Ioue to beehold his dearest daughter smy-leth, th'ayre, the water, th'ayre the water the earth to Ioy consenteth, each creature now to loue, {repeat} him reconcileth, th'ayre the water, th'ayre the water the earth to Ioy consenteth, each creature now to loue, each creature now to loue him reconci-leth.
LIII. The second part. BVT with mee wretch the storms of woe perseuer, & heauy sighes, but with mee wretch the storms of woe perse-uer, & heauy sighes, ye stormes of woe perseuer, & heauy sighs, ye frō my hart she straineth, that frō my hart she stay-neth, yt tooke ye kay thereof to heauen for e-uer, for e-uer, that: {repeat} so yt sing-ing of (sweet) byrds, so that sing-ing of (sweet) byrds, so that sing-ing of (sweet) byrds & spring time flowring, {repeat} & ladies loue yt mens affection gaineth, are like a de-sert, {repeat} are like a desert and cruell beastes deuouring. and ladies loue that mens affectiō gaineth, are lyke a de-sert, {repeat} are like a desert, & cruell beastes deuour-ing.
LIIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Was full neare my fall, and hardly scaped, {repeat} and hardly scaped, {repeat} through fond de-sire that headlong mee transported, that Loue himselfe for mee deuis'd and shaped, and if my reason but a while had stayed, but a while had stayed, to my mishappe, to my mishappe, I had no doubt assayed, what a death is to liue with loue surprysed. what a death is to liue with loue surprysed, what a death is to liue, with loue surprysed.
LV. The second part. BVt as the byrd that in due time espying, that in due time espying, the secret snare and deadly bush enly-med, the secret snare and deadly bush enlymed, quick to the heauens doth mount, quick to the heauens doth mount with song and plea-sure, traynes of false lookes and faithles wordes defying, mounting the hill so hard for to bee clymed, so hard for to bee cly-med, I sing for Ioy of liber-ty the treasure. I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure, the treasure.
LVI. The first part. Luca Marenzio. I Soung sometime the freedome of my fatncie, ye fire extinct, the yoke & bondes subdu-ed, with hart congealed, with hart congeal'd, I quencht the burning phran-sye, and with disdayne, and with disdayne, and with disdayne, {repeat} the harmefull bayte escheued, my bondage my bonds and my enchayning, all naked vnarmed, nor by teares, {repeat} mercy, nor comfort, {repeat} mercy, nor comfort, nor my griefe assuaged.
LVII. The second part. BEcause my Loue: while I with sighes re-sound hir name de-lightfull, my life depriueth: If I seeke to breake of the strings, that binde mee, If I seeke to breake of the strings that bynde mee, the more I flie, {repeat} the more I flye the faster I doe find mee, like the byrd like ye byrd in the snare in vaine that stry-ueth, in the snare in vaine that striueth, in the snare, in the snare in vaine that stry-ueth. ¶FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contayned in these bookes, with the names of their seuerall authors, and originalls. Of 4. THese that bee certaine signes. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Fagnient. The faire Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Ioy so delights my hart. III Gioia s'abond'all cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Loue now shoot. IIII Amor ben puoi. O griefe, if yet my griefe. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donato. In vayne hee seekes for beau∣tie. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What meaneth Loue to nest him. VIII Perche s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Loue when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your looke so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch. Of 5. From what part of the Hea∣uen. XIII In qual parte del ciel. Filippo di Montte. The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza 2. pars.   In euery place. XV Ogni luogo.   Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second part. XVII Frenò Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi morirò. 3. pars. Susanna fayre. XIX Susann' vn iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fayre. XX Susann' vn iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI To the note of Chi per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io pariro. Luca Marenzio. I saw my lady weeping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. XXIIII Come dal ciel. Giouan Ferrettie So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa. Cruell vnkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What doth my prety dar∣ling. XXVII Che fa▪ hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleepe mine onely Iewell. XXVIII Sonno scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2. pars. Sound out my voyce. XXX To the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide & watry perles. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale. XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In vn Roschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope re∣liu'd mee. XXXIIII Gia fu ch'io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini Alfonso Ferabosco. O sweet kisse. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fù mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertany. My hart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spight mee. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee em∣brace. XLI Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enioyed the gra∣ces XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alofonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol, The faire yong virgine. XLIIII La verginella▪ 1. pars. William Byrd. The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars. Of 6. I will goe dye for pure Loue. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that bee certaine signes. XLVII Questi ch' inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far frō my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1 pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi no'l sentite. 2▪ pars. Loe heere my hart. L Ecco ch'io lasso.   Now must I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzio. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1 pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was full neere my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Beecause my loue. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars. ¶FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA▪ QVINTVS. Madrigales translated of foure, fiue and sixe partes, chosen out of diuers excellent Authors, vvith the first and second part of La Verginella, made by Maister Byrd, vpon tvvo Stanza's of Ariosto, and brought to speake English vvith the rest. Published by N. Yonge, in fauour of such as take pleasure in Musicke of voices. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas East, the assigné of William Byrd. 1588. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
To the right honourable Gilbert Lord Talbot, sonne and heire to the right noble and puissant George Earle of Shrevvesbury, Washford and Wa∣terford, Earle Marshall of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of Blackmeere, one of her Maiesties most honourable priuie councell, Iustice of the forrestes and chases by north the riuer of Trent, and knight of the most honourable order of the garter. Ni∣cholas Yonge vvisheth increase of honour, vvith all happinesse. RIght honourable, since I first began to keepe house in this Citie, it hath been no small comfort vnto mee, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants of good accompt (as well of this realme as of forreine nations) haue taken in good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poore abilitie was able to afford them, both by the exercise of Mu∣sicke daily vsed in my house, and by furnishing them with Bookes of that kinde yeerly sent me out of Italy and other places, which beeing for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetnes of Aire, verie well liked of all, but most in account with them that vnderstand that language. As for the rest, they doe either not sing them at all, or at the least with litle delight. And albeit there be some English songes lately set forth by a great Maister of Musicke, which for skill and sweetnes may content the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with varietie haue wi∣shed more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I endeuoured to get into my hands all such English Songes as were praise worthie, and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good friends, certaine Italian Madrigales translated most of them fiue yeeres agoe by a Gentleman for his priuate delight, (as not long before cer∣taine Napolitans had been englished by a verie honourable personage, and now a Coun∣cellour of estate, whereof I haue seene some, but neuer possessed any). And finding the same to bee singulerly well liked, not onely of those for whose cause I gathered them, but of many skilfull Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed the accent of the words to be well mainteined, the descant not hindred, (though some fewe notes altred) and in euerie place the due decorum kept▪ I was so bold (beeing well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat the rest, who willingly gaue me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some other more lately done at the request of his par∣ticular friends. Now when the same were seene to arise to a iust number, sufficient to furnish a great sett of Bookes, diuers of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to haue them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could neuer obtaine the Gentlemans consent, though I sought it by many great meanes. For his answere was euer, that those trifles beeing but an idle mans exercise, of an idle subiect, written onely for priuate recreation, would blush to be seene otherwise then by twilight, much more to bee brought into the common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he tooke his
penne, and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Bookes these verses of the Poet Martial. Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas, Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus, Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli, Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones. Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by mee, not presuming to put my sickle in an other mans corne, till such time as I heard, that the same beeing dispersed into many mens hands, were by some persons altogither vnknowen to the ow∣ner, like to be published in Print. Which made mee aduenture to set this worke in hand, hee beeing neither priuie nor present, nor so neere this place as by any reasonable meanes I could giue him notice. Wherin though he may take a iust offence, that I haue laid open his labours without his licence: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by straun∣gers, lame and vnperfect by meanes of false Copies, I hope that this which I haue done to auoide a greater ill, shall deserue a more fauourable excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to offer my selfe and my bold attempt to the defence and protection of your Lordship, to whose honourable hands I present the same. Assuring my selfe, that so great is the loue and affection which hee beareth to your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Bookes, will take away all displeasure and vnkindnes from mee. And although this may bee thought a greater boldnes then the first (I beeing not any way able to doe your L. such a seruice, as may de∣serue so great a fauour) yet I hope these Songes beeing hitherto well esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for themselues, shall not be thought vnwor∣thie of your honourable defence. With which hope I humbly commit your L. to the pro∣tection of the Almightie: wishing to the same, that encrease of honour which your true vertue deriued from so noble and renowmed Ancestors doeth worthely deserue. From London the first of October. 1588. Your Lordship's most humble at commandement, N. Yonge.
Of 5. XIII. The first part. Filippo di Monte. FRom what part of the heauen, from what example brought was the mould whēce Nature hath deri-ued, that sweet face full of beau-ty, in which she stri-ued, to proue in earth her power aboue was ample, was neuer Nymph or syluane queene ado-red, that so dainty fine locks in ayre display-ed, nor hart Diuine with so great vertue sto-red, yet by her lookes my lyfe is all betrayed.
XIIII. The second part. IN vaine he seeketh for beauty that excelleth, that hath not seene her eyes wher Loue seiorneth, how sweetly here & there the same she tur-neth, he knowes not how Loue heales, & how, & how he quelleth, that knowes not how she sighes and sweet beguyleth, and how she sweetly speaketh, he knowes not how Loue heales & how he quel-leth, that knowes not how she sighes & sweet beguyleth, & how she sweetly speakes & sweetly smy-leth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smyleth.
XV. IN euery place I finde my griefe and anguish, saue where I see those beames that me haue bur-ned, & eke myne eyes to floods, to floods of teares haue tur-ned, haue tur-ned, thus in ex-tream-est pangs, eche houre I languish, eche houre I languish, O me, O me, O me, my shining starre, so sweet and sacred, cause of all comfort, of this world the Iewell, and of this world the Iewell, for want of thee my lyfe I haue in hatred, my life I haue in hatred, {repeat} was neuer griefe so great, nor death so cruell, was neuer griefe so great, {repeat} nor death so cru-ell.
XVI. The first part. Luca Marenzio. THirsis, Thirsis to dye desired, marking her fayre eyes that to his hart was nearest, no lesse was fy-red, sayd to him Oh harts Loue dearest, alas forbeare to dye now. {repeat} to dye too, by thee I lyue, with thee I wish to dye too, {repeat} by thee I lyue, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too.
XVII. The second part. THirsis that heat refrayned, wherwith in hast to dye he did betake him, that lyfe would not forsake him, and while his looke full fixed he retayned, on her eyes full of pleasure, the daintye Nymph that now at hand espyed, the haruest of loues treasure, said thus with eyes all trembling faynt & wasted, dye now sweet hart I dye now, I dye now, & I sweet lyfe do dye too, {repeat} & I sweet lyfe too, & I sweet life do dye too.
XVIII. The third part. THus these two louers so fortunately dy-ed, and so desi-red, that to dye so againe their lyfe retyred, that to dye so againe theyr lyfe rety-red.
XIX. Orlando di Lasso. SVsanna fayre sometime of loue reques-ted, sometime of loue re-quested, by two olde men, {repeat} whom her sweet looks allur'd, was in her hart, {repeat} was in her hart full sad & sore molested, full sad and sore mo-lested, {repeat} seeing the force her chastitye endur'd, to them she said, {repeat} If I by craft procur'd, do yeeld to you my body to abuse it, I kill, I kyll my soule, & if I shall refuse it, you will me iudge to death reproch-fully, but better it is, {repeat} but better it is in innocence to chuse it, thē by my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye.
XX. Alfonso Ferabosco. SVsanna fayre sometime of loue reques-ted, by two old men whome her sweet lookes allur'd whome her sweet lookes allur'd, was in her hart full sad & sore mo-les-ted, full sad and sore molested, seeing the force her chastitie endur'd, her chastitie endur'd, to thē she sayd, if I by craft procur'd, do yeld to you my bodie to abuse it, I kill my soule {repeat} and if I do refuse it, and if I do refuse it, you will me iudge to death, {repeat} but better it is, {repeat} in innocence
to chuse it, {repeat} then by my fault t'offend my God on hye, t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye.
XXI. Noe Faignient. WHen shall I cease lamenting, lamenting, {repeat} lamenting, la-menting, {repeat} {repeat} when shall I cease, {repeat} lamenting, when shall I cease lamēting, {repeat} when shal my playnt and moning, to tunes of ioy be turned, when shal my plaint & mo-ning, to tunes of Ioy be turned, good Loue, {repeat} good Loue, good Loue, leaue thy tormenting, good Loue, {repeat} leaue thy tormē-ting, to long thy flames within my hart haue burned, {repeat} O graūt alas with quicknes, quicknes, O graūt alas with quicknes, {repeat} {repeat} some litle comfort, {repeat} {repeat} for so long a sicknes, some litle comfort, {repeat} some litle comfort for so long a sicknes.
XXII. Luca Marenzio. I must depart al haples, I must depart all haples, but leaue to you my carefull hart oppressed, so that if I lyue hartles, if I lyue hartles, Loue doth a work miraculous and blessed, if I lyue hartles, if I liue hart-les, Loue doth a work miraculous and blessed, miraculous and blessed, that sure ere it be long, {repeat} my lyfe will fayle me, {repeat} my lyfe will fayle me, that sure ere it be long, {repeat} my lyfe will fayle me, {repeat} my lyfe will fayle me.
XXIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Saw my lady wee-ping, I saw my lady wee-ping, & Loue did lan-guish, & Loue did lan-guish, & of their plaint ensued so rare cōcenting, that neuer yet was heard more sweet lamēting, that neuer yet was heard more sweet lamēting, made all of tender py-tie, & mournfull anguish, {repeat} the floods forsaking their delightfull swelling, the floods for-saking, the floods forsaking their delightful swel-ling, stayd to attend their plaint, the windes enraged, {repeat} {repeat} still and content to quiet calme assuaged, still & {repeat} their wonted stor-ming, their won-ted stormes, and eu'ry blast rebel-ling, and eu'ry blast rebel-ling.
XXIIII. The second part. LIke as frō heauen the dew full softly showring, doth fall, ful softly show-ring doth fall, & so refresh both fieldes & closes, both fields & closes, filling the parched flowers, with sappe & sauour, {repeat} so while she bath'd the violetts & the roses vpon her louely cheekes, her loue-ly cheeks, so freshly flowring, {repeat} the spring renu'd his force with her sweet fa-uour, with her sweet fauour, ye spring renu'd his force with her sweet fauour, with her sweet fauour. so whē she bath'd the violetts & the roses, vpon her faire and louely cheekes, so freshly flowring, so freshly flowring, the spring his force renued, the spring his force renued, with her sweet fauour, with her sweet fauour.
XXV. Giouan Ferretti. SO gracious is thy selfe, so fayre so framed, so gracious is thy selfe, so fayre so framed, so gracious is thy selfe so fayre so framed, {repeat} that who so sees thee, that who so sees thee with out a hart enflamed, either he lyues not, {repeat} eyther he lyues not, or loues delight he knowes not, either he lyues not, {repeat} eyther he lyues not, or loues delight he knowes not.
XXVI. Giouan Ferretti. CRuell vnkind my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, Cruell vnkind, my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft me, and wilt not leaue, and wilt not leaue whyle any life is left me. And yet, & yet, & yet, & yet still will I loue thee, & yet, & yet, & yet, & yet still wil I loue thee.
XXVII. Luca Marenzio. WHat doth my prety dear-ling? what doth my pretie dearling, my pretie dear-ling? what doth, what doth, my song & chaūting, yt they sing not of her, {repeat} the prayse and vaunting? to her I giue my violetts, {repeat} & garland sweetly smelling, for to crowne her sweet locks pure gold excelling. To her I giue my violets, {repeat} & garlād sweetly smelling, for to crowne her sweet locks pure gold excelling, for to crowne her sweet lockes pure gold excelling.
XXVIII. The first part. Stephano Felis. SLeepe sleepe myne onely Iew-ell, sleepe sleepe mine onely Iuell, myne onely Iuell, sleepe sleepe mine one-ly Iew-ell, myne one-ly Iewell, much more thou didst delight me, thē my belou'd too cru-ell, that hyd her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, that hyd her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, that hyd her face to spyte me much more thou didst delight me, then my belo'd too cruell, that hyd hir face, that hyd her face to spyte me, her face to spite me, that hyd her face to spite me, to spyte me, that hyd her face to spyte me, to spyte me.
XXIX. The second part. THou bring'st her home full nye me, while she so fast dyd flye mee, while she so fast dyd flye me, {repeat} by thy meanes I behold those eyes so shining, long time absen-ted, {repeat} that looke so mylde appeased, thus is my griefe decly-ning, thou in thy dreames dost make desire well pleased, sleepe if thou be like death as thou art fained, as yu art fained, a happy lyfe by such a death were gayned, {repeat} a happy lyfe by such a death were gay-ned.
XXX. Gianetto Palestina. SOund out my voyce with pleasant tunes recording, re-cor-ding, the new delight that Loue to me inspy-reth, pleas'd and content, content with that my hart desireth, thanked be Loue so heauenly ioyes affor-ding, affording, shee that my plaints with rigor long re-iected, reiected, binding my hart with those her golden tres-ses, in recompēce of all my long distres-ses, said with a sigh, thy griefe hath me infec-ted, infected, said with a sigh, thy griefe hath me infected, thy griefe hath me infected.
XXXI. Luca Marenzio. LIquide & watery pearles, Loue weept full kindly, Loue wept full kindely, Loue wept full kindly, {repeat} to quēch my hart enfla-med, but he alas alas, {repeat} alas vnfriendly so great a fyre had framed, as, as were ynough to burne me, {repeat} without recomfort, {repeat} as were ynough to burne me, {repeat} without recomfort, and into ashes turne me.
XXXII. Orlando di Lasso. THe Nightingale so pleasant & so gay, {repeat} in green-wood groues, {repeat} delights to make his dwelling, to make his dwelling, in fields to flye chaunting his roundelay, in fields to flye chaunting his roundelay, chaunting his roundelay, at liberty against the cage rebelling, against the cage rebelling, but my poore hart, {repeat} with sorowes ouerswelling, with sorowes ouerswelling, through bondage vyle bynding my freedome short, binding my free-dome short, no pleasure takes, {repeat} no pleasure takes in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, {repeat} nor of his song receiueth no comfort.
XXXIII. Giouan Ferretti. WIthin a greenewood, {repeat} sweet of myrtle fauour, whē as the earth was with fayre flowres reuested, I saw a shepherd with his Nimph yt rested, thus spake the Nymph with sugred wrodes of fauour, say (sweet loue) to thy loue tell me my dearling, where is thy hart bestow'd, wher is thy lyking? the shepherd answerd then with a deepe sighing all full of sweetnes, {repeat} and of sorow myxed, & of sorow mixed, on thee dainty deare life my loue is fix-ed, my loue is fix-ed, with yt the gentle Nymph, {repeat} ful sweetly smy-ling, with kind words of delight & flattring gloses, she kindly kist his cheeke, with lips of roses, {repeat} she kindly kist his cheek, {repeat} with lips of roses▪ {repeat}
XXXIIII. Rinaldo del Melle. SOmetime when hope relyeu'd me, I was contented, to see my starre so sightly, that shines so cleare and brightly, to see my starre so sightly, that shines so cleare & brightly, that shines so cleare & brightly, O since she first consen-ted, to leaue the word all worldly Ioy defying, to leaue the world all earthly Ioy defying, all worldly Ioy defying, in vaine la-ment I, since a vaile now hydeth, the rarest beauty that on earth abydeth, the rarest beauty that on earth aby-deth, that on the earth abydeth.
XXXV. Alfonso Ferabosco. RVbyes and pearles and treasure, rubyes and pearles & treasure, kingdomes renowne and glo-ry, {repeat} please the delightfull minde & cheare the so-ry, please the delightfull minde & cheare the so-ry, but much the greater measure, but much the greater measure, of true delight he gayneth, that for the fruites of loue, {repeat} sues and obtay-neth, but much the greater mea-sure of true delight he gay-neth, that for the fruits of loue, {repeat} sues and ob-tayneth, sues and obtayn-eth.
XXXVI. Alfonso Ferabosco. O Sweet kisse ful of comfort, {repeat} O sweet kisse ful of comfort, O ioy to me enuy-ed, so often sought, so oft to me deni-ed. For thee my lyfe is wasted, yet thee I neuer tasted, O lippes so false & wyly, {repeat} that me to kisse prouok'd, and shroūck so slyly, O lookes empoy-sned, O face well may I feare thee, yt kilst who thee beholds and comes not neere thee, I dye now, I dye a death most payne-full, kild with vn-kindnes, farewell sweet lippes disdainfull, I dye now, farewell sweet lippes dis-daynefull, kild with vnkindnesse, I dye now, farewel sweet lippes disdayn-full▪
XXXVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SOmetime my hope full weakely went on by lyne & lea-sure, but now it growes to do my hart some plea-sure, went on by lyne & leasure, but now it growes to do my hart some plea-sure, but now it growes to do my hart some pleasure, my hart some pleasure. Yet that my hope decay not, by ouer much contenting, Loue will not giue my ioyes their full aug-men-ting, but still with some desaster, but still with some desaster, allayes my blisse, allayes my blisse that hope may be the faster. that hope may be the fa-ster.
XXXVIII. Lelio Bertani. LAdy that: Which gaue vnto the need-full, Lady that hand of plen-ty, {repeat} which gaue vnto the needfull, did steale my hart vn-heedfull, dyd steale my hart vnheede-full, sweet theefe of Loue so daintie, what will you do by the-uing, yt rob whē you are giueing? but you do giue so surely, yt you may rob & steale ye more securely, yt you may rob & stele ye more securely. If you sometime be plesed, yt my poore hart be eased, you do not yt to ioy me, you do not that to ioy me, {repeat} but stil by fresh assaults quite to destroy me. but stil by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me.
XXXIX. Gironimo Conuersi. MY hart alas why dost thou loue thine enemy, why dost thou loue thine enemy, my hart alas why dost thou loue thine enemy, {repeat} thine enemy? laughing so merely she goes {repeat} merely with gladnes, merely with gladnes, with gladnes, to see thy griefe & sadnes, cruell disdaine, merely does she goe, {repeat} merely does she goe with glad-nes, to see thy griefe & sadnes, cruell disdaine, lasting paine no remedy, lasting paine, lasting paine no remedy, saue most singuler beauty, {repeat} & litle pitty, and litle litle pitty, saue most singuler beauty, {repeat} and litle pity, and litle litle pi-ty.
XL. Alfonso Ferabosco. LAdy if you so spight me, lady if you so spight me, if you so spight me, wherfore do you so oft kisse & delight me, wherfore do you so oft kisse & delight me, kisse & delight me? sure yt my hart opprest & ouerioy-ed, may break & be destroyed, & be destroyed, sure yt my hart opprest and ouerioy-ed, may break & be destroy-ed. If you seeke so to spill me, {repeat} to spill me, come kisse me sweet & kill me, {repeat} so shall your hart be ea-sed, & I shall rest content, {repeat} & dye well plea-sed, {repeat} so shall your hart be ea-sed, & I shall rest content, {repeat} shal rest content & dye well pleased: shall rest content & dye wel plea-sed·
XLI. Cantio rustica. Giouan Battesta Pinello. WHen I would thee embrace, {repeat} whē I wold thee embrace whē I, whē I would thee embrace, thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, when I would thee embrace, {repeat} when I would thee embrace, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, {repeat} thou dost but mock me, & whē as I lament my case, & whē I lament my case, thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, {repeat} thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, & no no no no no no no no so saith my pigs nye, & no no no no no no no, & no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no still saith my piggs nye, & no no no no no no no no stil saith my piggs nye.
XLII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THirsis enoy'd the gra-ces, the graces, of Clori's sweet embraces, of Clori's sweet embra-ces, yet both their Ioyes were scanted, for dark it was & can-dle light they wanted, for darke it was & candle light and candle light they wan-ted, wherewith kind Cinthia in the heauen yt shined, her nightly vayle resigned, resigned, & yt faire face disclosed, and that faire face disclo-sed, where Loue & Ioy were mett, and both re-po-sed, that both of meere delight dyed & re-uiued. thē eche frō others looks such Ioy deri-ued, that both of meere delight dyed and reuiued, dyed and reui-ued.
XLIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THe Nightingale so plea-sant & so gay, so plea-sant & so gaye, in greenewood groues delights to make his dwelling, in greenewood groues delights {repeat} {repeat} {repeat} to make his dwelling, in fields to flye chaūting his roūdelay, chaū-ting his roundelay, in fieldes to flye chaunting his roūdelay, chaunting his roūdelay, at libertie, against the cage rebel-ling, but my poore hart, but my poore hart with sorows ouer ouerswelling, through bondage vile, bynding my free-dome short, {repeat} no pleasure takes, {repeat}
in these his sports excel-ling, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, receiueth no comfort, nor of his song re-ceiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no comfort, receiueth no comfort.
XLIIII. The first part. William Byrd. THe fayre yong vir-gin is lyke the rose, the rose vntain-ted, in garden fayre while tender stalke doth beare it, sole and vn-toucht, sole and vntoucht with no re-sort acquain-ted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock doth once come neare it, once come neare it, th'ayre full of sweetnes, the morning fresh depaynted, the morning fresh depayn-ted, the earth, the wa-ter, the earth, the water, with all their fauor cheare it, dainty yong ga-lants, dainty yong gallants, and ladyes most de-syred,
thire heads and brestes atty-red, dainty yong gal-lants, {repeat} and ladyes most de-syred, their heads and brestes atty-red.
XLV. The second part. BVt not so soone, not so soone, but not so soone, from greene stock wher it growed, where it growed, the same is pluckt & from the braunch, the same is pluckt and from the braunch remoued, as lost is all from heauen & earth, from heauen & earth, that flowed, that flow-ed, both fauor grace & beauty, and beauty best beloued. The virgin faire, {repeat} that hath ye flowre bestow-ed, which more then life to gard, it her behoued, loseth her praise & is no more desired, loseth her praise & is no more desired, of those that late vnto her loue aspired. loseth her praise, & is no more desired, loseth her praise & is no more desired, of those that late vnto her loue aspired. Heere endeth the songs of fiue parts.
Of 6. XLVI. Luca Marenzio. I Will goe dye for pure loue, except rage and disdaine come to recure loue, and in my flame sans measure takes her disport and pleasure, takes her disport and plea-sure, plea-sure, vnles some frost, I will go dye for pure loue, I will go dye for pure loue.
XLVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THese that be certaine signes of my tormen-ting, of my tormen-ting▪ of my tormenting, sighes be they none no, nor any sigh so showeth, nor any sigh so showeth, those haue some truce, but these, but these haue no relenting, haue no relen-ting, not so exhales the heate that in me glow-eth, the heate that in me glow-eth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this venting, makes all this venting, while with his wings the raging fyre he bloweth, saye Loue, {repeat} say Loue with what deuise thou canst for e-uer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, &
not consume it, say Loue say Loue, with what deuise thou canst for euer, keepe it in flames and yet, and yet consume it neuer, keepe it in flames and yet con-sume it neuer, and yet consume it neuer.
LXVIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SO farre from my delight, {repeat} so far from my delight, what cares tormēt me, fields do record it, & vallies, & woods & mountaines, & woods and moūtaines, & running riuers, & running riuers, & re-posed foūtaines, & still reposed foun-taines, where I cry out & to the heauens the heauens lament me, none other sounds but tunes of my complaining, Nymph of the groues or pleasant byrd once heareth, still recount I my griefe, & her disdaining, & her disdayning, to euery plant that groweth, that grow-eth, to euery plant that groweth, to euery plant that grow-eth, or blossome beareth.
XLIX. The second part. SHe onely doth not feele it, {repeat} O fieldes, O mountaines, {repeat} O mountaines, O woods, O vallyes, {repeat} O floodes, O fountaines, oh, oh stay no more oh, oh stay no more, oh, to heare a wretch appealing, O that some one this lyfe and soule would seuer, O that some one this life & soule would se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed, and these myne eyes opprest would cloze for e-uer, would cloze for e-uer, for best were me to dye so, for best were me to dye my loue concea-ling, for best were me to dye so {repeat} my loue concealing, my loue concea-ling.
L. LOe here my hart in kee-ping, I leaue with her that laughes to see me weeping, to see me wee-ping, to see me weeping, Oh what comfort or treasure, breake hart & dye then, that she yt still doth paine me, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slayne me, may liue the more conten-ted, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne me, that she yt still doth payne me, that she yt still doth payne me, may liue ye more content, whē griefe hath slayne me, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne me, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne me.
LI. Luca Marenzio. NOw must I part, now must I part my dearling, of lyfe & soule, of lyfe and soule, of lyfe & soule disseised, and Loue ther-with is pleased, Oh, oh what a death is parting? is parting, oh what griefe is now lacking? fare-well, {repeat} fare-well, I dye to part constrayned, oh what griefe is now lacking? fare-well, {repeat} fare-well, I dye to part constrayned, fare-wel sweet hart vnfayned, I dye to part constrayned.
LII. The first part. Gironimo Conuersi. ZEphirus brings the tyme that sweetly senteth, Zephirus brings the tyme that sweetly senteth, with flowres and herbes and winters frost exileth, with flowres and herbes and winters frost it ex-ileth, Progne now chirpeth, & Philomele lamenteth, Flora the garlands {repeat} white and redde compileth, Flora the garlands white and red compileth, fields do reioyce the frowning sky relenteth, Ioue to behold his dearest daughter smileth, {repeat} dearest daughter smy-leth, th'ayre the wa-ter, the earth, th'ayre the water, the earth to Ioye consenteth, eche
creature now to Loue him reconcileth, th'ayre the wa-ter, the earth, th'ayre, the water, the earth, to Ioye consenteth, eche creature now to Loue, him reconcyleth.
LIII. The second part. BVt with me oh wretch the stormes of woe per-se-uer, & hea-uie sighes, the stormes of woe perseuer, & heauie sighes, the stormes of woe perseuer and heauie sighes, which from my hart she strayneth, which from my hart she stray-neth, that tooke the kaye thereof to heauen for e-uer, That tooke the kaye thereof to heauen for euer, so that sing-ing of byrds and spring time flowring, so that sing-ing of byrds & spring time flowring, & ladies loue that mens affection gayneth, are lyke a desert, {repeat}
are lyke a desert and cruell beastes deuouring, and ladyes loue that mens af-fection gayneth, are lyke a desert, {repeat} are lyke a de-sert & cruell beastes deuou-ring.
LIIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Was full neare my fall, and hardly scaped, {repeat} and hardly scaped, through fond desire, that headlong me that headlong me transported, and with the darts and with the netts I sported, that Loue himselfe for me deuis'd and shaped, and if my reason, but a while had stayed, had stay-ed, to my mishappe, to my mishappe I had no doubt assayed, what a death is to liue with Loue sur-pri-sed what a death is to liue, what a death is to liue, with Loue sur-prised, with loue surprised.
LV. The second part. BVt as the byrd that in due time espying, but as the byrd, that in due time espying, that in due time es-py-ing, the secret snare and deadly bush enlymed, the bush en-ly-med, quick to the heauen doth mount, {repeat} with song and pleasure, traynes of false lookes, and faithles words defy-ing, mounting the hill so hard for to be clymed, mounting the hill so hard for to be cly-med, I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure, I sing for Ioy of lyberty the trea-sure, I sing for Ioy now, I sing for Ioy now, of lyberty the treasure, the trea-sure.
LVI. The first part. Luca Marenzio. I Soung sometime, I soung, the freedome of my fancye, with hart congealed, {repeat} I quencht the burning phransye, & with disdaine, & with disdayne, {repeat} ye harmeful bayte eschued, but now I waile my bonds, my bonds & my enchay-ning, all naked, in louely netts engaged, nor by teares, {repeat} can I find, nor by complayning, mercy, nor comfort, mercy, mercy, nor com-fort, nor yet my griefe assuaged.
LVII. The second part. BEcause my Loue: While I with sighs resound her name de-lightfull, my lyfe depriueth: If I seeke to breake of▪ from the strings that bynd me, If I seeke to breake of, the more I flye, {repeat} the more I flye the faster I do fynd me, lyke the byrd in the snare, lyke the byrd in the snare, in vaine that stry-ueth, lyke the byrd in the snare, in vaine that striueth. ¶FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales conteyned in these bookes, with the names of their seuerall authors, and originalles. Of 4. THese that be certaine signes. I Questi ch' inditio. Noë: Faignient. The faire Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Ioy so delights my hart. III Gioia s'abond' al cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Loue now shoot. IIII Amor ben puoi. O griefe, if yet my griefe. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donate. In vayne he seekes for beau∣tie. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What meaneth Loue to nest him. VIII Perche s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Loue when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your looke so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch. Of 5. From what part of the hea∣uen. XIII In qual parte del ciel. Filippo di Monte. The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza. 2. pars.   In euery place. XV Ogni luogo.   Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second part. XVII Frenò Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi morirò. 3. pars. Susanna fayre. XIX Susann' vn iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fayre. XX Susann' vn iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI to the note of Chi per voi non. Noë: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I saw my lady weping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. XXIIII Come dl ciel.   So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa. Giouan Ferretti. Cruell vnkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What doth my prety dear∣ling. XXVII Che fa▪ hoggil mio sol. Luca Marenzio. Sleepe myne onely iewell. XXVIII Sonno scendosti. 1▪ pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2▪ pars. Sound out my voyce. XXX to the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide & watry perls. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale. XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di Lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In vn Boschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope re∣lieu'd me. XXXIIII Gia fu ch' io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini. Alfonso Ferabosco. O sweet kisse. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fù mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertani. My hart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spight me. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee em∣brace. XLI Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enioyed the gra∣ces. XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alfonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol, The faire yoūg virgin. XLIIII La verginella. 1. pars. William Byrd. The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars. Of 6. I will go dye for pure loue. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that be certaine signes. XLVII Questi ch'inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far frō my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi no'l sentite. 2. pars. Loe here my hart. L Ecco ch'io lasso.   Now must I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzo. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1. pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was full neere my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my loue. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars. ¶FINIS. ¶ Imprinted at London by Thomas East, dwelling in Aldersgate streete, at the signe of the black Horse. 1588.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA. SEXTVS. Madrigales translated of foure, fiue and sixe parts, chosen out of diuers excellent Authors, vvith the first and second part of La Verginella, made by Maister Byrd, vpon two Stanz's of Ariosto, and brought to speake English with the rest. Published by N. Yonge, in fauour of such as take pleasure in Musick of voices. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas East, the assignè of William Byrd. 1588. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
To the right honourable Gilbert Lord Talbot, sonne and heire to the right noble & puissant George Earle of Shrewesbury, Washford and Wa∣terford, Earle Marshal of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, & Strange of Blackmeere, one of hir Maiesties most honorable priuie councel, Iustice of the forrests and chases by north the riuer of Trent, and knight of the most honourable order of the garter. Ni∣cholas Yong wisheth increase of honour, with all happinesse. RIght honourable, since I first began to keepe house in this Citie, it hath been no small comfort vnto mee, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants of good accompt (as well of this realme as of forreine nations) haue taken in good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poore abilitie was able to affoord them, both by the exercise of Mu∣sicke daily vsed in my house, and by furnishing them with Bookes of that kinde yeerely sent me out of Italy and other places, which beeing for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetnes of Aire, verie well liked of all, but most in account with them that vnderstand that language. As for the rest, they doe either not sing them at all, or at the least with litle delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set forth by a great Maister of Musicke, which for skill and sweetnes may content the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with varietie, haue wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I endeuoured to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthie, and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good friends, certaine Italian Madrigales translated most of them fiue yeeres agoe by a Gentleman for his priuate delight, (as not long before cer∣taine Napolitans had been englished by a verie honourable personage, and now a Coun∣cellour of estate, whereof I haue seene some, but neuer possessed any.) And finding the same to be singulerly well liked, not onely of those for whose cause I gathered them, but of many skilfull Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed the accent of the words to be well mainteined, the descant not hindred, (though some fewe notes altred) and in euerie place the due decorum kept: I was so bolde (beeing well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreate the rest, who willingly gaue me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some other more lately done at the request of his parti∣cular friends. Now when the same were seene to arise to a iust number, sufficient to furnish a great set of Books, diuers of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to haue them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could neuer obtaine the Gentlemans consent, though I sought it by many great meanes. For his answer was euer, that those trifles being but an idle mans exercise, of an idle subiect, written onely for priuate recreation, would blush to be seene otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he tooke his
penne, and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Bookes these verses of the Poet Martial. Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas, Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus, Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli, Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones. Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by mee, not presuming to put my sickle in an other mans corne, till such time as I heard, that the same beeing dispersed into many mens hands, were by some persons altogither vnknowen to the ow∣ner, like to be published in Print. Which made mee aduenture to set this worke in hand, he beeing neither priuie nor present, nor so neere this place as by any reasonable meanes I could giue him notice. Wherein though he may take a iust offence, that I haue laid open his labours without his licence: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by straun∣gers, lame and vnperfect by meanes of false Copies, I hope that this which I haue done to auoide a greater ill, shall deserue a more fauourable excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to offer my selfe and my bold attempt to the defence and protection of your Lordship, to whose honourable hands I present the same. Assuring my selfe, that so great is the loue and affection which hee beareth to your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Bookes, will take away all displeasure and vnkindnes from mee. And although this may be thought a greater boldnes then the first (I being not any way able to doe your L. such a seruice, as may de∣serue so great a fauour) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well esteemed of all, shalbe so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for themselues, shall not be thought vnwor∣thie of your honourable defence. With which hope I humbly commit your L. to the pro∣tection of the Almightie: wishing to the same, that encrease of honour which your true vertue deriued from so noble and renowmed Ancestors doeth worthely deserue. From London the first of October. 1588. Your Lordshp's most humble at commandement, N. Yonge.
Of 6. XLVI. Luca Marenzio. I Will goe dye for pure loue, except rage and disdaine come to recure loue, since in reward of all my faithfull seruing my ladye giues disgrace for well deseruing, and in my flame sans mea-sure, takes hir disport and pleasure, takes hir disporting, takes hir disport and plea-sure, vnlesse some frost assauge this heate and cure loue, I will geo dye for pure loue. I will goe dye for pure loue.
XLVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THese that bee certaine signes of my tormenting, of my tormenting, of my tormen-ting, sighes bee they none, no, nor any sigh so showeth, those haue some truce, but these haue no re-len-ting, not so exhales the heate that in mee gloweth, not so exhales the heate that in mee gloweth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart, makes all this venting, fierce Loue that burnes my heart, makes all this venting, {repeat} Saye Loue, saye Loue with what deuise thou canst for e-uer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, and yet consume it neuer, keepe
it in flames still, and yet consume it neuer, say Loue, say Loue with what deuise thou canst for e-uer keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, and yet consume it ne-uer.
XLVIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. SO farre from my delight, what cares torment mee. {repeat} fields doe record it, and vallyes, and woods, and mountaines, {repeat} and running ry-uers, {repeat} & running ryuers, and re-posed fountaines, where I crye out, {repeat} and to ye heauens lament mee, none other sounds but tunes of my complayning, of my complayning, Nymph of the groues or pleasant byrd once heareth, Nymph of the groues or pleasant byrd once hea-reth, still recount I my griefe & hir disday-ning, to euery plant that groweth, that groweth, to euery plant that groweth, to eue-ry plant that, that groweth, or blos-some bea-reth.
XLIX. The second part. SHE onely doth not feele it, she onely doth not feele it, O fields, O mountaines, {repeat} O mountaines, O woods, O vallyes, O floods and foun-taines, O stay no more to heare a wretch appealing, to heare a wretch appealing, O stay no more to heare a wretch appealing, appealing, O that some one this life and soule would se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed, and these mine eies opprest would cloze for e-uer, wold cloze for e-uer, for e-uer, for best were mee to die so, for best were me to die my loue concea-ling, my loue concealing, for best were mee to die so, my loue con-cealing, concealing, my loue concea-ling.
L. LOe heere my hart in kee-ping, I leaue with hir that laughes to see mee weeping, to see mee weeping, Oh what comfort or treasure, Oh, to liue in hir displeasure, that she that still doth payne mee, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more content when griefe hath slayne mee, when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more con-tented, when griefe hath slayne mee, that she that still doth payne mee, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more con-tent when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more content when griefe hath slaine mee.
LI. Luca Marenzio. I Must depart, I must depart my dearling, of lyfe & soule, of lyfe & soule disseised, and Loue therwith is pleased, Oh, oh what a death is parting? oh what a death is parting? but if the fates ordaine it, who can refraine it? oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needes bee pack-ing, farewell, farewell, {repeat} I dye to part oh, to part constrayned, but if the fates ordain it, who can refrain it, oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needs be pack-ing, farewell, {repeat} {repeat} I dye to part, oh, to part constrayned farewell sweet hart vnfayned, I dye, to part constray-ned.
LII. The first part. Gironimo Conuersi. ZEphirus brings the tyme that sweetly senteth, Zephirus brings, Zephirus brings the tyme that sweetly senteth, with flowres and herbs and winters frost exi-leth, {repeat} Progne now chirpeth, and Philomele lamenteth, Flora the garlands white and redde compileth, {repeat} Flora the garlands white and redde compileth, fields doe reioyce, the frowning Skye relenteth, {repeat} Ioue to behold his dearest daughter smyleth, {repeat} th'ayre, the water, th'ayre, the water, the
earth to Ioye consenteth each creature now to Loue, him re-con-cy-leth, th'ayre the water, th'ayre the water, the earth, to Ioye consenteth, each creature now to loue, him reconcyleth.
LIII. The second part. BVt with mee wretch ye stormes of wo perseuer, & heauie sighes, but with me wretch ye storms of wo perseuer, & heauie sighes, which frō my hart she stray-neth, which frō my hart she straineth, {repeat} that tooke ye kaye therof to heauē for euer, {repeat} for euer, so ye sing-ing of byrds and spring time flowring, so ye sing-ing of byrds, so ye sing-ing of byrds and spring time flowring, & ladies loue ye mens affectiō gayneth, {repeat} are lyke a de-sert, {repeat} are like a desert & cruell beastes de-uouring, and ladies loue that mens affection gaineth {repeat} are like a de-sert, are lyke a desert are lyke a desert & cruell beasts deuouring.
LIIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. I VVas full neare my fall, and hardly scaped, & hardly scaped, {repeat} that headlong mee transported, and with the darts and with the netts I spor-ted, that Loue himselfe for mee deuis'd and shaped, and if my reason, {repeat} but a while had stayed, to my mishappe, I had, I had no doubt assayed, what a death is to liue, by loue surpri-sed, to liue by loue surpri-sed, what a death is to liue by loue surprised, what a death is to liue by Loue surprised, by Loue surpri-sed.
LV. The second part. BVT as: That in due time espy-ing, but as the byrd, that in due time e-spy-ing, that: {repeat} the secret snare, and bush en-ly-med, quick to the heauan doth mount, {repeat} quik to the heauen doth mount with song and pleasure, traines of false lookes, false lookes, and faithles words defy-ing, mounting the hill so hard for to bee clymed, I sing for Ioy of li-ber-ty ye treasure. I sing for Ioy of li-ber-ty the trea-sure, I sing for Ioy of li-ber-ty the treasure.
LVI. The first part. Luca Marenzio. I Soung, I soung some-time, I soung, the freedome of my fancye, the yoke and bonds subdu-ed, with hart congealed, {repeat} with hart con-gealed, I quench the burning phransye, and with disdayne, the harmefull bayte eschu-ed, but now I waile my bonds, my bonds and my enchay-ning, all naked, vn-armed, nor by teares, {repeat} nor by teares can I finde, nor by complayning, mercy, mercy, mercy, nor comfort, nor yet my griefe assua-ged.
LVII. The second part. BEcause my Loue too lof-ty & dispightfull, & (too) dispightfull, while I with sighes resound hir name delight-full, hir name delightfull, doth smyle whē as ye flame my life depriueth, my life depri-ueth, If I seeke to break of, the strings that bind mee, If I seeke to breake of, the more I flye, {repeat} the more I flye, the fa-ster I the fa-ster I doe fynd mee, like the byrd in ye snare, in vaine that stryueth, in the snare in vaine that stri-ueth, like the byrd in the snare in vaine that stry-ueth. ¶FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contayned in these bookes, with the names of their seuerall authors, and originalls. Of 4. THese that bee certaine signes. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Fagnient. The faire Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Ioy so delights my hart. III Gioia s'abond'all cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Loue now shoot. IIII Amor ben puoi. O griefe, if yet my griefe. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donato. In vayne hee seekes for beau∣tie. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What meaneth Loue to nest him. VIII Perche s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Loue when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Mare' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your looke so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch. Of 5. From what part of the Hea∣uen. XIII In qual parte del ciel. Filippo di Montte. The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza 2. pars.   In euery place. XV Ogni luogo.   Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second part. XVII Frenò Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi morirò. 3. pars. Susanna fayre. XIX Susann' vn iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fayre. XX Susann' vn iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI To the note of Chi per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I saw my lady weeping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. XXIIII Come dal ciel. Giouan Ferrettie So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa. Cruell vnkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What doth my prety dar∣ling. XXVII Che fa▪ hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleepe mine onely Iewell. XXVIII Sonno scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2. pars. Sound out my voyce. XXX To the note of Vestin'icolli. Gianetto Pales
Liquide & watry perles. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale. XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In vn Roschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope re∣liu'd mee. XXXIIII Gia fu ch' io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini▪ Alfonso Ferabosco. O sweet kisse. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fù mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertany. My hart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spight mee. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee em∣brace. XLI Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enioyed the gra∣ces XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alofonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol, The faire yong virgine. XLIIII La verginella, 1. pars. William Byrd. The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2▪ pars. Of 6. I will goe dye for pure Loue. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that bee certaine signes. XLVII Questi ch' inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far frō my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1 pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi no'l sentite. 2. pars. Loe heere my hart. L Ecco ch'io lasso.   Now must I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzio. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1▪ pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was full neere my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Beecause my loue. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars. ¶FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA. BASSVS. Madrigales translated of foure, fiue and sixe parts, chosen out of diuers excellent Authors, vvith the first and second part of La Verginella, made by Maister Byrd, vpon two Stanz's of Ariosto, and brought to speake English with the rest. Published by N. Yonge, in fauour of such as take pleasure in Musick of voices. Imprinted at London by Tho∣mas East, the assignè of William Byrd. 1588. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
To the right honourable Gilbert Lord Talbot, sonne and heire to the right noble & puissant George Earle of Shrewesbury, Washford and Wa∣terford, Earle Marshal of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, & Strange of Blackmeere, one of hir Maiesties most honorable priuie councel, Iustice of the forrests and chases by north the riuer of Trent, and knight of the most honourable order of the garter. Ni∣cholas Yong wisheth increase of honour, with all happinesse. RIght honourable, since I first began to keepe house in this Citie, it hath been no small comfort vnto mee, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants of good accompt (as well of this realme as of forreine nations) haue taken in good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poore abilitie was able to affoord them, both by the exercise of Mu∣sicke daily vsed in my house, and by furnishing them with Bookes of that kinde yeerely sent me out of Italy and other places, which beeing for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetnes of Aire, verie well liked of all, but most in account with them that vnderstand that language. As for the rest, they doe either not sing them at all, or at the least with litle delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set forth by a great Maister of Musicke, which for skill and sweetnes may content the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with varietie, haue wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I endeuoured to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthie, and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good friends, certaine Italian Madrigales translated most of them fiue yeeres agoe by a Gentleman for his priuate delight, (as not long before cer∣taine Napolitans had been englished by a verie honourable personage, and now a Coun∣cellour of estate, whereof I haue seene some, but neuer possessed any.) And finding the same to be singulerly well liked, not onely of those for whose cause I gathered them, but of many skilfull Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed the accent of the words to be well mainteined, the descant not hindred, (though some fewe notes altred) and in euerie place the due decorum kept: I was so bolde (beeing well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreate the rest, who willingly gaue me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some other more lately done at the request of his parti∣cular friends. Now when the same were seene to arise to a iust number, sufficient to furnish a great set of Books, diuers of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to haue them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could neuer obtaine the Gentlemans consent, though I sought it by many great meanes. For his answer was euer, that those trifles being but an idle mans exercise, of an idle subiect, written onely for priuate recreation, would blush to be seene otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he tooke his
penne, and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Bookes these verses of the Poet Martial. Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas, Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus, Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli, Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones. Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by mee, not presuming to put my sickle in an other mans corne, till such time as I heard, that the same beeing dispersed into many mens hands, were by some persons altogither vnknowen to the ow∣ner, like to be published in Print. Which made mee aduenture to set this worke in hand, he beeing neither priuie nor present, nor so neere this place as by any reasonable meanes I could giue him notice. Wherein though he may take a iust offence, that I haue laid open his labours without his licence: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by straun∣gers, lame and vnperfect by meanes of false Copies, I hope that this which I haue done to auoide a greater ill, shall deserue a more fauourable excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to offer my selfe and my bold attempt to the defence and protection of your Lordship, to whose honourable hands I present the same. Assuring my selfe, that so great is the loue and affection which hee beareth to your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Bookes, will take away all displeasure and vnkindnes from mee. And although this may be thought a greater boldnes then the first (I being not any way able to doe your L. such a seruice, as may de∣serue so great a fauour) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well esteemed of all, shalbe so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for themselues, shall not be thought vnwor∣thie of your honourable defence. With which hope I humbly commit your L. to the pro∣tection of the Almightie: wishing to the same, that encrease of honour which your true vertue deriued from so noble and renowmed Ancestors doeth worthely deserue. From London the first of October. 1588. Your Lordship's most humble at commandement, N. Yonge.
Of 4. I. Noe Faignient. THese that: of my tormenting, no sighes {repeat} no sighes be they (no) nor any sighe so showeth, those haue their truce some-time, those haue their truce sometime, these no relenting, but these haue no relen-ting, not so exhales the heat that in mee gloweth, fierce Loue that burnes my heart makes all this venting, fierce Loue, fierce Loue that burnes my heart makes all this venting, while with his winges the raging fire hee bloweth, while with his winges the raging fire hee bloweth, say Loue, say Loue, with what deuise thou canst for euer, with what deuise thou canst for euer, keepe it in flames & yet cō-sume it neuer, and yet consume it neuer.
II. Giouan di Macque. THe faire Diana neuer more reuiued, the faire Diana neuer more reuiued, hir louers hart that spyed hir in the fountaine, while shee hir naked lims in waters die-ued, thē mee the coūtry wench, {repeat} set by the mountain, washing a vayle to cloth the locks re-fined, washing a vaile to cloth the locks refined, that on faire Laura's head the gold resemble, which made mee quake although the Sunne then shined, though the Sunne then shined, & euery ioynt with louing frost to tremble, and euery ioynt with louing frost to trem-ble.
III. G.PA. Prenestino. IOy so delights my hart, and so reliues mee, when I bee-hold the face of my beeloued, that any hard mischaunce or pang that griues me, is quite exild and presently remoued, and if I might to perfect vp my pleasure, to perfect vp my pleasure, without controulement, be-stow mine eyes where I repose my treasure, for a crowne & a kingdome sure pos-sessed, sure possessed, I would not chaunge my state so sweet & bles-sed, for a crowne & a kingdome sure possessed, sure pos-sessed, I would not chaunge my state so sweet, sweet and blessed.
IIII. G.P.A. Prenestino. FAlse Loue now shoote and spare not, now doe thy worst, now doe thy worst I care not, and to dispatch mee vse all thine arte and all thy craft to catch mee, for youth amisse bestowed, I now repent & for my faults I languish, that brought mee nothing else but griefe and anguish, and now at length haue vowed at liberty to liue, since to assaile mee, for frō thee good nor yll, nor good nor yll, comfort nor sorow {repeat} I will not hope nor feare, now nor to morow, I will not hope nor feare, nor feare, now nor to morow.
V. Baldessar Donato. O Griefe if yet my griefe bee not beleeued, O Griefe, {repeat} if yet my griefe bee not beeleeued, crye with thy voyce outstretched, that hir dispightfull heart & eares disdayning, may heare my iust complayning, may heare my iust complayning, my iust complayning. And when thou hast hir told my state most wretch-ed, tell hir, tell hir, I could bee well contented, if shee that now doth grieue me, had but the least desire, {repeat} once to relieue mee, {repeat} had but the least desire, {repeat} once to relieue mee, once to relieue mee.
VI. Baldessar Donato. AS in the night wee see the sparcks reuiued, & quite ex-tinct so soone, so soone as day appeareth, so when I am of my sweet sonne depriued, new feares approch, and ioy my heart forbeareth. But not so soone shee is againe arriued, as feare retires, and present hope mee cheareth, O sacred light, oh turne, oh turne againe to blesse mee, and driue away this feare, that doth oppresse mee, and driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee. O sacred light, oh turne, oh turne againe to blesse mee, and driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee. And driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee. And driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee, and driue away this feare that doth oppresse mee.
VII. Fillippo de Monte. IN vaine hee seekes for beautie that exceleth, that hath not seene hir eyes where Loue seiorneth, how sweetly heere and there the same shee turneth, hee knowes not, hee knowes not how Loue healeth, he knowes not how Loue heales and how hee quelleth, that knowes not, that knowes not how shee sighes & sweet beguileth, & how shee sweetly speakes, and sweetly smileth, and how shee sweetly speakes and sweetly smileth, and sweetly smi-leth.
VIII. G: P. Prenestino. WHat mea: in the faire eyes ad-myred, with louely grace and heauenly spryte inspired, of my mistres delight-full, of my mistres delightfull, enuious dames, enuious dames confesse & bee not spitefull, ah fooles do you not minde it, that Loue hath sought and yet could neuer finde it from Sunne ary-sing, till where he goes to rest him, a brauer place then in hir eyes to nest him, a brauer place then in her eyes to nest him.
IX. G.P.A. Prenestino. SWeet Loue when hope was flow-ring, with fruits of recompence for my deseruing, rest was the price of all my faith, of all my faithfull seruing, Oh spitefull death ac-cursed, oh life most cruell, the first by wrong doth paine mee, and all my hope hath turned, the last against my will doth heere detaine mee, but death to spite mee more is not consenting, mee thinkes with in my hart still hir place shee holdeth, and what my torment is plainely beehold-eth, & what my torment is plainely beeholdeth, plainely beeholdeh.
X. Marc' Antonio Pordeuon. LAdy that: Sweet thefe of Loue so daintie, {repeat} what will you doe by theuing, that robbe when you are ge-uing? but you doe giue so surely, but you doe giue, {repeat} so surely, yt you may rob and steale the more securely. If sometime you bee pleased, {repeat} that my poore hart be eased▪ you doe it not to ioy mee, but stil by fresh as-saults quite to destroy mee, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy mee, quite to destroy mee.
XI. Giaches de Wert. WHO will ascend to heauen and there obtaine mee, my wittes forlorne and sil-ly sence decayed? for since I tooke the wound that sore doth paine mee from your faire eyes, my sprytes are all dismayed. Nor of so great a losse I doe complaine mee, if it encrease not, {repeat} {repeat} but in some boundes bee stayed, but if I still grow worse I shal-bee lotted, but if I still grow worse I shalbe lotted, to wander through the world fond and assotted. {repeat} but if I still grow worse I shal-bee lotted, {repeat} to wander through the world fond & assotted. {repeat} fond & assotted▪
XII. Cornelio Verdonch. LAdy your looke so gentle so to my hart deepe sincketh, so to my hart deepe sincketh. why thē doe you constrain mee cruell to liue in playnts in paine & sadnesse, when one sweet word may gaine mee, whē one sweet word may gaine mee, peace to my thoughts and euerlasting gladnesse, peace to my thoughts and euerlasting gladnesse, euer-lasting gladnesse, peace to my thoughts with euerlasting gladnesse, peace to my thoughts, {repeat} with euerlasting gladnesse. Heere endeth the songs of foure parts.
Of 5. XIII. Fillippo de Monte. FRom what part of the heauen, from what example wher-by dame Nature framed, that sweet face full of beautie, in which shee aymed to proue in earth hir powre aboue aboue was ample, was neuer Nymph yet nor Syluane queene a-do-red, that so daintie fine locks in ayre display-ed, yet by hir lookes my lyfe is all beetrayed.
XIIII. The second part. IN vaine: That hath not seene hir eyes wher Loue seiorneth, he knowes not how loue heales and how he quelleth, and how shee sweetly speaketh, he knowes not how Loue heales and how hee quelleth, and how shee sweetly speaketh, and how shee sweetly speakes and sweetly smy-leth.
XV. IN euery place: Saue wher I see those beames {repeat} those beames that mee haue burned, and eke mine eyes to flouds, to flouds of teares haue turned, thus in extreamest panges ech howre I languish, ech howre I languish, {repeat} O mee, O mee my shining starre cause of all comfort of this world the Iewell, for want of thee my life my life I haue in hatred, my life I haue in hatred, was neuer griefe so great, was neuer griefe so great nor death so cruell, was neuer griefe so great, {repeat} nor death so cruell.
XVI. The first part. Luca Maranzio. THirsis Thirsis to die desired, marking hir eyes yt to his hart was nea-rest, and she that with his flame no lesse was fyred, sayd to him, oh harts loue dearest, alas forbeare to dye now, ij. by thee I liue, with the I wish to dye too, to dye too, by thee I liue, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too.
XVII. The second part. THirsis: Thinking it death that lyfe would not forsake him, his daintie Nymph that now, the haruest of Loues trea-sure, said thus with eyes all trembling, faint and wasted, dye now sweete hart, the Shepherd thus replyed, and I sweet lyfe doe dye too, and I sweet lyfe doe dye too, and I sweet lyfe doe dye too.
XVIII. The third part. THus these two louers so fortunatly dyed & so desired, that to dye so againe, {repeat} that to dye so againe, {repeat} their lyfe retyred.
XIX. Orlando di Lasso. SV-sanna fayre, {repeat} sometime of loue re-que-sted, by two old men, by two old men whom hir sweet looks allur'd, was in hir hart, {repeat} full sad & sore mole-sted, seeing the force, {repeat} hir chastie endur'd, to thē she said, if I by craft procur'd, doe yeld to you my body to abuse it, I kill my soule, & if I shall refuse it, you will mee iudge to death reprochfully, but better it is, {repeat} in innocence to chuse it, then by my fault, {repeat} to'ffend my God on hye.
XX. Alfonso Ferabosco. SVsanna faire sometime of loue requested, by two olde men whom hir sweet looks allur'd, was in hir hart, {repeat} full sad and sore moles-ted, seeing the force hir cha-stitie endure'd, to them she sayd, to them she sayd, if I by craft procur'd doe yeeld to you my bo-dy to abuse it, my body to abuse it, I kill my soule and if I doe refuse it, you will mee iudge, you will mee iudge to death reproch ful-ly, but better it is, {repeat} but better it is, in in-no-cence to chuse it then by my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by
my fault t'offend my God on hye, then by my faulte t'offend my God on hye, then by my fault t'offend my God on hye. {repeat}
XXI. Noe Faignient. WHen shall I cease: Lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting? when shall my plaint & mourning to tunes of Ioye bee turned, when shall my plaint & mourning to tunes of Ioy be turned; good Loue leaue thy tormenting, good loue, good loue leaue thy tormenting, to long thy flames within my hart haue burned, within my hart haue burned, O graunt a-las with quick-nesse, {repeat} O graunt a-las with quicknesse, some litle comfort, {repeat} some litle comfort, {repeat} some litle comfort, {repeat} for so long a sicknesse.
XXII. Luca Marenzio. I Must depart oh haples, but leaue to you my carefull hart oppressed, so that if I liue hartles {repeat} if I liue hartles, {repeat} Loue doth a worke miraculous and blessed, but so great paines assayle me, that sure ere it be lnog, that sure ere it be long my life will faile me {repeat} that sure ere it be long, that sure ere it be long, my life will fayle me, my life will fayle me.
XXIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Saw my lady weeping, I saw my lady wee-ping, & Loue did languish, & Loue did languish, & of their plaint ensued so rare consenting that neuer yet was heard more sweet lamenting, was heard more sweet lamenting, made all of tender pittie and mornefull an-guish, and mournfull an-guish, the flouds forsaking their delightfull swel-ling the flouds forsaking, the flouds forsaking their delightfull swelling, staid to attend their plaint, the winds enraged, the winds enraged, still & content to quiet calme asswaged, still and content to quiet calme asswaged, their won-ted stor-ming, and euery blast rebel-ling, and euery blast rebelling.
XXIIII. The second part. LIke as from heauen the dew full softly showring▪ doth fall, & so refresh both fields and closes, both fields & closes, filling the parched flowers with sappe & sauour? so while shee bath'd the Violets and ye Roses, so freshly flowring, so freshly flowring, the spring reneued his force with hir sweet fauour, the spring renued his force with hir sweet fa-uour, with hir sweet fauour: so while she bath'd the Violetts and the Roses, so freshly flowring, so freshly flowring, the spring renu'd his force with hir sweet fauour, the spring renu'd his force with hir sweete fa-uour, with hir sweet fauour.
XXV. Giouan Ferretti. SO gratious is thy sweet selfe {repeat} so faire so framed, so gratious is thy sweet selfe, {repeat} so faire so framed, that who so sees thee, {repeat} with out a hart enflamed, either he liues not, {repeat} either he liues not, or Loues delight he knowes not, either he liues not, {repeat} either he liues not, or Loues, delight he knowes not.
XXVI. Giouan Ferretti. CRuell vnkind, my hart thou hast bereft mee, my hart thou hast bereft mee, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft mee, {repeat} Cruell vnkind my hart thou hast bereft mee, my hart thou hast bereft mee, {repeat} my hart thou hast bereft mee, {repeat} And wilt not leaue yet, and wilt not leaue whyle any lyfe is left mee. And yet, and yet, and yet, still will I loue thee. {repeat}
XXVII. Luca Marenzio. WHat doth my pretie dear-ling? what doth that they sing not of hir, the praise and vaunting? To hir I giue my Violets, To hir I giue my Violets and garland sweetly smelling, For to crowne hir sweet locks pure gold excelling.
XXVIII. Stephano Felis. SLeepe mine onely Iuell, sleepe sleepe mine onely Iu-ell, sleepe sleepe mine onely Iuell, mine onely Iu-ell, much more thou didst delight mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, {repeat} that hyd hir face to spite mee, {repeat} much more thou didst de-light mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee, that hyd hir face to spite mee.
XXIX. The second part. THou bringst hir home full nye mee, while shee so fast did flye mee, did flye mee, while shee so fast did flye mee, long time absented, that looke so mild appeased, thus is my griefe declyning, thus is my griefe declyning, sleepe if thou bee like death as thou art fayned, as thou art fay-ned, as thou art fay-ned, a happy lyfe by such a death were gained, {repeat} a happie life by such a death were gay-ned.
XXX. Gianetto Palestina. SOund out my voice, with pleasant tunes recording, the new delight that Loue to mee inspireth, pleasd and con-tent with that my mind de-sireth, my mind de-sireth, thanked bee Loue so heauenly, so heauenly ioys affoording, shee that my plaints with rigor lōg reiected, bynding my heart with those hir golden tresses, in recompence of all my long dis-tresses, my long distresses, said with a sigh, thy griefe hath, thy griefe hath mee in-fec-ted, said with a sigh, thy griefe hath mee infected, thy griefe hath mee in-fec-ted.
XXXI. Luca Marenzio. LIquid and: To quench my heart enflamed, but hee a-las, {repeat} a-las, oh, as were enough to burne mee, without recomfort, as were enough to burne mee, without recomfort, and in-to ashes turne mee.
XXXII. Orlando di Lasso. THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, so pleasant and so gay, in greenewood groues, delights to make his dwel-ling, in fields to flye chaunting his roundelay, chaūting his roundelay, at liberty against the cage rebel-ling, but my poore hart, with sorrowes ouerswel-ling, {repeat} through bondage vyle binding my freedome short, no pleasure takes, {repeat} no pleasure takes in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receiueth no comfort. nor of his song receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receyueth no comfort.
XXXIII. Giouan Ferretti. WIthin: Thus spake the Nymph with sugred words of fa-uor, say (sweet loue) to thy loue, tell mee my dearling, where is thy heart beestowd, where is thy liking? all full of sweetnesse and of sorow mixed, with that the gentle Nimph full sweetly smiling, with kind words of de-light & flattring gloses, shee kindly kist his cheek with lippes of ro-ses, wt lippes of ro-ses, shee kindly kist his cheek, with lippes of ro-ses, with lipps of ro-ses, with lippes of roses.
XXXIIII. Rinaldo del Mel. SOmetime: O since she first consented to leaue the world all earthly Ioy defying▪ to leaue the world all earthly Ioy defying, cloudes of care all about my hart are flye-ing, in vaine lament I, since a vaile now hydeth, the rarest beautie thar on earth abydeth. the rarest beautie that on earth adydeth, the rarest beautie that on earth abydeth.
XXXV. Alfonso Ferabosco. RVbies and perles and treasure, Rubies and perles and trea-sure, kingdomes, renowne and glory, kingdomes, renowne and glory, please the delightful mind & cheere the so-ry, but much the greater mea-sure, of true delight he gayneth, sues and obtaineth, but much the greater mea-sure of true delight hee gay-neth, that for the fruits of loue, {repeat} sues and obtaineth, sues and obtaineth.
XXXVI. Alfonso Ferabosco. O Sweet kisse ful of com-fort, O ioy to mee enui-ed, {repeat} so often sought, so oft to mee denied, to mee de-ny-ed, de-ny-ed. Yet thee I neuer ta-sted, O lipps so false & wy-ly, so false & wy-ly, so false & wy-ly O looks empoysned, O face well may I feare thee, that kilst who thee beholds & comes not neere thee, I dye a death most paine-full, {repeat} fare-well sweet lippes disdainfull, kild with vnkindnesse, fare-well sweet lippes disdainfull, farewell sweet lippes, disdainfull.
XXXVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SOmetime my hope full weakly, went on by line & leasure, but now it growes to doe my hart but now it growes to doe my hart some pleasure. Yet that my hope decay not, by ouer much contenting, Loue will not giue my Ioyes their full augmenting, allayes my blisse that hope may be ye fa-ster, but still with some de-sa-ster, allayes my blisse that hope may be the fa-ster, that hope may be the faster.
XXXVIII. Lelio Bertani. LAdy that hand of plenty, which gaue vn-to the needfull, which gaue vn-to the needfull, Lady that hand of plenty, which gaue vn-to the needfull, dyd steale my heart vnheedfull, my hart vnheedfull. But you doe giue so surely {repeat} that you may rob and steale the more securely, If you sometime be pleased, that my poore hart bee eased, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy mee, you doe not that to ioy mee, quite to destroy mee, but still by fresh a-saults quite to destroy mee.
XXXIX. Gironimo Conuersi. MY hart alas why dost yu loue thine enemy, thine ene-mie, my hart alas why dost thou loue thine enemie, thine enemie, laughing so merely she goes, laughing so merely she goes, {repeat} with gladnes, with gladnes: cruell disdaine, cruell disdaine, merely does she goe with gladnes, merely does she goe, merely does she goe with gladnes: cruell disdaine, {repeat} lasting paine no remedy, lasting paine no remedy, saue most singuler beutie, & litle pitie & litle litle pitie, saue most singuler beautie & litle pitie and litle litle pitie.
XL. Alfonso Ferabosco. LAdy: If you so spight mee, if you so spight mee, so spight mee, wherefore doe you so oft kisse and de-light mee, kisse and delight mee, kisse and delight mee? may breake and bee destroy-ed, sure that my hart opprest and ouerioy-ed, may breake and bee destroyed, destroyed. If you seeke so to spill mee, {repeat} come kisse mee sweet and kill mee, {repeat} so shall your hart be eased, & I, & I shall rest content, {repeat} shall rest content, and die well pleased. So shall your hart be eased, and I shall rest content, {repeat} shall rest content, and dye well pleased.
XLI. Cantio rustica. Giouan Battista Pinello. WHen I would thee embrace, {repeat} whē I would thee embrace, thou dost but mock mee, {repeat} thou dost but mock mee, when I would thee embrace, {repeat} when I would thee embrace, thou dost but mock mee, {repeat} thou dost but mock mee, and when I lament, and when I la-ment my case, thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, {repeat} thou criest ty hy and no no no no no no no no no, so saith my piggs nie. & no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no so saith my piggs nie. & no no no no, & no no no no, stil saith my piggs nie
XLII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THirsis enioyd the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet embra-ces, of Clori's sweet embraces, yet both their Ioyes wer scan-ted for darke it was, and candle light they wanted, for darke it was, and can-dle light they wanted, wherewith kind Cin-thia in the heauen that shy-ned, hir nightly vaile resig-ned, and that faire face dis-closed, and that faire face disclosed, where Loue and Ioy were met & both re-posed, that both of meere delight dyed & reuiued, thē ech from oths looks such Ioy deriued, that both of meere delight dyed and re-uiued, reuiued.
XLIII. Alfonso Ferabosco THe Nightingale so plea-sant & so gay, so plea-sant and so gay, in greenewood groues de-lights delights to make his dwelling, delights, {repeat} delights to make his dwel-ling, in fields to flye, chaunting his roun-delay, chaūting his roun-delay, at liberty, {repeat} against the cage rebelling, but my poore hart with sorrowes ouerswel-ling, through bondage vyle, bynding my freedome short, my freedome short, no pleasure takes, {repeat} in these, in these his sports excelling, nor of his song {repeat} receiueth
no comfort. Nor of his song receiueth no com-fort, nor of his song {repeat} receiueth no comfort, nor of his song receiueth no com-fort.
XLIIII. William Byrd. THe faire young virgin, {repeat} is like the rose vntainted, in garden faire while tender stalck doth beare it, sole and all vntoucht, sole and vntoucht with no re-sort acquain-ted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock doth once come neere it, th'ayre full of sweetnes, of sweet-nes, the morning fresh depainted, the earth the water, {repeat} with all their fauors doe cheare it, daintie young gal-lants, {repeat} and ladyes most desired, desi-red, de-light to haue there-with, their heads and breasts, their heads and breasts attyred, Dayntie young gal-lants, {repeat}
and ladies most desired, desi-red delight to haue there-with their heads and breasts, their heads and breasts attyred.
XLV. The second part. BVT not so soone, {repeat} from greene stock wher it growed, the same is pluckt, {repeat} & from the branch re-moued, as lost is all from heauen & earth, from heauen and earth that flow-ed, both fauour grace and beauty best beloued, and beauty best beloued. The virgin faire, {repeat} that hath the flowre, that hath the flowre beestowed, which more then life to gard it hir behoued, loseth hir prayse and is no more de-sired, of those yt late vnto hir loue, vnto hir loue a-spi-red. loseth hir praise and is no more desired, of those yt late vnto hir loue, vnto hir loue aspyred. Heere endeth the songs of fiue parts.
Of 6. XLVI. Luca Marenzio. I Will goe dye for pure loue, except rage and disdaine come to recure loue, and in my flame sans measure, takes hir disport and pleasure, takes hir disport and pleasure, takes hir disport and pleasure, vnles some frost, I will goe die for pure loue, I will go die for pure loue.
XLVII. Alfonso Ferabosco. THese that bee certaine signes of my tormenting, of my tormenting, nor a-ny sigh so showeth, haue no relenting, not so exhales the heate that in mee gloweth, not so exhales the heat that in mee glow-eth, the heat that in mee gloweth, fierce Loue that burnes my hart makes all this venting, makes all this ven-ting, makes all this venting, Saye Loue, {repeat} with what deuise thou canst for e-uer, keepe it in flames still, & yet consume it ne-uer▪ and yet consume it neuer, say Loue, say Loue with what deuise thou canst for e-uer, keepe it in flames and yet consume it neuer, keepe it in flames still, and yet con-sume it neuer? and yet consume it ne uer,
XLVIII. Alfonso Ferabosco. SO farre from my delight, {repeat} what cares torment mee, fields do record it, and vallyes, and woods & mountaines, and running ryuers, and still repo-sed fountaines, and still reposed fountaines, wher I cry out & to the heauens, lament mee, none other sounds but tunes of my complayning, Nymph of the groues or pleasant byrd once heareth, still recount I my griefe, and hir disday-ning, to euery plant that groweth, {repeat} or blossome beareth, to euery plant that grow-eth, or blossome beareth.
XLIX. The second part. SHE onely doth not feele it, {repeat} O fields, O mountaines, O mountaines, O woods, O vallyes, O floods, O fountaines, {repeat} O stay no more to heare a wretch appea-ling, to heare a wretch appealing, to heare a wretch appealing, O that some one this life and soule wold se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed, and these mine eyes opprest, would cloze for e-uer, would cloze for e-uer, for best were mee to dye so, for best were mee to dye, my loue concealing. For best were mee to die so, for best were mee to dye, my loue concealing, my loue concealing.
L. LOE heere my hart in keeping, I leaue with hir that laughes to see mee wee-ping, Oh what comfort or treasure, break hart and die then, that shee which still doth payn me, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more con-tent, when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more contented, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slayne mee, may liue the more content, when griefe hath slaine mee.
LI. Luca Marenzio. NOW must I part my dearling, of lyfe & soule, of life and soule disseised, and loue therewith is pleased, oh what a death is parting? but if the fates ordaine it? who can refraine it? oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needes be packing, farewell, {repeat} farewell sweet hart vnfayned, but if the fates ordaine it, who can refraine it? oh what griefe is now lacking? yet must I needs bee packing, farewell, {repeat} farewell sweet hart vnfayned, I dye to part constrayned.
LII. The first part. Gironimo Conuersi. ZE-phirus brings the time yt sweetly senteth, {repeat} with flowres and herbs and winters frost ex-ileth, Progne now chirpeth▪ & Philomele lamenteth, Flora the gar-lands {repeat} white and read compileth, Flora the garlands white & read compi-leth, fields doe reioyce, the frowning Skye relenteth, Ioue to beehold his dearest daughter smy-leth, {repeat} th'ayre, the water, the earth to Ioy consenteth, each creature now to loue, him reconcileth, th'ayre the water, the earth, to Ioy consenteth, each creature now to loue, him re-conci-leth.
LIII. The second part. BVT with mee wretch ye storms of woe perse-uer, & heauy sighes, but with mee wretch the storms of woe per-se-uer, & hea-uy sighes, which frō my hart she straineth, which frō my hart she strayneth, that tooke the kay thereof to heauen for e-uer, that tooke the kay there-of to heauen for e-uer, so yt sing-ing of byrds & spring time flow ring, so that sing-ing of byrds & spring time flowring, {repeat} & ladies loue that mens affection gaineth, are like a de-sert, {repeat} are like a de-sert, and cruell beasts deuouring. and ladies loue that mens affection gaineth, are lyke a de-sert, {repeat} are like a desert, and cruell beastes deuour-ing.
LIIII. The first part. Alfonso Ferabosco. I Was full neare my fall, and hardly scaped, I was full neare my fall, and hardly scaped {repeat} and with the dartes & with the nettes I sported, that Loue himselfe for mee deuis'd and shaped, and if my reason but a while had stayed, to rule my sence misled and vnaduis'd. to my mishappe I had no doubt assayed, what a death is to liue by Loue surprised, what a death is to liue, what a death is to liue by Loue surprised, by Loue surprised.
LV. The second part. BVt as the byrd that in due time espying, but as the byrd that in due time espying, the se-cret snare and deadly bush enlymed, quick to the heauens doth mount, {repeat} with song and pleasure: traynes of false lookes and faith-les wordes de-fying, mounting the hill so hard {repeat} so hard for to bee clymed, I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure. I sing for Ioy of liberty the treasure, the trea-sure.
LVI. The first part. Luca Marenzio. I Soung, sometime, I soung, the fire extinct, the yoke and bondes subdu-ed, with hart congealed, with hart congealed, with hart congeal'd, I quench the burning phransye, and with disdayne, the harmefull bayte eschued. But now I waile my bonds and my enchay-ning, in louely nettes en-gaged, mercy nor comfort, mercy nor comfort, mercy nor comfort, nor my griefe assuaged.
LVII. The second part. BEcause my Loue: While I with sighes resound hir name de-lightfull, my life depriueth: If I seeke to breake of {repeat} the strings that binde mee, like the byrd in the snare in vaine that stry-ueth. like the byrd, in vaine that striueth. Like the byrd in the snare, in vaine that stry-ueth. ¶FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contayned in these bookes, with the names of their seuerall authors, and originalls. Of 4. THese that bee certaine signes. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Fagnient. The faire Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Ioy so delights my hart. III Gioia s'abond'all cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Loue now shoot. IIII Amor ben puoi. O griefe, if yet my griefe. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donato. In vayne hee seekes for beau∣tie. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What meaneth Loue to nest him. VIII Perche s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Loue when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your looke so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch. Of 5. From what part of the Hea∣uen. XIII In qual parte del ciel. Filippo di Montte. The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza 2. pars.   In euery place. XV Ogni luogo.   Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second part. XVII Frenò Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi morirò. 3. pars. Susanna fayre. XIX Susann' vn iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fayre. XX Susann' vn iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI To the note of Chi per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I saw my lady weeping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. XXIIII. Come dal ciel. Giouan Ferrettie So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa. Cruell vnkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What doth my prety dar∣ling. XXVII Che fa▪ hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleepe mine onely Iewell. XXVIII Sonno scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2. pars. Sound out my voyce. XXX To the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide & watry perles. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale. XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In vn Roschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope re∣liu'd mee. XXXIIII Gia fu ch'io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini▪ Alfonso Ferabosco. O sweet kisse. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fù mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertany. My hart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spight mee. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee em∣brace. XLI Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enioyed the gra∣ces XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alofonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol, The faire-yong virgine. XLIIII La verginella, 1. pars. William Byrd. The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars. Of 6. I will go dye for pure Loue. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that bee certaine signes. XLVII Questi ch' inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far frō my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi no'l sentite. 2 pars. Loe heere my hart. L Ecco ch'io lasso.   Now must I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzio. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1 pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was full neere my fall. LIIII Fùi vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Beecause my loue. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars. ¶FINIS.
