20946.8 22096A 99849987 17522
VOX COELI, OR, NEWES FROM HEAVEN. OF A CONSVLTATION THERE HELD BY THE HIGH and mighty Princes, King HEN. 8. King EDW. 6. Prince HENRY. Queene MARY, Queene ELIZABETH, and Queene ANNE; wherein SPAINES ambition and treacheries to most Kingdomes and free Estates in EVROPE, are vnmaskd and truly represented, but more particularly towards ENGLAND, and now more especially vnder the pretended match of Prince CHARLES, with the Infanta DONA MARIA. Whereunto is annexed two Letters written by Queene Mary from Heauen, the one to Count Gondomar, the Ambassadour of SPAINE, the other to all the Romane Catholiques of ENGLAND. Written by S. R. N. I. Printed in Elesium. 1624.
TO THE ILLVSTRIOVS AND GRAVE ASSEMBLY OF THE HIGH COVRT OF PARLIAMENT The fruition of all Temporall Blessings. The felicitie of all Spirituall Blessings. LORDS. KNIGHTS. BVRGESSES. TO you who are the re-presentiue body of England, and the Ep∣tomie and Compendium of this great Volume of our Estate; To you who are assummoned by our King, and sent vp by our Country, to obay the first with your best Fidelities, to serue the second with your chiefest Zeale and endeuours, and to affect and honour both, with your most religious Prayers and wishes. To you from whom God for his glory, our Soueraigne for his honour and safety, and our Church and Common-weale for their flourishing well-fare and prosperity, doe expect much by your transcendent and honourable imployments: To you I say, and to no other, doe I present this Consultation (termed VOX Coeli) to your consideration, and dedicate it to your protection. And because (in point of integrite and duty) I hold my selfe bound o bring the truth neerer to your knowledge, or rather home to your
vnderstanding; May it please you to be informed, that about some three yeares since, at the first sitting of the last high Court of Parliament, when our King was so earnest in proposing the match of our Noble Prince his Sonne, with the Infanta of Spaine; When the King of Spaine cou∣lourably presented (though not really intended) to be depely affected to entertaine and embrace the said motion; When Coun Gondmar (his Ambassador) made shew to be a zealous solicitour, and a most actiue and officious stickler for compassing and finishing it; When our Romish Catholiques became passionately, and insultingly confident of the free tolleralon of their Religion, and in the skie-reaching mountaines of their ambitions and superstitious hopes, were already preparing to erect their Groues and Altars, to set vp their Idols and Images, and consequently to introduce their Pope and his Masse in the Temples of our God; when all Prisons were vnlocked and open to all pernitious Priests and dange∣rous esuites, and that many others  (Caterpillers and Vipers) came flocking and swarming from diuers parts of Europe, to poison and eate cut the soules of our people, with their Idolatrous doctrine of Antichrist, and to with-draw their hearts and consciences from their Alleagiance and Fideliie, to their naturall Prince and Countrey, purposely (with  treachery then Religion) to subiect them to a forraigne power and iurisdiction. When the Emperour had beaten the King of Bohemia from Prague, and the Duke of Bauaria with the assistance of the Swords, Soulders, and Treasure of the King of Spaine, had in a setled truce as∣saulted and taken many Townes in the Palatinate, contrary to their pro∣mises to our King, and of his Maresties to the Prince his Sonne in Law, and contrary to the Publique peace of Germany aend Christendome. Then, then it was, (that to pull off the Maske of Spaines ambition and ma∣lice, who with the fire of this match sought to set England all flaming in a mournfull and miserable combustion) thereby to bury her glory in the dust, and her safety in the cinders of her subuersion and ruines) that as Prometheus fetch'd fire from heauen, so the fire of my zeale to the good of my Prince and Country, likewise fetch'd from thence this Royall con∣sultation for the discouery of our apparant and imminent dangers, and in knowing them, to know likewise how to preuent them; Which re∣soluing to mke publiqe; because it solely reded to Englands pub∣lique  and prosperitie: I contrary to my expectation (but not to my feares,) saw my hope nip in their blossoms, and my desires stised in their births, because the Seas of our Kings affection to Spaine went so
loftle, and the winder were so tempestious, that it could not possibly be permitted to passe the Pikes of the Presse: When albeit my zeale and fi∣delity againe and again infused new audacitie and courage to my resolu∣tions, to see it receiue the light yet it was imposible for mee or it, to bee made so happy, because I sawe Allureds honest letter, Scots loyall Vox Populy, D. Whiting, D. Euerard, and Claytos zealous Sermons, and others, suppressed and silenced, as also Wards faithfull picture, which yet was so innocent, as it onely breathed foorth his fidelity to England in si∣lent Rethorique, and dumbe eloquence. Wherevpon inforced to take a lawe from the iniquitie of the time, (with much reluctation and more greife) I bushed vp my said Consultations in silence, & because I could not serue my Prince and Countrie in that Booke of mine: I therfore then renewed my constant resolution and zeale to serue them in my most seruent prayers, and my most religious and zealous wishes, the which I haue euer since faithfully and constantly performed. Sitting thus to behold the constant inconstancie of the World, Which presents as many different accidents to our knowledge, as obiects to our eye; and being Iealous, Vigelant, and attentiue, to that which did, or which might any way appertaine to my Soueraigne and his Princely po∣steritie, to his Dominions and Subjects; I was enforced to see (O that I had beene so happie, as not to ban seene) the perfidious progresse of Spaines now trecheries, and vsurpation vpon many countries of Eu∣rope; for first his Cousen Leopaldus hath deuoured the Dutchy of Cleaues and Iulleirs: then he and his forces haue taken many other free Townes, and whole Bishoprickes in the Countries of Luxembourg, and L Marke, as also in the frontiers of Swisserland and Loraine; Then he and his factor the Duke of Bauaria (for him) hath finished his absolute Conquest of the Pallatinate (that dainty, rich and fertile Prouince of Germany) the dowry of our onely Princesse, the inheritance of the Prince her Husband, and the Patrimonie of their Royall issue, wherein the honour of our King, and his three famous Kingdomes, doe most ex∣treamely suffer. I saw him conquer the chiefest Cities, Forts, and Passages of the Gri∣sous, and hath brought their liberties and liues to their last gaspe and periode; yea, to the mercilesse mercy of his not generous but bloody sword; which being vnder the protection of the French King. doth likewise cast a wonderfull staye and blemish on the lustre of his honour and Crowne, if he speedily take not his reuenge thereof; by leauing these his honest  as free as he found them, and as great Henry his
Father left them. And after the Triumphes and treacherous progres∣sion of the house of Austria in Germany. The King of Spaine hath now made a body of his, and the Imperiall forces, and this Summer intends to play his bloody prize for the totall ruine and subuertion of the Nether∣lands, who (to the eye if the world, and to humaine iudgement) must shortly sinke if the two Kings of great Brittaine and France doe not make them swim; by speedily sending them braue succours and assistance in this their vrgent necessity. And wherevnto tends all this treacherous ambition, and formidable vsurpation and greatnes of the King of Spaine, but to cut out a passage with his sword, and to make his troopes & Regiments fly o're the Alpes, for his erecting and obtaining of the Westerne Empire: And wherevnto tends it I say, but to make his territories and Dominions to encirculiz great Brittaine and France, yea to be their Cloyster, and to make and esteeme those two famous Monarchies, but onely as a fatall Church-yard to burie and interre themselues in. But Illustrious and generos Sirs, it this all the malice and treacherie which Spaine hath offered towards England; O no, nothing lesse, for vpon that Iournie (which was as dangerous as suddaine) of our Prince into Spaine (then whome the world hath not a brauer:) Hath not the King of Spaine dealt treacherously with him about his match with the Infants his Sister, yea haue they not in his Princely person, violeted the Lawes of Hospitality, and the priueledges of Princes (when being vn∣der his owne roofe) by attempting to tye him to formes, which were dia∣etrally opposite to his honour; yea, to be so audatiously impudent, as with much violency and virulency to seeke to put a rape vpon his Conscience, and Religion, and proffered inforcement of his Conuersion to Popery; as if their Infanta had bin to him more pretious then his soule, or that he had bin so wretchedly grounded and instructed in pietie, that his Highnesse would haue forsaken his God purposely to haue obayed & adored the King of Spaine, who is not, nor cannot be a greater King then he is a Prince. And to step yet a degree further; was it not a hellish pollicy, and a diabolicall designe and resolution of the Counsell of Spaine, to aduise our Prince vpon his returne into England, to waerre vpon the Protestants, and to proffer him an Army to suppresse and exterminate them. The Pro∣tstants, I say, who are those by whome our King his Father raingeth, and without whom his Maiesty can neuer subsist nor raigne; nor his Highnesse sucessiely aspire, or hope to aspire to his Crownes and King∣domes
after him, sith they are the life, the vigour, the heart, and the soule thereof. And will our King, and our Prince, our Parliaments, and our Protestants of England, then euer forget this inueterate rage, and infernall malice of Spaine against them? as also the rest of their im∣perious and insulting cariage towards his Highnesse, and towards Great Brittaine, as if they priz'd i at so low a rate, and made their boundlesse ambition so excessinely ouer-valew their owne Spaine? that that were in the Crisis of her weakenesse and misery, and this in the prime and verti∣call point of her power and glory? And when his Highnesse pressed them for the restitution of the Pallatinate, which they had often promised to the King his Father, then they temporized so cunningly, and subtillized so trecherously with him, that euery day brought forth new delayes and dif∣ficulties, till in the end they had made the cure worse then the disease, and hauing taken firme footing therein, were enforced to vnuaile and vnmask their dissimulation, and faintly and coldly to affirme, that they would treat with the Emperour for the restitution thereof, but could not promise it: Thus hauing abused, first our King the Father, and then our Prince the Sonne, they haue now likewise betrayed and ruined our Princesse the Daughter in their finall Conquest, and resolute detention of the Prince her Husbands Palatinate, that Princesse I say, whose Royall and sublime vertues, make her the honour of her time, the ornament of her sexe, and the Phaenix Princesse of the world. Whereunto adding the absolute breach of the Match long since prophetically delacerated, and cast in Heauen by the Princely and Royall Authors of this Consultation, and since the same breach here on Earth likewise so happily confirmed by the King, as also by the Prince: so all these premisses considered, hath not En∣gland reason to hate Spaine, in regard Spaine hates it? especially be∣cause of these two maine ensuing points, and important considerations? First, for that the King of Spaine is a greater, and more professed Enemy to our sacred King, and his Royall posteritie, then either the Em∣perour, or Duke of Bauaia, and is to be held and esteemed of vs. Secondly, that therefore to denounce Warre to him, and to make it good as soone as it is denounced, is as Honourable as necessary, and as iust as honourable for England; As vpon New-yeares day last I made these two points apparant and manifest to the King; in my Discourse intituled Votiuae Angliae, which I sent his Maiestie in the behalfe and fauour of the Prince Palatine his Sonne in law, for the restoration of his Palatinate.
Hauing thus (with as much disdaine as griefe) seene his inueterate malice towards great Brittaine, towards our King and his Royall poste∣ritie, and consequently the eminent dauger whereinto our profound secu∣ritie hath throwne and precipitated vs in particular; and vnderstanding likewise how the said King of Spaine with Xerxes, threatens the Seas and Mountaines of Europe in generall; Being as well in heart as tongue an Englishman, and therefore knowing by Grace, what I owe by Nature to my Naturall Prince and Countrey (like Cressus his dumbe Sonne) I would not, I could not be silent thereat, but must expose this Consultation of Vox Coeli to the light and sight of the world: I meane to the light of your knowledge, and the sight of your considera∣tion, vnder the secure Target, and safe shelter and Sanctuary of your auspicious protection. To you therefore great Brittaines greatest Palladines and Cham∣pions, to you the inuincible Bulwarke of our King and his Royall Proge∣ny, and the inexpugnable Cittadel and Acrocorinth of our Estate: To you I say the Conscript Fathers of our supreamest Senate; doth it in dutie present it selfe, and in humilitie prostrate it selfe; which when your first leasure hath curiously read, and your best zeale carefully and maturely considered: Then by all that true English bloud which strea∣meth in your heart and veynes, by all the loue whic your Countrie beares you, and by all the dutie and affection which reciprocally you owe to your Country: I both request and coniure you, To tell our King that it is no∣thing for his Maiestie to haue made a braue and generous Declaration of Warres against Spaine, except hee speedily second it with execution, without which it will proue a vaine Fantasma, and an abortiue Embrion: Tell him, that it were the last Acts of Augustus, which embellished his raigne, and that old Pericles made the greatnesse of his generositie and courage, to reuiue and flourish on his Tombe, when hee caused the Athenians to warre vpon the Pelloponessians: Tell him that Philo∣paemenus affirmeth, that Peace is the best time to meditate of warre. Tell him that to transport Warre into Spaine, is to auoide and preuent it in England, as Hannibal said to King Antiochus, that the only way to make warre against the Romanes, was to begin it in the heart and bo∣wels of the Dominions of Rome, and so to vanquish Italy by Italy. Tell him that Plutarch affirmes there is no action so royall or magnifi∣cent in a King, as to take Armes to assist and reuenge his Confede∣rates vniustly oppressed and ruined, much more his owne Royall children,
and that if the Palatinate be too farre, that Flanders and Brabant, are but the skirts and Suburbs to England. Tell him that Agesilaus said, that words are feminine, and deeds masculine, and that it is a great point of honour, discretion, and happines for a Prince, to giue the first blowe to his Enimies. Tell him that Spaniards hate vs; why then should we loue them? that we can beat them at our pleasures, why then should we feare them? Tell him that if it goe not well with Holland, it must needs goe ill with England; and that if wee doe not preuent their ruine, that wee cannot secure our owne danger. Tell him that in matters of warre, it is dangerous to make a stand, shamefull to retire, and glorious to aduance. Tell him that Philip of Spaine is of Pyrrhus his minde, who said, that hauing deuowred and conquered all Europe, he would end his dayes in ollity and pleasure in Macedonia. And therefore that it is time, yea high time to strike vp our Drums against him, aswell because our saftie, as our honour inuites vs to it. And now turning from his Maiestie, to you the Illustrious and famous body of this great and famous Court of Parliament (whereof the King is the head) to you, I say, who are the creame and flower of his Subiects: O hold it no disparagement tha I tell you; that sith in all matters of Order, Policie and reformation, that delayes and protractions proue still dangerous, many times fatall: That you beware least as your Con∣sultations flie away with the time; That occasion and opertunitie flie not away with your Consultations, sith time must be taken by his forelocke, and then as Iulius Caesar saieth, we haue winde and tide with vs. Thinke what a happines, what a glorie it is for England to haue wars with Spaine, sith Spaine in the Lethirgie of our peace, hath very neere vndermined our safetie, and subuerted our glory; And let vs dispell those charmes of securitie, wherein England hath beene too long lul'd and en∣chanted a sleepe: And if feare & pusillanimitie, yet offer to shut your eyes against our safetie, yet let our resolution and courage open them to the im∣minency of our danger; that our glory may surmount our shame, and our swords cut those tongues and pennes in pieces, which henceforth dare ei∣ther to speake of peace▪ or write of truce with Spaine. No, no; to take the length of Spaines foote aright, we must doe it with our swords, not with our ecks, for the first will assuredly establish our safe∣ty, and the second infaliby ruines it. Wars, Wars, then ye (with cheere∣full hearts and ioyfull soules) let vs prepare our selues for Warrs: That our great Brittaine (the beautie of Europe as Europe is the glory of the
world) lie no longer exposed to the apparant danger, and merciles mer∣cy of this Castilian Rat, of this Crocodile of Italy, of this vulture of Germany, and af this woolfe of Ardena; but let vs all signaliz our fi∣delities to our Soueraigne by our courage, and immortaliz our zeale to our Country by our valour and resolutions herein: That we may all be of Alcibiades his opinion, that the bed of honour is the best death, that there is no better recompence of death then glory, nor no richer glory, then to dye for our Prince and Country. And here I had imposed silence to my penne, and infused a period to this my Epistle, had not the dignitie of your places, the quality of your im∣ployments, the nature of the time, and the consideration that I am an Englishman, commaunded me to insert and annex these few lines, by the way either of a supplement, or a post-script. Although I can adde nothing to your affection and care, for the good of our Country, yet giue me leaue (I beseech you) to substract this from mine owne fidelitie and zeale. 1 That you be carefull that your warres (both by sea and land) be plentifully stored with money, powder and shot, which indeed is the veignes and Arteries, the sinewes and soule of warre. 2 That you crye downe all gold and siluer Lace, and all silkes, Vel∣uets, and Taffities, and crie vp woole cloath, and blacke  and Corslets insteede thereof, that thereby England as a blacke and dismall cloud, may looke more martiall and terrible to our Enimies. 3 That our English Romanists may be taught either to loue, or to feare England. 4 That there be prouision made, and especiall care had to secure his Maiesties Coasts, Seas. and Subiect from the Ships of warre of Dun∣kerke and Ostend, by whome otherwise they will be extreamely indoma∣ged and infested. 5 That by some who'some Statute and Order, you cleanse the Citties and Countrie, the Streets and highwaies from all sort of Beggers, by pro∣uiding for their labour and reliefe, whereby many hundred thousand Christian soules will pray vnto God for his Maiesty, and to power downe his blessings vpon all your Designes and Labours, whereby without doubt our Warres will succeed and prosper the better. I will no further vsurpe on your patience: But here (withdrawing the Curtaine of this Preface) inuite your eyes and thoughts to the sight and consideration of this consultation, S. R. N. I.
The introduction, HEauen being Gods Throne, and the Earth his Footstoole, it is impossible any thing can be here spoken and acted, but will there be heard, reuealed and detected; for not onely our hearts but our thoughts, not onely our tongues but our in∣tents, lye open and are obuious and transparent, to the glorious, and relucent eyes of Gods most sacred Maiestie, who being the sole Ar∣chitector, and preseruer both of Heauen and Earth, rules that by his presence, this by his prouidence, and both by his power; and that wee Men are not by many thousands degrees so great in his eyes, as the smallest Pysmires are in ours; who lookes still in our Designes and Actions, sometimes with approbation; now with pitie, then with contempt, and anon with Choller and indignation, being himselfe the prime President, the great Moderator, the mighty Councellor, the eternall and euerlasting Iehouah; who can and will giue Lawes to all the Kings and Princes of the earth, as they doe to their subiects by their subordinate, and yet transcendent power, drawne from his most sacred Maiestie of Heauen, as the Starres who actually deriue their light, and borrow their lustre from the refulgent beames, and glorious body of the Sun. And as this great God seated in his Coelestiall throne of Glory, with his All▪seeing and sacred eyes beholds in Heauen the thoughts and actions of men here on Earth: so likewise out of his indulgent mercy and prouidence, he likewise giues the same authority and po∣wer to his Angels, Saints and Martyrs, to doe the like; who clad in white Robes, the Ornaments of sanctity and purity, with Palme branches in their hands, the Emblemes of Peace and Ioy, and Crowns and Coronets on their heads, the rewards and markes of Glory, Fol∣low the Lamb Christ Iesus wheresoeuer hee goe, still singing these ioyfull Io Peans and Epithalamians of Haleluiah, and Glory be to God on high, Peace on earth, and good will towards men. By vertue of which Diuine priuiledges, the maske of Spaines boundlesse Ambition being discouered and pull'd off, in supporting the Pope, and seeking the increase of his spirituall Iurisdiction, whereby his Holinesse in Exchange, may enlarge that of Spaines temporall Monarchie, so as that shall haue feete to goe, and these
wings to flie to the height of earthly greatnesse; whereby the Ca∣tholique Kings ayme, out of the ruines of Rome and Germany, to erect another Empire in the west, and endeauour by degrees to make most of the Kingdomes and Free Estates of Europe become Prouin∣ces vnto Spaine; as, some by force, some by policie, some by treache∣rie, and now England by the match of the Infanta his Daughter, with our most Illustrious and Royall Prince Charles (next to his Royall Father King Iames, our most dread Soueraigne) the hope of En∣glands life, and the life of it's ioy and hope. I say the newes of these proiects and resolutions of Spaine, hauing with as much fortunary as celeritie, passed the cloudes, and peirced the Vaults and windowes of Heauen, it fast arriued there, to the vn∣derstanding of that immortall Mayden Queene Elizabeth, whose heart euer loued England, as her soule did Heauen, and of whose flourishing wellfare and prosperity I cannot truely auerre, whether she still remaine more iealous or ambitious? whereat grieuing with as much disdaine, as she disdained with griefe, and knowing that her Nephew and God-sonne Prince Henry, participated and burned in her zeale, that the insatiable and blood-thirsty ambition of Spaine, might not erect his Trophees vpon the Tombe of Englands down∣fall, and the ruines of her subuersion, shee speedily acquaints him with it, whome although heauen had purified and deuested of his Earthly passions, yet such was this young prince, his neuer dying zeale to Englands euer liuing glory that his Highnesse could not re∣fraine from looking red with anger, and pale with feare, at the re∣port and knowledge thereof. They consult hereon and hold it both expedient and necessary to acquaint other English Princes herewith, especially those whome they knew stood deeply and sincerely affe∣cted to England. So Prince Henry acquaints his Mother Queene Anne herewith, and Queene Elizabeth her Brother King Edward 6. and both their Father king Henry 8. who so vppon aduise here∣of, could not refraine to looke on England with the eyes of affe∣ction and pitty, and on Spaine with those of indignation and con∣tempt. So these fiue great Princes & Queenes prepare themselues to Consult on this most important busines, when loe they are suddenly met and assayled, with a doubt of no meane consequence and consi∣deration viz. Whether, or no, they should admit & receiue Queene Mary into this their Consultation, whom not her Romane merits, but
the prayers of the Protestants had brought to Heauen; When at first they considering that in heart and soule, she alwayes loued, and pre∣ferred Rome and Spain before England; they resolued to exclude her, but at last (vpon riper and more mature deliberation) considering that she knew many secrets of Spain, wherof peraduenture they were ignorant; as also that from her innate and inueterate malice to Eng∣land, shee might (either in iest or earnest) bewray something that might turne and redound to the good of England, they all consented she should be aduertised hereof, and so admitted; which was instant∣ly performed; and as the rest of these Royall Princes enuied Spaines ambition, and pitied Englands dangers; So to speake the truth, and no more, Queene Mary (still resembling herselfe) both in her spee∣ches and lookes testified the contrary; Vowing that as she loued hi∣lip the II. the Father, so she would still honour Philip the III. his Son. Thus these three Princes, and three Queenes, not daring to con∣sult in Heauen on any thing, without permission of the Superiour powers, they all repayre to the sacred throne of the Lambe, (of that Great Maker and conductor of Heauen and Earth) whose Tribunall is enuironed with more sparkling and burning Sunnes, then we see Starres in the Firmament; and who is waited and attended on by many millions and Meryades of Angels; Where in signe of Gods glory and their humilitie, these Royall personages fall on their faces to his blessed feet, and so proffer vp their Petition to his heauenly Maiestie to haue authority, and place giuen them to Consult on this important businesse betwixt England and Spaine. Their Petition read and considered, God out of the profunditie of his immense affection and fauour, towards the prosperity of England, (Wherein for the space of well neere One hundred yeares, his Sa∣cred Maiestie hath seen himselfe truely serued and glorified) ratifies their request, and approues and authoriseth their sitting; When de∣parting from Gods most sacred Throne; they were by a full Quire of Angels with Trumpets and Tymbrels in their hands, vshered into the golden Starre-Chamber of Heauen, which was purposely pre∣pared for them; when taking their seuerall seates, the doore shut, and guarded by Englands Tutulary Angell, with a naked brandished sword in his hand, all thinges being hushed vp in silence, and all heauenly duties and ceremonies performed, these sixe Royall perso∣nages begin their Consultation in this manner.
The Consultation. H. 8. BEfore we descend to speake of Spaines ambition and Enue towards England, or the Match now in question betwixt England and Spaine, with the dangers which threaten, and presage vs will ensue thereof, it will not be impertinent, rather necessary; that we mount vp the steps of this last century of yeares, and so take a cursory, though not a curious suruey, with what Ambition and Cru∣eltie, and Treachery, the Kings of Spaine from time to time, haue knocked at most Kingdomes and Estates of Europe; in the vnfol∣ding and dilating whereof, you must not expect much light from me, rather I from your selues, sith as your yeares so your raignes succeeded me. Nauarre. E. 6. ANd as you all know my yeares were so few and my raigne so short, that neither these, nor this, made me capable to diue into the affaires of Princes and Kingdomes, and yet I must confesse it was both with griefe and pitie, that I reade, with what vsurpation and trechery, Ferdinand King of Arragon depriued Iohn of Albert, and Katherine his Queene of their flourishing Kingdome of Nauarre, who for meere griefe and sorrow dyed immediatly after, hauing no other claime nor title to this Kingdome, but an insatiable desire of Empire and Dominion, which the Aragonois, and Castil∣ans wonne with their Swords. Q. M. O but Nauarre lay fit and commodious for the Prouin∣ces of old Castille, Biscay, and Galicia, besides, the Kings of Spaine are the Catholique Kings, and therefore it is both proper and naturall for them to be Vniuersall. Q. E. It is indeed both naturall and proper to them to bee ambi∣tious and tyrannicall, for I am confident, that as Catholique as they are, they loue Earths Empire, better then Heauens Glory; and sure I cannot but lament to see Nauarre made a Prouince to Spaine, which more is the griefe of Christendome, and the shame of the Royall line of Burbon, now the French Kings, whose patrimonie and inheri∣ it is, and will not King Lewes recouer it?
P. H. Had Great Henry his Father liued, he would vndoubtedly haue conquered Nauarre with as much glory, as it was lost with shame and pitie; yea, the Turrets of Pampelone, and Fonteraby, had long since cast off the ragged Staffe, to beare out the three Flower de Luces. Q. A. So might King Lewes his Sonne too, if the Pope and Ie∣suites diuerted not his thoughts from that honourable and glorious Enterprise. E. 6. Surely it is against the lawes of Conscience, and the rules of Religion, for the Kings of Spaine thus to vsurpe Nauarre, or were they so iust, as they pretend they were holy, they would restore and not retaine this Kingdome. Q. M. O the Cathlique Kings are too wise to commit such grosse errours of State, as to restore; for it is Conquest and Possessi∣on, and no way restitution, which afoords them best melody; Be∣sides, sith they are the Catholique Kings, they cannot be irreligious much lesse vncharitable. H. 8. Why then Daughter, the Kings of Spaine are of Pirrhus and Lysandes minde, whose limits and confines of their Countries they held so farre, as their Swords and Lances could extend them. Which being so, they are only Catholique in title, not in effect, much lesse in heart or soule, for if Vsurpation bee Religion, I know not what is Heresie. E. 6. The Pope may, but our Sauiour Christ, neuer authorized or approued Vsurpation. Q. M. But the Kings of Spaine know the Popes will and plea∣sure, as they doe Gods, and this beliefe I am sure is both Catholique and Apostolicall. Q. E. See, see with how much Ignorance and wilfulnesse, with what blinde zeale and pore implicit faith, my Sister is perpetually lincked to Rome and Spaine. P. H. If so Vsurpation be Romes Doctrine, and Spaines delight and practise, my soule did well to make me hate the one, and detest the other. The West Indies, or new Spaine. H. 8. BVt leaue wee Nauarre weeping and groaning vnder the burthen of the miserable seruitude to Spaine; O how since
Columbus de Cortez, and Pizarro, (with as much iudgement as for∣tunacy) discouered to Castille the rich America, and in it the Gold and Siluer Mines, which hath giuen wings to his Ambition to flie to the height of this earthly Greatnesse, wherein wee see Spaine seated and founded; How it hath both grieued and amazed me to vnder∣stand, how at Cuba, Hayta, Peru, Panama, and Mexico, and in all these vast Iles and spacious Continents, that the Spaniards with a more then hellish Cruelty, haue slaine such infinite Millions and Meryades of those poore Indians, whereby in a manner they haue wholly depopulated these populous Countries, and not onely made riuers but whole seas of their Bloud; and of whose inhumane and bloudy Cruelty, I may iustly say; that as all former ages cannot shew the like President, so our posterity will difficulty beleeue it. And yet behold the horrible Hipocrisie of these insulting and vsurping Castillians; for demaund them the reason of these their bloudy and execrable Massacres, of those poore armelesse and harmlesse Indians, and of the rooting out and exterminating of all their Princes and No∣bility, they with as much falshood as impiety will affirme, that sith their King is the Catholique King, so this is to plant the Catholique faith in the remote, and new found Worlds of the World; whereby we may obserue, that Religion must still be the pretext, and cloke of their bloudy Vsurpation, when Heauen and Earth knowes and sees, that it is first gold, then a greedy desire of Dominion and Empire, which is the true cause, and sole obiect thereof. E. 6. But if that bloudy resolution, against these huge numbers of poore Indians tooke place in the heart and councell of Charles 5. must it needes follow that the like inhumanity and cruelty should liue in this of Phil. 2. and Phil. 3. his Sonne and Grand-childe: so as this bloud-thirsty malice of spleene and gall against these poore In∣dians, must be heriditary to the Kings of Spaine, as now by custome and intrusion, (and by the ignoble coniuencie of the Princes Ele∣ctors) the ambition to enioy the Empire of Germany, is to the house of Austria, from whence they are descended.
Portingall. Q. E. MY royall Father obserued well, that Religion was onely the pretext, but wealth and Empire the sole ob∣iect of Spaines ambition; for although Charles the 5. vsurped those places of America from the Indians, who indeede knew not Christ; yet what Religion or Catholique was that of Philip the 2, his Sonne, vnder hand to precipitate, and throw Se∣bastian King of Portingall, into the vnnecessary and vnfortunate warres of Affrica against the Moores, where hee losed his life with his ambition: and then after his decease, to worke so on the impotency, feare, and ignorance, of olde King Henry his suc∣cessour, as (contrary to the lawes of Iustice and Nature) to enforce him to illigitimate Don Anthony the Prior of Crato, who was the first and neerest heire vnto that Crowne and Kingdome, thereby to exclude him as indeede hee did, or if he had not an itching and longing desire to swallow and deuoure that Kingdome of Portin∣gall; which all Christendome and Rome her selfe knew was still more Catholique then Spaine; yea, and then when hee had ingaged his Royall word to the rest of the Pretendants, as the aforesaid Don Anthony, the Dukes of Sauoy and Parma, Katherine of Maedicis (Queene mother of France) and Katherine Dutchesse of Braganca; that hee with them would stand to the sentence of the Chamber of Lisbone, to know to whom the right of that Kingdome most pro∣perly and lineally descended. That then this King Philip the 3. for∣gat his conscience to God, and his promise to these Princes (fearing others right, and distrusting his owne) brought an Army to the gates of Lisbone, ere the Pretendants, or Portingalls themselues dreampt thereof, or had meanes or leasure to defend themselues, wherby such was his insatiable ambition, vsurpation, & couetousnes, that in a plaine and setled peace, hee deuoured this rich and noble Kingdome; making it not onely tributary but a Prouince to Spaine. And was this also Religion, or to plant the Catholique faith? or rather was it not manifest treacherie, and apparant vsurpa∣tion, such if Don Anthony had not, all the world knowes, the Dutches of Braganca had more right to this Kingdome then King Philip.
P. H. Yea, that policy King Phil. learnt of the Emperour Charles 5. his Father, who when himselfe, and King Francis the first of France. contended for the Empire of Germany, whiles Francis was bribing of the Electors, Charles brought an Armie into the field and so enforced them to elect and choose him. Q. M. I must confesse I euer held the Portingalls to be zea∣lous and good Romane Catholiques; but as Nauarre lay fit for Bis∣cay and Galicia, so Portingall lay exceeding comodious for An∣doulosie; and if my husband King Philip, had not seconded his right of descent by the law of his sword, perhaps he might haue had a bad neighbor in Portingall, which he and his counsell timely fore-see∣ing they as wisely preuented. And howsoeuer, although he hated Don Anthonie, yet I know he loued the Dutches of Braganca well; but When we speake of Crownes and kingdomes, Religion will make his surprise of Portingall a matrer of State, though to speake truth, State can neuer make it a matter of Religion. Q. A. How Well King Phillip loued the Dutches of Braganca, I know not, but this I am sure of, that both Monsieur de Boysise Monsieur de Bisseax, and Monsieur de Marais, (Ambassadours with King Iames my Husband; for the two last French Kings, Hen∣ry 4. and Lewes 13.) tolde me, that Philips hatred and rage was so great against Don Anthony, that he begged his body, which lyes in a Coffin of Lead, in the Cord-liers Church at Paris, to be deliuered his Ambassadours, and so sent him into Spaine; but as they said, these two most Christian Kings their Masters answered Philip, that there was little Religion, lesse charity, to take vp, and remoue the ashes of a dead Prince and King, as was Don Anthony, and so his body still remeanes in Paris. P. H. If Spaine were so malicious to a dead Prince, how ought those that are liuing to beware and take heed of him? H. 8. As a guilty conscience can neuer finde est, so it may be that King Philip was afraid of a second Don Anthony, as of a second Se∣bastian. P. H. But King Philip 3 his sonne, hath farre more reason to feare Don Anthony his two Princely sonnes, Don Emanuel, and Don Chri∣stopher, and of Don Emanuell, his two generous and Illustrious Sonnes, Don Maurice and Don Lewes, all foure liuing who are fa∣mos, and Royall reserued Peeres of Shipwracke of that Royall
Kingdome and blood of Portingall. Q. M. O but they are poore, and want friends and meanes to ad∣vance their iust title to that Crowne if they haue any. E. 6. Their right and title to Portingall is iust, and therefore can∣not, and should not dye. Q. E. If the French forces had met mine at the Groyne, Peneca, or Lisbone, or had the Portingals isen, my Norris, Drake, and noble Essex, in despight of Philip and his forces, had pluck'd the Crowne of Portingall from his head, and set it on King Anthonies. P. H. No, no: Don Anthonies Sonnes are beloued of the Nobili∣tie of England, France, and the Netherlands, and Don Emanuels wife, is Sister to that valiant and incomparable Captaine Maurice of Nas∣saw, Prince of Orenge. So if fortune smile, and a fauourable gale blow, these disinherited Portingall Princes may one day proue pricks and thornes to the sides of Spaine. For all Portingall knowes, that their veines and hearts streame with pure Portingall blood; yea, with the remainder of the royall blood of that Kingdome, which Philip 3. his last entertainment (together with the Prince his sonne) at Lisbone, had almost found true: but that his Maiestie departed with as much feare, secresie, and shame, as he came with resolution, popularitie, and glory: in the interim, these Portingall Princes re∣maine prodigious and ominious Commets to Spaine. Q. M. Did Spaine thinke so, it would quickly make these Prin∣ces ride Poast into another world. Q. E. If Spaine should send these Princes Poast into another world, either by the bcke doore of poyson, by the wicket of a Pon∣yard, and not by the great and fore-dore of Nature, it would draw the fists of most Christian Prince, about King Philips eares, and make all Portingall solemnize their Funerals with their swords drawn, and their Cities gates shut. E. 6. Indeede I haue heard that the Commons, and especially the Nobillitie of Portingall begin extreamly to distaste the imperious pride and ambitious carriage of the Spaniards, as many of them let not to say boldly and publiquely, that Phillip enioyes the King∣dome by vsurpation and nt by right. Q. M. Not by right? Why Pope Gregory 14. approued his Title and confirmed his Conquest of the Kingdome of Portingall. Q. E. So did not our Sauiour Christ, whose Successour and Vicar
the Pope pretends himselfe to be. P. H. In the meane time Spaine domineeres at her Conquest of Portingall, and well shee may; for it is one of the fairest flowers of his Garland, and of the richest Diamonds of his Crowne. H. 8, But the other Kings of Christendome haue ust cause and reason to grieue and storme hereat; for as it was Portingals mis∣chance then to fall, and vaile Bonnet to Spaine, so it may be theirs to morrow; for to a Prince and people so greedy and ambitions of Em∣pire as is Spaine, all fish is good that comes to his hooke or net. P. H. Thus Spaine deuoures Kingdomes as the Cyclope Polephe∣mus did passengers; for he surprizeth no more then he meetes with∣all, and yet will not Chirstendome beware of Spaine. Italy. H. 8. VVE haue past from Nauarre, the West Indies, & Portin∣gal, & now let vs come to Italy to see how Spain is be∣loued or feared of the Italians, & how he hath behaued himselfe there. E. 6. In Italy the King of Spaine is nayled to the Pope, as most of the Colledge of Cardinals, and all die Iesuites are to him; yea, he hath the greatest and richest territories thereof, as the Kingdome of Naples, the Dutchy of Millane, and the Island of Cicily, and (in a mannet, the Marquesse of Monaco, and Finall, the Dukes of Mon∣toua, Parma and Vrbin; the Princes of Massa, and Piombino, with the States of Genoua and Luca, doe all march vnder his banner, and call onely on his name; yea, he hath so incircled the Pope as hee is rather his Prisoner, then his spirituall Father; for if his Patrimony of St. Peter be the Temple, his Naples and Millane is the Cloyster to impall it, so as he hath no impeachment or obstacle from making himselfe sole Lord of Italy, but the great Duke of Tuscany, and the prudent and potent Seignorie of Uenice. Q. M. O but the Pope neede not feare the King of Spaine, for s Spaine is the Popes hand, so the Pope is Spaines tongue: For the Catholike King is his Holinesse Champion; and his Holinesse the King of Spaines Oracle. E. 6. I had thought that the Popes alwayes loued the Kings of France better then those of Spaine. Q. E. O no: there is reason to the contrary; for Spaine hath re∣ceiued Romes hellish and bloudy Inquisition, and France is so wise and couragious, as it reiecteth and disdaines it.
P. H. Nay, there is another reason likewise; for although the former Kings of France were braue and victorious, yet king Lewes that now is feares the Pope and loues him not, whereas King Phillip of Spaine loues him, but feares him not. Q. M. If the Popes had not loued Spaine, they would neuer haue giuen him Naples and Cicily, nor permitted him to enioy that rich and populous Dutchy of Millan, which is the Patrimony of the house of Orleans, and is now fallen to the right of France. Q. E. Surely there is a great Vnion betweene the Popes and the Kings of Spaine, for Spaine makes the Pope ride on his pontificall Chaire, and the Pope makes Spaine flie in Phaetens Chariot, about the foure corners of Christendome. P. H. But the Pope loued not Spaine so well, to giue him either the Marquisat of Anconitana, or the Dutchy of Ferrara, when he begged it of him by his Ambassadours. H. 8. But did Spaine seeke Ferrara, and the Marca of Ancona of the Pope? Q. M. Yea, and vpon good grounds and solid reasons too, for that lay commodious for Millane, and this for Naples, and both would serue as Bridges to passe into that braue and proud State of Venice. The State of Uenice. Q. E. NOw you speake of the graue and Noble Venetians; as they haue long since pull'd off the Maske of Spains itching desire to deflowre their beautifull Adriatike Sea-Nimph: so they haue resolued no more to trust Spaniards. For of late (notwithstan∣ding their prudent decree to the contrary, grounded vpon some pri∣uate reasons of State) they both thinke in their hearts, and know in their soules and consciences, that it was onely the ambition and double Pistols of Spaine, that laid the foundation of the last trea∣cherous and execrable attempt against their Citie; and conse∣quently against their whole State, notwithstanding that some per∣fidious Frenchmen (degenerating from the honour of their Coun∣try and Ancestors) were corrupted and seduced (by the gold and flattering promises of Spaine) to be the chiefest Agents, and for∣lorne Hope in that damnable attempt; and to make this as cleare and apparent as the Sunne, That Illustrious and wise Senate well knowes, that at that very instant, and nick thereof, the Duke of Ossu∣na (Vice-roy of Naples) houered with his fleet & Land-forces to lay
hold and embrace that occasion. Q. M. Sure Sister you wrong the Duke of Ossuna, and in him king Phillip his Master; for I haue heard that the said Duke did then Arme, vpon newes of a great Fleet of Gallyes comming from Con∣stantinople to Rhodes, vpon the irruption of intelligence betwixt the great Turke and the French King, for the escape of the Polonian Prince Coriski: for the which the Baron of Sancy, the French Am∣bassadour was at least confined, if not imprisoned at Constantinople, and that therefore for the safety of the Kingdome of Naples, it be∣hooued the said Duke to fortifie his Ports of Apulia, Otranto, and Calabria, as well with Fleets as Regiments. P. H. The King of Spaines Ministers neuer want pretexts and euasions for their designes; but if the Duke of Ossuna for affir∣ming hereof, should sweare Botto Dos, and par la Sanctissima Uir∣gina, till he were damn'd, yet that wise Senate, and especially the Councell of Tenn, will neuer beleoue him. Q. E. O but Ossuna and the King of Spaine his Master, shall giue me leaue to ioine in opinion with the prudent Venetians; and there∣fore I highly praise their fore-sight, and applaude their generositie, in keeping a braue Nauall Army on their Seas, and strong Garrisons in their Castles and Cities, for the security of their State, as also for keping of their Exchequer rich, and their Arsenall and Magasins a∣boundantly stored and furnished. H. 8. But hath Spaine offered the Signiory of Venice, no other wrongs and affronts but this? Q. E. O yes: for although that prudent State say little, yet they remember, (and will not forget) how busie his Ambassadour and Agents were at Rome, to giue fire to the quarrell betweene Pope Paulus Quintus and themselues, about banishing the Iesuites from their State, and for imprisoning the Chanon of Vincensa; as also, how readily and earnestly they proffered the Pope, that a great Spa∣nish and Neopolitan Army should instantly enter their State, and put all to fire and sword. P. H. And they likewise remember, how the King of Spaine (that thereby his Regiments mought fish in troubled waters, and get firme footing in their Country) hath often incens'd this Emperour Fer∣dinand, then Duke of Gratz, to inuade their frontier Townes in Fri∣, and the Trevisan,
Q. E. But Noua Palma Brescia, Pescara, and Veronae, are obsta∣cles and stops to the designes both of the Emperour, and King of Spaine; yea that wise Sate, is so watchfull and vigilent, that in time of peace they make their greatest preparation for Warre. And it were a blessed happinesse and a safe felicitie, for most Kingdomes and Estates of Christendome, if herein they would emulate and imi∣tate the example of these wise and valiant Venetians, which is neither to trust, much lesse to feare Spaine. Q. M. But as wise and as strong as the Venetians are, as their Church and Pallace of St. Marke, was not built in a day, so are not all the designes and resolutions of the King of Spaine, and therefore a time may come, but I say no more. Q. A. O, I gesse at your minde! you would haue the State of Ve∣nice made a Prouince to Spaine, that thereby he may finde a way for his Fleetes, to conuey his Armies into high and lowe Germany. And if Spaine thinke so: Contareno the Venetian Ambassadour, resident with the King my Husband; and since him Donato likewise told me, that herein Spaine is deceiued in the Arithmetick of his ambition and vsurpation; and thus to reckon, is to reckon without his Hostesse, and without God. Swisserland H. 8. BVt how doe the warlike Cantons of Swissers trust the King of Spaine? Q. A. As they doe the Emperour Ferdinand, his brother Leo∣paldus and the rest of the Austrian Princes: for they knowe his am∣bition and their malice, and so neither feare nor loue these, Q. M. But they loue the double Pistols of Spaine, doe they not? Q. E. Yes, but they say the French Crownes of the Sunne are farre purer and truer gold, and therefore passe currenter with them. E. 6. The Austrian Princes, and the Swissers; I haue still heard, are from Father to Sonne, hereditary and irreconcilable Enimies. P. H. Yea, the Swissers drawe good vse and benifit hereof; for by this meanes they liue not in securitie as some other States doe; but are still armed and ready to march and followe their colours, Q. E, But there is no Warre would be so acceptable and plea∣sing to them as vp to Millane, or downe to the free Country, Bra∣bant, and Heynault; if France, Sauoy, and Uenice, would command
them the first, and England, France, and Holland, ordayne and giue way to the second. Q. A. What is not past is yet to come. Q. M. Yea, but the Councell of Spaine hath policy enough, to insinuate and temporize with all these Princes and States; and so to diuert their Designes, and frustrate their resolutions, if they were bent that way. P. H. It hath indeede hitherto proued so by Spaine: for their po∣licy and treachery, hath purchased and gotten them more Countries, then either their valour or swords. Q. M. These easie Conquests are still sweet and pleasing to Spaine. P. H. Yea, but they are neither honest nor iust. E. 6. But hath not Spaine  with the Swissers for their con∣fines and limmits? Q. E. Yes, two wayes, next Germany by Leopoldus, and be∣twixt Losanno and Gray in the free County by the Archduke Al∣bertus. Q. M. Yea, the King of Spaine will angle so long till he take. Q. E. But hath not Spaine attempted by his Ambassadours and Agents, to sowe discention and discord amongst these Heluetian Cantons; to oppose them one against the other, and so to debauch and withdraw them first from the French Kings seruice, and then to his owne. P. H. Yes many times, but that tricke of Spaine is now growne olde and thrid-bare; so as the Swissers vowe to remedy the first, and the French Kings to preuent the second. Q. M. But the Catholique King will watch those Swissers a good turne, and if the Ephinaerides of his enie, ambition, and great∣nesse faile him not, either his Spinola, or his Pedro d Toldo, shall one of these dayes dine with him at Berne, Friburg, or Soleurre, ere their Table-cloathes be layed. Q. E. But Sister, you are deceiued in the Swissers; for their Table-cloathes are alwayes nayled to their Tables; yea, they haue so great a quantity of Swords, Pikes, and Mskets in a readinesse, to giue any Enemy of theirs a bloudy banquet, tht if Phillip King of Spaine dare assault them, they doubt not but to vse him as they haue formerly done Phillip Duke of Burgundy, whom they ouerthrew in
three seuerall pitch'd battels, at Grason, Morat, and Nancy, where he losed his treasure, his men, and his life. The Grisons. H. 8. BVt how stand the Grisons affected to Spaine? E. 6. Spaine through the vicinity of Millane, doth so often knocke at their doores, that if they keepe them not fast shut, they know, or at least feare that he will shortly enter by the Uolta∣line and Chiauena. Q. M. O though of late they made a shew of resistance, yet the gold of Spaine, the neighbourhood of Millane, the Fort Trents, but chiefly their owne credulity and security, hath almost brought them to the King of Spaines lure. Q. E. This people were both warlike and wise. P. H. But Spaine will briefly make them fooles and cowards if they will hearken vnto him. Q. M. As how Nephew? pray be not bitter against Spaine. P. H. Why, fist Spaine will  them vp in peace and secu∣rity till matters be ripe, or else he will engender factions, and sowe discords among themselues, either or Religion, or ranke, or be∣twixt them and their dearest friends the Swissers; and so when hee sees all things ready, and the Iron hot, then he will march, and strike, and not faile to vnite and annex the Cantons of the Grisons to Mil∣lane, as he hath already done Millane to Spaine. H. 8. If the Grisons at any time lose the Swissers friendship, or their owne vigilancy and generosity, it will not be long, ere they shake hands with their liberty and liues. Q: M. So Spaine hopes, for if warre cannot worke, and effect it, they make no doubt but peace shall. Q. E. If the Grisons hearken to the Charmes of Spaine, they are halfe lost. Q. M. If they hearken not to Spaine, they are wholly vndone, but if they listen to Spaine, all will be well. H. 8. Yea Daughter, I beleeue for the Spaniards, but not for the Grisons. Q E. To trust to Spaine, is to rely on a broken staffe, and to har∣bour a serpent in our owne bosomes. P. H. To trust to the promises of Spaine, is to commit our selues
to the mercy and protection of a Lyon who will deuoure vs. Q. M. The Grisons will see, and say the contrary. E. 6. So will I say, if I see the contrary; till when, I feare the Gri∣sons will buy their peace, as well with teares as bloud. Sauoy. H. 8. BVt how doth Sauoy brooke Spaine? for I take it this pre∣sent Duke Charles Emanuell, married this King Phill. 3. his second sister; the Infanta Katherina Michaela. P. H. Sauoy loues Spaine, as it hath deserued of it; for the noble and generous Duke thereof cries out; God deend me from such a brother in law as King Philip. Q. M. I beleeue if the Catholique King offered that Duke any vnkinde office, it was nothing but because hee was so neere a neigh∣bour to Geneua▪ as he and the Pope suspected his Highnesse, would turne Caluinist. Q. E. Alas that good Citie of Geneua, why all the world knowes the Dukes loue to it, and its Religion, witnesse the Barron of Attig∣na and his Consorts, as also Terraill and Bastide; but if there were once a Spanish Garison in this Citie, Sauoy would soone know how to distinguish betweene good and bad neighbours. E. 6. But it is the laughture of the world, to say that Spaine hates Sauoy, because he loues the Religion of Geneua. P. H. Yet this is as true as many other of Spaines Colours pre∣texts and euasions, when he hath a purpose and plot to vsurpe. Q. M. Why wherein hath the King of Spain abused, or wronged the Duke of Sauoy? P. H. First, in being himselfe the chiefe cause and subiect, and then mking him the Instrument and executioner, to cut off the two noble heads of Biron in Paris, and D'Aligny in Turin. Q. M. Why the Catholique King is the vniuersall King, and therefore it is not strange, if in all Countries of the world, hee haue his farre fetch'd policies, Agents, and Instruments to make his stra∣agems and resolutions take effect, for those who are obstacles to his will and pleasure; his verball friendship shall alwayes proue their eall ouerthrow and subuersion; howsoeuer hee and his Ministers pretend, and make shew of the contrary.
Q. A. Nay, let vs leaue Biron and D'Albigny in their Graues, for me thinkes it is a poore charity to take vp the ashes of the dead. And for our better information, let vs take a suruey of the courtesie, or rather of the cruelty that Spaine hath offered Sauoy. E. 6. None knowes nor can deliuer the particular truth thereof, so well as your Royall Sonn Prince Henry. Q. M. But I feare my Nephew will be too partiall in the deliue∣ry hereof, betweene the King of Spaine, and the Duke of Sauoy, be∣cause I haue heard that of the two Princesses their daughters, hee preferd that of Sauoy, before this of Spaine. H. 8. No, no; my Nephew Henry is a iudicious and iust Prince, therefore I know he will not wrong Spaine to doe right to Sauoy. Q. A. He resembles King Iames his Father too well, who will still loue the King of Spaine, although therein he hate himselfe, therefore speake on faire Sonne. P. H. When Great Henry of France (my honoured Vncle) made warres vpon the present Duke of Sauoy for the  of his Mar∣quisat of Saluses, then this Phillip King of Spaine, (vnder the pre∣tence and shew to ayde the Duke his brother in Law against the French) sent him may troopes and Regiments of Spanyards for the preseruation of his State; when the Peace being made betwixt the King and the Duke, and the exchange for Saluses, with the Countries of Bresse and Gex ratified and accomplished; These Spanish Regi∣ments being quartered in Carboneres, Mountemellion, Sauillan, Pig∣norall, and other places of Sauoy and iedmont, they vpon no request or assummons made them by the Duke, would depart thence, but being commanded the Contrary by the Count de Fuentes (Vice-roy of Millan) as he wa rom the King his Master from Spaine, they pe∣remptorily rsolued and vowed to keepe firme footing, which they long time did, vntill at last that wise and Valiant Duke being there∣unto constrained for the securitie of his estate, whose eminent and vtter subuersion he apparantly saw before his eyes, he very nobly cut all their throats. H. 8. Beleeue me his Highnesse of Sauoy did well, for it was an act most worthy of his iudgement and generositie. Q. M. But the King of Spaine, the Dukes of Lerma, Pastramae, Denia, Albecurque, Tolledo, and all the Counsell of warre of Spaine;
vow to haue their reuenge of this affront. Q. E. Spaine hath done his worst to Sauoy already, for as long as France loues Sauoy, Sauoy needs not feare Spaine; at least mine Au∣thors tell me so, who are that famouss Captaine, the Duke of Dedis∣guieres, his valiant son De Crequy: and noble Du Fremes. Q. A. Though this one wrong, be one too many, yet is these all wrongs that this King of Spaine hath offered this Duke of Sauoy. P. H. No Madame, for although the Duke winke, and seemes (with father Aubigny) to haue the art of forgetfulnesse; yet he well remembers how Don Iuan de Faxis (Spaines Ambassadour in France) told Lullius, Arconas, and Alimes, his Highnesse Am∣bassadours at Lyons, that the King his Master would Conttibute towards the Exchange of the Marquisat of Saluces, conditional∣ly it remained on that side the Alpes from the French; and since how his Catholique Maiestie hath performed nothing. He remembers Spaines Plots vpon his Castle of Nice (the key not only of his Countries, but of Italy) when his Spanish Galleyes lay at Villa franca to bereaue him of his Children, Hee remem∣bers how the Spanish Cardinals oppose his precedency at Rome, with the Duke of Florence, and how the Catholike King, or his Vice-roy of Millan for him, was the match and Incendiary to set fire twixt the Duke of Mantoua and him, For the Marquisat of Montferrad. Q. E. We may see what a kind brother in Law the King of Spaine is, and what it is to build vpon his alliance, affinitie, promises and assistance. P. H. I am glad the Duke of Sauoy, and the Princes his children haue now purchased the length of Spaines foote. E. 6. They haue reason to haue it, for they were all enforced to take it with their Swords, ikes, and Lances, at Cassallo, Uerceile, and other-wheres. Q. A. As long as Sauoy loues not Spaine. The Marquis of Lullius, and Monseur De  told me, it needes not feare it. Q. M. O but as long as Spaine Knockes at the Gates of Sauoy and Piedmond, he may at last enter. Q. E. Sauoy hath reason to enter Millan, not Spaine Sauoy. Q. M. But time and the policie and Swords of Spaine cut all do∣nations and rights in peeces.
P. H. Sauoy hath had warnings enough to beware of Spaine, and therefore as I euer loued that generous Duke, so I hope that he and the Illustrious and valiant Princes, his Sonnes, will neuer want arme of steele, and hearts of Diamonds to out-braue Spaine, who with such ambition and malice seekes to out-braue it. France. H. 8. But what sayes France of Spaine. Q. M. My honoured Father▪ all the world knowes that Spaine hath euer loued France well. Q. E. Yea, too too well, and so well as France will neuer loue Spaine, much lesse trust it in requitall. Q. M. Why hath not Spaine reason to ballance and counter∣poise the power and greatnesse of France. P. H. Yea, but not to seeke to make that famous and flourishing Kingdome become a Prouince to Spaine. Q. M. Spaine neuer wisht it, much lesse attempted it. Q. E. Yeares, more often then France hath Prouinces, or Spaine Cities. P. H. Why? who was the Author and Protector of the League, but first Spaine, then the Pope, and next the Deuill. Q. M. O that was onely to preserue Catholikes, and the Ca∣tholike Religion, and to exterminate and root out Heretickes, and was not this well done of the King of Spaine, sith he is the Catho∣like King. E. 6. Nay, now the least childe in France knowes that Religion was onely the pretext, but Empire and Dominion the obiect of that League. How els dared Mendoz (Spaines Ambassadour) in Paris seeke the Crowne of France for the Infanta of Spaine, or how els dared the Iesuites his Ministers, in their seditious Sermons, and per∣nicious Pamphlets aduance her right to the Crowne and Kingdome, when God and the world knowes she had none to it. Q. M. Why, it was when God had caused that good Fryer Iames Clement, to kill that bad King Henry the third at Saint Clou, and when indeed that Kingdome was without a head, and then the King of Spaine had reason to aduance his Daughters Title to France, in right of her mother Elizabeth, (that Queene of Peace) notwithstanding the fundamentall power of the Salique Law to the contrary.
H. 8. You are deceiued daughter, for it was a good King, and a bad Fryer (or rather a Diuell in a Fryers weed) to set handes on the Lords anoynted, but this arrow came out of the quiuer of Spaine, and Hell, for that bloody and execrable murther was no sooner per∣petrated, but then instantly followed the proposition of the Infantaes Title to France, which apparantly makes the murther to be Spaines, Q. M. It was the Dukes of Mayene, Mercuur who drew the King of Spaine, to assist the League and in it France. Q. E. No, no, contrarywise it was the King of Spaine, that de∣bouch'd and drewthese two Dukes, and with them almost all the Nobillitie, to frge and contriue this League, and in it to ruine France▪ for already France was almost Spaine, and the Infanta had vndoub∣tedly borne the Crowne, if Great Henry his victorious sword had not pul'd off Spaines maske, and so cut her Title and its pretence in peeces. Q. M. But see the equitie and iustice of King Philip, for when Henrie that Heriticke King came to the Crowne, he restored him Ca∣lais, Dourlans, Ualencienes, Blauet, and all other townes and Castles which he had formerly wonne and Conquered in France. P. H. But all this was not worthy thankes, for Philip alone re∣stored that which he could not, nor dared not to keepe. Q. M. Nay obserue farther, how religious King Philip was (in imitation of King Agesilaus) for he kept his faith inuiolable to∣wards Henrie 4. although he were an heritique King. P. H. Nay obserue how irreligious and treacherous King Philip was to King Henry 4. (in imitation of Antaxerxes, the Son of Xerxes) for he violated his faith and frindship towards him, in debaushing of Biron Marcanques, Loste, whose promises and gold made them Traytors to theit King and Country. E. 6. Surely I thinke it is incident, and I feare it will proue here∣ditary to the Kings of Spaine, to conquer more by treachery then by the sword. Q. E, But had Great Henrie liu'd, he would haue required, these courses of Spaine, as also that of Guyguard and Chastell; who (although the report runne otherwise) had their greatest light and encouragement from beyond the Pyreene mountaines; for to speake truth he in hart could neuer be drawne to loue Spaine. P. H. Yea, that Spaine knew full well, for when the French Iesuits
his Ministers had vnlocked that mistery, they like bloody Schoole∣masters, so diuilishly instructed and fortified that monster of men Rauilliaek (their execrable and damnable desciple) that he soone sent him hither in a bloudy Coffin. Q. M. But you will not say that the King of Spaine was accessary to Henry the 4. his murther. P. H. No, but I will say that if the truth were knowne, the ope∣ning of that veyne would make many great Birds, yea and many learned ones too, bleede themselues to death, and peraduenture the wounds and scarres thereof, would bleede an hundred yeares hence. Q. A. The Marshall of Lauerdin whispered me a word concer∣ning this, which I shall neuer forget, onely he requested my secrecie therein: so the King of Spaines Lerma, and the Queene Mother of France her D'Anchre, his Mariano, and her Cotton shall giue mee leaue to thinke. Q. M. Questionlesse it were the sinnes of that King, and the finger of Heauen that cut off the thred of his life. Q. E. Questionlesse you are deceiued Sister, for it were the sinnes of France who made the Knife, and the treasons of Spaine and Rome, which made that Parracide Rauilliack performe. H. 8. Well, in despight of Rome, Spaine, and Hell, that victori∣ous and glorious King is wafted hither in triumph, therefore leaue we him with God, and God with him, and let vs see since his de∣plorable death, how kinde King Philip of Spaine hath beene to King Lewes his sonne. Q. M. So kinde that hee hath matched King Lewis to his eldest Daughter, the Infanta Anna; and his eldest sonne, Prince Philip to the eldest Princesse of France Madame Elizabeth, that now these two mightie Kingdomes and Houses seeme to be but one. Q. E. This is faire to the eye of the world, but it will be excellent if the end of these matches proue fortunate for France. H. 8. Who were the Match-makers? P. H. S. P. Q. R. or to bee better vnderstood, Spaine, Pope and Queene Regent. Q. E. If King Philip of Spaine be Heyre as well to his Fathers ambition as to his Kingdomes, he will loue France so well as to push and fish for it.
P. H. What force could neuer effect, he hopes those Marriages now will. E. 6. Indeed, the Snake lurkes vnder the fairest greene leaues, and the Aspick vnder the purest and sweetest Roses. Q. E. No Kings of the world know better how to dissemble then the Catholique Kings. P. H. You speake Scripture, not tradition. Q. M. And you tradition not Scripture. H. 8. But what entertainement had the Infanta of Spaine in France? P. H. Noble, Royall, Glorious. E. 6. What trayne of Spaniards brought shee with her into France. P. H. A very great trayne, for Monsieur de Marais (the French Ambassadour with the King my Father) tolde me that Monsieur d Boelle (Maister of the Ceremonies to the French King) repor∣ted, that when the first of them were entring Paris at Saint Iaques Gate, that the lst were but comming owne the Pyrene Moun∣taines. Q. A. But what did all this rabble of Spaniards doe in France? P. H. To speake truth, they fell presently to skrewing and working themselues into the State, by begging and buying of Offi∣ces, Places, Pensions and Gouernments, both in Church and Com∣mon-weale, and by making Pensioners for Spaine, and consequently a bridge and passage for the King their Master to enter. H. 8. But how did the Parliaments, the Priuie Councell, and the Nobilitie of France brooke and digest this? Q. E. Yea, that is a question of state indeed. P. H. As for the Parliaments and Priuie Councell, many of them are so Iesuitiz'd, as they are Spaniards in heart, though French in tongue, and therefore they were so farre from preuenting, as they gaue way to it, onely for the Princes and Nobilitie (some few ex∣cepted) they (resembling themselues) vowed and swore, that their swords should cut the Pennes and Tongues in pieces of any Spani∣ard whatsoeuer, that dar'd propose or attempt it, for they spake a∣loud, and affirm'd, the Florenties had taught them wit. E. 6. A braue resolution of the French Nobilitie; for the greatest
of a State haue alwayes the greatest interest in the State; those Princes and Nobles are therefore highly to bee applauded and prai∣sed: and such of the Priuy Councell and Parliament who tacitely are delinquents, and Traytors to their Prince and Countrey, deserue to be found out, arraiged, and sacrificed to the good of the Com∣mon-weale, either with a sword, or a halter. Q. M. But what said the Clergy of France to this? Q. E. Sister, it is to be feared, as you wish and desire. P. H. Why they out of passionate zeale, more then of zealous and sollid iudgement, approue of any Match for their King, so it bee not with a Protestant, and yet of none so well as of this with Spaine; demaund their reason, and they will answer you (with as much ve∣hemency as ignorance) that the King of Spaine is the Catholique King, and if you come further to particularize, they reply, that their Cardinals (who indeede are onely the Popes creatures) shall de∣liuer more at the estates Generall: So the Clergie bad the Spaniards welcome into France. Q. E. But where are the Firebrands and Incendiaries of the State, the French Iesuites, who indeed are the Fistulaes and Botches of a State, what entertainment gaue they to the young Queene and her Spaniards? P. H. Surely Aunt, they crouched very low to the Queene; but in Cottons absence, Arnoux and Berrulla (their Tongue and Eare) whispered so secretly to her Maiestie, that I could neither gather nor vnderstand what they said, but I guest at it: onely they gaue faire words and actions to all the Spaniards in generall; and to the No∣bler and wiser sort of them in particular, they engaged themselues to keepe curious correspondence with the Catholique King, to whom they affirmed and swore by their Semie-God and sole Patron Ignati∣us Loyalla, they would beare true obseruance as the Marigold doth to the Sunne. Q. A. Are not these two Iesuites the French Kings ordinary Prea∣chers, and yet dare they doe it? Q. E. Although Berrulla be the Father of the Oratory, yet he is in heart and soule a Iesuite, and Arnoux is the Arch-Iesuite of France, and the Kings Confessour, and yet they dare, and will doe it.
H. 8. But how did the Queene Regent entertaine the Spani∣ards? P. H. Courteously and Nobly, because shee made the Match; which since she hath repented tho; yea, and the Duke of Mayene too, who concluded and finished it: And so did Villeroy likewise, although it were too late. But Sillery and D Uair loue Spaine so well, as their courages are so masculine, that though they see their errors in perswading these matches, yet they rather persist then ac∣knowledge it, for like good cleare-sighted States-men, they haue wit enough to beare vp with the time, for otherwise they know the times will not beare vp. Q. M. But how did the Commons of France entertaine the Spa∣niards? Q. E. Truly I thinke they will neuer be perswaded to like the fa∣shion of the little Hat, and great set Ruffe. Q. A. Son Henry, pray answere Queene Mary. P. H. If we may iudge of Hercules by his foote, so we then may of France, by those of Paris (which is the eye, the heart, the soule thereof) where the Citizens in all streetes, and especially the Lakeyes at the Lourre gate, and the new bridge, still salute the Spa∣niards as they passe by, by these courteous Epithites, Boracho, Pan∣talones, and Bouriques. H. 8. How long remained all these Spaniards in France? Q. M. So long I warrant you, vntill they did all their Kings bu∣sinesse, and their owne too before they departed. P. H. In truth so long, till all France was weary, and distasted of them and their proceedings, yea, so many yeares, that at last the King and Counsell were in a manner constrained to send them away by an Edict, as they themselues, not many yeares since, did the Moores. Q. M. The banishing of the Moores was a good and wholesome Counsell of Spaine. Q. E. And I assure you sister, the sending home of the Spaniards was as excellent one in France, for vpon the matter, they were but spyes, moaths, and drones,, and would haue proued so to France if they had continued there longer. E. 6. But were they all sent home, and none left at the Court of
France to giue, and receiue packets too and fro for the Iesuites, the king of Spaines Factors and Agents. Q. E. O, no assure your selfe, for the Councell of Spaine is too wise to commit so grosse and palpable an errour of State. P. H. Therefore to cast the thicker mist, and to put the better varnish one the businesse, The Countesse De la Tour was left there with the title of gouernesse to the young Queene, and there is as much correspondencie betwixt her and Don Ferdinand de Geron (the Ambassadour of Spaine) as there is betwixt him and the French Iesuites. Q. A. Thus Spaine leaues alwaies a Sting behinde him, and I feare France will in the end finde it so. Q. M. Whereon is your suspition, and feare grounded? Q. A. Vpon the apparant symptomes of the Lethargie, Feuer, or Consumption of France. E. 6. You say right Madam, and the Noblest and truest hearted Frenchmen participate of your apprehension: for the Iesuites (being the Popes Factors, and the King of Spaines Oracles and Agents) haue already corrupted the Parliaments and Priuie Coun∣cell, who should bee her Illyum and Acrocorynth. They haue vndermyned and ruinated the Sorbone, heretofore her Palladium, once the Queene of Vniuersities: Who now as a mournfull Wid∣dow, sits with her haire dandling about her eares, and her teares trickling downe her cheekes, liuing onely in her shad∣dow or Ghost, or rather in her ruines; for the Genius and Soule, hath already made a transmigration to Clermont House; Yea, and to speake true French, in our English tongue, they by their deuilish Aphorismes and bloudie positions (vnder a false and hipocriticall shew of Learning and Pietie) doe poyson and corrupt the Youth and prime Wits of France, as the Iewes did the springs and fountaines in England. Q. E. Also, the Clergie of France degenerates from its Pristine candor and zeale to the good of France, and the glory of the French Church, for they receiue Lawes from the Popes Nuncio, and the Iesuites, to whom they should giue them. How else at the last generall Estates of Paris, and the assembly of Notables at Rouen? were they so vnwise, dishonest and cowardly, to re∣ferre themselues to the two Cardinals Perron and Gondye? who
like good Cardinals, but bad Frenchmen (hauing onely their Bodies in France, but their hearts at Rome) in thankful∣nesse to the Pope for their red Hats, forgat themselues and their allegiance so much, as to prostitute and debase that fa∣mous Crowne, and flourishing Kingdome of France, to be de∣pendant to Rome in Temporall matters, notwithstanding the Pragmaticke Sanction, and the prerogatiues of the Crowne and Church of France to the contrary; whereat the Popes Nun∣cio at Paris laught with open mouth: So did the Colledge of Car∣dinals, and the Pope himselfe at Rome; and likewise the Ca∣tholike King in Spaine, with all that huge rabble of Iesuites, whiles all the Kings, Soueraigne Princes, and free Estates of Europe (Spaine and Italy excepted) greeued and lamented at it, with as much shame as wonde. E. 6 Indeed these are two maine points and reasons, that the greatnesse and generoity of France declynes, and that Rome and Spaine will shortly sluffie the Cards so well▪ as it must needs be made a Prouince to Spaine; for they both haue consulted, and finde, that what couldnot be effected during the Reigne of old Henry, may in these of young King Lewes his Sonne. P. H. It is not impossible, rather likely, for France abounds in a moustrous height of Pride and Sinne: And the old Cleargie of France admit of so many new orders of Fryers and Nunnes, that almost all is out of order; and the seuenteene Millions which the Duke of  left by accompt to the Queene Re∣gent, is all long since spent, and twice seuenteene more. So as al∣though the  be still on foote, Monopolyes neuer so rife, the Finnances, or Exchequer drawne dry, and exhausted, yet the King is extreamely  to his Nobilitie and Pensioners; and is not this  King of Spaine? H. 8. Great Henry liued, he would haue remedied and pre∣uented these calamities. Q. A. But his Sonne King Lewes is not so happy to doe it, no not his , the Duke of Luynes so discreet and honest to aduise and  thereunto. P. H. neglect thereof may make one, or both of them to repentt, and peraduenture the kingdome too; for already the Com∣mons , and the Nobilitie would, but cannot remedy it.
Q. M. Spaine loues France, therefore France neede not feare Spaine. P. H. The Panthers skin is faire, yet his friendship is fatall, and his breath infections. Q. E. Indeed if France loued not Spaine, it neede not feare it. Q. M. King Philip loues King Lewis dearely. Q. A. Not halfe so well as he loues his Kingdome of France. Q. E. In truth France hath reason to haue a vigilant eye ore Spain, for as long as shee sleepes in her bed of pleasure and securitie, per∣haps one of these dayes, Spaines Ambition may awake her with Drum, Trumpet and Cannon. P. H. O no▪ not as yet, for if the king of Spaine were so ill ad∣uised, his Councell is not; for they like old experienced Foxes, will neuer permit him to discouer himselfe, much lesse his Resolutions, and least of all his Ambition and Sword, vntill the Sunne hath at∣tain'd the Meridian. Q. M. I know not what my Nephew meanes by this Mathe∣maticall Riddle. Q. E. I was neuer greatly skild in the Mathematickes, and yet consuming my Youth, Yeares, and Cares for England, I haue rea∣son to vnderstand his knowledge. Wherefore Sister, sith hee is a Noble and famous Prince, let vs heare him, for he hath some mistery to reueale twixt France and Spaine. Q. M. He loues France, and hates Spaine, and which is worse, hee was an Heretique, therefore his tongue can make no Spherall melody. E. 6. But his heresie hath brought him hither to heauen tho, and hee is a famous and Noble Prince: therefore Cosen Wales speake on of France and Spaine, for now wee are all resolued to heare you. Q. E. I gaue him my Fathers Name, and he inheriteth my reso∣lution and courage, and the King his Fathers wisedome, therefore he can neither flatter nor dissemble. Q. A. Speake on Henry. P. H. Know all men by these Presents, that if Spaine did see the Heart and Bowels of France weltring in its bloud, and flaming in the fire of an intestine Giuill warre, if it did see the Princes banded against the King, or the King against the Protestants,
these rifeling of the Lourre, and of Paris, and his Maiestie be∣sieging of Rochell, Sancerre, Sedan, Nismes, or Samury, or denouncing warre to all those of that Religion. If it did see sixteene Parisian Tribunes, carrying away the Court of Parlia∣ment prisoners to the Bastille, and Chastellets the rebellious Ba∣rycadoes, and a bloudie Massacre in Paris; and generally in all the Cities of the Kingdome, if hee did see some Princes of the bloud (or two great Dukes as were Du Mayene and Mera∣ry) Captiuating and Deboshing the obedience and affections of the French Nobilitie, Clergie and Commons, and couering their pernitious designes and trecherous attempts, vnder the cloake of the holy League; If it did see Calais, Dourlaus, Amiens, Mont∣didier, Valencienes, Blauet, and Croyden, or other strong Ci∣ties, or Forts of France, bearing out the red ragged Crosse in∣stead of the three yellow Flower Deluces, and a second Mendo∣za for his Ambassadour, sate as premier President and Oracle in the Louare, Towne-house and Parliament, That then Phil∣lip the III. of Spaine loues his Sonne in Law Lewes the thir∣teene of France so well, that hee would vse him as King Phillip the second had an eager desire, and had almost done great Henry his Father. Q. M. Why how was that? P. H. Right as my Godmother Queene Elizabeth hath for∣merly told you, nothing but to depriue him of his Kingdome. E. 6. It were better that all the Iesuites were hanged, and the young Queene of France sent home to Spaine, with her Portion, to the King her Father. Q. E. But wee see strange alterations in the Court of France, for some dare, but will not, and others would, but dare not informe the King hereof. Q. A. France hath reason, yea, it is high time for her to looke to her selfe, for the Agents, Iesuits, and double Pistols of Spaine are busie, and their Swords and Pikes are not Idle. For whiles France playes the Theorie, Spaine playes the Practique.
Of the Netherlands. H. 8. How doth Spaine and the Netherlands gree? E. 6. Spaine hath so long inured and enforced the Hollanders to bloud and warres, as now at Sea and Land they are become such braue Souldiers and Marriners, as they feare not Spaine, and to loue Spaniards they vow it is impossible, much lesse to obey them. Q. M. It is pittie that King Phillip the second ended not the chastising and Conquest of these Heretique Hollanders, ere King Phillip the third began it, or that hee cannot reduce them to obedience, by ending these warres with more fortunacie, and lesse danger and dammage. Q. E. Nay Sister, it is pittie that these two Kings of Spaine, and the Archduke Albertus and Isabella, haue from time to time beene so ambitious, inhumane, cruell and reuengefull, to drowne the face of the Netherlands with many deluges of bloud, in seeking to pre∣serue their libertie, liues and Consciences from the cruell Tyrannie and Inquisition of Spaine. P. H. Indeed for this forty yeares, the Netherlands hath beene the Schoole and Theater of Mars, whereon there hath beene more braue souldiers and renowned Captaines flame, then in any Coun∣try of the world, or in many precedent Ages; and yet all this bloud is not capable to quench Spaines Ambition and Tyranny in seeking to deuoure those Prouinces. Q. A. Hath not Spaine assaulted the Netherlands as well by Trecherie as Hostilitie? Q. E. Yes, witnesse the damnable Villaine Gerrard, who long since murthered William the famous Prince of Orange, their Lieute∣nant Generall, and Father to Maurice that valiant and incomparable Captaine, who now succeeds him in his Principalitie. Q. M. O Sister, cast not so base an aspersion on King Phillip my Husband, to affirme hee was accessary to the murther of William Prince of Orange, much lesse authorised it or commanded it. P. H. All the Ocean betweene Holland and Spaine, cannot wash off that Murther from your Husband King Phillip, for his proscription to murther him beares it, and his Lieutenant the Duke
of Parma commanded the Count Assonuille to deale with Gerrard about this murther, who promised him twentie fiue thousand Crownes to effect it, which, O griefe to speake it, he did. E. 6. But his valiant Sonne hath long since had reuenge for the death of his Father. Q. A. If he haue not, he resolues to haue it. H. 8. But hath not Spaine since attempted, or broached any other Treason towards the Hollanders? P. H. O yes very lately, for whilst Spaine is Spaine, Holland will neuer forget how neere he was to haue extinguished her liber∣tie, and surprized their State, by infecting and corrupting their Se∣cretary Barneuelt, a man of so profound wit, and deepe iudgement and experience in matters of State, as he was not onely the Oracle of the Netherlands, but the Ornament and wonder of Europe, ye of his time. Q. E. See, the fruites of Spaines Gold, and the effects of his boundlesse Ambition, for it is a common custome with him, if not by the maine, yet surely by the bye, to breake the necke of Great Princes, and free Estates, publique Ministers, whether they are great Souldiers or great Statesmen, or both. Q. A. Yea, the Web of this Treason was so cunningly wouen, and so subtilly and finely spun, as if the Netherlands had not broken Barneelts necke, he long ere this had assuredly broken the necke both of their libertie and State. Q. M. Well, Barnauelt is gone, and now Spaine needs not feare his policy. P. H. Nay, Barneuelt being dead, and Maurice that famous Prince of Orenge liuing, Holland need not feare either the trechetie, or force of Spaine. H. 8. But Nephew, I heare that the Vnited Prouinces of the Low-Countries will this Spring haue Warres with Spaine, for their peace is neere expired and ended. P. H. A braue, noble, and wise resolution of theirs. E. 6. Heretofore England taught the Hollanders wit and va∣lour, and now they resolue to shew England the way to those two Vertues. Q. M. But the Gold and Siluer of Spaine wll preuaile against them, and weigh them downe.
P. H. But the Hollanders had Ships enough of their owne, and Gold, Siluer, and Men from England, therefore they disdaine to feare Spaine, nay rather they vow before the next Summer to make Spaine feare them. H. 8. See, see, a handfull of men dare attempt that against Spaine, which Great Brittaines huge infinitie will not. Q. E. And yet their cause and reason is Englands, viz. their Con∣sciences, Liues and Countries. Q. A. Pray God England and France interpose not to crosse the Warres, and seeke to conclude a Peace betwixt Holland and Spaine. E. 6. But the Hollanders are resolued to make King Iames a large Offer, to protect them against Spaine. Q. M. But King Iames loues Spaine too well, and therefore will not hearken to, or regard their proffer, for his Maiestie is resolued not to protect them. P. H. The more is the pitty. Q. E. The more my griefe. Q. M. And without griefe or pitty, the more is my ioy. Q. E. I protected the Netherlands in despight of Spaine. E. 6. But Spaine went neere by your Leicester, to betray both you and them. H. 8. If King Iames would now protect the Netherlanders, how easily might he refetch backe Flushing, the Brill, and the ? E. 6. Nay, how easily did his Maiestie depart with them to the Netherlands? P. H. It infinitely reioyceth me to vnderstand the Hollanders braue resolution and forwardnesse to haue warres with Spaine. Q. M. But there is a secret tricke to coole their courages which they least thinke of. H. 8. As how Daughter? Q. M. Why, to Pistoll this Prince of Orenge, as they did his Fater. Q. E. Heauen forbid it. P. H. God defend it. Q. M. Why, 'tis but one for another; for he knowing Barna∣uelt a Traytor to his Country because a Pensioner to Spaine, caused the Lords States, to put him to death, why then (in exchange
and requitall) should not a Pensioner of Spaine either poison, or pistoll the Prince of Orange? E. 6. These Diabolicall resolutions and bloudy Positions come from Hell. Q. E. And thither they goe that professe and practise them. Q. M. The King of Spaine is too religious to authorise so exe∣crable a Murther. Q. E. But the Pope as holy as he is will pardon it, and yet the World, I hope, knowes, that the Kof Spaine cannot be so religious as his Holinesse. Q. A. It were good then for Holland to be carefull of their Prince of Orange his life, as all the world knowes his Excellency is of their safetie and preseruations. P. H. And it will likhwise behooue them to obserue withall (as I hope they doe) how subtilly and trecherously Spinola, takes their neighbour Townes for the Emperour, and keepes them for the King of Spaine his Master. E. 6. And if the Warres goe on 'twixt Holland and Spaine; as I hope they will, it will be needfull for Spaine to haue a speciall care of his West-Indies from the Holland Fleetes. H. 8. Wherefore only Spaines West-Indies, or rather why not all the worlds West-Indies; sith their red and white earth sets all the Would on fire and in Combustion. Q. . Surely, ere this Summer passe, and the next appeare, the Hollanders vow to haue a heaue at them. Q. M. Nay, I hope the contrary, for the West-Indies is the maine and onely prop of Spaine, which if once found out, and taken away from them, will quickly make the greatnesse of his Ambition and Empire totter. P. H. Till when, all other Kingdomes and Estates of Christen∣dome may thinke themselues exempt from Spaines feare, but shall neuer be from his danger. Q. E. This Holland perfectly and apparantly knowes, and it were a greater happinesse for the rest of Europe, if they would here∣in imitate their Generositie, Valour and Wisedome, who stand on their Guards with their swords drawne, and their Match lighted ready to giue fire; as being constantly and vertuously resolued nei∣ther to loue, trust, nor feare Spaine.
ENGLAND. H. 8. But now leaue we all other Countries, and come wee to England, from whence being descended, wee by the Lawes of Na∣ture, are eternally obliged to honour and loue it; yea to preferre it and its prosperitie and glory to all other Countries of the world; wherefore let vs see Spaines Ambition and Enuy towards it; and how he hath from time to time borne himselfe to the English. Q. M. There is no Kingdome in the world, that Spaine loues better then England. Q. E. Nor no people vnder the Sunne that it hates more then Englishmen. E. 6. For Peter King of Castille, most ingratefully and basely a∣bused our famous and generous Edward the Blacke Prince, (the Or∣nament of Armes, the Glory of England, and the Honour of the World) and his whole Army in Spaine, after that he had inthroni∣sed and seated the said Peter in his Kingdome, and with his Victori∣ous Armes expel'd Henry the Bastard, who Vsurped it. Q. M. If Spaine had not loued England and Englishmen, King Philip would neuer haue married mee. Q. E. Hee loued you well Sister, but your Kingdome farre bet∣ter, for you were the Obiect of his zeale, but England that of his Ambition. H. 8. But Elizabeth, hee hated you more then euer he loued Mary. Q. E. And yet I dare truly affirme, that King Philip loued my Kingdome farre more then euer he hated my Peron. H. 8. To speake truth Daughter, he neither loued you, nor Ma∣ry his wife and Queene, but only England. P. H. And I haue heard that if he had neuer married my Aunt Mary, shee had neuer lost Calais, nor consequently, England, France. E. 6. Though that Match were vnfortunate to England in the losse of Calais, yet it was fortunate in that Philip and Mary had no Children. Q. M. If we had had any Males, England had beene long since a Prouince to Spaine.
Q. E. God knew so much, and therefore preuented it, wherein I qlese his Mercy and prouidence, as also your sterrilitie. P. H. Aunt, and I your resolution in speaking it. Q. M. The Kings of Spnine are the greatest nd most potent Kings of the World. Q. E. Yea, in Ambition and ostentation, but not in power, for I proued it not so, I found it not so, I left it not so. P. H. You Madame found Warre with Spaine surer and safer then Peace. Q. E. Yea, farre more safer, and farre more profitable too for England. Q. A. Then I wonder that King Iames my Husband so delights and drownes himselfe in his peace with Spaine. Q. M. O but Spaine findes both policy and reason enough to full King Iames a sleepe in the Cradle of Peace and Security. Q E. I neuer feared Spaine lesse, then when I loued it not, no more then when it made greatest shew to loue me. P. H. And the King my Father neuer loued it more, then now when he feares it. E. 6. But is it possible King Iames feares Spaine? P. H. It seemes so, for else he would neuer loue it so excessiuely. Q. E. Sir Nicholas Bacon my Chancellor on his Death-bed wrote me a Letter, that the Glory and Conseruation of England consisted in holding Spaine at Rapiers point; and will not his sonne Sir Fran∣cis, the now Chancellor tell his Maister so much? P. H. O no, he is otherwise imployed. H. 8. But tell mee Daughter, was Spaine euer treacherous to your Person? Q. E. Almost euery yeare Spaine hatched mee a new Treason, witnesse Parry, Babbington, Williams, Yeorke, Lopez, and infinite o∣thers, who sought to lay violent hands on my Person and Life, but that God in his infinite mercy and prouidence still protected and de∣fended me, to their owne confusion. P. H. But King Phillip 2. chiefely discouered his loue to England, in the treacherous attempt of his huge Armado of 88. (tearmed by the Pope) in a brauery (The Inuincible Fleete,) at what time his ambition and greedy desire of Vsurpation, so farre ore-swayed him and his Councell, as he thought to haue made an absolute Conquest
of England; but hee was deceiued of his hopes; for God looked on England with his indulgent eye of pitty and compassion, and on that great and mightie Nauall Army with contempt and dete∣station. Q: E. Yea God was so gracious to England, and so mercifull to mee, as not only my Ships and People, but the Windes and Waues fought for my defence, and that of my Countrey, against the pride and malice of Spaine, who grew mad with anger, and pale with griefe, to see this his great and warlike Armado beaten, foyled, and confounded, in the midst of their glory and ambition. E. 6, But Sister, was this all Spaines malice and trechery towards You and your State? Q. E. No, no, for I had forgotten how before that, his Maiestie in Spaine and his Lieutenant the Duke of Alua in Flanders, embarg'd and confisk'd a world of Goods and Ships that belon∣ged to my Subiects, contrary to all Lawes of Conscience and Na∣tions. P. H. And no other? Q. E. Yes, King Phillip beg'd my Kīngdome of Ireland of the Pope, and so assisted the Rebels, and made a confederacy with them for he Conquest thereof from me, bringing in first Stukeley, then Don Iuan of Aquila, into that Kingdome to the same effect: But Heauen alwayes laught at their ambition, vsurpation, and treche∣rie, which still proued as vaine, as impious and vniust. P. H. And yet see the iustice of the Cause, and the equitie of your Armes; for Essex landed at Calez, and in despight of Spaine tooke and rifled it, beating and sinking their best and greatest Ships, in a manner without any shew of defence or resistance. Q. M. O but now the times are altered and changed, for then Spaine was poore and England rich, and now England is poore and Spaine rich: Likewise Spaines warres parsimonie, and frugalitie, makes his Men Souldiers; and our Peace, Pride, and superfluitie, hath made our Souldiers either Courtiers or Co∣wards. H. 8. France knew that I found Souldiers in England when I tooke Tourney and Bouloigne. Q. E. And Spaine felt that English were Souldiers, when my Drake beat them on my Seas and Coast in 88. my Norris at Croyden
in 94. my Essex at Calais in 96. and my Montioy at Kingsale in 1600. Q. M. But when England was delighted in Combats, Warres, and Victories, and now in Stage-playes, Maskes, Reuels and Ca∣rowsing, so as their courages are become as rustie as their Swords and Muskets, which serue to grace the walls and not the fields, ex∣cept in poore Musters, and sleight Trainings, and that but once a yeare, which vpon the whole, is more for ostentation then Seruice: Moreouer, then Englands Nauy-Royall could giue a Law to the Ocean, and now time and negligence hath almost made all these ships vnseruiceable, who lye rotting at Chatam and Rocesther. E. 6. Here Queene Mary hath reason, for now she is in the truth. Q. E. What (Sister and Brother) my Royall-Nauy lye rtting, who are the Bulwarkes and Walles of England, and when I left them were capable to beate the power and pride of Spaine to shi∣uers? O this grieues me! but I beleeue not that my wife and pru∣dent Successour King Iames will suffer or permit it, I pray, God-son and Nephew Prince Henry, resolue me hereof. P. H. Indeed Madam, I confesse I haue seene so much my selfe, when God knowes I grieued to see it; neither did I faile to put the King my Father often in remembrance thereof; and his Maiestie still promised me to new build and repaire that Royall Fleete, to which number I added my Prince-Royall, a ship, who had she many fellowes, England needed not feare all the Fleetes of the World; but although the old Lord Admirall hath not beene carefull for the preseruation of the Nauy, yet the new one is. H. 8. If he be not, I grieue for the Fleet. Q E. And I lament it. E. 6. And I pittie it. Q. A. And I bewaile it. Q: M. And not to dissemble, both Gondomar, King Phillip his Master, the Pope, my selfe, and all the Romane Catholiques of Eng∣land reioyce hereat, for the Impotency and destruction of this Royall Nauy, is the Harbinger to prepare the way, and a step for King Phillip to mount the Throne of Estate, to plucke off King Iames his Crowne, and to place and ettle it on his owne head. Q. E. O my Ships, my Ships: God knowes they were still deare to me, because still necessary to England. Where is my Drake,
where my Cumberland, my For bisher, my Grinuille, my Cau∣dish, my Haukins, my Rauliegh, and the rest: Alas, they want me, and king Iames and Englnad wants them; for when they liued, and I raigned, our valour could stop the progression of Spaine; yea my ships domineerd in his Seas and ports, and their Clouds of smoke and fire, with their Peales of thunder, strueke such such amaz∣ment to the harts, and terrour to the courages of Castille and her faint-hearted Castillians, that euery Spanish Bird kept his owne Nest, not powerfull enough to defend themselues, much lesse to of∣fend any; and lest of all England, who was then n her Triumphes, in her lustre, in her glory. P H. Grieue no more (deare Aunt) for the Nauy Royall of England; for although Nottingam were remisse and carelesse here∣in, yet braue Buckingham hath of late yeares set a new face on that Fleet: and makes it not onely his delight, but his glory to re-edifie and reforme them; yea there is not a yeare passes him, but hee brings some new forth from their Dockes, and puts in other old, al∣though Cranfield (resembling himselfe) bites his lips at the charge thereof, because he affirmes he hath other occasions to disburse, and pay away the Kings Treasure. Q. E. Nephew Wales I am glad to heare that Buckingham is so carefull of England▪ Fleet-Royall, and in very deed, his Ambition, Care, and Zeale herein, will infallibly purchase him much loue and honour of the whole Kingdome, especially if he continue it. H: 8. Me thinks Scotland annexed and vnited to England, should make it farre the stronger. Q. E. But how can King Iames say England and Scotland is strong, when he feares the powers of Spaine, and will not know or beleeue his owne. E. 6. Yea it were much honour to the King, and happinesse to his Kingdomes and Subiects, if in any poynt (knowing the weake∣nesse thereof) he would fortifie and reforme it. Q. A. And it were a great happinesse for most Kingdomes and free Estates of Europe, if they would follow the examples of the Venetians and Hollenders, who will neither trust, nor loue, much lesse, feare Spaine. P. H. And among the rest, if England would follow it, they should drawe securitie out of danger, whereas now her apparant
danger is drawne and deriued from her apparant security. Q. A. O that the King my Husband would thinke hereof. P. H. O that the King my Father would make vse hereof. Q. E. O that King Iames my Heire and Successour would not hearken or beleeue the contrary hereof. H. 8. But this were the way to haue warres with Spaine, and King Iames I vnderstand, is resolued to liue and dye in peace with them. Q. M. Warre cannot be bought at a cheape rate. Q. E. But it is pitty that peace should be bought at too deare and dishonourable a rate. P. H. I haue alwayes beene enformed, that England still gets by her warres with Spaine. Q. E. I got by my warres with Spaine, and Spaine lost by it. P. H. My Father and his Subiects lose by his Peace with Spaine, and Spaine gets by it. Q. M. When England hath lost her selfe, she can lose no more. Q. E. But Sister, your death was the death of the Popes hopes, and of Spaines pretences to England. P. H. But they both seeme to reuiue and bud forth a fresh, if the Match betweene my noble Brother P. Charles, and the Infanta of Spaine take effect. Q. A. May Heauen deny the first, and the King your Father ne∣uer consent to the second. Q. E. So shall Spaine euer feare England, but neuer England Spaine. Q. M. But I hope the contrary; for in these dayes the King of Spaines Gold and his Ambassadour Count Gondomar act wonders in England. H. 8. Hath Gondomar propounded this Match to King Iames? P. H. O long since, and hee hath vowed to weare out his red leather Coach and greene Buckram Litter, but he will see an end of it this Parliament. Q. A. I thought indeede it was not for nothing, that he makes Aesops Fables his daily pocket guest. E. 6. How doth King Iames relish this Match. Q. M. His Exchequer is poore, and King Philips Indies rich, and therfore his Maiestie likes it so well, as he will hearken to no other.
H. 8. How doth Prince Charles himselfe like this motion? P. H. I know not how my Brother likes it, but for my part I should euer haue preferred a Daughter of Franc to that of Spaine, and I hope the Match will not succeede, because my noble Brother Prince Charles is wise, valiant, and generous. E. 6. But how doth the braue and graue Parliament sauour this Spanish Match? Q▪ A. Fewe loue it, most feare it, But as the Match, so the Par∣liament is not yet ended. Q. E. This would be musicke indeede for the Romane Catho∣liques of England, if it should take effect; for the very first newes thereof, made them flap their wings, as if they were ready to crowe. Q. M. Yea, for they hope, and which is more, they know, that if it proue a Match, That the Infanta will soone introduce the Masse, and Vsher in the Pope; therefore they haue reason to reioyce at it. P. H. But if the King of Spaine will not giue the summe which my Father King Iames demaunds, will not they make it vp? Q E. It is probable and credible, That their Holy Father the Pope, and themselues will stretch both their Purses and Credites to knit the Match. H. 8. Why? hath Gondomnr such power with King Iames, to hope to see this Match effected? Q. M. O yes; for his Maiestie saith, that his Master is an ho∣nest King, and hee a wise Seruant: The first all the world knowes; and the second, I hope England shall shortly feele, at least, if all hookes take. P. H. Indeed if Gondomar can effect this match, it is the direct way for him to be a Grande of Spaine, and to procure a red Hat for his Sonne or Nephew. Q. A. Was the Duke of Monteleone so rewarded for his French Matches? Q. M. Hee is already a Grande of Spaine, and hath the promise of a Hat. Q. A. Why then Count Gondomar need not feare, for hee hath as much policie as the Duke of Monteleone, though not so much o∣stntation. H. 8. Who made and concluded the match with King Philip? Q. M. My Selfe and the Parliament.
Q. E. Nay Sister, put in Woolsey and Gardyner, and leaue out the Parliament; for you onely proposed it them but for forme, and had secretly concluded it before hand your selfe. Q. M. Suppose I did, I might doe it of mine owne authority, and prerogatiue Royall. Q. E. But you offered no faire play to the Parliament, though in asking their aduise when the Contracts were ready to be sealed. Q. M. But I had reason to follow mine owne Iudgement, not their Passions. H. 8. Nay, nay Daughter, you contrariwise followed your owne passion, not their Iudgements, and so God gaue limits to Phi∣lips Ambition, and your owne desires, by making you orsake Earth, and he Engand. E. 6. But wise King Iames is opposite to my Sister Mary, as well in Religion as sexe; and therefore, I hope, nay, I assure my selfe, he will first consult this Match with his Parliament, ere he conclude it with Spaine. P. H. If the voyc of the Parliament be free, and not enforced, I make no doubt but the Pope, the King of Spaine, Gondmar, and all our Recusants will come short of their hopes for the Match. H. 8. Daughter, what benefits proposed you to the Parliament, by your Match with Spaine? Q. M. Strength, Profit, Honour, which England, King Iames, and Prince Charles will likewise now finde if the Match hold. E. 6. As for strength, if England would know its selfe, it neede not expect or hope for any from Spaine: for Spaines assistance hath alwayes proued fatall and ruinous, to those who haue vsed it; And if England would assume the ancient generosity of her Ancestors, and forsake her new fangled pride and prodigality: Wee know it is strong enough to beat Spaine, and all his Kingdomes and Prouinces, and no way so weake, to feare that Spaine should make England a Prouince; for it were farre safer for England and Englishmen, if they wore worse cloathes, and had better hearts and swords, and if they were more martiall and lesse effeminate. Q. E. For Profit, what Indies is richer then England? for if En∣gland want money, herselfe is still more powerfull and capable to inrich it selfe, if it would be lesse vaine, and more frugall and in∣dustrious, &c. what is a few hundred thousand Pounds to England,
if England be thereby exposed to the danger of Spaine? or that it b againe fetcht from them by the Bye, as it was brought in by the Maine? for was profit euer cheape when it was bought with losse and repentance, with teares and blood? or shall not euery Ducket be weighed and counterpoised downe with a farre greater preiudice and inconueniency: for if the Match hold, will not our Recusants looke a looe? will not Spaniards bee so ambitiously insolent to at∣tempt to out-looke English? will not the Pope steale in by degrees, and the King of Spaine breake in either like a torrent or a thunder∣bolt, when his factors and agents haue made all things ripe and in a readinesse? will this be Englands profit? P. H. For Honour, England and Scotland were Free, Royall, and ancient Monarchies; when indeed Spaine was not Spaine, but dis∣ioynted and disseuered Prouinces: yea, for Pompe, State, and Glo∣ry, our Princes were Kings, when their Kings were scarce Princes, nor their Princes Nobles: Therefore GREAT BRITTAINE by the Match can conferre and adde honour to Spaine; but not Spaine to GREAT BRITTAINE. Q. A. I could neuer yet affect the match of Spaine, for either of the two Princes my Sonnes: for the Spaniard is by nature as tre∣cherous as proud, and although Northampton perswaded me thereto, yet I loued true-hearted Salisbury, who alwayes diuerted me from it; as (in the depth of his Allegiance, and the profunditie of his wisdome and Iudgement) well fore-seeing they would proue atall and rui∣nous to England. E. 6. It is strange to see with what insatiable desire and Ambi∣tion, Spaine couets England; for hee hath already attempted it by trechery, by force, and now by the Match of his Daughter the In∣fanta to Prince Charles. Q. M. You meane King Philip the 2. and not this present King Philip the third; And as Don Iuan de Taris (the Ambassadour of Spaine) told King Iames at his first comming to the Crowne of En∣gland, that the Ambition and malice of Spaine to England, dyed with that Prince, and was interred and buryed with him. Q. E. But was this King Philip the third and his Councell, neuer acquainted with that horrible Gunpowder Treason, whereby it was intended and resolued, that England should haue beene blowne vp, ouerthrowne, and ruined in a moment.
Q. M. O no, he is too Catholique a King to haue hearkened, much lesse to haue approued that Passionate plot. Q. E. You might haue said, that execrable and damnable plot of Treason, but that you will seeke to diminish and extenuate Rome and Spaines Treasons. Q. M. You infinitely wrong the Pope, and King of Spaine, to suspect, much lesse to beleeue, that they were acquainted with that Powder plot. Q. E. No? went not Faulkes (that hellish Incendary) once to Rome about it, and the younger Winter twice to Vallidolide. Q. M. Yea, about some other businesse it may be, although I must confesse it was very immediatly before that Treason was discouered. P. H. Gondomar told me, that both the Pope and King of Spaine abhord that Treason. Q. A. I feare they abhord it, for griefe it tooke not effect. Q. M. If euer this King Philip hated England, yee may be sure now he loues it; for else he would neuer seeke to match his Daugh∣ter to it. Q. E. What force and treachery cannot effect, now affection in the match shall. Wherein King Philip is of Lysanders minde, who when the Lyons skinne will not serue, he will sowe on a peece of the Foxes tayle. E. 6. So he come into England, he cares not by which way he ariue. P. H. So the Daughter come not into England, England neede not feare the comming of the Father. Q. M. Count Gondomar will beate his head and his horse shoes, but he will bring in the Daughter, and already his hopes and the pro∣babilities are great, for he is exceeding great and familiar with King IAMES. Q. E. Else he could neuer haue gotten open the Prison dores for the Romane Priests and Iesuites. P. H. Nor haue made Raleighs head to caper beyond his body. Q. A. Nor haue kept back an Army from my Sonne and Daugh∣ter the King and Queene of Bohemia, when so many hundred thou∣sand valiant English Souldiers desired and longed to haue serued them in their warres. Q. E. Nor haue shipt away so great a quantitie of Ordnance for Spaine, which one of these dayes will returne bullets to our hearts.
E. 6. Nor haue procured a gallant Fleete to secure the Coast of Spaine, against the Turkish Pyrates, vndeer coulour of going to Ar∣gier and Barbary. P. H. That Fleete was fitter to haue gone to Mexico. Q. A. So indeed it might haue returned with glory and Gold, whereas now I feare it will with losse and repentance, I will not say with shame. Q. E. I know by Experience, it is an excellent thing for England to fight with Spaniards, but not to ioyne with Spaniards against others. P. H. Why should not our English Fleetes goe for the West Indies. Q▪ M. If this proposition be broached, then Gandomar will run madde. E▪ 6. What difference is there betwixt the East and West Indies? P. H. As much as there is betweene Pepper and Siluer, or white Feathers and yellow Gold. H. 8. O but England, neere this twenty yeares hath lost those golden times of going to the Gardens of Hesperides. P. H. And now Holland after ten yeares tryall, and patience, re∣solues to finde them. Q. E. Now we speake of Holland: It againe exceedingly grieues me, that England goes from Holland, in that it will not protect it a∣gainst Spaine. Q. M. And truely it is my ioy and comfort to vnderstand it; for the farther England goes from Holland, I am sure the neerer Spaine comes to England. P. H. Nay, if the Match hold, Holland can expect no assistance from England; for the Pope, the King of Spaine, Gondomar, the Ie∣suites, and English Recusants, will in few yeares so shuffle and deale the cards, as England shall not bee able to assist herselfe, much lesse her Neighbours. E. 6. Why that is the way, in a few more yeares, to make En∣gland a Prouince to Spaine. Q. E. Yea, yea, there is the mysterie; for if the match with Spaine hold, the conquest of England will vndoubtedly follow, & then Gon∣domar can be no lesse then Vice-roy or great Commander of England, for the King and Councell of Spaine will iudge him worthy of this
honour, because he hath deserued it. P. H. It were better Spaine were Hell, and Gondomar Vice-roy to the Diuell, as he is now Ambassadour to the Catholicke King. Q. A. But is it possible that the King of Spaine hath so little Iu∣stice and charity, and so much vanitie and ambition to desire it? E. 6. The Kings of Spaine make this the tenth Article of their Creed, that the Rules of Empire and State ought to giue Lawes, but not to receiue any. Q. E. But this is contrary to the Lawes of the KING of Kings. Q. M. But in the Counsell of Spaine, the Rules of State are al∣waies too sublime and powerfull for those of Religion; yea the Pope will easily dispence with the King of Spaine, to make a Conquest of England, either by treachery, hostilitie, or the match: for it is a∣gainst an Heriticke King and people, who refuse to enter into the bo∣some of the Church, and therefore lawfull in it selfe; because it tends to the Catholique cause, the displanting and rooting out of Heretikes, and the establishing and presuation of the Romane Catholikes in England. Q. E. Those giddy and passionate Romane Catholiques of En∣gland, who disire to fish in troubled waters, who delight in nothing but in innouation and nouelty, and who make a May-game of Consci∣ence, and an Ape of Religion, may peraduenture flatter themselues with the false sunne-shine of these hopes; but those of them whose hearts are better lodged, and whose eyes and iudgements can see far∣ther and clearer: Those I say who know by the Lawes of Grcae and Nature, what they owe to GOD, to their lawfull Prince and Coun∣try; those remember, that the Duke of Medina Sydonta said in eighty eight (who was then Generall of the Spanish Fleete) that his Commission was not to distinguish of Religion; but to make a pas∣sage with his Sword, ore both Religions without exception, that thereby the King his Master might haue the easier way, and fairer passage to the Crowne and Kingdome of England: Therefore wee neede no perspectiue Glasse, or Spectacles to see, that it is not the establishing of the Romane Religion, but of himselfe in England, whereat the King of Spaine still aymes. Q. M. Count Gondomar is wise enough to prouide a play∣ster for that sore, for hee in netling the Nobler sort of Catholiques
with the match, hath in plaine tearmes giuen the lye to the Duke of Medina his speech, and therefore he hopes they will beleeue him. P. H. The nobler and more passionate and factious sort of them may beleeue Gondomnr herein, but the wiser, temporate, and consci∣ous will not; and yet the Feminine Gender, are Masculine sticklers and solicitors for him, as hee and the Iesuites are for the King his Master. Q. E. Nay, the Romane Catholikes of England haue reason to beleeue Gondomar; sith King IAMES loues him well, as hee esteemes his speeches Oracles and Scripture; and who with the quintessence of his Castillian, or rather Galician braine, hath now brought matters to this passe, that no sincere aduise, honest Letter. Religious Sermon, or true picture can point at the King of Spaine, but they are called in; and their Authors imprisoned (in sted of rewarded) though neuer so honest and loyall Subiects. H. 8. But me thinkes that this is no subtill policie of Gondamar; for the more he striues to suppresse the truth, the more it will flou∣rish and preuaile; For (for the good of England) if one penne, or tongue bee commaunded to silence, they will occasion and set tenne at libertie to write and speake; as Grasse or Cammomell, which the more it is depressed, the thicker it will spread and grow. Q. M. But hath not Gondomar reason to strike whiles he findes the Iron hot, and to take the benefit of the floud, before the ebbe come or the tide be spent. Q. A. Indeed they say, hee reports that this Summer time, the ayre of London and Islington is not sweete enough, either for his Fistula, or perfumed braine, and that hee hath thereforefore gotten leaue of his Maiestie, to lodge in a part of his Pallace of Greenwich, which stands in so pure an Ayre, vpon the pleasant Christall Riuer of Thames. Q. E. That were a presumptuous part of Gondomar indeed, to as∣pire to lodge in that pleasant, and Royall Pallace of Greenwich. Q▪ M. But if it bee so, I thinke it is not to lodge there himselfe, but onely to square out the Infanta's Lodgings, her Chamber of Presence, and a Plot to build her Grace a Chappell against shee come, whereof Iones Sir Innigo hath already the Modell in his braines.
P. H. If King IAMES my Father lodge Gondomar this Sum∣mer in Greenwich, the next, King Philip himselfe will hope to lye in White-Hall. E▪ 6. Nay soft▪ first let his Daughter the Infanta come, for shee must breake the Ice, ere his Catholique Maiestie will dare aduenture to come passe the Seas hither. Q. M. Aduenture to come? why wherefore else, saith Count Gondomar, lyes King IAMES his Fleete at Alciant, and Carthage∣na, but to transport her for England this Summer? Q. E. Vntill I am enforced to vnderstand, that that Fleete is at Lisbone, the Groyne, or Saint Andera, I will not beleeue it, but then I will feare it. Q. M. So the Heretike Protestants of France feared their Spa∣nish matches, and yet we see they prosper. Q. A. It is the end which crownes the beginning, not the begin∣ning the end of a worke. Q. E. What speake you Sister of the French matches with Spain, to this of England and Spaine? for all the World knowes, that the Estates of England and France, are Diametrically opposite in point of Religion; for France hath fortie Papists for one Protestant, and England fortie Prot-stants for one Papist. Q. M. But those Protesting Heretikes of England, will sing an∣other tune, when they see the King of Spaine hath made their Coun∣trey his Prouince. P. H. Heauen forbid, that euer England should sing the tune of Spaines Ballad, or Spaine liue so long to make England see that dis∣mall and bloudy day. Q. E▪ It were farre better, that Prince CHARLES were mar∣ried to an English Milke-maid, and the Infanta of Spaine mewed vp for a Nunne in a Cloyster. Q A. Yea, for how can my Sonne Prince CHARLES thinke the King of Spaine loues him, when he sees that vnder-hand he is a mortall and professed Enemy to his Brother and Sister, the King and Queene of Bohemia. Q. M. You mistake Madame; for it is the Emperour Ferdinand, and not King Philip that is their mortall Enemy. P. H. If Philip had not (vnder-hand) powerfully assisted Ferdi∣nand, His Imperiall Maiestie, had neither had legs to goe, nor wings
to flie into Prague, and yet the King my Father will not asist his Son in Law, King Frederick. Q. A. Yes to recouer the Pallatinate if that were lost; But Gon∣damr through his slye crouches, and sugred insinuations, hath ex∣torred a hope, and some say wrested a promise from King IAMES not to assist Bohemia, but I hope the contrary. Q. E. But will Spinola restore those townes he hath taken in the Pallatinate. Q. M. Gondomar promised that Digby shall bring that home vn∣der his hand and seale, onely he sayes, tis fit that Spinola should be sa∣tisfied for his charges. Q. E. Thats an old baffle and tricke of Spaine, which vpon the matter, will proue but a flat denyall. Therefore if King IAMES please to hearken to my advise, I would send an Army thither and re-fetch these Townes of the Pallatinate from Ferdinand, Phillip, Albertus, and Bauari, with the point of the sword, in despight of Spinola, Tilly, and Cordoa. P. H. If I were againe liuing in England, I would so worke with the King my Father, that this resolution of Queene Elizabeth, should neuer dye, but spedily bee put in execution; for it is the sa∣fest, cheapest, shortest, and honourablest way for England; yea what would not England doe for my deare and Royall Sister of Bo∣hemia, if the King my Father would giue it the word of command? Q. M. But content your selfe Nephew▪ Count Gondomar hath promised that his Master King Phillip will giue King Iames content for his Townes of the Pallatinate. Q. A. So Gondomar promised his Maiesty, that Spinola should neuer attempt the Pallatinate, and yet we see the contrary, and be∣ing false in this, how, or what reason haue we to beleeue him to bee true in the match. Q. M. England must beleeue him sith the King doth, and will. And herein I both triumph and glory. P. H. Thus my Royall Father intreates; where he should com∣mand, and loues Spaine, where he hath farre more reason to hate it. Q. E And this is my truest griefe and deepest affliction, that King Iames will still delight in contemplation, when (if his Maiesty will not) all the world sees, that King Phillip is (vnder-hand deepe in actiō.
H. 8. It may be that King Iames thinkes King Phillip to be of Han∣niballs minde, who more feared Fabius not fighting. then Marcellus fighting, or of Pompe▪ or of Marcus Crassus their opinion, who were more afraid of Ccero's gowne, then of Caesars sword. Q. M. Nothing lesse; for King Phillip loues King Iames his Gowne and pen, yet no way feares his sword. Q. E. But if King Iames inherited my resolution as he doth my Kingdomes, I would make Spaine feare his sword, and Rome either loue or obey his pen, and neuer consent to a Peace, much lesse to the match. Q. M. But why should King Philip feare King Iames his sword, sith he neuer yet knew the way to drawe ir: or why should his Ca∣tholike Maiesty feare the Counsell of England sith it is apparant to all the world; that the eliment and delight of their King, is bookes, not battailes, the pen, not the pike. H. 8. Why? know you not Daughter that King IAMES hath lately established a Counsell of Warre, and whereunto think you tends that. Q. M. To peace I hope, or rather, assure my selfe. Q. E. Then Sister you are of neere intelligence with Gondomar; for not long since in one of his dispatches to Spaine, he wrote the LL. of that Councell, that they should not doubt nor feare of the Counsell or warre of England; for it was (said he) but a scarre-Crow to feare, not to hurt, and would onely serue as a Vane on a house top, rather for ornament then vse. But if King IAMES were of my minde, his Counsell of warre should strike rather then threaten; and send a Royall Army into the bowels and heart of Ca∣stille ere they thought it could be ready to depart from the Ports of England. Q. M. Not into Castille; for then the peace were quite broken betwixt ENGLAND and SPAINE. P. H. Why then into Bohemia, the Pallatinate; The Netherlands, or the States of Uenice, or wheresoeuer the Castillians Regiments di∣sturbe the publique peace of Christendome. E. 6. I see no reason to the contrary, but England should be as soone in Armes and action as Spaine. Q. E. But it is the inchanting melody of the match, that brings
England out of tune. Q. M. But in this proposition and parlee of the match, the King and Counsell of Spaine, speake faire termes, and giue reall not verball content to King Iames. Q. E. So did Philip your Husband, and his Father by his Em∣bassadours to mine at Bourbourg, thereby to ulle me a sleepe when his great Armado was in a manner ready to weigh Anchor, and set Sayle from Lisbone, to inuade me and my England. Q. M. But King Iames knowes Spaines affection and Gondo∣mars sincerity to him, and consequently to England in seeking this Match. Q. A. But England knowes neither the affection of the Mai∣ster, or the sincerity of the Seruant, and therefore hath reason, though not to feare yet to suspect both. H. 8. It rather thinkes King Philip of Pericles his opinion and Ambition, who desired that the land in the port of Piree mought be remoued, sith it was a moate and beame in his eye. P. H. The morall is, that Philip would  England a prouince to Spaine, but if the Match hold not; Spaines Ambition, Gondo∣mars policie▪ and both their treacherie will proue too weeke to per∣forme so strong an execution. Q▪ M. Then the King of Spaine will hate Gondomar, as much as he vaunts the King of England loues him: But I must count Gondomar hath liued too long to dote, or be made a Child in his old age. P. H. No, no, Gondomar is too young to dot, and too old to be a child, therefore he is confident and sure that the Match will hold; but withall, he saieth the Parliament must be ended, ere these Royall Nuptiall cerimonies can begin, and I thinke so to. E. 6. Indeed this Castillian Embassadour now sailes before winde and tide, vnder fore▪ sayle, and maine top-sayle, but very shortly he hopes to hoyst vp top and top-gallant. P. H. He may chance to packe on so much sayle, that he may at last crack the maine Mast of his policy, or the maine stay of his hopes, or be so busie and violent in the solicitation of this Match, as he himselfe may giue himselfe a Shotte, which may sinke either his reputation, or iudgement, or both, betwixt winde and water.
Q. E. Intruth I found his predicessour Mendoza too busie and dangerous in my State, and therefore I forbad him my presence, and discharded him my Kingdom, whereat I know not whether he, or the King his Master, more grieued, or my Counsell and my Countrey reioyced. Q. A. Gondomar hath had time enough to know my Husband King Ianes, but it seemes King Iames hath not yet enough deeply pryed into Gondomar. In a word I know his Maiesty hath heard his tongue, but not seene his hart, much lesse the designes and resoluti∣ons of the King and Counsell of Spaine, which are inuelloped and hood-winked vnder the Mysterie of this match. H. 8. Indeed I haue read that King Phillip King of Macedon went neere to haue betrayed Arisbes King of Molesses of his Kingdome, vnder treating a Match with him. Q. M. O but that Phillip of Macedon was a Heathen King, and this Phillip of Spaine is the Catholike King, therefore King Iames need not feare his sinceritie in the Match. Q. E. Sith you are so religious Sister, pray say, how doth the Inquision of Spaine like to Match their Infanta to an Heretique Prince, for so I know they terme my Noble Nephew Prince Charles.? P. H. Why? Digby could haue resolued you of that long since, for he knowes that the sacred and reuerend Inquisition of Spaine loue England, but not the match; our Countrie, but not our Religion and people; and yet in hope to roote out Heretikes, and to plant England with Romane Catholiques, they oppose not the Match, but rather giue way to it and approue it. Q. E. But can Royall King Iames, and his Illustrious Sonne Prince Charles obserue their Religion and Conscience, in consenting to this Matcb, or haue the Clergie of England warrant enough Au∣thenticall, out of the word of God to say Amen to it? Q. A. O no, for King Iames (though not the Prince and Cler∣gie) will now make Religion and Conscience Handmaydes to wait and attend the State. E. 6. But his Maiesty should doe farre better to defend the Faith (whereof he is the defender) and therein the State, which professeth the true and sincere Religion of Christ and his Apostles,
sith Plety is the preseruer of Kingdomes, and all our actions whatso∣euer should tend to the glory of God; which is the banishing of Ido∣latry and Superstition, with their effects and causes. Q. M. Why pray, what Marriage so religious as for Prince Charles to match with the Catholique King his Daughter. Q. E. Sister you haue still Religion in your tongue, but I feare we shall finde none in your heart, for pray what places haue you of diuine Scripture, to authorize and approue this Match of Prince Charles with the Infanta, sith they are of a different Religion and Beliefe. Q. M. As I confesse I haue none to approue it, so I am sure you all cannot alleadge any one to oppose and contradict it. H. 8. Yes, I produce Gen. Ch. 24. Ch 16. against it. E 6. And I, Exod. Ch. 34. Iudg. Ch. 17. Q. E. And I, Iosh. Ch. 23. 2. Chron. Ch. 21. P. H. And I, 1. Kings Ch. 11. Chap. 16. Q. A. And I, Ezra. Ch. 9. Nehem. Ch. 13. Q. M. Well, whatsoeuer you say this Match (notwithstand∣ing) tends to Gods glory, and the good of the Catholique and Apo∣stolique Church, and in the end you shall finde, that Gondomars po∣licie and Spaines Ambition will triumph ore your Scripture. Q. E. This match tends onely to bring in the Pope into our Churches, and the King of Spaine into our estate; for that is the ayme of the first, the Ambition of the second, and the obiect and hopes of both, and I feare a few yeares will proue it so; if in time it bee not remedied and preuented: which GOD of his mercie graunt, for 'tis true all the wheeles of Gondomars Art and inuention, are at worke to effect and accomplish it. Q. M. The Pope I must confesse (as Christs Vicar Generall on Earth) desires that England were Catholique, but for the good King of Spaine, hee hath Kingdomes enough of his owne, and there∣fore lookes not after England, onely he desires to see the Match con∣summated. P. H. Yes, the King of Spaines tongue hath so long watred, and his mouth gaped for England, that after Spaine, hee wisheth England were his, aboue all the Countries of the World, and his Ca∣tholique Maiestie is very confident, that this Match will giue a maine stroke to the businesse.
Q. E. If he once haue England, hee will presently assume the Title of Emperour of the West, as King Philip his Father was re∣solued to doe a little before his death; yea, his Ambition was so violent, as hee missing of England, would haue proclaimed himselfe Emperour of Spaine; and had not his Councell diuerted and pre∣uented him he would haue sailed to Mexico, and there inuested and intituled himselfe Emperour of America. P. H. And I haue heard that Gondomar hath giuen the King of Spaine his Maister good hope of England; for 'tis certaine that hee not long since wrote to the Dukes Lerma and Pastranna, that the re∣port of the strength of England resembled those huge Pageants and Colosses erected at Rome, as the Caesars past from the Meluine bridge to the Capitoll in triumph, who were outwardly glorious, and within filled onely with strawe and poore combustable stuffe. E. 6. Indeed, it is the shame and weaknesse of England, that Spaine is no better acquainted with its strentgh. Q. A. And tis my griefe, that Spaine should see Englands weak∣nesse, and not feele its strength. Q. E. O but it is the Spanish Match which will giue fire to En∣gland, and make her welter in her miseries, and flame in her calami∣ties and afflictons. Q. M. No, no, that Match will keepe the Temple of Englands peace from firing. H. 8. Yea, as Erostratus did that of Diana of Ephesus, which in one day consumed all the wealth that rich Asia had bin many yeares and ages getting. Q. A. As Religion is the powerfullest passion of our Soule, so there is no stronger lincke of Friendship then Conscience, and there∣fore I hope my Sonne Charles will not consent to match the Infanta of Spaine. Q. M. But one of his chiefest Vertues is his obedience to the King his Father; for although the Prince be his Son, yet hee knowes he is his Subiect. Q. A. All the world cannot better teach the Prince my Sonne to obey the King his Father, then already hee knowes and doth; but I could wish that King Iames my Husband, would not inforce his affe∣ction to this Spanish Match. Q. E. If he marry the Infanta, she may proue a false and vnsecret
Secretary to the Prince her Husband, and a dangerous Princesse to the State: for hee giuing her his heart, his Highnesse can hardly re∣serue any corner for himselfe. P. H. Yea, then euery Spanish Traytor and English Rebell will shroud themselues vnder the authority and greatnes of the Princesse. E. 6. So if England match with Spaine, Spaine vndoubtedly will in a short time ouer-match England. Q. A. And infallibly take the Crowne from it. Q. M. Borrow it peraduenture, to see it, not to weare it. P. H. I feare to weare it, neuer to returne it. H. 8. Yea, for once gone, it is gone for euer. Q. E. And then shall Englands strong men fall vpon the edge of the Sword; her Virgins bee defloured and murthered, her Wiues defiled and slaine in sight of their dying Husbands; and their Chil∣dren and young Babes shall haue their braines dashed out against the walles in sight of their dead Parents. P H. Yea, then shall our Nobilitie and Gentrie, dye vpon the swords of those barbarous , and those who escape and sur∣uiue their fury, shall bee fettered and led Captiues and Slaues to worke in the Mines of Peru and Mexico. E. 6. Then shall our Priests who are now cloathed in the white robes of Righteousnesse, bee drowned in those of their owne scarlet blood: No Church, no Temple, no Preaching, no Sacraments, but all couered with the thicke fogges of Romes superstitious Idolatries, and Aegyption darknesse. Q. A. Yea, then the King my Husband, the Prince my Sonne, my excellent Daughter the Queene of Bohemia, her Princely Poste∣rity, and if Spaine possibly can, all Great Brittaines blood Royall shall be rooted out and exterminated; as if they neuer had beene, or at least no remembrance left of them, or of the Name of GREAT BRITTAINE. Q. M. This were musicke indeed for Rome and Spaine to dance at, and for Gondomar to laugh himselfe to death for ioy. Q. E. But I hope God of his mercy will confound all those who wish or desire it, whether it be Gondomar, the Iesuites, Englands Re∣cusants, Spaine, the Pope, or the Diuell. The Conclusion of the Consultation. H. 8. But heere let vs make a stand, and shut vp our Consulta∣tion;
and sith so many millions of imminent dangers, desolations and miseries attend and hang ouer the head of England by this Match of Spaine; let vs goe to suffrages and Votes, that plurality may giue sen∣tence whether it shall be a Match yea or no; for what wee conclude, I make no doubt but our great God with his owne voyce will ratifie and confirme. H. 8. Q. M. E. 6. Q. E. P. H. Q. A. Whereunto we all consent and agree. H. 8. I am against the Match. E. 6. I am against the Match. P. H. I am against the Match. Q. M. I am for the Match. Q. E. I am against the Match. Q. A. I am against the Match. H. 8. Daughter Mary, wee are fiue against you one, therefore the Match of England and Spaine hath end  beginning, and is ab∣solutely cast without . And now let vs breake vp our Consultation; and againe repaire to the Throne of the Lambe, (of our sacred God both of Heauen and Earth) to acquaint his Diuine Maiestie with all the particulars there∣of, and therein his Heauenly pleasure and Commaund; When the Angell opening Heauens Starre-Chamber, a great concourse and af∣fluence of Saints and Angels (singing most Diuinely) conduct them to the blessed ribunall, where the whole newes of their Consulta∣tion, being already arriued to the vnderstanding of the Almightie; It pleased his Diuine and Coelestiall Maiestie, to call foorth Queene Mary whom hee sharply reproues and checkes, in louing Spaine, to bee so vnnaturall to hate her natiue Countrey of England. Then he infinitely disproues the Match of Prince Charles, with the Infanta of Spaine; as derogating from his Diuine Glory, and England safetie and prosperitie; and so to conclude very ioyfully and cheerefully ap∣proues of their Consultation; which for the more grace and autho∣ritie he makes and reputes as his owne. When Commaunding these three Princes, and two Queenes (for Qeene Mary was now put by and excluded) to send vnto England (by its owne Tutulary An∣gell) foure seuerall printed Copies of this their Consultation; The first to be deliuered to King IAMES; the second to Prince CHARLES
is Sonne; the third, to the High Court of Parliament; and the ourth, to the Lords of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuy Councell, the which in his Sacred presence was speedily performed and effected; When a great shout of oy, and an Vniuersall plaudity being hereunto giuen by all the Angels, and Host of Heauen▪ These fiue Royall Personages followed the Lambe CHRIST IESVS where hee went. This Consultation thus ended, Queene Mary biting the lip at her checke and disgrace; and grieuing to see the Match of the Infanta with Prince CHARLES thus vnexpected dash'd; and consequently the Pope frustrated of his hopes, and the King of Spaine of his Ambiti∣ous desires; Shee calls Mercury to her, and with all possible speed sends him away likewise to England, with these two ensuing Letters which shee had written, the one to Count Gondomar, the other to all the Romane Catholiques of England.
Queene MARY, To Count Gondomar Ambassador for Philip the III. King of Spaiine, resident with IAMES, King of Great BRITTAINE. YOur Excellencie may vnderstand, that I haue dispatch'd Mercurie to you in England,  aduertise you of a Consulta∣tion held here in Heaven, by my Father King Henry VIII. my Brother King Edward VI. my Sister Queene Elizabeth, Queene Anne, Prince Hnry, and my selfe, concerning your Masters pre∣tences & hopes of England, by the Match of the Infanta his Daugh∣ter with Prince Charles, which all the  fiue haue opposed as pre∣iudiciall and dangerous, and my selfe maintayned as profitable and Honourable for England; for louing Philip the Father, I must and will euer honour Philip his Son; They haue likewise ript vp and vnmasked Spaines former Ambition, Cruelty, and Treacherie, as well towards England, as other Kingdomes and States of Europe, the discouery and relation whereof, I could neither silence nor pre∣uent▪ your Excellencie must giue me leaue to signifie, that I feare your Secretaries are not so honest, as your selfe Politique; or you are here by these Princes brought on the Stage in your naked and natu∣rall Colours, therefore I could wish yu to be more modest and not so busie; Onely to the vtmost of your mrtall power,  the knot of this Math, for if it holde, the heart of England will be soone bro∣ken, or if the contrary, it will infallibly breake the necke of the King your Maisters generall hopes and preences, and also of your owne particular credit and reputation, as well in England, as Spaine; you haue many eyes ouer you, and although your sweet words and promises ull King Iames asleepe, you will neuerthelesse goe neere to be circumuented, by those  seeke to circumuent. If you can bring in the Ifanta, doubt you not but she will vsher in the Pope,
and consequently hee the Catholique King your Master; For▪get not to continue, and sorefie your Intelligence with  S∣minaries and Iesuites of England, as also with the Catholique Ladies of that Kingdome, and especially, with those of the No∣bler ranke, and who are most powerfull at Court, for they may open a passage for your Master when none else dare. At any hand vse the prime of your Art and Inuention, to keepe the King of Eng∣land poore, and be sure to riuet this  to his Maiestie, that there is no Vertue so Royall and Magnificent in a Great King, as Li∣beralite. I am sorie to heare that Englands Nauie Royall, doth so prosper and flourish; In which regard and Consideration the King your Master shall doe well to build store of new Ships in Biscay, O∣stend, and Dunkek; for if Spaine master England at Sea, Eng∣land can neuer withstand Spaine by Land; for now the English are Effeminate, and you  Souldiers. I doubt not but by this time, there is such order taken in Spaine, that the English Fleet at Alicant, and Caragena, shall returne home with lesse, shame and repentance, whereby you may teach them that it is onely proper for Spaniards, to Domineere at Sea, and that the Sea and Maritine actions, are now Spaines, no longer Englands Element. So whiles England lyes gasping, on her bed of Peace and securi∣tie, let the King your Master prouide for Warre; Continue to sowe Duision in the Church of England, and rather augment then dimi∣nish your Pensions to you know whm. If  be  Army to goe out of England, either for Bohemia, the Paatinat, the Netherlands, or Venice, deale so effctually with King Imes, that either it be so small as it can  great  to Catholiques, or be a manes to cause them to sta so long▪ that it bee impossible to  god for Protestants. I commend  Excellenies poliy, in being sharpe, and bitter against those, who either Speake, Write, or , against the King your  and his pretencs, for now you  the Hnour and feliitie, to see your selfe  to King  his Ere, and his Maiestie to your Girdle the  an  f thse will terrific others▪ Be sure to bee intimately  with all
Factious & Discontented Catholikes, for they will proue fine Agents and Instruments to execute your Masters Commands. I am glad to see King Philip so sleight and dis-respect King Iames, as hee hath not this many yeares sent him an Exraordinary Ambassadour, espe∣cially, now for Treating and Concluding this Match; for the more you and he Debase the Honour and vnder value the Reputation of England, the more you aduance and prise that of Spaine. But that which grieues mee most, is, because GOD himselfe hath opposed and Confirmed the breach, and delaceration of the Match; but I hope that for the Catholike Kings sake, our Holy Father the Pope, and our blessed Mother the Church, will so interpose their Prayers to his Sacred and Diuine Maiestie, that very shortly hee will reuoke and change his Resolution, and relish that which hee now distasteth. Through your zeale and industry, I likewise doubt not, but (be∣fore a few yeares bee past and  ouer) to see England made a Prouince to Spaine; her Nobilitie most murthered, and the rest ca∣ryed away Slaues to worke in the Mines of Peru, and Mexico; the Pope installed; all Heretikes rooted out either with Fire or Halter. Let your Excellency proceed, as you haue well and happily begun, and feare not but you shall enioy your wishes, the King your Master his hopes, and myselfe and all the Romane Catholikes of England our desires. In the meane time I kindly greet and salute your Excellency, and bp your next Dispatch for Spaine, fayle not to signifie that I kisse the Catholiks Kings hand. Written and sent from Heauen. Your Excellencies Friend: MARY Queene.
Queene MARY, To the Romane Catholikes of England, of both Sexes, and of all Rankes. MY Heart on Earth, and my Soule in , hath euer so deeply affected you and your Religion, as to the vtmost of my power, I will neuer admit, that any adurse accident, or stratagem what soeuer, shall endomage you or preiudice it: to which end by Mer∣cury (Whom I haue purposely sent vnto you) I would not faile to aduer∣tise you of a Consultation which hath beene here held, by my Father Henry VIII. my Brother Edward VI. my Sister Queene Elizabeth, Queene Anne, Prince Henry, and my Selfe; tending to the safety and glory of England, to the vnmasking of Spaines pretentious Ambition and Treachery to many Estates of Europe, and more especially to the vtter breach of the Match betwixt Prince Charles and the Infanta of Spaine, which two last points alone, I  and defended, but they all most violently contradicted and opposed. In which consultation (I write it as∣well with Griefe as pittie:) Cout Gondomar, hath eene narrowly both sifted and censured, and all his Actions brought on the Table, and made apparant and obuious to the dimmist Eye, to the weakest Iudge∣ment and vnderstanding, the which I haue now signified his Excellency by a particuler Letter; wherein I haue prayed him to haue a more Iealous and curious eye ouer his Secretaries, as I know England hath ouer him; And to the end your Soules and Consciences may haue Spirituall food and Consolation, I wish and exhort you to put all your Wits on the tenter-hooks to bring in the Infanta; or else neuer expect the Pope, and consequently not the Catholike King. For else all your intelligence with Rome and Spaine, your correspondence with the Iesuites and Count Gondomar, will not preuaile, nor your Poyson Poiard, or Powder take effct, if the Match doe not; and because King Iames wants money, and his Ex∣chequer drawne drie and exhausted, if he stand on a greater summe then the Catholike King can, or will giue, you shall doe a most acceptable ser∣uice to our Blessed Father the Pope, and to our Holy Mother the Church; That you Lords and Knights Morgage your Manners and Plate, and you Ladies and Gentle-women pwne your Ringes and Iewells to make vp the expected Summe; For the Match once consumted, you know, and Count Gondomar can perfectly teach you, a thousand wayes to refetch it, with a ioyfll and golden Interest; I highly
and applaude your oy, when you  Bohemia won, and the Pala∣nate assaulted; towards which Victories and , your  Contributions gaue a great stroke, which although Ferdinand for the pre∣sent cannot recompence; yet doubt  Phillip shotly & futrely will; Sit his Ambassadour Gondomar akes him confident, that you are as fast nayled to his Scepter, a his Catholicke  is to the Popes triple Crowne. Bee you still the eyes of Count Gondomar,  him still con∣tinue your , for you can neuer desire a better  then him∣selfe, nor a stronger Protector then the King his Master. But in very deed, I much feare that this great Parliament, will teach the Protestants of England wit, and you Romane Catholickes repentance. If Holland, the Palatioate, or Venice be in the Field, be you not Idle in your Houses or in England; for although Douer bee shut, you shall  Ports enough open, for it is for the Progression ad Aduancement of the  Cause, and for the Seruice of the Great Catholike King, and if all things hit well, you shall not repent your selues of your Valour & Generosiie employed and spent in his Seruic. What though God  here approued of this Consul∣tation against the Match; yet his great  the Pope, will confirme the Match against the Consultation▪ Therefore make you your  with the Pope, and doubt not, but his Holinesse, both can and will at his pleasure, make his with his God; Howsoeuer bee ruled, and beleeue in the Pope, who is the Head of the Church; For you know out of the Church, there is no Saluation. I like well, that there daily Trauels some of your wisest Gentlemen for Spaine, and now you see there is no feare to bring ome Priests and Iesuites, for Count Gondomar ath found out the Art and Mysterie, to open the Doores of Wisbich, the Gatehouse, and the Clincke at his pleasure. To liue Idle is Effeminte and  bee you there∣fore  your selues) still bsie and in action, for as in matters of Religi∣on and Pietie, so in thse of the State the Pactique is alwayes more Ho∣nourable then the Theorie. In a word, as long as  Kings raigne in England, your zealous Catholikes shall there finde but little Peace, and lesse Ioy; and yet I must need confesse, that God semes to bare a particu∣ler affection to King Iames, out withall you know the second meanes must bee vsed, wich (I write to my comfort) I see his  neglects; So f Gondomar continue in England, and the Mtch dyë not, then I hope a little time will worke all things to the best. Tll when I salute you all, and will till pray▪  you for the Prosperitie of the Great cause. Written and sent from Heauen. Queene MARY. FINIS.
