11363.5 99898252 173566
ARTICLES AGREED VPON AND GRANTED BY His Excelencie, and the Deputies of the high and mighty Lords, the States Generall of the Vnited Prouin∣ces, vnto the Clergie, Magistrates, Burgers, and inhabitants of the Towne of Bois∣leduke, or the Busse. printer's or publisher's device NOLI ALTUM SAPERE LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to bee sold at his Shop, at the South entrance of the Royall Exchange. 1629.
ARTICLES, Agreed vpon and granted by his Excel∣lencie, and the Deputies of the high and mighty Lords, the States Generall of the Vnited Prouinces, vnto the Clergie, Magistrates, Burgers, and Inha∣bitants of the Towne of Boisleduke, or the Busse. 1. FIrst All offences, injuries, and all acts and deedes committed betwixt this Towne and those of the Vnited Pro∣uinces, both from the beginning of these troubles, and ciuill commotions or warres, as also during this present Siege, in what place, and in what sort or manner soeuer, whether in generall or in particular, aswell within as without, they are, and shall be and re∣maine, pardoned, forgotten, and as neuer done; so that neuer any mention, molestation, action, or inquisition by way or forme of Iustice, or otherwise, can be made or instituted, either against such as are liuing, or against the Heyres of such as are deceased, or their goods, re∣spectiuely on both sies 2. The Inhabitants of this Towne are to behaue them∣selues according vnto the commandements Lawes and Proclamations of these Prouinces; enioying in the mean
time the liberty of conscience, as it is practised euery where. And all religious persons and Churchmen are to be gone and withdraw themselues out of this Town: But in the meane while they are to gouerne themselues also according to the said Lawes; and then they may carry away with them their moueables, Images, Pi∣ctures, and all the Ornaments of their Churches. The foresaid Ecclesiasticall or Church-persons may enioy during their life, all their reuenues and fruites of their goods, lying in places where contribution is paid. But it is conceiued and to bee vnderstood, that all the Church-goods are to belong vnto the high and mighty Lords, the States generall, that they may dispose of them either to the good of the Towne, or otherwise. 4. The Nunnes, and religious women may remaine in the Towne, during their life time, being to bee re∣spectiuely nourished by the goods of their Cloisters: the rest remaining wholly in the disposition of the high and mighty Lords the States generall: and the said Nuns shall be fitted with dwelling places, eyther in their Co∣uents or houses, or else-where. 5. There is also granted, that all the inhabitants of this Towne, both Ecclesiasticall and religious persons, as also Seculars, and all such as are gone away, and all o∣thers, whatsoeuer they be, either in or without charges, or military administrations, or otherwise, of the King of Spaine, or of the States of Braband, or of this Towne, respectinely, are to haue free both their liues and goods, both in generall and in particular, insomuch as this is not contrary to the former Article. 6. This Towne, with the Burgers and inhabitants thereof, afore-mentioned, aswell spirituall and secular, is and shall be receiued and used by the high and mighty Lords, the States generall of the Vnited Prouinces, and the Lord Prince of Orange, with all clemency and mild∣nesse, hereafter to liue in amity, friendship and concord
with the other vnited Prouinces and Townes, trading and corresponding together, according to their ancient liberties, as it is conuenient. 7. The said high and mighty Lords the States gene∣rall, and His Excellence are to vse and exercise within the said Towne and Maiorie, the same being annexed to the Towne, such jurisdiction and right, as the Dukes and Dutchesses of Braband haue had there vntill this present time; and they are to vse this Towne therein wholly, so as the other Townes and Cities of Braband are vsed. 8. This Towne, and the Burgers and inhabitants thereof and of the liberties of the said towne, are to keepe all their rights, customes, freedomes, liberties, exemptions, and all other priuiledges, aswell in gene∣rall as in particular, which from ancient time, and be∣fore the beginning of this towne they haue enioyed, both by Sea and Land, within and without the towne, in Bra∣band, Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, vpon the Rhine, and in other Prouinces, places and waters. 9. The gouernment of the town, aswell in the Courts of Iustice, as in affaires of Policy, is to remaine in the hands of the Magistrate, and of the three members of the towne respectiuely; and no body is to be preferred, promoted, or receiued vnto the same, vnlesse he he born in the said towne, or he that hath beene christned there, or such other persons as the Lords States shall finde good and fit to naturalize and qualifie to that end: But with this condition, that at and for this time, the Go∣uerment in Iustice and Policie, both of high and inferi∣our Magistrates, Officers, Gouernours, and other mini∣sters, shall be constituted and established by His Excel∣lence, and the Deputies of the Lords the generall States. 10. This towne is likewise to keepe and to retaine at her disposition and administration, all the common and hereditary goods, rights and impositions, fishings,
toles, Customes, taxes for merchandises and wares, and all other rights and reuenues heretofore belonging to the same in the same manner as the said towne hath en∣ioyed it, and had the dispositiou and administration thereof vntill this time, as beeing so priuiledged and grounded by right: With this condition neuerthelesse that the other members of the vnited Prouince doe re∣ceiue thereby no preiudice. 11. This towne is also to retaine and keepe all her owne prouisions that are resting, both of victuals, ma∣terials, and all other common goods, liquids and not li∣quids, to be dealt withall, sold or kept vnto the profit and discharge of this towne, according to the disposition of the foresaid three Members; Except all Peeces of Ordnance, Armes and other amunitions, which are to remaine for the seruice of the towne, and not to be sold. 12. All Societies, Companies, Trades, or Corporations thereof, that for this time are in the towne, are there to remaine, and to retaine respectiuely their Charters, or∣ders and priuiledges, and withall their goods, both li∣quids and not liquids, without respect to what end the same may be bought or gotten by the said Trades, Soci∣eties or Companies, that they may be disposed of vnto the comon profit, according to their owne will and pleasure, by the Prouosts, Officers, and Masters of euery Company. 13. Within the Countrie of Holland, nor in any o∣ther Prouince of these Vnited Prouinces, no body shall counterfeit or vse the Armes of this towne, nor the Armes ensignes or markes of the trades or Companies thereof, to wit, of Cuttlers, Pinne and Needle makers, and many other handicrafts. But euery one shall keepe and vse his owne marke, or of his towne, where the ware shall be made, and all such trades and handiworks. As allso all dying and all new Faires, that haue been ob∣tained and established during the time of these troubles,
are hereafter to cease within the Mayorie of this town; vnlesse those of the said Mayorie, being heard thereup∣on by the Lords the generall States, they be found so e∣quitable, that there be made some other new order and position concerning their Faires. 14. The Inhabitants of the Busse of Boisliduc, and all those of the Countrey thereabout, dwelling in places that pay contributions, are to be treated and vsed as all other good subiects and inhabitants of the vnited Pro∣uinces, whether they dwell within townes, or without in the Countrey here and there. 15. As concerning all the rents and lawfull debts, con∣constituted, made, or taken vpon change, to be paid by the three Members of this Towne, or their Deputies as well during this Siege as before the same, whether there be some Letters dispatched and sealed about the same, or none. The Magistrate of this said towne is to deliuer vp an estate of all, to be hereafter disposed of with all e∣quity by the said Lords the generall States. 16. As concerning the payment of the said debts, and of other charges as may fall vpon the towne, the Courts therein are to keepe their wonted Sessions and Sises, and aslo their impositions, and other meanes of the said towne, as now are ready at this present, and in custome, all which may be raised increased, or diminished by the three Members, according to their priuiledges and cu∣stomes; but so, that thereby no preiudice doe ensue vp∣on such meanes, the which the Common Cause may re∣quire to be leuied, vnto the profit and good of the said Common Cause. 17. All Acts, Resolutions, Decrees, Orders, and Pro∣clamations made by the said three Members, or Magi∣strates, for as much as they shall not be contrary to the State, or to the good of the Vnited Prouinces; As like∣wise all sentences giuen by the Escherins, or Iudges, vp∣on rem indicatam: And moreouer, all euictions of
goods, situated either within or without the Towne and duely solemnized, are to remaine in their force an vigour; but so that the interessed party shall keepe hi right of appeale or reformation, if so it doe please him 18. Those that now are, or haue heretofore beene o the Magistracie, are not to be molested or troubled for the acts or orders by them giuen to pay or to disburse any money or prouision of the Towne: Neither any Treasurers. Receiuers, or Paymasters to haue paid or disbursed the said moneys or prouisions, nor to haue made any accompt: And the said accompts made vp by the said Receiuers and other Deputies of this towne, shall not be subiect to be reviewed: As likewise all ac∣compts made by the Treasurers of the Dominions, of the States of Braband, Receiners of Licences, Contri∣butions, and Fortifications, are to remaine as they were, without trouble or search 19. The Gouernment of the Table of the Holy Ghost, of the Great Hospitall, of the building of the Churches, of the houses of the Orphants, of leprous, of bastards, of mad or Bedlam, and of all other particuler foundati∣ons of Hospitals, both of men and of women, and the election of the Pourueyors and Rulers thereof, are to be made, established and conferred, in such manner as hi∣therto the custome hath beene, according to the old priuiledges of the said Towne. 20 All proprieties, and masters of Mills, and Horse-Mills, and Milles to make Oyle, within this Towne and the liberties thereof, that haue beene broken, beaten downe and spoiled, either by the Ordnance, or other∣wise, during this Siege, and by the Warres in the for∣mer time, may bee againe erected and built vp vpon their old places and grounds, it being not necessary nor required to obtaine for the same any new Act or con∣sentment, or to pay any new right auely such as the said Mills haue been bound formerly to pay, before they
were destroyed, vnlesse they were imployed in the ser∣uice of the Countrey. 21. All secular persons, of what condition soeuer, being sworne vnto or in seruice of the King of Spaine, or of this Towne, or not; shall haue freedome and liberty, and it shall bee free and permitted for euery of them to withdraw himselfe out of this Towne with his Family and goods, presently after the reddition of the same, and for the same end to cause to come Waggons, Carts, Ships, and Boats, from the Townes and places of Bra∣band, Holland, or also neutrall parts, and neither their persons nor goods, nor those that shall transport the same, shall bee hindred, troubled, or harmed, by the Souldiers, Fiscals, or other whatsoeuer: They shall also haue no neede to obtaine or get for the said purpose, any other consent, passeport or safe-conduct. 22. Moreouer, the said Burgers being gone out of the Towne, and also those that will remaine therein, whether they haue beene sworne, or in seruice or other∣wise belonging to the King of Spaine, or not, and their heyres respectiuely, are to haue the space of three yeares next ensuing, that in the meane time they may sell, change, or otherwise put away, as they shall finde good, their goods, euery where, as well in the Towne, as in the liberties and Mayories thereof; or else they may cause the said goods to be receiued and administred by such as they shall appoint and thinke conuenient. And if they dye either within or without the said Towne, during the said space of three yeeres, hauing made Testaments, or none, in that case their goods are to befall to their heyre as they shall haue instituted or to their neerest kinsfolkes respectiuely. And those that during the said three yeeres, will goe into the dominions or Townes belonging to the said Kng of Spaine, about their particular affaires they shall haue liberty to doe the same foure times in one yeere;
but so that they first giue knowledge thereof vnto the Gouernour, of whom they shall be bound to take Passe∣port, the which he shall not deny vnto them, vnlesse hee haue some important reasons to the contrary And at the end of the said three yeeres they may make their dwelling either in this Towne, or in any neutrall place that doth pay contribution, where they shall enioy the said liberty and freedome to goe and come, and to trade in all places, and likewise all other Articles of this Trea∣tie. 24. There shall be ordered or made no other Gouer∣nour, or Lieutenant Gouernour ouer this Towne, but one of the House of Nassawe, or some other Lord of the Low-Countries. 25. The Garrison of this Towne is to haue no ex∣emption of impositions, or Subsidies, But is to beare like charges as the other inhabitants. 26. There shall be comprehended in this Treatie, all Citizens Burgers, and inhabitants that now are absent, with their Wiues and children, and all other persons, both spirituall and temporall, that haue withdrawne themselues. All persons that are sicke or hurt, and now in the great Hospitall or in other houses, both souldiours and others, may remaine & stay there vntill they be recoue∣red and well; and aterwards they may be gone or stay where they shall lke best, & then they shall be furnished with Wagons or Carts, for themselues and their bag∣gage, without any let or hinderance. All which Articles haue beene concluded, consented and agreed vpon and granted by his Excellency, and the Lords Deputies of the high & mighty Lords the States Generall, vnto the Ecclesiasticall persons, the Magi∣strate, Burgrs, and Inhabitants of the said towne, who haue acpted of the same by power and vertue of their Procurations respectiuely. In witnesse whereof, these
presents haue been signed at Vught, in the Campe be∣fore the Busse, this 14. of Septemb. 1629. stilo nouo. Signed, F. HENERY de Nassau. F. Michael, Episcopus Buscoducensis. Ioannes Moors, Abbas Bernensis. Ioannes Hermes, Deaconus Buscoducensis. R. van Verone. I. van Velde. R. van Grieneuen▪ B. Loef van Sloot. Hen. Somers. Pet. Huberts▪ Heriald Heuvel. THe Generall States of the Ʋnited Prouinces, hauing heard the report of their 'Deputies, after they had seene, read, and examined the aboue-set points and Articles, haue approued them vpon mature deliberation, euen as by these presents the said Generall States doe approue and avow the same, promising to keepe, and cause them to be kept, according vnto their former tenour. Giuen in the Campe before Bois∣leduc, or the Busse, this 14. of Septemb. 1629, stilo nouo. It was Signed, HENRY. And lower it was written, By order from the high and mighty Lords the States Generall. Signed, Corn. Mush. FINIS.
