9394.7 99898994 150869
ANNO. XXVIII. HENRICI VIII. ACTES MADE IN THE parliament begōne and hol∣den at Westm̄, the .VIII. daye of Iune, in the .XXVIII. yere of the reygne of our most drad soueraine lord kyng HENRY the .VIII. and there continued and kepte tyll the dissolution of the same parliament the .XVIII. of Iuly, to the honour of God, and for the common weale and profyt of this realme. THO. BERTHELET RE∣GIS IMPRESSOR EX∣CVDEBAT, CVM PRIVILEGIO.
THE TABLE. AN acte that felons abiuring for pety treason, murder, or felony, shall not be admitted to the benefite of their clergie. cap. i. An acte for continuinge of two statutes made in the last parlia∣ment, touchyng suche as go away with caskettes, iewels, goo∣des, or plate of their maisters. capit. ii. An acte giuinge the kinges highnes auctoritie newely to allotte the towne∣shippes in the shyres and marches of Wales, at any time within .iii. yeres nexte ensuing. capi. iii. An acte repellyng the statute lately made for the bringing in of doulas and lockerams. cap. iiii. An acte for auoydynge of exactions taken vpon prentyces in the cities bo∣roughes and townes corporate. cap. v. An acte for continuaunce of the statutes for beggers and vacabundes, and agaynst conueiaunce of horses and mares oute of this realme, agaynste Walshemen, makynge affrayes in the counties of Herff. Glou. and Sa∣lop̄, and aganst the vice of buggery. cap. vi. An act for the establishment of the succession of the imperial crowne of this realme. cap. vii. An acte for contynuaunce of the statute ayenste the cariage of brasse latenne and copper out of this realme: and for makynge of cables and ropes: for the wyndyng of wolles, and ayenst kyllyng of weinlinges vnder the age of two yeres. cap. viii. An acte for continuaunce of the statutes of periury, for makynge of iayles, for peuterers, and for sowynge of flaxe and hempe. cap. ix. An acte extynguyshynge the auctoritie of the byshop of Rome. cap. x. An acte for restitution of the fyrste fruites in tyme of vacation to the nexte Incumbent. cap. xi. An acte declarynge the lymyttes of the kynges palays of Westm̄. cap. xii. An acte compellynge spirituall persons to kepe resydence vpon theyr bene∣fices. cap. xiii. An acte limitting the pryces of wynes. cap. xiiii. An acte for punishement of pirotes and robbers on the sea. capit. xv. An acte for the release of suche as haue opteyned pretended lycences and dy∣spensations from the sea of Rome. cap. xvi. An acte giuynge auctoritie to suche as shal succede to the crowne of this re∣alme, whan they come to the age of .xxiiii. yeres, to make frustrate suche a∣ctes as shall be made before in theyr tyme. cap. xvii. An acte concernyng treason in certayne cases. cap. xviii. FINIS TABVLAE.
¶ An acte that felons abiuringe for pety treason, murder, or felony, shall not be admytted to the benefyte of theyr clergie. Capi. i. WHere in the laste parliament begonne and holden at Lon∣don, the third day of Nouembre, in the .xxi. yere of the kin∣ges mooste gratious reygne,Abiuration. and from thens adiourned to Westmynster, and there holden and continued by dy∣uers and sondry prorogations, It was enacted amonges other thynges, that such persone and persones,Sainctuary which dyd ee or resorte to any paryshe church, cimitory, or other lyke halowed place for tuition of his lyfe, by occasion of any murder robberye or other felony by the same person commytted, and thervpon confessed any murder felony or other offence before a crowner: for the whiche the same persone by the lawe of this realme afore that tyme vsed, shulde abiure and passe out of this realme, shulde be dyrected by the crowner to take his abiuratyon to any one saynctuary, being within this realme, which the same person wold decte and chose, there to remayne as a saintuary man abiured, duringe his naturall lyfe. And if after such abiuration, any person so abiured, came out of the same saynctuarye, to the which he was assygned, and be taken with∣out the same saynctuary, not hauynge the kinges speciall pardon or licence so to do, that then euery such personne abiured, and after abiuration taken without saynctuarye, whervnto he was assigned, shuld suffre lyke peyne of deathe, and after lyke maner shuld be ordered, as he shuld haue done and den, in case he had abiured this realme for murder or felony, and after su∣che abiuration had returned agayne into this realme, contrarye to ye lawes of this land. And it was further ordeined by the same acte, that if any such saynctuary personne so abiured, or any other personne or personnes, which then were, or at any tyme after shuld happen to be in any sainctuary of this realme, for doinge of any pety treason murder or felonye, or for being acces∣sarye to any such offences: or if any persone or persons, which at any time after the making of the same acte, shuld take, any sayntuary of this realme for any pety treason murder or felony, or for beinge accessary to any such of¦fences, or vpon abiuration: and so being in sainctuary for any such cause matter or offence, afterward cōmit any pety treason murder or felony with∣in the same sainctuarie, or be accessarie to any such offences, or goo oute of the same sainctuarie, and cōmytte any petye treason, murder or felonye, or be accessary to any such offences, and afterward come again to the same sainctuarie, or take any other sainctuarie for the same: that euery such per∣son and persons, beinge indited for any of the said causes or offences, shuld lose the priuilege of the saintuary by him taken, and of euery other saintu∣ary within this realme for any such cause of pety treason, murder, felony, or abiuration, or for any accessary to any suche offences. ¶And it was further ordeyned by the same acte, that al foreine plees, tria∣ble by countrey, whiche shulde be pleded by any person or persons array∣ned
vpon any inditement for any pety treason, murder, or felonye, shuld be tried before the same Iustices, afore whom such personnes shuld be array∣ned, and by the same iurours of the countie, that shal trie the petye treason murder or felony,Challenge without any further respite or delaie, And that no person arrayned for any pety treason, murder, or felony, shulde be admitted to any paremptorye challenge aboue the noumbre of .xx. which acte was made to endure to the ende of the nexte parliament, as by the said act amonges di∣uers clauses & prouisions conteined in the same more plainely is expressed. ¶And where also in the same parliamēt it was enacted, that no person or persons, which shuld happen to be founde giltie after the lawes of this re∣alme, for any maner of petye treason, or for any wilfulle murder of malice prepensed, or for robbinge of any churches, chapelles, or other holie places, or for robbyng of any personne or personnes, in theyr dwellinge houses or dwellinge place, the owner or dweller in the saide house, his wife, his chyl∣dren, or seruauntes then beinge within, and putte in feare and drede by the same: Or for robbing of any person or persons in or nere about the highe wayes, or for wilfull bourninge of any dwellinge houses or bernes, wherin any corn or graine shal happen to be: nor that any person or persōs, being founde giltie of any abbetrement; procurement, helpinge, maynteyning, or counsaylinge of or to any such petie treason,Benefyt of clergy. murders, or felonies, shuld be admitted to the benefyte of theyr clergye (suche as be within holy orders, yt is to saye, of the orders of subdeacon or aboue, all onely except) with many other clauses and prouisions conteined in the said acte, as by the same acte more playnely appereth: which acte was also made to cōtinue and endure to the laste daye of the nexte parlyament. ¶And where also in the same parliamēt it was further enacted, that eue∣ry such persone and persons, which shulde happen to be indited of any pe∣ty treason, wilfull burninge of houses, murder, robberie, or burgularye, or other felonye, accordinge to the tenour and meaninge of the said estatute nexte aboue rehersed,Standynge muet. and thervpon arrained, didde stande muet of malice, or froward minde, or challeng paremptorie aboue the numbre of .xx. or els will not answere directely to the same inditement and felony, whervpō they shal be arrayned: that then euery suche person and persones, shuld lose the benefite and priuilege of theyr clergie. ¶AND IT VVAS ALSO ORDEYNED by the same acte, that if any person or persones, be indited and founde giltie for stealing of any goodes or cattelles, in any countie of this realme, or beinge indited, stande muet of malyce, or chalenge paremptorie aboue the numbre of .xx. personnes, or will not aunswere directely to the lawe, shuld also lose the benefite of theyr clergie, in like maner and fourme as they shulde haue doone, if they hadde be endyted, arrayned, and founde gyltye in the same countie, where the same robberie or burgulary was doone, if it shall appere to ye Iustices, by euidence or examination, that the saide felons or robbers arayned afore them, shuld or ought to haue loste theyr clergie by force of the said estatute
in case they hadde be founde gyltie of the same felonies or burglaries, in the same shyre where they were commytted, as by the sayde acte amonges other thinges more at large is expressed. ¶And where also in the sayde parlyament it was further ordeyned, that the detestable vice of buggery, commytted with mankynde or beaste,Buggery. Felony. shoulde be felony, and that the offenders therin shulde lose the priuilege of theyr clergy: whiche acte was made to endure to the laste daye of the nexte parlyamente, as by the same acte amongeste other thinges it appereth more at large. For as moche as the sayde actes, be beneficiall and profitable for the common welthe of this realme, Be it therfore enacted by auctoritie of this present par∣lyamente, that the sayde actes and euery of theym, and all clauses and pro∣uisions conteyned in the same, shall stande in full strengthe and vertue, and from henseforthe to continue and endure vnto the last daye of the nexte par∣lyament. ¶And also be it enacted by auctoritie aforesayd, that suche as be within ho∣ly orders, shall from henseforth stande and be vnder the same peines and daungers for the offences conteyned in any of the sayde statutes,Orders. and be vsed and ordered to all intentes and purposes, as other persons not beynge with∣in holy orders: Any prouision or exception specified in any of the sayd actes, or any other vsage or custome of this realme to the contrary therof not with∣standing. This acte to endure vnto the last day of the next parliament. ¶An acte for continuing of two statutes made in the last parlyament tou∣chynge suche as go awaye with caskettes, iewels, goodes, or plate of theyr maysters. Cap. ii. WHere in the laste parlyamente begonne and holden at Lon¦don, the third day of Nouembre, in the .xxi. yere of the kin∣ges moost gracious reygne, and from thense adiourned to Westmynster, and there holden and continued by diuers prorogations vnto the dissolution therof, it was ordeined & enacted amongest other thinges, that yf any seruauntes,Seruantes, Caskettes, Iewels. to whome any caskettes iewels money goodes or catalles, shulde be deliuered to kepe by his or theyr maisters or maistresses, doo go a∣waye with the saide caskettes, iewels, money, goodes, or cacalles, or any parte therof, to the intente to steale the same, and defraude his or their saide maister or maystres therof, contrary to the truste and confidence to him or them putte by his or their saide maisters or maistresses: Or elles being in ser∣uyce without assente or commaundemente of his saide maister or maystres embesile the caskettes, iewelles, money, goodes, or cattalles,Embesiling. of his said mai∣ster or maistresse, or any parte therof, or otherwyse conuerte the same to his owne vse, with lyke purpose to steale, than if the saide caskets, iewels, money, goodes, or cattalles, that any suche seruaunte shall go awaye with or whi∣che he shall embesyle with pourpose to steale it (as is afore sayde) be of the
value of .xl.s. or aboue: that then the same false fraudulent and vntrewe acte and demeanour should from henseforth be demed and adiudged felony. And that he or they so offendyng,Felony. should be punished as other felons be punished for felony commytted by course of the common lawe, whiche acte was then made to endure to the next parliament. ¶And where also in an other acte made in the sayde parlyament, it was en∣acted, that if any seruaunte for the tyme beyng in seruyce with any person or persons, happen to steale, or felonousely take awaye any iewels money plate or other goodes or cattalles of his maister or maystresse: or if any seruaunt, to whome any caskette iewels money goodes or cattalles were delyuered by his mayster or maystresse, and goo awaye with the sayde casket money goo∣des or cattalles, or any parte therof, contrarye to the truste and confydence to hym or theym putte: or withoute the assente or commaundemente of his sayde mayster or mastresse embesile any caskette, iewelles, money, goodes, or cattalles, or any parte therof, or otherwyse conuerte the same to his owne vse, with pourpose to steale it, if the sayde caskette, money, iewels, goodes, or other cattalles, be of the value of .xl.s. or aboue: that then the offendour in suche case should lose the benefitte of his clergye,Benefite of clergy. Sainctuary. and the priuilege of al sain∣tuaryes, as by the sayde seuerall actes more playnly appereth. For as moche as the sayd actes bē thought necessary for the common welth of this realme, Be it therfore enacted by auctoritie of this present parlyament, that the same actes, and euery of theym, and al and euery clause article and prouiso therin conteyned, shall from henseforth stand good & endure and continue for euer. An acte gyuynge the kinges hyghnes auctoritie newly to allotte the towne∣shyppes in the shyres and marches of wales, at any tyme with in three yeres next ensuynge. Cap. iii. VHere in the parlyamente begonne and holden at London the thyrde daye of Nouembre, in the .xxi. yere of the reygne of oure mooste drad soueraygne lorde kynge Henry the .viii. and frome thense adiourned to Westmynster, and there holden and conty∣nued by dyuers prorogations vnto the .iiii. daye of Februarye, in the .xxvii. yere of the reygne of our sayde soueraygne lorde, and then and there holden and continued vnto the dyssolution therof, one acte and ordy∣nance was made in the session of the sayde parlyament, holden the sayde .iiii. day of Februarie,Shires newly made in Wales. wherby amonges other thynges dyuers shyres and coun∣ties were newely made and named within the dominion and principalitie of wales, and dyuers townes paryshes lordeshyppes commotes and cantredes within the sayde dominion and principalitie, were allotted appoynted & ly∣mitted to the said seueral shires and counties, as by the same act more plain∣ly and particularly amonges other thinges appereth. And for as moche as by credable information it is commen to the kinges knowledge sythens the makinge of the sayde acte, that some lordeshyppes, townes, paryshes, com∣motes,
hundredes, and cantredes, be not indyfferently allotted and lymyt∣ted to the shires named in the sayde acte, for the commoditie of the kynges ectes therin inhabyted: Be it therfore enacted by auctoritie of this pre∣sente parlyament, that the kynges hyghnes (durynge the tyme of thre yeres t after the ende of this present parlyament) shall haue power and aucto∣ritie, by wrytynge vnder his great seale,Allottyng of townshyps in Wales. to allotte appoynte assygne and ly∣te to euery of the shires named in the sayde acte, suche and so many lord∣shyps townes parisshees hamlettes hundredes commotes and cantredes, as his maiestie by his moste highe wisedome shall thinke moste conuenient and agreable for the ease and commoditie of his louinge subiectes the inhabitan∣tes of his sayde dominion and principalitie.Principalitie of Wales. And shall lykewyse haue power and auctoritie to name and assygne the shyre townes in euerye of the sayde shires named in the sayde acte. And that euery suche limitation apointment nomination and assignement to be made by the kynges hyghnes in that be∣halfe, by auctoritie of this acte, shall be as good and effectuall to all intentes and purposes, as thoughe it had bene done and made playnely and particu∣larly by auctoritie of parliament: any thyng conteyned in the sayd acte, made in the last parliament, or any other thynge or thinges to the contrary therof notwithstandyng. ¶An acte repellyng the statute lately made for the bringing in of doulas and lokerams. Cap. iiii. WHere in the parliament holden at Westminster the third daye of Nouember, in the .xxi. yere of the reigne of our soueraygne lorde king Henry the .viii. amongest other thinges it was en∣acted and established, that no person nor persons, englishe nor straunger, denisen or alien, from or after the feaste of saincte Mighel tharchangel than next folowyng, shuld bryng or con¦uey, or cause to be conueied or brought by any maner of meanes into this re∣alme of England, any linnen clothe, called doulas or lockerams,Doulas and lockerams. ones euery hole piece of doulas conteined in length fyue score elles of assise, accompted to euery elle, one inche of assise, and in bredth one yarde of assise: And euery halfe piece fyfty elles in lengthe, and one yarde in bredth of lyke assise, and al the hole piece and half piece of one goodnes in making. And also it was there enacted and establyshed, that euery hole piece of lockerams shulde be of lyke length, as the hole piece of doulas: and euery halfe piece of lockerams shuld be of lyke length as the halfe piece of doulas: and euery such hole piece and halfe piece of lockerams to be in bredth a hole yarde, lackyng a nayle of the yarde: and euery piece and halfe piece to be in lyke goodnes by all the length of the same piece, vppon peyne of forfeyture of the same doulas and locke∣rams so to be brought or conueyed into this realme, not conteynyng the full lengthe bredth and goodnes, or the value therof, as in the same statute more playnely at large doth appere. Sithens the makyng of whiche acte a greate
nombre of kinges subiectes, that is to saye, weauers, tuckers, spynners, dyers, and wulpikers, and many others haue bene ydell and without worke, to theyr great impouerysshynge, whiche more and more is lyke dayly to en∣creace, if remedy be not prouyded, for as moche as the clothemakers, whi∣che before the makynge of the sayde acte, were wonte to conuey theyr sayde clothes into Britaine, where the sayde lynnen clothe called doulas and loc∣kerams is made, and from thense to brynge with theym the sayde lynnen clothe called doulas and lockeram, whiche they canne not doo sythens the makynge of the sayde acte, without daunger and forfayture of the sayde lyn∣nen clothe by reason that there shall noo englishe man be suffered to carye or conuey any of the sayde clothes, called doulas or lockerams, from the parties of beyonde the sea into this realme of the length conteyned in the sayde acte: whiche wyl make the sayde cloth makers to leue the makynge of theyr cloth, to the greatte and manyfolde perylles of the kynges subiectes: Be it ther∣fore enacted by the kynge oure soueraygne lorde, with the assente of the lor∣des spirituall and temporall, and the commons in this present parlyament assembled, and by the auctoritie of the same, that the sayde acte, made in the sayde .xxi. yere, be to all intentes pourposes and constructions in the lawe, made vtterly voyde and of none effecte, as yf this sayde acte hadde neuer ben had nor made. Neuerthelesse to the entent that the byers of the sayde lynnen clothes, shall not at any tyme hereafter be deceiued by the length of the sayd clothes. Be it therfore enacted by the auctoritie afore sayd, that after the feast of sayncte Myghell the archangell nexte commynge, no maner of personne englysshe nor straunger, denysen nor alyen, putte to sale any hole piece or halfe piece of the sayde lynnen clothe called doulas and lockerams, one lesse there be mencion expressed vppon euery of the sayde hole piece or halfe piece of the sayde lynnen clothe called doulas or lockeram, so putte to sale, as is aforesayde, the hoole and entier noumbre of the yardes or elles, that is con∣teyned in euerye suche hole piece or halfe piece, vppon peyne of forfeyture of the same hole piece or halfe piece, not conteynynge the noumbre of yardes or elles, so mencioned vpon euery of the sayde hole piece or halfe piece, so put to sale as is afore sayde. The one halfe of euery suche forfayture to be to the kynge our soueraygne lorde, and the other halfe to hym that shall sease and wyll sue for the same by action of det, byl, plaint, information, or otherwyse: in whiche action, suite, or information, no wager of lawe nor essoyne shall be admitted or allowed. ¶Prouyded alwayes, that this acte or any thyng therin conteyned, be not preiudiciall ne hurtefull to any person or personnes, that before the fyrst day of this parlyamente, hath made any seaser, or putte in any information, in to any of the kynges courtes, for any maner of forfayture, doone or commytted by any person or personnes, contrarye to the sayde estatute, made in the saide thyrde daye of Nouembre, the .xxi. yere of the reygne of our soueraygne lorde kynge Henry the eyght.
¶An acte for auoydinge of exactions taken vpon prentices in the cities boroughes and townes corporate. Cap. v. WHere in the parliament begonne at London the third day of Nouembre, in the .xxi. yere of the reigne of our moste drad soueraigne lorde king Henry the .viii. and from thens ad∣iourned and proroged vnto westminster, the .xvi. day of Ia¦nuary, in the .xxii. yere of the reigne of our said soueraigne lorde, and there then also holden. It was & is recited, that where before that time it was established & enacted in the .xix. yere of our late soueraigne lorde king Henry the .vii. that no maister wardeynes and felowshippe of craftes, or any of them, nor any rulers of the gyldes or fra∣ities shuld take vpon them to make any actes or ordinaunces, ne to ex¦ecute any actes or ordinaunces by thē before that time made, or then here∣after to be made, in disheritance or diminutiō of ye prerogatiue of the king, nor of other, nor against the cōmon profite of the people: but if the same actes or ordinaunces were examined or approued by the Chancellour, trea¦sorer of England, or chief iustice of either bench, or thre of thē, or before the Iustices of assise in their circuite or progres, in ye shire where such actes or ordinaunces be made, vpon peyn of forfaiture of .xl. fi. for euery time that they do the contrary, as more plainely in the said acte doth appere.wardenies of felowshyps. Syth which tyme diuers wardens and felowships haue made actes & ordinaun∣ces, that euery prentice shuld pay at his first entre in their common hall to the wardens of the same felowship,Apprentice. somme of them .xl. s. some .xxx. s. some xi. s. some .xiii. s .iiii. d. some .vi. s .viii. d. som .iii. s .iiii. d. after their owne si∣nister mindes and pleasure, contrary to the meaning of the said act, made in the said .xix. yere of the reigne of the said late kinge Henry the .vii. and to the great hurte of the kinges true subiectes, putting their children to be prentises. It was therfore in the said parliament, holden at westminster in the said .xxii. yere of the reigne of kyng Henry the .viii. established and en∣acted by the kinge our soueraigne lord,Fraternitie by the aduise of his lordes spiritu∣all and temporall, and of the cōmons in the same parliament assembled, & by the auctoritie of the same, that no maister wardeines or felowships of craftes, or maisters, or any of them, nor any rulers of fraternities, shulde take from thensforth of any prentice or of any other persō or persons for ye entre of any prentice into their said felowship, aboue the some of .ii. s .vi. d. nor for his entree whan his yeres and terme is expired and ended, aboue iii. s .iiii. d. vpon peyne of forfaiture of .xl. li. for euery time that they doo to the contrary, the one halfe to the kinge our soueraigne lorde, and the o∣ther halfe to the partie that therfore shall sue by action of dette informati∣on or otherwise, and that in the action afore saide no protection or essoyne shalbe allowed: As by the same act amonges other thinges therin contey¦ned more playnely may appere. Sithen whiche sayde seuerall actes esta∣blisshed and made (as is afore saide) diuers maisters wardeines and fe∣lowshippes
of craftes, haue by cautel and subtil meanes compassed and practised to defraude and delude the said good and holsom statutes, cau∣singe dyuers prentises or yonge men immediatly after their yeres be expy∣red, or that they be made free of their occupatiō or felowship, to be sworne vpon the holy Euangelist at their first entre, that they ne any of thē after their yeres or terme expired, shall not set vp or open any shoppe house nor sellar, nor occupie as freemen, without the assent and licence of the maister wardens or felowshippes of their occupations, vpon peine of forfaitinge theyr freedome, or other like penaltie. By reason wherof the said prentices & iourney men be put to as moch or more charges therby then they before time were put vnto for the obteininge and entering of their fredom, to the great hurt and impouerishement of the saide prentices and iourney men, and other their frendes. For remedie wherof be it now, by the auctoritie of this present parliament establisshed, ordeined, and enacted, that no may∣ster wardens or felowshippes of craftes, nor any of them, nor any rulers of fraternities gildes or brotherhedes frō hensforth cōpel or cause any pren∣tice or iourney mā by oth or bond heretofore made or hereafter to be made, or otherwise, that he after his apprentiship or terme expired, shall not set vp nor kepe any shop house or sellar,Iourney mā. nor occupie as a free man without li∣cence of the mayster wardeines or felowship of his or their occupation, for and concerning the same, nor by any meane exact or take of any such pren∣tice or iourney men, nor any other occupieng for them self, nor of any other persons for them, after his or their said yeres expired, any sum of money or other thinges for or concerning his or their fredome, or occupatiō, other wise or in any other maner thē before is recited limitted & appointed in the said former acte, made in the said .xxii. yere of the reigne of king Henry the viii. vpon the peyne to forfaite for euery time that they or any of them shal offend contrary to this acte .xl.li. The one half therof to the king our soue∣rayne lorde, & the other half to the partie that wil sue for the same in any of the kinges courtes, by actiō of det, informatiō, or otherwise: in which suite or action no protectiō nor essoine shalbe allowed for the partie defendant. ¶An acte for continuance of the statutes for beggers & vacabundes and against conueyaunce of horses and mares out of this realme, ageinst Welshe men making affrayes in the counties of Herff. Glouc. and Salop̄, and against the vice of buggery. Cap. vi. WHere in the parliament begonne at London the third day of Nouembre, in the .xxi. yere of the reigne of our most drad soueraigne lorde king Henry the .viii. and from thense ad∣iourned to westmynster, and there holden and continued by prorogation vnto the .xvi. day of Ianuarie in the .xxii. yere of our saide soueraine lord, it was then in that session of the saide parliament, an acte made and established, declaring and concerning
as well how aged, poore, and impotent personnes,Vagab compelled to lyue by al∣rs shoulde be ordered, as howe vacabundes and myghty strong beggers shuld be whipped and punished: whiche acte was then made to endure and continue vntyll the last daye of the nexte parliament. And where also in the said session of the sayd parliament, one other acte was made for the restraint of carieng and conueyinge of horses and mares out of this realme,Horses and mare. whiche acte was also made to continue and endure to the last daye of the nexte par∣lyament, as by the said two seueral actes more plainly appereth. And where also at the sayde parliament continued and proroged vnto the thyrde day of Nouembre, in the .xxvi. yere of the reygne of our sayde soueraygne lorde, it was then in that session of the sayd parliament,welshemen. an other acte made and esta∣blyshed, for punyshement of welshemen, attemptynge assaultes or affrayes vpon any the inhabitauntes of Hereforde, Gloucestre, Shropshyre, whi∣che acte was also made to endure vnto the last day of the next parlyament, as by the sayde acte more plainely appereth. And where also in the sayd par∣lyament, contynued and proroged vnto the .xv. daye of Ianuary, in the .xxv yere of our sayde soueraigne lord, it was then in that session of the sayd par∣lyament one other acte made and establyshed for punishement of the vyce of buggery, declarynge suche offence to be felony,Buggery. whyche acte was than also made to endure to the last daye of the next parlyament, as by the sayde acte more plainely appereth. For as moche as the sayde .iiii. seueral actes be be∣neficiall and profitable for the common weale of this realme, Be it therfore enacted by auctoritie of this present parliament, that the said .iiii. actes and euery of them, and al clauses, articles, and prouisions therin conteined, shall from hensforth be obserued and kept, and continue and endure vnto the last day of the nexte parlyament. ¶An acte for the establyshement of the succession of the impe∣riall crowne of this realme. Capi. vii. IN their most humble wyse shewen to your moste royal maie∣stie, the lordes spiritual and mporal, and al other your lo∣uynge and obedyente subiectes, the commons in this your most high court of parliament assembled, that where in your laste parliament, begonne and holden at London the thirde daye of Nouembre, in the .xxi. yere of your mooste gracious reygne, and from thens adiorned to Westm̄, and there holden and contynu∣ed by dyuers and sundry prorogations vnto the .xv. daye of Ianuary, in the xxv. yere of your mooste noble reygne, and than there holden, It was made and ordeyned an acte concernynge amonges many thynges; as wel for rati∣fication and confyrmation of your maryage,Lady Anne Boleine. than hadde and solempnysed betwene your hyghnes and the late lady Anne Boleyne Marques of Pem∣broke, as for the lymittation of the successiō of your imperial crowne of this realme, to the issue of your body begoten & to be begoten of the body of the
sayde ladye Anne, with diuers remaynder ouer for defaute of suche issue, as in the said acte playnely & particularly more at large is expressed and men∣cioned.Othe. And where also by the sayde acte it was ordeyned and establysshed, that all and syngular your subiectes shuld take a corporal othe for the ful∣fyllynge, maynteynynge, and defendynge, the hole effectes and contentes of the sayde acte. And it was further ordeyned by the sayde acte amonges o∣ther thinges, that if any person or personnes, subiecte or resiant within this realme, or within any your gracis dominions, after the fyrst daye of Maye than nexte ensuynge, by wrytynge, prynte, dede, or acte procured or dyd, or caused to be procured or done any thyng or thynges to the preiudice, sclan∣der, dysturbance, or derogation of the sayd matrymony, solemnised bitwen your maiestie and the sayd lady Anne, or to the peryl, sclaunder, or disheri∣son of any the issues and heyres of your hyghnesse beynge lymytted by the same acte to inherite & to be inheritable to the crowne of this realme, wher∣by any suche issues or heires of your hyghnes myghte be destroyed, distur∣bed, or interrupted in bodye or title of inheritance to the crowne of this re∣alme, as to them is lymytted in the same acte: that than euery suche per∣son and personnes, and theyr aydours, counsaylours, maynteynours, and abbettours, and euery of them, for euery suche offence, shoulde be adiudged hyghe traytours, and that euery suche offence, shuld be adiuged high trea∣son. And the offendours and their aydours, counsaylours, maynteynours, and abettours, and euery of them, beynge lawefully conuycte of suche of∣fence by presentment, verdicte, confession, or processe, according to the cu∣stomes and lawes of this realme, shulde suffre peynes of death, as in cases of hyghe treason: as in the said acte amonges many other articles, clauses, and prouisions, is more at large mencioned and specified. ¶AND also in the sayd parlyamente holden at Westmynster by proroga∣tion in the thyrde daye of Nouembre, in the .xxvi. yere of your mooste noble reygne, an other acte was made for declaration and ratification of the sayd othe, whiche dyuers of your subiectes then hadde taken, and all your sub∣iectes after that were bounde to take for due obseruation of the sayd acte of the sayde Succession,Succession. as by the same acte amonges other thinges is also specified and expressed. And all be it moste dradde soueraygne lorde, that the sayde actes were thenne made, as it was then thoughte by your maie∣stie, nobles and commons, vpon a pure perfite and clere foundation, thin∣kynge the sayde mariage then had betwene your highnes and the sayd lady Anne in theyr consciences to haue ben pure sincere perfite and good, and so was reputed, accepted, and taken in the realme, tyll nowe of late, that god of his infinite goodnes (frome whom noo secrete thynges canne be hydde) hath caused to be broughte to lyghte euidente and open knowledge, as well certayne, iuste, trewe and lawefulle impedimentes vnknowen at the ma∣kynge of the sayde actes, and sithen that time confessed by the sayde ladye Anne, before the mooste reuerende father in god Thomas Archebysshoppe of Canturburye, Metropolytane and prymate of all Englande, syttynge
iudicially for the same: by the which plainely appereth, that the said mari∣age betwene your grace and the said lady Anne, was neuer good nor cōso∣ante to the lawes, but vtterly voyde and of none effecte. By reasō wherof, your highnes was & is laufully deuorced and seperated from the bōdes of e said mariage in the lyfe of the said ladye Anne. And this not withstan∣ding moste gracious soueraine lord, the lady Elisabeth your doughter, be∣inge borne vnder the said vnlaufull mariage, by vertue and auctoritie of ye acte of your successiō aboue remēbred, for lacke of heires males of your bo∣dy, shuld immediately succede as your lauful heire in ye most roial estate of your imperiall crowne of this realme, gainst all honour equitie reason and good conscience, if remedy shuld not be prouided for ye same. And ouer this most dradsouerayne lorde, al be it that your maiestie not knowing of any lauful impedimētes, entered into ye bondes of the said vnlauful mariage, & auanced ye same lady Anne to the honour of the soueraine estate of quene of this realme: yet neuer the lesse she inflamed with pride & carnal desires of her body, putting a part ye drede of god and excellent benefites receiues of your highnes, confederated her selfe wt George Bolein late lord Roche∣ford, her naturall brother, Henry Norreis esquier, Fraunces weston knight William Brereton esquier, gentillmen of your priuie chaumbre, & Marke Ston Grome of your said priuie chaumbre, & so being confederated, she and they mooste traiterousely cōmytted and parpetrated diuers detestable and abhominable treasons, to the moste fearefull perill and daunger of the truction of your most roiall person, and to the vtter losse disherison and desolation of this realm, if god of his goodnes had not in due tim brought theyr said treasons to light: for the which being palmely and manyfestely proued, they were conuicte & atteinted by the due course and order of your cōmon lawes of this realme, and haue suffered accordynge to theyr mery∣tts, as by the recordes therof more at large maye appere. ¶And al be it most gratious and most dred soueraine lorde, diuers & son∣dry honourable iust true and resonable clauses be conteyned & expressed in the said act, made for the establishement of your succession, which be verye necessary and profitable for the common welthe of this realm: yet neuer ye les bycause certaine articles & clauses conteined in the same, concerninge the ratification of your said vnlaufull mariage, betwene your highnes & the said ladye Anne, and the limittation of your succession to the issues of your body had by the saide lady Anne, & the othe expressed and mentioned in bothe the actes aboue remembred, for the defending and maynteinynge the holle effectes and contentes of the saide acte, whiche clauses and arty∣cles be nowe become of late so dishonourable, and soo far distaunte from the due course of your common lawes of your realme, and also so moche a∣gaist good reason equitie and good conscience, that they can not be sustei∣ned nor tollerated to continue & endure without greatte perill of dyuision hereafter to be hadde by occasion of the same, amōges vs your said moost humble louinge and obedient subiectes & our posterities. It may therfore
please your highnes of your most excellent and accustomable goodnes, and for the entier loue fauour & harty affection, that your maiestie hath alwais borne and beareth to the cōmon welthe of this your realm, and for the con∣seruation of the good peace vnitie and reste of vs your mooste bounden, & obediente subiectes, and of your said posterities, that it maye be enacted by auctoritie of this present parlyamente, that the said two actes and euery of them, and al clauses articles and prouisions therin conteyned, from ye firste daye of this present parliament, shall be repealed, adnulled, and made fru∣strate, and of none effecte. Repele.¶Prouyded alwaye, that the saide repeale and adnullaion of the sayde acte, which was made for the establysshemente of your succession, shall not be taken expounded nor vnderstand, to discharg any persone or personnes, which haue done or committed any offences of treason, or misprision of tre∣son, contrary to the same acte, or any parte therof, at any time afore ye firste daie, of this presente parliamente: but that suche offences of treason and misprision of treason, done and committed by any personne or personnes, contrary to the same acte, afore the firste daye of this present parliamente, shall be and remaine in the same degree & qualitie to be punisshed by auc∣toritie of the same acte, as if the same acte hadde not ben repealed: the re∣peale and adnullation of the same acte by auctoritie of this present parly∣amente in any wyse not withstandinge. Neuer the lasse the kynges moste royall maiestie, mooste gratiouselye consyderynge, that diuers and manye of his mooste louynge and obedyente subiectes nowe lately afore the be∣gynnynge of this presente parlyamente, haue spoken, doone, practysed, procured, and attempted, as well by wordes wrytynge and pryntynge, as by exteriour actes, not onely against the said vnlawefull mariage, solemp∣nised betwene his highnesse and the saide ladye Anne, and to the preiudice sclaunder disturbance and derogation therof, but also to ye perill sclaunder and disheryson of the ladye Elysabeth the kynges daughter illegyttimate borne vnder the same mariage, and to the let disturbaunce & interruption of the said ladye Elysabeth to the title of the crowne: and also to depriue ye said lady Anne late Quene, and the said lady Elysabeth, and euery of thē of theyr dignitie title and name of theyr roiall estates, contrarye to the te∣nours purportes prouisions and ordynaunces, as well conteyned in the said acte made in the laste parliament for the establishement of the kinges succession, as in an other act made in the laste parliament for punishement of treasons. Which wordes doynges practises procurementes & attemp∣tes of his said subiectes, all be it they proceded of no malyce, but vpō true and iuste groundes, for punyshement of the said late lady Anne, according to her desertes, and for reformation of the saide vnlaufull mariage, for the suretie of the kinges highnesse, & for the vnitie and welthe of this realme: yet neuerthelesse the kinges said subiectes mought hereafter happen to be empeched troubled and vexed for such theyr wordes doinges actes procure¦mentes and attemptes, as well by reason of the said estatute, made for the
establyshement of the kinges succession, and nowe repealed by this act, as by occasion of other statutes heretofore made for punishment of treasō and misprision of treason, to the greatte daunger and perylles of the liues lan∣des and goodes of the kinges sayde subiectes, which onely for harty good¦will and faithefull obedience, that they beare to the kinges maiestie, incur∣red into the sayd dangers and peryls: The kinges highnes thefore of his moost bountyfull mercy and benignitie is pleased and contented, that it be enacted by auctoritie of this presente parliament, that all and singular his louynge subiectes, which haue spoken done practised commited or attemp∣ted, or procured to be done or attempted directely or indyrectely, by wordes,Pardon. writinges, printes, or any exterior acte, any thinge or thynges what so euer it be against the said mariage, solempnysed betwene his highnesse and the saide late Quene Anne, or for the settinge forthe or preferremente of the de∣uorce or dissolution therof: or against the said late quene Anne, or the said lady Elisabeth, or to any of theyr sclaunders perilles, or disherisōs: or haue wished willed or desired by wordes or writinges, or inuēted imagined prac∣tised or attempted any bodily harme to the said late quene Anne, or lady E∣lyzabeth, or to depriue the same late quene Anne, or ladye Elizabeth, or any of them, of the dignitie title or name of theyr royall estates, or haue spoken done or procured to be done any other wordes writīges printinges wishing willinge, thinge or thinges, acte or actes, against the saide late quene Anne or lady Elizabeth, which is or moughte be demed or interpreted for treasō, or misprision of treason by any construction vppon any of ye statutes of this realme heretofore made, shall be freely and clerely pardoned discharged & released by auctoritie of this act of al those and such treasons, and mispri∣sions of treasons aboue mencioned. And that none of his said louing sub∣iectes for any of ye said treasons or misprisions of treason aboue mēcioned and specified, shal hereafter at any time, by any maner of meanes be empe∣ched vexed or troubled in theyr bodies liues lādes goodes or cattalles, any thinge in this act, or in any acte or actes heretofore made for treasons or misprisons of treason, to the contrary therof not withstandinge. ¶And that it be further enacted by auctoritie afore saide,Atteinder of quene Anne, and other. that the sayde late Queene Anne, George Boleyn, late lorde Rocheforde, Henry Norreis esquier, Fraunces Weston knight, William Breretō esquier, and Marke Smeton, for theyr abhominable and detestable treasons, by them and eue∣ry of them mooste abhominably and trayterously committed and done a∣gainst your maiestie & the realme, shal be by auctoritie of this present par∣lyament conuicted and atteinted of high treason, in suche maner & fourme and accordingelye as they be, by the dewe course and order of your lawes of this realme. And that the saide late Queene Anne, George lord Roche∣forde, Henry Norreis, Fraunces Weston, William Brereton, and Marke Smeton, and euery of them, shall lose and forfaite to your highenes and to your heires, al suche theyr manours, meases, landes, tenementes, rentes, reuersyons, remaynders, vses, possessions, offices, ryghtes, condycions,
and all other hereditamentes, of what names natures or qualyties so euer they be, which they or any of them, or any other to theyr vses, or to the vse of any of them had or ought to haue had of any estate of inheritaūce in fee symple or in fee taile, in vse or possessiō at ye daies of their seueral treasons, cōmitted limitted and expressed in theyr inditemente, or at any time after. Sauing to euery person & persons, and bodies politike, and to the heires assignes and successours of euery of them (other than to ye said late Quene Anne, and the other traytours afore named: and theyr heires and assignes of euery of them and all and euery other person & persons claiming by thē of or any of them, or to theyr vses, or to the vses of any of them, or to the vse of any of theyr heires) all suche right title vse possession interest condicion fees offices rentes annuites commons, and all other commodities and he∣reditamentes, what soo euer they or any of them moughte shulde or ought to haue had, if this acte had neuer ben had ne made. ¶And ouer this moste gracious soueraigne lorde, for as moche as it hath pleased your mooste roiall maiestie, not withstandinge the great and intol∣lerable perils and occasions, which your highnes hath suffered and sustei∣ned, as wel by occasion of your firste vnlaweful mariage solempnised be∣twene your highnesse and the lady Katheryne,Princes Dowager late princes dowager, as by occasion of the saide vnlafull mariage betwene your highnes and the said late queene Anne, at the most humble petition and intercession of vs your nobles of this realme, for the ardent loue and feruent affection, which your highnes beareth to the conseruation of the peace and vnitie of the same, & for the good and quiete gouernaunce therof, of your most excellente good∣nes to entre in to mariage againe, and haue chosen & taken a righte noble vertuous and excellent lady quene Iane to your trewe and lawefull wyfe,Queene Iane. and haue laufully cellebrated and solemnised mariage with her, according to the lawes of holy church: Who for her conuenient yeres, excellent beau∣tie, and purenesse of flesshe and bloudde, is apte (god willinge) to conceiue issue by your highnesse: whiche mariage is soo pure and sincere, withoute spotte doubte or impedimēt, that the issue procreated vnder the same, whan it shal please almighty god to send it, can not be laufully trewely nor iuste∣ly interrupted or disturbed of the ryghte and title in the successyon of your crowne: It maye therfore nowe please your moste gratious maiestie, at ye mooste humble petition and intercessyon of vs your nobles and commōs, assembled in this presente parliamente, as well for the clere extinguisshe∣ment of all ambyguities and doubtes, as for a pure and perfecte vnitie of vs your moste humble and obedient subiectes, and of all our posteryties, that it maye be enacted by your moste gratious and roiall maiestie, by con∣sent of vs ye lordes spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this pre∣sent parliament assembled, and by auctoritie of the same in maner and for∣me as hereafter in articles ensueth. ¶FYRSTE FOR AS MOCHE as the maryage here to fore solemp∣nised betwene your hyghnes and the said lady Katharine, late prynces do∣wager
deceased, whiche afore was lawefull wyfe to your naturall brother prynce Arthur, and by hym carnally knowen, as hath duly bene proued by fficient witnesses, at al times was is and ought to be demed and determi∣ned, to be against the lawes of almighty god, & not dispensable by any hu∣maine auctoritie, and so hath be demed and determined, as well by the hole clergie of this realme, in both conuocations, and by bothe the vniuersities therof, as by the vniuersities of Bonony, Padua, Paris, Orleaunde, To∣lowes, Angiew, and diuers other, & also by a great nombre of priuate wry∣tinges of many ryghte excellent well lerned men: Be it therfore enacted by auctoritie of this presente parliamente, accordinge as it was ordeyned and enacted in the said acte made in the last parlyament for the establyshement of your succession, that the said mariage heretofore hadde and solempnised betwene your highnesse and the said lady Katherine, which was before lau∣full wyfe, to the said prince Arthur your elder brother, and by him carnally knowen, as doth dewely appere be sufficient proue in a laufull proces had and made before the said most reuerend father in god Thomas, by the suf∣feraunce of god archebisshoppe of Caunturburye, Metropolitane and pry∣mate of all England, shall be by auctoritie of this presente parliament dif∣finitiuely clerely and absolutely declared demed & adiudged to be against the lawes of almighty god, and also accepted reputed and taken of no va∣lue ne effect, but vtterly voide and adnichiled: And that the seperation ther∣of made by the said archebishoppe shall be good and effectuall to all inten∣tes and purposes, any licence, dispensation, or any other acte or actes going before or ensuinge the same, or to the contrarie therof in any wise not with∣standinge. And that euery suche lycence, dispensation, acte or actes, thynge or thinges, had made done or to be done to the contrary therof, shal be to al intentes voide and of none effecte, and so shall be reputed and takē by and amonges al vs your true subiectes and inhabitauntes, our heires and suc∣cessours of and in your realme and dominions for euer. And that the issue borne and procreated vnder the same vnlaufull mariage, made & solemni∣sed betwene your highnes and the said lady Katherine, shalbe takē demed and accepted illegittimate to all intentes and pourposes, and shal be vtter∣ly forclosed excluded and barred to claime chalenge or demaunde any inhe∣rytaunce as laufull heyre to your highnesse by liniall dissent. ¶And also for as moche as the mariage solempnised, betwene your high∣nes and the said late quene Anne vpō true and iuste causes was and is de∣med and adiudged by the said most reuerende father, to be of noo value ne effecte, and a deuorce & seperation therof hadde and made by the due order and processe of the lawes of the churche of Englande, before the said reue∣rende father, Be it therfore enacted, by the auctoritie of this present parlia∣mēt, yt the same mariage betwene your highnes & the said late quene Anne, shall be taken reputed demed and adiudged to be of no force strength ver∣tue nor effecte: & that the separation and deuorce therof had by the sentēce and iudgement of the said most reuerende father, shal be good & effectuall,
and soo here after shall be taken and reputed for euer by al your subiectes, theyr heires and successours. And that none appeale repeale reuocation or adnullation therof, or any part of the same, shall here after be hadde taken allowed or admitted in any behalfe. And that all the issues and childrene borne and procreated vnder the same mariage betwene your highnesse and the said late quene Anne, shall be taken reputed and accepted to be illegit∣timate to al intentes and purposes, and vtterly forclosed excluded and bar∣red to clayme, challenge, or demaunde any inheritaunce as laufull heyre or heyres to your hyghnes by lyniall discent, the sayd former acte made in the last parlyament, for the stablyshement of your succession, or any thing ther∣in contiyned, or any other thinge or thinges to the contrarye therof in any wyse not withstandynge. Degrees of mariage pro∣hybyted by goddes la∣wes.¶And further more syns many inconueniences haue fallen, as wel within this realme as in others, by reason of marieng within the degrees of mari∣age, prohibited by goddes lawes, that is to say, the sonne to marye the mo∣ther, or the stepmother carnally knowen by his father, the brother the sister, the father his sonnes daughter, or his daughters daughter: or the sonne to marye the daugher of his father procreate and borne by his stepmother: or the son to mary his aunte, being his fathers or mothers sister: or to mary his vncles wife carnally knowen by his vncle: or ye father to mary his sō∣nes wyfe carnally knowen by his son: or the brother to marye his brothers wyfe carnally knowen by his brother: or any man maryed, & carnally kno∣winge his wyfe, to marye his wyfes daughter, or his wifes sonnes daugh∣ter, or his wyfes daughters daughter, or his wyfes syster. ¶And further to dilate and declare the meaning of these prohibitions, It is to be vnderstand, that if it chaunce any man to knowe carnally any wo∣man,Prohibitiōs of mariage. that then all and singuler personnes, beinge in any degree of consan∣guynitie or affinitie, as aboue wrytten, to any of the parties so carnally of∣fendinge, shall be demed and adiudged to be within the cases and limittes of the said prohbiitions of maryage. All whiche mariages all be it they be playnely prohibite & detested by the lawes of god, yet neuertheles at some times they haue proceded vnder colours of dispensations by mans power which is but vsurped, and of right oughte not to be graunted admitted ne, allowed. For no man, of what estate degree or condition so euer he be, hath power to dispence with goddes lawes, as all the clergye of this realme in the said conuocations, and the moste parte of all the vniuersyties of chry∣stendome, and we also do affyrme and thynke. ¶ BEIT therfore enacted by auctorytie afore sayde, accordynge as it is declared and conteined in the said acte, made in the last parliament for the establishement of your succession, that no person or persons, subiectes or re∣syauntes of this realme, or in any your dominions, of what estate degree or dignitie so euer they be, shal from henseforth mary within ye degrees afore rehersed, what pretence so euer shall be made to the contrary therof. And in case any person or persons, of what estate dignitie degree or condition so e∣uer
they be, hath bene heretofore maryed within this realme, or in any other the kynges dominions, within any the degrees aboue rehersed, and by any the archebishoppes or ministers of the church of England be separate from the bondes of such vnlaufull mariages: that then euery suche seperation shalbe good laufull fyrme and permanent for euer, & not by any power au∣ctoritie or meanes to be reuoked or vndone hereafter. And that the children proceding or procreate vnder such vnlauful maryage, shal not be lauful ne legitimate: any foreyn lawes lycences dispēsations, or other thing or thin∣ges to the contrary therof not withstandinge. And that in case there be any person or persons within this realme, or in any the kinges dominions al re∣dy maried within any of the said degrees aboue specified, and not yet sepe∣rate from the bondes of such vnlaufull mariage, that then euery suche per∣son, so vnlaufully maried, shalbe seperate by the diffinitiue sentence and iu∣gement of the archebishops, bishops, and other ministers of the churche of Englande, and in other your dominions, within the limittes of their iuris∣dictions & auctorities, and by none other power or auctoritie. And that all sentences and iugementes giuen and to be giuē by any archebishop bishop or other minister of the church of Englande, or in any other the kinges do∣minions, within the limittes of their iurisdictions and auctoritie, shall be diffinitiue firme good and effectuall to all intentes, and be obserued, and o∣beyed, without suing any prouocations, appeles, prohibitions, or other pro∣cesse, from or to the courte of Rome, to the derogation therof, or contrary to the acte made sithen the beginninge of the last parliament for restrainte of such prouocations, appeles, prohibitions, and other processes. ¶And also be it enacted by auctoritie afore said, that all the issue hereafter to be had and procreate betwene your highnes, and your said most dere and entierly beloued laufull wyfe Quene Iane, shall be your laufull children & heires, and be inheritable and inherite, accordinge to the course of inheri∣taunce and lawes of this realme, the imperiall crowne of the same, with all dignities, honours, preeminences, prerogatiues, auctorities, and iurisdicti∣ons to the same annexed or belonging, in as large & ample maner, as your highnes at this present time hath the same as king of this realme, the inhe¦ritaunce therof to be and remayne to your said children and right heyres in maner and fourme as here after shalbe declared, That is to say. ¶First the said imperiall crowne and other the premisses, shalbe to youre maiestie and to your heires of your body laufully begoten, that is to say,Establisshe∣ment of the kynges high∣nesse successi∣on. to the first sonne of your body betwene your highnes and your saide lawefull wyfe quene Iane begoten, & to the heires of the body of the same firste son laufully begoten. And for defaute of such heires, than to the seconde sonne of your body, and of the body of the said Quene Iane begoten, and to the heires of the body of the same seconde sonne laufully begoten, as aforesaid and so to euery sonne of your body, and of the body of the said quene Iane begoten, and to the heires of the body of euery such son begoten, according to the course of inheritaunce in that behalfe.
¶And if it shall happen your saide moste dere and entierly beloued wife quene Iane to decease without issue male of the body of your highnes to be begoten (which god defende) then the same imperial crowne, and all other the premisses to be to your maiestie, as is afore said, and to the sonne and heire male of your body laufully begotten by any other laufull wife, and to the heires of the body of the same sonne & heire male laufully begoten. And for defaute of such issue, than to your second sonne of your bodye laufully begoten, and to the heyres of the body of the same second sonne laufully be¦goten: and so from sonne and heire male, to sonne and heire male, & to the heires of the seuerall bodies of euery such sonne and heire male laufully be¦goten, according to the course of inheritaunce, in like maner and fourme, as is aboue said. ¶And for defaute of such sonnes of your body lawfully begotten: and of the heires of the seuerall bodies of euery such sonne laufully begoten, that thenne the saide imperiall crowne, and other the premisses, shall be to the issue female betwene your maiestie and your saide moste dere and entyer∣ly beloued wyfe Queene Iane begoten: And for lacke of suche issue, than to the heires females of your body, laufully begotten by any other lawfull wyfe: that is to saye: Firste to the eldeste issue female, and to the heyres of her bodie laufully begotten, and so from issue female to issue female, and to their heires of their bodies one after an other by course of inheritaunce, according to their ages, as the crowne of Englande hath ben accustomed and ought to succede and go, in case when there is heire female inheritable to the same. ¶And for as moche as it standeth at this present time in the only pleasure and wyll of almighty god, whether your maiestie shal haue heires begoten and procreated betwene your highnes and your said most dere and entierly beloued wyfe quene Iane, orelles any laufull heires and issues hereafter of your owne body begoten by any other laufull wife, and if such heires shuld fayle (as god defende) and no prouision made in your life, who shulde rule and gouerne this realme for lacke of such heires: that then this realme af¦ter your transitorie lyfe shall be destitute of a laufull gouernour: Or elles parcase encombred with suche a personne, that wolde couet to aspire to the same, whome the subiectes of this realme shall not fynde in their hartes to loue drede and obediently serue as their soueraigne lorde. And if your grace afore it maye be certaynely knowen, whether ye shall haue heires or no, shulde sodaynely name and declare any person or persones to succede after your decease, and for lacke of heyres of your body lawefully begotten, into the royall estate of the imperiall crowne of this realme: thanne it is to be doubted, that such person that shulde be so named, mought happen to take great harte and courage, and by presumption fal to inobedience & rebellion by occasion of which premisses greate diuision and discention maye be and is very likely to arise and springe in this realme, to the greate peryl and di∣struction of vs your moste humble and obedyent subiectes, and of all oure
posterities, if remedie for the same shuld not be prouided. For reformation and remedie wherof, we your moste bounden and louynge subiectes, most o∣bediently knowleginge, that your maiestie most victoriously prudently po∣kely and indifferently hath maynteyned defended gouerned and ruled this realme, in good peace rest quietnes & obedience, during all the time of your moste gratious reigne, which we most hartely desire moughte conti∣nue for euer, puttinge all oure hole truste and confydence in youre highe∣nes, and nothinge doubtynge, but that your maiestie, if ye shoulde faylle heyres of your body laufully begotten (which god defend) for the harty loue and feruent affection, that ye beare to this realme, and for auoydinge all the occasions of diuision afore rehersed, so ernestly mindeth the welth of the same, that ye can best and moste prudently prouide suche a gouernour for vs and this your realme, as shall and will succede and folowe in the iuste and right trade of all your procedinges, and maynteyne kepe and defende the same, and all the lawes and ordinaunces establisshed in your most gra∣tious tyme for the welth of this realme, which al we desire, wherby we your saide moste louinge and obedient subiectes, and our heires and successours shal and may liue, as nere as may be, in as good peace vnitie & obedience af¦ter your decesse, as we haue liued in the time of your most gratious reigne, o therfore most humbly beseche your highnes, that it may be enacted, for auoyding of all ambiguities, doubtes deuisions and occasions in that be∣halfe, by your moste royall maiestie, by the assente of vs the lordes spiritual and temporall, and the cōmons in this your present parliament assembled, and by auctoritie of the same, that your highnes shal haue full and plenar power and auctoritie, to giue dispose appoynte assigne declare and limitte by your letters patentes vnder your great seale, or elles by your laste wyll made in writinge, and assigned with your most gratious hand, at your one∣ly pleasure from time to time, hereafter the imperial crowne of this realme and all other the premisses thervnto belonginge, to be remaine succede and come after your decease, and for lacke of laweful heyres of your body to be procreated and begotten as is afore limitted by this acte, to such person or persons in possession and remaynder, as shal please your highnes, & accor∣dyng to such astate,Letters pa∣te and after such maner fourme facion order and condici∣on, as shalbe expressed declared named and limitted in your said letters pa∣tentes, or by your said laste wyll. And we your moste humble and obedient subiectes do faithfully promise to your maiestie by one cōmon assent, that after your deceasse & for lacke of heires of your body laufully begotten, as is afore rehersed, we our heires and successours shall accepte and take, loue drede serue and alonely obey such person and persons, males or females, as your maiestie shal giue your said imperial crown vnto by auctoritie of this act, and to none other, and holly to sticke to them as true and faithfull sub∣iectes ought to do, to their regall rulers gouernours and supreme heades. ¶And for sure corroboration therof be it further enacted by auctoritie a∣fore saide, that such person and persones, as to whome it shall please your
maiestie to dispose limitte and assigne your said crowne, and other the pre∣misses therto apperteininge, by your letters patentes, or by your laste wyll, as is aforesaide, shall haue and enioye the same after your decease, and for lacke of heires of your bodie lawfully begotten, according to suche astate, and after such maner fourme facion order and condition, as shalbe therof expressed mentioned and conteyned in your said letters patentes, or in your said last will, in as large and ample maner, as if such person and persons had be your laufull heires to the imperiall crowne of this realme, and as if the same crowne of this realme had be giuen and limitted to them plainely and particularly by special names and sufficient termes and wordes by the full and immediate auctoritie of this your most high court of parliament. ¶And it is further enacted by auctoritie aforesaid, that if any of your hey¦res or children hereafter doo vsurpe the one of them vppon the other in the crowne of this realme, or clayme or chalenge your said imperiall crowne in any other fourme or degree of discente or succession then is afore lymytted by this act: Or if any person or persons, to whom it shal please your high∣nes of your mooste excellent goodnes, by auctoritie of this acte to giue and dispose your said crowne and dignitie of this realme, or the heires of any of them, do at any time hereafter demaunde chalenge or clayme your saide crowne of this realme, other wyse or in any other course fourme degree or condition, then the same shall be giuen disposed and limitted vnto them by your highnes, by vertue and auctoritie of this acte. Or if any such persone or persones, to whom your maiestie shal hereafter giue or dispose your said crowne by auctoritie of this acte, or any of their heires, do interrupte or let any of the heires of your maiestie, that is or shalbe begoten, borne, & procre∣ated vnder your laufull pure sincere and vndouted mariage nowe had and solempnised betwene your highnes and your said moste dere and entierly beloued wife quene Iane, or any other your laufull heyres here after to be begoten of your body by any other laufull mariage, peasably & quietly to kepe haue and enioye the saide imperiall crowne, and other the premys∣ses, by course of inheritaunce according to the limitation therof, expressed and declared by this acte, that then all & singular the offendours in any of the premisses contrary to this acte,Treason. & all their abbetours mainteinours fau∣tours counsaylours and aydours therin, shalbe demed and adiudged high traytours to the realme. And that euery such offence shall be accepted repu∣ted and taken to be high treason, and the offendours therin, their aidours maynteinours fautours consaylours and abettours and euery of them, for euery such offence shal suffre such iudgement and peines of death, losses & forfaitures of landes goodes and priuileges of sainctuary, as in any cases of highe treason. And ouer that as well your sayde heires and children, as euery such person and persons, to whom your highnesse shall limitte youre said crowne, in fourme as is aforesaide, and euery of theyr heyres for euery suche offence aboue specified, by them or any of them, to be committed, shal lose and forfaite as well all suche righte title and intereste, that they maye
clayme or challenge in or to the crowne of this realme, as heires by discent,  by reason of any gifte or act that shalbe done by your highnes, for his or their aduauncement, by auctoritie of this acte, or other wyse by any maner of meanes or pretence what so euer it be. ¶And be it further enacted by auctoritie aforesaide, that if any person or persons, of what astate degree dignitie or condition so euer they be, at any  hereafter, by wordes writinge imprintinge, or by any exterior acte or dede, maliciously or willingly procure, or do or cause to be procured or done directly or indirectly, any thinge or thinges, to the perill of your moste roy∣all person, or to the perill of the person of any your heires or successours ha∣ng the royall estate of the crowne of this realme: or maliciously or wyl∣lingly giue occasion by wordes writing print deede or acte, wherby youre highnes or any your saide heires or successours, hauyng the royall estate of the crown of this realme, might be disturbed or interrupted of the crown of this realme: Or by wordes writing print dede or act procure or do, or cause to be procured or done any thing or thinges, to or for the interruptiō repele or adnullation of this acte, or of any thing therin conteined, or of any thing that shall be done by your highnes in the limittation and dispotion of your crowne by auctoritie of ye same. Or by wordes writing print dede or act pro∣cure or cause to be procured or done any thing or thinges, to the preiudice sclander disturbance or derogation of the said laufull matrimony, solemp∣ised betwene your maiestie and the said quene Iane, or any other your lau¦ful wife or wiues hereafter by your highnes to be taken: Or to ye peril sclan¦der or disherison of any of the issues and heires of your highnes, being ly∣mitted by this acte to enherite, and to be inheritable to the crown of this re∣alme, in such forme as is aforesaid: Or to the interruption or disherison of any such person or persons, to whom your highnes shal assigne and dispose your said imperiall crowne by auctoritie of this act, as is afore remembred: wherby any such issues or heires of your highnes, or such other persō or {per}∣sōs, might be distroied disturbed or interrupted in fame body or title of the inheritance to the crowne of this realme, as to them is limitted in this act, informe aboue rehersed, or as to them shalbe limitted and assigned by your highnes, by vertue & auctoritie of this acte. Or if any person or persons by wordes writinge imprinting or any other exteriour acte directly or indirect∣ly accepte or take, iudge or beleue any of the mariages had & solempnised betwene the kinges highnes and the said lady Katharine, or betwene the kinges highnesse and the said late quene Anne, to be good lauful or of any effect. Or by wordes writing printinge or any other exterior acte directly or indirectly, sclander interrupte empeche gaynsaye or impugne the lawefull iudgementes and sentences of the said most reuerende father in god, Tho∣mas archebishop of Canturbury and primate of all England, for and con∣cerning the deuorces and separations of the saide vnlaufull maryages or any of them. Or by wordes writinge print or any other exterior acte directly or indirectly, take, accepte, name, or cal by any pretence any of the children
borne and procreated vnder any of the saide vnlauful mariages, to be legit∣timate and lauful children of your maiesty. Or if any person or persons craf¦tely ymagine inuente or attempt by colour of any pretence to depriue the kinges highnes, the quene, or the heires of their bodies begotten, or any o∣ther the heires of the kinges body laufully begotten, or any person or per∣sons, to whom the kinges highnes shall dispose giue and limit the crowne of this realme, by auctoritie of this acte, of any of their titles stiles names degrees or royal estates or regall power. Or if any person or persons at any time hereafter, being required or cōmaunded by the kinges highnes, or by such person or persons, as shalbe auctorised by his grace or his laufull hei∣res to make or take an othe, to answere to such questions and interrogato∣ries, as shalbe obiected to them, vpon any clause, article, sentence or worde, conteined in this acte, do contemptuously or vtterly refuse to make or take such oth, or without frustratorie delay do not make or take the same oth: or after the making or taking such othe, do contemptuously refuse directly to answere to such questions and interrogatories, as shall be obiected con∣cerninge the same or any part therof: that then euery such person and per∣sones, of what astate degree or condition so euer he or they be, and their ay∣dours, counsayllours, maynteynours and abettours, and euery of them, for euery such offence afore declared,Treason. shalbe adiudged highe traytours. And that euery such offence afore especified, shalbe adiudged high treason, and the offendours therin and their aidours counsailours mainteinours and a¦bettours, and euery of them beinge laufully conuict of any such offence by presentment verdite confession or processe, according to the custom & lawes of this realme, shal suffre peynes of deathe, as in cases of high treason. And that also euery such offendour, being conuicte as is aforesaid, shal lose and forfaite to your highnes, and to your heires or successours kynges or regal rulers of this realme, all such manours landes tenementes rentes annui∣ties and hereditamentes, which they had in possession as owners, or were sole seased of by or in any right title or meanes, or any other persō or persōs had to their vse of any estate of enheritance, at the day of such treasons & offences by them committed and done. And shal also lose & forfaite to your highnes and your said heires, as well all maner suche estates of freeholde and interest for yeres of landes and rentes, as all other goodes cattalles & dettes, which they had at the time of their conuiction or atteinder, of any such offence: Sauynge alway to euery such person and persons and bo∣dies politike, to their heires assignes and successours, and to the heires and successours of euery of them (other then such persons as shall be so conuicte or atteinted, and their heires and successours, and all other clayminge to their vses) all suche righte, title, vse, interest, possession, condition, rentes, fees, offices, annuities, and commens, which they or any of them shall haue in or vpon any such manours landes tenementes rentes annuities or here∣ditamentes, that shall so happen to be lost and forfaite by reason of any con¦uiction or atteynder, for any the treasons & offences aboue rehersed, at any
time before the said treasons and offences committed. ¶Be it also enacted by auctoritie aforsaid, that no person or persōs, offen¦ding in any the treasons conteined and limitted by this act, or in any other treasons, shal in any wise haue and inioy the priuilege or immunitie of any maner sainctuarie within this realme, or els where, within any the kinges dominiōs: but shal vtterly lose, and be excluded of the same: any vse, grant,Sainctuary. custome, prescription, confirmation, or any other thinge or thinges to the contrary hereof in any wise not withstandinge. ¶And be it also enacted by auctoritie aforesaid, that if your maiestie shall happen to deceasse before any such your issue and heire male of your body, which shuld inherite the crowne of this realme, shalbe of his age of .xviii. yeres, or before that suche your issue and heire female, whiche shulde inhe∣rite the crowne of this realme, shalbe maried, or be of the age of .xvi. yeres, whiche almyghty god defend) that than the said issue and heire male to the crowne, so beinge within the age of .xviii. yeres, or your said issue and heire female to the crowne, so beinge vnmaried, or within the said age of .xvi. ye∣res, shall be and remayne, vntyll suche time as such issues and heyres shall come to their said seuerall ages afore limitted, at and in the gouernance of their naturall mother, and of suche other your counsaylours and nobles of your realme, as your highnes shall limitte and appoynt by your laste wyll made in writynge, sygned with your mooste gracyous hande, yf it shall be thought by your highnes moste conuenyent soo to be: or elles the sayd ys∣sues and heyres shall be at and in the gouernaunce of suche of your coun∣saylours and nobles of youre realme, as your maiestie shall name and ap∣poynt by your last wyll made in writynge, and signed with your most gra∣cyous hande, as is aforesaide. And if any person or persons, by wrytynge,Treason. printing, or exterior dede or act, directly or indirectly, procure or do, or cause to be procured or done, any thinge or thinges, to the lette or distourbance of the same: that than euery such offence shall be high treason, and the offen∣dours beinge therof conuicted, shall suffre such peynes of deathe and losse of inheritaunce, priuileges of sainctuaries, freeholdes, interestes for yeres, goodes, cattalles, and dettes, in such maner and fourme as is aboue speci∣fied in cases of treason afore mencioned. ¶AND for the more sure establishment of the successiō of your most roi∣all maiestie, accordinge to the tenour and fourme of this acte, Be it further enacted by auctorytie aforesayde, that as welle all the nobles of your re∣alme spirituall and temporall, as all other your subiectes nowe liuing and beinge, or that hereafter shall be at their full ages, by the commaundement of your maiestie, or of your heires or successours,Othe. at al times hereafter from time to time whā it shal please your highnes, or your heires or successours to apoynt, shal make a corporal othe in ye presence of your highnes, or your heires or successours, or before such other as your maiestie, or your heires or successours will assigne for ye same, for the kepinge obseruing defending auowynge and maynteynynge of this acte, and of all thinges that shall be
done by your hyghnes by auctoritie therof, accordinge to the tenour of an othe hereafter ensuinge, That is to say: Ye shal swere, to beare faith truthe and obedience all onely to the kinges maiestie, supreme heed in erthe vnder god of the churche of Englande, durynge his lyfe, and to his heires of his body of his most diere and entierly beloued lauful wife quene Iane, bego∣ten and to be begoten and procreated: And further to the heires of our said soueraigne lorde, according to the limittation in the statute made for sure∣tie of his succession in the crown of this realme, in the parliament begonne and holden at Westminster in the .viii. daye of Iune, in the .xxviii. yere of the kinges most gratious reigne. And also for lacke of such heires, to such person & persons as the kinges highnes shall limitte and appoint to suc∣cede to ye crown, by vertue & auctoritie of the same act, and not to any other within this realm, nor foreine auctoritie power or potentate. And in case a∣ny other othe be made, or hath be made by you to any person or persons: yt then ye to repute the same as vayne & adnichilate. And that to your coun∣ninge writte and vttermooste of your power, without gyle, fraude, or other vndewe maner, ye shall obserue kepe maynteine and defende the saide acte of succession made in the saide parliament, begon and holden at westmyn∣ster in the said .viii. day of Iune, in the saide .xxviii. yere of the kinges most roiall reigne, and al the holle effectes and contentes therof, and al thinges that shall be done by the kinges highnes by auctoritie of the same, and all other actes and statutes made in confirmation or for executiō of ye same, or of any thing therin conteined: and this ye shal do against al maner of per∣sōs, of what estate dignitie degree or condition so uer they be: & in no wise do or attempte, nor to your power suffre to be done or attempted directlie or indirectly any thing or thinges priuily or appertely, to the let hinderaunce damage or derogation therof, or of any parte of the same, or of any thynge or thinges, that shal be done by the kinges highnesse, by vertue or auctori∣tie of the said act, by any maner of meanes, or for any maner of pretence, so helpe you god, al saintes, and the holy Euangelistis. ¶And it is also enacted by auctoritie afore saide, that all maner your sub∣iectes, as well spirytuall as temporall, suynge lyuerey, or ouster le mayne, out of the handes of your highnesse, or of your heires or successours, or do∣ynge any feyltie to your highnesse, or to your heires or successours, by rea∣son of tenure of theyr landes, shall swere the saide corporall Othe aboue mencyoned. And that they nor any of theym, shall here after haue any ly∣uereys, oustre le mayne, or restytution out of your handes, nor oute of the handes of your heyres or successours, tylle they shall haue made the saide corporall Othe, in fourme aboue rehersed. And if any person or persones, beynge commaunded by auctorytye of this acte, to make the sayde Othe afore lymytted, obstynately or wylfullye refuse that to doo, or wyll proteste and saye, whan they shall be examyned vpon any interrogatories, that shal be obiected to theym, for or concernynge this acte, or any thyng therin con∣teined,
that they be not bounde to declare their thought and conscience, and styffely theron abyde: that then euery suche personne soo doynge, for euery suche offence shall be taken and accepted for offendour in hyghe treason. And that euery suche refusell shall be demed and adiudged highe treason,Treason. and the offendour therin, beinge as afore is limitted, lawefullye conuicted or attemted therof, by the lawes of this realme, shall suffre suche peines of death losses and forfaitures, and also lose priuileges of saintuaries, in like maner and fourme as is aboue mentioned, for the treasons afore limitted by this acte. ¶And be it further enacted by auctoritie of this present parliamente, that if it shall please the kynges maiestie at any tyme here after, by his letters patentes vnder his greate seale, or by his laste wyll made in wrytinge,Letters pa∣tentes. and ligned with his most gratious hande, to auaunce any person or persons of his most royall bloud to any title style or name, of any estate dignitie or ho∣nour, what so euer it be, and to gyue to them or to any of them any castelles honours manours landes tenemētes liberties frācheses, or other heredita∣mentes, in fee symple fee tayle or for terme of theyr lyues, or ye life of any of them: that then al and euery such letters patentes and last wyl of his high∣nes, so to be made to any such person or persones of his blode, shal be good and effectuall to them and euery of them, according to the tenour purpor∣ses and effectes of euerye such letters patentes and laste will. And that the said persone and persones, and euery of them, shall haue and enioy as well all suche titles style and names of honour dignitie and estate, whiche shall be conteyned, and expressed in any such letters patentes or laste wyll of the kynges hyghnes, as suche castelles honours manours landes tenementes lyberties francheses, and all other hereditamentes, whiche shall be specify∣ed and mencyoned in euery such letters patentes or last will in such maner fourme fation and condicion, and according to such estate or estates in the lawe, as shalbe expressed and limitted in euery suche letters patentes or last wyll, in as large and ample maner, to all intentes and purposes, as if the titles styles and names of honour dygnitie and estate, and the castelles ho∣nours manours landes tenementes lyberties francheses and other heredi∣tamentes, whiche shall be comprysed in any such letters patentes or laste wyll to be made, were all redye yeuen by good & sufficient letters patentes to suche personne or persons, of the kynges blode by theyr speciall names and surnames, and ratyfyed and confyrmed by auctoritie of this presente parlyamēte. Or as if the names of suche personne and personnes, soo be∣yng of the kinges bloudde, and such titles stiles names castelles honours manours landes tenementes lyberties francheses or other hereditamen∣tes, hadde ben specyally named and expressed in this acte, and gyuen to su∣che person and personnes of the kinges bloude by theyr propre names and surnames, by sufficient wordes termes clauses & sentences, immediatly by auctoritie of this present parliament. Sauinge to al and euery person and persons and bodyes politike, and to theyr heyres assignes and successours
other than to the kinges highnes, his heyres or successours, al such ryghte title interest possession rentes annulties fees offices comens rightes intere∣stes petitions condicions, & all other hereditamentes, which they or any of them may or mought claime of in or to any the said titles stiles names, ca∣stelles honours manours landes tenementes liberties frācheses and other heredytamentes conteyned or mentioned in any suche letters patentes or laste wyll, in as large and ample maner, as if this acte hadde neuer be had nor made. ¶AND BE it fynally enacted by auctoritie afore said, that this presente acte, and euery clause article and sentence comprised in the same shal be ta∣ken, and accepted, according to the plaine wordes and sentences therin con¦teined, and shall not be interpreted nor expounded by colour of any pretēse or cause, or by any subtill argumentes inuentions or reasons, to the hynde∣rance disturbance or derogation of this act, or any part therof: Any thing or thinges acte or actes of parlyament here to fore made, or here after to be had done or made to the contrary therof not withstanding. And that euery acte statute lawe prouision thinge and thinges heretofore had or made, or here after to be hadde done or made, contrary to the effecte of this statute, shall be voyde and of no value nor force. ¶ An acte for continuaunce of the statutes againste the caryage of brasse latenne and coper out of this realme, And for making of cables and ropes: for the wyndynge of wolles, & agaynst kyllynge of weynelynges vnder the age of two yeres. Cap. viii. WHere in the laste parlyamente begonne and holden at Lon∣don the thyrde daye of Nouember, in the .xxi. yere of the kin∣ges most gratious reigne, & frome thens adiorned to west∣minster, and there holden and continued by diuers proroga∣tions, vntyl the dissolution therof, it was ordeined and esta∣blished amongest other thinges one acte for restrayning the caryages of brasse,Brasse, laten and copper. latten, and coper out of this realme: And also one other acte was made in this parliament for the trewe makinge of cables halsers and ropes:Cables, hal∣sers ropes. wynding of wolles. Kyllynge of weinlynges. One other acte for the trewe windinge of wolles: and one other act to restraine killing of weinelinges bullockes steres or hester, being vn∣der the age of two yeres. All whiche foure seuerall actes were made to con∣tinue and endure to the nexte parliament, as by the said actes more plainly appereth. For as moch as the said seuerall actes, and euery of them, be ne∣cessary for the common welth of this realm, be it therfore enacted by aucto∣ritie of this presente parliament, that the said foure seuerall actes, and all clauses articles and prouisions therin conteyned, shall from hensforthe be and stande good and effectuall, and to endure and contynue vntyll the laste daye of the nexte parlyament.
¶In act for continuance of the statutes of petiurie, for making of iayles, for pewteres, and for sowynge of flaxe and hempe. Cap. ix. WHere in the parliament begonne and holden at London the thirde day of Nouembre, & from thense adiourned to west∣minster, and there holden and continued by prorogatiō vn∣to the .xv. day of Ianuarie, in the .xxiii. yere of the reigne of our moste dradde soueraigne lorde kynge Henry the .viii.Atteynt. Periury. Iayle. it was then in that sessiō of the said parliament one act made and established for the atteintes to be sued for punisshemēt of periurye vp∣pon vntrue verdictes, which acte was then made to endure to the last daye of the nexte parliament. And where also in the saide session of the said par∣liament one acte was made and established, for making of iayles in diuers shires of this realme, whiche acte was than made to continue and endure for one yere nexte after the ende of the same parliament. And where also in the time of the same parliament,Pewterers one other acte was made concerning pew∣terers, which act was also made to endure to the last day of the next parlia∣ment. And also in the time of the said parliamēt one other acte was made concerning sowinge of flaxe and hempe,Flax and hemp. which acte also was made to con∣tinue and indure to the last day of th nexte parliament, as by the said foure seuerall actes more plainely appereth. For as moch as the said foure actes be good and beneficiall for the common welth of this realme, be it therfore enacted by auctoritie of this presente parliament, that the said foure actes, and euery of them, and al clauses articles and prouisiōs therin conteined, shall stande continue and endure in theyr force and strengthe, and be obser∣ued and kepte to the laste day of the nexte parliamente. ¶An acte extinguishing the auctoritie of the bishop of Rome. Ca. x. FOr as moch as not withstanding the good & holsome lawes ordinances and statutes heretofore made enacted & establi∣shed by the kinges highnes our moste gratious soueraigne lord, and by the hole consent of his high courte of parliamēt for the extirpation abolution and extinguissment out of this realme, & other his graces dominions seignories and con∣treis, of the pretended power and vsurped auctoritie of the bishop of Rome,Byshope of Rome. by some called the pope, vsed within the same or elles where, concerninge ye same realme dominions segniories or countreis, which dyd obfuscate and wreste goddes holy worde and testament a longe season from the spiritual and trewe meanynge therof, to his worldelye and carnall affectyons, as pompe, glorye, auaryce, ambytion, and tyrannye, couerynge and shadow∣inge the same, with his humayne and polytike deuises, traditions, and in∣uentions, sette forthe to promote and stablyshe his onelye domynion, bothe vppon the sowles and also the bodyes and goodes of all Christyan people
excluding Christ out of his kingedome and rule of man his soule, as mo∣che as he may, and all other temporall kinges and princes out of theyr do∣minions, which they ought to haue by goddis lawe, vppon the bodies and goodes of theyr subiectes: wherby he dyd not onely robbe the kinges maie∣stie, being onely the supreme head of this his realme of Englād immediat∣ly vnder god, of his honour, righte, and preemynence, due vnto hym by the lawe of god, but spoiled this his realme yerely of innumerable treasure, & with the losse of the same, deceiued the kinges louing & obedient subiectes, perswadinge to them by his lawes, bulles, and other his deceiuable mea∣nes, suche dreames, vanities, and fantasies, as by the same many of them were seduced and conueied vnto superstitious and erronious opinions: so that the kynges maiestie, the lordes spirytuall and temporall, and the com∣mons in this realme being ouerweried and fatigated, with thexperience of the infinite abhominations and mischefes procedinge of his impostures, & craftilie colouring of his deceites, to the great damages of soules bodyes and goodes, were forced of necessitie for the publique weale of this realme, to exclude that forein pretended power iurisdiction and auctoritie, vsed & vsurped within this realme, and to deuyse such remedies for theyr relife in the same, as doth not onely redounde to the honour of god, the highe praise and aduauncemēt of the kinges maiestie, and of his realme, but also to the great and inestimable vtilitie of the same. And not withstandinge the said holsome lawes so made, and heretofore establisshed, yet it is commen to the knowlege of the kinges highnes, and also to diuers and many his louing faithfull and obedient subiectes, howe that diuers sedicious and contenti∣ous persones, being impes of the saide bisshoppe of Rome and his see, and in harte, membres of his pretended monarchy, do in corners & elles where, as they dare, whisper inculke preache and perswade, and from time to time instill in to the eares and heades of the pore simple and vnlettered people, the aduauncement and continuaunce of the said bishoppes feined and pre∣tended auctoritie, pretending the same to haue his grounde and original of goddes law, wherby the opinions of many be suspended, theyr iugementes corrupted & deceiued, and diuersitie in opinions augmēted & encreased, to the great displeasure of almighty god, the high discontentation of our said most dred souerain lord, and the interruption of the vnitie loue charite cō∣corde and agremēt, that ought to be in a christen region and congregation. For auoydynge wherof and repression of the folyes of suche sedicious per∣sones, as be the meanes and authors of such inconueniences, Be it enacted ordeyned and established by the kinge our soueraigne lorde, and the lordes spirituall and temporall, and the commons in this presente parliament as∣sembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, that if any persō or persons, dwel∣ling demurring inhabiting or resiant within this realme, or within any o∣ther the kinges dominions seignouries or countreis, or the marches of the same, or els where within or vnder his obeisance and power of what estate dygnitie preeminence order degre or condition so euer he or they be, after ye
laste day of Iuly, which shal be in the yere of our lord god .M.D.xxxvi. shal  writinge cifring printing preching or teching, dede or acte obstinately or aliciousely holde or stand with, to extoll setforth maynteyne or defend the ctoritie iurisdiction or power of the bisshop of Rome, or of his see, hereto  claymed vsed or vsurped within this realme or in any dominion or coū∣ye beynge of within or vnder the kynges power or obeysaunce, or by any tence obstinately or maliciousely inuent any thinge for thextollynge a∣cement settyng forth mainteinance or defence of the same, or any part of, or by any pretence obstinately or maliciousely attribute any maner of iurisdiction auctoritie or preeminence to the said see of Rome, or to a∣ bishop of the same see for the time beyng, within this realme or in any the ges dominions or countreyes: that then euery such person or personnes so doynge or offendinge, their aydoues, assistentes, comforters, abbettours, procurers, maynteyners, fautours, counsaylours, concelours, and euery of thē, being therof laufully conuicted, according to the lawes of this realme, for euery such defaulte and offence shall incurre and runne in to the daun∣gers penalties peines and forfaitures ordeyned and prouided by the statute of prouisiō and premunire, made in the .xvi. yere of the reigne of the noble & valiaunt prince king Richarde the seconde, ayenst suche as attempte pro∣cure or make prouisiō to the see of Rome or els where, for any thing or thin∣ges to the derogation or contrary to the prerogatiue royall or iurisdiction of the crowne and dignitie of this realme. ¶And to the entente that this acte at all tymes may be wel and trewly ex∣ecuted, and the offendoues therof haue and receyue condigne punishement according to their demerites, It is enacted by the auctoritie afore sayde, that as well iustyces of assise in their circuites,Iustices of assyse and peace. as iustyces of peace within the limittes of their commission and auctorities, or two of euery such iusti∣ciers of peace at the least, wherof one to be of the quorum, shall haue ful po∣ and auctoritie to enquere of all offences contemptes & transgressions, parpetrated committed or doone contrary to this acte, in like maner and fourme as they may of other offences ayenst the kinges peace: And shall certifie euery presentment afore them or any of them had or made, concer∣nynge this acte or any parte therof, before the kinge in his benche, within xl. dayes nexte after any such presentment had or made, if the terme be then open: And if not, thanne at the firste day of the terme, nexte folowynge the saide .xl. dayes, vpon peyn that euery of the iusticiers of assise, or iusticiers of peace, before whom such presentment shall be made, makynge defaulte of such certificat contrary to this statute, to lose and forfaite forty poundes to the kynges highnes. ¶And it is enacted by the auctoritie afore sayde,Certificat. that the Iusticiars of the kinges bench, as well vpon euery such certificat as by enquery before them selfes within the limittes of their auctorities, shal haue ful power and aucto¦ritie to here ordre and determine euery such offence, done or commytted con∣trary this acte, accordinge to the lawes of this realme, in suche like maner
and fourme to all intentes and purposes, as if the person or persons, ayen whom any presentment shalbe had vpon this estatute, had be presented v¦pon any mater or offence expressed in the said estatute, made in the said .xv yere of king Richarde the seconde. Visitations.¶ And it is also enacted by the auctoritie afore said, that al and euery arc¦byshoppes byshops and archedeacons within this realme, their commissa∣ries, vycars generall, and other their ministers, in euery their visitation ¦seanes,Seanes. shall make diligent insearche, enquerie, and examination of al & e∣uery ecclesiasticall and religious personne within and of their iurisdiction, which shalbe suspected accused or demed to be a transgressour or offendour of this acte. And if vpon such serche enquirie and examination any ecclesi∣asticall or religious persons shall be presented suspected accused, or founde culpable by witnes or confession, of any offence contrary to this acte, and be presente at the time of such presentmente examination or accusation: that then euery the archbisshoppes bishoppes and archedeacons, their commis∣saries, vicars general, and other their ministers, afore or to whom any such personne shalbe presented suspected accused or founde culpable (as is afore saide) shall committe euery suche persone so presented suspected accused or founde coulpable, if he be presente (as is aforesaid) to the next common iaile of the shyere, where such enquitie examination or accusation shalbe had or made, or elles by good & sufficient sureties, to be bounden by obligation to the kinges vse, shall lette euery such personne to bayle by their discretions, to appere before the kinge and his counsaile in the sterre chaumbre at west∣mynster, within .xv. dayes nexte after suche enquirie presentment or accusa∣tion, if the terme be then open and kepte, or elles in the first day of the terme nexte folowynge after the same enquerie presentment or accusation. And at the same day lymitted for such apparaunce, they shall certifie in to the saide sterre chamber by writinge vnder their seales, as well the saide bonde and obligation taken for such apparance, as the presentment examination ac∣cusation or conuiction of euery such personne, and all deposytions and cir∣cumstaunces therof, and the name of the iayle, where vnto they haue com∣mitted the saide personne. And if any suche ecclesiasticall or religious per∣sone, beinge presented suspected or accused in any seane or visitation, be not present at the tyme of the said seane or visitation, as is afore said, that then neuer the lesse euery the said archebisshoppes bishoppes and archedeacons, their commissaries, vicars generall, and all other their ministers, afore or to whom any suche presentement suspection or accusation shalbe had or made, shall certifie euery such presentement suspection and accusation, and al cir∣cumstance therof (as is afore said) in to the sterre chaumbre at westm̄ with∣in .xv. dayes nexte after suche presentment suspection or accusation had or made, or in the first day of the terme next folowinge after such presentment suspection or accusation, in such maner & fourme as is afore rehersed. And in case any ecclesiasticall or religious person, being presented suspected or accused of any offence done or attempted contrary to this estatute, be therof
conuicted by confession or witnes before any archebisshoppe bisshop or arch¦n, or before any the commissaries, vycars general, or other their mini∣, in their seanes or visitations, or before the kynges counsayle in the  Chaumbre at westminster: that then euery such spirituall and religi∣ person, so being conuicte, shal suffre suche peynes penalties and forfai∣s, as be expressed in the said statute made in the saide .xvi. yere of kinge harde the seconde. ¶It is also enacted by the auctoritie afore saide,Ecclesiastical Iuge. that if any ecclesiasticall ge or visitatour, do voluntarily concele cloke hyde or colour any present∣ accusation or confession,Visitour. that shalbe made to hym concerning this sta∣, and do not certifie euery such accusation presentment or confession be∣ the kinge and his counsayle in the sterred chaumbre at westminster, in ch maner and fourme as is aboue specified in this estatute: that then e∣ry such ecclesiasticall iudge and visitatour, so wilfully offendynge, for e∣ry such default shal forfaite .xl. li. the one halfe therof to the kinges high∣s, the other halfe to such person as will sue for the same by original wryt  plainte or information in any of the kinges courtes, in whiche suite no yne protection or wager of lawe shall be admitted nor allowed. ¶AND FOR stronger defence and mainteynaunce of this acte, it is or∣deyned and enacted by auctoritie afore saide, that all and euery ecclesiasti∣call iudge, ordynary, chauncellour, commissarye, offycyall, vycar generall, and other ecclesiasticall officer or minister, of what dignitie preeminence or degree soo euer they shall be. And all and euery temporall iudge, iusticyar, yer, bayliffe, shereffe, vndershereue, eschetour, alderman, iurate, consta∣ble, hedborowe, Thyrdborow, borsolder, and euery other laye officer and minister, to be made created elected or admitted within this realme or any other the kinges domynyons, of what estate ordre degree or condition so e∣uer he shalbe, from and after the saide last daye of Iuly, shal before he take vpon him the execution of suche office,Othe. make take and receyue a corporall othe vpon the Euangelystes, before such person or persones, as haue or shal haue auctoritie to admit him, that he from hensforth shall vtterly renounce refuse relynquisshe or forsake the bishop of Rome, and his auctoritie power and iurisdiction: And that he shal neuer consent nor agree, that the bisshop of Rome shal practise exercise or haue any maner of auctoritie iurisdictiō or power within this realme, or any other the kinges dominions, but that he shall resiste the same at all times to the vttermooste of his power.Supreame heade of the Churche of Englande. And that from hensforth he shall accepte repute and take the kynges maiestie to be the onely supreme hedde in erthe of the church of England. And that to his cunninge wytte and vttermooste of his power, without gyle fraude or other vndew meane, he shall obserue kepe maynteyne and defende the holle effec∣tes and contentes of all and synguler actes and statutes made & to be made within this realme, in derogation extirpation and extynguyshemente of the bishoppe of Rome and his auctoritie. And al other actes and statutes made and to be made in reformatiō and corroboration of the kinges power of su∣preme
hede in earth of the church of Englande: and this he shall do ayenste all maner of personnes, of what estate dignitie degree or condition they be, and in no wise do nor attempt, nor to his power suffer to be done or attemp∣ted directly or indirectly any thing or thinges pryuely or apartly, to the let hinderaunce damage or derogation therof, or of any part therof, by any ma¦ner of meanes, or for any maner of pretence. And in case any oth be made or hath bene made by him to any person or personnes in maynteynaunce de∣fence or fauour of the bisshoppe of Rome or his auctoritie iurisdiction or power he repute the same as vayne and adnichilate, so helpe him god all saintes and the holy Euangeliste. ¶And it is also enacted by the auctoritie afore saide, that all and euerye personne and personnes spirituall and temporall, suyng lyuere restitutions or vtter le mayne out of the kinge, his heires, or successours handes, or do∣ynge any fealtie to his highnes his heires or successours, or whiche shall be sworne to the king his heires or successours, or that shal haue any office fee or roume of the moste gratious gifte of the kinges maiestie, his heyres or successours, or shall be reteyned in seruice with his grace his heires or suc∣cessours, shall make take and receyue the saide othe. And that also all and euery religious personne, at the time of his or their profession or entree into religion, and euery other ecclesiasticall personne at the time of his takinge of orders, and all and euery other personne, which shalbe promoted or pre∣ferred to any degree of lernyng in any vniuersitie within this realme or o∣ther the kinges dominions at the time of his promotion or preferment, and euery of them, shall make take and receiue the said othe before his or their soueraigne, ordinary, or the commissarie of such vniuersitie. ¶AND IT IS ALSO enacted by the auctoritie afore saide, that if any personne or personnes, lymitted or commaunded by auctoritie of this act to make the saide othe, or commaunded by any other personne or personnes, auctorised by the kinges highnesse commission vnder his greate seale, or his seale ordeined for causes ecclesiasticall,Treason. to make the said othe, obstinate∣ly refuse that to do: that then euery such offence and contempt shalbe high treason, and the offenders therof being laufully conuicted, shall suffre pey∣nes of death and other forfaitures penalties and losses, as is limitted and accustomed in cases of high treason by any lawes or statutes of this realme heretofore made. ¶PROVIDED alwayes and be it enacted, that this acte nor any thing or thinges in the same rehersed mentioned or comprised, be in any wise pre∣iudicial hurtefull or derogatorie to the ceremonies vses and other laudable and politike ordinaunces,Ceremonies. for a tranquilitie, discipline, concorde, deuo∣cion, vnitie, and decent ordre heretofore in the church of Englande vsed in∣stituted taken and accepted, nor to any person or persons accordingly vsing the same or any of them. ¶Prouided alway and be it enacted by auctoritie of this pesente parlia∣mente, that this acte, concernynge the bysshoppe of Rome or any thynge
to be done by his vsurped auctoritie, shall no further bynde nor extende to and vppon the kinges subiectes of his yle of Iersey, Gernesey,Iersey and Gernsey. and Alder∣ney, in any other maner fourme or condition, than it shall please the kinges highnesse, with the aduise of his mooste honourable counsayle, vppon con∣sideration and examination of the state and disposition of his saide Iles, and the common welthe of the same hereafter to establishe, ordeyne, and de∣clare vnto them by his gratious letters patētes, vnder his great seale: And that the said letters patentes and euery thinge therin to be conteyned, shall be of the same effecte, strengthe, and vertue, as if they had bene passed and enacted by auctoritie of parliament, any thinge in the said acte conteyned to the contrary in any wise not withstandinge. ¶An acte for restitution of the firste fruites in time of vacation to the next Incumbent. Cap. xi. FOr as moch as in the statute of the payement vnto the kin∣ges maiestie, his heires and successours,First fruites. of the first fruites of spirituall promotions, offices, benefyces, and dignities within this realme, and other the kinges dominions, expres mention and declaratiō is not had ne made, from what time the yere shall be accompted, in which the first fruites shall be dewe and paiable to his highnes, that is to witte, whether immediately from the dethe resignation or depriuation of euery incumbente, or from the time of admission or newe takynge of possession in euery suche promotion. And also by reason that in the same statute it is not declared, who shal haue the fruites tithes and other profittes of the saide benefices offices promo∣tions and dignities spirituall, durynge the time of vacation thereof, dy∣uers of tharchebisshoppes and bishoppes of this realme, haue not onely whan the time of perceiuynge and takynge of tithes, (that is to saye, wolle, lambe, corne, and haye, and tithes vsuallye payde at the holye tyme of Ea∣ster) hath approched, differred the collation of suche benefices, as haue ben of their owne patronage, but also haue vpon presentations of clerkes made vnto theym by the iuste patrones, protracted and deferred, to institute, in∣ducte, and admitte the same clerkes, to the entente that they myghte haue and perceyue to theyr owne vse, the same tythes growinge, durynge the vacation: Soo that through such delayes (ouer and aboue the firste fruy∣tes, which be iustely dewe to the kynges highnes) they haue bene constray∣ned also to lose all, or the moste part of one yeres profites of their benefices and promotions, and to serue the cure at their and their frendes propre co∣stes and charges, or vtterly to forsake and giue ouer their benefyces & pro∣motions, to theyr greate losse and hynderaunce. For reformation wherof, it is ordeyned and enacted by the kinge oure soueraigne lorde, with the as∣sente of the lordes spirituall and temporalle, and the commons in this pre∣sent parliament assembled, and by the auctoritie of the same, that the sayde
yere,Vacation. in whiche the firste fruites shall be payde to the kinges grace, sha beginne and be accompted immediately after the auoydaunce or vacatio of any such benefice or promotion spirituall afore rehersed. And that th tithes, fruites, oblations, obuentions, emolumentes, commodities, ad¦uauntages, rentes, and all other what so euer reuenues, casualties, or pro¦fites certayne and vncertayne, affering or belonginge to any archedeacon∣ry, deanry, prebende, personage, vicarage, hospitalle, wardeyneshippe, prouosteshippe,Chantries. or other spirituall promotion, benefice, dignitie, or office, (chauntries onely excepte) within this realme, or other the kynges dominy∣nions, growinge, rysinge, or comminge, durynge the time of vacation of the same promotion spirituall, shall belonge and affere to such personne, as shall be thervnto next presented, promoted, instituted, inducted, or ad∣mitted, and to his executours, towarde the payment of the firste fruites, to the kinges highnes, his heires and successours: Any vsage, custome, lyber∣tie, priuilege, or prescription to the contrary had vsed or beinge in any wise notwithstandinge. ¶AND IT IS also enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any arche∣bisshoppe, bisshoppe, archedeacon, ordynary, or any other personne or per∣sones, to their vses and behoofe, at any tyme heretofore sythe the first daye of May laste paste, haue perceyued, receiued, or taken, or at any time here∣after do perceyue, receyue, or take the fruites, tythes, obuentions, oblati∣ons, emolumentes, commodities, reuenues, rentes, aduauntages, profittes or casualties, commynge, growinge, or belongynge, or whiche hereafter shall comme growe affere or belonge to any archedeaconrye, deanrye, pre∣bende, personage, vycarage, hospitall, wardeyneshippe, prouostshippe, or o∣ther spirituall promotion, benefyce, dignitie, or office (chauntries onelye excepted) within this realme or other the kinges dominions, durynge the vacation of suche archedeaconry, deanry prebende, personage, vycarage, hospitall, wardeyneshippe, prouosteshippe, or other spirituall promotion, benefice, dignitie, or office (chauntries onely excepted) And the same vp∣pon reasonable requeste from hensforth to be made, doth not render, restore, satisfie,Incumbent. contente, and paye to the nexte Incumbent, beynge laufullye in∣stituted, inducted, or admitted to suche archdeaconrye, deanrye, prebende, personage, or vycarage, or other promotion, benefice, dignitie, or office spiri∣tuall, excepte before excepted: or do let or interrupte the saide Incumbente to haue the same: that then euery archebisshop, bishoppe, archedeacon, or∣dinarie, or other person so doinge, shall forfaite and lose the treble value of so much as he shall then haue receyued of the fruites of euery prebend, per∣sonage, vycarage, hospitall, wardeyneshippe, prouosteshippe, or other spi∣rituall promotion, wherof he so shall perceyue, receyue, or deteyne, lette, or interrupte the Incumbent, to perceyue, receyue, and haue the fruites, ty∣thes, obuentions, oblations, emolumentes, commodities, reuenues, rentes, aduantages, profittes, or casualties: The moytie of whiche forfayture shall be to the kinge our soueraigne lorde, and the other moytie therof to the In∣cumbent
of the same prebende, personage, or vicarage, or other spirituall tion, to be recouered in any of the kinges courtes by action, bylle, nte, information, or other wyse, in which action or suite the defendante ll not be admitted to wage his lawe, nor any protection or essoine shal be  the defendaunte allowed. ¶Prouided alway, that it shall be lefull to euery archebishop, bishop, arch∣con, and ordinary, their officers and ministers, to reteine in his or their todie, so moche of the tithes, fruites, obuentions, oblations, emolumen∣s, commodities, aduauntages, rentes, reuenues, casualties, and profites, s shall amount to pay vnto such person or persons, as hath or shall serue  kepe the cure of suche archedeaconry, deanry, prebende, personage,Salary. or vi∣age, or other spirituall promotion, durynge the vacation, his or their re∣sonable stypende, or salarie. And also for the collection gathering and leui∣ng of such tythes, fruites, emolumentes, rentes, and other profittes, ry∣ge and growing duryng the vacation aforesaid: any thing in this acte teyned to the contrary in any wyse notwithstandyng. ¶Prouided also, and be it further enacted by the auctoritie aforesaide, that in case any of the incumbentes aforesaid, happen to dye,Glebe lādes. and before his death hath caused any of his glebe landes to be manured and sowen at his propre costes and charges with any corne or grayne: that then in that case all and euery of the same incumbentes may make and declare theyr testa∣mentes of all the profites of the corne, growynge vpon the same glebe lan∣des so manured and sowen: Any thynge conteyned in this presente acte in  wise notwithstandinge. ¶And where also before this tyme diuers and manye personnes, vicars, and other spirituall personnes, beynge seased, for terme of their lyues, of and in the saide spirituall promotions afore named,Leases. as well for greate sommes of money to them before hande paide, as for other causes and considerations, haue let in ferme for terme of yeres, by sufficient writinges, their saide personages, vycarages, and other spirituall promotions, or part therof, vnto dyuers and many of the kynges subiectes, and after such lea∣ses by them so made, the leassours therof haue often tymes vsed to resigne their saide benefices or spirituall promotyons, so demysed and letten in ferme:Personage or vycarage, let to ferme. by reason of whiche resignation and other the actes of the said leas∣sours, the saide benefices and other spirituall promotions haue ben voide, and the title and interestes of the said leasses, hath bene therby adnychy∣late, and of none effecte in the lawe, contrary to ryght and good conscience. For reformation wherof, and for a quietnesse the better hereafter to be had and contynued betwene the kinges subiectes. Be it enacted by auctoritie of this presente parliament, that from the foresaide firste daye of Maye laste passe, no maner of suche lease, by sufficient wrytinge heretofore made, nor hereafter to be made by any spiritual personne within this realme of Eng∣lande, Wales, or the marches of the same, to any lay personne, of any perso∣nage, vycarage, or other spirituall promotion aforesaide within this realme
vpon which leasse the rent and seruices reserued, with other the yerly charges of the leasse, as in seruynge the cure and otherwyse, shall amount with¦in fortye shillinges by the yere, of as moche as the saide personage, vyca∣rage, or other spirituall promotion aforesaide, so letten, is rated and vale∣wed at, vpon the kynges bokes, for payinge the firste fruites, shall be adiu∣ged voyde adnichilate or determyned, by reason of any suche resignation or other auoydance of the sayd benefice or spirituall promotion so letten by the onely acte of the saide leassour, but that euery such leassee or grauntee of any such benefices or spirituall promotions aforesayde, their executours or assignes, shall haue and may enioye their termes and interestes of and in the same, for ye terme of syxe yeres to be accompted next and immediate∣ly after the saide auoydance, yf the saide leassour doo so long lyue, and the lease so by him before made, do so longe contynue and indure. And that af∣ter such auoydaunce, the successour or successours of euery suche leassour, shall and may distreyne for the rent and seruices so reserued, and haue their actions of dette and all other aduantages by way of action entre or other∣wyse, agaynst the saide lessee, his executours, or assignes, for recouerye of the saide rent and couenauntes vppon the said lease reserued, as the lessour therof myghte haue had, if no suche auoydance had ben had. ¶ And further be it enacted by the auctoritie afore saide, that if hereafter it happen any such lessour to deceasse and dye before the ende of the terme by hym so made, and that there be one yere at leaste to come of the sayde terme: that then it shall be lawefull to the lessee therof, his executours or assignes, to holde and enioy their said leasse to thend of the same yere, wher¦in he is so entered at the time of his saide lessours death, if his saide lease do so longe continewe, bearinge and payenge vnto the successoure of euery suche lessour all such rent and seruices, as for the remenaunce of the sayde yere, shall vpon euery suche lease be dewe: for the recouerie wherof the saide successour shall and maye haue all suche waies and aduauntages as before is limitted and gyuen to the successoure, where his predecessour maketh suche lease and resygneth. Mansyon ouse of per∣sonage or vy¦rage.¶Prouided alway, that euery successour after the deth of his predecessour maye and shall haue vpon one monethes warnynge after the time of his in¦duction, the mancyon house of euery such personage, vicarage, or other spi∣rituall promotion aforesaide, with the glebe belonginge to the same not be∣inge sowen at the time of his said predecessours death, for mayntenaunce of his householde, deductinge therfore in his rent as heretofore hath bene borne for the same, or as it is reasonably worth: any thinge in this said act conteyned to the contrary not withstandinge. Fruites of vacation.¶Prouided alway, that yf the fruites of the vacation of the saide spiritu∣all promotions be not sufficient to pay the curates stypende and wages for seruyng the cure the vacation time,Curate. that then the same to be borne and paid by the nexte incumbent within .xiiii. dayes nexte after that he hath the pos∣session of any of the saide promotions spirituall.
¶An acte declarynge the lymittes of the kynges palayce of westmynster. Cap. xii. FOR AS MOCHE AS THE KYNGES palayce at Westmynster, buylded and edyfyed there,Kynges par∣lee sace at westm̄. before the tyme of mynde, by and nygh vnto the monasterie, and abbey of saynt Peter of Westmynster, in the countie of Myddelsex, is and of longe tyme hath ben in vtter ruyne and decaye; And that our moste drad souerayne lorde kynge HENRY the eight, kynge of Englande and of Fraunce, defendour of the Faythe, lorde of Ire∣lande, and Supreme head in erthe of the Churche of Englande, hath late∣ly opteyned and pourchased one great mansion place and house, sometime parcel of the possessions and inheritance of the Archebishopriche of yorke, sytuate and beinge in the towne of westmynster, in the same countie, not moch distaunte from the same auncyent Palayce. And the kinges highnes as we of late vppon the soyle of the said mansion place, and house, and vp∣pon the grounde therevnto adioyninge, moste sumptuousely and curiouse∣ly hath builded and edified many and distincte beautyfulle costely and ple∣saunte lodgynges, buyldynges, and mansyons, for his gracys syngular pleasure, comforte, and commodytie, to the greatte honour of his hyghnes and of his realme, and thereunto adioyninge hath made a Parke, walled and enuyronned with brycke and stone, and therin hath deuysed and ordey∣deyned many and syngular commodious thinges, pleasures, and other ne∣cessaries, most apte and conuenient to appertaine only to so noble a prince, for his singular comforte, pastime, and solace: Be it therfore enacted by the auctoritie of this present parliament, that all the saide soyle grounde man∣sion and buyldinges, and the sayde parke, with all other thynges commo∣dyties and plasures thervpon made buylded and deuysed, as is aforesaid, and also the soyle of the said auncient palaice, shalbe from hensforth ye kin∣ges hole palaice at Westminster, and so to be taken demed reputed called & named the kinges palaice at westminster for euer. And that ye same palaice shall from hensforthe extende and be as well within the soyle and places a∣fore limited and appoynted for the same, as also in all the strete or waye le∣dinge from Charinge Crosse, vnto the seintuarie gate at westminster afore said, and in all the houses buyldinges landes and tenementes on both the sides of the same strete or way, from the said Crosse vnto westminster halle, situate lyinge or being betwene the water of the Thames of the easte part, and the saide parke walle of the weste parte, and so forthe throughe all the soyle precincte and limittes of the saide olde palays. ¶AND THAT the saide palayce nowe made by the auctoritie of this acte, shal from hensforth haue and enioy within the precincte, limittes, and boundes before expressed and declared of and for the same, al such and like prerogatiues, lyberties, preemynences, iurisdyctions, and pryuyleges, as to the kynges aunciente palaice within this realme, haue at any tyme here∣tofore
belonged vsed or of right apperteined. And that the same olde and aunciēt palace of westminster from hensforth be reputed demed and taken only as a mēbre & parcel of the said newe palaice, made by this act, as is a∣foresaid: any prescription recorde or vsage heretofore had vsed or allowed to the contrary notwithstanding. Sauinge to al and singular person and persons, bodies polyke and corporate, theyr heyres and successours, and e∣uery of them, al such right title interest possession rentes reuertion remain∣dre distresse actiō lease leases graūtes annuiries suites petitions and con∣ditions in such maner and fourme as they or any of them, their heires and successours, or the heires and successours of any of them, haue had, shulde, myghte, or ought to haue had in the premysses or any parcell therof, if this acte had neuer ben had ne made: any thynge in this acte conteyned to the contrary not withstandynge. ¶Prouided alwaies that this present act, nor any thing therin conteined, be in any wyse preiudicyall or hurtfull to Wyllyam Babyngton, keper of oure olde palaice of westmynster, his heires nor assignes, for or concerning his said office, but that it shall be lefull to the saide Wyllyam Babington, his heyres, and assignes, to haue holde, occupye, exercyse, and enioye the sayde office of keper of the sayde palaice at westmynster, with all comodi∣ties, profytes, aduauntages, and other emolumentes, rysynge or growinge of the same office, in as large and ample maner as if this presentt acte had not benne made: any thinge in this presente acte to the contrary heretofore not withstandynge. ¶ An acte compellynge spirituall persons to kepe residence vppon their benefices. Cap. xiii. WHere as in the parliament begonne at London, the their day of Nouembre, in the .xxi. yere of the reine of our soue∣rayne lord king Henry the .viii. and from thens adiorned and proroged to ye palaice of Westminster, the .xvii. daye of Decembre than nexte ensuinge, amongest other good actes and ordinances, then and there by the auctoritie of the sayde parlyament, it was establyshed, ordeyned, and enacted, that as wel euery spiritual person, then being promoted to any archdeconry dean∣ry or dignitie in any monastery or cathedrall churche, or other churche con∣uentual or collegial or being beneficed with any personage or vicarage, as al and euery spiritual person & persons, which shuld after the feast of saint Mychaell tharchaungell, whiche was in the foresaide .xxi. yere of the reine of our saide soueraigne lorde kinge Henry the .viii.Residence. be promoted to any of the said dignities or benefices with any personage or vicarage, shuld from the saide feaste of sainte Mychaell tharchaungell, be personally residente and abydinge at and vpon his said dignitie prebende or benefice or at one of them at the least. And in case any such spiritual person, at any time after
the saide feaste, kepte not residence at one of his said dignities prebende or ices (as is afore said) but absent him selfe wilfully by the space of one eth together, or by the space of two monethes, to be accompted at seue∣rall tymes in any one yere, and make his residence and abidinge in any o∣ther places by such tyme: that then he shall forfayte for euery such defaulte  sterlynge, as in the same acte more playnely dothe appere. In whiche ae amonge other prouisions conteined and specyfyed in the same, it was uided, that the said acte of none residence shulde not in any wise extend  be preiuditiall to any scholar or scholars,Scholars beinge conuersaunte and abi∣ynge for studye without fraude or couyne at any vnyuersytie within this realme or withoute, as by the same prouysyon dothe also appere more at ge. Sythens the makynge of whiche good acte and statute, dyuers and manye personnes, beinge benefyced with cure of soule (as is afore sayde) and beyng not apte to study, by reason of theyr age or other wyse, ne neuer tending before the making of the said act to trauaile in study within any of the saide vniuersities for the encrease of lerninge, but rather mynding & tending theyr owne ease, singuler lucre, & pleasure, by the same prouision ourably to defraude the same good statute, & ordinaunce, do dayly & cō∣monly resorte and repayre to the said vniuersities of Oxen̄ and Cambrige and to either of them, where they vnder the said pretence and colour of stu∣dy doth contynue and abyde, lyuinge dissolutely, nothing profitinge them selfes by study at all in lerning, but consume the time in ydelnes, and in o∣ther pastymes and insolente pleasures, giuinge occasion and euylle exam∣ple therby to other yonge men and studentes within the said vnyuersities, tell or nothinge regardinge theyr cure and charge of sowle, contrarye to the mindes and entente of the makers of the foresaid good statute & orde∣naunce. And also diuers and many old beneficed men haue & do continu∣ally remayne there, neuer exercisynge nor practisynge theyr lerninge, to the example of vertue and mayntenaunce of the common weale, in dyscharge of their conscience, according to theyr duetie, hauing neuertheles and occu∣pieng such romes and commodities, as were institute and ordeined for the mayntenaunce & reliefe of poore scolers, to the great hinderance and detri∣ment of the same. Be it therfore enacted by the kinge our soueraygne lorde, with the assente of ye lordes spiritual and temporall, and the cōmons in this present parliament assembled, that all and singular spirituall persone and persones, whiche nowe be or hereafter shall be to any benefice or benefices promoted as is aforesaid, being aboue the age of .xl. yeres, the chancellour, vychancellour, cōmissary of the said vniuersities, or any of them, wardens, deanes, prouostes, presidentes, rectours, masters, principals and other head rulers of colleges, halles, and other houses or places corporate, within the said vniuersities, or any of them, doctors of the chaire, reders of diuinitie in the comon scholes of diuinitie, in any of ye said vniuersities onely excep∣ted, shalbe residēt & abiding at & vpon one of their said benefices, according to the entent & true meaninge of the sayd former act, vpon such peyne and
penalties as be conteyned in the saide former acte,Benefices persons. made and apoynted for such beneficed persons for theyr none resydence. And that none of the saide beneficed persons, being aboue the age aforesaid, except before except, shall from hensforth be excused of theyr none residence vpon the saide benefices, for that they be studentes or resiaunt within the said vniuersities or any of them, any prouiso, or any other clause or sentence specyfyed or conteyned in the said former acte of none residence, or any other thinge or thinges to the contrary hereof in any wyse not withstandinge. ¶And ouer this be it enacted by thauctoritie beforesaid, that al and singu∣lar such beneficed persons being vnder the age of .xl. yeres, resiante and a∣biding within the said vniuersities, or any of them, shall not enioye the pri∣uilege & libertie of none residence conteined in the prouiso of ye said former act, made for the scholars & studentes of the said vniuersities or any of thē, onlesse he or they be presente at the ordinary lecture and lectures, as well at home in theyr houses as in the cōmon schole or scholes, and in theyr propre persons kepe sophemes, problemes, disputatiōs, and other exercises of ler∣ninge, and be apponente and respondent in the same, according to the ordi∣nances and statutes of eyther of the said vniuersities, where he or they shal be so abydinge or resiaunt, any thynge conteyned in the said prouiso or for∣mer acte to the contrary not withstandynge. ¶Prouided alway that this acte shall begynne to take effecte at the feaste of saynct Mighel tharchaungell nexte comynge, and not before. ¶Prouided alway, that this acte, nor any thinge therin conteyned, shal ex∣tende to any person or persons, which nowe is or hereafter shall be readers of any publique or common lecture in diuynitie, lawe cyuile, phisyke, phi∣losophy,Reeders of Publique, Lectures. humanitie, or of any of the lyberall sciences, or publyke or cōmon interpretours, or techers of the Ebrewtong, Caldey, or Greke, in whatsoe∣uer college or place of any of the saide vniuersities the said persons for the tyme beinge, shal rede the saide cōmon or publique lectures: Nor yet to a∣ny person or persons, which after or about the age of .xl. yeres, which shall resorte to any of the said vniuersities to procede doctours in diuinitie, lawe ciuile, or phisike, for the tyme of their saide procedinges, and executynge of suche sermons dispucions or lectures, which they be bound by the statutes of the vniuersities there to do for the sayde degrees so obteyned. ¶An acte lymyttinge the prices of wynes. Cap. xiiii. BE it enacted by auctoritie of this present parliament, that no person or persons shal sell any Gascoyne Guyon or Frē∣che wynes aboue .viii. d. the galon,Price of wi∣nes. that is to saye, a penye the pynte .ii. d. the quarte .iiii. pence the potel, and .viii. pen∣ce the galon, vpon payne of forfaiture for euery pinte to be sold aboue the said price .iiii. d. and for euery quarte sold a∣boue the sayd price .viii. d. and for euery pottel so solde aboue the said price
xii. d. And for euery galon so solde aboue the saide price afore limitted .ii.s̄. And that no Malmeseys, romneys, sackes, nor other swete wynes, shall be de by retayle aboue .xii. d. the galō .vi. d. the potel .iii. d. the quarte, and .i.  the pynte, vppon peyne to lose and forfayte .iii.s̄.iiii. d. for euerye ga∣ .xx. d. for euery potell .xii. d. for euery quarte, and .vi. d. for euery pynte that shall be solde contrary to this acte. ¶Prouided alwaye, that the lorde Chancellour, lorde Treasourer, lorde President of the kynges most honourable counsayle, lord Priuie seale, and the two chiefe Iustices of eyther benche, or .v.iiii. or .iii. of them, shal haue power and auctoritie by theyr dyscretyons, to sette the prices of all kinde of ynes, that is to saye, of the pryces of the butte, tonne, pype, hogges head, cheon. teers, barrell, or rundelet, when it shall be solde in grosse, so that they or any of them cause the prices by them set to be written, and open pro∣clamation therof to be made in the kynges courte of Chancery openly in the terme tyme, or elles, in the cytie boroughe or towne, where any such wy∣s shall be solde in grosse: any thynge conteyned in this acte to the con∣trarye hereof not withstandynge. ¶And it is further enacted, that if any person or persons, after such prices beset and put in writinge by the said lord Chauncellour, lord Treasourer, lorde President of the kinges most honorable counsaile, lord Priuie seale, and the .ii. chiefe iustices, or by .v.iiii. or .iii. of them, and proclamation ther if hadde (as is afore saide) do sell any wines in grosse by any fraude or co∣, contrary to the said prices so sette and proclaimed:wines solde in grosse. that thenne euery offendour in that behalfe shall lose and forfayte for euery vesselle by them solde in grosse contrary to the said prices .xl.s̄. the one halfe of al which for∣faitur  be to the kinge our soueraigne lord, and the other halfe ther of, if it be within any cytie borowghe or towne corporate, to be to the mayres, shireffes, bailiues, or other head rulers of such cities boroughes or townes corporate. And if it be without citie, boroughe, or towne corporate, then to be to suche of the kinges subiectes as wyll sewe for the same. And that eue∣ry suche forfaiture shall be recouered by originall writte of det, byll, plaint, or information, In whiche suyte no wager of lawe shall be admitted, nor a∣ny protection or essoyne allowed. ¶And it is also enacted,Iustices of peace. Head offy∣cers. that the Iustices of peace in euery shyre of this present realme, and all maires shereues bailyues and other head officers in cyties boroughes and townes corporate, that is to saye, euery of them wtin the limitties of theyr cōmissions and auctorities, as well within fraunche∣ses as without, shal haue power and auctoritie to examine here inquire and determine the defautes of such as shal attempte to sell any wines in grose or by retayle contrary to this act, and to punyshe the offendours by impry∣sonment or otherwyse by theyr discretions. ¶And where as in the parlyament holden at westmynster in the fyrst yere of the reigne of kinge Rycharde the thyrde,Tonne of wyne. amonge other thinges it was establyshed, ordeyned, and enacted, that euery tonne of wine shuld conteine
CClii. galons, euerye butte of Malmesey shoulde conteyne .Cxxvi. galons, euery pype .Cxxvi. galons, euery tercyan or poncheon .lxxxiiii. galons, eue∣ry hogges head .lxiii. galons, euery teerce .xli. galons, and euery barrel .xxxi. galons, and dī. & euery rondelette .xviii. galons, and dī. And that no vessel shulde be putte to sale, tille it were gauged, vppon peyne of forfayture, as by the same statute it doth appere more at large. Neuer the lesse great dys∣ceyte is dayely vsed in sellinge of wines and oyles in caskes and vesselles, not bearinge the contentes aboue limitted, to the great losse of the kinges poore subiectes. For remedye wherof, it is enacted by the auctoritie of this present parliament, that the saide estatute made in the fyrste yere of kynge Rycharde the third, and al other estatutes heretofore made for trewe gaw∣ginge and measuringe of wines,Gaugynge of wynes and other licours. oyles, hony, or any other lycours, whiche estatutes afore this tyme be not repelled nor expyred, shall stande in theyr strength and vertue, and be put in due execution, according to theyr tenors and effectes in euery behalfe. ¶AND ouer that be it enacted by auctoritie of this present parlyament, that euery gauger within this realme shall trewelye and effectually within the limittes of his offyce, gauge all the saide tonnes, buttes, pipes, terses, poncheons,Gaugeour. tercyans, barrelles, hogges head, and rundlettes, and shall playnely and trewly make vppon the head of euerye suche vessell the con∣tent of the same, vppon peine to forfaite to the partie, to whose vse the wine oyle or other thynge therin beinge shall be sold, foure tymes the value of that that ye vessell so marked shall lacke of his laufull contente aboue wri∣ten: the same forfayture to be recouered ouer and besydes the costes of the sure, by the kinges originall writte, or by byll in any of the kinges courtes of his common lawes, or in any competente courte, hauynge iurisdyciyon in the place, where that offence shal be committed, by action or bill of dette, in which action or suite, none essoyn, protection, nor wager of lawe shalbe accepted admitted or allowed to the defendant or defendantes. And that e∣uerye marchaunte or other personne, sellinge the saide wine, oyle, or other thynge conteyned in the said vessell marked, shall allowe of the price ther∣of to the byer of the same, for euery quantitie of wine, oyle, or other thynge conteyned in the saide marked vessell, the ful valewe of the lacke therof, beynge by reason of defaute of full gauge of the vesselle, marked, or of defaute of fyllynge of the same vessell, or by reason of defaute of any of them, after the rate of the hole price of the wine, oyle, or other thinge, so be∣ynge solde by that vessell marked: and that vpon peyne of forfayture to the same byer the dowble value of the same vesselle and wine, oyle, or other thynge therin beynge so solde: the same forfayture to be recouered to ge∣ther with the costes of the suyte, in maner and fourme as the forfayture laste before written is lymytted to be recouered.
¶An acte for punyshement of pyrotes and robbers on the sea. Capit. xv WHere traytours, pirotes, theues, robbers, murtherers,Pyrates. and confederatours vpon the sea, many tymes escape vnpunis∣shed, bicause the triall of their offences hath heretofore ben ordered, iudged, and determined before the Admiral,Admyrall. or his lieutenaunt or commissarie, after the course of the ciuile la∣wes, the nature wherof is, that before any iugement of deth canne be yeuen agaynst the offendours, eyther they must playnely confesse their offences (which they will neuer do, without torture or peynes) or elles their offences be so playnely and directly proued by witnesse indifferente,Robbers on the sea. such as sawe their offences committed, whiche canne not be gotten, but by chaunce at fewe times, bycause such offendours commytte their offences vpon the sea, and at many times murdre and kylle such personnes, beynge in the shippe or bote, where they committe their offences, whiche shoulde wytnesse ayenst them in that behalfe: and also suche as shuld beare witnes be commonlye maryners and shipemen, whiche bycause of their often vy∣ages and passages in the seas, depart without longe tarienge and protrac∣tion of time, to the great costes and charges, as well of the kinges highnes as suche as wolde pursue such offendours. For refourmation wherof, be it enacted by the auctoritie of this present parliament, that all treasons, felo∣nies, robberies, murders, and confederacies hereafter to be commited in or vpon the sea, or in any other hauen riuer, creke, or place, where the admyral or admiralles haue or pretend to haue power auctoritie or iurisdiction, shal be inquired tried harde determyned and iudged in such shyres & places in the realme, as shall be limitted by the kynges commission or comissions to be directed for the same, in like fourme and condition, as if any such offence or offences had ben committed or done in or vpon the lande, and such com∣missions shalbe had vnder the kynges great seale, directed to the Admirall or admiralles, or to his or to their lieutenaunt deputie & deputies,Chancelloure of England, and to iii. or .iiii. such other substantiall persones, as shall be named or appoynted by the lorde Chauncellour of Englande, for the time beynge, from tyme to tyme, and as ofte as nede shall require, to here and determine suche offen∣ces, after the common course of the lawes of this lande, vsed for treasones, felonies, robberies, murders, and confederacies of the same done and com∣mitted vpon the lande within this realme. ¶And be it enacted by the auctoritie afore saide, that suche personnes, to whom suche commission or commissions shall be directed, or .iiii. of theym at the least, shall haue full power and auctoritie to enquere of such offences and of euery of them, by the othes of twelue good and lauful inhabitantes in the Shire, limitted in their commission: in suche like maner and forme, as if suche offences hadde benne committed vppon the lande within the same Shyre. And that euery inditement founde and presented before such
commissioners of any treasons, felonies, robberies, murders manslaugh∣ters, or such other offences, commytted or done, in or vpon the seas, or in or vpon any other hauen ryuer or creke, shalbe good and effectual in the lawe. And if any person or persons happē to be indited for any such offence done or hereafter to be done vpon the seas, or in any other places aboue limitted, that then such orders processe iudgement & execution shal be vsed had done and made to and agaynst euery such person and persons, so beinge indic∣ted, as agaynste traytours, felons, and murderers, for treason, felony, rob∣bery, murder, or other such offences done vpon the lande, as by the lawes of the realme is accustomed. And that the triall of such offence or offences, if it be denyed by the offendour or offendours, shalbe had by twelue lauful men, inhabited in the shire limitted within such commission, whiche shall be directed as is aforesayde, and no chalenge or chalenges to be had for the hundred.Challenge. And such as shall be conuicte of any such offence or offences, by verdicte confession or proces, by auctoritie of any suche commission, shall haue and suffre suche peynes of death, losses of landes goodes & cattalles, as if they had ben attaynted and conuicted of any treasons, felonies, rob∣beries, or other the said offences, done vpon the landes. ¶And be it enacted by auctoritie aforesaide, that for treasons robberies felonies murders & confederacies, done vpon the sea or seas, or in any place aboue rehersed,Clergy. Sainctuary. the offendours shal not be admitted to haue the benefite of his or their clergie, but be vtterly excluded therof and from the same, and al¦so of the priuilege of any sainctuary. ¶Prouided alway, that this acte extende not to be preiudiciall or hurtfull to any person or persons for taking any vittaile, gables, ropes, ankers, or sayles, whiche any such person or persons (compelled by necessitie) taketh of or in any shippe, which may conueniently spare the same, so the same per¦sone or persones pay out of hande for the same vittaile, gables, ropes, an∣kers, or sayles money or money worth, to the value of the thinge so taken, or to delyuer for the same a sufficient byll obligatorie to be payde in forme folowing,Straictes of Marrocke. That is to say: if the taking of the same thinges be on this side the straytes of Marroke, then to be paide within .iiii. monethes. And if it be beyonde the saide straites of Marroke, then to be payde within .xii. mo∣nethes next ensuynge the makyng of such billes. And that the makers of suche bylles well and truely paye the same dette at the daye to be limitted within the said billes. ¶Prouided alwaye, that whanne so euer any suche commission for the punyshement of the offences aforesaide, or of any of them, shall be directed or sent to any place within the iurisdiction of the fyue portes,Fyue portes. that then eue∣rye such commission shall be directed vnto the lorde wardayne of the sayde portes for the time beinge, or to his deputie, and vnto thre or foure suche other person or persons, as the lorde chauncellour for the tyme beynge shal name and appoynte: Any thynge in this present acte to the contrary not¦withstandynge.
¶Prouided alway, that whan so euer any commission shal be directed vn∣to the fiue portes, for the inquisition and trialles of any the offences expres∣ in this acte, that euery such inquisition and triall to be hadde by vertue of such commission shalbe made and had by the inhabitantes in the saide e portes or the membres of the same: any thing in this act to the contra∣ therof not withstandinge. ¶An acte for the release of such as haue obteyned pretended lycences and dispensations from the see of Rome. Capi. xvi. WHere the bisshoppe of Rome and his predecessours,Byshoppe of Rome. of his and theyr couetous and ambitious myndes, to thentent to aduaunce and enriche them selfes and the see of Rome, to the greate em∣pouerisshynge of this realme of Englande, and other the kyn∣ges domynyons, contrary to goddes lawes, the lawes and statutes of this realme, and in derogation of the imperiall crowne of this sayde realme, haue heretofore wrongefully pretended, extorted, vsed, and exercised within the same diuers and many vsurped powers, iurisdictions, and auctorities, durynge and by the which tyme the sayd bysshoppe and his predecessours, arrogantly and iniustly haue taken vpon them for great summes of money and other profittes to them giuen, to graūt vnto the kynges subiectes, and other inhabitauntes within this realme, and other the kinges dominions, many diuers & sundry auctorities immunities faculties priuileges lycen∣ces indulgences and preeminences, of diuers kindes natures and quali∣ties: which all thoughe they proceded by an iniuste and vsurped auctory∣tie, haue bene vnto nowe of late by the subiectes of this realme temerously and ignorauntly accepted receyued vsed & erronyously put in excercise and execution: the which vsurped auctoritie iurisdiction and power is nowe iustely trulye and ought to be clerely and absolutely extynguyshed extirped and abolysshed within this realme and other the kynges domynions. And for as moch as all and euery such person and persons bodies polytyke and corporate, which vnlawefully and without any maner of auctoritie or iuste grounde, heretofore haue temerously and ignorantly accepted receyued v∣sed & erroniously put in execution and exercise the said faculties immunities auctorities priuileges lycences indulgences and preeminences, haue nowe sincere pure and perfite intelligence and knowlege of the said vsurped auc∣toritie iurisdiction and power. And that the said faculties, auctorities, pri∣uileges, licences, and indulgences, so as is aforesaide accepted receyued v∣sed and erroniously exercised, were & ben to all intentes and purposes clere¦ly voyde frustrate and of none effecte. All be it if they shulde be impeached or interrupted of such priuileges liberties preeminēces auctorities iurisdi∣ctions profittes and other commodities, which they now haue vse and ex∣ercise by colour of such vayne and voyde licences dispensations and facul∣ties,
it shulde be to their intollerable inquietations and vtter vndoynge. Wherfore be it enacted by auctoritie of this present parliament, that al bul∣les breues faculties and dispensations,Bulles. Breues. Faculties. Dyspensaty∣ons. of what names natures or qualy∣ties so euer they be of, heretofore had or opteyned of the bishoppe of Rome, or of any his predecessours, or by the auctoritie of the see of Rome, by or to any subiectes resiantes or bodies politike or corporate of or in this realme, or of or in any other the kinges dominions, shall from hensforth be clerely voyde and of no value force strength nor vertue, and shall neuer here after be vsed dmitted allowed pleaded or alleged in any places or courtes of this realme, or of any other the kinges dominions, vpon the peynes contey¦ned in the statute of prouision and premunire, made in the .xvi. yere of the reigne of king Richarde the seconde. Yet not withstandinge at the mooste humble petition and intercession of the lordes spirituall and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, it maye please the kin∣ges maiestie, of his moste gratious benignitie goodnes and blessed dispo∣sition, that it maye be enacted by auctoritie of this parliament, that al ma∣riages had and solempnised within this realme, or in any other the kinges dominions,Maryages. before the thirde day of Nouember, in the .xxvi. yere of the kin∣ges moste gratious reigne, wherof there is no deuorce or separation had by the ecclesiasticall lawes of this realme, & which mariages be not prohibited by goddes lawes, limitted and declared in the act made in this present par∣lyament for the establishement of the kinges successiō, or otherwyse by holy scripture, shall be by auctoritie of this present parliament good laufull and effectual, and shalbe from the beginning of such mariages reputed estemed taken adiudged receyued approued & allowed by the auctoritie of this pre∣sent parliament, to al and singular purposes effectes and ententes, as good as sufficient and as vayleable, as though no impediment of matrymony had euer ben betwene them that haue contracted and solemnysed such ma∣riages: And that all children procreated and to be procreated in and vnder such mariages, shall be laufull to all intentes and purposes. Archebishop∣pes, and by∣shoppes.¶And that it may be also enacted by the auctoritie of this present parlya∣ment, that all archebishoppes and bishoppes of this realme, or of any the kynges dominions consecrated, and at this present time taken and repu∣ted for archebisshops and bisshops, may by auctoritie of this present parly∣ament, and not by vertue of any prouisiō or other foreyne auctoritie licence facultie or dispensation, kepe, enioy, and reteyn their archebishoprikes & by∣shoprikes, in as large & ample maner, as if they had ben promoted elected confirmed & consecrated, according to the dewe course of the lawes of this realme. And that euery archebyshoppe and byshoppe of this realme, and of other the kinges dominions, may minister vse and exercise all and euerye thyng and thinges, perteyning to thoffice or ordre of an archebisshop & by∣shop, with al tokens insignes and ceremonies therunto laufully belonging. And that al ecclesiasticall persons of the kinges realme & dominions, which at this time be taken had and reputed for abbottes priours, abbasses, prio∣esses,
and other heades of religion (whiche be not nother shall be excluded from their dignities by the late acte of suppression) and the religious per∣sons lyuinge vnder their obedience, and all persons now taken and repu∣ted as maysters presidentes prouostes and wardeynes of cathedrall chur∣ches and colleges, with the companies and felowshippes of the same, al pre¦stes and clerkes, which haue receyued any of the ecclesiasticall orders, all archedeacons and deanes, and other hauynge offices cures and dignities spirituall, may by auctoritie of this act, and not by the vertue of any forein power or auctoritie, administer vse and exercise all thinges perteininge to their dignities offices ordres cures religions and felowshippes, and maye laufully hereafter vse al tokens insignes, and ceremonies, which they haue ben accustomed to vse in times paste (so it be not expresly agaynst the lawes of god and this realme) any thing or thinges conteyned in any act or actes, made sithen the beginninge of this present parliament to the contrary of any the premisses in any wise not withstanding. ¶And where diuers and many of the kinges said subiectes haue purcha∣sed and obteyned many dispensations bulles breues and faculties of the bi∣shoppe of Rome for the tyme beynge, or by auctoritie of the see of Rome, as pluralities, vnyons, trialities, appropriations, commendams, exemptions, and other bulles breues and faculties, for diuers causes and matters, other than be afore expressed, which be of no strength or vertue: it may therfore please the kynges maiestie, that it may be enacted by auctoritie afore saide, that all and euery his said subiectes durynge the time of one hole yere next after the feast of saincte Michaell the archaungell nexte comminge, maye enioy vse and haue by auctoritie of this present acte, and not by the vertue of the said bulles breues and faculties, al & euery the effectes conteyned & specified in such bulles breues and faculties, in all such cases onely as may be dispensed with by the archebishoppe of Canturbury, by auctoritie of the lawes and statutes of this realme. ¶And that it maye be further enacted by auctoritie aforesaid, that all and euery the kinges said subiectes, bryngyng rendrynge and delyuerynge to such persons of his counsell, or of the maisters of his chancery, as the kin∣ges highnes shall name and appoynt, any bulles breues or any other facul∣ties concerninge any the premisses: that then if it shall appere to such per∣sons as the kinges highnes shall so name and appoynt to receyue such bul∣les faculties and breues, after dewe examination therof had, that the effec∣tes conteyned and specified in such bulles faculties and breues or any part therof, maye be laufully graunted by the saide archebyshoppe, of Cantur∣bury, by auctoritie of the lawes and statutes of this realme: that then & in euery such case the kinges saide subiectes, makinge humble suite to haue the effectes conteyned in the said bulles breues and faculties to be granted vnto them,Chauncellor of Englande. shall haue receyue and obteyne of the chauncellour of Englande or keper of the great seale for the time beinge, by sufficient writing in dewe fourme to be made, and to be sealed vnder the kinges great seale, all and e∣uery
such effectes conteyned and specified in such bulles breues and fac¦ties,Archebisshop of Cant. as may be laufully graunted by the sayde archebisshoppe of Cant¦bury, by auctoritie of the lawes and statutes of this realme, paying onel for the sealinge of euery such writinge .xx. s .iiii. d. And ouer that for t reasonable costes for peynes of the writinge therof .iii. s iiii. d. and not ¦boue, and for the peyne taken for dewe examynation of euery suche bulles breues and faculties .iii. s .iiii. d. and not aboue. And that this present act shalbe sufficient and immediate warrant to the chancellour or keper of the greate s, for thensealing and deliuerie of such licences faculties dispen∣sations and other writinges, which shall be made graunted and sealed vn∣der the kinges greate seale by vertue and auctoritie of this acte. ¶And it is also enacted by auctoritie afore sayd, that all and euery suche lycence dispensation facultie confirmation or other writing, to be had made or graunted vnder the kinges great seale out of the said court of chauncery by auctoritie of this acte, in fourme as is aboue rehersed, shall be good and effectuall to the saide parties suing for the same, according to the tenor and effectes therof, and shall be admitted, accepted, and allowed in all courtes and places of this realme, and in all other the kinges dominions: any v∣sage, prescription, foreyne lawes, customes, or ordynaunce to the contrary therof notwithstandinge. ¶An acte giuinge auctoritie to suche as shall succede to the crowne of this realme, whan they come to the age of .xxiiii. yeres to make frustrate such actes as shall be made afore in their time. Capitulo .xvii. FOr as moche as lawes and statutes may happen hereaf∣ter to be made within this realme, at parlyamentes hol∣den at such time as the kinges of the same shall happen to be within age, hauynge small knowledge and experi∣ence of their affaires, to the great hynderance and dero∣gation of the imperiall crowne of this realme, and to the vniuersall damage of the common welthe of the sub∣iectes of the same, Be it therfore enacted by auctoritie of this presente par∣lyament, that if the imperiall crowne of this realme, after the deceasse of the kynges mooste royall maiestie (whose lyfe our lorde longe preserue) di∣scende, comme, or remayne, to the heires of oure saide soueraigne lorde, or to any persone to be limitted by his highnes, as of very right it muste and ought to do,Actes of par∣lyament. according to the lawes of this realme established for the same, the saide heires or suche personne beinge within the age of .xxiiii. yeres, and that then any acte or actes of parliament shall happen to be made and esta∣blyshed in any parliament, that then shall be holden, before suche heyre or heires person or persones then being in possession of the said crowne, shall be of their full ages of .xxiiii. yeres: that then euery such heire or heires of
de soueraigne lorde, or such persone so possessed of the crowne, and  within the same age of .xxiiii. yeres, shall haue full power and au∣ at all tymes after they shall come to theyr saide full ages of .xxiiii.Letters pa∣tentes.  by theyr letters patentes, vnder the greatte seale of Englande, to e, adnulle, and repeale all and syngular suche actes, made and esta∣blished by their royall assentes in any parlyament holden during the time  they were within their saide age of .xxiiii. yeres, theyr royall assentes de to the same, durynge the tyme that they were within the said age of  yeres,Reuocation of actes. or any acte or actes hereafter to be made to the contrary therof notwithstandinge. ¶And be it also enacted by auctoritie aforesaid, that euery such repeale ad∣ation and reuocation of any acte or actes, that shalbe made and establi∣shed in any parlyament, holden before the time that such heires or person, possessed of the crowne, shall be of the saide age of .xxiiii. yeres, shall be as d and effectuall to al intentes and purposes, as though it had ben done  auctoritie of parlyament. ¶An acte concerning treason in certayne cases. Cap. xviii. BE it enacted by auctoritie of this present parliamēt, that if any man, of what estate, degree, or cōdition so euer he be, at any time hereafter, take vpon him to espouse, mary, or take to his wyfe any of the kynges childrē, being laufully borne or otherwise, commonly reputed or takē for his children, or any of the kynges systers or auntes of the part of ye father or any the laufull childrē of ye kinges brethren or sisters, or contract mariage with any of them, without the especiall licence assent con∣sent & agrement first therevnto had and obteined of the kinges highnes in writinge vnder his gracis great seale, or defyle or deflour any of thē not be∣inge maryed, shall be demed and adiuged a traitour to the king and to his realme. And that euery suche offence here after to be done made or perpetra¦ted, contrary to this acte, shall be adiudged and demed to be highe treason.Treason, And that euery man so offendinge, and their abettours, procurers, comfor∣ters, counsaylours, and ayders, being laufully conuycte of any suche of∣fence accordinge to the lawes of this realme, shal haue and suffre such and like peines and execution of death, losses of priuileges of sainctuary and for faytures of landes tenementes and hereditamentes to al intentes and pur∣poses, as in cases of high treason apperteyneth.Sainctuary. Sauynge to all and euery person and persons, bodies politike and corporate, their heires and succes∣sours, and to the heires and successours of euery of them, other thā the lord Thomas Howarde, and his heires, and all other persons, which shall for∣tune hereafter to be atteinted by auctoritie of this acte, and their heires and euery of them, all suche right, tytle, intereste, possession, leases, annuities, rentes, seruices, reuercions, remaynders, offices, fees, commons, conditi∣ons
& other commodities profites & hereditamentes, in such maner fourme qualitie & condition, as they or any of them haue had, shuld or mighte haue had, if this acte had neuer ben had nor made: Any thing in this present act to the contrary therof notwithstandinge. ¶Prouided alway and be it enacted, that in euery suche case before reher∣sed, the woman after the laste day of this parlyament so offendynge, beinge within the degrees before specified, shall incurre like daunger and penaltie as is before limitted, and shall suffre suche lyke dethe and punyshemente, as is before appoynted to the man offendyng in maner and fourme expres∣sed in this acte. ❧ GOD SAVE THE KYNGE. ARMA · REGIS · ANGLIE · ET · F·
