669.f.20[23] 99870471 163440
THE ground of desperation is our of the light, for Cain when he despaired, Gen. 4.8. went from the light, that killed the just; he that killed the just within, killed the just without: And Esan who despised his birth-right, who was a profane person, did seek to kill the just; Gen, 27.4. and he that rose up against the beloved of God, David, who despaired, 2 Sim. 28.15. & 31.4. there he rose up against the just: And the Jewes did despaire, and doubted, they did not believe in the light, and were against the just, though they professed all the Scriptures; Mat 27.5. and Judds which despaired, turned from Christ the light, to the changeable Priests; so the cause of desperation is going from the light, for that which will presume will despaire, which riseth up in that nature which acts contrary to the light, and that is it which wanders too and fro, up and down, and hunts abroad, Gen 25 . and builds that which God confounds. I am the light of the world, and doth enlighten every one that comes into the world, saith Christ, he by whom the world was made: Now every one being enlightned with the light that comes from him who is not of the world, who was tempted in the world to make himself away, who was tempted to lust after the Creatures, Luke 4.9. & , , 8. who was tempted to worship the Devil who is out of the truth, but overcame all: Now every one of you that come into the world, having a light from him that is not of this world, that was thus tempted, who entred not into the temptation; it is not a sin to be tempted, for he was tempted, but to enter into the temptation: So if you see temptations with the light that comes from Christ, the light, the truth, and the life; look at him who was tempred, Heb, 4.15. who overcame the temptations, who was not of the world; having a light from him whose name is called The Word of God, who saith, If thou keep my word, Revel. 3.10. I will keep thee in the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world, and it shall not come neer thee, which shall come to try all that dwell upon the earth: For having a light from the Word by which all things was made, & keeping the Word, Revel. 3.8. the power is received against all temptations, and they shall not come nigh. Art thou tempted to make away thy self? Luke 4.3. so was Christ. Look not at the temptations, but look at Christ, and there thou wilt receive power. Art thou tempted to the Creatures; doth the Devil, he that is out of the truth, who is a destroyer, Luke 4.7. tempt thee to the Creatures? so was Christ, he by whom all things was made. Heb. 2.10. Art thou tempted to worship the Devil? Doth the Devil who is out of the truth tempt thee to worship him? Look to Christ, John 14.6. he was tempted, who overcame: Look to him who overcame, he is the Captain of our salvation: So every one having a light from Christ Jesus, which is given to him to watch, and to pray, and to seek, and to knock after Christ, who is the door, the way, the life, the Covenant of peace: So look not at the temp∣tation, but at Christ, neither be troubled at them; but look to him from whom your strength come, that lets you see them, and there stand still, for there salvation is received, and your strength. Isa. 45.2. Have you made a Covenant with death, who contrary to the light in your consciences, have acted? Isa. 28.10, 17, 18. Have you made Covenants with Hell, and the Grave, and Satan, which is our of the light, our of the truth; Isa. 42.6. and that is the Devil that is out of the truth, the destroyer, the devourer. Isa 49.9. Therefore being turned to the light which comes from Christ, the Covenant of God, Gods Covenant of light, there waiting, the Co∣venant of death is broken, and in it believe, for there Gods mercy is received, against which Covenant Hells gates cannot prevaile, let her open her mouth never so wide; and all the bonds of iniquity, pro∣mises which you have made with the fleshly mind, and the lusts being turned to the light, the Covenant of life breaks all the bonds and the promises of the fleshly mind: Therefore in patience wait in the light which comes from Christ, the Covenant of peace which yee may receive, to have peace with God; Lam. 3.26. and never look at the temptations, but at the light which shewes them, and there stand still to receive power from him from whom all power is received; for that which is out of the truth, that tempts to draw from the light, and from the truth, and out of it; therefore every one having the light from Christ, who is not of the world, which is come into the world, that will let you see the temptations. John 17.18. Thou that keeps my word, they shall not come nigh thee, but power shall be received to trample upon all.Revel 5.10. And the worship in the Spirit and truth will be known, John 8.14. and the wisedome by which all the Creatures were cre∣ated, will be received, with it to use them to the glory of God, to which end they were created; Mat. 14. 29. and that which is out of the truth, which tempts to murther, for that is the murtherer which is out of the truth, and out of the light will with the light be seen, judged, and condemned; but before he will lift up, and exalt, and the same will bring to despaire: But learne of Christ the light, who is meek and lowly, and he is kept out and downe who is out of the light: But before this he will tempt into the creatures, to get into the creatures, he who is from the light, and from the life, and so a devourer of them, and so out of the wisdome by which they were created; therefore as I said before, wait in the light which comes from Christ the life, that with it ye may come to receive refreshing from the Lord, and to know the wisedome of the Creation, with which it must be used to the glory of the Creator. So having a light from him by whom the world was made, to whom all power in heaven and earth is gi∣ven; wait in the light, from him to receive power, which brings out of the worlds lusts and defile∣ments, which the light which cometh from him will shew you all the temptations to the creatures, John 9. 51. or obeying the will of him that is out of the truth, but you will come to know the right use of the crea∣tures, waiting in the light; so wait for power from the Lord in the light (which shewes you all temp∣tations) which comes from the Lord, for power to stand against all temptations; and so that all may be condemned with the light, that is contrary to it; Mat. 13.33. and so you may come to witnesse the leaven that leavens into the new lump, and see him that makes intercession, who is able to save to the utmost; Heb, 7.25. and so with the light you will see there is no temptation you are taken with, but which is common to man. 1 Cor. 10.13. So if you mind the light, and in it stand, you will see the Lord giving issue, whereby you will find delive∣rance standing in the light, which comes from the word, which is as a fire, & a hammer, and a sword, Jer. 23.29. which beats down that which is contrary to the truth, divides and burns up, which keeping the word the temptations will not come nigh, but the word of reconciliation be witnessed, and the word of faih whih mkes clean and purifies,  Cor. 5.19. and sancti∣fies: Where the old Garment is put off, and the knowledge in the flsh denyed, and the knowing in the life in the Spi∣rit where nothing comes to raigne but life and power, where all is overturned, and with the power of the  ¦hended the dread and life of the living God, to whom be all honour and glory for ever.
