B4634 E39_8 99858792 155062
A Briefe RELATION OF The siege at Newark, As it was delivered To the COVNCEL of STATE At Derby-house, by Lievtenant Col. Bury, whom the Earl of Manchester sent to Report. Together with Articles of Agreement betwixt Prince Rupert and Sir Iohn Meldrum; Wherein the perfidious dealings of the Enemy i made manifest; who, contrary to the Articles, took away their Colours, Swords and Pikes, and Plundred the Officers. LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole, March 26. 1644.
A Briefe RELATION of the Siege at NEVVARK. Whereas it hath beene Printed thut the Newarkers forced Sir Iohn Meldrums Regiment to retreat, and that the Lord Willowbie came with his Regiment to their timely releofe, there was nothing done that could colour that Relation. WHen we first drew before Newarke, Colonell Kings Regiment marched to the Countesse of Excesters house, where a part of the Regiment had a sharp conflict, and after they had gained that place, the enemies horse gave them a hot & desperate charge, notwithstanding they remained Masters of the place: after this Serjeant Major Iohn Lilburne desired Sir Iohn Meldrum to send him with a partee into the Island, which Sir Iohn waved, judging it a despereate service, but at last the importunitie of the Major, and the resolution of the Souldiers prevai∣led: assoone as a small party of them were over the wa∣ter, the Enemie drew forth their horse into the Island: and we hasted over the greatest part of Colonell Kings Regi∣ment,
and two Troopes of Horses; the Enemie perceiving our Forces to draw themselves betweene them and the Town, never charged, but hasted over Muscom Bridge, we followed on, and beate the Enemie from the Fort, which commanded that passage, and possessed our selves of it; in view a considerable Force comming to their reliefe: then we intrenched our selves in the spittle, and made our approaches; the Enemie sallied out and fell into our Trenches, the point being deserted by Capt. Caudron, but Ca. Cambridge (who had done bravely in managing of Muscom Bridge) enforced their sudden retreat. When part of Sir Michael Hubbard Regiment were marching off the guard toward their Quarters at Balderton, the Enemie sal∣lied forth with nigh 100. horse, finding them without light Matches fell upon them, tooke their Colours, and carried them prisoners into Newarke; two of the Lord Willoughbies Troopes, assigned for that Guard, looked on, but never offered to ingage. After this, these Newark Horse sallied into the Island; the relator drew forth his own, and another Company of that Regiment, and tooke with him the Lord Willonghby his Regiment of Foot, and advanced into the Island; he commanded 20. Musquetiers out of his own companies, and desired a proportion of the Lord Willoughbies to line the Hedges, so to prevent the enemies returne over the Bridge, although hee earnestly importuned them, promising they should go no further then himself, he could not obtain one man. When Sir Iohn Meldrum had Intelligence that the Horse which were driven from New∣arke over Muscome Bridge, and those which came to the releif, pillaged and plundred Leicestershire, he sent away all the Horse and Dragoones which could be spared, un∣der
the Command of Sir Edward Hartrop, who comming nigh the Enemies Quarters, sent in a forlorne hope of a∣bove 100. who fell in among them before they had an Alarm; and drave them forth, crying, Horse and away, we are all cut off: the forlorne hope tooke divers priso∣ners in the chase, one of which was a Major, who was left behind at Melton Moberrie. The Captaines of Horse seeing the Enemie in a confusion, desired Sir Iohn Hartrop to let them fall on; who answered them, his Commission was not to fight, but upon apparent advantage, although they conceived this to be so, and the Souldiers crying, March, march, on, on, they could not get leave to en∣gage; but upon Tuesday in the night returned toward Newarke, valiant Capt. Buff, with his brave Dragoones, whom Sir Iohn had commanded to secure a passe, were left to the enemies mercy, or to shift for themselves. In this Retreate the Lord Willoughbies Horses drew up, soun∣ded a charge, and Captain St. George, bid Captain Lilburn draw up his Horse & fight, for the Lord Willoughby should not be affronted by Coll. King: but the Capt. and other Gentlemen moderated that fury, and prevented the mis∣chiefe. What reason may be rendred that the Lord Grey his Horses left Sir Iohn Hartrop & returned to Leicester; the Relator knowes not. On Wednesday noone Sir Iohn Mel∣drum with his Councell of War, resolved to send forth these Horse and Dragoones againe, and would have con∣ferred that Command upon Colonell Rochester, who mo∣destly desiring to be excused, it was confirmed upon Colonell Thorney, but before they could march, came cer∣taine Intelligence that Prince Rupert was joyned with Sir Charles Lueas; which made that partee 8000. strong, and that they were to quarter that night 8. miles from New∣arke.
Sir Iohn Meldrum was moved by Sir Michael Hubbard and others in the Councell of War to retreate to Lincoln, but he resolved to draw all his foote into the Countesse of Excesters house, and to send his horse over Muscom Bridge to bring in Provision. (It was demanded where the L. Wil∣loughby was; the relator answered; he heard not of him after Wednesday, it seems about that time the Lord Willoughbie rode to Gainsbrough.) The Enemie drew through Balder∣ton in the morning, our horse drew up upon Bekon hill, whence they might have discerned and engaged upon ad∣vantage, but Sir Iohn Meldrum ordered them not to fight till they came within the reach of our Ordinance. Then as soon as our horses quitted the hill, the Enemy advanced thither, our horses standing in the valley nigh the Spittle facing the Enemy; as they were ready to close, Sir John commands off the Derby-horse, to guard the 200 Pyoneers and 400 Musquetiers, which Sir John then sent into the Island to make a Fort-Royall. The Enemy having drawn up two bodies of horse against our two bo∣dies, Colonell Rocester led on the left division, wherein were the 21 Captain Liburns, Captain Bethel and Captain Hunt, &c. who fiercely charged the right wing of the Enemy, led by Prince Rupert, routed them, and drove them up the hill to their reserve; but our right wing of horse ran away, and would have pressed in upon our own foot, had they not stood upon their guard. This Relator (after much intreaty, and many promises that they should not ingage nor advance beyond the command of our Musquets) prevailed with them, to rally and face the Ene∣my, so that Colonell Rocester made a safe and orderly re∣treat, and according to Sir John Meldrums order, drew all the horse, except 500. over the bridge, into the Island.
In this conflict, the Noble valiant Colonell Thorney was shot in the belly, which i feared, will be his deaths wound; Captain Moody, and Captain Lieutenant Lilburn, were taken prisoners, amongst others we took a great com∣mander of theirs, who being much wounded were sent into Newark, then the Enemie drew down halfe their horse, and the greatest part of their foot to force that Bridge, which was gallantly maintained by Colonel Kings company, and two or 3. of Yorkshire companies, although hotly assaul∣ted by the Welch Regiment, they were forced to retreat with much losse; all this time our Cannon plaied upon their Horse, the Master Gunner with the great Piece did excellent execution the enemies expectation of the Bridge being frustrate, they drew out the Newark foot with a con∣siderable strength of Horse, not giving Sir Iohn time to raise his fort Royall, possessed themselves of the Iland, and intrenched themselves there, to cut off our provision. The three companies of Colonell Kings, and the three Nottingham companies in the night, (Sir Iohn not know∣ing thereof) quitted the Forte, and passed over Muscom Bridge, brake up the Bridge, and so secured themselves, and our horses on that side, and taken Nottingham Colours & nigh 20. Musquetiers, as Col. Ayres, upon his reputation reported: the counsel of war resolved that we should retreat that night over Muscom bridge, not imagining, that our gard there would have given us the slip, before the Enemie came to charge them. But perceiving the Enemie passing over their foot into the other side of the Iland nigh Mel∣throp; and Norfolke Red-coats mutining, Sir Iohn sent to the prince for a parley, which being accepted, Sir Michael Hubbard, and Sir Iohn Paygrave Colonels, about nine of the in the clocke at night went to treat, and by seven in the
morning brought the Articles which the Enemie had granted, to have Sir Iohns anent, and at ten of the clocke returned with the Princes Commissioners, for the Prince to signe. I. That we should leave all our Artillery, and Ammu∣nition, and Fire-armes. II. That all our foot Souldiers should march away with their Swords, Pikes and Colours. III. That all our Horse-men and Dragoones should march away with their Horses, Swords and Colours. IV. That all Officers and their Servants should march away with their Horses, Swords, pistolls, moneyes, bagge and baggage. V. That we should have convoy for our safe conduct, two miles beyond the Princes out-most Quarters. By twelve of the clock the Foote marching forth according to agreement, the enemie contrary to the Articles, tooke away their Colours, swords, and Pikes, fell to plunder the Officers, the relater repairing to the Convoy for security, meeting greatest part of them galloping to plunder, and came away, holding it safer to trust in God, then put confidence in Princes. Postscript. THe reporter Iudgeth the Enemy, being ioyned with the Newarkers, to be nigh 3000. Foot, and Dragoones, and 4000. Horse, without Artillery, and that we have lost two Morter Pecces, one Demy Cannon, one Sacre, seven or eight Drakes, Armes for 3000. and much Ammunition. Printed according to Order.
