C111 E562_11 99865267 165232
The present condition of DUBLIN IN IRELAND; WITH The manner of the Siege, and how it is straitened, By the Marquesse of Ormond, L. Jnchequin, &c. Represented in two LETTERS, FROM A Colonell in Dublin, to his Brother a Merchant in LONDON. Dated at Dublin, June 22. 1649. June 30 LONDON, Printed for Henry Crips, and Lodowick Lloyd. 1649.
Dublin June 22. 1649. Loving Brother, I Wrote to you at large by the last Post of the 19. and 20. since which our siege continues very close; their camp is within a mile and half of Dublin; they begun to appear with their Horse on Wednenesday, and came within a mile of our works, and sending out a forlorn hope of about 40. horse came within half a mile, where about 30. of ours answered their charge, and shot Lievtenant Col. Dungans horse under him, and so got him Prisoner; and Major Dun∣gan his brother (sons to Sir Iohn Dungan) was deadly woun∣ded, and we hear he is since dead, for being carried to the Phenix where their horse stood, he was speechlesse when he came thither; our men brought off four of their horse, and blessed be God we had but one man wounded, none slain. The Marquesse of Ormond, and Lord of Inchequin are resolved to have Dublin before they depart, but dare not with what for∣ces they have to storm it, but we hear they daily expect the coming up of the Marquesse Clenrikard, Lord Taffe, Lord Dillon, Viscount Costelagh, and Oneale with their Forces, to come up suddainly; and then we must expect a sharp storm. Their tents are pitcht on this side Fingles, their Horse and Foot lie all in our fight; our Generall is labouring hard to fortifie against them, and the Seamen from the Ships are come to help us; Col. Monk is abroad with 800. of our horse to secure Tredagh, Trym, and Athbey, and after they
are secured, we expect some service to be done by them against the enemy; the papists Irish men, as well Cityzens as the Army are put out of the City; we are (blessed be God) in some reasonable possibility of the more safety thereby; and have hard duty to attend the line daily, but great will, vi∣gour and readinesse is in all men to perform the service; we have about 7000. foot with the Inhabitants fighting men, and about 500. horse to face the enemy; the rogues are too well accommodated for provisions, they eat and drink up our ruines; but we hope to see theirs in the end, if our Friends in England will make hast to releeve us; our provisions con∣sume very fast, and every thing is excessive deer, having now neither fish nor flesh to come to our Markets. The Post ready to depart, I must crave your prayers to God for us, and you shall have ours, so I rest, and remain, Your loving Brother, R. C. Loving Brother, MY last was of the 13. currant, the day following went forth Col. Jones, our Generall, with our Army, Col. Monk commanding the Foot, which were be∣tween twenty five and thirty hundred, and about twelve hundred Horse, with four pieces of Ordnance; the Army advanc'd against the enemy as far as Johnstowne (within a a mile or two of the Nase) where they kept their Rendez∣vouz, sending forth Scouts of Horse to discover the ene∣my,
and not expecting them to be of that strength as after∣ward they found them to be, sought to passe over the river Liffy, where the enemie made good all the passes against them, and pitch'd there their Tents, as if they stood onely upon a defensive posture; but by our Scouts on Sabboth day at night, some returned, and seeing the Tents in the place, re∣ported that the enemy was still there, but by other Scouts they were discovered, both horse and foot to be marching o∣ver the Mountaines of Wicklow, expecting to fall in between our Army and Dublin, whereupon our Generall made his re∣treat homeward, and came within three or four miles of this place, and there remained all yesterday: The Scouts last night discovering again the advance of the enemy hitherward, our Generall (with all his horse and foot) at one of the clock this morning came home (blessed be God) in safety: It argued a great vigilancy in him, and a provident care over this place, not to ingage our Army to put the whole Kingdome in dan∣ger; for if he had (as it might have pleased God to give him the victory) ingaged against the enemy upon such disadvan∣tage, he could not (without great hazzard) be able to prose∣cute the victory: besides, we had on Saturday last newes, that the Scots were coming up for our reliefe, but since we have a far greater doubt of them then before; our next businesse (if the enemy be not already too strong in those parts) is to strengthen the Garrisons of Trym, Athbay, and Tredath, who are in great danger, and yet we shall be much weakned by parting with our men, and shall not be able from time to time to relieve them, the enemy being fallen so far into our Quarters, who are already within four or five miles of this place. We have lost Kildare, but it cost the enemy very deere; for after three or four desperate assaults made by them on the breaches made by their Cannon, having lost many of
their men, they sent for a party, and observing the undaun∣ted resolution of Lievtenant-Col. Huteson, and Capt. Dixon, who commanded the men there, and of most of the men un∣der them, although many of their men would not fight at all, and are since gone to the enemy, that they gave our men quarter in two daies to carry away what they had, where was corne and meal that they could not bring away, but spoiled what they could thereof. Ballesoman is besieged, and it must be lost, because we cannot come to relieve them, nor send to them, nor hear in what condition they are. We heare, that Owen Oneale, with his Forces, is joyned with them of Kil∣kenny against us, but we have no certainty thereof: But we know, that the Forces under the Marquesse of Ormond with∣out them, are about 10000. Foot, and between 2500. and 3000. Horse, most of them very excellent horse; we looke for a siege, and are pulling down all the houses without our Works neer unto them, and are destroying any thing that may releieve the enemy. We are in a very sad condition; for all the Contribution out of the Countrey, which paid our Horse, is now lost, and we have not wherewithall to pay them; we have neither Hay nor Oats to keep our Horse nor Oxen in Town, nor for our Cattell; we must expect no more provisions out of the Countrey for our selves, for the enemy is now possessed of what should relieve us; we must expect that they will destroy all the Corne in our Quarters, and will be able to preserve and gaine all that is in their own, and will eat up all the grasse in our Quarters, and preserve their owne, then you may consider what will become of our horse the next winter: they are in a prosperous condition at present, and like to doe what they please, if aid come not sundenly, and money to pay them, and those that are already here, and more provisions for them all; for Wheat is here at five
pound ten shillings, Rie at four pound ten shillings the quar∣ter, little to sell, and little money to buy it: Our Men of War are come from Bewmorris, and divers ships from Che∣ster, and no men nor money; it is impossible (in mans judge∣ment) for us to hold out till aid comes from England, for as yet we heare not of any ready at water-side to come, and when all the shipping are come hither, it is like we shall have them to come thither, and when our shipping returns, I pray God they may not mutiny againe, and refuse to come for want of means; for if we have not a prevalent party, well∣wishers to us, and to our Cause, that may over-sway our se∣cret enemies that are amongst them, that would cause delayes till we are destroyed, we shall be lost indeed, and much mise∣ry will thereby fall on our Kingdome of England, upon whose account shall stand all the bloud that hath been mali∣ciously shed in this Kingdome, of the ancient, the honoura∣ble Ministers of Gods Word, the Widdowes, the Father∣lesse, and the Infants that have been destroyed. Besides the want of money, the dearth of all provisions, Cheese it selfe being at nine pence the pound, will undoe us, and which is far more dangerous, men will not ingage where is no mans to relieve themselves, their wives and children, but will seek to go where the best means is to be had: your Diurnalls are not true, in that there should be discord amongst our ene∣mies: my Lord of Inchiquins forces are now joyned with the Irish as one man, and no such thing as the coming away of any more of my Lord of Inchiquins horse to us; besides the first seven that came, as was reported amongst us, but are all set on mischief to destroy us. Our news by this Post makes mention of a good agreement in England, (whereat we greatly rejoyce,) and it is a wonder
to me they cannot sooner agree to releeve us; the danger we are now in with him from time to time reported amongst you these three monthes, and what hath been done for us; and some of the Jesuiticall faction to hinder releefe coming to us, (not only from England, but from France, and the low Coun∣treys) have raised reports from time to time that Dublin was taken, or delivered up unto the enemy, and that it was too late to send relief hither, and as fast as we could write to the contrary, have they revived this report; I would they might (by their words) be taken notice what men they are. But now I may write to you, truly I feare it will shortly come to passe; I am sorry that our Friends are no more sensible of our pover∣ty, and miserable condition (if it were only the weekly loane, it were enough to consume us, where a penny is not to be gotten) to pay 20. 30. and 40. l. a man, and some 4. 5. l. a week, and many that have lent great sums, are now star∣ving for want of bread, who report amongst you, that we are here in a very good condition; whereas moreover they know, we have not men enough to defend our quarters, nor money to pay those we have. Good Brother farewell, I knew not whether I shall see you again, or that I may again write unto you, for my resolution is according to my power (as the Lord shall give me strength) to be amongst my company to defend this place, yet I would not have you to forget me, nor to neglect what I have desired at your hand; I hope the Lord will defend this place, and that every one that puts his trust in him shall be delivered, to whose blessed protection I commend you, and rest ever, R. C. FINISr
