c5194 e242_2 99872195 130860
A Collection of SPECIALL PASSAGES AND Certaine Informations of all the most memorable Acci∣dents, and Remarkable Truths, FROM London, Westminster, and divers other parts of this Kingdome, from Munday Octob. 17. till Tuseday Novemb. 1. 1642. With a summary Collection of all the Declarations, Orders, Messages, Remon∣strances, Petitions, Letters, and other passages that have been published by Order of both Houses of Parliament. And what other Relations of Newes have been any other wayes published within that time from all other Parts. Collected for the satisfaction of all those that desire to be truely informed. London, Printed for Francis Coles, Novemb. 2. 1642. THere was a Declaration published by Order of both Houses of Parliament, setting forth the present condition of this kingdom, That his Majesty by ad∣vice and assistance of the evill and wicked counsell about him hath raised an Army, which are maintained with the spoyls of the Kings subjects; giving them leave to exact monies by force, plunder & spoyl all sorts of people. That this evil counsel doth not only hinder his Majesty from exercising the Iustice of a King towards his people, but even that honour which is observed betwixt enemies; That Sir Io. Hinderson (a Papist) one of the Kings party, laboured with one David Alexander a Scothman to kill Sir Iohn Hotham but hee refusing, his Maiesty sent twice for him to Bever∣ly, and when he came, had publike talke with him and gave him a summe of money, which he received. That the said Sir Iohn Hinderson also conspired with the said Alexander to fire the Lord Generals Magazine, but by great providence was prevented. That such of the Trained Bands as refuse to serve his Maiesty have their Armes taken from them; and that the Cavaliers by their cruell oppressions have so exhausted those Parts where his Maiesty hath been, that they now perswade him to march towards London, that so they might make the like spoyle in all those fruitfull Countryes in the way; and satisfie their long expected hopes out of the rich wealth of the City of London. To prevent all which miseries and dangers, the Parliament doe conceive it fitting that good provision be made by loane and contribution to maintaine the Lord Generalls Army, and that that Army doe alwayes attend the removes of the Kings Army, to prevent them in their spoyles of the Country. That those Countrys through which the Kings Army doth passe, doe associate themselves, and draw all their Forces together for their own defence, according to the direction of their Deputy-Lievtenants and other Officers; And that they have Powder, Munition, and Ordnance, in readinesse upon all occasions.
That all those who in the City of London or else where shall weare any of the Kings Colours shall be examined and disarmed. As also in that Declaration the Houses make severall excellent Queries concerning the grounds of this warre, the result whereof in short is, That it is not feare of some Innovation or alteration in Religion or Church Government that hath occasioned this warre; for that the Parliament have fully declared that they intend to take away nothing but the Govern∣ment of Bishops, which have been so evidently mischievous and dangerous to the Church and State; Nor is it to uphold the authority, Prerogative and honour of the King, as is so vainely alleadged by them; But the true cause and matter of the quarrell is, That Priests and Iesuites may domineere and govern in the Kings councell as formerly, That the Bishops may suppresse powerfull preaching, and introduce the Popish Religion under colour of the Protestant profession, That the Earle of Bristoll, Lord Digby, Master Iermyn, and other Traytors may govern the affaires of State, and be distributers of Preferments; That Delin∣quents may escape the Iustice of Parliament, and triumph in the spoyles of honest men, That through our troubles the Rebels in Ireland may prevaile, That We may cease to be a free Na∣tion, and become the obiect of crulty and oppression at home, and of scorne and infamy abroad, &c. With this Declaration, there were certaine Votes published, resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament, viz. That such persons as shall not contribute to the charge of the Common-wealth in this time of imminent necessity, shall bee disarmed and their persons secured. That the Fines, Rents, and Profits of Arch-Bishops, Bishops Deans and Chapters, and such notorious Delinquents, who have taken up Armes against the Parliament, or have been active in the Commission of Array, shall bee sequestred for the service of the Common-wealth. That the Kings revenue▪ rising out of Rents, Fines in Courts of Iustice, compositions for Wards, and all other his Maiesties reveues, shall be paid into the usuall places of receipt, but not issued forth, or paid out but by order of Parliament. There was also a Declaration published by order of the House, subscribed by Colonell Sandis at the Randevouz at Worcester, Octob. 11. in vindication of himselfe from those calum∣nious a persions cast upon him, by the letters of the Lord Faukland and Secretary Nicholas, who write that he was dead, and a little before his death should say, That death did not so much trouble him, as that he had endeavoured to defend so bad a cause, which he was drawne unto as well by his own ambition as by perswasions of others, and that hee wished that all the Actions of the Parliaments Forces might hereafter prove unsuccesfull, desiring God and the King wuld so gve him for his great sin of Rebellion; To which words, the Colonell doth seriously prot, that the apprehension of death did never so nearly touch him, but that if God shll nce restore his strength (which in good measure he hath already done) he will with as ch alacrity and courage endevour to maintaine the cause hee hath undertaken with his dearest blood as ever he did, nor was hee drawn into it by ambition, or other perswasions, the sch as w re backed by the best of Arguments, namely, Religion, the houour and secu∣rity of the King, the priviledge of Parliament, and liberty of the subiect, And that in his greaest danger of death, his conscience did clear him from the guilt of Rebellion or tumul∣tuous thoughts, And that the chiefest motive which carried him on to this Action was loyalty to hi Soveraign, and love to hi Religion and Country, &c. By Letters from Cornwall, it was informed that Sir Ralph Hopton with his Accomplices in Pendennis Castle, hath made great spoyle in pillaging and plundering the Countrey, that Sir Bevill Grevill, Sir Nicholas Slany, Sir Rich. Vivian, and Master Arundell, all Array men, are th chiefe Confederates, and amongst them have raised about 2000 men, which pus he Country into great feare, that thy have possessed themselves of Lanceston and Salt Ash, and are now bending their Forces against Barnestable in Devonshire but they have pro∣vided themselves well against them, by the meanes of Master Perd a Member of the House
of Commons, and have mouned 16. Peeces of Ordnance to defend the Towne. From Manchester it was informed that the powder and Match sent down thither by the Parliament, was intercepted by the way by Sir Edward Mosely in Staffordshire, but they have got some supply of match and powder from out of Cheshire, and have lately sallyed out of the Town, and taken 12. Gentlemen (which were their chiefest enemies, and Array-men) prisoners, and that the Ea. of Derby being not able to make any further assault against them, is marched with his ragged regiment consisting of not above 400 men to the King, bu it is said that the King is not pleased with him, in that he brought no greater a company to his ayde. From Newcastle it was for certaine informed, that the plague continueth there very hot, but the Earle is gone into Northumberland to rais Forces for the King, he and divers other Gentlemen, and some of them convict Papists, have received Commissions from his Ma∣iesty to raise 8000 Papists in Durham and Northumberland and other parts there abouts; and they intend to compell the Protestant party to billet them, and have already put the same in execution in some places thereabouts. The King sent a Writ of ease to Sir Io. Brampston Lord Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, and the like to the Lord Chiefe Baron in the Exchequer; Whereupon the Parliament were necessitated to appoint Iudge Berkley though a prisoner in the Tower to sit on the Essoyne day, for the continuance of Writs, otherwise the Subiect had lost the benefit of all Actions commenced, that are not come to Iudgement: It is reported that the King intends to make Iudge Heath Lord Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, and Serieant Henden Lord Chiefe Ba∣ron, who are both with his Maiesty. The Copy of the Oath by which they are to be sworn, his Maiesty hath sent for. The Lord Maior of London hath put Master Hall the sword-bearer out of his Office, for his malignancy against the Parliament, and for saying that the Prentices of London might have Actions against the Mayor, for cutting off their long loks. Tuesday the 18. of October. SIr Iohn Meldrums letter to the King, a reall thing, wherein with most excellent expressions he excuseth himselfe to his Maiesty, for his great aversnesse and reluctancy against all the late proceedings which have been attempted in his Maiesties service; setting forth the great zeale he alwayes had to the service of King Iames of blessed memory; and to his now Maie∣sties service at Rochell, and other occasions, which may iustly vindicate him from any aspersi∣on that may be cast upon him either of ingratitude or disloyalty: But for this warre it hath been occasioned by the unsettled and unconstant appetites of some factions and turbulent spirits about his Maiesty, whose attempts are and have been to force a woefull divorce be∣twixt his Maiesty and people, which of necessity can bring forth nothing but predigious issues, such as will not onely shake the foundation of Monarchy, but also overflow the fertile and pleasant fields of this Kingdom with streames of innocent blood, which might bee more safely reserved for more honourable imployments, then profusedly spent in the ripping up of the bowels of one another of his Maiesties subiects by this intestine warre: Setting forth to his Maiesty the miserable events that have followed upon other Kingdomes upon the like oc∣casion: by all which in conclusion he laboureth to perswade with his Maiesty, that he would no longer be inexorable to the perswasions, counsells, and petitions of his good subiects, in∣viting him to adhere to his great Councell the Parliament, who are onely able to make his Maiesty no lesse happy and glorious then any of his Royall Progenitors; And that his Ma∣iestie being sensible of the common calamities would leave his evill and wicked Counsell, and ioyne himselfe to his Parliament, that so some proper occasion may bee represented, whereby every true and loyall subiect may bee encouraged to offer up his sacrifice of blood for the honour and safety of his Maiesty and his Dominions. Io. Meldram. There was another book printed, of the examination of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Io. Steell, and some others, at the Commons House Barre, and Articles of Treason pretended to be ex∣hibited
by the Commons against them; But all a meere lie, the said parties being still in re∣bellion at Pendennis Castle in Cornwall. There was a book published by Order of Parliament, of Master Darells confession before the House of Commons concerning the report raised by him, of Master Pyms taking of a bribe of thirty pound; who confessed that the said report was notoriously false, and that hee had no true ground for the raising of any such Report, desiing the favour and pardon of the House for his folly and offence in reporting the same. Whereupon the Commons ordered, that he should make acknowledgement of his offence at their barre, which he did accor∣dingly upon his knees; And also ordered that he should make the like Acknowledgment at the Kings Bench Barre, the Chancery Barre, Common-Pleas-Barre, and Exchequer-Barre, upon the first day of the next full Terme, and that he should put in good baile to performe the same accordingly. A relation of Newes from Ireland, by which it is credibly informed that the Adventurers Forces under command of the Lord Forbes on the 23. of September last took a Castle from the Rebels, called the Knights of the Valley's Castle, not farre from Limbrick, In which they found a 1000 bushels of Wheat, 3000 weight of Butter, and great store of Barley, Mault, and salted Beefe; As also that the Lord Forbes hath taken in the River of Limbrick a French Ship which came from S. Mallos, wherein were 120 barrells of powder, 500 Armes, and 35 Butts of Sack, which were intended to assist the Rebels. Other certaine Newes for the Day. Both Houses passed a Vote, that they will accept of the 51 Commissioners that are to come out of Scotland to Treat for the Peace and safety of this Kingdom; And that according to their defires, they shall bring such a Convoy along with them as they shall think fitting; A Declaration of thanks being ordered to be returned to the Scots for their brotherly affecti∣on, and to informe them that the Parliament have admitted the Clergy nominated by them into the Assembly, to Treat of uniformity of Religion, and that they have passed a Bill and sent it to his Majesty for the Assembly of Divines by the 5th of November next. In that De∣claration for safe Conduct, the Duke of Lenox & the Lord Roxborough are excepted, the Duke of Lenox being voted a Delinquent, & the L. Roxborough being one that came along with the King in a warlike manner to the House of Commons, upon the accusing of their five Members. It was for certaine informed that Sir Christopher Wray and others of the Deputy Lievte∣nants for Lincolashire, have raised some Troops of Horse to send to Captain Hotham in Yorkshire to assist him against the Earle of Cumberlands Cavalleers. By Letters from the Army it was informed, that the Lord Generall having notice of the Kings intention to march from Shrewbury, hath divided his Army into three Brigades, one part whereof hee hath sent under command of Sir William Balfore to Warwick, to secure the passage that way either to Oxford or Coventry, and another part to Kittermaster and Beudly with the Lord Wharton and others; which Brigade marched in sght of Prince Robert for two miles together, but no encounter; The other Brigade is with Lord Generall at Worcester, with which he intends to march close after his Majesty upon his remove; Also informing that the moneyes which the Parliament sent to the Lord Generall came safely down to his Excellen∣cy, notwithstanding Prince Roberts vigilancy to intercept the same. The Earle of Warwick this day came from Sea to attend the service of the Houses, and hath left Captaine Batten Vice-Admirall in his roome: It is said that the Houses will give him a Commission to raise Forces in six Eastern Counties. Sir Dudly Carlton, one of the Kings servants, hath left his Majesties Army, and this day came to London. Wensday 19 of October. THere was a relation of newes from York, by which it was informed, that the Malig∣nant party have gathered a great head there, and plundered divers Houses in that City, forcing the Inhabitants to contribute towards the designes of the Cavalliers; That they have
committed to prison divers Aldermen that refuse to adhere to them, That they threaten to be the death of such Ministers as will not preach as they would have them, That they have com∣mitted S Iohn Bourchier to York Gaole, That the Lady Melion being about o send her goods by water towards Hull, had all her goods, money, and plate, to the value of 1000 l. taken by the souldiers, as they were putting into a Barge; that the chiefe Cavalleers that beare sway in the City of York, are Sir Francis Worthley, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Illay, Master Francis Nevill, and others, the Earl of Cumberland stands for a Gypher, they do what they please without his advice, That here is 1000 foot and three Troops of horse a arched towards Cawood where Master Hotham is. By another Book it was informed, that the Lord Generall hath sent instructions to the Counties of Derby, Warwick, Northampton, and Coventry, to raise the power of the Coun∣ties, and stand upon their Guards, to secure themselves from the Cavaliers, who plunder every place where they come, without distinction of persons and doe now endeavour to draw his Majesty towards London, intending to plunder by the way. There was a Book published of the Queens resolution discovered by some Letters read in the house of Commons from Master Strickland; Also another book of the Examination of Sir Edw. Rodny, Sir Edward Berkly and some others taken in Somersetshire, but they were both meere inventions: and two or three other of the same nature. Other certaine Newes for the Day. Both Houses taking into consideration the great danger that may happen to the whole Kingdome, if Sir Ralph Hopton and his Accomplices should persist in their Rebellious courses in Cornwall, committing such outrages as they daily doe, appointed the Earle of Pembrock to be Lord Generall for the Western Counties, viz. Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Hampshire, Do∣set, Devon, Cornwall, and the Isle of Wight; and have given him a Commission with the like power the Earle of Essex hath, to raise Forces and to march with them against Sir Ralph Hop∣ton, and all others in this Rebellion, and to fight with, kill, and slay all that oppose him. At a Conference of both Houses, It was declared upon good proofe, that his Majesty hath granted Commision to the Earle of Newcastle for the raising of Papists: and divers noto∣rious Papists in Northumberland, and Bishoprick of Durham, and Lancashire, have the like Commissions, and that there is 6 or 8000 Papists to be presently raised; That Sir Iohn Hin∣derson, and Colonell Cockeram are sent into Denmark to raise 10000 Danes, that are to bee brought to Newcastle and joyne with the Papists Army that are now in raising. That there are divers Irish Papists lately landed at Chester and gone to his Maiesty; and that Doctor Cooke of Chester discoursing with them how they durst have the impudence to see his Maiesty, They replyed, that the King knew them to be better subiects to him then he was, and no man should be heard by the King that complained against them; and the said Irish Rebels are now with the King, and in great favour; and that Prince Roberts Physitian is a notorious Rebell and indicted of high Treason in Ireland. Vpon consideration of all which businesses, the Commons moved the Lords, that the Parliament, City of London, and whole Kingdom might enter into strict association, with life and fortunes one to defend another, against the Kings forces or any that shall oppose them, and that such as refuse their persons, to be secured and their estates to finde horse and foot as they were able: To which the Lords agreed, and ordered that a Declaration for an Association should be drawn up and tendered to the City of London a Common Hall with all conveniency. Information was formerly given to the Parliament against Alderman Wright, that hee had not assisted the Parliament with money, or plate, proportionable to his estate; and thereupon an Order issued out for the disarming of him, as one dis-offected to the Parlia∣ment; But upon further information it appeared that he hath lent 1500 l. to the affaires of Ireland, and to the propositions of the Parliament 200 l. with proffer of 300 l. more: Whereupon it was ordered by the Commons, that the former Vote shall be taken off, and hee
freed from any restraint or imputation of dis-affection, and his proffer thankfully received. The Lord Coventry since his comming from the King, as a testimony of his affection to the Parliament, hath sent 1500 l. in plate to Guild-Hall upon the propositions. This day the May or of Worcster and Alderman Green of the said City, being apprehended by his Excellency for betraying the said City into the hands of the Cavaleers, were brought up to London with a strong Guard and committed to prison, and with them came a Waggon load of plate, contaiing twenty two hundred weight, which was sent to Guild-Hall. Thursday the 20. THere were this day 2. Bookes published in print, and both of them very lyes, and meere inventions: One of them was A Relation of the securing of Windsor Castle for the Parlia∣ment, by Dragoneers pretended to bee raised in Essex, Middlesex, Buckinghamshire, Bark∣shire, Surry, Hampshire, and other Counties, though no such matter. Another was of The Kings Resolution to come up to London with his Army, and that the Earle of Essex had stopped his passage by breaking downe divers bridges, whereby they were now so invironed with Rivers that they could not pass. The same day it was informed by letters that the King, with Prince Robert and the Army, was within five miles of Coventry, and that the King lay at Sir Robert Fletchers house; the Earle of Essex also the day before advancing from Worcester, having sent all his horse before, intending himself to be upon the Kings Army very suddenly. Other certaine Newes for the Day. By letters from Yorkshire it is informed, that the Lord Fairfax, understanding that the King hath granted Commissions for the raising of Papists, hath renounced the Articles of Neutrality, and is raising Forces to assist Captain Hotham: That Captain Hotham hath se∣cured Cawood Castle, and Selby, in despight of the Cavaliers, and that Sir Christopher Wray, Sir Hugh Chomley, and Mr Hatcher have raised three Troops of horse in Lincolnshire to assist Captain Hotham; and that Sir William Savile is labouring to make his peace with the Parliament, and renounceth the Cavaliers. It was also credibly informed, that the Earle of Pembrook is proclaimed Traitour in Wales, and all his Rents and Revenues there sequestred by order of his Maiesty. Letters from the Lord Generall informed, that the King with his Army is removed from Shrewsbury, and hath left the trained Bands with the Marquesse of Hartford to guard the Towne, that the King is marched towards Coventry, and that the Lord Generall the day past advanced with his Army from Worcester after his Maiesty, his Excellency only leaving be∣hind him one Regiment for a garrison at Worcester, and the Earle of Stamford at Hereford: his whole Army consisteth of 18 Regiments of Foot, besides the said two Regiments, 61 Troops of horse, and 46 peeces of Ordnance. It was also informed, that when the Waggons that car∣ried the forty thousand pound to his Excellency to pay the Army came to Oxford, news was brought that Prince Robert had vowed to have the money; whereupon they stayed at Abing∣ton for two or three dayes, and the Countreys came in in such abundance to aid them, that they were guarded to the Army with many thousand men, which Prince Robert heating of, let pursuing of it, and swore a great Oath, That the money was too hot for him to meddle with. Iudge Berkley (according to the Order of Parliament) came this day as a Prisoner from the Tower, to the Court of Kings bench to adjourn the Terme, and sate all the forenoon in that Court, and Iudge Foster in the Common Pleas, expecting the Kings writs; but none came: Whereupon they sate againe in the afternoon, and about five a clocke the writs came, whereby they djourned the Termeth Novemb. 18. according to the Proclamation. The Kings writs were dated at Bridge-north Octob. 14. 1642. The Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London (according to the Order of Parliament) have made diligent search in the houses of all such disaffected persons as refused to contribute to the propositions, and have taken from them all such Armes as they could meet withall, a further course being suddenly to be taken for the securing of their persons.
Friday the 21. THere was a Declaration and Ordinance of Parliament published, giving power to all his Majesties loving subiects in the kingdome of England, to be approved of by the Commis∣sioners of the Admiralty established by the Parliament, to furnish with all manner of provisi∣ons, and send to sea, what ships and pinnaces they shall thinke fit, and to take, surprize, and seize upon at sea, all manner of ships, vessels, goods, and merchandize belonging to the Re∣bels in Ireland, or any other persons that they shall finde or understand to have aided the said Rebels with Armes, Ammunition, or Victuals, by sea or land: and also to seize and surprize all manner of ships and other vessels, having on board them Armes, Ammunition, or Victu∣als, bound therewith to the kingdome of Ireland, or any of the dominions of the same, not having on board them a pasport or licence from the Commissioners of the Admiralty aforesaid, or from the chiefe Governours of Ireland appointed by his Maiesty, with consent of both Houses of Parliament, and to invade the said Rebels in any Ports, Harbours, Creeks, Havens, Islands, Castles, Forts, Townes, or any other places in the possession of the Rebels, and to take, seize upon, surprize, vanquish, destroy, or kill them, and to sack and pillage any such place or places; and to take or surprize all manner of pirates and sea-rovers, and their ships and goods whatsoever: And that all such as shall set forth any ships or vessels for the service afore∣said, shall have and enioy as their owne proper goods, all ships, goods, monies, plate, armes, victuals, pillage and spoile, as they shall take from the ebels in Ireland, or any other persons assisting them, without any accompt thereof to be made; only reserving the tenths accustomed in such cases to be paid to the Admirall, and to be disposed of by order of Parliament, &c. There was a Book published, of the Iudges Resolution on the Kings Bench in Westminster Hall, concerning the Kings proclamation for adjourning of Michaelmas Terme, but a very lye, the said Iudges speaking not one word concerning it, but adiourned the Terme according to the proclamation. There was another Book or two published, but not worth the reciting. Other certain Newes for the day. An Order was made by the Parliament, for the speedy sending of ten Merchants ships, for a Winter guard for Ireland, and they are to take all prizes they can meet withall, according to the Declaration formerly spoke of to that purpose. It was informed that the Counties of Worcester, Hereford, Glocester, Wilts, and Dorset, are entred into an affociation to defend themselues for the King and Parliament, against any force that shall come against them. By letters stom Chester it was informed, that since the Kings remove from Shrewsbury the City is very quiet, and they have cleared the Town of the Cavaleers; that the Commissioners of Array are now much quieter then formerly; but while they had hopes of his Maiesties con∣tinuing neere them they used great violence against the well affected party, forcing them to lend mony, and those that refused they committed to prison. Yet notwithstanding his Maiesty sent to borrow 2000. li. of that County, they have not got above 200. li. throughout the shire. Saturday the 22 of October. THere was a declaration and protestation published from both houses of Parliament to the Kingdome, tending to this effect, That they doe protest before God and the world that no private passion or respect, no defigne against his Maiesty, either against his person, or iust authority, hath engaged them to take up armes against the Authors of this warre; That they have used all possible meanes to assure his Maiesty of their loyalty and obedience to him, and resolution to defend his person and estate with their lives and fortunes: That for the avoi∣ding of blood by occasion of this war they drew up as humble a petition as possible might be, and sent it to the Earl of Essex to present to his Maiesty, for the delivery of which Peti∣tion his Excel. sent twice to his Maiesty, but his Maiesty refused to receive the same from his Excellency. By which & other evidences the Parl. are fully convinced, that the Kings Coun∣sels
& resolutions are so engaged to the Popish party, that all hopes of peace are excluded, and that it is intended to give satisfaction to the Papists by the altering of Religion, & to the Ca∣valleers and other souldiers by exposing the wealth of the Kingdom to be sackt & plundered by them. That for the better effecting hereof, great numbers of Papists have of late in shew con∣formed themselves to the Protestant Religion, by comming to Church, & taking the Oaths of Allegeance & Supremacy, which their own Priesis have encouraged them to do. And that at first his Maiesty would not seem to entertain any Papists in his Army: But now Commissions have bin granted to raise an army of Papists; & Prests, & Iesuits have bin released out of prison. All which is contrary to his Majesties solemn Oathes, Protestations, & execrations, so often taken to maintain Religion and the Lawes of the Land. That Sir Io. Hinderson, Collouell Cockram are sent to Hamburgh and Denmark to raise Forces for the King, and that divers of the Rebels in Ireland named are about his Maiesty; And divers others accused of Treason by this Parliament, as the Lord Digby, O-Neale, Wilmot, Pollard, Ashbornham, and others. That divers Priests and Iesuites in forraign parts make great collections of money to further his Maiesties designes against the Parliament, and great meanes are made to take up the differences betwixt some Princes of the Roman Religion, that so they might ioyne their Force for the extirpation of the Protestant Religion in this Kingdome. For all which rea∣sons both houses doe declare, That they will enter into a solemn Oath and Covenant with God to defend this cause with their lives and fortunes against the Kings Army, and all of that party shall ioyn with them in this wicked design: And that the parliament will Associate themselves, and unite with the City of London and all other of his Maiesties Dominions to the end aforesaid. And lastly, the parliament doe declare that they doe expect our brethren of Scotland according to the Act of pacification, will also ioyn with them in the said cause &c. There was also a letter published by Order of the House sent from M. Copley Muster-Ma∣ster Generall to the Earle of Essex Army, who was sent by his Excellency to the Earl of Dor∣set the second time to move his Maiesty to receive the petition of the Houses, by which letter the former passages of his Maiesties refusing to receive the petition is confirmed, wherein is also set forth the desperate and wicked carriage of the Cavalleers about his Maiesty, exclaiming against the parliament, and all that seem well affected to them, and sware heavie oathes that they have now taken a course with those Lords about the King that would not comply with them, and have lockt up his Maiesties eares and tongue, that he will neither heare nor speak to them, and that the Earle of Dorset and some others were treacherous and cowardly, and did discover the Kings intentions, but now the King had learnt to keep his Councels from them; and gave out other vile and approbious speeches, swearing that they would neither give nor take quarter. By an expresse from the Army it was informed, that the King had left Coventry, and lay the last night at Southam, and intends to go this day to Banbury: That the Lord Generall it marching close after his Maiesty, and is within ten miles of him, the Lord Generall once more desiring the Parliament that they would take care for the securing of the malignants in Lon∣don in case his Maiesty should come that way. This afternoone there were six of the Lords and twelve of the Commons met the City of London at a Common-Councell in Guild-hall, and tendered them the oath of Association to be taken throughout the Kingdom: The Earle of Northumberland made a Speech to the City declaring the cause of their comming, and after him Mr Pym read the houses Declaration con∣cerning the Oath of Association and the Oath it selfe, and made a short Speech concerning it. And after him the Earle of Holland made a most excellent and learned Speech with divers reasons and demonstrations exciting the City to the said businesse: the Citezens were much taken with his brave expressions, And the proposition was most cheerefully embraced by the City.
Munday the 24. of October. THere was a Letter published which was written by one Master Tempest a Papist to his Bro∣ther an Officer in the Kings Army, which Letter was intercepted and shewed to the Parlia∣nt. The letter expressed divers scandalous relations and some truths, viz. Concerning the seige of anchester, that it is a very weake Towne, and no considerable strength in it, and that the Lord ange Earle of Darby beseidged it with 8000. foote and 700. Horse and Cannon enough, but he the pooreliest off that ever was heard on: That concerning Yorkeshire Captaine Hotham  Sir Edward Roades beare a great sway there, dispight of the Archbishop, Sir Devoyne. Andrew Young, and sir Ralph Hansby, great malignants, and that Yorkeshire in generall is  to the King, except some heroicke ones (as he termes them) that will take no new impressions. That the Priests and Jesuites in Lancaster Goale are set at Liberty, and divers Catholique mmanders admitted, and all wel enough that way. That one Generall Reoyne lately come out of Sweden, is gone to the King to joyne with nce Robert. Also another letter from a Malignant in Shrewsbury, who writes that the King went from ce on the Wednesday before from Bridge North, and some of his forces to Sturbridge. That  King is 16000 strong. That the King hath commanded his Army that they plunder not at all  that he caused Judge Heath, who he saith is now Lord Cheife Justice, to sit with a Commis∣ of Oier and Terminer whereat six of the Kings Souldiers were cast for Plundering and stea∣g. That the Kings Mint is now come to Shresbury and one Master Bushell doth Coyne every day,  that boundance of Plate is brought thither from severall Counties, especially from Wales  Cornewell, and that also the Presse for Printing is come thither. That Sir Richard Newport is made a Lord, and hath given the King 10000 pound, The King uld have knighted the Mayor of Shrewesbury, but he refused it. That the Sunday before the King tooke a Protestation and the Sacrament upon it, to defend  Protestant Religion established by Queene Elizabeth and his Royall Father, That Prince Robert on the Tuesday before had beene at Brumingham and demanded 2000. he Towne, but the Inhabitants were fled to Coventry, Vpon Thursday he marched to Mereden  miles from Coventry, and the King with him, intending to goe to Banbury, from thence to ford, and so London, or Windsor, &c. There was a submissive and Petitionary Letter published sent from the Lord Littleton Lord per of the Great Seale; the effect of which Letter in short was, that their Lordships would igate his offence in leaving of them, and that his penitent submission may be his sentence, and aking away of the Seale (which he willingly offereth to his Majesty, may be his punishment  that their Lorships will spare any further censure of him, and recommend him to his Majesties ce and pardon for all that is past, &c. Other certaine newes for the day. Vpon consideration of the great danger the Kings Children at Saint Iames House Westminster ld be in, in case the Cavalliers should come to London, the Parliament Ordered that for their e security they should be removed to the Lord Cottingtons house in Broadstreet London, and  the Earle of Pembrooke should be their Protector. n Order was made for the speedy raising of 5. or 6000. Sea-men and others for the Guard of River of Thames, and to be drawne up for land service upon any imminent occasion, and to be oyed under the command of the Earle of Warwick, who is appointed for Generall for the East elve Companies of the Trayned Bands for London, were sent to Windsor Castle to Guard the e, for that it was informed that the King intendeth to come thither with his Cavalliers. The Like Order was taken that the speedy raising of Garison Souldiers for the City of London Suburbs, and the setting up a Court of Guard and Fortifications and Outworkes in the fielde.
Master Griffith a Minster and Prson of Saint Mary Mandlins Old-Fishsteet London commited to prison for preaching divers late Scandalous and Seditious Sermons, &c. It was informed by Letters from the Army that the Lord Generall came with his Army 6 miles from Warwick, and the King with his Army the same night lay within 4 miles of  That the Kings Cavalliers had beene at Banbury, but the Townsmen denyed them entrance stood bravely upon their Guard. That on Sunday morning an Alarum came to the Lord Generall that the Enemy was  three miles, and that the King would there give them Battell, whereupon, they marched in field and drew into Battalio in the Vally called the vale of the Red Horse, and the Kings  within two miles from them upon a high hill called Edge Hill, drawing into Battalio, that  forces by all relations were about 14000. & all the forces that the Lord Generall had with  that time were not above 10000. The Kings forces at the first had the wind and the field, th tell begane on Sunday about 12. of the clocke, and the Ordance first playad for 2 or 3  there was no good relation of the fight that day. Tuseday the 25. of October. THere was an Order of both Houses published to the City of London & Suburbs for the  setting up of Courts of Guard, Posts, Barres, and Chaines in all such places as shall be th necessary and convenient for the defence and safe Guarding of the City and Suburbs, and  charge thereof to be borne by the Inhabytants of the severall Parishes respectively, and if any ¦son shall refuse to contribute their proportions as they shall be rated, that the names of such ¦sons shall be certified to both houses of Parliament, that such further order may be taken the as to them shall be thought convenient, and that a competent number of the Trained Bands  Voluntieres belonging to every Parish shall day and night attend with their Armes in or ne their Court of Guard, and shall seize and arrest all suspitious persons, Ammunition or Arm sing through their Parishes, and acquaint the Parliament therewith, who will take order co¦ing the same. There was also another Order from the Houses, That all persons within the City of Lond VVestminster, Suburbs and Bourough of Southwarke be required to shut up their shops, and  beare their Trades and other ordinarie imployments, that so they may with the greater  and freedome and freedome for the present to the defence of the said places, and put in  and performance of any such commands for the defence and safety thereof, as they shall  time to time receive from both Houses of Parliament, the Committee for the defence of the k¦dome, the Lord Generall, or the Lord Mayor and Committee for the Militia. Another Order was also published by the Houses to exempt such persons in the City of L¦don and Suburbes from the strict observing of the duties of the Fast during this present  as shall upon that be imployed upon the Trained Bands or otherwise for the defence of the  of the Fast, but onely to such persons as shall be so imployed as aforesaid. There were two or three other Bookes published, but meere lyes not worth the name Other certaine newes for the Day. Vpon information to the Houses of the great disorders that have of late been at Paules Ch London in Service and Sermon time on Sundayes, by the malignants of the Citie, there was  Order drawne up from the Houses that the Lord Major should take care that Paules should  henceforth during these distractions be shut up to prevent the like disorders, and that  should be neither Service nor Sermon used there on Sundayes at all. There were three officers of the Lord Generalls Army namely one Captaine VVillson, L¦tennant VVhitney and Leiuetennant Shankes that came this day post to London, and  brought to the Parliament and examined, it appeared that they had run from their Com
he begining of the Skirmish, and had possessed the Country as they came along with false nors telling them that there were 20000. Ried on both sides, and other false reports ere upon they were sent to the Gatehouse by order of Parliament. Vpon information that the Country Trayned Bands about Winsor came in voluntariely to ard the Towne and Castle It was ordered that the 12. Citie Companies should be sent for k againe and imployed for the safety of the Citty. Wednesday the 26. of October. The Houses of Parliament kept the Fast at Saint Margarets Westminster Docter Vsher Bishop  Armagh preached in the forenoone and Master Case in the afternoone. A little before the end of the evening Sermon the Lord VVharton and Master Stroud came to estminster from the Army, and they writt a note and sent it to the Minister to read o∣ly in the Church at the end of the Sermon, which note in short, discovered the successe of the ttle on Sunday last, the effect whereof was that the Earle of Lindsay Lord Generall of the Feild  his Majesty is hurt and taken and also the Lord VVilloughby his sone Sir Thomas Lunsford  Edward Stradling and Colonell Vavasor, and that they are all now prisoners in Warwick stle. That they have also taken six Colonis his Majesties Standerd five Waggons laden with Ammu∣ion and plate, a Coach, and eight pieces of Ordnance, the King and Prince being all the time  he fight at Sir Edward Copes house at Hanwell, that the Kings losse was 3000. men, and but o. of the Parliaments. That the rest of the Kings Army were routed, and the Earle of Essex remaines Master of the ild. There was also a further relation of the Battle but not so perfect as is here afterwards related. Thursday the 27. of October. There was a Declaration of both Houses of Parliament published to this effect, whereas di∣rs Rebells Traytors and other ill affected people in pursuit of a wicked designe to alter Religion d subvert the lawes, are marching against the Parliament and Citie of London to distroy the e and have plundered spoiled and distroyed divers of his Majesties good subjects in their ffage, to the great danger of the Parliament Citie, and whole Kingdome; for the prevention hereof, both Houses have Ordered that the Committie for Militia of the Citie into London be horised to take a speedy course to put the Citty into a posture of defence, and to fortifie all pas∣ges within liberties as without & to raise the Trained Bands & other forces of the Citty both Horse d foote, and to lead and conduct the said forces aswell without the liberties as within, and to e battell and fight with all that shall aproach with any force against them, or raise any insur∣ction within the same, and them to invade resist represse, subdue, kill and slay, and by all o∣er meanes to destroy; And to do all things else needfull for the preservation of the Parlia∣ent and Citty either by land or water, observing such further directions as they shall re∣eive from the Parliament the Committee for the safety of the Kingdom, or the Earle of War∣ck their Lord Generall; And for so doing they shall bee protected and defended by the au∣ority of Parliament. There was also an Ordnance of Parliament published to this effect. That whereas divers per∣ons are or shall bee imployed in the present Warr, who have little or nothing to maintaine emselves their wives and children, but their owne labours. Both Houses have Ordered and eclared that they will provide competent maintenance and allowance for all such persons as all be maimed or hurt, and in case any such persons bee slayne that they will make provision or the livelyhood of their wives and children. And in case any persons of estate shall bee slayne  die in this service they will take the estate, wives and children of such persons into their pro∣ections, And in case any of their estates shall bee unsetled at the time of their deaths, they will  alwayes assistant to the freinds of the party dead, in etling of their estates for the most  vantage of their wives and children &c.
Other certaine newes for the day. The Earle of Warwick is made Lord Generall for six Easterne Counties, and hath a h Commission for the raising of forces, and to kill and slay all that come against him. Essex  to shew their zeale to the Parliament and love to the Earle of Warwick are raising a great s of Voluntieres, part whereof are already come to London to serve the Parliament. There was a Letter intercepted and brought to the Parliament; writ from Secretary Nichol to the Earle of Cumberland, the substance of the said Letter is inserted in Satterdayes newes. The Lord Fairefaxe and Captaine Hotham have done excellent service in Yorke-shire, and driven the Earle of Cumberlands Cavaliers and all the Malignants into Yorke City, they hav∣ing no other place left them to take sanctuary in, but it is hoped they will bee soone forced fro thence also. It was informed by an Expresse from the Army, that the Lord Generall with his Army is safe∣ly come to Warwick, and that the Earle of Lindesey since their comming thither, is dead, the rest of the prisoners remaine in Warwicke Castle, the King as is conceived is about Oxford, and intends as it is reported to mrch to London, but the Lord Generall will very suddainly advance from Warwick after his Majestie. There was an Order drawne up by the Parliament, that the Ordnance and other Ammuniti∣on that is at Chattam should be fetched from thence and laide up safe in London for more securi∣ty, to prevent treachery and that the Kings shipps that are lately come from the fleet into har∣bour should bee presently unrigged and their Ordnance to bee also laid up in London. The Earle of Pembrooke Earle of Holland Lord Say and Leale Lord Wharton and Master Strode according to an Order of Parliament met the City of London, at a Common Councell at Guild hall this night to acquaint with the passages of the late fight & some other matters, whose severall speeches are here afterwards flly related. The Earle of Westmerland being taken by the Trained bands of Northhampton was this night brought to London with other delinquents and committed prisoner to the Tower▪ Friday the 28. day. THere was a Letter published by order of the House in discovery of the battell at Kynton which was signed by M. Denzill Hollis Sir Phil. Stapleton, Sir Thomas Ballard, Sir Io. M∣drum and Colonell Charles Pym, in which letter the former passages were confirmed I need not agaeine write but observe some other passages which that letter speakes of viz. That part of the Kings left came up towards the Lord Generalls right, and charged them: and sir Phillip Staple∣tons and Sir William Belfores horses, with my Lord Roberts and sir William Constables Regi∣ments of foot, bravely answered them, and charged them so home thrice together, that they for∣ced all the Muskettiers of two of the best Regiments, to runne in and shoud themselves within their Pikes, not daring to shot a shoot and so stood, but then the Lord Ceneralls Regiment and the Lord Brookes came up and charged altogether, and forced that stand of Pikes, and wholly broke those two Regiments, and slew and tooke almost every man of them, and then the whoe body of the Kings foot ran a way, and the Army was routed, the prisoners before spoke of was then taken, Sir Edmund Verney who carryed the Kings Standard was slaine by a Gentleman of Lord Generalls Troope, The Lord Generall himselfe tooke the Standard and gave it to his Se∣cretary M. Chambers, but he suffered it to be taken away by some of the Troopers, whereby  was at first missing but since found, The Kings forces were forced out of the field into their owne quarters, the Lord Generalls forces continued in the field all night, and the next morning drew into battalia, expecting the enemy would make a fresh onset, but they were gone over the hill-quite away and never appeared, the Lord Generall with the Prisoners went to Warwick o Munday, but the Army staved in the fields to bury the dead; Sir William Balfore did excellent service in the fight and broke a Regiment of foot with greene colours tooke their Cannon, and pursued them halfe a mile upon execution, Also sir Philip Stapleton, who when five troopes of
ememies horse returned from pursuit of the left wing, charged them with his single troope, and  them to flight, there was of note none lost of the Lord Generalls side, but Colonell Essex d the Lord Saint Iohn dangerously wounded, There was a George found in the field by a com∣n souldier, and bought by Captaine Skinner for twenty shillings, which was sent to the Par∣ment to view. There was very many men of great quality slaine on the other side, the Kings t was most of them run away, and the rest of the force very weake, and should have beene rsued by the Lord Generalls forces, but they were necessitated to refresh their men for two or ee dayes: and then God willing they intend to addresse themselves to finish the worke. The Lord Generall did gallantly adventure himselfe that day in the front against the enemy, posing himselfe to great danger. Other Certaine newes for the day. Severall orders were drawne up to be sent into all the Maritine Counties in this Kingdome, t they should place diligent watch over their Shipping, and apprehend all persons that cannot duce their warrants from the Houses or Tickets from the Farmours of the Custome-house. A Committee of the Commons were appointed to sit every afternoone to receive all dispatches t come from the members of the House in the Countrey and to examine any delinquents and mit to custody if there be cause, and to send such instructions and directions into the Coun∣y as at any time they shall see needfull. And an other Committee were appointed to take into consideration what moneyes horse and te are raised in severall Counties, and to take order for the advancing thereof, and consider of e Kings returne. Saturday the 29. THere was a booke published of the severall speeches which were spoke by the Lords to the  City of London, at a common Councell in Guild Hall, upon Thursday night the 27, of ctober. The First that spoke was the Lord Wharton, who made a full discovery to the City of the fight Kinton, the substance in effect was the same that is formerly related, only some passages were rted which I shall nominate. As 1. of the occasion why so many of the Lord Generals for∣ were absent at the time of the fight, which was for that a Regiment of foot, and a troope or o of horse was left at Hereford under the command of the Earle of Stamford, to prevent the elsh for falling in upon Gloucester shire, and the river of Severne and so into the West, also a giment of the Lord Saint Iohns and Sir Iohn Merricks at Worcester, which place is seated on the river of Severne, and intercepteth all force that commeth from Shrewsbury into the est, there was another regiment of the Lord Rochfords left at Coventry, also Colonell Hamp∣ and Collonell Granthams Regiment and ten or twelve troopes of Horse were a days march inde, by reason of the Lord Generals suddaine march, who brought some powder; ammunition d artillery after the army, so that at the time of the fight there was with the Lord Generall but ven Regiments of foot, and about forty Troopes of horse. That the Lord Generall in his owne person came up to the charge at severall times, once with owne troope of horse, and with his owne Regiment of foot, which were raised in Essex. That they tooke the prisoners afore named. viz. the Earle of Lindesey, Lord Willoughby his ne, Colonell Lunsford and his brother slaine, Sir Ed. Stradling prisoner, and divers others of lity the Lord Awberney Colonell Vavasor, and sir Edward Munroy a Scotch man of great litie. That by all the information that can be gathered: there were three thousand of the Kings ne, and but thace hundred of the Parliaments. That by all that could be gathered there were t twenty of our men killed with the Kings Cannon. That Colonell Hampden Colonell Gran∣ and those other ten Troopes formerly spoke of, came not to the Lord Generalls army,  about one a clocke at night. That the Lord Generall kept the field all night and next day s, but the Kings forces never appeared but some scattering men of three or foure troopes
of none that came to bury their men, and however it was fully reported there was no sign Munday or Tuesday, &c. After the Lord VVhartons, M. Strode made a speech to the City, confirming the former, re made by the Lord VVharton, further adding, that the two regiments raised in London for the i Bookes, and Master Hollis, and the one regiment raised in Essex for the Lord Generall, w chiefe men that wone the day, that by these men that were ignominiously reproached by the  of Roundheads did God shew himselfe to bee a glorious God. I will adde one thing wh worth the observation, that the same day that this fight was, which was the 23. of October, 1 the same day twelve moneth, viz. 23. October 1641. did the Rebellion break forth in Ire After Master Strode, the Earle of Pembrooke made a speech, but the chiefe occasion of  speech was concerning a letter which was intercepted writ from Secretary Nicholas to the E of Cumberland in the North, dated the twenty foureth of October, which letter was read ten to this effect. The Scretary writes to his Lordship that the King takes speciall notice of his vigilancy  care of the businesse in Yorkshire, and the care he hath of the Lady Dutches of Buckingham that raised some 10000 horse and foote, and have disarmed all such persons in Cornewell, w they esteeme to be disaffected to the King, and are marching into Devonshire to doe the  there, and that they intend to meete the King at London; That there is also in Wales about  or seven thousand men raised for the King, which are to be under Marquesse Hartford, and be ¦dy to come to his Majesty: But the Secretary writeth that hee hoped there will be no need their helpe, for that he saith (however falsely) the King hath lately given the Earle of Essex  a blow, that they will make no hast againe to adventure themselves in that cause; And that morrow being (the 25 of October) the King marcheth towards London by Oxford. After the reading of this Letter the Earle of Holland made and excellent speech, chiefely ¦cerning the Letter, shewing them what is threatned by it, viz. A great Army of the King come against the City, and commanded by such, that intend no lesse then the utter destroying the City, their persons, and estates, and this not all, but that if they can destroy the City,  whole Kingdome must submitt and yeeld to them, wherefore hee desires them to consider  God hath kept the first blow from them & delivered them as from an iminent danger by the  power of his hand and let that be an encouragement to them to pursue all things that are for glory, and the defence of Religion and cause: Further adding, that he only recommended  unto them, that it might hasten them forwards to the worke, well knowing, and resting cons that they are not wanting of piety, courage, and resolution to defend themselves, the Parlia and Kingdome, &c. After this, the Lord Say and Seale made a speech further to second that businesse, wishing t that they would not bee wanting to themselves, and then there was no cause feare that d which is threatned by the Letter, nor any thing that can be done by the Kings broken Army those things that are falsly buzzed abroad by malignant party into the City; there is no s danger, but in security, in sitting still: further adding, that it was not a time for men to think being in their shoppes and getting a little money, but let every man shurt up his shoppe, and  his Musquet, and come forth freely to serve his God, Religion, Countrey and Parliament; had divers other excellent expressions, but they would be too tedious to relate here. After this the Lord Wharton made a second speech to informe them of some passagas that had before omitted in his Relation of the fight, which was that Prince Robert with his Tro whilst the Armyes were fighting fell to pillaging of the baggage and most barbarously  Countreymen that came in with their Teemes and women and children that came with the which businesse the Lord Wharton urged to the Citizens as a motive to raise up their hearts of worke which was before pressed to them, for that the cheife ayme of the Cavallsiers is p and baggage, and plundering, and the way by which they would come by it is murthering
destroying, wishing them to be of good courage, for if the Enemy doe come the Lord Generall ll not faile soone to be on the backe of them, by which meanes they will be enforced to lye be∣ixt two Armies, which by Gods blessing will bring things to a very short Conclusion. After this the Earle of Holland made a second speech further to incite the Citie to make gilant and carefull preparations for their owne securitie, and that they resolve and act both gether, telling them that it is conceived the Army would be at Oxford that night, which place ing within such a distance, as within 3. daies they may march to London, it being therefore ore than or little necessary to provide against this, as a danger that may be suddainly upon us. After the Earle of Holland, to conclude all, the Earle of Pembrooke made a second speech desire∣g the Citty as a thing which would much conduce to the safety of the Citty, to take care of the alignant party which is amongst them, and now while they have time to secure them▪ for if ey be let alone till a time of distraction, they will then appeare much more boulder then now ey are &c. Finis. A Copy of a Proclamation was also published which was agreed upon by e Lord Iustices and Councell of Ireland, and published 19. August 1642. The effect whereof as to annull and make void all protections which have beene unduely granted to the Rebels,  certaine Commissioners in divers Counties in Vister, and that they shall bee proceeded against pprest and subdued as traitors and rebels to the King. There was an other booke published, called the second part of Vox populi, Being the peoples port unto the King, upon the severall appeales declared in his Majesties name, an excellent ract, but too large to be here inserted. Other certaine newes for the day. BY Letters from Holland it was informed, that the Queene intends to stay there all this win∣ter, and that Colonell Goring is come to the Queene. That the States of Holland doe de∣re to hold a faire correspondency with the Parliament, and that upon a late Assembly there, The tates in generall have concluded for the more better preservation of the union and peace between ngland and them, to stand as neuters, and that no aid shall be sent from thence to assist neither rtie. By order of a Parliament, a member of the House of Commons is to bee sent into Flan∣en with a Declaration against their sending of aid to the Rebels in Ireland, as being a breach of eir treaty of peace with this kingdome. The like thing is in agitation for the sending of a ember of Parliament into France for the same businesse, It was informed that e Lord Herbert at his house neare Lambeth, hath about 400. Guns of a bigger bore than Mus∣ets and some other Armes, whereupon there was an order granted from the Parliament for the arching of the said Lords house, and to seize upon all armes shall be found there. The Lord Major this day came to Westminster and had his Oath administred to him in the uall way in the Exchequer Chamber but in a private manner. That evening the Trained Bands of London according to an Order of Parliament apprehen∣ed divers Malignants in severall wards in London, some of them being Aldermen and other Citizens of good worth and divers of the Malignant Clergy and three parsons for the present are ecured in London house by Paules and Croseby house in Bishopps gate street. On Munday and Tuseday there was noe booke or other relations published worth the nomi∣ating, from the Army it was informed that the Lord Generall is advanced from Warwick and n Munday came to Northampton and on Tuseday to Alisbury, the Kings forces having pillaged nd spoyled Banbury, have left the Towne and are now at Abington where they have made he like worke and at other Townes thereabouts, the King as it is roported went from Oxford to Abington on Munday or Tuseday last, but which wayes he intends to march is no wayes certain▪ But you shall have some further relations for the two last dayes in the next Collection. FINIS.
