D1985 E616_12 R206738 99865845 165766
ELIJAH THE TISHBITE's SUPPLICATION When Presented the likeness of Hand, &c. (Kings 18.) Lady Elnor Davis MARK 13. But when ye shall see the Abomination of Desolation (or maketh desolate) spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing where it ought not; Let him that readeth understand, &c. Novemb: 22 Printed in the Year 1650.
Elias Intercession preferr'd. O Lord of Hosts our God, How long thou Lord of Sabbaths, thus shall silence be in Heaven? How long whilest they suppose like their sitting Gods thou likewise faln asleep, slum∣brest, or hearest not at all; as theirs pursuing the Enemy, or on a march; thy thundring Voyce refrain no longer: O this day be it known That art God, I beseech thee, I thy Servant also, hear me for thy VVords sake, above all hasten to Answer, hear me, bidden in thy Name but ask Fire, fire, from the Wheels of thy Seraphin Throne, vouch∣safe the light of thy presence, a spark thence to lick up at once or Recon∣cile (a Deluge such of Divisions) threatning no less then quenching Celestial flames; Thy Incense smoke
to extinguish thus arm'd to re-edifie Babel-Rout these Gyants then as fared with those false Prophets both of one Spirit, Lo crying from morning to night too, Let none escape either, despi∣sing not the Birthright onely (sure Promises) But where thou blessest, filling up with inveterate hatred the measure of such Long-suffering, the VVorld, made believe thy Spirit confined in the Hemisphere of their Studies; That the Jews how much blest, uncalled in such revolted times, where beside Confusions Mark set on the Age present, confounded alike as that first Generation after the flood, their aspiring Towers Erecting when scattered, whether then turned Turks and Saracens, that Mother of Abo∣mination, bear witness, Mahomets Blasphemous ALCORAN also, at
Pauls, Cum Privilegio the Great VVhore stilled well Babylon, never more Bruitish after once inlightened, the Night past, that whoso runs may read, not a tittle failing, whose presence likened to Lightning out of the East, even shining unto the VVest, coming not short of the Jews Visitation, notwithstanding in as much want (if not more) to be reingrafted standing themselves, to Babylon lo returned. As moreover witness to this day in the first place, without Baptism; sup∣perless both; Nuld by them such a Deed of Gift bestowed on those Ma∣sters of Art our Rabbies, whereas in the Ark its first figure all at full Age, till after the Flood none born unto them; imposed nevertheless by these Gog and Magog Admintstrators on such, knowing not the right hand from
the left, retaining other Character, none but hearsay; together with the other left off, or taken as some morn∣ing potion, and other like Tradition: armd with thy Brimston Bow, appeal to thee, O righteous Iudge, thus where turned into VVormwood, the Waters of Life no few perishing that way the Springs of Iustice ans∣werable, if weighs not Naboths Case down Ahabs sword, instead of Solomons season'd in the strife of that now despi∣sed Sex, of Turkish slavery more then a taste partaking, VVidows Estates put into the Ballance, in the VVorlds state of Infancy, that if repentest at the heart, thou madest him not a Beast. Rather leave it to the world also of such an Expression the extent how much since concerned in it, that in Expectation of New Jerusa∣lems
Nuptials were it not, better a Thousand times the Gentiles Church since the Apostles Age, to have perish∣ed in that foreshewed Siege and De∣struction, not a stone left on a stone, also they as obdurate. VVhich Petition wherein without farther Process, not like Attorneys BILLS, supposing to be Heard for their much Repetition. VVhere lastly to be short with the time like that little dark Cloud a Hand like, to the waiting Prophet no small welcom token, as gathered therefrom these of Palmistries Science, extend∣ing to the present Jubile or Number of Fifty; so points to a Blow when as much attention lends to their Note, as they of such took notice sent from him, those Baals Sons the Image of God both alike, as the Baboon or such
like theirs carried with the current of the Cormorant Times. And so far for them drinking at the Brooks side their farewel, Four hundred and fifty, for Fish and Fowl such an unexpected evening Banquent. And for the peo∣ples hearts turned back, trusting in heartless Leaders, attended with that blessed shower expected as little so long after the Heavens restrained; and in Israel no few Widows too, but unto none of them, save to Sareptas Widow of Sidon, &c. As thereby that line behold mea∣sured the present Abominable Age its coming to it self again, cleansed the unparalleld Leprous Time. October The Lambs Wife. By Eleanor Tichet. FINIS.
