D641 e673_13 99866252 166260
A DECLARATION OF THE ARMIE To His Excellency The Lord General CROMWEL, FOR The dissolving of this present Parliament, and chusing of a new Representative. WITH Their Proposals and Desires touching 1 The Government of this Nation. 2 The Liberty and Freedom o the People. 3 An account to be given of the great sums of Money received. 4 The taking off all Taxes. 5 The setting free of prisoners that are not worth 5 l. August 10 Imprinted at London, for John Smithson, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1652.
A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY, To His Excellency the Lord General Cromwel, for the dissolving of this present Parlia∣ment. THe Officers of the Army having had sundry Consultations and Conferences, touching the dissolv∣ing of this present Parliament, and electing of a new Representative; after much time
spent in debate thereof, proceeded to a period of their Results, grounded upon publike safety; and in pursuance thereof, presented a Model of their Proposals, to his Excellency the Lord Generall Cromwel; with the subscriptions of most of the Officers of the Army; And by a general Condes∣cension, it was drew up in a Declaratory-Way to the Parliament; but exceeding high they are in their Proposals. But what will ensue, or be resolved upon time will manifest. In short, the current runs thus; For redressing of the groanes and heavy oppressures of the people, both in City and Countrey, and the enjoyment of freedom throughout the Nation, according to the several Engagements and Protestations of the Offi∣cers and Souldiery; and which hath been purchased at a dear rate by the expence of much blond. For, indeed, to desire liberty, and shun servitude, is natural to very beasts; and man seeming to be of worse condition than brute beasts, which as rational pass by the greater delights of sense to shun subje∣ction; he as irrational, passing by the better reasons of the understanding, precipitates himself into ser∣vitude, as if slavery were the greatest sensuality. The great God of Heaven hath made all soules equall, all bodies of the same materials; and if the Divine
Power endow one species with more noblenes then another, yet He does not so in individuals. Where∣fore shal we then make some greater then all, whom Nature hath not made greater then any one? If a Commonwealth be liberty, a Kingdom is servitude; nor is it the more to be praised if it be voluntary; rather he is more to be blamed who serves out of weakness, then he who serves enforst by Necessity. When time requires recourse to daring, there ought no recourse be had to patience: patience doth well in generous breasts, to asswage, necessity, and there it becomes fortitude: In all other places 'tis baseness of mind, unless it be assumed when time serves, to be laid aside when time serves. In a Word, there is nothing more desired by the Army, then the publike safety, liberty, and freedom of the People; who desire, that the ancient and so∣veraign Law, called Salus Populi, should be for ever kept inviolate, All other Laws, Customs, Conquests in that Case provided and usurped whatsoever, in any wise, notwithstanding. And in pursuance thereof, have proposed a way for redress of all Grievances, as evidently appears by these ensuing particulars, to wit;
1 That there be an account given of the vast sums of money, collected several wayes throughout this Nation. 2 That an account be given by all Trea∣surers, Committees, and others, how the said sums have been disbursed, and for what use and service they have respectively been employed. 3 That a new Representative be forth∣with elected. 4 That the heavy burdens of the people be removed, and all Oppressures and Taxes taken off, that so the poor may no longer be insulted over by the rich; but that truth, equity, and justice, may abound amongst them. 5 That Courts of Judicature be reduced into a smaller number, and the Officers not to exceed in number; but that both them∣selves, and their Revenues, be equally set down and stated.
Many other particulars of great con∣cernment are agitating; and amongst the rest, An Act for the redress and delivery of poor prisoners, which are not able to satisfie their debts, being impoverished beneath the value of 5 l. speedy care is taken for the ex∣pediting thereof. But me thinks, Gentlemen, I hear a re∣sounding eccho from some distemper'd spi∣rits, who say, That injuries received, tend to the ruine of men, who with the zeal of ho∣nour do not accompany wisdom; they run upon revenge for past-wrongs, and throw themselves headlong upon new miseries; they would amend one errour and produce a thousand. Too much haste is as much before time, as too much delay is out of time: Errours of impatience are worse then Errours of de∣lay; for it is better to shun precipices, than to run upon them: if they be not hindred
they will be retarded. Justice is not believed to be there, where violence is observed to be; nor can it be accounted wisdom, where there is no argumentation. Argumentation is not had in an instant; Time is not measured by instants; and things which have not bin done in times past, may well be effected in times to come. For, truly, never was there an Army, who desired to purchase freedom for their Countrey, more then these; and, indeed, well may they be called, the Acade∣my of Europe; or, an Army of Saints, by reason, that their Discipline is compos'd both in a spiritual and temporal War∣fare. FINIS.
