D741 e552_17 99865025 165066
A DECLARATION OF The Princes Navie, CONCERNING The Parliament of England and the Army; and their Re∣monstrance and Resolutin delivered to prince Rupert; with the particulars of a great and bloudy fight at Sea, and prince Maurice his Letter to the prince of Wales. Also, the Queens Majesties Message to the Prince at the Hague, concerning the present transaction of Affaires, in relation to England, Scot∣land, and Ireland. CH DIEN printer's device, consisting of the coronet of the Prince of Wales adorned with three ostrich feathers Imprinted at London, for G. Wharton, May 1. 1649.
A DECLARATION Of the Princes Fleet at SEA AND Their Resolution touching the Parliaments Navy with their present Design and Intentions touch∣ing the Parliament and Army. Honoured Sir, UPon the 26. of this instant, here arrived  Messenger from Prince Maurice, wi a Letter to the Prince of Wales, where  he gives an account to his Highnesse  the present transactions at Sea, purpo¦ting, That without a speedy supply of Monies, and ¦ther Necessaries appertaining thereunto, for acco¦modation
of the Mariners, a great distraction would suddenly break forth amongst them new Coles being already kindling, which are ready to break forth in a visible flame. For we hear, that they mutiny exceedingly, and have declared, That they will not engage against the Parlia∣ments Navy without assurance both of present and fu∣ture satisfaction; insomuch, that many of them have undantedly remonstrated to Prince Rupert, and other superiour Officers, that they will rather die and suffer martyrdome, then be enslaved and ruled by a usurping power and arbytrary Government. This strange allarum soundeth in the eares of many like a terrible eccho, and puts a great demur to the proceedings at Court, many of the Grandees declining Engagement; especially since the receipt of the In∣telligence, that the parliaments Navy are put forth to Sea who are joyntly resolved to hazard the encounter, and to bring them to obedience and subjection, who have perfidiously deserted, and betrayed the trust re∣posed in them. And by an Expresse from Helver-sluce it is further intimated, that upon the lanching forth of the parlia∣ments ships to the Ocean, they soon espyed a Squadron of the princes Fleet, all under sayl, being about sixteen in number, who making towards them, and comming within shot, gave them a broad side, which by reason of a second Volley from the assaulted, a hot conflict began, being disputed with great resolutenesse and gal∣lantry on both sides, the Victory seeming a long while doubtfull, but at last it fell to the parliamenteers, who sunk one of their Combitants, chased the rest many
leagues, and are now become Masters of a great part of the British Seas. This is reported here with great confidence, and it is verily believed, the rest will not stand a fight, divers of them fearing, that they shall be made exemplary, if e∣ver they be taken. Col. Popham one of the parliaments Admirals, hath cleered the Western Coast neere the Isle of Portland, and forced many to fly before him. The other two Admirals, Col. Blague, and Col. Deane, are upon the same motion on the South west point. Hague 27. Aprill, 1649. Postscript, Sir, Since the writing of my last, the two extraordinary Embassadours from Sweden and Denmark have had audience with the titufar King of Scotland, representing the personall appearance of their Masters, and promising him assistance for the ob∣taining of his Birthright. But truly we cannot discerne any visible Force as yet in Armes, and the Princes Propositions to the old Souldiers of the United Pro∣vinces are much slighted and rejected, having unani∣mously declared, that they will not any wayes inter∣meddle with the affairs of England, in relation to the erecting and setting up of Monarchy or any other Go∣vernment whatsoever. Here is a great demur hapned, at Court, by reason of the Parliaments Navy putting forth to Sea, which causeth many who at first seemed very forward to promote the Royall Design, to desert any further Engagement, taking a president by the late headlesse members, who acted against the Common∣wealth of England. Hague 27. Aprill 1649.
The Queens Letter to the Prince. SIR, THe Queen of England is much perplexed and sore troubled in mind, the Fountain and Rise whereof, taking its first derivation from the present streams or head of the Royal Off-sping at the Hague; for having sent a Letter to her Sonne Prince Charles, to advise him to a Treaty with her Maiesty, and to meet her at Amians in France, but hearing that his affections had taken Center another way, and that he could not meet her there, she resolved nt to mke any further addresse unto him, but returned backe o Paris, condoling much the losse of her late endeared Soveraign, and the present proceedings of the Prince, in reference to the work in hand touching his restau∣ration: And after some few dayes spent in serious meditations, watering her Princely bed with teares of sorrow, she desired a conference with Mr. Hey Jer∣min, at which she declared, That she had received seve∣rall Dictates in a Dream, and that may things were revealed to her thereby, by Apparitions and Visions, to wit; First, that if her Son Prince Charles did any wayes alienate his affections from going to Ireland, and cast himself upon the Kingdom of Scotland, He was a lost Prince, and that they would serve him as they had done his Father, to sell him for a sum of money, and so deprive him of all Earthly felicity, which might a∣bundantly flow from his three Crownes and King∣domes. Secondly, That if his vigilancy were not perspicu∣ous to those in power, in playing of his Game at Sea, that his Designe would be soone frustrated, and all
hopes of restauration wholly expiated, &c. Having dictated unto him these propheticall expressions, Her Majesty desired, that they might be forthwith com∣municated unto his Highnesse, which was asserted to, and a messenger immediatly dispatched from thence to the Hague: Leyden 26. Aprill, 1649. A Yorkshire Gentlewoman coming out of Cleve∣land, to present some things to the House of Com∣mons, delivered a paper to Lieut. Gen. Crumwell, con∣taining matters which she saith she had in command from God in a Vision, viz. 1. That the Parliament re∣form the Clergy, & only settle such Ministers as pro∣mote holinesse and the glory of God. 2 To make the Laws of the Land plain and just, grounded upon the Word of God. 3 To make speedy and effectuall pro∣vision for the poor. 4 That differences be composed at home, before the breaking out of further distractions abroad. These things she saith that she being as dead for a time were revealed to her by God, she beholding the glory of Heaven and the Almghty Jehovah. Sir, Our dependance here is, what his gracious Maje∣sty will do, all desire his comming hither, but the pro∣fessed downright Royalists would have him come wh a force for there instituting him in his Right; the other party, such as reall for Presbytery, would also have him come with a new heart. Wee hear that the vulgar sort of people do cry him up exceedingly; an say they ut and will have  King though it cost them never so much: here are ly risings in severall parts of the Country the Marquesse of Hunts Son is again in arms with 2000. Gourdons to revenge his Fathers death, they have declared for Charles the se∣cond,
and have set forth their Invitation, for all persons to come in to their assistance. Col. Car, and divers o∣ther English Officers, are likewise very active in rai∣sing of Forces, and have sent Letters of invitation into Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, for o∣thers to come to them, promising great matters of pre∣ferment, but it is more then they are able to performe, for the well affected party are both vigilant & active in suppressing of them. The Committee of Estates sit daily in consultation, and are exceedingly discontented at their new Kings re∣fusall to grant their desires, and reject a complyance with them; whereupon many of them have declared their assent for a message to be sent to the parliament of England, in reference to a Treaty, touching prince Charles; but many of the great Ones are divided in that particular, and the Commoners cannot indure to heare of the subversion of Monarchy. Berwick 27 April, 1649. FINIS.
