e3672 E175_8 99872757 157080
AN EXACT Relation, Of a battell fought by the Lord Moore, against the Rebels in Ireland; with the number of them that were slain on both sides. London, Printed. 1641.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms AN EXACT RELATION Of a Battell fought by the Lord Moore, against the Rebels in Ireland; with the number that were slain on both sides. THE Lord Moore hearing of the Rebellion of the Papists; sent for all his Tennants, and asked them, if they would assist him in suppressing of the Rebels; their answer was, they would be ready at all times, to venture their lives, for their King, him, and their Countrey: His Lordships answer was, he was very thankfull to them for their faithfulnesse to his Majesty, and also for their faithfulnesse to him, and to their Coun∣trey; and if they would assist him, he would by the 30. of October provide Arms for them; and he would go finde out some of the Rebels, who did much spoyl all the Countrey their abouts; their answer was, with all their hearts they would assist him, to the uttermost of
their lives, and fortunes promising all to attend him on the 29. of October. In the mean time, the Conspirators hearing of my Lord Moores design upon them, they made themselves two thou∣sand strong; intending to take my Lord Moore in his house, and to cary him away prisoner; and to seize upon all his Munition, and to take his hundred horse, that he had then in readinesse: he having notice of their coming, sent post fr all his friends, and Tennants; for that he was before their coming furnisht with a thousand men, but had not gtten in Arms for half of them: The Rebels drew neer his house, to the number of two thousand, with Drums, and Colours displaid before them. My Lord Moore seeing them so ner, thought it not wisedome to let the Rebels besiege him in his house; therefore he marcht out to meet with them, and having met with them in a narrow passage, which went to hi house, a Rock being on one side, and a River on the othr side; he placed his horse in the Front; where began a very smart fight between them; but the Re∣bels still prest to gain the pssage to his house; which they with much adoe gained: so that by that mans, the Lord Moores Horse could stad him in no stead; nither was he able to charge them any more with his Foot; so that he was forst to march to a City three miles of. The number of the Rebels slain in this fight, was three hundred; the number of the otherside slain, was forty; thn the Rebels entered the Lord Moores house, and took all that they found in it, and killed up all his Cattell; and pillaged his Tennants houses, and destroyed all thir Cat∣tell round about. The chief Commander of the Rebels is, Sir Patrick Oneal, the high Sheriff of a County in Ireland, who, with
the other Rebels, published many declarations in writing to this effect; Tht they were not a conquered Naion, nor would not live under th Laws, that have now of late been enacted; and they would have a free use of thi Re∣ligion without interruption; which they had now cause to fear, would be much straitned, if not uterly taken away: therefore it is high time to stirre, since it is of so great a cnsequence; therefore all that wish well to the Catholique Faith, let them now betake themselves to their Atms, and come now and assist us who are now in the field, to defend the Religion with our swords, which hath been established in this Kingdom, by our worthy Ancestors: and hereby we shall put honour upon our Religion, and make our names famous thorough the Christian world; and if any of the Catholique Religion shall refuse to assist us in this our just defnce, let them know, they will be kept under like slaves, and draw upon them a curse from all the Catholiques in the world, and the curse of us Priests, ad Fryers, and Souldiers. Given at the Councell, held the 31. of October, in the County of Monno. Patrick Oneal. Hugh Mackmadouse. Father Patrick. Fryer Dennis. FINIS.
