F1624 E616_4 99871448 165764
THE SOVNDING OF THE LAST TRUMPET OR Severall Visions, declaring the universall overturning and rooting up of all Earthly Powers in ENGLAND. With many other things foretold, which shall come to passe in this Year, 1650. Lately shewed unto GEORGE FOSTER, who was commanded to Print them. Printed in the Yeare 1650.
The Epistle to the Reader. O Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, and tremble thou earth, at the presence of the mighty God of Iacob; for behold, he comes to take ven∣geance on his enemies, and they that have exercised oppression shall be by the All of all, things confounded and brought to no∣thing, whether they be outward powers that have their fellow creatures in bondage to them, or the powers of flesh, ruling and domineeering in them, Isay both powers shall be brought to nothing, and shall not be able to stand any longer; for his ex∣cellent Majesty appearing in brightnesse, will be a terrour to all flesh and all powers shall become as weak as water before him; and Lucifer that hath made the Nations to tremble, shall be brought to nothing, even all the power, strength and glory of man shall be but as grasse, and as the flower of the field that is soon cut down, and then comes to nothing, and is as if it were not; even so at the appearing of the Lord of hosts, shall all powers of what sort or under what notion sever be, in a very little while, as if they were not, and God alone, even the eternall God appeare to be King and Lord over all the Earth; at whose appearance all things besides himselfe shall be brought to nothing, even all POWERS shall become as nothing: and the mighty men, and great men, as Kings and Lords, for fear of the Lord of Hosts, shall run into the holes of the rocks, and into the Dennes of the Earth to hide themselves for fear of his Majesty, for he doth now arise to shake terribly the earth, and all the earth
shall become dung before him; and all the powers of the earth shal be as dung before his Instruments whom he hath made choice of, to do his great and terrible work: for he hath now a strange work to do which will not be done by the pow∣ers of the earth; but the mighty Jehovah will do his strange work by por, weak, and dispised instruments, even by those that are as nothing in themselves, that the All of al things may appear to be their power and their strength, and so through the stength of the mighty God, levell and lay mountaines and hils low, and make plaines nd vallies equall with them: add so I will leave you to the ensuing Treatise, there to see what Gwd hath purposed to do: the which he hath been plea∣sed to reveale to me by vsions, which power as I a a creature hah so powerfully appeared in me, as I have not been able to re∣sist, but must send it forth th the publike view, as being one that that been made for a figne and wohder amongst men, and so for my own puietnesse sake, and qeace of Spirit, I am made to put it to thy view, and so am contented to be a foole, and to undergo the hard and harsh censures of many, leaveing it to thy serious consideration, or to thy malicious spirit, which may bite against it, and say I am deluded, and the Devil hath power o∣ver me: I'le leave it to you that see or heare of it; fo time to make manifest what it is, and I'le wait upon the mighty God of Jacob, being confident he hath made out himselfe un∣to me by Vision and Revelation; and hath set me as a Won∣der in the eyes of men: but wonder not as to mock and laugh at me least your hearts be hardned, & so you be one of the vessels whom the Lord will powre out the fiercenes of his wrath upon; for surely my God hath not set me as a sign for nothing; if he hath, I am contented to be nothing, that he, the Lord of hosts, may appear to be all: yea, I am confident the All of all things hath a very great work to do, & he hath made use of me, as of one that am a poor creature, purposely to st me a sign, for
some to be forewarned that the Lord of hosts is comming to destroy all things beside himselfe; that they may be wil∣ling when he appeareth to forsake all, and to count that which for the present is their God, as gold and silver, as nothing that they may cloath and feed the hungry, and so escape the day that shall burne as an Oven. But for others to be a stone of stumbling; a gin and snare at which they shall stumble and fall. And so Reader that thou maiest understand by reading of this treatise what God is now a doing: and how powerfull he is. For I have seen him to be very strong, for these things following; I did much question whether they were not a delusion of the Devill, by reason of the strangenesse of them, & so did by questioning of them bring my selfe into a restlesse con∣dition: as severall times to be tempted to make away my selfe. For these things saith the tempter, if thou publish them will make you a hissing and a laughing stock: and flesh being willing to be at ease, I could have bin contented to have buried them in the bed of oblivion, & so thought to have hid them and not to have brought them forth, but the voice of the Lord came to me saying, that thou maiest know that I the Lord of hosts, I have made out unto the by vision, & revealed things that shall surely come to passe, & that I have commanded thee to put them in print, & therefor to go to London, thou shalt be dumb (and so I was for ni houres) as a token to convince thee of thy unbeliefe. And the next day, the voice of the Lord said I should be blind, as a token to convince me of my unbeliefe, which I was for e∣leven houres. And at the same time, the voice of the Lord said: (for to hasten me away for to be a wonder in London) I should be deprived of the use of my hand untill I did go up to speak with Fairfax; and being thus taken speechles and blind and my right hand closed up, that I could not open it; I'did come up to London, and being in London I did go to the Generals house for to speak with him, but could not, then I
went againe, and could not; and the third time; but could not be admitted for to speak with him: And all this while my hand was closed up so fast that severall that saw it did not conclude it was by a supernaturall power: and I did tell them that I had a message to deliver to the Generall: but for the present I knew not what it was but I never did tell any that it could not be opened by force and strength: but did tell them that I my selfe could not open it: but as soon as I did speak with the Generall it should open, which was now so closed for a signe to convince me of my unbeliefe, and also a stumbling-block for those that did by violence open it; as a Priest for one, who was the chief cause of it, I being then in the Generalls house intending for to have spoken with him, as to deliver to him what God should have made out to me. But I see it since to be the wisdome of my God that I did not speak with him, and likewise the wisdome of God that my hand was opened by violence, that it may prove the fall of the enemies of Sion, and give them cause to mock and laugh at me; that so thy may be for the slaughter when the Lord ariseth to shke the earth terribly. And this I writ because I would not have you wonder why I do not go to the Generall for to speake with him, and so conclude that I am deluded, as they that opend my hand did; for the wayes of God are past finding out, and my message is done for the present in that I have endeavoured for to speak with him, and I am as much satisfied with my condition as if I had spoke with him, for I see an over-ruling power and so am made for to wait upon that power that made all creatures (knowing that he will do his pleasure) untill he doth in a more powefull manner carry me forth in such a way to act, which as I am a crea∣ture I am dead to, and when he appeares in power in his own time for to make use of me or a any other of his creatures, they shall not be able to wihstand him, as I fr my own pat have not beene able to withstand. So with this caution to you all, not to
mock at me lest you mock not only me, but the All of all things, and so dash your selves against that rock which will beat to pou∣der all other powers besides himselfe that he may be all and in all, I am willing to be silent, leaving my God to do with me, and all creatures, what he pleaseth. GEORGE FOSTER.
January 14 1650. THe first day of the appearing of the eternall God in me, so as to make his excellent Majesty most illustriously to shine in me as the most excellent and most glorious ob∣ject, was by declaring himself to be my God, and that he was come to make himselfe known unto me; who had a long time been in me buried under the clouds of proud flesh, and I was ignorant of him, and though I was ignorant of him [of the eter∣nall God dwelling in me] yet he did dwell in me, and was the life of me, which is a great mystery, and vnknown to most creatures, though most professe they know God, that God, even the eternall God dwels in them, by which they live and move and have their being. But it hath pleased the infinite Iehovah [who is the fulnesse of all, and fills the Creation with his grace] to appeare most gloriously in me, stripping and robbing me of all my former glory, that he alone may appear to be my all and in all, and so to declare and make himselfe manifest to me, that he the eternall God doth dwell in me, and is the life of me, and that he will no longer be buried in me, but now will arise like a man of warre, tearing and destroying all proud flesh which hath covered him, that he alone may appear to be my eternall King, and so to take me up into the full injoyment of him∣selfe, by declaring in me, saying, I the Lord of hosts am come, which voice was the most joyfullest voice that ever sounded in mine eares, though it was a terrour to my flesh, yet I may say with the Pro∣phet, this is the day which the Lord hath made, come let us be glad and rejoyce in it. The Prophet was not ignorant that the Lord did make all the dayes, for he knew well enough the Lord did make all, but this day wherein he sayes, he will rejoyce; was that day, even that day as the eternall God did appeare to be his God; and so apprehending him selfe by the manifestations of God to him, to be one with God, and no longer at a distance from God, did cause him to rejoyce and be glad.
But who shall abide the day of his coming? or who shall be able to stand when he appeareth? Surely no flesh shall be able to stand in that body when the mighty God of Jacob appeareth, neither shall any flesh abide there, neither shall that creature in whom he is pleased to manifest himself, be able to oppose him, for the Lord will do all his pleasure; He is like a refiners fire, and fullers sop. The eternall God by his bright appearing in his sons, he will purifie and re∣fine them, by destroying that which hath troubled them, and hath kept them at a distance from him, and cause them to see evill no more, and to see former things to passe away, and all things become new: And thus it hath pleased my excellent Majestie who dwels in me, to make known himself unto me, that so J may see former things, or old things passe away, and all things become new: And as the eternal God caught Paul up into rhe third heaven, and he heard there words not fit to be uttered; because if he should have made them know, they could not understand them, by reason of the dif∣ference of dispensations wherein they lived, Paul being a father, & all they babes and children. So my excellent Majesty the eternall God, having taken me up into himselfe by his appearing in me in such a high discovery of his love unto me, as to make me see him∣selfe in me, and I to have no life but he to be my all; yea, my life, and that I can do nothing without him, who hath caused me to deliver my Kingdome, all my strength [he being now the end of it] to my Father, that he may be all and in all: yea he hath [even my eternall God] so powerfully overcom me, that whether I was wel∣ling or no, destroyed my flesh (for God is a consuming fire) that he may take the kingdom to himselfe, and so to be all, and in all in me: even thus it pleased my eternall God even in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye to strike me dead, and likewise to raise me from the dead; and to cause me to heare the Angell sound the last Trumpet, and so to take me up to meet the Lord in the aire, and so to be ever with the Lord, sounding the tune of the seven Trum∣pets alwayes in mine ears, and causing me to hear the noise of the last trumpet, even the mystery of God, saying, it is done, it is done, and time shall be no longer; making me to see seventy weeks, spoken of in Daniel, to be at one end, and so to see sin and transegression to be finished, and to hear a voice within me, saying, everlasting righ∣teousnesse is brought in: This is that voice which hath already shoke the earth, but yet once more (saith my excellent Majesty, who doth most gloriously shin in me) that he wil shake not only the earth again
but the heavens also: for it is not the worke of God onely to destroy the earthly powers and to bring them to nothing, though he will do it, but he will also destroy the heavenly powers, even that welfavoured har∣lot: even those that thinke themselves to be Iews and are not, as well Independency and Baptisme way as he hath done Episcopacy and Pres∣byterie, and so to bring all flesh in to confusion, and to destroy the wisdome of man that he alone may be exalted, and then wil the lord make a way in the wildernesse, and pathes in the desarts. for to give water unto his people. And when the Lord hath done this great work, as he will do, to cause the poor creatures as think themseves as lights and stars, and have taught otheres, to be nothing but in confusion, then will they appear to be the wilderness and desarts barren and empty; and that nothing will satisfie them but the powring of the spirit from on high, which is no other, but God appearing in them, and making himself known to them that he dwels in them, which dwelling in them will be as water of life unto them, and so will the Prophesies be fulfilled; I will do a new thing, which new thing willbe the depriving of the creature of all his selfe-righteousnesse or holineste, and will make him to say, in the Lord have I righteousnesse, which righteousnesse will be God alone appearing to be the old way, and so will make them hear a voice behind them saying, this is the old way walke in it O the abundance of joy that is contained in these words: O it is the un∣speakable Ioy which the Apostle mentions, to hear God Preaching and speaking to us, yea, in us: what a deale of labour will this save poor creatures, this will stay them from running to broken ci∣sterns that can hold no water, this will take them off from Idolizing Priests, when the voice of God speaks in us behould, this is the mysterie that is to be made manifest to the sons of Sion in these later dayes, Christ in them the hope of glory, that so in seeing God in them, and they to be in God, are the new jerusalem that is com out of heauen, and so are the guests of that joyful wedding, hearing those joyful wrds, the mariage of the Lamb is ready, and so loose them∣selves to be married to the eternal God, and they to be the Lambs wife, and so by the power of the eternal God dwelling in them, they overcome and do inherit all things, by being brought into the in∣joyment of God, and so inherit all things in God; for God being theirs, all things are theirs, whether things present or things to come so that they shall now see weeping and sorrow to be fled away, and so to go with everlasting songs to Sion, in singing and dancing to
the house, of the Lord; Beloved this is that feast of fat things upon the mountaine, wine upon the leaves, even God the eternall King dwelling and manifestling himselfe to you as he hath done to me, whereby I see by the excellent Majestie, the eternal God in me, that crooked wayes are now made streight, and rough places made smooth; high places made low, and low places made high; flesh brought to nothing, and God to be all and in all; all my life joy and strength, and so no longer to labour and travell with child, but to bring forth, or declare that this eternall God is in me; and that he hath manifested himselfe unro me, in a more extraordinary manner then ever before he did which extraordinary manner was as followeth. As I lay awake in my bed between three and foure a clock in the morning Ian. 14. 1650. the Lord caused me to heare a pleasant fit of musick or melody, which musick made me much admire, being so early in the morning, and one being with me I would faine have ask∣ed him if he heard or knew where it was; But as J was thinking to know where it was, I was taken in a strange manner, with tremb∣ling, shaking; burning, and groaning, which made the party which lay with me much wonder and speak to me, but J could not make him any answer. And after J had lain trembling and groaning [be∣ing full of paine within and without] for halfe an houre and upwards: J began to have abundance of inward joy and consolation, even so full of joy was J that I was not able to containe my selfe, or expresse that comfort I had within me; but J did at length break forth in laugh¦ter, so heartily that I scarce ever laughed so heartily before, and did utter these words, the Lord of hosts is come, and the most joyfull day that ever came is now, and no joy like unto this joy: and then after∣wards was J taken with trembling and Groaned as I did before; and then afterwards I brake forth with laughing, and thus I did for foure times in the morning useing, the same expressions as J did at first: all this while beholding nothing with my outward eyes: for they were shut up that J could scarce open them, but beheld a glorious object within mee, which made me much rejoyce; and so I continued sometimes rejoycing within my selfe, and sometimes full of trouble, untill about twelve a clock at noon. And then was I taken in the same manner as before, and had three more fits; and in the last of the three, I being filled more with joy then in any of the rest; J lifted up my hands and cryed out, the Lord of hosts is come: And it is done, it is done, being so filled with joy as if it was the most joyfulls
newes which ever came to me; which since I have found it to be and that never no joy was like this joy to me, if I may speake the truth and lie not. And afterwards I passed the day and night, sometimes being full of joy, and somtimes full of sorrow; and the next day being thursday, J passed that with joy and went to bed, finding my self prittie well satisfied (but not quite satisfied) and slept a while, but awaked about 2. a clock; and being awake I was much troubled in my self and perplexed in my minde, but at length I heard a voice within me saying, heare my voice; and I cried out, who art thou that I should heare? and I was answered with these words, I am the Lord of hosts the holy one of Israel: and I was presently, yea, of an instant taken with shaking and groaning; and being tormented in my minde; I then heard a voice saying to me, I am now come to torment thee, to consume and burn thee up to nothing; and I did then apprehend a bundance of miserie and sorrow, crying out I was in hel: & presently I was as ful of joy in apprehending a glorious God within me, which made me as much rejoyce & laugh within my self, as if I had bin in no miserie at all. yea, though I was in hel, & among all the Devils, I cryed out, sorrow and sighing shall flie away. Some 5, or 6. of these fits, in my miserie, I cryed out I was in hel. In my joy I cryed out, the Lord of hosts is come: and sorrow and sighing will now flie a∣way; and that the Lord of hosts will not shake the earth, but the heavens also. These fits being over; there did appear to me four black horses all in harnesse, drawing and tugging as if they had bin in a cart that was set, and strived harder then ordinary to get out: And I said Lord, what is the meaning of this (sighing and groaning untill I had an answer) and I was answered, that these do represent the powers of the world that do oppose God in his people, & all powers [that they are now ready to be drawn in pieces and these being vanished: There appeared four horses al' read, and I said Lord what is the meaning of this, and the Lord said, these do re∣present all powers to be in blood readie to be strangled: and these being gone, there appeared 4. pale horses like unto death (for J looked much upon them) for they looked very pale, yet not with∣standing they did brance up and down and kept a vaporing about. But presently death seized upon them, and I beheld till I saw all powers throwne down, and covered in the earth that they should rise no more. And after these 4. pale horses were covered under the earth, there appeared one white horse without spot or staine, and
one upon him all in glory, having a sword in his hand, and he rid from East to West & from North to South, and he said, the king∣domes of this world are becom the kingdoms of the Lord, & he doth raign & Isaid Lord, what doth this mean? and the Lord said, That I the eternall God will appeare so glorious in my people to the burning up of flesh and sin, that they shall appear Conquerours and Kings; and I the Lord God am and will appear to be all and in all to my people. And as he prances from East to West from North to South, without any let or hinderance: so shall my people live in the injoyment of me; and nothing shall make them afraid, and a little while after, I beheld an Angell coming from God and have∣ing in his hand abook, and it was open. And he came to me and bid me put forth my hand and take it, and eat it and I did put forth my hand and did take it, and (I said) Lord what means this, and my God said that this is a testimonie or a seal to you that I am come to you, and have put my law in your heart, and have writ it in your inward parts, and you shall sin no more; and I was made to bow seven times to this Angell and my father said, even so shall all flesh bow to me in my people: and as the book was open in his hand, it shews that the mysterie which hath bin his is now to be made manifest and the everlasting Gospel to be preached. And on the thurseday morning between 5. and 6. a clok, I was taken with trembling and horror, and was strook dead for a while so as I drew no breath at all, and at length I heard a great roaring of waters, which made a great noise, and when I came to my selfe, I groaned, and sighed, and said, Lord, what means this noise, and my excellent majestie which dwell in me, said, that as you heare the roaring of waters and none is able to still the noise? so shall my people, even my sons come with singing and rejoycing to Sion and none shall make them weep any more: hear∣ing of this, I was much taken with joy even overcome with joy, and continued full of joy I was taken as I was before, and my breath being gone from me again. I lay as dead for a∣while; And did at length see a company of men and women standing upon Sion, having harpes, and made musick; and then came some others and they danced; and there was one more glorious then the rest in the midst of them. And I beheld till he that was in the midst of them did go into them all and they became all as one.
And on Friday morning about five or six a clock, I was taken with horrour and feare, and was much perplexed (in my selfe) in mind and at length J heard a voice, saying, heare me, and observe what I say and write: That as I have tormented and plagued thee, so will I torment & plague all powers besides my selfe: And J said, Lord, wilt thou torment and destroy this Parliament? and the Lord said J will destroy and consume and bring to nothing the Parliament & all power that have exercised cruelty upon my people; & will give the glory, and honour and strength of Kingdomes to my people, that there may be universall liberty and freedom, and will make the Wolfe and the Lamb lie down together, and be at peace one with another; and as you did see a white horse, and one upon him all in glory the night before last night, with a sword in his hand, riding from East to West, and from North to South and none to oppose him and none to help him but that he did destroy all his enemies him∣selfe: So I will (even by my own power and by my spirit) bring to nothing all the glory, honour, and power of all fleshly powers that J alone may be and none besides me, And J said, Lord, how long will it be first? and the Lord said, in a very little while, and J will over∣turne, overturne, overturne, and will appear in my Temple to the effe∣cting of mine own work. And on the 25. of January in the night, J was taken in the same manner as before, but only my fit of trouble was lesn'd and my fit of laughter more then any J had before: and after my mirth was over J was caused to lie still. And J heard a voice of very great waters, which made me greeve within my selfe, untill I had an answer what they should meane or what the noise should signifie. And at length my God within me told me, that the waters doth signifie the persons of Sion singing and rejoycing in Sion; and as the noise of the waters was great, so should the joy and gladnesse of Si∣on be great, and as I heard a noise and did not know from whence it came; so should their joy and gladnesse come from God, within them and not from Creature objects. And I said Lord they rejoyce and sing allready; but my eternall God within me told me, that their joy now is mixt with sorrow, and so is not perfect joy. But they shall ere long be brought into a full enjoyment of me, and then shall cease from sorrow. And presently after J beheld two Armies of men, one coming out of the North, and the other out of the South a little Westward. And the leader of them that came out of the South did seeme to be a very solentary man, and the other leader a fierce man, and J
beheld till they met one another, and had a sharp bout of fighting one at the other. But at length the horse belonging to those that came out of the South (there being one very glorious amongst them) broke in amongst the foote and routed them and tooke their General, and so had the disposing of the Field; and marched away presently to London, and searched a great house; pulling those that were in it out of it. And I said Lord what meaneth this? and the Lord said. That these be my instruments to destroy all pow∣ers, and to bring to nothing those that are in power. And so to take the Kingdomes of this world, and to give them to the Saints. And moreover the Lord said, that these his instruments by which he hath done this, he will so overpower that they shall not be like others, as to be a self seeking people (no) but he will make them to be bright. That there may be no complainings in our strees. And so restore the creation from the bondage it now groans under, into the Glorious liberty of the sons of God. That there may be universal liberty and freedome; and moreover the Lord said: that the fashion of this world goeth out, or is now a destroying; and that the men of this world shall now use it as if they used it not; and that I will (saith the Lord) make those that have riches dis∣pearse them abroad. That that saying may come to passe, and that my instruments by which I will do these things, shall confess that it is not by power or strength of men; but that it is God that is in them that doth these things. And so shall wholly deny them∣selves from usurping a power over others as to make Lawes for others to walke by. But as I have taken the power to my self, so shall they leave me (saith my God) to do what I see good to all people; and my worke will be (saith God) to bring in universal libertie. And I said how long Lord? And the Lord said, within a moneth or a very little while, and it shall come to passe. And in a little while after I saw a company of men and women singing and dancing, and they had every one of them a booke open in their right hand. And I said, Lord what meaneth this? and my eternal God within me said. That these represent my sons and daughters that shall sing and dance in Sion, and go up to the moun∣taine of the house of the Lord with everlasting joy: and as they had every one of them a book open in their hands: it sets forth that the mysterie which hath bin hid, is now by me (saith the Lord) made manifest, even Christ within them. And so shall be as my Thundering Angels crying out it is done, it is done, and time
shall be no more (saith my God) and so shall se transgression finished, & everlasting righteousness brought in. And all things with them to become new; former things be passed away. And so to be married to me the Lord: to be one with me. God living in them and they in God; and indeed are the new Jerusalem that comes out of heaven, and the Tabernacle of God with men. These fits being over, I was wrappped up in silence for a while: And the condition that I was in afterwards, was not a condition of horror, of trouble or feare, for about three nights before this, I heard a voice within me say, I am come, and will declare unto you, and I did waite for to have some thing from my God (by the working of my spirit within me) which having now, I was taken in a most pleasant manner, & was forced to lie singing & whisling; and then to rise out of my bed be∣tween one and two a clock for to dance I and so continued sing∣ing & dancing neare upon two hours by the clock, singing in this manner as followeth, or the expressions which I used some of them I wil here relate, though I am not able to remember a quarter of them. The King, the everlasting King, the King of glory comes; Ha∣lelujah, Halelujah, Halelujah, the Lord God omnipotent reignes: Sing, sing, be glad O Sion! for behold thy King, the everlasting King, the King of glory comes: shout, shout O Sion for behold thy King, the holy, one of Israel is in the midst of thee; & thou shalt se sorrow no more: now ore the kingdoms of this world becomthe kingdoms of the Lord, & of his Christ, & he shal reigne for ever. Sing, sing, and rejoyce for behold thou shalt no longer have neede of the sun of moon to give thee light, that is, outward ordinances, no but saith the Lord, I wil be thy light & glo∣ry. Sing & rejoyce, & go up with joy & rejoycing to the mountain of the house of the Lord; for now shal the light of the moon be as the light of the sun. & the light of the sun shal be seven fold more now then hath bin. Shout and be glad, for behold, I come; and he that is weake and feeble amongst you shal be as David, & David shal be as the Angel of God, even as God: Sing & rejoyce, for behold you shal now say, this is the Lord our God we have waited for him, and he is now come; therefore let us be glad and rejoyce in his Salvation. Sing and rejoyce and be glad, for now the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them: Shout, shout, crie aloude, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet. And say unto Sion, thy King cometh: prepare, prepare, make ready, the marriage of the Lamb is now come. For be∣hold, I come as a bride adorned for her husband. Sing and rejoyce for now Jerusalem cometh out of heaven: and former things shall passe away, and now shall all things become new: Sing and make ready,
for the marriage of the Lamb is come: Shout and be glad for the water of life doth now appeare for to heale the Nations. Crie. Crie, what shall I crie? Crie all flesh is grass, the grass wi∣thers, the flower fades and comes to nothing, but od abides for ever: Crie, Crie, the spirit of the Lord blowes upon flesh, that so flesh may come to nothing: I have a long time holden my peace and have bin still, but now will I arise (saith the Lord) like a man of war and will teare and devoure in pieces and none shall deliver. And now will I appeare to be (saith the Lord) the stone cut out of the mountaine: Crie, crie, what shall I crie? the Lord of Hosts will overthrow the strength of Kingdomes. And will ap∣peare to be an Iron rod that shall breake in pieces all powers like a potters vessel. And will make every one to throw their Idols of Gold and Silver away: money which men have made Idols of, shall now by the bright appearing of God, be counted nothing, but shal be thrown from one unto the other: And they that have abun∣dance shall hide themselves for feare of the Lord of Hosts. These and such like expressions by way of singing I did utter: and why I count it singing, is because I did (as being overpowered with joy) crie ha ha tall toll lall derah la loll la dero tall derall tall toll dero tall aroll atoll loll loll dero, in such a way I did breake forth between every 4. lines I have writ or oftner. And on the 29. day of the same month about 7. a clock in the night I saw in a vision two armies of men one a coming against the other; the same Leaders that were in the vision before, concern∣ing the last two armies mentioned, & I beheld til they were drawn up in a body, seeing their drums beating and their collours flying; their musquets charged, and the souldiers with lighted matches in their hands: and I beheld till J saw that these two armies did meet, and the musqueteers fired and fell off, and J saw men some∣times drap down: But at length J saw the Generals horse (which came out of the South) break in amongst their enemies and utter∣ly routed them, and tooke the General and killed him, and so had the field to themselves. And J said Lord, what is the meaning of this? and my eternall God within me told me. That the General and his armie that came out of the South, are instruments which J have chosen to do my worke: and the other Generall and his Souldiers are for the Parliament: and J beheld til the General that overcame marched with all his armie to London, and entred the Citie, and went to the Parliament-house. But they were dispersed,
and I saw the General and his Officers sit as a Parliament in the roome of the other, and did promise that they would now restore freedome to the people: and I saw the General and his Officers go into the Halls where money was and threw it to the Souldiers, and the Souldiers had so much, that they gave it away to the poore; and I heard the poore say one unto the other, these are joyfull daies. And I desired the substance of it and it is this (as my Lord hath revealed it to me) That the General and the people with him are the instruments of God. And he hath chosen them for to beat in pieces all powers; and to thresh mountaines and hills to chaff, that they may be no longer: and so to give the power to them that they may (or God in them) restore England from bondage: and by their giving of money away so freely, it shewes that the time is now come, that the Lord will redeeme the creation from bondage, and that I will (saith God) so breake that domineering self that hath bin in man: That he shall now throw away his Idols of Gold and Silver: that there may be universal love and freedome, and warr shall cease. Well, afterwards I had much joy within my self, so much that I am not able to expresse, and which caused me to breake forth in singing and dancing; and afterwards I was taken in a shaking fit, and after the fit was over, I was forced to give my money to them that were with me, and did give them all that I had. So by the appearing of me (saith the eternall God) shall all migh∣ty, great and rich men, throw and disperse their silver and gold to them that have need, that there may be no complaining in our streetes. And after this, I beheld a company of men and women with Crownes of gold upon their heads; and I asked my God, what meaneth these to have Crownes upon their heads? and my God said, these Crownes betoken victory, for these are they that have overcome all things by my power, and have come out of great tri∣bulation, and now have I wiped from their eyes, all sorrow and weeping, and they shall reigne with me. On the next morning about six a clock, as I was in my bed, I saw the same vision as I did before, as soone as I saw the Army routed, and the General slaine, I cryed out, they are now cut downe; and so I did at the night before twice or thrice, I cryed they are cut downe, and did afterwards expresse a bundance of joy, both as it appeared by singing and lifting up of my hands; and in this fit, I
was commanded to declare it to the General, and was told me by a voice within me, that I should have no rest until I had declared it. And I asked who it was that commanded me to declare it? and the voice said, I am that I am, the Lord of hosss, the King of Israel, and thou maist know I have made choice of thee to re∣veale these things, and that I have commanded thee to declare it to the General, and that my purpose is now to destroy all powers; yea, the Parliament, and that this vision is from God: thou shalt be presently taken in a shaking fit, and in a very little while I was taken so; and I desired my brother that lay with me, to lie upon me, and so he did, to try whether I should then shake, and I did tater him up and down and shake so much, that he could not make me lie: & about two a clock at noone, and on the morrow morning, I heard the same words as I did relate; that I have made choice of thee to reveale these things, & that thou maist know that I have commanded thee to declare these to the Generall, and that this vision is from the Lord of hosts, and that thou shalt have no rest untill thou hast done it; thou shalt be taken in such a shaking fit, as thou shalt be shaken more then ever thou hast been yet, and so I was of a sudden: thus perceiving I should be shaken, I laid me upon a bed, and called a man that was in the roome to lie upon me, and so he did lie upon me, and I shook him as if he had beene in a Cradle, and rocked by a man: And I desired to know what I should declare to the Generall, and my God told me, I should declare that it was his determination to bring to nothing the Par∣liament, and so destroy all powers besides himselfe, that he may be all in all. On the fourth day of the second of February in the morning be∣tween five or six of the clock, at the appearing of my eternall God to me; and indeed I had great cause for to rejoyce: for my father within me, told me saying, I thy comforter, thy Redeemer & Savi∣our wil declare some things unto thee: & after my flesh left trem∣bling: I heard a voice saying, behold, behold, what dost thou now see? and I beheld, and loe there appeared a company of men, and I told them and there were seven, that were very gallant, some of them had Sattin cloaths, and some of them were in cloaths that were laced with Gold and silver lace: and they had each of them two or three men a piece waiting on them, and they were merry: and I said, Lord, what meaneth these? & the Lord answered me, &
told me; That these doth represent the Parliament; and as the were very merry amongst themselves, I beheld & there appears a hand upon the wall and writ these words, Mene, Mene, Tek: Peres: and I asked the meaning of this writing: and I was told that they were weighed in a ballande & were found too light: & their Kingdom shall be taken from them and given to others: & I beheld them that they were very sad and hung down their heads at the appearing of this writing: and I heard a voice say, crie, crie, and I said, what shall I crie? crie that the Lord of host will bring down the Power, strength and might of men, and will lay their honour ie the dust: for my determination is to powere out upon them the fiercenesse of my wrath and indignation, and all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousie: for the day of the Lord is come that burneth as an oven and all they that do wickedly shal be as ashes under the sools of my feet; & I will take the King∣dome to my selfe and give it to my Saints: and after this was over: within a very little while my eternall God within me, uttered these words again: behold, behold, what dost thou now see? & loe I beheld a company of men & women Singing and dancing together with Crowns of gold upon their heads: and I looked on them, and did see them put their hands in their pockets, and they pulled out their money and gave it to one another: & presently after this I saw a company of men which were verry gallant (with their men waiting upon them) come to them and bowed to them: And I said, Lord what are these that dance and sing together? and the Lord said, that these are my Sons and daughters, and three crownes be∣token victory: that they have through the strength of me over∣come sinne and flesh, and now are come to Sion with everlasting joy and rejoyceing, and sorrow and sighing is fled away; and these shall reigne with me. And whereas thou seest Lords & Knights & their men come with bags of Gold & silver, bowing & presenting their money to them that were danceing: these shew the fullfilling of Scriptures: "that the sons of them that afflicted thee shall come bending down to the soles of thy feet & shall call thee the blessed of the Lord, the Sion, the holy one of Israel, & that the Kings, and the fulnes of the Gentiles shall bring their glory and honour to it: and as thou seest my sonnes receive their treasure, and upon the reciving of it they became one, and their men put on their Hats, and were no longer SERVANTS but Fellowes with them: the time is now at hand that J will be such a terror to all men that they shall throw away their idols of gold and sil∣ver
one to the other, for feare of the Lord, and for the glory of my Majestie, when I arise to shake terribly the earth: that they will no longer assume unto themselves, such a Preheminence as formerly they have done. And after a little while I heard these words utter'd within me againe: behold, behold, what seest thou now? and lo I beheld an Angell with a sickle in his hand come into a field of wheat; and I heard a voice say, thrust in thy sickle, for the harvest is ripe: and I said, Lord, who is this that hath a sickle in his hand? and the Lord said, this is my messenger that I have sent; and the sick'le in his hand is my power; by which he shall reap the harvest with∣all, And lo I saw him thrust in his sickle, and cut downe all those that were higher then the rest, and so made all equall; and all the field became as one, in greatness none bigger then another. And I said, Lord, what doth this field represent? and the Lord told me, That the field of wheat are men, and as you see the great eares cut from the little ones until they were all alike; so will I by my own power and by my bright appearing in my sons and daughters; Cut down the loftiness of men, and bring low their haughty lookes: and I like a mighty Leveller, will lay low-the moun∣tains & hills, and make them as a plaine; and will make crooked pathes straight, that I alone may be exalted: and so will take away that stumbling-block of private intrest, that men shall no longer seeke for honour, as to warr one with another: but I will make them beat their swords and speares into plowshares preuning & hookes, that there may be universall peace and freedome, and all dwell in love together. But in a little while after this, I heard the same words within me uttered. Behold, behold, what seest thou now? and lo I beheld a mighty Angel going from one end of heaven to the other, cry∣ing, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is thrown into the Sea, that it shall never rise more. And my excellent Majestie with∣in me (which is my eternal God) said, by Babylon is meant all forms of governments and ways of worships which men have set up, and all Lawes which men have made to keep their fellow-crea∣tures in bondage and slavery: but as thou seest this Angel throw a stone into the sea and the stone never rise more: so will I by mine own power take away the power of man for ever making any more Laws (to hang men) ee long, and so will destroy the searlet∣collour'd whore, and will slit her nose and burne her flesh with fire;
for the heaven and the earth shall now flie away and there shall be no more place found for it. And after this J heard the same words utter'd within me again. Behold, behold, what seest thou now? and lo I beheld a mighty Angel crying aloud, the Kingdomes of this world are now become the Kingdoms of God, and he shall reigne for ever and ever: and now the mystery of God which hath bin hid shall be made manifest; and time shall be no longer; and now are former things passed away, and all things become new. And J said, Lord, what is meant by this Angel? and the infinite God (by whom we live and move and have our being) said that this Angel holds forth my servants crying against the powers of this world, and crying me up as the onely power that they will set up: and as he cried the mysterie of God is now finished and time shall be no longer, it shewes that my sons and daughters shall see & know the mysterie of God; which mysterie is, God in them: and that they shall now say, time shall be no longer: by Gods working so powerfully in them burning up sin and flsh, that so sin and flesh or Satan, shall no longer have any power over them; but God will be their all and in all, & they shal now se it and know it too; which will occasion them to crie time shall be no longer. And thus by the strength of me (who am the Alpha and omega) they overcome all things, & so all things are become new: & so my sons & daughters shall inherit all things: for the Angel after he had cried all things are become new: so he cried, they shall inherit all things: for my sons and daughters (saith my God) shall now see me to be all and in all, and so shall see and inherit all things by the injoyment of me: for the mysterie being finished in you, and all things become new: it is such a change in you, that those things that you thought were unlawfull before, will now appear to be lawfull: for this is the new thing, you will now see and know that all things are Gods, and so will see and know that as God is yours, so all riches, as houses or Lands, are as much yours as any mans; for saith God; time shall be no longer. You shall know this (saith God) that sinne and transgression being finished with you, and everlasting righte∣ousnesse brought into you, and so swallowed up with righteous∣nesse, living in God, and God in you, you shall know that my worke, my strange work which I wil do, is now to break in pieces al things, and to make all things become new: which change is to restore the whole creation from bondage and slaverie, into the glorious li∣bertie of the sons of Gd; and so to take off the curse that is upon all
crearures, and to restore the creation to the first estate, as Adam was set in; that as I made Adam Lord over all creatures, and all creatures were for the use of Adam (saith the Lord) so now shall all the creatures men and women, have that priviledge (which by reason of the curse) have a lng time bin deprived of as to have the injoyment of the outward creatures, which now they shall have: for as the appearing of me in one single person Jesus Christ my anoyted Son, did cause a communion to be among my Saints in those dayes; so at the appearing of me in my sons and daughters now, I will cause union and fellowship to increase, first amongst my sons and daughters, and then will burne up some by my spirit in them, and will confound others by might and power; and will make such a strange worke, that I will make all sorts and degrees (some for feare of me, and some from the injoyment of me) give up give up, and relieve one another; that there may be universal love, peace and freedome; all enjoying the worke of my hands without let or hindrance, And being carried above my self (or taken out of my self) with joy, I burst forth crying Halelujah, Halelujah, the Lord omnipotent reignes: but could not rest my self contented until I did burst forth with singing, because of the abundance of joy I was in. And on the 5. day of the second moneth in the morning, came the word of the Lord unto me and said,, I come: which made my flesh to tremble: and at length I heard these words within me, behold I come to reveale unto thee things that must shortly come to passe: therefore behold what thou now seest. And lo, I beheld a great water, for the bignesse of it I could see no earth or ground; and in the midst of it a woman gloriously araied, sitting on a throne with a Crowne upon her head, and presently there came one with a sword in his hand, and cut off her head, and she and her head tumbled into the sea: and I said (Lord) what meaneth these waters and this woman that sitteth thereon? And the man that came with a sword in his hand and cut off her head; and my eternall God (within me) said: that the waters and multitudes of people: and the woman, is the Queen or the whore of Babylon, mentioned in the Revelations, that hath made all nations drunk with her forni∣cation; and this Queen, or lady, that saith she should see no sorrow: is Governments, and worships, and lawes which men have made and set up; and the man that came with a sword in his hand and cut off her head; is my messenger which J have sent, or my self
appearing in my sons and daughtera, which will cut off all pow∣er, as Kingly and Parliament powers, and so will destroy all Go∣vernments and forms of worships. And when her head was cut off: I heard a lamentation, men and women weeping and grieving, and some I saw were laughing and singing, crying Halelujab, Halelu∣jah; for thou art worthie to receive Glory, and Honour, and praise; for thou hast Judged the great whore, and taken vengeance on her for shedding the blood of the Saintt. And I said (Lord) who are these that weep? And who are these that rejoyce? and the Lord said that these are the Priests and those that have bin made rich by her fornications that weep and howle: as the Priests that have made merchandise of souls of men: but now their trade is destroyed, and they shall no longer preach as to receive money for it; therefore they weep: but these are my sons that sing and rejoyce; and indeed they have now great cause for to sing and rejoyce, because that which hath troubled them (as formes and worships) are now destroyed: and I said Lord, wilt thou destroy the Parliament? and the Lord said, I will begin first in this nation, and will by my bright appearing burn up some, and destroy others: that there shall (to mens apprehensi∣on) be nothing but confusion; for I will make great and mighty men run into the holes of the rocks, and throw away their Idols of gold and silver for fear of me, that there may be universal love and freedome. And I will be such a terror to the great men, they shall hide themselves for fear of me. And I said (Lord) wilt thou do this by thy own power without making use of any Instruments? and the Lord said no: but I will harden the hearts of the Parliament, and they shall raise an armie for to fight with the Generall, whom I will stir up to oppose their crueltie, and their actions, and so will destroy their power by my Instruments: and I said Lord, shall I go and declare this to the Generall as yet or no? and the Lord said wait upon me as yet and thou shalt know more, for I have some∣things else to reveal unto thee. And at night about eight of the clock on the same day, being in my chamber, the word of the Lord came unto me saying, be∣hold, behold, what dost thou now see? And I looked and loe a white horse and one upon him with a sword in his hand ready drawn: and he rid from East to West, and from North to South, cutting down all men and women, that he met with, that were higher then the middle sort, and raised up those that were lower then the middle sort, and made them all Equall, and cryed out epquali∣tie,
equalitie, in that I have now made all men alike: and he lifted up his hands to heaven, and did sweare by him that liveth for ever∣more, time should be no longer; and so did thrust his sword into his scabberd again. And I said, Lord, who is this that makes all alike? and my glorious God within me said: that I the Lord of hosts have done this: and I said, without any instruments Lord? and the Lord said, no: but by instruments which I have chosen to do this strange work: which shall cut down all powers, even the Parliament, and I said Lord, shall the Parliament raise forces against thy instruments to fight with them? and the Lord said they shall, but they shall be destroyed by Fair. (whom I have made choice of, and his Army: and whereas he cryed, time shall be no longer, and so put up his sword into his sheath againe: the meaning is: that when the time appoint∣ed is come, all visible powers shall cease: and I alone will be all and in all, both King and Parliament, and Governor; and then wars shall cease. And as you see him make all alike; so will I destroy some, and burne and consume others, and be as a terror to the rest; that there shall be none greater or richer then others. And I said, how long will it be first? and the Lord said, in a very little while it shall come to passe, but wait thou upon me and thou shalt know; upon this I desired of my God, that if he had judged me worthy to reveale this vision to me, and that it shall come to passe, and that it was from the Lord of hosts: I might have some token that I may know it to be from God: and my God said within me. That I should be presently shooke as if I should be shoock to pieces, as a token that he had made choice of me to reveale this vision and the rest to, and that it should surely come to passe: which token proved true, for I was presently shoaken, even so much that two men (which were in the roome with me, that I desired to lie upon me or hold me from shaking, which they did) could not keep me from shaking. But before this fit came on me one houre and halfe or such a mat∣ter, I saw a company of men and women, singing and dancing, giving away their money one unto the other: and my God within me, told me, that these were my sons and daughters that were come to Sion; and that he had now wiped all teares from their eyes: and that self-seeking is now ended with them: and instead of it there shall be universal lvoe, or a communitie, like unto the communitie of his Saints mentioned in the Acts: whereupon I was forced for my owne rest, to give away that little money I had,
about me: which thing others shall be made to do hereafter. Againe the word of the Lord came unto me saying (about one a clock on the 6. day of February) Behold, behold, what dost thou now see: and lo! I beheld an Army of men with their drums beat∣ing, and their colours flying, and they were upon their march: And I beheld till there came one to their General, being all glorious: and gave the General a sword, and said take this sword, for with it shalt thou beat down all thine enemies: and I said Lord, what is this Generals name? and the Lord said his name is Fairfax; the Army that are with him are my instruments whom I have stirred up to hate the oppression, covetousnesse and crueltie, of the Parliament. And whereas thou seest one give him asword. It is I the Lord of hosts, that have given him power to beat down all those that are coming to fight wih him: and presently I beheld another Army of men coming to fight with them: and I said, Lord, who doth this Army fight for? and the Lord of hosts said, they fight for the Parli∣ament: and the Lord said, I stired him up to oppose the Parliament, bcause they have exercised crueltie upon my people: and I beheld so long, that at length I did see both these meet together and did fight; and I beheld some now and then dropped down of Fair. his men; but they fell apace on the other side: but at length Fair. horse routed the oher horse, and followed some of them in pursuit; and some of them came and fell upon the foot, and at length broke in amongst them and routed them, and tooke the General and killed him, and so had the field. And I said Lord, wilt thou also destroy the Parliament? and the Lord said he would do it. for saith the Lord, I will now urne Le∣veller, and will level mountaines and hills, and will make them equall with low places and vallies; that there may be universality. And I said, how long will it be first? and the Lord said in a very little while and it shall come to passe, and I said, Lord, shall I go to the Generall and tell him of it? and the Lord said I should go: but should stay a little longer first. And saith the Lord, whereas I said (when I shewed thee this vision at the first) that thou shouldest have no rest untill thou hadst done it: so I have troubled thee ever since day by day, and will till thou hast done it: but thou shalt stay a little longer and wait upon me; and that thou maist know, I the Lord of Hosts the mighty God of Jacob, by whom thou livest, ovest, & hast thy
being hath done this, Thou shalt be presently taken in a shaking fit: that thou maist know I have made choice of thee: which fit of shaking came on me as soone as the words were ended: which terri∣fied my flesh, but my Spirit rejoyced within me for joy. And in a little while after: the Lord within me said; behold, behold, what seest thou now? and lo, I saw the heavens roleld up together as a Scroul: and figges fall off the figg-tree before they were ripe: and I said Lord, what is meant by the heavens rolling thus together as a scroule? and the Lord said, by the heavens, is meant, all outward administrations or forms of worship; preaching and baptizing: and I saw one throw the srcoule into the fire, and it was consumed; so saith the Lord, shall all outward heavens be burn∣ed up; and the figg tree is the Parliament in this nation, and it represents all powers which are a bringing forth some young figgs, which are some new formes or wayes of worship, or a doing some new thing, but before they can bring them to perfection, the day of the Lord overtakes them, and shakes them, and causes the figgs to fall off before they be ripe: and so I the Lord destroy the things that men would do. And the Lord again said: behold, what seest thou now? and lo, I beheld foure men stand upon the foure corners of the earth; which is East, West, North and South, and they held the winde in their hands that it could no longer blow upon the earth or Sea: and I said Lord, what meaneth these foure men to do thus as they do? and my excellent Majestie the Lord of hosts said, these foure men are my sons and daughters in whom I have spread my selfe through out the world. And by the wind which they hold in their hands, that it should blow no more upon the earth or Sea: is meant all outward formes or wayes of worship, which of one kind or other have bin in all places, set up by men: but now I have taken their power from them, and have given it to the Saints; and by my bright appearing in them, they shall not suffer any formes or wayes of worship to be set up. And again the Lord said: behold, behold, what seest thou now? and I beheld a Throne and one that set thereon; before whose face hea∣ven and earth fled away, and there was no place for them: and I said what is meant by this Throne? and the Lord said, by this Throne is meant my sons and daughters: and as you saw one that sat thereon: tis I the Lord of hosts who rule and reigne in my sons and daugh∣ters; and they are my temple and house wherein I dwell: and by
the heaven and earth that fled away is meant: all earthly powers, Governments and formes and wayes of worship, all outward admi∣nistrations, which by the appearing of me the God of Gods, shall be consumed and burned up; that they may never be more: but that I the God of Gods, may appear to be their teacher and ordinances, and so all and in all: and so my Covenant of grace spoken off by Jere∣miah my son, be fulfilled: you shall not need to say, know the Lord: so they shall know me from the least to the greatest: and that other Prophesie, ye shall be taught of God. And on the seventh day of February, The word of the Lord came unto me, and said behold, behold, what seest thou? and loe, I beheld, and there appeared a table and a cloth laid upon it, and trenchers and napkins upon it, and stooles pulled out for men to fit upon them: and one cried with a loud voyce, come all ye fowls of the heavens to the supper of the great God: and presently there were dishes of all sorts of meat set upon the table: and after this I saw three froggs creeping up and down, and at length they entred into Kings and Lords, and great men; and presently they gathered them∣selves together and their armies; and I said Lord, what is the mean∣ing of this Table; and of the things that are there on? and my God said, the table is the earth: and the things thereon being of all sorts, represent, all things in the earth: and I said, what is he that makes the supper? and calls all the foules of the heaven to come to it? and my eternall God within me said: it is I the Lord of hosts that make this supper, and invite the foules to it: and I said, what foules? and the Lord said: by foules you must understand; my sons and daughters who live in the heavenly injoyment of me: and they have all sorts of things here to supper: I, even the flesh of Kings, and Lords, and mighty men, and captaines, and of all both small and great, bond and free: it shewes that the day is now a coming that they shall have the full injoyment of all creatures, and so shall inherit all things: the flesh of Kings and great men which they eat, is the wayes of worships and formes of governments which they have set up: their eating of them, shewes a final consumation of them, as that they shall be consumed and never be more: the three froggs that went into the King and great men of the earth; are the spirits of devills, which is the proud flesh domineering over the spi∣rit of God, & so ruling in their hearts, maks them raise armies of men, & gather their forces together to resist the appearing or coming of
me saith the Lord of hosts: And thus through the pride of their hearts and loftinesse of their spirits, they gather Gog and Magog together, to compasse the Saints round: But I said, what is meant by Gog and Magog? and the Lord said, by Gog and Magog, is meant, all the wisdome, power, and strength of proud flesh, which the great and wise men of the earth have invented, as their power on one side, and their false wayes of worships, and formes of governments on the other side, and Lawes which they have made, to make the Saints and people submit unto, are the great armies that compasse the Saints round, or make war with me, saith God: But you see fire come out of heaven and burne them up; so by the bright appearing of me, saith the Lord of hosts, shall all the enemies of my Saints (which have deceived them) be consumed and burnd up; as formes, and govern∣ments, and wayes of worships, that they may be no longer deceived by them: and I beheld the Devil that had deceived them; and I did at length see him thrown into the lake of fire that burneth with brimstone, there to be tormented with the false Prophet day and night: and I said, what is meant by the Devil thrown into the fire? and my God said, by the Devil is meant all the wisdome, cunning∣nesse and craftinesse of proud flesh, which hath invented formes, and wayes of worships to deceive the people: they are all now burnt up and consumed by the fire of my jealousie, saith the Lord of hosts, and are to be day and night tormented by me: That is, all proud flesh and false Prophets (which is the wisdome of the flesh) shall from day to day, and from night to night, be under my wrath, and afraid to looke me in the face: and so by my appearing (saith the Lord of hosts, who am a consuming fire) shall they be tormented: who? all flesh and filthinesse, the power and wisdome of men Gog and Ma∣gog: that I (the Lord of hosts) may be all in all: For this lake of fire, is my wath (saith God) into which I have judged and senten∣ced proud flesh (that opposes me and throwne it; that so I may con∣sume proud flesh, and bring it to nothing. And againe the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, what seest thou now? and I looked, and presently I saw a great City, which to me did appear to be very gallant, as if there were none like it: and I said, Lord, what meaneth this City, or what Ci∣ty is this? and my Eternall God within me said, this great City is spirituall Sodom and Egypt, where the Son of God was crucified: and I said, Christ was crucified at Jerusalem: though he was (saith
the Lord of hosts) put to death by the Jewes, yet he was also crucifi¦ed in Sodome and Egypt; that is, the Lawes, and formes, and cu∣stomes of the Jewes, is Sodome and Egypt; because their Lawes and formes did slay my Son; and though he was put to death literally a Jerusalem, yet he was perpetually slaine by the filthy abominations of Sodome and Egypt, as Rebellion and disobedience against me the Lord of hosts: and so (saith the Lord of hosts) all formes, Lawes, governments, and wayes of worship opposing me, is spiritual So∣dom: and Egypt, that put to death my Son Christ, and hath from time to time, been the great whore that hath shed the blood of my Saints. But as thou sawest one set it one fire, and the people which thou sawest running to quench it, as Kings, and Lords, and great men, and of all sorts of men, with buckets of water, and hookes, to pull down some of it, that was on fire, but they could not quench it, as thou didst see untill the tenth part of it was consumed: I the Lord of hosts (by my appearing in my sons and daughters) have set this City on fire, and it hath been burned a long time; by my manifesting my self to them to be their all in all: and now the day of my judgement is at hand; I have sentenced this City to be burnt, for I the Lord of hosts, doe burne up and consume all formes and governments of men by my self, I being a consuming fire: and I said, Lord, what meaneth that, that the tenth part of it and not all, is consumed? and the Lord said, by the tenth part is meant all: for ten is a perfect number; as ten hornes mentioned, that sets forth a perfect strength, or all their strength, or all their power: and I said, Lord, it hath been generally understood, to be Nations, as our Nation for one, that shall fall off from Rome first, to be the City: but I the Lord of hosts say, this City is formes and Lawes, Governments, and wayes of worship, which is in all Nations, and so is the spirituall Sodome and Egypt that crucified my Son; and hath from time to time, murdered my Saints: But the time of her power is almost at an end, and she must be destroyed. And whereas you see all sorts of people run to quench the fire that it did not burne: It shewes the unwillingnesse of all sorts of men and women to have that which hath most deceived them, to be burned up; because some, yea most, have made the observati∣ons or traditions of men, to be their rule to walke by: and so have walked more by forme and custorne then by any thing else: But now I come, I come, saith the Lord of hosts; and I will take from men, & from the powers of the world, those things which they have gone
a whoring after: and they with all their might shall not hinder me from doing my worke. And the word of the Lord came againe unto me, saying, Behold, behold, what dost thou now see? and lo, I beheld a Temple, and it was full of smoke; and there appeared one in this temple with a crown of gold upon his head; and his rayment was of all colours, like unto a rainbow: and I beheld that he stretched forth his hands; and as he stretched them forth, the smoke vanished away: and I beheld that after the smoke was gon: there went out of his mouth flames of fire, and burned up the pictures that were in the Temple: and after they were consumed he cryed with a loud voice that the fourtie and two moneths and the time, times and halfe times, is now come to an end and then the temple and holy city which for 42 moneths was given to the Gen∣tils to be troden under foot; shall now no longer be troden under foot: But I will redeem it and deliver it from the bondage and slavery that it hath bin subject unto: and after this I beheld seven lighted torch∣es brought into the temple. And said, I Lord whose temple is this? and the Lord said, it is mine: and I said, what doth this temple set forth? and the Lord said; this temple are my sons and daugh∣ters: and he whom you see in it, is I the Lord of hosts who am come to take possession and to make them my dwelling-place: But as you see it was full of smoke: this smoke is darknesse, and gloominesse, and cloudinesse, and such a mist, that untill it be consumed, my people are not able to know me: but I said, Lord it is said, that no man was able to enter into the temple for the smoke: which seemes to hold forth the temple to be somewhat else then thy Saints: and the Lord said; that is a metaphor which seems to hold forth some thing else, that is, my sona and daughters are not able to come to the true knowledge of me, as to see and know that I live in them, without a more fuller discoverie of my self to them, saith the Lord of hosts: but as you see me spread forth my hands; and the smoke vanished away, that they come to have some knowledge of me: but as you see flames of fire issued forth from me that burned up the pictures: these flames are a full manifesting of my self to my sons and daughters: and the pict∣ures, are all the wayes of worship, formes and governments which by the wit of man are set up: and as pictures resemble something else besides what they are; so these formes, and wayes of worships, and governments, and all outward administrations, have seeming∣ly appeared to be the way which I would have them observe:
Though indeed it hath been but a picture of me. Or my way: and not my right way, or mine own way, but a way of confusion So that when I shall fully manifest my self to my sonnes and daughters: my spirit shall burn up all their pictures; that is, all their wayes of worship and formes of what sort soever, and con∣sume them to nothing: for I the Lord of hosts am a consuming fire; and will ere long appear to be so: that they may see me to be forms and wayes of worships, and see me all and in all: and so to see that they shall have no need any longer of outward administrati∣ons: But to see me to be their teacher: & I said, Lord what is meant by the temple or holy City that hath been troden under foot 42. months? by this temple or holy City; is meant, my sons and daughters which for the time of Antichrists reign hath bin kept in darkness, or in forms or wayes of worships which men have set up, and by his crying with a loud voice, he was come to deliver it from bondage or from the Gentiles, and so from them both: it is I by my coming to Judge all the powers of proud flesh which hath been an Alien and Gentile to me; and to destroy them, burn and consume them up; as the forms of men and worships set up by them: that so I may deliver them from bondage, saith the Lord of hosts, for the dayes of my coming is at hand. What doth these seven torches or lamps signifie? And the Lord said: the seven lamps burning, shews a perfection of light that shall be. When the forty and two month (that are spoken of) shall be at an end: for these forty two months are a certain time, saith the Lord of hosts, that I have suffered my self to be hid: and my glo∣ry hid from the Temple: but now the set time is at an end; and my light and glory shall shine: and as you see the lamps burning and none put them out: So will I appear burning up flesh and sin, and none shall hinder me from doing my work; saith the Lord of hosts, that will reign in mount Sion for ever. And again the the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, what seest thou now? And I beheld, and saw the Moon, and the Sun, and the Heavens, and the Stars, and at length I saw them turned into bloud, and they fell from the place that they were in, and fell to the earth: and I saw a company of Swine and Dogs lick them up; they being like unto bloud, and with their falling upon the earth, the earth was changed: And I said, Lord, what is this Sun, and Moon, and Heaven, and Stars, which is changed into blood? is it the material Sun that gives light by day, and the Moon that give light by night? And the Heaven; the Heaven that fouls fly
in? and my eternall God, within me, said, No: but by these is meant other things: as the Moone is a borrowed Light from the Sunne, and not a perfect Light it selfe, so by the Moone is meant outward Ordinances that People have and are under, by which they have received some Glympse of Light: but not the Light it selfe: by the Sun is meant a more glorious Dispensation of outward Ordinances, or Ordinances in a more higher Nature: As the one, being a Baptizing of Infants; and so they in this Dispensation, fetch Light from Creatures, or from the Men of this World, which seem∣ingly have light, but have not: So the other which is of a more higher Nature: as the Baptizing of Believers, is a Sun-light (as they call it:) and so the Baptisme-way of Baptizing Believers, and breaking of Bread together, is a way wherein, according to the Scriptures, they seeme to be more like the Sunne, than the other: but yet is not the way which I approve of, saith the Lord of Hosts: and the Heaven, is the Heaven of outward Dispensations, and Formes, and wayes of Worships, Governments, and Rules to walke by; that so long as People living under these, and do observe pun∣ctually to fulfill these, as the observing the Sabbath Day, Praying, and Preaching, and going to Church, as they call it; and others meeting in private Places, as they thinke fit to meet in, and so to heare a Man speake something of God; this is Heaven which Peo∣ple live in, and meant by this Vision, saith the Lord of Hosts: and the Starres is their professions of God according to the severall Di∣spensations they are under: and so this Heaven, and the Starres therein, and the Sunne and Moone mentioned in Scriptures, turned into bloud, is meant, all outward Administrations, as Formes, Go∣vernments, and Rules, and wayes of Worships, which have been as lights that People have seen something of God in, and so have seen God at a distance from them, are now changed from light to bloud: and so are fallen from their places that they may no longer be as lights: and by the Dogges and Swine licking them up: is nothing else but a totall Distinction of them, that they may never be more: and the People may from hencefortb loath them: and see me the Lord of Host, to be all, and in all, for my great and notable Day which these shall be turned into bloud: my coming to my sonnes and daughters, and so judging all these things in them; and making of them dark∣nesse; is the Earth that they fell upon: and was changed, and the Dogs and Swines (as is set forth by them a totall fall of Worships) by licking up the bloud: so by them is set forth the most greatest and
most wickedst Men: which have by their power set up these things, a change in them, that they shall no longer do so any more: but shall become new; for I have taken their power from them; and they are become new, saith the Lord of Hosts; and as thou seest a new Heaven, and a new Sunne and Moon in the place of the former, and a new earth; is but the fulfilling of Prophesies; that have a long tine since been spoken of; and now are come to passe; this new Heaven is the enjoyment of me; they living in me, and I in them; so they shall have no need of Heaven, of Ordinances or wayes to walk by; but I will be their light; both Sun and Moon; and so that they shall have no need of these lights to walk by: but I will be the glo∣ry of them: and as you see former things passed away and all things be∣come new, it is the passing away of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Hea∣ven; which are outward Administrations and Formes of Wor∣ships, Teachers of Men, that, I the Lord of Host, may be both Hea∣ven, Sun, Moon, Stars, and Teacher to, and in them, that they may hear a voice, saying, this is the way, wallk in it: and the new earth is a change of Men, which have had power over their fellow Crea∣tures, and did desire to have so, that they may be accounted great: but this was not an Earth wherein Righteousnesse dwelt: and so must pass away; that there may be a new one; which new one is an alteration or change of Mens mindes; that as they have desired a su∣periority, and have strived to cozen and cheat others, for to make themselves great, they shall no longer strive for these; but instead of them, shall humble and abase themselves, and throw away their Idols of Gold and Silver: their money, I mean, which they have made gods of, to them that have none, that there may be equality and universality, all injoying the fruit of the Earth, saith the Lord of Host, who hath commanded the Writer hereof to write it, as my will and not his, that so all things may become now, and there may be an Earth wherein Righteousnesse shall dwell. And again, the word of the most high, came unto me, saying, behold, behold, what seest thou now? and low! I beheld some∣thing almost in the fashion of an house; but it was not an house: and I said, Lord, what is this? and my God said, it is a taber∣nacle: and as you saw one with a Crown of gold goe into it: it was I the Lord that went into it: and I said, is this the tabernacle of God, that is said to be with men? and the Lord said, it is: and this tabernacle is my people wherein I will dwell: and as he had a Crown of gold that went into it: it betokens a victory, that
I have taken it to be my possession: and as soon as I was in it, you saw flames of fire burn up the gold, pearles, and precious stones, and the wood hay and stubble; and presently the Tabernacle that stood upon a foundation, had none: but hung onely by the power of him that went into it: this glold, pearles, precious stones, wood, hay, stuble, which was burnt up: are all manner of outward administrati∣ons that ever were, or is now at present; as formes, and lawes, and Governments, and rules of worships to walke by; which in one kinde or other have been highly esteemed of all sorts of men, according to the dispensation they have been under: and though they have laid Christ for a foundation, yet these hath been, in one sort or other, the work which they have built upon: which work is to passe under the fire, for the Apostle says, every mans work shall be tryed by fire: and if any mans works suffer loss, it will be by burn∣ing; yet he shall be saved so as by fire: which fire is my self even I the Lord of hosts) appearing in this tabernacle spoken of: which as soon as I did appear or entred in, all was consumed, and burnt up: all the most glorious dispensations and formes of worships which in my absence they have received comfort from: though all these outward administrations are consumed, yet the creatures remain∣ed, saved by fire: that is, by my self saith the Lord of hosts, who am a consuming fire: and as you see the temple as soon as these outward things? (gold, silver, wood, hay, stubble, were consumed) It had no foundation: but was held up onely by the power of him that was in it between the heaven and the earth: so this is the ulti∣mate end of my burning up all the formes and waies of worships and rules of men, that they may see that they have not had me to be their foundation: for if they had, and had built right upon it: the drosse would have been burnt from it, and they would have stood fast, and not have been removed which now thou seest they are, and have no foundation: their worships and wayes being taken from them, they fall, if I by my own power, do not hold them mp: but I have to this end destroyed them all and routed them of their forces; that they may now stand by my power alone; and see me to be their lives, and their all and in all. & that I would have them no longer receive comfort from streams; but from me their fountain of life: & as thou heards me say, I was a Alpha & Omeg. & they that over∣com shal inherit al things; & I wil be their God, & they shal be my peo∣ple: if nothing else but a declaration that I am all and in all: and he that over comes must be by my power (who am the all of all things)
that he doth overcome some; flesh, and Divell, and so by his over∣coming he shall inherit all things; he shall inherit me, or enjoy me the Lord of host; and I will in love communicate my self unto him; and by injoying me, he shall injoy all things, for all the beasts of the field, and all the houses, and lands, and mony in the world is mine, saith the Lord of host: so shall they be my sons and daugh∣ters, and they shall have a full injoyment of them all: for as I made Adam Lord over all creatures, and made all creatures to be for the use of Adam; and Adam, so long as he stood, he did injoy them all: so will I now, saith the Lord of hosis, recover my wool and my flax, and redeem the creation from bondage, and make such a work in the earth, by my bright appearing, that the rich misers shall howle and weep for depriving my sons and daughters of the outward creatures; and their rusty gold and silver shall so much rise up in their consciences, that they shall no longer sayts theirs, but its the Lords; and so shall suffer my people, and all other poor crea∣tures that want the outward goods of this world, to have what they please, that there may be universal love, saith the Lord of host. And the word of the Lord came againe unto me, saying, what seest thou now? and lo I beheld seaven men, and each of them had a trum∣pet; and one of them seven sounded his Trumpet, and the rest did not; and as soon as he had done sounding, there appeared one with a booke open in his hand, and lifted up his hands to heaven, and did swear by him that liveth for ever, time should be no longer; but now the mystry of God is finished as he hath declared by the voice of his for∣mer Apostles: And I said, Lord, who be these Trumpeters? and my eternal God within me said, these be my sons which have from time to time sounded an alarum to the world, & as you see but one sound, and the rest did not: It shewes, that they that did not, had sound∣ed already: That is, they according to their light, have preached and spoken against Antichrist; and have given Antichrist warning of what the seventh was to sound; but now the seventh sounds, the mistery of God is finished; that is, a great and glorious disco∣very of light is now made manifest, more thensever hath been, by the appearing of one, saith the Lord of host; which makes my sons and daughters know the mistery which hath been hid, and so crie a loud that time shal be no longer: not onely crie, but through their knowledge, swear by God, that liveth for evermore, time shall be no longer: And I said Lord, what is this mistery that hath been hid
and now is made manifest? and God said, this mystery, is my owne selfe making out of my self to be all and in all: and that I doe not dwell in a place afar off, that is, onely Heaven, and onely there; but that my dwelling place is now in my Temples, which Temples are my sons and danghters: and that I, who am the life and fulnesse of all things, have been always the life of all creatures, and the life of man, and have been in man, but not knowne to bee there: but have beene covered under the clods of proud flesh, but now the day of my appearing is come, that proud flesh shall be destroyed; and all that have kept the creature from looking after me the Lord of Host, within them: but have caused the creature to look after mee afar off: But now by my bright appearing, the book which thou seest in the Angels hands being open, will cause the mystery to be known that I am in all men, and the life of all men: for this book is the mystery, which mystery is I the Lord of host: and as the book is opened, so I the Lord of Host, have made my self, by my com∣ing to judge proud flesh, to be God in all men: manifesting my self in love to my sons and daughters; and appear in wrath to mine ene∣mies. And I said, Lord, what is meant that time shall be no longer, is it judgement? a dissolation of the world? or that time shall be no longer to them that thou hast manifested this mystery to? or that time shall be no longer for the beast to reign? or the whore that hath shed the bloud of Saints? And the Lord said, that by my appearing in my sons and daughters, I will burn up sin and flesh, so that time shall be no longer with them; for they shall sin no more, nor see no evil: which mystery is a riddle to most men, that the Sains sins & trans∣gressions should be finished: but though it be a riddle and few know it, that the seventy weeks (for to make an end of sin, & to bring everla∣sting righteousness) is at hand; yet the sounding of this Trumpet wil make more know it: I mean the Saints, I mean that the Saints shall see that they shall now no longer commit sin; for transgression is fi∣nished, and everlasting righteousness brought in, saith the Lord of host: and by time that it shall be no longer, is meant, that set time which I the eternal God have allotted Antichrist the man of sin or the beast to reign, which was for forty and two months, but now the forty & two months being expired, & come to an end, all the powers of flesh, Devil & sin, and that have been set up by the powers of this world, by Kings & Lords, and great men, their power shall be taken from them, and so shal all time be at an end with them; I mean, their powers shall be destroyed, when the time is come as it is now, that
the beast shall be destroyed: By the beast is meant, all forms and ways of worships, rules and Governments which is the wisdome of the flesh, as teaching and praying by the wisdome of the flesh, and living in outward administrations at a distance from God, and so thinking to make I the God of gods, in love with you for your ob∣servations and traditions: Time is come, and time shall be no lon∣ger for these things, but all these I have judged to be burnt up as be∣ing the Beast and flesh of the Word: for the mystey of God is now fini∣shed and time will cease; that I the Lord of Host may be all in all. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: behold, behold, what seest thou now: and lo I beheld a woman and shee was all in white, and not one spot to be seen about her: and shee had a Crown of gold upon her head, and in her right hand shee held a Scepter: and I did see men with Crowns of gold upon their heads, and other Gallants, and of all sorts, come to her with pre∣sents: and some brought gold and silver, and some pearls, and some jewels, and some precious stones, and some one thing, and some another: and presented them to her with bowing and bending. And one I did behold that proclaimed with a loud voice, that Jerusalem was come down from heaven: and that the marriage of the Lamb is now come: and presently I beheld one all in glory to come to this woman, who had a crown upon his head, and he went into the wo∣man, and they became one, and the woman delivered her Crowne and Scepter to him that came to her, and presently there cried out to make supper ready: and presently I beheld a long table & table cloth laid upon it, with trenchers and napkins, and stools pulled forth; and I beheld the dishes brought to the table; and there was set on the ta∣ble all manner of varieties that could be; and the guests were all in white: and there I saw them eat and drink, and were very merry to∣gether. The time being come that all sorrow and sighing shall fly a∣way: and I said, Lord, what woman is this with a crown upon her head and a Scepter in her hand? and the Lord said: this woman is the Jerusalem that comes out of heaven, the Lambs wife: and as she was all in white without spot: it was the righteousness of I the God of gods; and her Crown and Scepter shews, that she doth by the pow∣er of me, overcome all her enemies, as sin; flesh and hell: and by the great men, as Kings and Lords, bringing presents to her: it shews that I the Lord of host hath set my house above all mountains: and that my people shall suck the riches of the Gentiles: and that those, as Kings & Lords, that have persecuted her by the names of horeticks &
sectaries, and have laughed at her, shall now come, bowing and ben∣ding at the sols of her feet; and shall a knowledge of a truth, that the God of gods is in them. And as thou seest one come to her, and en∣tred into her, and she gave him her Crown and Scepter: it shews that I the Lord of hosts, and my people, shall no longer be two but one: and that I shall no longer appear to be in heaven a great way from them: but in them and one with them, married to them, their husband and joy: and as she at his coming to her, delivered her Septer and Crown to him: it shews that by my manifesting my self in them, to dwell in them, and to be one with them: will make my sons and daughters resigne up all unto me: that so I may de∣stroy all their proud flesh, and cover their nakedness with my righteousness, saith the Lord of hosts: and as you saw a table and all things thereon, as napkines and trenchers, and all manner of varieties, and the guests all in white: is nothing else but I my self saith the Lord of hosts: wherein is all manner of plentifulness; and that my sons and daughters are here set forth to be the guests all in white: That is, washed and made clean by my righteousness; are now come to the feast of fat-things, of marrow, and wine on the lees: where they my eat and drink and be satisfied with the fulnes of me. Therefore eate and drink, yea drink abundantly: and as they were at supper they were merry together, that is nothing else, but I injoy∣ing them, and they enjoying me: I did fill them so full of joy as to make them merry, that I told them sorow and sighing should now fly away: for my sons and daughters that have been at this banquet and see themselves married to me to be one with me: and so feed conti∣nually of the bread of life, henceforth not knowing sin, nor hun∣ger any more, but being satisfied in living in the injoyment of me, saith the Lord of hosts, who am life and joy, and time, as to sin, shal be no longer: and so knowing no sin: shall have no cause to see sorrow, or to weep any more; for all thine enemies both within and without shall be destroyed: that thou mayest come with everlasting joy and re∣joycing & singing to Sion, saith the Lord of hosts the holy one of Israel, who is in the midst of thee, & the days of thyweeping shall be at an end. And again the word of the Lord came unto me saying, behold, behold, what seest thou now? And loe! I beheld, seven Angels (mentioned in the Revelations) one more glorious then the rest, and he had some thing in his hand, which I did not know, till I asked God: And then it was told me it was a vial: and he pour∣ed it forth upon great men, As Kings and Parliaments, and all sorts
of men, and on the beast that comes out of the bottomlesse pit, and on the Locust, and on the scarlet colloured whore that is decked with all manner of precious things: and they all became dead: and the remnant were affrighted and gave glory to God: and I said Lord, what is the meaning that but one of them powred forth his vial? and the Lord said, that the rest had powred forth their vials & had tormented the men of the earth already: but this one that powres forth his vial now, doth not onely torment but destroy the men of the earth: and I said Lord, wilt thou take their lives from them that they shall be no longer? and my God, said, I; I will take from them that which hath bin their life: but yet I will not take from all of them their natural life: but from Kings, and Parliaments & great men; I will take from them their power, which they have had, and they shall instead of haveing power become humble and submissive and be as lowly as the poor: for this vial is my wrath, that shal burne and consume all fleshly powers: and as he that powres it forth is more glorious then the rest: it shewes my sons & daughters shall have more glorious discoveries and manifestations of me their God dweling in them, saith Lord of host; and through the fulnesse they have of me (I being in them) they shall now say, time shall be no longer: and I said Lord what is the meaning of the bot∣tomlesse pit: and the Lord said, by the bottomlesse pit is meant the heart of man: and by the beast that riseth out of it is not meant the Pope and Emperours: but is meant, all the wisedome of the proud flesh, that hath and doth stil invent all the wicked actions of men that have murdered the Saints: as formes and governments: and from this bottomlesse pit ariseth threatnings and malicious words, even such there is hatcht within it as a man is never able to know from whence they come, or whether they go. For the put∣ting to death of Saints, is first contrived here in this pit; which I the Lord of host doth say, is the heart of man: and then according as they have invented how and after what manner they shall put them to death, they put their power in execution to do it: and by the Locusts, is meant the Priests; for as Locucts destroyes and devours the fruits of the earth, so have these Priests from time to time been the chief actors and setters on of the Kings and great men of the earth for to make Lawes for them to worship God by, as they call it; and so poor creatures have been deluded by them to worship some∣thing, but they nor the Priests knew not what, instead of me saith the Lord of host; and so haue destroyed the earth, tha is, their
bodies; and being Spiritual Merchants, they have not onely destroyed the bodies of men, but have also made Merchandize of the souls of nem; and all this they have done pretending they did preach to bring them to heaven: when indeed they rather did the things that was a cause of ignorance and darkness (by telling them they were the mini∣sters of God sent to Preach, and that none was to preach but they, and so did keep them from the enjoyment of me, saith the Lord of hosts) and to throw them into hell: so their preaching of me was more for their fat Benefices then to bring souls to me, as they made it appear to bee: for if at any time any did out-strip them, or did doe some∣thing tending to the setting forth the glory of me, or had some dis∣coveries of me, and so would teach for nothing; they must be heri∣ticks and so must he cut off; and thus these priest-like Locust, have devoured men and kept them in bondage by their philosophy and cun∣ing craftinesse: but time shall be no more. And the woman which thou faw'st arayed with all manner of precious things, is the whore of Baby∣lon: and her Scarlet Colloured cloathes and precious things, sets forth her formes and wayes of worships, decked with outward zeale of professions, so that they seem to the eye of men to be my way, saith the Lord of host: for she being so gloriously arayed, sets forth all out∣ward administrations of what sort soever: but time shall be no longer; for the vials of my wrath is now powered forth upon them all, and they shal all be consumed and brought to nothing: and all these outward administrations, which seem'd before to have life; shal now be slaine and appeare to be dead: that I alone may be all and in all: such is the worke that I wil now do that those that shall be left alive shall be affrighted and give glory to me; for the remnant were affrighted and they gave glory to God: these of the earthly powers, as Kings and Lords, and of all sorts of men that doth escape with their lives as they be not taken away, shal give glory to me: some of them by being purified and my sons, and some of them by bringing their riches to my sons and daughters: for those that know not me I will be a terror to them and will make them throw away their Idols of Gold and Silver, and in so doing they shall glorifie mee: and I said, are these that powred forth thy vials Angels that are invisible, or be there no Angels but thy servants and sons here below? and the Lord said, that they that power forth my vials are my sons, and my sons are Angels, and ministring spirits: they are Angels: and the Angels mentioned in Scriptures, are no other but my sons and daughters: and those two Angels that came to Lot in Sodome, where two men:
but because I made them my messengers, they were called Angels: and the Angel that smote the Assyrians and slew so many thousands. Was a man whom I appointed to do that work, and so was called an An∣gel of the Lord, because he did my will saith the Lord of hosts: and for those that think Angels are invisible spirits, and so cannot be seen; and so doth likewise think, that I am in a place above the skies called heaven, and so think I have invisible Angels to keep me company, are out of the way, and have missed of the mistery; which I will now make manifest, saith the Lord of host. The word of the Lord came unto me saying, behold, behold, what seest thou now? And loe, I beheld a woman cloathed with white, and black spots upon her Gown; and I beheld, and there came one with fire and laid it upon her cloathes, and the fire burn∣ed all her cloathes: and upon her brest were knots of several ri∣bons, but they were all consumed: and so I saw her naked stript of all: but presently he that burned her cloathes (and she was not hurt in her body) brought her cloathes again to put on her all white without spot; and she, to my thinking, was then far more glorious then she was before: and I said, Lord, what woman is this? And my eternal King said: it was his Church: and as she was in white it did shew that she did apprehend her self to be clean by Christ: as she had black spots, it doth shew that she is not so pure as to be free from imperfection: and as she had knots of se∣veral ribons on her breast: it doth shew, that she (the Church) hath several outward ordinances or dispensations, formes by which she doth worship me, saith the Lord of Hosts: but as you saw one came with fire and burnt all her cloathes and all her ribons; and yet did not hurt her body, it shews, that I the Lord of host who am a consu∣ming fire, will burn all her dross, or consume all fleshliness and dross from my people, or Church; and so will strip her naked of all her administrations, and outward ordinances, and Church-fellowships, and pastors, and teachers, and of all though it seems never so glori∣ous. And as you saw he that burned up her cloaths, bring her new cloaths to put on all white without spot or wrinkle: it shews that I the Lord of hosts: after I have burned up and consumed all the flesh and fleshliness of my Church, as all her outward ordinances and dispensations, as formes of worships; and all her pastors and teachers and Church-fellow-ships, and so they striped her naked of all, that then I will new cloath her, that she shall (the
Church) appear far more glorious then ever she was before; for when she is thus striped of all and is naked in her own appre∣hensions; she shall be cloathed with the Sunne mentioned in the Re∣velations: and the Moon shall be under her feet: this Son is my righteousness: which will make her (the Church) all in white: as you see the woman after she had lost all was cloathed in white, and all outward Ordinances (represented by the Moon) under her feet: that when my church is stripped of all outward excellencies, then shall I appear to be excellent: as to be her pastor, and teacher, and ordinances, and so her all and in all, and then shall she be more free and at more liberty, when these shall be taken from her, then she hath been yet: for then my Church shall not run after men and so go gadding about for food: but shall quickly rest her self contented, with me the bread of life: and so shall worship me in spirit and in truth: and so my Church shall be compacted of living stones, that the prophesie may be fulfilled: there shall not be a Cananite in the house of the Lord any more: but she shal now wholly throw away that which shee hath highly esteemed of, as outward means: which hath been but streams, which have flown from me who am the fulness of all things: and shall now wait onely to hear the voice within her saying, this is the way walk in it: and so heard this voice, which voice (is I the Lord of hosts speaking in her) she shall have more satisfaction and rest in her spirit then ever she has had as yet: for she thus wait∣ing upon me; shall speak the pure language, which none shall have but those my sons and daughters that I make out my self unto: for the effect of this language (which is the spirit of me) will cause all difference and confusion to end, that some shall no longer worship me the Lord of hosts one way, and some another way: but being possest of me and hearing me teaching in them, I will make them all to serve me with one consent, which cannot be, so long as they worship me in several forms: therefore do I this saith the Lord of hosts, to strip my people of all forms: that some might not run one way and some a∣nother; but that all may serve me in one way: which way is onely to wait on me, saith the Lord of hosts, who wil bring it suddenly to pass. And as thou sawest one bring a book and it was sealed: and he that brought it opened it and gave it her in her hand: this book is the mistery of mee which is now to be finished: and as you see it was sealed up: it shews, that this mistery (which is I the Lord of hosts in my people) have been hid and none hath been able to look into it: but as he that opened it and gave it to her doth
shew, that though it hath been hid, yet (I the Lord of hosts) will now open it and make it known to all my sons and daughters; as the woman doth represent, by having it open in her hand, and when they shall see this mistery, I the Lord of hosts to be in them; then shall they know how to worship me, which will be without ordinan∣ces or forms, only waiting for me to teach them, and no longer to wait upon the teaching of man; for man hath teached them to look for me in heaven, or that I do dwell in heaven in a place above the skies, but they know not where, not teaching them to look for me within them, where they now, in waiting upon me, shall know that I do dwell saith the Lord of hosts. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, behold, what doest thou now see? and loe, I beheld a beast that had upon his head one horn, and he continied pushing until there came one and cut him down, and burned his body: and I said, Lord, what beast is this? And my eternal Majesty the King of eternal glory within me said: this beast is that beast with one horn mentio∣ned in Daniel: and yet is the same beast mentioned in the Revelati∣ons: That made an Image like unto the former beast: that had a wound and did live: which caused all both small and great bond and free, to receive a mark in their foreheads or in their right hand, that they might live and have a being amongst them: but here is wisdom: let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast for it is the number of man: and his number is six hundred threescore and six: And I said Lord what doth this Beast represent? That proceedeth from the Kings, and doth think to change laws and times: and had power given him until a time, and times, and dividing of times? And my eternal God within me said: that this beast is, the Parliament: who have their poewr by reason the 10 horns are cut down: that is by reason Kingly power, as the name of it is cut off with the late King that was beheaded: and likewise these formes of worships as the Episcopal Government for matter of rules of worships to walk by; as to do as the Bishops was pleased to have people do; they are all cut down by the Parliament: which the beast as thou sawest did set forth: for as the beast that was to rise after the Kings, should be diverse from the rest: even so hath the Parliament been diverse from King Charles; for though King Charles did oppress the people with ship money, which he should not have done, and so did shew his cruelty and tyranny: yet the Parliament hath ex∣ercised as much cruelty upon the people as he did: for as Charles
laid his little finger upon the people, the Parliament have laid their loynes: and for matter of oppression to the people have been far more cruel then Charles that was before; and so have been Di∣vers from Charles: which word Divers shews more then one, though called by one: as the Parliament are more then one: yet being compacted together they are but one in respect that what is done, is done by consent of all or most of them, and not by some few. And as the beast did think to change Times and Lawes, they being given into his hands: so the Parliament hath pretended to change times, that is, to take off the oppression of people and Lawes; that is, to alter the Lawes of the Land: for the Parliament have had power to do so: and the Parliament have done these in some sence; as the taking away the high Commission Court and Star Chamber, instead of being Governed or having Bishops; we must have classes and Presbyters, or at least they have declared that we should have: but though the first beast in the Revelations, had a wound with a sword and did live; though high Commission Court and Star Chamber, I mean the oppression that was used by them, though the name be taken away; yet in regard of oppression they live: for the Image of the beast, is nothing but the same oppression: as to have a new name, as not to be the same: but by this new name, and so under this new name exercising cruelty and oppression, is to make an Image, and so to represent the former: and though the Parliament have given themselves a new name, by stiling themselves a Free State, yet they are but the Image of the former beast: in re∣gard as the former exercised cruelty upon the people, and the Parliament doth the same: and as the beast mentioned in Daniel had power, and likewise in the Revelations, for to cause all both great and small, to worship the Image of the beast that they might live. Even so the Parliament: by the setting forth their Engagement (as they call it) and by forcing all to take it (which was their intents when they set it forth) and so to deprive them of the benefit of the Law, for denying submission to this power or Image which they have set up, and so the mark which the Image of the beast hath set forth, and caused all to receive, doth represent the Parliament, who have set forth their mark, the Engagement (as they call it) for people to receive it, in their fore-heads; that is, to profess them to be the supreame power, and that they ought to worship them, and submit to their Lawes: and on their right-hand, is meant, the aiding and assisting of them with power and with money; that the former,
which was Kingly power, might not rise again: but that they might be now adorned and have the honour: even the Parliament, seems to be the Image of the Beast, and the Engament the marke of the Beast but the Beast, or Image of other, is but for a time, times, and dividing of times, mentioned in Daniel, and also in the Revelations, to be the forty and two moneths, which is a set time that this Image of the Beast shall have power; and when that set time is at an end, which I have appointed, this Beast shall be destroyed and burned to nothing; all their powers, and all their Laws and formes, and wayes of govern∣ments and worships, and shall never rise more, nor any like it, saith the Lord of host: here is wisdome! this wisdome is I the Lord, and let him that hath understanding count the number of the Beast, and let him that hath my spirit and this wisdom revealed from me to him count, for the number of the Beast: is the number of a man, the number of a man is his continuance, or abiding here in this earthly body before it returnes to the earth which number is set forth or appointed by me the Lord of host, for his time here, before he be brought to the dust of the earth; which number be∣ing accomplished and come to an end, man must come to the grave: so the Beast is numbered, his daies are set down how long he shall have Power, or how long he shall continue. By the Beast that is numbered here, is meant the Parliament or powers of the earth, which (I tel you) is the Beast that must be burn∣ed or destroyed so soone as his time which I have let him, shall come to an end: for his number is six hundred threescore and six: which I the Lord of host, tell you they are so many dayes that this beast shall have the whole power to himselfe: that the Parlia∣ment shall have for their time to raigne, from the day that they beheaded Charles six hundred and threescore and six dayes: and I said, Lord, shall I take them to be litteral dayes, as fivescore to and hundred and so seven of them to make a week as we call it? and my God said, you shall take them to be litteral dayes, and so count them from the day that Charles was beheaded: for that is and shall be the time of their power: and before these six hundred and sixty and six come to an end, the Parliament shall be consumed and destroyed and brought to nothing: and I the Lord of host that hath revealed this vision to thee, will surely bring it to passe; and that thou maist know that it is I the Lord of host that have revealed this to thee, and that this is truth, I will presently shake thee in a strange manner more then ever I did at once, as a token
to satisfie thee that these shall come to passe: and as soone as the voice which spake these words ceased, I fell a shaking, and was so shooke that I made the bed I lay in tatter, and was lifted up as if some body had tooke me up, and threw me down again, which one that lay with me can tell; for I told him before I shook, I had received words that I should be shaken, which proved true, and I am satisfied in my self, that that which I now write, will (to the ter∣rour of Great men, and to the amasement of all sorts) prove very true, and that it is the pleasure of the Lord of host to bring to no∣thing all earthly powers, that the Lord may be all and in all: and who shall hinder him from doing his pleasure, for he will worke and who can let? And the word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, what seest thou now? and lo, I beheld a house by a great mountain, and there came one and removed this house and set it upon that great mountain as was by it; and I saw men and women come from East, West, North and South to this house: and I said, Lord, whose house is this? and my God and Father said, it is my house, and the Sion spoken of in Scripture; and as you see it car∣ried by one and set upon the top of a great mountaine: it shewes that I the Lord of host have removed sorrow away from Sion by my owne power; and this mountain that you see the house set upon, is but the fulfilling of the Sciptures, that the Lords house shall be set above all mountaines: for this mountain which you see is set an, is the powers of the world; and by its being set on it, shewes that it is above them: above great mountaines, which are great men as have had the power, but now have not; and the mountaine being under it, it shewes that great men have not power over Sion as they have had, but are rather Sions foot-stoole, and so bend to the soles of Gods feet in Sion: and I said, Lord, is this house Sion, and the place that thy sons and daughters shall come out of all Notions to? and the Lord said, this is Sion, or it doth represent Sion; and by people coming to it out of all Countries; it shews, that I the Lord of host, have people in all Countries: and this house doth onely shew, by standing in a place as you see it doth, the place that my sons and daughters shall make merry in: and where they meet together, if two or three of them, they shall be Sion; and they shall come to Sion with everlasting joy upon their heads; and sorrow shall flie away; for their going to Sion with joy and rejoycing, and their singing in the height of Sion, and making musick as they go to Sion, is not their going
to one place to worship, but they are glorying and rejoycing in me, because those that formerly were their enemies, are now cut down, so that they may speak of me without any fear; for a Law shall go forth of Sion, which Sion is my Church, and the Law is my self that they shall declare and speak abroad: for all the enemies as Antichrist and the beast, and the Whore, and forms and governments, and rules of men, being destroyed: there shall be now no other law then what shall come forth of Sion: I will now appear to be teacher, and Law, and rules, and worships, and all in all: and this Sion are my Church, or sons and daughters unto whom I have made forth my self; and ap∣peared now by manifesting my self unto them, that I dwell in them, and am a Law in them: and unto this Sion shall people say, come let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he will teach us his wayes: & the God of grace will be our teacher and instructer; and when he teaches us, we shall have no need of men to teach us: for he will write his Law in our hearts and in our inward parts, and we shall sin no more: and I said, Lord, shall there be no Law or formes to walk by as hath been formerly? And the Lord said, there shall be no other law but I my self will be all the Law: and if any offend me, I my self will terrifie him and not man: for I will be a terror to them that know not me, and a joy to them that know me: and when I have thus set my house upon the top of all mountains: then shall war cease: and then shall sto∣ny hearts be taken out of men, and instead of them they shall have hearts of flesh: and so I will saith the Lord, make men to beat their swords into Plousheers, and their spears into pruning hookes; and the nation shall not learn War any more: for when I have taken the power from great men, and likewise their self interest: that so he that laboured all the day and he that laboured but one hour in the vinyard, had both wages alike: so it shall be that they that have strived for honour and greatness and have laid up baggs of Gold and Silver, for five, or two, or twenty, or thirty, fourty yeers together, shall have no more then he that hath not laid up any thing at all, or else hath laid up but a very little but in one yeer: and whereas he that had wrought in the heat of the day, did murmur and thought it harsh that he should have no more then he that worketh but one hour: the Lord of the vinyard told him, it was his own he might chuse whether he would give any thing or no: and what I do give thee I do it out of mine own free will: for all is mine saith the Lord of hosts, all the beasts of the field, and all the riches of the world is mine, and not thine; and though I have lent thee them: and thou
having not made a right use of them, I take them from thee and give them to thy fellow creatures for their use as well as thine, for when thou hadest these things as I have now taken from thee, thou madst them but instruments of cruelty to thy fellow creatures: and so did not use this world as if thou used it not, but used this world as if thou shouldest never part from it: but I have taken these things from thee that thou shouldest use this world as if thou used it not: for the fashion of this world passeth away, and all things shall now become new: and these your Idols, of gold and silver, I will be such a terror to you, that if you do not throw them away, ye shall be consumed in my wrath. Now I arise to shake terribly the earth, and I will do this my act my strange act: as to make the low and poor equal with the rich, that they may every one sit under his own vine and none make him afraid: but all enjoying the fruits of the earth and so no longer to work for others, or others to have the benefit of their labours: but every man shall now enjoy the fruits of his own labour: and if any be servants it shall be those that know not me, saith the Lord of hosts. Thus will I stain the pride and glory of man, and will bring down the haughtiness of menand will lay low the mountaines, and will exalt the vallies, and then both oppressors and oppressions shall cease: that the creation may be restored from bondage: and this is the time of the restitution of all things, whom the heavens must retain: but the time being now come that the heavens cannot retain me any longer: therefore I come for to restore all things and the creature man from slavery and bondage, into the liberty of my sons: that they may now no longer be in subjection to their fellow creatures; but shall now see themselves to be equal with them: and the fat swine, to be but men whose breath is in their nostrils: that I may appear to be all and in all: that so universal freedom may be in your streets, and no∣thing but peace within your borders; that righteousness may now co∣ver the earth, and the emnity of all creatures be taken away: that the ground may now be freed from the curse; and the earth bring forth her increase, that I alone may be and none besides me, saith the Lord of Hosts, who is the life of all creatures. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of Man behold, behold, and loe, I looked and there appeared Chariots in Heaven runing up and down, and I told them, and there were seven of them, and one that led them about and was before them, cried with a loud voice to them that were in the Chariots, come let us go down and destroy the earth, before this yeer be at an end:
and I beheld that he that said so, drew his sword and gave it to a man; and said: goe thou and do the worke of the Lord, and I will be with thee, and thou shalt prosper. And I said Lord, what meanes these Charriots, there being seven of them? and the Lord said, the Charriots set forth those whom I have appointed to do my worke; and there being seven of them, shewes a perfect and compleat number that shall accomplish and do all my pleasure: and one being before: shewes that I, the Lord of host, have stirred them up and will lead them on and be with them: and as thou seest them in heaven; it shewes, that I have retained them in my favour: and one with them, it shews that I have been kept in heaven, until the time of the restitution of all things, or I have not made my name known: and whereas he cried come let us go down and destroy the earth before this year is at an end: it shewes the time of restitution is now at hand that I the Lord of host, will reco∣ver my wooll and flax, my glory and honour; and I thus appearing; earthly powers, which robbed me, must be destroyed: and I said, Lord, by earthly powers do you mean the Parliament? and by the year, do you mean, a year as we call it, as from Jan. to January? and the Lord said, by the earth, is meant the Parliament which shall be de∣stroyed: and as he said, before the year is at an end: is meant that the Parliament shall be destroyed and brought to nothing before January next; and so the year, to be a year as you account yeares: and some of them I will bring into me, to be in my favour, and others shall be devoured in my wroth: for I will make a short worke on the earth: and as thou sawest one that drew his sword being before them, he doth represent me, and as he gave his sword away to that man that stood by him, and said, take this sword and do my work. It shewes that I have made choice of a man to lead my Instruments on to do all my pleasure: and whereas he gave him the sword and bid him prosper: so I will, by my own power in you & by you, effect my strange work: and I said, Lord, what man is this whom thou hast given thy sword to? and the Lord said, it is him whom I have cho∣sen and stirred up to do my worke, as I have allreadie decleared to you: and the set time or the Longest time of the being of the Parlia∣ment is but sixe hundred threescore and six daies as I have shewn to thee allready, And the Lord within me that hath shewn me these things, told me that for the truth of what I had seen & had reveal'd, as that the Parli∣ament should be brought to nothing in such a short time, he the Lord of
host within me when he revealed it to me and commanded me to write it, and told me, as soon I had done writing of it, I should be taken in a shaking fit: which proved very true: and it came upon me as soon as I had done writing of it, before I could speake to them as was with me, or before I could rise from the stoole I sat on; in which fit of shaking, I was by a power taken off the stoole and lifted up; though one did strive to hold me down: whereby I see it is the Lords time to confound all things besides himself; that he may have the glory of all, and he onely be honour∣ed: unto which I say amen, amen. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: behold, behold, what seest thou now? and loe! I beheld a bush about seven foot high all on fire: and I said, Lord, what meaneth this bush to be of a flame and not to consume? and the Lord said, by this bush, is set forth my people, and by the fire, is set sorth I the Lord of host; & as the bush was all on fire, so will I be a fire to my Church; as the bush was not consumed, but rather more fresher, so will I burne away the dross and filthinesse of my Church, and make them more pure then ever they were; and as the bush stood still: so will I by my burning away their filth, make them (the Church) stand still and wait upon me, and so make them leave of running after any out∣ward teacher or outward meanes by which they have received some comforts, as from streames: but will make them to come unto me, the fountain where they shall have their filland be satisfied: and as I did in old time appear to Moses my servant in a burning bush, so have I ap∣peared to thee now in a burning bush: and as I sent Moses to Pha∣roah to tell him I will have my people out of the Land, and so Redeem them from their bondage and slaverie, so my time is now at hand that I will Redeem my sons and daughters from their heavie Task-ma∣sters, as the powers of this world: but as Pharoah was so envious against my people as to gather an army to follow them for to destroy them: ye read that instead of destroying my people, they were all drowned in the red Sea: even so all those that will not grant my sons and daughters freedome and libertie as to enjoy the fruits of the earth, that they may glorifie me: shall have their hearts hardned to war against them: but as I appeared for Moses and the children of Israel and gave them deliverance, So will I now appear against all those that appear against me the Lord of host, or against my people: and will destroy them and consume them that they may never be more: for I have spoken and it shall surely come to Passe; for I will do all my pleasure saith the Lord
of host. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, be∣hold this man and see what he doth: and loe, I beheld a man in gay cloathes: and he had a bagge in his hand; and he put his other hand and tooke al the mony that was in it and threw it about so long as any was in it: and thus shall all Misers in time throw away their mo∣ny that they have horded up and bring it (their gold and silver) out of their chests, and baggs out of their places where they have laid them, saith the Lord of host, for I will make them do it: that they that have gathered much may have none over: and they that have ga∣thered little may have no lack: saith the mighty God of Jacob. And presently after this: I saw the appearance of a man: his rai∣ment was of all colours like a rain-bow, and it came down to his feet: and I looked and could see no seme upon it, for it was without seme, and he had on his head a Crown of gold, and in his right-hand a Scepter, and I saw him coming to me, and I cried out, in the name of the Lord of hoast come not to me: but he came to me, and told me, that he was Jesus Christ; the mightie Angell of the Lord of hoast; and that he must come into me: and then he would declare unto me things that must shortly come to passe: for now the Lord of host had done speaking to the outward ears and appearing to the fleshly eyes: and will deal inwardly; both appear and speak to the spirituall eyes, & he entred into me which made me tremble & quake: and then I heard a voice within me, saying, harken to this noise that I will make, and I harkned: and loe it thundred, and I said Lord, what is the meaning of this, and the Lord said: these are the seven thunders that uttered their voices to John; and he would have writ the mean∣ing of them and I commanded him that he should not, because the meaning of them would have made my servants not to search so much into this Revelations which were written by John? but now I will declare them unto thee: these seven thunders shew a perfection, or a compleating of my determination. Which I have set; before I will begin to take the powers from the earth, and the last of these thunders or all in one shall take effect according to my determinati∣on (as I shewed it to my servant John) in the year one thousand six hundred and fiftie, but I would not have him write it: though I have now commanded thee to write it; and that I will begin my worke in this year, as it was shewed to John in this Iland of England: and I will bring to nothing the Parliament: but will stirre up their hearts and the wicked to joyne with them against Fairfax, that so I may destroy them whom I have appointed for the slaugh∣ter,
and so to be a terror and a dread to the others; and will make them be quiet. But presently after this the word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, behold, this that I present to thee: and I looked and loe, a tree that had on it twelve sorts of fruits, and the Lord said, the fruit of this tree is for the healing of the Nations: and I said, Lord, what doth this tree represent? And my eternal God within me said, it doth represent me the Lord of hosts; I am the tree and onely that which can cure the Nations; and the fruits of me or of my work which I am now a doing; Is First, to destroy earthly powers and so to bring down their strength. Secondly, I will make those that have drawn their swords to make war (if they be not destroyed) beat their swords into plow∣sheers, and their spears into pruning hooks. Thirdly, I will be a terror to those that have opposed me, that they shall be afraid of me; and instead of gathering themselves to∣gether as they have done: they shall hide themselves in holes of the rocks. Fourthly, I will destroy self-interest, that so there may be no striving for riches. Fiftly, I will destroy ambition, that there shall be no striving for honour. Sixthly, I will take away the pride of the heart, that there shall be none that shall think themselves better then the rest. Seventhly, I will take from man that presumption, as to think to have one or two men to wait upon him. Eightly, I will make those that have riches, give them to them that have none. Ninthly, I will make every man to be at peace one with the other. Tenthly, I will make all my sons and daughters, to be of one heart and mind. Eleventhly, I will take away the curse of the earth, that with a very little labour it shall bring forth its fruits. And Twelfthly, I will make that which one hath, to be ano∣thers, that so the naked may be cloathed, and the hungry fed: and if any have any thing better then others, it shall be my sons and daughters, for I will make all work in one way or other a little, for to keep themselves out of want, saith I the Lord of hosts; for I
will take the curse from off the earth, that the earth may be fruit∣ful; and I will take the enmity from all creatures, that they may be at peace with each other: and I will make them to be fruitfull and multiply that they may be strong to work and bring forth thousands and ten thousands, and so will make working a pleasure and rejoy∣cing, that I may be glorified and have the honour, saith the Lord of hosts. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, behold, and loe, I looked and there appeared a river running up and down on the earth: And I said, Lord, what earth is this, and river that runs up and down thus? And my God said, this is your body, and the bodies of my sons and daughters, which the earth sets forth; and the river is the river of life mentioned in the Reve∣lations; and this life is the pouring forth of my spirit upon this earth of men and women; and as you saw the living waters run about, it is that living waters, which are the fulness or flowings forth of my self in such a clear discovery and manifestation, as to over-power the earth man, with my glory as it is written, he that beleeveth on me, saith God, out of his belly shall flow forth rivers of living waters: which water of life proceedes from the throne of God; that is after my bright appearing, and filling my sons and daugh∣ters with my fulness, from them shall flow forth the water of life; that is, a discovery of me, or making me known to others, that I am the Alpha and Omega, that I am all and in all; that I will now take the power into my own hands, and will be glorified: for my peo∣ple are my throne, and the place where I dwell, saith the Lord of hosts; and as there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one: the Word is the Father, and the holy Ghost is the Father, and so I bear witness to them that have but a smal discovery of me; that is they living in some light, and so have some knowledge of me, they are said to be witnesses to his soul, even the Father, holy Ghost and Word, which is all but I the Lord of hosts; witnessing to them that I make forth my self unto them that they are mine: and the three that bear record in earth, the Spirit, Water, and Bloud, and all agree in one; the Spirit is the Lord, and the Water, the water of life mentioned, to proceed from the throne; and the Bloud, is the Bloud of I the Lord of hosts; and so all these three that witness in the earth, which is the bodies of men and wo∣men, to whom I have made forth my self, is I the Lord of hosts, witnes∣sing that I am theirs, and so sealing them up to be mine; and those
whom I have, and will make the water of life to run from them: that is my self so to over-power them, that I may appear to be all and in all, and so will I have the glory, saith the Lord of hosts; for the time is now at hand these Scriptures shall be fulfilled, and there shall be no more curse; there shall not be any wicked flesh or sin that shall hinder my servants from the injoyment of me, saith I the Lord of hosts, but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it: There shall be no power to rule and domineer in my City where I rule, which Citie is my sons and daughters, but I will be all in them, and they shall see my face, and my name shall be in their foreheads: I will speak in them and manifest my glory in them, which shall be as a mark on their foreheads, that they are the seed which I the Lord of hosts have blessed; and there shall be no night there: they shall have no need of a candle, neither the light of the Sun; that is, my sons and daughters shall have no need of any outward administrati∣ons, ordinances, or wayes of worships which they have had, but my river of life (running in them, that is my self dwelling in them) shall give them life and make them to reign over sin, hell, and death, and all enemies; so they shall reign with me for ever, saith the Lord of hosts. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, behold, that which I will now shew thee; and lo, I beheld one with a vail over his face so that none could see his beauty, but onely some glimmering light of him: and I said, Lord, who doth this set forth that his face hath a vail over it, that his beauty cannot be seen? And my eternal God, said, this sets forth me the eternal King of Glory, who have hid my glory and beauty from the children of men, and also from them who have been my dearest servants; that they have seen but very little of my beauty and also I have been silent and have not made out my self in any full measure or discovery of my self as yet: but as you saw him throw away his vail, and did behold him in his beauty: so will I now make out my self in the fulness of my self to my sons and daughters that they may now see and behold my beauty and the glory of me, that they may no longer go a whoring after other Gods: but that I the King of glory might have them come running to me to be taught by me, the Lord of hosts, who am the King of glory. And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, and observe, and I will shew thee that which shall suddenly come
to pass: and o, I looked and there appeared a man with a sword in his hand ready drawn; saying, I am now come to cut down that time may be no longer: I have a long time been silent, but I am now risen like a man of warre, and will cut down and devoure at once. And I beheld: and presently he fell to cutting off the heads of men that were together: and then he said, I will not onely cut off the heads, but I will cut up the root too; that there may not be left root nor branch. And I said, Lord, who doth this man represent? and my God said, it represents me the Lord of host who am now risen to cut down and destroy all my enemies: I have along time bin silent, but I will no longer be so: for my time is now come that I may make a short work: and I said, Lord, what doth time mean as he said, it should be no longer? and the Lord said, by time is meant the set time of my determination which is now in this yeare 1650. but the meaning of time shall be no longer, and time, times, and dividing of times, in Daniel, and the forty and two months spoken of, are now in this year 50. a beginning to be accomplished in this Land, to the cutting down of the Parliament and all pow∣ers besides my self in this Land, as was shewed thee by the cutting off of heads with my sword: and as he said he will cut down the roots too; and he thrust the sword as he had in his hand into the earth, and did cut off the roots, and said, he will neither leave root nor branch, but I will cut off the Parliament and all the powers here in England first, and they shall never rise more on the earth: the roots being cut up, it shews the Parliament who are a power chosen by earthly men, shall in this year be cut down, and there shall never be any more power; but I will be the power that shall rule here, saith the Lord of Host: And after I had writ this, I heard a voice within me, saying, I will shake thee that thou maist know it shall come to passe, and that I have commanded thee to write and print this saith the Lord of host, who will be all and in all: and I was presently taken with shaking, so that I was not able to hold my self still. And the word of my God came again, saying, Behold, and I will shew thee those things that shall come to passe, and lo, there appea∣red to me a field of Corn, and Reapers, with their sickles ready to reap it downe; and presently, I heard a voice say, the harvest is ripe, cut it down: And I said, Lord, what doth his field hold
forth? and the Lord said, the Parliament and all earthly powers: and the harvest, shews the time appointed that they are now ripe for the slaughter: for thrust in the cickle the harvest is ripe: this harvest sets forth that I had a set time for earthly powers to con∣tinue before I would destroy them: but the harvest is now ripe, in this year 1650. Therefore as you saw these reapers cut down the wheat, and made the others stand bowing and bending; they represent my instruments being seven; shews they are a perfect number, which I have chosen in this yeer, now the time of the harvest being come: that they shall cut down and destroy all powers whom I have appointed for the slaughter, and make the rest stand bowing to me in my sons and daughters, who am the mighty God of Jacob. And the Lord spake again unto me, saying: behold, behold, and loe: I beheld a beast with one horn push down men and kept them under, and some he killed of them. And I said Lord, what doth this beast mean? This beast is the powers (saith the Lord) as I have already told thee: the men are my Saints, which he hath pushed down and kept under, as the men that did appear firm a∣gainst oppression and cruelty: and as he the beast killed some: so have the Powers killed some as Locker and Thomson; but as you saw some antient men come together, the antient men, are they that are mentioned in Daniel, that are called the antient of dayes: which is onely a set time for this beast to push down the Saints and to keep them under; which time is now at an end in this yeer one thousand six hundred and fifty: and these antient men all in white, are my servants, that judge this beast to burned; or I appearing in them, to cause them to give judgement against this beast; and in giving judgment against him, you saw one cut off his head and burning his body; which doth shew that the ancient of dayes is now come, and that my set time for him to have power is at an end; therefore I the Lord of host will now arise and destroy the powers and bring them to nothing before the yeer one thousand six hun∣dred and fifty one, and burn them, that no other power besides my self may be. And the word of the most high God came unto me, saying, behold, behold, and loe, I beheld, and there appeared one like a man, and also there was a picture of a man whose head was
gold, breast silver, thighes brass, and feet, part iron and part clay, and I beheld till the man break in peices the Image and stamped it under his feet: and I said Lord who doth this man set forth? and the Lord said it sets forth I the Lord of hosts: and this Image sets forth all powers, as the Pope, and the Emperours, and Kings, and Parliaments, and as the man brake in peices the Image: so will I the Lord of hosts, break in peices all the powers and bring them to no∣thing, for the time is now come that I will cut the stone out of the mountain, which stone is my instrument which I have chosen to cut down and break in peices all other mountains, the instrument which I have chosen and cut out of this mountain (which shall be broken to peices) is Fairfax, and those whom I shall stir up to be with him: and the mountain is this power that is now on foot in the land, which shall be destroyed; for I the Lord of hosts, have purposed it, and it shall come to pass. Having received those things and written them down; about two dayes after I also received a command to go to London and put them in Print, for they must shortly come to pass; and I al∣so with this command received this motto, that I should have no rest until that I did get them printed; but that I might know that the Lord of hosts, by whom all creatures are made, hath now command∣ed me, and hath appeared to me and that they shall come to pass, I shall be exceedingly terrified; at which present I had some thing (which was told me it was bread of life) thrust as I thought into my mouth, which was told me should be bitter in my belly; and in truth I had a bitter fit of shaking and trembling, and in my belly an extraordinary working, so that I have had but little rest: but as I saw the appearance of a man which told me that he was now come to tell me what I should do; and as he had a sword in his hand, so me thought I saw the same appearance terrifying me, and telling me I shall have no rest until I doe it: which through abundance of trou∣ble and sorrow of minde; as I have now for two dayes under-gone) the third night I had some musick which was very pleasant: and afterwards the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, and there appeared a company of women dancing and singing; I said, Lord what doth these mean to dance and sing thus? And did also throw away their money: and my God told me, that as I saw them sing and dance and throw away their money; so before
the first of January next shall all my sonnes and daughters sing and rejoyce, for joy, and throw away their money, as you saw them throw away theirs, and so shall it be in that time that men shall use the world as if they use it not: and I said, Lord, shall it be before the Parliament be destroyed? and the Lord said, the Parliament shall be destroyed first. And I said, Lord, shall there be no power, and so no law? and my God said, there shall be no power besides my self, so no o∣ther law: but I will be a power and a law to keep the wicked under; and if any have any power, it shall be my sons and daugh∣ters; for they shall have of the best, and shall reigne as Kings: but not as to usurpe any authority over the rest: but I will make the rest come bowing and bending to them, and be afraid of me the Lord of host in them, and so will make men to care for no∣thing but for things that are necessary; as for riches, they shall not strive after it: and then I said, Lord, the men will be idle if they may have it for fetching it, as cloaths and victuals, and other neces∣saries: but the Lord said, that he would make all men worke as to provide things necessary for them: but I will take the curse of their labours away; and then their labours shall he pleasanter to them then ever they have been: but as for drunkards and such as have wasted my creatures, in vain, There shall no longer be any such: but I will be such a terror to the wicked that they shal be afraid of me; and shall howl for sorrow and grief, when my sons shall sing and rejoyce for joy; and I said, Lord, is this all their torment as they shall have? and my God, said, will not this be torment enough to be cast out of my love and favour, and so to lie under my wrath, I plaguing of them for their wickednesse, and making them servants to my sonnes and daughters; yea, they shall think it happy to doe any thing for them: but I said, Lord, it is said, that in the last day the wicked shall receive this sentence, goe you cursed into everlasting fire; and the Lord said, that this fire is his wrath, which the wicked shal be thrown under, and he will be as fire in their bones which shal burn them: and I said, Lord, is there no hell for them to be thrown in? and my God said, all the hell is, they shall be cast out of my love and favour, and so in stead of enjoying me they shall be terrified by me; which hell shall be here on earth, for when my sons and daughters shall sing and re∣joyce, they shall howl and weep for sorrow: and I said, Lord, it is said, that thou wilt separate the sheep from the Goats; and set one on the
right hand and the other on the left hand, & that in the world to come: And the Lord said, I will make a seperation, and such a seper∣ation as is spoken of; and that I will now set the one, of my sons and daughters on my right hand, which is my love and favour to them: and the other; to wit the wicked, shall bee on my left hand: that is under my wrath: and I said Lord, what is become of the wicked that have ceased: if there be no hel nor no other life? and the Lord said, their bodyes are returned to earth from whence they came, and so shall ever be, and never be more: but their spirits as soon as they go out of their bodies being not made of the four Elements as fire, water, earth and aire; neither is it the soule, which is their life: for I the Lord is their life and soule: and so soone as I draw my self, which is the soul out of the body, the body returnes to the earth and there it continues: but the soul, which is the life of the body, which life is my own invisible being returnes to its centre, as the body doth to his, and there remaines; which centre I the Lord of host am: and so the soul which is the life cannot suffer any torment after it is out of the body: but re∣turnes to me to be at rest with me: but the spirit, and the soul being two distinct, the spirit of a man, it is that is and shall be tormented. When the body shall rest and the soul be also at rest: I meane the body of him that is deceased, when his spirit (which is his conscience, that is compounded of reason, wisedome and knowledge, and so proceeds from man) and is called the spirit of a man: shall be tormented for ever, and that in a body, though it be not in the same body; for this spirit which is compounded of reason, wisdome, and knowledge, is that which exalts and sets it self against God; and so is the utter enemy to God; it being some thing which proceeds from flesh, and proceeds out of man, and yet it is not flesh nor man: and as soon as it comes out of one man where I the God of gods doe not rule, it goes into another wicked man, and there acts the same things which it did in the first; and so as Cain killed Abel, the same spirit is in wicked men, killing the Saints: which spirit of man being all that shall be tormented, I suffer it to embody it self in man, untill it becomes a legion of Devils; and there they remain in man, untill I by my spirit cast them out: or till I withdraw my self, and so let the body goe from whence it comes: and so the Devil which my Sonne Christ cast out
of the man, which man was tormented by it, it being in him (for so long as it was in him it did keep him from enjoying me) and so did torment him; is the spirits of wicked men transfused into one, and so rules in a man: and as it spake and desired Christ to let it go into the herd of swine, it shewes, that it was not able to a bide in that place were I would not have him tarry: neither can it go into any, but to those that I give it a commission to go into, and as it chose to go into swine; the swine sets forth wicked men: so that the Devil that was cast forth & went into the herd of swine, went into wicked men: and as the swine ran into the Sea and were drovvned; so those into whom I do suffer the spirit of a wicked man to go into and remaine and not cast it out, that man is tormented by that spirit and drowned in a Sea of mi∣sery. But as the spirit cried out, art thou come to torment me before my time? it shewes, that a spirit is not capable of torment out of a body, but in a body: which bodies shall now be, that the spirits of all wicked men shall be tormented in, and they shall for ever as one Devil and his Angels, be burning in my wrath; that is, those wick∣ed men that remaine, shall be the places wherein all the spirits of wicked men, and their spirits shall be tormented day and night; that is in bodies, wherein nothing but wickednesse dwels: so that all might be tormented and destroyed, but I the Lord of host: and I said Lord, there are some things in likenesse of hens, or doggs, or any any thing else, that can speake: and my God said that these are the spirits of wicked men: whom I can make in any shape, and can give them power to speake to other wicked men, or their spirits in them: which spirit workes in the children of disobe∣dience, in this forme and shape: and so these spirits are witches so called: because I suffer them in whom they remaine to have power, and so to bewitch them, that they come not to the know∣ledge of me: that is those in whom this power of darknesse rules, are so overpowred with darknesse, that they become fit subjects or bodies for me to execute my wrath upon them: which bodies being sensible of me the Lord, and of the glory, and happinesse of my sons and daughters, shal gnaw their tongues for paine, even in this world: so that the resurrection in Scripture mentioned is not a resurrection of the body out of the earth: but a resurrection of the the body from darkness to light, and from the wrath of me, to
the love and favour of me. For saith Christ, I am the resurrection and the life: so that the resurrection and life is Christ: that is so to be raised from the body of death and sin as to be anointed with the spi∣rit of God: and so to become new being dead before, and now to be alive, and ever to be with God. Free from apprehending God to be angry with us: but always feeling his divine power ruling in us and causing of us to see and look upon him as one that is well plea∣sed with us. FINIS.
