G1206 E12_1 99872787 125233
ΘΕΟΜΑΧΙΑ; OR THE GRAND IMPRUDENCE of men running the hazard of FIGHTING AGAINST GOD, In suppressing any Way, Doctrine, or Practice, concerning which they know not certainly whether it be from God or no. Being the substance of two Sermons, Preached in Colemanstreet, upon occasion of the late disaster sustain'd in the West. With some necessary Enlargements thereunto. By JOHN GOODVVIN, Pastor of the Church of God there. HEB. 10. 31. It is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the living God. MAT. 21. 44. Whosoever shall fall on (or, stumble at) this stone, shall be broken in pieces. Imprimatur. John Bachiler. LONDON; Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop entring into Popes-head Alley out of Lumbard-street. 1644.
READER; WE have an English saying, that the burnt childe dreads the fire. I have oft been cast into the fire of mens zealous indignations, by an uncleane spirit of calumnie and slander; Some have re∣ported, that I deny justification by Christ, i. that the Sun is up at noone day; Others, that I deny the immortalitie of the soule, i. that I murthered my father and my mother; Others, that I have preached against the Parliament and Assembly, i. that I am out of my wits, and weary of my present life, and carelesse of that which is to come. I per∣ceive there are more Sons of Belial, then those that wit∣nessed against Naboth, that he blasphemed God and the King.1 King. 21. 10. But having no vineyard to accommodate any man, I can∣not easily conceive, what men and their tongues meane to be still up in such unchristian contestations with me; ex∣cept this be it; Because I speak the truth, and men are not able to beare it; therefore they resolve (it seems) to make me speak such untruths, that I my selfe shall not be able to beare. I confesse, I doe not much dread this fire, made of the tongues of asps and vipers, not because I have not been sufficiently burnt by it, but partly because I have been a long time accustomed to such burnings, and have found them rather purifying, then consuming: partly, because the great Apostle informs me, that the way by which he passed into his glory, was through honour, and dishonour, through good2 Cor. . 8. report, and evill report. Yet neverthelesse, I had rather give an account of mine own words, then of other mens pre∣tending to be mine; and so to keep out of the fire, as farre as the peace and safety of my own soule and other mens, will suffer me. And this is the true account (Reader) of the publishing of these Sermons, which (haply) had not been an action so necessary otherwise. Understanding that the soule spirit, which hath for severall years haunted my
ministery, was beginning to practise upō ermons also, I thought it the safer course of the two, to put my self into the hands of the Truth (which yet perhaps will not much befirend me neither, in the thoughts and hearts of men, though with God, I am certain, it will) then to expose both it and my selfe to be rent and torne by him. What good, or hurt, they will or are like to doe, now they are gotten a∣broad, is not easie, either for thee, or me, so much as to con∣jecture. Be it in this, as God and men shall agree. When the danger of the disease runs high, there is little hope but onely in that physicke, whereof there is some feare. We are under a bondage of much misery, and it is onely the Truth (as our Saviour saith) that can make us free: and yetJoh. 8. 32. such is our condition and misery, that there is cause to feare, lest the Truth, which onely is able to make us free, should increase our bondage and misery, by being rejected and opposed by us, when it comes in love and mercy to vi∣sit us, and to blesse us out of our misery. For this end I was borne (as our Saviour saith of himself, Joh. 18. 37.) that I should beare witnesse to the truth, not to the opinions or ap∣prehensions of men. In which respect I know I am like to have the harder quarter and service in the world; but God hath made me a lover of men in such a degree, that I can willingly consecrate my selfe unto their service, through any sufferings from them. If this world faile me, I know God hath prepared another for a reserve, which will stand by me, and will not faile. Reader, take my prayers along with thee, and an honest heart of thine own; and so passe on to the Sermons before thee; doubtlesse they will either strengthen thy hand in the way thou art in, or guide thy feet into a way thou art not in, or at least qualifie thy spirit with christian patience and respects towards such a way. From my study in Colemanstreet, Octob. 2. 1644. Thine with an upright and single heart in Christ Jesus, JOHN GOODVVIN.
θεομαχια OR The Grand Imprudence of men, running the hazard of Fighting against God, in suppressing any Way, Doctrine, or Pra∣ctice, concerning which they know not certainly whether it be from God, or no. ACTS 5. 38. And now I say unto you, Refraine your selves from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsell or work be of men, it will come to nought; but if it be of God, yee can∣not destroy it, lest yee be found even fighters against God. WHen the Children of Israel, in the progresse of their Warres upon the Canaanites▪ wherein God had promised to be with them, and to give them successe, and that a man of their enemies should not be able to stand against them: notwith∣standing they fought under the prote∣ction of many such promises as these, yet met with a disaster and losse, thirty six of them being slaine by the men of Ai, and the rest of the partie ingaged in that service put to rout, and chased by their enemies: God himselfe upon the great dejection and solemne humiliation of the Elders of Israel, and Joshua their Generall, was pleased to make knowne unto him by speciall revelation, what root of bit∣ternesse
it was that brought forth this fruit of death, what sin by name it was amongst them, that had separated between him and them in their late sad miscarriage, yea, and would separate still, to their further and greater misery, except they took a course to make an atonement for themselves, by purging and clensing them∣selves from it. Onely the discovery or finding out of the person that had committed the sin, was put upon Joshua and the people; wherein yet againe they were directed by God to such a method or means for this discovery, that God himselfe may be said too to have discovered even the sinner also. For he it was, that by a spe∣ciall directing hand of his providence, caused the lot to fall upon Achan, who was the man that in taking the excommunicate thing, had fin'd that great and speciall provocation, which was fallen in this gust of wrath from Heaven upon the people. These things you shall finde related more at large Josh. 7. From which passages by the way (amongst many other very observable) you may take knowledge of these three things. First, That when God is at any time ingaged, and his hand in (as we use to say) shewing mercy and doing good to his peo∣ple, he is seldome or never wont to change or alter the tenour of his present dispensations, to break off the course of his grace by suffering evill to come upon them, but upon some speciall discon∣tent taken, from some speciall sin or other, one or more, commit∣ted by them. Secondly, That sometimes the sin of one or of some few, in a great societie or body of people, in the provocation or guilt of it, redounds and runs over to the involving and defiling of the whole societie, and rendring all the members thereof obnoxious to the displeasure of God. Thirdly, That the best, if not the onely way for the people of God, being under the disfavour of God, and stroke of his displea∣sure, to make atonement for themselves, and to recover his fa∣vour, is to make diligent search and strict inquiry, what that sin by name should be, which hath turned away the heart of their God from them, and accordingly to remove it. My Brethren, the case of the Children of Israel upon their losse neere unto the Citie of Ai, is our condition and case at this day; save onely that the hand of God hath been laid heavier upon us,
then it was upon them, in that breach. God had begun to doe great and gracious things for us, yea he had gon on for a good space together, treading and trampling downe the strength of our Enemies under us apace; insomuch, that wee began to take our Harps down from the willow trees, on which we had hung them, to prepare our selves to sing the song of Moses, the man of God: but loe on the suddaine wee are smitten back againe into the places of Dragons, and the God of our lives hath covered us with the shadow of Death. That vision of peace and good things which was let downe from heaven unto us, and was come so neere us, that wee began to arise, thinking none other but to fall to and eate pre∣sently; is now againe taken up from us into the heavens, and we have lost the sight of it. The best art and wisdome we can use to open the heavens over us, and cause them to deliver downe that treasure againe to us, to heale our present wound, if it be not dead∣ly, is to make as narrow a search, as strict an inquiry, as we can, what that particular and speciall sin or provocation amongst us is, the chastisement whereof is now upon us, and which hath brought the rod of this indignation upon our backs. If God him∣selfe would please by speciall revelation to make knowne what this sin is, as he did unto Joshua and the people of Israel, satisfaction in this point were at hand, nor should we need to abide the various and conjecturall discourses of men, Ministers or others, about the matter: But having perfected that standing Revelation of him∣selfe, the Scriptures, he refraines revelations extraordinary, and leaves his people to consult with these Oracles of his for resoluti∣on, in all such cases of Question and difficulty as this; onely pro∣mising the gracious assistance and guidance of his Spirit unto those that shall aske it of him, and not lay stumbling blocks in their way otherwise, to direct them in such dark and dubious inquiries as these. And one speciall end (I conceive) ayed at by that Au∣thority, which hath set apart this day for a solemne humiliation of our selves before God, was, that Ministers and people should joyne together in fervent prayer▪ and supplication unto God, that the one may be directed to make a true and unpartiall discovery of this inne, and the other judge of the discovery being made ac∣cordingly: that so the troubler of Israel being found out, execution may be done, and God pacified. In consideration whereof it is,
that I made choice of the Scripture read unto you, upon the pre∣sent occasion; Conceiving that very sin to be there described, yea, and expressed by name, (though somewhat more generall) which hath occasioned the sad interruption of late made in our hopefull proceedings, yea, and which in all likelihood wrought against us formerly, both in that blow which was reached us from heaven, in that as strange, as sorrowfull a defeat at Newark, and other∣wise; but was not then known or considered of. The Lord grant that yet at last it may enter into all our hearts to conceive aright, and to consider of it, lest it brings forth yet againe like bitter fruits, yea, and magnifies it selfe at last in our utter ruine and de∣struction. But let us addresse unto the words; and in them consider, first, their relation and coherence in the Context, and then their sense and meaning. For the former; the words are part of a speech made by one Gamaliel (as he is called ver. 34.) a Pharisee, and Doctor of the Law, in an Assembly or Councell at Jerusalem. The Councell (as appeares ver. 21. &c.) was called, about the A∣postles, their Doctrine and proceedings; the chief designe and intendment of it, was to consider and resolve what course to take with them, how to suppresse both them and their Doctrine, being both looked upon as prejudiciall to their personall and private in∣terests, both of honour and profit, in that State and Nation; and as likely to carry away the hearts and affections of much people from them. When they had sent for Peter and the other Apostles by a Captain with his Officers, to appeare before the Councell, the Prolocutor or chief Priest, charged them after this manner: ver. 28. Did not we straitly command you, that you should not teach in this Name? and yee have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, &c. When Peter and the other Apostles, standing stiffe to their tackling, had made their answer, fully justifying what they had done, and given a brief accompt of that Doctrine about which they were questio∣ned, and of their calling to preach and beare witnesse of the same unto the world; it is said (ver. 33.) that the Councell, seeing them upon those termes, hearing them speake at such a rate, burst in sun∣der for anger (as the former translation) or (as the latter hath it) were cut at the heart, and took counsell how to slay them. What? would they not submit to the Authority and advice of such a Reverend,
learned, and pious Assembly as that? Did they thinke themselves wiser then they? would they preach a Doctrine that should asperse them, and bring them out of credit and request with the peo∣ple? Such men as they were not meet to be tolerated in the State, nor yet to live; and therefore they would fall upon some course, how to free themselves, the State and Nation of them, and that must be in no lighter way, with no lower hand, then death it selfe, they must die for it. This (it seems) was the sense and resolution of the generality of the Assembly, untill one of them, (that Gamaliel we speake of) a man of a better temper and deeper reach then his fellowes, excited to speak, and assisted in speciall manner by God in speaking, by a grave Speech tending to moderation, qualified their spirits in part, and brought them to accept of somewhat a lighter attonement from the Apostles, for their supposed sin, then their lives would have amounted unto. For their spirits were so full of bitterness and indignation against them, that notwithstan∣ding all that Gamaliel could say, they were resolved to have their peniworths of them, (as we use to say) to ease themselves on them so far, as to cause them to be beaten, and withall, severely to charge them the second time, to give over preaching their erro∣neous and dangerous Doctrine, to speak no more in the name of Je∣sus, ver. 40. What the tenor of Gamaliels Speech was, from the be∣gining to the end of it, you may read, beginning at ver. 35. untill the end of 39. Men of Israel, take heed to your selves, what yee do to these men; as if he should have said, yee will but run a needlesse hazard of bringing evill, or ruine upon your selves by attempting any thing for the present, in a way of violence against these men; implying, that men had need take heed how they ingage themselves to suppresse, molest, or destroy any generation or sort of men whatsoever, untill they have a cleer and expresse warrant from heaven for the execution. To perswade them not to be too pre∣cipitate or forward in any course of violence against the Apostles, he declares to them by a double instance (well known unto them∣selves) that if they be seducers and evill men, and so worthy to be destroyed, God himself would in a short time, reveal his wrath from heaven against them, and bring them and their work to ruin. For thus he had done both formerly by one Ted, and more lately by Judas of Galilee; who projecting great matters for them∣selves
without any warrant or authority from God, though they went on, and seem'd for a while to prosper in their way, drawing great numbers of people after them, were yet, both they and all their complices and followers, by a speciall hand of God scat∣tered and brought to nought. Upon the mention of these two memorable examples of Divine justice against Seducers and De∣ceivers, he infers as followeth in the words read unto you. And now I say unto you, Refraine from these men, and let them alone, &c. This for the coherence. For the sense of the words (briefly) Refrain from, , that is, stand, or keep off from them, depart from them, go yee your way, and let them go their way; , let them alone, or suffer them, that is, (as some understand it) do not on∣ly forbeare persecuting of them your selves by your authority, but be no occasion that the Roman power any wayes interposeth to molest them: do not betray them into the hand of violence other∣wise; or else the doubling of the caution, may import the weigh∣tinesse of the matter in his apprehension that speaketh. However, by this double Caution or Item he gives unto them, not to have any thing to do (for the present) with the Apostles, in any way of molestation, he discovers an utter aversenesse in him to such pro∣ceedings. Wherefore he gives this reason further. For if this counsell or work be of men, it will come to nought] i. If the design which these men drive, with the method, course and means whereby they carry it on, hath no better foundation to bear it up, but either their own wisdomes, interest, and authority, or some other mens, , it will be dissolved, or come to nought, it will soon discover its originall by its end, if it were taken out of the dust, to dust it will return; and they that are ingaged in it, will fall and sink with it. But if it be from God] i. If it be countenan∣ced or authorized by God, if he be the Founder of it; Yee cannot destroy or dissolve it, lest, &c. i. you must not, or you ought not, to attempt any thing against it to destroy or dissolve it, because by such an attempt as this, you will do no better then fight against God. Yee cannot] viz. lawfully, or wisely, or upon any good ground. There is a double impotency, or impossibility often mentioned in Scripture; the one we may call naturall, or physicall, the other mo∣rall.
With the first kinde of impossibility, things are said to be un∣possible, when there wants a naturall or executive principle of strength or power in any kind to do them: with the latter, that is said to be unpossible for a man to do, for the doing wherof he hath no ground or warrant either in the Word of God, or in reason or equity, though he hath never so much naturall strength or power to do it. Of this latter kind, the Apostle Paul speaketh, 2 Cor. 13. 8. where he saith, that hee could do nothing against the truth, but for the truth; meaning, that he had no ground or warrant, either from God, or otherwise, to do any such thing. So again, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Yee cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of the Devill; i. yee cannot do it lawfully; or with any congruity either to the prin∣ciples of Christianity, or of sound reason. Of this kind of impo∣tency or impossibility, that common saying in the Civill Law spea∣keth, Id tantum possumus, quod jure possumus. Of the other kind, we have many instances also; I spake to thy Disciples to cast him out, but they could not (Mar. 9. 18.) i. they wanted an executive principle or power, whereby to do it: otherwise it was lawfull enough for them to have done it. So again, Mar. 6. 19. and Mar. 2. 4. besides many other. Destroy or dissolve it] i. do or attempt any thing to destroy it. Not only the endevours and attempts, but even the purposes and intents of doing things, are often in Scripture expressed by words, which properly signifie the doing or effecting the things them∣selves. Many good works (saith our Saviour, Joh. 10. 32) have I shewed you from my Father: for which of these works do you stone me? i. do you intend, or go about to stone me? for they had not yet actual∣ly stoned him. Thus Heb. 11. 17. Abraham is twice said to have offered up his son Isaac, because he was fully intended, and had at∣tempted to offer him. Besides many the like: So here, you cannot destroy it, i. you ought not, you cannot with reason go about or attempt the destroying of it.—Lest you be found even fighters against God; meaning, that in case the Doctrine and way of those men, against whom they were incensed, should be from God, and they nevertheless seek to destroy them, they would by such a course dash themselves against such a stone as would break them to pieces; they would be found even to fight against God. That causall particle, , lest, doth not alwayes note a hazard, or uncertainty of an
effect or consequent; but many times signifies as much as , ut non, and is us'd as well to signifie the dependance as well of a cer∣tain and necessary, as of a contingent effect, upon its cause:  So See M. . 6 a  1.  here, you cannot destroy it, lest you be found, &c. i. if you attempt to destroy it, you will be found, &c. Be found  The word  to be found, in such a constructi∣on as this, oft notes the unexpectednesse of somewhat befalling a person, whether in respect of his own, or other mens expectations. Thus it is said of the Virgin Mary, that before Joseph and she came together, , she was FOƲND with child, meaning, beyond, or contrary to expectation. So Luk. 9. 36. whereas Moses and Elias were immediately before the voyce from heaven, taken notice of by the Apostles to have been present with Christ upon the mount, as soone as ever the voyce was past, it is said of him, , he was found alone, to imply that Moses and Elias were withdrawn before the Apostles were aware, or thought of it. To passe by other instances for this importance of the word; it is said of Babylon the Great▪ (Rev. 18. 24.) that in her was found () the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slain up∣on the earth; meaning, that whereas this City had till now thought her self the most religious City under heaven, the Mother and Pa∣troness of Prophets and Saints, an enemy only unto Heretiques and persons hatefull unto God; now when God came to call her to an account, and to enter into judgement with her, contrary to her expectation and opinion of her self, she was discovered and evicted to have been the most cruell and bloody enemy that ever Prophets or Saints had, yea, and further, a principall Actress in the slaugh∣ter of many millions otherwise. So Gamaliel, expressing himself thus to the Councell, lest you be FOƲND even fighters against God; gives them to understand, that how holy, wise, or just soever they might seem in their own eyes, yea, and might think themselves the furthest of any men under heaven from practising or fighting against God, yet if they went on with their present intentions and resolutions against the men they had now before them, they might fall into this heavie guilt and condemnation, when they thought least of it. The heaviness of which guilt is further implyed, in that emphaticall particle , even▪ even fighters against God; which particle of speech in such constructions as this, is intensive in an
high degree, and still imports somewhat very remarkable in what is joyned with it. In such an importance as this, you shall find it used, Matth. 12. 8. for the son of man is Lord , even of the Sabbath; meaning, that this was a very transcendent Lordship indeed, and such as was incompatible unto any, but unto him who need count it no robbery to be equall with God. So Mar. 13. 22. and elsewhere. Thus Gamaliel admonishing his Colleagues, to consider well what they did, lest they should be found EVEN figh∣ters against God, plainly intimates unto you, that this is one of the worst stones in the world to stumble at, and that no improvi∣dence or inconsiderateness whatsoever besides, is like to make any such breach upon the comfort and peace of the creature, as for men to ingage themselves in any such action or course, wherein they shall be found fighters against God. , Fighters against God]. Every act of sin, especially with knowledge and consent of will, is (in a sense) a fighting against God: but that sin which Gamaliel here intends in his expression of fighting against God, is a sin of an higher nature then ordinary, as appeares by the particle , even, joyn'd with it, and formerly opened. Therefore by fighting against God (in this place) must needs be meant some high and peremptory action or ingagement of the creature, wherein it opposeth God in some speciall or re∣markable design, which he seeketh either to set on foot, or else to carry on in the world, whether the opposer knowes it to be a de∣signe of God's or no. And thus the propagating of that Doctrine, which the Apostles preached, being a designe of God, the opposi∣tion of the councell against it, especially with so high an hand as the crushing, or slaying of the Apostles, who were appointed by God to publish it, would have been, was, and would have been very properly, a fighting against God. The words explain'd, are matter ready prepared for Doctrine and observation. Onely one word (by the way) for Answer to that Question; What authoritie, weight, or credit, is to be given to that which Gamaliel delivers in this speech of his to the Coun∣cell? Whether may we build upon every thing, or any thing, spo∣ken by him, as authorized by God? I answer; 1. That there is little question to be made, but that the Spirit
of the man, was in speciall manner touch'd and stirr'd up by the Spirit of God, to interpose in the behalfe of the Apostles, as he did; as the spirit of Nicodemus (another branch of the same root) formerly had been, to stand up and speake in the behalfe of Christ, Joh. 7. 51. 2. The principall end and scope of what he spake, being the rescuing of the Apostles from the bloudy Counsells of those who had concluded their death, and were consulting about the execu∣tion; plainly sheweth, that there was more of God then ordina∣ry in the thing, especially if we consider further, that he who thus inexpectedly appeared with shield and buckler for the Apostles de∣fence, was of that sect or generation of men, who generally hated and opposed the Doctrine of Christ with more inveterate and vi∣perous malignitie of spirit, then any other. 3. Evident it is, 1. that the intent, end, and scope of Gamaliel in this speech to the Councell, being the bringing of the Apostles from the bloudy rage and violence of men, was good, and agreea∣ble to the will and word of God. And 2. as evident likewise it is, that the speech it selfe, in the whole carriage, and in all the passa∣ges of it, is duly, and with all exactnesse of wisdome and prudence, proportioned to the end, and tends in a direct and regular way to effect it. Now whatsoever directly and regularly tends to the ef∣fecting of that which is good, must needs be good, and conse∣quently from God. That which is good may occasionally and by some collaterall influence of Providence, be brought to passe, by means that are evill; but in a regular and direct way, it can onely be produced by that which is good. There is no more friendship or fellowship naturally, between good ends and ill means, then is between light and darknesse, Christ and Belial. But 4. (and lastly) There being nothing in all this speech (ex∣cepting onely the historicall instances, the truth of which, it seems,Interim or acu∣li instar nobis esse debet, quòd Dei cōsilia nul∣lis omm vi∣ribus imped re¦posse, humana verò suá spn∣te collabi disci∣mus. Gual. Ho∣mil. 37. an Act. was generally knowne among the Jews, and is attested by Jose∣phus their great Historian) but what is fully consonant with the word of God, (unquestionably so acknowledged) elsewhere, the credit and authority of it, for matter of truth, is one and the same with those other Scriptures corresponding with it. What we here learne (saith Gualter upon the place) should be unto us as an Oracle, viz. that the counsells of God are not to be defeated or hindred by any
strength of man; but for the counsells of men, they fall, and sink, and come to nothing of themselves. In the words, there be these six ensuing Points of Doctrine, faire and large, besides many others of a more collaterall and illa∣tive observation. First, From those words, ver. 38. And now I say unto you, Re∣fraine from these men, and let them alone: for, &c. Observe, that it is a point of much wisdome to forbeare the oppression, or suppression of such persons, Doctrines, and wayes, which men have any reasonable cause at all to judge or thinke, that they are, or may be, from God. Secondly, From those doubtfull expressions of so great a Do∣ctor of the Law, and one that knew how to measure and estimate the Authoritie and weight of a Councell-determination, and be∣sides can no wayes be suspected of any disaffection or prejudicate∣nesse against such Authoritie, from those doubtfull expressions (I say) of this man, If this counsell or work be of men, &c. And againe, If it be of God, &c. Observe, That the determination of a Councell, or of the major part of a Councell against a way, Doctrine, or practice, is no de∣monstrative or sufficient proofe for any wise man to rest or build upon, that such a way, Doctrine, or practice, are not from God. The whole Councell, as you heard, this one man excepted, had peremptorily concluded the Doctrine and practice of the Apostles, to be, not from God, but from men, and thereupon were in high consultati∣on to suppresse them, and that by death; yet all this did not satis∣fie Gamaliel in point of judgement or conscience, he was still but where he was, doubtfull and in suspence with himselfe about the businesse. Thirdly, From that clause, If this counsell or work be from men, it will come to nought] Observe, that every invention, contrivance, way, or device of man, especially in things either appertaining or pretend∣ing to appertaine unto God, in matters of Religion, will in time weare out into nothing and be dissolved. Fourthly, From the Connexion or dependance between the for∣mer and latter parts of ver. 39. But if it be from God, yee cannot de∣stroy it, lest, &c. Observe, That for any man, or men, to attempt the sup∣pression of any Doctrine, way, or practise that is from God, is to fight a∣gainst God himselfe. Fiftly, From that significant phrase or expression, of being
FOVND fighters against God, ver. 39. Observe, that many, who pos∣sibly for the present may conceive and thinke, and that with much confi∣dence, that they fight for God, when the truth comes to an unpartiall and perfect scanning, will be found to have fought against him. Sixtly, (and lastly) From the importance and weight of that emphaticall particle, even, in the last clause, Lest yee be found EVEN fighters against God; Observe, that fighting against God, is a most dan∣gerous posture or ingagement, for a creature to be taken or found in by God at any time. The dread and terror of such a misprision as this, is the base and ground-work upon which Gamaliel builds the fa∣brick of that important counsell and advice, which he gives un∣to his fellows, thoroughout his discourse or speech made unto them. We shall for the present (passing by all the rest) pitch upon that Doctrine mentioned in the fourth place, the tenor and effect whereof was this; That for any man to endeavour or attempt the sup∣pression of any Doctrine, practice, or way, which is from God, is to fight against God himselfe. For the sense and true import of the Doctrine, I shall need to adde little beyond what was said, in explication of the words; here we briefly shewed what was meant by fighting against God. I now onely adde this, (which is somewhat more particular) that it is not every degree or kind of opposing a way, Doctrine, or de∣signe of God, which either the text, or the Doctrine calleth a fighting against God; but onely such an opposing which is peremp∣tory, and carried on with an high hand, so that those Agents or Instruments of God, which he hath anointed to hold forth that way, Doctrine, or Designe of his in the world, are not suffered to execute their Commission, but are countermanded either by the Authoritie or over-bearing strength and power of men. It is one thing to oppose, or contend against a Doctrine or way of God, per modum Doctoris, as when a Minister through a mistake or weak∣nesse of judgement, pleads for Baal against God, preacheth error up, and truth downe, which may befall the best and faithfullest of men: another, to doe it per modum Judicis, as when men will as∣sume an Authoritative power, whether Ecclesiastique or Civill, to suppresse or silence the publishing, practising, arguing, or debating of such wayes or Doctrines, with the judgements and consciences
of men. It is true, even this kind of opposing them, is sometimes incident to men otherwise upright in the maine before God: but the children of this contention and contestation against their Ma∣ker, must expect to be taught rore wisdome and reverence towards him, with briars and thornes. If men fight against God after any such manner as this, upon such termes as if they were Gods too, this will ingage him to take up armes also in his own defence, and provoke him to fight against those, who fight against him. This for opening the Doctrine. For the confirmation of the truth of it, wee shall not need to cause many Scriptures to labour: the word will be sufficiently esta∣blished in the mouth of two or three of these Witnesses. Why doePsal. 2. 1, 2▪ 3. the Heathen rage, (saith David) and the people imagine a vaine thing? The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsell toge∣ther against the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us, &c. Those expres∣sions, of raging, setting themselves, taking counsell together against the Lord and his Anointed, amount every whit as much as to a fighting against the Lord. And what was it, that the Heathen, people, Kings, and Rulers of the Earth, did, or attempted to doe against the Lord and against his Anointed; (meaning Christ) Was it any thing else but to quench that fire, which Christ (as himselfe saith) came to kindle, to suppresse the Gospel, to cut off those wayes of righteous∣nesse and holinesse from the knowledge and practise of men, which are therein recommended and held forth unto the world? These are the bands, which they set themselves thus to cut asunder, and the cords, which, if it had been possible, they would have cast from them. Saul, Saul, (saith the Lord Christ from Heaven unto him, as he was travailing towards Damascus) Why perse∣cutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest, &c. Act. 9. 4, 5. To persecute Christ (and consequenly, God himselfe, who is in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.) im∣ports every whit as much, as to fight against Christ, and somewhat more. But why is Saul here charged with persecuting Christ? What course of hostilitie did he run or practice against him? It is said (ver. 2.) that he desired Letters of the high Priest to Damascus to the Synagogues, that if he found any of this WAY, whether they were men, or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. Whereby it appears,
that the precise opposition against Christ, upon which Saul was arrested from Heaven (as we heard) under the termes of persecuting him, was his attempting with so high and bloudy an hand, to de∣stroy out of the world that WAY of worshipping & serving God, which Christ in his Gospel recommends unto, and chargeth up∣on the world. Men and women were not the precise and formall object of his hatred and persecution, but that way of Christ in the Gospel, which they maintained, practised, and taught, who were persecuted by him. If he could have told how otherwise to have gotten this WAY out of their hearts, tongues, and lives, and con∣sequently out of the world, then by molesting, vexing, and perse∣cuting them, it is not like that he would have proceeded against them, with so rough and cruell an hand. It is said (Revel. 12. 7.) That there was warre in Heaven; Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon; and the Dragon fought, and his Angels. Whether Michael in this Scripture be Christ himself, (as ancient Interpreters gene∣rally carried it) or some prime Angel appointed by Christ, to be as a Generall or Head to his Saints and servants, in those warres and fiery conflicts, wherein they were for a long time engaged a∣gainst Satan, and his bloudy Agents in the Roman Empire, (as some later Expositors conceive) is not much materiall. But it is here expresly said, that the Dragon and his Angels, that is, the Devill and his Instruments, ignorant and bloud-thirsty-men, fought, viz. against Michael and his Angels, i. against Christ himselfe in those appointed by him to hold forth the way and Gospel of his King∣dome unto the world. But why, or how are they said to have fought against Christ? What was their ingagement or attempt a∣gainst him? Questionlesse nothing else but the extirpation and e∣jection of the Doctrine and Way of his Gospel out of the world, by the torments, slaughter and ruine of those who professed them, and by this profession, gave them a speciall subsistence and beeing in the world. For that rule, Doctrine, or way, which is not pra∣ctised or professed in the world, languisheth, and is little better then dead. I adde but one Scripture more, and then I have done with the proofe of the Point, in this kind. Then cometh the end (saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 24.) when he (i. Christ) shall have delivered up the Kingdome to God even the Father, when he shall have put downe all rule, and all authoritie and power. Why the end should not
be, untill Christ hath put downe all rule, and all authoritie and power, i. all kinds of rule, Authoritie and power; this reason is rendred, ver. 25. For he must reigne, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. I demand, why should all rule, all Authoritie and power, as well Ec∣clesiasticall as Civill, be looked upon, as enemies unto Christ? What is the enmity or hostilitie they exercise against him? Doubt∣lesse no lawfull rule, Authoritie, or power, are enemies to Christ, either in their nature or institution, but are confederate with him. It is their degeneration in their exercise and actings, that renders them of an hostile interpretation to him. There is none of them all but is apt ever and anon to be fighting against him, and that by some peremptory and stiffe opposing and suppressing some way, Doctrine, or practise of his, where they have to doe. And this is the quarrell which the Lord Christ hath to the whole fraternitie or association of them; for this he counts them his enemies. The reasons of the point, which we shall briefly touch, are three: First, He that attempts or seeks by an high hand to suppress anyReason 1. Doctrine, Way or Practice which is from God, may well be con∣ceived and said to fight against God, because he opposeth, and that with vehemence and might, the will of God, and that in a very considerable act, motion, or desire of it. There is no Way, Do∣ctrine, or Practice, which is from God, but his will stands strongly bent for the propagation and spreading of it in the world. I amLuk. 1. 49. come (saith Christ) to send (or, cast) fire on the earth: and what WILL I, (or, what is my desire, as the former translation had it) if it be already kindled? meaning, that his desire to see the Gospel on foot, to see it well taken, and sufficiently rooted in the world, was so great, that when he once saw it, he cared not how soon he left the world. So Luke 22. 15. And he said unto them, With desire have I desired to eat this passeover with you, before I suffer: mean∣ing that he even longed to erect and found that great Ordinance of the Supper, for the use and benefit of the world in after times, before he left the world. Many other Scriptures there are that speak this over and over, viz. that the heart and soul of God are firmly and deeply set within him, to have such Wayes, Doctrines and Ordinances as come from him, published, maintained, prea∣ched, and held forth unto the world. Therefore they who in∣gage themselves with all their strength, and all their might, to re∣sist
this will of his in the accomplishment of it, what do they else but fight against him? Secondly, Hee that magnifies himself to suppresse, quash, orReason 2. keep down any way, Practice or Counsell which is from God, pro∣portionably opposeth the glory of God, and doth what in him lies, to keep God from being magnified in the hearts and lives of men, at least as far as that Way, Practice or Counsell which hee seeks to suppress, tends to such a magnification of him. And will this, being weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary, be found any whit lighter, then a fighting against God? Certain it is, that God hath (as it were) a stock of glory in the hand of every Way, Do∣ctrine and Practice, which he recommends unto the world; yea, in all and every of these, he hath a peculiar designe for the exal∣tation of his Name. The beauty of the Lord is said to be seen, or to be beheld in the Wayes and Ordinances of his House, or Temple. Psal. 27. 4. There is no way or truth of God, but carries an im∣pression in it of some lineament or other of the glory and loveli∣ness of his face. So again, Psal. 67. The Prophet having (ver. 1.) petitioned that at the hand of God, which (ver. 2.) might make his way to be known on earth, &c. he breaks out (ver. 3.) in this pro∣pheticall strain, Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee; clearly implying, that the way of God being published, and made known to the world, is that which increaseth the Re∣venues of the throne of Heaven, raiseth and procureth new con∣tributions of praise and glory from men unto God. So then he that shall rise up to oppose the God of Heaven in any of those methods, counsels or projections of his, whereby he projects the exaltation and advancement of his own great Name and Glory in the world, may in as proper a sense, as the phrase lightly will bear, be said to fight against God; especially, if we consider but this one thing further: that Gods glory is his darling, his unica, his only one, (as David cal'd his life, Eripe à gladio animam meam, a cane uni∣cam meam, Ps. 22. 21.) it is the only life which he lives in the world; it is the only apple that his soul careth to eat of, out of that great Orchard which he hath planted (I mean the world.) Therefore doubtless, he that shall oppose him in his gathering of this fruit, hath the greater sin. Thirdly, (and lastly) there is in every thing that proceeds or de∣rivesReason 3.
its originall or being from another, somewhat of the nature, property, or spirit of that, from which it takes this rise or spring of its being: there is somewhat of the father in the childe, of the root in the fruit and in the branches, &c. In like manner, in every Way, Doctrine or Practice which is from God, there is somewhat of God himself. The very substance, frame and constitution of them, at least that which is operative, quickning and spirituall in them, what is it but a kinde of heavenly composition, the ingre∣dients whereof are the holiness, wisdome, mercy, goodness and bounty of God? and what are these, and every of them, but God himself? Every Ordinance or Way of God, is (as it were) a be∣nigne constellation of these stars unto the world; out of the midst of which he gives a gracious aspect of himself, and communicates those sweet and rich influences of himselfe, light, and life, and strength, and peace, and joy, unto the world. It is said, (1 King. 19. 11.) that the Lord neither was in the strong wind that rent the mountains, nor yet in the earthquake that followed it, nor in the fire that came after that; but after these there came a still voyce, wherein it is implied, that the Lord was. The meaning is, that God had neither prepared or intended, either the wind, earthquake or fire, by, or out of which to impart himself unto his Prophet Elijah; he had only prepared and sanctified the still and soft voyce for such a purpose as this; and therefore he is expresly denyed to have been in any other, and consequently supposed to have been in this. In such a sense or manner as God was in this still voyce, he is in every Way, Doctrine, and Ordinance of his; in, by, and out of all and every of these, he communicates and imparts himself graciously unto the world. Therefore whosoever shall fight against any of these, by seeking to supplant, suppress, or keep them down, that they may not run and be glorified in the world, what do they else, let this work and course of theirs be truly interpreted, but fight against God himself? We have done with the Reasons of the Doctrine; we shall con∣clude with somewhat by way of use and application. First, by way of Instruction: If to attempt the suppression or keeping down, any Way, Doctrine, or Practice which is from God, be of no less concernment, of no safer interprepation, then a fighting against God, then certainly it is the greatest imprudence
or improvidence under heaven, for any man, or rank of men what∣soever, to appear, especially in any hgh-handed opposition or con∣testation against any Way, Doctrine, or Practice whatsoever, un∣till they have proof upon proof, demonstration upon demonstra∣tion, evidence upon evidence; yea, all the security that men in an ordinary way (at least) are capable of, that such Wayes or Do∣ctrines only pretend unto God as the author of them, and that in truth, they are not at all from him, but either from men, or of a baser parentage. For what do men by such a practice and ingage∣ment of themselves as this, but run an apparent hazard, of dashing their foot against that stone, at which Paul stumbled, (when time was) yea, and without the highest hand of mercy that was ever lift up to save a mortall man, had been utterly broken to pieces by it? It is a hard thing for thee (saith the Lord by a voyce fromActs 9. heaven to him) , to kick or dash thy self against sharp goads or nails, made of steele or iron, (for so the word signifies) meaning that his undertaking or setting himselfe with such violence, to suppresse that way which Christ had a purpose to advance and set up in the world, was an enterprise of the sorest and most grievous consequence and portendance to him, in the nature of it, that ever he could have lift up either heart, or head, or hand unto. Vho ever hath been fierce against him (saith Job, speak∣ing of God) and hath prospered? Job 9. 4. He that is fierce against any Way or Doctrine which is from God, makes a covenant with sorrow and trouble, which is like to stand. And (to make the best of such a doubtfull and blind ingagement) put the case that that Way or Doctrine, which men shall prosecute with so much vio∣lence and fiercenesse of spirit, shall in conclusion be found to have been mistaken, erroneous, and not from God: yet . In this case men shall but offer the sacrifice of fooles, a kinde of sacrifice, wherewith God is not delighted. The Athenians wor∣shipped the true God, as appeares by those words of the Apostle unto them, Act. 17. 23. Whom yee then ignorantly worship, him sew I unto you; and yet were Idolaters notwithstanding. The same A∣postle beares record unto his Country-men the Jewes, That they hadRom. 10. 2. the zeale of God; but this zeale of theirs not being according to know∣ledge, in the prosecution of it, they neither pleased God, and were con∣trary to all men, forbidding the Apostles to preach unto the Gentiles, that
they might be saved, to fulfill their sins alwayes; because wrath was come upon them to the uttermost, Thes. 2. 15, 16. The beast under the Law, though it were a first-borne, yet was not to be sanctified or of∣fered unto the Lord, if it were either lame, or blind, Deut. 15. 19. 21. Nor was any man, though of Aarons seed, admitted to serve at the Altar, that had any blemish or imperfection of blindnesse on him, Levit. 21. 17, 18. God regards no mans zeale without knowledge, though it should pitch and fasten upon things, never so agreeable unto his will: nor doth he care that his enemies themselves should be destroyed, but upon lawfull triall and conviction. Secondly, Whatsoever Doctrine or way is recommended and tendered unto men in the Name of God, whether either the one or the other be from God or no, yet he expects from men (as well he may) that reverence and regard unto that Great Name of his, wherein such things are brought and tendered unto them, that they should be diligently considered, and due proofe and examina∣tion made, whether they be from him, or no, before they be reje∣cted, and much more before opposed. And certainly men doe but pollute and prophane that ever-blessed Name of God, by making refuse, yea abomination (as many doe) of such things as are brought unto them in that Name, before they know upon any considerable grounds or terms of knowledge, whether the things be indeed from God, or no; yea, though the things thus rejected should at last be found worthy of no better entertainment, as ha∣ving no agreement with God, or his Word. The event or issue in this case, though it should fall out to the best for such men, will ve∣ry little case or qualifie their sin. Shall not that wicked tyrant and enemy of God, Eglon, rise up in judgement, and condemne that genera∣tion of men we now speak of, who, when Ehud onely signified that he had a message from God unto him, did not presently reject the mes∣sage before he knew it, or fall foule upon the messenger, but (as the Text saith, Judg. 2. 20.) arose up from his throne, addressing him∣selfe in that deportment of Reverence to receive it? Thirdly, (and lastly) It is extreme madnesse in men to run the hazard we speake of, I meane of fighting against God, in seeking to suppresse such waies or courses as they are not able to demonstrate, but that they are waies of God indeed, because, in case they be not the waies of God, he himselfe will give testimony from Heaven a∣gainst
them in due time, he will suppresse and scatter them, and bring them to nought: and then there will be no danger for men to reject and abhorre them. Dearly beloved (saith the Apostle, Rom. 12. 19.) avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, i. unto the wrath of God, whose just avenging hand is lift up against those that wrong you, and deale unjustly with you, and is ready to smite for your sakes; as it followeth: For it is written, Vengeance is mine: I will repay, saith the Lord. It were great folly in any man, to expose himselfe to the just offence and displeasure of God, by seeking to right himselfe in an angry and revengefull manner upon him, whom he certainly knows hath injur'd him, God himselfe being ready with his stroke of justice to do him right, and to avenge him on his adversary, though he himselfe should be patient and it still. But it would be a point yet of seven-times greater folly then so, for a man to fall foule in a way of revenge upon an imaginary ad∣versary, and who (at most) can onely be supposed or suspected to have done him wrong, considering that God who is an infalli∣ble discerner and judge of injuries and wrongs, and withall a just Avenger of all such things, will shortly appeare for his full vindi∣cation, in case he hath been wronged indeed. Nor hath any man cause in this case to feare, lest whilst the grasse grows, the seed should starve, (as the Proverb is) I meane, that the person injured, whe∣ther really or in supposition onely, should suffer losse, by possessing his soule in patience, untill the day of divine recompence and ven∣geance shall come. For God certainly will give full and ample consideration for all forbearance and long-suffering of men, wherein and whereby the rights of his Throne are tendered and maintained. It were no lesse then an exaltation of folly in any man, to expose his own life to the stroke of justice, by assaulting the life of a malefactor whilst he is going to execution. Againe, secondly, (by way of Instruction) If to attempt the destruction or suppression of any Doctrine, or way, which is from God in so high and peremptory a manner, as was formerly ex∣pressed, be a fighting against God, take we knowledge from hence also, what in by name in all likelihood (at least) and with high∣est pregnancy of conjecture, it is, which ever and anon thus sepa∣rates between God and us, which still troubles our proceedings, and makes the Sun of our peace to goe so often backwards in the
Heavens thereof. Is there not a fighting against God amongst us, as well as a fighting for him? and doe we not pull downe by the one, what we build up by the other? Are not the hearts, and the heads, and the hands of farre the greatest part of men amongst us, inga∣ged, and that to the highest of all bitternesse, hatred, and enmity, against that Way of ordering the things of God's worship, and of governing his Churches and Saints, which hath been, and still is held forth in his Name unto this Nation, by some Embassadors and Messengers of his of a very choice anoynting, and indued with strength from on High, (many of them) as it were on pur∣pose to stand by some such way or counsell of God, untill it had throughly taken the hearts, and judgements, and consciences of men; besides many thousands more, and those (for the most part) of the best and choicest servants of God amongst us? Is not this WAY blasphemed and spoken against; yea, is not the de∣struction and ruine of it, with the grinding of the faces and brea∣king of the bones, with the suppression and crushing of those that hold it forth unto us, consulted, studied, and attempted by some that would be thought Pillars and prime men in the House and Temple of God? And have they not a great vote of the generality of people, who know little of God, or his Wayes, concurring with them, to strengthen their hand herein? May we not say of this WAY, as the Jews sometimes said unto Paul, concerning the Do∣ctrine of Christ which he preached, with those that professed it; We know that this Sect is every where spoken against? Act. 28. 22. SoActs 18. 2 then in case it ever shall appeare, or be found to be a WAY of God, we are in a Praemunire for the present, and have forfeited our peace, help and comfort in God, as touching deliverance from our pre∣sent dangers and miseries, by this our fighting against him. I pre∣sume you will all readily acknowledge and confesse, that if there be such a sin ruling and aigning amongst us, as fighting against God, this of all other is like to be the Achan, the Troubler of our Israel; that betrays our armies, our faithfull and valiant men into the hands of their and our enemies, and that makes us ever and anon, retrograde in our motions and tendencies towards rest and peace. Whoever hathJob 9. 4. hardened himself against him (saith Job, as wee heard before) and prospered? If this be but granted, it is enough to demonstrate our case and condition to be very dangerous and doubtfull▪ at the best:
For whether that WAY we speak of, which is so generally tro∣den and trampled upon like clay and mire in the streets, as well by the foot of ignorance and prophanenesse, as of learning and bet∣ter accomplishment, be the WAY of God, or no; most certain it is, that all the wit, wisdome, parts, learning, judgement, that have encountered and opposed it hitherto, have not been able by any demonstrative or concluding proofe, to overthrow that title or claim which it maketh unto God as the author and founder of it. Therefore unto me it is a thing of the saddest consideration un∣der heaven, and of more grievous portendance unto us, then any thing else, (as far as I am able to discern) that we should hang the great weight of the peace and safety of a whole Nation, all our hopes and expectations of help and assistance from God in our greatest extremities, upon the brittle pin of so doubtfull a dispu∣tation, as that which is maintained, and yet depending, between the one WAY and the other. For in case that way against which the spirits of men are so generally and fiercely bent, shall at last be found to be the Way of God, we are all this while look'd upon from heaven as fighters against God, and so have as good as given hostages to our enemies, that we never mean to prosper, or do any great thing against them. Whereas, if men would but follow Ga∣maliels counsell in the Text, and refrain themselves for a season from laying either violent hands, or tongues upon this way, un∣till God had either untied or cut the knot, till he had given sen∣tence against it, the doubtfulnesse of the disputation, need not, would not be prejudiciall in the least, either to our present proceedings, or future peace: and men do but make themselves wise above that which is written; yea, above that which is either reason or faith, to think, or speak otherwise. If it be objected, that Reformation suffers and loseth time, be∣cause that Way is not yet hedgd up with thorns, but men are suf∣fered to walk in it. I answer, First, If the Way be one of those wayes which call God Father; Reformation indeed suffers, and loseth time, but not because this Way is not hedg'd up with thorns, but because it is not laid more open, because it is not repaired and made more passable by the favour and countenance of men in place, whether Ministers or others; that so the people of God, whose hearts are towards it, may walk therein without fear.
2. That reformation (so called) which is the apple of so many eyes, and the joy of so many hearts, needs suffer nothing, nor lose an hours time, though the Way we speak of, be occupied in peace by those, whose feet by the light of Gods Word and Spirit (at least as they conceive) are guided into it. For what doth the poor Flie sitting on the top of the wheele to hinder the waggoner from dri∣ving on his way? If the residue of the Nation be subjected to this Reformation, the Nation it self may be said to be reformed (ac∣cording to such a denomination, as this Reformation will af∣ford) notwithstanding such a number of persons (comparatively so inconsiderable, I mean as touching their In severall populous towns in the Low Coun∣tries, scarce e∣very 5th, nay, not every 8th person (as I have been credibly in∣formed) is immembred▪ into any of their Chur∣ches, and yet the govern∣ment of the Nation is re∣puted Pres∣byteriall. 1 Joh. 5. 19. number) as adhere to this Way, be not concluded in it. During the regency of Prelaticall extravagancy, there were many Non-conformists; yea, severall Congregations of people in the land, who openly disclaimed and protested against that government; and yet the Nation was look'd upon as Episcopally reformed, notwithstanding. The irregularity of the mountains and valleys in the surface of the earth, troubles no mans opinion concerning the perfect roundnesse of it, because it is swallowed up into victory by the vastnesse of the globe. John saith▪ that this whole world lyeth in wickednesse, notwithstanding a remnant who were born of God. The gleanings of Independency (so called) will not hinder the vintage of Presbytery. 3. If a complete Nationall Reformation be indeed the Gar∣land or Crown that is contended for, let but Presbyterie bestir her self, and act her part within her Jurisdiction, with as much dili∣gence, wisdome and faithfulness, as the Congregationall Way will un∣dertake to act hers amongst her Proselytes; and there will not be the least occasion to fear, but that the whole and entire body of the Nation will shine with the beauty and lustre of a perfect Re∣formation. If this Way shall be found tardy, or loose, and not to keep pace with her sister in carrying on the work of Reformati∣on, even her enemies themselves being Judges, let her suffer; yea, let her with her children be cast out of doors. Therefore it is but a frivolous and putid slander cast upon her, when she is charged with enmity to Reformation: But, 4. (And lastly) I would gladly know, what, or what manner of Reformation can reasonably be expected, or hoped for, with∣out her. Such a Reformation, as that whereby that Angel
of darknesse, Satan is reformed, when he is transformed into an An∣gel of light (as the Apostle speaketh) is no reformation of desires:2 Cor. . 14. open loosenesse and prophaneness reformed into Pharasaicall hy∣pocrisie, brings in little to religion. For what saith our Saviour of such a Reformation as this? Verily I say unto you, that Publicans and Harlots go before you into the Kingdom of God. If then such a reforma∣tionMat 21. 31. as this should take place, it is much to be feared, that when the Genealogie of it shall be sought, it will be found to be of the house and linage of that Reformation, which the Scribes and Pha∣risees attempted in the world, when they compassed Sea and Land toMat. 23. 15. make one Proselyte; and when he was made, they made him twofold more a child of hell, then he was before; yea, then they were themselves; Or, what is the Reformation, wherein the Way we speak of, can∣not be admitted to have either part or fellowship? Will it take the members of an Harlot, and make them the members of Christ, whether either Christ or such members themselves, will or no? Or will it un∣dertake to reconcile darkness with light, to settle a communion be∣twixt Christ and Belial, to throw down the partition wall, and make the wildernesse of the world the garden of God, the Church and the world, enter-commoners? Or what is the glory or great∣nesse of the design of it, that the Congregationall Way is counted unworthy to be so much as a stander by, and to behold it? Will it lift up its hand, to quash and crush, to break the hearts and bones of the one half of the most religiously affected, and best conscienced people in the Land, for trading in Apes and Peacocks, for holding some erroneous opinions (perhaps erroneously so cal∣led) as if it self were the Lord of infallibility, and had a non posse errare settled by God, as an inheritance upon it? I professe inge∣nuously, that when I put my self into a posture of the greatest in∣dulgency I am able, to consider of the reformation so much spoken of, and even conflict with my spirit to forme and cast the possible effects and fruits of it to the greatest advantage, I am not able to apprehend any thing desireable likely to come of it, either in re∣spect of a civill, or religious accommodarion unto the Nation, above what might be expected, and that upon terms of a far more promising hope, from the other Way which indureth so much contradiction from men. But I apparently foresee many incon∣veniences, and those not of a light or contemptible importance
likely to attend it, for which no place would be found in the other Way. Particularly, it is to mee instead of all arguments and de∣monstrations, that no Reformation is according to the mind of God and of Jesus Christ, which is destructive to the edification of the Saints, and directly impeding their growth in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. And whether such a Reforma∣tion (if yet it be lawfull so to call it) which injoynes the Saints to sit under, and hold themselves to such Pastors, with whom their hearts cannot close in that relation with any tolerable satisfacti∣on, nor yet are capable of his Ministery, or any edification by it, be not under that condemnation, I leave to men that have not sold themselves under partiality, to judge and determine. If it be said, but men shall have liberty to choose what Pastor they please, and to sit under what Ministery they desire, if they will but choose their dwellings accordingly. I answer: 1. There may be (and I believe are) many of a rich anoynting from God for the work of the Ministery, and much desired by a considerable number of godly persons, in Pastorall relation, who must say their consciences nay, to accept of a Parochiall charge. In this case the change of a mans house will do nothing towards the blessing of his soul; if such a Reformation, as most mens thoughts run upon, should be established. 2. All the dwellings within the Parochiall line, relating to the Pastor that is desired, may be fill'd with Inhabitants already; and so there is no place, or possibility (at least for the present) for him whose soul longeth after that Pastor, to injoy him: and when, or whether ever whilest he liveth, the door now shut against him will be open, no man knoweth. 3. Many times the situation and conveniency of a mans pre∣sent dwelling for trade, imployment, &c. is such, that he cannot remove, but at the perill of his estate, and ruining himself and his whole family. And how they, who shall compell men, either to sacrifice their peace, comfort, and subsistenc this present world, or else run the hazard of losing a subsistence in that which is to come, will answer it either before the righteous God, or reason∣able men, is above my apprehension. 4. This liberty of choosing Pastors only by choosing houses, is so conditioned, that it smiles only upon the rich, (and that but some∣what
faintly neither) but frowns upon the poor; and so is partiall, and therefore not Christian. He that hath enough of that, which (as Solomon saith) answers all things, may probably be able to accom∣modateEccles. 10. 19. himself within the precincts of what parish he pleaseth, in point of dwelling; as either by buying out some Inhabitant, or by purchasing ground, and building upon it, or the like; but the case of the poor man is many times such, that he cannot tell where to finde another hole in all the world to hide his head in, besides that wherein it is hid already. So that this liberty of choosing a Pastor, being nothing else, if plainly interpreted, but only a liber∣ty of choosing such or such a Parish determinately to dwell in, is little better then a meer collusion, in respect of those that are poor, and (indeed) rather an upbraiding of them with their po∣verty, then any gratification of them with a liberty. 5. (And lastly) such a liberty as this we now speak of▪ were it more valueable then it is, is no gratuity, benefit or blessing of that Reformation so importunely demanded and pressed for by many, being nothing else, but what was every mans permission and en∣joyment under the iron rod of Episcopall tyranny. I am more be∣holding to every man that comes neer me, for not taking away my life, then I am to any Reformation whatsoever, for giving me li∣berty to choose my Pastor upon such terms. This for answer in full to that undue charge against the Congregationall Way, where∣in it was attainded of inconsistency with, and enmity against Re∣formation. A second objection levied against it, and all sufferance of it, by those that are adversaries to it, is, that if it be permitted quietly to walk up and down amongst us, and not be suppressed, it will soon make the Land unquiet, fill the Land with troubles, tmults, divisions, distractions, dissentions, discontents, confusions, in City, in Countrey, in relations, in families, and where not? To this also I answer. 1. That peremptness and height of confidence in an accuser, is no signe at all of reality or truth in the accusation. Wee know (say the Jews, concerning Christ) that this man is a sinner, Joh. 9. 24. And again, Joh. 8. 48. Say wee not well, that thou art a Samaritan,John 9. 2. and hast a Devill? And yet for all their knowledge, and confidence of well-speaking, the Lord Christ was never the more either a Sinner,
or a Samaritan, or had a Devill. The Way we speak of, is never the neerer the guilt of those things that are charged upon it, because her accusers bewray so little tendernesse or esitancy in drawing up their charge. 2. Nor is the tragicall dresse or pointed stile of an accusation any demonstrative proof of a guilt commensurable thereunto; no, nor yet of any proportion or degree of guilt at all. Want of crime and delinquency, either in things or persons, which are accused▪ many times makes a greater noyse in the accusation, then a reality or fulnesse of guilt would do. Innocency ath begtten the rankest and fiercest accusations that ever were managed by the tongues or pens of men. Thou lovest all devouring words (said David) O tho de∣ceitfullPsal. 62. 4. (or, false) tongue. They that accuse either upon knowledge or fear of little or no guilt in the accused, still labour to lay on ac∣cusation enough, lest nothing otherwise should be believed by the Judge. That mount of accusation which is raised so high against the Way we now maintain, doth not at all prove that there is any thing in it that deserves battery. 3. There is no substantiall reason at all can be given, why this Way should occasion troubles, divisions, discontents, or the like, above the rate of that other Way, which so much magnifies it self against it; except (haply) this, that it hath more of God and Christ in it, then that other: and then it is no marvell if it be more offensive, and troublesome to the world. But suppose both equally interessed in this, I affirm and undertake to demonstrate, that in the nature, frame, and constitution of it otherwise, it is every whit as gentle, sweet, complying and accommodating, and no whit more threatning or portending troubles or distractions, then the other; yea, that in all such considerations as these, it hath the preheminence: For, 1. It seeketh not, it attempteth not the molestation, harm, or disturbance of any sort of men that are contrary-minded to it; it thinketh no evill, it speaketh no evill of such: if it conceives them upright and faithfull with God and Jesus Christ, it imbraceth them with all love, tendernesse and honour, as partakers of like pre∣cious faith with it self; and nothing doubts, but that they serve and worship God with as much sincerity and singlenesse of heart, and are accordingly accepted by him in their Way, as it self.
2. If God should please to give it favour in the eyes, and interest in the hearts of the powers of this world, it thinks it very un-Christian and unworthy, to arm it self with this interest, to fight against the peace of the consciences of other men. If any of this Way have miscarried in any of these particulars, they have done it as men, and not as children of this Way; the principles of their Way taught them better things. And why, or how a way, baptized in∣to no worse, or harder spirit then this, should come to be arraign∣ed, as a troubler of State, or strife-maker, a dissention-breeder amongst men, except it be by a spirit of contention and strife in∣deed, is to me a thing incomprehensible. Neverthelesse it is no new thing, that both the wayes and servants of God should be charged with such crimes and demerits, not only whereof they are wholly innocent and free, but which have a speciall contrariety to some such grace or vertue, wherein they have a remarkable and choyce preheminence above others. Thus Joseph, the great mirrour of chastity, was accused of Adultery, Gen. 39. Moses, the meekest man upon earth, of ambition, and self-assuming, Numb. 16. Elijah of being the troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18. who was the Chariot and Horse-men of Israel, to defend it: 2 King. 2. The Lord Christ himself, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily, of having a Devill, Joh. 8. and so of being an enemy unto Cesar, when as it was, and is he, by whom Kings reign; with many the like. Therefore how∣ever it may seem strange that a Way of God, which is eminently set, strongly bent, and (in a manner) every wayes calculated for peace, should suffer in the tongues and thoughts of men as a di∣sturber of States, and sower of dissentions amongst men, yet is there nothing in this, but what hath been acted, and that over and over upon the Theatre of the world formerly. If it be here replied and said; Yea, but experience riseth up, and confirms the truth of that accusation and charge against the Way you speak of, which you would wipe off; this shewes and proves against all deniall and exception, that where your Way is entertained, Congregations are torn, families rent, relations di∣stanced and divided, &c. I answer, first, that Aristotle long since observed, that , was a very frequent Paralogisme or mistake amongst men, nothing is more ordinary then for men to range consequents and
effects under one & the same notion, especially where the dispro∣portion of causality is not very notorious and broad. A man in reason can hardly think, that any man, compos mentis, (as we use to say) should be so defective or weak in his inellectualls, as to think that the building of Tenderton Steeple, should be the cause of Godwins Sands, only because these sands were never known to be before the building of that Steeple; yet old Mr. Latimer relates the Story in one of his Sermrns, and improves it to very good pur∣pose: By such a form of arguing as this, Judas his betraying his Master, should have been the effect of the womans powring out that box of oyntment upon his head, mentioned, Mat. 26. 7. For he never betrayed him untill this oyntment was powred out upon him; and immediately after, he did. The Way we speak of, is ne∣ver the more any cause of troubles, dissentions, or divisions, be∣cause troubles, dissentions and divisions, many times follow upon the embracement and entertainment of it. 2. If troubles or divisions were the proper effects of this way, then the more, and more generally it were taken up and practised in a familie, Citie, or Countrey, the more troubles and divisions there would be. Effects are still found in proportion to their cau∣ses, where nothing interposeth to hinder it. But where it is gene∣rally assented and submitted unto, whether in families, relations, or otherwise, there is as much unitie, love, and peace, (as touch∣ing matter of government) as where Presbyterie hath its highest throne. Therefore the reason why troubles and divisions some∣times accompany it, is not because it is intertained, but because it is not intertained sufficiently, or with that generalitie of consent, which is desireable. 3. When troubles and divisions are occasioned in relations, families, Congregations, &c. by the meeting together of two op∣posite wayes, why should the one way be still burthened and char∣ged with the occasion of such troubles, and the other acquitted, there being no ground or reason at all, why either that which is acquitted, should be judged more innocent; or that which is charged, more obnoxious or peccant, in this kind. Nay, 4. If matters were duly and fairely examined between the two Combatants in this case, the way wee plead for, would be found via lactea, the candid, harmlesse, and peaceable way: and her cor∣rivall
or competitresse, via sanguinea, the trouble and strife-making way. Onely by pride (saith Solomon) cometh contention. Surely thatProv. 13. 10. way which commandeth homage and subjection unto her from all her fellowes, and threatens to breake them all in pieces like a potters vessell with a rod of iron, if they will not bow, and deny themselves for her sake, is the way of pride, and so of contention, (according to Solomons Logique) not that which is gentle, and easie to be entreated by all others, claiming no superioritie or ju∣risdiction over any. If there be any clashing or unkindnesse be∣tween the two wayes, Independency (so called) and Presbyterie, when they meet together, either in a relation, familie, &c. the very complexion of the latter bewrayes that to be still the foundresse of the quarrell. To me it is a wonder of the first magnitude, how men come to have so much ground of hope as to set their foot up∣on, of composing differences and distractions, of setling peace and love throughout the Nation, by exalting one way of Discipline, of Church-Government, for the treading downe and trampling un∣der foot all others. If Ephraim be against Manasseh, is it any wayesEsa. 9. 21. like but that Manasseh will be against Ephraim? And God himselfe prophecying of Ishmael, told his mother, that he would be a wildGen. 16. man: and that his hand should be against every man; and every mans hand against him. Undoubtedly that way, whose hand shall be against every way, will find that the hand of every way will be against it: and then what manner of peace can reasonably be expected under the predominancy of such a way? That way which shall be able to out-reason, not that which shall out-clubbe, all other wayes, will at last exalt unitie, and be it selfe exalted by gathering in all other wayes unto it. Solomon tells us, that all that is taken in hunting, isProv. 12. 27. not alwayes roasted; and that an inheritance may be hastily gotten,Prov. 20. 21. and yet the end thereof not be blessed: and the Prophet Habakk de∣nounceth a woe against him that shall build a towne with bloud. But,Hab. 2. 12. 5. I would gladly know what the plaintiffe in the objection means, by distractions, rents, divisions, in relations, families, Con∣gregations, &c. If he means onely this, that the father goes to heare one Minister in one place, and the son another Minister, in another, and that some within the same parochiall line goe to this Minister, or are members of this Church, others to another Mini∣ster, and are members of another Church, and the like, &c. I an∣swer,
That in this case, I know no more occasion, (at least no more necessitie) of any distraction, rent, or division, then when the fa∣ther being free of one company, as suppose of Merchant-taylors, shall still upon occasion of the meeting of this company, repaire to the hall belonging to it; and the son being free of another, as perhaps of the company of Grocers, shall upon the like occasion repaire to the hall appertaining to them. Who knows not that the members of all the severall Companies in London, dwell scattering∣ly and promiscuously up and downe the Citie, with the greatest irregularitie of intermixture that lightly can be, and without any observation of their relations to their respective Companies, sun∣dry members of twenty severall Companies (it may be) inhabiting within one and the same parish; and yet without any complaint or inconvenience of rents, distractions, or divisions? Or if by rents, distractions, and divisions, he means distances or alienations in af∣fections; nor can these with any face of reason be charged upon that way, whose cause we plead; because it is a maine principle and maxime in this way, to hold terms of love and Christian cor∣respondence, with all persons of what judgement soever in point of Government, if they be godly, as well as with her owne chil∣dren (as hath in effect been argued formerly.) But in this case the Roman proverb (it seems) must be verified; Aemilius fecit, plecti∣tur Rutilius. Or 3. (and lastly) if by rents, distractions, &. he means, the shaking or troubling of mens judgements, raising doubts or scruples in mens consciences concerning the way they went peaceably in before: I answer, 1. That if they were built upon sure and cleere foundations in their former way, there is not the least ground or reason why they should be troubled or shaken in their judgements, because they see another way acted and practised by others: or 2. if they were but at peradventure in their former way, and it was not the knowledge, but the ignorance of the truth, that both put them into it and kept them in it, they have no cause to complaine of being awakened out of so sinfull and dangerous a sleep, though it were never so sweet and pleasing to them. But, 6. (and lastly) Spose that all which the objection chargeth upon the way we speake for, be granted for truth, that where this Way comes and is entertained, Congregations are torne▪ families rent, re∣lations distanced, &c. Yet this maketh much more for it, then a∣gainst
it; because such figures and characters as these, are the knowne impressions of the Gospel upon the world, where it comes in power, and is entertained in truth. Thinke yee (saith our Saviour)Luk. 12. 51. &c. that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, nay, but rather debate. For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father: the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother: the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. Nor is it to be conceived that these divisions in relations and families, foretold by Christ as the common and ordinary effects and consequents of the Gospel (for in different respects they may be either) are to be limited onely to such either relations or families, wherein the ground or occasion of the division should be, the receiving of the Gospel in the maine truth and substance of it by the one partie, the other partie absolutely rejecting it, as if they were onely to take place in such cases as this; but they are to be extended to such both families and relations also, where some particular and spe∣ciall points or truths of the Gospel are intertained by one partie, and rejected by another, though both agree as well in the beliefe, as in the Profession of the Gospel in the generall. Experience shews that rents & divisions take place in both, as well, yea, and that with as much heate and distemper of affection, in the latter case and up∣on the latter occasion, as in the former. Now if the question in this latter case be, Whether the occasion of the division be rather to be imputed to the truth held and practised by the one partie, or to the error held and practised in opposition to the truth, by the other: The answer is, that where all were before bound up in unitie and peace, by a common band of error, there the occasion of the division must needs be imputed unto the truth comming a∣mongst them. Therefore were it granted, that the way so much contested against, did indeed occasion, rents, divisions, distractions, in relations, in families, in Congregations where it comes, this would rather turne unto it for a testimony, and assert its originall from God, then otherwise: The Gospel elfe works no other∣wise then thus, where it is preached and intertained. And as Ari∣stotle supposeth, that in case any piece or fragment were broken off from the maine body of the Heavens, it would move circular∣ly,
according to the naturall motion of the maine body; in like manner any particular opinion or practise which moves, acts, and works, according to the manner and tenor of that motion, acting, and working, which are genuine and proper to the Go∣spel, is so much the more likely to be a parcell or branch of the Gospel: but however, such a moving, acting, and working as this, can with no semblance or colour of reason, be drawn into any contrary interpretation, or be made an argument of the non∣conformitie of it unto the truth. A third objection against that way whose condemnation out∣runs her triall day and way, in the world, is; that it opens a doore to all errors, heresies, and unsound opinions, yea to all loose∣nesse and prophanenesse, and consequently it cannot but be a thing displeasing unto God, and so prejudiciall to the peace and safetie of the Nation, if it should be tolerated, or practised a∣mongst us. But to these things also full and clear answers are not wanting. For, First, it being certain that error cannot be healed or suppressed but by the manifestation of the truth, as darknesse cannot be de∣stroyed or removed but by the shining of the light; that way which affords the greatest advantages and the best incourage∣ments unto men, both for the searching out▪ and bringing forth into light the truth being found, must needs be so farre from opening doores unto errors, heresies, unsound opinions, &c. that it steers the mo advantagious and hopefull course that lightly can be taken, for the evicting, and consequently for the suppres∣sion of them. I need not adde, that it is the congregationall way (and this onely amongst all its fellows) that rejoyecth in the method of this warfare and advance against those enemies of God, and Religion, errors and heresies. And, Secondly, for the way sir-named Presbyterian, which conjures all mens gifts, parts, and industrie into a synodicall circle, and suffers▪ them onely to dance there, as it may possibly shut the doores against some errors and heresies, which were not like to stay long, in case they should enter under the other way; so it is in every whit as much possibilitie and danger, of shutting the doore upon, and compelling such errors and heresies as are al∣readie gotten in, and otherwise have a mind to be gone, to stay
it, and so to infest and annoy the truth, and peace of the Churches of Christ, against their wils. But, Thirdly, I would gladly learn of the sons of this objection, how, which way, or in what respect the way so much objected against, commits this folly-deed of opening a doore unto errors and heresies. Certain I am, first, that this way hates both the one and the other with as perfect an btred, as her competitresse doth. Secondly, I fully beleeve, that this way is as diligent, faithfull, and industrious to slay these enemies of Christ by the sword of the Spirit, (which is in speciall manner consecrated for such executions) as the other way. Thirdly, if the error be dan∣gerous, amounting to, or neer an heresie, after two or three ad∣monitions (that is, according to her warrant from Heaven) she casts it out of the line of her communication, unto him who cast it in (I mean, Satan.) If to hate errors and heresies, to preach with all diligence and faithfulnesse against errors and heresies, to excommunicate errors and heresies, be to open a doore unto error and heresies, then must the adversaries of the way whereof we speak, be justified in their accusation of her: otherwise they speak at the utmost perill of their reputations, when they lay such things to her charge. If it be here replyed and said; Yea, but all this notwithstand∣ing, the wy you plead for, is but feeble-handed, for the suppres∣sion of errors and heresies; because these, though hated, preach'd against, and cast out of the Church by excommunication, may yet live and gather head again in the world, except error and errant be further restrained by a secular hand, and heresie and heretique put to silence together in the grave. And this, which is the most, if not the onely effectuall means to preserve the wheat from those tares, the way of your desires exerciseth not, nor yet approveth. I answer: first, we presume that Prisons and Swords are no Church-officers, nor any appurtenances to any Ecclesiastique au∣thority in what form of Government soever. Secondly, we suppose that the Lord Christ so far tendered the spirituall safety and peace of his Churches, as to leave them suf∣ficiently furnished, and every wayes appointed with internall provision, for the effectuall procurement and preservation of
them, without any concurrence of any heterogeneall or exter∣nall power. Especially considering, that he fore-saw, that these Churches of his, for the space of three hundred yeers together, and somewhat more (during which terme he knew likewise that they would continue in their greatest puritie, and perfection of love and loyaltie towards him) were not like to have any ac∣commodation at all in this kind from any secular or civill power. Thirdly, though the Churches of Christ, during this period of time wherein they had no comportance with any secular arm for their preservation either in this or any other kind, were not wholly free from errors and heresies; yet did they quit and defend themselves against the danger spreading and troublesomenesse of them upon better terms, and with farre better successe, then they were able to do afterwards, when they had an arme of flesh and a sword in it▪ to assist them. Note this. Fourthly, if persons delivered up unto Satan by the Church, whether for Error, Heresie▪ or other crime, were presently to be cut off by the secular Sword, all opportunitie for the effectuall and saving work of that ordinance of Christ upon the persons so delivered up, would be cut off also. The Apostle, 1▪ Corinth. 5. 5. expresly affirms the end of Excommunication or delivering up unto Satan, to be the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be sa∣ved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And 1 Tim. 1. 20. he aith, that he had delivered Hymeneus and Alexander unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. Now as naturall medicines and phy∣sicall receits, must have a time to work, before they can in an or∣dinarie course of providence produce their mst proper and de∣sired effects; in like manner the ordinances and means which the Lord Christ hath graciously appointed for the everlasting salva∣tion of the precious souls of men, must, according to the nature and condition of their respective workings, and the tenor of Gods providence observed for the time of his falling in with them to make them effectuall, have their full and just allowance of time given and permitted unto them, to work upon men effe∣ctually. And whosoever shall limit or straiten the providence of God, in this kind, by any hasty or violent taking away a soul from under the influence and working of any ordinance of Christ appointed for his salvation, before the blessed work of
Repentance be accomplished in him, will be arraigned before the tribunall of the living God, as accessarie to the blood of that oul, except he can shew a better warrant from God for such an action, then I know any. And God himself having no where prescribed or limited any determinate or set time, within which he intends to make the sentence of Excommunication after the passing of it by the Church, effectuall to the saving of the soul, or otherwise never to do it, I conceive it can be no lesse then an act of high presumption in any man to undertake any such prescription or limitation. As God by the voice of the Gospel calls some at the third and sixth houre; so he cals othersMatth. 20. 6. at the ninth, and some at the eleventh houre: and why may he not work savingly, by the sentence of Excommunication with as much libertie, and difference in respect of time? And this sen∣tence being the last and utmost means which God is like to af∣ford a poore hardened, impenitent soul for the eternall peace and salvation of it, how can it but be conceived an act most un∣worthy of Christian bowels, to cut him off from this also, whilst God is pleased to spare him? If it be here objected and said, But if an heretique be suffered to live, he is in danger of infecting others, and destroying them eternally. I answer▪ first, so is a drunkard, a fornicatour, a swearer, a covetous person, with the like; the lives of all these kinds of sinners are of as dangerous a consequence in respect of infecting, yea and of destroying the souls of others, as the life of an heretique is: and yet no man (I presume) judgeth this a sufficient ground why such men should be punished with death. Secondly, as for those that are within the Church, they are not capable of any communion or com∣merce with an Heretique that is cast out by Excommunication, and so are not in danger of being infected by him: and for those that are without, these are infected already with a disease every whit as mortall, as any heresie, I mean unbelief. So that infe∣ction with heresie, will not much impaire the estates or condi∣tions of these. Thirdly, (and lastly) the truth is, that an Here∣tique being dead (especially if punished with death for his opi∣nion sake) speaketh in his surviving heresie with every whit as much authoritie, and consequently with every whit as much danger of infecting others therewith, as he could do if he were alive, if not with more. And so,
Fifthly, (and lastly) concerning other civill means for the suppression and restraint of those spirituall evils, errors, here∣sies, &c. as imprisonment, bnishment, interdictions, finings, &c. both reason and experience concurre in this demonstration, that such fetters as these put upon the feet of errors and heresies to secure and keep them under, still have prov'd (and are like to prove no other, but) wings whereby they raise themselves the higher in the thoughts and minds of men, and gain an opportu∣nitie of a further and ranker propagation of themselves in the world. It was an observation of Tacitus long since, that punitis ingeniis gliscit authoritas; To punish men of parts and wit, is to cast a spirit of Authoritie upon them, and to make their reputa∣tion glowe. Men of ordinarie capacitie, and vulgar apprehen∣sion, are and ever will be inclinable to think, that men of wis∣dome and worth will never expose themselves to sufferings, but for that which is weightie, and which hath more in it, then every man seeth. And besides, men of better breed, may easily be swayed by such a principle as this, that wise men, whilest they have the advantage and odds of their adversaries in reason, will never renounce or disclaim this so honourable an advantage by calling in the more ignoble assistance of horn and hoof to their aid. It is true, when Christ was handled with this rough hand we speak of, that piece of prophecie was verified; I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered; but ordinarily the smiting of the Shepherd or head of any Sect or error, is the ga∣thering together, yea the multiplication and increase, of his sheep. But Fourthly (to the main objection last propounded) whereas the innocent way is condemned as opening a doore to all loose∣nesse and prophanenesse, she may justly take up Davids com∣plaint, and say, Cruell witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not. Psal. 35. 11. The very truth is, that this way, above all her fellows, is so farre from holding any intelli∣gence or correspondence with loosenesse and prophanenesse, that her face is set to advance righteousnesse and true holinesse in all her quarters. Her heart runs parallel with Davids heart in those his meditations and vows, Psal. 101. 3, 4. &c. I will set o wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn
aside: it shall not cleave to me. I will not know a wicked person. Who so privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him that hath an high look and a proud heart, will I not suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithfull of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, shall serve me. He that worketh deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that telleth lies shall not trrie in my sight. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land: that I may cut off all wicked doers from the Citie of the Lord. This is such a draught and copie of Reformation as the Way we speak of (mu∣tatis mutandis) emulates, and aspires unto. If David in those resolutions and practises mentioned, opened a dore to loose∣nesse and prophanenesse, then cannot she excuse her self from part and fellowship with him, in that sin. If it be replyed and said; but this way taketh care for none in point of holinesse, but her own: she suffereth all the world a∣bout her to lie in wickednesse, and to sleep in death, without look∣ing after them, or taking any pitie or compassion on them. To this also we answer in one word: That she doth as tenderly, as affectionately desire and pray for, yea and with as much diligence and faithfulnesse, yea and prudence of endevour otherwise, and likelihood of successe, attempts and seeks the salvation of those that sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death, as any other way can do. It is true, she doth not judge it any wayes conducing towards the quick∣ning of those that are dead in sins and trespasses, to put them into a conceit that they are living stones (whilest they are yet dead) by putting them into the building of the spirituall temple of God: she knows no such method or means of converting souls unto God, as this. Nor doth she willingly suffer any man to at and1 Cor. 11. 29. drink damnation unto himself, to further him in his salvation. Nor doth she make Faith of apparent unbelief in parents, by baptizing their children, as any wayes accommodating the souls either of the one, or of the other. Therefore if she declines such things as these, it cannot be argued from hence (except either igno∣rance, or a worse Logician, makes the syllogise) that therefore she neglects or casts off all care of seeking the salvation of others; but onely this, that she thinks it no point either of wisdome or charity to expose her self to the displeasure of God by doing
that, which is more like to expose others also to the same stroke, then any wayes to comfort or relieve them. But whatsoever she can reasonably conceive or judge to be a means any wayes likely to save a soul from death, to translate men from darknesse unto life, she girds her self to minister unto the world both farre and neer, in every such thing: She cordially prayes for the conversion of the unconverted, she mourns over them, she causes her light to shine before them, she bears their burthens, she intreats them gent∣ly, she feeds their hungry, and cloatheth their naked (as she is able) she recompenceth evill for evill unto none of them, with all such exemplatities of life and conversation, which are san∣ctified, and appointed by God for the winning of those without the Word, who refuse to obey it. 1 Pet. 3. 1. And besides all this, (that which is the first-born means of conversion) she preacheth the Gospel with as much diligence, and faithfulnesse, and power, and with as much libertie and freedome unto all to partake with her in this her ministration, as any other way whatsoever: yea, as readie and forward she is as any other, to contribute her pro∣portion to the full, whether in counsell, purse, or otherwise, for the furnishing of all the candlesticks in the land with burning and shining lights, I mean for the erecting and setting up a faith∣full preaching Ministery throughout the Land, yea if it were possible, throughout the whole world. Therefore Fifthly, (and lastly, to the main objection) whereas this way with the permission and sufferance of it, is burthened with this jealousie and fear, that it is so highly displeasing unto God, that he is not like to turn in mercie unto the Nation, untill it be re∣moved, and all the factors for it taken away. I answer. First, that this jealousie and fear is of the same inspiration, with that wherewith Rabshakeh of old, sought to possesse the heart of the good King Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusa∣lem, that so upon the discouragement they might be the more willing to compound for their City. But if thou say to me,  trustIsa. 36. 7. in the Lord our God; is it not he whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and Jerusalem, ye shall worship before this altar? That which Hezekiah had done (in de∣stroying Idolatry) with great acceptation in the sight of God, and which consequently was in it self a pledge and confirmation
unto him and his people that God was and would be with them to save them and their Citie out of Rabshakehs hand, this doth this deceived ambitious man contrive into an argument of jea∣lousie and fear unto them, that God was offended with them; and so represents their hope and confidence, in the shape of diffidence and deep discouragement unto them. He that perswaded the wo∣man, that God knew how that in the day wherein they should eat ofGen. 3. 5. the tree i the mid st of the garden, their eyes should be opened, and they be like gods, &c. hath (it seems) possest many amongst us with this semblable apprehension, that from the day wherein they shall destroy that way we speak of out of the Land, and sup∣pree all those that walk in it, God will be gracious unto them, and remember their iniquities no more; as if to sacrifice the chil∣dren in the Fathers sight, were the onely means of making a∣tonement with him. But Secondly, how doth this carrie any shew or shadow of rea∣son or truth in it, that God should turn away his face from a State or Nation, for not hating his people or for refusig to per∣secute his anointed ones? God sometimes said, That Nation whom they shall serve, I will iudge. Gen. 15. 14. Is his mind so far altered in this point, that now he should say, the Nation who shall give them libertie, I will iudge? The generall rule of restraint which God hath charged upon States, Kingdoms, and Nations, is this: Touch not mine aited, and do my Prophets no harm: and hath hePsal. 105. 15. any where made Independencie (so called) an exception from this rule? or hath he any where made Presbyterie a distinguish∣ing character of such of his anointed ones, who must not be touc'd, from others of them, who may be crush'd, and whose bons my b broken? Surely circumcision and uncicumcision differ∣ed as much, as Presbyerie and Independencie can do: yet the Apostle tels us, Gal. 6. 15. that in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avileth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. If Inde∣pendents be new creatures, and born of God, their Brethren need not fear any displeasure or anger from their Father, for suffering them to dwell in peace by them in the same Land; but have cause to rejoyce in such their neighbourhood and societi, as being pillars of the sme strength with themselves, to support the State and Nation wherein they dwell. But
Thirdly, (and lastly) when mens table becomes a snare unto them,Psal. 69. 2. Ver. 25. and their welfare a trap, it is a signe that God is about to bow down their backs, if not to make their habitations desolate. When the Jews began to reason after this manner, (and to act accordingly) If we let him thus alone, all men will beleeve on him: and then the Ro∣manes shall come, and take away both our place and nation; it was aIoh. 11. 48. presage, that the Romanes indeed would come, and take away both: which they did not many yeers after. Make the heart of this people fat (saith the Lord by his Prophet, concerning the same people) and make their eares heavie, and shut their eyes, lest they see with theirIsa. 6. 10. eyes, and hear with their eares, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. I say no more in this, but onely pray with all mine heart, and with all my soul, that the people of this Kingdom, may see with their eyes, and hear with their eares, and understand with their hearts, that they may convert, and be healed. The Heathens were wont to say, Jupiter, quos vult perdere, de∣mentat. Another objection leavied against the Way is this: If this way be let alone, and suffered to take place, it will still under∣mine the credit and comfort, of many worthy and conscientious Ministers in the land. For as fast as they, through the blessing of God upon their faithfull labours in the work of the Ministery, shall convert souls unto God; this Way will allure them away from them unto it self; whereby their hand must needs be en∣feebled and discouraged to their work. But to this also I an∣swer. First, that if that way of Government and worship, wherein those good Ministers shall walk, who are supposed to convert people unto God, be indeed and in truth the way of God, there is little ground or cause of fear, that any other way should se∣parate between them and their converted ones. For first, the ve∣rie grace of conversion, being dispensed unto these by their hand, is a great and solemne ingagement upon them, to love and honour them above others. Secondly, the person being dearly lov'd, and highly honour'd, gives credit and interest both in the judgements and affections of those who do so love and honour, to all his matters, as well of opinion as practise; at least is com∣pleat
armour of proof against any prejudice in respect of ei∣ther. Thirdly, when men and women are converted unto God, they are endued with a principle of a neerer and more inward sympathie and compliance with all the wayes of God, then they had before. So that there is more cause for Ministers to fear the withdrawing of their people from them before their conver∣sion, then after, in case the way of worship and government which they imbrace, be of God. For in this case and supposi∣tion, unconverted ones have no inward sutablenesse of soul, to incline them to love or delight in this way, and consequently their hearts must needs sit loose (if they stand not in opposition) o it: but those that are converted, are baptized into such a spi∣rit, which is apt to comport and correspond with it. Again Secondly, if the hearts of men and women upon their con∣version unto God, are so generally found (for otherwise there is no place for the jealoie, which is the ground of the objecti∣on) to stand in propension to this way, is not this an argument, if not demonstrative, yet of a very high importance to evince, that this way is of a truth, the Way of God? I will wait on thy Name (saith David) for it is good before thy Saints; or, because thyPsal. 52. 9. Saints like it well (as another translation reads.) So that this great Prophet and King thought the generall approbation and con∣currence of the Saints, sufficiently assertive of the acceptablenes of a way or practise, in the sight of God. Thirdly, those Ministers who have the spirit of this glory cast upon them by God, to beget sons and daughters unto him by the Gospel, have no cause to envie the line and measure of those who receive them from their hand, upon such terms. That which our Saviour spake in another case, is every what as consi∣derably true in this: viz. that it is a more blessed thing to give, thenAct. 20 35. to receive: And the Apostle Paul makes no other account, but that his relation of a spirituall Father unto the Corinths, his be∣getting of them by the Gospel, was much more honourable unto him, then the relation of an Instructor, or builder up, was, or would be unto others. For though you have ten thousand Instruct∣ors1 Cor. 4. 15. i Christ, (saith he) yet have ye not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. And else-where he counts it a master-piece in the spirituall building, to lay the foun∣dation.
According to the grace of God which is given to me, as a wise1 Cor. 3. 10. master-builder I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth there∣on. So then, planting being more Apostolicall then watering (it was Paul that planted, and but Apollos that watered, 1 Cor. 3. 6.) and laying the foundations of life and immortalitie in men, of a more honourable interpretation, then the building of them up in their Faith; the Ministers so much tendered in the objection, have not the least colour for any such grievance or complaint, as is there presented on their behalf, indeed and in realitie of truth no more, then the Apostles themselves had, for complaining against such Ministers and Pastors, who feed those flock of Christ which they had first converted unto him. And without allHebr. 7. 7. contradiction (saith the Apostle) the lesser is blessed, but never en∣vied, of the greater. Fourthly (and lastly) the gracious and bountifull God hath so laid it in his counsell and decree, that, though the saying be true, which our Saviour taketh notice of, Job. 4. 37. That one soweth, and another reapeth; yet both he that soweth, and he that reap∣eth, should reioyce together. ver. 36. So that as Abigail told David,1 Sam. 25. 30, 31. that when the Lord should have done unto him all the good which he had promised him, it would be no grief unto him, nor offence of mind, that he had not shed blood causlesse, or avenged himself; no more will it be the least occasion of uncomfortablenesse or complaint unto Ministers, who have been faithfull unto God, and brought home souls unto him, when they shall shine like stars in the firmament ofDan. 12. 3. Heaven, that some of the children of their labours departed from under their hand when time was, to seek pasture and soul∣accommodations else-where. Another objection seeming to war with an high hand against the way hitherto protected, is this: Can that in reason be thought to be the way of God, which seemeth so onely in the eyes of a few inconsiderable, and (for the most part) illiterate persons▪ and not rather that, which triumpheth in the vote and suffrage of a Reverend, learned, pious and frequent Assembly; yea and further hath the approbation of many wise and worthy personsEccles. 9. 11. in full concurrence with it? Do not wise men see more then those that are weak, and many, then few? I answer, First, that Solomon returned, and saw under the Sun, that the
race is not to the swift, nor the battell to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but that time ad chance happeneth unto thm all; meaning, that God still reserves a liberty to himself to interpose, and to carry the issues and events of things against all advantages and likelihoods of second causes, when and where and as oft as he pleaseth. And therefore as King As in his cry unto the Lord his2 Cor. 14. 11. God, said, It is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: in like manner it is but of one and the same consideration with God, to blesse the world with the Re∣velation of truth, whether it be by few, or by many, by those that are learned, or those that are look'd upon as men of small understanding. Nay, Secondly, if we consult with the tenor of Gods providence and dispensations in this kind, our information or answer will be according to the tenor of our Saviours gratulation (being now in a kind of rapture or exultation of spiri) unto his Father: I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that th hst hidLuk. 10▪ 21. thse things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Though God be at libertie, to make the first discovery, or communication of the light of his Truth, unto the world, by greater numbers of men, and those learned and in high esteeme for wisdome, as by Councels, Synods, and Conventions of men eminent in their qualifications, as well as by one or fewer, and these under no great observation for either; et by the more frequent experi∣ence of all ages it appeareth, that he taketh pleasure in this latter way, rather then in the former. Doubtlesse it was not without some very considerable ground and reason, that that ancient and learned Father ; Greg. Naz. ep. 5. ad Proco∣pum. Act. 10. 40. 41 Grego ie Nzianzene should say, that he never saw good end, or desirable successe of any Councell; or that they procur'd any decrease, but rather increase of evis. Yea and adds: that the pertinacious contentions, and inordinate desires of do∣mineering or bearing rule, were such, as words could not ex∣presse. Him (saith the Apostle) God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly: not unto lith people, but unto witnesses chosen be∣fore of God, even unto us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. Mary a woman, had both the first revelation
made unto her of Christs rising againe from the dead, and also the first enterview and sight of him after he was risen. Joh. 20. 12. 14. The Scripture takes speciall notice of Lots departure from Abra∣ham, before God was pleased to make that excellent discovery of himselfe unto him, spoken of, Gen. 13. 14, 15, &c. Yea, most of those revelations of himselfe, which he was graciously pleas'd to impart unto his ancient Church of the Jewes, were not imparted unto them by their Synedrion or Great Councell, but by particu∣lar men; who likewise usually (if not alwayes) received their in∣spirations from God, in their greatest privacie and sequestration; yea, and that (if the observation of the Rabbins will hold in that behalfe) whilst they were yong. That light of Evangelicall truth, wherein the Reformed Churches rejoyce at this day, yea, and tri∣umph over Antichristian darkness, did not break out of the clouds of Councels and Synods unto them, but God caused it to shine upon them, from scattered and single starres, as Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Martyr, &c. God never took any pleasure to cumber his arme with flesh and bloud, when he meant to doe any great thing for his Church by it. Wee find him once complaining right out, that the people were too many for him, to give deliverance or victoryJudg. 7. 2. by; but we never heard of any complaint from him that they were too few. And why may we not think, but that God may as well say within himselfe, that there are too many learned and wise men in a great Councell, for him to reveale truth, or to give victo∣ry against error by? The reason of this kind of dispensation is ob∣vious; and therefore I forbeare (for the present) to insist upon it. 3. As a presuming confidence of a mans leggs, is a signe of such a time or chance (in Solomons phrase) wherein the race shall not be to the swift; and so the challenging a victorie, as it were of course, because we have chariots, and horses, and vast multitudes of men, expert in warre above our enemies, is a presage seldome failing, that the battell will not be to the strong: in like manner when Synods and Councels shall beare themselves inordinately upon their num∣bers and multitudes, upon their wisdome, learning, and pietie, and because of these, shall (upon the matter) challenge an infalli∣bilitie (for what doe they lesse, when they command all mens judgements and consciences to bow downe at the feet of their de∣terminations?) this is little lesse then an authorized ground of Divination, that they will miscarry, and that God will not ho∣nour
them, with the discovery of any of his Truth unto the world. A Synod or Councell, though of men never so conscientious and learned, though never so both frequent and fervent in fasting and prayer before God, that shall assemble and meet together upon such terms, I meane so as either to expect, but especially peremp∣torily to conclude, before hand, that all men shall make Faith and practise of their decisions, or else be censur'd, and made to suffer like evill doers; doe in this set up their idols in their heart, and put theEk. 14. 3. stumbling block of their iniquitie before their face: and consequently devest themselves of that capacitie, wherein they should be meet to enquire of the Lord. Should I be enquired of at all by them? (saith God himselfe Ezek. 14. 3. of such) Indeed where greater numbers of men, accomplished with grace, and parts of learning, shall as∣semble together with humilitie and meeknesse, and for ends pro∣portioned to the line and sphere of men, as viz. candidly and un∣partially to argue and debate, and so to finde out the Truth in things appertaining unto God, onely with an intent and desire to be helpers of the Saints, as by making rough things plaine, and things that were hard, easie, and dark things, lightsome, and not to exercise a dominion over their Faith (as the Apostle speaketh)2 Cor. 1. 24. by an authoritative commanding them out of their present judge∣ment, what ever it be, to doe homage to the results of their de∣bates, whether they see light and truth in them or no; they may expect a speciall presence of God with them, and the Churches of God about them, may comfortably waite for somewhat more of the minde of Christ from them, then they knew. In the multi∣tudeProv. 24. 6. of such Counsellors, there may be safetie, as Solomon speaketh. I would gladly beleeve, if I could find where to set the sole of the foot of such a Faith, that Councels and Synods are wont to meet upon such terms: which if they doe not, I am (almost) as farre out of hope of having the joy of my Faith holpen or increased by them, as I am of gathering grapes from thornes, or figgs of thistles. And therefore, 4. (and lastly) Whereas the objection urgeth, that wise men are like to see more then those that are weake, and many, then few: I answer, That this is not alwayes found true, no not in naturall, civill or artificiall things, wherein notwithstanding there is usual∣ly a greater regularitie and uniformitie in the actings and work∣ings of second causes; much lesse is it alwayes true in matters be∣longing
unto God; wherein himselfe more frequently interposeth by his prerogative, and ordereth the tenor and course of occur∣rences and effects, besides the proportion of second causes, by the good pleasure of his will. All the great and rare inventions of the world, which either former, or latter ages have brought to light, were not the issues or results either of the thoughts or studies of the wisest or learnedest of men, nor yet of the consultations or communications of the greatest numbers or multitudes of men: but the wise Disposer of all things, according to his owne good pleasure and will, cast this honour upon particular and single men, (for the most part) and those not alwayes of the most learned or profound, as by many instances might readily be evicted, if it were necessary. And Solomon reports unto us a case, wherein one pooreEccles. 9. 15. man by his wisdome delivered a Citie out of imminent danger; which (it seems) all the rest of the Inhabitants did not see or apprehend how to doe. Yea, in Councels themselves, or greater assemblies of men, it is usually seene that some one, or few, either of predomi∣nant parts, or authoritie amongst them, sway and steere all the proceedings, and act the judgements and affections of the rest, though conscientious and learned to a degree. So that upon the matter, and just accompt, the resolution of Councels and Sy∣nods themselves, are but the fruits or putting-forth of the learn∣ing, and judgement, of a very few men; and whether these be al∣wayes of the most conscientious, I had rather others should con∣sider, then I determine. The last objection designed for present examination, is this that the intent and project of this way, is ambitious, high, and dangerous, that it affecteth a Dictatorship Ecclesiasticall, a power of Law-giving, that it undermines Civill or Parliamentary Au∣thoritie, &c. But to this also we answer (omitting what was for∣merly said, concerning extravagant height of accusations and charges, and the slender probabilitie of truth in them: as likewise concerning the speciall disposition of God in ordering the malice or ill will of those that are enemies, either to his people or wayes, still to shoote the arrowes of their accusations against their bes∣plate of righteousnesse, where it is strongest and least penetrable▪ 1. That there is not the least colour, no, nor the least colour of a colour, to charge any ambitious or Dictator-like designe upon this Way. The reason is, because the most essentiall, intinsecall,
and fundamentall principles of it, stand diametrally bent against all dictatoring, and law-giving by men, in the things of God. The Sunne may with as much, or more reason be suspected of con∣sulting darknesse against the world, as this Way of meditating or projecting any Authoritative greatnesse unto it self in this kinde. Indeed, when it degenerates from it self, and passeth into another kind, there may be some danger and fear of this Way; as there is that Honey should turn into choler, when the native property of it is altered by the stomack. A Congregationall man become a Classique, may as soon as another make a Son of such a designe as is specified in the objection. 2. If the Way wee speak of, should be so contradictory to her self, as to desire or project such a Kingdome, as she stands charged with in the Objection; yet should not the world have the least cause to fear her prosecutions or executions in this kinde. If the Lamb in the fold should threaten or project the slaughter and de∣struction of all the Lions in the Wildernesse, had these ever the more cause to be afraid of her? The kingdomes and powers of this world, need not fear either the numbers or power of the Saints, for taking away their crowns, or breaking the scepters of their rule and government, untill the world that now is be transla∣ted into that which is to come. And therefore, 3. Whereas this Way is further arrested by the Objection, for a Pioner and underminer of Magistracy, or Parliamentary Autho∣rity; I answer, that there is no more in this Way to undermine or endanger any Civill Authority or Power whatsoever, then there was in Daniels heart to prejudice the life and honour of the King,Dan. 6. 10. 22. when hee prayed three times a day, (contrary to the Kings com∣mandement) or then was in Pauls Doctrine of Justification by Faith to make voyd the writings of Moses, or the Law; whereby indeed he did establish it (as himself affirmeth, Rom. 3. 31.) though the Jewes apprehended, and charged him with the contrary. And doubtlesse the learned Gentleman, who undertakes the unmasking of Independency, (which never wore any) is in an utter mistake,Independen∣cy examined, unmask'd, &c. not only of the intentions of the two Brethren of this Way (who ever they were) whose words he citeth, p. 3. of his late Examina∣tion; but also of the rationall and Grammaticall construction and import of the words. For whereas they say, that a man may as well bring a clean thing out of an unclean, as make a spirituall ex∣traction
t of a se, the Gentleman will needs interpret, that they make both Parliament and Assembly secular and unclean; whereas by the tenor and carriage of the whole passage, it is as clear as the Sun▪ that in neither of these expressions they reflect either upon the one, or the other; no, nor yet in those following words, wherein they affirm, that it will be demonstratively prov'd (against their adversary, who makes the Law of the State the first and most considerable band or tye upon men, for their submission to his Church-government) that he resolves the government of the Churches of Christ (in the last resolution of it) into the humors, wills and pleasures of the world, yea, of the vilest and most unworthy of men. And therefore, whereas upon his citation of these words, his demand is, Brethren, bona verba quaeso, the Brethren upon his interpretation of them, have far more reason to make this request unto him; Brother, bo∣nam glossam quaesum. The words are good, if the interpretation did but answer. For doubtlesse the Brethren in the mentioned period and ex∣pressions, reflected only upon the generality of the people in the Land, who according to the Lawes of the Land; yea, according to the prin∣ciples of all reason and equity, have the right of nominating persons into the places of Parliamentary trust and power; but have no Autho∣rity or power from Christ to nominate or appoint, who shall be the men that shall order the affairs of Christs Kingdome, or institute the government of his Churches. These, and especially the ignorant and ir∣religious part of them (which they that know any thing concerning the generality of the Kingdome for matters of Religion, must needs know to be far the greater part in every place) are that secular root, out of which the Brethren conceive an impossibility, that a spirituall extra∣ction should be made, that is, that a legitimate Ecclesiastique power should according to the minde of Christ, or any precept or president of Scrip∣ture, be by them conferred upon any man: and this impossibility con∣ceived by them, they only illustrate and declare by that parallel expression in Job, Who can bring a cleane thing out of an uncleane? When they imply, that men unworthy, and strangers to the power of godlinesse and matters of Religion, have the right and power of con∣ferring Parliamentary trust and power, upon persons chosen by them hereinto, they reflect not the least touch of prejudice or disparage∣ment upon the persons honoured with that choyce: First, because there is no other way, no, nor is there any conveniency or lawfulnesse of any way whereby to ascend the height of the interest and honour, but such a choyce: And secondly, the votes and voyces of such men being carried upon persons of honour, worth and Religion, demon∣strates that there was so much the more of God in their election;
which is so far from diminishing their honour in the least, that it add double and treble unto it. But to hold that the persons so elected, as hath been said, have a power by vertue of such nomination or election, to enact Laws and Statutes in matters of Religion, and to order under mulcts and penalties, how men shall worship and serve God; as it is a means to awaken the eye of jealousie upon them, and so is seven times more destructive unto, and undermining, not only of their power, but of their honour, peace, and safety also, then any thing that is found in the Way so ill intreated; so is it the setling of a power upon the electors of such persons, I mean, upon the promiscuous multitude of the Land, a greater power then ever Jesus Christ himself had, at least then ever he exercised. For as dare Regem argues a greater power then esse Regem, as hee that buildeth an house, hath more honour then the house, Heb. 3. 3. So to nominate and appoint who shall have power to umpire in matters of conscience and of God, to determine what shall be prea∣ched, and what not, what shall be believed, and what not, is a branch of a greater root of power, then the exercise of the power that is com∣mitted unto others in this behalf. Now though Jesus Christ had a power, and was authorized by God to be a Law-giver himself unto his Churches and Saints, in their spirituall Republique; yet it is hard to prove that ever he invested any other with such a power. His Apostles themselves were no Lords over the Faith of the Saints; nor had they any power or authority to impose any thing upon men, as necessary, either to be believed or practised, but what they had in expresse commission and charge from Jesus Christ himself to impose upon such terms. So that notwithstanding that severe & angry contestation of the fore-men∣tioned Gentleman against the two Brethren with their fellows, Is this your so much boasted of preaching, writing, fighting for the rights & priviledges of Parliament? whereby he thinks to dash both them and that their boasting together out of countenance; though they boast neither little nor much of any thing; boasting is their charge not their crime; they only say, and that with modesty yet, blessed be God, they are able to maintain and make good that their boasting (if it must needs be so cal∣led) in the sight of God and Angels, and men, and Devils, and whatsoe∣ver besides is named, not only in this world, but in that also which is to come. And though he hath done like himself, and (I speak it to his honour) far above the line of many others, in vindicating the rights and privi∣ledges of Parliament; yet (absit verbo invidia) I am very confident, that there are thousands of that Way and judgement, against which his pen riseth up with so much indignation, who rateably, and according to their means and opportunities, have quitted themselves upon equall
terms of honour, love, and faithfulnesse, towards those honourable Houses, with himself. 4. (And lastly) It were no task of much labour or difficulty, to de∣monstrate that the Way, in the defence whereof we have thus far ap∣peared, is so far from carrying any malignity, or seed of danger in it to the State, or persons invested with civill power, that it is of a manifest and rich compliance both with the one and the other. He that com∣mandedMatth. 22. 21. to give unto Cesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods: did Cesar as much (if not more) service, in the latter com∣mand, as in the former. Silver and gold, wood and stone, never got any thing by having an artificiall deity bestowed upon them, and being worshiped, but only a meer proximity to destruction. They that should only have said unto Herod, that he had spoken like a sober and well ad∣vised man, might have shewed as much affection to him, yea, and ho∣noured him upon better terms, then they that shouted, Is the voyce of aAct▪ 12. 22. God, and not of a man. There is no foundation so sure and precious to build the honour, peace and safety of Cesar upon, as a stone duly pitched for a land-mark between God and him. But if there be a question or difficult case between God and Cesar, whether such and such things be∣long unto the one, or unto the other, they will be found the best and faithfullest Counsellors unto Cesar, who shall advise him rather to sur∣render unto, then to claim a doubtfull right or priviledge from God. The Way we speak of is so ingenuous, loyall and true-hearted to men in place of civill authority and power, that it teacheth her sons to ex∣pose themselves unto their displeasure, for the procurement of their good; which even the heathen themselves have attested for one of the best and least questionable signs of true friendship and love. To these answers of objections, I thought to have added some po∣sitive arguments, whereby the Way, now little more then only defended, might have gained the honour of a more perfect conformity to the Will and Word of God, then (perhaps) hath been discovered or seen hitherto. Yet I cannot but think, that the vailes of the principall ob∣jections which covered the face of it, being rent and torn, the beauty and brightnesse of it must needs shine forth in the eyes of all those who have not sacrificed unto partiality. To close with a word of exhortation. The premises considered, as we love the things of our peace, and desire the speedy dispersion and scat∣tering of that dark and black cloud still hanging and hovering over our heads, and threatning more fiery storms & tempests of desolation and blood upon us, and to see the heavens cleering up, and looking like Crystall or Saphire over us, as we desire to see those terrible swarms of
Locusts and Caterpillars, which now devour and eat up our good land daily, swept away▪ and carried by a strong west wind into the midst of the sea, that so we may be fed again, with the ancient heritage of our fa∣thers, I mean plenty, safety, and peace; if there be any bowels, any com∣passions in us towards our nation, (so far spent & wasted with misery) towards our cities and habitations, towards our friends, towards our selves, towards any thing which is dear either to the one, or to the o∣ther; let us be exhorted to take heed of fighting against God; let it be the first-born of religious advisements and cautions to us, not to be fierce, no, nor so much as to lift up an hard thought against Doctrine or Way claiming origination and descent from God, till wee have security upon security, conditions as cleer as the noon-day, that they are but counterfeits and pretenders only, and stand in no relation at all, but that of enmity and opposition unto God. Particularly, let us be tender above all tenderness, to act to the value of the least hair of our heads in any way of bitterness or blood, against that Way of governing the Churches of Christ, which hath by so many good hands been presen∣ted unto us as most agreeable unto the Word and Will of God, untill we see the condemnation of it written with a beam of the Sun, by the finger of God himself; untill he hath disclaimed or renounced it from heaven, either by giving such wisdome unto men whereby to detect the error and vanity of it, or else hath quite rased it out of the fleshly tables of the hearts of his Saints, and distrest servants. The motion and matter is of a most serious and formidable importance; therefore let me exhort you yet once more, to beware of men, (as our Saviour ad∣viseth, in a case of lesse consequence) to take heed, that no man, either through passionate exclamations and outcries, or through any faire or flourishing pretences whatsoever, draw your foot into this snare, in∣gage you in any such warfare, wherein, for ought you know, you shall fight against God. If your judgements stand off from the cause wee speak of, for the present, and you can see nothing of God in it; you may please to consider, that this was the case of many thousands amongst you, in whom there is much of God, and in whose heart is this Way, as a Way of his. If they be deceived in imbracing it, GodPhil. 3. 15. will shew mercy unto them in revealing the truth unto them in due time. But if you shall be deceived in the violence and fury of your fighting against it, is it not much to be feared, that you will be in∣tangled with the guilt of such a sin, which shall not be purged fromIsa. 22. 14. you till yee die? FINIS.
