H676 E75_19 99860628 155515
The HAPPY SUCCESSE Of the PARLIAMENTS Armie at NEVVPORT And some other places. Who with the Northamptonshire Forces this last week at severall times, have slain & taken Prisoners neere upon a hundred of the Enemies, 2. Captaines, 3. Cornets, & a Trumpeter, and taken divers of their Horses, with the losse of 6. men and 15. Prisoners. As it was sent in a Letter from the Army, & published for the satisfaction of all those that have any Friends in the Service, and would willingly be informed of the Truth and nothing else. This is Licenced, and entred into the Hall Booke according to Order. London printed for John Wright in the Oldbailey. Novemb. 10. 1643.
The happy Successe of the Parliaments Army, at Newport & other places. THat you may be mindfull to send me the Printed newes, I wil as oft as I can acquaint you with what is materiall that I know to be truth, for we have too many Lyes abroad in this licen∣cious age: Nothing remarkable hath passed betweene the two armies in Northamptonshire untill Thursday November 2. when betimes in the morning by order from Major Ge∣nerall Skipton, the Horse forces in Northampton, or rather some troops of them were drawne forth to fall on the enemies Quarter that lay most re∣mote to the North, while 3. regiments of his Horse, viz. Colonell Midle∣tons
Regiment, Colonell Harvies, & Colonel Turners were sent out to fal on the South East part of their Quar∣ters, for the Kings Armylyes quarte∣red at the least 10. miles in distance one from another, the Northampton Forces hapned on the Lord of Nor∣thamptons Regiment about Stowes, 6. miles from the Towne, set on them by breake of day, and slew 3. or 4. of them, and took 14. prisoners all horse∣men, one a Coronet to the Earle of Northampton, & lost not one of their own: the London Regiments assaul∣ted them at the same houre at Alder∣ton, a mile from Geaston, they slew 15 on the ground, took 22 prisoners, and many horses which were left behind, the riders shifting for themselvs bet∣ter on foot into Geaston Park & other hedges, so that a horse-Fayre was kept
at Newport that day, and horses sold good cheape for ready mony, we lost but one man in this service. The Ene∣my to revenge this, did march all Friday night, & on Saturday morn∣ing, Novemb. 4. did set on our Quar∣ters at Oulny, we first took 2. of their Scouts, by which we perceived the approach of our danger: for their bo∣dy of horse, a very strong one too fell into the Town upon us, & charged us resolutely, & were received as stout∣ly by our men, untill we could or∣derly retreate to the Bridge, which with ease we made good against them, intending to keepe them in play untill our body came up to us from Newport 3 miles off, but they had no list to stay so long but some few faced us at the Bridge, whilst the rest retreated back, and by the way
some of them were met by the Nor∣thampton forces, who hearing they were gone towards our quarters sent out 7 or 8 troops of horse & about 500 foot they took of the enemy a Capt of a Troop of horse, one Cap. Geerye a Huntingtonshire man & a great ma∣lignant, his cornet, but not his colours (they have the trick to pull them of & throw the staff one way, & the Co∣lours an other) they tooke also his trumpeter & 9 other troopers which are all Prisoners in the towne. Post script. THe Enemy falling on our Quar∣ters, at Oulny, had a purpose to have charged resolutely through the Towne, and bin Mrs. of the Bridge, at the south end next Newport, but our Musketers were before them, & saluted them with two volley of shot, which drove them back, and by this
time Colonell Harvey, had drawne an indifferent body of Horse toge∣ther, who came bravely on the Ene∣my, but were by the great numbers driven backe, wee slew of them on the place, about 8 or 9 and they slew 5 of ours, many wounded on both sides; It being a very hot incounter for the time not exceeding halfe an houre, they got into the Towne, and in their lodgings tooke two Foot Collours, and two Drums, wee slew of theirs besides the other, a Captain of a Troope of Horse, and tooke his Cornet with his Collours, the Cornet desperately wounded, cannot live if he be not dead; They took of ours 15 Foot-men, & we twelve Horse-men of theirs, the losse was some-thing e∣quall, & there was much mercy in it, that they were stopped before they came to the Bridge, for had they
bin Mrs. of it, they had divided us from our Army at Newport as they did. a Troope of our Regiment that lay in a village and could not come at us, but were constrained to get to Northampton, so that ours & the Northampton forces have taken and slaine neer 100 of others this weeke with the losse of 6 men, and 15 Pri∣soners, no Officer as I can hereof; The Enemy retreated to Towcester, where they are with the greatest bo∣dy, they have both horse and foot; if more company comes down we shal give them another visit I hope, for we have good incouragment to acti∣on. God not being wanting to our weake endeavours, but hat follow∣ed us with his Blessings, the continu∣ation whereof is the Prayer of Yours &c. FINIS.
