J1245 E538_10 99862829 115006
A just VINDICATION of the Reputation of Mr. VVHITE Alderman of the City OF EXON, In Answer to a Scurrillous Pamphlet cald the Visible Vengeance, &c. Wherin is discovered the many fal∣sities and untruths in that Relation attested under the hand of his own servant that was with him in his journey till the day of his death: As also a true Relation of the sad accident that befell him, with the Circum∣stances thereof. They whet their tongue like a Sword, and bend their Bowes to shoot their arrowes, even bitter words, That they may shoot at the perfect Psal. 64. 3. 4. To him that is afflicted pity should be shewed from his friend, but he forsaketh the feare of the Almighty, Job 6. 14. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Rothwell, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Signe of the Sunne and Fountaine in Pauls Church-yard, 1649.
Courteous Reader, IT is no new thing for the servants of God that have in any eminent way oppos'd the ini∣quity of the times in their Generation, to be hated while they live, and to be reviled and reproached at their death by the tongues, and pens of lewd and prophane spirits, In all ages (saith one) there are not wanting some qui scepticè & scabiosè de bonis loquantur. This hath been the lot of this pious Ma∣gistrate of the City of Exon by this false and malicious Pam∣phleteere, who hath patch't together a bundle of untruths to make up his accusation and charge him (as will appear in the sequell) that he may hereby not only harden his own heart, but others also in their desperate Malignancy, sucking poyson out of every sad accident to increase their venom, and to strengthen themselves in their evill wayes, but thus it hath and ever will be, that those that seeke occasion to stumble at (by the just hand of God) shall find enough to harden themselues by to their own destruction. Let not the Saints of God be troubled at it, if they see reproaches cast upon their brethren in their life, or at their death, its their duty to keep themselves innocent, and it will be comfort enough when they are so; we must be content a while here, (if God will have it so) that our good names as well as our bodies (like the Corne) must dye, and rot awhile before they rise up a∣gaine, and appeare more glorious, the servant is not greater then his Master, Christ himselfe was call'd a Beelzebub while he lived, and suffered upon this very point, (as this servant of God doth) as a malefactor, when he dyed, because he was cryed out against as an enemy to Caesar. Reader, were the person so well known to thee, as he was in the place where he lived, it were needlesse to make reply by way of Vindication to so scurrilous a paper, for what is
there charged upon him cannot at all be credited by any so∣ber spirits that knew him, only considering that it is every Christians duty to endeavour what he can, to Vindicate the reputation of the innocent, (especiall such as were publick persons that cannot cleere themselves) as also because stran∣gers now adayes are too apt to entertain a beliefe of that which is asserted in Print and not contradicted, but chiefly that the mouth of inquity may be stopped, and that none from this sad act of Providence may take occasion to harden themselves in their Malignancy (against which the Majesty of Heaven hath so visibly appeared, and which seemes to be the errand of this lying imputation) I shall 1. Give thee a true Character of the man what he was who is thus aspersed. 2. A true relation of the sad accident that befell him in his journey to London, attested under the hand of his servant that was with him, that hereby (comparing it with the seur∣rilous Pamphlet) thou maist see how wickedly and basely he is wronged. 1. As for the Character of the man it is well known, That he was a pious man and a good Magistrate that punished sin impartially without respect of persons, one that hath both done and suffered much in person and otherwayes to further the worke of Reformation in a right Parliamentary way, he was no enemy to Monarchy; nor no friend to Malignants to uphold arbitrary and Tyrannicall Government, he was e∣qually averse to Sectaries on the one hand as to Malignants on the other, very sparing in his speeches to his very friends; and therfore very unlikely to be so rash; violent and reproach∣ing in his language of the King before strangers, yea and that such as were so vile and wicked (as those were that were in the Waggon with him;) as will appeare in the narration; he was of a more sober spirit then to use such bitter revilings and more wise then to speak before so rude a people; as is well known, to those that knew him, and therfore the more wicked was the Pamphleteere that belies him so much in Print to his defamation. 2. Take a briefe yet true Narration of his journey and the sad accident that besell him attested under the hand of his
own servant that was with him in his journey till he dyed. Which is as followeth. A briefe Relation of certaine passages which hapned unto my Master Mr. Walter White in his journey from his Son in Law Mr. William Whites house to∣wards London untill the time of his death. MY Master intending a journey for London, hyred two horses of one Paine a Waggoner belonging to the Town of Poole in the County of Dorset, who was to bring the said horses on the 20. th of November last past, to the house of Mr. William White at Hampreston, but then brought but one, pro∣mising at Ringwood five miles further on the road, he should not saile of the other, but my Master coming to Ringwood in expectation of this other horse sound the Waggon indeed there, and going towards Rumsey 15 miles from Ringwood, but the Waggoner (who made the promise) not yet come, and when come had not yet provided the other horse, so we were forced to stay there till he procured the horse, and by this time the Waggon being neere two houres before us ere we could overtake the Waggon, it was by six horsemen driven out of the road and robbed in the new Forrest, 5, or 6 miles from Ringwood. Being come to Rumsey, (for till then we knew not of the accident) the Waggoner (finding his goods so mixt that he could not discern one mans goods from another,) resolved to return, and would not let us have his horses according to agreement, being thus disappointed, with much difficulty (after one whole dayes stay at Rumsey) got horses to carry us to Winchester, and there not being able (after tryall) to get horses to carry us thorow to London, my Master was necessitated to put himselfe into an Hampton
Waggon, the Master whereof lived at Eason two miles from Winchester, whether we went on Saturday the 26 of Novemb. and 27 set forward in the Waggon with foure other passen∣gers (very lewd people as we afterwards found) one man and three women, we lay that night at Odium the next morning being gone neere 3 miles on our journey, coming into a bad way, the driver of the Waggon drove on the side of a banke, the Wagon being heavy loaden, leaning much to th'one side broke the pin which held it, and the wheeles together, and so fell over my Master having a box by his left side, fell on that, and the passengers on him, which bruised him very much, yet he lived neere 18 houres afterward, and 14 houres in perfect mind; he dyed Wednesday morning 29 of Novemb. 1648. Af∣ter the death of my said Master, the Jury and Corroner sitting upon him, found the aforementioned box to be part of the cause of his death, and so indited it. Christopher Dore. Now if thou please to peruse the Printed Papers relation, you may easily see the falsities therein contained which is as followeth, Friday the first of this instant December 1648. One White who was last yeere Major of Exeter, being upon the Road between that City and this of London in a Waggon of Exater, and twelve other passengers in it, neere Bagshot, began an invective and bitterly rayled against his Sacred Ma∣jesty, using many vile and reproachfull speeches against him, which when some of the company resented, and seemed to dislike in a rage of much sinfull passion, he stuck not to say, That hanging was too good for the King, and that if he were buryed alive, it were a death good enough for him: and added rather then it should be undone, he would be ready to do that himselfe, which words were scarcely by him uttered, when the Waggon was with the passengers in it suddainly overtur∣ned, and this blasphemous wretch White killed outright, with∣out leave of one words speech, not one of the rest (his man excepted who was a little bruised, it may be suffering for his relation to so wicked a Master) being in the leastwise hurt. What things are false in the printed relation of my master Mr. Walter White his death. He dyed the 29. th of November 1648. whereas the Pam∣phlet saith, the first of December.
2. He received his fall out of an Hampton Waggon one mile on this side Hartlerow in the Parish of Hartlewinkay; the Pam∣phlet saith 'twas out of an Exter Waggon neere Bagshot. 3. In the Waggon were but six Passengers with himself, the Pamphlet saith twelve. 4. The day before he sell, he reprooved the rest of the Reader thou maist perceive what a stranger he was to this sad ac¦cident which he relateth. passengers for their wanton and lasoivious discourse (which discourse was most abominable) but that day in which he received his hurt did not speake—one word of the King or of any State businesse; the Pamphler saith that he used ma∣ny vile and reproachfull speeches against the King. 5. He lived after his fall neer 18 houres, and in perfect mind above 14 houres, the Pamphlet saith he was kill'd outright. What is here testifyed by me is the truth. Christopher Dore. Reader, by this relation and the many untruths therein, thou maist easily perceive of what stamp the Pampleteere was of, and how much he resembleth him that is a lyer and Ioh. 8. 44. the father of it, one would think so short a relation could hard∣ly be stuft with so many untruths, It evidently appeares, he was not only a stranger to his person, but to this sad accident that befell him, yet deales with him as the Barbarians at Me∣lita with Paul, (though a stranger also to them) yet when the Viper was on his hand presently cry out that vengeance will not suffer him to live; Its a very ill but a very common thing to Judge of persous and of causes by the successe, man is apt to think them the worst who suffer worst, and that they have sinned most that have suffered most and have most sor∣row, surely he hath borne our griefs and carryed our sorrows yet (we did esteeme him) stricken, smitten of God and af∣flicted, Fsa. 53. 4. Luk. 13. 2 3. say they of our Saviour. I confesse great afflictions carry a charge of wickednesse upon the afflicted, but tis by them that judge only by sence. The Pamphleteere tels you immediately after his narrative, that the Judgements of God are a great deep, which indeed the Scripture sheweth, Psal. 36. 6. Ecel. 9. 8. and had he considered it as he ought, it might have silenced his revilings, for indeed here all things happen alike to all, as to the wicked so to the Righteous saith Solomon; I would not hereby take thee off Reader from observing the just judge∣ment,
of God, but take heed of being too criticall and censori∣ous in the particular application of them; indeed if men have been impions and abominable in their lives (which none can fasten upon this reproached Citizen) and God had in the ve∣ry act of sin cut him off, here might have been some place for an ecce digitus Dei, but to draw uncharitable and ungodly in∣ferences meerly from the untimely deaths of men, becoms not a sober spirit but is contrary not only to Religion but even to civility also; It was indeed an aggravation to his sad afflict∣ion that he fell into the company of such barbarous and un∣cleane people; which because he sharply reprooved them for their uncivill and wanton discourse while he lived, they would be sure to bespatter him with lying reproaches at his death, so Prov. 9, 7. true is that of the wiseman here, he that reprooveth a scorner getteth himselfe a blot. Reader I will not trouble thee further in replying to so bit∣ter and malicious a paper, as may appeare by his language and misapplications of Scripture, especially that with which he closeth up his railing discourse, 2 Sam. 16. 9. As for those places of Scripture that he useth or rather abuseth in his appli∣cation of them, you know they are the common texts which the Malignants of these times have frequently in their months to deceive simple soules, and to prop up a tottering and dying cause, which God hath once and againe so visibly declared a∣gainst, were they not hardened in their iniquity, they might see it, and repent, they are glad to catch at any thing that may support them in their sinking condition, and nourish that ra∣dicall hatred that is in them against the cause of God and his people. That which I have written hath been only to Vin∣dicate the slandered reputation of this worthy Citizen, whom we are bound to honour, and to satisfie the sober minded; As for others that are set upon reviling (whose tongues are bent like bowes for lyes) I know nothing will stop their mouths. I shall close therefore with that 14. Hos. 9. The wayes of the Lord are right, and the just will walk in them, but trans∣gressors shall fall therein. FINIS.
