l2171 e386_19 99861993 160228
THE RECANTATION Of Lieutenant Collonel John Lilburne, Prisoner in the Tower. OPENING, All the MACHINATIONS of the Independent Partie: THEIR Various Practises and Judgements. With the Reasons or Grounds of his unexpected Revolt from that Party: Also certain Rules to know them, with Cauti∣ons to shun most of their pernicious Heresies. Printed in the Yeer. 1647.
THE RECANTATION of LIEV. COL. IOHN LILBVRNE. Fellow-Commoners: I Know it cannot otherwise chuse but strike a wonder into you, to see me now revoke that Cause that for∣merly I have so unanimously main∣tained, both with my sword and pen; besides, many cruell sufferings, as whipping, imprisonments, and the like; in defence of you, your Priviledges, Freedomes, and Birth rights, even with the hazard of my life against all Opposers whatsoever; whether Bishops, Kings, Parlia∣ments, or any other Principalities or Powers in high pla∣ces. 1. Being imprisoned (by the Bishops) in the Fleet for a long time; denyed ever what nature it selfe so plenti∣fully gives to all sorts of Creatures, water being neere famished, shamefully betrayed by myEd. Chil∣dingden. friends, a∣bused by Jaylors, censured by Star-chamber, whipped
from the Fleet to Westminster, afterwards enduring long Captivity by the Bishops; then having obtained liberty by the meanes of my much honoured friend, Liev. Gen. Cromwell, no sooner released but againe ar∣raigned for my life, before the whole House of Peeres, about the Earle of Strafford, the King himselfe sending my Accusation againstMay 24. 1641. me. The House of Commons then vouchsafed me so ☜ much justice, as to vote for me. 1. That the Sentence of the Star-chamber given against mee was illegall, and against the Liberty of the Subject as also wicked, bloody, cruell, barbarous, and tyrannis all. 2. That reparations ought to be given mee for my impri∣sonment, sufferings, and losses sustained by that illegall sen∣tence. But since what justice I have received from them, let the world judge; considering the high esteeme I have had both of them and their Cause, that had I had at the beginning of these warres ten thousandmy hot Zeale. lives, I should have ventured them all for the Parliament, though I had stript my selfe to my very shirt, and though I had not left my Wife and Family any thing wherewith to have sub∣sisted: In their service I freely adventur'd my life with an undaunted courage and resolution, till being taken priso∣ner at Brainford, I was carryed to Oxford, where for al∣most a yeere I continued a prisoner, arraigned againe for my life; but when they could not worke upon mee by any threats or menaces, they resolved to try to doe that by polycy, they could not effect by force, and made me many proffers of worldly honours and preferments, which came even from the King himselfe, by the hands of 4 several Lords, yet I remained unmoveable as aMy strong faith. ock,
stopping my eares against all those juncto Syrens, and not so much as listning to any their conjurations or impreca∣tions, charmed they never so wisely, though I indured at that present as much misery as it was possible for any one man to doe by sicknesse, and otherwise, to the utter ruine of my estate, to the value of 6 or 700 l. as I can make it appeare. After this, being exchanged, I served under the Lord of Manchester, and being before Newarke, was stript to the bareYèt fer∣vent for their Cause. skin, hardly escaping with my life, and although I tooke in Tickell Castle from the Cavaliers, with much hazard, and danger; Yet the great Parliamen∣tary Reward for all my good service, was but an earnest desire to hang me, an unwelcome payment for so deser∣ving a service, and an excellent new reformed way to pay old debts, having due unto me under the command of the said Earle about 700 l. a summe that would have reared a gallows as high as Hamans for Mordecai; but &c. ☞ I forbeare to speake of Col. King. But they ha∣ving served their owne turnes of me, I could never have justice from them since, though I have been as faithfull a servant to them, and the Common-wealth, as any they ever imployed, and have bid defiance to all men in the world, to brand or taxe me with unfaithfullnesse: And whereas Magna Carta saith, Iustice and Right wee will de∣ny to none, nor wee will defer to none; Yet did I waite at least foure yeeres upon them, and in all that time, could not get them so much as to put their Votes in execution; since have I followed them 6 moneths, to the expence of above a hundred pounds to get a Petition read, that I might have Iustice and Right, yet denyed both, and have been since the 1 of May, 1641. imprisoned three times by authority of the House of Commons before ever I knew
mine accuser, or ever was suffered to speake one word in mine owne defence, directly against my Freedome, (ha∣ving beene in the field with my sword in my hand for the preservation thereof:) But if you please to read Magna Carta, 9 of Hen. 3. cap. 1. you shall finde there. That no Freeman may be taken and imprisoned, and dis∣seazed of his Freehold or his Liberty or his free Customes, or outlawed, or banished, or any way destroyed; neither will we go upon him, neither passe upon him but by the lawful tryal of his equals, or by the law of the Land; Iustice & Right we will sell to none, wee will deny to none, nor will deferre to none; all which is my proper Birth-right and Inheritance, con∣firmed by this present Parliament in many Declarations, taxing the King for the violation therof; yet acting con∣trary thereunto themselves. Deare fellow Commons, I Desire you to judge impartially, and tell me, if they deserved so faithfull a Champion as my ☜ selfe: That with undaunted courage, and un∣parrallelled valour have disarmed their enemies even at their very doores, (as namely Captaine Hide and others) and yet from that very house unto which those dores doe lead, have received so many Votes in Commitments, and otherwise, as any Freeman under the Cope of Heaven: the Copy of one followeth. Die Sabbati, 19 July, REsolved upon the Question by the Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, that Lievetenant Collonell Lil∣burne be forth with taken into Custody by the Serjeant at Armes attending this House, and so kept till the House take further Order.
To the Sergeant at Armes attending at this House, or to his Deputy, &c. H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com. I Could instance you many more Tyrannies and Outrages committed upon me since my commitment to the Tower, where I remaine yet a Prisoner, but it is needlesse, therefore enough shall suffice for this time. Let me in the next place give you notice concerning your Collections in your severall Congregations; I have found lately your Zeale very cold, and your Talent of Charity not to a∣bound; the streame of your bounty still ebbing, or flowing some other way; I speake this to put you in minde of your forwardnesse to minister freely to my wants, for I may speake it to your shames, that many of you mistaking the way to the Tower, are hurried with too forward zeale to Newgate, Bride∣well, or the Fleete; I must tell you Brethren,Martin Mar∣prist alias H. Over∣ton, his Wise in Bridewell. MARTIN, though a little bird, has a villanous stomacke,Mr. Mus∣grave, Jane Hu∣les and John Lar∣ner, in the Fleet, and Cupid O∣verton in the Gate∣house. even like any Cormorant, can digest your silver as easily as an Estriche Iron; Martin is aHe writ the Boke of soules mor∣tality, and maintaines the same. Mortall Creature and of a retrograde judgement to the truth of our profession; besides he studies Chymistry, and by his fained art of Eloquence, can easily extract the silver from his fellow-sufferers: O divine Martine, if your superla∣tive holinesse have no more fellow-feeling of the necessi∣ties of your Brethren, I shall hardly endure you to build your Nest (this Summer) on the charities of your abused Brethren, but will cause you take your flight (at Midsom∣mer) with Cockoes and Jackdaus more Westerly, where you shall pearch according to your Dignity. It cannot much impaire your holinesse function, considering your grave Labours, and most Elaborate Peeces thatA scurril∣lous Pam¦phlet enti∣tued Mar∣tins Eccho. Eccho forth your * sacred endowments. I shall goe neere to tell the people, that your holinesse battens (like an Abby-lubber) in your Cloyster of Newgate, far more aboundantly then in yourSacred decretall, or a Hue and Cry of  his holi∣nesse, Mar∣tin Mar∣priest. hole in Too∣lies: Martin went uponWhere his holinesse kept his Srupet called Mar∣gery Mar¦priest, alius his Prin¦ting-presse Crutches then, though now his holi∣nesse hath taken upon him the garbe of a compleat Gallant, smells like a † perfumer, God save his holinesse: Courts the Sisters, and findes them excellent well edified, and very com∣pliable
in their uses; Mortall Creatures, grasse and hey, all Mortal, all Mortall.Both his Servants names. But deare Brethren, enough of this fowle bird Martin, next I shall desire you to lay to heart all my suffering; for your Priviledges, Liberties,But he may thank sister Daw the Perfu∣mers wfe. and Na∣tive Birth rights: And that you would exhort all, and every Member in your respective Congregations, to contribute freely to my necessities, and the necessities of my fellow sufferers in the Fleet; and to hold your hand from contributing to profane Martin any more, till his Brethren that are more worthy sufferers then himselfe be first supplied, or he himselfe reclaimed from his pernicious Errors. Therefore to conclude, I give my judgement for the present, which I de∣sire to hold and maintaine untill I be convinced by you of the same, and convinced, shall be soone reclaimed. 1 I beleeve the King to be supreame head and governour, in all causes, over all persons, Ecclesiasticall or Civill. 2. I am of the judgement, that no Subject ought to take up Armes a∣gainst his lawfull King, and that all such taking up Armes against lawfull Authority, is fighting against God, and his Ordinances. 3. I querie whether the King, being despencer of Law, or Chiefe Mi∣nister thereof, offending, or breaking the Law, be under a capacity of being punished by any inferiour power, my judgement therein is, that no power under the King can doe it, but he is to expect his punishment from God only, and none else. 4. I am of that judgement, that if the King shall command me any thing contrary to the word of God, I ought not to doe it, neither to resist, but patiently suffer what punishment soever he shall inflict upon me, for Christs sake. 5. I am of that judgement, that there cannot be fighting for Religion, but suffering for Religion in England, Ireland, or else where. 6 I am of that judgement, that the Church founded upon the 12 Pillars or Articles of Christian Faith in the three Creedes, called the Apostles, Athansius, and Nicene Creed, is the true Church of God, and that wee ought not to seperate from that Church but from any knowne Error in that Church: And any new Faith coyned by the Assembly to the contrary of none effect. Thus deare Countrey men have I layd downe my judgement for the present, which shall no longer be evidenced by mee, then prooved by the Word. Therefore I desire thee to search the Scriptures, by which Rule all sure foundations are layd, for lasting structures, Common wealths, and Churches have not a Philosophicall Generation, the new out of the per∣version, the corruption of the ancient Government; the new out of the extirpation, the annihilating the established old Religion; And if so great tempests and Earthquakes of Drums and Attillery, subvertions and im∣mersions, of persons and estates: Such unreckonable expence of a King∣dome, coyned (to effect) for supplies, and such inundations and overwhel∣ming of blood, beget but a bare promise of such an issue, what remaines for the Nation to undergoe before its productions? Doubtlesse this birth
can at these rates be attended with no lesse then a desolation, when there shall be too few left, and those too much enfeebled to fall out about the enjoyment of so great a happinesse. Reason was given to man for a direction, as well as a distinction; and ge∣nerally wee beleeve our eyes above any assertions: Poore selfe-deceiving Englishman, who canst not be sensible how fantastick thy opinionate Refor∣mation is; how reall the devastation of thy substance, and canst finde a hope that the one will improove, and not a feare that the other may im∣paire; As thou art onely miserable in a proportion at present from thy selfe; So the Remaining degrees that thou art to take in misery, are not to be proceeded in without thy consent to a continued Vassallage. It is iust with God, and abates the Condemnation of imposing man to lay burdens, and use Goades on those who will be beasts by disavowing their reason, or pinning it upon opinion of anothers infabilities. and as just to strike him blinde, who will not see an object of his marke in other co∣lours or demensions then what are rendred by anothers spectacles. FINIS.
