P1753 E399_35 R201734 99862233 114384
A PETITION FROM THE CITY of LONDON WITH A COVENANT IN THE Name of divers Collonels, and other Of∣ficers, and Apprentices, and Sea-men; For the raising of Forces against the Army, and bringing the KING to LONDON. VVith the Votes of the House of Com∣mons concerning the said Petition. And the Parliaments Message to the Lord Mayor about the same. Printed in the Yeare 1647.
Heads of a PETITION From the City of LONDON: WITH A Covenant, in the name of divers Collonels, and other Officers, and Ap∣prentices and Sea-men, for the raising of Forces against the Army, and bringing the KING to London. FIRST. THat the Kings Majesty may passe the propositions which himselfe offered in his message from Holmeby, in answer to the Parliaments propositions, which
were sent to his Majesty to Newcastle (both concerning the settling of the Presbyterian Government, disposing of the Militia, pas∣sing Acts done by the great Seales on both sides, and other particulars,) as they are expressed in the said message 2 That upon the passing of the said pro∣positions made into Acts, his Majestie may bee re-invested in his honours and rights. 3 That his Majesty may be brought to London to reside with his Parliament and sit and continue with them. 4 That the Army may be kept at a dist∣ance, at his Majesties comming to Lon∣don. 5 That all Newters, may be turned out of the City. 6 By oath, (and by a covenant expres∣sed in the said petition) they ingage them∣selves by all the oaths and covenants that they have taken to manage this designe a∣gainst all opposers. 7 To oppose the Army. 8 To suppresse all Independents,
9 That it be read at a Common-hall. The said Petition is dispersed into severall parts of London, and intrusted in the hands of Agitators in the severall Wards, to get hands to it, and some solicite Apprentises for hands, and others Agitate with Watermen, and Seamen. Those who agitated with the Seamen, made so plausible a Narrative of the businesse, that many Seamen gave them a meeting, and after they had heard it read, began to subscribe. But some of them prying into it, found some faults, and said, it was of dangerous consequence, and that they would never ingage against Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Army. Then the rest cryed out to have their hands a∣gain, which they forced from the agitators, and then all cryed, home, home. Some Petitions were left with some of the chief∣est Officers in the City of London, to agitate in getting hands, who refused, though some others have been very active in it. Some who are eminent, excuse it thus: That their other imployments will not permit them to do any thing in it▪
But others, (and those not the least in the City) said that they will to their power labour to defend the City, whilest they have one drop of blood in their bo∣dies, but that in this case to engage against an Army in the field, where there are no other grounds or causes, then now visible: They will not be guil∣ty of spilling one drop of blood. But labour all they can for a sure and lasting peace. The Votes of the House of Commons concerning the foresaid Petition, And the Parliaments Message to the Lord Mayor about the same.
Die Jovis 22 July, 1647. A Member of the House of Com∣mons, declared to the House a paper in the name of a Petition from divers Collonels, &c. in the City; And the House taking the same into consideration, and the dangerous consequence thereof, proceeded to a way for suppressing it. I. It was Resolved by the Com∣mons in Parliament Assembled, That Members of the House of Commons, examine the said Peti∣tion, and who were the contrivers, and promoters therof, and report the same to the House.
II. It was Resolved by the Commons Assembled in Parliament That Alderman Pennington, Al∣derman Atkin, and Collonell Venn, Members of the House of Com∣mons, goe to the Lord Mayor of the City of London, to desire his Lord∣ship (from this House) to take care to suppresse all tumults, and prevent Mutinies, and insurrections in the City of London. FINIS.
