P1844 E449_35 99864556 161878
A PETITION Presented at a Common-Hall in LONDON On Satturday last concerning the KINGS MAJESTY, And the answer there∣unto. ALSO A Declaration of the Counties of Northampton, Leicester, and Rutland, and the Forces they have raised. WITH A Letter from Scotland and the Acts which the Parliament there made, and the people sworn to maintain, concerning the Kingdome of Eogland, and the proceedings of Duke Hamilton, and of their Forces comming into England. London, Printed for B. A. Anno Dom. 1648.
royal blazon or coat of arms C R A LETTER From Scotland, and the Acts made in the Parliament there, published at their adjournment, with an oath to observe therein. SIR, THe Parliament did break for two yeeres on the 10. of June, and have made as they call them these Acts 1. That no Minister whatsoever doe presume publikely or privately to speake against this Engagement of the Parl. or D. Hamiltons proceedings, upon penalty to be dismissed of his place, his person imprisoned, and what person soever do pay unto such persons any stipend, shal be proceeded against as a ma∣lignant, and his estate seized.
2. That what Parl. man or Minister of Justice soever in this Kingdom, that will not joyn with them in this Engagement, shall lose his place▪ his person imprisoned, and means seized. 3. An Oath to be given to all Parl. men, and others of what rank and quality soever, that they shall sweare to approve and conent to, and with their lives and for∣tunes maintain any Act or Acts, and all the proceedings of this Parl. and this new Engagement: This power is by act given to the Committee o Estates to execute, and the refusers to be proceeed against with imprison∣ment. No provision of monies made for the Army, and when the question was asked the Duke how his Army must be maintained, he answered in Parl. Put the Lads a foot in England they will shift for themselves. Now if but incouragement from England come there is ten to one against the rising, but they want an head, and an opportunity to draw to a head, which will be effected by some force drawing to the North to in∣gage Langdale: whereby these now raised in Scotland may be drawn away, and so Argyle have scope to array men. Two of Duke Hamiltons Regiments are revolted from him, and have declared for the Marq. of Argyle and his party, being resolved to dissert the articles of engagement▪ against the levying of a War in oppositi∣on to the proceedings of the Parliaments of both king∣domes. They have also secured the city and castle of Eden∣burgh
for the well-affected party, which was former∣ly under the power and command of Duke Hamilton, and are resolved to adventure lives and fortunes against all that shall endeavour to disturbe the peace and uni∣ty of either Kingdoms. A Declaration of the Counties of Northampton, Liecester, and Rutland. THe Right Honourable the Lord Grey coming downe into the county of Liecester, to further the settle∣ment of the Militia there, the well affected party of that County met together, and considered of such ways and meanes, as might put the said county into such a posture, as should be for defence of themselves, and render them most serviceable to the peace and safety of the Kingdome, and Ashby-de-la-zouch being alrea∣dy made a Garrison for the Parliament, they now a∣greed for the raising of Horse and Foot, and came to this result. That there should be raised in that County three hundred Horse and three hundred Dragoones to be di∣vided into two Regiments, and four Regiments of foot, They also proceeded to make choice of a Commander
in chiefe, and for that made election of the Lord Grey. And in pursuance of this businesse monies was raised, and the Horse and Dragoons are raised, and the Foot compleating with all expedition. The Gentlemen of that County have also sent Let∣ters hereof to the Parliament, declaring their integrity and good affections to the Parliament, and their for∣wardnesse to appear against the disturbers of the peace and quiet of the Kingdome, manifested by their renew∣ing of the old quarell, and by deluding of the common sort of people, endeavour to bring ruine and destructi∣on on the whole Kingdome, as experience sheweth by the present miseries which is thereby brought on Kent and Essex. Other Counties as well as this which have formerly felt the miseries of a Civill War, viz. Northampton∣shire, Rutlandshire, and others, are putting themselves into the like posture, and desire that power may be gi∣ven to such persons as they shall make choice of to command in chief, to grant Commission▪ to other Of∣ficers, which are also made choice of by the Coun∣try. Die Sabbati 24. Juuij, 1648. THis day according to the custome and char∣ter of the city of London, there was a com∣mon Hall, and for prevention of all insurrections,
a guard was set not only at Guild hall, but at the Gates of the City, and passages to the water side: there was this morning many Libels throwne into severall Halls where the Livery men met, one most invective against Major Gen. Skippon, and ano∣ther calling the Army cruell, bloud▪ thirsty, &c. At the meeting of the Livery of London at Guild-hall, they began with the work of the day, viz. the election of Sheriffs▪ and made choice of M. Gen. Brown, and Mr. Viner, a Goldsmith in Lum∣bard-street. June 22. Letters from the Head-quarters say, That the Army is within pistol-shot of Coulchester walls, and are resolved to give no quarrer to the Enemy, being sorry that they offered them such honourable conditi∣ons yesterday, which they have rejected. By an Expresse from Scotland, it was this Evening certified to the, Committee at Derby house, that two Regiments of Duke Hamiltons have revolted from him to joyn with the Marq. of Argyle, and keeps two castles against Hamilton.
After the debate of the Sheriffs a petition was pre∣sented in the name of many well-affected Citizens which was grounded on these three heads viz. That there may be a personall treaty with the King, that the Hamblets and the Subburbs of the City may be setled as that of the City London is. And that liberty may be granted to the City to make adresses to his Maj. by way of accommodation. This Petition was read and after some debate thereon answer was returned to this effect. That the Lord Major Aldermen and Common-coun∣cell, assembled on Thursday last had considered on the very same things mentioned in the two first clauses of this Petition and did agree to petition the Parl. for the same, and did then refer the businesse to a Committee of Aldermen and Commoners, to draw up a petition for that purpose to the Parliament; which petition would be ready to be presented on Thursday next at the fartheft. To the other perticular for addresses to the Kings answer, was returned thus. That a Common-councel should be called on Monday next, at the farthest and in the mean time any perticular man that hath any thing which he would have made known at that cōmon-councell should repair to the common-councel men of of their respective wards and acquaint him therewith, to to the end the court at their sitting may fully under∣stand the agrievances of the city and do the best that in them lyes for redressing the same, and put their helping hand for effecting a lasting and well grounded peace, which gave good fatisfaction to petitioners and al peo∣ple departed in an orderly and decent manner. Imprimatur G. M. FINIS.
