p3683 e540_4 99865031 117264
The PROPHECY of the WHITE KING Explained, Compared with severall Copies, both Welsh, Latine, and English: Some of which were written almost a thousand years agoe, be∣sides this old English Copy here Printed, which was of high esteem in the dayes of King Edward the fourth, Printed for Robert Ibbitson. 1649.
THE Prophecy of the VVhite KING EXPLAINED. A Thing foreseen, and declared to come to passe concerning great Britain, is very remarkeable, and thus prophecyed of long before. When Britain, (that is, England and Scotland) shall have one King (whose Armes is the Lion) And this King shall be the rightfull Prince of the whole Isle) then this time is neer at hand; but not to be fulfilled in his life; It shall not be accomplished in his time, but when he is dead, poysoned, or cut off, then shall the time bee. The King that succeeds him, shall be such a one, as must be King of all Britain, both England and Scotland, as the King his predecessor was. He shall be all in White, Suite, Cloke, Stockings, all white, or some other visible demonstration shall declare him to bee properly called a White King, at the very time of his Corona∣tion, when he receives the Crown, and Scepter. And he is to be not only born in Britain, but to be raised out of the loyns of the fore-going King, hee shall be his only son then living, The aged Father being dead, the Son shall rise, and sit in the Throne, to rule both England and Scotland. But yet hee shall not come to the Crowne without further markes concerning him; to declare who this White King shall be. For foure things are immediately to goe before his com∣ming to the Throne. 1 Hee shall rise to the Crown y flying over the head of his Brother, or some other, who is neerer  the Crown then he, And therefore shall be removed out of the way by poyson, death, banishment, or some way or other. 2 He shall ride, and travell farre, to seek him a wife, he shall goe into Spain or Italy, or some other Kingdoms, to effect it, but shall return un∣satisfied.
3 He shall marry one out of France, or some neerer place, then whi∣ther he before rl, and sought, and they shall be bodded, and lye together, before the old King be removed. 4 In his lying with his wife, be shall doe the office of an Husband. These some things being accomplished, the Lyon of Right∣fulnesse shall dye. And then the White King shall rise, and be led to the Throne. After the White King hath Reigned certain years in Britain, he shall so vex his people, that when he is in England, Scotland shall rise against him. And they shall publish Declarations, and shew whether there be not Christ and King in the Kirk, above the person of the White King. And by that Kingdome forces shall be raised, and an Army gathered together, for the freedome, and priviledges, of the People. And the White King also shall raise an Army in England, to be an help for him against those raised by the Scots, and shall take to him such Officers as he can best confide in, because he shall finde a great unwillingnesse in the people to this warre. But the Armies shall band, the King will impose ship-mo∣ney, and other Sessements upon the people, and make himself a Merchant of their Estates, Monopolies shall still increase, He shall set riders upon Horses, and force the people by Taxes, to pay them, and shall cause his Subjects of the two kingdoms, to be murthered like Oxen. The King shall be sought to, that there may bee a present help, and that all the burdens, and grievousnesses of the king∣domes may be removed, both in Church and State, but he shall not be prevailed with. Yet it shall so come to passe, that there shall be a Treaty, at which head for head shall have argument for argument; and at last a pacification shall be agreed on, and then shall the Scots returne back to their owne Kingdome, and the sun shall arise in England by the Kings calling of a Parliament. Yet so that another cloud shall arise and cause this sun to set by dissolving it presently againe; and then shall the peo∣ple be in sad discontents. But after the dissolution of this Parliament, great risings
shall be over all Brittaine, in so much that the King will bee forced to call a new Parliament. And in that Parliament divers Acts shall be passed, by the King, Lords, and Commons; and yet the people (in great discontents) shall exclaime against the King for oppression, and flock to the Parliament to cry for justice, by that Kingly authority which is in them. After this, when the King shall see how the people rise a∣gainst him, he shall go from his Parliament, and raise up his Standard, and put forth Proclamations, and Declarati∣ons against them, and all that oppose him; and shall be re∣solved (by the sword) to make them know that he is a King; for which purpose he shall appoint a Commission of Array to be settled in all parts of the Kingdome. These will be strange and trying times; some will stagger, and not know what to do; yet Wise-men will be able to dis∣cerne the providence and way of God, and notwithstanding the great divisions then amongst the people; yet they will finde a settlement in their judgements, because they eye the way of God. But there shall be a range of plundering Gleada, that shall live upon pillage of the Country: Cavaliers, that shall joyne with the White King, shall bereave men of their goods, and have the Command of mens houses, as if they were their own. And as for the time of this warre, it is to last for the space of seven years, in which time will happen many sad calami∣ties, which usually accompany warre. There will be ravening after mens estates, violence to shed blood, the people of God will be driven into Corners, and hide themselves in Ovens, and holes, from the barbarous Ca∣valiers. The husbandman will have his corn carryed away by strangers, many shall be brought to poverty, and driven to live a most miserable and wretched life; and yet (in their greatest misery) shall find but few friends. After this, Malignants, Chickens of the Court, shal passe from the South and the East, to the North of England, and up and down Britain, to joyne with the King against the Parlia∣ment. And to the Houses and Garrisons of the White King,
and the King himself will command them, and have great fel∣lowship with them. And by that time a yeare and an halfe is passed of the English war, the Scots will come in to joyn with the Parliament of Eng∣land; and then the war will be all over Brittaine, both in Eng∣land and Scotland, and then wil a promise belittle regarded; many will endeavour to keep that which is theirs, and to live upon o∣ther mens estates. And this shall continue for a certaine time. But the time shall come, wherein the White Kings Army at Nazby or some such place, shall be utterly defeated: land he him∣selfe shall be made very feeble and weake, And he shall be so pur∣sued that with much difficulty he shall make a private escape out of Newarke or some besiedged Garrison to Oxford, or to some For∣tification of his from whence he came, by which there is a rn∣ing water. Yet when he is there, he shall be followed by the Parliaments forces, and through feare leave his old Garrison againe; and at a place agreed on, he shall be met, and surrender himselfe to the Scots, who shall deliver him to the English, and themselves re∣turn backe into Scotland. He shall have guards of Souldiers set upon him; yet hee shall make to him a new hoast, and by private Commissions get a great strength, and they shall ingage for him in a new war; and the White King shall come to a Personal Treaty with the Parliament and that to bee over the great hall of the Schoole-house, in the Church-yard at Newport in the Isle of Wight, or over some other hall in a Kirke yard: where shall be his fall and ruin. After this shall the King who is the Eagle, and all his Chickins be brought to tryall by the supreame power of the Commons of England, the highest Pearch of all Brittaine, first of his life. And foure things are observable about the death of the White King. 1 Hee shall not bee slaine amongst the young Souldiers, but shall bee preserved all the times both of the former and the latter War. 2 Hee shall not come to be old, not live to see long time after the warres are ended, and yet he shall live to see peace.
3 That he shall come to be tryed for his life, in which the gen∣tle worthies of the Parliament and their Army, will not suffer wrong to be done unto him, But will give him an ample, publick and legall Tryall. 4 That the Realme being thus settled in peace, then the White King must dye. Here are also set down what shall come to passe after the death of the White King. 1 That two yeares after the Realme is in peace, there shall be fully established an Agreement of the People, and a holy rule from heaven, which shall settle the Church, as it shall stand for ever to the end of the world. 2 The Liberties of the three Countries shall be restored, so that England, Scotland and Wales, shall never be in such slavery to the day of Doome. 3 The superstition of the Orosse and all Popery and Prelacy shall be taken away. 4 There shall be a Temple builded not made with hands, but spirituall for the advancing of Jesus Christ upon his Throne. THE VVHITE KINGS PROPHECY. WHen the Lyon of Righteousnesse is dead, there shall rise a White King in Brittain, first Flying, and after Riding, af∣ter Ligging down; and in this ligge down he shall be lamed; after that he shall be led. And there shall be shewed whether there be another King: Then shall be gathered together much folke, and he shall take helpe for him: And then there shall be Merchan∣dise of men, (as of an Horse, or an Oxe) and there shall be sought help; and there shall none arise, but head for head; and then shall one gone, there the Sun ariseth, another there the Sun gone down: After this it shall be said by Brittain (King is King) King is no
King. After this he shall raise up his head, and he shall be taken him to be a King, be many things to be done, but wise men read∣ing, and then shall a range of Gleeds and that ever each hath be∣reaving) he shall have it for his own, and this shall last seven yeers, Lo raving and shedding of blood; and Ovens shall be made like Kirks; and that as one sowes another shal reap, and death shall be better then wretched life, and charity shall be of few men; After then shall come through the South with the Sun, on Horse of tree, and upon all waves on the Sea, the chicken of the Eagle sailing into Brittain, and arriving anon to the House of the Eagle, he shall shew fellowship to them beasts. After a yeer and a half shall be war in Brittain, then shall a sooth be naught worth, and every man shall keep his thing, and gotten other mens good: af∣ter the white King feeble shall goe towards the West, betlipped about with his folk, to the old place been running water, then his Enemies shall meet him, and meet him, and march in her place, shall be ordained about him in Hoast, on the manner of a shield shal be formed, then shal they fight on Oven front, After the white King shall fall into a Kirk-yard over a Hall. After the chic∣ken of the Eagle shall nestle in the highest Rooch of all Brittain, nay he shall naught be slain yong: nay naught come old, for then the Gentle worthines shall naught suffer wrong be done to him, But when the Realm is in peace then shall he die, and two yeers after shall come a new. Rule from Heaven and settle holy Kirk as it shall evermore stand, and bring three Countries into one, Eng∣land, Scotland, and Wales, unto the day of doom, and the Holy Crosse be brought into Christian mens hands, and there shall be made a Temple that never was made, such none. The Originall hereof was found by the Lady Poston of the Coun∣ty of Norfolk, amongst the evidences of Edw. the fourth his time. FINIS. Jan. 26. 1648. Imprimatur Theodore Jennings.
