R1065 R229656 99895339 152706
A REPLY TO That Pernicious and scandalous LIBEL, lately Printed in HOLLAND, IN AN ALMANACK, For the Year 1687. Writted by (whom?) but Io. Partridge an English Renegado. Manifesting his horrid Treasons, wicked Blasphemies, and most absurd Errours in Art; and exhibiting the genuine signification of the STARS toward GREAT BRITAIN. What reward shall be given (or done) unto thee thou false Tongue; even mighty and sharp Arrows with hot burning Coles. Psal. 120.3. Let the mischief of their own Lips fall upon the head of them: Let hot burning Coles fall upon them: Let them be cast into the Fire, and into the Pit, that they never rise up again. Psal. 140.9 10. If ye do Live, ye shall be Accursed: If ye Die, the Cuse shall be your Portion. Eccles. 41.9 Published by Authority. London, Printed for Nath. Thompson, at the Entrance into the Old Spring-Garden, 1687.
TO ALL LOYAL READERS, WHETHER ENGLISH, or DUTCH, Or, of any other NATION. Gentlemen! YOu may wonder to see a Prognostication for 1687. peep out in August, viz. when more than half the Year's expir'd. But you'l admire much more at the oc∣casion, when, in the Reading it you find 'tis a Reply to One of the same Year, written (I am asham'd to speak it) by an English-Man, with a design to Traduce and Trample upon His Majesty, and Government, to decry Monarchy, vent Treason, with Blasphemy, and all manner of wickedness that can be exprest in Ink and Paper; And this under pretence of Astrology, to the great dishonour of God, and the Science of the Stars, bidding de∣fiance to Heaven it self, with the greatest impu∣dence and indecency of Expression, that possibly can proceed from the Pen of one in Humane shape.
But that which we may most marvel at, is, that this Author, (fled for Treason into Holland, should There find Protection. In Holland! I say, a Country in Amity with England, and Ally'd to His Majesty by the strongest and most Royal of all Pledges, that Nature or Nations can afford: I mean the happy Espousal of the Royal and Illustrious Princess, the Princess MARY, the Eldest Daughter of England, unto the thrice Noble, Valiant, and Magnanimous Prince of Orange: The present visible hopes of that In∣dustrious and Fortunate Nations Rise, and Ho∣nour. If, I say, this be consider'd by that Wise and Prudent People, they'l never believe it Pleasant, or Grateful to the Ears of that Royal Princess, or to the most Excellent Prince Her Husband. Nor is it for the Honour of the High and Mighty States themselves, to suffer this bold Libeller to Publish his impudent Scandals and Treasons (un-regarded) under their very Noses. Which practice tends, not only to the dishonour and disturbance of those against whom he levels his Arrows of Envy; but, to a direct breach of the Friendship of both Nations: For the continuance whereof, every good Man in each Country will always Pray. If a Letter or False Report have (formerly) set Nations at odds, what then may be the Issue of a Connivance at the grosest Scandals and Trea∣sons? and wherein the greatest of Kings, and the
best and most Antient of Religions is concern'd? I will not presume to Augure, or Determine, what: But this I may be bold to affirm, if Honour be tender in a single Person, 'tis much more so in a Prince, or Nation If the Faith of Nations be allow'd Sacred, then, why not their Honour? It concerns me, that I am constrain'd to re-mind my Native Country of th se broad fac'd Calum∣nies, thus (sine causa) cast upon Her: But more, that in all this time there has not been found one Loyal English-Man of Courage and Ability to Retort them. As for the method, I have follow'd the Libeller, almost , (save in his rude and ridi∣culous Poetry, at the beginning, and end of his Libel, the substance whereof is sufficiently reply'd unto in the following discourse.) I have ript up his Ridiculous Follies expos'd his Blasphemies and Treasons, Corrected his Errours in Art, made known his gross Juglings and the no-ground he had, wherein to Traduce his KING and Country. For the Hexameters over the Months, I will not call them so much an Answer to his Infamous Rhimes, as Direction, and Caution to him of the danger of jesting with Edge-Tools, least his Treasonable and Blasphemous Mirth bring him to Perdion. Non bonum est ludere cum Sanctis. Had I exactly follow'd him here, I must have put my self upon the ungrateful Drudgery of repeating
all his Atheisme and Blasphemies; which must needs Nauseate any sober Reader. I have Explain'd all the horrid Scandals and Falshoods contain'd in his Chronology, and have taken the pains to inform him of some things, he'l no more thank me for, than care to hear of. Now that Truth may Triumph, and Rebellion and Falshood meet its just Reward; That our Nble Nation, and the most Puissant Governour thereof, may ever (as they already do) out-shine, and dazle their Enemies, and see the Down-fall of such as wish them Ill. That they may be the wonder of the World in their Devotion to God, and true Loyalty towards the King. That all true and useful Arts may Flourish among us; and that Loyal Artists may prove as Zealous in the Ʋse of them, for the Honour and Advantage of the King and Government, as Rebels and Traytors are ready to imploy them against both. Is the constant Prayer of (Gentlemen!) Your Humble Servant.
Observations on JANUARY. Touch'd with the sense of Ancient Britains worth, My Pent-up Muse into a Flame breaks forth, Of Sacred Fury! scorns to be afraid, Of vaunting Boasts dull Hereticks have made, Against the Christian Truth which must prevail; While every Schism unto Her strike Sail. REader! That thou may'st see what an English∣man the Libeller is, he hath omitted the Mar∣tyrdom of King Charles I. in his Calendar, which was January 30, 1648. a dismal Day indeed! and never to be forgotten by any Loyal Man, and Christian. A Day commanded by Act of Parlia∣ment to be observ'd for ever. But the Libeller is as much a Friend to the Priviledges of Parlia∣ment, as to the Honour and Prerogative of Kings. i. e. For either, or neither, as his perishing Interest leads him. For his Astrological judge∣ments of this Month, as they are not many, nor Material, so had he no great ground in Art, whereon to raise any. Howbeit, he makes Soldiers brisk and busie, &c. in this un-active and un-sutable time of the Year: Whenas, his Tusser might have taught him better. Astrology tells him, that every Coelestial Agent works upon the Patient; secundum quid, i▪ e. according to its aptness and disposition to receive the influence and im∣pression; and to the Time and Place also, when, and where the effect is expected; according to Hipocrates. Now Ja∣nuary, of all the Months in the Year, is the most unfit for Martial business, or briskness. And I will inform the Li∣beller, That though the Loadstone will draw Iron, it will not draw a Nail out of a Post.
Observations on FEBRUARY. Right Christian Priests are like their Mother, True, Pious and Painful, and Obedient too. Their Charity's so great, as fain would Save The veriest Villain, and the vilest Knave: Even such as Wrong them most! This is their Care, To bring Truths Enemies to Bliss by Prayer. HEre the Libeller boldly Praedicts— Some high offers made to the King of Spain by some Grave Saturnine States∣man. He seems to build his Judgement upon the Sextile of Sa∣turn and Mars; And so makes Mars to signifie that Monarch. But if any demand, Quo Warranto, by what Authority he doth so? He hath nothing to Answer. For neither is Spain it self, or yet that Catholick Prince, signified under Mars. And if he subject that Monarch to Saturn, (as some Astrolo∣gers do, and perhaps, truly) then he makes Mars the Grave States-man, who is to propound these offers, &c. It is cer∣tainly, Primae impressionis, the very first time that Mars hath been term'd a Grave States-man: Nor was he ever esteem'd a Politician, except in the Libellers Astrology; who, it seems, hath got Caucus's Art, and can make (—Candida de nigris, & de candentibus atra) Saturne, the Raring Boy, and Mars the Sober Thinking Philosopher.— He goes on, The Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in Sagitary, disturbs the Cler∣gy in England; I hope, (saith he) They are not about to put on Buff-Coats; if they do, the Souldier must wear the Black Ones. But, blessed be God, we have heard f no such Eccle∣siastical War in England. And to say the Truth, his Prae∣diction is without ground; For, if Cancer be the present Horoscope of England, (as it is,) then are the Clergy thereof not under Sagitary, but Aquarius; and may wear their Black Gowns themselves, if they Forfeit them not, or make themselves Irregular, by Dancing after the LIBELLERS Pipe.
Observations on MARCH. This Papal-Power, though Envy'd by the Fiend, Is That will bring His Kingdom to an End, That Fiend! which sts his Sons a broaching Lyes, To Cheat the Easy, and to Damn the Wise. Our Saviour's Promise to his Church is sure▪ With IT He'll be, while Sun and Moon endure. MArch, is threat'ned by the Libeller, to be a Month of Action with a Witnes; And to bode an Earth-quake among Gown-men, both Sacred and Secular; Bishops, Judges Civilians, &c. are blown up, and out of their Elements — But not one word of all this hth proved true. Nor was it likely it should. For let us examine upon what Con∣figuration he lays the weight of this Praediction; and we find it to be upon the Quadrate of the Luminaries to Ju∣piter at the New Moon. But doth not every Astrologer know that Qudrates are Aspects but of imperfect Enmity at the most? And that Jupiter is a Star of an Amicable and Preserving Influence Naturally? And are we not taught by the Sages of this Science, that if that good Planet hap∣pen to be detrimented, (which here he is not) it doth only minuere, (i. e.) Lessen his benefique Energie, but not per∣mute his Nature? How then, I say, should such an Earth∣quake have fallen out?— But the event hath answer'd his Prediction; As there was no ground for it, so nothing like it hath happen'd. The Libeller is as true in what fol∣lows, viz, About the third and fourth day a Surprize of some Town, Castle, Fort, &c. Holland threat'ned with War, and Denmark with Invasion, England and France with Discontents, &c. All which have been fulfil'd per , to the Lying Libellers Credit.
Observations on APRIL. Reason must yield to Faith in Sacred things; Priests, like good Angels, still good Tidings bring. 'Tis for our Souls they Watch. We then should Pray For, not Traduce them: least we run Astray From the great Shepherds Fold. Ungrateful men, Do Crucifie the Lord of Life agen. THe Libeller confidently tells us,— This is a month of War too, with News of a Bloody Dispute by Sea or Land, or both— But, for his Conviction there was not one word of any War, or any such Bloody Dispute heard of in all this month. And yet herewith he hath threat'ned England, France, Scotland, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and part of Germany.— The Man's chief design is to Terrifie Eng∣land, &c. with War, Disturbances, &c. but is hitherto mistaken in his measures, as he is like to be for the Future; Maugre all his Fanatick malice. For the Zodiacal Square of Mars to the Sun and Moon, (he lays so much stress on) is se∣perated, even beyond the Orbs of Mars, and They much swif∣ter in motion than He. Which had the Libeller minded, he had not been guilty of this Foolish and Ridiculous menace. Well! but though he hath frighted us with false fears of Variety of Mischiefs, &c. Yet he says, The Trine of the Sun and Jupiter from Sagitary and Aries, prefers some very Loyal Red Letter'd-Clergy-man, Common Lawyer, or Civilian, and that in England too. The Libeller is here turn'd Parasite, and Fawns upon, and Flatters those whom he mortally hates. Or else it may be he hath some Inter∣vals of a Penitent Conscience (which I wish him most heartily, if he have not) otherwise, how can we think him in earnest, when he allows of a Red-letter'd-man to be Loyal? Let him Read this Lecture to those Gontlemen, who in their pub∣lick Sermons, (and in Print too) have affirm'd the contrary. But alas! the Truth is, This Praediction came from him by way of Irony, I doubt. otherwise I could shew him its just Verification.
Observations on MAY. Says Truth it self,— Believe and Saved be; Yet show some Signs of thy Integrity In Pious Works; By which a Christian's known, And not by Beastly Ralling Order down. Christ came not to Destroy! but to fulfil The Will of God: The Rule of Humane Will. THe Libeller is here upon the High Rope: and tells us,— That Lorain, Ireland, Russia, and Poland, are violently, threat'ned with the effects of the Suns eclipse in Taurus: when Mars comes to the Square thereof in June and July, But, blessed be God, we have liv'd past those very months and do not find Lorain Restor'd, nor Ireland Disturb'd: which were the Libellers groundless Hopes. We know who he means by his Turk of Christendom in February; but let him, as an Artist, tell me if ever he knew any Person who had the Lord of his Horoscope in secunda Domo, that ever parted with any thing easily that he got, be it hy Conquest, or otherwise? And for the Affairs in Ireland, they are in a very thriving Posture, and daily like to be better. Let the Libeller read Mr. Whalley's Judgement on that Gallant Countrey, for 1687. and be convinced— That eclipses, Govern'd by Venus, are Innocuous both to Places and Per∣sons, unless aggravated by other Circumstances.— But he concludes,— Popery will not do. And, why not, Libel∣ler! If Red-letter'd-men are Loyal, as lately you allowed them.— But, 'tis not good (says he) to promote it by pre∣ferring Scandalous Favourers of it; I say so too. But where are any such Prefer'd? If he can find any; let him produce One Honest Man of his Faction to throw the Stone. The Wretch is brim full of envy, and is much troubled that the KING hath any Loyal men fit to Serve Him. But Popery! Popery! That's the Term with all those who know not what Religion, or Catholick is.
Observations on JUNE. To Rail at Priests, and Ban the Holy Cross. May purchase to thy Soul eternal Loss. Alas! No Inquisition here can free Us, from the Abyss of Eternity To Rome none need be Slaves! 'Tis Heresy Ingulpths our Souls! The True Church sets us Free. NOw the Libeller doubles his Threats at London, bid∣ding us remember the Sun is in Gemini, in Opposi∣tion to Jupiter in Sagitary; and that it affects London about Religion, Liberty of Conscience, Persecution, &c.— Sir, we do remember all you say very well, and affirm, secun∣dum Artem, that though Jupiter be in Opposition of the Sun, &c. Yet hath London felt no Persecution in this Month, either for Religion, or ought else; but the plain contrary. We must read the Libeller backward, as Men read Hebrew. In the room of Persecution, we enjoy Liberty of Conscience in the Service of God. A Dispensation! that we are in∣debted to Heaven for, and to a Gracious King; who is a true Nursing Father to all His People! A Dispensation! This Libeller no more Foresaw, than Wished. And, now I would have the Libeller remember, That in true Astrology, No aspects of the Fortunate Stars, (in a strict sense) can be hurtful, much less can they change their essential Virtues into Malignity, vide. Sr C. H. p. 513. The Libeller hath therefore Forged this Judgement; contra artem, on purpose to Create Disturbances. Slly Soul! to imagine that the Specifical Virtues of the Stars can be changed. They may, indeed, (as Astrologers, with good Reason allow) be Inten∣ded, or Remitted, but never alter'd: and Magis & minus non tollunt speciem: Their essences must remain the same for ever.
Observations on JULY. Nor can our Holy Mother give command To Murder men! For, on Her Ivory Hand A Spotless White is seen! No Blood-Stains there, The Schismaticks for Blood! the Church for Prayer. But this vain Wight believes that Christians can Command, what s Disallow'd by th' Alcoran. THe Libeller tells us, Mars Retrograde, in Opposition to the place of the last Conjunction 1682. shews loss to the Turk by the arms of his enemies. But, what hath the Turk to do with Aquary and Leo? the place and opposite of that Conjunction. I wonder he had not levell'd this Arrow against the Pope and Popery, (the only Butt or Mark of his malice!) but he had not the luck to hit on't. In truth it is of no great moment to either, but hat the Libeller loves to hang great Weights on little Wyers. For Mars comes every year to the place, and Opposition of that Conjunction, and should, by his Argument, as often put the Turk into a Feaver. But alas! Transits are but of little effect when other Influences are absent. There are other more preva∣lent Causes that menace the Turks, of which I perceive He's ignorant; and I have not room here to inform him.— But the Libeller talks of a New Plot, and Accusations for Trea∣son, upon the Opposition of Mars and Mercury; and Eng∣land and France are concern'd, The Man is willing to put his fellow associates in good Heart, that when he hath set us together by the Ears, they may take a trip over, to help on the Rebellion. Ungrateful Brute! Thus, without Reason, to Rave against his Native Countrey, He was affraid, to take notice of the formidable Trine of the Sun and Jupiter, which, with respect to a commanding Radical constitution, and other concurring Circumstances, bodes England much good in Earnest, and Anticipates his Plots, Trea∣sons, &c. But this was not for the Libellers tooth to take no∣tice of.
Observations on AUGUST. Let France and Spain, and all the World make known, The prejudice that Priests; as Priests, have done. And then consider how this Wretched Man, At th' Sacred Name of Priest, dare Curse and Ban, But They that Freedom take Gods Priests to Curse, Would serve Kings so! and (had they Power) worse. OUr Canting Libeller here tells us,— That from the Opposition of the Sun and Mars last Lunation, there will be more Murders, Duels, and Violence of all sorts. Where by the way, I must tell him, he's guilty of another Cretism, and false Art together. For that Opposition was not Angular, but Cadent: Celebrated in the Twelfth and Sixth Houses: And therefore could not intimate publick Murders, or Violence, &c. But rather Fears, Anxieties, Im∣prisonments, Sorrows, Bodily Infirmities, and the like. This he knows to be the true English of that Opposition, and not what he suggests. But he goes on,— Italy is under some apprehension of Troubles; some of the Sacred Crew at Rome disagree about power, precedence, &c, Here the Libeller hath transfer'd a term of Art used among Saylers, (viz. the Boat-Swain and his Crew,) to the Pope and his Cardi∣nals▪ as having just the same (but no more) Reverence for Them.— Well! but nothing comes of it but words and talk. Nay, I dare lay a Wager with him, nor that nei∣ther. For Jupiter (the Patron of the Sacred Crew, as he scurrilously terms them,) is in Sagitary, comforting the Horoscope of Rome, by a Noble Trigonal Beam: And Trines never disturb, but assist such places and persons that share in the Influence. But the Libellers Praedictions never afford any Musick, unless the Priest bear a part, like the Dumb Jack in the Virginals.
Observations on SEPTEMBER. The Voice of th' People cannot always be The Voice of God, W'have seen the Contrary. Frauds, and False Rumours have their Root in Hell. And 'twas for London's Sins, that London Fell. But that Rome Burnt it, Swear't who will! I Fear The Martyr's Blood! made London pay so Dear. NOw the Libeller talks of Peace and Reconciliation▪ but that the Troubls of Europe will not over, while the Power of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter lasts.— And that Mars in Aquary will irritate the Effects thereof. This is somewhat of the Cuckows Note he Sung before, and for which I have already reckon'd with him. But yet I ask hm, whether that Conjuncton be not more for quiet∣ing, than creating Troubles, since Jupiter is the Ruling Planet therein? Some trouble, 'tis true, there may be to bring Beggars to the Stocks, and then to get in their Legs. But Peace and Unity will be the Consequence of that Con∣junction. And I can tell him, that after the Celebration of that Conjunction, his Patrons, Shaftsbury and Monmouth, &c. never prosper'd. He proceeds,— The present Wars shall Travel from one Countrey to another, till all Europe have tasted thereof. But, (as I said) the Ruling Planet in that Conjunction, is for Peace, and for freeing us from Disquiet, not fomenting it.— But lo! He changes his Scene, to Whispers an England about a Man of Quality, Old, and Infirm. Who he is, we'll tell you when the Libeller hath told us. Sure he means not Sir P. W. who plays at Hide and Seek, to avoid the Punishment due to Perjury. He's an Old Man; and was of Quality too, when he (as this Li∣beller) affirm'd the Papists Burnt London, and maliciously Order'd it (when Mayor) to be Inscribed on the Monument at London-Bridge.
Observations on OCTOBER. The Libeller Rails still: and let them Rail; Try how his Brutish Morals will prevail For his Despised Cause.— For Godfrey's Blood, Oh! that the Truth were fully understood! But Prance! unhappy Prance! hath so much done, As (not to clear it, yet) to Quit just Rome. THe Libeller tells us—The New Moon in conjunction of Sa∣turn, and Square of Jupiter, concerns Germany, England, ('twere much if England should be out.) Denmark, &. about such Men and things as relate to Wars, &c. because Mars in Aquary is in Trine of them all.—What? in Trine of Ju∣piter too? you must lay your lies closer together, you'l be discover'd else. But he proceeds,—The effect will be Tea∣chery, —Practiced for Villanies sake (as all Treachery is, sure.) It concerns the Kings of Denmark and Portugal, an Duke of Brandenburg. And so it may, and yet never hurt them, unless Trines can be turn'd into Aspects of enmity. —Soon after he tells us,—Of a noise about Peace and Recon∣ciliation, and that the Aspests of the Month incline to quiet∣ness. Like the Traveller in the Fable, that could blow Hot and Cold in a Breath, &c. He hath Created War and Peace from the same Causes. For which his Delphian Cunning, let the Satyr be his Censurer.—He Concludes,—Some Reverend Right-Lin'd Clergy-man receives considerable referment. He distinguishes of the Clergy, as Mathematicians of their Triangles; makes some Right-Lin'd, some Spherical, &c. —But now, suppose his Right-Lin'd Clergy-man should prove Spherical; Or, what if no such matter happen at all, as 'tis most likely; (for Jupiter makes no perfect Aspect with any Planet in the whole Month, praeter Lunam.) Why then the trifling Libeller hath lost his Jest.
Observations on NOVEMBER. Hee, Blasphemy and Treason arm his Pen, To stike at God, as well as scratch at Men. Behold an Atheists Impudence! so great, He Counts both God, and Priesthood too, a Cheat. Take heed Curs'd Corah! least thy Mother Earth Do swallow thee, as an untimely Birth. WE have often been told of Popish Massacres, Blck Blls, Spanish Pilgrimes, &c. as if all the wicked Plots in the World were to be found among atholicks; and that the Protestant associating Party, were the Sheep and Doves of Nature, the very Pictures of true Innocence! But the Li∣beller here proves to us, that those pacifick Umble Bees have stings, and can shew them too for a need. For thus the Bloody miscreant Writes,— Never be bubbled by a Popish Lie, Rather then that, Resolve, Revenge, and Die. And in his Epistle to Protestants. Give not your Faith up, nor yet Tamely Die. He hath elsewhere declaim'd against Passive Obedience, and here excites to Resolution, Revenge, and not to Die tamely! what Rombald, Ferguson, or impudent Incendiary of them all, could have vented more Treason in so little Room, to have animated a Rebellion.—Resolve! you have been good at this before, as appears by the Testimonies, in the History of the Rye-House Conspiracy against you; which your Flight and present Malice prove to be true.—Revenge! on whom? who hath done you wrong? not tamely Die! how comes your Life in Question, unless you have forfeited it by your Treasons? —Give not your Faith up! —What Faith hath an Atheist to loose? —Sir, your Conscience haunts you, and ever will, for your Treasonous and wicked contrivances against your King and Country. 'Tis in that Glass you behold your wicked Actions, and thence proceeds your Distracted Fears. There's little else in November worth minding; save that the Libeller makes the Planet Mrs a Don-Quixet, and sets him a Fighting by himself.
Observations on DECEMBER. The Canting Varlet thinks he hath done well; To Grin at God, and 'gainst his King Rebell: And, for to Menace Gods true Church again, Raises his Raptures to a higher strain: And boldly boasts her certain down-fall here; When nothing like the Contrary's more clear. FRom the last New Moon being in Sagitary, in Square of Mars in Pisces, and in Conjunction of Mars at the First Quarter. The Libeller Predicts—Persecution for Religion, or some New Invention to punish people for difference in opinion from those in Power; but whether it extend to life or lesser pain, he cannot determine. And therein he's wary.—But Sir! your Art teaches you that Persecution proceeds not from particular Lunations, but General Constitutions. Consult your skill again, and tell me, are not the two Superiours in Cardinal Signes? and is not Saturn in friendly Aspect to the late triple Conjunction of him, and Jupiter in Leo?—I affirm, that in stead of the Persecution, this Libeller threatens us with, that the Actions of this Month, and the last also, with some Months succeeding, will make for the Honour and ease of Great Britain, and the Pious, (yet Warlike) Ruler thereof. And this the Libeller might have known, had he consider'd Revo∣lutions and Profections, and compared them with the great triple ruling Conjunction. But I will not charge the Libeller as guilty of the knowledge of so much Astrology, as goes to the understanding of Cardan's—Multiplicatio effectus Siderum Secreta.—He says, The square of the Sun and Mars incline to down-right Murther, &c. But this must needs prove false; The Planets squaring being govern'd by Jupiter, and nei∣ther of them in Interficient Decades, or Terms. Thus have I done with the Libellers monthly Predictions and Poetry, (or Ravings rather,) full Fraught with Falshood, Treason, and Blasphemy; and of so black a Die, that all the Water between Us and Holland will never be able to wash away.
THE LIBELLERS Lying Chronology EXAMINED. Since Phocas Murther'd his Master, and his Children, got the Empire, and then Piously set up the Pope. 1085. AS if there had never been a Pope until the time of Phocas. An egregious, yet pleasant falshood! The Man sure never saw Platina, or Heylin. —But here the story of Phocas out of Fox. —This Phocas comming up to be Emperour,—Thinking to establish his Empire with friendship and favour of his peo∣ple, and especially with Boniface the Third, the Bishop of Rome, quickly condescended to all his Petitions, and so granted him, (as it is said (mark it!) to be, that he would) the Universal and Head Bishop over all Christian Churches. So that you see Phocas did not make Boniface Pope, but found him so. Only, for quieting of differences between the two (then) contending Interests, he justly preserv'd the Title of Universal Bishop to the See of Rome. We wish that had been the worst act of which Phocas had been guilty. He was, 'tis true, a wicked Man, and came to a suitable end. God is ever just.—But Fox, (so by Nature, as well as Name) as knowing the falshood of his Relation, claps in the Paren∣thesis, (as it is said) to escape by, in case of pursuit. For he knew well enough that the Bishop of Constantinople did never dispute the Title of Universal Bishop, with the Bishop of Rome. Neither did that Title begin (by Phocas) to be attributed to the Pope, but from the time of the Emperour Marcian; above an 150 years before Phocas, it had been exhibited to Him in the Council of Chalcedon. And, after that, under the Emperour Justinian: above 50 years before the time of
Phocas, it had been given him in Constantinople it self. So that Phocas was as far from Piously setting up the Pope, as this Libeller is from setting out the Truth.—Vide Fox, Vol. 1. p. 155. and Card. Perron's Reply to K. James I, lib. 1. cap. 7. The Popish Powder Treason Nov. 5. at which time all the Protestant Nobility and Gentry were to be murder'd in the Parliament House. 82. IF this were really a Plot of the Papists hatching, (we do not deny but there were some deluded Catholicks in it▪ and suffer'd for it,) it was the most ridiculous (next to Oates's Plot) that ever was heard of. For there was no manner of Provision made for Security of their own Friends. Besides, it was a Catholick Lord, (viz. the Lord Mount-Eagle) that discover'd it by a Letter sent to him. A great sign that all the Eminent Catholicks were not concern'd (except passively) in that horrid Contrivance. And had the design taken the pretended effect, the Popish Powder (as the Libeller idly terms it) could never have distinguish'd between Catholicks and Protestants: So that the Popish Nobility and Gentry, must have been murther'd also. But be it as it will, I will, sing in Consrt with the late Loyal Sir George Wharton.— Twit Rome no longer with the Powder-Plot, The Doctrine is half English, and half Scot. The City of London was Burnt, by whom 'tis well known. 21. I wish it were! The dreadful, and never to be forgotten Fire of London, began September the 2, 1666. Many noises and rumours were spread concerning the cause thereof. Some, affirming the Papists did it. Others, the Fanaticks. Others, not sticking to say, it was the King himself. Whether will not malice read the Rascality?— If the Papists did it, they were the most imprudent men in the World; since as well their Protection, as Riches, and Relations, being in London, they must in such an Action labour'd the Rnine of themselves. If it were done by any Power then that of Hea∣ven,
I have great reason to believe, that, not the Papists, but Phanaticks were the instruments. For in a Gazet of April 1666. I read, That some of the Republican Party, (as confessed by some of them, then dying for Treason.) by con∣sulting Lilly's Almanack of that year, found September to be a month fit for their destructive and Rebellions purposes against the King and Government.—Albeit, it seems clear to me (if I may not offend in saying so,) that had not the hand of Heaven most manifestly appear'd therein, so vast and prodigious a Fire, could never have happ'ned in so short a time. I make no doubt but the good, (or rather bad) wishes, and perhaps, the Actions too, of some enemies to King and Kingdom might not be wanting. But that Heaven had a great hand in it, is very plain, to all reasonable and considering Men. Seeing this dismal Accident was preceded by a more then ordinary dry Summer, preparing the Hou∣ses, &c. of that Glorious City, fit for the consuming Flames; And at the very time of its commencement, and all the time of its continuance also, a mighty East-Wind prevail'd. So that neither the stately Structures of Churches and Halls, and other Sumptuous and Noble Edifices, were able to give a check, or opposition thereunto. But lo! at last, when as we may justly conceive its Commission for Destruction, began to expire, the Wind changed, and the Fire ceas'd to rage, and stop'd even at Paper Buildings, as it were, or Houses (otherwise) unable to oppose so mighty a Devourer. I am morally assured, that, had there not been digitus Dei in it, should Ten several Persons with Authority, have gone to Ten several equi-distant Places of that great City, on purpose to destroy it; They could never (without the assistance of such a Wind and Drought) have ruin'd so many stately Edifices, and so many Thousand Houses in so short a time. Besides, this dreadful Fire was long since Prophecy'd of by Michael Nostradamus, and (to shew that all Prophcies are not to be slighted) the very Time and Propinquate cause thereof was expressed by him, as you may find, Cent. 2, Stanz. 51. Le Sang du juste a Londres fera faut, Bruslez par feu, de vingt & trois les six, &c.
Which may admit of this English. For Blood of th' just fair London, Fire shall vex, Which happen will, in the year Sixty Six, &c. By the Blood of the Just, must be meant the Blood of that Blessed Martyr King CHARLES the I. who was barba∣rously murther'd at his own Door, January 30, 1648 —Nay, to add t this, I can truly affirm, That amazing Accident was Predicted in two Almanacks, wrote near a Twelve-Month before it happen'd; viz Trigg, and another; in which later; the Prediction was expung'd by the Licenser. But let any stupendious Accident whatsoever befall us, whether from Heaven, or by men, the Libeller is certain to Father all on the Papists. And, be sure also, that he means the English Papists, the natural Subjects of the King of England. Where∣as Hubert, (that died for the Fact) was a Foreigner, and a French-man. And 'tis easie to remember, that England and France were then in Hostility, they joyning the Hollander against us. Now, what an enemy doth, (in case Hubert did it, which the Observator proves not possible, by sundry De∣monstrative Reasons.) is not to be imputed to Religion, but to the fewd and distance between the parties concern'd. The Popish Massacre in Ireland, where 300000 Prote∣stants were murder'd, and this done by Authority. 46. THe Libeller had done well, if he had nam'd the Au∣thority. If any Authority Commanded so Barbarous an Act, it must be either lawful, or un-lawful. If the later, all good men will bewail the misfortune, as much as the Libeller. For then it is Vis, not Jus. And Force and Vio∣lence may effect what Law or Reason will not justifie. But if the Former, I would fain know of the Libeller (when he hath consulted his Casuists) how Men acting under a lawful Au∣thority, and not going beyond their Commission, can be guilty of murther? And if they exceed their Commission, they cease to be Sons of a lawful Authority, and adopt themselves Heirs of violence. Moreover, I require of
him to poduce one Commission from any Lawful Authority for the Proof of what he boldly thus asserts: wherein I doubt, he'll be as much to seek, as his Friend Titus was, to procure one of Paulus de Oliva's Commissions for the support of his Damnable PLOT. This piece of Chronology must pass therefore for a Horrid Scandal upon all the Loyal Party in Ireland, and likewise upon the Sacred memory of that Pious Prince and Martyr, King Charles I. Moreover, I have read many of the Pamphlets of those times, and all the Printed Papers that passed between the two Illustrious and thrice Noble Lords, viz. the Duke of Ormond his Grace, and the late Earl of Anglesey, as also the Memoires of the late Right Honourable Earl of Castlehaven, relating to the Troubles of Ireland, and find nothing in any of them to countenance what the Libeller maliciously suggests. This therefore I brand for a Horrid Falshood; though I remember the Mobilee were then strangely frighted with Monstrous Pictures, as if all the Ten Persecutions were there, and only there extant. Sir Edumndbury Godfrey was murder'd at So∣merset-House. 9 GOd forbid that this should be true, though Bedloe and others have Sworn it! The Libeller Prints this with as assured a Confidence, as if he had been One of the murder∣ers; or, a Sharer in the 2000 l. which Bedloe has Sworn to be offer'd for carrying away the Dead Body Monstrous Villain! that dares be so positive in a matter so Obscure! the non knowledge whereof is as much the Amazement of the World, as the non-discovery of the Vizzarded Villains who were on the Scaffold, January the 30th. 1648. when King Charles I. was murder'd. It was an unhappiness in a greater, and much more Lear∣ned Person than the Libeller, viz. He that Preach'd this un∣fortunate Gentleman's Funeral Sermon, (Oh! the Witch∣craft of Credulity) as to lay the murder on the Papists; and this too, before any Evidence appear'd to justifie the Fact. The Sermon was Preach'd October the 31st. 1678. But
William Bedloe did not accuse himself publickly of that Hor∣rid murder, untill November the 7. following. And 'tis well known, that Miles Prance came not in until December the 22. following.— As for Bedloe, I leave him to be dealt with by the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth Yet, may we reasonably be convinc'd, That Pardon, Pension, and Money in Hand, are very great Temptations to Men of no Consci∣ence, and needy too. But for Prance, he hath own'd his Perjury, and been punished for it. And I wish that others concern'd in that Barbarous murder, would discover the Truth thereof, for their Souls Health, and Satisfaction of the Deluded World; and implore the pardon of Heaven, and that of His Gracious Majesty, for their concealment of so horrid a Crime so long, to the provoking of Gods Judge∣ments, and pulling them down upon us. But though my Gentleman be so positive as to name the place, where, this Villanous murder was committed, yet could I never meet with any who would believe that a Justice of Peace should be Decoy'd down thither to part a couple of Rude Fellows, that were Fighting (forsooth!) at Nine a Clock at Night. If they had been Fighting in the Justices Hall, 'tis true, his Authority might have allay'd the Fray: but abroad, what could he do? How should he be acknowledg'd? Meer Stories. That Pious Prince, Charles II. died a Roman Catho∣lick, and yet Head of the Church of England. 2. ANd yet Head of the Church of England! Yes, Libeller▪ this good King did Die a Roman Catholick, and yet Head of the Church of England. Why not? What have you to do with Liberty of Conscience, if you will not allow it your Prince? What Infamy is it to Die a Roman Catholick? The Libeller and the Heard, think their case Desperate: But what Learned man ever said so? Do they not rather say, even They of the Church of England, that They come nearer Primitive Christianity than the Dessenters? He Died a Ro∣man Catholick! He knew what was best to do. But He pro∣fest it not all His life. Wretched Traytors! who Plotted
against His precious life, even while he was not declar'd to the contrary. You know whereabout I am; the Rye-House Conspiracy, you Varlet! You were One that Flatter'd up and down in that Black Design. In the mean while the Church of England is beholding to you very much, who Grind your Teeth at the mention of It, as at your Sovereign. A Viper that hisses at all that are better than it self. Our present Pi∣ous Monarch lives a Catholick, (and long so God grant Him to live!) and yet Head of the Church of England. His Headship over the Church of England, is no more a Bar to His living, or dying a Member of the Catholick Church, (A Church, that built all the Famous Churches in England!) than His Supremacy over the Presbyterian and Congregatio∣nal Assemblies, &c. All the People of England being Equal∣ly His Subjects, even as to their Religious Worship▪ (if out of the Pale of the Universal Church,) and for the practice thereof, are accountable to Him as their Sovereign. But least this Libeller should not truly understand what the Church of England is! I refer him to a very Rational Dis∣course lately Published, Entituled, GOOD ADVICE, &c. JAMES II. took His Coronation Oath, and was Crown∣ed King at Westminster. 2. IT is very true, that this most Excellent and greatly Suf∣fering Prince, as He was the lawful Heir, is now (by Gods wonderful Providence, Maugre the Malice of all Exclusio∣ners) Monarch of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, &c. and as such, was Crowned at Westminster, on April the 23. 1685. And then, and there did take an Oath, called the Coronation Oath, as the Libeller intimates. What then? was it not of His own Free Choice? He was King of England without it. And, tho' it hath been Customary for the Kings of England, (I think since the time of King Richard I.) to take an Oath at their Coronation, it is not of irresistable Obligation, but prudence and Humanity that they do so. As Sir R. Filmore hath fully proved. Kings have their Patents from Heaven, not Men. They are Founded in the Law of Nature upon Paternal Right. The Coronation makes not
the King, but only declares the Sovereign. 'Tis Treason to Act against the King, even before He is Crown'd But this Sawcy Rebel intimates a Violation of that Oath. Wherein? In wishing Well to what he thinks Right, and to which that very Oath obliges? In maintaining the Church of England, statu quo? In his Dispensation for Liberty of Conscience? Let the People be Judge who enjoy the benefit of that In∣dulgence; when that your self may come and hold forth, if you were not Obnoxious on other Accounts. In the mean while, now you talk of Oaths, and their Violation, but who regards the Oath that concerns them? the Oath of their Al∣legiance? This Libeller's Fled to Holland for his Allegiance; Will you believe it? Judge STREET. and—00000000000— Tresilian, &c, 1. HEre the Libeller accosts us with a Riddle under pre∣tence of a piece of Chronology. But we want not an Oedipus to unfold it. He seems by this Aenigma to menace Eleven of the Twelve Reverend Judges of the Nation. But One of them he hath mercy for; (impudent Varlet!) that I believe will scarce give him Thanks for his Civility. Howbe∣it, the other Eleven, understood by his Eleven Cyphers, must be Tresilianiz'd, (i. e.) in plain English, Hang'd. [The Libeller knows whose Destiny that is, if his Nativity belie him not.] How dares this Fellow thus presume to sit in Judge∣ment upon the Learned and Loyal Judges! What have those Reverend Sages done, as deserves thus to be Libel'd? They all most happily draw in a Yoak together for the good of the King and Kingdom. That One Worthy Person he men∣tions, as well as the other Eleven. There are no Dissenters among Them. 'Tis therefore a notorious boldness in the Libeller thus to Divide Them. As if Eleven of Them had agreed to do some Horrid Act, and that the other One should oppose Them. A nefarious insinuation! to make our Neigh∣bour Nations believe there's a Faction amongst our Judges: and that Eleven of them have Forfeited their Lives by going against the Law, and must therefore follow the Fate of Tresilion; &c.
As for Sir Roberet Tresilian, and the rest of th Judges in the Reign of King Richard II. They came to be censur'd, not for their Loyal Advice to the King, but for giving him Contradictory Advice, and renouncing their first given Coun∣cel. Adulation in Future advice and Gross abuses of the Com∣monalty, were those Judges Crimes. For it is Recorded in Stow, Baker, and others,— That Sir Robert Tresilian, and the rest of the Judges, had given the King Councel in his Parliament; and out of Parliament gave him advice quite contrary thereunto. Besides, Judge Tresilian is Noted for a Man of more Craft and Cruelty, than Justice and Integrity; and that at his coming to Coventry, he Indicted no less than 2000 Persons at once. An action sufficient to consternate the whole Kingdom. Nay, he was also in a Conspiracy with the Duke of Ireland, Earl of Suffolk, &c. to destroy the Duke of Glocester, the Kings Uncle, and the most Powerful Subject of that Age. Thus the Indignation and Fury, not only of the Commonalty, but of the Gentry and Nobility likewise, came to be heightened against Sir Robert Tresilian, and the rest of the Judges of those days. But, what is all this to the Reverend Judges of our Time? What have They done that looks Parallel to the Actions of Tresilian? with whom have They Conspir'd? or against whom? What Countries have they injur'd? What Single person have They oppress'd? Or, wherein have They contra∣dicted Themselves, or given double Advice? Speak! Infamous Libeller! that They should be thus Menac'd with Tresilian? The King could dispence with the Test, and all Laws.— 1. HEre we meet with a Reflective Irony, and Gross False∣hood together. The Libeller first Scoff's at the King's Dispensing Power, and then tells us, 'tis but One Year since He could dispense with all Laws.— If the King had not a di∣spensing Power by virtue of His Prerogative Royal, the Subject were in a most unhappy Deplorable condition. As many of them must have sadly experienc'd, even since His Majesties access to His Throne, who, by due form of Law must have perished, had not the Royal Mercy interpos'd for their
Safety. Summum jus, Summa injunia. The Laws are strict; Malice of Enemies boundless; and many there are that delight to make a Man an Offender for a Word. The Judge and Jury go according to Evidence: and it is just they should do so. But suppose the Evidence to be a Plotting Politi∣cian, whose Tongue is to be purchas'd by a Bribe; Or, what if he be a downright Enemy; He Swears for the King: The Prisoner's Condemn'd, and (let him be never so Innocent) it is not in the Power of the Judge to Save him. We have had liberal Demonstration hereof in Otes's Reign. What think we now? What's fit to be done in so hard a Case? If the King, as Grand Trustee of all His Subjects Lives, have not a Dispensing Power, Envy and Falshood prevail, because given in Evidence, secondum Laegem, and an Honest Inno∣cent Subject is Lost. Certainly, in such a Case, both Reason and Religion allow of a Dispensing Power in the King? Else He cannot be said to be exactly like God, whose Vicegerent He is, as wanting Power to extend Mercy to contemper and mitigate his Justice. And in my Opinion, none, but Men of Inhumane Dislloyal principles can any way grudge at it. Yea, but saith the Libeller, it is but One Year since the King could dispense with the TEST, and all Laws.— 'Tis the TEST you see, the Libeller's in love with. The TEST! a Trick contriv'd by the Associating Party, to Exclude the Lawful Heir to the Crown. And, well may we question that Mans Loyalty to the King, that shall offer to plead for a continuance of the TEST, against His Majesties Royal Inclination: That, and the Covenant of 1643. being both design'd for the Ruine of the English Monarchy. But further, by the Libellers leave, the Dispensing Power is of more than One Years standing: Or else the good Queen Elizabeth could never have exercised it; nor any of the English Kings before, or since her time; which that they all did, both Law and History manifest. In cases of Life the King's Dispensing Power was never question'd. And, the Li∣beller, when once the Law hath took hold of him for his Treasons, &c. will be glad to own such a Prerogative; as sundry persons of late Years have done, to their peculiar
Safety, and the Eternal Honour of His Majesties Courage and Clemency — Nay, our Learnedst Lawyers affirm, that not an Information, or Indictment upon Penal Statutes, but must give way to a Nolle prosequi, if the King please to move no further therein. And if it were not so, a Subject would usurp a Priveledge over his Sovereign, and make use of His Name without His leave (to sue in) for the vexing & abusing whom he pleases. Than the which, there can be nothing more Un∣just, or Unreasonable; nothing more absurd, and ridiculous. And so I have done with the Libellers Scandalous Lying Chronology. The Libellers General Judgements brought to the Test and found unable to abide the Tryal of true Art IN good time we are arrived at the Libellers General Judg∣ments wherein we shall meet with as much Loyalty, Truth and candour, as in the Former. He professes to build his Prae∣dictions upon the Vernal Ingress of the Year; (a weak foun∣dation, when not supported by other more weighty Argu∣ments.) But for want of room (he says) he forbears to insert the Scheam thereof. I will therefore do it for him, and shew him the Falseness thereof, and convince him of his persisting to abuse his King and Countrey under pretence of Astrology; whereas from the true Ingress, and other causes, Astrology speaks Good to both, and confusion to their Enemies. The Libeller, (though at Amsterdam) gives us the time of the Suns Ingress into Aries for London 1687. which is with him on March the 10th. day, at 10. Hours, 10 Minuits, A. M. the Figure's thus.
The LIBELLERS Figure for Sol entering Aries, 167. March 10d. 10h. 10l. Mane. Sub. Latit. Londini. ☽ a ☍ ♃ ad □ ☿ astrological chart Behold the Craft of the Libeller! He makes use of a Fi∣gure from whence to draw his Judgements against his King and Countrey, that none of the Tables made by the Princi∣pal Masters in Astronomy will own. And thence he threatens the King's Sacred Life, and the Kingdoms Ruine, over-turning of the Government, Wars, &c. and all this, and more, from a poor single Ingress of the Sun into Aries. But, alas! Doth not every Puny Astrologer know, that Vernal Figures, without consideration had to the Ruling Conjuncti∣ons and Aspects of the Stars at that time, are of very small or no Efficacy, from whence to Praedict Futurities. I allow it for a Truth, that Mars in an Angle is per se, of violent signification, and is commonly attended with rugged
effects. It is no News to an Artist to hear Almansor Command Aphoristically.— Averte Oculos â Figura, in qua Mars fuerit in Angulo. And all Astrologers give Caution against the Heats of Mars. Which, the Libeller knowing, hath made a Scheam with Mars on an Angle (though a false one) that he might thence take occasion to affright and terrifie us the more easily. But, as his Figure is False, so are his Judge∣ments. And were not Astronomy against him, yet the Events he expected have deceived him hitherto; and nothing hath happen'd to this Kingdom like to the furious Influence of Mars in an Angle, as he hath Praedicted. For further Eviction of his Errour herein, I shall present you with a true Figure of the Worlds Revolution for 1687, and that from such Tables Astronomical, as are in repute, and concurr with, the best and ablest Astronomers of the present Age. I say, the Tables of the Best Astronomers con∣spire with the Figure I shall present you with, viz, the Ru∣dolphine, Billian, Bullialdine, Shackerleian Tables, and also those of Vincent Wing in his Astronomia Britannica, and many more; but none of them all do own the Libeller's Fi∣gure. Perhaps he may have some singular conceited Author that himself only follows. But were it so, can any one force a belief upon me, that one Single Clock strikes the Hour of the Day true, when I find it differs vastly in Time from all the Famous and best made Clocks in the City? No sure. Be∣sides, I will tell the Libeller, that the certainty of Events do truly prove the Truth of Astronomy; and that there was an Astrology in the World, long before Astronomy came to any degree of Perfection; (perhaps before it was thought of,) as the Chaldean, Persian, and Jewish Philosophy fully prove. And Reason it self informs us, That had not Men first felt the Heats of Mars, and Cold of Saturn, it is very probable, they had never enquired after their Motions in the Heavens. Astronomy is therefore more oblig'd to Astrology than the World is aware of. And although the popular Opinion be, that Astronomy is the Elder Sister, (allowing Uraniah to have Twins) yet it is really the Younger; and Astrology hath the right of Primo-geniture. And so I come to give you the true Figure from the British Tables, thus.—
Tempus Datum, Ma. 9d. 20h. 15l. P. M. 1687. Longit. Solis, S. d. ′. ″. Apog. Solis. S. d ′ ″. Longit. Med. Solis Apogaeo Solis. 11. 27. 58. 29. 3. 6. 57. 6. 3. 6. 57. 0. Anomalia Solis. 8. 21. 1. 23. 2. 1. 31.   Verus locus Solis. 0. 0. 0. 0. in. r. 0d. 0′. 0″. And to this time, the Figure of Heaven in the Meridian of London, the Metropolis of England, is as followeth. The true Figure of the Sun his entring Aries, 1687. March the 9d. 20g, 10l. P. M. Sub. Latit Londini. ☽ â ☍ ♃ ad □ ☿ astrological chart Here we have a Vernal Scheam of 1687. that somewhat resembles the happy Peaceable Actions of the Year. Jupiter,
the most Benevolent Planet in the Heavens, is in the Seventh Angle, (the place of Discord, Controversy, &c.) there posited as a Constable upon his Watch, keeping the Peace; or ra∣ther, as a good Christian Arbitrator, Uniting Persons or Kingdoms at Odds, and preventing any New Animosities to break forth▪ so far is he from giving any notice of Wars, or Controversies to happen, as the Libeller had assigned us from Mars on the Seventh in his false Figure. And yet we have Mars in Quadrate of the Sun and Saturn, &c. though in parts of Heaven less powerful to do mischief, then they were placed in, the Libellers Scheam. — Why, what a sad place is Holland, that cannot afford one Astrologer able to Correct the Falshoods and Scandals of this Pitiful Libeller, that in∣habits among them. Before I proceed any further, I will in pure pity, teach this Libeller a little Art, that he may better Con his Lesson against the next year; for then he promises to appear again, viz. After he hath Learn'd a little good Manners, and aban∣don'd Disloyalty and Treason; (before which I shall never allow him to set up for a Secretary of the Stars.) Then let him supplicate God Almighty for his Grace and Assistance, in the Discovery of Truth; as the Noble Arabians were wont always to do. And when he hath thus fitted himself for his Work, making his entrance thereunto In Nomine Dei; He'll never think it just and honest to make a Noble Art a Bawd or Pro∣perty whereby to Praedict Wars, and Destruction to his King and Countrey; but follow the true Principles of Science, and acquaint us with the truth of the Stars Portents to us. But if he will not take this advice, as there's but little hopes he will; then I admonish him (for the better favou∣ring his hard favour'd Presages,) that if he find Mars in a Quarupcian or Beastial Sign, he do not make him dart all his Influence upon Humane kind; but remember that the Stars Operate upon such kind of creatures only, as are re∣presented by the Signs they possess. The Libeller knew, that Mars, Sol, and Venus (in his own Figure) were not lo∣cated in Humane Signs, and therefore could not Influence Men with any remarkable Violence in this Revolution —
The Superiour Planet Saturn ('tis true) is in a Humane Sign. But, Sir, he is not an Enemy, but a Friend both to the King and Commonalty, forasmuch as he irradiates both Medium Coeli; and the Horoscope, with an Amicable Aspect; and de∣lights and rejoyces in both places, as being Eminently Dig∣nified in them, He cannot therefore countenance any of the Dismal Praesages which the Libeller hath Falsly scatter'd among us. Nay, to our Comfort, and the Libellers Shame, we see the Year near three parts expir'd, and Nothing hi∣therto of his Praedictions have come to pass; nor is there any doubt but that they'l be answer'd with the same success in the remaining Quarter. But now enter Libeller. THis Position (meaning his own false Figure,) taken in general, is violent and pernicious; for it shews the Clergy and Commonalty of England to be at variance, and to look on each other with an ill aspect; and to say the Truth, the People cannot well have a good opinion of them; for it was They that pull'd in Popery by preaching up that cursed Doctrine of passive Obedience. The Caitiff cannot breath out a Praediction without some∣thing of the Incendiary and Traytor.— He knows the true Figure of the Ingress of Sol in Aries 1687. owns nothing of all this Scurrilous Treasonable Menace. Let us examine it a little, and that by Authority; a way the Libeller scorns to make use of. Indeed, Authors are against him. Here Haly▪ Si Jupiter fuerit in septima domo fortunatus, (as he must needs be when in Sagitary) gaudebunt homines mulieribus, & mulieres hominibus, &c. (i e.) When the Benevolent Planet Jupiter in a Revolutional Figure of the World, shall be fortu∣nately placed in the Seventh Angle, Men and Women in that Revolution shall rejoyce promiscuously together, and there shall be much Peace and Quiet among them. No Plotting and Contriving to do mischief can then take any effect: The Stars (sub Deo) renders the Malice of Enemies fru∣strate. Nay, Jupiter so located— Significat multum bonum in anni medietate, & meliorem successem in arboribus & fructus multos. He signifies much good to Humane kind to∣ward
the middle of the Revolution, chiefly, (the Seventh Angle divides the Circle with the Horoscope,) and that the Honest Husband-man, or Farmer, shall have better success in his Gardens, Orchards, and in his Setting and Planting, than in former years, and that they shall yield him abundance of Fruit, &c. rewarding of his Sweat and pains, to his great Content and Satisfaction. Let now Experience be Judge! When ever had we a more Peaceable, calm, and Quiet Year! When were we bless'd with geater Plenty of Fruit and Herbage? as if it were an Earnest of the favour of Heaven, in removing from us the Meagre-Sower effects which the late terrible Frost had left behind it. When had we fewer Law Suits in a year? Or, when, in Term time, was Westminster-Hall ever less throng'd? And is not all this parallel to the Position of Jupiter in the Seventh Angle? But we have not only Jupiter in the Seventh Angle, but the Moon in the Horoscope; (and the Moon, we know, is to be valued as more than half the Figure, she being the Con∣veigher of all the other Planets Influences to us.) When God Almighty graciously vouchsafes to befriend either Nations or Persons, He is pleas'd to suit Natural Causes thereunto accor∣dingly! 'Tis not in every Mundane Figure we have Jupiter in the Seventh, or the Moon in the Horoscope, 'Tis his great Mercy to our undeserving Nation, we find them so now.— The Moon in the Horoscope, being in a Humane Sign, denotes much happiness and success to Men, and not Wars and Con∣fusions, as the Libeller talks of; nor yet Quarrels between the Clergy and Commonalty, about pulling in Popery, by their Preaching up Passive Obedience, of which, more anon.— What says our Noble Arabian thereunto? Quando Luna est in Ascendente, significat prosperitatem & Salvationem Popu∣li in suis corporibus, & in omnibus membris suis, When the Moon shall be scituate in the ascendant, (chiefly in a Humane Sign) much Prosperity and Felicity is portended to the Peo∣ple generally in that year, Security to their Estates, Health to their Persons; and that they shall be vigorous and strong in all parts, sound and free from any Malignant Distempers.
Let any sober observing Artist, or Other, tell me— Whe∣ther this Judgement be not true in every part of it. Hath it not been a Gentle and Prosperous year with us hitherto? have we not enjoy'd Peace and Plenty in all things? Nay, in the thing that is most dear to us, I mean, a quiet Enjoyment of Peace of Conscience in our Religious Worship? And as to Corporal Health, we have been wonderfully blessed there∣with hitherto. When was it known, that the City hath had more People in it, and that the Bills of Mortality have been so moderate?— All proving against the Libeller, that his Figure and Judgements too, are notoriously False. The Libeller goes on threat'ning,— page 2. Mercury un∣der "the Sun Beams brings the Curse of Diseases, &c. But I tell him, that Mercury (even by his own Figure) hath no∣thing to do with Diseases. He might, (indeed) (had his Fi∣gure been true) have a hand in the Cure of Diseases, but not in the Cause of them. This malicious Trifter understands not the very first Principles of Astrology, but makes a Blundering with what comes uppermost, without either Reason or Autho∣rity. I desire him for time to come, to remember, that the Sixth is Domus Infirmitatum, and that the Tenth is Domus Medicinae, and not think to Pawn and Shuffle such apparent Falshoods upon the World for Truth: As if every Man that read him, understood nothing of the Significations, or Di∣stinctions of the Twelve Angles of Heaven. But the Libeller seems to lay the weight of his Forged False Praedictions upon the Moons being in opposition to Jupiter, saying;— The Moon, if you consider her Latitude, is not full twenty one Degrees in Gemini, and applying to an Op∣position of Jupiter.— And thence it is he hath presumed to set the Clergy and Commonalty together by the Ears, for their Preaching up the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and bringing in Popery. But that Aspest (the same in his False, as well as in the True Figure) is wholly against him, and gives him no countenance at all; for Reasons I have given in my Examen of his Monthly Errours. And, although I have neither Time nor Room, to cite Authors at large for his Conviction; (as in truth it needs not) yet, I'll Summon Haly in this Point, viz.
If the Moon shall (in any Revolution) apply ad oppositum Jo∣vis, significat placita & verba in lege & ejus Scientia, &c. And now let the Libeller tell me, whether this Oppositions Influence, looks like a difference between the Clergy and Com∣monalty for their pulling in of Popery, by their Preaching the accursed Doctrine of Passive Obedience. As he accursedly calls it.— But, have the English Clergy pull'd in Popery in earnest? Are they the Friends to it as this Man asserts? Is it really Settled yet among us? Let the Libeller reckon again, and calmly, and he'll find for one Catholick Chappel, an hundred Conventicles. He need not therefore make Po∣pery the Bugbear wherewith to affright the Nation. The Li∣beller's angry, that the poor Catholicks, (after their having been Harass'd, Imprison'd, Plunder'd, by such as Waller and his Crew; and suffer'd so miserably in their Lives, Liberties, and Estates; yea so severely, that had they dwelt among Turks, they could scarce have been worse used;) should par∣take at all of His Majesties Universal Favour to His Subjects; forgetting it seems, that they are English-men, as much as any of the other Dissenters. But alas! I do not so much wonder that this Uncharitable Wretch, (like another Julian Johnson) doth Storm and Rail at the Doctrine of Passive Obedience (he being, as he thinks, safe at Amsterdam,) when I find some of far greater Lear∣ning and Breadth in the World, (pretended Advocates for the Doctrine▪) to declaim as Zealously against it. Pray here One of them, for All, in an Address to Julian, viz. Be it known to Mr. J. (i. e. Mr. Johnson) that many of those who have Thunder'd so much of late with the Thebaean Legion, would rather think it their Duty, than any breach of it to tell, not only a Popish Prince, but a Popish King to His Face, did He openly profess the Popish Religion, that He was an Idolater, a Bread-Worshipper, a Goddess-worshipper, an Image-wor∣shipper, a Wafer-wroshipper, &c. Jovian p. 96. Here's the Doctrine of Passive Obedience made out with a witness! What greater Affront can be offer'd to God? to Religion? to the King? Is all our pretence and claim to the right of Primo-geniture in Loyalty, come to this? Is to Rail,
and Resist; become the Doctrine of Non-resistance? Is pas∣sive Obedience turn'd into the Bearding and Upbraiding of Kings? Heaven help us! Where are we?— My Province is not Divinity, and therefore I forbear. But this Authors Theo∣logy, and the Libellers Astrology, are of a stamp both for Re∣ligion, Art, and Loyalty. To return to our Libeller again, for 'tis He I have chiefly to do with. In page 2. he Praedicts,— The People of that Nation (England) shall again take Courage, and Re∣lease themselves from the Oppressions they now labour under, and this in a few Months; for it doth not reach unto Years. And this Judgement he derives from the Square of Jupiter and Mercury. who, (says he) are the two Stars that Pers∣nate the King and Government.- Mercury is under the Sun-Beams, which shews the Curse of Diseases. and Jupiter is in a Zodaical Parallel with Mars, which shews want of Mo∣ney, and also Danger of Death. These plainly shew a Ca∣tastrophy approaching, and that there will be a change in that Kingdom and Government also, and this in a short time. Thus far this dating Incendiary, with design to Buoy up the sinking hopes of Rebels and Traytors, in expectation of the Ruine of the Kingdom and Government to be near at hand, viz. in a few Months, for it doth not reach unto Years, he says. But to manifest this to be a ry vain and feigned encouragement to his own Party, (who I wish no longer to credit his Falshoods, but return to their Obedience,) the very Configuration upon which he builds all this Treasonous Trash, (which is the Quadrate of Jupiter and Mercury,) is of a quite opposite signification. Once more hear Haly,— If Jupiter and Mercury shall (in any Mundane Revolution) be in a Quadrate Aspect of each other, and that this Aspect shall happen from the Tenth Angle, (as it doth in his own false Figure,) Signi∣fit quod Reges diligent multum scire & perquirere Scien∣tias, & amabunt libros, &c. Such a Position and Aspect (saith he) denotes that Kings and Princes shall desire to know and read much, and diligently enquire into Arts and Sciences, that They shall be in love with Books, and will
greatly incline to Learning, and to be acquainted with the Mysteries of sundry curious Subtilties, the Secrets of Wisdom, and the like. This should honestly have been his Judgement from his own false Figure: Of which the Libeller was either Ignorant, or else had no mind his own Friends (with whom he basely prevaricates) should know the truth of things. But now, in the true Vernal Scheam, we meet with a much better signification of this Aspect: For therein we find Mer∣cury in the , the Angle of Friendship, As∣sistance, and of the Good Spirit; and there, being in Qua∣drate of Jupiter, Astrologers tell us, he signifies— Quod Rex vocabitur ad se sapientes, & ornabit eos. This Excellent As∣pect gives us great hopes of much happiness to attend the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the King or Governour thereof, and seems to intimate (sub Deo) that His Majesty will call unto Himself the Assistance, Aid, & Advise of the most Wise and Learned Men both in Church and State, and will Heap, or Confer Honours and Priviledges upon them according to their Capacity, Dignity, or Merit. It is of so Favourable an Influence to these Nations, (considering the Moon in Gemini, in Trine of the Eleventh Angle, and Aspect of Jupiter and Mercury, as before) that if it shall please God to incline His Sacred Majesty to call a Parliament, (His great Council of the Realm!) It may prove a most Happy and Healing As∣sembly to both the King and People, such a Parliament, whose great Wisdom may be made use of to Settle these Kingdoms in a fixed Condition of Prosperity, Peace, and Plenty, to the wonder of after Ages; and which we hope will consider of, and advise the Enacting of such Provisional Laws for a continuance thereof, as shall make for the Kings Honour, and for the Terrour of His and the Kingdoms Ene∣mies; and also be able to reach all wicked Traytors and Li∣bellers, tho' lurking in Holes beyond the Seas, thence trans∣mitting their Treasnous and Blasphemous Papers hither to do mischief. These are the Natural significations of that Quadrate Aspect, upon which the Traducer excites his Native Coun∣trey
to a Rebellion, by telling them— They shall again take Courage, and Release themselves,— Ha! Take Courage! Against whom?— Release themselves! from what? The Li∣beller, would have been a happy Man, no doubt, had he lived in Cromwels, the Usurpers time. For then was Astrology made a Pander and Property to every Treasonous purpose in the World: Art was wrested, Judgement from the Stars Forged; and all to encourage Rebels on the one hand, and terrifie Loyal Persons on the other. The Knavish Republi∣cans, then, as now, making it the Burden of their Song, to open against Monarchy. Take Courage! Release your selves! He tells you plainly against whom, and from what? if you dare take his word, in his Treasonable Verses to the Honest Protestants, thus,— The Sun will Rise, the Actors fill the Stage, And One and Twenty Months is not an Age. Again. Now Hangs your Freedom on each Villains Sword, Cheated your Selves, taking your Princes Word. And in his Farewel he says, A Commonwealth's the thing that Kingdoms want. The Libeller can't be thought here to speak in Riddles, like the Devil of Delphos. But will he say he deduces these Ryming Scandals from the Heavens too? I would have him, or any of the Rebellious Tribe he belongs to, set Spleen and Rancour aside, and soberly ask the Nation,— Whether it ever enjoy'd a more Free, Tranquile, and Peaceable time, than since His present Sacred Majesties access to the Throne of His Ancestors? (abating Monmouths Rebellion.) Does not every Man sit under his own Vine, and Eat the Fruit of his own Fig-tree, or Labour without disturbance? Do we not en∣joy both Life (and its Comforts) Liberty and Property, in a far greater measure than in any Age preceding? We are not annoy'd with Informers or Catch-poles, or with vexatious Suits or Indictments for our Religion. We have no Taxes to burden us. No Man permitted to do us wrong. The Law is preserved in its just Current (its rigour only abated; and is there any harm in that?) and awards to every one his Right
What is it that he would have Men take Courage against? What is it (I say) this Libeller would be Released from? When they groan under no Oppression at all; Are Burthen'd with nothing; except with an Excess of Ease and Plenty. Oh! English-men! ye know not the happiness you enjoy under a Lawful and Religious Monarch! Holland it self (the place that protects this Libeller) is, in comparison of England, a Hell to the Subject; where he cannot so much as wear a pair of Shooes, or eat an Herring, before they be nine times. Excis'd. As the Ingeniously Learned Sir George Pudsey most truly and wisely observ'd in his Speech at Oxford, upon his being admitted the worthy Recorder of that City. Whereas We of this Nation, like the Jews with Quails in our mouths, invoke the Wrath of God by Railing against His Majesty and His Government. We have Surfeited of Freedom, and like Jesurun, being waxed Fat, are ever ready, not only to Diso∣bey, but Kick at our Superiours. But the Libeller hath studied the Case more fully, and as boldly as plainly, tells us, what we are defective in, viz. A Commonwealth's the thing that Kingdoms want. I believe, the Libeller would, (non obstante this Bravado) give all the Shooes in his Shop to be at home quietly again, and be acquit of his Commonwealth.— But he shapes well, to make us believe the contrary; and gives his Brethren hopes of a Change in England; and page 4. thus Salutes us.— England seems to be pointed at in particular, as you may easily see, if you do but consider Aries as Englands Horoscope, and Gemini as Londons. And thus will there be turning, and overturning, till the Great turn comes. Quod faxit Deus, Incarnate Devil! to invoke God to hasten a Rebellion which himself (without ground in Art) praedicts. What if Aries be the Horoscope of England? It is not so particularly at this time. But, what if it were? Is not Venus in it? Doth not England dispose of its Enemies Significator, and (by his own words) afflict her too? And, what if Gemini be Londons Horoscope at large? Is not the Franchises and Liberties there∣of seized into the Kings Hands? You know for what, Libel∣ler!
And a particular Horoscope of that Famous City, no Man can know until His Majesty of His Grace give them a New Charter▪ which (finding the Moon in Gemini) I hope the Noble Senators thereof, by their Grave, Prudent, and Obe∣dient Actions and Demeanours towards their Sovereign Lord, will incline His Majesty the sooner to take it into His Prince∣ly Consideration. But, how comes the Libeller to be now so zealous for a Commonwealth? When, not long since, he contended as ear∣nestly for Monarchy, provided the unhappy Monmouth had been the Man. But possibly he deems an Illegitimate Mo∣narch, and a Commonwealth Synonyma's. No matter which to him, so a Change come, that he may get by the Bargain. Any thing but the Legal Heir will please his Pallate.— And, herein the Libeller Eccho's to a couple of English Miscre∣ants, calling themselves Astrologers also, who have Printed nearly the like Scandalous and Treasonable Stuff, some years since, under pretence of Praedictions. vid. Holwel's Cata∣strophe mundi, page 61. And Kirby's Astrological Prophet. page 29. But this Ternary of Knaves and Impostors have all liv'd to see themselves mistaken, by a Lawful Monarch's taking place against their long-hop'd for Commonwealth Nay. I dare assure the Libeller, and all that thirst for a Demcrati∣cal change, that the Stars are against them; and (if they be not willfully blind) they may plainly see, that God, (who is greater than the Stars,) is also against them too; and they will be all most miserably deceived and deluded in their Expectation thereof. Alas! A Commonwealth, (that is a Bo∣dy with no Head, or with many Heads) will not go down here. This Nation, Mad as it hath been (and the Libeller wishes it so agai, hath try'd, not only this Experiment, but all other Governments, and disrelish'd them all, but Monarchy. It hath had Presidials, Vicegrents, Lieutenant, Generals, Parliaments, a Free-State, Prtectors, Major-Generals, Committee of Safe∣ty, &c. But how uncouth, uneasy, and disgustful All of them have been to the three Nations, let the whole World about us Judge; who have with wonder and amazement beheld
our Confusions. All which mutations plainly tell us, that no∣thing can agree to the Honour and Government of these Re∣gal Nation, but a Legal Crowned Head. Britannia ab initio mundi semper fuit Regia, & Regimen illius simile ille Coelorum, (saith one.) Great Britain from the beginning of the World hath been Kingly, and her Go∣vernment like to that of the Heavens. It is impossible (I say) therefore, that she can remain long in Peace and Quiet under any other Power. And, what if I should tell you that Ptole∣my (that great Master of Astrology) hath plac'd England un∣der Aries, a Kingly Sign, and the very first of the Fiery Tri∣gon, as well as of the Zodiack. A Sign, wherein the Sun (the true representer of Kings) receives his Exaltation. As if it had been the Decree of the King of Kings (according to the Order of the Stars) that nothing but a Monarchy should be suitable to this Kingly Nation. I wonder how any Man endu'd with Reason, can plead for a Commonwealth? If he consider his Creation, that, as he is a , or a little World, and had but One Head as∣sign'd him, therein made in the Image of Him who is Lord of the Universe, he cannot possibly but own a Monarchy before all other Powers If God had intended a Man should have been in Love with a Commonwealth, he would have Created him with a Head on each Shoulder, as well as with what he did make him, which renders him of Form and Figure plea∣sant and graceful; whereas the other had been to have made him in the Image of Cerberus, and not of that Wise and per∣fect Being whose shadow he truly is. If Government therefore, like the Body Natural, should have many Heads, 'tis a Mon∣ster, and we know it ever bodes III. And, will not a dear-bought Experience convince us of this Gross Errour yet? And when we have paid so fully for our Knowledge? Is there any need of more Suns than one in a Day? Or of more Moons than one in a Night? Or of one King in a Kingdom? I cannot but think that Man out of his wits (saith one) that would affirm a positive necessity of any more. Hath not England been Fleec'd for its Wantonness and Wickedness? We thirsted after Change in 1641. we obtain'd
it But what got we by it? Ruine and Destruction. And that will be our Portion again, in case we should turn Wanton again. Hath not this Glorious Nation, first by opposing, and afterwards murdering the best of Kings, been turn'd into an Aceldema? And were we not made thereby the scorn and by- word of all the Nations round about us? Have not our state∣ly Pallaces and most Glorious Structures been turn'd into De∣solation and Rubbish? Our Plenty into Penury? Our Free-Trading into Dangerous Hazards?— And whereas, while under a Monarchy we sate quietly, (as now we do, Laus Deo,) and enjoy'd our Peace, Liberty and Property. Lo! when we were Subject to the Tyrany of a Commonwealth, (a Headles, or a Hydra-Government!) the Bramble of Confusion was con∣tinually scratching and tearing us.— Oh! what Virtuous things have Free-Quarter! publick Faith! Meal-money! De∣cimation! Robbing poor Servants of their Bodkins and Thin∣bles! Composition over and over! And One hundred and twenty thousand pounds per mensem! I say, what Virtuous things have these been to England, in comparison of a Tri∣vial Story of Ship-money! Which was indeed the No Grie∣vance that was Rebelliously complain'd of in the year 1640. &c. That Fatal year! in which Monarchy began first to be Bearded in England. By this short System of our past miseries, occasion'd by a Few Factious Spirits at the first, we may see, and be convinc'd, (if we are not willfully blind with obstinate prejudice) that the little Finger of a Commonwealth is Heavier than a Mo∣narch's Loyns. But the Libeller being of another Opinion, tells us,— Now, Hangs our Freedom on each Villains Sword This is a brisk gird at his Majesty for keeping an Army for the Security and Peace of the Kingdom. He'd be con∣tent that the KING were without a Guard, and Naked, that he, and his Party may the more easily Seize Him, and bind Him in chains. But the Libeller may ask, as some of his Par∣ty formerly,— Are not the Train'd-Bands a Gurd sufficient for His Majesty and the Kingdoms peace? I answer, no! Our late Wectern Experience tells him, no! Every one who can
wield a Pike, hath not the Valour to resist a Multitude of Evil Doers; hath not the Education to distinguish a Good Title to the Crown, nor a Resolution great enough to abet it. Jack Straw and Wat Tyler shew what Service the Countrey Train'd-Bands can do, when led on blindfold to pull down what they ought to maintain. So there is need of an Army, and why not? Doth not His Majesty pay them? Order them? and where need is, shew them the Severiiy of the Law? Upon this Coercive Power thus Establish'd;— Whose Li∣berties have they Invaded? Or what Damage have any suf∣fer'd by this, I may say, Civiliz'd Army? (unless he'll call that of opposing Monmouth in the West, a Damage.) An Army for Order and Discipline, none ever saw a better. Their Camp being more like a Well-Govern'd City, than a Field of Mars I am assured none can truly affirm that any one man in the Countrey where they came, hath been wrong'd to the value of a Pig, Goose, Hen, or an Egg, with∣out Redress, in case complaint have been duly made against the Offender. We Honour and Value the Train'd-Bands, &c. had they nothing else to mind but the Service of His Majesty, and Safety of the Kingdom. But Wives and Families are grea∣ter Clogs to Clergy-men and Souldiers, than to others. They are Powerful Load-Stones to draw Mens affections! of the One from the True Service of God, and the Other from the Faithful Service of his Prince. But the Commonwealths-men (for whom the Libeller is Ad∣vocate) are disturb'd the King hath any Army at all. Yet had their beloved Monmouth prevail'd, (that Protestont Prince!) they'd never grudg'd him an Army, any more, than their precious Predecessors did Oliver Cromwel; whose Title to the Government was Equal to his; but not one jot better. But saith the Libeller,— The Sun will rise, the Actors fill the Stage; And One and Twenty Months is not an Age. And to strengthen this his Trayterous Meeter, he tells us in Prose, p. 6.—England shall yet make a further advance; 'tis yet more than three months to the Harvest; and at the appointed time shall thy deliverance come; even at the
time when the Sun makes his second Visit to the Scorpion: and then will the Spanish Apple be grateful to the English palate. Here's Encouragement to purpose for Traytors and Rebels; in case they have but Faith strong enough to Credit the Li∣beller.— The Sun will Rise! yes, I hope it will, to discover such Sycophants as you, and Reward you too, for your Blas∣phemy and Treasons against God and your Sovereign.— Eng∣land shall yet make a further advance! God grant it may, in Honour and Grandeur. But God forbid it should, in the Libellers Sense: He intending nothing thereby, but Rebellion and Ruine. But Deliverance shall come at the appointed time! when the Sun makes his second Visit to the Scorpion, and then, &c. Here's Encouragement for Trayt rs and Rebels, I say, with a witness! had the Libeller call'd all the Infernal Fiends to his assistance, he could not have spoke more plainly or wick∣edly: But the best on't is, he hath deluded his Party hither∣to with his Spurious Oracles drawn from the Vernal Ingress, as you have heard; They have therefore little Reason to believe him in This, it being likely to prove as Errant a Falshood as any of his former ridiculous and groundless sug∣gestions. The Libeller, notwithstanding, is here come to the highest pitch of his Treason and Daring. For by these Hllish passages, he most Treasonably and Falsly imagines the Death of the King, and hath presumed to set Bounds to His Sacred life. [One and Twenty months is not an age!] For which I doubt not but Justice will Requite him. The 25th. of good K. Ed∣ward III. is not Repeal'd. Take notice Libeller! and re∣member that Kings are God's Vicegerent, and have long Arm. And why should not I assume as much Freedom to Answer this his Treasonable Insinuation, as himself hath taken Liberty to Write and Print it? For Astrology cannot own any such damnable suggestion, unless his Majesties Birth were known, which I am confident it is not either to the Libeller, or any other truly. Arch-Bishop Laud in his Diary says, His Maje∣sty was born on October the 14th. 1633. but no more, and
yet that good Bishop was an Astrologer. Mr. Whitlock says His Majesty was Born, October 13. And I have seen a Meddal made at His Majesties Sacred Birth, with October the 15. in∣scrib'd upon it. One of which Meddals Mr. Sandford also owns to have seen. And if the Day of this Illustrious Birth be thus uncertain, how much more the time of the Day? And, the Libeller knows that Astrology requires the minute, if Men would be exact in their Praedicting of any thing thereon de∣pending. There was a Scheam, pretended to be His Majesties Birth Figure, publish'd (among other things) in Anno 1659. [By no Enemy to the Royal Family, as the Book shews;) which Scheam had Leo on the Horoscope, and this possibly hath hope to misguide the Libeller, and his two Fellow Incendiaries be∣fore-mention'd; who greedily taking up the matter upon Trust, (as did the Publisher thereof,) hath occasion'd many to believe His Majesties Nativity is publickly known. But that Figure is not true, for many Reasons I could give. I'll mention one for all. What Imperial Geniture did any man ever see, that had the Moon in Duodecima Domo? That very Argument alone is sufficient to convince any understan∣ding Astrologer, of the Falseness of that Figure. And for the absolute true one, I am morally confident it is not, cannot be known. But, in case it were known exactly, what would the Libeller do with it? He'd even make the same Jarring false Musick with it, as he hath done with the French King's Geni∣ture, which is truly known, and Printed by Morinus in Astro∣logia Gallica. And what's that? Why, the Libeller doom'd that Great Martial Monarch to Death three years since, and yet is that Illustrious Prince alive, and likely to live, to prove him a very Impudent, but Ignorant Impostor. But alas! It is the Eclipse of the Sun in Scorpio, October 1688. which the Libeller refers to, when he tells us of the "Suns making his second Visit to the Scorpion, &c. at which time his XXI Months reaching from January 1687. are ompleated, which he says, are not an Age.— But what im∣partial Astrologer would dare to give Judgement upon his So∣vereigns Geniture at all, much less at so Wild and Groundless
a rate? Can a small Eclipse, &c. prove Fatal without other Arguments? What Author teaches him this for Astrology? 'Tis the Libellers Malice, not his Art, that makes him guilty of this palpable and most Treasonous Falshood. And although I ought not, and therefore dare not intermeddle too far with so Sacred a Theam as is the Life or Death of my Sovereign, otherwise than by my Prayers; yet I shall presume to tell the Libeller, that 'tis not full Nineteen Years since, (viz. in October 1669.) that the Sun was Eclips'd in the very same place, as he will be in October 1688. And no Danger atten∣ded His Sacred Person upon it. Neither can there now, for ought the Libeller can read in the Stars. And for his Spanish Apple, which He says, will then be grateful to the English Palate; he tacitly but most wickedly menaces His Majesty with Poyson. From the which I doubt not but God, and all good Mens Prayers will protect His Sacred Person. Behold! This Rancorous Bloody Villain! nothing can satiate his malice, but the life of his Sovereign! and that by a Death of his own appointment, without ground in Art. But Libeller! let me tell you, God hath preserved Him from the Lyon and the Bear; from the Associators and the Exclusio∣ners! from Perils by Land! and Dangers by Sea! And I doubt not but he will Deliver Him from the malicious, groundless menaces of this Uncircumcis'd Philistine, too. God Almighty, never Delivers any from Iminent Dangers, but for Great and Stupendious Purposes. As he preserv'd Moses in the Water, to be a Leader to his People. Joseph from Capti∣vity, and attempts upon his Innocence, to be the Supporter of his Family, and Countrey, by making him the Chief Man in Aegypt. David from variety of Dangers, and being Hunted as a Partridge upon the Mountains, to be the King of his People Israel. Cum multis aliis, &c. And, can we believe, tht God hath not a mighty Work for His Sacred Majesty to do, having preserved Him from as Imminent Dangers as ever he did any? Assure thy self, vain Libeller! thy Presages will never be answered, let thy Wishes be never so Bloody and Treasonable.
But this impudent Fellow, as making himself sure of His Majesties true Nativity, confidently ventures, (page 3.) to write—Saturn in Opposition to the part of Fortune in His Radix, and that giver of life, will in a few months, (mean∣ing his XXI months, no doubt,) be directed to a malefique Ray of Saturn, &c. Monstrous Lyar! As false to thy Art, as to thy Sovereign! what Genethliacal Astrologer ever taught, that the part of Fortunes directions to any Promittor were Dangerous to life? Such a Direction (as Astrologers tell us) may presage loss and damage several ways, according to the Nature of the Star that is Promittor, and place it may happen in: but can ne∣ver cut off life Ptolomy teaches us, in Judging of Natali∣tial Scheams, first to consider the Horoscope, Sun, and Moon, for the Life and Being of a Person or City, &c. and next to take care of its well-being, and that was by minding the , or place of the part of Fortune, which they commonly call'd the Lunar Horoscope, because projected from the Luminaries and the Ascendant. This was Ptolomy's method, and yet the Impudent Libel∣ler is not asham'd to vouch Ptolomy for this his new Discove∣ry, lib. 3. cap. 12. 13. But I have taken the pains to read Ptolomy in both those Chapters of his third Book, and, Truth be my Witness, there is not one word in either of them that sounds any thing like to what he asserts. Nor do the Argu∣ments of those Chapters lead him to any such purpose. He therefore hath bely'd Ptolomy, and is not to be credited, The first of those Chapters, treats, De impedimentis & infirmi∣tatibus Nati accidentibus Corpori. The second discourses, De qualitatibus animae Nati. Certainly, the Libeller, the Morning before he wrote this palpable Untrath, offer'd Sa∣crifice at the Altar of the Goddess Laverna, in some such like Supplication as this,— — Pulchra Laverna! Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctum{que} videri, Noctum peccatis & fraudibus obj ce Nubem;
Thus in English. Goddess most Fair! this Suit deny me not, That Quak and Lye I may, and yet be thought An Arrist Just: my Knavish Frauds o'respread, With Sable-Clouds, that they may ne're be Read. But, what if Ptolomy had said so, which you see he doth not. What stead would it have stood him in? unless the exact Horoscope of that Royal Birth were known. And that it must be before the place of the Part of Fortune can be obtain'd. Thus this busie Man endeavours to Flie without Wings, and vainly labours to exalt himself (with the Lord Montaign's Turnebus) as if he understood all things; when in Truth, he is a very shallow Fellow in the Art of Astrology, and hath nothing to value himself upon, but his common Talents of Treason, Atheism, and impudent Daring. Here, I was about to lay by my Pen; but that I had fresh and better consider'd the Libeller's Gross Prevarications and Abuse of his Art in deriving all his malicious Judge∣ments from one single (false) Ingress▪ and a Transit or two, &c. and neglecting more weighty Causes, by which an Ar∣tist ought to have been Govern'd in Praedicting of Futuri∣ties. As the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, which presides over this present Age; together, with other lesser Causes. The True and Natural Effects of which, I shall as briefly as I can run over, and so conclude. Let it in the first place be remembred, that the World is under the Regency of the Fiery Trigon, and so will con∣tinue untill about, or somewhat after, the year 1800, viz. For 113 years yet to come. But we, at this time are more particularly subject to the Government of a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, the Sun's Domal Dignity: The Influence whereof will extend unto 1702. yet 15 years to come. At which time will be Celebrated another Con∣junction of the same Planets in Aries, (England's Horoscope) the first Sign of the Zodiack, continuing the same Trigon. Now, we will briefly enquire into the Effects of this Fa∣mous Synod. Authors tell us, that,— Sub Arietis Triangulo
sunt Monarchiae ingentes, &c.— When such a Conjunction happens in Aries, there will be an appearance of Mighty Monarchs, and that Just and Pious Laws shall be Enacted for the Preservation of Men; and People will be more inclin'd to Piety and Devotion than formerly, and be more strict and serious in their Enquiries after things Divine, or belonging to a Future Life; They will abandon Sensuality, Fraud, Hi∣pocrisy, and each thing that leads to Destruction: and be more Just and Virtuous in their actions towards God, and one another. Further,— Dum fiunt Magnae Conjunctionis in Trigono primo, quae durant annis 199, & singulis 20. fiunt annis, &c. During the time of the great Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in the first Triplicity, which continues 199 years from their first entring the same; and are therein once every 20 years repeated: (saith Campanello) there arises in the World, New Empires, Monarchies, and with them much Peace and Tranquility, by reason of the Power the Sun and Jupiter have in that Trigon.— And the Learned Dasipodius fortifies the said Opinion, thus,— Conjunctones in signis igneis, si fiant, &c.— If Conjunctions of the Su∣periour Planets happen to be made in the Fiery Triplicity, New Empires and Monarchy's are erected in the World, for as much as the Sun and Jupiter bear sway therein; and there will also be an Apparition of Wise and Learned Persons; and much Peace and Tranquility will be visible among Men, &c. Dasip. Aph. 64. The Sun Naturally signifies Empire and Glory; and Ju∣piter promotes Goodness, Wisdom, Virtue, and Piety; which evermore preserves Empires; as the contrary Vices most certainly brings them to Destruction. And this con∣sider'd, it must be of excellent consequence to the World, (so much thereof at least as is therein concern'd) when such Conjunctions are Influencing of it. Give me leave to search a little into the Effects▪ which have formerly attended some of those Noble Conjunctions, and thence demonstrate the Truth of these Aphorisms. I will be very brief.— It was under the Influence of such a
Conjunction that the Assyrian Monarchy began; and that Nabonasser advanc'd to the Monarchy of the Babylonians, giving them a New Aera. Under such a Conjunction, Car∣dan says, the first Emperour appear'd. 'Twas under this Trigon, that the most Famous of Men have appear'd in the World, viz. Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Hezekiah; David, Solo∣man, &c. so also Thales, and all the rest of the Seven Sages under this Trigon, saith the Learned Mr. John Butler, (in a Manuscript of all the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, which he kindly gave to me,) Joseph was born, and all the XII. Patriarchs. And that Osiris began his Famous March over all Asia, teaching them to sow Corn, Plant Vines, make Wine, &c. The Holy David was advanc'd (through many difficulties) to be King of Israel. The Olympick Games, Famous for above 1000. years after, (he saith) began under this Trigon. And also, that under the same, Sylla arose, and became the first Imperial Monarch of Rome. The Ger∣mans were taught Physick, Agriculture, Grinding, Forging, Brewing, &c. under this Triangle. And under the same, many Famous Cities have been built, as Memphis, (now Grand Cairo) in Aegypt: But whether by Apis or Epaphos, I will not dispute. Sparta, Lacaedemon, Syracuse, Tarentum, Rhegium, Abdera, cum multis aliis, all Erected under this Trigon. So likewise the Famous Universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Tholouse in France, &c.— But, to instance in One for All, let us (in Duty and Thankfulness to God) re∣member, that, according to his good pleasure, (for the Enno∣bling of this Famous Trigon) the Blessed Lord and Saviour of the World was born of a Virgin, (under the same,) and became Incarnate, to take away the sins of the World, and reconciled Lapsed Mankind to a greatly offended Deity. By this short account, we may reasonably Judge of the Effects Dependant on the present Famous Conjunction; which must, according to the Course of Nature, be of ad∣mirable advantage unto the World, and those particular Kingdoms, Cities, &c. that are subjected to this Ignean Tri∣plicity, under a Friendly Consideration. 'Tis the Fire that Purifies all things. And this Conjunctions Influences (Ju∣piter
bearing rule herein) will most happily consume all the Dross and Dregs of Fanaticism, Fraud, and Hipocrisy, (which hath so long infatuated the World,) and leave us only the Pure Gold of Peace, Felicity, Religion, Honour, and Con∣tent, &c, And, what if I should say, they will salute us with Durable new Monarchies, New Cities, New Arts, &c. The Conjunction is Fixed, and Fixed Signs relate to things of duration, and continuance.— Mistake me not. I do not mean that the Effects of this Famous Conjunction shall be of so all-Glorious an Influence, or shall so far signifie Peace, Piety, Honour, Quiet, and Content; as that all War, Discontent, Atheism, or Dishonour should wholly cease, or be absent. No! What year was there ever so Dry, but that it admitted of some moisture? Or so Prosperous, but that some Men met Infelicity therein? The Antipathies of Nature can no more be destroy'd, than the Sympathies. Both, may be intended or remitted, but not (while the World lasts) abolished. A Man be said to be a good Man, and yet guilty of some Immortalities. And a Year may be said to be a moist, or a dry One, &c. in comparison of the moisture, or drought it is laden with. All the Diversity or Variety that appears in the World, is so but by comparison, viz. In respect of a Dry Year, or of a Temperate, such a Year may be reputed moist. Or, in regard of a Fruitful Revolution; such a one may be term'd Barren. But there can be no Year in which all Four Qualities shall not be Apparent and Visi∣ble. And thus ought we to understand the significations of the Stars at large, and of this Famous. Ignean Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in particular; and not otherwise. For while there is a Horoscope, and Point Culminant, there will be a Seventh, and a Twelfth Angle, i. e. As long as there are Men and Actions in the World, so long there will be Ene∣mies and Opposition to them. As there are Persons and Pla∣ces with whom this Great Conjunction accords, so there are such with whom its Influences Antipathize. The ad∣vantage of an Amicable Configuration is chiefly this, that, like the Diurnal Arch in Summer, we have (plus Solis) more of Good than of Evil; and that the Evil it self is
kept under, from being able to do the World any material or signal Damage. But the Libeller, (or some like him) may interrogate, what though Great and Famous Persons, and Actions have been the Effects of these Notable Congresses formerly? and perhaps may again now also appear during the continuance of this Trigon? Why should they be more visible to Eng∣land, or Rome, than to any other Kingdoms, Cities, &c. Or, why at this time more than another? I answer.— That the Effects of this Conjunction cannot concern Rome or England, more, than they will other places which are e∣qually related to that Triplicity. To such they will be of a suitable signification. But they will much more relate to those Famous Places, than to others that are either not at all, or else not Equally concern'd with them. Every Countrey, Kingdom, or City, &c. is not in Trine to the Conjunction, or in good Configuration with it, therefore cannot be equal∣ly advantaged thereby. Some Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Societies, &c. are in Quadrate, or Opposition to this Noble Congress: Others have Horoscopes, and Hylegiacal Points not at all beholding it. To such therefore it will be either of an Opposite, or of no signification at all. But all Astrologers concur, that those Places and Persons, &c. that Harmonise with the Conjunction, will be sharers in its Nobler Influences; and those that are Discordant un∣to it, will partake of its most adverse and contrary Effects. Now Rome and England being related to this Conjunction very peculiarly, (though not Exclusive of all other Places) are the more certain Eminently to share in its Effects, and that as I said for good. That England is subject to the Fiery Trigon, is, with Astrologers out of Dispute. Ptolemy himself places it un∣der Aries, and Mars; Unde impatientes regni, &c. saith He; And that truly enough, it being of the Nature of Collerick Countries, as well as Persons, to Aspire, Tyranize, &c. And Cardanus adds, that therefore we are a Rebellious and Unlucky People: And that also, is not to be disallow∣ed of, when labouring under Rebellious and Tyrannous Influences.
The Warlike Ram Ascends in England Scheam, And Mars, or Mars his Sons, must Govern them. For we must know it for a Truth, that all the shining Diamonds of Heaven do not emit such Salutiferous and Pre∣serving Rayes as doth the Planet Jupiter: Neither is Jupiter always the Ruler of  Conjunction; (though here he be) sometimes it happens that he is a Patient or Sufferer him∣self; and Envious Saturn will bear the Rule over him But now (Blessed be God) it is otherwise. Now, to strengthen the Opinion (though it scarce need) that Aries is the Horoscope of England, I have seen a Figure of Heaven, said to be that of William the Conquerors first Landing in England; and it is this, and probably the true time thereof, or very near: as I shall upon another occasi∣on endeavour elsewhere to Demonstrate. The Figure of HEA∣VEN at the time of Duke WILLIAM, Sirnamed the Conqueror, his Entrance into ENGLAND ☽ à □ ♂. ad △ 5. & □ ☉. astrological chart
Whether this be the very true Figure of Duke William's Landing at Pemsey I will not absolutely affirm; but it looks so like the True One, (chiefly as it accords to the Kingdoms Original Horoscope) that it may, cum graro Salis, be ad∣mitted for the truth. A Cardinal Scheme agrees well e∣nough to a vigorous, Active People; and Mars Lord of the Ascendant in Trine to it, and in Conjunction with a Star of his own Nature, in Sextile of the Sun and Venus, &c. well signifies a Disposition to Liberty, Pleasure, War, Victory, Conquest of Enemies, &c. with other matters visible in the Figure, which I purposely pass over; All confirming it to be nearly true. And if so, let us consider how the Full Moon Scheme before the Great Conjunction in 1682. agrees herewith. In that Figure the Laminaries are in a Friendly Aspect to the Place of the Conjunction; And as the Conjun∣ction it self fell in Trine to the Ascendent of England, so it was Celebrated near the place of Jupiter in this Scheme, and in partile Trine of the Ninth Angle (which is termed Domus Religionis) which is govern'd by Jupiter. All which Arguments prove England to be Eminently concern'd in the Effects of this Conjunction, and that for Good. And that which makes it the more considerable, the Profectional Scheme of this Coelstial Synod, is in Trine to that of the ull Moon preceding it, and therein return'd to the Place of the Conjunction, and that of Jupiter himself in the Radix. I want Room (if it were convenient) to Explain all these Excellent Arguments. — Unity in Religion (I say) is the main intendment of this Famous Congress; and those particular Testimonies tell us where? and to whom? Si Deus & Astra nobiscum, quis contra nos? Some may expect a Judgement Astrological on this remarkable Figure, (a Cardinal one indeed, and semblable to the Actions and Pas∣sions of this Warlike Nation) but that is Irrelative to my present Purpose. My business being to shew the Partiality and Neglect of the Libeller, or his malice rather, that thus hath dared to Disturb the Peace of his King and Countrey, (as far as lay in him) under pretence of drawing Judge∣ments from the Stars; whereas had he honestly consider'd them, they had been found wholly against him.
But further, for as much as the Libeller hath Confidently joyned Rome with England to suffer all the Plagues his Envi∣ous Pen was able to Scatter; I will here (to manifest his Folly as well as Falseness) Produce the Nativity of Rome, as I find it in Gauricus; that the world may see what little Ground he had so basely to bespatter it. The PALLADIUM of ROME, agreeing to its Second Restau∣ration. As it is found in LUCAS GAURICUS. Latit ROMAE. ☽. â Vac. ad ✶ ☉. astrological chart What skilful Astrologer is there, that seriously viewing, this Figure of Heaven, would dare to pronounce Destruction to Rome, under a Conjunction in the Fiery Triangle? Be∣hold how all the Planets are rang'd in Order, all (Supra ter∣ram too,) to assist it by their Harmonious Positions. Pisces Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, all possess'd by Planets. Fortunate Stars, Jupiter and Venus in the medium Coeli; and the Sun in Aries, his Exaltation, smiling on the Horo∣scope
with a Trigonal Ray: The Moon increasing in the An∣gle of Hopes and Assistance, applying to the Sextile of the Sun in the Ninth Angle. An Admirable Position of Hea∣ven, enough to Dazle the Eyes of Romes greatest Enemies: and sufficient to confirm them, that they shall be no more able to prevail against Her, then the Gates of Hell can a∣gainst the Truth She Maintains. And had that Whimsical Astrologer, who asum'd the Name of RUTH, (which Mr. Maxwel gives us notice of in his Collection of Prophesies, &c.) but truly observed the Glories of this Coelestial Scheme, he could never have been so Rash or Fanciful, as to have Praedicted the Downfal of this Famous City, and Hierarchy as He did, from a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Scorpio, 1484. and by sundry Pictures, and o∣ther frothy fallacious Stories; which vain presage, it hath now survived (laus Deo) more then 200. years, so that we see— Stout Rome stands still, a Bulwark, to Defie, The Pen-Granado's of False Phrophesie. You see by this, there have been other Fops and Impostors as well as the Libeller, and long before him too, that have been stretching their Skill, and straining their Credits, to strike at Rome. Mr. Potter flirted at it from the Number of the Beast, 666. And many others have done the same, by Chronograms, Crotchets, Prophesies, Dreams, &c. But alass! how vainly! All of them have been deluded and mi∣serably deceived in their hopes; and, may they not also be justly derived too? Plus faetent stercora mota. I will rake into this Dirty Puddle no further. Let me now consider how matters stand at present with that Noble Place and People, in respect of Coelestial Causes. And here I find this Famous Conjunction to fall in the very Horoscope of Romes Palladium; and the Moon in the Pleni∣lunium Figure exactly return'd ad locum Solis, and Sextilum Proprium therein. And if the Luminaries are the grand Spirits of the World, and the Life of All things Living, (as
saith Hermes Trismegistus,— Sol & Luna post Deum, Omni∣um viventium vita sunt.) then their places being fortuna∣ted in any Radix, must add to the Life and Vigor, and con∣sequently, to the Honour and Splendor of that Place unto whom they belong. Ergo, much Happiness, and Success must hereby be intended to the See of Rome, maugre all the Libellers Malicious Predictions to the Contrary; And this Judgement is the Natural Result of Art. Further, we may observe, In the Profectional Scheme, that the Conjunction is returned to the Fifth Angle; which (according to Natural Causes) renders that Holy See Pros∣perous, and Successful, and Prevailing, hy her Envoys, Agents or Ambassadors, &c. and heaps Honours and Advan∣tages upon many of her Obedient Children, and denotes them, also, happy in their Endeavours; and that their Pi∣ous and Praise-worthy Labours will be more Easie and De∣lightful, and less Hazardous to them, than in some former years; that they shall be respected, and kindly treated where ever they come; and not be (while this Conjunction Rules) subject to suffer under the Damnable Perjuries of Satan's Imps, as lately they most wrongfully did. I cannot Enlarge upon these two Illustrious Genitures; which if consider'd (as you have heard) with the two other mention'd Schemes, together with Revolutions and Directi∣ons of the Planets, &c. (A large, and Laborious task?) do pronounce most Glorious things, not only to England and Rome in particular, but to all Christendom; to the Ad∣vancement of the True Religion, and to the Depression of the Devils Kingdom, Heresy, Schism, &c. Here, let me premise, that when I mention Religion, &c. I do it not as if I believ'd the Stars acted Fatally upon Men, or that they had any Dominion over Consciences, or matters truly Divine. I am satisfi'd (with Indagines) that they Incline only, and that (many times) very gently too; the Mind is affected with Stellary Influences, only by the media∣tion of the Organs, and not Directly. And the Soul is a free Agent. 'Tis the Mutable part of Religion only, that is Cognoscible to the Stars; that part of it which is Subject
to our Senses: But the Substance, or Essence thereof is above their Influences, and, as being Eternal, admits of neither Alteration or Addition. Wherefore the Stars may discover a Hipocrite or Heretick, &c. because such are led by their sensual Appetites, and not by the Spirit of Unity. But alas! they can never Declare a Christian. A True christian is the Holy Apostles Spiritual Man, that Judgeth all things, and is Judged of None: He is Influenced by a Heaven a∣bove the Stars; Even the Caelum Empyreum, This premis'd, I say then with Origanus, &c. that the Christian Religion (secundum formam) is under the Sun and Jupiter, whence Cardan says — Lex Christiana, Lex est Pietatis, Justitiae, Fidei, Simplicitatis, &c. That the Christian Law, is a Law of Piety, Justice, Integrity, Faith, Simplicity, &c. — All which Virtues, as they are own'd by the Good Planet Jupiter, will be Improved and Advanced, during the Influence of this Conjunction, to the Honour of God, and the Happiness of those Gountries, Kingdoms, So∣cieties, &c. that are subject to the Fiery Trigon. Jupiters Influences are ever benefique.— Nam â Jove amicitie, fae∣dera, religiosi, &c. when Jupiter hath Supreme Rule in a Conjunction, &c. He intimates many Notable and Serious Enquiries into former Alliances, Leagues, Friendships and matters relating to Religion, and to the Civil Customs of Kingdoms, Countreys, &c. to an Abolishing of sundry un∣just Encroachments. A Reformation of many Notorious A∣buses; and to an Extirpation of Fraud, and Injustice. So far are Rome and England from suffering what the Libeller awards, that the Grand Chanel of Division and Confusion is like to be stop'd up, and turn'd into the Joyful Current of Peace and Unity. As to England in particular, give me leave to remember a Notable passage in Michael Nostradamus, Written about 130. years since, viz. some short time after the pretended Reformation; which is thus, Le grand Empire sera pars L' Angleterre. A mighty Empire England Once shall be.
And, allowing it a Prophesy, it hath not been yet fulfill'd. Neither can it be more likely to meet an accomplishment then in this present Age: England being now Govern'd by a Warlike-Martial Prince, and under the Influence of a Noble Regal Conjunction. Again, It is an allow'd Axiom among Astrologers,— Na∣tivitates quae configurantur cum propinquis figuris duorum superiorum Conjunctionem, &c.— That those Provinces, Coun∣tries, Cities and Persons, whose Genitures correspond with the Figure of the last Ruling Conjunction of the Superiours, will remarkably advance in Honour and Grandeur, &c. and shall perform some more than ordinary Action or Acti∣ons worthy the same. The Genesis of England, (as you have seen) doth happily agree with that of the present Ru∣ling Famous Conjunction. It follows therefore clearly (non obstante, the Libellers Rabsheka-Railing) that Great Bri∣tain will advance and prosper Eminently under the Influen∣ces of this Regal Conjunction; and that as well in things Sacred as Secular; to the rejoycing of the Truly Loyal, and Consternation of its Enemies. I may therefore be held to affirm,— That whoever He, or They be, that shall presume to promise themselves any Encouragement or Security in their Practices or Conspiracies against the Illustrious Mo∣narch of these Nations, or the Peaceable Government thereof, They will be most miserably deluded and decei∣ved; and be Frustrate in all their designs, by a timely dis∣covery thereof: Let Him, or Them, Act never so Crafti∣ly, or Occultly; and they will come to be expos'd to the greatest and severest of punishments as their Treasons can deserve, or the Law can inflict; even to the Destruction of their Persons, Ruine of their Estates; and possibly to the utter Extirpation of their Names and Families.— Let them remember the sad, but just Destinie which of late be∣fell their Brethren, and Fellow Conspirators in the West, viz. Anno 1685. Moreover, if the Evil Figures of a Kingdom, or City, &c. (as says the Famous Ptolemy) are intended, or remitted ac∣cording to contrary Configurations of the Heavens, or
Stars; Then our present Argument receives still greater strength. For, it is most apparent, that the Malignant and Angry Aspects of the Stars are removed from us. The late general troubled, and (I was about to say) unparallel'd Fate which fo furiously afflicted us, was occasion'd by the great Equinoctial Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter; preceding it, Which, as aggravated by other lesser Causes, made it so. Violent, Fierce, Turbulent, and Raging. It happen'd from Aries and Libra; and generated Diseases and Disturbances in the Head. (As well of Kingdoms, and Cities, as Persons) Which was wittily noted by the Author of the MEDAL, speak∣ing to the (then) Achitophel of England, telling Him,— That, the Pox'd Nation felt him in their Brains. Whence Issued so many Damnable, Wicked and unheard of Plots and Conspiracies of the Vulgar and Baser sort, a∣gainst their Superiours. But now, I say, be it known unto all the World, that those Malignant Dog-Stars, under whose fierce Influences we were of late so horribly worry'd, are wholly remitted, being super∣ceded by those of a more Noble, Generous, Temprate, Fixed and Preserving Influence, viz. that of the fore-men∣tioned Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo. No more Wallers, now, to be heard of, to look for Priests in Pepper-Boxes; Or to mistake Jacobus, s, for Popish Images; or Rich Bracelets, or Necklaces, for BEADS; Gold Watches, or valu∣able Jewels, for Trinkets belonging to the Whore of Babilon, &c. No more burning of our Savours Picture, to promote Re∣ligion. No more of these noon-day Cheats now! which were lately perform'd in the Face of the Sun, in Nomine Dei. The time of the devouring KITES intimated by Merlin, is past. We had them with us in the late Plot with a Wit∣ness! Such a Perjur'd Crew of Atheistical and Plundring Caitiffs the World was scarce ever acquainted with since Cain slew his Innocent Brother. A parcel of Dignify'd Knaves too! from Heraldry of their own making, viz Do∣ctor Otes! Capt. Bedlo! Capt. Dangerfield! Esq; Dugdale! Mr. Prance cum multis aliis, &c.— When as but a short time before, Otes beg'd for Six Pence of Pickering. Bedloe was
fed out of the Alms-Basket. Dangerfield fetch'd out of Newgate by a kind-hearted Old Woman; and had been of∣ten Whipp'd and Pillory'd before for his precious Pranks. Dugdale had squander'd away his Lords Money to whom he was Bayliff; and to even accounts with his Lordship, swore him into the Plot.— Yet, such was the Iniquity of the (then) times, these devouring Varlets were believ'd, and so strongly back'd, and held up by the Chin, that every honest Loyal Man, and some Great Noble Men too, (for these Birds of Prey slew at all!) which one would have thought had been out of the reach of such Verminous VVretches; stood in fear of them, and were terrify'd with the danger and noise of their horrid Mouth-Granodoes. Surely, Ambrose Merlyn himself, had he then been alive, would have sworn that these things had been an absolute full∣filling of his Prophecy.— Et erit tempus Milvorum. And there shall be a time of Kites, &c.— But blessed be God, this time of Kites is past. And all the pestiferous and Perju∣rious Vermin are either dissipated, or dead, (the Doctor only remaining in Salva Custodia, to assure us five times every year, that there was such a time of Kites among us.) And every Loyal Man begins to be reduc'd to his right mind again, and to enjoy himself. And so I question not but we shall continue, many and many years, notwithstanding the Machinations of Rebellious and Blood-thirsty Men. Now, as to what the Libeller talks of to attend us from the Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, to come in 1692. and 1693. I say▪ it is not only besides his present Text (for he wholly omitted to explain their Conjunction, that, being against his Knavish designs) which was a Judgement on the year 1687. but a direct and palpable Contradiction to what he hath writ. For he has as you have heard (tho' most Falsly) terminated the present happiness and Government of Eng∣land by October 1688 at the farthest. When the Sun makes his second visit to the Scorpion, then the Spanish Apple, &c —And One and Twenty months is not an Age. Which agrees to the foresaid Month of October. And yet (forgetting himself) he foolishly tells us of matters to hap∣pen
several years after we all are to be Destroy'd. — Oportet mendacem esse memorem. But alass! Were there any thing in what he pretends, the Effects of an Opposition, are ever Obedient to those of a Conjunction. And if the Congress be Balsamique, the Di∣ametrial Ray can never be Corrosive. It may indeed Mi∣nuerè, somewhat abate of the Synod's good significations, but can never oppose or alter them. Shall I give this Libeller a little more Light into the Truth hereof; and that by an Instance or two within our own memories also? Let it then be remembred that there was a Conjunstion of Saturn and Jupiter in Pisces, February, 1643. an Irregular Conjunction, and attended with as Anomalous Actions and Effects, viz. A Horrid Rebellion, and the Murther of the Best of Kings at his own Door, &c. I meddle not with any Forrein Effects thereof, though they also were Monstrous and Strange. — The Opposition of the same Planets happen'd Anno 1653. in the Signs Leo and Aquary. But, what then? Did that mend the matter? or did it not make it worse, rather? 'Tis true, the Rebelli∣ous Rump Parliament was soon after Routed. But, to continue the Rebellious Effects of that Conjunction, Cromwel, the Usurper, was exalted in their Room. Who, with his Major-Generals, and Lords of his own making, &c. Built upon the same wicked and Perjurious Foundation. Consult the History of those times, and then tell me, whether the Opposition did not answer to the Conjunction in it's Tyranous and Rebellious Effects, as in a Glass, Face answers Face. Under the Influence of the Conjunction, the Rebells Mur∣ther'd the King; and during the Regency of the Opposition, they Abjur'd the whole Royal Line. Study now, Libeller, and then tell me, where's the Difference? They, viz. Crom∣wel, and his Party, could not Kill him whom they had Murther'd before. But did they not endeavour to Murther him in his Issue? where now, I say, lyes the difference be∣tween a Conjunction and Opposition? Take another Instance nearer hand, which perhaps may be more readily remembred, viz. the great Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter Celebrated in Sagitary, October 1663 Sagitary is held less Noble, and more Feral, than Leo. This Conjunction was succeeded with a very great Plague, and terrible Conflagration of London, &c. Two or three Wars with Holland; and but a Wavering and Uneasie Peace at home. — Now, the Opposition of the said Planets fell in Aries and Libra, in the Month of April, 1673. The very year of the Discriminating Act, and of the Earl of Shafts∣bury's contriving the TEST, which was attended with the Damnable Projects for an Association, and an Exclusion of the Lawful Heir from his Birth-right. And for their more easy compassing thereof, the late Damnable Plot, common∣ly call'd Oates's Plot, was Spawn'd. The Nation was survey'd by the command of Subjects; who had nothing to do there∣with, and it was also divided into WORTHY MEN, and MEN WORTHY, by those whose honest business was Obedience. His Majesty that then Reign'd, was bearded by his Vassals, and almost brought into a Plot against him∣self. Many worthy Persons Innocently suffer'd Death, be∣ing Sworn out of their Lives by Varlets; and to compleat the Miseries England then Lahour'd under. A Noble and Loyal Lord was also Sworn out of his Life, and Dyed as an Enemy to the King and Government. — Thus thou seest (vain Libeller) that the effects of an Opposition are ever E∣quivalent to those of the Conjunction preceding. Can any believe that the Plague, and Dreadful Fire, which the Con∣junction brought, could be more Mischievous to England, then these Damnable Effects which follow'd the Opposition? This Nation hath Reason to esteem the Latter to be the far greater Plague of the two; It being far better to fall into the Hands of God, then of Men. And, therefore the Mali∣cious Menaces of the Libeller, from the Opposition of those two Planets, which will happen in 1692. and 1693. are both vain and false, since the Effects thence to Ensue, muct naturally bear a resemblance to those of the Conjunction. And were it not so, the Law of Nature, and of the Stars (which is all one) were not Uniform, as we know it ever is, when not contradicted by Miracles.
I should now take notice of his confidence in presuming to advise the German Emperour to leave the PAGAN, and lead his Forces against the CHRISTIAN TURK; thereby meaning the Great French King, and of his still threatning that Illustrious Monarch (whom three years since he had im∣pudently pretended to Kill by his no-Art,) with a three years mischief at his Doors. Of his Scandalously twitting Denmark with the weakness of a STAGGERING PRINCE. Of his Egregions Flatteries to the States of Holland.— That they shall plow the Ocean with success, &c.— I should, I fay, have taken notice of all these, and other Villanous Lying passages,— As, who it is this Varlet means by his HATED MONARCH, &c. But having been taught by the Noble Plutarch, to keep within my own Sphere, and to ABSTAIN FROM BEANS, i. e. Not to concern my self too nearly with the Actions or Affairs of Princes, Monarchs, States, &c. I shall leave such matters to be consider'd of by the several Honourable Agents or Ambassadours of such Princes or Re∣publicks, unto whom it properly belongs; for them to take Care in the places where they reside, that the Honour and Dignity of the Sovereigns they Represent; be not Lessen'd, Undervalu'd, or Wounded by Scandals in any sort or man∣ner; but much more, when they shall be dishonour'd and Scandaliz'd by Libellous Prints, which proclaims the same, not only to the present, but to future Ages for ever. And, so I have done with the Libeller, for this time pray∣ing God in mercy to reveal his Eyes, and awaken his hard∣ned Conscience to a love of the Truth, and of true Duty and Loyalty toward his Lawful Sovereign, whom he hath, with∣out Cause, most maliciously and daringly provoked. And also to give him Grace to Repent of all his Atheism, Treason and Blasphemy, intersper'd throughout his wicked Pamphlet, and that he may before it be too late, crave Pardon of God, and of his Sacred Majesty for all his wicked and wilful Of∣fences committed against both. Sero Sapit Ingratus. FINIS.
POSTCRIPT. I Have purposely omitted to search into seve∣veral strains of his Doggrel Poetry, as not willing to understand whom he points at: and yet they seem very plain and intelligible. Hear him in one or two of them.— He says, that in his wanted Commonwealth — No Charters seiz'd for Rome by New-found VVrit, Nor City-Rights question'd as they thought fit, And ROGUES made JUDGES to Determine it. And,— No FIDLING JUSTICE there perks up his Head, Prefer'd to Cheat the Church that gave him Bread. With sundry other Venomous Flirts at several Eminent and Loyal Persons, and some of them by Name, as Mr. Graham, Mr. Burton, &c His Majesties Solicitors; possibly, for that they might be appointed to Prosecute him for his Treason. Of which pray take a Copy thereof as it was Sworn against him, and Printed in the Rye-House Conspiracy, p. 90. of the Octavo Im∣pression, viz. — This Examinant (Mr. W. WEST) further saith, That Mr. Goodenough told him this Examinant, That he had spo∣ken to one PARTRIDGE a Shooe-maker and Almanack-maker in Covent-Garden, to Act in this ASSASSINATION, and that the said PARTRIDGE offer'd to Joyn in it, if it were to be done in Town, but was not a∣ble
to RIDE, and therefore could not Joyn in the ATTEMPT out of London. And fur∣ther saith, That the said PARTRIDGE had erected some Scheams, and thereby found the Duke of YORK would scarce out-live March or April: And that the KING was under an Ill Direction too, and the PEOPLE would be VICTORIOUS. And Mr. Riley told this Examinant the same thing as to the Scheams erected by PARTRIDGE. This Libellers horrid Treasons being thus dis∣cover'd, he fled into Holland to avoid the Pu∣nishment due unto them; and there the more fully to Evince his Guilt, he excites, (as much as in him lies) by his Poysonous Pen to a Rebellion against his Lawful King. Assuring his Associa∣ting Brethren, The advantage is far greater to the Patrons of Liberty, Courage, &c. than to the Patrons of Popery, and that Popery will not stand in England many months — but decline, and pe∣rish; — And then run Rogues. Now com∣pare Mr. West's Testimony, and see if it do not exactly jump with the Libellers Predictions.— And, yet, behold the Impudence of this Wretch! after all this Treason, and reiterated Provoca∣tion of His Majesty, abusing the Reverend Judges, and other his malicious Scandals, as you have heard,— He dares with the Whore in the Pro∣verbs, wipe his mouth, and say he hath done no Evil; But hath the hard'ned confidence as to send over an Almanack to London, to be Printed for 1688.
Finally, If any shall Judge me too Sharp in this my Reply; I must presume to tell them, that if they justly consider the occasion given, they'l then think me rather too sparing in my Animad∣versions upon so Horrid a LIBELL; Wherein the Libeller hath Traiterously traduc'd his Liege Lord and Sovereign, menac'd His Royal Life, and set bounds thereunto, to the Dishonour of the King of Kings, whose Prerogative it is; Di∣sturb'd and Bespatter'd his Native Countrey, from whence he drew his Infamous Breath; Scandaliz'd and threat'ned all the Reverend Judges of the Realm, Blasphem'd Christian Re∣ligion, and the Clergy of both Churches; and, to these his Enormous purposes hath unworthily prostituted Astrology, one of the most Antient and Ʋseful Sciences in the World, and ever in Repute with the Wisest of Persons in all Ages. Yea, and this too, when that Noble Art speaks quite different to what the Libeller brings it to prove.- I say, these Monstrous Stories consider'd, I have been rather too gentle and sparing.— Yet the Holy Apostle S Paul, advises Titus to Rebuke the Cretians) who he says, are allways Lyars, Evil Beasts, &c. as this Libeller) Sharply (, Cuttingly.) That they may be sound in the Faith, Tit. c. 1. v. 12.13. ERRATA. EPist. page 3. read . June, r. Ingulph's, p. 2. l. 4. r. hear, p 8. l. 19. for! r., p. 29. r. not, p. 35. l. 8. r. Trigon saith. p. 34. l. 20. r. Conjunctiones, p. 36. l. 24. r. Moist, or Intemperate. Smaller Errors are left to the Breast of the Candid Reader for Pardon.
