R1537 E392_17 99862071 160281
SIXE PROPOSITIONS PROPOUNDED, By the Officers and Souldiers under the command of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the Citizens of London. Wherein they set forth, the Reasons of their near approach, and their advancing to∣ward the said City. TOGETHER, With their Demands to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, concerning the Kings most excellent Majestie, the Honourable Houses of Parliament assembled at Westmin∣ster, and the Enemies of this Kingdome who endeavour to raise a second Warre▪ VVhereunto is annexed, The Answer of the Lord Mayor, to the Demands and Desires of the ARMY. Published at the desire of the Army, for generall satis∣faction to the whole Kingdome. London, Printed for G. E. Iune 14. 1647.
A Letter sent from an Officer in the Army, to a friend of his in London, concerning the Letter which was sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lievtenant Generall Cromwell, and the rest of the Commanders in the Army, to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor of the City of London. Kind Sir, HAving by severall Letters formerly, intimated unto you, the affaires and proceedings of the Army, since their repossessing themselves of his Majesty, I shall now in this small interim of time, once more communicate unto you, the sence of the whole Army ingenerall, together with their reall intentions & resolutions, in their present design, for advancing and approa∣ching neer your famous City of London; all which, (we do verily believe) will evident∣ly
appear to the whole world, that our En∣gagement, (being so unanimously agreed up∣on) in this present design, is not for any self or sinister ends, but only for the preser∣vation and safety of his Majesties Royall Person, the full Bing and Priviledges of our renow∣ned Parliament, (in whose Cause we have been wil∣ling to sacrifice our lives, for the preservation and de∣fence of the same) the liberty and proprietie of the Subject, and the good of the Common weale of En∣gland: Neverthelesse, (notwithstanding all our faith∣full actions, and dangerous engagements against the common enemy of this Kingdome, in the behalfe of that Cause, whom we so often adventured our lives to maintain,) divers ill affected spirits, have impro∣ved all opportunities, and advantages by false sug∣gestions, to make us odious to the Kingdome, by ca∣sting such a blot of infamy upon this Army, for which it is determined by the Officers and Souldiers inge∣nerall, not to cease in their present action, untill such time that they have right and satisfaction in these particulars and grievances, which they have so often demonstrated to the publike view, and that the Au∣thors and Fomentors of the same, may be brought to a legall tryall, and justice executed upon them, which is hoped, will not be denyed: And to that end, His Excellency (our renowned Generall) Lievtenant Ge∣nerall Cromwell, and the rest of the Colonels in our Armie, hath sent a Letter to the Lord Mayor of London, declaring the grievances of the whole Ar∣my,
and representing our desires and demands, con∣cerning that perpetuall blot of infamy, which hath been cast upon this Armie. by some wicked persons, who endeavour to involve this Kingdome in a second VVarre, and so overthrow both the priviledges of Parliament and People. Sir, We are now upon our march towards your ho∣hourable City, hoping to find redresse for all our grievances; which if granted (I am consident) it will tend much to the honour of his Majestie and his Roy∣all posteritie, the preservation of both houses of Par∣liament, the good of the Common weale, and the safety of the whole Kingdome ingenerall, by reason whereof, we do conceive the woole Nation to be con∣cerned in it, (having a long time suffered under the blood-thirstie and mercilesse sword.) And therefore, for the prevention of a second warre, and the speedie effecting of a safe and well-grounded peace, within the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales. It was resolved by the Officers and Souldiers through out the whole Army, at a late Randezvouz, as fol∣oweth: I. That having some cause of suspition, of a new design, lately contrived by a false and self-seeking party, for the involving this Kingdome in a new Warre, and to that end are very active, both in the City of Lon∣don, and severall other parts of the Kingdom,
to accomplish the same. It was resolved (with one unanimous consent) by the Offi∣cers and souldiers, under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, immedi∣ately to demonstrate, and represent their grievances, and also to declare the grounds of their intentions, concerning their ap∣proach and advancing towards the City of London; the Army being now upon their march, from their quarters near Cambridge toward Ware, and so to proceed on, as occa∣sion shall require. II. Their desire is, to preserve and not to spoyle, and to that end, are determined both Officers and Souldiers, horse and foot, not in the least, to be accounted the wicked of men, and destroyers, but preservers of that remnant and talent which God hath be∣stowed upon those, who serve him in truth and sincerity. III. That although they are now near ap∣proaching towards your vast and populous City, yet it is no waies prejudiciall to the State, but for the preservation and security of those priviledges, for which divers poor
souldiers have lost their lives for the main∣tenance of the same. IV. That if there be an answer returned somewhat suitable to their desires, and their reasonable requests granted, they shall pro∣ceed no further, but retreat to any conveni∣ent place, which shall be thought fit and convenient. V. That, their desire is, that they may re∣ceive a faire & suitable Answer to their Re∣quests, (professing that their intentions are reall, and not in the least, prejudiciall, either to State or Common-Wealth, but for the advantage of the publike good.) And that the Citizens of London with whom they have so often hazarded their lives withall against the Common Enemy of the Kingdome, may not in any waies stand in opposition against them, but really and unauimously knit their hearts in one link, against all opposers and disturbers of the publike Weale of England, in which troublesome disasters, both the Citizens of London and the renowned Pren∣tices (of the said City) in the Army, have wded through many difficulties. VI. And lastly, It is the desire of the whole Army,
that all things may be composed in love, and that all possi∣ble means may be ued, for a safe and well-grounded peace, that so his Majesties Honour and Prerogative may be main∣tained, the Priviledges and Being of Parliament preserved, and the peace and welfare of the Kingdome defended, a∣gainst all Opposers, and Disturbers whatsoever. These Desires and Demands were subscribed by divers of the chief Officers in the Army, and so to be communica∣ted to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor of London. Thus for the present, I remain, Your faithfull friend R. Rishton. Ware 11. 1647, Postscript. SIR, UPon the close of this Letter, we received intelligence, hat His Majestie (now residing at New-market) hath a great desire to advance more Southwards, but it is suppo∣sed he will remain there untill such time that the body of the Army advances further, which we conceive will not be, untill an Answer be returned, to His Excellencies De∣mands, Vale, Vale. Vpon Friday being the 11. of this instant moneth, the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, and the Common Coun∣sell of the City of London, had a large debate upon the Pro∣positions of the Army, but at length concluded that an An∣swer should be speedily returned to them, declaring that they have a good affection of the Army, and that their pre∣parations at this present, is onely for the strengthning of the guards, and security of the City, and to that end are abo sending of some certain Aldermen and Common-Counsell to the Army, to declare the same unto them. FINIS.
