S4649 E109_24 99860717 112842
THE LORD MARQUESSE OF HERTFORD, His Letter, Sent to the QUEEN IN HOLLAND. Also a Letter from the Committee in Sommersetshire, to the Houses of Parliament, with a Copy of their Message to Marquesse HERTFORD, and his men assembled in Arms at Shepton-Mallet, his Answer thereunto, and their Resolution upon the same. Likewise the Information that both Houses received from a Marchant in ROTERDAM, Relating how divers Captains, and other Officers upon a Letter from the Queen to the Prince of Orange, are by him discharged, and sent over into England for His Majesties service in the North; And how the Papists there have given to the King two hundred thousand pound in mony; with sundry other matters of great concernment. Whereunto is added, Certain Votes of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the apprehending, and bringing up, Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Thomas Smith, Captain John Digby; Members of the House of Commons, With Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Sir Francis Dodington, and some others as Delinquents. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That these particulars be forthwith Printed and published. Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliament. August 8. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscett, and John Wright. 1642.
Madam, I Am now (imboldned by Your Maje∣sties commands) to give You the trouble of a few Lines, which for∣merly I have done with some scru∣ple, fearing to intrench too much upon Your Majesties patience. His Majesties affaires, are now I hop in a prosperous way. And the affections of His People, breaks out every day more and more; who begin to have their eyes open, and will I beleeve no longer be deluded with the imaginary fears and jealousies. The King takes His journey to morrow towards Lincolnshire, invited thereunto, by a great number of the best Gentlemen of that County: The Prince goes with Him, But His Majesty hath commanded me to return to York with the Duke of York, where He is to remain untill the King comes back, under the charge of the Lord of Dorset, Because by His M jesties com∣mands, I am with all speed to repair unto the West, to put His Commissions of Array in execution, which I make no doubt to perform without any great difficulty;
If God prospers Us, as I trust he will in so good a cause. We shall then shortly (I hope) be blessed and cheered up with Your Majesties long wished for presence, And hey then down go they; And to Our greater incourage∣ment, Sampson is come over to us. Madam, Your Majesty may perceive I hope well, that I presume to be thus merry with You; But I hope You will pardon it, with all the other errours and pre∣sumptions of MADAM Your most humble, most faithfull, and most oblieged Servant, HARTFORD. Beverley the 11. of Iuly, 1642.
THE Copy of a LETTER sent from the Committee in Sommersetshire, to both Houses OF PARLIAMENT. SIR, ACcording to the commands of both Houses in your late Instructions, for the preservation of the peace of this County, since our Letter to Master Pym, dated the 29. of July in Bathe, Where we gave directions for a meeting this day in this Town of Shepton Mallet, to issue Warrants to severall hundreds, for preserva∣tion of the peace of this County, requiring them not to obey the Commission of Array, but to be ready from time to time to obey the Ordinance of Parliament, and such farther dir ctions as they should receive from us, according to your In∣structions; but so it was, May it please you, That under pretence of a Petition delivered last night to the Lord Marquesse of Hertford, in the name of some of this Town, gotten by the wicked practises of these Incendiaries, Inhabitants of this Town of Shepton-Mallet, viz. Richard Board, Hercules Whiting, Nicholas Downton, James
Strode, John Walker, and John Coothe the Parson, (who also did yesterday read publikely in the Church His Majesties late Answer to your Petition of Pacification,) insinuating into the people, That our meeting here was to fire their houses, and make their Streets run with bloud; This morning about eight of the clock, Sir Ralph Hopton a companied with Master Thomas Smith, both Members of your Home, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Father in Law to Master Thomas Smith, and a hundred horse at least, with swords, and some with Pistolls, came into the Market place, pretending to read the said Petition: Master William Strode, one of your Deputy Lievte∣nants, lying that night within a mile of the Town, and having no∣tice of some tumult in the Town; Presently himself, and his sonne, with his servants, in all, but four Armed horse, and two unarmed, came into the Market place, and demanded the reason of the tumult; Whereupon the said Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Smith, and Sir Ferdi∣nando Gorges came forth to Master Strode, and required him to alight, and hear a Petition read; to which Master Strode replyed, That he came not to hear Petitions, but to suppresse Insurrections and Tu∣mults, And required as one of the Committee of both Houses, the said three Gentlemen and the rest, in the name of the King and Par∣liament, to depart the Town, as they would answer it at their perills; Whereupon the said Sir Ralph Hopton laid hold upon Ma∣ster Strodes person, and his horse, with the assistance of Master Smith, and arrested Master Strode of suspition of Treason, Endea∣vouring to pull him from his horse, which he endeavouring to avoyde, Sir Ferdinando Gorges strook at him with a Halberd, and dive s of their Cavaliers drew their Swords, and held the points towards his Body, and forced him to alight: and then the said Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Smith, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, laying hands upon him, The said Sir Ralph Hopton did their arrest Master  of high Treason: And then the said Sir Ralph Hopton read the abovesaid false and scandalous Petition, and called for men to make it good; but there only appeared the abovesaid Nicholas Downton, which they  M ster  to take notice of, to which Master  replyed, That the said Downton was one of the Incen∣diaries
of the said Town, as they were of the County, and of the Parliament; and did again require them in the Name of the King and both Houses of Parliament, to depart the Town, and bid the people obey the King as he was guided and counselled by the Parli∣ament, and not as he was guid d and counselled by evill Counsel∣lors, from whom came this Commission of Array, both illegall, and destructive to the Kingdom: then they commanded the Constable to take charge of M Strode, who desired them that he might go with them to the Marquesse; and in this passage, word was brought to Sir Ralph Hopton that the Countrey was coming in upon him; whereupon they seeming to be amazed, and severing themselves, went down the Street, and took horse and rid to the Swan at the other end of Town, the place appointed to meet the other Deputy-Lievtenants, but none were yet come; whereupon he rid out of the Town to meet some of them, having set a good Guard for the safety of the Town (we had forgot to tell you that whilst Master Strode was in their power, one of their Cavaliers bent a Pistoll on one of Master Strodes servants) Neer unto the Towns end Master Strode met some others of his fellow Deputy-Lievtenants, with their Company, to whom he related what had passed: whereupon they all went with their Company into the Town, and up to the Market-place, whence Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Smith, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and their Company were departed, and gone in haste a mile out of the Town, and with them all the Incendiaries above named, together with one Tho. Strode, a new Captain of Sir Ed. Rodneys, where they endeavoured to raise all the Country about them, to surprise us, and did raise many men, and divided themselves in Troops or Companies, having sent both over-night and that morning post to Sherborn, to Captain John Digby, to bring his Troop of Horse to assist them, which he did ac∣cordingly: but meeting about three miles from this Town some of their own Troops, he was advised to leave Shepton, and go to Wells, which he did, with his Troops. In the mean time we the Deputy-Lievtenants having seen the Town all in quiet and peace, went with our Company to our place of meeting, there to persue our businesse, which we did the best way we could: But the Countrey hearing
how we were like to be surprised, came in without Warrants or any  of ours, with such diligence and affection, both Horse and Foot, that before noon were above 2000 Horse, though most un∣a med, and about 100 Foot; our Scouts bringing us word very fre∣quently how they surprised the Countrey-men coming to us, la∣boured to encrease their fears, beat and wounded His Majesties Sub∣j cts, took away their Powder, Bullets, and other provision they br ught to assist us. We thought it fit to draw into the Field, and put in order our people, the best we could to preserve the peace of the Countrey, where we publikely made our Instructions: and Mr Henry , eldest son to the high Sheriff, having his fath rs Au∣thority (himself being weak and sickly) was come to us, and c m∣manded as Posse Comitatus, all that were present, and the whole Country, to assist us for the service of the King and Parliament, and preserving the peace of the County, which the people with great Acclamation protested to obey. There was brought unto us a man , and we believe mortally wounded, by one of Sir Ralph  Cavaliers, and robbed of his Powder and Bullets, with ma∣ny other Complaints, too much to trouble you withall: And three of the Troops being in our eye, we thought fit to send them the enclo∣sed Message by Master William Long, and Master Lawrence Bull, two honest Gentlemen of our County: whereunto is added their answer, and the Marquesse is kinde of Proposition, with our answer to it, which we humbly refer to your perusall; and when our Messengers as we , might be with them, we began to draw our Company towards them also: whereupon they all disbanded in haste, most to∣wards Wells, and some to their own houses. And having likewise intelligence that the Maior of Wells hath delivered, by command of the Marquesse, the Keyes of the Magazine there to Sir Francis Doddington a Delinquent, and disarmed divers good and  Subjects within the Town of Wells, and seized on di∣vers men their Horses and Arms that  as strangers into the Town, and giving out Warrants  the Lord Marquesse of HERTFORD, the Lord  and the Lord of TROVVRID  their Hands,  Forces into Wells,
Wee thought fit to give out our warrants for the mustering two Regiments, on Friday next at Chewton upon Mendip within three miles of Wells. And for the better enabling us to preserve the peace of the County, we have sent to the City of Bristoll (who have shewed their good affections to us already in this service) for two field peeces of about 6 pound bullet, which wee conceive very necessary for the present occasion which as you see is dangerous, and therefore we desire you will speed us the Armes, and helps you have been pleased to promise us, with what else you shall thinke fit. And we shall be not wanting in our best service for the King and Parlia∣ment having had great experience amongst us al∣ready of Gods great mercy in bowing the peoples hearts to his service, and raysing their spirits to most gallant resolutions for the Defence of the King and Parliament, against all opposers; for which wee humbly and heartily blesse God, and commend the good successe of all unto him. And beseeching your pardon for this tedious relation, which wee conceive very necessary, doe remaine. Yours and the Kingdomes humble servants. Iohn Horner. Hugh Rogers. Alexander Popham. William Strode. Iohn Pym. Richard Coley. Ro. Harbyn. Iohn Ashe. Shepton malet the first of August. 1642.
Munday the 1. of August. THe Message of the Members of the House of Commons, and the Deputy-Lieutenants, the Committee of both Houses of Parliament, for the preservation of the peace of the County of Somerset sent to Troopers, and divers men in Armes gathered in bodies in the fields about Shepton mallet, by M. Bull and M. Long. Requiring them to demand of those Troopers and armed men the intention of their comming; and if it were for peace, then that they should returne home to their houses if not, that then they would take it as an insurrection; and en∣deavour to represse it. Mr. Bull, and M. Long comming with the message, they found these Troopers and Armed men, &c. commanded by Sir Ralph Hopton, and M. Tho. Smith, to whom they delivered the message; who told them they could not give them any answer till they had spoken with the Marquesse, and desired the two Gentlemen to goe to Wels to him, and then the said Sir Ralph Hopton, and M. Smith would goe with them, which they did. And then the Lord Marquesse of Hertford gave them this answer in writing by Sir Ralph Hopton.
My Lord Marquesse being informed of a great assembly to meet at Shepton in Armes this day, not knowing any cause of such meeting, sent me and some other Iustices of the Peace in order to the peace of this County, to know the cause of such meeting, and to prevent the disturbance of the peace. When they had received the abovesaid answer, the Marquesse gave them in writing these words under∣written, and desired answer. I understand there is a great assembly of armed men now at Shepton, which I conceive is unlawfull, and desire to know by what au∣thority they are met; for that as yet it seems to me a great violation of the peace of this County, and the Kingdome, to appeare so armed; and to receive their answer. To which the Comittee sent as followeth: After we understood that my Lord Mar∣quesse of Hertford came into this Coun∣ty with Companies of Armed men to put in execution the Commission of Array which is illegall, and setling himselfe at Wels, whether resorted many men in Armes, both Horse and Foot, We to preserve the peace of this County came this day to Sheptonmallet.
Die Ʋeneris 5 August, 1642. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament. THat Sir Ralph Hopton, M. Tho. Smith, and Captaine Iohn Digby shall be disabled to sit as Members of the House of Commons during this Parliament. Resolved, &c. That Captaine Iohn Digby be forthwith sent for as Delinquent. Resolved, &c. That Sir Ralph Hopton, Mr. Tho. Smith, Sir Ferdinand Gorges, and Sir Francis Dodington be forthwith sent for as Delinquents. Resolved, &c. That Richard Board, Hercules Whiting, Ni∣cholas Dounton, Iames Stroud, Iohn Walker, and Iohn Cooth the Parson of Shepton-mallet be forthwith sent for as Delinquents. ORDERED, THat the High Sheriffe of the County of Somerset, and the Deputy-Lieutenants, and Comittees of the same County, and the Forces that shall be sent downe to the assistance of the said Deputy-Lieutenants, and Comittee, be all required to use their best endeavours for the appre∣hending and sending up to the Parliament the Delinquents voted of that County.
August 5. 1642. A Merchant living at Roterdam saith, that he came from the Brill in Holland upon Monday last, and that when he was there he saw two Captains, viz. Capt. Padget, (as they told him his name to be) and Cap. Ger∣rard, who were newly come hither from the Haghe, and were discharged (as this infor∣mant was there told) by the Prince of O∣renge, to the end they might repaire into the North of England to serve the King; and saith, that there were divers other Lieute∣nants and Officers there that were also forthwith to come into England for the same purpose (as this informant was there told) and should have come over with this in∣formant in the same Ship, but that it was to come to London. This informant heard also, that M. Jer∣myn went from the Haghe to the States lea∣guer neere to Rhine-berck towards Cullen, in the Queens Coach to the Prince of Orenge,
(by whom he was royally entertained) with the Queens Letters to him, which contained the names of such Officers, as she had prick∣ed, and desired the Pr. of Oringe to discharge them, that they might come into England to serve the King. This informant heard there also, that the Papists in Holland and Frizeland had lent the King 200000. l. And he saith also, that he saw at the Briell, two vessells (viz a Pinke and a Boyer) laden with Powder, Muskets, and other ammunition, the one whereof went for Scarborough, and the other pretended to goe for Ireland; and that Master Knolles (a servant of the Kings) went in that boyer. Also this informant knoweth, that Master Jermine came to hire a Cole-ship of Scarborough being at Roterdam, and of about an 150 tunne, to carry over certaine amuni∣tion into the North of England; and the Ma∣ster of the Ship told this informant, that when the bargaine was made with him by Master Jermine for the hire of that Ship, Master Jermine told him, it was to carry over Letters into England, but when the Master understood that it was hired to carry over
Ammunition, he would not stand to his bar∣gaine He saith further, that upon Munday was sevennight, newes was brought from Flushing to Roterdam, that the States Admi∣rall had taken nine English ships, which were going into Dunkerk, and sent them to Flush∣ing, because he found they carried cordage and Ammunition, and that they sayd, they had one of the Kings ships to convoy them; He saith also, that he heard it credibly re∣ported there, that young Master Griffith having beene at Paris to seeke Master Jer∣mine, and not finding him there, came to him to the Haghe, where Master Griffith cha∣lenged Master Jermine into the Field, and Master Iermine tooke Oneale to bee his se∣cond, and Master Griffith had a Scottishman for his; and a Frenchman parted them. Hee saith also, that Prince Robert is at Helvore-sluce, ready to come overwith the first wind, in the vice-Admirall of Holland; the ship came from the Briell on munday last to goe to Helvore-sluce to take him in. FINIS.
