s5838 45578460 172374
A Strange and True RELATION Of a Wonderful and Terrible Earth-Quake, That hapned at HEREFORD on Tuesday last, being the First of this present October, 1661. Whereby A Church-Steeple and many gallant Houses were thrown down to the ground, and several of the Inhabitants slain; with the terrible Thunder-Claps and violent Storm of great Hail-stones that then fell, which were about the big∣ness of an Egge, many Cattle being thereby utterly de∣stroyed as they were feeding in the Field. Also, The prodigious and wonderful Apparitions that was seen in the Air, to the great amazement of all Spectators, who beheld two perfect Armes and Hands: In the Right-hand, being graspt a great broad Sword, and in the Left, a Bowl full of Blood, from whence they heard a most strange and loud Voice, to the wonderful astonishing of all present, the fright whereof causing divers Women to fall in Travel, a∣mongst whom the Clerks Wife, named Margaret Pelmore, fell in labour, and brought forth three Male-Children, who had all Teeth, and spake as soon as they were born, and presently after gave up the Ghost and died together, the like having never been known before in any Age! The Truth hereof is witnessed by Churchwardens. Francis Smalman, and Henry Cross, Peter Philpot. Constable. Nicholas Finch, Gent. James Tulley, Gent. George Cox, Robert Morris, Thomas Welford, &c. London, Printed for J. J. 1661.
A True and perfect Relation of the terrible Earth-quake, great Claps of Thunder, and mighty Hail∣stones, which hapned at Hereford, on Tuesday last, the first of this pre∣sent October, &c, Bfore I mention any further concerning this strange and sudden Accident, which hath so lately befaln at Hereford, and that this Rel and Au∣thetiqe Truh may not seem doubtful, I shall put the Readr hereof in minde to take notice and remember the several Disasters that hath befaln, not long since in, and about London, which I need not here to declare, yet none so wonderful, or worthy of observati∣on as this; but let it not seem strange, for we
know, and often read, that the Lord doth some∣times manifest his will unto the World in Won∣ders and Signes, thereby in some part to shew his Omnipotency, and let them know that he is still the Almighty God, and that he sees and knowes all our ways, how slight so ever we make there∣of: Then how can we praise him sufficiently, when he hear of this strange Disaster that did so lately befal at Hereford, in that he was pleased to keep the like from us here in London, we being as sinful as any: But he that is all Mighty and all Powerful, is also all Goodness and all Merci∣ful, whereon depends the best hopes of all good Christians. And now to descend to the subject I was be∣fore speaking of, which was of the violent Tem∣pest and terrible Earthquake, &c. that hapned at Hereford, be pleased to observe the true Relation thereof, which is thus: ON Tuesday last, being the first of this pre∣sent October, 1661. about 2 of the clock after Noon, there hapned a great and violent storm to arise, to the amazing and astonishing of all the inhabitants: The first beginning was with a most terrible Winde, which continued for
the space of 2 hours, with such vehemency, that it forced the Tiles off the Houses, insomuch, that none durst come out at their doors; in the midst of which storm, was blown down the Steeple of a Church, and many brave Houses, the falling whereof hath killed some persons, but what they are, or whom we yet know not. Then the Air began to be darkned, but sud∣denly clearing again the people began to look aboad; and so continuing for a while, all assu∣redly thought the storm to be over, but contrary to their hopes, about 6 and 7 of the clock in the Evening, their Ears were solicited with unwonted Claps of Thunder; and, more to augment their fear, presently fell such Hail-stones, that the like was never seen in any Age before, each Hailstone being about the bigness of an Egge, which seve∣ral Gentlemen of quality affirm, ere present in London, who certifie, that they destroyed the Cattle in the Field, and did much other harm. Then followed a terrible and fearful Earth∣quake, which continued almost for the space of half an hour, which so amazed the inhabitants▪ that they thought the last Day had been come; and immediately appeared a great brightness, as if it had been Noon-day, but was presently over∣cast
with a thick Black , out of which appeared a perfect Armes and Hands; in the Right-hand was graspd a great broad word, and in the left a Cup, or Boul, as they concived, full of Blood. Having glutted their eyes with amzement, and filled their hearts with great fear with beol∣ding these prodigious Appritons more o a∣stonish both them and us, appeared to their eyes a piece of Corn ground, ready to mow, and a Sythe lying by, from whence they heard a most strange and loud voice, which sad; Woe, oe to thee, and to the inhabitants thereof, fo he co∣meth that is to come, and ye shall all see him At the conclusion of these words, the people made a grievous cry, as indeed they mght, ad many Women that were wih Child, through ex∣tream fear, fel in travel, but none so wondefl to be taken notice of, as M Margaret Pesmre, the Clerks Wfe of the Ton who for the space of twenty Weeks, wanting her bodily ealth, had sought for cue of the Doctors: This Margaret Pelmore at that very instan ell in travel, being exceedingly affrighted, and brought forth 3 Male Children, who had all teth and spake as soon as they were born. The first said, The Day is ap∣pointed
which no Man can shun. The second demanded, Where would be found sufficient a∣live to bry the Dead? And the 3d said Where will there be Corn enough to satisfie the Hun∣gry and ney. As son as they had spoken these words, they all immediaely gave up the Ghost and died, to th gret astonishing and amazing of all present, and the Mother of the said Children doth at this time lie Distracted and raging in such extream manner that none can tell, as yet, whether she will live or die! The truth whereof is witnessed by Churchwardens. Francis Smalman, Henry Cross, Peter Philpot, Constable. Nicholas Fanch, James Tulley, George Cox, John Groom, Robert Maurice, Thomas Welford: And divers others. FINIS.
depiction of earthquake
