S5812B E132_5 R1505 99859790 111888
STRANGE AND BLOODY NEVVES FROM MINIARD: OR A BLOODIE MASSACRE ƲPON FIVE PROTESTANTS BY A COMPANY OF PAPISTS, MEE∣ting them as they were going to Miniard to take ship for Ireland. Also how they first encoun∣tred them, and how after some Discourse upon Religion, cruelly murdered them. As also, how they were taken, and carryed to Bristow Castle. With the Copy of a Letter found in one of their Dublets, directed to the Bishop of CANTERBƲRIE. As it was credibly reported by a Gentleman of good worth, being an Eye∣witness to the same, and by the swiftness of his horse, escaped their Bloodie hands, London Printed for Iohn Greensmith. 1642.
BLOODY NEWES FROM MINIARD. FIve English Protestants intending their journey for Ireland, purposed to take ship at Miniard, a place some 40. miles beyond the City of Bristoll. After they had travelled above a hundred miles, with many a weary step, drawing nigh to Miniard, even within sight of the town, though scarce to be discerned, in regard the day was spent, and now one houre within night, they met with a company of Papists, to the number of fifteen, every man with a good sword by his side, and a good cudgell in his hand. At the sight of whom, they were somewhat apal'd: yet tooke some courage, in regard they were not far off the Town, and thought that therefore they did not dare to offer them violence.
But it fell out contrary to their expectation, For being met together, the event well shewed that they had some ground and just occasion of their feare. The first salutation was this, Gentle∣men well met, pray from whence came you, and to what place do you travell: we ask not for any harm we mean to you, but only are desirous to know. These were smooth words you will say. Well, the poor men thought no hurt, for true Charity will favourably conster all things: and therfore plainly told them that they came out of Kent, and were going to Miniard, and so they purposed (if the wind served) to go for Ireland. To Ireland, said they, why? that is strange you would go thither, knowing the estate of the king∣dome, how all are up in arms, and the Protestants in fear to have their throats cut every hour; and now seeing we know so much, we wil understand before we part of what Religion you are; for we promise you, we may well suspect that you are not right: for there is something in the wind that moves you to go for Ireland, in a time so dangerous, and troublesome. If it be so, said the Protestants we are not ashamed of our Religion we are (to tell you the truth) protestants, and go not to side with the Rebels, but to see some friends of ours in Dublin. What do you say, said they, do you call the Kings subjects rebels: by St. Peter, you are some of those that would ba∣nish us Papists out of England, but wee will bee even with you ere we part: and so drawing their
swords fell upon them, and bloudily sheath'd them in each mans bowels▪ whilst they pittiful∣ly cryed out for mercy: but what mercy could be expected from men of bloud, whose hearts were as hard as adamant, and their minds as cruel as Prgne, who bloudily slew her own Son. The mrder done, a Gentleman on horseback riding by and seeing so pittifull an object, returned back to Miniard in sight of the murderers, who would fain have taken him, if they could; and so raised the Country with all speed, who tooke them in a wood, as they were at their Orisons on their beads. O how they looked then one upon another: what a sudden palenesse came into their faces. All their devotion was gone in a moment, and they readier to take them to their heels, then pray a minute longer; knowing well enough, that it was but lost labour to implore the aid either of Peter or Paul. To be briefe, they were all car∣ried to Bristow, and upon examination confessed the deed, and so were worthily adjudged to bee hang'd in chains the next Sessions, where we will leave them, and come to the Copy of a Letter which was found quilted in one of their dou∣blets, not any of them knowing one word with∣in it, else they would not so carefully have pre∣serv'd it.
A COPY OF A LETTER SENT TO THE BISHOP OF CANTERBƲRY. The Contents vvhereof are vvorthie our attension. MY LORD, MAy it please your Grace to accept these poore impolished lines of him that writes only of good will, earnestly wishing an emendation of life, and re∣formation of manners, then your Graces confutation; for it is the duty of every Christian to imitate his Creator, not to delight in the blood of any man, but to preserve it. But again (my Lord) as it is the part of a man to supply the Corpor all wants of his indigent brother: so especially, he is bound to supply the defects of the Mind, and to study the welfare of the better part of man, his precious soule, which after the first death in a moment, either ascends heaven, or descends hell. My Lord, it must needs be a precious thing, when the whole world it self is not comparable to it. Were but this seriously digested in the stomacke of a sound judgment, I beleeve the world like Rocks and Quick∣sands would not so miserably shipwrack such an infinit
number of mens soules as it doth. Your Grace knowes that rebus secuudis omnes feri elati snut, I will not say that your grace is so; but I would desire your Grace to enter into a serious Solilogue with your self, and to see whether it be so or no; and if your Grace for the honour of this world, and outward pomp and glory, have not made shipwrack of your Faith, and pleased man rather then God. No better time to bring a man home then that of affliction; for whereas Martyrs buy heaven, as Ignato spake, with their blood, and others steale it with their good deeds through Faith in Christ only, (as a learned Father sometime said) a man in af∣fliction is compelled to it. My Lord, remember Manasses, how hee prayed in prison, do you likewise. And for the world and Glory thereof, care not for it: remember that thrice Noble Emperor Henry the 4th. when his Crowne was taken from his head, saw nothing but his Deus Ʋideat & judicet. Let God see and judg. God grant us treasure in Heaven, where no Thiefe can approach. Amen. FINIS. London Printed for Fr. Coules, and T. Bankes. 1641.
