T2624 E124_18 99872808 125254
A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent unto the Right honourable the LORD MAIOR of LONDON, from a trusty Friend in the Army. Written on Munday morning 24. Oct. immediarely afrer the BATTELL. LONDON. Printed by Luke Norton, in the Yeare. MDCXLII.
A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent Vnto the Right honorable the Lord MAIOR of LONDON, from a trusty Friend in the Army. Written on Munday Morning 24. October im∣mediately after the Battell. Worthy Sir, IF it will Please you to accept of a hasty midnight letter from one, who if he had his owne time to command, would never faile to give you an exact account of e∣very thought, the smallest cir∣cumstance that ariseth here, on wedensday last our Army marched out of Worcester, the King having before wheeled about behinde us from Shrewsbu∣ry
by Killingworth, towards Southam; From thence to go to Banbury, and as hee intended or rather pretended to goe toward London, our Ar∣my lay at a place sven m fom Warwick, cal∣led Kinton, having layen the night before at Strat∣ford upon Avon, the King ly he same night three miles before them neere Banbury: this morning the Lord Generall began to move, with the Body of his Army toward the Kings, when, on the sud∣daine about eight of the clock, an alarum comes to us that the King would give us Battell, immedi∣ately our forces were with the best expedition that could bee put into a battalia, and the Kings Forces came marching down a hill, of vvhich they had a great advantage, could they have kept it, be∣sides the winde vvas for them, and drevv neere to us. All things were not in order on both parts till about one a clock in the afternoone, and from that time forvvard till six of the clock vve had as bloody a battel as can possibly be imagined, the ordinance played one upon the other all the time, vvee gave them tvvo shoots for one, and their ordinance bles∣sed be the God of battels, did us scarcely any hurt at all, vvhereas vve scarcely discharged avvy a bul∣let in vaine, our Foot vvas flanked on the right and left Wing, vvith, horse and Dragonners;  left
Wing of the horse; after the fight had beene about an hour, were drawn up to service, and before they discharged once ran away, whic had like utterly to have undone us, for wee trusted very much up∣on our horse, but the wise disposer of victories, was pleased to determine it otherwaies, our right Wing held it out bravely, and our Foote even to a miracle plied their businesse so well, that it seemed to be for the space o four hours only one continu∣ed Peal of thunder. However so it was that the un∣worthy retreat of our left Wing made us all despair al this day of the busines: the Cavalleers came on, and fired some of our Waggons, and tooke all the rest, and took six pieces of our best cannons, when on the sudden our men advanced bravely againe, and retook our Waggons, and all our cannons that we had lost, and three more pieces besides of the enemies, this eveniug we beat them cleare out of the field, and remain masters of it, though they had a greater number of combatants both of horse and Foote then we, and many more ordinance, there are very many slain on both sides, yet it is credibly reported, there are two of theirs slaine for one of ours, though both charged bravely and like vali∣ant men, I cannot give the number of them, though sure I am, very much blood is spilt: we have taken
prisoner their General of the field, the Earl of Lin∣sey, and his eldest son the Lord Willoughby, Col∣lonel Lunsford, and Collonell Vavasor, which last are here in warwick Castle, we have taken also the Kings Standard, wee have lost no man of note, but Collonell Charle Essex, wee thinke also Sir James Ramsey, for he cannot be found, Collonell Vavasour told me immediatly before rhe writing of this Letter, that the King himselfe was for a time (how long he cannot say) in the field: it is said by some Prince Robert is slaine, how true it is I dare not yet affirme, we had about 50. Troops of horse in the field, and two Regiments of Foot, and two of Dragoneers, tvvo Regiments came not up, but are fresh, to charge to morrovv morning, vvhen we do expect as hot service as any we have yet had, and I doubt not but the Lord vvill crovvn the day vvith a glorious victory. This Lords day at night, at the conclusion of the Battell I came out of the field about an houre after Sun-set, it is novv grovv∣ing tovvards morning, it is time I should take my leave. FJNJS.
