T2886 E86_26 99872552 124991
A True RELATION of a late VICTORIE Obtained By Sir RALPH HOPTON Against My Lord of STAMFORDS Forces in Cornwall. Which (through the mercifulnesse of the Generall Sir RALPH HOPTON) was gotten with little blood-shed. The like Victory cannot be paralleld in the memory of Man. Being the Copy of a Letter written from Salt-Ash by a very impartiall hand, Dated the 24. of this present Ian. 1642. which many other Letters that came by the same Post (no doubt) will confirm. Printed by His Majesties speciall Command at Oxford, Ian. 28. 1642. By Leonard Lichfield Printer to the Universitie.
A true Relation of a late Victory obtained by Sir RALPH HOPTON Against My Lord of Stamfords Forces in Cornwall; Which (through the mercifulnesse of the Gene∣rall Sir Ralph Hopton was gotten with little blood-shed. The like Victory cannot be paralleld in the memory of Man. I Doe not make it my profession to write Newes, but that this extraordinarie unexpected acci∣dent gives mee occasion: I doubt not but you will have it at Oxford from other Pens then mine, for
indeed I could have wished I had not had occasion, but truths which are so perspicuous cannot be hid: therefore I will (without further circumstance) come in briefe to the businesse it selfe. This weeke my Lord of Stam∣fords Forces under Colonell Ru∣then came out of Devon, to seeke out Sir Ralph Hoptons Army, and give him battell: it seems the De∣fendant had some advantage of the Assailants, as by that which followes will appeare.
Salt-Ash in Cornwall, Ianuary 24. 1642. FOr confiding Newes, take this for truth, that Sir Ralph Hopton with his stout Cornish blades, hath given the Lord of Stamford his Forces a totall overthrow: hee tooke from them all their Armes, Baggage, Munition, and Ordnance, amongst which was a Brasse peece of foureteene foot long,
with the Rose and Crowne engraven on it, and hath taken to the value of ten thousand pounds, most of it was taken up in Devon upon the publique Faith, with fifteen hundred prisoners, amongst whom is Sir Shitton Calmado, with many Commanders, and some eighteene Ensignes, Ruthen fled for his life and liberty, with much adoe got over Salt-Ash passage, in a small Boat, the rest that escaped report, that Sir Ralph Hopton is a most mercifull com∣mander, for otherwise every mothers fonne had perished; Sir Ralph lost but two men: the like defeat was never knowne nor heard of. On Sunday last, to cleare the Land of mercy (for so those that are escaped terme Cornwall) of the Militia Forces, Sir Ralph with a small party marched
towards Salt-Ash, wherein were three hundred Militia men, and ten peeces of Ordnance, he beat them from their Ord∣nance, entred the Towne, drove them to the Sea side, where about one hun∣dred did rather choose drowning then killing; of which three hundred but for∣ty escaped. After that, Sir Ralph, who was still in the front, tooke a lusty Ship, that rode in the river neere Salt-Ash, to assist the Towne against the Cornish, in which was sixteene good Guns, with much Ammunition and provision; so that now Cornwall hath cleared it selfe of the Militia Forces, and strongly for∣tified all its frontier Townes. FINIS.
