t3095 e112_8 99861724 130545
A TRVE REPORT OF THE OCCVRRENCES AT PORTS MOƲTH from a speciall hand presented to an Honorable person in London. August 15. LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. for H. Blunden. 1642.
Sir, I Know you love Truth where ever you find it, and on what side soever it fals. Because the Reports concerning the affais in and about Portsmouth so much vary▪ I will give you the certaintie upon my knowledge: It is happily no news to tell you, that Sir William Waller, and Collonel Hurry took away the Bridge, and such fortifications as Collonel Goring had made about it, on Friday night last about six of the clock 20 Troops adventured upon it, being ignorant of the strength that was or might have been on Collonel Gorings side; but they found but eight Troopers, one or two were taken, the rest fled to better refuge; the Colonels gunner, one Mader, being fled from his service sometime before: I must tell you the taking of this Bridge, is of greater moment then most think for, for it pos∣sesses them of the Island Portsley, which hath 2000 Acres of Corn now standing upon it; And
as it prevents their enemies of succours, so it is a supply to themselves, and a re-possessing the poor Inhabitants which were bereft of all; and further it renders the taking of Portsmouth feasable, whereof in my opinion there was no possibilitie (but by starving it) while the Bridge and those Forts were secured against them▪ they being three mile on this side the Town; and besides, this hath put much mettall into the Souldiers, and it would make a faint-hearted man a Soul∣dier, to see their spirits and resolution, two, Col∣lonel Hurry, and one Sir William Waller behave themselves bravely. The County of Hampshire is as they were not a little incensed against Col∣lonel Goring and the Cavaliers with him (which they call at every word Rebellion) so they are not a little encouraged, by this defeat against him; as also for the surprisall of sixscore and fifteen quarters of VVheat that was gone from Fareham to relieve Portsmouth, and was seized upon by one Master Allyn of Gosper, and a few Watchmen; The Colonel was so vexed at it, that he would in all haste have shot down Go∣sper with his Ordnance (for it is within reach) but with the Majors and others humble besee∣ching
him upon their knees to spare it for the women and childrens sake, he did desist that enterprise. It is very certain that the Collonels, Cavaliers and Troopers pillaged from Portsley a thousand beasts and above a thousand sheep, and so refel∣led the poor Inhabitants, that they left them not a bit of bread; It would grieve any one that hath the heart of a man to hear their complaints, you must know they were most mean, and li∣ving upon their Stocks. But that which is worse, (and not to be spoken without blushing) seven Cavaliers lay with one woman maid at once in open view, and one Trooper lay with a mans wife before his face, and while his fellow Troo∣per had his pistoll at the husbands brest, in case of resistance; Sure what ever they pretend, they are far enough from advancing for the King or his Cause, that thus practise: It was credibly in∣formed by some that had been in Portsmouth in the beginning of last week, that the Collonel had but 200 Souldiers, and one hundred of them cannot be rightly called his own, if they had a fair opportunitie; many of them are forced One man that came to Town to sell his Butter, was
made a Souldier, and those that be with him at that rate, its like are not hot in the service, and most that went in last Week before the gates were shut, were so served: my Lord Wentworth is with Collonel Goring, and there is some suspi∣tion (not altogether unprobable) that my Lord Goring is there, however his soul is there we may be assured. One Mr Norton, who hath a seat night the Bridge, carries himself like a gallant man, he hath store of Muskettiers to secure his house, that stand Sentinel at the gates. Some Trained Bands are come in, and some Horse out of Hampshire, & the County is gene∣rally for the Parliament, more are expected they be much incensed by Collonel Gorings Cavaliers. Master Waller and Collonel Hurry have each of them a Troop of Horse: There are some twen∣tie Firelocks that looks like desperate Souldiers; The Bridge is secured by foure peeces of Ord∣nance, which were taken out of the Maria; They are making Fortifications. On Wednesday he made Proclamation, that all women and children that feared should de∣part
the Town by Sunday at noon. There are foure ships of my Lord of Warwicks lie so as no relief can come to the Town, nor the Town hurt them. Yours in haste. FINIS.
