T3447 E562_17 99865312 165238
TWO GREAT FIGHTS IN IRELAND NEER THE CITY OF DVBLIN, BETWEEN. The Princes Army commanded by the Marquesse of Or∣mond, and the Lord Inchiquin; and the Parliaments Forces commanded by Colonell JONES. WITH The particulars therof, the manner of their engagement neer the Gates of the City, and the number and names of divers Captains, Cornets and Souldiers which were killed and taken prisoners, and Colonell JONES his Proclamationt ALSO, The manner how 13000. are incamped against the City, the storming at Kildare, the battering down of the Walls with great Ordnance, the surrender thereof upon Articles, and the Officers and Souldiers to march away with Bag and Baggage. LIKEWISE, Propositions from the Irish Army to the Parliament of England, for the ancient Lawes, Religion, Liberties and Customes. Imprinted at London, for R. Williamson. 1649.
A GREAT FIGHT IN IRELAND Between the Princes Forces commanded by the Marquesse of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin; and the Parliaments Army commanded by Colonell Jones, and Colonell Munk. Right Honoured, THe Marq. of Ormond with 13000 Horse and Foot is sate down before the City of Dublin, with a resolution to storm, if not suddenly surrendred upon summons; but renowned Col. Jones hath taken a resolution to fight it out to the last man, and hath already made a gallant attempt and
inroad vpon his Out quartes with 2000 Horse and Foot; and after a sharp conflict Col. Jones made an honourable retreat in∣to the City with the losse of 7 or 8, besides some sew wounded; but the Lord Inchiquins Brigade of horse being gallantly moun∣ted, took vpon them great resolution, and embraced the pursuit within a quarter of a mile of the Gates, where we had a second engagement, which continued very dubious for the space of half an hour, till at last a considerable party of the Sea men came in to our assistance, who by their lining of the hedges, did so gall the Enemy, that they were forced to retreat, leaving above 30 men dead vpon the place; in which fight we took Captain Smith, Cornet Johnson, and about ten more prisoners, with the losse of five-men. Since which time, they have made another attempt vpon our Out-guards, and vpon the neer approoch of their forlorn hope consisting of about 60 horse, 30 of ours answered their charge, and shot Lieut. Col. Dungans horse vnder him, took him priso∣ner, and Major Dungan his brother was mortally wounded, our men brought off 7 of their horse, and (blessed be God) but one man wounded, none slain They are incamped within a mile and a half of the City where they expect the coming vp of the Earl of Clanrickard, Lord Taff, and the Lord Dillon, with their forces, for a sudden con∣junction, and then to make a sharp storm. Their Tents are pitcht on this side Fingles, their horse and foot lye all in our sight; Col. Jones is labouring hard to fortifie against them, hath given Orders for the pulling down all the Outhouses that may advantage their design, and hath set forth Proclamation for all the Irish Papists, and other disaffected Citizens, to depart the City within 12 hours after the publish∣ing thereof; by whose unwearied pains and vigilancy, we are in some reasonable possibility of the more safety thereby, & have hard duty to attend the Line dayly, but great will, vigour and
readinesse is in all men to perform the service: We have about 7000 foot (with the Inhabitants) fighting men, and about 500 horse to face the enemy: Our provisions consume very fast, and every thing is excessive dear, having now neither fish nor flesh to come to our Markets, the enemy being possessed of that which should relieve us; and are in a prosperous condiiion at present, and like to do what they please if our friends in England do not relieve us suddenly, and mo∣eey to pay them and those that are already here, and more provisions for them all, for Wheat is here at 5. li. 10. s. the quarter, Rye at 4. li. 10. s. the quarter, little to sell and little money to buy it, our Men of War are come from Bewmorris, and divers ships from Chester, and no men nor money, it is impossible (in mans judgment) for us to hold out till ayd comes from England. We have to st the good Town of Kildare, but it cost the enemy ve∣ry deer; for after three or four desperate assaults made by them on the hreaches, made by their Canon, having lost many of their men, they sent for a parley, and observing the undauted resolution of Lie. Col. Huteson and Cap. Dixon, who commanded the me there, & most of the men vnder them, although many of their men would not fight at all, & are since gone to the enemy, that they gave our men quarter in two dayes to carry away what they had, where was great store of corn and meal. Ballesoman is befieged, and it must be last because we can∣not come to relieve them. We hear that Owen Oneal with his forces is joyned with them of Kilkenny against us, but we have no certainty thereof. We are in a very sad condition, all our provisions being almost all spent. yet I hope the Lord will defend this place, and that every one that puts his trust in him shall be delivered, to whose blessed protection I commend you, and rest ever, Your indeared, and most affectionate friend, SAMUELL COTTON. Dublin 24 June, 1649.
SIR, I Am heartily glad to hear of the quiet condition you are in at London, and do assure you that we are so here at present, and hope by the blessing of God upon the endeavours of those in authority, every man will in time sit peace∣ably under his own vine. There have vanished of late out of these parts two sorts of people, by whom we feared would much trouble befall the Nation, the one were such as took part with those called Levellers, and the other though more weak, and despised, were such as were called Diggers, which to me seem to incroach not only upon Commons, but upon the very foundation of every mans just pro∣priety, yet what need I spend time or paper on either of these whom (as before I have acquainted you) are scarce to be heard of with us, and seeing they were so soon sudued by force its my hopes, that where ever they are, they will now be the easier overcome by Love and truly we hear of so much good in agitation by the house, that if they have strength to bring forth, all interests will receive abundance of satisfaction, and the Nation will undoubtedly be setled in so happy a condition that they will be a terrour to all their enemies. The Souldiers that come this way for Ireland are most of them very Civil, and deserve all the encouragement we can bestow upon them and on the other side, some [especially of foot] carry themselves as though they were in Ireland al∣ready. The last certain news we had from Dublin was that no Enemy was then, before it but every day expected yet said the messenger, col. Jones was in a good condition and able to make strong defence. Bristoll 22 June 1649, The Resolutions at a Councel of War at Whitehall, for an Esta∣blishment of the Army. UPon consideration of the several allowances for billet money, and additional pay, requisite to be made to the several Regiments of Horse and Foot, and to all other Foot within the present Establishment. In pursuance of the lat Act of Parliament for that purpose, resolved as followeth; That for Sir Hardress Waller, Sir William Constables, Col. Ingoldesbie Col. Barksteads, Col. Coxes, Col. Brights, and Colonel Fairfaxes Regi∣ments being disposed into Garrisons, or Quarters for the present, but to be drawn out upon occasion for the field, there be allowed for billet money and additional pay, 3, d. per diem to each private Souldier, and non Commissioned Officers, of which allowance, 2. d. per diem to be allowed from the seventh of May, 1649, and the other 1. d. per diem from the fourth of June, instant.
And when they or any of them shall be called out upon field service, out of the Garrison, and beyond the respective Counties, where they are or shall be setled, then to have 1. d. per diem more for increase of pay; allowed to each soul∣dier, and Non-Commissioned Officer respectively, during such their imployment. That for all other Foot setled in Garrison, there be allowed 1. d. per diem for billet money, and 1. d. per diem for additional pay, and of these the billet money to commence from the 7. of May, and the additional pay from the 4. of June in∣stant. That for the Lod Generals, and Colonel Prides Regiments of Foot (while they guard the Parliament and City) and to any other Regiment that shall come to relieve, or assist them, (while such Regiments shall be upon that duty) there be allowed for billet money, and additional pay to each private souldier, and Non-Commission Officers 4. d. per diem, and this allowance to the Generals and Co∣lonel Prides Regiments, to be made from the 7th. of May, 1649. That the same allowances (as to the Generals, and Colonel Prides Regiments) be made to the several Regiments of Foot that go for Ireland, as upon the now establishment, untill they shall be transported into Ireland, and then the half thereof to cease (as to billet money) and the other half as additional pay to be con∣tinued, during the time limited in the said Act of Parliament: And of this allow∣ance to the Lieut. Gen. Regiment of Foot, the whole to be made from the 7. of May, 1646. (in regard it continued that moneth in London) but to other Re∣giments for Ireland, 2. d. per diem, to be allowed from the 7. of May; and the other 2. d. per diem from the 4. of Iune. Concerning allowances to the Horse and Drogoons; resolved, as follow∣eth; That for such Regiments and Troops as stay in England; the full allowances by the said Act be made accordingly, and also the same to those that engage for Ireland, untill they shall be transported, and then the one half thereof (as for billet money) to cease, and the other half as additional pay to be continued, du∣ring the time limited by the Parliament in the said Act: And of this allow∣ance to the Horse and Dragoons, The whole to be made to Colonel Saunders, and Colonel Whaleys Regiments, from the 7. of May, 1649. (in regard they continued then upon the guard of the Paeliament) but to the rest of the Regiments 3. d. per diem from the 7th of May, and the other 3, d. from the fourth of June, That these Resolutions (being approved by the Lord General) be certified by the Secretary to the Honourable Committee of the Army, as from his Excellency and his Councel of War. By appointment of his Excellency, and the Councel of War, cer∣tified and signed by me R. H.
The Propositions of Generall Owen Oneal, the Lords, Gentry, and Commons of the Confederate Catholiques in Ulster. To the most honorable and potent the Parliament of England. IMprimis, That all Laws, Statutes, Penalties, made, past, or con∣cluded against the Roman Catholiques, its Ministers or pro∣fessors, their liberties and exercises of the said Religion, since the 21 year of H. 8. to be neclaimed and perpetually to be taken off, and to extend to that paray and their successors for ever. 2 That the said Gen. Oneal desires that an Act of Oblivion be passed to extend to all and every of his party, for all things done since the beginning of the year 1641. 3 They desire that General Oneal be provided for a competent command in the army, befit∣ting his place worth or quality. 4 That on both sides, all jealou∣sies, hate and aversion be laid aside, unity, love and amity be re∣newed and proclaimed between both parties. 5 That the Army belonging to Generall Oneal and his party, be provided for in all points as the rest of the Army shall be. Subscribed, OWEN ONEAL. FINIS.
