V712A 43077741 151855
VOX CHARITATIS: CONTAINING A LOUDER CRY For Bowels of Compassion, to the Lord's Poor Afflicted People. With a Word of COUNSEL and COMFORT to Them; and a Concluding Word to their OPPRESSORS. By a true lover of His truly Sacred Majesty, and all his Faithful Subjects. Open thy Mouth for the Dumb, in the Cause of all such as are ap∣pointed to Destruction. Open thy Mouth, Judge Righteously, and plead the Cause of the Poor and Needy, Prov. 31.8, 9. Turn ye unto him from whom the Children of Israel have deeply re∣volted, Isa 31.6. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy towards thy People: yea, the Fire of thine Enemy shall devour them, Isa 26.11. Printed in the Year, 1663.
VOX CHARITATIS: Containing a louder Cry, for Bowels of Compassion to the Lords Poor Afflicted People. WE are informed by the Lord, Gal. 6.7. that it will not be as we shew; but as we sow, so shall we reap: and in the second and third verse, are esteemed nothing, if we bear not one anothers Burdens; that is to say, If we feel them not, as if they were on our selves, to help to make them light and easie to him on whom they are; by putting under our helping hand, to enable him to bear them; not knowing how soon our selves also (who are in the Body) Heb. 13.3. may have our own burthen, Gal. 6.5. and need the helping hand of others; and as a Conclusion, vers. 10. we are required to do good to all, especially the Houshold of Faith. And indeed, Job esteemed his Friends nothing, that saw his casting down, and were afraid, Job 6.21. or were not ashamed to make themselves strange to him, Job 19.3. Now regard to the Poor (especially the poor of God's People) is required, with more plenty of Promises, and upon more perils in the neglect thereof, than any act of a Christian besides; and the Lord's distressed Ones, are called His Poor, Psalm. 72.2. & 74.19. He stiles himself (in especial manner) The Father of the Poor, the Widdow, and Fatherless, in his Holy Habita∣tion, Psal. 98.5. and hath espoused their cry, especially in cases of wrong, or neglect of them, Exod. 22.22, 23. Ezek. 16.49.—And indeed, the People of the Lord especially, are in this day exposed to greatest poverty, by wayes scarce heard of; in a Land where Righte∣ousness was pretended, but as when there was no King in Israel, Judg. 17.6. And as in all times (for many Reasons) they ought to have the preference in Christian Alms before any, so in this day more than ever; for other poor as they have latitudes in their Nature, so have opportu∣nities now to attend at the door of the belly-gods, who now abound
(as Sodom) in their sensual Festivals; and such poor are now (many of them) transformed into Scullions, Players, Singing-boyes, Priests, Sub-Priests, Parators, Informers, Jaylers, Trapanners, and such like retinue: Others of them also, having generally their liberty of getting their lively-hoods, as their more civil Genius may incline; which latter sort (whose honest Callings may not yet with the utmost labour obtain a lively-hood) as they are also the Subjects of Christian Charity; so they either have or can claim, and have the advantage of those constant Parish Impositions, Publick Collections and Allowances for the Poor, throughout the Land, which the Lords Poor, are most of them (beyond their Ability) compel'd to pay to, and few of them (how poor soever) are sharers of; besides, the other poor (in extraor∣dinary Case) can have their Briefs, Admissions of their Widows and Fatherless into Schools and Hospitals, and other special Donations: But, who sees not the Lords Poor broken in pieces, and driven from their former Callings, and comfortable Societies (wherein they were cared for and supported) without the helps aforesaid; now under the evil eye of almost any evil Beast in all the Land: And who is so much a stranger in Israel, as not to see that any of the other poor crew afore∣said, or others (how prophane or inconsiderable soever) may malice his poor Neighbour (who feareth the Lord, by almost any impertinent information) into the Goal? where then his Calling is interrupted; and what ever his poor Family suffers at home, the mind of his hungry Goaler must be fed, with more in a week by Fees and Usury, for his poor Diet and Lodging, than perhaps he knew how to get for his Wife and Children in a Moneth before; and it may be six moneths there, be∣fore he may be heard, and so doubtly robbed, both of his Calling, and the little Meal he had in the Barrel; Yea, perhaps when heard, he appears before such cruel Judges, as shall strengthen his Chain (though he be cleared in the Matter whereof he was first accused) if he answer not their humour, to some Absurd, Illegal, Extemporary Question, in the Breast, either of the unjust Judge, or by means of any malitious Justice, or stander by, though the first false Informer against him, (viz.) Have you taken the Oath of Obedience? What Church are you of? Are you a fifth Monarchy-man? Will you leave Preaching, or going to Meetings, or the like? Or if he be released, perhaps he hath no soon∣er setled himself again to his honest Calling, but is in like cruel man∣ner interrupted, to the loss of his custom, and discouragement of him to settle, if he should be delivered; neither can he conscientiously be∣come a Servant, or any Master so comfortably imploy or depend upon him; because perhaps at the next Meeting to Worship his God (which
is deservedly dearer to him than his Life) he is again snatched from the Affairs depending upon him, which are then all at a stand. And for proof of these intollerable Sufferings of the Lords poor People, London it self may be a looking-glass into the Land; and by it, you may guess How the dark places of the Earth, are full of the Habitations of Cruelty, Psalm. 74.20. When in the chief City, even under the eye of the Chief, the imperious insolencies of some are such, and so boundlesse, that many thousand Families, its thought, have been brought to beg∣gery hereby. And many have deserted their Vocations, as thinking themselves most unhappy, to have served seven years, to be free of little in the chief City of the Land, but slavery to Subjects: Left now so free, in absurd and boundless insolency, by which, still poverty in∣creaseth, and the cry of the poor oppressed ones, as it goeth up daily before God, so it should enter into our Souls; for God hath so com∣manded us, and we know not how evil the day may be, and therefore saith Solomon, Eccles. 11.2. Give a Portion to seven, and also to eight. And vers. 1. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters, for thou shalt find it after many Dayes. The Blessings of him that was ready to perish, come upon me, saith Job, Job 29.13. It was well for Dorcas, that the poor Widows could shew to Peter the Coats she had made for them, Acts 9.39. Blessed is he that considereth the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble, &c. Psal. 41.2, 3. He that hath pitty to the Poor, lendeth to the Lord, Prov. 19.17. And that which he hath given, will he pay him again; he shall be repaid with interest indeed: for it is a Sacrifice so acceptable, and well-pleasing, that in return to the Philippians, who had sent twice to Paul, even to Thessalonica, to supply his necessity, Phil. 4.16. He saith, vers. 19. My God shall supply all your need, &c. The Lord shew mercy to the House of Onisiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my Chain, 2 Tim. 1.16, 17. And whosoever (saith Christ) shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold Water onely, in the Name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward, Mat. 10.42. For at the great day of Reckoning, the Lord will esteem your Meat, Drink, Lodging, Clothing, and visits of his Hungry, Thirsty, Pilgrim, Naked, Sick, and imprisoned Ones, as done to him, Mat. 25.35. &c. and the contrary will be cursed, vers. 41. For I was an Hungry, and ye gave me no Meat, &c. But such as consider the Poor, are pronounced happy, Prov. 14.21. He that gi∣veth to the poor shall not lack, Prov. 28.27. and the Righteous doth con∣sider them, Prov. 29.7. who yet perhaps, may need an exhortation to be more enquiring after those that are at a distance from them in this evil day; and like the Hebrews, shew more labour of love herein. Heb. 6▪10▪
making it more your business, as the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.2, 3, 4. Who to their power, yea, and beyond their power (were com∣mended herein) as willing; and according as the merciful Man, Psal. 112.5. so to order your affairs with discretion, as that you may be ever merciful and lending. Oh! how many a profuse dish of Meat, and other extravagancies, which (in such times especially) may be sin to provide, &c. Isa. 22.13. Exod. 33.4. Ezek. 21.10. Prov. 23.20. might be profitably laid aside for the poor? Oh! that we might not be by fits in this work, seeing the Poor are with us; and lest, as Deut. 15.11. yea, increased daily, perhaps for tryal of our love unfeigned to the Lord a little season, who will shortly rid them out of their distress; but that in giving, there might be a true respect unto their need, Deut. 15.8. He that hath a bountiful eye, shall be blessed; for he giveth of his bread to the poor, Prov. 22.9. As the good Samaritan, Luk. 10.33, 34, 35. who interrupted his Journey, imployed his Pains, Skill, Purse, and Credit too, wholly to free the poor stranger out of his misery, when the Priest and Levite (that professed more) neglected him: which pattern of pitty to our Neighbour, the Lord commendeth to us, vers. 37. as our stand∣ing example, when great Professors fail: and himself our Pattern; who, though he was Rich, for our sakes became Poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. Where∣fore I beseech you, put on bowels as the Elect of God; give not according to the broken fragments of money you have about you, but learn rather obedience to that Word of the Lord, Luk. 12.33. Sell that you have, and give Alms. Oh! how far are rich Professors from following the Lord herein, who among them hath voluntarily lessened the yearly value of his Lands (in Obedience to the Lord of all) in this? Oh! that vers. 34. may not conclude most rich Professors Treasure, to be onely earth∣ly: For where your Treasure is, there will your hearts be also. But, alas! How dwelleth the Love of God in him who hath this Worlds goods, and seeth his Brother need, and shutteth up his Bowels of Compassion? Oh! tremble Rich Professors, If (in your expence upon your selves) you are not so grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6. how can you face the a∣foresaid Word, in 1 John 3.17. with Peace, and shut up your Bowels to your poor Perishing Brethren? Who shall trust such Stewards, with the true Riches, Luke 16.11. who deny the Lord, the faithful im∣ploying the unrighteous Mammon? Profess what you will, you are no∣thing, if you be so unnatural as not to bear the burthens of your distressed Brethren, Gal. 6.2, 3. Do you pass on the other side, and hide your eyes like the Priest and Levite, from the poor Object in ne∣cessity? The compassionate Samaritan shall shame you in the Day of  you at such a time (Dives-like) fare deliciously, and
cloath your self gorgiously, and stop your ears at the cry of the poor? you also shall cry your selves, and shall not be heard, Prov. 21.13. Yea, is it not come to pass in part upon you already, as Zech. 7.13. (compared to vers. 9.) for this very thing? And will not yet your danger be, as Ezek. 8.18? And though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the Bands of Wickedness; to undoe the heavy burthens, and to let the Oppressed go free? and that you break every Yoak? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy house? When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh; then shall thy light break forth, &c. Isa 58.6, 7, 8. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord will answer; thou shalt cry, and he will say, Here I am, vers. 9. And if thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and satisfie the Afflicted Soul, then shall thy light rise in obsecurity, and thy dark∣nesse be as at noon-day: And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and sa∣tisfie thy Soul in drought, &c. vers. 10, 11. But Oh rich Professor! Canst thou not draw out thy Soul? Canst thou not sell a part of thy Land, nor spare of thy Goods? Are thy Bowels so shut to thy poor Brother? Art thou rather ashamed of him in his Bonds? Canst thou not send to the Lord? Know then, Thou reproachest thy Maker, Prov. 14.31. He hath little credit with thee, while in this world; and thou shalt be reproached by him for ever, when he shall shut out thy cry. Oh! will thy fading Riches, whereof thou art an unjust Ste∣ward, (Luke 16.9, 10, 11.) stand thee in stead with thy powerless Profes∣sion, when he shall require of thee an account of thy Talent? and thou shalt appear before him on the left hand, to hear him indict thee on this wise, When I was an hungry, &c. Mat. 25.42, 43. But to such as through Grace can trust the Lord, and honour him with their Substance, Prov. 3.9. I hope I need now say no more then exhort you, to do it in simplicity, Rom. 12.8. according to your ability, 1 Pet. 4.11. chearful∣ly, 2 Cor. 9.7. and as you have opportunity, Gal. 6.10. which will not be long. And whilst the Lord, who giveth Seed to the Sower, and blesseth the Seed sown, give you to reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. and bless your Seed sown, to the bringing the Blessings of many that are ready to perish upon you, and raising up in the heart of the relieved abundant thanks∣giving to God in your behalf, 2 Cor. 9.12, 13. To that end, as you are intreated for the Lords sake, to order your Affairs with Discretion, avoid∣ing all lavish expenses; every other way, to lay aside to your utmost weekly, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. and labour to engage (to this use) by your ear∣nest in treaty (like the Macedonians) some, as neat as you can, like Paul, 2 Cor. 8.4. and Titus, vers. 16. and such whose praise is in the Gospel,
vers. 18. and such who have often times proved diligent in many things, but now are much more diligent, vers. 22. whose work it may be more naturally to mind, and as equally as may be, administer your liberality, to the necessity of the innumerable distressed; in wisdom, that one do not abound, whilst others perish. Oh! that God would put it into the hearts of his Remnants every where, to imploy all their might herein; with correspondency, like to the Body whereof Christ is the Head, 1 Cor. 12.26. 2 Cor. 11.29. That our Fasts may not be flung as dung in our Faces; but with our acceptable Alms, come before him; and that the Primitive Example aforesaid, and the solemn choosing seven men full of the Holy Spirit, in one Congregation, Acts 6.3, 7. might so far add to the weightiness of this affair, that there might be at least some such set a part, on the behalf of the thousands of Precious Ones, ready to perish in the Land; that the fierce anger of the Lord may not yet further kin∣dle upon us, to the cursing our Blessings, and we be extinct as Monsters, forgetting our own flesh; that under so famous Profession, and frequent and fervent Prayer, suffered our fellow Members to famish, whilst we had fulness; Which the Lord in Mercy prevent. Amen. And now a Word to the Afflicted. IN the time of adversity consider, is the Counsel given of the Lord, Eccles. 7.14. And indeed, till adversity, we are like the Prodigal, Luke 15. who came not to himself, until he could not fill his belly with the Husks, vers. 16. This Voice of the Lord calls now to the City, and the Man of Wisdom will know his Name; hear the Rod, and who hath appointed it, Mich. 6.9. The Visitations of the Lord preserved Jobs Spi∣rit, Job 10.12. and if that be not the Fruit, to take away the sin, Isa. 27.9. there is too much cause to fear, whether such a Professors Case be comprised in the New Covenant, Psalm. 89.32. and then his Poverty, and his Riches, his Prison, and his Liberty, will be much a like, under a Curse; and he will fall into the two extream evils which Agar prayed (and Solomon by the Spirit gave Counsel) against, Prov. 30.8. & 3.11. But if the Lord please, I would (Elihu-like) speak in the uprightness of my heart, and utter knowledge clearly herein, Job 33.3. I am very much perswaded, That the good Figs for their good, are come first into captivity, Jer. 2.4, 5. By captivity I mean the variety of close affliction, which the Lord immediately, or by cruel men, or any other way, hath brought them into, or bound them with, and by which
he hath brought them down wonderfully; for so Job's various distresse is called a Captivity, Job 42.10. And now, whether Poor, in Prison, or both Robbed, Spoiled, or on the Bed of Sickness; Banished or chased from thy dwelling, with the addition too (it may be) of inward with∣drawing, &c. First, I desire that first of all, I may be accepted in imploring thy very serious and diligent search, and self-examination, with assurance, that, that word, Ezek. 14.23. is as true in thy case as ever, That God hath not done without cause, all that he hath done unto thee; and that (still finding out the cause) there will be no disposition to returning, but to self-justifying still, as Mal. 3.8, 13. Secondly, Till then the Commission for outward Judgements may continue, Lev. 26.40. 1 John 1.9. Prov. 28.13. Thirdly, Insensibleness of the Cause, exposeth to filthy-fretting, Numb. 14.23, 24. Prov. 19.3. but Aaron, when the Cause was shewed him, held his peace, Lev. 10.3. and so Mich. 7.9. Fourthly, Till then, we cannot so fitly enjoy deliverance, Ezek. 16.63. & 36.31, 32. Fifthly, This is a mean to deliver, when nothing else will do, Ezek. 7.16. Isa. 57.9, 10, 15. Hos. 5.15. & 6.1. Ezek. 18.30. Sixthly, Hereby God will be honoured again, and his Name glori∣ously vindicated, when thou shalt seriously thus acknowledge thy offen∣ces, Jer. 3.13. Josh. 7.19. And for Helps herein, I beseech you, First, Hearken to the voice of the present Rod, expounded by the Word, Psal. 18.25. Hos. 8.3 & 10.4. Levit. 26.25. Mich. 6.9. Secondly, Let no special excellency cause thee to over-look the Cause, Rev. 2.4, 5. & 14.20. much less when it may be with thee, as Rev. 3.1. Eli, Moses, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Asa, Jonah, David, &c. troubled themselves, and some of them Israel, though they were emi∣nent. Thirdly, Begin at the Root, Ezek. 16.2. to. 15. & vers. 27. Fourthly, Do not clear thy self, because men may in many things falsly accuse thee, Job 40.2. to 6. & 42.1, 2. nor because men may in every thing commend thee, 2 Cor. 10.18. Gal. 6.4. But, Lastly, Above all, seek at the Throne earnestly, with a true dispo∣sition to return, Lam. 3.40, 41. Jer. 29.12, 13, 14. Know now assuredly, that the Prison or Captivity in which thou art, is God's School or University, wherein he would shew thee thy work, and the transgression wherein thou hast exceeded, Job 36.8, 9. — For thy work then, sure if thou art chosen to bear his Name, it is set down briefly in this single Scripture, Mich. 6.8. and what doth the Lord
quire of thee? but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. Whereon I will not inlarge impertinently, to swell my speech be∣yond the patience of the afflicted, which perhaps his tribulation yet hath nor effected; but expound, walking humbly with thy God, by that explanation in James 4.7. where it is called, a submitting unto God, that is, to his Counsel, to his Will, with a reverend respect to all his advice and pleasure therein; contented with our condition, turning to his Will, hum∣bly and timely under his reproof. Now poor Soul, was there not a day wherein Professors experienced happiness, whilst they walked so humbly with their God? contented with Food & Rayment in the Work and Way of God? living in the comfort of the Righteousness of Christ? in rich communion with him? innocently abiding with him, as in the Case of A∣dulam, for his will and work? cleaving to such as favoured his Righteous Cause in truth? and steering thy course by the streight Rule of his Coun∣sel; not loving thy life in comparison of his Precious Service, Cause and Gospel? and whether it was not then better with thee? Did not all them that devoured thee offend? Jer. 2.3. Dost thou no yet say, It was then bet∣ter with me then now? Hos. 2.7. Dost not yet hear the Lord lamenting over thee? as Psal. 81.11. to 15. Oh that my people had hearkened to me, &c. Dost not yet know it's befallen thee, as Ephraim? Hos. 13.1, 9. Canst thou not remember where thou didst lose thy Crown? that the way in which Ephraim got gray hairs, Hos. 7.8. to the end, stole insensibly upon thee? & when men gathered thee? John 15.6. when the present world was imbraced? 2 Tim. 4.10. Was there not a time wherein thou followedst God, as in a Land which was not sown? Jer. 2.2. and thoughtst thou hadst gain enough in God and God∣liness? 1 Tim. 6.6. and thoughtst thou hadst enough of the world, and couldst never get enough of God? and hath not a time stolen upon thee, wherein thou couldest never get enough of this world, but hadst enough of God? When thou turnedst thy back upon the succesful victorious way of Faith, and tryedst the Carnal way of sence (like the Nations, Jer. 2.31.) in Pride and Oppression staying thereon? Isa. 30.12, 13, 14. when the Word of the Lord grew a burthen to thee? Jer. 6.10, 11. when thou grewest zea∣lous for thy utmost portion of earthly things, and cold and indifferent in heavenly things? Then thou mayest partly see thy work, and the trans∣gression thou hast exceeded. Hast thou not in thy fulness also fallen into Sodoms snare? Ezek. 16.49. Pride, fulness of bread, &c. and been proud also of the Mountain or Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4. under even the Na∣tions transgressions? Was zeal for Righteousness, and sence of others cry in simplicity of Soul, turned into insensibleness of others sufferings, and satisfaction taken in self, sensuality? then mayst thou cry (for a season at least) and not be heard, Prov. 21.13. Was successes abused, to advance thy  in provoking
the Lord to jealously? Deut. 32.6. by lightness in Worship, 1 Cor. 10.22. by breaking faith with the Enemy, 2 Sam. 21.1, 2, 3. and oppressing thy Brethren too at the same time, thinking to build Zion with blood, Mich. 3.10, 11. (wherefore it is now plowed as a field, &c.) and to settle on the lees, Zeph. 1.12, 13. when thou hadst gotten greatness and lands, Deut. 6.11, 12. blessing those that so steered backward, Ps. 10.3. or at least not mour∣ning over these, and such like departings and evils, Ezek. 9.4. then is our work now best to be, as Eze. 7.16. & 21.12. Ezr. 10.6. & to come to the Valley of Achor, stoning in our selves and others these troubling trans∣gressions; and to be humbled deeply, if the Lord seem to give us a divorce, as Jer. 11.15. Hos. 2.15. And if any of you have got riches, & not by right, and now leave them in the midst of your dayes; or if you with-held, and it tendeth to penury, lay your hand on your mouth, Jer. 17.11. Prov. 11.24. if by any hint thou seest thy sickness, and thy wound, do not do now as Hos. 5.13. Isa. 31.1. & 57.9. but try the good old way following, wherein never any yet fail'd of finding effect, who attained to it in truth, Deut. 4.29. Hos. 6.1. & 14.2, 3. Isa. 10.20. Jer. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. & 31.18, 19, 20. Ezra 10.2. Ezek. 7.16. For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength, and ye would not; but ye said, no; for we will flee upon Horses, &c. Isa. 30.15. But you will say to me, Who is he that liveth and sinneth not? have not all their faults? yea, yet let me say to thee, the spots of the Lords people are of several sorts; and though all of them have sinned, it is not safe (like the Hypocrite or time-server) to quit scores; therefore with their reprovers to spare the troubling sin. All Israel had sin in them, but Achans especially troubled Israel; therefore your Generation-sin against Gods Holy and Righteous Cause in your hands, dishonouring it, and his Holy Name, either by Oppression, grasping after the worlds greatness, wisdom or riches: which was so weak before you, unbelief drawing back, bringing an evil report upon the Promises; not delighting in, but despi∣sing the good Word and Wayes of the Lord; trusting in an Arm of flesh; lightly breaking Vows, and Faith, with God and men; walking haughti∣ly and loftily, whilst oppression and violence continued and increased. Yea lastly, making Covenants with Hell and Death, Isa. 28.18. that is, Carnal interests, for fear of danger; saying, The time is not yet, and the Lord will neither do good nor evil, Zeph. 1.12. and the like, are in the first place to be made close inquiry after, as troublers of Israel, and causers of confusion. Yet also have those that have erred in vision, and staggered in judgement, Isa. 28.7. limitting the Holy One to times, instruments and wayes of working, either for his People, or against his Adversaries, which he removeth as he sees good, Ezek. 16.50. though they should be wholly free (through mercy) from that dethroning sin of making league
with cursed interests, through unbelief, as Isa. 28. yet have they much cause of mourning, as having sinned both towards God greatly, and oc∣casioned stumbling to many, and to their own Souls. Yea, lastly, If God hath given so much integrity to any, as to preserve them from the raging power of all the first black classes of publick corruptions (which is much to be feared) yet if thou hast been proud of thine integrity, as Job 32.9. slighty in thy reproofs, as Eli, 1▪ Sam. 2.14. exalting thy self as Moses, saying, Must we fetch water, Num. 20.10. instead of sanctifying God; Yea, in the ostentation of Hezekiah, Is. 39.2. may not God bring thee through Jobs furnace, to bring thee into his abasement, Job 42.6. or make thy ears tingle as Eli with rebukes, 1 Sam. 3.13. or bury thee in silence as Moses, Num. 34.5, 6. or make all that is in thy house be carried into captivity, as Hezekiah, Isa. 39.6. but especially, if Cain-like, thou hast been glad in uncovering the nakedness of others; or Herod, or Jehu-like hast affected praise, 2 Kin. 10.16. Acts 12.23. or to have thy name exalted; may not God pour contempt upon thee? Oh! that we might be united in abase∣ment, through the pouring down of the Spirit of Grace and supplication, as Zach. 12.10, 11, 13. Observe these, that the house of Levi, Nathan and David (which were most eminent for faithfulness to the Lord) shall yet see cause enough (for their shortness made known to them in the light of the Spirit) to mourn as deeply (it may be) as Shmei, who at first cursed the work of God, 2 Sam. 16.5. Yea truly, the Publican-like defiled One, or who may be too justly stiled the Apostate (that said, I will not, and after repented and went, Lu. 21.19.) shall be before many that have learned to say, Apostate at every word, and walk not humbly with their God. On therefore! that as there may be maintained an irreconcilable enmity to, and true mourning over, yea constant, seasonable reprehension of every of the aforesaid evils; so also we might be more in the Spirit of the Holy Reprover of Old, and in their humility for our share of the evil, and shortness to prevent or cure it; which besides their own inward corrup∣tions, shamed them alwayes before the Lord; and though kept (through grace) from the publick gross appearances of defilements in their day, yet involved themselves in their confessions usually with the worst of the Transgressors, Ezra 9.7. Ne. 9.33, 34. Da. 9.5. to 10, 13, 14. Isa. 24.16. and 6.5. Oh! how humbly do the Holy Angels appear in the perfect Will of God? Isa. 6.2. The snuffers of the Sanctuary, were to be of pure gold, Exod. 37.23. What need have brazen reprovers to blush then before the Lord? and desire rather the power of Christ, then pride of their own Inte∣grity might rest upon them. The great means then that I advise towards thee, through healing of the breach (this day upon the Lords poor Ones) is, true poverty of Spirit; each bearing his shame, unto through abasement and repentance never to be repented of; no man sparing his own, nor
comming into the secret of any who would have his name whole, and his sin spared; but that they may be united indeed, thus to joyn together, to make one head, as Hos. 1.11. to look on their sin-wildred-state, and sean no more to their own understanding, but upon their Beloved; (as to trust in his Words, so to wait for and walk in his way) And then I assure you, He that sittern upon the Throne, would soon make all things new, Rev. 21.5. A new sharp threshing Instrument, having teeth, shall quickly be intrusted unto them who would imploy it with strength, chiefly. First, Against their own abhominations; then shal the iniquity of Israel be sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; For I will pardon them whom I reserve, saith the Lord, Jer. 50.20. In one day the inquity of that Land should be removed, Zech. 3.9. and the Lord their God shall save them in that day, as the flock of his People; for, they shall be as the stones of a Crown lifted up, as an ensign upon his Land. O turn you to the strong hold ye Prisoners of hope, even to day do I declare, I will render dou∣ble to thee, Zech. 9.12, 16. For in this Mountain shall the Hand of the Lord rest, (that is his contending hand, with his inheritance) and Moab shall be troden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the Dunghil, Isa. 25.10. In that day shall this Song be sung in the Land of Judah, We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks, Isa. 26.1. There will I make the horn of David to bud. His Foundation is in the Holy Mountains; for thus hath the Lord spoken unto me, like as the Lyon, and the young Lyon roaring on his prey; when a multitude of Shepherds are called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them; so shall the Lord of Hosts come down to fight for Mount Zion, and for the hill thereof. As Birds flying, so will the Lord of Hosts de∣fend Jerusalem; defending also, he will deliver it, and passing over, he will preserve it, Psal. 132.17. & 87.1. Turn ye unto him from whom the Children of Israel have deeply revolted, Isa. 31.4, 5, 6. Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which travaileth hath brought forth; Then the remnant of his Brethren shall return unto the Children of Israel, and he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide; for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth, Mich. 5.3, 4. Be in pain therefore, and labour to bring forth, O Daughter of Zion, like a woman in travel; for now thou shalt go forth out of the City, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go even to Babylon, there shalt thou be delivered; There the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies, Mich. 4.10. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and steps of the needy, Isa. 26.6. For he will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their Prayer, Psal. 102.17. This shall be written for the Generations to come, and the people which shall be created, shall praise the Name of the Lord; for he looked down from the height of his Sanctuary
from Heaven did the Lord behold the Earth, to hear the groaning of the Pri∣soner, to loose those that are appointed to death, to declare the Name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem; when the people are gathered to∣gether, and the Kingdoms to serve the Lord. For the Lord shall Judge his people, and repent himself for his Servants; when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left, Deut. 32.36. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen and Amen. But a Word to their Oppressors. TO deliver mine own Soul, yet cautiously, for some of them are now grown such sons of Belial, that a man cannot speak to them, 1 Sam. 25.17. and therefore I will confine my self to some Scripture truths (not yet out of date) which it wil concern them to consider, as the Oracles of him who (if they will not hear) shall make himself be heard, by another voice of his, that yet they have not heard. And the Lord shall cause his glorious Voice to be heard, & shal shew the lightning down of his Arm, with the indignation of his Anger, and with the flame of a devouring Fire: with scattering, and tempest, and hail-stones; for through the Voice of the Lord, shall the Assyrian be beaten down, which smote with a Rod, Isa. 30.30, 31. And I will execute vengeance in anger, and fury upon the Heathen, such as they have not heard, Mich. 5.15. The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the Voice of the Day of the Lord; the migh∣ty man shall cry there bitterly, Zeph. 1.8. to 18. For thus saith the Lord God, My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there, and the Assy∣rian oppressed them without cause; Now therefore, what have I here, saith the Lord, that my people is taken away? They that rule over them, make them to howl, saith the Lord, and my Name continually every day is blas∣phemed; therefore my people shall know my Name, &c. Isa. 52.4, 5, 6. So that a man shall say; Verily there is a reward for the Righteous; verily there is a God that judgeth in the Earth, Psal. 58.11. Wo to the bloody City, it is full of lies, the prey departeth not; Art thou better than populous No, &c. All thy strong holds shall be like fig-trees, with the first ripe figs; if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater. Thy crowned men are as the Locusts, and thy Captains as the great grass-hoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the Sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they are. There is no healing of thy bruise, thy wound is grievous, all that hear the bruit of thee, shall clap their hands over thee; for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually? Nahum 3.1. She is empty, and void, and waste; and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, Nahum 1.10. Because ye
were glad, because ye rejoyced, O ye destroyers of my heritage.—Jer. 50.11. For thus saith the Lord God, Because thou hast clapped thy hands, and stam∣ped with thy feet, and rejoyced in heart with all thy despite against the Land of Israel, Ezek. 25.6. And have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart to destroy it, for the old hatred, vers. 15. Behold I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem. And in that day, I will make Jerusa∣lem a burthensome stone for all people; all that burthen themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces. Though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it; In that day, saith the Lord, I will smite every horse with asto∣nishment, and his rider with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, &c. Zech. 12.2, 3, 4. The adversaries of the Lord shall be bro∣ken to pieces, out of Heaven shall he thunder upon them; the Lord will judge the ends of the Earth, and he shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his Anointed, 1 Sam. 2.10. Moreover, the multitude of thy stran∣ger, shall be like the small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away; Yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly. Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with thunder and with earth-quake, and great noise; with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. And the mul∣titude of all the Nations, that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her, and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision, Isa. 29.5, 6, 7. I was wroth with my People, I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand; thou didst shew them no mercy: upon the Ancients hast thou very heavily laid the Yoak, Isa. 47.6, 11. And thou saidst, &c. Therefore shall evil come upon thee, thou shalt not know from whence it riseth; and mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shalt not be able to put it off; and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know. And vers. 3. I will take vengeance, I will not meet thee as a man; for he bringeth down them that dwell on high, the lofty City he layeth it low, he layeth it low, even to the ground, he bringeth it even to the dust: The foot shall tread it down, even the foot of the poor, and the steps of the needy, Isa. 26.5, 6. Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn Righte∣ousness: In the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly; and will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envie at thy people; yea, the fire of thine enemy shall devour them. And they shall pass through it hardly bested and hungry; and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God, and look up∣ward: and they shall look to the earth, and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish, and they shall be driven to darkness, Isa. 8.21, 22. Behold the whirlwind of the Lord goeth forth with fury, a continual whirlwind, it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked; the fierce anger of the Lord
shall not return, until he hath done it, and until he hath performed the intents of his heart; in the latter dayes you shall consider it, Jer. 30.23, 24. For the Lord shall rise up as in Mount Perazim; he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his Act, his strange Act: Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bonds be made strong, Isa. 28.21, 22. Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the Prophets; Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in your dayes, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you, Acts 13.40, 41. And that prophane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come, when Iniquity shall have an end; Thus saith the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and take off the CRown, this shall not be the same; exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until He come whose right it is, and I will give it Him, Ezek. 31.25, 26, 27. His enemies will I cloath with shame, but on himself shall his Crown flourish, Psal. 132.18. And he shall come upon Princes, as upon Morter, and as the Potter treadeth clay, Isa. 41.25. For the oppression of the poor, and sighing of the needy; now will I arise (saith the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him, Psal. 12.5. The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoyce in the Holy One of Israel: for the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed; and all that watch for iniquity are cut off; that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate; and turn a side the just for a thing of nought, Isa. 29.19, 20, 21. Ezek. 35.5. Jer. 46.17. Isa. 10.1, 4. Ezek. 29.7. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him, Psal. 2.10, 11, 12. Have all the workers of Iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord. There were they in great fear: for God is in the Generation of the Righteous, Psalm. 14.4, 5. FINIS.
