15074 52633312 174733
Heir followeth the coppie of the ressoning which was betuix the Abbote of Crosraguell and Iohn Knox, in Mayboill concerning the masse, in the yeare of God, a thousand fiue hundreth thre scoir and two yeares. Apocalips. xxij. For I protest vnto euerie man that heareth the wordes of the prophecie of this boke: If any mā shall adde vnto these thinges, God shall adde vnto him the plagues, that are written in this boke. Imprinted at Edinburgh by Robert Lekpreuik, and are to be solde at his hous, at the nether bow. Cum priuilegio. 1563.
Iohn Knox vnto the reader, wisheth grace mercie and peace, from God the Fa∣ther, and from our Lorde Iesus Christe: with the spirit of righteous iudgement. ❧ AFter that the Prophet Isayas in great ve∣hemencie, had rebuked the vanitie of I∣dolles, and Idolaters as in the 40.Isa. 40 and 41. and 41. chapters, of his prophecie doeth ap∣pear, at last he bursteth forth in these wor∣des. Let them bring forth there Gods (saeth he) that they may shaw vnto vs thinges that are to come, or let them declare vnto vs thinges that haue bene done before. &c. Shaw thinges that are to come, that we may vnderstād you to be Gods, let you do ether good or euill, that we may declare it. By which wordes, the Prophet doeth as it were in mockage, prouoke Idolaters, and the Idoles to produce for them selues, some euident testimonies by the which mē might be assured, that in them was power, and that there religion had approbation of God. which when they could not do, he is bold to prononce this sen∣tence: Behold ye are of nothing,Isa. 41. and your making is of nothing, abomination hath chosen you. In which wor∣des the Prophet damneth, bothe the Idoles, & the Ido∣laters. The Idoles, because they can declare nothing to proue any power or wertue to be in them, why they sho∣uld be worshipped as Gods. And the Idolaters, because from Gods month they could bring no assurance of there addulterat and vsurped religion. If this reasoning of the Prophet, had sufficient strength in his aige, to shaw the vanitie of the Idoles, and the phrenetick foolishnes of suche as worshipped them: then may the godlie this day moste assuredly conclude against the great Idole pre∣sented by the Papistes to be worshipped in there masse, and against the patrons of the same: that it and they are
vaine, foolish, odious, and abominable before God. It, because it hath mo makers then euer had the Idoles a∣mongest the Gentiles: and yet hath no greater power, then they had. Albeit it hath bene worshipped as God him self. And they because, they worshipped there owne imagination, and the workmanship of there own hādes, without any assurāce of God or of his word. If any think that I speak more liberally, then I am able to proue, let him consider what makers the Idoles of the Gentiles had, and what makers the God of bread hath. And then let the power of bothe be cōpared, and let me be rebuked, if I speak not the treuth. The Prophet in discription of there vanities, maketh these gries. The earth bringeth forth the tree, it groweth by moistour, and natural wack∣nes, it is cutted doun by the hand of the hew t. A parte thereof is burnt, a parte spent in vses necessarie to man, an other parte chosen to be made an Idole. This is for∣med to the licknes of man or woman, and then set vp and worshipped as a God. All these and some mo, shall we find to assist & concurre in the making of this great God of bread. The wheat is sowen and nourished in the earth, rain, dew, and heat bring it to maturitie. The reaper or scherer cutteth it doune, the carte or fled, drawen by hors or some other beast, draweth it to the barne, or to the barnʒaird. The tasker, or the foot of the ox tradeth it out. The fan deliuereth it from the chaff. The millar, and the milstones by the help of wind or watter, maketh it to be meall. The smith maketh the yrnes, that giues to that God, his lenth and breaid, licknes and form. The fyne substance of that God is nether wood, gold, nor siluer, but watter & meal made ī maner of a drāmock. And then must the workmen take good hede to there hand. For if the fyre be to hote, that Gods skin must be burnt, if the yrnes be euill dight, his face wilbe blecked, if in making the roundnes, the ring be broken, then must an oher of his fellowes, receaue that honor to be made a God, and the crased or cracked miserable caik, that ones was ī hope to be made a God, must be giuen to a babby to play him withall. And yet is not all the danger past, for if there be not an anoynted preist to play his parte aright, all the formar artificers haue lost there laboure, for without him that God can not be made: yea, if he haue not inten∣tion to cōsecrate, the fashioned God remaueth bread, and
so the blind people committ Idolatrie. These are the artificers and workmen that trauell in making of this God: I think as many in nomber, as the Prophet reciteth to haue trauelled in making of the Ido∣les. And if the power of bothe shalbe compared, I think they shalbe found in all thinges equall, except that the God of bread is subiect vnto mo dangers then were the Idoles of the Gentilles. Men made them. Men make it. They were deaf and dum, it can not speak, hear nor see. Brieflie in infirmitie, they wholie aggre, except that (as I haue said) the poore God of bread is moste miserable of all other Idoles. For according to there matter whereof they are made, they will remaine without corruptiō ma∣ny yeares. But within one year, that God will putrifie, & then he must be burnt. They can abyde the vehemen∣cie of the wind, frost, rain, or snow. But the wind will blow that God to the sea, the rain or the snow wil make it dagh again, yea, which is most of all to be feared, that God is a pray (if he be not wel kept) to rattes and mise. For they will desyre no better denner then white rounde Gods ynew. But o then what becometh of Christes na∣tural bodie? by myrackle, it flies to the heauen againe, if the papists teach treulie, for how sone soeuer the mouse takes hold, so sone flieth Christ away & letteth hir gnow the bread. A bold and puissant mouse, but a feble and mi∣serable God? Yet wold I ask a question, whether hath the preist or the mouse greater power? by his wordes it is made a God, by hir teith it ceaseth to be a God. Let them auise, and then answer. If any think that I oght not to mock, that which the world so long hath hol∣den, and great Princes yet holde in so great venerati∣on. I answer, that not onelie I, but also all godlie oght not onelie to mock, but also to curse and detest, whatsoe∣uer is not God, and yet vsurpeth the name, power, and honor of God. And also that we oght bothe to mock, gain say, and abhorr, all religiō obtruded to the people, with∣out assurance of God & his word, hauing nether respect, to antiquitie, to multitude, to authoritie, nor estimatiō, of them that mantean the same. The Idoles of the Gen∣tiles were more ancient, then is the Idole in the masse. There worshippers, manteners, and patrons, were mo in multitude, greater in authoritie, and more excellent before the world, then euer was any that bowed to that
Idole.Isa. 4 And yet feared not the Prophet Isayas to mock and iest them, yea, sharplie to rebuke them, in these wor∣des. They are dung backward with shame, they shalbe ashamed, whosoeuer trusteth in a grauen ymage, and that say to the molten ymage,Isa. 44. ye are our Gods. All the makers of grauē ymages are vaine, there pleasing thing¦es shall not proffet them. For they themselues are wit∣nesses, to there Idoles, that they nether se, nor vnderstād any thing, and therefore they shalbe ashamed, who then (sayeth he) shall forge a God? or a molten ymage that profiteth nothing? behold all those that are of the fellow∣ship thereof shalbe confounded, for the workmen them selues are men, let them all be gathered together, and stand vp, yet they shall feare and be confoūded together. And when he hath fully painted forth there vanitie, he concludeth. They haue not vnderstand, for God hath shut vp there eyes,Blind∣nes and indura∣tion is Gods iust pu∣nishmēt for Ido∣laters. that they can not see, and hartes, that they can not vnderstand, none considereth in his hart, I haue brunt half of it, euen in the fyre, and haue baken bread also vpon the coalles thereof I haue rosted fleshe & earen it, and shall I make the residew thereof an abomi∣nation, shall I bow to the stock of a tree? &c. Thus, I say, we see, how that the Prophet doeth triumph against the Idolaters, in mocking of there madnes, and paintīg forth of there vanitie. Who then can iustlie be offended against me or any other albeit by all meanes possible, we let the blind world see, the vanitie of that Idole? consi∣dering that by it, hath the glorie of God bene more ob∣scured, then euer it was by any Idole in the earth. For to none was neuer absolutlie giuen,Let the Papists consider the name, nature, pow∣er, and honor of God, but to that Idole allone. If any think that the Scriptures of God giue vnto them patro∣cinie, ether to beleue Christes naturall body to be there, after the wordes of consecration (as they cal them) ether yet to beleue that Christ Iesus, in his last Supper, did offer vnto God his Father his body and blood, vnder the formes of bread and wine, he is miserablie deceaued, for the Scripture maketh no mention, of conuersion or transubstanciation of bread in Christes naturall bodie, but witnesseth that bread remaneth bread, yea euē, when the faithfull receaue the same,1. Cor 10 as the Apostle affirmeth in these wordes. The bread that we break, is it not the cō∣munication of Christes bodie? the cup of blissing which
we blisse, is it not the cōmunion of the blood of Christ we many, are one bread, and one body, because we are all partakers of one bread. And after he sayeth,1. Cor. 11. as of as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shew the Lordes death till he come. Let therefore, a man try him∣self and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this  &c. By these wordes we may clearlie vnderstand, what iudgement the Apostle had of the substāce of that Sacra∣ment, euen in the verie action of the same. And as tou∣ching that foolish opinion, that Christ Iesus did offer his body vnto God his Father, vnder the formes of bread & wine. &c. (which the Papistes make the ground of there masse) what suffrage that euer it hath by man, of God, nor of his word, it hath none.Ioh. 3. The Scripture dooth wit∣nes that God the Father gaue his Sone vnto the world, that the world might be saued by him, and that Iesus Christ did offer him self ones vnto God,Heb. 10 and 9. for the destructiō of sinne, and for to take away the sinnes of many, but that euer he did offer him self vnder the formes of bread and wine (as the Papistes alledge) the holy Goste doeth no where make mention. And therefore the faithfull not onely may reiect it as the dreame and inuention of man, but also are boūd to abhor & detest it as a doctrine broght in by Satan, to deceaue suche as delyte not in the veritie of God, to whose  and voice are the faithfull onely ou. M. Quintyne that great patron of the masse, in this subsequent conference,Maister Quinty¦nes affir¦matiue. aieds for the probation of his affirmatiue, Christ Iesus did offer (sayeth he) vnto God his Father, in his last Supper his body and blood, vnder the formes of bread and wine. &c. For the probation hereof, I say he adduces the fact of Melchisedec that broght forth bread and wine.Gen. 14. &c. But how sone he is ashamed thereof and how vn∣able he is to proue that which he alledgeth to be moste e∣asie to be prouen, the diligent reader may esy. For per∣ceauing him self unable euer to proue,Luk the ressonig of the thrid day. that ether Christe Iesus or yet Melchisedec, did make any suche oblation, as he & the fond Papistes do imagine. He rīneth straight to his fortres & shameles schift. O sayeth M. Quintyne, I haue hurt my own cause, I was caried away with zeal &c. It apperteaned not vnto me to proue any thing, but to defend my artickles as they are written. If M. O.
and his collatralles will resolue me an dout, then will I giue my iudgement, whether he oght to proue, or to de∣fend onely. My dout is this, whether are M. Quintynes artickles necessarie to be beleued to Saluatiō, or are they suche as without danger of damnation, we may dout of them? If we may dout of them and not offend God, then assuredly I think that M. Quintyne may hold them for treuth, til that the falshead of them be manifestly declared. But if they be suche as we are bound to beleue as a treuth of God, and an doctrine necessarie to Saluation, then is M. Quintyne bound to shaw to vs that God hath pro∣nonced them, and not man. which if he be not able to do, and that in plaine and expressed wordes, then must we reiect them as deceauable,Ioh. 10. & fals, accordīg as we be taucht by our maister Christ Iesus saying: My sheip heare my voice, but a stranger they will not heare. If M. Q. will not be reputed an fals Prophet, & one that teacheth lies in the name of God, and so expone him self to Gods here displeasure, he may propone no doctrine to the Church of God, the assurance whereof, he bringeth not from the mouth of God. If M. Q. were brawling in the scooles, or bragging of knowledge amōgest the Philosophers, I wold pacientlie abyde, that he should affirme as many paradoxes, as pleaseth him. But in the Church of God to affirme that God hath spoken, when God hath not spo∣ken, or done that which he is not able to proue, by his plaine word, that he hath done, so to do (I say) is alto∣gether intollerable, and therefore let M. Q. searche the Scriptures, for the probation of his affirmatiue, or els I will cry als loud as I can, that he hath lost his cause, and is conuicted an manifest lear: in that he hath affirmed Ie∣sus to haue done that, which no Scripture doeth wit∣nes, that he hath done. Let all men therefore that will not follow lies, detest the masse, till that it find a ground within the booke of God, as I am assured it neuer shall. And that shall the reader more ea∣sylie perceaue, by this confe∣rence that followeth. Read and then iudge. ☞ ✚ ☜
The abbotes first letter. M. Quintyne. IOhn Knox I am informed, that &c ar cum in this cuntrie, to fe disputatiō, and in special to mak pugnation to certane artickles quh war pronun∣ced and reheirsed be me to my stock, in Kirkos∣wald on sonday last wes (treulie I will not re∣fuse disputation with ʒow) bot maist nstlie & effectuouslie couatis the sain,  it may be to ye glorie of God, and tryall of ye treath, lyke as I haif, ye rest of ye ministers, uhilk hs bene heir, and culd haifnae. Quhair ore gift pleis ʒow this day viij dayes in ay hous of Mayboi ʒe pleis, prouidand alwayes thair be na com∣cation passand xiivj or xx on ather syde, quhil is ane sufficient nomber: to beir witnes beuir vs, I sal enter in restoring with ʒow, and God willing fall defend ye saides artickles be ye ma∣nifest word of God, and all gude resson, as  a writtin, and in special ye artickle concern ye messe. Ʒe salbe sure ʒe  ressaif na im of me, nor a that me pnis, nor nay  of molesttio in wd or work, bot familiar, formall, and ll restoring; and think not y this is done for ing of tyme;  be ressone I am eit and  be my Lord of Cos∣is, in name and  of the counsel,   or any other  his re∣turning
in the cuntrie, quhais command I haif promist to obey, nottheles and he cum not betuix and the said day, I sall discharge my promis to him with diligence, quhairthrouch ʒe, and all v∣thers may se how desyrous I am that ye treuth cum to ane tryall but drifting of tyme. Als ʒe may be sure that I am verray desyrous to haif my Lord of Callis (as my cheif and brother sone) and vthers my brether & freindes, quhom of I haif charge, to be auditors, quhairthrow gif it pleis God thay micht haif proffet of our resso∣ning, and gif ʒe pleis to accept this condicion, send me ʒour promes vnder ʒour hand writ, and I sall send ʒow the foresaid artickles to awise on, to this day viii dayes, and in the meine time ʒe may prouide to be auditors sic as ʒe pleis, cō∣forme to the nomber aboue heirsed, and I the lyke, and gif ʒe will nawise enter in ressoning without cōuocation of strāgers, the haill warld may se, it is ot perrbariō, tumultuation, and cummer that ʒe seik, vnder the pretence of the trew setting furth of Goddes word, and gloe, and this I certifie ʒow, I will not enter in dis∣putation with ʒow, gif ʒe eu with cōuocation, for I wil nawise be the instrument of discorde,The an∣swer thereof was sēd. But my lord ma¦id no re∣ply. a als it is not necessar &c m with conuoca∣tion of strangers, e  ʒe ha my Lord of Camilis proe qu  to ʒow, and all the est wi Catick, and in ye ines ne ʒe pleis to  confuation of yo gisme qu I  and to ʒow with the Ld of  ele, and gif ye
the samin weill, ʒe ar mair able to mak impug∣nation to myne. Of thir heides I require ʒour answer in writ, with this herat with diligence quhaitthrow I may send away to my Lord of Cassillis as said is. And sa fair ʒe weill, of Cros∣raguell this Sonday, the ser of September. Crofraguell the answer to the abbotes first lettter. Iohn Knox. THe treuth is, that the cause of my cō∣ming in these partes  not of pur∣pose to seak disputation, but simplie to propone vnto the people Iesus Christ cussed, to be the onelie Sauiour of the world, and to teach further, what are the fruites that God requireth of the members of his dear sone. &c. But heauing that ye had in oppen audience proclamed blasphemous artickles, making pro∣mes to giue further declaratiō of certane of thē, this last Sonday, lykewise in oppen assemblie, I could not but of conscience, offer my self to be your aduersat in that ace. And this far for the cause of my cōming ʒesterday to khos wai.
That ye haue required disputation of the mi∣nisters (of whome some are yet present) & could haue none, I hardlie beleue it, the contrary be∣ing assured to me by diuers of honest report. That ye offer vnto me familiar, formall, and gentill reasoning with my whole hart I accept the condition. For assuredlie my Lord (so I style you by reason of blood and not of office) chiding & brawling I vtterlie abhor, but that ye require it to be secrete, I nether se iust cause why that ye should require it, nether yet good reson why that I should grant it. Yf ye feare tumult asye pretex, that is more to be feared where many of euill mynd haue a few quiet and peceable men in there danger, then where a iust multitud may gainst and violence, if it be offered. Of my Lord of Cassilles promes, I nothing dout as touch∣ing my owne person, for I stand in the protec∣tion of the Almightie, to whom I render hartly thankes, when his mercie and power boweth the hartes of men, to assist the cause of the iust. But I wonder with what conscience ye can require priuat conference of those artickles that ye haue publicklie proponed? Ye haue infected the eares of the simple? Ye haue wounded the hartes of the godlie, and ye haue spoken blasphe∣mie in oppen audience. Let your owne consci∣ence now be iudge, if we be bound to answer you in the audience of 20. or 40. of whom the one half are alreadie persuaded in the treuth, & the other perchance so addicted to your error, that they will not be content, that light be cal∣led
light, and darcknes, darcknes. Yf ye be a pastor as ye brag your self to be, ye oght to haue respect to your whole flock, yea, to the instruc∣tion of all those, that are offended at your blas∣phemies. But now to grant vnto you, more thē reason, I am content of the greatest nomber ap∣pointed by you, prouided first that the place be. S. Iohnes kirk in Air, which is a place more conuenient then any hous in Mayboill. Secō∣darlie, that Noters and Scribes be appointed faithfully to take and commit to regester, in op∣pen audience, bothe your reasones, and myne, that so we may aswea auoid confusion & vaine repeticion in speaking as forclos the diuersitie of rumors, which may arise by reason of obliuion, what hath bene spokē by ather partie. The day by you required. I can not kepe, by reason of my formar promes made to the maister of Maxwel, and vnto the Churches of Niddisdall, and Gal∣loway. But if ye wil send vnto me, your artick∣les before the 15. of this instant, I shal appoint the day, which by the grace of God I shal not faill. Yf ye send your artickles to the baillies of Air, it shalbe sufficient discharge for you. And thus crauing your answer, I hartlie desire God if his good pleasure be, so to molifie your hart, that ye may prefer his eternal treuth, conteined and expressed in his holy word, to your own pre∣conceaued opinion. From Air this 7. of Sep∣tember. 1562. in haist. Youres to command in all godlines. Iohn Knox
the abbotes second letter, whereunto answer is made brieflie to euerie head of the same. M. Quintyne. IOhn Knox I ressaned your writing, this monūday the seuint of Septem∣ber, and considered the heides thairof, and first quhair ʒe say, ʒour cūming in this cuntrie, was not to seik disputation, but simplie to propone vnto the people, Iesus Christ crucified, to be the onely Sauiour of the warld, praise be to God, that was na newingis in this cuntrie, or ʒe war borne. Iohn Knox. I greatlie dout, if euer Christ Iesus wes treu∣lie preached, by a papisticall prelat or monk. M. Quintyne. Secondlie, quhair ʒe alledge that I proclamed in oppen audience blasphemous artickles (he is ane euill iudge that condemnis or he knowes) than had bene tyme to ʒow to haif called them blasphemous, quhen ʒe had sene them, red them, and sufficientlie confutated them. Iohn Knox. I had hard them, and thereof I feared not to pronunce them suche as they are. M. Quintyne. Thridly, quhair ʒe alledge that I promist decla∣ration of the saides artickles, on Sunday last
was, my promes was (as my hand writ will testifie) to do the samin, {pro}uidand alwayes yair had bene na conuocation of strangers, quhair∣throw tumultuation and cūmer micht follow, and swa was I exonered of my promes, in that, ʒe come thair conuoied with v. or vj. scoir of strangers. Iohn Knox. I lay the night before in Mayboil, accompanied with fewer then tuentie. M. Quintyne. Apperantlie mair lyke to seik perturbation and cūmer, nor the glorie of God. Als I was inhi∣beit be my Lord of Cassillis to his returne in the cuntrie, as I wrait to ʒow of before, for auoy∣ding of cūmers. Ferdlie, gif I required disputa∣tion of Iohn Villock, and als of maister george Hay, gif thay had ocht to say to ony warkes set furth be me, I report me to the auditor, and als gif thay refused or not, to the tyme thay had a∣uised with the counsell and the brethren. Iohn Knox. Maister george Hay offered vnto you disputa∣tion but ye fled the barras. M. Quintyne. Quhair to say ʒe can not perai hairfore. I sould desyre ere it desputation. Treulie it is not secreit, that is in the presence of al persones. Quhair ʒe say ʒe do not of my Lord of Cassil∣lis promes, as  your  person. Treu∣lie apperanlie ʒe refer als lytil  his omes as ʒe may, considering ʒe ome conuoyed with ie one nomber of strangers as is aboue reheirsed.
Quhair ʒe say, ʒe stand in the protection of the Almichtie, swa dois all gude christiane men as ʒe, bot apperanlie ʒe put als lytil in Gods hand∣is as ʒe may, that gois accompanied in euerie place, quhairsumeuer ʒe go with sic multitude, quhidder it be for deuotion, or protection, or ra∣ther tumultuatiō God knawis, for I knaw not. Iohn Knox. Ye do well to suspend iudgement. M. Quintyne. Quhair ʒe wonder with quhat cōscience I can require priuat conference (treulie I haif mony gude ressonis mouand me) first to auoid tumul∣tuation, perturbation, and cummer. Iohn Knox. Your reasones are as stark to your selfe, as ye think them. M. Quintyne. Secondly, that we may haif ane ressonable nō∣ber that may beir witnes of baith our pairtes, but clamor or tumultuation. Thridly, I am cer∣tane gif we cum to the iust tryall of the treuth, chair man be conference of mony buikes, quhilk can not be done cōmodiously in publick audiēce. Attoure it wilbe mair handsum and easie for me, nor misteris not sic crying out, as gif it  in oppē audience, for gif ye victorie cōsist in clamde, or cryīg out, I wil quite yow ye cause but father pley, and ʒit praise be to God, I may quhisper in sic maner as I wilbe hard sufficientlie in the largest hous in all catrick. Iohn Knox.
The larger hous, the better for the auditor & me. M. Quintyne. Quhair ʒe say I haif infected the earis of the simple I haif wounded the hartes of the godlie, and I haif spoken blasphemie in oppen audiēce. I meruell how ʒe forʒet ʒour self, chidand and railland on this maner. Iohn Knox. The speaking of the treuth is chiding vnto you. M. Quintyne. Considering ʒe said ane lytill afore, ʒe did abhor all chiding and railling, bot nature passis nurtor with ʒaw. Iohn Knox. I will nether interchange, nature nor nurtor with yow, for all the proffets of Crosraguell. M. Quintyne. Quhairfore I man beir with ʒour babline and barking, as dous Preices, hear poweris Ma∣iestrates, and mony hundrethes better nor I. Quhair ʒe esteme me as ane bragand Pastor, say and, that I cht to haif respect to my haill flock. It is question to me gif it de the weill of my flock, to mak oppen disputation in profound mysteries concerning the christiane religion, but ʒit will I not refuse gif ony man will mak im∣pugnation, but conuocation of strangers, or tu∣multuation, I haif hard of publick disputation in scoulis, but not afore ne vulgar and rude mul¦titude of people. Iohn Knox. Ye are not then so weall ne in the ancient wri∣ters as ye brag. M. Quintyne. Quhair ʒe desyre me to cum to dispute in S.
Iohnes Kirk of Air, ʒe may be sure I will not dispute with ʒow thair,My lord delytes in ryme without reason. for mony gude ressonis, quhilkis to write, war ouer prolitt, bot gif ʒe pleis to conueine according to my first writing, I salbe readie at all tymes, vpon viii. dayes warning, and sall send yow the artickles viij. dayes afore to auise with. And sa fait ye weill. Of Crosraguell with diligence, the famin day and daie. CROSRAGUELL. Iohn Knox. THis letter wes none otherwise answered for that tyme, but by appointing vnto him the place, according to his owne desyre, albeit that no reason could haue required that of me. The Earle of Cassilis letter. EFter hartlie commendation, forsameklil as I vnderstand thair is ane disputation ap∣pointed betuix yow, & the abbote of Crosraguell in Mayboill, the xxviij. of this instant, to the quhilk I am not willing that ony of myne mak disputation with ʒow, except it cum of ʒour oc∣casion, for I can not vnderstand that ony erudi∣tion fall proceid to the auditor of the famin, bot rather contradiction and tumult, the quhilk. I wald sould not be for ʒour pairt, lyke as I am willing to cause the abbote of Crosraguel to dis∣sist. As to quhasaeuer that wil proffer them self to preach the trew word, conform to the consue∣tude
of the realme, may do the famin without impediment as I wrait to ʒow of before, in ony of my rowmes. And desires ʒow to write me ane answer of this writing, and God keip ʒow. Of Sainct Iohnes chapell the xxiij. of Sep∣tember. 1562. Be ʒour gude freind. Cassillis the answer to my Lorde of Cassillis writing. Iohn Knox. AFter hartlie commendation, of my seruice vnto your lordship, your L. letter dated at S. Iohnes chapell the xxiii. of this instant, receaued I in Vghiltrie the xxv. of the same. As touching the disputation appointed, the occasion did pro∣cead of the abbote, who in oppen audience of the people, did propone certaine artickles, whereof the moste part conteane deceauable doctrine, whiche nottheles he promised not onely to ex∣plaine, but also to manteane against any that wold impugne the same. Whereof I being ad∣uertised, and so near in the countrie could do no les then offer my self aduersary to that doctrine, which I am assured shalbe certaine damnation, to all those that without repentance depart this
life, infected with the same. And vpon that mo∣tiue I repared to Kirkoswald, where because the abbote compered not, I preached, and after the Sermon a seruand of the abbotes presented vnto me a letter, conteaning in effect, that as he had required disputation of the other ministers, so did he of me, and did appoint vnto me, that day eight dayes in Mayboill. My answer wes, that to dispute I wes hartlie content, but be∣cause I had before appointed ye maister of Max∣wel to be in Dumfreis that same day, I desired the day to be prolonged, to my returning from Nethesdaill. In this meane tyme by letters past betuix vs the xxviij. of this instant is appointed which day be the grace of God I mynd to keap. Nether yet in my iudgement is there any iust feare of tumult, for the persones that shall con∣uene with me, will promes and keap all quiet∣nes, and of your lordship I nothing dout but ye will take suche ordour with your freindes, that by them there shall no occasion of trouble be of∣fered, and albeit that the erudicion shal not per∣chance be suche as the godlie wold desyre, yet I dout not bothe the veritie and the falshead shall appeare in there owne colors, albeit not to all, yet to suche as ether haue eares to hear ye treuth plainly spoken, or eyes to discerne darcknes from light.Let the abbote iudge if he had iust oc∣casiō to accuse me as he after do∣eth. And therefore I wold moste humblie re∣quire of your lordship, rather to prouoke and en∣curage your freind to the said disputation, then in any maner to stay him, for if your lordship do cōsider that whil, that he oppenlie preaches one
thing, and we an other, that the hartes of the people are distract, yea, and inflambed one a∣gainst another, your lordship should rather feare tumult and trouble to ensew thereof, then of mutuall conference, in the audience of peceable and quiet men. The nomber is not great that is admitted to hear, and therefore trouble is les to be feared. Please your lordship to vnderstand that the veritie oght to be to vs, more deare then our owne liues, and therefore we may not leaue the mantenance of the same, for feare of that whereof the ishew is in the handes of God, to whose protection I moste hartlie commit your lordship. Of Vghiltrie in haist the same houre your lordships letter wes receaued. 1562. Yours lordship is to command in all godlines. Iohn Knox the abbotes thrid letter answered by mouth. M. Quintyne. IOhn Knox I persaif the policie vsed be ʒow and vthers, to mak my awin ay my partie. The last tyme ʒe come in this cuntrie,Brag ot I was persuaded be my Lord of Cassillis not to rancounter ʒow, or
els treulie ʒe suld not haif passed vnrancoūtered as ʒe did, bot ʒe salbe assured I sal keip day and place in Mayboill according to my writing, and I haif my life, and my feit louse, notwithstan∣ding ony writing that is cumin to me, fra my Lord of Cassillis, therefore keip tryst, and excuse ʒow not vpon my Lorde of Cassillis writing, notwithstanding that I knaw it is purchest be ʒour policie,Ye kno∣we that, as ye knowe that mel¦chisedec offerred bread & wine vn¦to God, whiche two ye are ne∣uer able to proue to put me to schame, and ʒour self to aduansment, quhilk sall not ly in ʒour power, thairfore I assure ʒow, in cace I sould do the sa∣min with the haissart of my lyfe, do ʒe the lyke without excuse. And sa fair ʒe weill. Of Crosra∣guell this xxiiij. of September. 1562. Attoure that thair be na conuocation bot conforme to ʒour writing, or els thre scoir at the maist, of the quhilkis tuentie to be auditors on ather syde. CROSRAGUELL. The abbotes fourt letter. M. Quintyne. IOhn Knox and baiillies of Air, this present is till aduertise ʒow that I ressaued writing and credit with this gentle man, fra my Lord of Cassillis, certifi and me that he will keip day ap∣pointed for our disputation, thairfore keip ʒour promes, and pretex na ioukrie be my Lorde of Cassillis writing. And this fair ʒe weill. Of Crosraguell the xxv. of September. 1562. CROSRAGUELL.
The answer to the abbotes fourt let. Iohn Knox. TO nether of these did I answer otherwise, then by appointing the day, and promising to keap the same. For I can pacientlie suffer wā∣tone men to speak wantōlie, considering that I had sufficientlie answered my Lord of Cassillis in that behalf. SOme other letters are omitted because they were of les importance, follow the condict∣ons. THe day houre, condicions and nomber ag∣greid vpon, for the cōference betuix maister Quintyne Kennedy abbote of Crosraguell, and Iohn Knox minister at Edinburgh. The day is the xxviij of September. 1562. The place the Prouestis place of Mayboill, the houre to conuene is at eight houres before none, the day foresaid, the nomber for euerie part shall be fourtie persones, by there Scribes & learned men, with so many mo as the hous may goodly hold, be the sight of my Lord of Cassillis. And heirupon, bothe the said abbote and Iohn Knox are wholylie and fullylie agreed. In wit∣nes whereof they haue subscriued these presents with there handes. At Mayboill the xxvij. of September. 1562. Crosraguell Iohn Knox
THe nomber receaued within the hous foresaid, and so many besydes as plea∣sed my Lord and his freindes. Iohn Knox addressed him to make publict prayer, whereat the abbote wes soir offended at the first, but whil the said Iohn wold in no wise be stayed, he and his gaue audience, which be∣ing ended, the abbote said be my faith it is weil said. And so after that he had spo∣ken certane wordes, he comman¦ded one of his Scribes to read openly his pro∣testation as fol∣loweth. ☞ ✚ ☜
Heir followes the coppie of the ressoning quhilk wes betuix the commendator of Crosraguell and Iohn Ki in Mayboile concerning the masse, in the yeare of God. 1562. M. Quintyne. PErceauing the great perturbation con¦trouersie and debeate, quhilk is stirred vp laitlie in all Christen realmes, for the cause of religion (honorable auditor) and als be∣ing remembred of the terrible sētence conteined in scriptures toward all negligent pastors in this dangerous tyme. I was constrayned in conscience notwithstanding my great inhabili∣tie, as it pleased God to support my imperfecti∣ones to giue instruction to all those cōmitted to my cure, within my Kirk of Kirkoswald, how they shoulde be able to be enarmed against all wicked and decetfull preachers quhilk gaes about not knowing quherfra they come, nor by quha ordre. And to the effect that our deirlie-beloued flock micht haue bene the more able to haue bene warre with all fals wicked & vngodly doctrine. Amang other godlie lessones contei∣ned in my exhortation I inserit certane catho∣lick artickles hauing their warrand of the scrip¦tures of almighty God, according to ye doctrine of the halie catholicke Kirk, and burdyned my
conscience in the presence of God the saides ar∣tickles to be godlie, necessarie and expedient to be beleued by all good christiane men. Iohn Knox vpon sonday the aucht day of Sep∣tember, came vnto the said Kirk of Kirkoswald, being certefied that I might not be present, and as I was enformed to make impugnatiō to my saides artickles wherethrough I wrote to him, certifying that I wold affirm the saides artick∣les, and in speciall the artickle concerning the masse against him or quhasoeuer pleases to make impugnation there to vpō aucht dayes warning, the place being in any hous of Mayboyle, the nomber tuentie on either syde, without any fur∣ther conuocation. Shortlie we being agreed by writing of the day hour and place, quhilk was the 28. day of this instant September. I am cōmen conforme to my writing to affirme the saides artickles as they are written, beginning at the artickle concerning the masse. Protesting alwayes that I come not to dispute any of my artickles as ma∣ters of faith & religion disputable, cōsidering there is ordre taken alreadie by the Kirk of God (as I wold say) be the generall councelles, deulie cōuened quhilk represents the vniuersal Kirk of almighty God to whom it apperteines to take ordre quhensoeuer question rises for maters con∣cerning faith and religion, but according to the doctrine of S. Peter and als S. Paule to ren∣der my dett and duetie to all that inquires ther∣fore: and after that maner to abyde gentle and
formall reasoning of all that pleases, as may stand to the glorie of God and the instruction of the auditor. And to the effect foresaid that we may come to formal ressoning, as to ward the ar∣tickle cōcerning the masse, I wil ground me v∣pon the Scriptures of almightie God, to be my warrand cōforme to my first cōfirmation, quhlik was gathered vpon the priesthead and oblation of Melchisedec: and was presentet ʒou in Februare, and as ʒit has gottē no answer, not∣withstanding that it was of sober quantitie sex∣tene or 20 lynes. Wherfore please you to receaue this same confirmation yet as of before for to be the beginning of our formall reasoning, concer∣ning the artickle of the masse in maner as after followes. The Psalmest & als the Apostle S. Paule affirmes our Saluiour to be an priest for euer, according to the ordure of Melchisedec, quha made oblation and Sacrifice of bread and wine vnto God as the Scripture plainly teach∣es vs: now will I reason on this maner. Read all the Euangell wha pleases, he sall find in no place of the Euangel quhere our Sal∣uiour vses the priesthead of Melchisedec, de∣claring him self to be an priest after the ordor of Melchisedec, but in the latter Supper, quhere he made oblation of his precious body & blude vnder the forme of bread and wine prefigurate by the oblation of Melchisedec: then are we compelled to affirme that our Sauiour made oblation of his bodie & blude in the latter Sup∣per or els he was not an priest according to the
ordor of Melchisedec, quhilk is expres against the Scripture. Iohn Knox. Iohne Knox protested that he mght haue the coppie of this formar writting giuen in by my Lord in writ, to answer therto more fullie, & at greater leaser, which was deliuered vnto him. Quintene. And in lykemaner, my Lorde protested that he might haue place to reply, if he thoght good. The answer of Iohn Knox to the Abbottes oration, giuen in by the Abbote before the disputation, in writ. Iohn Knox. WHensoeuer it pleaseth God of his great mercy, to shew the light and to blow the trompet of his true word vnto the blind & vnthankful world, after darknes and lōg silence, it hath the strēgth to moue and walken not onelie the chosen, but also the reprobate, but in diuerse maner: for the one it walkeneth, from ignorance, error, super∣sticion, vanitie, and horrible corruption, to walk before there God in knowledge, veritie, true ser∣uing of his maiestie, and in puritie of life. But the other it walkeneth from there formar iueth, and yet to there further cōdemnation. For suche as in the time of darknes did liue as men with∣out God, at ye sound of the trompet, calling them to repentance, addes and ioynes to there format corruption, blasphemie against God, and against his eternal veritie. For perceauing that the light
discouereth there turpitud, and that the trompet wil not suffer them to slepe, as that they did be∣fore without open reproche:Isay. 5. they shame not to call light, darknes: & darknes, light: good, euil: and euil, good. And to bring that to pas, to wit, that the light shine no more, doeth the whole bād of suche as oppone them selues to the veritie of God, so earnestlie trauell, that stugardes and effeminat men become actiue and strong Soul∣dioures to the Deuil. The exemples hereof are in Scriptures so cōmon that they nead no long rehearsal. For what was the estate of the fals Prophetes and Preastes in the dayes of Isayas, Ieremie, Ezechiel, Micheas and the rest of the true Prophetes of God. What care (I say) they which by ordinarie successiō oght to haue teached the people of God, tooke ouer there charges, the complaintes & at∣testations of the true Prophetes vsed against them do witnes.Isay. 56. Read the place. In the which they call them dum dogs, blind watchemen, suche as regarded nothing but ambition, tyarous cheare and lustes of the flesh.Ezeh. 34 Pastors that fedd not the flock, but fedd them selues. Finally they terme them,Iere. 6. men from the moste to the least, giuen to auarcie, apostattes that had left God, his lawes, statutes, and ordi∣nances, and had laid them selues doun to sleape in the middes of corruptiō out of the which they could not be walkened. But yet how vigilant and actiue they were to resist the true Prophetes and the doctrine offred
by them, the Scripture doeth lykwise testifie. For then wes Isayas and suche as adheared to his doctrine,Isay. 8 holden as monsters in the eyes of the proude preastes,Iere. 38 and of the multitude. Then was Ieremie accused of treason, cast in presone, and dampned to death.1. Re. 22 Then wes Micheas o∣penly striken vpon the mouth, and briefly then did none of the true Prophetes of God escape the hatred and cruel persecutiō of those that cla∣med the title and authorie to rule in the Church. The same may be sene in ye dayes of Iesus Christ: for how negligent and careles wes the whole leuiticall ordor (a few excepted) these wordes of our maister Iesus Christe do witnes.Mat. 23. wo be vnto you Scribes and Pharises Hipocrites, for ye steak the kingdome of heauen before men: ye your selues do not enter, and suche as wold en∣ter ye suffer not. But when the trompet began to blowe in the mouth of Iohn the Baptist, and when Iesus Christe began to preache & to make mo disciples then Iohn did, when Iohn called them progenie of vipers and Iesus Christe did terme them blinde guides, how careful was the whole rable then?Ioh. 1. Is easie to be espyed. For then were ambassadours send to Iohn to knowe by what authoritie he made suche innouation amō∣ge the people and in the religion of God.Mat. 15. Then was Christe Iesus tempted with sharpe & subtil questions.Mat. 17. Then was he accused for breaking of the tradicsōes of the ancients. Then was he cal¦led Beelzebub, And in the end he was procured to be hanged betuex two theues. And by whose
diligence wes all this broght to pas? wes it not by them who before had abused the law? blinded the people, deceaued the simple, and vnder the title and name of God had sett vp the deuil and all abomination to ring ouer men? For in place of Gods true worshipping they had erected a market,Ioh. 2. and filthie merchandrise in the temple of God. The eiection whereof did so enrage those dum dogs that with an bay they began to barke a∣gainst Iesus Christe,Mat. 21. and his moste holsome doc∣trine: and that because the zeale of that great God, their bellie, did altogether consume and eat thē vp. These thinges we knowe to be moste true, and therefore we oght not to wōder albeit the true worde of God reteane the own nature, and that the self same thing chance now in our dayes that heretofore hath bene fully performed. As for my self I nothing dou but the great per∣turbation, controuersie, and debate, lastly stirred vp in all christen realmes, for cause of religion, is the cause that my Lorde abbote hath bee of lait dayes troubled to vnaccustomed laboures. For if the supersticion, idolatrie, pride, vaine glo∣rie, ambition, vniust possessions,The cau∣se why Pa¦pists ar¦ow so di¦ligent in preachīg superfluous rentes and filthy liuing vsed & manteyned here∣tofore by suche as clame the name and authoritie of the Church had not bene openly rebuked and a parte therof in dispyte of Sathan supressed it may be thoght that my Lorde in this his impo∣tent age could haue contented him self with the self same ease and quietnes that in his yonger
age and better habilitie, he enioyed. But now the trōpet soundeth dampnatiō to all negligent pastors, and thereof is my Lorde afrayed, and therefore to discharge his conscience he wil take the paine to instruct his flock, & to warne them to be ware of fals teachers. I wil interprete all to the best part, if my Lordes eye be single, his worke is good. But if the light that appe∣reth to be in him,Mat. 6. and in his sect, be nothing but darcknes, how great shall the darcknes be? my Lorde is a clerk & nedeth no interpreter of suche places of Scripture. Yet for the simple (I say) that rightlie to teach the flock of Iesus Christe,Trew know∣ledge is required in a trew preacher requireth right institucion in Christes own doc∣trine. For els a zeale without knowledge is no∣thing but the cause of further blindnes. Yea, if the blinde lead the blinde, the ignorant idolater take vpon him to teache the ignorant people of lōg time broght vp in idolatrie: neither of bothe can escape condemnation so long as they follow that traine. And therefore it wil nothing vnbur∣ding my Lordes conscience albeit that after his negligence and lōg silēce he begin to cry to suche as he tearmes his ock, bewar of fals prophetes. For it may be that him self be one of that nōber. Yea, perchance the falsest that they haue harde this hundreth year.Duet.  For if he be a fals Prophet that teacheth men to follow strange Gods, that prophecies a lie in the name of the Lorde,Iere. 14 and speaketh to the people the diuination and de∣ceat of his own hart,Iere. 18 that causeth the people to erre, and leaue the old pathes, and to walke in
the pathe of the way that is not troden. That constantlie say to them that haue prouoked God to angre. The Lorde heath spoken it. Ye shall haue peace. And to all that walk after the lustes of there own hartes there shal no euil chance vn∣to you. &c. If finally,Iere. 23. they be fals prophetes that be auaricious and studie for aduātage, that sowe pilloues vnder the arme hoilles of wicked men, and lay sinners a sleap,Ezeh. 13. and promes life to them, to whome they oght not to promes it. If these be fals prophetes (I say) as the Scripture effirmeth them to be, then standeth my Lorde abbote in a wonderous perplexitie and suche as beleue him, in no les danger. For God hath neuer pronunced, suche artickles as my Lorde calleth holsome doctrine, the chief of them, to wit, the masse, purgatorie, praying to sainctes, erecting of images & suche other, haue no assurance of Gods worde, but are the meare dreames, statutes, and inuentions of men, as there particuler examinatiō (if my Lord pleaseth to abyde the tryal) wil more plainlie witnes, & therefore, it is no sufficient assurance to the con∣science of the auditure, that my Lord burden his cōscience, in the presence of God that his artick∣les be godly, necessar, & expedient to be beleued. For so haue euer the fals Prophetes done, when they & there doctrine, was impugned. Did not the prophetes and preasts of Baal affirme there doctrine & religion to be godlie, against the pro∣phet Elias?1. Reg. 18 They did not onely burden there conscience, but also offred them selues, to suffer
tryal (God him self being iudge) before ye King and before the whole people.. Ac. 22 The self same thīg did the fals prophetes against Micheas and Ie∣remie, and therefore yet againe I say my Lords conscience (if a blind zeal be worthy of the name of conscience) will neither saue him self nor o∣thers, because it is not grounded vpon God, his reueilled wil nor promes. If my Lorde thinketh that the holy catholick Church is sufficient assu∣rance for his conscience, let him vnderstand that the same buckler had the fals prophetes against Ieremie for they cryed,Iere. 7. the temple of the Lorde the temple of the Lorde, the temple of the Lord, but as he with one stroke did brust their buckler a sonder, saying put not your trust in leing wor∣des: so say we that how catholick (that is vni∣uersal) that euer their Churche hath bene, holy are they neuer able to proue it, neither in lyfe, making of lawes, nor in soundnes of doctrine, as in my answer giuen by mouth, I haue more pla∣nely shewen. It pleaseth my Lorde to terme vs, wicked and deceatful preachers, who go about not knowing wherefro we come, nor by what ordoure, & further he feareth not to pronūce our doctrine, fals wicked, and vngodlie, for of vs, & our doctrine it is plane that my Lorde ment and meneth. I answer that as by Gods worde, we accuse the whole masse of mannes nature, of corruptiō, and wickednes, so do we not flatter our selues, but willingly confesse ourselues so subiect to cor∣ruption and naturall wickednes, that the good
that we wold do, we do it not, but the euill that we hate, that we do. Yea, we do not deny but that in our liues and outward cōuersation there be many things bothe worthie of reformation and reprehension. But yet if our liues shalbe cō∣pared with the liues of them, that accuseth vs, be it in general or be it in particular, we doubt not to be iustified, bothe before, God and man. For how many ministers this day within scot∣land, is my Lorde abbote (ioyning with him the whole rable of the horned Bischoopes) able to cōuict to be adulterers, fornicators, dronckards, bloodscheders, opperssors of the poore wedow, fatherles, or stranger, or yet, that do idilly liue vpon ye sweat of other mēnes browes. And how many of them from the hiest to the lowest, are able to abyde an assyse of ye forenāed crimes. And yet shal we be called by thē wicked and deceatful preachers, euen as if ye strongest & moste cōmune harlot, yt euer wes knowē ī the bordell, should scl∣ander & reuile an honest & pudick matrō. But in somwhat must the sonnes resemble there father. The deuil as that he is perpetuall enimie to treuth and to ane honest life, so is he a lear and accusar of our brethrē, and therefore albeit suche as serue him in idolatrie and all filthines of life, spew out against vs, there wennome and leis, wt testimonie of a good conscience, we refer ven∣gance to him, to whome it aperteineth, neither yet wold we haue ones opened our mouthes for the defence of our owne innocencie (for God be praised, euen before the world it will vtter the
self, war not that in sclandring our liues, they go about, to deface the glorious gospel of Iesus Christe, whereof it hath pleased his mercie to make vs ministers: and in that eace, let them be assured, that the lies which without shame & assurance, they causies womet out against vs, with shame and double confucion they shal iust∣lie receaue againe in there owne bosomes. If my Lorde abbote alledge, that he accuseth not our liues and external conuersation, but our doc∣trine which he termes fals, wicked, and vngod∣lie, we answer, that as that doeth more greiue vs, nor the sclandring of our liues, so doubt we nothing, but that he that made his fauorable {pro}∣mes, to afflicted Ierusalem in these wordes: Isay. 14.All instrument that is prepared against thee, shal not prosper, and euerie toung, that shal rise against thee in iudgement, thou shalt rightlie conuict and condeme of impietie. We doubt not (I say) but the same God, will in this our age, confound the tounges, that oppone them selues to his eternal veritie, which is the groūd, and assurance of our doctrine. And therefore we nothing feare to say, that my Lorde in the end shal spead no better (if he continew, in that his irreuerent rayling) then suche as heretofore, haue blasphemed Iesus Christe, and his eternall veritie, to the which albeit for the present, they wil not be subiect, and that because our persones and presence whome God maketh ministers of the same, are contemptible and despysed, yet in the end, they shal feal, that in rebelling against
our admonicions, they were rebellious to the mouth of God, and in defasing vs, they haue dispysed, the eternal Sonne of God, who of his mercie, hath sent vs, to rebuke there impeitie, and to reduce to knowledge, and vnto the true pa∣stor againe, suche, as through blind ignorance, haue followed the inuentions, and dreames of men: and haue soght iustice, remission of sinnes, and reconciliation with God, by other meanes then by Iesus Christe, and by true faith in his blood. But of this point, I knowe my Lorde moste doubtes, To wit, whether God hath sent vs, or not? For my Lorde sayes we go about, not knowing wherefro we come, nor by what ordor, we answer, that in our consciences we knowe, and he him self, wil beare vs record, that we are not sent by that Romane Antichriste, whome he calleth Pope, nor yet from his carnal Cardinal∣les, nor dum horned Bischoppes: and thereof we reioyse, Being assured, that as we are not sent by Christes manifest enimie in the earth, so are we sent by Iesus Christe him self, and that by suche ordor, as God hath euer kept, from the beginning, when publick corruption entered in the Church, by sleuth, and impietie of suche, as of duetie oght to haue fedd the flock, and to haue reteaned the people vnder obedience of God, as∣wel in religion, as in life and maners. The ordor of God (I say) hath bene in suche publick cor∣ruptions, to raise vp simple, and obscure men, in the beginning of there vocacion, vnknowen to the worlde: to rebuke the manifest defection of
the people from God, to conuict the pastors of there formar negligence, fleuth, and idolatrie, & to prononce them vnworthie of there offices. Reg. 17 Iere. 35. Amo. .For so was Helias sent in the dayes of Ahab, Ie∣remie in the time of corruption, vnder Iehoia∣kin, and Zedechias. Amos vnder Ieroboam, and the rest of the Prophets, euerie one in there own tyme, and after the same ordour hath God rased vp ī these our dayes, suche mē, as my Lord & his faction termes, Heretikes, Schismatikes Zuinglians, Lutherians, Oecolampadians, & Caluinists. To proue the Pope, to be an Antichr¦iste, his whole glorie in the earth, to be altoge∣ther repugnant, to the cōdicion of Christes true ministers. The masse to be idolatrie, & a bastard seruice of God, yea more corrupted thē euer was the Sacrifice in ye dayes of the Prophetes, whē yet they affirmed them to be abominable before God. Purgatorie to be nothing but a pykepurs. The defence of mannes frewill to do good, and auoide euil, to be ye damned herisie of Pelagius. The forbidding of mariage to any estate of men or woman, to be the doctrine of Deuills. And the forbidding of meat for conscience saik, to {pro}∣cead of the same fontaine. The erecting images in Churches, & in publick places of assembleis, to be against the expressed commandement of God. Prayer for the dead, and vnto sainctes, to be work done without faith, and therefore to be sinne. Briefly God hath rased vp men in these our dayes, so to discouer the turpitud and filthi∣nes of that Babiloniane harlote, that hir werrie
golden cuppe, in the which hir fornication wes hid before, is become abhominable to all suche, as trust for the life euerlasting. And they haue further sett so vehement a fyre in the werray ground of hir glorie, that is, in hir vsurped au∣thoritie, that she and it, are bothe like to burne, to there vttermoste confusion. My Lorde and his companions feare no suche threatninges. they are but rayling knaues yt dispytfully speak against there holy mother the Church. I haue alreadie said that the Prophetes in there dayes wes euen so rewarded of those, that had the same tytle & dignitie, that now our aduersaries clame. And yet did they not escape the plagues pronōu∣ced, and in the same confidence stand we, reioy∣sing further, that howsoeuer they repyne, storme and rage, yet they that are of God, hear vs, kno∣we the voice of Iesus Christe speaking in vs his weak instruments, and do flie from that horri∣ble harlote, and from hir filthynes, which is to vs a sufficient assurance that God hath sent vs for the cōfort of his chosen. But my Lorde per∣chance requireth miracles, to proue our laugh∣full vocation. For so doeth Vinzet procutor for the Papistes. To bothe I answer, that a treuth by it self without myracles, hath sufficient strē∣gth to proue the laughful vocation of the teach∣ers thereof, but miracles destitute of treuth, haue efficacie to deceaue, but neuer to bring to God. But this by the grace of God shalbe more fully entreated, in the answer to Vinzetes que∣stiones therevpon. And yet one word man I say
before I make end, to my Lorde, and vnto the rest of the Popes creatures. And it is this? If they will studie to keap them selues, in credeit & estimation, let them neuer call our vocation in doubt, for we in continent will obiect to them, that from the moste to the least, there is none a∣mongs them, laughfully called, to serue within the Church of God. But all cōmit symonie, all are heretykes, all receaue the spirit of lies, and ye leprosie of Gehezi, and finally, being accused in there first ordination, they neither can giue gra∣ce, nor benedictiō to the people of God, and this by there own law I offer my self to proue, as e∣uidentlie as my Lords Bischops, abbots, Pri∣ors, and the rest of that sect, are able to proue thē selues, called to ecclesiasticall function (as they terme it) by there fathers bulles, and cōforma∣tion of the Pope. I wonder not a lytil, that my Lorde should alledge, that I wes certified that he might not be present at Kirkoswald, the day that first I offred my self to resist his vaine and blasphemous artickles. I am able to proue that by his promes he had boūd himself ofter thē ones to be present. And also that by famous gentle men that same Sonday in the morning he was required either to come and teach according to his promes, and so to suffer his doctrine in audi∣ence of suche as he named his owne flock, to be tryed, or els, to come and heare doctrine, & with sobrietie and gentilnes, to oppon at his pleasure. These two heades (I say) I am able to proue. But that I wes certified, that he could not be
present. &c. I think it shalbe as hard to proue, as to proue that Melchisedec, made Sacrifice of bread, and wine vnto God. But my Lorde shall haue libertie of me, to alledge in suche cases what pleaseth him, so long as his allegation shal not preiudge the veritie, nor giue patrocynie to a lie, in maters of religion. It is not of great impor∣tance, whether I was certified, or not, that my Lorde could not be present, as he alledgeth. I presented my self at the day appointed. And that is some argument, that I greatlie feared not my Lordes presence. The letters that haue passed betuix vs, together withsome answers, that I differed, shalbe put in register before the dispu∣tation. That men may see, the whole procedings of bothe parties. And this muche by writ, to my Lordes first oration giuen in, in writ. Now followeth my answer, to the rest, giuen at that same instant by mouth. Iohn Knox answereth by mouth BEcause I perceaue, bothe in your protesta∣tion and artickle, that ye dispute not vpon these maters, as disputable, but as of things al∣readie concluded, by the Kirk, general coūselles, and doctors: I must say somwhat in the begin∣ning, how farre I will admit of any of the fore∣named.Ephe. . And of the Kirk first (I say) that I ac∣knowledge it to be the spous of Christs Iesus, builded vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: so that into all doctrine, it heareth
the voice of the spous onelie, and an stranger, it will not heare,Ioh. 0 according to the wordes of our master Christ Iesus. My shepe heare my voice. &c. And therefore if yt any multitude, vnder the ti∣tle of the Kirk, will obtrude, vnto vs, any doc∣trine necessar to be beleued to our saluation, and bringeth not for the same, the expres worde of Iesus Christ, or his Apostles, &c. men must aper∣done me, althogh I acknowledge it not to be ye Kirk of God, for the reason foresaid. And vnto the generall counselles, I answer the same, to wit, that suche as hath bene gathered duelie & in the name of God, for extirpatiō of heresies, with my whole harte I do reuerence. Prouided al∣wayes, that the doctrine, that they propone to be beleued, haue the approbation of the plaine worde of God, or els with that ancient I must say, that more credit is to be giuen to an man, bringing for him,Panor∣mita. the testimonie of Gods Scrip∣tures, then to an generall counsell, affirming a∣ny doctrine without the same. And as cōcerning the authoritie of the doctors (for whome I prai∣se my God, as that I do for all them whome he maketh profitable instrumentes in his kirk) I think my Lorde,Let the godlie iudge if these pe∣ticions be reaso¦nable. will bind me no straiter, then he hath desyred to be bound him self, that is, that men be not receaued, as God. And therefore with Agustine I consent, that whatsoeuer the doctors propone, and plamly confirme the same by the euident testimonie of the Scriptures, I am hartlie content to receaue the same, but els, that it be laughful to me with, Ierome to say,
whatsoeuer is affirmed, without the authoritie of Gods Scriptures, with the same facilitie it may be reiected, as it is affirmed. And these thre admitted. So forth I enter in disputation. M. Quintyne. Thair ar diuers heides quhair with I am of∣fended, willing that the purpose we come for, may go shortlie to passe. Thairfore presentlie I will omitt. And as the occasion sall serue of the doctoures, counsalles and ocht elles, quhilkis ar not expresly contened in the Scriptures. And this quicklie go to the purpose. Iohn Knox Ye are not ignorant (my Lorde) that in euerie disputation, the ground oght so to be laide, that ye mater disputable, or the question, either come vnder an perfite definicion, or els vnder an suf∣ficient discription: and specially when the que∣stion is, De woce simplici. As is, Missa. Yf it ple∣ase your Lordschip to defyne the masse, or yet suf∣ficientlie to discriue it, I will take occasion of yt, which I think wrong. And if not, then must I explaine my minde, what masse it is, that I in∣tend to impung, and haue called idolatrie, not the blissed institution of the Lorde Iesus, which he hath cōmanded to be vsed in his kirk,Let men iudge if this be not im∣pugnati¦on of the papisti∣cal messe to his gaincomīg, but that which is cropen in, into the kirk visible, without all approbation of ye worde of God. And this masse, I say, hath a name, a forme and action, an opinion conceaued of it, and an actor of the same. And vnto the whole foure I say, that neither the name, the forme and
action, nor the opinion, nor actor, haue there assurance of Gods plaine worde. M. Quintyne. As to the diffinicion or description that I gaif the last ʒeir, I will abyde at it this ʒeir, for I am not cūmin in vse of est, & non est. And as to ye masse that he wil impung, or any mannes masse, ʒea, and it war the paipes awin messe, I will mantein nathing but Iesus Christes messe, cō∣forme to my artickle as it is writtin, and diffi∣nition contened in my buik, quhilk he hes taine on hand to impung. Iohn Knox. As I can conceaue, my Lordes answer, con∣teineth thre heades, the first is, a relation to his booke as conteaning the difinicion of the masse. The second a declaration of his Lordschipes cō∣stancie.Let men iudge how fa∣uorable the sone is vnto the Fa∣ther. And the third, an affirmation, that he wil affirme no masse, but ye masse of Iesus Christ, yea, not if it wer the popes owne masse. Vnto the first I answer. That I haue not red his Lorde∣schipes booke (not excusing thereintill my own negligence) and therefore it appeareth vnto me, that rather his Lordship, should cause the diffi∣nition to be red out of his booke, nor to burden me with the seaking of it. As cōcerning his lord∣shipes constancie, I beseak the eternal God, to make vs all constant, in his eternal veritie: for inconstancie in the treuth, can not lack infamie, and great danger. But to me it appeareth, that in no wyse it can hurt, the fame, nor conscience of the godlie, to confesse them selues men, who
bothe may erre, and also be occation that others erre. And yet, when that the fuller knowledge commeth vnto them, by the spirit of God, no mā oght to impute vnto them inconstancie, albeit they retreat there formar error, as in diuers hea∣des did that learned Augustine. But the thride head doeth moste delite me, to wit, that my lord hath affirmed that he will defend no masse, but the masse of the Lorde Iesus:Note my offer which if his lord∣ship will performe (as my good hope is) then I dout not, but we are on the werray point of an christiane aggrement. For whatsoeuer his lord∣schip shall proue to me, to be done by the Lorde Iesus, that, without all contradiction, I shall embrace. Prouiding that his lordship alledge nothing to be done, by Iesus Christe, which his owne institution, witnesseth not to be done. M. Quintyne. I define the messe, as concerning the substance, and effect, to be the sacrifice and oblation, of the Lordes bodie and blude, geuen and offered by him, in the latter Supper. And takis the Scrip¦ture, to my warrand, according to my artickle as it is written. And for the first confirmation of the same, groundes me vpon the sacrifice and oblation of Melchisedec. To the second, I thank Iohn Knox of his prase and prayer of my con∣stancie, and in lyk maner for christiane cheriteis saik, prase God with all my hart, for his indu∣retnes and pertinacitie (gif swa be that he be in error) and will wish him, that he be willed to refuse his pertinacitie, as I sall do my cōstancie
gif I be in error. To the thrid, for auoiding of cauillation, I mein that I will defend no messe as concerning the substance, institution & effect, bot that messe onelie, quhilk is institut be Iesus Christ. Iohn Knox Omitting to further consideration, the answer to the definition, to the last two heades I short∣lie answer, that I praised no constancie, but that which is in the treuth. And as touching my ow∣en indurednes, wherewith my Lorde seameth to burden me, I plainlie protest before God, that if I knew my self in error, in that cace, or in any other, that concerneth the doctrine of Sal∣uation: I should not be ashamed, publictlie to confesse it. But the last parte of my Lordes an∣swer, appeareth somparte to varie (in my iudge∣ment) from his formar affirmation, which I tooke to be, that his lordship wold defend no∣thing in ye masse, which he was not able to proue, to be the verray institution of Iesus Christe. And therefore, must I haue recourse, vnto the formar diuision of the masse: which is in name, action, opinion, & actor. And humblie requireth of his lordship, that he wold signifie vnto me, if he wold be cōtent to proue the name to be gi∣uen by Iesus Chrste:Note if this be to shoot an pistollet at the messe. the whole action and cere∣monies from beginning, to the end, to be the or∣dinance of almightie God. The opinion, which hath bene conceaued, taught, and written of it, for to be aggreable with the Scripturs of God. And finally, if that the actor, hath his assurance
of God, to do that, which he there publictlie pro∣testeth, he doeth. M. Quintyne. As willing that the treuth cum to ane tryall, I will not trifle, bot schortlie geues for answer.A shiftīg answer. I wil begin at the best first, quhilk is ye substance and effect. And as to the ceremonies, actor and name, sal defend them abūdantlie (Godwilling) conform to my artickle quhen I cum thairto. Iohn Knox. The ceremonies vsed in the masse, and the opi∣nion conceaued of the same, haue bene holden substanciall partes thereof,Let the papests answer if this be trew or not. into the conscience of a great multitude. And therefore, oght the cō∣science of the weak, and infirme, first to be deli∣uered from that bondage. For what my Lorde affirmeth of the masse (to wit, that it is a sacri∣fice) this perchance may be also alledged to apar∣teane to the right institution of Iesus Christe, in some cace, which ones wes woid, bothe of those ceremonies, and that damnable opinion. M. Quintyne. I am not cumin heir to mantein the opiniones of mē, but to defend ye institution of Iesus Christ, conform to my artickle. Iohn Knox. It appeareh to me yet againe,This is a dow∣ble can∣nō aga∣inst the messe. that my Lorde is willing to defend no thing, but the werray institutiō of Christ Iesus. And I haue alreadie affirmed, that neither the name of the masse, the ceremonies vsed in the same, the opinion concea∣ued of it, neither yet that power, which the ac∣tor
vsurneth, hath either the institution or assu∣rance of Iesus Christe. M. Quintyne. I am willing to defend my diffinition concer∣ning the messe, as I haue diffined it, and takes Goddes word to my warrand,My lord fled the Barras for the first. and as to the ce∣remonies actor and all the rest fall defend God willing to be aggreable with Goddes word all throuch abundantlie as tyme and place sal serue beginning first at the substance and effect. Iohn Knox. I answer, that albeit in my iudgement, the conscience of man, oght first to haue bene sett at libertie, yet hoping that my Lorde wilbe cōtent, according to his promes, that the name, ceremo∣nies, and the rest of the accidents of the masse suffer the tryal by the worde of God. I am con∣tent shortlie to enter in the bodie of the mater. And desireth the difinition to be resumed. M. Quintyne. Let my Lord re∣member his pro∣mes.I promes, before this honorable auditor, to defend that all cōtened in the action of the messe to be aggreable with Goddes word, prouiding alwayes we gang to the substance. The difinition being resumed. Iohn Knox answered. Your lordship is not ignorant, that in euerie difinition, there oght to be, Genus, which I take your lordship here maketh this term (Sa∣crificium) but because the term is generall, and in ye Scriptures of God is diuersly taken, there∣fore, it must be broght to a certane kinde. For in
the Scriptures there be sacrifices called EVCHA∣RISTICA that is, of thankes giuing. The mor∣tification of our bodies, and the obedience that we giue to God, in the same, is also called Sa∣crifice. Prayer & inuocation of the name of God hath also the same name within the Scriptures. Liberalitie toward the poore, is also so termed. But there is one Sacrifice, which is greatest, and moste of all, called, Propiciatorium, which is that Sacrifice, whereby, satisfaction is made to the iustice of God, being offended at the sin∣nes of man. &c. Now I desire of my Lord that he appoint vnto the masse, whiche of these Sa∣crifices best pleaseth him. M. Quintyne. Quhat ʒe mein be the Sacrifice, Propiciatorium, presentlie I will not dispute. But I tak the sa∣crifice vpon the cro, to be the onelie Sacrifice of redemption, and the Sacrifice of the masse, to be the Sacrifice of cōmemoration, of Christs death and passion. Iohn Knox. So farre as I can conceaue of my Lordes an∣swer, he maketh no Sacrifice, Propiciatorie,Heir are mo can∣nons thē one. in the messe: which is the chiefhead, which I in∣tend to impung. For, as for the cōmemoration of Christes death and passion, that I grant, and publictlie do confesse, to be celebrat in the right vse of the Lordes Spper, which I denie the messe to be. M. Quintyne. It is ʒour deutie according to formall procei∣ding,
to impung my warrand,If this be shif∣ting or not let men iu∣dge. quhilk I haue chosen, to defend my diffinition be, and artickle euen as it is writtin. Iohn Knox. Protesting that this mekle is win, that the Sacrifice of the masse, being denied by me to be a Sacrifice Propiciatorie for the sinnes of ye quick and the dead,Let men now iud¦ge whit∣ther the messe gat a wond or not. according to the opinion thereof before conceaued, hath no patron, at this presēt: I am content to procede. M. Quintyne. I protest that he hes win nothing of me as ʒit, and referres it, to black and quhite, contened in our writing. Iohn Knox. I haue openlie denied the masse to be an Sa∣crifice Propiciatorie for the quick.Note. &c. and the de∣fence thereof is denied. And therefore I referre me vnto the same iudges that my Lorde hath clamed. M. Quintyne. Ʒe may deny quhat ʒe pleis, for all that ʒe de∣ny I tak not presentlie to impung, bot quhair I began thair wil I end,Shift on that is, to defend ye messe, conforme to my artickle. Iohn Knox. Seing that neither the name, the action, the opinion, nor the actor of the masse, can be defen∣ded for this present, I wold glaidly knowe what I should impung. M. Quintyne. All aboue rehearsed can be defended, and salbe
defended (Godwilling),I did no¦thing but as my lord commā∣ded and quhair ʒe are glaid to knaw, quhat ʒe sould impung, apperanlie that sould be na newinges to ʒow, for I certifie ʒow ʒe sould impung my warrād alledged for defence of my diffinition and artickle. Iohn Knox. If be your warrand,Haue at your gro¦und. ye vnderstand the obla∣tion made in bread and wine by Melchisedec, I plainly deny, that Melchisedec made any oblati∣on or Sacrifice, of bread and wine vnto God, and desires the text to be iudge. M. Quintyne. It is ʒour pairt to impung, and myne to de∣fend, for I am the defender, and salbe Godwil∣ling. Iohn Knox. Can I impung more plane, then when I de∣nie your ground? M. Quintyne. I say the denying of the ground is na proper impugnation. Iohn Knox. Your lordships ground is, that Melchisedec is the figure of Christe, in that,Let men iudge now if my lords ground for the messe be not sha∣ken. that he did offer vnto God bread and wine, and therefore yt it be∣houed Iesus Christe to offer in his latter supper his bodie and blood, vnder the formes of bread and wine. I answer to your ground, yet againe, that Melchisedec offered neither bread nor wine vnto God. And therefore it, that ye wold there∣upon conclude hath no assurance of your groūd. M. Quintyne.
Preue that. Iohn Knox. Whether that the probatiō of a negatiue, should be deuolued vpon me, especially when I haue denied your chief ground, I am content the le∣arned iudge. M. Quintyne. Moued throuch feruor of the tryall of ye treuth of Goddes worde, I refuse logik captious ca∣uillationis for the present (not perchance for ig∣norance) bot yt we tyne not tyme,Gather what is spoken. to finnish and establis our godlie pretence for the ease and qui∣etnes of the conscience of the noble men heir pre∣sent. Iohn Knox. I haue els protested, that I abhor all cauilla∣tiones, and yet againe declares vnto your lord∣ship, that in my iudgement it is the way moste succinct, yt your lordship proue your own groūd, that is, that Melchisedec, offered vnto God bre∣ad and wine, which I denie. M. Quintyne. I tak the text to be my warrand and ground. Iohn Knox. The text being red, the 14. of Genesis. There is no mentiō made of any oblation of bread and wine, made by Melchisedec vnto God, but one∣lie yt Melchisedec being King of Salem,Gen. 14. broght forth bread and wine. And that being Priest of the moste hie God, he blessed Abraham as the text beareth witnes. And therefore I say that the text, preueth not that any oblation of bread
and wine, was made vnto God by Melchisedec. M. Quintyne. Ʒe do affirm that Melchisedec brocht furth bread and wine. I speir at ʒow to what effect?Iudge now if my lord shiftes. Iohn Knox. Will ye deuolue vpon me now, the persone of an answerer, seing that ye refused your self of before the same? M. Quintyne. This quhilk he calles answering, is mair {pro}∣perlie to be called impungnation in this cace,Marck what is confessed by my lord. in that, finding the text to serue nothing for my pur∣pose, is plaine impungnation to my pretence. And swa are ʒe cled rather with the personage of ane impungnar, nor ane defendar. Iohn Knox. Whether that I susteane the personage of an impungner, or of an defender, I am not bound to answer, what wes done with the bread and wine, after that it was broght forth. It suffiseth to me for my formar purpose, that there is no mention made in the text, that bread and wine by Melchisedec was offered vnto God. M. Quintyne. It ryndes to ʒow to preif,Let the learned Iudge if this be trew. that Melchisedec made no oblation of bread and wine vnto God. Iohn Knox. It suffiseth to me, that in the text there is no mention made that Melchisedec, made any ob∣lation of bread and wine vnto God, as ye before alledged, and hath laide for your ground. M. Quintyne.
I say the wordes of the text ar plain that Mel∣chisedec maid oblation of bread and wine vnto God,Note if so be. and desires ʒow to impreue the same be the text. Iohn Knox. My inprobation is alreadie ledd. For in the text there is no mētion of oblation of bread and wine made vnto God. And therefore I am con∣tent, that the whole world iudge, whether the ground be not sufficientlie inprouen or not. M. Quintyne. Melchisedec brocht furth bread and wine, quhilk he did not without cause, and ʒe deny yat he brocht it furth,Cōsider in what straitnes my lord was now, for the cause, that I alledge, ergo, for some other cause. Quhilk gif ʒe wil not, nor can not shaw presentlie, I sall do deligence to cause the present auditor vnderstand cleirly, that he brocht furth bread and wine for the cause alledged be me. Prouiding that gif ʒe will not shaw the cause presently, that ʒe sal haue no pla∣ce to shaw it heirefter. Iohn Knox. I answer, that he broght forth bread & wine, the text plainly affirmeth, and I haue alreadie granted. But that he made oblatiō of the same, because the text {per}porteth it not, I can not grāt it. As touching the cause wherefore he broght it for∣th (if place shal be giuen to coniectors, and that not groūded without great probabilitie, and also with sufrage of some of the ancients, to wit, Io∣sephus & Chrysostom.) It may be said that Mel∣chisedec being an King, broght forth bread and
wine, to refresh Abraham and his werie souldi∣ors. And this, for your satisfaction of the cause, why he broght forth bread and wine: euer still sticking vpon the principal groūd. That because no mention is made, that Melchisedec made ob∣lation of bread and wine vnto God, I deny it, as of before. The pennult of September. 1562. M. Quintyne. Of Iohn Knox saying is aboue reheirsed, I con∣ceaue twa heides in special, the ane is,This was the beginni∣ng of the second dayes trauell after that my lord had slea∣ped. that Mel∣chisedec maid na oblation vnto God, dot he did bring furth the bread and wine, to refresh Abra∣ham and his companie. I will answer vnto the saides heides formally, and on this maner. First I wil mak impugnatiō vnto ye last heid quhair it is thocht that he did refresh Abraham and his companie. In that the text is manifest in ye con∣trar, in sa far as the text testifies, that Abraham and his company war refreshed be the spolʒe of the enimies, and was not refreshed,Let my Lordes argumēt be noted nor mistered na refreshing of Melchisedec, quhairfore it is ma∣nifest that Melchisedec brocht furth bread and wine vnto ane vther effect, nor to refresh Abra∣ham and his companie. Iohn Knox. My formar proue, that Melchisedec, did not offer bread and wine vnto God, standeth vpon this ground, that the text maketh mention of no maner oblation made there vnto God of bread and wine. And therefore in a mater of so great importance, darre not I affirme oblation to be
made, whill that the holy Ghost kepeth silence. And now vnto my Lordes argument,Answer to the formar argumēt first, I answer, that there is no contradiction betuix these two, Abraham and his company, were re∣freshed of the spoolies of there enimies: and A∣braham and his company were refreshed of the liberalitie of Melchisedec. And first, because in the tyme when Abraham and his company re∣ceaued there nourishement of the substance of there enimies, they were out of the presence of Melchisedec: and not returned vnto there coū∣trie. But albeit that they had bene euen in the presence of Melchisedec, yet they might haue bene nourished, partlie be his liberalitie, and partlie be there owne prouision. And thridly be∣cause the text doeth not affirme that Abraham and his, wer nourished onely of the spoile. I can not admit my Lordes argument. M. Quintyne. For satisfaction of the auditoure, and to cum quicklie to the point without drifting of tyme I will refuse reasoning, after scoolmaner, and will go ʒit to the text, and depend thairupon. And on this maner sayaud (Saif onely that, quhilk the ʒong men hes eatin) I inferr of this text, that it dois appeir, ʒe and is manifest, that thair rema∣ned mair nor was eitin, be Abraham and his company, for the present. Iohn Knox. I do not deny, but there remaned substance, which wes neither eatin nor consumed by Abra∣ham and his company, but what shalbe hereof
concluded? M. Quintyne. I infer yat not onely thair remaned substance, bot thair remaned mekle mair substance, nor A∣braham and his company was able to consume, ʒea, and to gif ane great deale away, for quhy, Abraham was victor of foure Kingis, quhair∣throuch he obtened ane great spolʒe, & not onely of foure, bot also he gat the spolʒe of vther fyue, and gat all thair viuers and meat, quhairthrouch it is manifest be ye verray plaine text that Abra∣ham and his company, had mekle mair meat nor they war able to consume, and swa mistered he nor his company na refresching of Melchisedec, considering he and his company was bot ane meine nomber (as I wold say) thre hundreth & auchtene. Iohn Knox. The victorie of Abraham is in the text speci∣fied, as also the nomber of the Kinges vainque∣shed. And that there remaned substance, yea, me∣kle more then was spent; I do not deny. But this wil not necessarlie conclude, but that Mel∣chisedec of his liberalitie broght forth bread and wine, to the purpose forsaid: as be coniecture, is moste probable. For men of godlines and ciuill honestie, do not onely shaw them selues, liberal in tyme of extreme necessitie, but also wil declair there beneuolence without great neid, yea, and in greatest aboundance. M. Quintyne. Because Iohn Knox speakis of substance in∣differentlie,
I will desire him to declair his opi∣nion, conforme to the text, quhither Abraham and his company, recouered of the nyne Kingis spolʒeis bread and wine, and vther sustenance, quhilk treulie, albeit the text do not proport the same in plaine wordes, ʒit can na man of iudge∣ment think vtherwise, as I can gif many hun∣dreth examples in the Scriptures, and ane in speciall, quhair Iesus Christ our Lorde speakis in his awin prayer, called the Pater noster, of day∣lie bread, quhairinto is to be vnderstand all re∣quired vnto the sustentation of man, albeit the text dois not expresly declair the samin. Iohn Knox. I haue spoken of substance in generall, so in∣structed by the plaine text, which maketh men∣tion neither of bread nor wine, in expressed wor∣des, other nor of that which Melchisedec broght forth. And by all apperance, there could not any great store, of bread and wine be caried back a∣gaine, by Abraham and his company, after the victorie of his enimies. For plaine it is, that he broght nothing back, which they before did not carie away (him self and his company onely ex∣cepted) we read that they toke the pray of So∣dom and Gomorra, and caried with them the substance,Let this cōiectur serue for answer to my lords ar∣gumemt yea, & the victual, Loth, his substāce. &c. Now albeit that in the beginning there vic∣tualles had bene great, yet being suche a compa∣ny as we may iustlie suppose them to haue bene: and also being arriued within there own costes, it is not appearīg that great store wes reserued.
But howsoeuer it be, this mater standing in cō∣iecture, we wil of necessitie conclud no thing, se∣ing that the holie Ghost hath not expressed it. As touching my Lordes allegation, of the daylie bread. &c. I acknowledge with his lordschip that to be the familiar phrase of the Scripture, that vnder the name of bread, is commonly ta∣ken all thinges necessar for the vse of mānes bo∣die, like as these, Frange efurienti panem tuum. &c. M. Quintyne. Hauand consideration, that Iohn Knox, wald cast in ane suspicion in the hartes of the honora∣ble auditor (saifand his pardone) be continual repeticion of this word coniecture, we wil do as God will giue vs grace, to tak this policie out of the hartes of the auditor, and that by proper discription of argumentes of inferrence or con∣iecture, quhairfore the auditor sall consider, that thair is sum conietures and argumentes of in∣ferrēce quhilk necessarlie concludes and follow∣es vpon.Let the learned consider this pro∣per dis∣cription of coniec¦tural ar∣gumēts whiche do neces∣sarly cō∣clude. And arcalled nottheles argumentes of coniecture or inferrence, because the ane worde is not the other, nor dois not expresly conclud the other, as for ane familiar example, Spirat, ergo viuit, as I wald say, he aindes ergo he liues. Quhairfore I infer that this conference of phra∣se, or maner of speach quhair it is said in the text, al thair victuallis, necessarly inferris breid wine, and all vther thingis expedient to be eatin, cōsi∣dering thair was great aboundance in the cite∣is quhilk war spolʒeit as do this phrase, break vnto the hungrie thy bread, and swa quhatsum∣euer
may be inferred of the ane phrase, necessar∣lie may be inferred of the vther. Iohn Knox. Hitherto I haue trauelled, to make difference betuix that, that man of necessitie is boūd to be∣leue, and that which man may either beleue, or not beleue, without any hurt of conscience. What God in expressed wordes and sentences, hath committed to vs within the Scriptures & cōmanded the same to be beleued, he requireth of vs that necessarlie we beleue the same. But where the spirit of God hath keped silence, and hath not in plaine sentences, declared vnto vs the will of God our Father, there may a man suspend his iudgement, without hurt of consci∣ence, yea, and more sure it is, not bouldlie to af∣firme, that which is keped close, by the wisdome of God: then that we should rashelie affirme any thing, without the warrand of Gods worde as we are taught by the admonition of Augustine. As touching ye diuersitie of arguments. I know bothe the strength of them, that are called Neces∣sario Concludentia, and of those whiche stand in probabilitie,The groūd of fayth is the word of God reuealed which bothe I grant to haue the strength in persuasion: but the faith of man re∣quireth a surer ground, then any argument that can be deduced from nature (to wit) it requireth hearing, and that hearing of the worde of God, according to the doctrine of the Apostle. Now to my Lordes argument, I say it doeth not ne∣cessarlie conclude, that Abraham and his souldi∣ors broght more reddie meat, suche as bread and
wine back from there victorie, then they were able to spend, albeit that they caried with them the whole substance, yea,That is the Kin∣gs vicust by Abra¦ham the whole victualles of Sodom and Gomorra. &c. Because that in the iorney some might haue bene lossed, in the iorney no dout but muche wes spent, and in the victorie the rest might haue bene dispersed or lost. For by all apperance Abraham had smal respect to bread & wine,Let the reader aduert. more then to that which might reasonablie susteane him and his company vnto there returne. And thus from coniecture we shal cōtinually pas to cōiecture, onles that my Lord be able to proue, that the text affirmeth in plane wordes, that suche superflouous aboundance of bread and wine wes broght back, vnto the time that Melchisedec met him (& althogh his Lor∣dship be able so to do as I am assured no man is able) yet shal alwayes Melchisedec and his libiralitie stand still vnconuicted. M. Quintyne. To meit all the heides cōtened in Iohn Knox, partickle aboue rehearsed, notwithstandinge appearanlie I am constrained to the same. Ʒit alwayes in fauoris of the auditure,Let the indiffir¦ēt iudge I will go schortlie to sum speciall heides. And first quhair he makes ane meine, that I go by naturall res∣sonis to persuade, to take the suspicion of men iustly of me in this heid, I say and do affirme, yt I haue done not in that cause as ʒit, bot cōforme to the Scriptures althrouch. And quhair Iohn Knox speakis in general of meat, our contention was for bread and wine, quhilk I inferred ne∣cessarlie of the text. And desires him to giue me
ane resson schortlie, grounded vpon the Scrip∣ture, quhairfore the phrase alledged be me con∣cerning the meat sal not include bread and wine asweil as his phrase concerning the bread, be his opinion, without expres Scripture sall include all kinde of vther meatis. Iohn Knox. I purge me first, that I neither burden my Lorde, with informalitie, neither yet, that his lordship, trauelleth by naturall reason onelie, to persuade to man. But because the whole state of the cause (as I vnderstand) standeth in this, whether that Abraham and his souldiors broght back againe, superfluitie of bread & wine or not, I haue desired the same to be prouen by the expres¦sed worde. The phrase is not mine onely, but I did aggre with my Lorde,Let all men iu∣dge if this rea∣son be not fuf∣ficient. bringing in the same first. And now why I think that Abraham, and his, broght no superfluitie of bread and wine back againe? the reason is, because the text do∣eth plainlie affirme, that victualles, besydes the other substance, wes caried away by the enimi∣es. But that any victualles, besydes the substāce were broght back againe, there is no specifica∣tion. M. Quintyne. Because I perceaue Iohn Knox, dois not meit the heid of my partickle quhair I do mark the conferrence, betuix the phrases of the Scrip∣tures alledged be vs baith: quhairin (efter my iudgement) consistes the marckis point of the purpose, I will trauell na further thairin, not∣withstanding
that I haue ground of ye Scrip∣ture abundantlie. And swa I wil go to ane v∣ther heid, to assure the reader that Melchisedec brocht not furth bread & wine, to refresch Abra∣ham and his company, I wil ground me proper∣lie vpon the text, and on this maner. The text sayis, Protulit or proferens, quhilk is in the singu∣lar nomber as, ane, person bringand furth bread and wine, quhairfore necessarlie it concludes he brocht not furth bread and wine to refresch ane multitude, as Abraham and his company was, quhllk was not possible to ane person to do: but onelie to mak Sacrifice conforme to my begin∣ning. Iohn Knox. What I haue answered, the beneuolent rea∣der shall after iudge, to the present coniecture of my Lorde, I answer that if Melchisedec allone without al cōpany had broght onely furth so mu∣che bread & wine, as he wes able goodly to carie, yet shal it not be necessarlie concluded that there∣fore he broght it not forth to gratifie Abraham, for an small portion may oftentymes be thank∣full to many, but my Lorde appeareth to shoote at that ground, whiche I haue not laid for my principal. And therefore albeit his lordship shuld win it, yet my formar strength were litle demi∣nished (in my iudgement) for onles his lordship, be able to proue by the {per}taine wordes of the text that the bread and wine wer broght forth to be offered vnto God, my principall ground doeth alwayes abyde. But ye phrase of the Scripture,
and als the ordinarie manere of speaking, do∣eth often tymes attribute to the principall man, that which at his cōmandement, or wil is done, by his seruandes or subiectes, whereof I offer my self, to shaw in Scriptures, mo testimonies then one, with tyme. And yet this is not my chief ground, but this I speak for explaning of the text. M. Quintyne. Of the formar pertickle I mark twa heides in speciall, quhilk dois not onely giue apperance for my pretence, bot plainlie dois conuict, as the godlie and ineffectionat reader may cleirly per∣ceaue. The first heid is, quhair Iohn Knox dois allege that Melchisedec brocht furth bread and wine,Cōsider what shi¦fts my lord sou∣ght. to refresch Abraham and his werie com∣panie, quhilk plainly differis fra his speaking present, say and that it was to gratifie Abraham and his company, quhairinto thair is sic mani∣fest diffirence as it giues plaine persuasion, his ground in this heid to be nochtis. Secondly, it is against the ordur of nature, to think that ony ane man (lat be ane King and ane Preist) sould bring furth that might gratifie, lat be to refresch sic ane multitude as, thre hundreth and auch∣tene werie personis. Iohn Knox. What my Lordes iudgement doeth moue in the harts of the auditure, I remitt to there own iudgement, but I plainly affirme: that neither in my worde, nor in my dytment is, there any such repugnance or diffirence, as iustlie may conuict
me to haue an euil ground. For in my formar sayinges, my wordes were, that by probable coniecture, the bread & wine were broght forth by Melchisedec, to refresh Abraham and his we∣rie company. I did not affirme,Note that he and his whole cōpanie were thereof wholylie refreshed. And in my latter wordes, I say, that albeit there had bene no more bread and wine, then Melchi∣sedec onely broght forth, yet doeth it not thereof necessarlie conclude, yt the same were not broght forth, to gratifie Abraham. In which maner of speach, this terme gratifie, doeth nether repung, nor yet differ, from the terme refresh, otherwise, commonlie doeth in maner of speach Benus and Species, that is to say, the more generall, and the inferior. For in sofar as Abraham and his com∣pany were refreshed by the bread & wine (were it neuer so litle) in sofar doeth he bring it forth, to gratifie him. Protesting plainly, that vnwil∣linglie I am compelled thus to answer. And thus endeth the second dayes trauell, all whole spent to answer my Lordes shifting. Whereto he wes moued, because he wes not a∣ble to proue that Melchisedec offered bread and wine vnto God, as willinglie ones he tooke to proue. M. Quintyne. As dois Iohn Knox, sa do I with all my hart, remit me to the iudgemente of the auditor, in this heid: and will not report the heides, of his formar pertickle for auoiding of prolixtnes. But now will I conclude with ane argument.
And thus beginnes M. Quintyne the thrid day, hauing this argument written in paper which he caused to be red. M. Quintyne. Quhatsūeuer opinion is conceaued of the Scip∣tures of almichtie God, hauand na expres testi∣monie nor apperance of the same, is alluterlie to be refused (as sayis Iohn Knox him self). Bot swa it is, that Iohn Knox a win opinion, conce∣aued or contracted of the Scripture, cōcerning the bringing forth of bread and wine, by Melchi∣sedec, to refresche or gratifie Abraham and his werie company, is not expresly contened in the Scripture, nor hes na apperance of the samin: therefore it followis weill, that it is alluterlie be his awin iudgement to be refused. Moued on godlie zeill (honorable auditor) that in this dangerous tyme, the treuth sould cum to tryall, in sic maner, as the conscience of sic, as ar perturbed (safar as lies in oure sober possibilitie) sould be establesed, and at quietnes: we set furth certane artickles (as plesed God to gif vs grace) vnto the quhilkis, Iohn Knox tuik on hand to mak impungnation: specially to the artickle concerning the messe. Day houre & place beand appointed and obserued, I come to defēd my artickles, and in speciall my artickle concer∣ning the messe.Let the blindest amongs the Pa∣pistes iudge. And according to the samin, tuik me properlie to my warrand, grounded vpone Goddes word: vnto the quhilk warrand, Iohn Knox, as ʒit hes maid na impungnation, bot de∣syred me to sustene and defend the name, the ac∣tor, the ceremonies, the opinion of men cōceaued
of the messe, and gif it wes ane Sacrifice Propi∣ciatorie. I beand willed, that we schortlie sould go to the ground, and effect, and substance of the purpose quhairfore we come, I stude be my artickle and warrand, as they ar written: not refusand to defend, the heides aboue reheirsed, as tyme and place sould serue. And notwithstā∣ding that I was sufficientlie grounded vpon Gods worde, quhilk I tuik to be my warrand,Note that my Lorde confesses that he wes per∣sewer & that he hes hurt his own cause. and tuik lykewise vpon me, farr aboue my ha∣bilitie, the place and personage of ane defender: nottheles throuch occasion that serued (as work will beir witnes) I was cōstrained to tak vpon me the personage of ane persewer, farre by my appetit, ʒea, and the weill of my cause: and als by the opinion of all sic as wald the weill of the samin, moued on godlie zeill (as God be iudge) that the trueth sould cum to a tryal,Sed sero sapiunt Poriges. to the plea∣sure of God, and satisfaction of the honorable auditor, I beand cled with the personage of ane impungnar, expres contrar to my mynd, for sic causes as ar abone reheirsed, I maid impūg∣nation, not be manlie imaginationis, bot be the manifest worde of God. And that thre maner of wayes,Let your freinds yet iudge first to tak away Iohn Knox conceaued opinion, that Melchisedec brocht furth bread & wine, to refresche or gratifie Abraham and his werie company, I called to remembrance, how that the spulʒeis of nyne Kingis, and of certain citeis to, was recouered be Abraham, quhairthr∣ouch, he and his company, was sufficientlie re∣fresched, and had yneuch to be refresched on, swa
that they mistered not to be refreshed with breid and wine of Melchisedec. Secondlie quhair Io. Knox maid question, that they had not bread & wine. I returned againe to the text, to werifie the samin. Quhilk sayes, and all thingis, perte∣nand vnto meat. Inferrand that in this phrase, was contened bread and wine, conforme to the phrase of the Scripture, quhair mention is maid onelie of bread, contenand all thingis necessar for mānis sustentacion, he find and this not suffi∣cient satisfaction. Ʒit ʒeid I not to mānis imagi¦nation, bot to the plaine text, and grounded me vpon the wordes of the text sayand. Melchi∣sedec brocht furth bread and wine. Inferrand, in that it was spokē in the thrid person singular,How shal that be pro∣uen. it was against the ordoure of nature, to think that ane mā, sould bring furth (especially he that was ane King and ane preist) to tak that paines to bring furth bread and wine, that micht grati∣fie (lat be to refresch) thre hūdreth and auchtene men. Seand that inuinsible persuations, proper∣lie gathered vpon the text,But did nor does not so appeir to others. could na wise bring Iohn Knox, to confesse that thing quhilk appe∣red vnto me conforme to the Scriptures of al∣michtie God, and all gude resson he sould haue confessed. Then concluded I with the Scrip∣tures,Nor yet will do to hurt a iust cause as I did begin, as my conclusion wil beir witnes, that he wald haue iustified his opinion conceiued of the Scripture, cōform to his awin sayingis, be the expres word of God. And of my liberalitie wil grant him ʒit, gif he hes any ma∣ner of apperance of the samin, notwithstanding he said to me, he wald not gif me ane hair of his
heid, gif I sould stand thir seuen ʒeires. Iohn Knox. Protesting first, that I may answer, in writ, vnto the formar argument (because as I per∣ceiue it wes before conceiued in writ) I enter in shortlie vnto the long discourse, made by my Lorde: not willing to answer euerie part there∣of, but onely so muche, as may appear to infirme the iust cause. And first, where that my Lorde affirmeth, that I haue made no impungnation vnto his lordships artickle concerning the masse, I am content, that not onelie this honorable au∣dience, but also the whole earth be iudge, in that point. For I haue plainly denied,Note, that ether the masse, hath approbation of the plaine worde of God, ether in name, action, opinion (to witt written of the masse, taucht of the masse, and in the conscience of men, conceiued of the masse) & finally that the actor therof, for his vsurped power, hath no greater assurance of Gods wor∣de. Which whole heades being denyed to be dis∣puted, at the present, against my Lordrs artickle and ground, I did thus reason: that his lorde∣ship wes not able to proue that Christ Iesus, in his latter Supper did offer his bodie and blood vnto God his Father, vnder the formes of bread and wine. His lordeship taking for his proue, the alledged Sacrifice of Melchisedec in bread and wine, offered vnto God. I did lykewise deny, that Melchisedec did at that tyme (to wit in the presence of Abraham) offer ether bread or wine vnto God, which hath bene these two dayes by∣past
in controuersie betuix his lordeship and me. I haue alwayes denied, that the holy Spirit, in any notable or euident place of Scripture do∣eth affirme suche an sacrifice to haue bene made by Melchisedec vnto God: & whil ye I did hear no place of Scripture adduced, for the approbati¦on thereof, my Lorde demandand of me, what then I thoght wes done with the bread & wine, I answered, that albeit, I wes not bound to giue my iudgement, because that he wes bound to proue his affirmatiue (as yet I say he is boūd) and thereof I wilbe content,Consid∣der what iudges I admit that his lordshipes moste fauorable freindes, of best iudgemēt, yea, euen if his Lordeship please, the Lordes of the Session, be iudges in that point. I answered, I say, that be coniecture, the bread and wine were broght furth by Melchisedec, to refreshe Abra∣ham, and his werie company. Vpon which oc∣casion, his lordship (how iustlie let all mē iudge) did cleith him self againe,Contrar the obiec¦tiō made of impos¦sibilitie & that it was aga¦inst na∣ture that Melchi∣sedec al∣lone sho∣uld brīg forth bre¦ad. &c. without my procure∣ment, with the personage of ane impungnar. And did adduce suche thinges, as best pleased his lordship, whereto I did answer, as ye whole conference will report, and as I suppose, suffi∣cientlie to euerie thing obiected, except that be∣cause my Lord did not touche the exposition al∣ledgede by me, vpon the wordes, Melchisedec allone did bring forth bread and wine (as my Lorde alledgeth) I differed to bring in the con∣ference of Scriptures, to proue that it is an thing in Scripture verrie commone, that the thing, that is done at the cōmand of any notable
persone, is attributed vnto him self, althogh it be done, be seruandes or subiectes at his com∣mand, which I do now shortlie. It is said in Scripture, that Noie did all that God cōman∣ded him: and plaine it is, that God cōmanded him to make the Arck,Gen. 6.7. which wes ī building the full space of a hundreth yeares. God further cō∣manded him to furnish the Arck with all kynde of victualles, which the text affirmeth, that he did. Now if we shal conclude, that Noie allone cutted euerie tree, Noie allone did hew euerie tree, and so forth: it appeareth to me that we shal conclude a great absurditie. The same is euidēt in Dauid, of whome mention is made, that he being Prophet and King,2 Sam.  deuided to the whole people, yea, vnto the whole multitude of Israel, yea, bothe to men and women, an portion of bread, an portion of flesh, and an portion of wine. If we shall think, that Dauid did this with his own hand, we shall conclude in my appea∣rance, ye formar absurditie. The same is manifest by many other phrases, yea, and by our daylie maner of speaking. And therefore yet as of before. I think my Lordes exposition coact, in that he will admit none to haue broght forth the bread and wine, but Melchisedec allone. But howso∣euer it be, it moueth me nothing, for vnto suche tyme, as that my Lorde, in plaine wordes pro∣nounced by the holy Goste, proue that Melchi∣sedec, did offer vnto God bread and wine: he hath prouen nothing of that, which he took on hand to proue. And therefore I greatlie feare,
that whill that,The best ground, culd find no grou∣nd with∣in the word of God. which his lordeship calleth the best, is so long in finding an sure ground within the Scripture, that the rest in the end, be found altogether groundles, at the least within ye boke of God. And therefore I desyre, as of before, to hear his lordshipes probation of the principal. M. Quintyne. I am sorie that we ar contrined on this ma∣ner, to driue tyme, ather parteis in iustification of his a win cause: bot wisses quicklie to go to the markis point, as I haue euer done, conforme to my artickle and to my warrand: and makis the haile warld to iudge, quhither it is my deutie, efter formall ressoning, to defend the saides ar∣tickles, or to proue, or to impung. Quhair Iohn Knox makis ane meine, that I haue brocht my argumēts or purposes in writ: quhat I haue in worde or writ, or vtherwayes, I praise God. Bot the trueth is, according to my custome, I maid memorie, efter my repose, of sic heides, as I thocht, I was able to haue busines ado with all. And that I did be the grace of God onely, not that I am eschamed to be learned with ony man that wil teach me. And as to the conclusiō of his partickle, quhair he dois mak meine, yat I haue na groūd of the Scripture for the messe (as he beleuis) will God sall frustrat his expec∣tation in that,When ye perform promes let men beleue you. and all vthers. And assures him will God sall iustifie the messe als sufficientlie, conforme to my artickle, as he and all the rest of his opinion in christendome, salbe able to iustifie be expres Scripture, or ony vther meine, that
Iesus Christe is ane substance with the Father.Homonsi∣on siue cō∣substantia¦lis And that it be not thocht that thir ar wantone wordes, like as the mater sould not cum to pas, bot that I wald trifle the mater: I will desyre Iohn Knox maist humblie & hartlie, for Christes saike, lat vs go schortlie without trifling to the purpose, and lat wark beir witnes. And swa re∣quires, to resume my argument, and say thereto formalie as effeires. Iohn Knox. Because that euerie man muste giue accomp∣tes before God, not onely of his workes, but also of his wordes and thoghts. I will make no fur∣ther protestation, whether that I haue defended hitherto my own opinion, or a manifest treuth, or whether that I haue impungned any treuth of God, or a manifest lie (let this be said with reuerence of all persones, for the iustnes of the cause) leauing, I say, the iudgement to God: I say that I haue in plaine termes iustlie oppung∣ned bothe the groūdes, broght forth by my Lord, for defence of his artickle. For in plaine wordes, I haue denied, that Iesus Christe, into his lat∣ter Supper, did make any Sacrifice of his bo∣die and blood, vnder the formes of bread and wine, vnto God his Father. And lykewise I haue denyed, that Melchisedec did offer vnto God, bread and wine as of before. which groū∣des, because my Lorde hath not hitherto {pro}uen, I must hold them as impunged and oppūgned: euer whill, I hear the ground of Melchisedec, plainly prouen, by plaine Scripture (to wit)
that the plaine Scripture say, that Melchisedec offered vnto God bread and wine:Let my lord an∣swer when he pleases. or that it be of any plaine and euident Scripture, plainlie conuicted, that so he did. His lordship, oght not to think it strange, althogh I require to answer in writ, to that argument, which his Lordeship hath {pro}ponded, conceaued before, and cōmitted in writ, for such I take to be, the libertie of all fre dis¦putations. Whose lauboure it wes, or is, I no∣thing regard. For so long as God doeth minister vnto me, spirit & life, with iudgement and habili∣tie, I intend (by his grace) til oppūg, that which in my cōscience I hold to be damnable idolatrie. And where his lordship sayeth, that he is als a∣ble to affirme the masse (which I impung) to be the ordinance of God, as that I or any of my o∣pinion, is able to proue Iesus Christe to be one substance with the Father:Let the godlie iudge if the masse & Christ Iesus & his di∣uinitie oght to hing in one bal∣lance. with reuerēce of his lordshipes personage blood, and honor, and with the reuerence & pacience, of the whole auditor, I say, that the assercion is not onelie rashe, but also moste dangerous, yea, and in a part blasphe∣mous. For, for to compare the greatest mysterie, yea, the whole assurance of our redemptiō, with that, which as it hath bene vsed, hath no appro∣bation of Gods worde (for that I haue impūg∣ned, and intendes to impung) can not lack sus∣pition, of a lightlie esteaming of our redemptiō. And to cut the matter short, the formar question being decided (to wit whither that Melchisedec, did offer vnto God bread and wine) I offer my self, without further delay, to proue, that Iesus
Christe, is of one substance with the Father: and that by the euident testimonies of Gods Scrip∣tures. And therefore yet as of before, I humbly require his lordeship, to prepare him for his pro∣bation of the formar, to witt, of the oblation of Melchisedec. M. Quintyne. Quhair Iohn Knox dois affirme, that in plaine termis, he hes iustlie impunged, baith ye groūd∣es, brocht furth be me, for defēce of my artickles. I answer, I deny that he hes maid ony impūg∣nation. And quhair he sayes, that in plaine wor∣des, he hes denied, that Iesus Christe, into his latter Supper, did make ony Sacrifice of his bodie and blude, vnder the formes of bread and wine, vnto God his Father: or that Melchise∣dec did offer vnto God bread and wine,Your warrād is so weak that it neides no other impug∣nation, thē to say it is not as of be∣fore. I answer, that it is his deutie to mak im∣pugnation, to my assercion, conform to my war∣rand, for denying, is na proper nor sufficient im∣pugnation. And quhair he sayes, that because I haue not hidderto prouen the saides groūdis. &c. I answer, that it is my deutie to defend and not to preif, conform to my artickle, & my war∣rand. And quhair he desyres tyme to answer to my argument, {pro}poned this day in writ, I frely grant it vnto him. And quhair Iohn Knox sayes,Then ye ouersaw yourself. yat my assertiō is not onely rashe, bot also maist dangerous, ʒea, and in ane pairt, blasphemous. I answer, that quhair he sayes, I am to rashe: I wis his modestnes in this samin, sic as becū∣is ane sinceir christiane, like as he is reckned to
be.Blasphe¦mie is blasphe∣mie be∣fore that mā pro∣ue it. And quhair he callis my assertiō in ane pairt blasphemous: than had bene tyme to haue cal∣led it blasphemie, quhen he had prouen it in deid sufficientlie. And quhair he sayes, it is dange∣rous, thair is na danger, it be and vnderstand, as I say, and treulie meines. For I am mair nor assured, that Iesus Christ our Lord, is ane sub∣stance with the Father,Not as papistes haue v∣sed it. & als that Iesus Christ is the author and institutor of the messe. And swa dois not ane veritie, mak impugnation to ane vther. Bot in this maner of speaking, I wil plaine my industrie, giuen vnto me be the grace of God,Aduerr what ye speak. willing to contrafit the wisdome and prudence, of the wise and prudēt medicinar (for we are, and sould be of resson, medicinars to the saule) for lyke as the prudent medicinar, dois expell ane vennome or poysome, be contrapoy∣sone. Swa wald I expel the damnable herisies, of the Caluinistes,My lord wolde haue bur¦sen if this byle had not bro∣ken. Lutherians, and Accolam∣padians, against ye blissed Sacrifice of ye messe, be conference with the damnable herisies of the Arrians, quha did alledge ten testimonies of Scripture for ane, geuand mair appearance, to preif that Christ was not ane substance with the Father: nor dois the Caluinistes, Lutherians, and Aecolampadians, to preif that the messe, is idolatrie: as I fall sufficientlie iustifie, as may stand to the glorie of God, and weil of my cause. To the latter pairt, quhair he sayes, to cut the mater schort, the frnar question be and decided (to wit quhither that Melchisedec did offer breid and wine vnto God or not) he offeris him selfe
without farther delay, to proue yat Iesus Christ is ane substance with the Father. &c. I answer to the hinder pairt of this partickle. I wis of God, he and all vthers of his opinion mistered als lytle probation or persuasion, to the ane, as I do to the vther, as I wald say, to beleue the messe, to be the institution of Christ Iesus, as I do mair nor assuredlie beleue, Christe to be ane substance with the Father,That ar you ne∣uer able to do. and desyres na pro∣bation thereof: bot sall God will and preif ye ane be the Scripture als expres, as he sall preif ye vther. And quhair he humblie desyres me, to prepair me for the probatiō of the formar (to wit of the oblation of Melchisedec) I humblie and hartlie desyre Iohn Knox, as he will testifie his feruor, that the treuth cum to ane tryall, and as he will satisfie the expectation of the noble audi∣tor, that he will mak impugnation formallie ac∣cording to his deutie, to my last argument and conclusion. Iohn Knox. Where my Lord to vnburden him self of that, which by all reason, he oght to susteane, to wit, to proue his affirmatiue, by him self proponed,Your lordship took to proue your gr∣ound by the text, and that you haue not don. sayeth, that to deny, is not properlie to impung. I answer, that in that cace, it is moste proper. For he that {pro}poneth for him self an affirmatiue, and his aduersar denying the same, is euer still boūd to the probation thereof, and the aduersar hath euer still impungned it, vnto he proue it, and thereupon I desire iudgement. To the Se∣cond, I stil affirme that it is his lordships deutie,
to proue his affirmatiue, whereupō standeth the victorie of his whole cause: wc is be me in plaine wordes denyed. To the thrid, I thank his lord∣ship hartlie,And that he hes receaued and promises vnto him an answer, againe in writ, this present conference being put to an sufficient end. To the fourt. As my prote∣station will witnes, I speak against the asserciō onelie and not against the persone: whiche yet (in my iudgement) lacketh not suspicion of the formar crimes. For howsoeuer my Lord be per∣suaded of the ground and assurance of the messe (the assurance whereof I haue not yet hard) I my self am fully assured, that there be mo then ten thousand, which euidentlie do knowe, the vanitie and impietie of that masse, which I haue impungned: who nottheles, moste constantlie beleue Iesus Christe, to be of one substance with the Father: yea, that do beleue, whatsoeuer by the Scriptures of God, can be prouen necessa∣rie, for ye saluation of man. Therefore yet againe, I say, that to lay in any maner of equalitie, that which is moste sure, and that which was neuer yet plainlie prouen by the Scriptures of God, to be the institution of Iesus Christ: is more sub∣iect to the crymes foresaid, then that I can be subiect to any suspicion of immodestie for my for∣mar wordes. To the blasphemie, I answer, as before. Immediatlie to the sext. How that euer my Lord vnderstandeth and meaneth, that his lordship is als able, to proue the masse to be the institutiō of Iesus Christ, as I am able to proue Christ, to be one substance with the Father: I
think that an great nomber will think my lords affirmation, verrie hard to be prouen. And I my self will still continually dout, vnto the tyme, I hear the probation led. To the seuent, as touch∣ing my Lordes comparison of the mediciner, and of his lordships industrie. What the pastors of ye Church oght to be, the Scriptures plainly do teach vs: but what vniuersallie they haue bene these nyne hundreth yeares bypast, histories, ex∣perience, and recent memorie, hath taught vs, yea, and presentlie do teach vs: to the great greif of all Christianitie. Where that his lordship do∣eth in plaine termes, condempn the Caluinistes, Lutherians and Aecolampadians, of herisie: I wold haue required of his lordship delay of time, according to his desyre of me, vnto the tyme, that there cause had bene sufficiētlie tried, in an lawfull, vniuersal counsell, deulie indicted, and conuened. But where that he compareth, the doctrine of the forenamed, with the damnable heresie, of Arrius: I wold lykewise haue wished vnto his lordship greater foresight, in so graue a mater. For howsoeuer the Arrians appeared to aboūd in testimonies of Scriptures, without all ground, indistinctlie cōgested (and that because they made no diffreence betuix the two natures in Iesus Christe,Let my lorde ac∣cuse be∣fore he cōpai. but did foolishlie appropriat to the Godhead, that, which did onelie aperteane to the manlie nature) yet think I, that my lord shall neuer be able, by plaine Scripture, to im∣pung any chief head, ether affirmed, or denyed, in doctrine of saluatiō by the foresaides persons:
lyke as did the godly and learned in there ages, the foresaid damnable herisie. To the last, I haue alreadie promised to answer, to my Lordes ar∣gumēt in writ: and therefore oght not to be bur∣dened with it now, especiallie because it is with∣out our formar ground, and doeth not properlie aperteane to the cause. And yet therefore now last for conclusion, that we shal not be compelled continually to repeat on thing, I desyre my lord according to his deutie, and reason of disputati∣on,Heir my lord stay¦ed & for answer offerred to me a book. to bring forth his probation of his two for∣mar groundes, be me plainly denyed. This conference being ended, for this tyme, my Lorde presentlie did rise, for trouble of body, and then Iohn Knox, did shortlie resume, the principall groundes. And because the noblemen heir assembled, were altogether destitute of all {pro}uision, bothe for hors and man, the said Iohn, humblie required the foresaid Lord, that it wold please him to go to Air, where that better easi∣ment migh be had for all estates. Which because my Lord vtterlie refused, the said Iohn desired when that the said conference should be ended. My Lorde did promes, that vpon licence pur∣chased,Whither I haue so done or nor mo then them sel∣ues can witnes. of the Quenes maiestie, and her honora∣ble counsell, that he wold cōpeir in Edinburgh, and there, in there presence, finish the said confe∣rence. The said Iohn did promes, to trauel with the secret counsel, that the said licence might be obteined. And desired the foresaid Lorde, to do the lyke with the Quenes maiestie, whereupon the said Iohn Knox, took instruments and do∣cuments.
M. Quintyne. At the conclusion of our ressoning,The answer wes gi∣uen be∣fore, so that it apperte∣aned not to me to proue my inter¦pretatiō, but it ap∣pertened to my lord to proue that mel∣chisedec offerred &c. But that can not my lord vn∣derstand I gaif Iohn Knox ane argument in writ, desiring him that he wald iustifie his opinion be expres testi∣monie of Scripture, or ony apperance thereof. Quhairto the said Iohn required tyme to gif answer, and the tyme, micht nawise serue, of farder ressoning, for sic causes, as ar compre∣hended in the said Iohn Knox writing. And as toward his desyre of me to Air, treulie it was ye thing that I micht not presentlie, cōmodiously do. Bot alwayes, I will copeir before ye Que∣nes grace, and sic as hit grace, plesis to take to be auditors, to defend the saides artickles, and in special the artickle concerning the messe, as thay ar written, quen and quhair it be hir grace plesure, swa that the habilitie of my bodie will serue ony wise as I hope to God it sall, to quhom be praise glorie and ho∣nor for euer. Crosraguell
The answer to my Lordes last argument, proponed by him in writ, the last day of disputation. The argument is this. M. Quintyne. WHatsumeuer opinion, is conceaued of the Scriptures of almichty God, hauand na expres testimonie nor ap∣perance of the samin: is vtterlie to be refused, as sayes Iohn Knox him self. Bot swa it is, that Iohn Knox a win opinion cōcea∣ued or contracted of the Scripture, concerning the bringing furth of bread and wine, be Mel∣chisedec, to refresh or gratifie, Abraham and his werie company, is not expresly conteined in the Scripture, nor hes na apperance of the samin, thairfore it fal wis wei, that it is allterlie be his awin iudgement to be refused. Iohn Knox. Yf I should grant vnto you, my Lorde your whole argument, I should but declare my self ignorant of the art, and lyndful of my owne affirmation: but yet had ye prouen nothing of your intent. The chief question, and controuer∣sie betuix you and me, is not whether that my interpretation of that place which  your in∣stance and  not: but whether that Melchisedec the figure of Christe, did offer vnto God bread & wine, whiche ye haue affirmed, and haue laid it to be the ground and cause, why it behoued Christe Iesus, to haue made
oblation of his bodie and blood, vnder the form∣es of bread and wine, in his latter Supper. Which bothe I denyed. So that it rests to you to proue, that Melchisedec the figure of Christ, did offer vnto God bread and wine. &c. And ap∣perteines not vnto me, to proue my opinion, nor interpretation. For supposing that my opinion, cōceaued of that place were to be reiected (as ye are neuer able to proue it to e) yet is your af∣firmatiue, neuer the better prouen, for if ye will conclude: it wes not broght forth to refresh A∣braham (which yet is not prouen) ergo it wes broght forth to be offered vnto God: babes will mock you, and send you againe to your logick. But yet my Lord with your leaue I must come nerar you, and say, that the maior or first part of your argument is fals and that ye falsly alledge vpon me, that which I neuer spak nor ment. Read the whole conference betuix you and me, and ye shall not find that I haue simple affir∣med that all opinion of man, conceaued of the Scriptures, is vtterlie to be reiected: onles the same be prouen by the manifest worde of God. For I am not ignorant that some interpretatiōs ar tollerable, yea, and may be to the edification of the Church, althogh they do not fully expres, the minde of the holie Goste, in that place. But I haue affirmed, and yet affirmes, that nether the authoritie of the Church, the determination of the counsell, nor the opinion of the doctor, is to be receaued in matters of faith, & in the doc∣trine concerning our saluation: onles the same
be prouen by the expres word of God. And ther∣fore my Lord, with your leaue, I must say, that ether wilfully or els by some ouersight, ye haue omitted bothe in the maior & in the minor of your argument, that which should haue bene, ye cause and assurance of your conclusion. For thus ye oght to haue reasoned. Whatsoeuer opinion is conceaued of the Scripture of almightie God, concerning faith and the doctrine of Saluation, hauing no expres testimonie of the same, is to be reiected. But so it is, that Iohn Knox owne o∣pinion, concerning the bringing forth of bread and wine by Melchisedec, is a matter concer∣ning faith, and the doctrine of our Saluation, and yet hath no testimonie of Gods expressed worde: therefore it is to be reiected. Yf on this maner ye had reasoned, my Lord, (as of necessi∣tie ye must do, if ye conclude any thing against me) I wold haue immediatlie denied the second part of your argument, and haue said: that to know or define, what wes done with the bread and wine, broght out by Melchisedec, is no ar∣tickle of our beleue, nether yet is it a doctrine, necessarie to the Saluation of man. For nether did Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, Henoch, Ma∣thusalem, nor Noie, beleue any suche thing, ne∣ther yet is there since the dayes of Abraham, any cōmandement giuen by God, to beleue suche an artickle, yea, further in the whole Scriptures, there is no mention made what wes done with that bread and wine, and therefore it can be no artickle of our beleue, nor yet no doctrine con∣cerning
our Saluation, and so hath your argu∣ment broken the owne neck. Yf I list, my Lord to sport a lytill with you, I might find some oc∣casion in the second part of your argument. For where ye affirme that my opinion cōcerning the bringing forth of the bread and wine, by Mel∣chisedec, to refresh Abraham and his companie, is nether expresly conteined in the word of God, nether yet hath appearance of the same: and therefore vtterlie it is to be reiected. Now my Lorde giue me leaue, to turne this part of your argument in your owne bosome, if I can, and that so I may do, thus I reason. The opinion conceaued by my Lorde Abbote, concerning bread and wine, broght forth by Melchisedec to be offered vnto God, is not expresly conteined in Gods Scriptures, therefore it is vtterlie to be reiected. Bewarre my Lorde, that ye be not beaten with your own batton:Let my lord de∣gest this for then must the masse, yea, the best part of the same, stand vpon an vnsure ground, that is to say, vpon the opi∣nion of man, and hauing no assurance of Gods expressed worde. But now my Lorde, meryues set asyde, I humblie require you, by my pen, as I did by mouth, that depelie ye consider, with what cōscience before God, ye da affirme ye doc∣trine to be holsome, yea, & necessary to be beleued,
ye are able to bring no prufe out of the manifest word of God. The second day of our conference and disputation, when I wes cōstrained to an∣swer, your treuole cōiectures and vanities: your bragges and boste, ofter blowen out then ones, were, that your probation should be so euident, that the stones should heare your probation, and ye dead walles should se the iustnes of your cause. I paciently did abyde (althogh perchance with the greif of some brethren) these your wantone wordes, and thoght with my self Parturiunt mon∣tes. &c. But what is now produced and broght forth; the world may se. It may appeare that ye were hard beset, when for to auoide the prufe of your owne affirmatiue, ye fled to impugne, that which apperteaneth nothing to the purpose. For as I wes not bound to haue shewen vnto you what I thoght wes done with the bread and wine, broght forth by Melchisedec, so wes I not bound to haue defended, my interpretation and iudgement of that place: but vnto you it alway∣es aperteineth (and if euer we meit againe vpon that head, it wilbe yet iudged to aperteine to you) to proue that Melchisedec, did at that time offer bread and wine vnto God, which I am well assured, that ye are neuer able to do, by any testimonie of Gods worde.Note. And therefore must I say, the masse standeth groundles. And the greatest par thereof, for all his sicker riding hath ones loste his stirropes, yea, is altogether set besydes his sadil. And yet the common brute goeth, that ye my Lorde, your flatterers, and
collateralles brag greatlie of your victorie, ob∣teined in disputation against Iohn Knox, but I will not beleue you to be so vaine onles I shall knowe the certantie by your owen hand writ. Let all men now iudge vpon what ground the Sacrifice of the masse standeth. The hea∣uenly Father hath not planted within his Scriptures suche a doctrine. It followeth therefore that it oght to be rooted out of all god∣lie mēnes hartes. the end Imprinted at Edinburgh by Robert ekpreuk. Cum priuilegio. 1563.
