A3357A 51784356 174783
An ANSWER, To Dr. Jaques Vindication, AGAINST Master KIRKWOODS Defamation. WERE it not on the Consideration, that this most Invective, False, and lying Paper has gone through the hands of ma∣ny Hundreds of People, who, 'tis like, never once saw,  read the account given by Mr. Kirkwood of his Plea with the Kirk-ession, and Presbitry of Kelso, it might be thought altogether need∣ss to make any Answer thereto; For in effect, 'tis so far from being  Vindication of the alledged Defamation, that it is not only a down∣ght Confirmation, but a clear Commentary on, and an Enlarge∣ent of the whole affair. Know therefore, that all Mr. Kirkwood sayes, (Page: 38) upon is head is, that Mr. Jaque did let go one Mistress  Stone, an nglish Woman, who brought forth a child in his House, and that,  the common report went, to his own Son, without bringing her fore any Judicature, Ecclesiastical, or Civil. Now all this, and much more the Dr. confesses, giving, as he sayes Faithful and plain account of the whole affair; The summ where∣ is, that this Mrs. Stone, a rich Merchants Daughter in London, ing acquaint with on Vanderkistee a Dutch-man, is married to him thout her Parents Knowledge; Which thing she letting fall to the  and his Wife, who was her near Kins-woman, they contrary to  inclination, inform her Parents. After inquiry made by them out Vanderkistee's Circumstances, 'twas found he Cohabited with other Woman, who was reputed his Wife, and by whom he had eral Children then Living. Whereupon the Parents resolves to rsue for a Divorce. In the mean time the Dr. is advis'd by them  carry away their Daughter to his House in York-shire, which ac∣rdingly was done: tho very much against her inclination. And
besides it was also their desire (sayes the Dr.) that she should still go under the name of a Maid, in order to conceal the Marriage. After some abode in York-shire, he brings her and his Wife into Scot∣land to his Fathers House at Biggar; Where she liv'd about three Moneths, as a chaste Virgin, None all this time (except the Dr. and his Wife) knowing she was with Child, till the very Minute her pains of Child-Birth came upon her. The Dr. being at Lanerick, a∣bout 7 Miles distant, is alarm'd with the sudden news; For 'twas expected the Damsel had six weeks longer to go. Home he flees to his Fathers House, to Apologize for concealing the secreet so long: But his Father (he sayes) was so incens'd, both against him and Mrs. Stone, that he would neither hear, nor believe what they said; Tho she produc'd a Certificate from the Minister that Married her. Now further know, that the Drs. Wife died some days only before this fell out; So that immediately the report run through the Coun∣try, that the young Gentle-woman, whom all took to be a Virgin; had brought forth a Child to Mr. Jaques Son, and that not without strong Presumption, his Wife was hastened a little too, early off the stage of this Life. In the mean time Mr. Jaque fretted, and was ex∣ceeding Impatient, till he got the sick Woman turn'd out of Doors: She was no sooner able to stir about (sayes the Vind.) but he requir'd her to be gone. Now, Pray, tell, wherein Mr. Kirkwood faild in his Relation of this affair. Certainly, if in any thing, 'twas, that he comes short in telling all the Truth. Many things he omits, which might, and ought to be told: Others he qualifies and minces by representing them in milder terms, than the matter requires. Mr. Jaque (sayes he) Let that Woman go, &c. He requir'd her to be gone, sayes the Vind. This is a strange business, if sounded to the Bottom. The Dr. confesses he was extreamly faulty, and inconsiderate; Guilty of an Egregious Act of Imprudence and Folly. An Act! A wonderfull Act  An Act with so long a train, that no Eye under Heaven can reach its End. 'Tis a continued Series, or Concatenation of a Thousand Acts; And all these perfect lyes, In a word, 'tis a meer sham; a
down right Imposture. The beginning is told us; But where it was to end, GOD alone knows. It was hatch'd at London, From thence carried to York-shire, where it abode for sometime; Then came into Scotland, and settl'd at Biggar, in the worst place on Earth; In a place, where it was capable to do most Hurt. Me-thinks I see the Dr. with this young Virgin laughing very heartily together, while alone in a Chamber, considering how not∣ably they cheated all the World, and Especially the Honest, Old, Reverend Couple, the Father and Mother. And yet this laughter could not but end with great Anxiety of mind, how to carry when matters came to a Pinch. Pray, might one say, Think you the Dr. had a mind to unfold this se∣cret to his Parents, sometime before the Maids bringing forth the Child. It seems, No, for certainly the sooner the better. And, since he did it not any time of the six Weeks before his Wife fell sick; Nor in the eleven days of her sickness, nor after her Death; 'Tis highly probable he had no thought to do it at all. It would seem so indeed, but I must still ask what they resolv'd to do, when things came to extremity. He and she had six Weeks, you know, to advise about that; For according to her Reckoning, layes the Vind. she had so much longer to go. No question they had de∣termin'd already what to do. But I'm still in the mist; and therefore you'l excuse me; if I repeat my question by asking what course, or Method you think, they wou'd have taken, if GOD had not prevented their design. That's a Riddle, which I believe OEdipus himself could not unfold to you: But if I may give you my Conjecture, I'm apt to sancy, the Dr. had a mind to carry her to some secrect Corner, where she might be eas'd of her Burden. A Doctor you know, can in a strait, act the Mid-wife pretty well. But, Pray, tell me, what they would have done with the innocent little Babe. GOD knows: All, I can say, is, if it chanc'd to be dead Born, any little hole was sufficient to shut it in. It was but s curious Brat, begotten, as the Dr. conceives in Adultery, what matter where it lye. And if it hap∣pened to be Born alive, many means, you know, are us'd to convey such poor Animals out of the way. And what next think you, wou'd the Dr. have done. He might then with great freedom return back to his Fathers House with this young Lady, and there get her Married to some Person of Honour, or rather take her to himself? For no question her Father (as the Dr. sayes) being an Eminent and Opulent Merchant in London, wou'd
not stand to give with his only Daughter, a very considerable Portion, Es∣pecially to the Doctor, who had done him and her such Extraordinary  Service. This is duely Considered, will be found a business of a most horrid Nature:  by this means the Doctor, or any other Person, who should marry this Woman, wou'd live and dye guilty of Adultery: So that at least, he is  and Part, as we say, of that abominable iniquitie, he confesses in his ind. (we need not cite the Page, there being but 7 in all) that with much difficulty he got this Woman perswaded to forsake her Husband, and go with him to York shire. He forc'd her to Perjure her self; and to break that Tie, which God and Nature had made. He forc'd her by his Rhetorick. Curs'd is that Rhetorick, which perswadeth to do wickedness. For this he seems to make an Apology, saying, he had promis'd to her Parents to do so and so. Ah! He promis'd to do wickedness, and must he perform it? Surely the Doctor, who is also a Divine, having once enter'd into that Sacred Function, will teach no such Doctrine. Nor had the Pa∣rents such power over their Daughter, being now Married, as to force her to leave her Husband, and to go away with another man into a forraign Kingdom. He further Apologizes thus: It was found, sayes he, that Vanderkistee Cohabited with another Woman, who was reputed his Wife, and by whom he had se∣veral Children then Living; and therefore Mr. Stone resolv'd to pursue for a Divoree. Vanderkistee Cohabited with another Woman, &c. Pray, where, Doctor? In Holland, or London? You are silent in this, as in many other very necessary Points. 'Tis more than Probable, 'twas not in London; For it can hardly be well suppol'd, that a man, especially one of so publick Imploy, as they say he is, Viz. a Mountebank, who Cohabites with a Woman, that's reputed his Wife, and by whom he has several Children living, will be so mad, as to marry another Woman in that same City, it being a Capital Crime so to do. 'Tis therefore more likely 'twas done in Holland his Native Country. The Doctor it seems has a great Veneration for common Fame tho at a good distance, even beyond Seas in a forraign Nation; and yet Condemns others fortaking notice of such matters done at their very door. He carries away a mans Wife against her will, because it wastalk'd that her Hus∣band had Cohabited with another Woman; as his Wife in a strange Na∣tion. He adds, that Mr. Stone resolv'd to use his outmost Efforts to get-a-Divorce for his Daughter. Pray, Doctor, has he yet got it? Yea, tell me, if he did ever Commence the Plea? 'Tis strange, if he resolv'd to use his out most
Efforts, as you speak, and yet to this hour, now after many years, has not so much as begun the work. It wou'd seem you have found out a much bet¦ter way, to separate man and Wife, than by a long and expensive Pursuit in Law. One thing here, Doctor is pretty astonishing, you will not surely deny, but the Wifes presence is absolutly necessary at the obtaining a Di∣vorce; And yet in the mean time that this is to be had, you carry her out of the way into another Kingdom. Doctor, Doctor; Your tale tells very ill. You'll have hard work to reconcile one thing with another. And be∣sides, by this your carriage, you shew your self to be above Law; For you will not wait, till matters be decided by a Judge, and that in a business, where∣in you are little, or nothing concern'd. A third Apology, is the Doctors acknowledging his Fault. He confesses that he was Extreamly faulty and inconsiderate in the matter; guilty of an Egregious Act of Imprudence and Folly in not making the thing known to his Parents before the Womans delivery. He adds, that be is so far from. Extenating his Crime, that he is willing to Agravate it against himself. May it nor seem very strange to see a man, who is guilty of several faults, some of less, some of more heinous a Nature, only troubl'd for a lesser fault, but not touch'd with the sense of the more horrid Crimes. There's too just ground to suspect the sincerity of such a mans Repentance, even for the lesser fault. This truely is the Doctors case. He seems sorrowfull for what he has done in this Affair Relating to his Parents, which is but a small fault, when compar'd with the great injury done Vanderkistre. Where's his sorrow for that? Not one Syllable here relating thereto. Hence the Doctors Repentance is but in part, and by far the more inconsiderable. And besides, we have too great reason to think, that even this sorrow the Doctor seems to have, is at best but forc'd; For, if Providence had not prevented him, he had run on; God knows, how far. There's one thing here following, which by far is the most astonishing of any in this whole Paper; And gives the greatest Offence to all, that hear the same. The Doctor, saves the Vind. has ever since suffer'd, as a punishment, his Fathers displeasure, and has been an Exile both from his Favour and presence. Now, think you it not a very strange thing, if the sons Crime be, as is here Repre∣sented and he so penitent for it, and most willing to fall down on his knees to beg his Fathers pardon; Is it not, we say, a very strange and Unnatural thing, that the Father, now after many Years will not suffer his son to come into his presence, and that tho much pains has been taken by several Persons, to Reconcile Father and Son; but all in vain. And certainly never any in the World had more, and stronger motives, pressing them to be reconcil'd, than Mr. Jaque has.
To pass that he is a Minister of the Gospel, and a man of no small Natural parts, and one well advanc'd in Years, being above 70 and not only very tend∣er and sickly; But is, and has been these 7 or 8 Moneths before the publishing of his sons paper, so exceedingly opprest with several painfull Diseases (Gout and Gravel, &c.) that many alledge he can hardly well recover. To pass, we say these verie weightie Motives to induce the Father to be reconciled with his son, further know, that he is his only Child alive, and being a Professor of Medicine is thereby in a Capacity to be very serviceable to him in his pre∣lent Circumstances. And is it not a cruel and Unnatural thing in a Father ab∣solutlie to refuse to admit his only Child into his presence; and especially now when he is very like to go off the stage of this World, and step into E∣ternity? Now, I say, when he ought to call for him; And give him his best advice, and his blessing before he die. What is this, but as't were to Curse his son in stead of Blessing him? Good Jacoh did not treat his Sons Reuben, Simeon and Levi after this manner; Tho the first was guilty of Incest, Gen: 35 22. The other two of many cruel Murders, 34.25. Yet this holy man did not banish these his Sons out of his Family, And at his Death blessed them, 40.28. There's one Consideration, which highly Aggravates Mr. Jaques (a riage, Viz. That his son goes frequently to his house (they both living in Kelso) but is never admitted into the same Room with his dying Father: For know that Mr. Jaque in time of his sickness being in an upper Chamber, and his Wife in one below, neither of them for several Moneths were able to go the one to the other; For she is no less infirm than he; So that the son has fre∣quent access to his Mother; But never suffer'd to go in to his Father. Another very pressing Motive is, That this unnatural carriage of the Father does much confirm the Report, that went of his Son at Biggar. The chief Reason, why he ought to be reconcil'd, is the great Scandal his Carriage gives to many thousands of People. And that which exceedingly aggravats this Point, is, That of late he preach'd near a whole Year twice a day upon that Verse of St. Luke 15.24. about the Prodigal. And does it not, think you, give ground of Of∣fence so palpably to teach others one thing, and practise the contrary himself. We must not here omit to do Mr. Jaque all the Justice that's due him, tho perhaps it will not a little empair his Son's Credit; Nor likely much advance his own Praise. In short therefore know, that,
when some Persons of good Note were discoursing with him about his severe Carriage towards his Son, he told them, 'twas not so much for that business, which fell out at Biggar, as for a matter of great∣er Consequence, which he would communicat to no person save one, and that he had done already. How here to reconcile the Father's Words with these of his Son above-mentioned, we can't see, the one saying their difference is on the account of that business at Biggar, the other for a matter of greater consequence. We now come to the grand Apology made use of by the Doctor, the Summ whereof amounts to this; viz: I'm not, sayes he, the Fa∣ther of that Child brought forth by Mrs. Stone at Biggar, because she is married to one Vanderkistee a Dutch Man. That she is Married, he proves thus. 1mo. She produc'd a Certi∣ficat to Mr. Jaque, from the Minister that married her. 2do. Her Father wrote from London to Mr. Jaque, that she was married to Van∣derkistee. 3tio. Mr. Burroughs, Son in Law to Mr. Jaque wrote also to him from London, that he hear'd out of Vanderkistee's own Mouth, that he was Lawfully Married to her, and had bedded with her. To pass here, that single Letters about Matters of this kind from remote places, are often found meer Cheats and Lies, especially coming from persons so much Interessed; We say, that Mr. Jaque ought not to sit Judge in such a Cause relating to his Son: He was not to determine, whether these Letters were sufficient Evidences of the matter under debate, or not. But let us grant all that's crav'd, and suppose, that Mrs. Stone, is Lawful∣ly married to Vanderkistee, &c. It will not hence follow, that the Dr. is free, as he pretends, of any Crime, except that Act of Imprudence and Folly, (as he calls it) in not making known to his Parents, Mrs. Stone's Circum, stances before her delivery. That's indeed an instance of great Folly; Yet no real injury is thereby done to any person, only a great offence given to all that hear thereof. But besides this Scandal, there is horrid iniquity and injustice committed in this matter, And that, which highly aggravates the Crime, is, that the injury is irrepairable. Pray, good Dr. (to pass that 'tis a most Heinous Crime, to perswade a young Damsel to perjure her self)
In sober earnest let me ask, if you think it not a very great Act of injustice, to carry away a Mans Wite some few days after Marriage, into a Forraign Nation, to a place 3 or 400 Miles distant. If you take away a Mans Horss, or Purss, he may get you hang'd for your pains, tho you offer to repair the Damnage. What must it then be to take away a Mans Wife, being that which is dearest and nearest to him of any thing in this World; And the loss altogether irrepairable. Be ingenuous, I say: Would you contented∣ly have suffer'd this of another Person. Suppose Vanderkistee had entic'd your Wife three or four days after Marriage, to go with him to a Forraign Kingdom, and kept her there till she brought forth her first Born; Pray, good Dr. tell me freely, what thoughts you wou'd have had of him in such strange Circumstances. What wou'd you have said to him, if he had been cast in your way; Or rather, what wou'd you have done to him, if you'd had such an opportunitie, as you could wish. urclie You'l say (if you have but one dram of ingenuity) that cudgelling in the severest manner imaginable, is too too slender a punishment for so Heinous a Crime, Yea, that tho you pursued him to death by the Hand of Justice, he wou'd get but what he deserv'd. I know very well, Dr. you'l tell me; That I'm supposing all alongs that which is not; That I speak, as if you had been too too familiar with Madam Vanderkistee; Whereas you never once had a thought tending that way. Doctor, I must freely tell you, that what you say, is no less absurd. and Ridiculous, than if you should carry away your Neighbours Mare 3 or 4 Miles, and when you are challeng'd, to tell him, you never once laid your Leg over her, Besides Dr. what if he in the Interim, having use of his Mare broake into some Bodies Park, and there took the Readiest? Certainly you are a Sharer in his Wickedness, and if one of you must hang, far rather you, than he. You pretend. you are altogether Innocent as to this particular, and will have the World to believe 'tis so and that upon your simple word, in opposition to the strongest presumptions almost can be. Doctor, We have a good old Scots Proverb, very applicable to your Case. If you do no Ill, do not Ill-like; If you steal not my Kail, break not my Dyke. I dare not, nor will I say, you are surely guilty as to this Point; Yet I must be so free, as to tell you plainly that, which ten thousand
think, Viz. They see not wherein they transgress the Bounds of Chistian Charity, thô they have thoughts quite differing from what you pretend to in this Matter. They see you but a Man, and that a Young Man, made up of Flesh and Blood like themselves. They find also the Gentle-woman forward enough that way, else she had not behav'd, as she has done without her Parents Consent: And hav∣ing once, you know, travelled that Road, she would with the great∣er freedom go it over again. I need not tell you, Doctor, what a mighty Temptation Oppor∣tunity is; And this you had in an eminent manner a thousand times. Besides, 'tis safe Fishing, as we say, in drumly waters. There was no fear, such underhand dealling should appear above Board. Nor will it satisfie a considering person to say, you had Work e∣nough to do at home. Alas, see we not too too many going abroad, when it were fitter, they should be employed within their own doors. But I know Topical Arguments are of no Force with those, who think their bare word should pass for a Demonstration, which is all the Doctor can pretend to in this, and many other Points of his Paper. We shall leave off to start any more Questions, thô hundreds all a∣longs this Paper offer themselves very appositely to our Considerati∣on, and come to some other Things of greater Moment, at least more pertinent to our present purpose. And first, We appeal to any indifferent, and unbyassed Person, that will seriously consider this whole Affair, with all its various Cir∣cumstances, whether or not Mr. Jaque acted like himself in requir∣ing that Woman to be gone, who in such a Surprize brought forth a Child in his own House to his own Son, as the common report went? Was it not, we say, his Duty, as a Christian, much more as a Mi∣nister of the Gospel in that place, and Father to the Person so calum∣niated by common Fame, as is pretended, to have vindicated him in a legal manner from these horrid Aspersions, that went up and down the whole Country of him. And if it was his Duty so to do, no per∣son ought to blame Mr. Kirkwood for what he sayes in his Book re∣lating to this Affair.
As to other things in this Paper, 'tis needless to be at much pains to give them any return, most of them being altogether impertinent, others in so general and ambiguous term: that the best Answer is a flat Denyal; Some not only gross Falshoods, but manifest Lies; And in not a few one may very well grant the Premisses, and yet deny the Inference: We need not travel far into it to find out Instances. Lo, one in its very Front. The words are, The like of Mr. K's. Pamph∣let, all things being considered, was never writen in any Language by any Perswasion, being both Prophane, Blasphemous, and Obscene. We may safely grant you, that never before this time such a Book was writen; Because never any person had such an Occasion, or such a Subject to write on: Never, we say, was such a Judicature on Earth, and acted such things, as that, which sat at Kelso 24. September 1695. Of which at large from the 8. Sect. to the 22, Part 3. We shall also confess, that there are some Words in Mr. Kirkwood's Book, which may give Offence to a Modest Ear, and therefore may be called Prophane, or Obscene, (for both these words may pass here, as one, thô the Doctor makes a difference by interposing a third, and that without any ground) Yet we positively assert, that Mr. Jaque and his Elders are justly blameable upon that head, and not Mr. Kirkwood. They most falsly inserted these words into his Libel, and have recorded them in all the Registers of the Kirk of Scotland, and publish'd them by Word and Write, far and wide, through the Kingdom to disgrace him; And may not he repeat their Words for his own Vindication? And further know, that it were very easie, were we not hastening to a close, to shew you from this Paper a vast number of abominable Lies: But we shall content our selves with this one, which may well pass muster for all the rest. The Doctor's words are, The Honourable, Pious, and Learn'd Nobility and Gentry of this Ancient Kingdom, who favour the Church Judicatures with their presence and assistance as Ruling Elders, are not exempted from Mr. K's. severe and false Censures of Par∣tiality, Injustice, Envy, Malice, Ignorance and Falshood. Now know, that the very contrary is again and again repeated in
his Book; And that not transciently, or by the by; But brought in as 'tre with an OES in express Terms, prefixing to it a Title, viz. A necessary Caution, Page 79. Pray, sayes Mr. Kirkwood, do not mis∣take us, as if we were charging ALL the Members of the Syond as guilty of the above-mentioned Crimes, No, No: We are far from that. ALL the Worthie Gentle men, Sir John Home, Sir John Pringle, and others, with a good Number of the People, did what lay in their power to stop the Carrier of the furious multitude, but were not able; Especially, when it came to a Vote, where a Dunce can do as much as much as a Solomon. And page 128. are these words; As to the many Honourable and Wor∣thy Gentlemen, the Ruling Elders, Mr. Kirkwood here declares them al∣together Innocent, and free of having any hand in the Sentence past against him. Yea, how frequently in his Book does he lament and bemoan his sad misfortune, that Gentlemen sat not his Judges, page 49. We must not here omit (sayes he) to tell you, that we are far from ascribing these wild and exorbitant Actings to every Member of the Committee. No, No, Not to the half of them. These Worthie Gentle-men above nam'd, would certalnly have abhor'd to sit amongst the Actors of such gross Enormities. Alas! alas! (he adds) It has been Mr. Kirkwood's great Misfortune, hat Gentle-men kept not Diets: Many never came, and some very seldom. Now, good Reader, do you not think the Doctor has been be∣witch'd; At least hudgely demented and blinded with the Passions of xcessive Malice, Envy, Revenge, and such like Prejudices, which ave instigated him to write against the very Light of the Sun at oon-tide? By this one Instance you may conjecture, what kind of Paper the Doctors is, if duely compar'd with Mr. Kirkwood's Book. To conclude; These most scurrilous, affected, and bombast words, herewith the Doctor's Paper is, as 'twere cram'd, viz. The Crazie∣eaded Pamphleter; The Vacuum of his Cholerick Brain; He has the ickets in his Understanding, &c. deserves no Answer, except to be ught at, or retorted upon himself with far greater Reason, than he  a most malicious manner would throw them upon another. Such ords may perhaps amuse the Vulgar Reader, whose capacity sel∣dom
reaches further, than the out-side of things; But Men of Un∣derstanding, who can discern the true Use and Importance of words, will laugh at such silly, empty, and frivolous Notions and Chimera's of a Pedantick Mountebank, and not the grave Expressions of a Learn∣ed and Skilful Professor of Medicine: For in effect, whosoever shall narrowly consider this whole Affair, will palpably see that the Doctors Intellectuals are mighty shallow, if we may judge of the Tree by its Fruit: So that upon just Ground it may be said, that he not olny has the Rickets in his distorted and decrepit body in a very eminent man∣ner; But that they are flown up into his empty brain, and there have begot such a strange Vertigo or Giddiness in his Noddle, that it made him run round two Kingdoms with another Man's Wife hanging by his tail, giving out to all persons whethersoever he went, that sh was a Chaste and Pure Virgin. The Doctor concludes with this old Saying, Quos Deus vult perde∣re, prius dementat, applying it to Mr. Kirkwood: But with his leave he may upon better Ground take it to himself; since he openly ac∣knowledges, that he is guilty of the height of Imprudence and Folly▪ And that not in a single Act, or two, but in a long continued Serie of a vast number of various kinds of most horrid and wicked deed amounting to no less, (in the Sense and Judgement of his old Father than that unpardonable Sin against the HOLY GHOST: So tha GOD, it seems, has quite robb'd him of all his Intellectual Facultie leaving him nothing in their Room, but a Chimerical Vacuum, ( use his own word) as a fit Receptacle for all sorts of malign Spirits▪ For certainly no good Quality can lodge with excessive Folly an Imprudence, if we may apply with a little Variation, that Saying  the Moralist. Nullum Numen adest, nisi sit Prudentia. — FINIS.
