C880 R170936 52211897 175467
The CASE of ANN, Wife to the late Baron SLANE. BY Marriage-Articles dated and executed in September, 1684. between the Countess-Dowager of Drogheda (Grandmother and Guardian to the said Baron) and other Friends of the said Lord and Ann his Wise; in Consideration of 6000 l. Portion, the Estate, which was worth 2500 l. per Annum, was agreed to be settled on Trustees for the following Uses; viz. 2000 l. per Annum upon the Issue Male, with fair Provision for Younger Children; 800 l. per Annum Jointure; and also 200 l. per Annum to the said Ann's Separate Use Yearly, during their Joint Lives, and Land to be secured for its Payment. The said Ann (in order to obtain an Allowance out of the Lord Slane's Estate) did, in the Year 1695, prove before the Lords Justices of England, That Three thousand Pounds of the said Portion was paid on the very Day of her Marriage; and that the remaining Three thousand Pounds was paid in a short time afterwards. On the 14th of June, 1690, (which was indeed long after the Marriage, though within a few days after he came to Age) the late Lord Slane, by Deeds of Settlement, made in pursuance of the said Articles before executed, did convey the Estate to Trustees upon the aforesaid Uses, and did engage 300 l. per Ann. of Land, for the Payment of the said 200 l. per Ann. to his Lady's own Use. Being under Age, he could not execute such Deeds sooner. It must be confess'd, That in Easter-Term, 1691, the said Lord Slane was outlaw'd for High Treason, upon the account of being in Arms for the late K. James in Ireland; and the Treason mentioned in the Indictment is alledged to be committed before the Settlement made by my Lord: But the Settlement (s has been stated) was made only in pursuance of the Articles of Marriage  were long before agreed to by the Friends, Guardian, and Grandmother of e said Lord, and was made as soon as my Lord came to Age; and also upon the valuable Consideration of having received 6000 l. Portion with his Lady: (Which is in truth a great Portion in that Country, where they generally give little or none.) Upon his being Outlawed the whole Estate was Granted to the Earl of Athione in the year 1692. And in the year 1695, the said Earl of Athlone obtained an Act of Parlia∣ment in Ireland for the confirmation of his said Grant, without any Allowance for the said Ann or her Issue. She has a Daughter as well as her self to provide for, and she had no part of that separate Allowance which was provided by the Articles till 1696, from which time the Earl of Athlone has been pleased to allow her 200 l. per Ann. so that there is a great Arrears of that separate Allowance still unpaid. Now forasmuch as the said Lady Slane brought such a very considerable Portion, as Six thousand Pounds is in that Country, and that she hath no Means left to support her self and Child, and that also all her Relations are become unable to Maintain and Relieve her; and withal since the said Estate is the freest from Incumbrances of any that is Forfeited; She therefore hopes from the Justice of an English Parliament, that in tender Commiseration of her sels and Child, before the Act relating to the Irish Forfeitures is Passed, some compassionate Care will be taken of her and her poor Distressed and Innocent Daughter.
Wise to the late Ba∣ron Slane.
