L168A 52211859 175712
LAETITIAE CALEDONICAE, OR, SCOTLANDS Raptures, Upon the thrise happy Return of Her Sacred Soveraign CHARLES the Second, Monarch of Great Britain, &c. WHat Poetaster bold dare undertake, An Embleme of my mirth in rime to make? The tongues of Men and Angels, should but wrong This Theam, so far transcending any Song: My Loyalty likewise it would Eclipse, If't were definable by humane lips. Old Maro sure would blush, if he were here, And gall'd with this disaster, shed a tear; His soaring quill, which many Triumphs wrot, Should in defining this, its Triumphs blot: Parnassus Nymphs also, I dare be bound, Would curse their native Soil, for barren ground, That disproportion vast when they should see, 'Twixt their best notions, and this extasie. How then shall Caledon, her sense expresse Of this unuterable happinesse? This blest Arrivall of her Soveraign brings That true Vice-gerent of the King of Kings; Shal't be with flying cups? O that's hot fit! His Sacred MAJESTY prohibits it. Shal't be with ranting swaggering bravado's, We will do wonders 'gainst his foes Armado's? This neither will suffice, himself can tell, This is the Dialect 'bout Bacchus Well. Shall we renewing Covenants, engage, His Person to defend, and Royall badge? No He'll ne'r trust's thee more; (and who can blame him?) Nor Tongue, nor Hand, that stop't e're to disclaim him: What then shall our deportment be, and how, Shall we do homage to that Sacred brow? That brow! whose sweet appearance hath undone Those miseries, our follies had begun: Ev'n this; each Loyall Heart shall undertake, With resolution, recompence to make, By strong endeavours, never to back-slide Into these principles, did us divide From our Alleageance, shun equivocations As Popish practices , to crush the Nations. Each sparkle of rebellion let us smoother, And to that purpose strengthen one another: Each Overture that's made, before 't's appointed Let's ponder well, let not the Lord's Anointed Get any prejudice from what we do, Give him that right the Scripture doth allow. This will as in one Atome us unite, And to commend us, forraign Pens invite: This will the Moderns move aloud to praise us, And our Posterities shall Trophees raise us, With this Inscription, Blessed be our Sires, Their Countreys honour bounded their desires; Whose souls expiring, Loyally did sing With firme Devotion, long may our Soveraign Raign. FINIS.
