L3216A 99887203 183446
The Love-Sick Maid: Or, Cordelias lamentation for the absence of her Gerhard. To a pleasant New Tune. BE gone Thou fatal fiery feavor, now be gone, let Love alone, Let his Etherial flames possess my breast, His fires, From thy consuming heat no aid requires, for swift desires, Transports my passion to a throne of rest; Where I, Who in the pride of health, did never feel such warmth to move; By sickness tam'd am so inflam'd, I know no joys but love. And he That trifled many tedious hours away, my love to try, In little space had gain'd the grace, to have more power than I. Depart Thou scorching fury, quick from me depart, think not my heart, To thy dull flame shall be a sacrifice; A Maid Dread Cupid now is on thy Altar laid, by thee betray'd, A Rich oblation to restore thine eyes: But yet My fair acknowledgement will prove thou hast no caft, To bend thy Bow against thy foe, that aim'd to catch the shalt: For if That at my breast thy arrows thou all at once let his, She that receives a thousand sheaves, can do no more but due. No more you learn'd physitians, tire your brains no more pray give me o're, Mine is a cure, in Physick never read; Although You skilful Doctors all the world doth know, pray let me go. You may as well make practice on the Dead. But if My Gerrard dain to view me with the glory of his looks, I make no doubt to live without Physitians and their books. 'Tis he That with his balmed Kisses can restore my latest breath; That bliss is this, to gain a Kiss can save a maid from death? To you That tell me of another world, I bow, and will allow Your Sacred Precepts, if you'll grant me this, That he Whom I esteem of next the Deity, may go with me, Without whose presence there can be no bliss, Go teach Your tenets of eternity; to those that aged be, And not perswade a lovesick maid there's any heaven but he. But stay Methinks an icy slumber hath possesst my frency brain; Pray did him dye if you see I The Young-Mans Answer: Or, his Dying Breath, Lamenting for his fair Cordelias Death. To a Delightful New Tune. Come on thou fatal messenger from her that's gone left I alone Within that quenchless flame for ever fry; The Lake Of love being kindled, wherein none can take rest, but wake, Where slumber hath no power to close the eye; Whilst I That by my fair Cordelia desire to take a sleep, With lids wide spread upon my bed am forc'd a watch to keep: And she That waited many tedious hours, my constancy to try, Is now at rest, while I opprest, fain would but cannot dye. Dispatch Thou scorching fury, quickly now dispatch, by Death I watch. To be releast from this tormenting flame; The Dart Sent from dread Cupid, sticks fast in my heart, I wanting art, Had not the power for to resist the fame Though she Who by her late acknowledgment, profest thou hadst no craft, Yet from thy bow thou madst her know what power lay in the shaft: Yut then Thou sent'st another arrow which me of hopes be rest, Most like a soe to wound me so, for whom no cure Wherefore Did you Physitians give my mistress o're had you no more Experience, but what you in books have read; Or why (You learned Doctors) did you cease to try your skills, when I Might have reviv'd her if she'd not been dead? And yet Suppose that I in Person had present been to view her; Is there such grace in any face to work so great a cure? But now I'm come too late to kiss her, which were it not in vain, After her death I'd spend my breath to fetch her back again. Vnto The fair Elizium thither will I go, whereas I know She is amonghst those sacred ones prefer'd, Then I Shall be admitted for to come so nigh, pardon I'll cry For my long absence, wherein I have err'd: And since By her I was esteem'd so much on earth being here, Hence for her sake no rest I'll take, till I have found her there. No more, But only I desire to hear my passing bell; That Virgins may lament the day
