M288A 51617580 175291
Whitehall, June 7. 1697. The Mail from Holland of Friday last arrived this Afternoon; tho' that of Tuesday the first of this Month is not yet come in. Published by Authority. Geneva, May 26. N. S. THe last Advices we have received from Provence give an account, That 12 Men of War lay ready at Thoulon, and 32 Gallies at Marteslies, being all ordered to fail towards Barcelona. The Cardinal of Bouillon, who came in one of the Great Dukes Gallies from Marseilles, landed two days ago at Savona, and arrived have yesterday in his way to Rome. Venice, May 1. The Ban of Cro has sent to Sig∣mr Mocenigo, who commands the Venetian Forces in Daimatis, to acquaint m, that in pursance of the Or∣ders he had received from the Emperor, he was upon his march with an Army of 24000. Men to Beege the Fornes of Biharz, and to desire him to give the Turks at the same time a Diversion on that Frontier. We have no fresh Letters from the Levant. Madrid, May 29. The King of Spain continues in ve∣ry good Health; and the Queen is recovered of her late Illness. We have an account from Barcelona, That the French Army Rendevouses near Gironne, 28000 strong. The Spaniards are about 18000. Count Harach the Em∣peror's Envoy is arrived here. Corunna, June 8. On the 22th of the last month came into this Port the Elizabeth and Katherine, and the Speedwell, the first bound to Barbadoes, and the other to Nevis, who came out with the West-Ia Fleet; and the 26th they failed again. On the 30th were seen off Cape Prior 14 great Ships standing to the Westward. Vienna, June I. The last Letters from Croatia give an account. That the great Rains which had fallen in that Country had for several days retarded the Siege of Bihatz, but the weather growing fair again, the Troops were on their march, and they intended to invest the place the first of this month. General Staremberg is forming a Camp near Verismarton. We have Advice that the Town of Baya is burnt down, with the Magazine of Forage laid up there; every body be∣lieves 'twas occasioned by Treachery. Francfort, June 9. The Forces of the Allies continue in their Camps formerly mentioned; The Regiments who have not yet joyned them are on their march; 'tis believed they Will in 3 or 4 days be all formed in one Body; And Price Lewis of Baden, who is at present at Ausburg, intends to go thence to morrow to the Army. The Marechal de Choiscul is marched from his Camp at Neuistar nearer to Mentz; His Army is about 30000 Men. Mentz, June 10. The Forces of the Allies, which lay at nglmgen, marched from thence yesterday to Cost∣; where they are to pass the River Mane, and af∣ter  the Rhine, near this City, in order to Post them∣ in our Neighbourhood. The French Army moves  way; Were yesterday at Lampensheim; and it's ght they ins to posiess themselves of their old  at Ne. Cologne, Jan 11. Ten Btalions of the Lunenbug  pa the Rhine at Son and Lintz the th and , and are marched towards Brabant; d the  the Lunenurg Tr, and those of  intend pass the Rhine tomorow  and to continue their march like∣wise to . They write  That P  was expected in the Cont  on the  or 12th o this  which  then march ds the  she  no other design the Danish Forces, to the  Holmen Fort long to the  not yet made use or Ary against the  mean time the Ende are  ters. Three Ambassadors from the Czar of M fcovy ar∣rived at Coningsberg the 27th past with a nuus Ketibenue, and had Audience of the Elector or andourg on the first instant; and from thence they are to go to Vienna. The last Letters from Poland lay, the r had not yet made choice of a Marshal, but in the mean time had appointed a Gentleman, who was Marshal of the last Diet, to preside in their Assembly; tho' nothing of great moment would be done till all the Gentry were red. Paris, June 10. Yesterday arrived here an press from the French Army in Catalonia, whence he parted on the  of this month, and brings an account, That the Spaniards upon the march of our Troops had put 6000 of their best Men into Barcelona; and that the Duke de Vendome had invested that place; That the Countd Estree lay before the Port with a Squad n of Men of War from on; and the Galies, who had been stop by bad weather at Balams, were daily expected, They begin to have here but  hopes of the Prince of Coni's succeeding in his Preteions to the Crown of Poland; though tour Mans of Lives have been al∣ready spent to promote this design and  more are pro∣mised after the Election. An Ocer arrived here the 7th at night with the Arties  the Surrender of Ath, which were signed the 5th of this month. Bussels, June 12. The Garison of Ath, after the French had taken the Ravelin, and made two Breaches in the Walls of the Town, and were preparing for a General Assault, Capiulated the 5th in in the Evening, and the Articles after some dispute being signed, the Garison marched our the 7th in the morning with Arms and Bag∣gage, Drums Beating, Colours Flying, and other Marks of Honour, and were conducted to Dendermond; but Mareschal Catinat caused the Prince de Chimay Colonel of Ho se, Lieutenant Colonel Catoire, a Major and two Cap∣tains to be made Prisoners, on pretence of making Repri∣zis for the Hostages that were stopt by the Allies at Na∣moror Payment of the Debts the French had contracted in that Town. From His Majesty's Camp at Promelles, June 13. The Enemy remain still in their Camps near Ath; O Tuesday they fired all their Cannon for the taking of that Place. His Majesty saw put of the Army drawn our yesterday and will continue the Review tomorrow. Brigadier Spar is sent with 4 Regiments to reifrce the Garison of Audenarde, which contained of 3 before. The Trops of Lunenburg are come as far as Mctriche and may join us the next week, several Dragon and Fushrs who have Deserted the Fech Army within these 2 r 3 days, are come hither with their Horses and Accounments. Hague, June 14. N. S. His Excellency Sir Joseph Williamson being arrived here from Ro erdam, assisted on Wednesday at the Conference a Ryswick. On Thursday aitent out of the Texell on Dutch Men of War with the Merer Ships bound to Spin and Portugal, VVe have Advice that cu Barr designs in few days to fall with his Squadron from  kirke. Plimouth, June 4. Yesterday came in the Lion of London, William. Sexton Master from Antegoa, who re∣ports, That before their leaving that Island, they had an Account from Barbadoes, That Vice Admiral Nevill and Commadore Ms were both come thir, and joyned on Saturday the 24th of April, being then 18 Men of War, who er two days stay at Baes, were to fail for at, and there to meet and Joyn two other h Men of War, and  that they would proceed  to look for  Squadron. And he dds, That the  of t Islands, as at ama  under no a  of the French,  was  to be against the Spanish  at . , with His Majesty's  Walward. Printed by Edw  in the Svoy. 1697.
