P1135AA R181598 51784608 175018
PENALTIES BY SEVERAL STATUTES UPON Justices of the Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, Over∣seers of the Poor, and other Officers that neglect their Duty, Necessary to be known to Them and Others. JVstices of the Peace, shall keep thir Sessions eve∣ry Quarter of the Year, on pain to be punished at the discretion of the Kings Council, 36 E. 3. cap. 12. 2 R. 2. cap. 10. 2 H. 5. cap. 4. Iustices of the Peace, Not doing their Duty in cases of Forcible Entry or Riot are Indictable, 15 R. 2. cap. 2. Style's Rep. 246. In case of a Riotous Assembly or Rout of People, Two Justices of the Peace, and the Sheriff, with the Power of the County (if needs be) shall Arrest them, and the said Justices shall Record that which they shall find so done in their presence against Law, on pain of One hundred Pounds, 13 H. 4. cap. 7. The Lord Chancellor, As soon as he has knowledge of a Riot-assembly or Rout, shall cause the King's Writ to be sent to the Justices of the Peace and Sheriff, that they shall put the Statute 3 H. 4. cap. 7. in Execution, on pain of One hundred Pounds: And if no Writ comes to them, they shall not be excused of the said pain if they execute not the said Statute, 2 H. 5. cap. 8. Iustices of the Peace, That take Bail for Suspition of Felony, and not certifie the Recognizance to the next General Sessions, or Goal-delivery, on pain of Ten Pounds, 3 H. 7. cap. 3. Iustices of the Peace, At every Quarter-Sessions are to cause the Proclamation annexed to the Statute 4 H. 7. cap. 12. to be openly read on pain of Twenty Shillings each. Clerk of the Peace. If he takes above Twelve-pence for Enrolling a Bargain and Sale of Lands under Forty Shillings, he is Indictable, 27 H. 8. cap. 16. Iustices of the Peace, That take a Recognizance of one Licensed to keep an Ale-house, and certifies not the same to the next Sessions, forfeits Three Pounds six Shillings and eight pence, 5 & 6 E. 6. cap. 25. Iustices of the Peace, Must take the Examination and the Information against a Felon in Writing, and bind some to Prosecute him on pain to be fined by the Justices of Goal-delivery, 1 & 2 P. & M. cap. 17. and 2 & 3 P. & M. cap. 10. Surveyors, Of the Highway duly Chosen, that re∣fuse to serve, forfeit Twenty Shillings each, 2 & 3 P. & M. cap. 8 No Officer, Or other shall take above Four-pence for the Impounding of any Distress on pain of Five Pounds. 1 & 2 P. & M, cap. 12. High Constable, To make true Account of what Money he Collects upon the Estreats for the Highways, on pain of Forty Shillings, 2 & 3 P. & M. cap. 8. Constables, Not punishing Artificers and other Per∣sons able to Labour, and will not in Harvest-time, by putting them in the Stocks, forfeit Forty Shillings, 5 Eliz. cap. 4. Iustices of the Peace, That are absent at the Set∣ting of the Rates of Wages for Servants and Labourers, forfeits Ten Pounds, 5 Eliz. cap. 4. Clerk of the Peace, If he takes above Two Shillings for a License for a Badger or Drover, he is Indictable, 5 Eliz. cap. 12. Surveyor, That presents not the Defaults in the Highways to the next Justice of the Peace, forfeits For∣ty Shillings, 5 Eliz. cap. 13. Iustices of the Peace, To whom such Presentment shall be made shall certifie the same to the next General Sessions, on pain of One hundred Pounds, 5 Eliz. cap. 13. Iustices of the Peace, To whom any Bulls, Wri∣tings, Instruments, or other Superstitious things from the See of Rome shall be shewed, uttered, or declared, and do not in fourteen days signifie the same to a Privy Council, incurs a Premunire, 13 Eliz. cap. 2. Churchwardens Not levying the Tax for Relief of Prisoners in Common Goals, and paying the same to the High Constable, forfeits Five Pounds, 14 Eliz. cap. 5. High Constable, Not paying what Sums of Money he shall receive from the said Churchwardens to the Col∣lectors for the said Prisons, forfeits Five Pounds, 14 Eliz. cap. 5. Iustice of the Peace, To inform a Privy Council within eight and twenty days of a Priest or Jesuit to him discovered, on pain of Two hundred Marks, 27 Eliz. cap. 2. Iustices of the Peace, Must certifie the Oath and Submission of a Priest or Jesuit into Chancery in three Months, on pain of One hundred Pounds, 27 Eliz. cap. 2. Constables and Headboroughs, That do not their best endeavours to apprehend Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, and cause them to be punished, forfeits Ten Shillings, 39 Eliz. cap. 4. Iustice of the Peace, That neglect his Duty in putting in Execution the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 20. against Stretching and Tentering of Northern Cloth, forfeits Five Pounds. Overseers of the Poor, That meet not Monthly, nor will account in four days after the year, and new
ones named, or neglect their Office, for every default they forfeit Twenty Shillings, 43 Eliz. cap. 2. Churchwardens and Overseers, Of the Poor, that refuse to account, to be Committed to the Common Goal until they make a true account. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. Iustices of the Peace, If there be no Nomination yearly of Overseers of the Poor; forfeit Five Pounds, 43 Eliz. cap. 2. Churchwardens, Of every Parish, shall truly Col∣lect and pay over to the High Constable the Tax set by the Justices of the Peace for the Relief of Poor Pri∣soners in the Kings-Bench, &c. on pain of Ten Shillings, 43 Eliz. cap. 2. High Constable, If he neglects to pay the said Rate to the Treasurer for the County, he forfeits Twenty Shillings. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. Treasurer, Of the County chosen, and refuse to serve or to account (if he serves) Fine able at the Quarter-Sessions, which Fine at least must be Three Pounds, 43 Eliz. cap. 2. Constables, Refusing to punish Lewd Persons that shall Cut, or unlawfully take away any Corn or Grain, dig up Fruit-trees, Rob any Orchard or Garden, Break or Cut any Hedge, Pails, Rails, or Fence, &c. shall be Committed to the County Goal, till they cause them to be punished, 43 Eliz. cap. 7. Constables, Not punishing Rogues and Vagabonds according to the Statue of 39 Eliz. cap. 4. Forfeits Twen∣ty Shillings, 1 Jac. cap. 7. Constable and Churchwardens, Neglecting their Duty, in Levying the Penalty upon Victualler, for sus∣fering Tippling in his House, Forfeit Forty Shillings 1 Jac. cap. 9. Iustices of the Peace, Whereof two at least to take the Submission of one Reconciled to the See of Rome, within six days after his return into England, and certi∣fie the same at the next Quarter Sessions, upon pain of Forty Pounds, 3 Jac. cap. 4. Constables and Churchwardens, Shall once a Year present the Monthly absence of Popish Recusants, and their Children, if above Nine Years Old, on pain of Twenty Shillings, 3 Jac. cap. 4. Clerk of the Peace, That does not Record their Pre∣sentment in Sessions, Forfeits Forty Shillings, 3 Jac. cap. 4. Churchwardens and Overseers, Not distributing the Money they receive upon the account of one Selling Ale to an Unlicensed Ale-house-keeper amongst the Poor, forfeit double what they receive, 4 Jac. cap. 4. Constable, Neglecting his Duty in Executing a War∣rant of Distress upon the Goods of one Convi∣cted of Drunkenness, or putting of him in the Stocks for want of distress, forfeits Ten Shillings, 4 Jac. cap. 5. Iustices of the Peace, If there be no House of Cor∣rection in the County, forfeit Five Pounds, 7 Jac. cap. 4. Constables, Not appearing at the petty Sessions the next Morning after a general search, may be Fined, not exceeding Forty Shillings, 7 Jac. cap. 4. Governour of the House of Correction, Is to give a true account to the Justices of the Peace at every Quar∣ter Sessions, of all Persons Committed to his Custody, and if any of them be let abroad, or otherwise escape, not being discharged, he is Fineable at the discretion of the Justices in the Quarter Sessions, 7 Jac. cap. 4. Constables or Churchwardens, Neglecting to Ex∣ecute a Warrant against one that Sells Ale without License, shall be Committed to the common Goal, un∣less they pay Forty Shillings, 3 Car. 1. cap. 3. None to be Iustices, Of the Peace in any County in England, if he has not Lands or Tenements to the value of Twenty Pounds a Year, and if such be put in the Commission, and acts, forfeits Twenty Pounds, and be put out; Provided the Lord Chancellor shall have Power to put discreet Persons, learned in the Law, in such Commis∣sions, 18 H. 7. cap. 11. Constables and Surveyors, Of the High-ways, that suffer any Wagons or Carts to pass through their respe∣ctive Limits with more than five Horses or Beasts at length, shall forfeit a Sum, not exceeding forty shiilings, 22 Car. cap. 12. Constables or Surveyors, That do neglect to put the former Statutes for better repairing and amending of the High-ways, in execution▪ forfeit a Sum not exceeding forty shillings, 22 Car. 2. cap. 2. Deputy Lieutenants, May require the Constables to provide and furnish so many sufficient Foot Arms in a reasonable time, and place appointed, under the penal∣ty of Forty Shillings, 15 Car. 2. cap. 4. Bayliff of Yarmouth, Is to appoint Packers of Butter, before the first of July, Yearly, on pain of a Hundred Pounds, 15 Car. 2. cap. 16. Constable, Permitting Tobacco to grow by the space of Fourteen Days after a Warrant is delivered him, forfeits for every Rod Planted or Sowed, Five Shillings, 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 26. 3 and 4 W. and M. fol. 479. Overseers, Of the Poor, must give an account of all Burials within their Parishes, and the Names and Qua∣lities of the Persons Interred, and of such Certificats as came to their hands from the Minister of the Parish, that the Persons within mentioned were Interred con∣trary to the Statute 30 Car. 2. fol. 49. on pain of Five Pounds. Scavengers or Rakers, Every day except Sun∣day, shall cause a Bell to be Rung in the Streets, to give notice to the Inhabitants to bring out their Dust, Dirt, Ashes and Soil, and carry the same away, on pain of For∣ty Shillings each Default, 2 W. and M. fol. 283. Scavengets, Duly Chosen, upon notice, seven days being past, refusing to serve, forfeits Ten Pounds, 2 W. and M. fol. 287. Scavengers. To account within Eight and Twenty days after the Election of new ones, and pay what Mo∣ney they have in their hands unto them, in Default thereof, the Justice of the Peace may Commit them to Prison, till they make true account and pay what Money they have in their hands, 2 W. and M. fol. 290. Churchwardens and Overseers, Of the Poor, that neglect to cause to be read notice in Writing of ones co∣ming into the Parish in order to settle himself there, forfeits Forty Shillings, 3 and 4 W. and M. fol. 291. Churchwardens and Overseers, Of the Poor, that will not obey a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of two Justices of the Peace for the removal of a Poor Person from one Parish to another, forfeits Five Pounds, 3 and 4 W. and M. fol. 294. Surveyors, Of the High-way, being duly made, refusing to serve, forfeits Five Pounds, 3 and 4 W. and M. fol. 304. Surveyors, In Fourteen Days after acceptance of the Office to View the High-ways, Bridges and Causeys, and every four Months after, and to present upon Oath to some Justice of the Peace of the same Division, the State and Condition of them, on pain of Five Pounds, 3 & 4 W. and M. fol. 308. Surveyors, Of the High-ways, neglecting their du∣ty required of them by the Statute of 3 and 4 W. and M. fol. 310. forfeits for every Default Forty Shillings. Iustice of the Peace, That shall neglect or refuse to do what is required of him by the said Act made in the 3 and 4 W. and M. Intituled an Act, For better Re∣pairing and Mending the High-ways, forfeits Five Pounds. Constable, Duly chosen, and refusing to take his Oath, is Indictable, Allen's Report, 79. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Braddyll, and are to be Sold by Rich. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-Lane, MDCXCIII.
