S1061 R183869 52529192 178881
ACT CONCERNING APPAREL. At Edinburgh, the 2. of December, 1673. THe King's Majesty, considering that some difficulties have occured, concer∣ning some expressions and qualifications mentioned in the Act made in the last Session of Parliament, concerning Apparel, and that the Manufactur of whyt-Lace or Pearling made of threed (whereby many poor people gain'd their lively-hood) was thereby much prejudged and impaired: For the clearing and remeed whereof, in time coming, His Majesty hath though fit with ad∣vice and consnt of His Estates of Parliament, to Rescind, Discharge and Annul that part of the aforementioned Act for Apparel concerning the allowance granted to the persons thereby priviledged, to wear Velvet, Satins and other silk Stuffs, &c. And Declares, that now and in time coming, it shall be free to all and every person within this Kingdom, to wear all such Silks, whyt-Lace, Cloaths and others▪ in the same manner, and als freely, as be the aforesaid Act, they were allowed to be worn by the priviledged persons therein mentioned: And that plain Sating-Ribbons may be worn upon Apparel in the same manner as Taffietie Ribbons, any thing in the said Act to the contrare notwithstanding. Like as His Majesty, with advice foresaid, doth hereby Ratifie and renew the afoesaid Act, past in the last Session of Parliament, concerning Apparel, in all the other Head, Clauses and Articles thereof, which are not by this Act innovat or discharged. ACT Concerning the importation and Excise of BRANDY. At EDINBƲRGH, the 1. of December, 1673. THe King's Majesty, having, upon good consideration, though fit to allow the Importation of Brandy, and Mum or Bremer-beer within this Kingdom; Doth therefore with ad∣vice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Rescind and Annul and Acts of Parliament and Privy Council, Proclamations and other Warrands prohibiting the same. Like as His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Appoints every tun of imported Brandy to be lyable in pay∣ment of sixscore pounds Scots for custome, without any defalcation, and ilk Scots pynt of the same Brandy to be lyable in the payment of six shillings Scots for excise: And every barrel of the afore∣said Mum, not exceeding twelve gallons to be lyable in thretty shillings Scots of custome, and alsmuch for excise, which excise of Brandy and Mum is to be raised in the several Shires and Burghs, where the same shall be retailled, by tapping and selling in smals, and employed for the proportional relief of the annuity of Excise payable by the saids Shires and Burghs, and this custome and excise to be lifted and payed conform to the Laws and Acts, made concerning Custome and Excise respectivè. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent MAJESTY, Anno 1673.
