r70b 99885203 182561
AN ELOGIE WITH AN ACCROSTICK And an Epitaph On the Death of that Laborious Servant and Minister of CHRIST; Mr. James Janeway; who de∣parted this Life and put on Imortality; the 16th Day of March 1673/4. Mrs ommibus Commune est. An Elogie. AH! Whither, whither, into what Abyss Of Sorrow, and unfatom'd Grief, is this In which my troubled Soul is plung'd? what Seas Of terrour causing (what strange) thoughts are these? What aies my Heart, that thus with fear it quakes? What? have the Furyes with their hissing Snakes, And flaming Torches, left their Dark abodes? VVhat! hath Black Dis, and the Infernal Gods, Let loose those Hellish Fiends, confin'd to lye In that Infernal place Eternally? Ah? No: great JANEWAY'S dead: whose name ev'n struck Such fear, that (nam'd) the Throne o darkness shook? Th' Infernal Legions trembled at his Name, More than th' Dice Charmes, Thessalian Witcke frame. Their Great Antig'nist, who so oft assail'd Their Pow'r, and (spite of all their spites) prevail'd, He who so often did retake the prey, Which else those Cursed Fiends had born away, Now's Dead: But FAME (loth to divulge his death.) Refus'd to give her Trump its wonted Breath: She deck'd her self in Sable Weeds: Then took A ruthful Gesture, and a Mounrnful look; And with great Grief (Tears bursting out,) did shew That he was Dead (alas! by far too true): VVhich when those Damned Spirits heard, they all VVith joy (if joy's in Hell,) kept Festivall: They joy to think that he from whom they fled, And were so oft o'recome by, now is Dead. He was—But Oh! that some Celestial one VVould tell me what! 'till then I can't make known. CALIOPE, and all the Learned NINE (Nay though with Great HYPERION they combine,) Cannot sufficiently Sing forth his praise, Unless Divine Assistance time my Layes I shall but Blot, and Blur, (and not Indite) His worth: then Lord, inspire my Pen to VVrite! But why digress I thus? he's known so well, That who, or what he was, I need not tell: His Learning, Labour, Gifts, and Graces, shew His worth (which in his want we dearly Rue): His Life confirm'd his Motto still to be, HOLY, and BLAMELESS in the high'st Degree: Such was his Death: he could Triumph, and Sing Grave were's thy Victory! Death where's thy Sting? He was a Burning and a shining Light (In this so wicked Age) to judge aright Unto that place of Bliss, t' which now he's gone, (Except true followers) now he'l live with none. A Star a Famous star which did appear VVith such great Glory in our Hemispheare Is fallen: know ye not, (ye know full well,) A Great Man's fallen this day in Israel? I would, I wish (and therein I'de bear part) That JANEWAY were ingrav'd on every Heart: When (else) our Hearts would sin, they would forbear For shame when as they find his Name writ there. Ah! Cruel DEATH, could thy impartial Dart Be Level'd at, and pierce good JANEWAYS, Heart? Had he been one to whom the Glass of LIME Had run Three  'twere less; but in the prime And Flow'r of all his Days! Ah, Cruel DEATH. Then, to deprive him often Life, and Breath; And Launch him-forth in to Eternity! Virtus Post, fueri vivet. Was he so fair and tempting to thine Eye, That thou did'st long, and take? or was't that he In this respect made like to Christ might be? Or, wer't solic'ted by the Pow'rs below, (Who fear'd Subversion, and an overthrow)? No, 'twas not Fate, or any other Pow'r: But Gods Decree, that caus'd that fatal hour. And wherefore Lord (when as the Harvest's large,) Remov'st thou those, who're faithful in their charge? VVhen faithful Labourers are so scarce, then will Their Nunber lessen, and diminish still? VVhen Canaies out so fast, so fast decay, 'Tis a sad Omen, God will take away His Golden Candlestick from us, and give It those, who will more answerably live. And art thou gone SWEET SOUL! hast thou forsook Thy Earthly House of Clay? he could not brook Those daring sins, which ev'ry where are found In all Relations, and Degrees t' abound; For when he saw't, with holy Zeal he hurl'd Contempt on this, and fled to th' other VVorld. And could he dye, and yet no blazing Star, Or Comet (usually portending VVar,) Presage his Death? Ah! no: alas! alas! The great decrease of worthys, that, that was A certain sign: which seen, he would no more Stay here behind's (Companions gone before). Alas! alas! and shall he now depart VVithout the sighs, and sobs, of ev'ry heart? Oh! that mine Eyes had pow'r to draw up All, and each Spring, into my Brain! and sup Th' Ocean into my Brest, that't might supply Perpetual moisture to my weeping Eye. Come, VVidows, Orphans, all who're in distress; Let this be th' Object, here your Grief express. And you (Mr. Nat. Vincent. Dear Friend,) who had so large a share Of his Affections, and of ev'ry Pray'r, 'Twixt whom the Name of Brothti past: alas You shall no more behold him as he was: You shall no more on Earth, behold, or see, His Heav'nly face: and therefore now with me, And with this Troop of Mourners, bear a part, To weep and Mourn with an unfeigned Heart. Let's weep whole Flood's of Tears, that may surround His Tomb; and keep th' impure from holy Ground: Then Metamorphose them to Chrystal pure, And grave his Fame for ever to indure. And you his Hearers weep, Oh! weep full fast; Now use your Tears, this day may be your last. He spent his Strength and Life for you: Oh! then In Tears, strive to retaliate it agen. Come, come, be liberal for God observes: And in ordained Bottles, there preserves Them as the Tokens of your tender Love To, and esteem of him: by Grief you'l prove Your Love was real: Weep, and do not grudge, God sees your Grief: and thereby will you judge. An Accrostick. Jt is a Truth, Ripe Fruit is soon'st pull'd down: And 'tis like Truth, he ripe, receiv'd his Crown. Much pains, much fears, much care he here exprest: Eternally he now njoyeth Rest, Sorrow and  doth stay. Jn Heav'n all's joy: no Night, ensues his day. All Earthly things do change: are transitory: No change is incident to Heav'ns Glory. Ere we're aware, our Thread of Life (being spun) Whilst we're secure is cut, or Life is done. And now (from heav'n.) his Voice this seems to be You all must dye: prepare to follow me. An EPITAPH. WHat is't (Spectator) thou would'st see, or know Who's here Inter'd? Alas! I dare not show VVould'st know his Name? why, no unhallow'd ea Must hear it nam'd: avaunt then, come not near You who're Prophane: but you whose Gentle Eye Can weep at will; know, JANEWAY here doth lye: Here Lyes his Body: But, his Soul's at Rest, In Glorious Glory, not to be exprest. To his Late Wife, but now sor∣rowful Widow. YOur Lost is great. 'Tis true: but 'tis much le That (though a Widow) you'r not husbandless; (The God of Heav'n, and Earth's, Espous'd to you) Lessen your Grief: for why, Behold, all do Lament your Loss in theirs: Look how their Eyes Pay back Tear-Tribute to his Obsequies! Ah! cease those floods of tears: though Death doth sever Your self, and him; yet know, 'tis not for ever: For when, that, nought shall of this all remain, You'l meet in Bliss, and never part again. S. R. Aetatis Suae, 45. NOx Erat et nigra velaverat omnia veste Herebam Nexis tecam ego brachietis, Membraq{que} lanqui duto reparabam fassa sapore Cum steti ante oculos Pallid us ille meos Scire velu quid agam? vivo modo, simodo vivit Pnano ners, animae Corpus inare suae, Sed  ingratas cev vivi Ducimus auras Er  evanmem languida vita moram; Santu sed JANEWAY castae Pietatis mago Pramia sudorum quos habet ante tenet. Es  supremae teget consinia metae Hic Dixis Merti cur mihi tarda venis? Nunc ubi seradies fatalem vx erat horam Quae solvat vin c'lis te quoq{que} corporeis Laetus in Elysa mecum spatiabore ripa Qua Lauri vitreas lucus inubrat aquas. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockeril.
