s1047a 52614916 176082
ACT ANENT THE LEAVIES OF HORSE and FOOT, To be put out by the SHIRES and BURGHS. AND The List of the Colonells, with their several numbers of Horse and Foot. EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie. 1648.
Edinburgh Quarto Maii. 1648. FOrsamikle as the Estates of Parlia∣ment considering the great and im∣minent dangers to Religion, the Co∣venant, His Majesties Person and au∣thority and peace of thir Kingdoms, have thought fit, and accordingly given order, That this Kingdom be put in a posture of warre, and that the Colonels and Commitees of warre in the several shires be carefull in listing and exercising the hail sencible persons within their bounds, & providing them with Armes, that they may be in readiness to send forth such number of horse and foot as the Parliament or their Committees shall call for. And now finding that the toune of Berwick is seased on, and that the dangers are nearer to us then formerly, whether from Sectaries or Malignants, and that it is our dutie to make use of the power and strength of the Kingdom for its preservation and safe∣ty, And for preventing those evils wherewith wee are threatned, have thought it therefore fitting to re∣quire the several Collonels and Committees of warre
of the Shires on this side Tay, to meet upon the ninth of this instant, and these on this side of Spey upon the twelfe, and those upon the North side thereof upon the sixteenth day of the same moneth, and at their said meetings, to take present course for listing and intolling the particular numbers of men, horse & foot, according to the list hereunto subjoyned. And that they appoint & nominate under officers to the foot, viz. Lievtenant-Collonels, Major, and Captain: and that they cause the heritors, proper wodsetters, liferenters and others subject in outputting of horse and foot conform to the Acts of Parliament, put out their proportion of horse and foot well armed, the foot, two part with musquets, and third part pikes, and all with swords, with two Dollors of Levie monie, and twenty dayes provision to each souldier, and to all officers under a Captain conform to the Scotts establishment, at two part pay horse and foot: And that for carrying of the neces∣sary provision of thir forces, They provide a sufficient baggage-horse for every Twelve men: And that ane strong and able man with sword and halfe pike be ap∣pointed to attend each two baggage-horse, who is to have a souldiers pay: And that the heretors, liferenters, and others aforesaid of the severall Shires who are ly∣able to the putting out of men, be ordained to bring their severall proportions of horse and foot Armed and provided as aforesaid, to the place of Randevouz in each Shire, under the pains following, viz. Under the paine of 400. marks for each deficient horsman, And under the paine of 100 li. for each deficient foot∣man not brought to the foresaid Randevouz, which are hereby ordained to be keeped at the dyets following,
viz. All the Shires on this side Tay upon the 24. of this month, and these upon the Southside of Spey upon the 27. and those upon the Northside of Spey upon the last of this moneth, and Ordains the saids Colonells and Committees in the severall Shires to have their proportions of Horse and Foot Armed and provided as aforesaid, in readinesse at the place of Rendesvouze, and at the diets respective before mentionat, to march according to such orders as shall then be sent to them, under the penalties aforesaid; And for the more spee∣die and effectuall raising of the said Foot and Horse, the Estates of Parliament gives power and command to the Colonells, with assistance of such of the Com∣mittee of the Shire as will joyn with them; and are hereby commanded to be assisting to them, to poynd and distrenzie the goods of any heretories and others aforesaid, who are deficient in outputing either of their Horse or Foot, viz. For every horsman wanting at the day of Rendesvouze the sum of 400. Marks from every Heretor and others aforesaid, who are lyable to put him out. And for every Footman wanting, the sum of 100. l. And further the saids Estates declares, that the Heretors and others aforesaid failing in puting out of their proportions shall be esteemed as enemies to, and hinderers of the publick service of the Kingdom, in persuance of the ends of the Covenant, and notwith∣standing some persons may be hereby overburdened in respect of the meanes of their rents, and multitude of Tennants, living upon their lands: Yet the Estates Ordains the foresaid Number of men providit as aforesaid to be put out by them, and incase any of them finde themselves thereby prejudged, and make their
complaint known to the Committee of the Shire, in that case the saids Estates Odains the Com∣mittee of the Shire to cast up the accompt, what the price of the aforsaid Armes Levi-mony and price of baggage-horse will amount to, and so to provide for their relief, that the burthen may be equally upon the whole Heretories and others aforesaid according to their rent, as in the maintenance. And because the saids Estates having after calculation found that the number of horse, according to the pro∣portion of the Levie in Anno 1644. are to be raised, will not exceed 2700. And seeing the present service will necessarily require a greater number of Horse; and that the Shires of this Kingdom will hardly be able to outreik the same: Therefore the saids Estates have ordained that each Regiment of horse shall con∣sist of 180. Troopers, to be framed in three Troops, and commanded by a Colonel, Major, and Rutemaster, and the Colonell to have the nomination of all his un∣der Officers; Providing the Lieutenant or Cornet be appointed with advise of the Committee of the Shire, out of the which the Troop is to be levied: And ordains the Regiments to be made up in manner fol∣lowing, viz. The present Rutemaster to have assigned to them locallie out of some Shire or Shires the num∣ber of 80. Troops, according as is set down in the List hereunto subjoyned, which Troopers the saids Rute∣masters are to receive at the day and place of Rendez∣vous of the foresaid Shire or Shires beforewritten, and shall give sufficient security to leavy upon their own charges as many Troopers well mounted, and Armed, as with the Troops they presently have, shal make 160.
in the whole; and that they shall have the saids Troo∣pers so to be listed upon their own charges at the fore∣said day and place of Rendezvous, under the pain of 400. Marks for each deficient Trooper: And for such Noblemen and Gentlemen designed Colonels, who have no Troops presently, the Estates Ordains them to receive the number of 80. Troopers from the Shire assigned to them for that purpose as is contained in the foresaid subjoyned List; and to finde sufficient sure∣ty for leavying the number of 100. Troopers upon their own charges, and to bring them to a Rendezvous at  upon the tenth day of June next, under the pain of four hundred Marks for each deficient well mounted and Armed Trooper: And in case any Co∣lonell shall upon his own charges raise 60. horse more to make up the fourth Troop, the Estates of Parliament allows him to have a Lieutenant Colonell; and what farder Troopers the Colonel or his Officers shal leavy upon their own charges, they shall have entertainment therefore as the rest of the Army: And the Estates of Parliament ordains the foresaid Committees to use all diligence for performing the foresaids duties intrusted to them, as they will testifie their affection to Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom; and that they fail not to make report to the Parliament or the Committee of Estates of this Kingdom, within six days after the days of Rendezvous respective abovewritten, assigned by the Parliament to the Shires respective, as is afore∣said: And if the Committes of Shires be remiss in their meetings, or in putting their Orders to execution, that the Colonels with such of the Committee as are willing to joyn with them, conveen upon all occasion
for putting their orders to execution, and for doing every thing that may further the Leavies, being always comptable for their proceedings to the Parliament, or Committee of Estates: And if any person or persons of what degree, quality or condition soever shall offer to oppose or obstruct by violence, the resolutions of the Parliament, or Committees thereof, With power to the saids Committees and Colonels to use all means to compess them, and if need be, to pursue the raisers of the tumults, and publick opposers of the Resoluti∣ons of the Estates in a hostile way by the strength of the Shire: And if the Insurrection or opposition come to that hight, that the Shire where it falls out is not able to suppress the same, that the Colonels, Commit∣tees and Commanders of the next adjacent Shires, on all Quarters, joyn for suppressing thereof, as they shall receive advertisement: And farther, the saids Estates upon consideration of the great abuses in former Lea∣vies, committed by Officers in taking of money from the Heritors, and others aforesaid, who are liable in putting out of Men, Horse or Foot in place of their said men; Declares that whatsoever Officer shall be found to have done so, shall not only be cashiered from his charge, but also branded with ane mark of infamy and disgrace: And that the saids whole forces may be kept in the better order and discipline, the saids Estates Ordains all Officers constantly to attend their saids charges, and that none of them upon any pretext what∣soever be absent the space of ane moneth, With cer∣tification to the contraveeners hereof, that their places shall be declared vacant, and ane other established in their charge. And the Estates of Parliament declares,
that whatsoever Officer or Souldier shall be found guilty of taking, at their own hand, horse, or any other guids from the Subjects of this Kingdom, they shall die for it without mercy. And for the better regulating of the putting forth Horse and Foot of such as will not fall to put forth ane whole Horse or Footman: It is declared, that the greatest Rent of these to be joyn∣ed for making up ane horse, shall provide the horse, and the rest that joyneth to contribute, according to 160. l. for ilk Horsman; and who have the manyest men to provide the Footman, and the remanent that joyneth, to contribute with him according to 40. l. for ilk Footman for their outreik of Arms, and whole fur∣niture belonging to them with their twenty dayes pro∣vision: And where the Rent, or number of men are equall, to cast lots. Follows the List of the Horse and Foot, to be put out by the severall Shires and Burghs of the Kingdom, with the names of the Colonels of the Foot. OUt of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 2000. Foot, and 200. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Roxburgh, the Earl of Bucleuche or his brother, the Earl of Louthian, or in case of his re∣fusall to accept, the Sheriff of Tevitdail, or Richard Dowglas his son. Out of the Sheriffdom of Berwick 1200. Foot and
100. Horse, Colonell for the Foot, the Earl of Home. Out of the Sheriffdom of Hadingtoun 1200. Foot & 100. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Lord Zester and Laird of Wauchtoun, and in case of Wauchtouns re∣fusall, the Lord Zester to be Colonel for the whole. Item, out of the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh to Land 1200. Foot, and 100. Horse, Colonels to the Foot, the Lord Balmerino, or in case he accept not, the Laird of Collingtoun and the Lord Cranstoun. Out of the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow 500. Foot, and 60. Horse; and out of the Sheriffdom of Peebles 400. Foot and 40. Horse, Colonell for the Foot of thir two Shires, the Lord Bargany. Out of the Sheriffdom of Dumfreis 1200. Foot and 120. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Dumfreis, and the Laird of Kethead. Out of the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun 1200. Foot, and 120. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Lord Gairleis, and the young Laird of Lag. Out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew, 2000. Foot and 240. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Glencairn, the Lord Ross, and the Lord Cochrane. Out of the Sheriffdom of Lanireck 1500. Foot and 200. horse, Colonell for the Foot, the Lord Duke of Hammiltoun. Out of the Sheriffdom of Sterling and Clakmannan 1000. Foot, and 120. Horse, and the Town of Stirling exemed (in regard of the pestilence) from the one half of their proportion, extending to  Colonell for the Foot, the Earl of Callender. Out of the Sheriffdoms of Fyffe and Kinrosher 1500. Foot and 240. horse: Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of
Kellie and the Lord Elcho, and the Estates of Parlia∣ment, remits to ane Committee of the Shire, which is to be equall of the Gentry and Burrows of the Shire, to proportion the ease granted by the Parliament to this Shire. Item, For the Sheriffdom of Perth 2400. Foot, and 240. Horse, the Town of Perth and Culros to be tane in consideration by the Committee of the Shire, in∣regard of the former vastations by the Plague, and all other places in the Shire, which are now waste by the same or by the War; And the Estates declares, that what the Committee shall deduce inrespect of wasted lands, shall be deduced to the Shire: And also declares, that the heritors of these wasted lands shall onely be lyable to put out their proportion accord∣ing to the fourth man they have presently. The Co∣lonells of the foot, the Earle of Atholl, the Earle of Tullibardine and Sir James Drummond younger of Machanie. Out of the Sheriffdome of Forfar, 1500. Foot, and 140. Horse, the Town of Breichen exeimed of 30. men of their former Levie, Colonell for the Foot, the Lord Carnegie: Out of the Sheriffdom of Kincardine, and the Earl of Merschellis part of Aberdeen 1200. Foot, and 100. Horse, Colonells for the Foot, George Keith, brother to the Earle of Marschell and Colonell Harie Mauld. Out of the rest of the Sheriffdom of Aberdeen, and out of the Sheriffdome of Bamff, 1600. Foot, and 240. Horse, the Town of Aberdeen to be exeimed from 60. of their proportion, inregard of their vastation by the Pestilence. The Town of Culane of 6. and the
Town of Bamff of 7. Colonells for the Foot, The Lord Bamff or his son, and the Master of Forbes: and the Estates of Parliament remits to the Committee of 24. to divide the proportion of Horse and Foot whilk Kilcardine, Aberdeen and Bamff shall put out. Out of the Sheriffdome of Elgine, Nairne, and that part of Innernes on this side Ness, 1500. Foot, and 120. Horse. The Town of Nairne to be exeemed of the two parts of three of their formar proportion. The Town of Forres to be exeemed of 6. men, and the Town of Innernes and Elgine to put out their fourth man upon the Oaths of the Magistrates and Mini∣sters: Colonell for the Foot, the Earle of Murray. And the Estates of Parliament recommends to the Com∣mittee of Warre of the Shire to have consideration of the vastation of the Sheriffdom of Nairne, and the like consideration for the Town of Innernes, in respect of its great and extraordinary condition. Out of the Earl of Seaforth and Lord Lovattis divi∣sion of Innernes, 1000. Foot, and 120 Horse, Colo∣nell for the Foot, the Barron of Kilraok. And the Estates of Parliament remits to the Committee of 24. to make ane just division betwixt the Earl of Seaforth and Lord Lovattis division foresaid. Out of the Earl of Seaforths part of Innernes, Su∣therland and Cathnes, 1600. Foot, and 120. Horse, Colonells for the Foot, the Earl of Sutherland, or in∣case of his refusall, the Laird of Duffus and the Laird of Murkill, and incase both Sutherland and Duffus re∣fuse, the Laird of Lumlar, so in this case the Lairds of Murkill and Lumlair to be Colonells, and the Estates remits to the Committee of 24. to clear this division.
Out of the Marques of Argyles division of Inner∣nes and Badzenoche, 1000 Foot, Colonell, the Laird of Macleoud or his brother Rorie. Out of the Sheriffdom of Bute, 50. Foot. Out of the Sheriffdom of Dumbartan in of place of their Foot 40. Horse, and this ease of their former Leavies to be given to these Parishes who hes had greatest losse by the Enemy. And in particular, the Barronie and Parochine of Lenzie, and each Horsman to be rated at 160. l. and the Town of Dumbartan to be exeemed from Ten, of their old proportion. The Sheriffdom of Argyle exeemed. Out of the Sheriffdom of Orkney 1000. Foot, Co∣lonell, the Earl of Morton or any that he shall appoint who is capable thereof, according to the Laws of this Kingdom. Follows the List of the Colonells of Horse, with their proportions of Horse out of the severall Shires. The Earle of Arroll, out of the Sheriffdom of Aberdeen 80. Horse. The Earle of Merschell, out the of Sheriffdom of Kin∣cardine 54. Horse, and part of Aberdeen 26. Horse, inde 80. Horse. The Earle of Buchane, out of the Sheriffdom of of Forfar, 70. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Bamff, 10. inde. 80. Horse. The Earle of Dumferling, out of the Sheriffdom of Fyfe. 80. Horse.
The Earle of Lauderdaill, out of the Sheriffdom of Hadinton, 80. Horse. The Earl of Traquair, out of the Sheriffdom of Peebls 40. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Drum∣freis 40. Horse, inde 80. Horse. The Earl of Dalhoussie or his son, out of the Sheriff∣dom of Edinburgh. 80 Horse. The Earle of Lanerek, out of the Sheriffdom of Lanerk 80. Horse. The Vicount of Kenmure, out of the Sheriffdom of Wigtoune and Kirkcudbright 80. Horse. The Vicount of Dudhope, out of the Sheriffdom of Forfar 70. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Bamff 10. Horse inde 80. Horse. The Vicount of Fendraught, out of the rest of the Sheriffdoms of Aberdeen, and Bamff, not formerly assigned 80. Horse. The Lord Sinclare, out of the Sheriffdom of Fyfe 80. Horse. The Lord Spynie, out of the Sheriffdoms of Stirling and Clakmannan 80. Horse. The Lord Balcarras, out of the Sheriffdom of Fyffe 80. Horse. The Lord Montgumrie, out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew 80. Horse. The Lord Levinstoune, out of the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh 20. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow 60. Horse, inde 80. Horse. Lievetenant Generall David Lesly, out of the She∣riffdom of Pearth 80. Horse. Generall Major Midletoune, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 80. Horse.
Colonell Sir John Broune, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 40. Horse, out of the Sheriff∣dom of Berwick 20. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Hadingtoune 20. Horse, inde 80. Horse. Colonell Robert Montgumrie, out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew. 80. Horse. Colonell Hary Barcley, out of a part of Aberdeen Shire, and Bamff 80. Horse. Colonell James Merser of Aldie, out of the Sheriff∣dom of Pearth 80. Horse. Colonell William Lokhart of  out of the Sheriffdom of Lanerk 80. Horse. Colonell William Keith of Ludquhairne, out of the Sheriffdoms of Stirling and Clakmannan 40. Horse, out of the Sheriffdom of Lanerk 20. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Dunbar. 20. Horse, inde 80. horse. Colonell Alex. Stranchane out of the Sheriffdom of Pearth 80. horse. Colonell Gilbert Ker, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 80. Horse. Col. Sir Mungo Murray, out of the Sheriffdom of Dumfreis 80. Horse. Col. David Barcley, out of Innernes and Murray 80. Horse. Col. William Vrry, out of the Sheriffdom of Ren∣frew 40. Horse; out of the Sheriffdom of Dumbartan 20. horse, and to receive 4000. Marks money, inde 80. Horse. Col. Hugh Frasar out of the rest of the Sheriffdom of Innernes 80. horse. Col.  Innes younger of that ilk, out of the Sheriffdoms of Elgine and Nairne 40. Horse, and the
Alex. Gibson, Cler. Regist. FINIS.
