s1472 52528916 178934
ACT, Requiring the Lists, and Original Subscriptions of these who have taken the Indemnity, to be instantly Transmitted to the Clerks of Privy Council. EDINBURGH, January 19. 1692. FOr asmuch, as by a Printed Act of Council, of the date the twelfth day of January instant, the Sheriffs Principals of the several Shires of this Kingdom, their Deputs, and Clerks are Ordained to Transmit to the Clerks of Privy Council, not only the Lists of the Persons, who have taken the benfite of Their Majesties Gracious Indemnity; but like∣wise the Oaths already Sworn, and Signed by the Takers thereof, with their original Subscriptions, and that before the Persons, and in the precise Terms mentioned in the said Act, betwixt and the twenty fifth day of January instant; for such as are on this side of the River of Tay, and the tenth day of February next, for those on the other side thereof. And the Lords of Their Majesties Privy Council Consi∣dering, that the present State of Their Majesties Affairs does require, that the forsaids Lists, and Oaths, with the Ori∣ginal Subscriptions, be transmitted to the Clerks of Coun∣cil, before the days above set down: Therefore They here∣by Require and Command the saids Sheriffs Principals and their Deputs, and Clerks instantly, upon their receiving of a Printed Copy of this Act, to Transmit to the saids Clerks of Council, without any delay, the saids Lists, & Oaths with the Original Subscriptions: And appoints Their Ma∣jesties Sollicitor, or his Assistants, immediatly to dispatch Expresses to the several Shires, with Coppies of this Act to the Sheriff-Clerks of the several Shires, to be by them in∣timate to their Sheriff-Principals, and Sheriff Deputs, with Certification to such as shall failʒie in not giving punctual Obedience to this Act, that the same shal be accounted a mal∣versation in their Office, and shall infer the punishment of deprivation, and they shal be deprived accordingly. And Ordains these presents to be Printed. Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me GILB. ELIOT, Cls Sti. Concilii. GOD save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excel∣lent Majesties. Anno Dom. 1692.
