s1549 52529219 178948
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the Twenty Fifth Day of March, to the Fifteenth Day of May, 1691. WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Brittain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; to Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially Con∣stitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our Proclamation of the Date the Fifteenth Day of October last, Adjourn the Current Parliament of this Our Antient Kingdom of Scotland, from the Twenty Two Day of October last by-past to the Twenty Fifth Day of March instant: And we Considering, that the present State of Our Affairs doth no Require the Meeting of Our Parliament so soon as the Twenty Fifth Day of March to which it was Adjourned, and We being unwilling that the Members of Our said Parliament be put to the Trouble & Charge of Meeting upon the foresaid Day; Do therefore, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn Our said Current Parliament, until the Fifteenth Day of May next ensuing; Hereby Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament to Attend that Day, in the usual Way, and under the Certification contained in the seve∣ral Acts of Parliament. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Our antient Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the said Adjournment of Our Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said Twenty Fifth Day of March instant, untill the Fifteenth Day of May next ensuing, as ye will Answer to Us thereupon. The which to do, We Commit to you, conjunctly and severally, as said is, Our full Power by these Presents, delivering them by you duely Execute and Indorsed again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Third Day of March, and of Our Reign the Second Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA. MONCREIF, Cls. Secreti Concilii. GOD save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Ex∣cellent Majesties, 1691.
