s1735 52612311 179616
A PROCLAMATION Declaring Mr. Richard Cameron, and others, Rebels and Traitors, &c. CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland defender of the Faith, To  Our Lyon King at Armes, and his Brethren, Heraulds, Macers, Pursevants and Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly, and severally, specially constitute Greeting; Forasmuch, as Mr. Richard Cameron, Cameron his brother, Mr. Thomas Douglas, Mr. Donald Cargill, and others their accomplices▪ Have now at last shaken off all respect to Our Laws, and their allegeance it self to Us their undoubted Soveraign, and have ente∣red into express and open Combinations and Covenants, wherein they most Sacrilegiously do by a solemn Oath, In∣gage themselves to disown Us and Our Authority, and declare it not only lawfull, but a Christian duty upon all Our Subjects to rise in Arms against Us, and to murther such as are in any Trust or Imployment under Us, declaring Us an Usurper, and that none should obey them who re in Authority under Us, but such as would obey the Devil and his Vicegerents, and that they will chase and set up Magistrates who shall govern them according to the Judicial Law of Moses, and not according to the Laws made by Us or any of Our Predecessors: Which Covenant, with several most Impious, Scandalous, and Seditious Pamphlets, were taken from the said Mr. Donald Cargil, (one of their Pachers) at the Queens-Ferry upon the third day of June instant. Likeas, the said Mr. Richard Cameron, and his brother, and Mr. Thomas Douglas, accompani∣ed with several Ruffians, and particularly Iohn Vallang, brother in Law to Robert Park one of the Bailiffs of Sanquhar, Daniel Mackmitchel in gfoot, Thomas Campbel son to , Campbel late of Dalblair in Auchinleck Paroch, Iohn Madie brother to the Miller at Cubs-Milne in the same Paroch, Iohn Fowller, sometimes servant to the deceast  Lindsay of Covingtown, Patrick Gemill son in Law to Charles Logan, Messenger at Cumnock-maines, James Stewart son to Archibald Stewart at Calsey-end, near to the Earl of Galloway's House, Alexander Gordown called of Kilsture, Francis Johnstoun Merchant in Clidsdale,  Creichtown, son to Robert Creichtown of Achtitinch now in Water-head, and others to the number of twenty one persons, did upon the twenty two of June, enter within the Burgh of Sanquhar, with drawn Swords and Pistols in their hands, and after a solemn procession through the Town, did draw up at the cross, and published and affixed upon the Cross and other publick places thereof, a most Treasonable and unparralelled Paper, disowning Us to be their King, and defaming Us with the very same names and designations used by the Usurpers in their greatest rage after they had murthered the King, our Royal and blessed Father of Eternal Memory, and overturned all the fundamental Laws and Rights belonging to Us and Our Subjects, whose principles and Foot-steps they exactly renew and follow; The reading and affixing of which Proclamation by these Traitors and Rebels being clearly proved to Our Privy Council by witnesses upon Oath; And it being notour and undeniable, that these Traitors, to the number of seventy, or thereby, continue in Armes committing all manner of Outrages and Insolencies. We have therefore, with advice of Our Privy Council, thought fit, as use is in such cases, to declare the said Mr. Richard Cameron,  Cameron his brother, Mr. Thomas Dow∣glas, Mr. Donald Cargill, Iohn Vallang, Daniel Mackmitchel, Thomas Campbel, John Mudy, Patrick Gemill, James Stewart, Alexander Gordown, Francis John∣stown and  Creichtown, open and notorious Traitors and Rebels against Us and Our Authority, impowering and requiring all Our good Subjects, to treat them as such; And particularly, We hereby require and command all Our good Subjects, as they will be answerable upon their Allegeance, to to do their outmost diligence to discover the saids Traitors, and to give timous Intimation with all possible speed, in case they be not able to seize and ap∣prehend them themselves, to the nearest Officer of Our standing Forces, (if any be within twelve Miles) and if none be within the said distance, to the next Magistrate, commanding all persons to concur with Our Forces for apprehending the said Traitors. And to the effect, the harbourers and ressetters, or those who neglect to discover them, may be known and punished, We do require the hail Heretors, or their Bailiffs or Chamberlands in case of the Heretors absence, to cause call and cite before them in a Court, all persons living upon their respective Lands, Men or Women above the age of sixteen years, in all the Paroches underwritten, viz. Carsfern, Balmaclellan, Dalry, Kells, Barr in Carrick, the Moor Kirk of Kyle, Galstown, Lowdon-Tindergarth, Streven, Lesmehage, Sanquher, Irongray, Glencairn, Cumnock, Monigaff, and Penningham, upon the second and last Tuedayes of July and August next: And to take the Oaths of all the saids persons living upon the respective Lands whether any of these Traitors foresaid were in that Paroch; and where and when; and left they may pretend not to know the saids Traitors, that they discover upon Oath any skulking or lurking persons which they have known to have been in that Paroch after the Publication hereof in the respective Shires, and the Heretors or their Bailiffs and Chamberlands in their ab∣sence, to give an account of their diligence in Writing, within eight dayes after each Dyet foresaid, to the Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of Regalities, Magi∣strats of Burghs, and shall adjoyn thereto the following Declaration upon Oath. I  do solemnly swear by the Eternal God, that I have truly and faithfully examined upon Oath, the whole Persons; Men and Women living upon my Lands, who compeared, who are above the age of sixteen Years, whereof I am Heretor, Bailiff, or Chamberlain, within the Paroch of  and that I caused my Officers give Execution upon Oath, that he did cite at the saids Persons to the foresaids Diets, and have given as account of the Persons who compeared not, or compearing, refused to give Oath. And in case the saids Traitors should leave and dishaunt the abovemed Paroches, and repair to other Pchs or places, that immediatly upon notice from the Leiutenant General, or any authorised by him to the Sheriffs and other Magistrates of the respective Burghs, where from time to time they resort, the saids Magistrats are ordained to make intimation to the Hereors of their Bailiffs, or their Chamberlains in their absence, to the end they may make the same enquiry after the same way and method, and to return an account of their diligence within two Moneths after such Intimation from the Leintenant General as aforesaid; with certification to such as compear not & Depone, shall be holden and repute as connivers at and concealers, of the saids Traitors; and that the Heretors, or in their abseace their Balilffs & Chamberlains who shall not return their accounts to the said respective Magistrats as aforesaid or their Deputs, and the faid Magistrats who shall not return their accounts to Our Council the first Council day in August, for their diligence in July, and the first Council day of September for their diligence in August, shall be proceeded a∣gainst with all rigor, a s and concealers of the saids Traitors. And further, We do hereby require and command all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of Regalities, and Magistrats of Burghs where the saids Traitors use to haunt or resort, to raise such persons in their respective Jurisdictions, as they shall find necessar for that Service, for whom they will be answerable; and that the Sheriffs and other Magistrats foresaids, require the assistance of the Commissioners of the Militia, in their respective Jurisdictions: And to search for take and apprehend the saids Traitors in their respective bounds, and in case they flye forth thereof, to advertise the Neighbouring, Sheriffs, and other Magistrats who are appointed to do the like diligence con∣form to the 144. Act 12. Par. K. Ja. 6. And if in pursute of the saids Traitors they resisting to be taken, any of Our saids Magistrats, or other Our good Subjects shall happen to kill or mutilat them, or any of them. We do hereby declare that they nor none assisting them shall ever be called in question, or pursued Civilly or Criminally therefore in time coming, but that these Presents shall be as sufficient for their exoneration, as if they had Our special Re∣mission, and that their doing thereof shall be repute good and acceptable service done to Us. And for the better encouragement of such as shall apprehend and bring in the saids Traitors dead or alive, the Apprehender of Mr. Richard Cameron, shall, as a reward, have five thousand Merks; and for Mr. Thomas Dowglas, M. Donald Cargil, and for the said  Cameron, brother to M. Richard, who red and assist the said Traiterous Declaration at Sanquhar, three thou∣sand Merks for each of them, and one thousand Merks for each one of the rest of the Traitors abovementioned, to be instantly payed to them by the Commissoners of our Thesauary. And ordains these Presents to be Printed, and published at the Mercat Crosses of Edinburgh, and Mercat Crosses of the remnant head Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom on the south side of the Water of Tay, and other places needful, by the Sheriffs of the respe∣ctive Shires foresaid, that none pretend ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the last day of June, One thousand six hundred and eighty and of Our Reign the thirty two Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concil God Save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1680.
