s1738 52528948 179015
royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Declaring War against the French King. Edinburgh, the 6th of August, 1689. WHereas the French King being the great Disturber of Christendom, these several years, Hath not only Invaded, and Seized the Territories and Rights of his Neighbouring Princes, His Majesties Allies; but hath used unparalelled Cru∣elties, and Devastations, and by a most Unchristian Persecution, having design∣ed to Suppress and Extirpat the Protestant Religion, he hath been the great Sup∣porter, and Abetter of the Arbitrary Courses in these Kingdoms, for the Destruction of their Religion, Liberties, and Laws; and hath of late, without any Declaration of War, Invaded he Kingdom of Ireland, Fomenting and Maintaining a Rebellion there: And likewise, he has lately Declared War against His Majesty, and his Kingdoms of Scotland and England, and hath sent Ships to Transport Irish Forces to Invade the said Kingdom of Scotland; For which cause His Majesty having Required the Lords of His Privy Council, To Emit a Declaration of War in His Majesties Name. Therefore the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, in Their Majesties Names and Authority, Do Declare War against the French King, and his Subjects, and Discharge all the Leidges of this His Majesties Antient Kindom of Scotland, To Trade, Cor∣respond, or have any Intercourse, or Meddling with the said French King, or any of his Sub∣jects: Declaring nevertheless, that such of the French Subjects, as for the Causes foresaids have been Expelled, or have abandoned their Native Countrey, and have taken Refuge in this Kingdom of Scotland, that they living dutifully, and not Corresponding with His Majesties Ene∣mies, they shall be secure in their Lives, Liberties and Fortunes, under His Majesties Protecti∣on, and the Shelter of His Laws. Requiring likewise, all Officers of War, Captains, and Masters of Ships, and generally the whole Leidges, to Prosecute the War against the said French King, and his Subjects, with all Acts of Hostility, by Sea and Land, to their uttermost. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published by the Lyon King at Arms, or his Depute, Heraulds, Macers, and Pursevants, at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, at the Castle-Gate, and Peer and Shore of Leith, and other places needful. Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. God save King VVilliam and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Privy Council, Anno Dom. 1689.
