S1802 52529282 179050
A PROCLAMATION For a Solemn National Thanksgiving. WILLIAM By the Grace of God King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To Macers of Our Privy Council, Mes∣senger at Armes, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally speci∣cially constitute Greeting; For as much as the Almighty and all wise God having superadded to all the Mercy and Goodness manifested to∣wards Us and Our People, in protecting Our Royal Person, and De∣feating the Secret, as well as open Designes and Attempts of Our Ene∣mies against Our Royal Person and Kingdomes, during the Course of a dangerous and bloody War; The incomparable Blessing of an honourable Peace to all our Dominions, and Allies joyned with Us in Defence of the same Cause; And likewise, That God hath been pleased to return Us in Safety to these Our Dominions, to the great Satissaction and Joy of all Our Good Subjects, It is Our Duty and theirs by a Day set a Part for that effect to pay Our Solemn Acknowledgements, And return Praise and Glory to God who has been to Us a Mighty Deliverer; And for which also, the Ministers met together at Edinburgh, in the Commission of the late General Assembly of this Our Antient Kingdom have made Address to the Lords of Our Privy Council, that a Solemn Day of publick Thanks giving may be set apart to be Religiously observed throughout this Our Antient Kingdom: Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do Appoint and Command, that the sixteen day of December next to come be Religiously observed, as a Solemn Day of publick Thanks giving by all Persons within this Kingdom, for returning most humble and hearty Thanks, to the Divine Goodness, for the signal Blessings and De∣liverance already bestowed upon Us and Our People, and to implore the Continuance thereof, whereby Our Subjects under Us, may not only enjoy the Fruits and Comforts of a happy and lasting Peace; But We and They may be enriched with all the Blessings of the Gospel; And that God may establish that which he hath wrought for Us: Which Day of Thanksgiving for the Causes and Ends foresaid; We hereby peremptorly re∣quire and enjoyn to be observed with all Religious Exercises suitable to such an Occasi∣on by all Our Good Subjects, Ministers and Others, as they will be answerable at their High∣est Peril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you stricty and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and the remanent Mercat Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority make Publication of the Premisses, that none may pretend Ignorance; And We ordain Our Solicitor to dispatch Coppies hereof to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of the Stewartries or their Deputs or Clerks to be by them published at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs upon Receipt thereof, and immediatly sent to the several Ministers, to the effect they may read and intimat the same from their Pulpits upon the Sunday before the said sixteenth day of December next: And Ordains these Presents to be Printed and Published in manner foresaid. Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty day of November, and of Our Reign the nynth Year 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1697.
