S1896 52528985 179086
WR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION For raising the Rate of Money. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Mes∣sengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as, by reason of the raising of the Rates of the current Coyns in the neighbouring Kingdoms, and Countries with whom this Our Ancient Kingdom hath Trade and Traffique; It is found, that there is much Money, both Gold and Silver exported forth of the same, so that a Proportional raising of the Rate of of the Coynspresenly current in this Kingdom, is necessary to restrain the said Export, and prevent the preju∣dice thereof; Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council have thought fit to Raise and hereby do raise the Rates of the Species after-mentioned, to be from the Day and Date hereof as follows, viz, The Rate of tbe silver Crown-piece coyned in Scotland, or of the silver milned Crown of England, to three pounds six shilling: Of the silver Scots fourty shilling Piece, to fourty four shilling: Of the silver milned Half-Crown of England, to thirty three shilling: Of the silver Scots twenty shilling Piece, to twenty two shilling: Of the silver Scots Ten shilling Piece, to Eleven shilling: Of the Ducatdoun, to three pounds fourteen shilling: Of the four Rex Dollars, called the Bank-Sword-Dollar, Wild-man and Wild-borse Dollars, and Caste-Dol∣lar, to three pounds, all the rest of the Rix Dollars continuing as they were at the Rate of fifty eight shilling: Of the Scots four merk Piece, the Leg dollar, French silver Crown Piece, Cross-dollar and Milnryne, each of them to fifty eight shilling, and all their Halfs and Quarters proportionally. And these Rates above-set-down, are hereby Declared and Ordained to be the Current Rates of the foresaid Species and Coyns, at which all Per∣sons in Contracts and Bargains, and in all Payments whatsomever, shall be obliged to receive the same, as the Current Coyn of this Our Antient Kingdom. And farder, We do hereby strictly Order and Command, that the Laws and Acts of Parliament against the transporting of Gold and Silver out of this Kingdom, be punctually Observed and put to Execution by all concerned. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent thir Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and whole other Marcat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance: and Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the Twelfth day of July, And of Our Reign the Seventh year, 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.
