S1935 R183558 51784664 175068
HONI SOIT  MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
A PROCLAMATION For the more effectual Uplifting and Inbringing the Annexed and Additional Excise. Edinburgh, August 14. 1655. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Mes∣sengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as, by the late Act of Parliament for the additional and annexed Excise, it is provided, that the Lords of Our Privy Council shal prescribe such other Methods and Orders, besides these contained in the said Act, as they shall judge necessary for making the same effectual, which two Excises are now set in Tack, for the space of eighteen Months after the first of September next. Therefore, and for the more effectual uplifting and inbringing of the foresaid Excises, We have thought fit to Ordain, and do hereby with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council Ordain and Appoint, that no Brewer within Burgh of Royalty or Regality vend or sell any part of their Brousts, until first they make entry thereof to the Excise-Office within the Burghs, and there obtain a Sufferance for the quantity browen, which the Keeper of the Office is to give gratis, and without delay: and that in case of non-entry, or wrongous entry, the Brewer be lyable in the sum of ten Pounds Scots toties quoties, which entries may be disproven before any Magistrat, Justice of Peace, or Commissioners of Excise, by Witnesses, or Oath of Party, notwithstanding any Survey made by the Surveyours and Waiters, That in regaird the Excise of strong Waters, Aquavitae, Brandy, and Forreign-beer is ordered by the said Act of Par∣liament, to be payed by the Retailers, Therefore all Brewers of Aquavitae, and strong Waters, make Month∣ly Entries of the quantities of the said Liquors, brown by them, and give in subscribed Lists to the next Ex∣cise Office, of the Names of the Persons to whom they sell their Aquavitae, or strong Waters, to be again sold by retail: as likewise, that the Collectors, Clerks, or Surveyours at Sea-ports, do give up a true and particular Accompt to the saids Tacks-men of the Excise, or their Deputs, of the Quantities of Forraign strong Wa∣ters, Brandy and Forreign Beer, Imported from time to time, and who is tbe Merchant Importer: as also, that the said Merchant Importer be lyable and obliged to give and deliver subscribed Lists to the said Tacks-men and their Deputs, of the persons Names to whom they sell the said Brandy, strong Waters or Forraign Beer for re∣tail; and of the Quantities sold to them. Item, that all Brewers Barrells be for hereafter marked with their own Name, and the Seal of the next Excise Office, which Seal shall be furnished to them gratis. Item, that no person presume to resett any Ale or drinking Beer in their Houses, in order to the Imbazling of the same, under the pain of ten pounds Scots toties quoties, to be payed to the foresaid Tacks-men. And lastly, that all Tap∣sters and Vintners of Ale and drinking Beer, shall for hereafter, before they tap or vent the same, take first a Licence from the next Excise Office, and there give Bond and Caution that they shall not tap and sell for less prices than these appointed by the Act of Parliament, under the penalty of ten pounds Scots toties quoties, ap∣pointed by the said Act. OƲR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this our ancient Kingdom, and there be open Proclama∣tion, make intimation hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance: and Ordains these Presents to be Printed and Published. Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the Fourteenth day of August and of Our Reign the Seventh Year 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii▪ God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most Sacred Majesty, 1695.
