s3994 99887887 183542
The Slighted MAID: OR, The Pining Lover: With sighs and moans she doth intreat her Dear, Whilst he seems to be deaf and will not hear: At length his frozen Heart begins to melt, Being moved with the passion she had felt. To the Tune of, I prithee Love turn me, &c. Licens'd and Enter'd according to Order. WAs ever Maiden so scorned, by one that she loved so dear; Long time have I sighed and mourned, and still my Love will not hear: O turn to me my own dear Heart, and I prithee Love turn to me; For thou art the Lad I long for, and, alas! what remedy? My lodging is on the cold ground, and very hard is my fare, But that which troubles me most, is the unkindness of my Dear: O turn to me my own dear Heart, and I prithee Love turn to me; For thou act the Lad I long for, and, alas! what remedy? O stop not thy ear to the wailings of me a poor harmless Maid; You know we are subject to failings, blind Cupid hath me betraid: And now I must cry, O turn Love, and I prithee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone art the cause of my misery. How canst thou be so heard hearted, and cruel to me alone; If ever we should be parted, then all my delight is gone; But ever I cry, O turn Love, and I prithee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone art the cause of my misery. I'll make thee pritty sweet posies, and constant I ever will prove, I'll strow thy chamber with roses, and all to delight my Love: Then turn to me my own dear Heart, and I prithee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone can procure my liberty. I'll do my endeavour to please thee, by making the bed full soft, Of all thy sorrows i'll ease thee, by kissing thy lips full oft: Then turn to me my own dear Heart, and I prethee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone can procure my liberty. But thou wilt harden thy heart still, and be deaf to my pittiful moan, So I must endure the smart still, and tumble in straw all alone: Whilst still I cry, O turn Love, and I prithee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone art the cause of my misery. If that thou still do disdain me, I never will love thee more, Thy cruelty shall never pain me, for i'll have another in store: But still I cry, O turn Love, and I prethee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone art the cause of my misery. By hearing her pittiful clamour, the passion of love he felt; He could no longer disdain her, his frozen heart it did melt: For ever she cryed, O turn Love, and I prethee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone can procure my liberty. He said, My Love I will please thee, thy heaviness grieves me sore, But let not sorrow once seize thee, I never will grieve thee more: I'll turn to thee my own kind Heart, dear Love i'll turn to thee; For I am the Man that now am come to procure thy liberty. I'll crown thee with a garland of straw then, and marry thee with a rush-ring, My frozen heart it will thaw then, and merrily we will sing: But ever she cry'd, O turn Love, and I prethee Love turn to me, For thou art the Man that alone can release my misery. Most lovingly he embrac'd her, and call'd her his Heart's Delight; And close by his side he plac'd her, all sorrows was vanquisht quite: And now she for joy cry'd, Turn Love, and I prethee Love turn to me; For thou art the Man that alone hast releast me of misery. London: Printed by and for W. O. for A. M. and sold by C. Bates, at the Sun and Bible in Pye-corner.
