S3721A 52529324 179120
ADVERTISEMENT WHEREAS His Sacred MAJESTY, by His Patent, hath constituted Sir Robert Sibbald, one of His Physicians in Ordinary, His Geographer for His Kingdom of SCOTLAND, and Commandeth and Ordaineth him to publish the Description of the Scotia Antiqua, & Scotia Moderna, and the Na∣tural History of the Products of His Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND: These are earnestly to en∣treat all persons, that they would be pleased freely to communicate their Answers to these following Queries, or any of them, Directing them to the said Sir Robert Sibbald at his Lodging at Edinburgh, or to Master James Broun at his house in Harts-closs, who is Deputed by the said Sir Robert Sibbald, to receive and Registrate them; or to Robert Mean, Post-master at Edinburgh, to be sent to any of them: Withall specifying in their Letters, the place of their Habitation, that they may be again Written to, if Occasion require; And an Honourable Men∣tion shall be made of them in the Work, according to the Importance of the Information. General Queries, to which Answers are desired. I. What the Nature of the County or place is? And what are the chief products thereof? II. What Plants, Animals, Mettals, Substances cast up by the Sea, are peculiar to the place, and how Ordered? III. What Forrests, Woods, Parks? What Springs, Rivers, Loughs? With their various properties, whether Medicinal? With what Fish replenished, whether rapid or flow? &c. The rise of the Rivers, and their Emboucheurs? IV. What Roads, Bayes, Ports for shipping, and their De∣scription? And what Moon causeth High-water? What Rocks, and sholes on their Coast? V. What Ancient Monuments, Inscriptions, graved and figured Stones; Forts and ancient Camps? And what Curiosities of Art  have been found the? VI. What great Battels have been there fought, Or any other Memorable Action or Accident? VII. What peculiar Customs, Manners or Dispositions the Inhabitants of each County or Town have among them? VIII. What Monasteries, Cathedrals, or other Churches have been there, and how named? IX. What places give, or formerly have given the Title to any Noble-man? As also, what ancient Seats of Noble-Families are to be met with? X. What the Government of the County is? whether She∣riffdom, Stewartry, or Baillery? XI. What Towns of Note in the County, especially Towns Corporate? The Names of the Towns both Ancient and Modern? Whether they be Burrows Royal, of Regality or Barony? The Magistracy of Towns Corporated, when Incorporated? And by whom built? With the Return of Parliament-Men? The Trade of the Town; How inhabited, and their manner of Buildings? What Publick or Ancient Buildings? Their Jurisdiction? &c. XII. In what Bishoprick each County or any part thereof is? Who is Sheriff, Stewart or Baily? And who commands the Militia? What Castles, Forts, Forrests, Parks, Woods, His MAJESTIE hath there? &c. To the NOBILITY. What Sheriffdomes, Bailliries, Stewartries, Regalities, Baronies and Burrows they have under them? What Command of the Militia? What special Priviledge, Dignity and Heritable Com∣mand they have? The Rise of their Family, Continuance, and their Branches? What Forrests, Woods, Parks, Loughs, Rivers, Mines, and Quarries they have? What Fishing? &c. What Harbours they have? What their Titles are? What Memorable Actions raised or Aggrandized their Family? &c. To the CLERGY. What their Priviledges and Dignities are? Their Erection? The Bounds of their Diocese? Their Chapter? The number of their Parishes in their Diocese? Their Jurisdiction, their Foundations for publick d pious Uses their Re What Lands hold of them? Their Houses? &c. To the GENTRY. What the Rise of their Family, their Priviledge and Dignity? What Baronies and Burrows under them? What Harbours, what Forrests, Woods, Parks? Their Houses, the Description and Names of them? The Chief of the Name and the Branches? The Memorable Exploits done by them, and the Eminent Men of the Name? Their Heritable Command and Jurisdiction? &c. To the Royal BURROWS. Of what Standing? The Constitution of their Government? their Priviledges, Jurisdiction and its Extent? Their publick Houses, Churches, Forts, Monuments, Universities, Colledges, Schools, Hospitals, Manufactures, Harbours? What their Latitude and Longitude is? &c. To the UNIVERSIT DGES. What Standing they are of? Their priviledges Jurisdiction and its Extent, their Constitution? The Number of their Professors, their Names, what they teach? Their Salaries, Foundations, and their Founders? Their Revenue and Dependencies? Their Houses, Churches and Chappels, Aedifices and Monuments? Their Libraries, Curious Instruments? The acount of the famous Men bred there, or Masters there? What are the Observations of the Masters or Students, that may be for the Embellishment of this Work? The Answers to these preceeding Queries are to be Registrate, and to be Insert in their proper places. The Answers to these Queries is earnestly desired that no person may complain, if what concerns them be not insert: For the Author is resolved to insert all that he is assured of the Truth, and certainty of, as Informed. Imprimatur Jo: Edinburgen. Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, at his Printing-House in Bells-Wynd. Anno 1682.
