V530A 99885024 182862
A VINDICATION OF THE RUMP: OR, THE RUMP RE-ADVANC'D. To the Tune of, Ʋp tails all. FUll many a Ballad hath been penn'd, and scoffing Poem Writ Against the RƲMP, but I intend to speak in praise of it. Come Jove and Apollo, come Venus and Mars, And lend your assistance: to speak of the A— will require a Prodigious wit. There's scarce a Lady to be found that loves either Pear or Plum One halfe so well, if she be sound, as tabering at her B—. It may be, you'l say, I'm wide of the Case, Since that Musick's made in a distant place: I answer, the bredth of your Thum. When Alderman Atkins did bemar his Hose, through a Panick fear, And Captain Rea, that Man of War, Oh! what a Hogo was there? If you ask me, what praise is in this? at a word, The Captain so fenced himself by a T— that his enemies could not come near. There is not a Lawyer in Countrey or Town, whose Rhetorick doth prevail, Although he hath purchas'd Fee-simple Gown, th' but loves to be dealing in tail; And I may well swear by Apollo or Mars, That at a place called, the Oven's Arse, oft times I have drunken good Ale. And when you are dallying with a young Maid would you not her buttocks bethump? And I have been often well apaid with a Goose both fat and plump: The body being eaten, we strive for the tail, Each man with his Kan'kin of nappy brown Ale, doth box it about for the RƲMP. The RƲMP of a Coney I often have seen most piteously claw'd by a Ferret, And a Capon's Rump is a bit for a Queen, although she's a person of merit. In preaching & praying who spends the whole day, At nights keeps a Rump wherewithall for to play, be he never so full of the spirit. I wonder who first call'd the Parliament RƲMP, some say, that it was Jack Hobby, And some, fiery Pryn: good wits will jump; now I write not this to bob ye, But only to tel ye, that good Mr. Pryn, For all that he's cropt, yet he could not get in, but was fain to remain in the Lobby. The other day I was going in haste, (to think on't, it grieves my heart) I saw a poor fellow all nak'd to the waste, and whipt at the Arse of a Cart: His Rump ('tis true) suffer'd the rout. But I would Fain know who it was, that durst be so bold, as to call Mr. Speaker Sir F— He might as well have stiled him Anus, since he was the mouth of the RƲMP, As cunning a Fox as Rome's Sejanus: but I do not love for to frump; Or else I could tell ye, my friends, to an Ace, What good can accrew to the Land by a Mace, as long as the Knave's the great'st Trump. Our zealous sticklers for Reformation will edifie on the Rump of a Sister, And it will never grow out of fashion to physick the tail with a Glister. But beware that Monk doth not come with a bitter Purge to our Rump, which wil make her beshit her, for she hath already bepist her. Rumpatur. London, Printed for Rosicleer Arsewind, the RƲMP's Leather-Seller.
