641 [ocm]72798016 183990
CHRISTOPHER ANGELL, A Grecian, who tasted of many stripes and torments inflicted by the Turkes for the faith which he had in Iesus Christ. AT OXFORD, Printed by Iohn Lichfield, and Iames Short, Printers to the famous Vniuersitie. 1618.
TO THE MOST RENOWNED AND resplendent, most wise, and iudicious, most learned and louing Patrons of the Greeke Tongue: most gracious supporters of the decayed estate of all distressed Grecians and Strangers: Fathers and Brethren in Christ, Gouernours and Heads of the two famous and flourishing Vniuersities of this Iland in generall, and more in particular to all heads of Colledges ther∣in, and whatsoeuer Students vnder their protection, and to all Diuines, Physicians and Lawyers: Furthermore to all that beare authoritie in the ample and well gouerned Cities; In generall to the industrious and studious among the Com∣monaltie within the Confines of the euer honoured and admi∣red England, prosperitie here, and glory hereafter. HEretofore gray-eyed Minerua spake and prophesied in Athens, by the mouthes of learned Grecians: but now, and long before this time, I see her singing in Brittany by the mouths of the most wise English men, and crowning the sonnes of England with all kinds of diuers coloured Garlands. Concerning me, if any man shall enquire what might be the cause, and for what reason I came into this famous Iland, and haue trauelled so far as this most illustrious and renow∣ned Vniuersitie of Oxford; may it please him to he are the cause, (God himselfe will witnesse it to bee true according to this ensuing discourse.) Because the Deuill perceiued that his time was but short, therefore he came into the Earth full of wrath and was mooued against the Church of God, as a ra∣ging and angry Lion; according to that which S. Iohn saith in the Reuelation, the 12. Chap. and the 22. Verse; and as the Prophet Danid speaketh in the 80. Psalme and the 13.
Verse, The wild Bore out of the Wood hath destroyed it, and the wild beasts of the fields haue eaten it: and againe in the 83. Psalme, Verse 5. and 6. They haue consulted together in heart, and haue made a league against thee; The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismaelites, &c. Right so the Greeke Church at this time suffereth, being destitute of all perfection and know∣ledge: the cause of this euill, is the great Turke, that is, the King of the Turkes doth desire, and is willing to haue peace with all that are vnder him: but some of his Magistrates are very wicked and proud, and by those the Greeke Church doth suffer much misery. For this reason, neither can there be any Schoole, neither any Master desiring to teach Schol∣lers can remayne in one place. Euen as I suffered and know: who haue tasted of many kinds of miserie. Now the cause of this my miserie was this: I in my youth desired much to better my vnderstanding and my learning, remembring that saying of Christ; Search the Scriptures and in them thou shalt find euerlasting life: and that of Saint Paul to Timothie, In that thou hast knowne the holy Scriptures of a child which are able to make thee wise vnto saluation. And that of Salo∣mon; where the Lord saith, In that thou askedst wisdome only and nothing else, I will giue thee wisdome and riches therewith∣all, and a Kingdome greater then all the Kingdoms of the earth: And that of Dauid in the hundred and nineteenth Psalme, In thy Lawes did I meditate. Yet by reason of the defect of Teachers I trauelled through many places in Greece that I might supply that wāt; profiting in some places more, in some lesse: At length I came to Athens, studied & preached there; now the Captaine of that place, was an Hagarene, & a dead∣ly enemy to all Christians which dwelt at Athens: besides this, he was very couetous and cruell, vniust, and did much wrong to the Athenians: by reason whereof the Athenians went to the great Turke three seuerall times, and complay∣ned of the iniuries which he had offered them, whereupon the great Turke sent certaine Noble men to hang him; but by reason of his Riches and Nobilitie they could not accom∣plish that they were sent for. The Captaine vpon these com∣plaints
was grieuously offended with the Athenians: and far∣ther, to satisfie his owne greedie desires, he oppressed many Strangers: amongst the, rest seeing me also, who was a Stran∣ger and vnknowne of all: immediately he layes hands vpon me, diligently examined me concerning the name of the Go∣uernour of my Natiue Countrey: I answered, that it was now almost twentie yeares since I left my Countrey for study and learning sake; and that I had not as yet returned to my Coun∣trey, and therefore I knew not the name of the Gouernour thereof. Then hee answered me, If you know not your Go∣uernour, you must goe to Prison; whither when I came, they clapt a paire of Bolts vpon my legs. Not long after the Go∣uernour called many of the Turkes, who deriue their begin∣ning from Mahomet: and then he tooke me out of Prison, & brought me before them, and said vnto them, Behold a Spa∣nish Traytor. They all cryed out, Tis true as you say, hee is a trayterous Spaniard, as we know by his Beard, for it is long and picked, and blacke, and his clothes are of a Spanish red (for I did weare apparell of red colour, such as the chiefe of the Greeke Monkes vse also:) and some of the Christians standing by, made answere for mee to the Turkes, that this was the vsuall apparell of the better fort of the Greeke Monkes: but the Turkes withstood that, saying, that the Monkes Habits were made of courser cloth, but mine was of finer, and therefore a Spanish garment. This they said, not that the cloth was indeed finer then that of other Monks, but that they might vniustly picke a quarrell; and bring some accusation, whereby they might punish me. After this they began to iutice me saying; Our Easter is neere at hand, and if thou wilt deny thy Christ, wee promise thee (and that wee may not deceiue thee as concerning our promise, we sweare) that if thou wilt become a Turke, thou shalt greatly honour our feast day, and for this wee will make thee a Centurion, besides other great honours which wait vpon thee. Now it is the manner of the Turkes when they sweare, not to falsifie their words; and thrice in this manner they tempted me: but I denied them alwaies, telling them, That my care was not
for honours, but that I desired rather to die in the same Re∣ligion, for which my father and mother died also. Then one of the Gouernours came, and plucking me by the Beard, & the haire of the head, buffetted mee, saying; Why, seeing I turned Turke, maist not thou also? (for before time he had beene a Christian) I answered him, that I cared not what hee had done, I allow not of it. Then he threw me on the groūd, and trampled vpon my head before all the Congregation of Turkes, and Christians. And afterwards they shut mee vp in close ward, meaning after a few houres to bring mee out a∣gaine to punishment, that for feare of stripes I might turne Turke. And certaine Christian slaues belonging to the Cap∣taine, who were of the Westerne Church, came to me, saying: Now is the time that thou shalt bescourged to death vnlesse thou turne; and they besought me, saying, It is better to dye then turne Turke. I answered, God forbid, that I should de∣nie Christ the true God, I will first die an hundred times in one day before I denie my Sauiour Christ. Then my consci∣ence said to me in priuate: But can I then endure torments euen vnto death? Then my reason answered, Christ was a man, and yet he suffered on the Crosse to death, and that not for himselfe, but others. But then I reasoned againe; Christ was both God and man, therefore hee could withstand the terrours of death: but I am a fleshly man, and perchance I cannot vndergoe the cruell pangs of death: but my consci∣ence solued all this doubt, in that the Martyrs were fleshly men, and sinners, yet by the grace of God were strengthe∣ned to die, therefore by the same grace shall I be sustained. And in this cogitation I was much comforted, and preuailed in spirit, and wholly gaue my selfe ouer to suffer death: and they led mee straight waies to the place of execution, and bound me hand, and foote in manner of a Crosse vpon the Earth, as appeareth by this figure following.
These signifie two Turkes, beating Christopher Angelo with two Cudgels on each side of him, one strikes him on the head, and the other on the side. And hee remayned one houre dead, as the Athenians told him, after he was reuiued. Since here I haue no witnesses, that for the present may te∣stifie the truth of these my sufferings, therefore I call the e∣ternall Father, and God of all, both witnesse and iudge in this manner: The eternall God punish me in this World and in that to come, if I haue not thus suffered from the Turkes vniustly, for my faith in Christ, as is aboue-written. For they laid on the Earth thicke pieces of Timber like the beames of
an house, and to them they bound me; and then they began to beate mee with scourges, as appeareth in the figure. Two men dipping their Roddes in salt Water beganne to scourge me; and when the one was lifting vp his hand; the other was ready to strike, so that I could take no rest, and my paine was most grieuous: and so they continued bea∣ting me, saying, Turne Turke, and we will free thee: but I answered them, In no case, vntill they made me halfe dead. Then they rested a while, saying, He is surely very constant, and will not deny his Religion: but we will tell him that we will let him goe if he will say that the Athenian Merchants which are in Venice, sent him to betray Athens vnto the Spaniards: and then they began to beate mee on the feete, saying: Confesse that the Athenians which traffique in Venice, sent thee to betray Athens to the Spaniards, and we will let thee goe. Now the Turkes would haue mee beare false witnesse against the Athenians, that thereby they might take them, and slay them for the hatred which was between the Gouernour, and the Athenians. I said nothing to this, and till this time I vnderstood what the Turkes said; but from this moment, that is, from that time, in which they said twice or thrice to me, Confesse that the Athenians sent thee to betray Athens, I answered nothing, I vnderstood nothing, I was perfectly dead, and so remayned for the space of an houre, and againe after an houre, by the grace of God reui∣ued. I know not wel how long time I remained dead; but the Grecians of Athens told me that I was dead for an houres space, as they had heard from the mouth of the Turkes that tormented me. Then the Turkes tooke all my substance, my bookes, I meane; and riches; and I was much in debt, till by the request of many Noblemen I was freed from Prison. And after a weeke, they counselled among themselues to take mee, and in one houre to kill mee, or make mee turne Turke by whipping, and other torments: But this laying wait was made knowne to all the Christians, both men and women in Athens, and to me also. Then I fled from Athens, and came vnto Peloponnesus into the house of my Brothers,
and the Turkes pursued mee to their house, to the end they might take me in the same: who wrought meanes for my es∣cape, that I was not then taken. And after that I was fledde from thence, they layd hands on my two Brothers, with whom how they dealt God knowes, and not I. And thus wandering abroad, I found expert Merchants, which knew well both England and many other places: and I inquired diligently of them where I might keepe my Religion, & in∣crease my Learning: they told me, in England you may haue both, for the English men loue the Grecians, and their Learning: and it is a Monarchie, where are found many very honest, wise, and liberall men. Therefore I came in a streight course to England, studying these many yeares. And first I thanke God, who sent mee such honest and lear∣ned men; and secondly your Worships, who are my most kind Benefactours, and all good and charitable men: and I be∣seech God day and night, that hee will restore an hundred fold to you in this life, and in the life to come a Crowne in∣corruptible; to you I say, and all other good men, for their great goodnesse and liberalitie. Amen. An Epistle in commendations of England and the Inhabitants thereof. I am conscious to my selfe of mine owne vnworthinesse, hauing not so much as a tast of that Learning, which might make me bold to present my lines before so worthy men: yet because (as a Wiseman hath it) necessitie driues a man to many a shift; I am therefore thus set on worke. Our Sauiour Christ both God and man; as God doth require spirituall honour from the soules of men, to wit, goodnesse, loue, care∣fulnesse to performe good things, almes deeds, and the like; according to that of the Prophet Dauid, Let euery spirit praise the Lord: and as S. Paul commandeth, Glorifie GOD in your bodie, & in your spirit, for they are Gods. Now as man, our Lord requireth such honour, as was due vnto that person in him. For so it appeareth in that question of his vnto the Le∣per;
who, of ten that were clensed, alone returned to render our Sauiour thankes: Are there not ten cleansed, but where are those nine? Surely as a Wiseman speaketh, he must needs be of a very ingratefull disposition, who in matters of kind∣nesse can suddenly become forgetfull. For my owne part if there be any such, who for benefits receiued, shall not re∣turne speciall acknowledgement alwaies vnto his friends, let him beare that foule note of ingratitude, with disgrace and infamie amongst men. I my selfe for some yeares haue beene nursed in this delicious and blisfull English Ile: should I not euer acknowledge this with all thankfulnesse both to this Countrey, and specially to your most reuerend dignitie, and to your selfe my kind Master and Benefactour? I might iustly be accounted one of those. Therefore that I may not seeme vngratefull for such great benefits, as much as in mee lyes, I will send forth this speech, and so I begin. O faire-like man, thou most fertill and pleasant Country of England, which art the head of the World, indued with those two faire Eyes, the two Vniuersities, which rainest downe most plentifully Milke and Honey. I call thee faire∣like man, and the head beautified with two pleasant Eyes, because heretofore thou didst send forth two hornes of the holy Church of Christ. The first is Constantine the Great, that second Light of the World, who freed such as were held in captiuitie for the confession of Christ, who driued away the myst of Idolatry, who was equall with the Apostles, and first triumphed ouer the enemies of Christ. The second horne is holy Helen, who found out that life-bearing crosse, the weapons of all true Christians, the most holy Mother of the World. But now, and long since thou hast beene beautified with two resplendent Eyes, in that thou contaynest the two famous Vniuersities. For I call the two Vniuersities the two resplendent Eyes, euen most renowned, and most beautifull Oxford, with her Sister the like renowned Cambridge. And if it be lawfull to compare the World to a mans body (for a man, according to Aristole, is a little World) surely I must account England the head of this bodie: for it is euen so diui∣ded
by the Sea from the other parts of the World, as a mans head from his body by the neck. Thou art also the place of re∣fuge, euen the hauen of comfort to poore Grecians oppressed with the tyranny of the Turks: as Dauid saies in the 83. Psal. Against the Arke of the couenant, the Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismaelites haue set themselues, &c. Thou bringest forth most Wise men, yea most valiant and heroicall Cap∣taines, (as heretofore Grecia did) yea and those louers of the Greeks, & partakers of their former vertues. Now the reason of this I will tell you. We reade in the Histories of Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, that Constantine the Great, & his holy mother Helen were Brittaines, the offpring and flowres of Brittaine: and when Constantine the Great, ruled ouer the Grecians, as also the whole World, then his kinsfolke came out of Brittaine to Constantinople, & liued in the presence of Constantine; and like wise the Grecians were sent into Eng∣land from Constantine, and so the Grecians & English were mingled in bloud. And for this cause the English loue the Grecians, and their Learning, and are beloued of them more then any other Nation. And they partake one of another in many things beside: For the English Nation haue excelled in Wisdome, & all Heroicall Vertues, as the Grecians of old did. And they doe diligently, & with great vnderstanding search out the truth, (as saith Paul, Beware lest any make a prey of you through philosophie, and vaine deceit) as the Gre∣cians also heretofore are accounted to haue done: and they are also giuen to hospitalitie, & pittie of poore strangers, as were the Grecians (as S. Paul sayes to the Thessalonians, Con∣cerning brotherly loue I need not speake: for you are taught this from aboue:) & they will also dye for their Religion, but ne∣uer turne from their true worship of God to any other, as al∣so the Grecians: yea I my selfe was once dead through the cruell scourging of the Turkes for the Faith of Christ, and I neuer denyed Christ the true God. (I thanke him that streng∣thened me.) All haile therefore, O most worthy England: for thou art a Virgine, which wast neuer brought into thraldome by any
King, although thou hast bin sometime humbled, yet thou wast ne∣uer captiued: & as thou art a Virgine, so the mother also of many wise men, yea valiant Captaines, & heroicke Warriers. Thus much be spoken of England, which of no other can so truly beverified. In Commendation of England. First, the Head, signifieth England. Secondly, the Crowne, shewes the strength of the Land. Thirdly, the Eyes, signifieth the two great Vniuersities of England. Fourthly, the Mouth, signifieth London. Fiftly, the Nose, signifieth the Riuer of Thames. Sixtly, the Haire, signifieth the goodnesse of England. Seuenthly, the little Man, sig∣nifieth a Grecian that was persecuted by the Turkes, and comne to receiue the goodnesse of England.
THe Bearer hereof, Christopher Angell, a Greeke borne in Peloponnesus, hauing bin persecuted by the Turkes for his Religion, which by his Letters Testimoniall appeareth, and for that cause was forced to leaue his Countrey, came to Cambridge about Whitsontide 1608. and finding some re∣liefe, hath continued vnto the day of the date hereof. During which time, his mauner of life hath bin very honest and stu∣dious. Now, because he could not here haue his health, be∣ing desirous to trauell abroad into the Countrey, he hath re∣quested these our Letters for a Testimonie of his honest be∣hauiour, which we haue willingly granted vnto him, and set to our hands, this tenth of May. 1610. Ioha. Duport. Vicecan. Thomas Comber Trinitatis Coll Samuel Brooke Trin. Coll. Geruase Nid. Nath. Taylor. Iosua Blaxton. To the Clergie and others of the Dioces of Sarum. WHereas the Bearer hereof, Christopher Angell, a poore Grecian (whom we haue knowne in the Vni∣uersitie of Oxford well and honestly to behaue himselfe to∣wards all men) being in great want, and hauing not where∣with to supply the same, requested our Letters to stirvp the hearts of those that shall bee ready to commiserate his case: These are therefore to commend him and his charitable suite to your Christian beneuolence, in sustayning of whom you shall doe very well: and so much the more, because hee hath bin persecuted for his Religion, as by his Letters Testimo∣niall plainly appeareth. Thus fare you well. From our Palace at Sarum. 15. Die Augusti. 1616. ¶ Ro. Sarum.
THe Bearer hereof, Christopher Angell, a Greeke, borne in Peloponnesus, hauing bin persecuted by the Turkes for his Religion, as by his Letters Testimoniall appeares, & for that cause forced to leaue his Countrey, came to Oxford a∣bout Whitsontide 1610. and finding reliefe, hath continued vnto the day of the date hereof; during which time, his man∣ner of life hath bin quiet, honest, and studious. And because he is weary, and desirous to visit his friends in England, hee hath requested these our Letters Testimoniall of his honest behauiour amongst vs, which we haue willingly granted vn∣to him, and thereunto set our hands, this 20. of March, An. Dom. 1617. Arthur Bath and Wells, Vicecan. Oxon. R. Kilby. R. Kettell. William Goodwin. Sebastian Benefield. William Langton. Richard Mocket. Iohn Prideaux. Tho. Anyan. Theod. Price. Io. Wilkinson. Tho. Iames. Samuel Radeclif. Ant. Blincowe. Griffith Powell. Fr. Greuile.
THe Bearer hereof Christopher Angell, a Greeke, borne in Peloponnesus, hauing been persecuted by the Turkes for his Religion, as by his Letters Testimoniall appeares, and for that cause forced to leaue his Countrey, came to Oxford a∣bout Whitsontide, 1610. and finding reliefe hath continued vnto the day of the date hereof; during which time his man∣ner of life hath beene quiet, honest and studious, greatly differing from the lewd course of some other Greekes, that wander vp and downe: and now they haue sent Letters from his Countrey, certifying him that after hee fled thence, the Turkes layd hold of his Brethren and Kinsfolkes, as that sent him away; and haue taken from them all their goods, & cast them moreouer into great debt, for which debt, and much vse which they are forced to pay, they are in trouble vntill this day. For which cause he hath desired these our Letters Testimoniall of his honest behauiour amongst vs, which wee haue willingly granted vnto him, and therunto set our hands, this Iuly 3. 1620. Iohn Prideaux Vicecan. Oxon. Richard Kilbey. R. Kettell. Sebastian Benefield. Io. Parkhurst. Theo. Price. Tho. Iames. Io. Wilkinson. Guliel. Piers. Rich. Astley. Ro. Pinck. Guil. Smith. Tho. Clayton. Medic. Professor Regius. Matthew Osborne, Procurator senior.
Eugenius and Rhodius, thy Brethren according to the flesh, and thy Sifters Gergulina and Asmena, and the rest of thy Kinsfolkes and friends, salute thee our Bro∣ther Master Christopher. WE giue you to vnderstand (Brother) that since you fled from Athens, lest thou shouldest be apprehen∣ded againe, and forced to denie Christian; and repayring to vs to auoyd them that sought thee, wee procured thee safe flight; and after thy flight, the Turkes and the Grecians, who payed money for thee in Athens, hauing notice that we were thy Brothers, laid hold on vs, and imprisoned vs, and sore afflicted vs with many punishments. The Turkes also that payd money for thy ransome, took from vs all the goods we had, and for the remainder we yet pay interest. Now all thy debts together with the vsurie, amount to three hundred pounds or thereabout. Neither is this all wee suffer, but our Children also are in hold, and attached for thy debt, and are in danger to turne Turkes and deny Christ. Wee knew not whither thou wast gone, now wee haue heard thou art in England. Now we demand of thee, whether it be good that we and our Children should suffer these euils for thy debts? We entreate therefore for Gods sake, either to come thy selfe to pay thy debts, or send them, and free vs and our Chil∣dren from the hands of Infidels, lest thou giue an account to God for the iniuries which for thy sake we suffer. From Gaston a City in Pelopon. 1618. 5. Ian.
