18507.242 [ocm]68222495 183769
March 6. Numb. 14. THE CONTINVATION OF OVR FORRAINE AVISOES, since the 27th of the last. Conteining many remarkeable late passages out of the High Dutch, out of private Letters, & out of the Low Dutch: some part do follow. The first meeting of the King of Bohemia with his Majesty of Sweden at Soest, not far from Franckford, with their mutuall Embracements, and affectionate entertaine∣ment; together with the joyfull acclamations of his Subjects vpon sight of their naturall Prince. The truth of that which passed betwixt the forces (which passed over the Mosell) vnder Count Iohn of Nassaw, and the Rhinegraue, neare Franckendale. The taking of diverse Townes, especially that of the Bi∣shop of Bambergh, by Gustavus Horne in Franconia. The great feare and distraction of the people of Austria and Vienna, by reason of the forces of the King of Swe∣den, and the Duke of Saxony. The feare at Vienna, of being besieged, being ill provided to defend themselues. The proceeding of the Duke of Lunenberg, and Swedish neere Stoad. Many more particulars included in the Booke. LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.
The Continuation of our Weekely NEWES. From Rome the 14. and 24. of Ianuary, 1631. WE heare from Naples, that processions are holden there, to giue God thankes, that that Citie is now free of the danger of the ashes from the Mountain Soma, which were so carried by the force of the winde, that they appeared like Clouds. In Appuleia much Cattle are dead for want of fodder, which the ashes spoyled. On munday it was here concluded in the Consistory, that the Spiritualtie should contribute a summe of money vnto the Emperour towards the warre in Germany: To which end al∣so the great Duke will maintaine 6000. Souldiers for his Im∣periall Majestie. From Spaine we vnderstand that his Majestie bendeth all his forces for Italy and Germany; And, that he may be nearer those Affaires, will take vp his Residence at Barcelona. He hath also appointed foure Millions of Gold to be paid in I∣taly and Germany. From Venice 20. and 30. of Ianuary. From Piemont we heare that more Frenchmen doe still dai∣ly come into the borders of Montferat and Millan, to whom the Duke of Savoy giues Passes. Also we eare that the Duke of Lorraine hath not onely prepared divers places for the K. of France, that he may haue the passage into the Elsas, but also hath given vnto him divers men and provision. From Zurich the 31. of Ianuary, 1631. Monsieur Mennie Ambassadour from the Duke of Roan is arrived here, he desireth 2000. men for defence of the passa∣ges, to which there will be answere given this next weeke.
From Berlin 23. of Ianuary, Feb. 2. The Wismarish Garrison is now in their March, there are aboue 3000. gone out. Amongst which arose a great diffe∣rence between the Swedish Generall Todt, and Colonel Gram, for that Gram shot a servant of Todts, vnder pretence that he was a Spy; And, as some say, Gram tooke with him twelue great peices and three hundred Musquets, more then was a∣greed on. Whereupon the said March is stayed and hinde∣red, 500. men are slaine and dispersed, 2000. men haue sub∣mitted themselues, and Colonel Gram is carried to Gripswald till he maketh satisfaction. In the meane time, the rest are marched towards Prignitz. There are 300. men at Perleberg, if money and necessaries be not ready, not one man, saue one∣ly the Officers, will come into Silesia. From Lyons we heare, that the Duke of Loraine hath beene with the King at Metz. But when hee vnderstood that the King would take his journey to Nanzi to view the Citie, the Duke was intended to travaile thither before to entertaine the King, but the King would not suffer him, but comman∣ded him to waite vpon him. Whereupon the King, together with the Duke, and one Regiment travailed towards Nanzi; Wherefore it is thought that he will take possession of it, and not so soone quit it. The King of France hath sent an Ambassadour to the Arch∣duke Leopold, to cease treatie with the Switzers, and to lead away his Souldiers that lye in those parts, and that he should be more earnest in the affaire, seeing the Switzers are enter∣tained vpon the King of France his pay. At Schorndorff the Ordnance and Munition, are taken away and carried to Dionsburg, also the Emperours Garrison is shortly to depart from thence, from which many Souldiers ranne away, and betooke themselues to the Swedes. It is said that the Swedes haue taken in Elwang, and the Garrison there∣in removed to Dunkelspiel, whether the Swedes are also pre∣sently to March. From Minden the 5 of Ianuary. The Duke of Weymar, Collonell Bannier, and
Hamilton, are joyned together, they are about 20000. strong, and draw neare to the Weser, they haue fallen vpon six Companies of foote, that lay in Damitts, and slaine fortie of them, the rest, except onely the Coulers, are taken prisoners. The Lord Marshall of Papenheim, remaines still with his Souldiers at the Weser, about Hammeln and Hexter. Those of Brimen haue taken Verden againe, and besieged Long Wesel, and as some say, taken it. The Swedish troupes that lay in the Province of Pinnen∣berg, are come over the Elbe, & are joyned with Duke George of Luneberg, who blocked vp Nienburg. Papenheym lyes in the Bishopricke of Hildesheim, Landgraue Wilhelme waits for him behinde, and Generall Banier before, Eisfeld is againe, especially Duderstat, and Russenberg is fast blockt vp, and it is hoped they will presently yeeld. From Hamborough the 28. of February. The Duke of Lunenburg, who lately tooke in Buxtehuid for the King of Sweden, now besieges Stoad with 15000. men; giving the Towne but two dayes to consider of the termes of yeelding. And whereas the Prince of Denmarke (the second brother) had with a Fleete taken the Fort of Friburg at the mouth of the Elbe, built by the Imperialists; the Duke sending to him to know whether he did it for the King of Sweden, or not: the Prince the next day quit the place, which the sayd Duke immediately tooke in. From Regenspurgh the 10. of February. This day 1000. Bavarian Souldiers are come over towards Amburg, they make themselues exceeding strong on this side, where 6000. men are to meete. The Drumme is beaten here for his Imperiall Majestie, but few resort to be enterteined. The Duke of Friedland also ma∣keth himselfe strong. And the Saxons may haue enough to doe. From Gravenhage the 10. of February. A few dayes agoe an Ambassadour from the King of Swe∣den, called Oxenstern arrived here; He had audience three dayes since, and to day is to haue another, what he comes a∣bout
about is kept secret, yet it is reported that, amongst other things, he admonished and put the Lords States in minde, that they should be timely in the field with their forces, that vpon all occasions they might the better joyne one with ano∣ther. This Ambassadour was enterteined at the charges of the Lords States, and lodged in their Pallace. It is supposed that his Excellence, about the middle of March wil be in the field with his Armes, for there are great warlike preparations as well by Sea as by Land. Those that would haue betrayed Schencken-sconce are most of them brought to Halft, a short dispute shall serue them. From Colen 15. of February. There are here at this present Count Mansfield, Count Gronsfeld, the Lord of Nersen, and many other Commaunders and it is thought there will be a great new Levie of Souldiers on their side. From Nurenberg the 29, of Ianuary. Here the Suburbs called Gossenhofft is broken downe to build Sconces there, the most part whereof, as also all the o∣ther Out-works are almost finished; Field Marsh: Gustavus Horne, who hath lately beene here, hath viewed them, which pleased him very well, and he hath given commaund speedi∣ly to make an end of the rest, for that they should without doubt haue need of them. From Vienna the 28. of Ianuary. Here is great lamentation, as likewise all the Countrey o∣ver; For although the Officers of the Countrey haue yeelded to his Imperiall Majestie halfe the Contribution required, yet is his Majestie not therwith content, but will haue the whole; albeit the Commonaltie is agrieved & cannot pay the halfe. A siege is much feared here: and the people already beginne to betake themselues into Hungaria; and his Imperiall Maje∣stie is removed to Gratz and Clagenfurt, to make a Court-Leaguer there, to the end he may make vse of it vpon occasi∣on.
Whereas his Majestie of Sweden hath sent out Patents into all Countries, that all Merchants should be safe and free with∣out question of Religion, to trade and commerce this next Lent Mart. The Emperour on the other side, hath caused a Contra-Mandate to be published, that every Merchant who∣soever he be that shall trade to Franckfort in the said Mart, shall be proclaimed a Rebell of the Empire. From Nurenberg the 3. of February. At the end of the Truce, Gustavus Horne with his Armie of about 18000 men went towards Bamburg, he sent a Com∣panie of foote before towards Hochstat; but were in the way driven backe by those of Bamburg, that lay in a Village neere-by vpon advantage, being about 50. men: but as soone as succours came, they did not onely fall vpon the Bambur∣gers, and beate them backe into Foreheim, but also assaulted Hochstat with 9. pieces of Ordnance, which the next day yeelded it selfe: which when the Garrison in Bamburg vn∣derstood, they pillaged the Towne, and forsooke it. Horne still gathers more men together, with intent to fall into the Ʋpper Pfaltz, or into Bohemia. Prince Ernest of Anhalt with 8000. of the Saxon Forces is risen from Eger. It is supposed he will lead them against the Emperor, who doth much mischiefe in the Ʋpper Pfaltz, having this day burnt to ashes a fine Village called Mitter∣teich, and tooke away from thence about 2000. head of Cat∣tell towards Weiden. His Majestie of Sweden, hath given the Count of Solms, that rescued Nurenburg, the Earledome of Swertzenburg, and all that there vnto belongeth; and hath made him Generall o∣vera flying Armie. The Bishop of Bamberg hath made suite vnto Lieutenant Generall Schlammersdorff, to make intercession for him; but it is thought it will little availe him. The States of the Empire are to assemble at Hailbrun, and the Nurenburgers, Strasburgers, with the halfe of Wurten∣burgers, are to make more provision for their safetie. From Augsburg the 4. of Ianuary. The spirituall Catholicks here, haue taken away all the Church ornaments of gold and silver. They must now make a shift with wooden Idols.
Tilly hath taken 13. pieces of Ordnance from the Fort of Wilsberg, and caused them to be carried to Costnitz and Lin∣daw, which will not please the Switzers. Dunckelspill is now also yeelded to the Swedes. From Franckford February the 11, 1631. Ten thousand Spanyards came lately vp from Brussells to Triers, and there had passed two Regiments ouer the Mosell. Vpon the rumor whereof, the King of Sweden was marching towards them with his Armye: but the Rhine∣graue had encountred them before he came to Mentz, de∣feated one whole Regiment, caused the other to retyre into a wood, and sent 7. of their Colours in tryumph to the King at Mentz. Since this they haue againe passed over the Mosell, and caused the Rhine-graue to retreat; but without a∣ny considerable losse, and hearing that the Kings Army was comming towards them, are gone back once more. The King of Bohemia arrived on Friday about ten a clocke; is received with great joy and acclamations of the people wheresoever he passeth. From Delfe the 10. of March. The King of Sweden goes well on; the French King hath let the Duke of Bavaria and the three great Bishops and others know, that if they doe not renounce the house of Austria, and their league, restore all honors, lands, and townes to the late distressed and oppressed Princes, and others: quit their Ar∣mies to the King of Sweden, and pay them; and render such Townes and Forts as he shall demaund; he will not onely leaue mediating for them, but will assist the King of Sweden against them. The said King of Sweden hath called an Assembly of the States of Germany at Franckford on the Maine, instantly after he will be in action some where; he is making three Bridges one over the Mayne, one over the Rhyne, and the other over the Mosell. The King of Spaine (our good Friend) is much startled he may finde too much to doe at home, that he may leaue o∣thers to themselues.
From Overland the 12. of February. The Imperiall Army is still at Gingen in the jurisdiction of Heydenheym, is about to march (as the rumor goes) to Franconia. To this end the Commissary Ossa is broke up from Augsburg, and causeth all the Ordnance & Munition, to be convayed from Augspurgh to Donaweert. The Army which still goes under the name of Tilly, will also breake up ere long, and abandon the whole Country of Wurtz∣burg: in which Country, they are much terrified for, feare of the Swedish forces. Many of the Inhabitants flye thence, and transport their moveables and goods into Switzerland. As present tydings relate, the Swedish have also taken Elwang, and convoyd the Guarrison to Duneken∣spill, whither the Swedish are now marching to assault the same Towne also. From Franconia the 14. Dito. The 8. of this Moneth, the Field-Marshall Gustavus Hoorn, did incorporate Hooghstadt, at the taking whereof, the Major was wounded, and some of the souldiers slaine, 300. of the Garrison have betaken themselves into the sayd Field-marshals service. While this place was besie∣ged, the Imperialists 500. foot, and 500. horse, under the command of the Commander Despagni, came out of For∣cheim, and on the other side of the Eysch, they came to∣wards the horsemen of Solms, which were thereabou thinking to relieve Hooghstadt. But the Solmish forces be∣ing but three companies in all, they called upon the Com∣mander Rochetzky, for ayd and pursued the Imperialists: but they could not get them to battaile untill they came within a mile from Forchiem, where the foot-forces of the Imperialists were constrained to stand, whereupon there some of them lay in ambush neare unto a Village, the rest betooke themselues upon the Church-yard in the Village, by which advantageous meanes, they waited for the com∣ming of the Swedish, and fought with them very stoutly. In this skirmish besides some ordinary soldiers were slain two Lieutenants, and 3. Cornets, forty or fifty horsemen sorely wounded, and two Ritmasters of the Swedish.
In this encounter it fell out worse for the Swedish at the first, but afterward they gained the better of it, for after the Rochtezky (who was shot in one of his armes) was re∣scued by his Lieutenant, they fell on with a renewed cou∣rage, and utterly defeated the Imperialists, chased them out of the Village, and slew abundance of them both horse and foote.. By reason of this defeate the Imperialists presently pillaged Bambergh and forsooke the same, notwithstanding that they were 2000. strong. Forcheym must also yeeld ere it be long, for they are already prouiding for their depar∣ture, The whole Bishopricke of Bambergh were hereupon constrayned to come to an agreement with the said field∣marshall Gustauus Horne, and to yeeld him 400000. Ryx∣dollers. Wee doe at this instant understand that Forcheym is yeelded, there remaines no more now but onely Crouniach in that Bishopricke which is not yet taken, but doubtlesse will bee ere long. From Berlin the 16. Dito. The Commander Gram who was Governor of Wismar by reason of his infidelitie and treachery is carryed priso∣soner to Gripswald, his troupes are most of them scattered and dispersed, 300. of them are now about Pereleborgh. From Francfort the 19. of February. His Maiestie of Sweden departed hence upon Munday last to Hnxe, and as yet resides there. Captaine Marara with his Ancient-bearer, who were taken prisoner at the taking of Manheym, and afterward ransomeds were brought to Heydelbergh, and there beheaded through the command of the Governor by reason of the losse of Manheym. Since the last great skirmish about the Honserugh in which encounter the Regiment of Torpaert, and the Regi∣ment of Count Iohn of Nassau onely sustayned the losse, the Rhyne-grave with 600. horse hath againe fought with some Spanish forces
But whereas the Spanish were 1800. strong of Horse and a whole Regiment of Spanish lay in ambush. the said Rhyne-Graue was constrained to retire with some losse, leauing behind him the young Earle of Serbruggen who was wounded and taken prisoner. His Maj: of Sweden causeth two new bridges to bee made: the one over the river Rhyne at Meinz; and the o∣ther over the River Maine at Costum. All his forces both horse and foot are now marching to Mems. At Heydelburgh very lately happened a most greuious and terrible fire which was palbably seene three leagues off. The same hath done much mischeife in the Citty, hath ruinated and burnt downe to the very ground some of the Cheife buildings, especially hath the same done great harme in the Tower named Glazenen-sael and the buildings of Otthenrycks. At Spiers are 600. men vnder the Commander Horneck, who requiers more forces vnder his command, and doth dayly a ugment his troupes. 2000. soldiers lately made an excursions out of Franckendale, their intent was to attempt something against Wormes, but they were dri∣uen back into Franckendale by the horsemen of Wormes. The besieged here sent all their women and children our of Frankendael, notwithstanding they report that they are well prouided with corne and wine. But the Plague is very hote amongst them. Vpon the 16. day of this moneth February, a Regiment of souldiers marched from hence to Ments. whether all the Swedish forces must resort. In the Citty of Ments a certaine Captaine is imprisoned who had held some cor∣respondencie with the Spanish. The Commander Dubalt armed his Regiment here in this City vppon the 16. of this moneth, beeing 12. Com∣panies of the said Regiment. Vppon Yesterday being the 18 of February, Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine arriued at Hanaw where he wsa worthylie receiued. Copie of a Letter written by Phillippus Christopher, Arch-Bishop of Trier, and one of the Princes Electors, sent vnto the Citty Trier, and rest of his subiects from Hermersteyn. I cannot conceale from your Honors, how graciously it
hath pleased Almighty God to deliuer us and our Bysho∣pricke, from the apparent, cruell, and fearfull destruction, by our terrible enemy the King of Sweden, as also from the lamentable and vnchristian percecution of the Spanish. By meanes of the Prince Elector of Bauaria, who through the faithfull, well meaning, & Heroicell meditation, interposi∣tion & assistance of his Maj of France with the King of Sweden, hath not onely for himselse but also for others, concluded and agreed vppon a Neutrality with the saide King of Sweden. In which matter we haue not been slack or negligent, but with the Godly and Religious assist∣stance of the said his Maiestie of France, obtained so much, that the said King of Sweden hath declared vs and our Archbishoppricks to bee neutrall. By which meanes, the Peeres, of the whole Romish Empire, and all the allyed Christian Potentates, and Republicks, if they please may live together with more peace and contentment then e∣ver they haue done formerly, and you and they may aswell by the Swedish as the Spanish hold your selues excused. Now to the end that this Neutralitie may remaine invio∣lable for vs and ours, and that by that meanes no incum∣brance nor misery may befall vs and our poore subjects, the said his Maj: of France as interponent, hath proffered his Royall assistance to vs and all other Catholicks, yea (if need bee) the King of Spaine himselfe also. And promised us, to afford vs all helpe and assistance and to take away and remoue all difficulties, and come with their Armies into the Empire to this end. With these things you may comfort and helpe your solues, and giue thankes to God for the same. And with∣all pray, that the deed may follow so favorable a promise, and so this great punishment which now layes vppon vs, cease. And in the meane time it must be your care, that al Spanish Insolencies dayly committed, and the persecuti∣ons amongst vs may be shaken off effectually, wherefore you shall publish and declare in all places the said Neutra∣lity, and withal: make knowne that the glory thereof must nōt bee ascribed to vs, but onely to God, and the
Prince Elector of Bauaria, who hath beene the meanes to obtaine this Neutrality for himselfe and others. If now then after all this procurement, any will not∣withstanding persecute us, or (as it happened at Mentz) if hereafter under pretence of Spanish assistance, our whole Archbyshopricke should chance to fall into the Swedish hands, by murdering, burning and pillaging, which God deliver us from, and the Catholicke Religion, should be exterminated; we shall remaine guiltlesse, and the oc∣casioners thereof shall he bound to answer for the same to God, the Popes Holinesse, and all Christian Princes and Potentates. Vnder neath Philippus Christoper. These Articles following were delivered up at Trier, the 24. day of January. 1. The passage at Cobelenitz over the bridge to be gran∣ted. 2. The strong hold Hermerstein, with all the Ordnance, to be delivered up to his Maj. of Sweden. 3. The soldiers which lay in Garrison there shall take the oath of fidelity to his sayd Maj. 4. A reasonable competent summe of mony to bee con∣tributed towards the payment of his souldiers. But the City Trier would in no wise condiscend nor yeild to these Articles. And therefore have taken the Spanish to assist them, who do incorporate the whole Country, so that all the subjects, & the whole Country doth oppose the Ele∣ctor. From Minden the 17. The Armies of the Duke of Wymeren, Bannier, and my Lord Hamelton are now at the Weser, their forces have in the jurisdiction of Wieckesen surprised sixe Companies of foot forces, which formerly were in Garrison at Damnitz, they slew forty of them and tooke, the rest Prisoners with their Ensignes.
The Bremash have againe taken Verden, and blockqued up Langeuell. The Swedish troupes which lately came from Pienenberg over the river Elve, are joyned to the Duke of Lunenburg his forces to blocke up Nieuburg. From Cullen the 16. of February. Our Lords are still at Franckfort, they will doubtlesse ob∣taine the neutrality, if they will but subscribe to these Ar∣ticles following, propounded to them by his Majesty of Sweden. 1. A Church to be allowed for those of the Confession, of Auspurg, and one for the Reformed Religion. 2. To desist from and renounce the League. 3. To afford his Majesty free egresse and regresse with his Army, and to yeild him provision for his mony. 4. To contribute 200000. Ryxdollars to his said Maj. But this City will in no wise agree to the sayd Articles, they will rather see what shall be the uttermost. Our Prince Elector hath caused Proclamations to bee published throughout his whole jurisdiction, that the Country people should bring their goods and victuals into the City. The Earle of Papenheim is at Paterborne, 6. of his Regi∣ments are neare unto Bielveldt. As we understand he will enquarter his forces again in the Country of Berg and Gu∣lick, wherefore his troupes are already come to Ham. The Regiment of Giles de Haze, which was marching toward the sayd Earle of Papenheym, is beaten back by the Boores in Marckland. Although those of the Protestant Religion in this City, thought that by reason of the great and successefull pro∣gresse of his Majj. of Sweden, no such vigilant eye should be held over them, yet they are not so secure as they made ac∣count they were. For but a few dayes agoe, complaint was made of one whose servants did but sing Psalmes. Where∣fore a great mulct of mony was impoed upon him, and whereas he refused to pay the penalty injoyned, his goods were carried away out of his house by an Officer. From Paris the 14. Dito.
The Kings Maj. hath divided his Army into two parts, the one being nearer to Elsatia, under the command of Monsier de la Force: and the other toward Piccardien; under the command of Marshall de Scomberg, which two Armies, are strengthened with 30000. men. The Marquis de Fiat, is gone towards their Armies, with 40. tun of gold, and ten tun more are sent to Italy, to the Duke of Rohan. From Munster is written that the Generall Papenheym caused two Burgemasters at Lemgo to bee hanged at the Gates of the sayd City, because they did not speedily at his demand, open the sayd gates for him. Hee is departed thence to Reda, where he received the wofull tydings, that two of his Regiments were defeated by the Weser. The 16. of this month, most of the companies in Breda, marched to Herentalls, they were convoyd with 8. Cor∣net of horse. In lieu of these, some other new levied troups are brought for Garrison into the sayd Citie. From Vienna the 6. of February. Here are certain Commissioners ordained, who go about frō house to house, to enquire what kind of people lurk in this City, and all those that do not shelter under some good Lord and master, are taken up for soldiers; for the Army of the Duke of Freedlandt is not yet raysed, wherefore the levying of soldiers continues very strongly. The Comman∣der Diepenbach hath yielded up his forces to the sayd Duke, so that his Army hegius to be very strong. He hath given a strict charge to all his Officers, to have all theyr Companies compleat against the latter end of March. The Turke hath againe done great mischiefe by an in∣cursion about Presburg, whence he hath taken away cap∣tive above 200. Christians. From Vlm the 18: Dito. The Emperiall troupes passe by here dayly towards Bunten, to open the passage, and to bring an ayde of 8000. men, through the same into Germany. But the French keepe the sayd passage strongly, so that there is no possibility the same shall be obtained without the spilling of much bloud. From Brunswick the 20. Dito. The Duke of Wymeren hath taken Goslaer, with an ex∣traordinary stratagem, which Citty he required to pay
100000. Ryxdollars, to be freed from pillaging. Where upon, the Councell in all haste layd downe 10000. Ryx∣dollars and proffered all manner of good love and usage, so that they escaped the pillage. The Duke and General Bannier, presently left the City, and layd a thousand soul diers in Garrison. From Franconia the 23. The Bishop of Bambergh assembles some thousands of men together in the upper Palatinate, to relieve Forcheim. The Duke of Bavaria, gets also many forces together, to hin∣der the proceedings of the Duke of Saxony, in those parts. From Hildesheim the 19. All these parts are taken up with Swedish troupes, inso∣much, that the Imperialists for very feare have left and a∣bandoned Boeckelen, Toesken, Bronnau, Lawensteyn, Alle∣feldt, Pladsen, Patenes, and Saesteden. Levenberg is also yielded up by agreement, and yesterday, the City Pynes was also rendred. But the Castle holds out still, whence they cast fireballes continually, and are resolved to defend themselves to the last cast. To morrow let Marienburg and Steurwalat looke to themselves for they must either suf∣fer or come to composition. All places hereabouts are full of fugitive Popish Priests, Moukes, Fryers, &c. For they are banished by the Duke of Brunswick, who places Protestant Preachers in theyr roomes. The Swedish in the last noted expedition, tooke at least 400. Prisoners, of Papenheyms souldiers, and many En∣signes with very rich booty. FINIS.
