20575.7 [ocm]82475158 185158
TO THE RIGHT WORTHIE Knight, Sir Iulius Caesar, one of the Maisters of his Maiesties Court of Requestes. &c. Right worthie Sir. IT is so familiar a custome to dedicate books to some person or other of note, As he keepes not decorum with these times, that accompanies not the same course. The fashion at first (questionlesse) was propagated by those two pa∣rents, Affection, and Care: Affection, rising from the merrited good conceit of the Patrone; Care to preuent the malice of detractors, vnder the Shield of some more potent Arme. By the first, I deuotedly beare this worke to your worthie iudge∣ent,
as one whose imminent knowledge in matter of State, well fits a worke of such ualitie: and the thing it selfe, though I imagine it aboue the reach of short-armd detrac∣ion, yet your iudiciall allowance may giue it a more quiet passage. If I seeme ouer-bold in his sort to dispose it, Let my good intent (I pray you) excuse me, which like true truth ap∣eares nakedly in plaine termes. The Originall was in Latin, dedicated to the Kings most xcellent Maiestie; The matter such, as I thought pittie should be lockt from those which want the perfection of that Language, and yet would be glad from such a methodicall Picture of words, both to forme their dutie to the State, as also to manage their priuate in∣terests. Thus hauing according to my poore measure, yeelded the reasons for this my De∣dication, as also the cause which moued me to publish the same in English, desiring your pardon (if you should distaste my boldnesse) I humbly cease further to trouble you. Resting Your VVorships most deuoted, Edmunde Sadler.
The Contents. Of Studie. Of Gouernments. Touching Lawes. The foure Cardinals vertues. Generall and particular. Of Warre. Of Peace. Directions for methodicall disputations.
Concerning Study, and the way to frame ones Study. In fra∣ming ones study, two things are to be con∣sidered. 1. What study is to be chosen: But it is chosen either of Neces∣sity of State, if one be poore. Nature, if the wit bee somewhat dull. Free will: when either A man is weal∣thy: By rea∣son of these, some men set before them∣selues Com∣moi∣ties. Priuate, As hey which follow Diuinity, Ciuill, Law. Cōmon, Phisicke. Schoole disputations, and the like studies. Publike, De∣lights of the minde, as they who giue them∣selues to Phi∣losophy, by help wherof, they may 1. Iudge ightly of mat∣ters. And this is called 1. Rati∣onal, vz. Grammer, Rhetoricke, the Art to speake to pleae well. to dipute Logicke, 2. Mo∣rall. viz. Ethike, Politick, And these are to be lear∣ned out of holy Scriptures, especially void of all error. Pro∣phae Au∣thors, as Aristostle, Cicero, Seneca, Co g more or , this or that way. Hori graphes, ets, Oatrs, & ers. Recom∣micke, 3. Natu∣rall: here are to be con∣sidered, 1. Profit, for it is a∣uaileable 1. To purge the minde of corruptions. 2. To contemne erthly things. 3. To shw the frail estate of ll things. 4. To increase the care of the soule. 2. Ob∣iects. viz. the Elements, Earth, S, Mountais, Riuers. Manners, boūs, conditions of countries, & their gouernmets received. pronoun∣ced. Vertue of Stones, Trees, Hearbes, Liuing things & their story, ge∣neration & parts. 3. Arts of a like nature, viz. Phisicke husbandry, warfare, building, pain∣ting, engrauing▪ &c. 2. Vtter their minde in fite termes. See af∣ter in A. Hath store of wit giuē him. 2. How men ought to perseuer therein. See after at B. b.
Aa 2. The care to expresse the minde in fit termes is two-fold, 1. That you may speake well, which is brought to passe, 1. In reading god and corrected Authors. 2. By translating their workes into the mother tongue, in significant words. 3. By rightly framing within our minde, whatsoever thing wee goe about to write in ou Country language. 4. By expressing it in Latine words properly and purely, signifying the same thing. 5. By endeuouring that whatsoeuer you are about to write, that at the beginning you write it very purely, and in good Latine. 2. That you speake eloquently; which will neuer be, vnlesse your speech be perfect and haue all the parts. Bb 2. Of the choice of study wee haue spokē. The way to perseuer in our study followeth: And this is effected in obseruing 3. things. 1. In rightly per∣ceiuing what wee learne. This is a worke of diligent reading, which is conuersant in throughly vnderstanding the thing which is deliuered. clearely perceiuing the force propriety of words. construction garnishing considering the force of expressing things in words. and speaking perseuering, although we happen vpon a place obscure and darke, vntill time, man, place, or reading, make it manifest. 2. In faithfully kee∣ping that which wee learne, This is a work of a trusty memory, which partly consisteth by Nature. is holpen by Art. vz. if when we must plead, we take heed that we want not order & propor∣tion. an often vse be applied. negligence and carelesnesse be remoued. with most diligent care we comprehend what we reade. very often we require them of our minde. the minde be free and quiet from the multitude of other cares.
3. In brin∣ging forth & framing some thing out of these, which is a worke of continuall exercise. This place comprehen∣deth two things, 1. The things which we learne to be had in a readinesse. 2. Things to bee inuented and made by our selues, out of those things which we haue learned. Heere three things are necessary. 1. That we haue certain heads, as are vertue, vice: life, death: learning, want of learning: good will, hate: and other of the same kinde. Whatsoeuer things we learn, may well be directed to those heads. But heere we must note, that oftentimes one example or sentence may bee brought to the same heads, according to the signification of the words. 2. That out of those things which wee learne, we carfully and dili∣gently conferre the words together, and expresse them with a larger dilating. 3. That wee deduct these through all the places of Logicke, whence will spring great abundance, both for pleading and inven∣ting. Of Gouernments.
Perfect go∣uernments are three, Basili, that is to say, Monarchy, or princely gouernment; as it is with vs at this time laudable and mo blessed. Aristocratia, viz. The gouernment of the Nobility, as was the gouernment of the first and former R∣mane Coulls. Politia, viz. The ciuill Magistrate and politique iurisdiction; such as free Cittizens, ruling by right, & doe vse. Imperfect gouern∣ments are three. Tyrannis, where the King abtruding his commandements for all reason, vndeseruedly afflicteth t Common-wealth. Oligarchia, is the vsurping of a few, such as were some Senators, made by the common people at Rom inclining vnto the wandring affections of the multitude, that they might merite the peoples fauour. Anarchia, is the iurisdiction of the multitude, and of the mischeeuous and rash common people. When as heeretofore in Persia (King Cambyses being dead) the Kings Counsellors and Peeres, viz. Darius, Megabiz Ottaes, &c. had convented themselues in the Parliament house, to consult of the safety of the Kingdome; as th were consulting, a controuersie befell touching three things especially, (that is to say) the foresaid three perfect go∣uernments. The three perfect, Monarchia was preferred by Darius, through strong and very good reasons, as comming very neere vn te die and heauenly Kingdome. Arstcrtia, by most weighty arguments, and most pleasant sweetenesse of speech, was preferred by M giz, (as very long flourishing) Pol, ked and best pleased Ottanes. Tyrannis, These are reiected as most horrible, violent, and hurtfull to humane societie; whereof proceeded th noble and excellent iudgement of Tully, concerning an ill gouerned Common-wealth. Oligarchia, Anrhia. He saith; that the tyranny of one, is dangerous; more, is worse: the common people is the most horrible plague of a Common-wealth.
antient gouernments and continuing many ages, alterations of times made manifest all the fore-said perfect and im∣perfect kindes of gouernments; that is to say, at Rome. Rome, 1. Monarchia, that is to say, Kings, Romuus, Num Pompilius, Ancus Martius, &c. who raigned 243. yeares. 2. Tyrannis, that is to say, Tyrants; Tarquinius, Syla, Caesar, &c. 1. Aristocratia, the gouernment of the Nobles, when the Peeres and first Consulls ruled, that is to say, ∣nius Brutus, Tarquinius, Collatinus, Seruius Sulpitius, Manlius, Tulliu, who ruled 301. years. Ar them succeeded also Furius Camilus, Paulus Aemilius, Fabij, Mel, Scipiones, Catos, Cicero, &c. All mighty in warre and peace. 2. Oligarchi, the vsurping of a few Senators; the discommodities whereof Rome felt, in that dangerous of∣fice called Trimvatius; that is to say, the office of three men in like authority, and appeared most perniiously in that ambitious Protectorship, and Triumviracy of Caesar, Crassus, and Pompey. And last of all, in the triumviracy of Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus. Whereupon Cicero saith: Let there be successiue Magistrates, that one doe not ome proud with continuall gouernment; and hope of adcement, comfort very many. 1. The pollicy of the ciuill Magistrate: who expelled the Decem, because one of them, that is to say, Ap∣pius Claudius, rauished one Ʋirginia, the daughter of a noble Citizen of Rome. 2. Anarchia, the authority of the raging and most audacious Commons, who, when Antoniu was mooued and prouoked with anger, most wickedly and villany murdered Cicero, and many states of Rome: because the Senate created Octauius Caesar Consull, and passing by, put backe Antonius ambitiously, desiring the gouernment. This popul state is vnstaied, and very quickly goeth to ruine, and easily degenerateth into another ty∣ranny. Whereupon commeth this saying: Tyranny is next to the victory of the Commons. Not oely the Romans, but also the Thebanes, Spartanes, and Atheniens, &c. (florishing with great soueraigties) haue knowne all these kindes of gouernment.
It is to be noted, that a Common-wealth and the most perfect kindes of gouernments, are very seldome found abs∣lutely simple, but fitly composed amongst themselues. For a certaine mixture is voluntarily admitted amongst them; y so mixt and tempred, that in a triple forme (as in a meruailous and sweet harmoni) one counsell signifieth as it were o minde. Yet the Common-wealth keepeth her name of the worthier part ruling the rest. It is also to be noted, that a Common-wealth very seldome is long found firme and strong, if God protect it not. F it is resembled to the fraile nature and vnconstant minde of men (the foresaide politique body being compact of the which are variably tossed hither and thither: one while they are aduanced from small to great: another while they a throwen downe from their greatnesse into diuers perils of things. They are also endaungered, being tossed too and  in very great and innumerable perills, one while of sicknesse, another while of health: euen vnto the last period of li Whereupon commeth this saying. As a Ship is subiect to waues, so the minde is to perils: Now enioyning good, and then readie to perish through euils. In this so wast a sea of perils, Gods helpe is to be craued. Also an excellent sharpnesse of the wit, and an admirable quicknesse, and wisedome, are requisit in inuenting the b pollicies. By too long delay, counsels waxe little worth. There is no treasure more commodious to a Prince and Common-wealth, then Counsellours excelling in vertu wisedome, fidelitie, and valour. The graue counsell of Kings maketh euery thing known, which he would have searched out. A Prince ought to haue many eares, and many eyes▪
Theee sorts of men necessarie in a Common-wealth. Magistrates, who may rule iustly: and these are by Plato called Golden men. Captaines and Souldiers: who may valiantly faithfully defend, and these are called Siler Artificers, who by disciplies and profitable Arts may helpe, and these are called Brason A well ordered Common-wealth, consisteth of Religion and pollitique Lawes. A Common-wealth, a Citie, and a familie, will be alike eftsoones dissolued, vnlesse they be lincked together with the bands of Lawes. The next tempest bringeth shipwracke to that Cōmon-wealth, the establishment of whose lawes is vnconstant. Therefore it is meete that we passe to the Lawes. Touching Lawes. cero de Lege, defineth a Lawe, to be a certaine rule proceeding from the will of God, perswading that which is iust and good, and prohibiting euill. eraclitus, telleth vs, that we ought to fight no lesse for our lawes then for our citie walles, because without walles our countrey may be safe, without lawes it cannot. s a body without a soule, so a citie without lawes cannot vse her parts and sinewes, blood and members.
It is ex∣pedie blish re what things are most con∣enient for euery common-wealth, and doe bring forth commodity, or pre∣seruation, losse, or destruction. whether they be profitable and prop this Commō-wealth,  to a Common-wealt of another kinde. Ouermuch liberty vtterly subuerteth and extinguisheth euery gouernment. Moderate liberty is profitable for euery one, and for the Common-wealth. what things in mes past brought commodity, to our, or gouernment. to forraigne discommodity, To dianull wholly, when they are repugnant to Religion, Let that bee the principall regard which maketh for Re∣gion. pollicy. in part, when some things are to bee changed If any thing must be changed, it must be changed by little and little, which b little and little hath increased. Destruction is very neere to suddaine alteration. It is a point of wisedome, in difficult matters, freely to grant somewhat to th disposition of the people. To interprete. That is to be refer∣red to the Interpreters of the law. In expounding the laws, sanctity and equity are to be regarde Lest they make white of blacke, and blacke of white.
To obsrue lawes, the care wher∣of proper∣ly belon∣geth to Princesse, Counsel∣lours, in whom are requi∣red vnderstan∣ding, to know what is iust, and to be done: what is euill, and to be repressed: who are worthy reward, according to the quantitie of the fact. qualitie punishmēt; Authoritie; to punish the guilty and the wicked. defend the godly, and the good. make famous the worthy, by titles and due promotions. He receiueth a benefit, who giueth to him that deserued it. Let vertue be the chiefest merit for promotions. The Common-wealths safetie, is preserued by reward and punishmēt. There is nothing more Princely, than to giue due testimony to vertue. Let haynous offences be punished with cruell punishments. Iudges: Magistrates in euery countire and citie: of whom are requi∣red diligēce, which ought to be fenced with Integrity against anger, we do not vse trobled water, vntill it stand still: much lesse must wee vse a troubled mind vntil it come to it selfe. Socrates: gifts, fauour, interces∣cessions Constancy and fortitude against feare of displeasure. danger. care▪
There must heed be taken, lest the respest of priuate matters, doe hurt and harme publique affaires. An vncorrupted Law is the keeper of equitie, and the mistresse of truth: She hath no affections, but ruleth causes by right. The Law, whereunto a penaltie is not ioyned, & penaltie, which hope of pardon ensueth, are altogether vnprofi Right often passeth to wrong, if the indifferent Magistrate doe not prohibite it. Rulers and Magistrates offen∣ding, hurt more by their examples, then by their offences. Where Iudges and Magistrates doe well and iustly execute their offices for their owne dignitie, and the estimation  their charge, there it must needes be, that the same Common-wealth do florish, and flow with all good things; the peop applauding and praysing the excellent beautie of vertue shining in their superiours, and set before their eyes to imitate  Cicero. The Law, equitie, execution of Lawes, the dexteritie of the Magistrate, are the patrimony of a Common-wealth. Where the Common-wealth reuerenceth and adoreth the Law, there is all happinesse. Where the Lawe is in subiection to the Common-wealth, there is all impietie. Where the Law is cast off by the Common-wealth, there is all confusion and mischiefe. Cicero. It is very hurtfull vnto a Common-wealth, if holy and iust Lawes be not kept firme and mutable; and if foolish Aud¦tors doe applaude euery man (through desire of noueltie, and ostentation of wit and eloquence) ouerthrowing tho things which are profitable, necessary, and well ordained for the good of all men. Let not perswasion beare downe that thing which action hath conuted. Let no Tobaccho-sellers be neere a Common-wealth. Let not the more noble, but the better iudgement obtaine the victorie. Many controuersies arise of a Law containing many words. Architas Commaundeth, that in establishing lawes, those things be first confirmed which belong to God. Next, those things which be honest and commendable. After, things profitable. He saith also, that it is meete (next after vertue) that the Lawes be contained in mens minds, rather than in bookes.
Of the foure Cardinall vertues in generall, and after of Politique. y the Cardinall vertues the soule is rectified in her power. Prudence. rectifieth the rationall power. Fortitude, the power of anger. Temperance, the power of concupiscence. But Iustice rectifieth all the powers, and containeth in it self all the vertues, whereupon commeth the saying; Iustice in it selfe comprehendeth all vertues. Iustice is is not onely a speciall vertue, but also a generall; containing the direction of the whole minde towards God nd our neighbour: and is called the rectifier of the will. By the Cardinall vertues a man is instructed in all good things, and is armed against vices: as Augustine saith. Prudence teacheth to Choose. Prudence consisteth in preuenting deceits. Fortitude Endure. Fortitude enduring sorrowes. Temperance Vse. Temperance brideling wicked pleasures. Iustice Distribute. Iustice relieuing miseries. It is the propertie of Prudence to knowe what may be. to be willing to doe most. not to presume of that which cannot be. to desire equitie in all things. Fortitude. Temperance Iustice
These foure Vertues are called Cardinall: because as the doore is turned vpon the hinge, so on these, mans life is tu∣ned and ruled. They are also sometimes called Politike; because by these a ciuill life is ordered, and they pollish and adorne a ma and rule the life as touching outward things, and as farre forth as they fight against vices. They are also called Humane; because they are gotten by mans study, except they be infused by God. They are also called Consuetudinall; because they are gotten not by one action, but by custome. These Vertues haue their degrees of perfection, according to which they are in them which beginne one way, an ther way in them which profite, and a third way in them which are perfect. To conclude, euen as God is a diuine sampler of all things; so these patternes of vertues abide in him, and flow vnto from the fountaine of his diuinitie, whereof they are called Exemplares. Of Prudence. Prudence, in as much as it is a politike vertue, is called the Rule of Reason, enlightning our mindes: which consid∣reth what she doth: she determineth without error: she willeth or doth no vnseemely thing. Whence commeth the sayin Amend what is past, rule what is present, see what is to come: For a wise man is accustomed to obserue these things. Consider the things present, and fore see that which is to come. Prudence as it is a vertue of a well instructed minde, is to know onely diuine things. Prudence Exemplare, is the diuine vnderstanding, whereunto all things are vncouered and open. The parts of Prudence are three Vnderstanding, Prouidence, Memory. Vnderstanding, is that by which the minde perceiueth the things which be. Prouidence, is a vertue (as Cecero saith) by which some future thing is seene before it be done. Memory, is that by which any one remembreth the things which haue beene.
The office of Prudence, is to sustaine other vertues in their actions, according to all the parts of man. Morall Philosophy; which are Ethicke, Oeconomicke, 1. Ordereth the manners, as touchig man, 2. Setteth a family in order, 3. Ruleth Cities and Kingdomes. Politike. Prudence is triple. 1. The first of the heart: and this is in disposing things present, in remembring things past, & fore-seeing things to come. Deut. 32. Would God men would be wise: that is to say, by things past: and would vnderstand, that is to say, things present: and would fore-see the last things: that is to say, things to come. 2. The second is of the mouth: and this is in gouernment of our speeches. Prou. 10. He is most wie, who can rule his lips. The third is of worke: and this consisteth in eschewing the euill, and choosing of good. Psal. 33. Decline from euill, and doe good. We must note, that ther is worldly, humane, & heauenly wisedome. 1. The first, is in getting temporall things. 2. The second, in commodity of the flesh. 3. The third, in diuine seruice. The office of Prudence is, to direct the actions of other vertues, and to esteeme and ordaine euery thing according to vertue. Seneca. To conclude, as an empty ship is to be fenced and furnished with conuenient tacklings: so a life, with the effect of Pru∣dence. Socrates. Of Fortitude. Fortitude, in as much as it is a politike vertue, is to beare a valiant minde, to feare nothing, but dishonest things: manfully to endure aduersity, or prosperity. Fortitude of a purged minde is, to be ignorant of passions, not to feare, that it knoweth not to be angry, and desireth no dishonest thing. Exemplare fortitude is, to be vnchangeable; because it is alwaies the same, and is not at any time changed.
The parts of forti∣tude are foure, Magnificence, Confidence, Patience, Perseuerance, Magnificence is the cogitation and exployting of great and high matters, with a certaine honorable purpose of mind Confidence is a vertue, whereby the minde it selfe in great and honest matters hath reposed much in it self, with a certain hope of trust. Patience is a voluntary and continuall sufferance of hard and difficult things, for honestie and commodities sake. Perseuerance is a vertue sure and permanent in a well aduised purpose. There are many effects of Fortitude 1. it triumpheth ouer ones enemies, Mark 5. and he a most valiant man. 2. it keepeth a mans goods: Luke. 11. when a strong man armed, &c. 3. it enricheth,—Prou. 10, the hand of the strong getth riches. 4. it adorneth,—Prou. 31. fortitude and comelinesse his garment. Fortitude con∣sisth in fiue things, In aduenturing vpon hard things: Many things help fortitude, 1. The exhortation of wise men. In despising earthly things: 2. The example of the strong. In suffering tribulation: 3. Excercise in fight. In resisting emptations: 4. Hope of reward. In fighting against vices. 5. The helpe of prayer. As Harts haue great Hornes in vaine, seeing they want courage: so it is not sufficient to be strong and to be of pow∣er in other things, vnlesse Fortitude be adioyned. Plutarch. Of Temperance. Politicke Temperance (according to Macrobius) is, to desire nothing to be repented, in nothing to exceede the rule  modestie, to tame desire vnder the yoake of reason. Whence commeth the saying: Wilt thou be crowned? wilt thou be filled with delicates? Haue this short saying alwayes before thee; Be sober. Temperance of a purged minde, is, not onely to represse, but quite to forget earthly desires. Temperance as it is an Exemplar vertue, is, a certaine turning about towards it selfe with continuall diligence.
There are three parts of Temperance, Continence. Clemencie. Modestie. Continence (according to Tully) is a vertue, by which the desire is ruled by the gouernment of counsell. Clemencie is a vertue, whereby the motions of the mind, being stirred with rashnesse, to the hate of some one, are staied by gentlenesse and pleasantnese. Modestie is a vertue, by which an honest shamefastnesse getteth an honourable and durable estimation. There are againe three formes of Temperance, Sobrietie, Abstinence, Modestie. The first consisteth in tast: which Sobrietie moderateth. The second consisteth in touching, wherein Abstinence and Chastitie put a meane. The third consisteth in words and deeds. But a deede, as it is heere taken, doth appertaine to three sences▪ about their propper matters, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, This deede pertaineth also to touching, not onely in things vsing the act of generation, but also pertaineth to others, whose instruments are hands to smite and take, and feete to walke. In all these, Modestie setteth downe a meane. The dignitie of Temperance is seene in these two things; 1. First it preserueth Nature, because Nature is delighted in meane things, and through extreames is corrupted. Keepe a meane, if thou wilt not loose the end. Blessed men haue kept a meane, saith Bernard. 2. It adorneth the minde. For as in Natures the forme is more comely, than the matter: so also in manners, the manner, is more commended than the action it selfe. Whence commeth that olde common saying; We merit not by Verbes, but by Aduerbes: that is to say, not in that we speake or doe any thing, but in that we speake well, or doe well. It is manifest by an example in that Widow, who, offering two mites, is more commended by our Lord, then they who cast in great gifts into the Treasury.
Temprance is compared vnto the Sunne, which is the midst of the Planets, and most glorious amongst them all. Socrates said, that a temperate habite of the minde, and contented with it owne, was like a short and pleasant life. Fo hath much peace, and little labour. Of Iustice. Now time requireth that we enter into the holy closets of Polliticke Iustice: whose propertie is to keepe to euery  his owne: where also a respect of a iust and honest fact is busied, with a religious obseruation: and nothing is termed p∣fitable which may seeme dishonest. Iustice of a pure mind is, so to be with that high mind, that it keepeth with it a perpetuall league by imitation. It is a propertie of Exemplar Iustice, by an euer during Lawe, not to be turned from the perpetuall continuation of worke. There are six parts of Iustice. 1. Religion, 2. Pietie, 3. Thankes: 4. Reuenge, 5. Obeysance 6. Truth. To these mercy seemeth to be fitly ioyned, being a vertue most accepta to God; which will not onely pittie, but also succour the aduersiti another. 1. Religion is a vertue of a certaine superiour nature, which men call diuine, and bringeth with it care and ceremony. 2. Pietie is, when dutie and diligent reuerence is giuen to them who are linked to vs in blood and good will. 3. Thankes is that, wherein are contained the remembrance and desire of requiting the amitie and offices of another. 4. Reuenge is a vertue, whereby violence and iniurie and euery obscure thing, is repelled by defending and reuenging▪ 5. Obeysance is a vertue, whereby men excelling in some worthinesse, are vouchsafed with some reuerence and hono 6. Veritie is a vertue, whereby those things are said to be changed, which haue beene, are, or shall be hereafter. Heere is to be noted, that Iustice is not so much a speciall vertue, as a generall, as is abouesaid in the Cardinall ∣tues. But Iustice may be peruerted three wayes. 1. Through loue of the person, or of money. Isa. 5. Woe to you who iustifie the vngodly, for a reward. 2. Through feare, Mat. 10. Feare not them who kill the body, &c. 3. Through enuie. Marke. 15. Knowing that for enuy they had betrayed him. Many things draw vs to Iustice: that is to say; The Scripture, Eccles. 4. Euen vnto death striue for Iustice. Our naturall inclination. Augustine. Naturally Iustice is in the heart of man
Also brute beasts admonish vs to Iustice by their agreement and innocencie. There are many effects and blessings of Iustice. Mat. 5. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after Iustice. et. 3. Blessed are ye if you suffer any thing for Iustice. ccle. 4. Who worketh Iustice, shall be exalted, and is blessed. r. 10. Iustice deliuereth from eternall death. It rewardeth. Psal. 17. My lord will reward me according to my Iustice. It crowneth. Tim. 2. The crowne of Iustice is laide vp for me. To conclude, Iustice is called the vpholder of the Common-wealth, the life and Queene of all vertues. The Sunne is most pleasant to them who can behold it: so also is a Prince to them who loue Iustice. Concerning VVarre. Of Warre. Warre is offensiue, or defensiue. In Offen∣siue warre the consi∣deration is either Generall: where we ought to respect the kind. For it is either Necessary, or not Necessary. the moment. For it is either daungerous, or not daungerous. Particular. See after∣wards. Heere also the Places, are to be considered. Meanes and Times The rules. To knowe the fittest time, and to take hold thereof, an vnknown commoditie, Strength without aduise, ouerthroweth it selfe with it owne waight. Strength is small worth abroad, vnlesse there be wisedome at home. Let no man through confidence of his owne wisedome or strength, vndertake daungerous and vnnecessary things.
For God in a suddaine moment can ouerthrow the greatest glory of things. The story of Craesus amongst others, is famous, who through error of iudgement and confidence of his owne power, hee rashly stirring vnnecessary Warre a∣gainst Cyrus, procured most greeuous calamities to himself and his whole king∣dome. Whence commeth the verse. All worldly things hang at a slender threed. And they fall by sudden mischance, who haue beene mightie. And he is suddenly a beggar, who euen now was exceeding rich. Things present are to be retained; and things certaine are not rashly, and for vn∣certaine and vnknowen things, to be hazarded. Do nothing but what is needfull to be done. And one rule which God hath giuen, is to be followed. A Prince must fight sometime, not because he will, but because his enemies constraineth. It is also well knowen by the Law of Nations, that Warre may bee repelled by Warre. Also delaying of future Warre, is for the most part a great losse and shame to a Prince. Liui. It is also the dutie of a wise man to try all things by aduice before he fight. And if warre cannot be auoided, because all are in daunger, he must wisely attempt it, and valiantly repell it; and a diligent preparation is to be thought vpon, and vsed in time of peace.
In a gene∣rall consi∣deration it must be regarded What Captaines are to be made, remoued. what store of foode and victuals is necessary: whence they may be had certainly, verily, speedily. How great an armie our ene∣mies or we in quantitie haue, are able to procure at home, abroad, to abstaine now at the present time, in time to come. in qualitie by Sea, that is to say, Souldiers on Sea. by land footemen, what sorts of both. horsemen, what furniture of warre is necessarie, that is to say, Armour, weapons, Armour, or complete Armour. Horses, Gunnes, Engines, Iron bullets, Cariots, wild fire pouder, Carriages, and other engines. What places are fit to skirmish: There are three sinewes of Warre, Gold, the hand, yron. What times are fit and conuenient. Horsemen and footemen, armed men are called the hands and legs of the Captaine. Plutarch. But a Captaine wanting money, is said to haue no bellie.— Souldiers are also to be kept in obedience, and they may the better be gouerned, their wages is to be payed them in due time.
Particu∣lar consi∣deration resteth in the Cap∣taines wis∣dome & experiēce in Warre, who ought to marke & foresee Treasons, secret engines, priuie whisperings, treacherie, strangemes, &c. The way of the souldiers going forth to battaile, Places which are indifferent and fit to fight, to skirmish, The opportunitie of the place oft times more auay∣leth, than valour. Caesar. to winter in. Conuenient places to enter into sight, by night, or by day. forthwith, or at some other time. leaue off their fight, goe forward, retire, make a stand, spare their enemies being subdued, or to exercise crueltie against them. They who with very small intreatie do pardon them which are ouercome, do for this cause, allure more to try the fortune of Warre against them. But there appeared very manifestly in Pausanias, Dk of the Spar∣tanes, not onely warlike vertue and fortitude, but also modestie, and the honour of chast shamefastnesse, Who, after the victorie gotten at Platea, conquered himselfe with a most glorious victory, and abstayning from Coa, being taken Prisoner defended her. And with great prayse of moderation and humanitie, he raged not against the dead carkasses of his enemies being slaine, but said, it suffised him, if that doing and speaking iust things, he could please his Spartanes. On what side he is to giue the onset before, behind, on both the wings of the Armie, &c. How Warre is to be made, either by field battailes, in open field; or subtilly, and by Ambushes. fences of Bulwarks; or by suddaine issuing out of their Tents and Townes. whole Armie, or by light skirmishes and Fortresses. Spoyling the fields, and by besieging their cities. Making experiment with the whole Armie, in one set battle, or by many long bat∣tailes.
How the whole hoast and armie is to be ordered and set in array, when a slaughtering and most cruell war is to be vndertaken and dispatched. What places are most meete for receiuing their Garrisons, and what places are inconuenient. What Captaines and particular Bands and captainships they shall haue. From whom we may get food and victuals. Who wanteth food and victuals, dieth through hun∣ger, not by the swoord. How we ought to vse the victory being gotten. How our Souldiers subdued in Warre, are to be comforted and encouraged in mind. defen∣e war, It must be kno∣wen, How our Country, Citie is fenced. by Nature, by land, by sea, with rocks, with mountaines, with woods, with marishes. By Art, with Hauens, Castles, Fortresses, Ditches. may be fenced with— new hauens, Castles, Munitions, Trenches and ditches. what things are necessary, and of what for the Garrisons of our owne Souldiers or of forreyners are, because if they want, it is requisite that they be augmented they are ouer-many, that they be bated. what places are fit for our enemies to assault vs, that we leaue strong places. Let that bee the chiefest part of a Citie, for whome it is most expediēt that all things be quiet. that we fence daun∣gerous places. vs, to defend our selues, It is more easie to keepe out the enemie, than to expell him being let in.
It must be con∣sidered what warres many yeeres haue bene made in our countrey, or in other places, how they haue bene managed. Let not continuall warre be made, although with an  experienced enemie. vpon what causes they arose. how they were ended. It is very easie to iudge the like of the like things. But hee who followeth auncient and excel∣lent examples without particular obseruation, shall sometime greatly erre. We ought to see how manie what friends wee can call to ayde vs; lest wee rashly prouoke them who are mo mightie then wee. Wee must preuent the iniuries of them who are more mightie, not by rashly reuenging, but by taki heede of worse turn Improuident & blind hast, is vnfortunate: but delay stopping the wādring vehemecy of the minde, pro∣teth much, which although they straightway appeare not, yet in due time any one may certainly find To conclude, weee must take heede least in ending warre, or succouring others, warre bee so extinguished abroade, tha bee kindled at home. Of Peace. The most firme league, peace and amitie is, that, which is purchased through opinion of vertue, likenesse of manners, and consent of Religion. The best league is, to do well, for with such men GOD himselfe is confederate, saith Isocrates. Peac is eyther to be made. Heere we ought to offer Conditi∣ons, wher care is to bee had of the Time. For sometime these conditions (in conuenient time) will be thankfully and willing accepted, which afterward may bee suspected and reiected. Reasons, wherby our aduersaries are perswaded to accept our cōditions of peace, being offere Persons treating of peace. For very often it happeneth, that the selfe same truces are confirm or reiected, by reason of the inequalitie of the persons handling the matter. Conditions thēselues, least they seeme Dangerous, Craftie and bold policies are at the first sight pleasant, hard to  handled, and in the euent dolefull. The vnequall conditions and policies of Lycidas and Circilus a to be shunned. Herod Some cures are more greeuous then the disease it selfe, where it better die, then by them go about to recouer health. Difficult, Intollerable, Dishonest.
Pre∣ser∣ued. To ac∣cept con∣ditions. Where it must be cōsidered. Vpon what cause our aduersaries to make a league with vs, whether they are per∣swaded. voluntarily, or vpon necessitie. what ayde we or our enemies haue to make warre. How the Souldiers are affected. what kinds of cōditions they be. For if they appeare to be iust & honest, we must be∣ware lest in re∣fusing them, we seeme Obstinate or stiffe necked, as the Iewes were in the siege of Hierusalē. Proud and hawtie, as Pompeius, &c. in contemning truce with Caesar, who when Cicero brought most indifferent conditions of peace, was willing to dismisse his armie; but Pompey despised him, as his enemie, but afterward was slaine in vnfortunate warre, wherein also two hun∣dred thousand men were slaine. Philo telleth vs, that it is better to haue peace, although not commodi∣ous and indifferent, than to vndertake warre with great mischiefes. Peace is a worke full of vertue, peace is the summe of labour. Peace is the reward of finished warre, & the reward of danger. A man vnhurt, will sleepe better, than he who is wounded. The beuers, in hunting, bite of their stones, when as they perceiue that for this cause they are pursued: so it is the part of a wise man, somtime to cast away that thing, for which he is endaungered. Plin. ith rreine eople adioyning, who loue vs, who maligne vs, who carry them∣selues indifferēt∣ly towards vs. Heere wee ought to see with whō we ought to make leagues. to preserue friēd∣ship, to shew loue & good, will, ei∣ther by deed, or coun∣ter fait it onely by word. by whom how opē∣ly, how secretly, how lōg. By what offices we may pacifie the offended, confirme the doubtful, perswade the suspitious, dwelling farre of:
Peace is preserued by auoy∣ding of∣fences & enmities with do∣mesticall people: which may arise through negligēce & defect of Instructions, which doe not respect the education of youth. For it is especially to be considered. what doctrine ought to be taught in a expelled from Common-wealth. what studies are con∣uenient for euerie age, to adorne the mind with Diuinitie. morall Phylosophie. Histories, &c. stirre vp strength Agilitie of the body. health How much time is to be spent in learning, &c. Good education is called the foundation of wisedome. Ordayning of Magistrates how many, what Magistrates the common-wealth wanteth. who are worthy & fit for euery place, t these may be called tobeare office, lest  enuious doe speake in reproach of the ∣ther: according to that of the Poet. Two things especially doe rule all the counsels and actions of wise men in the common-wea and priuate life, vz. Hearing, o precepts, set down in the word of God, in Phylosophy, and honest lawes. Examples of counsels, euents and punishments: which are more notable, and more effectual moue and pearse the minds of the ruder sort. An Historie wisely written (as Cicero saith) is the mistresse of life, and the witnesse of times,  light of truth, the messenger of antiquitie, & Thucididies calleth it the picture & theater of  life, agreeing to all times of this world: wherein as the nature of man continueth the same: their dispositions, manners, businesses, occasions, counsels, euents, misdoings, and also for t most part, the same offences continue. Onely the persons and Actors of the Historie, do succeede new euery age; and the names bei changed, the stories are now told as it were of our selues. Oh shame! men vnwise, and of a grosse braine,
Despisers of learning (who haue onely care of dycing, Or to feede dogges, horses and hawkes, And to leade a childish life in continuall sportes) Do beare the Scepters, rule the people, and gouerne Cities. Hence come so many thousand scabbes of errors, so manie sinkes of follies, so manie thousands of mischieous deeds. Appointing of gifts and rewards, for euery one that well deserueth, whether they bee 1 Noble, or For it is not well if   Ignoble, 2 Souldiers,   Peacemakers, 3 Learned,   Vnlearned, 4 Magistrates,   Priuate men, 5 Cleargie men,   Laye men. Good men bee obscured, as it were with darkenes enuironing them, & be not regarded: be adorned with no praise of due honor, be difficultly, faintly & coldly, preferred. Where there bee fewe which desire offices, there the com∣mon wealth is in daunger. By rewards & honors, excellent wittes are stirred vp with a more earnest vehemency of minde, to the study of vertue. Let no estate of men bee depriued of hope to attaine anie preheminence, sauing what belongeth to the King. Let a more honorable office bee giuen to the more noble, a more gainefull office to the poorer sorte, other things being equall. Bad men be pre∣ferred as, Tale-bearers Hee who giueth more to him that ill deserueth it, and lesse to him who wel deserued, is iniuri∣ous & vniust. Good turnes ill bestowed, are esteemed ill deeds. Let wicked and mischieuous men be punished. Scoffers, False accusers Dishonest, Flatterers, &c.
Remedies are to be inuented, and applied to the sicknesses and dis∣eases of the com∣mon wealth. Ambition: which disease is spread farre and wide, and increaseth daily. Couetousnes and pride of Noblemen. It is vncertaine what the euening bringeth, therefore wee must not bee proud in aduersitie. Magistrates. Angrie men hate pride, wise men deride it. Prodigall spending of ones wealth, especially of them who are indebted vnto others. Want & need of others: for many kept vnder with want, haue desperatly robbed the cōmon wealth. Impuritie of offenders, and iniurious men, make the Lawes to be contemned. Iniuries are offe∣red to the inferiours by their superiours: that is to say, To the common sort by the Nobles: Thereby wee read in the Romane Empire, that the Kings were expelled, and that the state of the common-wealth was pluckt diuers wayes and altered. To priuate men by Magistrates: Thereby also in Heluetia, the Magistrates and Nobles were driuen away, and the policie of the people erected. To equalls by theyr equalls, that is to say; To Magistrates by Magistrates. Hereby deadly warre haue oftentimes arose. Empires haue bene rent and torne asunder. The times of Sylla & Marius were most lamentable to the cōmon wealth of Rome By one priuate man to another Through a rod kindled, or a candle left negligently in a house the whole Cittie is oftentimes set on fire: so of priuate ha and dissension, a publick dammage sometimes ariseth. Inward sedition is by so much more hurtfull than warre, (whereas it is archieued against forreyners with agreeing mindes) by how much warre is worse then peace. Wee ought to contend at all times, not with priuie grudg and hatreds, but whether of all can best deserue of o Prince and Countrey, and doe most good for it. Aristides. Themistocl.
All things are to bee ordered and gouerned at home, with counsell and the arts of peace. The disagreement of degrees is the bane of the common-wealth. The ambition of superiours are to bee taken heede off. The enuie of equalles The suspition of inferiours Withdraw the matter, and the fire will be quenched. Take away the occasion, and hatred or enuie will cease, Friendship ought to bee immortall, andenmities ought to bee mortall. ouching foode and victualls necessary for he sustenaunce of a common wealth. In preparation of foode and victualls necessary to sustaine the common-wealth. &c. wee ought To consider all things In their kindes, for either they are ministred to vs, by forraine Countreys: or are at home, & growing in our owne Countrie. in their quantity How much the cōmonwealth wil need in time of warre & peace. how much will be spare to transport to whom, when, how. how much is to be distibuted to euerie one in warre, and peace, To take heede least by the malice and enuie of some our common wealth be destitute, & afflicted by vnlawfull trans∣portations, or Mo∣nopolies at home. our friends, being in great want, bee not satisfied and refreshed, our ennemies do freely eniy our benefites and commodities. Heereof many men make greeuous complaint, and therefore geat care is heere to bee vsed. For it suffiseth not to haue lawes and proclamations touching loue and charity, and moderating our desires & superfluous expnes, but (couetousnes and blinde lusts being repressed,) to deale more moderately and religiously towards our Countrie and neighbours. For not our wordes, but our deedes ought to agree to holie lawes.
The sight also, and almost the feeling of most wofull calamities, the long continuance and great burden of warres, fa∣mine, pestilences, seditions and great slaughters, which for very many yeares hath spoyled adioyning countries, ought to mooue vs through true penance, godlinesse and obedience of our whole life, to put away henceforth, the anger of God▪ and perhaps the like punishments hanging ouer our heads. It comforteth me to haue escaped so many Grecian cities, and to haue kept the middle way through my enemies. Virg. We ought also to be mindfull that dth hangeth ouer euery mans head, and we must once tread the way of death. Therefore we must prouide such wealth, which (the ship being broken) may swim out together with their maister. There is nothing worse, nothing more hated, nothing more repugnant to Gods ordinances, than the crime of auarice, and cruell outragiousnesse. Cursed is that couetous Steward whose maister is bountifull. Bernard. As in quick-siluer all things swimme, except gold; for this is one thing it draweth too it: so nothing sinketh into the mind of a couetous man, beside gayne. Charitie, pietie and honestie, swimme on the top: they descend not into the heart. The fish Polypus, being otherwise a blockish creature, vseth incredible skill in catching the oyster: so some men are ver wise onely in gayning; in other things they are mere beasts. Let him that is condemned of Auarice, enuie and impietie, be excluded from euery office of the Common-wealth.
Touching the principall and chiefest notes, wherein we must pursu a matter in disputation. Perswadeth n a ques∣ion Simple, wee must vrge that this is possible, easie, honest, religious, laudadle, honourable, profitable, necessary, safe, pleasant. Comparatiue: more possible, more easie, the ten wayes, as aboue. more honest, &c. Disswadeth in question. Simple, here we must vrge that this is Impossible, hard, vnhonest, Irreligious, discommendable, Ignoble, vnprofitable, vnnecessary, dangerous, vnpleasant. Comparatiue: more impossible, the ten wayes as aboue. more difficult, more irreligious, more dishonest, &c. Touching the Methode which is to be obserued in perswading and disputing. Inuention of Arguments wherewith we may prooue things. refute amplifie we may effect the Auditors. beningnely, pleasantly, vehemently with hope, with feare, Placing of Arguments, for arguments of greater efficacie and vertue are to be placed in the beginning. ending. of lesser moment are to be heaped together n the midst. with what excellēt sentences & elquent
Heere a∣so is to be noted, that argumēts are to be taken frō places of Rhetori∣cians, which are called A∣tributes of Persons where are comprehended the name of a man. the nature are related the— Nation, countrey, kindred, flocke, sexe, age, commodities, discommodities, of body, of fortune. Herodotus admonisheth vs sometime to imitate the natures and manners of men, the natures of the countries and places wherein they are borne. Life: where are considered the fosteres, and helpers, Schoole-maisters & teachers, friends, seruants, profession, Sort, state. Habite of Bodie, minde. Studies and counsels. Accidents which haue happened to them. Conferences and often speeches. Actions. Things: whereof are numbred Time, place, fact, matter, cause, power, instruments, and the manner of doing.
Logicians according to Ramus vz. by the Causes, Effects, Subiects, Adiuncts, Disagreeing things, Compred things, Name, Distribution, Definition, Testimonie. But now Methode and order require that this my Epitome beganne with holy things, should be ended with holy and di∣uine things. Let it please you therefore, that fewe things bee in generall explicated touching the three Theologicall vertues. It is necessary, that our soule, as touching the superiour part, wherein the image of God consisteth, be rectified by the three Theologicall vertues, Faith, Hope, Charitie. Faith (according to the Apostle) is saide to be the substance or foundation of things to be hoped for through Grace, and an argument of things not seene, inclining the vnderstanding to beleeue those things which appeare not. This is a very excellent description of faith by the Effects, because it representeth things, as yet consisting in hope, and putteth inui∣sible things as it were before our eyes. Hope is a certaine expectation of future blessednesse, proceeding from the onely grace of God. Charitie (according to the Apostle) is said to be a diuine loue and right will, altogether turned away from all worldly and present things, vnseperably ioyned and vnited to God, kindled with a certaine fire of the holy Ghost (from whence it is, and whereunto it is referred) free from all pollution, not knowing to be corrupted, desirous of diuine contempla∣tion, the life of vertues, and is accounted the end of all heauenly precepts. Faith directeth in beleeuing the chiefest truth. Hope in imitating and expecting the chiefest hard thing.
ut aritie in desiring and louing the chiefest good. ese vertues h their proper actions. Faith maketh vs assent to God. Hope maketh vs trust in God. Charitie maketh vs to loue God. They also worke diuers wayes by reason of the obiect Faith is conuersant about the truth, Hope a difficult thing, Charity good. Lastly, they differ by reason of the effect.— Faith, followeth God, presently. Hope accompanieth to Heauen. Charitie euerlastingly embraceth Almighty God. Hence it is manifest, that amongst these three Vertues, Faith is accompted the greatest, as which (according to the Apo∣stle) is not abolished in the life to come, as the others; but is perfected. Because whereas Faith and Hope is ca∣ried into promised and future things, when wee haue obtained them present, to what ende should wee have Faith and hope. But there both wee shall alwayes mutuallie loue God, and God will loue vs truely and perfectly. To conclude, euen as God hath placed in Heauen the Sun, who representeth him towardes all men, both in Theologicall, and also in Cardinall vertues, (that is to say, Temperance, Iustice, and Liberalitie.) FINIS.
