L1449A R179539 [ocm]62369431 187988
A LETTER From an Officer of quallitie of the Par∣liaments ARMY in Munster, to an Honourable Mem∣ber of the House of Commons. VVherein is shewed the late further great Victories God hath given to the LORD INCHIQVIN against the Rebells in that Province. London, Printed by T. Paine, August 26. 1647.
A LETTER FROM AN OFFICER of quality of the Parliaments Army in Munster, to an honurable Member of the House of Commons. SIR, YOur constant friendship ingages me to give you some account of our proceedings of late in this Pro∣vince, we have kept the field ever since Midsommer, in pursuit of the Rebells, and not being able to draw them to an incounter, which my Lord Prsident design¦ed, we took divers Castles in the County of Lymrick, and his Lordship placed competent Wards in two of them, viz. Ballingarry and Castlematras, and destroyed the rest Soone after this, his Lordship withdrew into the County of Corke, in expectation to ingage the Rebells Army before them, which hapned accordingly, for that the Rebells laid seidge to Ballingary Whereupon my Lord President marchcd with all possible speed to the reliefe of the place, but he that had the command of the Castle gave it up upon a summons, within the time
prefixed by my Lord, by his letter for his reliefe, being no way necessitated thereunto, for which he is now in question. Being disappointed of our engagemēt expected with the Army of the Rebels, the L. President march'd towards those parts where he was most like to find them. He first met with an entire company commanded by Capt. Den, of whom he slew 23. and took the Captaine, Lievtenant, Ensigne, and 27. common Soldiers Priso∣ners, with 80. oare Armes. From hence his Lordship ordered his march towards the Rebells, neer the River of Shanon, upon the River of Moylkerne, 4. or 5. miles above Lymrick, where with 1300. Horse, and 2000. foot, expecting the rest of their Army, the Rebells intended to secure themselves from fighting with us, untill they could get an advan∣tage, that Country being a very fast Country by reason of great Rivers, Woods and, Bogs. After 3. houres dispute we gained the passe with Gods assistance, on the third day of this month, and ha∣ving beaten of and routed their forces, pursued them as farre as we could, kild 100. upon the place, wounded many, whereof some are since dead, took 200. servicea∣ble Horses, their Riders forsaking them, and kild and wounded many others, who at the first pressed hard up∣on our foot, here we got 200. Cwes about the Lord Bourck of Castleconels, and Sir Edmond Walshes. That night we marched to New Castle, a Garrison of the Re∣bells, within half a mile of the City of Lymrick, which was surrendred upon summons, and quarter only for their lives, upon relation of the defeat given to their Ar∣my. And here we rested the remainder of that night, Some of our troops pursued the Rebells over the River of
Shanon, (which is very seldome passable thereabouts) into the County of Clare or Thomond,, whither most of the Cattle about Lymrick (on this side) were driven over Lymerick bridge. The Lord President secured the sick and wounded Soldiers, with the baggage & carriages with a good guard at another Castle lately taken in, and mar∣ched with the Army homewards 2, or 3. miles, and in the evening faced about and commanded a party of 600. Musqueteers, and as many Horse to march away and passe the River, and drew up the rest of the Army pre∣sently after to secure them, against any attempt. The party that got over were disposed into several di∣visions and commanded severall wayes under those Offi∣cers that best knew the Country, Leivtenant Mathew Considen commanded one division towards Killallow, and having taken a prisoner in his march, hee (to save his life) discovreed where some Officers of quality were, upon the Lord Presidents Land called Bryens Bridge in Thomond, 6 myles from Lymrick wherupon he desisted from seeking after his prey, and early in the morning surrounded the place where they were, some of the Offi∣cers made shift to get on horse back, but finding no pos∣sibility of escaping, submitted themselves; Among those Officers was a brother of the Lord Presidents, a Leiv∣tenant Colonell of horse who being in France at the be∣gining of the Rebellion, was thence inveigl'd by the Re∣bells for their assistance; and his Lordship desires to send him to the Parliament, the rest of the party gained a prey of 8000 head of Cattell and at least 5000 sheepe (the most part of them upon the Lands belonging to Briens bridge,) with good plunder. The sheepe could not passe the River, and many of the Cattell by reason
of the Woods thereabout, and their wildnesse by the losse of their Calves got away, but our Soldiers feasted themselves thereabouts, and brought away to our Gar∣risons neer two thousand head of Cattell, which is a great reliefe unto them, our unexpected getting over the Shannon strook such a terror into the Rebels of Thomond, that they burnt the Earle of Thomonds Castle of Bun∣atty, which they had garrison'd. The Lord President with the Army is now returned for a few dayes to refresh the Soldiers, who are gene∣rally barefoot and extreame naked, and he intends to march presently out againe towards the County of Tip∣perary, and the borders of Lemster, whereof Col. Iones hath the command, which is conceived to be of much more advantage to the service then any other course, as∣well in spoyling the enemies quarters, as in diverting Prestons forces, which we heare are very strong in those parts towards Dublin. In this six weeckes abiding in the field, the Soldiers had but six pound of bisquet and one pound of cheese for e∣very Soldier that marched, but have made shift to live on what could be got in the Rebells quarters, where what we could not save, the Lo: President caused to bee burned, with many good Castles and all houses gene∣rally; (especially for some myles about the City Lyme∣ruk) to their great losse and dammage, computed by us at 80000 pound at the least, whereby they are much dis∣abled from raising and supporting an Army, which they can very hardly make, unlesse they can procure Owen Roe Neale to come to their assistance, which they give out they have obtain'd, supposeing Preston wilbe able to ans∣wer all occasions in Lemster and Vlster, and the Conaught Rebells
to defend themselves, they are to have a consultation shortly at Cashell (as we heare) about this affaire, which my Lord president is resolved to use all dilligence to in∣terupt, In the meane time the forces in the Garrisons of Dungarvon, and Cappaquin with Lismore & Tallow which we gained in May last have marched under Leiv. Col. Michaell Byrne into Butlers Country in Typerary by order of the Lord President to make a diversion, and taken the Lord of Cahers Castle called Grace Castle; stormed it, put the rogues to the sword & got a good prey of 1800 head of Cattell and Garrans or Horses with some store of sheepe and though many of them were lost and Em∣beziled, they brought home the most part of them to their Garisons with some good plunder, I cannot omit to acquaint you, in the County of Lymrick, we stormed & burned the Abby of Adare held by the Rebells where four friers were burned and three taken Prisoners, and also the Garrison of Owney belonging to the heires of Sr. Edmond Walsh, with a Castle belonging to one Mr. Fox where all that were within suffered death, save Fox himselfe, who was let down by a rope from the Battle∣ments who is kept prisoner, and one desperate Rogue who leapt from the battlements, (which few would have attempted) hopeing to make an escape, but was Knock∣ed on the head by our Soldiers: Thus God hath blessed us exceedingly in the field service, and had my Lord some more foote, with some money to encourage the Soldiers, and carriages which are extreamely wanting, and clothes and shooes, for the Souldiers, who are many of them almost naked, he would doubt∣lesse give the Parliament an account of this province beyond their expectation before this Winter passe,
no man can do more then he doth, with the meanes he has, should he take any great and considerable Towns, it will requre so many men to Garis them, that our forces re∣maining, would not be, sufficient to keep us masters of the field, & they are such and so built, and lying on such Rivers that they ought to be kept when they are taken for the good of the ser∣vice; and cannot easily be demolisht, if we would, and therefore we hope God wil put it into the hearts of the parliament, to send over some necessary supplyes speedily to encourage us to pro∣ceed in the finshing of their work here, which no man can wth more valour vigilance and fidelity intend, nor with more satis∣faction to the whole Army then the Lord President doth who it hath pleas'd the Lord to make a happy instrumēt in this service. I crave your pardon for being thus prolix, and yet I have many things to acquaint you with, that all true English men that are lovers of their Country cannot be but well satisfied to heare see∣ing God workes so graciously for them, against these barba∣rous Rebells even when they can least attend it. Dated at Cork the 12. of August 1647. Prisoners taken. Lievtenant Col. Christopher Bryen. Adiutant Generall Mac. Grath. Captain Bryen, Mac. Bryen Arra his sonne. Lievtenant Tirrelagh Bryen. Captain Harbert. Captain Fox. Lievtenant Colonell ô Callaghan. Lievtenant Bourke. Captaine Mac. Grath taken but dyed of his Wounds. Liev. Col. Ryan slaine and divers others of quallitie whose number or names are not yet knowne. Amongst the rest I may not omit the Lord of Muskerys page, who was taken with his Lords cloake in the pursuit. FINIS.
