25795 S102809 99838571 177782
JACOBS LADDER, Or A SHORT TREA∣TISE LAYING FORTH distinctly the seuerall degrees of Gods eternall purpose, where∣by his grace descends vpon the e∣lect, and the elect ascend to the predestinate glory. LONDON Printed by William Hall, for Nathaniel Butter. 1611.
To the courteous and friendly Reader. COVRTEOVS and friendly rea∣der, I haue laid heere before thine eie at one view (as it were) the steps of that most deepe counsell and wisedome diuine, as farre as it hath reuealed it selfe touching the eternall estate of all men. Wonderfull is the wisdome of of God in all his waies and workes,
which hee hath purposed in great wisdome, made in great wisedome, and in great wisdome disposeth of euen to most excellent ends, how∣soeuer the weak eie of our poore and dimme vnderstanding cannot reach them. But as man is one of his noblest creatures, in framing T. 139. 6. 7. Psal. 8. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and ordering of whom his name is become excellent and wonderful: so most maruellous is that wis∣dome which was expressed in the counsell of God, concerning the ne∣uer ending conditiom of this crea∣ture. Truth it is, when high matters are once laid open to vs, that we be∣gin a little to see into them; then as it fareth in a riddle, when it it is vnfolded, wee despise it, and wonder at our selues that wee were
so blockish as we could not perceiue it without an interpretor. And as the glorious sunne, which wee com∣monly look vpon, growes despiseable and meane by little and little, tho∣row often looking vpon it: So di∣uine mysteries being familiarly de∣clared and made easie to vnder∣standing, they are of fooles lesse re∣uerenced and esteemed then before. But the godly which know the worth of the knowledge of that truth which is according to godli∣nesse, after it is once cleerely known & wel considered, they do the more admire it; & are stirred vp to praise God the more heartily for their light giuen them that way, by whomsoeuer it be, and how little soeuer it be which is added to their
former vnderstanding. Now be∣cause the vse of any thing, when it is both good and manifold, bring∣eth no small estimation to the thing it selfe; I haue thought good to ad∣uertise thee of the vse and benefit which is to bee made of this short draught of the degrees of Gods pur∣pose touching mankind, and of the  It also helps a∣gainst the late error of some, who con∣founding the tvvo e∣states of corruptiō and grace, vvould haue men iustified in order of time be∣fore they beleeue, vvhiles they be in the old mā: which crosseth Gods pur∣pose di∣rectly, as vvill ap∣peare by looking vpon the procee∣ding ther∣of. execution of that part of it which concerneth the elect, for it is no meere speculatiue thing, but tendeth to practice. It helpeth thee against that er∣rour which laieth the purpose of sa∣uing or condemning vpon foreseene good or euill: whereas the doing of good or euill is rather a consequent of Gods purpose then any prece∣ding cause or motiue thereof,
Ephes. 1. 4. Secondly, hauing heere before thine eie the two certaine vndoub∣ted ends, that al men must come vn∣to, eternall life, or eternall death: and the meanes by which it is pur∣posed they shall bee brought there∣unto; thou maiest iudge of thy selfe by the purposed meanes, to which of the purposed ends thou art sure to come to. When thou seest in thy selfe or  others any of these purposes effected or considerest of the execution of a∣ny part of the purpose of God; then call to mind the constancy of Gods purpose, and collect, that as cer∣tainly shall those other parts of his counsell, which yet are not, bee in their time accomplished: as when
thou thinkest of the purpose of cre∣ation, or of mans fall, or of calling by the Gospell performed, bee as∣sured that the purpose of resur∣rection, of generall iudgement shall holde firme. And when thou findest the purpose of effectuall calling, of faith, of sanctification, and repen∣tance now already done in thy selfe; thou maiest be perswaded that the purpose touching this perseuerance to the end, and of thy blessednesse in the end shall stand as a mountaine of brasse vnmoueable. This short Summe will much help  thee in the vnderstanding of Ser∣mons and of good bookes; thou shalt see (being one whose eies God hath opened) vnto what heads all is to be referred, which is spoken, or which
thou readest touching the worke of mans saluation. It will serue also as a touchstone to try teaching and teachers, both for matter and me∣thod, in handling it. Also, perceiuing that the whole course of thy saluation and euery particular in it, doth depend vpon Gods purpose as the soueraigne cause, yea that the very mediation and merit of Christ, was no motiue to leade God to choose thee to life, but that the purpose of a Sauiour was subordinate to the purpose of God so lo∣ued the world that he gaue his sonne. Iohn 3. election, thou maiest bee stirred vp to thanke God and to praise his free grace euen for Christ himselfe, as well as for all other things which thou enioiest that be good. Colos. 112. Giuing thanks vnto, &c.
It will humble thee much, and make thee awefull of God to consi∣der well, that thou holdest thy selfe, and whatsoeuer else is in thee, or a∣bout thee, without any respect at all of ought in thy selfe to mooue God to do so & so to thee, all being from his free purpose. Phil. 1. Worke out your saluation in feare and trembling: for it is God that worketh both will and deed, and that according to his good pleasure. It may prouoke thee greatly to admire Gods loue towards thee, and to loue him so much the more, to thinke that a thousand others being no worse then thou by fall, and as good as thy selfe by creation, yet God passed by them, and had a
purpose to saue thee, 1. Thess 1. 3. 4. In all things which fall out in the Church strangely for the ruine and decay of any particular Church in doctrine and religion, or for the remouing the word from them, or for the fall of any member in the Crurch, it will stay thee in patience a while to ponder that Gods wise and iust counsell determined it; thou hast done it Lord, euen so, because it so was thy will and purpose. And so in all things else that happen vn∣wontedly, it will moue all men with silence to thinke of it, or with sub∣mission and reuerence to Gods coun∣sell to speake of i, Acts. 11. Seeing the time of effecting Gods purpose toward the elect for their calling to Christ and to saluation
by him it is vncertaine, sometime deferred euen till the end of a mans life; therefore if any reade this short Summe who doth not finde himselfe by any worke of Gods sauing grace within the compasse of the purpose of election, let him not cast away his hope, but hauing an outward calling according to Gods counsell offorded, let him make account that the purpose of election hath offered and afforded it to him; and casting off security & presumption, let him waite vpon Gods mercy for that which remaineth in the diligent & cōstant vse of al good means priuate & puplik, and careful practise of al good duties, and abstinence from e∣uill works, as farre as lies in him. Now suffer mee to giue thee
a few aduertisments concerning the subiect matter of this short Summe and draught of Gods decree. Though Gods purpose were of euery thing that is, or happeneth; & is not nor shall euer happen: yet I meddle  with his purpose so far as cōcerneth onely as concerneth men, and here∣in so far only their eternall estate. Secondly, my meaning was to  lead thee into Gods Counsell-cham∣ber, no further then leaue and li∣cence by his word is giuen vs. For Thing re∣uealed be∣long to vs and our children. Deut. 29. vers. last. those things which I set downe are reuealed and doe therefore belong to vs. For the things are not to be held secret which God hath once manifested either by his word, or by euents. Thirdly, I deale no further here∣in
then as may and doth stand with rules of the word, and serue for edi∣fication, aiming after nothing but thy profit, not to satisfie any mans curiosity, nor to minister matter of debate and dispute. Furthermore, vnderstand that  He pre∣destinats in him∣selfe. Ephes. 1. 4. 5 Because it so pleased thee ô fa¦ther: Mat. 11. Psal. 115. 3 Whatsoe∣uer plea∣sed him, that hee doth, in heauen & in earth. Gods purpose hath no other cause, but Gods wil, and that therefore as it is eternall & vnchangeable euen as God is: so it is most free, most holy, most wise, most good, without all exception, howsoeuer it seemeth o∣therwise to corrupt men. Moreouer, I haue exprest the execution of Gods purpose so farre as it concerneth the Elect onely. Noting summarily, all such works of grace as they are brought tho∣row according to Gods counsell, and
doe omit to doe the like touching the reprobate: because my meaning was to giue light to the godly tou∣ching their owne estate and the wonderous mercifull dealing of God with them, and yet in laying out the proceeding of Gods purpose to∣ward such as be not chosen (there is so much discouered (if it be mar∣ked) as will let a man see how neere vnto, or farre off hee is from that heauy lot and condition. In all counsel humane & diuine  The end is first in the inten∣tion, last in execu∣tion. the end is thought on before the meanes, and of the meanes one is afore an other in order of causes, and for execution of them in order of time too. Seeing God worketh all things  Nothing done of God in after the counsell of his will, Ephe.
1. 11. it followeth necessarily that what is wrought by his hand in time, was purposed in his counsell before all time. Finally, if either I haue omit∣ted by ignorance or forgetfulnesse, any degree or steppe of Gods purpose or haue not giuen them their due place (wherein yet I trust I haue not failed, I am sure my care was not to faile) pardon such ouersight, and helpe thy selfe with the benefit of that knowledge which thou hast: and take occasion by this rude draught, to performe something this way more absolutely, if thou be able so to doe: for it is easie to adde to things already deuised; more easie to espie the blemishes of a worke, then to frame the like worke:
most easie of all to finde fault with that which is otherwise then well done. Conferre and vse thy know∣ledge to correct and not to carpe, not to detract, but to amend. Thine in the Lord, Thomas Wilson.
The seuerall steppes and degrees of Gods eternall purpose and counsell, con∣cerning the euerlasting estate of man∣kind, according as we may & ought to consider of them by the rules of Gods word, which tea∣cheth that things together purposed, yet haue an order amongst them: es∣pecially being purposed by him who is God of Order. First, touching all men. GOD These two words (God purposed) are to be vnder∣stood in the beginning of euery section. The first de∣grees of Gods purpose tou∣ching al men while they were in massa pura. This was first thought of as the vtmost mark and end of all. Gods glory the furthest end of his counsell. purposed from euerlasting, to glorifie himselfe by mankind, in his iustice and mer∣cy. Prouer. 16. 4. The Lord hath made all things for him self, yea euen the wicked for the day of euill. And Rom. 11. 36. For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him bee glory for e∣uer.
2. God purposed to create all men  The first meanes to bring to the end. Integrity must goe a∣fore corruptiō good in Adam at the appointed time. Gen. 1. 26. Let vs make man after our owne image and likenes. So he did make them, therefore his purpose was so to make them according to the seuenth aduertisement before. 3 For iust causes to Permissiō of mans fall was decreed, and his fall also as a meanes by which Gods purpose was to be fulfilled; but not as it is a sinne. permit Adam  Corruption & disease bee before the re∣medy, in or∣der of causes. (being tempted and left to himselfe) to fal, and all men in him, which part of his purpose is manifested in the 3. Chapter of Genesis, & Rom. 5. 14. In A∣dam all men haue sinned. The second meanes tending to the maine end. 4 To Our cōming into the world cor∣rupt by sinne is a consequēt of Gods de∣cree, for ha∣uing purpo∣sed to permit our fal, it fol∣lowes that we must come sinful into the World. The next degrees of diuine counsell touching the elect: 1. Al men must be like, that the choice may be free. And heere the end was to be thought of before the means: The end of election in respect of the elect being their saluation, the means being by Christ. bring all men, each in their own time into the world, couered with sinne and vnder wrath, Eph. 2. 3. Wee also were by nature the children of wrath aswell as others▪ and Psalm. 51. 4. In sinne my mother conceiued mee. The third meanes seruing to the principall end. Secondly, touching the Elect. FIrst, God purposed of that lost lump of mankind to choose some
of them to be drawne out of that com∣mon misery, to be saued by his mercy. Rom. 9. God would haue some to bee vessels of mercy. Eph. 1. 4. He hath cho∣sen you, Math. 20. few Chosen. 2. To giue them a Sauiour, euen his  The purpose to giue must go before the purpose to promise. owne Sonne Christ. 1. Peter 1. 20. Hee was ordained before the foundation of the world, but declared in the last time Also 2. Tim. 1. 9. 3. To make them a promise of this  The pur∣pose to pro∣mise, must goe before the purpose to ex∣hibit and send him. sauiour, and in fulnes of time to send him to worke their saluation in mans nature by his obedience to death. Gen. 3 15. The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head. Gal. 4. 4. In fulnesse of time, see Titus 1. 2. 4. Hauing brought them into the  The pur∣pose of com∣ming to a sa∣uiour by faith, must follow the purpose to exibite him. world, to call them vnto his sonne, and in him to iustifie them by faith, and to sanctifie them by his spirit. Rom. 8. 30. Whom he predestinated, them hee called and iustified. 5 To reserue them vnto Christ, &  Keeping or strengthning by Christ is after our ha∣uing of Christ keepe them by him vnto the end of their life. Iud. 1. Reserued vnto Iesus Christ. See Iohn 10. 29. 6. To cause all things not onely  Purpose of conuerting al to good, goes after purpose of confirmati∣on by Christ. Gospel and law, and benefits, but euen
sins, afflictions, death, to further their saluation. Rom. 8. 28. 7. In the end of their Life to trans∣late  Bestowing the crowne and garland followes the bringing to the goale. their soules into the kingdome of Heauen, Luke 23. 43. To day shalt thou bee with mee in paradise. Also see Luke 16. 22. Thirdly, touching the Reprobate. FIrst, God purposed of that corrupt The next de∣grees of Gods counsell. 1 Where there is an election of some out of many, there others must be refu∣sed and not chosen. masse, to refuse a certaine number, which should not be saued: and this for his wil sake. Rom. 9. 11. 13. Ere euer Esau was borne and he had done any euill, it was said of him, Esau haue I hated; and ver. 22. Vessels of wrath. 2 Not to giue his Sonne for them  He that purposeth not the end, that is, saluation, doth not pur∣pose to giue the meanes to that end. to be vnto them a mediatour of salua∣tion. Iohn. 17. 9. I pray not for the world. See Rom. 8. 32. 33. 34. All the parts of Christs mediation are for the chosen onely, the reprobates were not giuen to Christ, nor Christ was giuen for them. 3. Being brought into the world,  Such as are not giuen to Christ, must needs bee left in Adam. to leaue them in their naturall cor∣ruption.
4. Either not to cal them to his sonne  Such as are purposed to sticke in their corruption can haue no means to come out, or no good of the meanes. by the Gospell, or to affoord them an outward calling without the spirit of faith: Math. 20. 16. Many called, few chosen. Acts 28 24. And some beleeued not. See Acts 17. 30. and 16. 6. and 14. 1. 2. 5. To harden them for former sins  Punishmēt comes after the fault, as effect after the cause: this God doth as a Iudge, puni∣shing sin by sinne. and to deliuer them vp to vile lusts, so as they become impenitent and die in their sinnes: Rom. 1. 26. God gaue them vp to vile affections. Exod. 4. 2 1. But I will harden his heart. See Rom. 2. 5▪ Iohn 8. Ye shall die in your sinnes. Acts 28. 26. 27. 6. That all things (euen the Gos∣pell  None dāned &,  destroi∣ed, but in re∣spect of fore∣going sinnes, which God punisheth with destru∣ction, as hee purposed to doe. and Christ) should be occasion of ruine to them through their own fault. Esay 8. 14. 1. Pet. 2. 6. 7. At their death to send their souls into Hel, there to bee destroied in re∣spect of their sinnes. Rom. 9. 22. Prepa∣red to destruction. Luke 16. 23. The rich man died & was in hell in torments. See 1. Thessa. 5. 9. Iude 4.
Fourthly, the last degrees of Gods coun∣sell common to Elect and Reprobates. FIrst, God purposed to bring their  Bodies are to fal, ere they can be raised. bodies to dust by death, Heb. 9. ver. last. It is appointed for men once to dye. Gen. 3. Dust thou art. &c. 2. To raise them vp at the last day by  Raised and made to bee, ere they can be summoned his power, and so to ioyne them to their soules. Acts 24. 15. The resurrection shall bee of the iust and vniust. 3. To summon and bring all to  Summons & appearance a∣fore separatiō Iudgement. Acts 17. 31. God hath ap∣pointed a day wherein hee will iudge the World. See Math. 25. 30. 31. Rom. 14. 10. 2. Cor. 5. 10. 4. To separate the one from the  Separation afore the sentence other, as goats and sheepe are separated by the shepheard. Math. 25. 32. 5. To open the books of mens con∣sciences  Which hath first laying o∣pen of all things, and then giuing of the sentence. and bring forth al mens works, euen the most secret. Hee shall Iudge euery secret thing. Eccles. 12. ver. last. Rom. 2. 6. Reuel. 20. 12. And the bookes were opened. &c. 6. To pronounce (vpon this mani∣festation)
the finall doom and sentence of blesse and curse. Math. 25. Come ye blessed, Goe ye Cursed. 7. To execute that sentence pre∣sently  Sentence pronounced first, & then executed. and mightily vpon the whole man, to the eternal praise of his name. Math 25. 46. And these shall goe into e∣uerlasting paine, and the righteous into life euerlasting. See Matth. 13. Fifthly, the order of these particular Execution of Gods purpose towards the elect. works of grace by which the Elect passe vnto glory. FIrst, vocation to Christ by prea∣ching 1 Culled and fingled out of the worlde of reprobates. Vnderstāding the chief part of the Soule first to be en∣lightned. Wil guided by the mind re∣newed. Faith is an act of a renewed mind and wil. of Law and Gospel. Mat. 28. This hath annexed as parts: 2. Illumination or opening the eies of the mind. To open their eies. Acts 26. 18. 3. Opening of the heart. God ope∣ned Lydias heart. Acts 16 14. 4. The worke of Faith. Paul prea∣ched, and many beleeued. Asts 14. 1. Faith hath annexed as fruits: 2. Incorporati∣on, 3. Iustification, 4. Sanctificati∣on. 5. Incorporation is our vnion with
Christ: who dwels in their harts by faith. Eph. 3. 6. Iustification, being iustified by By faith first one with Christ him∣selfe. faith. Rom. 5. 1. and it hath these two parts. Rmission of sinnes. Then one with his iu∣stice & other benefits. Imputation of Iustice to the Belee∣uer. Effects of Iustification. 7. Reconciliation with God Vpon remissi∣on there is re∣concilement, which breeds peace & qui∣etnes, quiet∣nes encrea∣seth the ioy. Hope sprin∣geth out of Faith. Where sin is forgiuē, there it is also kil∣led by sancti∣fying grace. Rom. 7. 15. 16. 17. Acts 3. 26. Rom. 5. ver. 1. 2 3. 4 5. 8. Peace of Conscience. 9. Ioy in the holy Ghost. 10. Hope of glory. 11. Sanctificati∣on consists in 1. Mortification or death of the olde man. 2. Quickening of the new man. Rom, 6. 2. 3. The consequents and fruits of Sancti∣fication. 12. Combate spirituall betweene the old man and new, which comes from that imperfect sanctification. Rom. 7. 15. 16. 13. Repentance for the foiles and falles which the new man taketh in the combat. This hath annexed.
14. Study of good works, as fruits True sancti∣fying grace is fruitfull. It encreaseth and continu∣eth: where it once quickēs, it neuer dyes. It determines in glory. of Repentance. Math. 3. 5. 6. 15. Perseuerance in former graces vnto the end. Rom. 5. 2. 1. Pet. 5. 16. Glorification in the end, Them he glorified. Rom. 8. 30. FINIS.
A DIALOGVE About IVSTIFICATION by Faith: Wherein the nature and office, the property and pow∣er of Faith is Plainely taught, against such as deny the certainety or parti∣cularity and powerfulnesse of FAITH. Especially, against a late errour, deni∣ing the necessity of Faith vnto IVSTIFICATION. LONDON Printed by William Hall, and are to bee sold by Nathaniel Butter at the signe of the pide Bull, neere St. Austens gate. 1611.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipfull Sir Henry Plamer, Sr. Robert Edolphe, Sr. Char. Hales, Sir Edward Filmer, all health in Christ Iesus. AMongst sundry vn∣fained Louers of the truth, and welwillers to my simple selfe, I haue found you four not behind any, and before very many, whom as you doe excell in authority, gifts and care for your Countries good according to your meanes, and as these bad daies will suffer; so yee haue beene presi∣dents and examples of reuerence and zeale to the word of God, whereof ye
are the constant hearers, and vpright practisers, shewing your selues ene∣mies, as to corruptions in manners, so to errours in Doctrine, and Idolatry in Gods seruice, whereof as occasion is offered yee bewray your detestati∣on. Now for your encouragement in euery good way (if a spurre may be added to such as run well, seeing none there is but may amend his pace, for wee are all imperfect and farre from the marke) as also for some part of recompence for your long continued and vndeserued affection of loue to me, my Ministry and labours, I haue presumed to set out vnderyour names a Dialogue concerning that excellent and most necessary point of Iustificati∣on, of elect sinners by faith in Iesus Christ: wherein, together with the truth of Doctrine positiuely set downe in the first part, vnder the names of Philoponus, and Philalethes, I haue afterward confuted what the Iewes, zealous of the Law, ioyning
Moses with Christ, and Papists, prepo∣sterous commenders of good works, ioyning them with grace in the mat∣ter of Iustification, vse to alleage a∣gainst Christ the matter or subiect of Iustification; or what late seduced spirits can say against faith the instru∣ment of our righteousnes before God, vnder the names of Philoponos, Phi∣lopseudos, and Philautos. Also toward the end I haue indeuoured to meete with the abuse of this Doctrine of free Iustification by Libertines and carnall Gospellers, which turne the grace of God into wantonnesse, and thinke they may sinne more freely the more grace doth abound, vnder the name of Philedonos. I doe intreat you to interpret well my purpose in this Dedication, also to accept my weake endeauours: finally so to pardon my presumption, as ye render the praise to God of all the profit that comes to you by this booke. Yours to be commanded, THOMAS WILSON.
To the Christian Reader. GEntle Reader, this Di∣alogue something dif∣fers from others, not onely in nature of the Argument, being a∣bout that most needfull, and holy truth which is the ground of all Christian comforts, to wit, Iustification by faith in Christ, whereof I know not whe∣ther any thing hath beene written so fami∣liarly, and plainely as this is; also in the Number of persons who conferre, occasio∣ned by the great differences about this point (more opposed by Satan and his in∣struments, then any one Diuine truth whatsoeuer, as being the very soule and life of Christianity) yea and in a third thing this Dialogue differeth from o∣thers, because the most part of it was (res¦gesta)
a thing truely done, namely so much as concernes the nature and office of faith resisted by a deceiued spirit, (or rather spi∣rits, for they were sundry) vnder the per∣son of Philautus: whose shifts and eua∣sions to the Arguments brought against him, as also the obiections in fauour of their execrable vnheard of errour, or er∣rors rather, are here truly set downe with∣out any falsification, and orderly without confusion, as neere as such confused stuffe could be reduced to Order. And for as much as we are all by nature prone to erre, al men hauing the seeds of Heresie, as of all other sinnes, euen from the wombe, yea and there is none which doth not embrace some one corrupt opiniō or other, howsoeuer we espie it not, seeing our iudgement is imper∣fect: also the loosenesse and prophanenes of our liues doth deserue that we should haue strong delusions to beleeue lies in Religion, because wee doe not receiue the loue of the truth; therefore vnto the Dialogue of Iu∣stification I haue ioined a receit against Heresie, both to preserue Christian pro∣fessors from running into it, and if any
be ouertaken with errour (as all may be) to pull them out. Good Reader, endeauour to profit by this booke; it hath cost the Au∣thor more then much paines, euen great griefe and trouble of minde, as well as of body; I would be loth euery or any godly Minister should buy the wrestling with er∣roneous spirits at such a rate, as I haue done. Farewell. Thine in the Lord, T. W.
A Dialogue concerning Iustification. Philoponus: A Minister that loueth to la∣bour in the word and doctrine. Philalethes: A Protestant Christian, which is a louer of truth. Philopseudos: A Church-Papist, which yet still loueth some Errours and Lies. Philonomus: A Proselyte Iewe turned Chri∣stian, which is still in loue with Moses Law. Philautus: A selfe willed fellow, which is in loue with his owne opinion. Philedonos: One that loueth pleasure more then Godlines. Philoponus. WEll met Philalethes, whence doe you come? Philalethes. I come from a Sermon, wher I heard a comfortable point handled.
Philoponus. I pray you what was the point? Philalethes. It was the Doctrine of Iustification by faith. Philoponus. That was a great point indeed, of mar∣uellous vse for edification and comfort. And now seeing we are alone, and haue a spare time, I pray you rehearse vnto me briefly the chiefe matters of the Sermon in order, as they were deliuered: for I know you haue an exceeding good memory. First therefore, what Text did the Preach∣er expound? Philalethes. The Text which he expounded was the third Chapter to the Rom. from verse 24, vnto verse 29. And are iustified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Iesus. 25 Whom God hath set forth to be a recon∣ciliation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousnes, by the forgiuenes of the sins that are passed, through the patience of God, 26 To shew at this time his righteousnes, that hee might be iust, and a iustifier of him which is of the faith of Iesus. 27 Where is then the reioicing? It is ex∣cluded.
By what Law? of workes? Nay: but by the Law of faith. 28 Therefore wee conclude, that a man is instified by faith without the works of the Law. Philoponus. What did the Preacher say was the scope and drift of this Text? Philalethes. To open and declare the Doctrine of Iustification by the seuerall causes of it, and especially to proue, that it is by faith, and not by workes. Philoponus. What did he say was the context or co∣herence of this Scripture with the former? Philalethes. He told vs, that the Apostle in the for∣mer Chapters, from verse 18. of Chapter Cohe∣rence, or Context. 1. vnto the two and twentith verse of chapter the third, had proued that Iusti∣fication came not by our workes, because all men were sinners, either by transgres∣sing the Law of Moses, as the Iewe, or of nature, as the Gentile; both which he con∣uinced of sinne, by the testimony of Scrip∣ture, and by the common principles of na∣ture, and by mens consciences: And ha∣uing at the two and twentith verse of this Chapter, propounded the Doctrine
of Iustification by faith, and shewed the necessity of it, in regard that al are through guilt of sinne depriued of Gods eternall glory: Here in this Text he explaineth & establisheth this Doctrine. Philoponus. How did he diuide his Text? Philalethes. Into two generall heads: First, what Diuision. 2. Parts. Iustification was, or what it was to bee iustified: Secondly, what were the causes of our Iustification. Philoponus. What did he say Iustification was? Philalethes. He said that this word (Iustify) was  To Iustifie what it is. (verbum forense) a borrowed word from the custome of ciuill Courts, where parties accused, which vpon triall be found inno∣cent, are absolued, and by the mouth of the Iudge pronounced innocent: Euen so sinners which beleeue in Christ, hauing his Iustice and obedience imputed to them, they are absolued from the guilt of sinne, and pronounced iust by God him∣selfe, both in the word, and in their owne conscience. And this is their Iustifying. Philoponus. Can you remember how he made good
this signification of the word Iustify? Philalethes. Yea, by certaine testimonies of Scrip∣ture, where Iustify is set against condem∣ned. As Prouerbs 17. 15. He that iustifi∣eth the wicked, and condemneth the in∣nocent, both are abominatiō to the Lord. Aso Rom. 8. It is God that iustifieth, who shall condemne? But most plainely out of that place, Act. 13. 39. By him euery one that beleeueth is iustified from all things, from which he could not be iusti∣fied by the Law of Moses: where to bee iustified from a thing, can signify nothing else but to be fréed and absolued from it, and pronounced vnguilty, as condemna∣tion is a pronouncing of guiltines vpon conuiction of the fault; so by the Law of contraries, seeing to condemne is the pro∣nouncing of one guilty, to Iustify (which is contrary to it) must signifie to absolue, and to pronounce one innocent and iust. Philoponus. VVhat did he further say of the word? Philalethes. That if we follow the Latine Etymolo∣gie, to iustify was to make iust, as to san∣ctify is to make holy, to rectify is to make right, to mollify is to make soft, to glori∣fie
is to make glorious. So when one is iu∣stified being before a sinner, and vngodly, Rom. 4. 3. he is made righteous, Gal. 3. both by the imputation of an others iu∣stice, and also at the same time by a work of the spirit, regenerating and beginning in him true righteousnesse, he is sanctified. But he told vs, that howsoeuer following the Latine Etymology, this word iustifie, may import, to make iust, yet in the Scrip∣ture phrase when this word is vsed in the question of iustification of a sinner before God, there cannot one place bee found, where it is otherwise taken then to ab∣solue and pronounce iust. Philoponus. Would not the Preacher tell you how the imputation of Iustice from an other could make vs iust, seeing it is likely that euery man should be iust by his owne iu∣stice, as he is wise by his owne wisdome? Philalethes. Yes: for he said that the iustice which made vs iust, though it were inherent and did sticke in an other, to wit, in Christ: yet being imputed to vs of God when wee beleeue, it is now out owne iustice, as ve∣verily as if wée had wrought it so; that when the Scripture teacheth, that the
righteousnesse of an other, which they haue not in themselues, is imputed to beléeuers, it meaneth not, they no way haue this righteousnesse, for they haue and hold it by Faith: but the meaning is, that they haue it not inherent in themselues, but that it is in the person of Christ, as in the onely Subiect thereof. Philoponus. Can you call to minde, how this was de∣clared? Philalethes. Yea, by this comparison: as the sinnes of the Elect are by imputation, so made Christs sinnes, as that he taking them vp∣on himselfe was accursed, and punished for them, no lesse then if they had béen his owne: euen so the righteousnesse of Christ which hee wrought in his manhood is by imputation in such wise made ours which beléeue, as by the merit of it we shall be sa∣ued, no lesse, then if in our own persons we had fulfilled the Law, which was proued by 2. Cor. 5. last verse, For he hath made him to be sinne for vs, which knew no sinne, that we should be made the righte∣ousnesse of God in him. Also, Rom. 1. 17. 18. For by it the righteousnesse of God is reuealed, from faith to faith: as it is writ∣ten,
the iust shall liue by faith. For the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen a∣gainst all vngodlinesse, and vnrighteous∣nesse of men, which withhold the truth in vnrighteousnesse. Philoponus. This done, what was more added? Philalethes. The word being thus interpreted, hée came to define the thing it selfe, after this fashion, and to this purpose. Iustification is an action of God, freely and out of his meere mercy, accounting to such as be∣leeue the whole and perfect obedience of Christ both in doings and sufferings, by the merit whereof they are absolued and acquited from the guilt and punishment of sin, and accepted as righteous vnto e∣ternall life, to the glory of his rich grace. Philoponus. Euery part of this definition is to be pro∣ued by the Text it selfe. Philalethes. It is so, for it consisteth of causes which are distinctly laid downe in the Text, and therefore after the Preacher had told vs, that Iustification was diuided into two parts, Remission of sins, and Jmputation of iustice, he came to open the causes of
Iustification, which was the second part in the diuision of his Text. Philo. Rehearse now these causes, as he deliue∣red  them. Philal. The principall efficient cause, hee said Causes of Iusti∣fication. Efficient cause. was the grace of God fréely giuing his Sonne to bee borne, and to worke our righteousnesse in our nature, which he as∣sumed, by the doings of his life, and suffe∣rings of his death, and freely reckoning that righteousnesse to vs, hauing by the Gospell fréely offered it vnto vs, and by his holy spirit, or grace freely working faith in our hearts, made vs able to appre∣hend and receiue it. Philo. Belike then the Preacher told you, that the grace of God proceeded by these degrees to the work of Iustification; first, to purpose from euerlasting the sen∣ding of his Sonne to bee made man, to worke righteousnesse for men, 1. Pet. 1. 20. Secondly, according to that purpose in the fulnesse of time, to send his Son made of a woman, borne vnder the Law, &c Gal. 4. 4. Thirdly, to reueale his Sonne to vs, by the preaching of the Gospell mouing
vs through the spirit to beleeue in the name of his Sonne, and thereupon lastly accounting to vs the obedience of his Son for our righteousnesse, Rom. 8. 29. 30. and all this he did freely of his own good plea∣sure. Ephes. 1. 6. 8. Phila. You say right; For so hee deliuered it, to that effect, and told vs, this procéeding of Gods grace in the matter of our Iusti∣fication was pointed at in those words of his Text, where it is said, that God set foorth his Sonne, &c. which setting foorth he said might be referred both to Predesti∣nation, vpon which, as vpon the first cause dependeth the whole work of our redemp∣tion, and also to the reuelation of Christ by the Gospell, where not onely things to bee beléeued concerning Christ are pro∣pounded, but moreouer the spirit of Christ is giuen to perswade the mind to assent to the pleasant and ioyfull things there shewed; and hereupon gaue foorth this double doctrine. First, that wee must not séeke the primary and chiefe cause of our Iustification in Christ touching his hu∣manity, and as he is our mediatour, much lesse in our selues, but in God the Father euen in his frée loue, and free fauour. For
God so loued the world, &c. Ioh. 3. and heere it is written, wee are iustified by his grace freely giuen. Secōdly that we are be∣holding to the frée grace of God, for the be∣ginning, middle and end of our Iustifica∣tion: whence he beat downe Predestina∣tion vpon foreseene works and merit by works. And after this he added, that the doctrine of the Gospell, neither was it any idle inuention of men, like to the Decretals of Rome, but taught and set foorth of God, neither yet a bare exhortation of words, as the Law, but effectuall to mooue and per∣swade to that which was set foorth in it. Philo. It is well remembred: Now proceed to the next cause, which is the materiall cause. Phila. He taught, that Christ was the matter Materiall cause. of our iustification, as his Text saith, Through the redemption in Christ Iesus whom he gaue, &c. Philo. What did he consider in Christ? Phila. Three things: his person, God and man in Person. one person: where he taught both the truth and the necessity of this vnion of two na∣tures
in one person: because vnto our Iu∣stification was requisite the holinesse and obedience of his manhood, and the po∣wer and officacie of the God-head. The second, was his Office of Priest, Prophet Office. and King: Priest, to offer the sacrifice that should purchase righteousnesse and remission of sins. Prophet, to teach it to the Church by himselfe and his Apostles. King, to apply it by his spirit, stirring vp that wonderfull gift of Faith for the receiuing of it. The third thing was his Benefits. benefits, comprised in these two words, Redemption, Propitiation. Philo. VVhat said he of those two words? Phila. He said of them, that they were both fi∣guratiue, Redemp∣tiō. what it is to re∣deeme. and borrowed spéeches. Re∣demption is a word borrowed from the vse of warres, where such as be taken pri∣soners are ransomed and fréed by a cer∣taine price from their captiuity. So the e∣lect being by Gods iust iudgement for sin, captiues vnder Satan, held by him not on∣ly in the guilt and condemnation of sinne, but also in the power and tyranny of sin, are by the price of Christ himselfe ransom∣ed and fréed, from that horrible curse
and bondage, and restored to a gratious 2. Tim 2. 4. and glorious libertie. Philo. When the word was thus interpreted, how did he proceede? Phila. After this sort: he proued the elect by their fall in Adam to be both the seruants of sinne and children of Gods wrath, and so to be both vnder the dominion of sinne, and condemnation of sinne. Ephe. 2. 1. 2. 3 Rom 6. 17. Then he shewed, that the redemption that Christ wrought for them, was the fréedome both from the wrath of God, and condemnation of sinne in this Redemp∣tiō wher∣in it con¦sieth. worke of Iustification: and from the ty∣ranny and dominion of sinne in their san∣ctification: which benefits, though they be seueral, yet they are both at one time giuen the elect, the one being a necessary, and vnseparable effect of the other. This he thus declared, that when God hath accep∣ted the perfect obedience of his sonne both actiue in doing, and passiue in suffering, as a satisfaction to his iustice for sinne, so as his wrath being appeased the guilt and punishment of sinne is remoued, and we not only haue escaped hell by his suf∣fering punishment, but haue found an
entrance into heauen by his absolute obe∣dience, that thencefoorth Satan can no lon∣ger kéep the sinner in the tyranny & power of sin; no more then a cruell Creditor can hold one in prison that hath paid his whole debt. Also where Christ doth giue vnto any his obedience and sufferings for re∣mission of sinne and righteousnes, there he giues his spirit for the mortification of sinne, and liuing to God in newnesse of life, which was proued by the whole sixte Chapter of the Epist. to the Romans, and 1. Cor. 6. Rom. 8. Philo. You haue told me the sum of that, which he taught of the word Redemption. Let me heare somewhat of the word, Propitiation. Phila. Yet I had almost forgot to tell you, that after he had expounded the word, and Propiti¦atiō. laid forth the thing it selfe, shewing what our redemption was; he put the redéemed in mind of the great and dangerous slaue∣ry of sinne, being a spirituall slauery and tending to eternal woe. Secondly, of the excéeding loue of Christ their redéemer, lay∣ing down such a prise for thē, as himselfe, his whole manhood, to frée them from such a wofull estate. Lastly, of the loue and
thankfulnesse that they did owe, and must endeauour to returne in word and deed to such a most louing Redéemer. After this, hée said, that in calling Christ our Attone∣ment or Propitiation he did allude and heerein had respect vnto the propitiatory or mercy seate in the Law Philo. He would then teach you wherefore the Apostle compared Christ to the Propitia∣tory or Mercy seat. Phila. Yea, hee did so, and also why Christ and he alone is our attonement with his Father. Philo. Let vs heare it. Phila. For the former, he said that the Propi∣tiatory was a figure of Christ in three things: First, as out of the mercy Seat God gaue his Oracles to the people (sée Exod. 30.) so to vs by his sonne Christ Ie∣sus hath hée reuealed the Oracles of his will, touching our duty and saluation, as Iohn saith, Christ hath declared him to vs, whom neuer man saw. And this is my beloued son, heare him, Mat. 17. Secōdly, God was said to rest or dwel at the Propi∣tiatory,
betwéene the Cherubins hee ha as it were his residence; so in Christ the whole fulnesse of the God-head dwel∣eth bodily, Col. 2. 9. Thirdly, at the Pro∣pitiatory God was made fauourable to his people, by the blood which the high Priest sprinkled, which was also a type of Christ by whom God alwaies is pacified and reconciled to vs, peace being made by that blood of his Crosse. Col. 1. 18. Philo. This should seeme to be the cause, why he mentioneth the blood of Christ in this Text: [Through faith in his blood.] Philo. True, not onely to teach whereunto faith leaneth and looketh; namely, to Christs death and bloodshed, as to his proper obiect; but to signifie that Christ is that true high Priest, who by his owne blood once entered into the holy place, to make perfect for euer those which are san∣ctified by him, Heb. 10. where he puts vs in mind of the terrible iustice and wrath of God conceiued against sinne and sinners, in that he could not be pacified but by the heart blood of his onely begotten Sonne: Which serueth for the humbling of vs déepely, whose sinnes were the true cause
of such his death, as it made greatly also for our comfort, that such an vnualuable price was laid downe for sinners; for hee said that this was more, & of more worth, then if all Angels, and men had béene sa∣crificed, because of the infinite dignity of his person. Philo. Now let vs heare the latter thing, where∣fore Christ, and Christ alone is our Propi∣tiatory or attonement. Phila. Because hee alone is a man frée from 2. Cor. 5. Rom. 1. 4. last. sinne, that he might be a spotlesse sacrifice. Secondly, he is so man, as he is God also, that hee might be a meritorious sacrifice. Thirdly, he alone is the person, appointed of his Father to be the reconciler of man∣kinde, as it is written, Ion. 6. him hath God the Father sealed, that he might be a Iohn 6. full acceptable sacrifice. Philo. I thanke you for this relation. Shall wee heare now what was spoken of the instru∣mentall cause of our Iustification? Phila. Yea, if you suffer me to admonish you of Instru∣mentall cause. two things which he spake before he came to the instrument. First, that Christ in
his life and death, in his whole conuersa∣tion and passion was a Redéemer and Re∣conciler by merit. And in his resurrection, ascension and sitting at the right hand of God his Father he became a redéemer by efficacy. The other thing was, that what∣soeuer men bring of their owne towards the pacifying and reconciling God to vs, whether it be works of nature, or of grace, or degrees and orders of life, or suffering of paine, it is to be refused as an accursed additament of mans braines, which voi∣deth all the effects of Christs death and suffering, as the Apostle plainely teacheth and fully, Gal. 2. 34. Philo. It is now time yee declare the substance of that which was spoken touching the in∣strumentall cause of our Iustification. Phila. He did insist much vpon this, to declare In what sense faith doth iustifie. and proue that faith is the onely instru∣ment of the soule by which wee obtaine Christ and his righteousnesse, which doth not at all profit vs vntill we doe beléeue; thus he expounded his Text (by Faith in his blood) and all those texts of Scripture, where we are said to be iustified by Faith, and where the righteousnesse of Christ is
called the righteousnesse of Faith: he said the meaning was, that faith is the instru∣ment of our righteousnesse, and that Christ and his blood doth iustifie vs being appre∣hended by this instrument: And this ex∣position hee proued by comparing other texts of Scripture. As where it is written, that we receiue or lay hold on Christ by faith, Ioh. 1. 12. And that we seeke and at∣taine righteousnesse by faith Rom. 10. And that we are made righteous by faith, Gal. 3. 24. And receeiue the promise of the Spirit by faith, Gal. 3. Which being written of faith, and not of hope or loue, or any other grace, doth proue it to be the onely instru∣ment of our righteousnes: & this thing he taught very distinctly yt faith as it is a gift, quality infused, or worke of the spirit, is no part of our righteousnes wherby we stand iust before God, neither doth merit any thing for vs of God, but that it was only ye perfect obedience of Christ in his doings and sufferings that merited for vs, that we should be accepted for righteous be∣fore the tribunall Seat of his Father, Faith seruing onely as a spirituall Organ and instrument to receiue or lay hold on that righteousnesse of Christ and to appro∣priate it vnto vs. Hauing thus proued
and explained it vnto vs, how faith doth Iustifie. In the next place he taught: First, what faith it is that iustifieth. Se∣condly,  and shewed many reasons to proue  that without that faith we are not iustifi∣ed. And thirdly, withall that iustification  by faith without works, is the onely true Iustification. Philo. I long to heare you how hee dealt in these points. Phila. That you shall heare, as well as my me∣morie What faith it is that iusti∣fieth. will record. He sayed there were 4. kinds of faith mentioned in the Scripture: one historicall or dogmaticall, which is a bare knowledge of the history and letter  of the Scripture: with this faith the Di∣uels are said to beleeue, Iam. 2. 19. And the Iewes, Ioh. 2. 23. The second was a  miraculous faith, or a faith of miracles, which is a beliefe that by the power of God strange wonders may be done: this faith is spoken of, 1. Cor. 13. 2. If I had all faith, so as I could remoue Mountaines &c. The third, is called a temporary faith,  spoken of in Mat. 13. Such as beleeue for a season, and receiue the word with ioy, bu in time of temptation goe away. These
thrée did all méete in Iudas and sundry o∣thers. The last is a true and liuely faith,  euen a firme assent to Gods promise of re∣mission of sinnes and righteousnesse by Christ, with particular application thereof vnto our selues, by which faith being in∣graffed into Christ, and made one with him, we are also partakers of his righte∣ousnesse vnto life eternall, whereof it is called iustifying faith, as iustification is called, Iustification of life, Rom. 5. Hée said this Text ment such a Faith, and this was the Faith commended throughout this Epistle to the Romans. Philo. What did he further teach of this truely Iustifying faith? Phila. That it hath two parts: Knowledge of the things to be beleeued, wee know and Too parts of iustify∣ing faith. beleeue, Ioh. 6. 62. Hence it is that know∣ledge is so often vsed for Faith, as Ioh. 17. 3. Isai. 53. 11. 1. Ioh. 2. 4. 5. The second part is application of these things which wee know, to our selues. Philo. How did he proue, that there must be applicaton in a liuelie faith?
Phila. Sundry waies: First, by the commande∣ment, It is the natue of true faith to applie. bidding vs to beleeue in the name of Christ, 1. Ioh. 3. 23. which cannot bee ment of knowing and beleeuing him in generall, to be the Christ and Sauiour, because there is a promise of eternall life made to such as beleeue in Christ, Ioh. 6. 47. Now if to beleeue in Christ were no∣thing else, but in generall to beléeue Iesus to be the Christ and Sauiour; all that so beleeue should haue eternall life, euen the Diuels themselues and wicked men (for they doe beleeue and confesse) which being otherwise, it followeth that to beleeue in Christ, or in the name of Christ, is not onely in generall to beleeue him to bee the Sauiour, but with particular application to our selues, that he is our sauiour. Here the Preacher said, that thus much knew P. Lombard the Master of the Sentences, though a popish Writer, Lib. 3. Sent. di∣stinct. 23. Multum interest vtrum quis cre∣dat Christum vel in Christum, &c. that is to say, There is great difference betweene these two, whether one beleeue Christ or in Christ: for Iesus to be Christ, the Di∣uels haue beleeued, but they beleeued not in Christ. For it is one thing to beleeue in
God, another thing to beleeue God, and a third thing to beleeue God to be. To be∣leeue God, it is to credit those things to be true which God speaketh, which euen wicked men doe. To beleeue God to be, is to be perswaded that he is, and that hee is God only; which also wicked men doe. To beleeue in God, it is by beleeuing to goe vnto God, and to cleaue to God; by this faith the wicked man is iustified. Se∣condly, he proued it by the nature of faith, which hath the nature of an hand, or an eie, whose propertie is to apprehend and draw things without vs vnto our selues; such is the nature of this spirituall hand and eie of faith, to attracte Christ to it selfe by application. And that this special application, is of the nature of faith, hee proued first out of Ioh. 6. 53. where to eat and drinke Christ, is put for to beleeue in Christ. For so not onely August: Tract. 25. in Ioan. expoundeth it, but also some of the Papists themselues acknowledge it: Rhemists on ver. 32. of that chapter. And Iansen. Ioh. 6. 50. Manducare se, acci∣pit pro credere inse. Tho. 3. part. summae, q. 65. art. 4. resp. ad 2. To eate him, he taketh it to be al one with this, to beleeue in him. Now then as in eating and drinking, there
must be a particular applying of the bodi∣ly nourishment to the mouth, and so to the stomacke: in like manner also, in the spirituall eating and drinking of Christ by faith, there must bee a spirituall appli∣cation of him, that so he may become to vs the foode of our soules. So Iansenius ibi∣dem, p. 470. Sicuti aptissimo tropo se panem vocauit, ita aptissime credere inse, &c. As by a most fit trope he hath called himselfe bread, so most fitly hee hath called the ea∣ting of him, a beleeuing in him: for by our faith this bread is not simply taken, but as it were after a sort chewed with teeth, whiles wee thorowly ponder and waigh what and what manner a meate it is; and it is also broken as ye would say, and cast into the stomach or bowels of our soule, by a certaine delight of spirituall taste, and is also so incorporated into vs, as that by Faith in a secret maner, he is v∣nited to vs, dwelling in our hearts, and quickening them by his presence. Se∣condly, againe it may bee proued to bee of the nature of faith, by that speech of our Sauiour Chr. vnto Thomas, who whē he had put his finger into ye side of Christ say∣ing, my Lord and my God. To this spéech Christ replieth thus, Thou hast séene and
beléeued: whence it is euident, that a par∣ticular application is of the nature of this true iustifying faith. For to bee assured that Christ is our Lord, and God, is here called a beleeuing. And this some of the sounder sort of popish writers do acknow∣ledge with vs. Fers writeth thus of this place of Iohn. Nō satis est credere quod do∣minus et Deus sit, nisi credas quod domi∣nus tuus & deus tuus sit. It is not sufficient to beleeue (of Christ) that he is Lord and God, vnlesse thou shalt beleeue that hee is thy Lord & thy GOD. Iansenius one of their own Bishops in his harm. on Ioh. 6. 47. verum est fidem in Christum non saluare, nisi eam quae includit etiam fiduciam in Chri∣stum It is true that no faith in Christ doth saue, saue that which includeth confidence in Christ. 3 Thirdly, by example of Saints in Scripture, who by their faith did apply the promises of saluation to themselues: as Dauid, God is my Rocke, he is my God, Psal. 18 and 42. my strength and my Re∣deemer: Psal. 19. Also the virgin Mary, my soule reiosceth in God my Sauiour, Luke 1. 47. Thomas: my Lord my God, Iohn 21. Paul: I thanke my God, Rom. 1. Againe, Christ loued me, and died for me, Gal. 2.
Hereunto belongs that testimony of Lu∣ther: Haevoces, qui dilexit me, &c. These words (who loued me and died for me) are most full of faith: that giuing of the Son of GOD to death, I apply to my self; and this application is the true force of faith. Therefore read with a great Emphasis and significant force, these speeches (me, and for me) and accustome thy selfe to be able to conceiue and apply to thy selfe that same (me) To the same purpose hee saith in an other place: Disput. in verb. Pauli, Rom. 3. 28. disput. 1. quae est de fide, o. 1. ope∣rum. fol. 386. Vera &c. True faith it saith, I beleeue the Sonne of GOD to be dead, and risen from death, and all this for mee and for my sinnes: and hereof I am cer∣taine. Example hereof Saint Paul per∣formes in his own person, saying: Gal 2. Who loued me, and gaue himself for me. That (for me) if it be beleeued, it maketh it to bee a true faith, and seuereth the same from all other faith. Vpon these practises of certaine particular persons, hee added certaine sayings of the Fa∣thers, to shew their consent with him, as that of Cyril on Ioh. 21. It is manifest, because no otherwise then Thomas con∣fessed, my God my Lord, God will haue vs also to confesse him. Chrysostome
vpon the Rom. Hee said not to GOD, but to my God, euen as the Prophets also doe, making him which is common, pe∣culiar to themselues. Hierom. He which is God of all, is mine in speciall. 4 His fourth proofe was from particu∣lar persons, rebuked for their infidelitie, whereof the Scripture affordeth store. Fiftly, where God offereth mercy in par∣ticular, there must be a particular faith, to receiue and apply this mercy: but God of∣fereth mercy to euery one particularly in the Sacrament, where by Gods Ordi∣nance, the Minister in the steade of God himself, doth offer Christ with al his bene∣fits to euery one in particular: therefore there is required in vs such a faith, where∣by wee may particularly receiue Christ, and apply him with all his benefits, vnto our owne soules. 5 Lastly he said, that in all faith there  was a Syllogisme made, where of the Mi∣nor or assumption, is with application: He that beleeueth shall be saued: Hee that mourneth shall be comforted: The heauy laden shall bee eased: The hungry and thirstie shall bee satisfied. But I mourne, am heauy laden &c. Therefore I shalbe comforted, eased, &c.
Philo. It commend you for remembring these things so distinctly: you can tell vs what followed. Phila. Yea very perfectly: first, he hauing pro∣ued that iustifying faith, is with applicati∣on, then he admonished vs of certaine ac∣tions of the Soule, necessarie to this ap∣plication, Actions of the soule, ne¦cessary to applica¦tion of faith. which were 5. in number: first approbation of the things beleeued, iud∣ging all things losse and dung in compa∣rison of them, Phil. 3. Secondly, expeti∣tion, in an earnest desire of these things, such as Sampson had, when he cried, giue me drinke or I die, Iudges 15. 18. Third∣ly, apprehension or a fast laying hold on Christ: as the lame in the Acts, chap. 3. held Peter and Iohn so fast, as hee would not let them goe. Fourthly, oblectation, delighting our selues in Christ, as in our treasure. Fiftly, expectation or looking certainely to enioy the thing wee beléeue, concerning Christ, and free saluation by him. Philo. What spake hee of the degrees of this liuely faith? Phila.
This also he somwhat touched, telling vs Degrees of faith. that there were two degrées of it. The first degree is, that which the Scripture calleth a little faith, Mat. 6. 30. When there is wrought in vs a certaine but weake assu∣rance, that the promise of God belongeth to vs: this he compared to a childes hand, because it is weake, and full of doubts. The second is a strong assurance, when the heart is fully perswaded of the promi∣ses, that they appertaine to vs. This he likened to a strong hand of a man, which holdeth things very firmely: and such a faith he said was in Abraham, Rom. 4. & in Paul. Rom. 8. Shutting vp this mat∣ter with this assertion, that the liuely faith in the weakest and least degree, bee it but an vnfained and earnest desire of an hum∣bled heart to beleeue, and to enioy Christ, and remission of sinnes by him; it is suf∣ficient to the apprehending of Christ vnto iustification and saluation, which rather consisteth in Christ his comprehending of vs, then in our apprehending of him. Phil. 3. Euen as a weake and feeble hand holdeth a Iewell, as well though not so steadily and firmely, as a strong hand: And a sore and dimme eie might as well looke vpon the brazen Serpent in the wil∣dernesse,
as a healthfull and perfect eie. This the Preacher saith, hee added for the comfort of such Christians as were temp∣ted about the measure of their faith; whom hee seriously exhorted to take comfort for the trueth of their faith, and so to thanke God, for that measure they had already, as to striue by all meanes to increase it. Lord increase our faith: Luke 17. Philo. Now let mee be hold to aske you what reasons he gaue, why an elect Sinner can∣not bee iustified by Christ, without this true and liuely Faith. Phila. Herein I can satisfie your request: for I did well obserue them, and kept them Why we are not Iustified without Faith. in good remembrance.  The first was this: We must be one with Christ himselfe, or euer we can either haue his righteousnes, or any other benefit of his. For the per∣son of Christ, and benefits inseparably go together. Hee that cateth my flesh shall liue by me. Ioh. 6. And the branch is first one with ye Vine, that it may partake in the life, & iuice of the Vine. Christ is the Vine, we are the Branches, Ioh. 15. 1. Now it is certaine we are not one with Christ, vntil we haue faith, by which it is, that he dwel∣leth in our hearts. Ephe. 3. Therefore
without faith in Christ we haue not righ∣teousnesse, or any other benefit of his. His second reason was this, that if we be iustified without faith, then we please God without faith; for iustified persons please God. Rom. 5. But it is impossible to please GOD, without faith, Heb. 11. 5. Therefore we haue no Iustification with∣out Faith. His third reason was this: Forgiuenes  of sinnes is one part of our Iustification: Rom. 4. 4. where righteousnesse is placed in forgiuenesse of sinne, by the testimonie of Scripture, Psal. 32. Now most certaine it is, that we haue not our sinnes forgiuen vs, vntill wee beleeue the promises. Vnto this, all the Scriptures beare witnesse, that whosoeuer beleeueth in Christ, shall haue remission of sinnes: therefore no righteousnesse without faith. The fourth reason was this: If wee  cannot liue to God without faith, neither can wee be righteous without faith: For perfect iustice and life are necessarily knit together, as the cause, and the effect But wee liue a spirituall life to God, onely by faith. Galat. 3. 11. The iust shall liue by faith, and Gal. 2. 20 In that I liue, it is by faith in the Sonne of God: therefore only
by faith we are iustified: The argument is proued out of the Rom. 1. 17. Where the Apostle reasoneth in the very same maner, We are iustified by Faith, because by Faith we liue. His fifth reason was this, that seeing the elect are at one time iustified and sanc∣tified, and wee cannot haue sanctification vntill we beleeue (for by faith the heart is purified, Acts 15.) therefore wee are not iustified before we haue faith. Moreouer, thus hee reasoned, that as the Israelites being stung by fiery serpents in the wil∣dernesse, recouered not health, vntil they looked vp to the brasen Serpent: So sin∣ners beeing spiritually stung to death, by that olde serpent the diuell, recouer not righteousnesse and life, without beleeuing in Christ crucified, Ioh. 3. Finally, he taught that Christ was the bread of life, the physicke and salue of our dead, sicke and wounded soules; the white robe to couer our filthy nakednes, an vn∣speakeable gift to inrich his people. Ther∣fore as we doe not eate without a mouth, nor take a gift without an hand, nor haue any helpe by physicke without application of it, or benefit of apparell, except wee put it on: So neither had wee any part in
Christ and his benefits without beliefe, which is the mouth, and hand of the Soule. Philo. It remaineth now, that ye rehearse the proofes which he brought to demonstrate the other point ye spake of: Namely, that the iustification which is by faith alone without workes, is the true Iustification that the Scripture teacheth, and vvhich shall stand the Sinner in stead in this life, and at that great & glorious day of Christ his appearing. Phila. This will I doe, if first I tell you, that he did admonish vs, that howsoeuer the word (alone or only) were not expressed in any text of Paul: yet there were words e∣quiualent, which did import so much: For when he writeth that we are iustifi∣ed by faith, and generally denieth this vn∣to Iustifica∣tion by faith alone the only true Iusti∣fication. Rom 3. Ambros. saith, all that are Iustified are freely iustified by faith onely. In 3. ad Rō. Chrysost. God hath iustified vs, vsing thereto no works, but requi∣ring faith onely. Greg. Naz. orat. 22. To be∣leeue only is our iu∣stice Only faith in Christ doth make cleane: Aug. in Psal. 88 Cyor Faith only auai∣leth, and so much as we be∣leeue, so much we obtaine. Hlarie: Faih on∣ly Iustifies. Aug. in Psal. 67. Without al merits of good works, the vngodly man is iu∣stified by the faith of Iesus Christ. Againe. Wo to the most com∣mendable life of men, if it be iudged without mercy. Againe: We collect (saith he) out of ma∣ny testi∣monies, that a man is not iusti¦fied by the precepts of a good life, but by the faith of Iesus Christ. De¦spir. & lib. cap. 13. workes, auouching that wee are iusti∣fied without the lawe, without the works of the lawe, not by workes: it is as much, as if it had bin written, by faith onely. If a man shall say that hee did see with his eie, and did not see with his other mem∣bers, is it not all one, as if he said he did sée with his eie alone? Or if one should say
that the King doth ratifie Acts of Parlia∣ment, and not the Subiect, or without the Subiect, this in common vnderstan∣ding is, as one should say, the King a∣lone. He brought in a like example euen of our Sauiour Christ, who finding it writ∣ten, Deut. 6. Thou shalt serue the Lord thy God, and feare him: And afterwards, Thou shalt not serue strange gods: Here∣upon Mat. chap. 4. is bold when he cited the former text against Sathan, to alledge it thus: Thou shalt serue the Lord thy God onely: which word (onely) he found not in Moses, but yet finding so much in sense, hee added nothing by putting it in. So wee in vsing this word (onely) when we speake of iustification by faith, doe no iniury to the word of GOD, because in sense it is found in the word, though not in so many syllables. Now to your demand, to proue to vs that this Iustification by faith alone, was the true Iustification; the preacher gathe∣red reasons here and there, out of the A∣postle himselfe. First, that must needs be the true way of Iustification, whereby all glory is ta∣ken from our selues, and giuen to God: the reason of this is, because in the worke
of iustifying sinners, the thing that God chiefely aimed at was his owne glory, the praise of his glorious grace, Ephes. 1. 4. Euen to declare his righteousnesse, as it is said in our text. And in Iohn our Saui∣our giueth this, as the touchstone where∣by to try his doctrine, that it was good, because that in it hee sought the glory of his father. Now the Apostle affirmeth of Iustification by faith, that it taketh away from vs, all matter of reioicing and boast∣ing: whereas, if it were by workes, wee might glory, that we had done something whereby to purchase our owne saluation: But now in renouncing all our own wor∣thinesse, and relying by faith for righte∣ousnesse, vpon the meere grace of GOD and merits of Christ his sonne, wee take away all matter of reioicing from our selues: therefore this iustification by faith alone, is the onely true iustifying before God. And here the Preacher told vs what the Papists vsually reply to this our ar∣gument. Namely, the Apostle in the place before named, excludeth not all boasting, but onely that which comes from workes done by our owne naturall strength of Free-will: whereby wee might glory in our selues, and not in the Lord. But hee
that glorieth in workes done of faith (which are workes of grace) doth glory in the Lord) from whom hee acknowled∣geth all his good works to come) and not in himselfe, and such boasting is not ex∣cluded. Sic Bellarmin. lib. 1. de iustificat. cap. 19. To which the Preacher answe∣red: First, that thus the proud Pharisie  might also be excused, Luke 18. Who exal∣ting himself, & boasting of his good works, acknowledged all to come from God. O God (saith he) I thanke thée, I am not as other men, &c. yet I thinke no papist will deny, but that he boasted in himself, and so much our Sauiour intimateth, ver. 14. Secondly, the Pelagians, who ascribed  the beginning of faith, and the doing of good workes, to the strength of naturall free-will, being vrged, that so they obscu∣red Gods grace, and gaue occasion to vs to boast in our selues; answered in like manner, that they detracted nothing from Gods grace, nor gloried in themselues: because they acknowledged their naturall abilitie of frée-will to come from the méere gift of God: and therefore their reioicing was in the Lord, to whose gift they a∣scribed the naturall power of free-will.
Thirdly, how could it truely bee said  by the Apostle, that all boasting is exclu∣ded by the lawe of faith, if wee may boast of such workes as come from faith, and which wee doe by Gods grace, when we are beleeuers? For then it seemeth, that faith bringeth with it cause of boasting: namely those good workes that follow faith: So that by this doctrine of the pa∣pists, boasting is not shut out, but rather brought in, by the law of faith. Fourthly, hee said that iustification by faith, absolutely excludeth all boasting, because it teacheth to seeke the righteous∣nes wherby we are iust in Gods sight, out of our selues; but Iustification by workes of grace, leaueth to vs some matter of boasting: because it teacheth to seeke that righteousnes in our selues, which though it be wrought in vs by the Spirit of God; yet not without the concurrence of our own free-will (as the papists teach) which according to their doctrine, so receiueth grace to do good works, as that it is also in our power to refuse the same. Concil. Trid. Sess. 6. ca. 5. Tangente deo cor hominis per Sp. S. illuminationem neque homo ipse nihil omnino agit, inspirationem illam recipiens, quippe qui illam & abicere potest, &c. Who
seeth not here that according to their own doctrine, hee that doth good workes euen of grace, may glory of the goodnes of his owne free-will, in that hee yeeldeth to the motion of Gods Spirit, and refuseth not the grace, inabling vs to doe good workes, when it is offered. Which being so, it fol∣loweth, that the doctrine of Iustification by faith doth onely exclude boasting, and that iustification by any workes whatso∣euer, leaueth in vs matter of boasting: and therefore, it is not the true doctrine of iustification. Secondly, that must needs be the true  Iustification, which bringeth forth his true and proper effects: Peace with God, accesse into his fauour, standing and per∣seuerance in grace, hope of glory, ioy in this hope, ioy in tribulation, patience, &c. But these effects doe follow Iustification by faith, as it appeareth, Rom. 5. 1. 2. 3. And these effects cannot bee ascribed to good workes; the very best whereof being sinfull and imperfect, are so far from cau∣sing peace with God, or accesse into his fauour, that on the contrary if wee should thinke, that God would examine them in iustice, there would follow terrour of con∣science, and flying from his presence:
Therefore seeing these effects follow Iu∣stification by faith, and not by workes: it followeth that the doctrine of Iustificati∣on by faith, is the true doctrine of Iusti∣fication. Thirdly, as Abraham was iustified, so  are all the elect iustified; for it is laid down as the paterne of their Iustification, Rom. 4. &c. Now it is expressely said of Abra∣ham, that hee was iustified not by his workes, whereof hee had store, and some very excellent, but by beleeuing the pro∣mise: therefore likewise all Abrahams children are to be iustified by faith, with∣out workes. Lastly, he said that the promise of righ∣teousnesse and life, was made in the Gos∣pell, on condition of beléeuing, and not vpon condition of working: therefore righteousnesse came not by works, which none could bring in perfection, but through faith alone. Philo. Doe ye remember any thing obserued in this discourse? Phila. Yea, amongst other things, first he ob∣serued the wonderfull goodnes of God, in appointing such an easie and possible way,
for our Iustification; whereas hee might haue made the way to Iustification, vnac∣cessible, by requiring either perfect obe∣dience, or perfect faith. Philop. Why, it is as hard and vnpossible for vs to beleeue, as it is to fulfill the lawe, in all the workes of it. Phila. True, so hee said. Naturally we are as vnable, and vnapt by any power in our selues to beleeue, as to fulfill the law: yet this hee willed vs to consider, that to be∣leeue and giue credit to a iust word, is not a thing so difficult in the nature of the thing, as to doe a great deale of worke. If the King should promise to any Sub∣iect, to conferre and bestow vpon him, much dignity and liuing, on this only con∣dition, so he would beleeue his word and promise, this is nothing so much, as if he should say, conquer mee such a Country, and I will promote and inrich thee. Againe, whereas the fulfilling of the Law, is meerely vnpossible to our nature, corrupt by sinne, so as grace could ne∣uer effect this in our nature, remaining in the state of vnperfect regeneration, as ap∣peareth
in this, that there was neuer méere man since Adam, that by grace was so farre holpen, as to keepe the Law perfect∣ly, yet it is possible to grace, euen in this estate, to make our nature capable of faith, as appeared in 1000. beleeuers which belée∣ued truely; and this is sufficient. Hee further obserued, that there is no blessing to the blessing of a beleeuing heart, affirming out of one of the Fathers, that the virgin Mary was more blessed in re∣ceiuing Christ into her heart by Faith; then by conceiuing his flesh in her womb. Whereupon, hee stirred vp those which had receiued this Blessing to great thank∣fulnesse, and others neuer to bee at rest till they had it, giuing themselues care∣fully to the vse of all good meanes for that purpose. Philop. What remaineth yet more? Phila. After this hee spake of the Finall cause Finall cause. of our Iustification; which hee said from the Apostle, was the praise of Gods righ∣teousnesse, or the manifestation of his pa∣tience, and righteousnesse, to the glory of his Name.
Philop. What did he say was meant by the righ∣teousnesse of God? Phila. First his fidelitie in sending his Son, according to his promise, to worke our Righteousnesse. Secondly, the Iustice of God, inflicting the whole punishment of our sinnes, vpon the person of his Sonne. Thirdly, the mercy of God in smiting his onely Sonne, that hee might spare vs: receiuing the paiment of that debt of Sinne, from our surety, and passing by vs, who were the principall debters. Philo. Did hee from hence giue any Instru∣ction? Phila. He did, and it was this: that seeing the marke whereat God himselfe aymed, in the iustifying of Sinners by his Sonne, was his owne glory, euen to declare and shew himselfe to bee most true, iust, and mercifull: therefore after his example we ought to aime at the same marke, both in dueties of our calling, and in seeking our saluation: Let all things bee done to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. This hee said was the very essence of a true Christi∣an, the life and soule of all profession: for
want whereof, all our workes were cor∣rupted. After this he spake of other points, as his text gaue him occasion. And name∣ly of the patience of God towards sinners, of the true vse and bounds of the law, and of the nature and vse of good works. Al∣so of certainty of our Iustification, and saluation by faith. Philop. Yea, but for this time you may spare your further labour, for I haue alreadie much troubled you. And mee thinks I see certaine men come towards vs. VVhere∣fore wee will here breake off. Phila. Agreed: Yet let me tell you, that these men, which come vnto vs, were all pre∣sent at the Sermon, as well as my selfe. Philop. Good time: wee shall vnderstand of them their opinion, and liking of this doctrine which was taught there. Phila. Ye say well, and I beléeue you shall find these foure persons, to haue so many sun∣dry conceits, and constructions of this do∣ctrine: if you please we will take some tri∣all of it. Philop.
VVelcome Neighbours, you come in a good time, I here by my friend Philalethes, that you all were at Sermon to day. And we two haue bin talking of that the Prea∣cher did teach there. Let mee know hovv you liked his doctrine. Philonomus. I did well like of that which hee taught concerning Christ, and Iustification by him, and concerning the Office and power of Faith. Philopseudos. I also thought well of his teaching in some of these things, yet both wee came away discontented. And here is a Fellow more male content then vs both. One∣ly Philedonos holds himself well pleased. Philautus. It is true, I am very much displeased, with some things in this Sermon. Philoponus. That is maruell, that being a Professor, & known Protestant, you should mislike the doctrine of Iustification by Faith; in which all Protestants doe so constantlie and well accord. VVell, let vs heare all your exceptions. My hope is, that I, and my friend Philalethes, will satisfie you. For though J were not present, yet am I so
well perswaded of the Preacher, that hee would giue no iust cause of mislike: ei∣ther for his matter, or manner of hand∣ling it. For though he haue no deep lear∣ning, yet according to his knowledge hee is carefull to teach wholesome doctrine, soundly and plainely, and as may best fit his text, the present Auditors, and the time. Philonomus. I am content so to doe. For I doe long to heare something reconciled, which trou∣bled mee. I haue lately bin a Iewe, by That there is no righte∣ousnesse to be loo∣ked for by our workes. Nation and Profestion, but am now brought to beleeue Iesus to bee the Messi∣as, promised in the Scriptures, from whom wee are to looke for all peace and happinesse: yet so as I doe verily thinke, that wee cannot be iustified and saued by Christ, vnlesse wee bee circumcised, and keepe the Lawe. Now the Preacher spake otherwise: namely affirming, that in the Lawe, the workes and ceremonies there∣therof, there is no power of iustifying and sauing vs: but without this, that the Law be fulfilled of vs. Our righteousnesse & life, doth wholly depend vpon this Iesus, & his merits being apprehēded by faith. And this was the thing yt offended me, that he made so light of Moses Lawe, which was mira∣culously
giuen by God himself, and great∣ly honoured of his people, that now it should be spoken against; this troubled mee. Philoponus. I commend this in you, that you deale plainely, and open your heart so freely: as also that you speake of scruples, not con∣tentiously, but out of a desire to learne: Onely this I must tell you, I doe mislike, that you mis-report the Preacher, in say∣ing that hee spake against Moses Law, and made light account of it. For answer mee. I pray you, he that shall say gold is a good thing, and serueth for many good vses, yet it cannot asswage hunger; it hath no power to preserue and continue ones life, one minute of an hower; doth hee speake against gold, and vilifie it? Also if one should tell you, that the Sunne is a noble creature, and very profitable and necessa∣rie for the world, but it hath no power to make a blind man see, would yee take it that he spake against the sonne? Philonomus. No surely: I had no reason, because gold and the sunne were not ordained for any such purposes. Philalethes.
Yee say well, and doe you not remem∣ber, that the Preacher did affirme of the Lawe, that it is iust and good, and holy, and it serueth for very good vses. Onely hee denied vnto it, this power of iustify∣ing and sauing vs, which hee proued, the Lawe was not ordained to effect and doe for vs, both by testimony of Scripture, and by reason. Philoponus. I pray you friend Philalethes, what were the vses, vnto which hee said the lawe did serue? Phila. He taught that the Lawe had good v∣ses, whereof some be common to persons both elect and reprobate, some were pro∣per to each of them. Philop. What were the vses common to both? Phila. First, the law serueth to shew vnto all Vses of the law to all men. men what was Sinne, the knowledge wherof, being obscurely set forth in ye book of Nature, is cleerely giuen in the booke of the Law: by which (saith Paul) commeth the knowledge of Sinne. Rom. 3. In this respect, he compared the law to a crystall glasse, wherein the spots and deformities
of the Soule and life, are in most liuely manner to be séene. A second vse common to all men was  this: That by it was reuealed the wrath of God, and that punishment, which from his iustice is due to Sinne, to the great terrour and astonishment of guilty persons: From this consideration it is written: that the Lawe causeth wrath. Rom. 3. Also that it is the Minister of death, and condemnation. 1 Cor. 3. Sen∣ding forth a Spirit of feare and bondage. 2. Tim. 1. By which men see themselues worthy of eternall death, and in bondage to Sathan. A third vse, common to both sorts of  men is, that it pleaseth God, by the in∣structions of the lawe, to keepe in their corruptions, and to restraine them from many outward enormous vices; which otherwise they would runne into, and to hold them in a ciuill course of liuing: And this hee doth, for the good of humane so∣ciety, which could not consist long, except there were such a bridle, cast vpon the vntamed Nature of men. An example hereof, we haue in the yong man mentio∣ned in the Gospell: which by the infor∣mation of the Lawe, was framed to such
an outward good cariage, as that Christ is said to loue him. And Paul while hee was a Pharisie; his life was vnblame∣able, only by the vertue of the law. Phil. 3. Fourthly, in all men, the law hath that  effect, which Paul speaketh of, Rom. 7. to stirre vp and irritate our corruption, and so to reuiue Sinne being dead, and through the flesh to bring forth sinfull af∣fections, as an husband by his lawfull wife, begetteth children. Philop. What vse had the Lawe, peculiar to Reprobates? Phila. First, it teaching them the wil of God, Vses of the law to∣ward Re∣probates which liue in the church visible. touching things to bee done, and left vn∣done, leaueth them without excuse: For if the light of Nature, leaue the Gentils vnexcusable, Rom. 1. how much more doth so great a light of the law, take away from Reprobates, which liue in ye church, all Apology, and defence for themselues? Secondly, in many Reprobates, the lawe hath that effect, by knowledge of their sinne, and their condemnation due vnto it, to bee an occasion to them of des∣paire; as it happened to Iudas, and many others: and so through their own default,
it is an Instrument of their own destructi∣on, and downefall. Philop. You haue not yet told vs, what vses of the Lawe were proper to the elect. Phila. I meane now to doe it.  The first was, Vses of the law proper to the elect. that by shewing them their sinnes, and miserable estate; it driueth them to think of a remedy; and so hauing humbled them, it prepareth them for Christ: euen as hee that telleth one of some secret dangerous disease lurking in his body doth cause him to looke out for the Physition: So the law laying forth to the elect, their most sinfull and wofull condition, they stand in by the breach of it, doth occasion them to looke out, and to long for a Sauiour, by whom they may haue reliefe against their mise∣ry. In this regard, the law is said to be a Schoolemaister, to bring vs to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. And hee added, that as the needle maketh way for the thred: so the Lawe though it giue not grace, though it doe not suggest the holy spirit, nor giue a∣ny peace to the conscience: yet it maketh a way for grace, and prepareth the heart by amazing and humbling it, that grace may enter into it. Secondly, after the e∣lect
are conuerted, & engraffed into Christ: the Lawe is a Rule of a iust and holy life vnto them, being a way wherein they are to walke, toward their Countrey which is aboue, a light, and a lanthorne to direct their feete in all dueties, towards God and Man. And here hee told vs, that no course of life, was liked of God, saue that which was framed after the leuell and square of the lawe. And the neerer that mans life came to the precept of the law, the neerer it drew to perfection; and so concluded, that howsoeuer the lawe were shut out, from hauing ought to doe, in our Iustification; yet it beareth great sway and stroake in our conuersation. Philonomus. All this I well remember, and did wel relish it, sauing that he did wrong to the law in this, that he did exclude it from Iu∣stification. Phila. Let mee helpe you herein. It was not the Preacher did exclude the lawe from Law hath no power to iustifie, vs. Iustification. For it is neither hee, nor any creature, can either giue, or take a∣way from the Law that power. But it was told vs, that God himselfe the lawe-giuer, had not appointed the lawe for any
such end: as hee hath not made gold,  any such purpose, as to allay hunger, or the sunne to enlighten the blind, or to giue sight to the blind. Philop. I heard you say, that hee cited testi∣monies of Scripture, and gaue some rea∣sons, that the Lawe could not effect any such thing, as forgiuenesse of our sins, righteousnesse, or saluation; I pray you, doe rehearse some fewe of them vnto vs. Phila. The first, Rom. 3. Without the lawe, the righteousnesse of God is made mani∣fest. Againe, in that chap. No flesh shall bee iustified by the workes of the lawe. Againe, As many as are vnder the lawe, are accursed, Gal. 3. Againe, If there had bin a Law giuen, which could haue giuen life, then Righteousnesse should haue béen by the Lawe. Gal. 4. The promise was not made to Abraham and his seede, as touching the inheritance (of heauen) on condition of keeping the Lawe: Rom. 4. And Paul in Rom. 8. 3. doth not onely af∣firme, that it is impossible to the lawe to giue life: but addeth the reason, because of our vnablenesse through the flesh (the
corruption of our nature) to keepe it. Here the Preacher told vs, that the com∣mandements of the lawe in their owne nature, did pertaine to life; and that the promise of life eternall, was made to the obseruing of them; Doe this and liue: Howbeit, such was the peruersenes of our corrupt nature, euen after our regenerati∣on, that none could euer attain to that per∣fection of obedience, which the lawe pit∣cheth at; but faileth both in matter of du∣tie, doing things quite contrary to the lawe, and in the manner of doing things commanded, not doing them out of the perfect loue of God, and of our Neighbor: and also in the end, not referring that which was well done, to Gods glorie: Whereof it came to passe, that none could haue righteousnesse and life, by the lawe. Now vnto these testimonies of scripture, hee added 2. or 3. forcible reasons, fet∣ched also from the scripture. First, it was Gods pleasure that the Inheritance should not be by the lawe, because then the pro∣mise had beene vaine: and Faith also had beene vaine: Rom. 4. The ground of this reason is this: If eternall life had bin promised only to such as perfectly kéep the lawe, the promise had beene made in
vaine: because no man can perfectly keepe the lawe, & so none should obtaine the pro∣mise. But God hath not promised eter∣nall life in vaine: therefore hee hath not promised it to such as perfectly fulfill the lawe. It were absurd once to thinke, that God hath promised eternall life in vaine, or that hee had in vaine bid vs beleeue it: but yet this should bee so, if wee should thinke to haue life, on condition to keepe the lawe, because this is an impossible condition, and a thing that no man can accomplish: therefore the lawe hath not power to saue vs. A second reason in the same place: God (saith Paul) would giue the Inheritance by faith, that it might bee according to grace, and that the promise might bee firme. Whence the Preacher reasoned thus: that for so much as righteousnesse and life did depend, not vpon condition of working, but beleeuing: and that for this purpose, that it might bee free, and come of fauour, and also that our minds should not wauer, but bee firmely and surely perswaded of the promise: there∣fore wee cannot hold our righteousnesse from the lawe, except wee will both rob
God, of the glory of his grace, and alwaies be vncertaine of our saluation, seeing our conscience would euer accuse vs, that wee had not done so many workes, and so perfectly as the lawe requireth. His third reason, was taken out of that 4. chap. to the Rom. from the circumstance of time, when Abraham was iustified, which was a good while before euer hee was circumcised: therefore circumcision which came after, could bee no cause of his Iustification, which went before: from whence the Preacher gathered, that if circumcision (of which such great things were spoken by Gods owne mouth) did auaile nothing to forgiuenesse of of sinne, and righteousnesse with God: much lesse could any other ceremoniall works of the lawe haue any strength, to such a purpose: and withall said, that to retaine the cere∣moniall lawe, especially with opinion of Iustification and saluation by it, would shake our faith, in the comming of Christ: for to what end should wee haue the types and figures of his comming, if he himselfe be already come? To these he coupled a 4. reason, from these words of S. Paul to the Gal. 2. 21. If righteousnesse come by the lawe, then
Christ died in vaine. Where hee reasoned thus. That which ouerthroweth the death of Christ, may not be in any wise admit∣ted, but to claime righteousnes frō the law in whole, or in part, doth quite ouerthrow the death of Christ, which is insufficient if it alone doe not redeeme vs. And if any other thing doe iustifie vs, then it might bee spared as a superfluous thing. And hence he tooke away the an∣swere, which the papists giue to this rea∣son; for they seeme to answer thus: That it is true which the Apostle saith, that Christ died in vaine, if there were any Iustification by workes of nature, which we might doe of our selues, without the grace of Christ; but hee died not in vaine, if we be iustified by workes of grace, be∣cause by his death, he merited that grace for vs. Sic respondet Bellar. de iustifi. lib. 1. cap 19. Vnto this the Preacher repli∣ed to this effect. Namely, that Christ may be said to die in vaine, if wee bee iustified by any workes at all, whether of grace or of nature. For that is said to be in vaine, which attaineth not the ende, which it intendeth and aimeth at. Now the ende which Christ intended in his death, was to worke our perfect redemption, and to
become sinne for vs, that wee should bee made the righteousnesse of God in him. 2. Cor. 5. last. But if by our owne good workes of grace, wee bee (though but in part) iusti∣fied: then it followeth, that Christ by his death hath not perfectly redeemed vs, nor wrought the full matter of our Iustifica∣tion: neither are wee made the righteous∣nesse of God in him, but in our selues through him, and so hee is not our perfect Sauiour; but onely hath by his death procured that we our selues should in part be our owne Sauiours, and our owne iu∣stifiers: and therefore hath not attained the end of his death, but may bee said to die in vaine. Vpon these reasons hee told vs, that all the helpe which came by the lawe of Moses, vnto Iustification before God, was by conuicting vs of sinne, and shewing vs our iust and fearefull dam∣nation thereby, and breeding in vs gréefe and feare, in respect of our own vnhappy estate, by this meanes to driue vs out of our selues, to seeke in an other (euen in Christ) for that righteousnesse, which we want in our selues: and when the lawe hath effected and done this, then it hath done that it was appointed to doe toward
our Iustifying. And if it should procéede further to giue any hope, or comfort of life and glory; it should exceede his bounds, and intrude it selfe, into the office and roome of Christ, who alone is the Iusti∣fier of the vngodly: Rom. 4. 3. Philop. How like you this, Philonomus? doth not this cleare the Preacher from impeach∣ing the credit of the lawe, the excellent vses whereof, hee truely deliuered, lay∣ing the blame why it did not iustifie, not vpon any want in the law, but vpon our selues, which beeing full of defects can∣not fulfill the lawe? And in pleading for Christ to bee our sole Iustifier, taking a∣way our sinnes by his death, and making vs iust by his obedience, hath so proui∣ded for the glory of God, the peace of our conscience, the stablenesse of Gods promise, the perfection of Christs obe∣dience and passion, as al this is done, with∣out any preiudice to the lawe, where∣unto God appointed his due compasse, and precincts: beyond which, we may not stretch it, without apparant and great wrong to the lawe, also to God the author of the lawe: and to Christ who hath re∣deemed vs from the lawe.
Philon. What meaneth this, that wee are redeemed from the lawe, And which the Preacher said, that Christ hath fréed vs from the lawe; so as we are now no more vnder the law? is not this to abrogate the lawe and to derogate from it? Philop. It is not to derogate from the lawe, to teach that Christ did abrogate the lawe, so as it bee rightly vnderstoode, that the ceremoniall lawe, being but a shadow, ceased in Christ, the substance and truth of it. And the Morall lawe is abrogated in these respects following: 1. Touching the curse, which Christ, being made a curse, hath done away. Secondly, touching the ri∣gorous exaction, requiring all to be done vpon paine of death, to euery least omis∣sion. Thirdly, and so as it is not now a Schoolemaister to compell to duety. Fourthly, nor an instrument to the flesh, or our corrupt nature, to bring forth sins. Yet the doctrine, the Institution, and o∣bedience of the lawe, still belongeth to Christians; who must endeauour accor∣ding to grace receiued, to liue after the discipline and rule of the lawe: and in this sense, they are still vnder the lawe, that
is, not vnder the malediction of the Law, nor the strictnesse of the lawe as it com∣mandeth, and helpeth nothing, to doe what is commanded. Phila. Friend Philonomus, are ye not adui∣sed that the Preacher frō the Apostle, fur∣ther signified thus much to vs: that this doctrine of free Iustification by Christ did Rom. 3. last. stablish the Lawe: insomuch, as the cere∣moniall lawe is so ceased in Christ, as that in him it hath perfect accomplishment, he being the trueth of it? And for the Mo∣rall lawe, Christ Iesus himselfe fulfilled it in his life, touching the workes com∣manded in it: And in his death, tou∣ching the punishment due to the breach of it: Requiring of them for whom hee did all this, that they be carefull to walke in the precepts of it, to testifie their thank∣fulnesse to him. Lastly, for the iudiciall, he taught that our Lord Iesus did not meddle with States and Policies, but left them as he found them, so as they adde nothing re∣pugnant to the word. Adding this, that if any people vpon mature consultation, thought that policy of the Iewes fitter for them, then their owne, they might
without any blame entertaine or make vse of it, as would well agree with their state, it being in it selfe, the law of grea∣test equitie, as comming from the God of equitie. No Nation being yet further bound, to the politicall law of the Iewes, then they did agree with the common law of Nature, which bindeth all men, at all times, in all places. Philon. Yee somewhat perswade mee to em∣brace these things, which when I heard Praeiudiciū tollit inci∣um. them taught, I was so hindered by preiu∣dice, that I could not rightly iudge of them. Wherefore I doe giue you thanks for this paines; and purpose to thinke bet∣ter of these matters. Philop. Come now neighbour Philopseudos, whereat doe you stumble? you are com∣ming on to like of our religion professed now in England; the people whereof in the seruice of God, speake the language of Canaan, and the diuell will bee busie with you, to cast into your minde offen∣ces, to turne you backe againe into the Sodom, and Egypt of Popery. Philopseudos. For your religion (that is, the forme
of diuine worship) that yee vse, I seene reason why I should mislike it. Yee pray only to God, and in the name of Christ onely, and aske such things only, as God requireth in his word, and all your Sa∣craments are commanded of God in the word. I would I could so well like your doctrine, which ye teach, touching meanes of saluation. And for the Sermon wher∣of ye talke, there were two things espe∣cially, which offended me. The first was, yt he did attribute too little to good works: and thereby gaue great discouragement, slacking the studie, care, and endeauour of men, in the doing of them. The other thing, wherewith I was offended, it was, that he taught ifaith must bee particular, with application: whereby great trouble may arise in mens consciences about the certaintie of their beleeuing, and salua∣tion. Philoponus. Ye are contented to haue your excep∣tions examined? Philopseudos. Yes very willingly, sithence yee deale so mildely, and with such good moderation. I hope to finde such measure met to me, as you met to my friend Philonomus.
Philop. Assure your selfe thereof, if yee for your part deale meekely, and with rea∣son: casting aside all cauillations and bit∣ternesse. I wish that our conference with you, might finde so good successe, as it did with your friend Philonomus. Tell me then I pray you, what would yee haue vs attribute to good workes, or do you know what our doctrine is, touching good workes? Philopseudos. Sir: I haue heard and obserued your doctrine of good workes: and this I doe remember yee teach: That the man must first bee good, before he can doe a good worke: as first the tree must bee good, before the fruit be good, and that a good worke doth not make the man good, but of the contrary. Also, that no worke must haue the estimation of a good worke: ex∣cept for the matter thereof, it be warran∣ted in the word, because what God com∣mandeth, wee are onely bound to do. And as it is written, Obedience is better then sacrifice. For the manner: that it come from sin∣cere loue of God, and our neighbour, as it is written: Let all your things be done in
loue. Lastly for the end, it must be refer∣red to Gods glorie, and edifying of my neighbour: Whether ye eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer ye doe, let all bee done to the glory of God. Moreouer, I haue heard you teach, that all good workes, they haue both imperfe∣ctions and impuritie, or staines, because our sanctification, it is imperfect, and our good workes, howsoeuer they bee pure, as they spring from the fountaine of grace; yet contract vncleannesse, as they passe through the muddie chanell of our vnder∣standings and wils, which are not whol∣ly purged from the filthinesse of sinne. There bee other things, which yee teach touching good workes. But this I blame in your teaching, and maruell at, that you doe not afford vnto them, power to iustifie, and to merit: seeing the Scrip∣tures so plainely speake of works, that they iustifie, and promise reward to them in so many places. Philop. And I much maruell at you, why you should looke to haue so much ascribed to good works: if as you seeme to vnderstand our doctrine of vnperfect sanctification, so you beleeue it to be true. But let mee
heare what workes would you haue ad∣mitted, to the power of iustifying, and of merit: whether those which are done be∣fore, or after Iustification? Philopseudos. Sir: I was neuer any great learned Good works me∣rit not. Clerke, that I could well distinguish of these things: I haue heard the one doth merit ex congruo, the other ex condigno. But I wel know not what that meaneth, except it bee that such workes as are be∣fore grace, doe merit of conueniencie: those that follow grace, doe merit, by the worthinesse of the worke done. Onely this I haue beleeued, that wee must hold fast the merit of good workes, or else wee destroy all well doing. Philoponus. Neither doe I professe any great lear∣ning: howbeit, if we meekely submit our selues, to the plaine truth of Scripture, so farre as God by his holy Spirit, reuea∣leth it vnto vs, that will make vs learned enough, to destroy an errour and falshood, which ariseth contrary to truth. For as the learned say, that Rectum est index sui & obliqui, that is, a straight line will de∣clare it selfe, and bewray a crooked: so the truth being soundly knowne, and cleere∣ly
by a distinct illumination of the spirit, when any falshood or lie ariseth in the way, it will discouer it: For they vvho meekely submit their iudgements to the truth, though they bee not deepely learned: yet God so blesseth them with a spirit of discretion, that they can tell what is truth, and that no lie is of the truth, 1. Ioh. 2. Therefore if wee will examine this matter, by the touch-stone of Scrip∣ture, there is no reason to thinke and af∣firme of workes done afore the grace of iustification, that they can iustifie a sin∣ner: no not so much as to dispose, or prepare to it: forsomuch as they be sins, being done without faith, Rom. 14. verse last. Also make the tree euill, Mat. 12. and the fruit will be euill. What? Can we gather figges of thornes, or grapes of thi∣stles, saith Christ? And finally in Rom. 6. as as in sundry other places, the Apostle auoucheth of all men, before the grace of their conuersion to Christ, that they are seruants of sinne, free from righteousnes; bringing forth, by their pure naturals, no other fruits, but such as giue matter of shame, and merit of death. What fruit haue ye now, saith hee, of these things,
whereof ye are now ashamed? and the end of those things is death. How then I pray you, can they so much as prepare to grace, beeing they worke shame, and deserue condemnation; not onely ex congruo of conueniency: but ex condigno, euen of worthinesse of the euill worke done? For the stipend of sinne is death. And what colour of reason is there, to ascribe power of iustifying to workes done after grace? For how can they which bee done after, bee any cause of Iustification, which went before? The fruit doth not make the tree good, but the tree is first good. And Augustine tel∣leth vs of good workes, that they doe not goe before vnto Iustification, but follow him who is already iustified. For as touching that distinction, of first and second Iustification, it is a fiction with∣out First Iusti∣fication they call it, wherby one of a sinner, is made iust: this stands in remissi∣on of sins, and it is by faith. all ground in the word, which teach∣eth but one Iustification before GOD, depending vpon faith, both for the be∣ginning, proceeding, and end of it. As it is written; The righteousnesse of GOD is reuealed from faith to Faith. Of Abra∣ham the Scripture witnesseth, that hee was Iustified by Faith; not onely at the time of his first conuersion: but many
yeares after stil the Scripture affirmes, that Second Iu∣stification they call that, whereby a iust man becomes more iust, that is, by workes, as well as by faith. Opera quae sequuntur fidem di∣cuntur iustificare secundum quod Iusti∣ficatio di∣citur iusti∣tiae exer∣citatio, vel ostensio, vel consūmatio Thom. A∣quinas in Iac. 2. Caietanus in Iac. 2. Ja∣cobus docet quod non fide sterili, sed fide fo∣cunda o∣peribus iu∣stificamur. his faith was accounted to him for righ∣teousnesse: and Paul many yeares after his conuersion saith; The life which I now liue, I liue by faith, Gal. 2. 20. Ac∣knowledging but one Iustification, at his first calling, and euer after, namely that which is by faith. And concerning the place of Iames, it may well and truely bee expounded thus, that Abraham was iustified by his workes, not effectually, but declaratiuely; because his good works shewed vnto men, that he was a iust per∣son: and his faith no dead and counter∣fait, but a true and liuely faith. And the Apostle himselfe giues vs the light of this Interpretation, where he saith: Shew mee thy faith by thy workes. Whence the distinction of Iustification before GOD, by faith in his Sonne; and be∣fore men, by good and iust life, did a∣rise, this place of Iames, being compa∣red with the Epistle of Paul to the Ro∣mans. Philalethes. So the Preacher told vs: and more∣ouer, according to this which you haue said of workes, done before and after Iu∣stification, I doe remember that hee said
in his Sermon, to this effect: That al our workes were either sinnes, and euill workes (and such bee all which wee doe before our new-birth) or else they bee fruits of the Spirit, and so be good works, and are so called. Of the former, he said that they increased our debt of sinne: so farre off were they from beeing able to discharge our debt. And of the latter, he said that they be part of our debt, because we stand bound to God, as well to doe good, as to abstaine from euill. Therefore as a man that oweth se∣uerall debts, by paying one is not freed of another: so our good workes beeing due to God (yea though they were per∣fect) cannot claime so much as thankes from GOD, especially being vnperfect, much lesse cleere vs of the debt of our sinnes: Luke 17. 9. Philopseudos. Yet I haue heard of some, that those words of our Sauiour Christ in Luke cap. 17. 10. When ye haue done all you can, say ye are vnprofitable seruants had this meaning: that wee are vnprofitable to God, but not to our selues. Philop. True: such silly shifts yee may often
here of. And this shift is ouerthrowne by Mens me∣rits are not such as that e∣ternall life can be due to them. Ber. Serm. de annunciat. It is suffi∣cient to merit to know that our good works doe not merit. Bern. Ser. 26. on Cant. Againe, My merit is Gods mercy: I cannot be poore in merit, whiles God is rich in mercy. Againe, What be all merits compared vnto such glory? the very words: VVhere hee speaketh of a seruant, that deserueth not so much, as thanks at his masters hands, for doing that he is bound to do, much lesse any reward. Euen so when wee haue done all that is commanded vs; yet wee deserue not so much as thanks of our Lord, much lesse any recōpence: because it is a debt which wee performe vnto him. VVee then see here, that wee are called vnprofitable ser∣uants, not in respect of GOD, but of our selues, which cannot deserue at our masters hands, so much as thanks. Be yee Iudge your self: what profit good works can deserue towards our selues, vvhen they haue not so much due to them by desart as thanks. Yet wee deny not, but that howsoeuer good workes doe not profit vs, in this sense and respect, as to merit the least thing at the hands of God (much lesse the blisse of heauen) for our good works, being not, our owne, 1. but wrought of God, who giueth the will and deede, Phil. 2. 13. 2. and also being a debt, which we owe to God, Luke 17. 10. 23. 3. And lastly, there beeing such disproportion, and inequalitie, betweene the ioies of hea∣uen,
on the one side; infinite in number, Bellar. de Iustificat. lib. 5. cap. 7 For the vncertain tie of our own righ∣teousnes, & danger of vainglo¦ry, it is sa∣fest whol∣ly to relie vpō Gods only mer∣cy & be∣nignitie. continuance and measure: and our fewe poore good workes, on the other side, how can they bee thought, by the wor∣thinesse of the workes done, worthy and meritorious of heauenly ioies? rather for the imperfections and spots which cleaue to them, they deserue destruction, in seueritie of iustice. Yet I say wee deny not, but in other respects, they haue pro∣fitable and necessary vses, Tit. 3. 14. both in regard of God, of our selues, and of our neighbours. Of God, to glorifie him, Mat. 5. to beau∣tifie his Gospel, 1. Tim. 5. 1. to witnesse our thankefulnesse to him, to please him, Col. 1. Heb. 13. And yeeld him obedience, Rom. 6. 17. Of our selues, to make sure our election,  2. Pet. 1. 10. to declare the trueth of our Faith, Iam, 2. to purchase a good name, to escape many Iudgements in this life, and torments of hell hereafter, Mat. 25. to in∣crease our graces in earth, and our glory in heauen. According to that which is writ∣ten; To him that hath it shall be giuen: and all this not by merit, but by vertue of a free promise. Of our neighbours by our good con∣uersation,
to win such to Christ, as yet be strangers from him, 1 Pet. 3. 1. and to stop the mouths of such, as by our euill life, would take occasion to blaspheme God, and his word: or if they be alreadie with∣in the Church, and wonne to God, then our good workes serue, to refresh the bowels of the Saints: and to profit their soules, by encouraging the weake, through our good example, and confirming more and more, such as bee already strong, and vnto both, setting them a paterne for imitation, Phil. 3. 1. Pet. 2. Philopseudos. Let mee aske you this one thing; see∣ing you teach the best workes of the Saints, to bee defiled and vnpure: how is it, that they please God, who can a∣bide no vnpure thing? Psal. 5. 3. Philoponus. Wee affirme indeed, that remainder of corruption which is in the children of God, doth staine the best workes, according to the plaine testimonie of Esay: All our righteousnesse, is as a menstruous cloth, Esay 64. 6. euen as cleere water draweth filth from the foule chanell it passeth through. Yet the person which doth these workes, beeing in Christ, and by him re∣conciled
to GOD, his good workes do please God, through forgiuenesse of sin, that which is either lesse then it ought to be, or otherwise done then it ought, either imperfect or impure, short or faulty being pardoned, and supplied in the perfections of Christ; whose holinesse and innocency, wipeth away al spots. And so God looking vpon the deeds of his Children, as fruits of their Faith in Christ his Sonne, doth accept them in him, in whom themselues are accepted: According to that of Peter, We offer spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to God, through Christ, 1. Pet. 1. Philopseudos. But why doe yee not allow the do∣ctrine of the catholicks, who affirme that Christs merits, make our workes able to merit? Why should Christ cause good works (which as they come from vs, haue matter of wrath) to bee pleasing to God, & not also by his merit, cause our works, (which in themselues be not of such wor∣thinesse) to merit eternall life? Or how commeth it to passe, that Christ can make spotted vnperfect workes, please God as you say, and cannot make our vnwor∣thy works merit from God, as Catho∣likes say?
Philop. There is great reason, why we should say the one, and no reason why they which are falsely called Catholikes should say the other. First we say, there is no small oddes betweene pleasing GOD, and meri∣ting before GOD. The workes which Christ did for our Redemption, receiued vertue to merit, from his Godhead, in which his humanitie doth personally subsist: Now as the Godhead of Christ cannot bee communicated to any crea∣ture, no more can the power of meriting, which depended on his Godhead. But he causeth our works (though vnperfect in themselues) to bee accepted, and pleasing vnto GOD, because hee hath obtained Bafil in Psal. 14. Euerlast∣ing rest doth re∣maine for striners, not as a debt due to their works, but by fauour of the most boū∣ful God. pardon for all our defects and sinnes. So that the defects of our good workes be∣ing pardoned, and they presented to God, in the righteousnesse of Christ, they appeare as perfect in his sight. Hee is pleased with all the workes of his hands. But you will not say, that euerie one of his owne works can merit. For to merit something of GOD is such a matter, as none saue hee which is GOD can doe: therefore the man Christ could not me∣rit
vnlesse his Godhead gaue merit to the workes, and sufferings of his manhood. Secondly, wee say according to scrip∣ture, that the proper end of Christs death  was not to make good workes able to me∣rit, but to take away our sinnes, Rom, 4. vers. last: that is, both the imperfections of good workes, and the iniquitie of euill. Hee died not for good workes, to giue power to them to merit: but for euil works, to remoue from vs their ill demerit: only thus farre, and in this sense, wee may be bold to say, he died for good works, to purge them, that they might please GOD as spirituall sacrifices. Further, if Christ should make our good workes, able to merit saluation, then hee should make vs in part, the Sauiours of our selues. And then the Scripture should not say true, that hee hath purged our sinnes in  himselfe, Heb. 1. 3. that is, by the workes and sufferings, which in his own person he wrought, not by those workes which hee worketh in vs, either in whole or in part: for then it should haue been written, that hee purged our sinnes, not in him, but in vs, or both in himselfe, and in vs. And finally, if it were so, that Christ his
death could not merit saluation for vs, ex∣cept he inabled our workes, to merit with∣all, then hee should bee no more able to saue vs without our selues, then wee are to saue our selues without him, which how much it derogates from Christ, doe yee iudge. Philopsudos. But mee thinkes you haue little rea∣son, to deny merit vnto good works, sée∣ing the Scripture doth so often and plain∣ly say of them, that God wil reward them. I pray you what difference is there be∣tweene reward and merit? Philopon. Great difference: for a reward doth not alwaies presuppose desert: for the Scrip∣ture Because all are sin∣ners, ther∣fore not in our me∣rits, but in Gods mercies, consists our salua∣tion. Ansel in Rom. 12. The king∣dome of heauen is not a re∣ward of works, but the grace of God, prepared for his faithfull seruants. sheweth plainely, that there is a re∣ward of mercy, and of sauour, as well as of desert and debt, Rom. 4. 4. Now wee de∣ny not, that good works are rewarded: but wee deny, that they deserue this reward, and affirme that it is giuen, because God in mercy promiseth it: not because the workes by their worthinesse deserue it. Al∣so it is true, that the promise of reward is often made to good workes, not to shew the merit and worthinesse of the worke, but to encourage the worker, to hold out
to the end, by a speech taken from the cu∣stome of men; who giue rewards vnto such as labour for them, in the end of the day, when their labour is done, by the ex∣ample of him who hired labourers into his vinyard. So our most good GOD, and heauenly father, to excite his childrē to per∣seuerance in well doing, promiseth to giue them in the euening and ende of their life, the fruit and reward of their labour. Wher∣in he dealeth like a bountifull father, who though hee owe nothing to his child, but may by his right and authoritie, enioine and put him to doe some worke; which being done, there is no more done then du∣ty; yet to whet his courage to well doing, both promiseth and performeth a good re∣ward to him: which commendeth not the worthinesse of the childs deede, but the free liberalitie of his kind father. Againe, who is so vnreasonable as to thinke that we the poore creatures of God, can make him our creator, to become a debtor vnto vs? For whereas wee haue not so much as a crumme of bread, but by his free gift and mercy, shall we thinke that so great matter of heauen, is or can bee deser∣ued by our workes. Lastly, wee acknowledge merit not of
our workes, but of our persons. For the merit of Christ, it is the merit of him who is in Christ a true member of his, for to such hee hath giuen himselfe, and all his, Rom. 8. Philopsendos. Well, you speake that which I know not how to contradict. But sure it is a great encouragement to good workes to teach the merit of them; and since this doctrine was cried downe, wee haue but a few good worke done. Philoponus. First I say to this, that though the popish doctrine of merit, be sent to hell whence it came, yet wee lacke no encouragements to good workes. If the loue of the father in giuing his Sonne, the loue of Christ in gi∣uing himselfe to death; if the care of plea∣sing and glorifying God; if the comman∣dement of God, if the hope of a great and free reward at length in heauen, and the mercies of God, which we presently haue, if the doing so much good to our selues and others, if the example of Christ and godly men, cannot preuaile with vs, to breede in vs, a readinesse to doe good workes, it is not the conceited doctrine of merit, that will doe it.
And not our doctrine is the fault, that there bee no more good workes done a∣mongst  vs, but the not receiuing of that doctrine; which where it is beleeued true∣ly, it is found to be fruitfull in good works: yea and this may be auouched, that though popish Catholicks doe boast of their good workes: yet the Gospell in fewe yeares, hath brought forth more true good works, Se Master D. Willes report hereof in his Synop∣sis. then were done in many yeares of Po∣perie. For let mee tell you, that howsoeuer we deny not, many workes good, for the mat∣ter and substance, or things done, to haue bin done in Popery: yet such workes as haue proceeded from hope of merit, and desire to deserue heauen, doe not deserue the name of good workes, because such come not from the pure loue of GOD and his glory, as euery good worke ought to doe, but from selfe-loue and affection to our selues: So as if we waigh the works of Popery in a iust ballance, seeing some of them are such as GOD neuer required, and they which are commanded of God, being done not for Gods sake, but for their owne sake, yea and often with great wrong to their posteritie, whom they robbed of their right, to giue to superfluous and ido∣latrous
vses, it wilbe found, that no works in popery will bee worthy of the name of good workes. Philopseudos. Sir: I haue heard your answer, tou∣ching my first exception about workes, and thus farre I hold my selfe beholden vnto you, that you haue in so courteous manner acquainted me with your mind: which I confesse doth deserue to be consi∣dered of. And by your good dealing in this point, I am encouraged to proceed to the next exception about application of faith: I haue thought it sufficient generally to beleeue the truth of the Scripture, and namely the Articles of our christian be∣liefe, and that this were enough for a mans saluation. Philopon. It is well yee doe allow of thus much; yee are an enemy I perceiue to the doctrine of Implicit Faith, to think that beleeuing, as the Church beleeues, would serue a mans turne. And there is reason to bee an enemy to it: for euery man is iust by his own faith, Rom. 1. Againe, Let euery man be per∣swaded in his owne mind, Rom. 15. How∣beit, in this that you say of faith, I may truely charge you with that fault, wherwith you falsely charged vs, about vvorkes:
Namely, that in speaking of faith, yee come far short, and ascribe lesse to it, then ye ought to doe, in as much as yee wil haue it to be, but a general perswasiō of the truth of such things, as are to be beleeued, without particular application; which your opinion to be faultie, will appeare by these reasons. First a naturall man, as hee may bee forced by discourse of a reason, to acknow∣ledge See a bone. pag. 22. 23. a God, and that this God is po∣werfull, and eternall, Rom. 1. so by his strength of naturall reason, hee may bee drawen to beleeue, this God to be author of the bookes, called the Scriptures, and to hold GOD to bee iust and true, euen truth it selfe, and so hee will easily agree, that whatsoeuer this most true GOD speaketh in his word, is also true. Inso∣much, as a Iewe if he were perswaded, that the new Testament were inspired of God, might bee brought to beleeue, that Iesus were the Christ; whereas true Christian faith is no naturall thing, it is a special gift, which commeth vpon our minde, by the speciall worke of the spirit. Faith is the gift of God, Ephes. 2. and, To you it is gi∣uen to beleeue, Phil. 1. 29. Secondly, christian faith is euer accom∣panied with confidence, and hope in God
who is beleeued in. For they which haue a liuely faith, haue also a trust in GOD with setled affiance in his goodnesse, that hee will succour them, and do them good Faith brin¦geth forth cōfidence in God. for euer; which appeareth not onely, by yoking these together, Ephes. 3. 12. but also by the example of Dauid: Psal. 22. and 42. and in many other. Now the generall beliefe of the Scripture, that it is true, may stand alone without hope and confidence in God, as appeareth in Iudas, and sundry others. The like is to bee said of loue, which is a necessarie companion of a liuely iustify∣ing faith, as the Apostle saith, Faith wor∣keth by loue, Gal. 4. whereas this generall faith hath been in many, who neuer loued GOD nor his Saints, but persecuted them bitterly, as Paul before his conuersion: therefore this generall faith, it is not the right iustifying faith. And so it is witnessed of King Agrippa, euen by the testimonie of Paul, beeing an Apostle, that this King did beleeue the Prophets, Acts 26. 27. 28. I know saith hee, that thou beleeuest: yet this Agrippa by his owne confession, was not then a Christian: therefore the gene∣rall faith of the Scripture is not sufficient, to make one a Christian.
Lastly, J see not but that if a generall faith bee sufficient, the very diuell might bee a good Christian: For by his wonder∣full intelligence, and long obseruation and experience, hee vnderstandeth the Scrip∣tures, and beleeueth them to be true, which is very cleere, by the story of Christs temp∣tation, and the rest of the story of the gos∣pell, compared with Iames 2. Philopseudos. Stay here: for you haue spoken some∣thing, that I cannot allow of. As name∣ly, that by discourse of naturall reason, Note. one may bee brought to beléeue Scrip∣tures to be of God, and to bee true; and also that which yee say of Paul, is some∣thing doubtfull to me. Philopon. You will grant that the dimme eie of na∣turall reason can see there is a GOD, and that hee is an Almightie and eternall being. Philopseudos. Yea, for reason telleth vs, that there is a supreame power, vpon which all Rom. 1. 19. 20. things depend: also our feares for secret sinnes tell so much to euery man. Philopon. Further, you will confesse, that the great
Booke of nature written in great letters, which a man may runne and reade vvas written by Gods owne finger, I meane that the eie of reason can behold God to be the Authour of that Booke, the maker of the world. Philopseudos. This I doe confesse, reason can behold it, for it could not make it selfe, and ther∣fore must haue a maker, which is none but God. Philopon. Will ye nor also grant this, that if this eie can see some part of that Booke called Scripture, to bee of God, that it may like∣wise see all the rest so to be? Philopseudos. This is true I must confesse it: for rea∣son De fimili∣bus, simile iudicium. saith, that of like things, like iudge∣ment is to be made. Philopon. Well: It is in Scripture written, of Iosi∣as and Cyrus, some hundred yeeres before they were born, that such men there should be, what things they should do, and there were indeed such persons, and did such things, as so long time before were spoken of in 2. Kings 13. Esayas 45. Also it is plaine, that the Messias cal∣led
Christ was spoken of, more then three thousand yeeres before, and what he should doe and suffer when hee came: And such a person there was, that did come and suffer such things. Now aske reason, if any creature, Angel, diuell, or men, or all Angels, diuels and men, were able, or be able before hand to declare, such extraordinarie things as shall truely come to passe: Namely, what par∣ticular person or persons shall be borne in∣to the world, but twenty yeeres hence, and what these particular persons shall doe? will not reason answere you, that it is im∣possible for the creature to know effects, whose causes are not yet extant, nor euer were? will not this same reason conclude, that these prophecies, not comming from the creature, were of diuine reuelation? If reason can see this, in these scriptures, it may also see the like touching the other scriptures. And if reason can perswade the scriptures to bee of God, it may perswade that these scriptures, are very true, and wor∣thy to be beleeued, forsomuch as reason corrupt beleeueth of God, that hee is all goodnes and truth, and hath no euil or fal∣shood in him. And if reason which is a facultie of na∣ture,
can conceiue, that all things spoken or written by the true GOD, are also certainely true, the beleefe of these things beeing but a naturall thing, cannot be that beleefe which the Scripture commends, as the meane and instrument to ioine vs to Christ and his benefits. Now that which you say to be doubt∣full of Paul, is very cleere: for it is most plaine, by the 3. Phil. 6. compared vvith the Acts 26. 4. 5. that he was not onely stu∣dious in the Scriptures to know them, but that the beleefe of them brought forth an vnrebukeable life to the world-ward. And howsoeuer hee erred, about the particular person of Iesus, the sonne of Mary, whom hee did not know to be the Messiah, in which errour was Cornelius and others, the true worshippers of God: yet all the prophecies in the old Testament, touching the Messiah, he generally belee∣ued to bee true, according to that vnder∣standing which hee had of them. Howbe∣it, it it sure, that this beliefe was seuered from godly loue, for he persecuted Christ in his members. Therefore it was not a generall beliefe, which is the true iustifying beliefe, which is full of loue, toward God and his chil∣dren.
And let mee aske you heere, (and do well consider what I aske) how it commeth to passe, that Cornelius did no more know and beleeue Iesus to bee the promised Saui∣our, then Paul did while he was a Pharisie; and Paul knew and beleeued the truth of prophecies touching Christ, no lesse then Cornelius, if not better and more perfe∣ctly: how, I say, it commeth to passe, that Cornelius his faith made him, & his works and praiers, acceptable to God, as the Ho∣lie ghost witnesseth, Act. 10. 2. And Paul notwithstanding his beliefe of the Scrip∣tures, was for the time a childe of wrath, & his workes abominable to God, as hee confesseth of himselfe: Ephe. 2. 2. 3. and 1. Tim. 1. 13. Canne there bee any other cause alledged (being both the children of Gods purpose and election) but because the beliefe of the one, was with application of the thing beleeued (saluation of Christ that should come, as hee then thought) to him∣selfe: The others beliefe was generall, and wanted that particular assurance: whereas both beleeued the promise, that the Mes∣siah would come to bee true, though both ignorant that he was come: yet the one, so beleeued the promise to be most true, as he was made to trust in it: the other beleeued
the truth of the promise, without trusting in it. Philopseudos. I was once in the error, that Cornelius his workes were done afore grace: in which point by helpe of your doctrine, I haue altered my mind: and touching your question, I leaue  to bee answeared by some better seene in these matters then my selfe: onelie, I hold it fitte for mee to thinke vpon it, and so I will: But meane while, I find that the promises are made to such as beleeue. Whosoeuer beleeueth that Iesus is come in the flesh, is of God. 1. Ioh. 4. Hee that beleeueth shall bee saued. Ioh. 3. and many such like texts there bee where there is no spéech of application. Philopon. Yes, though not expresly, yet by im∣plication and good consequence. For seeing it is most true, that many haue beene Hypocrites, of whom it is said, they beleeued, as they in Ioh. 2. 24. And Simon Magus, Acts 8. also Agrippa, Acts 26. And they which beleeued for a season, and after fell away, Mat. 13. It is sure that where the Scripture saieth, He shall be sa∣ued that beleeueth, and he is born of God that beleeueth Iesus to bee come in the
flesh, that heere in these places such a be∣liefe is ment, as is relying vpon this Iesus, as vpon our owne Sauiour: not a beliefe, that is, a generall knowledge and assent to the doctrine (for this Agrippa, Simon, Ma∣gus, Iudas beleeued, or they beleeued no∣thing) but a particular application of it to our owne persons. Secondly, one Scripture is to bee ex∣pounded by an other, and where any Scripture speaketh darkely, or commeth short, it is to be opened and supplied by some other Texts of Scripture, which speake the same thing more fully and plainely. Now to fit this to our owne pur∣pose, whereas some texts of Scripture speake of sauing beliefe; so, as it doth barely vse the word of beleeuing, and in other places such beleeuing is made all one with receiuing Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. ea∣ting and drinking Christ, comming to Christ, and seeing Christ, Ioh. 6. All which Phrases (as wee haue seene before) con∣taine particular assurance, & application. Heereof it appeareth, what we are to iudge of other places of Scripture which pro∣mise saluation simply to beleeuing: name∣ly, that there is more meant then belee∣uing the doctrine with assent to it that it
is true, which assuredly (as we heard) very many doe, who neuer receiue Christ, nor eate and drinke him, nor see him, nor come to him. Philopseudos. This wil ingender much scruple in mens minds about their Saluation: for men will still doubt, whether they haue such a particular Faith. Philop. No such thing: for where this true par∣ticular We by his spirit doe know, both that we haue his gifts, and haue receiued them of him. Ans in 1. Cor. 2. Euerie man that belee∣ueth doth fee that faith which is in his owne heart Au. lib. 3. de Trin. cap. 1. faith is giuen of God, they haue another gift withall to know, that they do so beleeue. 1. Cor. 2. 12. Wee by the spirit know the things that are giuen vs of God. Also 2. Cor. 13. where the Apostle exhor∣teth to examine our selues whether wee be in the faith: this exhortation were vaine except vpon such triall wee might finde out our faith and know it to be in vs. But this is true, that seeing we haue no saluati∣on, without a particular faith, they which want such a faith, must needes bee trou∣bled. Philopseudos. Yet for ought I see, this our particular faith and application, wil proue but a car∣nall presumption.
Philoponus. I am sory to heare you speake after this fashion, but it may please God heereafter to giue you some eie-salue to cleare your sight, that you may better see these things. For this that you call carnall presumpti∣on, is indeede Christian submission, to yeeld obedience vnto that Commande∣ment of God, which biddeth vs to beleeue in his onely begotten sonne, Ioh. 3. How∣beit this I graunt, that some there are which doe presume of hauing that they haue not, while that they perswade them∣selues, that they doe particularly beleeue and apply the promise of grace to their owne person, and doe it not. Yet this is certaine that they to whom the holy spirit doth giue a liuely faith, are able to dis∣cerne this worke of the spirit, perswading them particularly of their owne saluation, from the presumption of the flesh. And amongst many there are two markes espe∣cially, whereby they doe discerne it. The first is, their constant and earnest calling vpon God with confidence in his goodnesse, which is a fruit that cannot be found growing vpon the cursed tree of presumption, but ariseth from the blessed spirit of adoption which bearth witnesse
to their spirits, that they are the Sonnes of God, and maketh them cry Abba Fa∣ther, Rom. 8. The second marke, is their hearty and sincere loue of God their heauenly father, as well in their aduersity, as in their pro∣sperity, and of their brethren for Gods sake, euen in their afflictions and bonds, as Onesiphorus loued Paul, 2. Tim. 1. 16. and as it is written, 1. Ioh. 3. Heereby wee know that we are translated from death to life, because we loue the brethren. And a∣gaine, He that loueth is borne of God, and knoweth God, 1. Ioh. 4. 7. But you which cast the slander of presumption vpon the application of faith, you will not sticke to blame that other doctrine, concerning cer∣taintie of saluation by Faith. Philopseudos. That indéed was an other point, which I misliked in the Sermon, whereof wee talke. For I know no other certainty of Saluation, but that which is either by reuelation, as to Abraham, Paul, and some few other, or by hope, as to all good Christians. Philopon. Jf christian hope giue a certainetie, as in∣deed it doth, (for hope maketh not asha∣med)
much more there is a certainetie by faith: for faith is the ground and foundati∣on of hope, because wee cannot hope for that to bee certainelie giuen vs, which wee do not first beleeue to bee truelie promised vs: Againe, of whom thinke you Paul speak∣eth, 2. Cor. 5. 1. Rom. 8. 38. 39? (See the text.) Philopseudos. Of all the faithfull, as wel as of himself; for of them hee speaketh to whom hee wri∣teth, and for their better incouragement. Philopon. Then make you the collection your selfe. The faithfull know of themselues, Let vs bring faith and obediēce and so let vs firmelie trust such things as be promi∣sed, as if they were now fulfil∣led. Chrys. in Gen. 29. Homi. 54. Ber. Ser. 1. de Annunc. If thou beleeuest that he a∣lone, a∣gainst whō thou hast sin∣ned can forgiue thy sins, thou dost well; yet ad heere∣unto this one thing and be∣leeue thē to bee in∣deed for∣giuen. Cyprian ad Demetr. There li∣ueth in vs a firme faith, a cheere∣full pati∣ence, and a soule se∣cure and bold in her God. Let not him who loueth God, doubt whether he againe bee loued of God. Ber. in Can. 53. 50. that they shall certainelie be saued, as those words proue: & this commeth not to them by reuelation, which you thinke not to bee common; then it should follow that the faithfull are sure of their saluation, by the knowledge and certainty of faith, which is indeed common to Paul with other belee∣uers. Moreouer, seeing such as know them∣selues to be elect, may also know surely that they shall bee glorified, Rom. 8. And faith is an effect and fruit, which is a proper marke of the elect children of God, Acts 13. so many as are ordained to eternall life did beleeue, therefore euen by faith there
is certainty of saluation to bee had. More∣ouer, if it be by faih that the elect are made the sonnes of God, Gal. 3. And the sonnes of God being that they be heires annexed with Christ, are certaine of their own sal∣uation, Ro. 8. it followeth that faith giueth certaineie of saluation, to all such as know God & lead a godly life. Also seeing that e∣uery one that beleeueth shal be saued, Mar. 16. and the beleeuers may know of them∣selues that they haue faith, 2. Cor. 12. 5. therfore by faith there is certainety of salua∣tion to be had. To conclude, what peace or sound ioy could spring from faith, if faith did not breed a certainety? for there is none ioieth in vncertainties, but in certainties; but faith breedeth ioy vnspeakable & glori∣ous, & firme peace of conscience, Rom. 5. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 8. therefore faith bringeth certain∣ty of saluation, the onely matter of sound ioy and peace. How did you like the do∣ctrine of free predestination to eternall life, without any dependance or respect to the creature? Philopseudos. I doe hold predestination, to depend vpon foreseene workes; contrarie to that the preacher taught, that it had the will of God, for the onelie cause of it.
Philop. Scripture and reason grounded thereon, teacheth that you erre. For Scrip∣ture saith expresly, men are chosen of God according to the good pleasure of his will, & that they are chosen in himselfe, there∣fore not in our selues, Eph. 1. 4. 5. Also of E∣sau & Iacob, the one is said to be chosen, the other refused, before that they had done either good or euill, Rom. 9. which shew∣eth that Gods decree respecteth not mens works. And right reason perswadeth thus much, that seeing good workes are effects which follow vpon Gods decree of ele∣ction, for he ordained them for men to walke in, Ephe. 2. And in the first Chapter God saith, he chose vs in Christ (not be∣cause hee foresaw wee would bee holy) but that wee might bee holy and vn∣blameable in loue: therefore our works can be no cause of the decree of election. Also touching the other decree, reason teacheth, seeing God forefawe that all men would fall into sinne and death: if then the decree of Reprobation did depend vpon foreseene euill works, it would follow that all men had beene damned, because all men be sinners and enemies to God in his foreknowledge. And therefore since all were alike corrupt by sinne in Adam, and
thereby subiect to eternall death, and yet of all men some taken to mercie and life, other left in sinne and death this: diffe∣rence can haue no other cause, then the meere will of God: As it is written, I will haue mercy vpon whom J wil haue mercy, and I wil harden whom I wil. Rom. 9. 15. 18 Philopseudos. Sir, I thanke you for your louing paines taken in these points: And when I shalbe resolued in these things, which I will endeauour to bée, I will more deepely loue you and your paines. Philopon. Well, the Lord blesse it to you, and to so many others as shall need it: for I doubt nothing of the truth of those points of do∣ctrine which J haue sought to proue to you as I could. Now Philautus, what haue you to say against the Sermon which you heard to day? Philautus. I haue more exceptions, against this doctrine, then both my fellowes. Philal. Mée thought so, by the hanging downe of your heade and deiected countenance, that something was not well and to your liking.
Philopon. Let vs heare of all your exceptions, and if reason will satisfie you, I doe nothing doubt but to satisfie you. Philau. I would bée glade to bee satisfied. First it séemed to mée, that the Preacher ioined Christ and faith together; and made them equall in our iustification. Philoponus. It is true, he might well ioine them to∣gether, because God hath ioined them; and take you heed how you put asunder that which God coupled. But hee would not, I dare say, ioine them in equall degree; indeed they must goe together in our Iusti∣fication; but as the gift and the hand; the eie, and his obiect; the matter and his in∣strument: thus hath the spirit coupled them in his Text, and in many other Scriptures. Philau. Yea, but it séemeth to mée, that faith is not so much as an hand or instrument: for an hand, in receiuing a gift, doth some∣thing, but faith doth nothing in our iustifi∣cation before God. Philopon. As an hand receiueth a gift, and that is all it doth; so all that faith doth toward
iustifying, it is to receiue the perfect iustice of Christ. This the preacher told you, that faith is not our righteousnesse, nor any part of it; it did onelie laie hold on that which is our righteousnesse, and applie it to vs. As neither the hand nor the action of the hand, doth enrich a poore man, but the gift which is bestowed on him: So nei∣ther our faith nor the action of beleeuing did iustifie vs, but Christ his obedience & sufferings. Yet as the gift, doth not pro∣fit a poore man, except he receiue it; nor physicke a sicke man, vnlesse it be applied: So neither doth the death and obedience of Christ, benefit vs to iustification, vn∣lesse they bee receiued by faith. Philau. I like not these comparisons: And it séemeth to mee, that I haue benefit by Christs death ere euer I beléeue. Philoponus. You like not the comparisons, because they are directlie against your conceite but the comparison is grounded on Scrip∣ture: For if Christ bee a Physition, as he is called in the Gospel, and came to heale the sicke; his blood must needes bee the phy∣sicke, and that which doth the cure: And we being poore, are made rich by that vn∣speakable
gift of Christ, who became poore, to make vs rich: Therefore as in physick, it is necessarie to bee applied to the sicke patient; and a gift helpeth not, but when it is receiued: So it is with our spirituall physicke (the death of Christ) and that gift of himselfe for vs. True it is, it may bee said when Christ died, that he died for vs, on our behalfe, and for our singular benefit: but that the proper be∣nefit of his passion, which is remission of our sinnes, doth come to vs before we be∣leeue in him; it is as one should say, that meat doth benefit him before he eate it, or apparell before he put it on. Philaut. Is not my meat mine before I eat it, and my apparell also before I put it on? hauing paid for them I haue right to them both: so Christ is mine and I haue benefit of his death before faith, but I know not so much till I beleeue. Philopon. Iesus Christ and his righteousnesse being offered in the Gospel, there set foorth to be receiued, are like to meat bought and brought home, and to apparell made and laid ready for our vse. Now then as meat and apparell, if the one be not taken and
eaten, and the other be not put on, we haue no benefit at all, for clothing and feeding our bodies, which is the proper benefit of them. In like manner Christ and his righte∣ousnesse, though already wrought for vs and laid before vs in the word: yet neither clothe nor feede our soules, that is, doe vs no benefit to iustification, vntill by faith we take it to our selues: and for right vnto Christ and his merits, God hath decreed wee shall haue right to them, when in time we come to beleeue, but a∣ctuall right in them we haue none, till wee bee actualy engraffed into Christ by faith. Philau. I grant we haue no comfort of our Iu∣stification till we doe beleeue. Philoponus. Comfort of soule is a fruit of iustification, which must first be had by faith; and when the beleeuing sinner once is pardoned his sinnes, and accepted for righteous with God, then followeth peace and comfort, as it is written, Being iustified by faith wee haue peace with God, Rom. 5. 1. And Paul praieth God to fulfill the Thessalonians with ioy through beleeuing. Againe, it is an ab∣surd thing to imagine that a man may haue iustification without comfort, that a mans
sinnes can be forgiuen, and he become the child of God, the heire of heauen, parta∣ker of Christ, and all his riches, liue in hope of Celestiall blisse and glory, as the iustified person doth, Rom. 5. 2. and yet be without comfort, as you fancy that one may be iustified in distance of time, long before he doe beleeue to his comfort. Philau. I pray you, let mee aske you this one thing, what it is that makes a man stand iust before the iudgement seat of God, is it his faith? Philopon. You neuer answer to any thing, Philautus, but rome vp and down in your obiecting & questioning. Wel, I wil follow you & go step by step with you. Therefore I answere, that it is not our faith as a quality or gift can doe it: for it is weake and vnperfect, not a∣ble to abide the rigor of Gods Iustice, no more then loue or good works. So as the iust God, if he would deale strictly, might condemne a man for the imbecillity of his faith, and euery one of Gods children haue cause daily to pray pardon for vnbeleefe, and doubting ioined with their faith, and that God would increase it more & more. yet for all this it hath place in our iustifying
as an instrument. Philau. Yea, but then what is it, that maketh vs stand iust before the Tribunall of the most righteous God? Philopon. Christ Iesus and his perfect obedience, being apprehended & made ours by faith. For in Christ his obedience, there is not the least spot: so as it can endure the examina∣tion of Gods iustice: yet this profiteth not vs, till it bee made ours by beleeuing the promise concerning Christ. Philaut. I cannot allow it, that wée should bée said to bée made righteous by faith: And that was one thing which I misliked in the preacher, that hée spake so, as if faith were a cause of our righteousnesse. Philopon. You shew your selfe little skilled either in causes or in Scripture. Gods grace is the principall efficient cause, Christ obedi∣ence and death the materiall: Imputation of Christs righteousnes to vs, is the formall: the glorie of Gods grace is the finall; and faith is (as Logicians speake) causa adiu∣uans, an helping cause, an instrumentall cause; by helpe whereof the righteousnes
of Christ is made ours, that so we may be approued for righteous persons in Gods Iudgement. And why then may wee no say, We are made righteous by faith, see∣ing not onely the Scripture speaketh so, Gal. 4. That we might be made righteous by faith in Christ: but also common speech will beare out this? For doe wee not say that this horse-shooe was made with this hammer, and this penne was made with this knife, and this peece of cloth was made with this shuttle and loome, because these are instruments by which such things are made? so is faith a spiritual instrument, without which we are not made righteous. And albeit it is indeed the perfect iustice of our Lord Christ, which maketh vs iust, yet if yee knew any thing, yee could not well be ignorant of this, that it is vsuall in Scripture and common speech to attribute to the instrument, that which belonges to the author and worker. But I maruell what may bee the reason you are so loth to admit faith to haue some thing to doe in the act of iustifying, seeing the Apostle saieth so expresly, that wee are iustified by faith. Philautus. Because faith it is a quality, and qua∣lities,
they be in vs: and no thing in vs can auaile to iustifie vs before Gods iudgement seat. Also it is a part of our sanctification, how then can it iustifie vs? Againe, if we should be iustified by faith, then wee should giue some glory to our selues, for our owne iustification, and so robbe Christ. Moreouer, how shall little children bce iustified, for they haue no faith? And besides this, if I should say, that wee are not iustified, till wee haue faith, then we should make God change∣able, and our faith should be the mouing cause why God should loue vs, and bee pleased with vs. As for that which is writ∣ten, that we are iustified by faith, there is so much said of works by Iames; And by faith, in Paul I vnderstand Christ the ob∣iect of our faith. Philoponus. You haue said many things which I will answer vnto in order. That faith is a qua∣lity, it is true, and that it is in vs: but withal know this, that it doth not iustifie as a qua∣lity in vs, but in an other consideration, as by the ordinance of God it is appointed to bee an instrument to reach out it selfe, and lay hold vpon the righteousnesse which is without vs, in another, euen in Christ, and
to make it ours, or (because that word of fends you) to receiue it, and apply it vnto vs: euen as the eie and the hand, are parts of the body, to profit the whole: But wee doe not see, and receiue any thing by them as they are parts in the body; for so the foote is, and yet cannot see: but by a cer∣taine property, put into them of God, whereby they can looke and behold, re∣ceiue and lay hold vpon their proper ob∣iects. So faith, is a quality in our soule, and a part of sanctification, but yet iustifies not in that respect; for then loue, and hope, and meekenesse, which are qualities, might iustifie. But faith doth it by a certaine pro∣perty giuen it of God, whereby it is able to see Christ, and to receiue him with his righteousnesse. And whereas you feare lest some glorie should be taken from Christ by iustification by faith, the Apostle quit∣teth you of that feare, in telling you the quite contrary: That God doth iustifie vs by faith in the blood of his Sonne, to de∣clare his righteousnesse and patience, and that by this doctrine of faith, all reioicing and glorying is excluded from vs, Rom. 3. And indeed it is much to the glorie of God, that faith finding nothing in our selues wherewith to pacifie God, neither before
nor after our regeneration, seeketh for the whole matter of our righteousnesse and sa∣tisfaction for our sinnes, in Christ Iesus, a∣scribing euen this, that we haue Christ and his iustice for forgiuenesse of sinnes, vnto the free grace and mercy of God: and as he that reacheth out a leprous hand to re∣ceiue a gift of a king, hath no cause to re∣ioice: so no cause is there to reioice be∣cause we receiue Christ his rightetousnesse by our faith, which for the infirmities be in it, is as a leprous hand, and needeth par∣don aswell as other our imperfect gifts and works. Touching your reasō from Infants, albeit some Diuines affirme, that elect In∣fants haue a degree of faith of their own, and others say, that they are iustified by the faith of their parents, yet because it is not agreed by what instrument they are iustified, and it is enough for vs to know, that being the seed of the faithfull, the coue∣nant of grace and saluation is made to them, therefote that need not trouble you. The matter is, how men of yeeres are iusti∣fied: this wee say with the Apostle, is by faith. How this Doctrine should make God changeable, I see not, neither well can I tell your meaning, except it be this, that the elect being not iustified, and ab∣solued
from their sinnes, till they beleeue the promise, God doth begin to loue them now, with whom he was wroth and angry before, and so in your conceit may become changeable. We must needes speake with the Scripture, that euen the elect before their conuersion and iustification are chil∣dren of Gods wrath, and that beleeuing and being by faith in his sonne, hee is then well pleased with them, Ephes. 2. 3. Mat. 3. verse last. Yet heerein the change rather is in the Elect, then in God, with whom there is no shadow of change, Iames 1. 17. But as hee loueth his elect from euerla∣sting by loue of his purpose, and as tou∣ching his good will in determining to doe them good; so at their calling and iustifica∣tion he powreth out the fruits and effects of that ancient loue, beginning to loue them actually and really, whom he euer lo∣ued in his counsell and decree: and so here is no change in God, except either he should not at all actualy loue whom he hath once determined so to loue, or hauing once be∣gun to loue them actually, should after∣ward alter, and hate them; this were change indeed. But the elect themselues in their new birth and iustification are changed from sinne to righteousnesse, from Satan
to God, from death to life. Tell me, if the day which in the morning was cloudy and rainy, proue cleare and faire: if a man which was sicke and crasie, become whole and strong; if a Citie besieged and beset with enemies, suddenly obtaine peace: yee will say, that day, that man, that City is changed from euill estate, to good estate: but ye will not say God is changed, who wrought these changes, purposing for cau∣ses known to himselfe, to send foulnesse of weather, sicknesse, warre for a time, and at his owne appointed time, to alter this. The like is here, if the elect while they lay in darkenesse of ignorance and sinne, by rea∣son of that corruption, which God (being holy) hateth, were for the time vnder his wrath, obnoxious to iudgement, and after∣ward being inlightened and drawne to Christ, to beleeue in him, and renewed by his spirit, God doth now begin actually to loue them, hauing printed in them the I∣mage of himselfe, and put the Iustice of his Sonne as a roabe vpon them, we may well say, that the elect are changed, from a wretched to a blessed estate: Yet no change at all in God, who purposed alwaies in himselfe at some certaine time to rege∣nerate and iustifie euery one of his elect by
faith in his Sonne. Further, take an other comparison. A king riding along in his hunting sport or progresse, espieth a most piteous child naked and poore, cast out and exposed to violonce of weather and fury of beasts, yet he setteth his heart on it, cau∣seth it to be taken vp, giueth charge that order be taken to clothe it costly, and feed it plenteously, and bring it vp liberally, by which meanes it groweth, becommeth a man, applieth his wit and strength, and gifts to please the King, who seeing his to∣wardnesse and good behauiour, is now delighted and taketh pleasure in him, whom he did onely pity before: so it is with God the heauenly King, hee euer lo∣ueth his elect with the loue of mercy, pit∣tying them euen when they are beggerlie and empty of all good things, and exposed through sinne to all miserie and danger. But after he hath put his spirit in them, and furnished them both with perfections of his Sonne and the gifts of the holy ghost, so as they applie themselues to serue and please him, he now delights in them, and loueth them with loue of complacencie, as I may speake, being wel-pleased with them.
Philal. Sir, I pray you be contented to speak yet somewhat more to this point, to lay it out with so much plainnesse as you can: for it is a thing that (as I haue heard) this our neighbour doth much harpe vpon, that our doctrine of Iustification by faith, maketh God sometime to hate and some∣time to loue his children as a change∣ling. Philopon. At your request, I am contented so to do. God at the first doth not actually loue vs, because yet wee are not, wee haue no existence and being, but he onely purpo∣seth and determineth to loue vs: And so are the places of necessity to bee vnder∣stood, which speake of his louing vs from Beza in his annot vpō Ro. 9. verse 13. Amoris est, primū bene velle, dein∣de benefa∣cere. Zanch. de attrib. As the theefe on Christs right hād. before the foundation of the world, as M. Beza expoundeth them; He loued Iacob: that is, he decreed to loue him, or he lo∣ued him in purpose. And sure it is a good part of loue to purpose and meane well to one, especially such things as GOD meant and purposed to vs: But when we are borne into the world (I speake of such to whō God giueth not faith, vntill they runne out perhaps the greatest part of their life) hee loueth vs now as his crea∣tures,
for that is his owne making, and whatsoeuer he made is good, and to bee beloued: But as wee are still in the old man, corrupt and sinfull, and wholly per∣uerse and naught, hee hateth that; for it was none of his making, neither is it the thing which he purposeth from eternity to loue, but is that which shall perish and be destroied: 2. Cor. 5. 5. VVhen we come to be regenerate and borne againe, this new man, which is of his owne making, or this Creature thus renewed, he loueth with a perfect loue: for now wee are his owne; and these are they whom hee pur∣posed to loue from eternity: Iohn. 13. 1. 14. 13. Now if ye say Gods loue in this is changeable, you speake absurdly: for is it changeable, because that which was in purpose, is now in act? If a Father out of his loue purpose to giue his sonne an house and land, and keeping his meaning hid to himselfe till a certaine time, do then manifest this his purpose and giue it in∣deed, this is constancy and not change. That is changeable which being once be∣gun doth after alter, & that subiect which God doth once hate or loue, hee doth it to the end. As wee are his creatures God loueth vs, but more as wee are his new creatures
tures iustified and sanctified, and so hee doth loue and will do for euer. As farre as we are vnregenerate, that is, so much in vs as is vnregenerate, God doth still hate and will hate it vnto the end, till it bee a∣bolished. And so doth God speak of that excellent regenerate man, King Dauid: 1. Sam. 11 27. that which Dauid did was e∣uill in the eies of God: and no meruaile; for if a sinfull man which is regenerate, do hate that part of his that is vnregenerate, and disclaime it to be none of his, as Paul did, Rom. 7. Not I, but sinne which dwel∣leth in me, &c. How much more shall wee thinke the same of that most holy GOD, that is more pure of eies, then that he can behold iniquity? Now to returne to you Philautus, whereas you said that wee make faith a mouing cause, to moue God to loue vs, because we say, that we are iustifi∣ed by faith, this is a silly shift and a false: we neuer teach so, nor it cannot follow of this doctrine. We teach that God foūd nothing to moue him to giue his sonne for vs, and to put faith in vs, but his owne free grace and goodnes. And whensoeuer hee doth vs any good, hee fetcheth the cause from himselfe: Psal. 25. 7. Onely we teach, that at what time we beleeue in
his sonne, then wee are partakers of his sonne, and of all his good things, that he may embrace vs as a Father his children, who before by reason of sinne were the children of his wrath. That which ye say to annihilate iustification by faith, that Iames affirmeth, that we are iustified by workes, as well as Paul saith we are iustifi∣ed by faith, if your meaning be (as I feare it is) that we are no otherwise iustified by faith, then by workes, ye do foully misse the marke, and are in a manifest grosse er∣rour: for when Paul affirmeth, that we are iustified by faith without the workes of the law, the meaning of the Apostle is plaine, that we are otherwise iustified by faith then we are by workes. How we are iustified by workes Iames expoundeth in that place, whē he writeth thus, Shew me thy faith by thy works. Works thē iustify declaratiuely, because they declare & shew our faith to bee no dead faith, and our selues to be iust persons: therefore to bee iustified by faith (as Paul writeth) must haue some other sense, that we are iusti∣fied by it not declaratiuely, as if we should onely know our selues to be iust by faith, as wee do by works, but instrumentally, because by it we apprehend that which is
our iustice. This then I say, there is a iustification of the person before God, & this is by faith, as Paul saith; and there is a iustification of faith it selfe before men, and this is by workes, as Iames saith: for workes shew that the faith of the Elect is no counterfeit faith. Lastly, wheras you will haue Christ meant in these places which speake of righteousnes by faith, & of being iustified by faith; this wee grant to be true, that where faith is mentioned in such places, without expresse mention of Christ, there Christ is inclusiuely con∣tained; but herein ye are deceiued: first, if ye thinke, that Christ is meant in such places without all referēce to faith. Christ is meant & faith too, the one, as the mat∣ter of our righteousnes, the other as the instrument: for why would the Apostle name faith if he meant it not? Secondly whē the Apostle together with faith doth, expresly speake of Christ: as Gala. 2. 16. We are not iustified but by the faith of Christ. And againe, We are iustified by the faith of Christ. And Gala. 4. 27. We are all the sonnes of God by faith in Christ. If in these and the like places you will say that Christ is meant by faith, you bring forth very trim and fine expositions of Scrip∣ture,
for it would be thus much: We were iustified by Christ in Iesus Christ, and be the sonnes of God by Christ in Christ. Wherefore wee must of necessity yeeld to this proposition, that Christ iustifieth vs by faith. VVhat say ye? do ye not acknow∣ledge these words of Scripture, We are iu∣stified by Faith in Christ? Philau. I say we are iustified by Christ with∣out the helpe of faith. Philopon. Ye will not say (I dare affirme) that wee bee iustified without faith, this were to crosse the plaine words of the Apostle. Philau. I say we are iustified by Christ with∣out the helpe of faith. Philopon. Well Philautus, this argueth no good meaning, you would gladly say wee are iustified without faith, but that ye see, you must therein gainesay the spirit of God: and yet ye might as well say it: for this which ye affirme is all one, but that Satan blindeth you, that you cannot see your palpable mooking of the truth: for I pray you, to bee iustified without faith, and without the helpe of faith, is it not all
one. If, I say, of one that hee eateth this meat without a knife, it is all one as to say, he eateth it without the helpe of a knife: or if it should be said, that you lifted a log without me, is it not thus much, you lif∣ted it without my helpe? God open your eies, for I perceiue you are out of the way. And that you may the better see to come againe into the way, consider this, that all that faith can do in this matter, it is to be an helpe, not to Christ, who alone hath absolutely in himselfe wrought our righ∣teousnes, but an helpe to vs, thereby to attaine and come to that righteousnesse, drawing and pulling it to our selues by that spirituall hand. Philaut. If this be an errour to say that we are iustified by Christ, then am I in an er∣rour. Philoponus. Well Philautus, ye bewray your spirit: For wee teach Christ to be the on∣ly merito∣rious mean of our righteous∣nes & life. who saith it is an errour to hold that wee are iustified by Christ? this is yeelded to you: but to affirme that Christ doth iusti∣fy vs without faith, this is an errour to shut out faith from being the instrumen∣tall meane of our iustification and saluati∣on; this is erroneous.
Philaut. I do not so: For I hold that wee are not saued without faith, though wee be iustified without the helpe of faith. And further I hold, that by faith we know our selues to be iustified, and haue the com∣fort of it: and also I hold, that we appre∣hend Christ and righteousnes by faith. Philopon. Some of these sayings sauour of igno∣rance, some of them are such as may be well taken if they bee well meant, and some are true and sound, if you will stand to them, and some of them fight against other some, the last against the first, as be∣ing contraries: for it is ignorance to say, that we are not saued without faith, and yet are iustified without it, seeing the scripture which affirmeth the one, Ephe. 2. 8. We are saued by faith, doth also say the other: Gala. 2. 16. We are not iustified but by the faith of our Lord Iesus. A∣gaine, if by saluation ye vnderstand (as the Scripture doth) our entrance into the estate of grace, when we begin at our new birth to be freed and saued both from the curse and bondage of sinne by forgiuenes of sinnes, and sanctification of the spirit, then iustification is saluation begun, and
to be iustified and saued by faith is all one. Hee which is iustified is now saued by Christ inchoatiuely, as touching the be∣ginning of his saluation: and thus the ho∣ly Ghost speaketh of Zacheus when his sinnes were forgiuen him: Luk. 21. This day is saluation come to thy house: And Ephe 2. 6. By grace we are saued; being spo∣ken of such as did beleeue in Christ, and were yet liuing in the world: And Iohn 173. This is eternall life, to know God and Christ. Which places doe teach thus much, that saluation and eternall life is begun here, and perfected hereafter in heauen. But if you meane by saluation the full possession of glory in heauen, without all respect of the entrance and beginning of it here in earth (as I doubt ye doe) then you doe still rub vpon that errour, that faith doth no more to salua∣tion then hope and loue or repentance, which euery one must haue as well as faith before he can go to heauen. Wher∣as ye adde (to make a shew that ye exclude not faith) that we know our selues iustifi∣ed by our faith, this speech might well passe if it were spoken by one that meant well: for so the Scripture speaketh, My righteous seruant by his knowledge shall
iustify many: Esai. 53. And to know God and Christ is eternall life: Iohn 173. and 2. Cor. 5. 1. We know that when &c. In which places the Scriptures speake of the knowledge of faith, of the apprehensiue knowledge which bringeth vs to Christ, and knitteth vs with him and all his bene∣fits. But if vnder this terme ye doe hide the poison of your errour, that ye are first iustified, and then by faith ye know your selfe to be iustified, as by a signe or token, euen as ye know it by other workes of the spirit, then it is vtterly vntrue, and ye do but dallie. Touching your other speeches of ap∣prehending Christ by faith, and that yee are by faith iustified apprehensiuelie, stād to this and then you think as the Preach∣er taught, and as euery good Christian ought to thinke: But how doth that a∣gree with your other words, when ye said we are iustified without the help of faith, and that ye haue benefit by Christ before ye beleeue? These things implie contra∣diction, to say ye apprehend Christ and his iustice by faith, and that yee haue Christ and his Iustice without the helpe of faith: your words therefore haue some secret sense which you are loth to haue o∣opened
& vnfolded, but I will vncase your meaning. Tell me in good earnest: you do say, that faith doth apprehend Christ; is not your meaning, that faith apprehends him, not to iustification, but to your com∣fort? Js not this your minde; that first yee haue Christs iustice without faith, and then beleeue, that vpon that faith comes com∣fort? Philaut. It is indéed: for as I haue said before, I haue Christ and my Iustification by him before I beléeue, but when as I doe beleeue, then I haue the comfort of it to my selfe. Philopon. I thought so: you speake ignorantly. We apprehend Christ by faith both to iustifi∣cation and to comfort: these are things that cannot be pulled asūder, though they be sundry things, as the cause and effect: for one of these depend on an other, as I haue said before. It is such a conceit as I thinke neuer before did enter into any mans braine, that wee should haue onely comfort of iustification by faith, and not haue Christ and his righteousnes by faith. Philau. We cannot possesse Christ without faith,
but we haue him before we haue faith. Philoponus. This is your ignorance: what is it to pos∣sesse a thing but to haue it as ones owne? so that to haue Christ, is as much as to pos∣sesse him. But I know your meaning, that you cannot fully possesse Christ in heauen, before ye haue faith; and this is true: and so much ye may say of all gifts and of actions of our life, and of your death too, these must go before your full possession of Christ in heauen: but I hope there is more to be at∣tributed to faith then this, euen this, that you cannot here in your pilgrimage either haue Christ himselfe, or his righteousnesse, or any benefit of his, vntill ye haue faith to beleeue in him. Philau. If this should bee true, in what com∣fortles case are those Parents, whose chil∣dren die in their infancy, before they doe or can beléeue? Philopon. Before you tooke thought for your In∣fants: Now you are troubled about the Parents of infants. Ye are afraid lest this blessed truth of God, concerning the office and power of Faith to apprehēd Christ for our righteousnes, should shut infants that
die in their infancie out of heauen, and so plunge their parents into a gulfe of heaui∣nes, therefore for the easing of your heart, or rather indeede in behalfe of such parents whom it may concerne; I will here adde some thing to that hath been said this way. I desire that al which read my opinion with these reasons following, would waigh them without preiudice, examming them in the ballance of right reason, and of di∣uine truth; where if they be found to beare waight, let them be receiued, if otherwise, Let the spirit of the Pro∣phets be subiect to the Pro∣phets 1. Cor. 14 23. In some sort such infants may be said to haue faith as they haue rea∣son, the fa∣culty or habit with∣out the act of reason. P. Martyr. yet blame me not for reporting mine own iudgement, with the grounds of it, sithence J referre my selfe herein to the censure of the godly learned, without any offence to any man that is not of my minde herein. This then is my opinion touching such in∣fants, as being elected to life die in their mothers wombe, or soone or not long af∣ter they come into the world: I say of thē, they haue faith, and may as well bee said to haue faith supernaturally giuen them of God, as they may bee said to haue know∣ledge, memory, will, affections, and other faculties of nature. For what is faith? an apprehending knowledge, or knowing ap∣prehension of Christ, Iohn 1. 12. How weak soeuer that knowledge and apprehension
be. 3. Is it impossible or absurd to say, that Infants of christ an parents apprehend righteous∣nes by faith, vvhich is a motion of the spirit in infants knowne to God a∣lone. Heming. in 1. Cor. c. 10 vers 2. Caluin lib 4. cap. 16.  19. this or the seed of this, some sparke of it, should bee in infants, more then to say the seeds or sparks of knowledge, will &c. are in them? doth the weaknes of the organ of the body make it impossible for God to worke supernaturally in the soule? and whom in a moment and an instant (beeing taken vp into heauen) he powreth a whole Sea of graces vpon, and endueth with more knowledge & vnderstanding, then all the Apostles and Prophets had whilst they li∣ued vpon the earth, where they saw in part (infants now in heauen seeing perfectly) can he not immediately before the trans∣lating them, bestow one droppe of know∣ledge on them, as much faith as a grain of mustard seed, and make them by the tippe of the hand of the soule, and as it were, their fingers end to touch him, whom they shall straightway vpon their departing hence haue the full sight and fruition of? And  how was Iohn Baptist filled with the ho∣ly Ghost, being in his mothers wombe, if the spirit could not at all worke in the fa∣culties of his vnderstanding? The worke therefore of God in these infants, it is vn∣possible for vs to sound, who know not so much as the very naturall worke of God in
infants? For what or how farre these pow∣ers of nature extend not onely for the seeds of vnderstanding, will, affection, but euen of actuall vnderstanding, willing, affecting, which of vs can tell? And that infants doe thus come to Christ and by faith beleeue  in him, besides the arguments and places before alleaged, it is to me manifestly pro∣ued, Iohn 6. 35. 37. Whereas our Sauiour defining first & teaching what it is to come to him, namely, to beleeue in him: He that commeth to me shall not hunger, and he that beleeueth in me shall not thirst: im∣mediately addeth this generall and vniuer∣sall doctrine, as the condition of all the E∣lect, which none can bee exempted from, Whatsoeuer the father giueth me (meaning all those, whom GOD in his euerlasting counsel hath appointed to be Christs) shall come vnto me or beleeue in me. Againe, This is the wil of him that sent me, that eue∣ry one which seeth the sonne, and belee∣ueth in him, should haue euerlasting life. Hence it is, that faith is called the faith of Gods Elect, Titus 1. 1. For they all and on∣ly they haue it. And to the Romans, Whom he predestinate, them he called, and whom he called, them he iustified, Ro. 8. All there∣fore & euery one of the Elect, euen the little
Jnfants are called, that is, come to Christ An inward spirituall, effctuall calling they haue. by faith, before they be iustified by him. The antithesis or opposition, which is made, Gal. 3. 22.  The Scripture hath shut all (that is, all men, and whatsoeuer is of, and in man) vnder sinne, that the promise by the faith of Christ, might be giuen to those that beleeue: this proueth that faith which is the remedy, must needs be as ge∣neral as the disease that spread ouer al. And where in an other place, 1 Cor. 1. he saith, that Christ is made vnto vs, (to al, & euery one of the elect) wisdome, as well as righ∣teousnes & sanctification; the infants iusti∣ed  and sanctified by him, are of necessity to haue this wisdome, which standeth in knowing and beholding of him, in whom onely true wisdome is to be found, and is the roote and mother grace from whence the rest doe spring. And lastly, the simi∣litude of the brasen Serpent, Iohn 3. 14. doth euedently confirme it. Now as for the obiection, that faith commeth by hea∣ring, that men are regenerate by the seede of the word, &c. it may receiue this short answere, namely, that it is plaine that those things are spoken but of Gods ordinary dispensation, towards men growne, and capable of hearing. Now to the incōueni∣ences
concerning beleeuing parents, this I say: they are not to be greeued but to re∣ioice, that God, being the God, not of them only, but of their seed, their children departing are within the outward coue∣nant most assuredly (which no other children are) and it is to be hoped, are the heires of the true couenant. Philalaut. If I could beléeue this you say of Infants, then I should the more readily be brought, to thinke that surely there can bee no iustification of any elect without faith. For there is but one way of Iusti∣fication common to al the elect, but I yet thinke the elect. Infants to bee iustified without faith, therefore I iudge the like of men growne and in yéeres. Philoponus. Ye haue heard what I can say for Infants: but let me tel you this Philaut. that how∣soeuer the case be cōcerning infāts, either in truth, or in your opinion; yet of men which come to yeers before they beleeue; it is certaine they haue no part in Christ and his righteousnesse, till they beleeue: and besides these reasons, which Philale∣thes our friend, reported to be vsed by the Preacher in your hearing, I will not stick to cast in my mite: to trie if it be possible
to bring you to a better consideration in this point. First, we haue not Christs righteousnes till we haue his spirit: For if any man haue  not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Rom. 8. But by faith onely we haue the spi∣rit of Christ, Gal. 3. 2. Receiued ye the spi∣rit by the works of the law, or by the hea∣ring of faith preached? And Gal. 3. 24. he saith, We receiue the promise of the spi∣rit through faith, therefore wee haue not the righteousnesse of Christ till faith. Secondly, wee haue not Christs righ∣teousnesse till we be the Children of God:  But by faith onely wee be the children of God, Gal. 3. 26. All yee are the sonnes of God through faith in Christ Iesus. And Iohn 1. 12. As many as receiued him he gaue them this dignity to be the children of God. euen to those which beleeue in his name, 1. Ioh. 5. 1. Euery one that beleeueth is borne of God: there∣fore we haue not Christs righteousnesse vntill we haue faith. Thirdly, that whereby wee receiue the promised blessednes, is the meanes where∣by  we receiue Christs righteounesse: for these two, righteousnes and blessednesse, cannot possibly be seuered; for which see Rom. 4 4. But by faith onely we receiue pro∣mised
blessednesse, Gal. 3. 9. They which are of faith are belessed with faithfull A∣braham. VVherefore Gal. 3. 22. it is said, that the promise by the faith of Iesus Christ may be giuen to them that beleeue: Therefore no righteousnesse till faith. Fourthly, they which of darkenesse are light in the Lord, & be called out of dark∣nesse into this wonderfull light, are tran∣slated from the power of darkenesse vnto the kingdome of Christ, were not parta∣ker of Christs righteousnesse before that time. But such is our estate, as appeareth by Ephes. 5. 8. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Coloss. 1. 13. Therefore we are not parakers of Christs righteousnesse so soone as wee are borne, or at any time before wee beleeue. Now then Philautus, to retort your argument vpon your owne head, and to beat you with your owne weapon; I doe thus reason: There is but one way of Iusti∣fication, common to all the elect, which indeed is true by Rom. 4. (see the whole Chapter.) But men of yeeres which are e∣lect (by the former reasons) haue not Christ with his righteousnesse, till they haue faith to beleeue in him. Therefore also this is true of elect Infants, that they are iustified no other way. And to fortifie
this with a new Argument: If Abraham and his seed haue one common way of Iustification, as the fourth to the Romans cleereth, and elect Infants bee Abrahams seed, it followeth that as righteousnesse was imputed to Abraham through faith, so is it also to all his seed, elect infants and others. Philaut. But whereas it is written of Abraham; Hee beleeued and it was imputed to him for righteousnesse: this Text is cited out of Genesis 15. 6. Yet certaine it is, that Abraham was iustified long before that was spoken vnto him: therefore before he beleeued. Againe, it was not his be∣leefe iustified him, but that thing which he did beléeue, that is, Christ. Philoponus. I perceiue, Philautus, whatsoeuer is said to you to perswade, you hold still your conclusion, that the elect are iustified be∣fore they beleeue. But touching Abraham, it is certaine as you say, that Abraham was iustified before that was spoken vnto him and of him in Genes. 15. 6. Abraham be∣leeued, &c. but not before hee beleeued: for at the instant of his calling when faith was first put into his heart, hee then was
iustified. But yet because the Scripture doth not pronounce of him to bee iust till that time that it bringeth him in beleeuing that promise made vnto him, concerning issue of his body there, Genes. 15. 6. this was it which made Paul, Rom. 4. 3. 4. ob∣seruing that, to affirme that Abrahams righ∣teousnesse came not through workes, but through faith, whereof he then gaue a new proofe and triall: so as Abrahams iustifica∣tion which began by faith, proceeded also by the same meane. Now to that you say, that not faith, but that which his faith laid hold on did iustifie him: true it is, Christ is his righteousnesse before God; yet so, as it is ascribed to faith, being the instrument, to receiue it. That which Abraham be∣leeued, to wit, Christ, did iustifie him, yet not before, nor without his beleeuing. For seeing Paul saith, that Abraham found no∣thing by his workes, whereof to reioice with God, and that the promise was made to him, not by the law, but by faith, it is hereby plaine, that Abraham had no iusti∣fication by Christ at all without faith. But Philautus, I haue oft heard ye say, that the elect are iustified by Christ before they be∣leeue. Yet you neuer opened your minde to shew at what time the elect are iustified,
and how Christ and his righteousnesse are conuaied vnto them. I pray you therfore tel vs your full opinion heerein: and let vs heare also what Scripture you bring to proue your opinion. Philau. Herein I will satisfie you. I hold that Christ with his righteousnes doth come to all the Elect by imputation: and for the time, I hold that the Elect are imputed righteous, and so accounted of God euen from euerlasting. And touching the Scriptures, which be the grounds of my opinion, I want not Scriptures to war∣rant that which I say, nor the force of good reason, as I thinke. Philopon. This is it ye say: 1. that we haue our righ∣teousnes from Christ before we beleeue in him: 2. and it is connaied to vs by imputa∣tion, and that from euerlasting: 3. and that ye haue Scriptures to proue what yee say. VVell then, let vs heare your Scriptures, for the first point, that our righteousnes is by Christ, without all reference to faith, which hitherto ye haue affirmed, but made little shew of any Scripture to prooue it. Philaut. My first Scripture is out of Genesis. In
this séede all Nations shall be blessed, this séed is Christ, and in him we are blessed, therefore in him we are righteous. Philopon. Philautus, there was neuer Heresie so Non litera legis sed le∣gislatoris mens est lex. Verbum dei non in cortice syl∣laarum sed in radice rationis. desperate and sottish, but it could make some shew of Scripture for it. If Satan could cite Scriptue, no maruell if error his child be bold to alleage it. Therefore not the words but the meaning of Scripture is to be looked into. For your place of Gene∣sis, all yee can gather from it, is granted you. In Christ we haue righteousnesse and blessednesse? but what of this? where is your conclusion, that we are partakers of this Christ together with his righteousnesse and blessednesse without faith? no such thing will follow from that place. Nay, what will you say, if this place which yee bring against Iustification of faith, doe preach Iustification by faith? See Gal 3. 8. The Scripture seeing afore hand that God would iustifie the Gentiles, through faith, preached before hand the Gospell to Abra∣ham, saying, In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed. Loe, heere in that text of Genesis we finde faith the instrument taught as wel as Christ, the matter of our righteousnesse. Tel me Philautus, be the rest of your Scrip∣tures
of that nature with that in Genesis, where Christ is named, without expresse mention of faith? Philaut. They are indeed, as 1. Cor. 1. 30. and 2. Cor. 5. 10. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himselfe, and such like. Philopon. Then you haue your answer already, out of that former place to the Galathians, which sheweth vs, that faith euen where it is not named, must be vnderstoode, and is to be coupled with Christ, as the instru∣ment with his obiect. Howbeit, know yee further, that ye reason foolishly from the mentioning of Christ, to the excluding of faith. For subordinate causes; are not con∣trary one to another, as if one being put and granted, the other should be denied & remoued. Would you thinke this a good reason: It is written, God giueth children, or children are the gift of God, Psal. 127. therefore they are not brought foorth by their parents? Or thus: It is writen, Christ is our Sauiour therefore he doth not saue vs by the ministrie of the word? Or thus: It is written, Wee are iustified by faith, there∣fore we are not iustified by Christ: how false is this? And yet I may reason thus, as well
as you may reason as you doe. Lastly, euen those places which you name, fight against you, being well and duely considered: As seldome can they which maintaine an er∣ror, alleage a Scripture, but it will bee as a sword to cut their owne throte. As for ex∣ample, yee alleage Christ is made righte∣ousnesse, 1. Cor. 1. 30. but to whom? to vs, faith the Apostle, that is to say, to Paul and other beleeuers. Againe, God recon∣ciled the world to himselfe in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 19. but what world? the world of the elect beleeuers: for as there is a world of Infidels, Iohn 17. I pray not for the world: so there is a world of faithfull ones, 1. Iohn 2. 3. Not for vs onely but for the sinnes of the whole world: that is, belee∣uing Gentiles as well as beleeuing Iewes. I remember Philautus, ye said that the elect were iustified and accounted righteous by Christ from euerlasting; doe you thinke so? and what Scripture haue you for this? Philaut. I doe so iudge and hold, that the elect were euer accounted righteous with God, & heires of his kingdome through Christ: because it is written, Christ was the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world, that is, from euerlasting.
Philopon. What do you gather from hence? Philaut. That Christ was euer the head of his elect, and they euer his members, and therefore the righteousnesse of him the head must néeds be the righteousnes of his members. Philopon. First Philautus, we grant that all things are present with God, simul & semel, that is, together & at once, for there is not with him prius & posterius, that is, before and af∣ter, as with vs. To our purpose, it is yeeld∣ed that Iesus Christ his actions, sufferings, death, resurrection and his whole mediati∣on, with all the effects and fruits towards all the Elect, were at once and all together foreordained, by an immutable counsell from all eternity: but if hence you will say, that they were iustified from before the worlds: wee may as well say, that wee were called from euerlasting, sanctified & glorified from euerlasting, and that wee were both borne and dead before we were so indeed. For all these things GOD at once purposed, and they were all at once before the view of his all-seeing eie. Christ speaketh of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and
saith, that their bodies beeing dead did liue, God (saith he) is the God of Abraham &c. But he is not the God of the dead, but of the liuing: for all liue to him, that is, in Math. 22. his sight, and by his appointment their dead bodies shall as certainely liue, as if now they were aliue: but will you say, that when our Sauiour speaketh so, that their bodies were then aliue indeede? it were absurd. In like maner to say, wee are iustified indeed, because in Gods coun∣sell it was decreed, is a foolish reason. Rō. 8. Paul the Apostle doth distinguish pre∣destination from iustification, as the cause from the effect, an effect performed in time, proceeding of a cause which is eter∣nall. This therefore wee are to hold, that the counsell of God hath so appointed all at once, as yet God doth fulfill that coun∣sell by certaine degrees: which here for your instruction, J will plainely according to Scripture set downe. First hauing de∣creed to create all good in Adam, and to suffer all to fall in him, hee findeth in him∣selfe alone, cause & matter, for the which passing by others, he meaneth to loue and to saue vs, Ephes. 1. 5. Secondly, hee pur∣poseth to giue his Sonne for our redemp∣tion, that he being our head, & we grow∣ing
vp as members into his body, may be partakers of all the good things in him: Ephes. 14. 5. 11. Thirdly, he doth in his good time make vs by an effectuall in∣ward calling, to come vnto Christ, that is, to beleeue in him. Iohn 6. 37. From which faith, these blessings ensue in order, and nature, one after an other, all being wrought together, and at once in respect of time. First, we are by a spiritu∣all new birth incorporated into Christ, & made his members by ioints and sinewes, aptly compact and knit together in him. Iohn 1. 12. 13. Ephes. 4. 15. 16. 1. Iohn 5. 1. Secondly, wee become hereby one with him, whereupon, the Church it selfe com∣prehending the head, as well as all the mē∣bers; is called Christ: 1. Cor. 12. 12. Third∣ly, being one with Christ, we haue also his spirit to be ours. 1. Cor. 6. 17. Rom. 8. 9. 14. Fourthly, this spirit being ours, work∣eth three noble effects. First adoption, or the making of vs the sonnes of God by grace, being regenerate and borne againe in Christ, who is the sonne of God by na∣ture. Gala. 4. 5. Secondly, imputation of our sins to Christ, and of his righteousnes to vs, whereby we are iustified, that is, held and pronounced righteous before the
iudgement seat of God. 2. Cor. 5. and last. Rom. 4. the whole chapter. Thirdly, San∣ctification, whereby the power of our na∣turall corruption is corrected and maste∣red, that the old man with his lusts being mortified, we may liue in newnesse of life. Rom. 6. verse 3. till the 11. And so by these steps we ascend to our glory, which is the last and vttermost period, and furthest end of Gods counsell in respect of vs, as is his owne glory in respect of him selfe, Ephes. 1. 4. 5. Now touching the Scripture which you cited to proue Christ to bee the head of the elect from euerlasting: That Christ is the Lamb slaine from the beginning of the world: if ye referre these words (from the beginning of the world) vnto Gods counsell, then the meaning is to shew that Christ Iesus is an eternall redeemer in the purpose of his father: who (as Peter saith) did ordaine him before the foundations of the world were laid: But if ye referre it to the time of the promise made in the be∣ginning, at and about mans fall (as in that saying, the diuell was a murderer from the beginning, i. an ancient murderer, as old as since his fal, which was in the begin∣ning) then the sentence yee alledge, com∣mendeth the efficacie of Christ his death,
to be as ancient as the promise of Christ himselfe; and it proueth thus much, that our Lord Iesus Christ is the onely redee∣mer of those which liued before his com∣ming, and of those also which liue since. Christ by his death is the common Saui∣our of them both, the power and merit of his death, reaching both backward & for∣ward: no lesse to such as beleeued that he would come, then to such as doe beleeue that he is already come: and so controlleth that corrupt conceit of tying and limiting the validitie of his death, to the time of his incarnation, as if such of Gods people as were in the world before, had enioied on∣ly temporall promises, without any fruit in the Messiah to life eternall. Philale. This was it that the Preacher noted in these words of his Text, where it is said (by the forgiuenes of forepassed sins) namely by one instrumentall meane, e∣uen by faith, in the blood of this slaine Lambe, the sins committed of such as li∣ued in times afore his incarnation, and of such as liued after, were remitted. Philopon. From hence then ye cannot collect, that the Elect were in Christ their head iustifi∣ed
from euerlasting. And whereas you say, the righteousnesse of the head is the righteousnes of the members, that is true: but none are the members of Christ, till faith make them such: for in that you pre∣sume, that Christ was the head of the E∣lect from euerlasting, you must grant that it must be vnderstood what God in his se∣cret counsell hath appointed shall be, not what presently and actually he is: For to say that Christ was really and actually the head of the elect before Adam fell, it is ab∣surd, when as yet all men were perfect in Adam, and needed no Christ, nor any Christ was promised them. And it is im∣possible they should be in both Estates to∣gether, that is, members of Adam and of Christ. That is also absurd that yee say the Elect were accounted heires from e∣uerlasting; for in the sight of God wee are not heires till we bee sonnes, Rom. 8. And sonnes we are not till our new birth; and borne anew, we are not till we beleeue, as it is written, VVhosoeuer beleeueth is borne of God. 1. Iohn 5. 1. Philaut. Well sir: say what you will; I be∣léeue that with God wee are accounted heires, and had our sins forgiuen vs long
before wée beléeue: euen as any king ha∣uing once purposed to pardon a traitor, he is now pardoned with his king, thogh he know not so much, and do still remaine in prison. Euen so God hauing purposed in himselfe from before all worlds to iu∣stifie vs and forgiue vs, we are with him now pardoned and iustified, though yet we know not so much. Philopon. This reasoning by similitudes is a very weake kinde of argument; they be leaden Plumbea argumēta. reasons. When matters are substantially prooued by authority of Scripture and good reason grounded thereupon, then si∣militudes doe serue well to illustrate and declare the thing more plainely. But for answere to your leaden argument, we say that as a traitor to whom the Prince hath purposed his pardon, is now pardoned in the kings purpose: so are the Elect sin∣ners pardoned from euerlasting in that pur∣pose of God wherein hee decreed their pardon: but as a Traitor is not actuallie pardoned, except his pardon bee drawne in writing, sealed, presented to the offen∣der, accepted and pleaded: so the purpose of God for the pardoning of the Elect, must be reuealed in the word, offered and
presented by the ministers, sealed by the Sacraments, receiued by the Elect through faith, and then are they actually pardoned, and not before. Now for that you say, the Traitor is pardoned & yet remaineth in prison; how doth that fit your turne? seeing the Elect beeing once effectually pardoned with God, they are now at liberty, and become Christs freemen. But whilst their sins are retained and vnforgiuen, they are in bon∣dage to Satan, Acts 26. 18. And when you say the Elect are iustified before their faith, but they know it not, ye know not what ye say: for euery iustified person knoweth he is so, 2. Cor. 3. And by the same spirit we know the things are giuen vs of God, saith Paul in the forenamed place. Now of these things which are giuen to the Elect of God, Iustification is one, and a cheefe one. Philaut. But our sauiour Christ speaking of the Elect Gentiles, which were not yet conuerted to the faith, saith, they were his sheepe: I haue other shéepe, saith hee, Iohn 10. which are not of this fold: therefore it is plaine, that the Elect euen from euer∣lasting are actually iustified, and the chil∣dren
of God. Philoponus. He meaneth they are not actuall sheep, but sheepe of Gods purpose: for when he saith a little after, that he will bring them to the fold; it is plaine hereby, that they were not actuall sheepe, nor sheepe of his calling: but only such in Gods counsell & appointmēt: which because it is vnchange∣able, therfore the Scripture speaketh som∣times of things and persons decreed, to be such, as if they were now such indeed. How say you Philaut. do you not perceiue, that ye are awry in this matter? Philaut. Yet at the least, Christ with his righ∣teousnes is giuen the Elect, from ye time of the promise made to Adam: for if the disobedience of Adam from the time that hee fell made all vnrighteous, then like∣wise the second Adam beeing once pro∣mised, made all the Elect righteous at once. Philoponus. If Christ his righteousnes were not con∣uaied Heresie contrary to it selfe and to the truth. to vs till the promise, it is plain, that then it was not ours from euerlasting. But further in your similitude there is a great vnlikenes, and dissimilitude: for all men
were in Adams loines at once, & so stood and fell with him, as it is written. In Adam we all sinne, and in Adam we all die. But all are not at once ioined to Christ, but e∣uery elect person in his owne time, when he is regenerate, which is not till hee bee borne into this world, and begotten a∣gaine by the spirit of Christ. It is very true, that if all elect ones had by the ordinance of God beene one in Christ, knit and ioi∣ned to him, as to their spirituall head, from the time of the promise, as all were one in Adam, at the time of his fall (he beeing the roote and head in whom all men were by Gods appointment euen from his first being) then your reason had concluded some thing. There be other things wher∣in Christ & Adam be like one to the other, namely, that each conuay that which is theirs vnto such as belong vnto thē. Adam conuaies sin and death vnto his members: Christ conuaies righteousnes and life vnto his. But they do this not in one maner: for Adam by nature, Christ by grace: nor at one time, Adam from the instant of his fal, Christ from the time that the elect are ingraffed into him by faith: therfore when Paul had said, Rom. 5. 19. As by the disobe∣dience of one man, many are made sin∣ners,
hee doth not say in the present time, that by the obedience of Christ, many are made righteous, but in the future time, ma∣ny shall bee made righteous, euen then whensouer they shall beleeue. Philaut. But you will not deny I trust, but yt al the Elect were actually redéemed and iustified at the time of Christs death. Philopo. It is well; I see heresie is vnconstant & Heresie is only con∣stant in vnconstā∣cy, like fortune. vncertaine: and no maruaile, hauing no other grounds to rest on, but the vnstaied braine of fickle man. But to your asserti∣on: It is true, that Christ when he died did then act the worke of our redemption, & fully merited by that act, or suffring rather, or if you will, by that actiue passion, or pas∣siue action, perfect righteousnes and life for all the elect. But if ye fasten the actu∣all redemption and iustification of all the elect vnto the very time of his death, what a matter were that? For what then should become of all that liued and died before the comming and passion of our Lord? they must needs by this doctrine goe out of the world not actually, and indeed re∣deemed and forgiuen, because Christ was not yet actually offred: contrary to the Scriptures, which teach (as we haue seene
before) that the vertue and merit of that death, which Christ once suffered at the appointed time, doth reach to them that beleeued the promise of his comming, though they died afore his comming: for this is the nature of faith, that to it are pre∣sent, not onely the things which be now at this time, but which shall be, or which haue beene heretofore. For it is the eui∣dence of things not seene, Heb 11. There∣fore it is written of Abraham which liued before the law, that hee saw the day of Christ, and reioiced. And Iob beleeued in Christ the redeemer long afore hee came, and by that beleefe was iustified. Againe, for those elect that were borne after Christ his ascension into glory, it must be said of them, that ere euer they did exist in their owne persons, or had any sinne, their sins were actually forgiuen, and their persons actually iustified, which to say, what an ab∣surditie is it? Therfore this we are to hold, that Iesus Christ at the time of his sacri∣fiice did by his obedience to death per∣forme and worke that righteousnes, which by diuine appointment was to be imputed to all the elect, for their actuall iustificati∣on at what time they were in the world & did beleue. And here commeth your other
folly to bee confuted, that the elect haue Christ with his righteousnes by imputati∣on without faith: for in that you will haue it conuaied by imputation, euen hereof it followeth, that neither from euerlasting, nor from the time of the promise, nor yet from the instant of Christs death, were the elect iustified by Christ: but then and at that time whē euery one of them had faith to embrace Christ: for to bee iustified by imputation and by faith is all one, for im∣putation is not made but vnto faith, and through faith, as the Apostle affirmeth se∣uen times at least in one chapter. Ro. 4. And the reason is good, because imputation is an action of God, reckoning and account∣ing the righteousnes of his sonne to be the righteousnes of that man which hath faith to beleeue that it is his, and was wrought for him, and not till that time that he do so beleeue: for which purpose marke well which is written, Ro. 4. 23. 24. It was not, saith Paul there, written for Abraham on∣ly, that righteousnes is imputed vnto him, but also for vs, to whom it shall be imputed, at what time vve shall beleeue on him that raised Jesus from the dead. Thus by the iust iudgement of God this curse is laid vp∣on heresie, that it should not onely be con∣trary
to the truth, but to it selfe: for to af∣firme righteousnes to bee giuen the elect from before they haue saith, and yet to be giuen by imputation, are (as we haue shew¦ed) plaine repugnant, the one opinion striking at another, like Ismael and o∣ther wicked men, which neither bee at peace with other men, nor with them∣selues. But Philautus, if I be not deceiued, there was some other thing in that Ser∣mon you heard to day did trouble you, be∣sides the Doctrine of Iustification by faith. Tell me, is it not so? speake plainely and vt∣ter your whole mind. Philaut. There was indéede, and it was that which he taught touching the persons of the elect: of whom hee said, that before their calling and iustification, their verie persons be vnder the wrath of God and dominion of satan, no lesse then the Re∣probate: wheras I do hold, that the per∣sons of the elect are alwaies in Gods fa∣uour, and God is neuer enemy to their persons, but they come into the world righteous and acceptable before God: the Elect indéede are reconciled to God when they beléeue, but God is alwaies recon∣ciled to them: for he euer loued them, and
did but loath their euill qualities and sin∣full actions onely: so as the Preacher which taught iustification to bee the ac∣cepting of their persons into the fauour of God by imputation of righteousnes and forgiuenes of sinnes, was ouerséene, whereas iustification by faith, is but a making of our actions onely to bee iust through faith, that they may please God, who was neuer displeased with the per∣sons of his elect. Philopo. J did smell such a matter. See, that as no sinne, so no errour goeth alone: ye can∣not indeed hold iustification to be before calling and faith, but that you must by consequence deny the doctrine of mans fall, and all that which is taught touching the two estates, of corruption and of grace, and so with one blow ye strike downe the whole Doctrine of Scripture. Well, ye haue said many things, yet scant haue ye vttered one true word in all this which ye haue said, as any reasonable man shall perceiue. First, it is most certaine and vni∣uersally acknowledged of all Christians, that in Adam all men fell, and by his diso∣bedience are all men alike vnder sinne and death, which from Adam entered
equally vpon all, Rom. 5. 12. Consider what the Scripture speaketh, euen of the very elect before their conuersion, name∣ly, that it calleth them vngodly. Rom. 3. and Rom. 4 And sinners, enemies, of no strength. Rom. 5. Seruants of sinne. Rom. 6. Dead in trespasses and sinnes. Ephes. 2. 1. and verse 3. Children of Gods wrath, and in verse 12, they are said to bee without God, strangers from the life of God, with∣out Christ. In other places, as Acts 26. 18. they are said to be vnder the power of Sa∣tan, and in darknesse. And Ephes. 5. 18. they are said to be darknes; Ye were som∣time darknes. It were infinit to rehearse all places which report euen of the verie elect such vicious crimes, as they liued in before their calling, as beeing ouercome by them. See 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. 11. Titus 3. 3. Colo. 1. 21. 1. Tim. 1. 13. and infinit other. I beseech you now, what differēce is there betweene the elect and the reprobate, as touching their persons before their rege∣neration: for can the estate of reprobates for their persons be worse for the time: was it not the elect persons of whom those forenamed things were written? Were their qualities and actions onely euill, vn∣godly, sinfull, &c. and were not their per∣sons
become such through those euill cor∣rupt qualites which did clean to their per∣sons, as close as flesh to the bones, or skin to the flesh. Doth not the Apostle point out the persons of the elect when he sai∣eth, Yee were dead through trespasses and sinnes? were the sinnes onely dead works as they be called Heb. 6. 2. and were not the persons spiritually dead by meanes of sinnes? And when he writeth, wee were by nature the children of wrath, and there is none righteous, no not one: And all, men are concluded vnder sin: And, the whole world is obnoxious (that is the men in the world) to the iudgement of God: do not these Scriptures censure the persons wrapt in sinfull qualities, as in filthy rags, to be in dangerous estate? Also when E∣say saieth, Sinne separateth betweene God and vs, meaneth it not, both our persons that they are separat, and also the cause for which, to wit, our sinne? Yet further when elect Paul was a Pharisie and a blas∣phemer of God, an oppressour of his Church, and a bloody persecutor, were his sins then forgiuen him, had God then in mercy accepted his person for righte∣ous? He himselfe denieth it, 1. Tim. 1. 12 When the Corinthians were couetous,
and Idolaters, drunkards, contentious, were they then iustified? Paul saith the contrary, 1. Cor. 6. Are men at one time both in the kingdome of darkenesse, and in the kingdome of Christ? Be ashamed of such monstrous stuffe as this is. Yet thus much is true, that in two things the elect whiles their persons by sinne stand in so fearefull an estate subiect to death; in two things, I say, differ their persons from the reprobates: First, that the de∣cree of God is vpon them for their effe∣ctuall calling, in his good time, when their feet shal be pluckt out of those dead snares, wherein Satan held them for a time at his pleasure, 2. Tim. 2. vers. last. Secondly, they are by the hand of God preserued from that headlong and vnre∣couerable downefall spoken of, Heb. 6. & 10. and Mat. 12. into which some of the reprobats are suffered to runne. For God will lose none of his elect, but will raise them vp at the last day, and giue them eternall life: Ioh. 10. Philaut. Yea, but I hold a further difference, namely that the persons of the elect did alwaies please God, and be as much beloued before they haue faith as after,
and after be as wretched as they were before. Did not Paul being now a belee∣uer cry out: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from this body of death? Yet I confesse we are all lost in Adam. Philopon. You speake very vnwisely, but you that hold a iustification of mens persons before they beleeue, must needes speake after this fashion. For iustified persons doe alwaies please God and are alwaies beloued, and can in no wise be children of wrath, or wretched, or vnder Satan, or subiect to death and iudgement, and so you will make the Scriptures to bee sound writings. But consider this which I further say to you: are the elect as deere to God and so much beloued, when they beare the Image of Satan, as when they beare the Image of God their father? and are they as wretched when they be∣leeue and haue their sinnes couered, Psal. 32. 2. as before their sinnes were forgiuen them? and saying thus, I doe not beg the question, seeing I haue proued, and you are not able to refute it, that sinnes are not forgiuen the elect til they beleeue. In that place which you blindly cite, Rom.
7. the meaning of the Apostle is not, to shew that his person now hee was a be∣leeuer and regenerate, was no more happy, then when he was a blinde super∣stitious Pharisie: but to expresse by that exclamation (O wretched man) how irkesome and greeuous to be borne it is for Gods children to be stil tugging and combating with remaining and dwelling corruption, stil to be molested and com∣bred with the eggings and rebelling mo∣tions of sinfull nature, rising vp against God; resisting, hindering, and staining euery good thing, and often prouoking and preuailing to bring forth euil works highly displeasing vnto God; keeping backe many blessings, and pulling down many rebukes from his mouth, and strokes from his hands; this is that hee complaineth of. But you confesse wee are all lost in Adam; wherein you know not, or consider not, what you confesse. For they which are lost in Adam, are at that time when they are lost, through corruption of nature guilty of wrath and death; be the elect also at that same time pardoned, beloued, accepted, as righteous? bee they then children and heires? Is not this to confound sinne
and grace, death and life, hell, and hea∣uen, Satan & God together; and to make such a strange mixture, as neuer was heard of before? What nouice in reli∣giō Foure e∣states which the elect passe thorow. Rom. 5. 12. knoweth not this, that the elect were 1. first created innocent in Adam, 2 & after by his disobedience fell together with him into sinne and death, in which estate they remaine till they bee 3 regenerate by grace, that at length they 4 may passe into the estate of glory. As then at one time none of Gods elect being inwardly called while they liue heere, are both in the estate of grace and glory: so at one time they cannot be in the estate of cor∣ruption by Adam, and in the estate of grace by Christ: they cannot at one time he both the members of Adam & of Christ, sticking in the rotten roote of the old man, and in the new and noble plant Christ Iesus. And heere a little for your instruction take this difference, which is in the elect betweene themselues as they first stand corrupted and dead in Adam, and are after new borne and made aliue in Christ; though this difference may be gathered well, by that hath beene alrea∣dy said, yet I will adde some thing for more plainnesse. In sinne, there are these
things to be considered, 1. corruption, Foure things in sinne to be considered 2. guilt, 3. punishment, 4. dominiō & rule: the elect before their conuersion are in∣tangled in all these, they haue both the fault and coruption, and also through that, are guilty and subiect to punishment and curse, being withall slaues to their sinfull lusts, which they obey as seruants their Lord: and besides this, they are free from all righteousnesse, Rom. 6. 20. But when faith commeth, and that thereby they be one with Christ, they haue still the corruption of sinne, but are now cleared and quited by Christ from the dominion of sinne, also from guilt and punishment of sin, and are become par∣takers of grace, not onely for remission of sinne, but for the mortification and buriall of sinne, and liuing to God in righeteousnes and true holinesse. Iudge ye whether there be not now great dif∣ference in these things. But me thought I heard you say, that sinne hath made vs enemies to God, but not him enemie to vs, and that reconciliation is on our part, who were stangers from God, not on Gods part, who neuer was out of loue with vs.
Philaut. It is true, I did so indeed, and so I still thinke and iudge. Philopon. What grosse blockishnesse is this? who can be so ignorant liuing in the Church, and partaking in the ministry, but hee must know, that through sinne, there was mutuall variance between God and man? Gods iustice being infinitely dis∣pleased and offended with men for sin, and men through sinne altogether alie∣nated and turned from God, hauing their minds not set vpon his wil, but vp∣on euill workes, Col. 1. Doth not com∣mon reason teach, that reconciliation taketh not place, but where first there is a diuision? There must bee a rent be∣tweene two, where reconciliation is needfull. Also is it not written, that a mediator is not a mediator of one (but of two?) Gal. 3. 20 And if Christ by his death haue appeased diuine wrath and iustice, being offended with the sinnes of the elect: is not then God reconciled to the elect as well as they to him? Final∣ly, doth not the Apostle lay this downe, as an effect, and principal fruit of the Gospell, that God and the faithfull haue
communion one with the other; he with them, and they with him, 1. Iohn 1. 3. 7. this being the marke whereby to know it, namely, to walke in light, as God is light. You imagine that God cannot at one time, both loue his elect, and be wrathfully displeased with them: of which matter though some thing be spoken before, how the elect are loued before their new birth, yet for more e∣uidence, vnderstand yee that in diuers respects this is true, as Paul saith of the reiected Iewes, Rom. 11. 28. that at one time they were both enemies and belo∣ued: enemies as touching the gospell for the Gentiles sake, but beloued accor∣ding to election for their fathers sake: so the case standeth with all the elect be∣fore their receiuing into the estate of grace, they are loued as creatures, and more loued in purpose as elect: yet as creatures so qualified, defiled wholly with filthinesse of sin, and also poisoned with originall infection, and the contagi∣ous fruits of that bitter dead roote, they stand vnder wrath, Ephes. 2. 3. so as if it were possible they could die before any change wrought in them by the spirit of regeneration (which cannot bee) they
should surely perish. But of all absurdities which yet yee vttered, that is most appa∣rant, that ye will haue iustification by faith to be nothing, but a making of our acti∣ons iust through faith, the persons beeing What an absurd thing is this, that there shold be a time when our persōs be righteous and good, and our actions not so, but euill and vniust, se∣ing it is written, Make the tree good and the fruit will be good? Why the righte∣ousnes of Christ is called the righte∣ousnes of God. righteous before without faith; in which definition there be these faults: first, that iustification is a pronouncing and accoun∣ting iust, and not a making iust, otherwise then by imputation of faith, as before hath beene shewed. Secondly, ye confound iustification with sanctification; for this is the iustice or rightnes of our qualities and actions: but that is the iustice of our per∣sons, and is neuer ment of sanctification, no not when it is perfect in the heauen, much lesse of our imperfect sanctification here. Lastly, in declaring what iustificati∣on is, this is faulty, that ye mention not the righteousnes of Christ, which is the onely righteousnesse that is approued in Gods sight, and can abide the rigorous triall of his seuere iudgement, and therefore often called the righteousnes of God: for that it is both to be found in that person which is God, though wrought by the manhood of Christ, and also getteth all such to bee iustified before God (that is, allowed as iust in his eies) to whom it is reckoned: thus
ye may perceiue if you be not blind, that all this while that ye haue beene reasoning for a iustification without faith, yee haue spent your breath and lifted your tongue against God. Philale. Philautus, me thinketh, that these things which Philoponus hath opened vnto you, should somewhat preuaile with you to recall you from that accursed damnable errour of iustification by Christ, without and before faith, and from those other grosse conceits about this point. Philaut. Why sir, doe you thinke so badly of me, that euer I denied iustification by faith? I was alwaies of this mind, that we haue no assurance of Christ and his benefits till we beléeue. Philalethes. This that ye say of faith, that it brings assurance with it of Christ, and his be∣nefits to be ours, is very true; the Scrip∣ture speaketh thus, Rom. 4. Abraham by his faith was strongly assured: but you hold that the thing it selfe, to wit, the righteousnes of Christ, is first yours, e∣uen in order of time, and then faith bring∣eth assurance, knowledge and comfort to
you, as appeareth out of your own words to Philoponus. Philautus. They do abuse and wrong mee, that say I deny iustification by faith: so it is affirmed and giuen out, that I should hold preaching of the word vnnecessarie, and that I denied Adams fall. Philalethes. Nay Philautus, it was onely said, that these things follow your opinion: for if the elect from their birth and before their birth, be alwaies accepted for iust, & be actually redéemed: If they alwaies be the members of Christ and heires of heauen; surely by this opinion ye doe at one stroke (as much as you may) cut and crosse out of the Booke of God, the whole doctrine of originall sinne, and mans fall therein, making nothing of it: for this Doctrine cannot stand with your opinon. For by this doctrine of originall corrup∣tion, there is a time when Gods elect are not iustified nor sanctified, but bee both the seruants of sinne, and dead in tres∣passes, children of Gods wrath, mem∣bers of the kingdome of darknes, heires by descent of sinne, euen of hell fire. Nay your opinion not onely abolisheth the do∣ctrine
of mans fall, but it maketh Christ no Christ. For he that will haue Christ a iustifier of faithles men whiles they are faithles, and of vngodly men whiles they are and remaine vngodly; these by their opinion bring in a false Christ, such as the Scripture neuer spake of: therfore iudge ye whither this error would carry you, & whither you by it would cary other men. Moreouer, if Christ and his righteous∣nes may be had without and before faith, and if we alwaies stand righteous before God, and be his adopted sonnes; here∣in ye destroy calling, and take away the chiefe end of preaching the gospell, which is to turne men from infidelity to faith, from satan to God, from the power of darkenes to light, that we might receiue forgiuenes of sinnes and righteousnes a∣mongst them which are sāctified by faith in Christ. Acts 26. 18. Therefore know this, Philautus, that he which holds and he∣resie must be charged with all the errours that hang vpon it: As a drunkard is chargeable with al the fruits which come in with his drunkennes. Such Iewes as came to Christianity, and that stil held that righteousnesse came as well by the law as by Christ, and that Christ did not saue, except the Law were obserued,
they did not expresly say, that the pro∣mise of grace was vaine, and faith vaine, and that Christ died in vaine. Yet al this followeth of this opinion, as the Apostle chargeth them: Rom. 4. So of your opi∣nion many absurdities follow, and very foule ones, which you must bee content to heare of. And if you abhorre such mon∣strous consequences and inconuenien∣ces, as do arise of your rotten conceit, thē you must disclaime the bitter root which beares such lothsome vnsauorie fruits. Philedonos. Philopseudos. Philonomus. We haue al so vnderstood him hitherto, & we could no otherwise take him: surely this fellow is either franticke or he loues contention. I neuer heard such maner of dealing: but this is not the first time yt he hath béen burnt in the hand: For I heare that he once was inclined to Popery, and after was going to Brownisme, & now he is I know not where. Philo. You are a wonderful man: you haue very lewdly carried your selfe: but if you now were truely reclaimed, it is well: yet let me tell you, till you see that you haue held an errour, yea sundry errours, and from your heart be sorrie that you haue so offended God, and troubled your Pastor, & other good Christians, which your bu∣sie
dealing and sowing the graines of he∣resie, and with your mouth confesse your fault, and become quiet and peaceable, fol∣lowing your vocation with quietnes, else it will bee hard with you before God at that great day, howsoeuer you speed here in this world. And so fare ye wel Philautus and you my good neighbours. I must conferre with my friend Philedonos. Stay you with vs Philalethes. Now neighbour Philedonos, J heard you say, that you were well apaid with the Sermon which you heard to day, I pray you what was it that ye liked so well of? Philedonos. It is true, I did much allow of that I heard. For the Preacher did highly ex∣toll Christ, & the sufficiency of his death and sufferin for the redéeming of most miserable sinners which beléeue in him. And I do like well such comfortable ser∣mons. Philalethes. But neighbour, you should haue mar∣ked that the Preacher spake of dueties, that sinners doe owe to such a Sauiour: and how this Sauiour and his benefits did not belong to any, vntill they were
terrified and humbled by the law: for howsoeuer that you liue ciuilly amongst your neighbours, doing no harme, and paying euery man his owne, kéeping your Church, and giuing dueties to whō dueties belong: yet you take too much li∣berty to your selfe in sinne, ye wil sweare often, and vpon light causes, and ye make no conscience of a lie, and ye vse very loose company, with such persons, as beare no good will to the Gospell and ministers; So as yee had more néede in my opini∣on of the corasiues of the law, then of the comforts of the gospell: And I for my part would haue béene more glad to haue heard that you had liked the sermon, be∣cause ye had beene humbled by it: for ye may be too hasty to apply comforts, be∣fore ye féele the smart of the wound, and do hunger after the remedy. And this I speake to you of good will: consider what I say. Philedo. I thanke you neighbour Philalethes, that ye deale so plainely with me. I grāt we are all sinners, and I haue my faults as other men: but I loue good men and good preachers, and they are welcome to my house, and I loue to heare good Ser∣mons
and to commend them. Philopon. Ye are indeed much beholden to your friend Philal: for he telleth you that which is meete for you to heare: for you shall but hurt your selfe to lay hold on the do∣ctrine of remission of sinnes, to be cheered vpon it, whiles yet ye are not truly grieued and humbled for your sinnes, with a pur∣pose to turne vnto God, and amend your life: if you bee such a man, as your friend doth describe you to be, that liues in di∣uers sinnes, without conscience of offen∣ding God in them; then the merits of Christ doth not belong to you, because yet ye beleeue not: for hee that truely be∣leeueth in Christ, cannot liue ill, be∣cause that true faith that apprehendeth Christ for righteousnes, doth also clense & sanctifie the soule, that it may in some good measure delight in, and loue the commandements of God, and abhorre all sinfull and wicked waies; and therefore howsoeuer beleeuers haue their particular slips and falles, yea sometimes very grie∣uous ones, yet none of them doe liue and lie in any sinne small or great without re∣pentance; for beeing borne of God, they cānot liue in a continual course of sinning,
because the seed of God remaines in thē. Looke to it neighbour Philedonos, and the rather, because it is the policie of Satan to cast the vaile of a ciuill life ouer the eies of men, that they may not see the danger they stand in, by their presumption and securitie. And whereas he suffereth them to take someliking of good men & good things, it is to the end they should not sus∣pect their euill course of liuing, but rest themselues in some common and exter∣nall dueties. Philale. And by your patience Philedonos, now that wee are left alone, and may speake more fréely, these cauillers béeing gone, howsoeuer you are a man of faire condi∣tions, and haue good will borne you for many good parts in you: yet besides o∣ther things which I haue told you of, there be diuers matters wherein you do amisse: for vpon my knowledge you are too néere, and loue filthy vnhonest gaine, you will not sticke in the dealing of your trade to straine a good conscience, and by cunning sleights to deceiue simple men which cannot looke into matters: Also if you can catch a man vpon an aduan∣tage, you take no care to hurt another,
for your owne benefit, pretending stri∣ctnes of bargaine. Also you are intem∣perate of diet; though you bee no noted glutton or drunkard, yet you do too much seeke to please your appetite, and make too much of your body, that it is no mer∣uaile your soule doth thriue so ill: for where the body is pampered, there lust will raigne, and grace will decay. You are immoderate also in your honest re∣creations, allowing too much time to them, and following them with too much intention of minde, farre more then you do the best things; and some games you vse which are not of good report. Lastly, albeit ye shew some kindnes to preach∣ers and others which bee good men; yet you do too easily admit to your company, and do in a manner specially loue some such as you ought not to bee familiar withall. Philedonos. I know you speake all this to mee of good will: but let mee tell you, that some of these things I did not take to be offen∣ces: and for other things wherein I doe amisse, I cry God mercy, and I hope as the Preacher taught, that whatsoeuer my sinnes are, yet they are farre inferior
the value of Christs merits. I do eue∣ry day confesse my daily sins, as duely as I aske my daily bread, and I pray with my family, and sing Psalmes, and reade the Scripture: yea and both catechise my familie, and examine them vpon points of the Sermon: Also I do much help the poore, though I speake it. I am giuen to no notorious vice, and so long I hope well. We can none of vs be perfect. Philopon. These things that you speake of be ve∣ry good and commendable things: but as for all these externall things, an hypocrite may do them. See Esai 1. 13. 14. And if the conscience & mind be vncleane, looke whatsoeuer good any doth, it is vnclean. Titus 1. 15. And see 1. Cor. 13. 3. that the most excellent workes, euen the giuing of all our goods to the poore, and offering our bodies to be burned, except they come of loue, that they are nothing worth; and loue springeth not but from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith vnfained. 1. Tim. 1. 5. Therefore Philedonos please not your selfe in your profession, or in ex∣ternall dueties, either of iustice or of piety: for if you practise any sinne being known to you to be a sinne, with a purpose to liue
in it for some gaine or pleasure, that you haue by it: this is an argument sufficient, that all is done in hypocrisie, and that the mind and conscience is soule, and that there lacketh the roote of a liuely faith, & christian loue. For he that loueth one sin doth hate no sinne, as he that hateth one sinne will hate all sinnes: and a liuely faith stirreth vp Christians to watchfulnes, ma∣king them to looke to, and to preserue themselues. While ye are therefore se∣cure in any part of your duetie, or doe through slothfulnes cherish any knowne sinne, take heed, and doe not promise to your selfe forgiuenesse from Christ, who doth sanctifie them to the willing and sin∣cere obedience of the law, whom hee iu∣stifieth by the faith of the Gospell. Let me further tell you Philedonos, it is a great in∣iurie not to our selues onely, but to the death of Christ our Lord, to perswade our selues, and professe we haue Christ our iu∣stifier and Sauiour, so long as we are giuen ouer to the power of any sinne, and haue not our hearts soundly setled to follow Gods knowne will in euerie duetie which concernes vs, so sarre as the measure of grace and knowledge will suffer vs: for it is the greatest taking of Christs name in
vaine, that can bee, to speake of his mer∣cies and merits, without care to reforme our selues throughout, according to the word. See Psalme 50. 6. And ye know what the third cōmandement threatneth to such as take Gods name in vaine. In which regard, friend Philedo. suffer me to say this to you: if your perswasion that you haue saith, and bee iustified by Christ, to the forgiuenes of all your sinnes, bee true and sound, it will surely worke all good care and endeuour to walke worthy of that grace, by making you seeke to please and honour God in all honesty and godli∣nes of conuersation, 1. Pet. 2. 12. But till you be more smitten for your sinnes, be∣ing feared with Gods iudgements due to those sinnes ye liue in, that ye may come to Christ mourning and heauy loaden vn∣der the waight of your transgression, in a resolutiō of a new course, ye do but flatter your selfe, if ye thinke ye doe beleeue and haue any part in Christ. Philedonos. I thanke you both for your honest and louing dealing, & I will endeauor what I may to lay the law to my heart, for the humbling of me, that the Gospel may be swéete and effectuall to mee for my com∣fort,
and striue to leaue one sinne aswell as another, & in al duties to please God: I neuer considered thus much before, as you haue now said to me. Alas, if it bee thus with me, for lacke of true humbling, and vnfained thorow repentance, what may bee the case of many thousands, which liue more loosely then my selfe, ta∣king more liberty to doe more foule things then euer I durst aduenture on? yet for al their dissolutenes of behauiour, being common and grosse swearers, ma∣litious reuengers, and vnchast liuers, or proud & insolent Peacocks, or couetous worldlings, openly wringing & oppres∣sing their neighbours, do sooth thēselues, that they shall haue good share in the mer∣cies of God, trusting as well to bee saued by Christ as the best of them all? Thus they will boast. Philalethes. They full little thinke of that which Paul threatneth, 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. and Galat. 5. 19. 20. and of that which is written, Reue. 21. 8. And they forget that excellent place of Titus. 2. 11. 12. The grace of God hath appeared, bringing Saluation to all men, teaching all men to deny vngodli∣nes & worldly lusts, and to liue godlily,
iustly, and soberly in this present world, &c. But it is well, good neighbour, that you are minded more néerely to looke vn∣to your selfe, & to a more narrow watch ouer your waies. And now if you please, Philoponus, we will breake company, for it drawes toward night, and we haue al∣ready spent both much time, and some of our strength about these matters: let vs returne to our families to sée how things go, and there to refresh our selues after our labour. Philopon. I am content with your motion, if first of all, as you haue well admonished our neighbour Philedonos, that he should ten∣der the peace of his owne heart, and glory of his God, by ioining vnto profession of Christ, mortification of his lusts, deniall of himselfe, and amendment of life, seek∣ing to draw all his knowledge into pra∣ctise; so you giue mee leaue to aduertise you to beware that your great graces of knowledge, memory, wisdome, loue and meekenes, doe not puffe you vp & make you swell: Satan being such a workman, as can turne our vertues into poison, by making them matter of pride and vaine-glory; and it beeing too rare a thing to see
any humble with their great gifts, so prone we are to offend this way, & so dangerous is this offence, it being written, that God resisteth the proud, and that he will hum∣ble An hūble sinner is better thē a proud Saint. such as exalt themselues, as wee all haue need to be warned of it, and also to take good heed of security, which com∣monly creepeth vpon vs when Gods blessings do most abound: be watchfull therefore good Philalethes, and embrace the truth in humility and loue, increasing more and more, as ye haue receiued: and considering the mercies of God towards you, to call and draw you to his sonne, to iustify you in him by faith in his blood, to sanctify you by his spirit, to preserue and keepe you vnspotted, till this howre a∣gainst hell gates; therefore giue euen all diligence to fly the corruption which is in the world through lust: Ioyning moreo∣uer vertue with your faith, and with ver∣tue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance pati∣ence, and with patience godlinesse, and with godlinesse brotherly kindnesse, and with brotherly kindnesse loue: for if these things be in you and abound, they will make you that you shall not be idle nor
vnfruitfull in the acknowledgeing of our Lord Iesus Christ. And now my good friends, I do bid you heartily farewell, gi∣uing you thanks for your good compa∣ny, and wishing to you as to my selfe, all good of our meeting. FINIS.
A RECEITE Against HERESIE, For Preuention or purging out (if it be entred) that spirit of Hereticall prauity.
To the courteous Reader. FOrsomuch (courteous Reader) as this wicked spirit of Heresie hath beene sent into some (for punishment of their proud and barren profession) who as one would haue thought had beene farre from it; and that which befals to any, may happen to many; God in the plaguing of a few, for their prophanenes and pride, giuing warning to other: I haue there∣fore (being but an vnskilfull Physition) prepared a receit against this pestiferous malady. And howsoeuer to some, and not without cause, it is thought very hard to giue a Scholastical definition of Here∣sie and Heretikes; yet by this which I haue gathered out of Scriptures, Fathers, and experience, it will be somewhat ea∣sie,
as I thinke, to giue some aime at it. Sure I am it will afford some light to such as are not acquainted with that ma∣lignant spirit, to see when themselues or others, be neere it, and how it may hap∣pily be preuented. Farewell. Thine in the Lord, T. W.
A Receit against Heresie. HEresie is some opinion  Heresie vvhat. contrary to the truth of Scripture, which one hath chosen to himselfe and doth obstinatly maintaine. Three things are required to the proofe of an Heresie: first, that it be an error. Secondly, an er∣rour against the truth of Gods word. Thirdly, that it be stoutly and willingly maintained. Iewell. Error is some opinion against the  How error differs frō heresie. word of God, held by ignorance and simplicity of such as are ready to yeeld to the truth, being shewed vnto them. But Heresie is an errour persisted in after conuiction and due admonition, Mat. 22. Yee erre not knowing the Scripture, Tit. 3. 11. Wilfull obstinacie doth distin∣guish betweene Error and Heresie: erra∣re
possum, haereticus esse nolo: Augustine: I may erre, but will bee no Heretike. A∣gaine, such as defend a false sentence with no obstinate heart, being ready to be re∣formed by the truth when they finde it, such are not to be reputed amongst He∣retikes: August. Epist. 162. Heresies, some be fundamental, which  Diuision of Heresies directly or by consequence ouerthrowe some foundation of religion, which be∣ing denied, ouerthroweth all religion: as of them which denied the Trinity of persons or the vnity of Essence, the diui∣nity or humanity of Christ, or the hy∣postaticall vnion, or the resurrection, or the sufficiency of Christs sacrifice, or free iustification. Some besides the foun∣dation, in matters of lesse moment, and yet of moment (as euery denied truth is) As such as deny the vse of Magistrats, of mariage, also diuers false opinions a∣bout the Sacraments and ministery, &c, 1. Cor. 11. 16. There were Heresies a∣mongst the Corinthians as touching the Eucharist. See Doctor Fulke vpon this place. An Hereticke is hee which obstinately An Here∣tike who? defendeth some grieuous errour, contra∣ry to the manifest authority of holy
Scripture: Aug. lib. 4. de Bapt. cap. 16. Aug. lib. 8. de ciuit. dei. cap. 51. He is an Heretike that when the doctrine of the Catholike faith is made plaine vn∣to him, had rather resist it, and choose  Efficient causes of Heresie. that himselfe held, &c. Againe, they that being admonished, persist in pestife∣rous opinions and obstinatly defend them, are thereby become Heretikes. The remote and furthest causes are two. First, Satans malice, who inspireth men with errour and hardneth them  That here∣sies be, it comes of of Satans and mans malice. therein, being a lying spirit in the mouthes and pennes of heretiks. There∣fore heresies be called doctrine of di∣uels, 1. Tim. 4. 2. And the diuell is the fa∣ther of lies, Iohn 8. 44. Of lies in religion and in doctrine, as well as in ciuill life, the diuell is father and author. Secondly, corruption of nature, which  inclineth all men as to other sinnes, so to heresies, whereof euery man hath in himselfe the seed, Gal. 5. 20. The works of the flesh are Jdolatry, heresie, &c. The next or neerest causes of heresie, 2 August. He is an heretike that for some tem∣porall cō∣modity, or for his owne glo∣ry cometh new and false opini∣ons. be also two, couetousnesse and pride: the loue of filthy gaine, or of vaine glory begetteth heresies: whiles by be∣ing authors of some new or strange opi∣nions, men doe desire either to get fame,
or to amend and helpe their decai∣ed estate amongst their followers, Tit. 1. 17. Teaching things they ought not for filthy lucre, Romans 16. 18. They serue not the Lord Iesus, but their owne belly. Iude 16. Whose mouth speake proud things, 1. Tim. 6. 3. 4. If any teach otherwise, he is puffed vp, August. Epist. 162. Heretikes (saith hee) swell with odious and detestable pride, and are mad with frowardnesse of wicked con∣tention. A gaine, An Heretike is he which for loue of gaine or rule bringeth vp or followeth new opinions: Aug. lib. de vti∣lit. credend. First, the discouery of such as are vn∣stable & wauering minded, that they may  Final cau∣ses of here∣sie. be knowne and beare the shame of their lightnesse and inconstancy, to the terror of others. Secondly the manifestation of such as  bee constant and firmely rooted in the truth, which will not be shaken off and remoued from their steedfastnesse with euery wind and blast of false doctrine, 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must bee heresies also amongst you, that they which are appro∣ued Aug. cap. 8. de vera retigione. might be knowne. Heerewith agree∣eth that notalbe sentence of Augustine,
Let vs vse Heretikes, not to that end to ap∣proue their heresies, but that by defen∣ding the catholike doctrine against their deceits, we may bee more watchfull and wary: because it is most truly written, There must be heresies, that the tried and approued may be manifested and dis∣couered from the hollow hearts among you. Let vs vse this benefit of Gods pro∣uidence; for Heretikes be made of such as would erre or be naught, though they were in the Church: but being out, they profit vs exceedingly, not by teaching the truth, which they know not, but by stirring vp the carnal in the Church to seeke truth, and the spirituall Catholikes to cleare the truth. For there bee innumerable holy approued men in the Church, but they be not discerned from others amongst vs, nor manifested, so long as we had rather sleep in darkenesse of ignorance, then behold the light of truth. Therefore many are raised out of their sleepe by Hertikes, to see the day of God, and are glad there∣of. Thus farre Augustine. Thirdly, the punishment both of their  prid, which hold not the truth in humble∣nesse and loue, but were puffed vp with their knowledge, & of the prophanatiō of
some who not walking worthy the truth which they knew, therefore are deliuered vp to errours, and by strange delusions made to beleeue lies, 2. Thess. 2. 11. Finally, Gods glory: for while he seue∣reth  the chaffe from the corne, and vp∣holdeth his own in the truth, & punisheth the proud and prophane professor, and turneth mens follies and heresies to the good of his Church, all this maketh to the praise of his wisdome, goodnesse, power, and iustice. These be the ends of heresies in respect of God. But in respect of Satan the ends be, destruction of soules, and disturbance of the Church: and in respect of Heretickes themselues, their ends bee, the obtaining of dignity and honour, or else gaine and pleasure. Occasions be some discontentments vp∣on  Occasions of heresie. some disgrace or iniury done, or sus∣pected and supposed to be done. When proud Gospellers find themselues negle∣cted or not respected to their worth (as they think) others farre worse then them∣selues being preferred, when they are pas∣sed by; this occasioneth them to runne out of the Kings high way into by-paths of error, and forsaking the fold to single themselues into Hereticall companies.
Heresies worke in such as receiue them a loathing & contempt of Scriptures  Effects of heresie. and of Sermons: 2 an hatred of true prea∣chers which oppose vnto their heresies,  and disdaine of all sound professors,  e∣specially such as encounter their errours: 3 an execrable ouerweening of themselues:  4 a flat despising both of the iudgement &  censure of the Church of Christ: 5 an  ob∣durate and desperate stiffenesse in euill,  with a shamelesse impudency, besides those effects named, 1. Tim. 6. 4. as enuy, strife, railing, euill surmisings, vaine dis∣putations of men of corrupt minds, desti∣tute of the truth, thinking lucre to bee godlinesse. First, a cauilling with truth doubtfully  Symp∣tomes and signes of an hereti∣call spirit. vttered, which might by an ingenuous ho∣nest hearer be well taken. Secondly, contradicting of plaine and euident truthes, with a delight to gainesay them. Thirdly, subtilty in hiding their errone∣ous conceits, carying them in tearmes e∣quiuocall and ambiguous, especially when they deale with men of learning or auto∣rity which are able to espy them, or curbe them. Fourthly, a vehement desire to infect o∣thers,
or to draw many to be of their mind. Acts 20. 30. Fiftly, a desire of conference vnder pretence of taking satisfaction, but with  a purpose to vent their poison more free∣ly, and to get an opinion of knowledge and occasion of insulting. Sixtly, lying, shifting, now saying this, now denying it, facing out vntruthes,  outfacing manifest things, counterfeiting reconcilements. Seuenthly, profession of conscience, and that they would imbrace the truth, when  they shall see it; yet after demonstration of truth, stubburne perseuerance, yea and sometime boasting of reuelation, as if God had shewed them that neuer men saw before, eluding and scornefully tur∣ning off euident authority of Scriptures. To which I will ioine other marks out of Master Fulk & other authors: for I haue set downe the former out of my experience. Heretikes are known by diuision from More marks of heretikes. the Church, by diuision from among themselues, one from another, euery one from himselfe, and all from the truth: by taking to themselues new names and new masters: by inconstancy in doctrine; by loue and liking of themselues; by pride and vntolerable vaunting of their
owne knowledge aboue more learned men then themselues; by corruption of authors and of Scriptures. The proper marke of an Hereticke is to teach otherwise then the truth is, or contrary to that faith receiued from Christ and his Apostles. Also they boast of the spirit that they They boast of the spi∣rit without the word. haue it. They runne afore they are sent. They deceiue with hypocrisie and vaine words, Rom. 16. They are full of vaine glory. They vse meretricious and pain∣ted eloquence. As they teach new do∣ctrine, so they inuent new termes and speech. They be ignorant of Scripture, & yet vaunt great knowledge of Scripture. They contemne the iudgement of all lear∣ned and sound authors & teachers. They cōtrol the very text of scripture. They slan∣der such as study & seek to reforme them. Remedy against an hereticall spirit consists in meditations, practise, praier, and fasting. ALbeit I doe thinke authority to bee 9 Remedy or cure of heresie. either the onely, or best cure for him that is already an hereticke, yet such as naturally haue the seede of heresie, being
but prone to it, or they in whom the spaune is come, but to conception (the will hauing consented to an errour) there lacking nothing but obstinacy to bring errour vnto the birth of heresie, by this receit may happily (through Gods bles∣sing) bee kept from such a dangerous downefall, if now and then (namely when they obserue any inconstant fleeting in their iudgement, that they incline hastily to apprehend new opinions) they will inure themselues to take liking and con∣sideration of this prescript, or some such like of their owne. Assuredly any one of these meditations or practises following (through Gods helpe) wil preserue against errour that it roote not it selfe, but two or three remembred and practised wil doe it much more. Meditations. 1 ERror and falshood, is the image  and very likenesse of the di∣uell, Iohn 8. Therefore to be detested. 2 Truth, it is the ofspring of God, who is truth it selfe; it is part of Gods Image: therefore to be delighted in, Psal. 34. a God of truth. 3 Heresie is a worke of the flesh, Gal.
5. 20. The works of the flesh be, conten∣tions, seditions, heresies: therefore to be mortified. 4 Errours and heresies be grosse lies, and such are liers as hold them, yea they are liers against God: therefore to be a∣uoided. 5 Heresies proceede of filthy causes, as pride and couetousnesse (as wee haue said before:) therefore it is to bee abhor∣red. 6 Heresie leades men vnto eternall destruction: it is one of the grosse crimes which barre out of heauen, Gal. 5 20. therefore to be taken heede of. 7 God hath often and earnestly war∣ned men to take heede of heresies, char∣ging men very strictly to eschue al strange and false doctrines, yea all vaine dis∣putes and needlesse arguments, and what soeuer may occasion the falling into an errour, Rom 14. 1. 8 Jf a man which once held the truth leane to error, and being conuicted shall yet continue in his erroneous opini∣ons, and because he would not be thought to haue erred, shall therefore contumaci∣ously (against the light of the truth shining in his conscience) goe forwards in error,
and become an Heretike, such an one is subuerted, that is, he is as an house rui∣nous and ouerturned, which is not to bee repaired or built againe, Tit. 3. 11. there∣fore beware of heresie. 9 Hardly can a man grow to an here∣sie, but he will proue a seducer of others, and so grow from sinne to sinne, til he be∣come of a false professor, a false teacher. Of which we haue charge to haue him in such a detestation as not to bid him God speed: because not onely he beleeues not the truth, but brings an other doctrine, 2. Iohn. 10. 11. therefore fly heresie. Irae∣neus, Such as are corrupters of the truth, we may not so much as in a word com∣municate with them. 10 Many times Gods strange Iudge∣ments euen in this life, light vpon the heads of men giuen ouer to heresie, for example of others. Therefore feare to fall into heresie, lest Gods wrath fall on thee. When Iohn the Euangelist saw Ce∣rinthus, the heretike, in the bath with him, he suddenly skipt out, saying, he feared the bath would fall. 11 Consider that if yee make en∣trance Yeeld to one absurd opinion, into one error, yee shall open a dore for more: for one error neuer comes
alone, as one sinne neuer goes alone, but a thousand will follow as a gangren or canker, so is an errour, it doth by degrees take hold and corrupt the whole man in all parts and powers: therefore giue no place to any false do∣ctrine, which is as leauen that sowreth an whole lumpe of dow. 12 Ye cannot imbrace an error, but it will diminish your loue to the truth, which reproues your error, and to the brethren also, which dissent from your error; and what a matter it is to fall from your first loue, let the examples of the E∣phesians, Reu. 2. and Demas, 1. Tim. 6. also of Hymeneus and Philetus, 2. Tim. teach you. 13 The spirit of heresie is alwaies ac∣companied with the spirit of hypocrisie, and filleth men with subtiltie and dissi∣mulation, whereby they become the children of the diuell, Acts 13. 10. and 2 Pet. 23. 1. Tim. 4. 2. the first begotten of Satan, as Polycarpe called the heretike Marcion: therefore renounce all heresie. 14 The spirit of heresie is euer ac∣companied with the spirit of dishonesty; they that deny the faith, make withall shipwracke of conscience. An hereticke is a rancke knaue, saith Master Greenham,
therefore abandon heresie. Rules for practise. 1 COnuerse not with men which 1 haue the spirit of cauilling and contradiction, which is the forerūner of an hereticall spirit; this is dangerous, and in time you will become such as they are. Therefore auoid such, and ioine your selfe to them who professe the truth in loue, and doe reason of Doctrine sober∣ly, with desire to bee instructed, not with purpose of contention: for as in actions and manners men proue such as they be with whom they accustome themselues to liue: so in opinions men shall learne to thinke and iudge, as others doe with whom they vse to conferre and be fami∣liar. 2 Beware of reading hereticall writers, as Popish bookes, yea though there bee a counter poison prouided by a sufficient an∣swere: for such as being not well ground∣ed in their principles, and are of vnstedfast minds, will sooner be corrupt by an errour which they read, then confirmed in the truth; as one that is not of a staid life, is more easily made worse by a bad man, then
better by a good: some that is not stabli∣shed in iudgement, shall sooner sucke er∣rour from a papist, then truth from a Pro∣testant: therfore vntill your selfe can iudge of a fallacie in reasoning, or except ye haue some with you that can discerne of Sophi∣stication, do not aduenture vpon vnsound writers. Some beeing too hardy this way, haue ouerthrowne themselues and others. A thing proued. 3 Jf ye be tempted to errour by sugge∣stion of any lying spirit, in the mouth of any proud professor or Popish hereticke, after ye haue once protested against their errour, & haue in few words confessed the truth, which you hold according to the word, haue no further talke with them: Remember our grandmother Eue, who had taken no harme, if shee had stopped her eares against the Serpent, with whom while she entred parly, she tooke a blow which made her halt right downe, it being a deadly blow indeede. M. Luther giues counsell, not to conferre with an hereticke: it makes him proud, and doth endanger weake ones. Both which to be true, I am able to auouch out of experiment. 4 In your reading and hearing of any doubts, do not turne your doubts into o∣pinions,
nor make euery mans opinions your owne by hasty consent. but conferre with such as are learned and sound. Waite vpon God, who shall in good time reueale what is darke and secret, and cleare what is doubtfull, so ye bee desirous vnfainedly to know the truth, that ye may practise it in your life and conuersation. 6 If ye haue any measure of knowledge, remember that you haue receiued it, and that ye are ignorant of more then ye know: and therefore be not proud of it, for God resists such: neither keepe your knowledge for to furnish you with talke onely, or to direct you in externall dueties for reputati∣on sake amongst men; but apply it to the reformation of your heart and affections, being a door of the will of God; then yee shall be blessed with a discerning spirit, that ye may perceiue and see what doctrine is of God, as Iohn 7. 17. If any man will doe his will, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speake of my selfe. Furthermore, ground your selfe well in the principles of faith, thinke it no shame for you (if you be not already) to bee well catechised: for the beginning of the do∣ctrine of Christ being well learned, it will not be hard to discerne an errour; for that
which doth not agree to your fundamen∣tall articles, must needs bee a lie. Neuer shall any man be able to iudge soundly of an errour, who is not by catechising first well grounded in the truth. 7 Beware of priuate interpretations of 2. Pet. 1. 20. Scriptures; bring not your owne sense vn∣to the word, but submit to such sense as the word it selfe makes of it selfe: for Scrip∣ture is most safely interpreted by Scrip∣ture. Nehe. 8. Nothing is darkely spoken in any place, which in other places is not vttered most plainely. Aug. lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. 8 Suspect all priuate opinions which differ and dissent from the generall cur∣rent  of Doctrine, as it is taught and recei∣ued in the whole Church of God. The way of truth is a beaten and plaine way. A forme of praier for preseruation from false Doctrine. MOst mercifull God, the louer and A Praier. author of truth, and the auenger of all falshood and lies, I confesse my selfe (as all other men bee) to bee a lier, apt to bee deceiued, hauing no truth in me, but what I haue receiued by the enlightning of thy spirit. I beseech thee pardon mine igno∣rances,
and more and more enlighten my blindnes: encrease my little knowledge, settle my weake iudgement, giue me power to discerne of things that differ, make me able to descry an errour, and to detest it; worke in me a loue of thy truth, and cause me to abhorre all false waies. Bow mine heart to the obedience of the known truth, and blesse me with an humble and lowlie spirit, that thou maist teach me thy waies, and direct me in thy iudgements: Finally, for euer preserue me vpright, both in opi∣nion and in action: and gratiously deliuer out of errours, such of thine as Satan holds in his snares, euen for thy name, and for thy Christs sake: Amen. 13 If any be already possessed with an hereticall spirit, to earnest praier must bee ioined religious fasting, by such as will conceiue any hope to cast out this spirit: for it is a detestable, proud, and obstinate spi∣rit, which will not out but by praier and fasting. FINIS.
A SERMON OF SANCTIFICATION or new Creation. PREACHED ON IANV∣arie the first, beeing Newyeares day, in the Chapter house of the Cathedrall Church in Canterburie. LONDON Printed by William Hall for Nathaniel Butter, 1611.
To the right worshipfull Knight, Sir Moile Finch, and the Lady Elizabeth his wife, all grace be multiplied in Christ Iesus. THat any Christian, how meane so euer, should in sincerity loue the Lord Iesus, his word and Saints, it is a very, nay the onely good thing: but it is both good and rare, when persons in∣honoured by birth and blood, by great place and rancke in the common wealth, set their hearts vnfainedly to seeke God. For it is written, Not many mighty, not many noble are called; and yet such by the example of their zeale, prouoke many: as iniquitie when it accompanieth persons of authority, doth much more hurt, then if it be foūd in a priuate person: so godli∣nes in eminent persons is more powerfull
to draw others the more to like and fol∣low after. This was well seene in you (right worshipfull) when ye were our neighbours at Canterbury, and did go before your inferiours in diligent and re∣uerent hearing of the word, not onely at that time, but euer since the assemblies haue beene more frequented. The expe∣rience whereof, as also of your speciall re∣spect to my poore selfe, both then in time of my best peace, and afterward in my soul sorrow and trouble, wherin ye appro∣ued your selues towards me (as did some others) rather as parents then friends, (though I neuer durst looke for so much as your friendship, when I looked vpon my selfe so farre inferiour, so farre vn∣worthy) hath moued me to dedicate vn∣to you (till some better thing bee ready) this short Sermon, as some fruit of a thankefull mind: accept, read, consider, apply, practise, perseuere, that the God of trueth and mercie may crowne you in a blessed immortality. Yours euer to be commanded, T W
A SERMON OF Sanctification or new Creation. 2. Cor. 5. 17. Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. OVr Apostle in the begin∣ning Coherēce. V. 16. of the 16 verse, had affirmed that hee knew no mā according to the flesh. By the flesh hee meaneth such outward things, as draw respect or contempt after them with worldly men, amongst whom, riches, po∣uerty, honour, ignominie, eloquence, lear∣ning, ignorance, rudenes of speech, and such things are much and only regarded, holines and sincerity being with them of no account. I (saith he) do not thus know
and esteeme of other men, though some∣time hee had knowne Christ in this man∣ner, whiles hee was a Pharisie, before his conuersion, he reckoned nothing of him, because of his mean and contemptible cō∣dition in the world: yet now he did not so know Christ, in whom he beheld only spi∣rituall and celestiall things. Now in this 17 verse, he generally auoucheth that the Praecipua Christiani laus in sui abilegatio∣ne. Cal. in 3. Col. Ve. 17. chiefe praise of euery true Christian con∣sists in newnes of life: Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him bee a new crea∣ture, this new creature is the regenerate man, who alone hath place in the king∣dome and Church of Christ, wherein no∣thing deserues any commendation and e∣steeme, beside new birth. In this text now read, he proues his assertion by the testimony of the Prophets, who foretell that there shall be new heauens and new earth, to signify thereby, that by Christ being exhibited and sent, all things shall be turned into a better state, vntill the Saints come vnto the full felicity in hea∣uen. Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. This sentence hath two members, one, Old things are passed away: the other, All things are become Diuision. new. In the former we are to examine what
these old things bee: secondly, how they are passed away: and thirdly, what lessons and vses are to be made of this truth: like∣wise, in the latter member wee are to see what All things are meant, secondly, how they are become new, and lastly, what in∣structions for profit to be gathered. In Scripture I find, that old things are of three sorts. First, is the whole legall ser∣uice, Old things of three kinds. Priests and Priesthood, their gar∣ments, their Sacrifices and Sacraments, & all the leuiticall ceremoniall worship gi∣uen by Moses to the Iewes: yea, the very  Ceremo∣niall law. couenant of free saluation by Christ, clo∣thed wth these types, placed in ceremo∣nies, and propounded in darke prophe∣sies, is termed the old testament, by reasō of time and vanity: because that for old∣nes it is vanished away, euen as the dark∣nes of the night doth passe and giue place to the sunne arising in the firmament: so the shadowes of the Law did passe, when Christ the sonne of righteousnesse beeing dead and risen againe, did send forth his bright glorious light in the preaching of the Gospell by the Apostles, whereas these old types being to die, & truly dead In morte Christi le∣galia ter∣minantur. at the death of Christ, the vaile of the Temple then renting asunder, to declare
that the time of their passing away was come: yet for the infirmities of beleeuing Iewes, they were a certaine time continu∣ed after the ascension of our Lord, because God would haue his owne ordinances ho∣nourably buried, and the weaknes of his people charitably tolerated, and borne with, vntill they might bee established in the knowledge of their liberty by Christ Iesus. The old things of the second kind are  Tribulati∣ons. afflictions and miseries of this life, both such as bee common to the righteous and wicked, and such also as be proper to the godly, suffering for the testimony of Ie∣sus. These tribulations, as sorrow, weep∣ing, paine, crying, death, and such like are, Reuel. 21 5. called the first things, and their passing away is at the great and last day, when such euill shall wholy cease and be abolished to the faithfull, from whose eies all teares shall be wiped, and al things shall be come new vnto them, a new Ieru∣salem, a new name, new Sabbath, &c. The corruption of nature with all the wicked workes of our flesh, are also by the spirit in the word called the old man, the old Adam, old leauen, and old things. These be named old, partly because they
are now ancient, hauing beene in the world euer since the fall of our first pa∣rents: Originall corrupti∣on and all the deeds of the flesh Vtique Te∣stamentum vetus cum suis iustiti∣u carnis transijt, & nouum suc∣cessit. Musc. partly, because they are in the elect children of God before their new birth, who first are members of the first Adam and seruants of sin, ere they bee members of the second Adam, and made seruants of righteousnesse: albeit some interpreters will haue this text in part at least to bee meant of the Ceremoniall legall seruice & sacrifices, and of their passing and vanish∣ing, (which may bee was aimed at by our Apostle) yet considering his scope, ap∣peares to be this, to set forth and extoll the dignitie of the new creature, and the regeneration of the chosen, by the power of the holy Ghost in the preaching of the Gospell, was principally foreshewed in those titles of new heauens and new earth Cur in reg∣no Christi sola creatu∣ra noua lo∣cum habeat vaticinio prophetico ostendit. Prophetae enim cum de regno Christi lo∣quuntur, conferunt illud caelo nouo et ter∣rae nouae vt Esa. 65. & 43. quibus vaticinijs conditio pi∣oū in reg∣no Christi in hac vita, & status rerum post iudicium significatur Heming. Ea quae sūt vetustatus, qualia sunt peccata & somes ad peccandū. Caietan. Col. 3. 5. whereunto Paul in this text doth allude: therefore I do expound these old things of our sinfull nature, and the lusts thereof, which are said to be passed away in such as are new borne, because the blindnesse of their vnderstanding in things of God, and the peruersenes of their will beeing cha∣sed and driuen out of them, by the grace of Christ (as mists vanish at the breaking out of the Sunne) their mind and will are changed, the one enlightned to a cleare
distinct knowledge of God, the other bowed to the obedience of God: and al∣beit after this chāge, yet there is stil much ignorance remaining in the mind, errour in the iudgement, forgetfulnes in the me∣morie, dulnes and obstinacy in the heart and will, crookednes in the affections & manners, much oldnesse in the whole mā; yet these things are said to bee passed a∣way: partly, because the spirit hath be∣gun to mortify these old things all our corrupt lusts, and daily proceedeth in this worke, still somewhat reforming that old∣nes is left; and partly to teach both what at last shall bee due in euery one of Gods children, and what is the marke they are to leuell at in all their life: name∣ly, they ought to endeuour that these old things (euen whatsoeuer sticks be∣hind of the old man, of corrupt vnre∣generate nature) may passe a way and bee destoied: this then which hee saith of old things passing away, it is one with that in Romans 6. 6. The old man is crucified, the body of sinne is destroied, the earthly members are mortified, as if he should say, they which once did obay sinne in the lusts thereof, being vnder the dominion of sinne, wholly addicted to do the will and fulfill the desires of sinne, are
now so altered by grace, as they doe no more serue sinne, but striue and labour hard the death of their lusts: Old things are passed away. Now we haue heard what be these old things, to wit, our corrupt lusts and vices, and why these are called old, and how they are passed away: to wit, the sinfull desires and deeds of corrupt nature, are by little and little abolished in him, which  Lessons to be lear∣ned. is Christs by the mortification of the spi∣rit: Wee are to collect some instructions from hence to our edification. This first part then of our Text thus o∣pened, commends vnto vs a benefit com∣mon to all which belong to Christ: Se∣condly, a duetie which they are bound vnto by the obligation of that benefit: Thirdly, a strong motiue vnto that duty. Benefit.  The benefit is deliuerance, not onely from legall rites and seruices, which had in them much labour of body, and requi∣red much cost of the purse: but from their naturall corruptions, the guilt whereof as it passed from them by forgiuenes, so the power and tyrannie also begun to be de∣stroied by mortification: A benefit very great and exceeding pretious, and the more precious, being peculiar vnto the true members of Christ, who alone are
partakers of it. That whereas all other men being in Adam children of wrath, and seruants of sinne, they are still left in this fearefull estate, sticking in the clefts of their corruption, liuing in bondage vn∣to their lusts; when such as are in Christ, howsoeuer by the righteous iudgement of God they also were enthralsed to Sa∣tan, and vnder sinnes power; yet by the mercies of God, and the spirit of Christ Iesus, they are pulled out of that first sin∣full and wofull condition, that though they haue much oldnes of sinne still abi∣ding in, and cleauing to their nature, yet not so as that they should be now as be∣fore their regeneration, dead in sinnes, seruants to sinne, but they haue escaped as the condemnation and curse, so the rule and dominion of sinne. Further, desire and pronenes to sin is corrected, the strength of their corrupti∣on is abated and taken downe, their cor∣rupt lusts cannot lead them captiue as they were wont; beside the rebellious fierce∣nes of their affections is tamed and meek∣ned, the pride of their heart humbled, withall, their ignorant minds be enlight∣ned, their erring iudgements rectified, the sluggishnes and dulnesse of nature to all goodnes quickned: at a Word, their old
things are passed away, they are now no more the members of old Adam, the lims of Satan, the vassals to corruption, the ser∣uants of sinne, the bondmen of lust, the children of wrath: this is the benefit. It deserues thankfull acknowledgement & remembrance. The passing away of old legall ceremonies, in that Christians are freed from that burthēsome yoke of Mo∣ses law, is surely a great mercie, if men do rightly consider how combersome and how chargeable that kind of seruice was; but this mercie farre exceeds, that our cor∣rupt lusts are passed away, and wee freed from the deadly and damnable seruice thereof. The Apostle did thanke God on behalfe of the Romans for this benefit, Rom. 6. 16. Much more is euery Christian bound to do it for himselfe. But from the  Duety. consideration of the benefit, let vs passe to the duetie, which is this, that it must be the care and endeuour of euery true Cri∣stian throughout their whole life, to get their lusts and sinfull desires restrained & subdued, till they be whollie extinct and vtterly abolished: for our mortification is but in part, the holy spirit hath put in∣to none an absolute power against sinne, so as they should wholly bee without all
motion to sinne, this is a dangerous con∣ceit leading to a deadly downefall: for in the best men sinnes are but passing away. Indeed, the Scripture saith we are dead to sinne, Rom. 6. 2. and dead to the law, Rom. 7. 4. and the old man is destroied, Rom. 6. 6. and that the Saints are free from sin, yea, that such as are borne of God doe no Rom. 6. 21. 1. Iohn 3. sinne, as if by grace of new birth the god∣ly were wholly quite of their corruption of sin: whereas the intention of the spirit in speaking of mortification, as if it were already perfit; it is not only thereby to as∣sure the faithfull, that sinne can neuer re∣couer his former vigour and force which it had in their vnregenerate state, it being as a serpent that is crushed in the head, yet wriggles and moues with his taile, or as a souldier that had got a mortall blow in his braine, yet is able to stirre and thrust a little with his weapon, so it fareth with sinne, euen as with a man that lieth a dy∣ing, of whom we say he is dead, because he cannot liue long, and with a day which draweth toward night, whereof we say it is passed away, because it hastneth to an end, and shortly will bee passed: so the spirit affirmeth sinnes in the regenerate to bee dead and passed away, because they
are so inchoatiuely in a beginning, and shall be so consūmately & in perfection: But withall hereby is signified what mark the faithfull must striue vnto all their life time, namely, that by a continuall and daily mortification and resistance of their lusts, they may at last be cleane rid of thē: Hitherto tend those exhortations to such as haue the old man already killed, that Rom. 8. 13. they should by the spirit mortify the deedes of the flesh, and should not walke after the flesh, but abstaine from the lusts Rom. 8. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 12. of the flesh, and such like; which insinu∣ate two things: first, that some old things are still remaining vnpassed away, and se∣condly informe vs all of our duetie, which is, mightily to labour and fight against them, that they in the end may be vtterly rooted out of our nature: for as the work of mortification is on Gods part done and finished by degrees, so on our part it is eue∣ry howre and day, euery weeke, euery moneth, euery yeare to bee set forward, now slaying one sinne, now another, euer resisting them all: as an old rotten house is pulled downe peece after peece, part after part, not all together, and a field or garden full of weeds, are purged and clensed (as we see) one part after another:
so there is a Progresse in the worke of mortification, in which though some∣thing bee done daily and howrely, yet there will still bee worke enough for all ones life long; yea though it were so long as Methushalems, or as from Adam vntill the last man shall stand vpon the earth; so hard a matter it is wholly to conquer the armie of our lusts, and to draine out the ocean of our corrupt affections. Which as it reproues euen the best Christiās for the allowing so much of their short pilgri∣mage to things which profit not, negle∣cting this maine worke of the destruction of old things: and much more such as are wholly drowned in pleasures and profits of this world, neuer set themselues in ear∣nest about this businesse, contenting thē∣selues with outward profession and a ciuil life, suffering their afflictions & lusts, with full power to rule in them: So it admo∣nisheth these latter betime, without fur∣ther delay, and seriously without dalli∣ance, to set vpon this worke, studying to redeem the time, after the counsell of the holy Ghost; doing as they do, who hauing Col. 4. 4. in haruest time, or in a faire time foreslow ed the fore part of the day, therefore they double and increase their paines in the
latter part of the day: and it aduertiseth the former to quicken their care also and take time from other things which are vaine, to bestow about this most needful and tough worke; especially, con∣sidering that if it bee a hard labour to shake off but one sinne, to leaue one old fashion and custome, one old lust and affection, (as it is indeed, and such as trauell in this worke finde it so) let them therefore well waigh, what time, and en∣deauour, what groanes, praiers, watch∣ings, fastings and continuall strife it will require to purge out the old leauen, the whole lumpe of corruption and to ma∣ster all vnbridled desires. Blessed is the man which makes this his chiefe worke, or rather his onely worke, causing all o∣ther things which he doth priuately, or publikely, in his calling or in his seruice of God, to helpe hereunto; also wisely obseruing and applying all the works of Gods mercy and iustice towards him∣selfe or others, vpon persons or people, and all the word of God for the promi∣ses, commandements, threatnings, re∣bukes, to this purpose, euen for the bea∣ting downe of that rebellious vntamed flesh: which as it will not be brought vn∣der
in short space, so they bee no few or weake meanes, that Christians haue need of that they may thorowly mortifie the works thereof, which is a thing that much behoues them. Princes who haue many Subiects at once in armes against them, as they are carefull to appoint not euery one, but an expert, valiant Captaine for subduing and vtetr extirpation of them, and to allow sufficient, both men, muni∣tion, and other meanes for suppressing them, so they are highly displeased if there shall lacke endeauour in such as be trusted with the managing of their wars against their enemies: and reason too. Now let al men thinke vpon it, that how∣soeuer the things (the vices and sinnes I meane) which are to be pluckt vp by the roots and destroied, bee very many and haue the whole power of Satā to streng∣then them against you; yet God hauing giuen you his spirit into your hearts to be your Leader, Captaine and Generall, and afforded you such plentifull and powerfull meanes for the ouercomming of them, as the light of his holy word, so many precepts, reproofes, exhortations, cōminations, promises, and the light of
your conscience: so many inward checks, motions, & suggestions: also the benefit of brotherly admonition, corrections, iudgements diuers and dreadfull, bene∣fits and gifts spirituall and bodily, priuate and common, praier, Sacraments, &c. I say, hauing afforded so many helpes, if yet, his enemies, your sinful desires be not kept vnder and more and more slaine, that he cannot but bee highly offended, and prouoked, if not to the condemning and casting you out of his presence into euerlasting ruine, yet to inflict heauy chastisments and dreadfull strockes vp∣on you. Therefore let men bethinke themselues and fal to their duty more di∣ligently and carefully endeuering them∣selues to weaken & lessen their own cor∣ruptions, mightily setting themselues as against all and euery one of them, yet more chiefely against such sinnes, as by their complexions, or their trades, or the condition of times, they are most disposed and giuen vnto, which being taken downe and mastered, other euils will sooner be preuailed against. And for a further motiue to encou∣rage you thus to doe, let this be thought vpon, that the euill and vicious lusts
which yeare to destroy, they are here cal∣led (old things) which secretly and close∣ly whetteth our stomacks against them, it being a thing vsuall and reasonable to cast away things which grow to be old. There are other innumerable and weighty motiues, to hearten any man a∣gainst his remaining sinnes, and to set him in a loathing of them; namely, be∣cause they are against the holy Law of God, and offend his infinite iustice, and deface his glorious image, and deserue temporall and eternall curses, and doe defile the temple of the holy Ghost, are against our vow in baptisme, doe vnfit vs for his seruice; giue matter of ioy to Satan, and of griefe to our owne soule, make Gods blessings to bee turned into curses, good things into euill, his ordi∣nances to bee vnfruitfull to vs, yea our selues to be both vnprofitable and abo∣minable; and finally, were the proper causes of all that ignominy and torment which our blessed and innocent Sauiour felt incomprehensibly both in body and soule; yet amongst the rest, this is not the least, that therefore wee ought to a∣bandon and put far from vs, all wicked lusts; as wrath, anger, enuy, pride, co∣uetousnesse,
hypocrisie, infidelity, igno∣rance, hatred, fornication, adultery, drunkennesse, Idolatry, murther, here∣sie, and all such deedes of our corrupt narure, euen because these are old things, such as through time are become putrifi∣ed and rotten, good for nothing but to passe away. Such old things as by con∣tinuance haue not lost their vertue and beauty but retaine still their grace and goodnesse wee willingly retaine; therefore we with good iudgement pre∣ferre old wine to new, and chuse rather to trust to old friends then to new; but where things with the oldnesse haue lost both fashion and profitablenesse, we doe worthily passe by them, therefore wee refuse old ruinous houses, we detest old meat which is kept till it corrupt, old garments wee cast away, either vpon dunghils or vpon beggers. Now our lust being old, and with their oldnesse being corrupt, naught and vicious, therefore as we deale with old ragges, we doe in a loathing of them hurle them from vs; so we are by good reason much more to put off the old man, and with a detestation of them to suffer all old things to passe away: and it were to bee
wished that with the old yere these things might vanish and passe from euery one of vs, whatsoeuer oldnesse doth yet hang about vs. I therefore exhort tradesmen which v∣sed to gaine to themselues with the losse of others, selling bad ware for good, or bad and good together, all vnder the name of good, or whatsoeuer other sleights and deuiees there bee amongst them to draw commodity to themselues with the hurt of their neighbour, that ha∣uing found mercy with God to see and dislike such courses and begun to leaue them, if as yet they haue not thorowly forsaken them, to let them passe away because they bee old things they sauour of corruption. If any Officers of iustice, which in ministring of iudge ment, haue beene carried with respect of persons, or blinded with gaine, if be∣ing publike persons they haue neglected the common good, being too much ad∣dicted to their priuate, if any haue taken profit of mens sinnes, and sucked aduan∣tage out of iniquity (which the Scripture cals filthy lucre) and seeing their faults doe pupose an amendment, let them en∣deauour it, more and departing
from such practises, because they be old things which must passe away. If any Lawyers haue wittingly pleaded against truth; and when the cause was right in their knowledge, yet would set a good glasse vpon it with faire words, studying for their owne profit or credit, to put out the eies of iustice, and they perceiue this to be euill with a resolution to reforme it, let them be constant in their purpose to bid adew and giue a flat farewell to such old things, whose end is to perish and passe away. If any yong Gentelmen doespend their precious time in vaine imploiments, being like the Athenians, desiring to heare and to tell newes, lo∣uing the plaie-house aswell (if not better) then Gods house, and setting their heart vpon things which profit not, in stead of bestowing their time in study of the Scriptures, reading Chronicles, and Sto∣ries, to make themselues more seruicea∣ble to Common-wealth, and for gouern∣ment of their families: because these things are old, let them intend to leaue them, making choice of their recreati∣ons and keeping a mediocrity in them both for time and actions, that they may become fit for the chiefe things. If
any Gentlewoman and other women haue beene wont to bestow more cost and labour vpon their mortall bodies for the adorning of them, then vpon their immortal soules for the decking of them with inward graces: and haue their eies opened to see this to be a fruit of the old man, let them repent and turne vnto God, whith all their heart. Finally, if a∣ny which be Ministers of the word haue not fulfilled their Ministry, but with∣drawne the light of their example or do∣ctrine from their flockes, either in sub∣stance or degree, sowing spirituall things sparingly there where they liberally reape temporall, because all failings in duties are old things and comes of cor∣ruption, let them determine to set hand to plough and fall to the Lords worke wisely, walking before their peo∣ple in a perfect way. And generally, who∣soeuer haue in their course of liuing hi∣therto held fast any corruptiō in respect of the profit, pleasure, or worship which followeth it: let all such shake it off, and giue it a discharge: for it is certaine that we cannot liue in Christ, and yet walke after the flesh: Wee cannot haue part in Christ if wee nourish and keepe old
things. Wherefore let the wordling lay aside his couetousnesse and loue of mo∣ney: the malicious person let him re∣nounce his hatred and desire of reuenge: let the proud person pul downe his high conceit, casting away his peacocks fea∣thers: and the wanton his filthy dallian∣ces, and the lier his falshood, the swearer his customable oathes and cursed blas∣phemies: let the drunkard abhorre his excesse in drinking, and as any haue ser∣ued any lust, and obeied any sinne, let them (as they couet to haue any portion in the death of our Lord, or any praise in his Church,) denie themselues, whoso∣euer haue set their course of life by the directiō of the flesh, hauing no other guid of their way but sinfull nature, no other end of their way, but to please other men and themselues, because all this is old let it be striuen against till it bee passed cleane away. Remember ye haue often beene called vpon so to doe, out of this place and others. Many warnings haue beene giuen and yet there is too much oldnesse to bee seene amongst vs: well looke to it; for we know not whether e∣uer the Lord will vouchsafe to warne any more, whether we shall haue any space
of amendment further granted vs, or if God doe giue vs both time and admoni∣tion; yet if wee still stop our eares, it will be iust with God to shut his eares against vs, that as we refused his call, so when the houre of our iudgement comes he wil refuse to heare when wee call; Thus much of the first part of our text. Old things are passed away: it followeth. Behold all things are become new.] Here∣in we are first to declare the words, that the meaning may appeare, and thence to deriue instructions for vse. By Things, some vnderstand the things of Gods worship, all which are become new, in∣asmuch as (Christ being exhibited and offered) the old Testament, which was in ceremonies fading and passing away, the Testament became new, the Sacra∣ments new, the Church new, the religiō & doctrinenew, (as touching the forme and manner being more plaine and cleere) the Ministery new, all things became new in 2. Part. In eo qui est Christi omnia noua Junius. Hortatur Apostolus vs omnes sedulo stu∣deant in nouitate vitae ardon∣lissime ser∣uire deo, siquidem vere volunt esse christi∣ani. Illyricus in Glossa. Non crea∣turas intel∣ligit, sed quae in cre∣aturis qua∣litates. Iunius. the seruice of God. But fithence, as we said before, the Apostle speakes of persons which are in Christ, and be through his spirit renewed, and his maine drift is to extol new nesse of life and to exhort to it, therefore by [things] here we vnderstand
our soules and bodies; the powers of the one, and the organs of the other; not as they be creatures made of God, or sub∣stances created (for these remaine the same vnaltered) but the qualities which be is these creatures, as blindnesse in the vn∣derstanding, errour in the iudgement, forgetfulnesse in the memory, peruesenesse in the will and affections, obliquity and disobedience in actions, corruption in the whole man. Of these [things] the Apostle saith, They are become new, that is, hee which is in Christ is renewed as touching these things, there is powred into his blinde vnderstanding, a newe light of knowledge, whereby he knoweth the things of God, sufficiently, particularly and cleerely; his iudgement is renewed being enabled to discerne truth from er∣rous, his memory renewed and made strong, both to call good things to minde, and to keepe them in minde till occasion be to vse them: his will renewed, of per∣uerse and stubborne, become flexible: his affections renewed, being now set vpon things godly and heauenly, which before were set vpon euill works: his members renewed, and of the weapons of vnclean∣nesse and iniquity, are become weapons
of righteousnesse and holinesse. Finally, his conuersation and life renewed, there being begot in him new thoughts, new Ecce status noui Testa∣menti, se∣cundum quem in∣ternus no∣ster bomo renouari diciour. Caietanus. Noua facta sunt omnia, i. is qui est in Christore nouatus est per omnia. Iunius de Trinitate. purposes, new desires and motions, new counsels, new words, new works; of co∣uetous, fierce, proud, ambitious, enuious, vnchaste, intemperate, foolish, he is be∣come liberall, milde, humble, modest, charitable, chast, sober, graue and wise. Thus are all things become new, whiles the elect of God in his regeneration is re∣newed throughout (though not perfect∣ly) yet in euery part and power of soule and body. There is a change and happy alteration wrought, both within and with∣out, in the soule and body, in the minde, and manners: as all was corrupted by sinne, euen the noblest parts, our vnder∣standing and reason being poisoned with ignorance & error, in matters of saluation; at a word, as all was auerted & turned from God, nothing being whole from top to toe (as we say:) so in regeneration there is wrought a total change by grace of new birth, euery faithfull person being sancti∣fied throughout, his spirit, soule and body and all parts of his behauiour reformed, so as he can begin to please God in euery duty commanded him in the law and to
forsake euery sinne forbidden him therin. This is (in part) that new heauen and new earth prophesied of by Esai 65. This is that new heart and new spirit, which by Esay 65. Ezek. 11. 19. Ezekiel is promised, this is the new man and new creature, which our Apostle speakes of. Where this doubt is to bee re∣moued, how a Christian may bee called a new creature after his conuersion, and all things in him said to be new, seing there remains in euery regenerate person much oldnes, and in some more old then new, more euill then good. If the Apostle Paul a man so greatly renewed, yet did feele in himselfe flesh and spirit, a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind; yea so much flesh and corruption, as he confesseth he was sold vnder sin, and the good he would do he could not, but did the euil he would not; so seruing God in the mind, as in his members hee serued sinne, yea and complained, wretch and miserable man that I am, who shall free me, &c. How then fareth it with others, who come many degrees short of Paul in the grace of new birth? To this I answer, it is very true, that such as are most renew∣ed in this life, their old things are but pas∣sing away, not passed already (sauing in
sort as ye haue heard) and their newnes Facta sunt omnia noua hic quidem in choatine dum inte∣nus homo renouatur demum au∣tem consū∣mata. Caieta. is but a renewing, an act which continu∣eth all their life long: so done, as it is still adoing, there being no man liuing, can say his heart is cleane, he can liue without sinne: for it is with euery regenerate per∣son, as with the aire at the dawning of the day, when there is in the aire darkenesse thorow out, and light thorow out in euery part of the aire, & as in a cup of wine ming led with water, which is not halfe water, halfe wine, but wholly wine and wholly water; so it fareth with the children of God, after new birth, sinne and righte∣ousnes, grace and corruption, mingled to∣gether in the whole man, a regenerate man being both old and new at once, not halfe old, halfe new, but old thorow out, and new thorow out: yet hee is in the phrase of Scripture called not old, but new. The denomination or name being giuen of that which is most excellent in him, as a Noble man, who is bailiffe of Westminster, and Lord Treasurer of Eng∣land, Denomina∣tio qui praestantio∣rem partē. he hath his appellation and title of the more worthy office, and a man which consists of body and soule, he is named by that part which is the better. Therefore we vse to say, Lazarus is in Abrahams
bosome, and Abraham is in heauen, be∣cause the soule is there: so it is here, that new qualitie of holines giuen in regene∣ration (which succeeds that old corrupti∣on of sinne) it beeing the more eminent thing, and of greatest value, (though it be lesse in quality) yet the name is giuen to a man sanctified, according thereunto. For an elect person after his conuersion, is ne∣uer termed as before, a sinner, the old man, an enemy to God, vngodly, vnlesse when hee humbleth himselfe before the throne of grace, in a voluntary confession of guilt (as the Publican, God be mercifull to me a sinner) but be called saints, righ∣teous, good, holy, godly, & new creatures, as here. The words being thus explained, we are to passe vnto obseruations. Three things are to bee obserued for The bene∣fit of a blessed change. our instruction in this latter part of the sentence. The first is the benefit of a bles∣sed change wrought in all Gods elect, from oldnes vnto newnes, from corrup∣tion vnto grace. There is nothing besides God himselfe, but it is subiect to change; there is a change in the weather, frō faire to foule, and from foule againe to faire: from tempest to calme, and from calme to tempest: in the sea by ebbing & flow∣ing:
in the sky, it being sometimes clow∣die, sometimes brightsome and cleare: in mens bodies from strength to weaknesse, from health to sicknes, and contrariwise: in mens ages there is a change, whiles we passe from infancy to childhood, from childhood to youth, from youth to mid∣dle age, from middle age to dotage, and from thence to the graue: also in mens estates, some of rich being suddenly made poore, and of poore being suddenly made rich: some raised from the dunghill to sit in the throne with Princes, others cast downe from their seats to lie in the dust with beggars: in kingdomes and com∣mon wealths there is a change too, of Princes, of lawes, of gouernments: there is a change of seasons and times, winter turned into sommer, and sommer againe turned into winter, the day giuing place vnto the night, and the night vnto the day: the old yeare passing, and the new yeare succeeding: finally, the whole world shall bee changed euen as a garment, so shal God change thē, heauen and earth, & there shall bee new heauens & new earth. And as in all things created there is a change, so the elect of God in respect of their spirituall estate, doe meet with sun∣dry
changes: first, they were changed frō innocency vnto corruption, being made righteous and blessed in Adam by creati∣on, through his fall they became sin∣ners, seruing diuers lusts and pleasures, & children of Gods wrath, obnoxions to his iudgement. Secondly, they are changed by the spirit of Christ, from sinne and mi∣serie, vnto righteousnes and life, their ini∣quity being forgiuen them as touching the guilt and condemnation, and beeing corrected and cured as touching the pow∣er and dominion of sinne: they haue Gods image of righteousnes and true holinesse restored vnto them, and another and new nature as it were, being created in them: they begin to know God & put confidēce in him, as in a louing father, they vnfained¦ly loue him, and his word and his chil∣dren, they seriously feare him, and walke in his commandements, leading a pure and vnblameable life, as becomes new creatures. After this change there followeth ano∣ther, which is a change from grace to glo∣ry, from vnperfit sanctification to perfect glorification, when all oldnes beeing vt∣terly done away, all things shall be come absolutely new. In these changes the re∣probate
partake with the elect in the first onely: for being made righteous in Adam by his disobedience, they were made sin∣ners and accursed. Thus they change once from the better to the worse, but af∣ter that, they neuer make more changes; as the Psalmist saith of al the wicked, that they know no change, they sticke still in the corruption of their nature, in the clefts of their sinne, growing still vpon the rot∣ten stocke of old Adam, being still dead in trespasses and sinnes, walking after the flesh, and bringing forth fruit to death. True it is, that many reprobates that liue in the Church, especially vnder a sound and constant ministerie, they haue a cer∣tain change wrought in thē, being before ignorant and prophane; they receiue the truth taught them into their minds, they acknowledge the truth which they doe vnderstand: they ioy in it, they forsake the filthinesse of the world; they cleaue to good ministers, they shew loue to their persons and doctrines, they shew a liking to good things and good men, they a∣mend many things in themselues, they call vpon others for reformation of life: finally, their house is swept and garnished (as the Scripture saith) and yet this chāge
it is without change, their old things are not passed away, all things are not be∣come new in them: it fareth with them as with men who being much in the sunne, they are by the continuall shine and heat thereof, somewhat discoloured and of a tauned hew, but not pure and perfit black: so it is with many professors, be∣cause the sonne of righteousnes Christ Ie∣sus, in the beams of his gospell, hath long shined vpon them, therefore they are altered and changed from that they were, not with a thorow and effectuall change, but with a light and sleight change. Hence it is, that in the good things, which they do, being not led by the spirit, they haue not faith for the ground of their actions, nor the word of God for their rule, nor Gods glory for their marke: their works proceed not from a good conscience, a pure heart, and faith vnfained, but from selfe-loue, out of a desire to please them∣selues and others, and to gaine credit a∣mongst men, or to auoid worldly shame, or for reward sake from God, or such like sinister respects. Likewise, whereas they forsake and leaue many of their sinnes, it is not because they hate and abhorre sins, as they be the offences of a good God, the
breaches of his iust lavves, and the cau∣ses of his sonnes bitter death: but it is ei∣ther the feare of iudgements from God, or their respect of reputation from men, keeps them from running into such ex∣cesse of riot as other men doe: It faring vvith them as it doth vvith a field or gar∣den, vvhere the tops of the vveedes are nipt off, and the roots left sticking in the ground: or as it doth vvith a running brooke, where the streame is damd and dried vp, but the spring head is not stopt and dammed; and therfore in those fields the weeds will rise vp as fast as before, & in those brookes the channell will bee as full of vvater as afore: so it fareth vvith these men, they haue externall piety, and labour to suppresse the outvvard act of sinne, being free from vnhonest words & deeds; but the roote of sinne is not mor∣tified and killed, the affections of the flesh are not mortified and crucified, the heart was neuer framed to sound faith & loue: therefore in processe of time, they do fall from their righteousnes, and returne with the dog to their vomit, and with the sow to their wallowing in the mire, their lat∣ter end being made worse then the first. Seeing then this blessed change which
is by the grace of new birth, is proper to the elect, and is no where found, but in them which are become one with Christ: it is therfore no hard thing by this change to iudge of our election in Christ, and of our vocation to him. Whosoeuer they be, which do find in themselues the strength of sinne broken, and hauing still corrup∣tion in them, are yet deliuered from the tyrannie of it, not obeying sin in the lusts thereof, but hating and striuing against those sinfull affections and waies, which they were wont to embrace and follow: also louing and practising those dueties of christianity, & of their particular callings which they were wont to loath, or to doe for fashion sake onely, studying to please God in one duety, as well as in another, leauing one sinne as well as another, and finally, accounting this the chiefe honour of a christian, to deny himselfe, to morti∣fie his lusts, and to liue vnto God, estee∣ming all other things which are without renewing in Christ, whether it be riches, honour, learning, eloquence, birth, nobili∣ty, to bee no better then losse and dung: these who are thus reformed, haue an e∣uidence which cannot deceiue them, that they are in Christ, his very true members,
sonnes, and daughters of God, and heires of heauen, because they are new crea∣tures: for to be in Christ and to be a new creature, are (termini conuertibiles) terms which mutually and reciprocally are affir∣med one of the other: for as he that is in Christ is a new creature, so hee that is be∣come a new creature is in Christ, he that is a true Christian, is new borne; and who∣soeuer is new borne, is a true Christian: contrariwise, if no new creature, then as yet no true Christian. This is infallible & most certain. Hauing thus farre spoken of the  Duty. benefit, in the next place wee are to consider of a duetie which is taught vs from this latter part of the sētence, name∣ly this, that such as are effectually renew∣ed and changed, being but vnperfitly re∣newed, are bound therefore to profit dai∣ly, and grow in newnes of life, encreasing from knowledge to knowledge, from grace to grace, from strength to strength, till they become wholly new. As in other things, there is an increase and growth, yong plants become tall trees; fruits, as figs, grapes, being at first little they waxe till they come to their due ripenes & big∣nes; Lambs grow till they bee sheepe, calues till they be oxen, and infants till
they be men: so in Christianity there must be a progresse from one measure of holi∣nesse, of wisdome, of loue, of feare, of o∣bedience vnto another, vntill we become perfect, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. They therefore which thinke they may be Christians and stand still at one stay, de∣ceiue themselues. For in our Christian profession if we be not proficients, we be deficients, we goe backward except wee goe forward: all our graces are but sha∣dowes of graces, except they continue and increase: and our obedience is but coun∣terfeite, except it daily grow better and stronger: If we be true Christians it will be with vs, as it was with Christ our head, who grew as in stature, so in wis∣dome & in grace. What numbers of men doe beguile themselues, whiles looking vpon other men, whom they see to bee more ignorant and lesse reformed then themselues, they are straightway perswa∣ded that they are in good case because they be better then others be? whereas in truth they are neuer in good case, nor in the estate of true Christians, til they migh∣tily striue to exceed themselues, labou∣ring to liue better to day then we did ye∣sterday,
to doe more good this yeere then we did last yeere, and as wee increase in yeeres to increase in wisdome and good∣nesse, giuing all diligence heereunto, so 1. Pet. 1. 5. 6. to ioine vnto our faith, vertue; vnto ver∣tue, knowledge; vnto knowledge, tem∣perance; vnto temperance, patience; vn∣to patience, godlinesse, &c. That these things may both be and abound in vs. Lastly, for our better incouragement to  Motiue to exercise & increase in godli∣nesse. pursue and follow after these vertues, wee are to consider that these are the things which our text calleth [New.] New things we know are as a Load-stone to draw our loue toward them. Mans nature is desi∣rous of new things, and mans reason pre∣ferres things that are new; and the heart of a man renewed must the rather imbrace and exercise righteousnes and holy words and workes, because they are new things, being works of the new man, and the way wherein wee are to walke vnto the new Ierusalem which is aboue. Many and weighty bee the motiues, which may put heart into all Christians, continually to study how to please God more and more, and to liue better and better:  as first, that it is the will and com∣mandement of God that wee should so
doe.  Also it greatly tendeth to the glory of his name,  to the honour and credite of the Gospell and of our profession,  to the testifying of our faith,  to the sealing vp of our election,  to the comforting and con∣firming of the godly brethren,  to the con∣founding  and grieuing of Satan and the wicke.  Finally, Gods benefits priuate and publike,  his works of iustice in cor∣rections and punishments,  our vowes and promises, secret and open;  the feare of hell, the hope of heauen,  the loue of the Father, the grace of the Sonne,  the com∣munion and comfort of the spirit; all and euery one of these are so many obligati∣ons and bonds to tye and bind vs to bring forth the fruits of new obedience more plentifully: yet this is not the least induce∣ment heereunto, euen the title of new things, which is by the holy spirit put vp∣on these fruits, to admonish and excite vs that as in other matters we loue and like newnes, as new houses, new furniture, new vestiments, new vessels, new books, new plate, &c. so we should prouoke our selues to affect aboue all things to loue a new heart, a new spirit, a new life and conuersation. Iudge you how vnsuteable it is that all things about you being new,
your selues onely should not be new? that wee should be pleased to haue our face, our hands new washed, our hat, our gowne new, our band, our shirt our shooes new, and yet our heart and our manners still to remaine old? To conclude there∣fore, let this text, and let this title and time admonish you to put on the new man, to be renewed in the spirit of your minde, resoluing herein to doe otherwise then yee were wont to doe, which is to say, when the new yeere comes about, yet still to like and to keepe your old fashions and customes, your old courses and con∣conditions, to bee the same that yee had beene, to goe from Sermon to dinner, and hauing well eat and drunke, to fall to play and sport, and then to returne to your old steps wherein yee walked in the yeere before, as though yee were already be∣come so good as yee could not be made better, as if yee did release onely old things, and that new things were out of taste with you. My brethrē, this would not be so; and that it may not be so, let vs pray God, with the new yeere to giue vs new hearts, and new mindes, and such mea∣sure of his grace, that we may endeauour to doe more duties and better duties then
euer wee haue done. For Christianity is like a great building wherein a man must proceed by degrees: first, to lay the foundation, then to reare the walles, after∣ward to set vp the roofe, and lastly, to trim it. Such a building as is stately and large, it may be begun this yeere and not ended in seuen yeeres following. We say in our common Prouerbe, that Rome was not built in a day: so I may say of Christi∣anity, it is a worke which will aske much time and great labour: for besides the dai∣ly decaies and wracks which we suffer by the malice of Satan, corruptions of our owne hearts, and of the times which are continually to bee made vp and repaired by renewed repentance; there is also a great deale of worke behinde, much wanting of perfection, much oldnesse to be corrected and cast off, and much new∣nesse to be followed and striuen vnto, and therefore all praier, care, endeauour wat∣ching and whatsoeuer else wee may doe, will bee found little enough to bring our building to perfectnesse. Yet we haue but a little time remaining, the number and terme of life our drawes to a period a pace; so much the more heede and diligence is to be giuen and vsed, that our remnant
daies which are to come bee rightely im∣ploied to the best furtherāce of our selues in holinesse of life: especially knowing that our labour in the Lord shall not bee in vaine. For there is a crowne of im∣mortall glory laid vp in the heauens for all which striue hard toward the marke. To which he bring vs which made vs, for his merit that redeemed vs, through the leading of that spirit which sanctifies vs, the Father, Sonne, and Spirit: to whom bee all parise and honour, both now and foreuer heere∣after. Amen. FINIS.
A SERMON OF THE SPIRITVALL Combat, betweene the two Lawes of sinne, and of a mind renewed by grace: OR, OF THE STRIFE BE∣tweene the flesh and the Spirit, preached in S. Georges in Canter∣bury, Aug. 8. 1609.
TO THE TWO right vertuous and Chri∣stian Gentlewomen, his wor∣shipfull friends, Mistres Anne Paramor and Mistres Mercy Breet. WHen I had finished this short Sermon, touching the spiritual combate, betweene grace and re∣maining sinne, amongst all my Christian friends, I thought of you two as fittest, in whose name I might publish it to the world. For I called to minde how you had beene exercised in this battle, betweene the flesh and the spirit, betweene grace and corruption: Though all your daies haue beene daies of peace outwardly, yet yee haue abid a
great fight of afflictions within: as Re∣becca selt a strife in her wombe, the two twinnes strugling together: so you haue felt in the wombe of your heart a bitter and tough combate betweene the old man and the new. There be a great number of Christians in the world very like those Israelites whom wee read of in Iudges 3. That they knew not all the warres of Canaan: I say likewise, of innumerable Gospel∣lers, they be vtterly vnacquainted with all the warres of Christians, being at a league with iniquity and hell, they neuer strooke stroke against sinne and satan, but full many for them. It is farre o∣therwise with you: For euen as it is said of Dauid, that hee was a man of warre and did fight the Lords battles: so (though yee be a paire of weake women) yet your hands haue beene taught to war and your fingers to fight; you haue and that valiantly fought, and still doe fight the Lords battle against the whole host of your sinnes, vnder your Captaine and
Generall Christ Iesus, who as once in himselfe, so now in you (as in all other his members) is still more then a Con∣querour ouer the power of Satan and sinne. Dauid prospered not better in his warres, then you haue done in yours, through the power of Christs might. Heerein yet are yee vnlike to that godly King, that his warres hindered him so as he could not build a Temple to the Lord: this worke required times of peace, and a man free from such distractions as ac∣companie warres. But in the midst of your bickerings and hot skirmishes you haue had the mercy from God to build him a Temple, euen a spirituall house, your bodies and soules, being the habita∣tions for his honour to dwell in, where he maketh his mansion by his spirit which is in you, aad delighteth to rest there, en∣abling you to endure the combate with your soule-enemies, furnishing you with that cōpleate harnesse, instructing you to the right vse of your weapons, framing
your hearts graciously to repentance vp∣on fals and wounds receiued in the fight, raising you vp and renewing your strength and courage daiely. And fi∣nally making you fruitfull in euery good worke to the praise of his owne name; of whom it is ye haue both the will and the deed, both meanes to doe much good, and a minde to imploy your talent to the best aduantage for your Lord. Giue God the glory, & hold on in your course, wor∣king out your saluation in feare and trembling; so being humbled and made afraid by sight of your inbred corruption and great infirmities, as that yee looke vp to Christ with the eie of faith, and in confidence of his might bee bold and couragious. Finally, fructifie in all good works, as trees planted by the Riuers of water, doe bring foorth mature and sea∣sonable fruit, and as they who be plan∣ted in the house of God, still flourish like a greene Oliue, and bring footh more fruit in your age, standing firme and vn∣remoueable
as Cedars of Libanon, knowing that your worke in the Lord shall not be in vaine. To whose protecti∣on I commit you. Yours in all duty, T. W.
A SERMON OF the Spirituall Combat. Rom. 7. 22. 23. 22 For I delight in the Law of God concer∣ning the inner man. 23 But I see another law in my members rebelling against the law of my minde, & leading me captiue vnto the law of sinne. THe third part of this Chapter beginning at the 14 verse, containeth a description of the spirituall cōbat, which is in euery regenerate man, set forth in the person of Paul himselfe, who in the ver∣ses before our text, hath propounded and acknowledged these things. First, that he
was sold vnder sinne: that is to say, that Verse 14. he was in part subiect vnto sinne. Second∣ly, for proofe of this, he hath affirmed two things: first, that the desire of his heart was to doe that good which the law re∣quires, which hee expresseth in these v. 15. termes, He would do good, he would not do euill, he consented to the law that it was good, to will was present with him. v. 16. Secondly he affirmeth, that he was so hin∣dred by sinne, that hee could not doe his owne will and minde: this hee expresseth in these termes, He did the euill which he hated, euill was present vvith him, and sin ver. 14. dwelt in him. Next the Apostle openeth his matter by a distinction, vvhich is this: ver. 21. ver. 20. ver. 17. so farre as he was renewed, hee willed the thing that was good, but so farre as hee was vnrenewed, hee willed that which was euill. Now in this presēt text we haue a further explication of this spiritual conflict, which Ver. 22. 23. Coherēce. is more fully and plainely deliuered; for in the 22 verse hee saith, that his inward man delighted in the law of God, which is more then to will that which is good, for it is to wil it with a great and feruent plea∣sure in it, and in the Law which commā∣ded it. Againe, hee saith, the law of his
members rebelles, &c. Which is more then to will and to doe euill: for it is as much as to will and do euill with a strife, to bring the whole man vnder the gouern¦ment of sinne, so as this text containeth two parts. Diuision.  1 First, the oblectation or delight, which a renewed mind taketh in the law of God, rightly vnderstood. 2 Secondly, the reluctation and fight  which sinne maketh against the gouerne∣ment of the spirit in the mind of a renew∣ed man. I delight in the Law of God] The Expositi∣on. words are first to be expounded, then the doctrine to be gathered and applied. [In the Law] By the Law he vnderstandeth the Law. morall Law or ten cōmandements, which reuealeth the will of God touching due∣ties to be done to God, to our selfe & our neighbour, as appeareth by this reason; because vnto this law hee opposeth the law of his members, and the law of sinne, which is most opposite and contrary vn∣to the morall law. Againe, the instance in the 7 verse of this Chapter taken out of the morall law, and that testimony gi∣uen to the law, that it is spirituall, ver. 14. proueth that in our text, and thorowout
this Chapter hee speaketh of the morall law. By the inward man, some infected with heresie, and some of weake capacity, vnderstand onely that part of our soule which is rationall, called the mind, or the vnderstanding: whereas by the inward man in the phrase of the Apostle, is signi∣fied the whole man, euen whatsoeuer is within him, or without him, his mind, his will, his flesh or body, so farre forth as they are renewed by grace: and so much as is not renewed either in soule or in body, in Pauls language, is termed the outward man. And this is to be noted in this ar∣gument of sanctification, that in the stile of Scripture, the termes, the termes, the old man, sin, the flesh, the outward man, the law of sinne, the body of sin, the body of death, are equiualent and import one thing, that is, all that which in the child of God is vnregenerate. Likewise these words, spi∣rit, grace, nevv man, the lavv of the mind, inner man, are synonyma, and do signifie so much as is regenerate either in the soule or bodie. The reason vvhy the regenerate man is called the invvard man, is because his pleasure is placed in forgiuenes of sinnes,
righteousnes, holines, and other spirituall graces and blessings, vvhich are invvard things, hidden from the men of this world: and the reason why that vvhich is vnregenerate is called the outward man, it is because it altogether taketh pleasure in riches, pleasures, honours, goodly shevves, and such other things, as be out∣ward, Sinne. sensible and earthly. Looke how much our delight is these in things, so far, and so much we are carnall and outward. Now then when the Apostle saith he delighted in the law of God in the in∣vvard man, it carrieth this sense, that he did vvith cheerefulnes in his soule and bo∣dy, and the povvers thereof, both know and practise the vvill of God declared in his morall lavv, according to the measure of grace giuen him. This verse then affordeth vs a marke of a regenerate person, vvhich is this, that  the lavv of God, though it discouer his sinnes, and denounce iudgements against them, and enioine him much vvorke full of labour and difficulty; yet it is very de∣lightfull vnto him, and his heart taketh great pleasure in it. The lavv to an vnre∣generate man is hatefull, because it vtte∣reth and threatneth those sinnes vvhich he
loues, and commandeth such dueties which he hates: but a person regenerate which hath begun to hate his sinnes, and to loue godlines, doth reioice and delight in the law, not onely because it sheweth him the good way, but euen in this very respect, that it doth reueale and rebuke his sinnes, that hee may bee driuen vnto Christ to lay faster hold on him. The proofes of this must bee fetched Scripture. from the testimony of Scripture, & from reason grounded vpon Scripture, and la∣stly, from experience of persons regene∣rate. In the first Epistle of Iohn 4 it is thus written, They that be of God heare Gods word. In the Gospell of Iohn 10. My sheepe heare my voice, saith Christ, that is to say, willingly they heare it with delight in it, and loue to it: for thus the sheepe heare the whistle, and call of their shepheard. Great reason haue the children of God  Reason. thus to be affected towards Gods word: for the word euen of the law, though it be not the seed whereof they are begot∣ten; yet it is that sincere milke whereby they are nourished vp, as 2 Pet. 2. 1. They haue reason therefore to take delight in it, as yong children in the sucke of their
mothers breast. Againe, the law, though it be not that light which enlightens their eies to see Christ, yet it is a light to direct their steps, and a lantern to guide the feet of such as be already come vnto Christ: and therefore it is delightfull to them as naturall light is to the bodily eie, of him especially who hath long beene detai∣ned in darknesse. Moreouer, if natural men be delighted with goodly pictures, well and artificially drawne, no meruaile, if the spirituall man bee delighted with the law, which is a most absolute image and portraiture of a righteous and iust person: yea the law, it is the very image of God himselfe, and as a glasse wherein his perfit iustice is to be seene: Besides, there is cause enough to delight in the law, in as much as though it teach not the meanes how to be saued; yet it doth chalke out the true way where∣in they are to walke which shall be saued: It is the rule of a good life, though it bee not the cause of eternall life, albeit it doth not giue vs faith and remission of sinnes; yet by giuing vs a fuller and clearer in∣sight into our seuerall sinnes and wants, that wee may the better perceiue what need we haue of Christ, how much we are
beholden vnto him, and stirred vp more earnestly to beg the benefit of his grace, as well for reformation as for remission, euen this were sufficient reason to moue all godly persons to take great delight in it; yea, if there were no more in it but this, that it was the Schoolemaster that displed them, and droue them to Christ.  Experi∣ence. If we will now hearken vnto experience, it will tell vs how much the godly in all times haue beene delighted with the law of God Ieremie the Prophet he saith: Thy word O Lord, it is my ioy. The Prophet Dauid, as if hee had lackt words to ex∣presse his loue and delight in Gods law, saith, O how do I loue thy statutes, how deare are thy testimonies vnto me. Psal. 119. It will be worth our consideration to marke by what similitudes his delight in the Law of God is declared vnto vs: They are dearer to me (saith he) then thousands of gold or siluer, Psal. 119. more to bee desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then hony and the ho∣ny combe, Psal. 19. 10. It is knowne that great is the pleasure that our tast and palate findeth in the hony and the comb, and that it is no small delight that the worlding taketh in seeing and fingering
his gold, especially when it is of the finest; yet such and so exceeding great is the de∣light and pleasure which godly Dauid tooke in Gods Law; which he accounted as his heritage and portion for euer. Psal. 119. Grounds and farmes if they come vnto vs by inheritance from our parents, giue vs not a little delight and content∣ment. Now Gods children they are so delighted with the law, as if a great por∣tion or heritage had befallen them. A∣gaine, I delight in thy law, as one that fin∣deth a great spoile (saith the Prophet:) an∣other similitude taken from Souldiers, who after victory obtained, diuide the spoile with ioy, especially if it be a great spoile and a rich one. And as it was with Dauid the father, so it was with Salomon his sonne: for they both had the same spi∣rit of grace, working in them the like de∣light in Gods law: for as appeareth by his booke of Prouerbs, it was neither siluer nor gold nor pearle, nor precious stone, nor ought else whatsoeuer mans heart could desire, that hee valued and loued as hee did the wisedome of Gods law: and to be short, we haue blessed Paul the paterne of a regenerate man, prote∣sting Rom. 7. 13. 14. his consent to the law, & his delight in
it, as in a thing that is good, holy, & iust. Now that which Peter saith of faith in the gospell, that all beleeuers haue the like precious faith, that may truly be affirmed of delight in Gods law, that all the rege∣nerate haue like ioy in it. Like delight (I say) not equall delight, of such qualitie, though not so much in quantity; the spi∣rit of regeneration framing the hearts of all the faithfull to delight truly in the law of God, though not so feruently one as a∣nother. And if the godly are delighted with the law, how much trow you are they delighted with the gospell? if their delight be such in the word of comman∣dement, what is their delight in the word of promise? if they take pleasure in the word that rebukes sinne, what may be the pleasure (thinke you) that they take in the word that forgiueth sinne? if the pre∣cept bee ioious to vs which inioines vs vvorke, hovv ioifull is the doctrine which offereth grace? when there is that sweet∣nes in the law, which can bring vs no fur∣ther then to see the need wee haue of Christ by opening to vs our sinne and mi∣serie; how hony-sweete is the gospell which is the power of God to saluation, to all that beleeue? If the glasse please
vs which shewes vs our spots and shame; oh how will that mirrour please vs that transformes vs into that Jmage of God from glory to glory, as by the spi∣rit of Christ! O how comfortable is the salue and medicine that heales the wound of conscience, when the instru∣ment that openeth and makes vs to see & feele the wounds, proues so delightfull Finally, how should not the tidings of peace and good things breed glad∣nesse, when the word of feare and terror makes glad the inward man of Gods children? From this delight which the The de∣light also in Ministers for the vvord sake. A discriptiō of a true Minister. regenerate haue in the whole word of God, springeth the delight which they haue in the Ministers and interpreters of that word, which labour in the word and doctrine, and like faithfull and wise Stewards giue to euery one in the familie their portion of meat in due season, milke to babes, strong meat to such as haue their senses exercised in the word, taking care of the whole flock, feeding it not by constraint, but of a rea∣dy minde, liking better of the worke and duty, then of the benefit and dignity of the ministry. O how beautifull are the very feete of such, to all such as loue the
Lord Iesus, and his word in sincerity. A mans eie is a deare and precious part, yet would the Galatians (as infirme and weake as they were) haue pluckt out their very eyes and haue giuen them to Paul that begot them in the word, yea they esteemed of him euen as of the An∣gel of God, euen as of Christ Iesus. The precious life of man is more worth then all the comforts of life, yet such was the delight and loue which Priscilla and A∣quila bare the same Apostle, as for his life they would haue spent and lost their owne. Rom. 16. 4. What should I speake of the Christians at Damascus and at Phi∣lippi, how willingly they parted from their goods and hazarded themselues for their teachers, Act. 9. Phil. 1. And as the Ministers of God for the word sake, so for the same cause Gods Sabbath is de∣lightfull and deare to Gods children, they long for it before it comes, and they cheere vpon it in their hearts, when They de∣light in Gods Sab∣bath. it doth approach, and sanctifie it with some measure of alacrity and comfort when it is come. The men of this world haue not more ioy and gladnesse in the daies of their vintage and haruest, then Gods children haue in the Lords day.
we may take a scantling of their delight and comfort which they haue in fre∣quenting the Lords house on the Sab∣bath, by the exceeding greatnesse of their griefe and heauinesse, which they conceiue because of their restraint from it, Psalm. 42. This cost Dauid many a salt and bitter teare, as on the other side, Vse of this doctrine. his freedome to come into the Lords house vpon the Sabathes, filled his heart with ioy and his mouth with laughter, Ps. 122. how did I reioice when they said vnto me, Come let vs go vnto the house of the Lord. These things being so, that the spirit of regeneration where it is giuen, engendreth such a delight in the Law the word of obedience, and in the Gos∣pell the word of faith, in Pastours and Teachers, the ministers of this word in the Sabathes and assemblies, when and where this word soundeth; then what audience haue wee, what a sure roken and witnesse is it of our regeneration that we are borne anew by the spirit of God, when we can finde our hearts delighting & reioicing themselues as men are chee∣red at a feaste: in the doctrine of god∣linesse contained in the Law and Gospel; that as wordly men are moued to delight
in the presence and possession of earth¦ly profits, Siluer, Gold, Lands, Hou∣ses, Credit, and worship, and such like outward things, so wee counting these things as they are meere vanities, can fixe our delight and comfort in such inward spirituall graces as bee offered and con∣ueied vnto vs by the blessed word of our God and the holy ministery thereof. Oh thrice blessednesse, the soule can delight it selfe in these things. But paraduenture, some will be ready to obiect and say, that this can be no such Obiection against former doctrine. certainty of our regeneration, seeing it is written of those that are likened vnto e∣uill ground, and fall away in temptation, Mat. 13. That they receiue the word with ioy. There bee also diuers exam∣ples in Scripture, both of Hypocrits and wicked men which haue shewed their delight and reuerence to the Word and Ministers thereof, it is written of Herod, that he reuerenced Iohn & hard him glad∣ly, Mark. 6. of Simon Magus that he did beleeue and cleaue vnto Phillip, Asts 8. and if Iudas had not shewed some delight in Christ, in his doctrine, in his myracles he could not haue held the reputation of an Apostle so long. Finally, doe wee hearers
not see our Churches replenished with hearers of all sorts both bad and good, shewing their delight & loue to the word, and therefore it should seeme to be no such great matter to delight in the word? It is very true that great is the likenes Reply and answer. Let al rea∣ders con∣sider it. betweene the hypocrite and the true child of God in this matter of reioicing in his word, and so great, as it is not easie to discerne it, many haue beene decei∣ued about it. Thinking that they had the ioy of a faithfull man, when they were not gone one inch, no, not a haire breadth beyond the delight of an hypo∣crite. Yet a manifest difference there is, and it will be our wisdome to learne and obserue it: difference there is, 1 in the measure of their delight, 2 in the matter, Measure of delight. 3 in the nature 4 and in the effects. As touching the measure, no hypocrite is a∣ble to say that he delights in the law as one that findes a posie, or that it is swee∣ter to him then hony, deerer then siluer or gold, loued as his heritage; whereas there is none of the children of God that delights in these externall and wordly things, as they doe in Gods word, Mini∣sters, and Sabath: for though all rege∣nerate persons haue not one measure of
delight, as they haue not of knowledge and faith, yet in the meanest Christian it is so great as it exceeds and drownes his delights in worldly things being har∣tely sorry their delight is so small, stri∣uing to attaine the best measure. For the matter of their delight: the godly mans delight it is in the law, and in Matter of delight. the Gospell, so is not the delight of the hypocrite: he cannot be truely said to delight in the Law, or Gospell, or in the word of God. It cannot be denied, but the hypocrite vpon the hearing of the word, of law and Gospell, being enlight∣ned to know the doctrine, he taketh de∣light in this knowledge, it is a pleasure to him to vnderstand such things as the word propounds, and the things which are vnderstood being new, and strange, as also sundry and diuers, this variety and nouelty of the matters which he knows by the ministry of the word is the ground of all his delight and not the word it selfe, as it is Gods word giuen to declare Gods will for our duty and saluation, as appeareth in this, that the same word which he delighteth in, when it instructeth and teacheth him, and when it promiseth comfort and good
things to him; it is hated and detested of him when it detecteth priuy corrup∣tions and rebuketh them, as it is to bee seene in Herod, and in Iudas, who abhor∣red that word that laid open and blamed their secret lust: and of all hyhocrits, that is true which Christ saith, that they hate the light, because their works be euil, Ioh. 2. Now the child of God hath his delight in the law and in the whole word, so as whether it comforteth, or teach, or ex∣hort, or threaten, or reproue, it is stil sweet and pleasant to him. Howsoeuer the child of God in the strength of a corrup∣tion Psal. 141. 5 raging, or fit of a temptation decei∣uing him, he may shew some mislike of rebukes, yet when he comes to himselfe such as reproueth him shall at last finde more fauour, then he that flattereth him with his lips. The third difference is in the nature Nature and kind of delight. and kind of delight: for albeit each de∣light, that of the hypocrite, as well as that of the godlie proceede from the spirit of God: yet so, as the hypocrits de∣light which he hath in the word, it comes from a generall inlightening and com∣mon grace of the spirit breeding in him besides the light of knowledge, a certain
feeling of the sweetnesse of Christ and his doctrine. It being written euen of such as fall away, that they taste the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6. 4. as a man tasteth meat and is not fed with it, or as one that tasteth a sweet morsell and afterwards spits it out againe; such is the taste and delight of an euil man whose heart is false slender and sleight, vnsound and such as lasteth not, but vanisheth away, nay, is turned into dislike and loathing, so as he can spurne against that truth, the sweetnesse whereof sometimes he felt in his soule: whereas the delight which is in the regenerate man proceedeth from a speciall worke and grace of the spirit by his mighty power rooting and grounding him in Iesus Christ by faith of the promise; whence there springeth a sinceere loue and delight both in the word of promise the seed of his new birth, and in the word of the law, the milke and the seed whereby he is nourished vp, the sweet∣nesse and comfort that he takes in hea∣uenly doctrine, being like the comfort of one who tasteth and eateth, digesteth and concocteth good meate to the uou∣rishiment and strengthing of his body
whereof it commeth that the godly mans delight in the word, being sound is also lasting and constant, and as his faith in Christ, and repentance towards God is increased by the word, so his de∣light in the same word is increased more and more, as the Sunne shineth more and more brightly till it be perfect day. The fourth and most sensible diffe∣rence, is in the diuers effects which fol∣low Effects & cōseqnēts of this de∣light. their delight. Which I expresse by this Similitude of two Painters, which both together at one time doe view and looke vpon a cunning picture well and Artificially drawne; the proportion, and lineaments, fauour and whatsouer else is to be obserued, being in such liuely man∣ner represented as they both are greatly delighted with the workemanship, but when they are gone away from it, the one, by his delight which hee tooke in the picture is caried and led no further but to speake of it, what a goodly picture he hath seene, and to giue the vvorke∣man his due praise and commendation: he neuer studieth, nor once goeth about to make the like, to expresse the picture which he saw, nor to imitate the worke∣manship; whereas his fellow by the plea∣sure
that he had in the picture is moued to attempt the making and drawing out the like, and to expresse the art and skill which hee did see, by doing the like, according to his patterne: and when he casts his eie vpon his owne worke and perceiueth how farre he commeth short of the patterne, he is much grieued, stri∣uing still to come neerer vnto his first type: euen thus the case standeth be∣tweene hypocriticall and true professors as it doth betweene these two Painters; they both togeather heare the word and there doe behold the picture of a perfect man made and fashioned by Gods own finger: and they are both pleased and delighted with the image of a righteous man which they see printed before them vpon the Tables of the law: but when they are gone, there delight hath farre differing effects: for the hyocrits delight bringeth foorth nothing but talking and praises and profession of the word, it sets him not a worke to expresse the I∣mage which he saw, to transforme him∣selfe into it, he labours not to draw his knowledge into practise, if hee doe some outward workes that is all, he striues not to subdue his reason, will, and affections
to the obedience of the word, that he may be like vnto God, bearing the image of his righteousnesse described in his Law: on the other side the godly person, not troubling himselfe so much with praises, and outward profession of the word in∣steede of talking of it, hee endeauoureth the practise of it, and taketh great care and paines to expresse the Image of God shining foorth in his Law: hitherto hee is brought by his delight to study how hee may come neerer and neerer euery day to that perfect righteousnesse of the Law, and hauing vsed his best endeauour to be a doer of the word, not a hearer onely, when he casteth his eie vpon his owne workes and perceiueth how faulty and de∣fectiue they are, not answering that Pro∣traiture of a righteous man, which he be∣held with such delight, he findeth great displeasure and sorrow in his soule mour∣ning for his imperfections and sins: yet so, as he laieth hold vpon the mercies of God in Christ, for the forgiuenesse of his iniquites, praying for more grace and en∣deauouring according vnto grace recei∣ued, to come neerer and neerer vnto his patterne. Thus it was with this our Apostle who
as he said of himselfe that hee delighted in the law of God, saith also in the last verse of this Chapter, That he serued the same law in his minde, and in rhe 24. of And Phil. 3. That hee was not yet Perfect but endea∣uoured toward the marke. the Acts, That he endeauoured to keepe an vnspotted conscience towards God and men: and that Dauid that could say, He loued and delighted in the law, could assume also of himselfe, I haue kept thy word. Saue me O Lord, for I haue kept thy testimonies, Psal. 119. And vntill we bee able in truth to say, and to doe this, how much soeuer wee like the word, or the Ministers therof, or the Sabbathes, or the publike assemblies, whatsoeuer shew and profession we make of loue and delight in them: yet all will proue no better then an hypocriticall ioy or false delight, and shaddowe of comfort which will de∣ceiue both our selues and others. Let it suffice that we haue spoken thus much of this 22. verse.
Second Part. Of the Rebellion of Sinne. BVt I see a Law in my members] These Text. vers. 23. words haue the second part of the Text, and it containeth two things. First, the strife and resistance that sinne made against grace in regenerate Paul: I see a Law rebelling, &c. The second thing is, the successe of The Law of my mē∣bers what it signifieth this strife what effect it tooke, It led him away captiue to sinne. Heere we are againe first, to examine the words and then to collect doctrine and apply it. I see a Law] The word Law, is put Members what it signifieth. heere in a large sense, for euery thing that gouerneth and moderateth: and by law, he meaneth our sinne and corruption of nature, as appeareth by the last words of this verse, where he calleth it the Law of sinne: that is to say, sinne that is like a law, or would gouerne like a law. Now the whole euill of sinne, being at it were a body, as it is elswhere termed the body of sinne, and the body of death, the lusts
and motions of sinne, be as it were so ma∣ny Lusts of sinne are the mem∣bers of sin, which be∣cause they were in himselfe, they are called his members. membrs whereof it consists, and be∣cause sinne is as it were a Lord, or tyrant rather, whose lusts stand for lawes, con∣cupiscence for commands, motions for mandates or edicts, seeking and stri∣uing to draw all the powers of the body and soule vnder their rule and gouern∣ment that all may become obedient to them, hence it is, that sinne with the lusts thereof are compared to a law. Such an impious thing sinne is, it lookes to com∣mand as a law or Lord: either it will bee king, or nothing. Vnto this law of sinne and our lusts, The law of my mind, vvhat it sig¦nifieth. there is set as contrary, the law of our mindes, whereby he meaneth a minde re∣newed with the grace and spirit of God, which is insteed of a law, being forcible to gouerne and moderate: first, the faculty of the minde, and then all other faculties of soule or body, according to To rebell what it meaneth. the will of God. Against this grace ruling (as a law) in regenerate persons, the law of sinne is said heere to rebell, that is to say, not onely to make opposition and re∣sistance, but as it were to beare weopons, and to bee in armes, waging warre a∣gainst the good motions of the spirit as
mortall and deadly enemie vnto them. Like vnto a Rebell that will cast off the law and gouernment of his lawfull Soue∣raigne to make his owne will and lust to stand for a law. Thus doth sinne rebell against grace it struggles to put downe grace, that it selfe with his wicked lusts may rule alone. The words being thus expounded, let  vs see what instructions will arise. First of all in the person of Paul wee haue an ex∣ample of euery regenerate man, in whom there are two men, the old man and the new man, or two Lawes (as it were two Fight be∣tweene grace and sinne how bitter and dangerous. Lords and Emperours), the law of the members, or of sinne, and the law of the mind, and these being of contrary quali∣ties, the one earthly and the other heauen∣ly, the one carnall the other spirituall, the one delighting in outward things, the o∣ther in inward, finally the one leading to Satan and death, the other to God and to eternall life: by reason of this contrariety it commeth to passe that there is a conti∣nuall conflict and combat in the soule of euery godly person, sinne and grace stri∣uing together as two professed foes, not onely which of them should raigne but which of them should exist and be: grace
striuing to destroy sinne, and sinne stri∣uing to destroy grace: for it fareth in this conflict with sinne and the lust thereof, as it doth with a rebell that riseth vp in Armes and maketh insurrection against his naturall Prince, vpon pretence of title vnto the Crowne and kingdome: as Ab∣solon rebelled against his Father Dauid, and as Iereboam rebelled against Rehobo∣am the sonne of Salomom. Such rebels as aime at a kingdome will not content themselues with this onely, to depose their lawfull king from his gouernment, and to cry downe his lawes, that they may set vp their owne, vnlesse they de∣priue him of his life too. As the Rebell Absolon consulted to take away the life of his Father Dauid. Experience of all times teacheth this, that rebelles will not suffer him to liue that standeth in their way to hinder their rising. Likewise the rebelli∣ous lusts of our corrupt nature, because e∣uery lust wil be a law and a Lord to raigne alone, therefore they endeauour tooth and naile, as we say, to quench and quell the spirit of God vtterly if it were possible and this it it which the Apostle Peter doth admonish vs of in his second Chapter 11. verse of his first Epistle, where hee saith,
that fleshly lusts fight against the soule. Hee meanes against the grace and goodnes that ruleth in the soule, and against the saluation and eternall good thereof, to strippe and void it of all, that it may perish by iniquity: as souldiers and enemies whose fighting is for no other end and purpose but to spoile and kill. And on the Simile. other side, the grace of the spirit which gouerneth in the soules of regenerat per∣sons it seeketh and laboureth not onely to keepe vnder the wicked lusts of sinne, but quite to extirpe and roote them out by little and little, whereunto tend those commandements which are giuen vnto the faithfull, who are charg∣ed in the word of God not alone to abstain from fleshly lusts, and to put them 1. Pet. 2. 11 1. Pet. 2. 1. Col. 3. off, and to lay them away: but to mortifie them. Colo. 3. to crucifie them. Gala. 5. that is to slay, and put them to death with the two edged sword of the spirit of the word of God: euen as Princes deale with Simile. Rebells, whom being taken and appre∣hended, they put them to the sword with∣out pitty or mercy, this is that same bit∣ter and bloody combat that deadly end which is betweene corruption and grace, the spirit and the flesh in the new borne
children of God, and in them alone for the vnregenerate know not what this combate meanes they haue no experience of this battle, there is indeed a fight in all men, bad and sinfull men, as well as in the Fight be∣tvveen rea¦son and passion. godly. For first of all in the wicked, there reason fights against appetite, and appe∣tite and sence rebels against reason: but this fight is common to a Christian, with Heathens, amongst whom diuers by force of reason did so moderate their passions as for a ciuill life they equalled or excee∣ded rather sundry Christians, and diuers of them taking part with their passions a∣gainst reason prooued worse then biuit beasts. Againe there is another fight be∣tweene Fight be∣tween sin & consci∣ence en∣lightned by ye word. sinne and the conscience enligh∣tened by nature and the word, which checketh and controlleth the motions of sinne warning and accusing men when they do any sinne: and sinne on the other side fighting against the light of consci∣ence to extinguish and put it out, but this fight is common to a true Christian with the vngodly & hypocrites, in whom there is much and continuall wrestling between Rom. 2. sinne and conscience, this soubbing and condemning sinfull thoughts, saying be∣fore hand they are sinnefull doe them not,
follow them not; and after they are done and fulfilled, telling them that they haue done euill and deserue death: but as for the third kind of fight mentioned in out Rom. . Ver last. Fight be∣tweene grace and sinne pro∣per to the regenerate text between the law of our mind, and the law of sinne, that is, between a person renued by the grace of the spirit, and the sinne that still stickes in his nature, all e∣uill men are vtterly vnacquainted with this fight: For they being vnregenerate they haue no sanctifying spirit & grace to the renuing of them, but are wholy, within and without, flesh, corruption and sinne: and as Christ sayth of Satan that he is not diuided against himselfe; Is Satan, (saith he) diuided against Satan? so may I say, that sinne is not diuided against sinne; is the flesh diuided against the flesh? Doth the law of sinne rebell against the lavv of the members? If it were so, then the king∣dome of sinne could not stand nor endure. Doth not our Sauiour Christ tell vs that where the strong man armed keepes the house, there all things are in peace? Luke. 11. 21. It is therefore the righteous and regenerate man, in whom the strong man is disarmed by one stronger then hee, and cast out, that hath experience and tri∣all of this tough and tedious, combersome
and perilous battle, and vnreconcilable warre. Satan and sinne being thrust and turned out of possession seeke by all pos∣sible meanes to recouer it. To this end set∣ting a work continually his sworn frends, and billed souldiers, euen a mans owne lusts and sinfull desires, to warre against grace, infidelity against faith, ignorance a∣gainst The parti∣cular com∣baters in this fight. knowledge, despaire against hope, hypocrisie against singlenes, pride against humility, vnkindnes against loue, wantō∣nesse and intemperancy, against chastity and sobernes, cruelty and fiercenes against mercy and meekenes, and finally corrup∣tion and sinne against grace and holines. The man∣ner of the combat. For as the aire at the dawning of the day light and darkenes are together spread through the whole aire, and as water and wine are mingled together in one cuppe: so are holinesse and sinne, grace and cor∣ruption blended and mixed in the man that is regenerate: grace and the moti∣ons thereof crossing and hindring sinne and the lusts therof; and on the other side sinne crossing and hindering the motions of grace, and all holy desires: and this bickering is found in euery action and worke of our life. Whence it comes to passe that godly men as they cannot doe
all the euill that sinne and Satan would haue done, because their euill desires are hindred by good desires: so neither can they do so much good and so perfectly as themselues would do, and the law requires to bee done, because their good desires are crossed and hindred by euill. This is it which our Apostle complaines of in him∣selfe, that he did not the good which hee would, but the euill which he hated, and when he would do good, euill was present with him: that is to say, it was alwaies ready and at hand to chop in, and resist his good motions, and so to trouble him that he could not keep on his course, with that cheerefulnesse and vprightnesse as hee would, and ought to haue done: and fi∣nally it is the same complaint he takes vp in this our text, that his inward man de∣lighted in the law of God, but hee saw an other law rebelling against that law. Hauing spoken thus much of this spi∣rituall conflict, we are to see what pro∣fit  Vse 8. Of the for∣mer Do∣ctrine. Reproofe. is to be made of it. First of all this doc∣trine serueth to reprooue such as are well perswaded of their sanctification, and will say that they haue a pure and cleane hart. and yet neuer striue against their sinne, suffering their lusts to raigne in them as
Lords which they serue and obey with∣out resistance, wheras euery sanctified per∣son hath within him two men, old & new, and two lawes, of the mind, and of the Libertine: in professi∣on or in life. members, which alwaies struggle and striue together as the two twinnes in Re∣beccaes wombe, hauing continuall & mor∣tall warre together, as Israel had with A∣malecke. Such therfore as giue themselues ouer to sin, committing vncleannes with their bodies, liuing in fornication & drun∣kennesse, contention, lies, slanders, swea∣ring, railing, and such like, and yet will thinke or say that their heart is good and cleane, they are lyers, and there is no truth in them. 1 Iohn. 1. 5. Secondly, not these Libertines only, but  Confuta∣tion. another sort of men as bad as they, are confuted by the former doctrine, such I meane as affirme that the elect in their re∣generation receiue an absolute power to free them from al sinne, that it should not so much be in them to tempt thē. Which if be true, then the doctrine of the spiritu∣all Familists. combate is false; for there can bee no conflict with sinne, where there is no sin; where there is no enemy, there can bee no fight: but if there bee a perpetuall strife in euery regenerate person betweene the law
of sinne, and of Grace, then that opinion of perfect holinesse falles to ground, not onely as a false conceit, but is to be abhor∣red as a dangerous opinion, tending to puffe vp with pride such as beleeue it to bee true and dreame of such a perfection to bee in them, or to driue to despaire such as thinke they ought to haue it, and yet finde it not in themselues. Perfection is a state fit for heauen, where there shal be no spot of sin. The life of the Saints in earth is a warfare, where the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit lusteth against the flesh. Gal. 5. 17. Our best perfection here, is to endeuour toward perfection, & to con∣fesse our selues vnperfect, after the exam∣ple of this Apostle, acknowledging that he serued God in his mind, and sin in his members. Thirdly, this text ministreth consolati∣on Consola∣tion. to godly Christians which be infirme and weake, groning in the sense of their imperfections and encombred with the stirrings and motions of their sinful flesh, so as sometimes they feare themselues lest they be not sanctified: for such there is a twofold comfort: First, it is a comfort to heare and vn∣derstand from the word of truth, that eue∣rie
regenerate person is encombred with the rebellious lusts of sinne, though it be a tedious thing to be molested with such a rebel as sinne is, yet when we are taught by the holy Ghost that it is a sure marke of a Sanctified person, what reason is there to bee too much discomfited? For the shadow doth no more commonly follow the body, then this fight betweene sinne and grace doth follow the regenerate man; therefore where this fight is, there is regeneration, no fight no regeneration. This comfort will be much encreased if we consider that sinne so striueth in vs a∣gainst grace, as it can neuer wholy ouer∣come vs, so we resist: wee may and shall conquer and destroy it, but it cannot possibly destroy vs: but as Satan fought against Christ and himselfe tooke the foyle, so it is in this spirituall combat; sin is sure to be put to the worst in the end: for it is written, Sinne shal not haue domi∣nion ouer you, because ye be vnder grace. Rom. 6. 14. Furthermore there ariseth much comfort euen from this particular example, that such a one as Paul was, an elect vessel, an excellent instrument of Gods truth, a man of singular wisedome and holines, should be tickled and trou∣bled
so with wicked desires, as inforced him to cry out and complaine of his mise∣ry in that behalfe, O wretched man that I am. Whosoeuer thinke that they belong not to Christ nor haue his spirit, because of euill lusts which be in them, and rebell against their mind, let them call to mind this example of Paul, and plucke vp their spirits. Paul would not haue set down this spirituall combat in his owne person but for the greater consolation of the Church of God. Lastly here is an admonition for all  Admoni∣tion. Gods children, to warne and stir vp their minds to set themselues against their sin∣full nature and the lust thereof, as against most dangerous Rebels, seeing the holy ghost here beareth witnes of our corrupt desires that they do rebell, and are al∣waies (as it were) vp in armes fighting a∣gainst grace to ouerthrow the gouernmēt thereof in our minds: what other thing are the godly in this case to doe but that which earthly Princes doe, against such subiects as proue rebels, and would either trouble their states or pull the Crowne from their head? It is the fashion of Princes to put downesuch re∣bels, as persons not worthy to liue. The
children of light must follow this wise∣dome of the children of this world to cry downe, subdue and slea all rebellious mo∣tions, whether they be of the reason or of the will; for these striue against Christ and would spoile him of his Crowne, take his kingdome from him, and cast downe his throne, that he should not raigne in vs by his spirit and grace: and besides this, that our wicked lusts lift vp themselues like Giants against Christ and Heauen, they doe indeuour also to make vs vnderlings and vassals to Satan vnto our eternall mi∣serie in hell; and therefore as wee tender Christs honour and dignity, or our owne safety, we are not to pitty them with our eye, nor to spare them with our hand, but earnestly, and continually to vse all good meanes by praier, meditation, the word &c. for the supressing of them. And to prouoke all the godly to be most resolute heerein, let them consider that all their wicked lusts and motions, being so many wicked rebels, so poysonfull in their na∣ture, so perilsome in their temptations, that therefore as it is no wisedome to harken vnto them, take aduice from them and follow or obey them: so it cannot but proue vnto vs a very hurtfull and mis∣chieuous
thing to doe so: for how should Dāgerous to partake with re∣bels. God take it at our hands and put it vp, if we should but so much as shew a good countenance or giue a good liking to that which is an enemy to him, and fights for satan against him? If wee should then through forgetfulnes & security take part and ioyne side with our rebellious lusts against the directions of his word or mo∣tions of his spirit, this must needs kindle his wrath against vs, and pull down some heauy iudgement vpon vs. I haue heard by very credible report It is not safe to bid a rebell God speed or to af∣ford him a good look. that in the time of Kets rebellion in Nor∣folke, a certaine butcher in Cambridge, ha∣uing lesse offered for a ioint of meate then it was worth, happened to say that he had rather giue it to the Rebels: for which his words, (being interpreted to bee spoken in fauour of the rebels,) hee was executed and put to death. And it is certainly knowne of one of the chiefe Cities in this kingdome, that In the daies of K. Edward the fourth. when the Maior thereof in good policie (as he thought) sent certaine prouision of victualls to a company of rebells approa∣ching the City, raging and thretning cru∣ell things if they were not relieued: vpon complaint here of commission was direc∣ted
vnto the same City and by Marshall law his head was cut off. So harmeful and dangerous a matter it is to affoord but a shew of fauour & support vnto knowne rebels. Now then our vile lusts and af∣fections, as pride, couetousnesse, wrath, enuy, &c: with all the rebels of our euill thoughts & imaginations, being knowne vnto vs so wel to be enemies to God & to our owne soules, if yet we should cherish thē & take part with thē, surely we should deserue eternally to dy and to perish: and though God bee so good to vs not to de∣stroy our soules, because we be his adop∣ted children; yet it may bring on some fearefull temporal affliction, yea and hap∣pily cost as much as our liues come to. They that obey the lusts of their ignorāce 1. Cor. 11. 30. 31. (that is, such lusts as they know not, nor marke not to bee sinfull and rebellious) they I say that know not their masters wil and yet doe against it, if they shall not ∣cape Gods hand but shall be beaten with stripes; such as against their knowledge will runne with their lusts and doe them seruice, how much more may they looke to be punished? J my selfe can call to remembrance while the two Earles of Westmerland and
Northumberland did rise & were in armes against their lawfull Soueraigne, vpon pretence that their attempt was for God and the Queene, sundry of the vulgar and common sort were drawne to ioyne with them: and though their meaning were not ill, being deceiued with false pretexts; yet when the Queenes power had discomfi∣ted the chiefe rebels, others which through feare or simplicity went after them, were by Marshall law haled vnto the gallowes and executed. If humane Iustice thinke those worthy to be cut off which of ignorance or error are found to haue a hand in ciuill rebellions, how can we think that diuine Iustice will winke at such as wittingly goe after the rebellion of the flesh and sinfull nature? Is it not a thing known by experience, that some of Gods deare children, because they haue As Dauid, Peter and many o∣thers. not withstood the rebellion of their na∣ture, and resisted their lusts at their first rising, but giuing too much way vnto them nourishing them and consenting vnto them by their will, they haue deserued to be left and giuen ouer to actual rebellion, euen to doe and commit some horrible crime which hath brought much shame and harme, to their owne persons, to
their whole families, and to innumerable 2. Sam. 12. & 24. 15. others. Let al men therefore be warned betimes, to oppose & set themselues against their owne rebellious thoughts and desires, with all their maine and might, and with all seuerity, thrusting them through with that spirituall sword, as Ioab thrusted through the rebell Absolon with a mate∣riall sword. They say, Giue a Foxe no law, but there would no law bee giuen vnto a rebell: crush a rebell at the first, ere hee get head and strength, when it will bee more laboursome and dangerous to ouer∣come him: so deale with sinne, kill him betimes, lest he kill thee. Thus much be spoken of the strife betweene sinne and grace, betweene the law of the mind and the law of sinne. Now let vs come to consider of the successe of this strife, what effect it had in Paul, and hath in other godly men. Leading me away captiue to the Law of Text. sinne which is in my members.] By the law of sinne is meant, sinne, which is like a law Law of sin. exercising authority and gouernement as a law. This sinne is said to be in his mem∣bers, either because the motions of sinne are executed by the body and doe forci∣bly
worke in the members thereof. Or by members we may vnderstand the powers of his mind and body, so farre as they are corrupted by sinne. Whereas he is said to Captiue to sinne. be led captiue to sinne, the meaning is, that he is ouercome by it, as one that is ta∣ken prisoner in warre. These words then commend vnto vs the successe of the strife which sinne maketh against grace: it many times preuaileth Issue of the strife so farre as to get the vpper hand of grace, and though not for euer and wholly to ouercome it; yet in part and for a time to conquer it, and cary it manacled and fettered like a captiue, and vanquished man. I say this is done but in part, because a regenerate man neuer consenteth to sin In my mind I serue God Rom. 7. v. last. with his whole will, nay, his will (as it is renewed by grace) doth neuer consent at all vnto sinne: for grace can no more sinne and doe euill, then sinne can do well; but being too weake to make resistance (God withdrawing his aide) and tempta∣tions of sinne waxing too strong) it is conquered for a time: for a time I say, not foreuer; because the godly though they fall, yet they rise againe by repentance. Neither is it alwaies that sinne getteth the victory, but rather for the most part
grace keepeth sinne vnder, and puts it to the worst. The case in this spirituall bat∣tle is much, what one with the condition of wordly warres, where two Princes, or two people wage battle together. It is written of the war betweene the Israelites and Amalecke, that while Moses held vp his hands, Israel preuailed, and while he Exod. 17. let his hands fall, Amalecke preuailed. And our owne stories doe report, that in the ciuill warres betweene Henry the sixt and Edward the fourth, sometime Edward preuailed, sate as King in the throne, and led Henry away as captiue: sometime, Henry was the stronger, won the field, chased away his enemy and re∣recouered his Crowne. Right thus it fa∣reth betweene these two champions grace and sinne: otherwhile, grace is too mighty for sinne, beating downe the mo∣tions of it, and keeping them vnder as slaues and prisoners: otherwhile, sinne is too strong and too hard for grace, not onely hindering and crossing good and godly desires of the minde; but so farre preuailing as to draw the regenerat man to doe some euill act, and to act some e∣uill crime, as Scripture, examples, and daily experience doe plentifully and
plainely proue, that the best men in this spirituall combate, doe not onely take some lesser thrusts and foines, but such deepe wounds as moue them to despaire euen of life, & to cast out doubtful speeches touching their owne estate, as if all grace were gone, and God had forsaken them, quite cast them out of his sight, shut vp Dauid. his loue from them, reckoned them as e∣nemies and meant to destroy them: yea, they are sometimes so farre conquered by sinne, as not only to make doubt of Gods fauour and their owne saluation, but doe Iob. call into question, euen God himselfe and the truth of his Scripture, and his proui∣dence, whether there bee any such thing or no, and are brought sometimes to that passe as they are not farre from blasphe∣ming and renouncing him. We read of Iob, cursing the time and meanes of his life, Iob 3. 3. Of Ieremie do∣ing the like, Ier. 20. 14. 15. Cursed bee the day wherein I was borne, and let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blest, &c. and in the 12. Chapter verse 1. he ex∣postulateth the cause with God, as if hee were not righteous in his administration because of the exceeding prosperirity of the vngodly. Also the Prophet Dauid
when he looked vpon the flourishing e∣state of euill men, how they were not onely free from euils, but enioied more good things then their heart desired, when as good men suffered want, and had many calamities; his faith was so shaken as he was ready to cast away all care of wel doing, and to thinke it best to Psal. 73. 1. 2. 3. &c. say and doe as the wicked did. Thus mightily doth sinne preuaile, euen in these which are the Lords Morthies. Let all men iudge then by this what great reason there is for euery man to stand vpō his guard. When the valiant Captaines are taken prisoners of sinne, what great cause haue the Souldiers to liue in feare and trembling? when the strong pillars of the Temple are shaken by sinne, and made to bow, how ought others which are but as stones in the Temple, to looke to themselues? Jf the mighty men be led captiues with sinne, they which are but weaklings had neede to watch and pray that they fall not into temptation. And againe, see what great comfort there is to such as against their wils are ouer matched by sinne, when such men as Iob, Ieremy, Dauid, Paul, were captiuated to the law of sinne. It is a comfort to such as haue
any grieuous disease to heare of others that haue had the like & recouered. Like∣wise it may comfort poore sinners vexed by their lusts and sometime vanquished, to heare their betters haue beene so, and yet done well. Before wee can make an ende, there are two knots to be loosed. Two que∣stions pro∣poun∣ded. The first is, seeing both regenerat and vnregenerate are captiues to sinne, what difference is there betweene their captiui∣tie? Secondly, seeing Christ by his spirit could haue freed the elect in the new brith wholly from sinne, and this (as one would thinke) had beene best for our good and his glory, why then hee still keepeth them partely bond to sinne and captiue to corruption? The answer to the first question is this; Resolued and answe∣red. The captiuity of regenerate persons is vn∣uoluntary, with seeling of their bondage, and desire of liberty, imbracing it when it commeth and is offered: but the cap∣tiuity of vnregenerate men is voluntarie, without not onely the feeling of their bondage, but not so much as suspecting it, and so without any true desire of liberty. This difference I doe expresse after this
manner. Let it be supposed that there were a battell fought vpon Barham or Adsham downe, betweene the English and the French, and that two English Lords were taken prisoners by the French: the one slaine and dead, who doth not so much as thinke of his captiuity, nor is a∣ble to thinke of it, with desire to bee ran∣somed, because he is dead: the other who is a liue, as he was taken being too weak to resist, so he is kept prisoner against his will, longing for liberty, and when a meane and time of deliuery is giuen, gladly accepting it: so it is with the re∣generate and vnregerate persons. The former striuing against their sinnes are taken & led captiues, because they could not resist the strength of temptation, so as they doe not like of their bondage, they couet to bee deliuered and pray for it, and when their redeemer Christ reacheth out his hand vnto them to pull them out, they willingly lay hold vpon the grace offered, taking the opportu∣nity of their freedome, and afterwards standing better vpon their guard: as is to be well perceiued both in Peter, repen∣ting vpon the crowing of the Cocke, and
Christ looking backe vpon him: and in Dauid returning from the captiuity of his lusts, when God sent vnto him the Mat. 26. 2. Sam. 12 prophet Nathan. Now on the other side it is quite contrariwise in the captiui∣ty of vnregenerate men, who because they are dead in trespasses and sinnes, there∣fore they are held of Satan in his snares and bands at his will and pleasure, being so farre from thursting after liberty or greeuing for their bondage, as they say, with the Iewes, We are free, wee were ne∣uer bound, Ioh 8. If this resemlance doe not sufficiently declare the point of difference, take an other. Imagine that in the former bat∣tle, two French Lords should fall as pri∣soners into the hands of the English, both being aliue, the one bearing a false heart vnto his liege King, willingly suffereth himselfe to bee taken priso∣ner that he may practise against his So∣ueraigne whom hee loues not: the o∣ther, ouercome & led away into the ene∣mies campe, because he wanted might to withstand the assault, carying still a true heart to his owne Soueraigne, desiring his freedome that he may returne againe vnto his seruice: the former Lord not
once minding his freedome, because he is purposed to serue the enemy against his Countrey: so stands the case betweene those that are borne a new of the spirit, and those that are wholly carnall: the former through the deceit of sinne and Satan, and through their owne infirmity are surpised & ouercome by their lusts, yet so as they beare a true heart vnto Christ, desiring to be freed, that they may returne vnto his seruice from the seruice of their lusts: the later, which be all car∣nal, hauing a false hart to Christ, willing∣ly fight for sinne against his wil and law; whatsoeuer shew and profession of loue they make vnto Christ; yet that which Christ saith of the Iewes, Iohn 8. is true of all carnall professors, That the lusts of their father they doe and will doe them, that is, they doe them with delight, and with greedinesse. And thus much of the first question. Now to the second Question; wherfore Answer to the second question. God would suffer sinne to remaine in his children after sanctification, and to pre∣uaile sometimes so farre, as to lead them away captiue, whereas he might at once haue holy freed them from all sinne: I make this answere. Touching his power
there is no doubt but thereby hee could haue caused it to bee otherwise: for how could he not quit the soule & body frō sin in the time of life, that can doe it at death in one instant? and his goodnesse is such (had it beene more expedient for his chil∣dren to haue had it so) it had surely been so: but the truth is, Gods way (as in all things) so in this, is the best way. For as it was Gods wonderfull mercy at all to giue them sanctification in any measure, and so to put them out of that prophannesse in which they liued obeying the Prince that ruleth in the aire, Ephes. 2. 2. walking in sinnes according to the course of the world: so it was not without a very mer∣cifull and gratious respect vnto their own good, as well as with a zealous respect of his owne glory, not to giue it them in full measure during this life. First, in that sinne is suffered still to re∣maine and to tempt them, this stirreth Commo∣dities which are to be made of sin re∣maining in the Saints. 1. vp watchfulnesse; to haue such an enemy within the house, yea in the bedchamber, euen in the inward hart & spirit of a man, it will not suffer him to sleepe in security; but as in townes which are but assaulted outwardly, men stand continually vpon their guard: so it behooueth much more Prayer.
Gods children to doe, hauing their Citie already surprised, sinne being within their soule. This is it also which will cause them with awfull watch, to ioyne faithfull and  Wathch∣fulnesse. ardent prayer for helpe and strength from God against it, whence it is that our Saui∣our hauing put his disciples in mind of their sinfull weakenes, the flesh (saith he) is weake, that is, sinne and corruption ma∣keth you weake, either to resist euill or to doe good: therfore he commandeth them, and in them all other Christians, to giue themselues vnto watchfulnesse and pray∣er, lest they fall into temptation: for Sa∣tan Mat. 26. finding vs feeble and ready to stum∣ble and fall at euery straw through sinne, will be apt enough to take the aduantage of our infirmities, and by his subtill temp∣tations to draw vs to wickednes, so as there will be danger of being conquered by him, except with a watchfull eye chri∣stians looke to themselues, and get them for succour vnto God, that by his might they may be made able to stand. Therefore as the Cananites which were Simile. lest in the land vndestroyed, did both awe the Israelites, awake their slothfulnesse, & prouoke them in danger to flye vnto God by prayer: so the corruptions stick∣ing
in the Children of God, doe through feare of being foiled by them, driue them vnto God, & shake off their spiritual sloth∣fulnesse. Beside, hence it is that they can  Compassiō with pity and compassion thinke & speak of other mens sinnes, being alwaies rea∣dy with a fellow feeling heart to reprooue them, knowing and considering them∣selues how they are compassed with like infirmities. Gala 6. 1. They are also pro∣uoked  Charity. to exercise their charity, not this way only, but in prayer for their brethren. For by their owne experience of sinfull lusts, what they do in themselues, they can giue a ghesse how it fareth with others. Yea they are by this meanes not without some griefe to heare of the grosse and hor∣rible wickednes of Gods enemies, re∣membring that the same inclinations to euils and seeds of sinne are in them, which breake out to the shame and ruine of o∣thers. Moreouer, by this they are often brought to sue for pardon vpon their slips and frailties, and to begge the encrease of Confessi∣on of sin asking par¦don. Gods graces and comforts, and so they haue manifold proofe of Gods truth and goodnes in standing to his promise, wher∣by he hath bound himselfe to fulfill the desires of his people, and can encourage
others and do quicken them in their faith to trust in that God whom they find so very willing to relieue and refresh them according to his word. For when their  Confidēce in God. sinnes & temptations force them to God, and his mercies and truth doe manifest thēselues, being found whē he is sought, opening to such as knocke, giuing to such as aske, forgiuing such as humbly confes their faults, they haue their mouths ope∣ned, as to speake for the Lords praise and to glorifie him in his righteousnesse and saluation, and to declare them abroad: so  Praising God. to excite all their fellow Saints to magni∣fie this God, to seeke and to rely vpon him with strong confidence. See the practise of this in that holy Prophet Dauid, who hauing recourse to God against his sins, and drawing downe grace and comforts by his prayers, he is ful, as of harty thank∣fulnes for him selfe: so of holy exhortati∣ons towards others to mooue them vnto godlines. Yet further, whereas the great  Humility. fauour which is vouchsafed the elect in their calling, and the rare graces put into them from Gods spirit, might heaue and puffe them vp, euen Paul being subiect to pride and arrogancie in regard of singu∣lar blessings vouchsafed him, 2. Cor. 12.
the fight and sense of the remainders of old Adam serueth both to keepe from rash iudging others, & from taking pride in our owne good things, there beeing more reason to be abased for filthinesse of sinne, for that is our owne, then proud for the holiest gifts, for they are not our own; and withall, they are blemished and spot∣ted through that poison and contagion of sinne that mingleth it selfe with our best praiers, best words, best gifts, best actions, best graces, to make our selues and them euen odious to God, should he but with a rigorous eie behold the best things in vs and done by vs; for his pure eye cānot be, hold any euill, Ha. 1, 13. and the best men haue some euill ioined with their good, yea there is more euill in that they doe, thē good; that were it not for Gods mer∣cifull acceptance, passing by and winking at the euil, pardoning wants and staynes, and imputing his sonnes righteousnesse to the Saints, their holiest endeuours might worthily sink them into destruction. The due consideration whereof doth preserue them from those most hatefull vices of pride and presumption, which are the breakenecks of so many thousands. In these and other sundry respects, as to stir
vp in the godly a desire & loue to the fel∣lowship of the Saints, to the vse of the Lords Supper, and of all other good meanes of their saluation to the patient bearing with, and gently censuring the imperfections of the brethren, and infinit such other benefits as redound to them∣selues By this way of their imperfit, San∣ctification,  Gods glo∣ry. God doth also maruellously worke out his own glory. Sinnes assaults, and Satans temptations combining them∣selues with their confederates the worlds allurements by pleasures and profits and glory sometimes, and somtimes by fears, threats and persecutions, al conspiring to∣gether against the poore soule of the child of God, as Ammon. Moab, Edomits did band against the Lords people, doe mi∣nister but occasion vnto God the more to euidence his Almightinesse and sufficien∣cy of grace, in that hee doth against all these maintaine one weake heart, not on∣ly enabling to the encounter, & strength∣ning to endure it; but also giuing power to ouercome and triumph ouer them, that they may reioice and glory in the strong God of their saluation; whose power is so manifested in their weakenes, as the more and neerer enemies did arise vp against
Ioshuah in the land of Canaan, and against Moyses in the wildernes, the more it tur∣ned to the honour of God and their glo∣ry also, to vanquish them, and to put thē to flight; so it is here, the name of God is the more aduanced in his wonderfull as∣sistance and protection which he affoor∣deth vnto his Saints against the gates of Hell. Yet moreouer, which is an admi∣rable  Sinnes re∣medies of sinnes. thing, euen by the grosse sinnes of his children, it pleaseth God as to doe them much good both to grieue them for that which is past, to humble them and shame them for the present, to work more feare & warines for time to come, it turns greatly to satans confusiō, their sins proouing to be medicines and remedies of sinnes past, and preuentions of sinnes to come; the which thing it cannot chuse but vexe Satan at the hart, that such sins as he hath drawne the godly vnto with great diligēce & lōg deuice hoping ther¦by quite to spoile and destroy thē, shold be made meanes through Gods wonder∣full goodnesse and wisedome, euen to whet and sharpen them the more against Satan, the procurer of their wounds and woe, by stirring vp themselues the more, and strengthening others vnto all good
duties. Hee had beene better sit still then to haue tempted Dauid & Pe∣ter vnto such sinnes as he did: for after that they were conuerted, both them∣selues became more strong and wary of him, and better able both to warne and confirme others. Finally, that we may grow vnto an end; by the remainder of sinne in new borne Christians, & by those daily bitter fruits that spring from thence, there is more occasion giuen to them to exercise their faith, touching mercy and forgiuenesse present, and their hope touching the blessednesse to come, and all other their graces; which if they were perfect, and al sinne done away at their regeneration, then what great vse of faith or hope, when there should bee no vnbeliefe nor doubting within thē? or what vse of any other vertue, when it lacketh the opposi∣tion & resistance of the contrary vice to set it on worke. Here is our warfare, and there must bee a continuall strife inward∣ly in our selues betweene grace and sin, as well as outwardly against the wicked. In heauen our warfare shall bee ended, and not before: in the meane space, by how much the sinnes of the godly doe
increase and abound, so much the mer∣cies of God in pardoning, and Christs righteousnesse in couering such and so innumerable transgressions, are manife∣sted to be the more excellent and glo∣rious, there being no lesse grace (if not more) expressed in forgiuing sinnes, done after the spirit of God and faith re∣ceiued, then such as were done before: sithence the more Gods children are beholden to God, and the more meanes they haue against sinne, and the more they are enlightened to vnderstand their duty, the more grieuous be their faults wherein they offend: which yet being all remitted freely vpon their vnfained repentance, it declareth the abundance of the grace of God towards them. Thus haue I shewed for what purposes God hath left such a rebell as sinne is, to dwell in his regenerate children, and what those profits and benefits bee, which they are to make of their naturall sinnefull rebel∣lions. Vnto all which, this I will adde for conclusion: that as the godly haue need and cause enough to reape the most and best fruit they can of their spi∣rituall enemies, sinne and Satan, consi∣dering the manifold and great, both
harme and shame which they take by their temptations and motions; so it is not the least part of Christian wisdome, both to know and to endeauour how to aduantage and helpe our selues by such enemies, following here∣in the wisdome of the men of this world. FINIS.
A Table of the principall Con∣tents of the seuerall treatises, handled in this booke. The first treatise. IAacobs Ladder, containing the seuerall steppes of Gods eternal counsell, touching the finall state of all men. Heere∣in are handled these points following: (1) The manifold and great vses of this treatise. (2) Certaine aduertisments and directi∣ons, touching the vnderstanding of it. (3) The degrees of Gods counsell concerning all men before the fall. (4) The degrees of diuine counsell touching elect men alone. (5) The degrees of his counsell pro∣per to the reprobate. (6) Certaine degrees of his counsell
common to elect and reprobate, from the time of their death. (7) The execution of Gods counsell towards the elect, by those works of grace (particularlie and exactlie set downe) by which they passe to glorie. The second treatise. Wherein are handled: (1) The etymologie and definition of iustification, what it signifies, & what it is. (2) The causes of iustification, effici∣ent, materiall, and finall. (3) Also the instrumentall cause, to wit, faith. (4) What faith it is that doth iustifie. (5) That application is a part of iusti∣fying faith. (6) That there is no iustification of sinners, without, or before this faith. (7) That iustification onely by faith, without the works of the law, is our iusti∣fication before God. (8) That it is impossible for the law to iustifie vs, neither was it ordained of God for such an end. (9) An answere to the Papists about iu∣stification by merit of good workes.
(10) An answere to the obiections of such, which would haue iustification without faith. (11) The office and power of faith throughlie examined, and deliuered from all cauils of the aduersarie. (12) The doctrine of free iustification of faith, giues no libertie to the flesh. (13) An exhortation to iustified and beeleeuing Christans, to expresse the power of faith. The third treatise. A receite against heresie. Wherein are handled: (1) A definition of heresie. (2) Difference betweene heresie and error. (3) What an heretike is. (4) The causes of heresie, efficient, materiall, and finall. (5) Occasions of heresie. (6) Effects of heresie. (7) Symptomes or tokens, whereby to discerne the spirite of heresie. (8) The cure or remedie against the maladie of heresie. (9) Foure parts of the cure: meditati∣on, practice, praier, fasting.
The fourth treatise. Of the new creature, or of sanctifica∣tion. Wherin are handled: (1) The chiefe praise of a Christian consists in newnes of life; this is his chief glorie. (2) Three sorts of old things mentio∣ned in scripture. 1. Ceremoniall law. 2. Tribulations. 3. Corruptions of nature, with the fruits thereof. (3) In what sense and sort, these old things are passed away. (4) The double vse to be made of this passing away of old things: 1. the thank∣full acknowledging of a benefite. 2. the carefull performance of a dutie. (5) What is ment by all things, and how they are become new. (6) How all things may bee said to be renewed, in them who haue more oldnes then newnes. (7) An effectuall change into a new creature, what a benefite it is. (8) How neere reprobates come to the new creature. (9) A true and effectuall change, is proper to the elect. (10) A duty which lieth vpon euerie
new creature, to perseuere & grow in the grace of new birth. (11) Strong motiues to perswade to this dutie. The fift treatise. Of spiritual combat. Wherin are handled: (1) Two speciall notes and markes of Gods children. (1) A sincere and constant delight in Gods law: where the difference between the ioy of Gods child, and of an hypocrit is cleerelie laide down. (2) The daiely & earnest strife against all and euery sinne: where ye haue the threefold strife, 1. betweene reason and affection: 2. betweene conscience and sinne: 3. betweene sinne and a renewed heart; plainely vnfolded. (2) Two questions propounded and answered: 1. Seeing regenerate and vn∣regenerate are both led captiue to sinne, what difference betweene their captiuity. 2. Seeing Christ Iesus was able at once to enfree beleeuers, why then are they all their life long kept partly bound and cap∣tiue to sinne? Where the great and mani∣fold profites, to bee reaped by remaining sinne, are distinctly named.
GOod Reader, although some of these faults, escaped at the presse (as how can it otherwise be where the copy is obscure) yet many of them, and the most materi∣all, were committed through default of the copie; partlie by his failing, that co∣pied out part of it, partlie also by some mistaking in it, afterward it came from the author, and afore it came vnto our hands, as by comparing with the copie we haue seene. The faults of moment thou hast heere corrected. If any others be, light or literaI, thou maist easily discerne, and amend them. Farewell. Faults escaped in the Dialogue of iustification. P. signifies page. 1. line. r. read. PAge 16. line 1. put in (because) before (be∣tweene) p. 17. l. 10. r. propitiation. p. 20. l. 4. for and r. hee, p. 26. l. 23. r. vnto. p. 28. l. 1. r. I. p. 30. l. 5. r. frō. p. 36. l. 5. r. frō. p. 39. l. 7. r. he, p. 45. l. 25. r. vs, our p. 48. l. 8. r. for, p. 59. l. 30. strike out (that) p. 60. l. 1. for is r. but, p. 68. l. 12. r. effectiuelie. p. 155. l 16. strike our (they) p. 157. l. 26. r. desert. p. 161. l. 3. strike out (doing no harm) p. 171. l. 4. after (to) put in (haue.
In the treatise of Iaacobs Ladder. Pag. 1. l. 15. In his iustice & mercy, strike it out. In the receite against heresie. Page 2. line 9. after (by) put in (immediat) p. 2. l. 17. after (some) put in (are) p. 2. l. 19. r. diuine. p. 3. l. 5. r. holdeth. p. 11. l. 10. r. they are. p. 14. l. 1. r. one. In the Sermon of Sanctification. Page 12 line 20. r. affections. p. 18. l. 5. after (which) put in (haue) p. 19. l. 28. r. affection. p. 20. l. 20. r. dili∣gentlie. p. 31. l. 7. r. tauny. In the Sermon of the Spiritual combat. Page 13. line 22. r. euidence. p. 15. l. 22. r. spoile. p. 24. l. 12. r. imperious. p. 27. l. 27. r. feud. p. 45. l. 19. r. bound. p. 14. l. 10. r. blessed is. Also in the Dialogue of Iustification in page 159. after these words (loathsome vnsauory fruits) in the twelfth line there must needs bee read these words following: Now whereas you said that you neuer denied Iustificatiō by faith, this is too shameles dealing. My friends you know the truth of this matter, what say you to it? In the words before the Dedicatory Epistle to the Dialogue of Iustification for Plamer, there must be read Palmer.
