D514 [ocm]11285040 205022
The Deceived Virgin, OR THE Treacherous Young LOVERS Cruelty. Being a New Song Sung at Windsor: By E. G. Fair Maids Beware, for Men has Oily Tongues, And Smoothly Court you to your greatest Wrongs, With Curses, Oaths, large Promises to Boot, They'l Importune you to Admit the Suit, But you are Fools I'le Swear by Gad if e're you do't. A good Sword, or Stick, if you'l but take the Pain, Will Force that Right which you but Court in Vain. To the Tune of Celia my Foe. Entred according to Order. COme Hither all you, Who to Love never knew; Here's a Ditty, Both Witty And Wonderous true, Such a one that will make Your sad Hearts for to Ake When I tell ye What befell me For my true Loves Sake. I was a Fair Maid, And some Beauty I had Which the Young Men Came Thronging To see, and were glad But amongst all the Rest, There was one I Lov'd Best, Who with pain Did Obtaine A Large Room in my Breast. With more Care and more Pain Then in Seiges was Tain, To my Chamber, Through Danger He constantly came Where he wasted the Night In desiring he might, But at first I was Curst And rejected him quite. With a Thousand more Oaths, He heaved up the Cloaths With such strength That at length He in Vain did oppose; But my affections within Was as Urgent as him, And with Arder Did Further His Fatal designe. When he had gain'd my Warm Fort, Which so long he did Court, He had Leasure With Pleasure To Pause on the Sport, By the Oath of a Kiss, He Renewed his sweet Bliss, And Swore As Before, I shoul ever be his. But Alas! How in Vain, Does Poor Maidens Complain, When the Men Has once Tain What they wish for again When their Fair Virgins Flower Is gone out of their Power, They may Snatch, But can't Catch At one happy short Hour. VVith that we both went To compleat our content To the Church, VVhere with much Satisfaction we spent All the time, whilst in Bands, The Black-Man Joyn'd our hands VVhilst Returning Both Burning He squenched our Flames. Thus Maids may behold, VVhat it is to be bold, VVhen in Courting And Sporting Your Sweet-Hearts grow Cold, A good Sword in your Hand, VVill your Affections Command, VVhilst with Sighing And Crying Unpittied you Stand. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for Absalon Chamberlain, 1684.
