D838 [ocm]12137929 199149
New Discovery OF AN Old Intreague: A SATYR LEVEL'D AT Treachery and Ambition: CALCULATED To the Nativity of the Rapparee Plott, and the Modesty of the Jacobite Clergy.DESIGNED By Way of Conviction to the CXVII. PETITIONERS, and for the Benefit of those that Study the Mathematicks. Unus Nobis Cunctando Restituit.— Ennius. Printed in the Year MDCXCI.
PREFACE TO THE One Hundred & Seventeen. THE End of Satyr ought to be, expo∣sing Falshood, in order to Reformation. As all Warrings are Ʋnlawfull whose Aim is not Peace; so Satyrs not thus meant, are no more Satyrs but Libells. One great Character, and the Lines of which I liked as well as any, is left out here: Because the Person is Attoning, as I am told, for the past Errors of his Practice, by a future Loyalty to the Government. As for me, if I am blamed for accounting the Petition re∣flected on, a Branch of our New Jacobite Plott, I referre to the Letters taken with my Lord Preston: and say no more, to any whose meaning was short of that, (as I hope some were) than that they may here see and be convinced whose Tools they have been made, and whose Work they have been doing.
PREFACE. For my self, Gentlemen, who I am, you must excuse me, you shall not know: Why I wrote this, I shall answer onely Negatively: Not for Profit, nor make none of it I assure you; and if I thought I could work on you, I would bestow 117 upon you gratis, and lose so much for a Reformation: Not for Applause I assure you, for I shall not so much as ask How you like it: Not for Envy or Malice, for I Honour your Persons, and should be glad to see you become English-men again; and as I hinted above, should be so much a Friend to the Work of Conversion, as to leave out any other Character of a Reforming Brother. If no Reformation follows, I must do as Provi∣dence does, let you alone to your Own Wills, and as I never drew my Pen before, so expect no Se∣cond Item from Your Humble Servant, &c.
THE INTRODUCTION. IN ancient Times when men of Worth were known, Not by their Fathers Actions but their own, When Honours sacred Pile could be come at, But by the Steps to Virtue Dedicate; No purchas'd Fame our Panegyricks sung, Nor were our widdowed Harps on Willows hung. Renown by Down-right hazard was attain'd, And Deeds of Honour onely Honour gain'd. Expence of Blood the Noble Theam began, And he alone who sav'd a Roman call'd a Man. No gawdy Heir which purchas'd Honour sate Insulting o're the Legal Magistrate; Nor Glittering Knighthood strutting with Renown, That from the Fathers well stuft Chest begun, By purchased Mandamus made his Own: But well Fought Victories did Fame advance, The Old try'd English way of Fighting France. And certain Valour certain Glory won, The honest Bait to Emulation.
No tatter'd Hero in his Shoulder-Belt, In Age and Poverty his Bruises felt: By conquering Fortune still acknowledg'd Brave, Yet go Heroick Beggars to the Grave, No mangl'd Cavalier at Seventy Four, With Fifteen Wounds obtain'd at Marston-Moor, His Scars Expos'd to the Unthankfull Court, The Fathers Champion, and the Childrens sport; Whose stranger Politicks New Systems had, And crusht the Carkase to Exalt the Head; And so the Basis of Deceit began, The King put on by putting off the Man. And that the Royal Stratagem might take, Heroick Paths of Luxury they make: New Wayes of Happiness and Life Define, And sacrifice to their almighty Wine; No Idol Pagod more Enchantments knew, Than this did first contrive, and that pursue: Nor do the Ages since Records were known, Such Standards of Refin'd Delusion own: In close resolved Tyrannies pursuing, By different Means That one great End, our Ruine. While Crouds of Thoughtless Mob with Changeling Praise, To their great God the King did sacrifice: Nor Hor-brain'd Zeal to Fiery Moloch paid Inhumane Offerings of the sacred Seed,
(While hapless Mothers their own Breasts deny, To Bribe the God with their own Progeny) With greater Gust than our Addressors sold Their Liberty for Lust, for Flattery their Free-hold; With eager Violence their Charters gave, Bartring the shadow Freedom, for the substance Slave. And thus the new erected Fabrick throve, And Freedom long with dying Pangs had strove, Till Fate disclos'd its Restoration nigh, The Mighty Sound dispirits Tyranny, So darkest Clouds the Morning Brightness flye. But still the haughty Faction's discontent, And struggle with the Chains of Government; Restraint from Ill is Freedom to the Wise, And he that parts with that will Tyrannize. Kings but by Agents act Illegal Power; No Jalour like a licens'd Prisoner. Who first his Freedom sells, receives in Pay Licence to tyrannize some other way. He paid for this who first Indulg'd their Heat, Whose Guile by pious Fraud they first defeat; Men work for others, but for Themselves they cheat. For when they found Their darling lust Ambition he restrain'd, That Nero would be Nero by Himself, That He Engross'd the Power and eke the Pelf;
That all their Recompences were Delays, Or such as Tyrants, always Traytors Pays; Then their Engag'd assistance they withdrew, And with their Lives New Fortunes they pursue. So Greedy Traytors when their Hopes decline, Do then their Benefactors undermine; So Wolves when barren Wastes afford no Prey, Will one another brutishly destroy.
A SATYR, &c. OF Modern Fame which hourly Pacquets bring, And actions born of Yesterday, I sing: No Errant Knights, but Errant Knaves I quote, With Presidents enough, and none remote. No Forreign Lists our Catalogue supplies, Some of our Own the French have took as Prize; We scorn Reprisals, Knaves of Forreign growth Are Contraband: Besides, the Prohibition barrs the Trade, And none but Knaves of English Stamp are made;
And Faith the stock is so improv'd for sale, The Manufacture is not like to fail. No Parallels from Hebrew times I take, And leave the Jingling Simily to speak; Who faithful Balm to Englands Wounds applyes, The Danger shows before the Remedies: Some Harmony with Hebrew Times may be, In some things differ, and in some agree. The chiming Parallel runs counter more, On all the different steps than is agreed before. The sacred Tribes with Heaven it self conven'd, And thundring sounds the dreadfull Law rehears'd; Immediate Dictates their Records began, Carryed by Voice, and constant Vision on; Humane Debates obey'd the heavenly Mode, And all their Statutes were the Laws of God; Long Names and Pedigrees did only tell, The Hero was the seed of Israel: For different Tribes no different Honour gave, But onely Mark't the Hebrew from the slave;
By Jus Divinum of the Heavenly Call, The son of Jesse, not the son of Said, The Regal Dignity at Hebron took, And all the Tribes the Royal Line forsook. The sacred Oyl was now as loud a Call, As when their Teams were threaten'd by King Saul: No Levite durst in canting phrase dissent, Nor levy Warr with dint of Argument: Nor did with David any Priest abide, Whose Dormant Faith attended for the strong'st side: Even Samuel a due Obedience paid Unto the Monarch he himself had made; Proportion'd Grandure for himself declin'd, To his proper work the Ark, and Sacrifice confin'd: No Titles rais'd, nor Haughty Pallace fram'd, But still was poor, and still was Samuel nam'd; The Altar serv'd, a linnen Ephod wore, Was still as Meek, and Humble, as before; Retyr'd from Court, in reverend Vests array'd, To Israel's God, for Israels King he pray'd: Ah had the sacred Tribe his steps pursued, What Years' of peace to Israel had ensued?
How had our Flourishing Isle glad Hours enjoy'd, For calmer Joys, and Nobler actions made? While their dark Councils now Embroyl the State, Our Feuds encrease, and Vengeance antedate; And their unpractis'd Hands exempt from Warr, Do all the profits of Confusion share. Fatal their skill, too undiscern'd the Fraud, While passive Zealots their Harangues applaud; Their Dictates swallow, and at Jehu's Rate, Swiftly drive on with these black Guards of State; A nameless Hydra Crow'd with Janus Face, That whisper Civil Fewds, and cry for peace. Domestick Heroes, whose Dragooning Hands Seek out no Forreign Wars, while they can plunder Friends. Inspire me Jove, with thunder arm my Pen, To lash the Manners, and describe the Men. How their lov'd Tyrant they at first ador'd, And hugg'd the Romish Fopperies he restor'd; How their reciprocal Contrivance met, And Mighty Injury upheld the State: How the loud Echoing Theatre the Church, Burlesque their God, and sacred Theams debauch,
Loud thanks return for th' Monster they had made; A Protestant Body with a Popish Head: With humble prayers that Christ would now permit That Antichrist should take his sacred Seat; The Body govern, and the Members keep, So Wolves protected the Unarmed Sheep. Their loud Addresses sanctifie the Fraud, And his Almighty Violence applaud: Prompt him to Mischiefs with upraised Note, As Right, and Wrong, had been their own by Vote. Vow'd that if ever he his Fate should try, With Life and Fortune they would all stand by, So afterwards they did at Salisbury: Nor Murmur'd they untill Dispensing Art, Their well-belov'd Ambition had cut short: But Early The Car∣lisle Ad∣dress. Thanks for standing Armies gave, And shouted home the glorious Charter Slave: With Mushrome Joy themselves Themselves deceiv'd, And thank their God for what they ne're Pr. of Wales. Believ'd. Triumphant Flames in Hypocritick Scorn, A second time do London's Fire∣works. Trophies Burn, While Injur'd Heaven does Flash for Flash return.
Yet these the same who when his Fame decreas't, And all his borrow'd Gloryes Overcast; Are found Caballing, and in short Debate, Quitting his Fortunes to avoid his Fate. Nassovian Justice Tyranny supprest, The wearied Land for some few dayes had rest; Ah few they were indeed, but very few, Till Discontent our former Feuds renew; And did King Jesus Reign they'd murmur too. Some smaller aids to our new Joys they lent, And feign'd to smile when they could not prevent But bauk'd of Lawless power as once to Reign, At their own aukward Jest they first repine; At Government with passive Fury rail, And their forsaken Idol now bewail: His hopefull Voyage to Irish Boggs they sing, And his Almighty thousands hither bring: From Month to Month his Numerous Hosts they show, How oft has England been Invaded so! Of his great Deeds they threatn'd, and of their own, And talk'd of Fights, but always talk'd at Home.
So Great D—s the Royal Fortress mann'd, How oft he swore, how oft the Prince he Damn'd: With many a Battering Curse, and many a Gun; Still as he run he curst, and as he curst he run. His willing Bands with wondrous Courage broke, Nor fought he for his Monarchs Cause a stroke; But fled e're yet the distant Troops appear, Ah! had his Guilt been less, so had his Fear. And now for Twins in craft observe the Men, Who early for the Princes Cause began: The Posse rais'd, and with united bands, In Fraud, and in Ambition too shook hands; For Hostages their Noble Pledges gave, There needs no arts to keep him true that's Brave; Once with our Hate successfully they strove, Screen'd by their Vices, and their Masters Love; Bloted by Pride, as they had oft been told, By their own Brass, and by the Kingdoms Gold: Their early Dictates of Tyrannick Sway, When we the King, the King did them Obey,
They still maintain, nor can they soon forget, To crush the Subject, and Embroyle the State; New fears of unborn Factions do infuse, And thread-bare cryes of Forty One renews. Accustom'd to be Jealous even of Light, When formidable Nothings did affright; Vouch that the Votes that William's Scepter gave, Made him a King, a Commonwealth to have. That those are fittest to direct his Rule, Who meant him that unthinking thing a Tool; Unfettered at his hazard, not their own, Would pay the Switzer off, and Reign alone: And now in closest Councils they preside, With Friend, and Foe, an equal spoil divide: With double aspect, seek their single Ends, Aiding King William with King James his Friends; To neither true, but hold the Poise at home, That both may humble Clients be to great King T—. And now the Church that sacred Vizor's on, And Rome begins to pull down Babylon: Dragooning's ceas'd, and Passive Laws declare, They wait to see the Issue of the War.
Too well the subtil Statesman knew the Tribe, To tamper till he found the Soveraign Bribe, Too well he knew they could not long withstand A trifling Oath. De Facto now at one Distinction gain'd The Militant thousands of the Sacred Train, Who long with starving hopes withstood in vain. Four Golden Candlesticks compose the Van, With all their Persecution glories on. The same that in the fiery Furnace trod, For Sons o'th' Church are all the Sons of God. A fifth nor Clergy, nor the Laity own, Was Souldier, Bishop, Lord, and Puritan. Blew Cloak, or Cassock, Troop, or Convocation, And thus he tryes his skill upon the Nation. In Grand Procession thus he views the Lists, His Squadron full four hundred booted Priests; The black Brigade thus for their Church appear'd, And horrid cryes for Abdy, Harvy, rear'd: With Notions scar'd, and their own Guilt subdued, So once before they fled when none pursued;
But when the terror of the Church begun, And Citts in Troops of Blew-Coat-Whiggs came on; The Martial Zealot in his Cope uprears, To the Royal Petticoats his Christian Prayers: And for Disbanding Grace made his Orisons, Which like his Graces Repartees were wise Ones. One purchas'd Priest, whose pay did not miscarry, A very Priest, for very Mercenary; Conscious of his too tottering Faith, and knew That if he took but one, should perjure two; In Conscience said hee'd never break them both, And swore, by God, he would not take the Oath. But now the gawdy Nicety's in vain, De Facto Swearers with De Jure joyn. Sworn and unsworn, one common Cause promote, And private Fewds for publick good forgot; While Doctor Sherlock now the Church harangu'd, With that same Topick Cook had try'd and hang'd. The Honest Levites who are poor and few, As they may well be poor who dare be true;
With words they wheedle some, with Gold as many, For Priests were always to be bought for mony. Room for a Regiment of Bigott Citts, Who lately lost, and lately found their Wits; By wondrous Fate with I don't an the Lieutenancy. forfeit Favours grac'd, By Mighty T—m's Almighty Magick plac'd: View them in Arms when our invaded Coast, Some glittering hopes propos'd that all was lost; How their advanc'd Battalion's did appear, To fight the Men appointed to come here. Sir W—m that in Martial Robes did shine, And Reason good indeed, began the Line; With many a Rank of Tory Buff and Feather, That's now Restor'd, and gone the Lord knows whither; To keep the Peace Precedency's did grant, And here, (if not at home) he's Commandant; Tho might he choose Commands, 't would be agen Ten thousand Guinea's, not ten thousand Men: Ah! Tom Papillion, 'twas a slippery trick, To bilk the Mayor, and then to Holland sneak:
See now the Martial Magistrate from far, With all his dreadful Equipage of War; Three equal Halves compose his stately Meen, Half Lord, half Souldier, half a Gentleman. And three as equal Dividends make out, The gawdy styles of his Pedantick Rout. True City Champions, tumults to appease, And wish't for Conventicling Trophies raise: As Taylors, Porters, Prentices, become Half drunk, half sober, and a half run home. Sir P—r next had Primitive command, Compleatly fix't, had but his Boots come on, A Campaign Phys, and as it came to pass, As much a Souldier, and as much an Ass: In different styles his numerous Titles ran, Was Hangman, Collonel, and Chamberlain; Synonimous to that Miraculous store, Was very Rich, and also very Poor. In later times he learnt to Domineer, And now most accurately swaggers here:
His Favourites now his dear bought Trophies sing, And he sues for speaking Treason like a King: Enrich't with lusty Verdict from the Suing Bellamy for words, & had two Marks Damma∣ges. Assize, Who at two Marks his over-valued Honour prize. A third, and fourth, to fill the Cavalcade, With match't Battallions meet on the Parade; For equal Falshood, equal Fate befell, This dub'd a Knight, and that a Collonel. A fifth and sixth, with many a subaltern, Went out with Fools, and just as wise return. But his Condition justly we condole, For pity is a Tribute to a Fool; Who first dismounted in the hot dispute, Went out on Horseback, and came home on Foot; The unhappy shot distinguish't to a Jest, Pick't out the Animal, and spar'd the Beast: Tho' some affirm the truth did not appear, Till he had first be—t himself for Fear; Nor with the fright did his Misfortune end, But first his brother Beast condol'd, and next his Friend:
So once the Woodman to the Man of God, When the lost Ax sunk in the Neighbouring Flood, Alas 'twas borrowed. And thus the Knights with City Discipline, Martch't to High Park indeed to see the Queen. So once the French with Forty thousand Men, Went up the Hill, and so came down agen: So once King James his Squadrons did delude-a, By storming Hounslow Heath instead of Buda: Had you the Baggage of the Host but view'd, Besides the running Campers that pursued: Had you beheld the Stores, the Magazine, The Bread, the Cheese, the Bottles, and the Wine, You would have swore 't had been a Scotch Campaign; That barren Highlands their fateagues should know, Where neither they could reap, nor others sow: Or that Montross's Marches they should take, With fifty days Provision at his back. And now the Queen advances to the view, Lord! how the ready Troops in order shew,
No more a Figure, their now dissolved Files, And one great Throng the well fix't Line compiles; To let the Queen their Annual postures know At their more regular Figure, Lord-Mayors-Show. And now the Royal Chariot's shouted home, By that Almighty Monster Captain Tom: Whose ecchoing shouts when she no more can hear, Their Pot-gun Volleys charge Her Royal Ear; Whose regular noise, had she not known how tame, How unprepar'd, and how resolv'd they came: Some dreadful scambling combate did present, Alike confus'd, thô different in event: And who knows what that day might have produc'd, By Wine and Martial Gallantry seduc'd; Had not the Wiser Sex their Votes deny'd, As to the Bagg of Bullets by the side. Wisely the advent'rous Wife her presence gave, To calm with Frowns, the Fop she came to save; A Whip's a proper weapon for a Slave, So once Sclavonian Masters did attack, When conquering Slaves came in Rebellion back.
And thus the Royal Muster did conclude, And the Host dissolv'd into a multitude; Meer Mob the Matter, Army was the Form, So Bees go out a Troop, come back a Swarm. So well composed Vapours represent Ships, Armies, Battails, in the Firmament; 'Till steady Eyes the Exhalation solves, And all to its first matter Cloud dissolves. Mean while the Martial Terrors of the Field, The threatned Whiggs with just Disdain beheld; The unwieldy Monster they at once defie, And in their Monarchs Cares do Peace enjoy; Their joyful Aids to his support lay down, And thankfully his happy Influence own; Their hearty thousands his Exchequer knows, And ready Loans their Press'd Obedience shows; No false Harangues of late addressing Age, But thus their Lives and Fortunes they engage; An active Loyalty their Princess sees, To purpose shown, and in Extremities:
Words are an empty Loyalty at best, And cheaply paid, Occasion is the Test; So found too late their Abdicated James, And so our Naval Management Proclaims. Nor do we Laurels to his Temples bring, Or conquering William's dear bought Triumphs sing With greater Joy, than with regret we see His Cause (for his is ours) Betray'd at Sea: So while th' accursed thing i'th' Camp remain'd, Were Israel's Tents with Israel's slaughters stain'd. Not so the Hero's our Design displayes, Whose awkward Grin their treacherous Joy betrayes. Ungrateful Smiles their envious hopes declare, And style the Invasion a Familiar War. Their horrid Jests on English Fears they make, And wild Delights in hop'd Revenge do take: Boast of our Losses with exalted Voice, And at their Countreys Infamy rejoyce. With uncouth Joy the well known Story told, How an Invasion's bought, and England sold;
And how exact the deep Intreague is laid, The Dutch be sacrific'd, and we betray'd. 'Twas like a Priest, when of the Sacred Tribe, One in his bloated Hopes their Plots describe: Our Plot! said he, and paus'd, to let you know To whom your Hopes, to whom your Thanks you owe, 's So deep, so well contriv'd, such Actors in't, The Devil perhaps may know't, but can't prevent. But when the Mob the Reverend Author took, How like his Roger when ook and car∣ried to Guild-Hall. Guide did passive Clerus look; How more confus'd, if Impudence can blush, When sarch't for boasted Plots! The Priest, as Priests are wont, deceiv'd the throng, And lookt for A Par∣son taken at Grave's Coffee-House. Treason's prov'd a Bawdy Song, And thus the Gallick Victories they declar'd, Even before the hastening Fact appear'd: Boasting their shame, and hugg'd themselves to find Their Israel, their own Israel flee before the Philistine: Just then when sinking Horror did surround, And present Fears our absent Hopes confound;
The wondrous Trump his Bone▪ Conquest sounded o're, So once his Aspect sav'd the Land before. Moments of time the vast occasion hit, To those surprizing, and to these compleat: Had the great deed exactly tim'd by Fate, One weighty juncture slipt, 't had come too late; Had he not fought, or had it not been then, Thô he had conquer'd, it had been in vain. So Mighty Nassau, so did Heaven contrive, That thy Great hand should twice the Nation save. See now the Hydra-Faction of the Town, Cry Hail, and bend with aukward Couchees to the Throne; The Cause disown, and cowardly Nero curse, Not that he did no better, but no worse: Ah! were they true to their adopted Cause, There's far more danger in their Tongues than Claws. For now with fatal Industry they drive, And unto one past Plot two more contrive;
Nor grudge to perish in the storm they raise, So their last fall their Country but betrayes: So swift are Men to desperate Ills design'd, To ill spontaneous, and in good confin'd. A proof the evil Principle is first, And Guilt has all the Power to Will engross'd. View next the last Fateague of New-born hope, To sink their fears, and empty Comforts prop, Exactly laid, but The Words of the Letter to K. James, taken with Lord Preston. God knows how let drop. In suppliant Postures now to Court they go. And they who once abhorr'd, Petition now. Nor are the Rout of less suppos'd esteem, Than six score representing Persons seem: Captains of thousands, mighty Men of Valour, From silly Will, to Captain Tom the Taylor; In Mood and Figure to the House made way, To beg their Prentices a Holy day.
And made a most unconscionable Prayer, That they might have no Aldermen, nor Mayor: But that the City as in ancient Troy, One General Revel-Jubilee might enjoy; That Bedlam, Newgate, Counters, and Bridewell, Might with the Common-C—il now Rebell; That Tower Ditches might exclude the Thames, And Royal Nassau truckle to King James: And that your poor Petitioners may be eas'd, And have a Mayor, or no Mayor, as they pleas'd; Remonstrating that what they did restore, Had more restrain'd them than they were before; 'Twas not their loathsome Priviledges they sought, But freedom to do ill. Give them their ancient Priviledges agen, When they could plunder and destroy like Men: The luscious Garlick of the former Reigns, And pin not Freemen up with Posts and Chains: When threatning Bastions at the Tower begun, And Guild-Hall Gate became a Garrison. When Charters were the Test, and Kings did know What they durst ask, the Subject durst bestow:
When trusty Patriots bought Mechanick sway, Begg'd for Illegal Orders to obey, And Compliment their Liberty's away; Whose Pickering that begg'd to have his Companies Charter taken away, and deli∣vered it with his own hand. swifter Grant his cravings did defeat, And Tyranny it self anticipate. A new Sir Will. this second March begun, And brought his Blunderbuss, but left his Gun. 'Twas thought the King bestow'd his Spurs in spight, And spoild a Captain to compose a Knight; In Whigg-Plot days have you not seen the Beau, With Martial Bagpipe to the Main Guard go; With many a Blunderbuss, and Musquetoon, Compleatly arm'd, with Cane, and Pantaloon: Equip't with his Hereditary Pride, And his Inheritance of Brains beside: Nature has wisely blazon'd on his Face, The Escutcheon of his Family, an Ass: From ear to ear the Mantling does extend, Creste'd to show the Goat's the Asses Friend; Accostom'd to Command, he rais'd in pity This Independant Troop to serve the City:
And wisely does remonstrate to the House, How much his Zeal before his Knowledge goes; And how he had improv'd his time at School, Was now a well accomplish'd Captain Fool, A weighty Blockhead, with an empty Scull. Next him Sir Ralph, in his due order stood, A very Ralph, a very piece of Wood: By art they say his Timber does excell, An artificial stroke may polish Hell: Some hid accomplishments he may contain, That do for Speculation still remain; Or to be known; when th' art to understand, Without the drudgery of speaking's gain'd, At present if we judge by what is known, As to the species of a Fool, he 's one. Alas Tom Durfey thou hast fallen Short, And now New Rappares, pag. 6. Drugestus shall excuse thee for't, For he had else come next to make us sport; With Ruby Face, and old abhorring Nose, So Copper mix'd with Stone, does Brass compose.
Next Cousin Will, with wither'd Face and Foot, In his Addressing Slippers hobbl'd to't, With aukward Phys, and a Petitioning Band, Recants Abhorring now, to heal the Land: With many a sigh the Danger represents, And now like Pen, the Brother Statesman cants; Had he a Linnen Ephod from the Stall, On's head a neighbouring Sign, he'd be a Cardinal: Were I King James, I'de send for him to France, And to a real Hat the Tool advance. Who knows when once become His Eminence, He may be fitter for an His Blunder at the Barr of the House. Evidence; Besides some change attends him that he knows, Inform'd by his prognosticating Toes. Now if you'd hear some Loyal City Farce, Hear Bed—d, hee'l bid you kiss his Ar— Nor Shrieffs, nor Mayor, nor Common Halls excus'd, But his Posteriors are alike expos'd: Nay, if Bow Bells for Whiggish Joys are rung, The jangling Mettal must salute his Bung;
The Parliament he hopes will hear him now, If not his common Compliment they know. Some of the sort have Crimes are Capital, On whom their Brothers Blood do's Vengeance call; Tender of these, we say to Rouse and Brough, Eternity is Punishment enough. Take an authentick Term for your Condition, 'Twas Murther styl'd by th' House you now Petition; Petition Heaven, (if it be not too late,) And tempt no more inevitable Face: But note, that they do Penitence pretend, Who strive to extenuate, and not amend. And here some Tears does injur'd Cornish call, Whom weeping Heaven does annually bewail, And Vengeance swift as Fate upon his Murtherers entail; Whose Death will never be forgot, forgiven On Earth by Man, or unreveng'd by Heaven: An Innocent Man by your unrighteous Breath, As a Man before the wicked fell. —
To paint the single Character of all, Would swell the Satyr to a Chronicle: As whipping Langham, and his Brother Kent, With Pious Brerewood, Doctor Small-beer's Saint; And some that sacrificed Mistress Gaunt; With one of Cornishes, (that yet survives,) And near an hundred more Diminutives: One general Character the List may Own, The Hackney Jurors of the Drooping Town; The Inquisitors of late Tyrannick Reign, Who now Petition for Power to Ride again. How vast had been the List, had not the band, To Senate Members only been confin'd: Thus Sir J— M—r they left, and that was pity, Who had so long been th' Genius of the City: Well might the King to his Escutcheon add The Rampant K. Charles ad∣ded to his Scut∣cheon the Lyon Rampant. Lyon, who such roaring made, And eat up all the Priviledges we had: And some Assistants that the Fury fed, Were now become of the Petitioned.
Not thence the slacker handed to put on, The labour'd purchase of Confusion: For if past Hazards are a proper Test, Sir Thomas shares a Faith above mistrust: Who Frigidated by Distemper'd Hams, His Fiery Zeal for Slavery proclaims; With Gouty Corps, in Mathematick Chair, To Charter giving Votes did heartily repair. Sir Sy—n L—s held up both his Paws, To think that he who smarted for the Cause, Should now be robb'd of his delight, Applause; And by his quondam Honours loudly swore, Tho' Jilted oft, was never Thus before; Nothing but time can lay the fermentation, Or make his Worship fit for Conversation. Not Celia's Charms, not Clora's tender hours, But raves in Love, and frets in his Amours. Sir W—m W—ms first the Cause espous'd, And all his sputtering Eloquence he rous'd;
Foaming with learned Fury, you'd ha' thought, He came to spew them in, he once spew'd out. Well hir'd to be the Churches Champion, And thus for Bishops Tryal does attone. For Soveraign Fee, with eager note does prate, No Cause so bad but has an Advocate. And to make up the showe, with Men of Sence, Comes Common S—t for an Evidence; With We's, and They's, with Us's, and Suppose's, Tells how in Common Hall he counted Noses: Tells you how he himself with City Power, Decently waited on by Sheriffs, and Mayor, Does Propria Persona first disclose, And tell the People who it is they chose. With Meagre Face, and true Mechanick Pride, So will th' exalted Beggar always ride.
The CONCLUSION. GReat Nassau from his envied Throne look't down, And view'd their busie Malice with a Frown. Their Impotent Fury view'd with just disdain, And ask'd if he had Sav'd them all in vain? Their weak Intreagues with due Contempt he saw, And generously restrain'd the scourge of Law. His Conquering Mercy did his Justice stay, And at his Peril let them disobey: Restraints to his own injur'd Passions gave, Their Folly pityed, and their Guilt forgave. A Proof he strove for their meer Liberty, Had fought to save, and conquer'd to set free; Divinely Good, their treacherous arts he bore, Was still as kind, and gentle as before: Arm'd them as Friends, to fortifie his Throne, And smil'd until they thought he durst not frown. But when their Insolence his Arm defy'd, And wou'd again their baffled Cause have try'd, And he must now destroy or be destroy'd;
Let's flye at once his Vengeance to devour, And gives a taste of his mistaken Power: Takes care that they shall never more rebell, And with just Thunder drives them down to Hell. "So Jove when Earth born Titan's did aspire, "Pile Hill on Hill, and higher yet came and higher, "Till they almost had scal'd Heavens glittering Wall, "And either they, or he himself must fall; "Unrein'd his Vengeance, let his Thunders flye, "And forked Lightnings sally round the Skye; "The black Abyss is cover'd with their spoils, "They float on Chaos, like enchanted Isles; "Transfix't with angry Bolts, from surge to surge they go, "Despair and raving wander in Eternal Woe: May all thine Enemies, Great Nassau, perish so. FINIS.
