F18 [ocm]17022055 206286
ENGLANDS Deplorable Condition: SHEWING The COMMON-WEALTHS Malady, By Sacriledge, and want of Duty in the People. Contention, want of Charity in the Ministery. Perjury, and want of Truth in both. And Its Remedy, By The Peoples Obedience and Liberality. The Ministers Love and Unity. Both their Repentance, and Fidelity. Briefly Declar'd in THREE TREATISES, Of The Ministers Patrimony, and Peoples Duty. Proposals to reconcile such as are for Lordly Episcopacy, and Un-ordain'd Presbytery; for Popular Independancy, and Upstart Antipaedobaptistry. And against Perjury. Also, a Petition for the JEWS. As they that served at the Altar lived of it, so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of it, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Every Devoted thing is most holy to the Lord; it shall be the Priests, it shall not be sold, nor redeemed, Lev. 27. 21, 28. . Intentione Dantis, Exod. 20. 2, 6. Extentione Recipientis, 1 Cor. 16. 14. Impletione Mandatorum, Rom. 13. 8. Acceptatione Evangelii, Luk. 10. 27, 28. Origine Obedientiae, 1 Cor. 13. 1, &c. Operatione nullius mali, Rom. 13. 10. Who shall inherit heaven? He that sweareth to his own hurt, and chan∣geth not, Psal. 15. 4. That hath not sworn deceitfully, Psal. 24. 4. I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back, Judg. 11. 35. Even so hath the Jews now not believed, that through your mercy, they also may ob∣tain mercy, Rom. 11. 34. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Richard Skelton or at the Hand and Bible in Duck-lane. 1659.
To all that tremble at Gods Word, and fear an Oath; Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ who is our Hope. BELOVED, AFfliction, the Rod God useth to correct us with, for he scourgeth every Son he receiveth, Heb. 12. being laid on me, it made me in Jan. 8. 1651. to search and try my wayes, and to turn unto the Lord, and because no man as David saith, knoweth his errors, therefore I prayed in the words of Elihu, Job 34. 32. that which I see not, shew thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do so no more; and knowing it a truth by experience formerly, which he spake Job 33. 15. That God speaketh in a dream, in visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumbring on the bed: then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction, &c. (though I ab∣hor those filthy Dreamers St. Jude speaks of, and those Enthusiasts condemn'd by Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. Tripart. lib. 7. cap. Epiphan. scholast. Interpr. Hi enim cujusdam Daemonis operationem expectant, & hanc sancti spiritus presentiam arbitrantur: whose successors most of our Ranters and Quakers are, who believe things contrary to the written Word, and practice what the Scriptures condemn, as did these old Messalians, Euchitae, for by all these three names they are call'd there. After which God shewed me (according to my Prayer) my not performing my Oath and Covenant in a Sermon by acci∣dent I heard in Bathe, as I was travelling through that Town: and shortly af∣ter moved me exceedingly in a Dream to write against the sin of Perjury, and to add it to my former Tract in my first Book I delivered to the King, 1647. against this sin, for sith the Lord punish'd him for this sin; how can he spare us unless we repent of it. And though I humbled my self for this sin presently, yet was I not resolved to print it till in March following, reading Ezek. 9. 4. that we ought not to mourn for our own sins only, but for the sins of the Land: I be∣thought my self of them, and then was moved, (as I conceive by Gods Spirit) for his glory▪ and his Churches good, and the discharge of my duty, to mak a Vow to write against the sins in this Book specified; and then I prayed for
direction and assistance, for grace, wisdom, and prudence, for strength, health, and means to effect it, so as it may accomplish the ends desired, &c. And though Satan hitherto hath much bindred me, together with mine own infirmities, whilst I too much looked on the things seen, and conferr'd with flesh and blood. Yet now Christian Reader, for he ends alone above-specified, and to pay my Vow with fear and trembling at Gods Word, and the judgements that hang over our heads, and not for any by-interest to any Person, or malice, or hatred against any, or out of pride, prejudice, or self-seeking have I imprinted this (as God is my Record, whom I serve in the Spirit, I speak the truth, and lie not.) And therefore what is of God, and agreeable to his Word, I desire thee only to hold fast, and practice; What hath not warrant thence, impute it to my igno∣rance and weakness, (which in Christs name I desire thee to pardon) but before thou judge any thing, prove it by the Word to be an error, without partiality, or hypocrisie, self-love, interest, or fear of Man; and the Lord grant us both the Spirit of Discerning, to know the things that differ, and to approve the things that are most excellent, and to walk in the light when we have it, with∣out detaining the truth in unrighteousness, lest the wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against us for it: but grant that we may be sincere; and without offence now, and hereafter in the day of Christ, which the Lord grant for Christs sake. AMEN. So wisheth thy Souls Friend, E. F. de C. V. ERRATA. PAge 2. l. 2. justly claim. p 3 l 4 Chemosh, & l 15 per, & l 37 chad: p 4 l 12 Nicephorus: p 5 l 16 the Maintenance, & l 22 he which, & l 27 de fructibus: p 7 l 30 Judae, & l 24 in cospectu: p 8 l 5 admoveat, & l 19 Areopagitae, & l 38 this: p 13 l 10 and to bring: p 14 l 15 ademi possit: p 20 l 26 clargiti: p 22 l 1 Haeres: p 26 l 4 Gal: 3 15: p 30 l 33 for their▪ p 31 l 6 , & l 20 . p 37 l 35 ab authore: p 38 l 38 Advowsons: p 40 l 9 Clinici, & l 36 another: p 47 l 21 Alfred: p 56 l 35 fraus: p 58 l 11 yet: p 60 l 28 dele they.
THE MINISTERS OF THE Gospels Patrimony. AND THE Saints Duty. THE Earth is Iehovaehs, and the plenty thereof the World, Ps. 24. 1, 2. Deut. 10. 14. and they that sit therein, both by right of Creation, for he hath founded it on the Seas, and establisht it on the Rivers, and by right of conservation, for as all things were made by him, so he upholdeth all things by the word of his power. Heb. 4. 1. Psalm 50. 12. In him we live, move, and have our being. Acts 17. 26 And he hath made of one blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on the face of the whole earth, and hath determined the times appointed, and the bounds of their habitations, for he hath divided inheritances unto the Na∣tions, when he separated the Sons of Adam, at the confusion of Languages, and set the bounds of the people, according to the number of the Sons of Israel. Deut. 32. 8 Gen. 10 31. Thirdly, by Inheritance and Redemption, the World, and all therein are the Lord Je∣sus Christs, by whom the Father hath reconciled all things un∣to himself, Col. 1. 20, and whom he hath appointed to be heir of all
things. Heb. 1. 2. Therefore whatever Title, or Interest, or Propri∣ety any man can claim to any part of the earth, or the fruit there∣of, or the Cattel therein, or any profit that comes by Sea or Land it must come from God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the grand Landlord, and Lord paramount over all other Lords, and things, 1 Tim. 1. 17 and 6. 15. Rev. 19. 16. and 17. 14. all which are the godly mans, Quoad usum, non quoad possessionem, 1 Cor. 3. 21 they shall serve for their good, though they be not their servants to command. Now there are four wayes whereby Lands or Goods become proper to any man. By which he may justly lay claim to them (for I omit all unlawful and pretended Titles) as his proper Goods, or Land. First, by Gods immediate Donation or Gift, for this is most ancient; thus God gave to Adam the Earth, and all the Creatures in it, with the Fruits thereof, for him to subdue it, and to have dominion over it, Gen. 1. 28. and after Adam his Sons were to enjoy it. Psalm 115. 16. And thus, Secondly, by Inheritance, Children may enjoy their Parents Estates belonging to them, as the Land of Canaan was given to Abraham and his Seed, for them to inherit the same, as Heirs to their Father of the Promise Heb. 11. 8, 9. made Gen. 12. 7, and 15. 18. and 26. 3. and Numb. 27. 8. 12 yea the Inheritance was to passe unto the Daughters where heirs Male faild; the Twelve Tribes had their Inheritances by Lot assigned them, which was by the disposition of the Lord Prov. 16. 3. as Solomon sheweth. Thirdly, By Purchase Land becomes a mans own, when he buyes it with his money, or Goods; Thus Abraham with mo∣ney bought the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, and the Cave therein, and all the Trees that were in the Field, and in all the Borders round about, for a possession to him and his heirs for ever, Gen. 23. 17 for four hundred sheckles of Silver. And so Ia∣cb bought a parcel of a Field for an hundred Lambs, or pieces of money on which the Images of Lambs were stamped, Gen. 33. 19 Josh. 24. 32. for 'twas an ancient custome to buy things by Exchange, as among the Greeks; Homers I∣liad. 8. both these wayes are intimated. 1 Kings 21. 3. Fourthly and lastly, Lands or Goods becomes a mans own by conquest, or mediate gift of men; by Conquest, when men by his command, or according to his will, invade any Land or Nati∣on; Thus by Conquest the Israelites at Gods command invaded the Land of Sihn King of the Amorites Deut. 2. 31. and they conquered
them, and God is said to give their Cities and Lands to them, as Iephthah peads, Judg. 11 2 2, 23. and this seemeth then as wel as afterwards to be the Law of Nations, as appears in that following, wilt thou not possess that which Cheimosh thy God giveth thee? because victory in battle is the Lords? 2 Chron. 14. 11. & he gives it to whom he wil, and here∣by destroyeth utterly sometimes, and displanteth Nations, as the Zuzims, and Emims, and Raphaims out of Canaan by Chederlao∣mer. Gen. 14. 5. The Chorits, and others dwelling in Mount Seir by Esau and his Sons. Deeu. 2. 21 Or 2ly God immediately by mens wil and disposition giveth unto men Lands and Goods as Abram gave Goods to his Sons by Keturah, Gen. 25. 6. but his Lands, and the chief of his Estate he gave to Isaac and his posterity Gen. 24. 36 & so the Eleven Tribes at Gods command gave Cities to the Tribe of Levie Josh. 21. 3, and paid their Tithes and Offerings, Levit. 27. pro totum. so those who to ac¦knowledge their homage and thankfulness to God in a singular way to honour him, and to maintain his Worship and Ministers, and the poor sanctified houses or fields, or the prices of them, or else devoted persons, and redeemed them, as in the place before quoted: so also Barnabas under the New Testament sold his Land, devoted and brought the money, and laid it down at the Apostles feet, Acts 4. 3. so did many others that had possession of Lands and sold them, Houses, and brought the prizes of the things sold, Acts 4. 34. which also Ananias pretended to do out of vain glory. Acts 5. 1. Now this belonged to the Apostles and poor in the primitive Church, verse 35. and they accordingly distributed unto every man as he had need; it was before it was sold their own, as Peter plainly tells Ananias, and after that was sold, the money was in his own power to dispose of it as pleased him, but after it was devoted, then it was not in his power to keep back part of it; heren he betrayed his covetousness and dffidence: his hypocrisie andThe applicati∣on of what was spoken before. sacriledge; and telling a Lye to the Holy Ghost, he became a spectacle of divine vengeance. In the times of the Apostles the Brittons were without questi∣on the lawful possessors of this Isle, God having given the same to them to inhabit, as he did Mount Seir to the Edmites, Deu. 2. 5. Ar to the Moabites Deut. 2. 9. & having brought the Brittons from Troy, as he did the Philistines fom Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir Amos 9 7. as the Bittish Chronicles generally agree. Brute who was their King having reigned there four and twenty years before Sauls Death. Cnadder∣ions third age of the world, Gildas and o∣thers
This Nation as well as other Gentiles when Christ suffered,(h) Fox Acts and Monum. 1 part, page 95. printed 1610. worshipped dumb Idols, and offered Sacrifice to Devills. But about the years of our Lord (68) Joseph of Arimatha after the disperson of the Jews was sent by Philip the Apostle from France into this Island, who here remained during his life, and He with his companions if Gildas may be credited, laid the first foundation of Christian Faith among the Brittons, who after∣ward were confirmed, and Beleevers increased by other Preach∣ersGoodwin of Bi∣shops Initio libri. and Teachers that came over. To him and his Associates was given in the Reign of King Arniragus, Glacenbury, with (12) Hidelands adjacent to it, for their maintenance in the Ise then called A valon, (i) although I rather approve of Nicephorus his testimony, Nicepsorum libr. secuno, cap. 4. who saith that Simon Zelotes did spread the Go∣spel of Christ to the West Ocean, and brought the same to the Isle of Brittain. Now God bearing witness to the testimony of his Gospel in this Land as elsewhere, and confirming the word spoken both with signes and wonders, and divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will, of which King Lucius (Son of Coilus that builded Colchster in this Land) hearing, a∣bout the year (180) he sent to Elutherius the Bishop of Rome to receive of him the Christian Faith, and to be Baptized, who rejoy∣cing to hear the request of thi King, and to see the godly for∣wardness of his well disposed mind, presently sent him Faganus and Damianus Preachers to him, who preaching to the King, his Court and people, converted many, and Baptized them, and so they subverted the Idol Temples, and all other monuments of(l) Fox Acts and Monum. 1 Part, pag. 96 printed 1610. Gentility, and embraced the Christian Faith. And whereas be∣fore there were amongst the Gentiles eight and twenty head priests called Flamins, & three Arch-Priests cald Arch-Flamins, these they turned into eight and twenty Bshops, and three Arch-Bishops, taking away the meanes which formerly was given to Sathan and his Ministers, for to maintain the worship of Devils, and conscrating it unto Jesus Christ, and his Ministers, for to maintain the true worship of God, of which its probable Tythes were a part; for so the Gentiles paid Tyth to their Flamines, as well as the Jews did to the Priests and Levites. So Pisistratus Tyrant of Athens infoms Solon that all the Athenians did sepa∣rae the Tythes of their Fruits, not to spend them on private use, but for the publick Sacrifices, and common profits. Lcrtiue in vita solonis: So
amongst the Latines they used to pay Tythes to Hercules. Pmpon. Lat. de sacer. Macrob. Sa∣turn. lib. 3. cap. 12. And Cyrus his Souldiers by the advice of Craesus were staid from spoiling the Lydians City that the Tythe might first be paid to Jupiter. Herod in Clio. However certain it is that this good King Lucius founded many Churches, gave great riches and liberties to the same, as Fox confesseth Fox Acts and Mon. ut su∣pra, p. 97. so did many other christian Kings converted to the Faith, as Ethelbert gave Lands and Re∣venues to Austin that converted him at Canterbury, Sigibert gave to Melitus at London; also Quicelinus gave the ity of Dorchester to Berinus, and after to the Bishop of Winchester seven miles compass of Land, to build there the Bishops Sea, which was accomplished and finished by Kenwalkus his Son, Fox ut su∣pra pagin, 110. as our Fox relateth. And that Tythes as now they are pad were given by Lucius and his people, is more than probable, sith they were governed in Religion & the discipline of the Church, & maintenance there∣of, was after the example of the Rmish Church which then was in its purity, or very little swaving from the Apostolick Faith. Fox ut supra pagin. 96. And at that time Tythes were paid at Rome, for all Christians are bound both by the Law of nature, and institution of the Church to pay Tythes, Aquinas 2da: 2da: q. 87. A. 1. and St. Augustine saith Tythes are re∣quired of due debt, and the which will not give them, invades a∣nother mans goods; Aug in Serm 1. Domin. post T. in. 12 & in Ser. de tem∣pore 219. Decimas de tru∣ctibus vestris red∣ditae, ille vero Christianus est qui decimus an∣nis ngulis ero∣gandas pauperi∣bus reddit. and again, he which gave hee the whole requires again the Tenth of thee, not certain to profit himself but us. In the National Councel of Calehuth, anno 785, as Spelman relates in the Reigns of King Oswald, and Offa, there on good grounds specified, Tythes were commanded to be paid as a special gift and tribute we ow t God, Spel. Concil. pag. 292 for so indeed pay∣ing of Tythes was a sign of Homage, and subjection we owe to God, as also of thankfulness, which therefore was given to Gods Mnisters, and Priests before the Law, Gn. 14. 29 and 28 21. and under the Law, Lev. 27. & Numb. 18. and Deut. 14. 22. and under the Gospel. Rom. 15. 27. and 1 Cor. 9. 13 Gal. 6. . Kng Ethelstane in his Land gave Tythe of his proper Goods, as well in living Cattel, as in Corn and Fruits of the gound, and the same charge and command he gave to all his Officers throughout his Realm to pay the same, which was about nne hundred years after Christ, & the ground of it was from the example of the godly who paid Tyths before the Law, and by the words of our Sviour, and by the terrible threats denounced in other Books, which told them that if they would not pay their Tenth, their nine parts should be taken from
them, and they should enjoy only the Tenth: also it appears in the Reign of Egbert almost two hundred years before, Fox ut su∣pra, pag. 135, & 136, and 149, & 150. for in the beginning of his Reign Cutheart Arch Bishop of Canter∣bury with his Synod of Bishops and Prelates concluded that the Congregation in every place should be constituted after the abi∣lity of their Goods, which had been to no purpose had not Tythes been paid out of them. Afterwards in the Reign of K. Ed∣mond C. Anno 940. the King with the advice of his Lords and Bishops Enacted a Law that Tythes should be paid by every chri∣stian man: Fox ut supra pag. 136. And this was after confirmed by the Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings that succeeded, as appears in that Oath they usually took at their Coronations, to preserve and defend the rights and priviledges of the Church, as is manifest in the descrip∣tion of a King by King Edward the Confessor. Fox ut supra pag. 149, 150. The King of right and by his office ought to conserve fully and wholly in all ampleness without diminution the Holy Church, according to the consttution of his Ancestors and Predecessors, and to defend the same against all foes: And these Tythes hath been ratified and confirmed on the Ministers of the Church, by sundry Acts of Parliament since the Coquest, as by Magna Charta of King Henry the First, and King John, and Henry the Third, & 37. times since confirmed in Parliament, Vide Mr. Prin's Gospel Plea in his Pre∣face to the Christian Rea∣der. and the last Parliament calld 1640. hath confirmed the same by their Ordinance, 1644. Vide the Or∣dinance of Par∣liament made November 1644. for the better payment of Tythes. nor were ever any of those acts repealed, but are in force still. Therefore I humbly conceive that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to live of those things that are given, and by devout men consecrated to Gods service, according to the Laws of God and man, and that their maintenance ought to be according to the greatness of their employment, and to the number of Wife and Children in their Families, which they are obliged to provide for Acts 4. 37. & 6. 2. 1 Tim. . 8. Lev. 22. 11, 12 as the Priests and Levites did of old with their Families; And the Civil Magistrates if there be disorder in the dividing of the Churches Goods, or ignorance, and slouth in the Ministers, or obstinacy and neglect in those that should pay their▪ Tythes and Offerings, may command the same to be rightly divided, and see it be done as did Hezekias, 2 Chron. 31. 45, &c: who is said to do that which is good and right, and truth before God, verse 20. and they may punish or remove those Ministers that are ignorant, or prophane, even the chiefest of them, as David and Solomon did of old, 1 King. 2. 26. and 35. and Cnstantine the Great, and Theodosius, & other Christian
Princes under the New Testament, Theod Eccles▪ Hist. lib. 1. c. 20. & lib. 5. c. 19: and cause the Tythes to be paid to the Ministers, as Nehemiah did, Nehem 13. 10, 11, &c. who caused the porti¦ons of the Levites to be given, and so did the pious Magistrates in our Land, who made those Laws above specified, requiring all sorts of persons to pay their Tythes, on penalty, as being due to Christs Ministers, both by the Law of God and man. Well they knew it was not in mans power to detain, or take from God that which God required, or by the motion of his Spirit was devoted to him and his Service; such Houses, Lands, Goods, under the Law was not to be sold, or redeemed, it was holy to the Lord; Levit. 27. 28. or as it is in the Original, twas holiness of holiness, that is most holy in respect of them that devoted them, and therefore not to be sold, detained, or denied, God would not suffer them to redeem it, to teach them con∣stancy in all good purposes and words, that so in them we may be un∣changeable as God is, Ainsw. Annot. in loc. no part of it may be held or kept back without theft, that I say not Sacriledge, the property being altered after it's devoted, as St. Peter told Ananias, Acts 5. 1, 4. both be∣fore he sold 'twas his own, and after he had sold and received the mony, 'twas in his own power to dispose of it, but when he had devoted the whole money to the free use and benefit of the Church, to be distributed by the Apostles, for him then, to keep back part of it, and to lay down the residue as the whole, and to confirm it to be the whole with a wilful lye, for this the Apostle sharply reproved him, for thereby he tempted God, and lyed to the Holy Ghost, and therefore God made him a spectacle of di∣vine vengeance for his detaining the truth in unrighteousness, and for his Sacriledge, for such a sin there is under the Gospel, Rom 2 22. as well as there was under the Law, which is theft in the highest degree, which St. Austin compares to Judas treachery, Ideoque A∣nanias & Sa∣phira in conse∣tu Ecclesie mor∣tui sunt, ut A∣postolica Attho∣ritas quanta es∣set ostenderetur & quam mag∣num peccatum esset, quod obla∣tum iterum ab Ecclaesia retra∣heretur, monstra∣retur & caeteri exemplo hujus castigarentur Aug. lib. 3. de Mirab. Sacr. Script. for if he be accounted a Thief that steals goods from a private man, how much more is a sacrilegious person a thef, who dares to steal from God and his Church, Qui aliquid de Ecclesia furatur Jurae perdito comparatur: He which steals from the Church is to be compared with cursed Judas, Aug. in E∣vang. John tract p. 50. the Heathens abhord this sin: therefore we read that Joseph when in the Famine in Egypt, he bought with Corn all the Land of the Egyptians, yet the Land of the Priests he bought not, for they had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, nor sold they their Land; Gen. 47. 22. whence Theodoret saith, if wicked men so much reverenced hose gods which were not gods, so that their Priests Lands given to them for the worship of those gods, were not sold nor taken from them, what impiety do those commit under the Gospel, who will not suffer the Mi∣nisters
of the living God to enjoy this liberty, Theodor. quest. in Gen: cap. 27. that so his ser∣vice may be preserved, and continue with them? The Heathen to preserve their gifts devoted, from the hands of prophane sacrilegious persons, engraved on them these words, Sunt bona Decrum, ad hc ne quis manum admoliretur, Valcrius max. lib. 1. cap. 2. and the Jews calld their devoted things chosen, in Greek  Levit. 27. 28. Luke 21. 5 . wishing and judging them accursed, that turnd them to any other use than to that they were devoted unto; and so amongst us Christians, the most of the Lands in this Island they were gi∣ven to God and the Church, with an execration on those to be separated from Christ, and given to the Devil, that should alter them, or employ them to any other use than by the Donors, they were at fist devoted unto, which in general was the service of God, (although many in the times of Popery faild in the super∣stitious observing and requiring of many things which might have been Reformed, and the deceased devout persons wills been ob∣served inviolably in the general, though not in that specifical ser∣vice required, 'Twas so high a crime in the eyes of those that saw only by the light of nature that the Areopagit condemned Aelians boy for this sin. Aelian: Hist: lib. 5 cap: 16. Var: Hist. God almost miraculously killd King Rufus See Hoy∣woods History of the death of King Rufus. by an Arrow shot by Sir Walter Tirrel at a Deer; He was wont to call that got from the Church sweet-bread, but it proved bitter to him at the last, when he was slain in his sports in the new Forrest, which for his pleasure he had made, thereby depriving seventeen Churches of their Revenues, and the Mini∣sters of the Churches, and also the people of dwellings, depopu∣lating those Parishes, God had warned him Prov: 20 5. that it was a snare to devour that which was holy, and after vows to make enquiry. He had at that time also in his hand three gret Bishopricks, viz. Canterbury, Winchester, Sarum, and twelve Abbies in Farm, his Brothers Son also was slain there. Fox Acts and Mon: 1 Part, page 171, and printed 1610. Idolaters of old conferred Lands and Riches, yea much of their Goods on their Idols service, and Priests, witnesse these Scriptures Hs: 218. Ezel: 16. and 1 Kings 18, 19 and the wisest of them were afraid for fear of death to commit Sacriledge, or to take away any Lands or Goods devoted to their gods, such they reputed Atheists, Valer Max. lib: 1, cap. 2 as Dionysius Senior, Nero, Julian, the Apostate, and others, and the living God to shew his detestation of his Sin, hath accordingly plagued the same. As Swanus the first Danish King in England that wasted and spoi∣led the Land of St. Edmond, devoted to Gods service; shortly
after, saith Fox, he died suddenly, crying and yelling among his Knights; some say he was stricken with the Sword of St. Ed∣mond, of which he died the third day, Fox ut supra page 145. which caused his Son Ca∣nutus after his death, to grant them their Freedom and Liberties, and to enlarg their Possessions, building a Church and Abby there: after which it was used that the Kings of England, when they were Crowned, sent their Crown for an Offering to St. Ed∣monds shrine, and after redeemed the same at a dear rate. Fox ut supra page 146. Ju¦lians Uncle, & Faelix the Kings Treasurer, who took Theod Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 11, 12. away the Silver and Gold Constantine had Dedicated, by fearful Plagues perished; the one Vomited at his mouth his Ordour till he died, and the other, Blood. Many yet alas in these Iron dayes which are mixt with Clay, Dan. 2. 42 without fear or shame, have attempted to devour things Consecrated, and have effected wicked devices as the Psalmist saith: Psal. 37. 7. but they have been cut off, and are not what they were: Do but diligently consider, (there) where their place stood, and they are not, I mean the Parliament that first sold the Bishops Lands, and those after them that sold the Dean and Chapters Lands; and what may be the end of those that have bought these, and retain these to their own use, without Repentance, may be conjectured by what hapned to HENRY the Eighth, and his Favourite, the Earle of ESSEX, who sold and alienated the Land and Revenues of the Mona∣stries;i Mal: 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Non remittiur peccatum nisi re∣stituatur abla∣tum. Aug. Cir∣cuite totum mundum non reperietis tam effrenem li∣centiam in gen∣tibus qualis in∣ter vos grassa∣tur. Illi enim obsequium ali∣quod reddunt diis suis & sa∣crilegium illis est ahominabile vos autem me frau∣datis. Calvin in locum prelect. they were cut off, and their Posterity is not known. And truly I think, this was not the least sin that stuck too, and devoured like the Eagles feathers, the Crown Land. Gods Re∣venues wrung from him by violence, or stoln away under any specious pretence, proving like the Gold of Tholouse, that preju∣diced still the owners of it, or like Acans Wedge (which was indeed devoted Gold) that kindled a fire on himself, his Family, and the rest of his goods, which prov'd his utter destruction Josh. 7: And yet though divine vengeance sleepeth not, nor spareth the greatest Delinquents in this sin, yet such hath been the prophane∣ness and Atheism of some, the ignorance and blind zeal of others, to Petition to have all the Chuches Revenues sold, and to have a Law confirmed for the taking away of Tythes, See the Reso∣lution on the Question by the Parl: April 29. 1652. and some other competent Maintenance to be setled in lieu of it. But what is this, but as if men under pretence of Liberty, should desire Property to be taken away, and that it may be lawful for any man to steal from his Neighbor, nay, from his God, (under pretence of given
them satisfaction for it another way) for so the Lord of Hosts by his Statute Law, by which all shall be judg'd, accounts it, Ye have robbed me in Tythes and Offerings: And to terrifie those of that age from this sin, he sets down the punishments to be in∣flcted on them, unless they repented of it, and restored the Goods taken, by making satisfaction for the Sacriedge, and for∣saking afterward the sin, and hereupon he promiseth Mat. 3. 9. a blessing on them when they should so do. God needeth not our Offer∣ings, Gifts, nor Tythes, but his poor Members do; and what is done to any of them, is done to himself, and his Ministers wants these, that helped by these, they might attend on his Service and Worship, and therefore well may he call these his, which are de∣stinated for things so dear unto him, as are the poor who are his Children, as dear to him as the apple of his eye, and his Worship and Glory, which he will not give to another; Suum Deus merit vocat ac censet quod de∣stinat in cultum suum. Ideo sa∣crilegi sumus quoties non red∣dimus fratribus nostris quod Deus jubet. Calv. ut supra. therefore with∣out doubt (saith one) God is wrong'd of his Right, and Sacri∣ledge is committed (which the very Heathen abhord) when ei∣ther Christs Ministers, or the Poor, are defrauded of their due. Now God challengeth the Tyth for his due; Levi. 27. 30, 31. All the Tyth was Jehovahs, Holiness to him: nor was it to be redeemed or chang∣ed, and that by the Law of Nations, for 'twas allowed of, and approved, and practised long before the Ceremonial Law was gi∣ven by Moses, as Gen. 14. 20. & 28. 21, 22. in Abraham and Jacobs dayes who paid their Tythes. Gen. 14. 20. & 28. 21, 22. Yea, this seems to be a positive Law of God, given unto Adams Sons from the beginning, for both Cain and Abel brought their Oblations Gen. 4. 3, 4. and first Fruits of the Corn, and of the Beast: and God required of the Souldiers that fought against Midian (before the Israelites had any Land to pay their Tythes out of it) to pay the Tenth of their Spoyles: Numb. 31. 28, &c. yea, the first City on this side Jordan, which the Israelites took in Canaan by War, was by Jesus Christ himself devoted to the maintenance of the Priests, and to his own Service; I mean the Silver, Gold, vessels of Brass and Iron in Jericho, they were all to come in into the Troasy of the Lord; Josh. 6. 17, 19. yea, he was so careful for his own portion, th Achan having taken of the devoted thing by stealth, and dissembling it, hiding the 200 sheekles of Silver, and the Wedge of Gold in his Tent under the Earth, that God is dis∣pleased with all Israel for it, and would not go forth with their Armies until this accursed thing, with Achan and his Family were consumed by fire: Josh. 7. 26. And truly we shall find that the Devil who
is Gods ape, set his Children and servants about this work of old. You know what honour and means the Priests of the Egypti∣ans had in Josephs dayes, insomuch that a Priest and Prince of On are words Synonomous: The Septuag. translates it, Priest of Helio∣polis, or he may be the Presi∣dent & Prince of it; perhaps he was both, as was the manner of those times and places. Ainsw. Annot. in Gen. 41. One man in those dayes enjoy∣ing both Offices, as Melchizedec was King of Salem, and Priest of the most High God. Gen. 14. 18. For among the Egyptians, Priests were learned men, and Doctors , , Diodor. Sicu∣lus, lib. 2. though here he seems to be the chief Priest amongst them who was the next in honour to their King; for to this Helicpolis, or City of the Sun, the people used to resort once a year to do honour unto the Sun by Sacrifice. Herod. in Euterpe. The Magi also amongst the Persians and Chaldeans had little less honour or maintenance. Just in Hist. Amongst the Greeks they used to Sacrifice the Fruits of the Earth. Hom. Iliad. 1. So Numa, the famous Law-giver, ordained the like amongst the Ro∣mans; Plin. lib. 18. cap. 2. See the Law of the 12. Tables, De Rolig. tit. 1. lex 4. and the like was for their offering of Beast, and paying of Tythes. The Priests of Baal had Courtly Provision and At∣tendants at Jezabels table: 1 King. 18. 19 And without question those Priests of Jeroboams making, who waited on the service of the Idols at Dan and Bethel, had the Tythes belonging to Gods Priests given them, and other rch Offering besides, otherwise they would not have so eagetly have coveted that Office as they did, 1 King. 13. 33. which God calls their Hires Micah 1. 7. they gave when they com∣mitted Spiritual Adultery. The Athenians also, as I shewed be∣fore, separated the Tythes for their Idol-service. D. Laert. in vita Solonis. So did the Latins to Hercules: Pompon. lt. de sacerd. Ma∣crob. saturn. lib. 3. cap. 12. nor did the Devils, whom they worshiped, hinder his servants in this service, but moved them to it, and com∣mended them when they were most lavish therein, and then gave their Answers, when they would not before, as in the Laconian Hecatombs: and in Craesus and Julian Gifts and Sacrifices, before they fought with their Enemies, both which the Devil deceived with his equivcal Oracles. And no marvel Satan approved of these Tythes and Offerings: Sith that hereby God is wronged of his Right▪ and his Honour is given to his Enemy, and his kingdom hereby was advanced, his Worshp maintain'd, and mens souls destroyed: For as the godly by payment of their Tythes acknowledge their subjection and thankfulness to God, (the payment of these being a token of subjection) Heb. 7. 4, 5, 6, 7. and a grateful confession that 'twas Gods blessing made them fruitful, and gave them that encrease, by which they honored God, and maintain'd his Ministers and Worship. So
Idolaters by the payment of their tythes to the Idolatrous PriestsThe giving of the Tenth Beast to the Lord was (besides the ac∣knowledgment of their Obedi∣ence, Subjecti∣on, and thank∣fulness to him for the other Nine) A con∣fession that the beginning of all propagation & encrease was from God, withou whose blessing all Creatures are barren & fruit∣less, Gen. 1. And the giving of the Tenhs of the Trees & Corn, was an acknowledg∣men that Gods blessing made them plentious in the fruit of their Trees and Ground. Ains. Expos. on Levit. 27. as the Brittons of old did to their Flamins, thereby they acknow∣ledged Satan their Lord, who is therefore caled the God of this world, gave thanks to him, honored him, and maintained his service; and therefore Satan could not endure that men should pay their Tythes to Gods Priests and Ministers, neither under the Law, nor Gospel, Nehem. 13. 10, 12. Mal. 3. 8. Luk. 1. 41, 42 1 Cor 9. 6, 7, &c. well-knowing that Sacriledge it strikes at the root of Religion, and of the true Worship of God: and therefore as of old, so now he tempts men to it, (though now more craftily) under the specious pretence of Piety, [and though by with-holding these, they starve and kill Christs Mini∣sters] yet many (as the pharisees of old) think herein they do God good service, when indeed by those that truly fear God, and by experience in other Countries, 'tis known 'tis a means to in∣troduce Popery, or Barbarisme, to destroy Learning and Piety, and to remove our Angels, and Gods service together: Nehem. 13. 10, 12 As it came to pass in Israel before Nehemiahs second Reformation, when the Tythes and Portions of the Levites were not given them (although their Lands, Gleabs, Fields were not sold, nor let out, for thither they retired for food: See ver. 11, 13 This is (as is con∣ceived) the reason why the Devil is so busie (seeing A Refor∣mation and purgation of Gods service and Ministers is now in a∣gitation, to clense us from Romish and other superstitious dregs) to cry down the Ministers of Christ, and their Maintenance too, as Popish and Antichristian▪ that so he may draw us from ab∣horing Idols to commit Sacriledge, which is indeed the greater sin; Rom. 2. 22. which the Apostle inveighs against, with a bitter Interro∣gation, Thou that abhorrest Idols, dost thou commit Sacriledge? For this sin will serve well his turn to overthrow not only the begun Reformation, but also the professed Protestant Religion from amongst us, that so he may hereby make our Reformers the destroyers of our Religion; for by this means he knows our Mini∣stry will become poor, illiterate, and contemptible, wanting Boks to provide, or time to study, and so there will not be found as heretofore, (such as Ridley, Latimer, Cranmer, Willet, Fox, Jewel) able men to convince the gain-sayers, to encounter ei∣ther by Dispute, or Dying, with our equivocating and sophisti∣cated Jesuites, or with our cunning Socinians, Arrians, Pela∣gians, Nestorians, and such like Wolves and Foxes this age hath
produced, whilst the golden reins of Discipline have hung loose. This was the old plot he set Julian the Apostate about, to ex∣tirpate the Name and Faith of Christianity, whilst he hindred Christians from training up their Children in Schools of Learning, Theod. l. 3. c. 7 in his Eccles. H. and 'twas Pharoahs design to keep them poor, and over-burden them with work, that so they might not hearken to Moses Mes¦sage, but refuse Gods service, as they did some of them Ezod. 5. 6, 7, 9, 21. Vide Newco∣men's Sermon before the house of Parliament.. Al∣so the Princes of Midian had such a divilish intention, that they might keep Israel in subjection, and subvert the true Religion that was amongst them, and so bring them over to their Idolatry, Psal. 83. 12 viz. by taking away the Levites Cities and Lands in the Land of Canaan which the Eleven Tribes had given Josh. 21. by Gods ap∣pointment Numb. 33 2 unto the Levites, for so the Levites and Priests houses are called, The houses of God, which they resolved to take into their possession, (there being no houses of God built till So∣lomons time) which proved both a snare and ruine to them all: Judg. 7. 22 & 8. 11, 21 and the like success the Prophet by the Spirit imprecateth on such sacrilegious persons for the future whom he calls Gods enemies, for they had, and did herein consult against God, Psal. 83. 2, 5, 10 be∣cause 'twas against his hidden ones, viz. The Saints that are hid∣den by God in his Tabernacle in the day of Evil, from the strife of tongues, Psal. 27 4. & 31. 20 and who are hidden in the world, for that knows them not. And lastly, because their life is hid with Christ in God, Colos. 3. 3 nay, he desires more fearful Curses on these oppressours of the Church than hapned unto them Psal. 83. 13, 14, to the last.. The very Turks and Papists abhor this sin: And yet notwithstanding 'tis to be feared, these Three Nations are greatly guilty of it, in devouring things devo∣ted: What our Pious and Devout Predecessors gave to the Mini∣sters and maintenance of Gods service and poor, out of a zeal to Gods house, devoting it to Gods service, these have out of a fiery zeal, laid waste and consumed; yet we their Children, after their vows do make enquiry wch God abhors, Prov. 0. 25. yet some in authority out of a blind zeal, have sold most of the Gleabs of the Land, & so devoured devoted things, notwithstanding the will of the Donors forbidding it, & the Oaths of our Princes heretofore made to the givers of them: as Saul endeavoured to destroy the Gibeonites, notwithstanding the Oath of the Princes made of old to them on the contrary, which caused a Famine in King Davids dayes:2 Sam. 21. 1, 2. And I pray God there follows not a Famine in England as it did
on Israel for this sin: Ut supra And if the Glebs given to maintain Gods service in this Isle, may not be alienated from God, nor with∣held from his Ministers hom he hath appointed to receive them, then much less may the Tythes of Grounds, Trees, Cattel, be snatch'd from them without injustice, if not sacriledge, Math. 10. 10 Gal. 6 6 they being theirs who are true and lawful Ministers of Christ; and ac∣cordingly execute their Office by as good Law of the Land as any man holds his Free-hold or Inheritance in this Land, which were confirmed to them by Magna Charta of Henry the First, King John, and Henry the Third, and 37 times since by Acts of Parlia∣ments and Ordinances, See Mr. Pryns Gospel-Plea for Tyhes and many times long before, as hath been shewed; they being most of them the Gifts and Legacies of devout Saints deceased, and given with direfl imprecations on such who should alter their Wills, whose Testament cannot be revoked without injustice, Gal. 3. 15 If it be but a mans Testa∣ment, yet if it be confirmed by the Seal and Death of the Testator, no man disannul∣leth or addeth thereunto. Nihil addi vela∣demi mipossit se∣cundum omnia jura. Lutheri Comment in loc Ʋltima voluntas est vice legis, sic juri consulti: no reasonable men will do it, either despise it, reject it, or make it void, or adde to it, as Theophilact renders it; . Vide Gagneus in loc. Gal. 3. 15 therefore whosoever doth attempt or effect it, shews himself unreasonable. And if it be oppression, injustice, and theft, for any persons under heaven, to make a Law to take away the Free-hold and In∣heritance of an innocent man, or to disanul and alter the Testa∣ment of a Pious man deceased, who before he died bequeath'd his Lands and Goods to whom he pleased; then certainly the sin is aggravated in any persons that shall establish iniquity by a Law, to take away the Tythes, Gleabs, and Lands given to God, which were the Gifts and Legacies of holy men devoted to God for the maintenance of his service and Ministers out of a zeal to Gods glory, being moved thereunto by the Spirit of God, Ainsw Annot. on Levit. 27. 1. The Lord con∣cludes this law touching Vows and voluntary Services which his people should honour him with of their own c∣cord, through the working of his Spirit in them. or to deprive the Ministers of their Free-hold and Inheritances, which not only by Gods Law, but by so many Laws and Acts of Parliament by our Ancestors through many ages is confirmed un∣to them: And though it be objected, That many of these Lands were given for Superstitious Uses, as to say Masse, Pray for the Ded, &c. To this I Answer, That 'tis not lawful to employ these to those Suprstitious ends which perhaps the Testators in those blind times of Popery, seduced by Antichrists Ministers, allotted them fo: Yet the main Intention of these Zealous per∣sons is to be respected, which was Gods glory, and the mainte∣nance of Gods service, and Ministers: For the Abuse of any
thing, take not away the right Use of it: nor the aberration n some circumstance make the Design frstrate. The censors f Chorah, Dathan, and Abiram, and teir company, were to e taken up out of the burning, because they were hallowed, Numb. 16. 37, 38, 39. Unlawful for common uses, because they had made them for vessels to mini∣ster unto God withal. Ainsw. in loc. though now ill employed, and turned afterward to an holy Use, even for broad Plates to cover the Alter. Many Gifts and Ornaments of the Temple which had been confer'd on it, though by disobedient and superstitious Persons as Christ intimates Mat. 15. 5. for they are cal∣led Anathemata. Luke 21 5 for l ends, yet Christ though he condemnes the sin, and reprehends he persons offending, never gave any oder for the selling of hose Gifts, or converting them to another Use, for they were holy; as were the Gifts given by Artaxerxes and his Coun∣ellors Ezra 8 28 So were al gifts given to God and his Mini∣sters, Lev. 27. 9 long before; The vessels of the Temple which Nebuchad ezzar brought forth out of Jerusalem, and put them in the house of his God, which Belshazzar also abused to Idolatry and Excess, Dan. 5. 2. 3 are by Cyrus restred Ezra 1. 7, 8. 11. and carried up to Jerusa∣lem by Shezbazzer, and were brought into the▪ Temple and put every one of them in his place. Ezra 6. 5 Darius also gave great Gifts nd Maintenance for the Service of God and his Ministers, al∣though he were a Heathen Prince, and fail'd in the circumstance, giving the same not for Gods glory, and in Faith of Christ typifi∣ed in those Sacrifices, nor for the obtaining pardon of his sins thereby, but rather out of servle fear of Gods Judgments, or self-love, for the preservation of his life and his Children, Ez. 6. 10, 11, 12 yet his being given with a direful Execration, the same fell on hose that took away these Gifts, as on Jason, Antiochus. Mene∣laus, Apollonius, and others, who took the holy vessels with pol∣uted hands, and with prophane hands pulled down the things hat were dedicated by other Kings to the augmentation, and glo∣ry, & honor of the place In Simon, and Jason, & An∣tiochus, Mene∣laus, Apolloni∣us, and others, vide Rawl. hist. lib 5 c 6. 2 Mac 5. 16. & 9.▪ 28 Heliodorus.▪ these Antiochus gave away, and he ook out of the Temple no less than one thousand and eight hun∣dred Talents, for which shortly after the Lord smote him so that he died miserably.  Mac 9. 5, 6, 7. & 28. so 2 Mac. 3 ch. & ch 4. in An∣dronico. Now as it was lawful for those under the law by Vows, or Gifts, to Consecrate and Devote persons Money, Houses, and Lands to Gods service, and the maintenance of the Priests and Levites, and no devoted thing was to be sold, or re∣deemed, but was most holy unto the Lord: Levi. 27, 28, 2. Haemin. in Rom. 9. 2. So also under the Gospel it was Prophesied, That the godly should anathematize, or devote with a Curse their substance and desireable things Micah 4. 13▪ Isa. 60. 5, 6. & 61. 6, Rev 21. 24 unto the Church for the Maintenance of the Ministers▪ and
poor Saints therein, which also in fact was performed Acts 2. 45. & 4. 32, 34, 35, 36. & 5. 1, 2, &c. & 11. 29. 30. Rom. 15. 26 by the Gentiles. To Conclude, The Apostle gives the Reasons of it, proving these Gifts, Offerings, and Devoted things belonged to the Mi∣nisters by way of Debt and Duty, Cor. 6 11. & Rom 15▪ 27 for if the people have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty also is to Mi∣nister unto them in carnal things; therefore saith he by way o command, Gal. 6. 6 . Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teacheth him in every good thing; or as in the Original▪ in all good things which they enjoy Now how can this be done▪ without communicating a part of all they possess unto them, a Christ commands his Disciples to do, viz. Give alms of all tha ye possesse, or of such things as you have, Luke 11. 41 and then behold all thing are clean unto you. Almes they are, in regard of the Poor tha enjoy them; and Debts and Honour, in regard of the Ministers that deserve them, and of God who requires them, who ac∣counts himself paid and honored, when they are duly and truly given to his Embassadors. Now what part was that under th Law but the tenth? And under the Gospel it must needs be a large a part as it was under the Law▪ according to Christs Ordi∣nance; 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Non est siut similitudinis sed aequalitatis. For so hath the Lord ordained, That they that Preac the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, as they that waited at the Al∣tar, did live of the Altar, which, , as, is of equality, not simi∣litude. Therefore I cannot see how either Christians can obey this Or¦dinance of Christ, or pay their Debt, or shew their Duty, un¦less they pay their Tythes, or what is equal thereunto: For 'ti not a pecuniary Stipend short of the Tenth, nor an Alms give half worth the Tenth, that will pay the Debt, or perform th Duty, much less obey Christs Ordinance which is made in Justic and Truth to continue to the end of the world. Those Priest that served at the Altar, lived partly by Oblations, free-wi Offerings, and Sacrifices, and by Devoted things, and Tyth which were brought into Gods house to feed them, and so the are said to live of it, 2 Chron. 3 1. 5, &c. although they had Estates, and House and Cties of their own, as its plain Levit 6. 26. & 7. 31, 34 Neh. 13. 12 Josh. 21. 4 &c. Numb. 35. 2 by Gods command a loted them for a part of their livelihoods: The equity of whic Law, saith holy Ainsworth, who was no friend neither to B¦shops, nor Tythes, both for honoring the Lord with our substanc Prov. 3. 9. Gal. 6 6. Asw. Anno▪ in▪ Numb 35. 1. and for maintaining of his Ministers, s perpetual. Therefo
seaking of the Church under the Gospel according to these le∣l figures, Ezek. 45. 1. 4, 5, &c. & 48. 9, 10, 13. which Houses, Gleabs Lands, once given as a por∣tion to God, might not be sold, changed, nor altered, nor alienated by the Priests themselves, much less by a∣ny other. See Mr. Prynns Go∣spel Plea, p. 98. he saith, When ye shall divide the Land by inheri∣nce, ye shall offer an Oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the  and, &c. which shall be for the Priests, the Ministers of the San∣uary, who shall come neer to minister unto the Lord; and it shall e a place for their houses, &c. For so hath the Lord ordained, that hey which preach the Gospel, should live of it, viz. By those oluntary Alms and Offrings which the people should give them, nd by the Tythes they should pay to them, although they have leabs and Houses of their own to live in. The Ministers are to ave as free, bountiful, and certain Means to maintain them for reaching of the Gospel, as the Priests had that served at the Altar or their attendance thereon: Christ afforded food and rayment ufficient to his Apostles when he sent them to preach, and there∣ore would not have them to provide before hand for things ne∣essary, Mat. 10. 9, 10. and gives a reason grounded in equity for it, becausez Luk. 10. 7. . he labourer is worthy of his meat, or of his hire, as St. Luke stiles t, or reward as the word signifies: Intimating that as 'tis op∣ression and cruelty in men not to allow their Servants meat that abour for them, and wages for their work; so 'tis no less sin a∣mongst Christians not to allow their spiritual labourers the same: Nay, the Apostle proves it an unnatural and an unreasonable sin or men guided only by the light of Nature and Reason, allow their Horses and Oxen meat, that do their work; and the like belongs o the Ministers of Gods Word who tread out the corn according to Gods ancient Law, Thou shalt not muzzle the Oxe that treadeth out the Corn. Deut. 25. 4. Spiritually this figured the labour of the Mini∣sters of the Word, preparing the bread of life for the Soul, as the Apostle sheweth 1 Tim. 5. 17, 18. So the He∣brew Rabbins write; A beast is to eat all the while that he worketh, and he is not to be musled by string or voice, thereby staying him from eat∣ing; for whoso doth so, is to be beaten: or if he put a gag in his mouth, or keep him from wa∣ter, or use any other means to hinder him from eating. Maimon. tom. 4. cap. 13 sect. 1, 2, 3. of hired things twice to confirm Ministers maintenance. 1 Cor. 9 9 And therefore by word or deed, or any other way, to hinder them from receiving of these is a transgression of Gods Law, St. Paul himself being Expositor of it. To keep back the Hire of the Labourers is a crying sin in the ears of the Lord of Hosts; saith another Apostle, It sounds high, and enters soon: James 5. 4 And will not the keeping back and detaining of the spiritual labourers hire cry as loud, and as soon pierce Gods ears, as that of the temporal abourers; when they are his Embassadours, and stars in his right hand, and the glory of Christ; and he hath in a special manner eproved Kings for their sakes, and commanded all men not to touch his Annointed, nor do his Prophets no harm, Psal. 105. 15.
Nor is their hire to be small, but honourable; and therefore stiled by the name of Honour, 1 Tim. 5. 17 because Christians honour both God and them in giving and paying the same. Prov. 3. 9, 10 Divitiis non na∣turalibus ut au∣rum & argen∣tum & ejusmo∣di, Et fecundo naturalibus quus terra perfert. vide Mercerus in locum. Honour the Lord with thy Riches, and with the first Fruits of all thy encrease; To which Duty is annexed a large Promise of temporal and spiritual good things: Mat. 21. 34. For as Tenants honor their Lords and Stewards they send, in paying their Rents and Tributes due; so do these honour God and his Stewards, in paying that which he requires of them, and is due to him, and to be paid to them: for their meat should be so largly provided for them, that they should not have only sufficient to provide for themselves and Families as had the Priests of old, (neglecting which, they should be worse than Infidels) 1 Tim. 5. 8 but they should also have to entertain strangers, and to be Hospitable to those that visit them: and therefore its a Go∣spel-Precept given to them, which I find was not given to the Priests under the Law, That they be lovers of hospitality. Titus 1. 8 Although the Priests were so rich and ho∣norable that they were chief of their princes. To con∣clude, if Souldiers are worthy of their pay, (which God forbid any should deny to such as are faithful and good) if Tradesmen that truck or merchandize are to have money or an equal value of other Commodities from those they trade withal: if Shep∣herds are to be paid for keeping their Sheep; then also ought the Ministers of the Gospel to be paid, who are Christs Souldiers, and commanded to endure hardness, 1 Tim. 5. 8. attending only and wholly on this Warfare. 'Tis fit these spiritual Merchants that communicate to men the heavenly treasure of the Gospel, should receive at least earthly things for it; for if their Auditors have been made partakers of their spiritual things, the Apostle saith, 'tis their Auditors duty to minister to them in carnal things, Rom. 15. 27 'tis fit these spiritual Shepherds should be liberally fed and clothed by the Flocks they feed, as the same Apostle proves 1 Cor. 9 7 Ne videretur Apostolus gra∣vare ae quum esse quod facernt ostendit, à com∣paratis, quum & milites stipendiis acceptis, & A∣gricolae suorum fructibus labo∣rum & Pastores sui gregis pro∣ventu vivnt. Beza in loc. from equity. And indeed without this the Ministers cannot in humane judg∣ment so well rebuke with all Authority as they ought▪ Tit. 2. 15. & 1 Tim. 4 11 nor perform their Office of giving themselves alwayes to Prayer and Preaching as the Apostles did. Acts 6. 4 'Tis too well known by expe∣rience, That the poorer sort of the Ministy are despised, even by those that profess Godliness, how much more will prophane men contemne them? poor men and their counsel are alwayes lightly esteemed. 1 Sam. 18. 23 Prov. 18. 23. & Eccles: 9. 15. & James 2. 2, 3 But a liberal maintenance as it will cause their per∣sons to be reverenced, so also will their Doctrine by the world
be sooner hearkned unto, and they themselves be freed from those temptations which usually accompany poverty, as of flattery, time-serving, men-pleasing; yea, and wrenching the Scriptures for their own profit, as most of the poor Vicars and Curats in the late Bishops times did, and at this day most of your poor Friars and Monks do. And this generally did the inferior Clergy of old, as when the Arian Heresie prevailed, they turn'd Arian, and so did they who lived in Queen Maries dayes; as did Bala∣am of old, and those St. Jude speaks of, that run greedily after his Errour Jude 11. & 16 & 2 Pet. 2. 14 Sicut lucri causa maladicturus Israelitis vene∣rat Balaam. ita lucri & quaestus gratia, perversa annuncant dog∣mata. Gagneu Scolia in Epist. Judae. for reward, having mens persons in admiration be∣cause of advantage, for they changed themselves and their peo∣ples opinions according to those that were in power, and so main∣tained them; as too many lately have done from an Argument drawn from their Wives-bellies, and Childrens-backs, just as Je∣roboams Priests who were of the lowest of the people, who for maintenance upheld his Calvish-worship: 1 King 13. 13 And as the Priests of Baal served at that Idol-service to be fed at Jezabels Table, 1 King. 18. 19 to prevent which let them quietly enjoy what is already by Gods and mans Lawes settled on them; and if that be not sufficient, let more be added to make it an honorable and blessed Mainte∣nance, that so they may not (as those of old) sophisticate as hucksters the Word of God, but may preach it, as of sincerity as of God, in the sight of God the Gospel of Christ. 2 Cor. 2. 17. Aaron and his Sons when they were call'd to the Office of Priesthood, had Garments put on them of Honor and Glory before the whole Congregation, that so they might be the more reverenced and obeyed. Ex. 18. 2. 2 For these two, viz. honor and glory, signifie the highest de∣gree of dignity. Honor inward∣ly in the heart and affections, Glory outward∣ly in the appear∣ance and car∣riage: Their garments were to be new and▪ fair, like the garments of great men: e∣very polluted old or dirty garment were for threads and weak for the Candlesticks, Ainsw. in loc. And God to honour Elisha the Prophet, who had been but servant to Elias, when he was to succeed in his room, had not only the internal Gifts of the Spirit conferred on him, (the Spirit of Eliah being redoubled on him) but had even a Miracle wrought for him, to procure honour and obedience to him from the rest, both of the Prophets and People: 2 King. 2. 14, 15, &c. And if this were necessary for the Priests and Prophets under the Law to procure obedience to their word; how much more should it be under the Gospel to the Ministers thereof, whose ministrati∣on is far more glorious, than that under the Law: 2 Cor. 3. 11 That the Ministers and Prophets should have honour and glory put on them, which can never be, so long as they be poor, mean, and contemptible, as before hath been said: Therefore that the people may obey and submit unto them, that are over them in
the Lord, and that the Ministers may wait for their souls, and so be able to give an account of them with joy, and not with grief; which wil be unprofitable for the people, either in their Prayers when they give account of them to God, or at their Hour of Death▪ or day of Judgment, when they are to give an account of their Steward-ship, if they have not been honoured both with Reverence and Maintenance, or not obeyed and submitted to as his Stewards. Heb 13 7 All the Apostles though Christ freely gave them power and a∣bility immediately from Heaven to Preach the Gospel and work Miracles, Acts 2. yet had they Hire for their labour sufficient to cloath and feed them, and to provide all things needful for them, so that they lcked nothing by their own confessions; Luke 22 35▪ nor were they only to be provided for, but also their Wives were to be provided for, and maintained at the charge of those they taught, this power God gave them: And St. Paul challengeth it as be∣longing to other Ministers of the Gospel as well as to Peter and the rest of the Apostles: 1 Cor. 9. 5 and though he and Barnabas had not made use of that power, yet he pleads it belonged to him, and that he took wages of other Churches to do service to the Church of Corinth; 2 Cor. 11. 7, 9 for he was supplied by the Brethren that came from Macedonia, which made that Church of Philippi which thus liberally contributed to the Apostles, to be more ho∣norable than that of Corinth, Phil. 4. 14 Rationem accepti fecerunt quia spiritualia ex me, receperunt rationem dati non fecerunt quia nihil contra mi∣hi pro illis▪ sunt clargit, Gagn. in locum scol. and this of Corinth to be inferior to other Churches for neglecting this Duty of providing for them, 2 Cor. 12. 13 for they wanted Fruit to abound to their account, and did not offer that Incense which gave an odour of sweet smell, that Sacrifice which was acceptable and well pleasing to God as the Church of Phillippi had done, Phil. 4. 18 which made the Apostle St. Paul to rejoyce, and to be encouraged in his Ministry, they be∣ing his dearly beloved, and long'd for, his joy and crown: Phil. 4. 1 and to encourage other Christians to imitate them, he praised God for this work of his Spirit in them, for it would redound not only ro their spiritual account, and to their eternal happiness, but also God seeing them faithfully distributing his talents, he would encrease these temporal blessings also, supplying all their wants according to his Promises, verse 19, & Prov. 3. 9. 10 2 Kings 4. 8 Haggai 2. 19 Mal. 3. 10, 1 Mat. 10. 41, 42 Mark 9. 41 2 Cor. 9. 6 Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8 both in the Old and New Te∣stament. On the other side, If any person or persons, though never so great or many, shall detain or with-draw, or fraudulently keep
back any thing Devoted or Consecrated to his Ministers mainte∣nance, they will bring a Curse on themselves, and all others that partake with them in this sin, as its plain in Achans case, Josh. 7. 25 it brought a consuming fire on him, his Sons and Daughters, his Oxen and Asses, his Shep and Tent▪ and all that he had, which were burned with fire after they had been stoned. This with o∣ther sins annezed to it, brought sudden death on Ananias and Sap∣phira, Acts 5. 5▪ 10 it brought severe judgments on the whole Nation of Israel in the Prophet Malachy's dayes, Mal. 3. 19, 10 especially on the sa∣crilegious persons, Hag. 1. 9. 10 compared with Nehem. 13. 10. Sir Henry Spilman sheweth at large how God hath wonderfully plagued this sin in our fore fathers dayes, vide Spilman. and of late in the last Three Princes Reigns, God who is just and holy in his wayes, who is the Fear, cutting off the Spriis of Princes, and being terrible to the Kings of the earth, on Psa. 76. 12 destroy∣ing utterly the Family of Henry the 8th. that great Tyrant and Church-robber, in the Death of Queen Elizabeth, who was the first that sold away openly the Revenues of the Church devoted to Gods service, changing the Consecrated Lands for others, with divers honourable and generous Families in this Nation (only in this Fact degenerating from true Pety and Charity) whose Po∣sterity have felt the smart of Gods justice, and they inheriting their Fathers sins with those devoted Lands, and not restoring them, they have also inherited their plagues. Queen Elizabeth her self (though I hope a Saint with God) yet one of the last and worst works she did, by the flattery and perswasion of her Favourites, was the passing over the Mannor of Sherbourne be∣longing to the Cathedral of Sarum, (of which Revenue Bishop Jewel that great Champion of our Religion had made good use) unto Sir Walter Rawleigh, who was as I am informed by a Reve∣rend D. of that Church warn'd to desist from that enterprize, fore∣telling him of the sad sequel would follow thereon; but his am∣bitious and Covetous Wife over-swayed the wise man, as Solomons Wives did him; 1 Kings 11 4▪ He was by Dr. Hide, Cannon of the Church of Sarum, dis∣swaded from desiring the Dean & Chap∣ter to ratifie the Gift of the Queens: and though that Sir Walter was by the old mans Arguments o∣vercome, and contented to surcease the en∣terprize: yet his Wife would not suffer him to be quiet un∣til the business was ended, as one of the Walters related to me. But the Donor lived not long after, but lost her life and Crown together, leaving it to a Forraign Prince: and though the Gift was sweet to those who for a while enjoyed it, yet it fill'd the belly with gravel, and raised him such foes, that burthen'd him so heavy, till they brought him to the block: and truly divine Vengeance attended all the owners of it ever since, As the Earle of Sommerset, Prince Henry, the Earls of Bristol, &c. and hath not the like fate hapned to the Crown, that was ador∣ned with these precious stones, which were on the brest-plate
or shoulder of our Priests, vix gaudet terius hrts, that I say no more; I could tell you strange things: and yet God is my witness I speak but truth, concerning the alienation of Tythes in the place where I live, even in the memory of man: A Knight, a Nobleman, a Justice of the Peace, a Gentleman, and his Widow, after they were once possessors of them, did all decay in their E∣states, and died some of them strange and unnatural deaths; I need not particularize in others: no Shire in England but yields plentiful examples: And truly I fear the first long Parliament that sold the Bishops Lands, and the second that sold the Dean and Chapters, felt the reward of this sin. The Lord preserve that to come, from selling the Gleabs that is behind, and taking away the devoted Tythes, lest they drink of the same Cup, for the sins of Sacriledge and injustice. But if Tythes which have been devoted and is most holy unto the Lord, be occasion of of∣fence to tender Consciences, these may be redeemed with money, but he that will do so by Gods Law, must add thereto the value of them, the fifth part thereof Levit. 27 31 If he would re∣deem it for himself, viz. his own private use, for other∣wise if he dwelt far off he might redeem it. Deut 14. 23, 25. more then they are valued at by the Ministers, which I suppose few will do, as the Israelites were to do under the Law. For though Christians are not obliged to pay Tythes according to that manner and form as was paid to the Priests, and Levites; the Priesthood ceasing, the Law is changed with it, Heb 7. 12 Simul autem & lex. & sacer¦dotium iustitu∣ta sunt: si ergo tranfertur sacer¦dotium legem, quoque trasserri oportet. Gagn. in loc. as the Apostle sheweth the necessity of it: yet see∣ing the Tythes and Gleabs were by our Religious Predecessors in the Primitive timts devoted to God, and to the maintenance of his service and Ministers, as the Primitive Christians in Judaea de∣voted the Money of their Possessions and Houses they sold Acts 4. 34, 37, & 5. 1. 2. Signifct hoc verbum . callide quidpiam sur∣ripere & quasi essicere ne quid∣piam ad Do∣inum perveni∣at. Tit. 2. 10. sic Ananias & Spphira cum hoc praedium Domino conse∣crassent, &c. it's no more lawful for us (who do succeed in their Land and Houses, who never bought these Tythes and Gleabs, nor ever were they given us by our Ancestors, or by God immediately) to with∣hold or retain them, or part of them, than it was for Ananias to keep back part of the price for which he sold his Possession: And therefore I wish that such as have Impropriations, and Gleabs, and Lands formerly devoted, would now tremble at this fearful ex∣ample, and not expose themselves to Gods wrath, or their Mi∣nisters to poverty, or want, by their Usurpations on them: And therefore let them with Zacheus either make Restitution to the Church, or at least allow their Ministers an honorable and setled maintenance in lieu thereof, otherwise they have gone beyond and defrauded their Brother, and God will avenge all such. 1 Thes. 4. 6 'Tis
the golden Rule left us all, Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, the same do ye unto them; for this is the Law and the Pro∣phets. Matth. 7. 12 Haec est regula aurea, non lesbi pro omnibus communis. Now what Shepherd is it that would not be paid his Wages, and live of his flock? What Souldier would not have his Pay for himself, and his Family, to live comfortably on it? What Tradesmen is there that would not have exchang of Wares or Money for those things he trades in? What Country-man ex∣pects not to reap what he soweth? Or, What Labourer, At∣tourny, School-master, would not have Wages and Pay for their work and pains? This is true in all Arts, Manufactors, Labours, Professions; and Christ approves of it, That the Labourer is wor∣thy of his hire: And shall only the spiritual Husband-man, the spiritual Shepherd, Merchant, Builder, Teacher, Souldier, La∣bourer, have no wages nor reward for his pains, who best de∣serves it of all others, it being longer ere they can perform this work aright, and it costing them more charge usually than other Works or Professions do, it requiring the most able Souls, 2 Cor. 2. 16. . for who is sufficient for those things) it being the most difficult, la∣borious, and perillous work of all others, as perillous as Soul∣diers, 2 Tim. 2. 3 as labourious as Shepherds or Husband-men, 2 Cor. 4. 8. & 2 Cor. 11. 22. to the 33 verse, & 1 Cor. 9. 4 7. to the 15 verse. or as Merchants, as the Apostle sheweth: And 'tis as profitable to have such sort of Labourers as any other for all sorts of persons; Therefore Christ commands his Disciples to pray the Lord of the Harvest to send forth such Labourers. Ma. 9. 38 They being necessary in an ordinary way for the conversion and salvation of Souls; Faith coming by Hearing, and the Gospel preached being Gods power to the salvation of as many as believe: Rom. 1. 16 & 10, 14, 17. ab∣solutely neces∣sary, necessitate medii. Aquin. for so it hath pleased God in his wisdom to dispose of things, that by the foolishness of Preaching (as the world accounts it) he will save them that believe. 1 Cor 1 21. & 2. Thes. 1. 10. And their Calling and Power committed to them is more honourable than the highest Callings are amongst men, they being the Courtiers and menial Servants of the great King of the whole earth, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, they being all of his privy Council, and Stewards of his Mysteries, Psal. 134. 1 1 Cor 4. 1 co-workers together with God; 1 Cor. 3. 9 yea, they are all his Embassadours sent in the weightest Message that ever was, viz. To reconcile men to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20 being instrumen∣tal with Christ herein, who is the efficient, material, and meri∣torious cause thereof, called therefore Saviours, Obad. ult. they being employed by God in Christs stead, and Name, to make known
the infinite love of God in sending his Son for to save sinners, and the unsearchable riches of Christ which belongs unto those that receive him, whilst Christ in heaven is employed in his Regal and Priestly Office chiefly, and to prepare Mansions of Glory for them that believe through their word, as Christ pray'd for it, Joh. 17. 20, 24, &c. and ascended to effect it, Joh. 14. 2, 3 as on the Cross by his Death he had me∣rited the same: for though they be sinful men, subject to the like passions and frailties with others, yet they have heavenly treasure contained in them, 2 Cor. 4. 7 they being sent to turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that so they may receive remission of their sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus, Acts 26. 18 they are called Angels for their power and honour, Rev. 1. and can do more with their Keyes than the greatest Kings of the earth with their Swords, for they only can cut off men from the earth, and destroy the body, Mar. 10. 28 but these can exclude men from heaven, and deliver their Souls over to Satan; 1. Tim. 1. ult. which even Theodosius the Emperour confest when he was Excommunicated by St. Am∣brose; Theod. hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 17 Mihi autem non modo ad Tem∣plum verum e∣tiam ad Coetum ipsum accessus perclusus est, &c. And St. Paul exercis'd upon Hyminaeus and Alex∣ander that they might learn not to blaspheme. As the Priests pro∣nouncing a person unclean, the people were to put him out of the Congregation: Numb. 5. 2 So the Ministers of Christ pronouncing a per∣son unclean, the Congregation is to put away from their Society such a person 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 13. till the Minister doth Absolve him. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, &c. In a word, Christ speaks with their tongues from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25 they arew 1 Tim. 1. 20 placed by Christ and the Holy Ghost to feed the flock Christ hath purchased with his bloud, Acts 20. 28 they are Rulers of the Churches, Heb. 13. 7 and the glory of Christ. 2 Cor. 8. 23 Now if their Calling be more la∣borious and perilous, more profitable and honourable than all other Professions, Offices, and Callings, there is no reason nor Conscience but that their Persons should be Reverenced, then Wages and Maintenance should be proportionable in some sort thereunto, that so their Doctrine may be esteemed, and they themselves may have sufficiency both to keep Hospitality (which they of all others are obliged to do) Tit. 1. 8 A Bishop or Elder ought to be . for they are to belovers of Hospitality and of good men) and to buy Books, Food, and Cloathing for themselves, and their Families, by which means they may be the better able to perform well their Callings, and with the more joy and chearfulness endure their perils and hard∣ship, and may with the more gravity, reverence, and honour,
and success preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments and Censures of the Church, to the glory of God and honour of our Lord Jesus Christ who hath sent them, and to the greater benefit and comfort of his Churrh to whom they are sent; lastly to the etnal salvation both of the preachers, and of them that are taught by them, who are free and bountiful in giving to them in the name of Prophets, for they shall receive the Prophets reward, Mat 10. 41 Qi Prophetam sua largiate su∣stentat, quam vis ipse Prophetim non habet, apud Deum tamen prophetis prae∣mium habebit August Ex. loc Math. 10. For hereby they shall be fellow-helpers to the truth of God, 2 John 8 and by sowing these temporal things to the Spirit, they shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Gal 6. 8 Arguit eos qui falso paupe ta∣tem pretende∣bant ne doctores suos alerent, no∣lite inquite era∣rare novit Deus vestras faculta∣tes ne{que} irrdetur tanquam ludi∣brio dcceptus haberi potest, hic enim Grci irridri pro∣falli sumunt. Gagnes in loc. Now then sith the Lands, Houses, Gleabs, and Tythes are the Ministers of the Gospel in this Land, by Donation, and Gift, God having given them to them, by our Ancestors Wills, who devo∣ted them, as they were moved by his Spirit, and they being con∣firmed to them, and their successours, for so many hundreds of years for ever; and Ratified by many Parliaments both in the Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings Reigns: and some of them in the Brittains dayes when they were Lords of the Land. And sith they have as good shewings, Evidences, Charters, Deeds, and Conveyances, for the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of them, as any other Persons have for the enjoyment of their Manors, Lordships, Honours, or Free-holds. Lastly, Sith they are theirs by the Law of Nature, and Nations, and by the Command and Ordinance of Christ under the Gospel, whose Law is irrepealable by man, (he being Lord paramount) sith they are theirs by the Common, and Civil Law, which con∣firms the Wills and Testaments of dead men deccased, sith they are the Hire for their Labour, their Wages for their Work, the ho∣nour due to them from the people they teach; I cannot see how any person, or persons on earth (without destroying Property, and committing injustice and Sacriledge, can sell these away from them, or alienate them to any other prophane, or common use, or prohibit the people to pay them to those that tech them. Hearken what the Apostle saith, Be not deceived, neither by thine own heart which is naturally full of self. love, and adictd to covetousness; yea, deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9 Tam varium est cor versipelle in∣sidiosum quod aestus suos multis iolueris con∣volvat, ac tegat ut ne homo quidem ipse fibi abunde notus esse vix unquam queat Ecol in loc. nor by others, who for self interests, or by-ends, perswades thee this is no sin, out of Pride, prejudice, malce, hypocrsie, or love of the world; for God is not mocked, nor will he be, by carnal reasons and pretences. But look in ths
particular, what a man soweth, that shall he reap. If men will impiously make void the Wills and Laws, not only of men, but of God, they cannot free themselves from the guilt of prophan∣ness and Sacriledge, and of more than Pagansh injustice, as the Apostle intimates, Heb. 9. 17. & Gal. 3. 11 for the Heathen abhor'd to do it to their Priests, though they were imploy'd in a false Worship: And therefore Joseph in Egypt durst not buy the Priests Lands, lest he should have been accused of Sacriledge by the Nobility, or Com∣minalty Gen. 47. 22 And they had a portion assign∣ed them of Pharaoh, and so had no need to sell them as others had: I have heard it reported of certainty, That when a Turkish Embassadour came into Spain, and was by some Agents from the Pope, sollicited to embrace the Christian Faith: He be∣holding the gallantry of the Spanish Court, and the rich garments and Robes they wore, but withal espying the mean Habit of the Priests, and how contemptible they were whom they stiled Christs Embassadours, that he cryed out, Surely that Religion cannot be true, where the Professors of it are so brave and rich, and their Teachers so poor, and beggarly, whom they so much undervalue and contemn, as not to allow them food and cloathes convenient to maintain them. 'Twas otherwise with the Galati∣ans who were converted by St. Paul, they received him as an An∣gel of God, yea, as Jesus Christ himself; and were willing not only to impart their goods, but if it had been possible, they would have plucked out their eyes and have given them to him, Gal. 4. 14, 15 such was the true zeal of the godly in the primative times, so sincere and servent their love, that they not only parted with the Tenth to their Teacher, but sold all the Lands and Possessions they had, and laid down the Money they received for them, at their Teachers feet, desiring them to employ it for their own, and the Churches necessities Acts 4. 34▪ 3, &c.: but this fire is almost quenched, this love (as Christ foretold) Mat. 24. 12 waxeth cold in these last un∣charitable and worst dayes, in which, as the Apostle also pre∣dicted, men should be lovers of themselves, more than lovers of God 2 Tim. 3. 4, and prfer their pleasures, profits, honours, before him, and his service, and Ministers, although concerning them Christ hath said it (who will not lye, nor can he repent) That he that heareth them, heareth Christ; and he that despiseth them, despiseth Christ Luk. 10 16 Si legatum principum in terra contemptus rimen habet nefas est illo despicere quos misit omnium nostrum redemp tor Christus rex regum & index principum.: And truly what do men do by not receiv∣ing their words, but put from them the Word of Life, and judge themselves unworthy of it Acts 13. 46; as the Jewes at Antioch did: or by not giving double honor to their persons, who deliver their
Embassage, but rener themselves subject to the greatest plagues, even to be in a worse condition than Sodom and Gomorah Ma. 10. 14. Therefore let all Kings, Magistrates, Princes, Rules, and Judges of the Earth serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce before him with trembling, and kiss the Lord Jesus Christ lest he be an∣gry (by way of reverence, love, homage, and obedience) for if his anger be kindled never so little, they only are blest that trust in him Psal. 2. 11, 12 &c., and receive his Ministers testimony here 2 Thes. 1. 8. & the 10 vers. compared., and obey his Gospel whom they preach▪ and take heed what they do, either in putting down the godly successive Ministry whom God in his goodness, long-suffering, and mercy, hath placed a∣mongst us, and continued to us, (which he hath not done to ma∣ny other Nations) which hath been the design of Satan and Er∣ronous persons alwayes) although this Ministry ordained by Christ, shall continue to the end of the world, as Christ promi∣sed, and St. Paul related it Mat. 28. 20, 21 & Eph 4 11, 12, &c., and was of old prophesied Jer. 3. 15. & 23. 4, & Isa. 30 20, 21 Docet Deus se nunquam suos relictarum esse orphanos quin A doctoribus & ministris Dei assidue corrigan∣tur informentur, &c. Trem. Annot. in loc:, or in taking away the oyl which should maintain these lights; fot if they, and the means belonging to them be of God (as hath been proved) it will stand, as hitherto above 1000 years it hath, and whoever thou art, or ye are, that have sold their Means away, and endeavour to do the same with the residue, ye cannot overthrow it, nor perfect the intended work. O refrain therefore from attempting such a thing, lest ye be found even to fight against God, as Gamaliel told the Council Acts 5. 38 Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ab∣latum, Aug.. Let me advise rather all such who themselves or their predeces∣sors have had a hand in the foregoing Sacriledge, and stiil possess devoted things, viz. Manors, Gleabs, Lands, Tythes, or Im∣propriate Parsonages, or the like; repent of this their sin, and make restitution to the Ministers wronged: For I will tell them what devout Augustine saith, That the sin is not pardoned, unless restitution be made, viz. according to the ability of the person guilty. And indeed where true sorrow is, it hath these Two ef∣fects, which is Clearing, and Revenge 2 Cor. 7 10 Quienim dolore asficitur cavet ne alieni peccati reus fiat, & in∣scipsum pro pec∣catis sumei ultionem, atque alios peccantes in ab errore re∣vocari conatur: Haeming. in loc. which cannot in this sin be manifest, where that before-nominated be not performed. Otherwise if this my Counsel be slited (which in Christs name I give to you, desiring you to hear what the Spirit saith to the Church) 'tis to be feared, That as heretofore the Curse of God hath seized on Sacriledgious persons in former times, (who were made examples for us on whom the ends of the world are come 1 Cor. 10. 11, may also seize on these: For our God is Jehovah, and changeth
not Mal. 3. 6, a consuming fire into whose hands to fall, 'tis a fearful thing Heb. 10 31: And truly, unless such do repent, they shall all perish as Christ tells them twice Luk 13 3. 5, for he is no respecter of persons, but be the persons guilty of this sin never so rich, wise, great, many, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Ministers and Embassadors they are, is richer, wiser, greater, and above them all Eccles 5 8: He hath re∣buked Kings for their sakes Psal. 10. 15: and he reputes what is done unto them, as done unto himself Mat. 25, 45; and he will render to e∣very man shortly according to what he has done in the flesh, whether it be good or evil 2 Cor. 5. 10; then the Lord will be the a∣venger of those Ministers of his who have been oppressed and defrauded 1 Thes. 4. 6; those Riches then they have gotten by fraud or oppression, shall be a witness against them, and eat their flesh as fire, Jam. 5. 3: yea, God may for it severely plague you here as he hath dealt with thousands in this Land; for some mens sins go before to judgment for to terrifie and admonish others, and some mens follow after 1 Tim. 5. 24: then they that have given to Christs Prophets and Saints in his Name, shall receive to their eternal comfort that blessed sentence, Come ye blessed, &c. Mat. 25. 34 Ad sinem.. But they that have done evil, shall hear to their eternal torment that direful sentence of, Go ye cursed, &c. for their Sacriledge and unmercifulness to them; for those shall go away into everlasting punishment. O consider this ye that hitherto for profits sake have persisted in this sin, and forgotten God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, and confess and forsake your sin, then shall you obtain mercy, Prov. 28. 13. Having food and rayment, be ye therewith content, for he hath said, He will not leave thee, nor in any wise forsake thee Heb▪ 13. 5 Mat. 22. 21; Render thou to Caesar the things that be Caesars, and unto God the things that be Gods, and owe nothing to any man but this, That ye love one another Rom. 13. 8: and whatever ye would, were you in the Ministry, that others should do unto you, the same do ye unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets Mat. 7. 12: But he that doth wrong, shall receive for the wrong he hath done; and there is no respect of persons with God Col. 3. 2▪. The Lord open the eyes of those that have been blinded with self-love, and with the love of the world, or been deceived with humane laws, customes, and evil examples of the mulitude that have been guilty of this sin, that they may see it and repent of it; remembring Christs saying, It will profit a man nothing to gain
the World, and lose his own soul Mark 8. 36: Now that I have shewed you the light do not walk in darkness and hate the light because your deeds are evil; for to him that knows to do well, but doth it not, to him it's sin with a vengeance Jam. 4. 17. The wrath of God being revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men who detain the truth in unrighteousness Rom 1. 18: And if you shall not speedily repent, the same judgement may befal you which be∣fel Ananias, Sapphira, or Simon Magus, for their covetousness and sacriledge; for such impenitent persons are in the gall of bit∣terness, and bond of iniquity Acts 8. 23, as they were by reason of those sins. And the Lord avert his wrath from this Land and Nation which hath been horribly guilty of this sin, to that end let the Magistrates find out some way or means for the Reformation of this sin, as Nehemiah did in his Reformation Neh. 13. 10, 11, 12, who caused the portions of the Levites to be given to them, and the Tythes to be paid to the Priests and Levites, for their service in their Churches, according to their Courses: As also zealous Hezekiah ordered it 2 Chron. 31 12, 13, &c., and appointed Officers to see them faithfully distributed; which thing was good, and right, and truth before the Lord his God verse 20, For the Lord had blessed his peo∣ple, Mal. 3. 10, 12 Deut. 26. 10, 12 Prov 3. 9, 10 Mat. 10. 40 Psal. 4. 18, and brought a blessing on the Land and people z. Secondly, Let those Impropriations, whose heard-hearted Owners tremble not at Gods Word, nor fear his threatning, be bought in at the Wisdom and Discretion of the Honorable House of Parliament, which I conceive in a short time may be effected by the Revenue coming into the Honourable Trustees for Bishops and Dean and Chapters Lands, over and above what they now pay, for Augmentations. Lastly, for the right ordering of Ministers in every Church for to receive these Tyths, and devoted Lands and Goods, and to perform the work of the Ministry, and for the gathering and build∣ing up of Gods Church; Let these proposals be considered by them.
To the Magistrates of England, E. F. on the Jews behalf. Humbly Dclareth, THat sih its apparent by the Scriptures, That the Jews. Gods ancient People, shall be converted to the Faith, as these Scriptures testifie, Rom. 11. 25, 26. Psal 5 6 & 67. 5. 6 & 69. 35, 36. Isa. 1. 25, 26 & 11 1. Zeph. 3 9 &c. And being converted, they shall be a blessing unto the Godly amongst whom they live, they ministring to them exceeding cause of joy; for if their Fall be the Riches of the world▪ and their Diminution is the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their ful∣ness? For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what will their Assumption be, but life from the dead, Rom. 11. 12. Zach. 8. 13. And sith by our mercy they shall obtain mercy, Rom 11. 31. And many shall seek their favour, as its prophesied Zch. 8. 23. And God will execrate and destroy thse Nations that have been enemies to them, as the Prophets fore-tell, Isa. 11. 13. Gen. 12. 3. Jer. 3. 16. Zeph. 3. 19, 20. Isa. 51. 21, 22. & 47 6. Jer. 2. 3. Zach. 1. 12, 15. And sith in our Directory made by the late reverend Assembly, and confirmed by the High Court of Parliament, the Ministers of the Gospel were commanded to Pray for their con∣version, and so to use all means to effect the same, unless we will flatteringly mck God in our Prayers, especially sith they are beloved according to the Election for their Fathers sake, of our heavenly Father, whm we are to imitate, and whose gifts and callings are without repentance, Rom. 11. 28. and whm we are to follow as dear Children, sith from them came the Adoption, and the Glory; fm them we re∣ceived the Covenants and the Law, the Worship of God, and the Promises; for theirs were the Fathers, and from them Christ came, who is od ver all, bssed for ever, Rom. 9. 4, &c. Lastly, Sith they abound in Wealth, Arts, and Sciences, and ex∣cel in ingenuity and Tongues, and God is able to graft them in again, and the Re∣deemer shall come to Zion to turn away iniquity in Jacob, and the time of fulfilling this is by the common suffrage of the Godly at hand, Rom. 11. 26. Therefore to hasten their Conversion, and to procure the Blessing and life to us and our Po∣sterity, to have the honour and glory to be happy instruments of their Conversion, through out mercy spread towards them, to get to us and our Posterity deliverance from the evil threatned to fulfil the Prophesies, avert all Judgements, and to obtain our Peti∣tions for ingrafting and Salvation: Therefore your Petitioner humbly prayeth, That they may have Liberty (as well as other Nations) to Trade and Traffick in our Com∣mon-Wealth without peril of their lives: To that end, let the Statutes of Bannishing them be Repealed: And if the Parliament think fit, let them (on good Cautions and Conditions as shall seem meetet to their wisdom) be suffered here to Continue and Dwell amongst us, as formerly before the Conquest, that so living with us, they may with the Sweetness and Fatness of our Land, receive into their Souls the wholsome and saving knowledge of the Gospel, which in no Country under Heaven (blessed be God, and continued still be this Mercy to us and ours till Christ come) is so purely and powerfully preacht and held forth as in this Common-Wealth: To effect which; Your Petitioner shall alwayes Pray, &c.
The Proposals. 1. SIth by the Word of God (the touchstone of all truth, the best judge of all Controversies) it appears there were no ecclesiastical Bishops, or Elders in the Church of Christ, in the Apostles dayes, but such as were either extraordinarily Called and sent by Christ, as were the Apostles, Prophets, Evan∣gelists, Workers of Miracles, and such as had the gifts of healing, or speaking with, or interpreting of divers Tongues; 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29, &c. Ephes. 4. 11.: or else such as were ordinarily called and sent by these, or by the Presby∣tery of ordained Elders, who impos'd their hands on them with Fasting and Prayer. Titus 1. 5 7. Acts 14. 23. & 13. 2. &c. 1 Tim. 3. 10. & 4. 14. & 5. 22. 2 Sith in each Congregation or Church we read of in Scripture there were more than one ordained Bishop or Elder in the Primi∣tive Church, placed there according to the bigness of the City, or Church, by the first Planters. Acts 14. 23.  Acts 20. 12. Phil: 1. 1. Titus 1. 5, 7. 3 Sith many were given by Christ to the Church, Ephes. 4 11. and placed there by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28. and 1 Cor. 12. 28. and by the Apostles, Acts 14. 23. Titus 1. 5, 7. yea Christ, when he sent forth his Apostles, paired them, which also the Holy Ghost confirms, in sending Paul and Barnabas (after they had been separated or ordained by the Eders of Antioch) for the work whereunto God had caled them; Acts 13. 1, 2.: yea when these two holy men differed in judgement, yet singly they went not alone to plant, or water the Churches; for Paul chose Silas, and Barnabas Mark, both which were teaching Elders. Acts 15. 39, 40. & 16. 13. 4 Sith we read of one Elder of a Church absent, and so detained by St. Paul, Phil: 2. 30.: who had other Elders to feed them, Phil▪ 1. 1. Cl: 1. 7.: and of Epaphras at Coloss Minister, who was with the Apostle at Rome, whilst the Church had Archyppus to teach them, Colos. 4. 12. 17. 5 Sith its inconvenient, if not hurtful to have but one Bishop, or Elder in a Congregation to feed and rule the people therein, who being sick, as was Epaphroditus of Philippi, or otherwise lawfully
imployed as was Epaphras of the Church of Coloss. Phil: 2. 25. Col: 4. 13.: the Con∣gregation in the mean time may starve, or want food, at least be neglected and exposed to danger, as sheep without a Shepheard; Ezek: 34. 8.: and the publick Ordinances of Christ be omitted on the Sab∣bath day, or at least not be so seasonably and perfectly perform∣ed as they ought to be (as is evident by daily experience in many places) and therefore its necessary, at least convenient that there should be more than one ordained Elder in every Church: other∣wise how can he aright receive the Lords Supper, when there is no Elder in Christs name authoritatively to bid him take and eat, and to represent Christs person, to command him to do it, as Christ gave it to his Apostles, and they distributed each to other, and so to the Church as they had received of the Lord, Luke 22. 17 1 Cor: 11. 23, 24. Ʋt in prima coenae institutio∣ne discipuli ocu∣los habuere, in∣tentos ad Domi∣num qui ad men∣sam sedens por∣rexit discipulis corporis▪ & san∣guinis Sacra∣mentum; ita nos quo{que} levemus corda nostra ad Dominum, qui illi agens nobis ministrorum manibus porrigit verum suum co∣pus, &c: Haem∣ing: Comment: in Loc: August: de Consensu Evang: lib: 3. Mat 5. 7.: for the Minister, his action and words are herein Sacramental, it belong∣ing only to the Ministers of the Gospel to break the Bread, and bless the Cup, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. (though some unwarily of late have practised the contrary;) nor Secondly, without there be two or more of those ordained Elders in a Church can christians perform the duty the Apostle requires of them in sickness, viz. to send for the Elders of the Church to pray for them, James 5. 14. nor can one Elder annoint the sick person with Oyl in the name of the Lord, the Commission being given not singly to one Elder, but jointly to two at the least. Nor Thirdly can the people ob∣serve aright (as I conceive those rules of giving them double ho∣nor, 1 Tim. 5. 17. 1 Thes. 5. 12. and to know them that labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, & admonish them to submit to and obey them that watch for their Souls, and are their guides, Heb. 13. 7, 17. if there be only one Elder in their Congregation. Nor Fourthly, can the Doctrine the Minister preacheth be so ful∣ly cofirmed, unless there be two or three of the Elders to ratifie it; (Christ himself had his Father with him, to bear witness of the truth he spake, John 8. 18. though his  had been suf∣ficient) for in the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word shall be established. Mat: 18. 16: Nor Fifthly can the discipline of Christ in each Church be rightly administred unless there be two or three of thse ordained Elders gathered together in Christs name, to bind or loose, as Christ requires, Mat: 18. 17, 20. which makes up a Repre∣sentative Church, as the company of Prophets are called, 1 Sam: 19: 20:: for so Christ speaks to his Apostles, and in them to the Elders that succeed them, What ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in
Heaven, and what two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing ye shall ask, it shall be done for you of my Father which is in Heaven, Matth. 18. 18, 20. Nor lastly can the wicked be so fully convinced, neither here in the Church, nor yet hereafter in the day of Judgement, unless there be two or three of these, Luke 10. 16 Acts 13. 46 2 Thes 1. 10: therefore St. Paul excommunicates not the incestious Person, but as joyned with other Elders; p: which authority the Lord gave unto them for edification; 2 Cor. 10. 8: yea Christ himself distinguisheth the El∣dersl 1 Cor. 5. 4 and Angel of the Presbytery in Thyatira, Rev. 2. 18, 24. from the people; and divers of the holy Martyrs in the Primitive Church confirm the same. Clem. Epist. ad Cor: pag: 54 Polycarp Epist: ad Phillip: Ambros: Com. in Eph: cap: 4: Iraeneus calls all the first overseers of the Church of Rome Presbyters: Iraen Epist. ad Victor. & adv. Haeres. lib: 4, chap: 43: as Saint Luke long before had called all the Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20. 17, 28. yea Evaristus Martyr, who was the Angel, or chief Presbyter of the Church of Rome, ordained seven Presbyters to be in every City for Doctrine and Discipline, Gratian dist. 93. cap: legimu: Cyprian would do nought without his Cler∣gy, and therefore in the fourth Councel of Carthage it was conclu∣ded as Orthodox, that every Church should have his Presbyters, or Elders, without whose Counsel nought should be done in the Church, Concil Carth: 4: Ignatius long before affirms the Presbyters to be as the Court of God, and combination of the Apostles. Ignat. Epist.w Tert. Apols adu. Gent. cap 39 ad Tral. also Tertullian affirms, that the approved Elders sat as Presidents in their Assemblies. u: so likewise Origen and Am∣brose informs us, that there was nothing done in the Churches with∣outy Celsum. Ambr: Com: in Tit. chap. 5. 1 See the Appen∣dix to Ius Di∣vinum ministerii propos. 7 their Counsel, although in Ambrose his time the custom began to be obsolete by the sloth, or negligence, or rather pride of some Presbyters, Origen Cnt:: who would alone seem to be somewhat, which made way for Antichrist to come in, for its conceived by some learned men, that the exaltation of one Bishop above another was, and hath been a chief means of setling Antichrist in his Throne; Greg. M▪ Ep. ad Patriarch Const Iohan & Epist. ad Maur. Imp. Fox Acts and Mon. part 1, page 108. Zanch: Annot: in 2 Thes 2 Musc▪ com. Loc Ius Divin. Mi. append. page 118, & 119: and the want of these ordained Elders in each Church hath caused the Discipline of Christ to cease, and the inventions of men to be setled in its stead in many places, whereby Christs vine wanting a fence, is exposed to the wild Bore of the▪ Wood▪ and crafty Fox∣es of the Field, who pull off and devou many of he tender Grapes; by means whereof Sects and Schisms are multiplyed, Blasphemous and monstrous Opinions are hatched and defended without shame, to the heart▪ grief of Gods people, to the dishonor of God, and scandal of the Reformed Religion which we pofess; for those of the Reformed Religion here amongst us are grown
into four great Factions: some are for Prelacy, and Lordly Epis∣copacy, others for strict and Aristocratical Presbytery, others for pure and popular Independency: others for refined and upstart Antipaedobatistry, and Anabaptistry. Therefore for Gods glory, the Churches edification, for recon∣ciling our unhappy differences, for the composing our distractions the re-uniting of these four Factions, and preservation of love, unity, and peace among us, I humbly offer these Proposals to your consideration. First, It seems convenient, if not necessary, that the three Nati∣ons (though they stil retan their Parochial bounds for civil ends, as now) should be divided into several Congregational Churches, according to the ancient constitution of the Churches in the Pri∣mitive times, and Apostles dayes, as the supream Authority of the Nations shall think fit in every Market-Town, and in some great Villages also, where Believers are many, and the Towns few, and inconveniently placed, as the Churches were at first planted by the Apostles, and Apostolical men at Ierusalem, Samaria, Anti∣och, Lystra, Iconium, Derbe, Troas, Rome, Corinth, Philippi, Co∣loss, Ephesus, Smyrna, &c. as the Scriptures testifie; and Saint Paul left Titus at Creet, to ordain Elders in every City; Tit: 1. 5, 7: and so much Ecclesiastical History abundantly testifies, Clem. Epist. ad Cor: p: 54 Ignat: ad Tral. Polycarp: ad Phillip: Epist. Eusebius Eccl: Secratet: Theodoet and ohers.: thus in Ju∣dea of old there were Synagogues in the Towns and cities among the Jews, the Villages belonging to these Towns, belonged to the Elders of the Towns. Now the places where Christians assem∣ble are by the Apostle called Synagogues, Iames 2. 2. and there were many Synagogues in Ierusalem, no less than four hundred Schools and Synagogues; Ainsw: Annot: in Lev: cap: 26 31: and so much Saint Luke intimates, Acts 5. 21 and 24. 12: so at Ierusalem under the Gospel, though the Christians there were but one Church, Acts 15. 4: yet questionless they had Synagogues or distinct places of meeting each from other, which the twelve Apostles joyntly for a time did govern, together with the Elders and Deacons ordained by them, Acts 15. 6, 22.: for all the Apostles spake to∣gther, and the Deacons served at the Table, and Ministred for the Churches good, and the Elders assembled in Counsel with the Apostles, to consider of matters in Doctrine, or manners; af∣ter when the Church of Ierusalem multiplyed to some mllions, Acts 21▪ 20.: each of the Apostles went to his place, and Iames with the Elders
guided that Church, as all Ecclesiastical Writers affim. 2. It seems fit that in each of these Churches whereunto the Congregation are to resort for Ecclesiastical Discipline, there be joyned all the Elders of that City or Town, together with the El∣ders of the Villages belonging or adjoyning unto the said City or Town, to be the Bishops, Elders, or Guides of that Church, to feed and rule the same, Acts 13. 1 & 20. 17 Phil▪ 1. 1 Heb. 13. 7. 17 Titus 1. 5: and let no un-ordained Elder be joyned with them, (the Deacons being first approved, 1 Tim. 3. 10▪: and elected, yea and ordained by Prayer, and imposition of hands of the Pres∣bytery before they were thought fit to execute in the office; Acts 6. 3, 6: nor read we in the Scripture of any one un-ordained Elder that ruled in the Church; those Ruling Elders mentioned, 1 Tim. 5. 17. being such as did tread out the corn of the Word, verse 17. and so worthy of Reward, for if the inferior Officer the Deacon was to be ordained: much more ought the Superior, which is the Elder, as its plain they were, n: Ordination giving both name and being unto a Church-Officer, as a Commission doth to a Judge in civil affairs, as the Reverend Ministers of London prove, Acts 14. 23 & 1 Tim. 4. 14 Titus 1. 5 Ius divin. minist: cap: 11. 3. It seemeth fit that there be in each Congregation or Church at least two or three of these ordained Elders, to gather together in Christs name for the administration of Discipline, as Christ and his Apostles teach, Mat. 18. 20 1 Cor. 5. 4: promising to them his special presence where two or three of them are gathered together in his name, as there were three in the least Ecclesiastical Courts in Israel; & where Believers are many, and the Parishes thick, there may be twenty three as there were in each City amongst them, wherein were one hundred and twenty men housholders; Ainswrth Annot: on Deut. 16 Goodwins Iew∣sh Antiq. lib: 5. cap: 1. 14: yea in our greatest Cities there may be more, as there was in Ierusalem, the Sanhedrim, which consited of seventy two persons; l: and let these by common consent rule in each Congregation, as they did in the Primitive times untill Cyprians dayes, Cypr: Epist. 39.: yea till Saint Ambrose time, who flourished about Anno 374. for then the Churches had their Elders as well as their Angels, without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church; Ambr. Com: in Epist: Tim: cap: 5 and let all these la∣bour in the Word and Doctrine, and in ruling the Congregation committed to them, either by course in their several places of meeting, as the Priests served in the Temple, Luke 1. 5 & 1 Cron. 24 19.: whilst the rest are imployed in ruling, or else let them constantly preach, as now they do in their several Parishes, both publickly, & from house
to house, & privately as Saint Paul did, t: unless sickness, or someActs 20. 20 Moses chose Rulers in Isra∣el over thou∣sands, hun∣dreds, fifties, tens, to judge the people, Exod. 18. 25 other necessary occasion hinder any of them, at which time let the other Presbyters assist him that is wanting, and so let them all rule joyntly with common consent, the Church of God committed to them. 4. It seemeth fit that the eldest Presbyter (if he please to ac∣cept of it, or the next Senior that will accept of it) be with com∣mon consent of the Presbytery and congregation, chosen Angel of the Church, for such we read werein the seven Asian Churches, approved of by Christ, to whom he directs his Epistles; and so it was in the first Century, though soon after altered as Ambrose, confesseth; Rev. 2 & 3 capita. Ambr. Com. in Epist. ad Eph. capit. 4 See the Ap∣pendix in Iu Divinum Mini∣sterii cap. 6. & 7: that the Ordination that was then in the Church agreed not in all things with the Ordination that was in the Apo∣stles dayes: for St. Paul calleth Timothy a Presbyter, a Bishop created by him, for at first Presbyters were called Bishops, and so the elder Bishop or Presbyter departing, the next following succeeded him; and because the following Presbyters began to be found unworthy to hold that Primacy, by the advice of a Counsel, this form of succession was altered, that not order, but desert should create a Bishop; thus in time the Church forsook the Apo∣stolical pattern (under a shew of wisdom as the Apostle saith) and establisht a humane tradition in its place; and the best way to reform its corruption, is to teturn to its Primitive institution, as Christ removed Bigamy out of the Church of the Jews; Mat. 19. 8 Such at this day are the super∣intendents a∣mongst the Germanes, as Zeppyrus writes, lib. 2. cap. 10. un contro. lib 8 2. cap. 5. no. 1: and let the Angel in each Church be the first Presbyter in order of all the rest; but not in dignity or office above them: for though St. Peter wills the younger Presbyters to submit to the elder; Pet. 5. 5.: yet are the elder also to be subject to them: and so the Holy Ghost requires a subjection each to other. The Angel of the Church is to be Moderator in the Assembly, and collect the Votes, and pro∣pound questions to the Presbytery for Reformation, and there∣fore Christ blames them when they were negligent herein, Rev. 2. 2. 14. 20, & ch. 3. 1. 15; they are to see that all things in the Church be done decently, and in order, with the advice and consent of his Co-presbyters. But he is not to have any power or jurisdiction over the other Presby∣ters, or more than the rest, sith the Keyes of the Kingdom of Hea∣ven are equally committed to them all; nor hath the Pope of Rome, or any other Bishop moe power than other Bishops here∣in; Harmony of Confes. page 364. see Sect. 11: as the Belgick Church concludes; therefore in al Acts of Government let them be done by the common consent of
the Presbyters, or major part of them (as it was in the first Coun∣sel: Acts 15. 6 22, 23 of the Apostles, Presbyters, and Bishops in their assembly in Ierusalem) with the consent of the Brethren; for though the Presbyters are to separate the precious from the visd, Jer: 15. 19: and to judge what is good, or ill, truth, or error, who are holy, who pro∣phane, who clean or unclean, and authoritatively to declare them so to be; Lev. 13. 3 Deut. 21. 5, 8: and though the Ministers of Christ as was before prophesied of them should stand in judgement, and teach the peo∣ple between holy and prophane; (Ezek. 44. 23: and Christ gave to them the power of loosing, and retaining sin) Mat. 18. 18 John 20. 23: yet the Congregation of Israel were obliged in general by Gods command to put their sentence in execution, as to shut out the Lepers out of▪ the Congre∣gation, whom the Priests had declared to be such; Numb, 5. 2, 3: so also under the Gospel St. Paul requires the Church of Corinth to put away the incestious person, whom he and the Presbyters had pronounced unclean, for he had determined of him already, 1 Cor.Hac increptio quae a pluribus sie Arius Mont. Int. 5. 4, 5. 7. 13. and he desires the Presbyters when they were ga∣thered together in Christs Name, and his Spirit with the power of our Lord Iesus to deliver him over to Sathan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved: and after enjoyns the whole Congregation to purge out the old Leaven, and to put away from them that wicked person; nor were they to receive him in again till the Presbyters should pronounce him clean: no more than the Lepers were to be received into the Camp, till the Priests pronounced them clean; nor did the Church of Corinth receive him in again till St. Paul had judged of him, and pronounced him clean, so absolving him, and desiring the Church to receive him, and the Presbyters to forgive and comfort him, for he judged, sufficient unto him was the increpation, which was inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2. 6: many blamed him for his sin, and scandal, and executed the sentence, St. Paul and the Presbytery had pronounced upon him; but they did not judge and censure him as our Democrati∣cal Brethren would have it, assuming to themselves the Kye Christ never gave them, for they belonged to the Ministry, they received that power from the Lord; Lev. 14. 3, 4 2 Cor. 10. 8 Tatae se uti dici potestate quanta concessa est ab author. Ambr: Com. in loc.; all he Church cannot be head, eyes, or Rulers: where then were they rued, and the rest of the body, 1 Cor. 12. 14. or who then were to obey and submit unto their Rulers, Heb. 13. 7. 17.
5. If either of these Elders dye, let the people chuse, Acts 6. 3. and 14. 23. and the Presbytery of that Congregation approve of, and ordain another to take his office, 1 Tim. 3. 10 Acts . 20. & 6. 3 Ambr. Com. in c: vide Appendix Iuris divini Minist▪ Agl. page 120: but if the Angel die, let the next Presbyter succeed him, for he is a Bishop or Angel who is first amongst the Presbyters; as Timothy a Presbyter was a Bishop, because he had no Presbyter before him, as Ambrose saith; and let the Ordination be with Fasting▪ Prayer, and Impo∣siion of the hands of the Presbytery, according to the example and precepts of the Apostles, Acts 14. 23. 1 Tim. 3. 1. and 4. 14 and 5. 22. Titus 1. 5. Heb. 6. 2. 6. To prevent envyings, emulations, dissentions which may arise between the Presbyters themselves, or any other of the Church let all Tythes, Glebes, Rents, Pensions, Oblations, Augmentati∣ons, or any other annual profits whatsoever, belonging to the Presbyters of each Congregation, as Presbyters there be paid in kind, according to Law, or be valued by a Jury of men of ano∣ther Congregation on Oath before a Judge of Assize yearly, and let each particular proportion of Land be rated what it ought to pay in lieu of the Tythes, &c. and the time of payment be by a Law prefixed to be paid to the Presbyters, or their Deputies, on the penalty of treble dammage, according to the Satute of King Edward the Sixth, (still in force) for predial Tythes, i: andVide Statut. Edwardi 6: de decimis sled. let these Tithes, Gleabs, Rents, &c. thus valued be paid in unto the Angel of the Presbytery, who shall repay faithfully the same, according to each mans need, Acts 4. 35 in the Presbytery, and according to the number of each Pretbyters Family, for which by the command of Christ he is to provide for, 1 Tim. 5. 8 Rom. 12. 17: and let the An∣gel be accountable for his distribution to the Presbyters. Thus was it decreed by God amongst the Levites of old, they were to eat portion like portion, Lev. 6. 16, 17 &c. 10. 13, 14 Num. 18 9 10, 19 Lev. 22. 11 Deut. 18. 8: and this was put in execution by those two zealous Reformers, Hzekiah, and Nehemih,  Chron. 31. 15 Nehem. 13. 3: and was also practised by the Primitive Saints; Acts  3 1 Cor. 9 , 13, 14 2 Cor. 8▪ 14 Gal. 6. 6 and until this in Par∣liament be established, let every Presbyter enjoy the profits of their own particular Parishs as now they do, and accept if they please of better livings, as they fall in the Congregation by Senio∣rity in the Mnistry, that so the youngest Presbyters may have the least, and the eldest the greatest Means; old age being honoura∣ble, if found in the way of Righteousness. And let all Avowsons sentations, Impropriations, Donations, Tenths, and First-Fruits be taken away out of the Church of Christ, as being inven∣tions
of Sathan to allure men to simony and corruption, which were brought into the Church in the time of Antichristian dark∣ness, approved of to feed and enlarge the Popes and Prelates Re∣venues, and sold to others, and bought by others for self▪ ends, and worldly advantages, and hath occasioned abundance of horrid sins, to the destruction of many mens souls; yet let there be a just and reasonable satisfaction made to the Impropriators for them, out of the Bishops, and Deans, and Chapters, or other Church∣land, as the Supream Authority of the Nations shall think fit in each place, according to the proportion of money paid for them, or Land given in the Lieu of them, and in consideration of the time they have already, and are for the future to enjoy them. Lastly, The Presbyters thus setled and provided for, let them diligently by praying in publick, and Teaching from house to house as Saint Paul did, Acts 20. 20; gather together the Saints, and labour in the Word and Doctrine to convert Souls, and to separate the precious from the vile; Ephes. 4. 12 1 Tim. 5. 17 Jer. 5. 19; and those that are not scandalous in life, or Doctrine, but are ready to give the Presbyters a reason of the hope that is in them, with meekness and reverence, and are wil∣ling to own them as their Guides and Pastors, and to obey them in the Lord as such, 1 Pet. 3. 15 Heb. 13 7▪ 17; let them be received as perfect members of that Congregation, to partake in all the Ordinances of Christ in that Congregation administred. But as for such as are igno∣rant, before they be admitted to the Lords Supper, let them be first Catechiz'd, untill they are able in some reasonable measure to give an account of their Faith, and to declare their willingness to walk in Christs wayes, and to observe all his commands, as Members of that Church, and then let them being approved of by the Presbytery, with the peoples consent, be admitted to the Lords Supper, after one or more of the Presbyters have prayed for them, and laid their hands on them, Heb. 6. 2 Acts 8. 17. & 19. 6. for this Ceremony fol∣lowed Baptism to compleat Church-members, See Hanmers .: which even the Presbyters did perform, the Angel or Bshop being absent, Ambr. Com. in Epist. Eph. cap: 4. Apud Aegiptum Presbyteri con∣signant si presens non sit Episcopus.; as Saint Ambrose affirms. Secondly, Let the Children of Church-members (who are though un-Baptized, yet holy) 1 Co. 7 14 Ezra 9. 2 on the desire and profession of one of the Parents Faith, be admitted to Baptism, as the holy Seed of Israel was to Circumcision, the Promise being made, not only to the Jews, and their Seed, but also to as many of the Gen∣tiles,
and their Seed, as are called of God, and faithful, Acts 2. 39 Gal 3. 7, 14, 26. who are also Abrahams Seed to signifie, which God called his Name Abraham, Gen. 17. 6. compared with Rom. 4. 16. But let Baptism be administred (if it may be without danger) by immersion, and not aspersion, as it was ge∣nerally practised by the Church for many Centuries, as the most common and landible way of Baptizing, Aquin: sum: part 4. 66 art. 7 Chris. Hom. 24 in Iohan cap. 3▪ and only used, unless incases of necessity, Cypr. Epist. 26: which caused those so Baptized to be called Climici; but as for such as allow not of Infant Baptism, contra∣ry to the custom of the Church, and gracious Promises, and privi∣ledges belonging to them, Gen. 7. 17 and 28. 4 Mark 10. 14 Acts 2. 39: for the Seed are in the Blessing, Psalm 37. 27. as Heirs called to inherit it, 1 Pet. 3. 9. yet so they hold no error, contrary to the foundation of Religion, and behave themselves in our Assemblies without farther offence; we may bear with them, that by the Word they may be convinced, or converted: we are not rashly to judge them for their weak∣ness, but ought to bear with them, and not please our selves, but them, for their good, to edification as Christ did. But if by hol∣ding this Opinion, or other of like nature, they cause division and offences, contrary to the Doctrine received, we are to avoid them, Rom. 16, 17: In things superstructive, which are dubious, or indiffe∣rent, we ought not to condemn, or contemn our weak Brother, Rom. 14 per totum Phil. 3. 15, 16: for if it be necessary for him, God will sooner, or later reveal the same unto him; nevertheless whereunto we have attained, we should walk in love, and speak the truth in love, Eph. 4. 15 2 John 1: and love one mother in the truth. Thirdly, But for those who have been Baptized in their Infancy, and through ignorance shall not be able to give a reason of the hope that is in them, nor do not know how to examine them∣selvs, nor undeastand nor in any competent measure the Cove∣nant of Grace, nor the nature, use, and end of receiving the Lord Supper; 1 Cor. il. 28, 29 26, 27; or are scandalous in their Lives and Conversa∣tions, and so unfit to eat with the Godly, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 13: or through pro∣phaneness, carnal shame, or fear, or out of hardness of heart, or perverseness of spirit shall refuse to give an account of their Faith, or to obey and submit unto their Guides, cleaving unto them Acts 17. 34 willngly, freesy, and sincerely, Psalm 110. 3 Mark 8. 38 Luke 14. 23 Philem: 14 let them be suspen∣dd from receiving the Lords Supper, that they may be ashamed; yet let not the communicates count them as enemies, but admonish them as Brethren, 2 Thes. 3. 14, 15. and the Rule by which all
Members are to walk, is, the Scriptures, which s able to make the Man of God perfect, throughly furnished to every good work. 2 Tim. 3 16. 17. hereby the Spirit is to be tryed, by which we speak, Esay 8. 20 1 John 4. 1. for if any speak not according hereunto, 'tis because there is no light in him; nay, if an Angel from Heaven should bring ano∣thsr Doctrine than that which is to be plainly proved by the Scrip∣tures, we are to repute him accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Christ and his Apo∣stles have already revealed the whole Will of God to the Church▪ and who so shall add to it, or diminish from it, shall be damn'd for it, John 17. 6 Acts 20. 20, 21. Rev. 22. 18, 19. 4. In all cases of Offence between Brethren, let that golden rule of Christs be observed, Matt. 18. 15, 16, &c.. If any be obstinate in any scanda∣lous sin, or fundamental error, after the first and second admo∣nition, reject him, and repute him as a publican, Tit. 3. 10, 11 Mar. 28. 17. If he shall refuse to hear the Church, after that the Presbitery gathered together in the Name of the Lord Jesus, have by Christs power, delivered him over to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 4. and the people have put away, from themselves, that wicked per∣son) 1 Cor. 5. 1. 3. until he shall to the whole Church shew evident testi∣mony of his Repentance, after his Excommunication, as the in∣cestuous peson did, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, &c to 1. But if he shall Apostatize from the Christian Faith, and become an open and wilful blasphemer of the Truth, or an Idolater, and false Teacher, seducing others from the Faith, to believe and receive his fundamental Errors and blasphemies: he ought by the civil Magistrate (if he be a Chri∣stian) to be put to death, as God commanded, Levlt. 24. 16 Deut. 12. 6, &c. or at least to be severely punished, Zach 13. 3. as Pious Kings in Israel, and Chri∣stian Princes in the Primative times have done, Euseb. Eccles. Hist.. 2 Chron. 15. 13. But in superstructive Points of Doctrine, each man ought to walk according to his knowledge, and conscience, Phil 3. 15, 16. Rom. 14. 22, 23. Sih whatever is not of Faith, is sin; and we ought to bear with the weak, and not to judge each other about meats, or dayes, or such like things, Rom. 15 1 & 14. 3, , &c.. If any man be over∣taken in a fault, such as are spiritual ought to restore such an one with the Spirit of Meekness, considering himself lest he also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1. Each man should abide in that Vocation wherein he is called with God, 1 Cor 7. 20. 24. & 14. 33 & 12. 17, 25. and not usurpe each others Calling, or Office, no more than the Members of the natural Body do: but having Gifts differing according to the Grace gi∣ven us, so let us use them, Rom. 12. 6 Ephes. 4 2, 3. for the profit of the whole Body,
endeavouring (in all lowliness, meekness, and long-suffering, forbearing one another in love) to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace. Every one should observe those general rules, Rom. 12. 1, 9, &c Phil. 2. 2, &c. Eph. 4. 31, 32. Heb. 3. 10, 11. & 10, 24. & 12. 1. 14, &c. ad finem Epist. 1 Cor. 1. 40. in parti∣cular for our thoughts, all of us should observe those two rules, Pro. 4. 23. Phil 4. 8. & Col. 3. 1. & for our words, those two, Eph. 4. 29. Col 4 6. remembring that he, whatever he be in his seeming Devotions, that bridles not his tongue, his Religion is vain, James 1. 26. And for our actions, those rules of the Apostle, Col. 3. 16, 17. Heb. 11. 6. Matth 7. 12. 1 Cor. 16 14. 1 Cor. 10. 31. doing all things in Charity, and in Faith, in Christs Name, to his glory; denying our selves, taking up our Cross, lets follow Christ, Mat. 16. 24. and deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly, godly, and righteously, Titus 2. 14. following God as dear Children, Ephes 5. 1. walking in love, as Christ hath loved us, being ready to lay down, not only our Goods, but our Lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3. 16. and lets ab∣stain from the appearance of evil. 1 Thes. 5. 22. Lets do nothing doubtingly, against Conscience, or undutifully against Autho∣rity, for Conscience sake, Rom. 13. 5. & 14 22. or uncharitably against our Brother, in things that 1 Cor. 8. 7, &c. Rom. 14. 5, &c. are indifferent; but lets walk as Children of the light, circumspectly as wise men, Eph. 5. 15. daily growing in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, abounding more and more in well-doing, and persevering therein unto the end, Mat. 10. 22. being faithful unto the death, that so we may receive the crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. In observing of these things, through Gods blessing, the Chur∣ches of Christ which are amongst us, shall be edified, and walking according to these rules, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost,Acts 9. 31 be multiplyed, and all the Saints be in one united, to serve God with one lip, Zeph. 3. 9. and shoulder, Zach. 14. 21. and no Canaanite shall dwell in the House of the Lord unwarn'd, or unpunished, which is the earnest Desire, and shall be the fervent Prayer of thy Souls Friend, whosoever thou art, that readest these Proposals, so thou be Christs, under what form soever thou livest.
A TREATISE AGAINST PERJURY SIth any way to take Gods Name in vain, is such a sin, that God will not hold the Offender guiltless, Com. 3. And God hath absolutely forbidden swearing falsly, Levi. 19. 12 Numb. 30. 2. and Christ and his Apostle forbids us to swear at all, Mat. 5. 33. & James 5. 12. (not that he doth hereby abolish any part of his Fathers di∣vine Worship, commanded in the Law, Deut. 6. 13. but to pre∣vent all occasions of Perjury, and rash, and presumtuous swear∣ing) which is a sin sticks so fast unto the Soul, that without a great deal of washing, it will not out, Psal. 51. 2. Therefore above all things St. James dehorts from it, following herein the counsel of the Hebrew Rabbies, Maimon Trea. of Oathes. c. 12. who advised their Scholars to beware of this sin, more than of all transgressions, it being one of the heavie iniquities, greater than all iniquities. St. Paul tells us, the Law was made to condemn such, 1 Tim. 1. 9. 10 Zach, 5. 1, &c. Jer. 23. 10. for God sends his flying Roll against them, which shall enter into the house of him that sweareth falsly, to consume the stone, and the timber of it, yea, the whole Land shall mourn because of it, Mal. 3. 5. Christ in Judge∣ment will come near to such, and be a swift witness against them, g. he will make the Land desolate, and deprive it of man and beast, for swearing is the Captain, in that cursed company of Vices, Hos. 4. 2, 3. The Heathen accounted it a fearful sin, and
therefore the wisest of them allowed it not, but in great and weighty matters, as in the vindication of a mans fame, or pre∣servation of his own, or friends life, h. St. Augustine calledIsecrat. in Stbaeo ser. 25 it, a dangerous Medicine, never to be used, but in a desperate Disease, August. ser: 28. de verbis Apost. Deut. 28. 59. And indeed God threatens to make their plagues wonderful, and of long continuance, that fears not his great and glorious Name: He knows not how to spare that People that persist in this sin, Jer. 5. 7, 11. for they shall fall, and not rise again, Amos 8. 14. he will surely cut them off, Zeph. 1. 4, 5. Sith therefore punishment in∣seperably follows at the heels of this sin, and lighteth either in∣visibly on the Souls of men, as namely, by Gods with-drawing his Grace, and favours from them, as from the ten Tribes that revol∣ted from Davids house, to whom they had sworn Allegiance, for which they are said to rebel, because of the Covenant they had made with David before the Lord, 1 King. 12 19 compared with 2 Sam. 5. 3. (although it be said, the cause was from the Lord, that Rehoboam hearkned not unto the people, 2 Kings 12. 15.) which was the ground of that Re∣bellion: or else God permits Satan to blind, and harden their hearts, and to take full possession of their Souls, as he dealt with Ananias and Sapphira, who agreed together to tempt the Spirit of God, and to lye unto the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 1, &c.. So it happened to▪ Judas the Traytor, after he had perfidiously betrayed his Master, Satan was permitted by Christ, after the Sopp, to enter into him, and to fill him with all impiety, and then to hurry him to the halter, and Hell; or else God suffers Satan to seduce them, to beleeve those that speak lyes in hypocrisie, and to credit his strong delusions, which is a judgement threatned on all, that receive not the love of the truth, 2 Thess. 2. 9, 10, 11. And that are traytors, truce-breakers, lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God, having a shew of godliness, but denying the power of it, 2 Tim 3. 2, 3▪. Or, Lastly, God departs from them, for detaining the Truth in unrighteousness, and so gives them over to a reprobate mind, and vild affections, Rom. 1. 21, 24, 26▪. St. Augustine tells us, That the life of the Body is the Sul, and the life of the Soul is God; the Body dieth when the Soul de∣parts, but the Soul dieth when God depats, when the Body is wounded with a sword, the Soul departs; and doth not God de∣part when the Soul is wounded with perjury? s. Or else visiblyAugust. in E∣pist. Iacob. Gods Judgement falls on the persons, estates, goods, or good∣name, of the prophaners of his Name, or they fall into con∣demnation, and pit of destruction, before they have lived out
half their dayes, James 5.  Pa. 55. 0, 23. for God is jealous of his honour, and will not suffer it to be prophaned by any man, but will have it recover∣ed by their conversion, or confusion: Peter Martyr from the Rabbins tells us, That when the Law was given in Mount Sinai, against Perjury; Heaven and Earth shook, trembling at so hor∣rible a crime, Martyr loc Com: clas: 2. c. 7 Cum in Sinai darentur tabu∣lae statim ut lata lex est de perjurio totue orbis est con∣cussus.. for to prophane Gods Name, is the proper dialect of the damned in Hell; who speak as the Devil gives them utterance▪ their tongues being set on fire of Hell, and fearful without repentance will their doom be, Rev. 16. 11. Mat. 5. 37 James 3. 6 Psal. 109. 27. God is known to abhorre this sin, by the judgements he hath (in this world) exe∣cuted on such as have been guilty of this sin; as in the three years Famine in Davids dayes, which came on Israel, for their break∣ing the Oath with the Gibeonites, x. Sauls Family felt they 2 Sam. 21. 1 vengeance of their Fathers folly. And the Kingdom of Judah, and Israel, mourned because of this sin, Jer. 23. 10 Hoses 4. 2. God removed the Diadem, took off the Crown, and over-turned the glory of King Zedekiah, and brought shame and confusion on his posterity, and Army, for his prophanness and perjury, Ezek. 21. 23, 25, &c: & Ezek. 17. 18, 19. And what hapned to the late unhappy King, and his damning, cursing, and perjured Army, is too fresh in memory to relate. I have read of a Soul∣er in Germany, who being sick, gave his Money to the Host, we he lay, and being recovered, he demanded it, which he denying, the Souldier sued him; but the Host forswore it against his Conscience, and presently the Devil carried him away in the presence of the Court, nor could he ever after be heard of, Fincelius libr. 1 demirac:. 'Tis as one calls it, A God provoking, and a Devil impowering sin, Heavens A∣larm to Jurors.. It so provoked the Lords wrath against the Christians in the Holy Land, and so impowered the devilish Turks, that they prevailed still against them, and over-came them after that Al∣merick King of the Holy Land, the 50th after Godfry, had roke his Faith, and violated his Oath, which he had made with Elha deck the Caliph, and his Vicegerent: after this, he was soon van quished in the field, the Lord forsaking the Christians, and taking part with their foes: so that (as our famous Hstorian speaks) Rawl: Hist: of the world, lib▪ 2▪ prim: part: c: 6. sect▪ 8. Psal: 5: 6 Wisd▪ 1: 11.. though the Crosse of Christ, on which he suffered, was brought into the Field, by the Christians, (as their last Refoge) yet sith they had forsworn themselves in his Name, that was crucfi∣ed thereon, and so prophanned it, they could not stand, but were destroyed. The Soldan Sanar, being suddenly invaded by Al∣merick, drew in the Turk Syracon to their Ad, whose Nephew
Saldine, after he had made Egypt his own, beat the Christians out of the Holy Land. If the mouth that speaketh lies shall be de∣stroyed, how much more shall his be that swears them? Very well known is the History of Vladislaus King of Hungary, who having sealed and sworn a Truce, with Amurath the second great Turkish Knolls his Turkish Hist. pag: 297, and Rawl: Hist: ut supra:. Emperor, (and that, as my Author saith, the most ad∣vantagious for Christians, that ever was) yet was he by Eugenius the Pope commanded, and by Cardinal Julian, and other Bi∣shops perswaded, to break the same▪ and to provoke the Turk to renew the War; and though Vladislaus for a while prevailed in the Fight, (he being now far stronger in the Field than before) yet as soon as Amurath had drawn out the Truce, (Vladislaus had sworn, and sealed) and spread it before heaven, and invoca∣ted, revenge from Christ, on the Christians, for prophaning his Name, by this sin, saying, If thou art the true God (as the Chri∣stians affirm) shew then thy justice on these perfidious persons, who say they are thy servants: and loe immediately the Day was lost, the Battel turned, and Vladislaus, Julian, and 30000. perfidious Christians lost their lives, and perished in their sin: And if God hath thus remarkably from heaven revealed his wrath on all such, as are guilty of this sin, shall we think they were greater in this sin than others, in this Land, as Christ speaks, Luke 13: 3: 5▪ surely no; there be thousands in this Land are guilty of this sin, as well as they, and unless we repent, we shall all perish, for very few of age, can free themselves from it: for so I find in a late Invitati∣on to observe a solemn Fast throughout the Land, See the Invit. to a Fast in the Land, Mar: 26 1656.. that Oaths are put in among other sins of the Land, provoking the Lord to wrath; and surely if any Oathes are to be repented of, then much more such whereby men swear falsly, of which there are Three sorts: As First, To affirm a falshood by an Oath, under which espe∣cially are comprehended all false Witnesses, and Jurors, and truly 'tis to be feared, such are most of our Talesmen, and hackny Jurors, at our Sessions, and Assizes, who swear only for hire, and for gain go on either side usually, perverting judgement, and truth, without fear. 'Tis a great sin to make a Lie, for it bas from hea∣ven, Rev: 22▪ 15. but greater to stand in a Lie, and defend it, as Gehezi did,  Kig: 5: 25, 26.. which brought on him Naamans Leprosie; but the greatest sin of the Three, is to swear a Lie, as those sons of Belial did▪ to take away the life of innocent Naboth, 1 King: 21: 13. and those perjured persons that swore against Christ, Mat. 26: 61, 62..
'Tis a sin against the light of Conscience, derogating from all the Attributes of God; when men tremble not at his sin re∣venging Justice, nor fear his soveraign power, and greatness, nor are awed with his all-seeing wisdom, and truth, who is the searcher of the hearts, and will render to every man according to his works: O what desperate folly is it against all these, for men to put his holy and dreadful Name to that, which their own Con∣science tells them is a falshood? What other is it but a bold and impudent asserting of a Lie before Christ the just Judge of quick and dead? 'Tis a prophane and desperate invocating of God to be witness to a Lie, as if he were the patron of it, or ap∣proved it, when he infinitely loaths and abhors it, and hath oft plagued such as have presumed so to do; as Anne Avery, a Wo∣man in Woodstreet in London, who swearing a Lie, was struck speechless in the place, and cast up her excrements at her mouth, with horrible stink, Bayly n his Practce of Piety.. So also Earl Godwin in this Land, who flew Kng Alfreds Brother, of which he being accused by the King, he not only denied it, but forswore it, wishing the bread he wasm Hollingsh: Chron. in sie life of King. Alfyed. about to eat, might choak him, if he were guilty of the Fact; but loe, no sooner were the words spoken, but God vindicated his honour; so that the bread, according to his wish, choak'd him, and so he perished; a fearful spectacle of Gods indignation, and the Sea, not long after, devoured his Land, which to this day are called by his name. Eusebius tells us of three notorious persons that conspired falsly to accuse Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, and to affirm their Lie, one of them wshed he migh be consumed with fire if he swore not the truth, Euseb. cccles. Hist. lib. 6. c▪ 7. The second wished, that some grievous and deadly Disease might seize on him, if he swore falsly, Called by the Translator, Mrbus regius.. And the third wished he might be strucken blind, if he were perjured: And oe for their perjury, according to their imprecations, God plagued each of them: for the first had his Wife, himself, and Children, with his house, and all he had, burnt with fire from hven: The second perished by a fearful and violent Disease: The third was so terrified with the justice of God on his wicked Confederates, that he penitently confessed the perjury, and mourned so long, and bitterly, under the sense of this horrid sin, (for which, he obtaned not pardon) untl he had wept out his eyes; and so God made him as a spectacle of his ju∣stice, in his blindnesse: so a so a monument of his Mercy, in gi∣ving him repentance to mourn so lamentably for this horrid sin,
which was not quite expiated till his imprecation was fulfilled upon him, and his eyes expunged: And woe will be to those, who be∣ingNon remit∣r peccatum isi restituatur blatum: Aug: Epist: 54 guilty of this sin, do not repent much, and speedily, making also satisfaction, as much as in them lyeth, for the injuries done by their perjury, o. God pardons not the offence till thy Brother be reconciled, Mat: 5: 24. or thou endeavour restitution. The second sort that swear falsly (who are not so bad altogether, although guilty of a great sin) are such, who being ignorant of the truth, yet doubtingly, and rashly, without certain Knowledge, Faith, and Jer: 4: 2. Judgement, confirm the same by an Oath to be truth; for though the thing they confirm were truth, yet they not knowing it so, and yet by Oath affirming it that they know it so, swear falsly; for in swearing they pretend to know that, which indeed they know not, and so in reference to them 'tis false they swear, though in it self the thing may be true they swear: this God accounts lying, and an Oath being added to it, makes it Perjury. For to Lie, is to speak against that, which he thinks in his mind; such swearing the truth, but not from the heart, as God requires, Psal: 15: 2 Mentire, est contra mentem¦ire: Plin:. swear a Lie, because they know not they swear truth. Now Liars are from their father the Devil, and his works they do, Iohn 8: 48. and to swear a Lie is one of the greatest aggrava∣tions of it; for the Devil will speak truth, but not truly, not after a right manner, nor for a right end; 'tis to equivocate, deceive, and hurt mens souls; as in Adams tentation, he told the woman, if they did eat, they should be as Gods, which if understood of Angels fallen is a truth; but if of the blessed Trinity, or holy Angels, as he would have Eze understand it, was a Lie, Gen. 3: 5. So the spirit of Python in the Maid, confessed Paul and Sylas to be the servants of the most high God, which shewed to them the way of Salvation, Acts 16: 17. but this was for ill ends; as that he might be acknowledged a God, in speaking truth, or to uphold the false tenant of many gods, or provoke St. Paul, and commend his own Oracles; or lastly, by this means to hinder the preaching of the Gospel, and to raise persecution against the Apostles, which accordingly took effect; for Paul grieved in Spirit, could no longer endure the Devils approbation, when they had the power of Christ in their Ministry to confirm the Doctrine they preached, Acts 16: 17, &c. to 25. but turning, commanded the Spirit in the Maid, in the Name of Christ, to come out of her, and when her Masters saw the hope of their gain was gone, they raised persecution
against them. So that he swears falsly, who without judgement, and justice, swears; which is a high prophaning of Gods holyCom. 3d. Name, in which whosoever sins, God will not hold him guiltless. And truly 'tis to be feared, a great part of the knowing men of the Land are guilty of this sin, swearing ignorantly, doubtingly, or rashly; witnesse those Oathes taken in the Universities, to ob∣serve the Statutes thereof, when Schollars are Matriculated, or take Degres, when scarce one o a hundred knoweth them: The Oaths heretofore usually taken by Majors, Burgesses, Sheriffs, Common Council-men, Citizens, Free-holders, and Tenants, in their Cities, Towns, Courts, Assemblies, which usually were igno∣rantly, or doubtfully taken, or carelsly and negligently per∣formed; yea, worse than these are the Oaths which Judges, Ser∣geants at Law, Apprentices to the Law, and Clerks, and other Officers in Chancery, Inns of Court, and other Courts take, ig∣norantly or prophanely, many of them, without any intetion, or purpose to keep them, for usually fr Bibes and excessive Fees, (which now abounds more than ever; witnesse the wealth not only the Judges and Lawyers have gotten, but even their Clerks, Registers, and other Officers far surpassing some Knights, or Esquires estates) they have turned judgement into womwood, and have left of righteousnesse in the earth, and oft some of them plead against their Consciences, in most unjust causes, helping therein to oppresse the poor, fatherlesse, and widow, against such God complains and threatens ruine: Amos 5. 7. Nor are all our Justices of the Peace, Bayliffs, Constables, Head-borroughs, Church Wardens, Overseers of the Poor, and High-wayes, Ty∣thing men, Jaylors, and other inferiour Officers, especially most of your Attorneys, Under Sheriffs, Bayliffs, &c. free from this sin; many of them ignorantly, rashly, without faith, reverence, knowledge, or judgement, taking their Oathes, for honour, or profit; and usually without fear, or care to avoid perjury, con∣tinuing in, and executing their Offices; and therefore God may justy (as he threatens) call the Husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing, because he wll passe through the Land in wrath, Amos 5, 10 th 18 verse. Nay, I am afraid, some of our Nobles, and our late Parliament Men, our valiant Commanders, and reverend Ministers, cannot wholly vindicate themselves from this sin; much lsse can many of the Common Souldiers, and Country people of the Land, who took the Oathes of Allegiance,
and Supremacy, the Protestation, and Covenant of the Three Kingdoms: Did not most of us, do it, ignorantly, rashly, or doubtingly, compulsively, or presumptuously, without Faith, Judgement, and Righteousnesse, which is a great sin, contrary to Gods Rule, who will have us swear in judgement, justice, and truth, Jer. 4. 2. Surely, I fear few can free themselves from this sin, if without fear, prejudice, favour, or self-love, they would seriously in their Consciences peruse those Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant; and deal impartially with themselves, as God will do without respect of persons, when he comes to Judge them: Or if any plead he sinned not in taking these; then certainly he sinned with a witness, in not keeping these, as his own Consci∣ence, Gods Spirit, and his Word taught him: which is the Third way of swearing falsly; namely, Thirdly, When men swear to God, or men to do something, thats just and lawful, which they intend not to do, or if they in∣tend it, yet perform it not, but do quite contrary thereunto, ha∣ving their evasions, equivocations, or mental reservations, to elude, avoid, and frustrate these which was accounted a Jesuiti∣cal trick, and a damnable sin heretofore amongst Protestants in Queen Elizabeths, and King James his dayes. Dr. Mortons Reply to the moderate Ans∣werer against more than hea∣thenish equivo∣cations written 1606.. This sin in Religion, saith my Author, is sacrilegious and detestable, in politick State most pernicious, and intollerable; and in every man most wicked and baneful to his soul: This is a horrible sin tending to most fearful damnation. Dod & Clea∣ver on the 3d. Com: p. 107, & 108.. For he is a true Christi∣an that having sworn to his hindrance, yet will keep his Oath: But he is far from a good man, that sweareth that, which he never purposeth to perform; both Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, and all godly Divines have condemned it. Aug. Contra. Mend. cap. 5. 8 Hierm. Com∣ment in 1 Cor. 4 Pet. Lumb. lib. 3. dict. 38. Aquin. 22. quest. 111. art. 1 Harm. of Con∣fes. sect 10 Mockets Book of God & the King. I fidore. Beda, Dr. Featly, Saunderson, &c.. Yea, and the very Heathen too. As Menander, Plato, Cisero, Aristotle, Se∣neca, Plutarchs Lives, &c.. for not only Gods Name is abused whom they invocate to witnesse, (which is most fearful and glorious) but also men are hereby cheated. and deceived, and made to beleeve a Lie, instead of Truth: God much complains of this sin, Jer. 3. 10. & 2 Cron. 34 32. and threatens severely to plague it. Ezek. 17 15 Jun. Annot. in locum▪. It provoked the Lord to break forth as a man in passion, shall he break the Covenant, and be delivered? Nay, God swears in his wrath (as one mightily offended) severely to plague Zedekiah, though a King, for de∣spsing the Oath, and breaking the Covenant, which God calls his Oath, and his Covenant; because (as Junius observes) was sworn in his Name, and he was the Author of it, by his Pro∣phet.
Jer. 34. 11 Aecolam. Exp. in loc:. As also to shew, as one saith, Tthat he will revenge the breach of Oath, and Covenant made o men, as much as if it had been made to himself; he had prophaned Gods Name, and God would not hold him guiltless, but his imprecation shall fall on his own head, for his perfidiousnesse, which indeed was fulfilled on him, and his, in severity, 2 King. 25: 6, 7 Jer. 52. 1. when his Children and Nobles were slain before his face, and then his eyes put out, and he himself carried Captive into Babylon, and kept there till the day of his death. And yet alas, our Land is too much guilty of this crying scan∣dalou sin, which cryes aloud for vengeance; for such were, and are, for the most part, the Oaths that have been taken by Papists, and Church-Protestants against the Popes Supremacy, the Oath of Abjuration, which thousands never intend to keep, they ha∣ving their Dispensations, Equivocations, mental Reservations, and secret Evasions, to delude God, the Magistrates, but chiefly themselves; for in their hearts they are still resolved to yield O∣bedience to the See of Rome, and beleeve Transubstantiation, and Purgatory; use Pilgrimages, and Prayers to, and for the Dead: yea, some Protestants are too much Jesuited, who took the former Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant, when in the very taking of them (I fear) they intended not to keep them; for generally the Country took one, or more of these, for fear, ra∣ther than love; by constraint, rather than willingly; for self∣ends, and not for Gods glory. Generally, the whole Nation feared not an Oath, but some either ignorantly, rashly, or pre∣sumptuously took them; or which is worse, resolved prophanely and perfidiously not to keep them: like those that took the Co∣venant in Josias dayes in falshood, Jer. 3. 10. returning unto the Lord feignedly: Nor to this day is there any fit means used (as I know of) to remove the guilt of this crying sin from the Land, which in the opinion of an enlightned Jesuite, Emman. Sa. Aphr. tit. de Jurament. 26 Perjurium gra∣vius est Homi∣cidio, &c.. is greater than Mur∣ther: Therefore one long since wished, That as the Murtherer in our Land, for Murder, was hanged by the Neck; so the Per∣jured person for his sin, might be by the Tongue: Dr. Mortons Confut of E∣quivocation, cp 5.. And though we punish not so severely this sin, as other Nations have done, and God hath out of his patience, and goodnesse, forbore with us, thereby leading us to Repentance, yet their Damnation slumbreth not, that shall to their lives end, persist in the same; God will hasten his vengeance, and cast such out of his sight,
(as the Prophet speaks) Ier. 14. 11. and if they continue in this sin, God will not hear them. God hath oft, and clearly forbad this sin, Deut. 23 21 Numb. 30. , &c.. and theatned such with the losse of Heaven: Psal. 15. 4 Revel. 22. 15. And the truly godly have kept their Oath, though it were to their own hurt, as Joshua, and the godly Princes, Jephtah, and others: yea, 'tis the mark of a true Christian, that he feareth an Oath: Eccles. 9. 2. I have opened my mouth to Jhovah, saith Jaepthah, and I cannot recal it: Iudg. 11. 35. he was content to put an end to his Poste∣rity, rather ten to commit Perjury. And so zealous was Joshua, and the Princes, having sworn to the Gibeonits, that when the Army would have destroyed them▪ they cryed out, We have sworn to them by Jehovah God of Israel, and we may not touch them: No, though they were a people of the Hevites (who were expresly, and by name, commanded of God to be rooted out) Exod. 23. 23. though they were Lyars, Decevers, and Coun∣terfeits, and over-reachd, and as it were derided Ioshua, and the Princes, by feigning themselves Embassadours from a far Coun∣try, which they avowed by their vynowed Bread, and patched Cloaths, clouted Shooes, and rent Bottles; nay, though Gods command (of destroying them) long preceded the Peace, they had granted them, of sparing them: and though the Oath and Promise they made was with a People a far off, for so the Israe∣lites had told them: Iosh. 9. 7. If they dwelt amongst them they could not make a Peace with them, because God had forbidden it: Nay, though this Peace was made without warrant from the Lord, Iosh. 9. 14. nor could they challenge (as our famous Historian speaks) the witness of the true God, in whom they beleeved not, Rawleighs Hist. of the World, l. 2. c. 6. sect. 3.. and therefore if ever any man might have saved him∣self by Evasion, or Delusion, Ioshua might have done it, with∣out Equivocations, or mental Reservations. Yet to the end (saith he) that the faithlesse subtilty of man should borrow no∣thing in future, from his example (who knew well that the Pro∣mises made in the Name of the living God, were made to God, and not to the dying man) he held his Oath and Promise firm, and inviolable (though they to whom he swore were worshippers of Devils) for 'tis not as faithlesse men take it (saith he) that he which swears to a Man, Society, State, or King, and swears by the Name of the living God, and in his presence, that the Pro∣mise, if it be broken, is broken to a Man, Society, State, or Prince; but the Promise made in the Name of God, is broken
to God. 'Tis him we neglect herein, and professe we fear him not, but set him at nought, and defie him. And not only the godly, but the very Heathen abhorred breach of Oath and Covenant to men (though they swore by false Gods) Marcus Attilius Re∣gulus is famous herein amongst the Romans, who being taken by the Carthaginians prisoner in the War, had leave to go back to Rome, on his Parol, taking his Oath, That he would return again as their Prisoner, if he effected not what was desired by the Car∣thaginians; which he being not able to accomplish, yet for his Oaths sake (though he knew the Carthaginians would kill him, on his return) he returned back unto them, August. l. 1. de Civitatde. cap. 15. chusing rather to endure their Cruelty, than to commit Perjury. In such high esteem, and honour, was the Religion of an Oath, even amongst the Heathen. 'Tis indeed a great sin for a son to break his Pro∣mise with, or to alter the Deed of his Father; but greater for a State, Kingdom, or Prince, to break those contracts made in for∣mer times: witnesse Sauls breaking the Oath of Ioshua, and the Princes (though it were 400. years after it was made: 2 Sam. 21. 1. (And this I instance in, lest any should think Ioshua, and the Princes, erred in keeping the Covenant with the Gibeonites afore-named) which provoked the Lord so much, that even in holy Davids dayes, God sent a Famine for three years on the whole Land, nor was his wrath appeased, til seven of Sauls Grand-children were delivered to be executed, on a Gallows, by the opprssed Gibeonites. Therefore we may not think to make void our Oaths by new coyned Distinctions, forged Evasions, God-mocking Equivocations, to swear one thing, (as my learned Author long before our Troubles spake) Rawl. Hist. of the world, lib. 2 cap. 6. sect. 8.. by the Name of the living God, and to reserve in silence, a contrary intent▪ for then the life and estates of Men, the Faith of Subjects to Kings, of Ser∣vants to their Masters, of Vassals to their Lords, of Wives to their Husbands, of Children to their Parents, and of all tryals of Right, will not only be made uncertain, but all Chains where by F-men are tyed in the world, be ton asunder. For by his Oath a man assures others, that his ords are true, as God, whom he invocates, is true; and scretly, or expresly imprecates a Curse on himself, if they be not true: Therefore, saith the Schoolman, he is doubly guilty, that swears fraudulenly: first, Because he takes Gods Name in vain: and secondly, Deceives his Neighbour when he sweareth falshood, Pet. Lumb. lib 3. dist. 9: Qui clliditate utitur jurmen∣to dupliclier peccat. uit & nousen den Vanum sum: & proximum dolo capit.. But he that loveth,
or maketh a Lie, shall be damned, and much more he that swears2 Rev. 22. 15 Psa. 15. 4 him. z. Let a man use never so great art, or cunning in swearing, yet God doth value the Oath, according to their sense to whom the Oath is made. Isid. lib 2 de snm. bono capit 13. Faith is to be kept in an Oath (saith St. Hierom) because we are not to regard man, to whom we swear; but God, by whom we swear. Hierom Com. in Ezek. cap. 17. They are Perjured persons, saith St. Augustine, who preserving the words, with some Sophism, deceive the expectation of them, to whom they have sworn, Aug. in Gen.. Therefore God fore-seeing that in the last days this sin should abound, and knowing that mans heart was de∣ceitful above all things, and desperatly wicked, he plainly com∣mands in his Law, that that man that swears, should not swear fasly, Levit. 19. 12. for thereby he should pophane his Name. If by an Oath he hath bound himself▪ he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth, he shall not break his word, Numb. 30. 2. God will surely require it, that thou keep thy Oath, or else plague thee for it, according to thy dsert; for so much the word rquiring signifies. Gen. 9. 5 Deut. 18. 19 & 23. 21. That which is gone out of thy lips, thou shalt keep, and perform, according as thou hast vowed to the Lord thy God, and as thou hast promised with thy mouth; Deut. 23. 21. The Law (saith the Apostle) under the Gospel is made to con∣demn such, 1 Tim. 1. 10. and they are given over to vild affection, and to a Reprobate mind, as the Romans were, who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit this sin are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Rom. 1. 26, 28, 31, 32, compared to∣gether.. Truce-breakers, and Traytors▪ are two of the number of those Hypocrites that shall come in the latter days, 2 Tim. 3. 3, 4, 8. who as Jannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so shall they the truth. And yet alas, though God is so severe against this sin, and requires such sincerity, and simplicity, in all our Oaths and Pro∣mises we make, to God, and Men: yet how mightily hath this sin prevailed in these latter dayes amongst us, Men making breach of Oaths, a mater of custom, not Conscience, under pretence of honest publick intentions, and necessity for publick ends; vio∣lating the Oaths, Covenant, Protestation, Engagements before∣named, which we promised to observe, and keep, and to perform the things, especially contained in the Covenant of the Three Nations, as we would answer for our Perjury at the Great Day, when the secrets of all mens hearts shall be disclosed, and every
man shall receive according to what he hath done in the flesh, whether it be good, or evil. Now for us to violate those Oaths, and perfidiously to break any Article therein, (which is in our power, and lawfully we may observe) under pretence, that good may come thereby will not (as the Apostle saith) then, our damnation be just? Rom. 3. 8. Justam pnam blasphemis illis Paulus denun∣ciat: Beza An∣not: Hoc peccatum blasphemiam appellat Paul & abjicit a sensu divinae Doctrinae, Amb. in loc.. The Jews might not break a Ceremo∣nial Precept, much lesse a Moral, under pretence of any good to come thereby: it lost Saul his Kingdom for offering Sacrifice, and not obeying Gods command, under pretence that the people fled from him, and he was afraid the Philistims would come o him, before he had Prayed, and craved Gods assistance, 1 Sam, 13: 12. Ʋzza lost his life, for touching the tottering Ark, though with a good intent to stay it; for so 'tis said, the Oxen shook it, ne∣verthelesse the anger of the Lord was kindled against him, so that he smote him for his Error presently. 2 Sam. 6. 6, 7. St. Augustine allows not a man to tell a Lie, though it were to save his life, or another mans life; and he gives a good reason for it, for therebyl Gregor: lib: Mor: 18: in Job, cap: 2 Innocent. Tit: de Vsuris, c: 4. he destroyes his own soul. Aug. lib: de Mend. c. 6. and Gregory, and Innocentius say the same; p. otherwise Peter had not sinned in denying his Master: And if Christians may not tell so much as an offici∣ous Lie, for the saving of their own, or their Brothers life, (which is the greatest good, can be performed, or pretended by any) much lesse may they prophanely, or perfidiously swear a Lie, (by violating their Oaths, and Covenants so solemnly sworn unto) under pretence of necessity, or publick good; David prayes against such cursed Hypocrisie, and God-mock∣ing flattery, Encline not my heart unto any evil thing, to pre∣tend pretences in wickednesse, with men that work iniquity, let me not eat of their dainties: Psal: 141: 4 Se Ainsworths Anno: on the place.. So Ainsworth translates it: And David gives the reason of it in another Psalm; Psal. 125. 4. 5. As for those that turn aside to their own crooked wayes, to which Satan and their own deceitful heaes lead them, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: Or as the Chalde Para∣phrase, He will lead them to Hell, and their part shall be with the workers of iniquity; but Peace shall be on Israel▪ (viz. such as are upright in heart, to pay th Promise, as Israel dd. Gen. 35. 2. 3 compsred with Gen. 28 20 And if any man, to free himself from Perjury, shall say when e took those Oaths and Covenant, he quivocaced, and had his mental Reservation, &c. e doth not surely thereby exteuate, but rather aggravate his offence; for in his swearing and Cove∣nanting,
he professed God to be the Author of Truth (who cannot deceiv, no be deceived) whom he invocated to wit∣nesse the truth, and sincerity of Agreement, btween his words and heart; imping his vengeance, if  speak not the truth: when neverthe by his eqvocation, and reservations, by his Lies, and persnesse, he endeavours to deceive God, and doth deceive himself, and the Persons to whom, and with whom, and before whom he swears: But let such know, God will not be mocked; Gal. 6. 7 but what a man seth, that shall he reap: with the uright sweaer that ereth n Oth, God will shew him∣self upright, Ps. 18. 25, 26 in keeping Oath, and Promise to such: But with the perverse, and froward, who have in their Oaths, such wrenches, and vasions, God will shew himself awry, for Gods wrath is revealed from Heaven against all such, Rom. 1. 18, 3▪ 2 and 'tis to be feared such are blinded in their sins, or given over to a repro∣bate mind, who prophanely sport with these holy things, and yet think they sin not, but play as Sampson with his Cords, fast and loose, as pleaseth them: Just like him, whom the Oatour speaks of, Clsero lib: de Offic: 3 who being a Roman Souldier, captive at Carthage, was granted his Parol (on his Oath) to return again into Prison thither, within a perfixed time; who as son as he was out of Carthage, returned unto the Prison again, pretending he had forgot something behind, which ther he would fetch (intend∣ing thereby to elude his Oath) which done, he came to Rome, and there stayed longer than his Parol allowed him; telling the Senate, he was freed from his Oath, by reason of his former re∣turn: but the Grave Senators, understanding of his fraud, sent forth-with this Perjured fellow, back to Carthage, bound with Cords, to shew their dislke of such deceit, and equivocation in an Oath, though it were made to an Enemy; well knowing, that fraud, and deceit in an Oath, doth not lessen Perjury, but make it more heynous. And lest any man should plead the wickednesse of the person, or persons, to whom the Oath, or Covenant were made, might disobige them let them remember the Gibeonites forementio∣ned, who were olaters, and Deceivers themselves, with whom fraud may be used if with any. Fallere fal∣leatem non est fians. Livius de bello pun. lib. 2 And thes Carthaginians, who were faithlss and perfidious even to a proverb. Punica sides. But you my see by  Exmple, that both Religious and Hea∣then Princes abhorrd this sin. Insomuch that Cicero saith, such
as use these Evasions and Pretences, they seek out but for a shift∣ing hole, for their Perjury. Clcero lib: Offic. 30. And indeed any thing may rather subtilly be excused than an Oath, in which the least deceit, is an heynous sin, and pulls down speedy vengeance on him that useth it; Witness Arrius, that Blasphemous Heretick: this was the grand sin that filled up the Measure of his wickedness, and put a period to his imfamous life, Histor. eccles. Tripart. Epiph. scol: imerp: lib 3 pag: 135, 136 Omnes transe∣untes digito no∣tabant locum Arrii detestabi∣lem recordante interium. for being compelled by Con∣stantine, that godly Emperour, fot the peace of the Church) to deliver his Subscription, to the general Council of Nice, and to avouch his integrity thereunto, to subscribe it, by an Oath, he con∣sented hereunto; but before he did it, he wrote his damnable He∣resie in a Paper (as his desperate wicked heart had invented to Elude his Oath) and this Paper he put secretly under his cloathes in his bosom; and then being urged, after he had written his sub∣scription, to the truth, (confirmed in the Council of Nice) to swear, That he had written according to the truth in his heart; he clapt his hand on his bosom, and swore he had written as he did truly beleive in his heart; meaning in the Paper in his bosom: which the good Emperour, and his Followers, understood of the Papers he had subscribed. But the Almighries Eye beheld his trea∣chery, and his wrath was kindled against him, and his Perjury, his damnation slumbred not; for no sooner was he out of the Court, going in triumph into the City, to glory over his foes, (the holy Bishop Alexander, and his Orthodox Adherents) but loe, when he came into the place called Constantines Market place, he was stucken suddenly, with the terrors of the Almighty (as the Psal∣mist saith) Psal. 120. 3, 4 Verba similia sagittis acutis rbusti, i. e. maxime lethalia ut presentissi∣mam mortem afferentia deo{que} obvium quic∣quid est confla∣grantia. Trem: & Jun. Annot. in loc: for his deceitful tongue, there was given to him, the sharp Arrows of the mighty One, and coals of Junipe, which so burned in his belly, that it made him with-draw behind the Market-plce, where a Privy was, where, with his Excrements, be voided out his Entrails, and a multitude of Bloud, and his Liver, with his Spleen, of which, he immediately died: God in his Ju∣stice for his Blasphemy, Perjury, and Hypocrisie, striking him with a Judgment proportionable to his sin; for he had hid his wicked∣ness in his inward parts, therefore God will openly discover both it, and them, he had deceived, and mocked good men: now his deceipt in his Breast, is discovered, and he is made a spectacle and derision to Angels, and Men: The Almighty caught him in his craftinesse, and his devices were carried head-long, Job 6. 13 And thus is he made a Monument of divine Vengeance to all men, who
thought to delude and deceive all: Insomuch (as my Author saith) all men passing by, with their finger pointed at the place, record∣ing the detestable death of Arrius. 'Twas therefore a good Lesson Acosta the Jesuite taught his Perjured brethren, Acost: lib: 2 cap: 21 de salute Iudiarum: That men ought not to Lie, though it were to gain all the Barbarians to the Faith; and he said no more, than St. Augustine long before had done, that a man might not Lie to his Neighbour, though it were to procure his Salvation, August: lib: de mendacio, cap: 20 And if he might not Lie, much lesse might he swear a Lie, for though it were true (which yet indeed is false) (as the Jesuites affirms) that the officious, and jocosous Lies, be venial sins, Aquin: 22 dae: quest: 110. Ar: 2 c: They borrow∣ed this from the old Errour of the Priscillia∣nists: Qui do∣ebant & suo exemplo confir∣mabant, licere propter alicujus salutem mentire in Religione, ita ut quod credis negare & quod non Credis pro∣fiteri bona con∣scientia possis: modo veritatem fidei in Corde saluam retineres Aug. ad Consen. cap: 3: tom: 4: yee even these when they are sworn unto, and confirmed by an Oath, become pernitious, as Tollet, a chief Father, amongst them sheweth. Tollet Jes: in∣struct: sacerd, libro de Sept: pec: cap: 54 In a word, an Oath being the end of all Contention, Heb. 6. 16. all Nations, by the Law of Nature, have condemned this sin, and provided punishment for the Perjurers, that wilfully transgresse herein, some adjudged them to be whipped; others to be hanged, others to be slit in the Nose, others to be branded in the Fore∣head, others to lose their Ears, others to be bored thorow the Tongue, Dr. Whites Confutation of Equivoca. t. 20 The Judicial Law of God was amongst the Jewes, that he should suffer the evil, or losse, which by his Perjury, he had brought on another; as an eye, for an eye; a hand, for a hand; and life, for life, Deut. 19. 19 Thus Susanna, her false Witnesses, are sto∣ned to death, which death they intended against her. Hist. of Su∣sanna And Daniels are cast to the Lyons, who by their malice and Perjuty had caused him to be cast to them, Dan. 6. 24 And though this sin may e∣scape the punishment of men, yet shall it not the Judgement of God, Prov. 19. 5 for so the holy Ghost tell us a false Witnesse shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks Lies shall not escape. Plutarch gives us a notable Example hereof, in one Cleomenes, Plut. in Lac. who having made a Truce with the Argives, for seven dayes; when he observed them the third night, to be carelesse of their Watch, and given to sleep (in confidence of the Truce made) he arose in the Night, and seized on the City, and slew some, and captivated o∣thers: But when they complained against him, for his Perjury, and violation of the Truce made; he Replyed, He Covenanted for seven Dayes, the Nights were not added in the Oath: But God suffered not this Perjured Commander, to prevail, for the Women of the City, he had taken, took Arms out of the Temples of their god, and with them executed Vengeance on his Army,
and at last he himself was stricken with Madness, so that the woun∣ded himself with a Dagger, and slit his body from his Ancle-bones unto his Vital ports, and so langushing, drawing his mouth aside, he ended his perfidious life, as a fearful Example of Gods wrath against this sin revealed from heaven. Sith then God is so severe a revenger of thi sin, and the Oaths and Covenant we have taken do oblige us faithfully to observe the things contained therein, so far as they are lawful, good, and possible to be kept. Lets all, in these Three Nations, that are guilty any wayes of this sin, humble our selves for it, confesse it, and forsake it; for if we hide it, we shall not prosper, nor obtain Mercy for it, Prov. 28. 13, 14 O lets not with the wicked pretend pretences, or invent excuses, to extnuate it, or paint it over, by equivocati∣on, or mental reservations, (that we had in the taking of any of them) or think by any private interpretation of our own, to elude them, or by any Napkins that others may bring, suppose that we may wipe them out, by any new Oath, or Engagements made, Ezek. 21. 28 Trem & Iun. Not. in loc. and so think they are frustrate, or repealed, safer and happier will it be for us, to fear alwayes, as its in the next verse, that so we may be brought to Repentance: for he that hardeneth his heart in it, shall fall into mischief, See Iun: notes on Prov 28. 14 And truly, unlesse we, throughout this Land, do repent of this sin, as Christ tells us twice, we shall all perish, Luk: 13. 3, 5 there's no Appeal from this Judge. Secondly, Sith we have lifted up our Hands to Heaven, and opened our Mouths to the Lord, and so cannot go back from the Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant, we have made (as Jptha said) Judg. 11. 35 Lets (as we expect to stand before Christs Tribunal with Joy, and receive the blessed sentence from him) observe, and do the things we have promised, so far as they are lawful, just, good, and possible, (which are Conditions should have been inserted as a Clause in all those Oaths and Covenant) lest otherwise, we per∣sisting in this sin, pulls down Gods wrath on us, and our Land: O lets not after Vowes make inquiries, w. nor suffer our mouths to cause our flesh to sin, nor say before the Angel, that it was anu Prov. 20. 25. Error, why should God be angry at our voice, and destroy the works of our hands, Eccles: 5. 6 yea, not only hurt our selves, but hereby give a scandal to all Christians, and cause the precious Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, and his glorious Gospel to be blas∣phemed, by Turks, Papists, and Infidels, as if the Christian Reli∣gion which we professe, were a Doctrine that allowed of Perjury,
which the very Turks and Heathen do abhor, and have been con∣tent, to suffer any misery, rather then wilfully to run into Per∣jury: Witness that famous Roman Augustine relates of, who to a∣void this sin, and perform his Oath made▪ returned into the hands of his deadly foes, who with exquisite torments Mudered him, including him in a strait piece of Wood, full of sharp Nas, in which he could scarce stand upright, and if he leaned on any side, he must needs wound himself, and so long he stood, till he died with Watching, though he were a Heathen, yet he chose rather to endure the worst of temporal evils, rather then offend his gods by whom he had sworn, Aug lib. 1. de Civitate Dei, cap: 15. he feared to offend his false god, which were indeed Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 20. will not he rise up in Judgement against those, that fear not to offend the true God, by Perjury, who will not acquit an offender. Exod: 34: 7. The like dread of Perjury is repor∣ted to be in the Saguntines, who chose rather to have their City rui∣nated, than their Faith violated, which they had made to the Ro∣mans: Aug. de Civi∣tate Dei, lib: 3 cap. 20. Did not Amurath ubbraid the Christians with Vladi∣slaus Perjury, and will not both Turks and Heathens condemn our Religion, as false, when they shall hear that there is such Perjury and Falshood continued in amongst us, that is not to be named amongst the Heathen, as St. Paul speaks in another case. 1 Cor. 5. 1 What can this work amongst them at this day but obsti∣nacy in their infidelity, and blasphemy of that Faith which is the life of our Souls. Dr▪ Mor∣tons Confutat. of Equivoca. part 3: cap: 20. Therefore Thirdly, Let there be a day of Humiliation appoint∣ed by the Three Nations, that every man guilty of this sin, may smite upon the thigh, and be ashamed, and so may confess and forsake it; but especially, let such deeply humble themselves, whose mouths, have been full of Cursing, and bitterness, swear∣ing on every light occasion, powdring in their common talk (as they they think) their discourse, but indeed putrifying it, with prophane and cursed language, and Oaths, as the Devil that rules in them, gives them utterance; their tongue, in St. James his phrase, being set on fire of Hell: James 3: 6 sc. icitata A diabolo Ge∣bennoe & in∣ferni civi: Gag∣neu scol: in loc:. Also let us bewail our wick∣ed, absolute, and impossible Vows, and Oaths, which are not to be kept, but broken, A turpi Voto muta de cretum, quod iniquiter jurastine per∣solve: James 4: 17. (if the Lord will) saith St. James, d. (and so far as conveniently we may, as well as lawfully) saith St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10: 23. are requred in those that promise ought. Saul sinned in his rash Vow of killing him, that tasted meat that day. 1 Sam. 14. 24. So did David in his passionate Oath to destroy Nabal, and his Family▪ for their Masters incivility, and want of charity, 1 Sam. 25. 21. worse, did those Forty that bound themselves in an Oath, not to t till they had killed the holy Apostle, Acts 23: 12. this the very Papists condemn, Dr Saunder∣son de jurament. sect: 13: lect. 2..
for in an Oath we are to have regard, as well to the matter, what we swear, as to the manner how we swear: So said the Dr. of the Chair, An unlawful Oath, in respect of the act of swearing, ob∣ligeth, although it be certain, what ought not to be performed, ought not to be sworn; nevertheless it may come, and doth often come to pass, that what ought not to have been sworn, ought not∣withstanding to be performed, the thing being lawful, not of it self, but by accident, (viz the Persons swearing) & so it obligeth the Person swearing to his promise, (unlesse there appears some o∣ther sinful impediment) as he instanceth in the Oath of the Israelish Princes given to the Gibeonites before mentioned: they ought not to have sworn to them, but having sworn, they ought not to break their Oath, which Sauls Posterity found true to their sorrow, as well as all Israel, 2 Sam: 21: 1, 2, &c:. in this the Schoolmen are right, Aquin: 2d: quest: 88: Ar: 2, & 3: Fieri non debet sed factum va∣let.. To prevent Perjury in the Universiries, and Cities, and Courts, let the Statutes, Laws, and Customs, which they are sworn to ob∣serve, be set down in a Book, or Table, for Publick use, to be made, and truly used by all men, in some Common Place, where all may have liberty to read, and know them, that so men may swear in Judgement, Justice, and Truth, Jer: 4: 4. And to pre∣vent this sin in Judicature at our Assizes, and Quarter-Sessions, let there be no Tales-men returned, by the Sheriff, or his Bayliffs, nor no Jury-men allowed of, but such as are approved of by the Testimony of the Minister, and Church, where they live, to be wise, and able men, sound in the Faith, fearing God, and hating covetousness, of knowledge in the Laws of the Land, of holy life, and conversation, unto the Justices of the Peace in each County, to serve as Jury-men, who confirming them, and allowing of them, let these freely for their Countries good, serve in all Juries, with∣out taking Reward for their pains, on the penalty of Bribery, un∣lesse what may be allowed by the Common Purse of the said County) this will, I believe, destroy all our Hackney Jurors, and prevent abundance of Injustice, and Perjury, now perpetrated in Courts of Judicature. Fifthly, Lets all Repent of our rash swearing without Judge∣ment, and submission to Gods will, whereby we have made our Wills superior to Gods, whose counsel alone shall stand, and he will perform all his pleasure, who hath lately shewed our vanity, and prophannesse herein, in dis-enabling most of us to do, what
we absolutely Covenanted, and swore to perform; yea, let there be no swearing, but on weighty Causes, James 5: 12 Mat▪ 5: 34 Aug: lib: 19: contra Faustum:. they ought to be u∣sed only in cases of necessity, as men use dangerous Medicines. Sixthly, Let the Laws already made against rash Swearers and Perjured persons, be put better in execution, and let more en∣couragement be given to those shall discover them. And let such as hear them swear rashly, and falsly, and know it so, but shall not reprove them, or see them punished, let them undergo the same pu∣nishment, as being partakers with, or approvers of the same sin. Agentes & Consentientes pari paena pui∣edi sunt, Lin∣wood.. Lastly, Let all sorts of Persons in the Three Nations faithfully perform their Vows, Oaths, and Covenants made (with submis∣sion to Gods Will) to their utmost power in their vocations▪ (and so far as lawfully they may) though it be to the losse of their ho∣nors, places, offices, or riches, for what will it profit a man to gain the world, and to lose his own soul, as every perjured person that remains unrepentant in this sin, doth: Mark 8: 36 1 Tim. 1: 10 Psal. 24. 4.. Therefore let every man do this seriously (as in Gods presence who seeth him, and be∣holds all his wayes, before whom shortly he must appear and give an account for these Oaths and Covenants) read over, and piously meditate on the Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant he hath sworn unto, and then let him pay, what he hath promised, and vowed, without delay, especially such things as concerns the glory of God, the honor of Christ, the good of the Church, the maintenance of Truth, Unity, and Love, the punishing of Hereticks, Scismaticks, and such as cause War and Division in the Nations, and the flying of the sins we have sworn to forsake, and to reform to our power the same in others, and in reference to the persons to whom, and with whom, we have sworn; lets observe those Rules of Christ, to love them as our selves, Rom. 13: 9 Mat: 7: 12. and to do to every one of them, as we would be dealt withal our selves, were we in the same state, and condition with them, q. O lets not pretend pretences, or make excuses or invent Arguments, to shift off, quivocate with, or any way to elude these sacred bonds, for God will surely require the payment of them: Suffer not therefore thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou before the Angel, it was an Error; wherefore should God be angry with thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands for thy perfidiousnesse, as Solomon teacheth, Eccles: 5: 4, 5, 6:▪ O lets remember that new Oaths and promises cannot make void the old, no more than Zedekiahs new Oath to the King of Egypt, could make void his old Oath made to the King of Babylon, 2 Chron 3: 13: compared with Jer. 37: 5: & Ezek: 17: 15.
or a new Covenant or Promise made to a second Wife, can make void the old Covenant and Promise made to the first (she being a∣live, and she being not put away from him) Dr: Saunder∣son de jurawent: lect: 2: sect: 11:. because an Oath hath naturally its obligatory power, but constructive only, not de∣structive, it cannot take away the Obligation it findeth, or impose another repugnant to it; and the reason is, because by all obli∣gations some right is confered on another, for whosoever is oblig∣ed, is obliged unto another, and its most unjust, that by the meer act of one, the right of another without his consent should be weakned. The obligation of an Oath cannot be taken away by di∣spensations from any third person, (unlesse the Party be willing for whose favour and benefit it was made, to accept of, and ratifie the same, Saunders: ut supra, lect: 7: sect: 8:. as the Doctor sheweth. Let us therefore know, thus it is with us, in our Oaths and Covenants, God was called to be a witnesse of the truth, and sincerity of our words, and hearts, whoe mouth cannot be stopt, nor hand stayed, from executing venge∣anc on those that are Perjured herein; he regards not persons, r will he take Gifts; Rom: 2: 11 Acts 10: 34 Gal: 6 Deut: 10: 17. he accepteth not the persons of Prin¦es, nor regardeth the Rich, more than the Poor: He will come nigh to them in Judgement, and will be a swift Witnesse against them, for their not fearing him who is the Lord of Host: Mal: 3: 5. the flying Roll sent by God shall irresistably cut them off, Zach: 5: 3. which is his Curse, for every one that stealeth, shall be cut off as on this side, according to it, and every one that sweareth shall be cut off, as on that side, according to it: The Lord of Hosts saith, he will bring it forth, and it shall enter into the house of the Thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsly, by his Name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. Therefore I Conclude▪ that neither Pope, nor prince, Senate, nor Synod, no Ecclesiastical, nor Secular power, hath any right to dispense with, or absolve a∣ny man from that bond, wherein before the dispensation granted he was engaged in; as the learned Doctor affirms: Dr Saunders. ut ra, lect: 7: sec: 4.. And  men (against the light of Gods Word, and conviction of  own Conscience) will take liberty unto themselves herein, od will surely no more spare them, than h did King Zedekiah. Ezh: 17: 19  &c us  andi vio∣lao impieati coput est quia omni exusatione vacua si eus∣modi violatio: Thed: interp: in Zachar.. For to confirm the truth hereof, God swears (who cannot i, nor Repent) to terifie men from Perjuy, As I live, saith the Lord, surely mine Oath that he hath despised, and my Covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recompence on his own head:
and the Prophet after shews him his particular doom, Ezech: 21: 25 26, 27. in these words; And thou prophane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end; thus saith the Lord God, remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown: This shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high: I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, un∣til he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. Now this, and all the former remarkable Examples, specified before, of Gods divine Justice, related in this Book, and others we read of, hapned to them, for Examples of Gods indignation against ths sin, and they are written for our Admonition, (as the Apostle saith) upon whom the ends of the World are come, 1 Cor: 10: 11:. Wherefore my dear∣ly beloved, lets fle from this sin, lest partaking with those before named herein, we also reap of their plagues; for unlesse we repent of it, we shall all perish by it, Luk: 13: 3, 5:. The good Lord prevent us with his Mercy, and remove the Judgments hang over our heads, and deal not with us after our sins, nor reward us accord our iniquities, but as high as the Heaven is above the Eart great let his Mercy be towards us; and the Lord our God pardon what is st▪ and grant us Wisdom to discern, and Piety to practise what is required, that so the flying Roll that is gone forth, come not into our Lands, or Houses, to cut us off, and the blessing of God the Father, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ his Son, and the Comforts of God the blessed Spirit, be on the heads, and remain in the hearts of all those, that tremble at Gods Word, Ezra 9: 4: Eccles: 9: 2:. and fear an Oath, e. which is the desire, and shall be the con∣tinual Prayer, of your Souls Friend, and Servant in the Lord, E. F. FINIS.
