H3465 190.g.12[67] R229375 99888357 201884
❧ The humble Petition of His Majesties loyall Subjects in the County of Lincoln. IN all humility representing, as our thankfullest acknowledgements to God, and to your Ma∣jestie, of the great Blessings which we have for these many yeers enjoyed under your graci∣ous Government, and particularly the blessed Fruits of this present Parliament, by your Majesties Wisdom and Goodnesse assembled, whereby many wholsom Laws have been enacted, for the great Honour of your Majestie, relief of your People, the prosperous Go∣vernment of this, and happy setling of the late Troubles in both Kingdoms, so our saddest regrete for any the least mis-understanding, and Differences which have hapned betwixt your sacred Majestie and the said Parliament, or any Members of the same, with our many Distractions thereupon, and Fears of the ut∣ter ruine of your Majestie, and your Royall Posterity and Kingdoms, by the malicious and insolent De∣signes of the Popish partie, and the advantage that forreign Enemies may easily take thereby. Humbly prostrating our selves at your Majesties feet, most affectionately pray, that your Majestie and Parliament may by all good means be firmly united. And for that purpose you would graciously please to reside neer, and listen unto the faithfull counsels of your said Parliament, whereby Romish Idolatry and Superstition may be extirpated, Church and Common-Wealth duly reformed, the true Religion, and all things else, setled in a blessed Peace under your Majesties Government; And we shall have still further cause to continue our cheerfull aids both of Persons and Estates, for your Majesties, and your Kingdoms Pro∣sperity and Honour. And shall ever pray for your Maiesties long and happy Reigne over us. ❧ At the Court at York. 28. Martii. 1642. His Majestie hath given me expresse Command to give you this His Answer to your Petition. THat this Petition (as some others of this nature) is grounded upon mis-infor∣mation, and (being grieved and highly offended to see how His good People have been, and are abused by false Rumors and Intelligences, which have procured causlesse Fears and Apprehensions) refers the Petitioners to the two Answers He hath given to His Parliament, viz. To the Declaration presented to Him at New-Market, and to the Petition presented to Him the six and twentieth of this moneth at York: wherein you will cleerly perceive, That His Maiestie is not gone, but dri∣ven away from His Parliament, and therefore His Maiestie hath reason to think, that now (understanding the love He bears to, and Confidence He hath of His Peoples Fidelity; As likewise His constant Resolution for the maintaining of, and governing by the Laws of the Land) you may finde reason to petition the Parliament to comply with His Maiesties iust Desires, and gracious Offers, this being the onely Way, safely and speedily to cure the present Distractions of this Kingdom, and (with Gods blessing) to put a happy end to the Irish Rebellion: for the effecting whereof (as His Maiestie hath often said) He will neither spare pains, nor decline any hazard of His Person or Fortune. Signed by Master Secretary NICHOLAS. ¶ Imprinted at York by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of JOHN BILL. 1642.
