J61 c.121.g.9[90] R229236 99888261 201067
Jack PRESBITER. To the Tune of, Some said the Papist had a Plot, &c. Licens'd and Enter'd according to Order. JAck Presbyter pricks up his Ears, And flourishes now his Flail; The Beast has now laid by his Fears, And curls his wanton Tail: O for the Church, and Crown, he cries, The Day is all our own; The Scottish Clans begin to rise, And Bishops they must down. But hold, good Sir, be not too hot, Nor count before your Host, Least you at last should pay the Shot, For all your mghty Boast: We han't forgot your former Feats, Nor sanctify'd Trapans, Religions Tricks, and Holy Cheats, With all your Canting Shams. Remember how the Game begun, In Forty One of old, When you with th' Hare did seem to run, But with that Hound did hold; You swore to fight for, and defend The Person of the King; But perjur'd Praytors, in the end, Him to the Block did bring. That blessed Martyr's Royal Blood, Does still for Vengeance call, And on the damn'd Geneva Brood, The Curse in time will fall. Give them but Rope they'll hang themselves, So hasty is their Fate; Or Ketch will ketch those snevelling Elves, In Mouse trap of the State. A scurvy, sow'r, ill-natur'd Race, These Presbyterians are; You may read Faction in their Face, If you can them out-state; For with Predestinating Eyes, Like Bazalisks they ill, There's Poyson in their Glances lies, By which they wound at will. Beware of them, all you that prize, The King, the Church, and Laws, For they'll tell you ten thousand Lies, to prop the good Old Cause: They'll promise much, but none perform, When Sword is in their Hand; We must expect a poppering Storm, if er'e they get Command. T'th' Works of Grace, the Brethren then, With Heart and Hand will fall; Each Hedg-hog Saint, will sneak in's Den, But his Brissels turn to all; Plund'ring and Sequestration too will then seem very meet; Titles to Bishops Lands they'll shew; Church-bread is wond'rous sweet. These things, and more we must expect, Of our unkinder Fate, Shou'd ever mount Presbiter Jack In Saddle of the State; No King wou'd er'e be safe in's Throne: Then mark well what I Sing, The Miter only props the Crown, No Bishop, then no King. Printed in the Year, 1690.
