J304 C.21.f.12[103] G.6022[114] R225993 99886424 186678
BY THE KING: A PROCLAMATION. JAMES R. WHEREAS We have by a former Proclama∣tion of the One and twentieth Day of January last, for the reasons therein sett forth. Declared and Ordained amongst other Things, that all manner of Persons who were then in possession of any Meadow-Grounds, should fence in, and preserve the same in due season. And whereas We have since caused Several Commons and other Pasture-Grounds to be fenced in, and in∣closed for the use of Our Troops; We have therefore Thought Fit, by the Advice of Our Privy-Council to Publish and Declare and We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all the Officers and Private Men of Our Troops of Horse and Dragoons, and others of Our Army, and all manner of Persons whatsoever, that they, or any of them do not at any time hereafter presume to Graze any of their Horses or Cattel in any Mea∣dows or Grounds preserved for Meadows, or any Commons or other Pasture-Grounds fenced in, and inclosed as aforesaid, upon the Pains and Penalties
Following, that is to say, any Officer who shall Transgress herein to be Cashiered, and the Private Troopers or Soldiers to suffer Death, or such other Punishment as a Court-martial shall think fit; and as to any o∣ther person not Imployed in Our Army, to Forfeit unto Vs such Horse or other Beast as by the willfullness or Neglect of the Owner shall be found Grazeing in any such Meadows, Meadow-Grounds, Commons or Pasture Grounds Fenced in, and Inclosed as aforesaid: And We do hereby Strictly Charge and Command Our Respective Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Supervisors and Iustices of the Peace of Our Counties, of this Our Kingdom, and all other Our Officers both Civil and Military, that they and every of them, do cause with all Possible Care and Diligence, Our Royal Commands hereby, and by Our said former Proclamation Declared to be duly put in Execution, as they and every of them shall answer the Contrary at their Perils. Given at Our Court at Dublin-Castle the 15th Day of April 1690. And in the Sixth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. DƲBLIN, Printed for Alderman James Malone Printer to the King's Most Ex∣cellent Majesty; and are to be sold at his shop in Skinnerrow. And by Andrew Crook on Ormond-key 1690.
