L2857e 816.m.10[70] R213583 99884126 185393
Moore Mayor. arms of London At a Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guild-Hall of the City of London, on Wednesday the 16th Day of Novemb. 1681. and in the Three and thirtieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of England, &c. Before the Right Honourable Sir John Moore Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir John Frederick, Sir John Lawrence, Sir James Edwards, Sir Patience Ward, Sir Henry Tulse, Sir William Pritchard, Sir James Smith, Sir Robert Geffrey, Sir John Shorter, Sir John Peake, Sir Thomas Beckford, Sir Jonathan Raymond, Knights, Aldermen; and Thomas Pilkington Esq; Alderman, and one of the Sheriffs of the same City, and also the Commons of the said City, being then and there in Common Council assembled. Ʋpon Reading of Proposals this day presented by the Committee of this Court for Insuring of Houses in Cases of Fire, the Tenor whereof follows, I. THat all such Persons and Corporations as shall think fit to Insure their Houses and Buildings, scituate within the City of London and Liberties thereof, in Ca∣ses of Fire, shall be received and provided for by this City, according to the Terms and Conditions here under mentioned. II. That Books shall be prepared by the First day of December, 1681. and lodged in the Chamber of London, for receiving and entring the Subscriptions of all such Per∣sons as shall come into this Insurance. III. That Lands and Ground-Rents, belonging to the City of London, to the value of One hundred thousand Pounds at least, shall be forthwith setled as a Fund, to Insure such Houses as shall be Subscribed for and brought into the said Insurance. IV. That hereafter, as Subscriptions shall be made, a farther Additional Fund by the Praemium which shall be received, shall be made and setled by the said City, for Se∣curity of all such Houses as shall be so Subscribed for. V. That these Funds shall be setled upon Trustees in such manner, as the Insured in Cases of Damage may receive the Value of their Insurances with the most speed, and least trouble unto them. VI. That the Praemium for Insurance of Brick-houses and Buildings, for the Term of One and Thirty Years, shall not exceed Forty eight Shillings per Cent. according to the Value that shall be Insured on such Houses; that is to say, For the Insurance of a House valued at Three hundred Pounds, seven Pounds and four Shillings for the said Term of One and thirty Years, and that all other Terms of Years shall be Insured proportionable to that Rate; for which purpose a Table shall be Calculated. VII. That the Praemium for Insuring of Brick-houses and Buildings for ever, shall be four Pounds per Cent. according to the Value that shall be Insured on such Houses and Buildings, viz. for Insuring a House of Three hundred Pounds value, Twelve Pounds. VIII. That the Praemium for Insuring of Timber-houses and Buildings for Ever, shall be Eight Pounds per Cent. according to the Value that shall be Insured upon such Hou∣ses and Buildings; viz. Sixteen Pounds for Insuring a Timber-house to the Value of Two hundred Pounds. IX. That all Terms of Years in Timber-houses and Buildings, shall be Insured pro∣portionably to the said Insurance of Eight Pounds per Cent. for ever. X. That the said Committee, in order to the said Security, do forthwith, by Ad∣vice of Council, proceed to prepare Settlements of the said Lands and Ground-Rents, and to draw up Articles and Agreements at large in pursuance of these Heads, to be proposed to such as shall Insure upon the same. All which Proposals being unanimously agreed to and approved of by this Court, are Ordered forthwith to be Printed and Published, and speedily and effectually put in Execution. Wagstaffe.
