11767 S117393 99852607 17936
The Soules WATCH: OR, A Day-Booke for the Deuout SOVLE. Consisting of 52 heauenly Medications, and diuers godly Pray∣ers, d to all the dayes of he WEEKE. Being holy Exercises for a Sanctified conuersation, and spiritall riches for the ard Man: By IOHN GERHARD Dr. of Diuinity, and superintendent of Heldourge. PSAL. 143.10. Let thy good spirit lead me into the land of righteousnesse. Englished by R. B. With the Lords Prayer expounded by him. The fourth Edition. London, printed by Thomas Harper for Iohn Harison, and are to be sold at his shop in Pater noster row at the sigue of the Vnicorne. 1632.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, Religious and worthy Lady, the Lady LVCIE, Countesse of BEDFORD. Right Honourable: THe fauor that these Meditations found with the more iudi∣cious and deuout sort of people, whē they where first im∣printed, hath caused mee to take more paines and care about this, then I did about the former. What I haue swept out that was in that, what I haue newly added vnto this
I haue prefaced to the Reader. I haue enough for all my paines, if the Prayers which I haue added will serue at any time to stirre vp the least fire or sparke of deuotion in any Christian heart: but for the Meditations I can neuer speake e∣nough: so heauenly, so pithy, so feeling, and so quicke, that he that reades or heares them, if he haue any life of grace in him, shall feele them not only pleasing to his taste and sweet vnto his eare, but mo∣uing his affections also, and work¦ing on his heart. Now, that this booke is named vnto your Honour from the man that you haue not known, may be an imputation of my great pre∣sumption, that haue dared to offer it, will bee an intimation of your greater goodnes vouchsafing to accept it: This may your Honour pardon in mee, that shal I praise in
you; and yet there are some reasons that haue inclined me hereūto. For besides the aduice of my friends herein, that are people of your knowledge, two things as iust mo∣tiues, haue induced me thus to do. First, hauing liued some yeeres in the place neere, where your Honor kept your residence; and hearing diuers well-affected people testifie of your loue to religiō, your pious heart, and godly conuersation, I thought good in this liuing and liues like Booke, to giue a testimo∣ny thereof also to the men of this age, and to the people that shall come hereafter. Secondly, because I could not chuse but do, as I thinke all other did, that either knew your person, or had heard of your Honourable name; and knowne your sorrow, namely, condole you in your losse I thought the comforts of this
Booke would befit your mour∣ning, which speakes oppositely to that purpose, as in other places, viz the exercise of the first and seuenth dayes, so especially in the two and thirtieth Meditation: you will thinke when you reade it, that it was meant and written purposely for your comfort. I speak out of experience of mine owne affliction, when the Lord of late had made many sorrowes to lay hold of mee at once, and brought vpon mee breaking vpon breaking, like the waues of the Sea, one in the necke of another: after hee had plucktout of my bosome, and slaine theWho died the 19 of August 1614. Mother of my children, mine honest and best-deseruing Wife: after he had bound me to the peace, on the Bed of my sicknesse, hopelesse of life and health, and had like yet farther to haue made a further slaughter in my
house, amongst my yong ones: In the recouery of my health, when I came to visit my solitary dwel∣ling, these Meditations were mine especiall comforts in the house of my mourning. God Almighty make this Booke this way also vsefull vnto your Ho∣nour, and otherwise profitable vn∣to your soule, and to the soules of all that reade it; and the Lord giue vnto you a blessing in the increase of grace and honor in this life, and the full fruition of happines in the life to come. Your Honours to be commanded in the Lord Christ, RICHARD BRVCH.
To the READER. I Am enforced to Epistle thee also (gentle Rea∣der) that thou maiest know somwhat from me concerning the Editions of this Booke; I made it indeed at first to speake English, and then deliuered it to bee printed; but there were added vnto it diuers things without my knowledge. For it tooke from me neither name, nor any other thing in it else be∣sides the version. All which things thus come into it, I haue now taken out, & in this Editiō haue added to this Booke neere halfe so many Prayers as there were before Meditations. So that now there is nothing in it, but that which I must either answere for as another mans, or father as mine owne. I must desire thee also, that hast seene the former Edition, to account it no violence offered to the Booke, though many things are heere inserted into the Meditations themselues, and Notes in the margin put vnto them. All that hath been done, was to help thee in thy prayers and deuotion. Fare thou well. Thine in the Lord Christ, RICHARD BRVCH, Minister of Gods Word.
THE EPISTLE OF THE AVTHOR TO THE CONSVLS, AND THE WHOLE Order of the Senators of the famous Common wealth of Halberstat. THey which compare Diuini∣tie and Physicke together, are many, and they seeme to vnfold the matter very well. For, as the end of Physicke is two∣fold, to maintaine health in mans body, and to recouer the same when it is lost: so Diuinity, in respect of the diseases of the soule, after the same manner doth ac∣knowledge a double end: for it shewes not onely how wee may be freed from sinnes, but also how wee may bee preser∣ued in grace. Both Physickes, as well that of the body, as that of the soule are of God, as said Gregory, therefore also they
agree in the Author. Physike hath her certain principles: that is to say, Reason, and experience, which for that are called certain legs thereof, with which she ac∣cepteth that which is agreeable, and refu∣seth that which is disagreeing: so Diui∣nity hath her sure and vnmoued princi¦ple, the Word of God, comprehended in the Propheticall and Apostolicall Wri∣tings, with which that which agrees, she doth accept of, that which disagrees, she doth refuse. Others goe further, & shew, that all true Physike is of regeneration, seeing that nothing can regenerate which is not it selfe regenerated, there∣fore to the cleansing of the vitall spirits from the impure tinctures of diseases, which is as it were a certaine regenerati∣on, there are required regenerated bo∣dies, that is, spirits which are bodies spi∣rituall for penetration and tincture: and neuerthelesse they are all spirits corpo¦reall: so also the true end of Diuinity is, that spirituall regeneration of the inward man, which the Truth doth testifie to bee made of Water and the Spirit. They adde also the comparison of the Philosophers stone, with the blessed stone in the Church: but because this is neither knowne of all, nor granted of all, I will
not dwell on these things, it is sufficient for my purpose, that out of the comparisō of Diuinity with Physike, I can gather by very good reason, that Diuinity is a prac∣tike doctrine: and therefore that they do not iudge aright, which contend that it is onely speculatiue, which in number are some of these Schoole men; for although not onely those things that are to bee done, but also which are to bee beleeued and hoped for, are proposed vnto vs in this heauenly Philosophy, yet that doth not hinder, but it may as yet bee called practike, for Physike also is occuped in the Theory of certaine things, neither yet is therefore a speculatiue discipline, because it followes this same Theory by reason of practice, and in order to prac∣tice: so is it in Diuinity; yea, I may adde, that in those very things that are to bee beleeued, or in the Articles of the Faith, there is required not bare knowledge onely, but also consent, which that it is an action of the part of the will, they doe confirme by fit arguments to whom this care doth appertaine. Now, if Diuinity bee a practike doc∣trine, then the end thereof shall not bee bare knowledge and subtile Theory, but rather practice. If ye know these things,
blessed are ye, if ye do them, saith our Sa∣uiour to his Disciples. The matters of our Religion doe not consist in words, but in deeds, saith Iustin. Not to talke onely, but also to be, makes Christians, saith Ignatius. The summe of Christian Religion is to imitate him whom thou worshippest, saith Augustine. What is Christianity? The likenesse of God according to that which befals the nature of man, saith Basil. Now if the end and perfection of Christian re∣ligion bee not a bare knowledge, but a practise, how few true Christians shalt thou finde at this day? there is euery where much science, little conscience. It is very well done that the Orthodoxe doctrine is defended by Bookes, Disputa∣tions, Sermons, and all manner of meanes, but we must also doe our endeuour, that our life may answer to the Christian pro∣fession. If I haue the knowledge of all mi∣steries, and haue not loue, I am nothing, saith the Apostle. What then shall they answere hereafter, which haue not the knowledge of all, but of few? not a per∣fect, but a very slender knowledge of my∣steries, and yet they are proud of it; they contemne others, they enuy others, scarcely making any account of Christian Charity. I will hither ascribe a place out
of a certaine notable Booke. He that will fully and sauourly vnderstand the words of Christ, it behooues him that hee study to conforme his whole life vnto Christ. What doth it profit thee to dispute on high of the Trinity, if thou want humili∣ty, from whence thou maist displease the Trinity? If thou knewest the whole Bi∣ble, and the sayings of all the Philoso∣phers, whar would all this profit thee with∣out the loue of God, and grace? Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity, besides the loue of God and his seruice only. Knowledge without the feare of God, what doth it import? If I knew all things which are in the world, and were not in charity, what would it helpe me before God? By how much the more and better thy knowledge is, by so much the more grieuous and heauy from thence shall bee thy iudge∣ment, vnlesse thou liue the more holily. Be not therefore lifted vp for any Art or Science, but rather feare for the know∣ledge that is giuen vnto thee. Hither also pertaineth a place of Erasmus. Whereto pertaines it to dispute how many wayes sinne may be taken, whether it be onely a priuation, or else a blemish inherent in the soule: let the Diuine rather labour this, that all men may abhor and hate sin.
Wee contend without end, what distin∣guisheth the Father from the Sonne, and both of them from the holy Ghost, res an relatio, and how it can be that they should bee called three, of whom there can bee none which is other, seeing they are one essence: how much doth it more pertaine to the purpose, to labour this by all meanes, that we worship and adore god∣lily and holilty that Trinity, whose Ma∣iesty it is not lawfull to search into, and that wee expresse the vnspeakeable con∣cord thereof by our concord, as farre as we may, so that hereafter it may come to passe, that wee may be taken into the fel∣lowship thereof? We dispute, how it can be, that the fire with which the soules of the wicked shall bee tormented, seeing it is materiall, can worke vpon an incorpo∣reall thing: how much more did it con∣cerne to labour with all our strength to this end, lest that fire finde any thing in vs, which it may burne, &c? But I say, againe, that the thing it selfe is not taxed, but the abuse of the thing: it is well done, that our endeuour and stu∣dy is spent on the accurate knowledge of the Articles of the Faith: it is well done, that the Orthodoxe doctrine is defended against Heresies, if so be that the summe
and perfection of Christian Religion bee not thought to consist therein, if so bee also there bee a respect had of Christian I fe and charity. There is an ill life where there is not a good beliefe in God: and againe, it is an vnprofitable beliefe, where there is not a good life: there is no true faith within, where workes doe not ap∣peare without: they that walke not in the light, are not the sonnes of light: they are not Christians which doe not lead a life worthy of a Christian. That therefore in this most cold old age of the world, I might put to some heate to Piety, that is almost extinct, that I might put to a goad or somewhat that would pricke forward, to those that are slow in the way of the Lord, and that I might admonish my selfe and others of our duty, I haue written this little Booke of holy meditations at successiues houres, insisting in the foot-steps of Augustine, Bernard, Anselme, Tauler, and others in this kinde, whose sayings I doe diuers times vse in this Enchyridon, yet no where (which might most easily haue bin done) doe I put to the names of the Authors, seldome note the places of Scriptures; for I did feare, lest thereby the meditation of those that read, might be troubled. I doe
not think that it skils much to be known, whether any thing bee exprest in the words of the Fathers, or in mine, so that that which is spoken be diligently atten∣ded vnto. If it please any one to attribute all things that are spoken fitly and con∣ueniently in this little Booke to the holy Fathers, and to assigne those things vnto me which are vttered nothing so fitly, I doe not stand against it; that onely I seeke, that some fruit may redound from thence to the sonnes of the Church: and truely I shall thinke I haue my wish, if out of the reading of this Booke, some one godly & holy cogitation do arise but in one soule, at one moment. If any man meet with words that are not so pure, so fitly vsed, I say moreouer with words that are not so fitly agreeing with the Ana∣logy of Faith (which yet I hope he shall not) let him not straightway cast away the whole Booke, nor straightway marke me for an Hereticke, but let him weigh the kinde of writing. I handle holy things, which doe not much desire Rhe∣toricall ornaments: I write Homilies, not exact disputations; I would haue a grea∣ter care of things, then of words. Thou shalt not finde here thornie and knotty quest ons, but earnest exhortations to
holy life: thou shalt not finde here scur∣rilous conceits, but the spirituall riches of the inward man: thou shalt not finde here, that which may exercise thee in the subtility of disputing, but that which may instruct thee in the way of humility. I doe sometimes follow Allegories, not that I thinke that all things must bee transfor∣med into Allegories, but because this kinde of writing, being directed to teach and admonish, not to striuing and dispu∣tation, did not seeme to refuse them, but why do I speake more about this matter, and why doe I bring so many things to defend my selfe? seeing I haue already satisfied the indifferent Readers; but I shall bee neuer able to satisfie the vniust Censurers. Now to you (most famous, wise and prudent men) doe I dedicate and offer these holy meditations, that there may be some pub∣like testimony extant of mine obser∣uance towards your Honours, your con∣stancy in preseruing of the purity of reli∣gion is knowne of all, and praised of all, your singular prudence in the gouern∣ment of the Common-wealth, your be∣neuolence towards all that are lettered, these and such like things haue easily per∣swaded me, that I should not doubt to of∣fer
these first fruits of my studies, such as they be, this vsury of my winters rest, such as it is, to your Honors, with due signifi∣cation of reuerence, and specially seeing by my grandfathers, on the fathers and on the mothers side, of godly memory, some of your Honors famous Order doe come neere vnto mee in consanguinity and affinity. Take therefore (most excellent Men) with a cheerefull countenance and indifferent minde, this paper gift from my tenuity, receiue me into your protection, and goe forward to fauour my studies as heretofore, so hereafter. I beseech the good great God, with humble sighes, that he will continue your good things vnto you, that is, that hee vouchsafe most fa∣uourably to preserue the holy pledge of his Word, peace and tranquillity, an hap∣py increase of the Common wealth, and all those good things which he hath most largely bestowed on your City, and that he vouchsafe also to passe them ouer to your posterity. At leanes in the moneth of Aprill. 1606. Your Honours most dutifull M. IOHN GERHARDI. Quedlinburg.
THE TABLE. Munday Morning Prayer; for Gods helpe & assistance in all our labours. Fol. 1 The Mornings Meditations. OF the vnconstancy of this present life. Fol. 5 2 Of the vanity of the World. Fol. 15 Munday Noones prayer. The Noone meditations. 3 Of the lying in waite of the Diuel. Fol. 25 4 Of the dayly consideration of death, Fol. 35 Munday nights Meditations. 5 Of the grieuousnes of the torments of hell, Fol. 43 6 Of the eternity of the paines of hell. Fol. 53 Munday nights prayer, on the dayes Meditations. Fol. 66 Tuesday Morning, a thanks giuing for all kind of benefits. Fol. 63
The mornings Meditations. 7 Of the true acknowledgement of our sins. Fol. 69 8 Of the shaking off of security. Fol. 77 Tuesday noone, a Prayer. The noone Meditations: 9 Of the denying of a mans owne selfe. Fol. 87 Tuesday nights Meditations. 10 Of the profit of Temptation. Fol. 97 11 Of the study of true humility. Fol. 105 Tuesday nights prayer, on the dayes Medi∣tations. Fol. 113 Wednesday morning, a prayer for a blessing in spirituall things. Fol. 116 The Mornings Meditations. 12 Of the assurance of our saluation. Fol. 119 13 Of Predestination. Fol. 126 14 Of the satisfaction for our sinnes. Fol. 135 Wednesday Noone, a prayer. The Noones Meditations. 15 Of the name of Iesus. Fol. 142 16 Of the mystery of the Incarnation. Fol. 149 27 Of the wholsome fruit of the Incarnation. Fol. 158
Wednesday nights Meditations. 18 Of the fruit of the Passion of our Lord. Fol. 165 19 Of the Ascension of Christ. Fol. 172 20 An Homily of the Holy Ghost. Fol. 180 Wednesday nights Prayer, a confession of sins. Fol. 191 Thursday Morning, a Petition for temporall blessings. Fol. 194 The Mornings Meditations. 21 Of the natures & properties of true faith. Fol. 197 22 Of our true reconciliation with God. Fol. 206 23 Of the fruits of Baptisme. Fol. 212 Thursday Noone, a Prayer. The Noones Meditations. 14 Of the dignity of the Church. Fol. 221 Thursday nights Meditations. 27 Of the mystery of the Lords Supper. Fol. 247 28 Of the serious preparation before the vse of the Lords Supper. Fol. 254 29 Of the wholesome participation of the Body and Bloud of Christ. Fol. 262 Thursday nights Prayer on the dayes Me∣ditations. Fol. 269
Friday Morning, a Prayer for deliuerāce from all spirituall euils. Fol. 271 The Mornings Meditations: 36 Of the wholsome efficacy of Prayers. Fol. 274 31 Of the custody of the holy Angels. Fol. 285 32 Of the consolation in the death of our friēds. Fol. 299 Friday noone, a prayer. Fol. 305 The Noone Meditations. 33 Of the true rest of the soule. Fol. 306 34 Of an exercise of Faith, out of the loue of Christ, in the Agony of death. Fol. 315 Friday nights Meditations. 35 Of the fruit of true & earnest repentāce. Fol. 321 36 An exercise of repentance, out of the Passion of our Lord Christ. Fol. 331 37 A consolation of the penitent, out of the Pas∣sion of Christ, taken out of Ansel. especially. Fol. 338 Friday nights Prayer, for the Church, and all such as in charity we are bound to remember in our prayers. Fol. 345 Saturday Morning, a Prayer for deliuerance from all bodily dangers. Fol. 348
The mornings Meditations, 38 Of generall rules to liue godly. Fol. 350 39 Of louing God onely. Fol. 360 40 Of the holy imitation of the life of Christ. Fol. 370 Saturday Noone, a prayer. Fol. 378 The noone Meditations. 41 Of the purenesse of the Conscience. Fol. 379 42 Of the auoyding of Couetousnesse. Fol. 389 43 Of the properties of true Charity. Fol. 400 Saturday nights Meditations. 44 Of the studay of Chastity. Fol. 411 45 Of the foundation of Christian patience. Fol. 421 46 How the temptation of perseuerance is to be ouercome. Fol. 430 Saturday nights prayer, on the dayes Medi∣tations. Fol. 447 Sunday Morning, a prayer that we may keepe holy the Sabbath. Fol. 449 Sunday Mornings Meditation. 47 Of the spirituall resurrectiō of the godly. Fol. 452 48 Of the auoyding of Couetousnesse. Fol. 459 Sunday noone, a prayer. Fol. 462
The Noones Meditations. 49 Of the last Iudgement. Fol. 463 50 Of the desire of eternall life. Fol. 471 Sunday Nights Meditations. 51 Of the most sweete company of the Angels in Heauen. Fol. 481 52 Of the most blessed vision of God in Heauē. Fol. 489 Sundy Nights Prayer, on the days Medita∣tions. Fol. 493 A prayer for a woman in trauell of Child. The thankesgiuing of a woman after the birth, and her deliuerance. Lastly, the Lords Prayer expounded Fol. 105
A DAY-BOOKE for the Deuout SOVLE. Munday Morning Prayer. WHither, O Lord God, Father euerlasting, maker of all things, Author of goodnesse, shall I direct my heart and voyce? to whom shall I ad∣dresse my selfe for helpe and suc∣cour; but to thee, which art a God of nature most benigne & louing, of grace most free, of power Al∣mighty, and therefore most ready
to heare, and most able to helpe. I know, O Lord, that without thee all mine endeuour is but vaine: If thou do but blow vpon my la∣bour, it will come to nought; If I begin, and thou withdraw thy self from my helpe, I shall faint in the way, and fall from my purpose, be∣cause I am not able of my self as of my self, so much as to think, much lesse to do any thing that is good, but all my sufficiencie is of thee: therefore I implore thine aid, and pray thee with thy grace preuen∣ting, accompanying and follow∣ing, to be with me in al my works, and in all my wayes, that I may see the successe and prosperitie of that which I shall take in hand, the dew of thy blessing distilling euermore on the works of mine hands. Di∣rect thou, O Lord, my way in thy truth, put counsell and vnderstan∣ding into my heart, and into my
reines. Grant that in all my busi∣nesse I may propose vnto my selfe firmly these ends: First, thy glory, next, the good of mine own soule, then the profit of my brethren. Take from me floath and weari∣somnesse: giue vnto me strength, vertue, and courage, that I may both begin and finish the workes of my Calling, with all faithful∣nesse and diligence: But before all things, O Lord, put into my minde a care of religious duties, thy worship, and the workes of Charitie, that I may glorifie thee in them here on earth which are in heauen. O Lord, in my be∣ginning I take on mee a vow of seruing thee; giue strength, O Fa∣ther, that I may performe my vowes! so assist me in thy seruice, so confirme me in thy wayes that nothing be able to diuert or turne me out of the right way. Rebuke
Satan, that is on my right hand to hinder me, let not his contradicti∣ons, nor the gainesayings of men dismay me, or make me to quaile: Let not mine owne infirmity, the weakenesse of flesh and bloud, make me either to halt in the way, or faint before I come to the end of the way: But grant that in thy power my soule may march vali∣antly, and that through thine as∣sistance, I may runne a good race, and finish vp a good course, at the end whereof I may meete with blisse and immortalitie in thy Kingdome, where there is all ioy without sadnesse, all mirth with∣out mourning, full contentment without any disgust, sweetnesse without gall, saciety without sur∣fer, peace without all warres, rest without disturbance, plenty with∣out penury, the fulnesse of hap∣pinesse, and the Riuer of plea∣sures,
vnto which, thou which hast made me, bring me, for thy deare Sonnes sake Christ Iesus. Hominis quid vita? Cylindrus. What is the life of man? a Cylinder. 1. Meditation. Of the vncon∣stancie of this present life. THinke, O deuout soule, of the mise∣ry and vnconstan∣cie of this life, that thy heart may be lifted vp to desire the heauenly inheritance. While this life doth grow,Waining. it doth daily decrease: while it is increased, it is also diminished: whatsoeuer is added vnto it, some∣what also is taken from it. It is but a minute of time that we liue,Short. and somewhat lesse then
a minute: while wée turne our selues, immortality will be here: we are in this life as it were in a∣nother mans house. Sepulchre.2 Abraham had not in the land of Canaan, a ground of his owne to dwell in, but onely the inheri∣tance of a sepulchre: so this life present, is a place of lodging and of a grange. Our life is like to one that sailes:Death be ginneth. hée that sailes, whether hée stand, or whether he sit, or whether he lye, alwayes goes nearer to the hauen, and thi∣ther he goes, whether he is led by the course of the Ship: so wée also, whether sléeping, or whether waking, whether vnwilling, or whether willing, by the mo∣ments of times, are alwayes led to our end. This life is ra∣ther a death, because euery day wée dye, séeing that euery day we consume somewhat of our liues.
The entrance into this life is straight-wayes the beginning of death. 3 This life is full of the griefe of the things that are past,Grieuous. of the labour and paine of things that are present, of the feare of things to come. The IngresseIngresse. into life is lamentable, because an infant begins his life with teares, as it were foreséeing the euils to come: the ProgresseProgresse. weake, because ma∣ny diseases do afflict vs, many cares do vexe vs: the EgresseEgresse. horrible, because wée go not forth alone, bu our workes go forth with vs, and by death wee go forth to the seuere iudgement of God. 4 Our conception is a fault:Summe. our birth is misery: our life is paine: our death is distresse. We are begotten in filthinesse, we are fostored in darknesse, we
are brought forth in heauinesse. Before we come forth into the world, wée are a burden to our wretched mothers: in our coming forth, wée teare them after the manner of Vipers: we are pil∣grims in our birth, and strangers in our life, because we are compeld to go forth by death. Liues parts miserable.The first part of our life, knowes not it selfe, the midst is ouerwhelmed with cares, the last part is oppressed with troublesome old age. All the time of our life. is either present, or past, or to come. If it be present, it is vnstable: if it be past it is now nothing: if it be to come, it is vncertaine. Matter miserable.We are putrifaction in our be∣ginning, a bubble in all our life, and the food of wormes in our death: we beare the earth we were the earth, we shall be earth.
The necessityNecessity of our birth is ab∣iect, of our life is wretched, of our death is hard. Our bodie is an earthly habi∣tation, in which dwels death and sinne, which euerie day consume it. All our life is a spirituall war∣fare: the deuils aboue vs,Life cros¦sed. waite for our destruction, on the right hand and the left, the world doth oppugne vs, beneath vs and with∣in vs, our flesh doth warre against vs: the life of man is a warfare, because in it there is a continuall wrastling of the flesh and of the Spirit. 5 What therefore can be the ioyNo ioy of man in this life, when there is no secure felicity in it? What can there happen vnto vs of things present to delight vs, when all things passing away to∣gether, yet that doth not passe
away that hangs ouer our heads? when this is wholly en∣ded that is beloued, and that al∣wayes comes nearer where griefe is neuer ended: we gaine that by our longer life, that wée do the more euils, that we sée the more euils, that we suffer the more euils: our longer life doth this for vs, that in the last iudge∣ment the accusation of our sinnes is greater. Vncer∣taine.6 What is man? the slaue of death, a traueller that passeth a∣way, lighter then a bubble, shorter then a moment, vainer then an Image, vainer then a sound, frailer then a grasse, more changeable then the winde, more inconstant then a shadow, more deceiueable then a dreame. 7 What is this life?Life mise∣rable. an expe∣ctation of death, a scene of mocke∣ries, a sea of miseries, one onely
viall of bloud, which euery light fall breakes, euery little Ague doth corrupt. 8 The courseCourse. of our life is a Labyrinth, we come into it out of the wombe, we go out of it by the gates of death. We are nothing but earth,Matter. but the earth is nothing but smokes but smoke is nothing. We there∣fore are nothing. 9 This life is fraste as glasse,Vncer∣taine. slippery as a Riuer, miserable as warfare: and yet to many it ap∣peares very worthy to be desired. 10 This life appeares a pre∣cious Nut outwardly,Deceitful but if thou open it with the knife of truth, thou shalt sée that there is nothing but wormes and rottennes with∣in. There grow Apples about the Region of Sodome, which delight with the outward beas∣ty, but being toucht, do go into
dust: so the felicity of this life doth delight outwardly, but if thou touch it with a straighter conside∣ration, it will appeare like to smoke and dust. Counsell.Do not therefore, O beloued soule, referre the chiefest of thy thoughts to this life, but with thy minde alwayes aspire to the ioy to come. Compare betwéene themselues the most short mo∣ment of time, which is granted vnto vs in this life, with the infi∣nite and neuer to be ended ages of ages, and it will appeare how foo∣lish a thing it is, to cleane to this most inconstant life, and to neg∣lect the eternall. This life of ours is most swift and vanishing, and yet in it eternall life is either gotten or lost. This life is most miserable, and yet in it eternall felicitie is either gotten or lost. This life is most full of calami¦tie,
and yet in it eternall ioy is ei∣ther gotten or lost. 11 If therefore thou aspire to the life eternall,Vse the World. desire it with all thine heart in this life most swift∣ly flying and fading away: vse the world, but let not thy heart cleaue to the world: follow thy businesse in this life, but let not thy soule be fastened to this life: the outward vse of worldly things doth not hurt, if the inward loue doth not cleaue vnto them. 12 In heauen is thy countrey, in the world thy lodging on the way: be not so delighted with the lodging of this world, which is but for a day, that thou be with∣drawne from the desire of thy hea∣uenly countrey This life is a sea,Trouble. Rest. eternall life is the Hauen: be not so delighted with the momentany tranquilli∣ty, that thou contend not to come
to the hauen of eternall-tranquil∣lity. Failing.13 This life is slippery, and doth not kéepe touch with her lo∣uers, because besides all opinion, it oftentimes flyes from them: why therefore wilt thou put any trust vnto it? It is a dangerous thing if thou surely promise vnto thy selfe but the security of one houre, because ofttimes in that one houre this fading life is fini∣shed: it is most safe at all houres to expect the departure of this life present, & to prepare a mans selfe thereto by earnest repentance. Vncertain14 In the gourd wherewith Ionas was delighted, God pre∣pared a worme that it might wi∣ther away: so in worldly things, to which many do cleaue by loue, nothing is stable, but the wormes of corruption do bréed in them. Counsell.The world is now worne out
with so great a blemish of all things, that it hath also lost the shew of seducing, forasmuch as they are to be praised and to be set out, which haue not vouchsafed to flourish with the flourishing world so much are they to be blamed, and to be accused, whom it delighteth to perish with the perishing. Withdraw our hearts, O Christ, from the loue of this world, & stirre vp in vs a desire of the heauenly kingdome. Praestant aeterna coducis. Things e∣ternall passe those that perish 2. Meditation. Of the vanity of the world. DO not loue those things, O thou soule, which are in the world: the world shall perish, and all things that are in it shall bée burnt: where therefore will thy loue be then? Loue the eternall
good, that thou maist liue for euer. Creatures vaine.1 Euery creature is subiect to vanity: he therefore that cleaues vnto the creatures by loue, shall himselfe also become vaine. Loue the true and stable good, that thy heart may bée made stable and quiet. Honour.2 Why doth the honour of the world delight thée? He that séeks the honour of men, cannot bée honoured of God: hée that séekes the honour of the world, is con∣strained to conforme himselfe to the world: hée that pleaseth the world, cannot please God. All things are perishing and vnsta∣ble, which are giuen from those which are perishing and vnsta∣ble: wherefore the honour of the world cannot be stable: whom the day before they lifted vp to Heauen with the highest glorie,Quem dies veniens vi∣derit super∣bum, &c. him oft-times the day following,
they reproach with the greatest ignominy. Desire to please God, that thou mayest be honoured of God: the honour of God,1. Sam. 2. is true and stable. What is man the better from thence, that hée is re∣puted greater of man?Rom. 2. 2. Cor. 10 As much as euery one is in the eyes of God, so much he is, and no more. When Christ was sought for for a Kingdome, he fled away:Contempt better thē honour. when he was sought for to reproaches and the ignominious punish∣ment of the Crosse, hée offered himselfe of his owne accord. That therefore thou mayest bée conformed vnto Christ, let the ignominy of the world delight thée more then the glory. He that for Christ doth not despise world∣ly honour, how would hée lay downe his life for him? And there is no other way to glorie, but by the contempt of worldly
glory, euen as Christ by the igno∣miny of his crosse entred into his glory.Phil. 2. 3 Loue therefore to bée con∣temned, to be despised, to be put backe in this world, that thou maiest be honoured in the world to come. Christ hath taught vs by his life, what we are to estéeme of the worldly glory: all the glory of heauen doth serue him, nay, hée alone is true glory, but he doth as it were cast away glory. By how much therefore a man is the more honored, and abounds with the more corporall comforts, by so much he ought to be the more pro∣foundly and inwardly sad, séeing himselfe to be so much the farther off from the conformity of Christ. Vaine is the praise of man, if an euil conscience accuse vs within: what doth it profit him that hath a feuer, if he be placed in an Iuory
bed, when he is afflicted nothing the lesse with inward heat? true honour and true praise is the te∣stimony of thine owne conscience. No man is a more indifferent iudge of thy doings then God and thy conscience, desire to approue thy doings to his iudgement. Is it not sufficient for thée that thou art knowne to thy selfe, and that which is most of all to God? But why doest thou so much desire riches?Riches. He is too couetous, to whom the Lord is not sufficient. This life is the way to the euer∣lasting countrey: what then doth great wealth profit? It doth ra∣ther load the traueller, as great burthens the ship. 5 Christ, the King of heauen,Rom. 8. is the riches of the seruants of God. The true treasure ought to be within a man, not without him. The true treasure is that which
thou canst bring with thée to that vniuersall iudgement:Perish. 2. Pet. 3. Luk. 12. but all those exterior goods are taken a∣way from vs in death. They pe∣rish being gathered together, but the gatherer of them together doth perish worse, if hée bée not rich in God. Poore. Job 1.6 Thou camest poore into the world, and thou shalt go poore out of it. Wherfore should the middle differ from the beginning and the end? Riches should tend onely to vse, and how little will suffice? The least good of grace and vertue is more excellent then all earthly riches: why? because vertue plea∣seth God, but riches do not, vn∣lesse it be through vertue. Christ poore.7 The pouerty of Christ ought to bée more acceptable vnto vs, then the riches of the whole world. Pouerty is sanctified in Christ. He was poore in his Na∣tiuity,
poorer in this life, most poore in his death. 8 Why doest thou doubt to preferre the pouerty of the world before riches,Pouerty better thē riches. when Christ hath preferred it for the kingdome of Heauen? How will hée trust God with his soule, which will not trust him with the care of his flesh? How will he lay downe his life for his brother, which doth not lay out his riches for him? Riches bring forth paine in the getting, feare in the possession, griefe in the losse; and (that which is more to be lamented) the labour of the couetous is not onely peri∣turus, perishing, but also peremp∣torius, killing, as Bernard teach∣eth vs. Thy loue is thy God: where thy treasure is,Mat. 5. there is thy heart also. Hée that loues these corporall, worloly, perish∣ing riches, cannot loue the spiri∣tuall,
heauenly, eternall riches: why? Because those do depresse a mans heart, and draw it downe∣wards, but these do lift it vp∣wards. The loue of earthly things is the birdlime of spiritual wings, said one of the true louers of Christ. 9 The wife of Lot, turned in∣to a pillar of Salt, doth as yet preach vnto vs, that we looke not back to those things that are in the world: but that we go the straight way to our heauenly countrey. The Apostles leauing all did follow Christ. Why? Be∣cause the knowledge of true riches doth take away the desire of ri∣ches falsely so called. To him that hath tasted of the spirit, the flesh doth not rellish well: the world is better to him to whom Christ is swéet. Pleasure.10 But why doest thou so
greatly desire pleasures? let the remembrance of him that was crucified, crucifie in thee all desire of pleasure. Let the remembrance of the burning of hel, extinguish in thée all the heat of lust. Compare the most shortShort. moment of plea∣sure, with euerlasting torments 11 Pleasures are beastly,Beastly. and make vs like to the bruit beasts. The swéetnesse of the kingdome of heauen doth not sauour with him that is daily full of the husks of Hogs.Mortifie it Let vs mortifie all the pleasures of our sences, and with Abraham, let vs offer vnto God in spirituall sacrifice, that beloued sonne, that is to say, the desires of our soules, voluntarily renoun∣cing all pleasures, and embracing the sharpnesse of the Crosse. 12 It is not a plaine way and strawed with roses,Matth. 2. but a rough way, and beset with thornes, that
leads to the kingdome of heauen. The outward man taketh increase by pleasures, the inward by the crosse and tribulations: as much as the outward increaseth, so much the inward is diminished. Pleasures serue the body, but they that are truly godly, haue the least care of their body, and the great∣est of their soule▪ Pleasures do captiuate our heart, lest it should be free in the loue of God. Thou shalt not carry away the plea∣sures, but the contempt of plea∣sures with thée in death, and bring it to the iudgement. 13 Therefore let the loue of God kill thy flesh, lest carnall loue deceiue thée. Let the re∣membrance of Gods iudgement be continually in thy minde, lest the peruerse iudgement of thy sensuall appetite leade thee away into bondage. Regard not the
flattering countenance of the ser∣pent,Reu. 12. but thinke vpon his tayle that pricks sharply at the last. O∣uercome by the grace of Christ, that at length thou mayest be crowned a conquerour by Christ. Munday Noone. PRosper thou the works of our hands vpon vs,Psal. 90.17 O Lord ô pro∣sper thou our handy worke. Quis norit daemonis astus? Who knoweth the deuils wiles? 3. Meditation. Of the lying in wait of the Deuill. THinke, O deuout soule, in how great danger thou art which doth alway hang ouer thée from thine aduersary the deuil: he is an enemy:Sat arte. 1. in boldnesse most ready: 2. in force most strong,
3. in cunning most crafty, 4. of all treacheries most full, 5. in the de∣sire of fight infatigable, 6. and into all shapes variable. 1 Treachery2 He enticeth vs vnto diuers crimes, and after he hath enticed vs, hée doth accuse vs before the tribunall seat of God. Gen. 3. Reu. 12: 2 CunningHe accuseth God with men, and men with God, and men againe betwéene themselues. He doth first exactly looke into euery ones inclination, and afterwards sets for him the snares of temptations: As they that assault Cities,Force. Compari∣son of as∣saulting Cities. go not in their assaults to the strong and fenced parts, but where they thinke that the walls are weake, the ditches plainer, and the towers not well guarded: so the Deuill, alwayes assaulting the soule of man, first sets vpon that which he shall perceiue to be weake, and of least resistance. Being once
ouercome, he doth not altogether yéeld,Infatigable but he comes on again more valiantly to tempt, that he may ouercome them by wearisomnesse and negligence, whom hée could not ouercome by temptations vio∣lence. From whom can he refraine his wiles,1 Bold. which durst to set vpon the Lord of Maiesty himself, with the fraud of his cunning? From what Christian will he abstaine, which desired to winnow the A∣postles of Iesus Christ them∣selues as wheat? Hée deceiued Adam in na∣tures institution,Cunning▪ whom shall hée not be able to deceiue in natures restitution? He deceiued Iudas in the schoole of our Sauiour, whom shal he not be able to deceiue in the world, the schoole of errour? In all things the deceits of the de∣uill are altogether to bée feared:Infatigable cunning.
In prosperity he prouokes vs to pride of minde: in aduersitie hée eggs vs on to desperation: If he séeth any one to be delighted in parsimony, he delights to tye him in the giues of insatiable coue∣tousnesse: If he sée one of a gallant and heroicke spirit, he sets him on fire with the prouocations of wrath: If hee sée a man some∣what iocond and merry, he pro¦uokes him to the heate of mad lust: those whom he sées feruent in Religion, be doth endeuour to hamper in vaine superstition: those whom he sées placed in high dignities, them doth he vexe with the fire-brands of Ambition: when he driues vnto sinne, hée amplifies the mercie of God: when he hath cast a man head long into sinne, then he doth ex∣aggerate the iustice of God. First hée will leade a man to presump∣tion,
afterwards he endeuours to bring him downe to despera∣tion. 3 Sometimes hee doth op∣pugne vs from without with persecutions: sometimes he doth oppugne vs inwardly with fierie tentations: sometimes he doth impugne vs openly and violently: sometimes hiddenly and fraudu∣lently. Sometimes he distorteth the body with sicknesse, casteth in∣to the fire, bloweth downe houses, blasteth our selues, seruants, and cattell. Sometimes hée raiseth open tyrants, oppressours, mur∣therers, théeues, false witnesses, adulterers to spoyle vs. Some∣times false teachers, false friends, at home, abroad, in land, and sea, citie and countrey, to seduce, be∣tray, and make merchandize of vs. He hath put gluttony in féeding,Corrupt∣eth.
luxury, in generation; sloth, in exercise; enuy, in conuersation; couetousnesse, in gouernment; wrath, in correction; pride▪ in dig∣nity; euill thoughts in the heart; false spéeches in the mouth; vniust works in the members: in watch∣ing he moues to euill déeds, in sleeping to filthy dreames. So therefore euery where, and in all things, the deceits of the deuil are to be feared. Against security.4 The Lord watcheth ouer vs, and he watcheth: we are secure, and he goes about like a roaring lyon. 5 If thou shouldest behold an angry lyon to come violently vpon thée, how wouldest thou tremble for feare? and when thou hearest that the infernall lyon doth lay wait for thée, dost thou as yet sléep securely on both eares? Remedies.6 Consider therefore, O faith∣full
soule, the wiles of this most mighty enemy,1 Spirituall armour. Ephes. 6. whom of thy selfe thou canst not escape, séeke for the helpe of spirituall Armour: Let thy loynes be girt with the truth▪ and putting on the breast-plate of righteousnesse, put on the perfect righteousnesse of Christ, and thou shalt be safe from the temptations of the deuill: hide thy selfe in the holes of the wounds of Christ: as often as thou art terrified with the darts of this malignant Ser∣pent, do thou truly beléeue in Christ: as therefore Satan hath no right in Christ, so also he hath no right on him that truly beléeues in Christ. Let thy féet be shod in the preparation of the Gospel of peace. 7 Let the confession of Christ be alwayes heard & sound in our mouth,2 Confessiō. so no temptation of the deuill shall hurt vs: the words of
the inchanter do not so much driue away the bodily serpent, as the spéeches of a constant confes∣sion do driue away this spirituall serpent. 8 Let the buckler of faith3 Faith. bée taken vp, that the fierie darts of this most wicked enemy may bée quenched by vs. It is faith, which also remoues mountaines: vnder∣stand the mountaines of doubt∣ings, of persecutions, and of temp∣tations. 9 The Israelites were not smitten of the Destroyer, whose posts were signed with the bloud of the Paschal Lambe: they shall not be hurt of this Destroyer, whose hearts are sprinckled with the bloud of Christ by faith. 10 Faith relyes on the promi∣ses of God, but Satan cannot o∣uerturne the promises of God: therefore also he shall not be able
to preuaile against faith. 11 Faith is the light of the soule, therefore the temptations of the malignant spirit do easily appeare in this light. 12 By faith our sinnes are cast into the déepe sea of Gods mercy, in that the fiery darts of the deuill will easily be extinguisht. 13 We ought also to take the helmet of Saluation, that is,4 Hope. an holy hope: endure temptation,Fight bet¦ter then peace. looking vnto the end of temptati∣on. For God is the gouernour of them that striue, and the crowne of them that ouercome: if there be no enemy, there is no fight: if there be no fight, there is no victo∣ry: it there be no victory, there is no crowne: better is that fight which makes vs neare vnto God, thn that peace which enstrang∣eth vs from God.5 Sword of the Spirit. 14 We must also take the
sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: let the consolati∣ons of the Scriptures be of more force with thée, then the contradi∣ctions of the deuill: Christ ouer∣came all the temptations of Sa∣tan with the Word, the Christi∣ans as yet ouercome all the temptations of Satan with the Word. 6 Prayer.15 To conclude, in prayers thou hast the greatest help against temptations: as often as the ship of thy soule is ouerwhelmed with the waues of temptations, awake Christ with prayers: by smiting we ouercome our visible enemies, by pouring out of prayers, wée ouercome our inuisible enemy. Fight, O Christ, for vs, in vs, that also we may ouercome in thée.
Mortis meditatio vita est. The medi∣tation of death is life. 4. Meditation. Of the daily consideration of death. O Faithfull Soule,Thinke of death all times. looke for death euery houre, because that layes wait for thée at all houres. In the morning, O man, when thou risest, thinke that this will be the last day of thy life: in the euening when thou goest to bed, thinke that this will bée thy last night vpon earth. 1 Whatsoeuer thou doest,In all works. whatsoeuer thou vndertakest, thinke alwayes first, and consider with thy selfe, whether thou wouldest do such things, if thou shouldest dye this houre, and come to the iudgement of God? Doest thou thinke, if thou doest not thinke of death, that it doth not draw neare vnto thée? or
that death is hastened, if thou thinkest vpon it? whether thou thinkest vpon it or not, whether thou speake of it or not, it is al∣wayes at thy backe, hard at thy héeles: thy life is but lent vnto thée, it is not thy frée-hold. Thou camest in on this condition, that thou shouldest go out: thou ca∣mest naked, thou shalt go away naked: thy life is a pilgrimage, when thou hast walkt long in it, at last thou must returne: thou art but a Farmer and Tenant of the world, not a lasting Lord. Thinke euery houre, that euery moment thou art hasting. We are deceiued in this that we think wée dye at the last gaspe of our life: wée dye euery day, euerie houre, euery minute. That of our life which comes on also goes away that of our life which is ad∣ded, is likewise withdrawne and
taken from vs: we do not sudden∣ly fall on earth, but we go towards it by degrees. 2 This our life is a way,Compse thy self to dye. wée must daily finish somewhat of it. Death and life séeme to be most distant, when notwithstanding nothing is nearer then death to life: this alwayes slides away, and that followes hard after. As they that go a iourney in a ship, oft-times when they féele it not, when they thinke not of it come to their hauen; so whatsoeuer we do, whether we eate, or whether we drinke, or whether we sleepe, alwayes we draw neare to death. Many haue made an end of their way, when they séek things néed∣full for the way. 3 No man receiues death chéerfully when it comes▪ but hée that hath long compoed himselfe vnto it. Die to thy selfe daily in
thy life, so thou mayest liue in death vnto God. Before thou dyest, let thy vices die in thée: let the old Adam dye in thée in thy life, so Christ shall liue in thée in death: let the outward man daily decay in thy life, so the inward man shall be renued in thée in death. Prepare to dye to eternity.4 Death doth forthwith tran∣slate thée to eternitie, because where the trée falleth, there it will abide: how carefully therefore must we thinke on death? Time passeth away, & the infinite spaces of eternity remaine, therefore in time prepare thy selfe to eternity. Such as we shall be for eternity, blessed or wretched, it is decréed in that one houre of death, in this one moment eternall felicitie is either possessed or lost.Benefits of the me∣ditation of death. 5 Wherefore, O faithful soule, how carefully oughtest thou to
prepare thy selfe to this houre? Thou shalt easily contemne all things in the world, if thou wilt but thinke that thou shalt dye: Thinke on thine eyes that shall waxe dimme in death, & thou shalt easily turne them away from va∣nitie: thinke of thine eares that shall waxe deafe in death, and thou shalt easily stop them against wic∣ked and obscene words: thinke of thy tongue that shall waxe stiffe in death, and thou shalt haue a greater care of thy spéech. Let the swet and anxiety of those that die, be continually before thine eyes, so thou shalt easily contemne the delights of the world: let the na∣kednes of those that go out of this life bée continually before thine eyes, and pouerty in this life shall not be grieuous vnto thée: thinke on the horrour of the whole body in death, and thou shalt easily
contemne the glory of the world. Sée the pitiful wailing of the soule when it is compelled to go out of the house of the body, and thou shalt easily take héed of the guilt of all sinne. Thinke on the rotten∣nesse that follows death, and thou shalt easily make humble thy proud swelling flesh. Thinke how destitute and naked thou art left of all the creatures in death, and thou shalt easily turne thy loue away from them, and turne it to thy Creator. 6 Thinke how narrowly death doth look that thou carry nothing with thée out of this life, and thou shalt easily contemne all the riches of the world. Sin bring∣eth er∣nal deth7 He that in this life doth dai∣ly dye through sinne, passeth by death to the punishments of eter∣nall death No man passeth to e∣ternall life, but he that begins to
liue here in Christ: that thou mayest liue in death, graft thy selfe by faith into Christ: let death alwayes be in thy thought, because it is alwayes in expectation of thée: we alwayes carry about death, because we alwayes carry about sin: but the wages of sinne is death. 9 But if thou desire to scape the bitternesse of death,By faith we scape death. kéepe the word of Christ. Faith doth con∣ioyne and vnite vs with Christ. They therefore which are in Christ, dye not, for Christ is their life. He that cleaues to God by faith, is one spirit with him: and therefore the faithfull shall not dye for euer, because God is his life. 10 The people of Israel passe through the Red-sea to the promi∣sed land:Death a gate to life and death Pharaoh and his armie are drowned therein: so the death
of the godly is the beginning to them of true life, and the gate of Paradise: but the death of the wicked and euill is not the end of their euils, but the knitting to∣gether of those that went before, and those that follow, they passe from the first death to the second. The bene∣fit in death of our v∣nion with Christ.11 So straight is the vnion of Christ and the faithful, that it can∣not bée dissolued by death: in the very thickest shadow of death, the torch of Gods grace doth shine before them: in the perillous pas∣sage of death, Christ doth prouide his beloued the protection of An∣gels. The bodies of the Saints are the temples of the holy Ghost: the holy Spirit will not suffer his temples to bée vtterly destroyed by death. The Word of God is an incorruptible séed, that is not extinguisht by death, but is hid∣den in the hearts of the god∣ly,
and will quicken them in his time. Semper meditare gehennam. Thinke e∣uer of hell 5. Meditation. Of the grie∣uousnesse of the torments of hell. THinke, O deuout soule, on the heauinesse of the paines of hell, and thou shalt easily ouer∣come all the wicked pleasure of sinning.All euill no good to sinners. There will be the pre∣sence of all euil, and the absence of all good. What euill can be away from them which are punished for the greatest euill, that is to say, sin? What good can there be pre∣sent with them, which are remo∣ued from the chiefest good, that is to say, God? whatsoeuer hath béene giuen to the elect to the in∣crease of their glory, all that shall turne to the damned to the aug∣mentation of their paines.
Touching.1 There shall bée the heate of fire, and the extremitie of cold. There shall bée perpetuall darknesse. There shall be smoke and continuall teares. There shall be the terrifying sightSight. of the deuils. There shall be crying for euer.Taste. Smell. There shall bée drought, thirst, the stinke of brimstone, the worme of conscience, feare, griefe, shame,Within. and the confusion of sinnes, manifested to all: enuy, hatred, sadnesse,Without. the want of the sight of God, the taking away of all hope. 2 By the power of God the brightnesse of the fireFire. shall be se∣parated from the adustiue vertue thereof. The brightnesse shall turne to the ioy of the Saints: the force of burning to the tor∣ment of the damned. It shall shine to the wretched, not for an obiect of consolation, that they
may sée, wherat they may reioyce: but for increase of their miserie,Shining to increase sorrow. Eyes. that they may sée whereat they may more grieue. 3 The sight shall be depriued of the beholding of the Sunne, the Moone, and all the Starres; as also of the sight of Christ, and all the Saints: and it shall be pu∣nished with wéeping, smoke, and the beholding of the deuils▪ and all the damned. The earesEares. shall heare the howlings and continu∣all blasphemies of the damned: as also the horrible roarings of the deuils. The tasteTaste: shall be af∣flicted with thirst and hunger: and shall be depriued of all the plea∣sure of meat and drink.Smell. The smel∣ling shall be tormented with a sul∣phurous stink. The touchingTouching. shall féele the fire burning within and without, and piercing euen vnto the marrow.
Body de∣formed.4 The bodies of the damned shall be ill-shapen, darke, slow, ponderous. The memoryMemory shall be tormented with the remembrance of sins. Neither shall it grieue so much that it hath sinned, as that it hath lost his pleasures. The phantasie shall bée afflicted with hard imaginations, and discour∣ses of life and death, good and ill, heauen and hell.Sparke many tor∣ments. One sparke of the fire of hell, shall hurt the sin∣ners, more then if a woman should endure a thousand yeares in labour, and bringing forth a childe. There shall bée no vice which shall not there haue his proper torment. There shall bée wéeping for griefe, and gnash∣ing of the téeth for madnesse: in the flesh they shall bée tor∣mented by the worme of consci∣ence. Nothing auaileth.5 As nothing is desired in the
kingdome of God, which may not bée found: so there is no∣thing found in hell, which is de∣sired. It shall there nothing a∣uaile the damned, that they haue vsed diuers pleasuresPleasures. in this life. But the remembrance of them shall rather torment them. It shall nothing auaile the dam∣ned, that in this life they haue liued in continuall saturitie and drunkennesse:Drunken∣nesse. Which cannot then obtaine as much as a drop of water. It shall nothing a¦uaile them that they haue béene héere gallantly arrayed,Apparell. be∣cause they shall be couered with confusion, and their bodies shall bée cloathed with shame. It shall nothing auaile them that in this life they were placed in ho∣nours:Honour. because in hell there shall bée no honour, but conti¦nuall groning and griefe.Riches. It
shall nothing auaile them, that in this life they haue heapt riches: because there shall be equall po∣uerty of all. Shall not see God.6 They shall be remoued from the blessed, and blessed-making sight of God: not to sée God, is more then all the torments of hell. 7 If the damned that are shut vp in the prison of hell, could sée the face of God, they should féele no paine, no griefe, no sadnesse. But they shall haue experience of the wrath of God: and yet they shall neuer behold the bles∣sed face of God: They shall féele punishments from his face: and yet they shall neuer behold his face. The wrath of God shall e∣uerlastingly inflame the fire of eternall damnation like a Riuer of Brimstone. Neither shall they onely be remoued from the
beholding of God, but they shall also miserably be tormented with the sights of diuels. 8 They shall féele their scour∣ges,Scourges of deuils. Sight. whose wil they haue followed in their life. If the beholding of some spirit doth almost make a man dead in this life: what shall the horrible looks of the diuell do, which shall abide for euer? 9 Neither shall the damned be constrained onely to bée perpetu∣ally conuersant with the diuels:Conuerse. but they shall also féele themselues to be euerlastingly tormented of them. If the diuell by the permis∣sion of God doth so grieuously af∣flict the Saints in this life: how grieuously shall hée torment the damned, when they are deliuered to his power for euer? The dam∣ned shall not onely be tormented by the diuels without: but also by the worme of conscience within.
No helpe of repen∣tance.10 All the sins which euer they haue committed, shall continually be set before their eyes: but the torment shall be by so much the more grieuous, because there re∣maines no more the benefit of re∣pentance. When the virgins that are in readinesse shall enter with the Bridegroome, by and by the gate shall be shut:No mercy vnderstand the gate of indulgence, the gate of mercy, the gate of consolation, the gate of hope, the gate of grace, the gate of holy conuersion. No hils.11 The damned shall cry out and say to the hils and rocks, fall vpon vs, and hide vs from the wrath of the Lambe: but that cry shall be in vain, because heauen and earth shall flye from his wrath, as it is written, Euery Iland flies away, and the hills are not found. 12 The damned shall not féele any ease from thence, that some of
their kinsfolke and friends are ta∣ken vp into heauen: because the elect also shall féele no griefe from thence, that they know that some of their kinsfolke are gone to e∣uerlasting punishment. 13 There shal be indéed degréesDegrees. of punishments, but yet he which féeles the least torments, shall thenceforth féele no ease. He that shall be tormented with greater torments, shall enuy him which is afflicted with lesse. There shall be so great grief & torment in ye dam∣ned, that their minde can be direct∣ed to no other thing, but to that the force of griefe doth driue them. 14. The damned shal hate all the creatures of God,Hate God they shall hate one another, they shall hate the holy Angels, the elect men, yea, euen God himselfe, not in himself, and in his nature, but in the effects of his iustice.
15 All the euils of this life are singular: one is pressed down with pouerty, another is tormented with the grieuousnes of a disease, one is cast down vnder hard slaue∣ry, another is burdened with an heape of reproaches: but there all shall be tormented together with all euils:There all. there shall be vniuersall griefes in all the senses and mem∣bers.Here hope There none. In this life the hope of ease doth mitigate all vexations: but there is left no hope of deliuerāce. The paine of hell is not only eter∣nal, but also without interruptiō, euen for the space of one minute. Great tor∣ments.16 And hence it is, if all the men born since Adam vntill this day, and that shall be borne hereafter, and liue till the last day: if they should diuide but one punishment which the soule is constrained to endure for one sinne in hell equal∣ly amongst them, then euery par∣ticle
of that punishment of one man, would be greater then al the torments which all robbers and malefactors euer haue endured. O Lord grant that we may thinke vpon hell, lest we fall into hell. Tormenta aeterna malorum. The tor∣ments of the wicked are eter∣nall. 6. Meditation. Of the eternity of the paines of hell. THinke, O deuout soule, on the eternity of the paines of hell, and thou shalt the better vnder∣stand the grieuousnesse thereof. There is in Hell a raging flame, and burning without end:Life, death the life of the damned is to dye without end:Torment. their death is to liue in eter∣nall paines. Neither is ho wea∣ried which tormenteth: neither doth hée at any time dye which is tormented. The fire doth so consume there, that notwith∣standing it alwayes reserues: the
torments are so augmented there, that notwithstanding they are alwayes renued, the damned shall so dye, that they may alwayes liue: they shall so liue, that they may alwayes dye. Neuer haue de∣sire.2 That a man should be tormen∣ted for euer without end, that goes beyond all the bounds of despera∣tion. For, what is more grieuous then alwayes to will that which neuer shall be, and alwayes to be vnwilling to that which for euer shall not chuse but be? The dam∣ned shal not attain that which they would for euer, and they shall be compelled to suffer that which they would not for euer. 3 When the iustice of GodIustice of God. shall be changed, the torments of the wicked shall also be changed: but the iustice of God is inuariable, therefore the punishments of the damned shal be eternal. When the
wrath of God shall cease,Gods wrath euer. the pains of the damned shall also cease: but his wrath is eternall, therefore their paines shall be eternall. 4 It pertains to the sentence of the seuere Iudgement,udgemēt. that they neuer want punishment, which in this life would neuer want sinne. The damned haue chosen momen∣tany pleasure, and the finite goods of the world, before the infinite good God: they haue striued rather to attaine the delights of this fa∣ding and short life, then the riches of the life eternall: it is iust there∣fore that they féele infinite paines. It is iust that there be no bounds of vengeance giuen to the damned, who, as long as he was able, wold haue no bound of sinne. The dam∣ned haue sinned for their lasting,Euer sin that is, as long as they liued: it is iust that they be punisht for Gods euerlasting. They haue sinned
with end, because they haue liued with end: verily they would not haue offended with end, if they might haue liued without end, that they might sin without end. Deuils torment∣ing.5 When the deuils shall leaue off to torment, the damned shall cease to bée tormented: but the rage of the deuil shall neuer cease; therefore the torment of the dam∣ned man shall neuer cease. Repenting neuer.6 When the damned shall tru∣ly repent, they shall be fréed from their sins: but the time of repen∣tance is shut vp before, therefore there remaines no hope of mercy. An euill will shall neuer be taken away from the damned:The will euer ill. therefore the punishment of an euil will shall neuer be taken away. Fire eter∣nall, sinne.7 The manner also of the fire of hell is eternall, that is to say, the spot of sinne, theerefore also a∣gréeably the pain is eternall. The
filthinesse of sinnes in the damned shall not bée remoued from the eyes of God: how then can the greatnesse of the punishments ap∣pointed against sinne be remoued?Sins ob∣iect infi∣nite. Moreouer, sinne is an infinite euil, because it is committed against the infinite good: and Christ payed for it an infinite price, therefore agréeably an infinite punishment is appointed for those which dye in sinnes. 8 God created man in the be∣ginning to his owne Image,Creation. that he might liue with him for euer. 9 Man killedGods I∣mage kil∣led. in himselfe the eternall good, therefore by the iust iudgement of God, he fell into the eternall euill. 10 God reformed man,Reforma∣tion in Christ. being falne into sinne, through Christ, to his owne Image: he hath pro∣uided for him all the meanes of eternall saluation, and hath of∣fered
vnto him all the rewards of eternall life: therefore it is iust that they which will want the e∣ternall rewards, bée also subiect vnto eternall punishments. Eternity euer be∣ginneth torments.11 O eternity without all bounds! O eternity that can bée measured by no spaces of time! O eternity that can bée vnderstood by no vnderstanding of man! how much doest thou increase the punishments of the damned? Af∣ter innumerable thousands of yeares, they shall alwaies be con∣strained to thinke, that this is to them onely the beginning of tor∣ments. Compari∣son.How grieuous a thing is it to lye in a most soft bed vnmoueable for thirty yeares? what will it bée to burne thirty thousand yeares in that lake of fire and brimstone? 12 O eternity, eternity! thou alone beyond all measure doest
exaggerate the torments of the damned. Grieuous is the punish∣ment of the damned, by reason of the sharpnesse of their torments: it is the more grieuous, by reason of the diuersity of their torments: it is most grieuous, for the eterni∣ty of their torments: there shall be death without death, end with∣out end, defect without defect: be∣cause death euer liueth, and the end euer beginneth, and the defect knoweth not how to faile. 14 The damned shall séek life,Seeke ease in vaine. and shal not finde it, they shall séek death, and death shall flye away from them: after an hundred thou∣sand thousand thousand yeares, without any end they shall return to renued torments. The thought of the continuance of their griefe shall more torment them, then the féeling of their outward tor∣ment: what can be more wretched
then so to dye, that thou mayest alwayes liue, so to liue, that thou mayest alwaies dye? that life will be deadly, and death immortall. If thou art life, why doest thou kill? If death, why doest thou alwayes endure? Wée do not perfectly know what manner of thing eternity may be. For it is no doubt, but that which is cir∣cumscribed by no measure of time,Eternity not known can also be comprehended by no created vnderstanding. Yet if thou wilt estéeme any thing of the space of eternity, thou must think of the time before the world: if thou canst finde the beginning of God, thou maiest also finde when the torment of the damned will haue end. 15 Imagine some most high mountaine,A moun∣taine and bird. which in greatnesse may excéed the space of heauen and earth, Imagine a certaine
Bird to carrie away euery thou∣sand yeares from this hill one little graine of the thinnest dust: It might bée hoped, that at length, after many incomprehen∣sible thousands of yeares, the greatnesse of that Hill would be finished: but it cannot be hoped that the fire of Hel will euer haue end. 16 The rewards of the Elect shall neuer haue end,Contrary to the same, ioy. the torments of the damned shall neuer be fi∣nished: because as the mercy of God is infinite toward the chosen, so the iustice of God is infinite to∣wards the reprobate. 17 Imagine that there are as many kindes of torments in the damned as there are drops of wa∣ter in the great Sea:A Sea and Bird. imagine that after euery thousand yeare a certaine Bird should come, and draw vp one small drop of water:
it might be hoped, that at length the abundance of the Sea might be exhausted, but it cannot be ho∣ped that the torments of the dam∣ned should euer haue end. Meditate,18 O deuout soule, let the eternall punishment of the dam∣ned be euer before thine eyes: the remembrance of hell kéepes vs from falling into hell. Repent.19 Haue a care of repentance, while there is as yet a time of mercy: what other thing shall that fire deuoure but thy sins? by how much the more thou heapest vp sins, by so much thou reseruest the more matter for the fire. O Lord Iesus, which hast satisfied by thy passion for our sins, kéepe vs from euerlasting damnation. Amen.
Munday, Euening Prayer. THat my minde being freed from the distractions of worldly businesses, which are the bane of piety, in the shutting vp of this day, I may lay mee downe to quiet rest, ruminating deuoutly on those holy Meditations wherein I haue beene exercised: purifie, O Lord, and clense my heart from all worldly and vnclean thoughts, and put into it the desire of good things, that it being lifted vp aboue these earthly, I may fasten the eye of my soule on the contemplation of heauenly matters. And because (my good Lord) that that spiritu∣all Nahash, the Deuill, labours to put this right eye of contemplati∣on out of mine head, and to leaue vnto mee onely the left to looke downe vpon, and to behold
this earth and this world, which bewitching my sences, may make me enamoured of them, and for∣saking thee, in inordinate loue to cleaue vnto them. Giue me, O Lord, the light of knowledge, to discerne betweene the earthly and the heauenly, the perishing and the lasting, and the grace, these to preferre, to my chiefest ioy, and to chuse the better part, lest my soule cleauing to this earth and clay, and embracing this present euil world should leaue and leese thee which art life and blisse, yea, and leese it selfe, and perish with the perish∣ing. Grant therefore, O my God, that I may alwaies think of the vn∣constancy of this life, lest I build vnto my self here a Babel of confu∣sed, ruinous and forlorne hopes. Giue grace that I may consider se∣riously of the vanity of this world; lest the honours, pleasures, riches,
lusts thereof deceiue mee. Let not that wily Serpent entrap my soule, which laies his snares for me in all the paths wherein I walke: Make me, whilest here I liue, to compose my selfe to death, that when the time of my dissolution shal come, I may not dye the death: And saue my soule, O Lord, from the low∣er-most Hell, the paines whereof are most grieuous, and torments eternall, that I may liue and praise thee in thy kingdome: vnto which bring mee for thy deare Sonnes sake, Christ Iesus, which hath died for me to saue me. To whom, &c.
Tuesday, Morning Prayer. ABout the opening of the eye∣lids of the morning, when I awake (O my Lord God) and thinke of the benefit of rest, that thou hast giuen me, while I haue paused in my bed by night, lo, the day sprung from on high visiting; and the light blessing mine eyes, minds me of thy other benefits & blessings, which thou hast giuen me, aswel the light as the night; the light, therein to go forth vnto my labor vntill the euening, the night therin to pause & rest. Lord think I, what am I? or what is man? that thou shouldst thus make the Sun, the Moone, the Starres to serue vs in their courses, to serue vs in their seasons? Early and late thou visit∣est vs, and fillest our hearts with ioy and gladnes: as if it had been a small thing for thee to haue giuen
vs the sons of men, the earth for a possessiō, to haue made vs lords of the beasts of the field, of the fowls of the aire, & the fishes of the sea, and to haue put all these things in subiection vnder our feet: thou hast made the heauens themselues to serue vs, nay what is more, the An∣gels also, the inhabitants of the heauenly countrey, to minister vnto vs. These are great and ex∣cellent things that I haue spoken of, tokens of thy loue; but when I thinke, how besides all these, thou hast sent thine owne Sonne, thine only begotten Sonne, out of thine own bosome, in the similitude of sinfull flesh, into this world, to po∣uerty, ignominy, to death, euen the shamefull death of the Crosse, for vs men and for our saluation, then my heart faileth within me, melting away, because I cannot conceiue sufficiently of so great a
benefit of so great loue, and of so great saluation: what thanks (O Lord) do I owe vnto thee, for cre∣ating mee, when I was not? For redeeming me, when I was worse then nought? for calling mee by thy Word, for iustifying mee by thy righteousnesse; for sancti∣fying mee by thy Spirit; for con∣seruing my bodie vnto this day in the life naturall, and my soule in the life of grace spirituall? I must confesse with Iacob, and say, I am lesse then all the mercy, and all the truth and goodnes that thou hast shewed vnto thy seruant: for thy goodnesse hath beene greater to∣wards me, then I can esteeme: thy mercies haue beene more towards me, then I can tel how to number. I owe vnto thee my whole selfe, for that thou hast creaed mee: I owe vnto thee more then my self, for that thou hast redeemed mee.
I cannot vtter nor cōceiue thanks worthy of thy loue and kindnesse, of thy bounty and goodnesse to∣wards mee; the oblation of my heart, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiuing, the calues of my lips I offer vp vnto thee; Accept them (O Lord) and accept me thy seruant, in thy Sonne Christ Iesus, and for his sake. To whom, &c. Sanat confessio Morbi. Confessiō cureth soules. 7. Meditation. Of the true acknowledgement of our sinnes. O Holy God, O iust Iudge, my sinnes are alwayes be∣fore mine eyes, alwayes in my minde, euery houre I thinke of death, because death hangs o∣uer mine head at all houres: I
thinke euerie day of iudgement, because I must render an account of euery day in iudgement. Vaine life.1 I examine my life, and behold it is altogether vaine and profane: vaine and vnprofitable are many my actions: vaine as yet are more my spéeches: vaine moreouer are most my cogitations: neither is my life onely vaine, but also pro∣phaneProphane. wicked, I finde no good in it, for if any thing séeme in it good, it is not truly good and perfect, be∣cause the contagion of originall sinne,Corrupt. and my corrupt nature hath marred it with defect. 2 The holy man Iob said: I did feare all my works. If the ho∣ly man complaine so, what ought the wicked man to do?Our best, corrupt. All our righteousnesse is like the cloth of a menstruous woman: if such be our righteousnesse, what will bée our vnrighteousnesse?
3 If you do all things (saith our Sauiour) which are com∣manded you,Vnprofi∣table. say yée are vn∣profitable seruants: if in obeying wée are vnprofitable, surely in transgressing, wée shall be abho∣minable. 4 If I owe my selfe, and what∣soeuer I can do, vnto thée (O holy God) yea when I do not sinne, what can I render vnto thée for my sinne? Our righteousnesse it selfe, which séemes to be such, com∣pared to Gods righteousnesse is méere vnrighteousnesse. A lightA light in the Sun. is séene to shine in darknes, which being put in the Sun-beames, is quite darkned by his brightnes. A piece of wood is thought to bée straight, if it be not laid to ye Line, but when it is laid to the Line,Timber to the Line. by a certaine crookednesse it is found where it is out of square. A pictureA picture to a work∣man. will séeme perfect in the eyes of
those that looke on it, which not∣withstanding is much vnperfect in the eyes of the Artificer: so, that oftentimes is foule in the discre∣tion of the Iudge, which shines in the opinion of the workman. For the iudgement of God and of men are not all one. Memory.5 The memory of many of my sinnes doth affright mée: but more of them are hidden from me.Hid faults. Who vnderstands his faults? Clense mée (O Lord) from my hidden sinnes. No refuge in heauen6 I dare not lift vp mine eyes to heauen, because I haue offend∣ed him which dwells in heauen. Neither do I finde any refuge in the Earth:Earth. for what fauour can I hope for of the Creatures, when I haue offended the Lord of the creatures? Mine aduersa∣rie the Deuill doth accuse mée:The deuils claime. Most iust iudge, saith he to God,
iudge him for his fault to be mine, which through grace would not bée thine: thine he is by nature, mine by taking pleasure together with me in sinne: thine he is by thy passion, mine by my perswa∣sion: disobedient he is to thée, obe∣dient to me: of thée he receiued the long robe of immortalitie and innocency, of me he hath receiued this patched coat of a most wicked life: he hath let go thy garment, and is come to mée with mine. Iudge him to be mine, and to bée damned with me. 7 All the Elements accuse me. The Heauen saith,Heauen. I haue mini∣stred light vnto thée to comfort thée. The Ayre saith,Ayre. I haue gi∣uen thée all kinde of birds to obey thée. The Water saith,Water. I haue giuen thée all kinde of fishes to féed thée. The Earth saith,Earth. I haue giuen thée bread and wine to nou∣rish
thée: but yet thou hast abused all these, to the contempt of our Creator.Gen. 4. Therefore may all our benefit turne to thy torture. Fire.8 The fire saith, let him be bur∣ned in me: the water saith, let him be drowned in me: the aire saith, let him be winnowed in me: the earth saith, let him be deuoured of me: and hell saith, let him be swallowed vp of me. Lost the benefit of Angels.9 The holy Angels accuse me, whom God had giuen to minister vnto me in this life, and to kéepe me company in the life to come: but by my sinnes I haue depriued my selfe of their holy ministerie in this life, and of the hope of their societie in the other life. God by the law accu∣seth.10 The voice of God it selfe doth accuse me, that is to say his diuine law: either I must fulfill the law of God or else I must pe∣rish: but that I should fulfill the
law is impossible, and to perish e∣uerlastingly, is intolerable. God the most seuere IudgeThe Iudge doth accuse me, the most mighty executor of his eternall law. I cannot deceiue him, for he is wisedome it selfe. I cannot flye from him, for he is the power that raignes euery where. Whither therefore shall I flye? To thée most louing Iesus, my onely Sauiour and Redeemer.Sauiour, Satisfactiō My sins are great, but thy satisfaction is greater. My vnrighteousnesse is great,Righte∣ousnesse. but thy righteousnesse is greater. I acknowledge, do thou forgiue. I open, do thou shut. I vncouer, do thou couer. There is nothing in me, but whence I may be damned: there is nothing in thée,All suf∣ficient. but whence I may be saued I haue committed many things for which I may be most iustly damned: but thou hast not lost that through which thou mayest
most mercifully saue me. I heare the voice in the Canticles, which bids mee hide mée in the holes of the Rocke: thou art a most sure Rocke.Thy wounds my caues. The holes of the Rock are thy wounds, in them will I hide me against the accusations of all creatures. My sinnes cry vnto hea∣uen but thy bloudBloud cri∣eth. Heb. 12. which was shed for my sinnes, cries more strongly. My sinnes are of great power to accuse me before God, but thy pas∣sion is of greater power to defendDefend. me. My most vnrighteous life is able to condemne me, but thy most iust life is more able to saueSaue. me. I appeale from the Throne of thy iustice in the Law, to the Throne of thy mercy in the Gospell. Nei∣ther do I desire to come to iudge∣ment, vnlesse thy most holy merit be placed betwéene me and thy iudgement.
Securè viuere, mors est. A secure life is death. 8. Meditation. Of the shaking off of Securitie. THinke, O deuout soule of the difficulty to be saued, and thou shalt easily shake off all secu∣rity. At no time, and no where is there security, neither in heauen, nor in Paradise, much lesse in the world. 1 The Angell fell in the pre∣sence of the diuinity.The holi∣est fall. Adam fell in the place of pleasure. 2 Adam was created to the i∣mage of God, neuerthelesse hée was deceiued by the cunning of the deuill. 3 Solomon was the wisest of all men, notwithstanding he was turned away from the Lord by women. 4 Iudas was in the schoole of
our Sauiour, and did daily receiue the wholsome wordes of that great Doctor: neither yet was he safe from the snares of the seducer: he was cast headlong into the pit of auarice and out of auarice, into the pit of eternall sadnesse. Dauid was a man after Gods owne heart, and the most deare Sonne of the Lord: but by mur∣ther and adulterie, he was made the sonne of death. 5 Where therefore is there se∣curitie in this life? cleaue with a firme confidence of thy heart to the promises of God,God a safe refuge. and thou shalt be safe from the assaults of the deuill. There is no security in this life, but that which the infal∣libility of Gods promises yéelds to them that beléeue, and walke in the wayes of the Lord. We shall come to the future felicitie, then at length shall we haue full secu∣rity.
In this life feare and religion are knit together, neither ought one to be without the other. 6 Be not secure in aduersitie,Aduersitie no securi∣tie. but whatsoeuer aduersities befall thée, thinke they are the scourges of thy sinnes. Oft times God doth punish hidden faults by ma∣nifest chasticements. Thinke of the grieuous blemish of thy sins, and feare the iust reuenger of sinnes. 7 Be not secure in prosperity:Prosperity for God is angry with him that is not corrected in this life. What are the afflictions of the godly? bitter darts cast out of the swéet hand of God. God counts many vnworthy of the present punish∣ment, which notwithstanding he doth reprobate for euer. The suc∣cesse of humane felicitie is oft∣times a token of eternall damna∣tion. Nothing is more vnhappie
then the felicity of sinners: nothing is more miserable then hée that knows no misery. Whither soeuer thou turnest thine eyes, thou find∣est matter of griefe, and beholdest remediesRemedies. against security. Aboue thinke of God,God. whom wée haue offended:Hell. beneath of hell, which we haue deserued: behinde of our sinnes which we haue committed:Sinnes, Iudgement Consciēce. before of the iudgement, which we feare: within of our conscience, which we haue defiled: without of the worldWorld. which wée haue lo∣ued. Place.8 Sée from whence thou com∣mest, and blush: where thou art, and sigh: whither thou art going, and tremble. Gate and way.9 Narrow is the gate of sal∣uation, but yet straighter is the way of saluation. God hath gi∣uen thée the treasure of faith:Faith. but thou bearest that treasure in
earthen vessels. God hath giuen thée the AngelsAngels. to kéepe thée: but the deuill is not farre off to seduce thée.Renoua∣tion. He hath renued thée in the spirit of thy minde: but thou hast much as yet of the old∣nesse of the flesh.Grace. Thou art set in the grace of God; but thou art not yet placed in the eternall glory. 10 A mansionMansion. is prouided thée in heauen: but yet the world by her assaults must first afflict thée. 11 God hath promised thée leaue to repent:Repen∣tance. but hée hath not promised to giue thée a will to repent when thou doest offend. The consolationsConsola∣tion. of eternall life do abide thée: but yet thou must enter by many tribulati∣ons. The crowneCrowne. of eternall re∣ward is promised thée: but there remaines a great fight which
must first bee ouercome of thée. God doth not change his promise, neither oughtest thou to change the study of an holy life. To the seruant that doth not do as he is commanded, the Lord will do as hée hath threatened. Wée must therefore sigh continually, and mourne, setting aside securitie: lest a man be forsaken by the iust and secret iudgement of God, and be left in the power of the deuils, to be destroyed. So long as the grace of God is present with thée, be thou delighted in it:Grace de∣lightfull. yet so, that thou thinke not that thou doest possesse the gift of God by an hereditarie right, so secure of it, as if thou couldest neuer léese it, lest suddenly when the Lord shall withdraw his gift, and draw backe his hand, thou bée abashed in thy minde, and become more sad then thou oughtest. Happie
art thou doubtlesse,Beware. if thou take care to beware of carefulnesse, the source of all euils. 11 God will not forsake thée, but take héedTake heed that God bée not forsaken of thée. God hath giuen thée grace,Pray. pray that he may al∣so giue thée perseuerance. God hath commanded thée that of thy saluation thou be sure,Be sure. but hée hath not commanded, that thou be secure. 13 Thou must fightFight. vali∣antly, that at length thou mayest triumph swéetly. Thy flesh within thée fights against thée, an enemy by how much the nea∣rer, by so much the fearefuller. The world about thée fights a∣gainst thée, an enemy by how much of the greater number, by so much the more to bée fea∣red. The deuill aboue thée fights against thée, an enemie by how
much the more mightie, by so much the more to bée feared. Feare not in the strength of God to wrastle with those enemies, in the strength of God thou shalt get the victory. Enemies not obser∣ued.14 But thou shalt not ouer∣come so great enemies by securi∣ty, but by continuall fighting. The time of thy life, is the time of fight. Then art thou specially set vpon, when thou knowest not that thou art set vpon. Then do they spe∣cially gather their strength, when they séeme to yéeld thée some rest. Be ready.They watch, and doest thou sléepe? They prepare themselues to hurt thée, and doest not thou prepare to resist? 15 Many faint in the way, before a place can be giuen them in the Countrey. How many of the Israelites died in the Desart,
none of which attained vnto the promised Land? How many of the spirituall sonnes of Abra∣ham perish in the desart of this life, before they attaine the pro∣mised inheritance of the heauen∣ly Kingdome?Thinke of examples. There is nothing of more force to shake off securi∣tie, then if wée thinke of the small number of those that per∣seuere. Therefore let there be so great desire of the heauenlyDesire of heauen. glorie in vs, and loue to come thither: let there be so great griefeGriefe, losse. that wée haue not yet attained it: let there bée so great feare,Euer feare. lest wée should not attaine it, that wée perceiue no ioy, vnlesse it bée of those things that minister vnto vs either helpe or hope to come thither. 16 What doth it auaile thée to reioyce for a moment,Ioy mo∣mentany. if thou bée
inforced to lament euerlastingly? What ioy can there be in this life, if that passe away which delight∣eth, but that passe not away which tormenteth? 17 We liue secure, as if we had past ouer the houre of death and iudgement. Christ saith, that he will come to iudgement in the houre that we think not:Heare and feare. Vnproui∣ded. the truth saith this, and repeates it againe: heare, and feare, If the Lord shall come in that houre in which wée think not, it is greatly to be feared lest we come vnprouided to iudge∣ment. If wée come vnprouided, how shall we be able to beare the seuere examination of this iudge∣ment? Neuerthelesse that which is lost in this one moment,Lost, neuer got againe Iudgment in a mo∣ment. cannot be gotten againe for euer. It shall be adiudged in the shortnesse of one moment, what manner of men we shall be for all eternitie. In
this one moment, life and death, damnation and saluation, eternall paine, and eternall glory, shall bée adiudged to euery one. O Lord which hast giuen vs grace vnto good, giue vs moreouer perseue∣rance in that which is good. Tuesday Noone. VVHat reward shall I giue vnto thee, O Lord,Psalm 116.11. for all the benefits that thou hast done vnto me? Jlle negat Christum, qui se non abne∣gat ipsum. Thou must deny thy selfe, or Christ. 5. Meditation. Of the deny∣ing of a mans owne selfe. HE that will follow mée,Deny our selfe. let him deny himselfe, saith our Sauiour: to deny himselfe, is to renounce the loue of his owno
selfe, the loue of a mans owne self kéeps out the loue of God: if thou wilt be the Disciple of Christ, it is necessarie, that the root of the loue of thine owne selfe dye in thée vtterly.Root out self-loue. No man loues Christ but he that hates himselfe. Vn∣lesse the graine of corne that falls into the earth be dead, it brings forth no fruit: so also thou canst not entertaine and receiue the fruits of the holy Ghost, vnlesse the loue of thy selfe be dead in thy heart. Abraham forsook his countrey. Gen. 12.1 The Lord said to Abraham, Go out of thy owne land, and from thy kindred, and from the house of thy father, to the land which I shall shew thée. Abra∣ham could not haue béene made so great a Prophet, vnlesse hée had first gone out of his owne countrey. Thou shalt not bée a true Disciple of Christ, and a
true spirituall man, before thou departest from thine owne loue. 2 Iacob by the touching of the Angel did halt vpon one foot, the other being sound and whole.Two feet double loue. By these two féet is vnderstood a dou∣ble loue, that of a mans owne self, and that of God: then shall a man bée partaker of Gods blessing, when he shall halt on the foot of the loue of himselfe, that other of the loue of God remaining whole and sound.The eye. It cannot bée that with one and the same eye thou canst behold heauen and earth: so it cannot be, that with one and the same will a man should loue him∣selfe inordinately and God too. LoueLoue the best onely. is the chiefest good of our soule, therefore wée must giue this chiefest good of our soule, to the chiefest of good, that is, to God. 3 Thy loue is thy God, that
is to say,What thou louest, is thy God. whatsoeuer thou louest principally, that doest thou set vp in the place of God. Whatsoeuer thou louest chiefly, that thou thin∣kest to be chiefest: but God is tru∣ly the chiefest of all things: hée therefore that loues himselfe,Selfe loue. Idolatry. thinketh himselfe to be God, and sets himselfe vp in the place of God, which is altogether the grea∣test idolatry. 4 That which thou doest espe∣cially loue, that thou estéemest the end of all things and holdest it the last complement of thy desires: but God alone is the beginning and end of the creatures: he is the first and the last: he alone fills the de∣sire of our heart,God fils all desires. and nothing of that which is created can satiate the desires: therefore thou oughtst to preferre the loue of God, be∣fore the loue of thine owne selfe. God is the beginning and the end:
in him therefore ought our loue to begin, in him also ought it to end. 5 The Essence of God is with∣out al the creatures, euen as God was from euerlastingEuerlast∣ing. in himselfe therefore withdraw thy loue from all the creatures. Such as thy loue is, such also are thy workes. If thy works proceed out of true faith, and out of the loue of God, they are acceptable vnto God, and great in his eyes, although they be but little in the eyes of all men: if they procéed out of the loue of thine owne selfe, they can neuer please God. The loue of a mans owne selfe doth defile all the excellentest works. 6 When Christ was in the house of Simon,Maries ex∣ample good. a certaine wo∣man broke a vessell of precious ointment, and anointed the head
of Christ: the worke appeareth to be small, notwithstanding it was acceptable vnto Christ, be∣cause it did procéed out of true faith,Luke 7. pure loue, and serious con∣trition. The sacrifice was a worke acceptable to God in the old Testament: notwithstand∣ing it did not please God that SaulSaul ill. did separate the prey of the Amalekites, to offer sacrifices vnto God. Why? because this did not procéed out of the loue of God. For if he had loued God truly, he had not contemned the commandement of God of bur∣ning the spoyle: he loued him∣selfe and his owne deuotion. Loue is a certaine fire, for so prayes the Church: Come holy Ghost, and kindle the fire of thy loue in the faithfull.Loue as fire ascen∣deth. Fire doth not sticke as fastened in the earth, but alwayes goes vpward: so
thy loue ought not to rest in thy selfe, but to lift it selfe vpward vn∣to the Lord. 7 Moreouer, to deny a mans owne selfe, is to renounce his owne honour.Honour giuen to God, not our selues. The greatest and highest honour is due to the chie∣fest good alone: God is the chie∣fest good. He that séeks his owne glory, cannot séeke Gods glo∣ry, as our Sauiour said to the Pharisées: How can ye beléeue, which receiue glory one of ano∣ther? Behold Christs example and follow it: he oftentimes te∣stifieth of his owne selfe,Christ doth not seeke his own glory. that hée séekes not his owne glo∣rie, that he receiues not honour from men, that he is humble in heart. 7 All thy gifts thou receiuest from God, therefore giue all a∣gaine vnto God: all the riuersRiuers. of good things procéed from this
fountaine of diuine goodnesse: therefore let all good things bee carried againe into the Sea. The hearbs which are called Sollequia,Marigold. alwayes turne themselues to the Sun, from whom they draw their life and nourishment: so with all thy gifts, and with all thine ho∣nour turne thee vnto God, and attribute nothing vnto thy self. If thou hast any thing of thy selfe,What hast thou that thou hast not recei∣ued? thou mayest séeke thine owne ho∣nour, and attribute thy gifts vnto thy selfe: but because thou hast nothing of thy selfe, but all from God, therefore thou oughtest not to séeke thine owne but Gods ho∣nour. A mans owne honour doth turne man away from God. There is an exampleExample. in Nabu∣chadnezzar which safe, This is that Babylon which I haue built for the house of my kingdome, in the strength of my power, and for
the glory of any Maiestie. 8 But what follows? as yet the word was in the mouth of the King, when a voice came from heauen: I say vnto thée, Nabu∣chadnezzar, thy kingdome is gone from thee: they shall cast thée out from among men, and thy dwel∣ling shall be with the beasts of the field. So if of thine owne honour and pride, that is to say, of the building of thine owne workes, thou esteeme of thy spirituall Ba∣bylon, and giuest the honour ther∣of to thine owne selfe, and not to God alone, thou shalt be cast out of the sight of God. 9 To conclude,Gods will best. to deny a mans owne selfe, is to deny his owne will. We must alwayes obey the best will: but the will of God is alwayes best. We must obey his will, from whom wee haue all that we haue: but all things come
from God vnto vs. We must obey his will, which alwayes leads vs to life, and to good: the will of God doth alwayes leade vs to life and to good. Delight in the Lord, and he will giue thée the request of thy heart. Our owne will doth leade vs to death and damnation. Through what did our first Father fall out of the grace of God and state of saluati∣on, into eternall damnation? Set∣ting aside the will of God, he fol∣lowed his owne will, he neglected the commandement of the Lord, and hearkened to the perswasion of the deuil. 10 Therefore the true disciple of Christ, renounceth his owne will, and desires to follow the will of God. Behold Christ, hée being in the agony of his passi∣on, offers vp his owne will, as a most acceptable sacrifice vnto
God. Offer thou also thine owne will vnto God,Christs will offred to his Fa∣ther. and so thou shalt performe that which Christ re∣quires of thée, the denying of thy selfe. O Lord, let thy holy will be done, as in heauen, so also in the earth. Crescit sub pondere palma. The Palme increaseth vnder the weight. 10. Meditation. Of the profit of Temptation. IT is profitable for the faithfull soule, to bée tried and confir∣med by Temptations in this world.Christ tempted, Our Sauiour himselfe would wrastle with the deuill in the Wildernesse, that hée might ouercome him for vs: and for our saluation, and that hée might bée the first and faithfull fighter of our conflict. He descended first
into hell, afterwards againe hée ascended into Heauen: so the faithfull soule doth first descend to the hell of temptations, that she may ascend to the heauenly glory. 1 The people of IsraelIsrael. could not possesse the promised land of Canaan, vnlesse they had first o∣uercome diuers enemies: neither can the faithfull soule promise to it selfe the kingdome of heauen, vnlesse shée first ouercome the flesh, the world, and the deuill. Temptation doth try vs, purge vs, illuminate vs. Temptation doth try vs: because our faith be∣ing shaken with aduersitie, is strengthened more firmly on the Rocke of saluation, propagates it selfe wider into the branches of good works, & it is lifted vp higher into the hope of deliuerance. 2 When AbrahamAbrahams sacrifice. béeing
commanded to sacrifice his sonne, shewed himselfe readily obedient to the commandement of God, the Angel of the Lord appeared vnto him after the temptation, saying, Now I know that thou fearest God, séeing thou hast not spared thine onely Sonne for me: so if thou shalt offer vnto God the beloued sonne of thy soule, that is to say, thine own will in temp∣tations thou shalt be reputed tru∣ly fearing God, and shalt feele the talke of God in thine heart. The fire tryeth gold; temptation, faith.Faith trie by tentat¦on. It appeares in the battell how valiant the souldier is: so tempta∣tion shewes how strong our faith is. When the boisterous rage of windes, and the tempestuous waues of waters rush vpon the ship of Christ, then it appeares, of how little faith are some of his disciples.
3 The Israelites, whom the Lord commanded to be led to o∣uercome the Midianites, were first tryed at the waters: so they are first tried in the waters of tri∣bulations and temptations, which ouercomming their enemies, are to be brought into the heauenly countrey. Whatsoeuer aduersitie therefore, whatsoeuer temptation happen to the faithfull soule, let her thinke it to be for probation, not for reprobation. 4 Temptation doth also purge vs. Our Physitian Christ doth vse many graines of Aloes to draw out the pestiferous humour of the loue of our selues, and the world. Tribulation doth stirre vs vp to search our conscience, and cals againe into our memory, the sinnes of our life that is past. Yea, as the physicke of the body kéepeth vs from contagious diseases: so
tribulation preserues vs from sinnes. Man truly is alwayes in∣clined to fall, yet more in the time of prosperity,Ease slay¦eth pro∣speritie. then of aduersitie. Riches are thornes vnto many: Therefore God pluckes vp the thornes, lest they might strangle their soules. 5 Varietie of worldly busi∣nesseBusinesse. doth hinder many from the seruice of GOD: there∣fore God sends them diseases, that returning to themselues, they may beginne to dye to the world, to liue to God. It hath béene profitable vnto many to haue falne from the high tower, either of wealth or honour, vnto the quiet rest of a meane con∣dition. The honourHonour. of the world lifts vp many vnto pride: God therefore sends contempt, and withdraws that which nourisheth pride.
ipes e vn∣rstand∣g.6 Finally, temptation doth enlighten vs. We know not, we acknowledge not, vnlesse it be in temptations, how fraile and vaine all the worlds comfort is. When Stephen was stoned, he saw the glory of Christ: so Christ shews himselfe to the contrite soule in calamities. True and solide ioy comes not but from God dwel∣ling in vs. God dwels in a con∣trite and humble spirit: it is affli∣ction and temptation which makes the spirit humble and contrite: therefore true and solid ioy is in the soule of the afflicted. 7 Temptation is a certaine way to the knowledge of God: therefore the Lord saith, I wil be with him in trouble: I wil deliuer him, and make him sée my salua∣tion. 8 Tobias, when he was blinde, saw nothing of those things which
were aboue, beneath, or before him, no not himselfe: but being il∣lumined of God, by the Angel Raphael, he saw all things, which before he could not sée: vsing no other medicine then the gallGall gi∣ueth sight. of the fish: that by this it might be de∣clared, that our eyes must bée a∣nointed and illuminated with the gall of bitternesse, that we may come to the true knowledge of our selues, and the goods of the world. 9 Wherefore saith the Apostle, that wée know in an enigme or darke saying? because we know in temptations, that God can make his Elect merry, vnder the forme of sadnesse: that hée can quicken them, vnder the forme of death: that he can heale them vn∣der the forme of diseases: that hée can inrich them, vnder the forme of pouerty.
10 Therefore the crosse and temptation ought to bée accep∣table vnto him, which is not vngratefull vnto Christ that was crucified for vs, and tempt∣ed for vs. O good Iesus, burne here,Correct vs O Lord. strike here, that thou mayest spare vs in the world to come. O good Iesus, which oft-times by sparing doest cast vs from thée, make vs by stripes to returne vnto thée. Afflict and presse our outward man, that our in∣ward man may grow and bée liuely: fight, O good Iesus in mée, against me. 11 Be thou my gouernour in striuing, and my crowne in ouer∣comming. Let whatsoeuer ad∣uersitie I féele in my selfe, be the strength and increasing of my faith.Encrease our faith. Helpe, O good Iesus, my weake faith, for so thou hast pro∣mised in thine holy Prophet.
Euen as a mother comforts her sonnes, so will I comfort you. A mother doth foster and nourish her sucking Infant with very great care: so, O good Iesus, lift vp and confirme my languishing faith. Grant that thy inward con∣solations may preuaile more with me, then the contradictions of all men, and of the deuill: yea, then the thoughts of mine owne heart. O gentle Samaritane,Wine and oyle. powre biting wine into my wounds, but put thereto also the oyle of diuine consolation: mul∣tiply thy crosse, but vouchsafe vnto me further abi∣litie to beare it.
Quid homo? quid bulla? nihil sunt. What is man? a ubble? othing. 11. Meditation. Of the study of true humilitie. Wretched.THinke, O faithfull soule, on the miserable condition of man, and thou shalt easily escape all the temptations of pride. Man is vile in his ingresse, wretched in his progresse, lamentable in his egresse.Sinfull. He is impugned of the deuils, hée is prouoked by temptations, he is inticed by de∣lights, he is cast downe by tribu∣lations, he is wrapped in crimes, hée is spoyled bare of vertues, he is insnared in euil customes. 1 Whence therefore art thouThou art. proud, earth and ashes? What wast thou before thy birth? stink∣ing sperme. What art thou in thy life? a sacke of doung. What
shalt thou bée after death? the food of wormes.Thou hast If there be any good in thée, it is not thine, but Gods: nothing is thine but thy sinnes: therefore thou mayest ar∣rogate nothing of those things that are in thée to thy selfe, but thy sinnes Hée is a foolish and vnfaithfull seruant, which will bée proud of the goods of his Ma∣ster. 2 Behold, O man, the exam∣ple of Christ:See Christs example. all the glory of the heauens doth do seruice vnto him. Nay, he alone is true glory, and neuerthelesse, he casts away from himselfe all worldly glory: be cryeth as yet, Learne of mée: because I am méek and humble in heart. 3 The true louer of Christ is also an imitator of Christ. To whom Christ is deare, to him al∣so his humility is deare. Let the
proud seruantThe Ser∣uant as the Master. be ashamed and confounded, when the Lord of Heauen is so humble. Our Sa∣uiour saith of himselfe, that he is the Lilly of the Vallies,Lilly of the vallies. because that hée which is the most noble flower, springs, and is preserued, not on the hils, that is to say, in proud and loftie hearts, but in the lower Vallies: that is, in the contrite and humble mindes of the godly. For the humble soule, is verily the seat and delectable bed of Christ, as saith a certaine holy man. 4 True graceThe works of grace. doth not lift vp, but humble a man: therefore he is not as yet partaker of true grace, which doth not walke in the hu∣militie of heart. 5 The streames of Gods grace do flow downewards, not vpwards. As the waters by na∣ture do not go to high places:
so the grace of GOD doth not flow but to humble hearts. The Psalme saith,So singeth the virgin Mary. the Lord dwelleth on high, and beholds the low and humble things in heauen, and in the earth. This truly is wonder∣full, that we do not draw neare to the greatest and highest God, but by humilitie. He that is vile in his owne sight, is great in Gods: he that displeaseth himself, pleaseth God. 6 God made the heauen and the earth of nothing.Ephes. 2. As it was in the creation: so is it as yet in mans reparation. God creates of nothing, and he repaires of no∣thing. That therefore thou maist be partaker of the regeneration, and reparation,Be hum∣ble. be nothing in thine owne eyes, that is, attribute nothing to thy selfe, arrogate no∣thing to thy selfe. Wée are all weake and fraile, but iudge no
man frailer then thy selfe. It hurts not if thou iudge thy selfe inferi∣our to all, and through humilitie put thy selfe vnder all: but it doth much hurt, if thou set thy selfe but before one. 7 The twenty foure Elders,Elders. that is to say, the whole Church triumphant, casts away their crownes before the Throne, giues all righteousnesse and glo∣rie vnto God: what then may a vile sinner do? The Scra∣phins, the holy AngelsAngels. Isa. 6. couer their faces in the sight of the ma∣iestie of God: what may man do, so vile a creature, and so many wayes vnthankfull to his Creatour? ChristChrist. the true and onely begotten Sonne of God, out of his wonderfull humilitie, descended out of heauen, and tooe our fraile nature vpon him, set himselfe as low as our flesh, to
death, to the Crosse: what may man do, who through his sinne hath departed so farre from God? Sée, O faithfull soule, with what wonderfull humility ChristFollow Christ. hath healed our pride: and doest thou as yet desire to bée proud? By the way of his humility and pas∣sion, Christ entred into his glo∣rie: and doest thou thinke that thou canst come to the heauenly glory walking in the way of pride? The deuillThe deuil. for his pride was expelled out of the kingdome of heauen: and doest thou, which wert neuer yet in the glory of Heauen, goe thither wards, thorow the way of pride? AdamAdam. for his pride, was cast out of Pa∣radise, and doest thou desire to come to the heauenly Paradise through the way of pride? Let vs desire rather to serue and wash the féete of others, with
Christ, then to séeke for the more worthy place with the Deuill: Let vs bée humbled in this life, that we may be exalted in the life to come. See thy want.10 Thinke alwayes, O faith∣full soule, not of what thou hast, but of what is wanting vnto thée. Grieue more for the vertues which thou hast not, then bragge of the vertues which thou hast. Couer thy vertues,Couer vertue. reueale thy sinnes. For it is greatly to be fea∣red, lest if thou lay open the trea∣sure of thy good works, through glory, the deuil spoile thee thereof through pride. 11 The fire is best kept, if it be couered with ashes: so the fire of Charitie is neuer kept more se∣curely, then when it is buried in the ashes of humility. PridePrides mischiefe. is the séed of all sinnes: take héed there∣fore, that thou be not lifted vp,
lest it happen that thou bée cast headlong into the déep pit of sinne. Pride is the acceptable chamber of the deuill:The deuils Chamber. take héed therefore that thou be not litted vp, lest it happen that thy wretched soule be subdued of the deuill. Pride is a winde that burnes and dryes vp the fountaine of Gods grace:Dryeth vp grace. take héed therefore that thou bée not lifted vp, lest it happen that thou bée separated from the grace of God. 12 Heale, O Christ, the swel∣ling of our pride: let thy holy hu∣mility be vnto vs the merit of e∣ternall life: let it bée also the ex∣ample of our life: let our faith firmly embrace thy humility, and let our life constantly follow the same.
Tuesday, Euening Prayer. I Will not hide my sinne, like Adam, but I wil confesse against my selfe, mine owne vnrighteous∣nesse, that there may be an healing of my sinne, that thou, O Lord, mayest do all mine iniquitie out of thy sight: I will bewaile mine originall corruption, I will con∣fesse against my selfe mine actuall transgression: my best things are but bad, my worst things are ab∣hominable, Lord, be mercifull vn∣to me a sinner. While sinne dwelleth in my house, whilest the deuill daily fights against my soule, and layes siege vnto it, I will not say to my soule, Peace, peace, when there is no peace; but I will stand vpon my guard, lest in my securitie the ene∣mie oppresse me at vnawares. To
whom should I flye for succour in all my distresses, but to my Saui∣our? O Christ, I will cleaue vnto thee, I will leaue, I will deny, I will hate my selfe for thy loue: I will loue thee aboue all things, I will honour thee aboue all other, I will resigne my will to thine, since I haue learned, that mine own will leads me to death, and to damnati∣on, but thy will to life and health. Giue strength, O Lord, that I faint not for the fiery trial, but that I may stand fast in the euill day, & possessing my soule in patience, by thy helpe profit by all manner of Temptations. Aboue all things, O Lord, let not pride get the vpper hand of me; but grant me, that considering mine owne vilenesse and miserie, and looking vpon the example of thine humilitie, I may from thence learne to bee lowly and small in mine owne eyes,
that so thou maiest exalt me in the time of need. In conclusion of this my prayer, I pray thee to close vp mine eyes this night in quiet sleep: yet while mine eyes sleepe, O Lord, let my heart watch and wake vnto thee. Lighten thou mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleepe not in death, but raise mee heere from the death of sinne, to the life of grace elsewhere, to the life of glory, that therein thy light I may see light, and bee partaker of thy glory. Amen. Wednesday, Morning Prayer. IT is the word of Truth it selfe, which saith, Aske, and it shall bee giuen vnto you: I wretched creature (O Lord) which know my selfe to haue falne into the hands of those theeues, which
haue not onely wounded me, but also vtterly stript me of grace, so that to me is left no good thing, relying with assurance on the con∣fidence of this word and promise, doe aske those things at thy hands, which my soule wanteth, whereof shee hath beene spoyled, that thou with a free hand mayest giue them vnto mee. Now of the things whereof I feele my selfe to stand in need, what shall I aske first? Euen thy grace to streng∣then me in mine inward man, that I may bee able to resist and ouer∣come mine owne corruptions, mine owne euill nature, the law of sinne in my members, which contradicting the law of my mind, leades mee captiue to sinne, and drawes mee to destruction. Thy grace (O LORD) I begge and craue, without which I can doe nothing, which strengthening
mee in thee, I am able to do all things. Next to this gift of grace, the gift of feare bestow vpon me, O Lord, thy feare to wound my flesh, lest the loue of sinfull flesh deceiue me: with these giue me a firme faith, with faith, sound hope and confidence, then let all other vertues and spirituall graces come trouping into my soule, like the company of Leahs children into Iacobs house, with temperance, pa∣tience; with patience, humilitie; with humilitie, true obedience; and with these, meeknesse and ho∣linesse, chastitie of minde, chastity of bodie, the loue of thee my God, and the loue of my neighbour. O gracious and louing God, withdraw not thy selfe from my helpe, withhold not from thy ser∣uant any thing that shall be good for him, but fill my soule with all spirituall benediction, that it may
bee as the field which the Lord hath blessed, sweetly smelling, richly fruitfull in all grace and goodnesse, which thing I beseech thee to grant vnto mee for thy deare Sonnes sake Christ Iesus. Bona spes confundere nescit. Good hope sha∣meth not. 12. Meditation. Of the assu∣rance of our saluation. VVHy art thou troubled,Thy Crea∣tor ma∣keth. O my soule? why doest thou as yet doubt of the mercy of GOD? Remember thy Crea∣tor, who created thée without thée; who formed thée in secret, when the house of thy body was framed, in the lower parts of the earth. Hée therefore which vndertooke the care of thée when as yet thou wert not, should
not hée take a care of thée, after be hath made thée to his owne I∣mage?After his own image I am the creature of God, I turne mée to my Creatour. What if my nature bée infected of the Deuill? what if it bée may∣med and wounded of théeues, that is to say, of sinners? yet my Creatour liues as yet:Creatour cureth. hée that could make me, hée also could renue mée. He that created mée without any euill, can also take from mée all euill, which being entred into me by the suggestion of the Deuill, by Adams trans∣gression, and by mine owne action hath gone through my whole substance. Therefore my Crea∣tor can renue me, if so be he will. Yea,Gods loue. and he will: for who euer hateth his owne worke? Are not wée before him as clay in the hands of the Potter? but if hée had hated mée, hee had neuer
created me of nothing. He is the Sauiour of all, especially of those that beléeue. 1 He hath created me wonder∣fully,Christs Passion. but he hath redéemed mee more wonderfully. It neuer ap∣peared more clearly that God lo∣ued vs, then in his wounds and passion.Phil. 2. He is truly beloued for whom the onely begotten is sent out of the bosome of the Father. 2 If thou didst not desire my saluation O Lord Iesus, where∣fore shouldest thou descend from heauen? but thou hast descended to the earth, to death, to the crosse. That God might redéeme his Seruant,Redemp∣tion. he spared not his Sonne. He therefore loues man∣kinde with a truly great loue, which for the redemption of man∣kinde deliuered his Sonne to bée afflicted, to be slaine, to bée cru∣cified.
3 It is altogether a deare and great price, with which we are re∣déemed: deare therefore and great is the mercy of the Redéemer. It may séeme therefore to some, that God louethHis loue in adoption. his chosen sonnes, as well as his only begotten Sonne. For that on which we bestow any thing, is dearer then that on which we bestow nothing. That he might haue adopted sonnes, he spared not his naturall and coes∣sentiall Sonne. 4 What great thing is it therefore, that he hath prouided for vs mansions in the house of heauen:Mansions in heauen. when he hath giuen vs his owne Sonne, in whom is all the fulnesse of his Godhead? Surely where is the fulnes of the Godhead, there is the fulnesse of eternall lifeFulnesse of eternall life. and glory. But if he hath giuen vs the fulnesse of eter∣nall life in Christ, how shall hée
deny vs the least particle thereof? The heauenly Father loues vs sonnes adopted with a truly great loue, for whom he deliuered vp his onely begotten Sonne. The Sonne embraceth vs with tru∣ly great loue, which for vs deli∣uered vp himselfe. That he might make vs rich,Maketh vs rich. hée endured ex∣treme pouerty: for hée had not where he might lay downe his head. That he might make vs the sonnesSonnes. of God, hée was borne man. Neither hauing once per∣formed the worke of our redemp∣tion, doth he afterward neglect vs: but hée is as yet placed on the right hand of the Maiesty of God,Maketh still inter∣cession Obtaineth all things. and makes intercession for vs. 5 What will he not obtaine for me necessarie to saluation, when hée hath imparted himselfe to deserue my saluation? What
will the Father deny the Sonne, who was made obedient vnto him, euen vnto the death, yea, the death of the Cross? What will the Father deny the Son, which hath accepted the price of redemp∣tion, paid by the Sonne? Great is mine assurance in the holy spi∣rit. For my Sauiour dyed to send him to my comfort. He tells my spirit I am the sonne of God. Hée helpes me to cry to my Fa∣ther. Yea, in this sinfull vale hée leads me to the land of righteous∣nesse. Rom. 8. Nothing separateth frō Gods loue: Not Satan6 Let my sinnes accuse me, I trust in this Intercessor: hée is greater that excuseth, then he that accuseth. Let my weaknesse af∣fright me, I glory in his strength. Let Satan accuse me, so that this Mediator excuse me: Let heauen and earth accuse me, and sue mée guilty of iniquitie: it sufficeth me,
that the Creator of heauen and earth, and righteousnesse it selfe, doth intreat for me. 7 It sufficeth me to merit, to know that my merit is not suffi∣cient.Not sinne It sufficeth me to haue him fauourable vnto mée, against whom onely I haue sinned. Whatsoeuer he hath decréed not to impute, shall be as if it had not béene. Neither doth it moue me, that my sinnes are both heauie and diuers, and often doubled: for vnlesse I were laden with my sinnes, I should not desire his righteousnesse. 8 Vnlesse I had a disease, I should not craue the helpe of the Physitian. He is the Physitian, he is the Sauiour, he is the righ∣teousnesse, he cannot deny him∣selfe. I am sicke, I am damned, I am a sinner, I cannot deny my selfe: Haue pitie vpon mée, O
thou the Physician: O thou the Sauiour: O thou the righteous∣nesse: O thou the comforter and reioycer of the heart. Amen. In Christo electio facta. God chose in Christ. 13. Meditation. Of Prede∣stination. By Gods decree be∣fore the foundati∣on of the world. Reu. 13. & 17. Ephes. 1.AS often, O deuout soule, as thou wilt thinke of thy pre∣destination, behold Christ hanging on the Crosse, dying for the sinnes of all the world, rising againe for our righteousnesse. Begin from Christ lying in the manger, and so shall shy disputation of Predesti∣nation go on in good order. Chosen in Christ.1 God hath chosen vs before the foundations of the world were laid, but yet the election was made in Christ. If there∣fore thou bée in Christ by faith,Faith.
doubt not that the election doth pertaine vnto thée also. If thou cleaue vnto Christ with a firme confidenceConfidēce. of heart: doubt not that thou art in the number of the e∣lected. 2 But if from the former, without the bounds of the WordNot with∣out the Word. thou wilt search the depth of Predestination, it is greatly to be feared lest thou fall into the depth of desperation. Without Christ God is a consuming fire: take héed therefore that thou come not neare this fire,God a fire without Christ. lest thou be consu∣med. Without the satisfaction of Christ, God by the voice of his Law doth accuse all, doth con∣demne all; take héed therefore, that thou draw not the mystery of pre∣destination out of the Law. In∣quire not into the reasons of Gods counsels,Predesti∣nation no in the law lest thy thoughts do much seduce thée.
Be sober.3 God dwelleth in the light that no man can attaine vnto, en∣deauour not rashly to go forward vnto it.The Go∣spel safe. But yet God hath reuea∣led vnto vs the light of the Go∣spel: in this thou maiest safely en∣quire after the doctrine of this se∣cret,The se∣crets be∣long to God, the reuealed thing to vs. Deut. 16. in this light thou shalt sée true light. Leaue the profunditie of this eternall and from euerlast∣ing made decrée, and turne thée to the clearnesse of the manifestation made in time. Iustification, that is made in time, is the looking-glasse of Election, which was made without time. 4 Acknowledge out of the lawLaw. the wrath of God for sinnes, and repent thée. Acknowledge out of the Gospel,Gospel. the mercy of God for Christs merit, and apply that by an assurance to thy self. Acknow∣ledge the nature of Faith,Working faith. and shew it through a godly conuer∣sation.
Acknowledge Gods fa∣therly chastisement in the crosse,Correctiō. and beare it with patience. Then at length begin to handle the do∣ctrine of Predestination. This me∣thod hath the Apostle shewed vs: let the true disciple of the Apostle follow this method. 5 Thrée things there are, which are alwayes to be obserued in this mystery. The mercy of God,Gods mer∣cie. that loues vs: the merit of Christ,Christs merit. that suffers for vs: the grace of the holy Ghost,Grace of the Spirit. that calls vs by the Gospell. 6 Great is the mercy of God, because hée hath loued all the world. The earthGreat as the earth. is full of the mercy of the Lord, nay, it is grea∣ter then the heauen and the earth. For it is so great as God him∣selfe is: because God is loue.As himself He hath testified in his word, that he would not the death of a sinner.Saith it.
If this be little, he hath also con∣firmed it with his oath.Sweareth it. If thou canst not beléeueBeleeue. God when hée promiseth, at least beléeue him when he sweares for thy salua∣tion. 7 He is called the FatherFather. of mercies, because it is his proper∣tie to pitie and to spare.Pity from himselfe. He takes the cause and originall of shewing pitie from his owne:Iudge∣ment from others. of iudging and reuenging rather from ano∣ther. So that taking of pitie séemes to procéed farre otherwise from his heart, then taking of pu∣nishment. Great also is the merit of Christ, because he hath suffered for vs all.Loue in creation. What therefore could proue the loue of God more open∣ly, then that he loued vs, when as yet we were lost, because it is of his loue that we are created?In giuing his Sonne. He loued vs moreouer when wée were turned away from him, be∣cause
it is a part of loue, that hée gaue his Sonne vnto vs to be a Redéemer. To the sinner that is adiudged to eternall torments, and not hauing wherewith he may redéeme himselfe, saith God the Father, Take my onely begotten, and giue him for thée. The Sonne himselfe saith Take me, and re∣déeme thy selfe. 8 Christ is the flower of the field,Cont. not the flower of the Gar∣den:Christs merit open. because the sauour and smell of his grace is not shut vp to a few, but opened vnto many. And lest thou shouldest doubt of the greatnesse of his merit, Christ,To his enemies. when he suffered, prayed for those that crucified him▪ and poured forth his bloud for them which poured forth his bloud them∣selues. 9 Great also and large are the promises of the Gospell: because
Christ saith,Mat 1. All come. Come vnto me all ye which labour. That which was performed for many, is offered vnto many. As much as thou shalt stretch forth the foot of confidence in these good things: so much also shalt thou obtaine. Christ denies his graceGrace. vnto none, but to him that thinkes himselfe vnworthy of it. Consider therefore O faith∣full soule, these thrée propsThree props. of Predestination, and leane on them with a firme confidence of thine heart. Consider the benefits of Gods mercy, that are past, and thou shalt not doubt of finall per∣seuerance. Creation.10 When as yet thou wast not, God created thée: when thou wert damned by Adams fall, hée redéemed thee:Redemp∣tion. Calling. Instructi∣on. when thou didst liue in the world, out of the Church, hée called shée: when thou wert ignorant, he instructed
thée: when thou wentest astray,Seeking. hée brought thée backe: when thou didst sinne, he corrected thée:Correctiō Vpheld. when thou stoodest, he held thée: when thou didst fall, he raisedRaised. thée vp: when thou didst go, he led thée:Load. Receiued when thou camest vnto him, hée tooke thée vp: in expecting thée, he shewed his long suffering:Patience. Pardon. in par∣doning, that he was easie to be in∣treated. 11 The mercy of God goes before thée,Mercy first and last. hope firmely that it will follow thee also. The mercy of God doth preuent thée, that thou mayest be healed, it will fol∣low thée also that thou mayest bée glorified. It preuenteth thée, that thou maiest liue godly, it will fol∣low thée also,The Lord preserues that thou maist liue for euer with him. Wherefore is it, that falling thou art not bru∣sed? Who hath put vnder his hand? who but the Lord? Trust
therefore hereafter also in the mercy of God, and hope firmely for the end of thy faith, eternall saluation. Gods hands safe12 In what hands also can the matter of thy saluation more safe∣ly lye, then in those which haue made heauen and earth? in those which are not shortened? in those which do flow with the bowels of mercy: neither want their holes, by which it may flow out? Election for sancti∣fication:13 Howbeit, thinke, O deuout soule, that we are chosen of God, that we should be holy and with∣out rebuke. In whom therefore there is not the study of an holy life, to them the benefit of election doth not pertaine. We are chosen in Christ: in Christ wee are by faith: faith shewes it selfe forth by loue: therefore where there is not loue, there is no faith: where there is no faith, there is no Christ:
where there is no Christ, there is no election. Truly, the foundation of God abideth sure, hauing this seale, the Lord knoweth who are his. But yet let him depart from iniquitie, whosoeuer calls on the Name of the Lord. No man shall snatch the shéepe of Christ out of his hand: but yet let the shéepe of Christ heare his voice. We are the house of God: but let vs retain the confidence and glory of our hope firme vnto the end. O Lord, which hast giuen vnto vs to will, giue vnto vs also to do thy will. Mors Christi vita piorum est. Christs death Saints life 14. Meditation. Of the satis∣faction for our sinnes. COme vnto me, ye which la∣bour and are heauy laden, and I will refresh you: they are the
words of our Sauiour. Truly, O Lord Iesus, I am too much laden, and grone vnder the bur∣then of sinne: but I haste me vnto thée, the fountaine of liuing wa∣ter.Christ first came, to entice vs to come. Come vnto me, O Lord Ie∣sus, that I may come vnto thée. I come vnto thée, O Lord, because first thou camest vnto me. I come vnto thée, O Lord Iesus, and carefully I séeke thée: for I finde no good in my selfe.No helpe in man. But if I could finde any good in my selfe, I should not seeke thée so careful∣ly. Truly, O Lord Iesus, I la∣bour and am laden: neither can I compare my selfe to any of thy Saints: or else of penitent sin∣ners, vnlesse perchance to the Thiefe vpon the crosse. Haue pitie vpon me, O Lord, because thou hadst pitie vpon the Thiefe on the crosse. 1 I haue liued wretchedly, I
haue liued in sinnes,Desire a good death by Christs mediation but I desire to dye godly: but I desire to dye in righteousnesse. But pietie and righteousnesse is farre from my heart: therefore I flye to thy pie∣ty, and to thy righteousnesse. Let thy soule (O Lord) helpe mée, which thou hast laid downe for a redemption for many. Let thy most holy body helpe me, afflicted for me with scourges, spittings, buffets, and thornes, and fastened also to the crosse. Let thy holy bloud, O Iesus, helpe me, which was poured out of thy side, as thou didst suffer and dye, which cleanseth vs from all sinnes.Diuinitie resting, but present in the passiō. Let thy most holy Diuinitie helpe me, which sustained thy humane na∣ture in thy passion, and which resting, and not shewing it selfe forth, the most holy mysterie of our Redemption was wrought, and which added infinite power
and weight to thy holy Passion: So that God hath purchased mée poore wretch to himselfe with his bloud. Let thy wounds helpe me, in which is all my soules salua∣tion.Christ suf∣fered for sinners, not for himselfe. Let thy most holy passion helpe me, let thy merit helpe me, my last refuge and remedie a∣gainst sinne, for that which thou hast suffered, thou hast suffered for me. 2 That which thou deseruedst, that dost thou also deserue for me, and mine vnworthinesse.God gi∣ueth his Sonne. There∣fore God doth commend his cha∣ritie and loue in vs, and doth proue it by a testimonie that excéeds the vnderstanding of all men, yea, of the Angels, that Christ dyed for vs, when as yet we were sinners,To sinners and the enemies of God. 3 Who wonders not hereat? who can choose but bée amazed?
being intreated of no man, yea being hated of men, the most mer∣cifull Sonne of God doth intreat sinners and his enemies. Neither doth he onely intreat:Satisfactiō by Nati∣uity, holy Life, Passi∣on, Death. but he also makes satisfaction to the iustice of God, by his natiuity most poore, by his life most holy, by his pas∣sion most bitter, by his death most cruell. 4 O Lord Iesus,Iesus lo∣ueth first. which didst intreat for me, suffer and dye for me, before I could desire thy me∣rit and passion, or could sollicite thée with prayers to pay my Re∣demption: how wilt thou cast me from thy face? how wilt thou deny me the fruit of thy most holy pas∣sion, when now out of the déepes I cry vnto thée,Cries not cast away. and desire the fruit of thy merit with teares and groanes. 5 I was an enemy by nature: now since thou hast dyed for mée,
I am become a friend, a brother, and a sonne by grace. Thou heardst thine enemie, when hée did not yet intreat thée: how shalt thou despise thy friend when hée comes vnto thée with teares and prayers:A friend not despi∣sed. Thou wilt not cast him forth that comes vnto thée, because thy Word is truth.Come but in Gods truth. 6 Thou hast spoken vnto vs in spirit and truth, and we haue receiued of thée the words of eter∣nall life. Attend, and lift vp thy self, O my soule: before we were sinners by nature, now we are iust by grace▪ before wee were enemies, now we are friends and allies: before our help was in the death of Christ, now also in his life: before we were dead in our sinnes, now we are quickened in Christ. 7 O the great loue of God, wherewith he loued vs! O the
abundant riches of his diuine grace,Diuine riches. whereby hée hath made vs to to fit together in heauenly places! O the bowels of the mercy of our God, in which hée hath visited vs, rising from on high!Of death. Rom 5.10. Of life. Now if the death of Christ hath brought life and righteous∣nesse to vs, what can his life? If our Sauiour payed a price to his Father for vs dying, what shall he do liuing, and making interces∣sion for vs? For Christ liues and dwels in our hearts, if so be there liue and flourish in them the re∣membrance of his most holy me∣rit. 8 Draw me, O Lord Iesus,Cant. 1.5. that I may possesse that in verie truth, which here I expect in a sure hope: let thy Minister,The Ser∣uant with the Master I be∣séech thée, be with thée and sée the brightnes which thy Father hath giuen thée: let him inhabite the
mansion, which thou hast prouided for him in thy Fathers house. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord, they shall praise thée for euer and euer. Wednesday Noone. Psal 68.16:TVrne thee vnto me, O Lord, & haue mercy vpon me: giue thy strength vnto thy seruant, and helpe the son of thine handmaid. Nomine quid Jesu suauius esse potest? What can be sweeter then the name of Iesus? The sweet∣est. 15. Meditation. Of the name of Iesus. O Good Iesus, bée thou also vnto me Iesus: for thy holy Name, haue pitie vpon mée. My life doth condemne me, but the Name of Iesu will saue me. For this thy name, do vnto mée ac∣cording
to thy name. And where∣as thou art a true and great Sa∣uiour,Iesus re∣specteth sinners. thou dost also respect true and great sinners. Haue mercy vpon me, O good Iesus, in the time of mercy, lest thou condemne me in the time of iudgement. If thou receiue me within the bo∣some of thy mercy,Iesus am∣ple. thou wilt not be for me more straitned. If thou distribute vnto me the crummes of thy goodnesse, thou wilt not be therefore more néedy. For me thou hast béen borne, for me thou hast béene circumcised, be thou also vn∣to me Iesus. 1 O how swéet and delectable is this name! for what is Iesus, but a Sauiour? and what incon∣uenience can happen vnto those that are saued? what can wée aske, or what can wée expect as yet beyond our saluation?Desire it in thy par∣ticular. Take mée, O Lord Iesus, within the
number of thy sonnes, that with them I may praise thy holy and sauing name.Where sin aboūdeth, grace a∣boundeth. Rom. 5: If I haue taken a∣way mine owne integritie, haue I also destroyed thy mercy? If I wretched man, was able to de∣stroy and damne my selfe, art not thou therefore, mercifull Lord, able to saue me? Do not, O Lord, attend so to my sinnes, that thou forget thy mercie. Do not so weigh and ponder my defaults, that they preponderate thy me∣rit. Do not attend so vnto mine euill, that therefore thou forget thy good. Be not mindfull of thine anger against the guilty, but be mindfull of thy mercy toward the wretched. Iesus shew∣eth our misery to helpe vs.2 Thou which hast giuen me a minde that I might desire thée, wilt thou withdraw thy selfe from my desire? Thou which hast shewed vnto me mine vnworthi∣nesse,
and iust damnation, wilt thou hide from me thy worthines, and promise of eternall life? 3 My cause is to be handled be∣fore the iudgement seat in heauen:Iesus is Iudge. but it comforts me, that the name of Sauiour is assigned vnto thée in the Court of heauen: because that name was brought by an An∣gel from heauen. 4 O most mercifull Iesus, to whom wilt thou be Iesus, if to wretched sinners, which séeke grace and saluation, thou wilt not bée Iesus?Iesus call∣eth not the righteous but sin∣ners. They that trust to their owne righteousnes and ho∣linesse, séeke saluation in them∣selues: but I, because I finde no∣thing in my selfe worthy of eter∣nall life, flye vnto thée my Saui∣our. Saue me that am condem∣ned: haue mercy vpon mée a sin∣ner: iustifie mée that am vnrigh∣teous: absolue mée that am ac∣cused.
Thou (O Lord) art truth, thy name is holy and true. Let therefore thy name be true in me, be thou also vnto me Iesus and a Sauiour. Euery where be Iesus.5 Be thou vnto me Iesus in this life present: be thou vnto mée Iesus in death: be thou vnto mée Iesus in the last iudgement: bée thou vnto me Iesus in the life e∣ternall. Yea, thou wilt be, O good Iesus, because as thou art inuari∣able in Essence, so thou art inua∣riableInuariable in mercy: thy Name shall not be changed, O Lord Iesus, for me one onely wretched sinner, but thou wilt also be vnto me a Saui∣our. For thou doest not cast forth a doores him that comes vnto thée. Thou that hast giuen mée a will to come, wilt giue me also fa∣uour,Ioh. 6. that comming I may be re∣ceiued. For thy words are truth and life.
6 Let the propagation of ori∣ginall sinne in me condemne mée:Conquer through him that loued vs. notwithstanding, thou art vnto mée Iesus. Let my conception made in sinne condemne mée: notwithstanding thou art vnto me Iesus. Let my shape made in sinne and vnder the curse con∣demne me: notwithstanding thou art my Sauiour. Let my corrupt natiuity condemne me: notwith∣standing thou art my saluation. Let the sinnes of my youth con∣demne mée: yet thou art my Ie∣sus. Let the leading of my whole life, spotted with most grieuous sinnes condemne me: yet thou re¦mainest my Iesus. Let death which is to bée inflicted vpon mée for my sinnes and diuers offences condemne mée: yet thou art my Sauiour. Let the most district sentence of the last Iudgement condemne mee:
yet thou art my Iesus. Death in vs, life in Iesus.6 In me is sinne, reprobation, damantion: in thy name is righte∣ousnesse, election, saluation: but I haue béen baptized into thy name: I beléeue on thy name: I will dye in thy name: I will rise againe in thy name: I will appeare before the iudgement in thy name. All things are prouided for vs in this name, and shut vp like a treasure: so much is wanting of these good things, that I detract by my diffi∣dence. Which that thou mayest command to be farre from me, I pray thée by that very name, O good Iesus, that I be not damned by my fault and vnbeliefe, whom thou desirest to haue saued by thy precious merit, and thy sauing name.
Fulgent cunabula Christi. Christs cradle doth shine 16. Meditation. Of the Myste∣ries of the Incarnation. LEt vs withdraw our mindes a little from these temporall things,The Nati∣uity. and behold the mysteries of the Natiuity of our Lord. The Sonne of God descendeth out of heauen vnto vs, that we may ob∣taine the adoptionAdoption. of sonnes. God is made man, that man may bée made partaker of the diuineDiuine. grace and nature. Christ would bée borne about the euening of the world, that he might signifie that the benefits of his Incarnation do not concerne this lifeLife. present, but the life eternall. 1 He would be borne in the time of Augustus the peaceable,Peace. which hath made mankinde at peace with God. Hée would bée
borne in the time of the seruitude of Israel, which is the true de∣liuerer,Deliuerer. and auenger of his peo∣ple. He would be borne vnder the Empire of another Lord,Empire of another world. as hée whose kingdome was not of this world. He is borne of a Virgin, that he may signifie that he is not conceiued and borne but in the hearts of them which are spiri∣tuall Virgins,Spirituall Virgins conceiue Christ. Reu. 14. that is, whose mindes do neither cleaue to the world, nor to the Deuill, but to God in one spirit. He is borne pure and holy, that he may san∣ctifie our impure and defiled na∣tiuity.Sanctifie our nati∣uity. Hée is borne of a Virgin that was espoused to a man, for the honour of Matrimony, insti∣tuted of God, and to draw vs to loue our spirituall marriage with him▪ He is borne in the darknesse of the night,Enlighten the darke world. which was the true Light, inlightening the darknesse
of the World. Hée is borne in Bethlehem, that is to say, in the house of Bread, which brought with him most plentifull food of the heauenly benefits. He is laid in a cratch, which is the true foodFood. of our soules.Iohn 6. Hée is borne be∣twéene an Oxe and an Asse, that he might restore men vnto their ancient dignitie,Dignity. which were made like vnto the beasts by sinne. Hée is the first begotten, and the onely begotten of his mother in earth, which according to his di∣uine nature is the first begotten, and the onely begotten of his Fa∣ther in heauen, that we might be numbred among the first begot∣ten, whose names are written in heauen. He is borne poore and néedy, that hée may get for vs the heauenly Riches.Riches. Hée is borne in a vile Stable of Cattell, that hée may bring vs to the
Palaces of the heauenly Court.Heauenly places. 2 The messenger of so great a benefit is sent out of heauen, be∣cause none in the earth did vnder∣stand his greatnesse. Of celestiall gifts, there is also worthily a cele∣stiall messenger.Mat 11. Angels fellows. The armies of the Angels reioyce, which may haue vs fellows of their happines, for the incarnation of the Sonne of God. 3 So great a miracle is first told to Shepheards, because the true Shepheard of our soulesShepheard of soules. was come to bring backe the lost shéepe into the way. The matter of so great ioy is told to the contemned and ignoble,Ignoble partake in Christ. because none can bée made partaker thereof, which doth not displease himselfe in his owne eyes. This Natiuity is told to them that watch by their flock, because not they which snort in sinnes, but whose heart doth
watch to God,Watchfull. are made parta∣kers of so great a gift. The com∣pany of the heauenly Souldiers doth triumph,Angels ioy which was grie∣uously sorrowfull for the fault of our first Parent. 4 The brightnesse of that Lord and King,A light in darknesse. appeares in the Hea∣uens, whose basenesse man did de∣spise in the earth. The Angel commands to let go feare, because he was borne, which was to take away out of the midst,Cast out feare. the causes of all feare. 5 Ioy is denounced out of hea∣uen, because the Author and giuer of all ioy was borne.Reioyce. Ioy is com∣manded, because the enmity be∣twéene God and men, the cause of all sadnesse, is remoued. GloryGlory. is giuen vnto God on high, which our first parent, by the vnlawfull transgression of the commande∣ment, would haue snatcht away.
6 True peacePeace. is gotten by this Natiuity, because before men were enemies vnto God: before their owne conscience was an aduersary vnto them: before they were at difference with themselues, betwéene them∣selues. True peace is restoredRestored. to the earth, because he is ouercome which did hold vs captiues. Goe to Christ.7 Let vs also with the Shep∣heards goe vnto Christs Cratch, that is, the Church, and wée shall finde this infant wrapt vp in Swathes, that is to say, the holy Scriptures. Let vs also conserue with Mary, the holy Mother of the Lord,Keep his words. the words of so great a mystery, and let vs renue the same alwayes in our dayly re∣membrance. Let vs with our voyce follow the Angels that sing before vs,Sing with Angels. and let vs giue de∣serued thankes for so great a be∣nefit.
Let vs reioyce and be glad with the whole heauenly army.With the heauenly Army. For if the Angels doe reioyce so greatly for our sakes: how much more ought wee to reioyce, for whom this Infant was borne and giuen? 8 If the Israelites did lift vp their voyces,With Israel and shout when the Ark of the couenant was brought vnto them, which was the figure and shadow of the Lords incarna∣tion: how much should wee re∣ioyce that the Lord himselfe hath descended, taking our flesh vpon him? If AbrahamWith A∣braham. did reioyce when he saw the day of the Lord, and when the Lord appeared vn∣to him in the shape of a man ta∣ken vpon him for the time, what shall we doe, when he hath ioyn∣ed our nature vnto him in a perpe∣tuall and indissoluble league? 9 Let vs here maruell at the
infinite bounty of God, who when we could not ascend to him,Admire Cods bounty. would himselfe descend vnto vs. Let vs wonder at the infinite power of God, which of two things most distant, that is to say, the diuine and humane nature, could make one thing most coniunct, that now one and the same is both God and man. Let vs wonder at the infi∣nite wisedomeWisedome. of God, which could finde a meanes of our re∣demption, when neither Angels nor men could sée the meanes. The infinite goodnesse was offen∣ded, and an infinit satisfaction was required: man hath offended God, of man was the satisfaction requi∣red: but neither could an infinite satisfaction be performed of man: neither could the diuine Iustice bée satisfied without an infinite price. 11 Therefore was God made
man, that both he which had sin∣ned might make satisfaction: and that he which was infinite, might pay an infinite price.Look vpon and desire it. Let vs won∣der at this amazing temper of Gods iustice and mercy, which no creature, before God did mani∣fest it, could finde out, nor since it is manifested, can fully per∣ceiue. Let vs wonder at these things, let vs not search curiously into them, let vs desire to looke into them, although wée cannot fully conceiue them: let vs rather confesse our owne ignorance, then go about to deny Gods power, bounty, or wisedome.
Sit grata Redemptio Christi. Be thank∣full for Christs re∣demption. 17 Meditation. Of the whole∣some fruit of the Incar∣nation. I Bring you tidings of great ioy, saith the Angell, at the Na∣tiuity of our Sauiour. Truly it was great, and greater then mans vnderstanding can conceiue. It was the greatest of euils, that wee were held as captiues vnder the wrath of God, vnder the pow∣er of the Deuill, vnder eternall damnation. It was a greater euill as yet, that men were either ig∣norant of these greatest euils, or else did neglect them. But now tydings of great ioy is brought vnto vs,Ioy for sal∣uation. that hee came into the world, which should free vs from all these euils. The PhysitianPhysitian. came to the sicke, the RedeemerRedeemer.
to the Captiues,Way. Life. the way to the wanderers, life to the dead, salua∣tion to the damned. 1 As Moses was sent of the Lord,Moses. to free the people of Israel out of the bondage of Egypt: so Christ was sent of his Father to redeeme all mankind from the captiuity of the Deuill. Euen as the Doue,Noahs Doue. when the waters were dryed vp, after the Deluge, brought a branch of Oliue to the Arke of Noah: so Christ came in to the world to preach peace, and the reconciliation of mankinde with God. Wee doe therefore worthily reioyce,Due ioy. and conceiue great things of the mercy of God, which loued vs so, when wee were as yet enemies, that hee scorned not to assume our nature into the most straight imbracing of the Diuinity.Assuming our nature. Therefore denieth nothing. What shall hee deny them which are ioyned vnto
him by participation of his flesh? who euer hated his owne flesh? how therefore can that highest and infinit mercy, driue vs away from him, being now made par∣takers of his nature? Wondrous mystery.2 Who can conceiue aright of the greatnesse of this mystery, much lesse vtter it in words? there is the greatest height, and the greatest basenesse: there is the greatest power, and the grea∣test infirmitie: there is the grea∣test maiesty, and the greatest frailtie. What is higher then God, and viler then man? What is mighter then God, and wea∣ker then man? What is more glorious then God, and more fraile then man?Gods po∣wer recon∣cileth all as in it self impossible. But that grea∣test power did finde a meane, whereby these things might bée ioyned together, when that grea∣test righteousnesse did require
the necessity of such a coniuncti∣on. 3 Who also can conceiue the greatnesse of this mystery?Infinit sins require in∣finit price. an equiualent and infinite price was required for the offence of man: because man hath turned himselfe away from the infinite goodnesse, that is to say, God. But what can be equiualent to the infinit God? The infinite iustice therefore, as it were of it selfe, doth take an equiualent price to it selfe, and God the Creatour doth suffer in the flesh, lest the flesh of the creature should suffer for euer. The infinite goodnesse was offen∣ded, there could none but the Mediator of infinite power make intercession, but what is infinite besides God? Therefore God himselfe hath reconciled the world to himselfe, God himselfe is made the Mediator: God him∣selfe
redéemes mankinde with his owne bloud. The Crea∣tor recon∣cileth the creature.4 Who can perceiue the great∣nesse of this mystery? the great Creator was offended: neither was the creature carefull to paci∣fie him, or to make a reconciliation with him, the same that was of∣fended, assuming the flesh of the creature, made the reconciliation. 5 Man had forsaken God, and had turned himselfe to the enemy of God, the Deuill: but he that was forsaken, doth carefully en∣quire after him that forsooke him, and doth most kindly againe in∣uite him to him. Man went away from the infinite good, and was slipt into the infinite euill, but that infinit good, giuing the infinite price of his redemption, set frée the creature from that infinite euill. 6 Is not this infinite mercie,
which excéeds all the finite vnder∣standing and thought of man? our nature is made more glorious by Christ,More glo∣rious in Christ. then it was disgraced by the sinne of Adam We haue gai∣ned more in Christ, then we haue lost in Adam: sinne did abound,Rom. 5. but Gods grace did superabound. 7 In Adam we haue lost inno∣cency, in Christ we receiue full righteousnesse. 8 Let others maruell at Gods power, his diuine bountyGods bounty the greatest maruell. is more to be maruelled at, although in GOD both power and mercie be equall, both of them infinite. Let others maruell at the Crea∣tion, I rather list to maruell at the redemption: although both the creation and the redemption bée déeds of infinite power. It is a great thing to create man which had deserued nothing at all, as who as yet had no ex∣istence:
but it séemes as yet a greater thing to redéeme man which had ill deserued,Wonder∣full. and to take the satisfactionSatisfactiō of the debt vpon himselfe. It is a wonderfull thing, that our flesh and our bonesBones. were formed vnto vs of God: it is as yet more wonderfull, that God would be made flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones. O my soul, be thankfullBe thank∣full. vnto thy God, which created thée, when as yet thou wast not: which redéemed thée, when thou wert damned through sinne: which hath prepared the heauenly ioyes for thée, which cleauest by faith to Christ.
Measpes est passio Christi. The passiō of Christ my hope. 4. Meditation. Of the fruit of the Passion of our Lord. AS often as I thinke of the passion of Christ, so often I presume highly of the loue of God, and of the forgiuenesse of my sinnes. His Head is bowed downe to kisseKisse. mée: his Armes are stretcht forth to embrace mée:Cant. 1.1. Imbrace. his Hands are open to giueGiue. vnto me: his Side is open to shew me his Heart flaming with loue:See loue. hée is exalted from the earth, that he may drawDraw me. all to himselfe: his wounds are pale with griefe, but bright in loue. Therefore by the ouerture of his wound we ought to enterEnter in to him. into the secret of his heart. Doubtlesse there is plenti∣ful redemptionPlentifull redēption. with him; because not some drop onely, but a whole
streame of bloud did flow plenti∣fully thorow fiue parts of his bo∣die. Euen as the grape cast into the wine-presse, is broken by the weight that is laid vpon it, and on eueryEuery way flowing. side poures out his liquour: so the flesh of Christ pressed down with the weight of Gods wrath, and the burden of our sinnes, doth euery where poure forth the li∣quor of his bloud. 1 When Abraham would haue offered his sonne in sacrifice, the Lord said, Now I know for a truth that thou louest me: do thou also acknowledge the great loue of the eternall Father,Great loue that he would deliuer his onely begot∣ten Sonne to death for vs. Wée were beloued, when as yet wée were enemies:Loueth enemies. shall he forget vs now, when an atonement is wrought by the death of his Sonne? Can the so precious
blovd of his Sonne be forgotten before him, when hée also num∣bers the teares and the steps of godly men?Numbreth teares. Can Christ forget them in life, for whom he would sustaine euen death?Sustaineth. Can he for∣get them in his glory, for whom hée suffered such torments in his humility? 2 Consider, O faithfull soule,In death. the manifold fruit of the Passion of our Lord. Christ poured out a bloudy sweat for vs, lest the most cold sweat in the agony of deathIn the A∣gonie of death. should oppresse vs. Hée would wrastle with death, lest we should faint in the agony of death. He would sustaine a most grieuous anxiety and sadnesse, euen vnto death,Sorrow. that wée might be made partakers of eternall ioy in heauen. 3 He would be betrayed with a kisse, which is a signe of friend∣ship
and good will, that that sinne might bée extinguisht,Treason of the serpēt. by which Satan vnder the shew of singular good will betrayed our first pa∣rents. Hée would be taken and bound of the Iewes, that he might loose vs which were tyed with the bonds of sinne,Bond of sinne. and were to be cast into eternall damnation. 4 He would haue his passion to begin in the Garden,Garden. that hée might expiate the sinneSinne re∣moued. which had his beginning in the Garden He would be comforted of an An∣gel,Company of Angels that he might make vs com∣panions to the Angels in heauen. He is forsaken of his owne Dis∣ciples, that he might ioyne vs to himselfe, which were seuered from GodVnite vs to God. by so foule a falling a∣way. Hée is accused of false wit¦nesses before the Councell, that we might not be accused of Sa∣tan,Not accu∣sed. by the Law of God. Hée
is condemned in the earth, that we might be absoluedAbsolued. in heauen. He held his peace for our sinne,Open our mouthes before him which had done no sinne, lest wée should be constrained to hold our peace for our sinnes brought a∣gainst vs into the iudgement of God. He would be buffeted,Freed frō pes. that wée might bée absolued from the stings of our owne conscience, and the buffetings of Satan He suffered himselfe to be mockt,Mockes. that we might mocke at the in∣sulting Satan. His face was co∣uered, that he might remoue the vaile of sinne from vs,Vail of sin. which hin∣ders in vs the sight of God, and brings into vs damnable igno∣rance. He would be stript of his garments, that the garment of innocency, lost by sinne might be restored vnto vs. He is prickt with thornes, that he might heale the compunctions of our heart.
He bore the waight of his Crosse,Heale the heart. that hee might remoue from vs the waight of eternall paine.Remoue burthens. Hee cryeth out that hee was forsaken of God, that hee might prouide an eternall habitation for vs with God.Prouide habitation with God. He thirsted on the Crosse, that hee might deserue for vs the dews of Gods grace,Dew of grace. and lest wee should bee constrained to perish with eternall thirst. Hee would be scorched with the heat of Gods wrath, that hee might take from vs the fire of hell.Take away hell fire. He was iudged, that he might free vs from Gods iudgement. He was pronounced guilty that hee might absolue vs from guilt.Absolue vs Hee was beaten with vnrighteous hands, that he might take away from vs the stripes of the deuil.From the Deuils stripes. He cryed out for griefe, that hee might kéepe vs from euerlasting howlings.Howling. He pow∣red forth teares, that hee might
wipe away our teares.Teares. Hée was dead, that we might liue. He felt the paines of hell throughly,Hell. that we might neuer féele them. Hée was humbled,Pride. that there might a salue be brought for our proud swelling. He was crowned with a thorny crowne,Giue a crowne. Saue all. that hée might deserue for vs the heauenly Crowne. He suffered of all, that he might bring saluation vnto all. His eyes were darkened in death,See hea∣uen. that we might liue in the light of the heauenly glory. He heard con¦tumelies and reproaches, that we might heareHeare Songs. the Iubilies of An∣gels in heauen. 5 Despaire not therefore,No ds∣pire O faithfull soule. The infinite good∣nesse is offended by thy sinnes, but an infinite price is payed for it. Thou art to be iudged for thy sinnes, but the Sonne of God is iudged already for the sinnes
of the whole world, which hée hath taken vpon him. Thy sinnes are to be punisht, but God hath punisht them already in his Sonne. Great are the wounds of thy sins, but precious is the balme of the bloud of Christ. Moses pro∣nounceth thée cursed, because thou hast not kept all things which are written in the booke of the Law, but Christ is made a curse for thée. There is an hand-writing against thée in the Court of heauen, but it is blotted out by Christs bloud. Therefore thy passion, O holy Ie∣sus, is my last refuge. Cum Christo ascendere nostrum est. Ascend w th Christ. 19. Meditation. Of the Ascen∣sion of Christ. THinke, O faithfull soule, on the ascension of thy husband,
Christ hath withdrawne his visi∣ble presence from his faithfull, that Faith might haue her exer∣cise:Wee walke by faith, not by sight. for blessed are they which sée not and beléeue. Where our treasure is, there also let our heart hée. Our treasure, Christ, is in heauen,Col. 3. therefore set our heart adhere to heauenly things, and thinke on those things that are aboue. The Bride desires the returne of the Bridegroome, with most ardent sighs: so the faithfull soule alwayes desireth that the day may come wherein she may be brought vnto the mar∣riage of the Lambe. Let her trust in the earnest of the holy Spirit,Trust the Spirit. which the Lord left her when he descended vnto her. Let her trust in the body and bloud of the Lord,The Te∣stament. which she receiues in the myste∣ry of the Supper. Let her beléeue that our bodies being filled with
this incorruptible food, shall some∣time be raised vp againe. That which we now beléeue, then wée shall sée,Our hope a possessiō. and our spes shall bée res, we shall enioy the substance of our hope: the Lord is present with all trauellers vnder a strange forme, but in the heauenly countrey wée shall sée him, and know him as he is. 1 Now our Sauiour would ascend from mount Oliuet: the Oliue is a signe of peace and ioy, therefore he doth fitly ascend from mount Oliuet, which by his pas∣sion hath brought forth peace and tranquillity to the consciences that were terrified and cast downe.Peace: Hée doth fitly ascend from the mount Oliuet, who is receiued with the greatest triumph of the Court of heauen, because he is the King of Peace. 2 Those mountaine places
do call vs vnto heauenly things:Set affect¦os on heauenly tings. let vs follow with holy desires, because we cannot follow with bodily feet. Moses likewise went vp vnto the Lord, in the mount: the holy Patriarkes worshipped on the Mount: Abraham chose the hills, but Lot the plaines. 3 Let the faithfull soule leaue the plains of the world, and striue with an holy deuotion vnto the hills of heauen:There speakes with God so shall shée per∣ceiue the most swéet talke of God, speaking inwardly vnto her: so in her prayer, shée shall bée able to worship in the Spirit:In spirit. so shall she be able with Abraham, to escapeEcape. the euerlasting conflagration that is prepared for the plaines of the world.Gen. 19. 4 Bethany doth note vnto vs the Village of humilitie and af∣fliction: by which there is an en∣trance for vs to the kingdome of
heauen:Humility, the gate to glory. as Christ also out of the village of affliction, hath descended vnto the heauenly ioyes. Paradise open.5 Hitherto heauen did séeme to be shut, and the vper paradise to be kept by the glittering sword: now Christ the conquerour opens heauen, that he might shew vs the way into our heauenly coun∣trey, from which wee are falne. The disciples did stand with lifted vp eyes,Look thi∣ther. looking into heauen: so the true disciples of Christ lift vp the eyes of their hearts to behold heauenly things. 6 O Lord Iesus, how glorious a conclusion did follow thy Pas∣sion? how happy and how sudden a change was this? what a one did I behold thée suffering in mount Caluary? and what a one do I now behold thée in the mount Oliuet?Alone. there thou wert alone, here accompanied with many
thousands of Angels.With An∣gels. There thou didst ascendAscend. vnto thy Crosse:Crosse. here thou doest ascend in a cloud to heauen.Heauen. There thou wert crucifi∣ed among théeues:With Theeues. here thou doest triumph among the quires of An∣gels.Angels. There thou wert fasten∣ed to the Crosse with nayles,Suffered Deliuered and condemned: here thou art free and a deliuerer of the damned. There thou wert dying and suffe∣ring:Dye. Triumph. here thou art reioycing and triumphing. 7 Christ is our head,The chāge in Christ our ioy. wée are his members: be glad therefore, O faithfull soule, and reioyce in the ascension of thy head. The glory of the head is also the glory of the members. Where our fleshFlesh, raigneth, there let vs beleeue that wée shall raigne: Where our bloudBloud. beares rule, there let vs hope that wée shall be glorious, although our sinnes do hnor
vs, yet the communion of natureNature. doth not repell vs. Where the headHead. is, there also shall the rest of the members be: our Head is en∣tred into heauen, therefore the rest of the members haue iust reason to hope for heauen: not this onely, but they haue already taken their possession in heauen. Came, &c. Ascended for vs.7 Christ came downe out of heauen to redéeme vs: he ascended againe into heauen to glorifie vs. He was borne for vs, he suffered for vs, therefore also he ascended for vs.Ground. Our charitie is grounded on the passion of Christ, our faith on the resurrection, our hope on the ascension. 8 Now we must followFollow. our Husband and Bridegroome, not onely with ardent desires, but also in good worke. Nothing that is defiled shall enter into that Citie that is aboue:Vndefiled. in token whereof the
Angels coming out of the heauen∣ly Ierusalem,Like An∣gels. appeared clothed in white garments: by which is set out vnto vs purenesse and inno∣cency. 9 Pride doth not ascend with the master of humility,Sinnes en∣ter not. nor malice with the author of goodnesse: nor discord with the friend of peace: nor lust and luxury with the Son of the Virgin. Vices do not ascend after the father of vertues: nor sinnes after the Iust: neither can infirmities go after the Physician. He that desires sometimes to be∣hold God face to face, let him also liue worthily in his sight. He that hopes for heauenly things,Hate earth. let him contemne earthly things. Draw our hearts vnto thée. O good Iesus, to Paradise, where thou art.
Electos Deus obsignat spiramine sancto. The elect are sealed by the spi∣rit. 20. Meditation. An Homilie of the holy Ghost. Gift of the holy GhostOVr Lord ascending into the heauens, and entering into his glory, sent the holy Ghost vn∣to his Disciples, on the very day of Pentecost. Euen as in the old Testament, God promulging his Law on mount Sinai, did de∣scend vnto Moses himselfe: so when the Gospel was to bee pro∣pagated, through the whole world by the Apostles, the Spi∣rit it selfe did descend to the Apo∣stles.The Law thundreth There were thunderings, and lightnings, and the most shrill voyce of a trumpet, because the Law doth thunder against our disobedience, and proues vs guil∣tie of the wrath of God: but here is the sound of the WindeGospel sh ill winde.
making a still noyse,Flye. Exod. 20. because the preaching of the Gospel doth lift vp the minds that are cast downe. There was the feare and terror of all the people, because the law worketh wrath: but héere the whole multitude comes toge∣ther,Assembly. Act. 2. Heb. 12. and heares the wonderfull things of God: because there is a passage open for vs vnto God, by the Gospell. There Iehouah comes downe in fire: but in the fire of wrathFire of wrath. and fury, therfore the hill was moued and did smoake: but here Iehouah, the holy Ghost, descends in fire,Fire of loue. but in the fire of loue and charity, from whence the house is not moued with the wrath of God, but rather it is wholly filled with the glory of the holy Ghost. What maruell is it if the holy Ghost be sent out of the Court of heauen to sanctifie man∣kinde, when the Sonne was sent
to redéeme mankinde? the Pas∣sion of Christ had not béene profi∣table, vnlesse it had béene decla∣red vnto the world by the Go∣spell. For what vse is there of a treasureTreasure communi∣cated. that is hid? therefore the most benigne Father not one∣ly prepared a great benefit by the passion of his Sonne, but also would offer it to the whole world, by the sending of the holy Spirit. Two brests1 A faithfull mother giues both her breasts to her tender sonne: our faithfull God sends vnto vs, poore wretches, both his Sonne and his holy Spirit.Sonne and Spirit. But the holy Ghost came vpon the A∣postles when they did continue together with one accord in pray∣er:Spirit of prayer. for it is the spirit of prayer, it is obtained by prayers, and it driues vnto prayers. Why? be∣cause it is that bond by which our
hearts are vnited vnto God,Spirit vni∣teth to God. euen as it vnites the Sonne with the Father, and the Father with the Sonne. For it is the mutuall sub∣stantiall loue of the Father, and of the Sonne. This spirituall con∣iunction of vs with God is made by faith,By faith. but faith is the gift of the Spirit, it is obtained by prayers, but true prayers are made in the Spirit. 2 In the Temple of Solomon when Incense was burned vnto the Lord,Spirituall prayers sweet o∣dours, the Temple was filled with the glory of the Lord: so if thou offerest the swéet odours of prayers vnto God, the glorie of the holy Ghost will fill the temple of thine heart. 3 Let vs here maruell at the mercy and grace of God:Maruel∣lous helpe of prayer. the Fa∣ther promiseth to heare our pray∣ers: the Sonne makes intercessi∣on for vs: the holy Ghost pray∣eth
in vs: the Angels carry our prayers vnto God, and so the whole court of heauen is open to our prayers. Affection.4 The mercifull God giues vs an affection to pray, because he giues vnto vs the spirit of grace, and of prayers. He also giues vn∣to vs the effect of prayer,Effect. because he alwayes heares our prayers, if not according to our will, yet to our profit. 5 The holy Ghost came, when they were all with one accord in one place:Spirit of concord. With Christ, God. Man. forsooth he is the spirit of loue and concord: he ioyneth vs vnto Christ by faith: he ioyneth vs vnto God by charity, he doth vnite vs also with our neighbour by loue. The deuill diuideth.6 The deuill is the author of discord and separation, he sepa∣rates vs by sinnes from God: hée separates men from themselues
by hatred, contentions, and brawles: but the holy Ghost,The spirit ioyneth. as it hath ioyned together in Christ the diuine and humane nature, by his wonderfull ouer-shadowing: so also by his gifts that are poured forth vpon vs: he ioynes together both men with God, and God with men. 7 As long as the holy Ghost remaines in man,As long as he abideth. by his grace and by his gifts, so long man abides vnited vnto God. As soone as man by his sinnes falls from faith and charity, and shakes off the holy Ghost, he is separated from God, and that most blessed vnion is ta∣ken away. 8 He that hath the holy Ghost,No hate of members. hateth not his brother. Why? be∣cause by the spirit he is made par∣taker of the mysticall body of Christ, whose members are all the godly: but who euer hateth
his owne members?Ephes. 5. But loue. Nay, he lo∣ueth his enemies which is gouern∣ed by the Spirit of the Lord. Why? because he that cleaues to the Lord, is made one spirit with him. But now God suffers his Sunne to arise both vpon the good and vpon the euill, and hateth no∣thing of those things that he hath made:Like God. so he that hath the Spirit of God, is ready to serue all, after his power, doth do good vnto all; offers himselfe to bée vsed of all, because God also is the fountaine of all mercy and grace towards all.Spirit wor∣keth Gods Image. Now the holy Ghost brings to passe such motions in man as he himselfe is. Euen as the soule makes the body to haue life, fée∣ling, and mouing: so the Spirit maketh a man spirituall,Maketh spirituall. it doth fill a mans minde with the plea∣sure of Gods swéetnesse, and doth direct all his members to per∣forme
obedience to God and his neighbour. That found came out of heauen, which was a token of the holy Ghosts coming, because that holy Spirit is of an heauenly nature, that is to say,Heauenly of the same essence with the Father and the Sonne, from which Father and Sonne he procéedeth from all eter∣nitie: he makes men also to haue minde of heauenly things, and to séeke those things that are aboue: he that doth yet cleaue to earthly things, and is knit to the loue of the world, he is not made partaker of the holy Spirit. 10 He comes vnder the simi∣litude of a winde or breath,Comforta∣ble. be∣cause he doth minister liuely con∣solation to the afflicted. Because also by a reciprock breath and re∣spiration of the aeriall spirit, wée liue according to the flesh:Life. there∣fore he came vnder the similitude
of spirit and breath, which giues vnto vs, that we liue according to our better part. Joh. 3.11 The winde blows whither it will, and thou hearest the sound thereof,Passing vnderstan∣ding. but knowest not whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is euery one which is begotten of the Spirit. 12 Hée came also agréeably vnder the similitude of breath, which procéeds from the Father and the Sonne at one breathing from euerlasting. That was a ve∣hement breath,Quick∣ning. because the grace of the holy Ghost knowes no slow endeuours. That holy Spi∣rit doth moue the godly, in whom he dwelleth, to euery good worke, and so moues them,Ready. that they nei∣ther care for the threatnings of Tyrants, nor the deceits of Sa∣tan, nor the hatred of the World, but in all temptations serue
God with a ready minde. 13 He bestows on the Apo∣stles the gift of tongues, because their sound ought to go forth into all the earth.Speaking. And so the con∣fusion of tongues which had béene a punishment of the pride and rash∣nesse in building of the Tower of Babel, is taken away: and now the Nations that were dispersed through the diuersitie of langua∣ges,Gather∣ing and conuersing are gathered together by the gift of the holy Ghost into the v∣nitie of faith. He came agréeably vnder the figure of tongues, of whom inspired, the holy men of God haue spoken, which spake in the Apostles, which puts the word of God in the mouthes of the Ministers of the Church. 14 Thinke, O deuout soule, of this great gift which Christ ascending gaue thée. The great goodnesse and mercy of the Lord
is made thine owne onely by his blessed spirit. Thou wast empty, it filleth thée with graces. Thou wast a stranger, it knitteth thée to God. Thou diddest stray like a lost shéepe, the Spirit onely brought thée to the Shepheard of thy soule, and led thée in all truth. Thou wast without hope, the Spirit did fill thée with hope. Ma∣ny were the iust causes of sorrow for feare of sinne to infect thée, the Deuill to accuse thée, God to iudge thée, Hell to swallow thée, the world to faile thée, and euery misery to gnaw vpon thée. The Spirit it is that in all afflictions doth comfort thée, turneth thy teares to ioy, thy sighs to smiles, thy feares to assurance, by assu¦ring thée that the Father doth loue thée and prouide for thée, to whom the Sonne will bring thée. O deare Soule, kéepe safely this
pledge and earnest, of thy happi∣nesse, grieue not him that is thy comfort, quench not that fire that burneth vp thy corruptions, and inflameth thy cold heart with cha∣rity and zeale. Let this swéet lo∣uing Spirit sléepe swéetly in thy breast, and wake him not till himselfe do please. For so great gifts that holy spirit is to be lau∣ded and blessed, together with the Father and the Sonne for e∣uer. Wednesday, Euening Prayer. VVHen I draw neare vnto thee (O Lord my God) and thinke of the many rebelli∣ons and transgressions which I haue committed against thee, me thinkes I cannot but take vp the word of the Prodigall Sonne a∣gainst
my selfe, and say; Father, I haue sinned against heauen and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy sonne: I blush and am ashamed to lift vp mine eyes vnto thee: I think my selfe vnwor∣thy to lift vp mine eyes to heauen; for my sins haue couered my face with confusiō, mine offences haue taken such hold of mee, that I am vnable to looke vp. What shall be done vnto the man that hath dis∣honoured his Father? that hath disobeyed his Master? that hath dealt vnfaithfully with his friend? that hath rebelled against his Prince? that hath sinned against his God? O Lord, I am that sonne of confusion, that seruant of vnduti∣fulnes, that companion of vnfaith∣fulnesse, that subiect of rebellion, that creature of sinne: thy sen∣tence is gone forth against me in thy Word, that I am but the sonne
of death, I haue receiued the sen∣tence of death in my selfe. What helpe, what hope is left vnto mee, wretched and vile sinner? Whither shal I fly to saue me from the tem∣pest of thy wrath? my helpe is in thy mercy, my hope is also in thee, I will flie from thy wrath to thy good pleasure; from thee my God offended with me for my sinne to thee my God appeased toward me in thy Sonne. O Lord vnto me be∣longeth shame and confusion, but to thee mercy and forgiuenes: re∣mit therfore the euil deseruings of thy seruant, for the merits sake and good deseruing of thy Son. Looke O Lord, vpon the face of thine an∣ointed, and hide thy face from my sinnes, and blot out all mine offen∣ces. Take me, O Lord, againe into thy fauour, take me this night also into thy safe protection, watch o∣uer me whilst I sleep: keepe me as
the apple of thine eye: hide me vn∣der the shadow of thy wings: compasse me about with the wall of Angelicall defence: giue sweet sleep to mine eyes, and slumber to my eye-lids, and raise me vp in the morning to walke before thee in thy feare, through thy Son Christ Iesus: To whom, &c. Thursday, Morning Prayer. VVE haue a sure word of promise in thy Word (O gracious, louing, and bountifull God) not onely of spirituall, but also of corporall things, as of food conuenient, and those things that shall bee needfull for this bodily life: yea, the Truth hath taught vs also to pray for daily bread, and confuted our mistrust of hauing sufficient food and rayment, from
thy feeding of the young Rauens that call vpon thee, and cloathing of the Lillies. Now as these things, though not in the first place to be sought, yet are to be sought for; so likewise, though not in the first place, yet are they to be praied for. I therefore, knowing how many things the frailty & necessity of my life requireth, do call vpon thee the Author & giuer of euery good and perfect gift, beseeching thee to giue me things needfull for this life, food and raiment, and a mind therwith content, and cut out vnto me my commons, O Lord, accor∣ding to Agurs wish, neither too much, nor too little, lest plenty and fulnesse make me either to forget or deny thee, lest pouerty & want make me to fall to stealing & take the name of thee (my God) in vaine. And whereas, O Lord, thou hast placed me in a particular cal∣ling,
therein to serue thee here on earth, grant, I pray thee, that herein I may walke conscionably, and blesse thou the workes of mine hands vpon me: make al my waies, mine out-going, and my in-com∣ming to prosper vnto me. Giue me health and strength of body, and a good disposition of minde, that I may be the better fitted vnto all my labours: take from me rebuke and shame, the thing that I feare: vouchsafe me the sweet sauour of a good name, with the testimony of a good conscience, which may refresh and feast mee in this life, and at the end of my pilgrimage here on earth, bring me (O Lord) to euerlasting life. Amen.
Viva est & victrix, si modo vera fides. True faith a liuely conque∣rour. 21. Meditation. Of the na∣ture and properties of true Faith. O Beloued Soule, consider the power of faith,Faith graf¦teth vs in∣to Christ. and giue thanks vnto God the onely giuer of faith It is faith alone that doth graft vs againe into our Sauiour: that as the Vine branches draw iuice out of the Vine, so we may draw out of him life, righteous∣nesse and saluation. 1 Adam fell from the grace of God,Giueth fauour and Gods I∣mage. and lost the Image of God by his incredulitie: but we are re∣ceiued againe into fauour by faith, and the Image of God begins to be reformed in vs. 2 By faith,Christ ours. Christ is made ours, & dwels in vs. But where Christ is, there is the grace of
God. Where is the grace of God, there is the inheritance of euer∣lasting life.Abels sa∣crifice. By faith Abel offe∣red a greater sacrifice to God then Cain: so wée offer spirituall sacrifices to God by faith, that is to say,Henochs translatiō. the fruite of our lips. By faith Henoch was translated: so faith doth translate vs out of the societie of men, into the societie of heauen: yea, euen in this life. For euen now Christ dwells in vs, euen now there is in vs euer∣lasting life,Noahs Ark. but hidden. By faith Noah prepared the Arke: so by faith we go into the Church, in which our soules are saued, all the rest perishing in the vast sea of the world.Abraham left Ido∣latry. By faith Abraham did leaue the Idolatrous land: so by faith we go out of the world, leauing parents, brothers, and kinsfolke, and cleauing to the Word of Christ that calls vs. By
faith hee soiourned as a stranger,Soiourn∣eth. and lookt for the promised land: so wee doe looke for the heauenly Ierusalem, which God hath pre∣pared in Heauen: we are stran∣gers and pilgrims in this world, by faith aspiring to our heauenly countrey. By faith Sara concei¦uedSara con¦ceiued aged. her sonne Isaac in her age: so wee being dead spiritually, doe receiue vertue to conceiue Christ spiritually. For as Christ was once conceiued in the holy bow∣els of the Virgin Mary: so hee is daily borne spiritually in the faithfull soule, which keepes it selfe pure from worldly compa∣nies. 3 By faith Abraham offered Isaac:Abraham offered Isaac. so wée by faith do spiritu∣ally kill and sacrifice our owne will, which is the beloued sonne of our soule. For he that desires to follow Christ, ought to deny
himselfe, that is to say, renounce his owne will, his owne honour, his owne loue. Isaac bles∣sed Iacob.4 By faith Isaac blessed Iacob: so by faith wée are made parta∣kers of all the heauenly blessings. For in the séed of Abraham, that is,Ioseph re∣moued. in Christ, all nations are blessed. By faith Ioseph prophe∣sied of the going of the Israelites out of Egypt, and gaue comman∣dement of his bones: so by faith we looke for a going out of this spirituall Egypt,Moses hid∣den. that is, the world, and an happy resurrection of the body. By faith Moses was kept for thrée moneths: so faith doth hide vs from the tyranny of Satan, till at last we be brought into the regall palace of God, and adopted for spirituall kings. By faith Moses chose rather to bee partaker of the calamities of his people,Chuseth affliction. then to liue in the glory of
Egypt: so faith doth stirre vp in vs a contempt of the glory, ho∣nour, riches, and pleasures of this world, and a desire of the heauen∣ly kingdome. By faith we chose rather the rebukes of Christ, then the treasures of this world. By faith Moses left Egypt,Left E¦gypt. neither feared the kings wrath: so faith doth animate and confirme vs, that we be not terrified with the threatnings of the tyrants of this world, but that with a valiant and constant minde we obey God when he calls. By faith Israel did celebrate the Passeouer:The Passe∣ouer. and we also by faith do celebrate our Passeouer Christ. Our Passe∣ouer is sacrificed for vs, whose flesh is meat indéed, and whose bloud is drinke indéed.Israelites passe the Red sea. By faith the Israelites passed ouer thorow the Red-sea: so wée by faith do passe thorow the Sea of this
world. By faith the walls of Ie∣richoIericho falleth. fell downe: so we by faith do destroy all the munitions of Satan.Rahab safe. By faith Rahab was sa∣ued: so in that vniuersall ouer∣throw of the whole world, by faith we shall be saued from destructi∣on.Fathers mighty by faith. By faith the Fathers ouer∣came kingdoms, stopt the mouthes of Lyons, put out the force of fire: so wee also by faith destroy the kingdome of Satan, escape the snares and rage of the infernall Lion, and are fréed from the bur∣ning of the fire of hell. Faith, where it is5 Howbeit faith is not a bare opinion and profession, but a liue∣ly and effectuall apprehension of Christ proposed in the Gospell: it is a most full perswasion of the grace of God, a fiduciall rest of our heart, and peace relying on the merit of Christ. 6 This faith springs out of
the séed of the word of God.It springs from the Word. For faith and the spirit are one: but the Word is the Waggon of the holy Ghost The fruit follows the nature of his séed.Fruit of diuine seed Faith is a diuine fruit, therefore there must be a di∣uine séed, that is to say, the Word. Euen as in the creation the light did spring out of the Word of God: for God spake, and the light was made: so the light of Faith springs out of the light of Gods Word. In thy light shall we sée light, saith the Psalmist. All the Word is light: but the word of promise bringeth in Christ, that Sunne that enlightneth euery one that commeth into the world. There faith doth spring from the word of promise as from the grea∣test light. 7 Séeing Faith doth ioyne vnto vs Christ:Mother of  vertues séeing Faith doth vnite vs with Christ, therefore
it is also in vs the mother of all vertues. Where is faith, there is Christ: where Christ is, there is an holy life, that is to say, true humilitie, true méeknesse, true loue.Without Christ we can do nothing. Joh. 15. Christ and the holy Spirit are not disioyned: where the holy Spirit is, there is true holinesse. Therefore where there is not an holy life, there is no holy Spirit: where there is no Spirit,No Chri∣stian life, no faith. there is no Christ, where there is no Christ, there is no true faith at all. What branch soeuer doth not draw life and iuice out of the Vine, it is not to be iudged to bée ioyned with the Vine: so we are not as yet ioyned vnto Christ by faith, vnlesse wée draw life and iuice out of him. Faith is a cer∣taine spirituall light: for our hearts are enlightened by faith:Faith light. therefore it scatters abroad the beames of good workes. Where
there are not the beames of a spi∣rituall life, there also, as yet, is not the true light of faith.Ill works darknesse. Euill workes are the workes of darke∣nesse: but faith is light. Now what society hath the light with darknesse? Euill workes are the séed of Satan, faith is the séed of Christ. Now what societie hath Christ with Satan?Faith pu∣rifieth. By faith our hearts are purified: but how can there bée an inward pu∣rity of the heart, where impure words and impure workes ap∣peare from without?Ouerco∣meth. Faith is our victory: therefore how can there be true faith, where the flesh ouercomes the spirit, and leades it as it were captiue? By faith wée haue Christ, and in Christ eternall life: but no impe∣nitent person and that perseuers in his sinnes, is partaker of eter∣nall life: how therefore of Christ?
how therefore of faith? Kindle in vs, O holy Iesus, the light of true faith that by faith we may attaine euerlasting saluation. Solvit mea debita Christus. Christ payes my debts. 22. Meditation. Of the Recon∣ciliation with God. Christ our buckler. Gen. 15.TRuly God hath taken vpon him our infirmities, and hée hath borne our griefes. O Lord Iesus, that which deserued in vs eternal punishment, that hast thou translated vpon thy selfe.Refreshing Mat. 11. Thou hast taken vpon thée the burthen that was ready to presse vs down vnto hell. Thou art wounded for our iniquities,Health. and thou art smit∣ten for our sinnes. By thy stripes we are healed. The Lord hath laid on thee the iniquities of vs all.Wonder∣ful change Wonderfull truly is the change,
thou translatest our sinnes on thy selfe, and thou giuest thy righte∣ousnesse vnto vs: thou layest death, that was due vnto vs, on thy selfe, and giuest vnto vs thy life. I can∣not therefore by any meane doubt of thy grace,No cause of despaire Christ ta∣keth the worst that is in vs. or despaire for my sinnes. 1 Thou hast translated that which was worst in vs on thy selfe: how shalt thou despise that which is best in vs and thy worke, that is to say, our body and our soule.Leaueth vs not. Psal. 32. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell, neither wilt thou suf∣fer thine holy One to sée corrupti∣on. For he is truly holy, whose sinnes are abolished and taken a∣way: he is happy, whose iniquities are remitted, to whom the Lord doth not impute sinnes. 2 How can the Lord impute our sinnes to vs, when hée hath imputed them to another? for the
wickednesse of his people he strook his most beloued Son:Strooke for vs. he there∣fore with his knowledge shall iu∣stifie many, and he shall beare their iniquities. 3 How shall he iustifie his? Heare,Christ iu∣stifieth. O souls, and attend: he will iustifie them which cleaue vnto him by knowledge:By know∣ledge. that is to say, by a sauing acknowledgement of Gods mercy and grace in Christ, and by a firme apprehension of the same by faith.Faith. This is life eternal, that they know thée the onely true God,Ioh. 17. and whom thou hast sent, thy Sonne Iesus Christ: and therefore if thou shalt confesse thy Lord Iesus with thy mouth,Rom. 10. and shalt beléeue in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saued. Satisfacti∣on.4 But faith doth apprehend the satisfaction of Christ. For he hath borne the sinnes of his: hée
hath taken vpon him the sinnes of many, and hath made request for the transgressors. For truly he had had none iust, vnlesse hée had mercifully receiued the sin∣ners. 5 Thou shouldest haue,No con∣demnation to the faithfull. O Ie∣sus, few iust, vnlesse thou didst remit their sinnes to the vniust. How then shall Christ iudge the sinnes of the penitent in seuere iudgement, which hée hath taken vpon himselfe? how shall he con∣demne him that is guilty of sinne, when he himselfe was made sin? He shal iudge those whom he calls friends: he shall iudge those for whom he hath prayed: he shall iudge those for whom hée hath dyed. 6 Lift vp thy selfe,Haue peace with God. Rom. 5. O my Soule, and forget thy sinnes, be∣cause the Lord hath forgotten them. Whom dost thou feare to
take vengeance of thy sinnes, but the Lord which hath satisfied for thy sinnes?No other name vn∣der hea∣uen. If any one else had payed the price for my sinnes, I might as yet doubt whether the iust Iudge would accept that sa∣tisfaction. If any man or Angel had satisfied for me, it might bée doubted whether the price of the redemption were sufficient. But now there is no place left for doubting.No feare. 7 How shall he not accept the price which he payed himselfe? how shall that not hée sufficient which was paid by God himselfe? Why art thou as yet troubled, O my soule?Mercy and Iustice do comfort vs. All the wayes of the Lord are mercy and truth: for the Lord is iust, and iust is his iudge∣ment. Why art thou troubled, O my soule? let the mercy of God lift thée vp: let the iustice of God comfort thée. For if God be iust,
he will not exact a double punish∣ment for one onely fault. For our sinnes he smote his Sonne: how shall he smite vs his seruants for the same? how shall he punish in vs the sinnes thae were punished in his Sonne? for the truth of the Lord shall not faile for euer.Truth. I will not the death of a sinner, but that he may be conuerted and liue, cryes our God. 8 Come vnto me, all ye that labour and are heauy laden, and I will refresh you, cryes our Saui∣our. Shall we go about to con∣uince God of a lye? and shall wée endeauour to depresse his mercy with the weight of our sinnes?The grea∣test sinne to distrust God. To accuse the Lord of a lye, and to deny his mercy, is a greater sinne then all the sinnes of the whole world: when Iudas sinned more in despairing, then the Iews in cru∣cifying Christ.
Grace most rich.8 But rather where sinne hath abounded, there grace hath a∣bounded also, which is infinitely more weighty then the ballance of our sinnes. For the sinnes are of men, but the grace is of God. Sinnes are temporall, but the grace of our Lord is from euer∣lasting to euerlasting. Satisfacti∣on is made for my sinnes: the grace of God is repaired by the death of Christ, and establisht for euer, to whom I flye with all de∣uotion and humilitie. Sacrum Baptismalauacrum est. An holy bath is Baptisme. 23. Meditation. Of the fruites of Baptisme. REmember, O faithfull soule, the great grace of God shew∣ed vnto thée in the wholesome bath of Baptisme. Baptisme is the washing of regeneration:
therefore séeing thou art dipt in the font of Baptisme,New birth thou art not altogether in the oldnesse of the carnall natiuitie: but because thou art borne of God, that is, by water and the Spirit,Sonne and heire. therefore thou art also a sonne of God, and because a sonne, therefore also an heire of eternall felicitie. 1 For as the eternall Father at the Baptisme of Christ, vtter∣ed this voice:Mat. 4: This is my beloued Sonne: so all that do beléeue and are baptised, he doth adopt for sonnes. Euen as in the Baptisme of Christ, the holy Ghost appea∣red in the shape of a Doue: so al∣so in our Baptisme, the same spi∣ritReceiueth the Spirit. of the Sonne of God is pre∣sent, and giueth force vnto it. Yea, by Baptisme he is bestowed on the beléeuers: and he worketh new motions in them, that they may bée prudent as Serpents,
and simple as Doues. 2 As it was in the Creation: so it is also in our regeneration. In the first creation of things the Spirit of the Lord rested on the waters, and gaue vnto them vitall force: so also in the water of Bap∣tisme the holy Ghost is present,Spirit of life. and makes it the wholsome means of our regeneration. Our Saui∣our Christ himselfe would be bap∣tised, that hée might make it knowne that wee are made his members by Baptisme.Christs members. Physicke to the head for the members. Often∣times physicke is applyed to the head, that the other members of the body may be healed: our spiri∣tuall head is Christ, he tooke the physick of Baptisme for the health of his mysticall bodie. 3 In the Circumcision God did enter into a couenant with his people in the old Testament: so by baptisme we are receiued into
the Couenant of God in the new Testament,Enter into the king∣dome of heauen. because Baptisme succéeded in the place of Circum∣cision. He therefore that is in the couenant of God, let him not feare the accusation of the deuill. 4 In Baptisme Christ is put on.Christ put on. Hence the Saints are said to haue made white their long robes in the bloud of the Lambe. The perfect righteousnesse of Christ is that most faire garment.As a robe. Hée therefore that is clothed with this garment, let him not feare the spots of sinne. There was at Ie∣rusalem a poole about the shéepe-market,Iohn 5. into which at a certaine time an Angel did descend and trouble it: he that first after the troubling of the water did go downe into it, was healed of whatsoeuer disease hée was hol∣den.All diseases cured. The water of Baptisme is that poole which doth heale vs
from euery disease of sins, when the holy Ghost descends into it, and troubles it with the bloud of Christ, which was made a sacri∣fice for vs: as also in time past in that fish-poole at Ierusalem the sacrifices were washed. Heauens gate.5 About the Baptisme of Christ, the heauens were opened: so also in our Baptisme the gate of heauen is opened. In the Bap∣tisme of Christ there was present the whole holy Trinitie: so also he is present in our Baptisme.Trinitie present. And so in that word of promise which is annext vnto the element of water, faith receiues the grace of God that adopts,Receiued. the merit of the Sonne that cleanseth, and the efficacie of the holy Ghost that regenerates. Pharaoh and all his Armie was drowned in the Red-sea, the Israelites passed thorow well and safely: so in Baptisme
all the army of vices is drowned,Vice drow∣ned. and the faithfull come safely to the promised inheritance of the heauenly kingdome. Therefore Baptisme also is that Sea of Christall glasse,Reu. 4. & 15. which Iohn saw thorow, as thorow a certaine glasse, the bright shining of the Sunne of righteousnesse doth en∣ter into our minds.Washed white be∣fore the Throne. But that Sea of glasse was before the throne of the Lambe: the throne of the Lambe is the Church, in which alone is found the grace of holy Baptisme. 6 The Prophet Ezekiel saw waters going out of the Tem∣ple,Chap. 47. Waters of health is∣sue out of th Tem∣ple. which did quicken and heale all things: in the spirituall Tem∣ple of God; that is, the Church, do as yet spring forth the whol∣some waters of Baptisme, into the depth whereof our sinnes are cast: all things shall bee healed
and liue, to which that brooke shall come. 7 Baptisme is the spirituall Deluge,Drowne sinne. in which all the flesh of sinne is drowned: the vncleane crow or deuill goeth out, but the Doue or holy Ghost flyes backe, and inspires into our mindes, the leafe of Oliue, that is, peace and tranquility. Memora∣ble fauors.8 Remember therefore, O faithfull soule, that great fauour that was shewed vnto thée in Baptisme, and giue due thankes vnto God. 9 Howbeit by how much the grace bestowed vpon vs by Bap∣tisme is more plentifull, by so much there ought to be a more di∣ligent custody of the gifts that are conferred.Keep them We are buried with Christ by Baptisme into his death: therefore as Christ was raised vp from the dead, into the
glory of the Father, so let vs al∣so walke in newnesse of life.New life. Wée are made whole, therefore let vs sinne no more,Sinne no more. lest a worse thing happen vnto vs. We haue put on Christs righteousnesse, a most precious garment, therefore let vs not defile it with the spots of sinnes. Our old man is crucified,Fall not. and dead in Baptisme: therefore let our new man liue.Mortifie the old man. Wée are regenerate and renued in the spi∣rit of our minde in Baptisme: therefore let not the flesh raigneLet it not raigne. ouer the Spirit. Old things are past away, behold, all things are made new: let not the oldnesse of the flesh therefore preuaile ouer the newnesse of the Spirit. Wée are made the sonnes of God by spirituall regeneration: therefore let vs leade a life worthy of such a Father.Walk wor∣thy our Father. We are made the tem∣ple of the holy Ghost: let vs pre∣pare therefore an acceptable rest∣ing place for so great a ghest.Clense the San∣ctuary We are receiued into the couenant of God, let vs take héed therefore that we serue not vnder the deuils pay,Keepe co∣uenant. and so fall from the grace of the couenant. 10 Bring all these things to passe in vs, O blessed Trinity, which art one God: thou hast gi∣uen vs so great grace in baptisme, giue vs also perseuerance in so great grace. Thursday Noone. Psal 85.13.O Lord God, be thou my light and defence: giue me grace and worship, and no good thing withhold from me that am thy seruant.
Christi Ecclesia sponsa. The Church Christs Bride. 24 Meditation. Of the Digni∣tie of the Church. THinke, O deuout soule, how great a benefit God hath be∣stowed vpon thée,Commu∣nion. that hee hath called thée to the communion of his Church. My beloued is one, saith the Husband in the Canti∣cles: one indéed, because the true and orthodoxe Church is one one∣ly, the beloued Spouse of Christ.One Church. Without the bodie of Christ is not the Spirit of Christ, but hée which hath not the spirit of Christ is not his: he that is not Christs,One spirit▪ cannot be made partaker of eter∣nall life. 1 All without the Arke of Noah,Without, all perish, 1 Pet. 3. were constrained to perish in the deluge: without the spiri∣tuall Arke of the Church all are
folded vp in euerlasting destructi∣on.Not Gods sonnes. Hee shall not haue God his Father in heauen, which hath not the Church his Mother on the earth. Meditate on this.2 Thinke, O deuout Soule, that euery day many thousand soules go downe into hell, there∣fore, because they are without the bosome of the Church. Nature hath not separated thée from them, but the grace of God alone that tooke pity vpon thée. When Egypt was wrapped vp in pal∣pable darknesse,Darknes. amongst the Is∣raelites onely was light: so in the Church alone is the light of the knowledge of God: they which are without the Church, passe from the darkenesse of ignorance in this life present, to the darke∣nesse of eternall damnation in the life following. He that is not a portion of the Church Militant,
shall neuer bée a portion of the Church triumphant.Vnsepara∣ble com∣munion. For these things are most inwardly ioyned together, God, the Word. Faith, Christ, the Church, and Life eter∣nall. 3 The holy Church of God is a Mother, a Virgin, and a Spouse.Mother. She is a Mother, because she doth daily bring forth sonnes vnto God:Virgin. she is a Virgin, because shée doth kéepe her selfe cleane from the embracements of the Deuill and the World: shée is a Spouse,Spouse. be∣cause Christ hath espoused her to himselfe, in an euerlasting coue∣nant, and hath giuen her the car∣nest of the Spirit. 4 The Church is that ShipShip. which carries Christ and his Dis∣ciples, and brings vs at last to the hauen of eternall happinesse: the Church sailes, being furnished with the sterne of Faith, with an
happy course through the Sea of this world,Steerman. hauing God her stéer∣man:Rowers. Fraight. the Angels her Rowers: carrying the Quires of all the Saints: and in the midst of her, as her Mast,Mast. is set vp the whole∣some trée of the Crosse, on which are hanged vp the sailes of the faith of the Gospel:Winde. by which the holy Ghost blowing on them, she is brought to the security of the eternall rest. Vineyard. Isa. 5. Planted.5 The Church is that Vine∣yard which God hath planted in the field of this world: which he hath watered with his bloud:Watred. which he hath compast with the hedgeHedged. of Angelicall protection: in it he hath built the wine-presseWine-presse. of his passion: and out of it he hath taken stonesStones ta∣ken out. & stumbling blocks.Reu. 12. The Church is that WomanWoman clothed. which is clothed with the Sunne, because shée is couered with
Christs righteousnesse:Her foot∣stoole. she treads the Moone vnder her féet, because she despiseth earthly things, that are subiect to diuers changes: crowned with starres for celestiall doctrine. 6 Consider this great dignitie of the Church, O deuout Soule,Meditati∣ons. and giue due thanks vnto God. Verily, great are the benefits of God in the Church, but they are not obuious vnto all. It is a gar∣denA garden. that is inclosed, and a foun∣taine that is sealed vp: no man sées the beautie of a garden that is inclosed, but he which is in it; so no man acknowledgeth these great benefits in the Church, but hée which is in it himselfe. 7 This Spouse of Christ is blacke outwardly,Blackes Psal 45. but faire in∣wardly: for great is the glory of the Kings daughter within. This ship is shaken with diuers tem∣pests
of persecution,Shaken. yet ariueth safe to her desired hauen. This Vineyard being downe, is raised vp:Cut. being cut, is increased. The infernall Dragon himselfe doth diuers wayes lay waite for this woman. Among Thornes.8 The Church is a faire Lil∣ly, but yet amongst thornes. The Church is a most faire Garden, but when the North windeWinde. of tri∣bulations blow vpon it, then do her Spices giue their smell. The Church is the daughter of God: but very much hated of the world. Shée lookes for the heauenly heri∣tage,Hated. therefore she is constrained to be a pilgrimePilgrime. in this world. In her pilgrimage she is opprest: in her pressure she is silent: in her si∣lence she is strong and valiant: in her strength she ouercomes. The Church is a spirituall mother:Mother vnder the Crosse. but she is constrained to stand vnder
the Crosse, as also Mary, of whom Christ was borne into the world, stood vnder the Crosse. The Church is a Palme, because it grows more and more vnder the weight of tribulations and temp∣tations.Palme. 9 Thinke, O deuout soule,Depend on thy mother. of the dignitie of the Church: and take héed thou do nothing that is vnworthy of her. The Church is a mother, take héed therefore that thou contemne not her voyce. She is a mother, therefore thou oughtest to hang vpon her breasts. The brests of the Church are the Word and Sacraments. The Church is a Virgin:Keepe thy Virginity▪ if there∣fore thou bée her true sonne, ab∣staine from the embracings of the world. Thou art a member of the Virin Church: sée that thou prostitute not thy Virgins members, and commit whore∣dome
with the Deuill through sinne. 10 The Church is the SpouseBe a good Spouse. of Christ, as also euery deuout soule: let her take héed therefore that she cleaue not to the deuill. Thou art the spouse of Christ, sée that thou léese not the earnest of the holy Ghost that is giuen vnto thée. Thou art the Spouse of Christ, pray daily that thy Hus∣band may make haste and bring thee in to the heauenly marriage. Now thy husband will come in the night of security: watch there∣fore, lest when thy husband shall come he finde thée sléeping, and shut against thee the gate of eter∣nall saluation. Let the oyleHaue oyle. of thy faith shine, lest at the comming of the Bridegroome thou be constrai∣ned to desire it in vaine. Make not shipwrack.11 Thou art carried in a ship: sée that thou cast not thy self head∣long
into the sea of the world, be∣fore thou come to the hauen. Thou art carried in a ship, pray that it be not swallowed vp of the tempests of afflictions, and of the waues of temptations. 12 Thou art called into the Vineyard of the Lord:Labour. sée that thou labour stoutly, let the consi∣deration of thy hire, the penny, take away from thée the tedious∣nesse of the day. Thou art the Vineyard of the Lord,Prune thee. cast away the vnprofitable branches, the vn∣fruitfull workes of the flesh: and thinke that the whole time of thy life, is the time of pruning and cutting. Thou art a branch in the true Vine Christ: sée that thou a∣bide in him, and beare much fruit,Ioh. 15. because the heauenly Husband∣man will take away the branch that beares not fruit, and will purge that which beares fruit,
that it may bring forth more fruit. Thou hast put on Christ by faith,Affect not earthly things. Col. 3. and art clothed with this Sunne of iustice: kéepe therefore thy gar∣ments, lest thou walke naked: sée that thou tread the Moone, that is, all earthly things vnder thy féet, and in respect of the euerlast∣ing good things, estéeme little of all things. O good Iesus, which hast brought vs into the Church mili∣tant, bring vs also at length into the Church triumphant. Animarum sponsus Iesus. Iesus the Soules Bride∣groome. 25. Meditation. Of the spiritual marriage of Christ and our Soule. Christ the Husband.I Will espouse thée for euer to my selfe, saith Christ to the faithfull soule. Christ would be present at the marriage that was celebrated
at CanaTestified at Cana. in Galilée, that he might shew that he came into the world to spirituall marriage. Reioyce in the Lord, and triumph, O faithfull soul, in thy God, which doth cloath thée with the garmentsThe bride▪ garments of salua∣tion, and compasseth thée about with the vesture of righteousnesse, as a Spouse adorned with iewels. Reioyce for the honour of thy hus∣band:A husband chiefe of a thousand. Cant. reioyce for the comelinesse of thine Husband: reioyce for the loue of thine Husband. 1 His honour is very great, for he is the true God, blessed for euer: how great therefore is the dignity of this creature, that is to say, the faithfull soule, that the CreatorA Creator Comely. Psal 45. himselfe will espouse her vnto himselfe! His comelinesse is very great, for hée is fairer then the sons of men. Truly they saw his glory, as the glory of the onely begotten of the Father: his face did
shine like the Sunne, his gar∣ments were like snow:Mat. 17. grace is poured out in his lips: hee was crowned with honour and glory. A part of how great mercyVnspeaka∣ble mercy. there∣fore is it, that bright beauty doth not scorne to chuse vnto himselfe for a Spouse, the soule deformed with the spots of sinne? there is very great maiestie of the part of the Bridegroome, very great infir∣mitie of the part of his Bride: ve¦ry great comelinesse of the part of the Bridegroome, very great de∣formitie of the part of the Bride: and greater is the loue of the Bridegroome toward his Bride,Loue. then of the Bride toward that most honoured and beautifull Bridegroome. 2 Sée the vnmeasurable loue of thy Bridegroome, O faithfull soule. Loue drew him from hea∣uen to the earth, bound him to a
pillar, fastened him to the Crosse, shut him vp in the sepulchre, and drew him downe to hell. Who did all these things but loue toward his Spouse?Vnkinde Spouse. but our heart is more heauy then stone and lead, that the bond of so great loue doth not draw it vpwards vnto God, since first it drew God downe vnto men. The Spouse was naked, neither could shée so naked bée brought into the royall Palace of the heauenly kingdome:Hee clo∣thed her that was naked. hée clo∣thed her with the garments of saluation and righteousnesse, when shée lay wrapped in the lothsome garment of her sinnes, and in the most filthy rags of her iniquitie: he granted her, that shée should couer her selfe with shining and white Silke, which Silke are the righteousnesses of the Saints. This garment was gotten by the righteousnesse, death,Reu. 19. and
passion of the Husband himselfe. 3 Iacob did labour fourtéene yeares, that he might get Rachel to wife:Serueth more then Iacob. Christ for almost foure and thirtie yeares did sustain hunger, thirst, cold, pouerty, ignominies, reproaches, bands, scourges, the bitternesse of gall, death, the crosse, that hee might get the faithfull soule a Spouse for himselfe. 4 Sampson went downe, and from amongst the Philistines, a people adiudged to destruction,Excelleth Sampsons loue. he sought him a wife: the Sonne of God comes downe, and chooseth him a Spouse from amongst men that were condemned & adiudged to eternall death. Rom. 5. Enemies reconciled5 The kindred of his Spouse was at enmity with his heauenly Father, but he hath reconciled it to his Father by his most bitter passion. His spouse was defiled in her owne bloud,Filthy. and cast out in
the face of the earth, but he hath washedWashed. her with the water of Baptisme, and made her cleane in a most holy Bath. Hée hath cleansed the bloud of the Spouse with his owne bloud, because the bloud of the Sonne of God doth cleanse vs from all sinnes. 6 His Spouse was foule and deformed,Deformed Beautifull but he hath anointed her with oyle, that is to say, with mercy and grace. His spouse was not honourably attired, but hée gaue vnto her bracelets, and eare∣rings, and adorned her with ver∣tues, and diuers gifts of the holy Ghost. His spouse was most poore,Poore cn∣riched. and had nothing that shée might giue in stead of earnest, therefore he left vnto her the earnest of the Spirit, and tooke from her the earnest of the flesh, and brought it into Heauen. His Spouse was hungry: but he gaue vnto her fine
flower and hony, and oyle to eate: hée féeds her with his flesh,Hungry fed. and with his owne bloud vnto euer∣lasting life. His Spouse is disobe∣dient,Adultresse conuerted, is accept∣ed. and oftentimes breaks her faith plighted in Marriage, shée commits fornication with the world and the Deuill: but out of his infinite loue, her husband takes her againe into fauour, as often as in true conuersion she re∣turns vnto him. 7 Acknowledge, O faithfull soule, so many and so great tokens of his infinite loue. Loue, O faith∣full soule, the loue of him, which for the loue of thée came downe into the wombe of the Virgin.Loue him againe. By so much ought wée to loue him more then our selues, by how much he is greater, which hath deliuered himselfe for vs. Let all our life be made confor∣mable vnto him, which for the
loue of vs hath conformed him∣selfe wholly vnto vs: he is accoun∣ted deseruedly most vnthankfull, which loues not him againe that loueth him: how much therefore is he to be beloued of vs, which for the loue of vs hath forgotten as it were his owne Maiesty? Happy is the soule which is ioy∣ned vnto Christ in the bond of this spirituall marriage.True hap∣pinesse, It doth apply all those benefits of Christ to her selfe safely and confidently: as otherwise in marriage, the wife shines bright by the beames of her husband.By faith we are ma∣ried to Christ. Engraf∣feth, But we are made partakers of his happy and spi∣rituall marriage by faith alone, as it is written, I will espouse thee to my selfe in faith. Faith doth graft vs branches into Christ, as it were the spirituall Vine, that we may draw life and iuyce out of him. And euen as they that
liue in marriage, are no more two but one flesh: so they which cleaue vnto the Lord by faith,Maketh one with him. are made one spirit with him, because Christ dwels in our hearts by faith, and that faith, if it be true, is working through loue, as a good trée beareth fruit. 8 Euen as in the old Testa∣ment the Priests were constrain∣ed to marry Virgins:Present thy selfe a Virgin. so that hea∣uenly Priest doth couple such a Virgin to himselfe spiritually, which kéepeth her selfe whole and vndefiled from the embracements of the Deuill, the World, and her owne Flesh. Make vs worthy, O Christ, that one day wée may bée ledde in to the marriage of the Lambe. Amen.
Quid Deus est animae? lux, medicina, cibus. What is God vnto the soule? Light, Physicke, Meat. Prou. 9. 26. Meditation. Of the spiri∣tuall repast of the Soule. THE most bountifull God hath prepared a great ban∣quet,Banquet. but wée must bring hunger-bitten hearts vnto it. Hée doth not perceiue the swéetnesse of the heauenly banquet, which tastes it not, he tasts it not, that hungersHunger. not. To beléeue in Christ,Ioh. 6. is to come to the heauenly banquet: but no man can beléeue, but hée which acknowledging his sinnes; is truly contrite and penitent. Contrition is the spirituall hun∣ger of the soule: faith is the hand, mouth, and stomacke that recei∣ueth, and profitably digesteth this spirituall food. 1 God gaue Manna to the Is∣raelites in the Desart, the bread
of Angels: in this banquet of the new Testament God giues the heauenly Manna,Christ the true Man∣na. that is to say, his grace, the forgiuenesse of sins, nay, his owne Sonne, the Lord of the Angels. Ioh. 6.2 Christ is that true heauen∣ly bread, which came downe from heauen, that hée might giue life vnto the world. He that is full of the huskes of hogges, that is to say, of the delights of this world, doth not desire that swéetnesse. The outward man doth not per∣ceiue what is swéet to the in∣ward. God giues his Manna in the Desart, that is to say, where all earthly food,Giuen where is no food. all earthly conso∣lation is withdrawne from the soule. They that haue Wiues delay to come: the chaste virgins, that is,Virgins. the soules which nei∣ther cleaue to the Deuill through sinne, nor to the World through
delights, doe come to this ban∣quet. I haue espoused you a chast virgin to one man, saith the Apo∣stle:Beware Adultery. our soule ought not to giue it selfe to spirituall adultery, that God may contract with it spiri∣tuall marriage, and so bring it to his heauenly banquet, where doth enter none that is vncleane They that were with-held with the delight of séeing of the field, did refuse to come, they which loue the pleasures of this world,Pleasures. doe not aspire to the heauenly sweetnesse. Desire is the foote of the Soule, our soule doth not come to this mysticall banquet, if it doth not desire it: the soule that is filled with the consolation of this world, cannot desire the heauenly sweetnesse.Riches. When the rich yong man heard, that the riches to which his soule did sticke fast, must bee forsaken for
Christ, he departed heauy. Christ the heauenly Elizeus,Filleth the empty, not rich. Christ doth not poure in the oyle of celestiall swéetnesse, vnlesse all the vessels be first empty: the loue of God doth not enter into our soule, vn∣lesse the loue of our selues, and the loue of the world, do first go out of it.Loue draweth. Where our treasure is, there is our heart: if the world be thy treasure, thy heart is on the world. The force of loue is to vnite, if thou louest the earth, thou art v∣nited to the earth.Vniteth. The force of loue is to change,Changeth. if thou louest the world, thou shalt become worldly, if thou louest heauen, thou shalt be heauenly. Couetous.3 They that buy Oxen, and do trade, come not vnto Christ: they that cleaue vnto riches with their heart, séeke not the heauenly ri∣ches. Earthly riches fill the desire of the soule with a certaine false
shew of sufficiency: lest it should go to séeke her true sufficiency in God, which doth fully satiate. All earthly riches consist in the crea∣tures, in siluer, gold, buildings, grounds, cattell: but no creature doth truly satiate our soule, be∣cause that it is more excellent than all the creatures,No satiety in earth. for all of them were made for her vse. How weak the creatures are to fill and satiate our desires, appeares in death, in which we are forsaken of all the creatures.Flye at death. It is a wonder that we sticke so firmly to the creatures, when they sticke so weakly and vnconstantly to vs. 4 Adam when he turned him∣selfe away from the comfort of God,Lust of the world, is the losse of life. and sought deli ht in the trée of the knowledge of good and euill, he was driuen out of Para∣dise: our soule if it turne it selfe from God to the creatures, is
depriued of the heauenly consola∣tion, and is driuen altogether from the trée of life. Neglect∣ers depri∣ued of food.5 But what remains to them which neglect this banquet? the world passeth away, and all that cleaue vnto it: the creatures passe away, and all that put their hope in them. The heauenly Father sweares that they shall not taste of his Supper, which preferre Oxen, Farmes, Wiues, that is to say, whatsoeuer earthly things, before the swéetnesse of the hea∣uenly Banquet. After Supper there is no more meat prouided, when Christ is neglected, there remaineth no further remedie. Those contemners shall bée pu∣nished with eternall famine,Famished. and shall liue in euerlasting darke∣nesse, which would not heare Christs calling, Come vnto mée yée which labour, and are laden.
They shall heare him sometime commanding, Go ye cursed into euerlasting fire.Cursed. 6 The Sodomites were con∣sumed with fire,Like So∣domites. when called to this banquet by the preaching of Lot, they refused to come: the fire of the wrath of God that endures for euer, shall consume them, which being called by the Gospel, haue despised this banquet. When the Bridegroome was comming,Foolish Virgins. the Virgins, whose Lamps were destitute of oyle, made delay; in the meane time the gate was shut: they whose hearts are not filled with the oyle of the holy Ghost in this world, Christ will not let them into his ioy, but the gate of indulgence shall be shut against them, the gate of mercy, the gate of consolation, the gate of hope, the gate of grace, the gate of good works.
7 There is as yet a certaine inward calling of Christ: happy is he which heares it.Happy hearers, knockers by sighes. Chiist often∣times knocks at the doore of our hearts by holy desires, by deuout sighes, by holy cogitations, happy is he that opens to him when hée knocks. 8 As soone as thou féelest any holy desire of heauenly grace in thy heart,Desire. set downe this surely with thy selfe, that Christ doth knocke at thy heart:Open. let him in, lest he passe away, lest he shut a∣gainst thée afterward the gate of his mercy. 9 As soone as thou féelest any little flame of holy meditations in thy heart,Medita∣tion. thinke that it is kindled by the heat of the loue of God, that is to say, of the holy Ghost: foster and cherish that flame, that it may grow out into a fire of loue: take héed that thou quench not the
Spirit, and hinder the worke of the Lord. 10 He that destroyes the tem∣ple of the Lord, shall féele his se∣uere iudgement. 11 The temple of the Lord is our heart: that doth hée destroy,Destroyers of the tem∣ple. which refuseth to giue place to the holy Ghost, calling him in∣wardly by the Word. In the old Testament the Prophets could heare the Lord speaking inward∣ly: in the new Testament all that are truly godly, do féele those in∣ward motions and drawings of the holy Ghost. Blessed are all which heare and follow. Mirari, non rimari sapientia vera est. Wisedome wondreth, enquireth not. 27. Meditation. Of the myste∣rie of the Lords Supper. IN the holy Supper of the Lord, there is a great and
wonderfull mystery proposed vn∣to vs, there is the treasureThe Sup∣per a trea∣sure. and store house of the grace of God. We know that the Trée of LifeA tree of life. was planted of God, whose fruit should keepe our first parents, and their posteritie, in the happinesse of the immortalitie wherein they were created. There was also placed in Paradise the Trée of the knowledge of good and euill.Which lost by sinne. But euen that same which was giuen of God for their health and life, and for the exercise of their obedience, that was an occasion of death and damnation: while they poore wretches are led by the inticements of Satan and their owne desires.Is here re∣stored. Here againe is gotten that true Trée of Life, that sweet wood, whose leaues are healing, whose fruit is salua∣tion: the swéetnesse thereof takes away all bitternesse of euils, yea,
euen of death it selfe. 1 MannaTrue Manna. was giuen to the Is∣raelites, that they might be nou∣rished with heauenly food: here is that true Manna which came downe from heauen, that he might giue life to the world: this is the heauenly bread, and Angelicall food, of which if a man eat, he shall neuer hunger. 2 The Israelites had the ArkeThe true Arke. of the couenant and the propitia∣torie, where they might heare the Lord speaking face to face: here is the true arke of the couenant, the most holy bodie of Christ, in whom are hidden all the trea∣sures of knowledge & wisedome here is the true propitiatory in the bloud of Christ, which makes vs to be beloued in the beloued. Neither doth hée onely speake vnto vs by inward consolation,The true Oracle. but hée dwels in vs. Hée doth
not féed vs with heauenly Man∣na, but with himselfe. Here sure∣ly is the gate of heauen,Heauen gate. and the Ladder of the Angels: for whe∣ther is heauen greater, then hée that is in heauen? whether is heauen knit nearer and straighter vnto God, then mans flesh and nature which hee hath assumed? Heauen truly is the seat of God, but in the nature that Christ hath assumed rests the holy Ghost. God is in heauen,Heauen. but in Christ dwels the fulnes of the Godhead. Verily this is a true and infallible pledge of our saluation. He had no greater thing that he might giue: for what is greater then him∣selfe? what is so straightly knit vnto him, as his humane nature, which being taken into the society of the most blessed Trinitie,Knit to the Trinitie. is made the treasury of heauenly good things?
3 What is so straightly ioyned vnto him as his flesh and bloud? but with this heauenly nourish∣ment he doth refresh vs miserable wormes, and makes vs partakers of his nature,We are in him parta∣kers of di∣uine na∣ture. how not also of his grace? who euer hated his owne flesh? how therefore can the Lord despise vs whom he féeds with his own flesh,Despiseth vs not. & his owne bloud? how can he forget them, to whom hée hath giuen the earnest of his body? how shall satan be able to subuert vs,Satan hur∣teth not. when we are refreshed with heauenly food, that we faint not in the battell? Christ doth estéeme vs deare, because hee bought vs deare:Deare to Chr st bought. he doth estéeme vs deare, because he feeds vs with deare and precious things:Fed. bee doth estéeme vs deae, because we are his owne flesh and members.Members. Healthfull Balme. 4 This is the onely soueraigne salue of all spirituall diseases:
this is the salue of immortalitie: for what sinne is so great, that the holy flesh of God may not expiate? Quicken∣ing.4 What sinne is so great, that the quickning flesh of Christ may not heale? what is so deadly, that it may not be taken away by the death of the Sonne of God?Deuils darts quenched Spots clensed. what darts of the deuill are so deadly, that they may not be extinguisht in this Fountaine of the grace of God? What spot of the consci∣ence is so great, that this bloud may not cleanse? the Lord was present with the Israelites in the cloud and fire:Light. but here not the cloud, but the Sunne of righteous∣nesse it selfe is present, which is the present light of our soules. Here the fire of Gods wrath is not felt,Not feare of wrath. but the heat of his cha∣ritie, neither doth hée depart from vs, but hée makes his abi∣ding
with vs. 5 Our first Parents were brought into Paradise, that most fragrant and swéet garden, a type of the eternall blessednesse, that being admonished of Gods beni∣gnitie, they might yéeld due obe∣dience to their Creatour. 6 Behold more then Paradise,Better then Pa∣radise. in this place: for the creature is filled with the flesh of the Crea∣tor: the penitent conscience is cleansed by the bloud of the Son of God: the members of Christ,Benefits. the head, are nourished with the bodie of Christ: the faithfull soule is fed with diuine and celestiall banquets. 7 The holy flesh of God, which the Angels do adore in the vnitie of person, the Arch∣angels do worship, the powers do tremble at,Most reue∣rend food. the vertues do admire, that is made our spiritu∣all
nourishment. Let the heauens reioyce, and the earth triumph: but more the faithfull soule, on whom gifts so great and of such qualitie are bestowed. Christi sis prouidus hospes. Be Christs carefull ghest. 28. Meditation. Of serious pre∣paration before the vse of the Lords Supper. NO vulgar banquet, neither any feast of a King, but the most holy mysterie of the bodie and bloud of Christ is set before vs: therefore there is required worthy preparation:Worthy prepara∣tion. lest for life we finde death, lest for mercy we receiue iudgement. How doth that most holy Patriarks,Abraham. famous for the strength of his faith, trem∣ble? how doth he feare, when the Sonne of God appeared vnto him in the shape of a man, and told him
before that he would ouerturne Sodom? Here the Lambe of God is not set before vs to be looked vp∣on but to be tasted, and to be eaten. Tremble then at his presence. 1 Vzzias when he came vncon∣siderately to the Ark of the Coue∣nant, was forthwith striken with leprosie of the Lord: what mar∣uell is it therefore, if hee eate and drink his owne iudgement,Tremble at the iudgemēt. which eats of this bread, and drinkes of this wine vnworthily? for here is the true Arke of the new Coue∣nant, prefigured by that old. 2 But the Apostle teacheth vs true preparation in one word: let a man, saith he, examine himselfe,Examine. and so let him eate of this bread. But as all godly and diuine exa∣mination is to be tried by the rule of the holy Scripture, in like rea∣son also this, which the Apostle requires.
Our cor∣rupt na∣ture.3 In the first place therefore let vs consider our owne infirmi∣tie. What is man? dust and ashes: out of the earth we are borne, of the earth we liue, vnto the earth we returne. What is man? stink∣ing sperme, a sacke of dung, and the food of wormes. Fraile life.4 Man was borne to labour, not to honour. Man was borne of a woman, and therefore with guilt: he liues a short time, and therefore with feare: he is full of many miseries, and therefore with wéeping: and very many, because of body and soule together. 5 Man knows not his birth: he knows not his death: we are for a while as the hearbe of Sum∣mer,And short. and that short life hath griefs and labours that are nothing short.Vaine compared to God. 6 In the second place, let vs consider our vnworthines: surely
euery creature in respect of the Creator is a shadow, a dreame, nothing, so also is man. 7 But more and more hainous wayes is man vnworthy: for he hath offended his Creator with his sinnes.Sinnes. God is iust by nature and essence: he is angry therefore at sinnes by nature and essence. 8 What are we but stubble to that consuming fire? how shall our most foule facts consist?That can∣not con∣sist. or how shall our iniquities appeare, which thou puttest before thée, and our errours which thou pla∣cest in the light of thy counte∣nance? God is infinite, and al∣wayes like himselfe,Before an infinite God. of infinite iustice, and of infinite wrath. For if he be so in all his works, he is so also in wrath, in righteousnesse and in vengeance. God is altoge∣ther great and wonderfull.That spa∣red not his Sonne. 9 He that hath not spared his
Sonne, shall hee spare his other workmanship? he that hath not spared the most holy, shall he spare an euill seruant? In so great ha∣tred is sinne with God, that hée punisheth it in his most beloued: which appeares in Lucifer, the chiefe of the Angels.The chiefe Angels. Examine the Sacra∣ment.10 Howbeit, let this examina∣tion not onely respect our selues, but this blessed bread also, which is the communion of the body of Christ, then will the true foun∣taine of grace, and the vnexhausted spring of mercie appeare. God cannot altogether neglect vs whom he hath made partakers of his owne flesh:In the be∣nefits. for who euer ha∣ted his owne flesh? therefore these holy feasts shall transforme our soules:Of ma∣king vs diuine. these diuine banquets shall make vs diuine men, vntill at last we be made companions of the future felicity, being capable of
God wholly and alone, and wholly like vnto God. That which wée haue here in faith, and in a myste∣rie, there we shall haue in déed and most openly. Let vs therefore examine our selues, whether wée be in the faith or not: Examine then thine eye of faith by know∣ledge, whether it truly discerne the Lords body, in this mysterie. Ex∣amine the ground of thy faith, whether it bee assured, without wauering. Examine the fruit of thy faith, whether it hath banish∣ed all vngodlinesse and vnrighte∣ousnesse, and hath begot an Aca∣demy of vertues: so shall tempta∣tions giue ground, and flye, and so shall appeare the happy change of thy soule. 11 Our bodies also shall at∣taine this dignitie,Happy body. that in them wée shall sée God face to face, which now are the temples of
the holy God: and are sanctified and quickened by the body and bloud of Christ dwelling in them. This most holy salue heales all the wounds of sinnes:All whole by salue. this quic∣kening flesh ouercomes all mortal sinne. This is the most holy seale of the promises of God,By promi∣ses sealed. which we may shew before the iudgement of God. This pledgeBy pledge. being giuen vs, we boast safely of eternall life. If Christs body and bloud be ex∣hibited vnto vs, then also all the benefits which are gotten by that most holy bodie, and by that blessed bloud.Gift. How shall hée that hath giuen vs greater things, deny vs the lesse? he that hath gi∣uen his Sonne vnto vs,Rom. 8. how shall hée not with him giue vs all things? 12 Therefore let the Spouse reioyce:Reioyce. because the time is nigh, that she shall be called to the mar∣riage
of the Lambe. Let her bée cloathedBe clo∣thed. with her precious gar∣ments, let her take the wedding garment, that she be not found na∣ked. That garment is the righte∣ousnesse of the Bridegroome, which we put on in Baptisme. So farre is it that our righteousnesse should be the wedding garment, that it is rather the cloath of a menstruous woman. Let vs there∣fore feare to bring to the solemni∣tie of that marriage, the most fil∣thy and stinking garments of our owne works: let the Lord cloath vs, that we be not found naked.
Vitae fons est caro Christi. Christs flesh, lifes fountaine 25. Meditation. Of the whole∣some participation of the body and bloud of Christ. HE that eates my flesh, and drinkes my bloud, shall liue for euer, saith Christ. Verily, great is the benefit of our Saui∣our, that he hath not onely taken vpon him our flesh, and lifted it vp into the Throne of the heauenly glory: but also féeds vs with his body and bloud to life eternall. O wholesome dainties of the soule!Wholsome dainties. O desired banquet! O celestiall and Angelicall food! Although the Angels desire to looke into that great mysterie,Seene of Angels. yet he did not take vpon him the Angels,Heb. 2. but the séed of Abraham, our Sauiour is nea∣rer vnto vs,Christ nearest vs then to the Angels themselues: because wée haue
knowne his loue out of this, that he hath giuen vs of his Spirit:In Spirit. and not onely of his Spirit, but also of his bodyBody. and his bloud, for so doth the Truth speake of the bread and wine in the Eucharist. This is my bodie: This is my bloud. How can the Lord forget them,Cannot forget vs. whom hée hath redéemed with his body and bloud, whom he hath nourished with his bodie and bloud. 1 He which eateth the flesh, and drinketh the bloud of Christ, abides in Christ,In Christ. & Christ in him. 2 I do not therefore greatly wonder, that the haires of our head are numbred, that our names are written in heauen, that we are written in the hands of the Lord,Excellent benefits. and that we are carried in his bo∣some, and in his wombe, because we are fed with the body and blood of Christ.
Dignity of soule.3 Verily, great is the dignitie of our soules, which are fed with the precious price of his redemp∣tion. Great also is the dignitie of our bodies, which are the habi∣tations of the soule, that is redee∣med by the body of Christ, that are filled with the bodyBody. of Christ, which are the temples of the holy Ghost, and houses of the whole most holy Trinitie. For it cannot be that the same should abide in the graue,Christ rai∣sed vs. when they are nourish∣ed with the body and bloud of our Lord. It feedeth vs by changing vs.4 This is that meat of men, that are of age, we eat it, neither yet do we change it into our body, but are changed into it. Liuely members fed.5 Wée are the members of Christ, we are quickened by his Spirit, and we are fed by his body and bloud. 6 This is the bread which
commeth down from heauen, and giueth life to the world: of it if any one shall eat, he shall not hun∣ger for euer.That hun∣ger not. This is the bread of grace and mercy, which if any man shall eate, he tastes and sées how swéet our Lord is, and of his fulnesse hée receiueth grace for grace.Tast sweet grace. This is the bread of life, not onely liuing, but also quick∣ning, if any one eats of this, hée shall liue for euer.Liue euer. This bread commeth downe from heauen, neither is it onely heauenly, but also it makes the ghests heauenlyMaketh heauenly ghests. which eat it wholsomely and in the spirit. They shall be heauenly, because they shall not dye, but shall bée raisedraised. vp againe in the last day. But they shall bée raised vp not vnto iudgement, because hée which eateth of this bread, comes not vnto iudgement; not to condemnation, because there
is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Iesus: but to lifeLife. and saluation. For he which eats the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinks his bloud, hath life in him∣selfe, and shall liue: for Christ his flesh is meat indéed, and his bloud is drinke indéed. 7 Let vs therefore be filledBe filled. not with the food of our owne works,Eate. but of the Lord. Let vs be drun∣ken of the fulnesse not of our owne house,Drinke. but of the Lords. This is the true fountaine of life,The foun∣taine of life. he that shall drinke the water thereof, it shall become in him a fountaine of water springing vp vnto eternall life. 8 All ye that thirst, comeCome. to these waters, and you that haue no siluer, make haste, buy, eate: let them that are athirst come: come also my thirstie soule, vexed with the heat of thy sinnes.
9 But if thou art destitute of the siluer of thy deserts, make so much the more haste:Haste. being desti∣tute of thine owne merit, haste thée so much the more earnestly to Christs merit: make haste there∣fore and buy without siluer. Here is the chamber of ChristTo Christs Chamber. and our soule, from which let not thy sins deterre thée, neither let thy me∣rits enter with thée. 10 But what can our merits bée?Without merit. They weigh siluer, but not for bread: and labour, but not for fulnesse, saith the Prophet. Our labours do not fill vs, neither is the grace of God bought with the money of our merits. Heare there∣fore, O my soule, and eate that which is good, and be delighted in fatnesse. 11 Those words are spirit and life, and the words of eternall life.Eternall life. The cup of blessing is the commu∣nicating
of the bloud of Christ: the bread which we breake, is the participation of the body of the Lord. We cleaue vnto the Lord, therefore wée are one spirit with him: wee vse not onely the com∣munion of nature with him, but also the participation of his bodie and bloud. John 6.12 Therefore I do not say with the Iews, how can he giue vs his flesh to eate? But I rather crie out, how doth the Lord distribute vnto vs his flesh to eate, and his bloud to drinke? I search not into his power, I wonder at his good will:Wonder∣full good will. I looke not into his maiesty, but I worship his bounty: I be∣léeue a presence,Presence inward. I am ignorant of the manner of the presence: I cer∣tainly know that it is most strait and inward. Ephes. 5.13 Wée are members of his body: flesh of his flesh, bone of his
bones: he dwels in vs, and we in him. My soule desires to be drow∣ned in the cogitation of this most profound depth:The soule drowned in medita¦tion. it hath not as yet found out by what words it may vtter or declare that goodnesse: but if is vtterly amazed at the behold∣ing of that so great grace in God, and that so great glory in the blessed. Thursday, Euening Prayer. O Lord God, gracious and mercifull Father, hauing learned what is the nature and properties of true faith, and desi∣ring it earnestly for the excellen∣cie thereof, I come humbly to craue it at thy mercifull hands, that thou vouchsafing to enrich mee with so great a blessing, in the power thereof, I may ouer∣come
the World, and being fully perswaded thereby of thy loue and fauour towards mee in Christ, in whom thou wast reconciling the world to thy selfe, I may know for certaine, that thou art at peace with me, and may also feele the fruits of my Baptisme in my soule, through which I had an entrance into thy Church; the dignitie whereof is such, that thy Sonne hath knit it in the straightest bond vnto himselfe, in which alone is saluation; out of which all that are, are yet in the state of damna∣tion. O Lord, vouchsafe to keepe me alwayes within this thy fold, a lambe of thy flocke, a member of this Church. And to this end knit my soule vnto thee, espouse it to thy Sonne, that I may par∣take of this honour, and be made comely by his beauty, and enrich∣ed with his loue, and satisfied euer∣more
with the fatnesse of thine house, partaking here of the spi∣rituall repast that is offered vnto me in thy Word, and at thy Table, vntill the time come, that I shall drink the wine of gladnesse with∣in thy kingdome, there to reioyce with thee euerlastingly, O blessed God, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost. Amen. Friday, Morning Prayer. THis life being full of cares, this world full of snares, wherewith the cruell Nimrod, the Deuill, hunts for the soules of men: what shall be my comfort in this life, but thy refreshing, O God of all comforts and consola∣tions? What shall bee mine assu∣rance and direction in the wayes of this world, to auoid the snares
of death, but thy hand and thy staffe, O Lord, that leadest vnto life, euen those that walke in the shadow of death? Giue me there∣fore thy refreshing Spirit, I do be∣seech thee, to comfort and cheare me vp in all the afflictions of my life, that I be not ouercome of too much sorrow. Giue me thy Spi∣rit of truth to leade me into all truth, that I perish not in the common errours of the world, nor in the gaine-sayings of the rebel∣lious children, nor fall into the pit that the enemie hath digged to entrap my soule; but that pre∣serued in the truth, I may walke safe from all dangers, through the labours of this vally of teares, towards my rest in the heauenly Countrey. Free me, O Lord, from all spirituall euils: keepe my soule from the iawes of the Lyon: take the seales of ignorance from mine
eyes: take the cawle of hardnesse from mine heart: keepe me from presumptuous sinnes, that they get not the dominion ouer mee. Let not pride puffe me vp let not couetousnesse presse mee downe: let not the filth of mine owne flesh defile mee: let not the deceiua∣blenesse of the world beguile me: let not wrath and passion trans∣port me: let not sloath make me to be likened to the Dogge, or to the Swine: let not enuy bleare mine eyes: let not surfetting drowne mine heart: let mee not presume to take thine office vpon me to reuenge my selfe, but grant that in all my pleasures, in pati∣ence I may possesse my soule. Haue pity (O Lord) vpon mine infirmitie, and loose the yoke of my captiuity, and from all sinne and danger of the enemie de∣liuer mee this day and euer,
for thy deare Sonnes sake Christ Iesus, Amen. Penetrant suspira Coelum. Sighes pierce the Skies. 30 Meditation. Of the whole∣some efficacy of prayers. THis is an excéeding great be∣nefit of God, that hee re∣quires the familiar talke of godly prayers:Talke with God. hee giues vnto vs the af∣fection to pray, hee also giues vn∣to vs the effect of our prayer. Great is the force of prayer.Prayer forcible.which is powred forth in the earth, but workes in heauen. The prayer of the iust is the key of hea∣uen:The key of heauen. prayer doth ascend, and Gods deliuerance doth descend. Prayer is the buckler of saluation,Buckler, by which all the darts of the wicked are driuen back. 1 When Moses did stretch
forth his hands, Israel did pre∣uaile against the Amalekites: if thou stretch forth thy hands vnto heauen, Satan shall not preuaile against thee.Weakneth enemies. Euen as a wall by the enemy, so the wrath of God is broken by the prayers of the godly. 2 Our Sauiour himselfe did pray. not for any necessity,Christs example. but that hee might commend vnto vs the dignity of prayers. Prayer is the tribute of our subiection,Tribute. be∣cause God hath commanded vs that we offer vnto him daily pray∣ers, as a certaine spirituall tri∣bute. It is the ladder of our as∣cension:A Ladder. because prayer is no∣thing else but a certaine peregri∣nation of the minde vnto God. It is the buckler of our defence:Buckler. be∣cause the soule of a liuing man is safe in prayer from the assaults of the deuill. It is the faithfull mes∣senger
of Embassage:Messen∣ger. because prayer ascends to the Throne of God, and inuites him to helpe vs: this messenger is neuer frustrate of his purpose, for God alwayes heares vs, if not according to our will,Euerheard yet for our profit and salua∣tion. We may hope for one of the two vndoubtedly, either hée will giue vs that which we aske,For good. or that which he knoweth to be more profitable. 5 God gaue his Sonne, that most excellent gift, being not in∣treated: what shall hée do being intreated?Without doubt. we can neither doubt of the Fathers hearing, nor the Sonnes intercession. In any cause whatsoeuer, thou mayest enter with Moses into the Taber∣nacle, to aske counsell of the Lord, and thou shalt soone heare the answer of God. When Christ prayed, hée was transfigured: so
in prayer there are made great changes in the soule because pray∣er is the light of the soule,Transfi∣guring the soule. which very often leaues him triumphing whom it found despairing. With what forehead doest thou behold the Sunne,All sancti∣fied by prayer, Sunne. vnlesse thou hast first worshiped him which sends that most swéet light to thine eyes? by what meanes doest thou enioy thy table,Table. vnlesse thou hast first wor∣shiped him, which doth giue and minister vnto thée so great good? with what hope wilt thou deliuer thy selfe to thy nights rest,Rest. vnlesse thou hast first guarded thy selfe with prayer? What fruit canst thou hope for of thy labours,Labours. vn∣lesse thou hast first worshipt him, without whom all labour is vn∣profitable?Aske. If therefore thou de∣sire gifts either spirituall or cor∣porall, aske, and thou shalt re∣ceiue. If thou desire Christ, séekeSeeke.
him by prayers, and thou shalt finde him. If thou desire to haue the doore of Gods grace and eter∣nall saluation opened vnto thée, knockeKnocke. at it by prayers, and it shall be opened vnto thée: If the thirst of tentations and the penu∣ry of spirituall good things doth afflict thée in the Desart of this world, draw néereDraw neare. to the rocke of spirituall things, which is Christ, by deuotion, and smite it with the rod of prayer, and thou shalt féele that the waters of Gods peace can quench the thirst of thy pe∣nury. 4 Wilt thou offerOffer. an accepta∣ble sacrifice vnto God? offer pray∣ers: God shall féele the odour of swéetenesse, and his wrath will cease. Wilt thou daily be conuer∣sant with GOD? loue praye∣ers,Conferre. which are the spirituall conference of GOD and the
deuout soule?Tast God. wilt thou taste how swéete the Lord is? inuite him by prayers to the house of thy heart. 5 Prayer doth please GOD but it is that prayer which is made after a due manner: there∣fore he which desires to be heard, let him pray wisely,As hee ought. Wisely. ardently humbly, faithfully and confident∣ly. Let him pray wisely, that is, that hée pray for those thinges which serue for the glory of God and the saluation of his neigh∣bours. GOD is almighty, there∣fore thou maist not let him downe a measure in thy prayers: hée is most wise, therefore thou maist not prescribe him an order: pray∣ers may not breake foorth rash∣ly, but let them follow, faith go∣ing before: but faith respects the word. Those things there∣fore which GOD promiseth ab∣solutely
in his word, thou mayest pray absolutelyAbsolutely for: those things which he promiseth with a condi∣tion,With con∣dition. as temporall things, those thou mayest likewise pray for with a condition: those things which hée by no meanes promi∣seth,No pro∣mise, no prayer. thou mayest also by no meanes pray for. Oft-times God grants that when hée is angrie, which hée denyes when hée is pleased: follow Christ therefore, which wholly resigneth his will vnto God.Gods will be done. 2. Ardent∣ly: Secondly, let him pray ardently: for how canst thou require that God should heare thée, when thou canst not heare thy selfe? Wilt thou haue God to be mindfull of thée, when thou art not mindfull of thy selfe? When thou wilt pray, go into thy chamber, and shut the doores: thy chamber is thy heart, into it thou must enter. If thou wilt
pray after a due manner, thou must shut to thy doores, lest the thoughts of worldly businesses chance to trouble thée.See none trouble thee. The words come not to the eares of God, vnlesse there be an affecti∣on of the minde.Stirre the minde. The minde ought to be so stirred vp with the heate of cogitation, that it may farre go beyond all that which the tongue expresseth: and this is to worship in spiritIn Spirit. and truth, which the Lord requireth. Christ did pray in the mount, and lifted vpJob. 4. Lift vp. his eyes to heauen: so hauing turned our minde away from all the creatures, we ought to turne it vnto God. Thou doest iniury vnto God, if thou prayest him that hée would attend vnto thée, when thou doest not attend to thy selfe. Wee may pray vnces∣santly, if we pray in the Spirit, that is, if our minde do alwayes
watch with holy desires vnto God. No cryes.6 It is not alwayes needfull to cry out, because God also heares the sighes of the heart, sée∣ing bee dwels in the hearts of the godly.Much bab∣ling. There is not alwayes need of many words, because hee is al∣so amidst our thoughts. Some∣times one grone,One true grone. one sigh stirred vp by the holy spirit, and offered in the spirit vnto God, is more acceptable vnto God, then the prolixe saying of prayers, where the tongue speakes, but the heart is dumbe. Thirdly, let him pray humbly,3 Humbly. Without our merit. that hee trust not to his owne merit, but onely to the grace of God. If our prayers re∣ly on our owne worthinesse, they are condemned, although for de∣uotion our heart should sweate out blood. No man pleaseth God, but in Christ:In Christ. therefore also no
man prayes aright, vnlesse through Christ, and for Christ. The sacrifices did not please God, which were not offered on that onely altar of the Tabernacle: Prayer pleaseth not God, which is not offered on that onely altarThe onely altar. Christ. The Israelites were pro∣mised the hearing of their prayers, if they prayed with their face tur∣ned to Ierusalem: so let vs turne our selues vnto Christ in our prayers, which is the temple of the Diuinity.And di∣uine Tem∣ple. 7 Christ being about to pray in his passion,Cast thee downe. casts himselfe on the earth: sée how that most holy soule doth humble himselfe before the diuine maiesty! Fourthly, let him pray faithfully,4 Faith¦fully. that he offer himselfe to the wanting of all ioy in himselfe, and to the patience of all punishment. By how much a man praies the sooner, by so much
the more profitable.Soone. By how much the oftner,Oft. by so much againe the more profitably. By how much the more feruently,Feruent. by so much the more acceptably vnto God. Fifthly, let him pray confidently,5 Confi∣dently. and with perseuerance:Perseuere. because when the Lord giues slowly, hée commends his gifts, he doth not deny them. Things that are long in desiring, are the more swéet in the obtaining. Againe, let him pray confidently, that is, that he make request, nothing doubtingNot doubting. in faith. O most mercifull God, which hast commanded vs to pray, grant also that we may pray aright, and thereby obtaine that which is for our good.
Sanctis sacer Angelus astat. Saints kept by Angels. 31. Meditation. Of the custo∣die of the holy Angels. THinke, O deuout soule,Angels as∣sist vs. how great the grace of God is, that hée hath appointed thée the guard of Angels. The heauenly Father sends his Sonne to deli∣uer vs, the Sonne of God was incarnate to saue vs, the holy Ghost is sent to sanctifie vs: the Angels are sent to protect vs.Protect vs. So therefore the whole Court of heauenAll the Court of Heauen. doth as it were serue, and traduceth their benefits vnto vs. I do now no more maruell, that all the inferiour Creatures were created for man, when the An∣gels themselues, which are farre more worthie Creatures,Creatures. do not deny their ministerie vnto man.
1 What maruell is it, that the heauen doth minister lightLight. vnto vs in the day, that wée may labour: darknesseDarke. in the night, that we may rest, when the inha∣bitants themselues of the heauen∣ly kingdome minister vnto vs? What maruell that the aireAire. giues vs vitall breath, and all kinde of birds to obey vs, when the hea∣uenly Spirits do watch for the preseruation of our liues? What maruell that the water giues vs drinke, cleanseth our vncleannesse, watersWaters. our drie places, and affords vs all kinde of fishes: when the Angels themselues are at a readi∣nesse, when we are wearied with the heate of calamities and tenta∣tions, that they may refresh vs? What maruell that the earthEarth. doth heare vs, that it nourisheth vs with bread and wine, that it fills our tables with all kinde of
fruits and liuing creatures: when charge is giuen to the Angels, that they kéepe vs in all our wayes,Psal. 91. that they beare vs in their hands, lest we offend our foot a∣gainst a stone? 2 The Angels were carefull of Christ,The An∣gels serued Christ. because an Angel doth tell of his conception, an Angel doth manifest his natiuitie, an Angel doth command him to flye into Egypt, the Angels serue him in the Desart, the Angels minister vnto him in the whole ministery of his preaching: an Angel is present with him in the Agony of death, an Angel appeares in his Resurrection, the Angels were present in his as∣cension, and shall bee present in his future returne to iudgement. As therefore the Angels serued Christ in the dayes of his flesh:So vs the faithfull. so they are also carefull ouer all
them which are incorporate into Christ by faith:Members as they serued the head, so do they serue the members. They do reioyce to serue them in the earth, whom they shall sometimes haue for their companions in Heauen:Their cō∣panions, And fel∣lows. they do not refuse their Mini∣stery, whose most swéet fellow∣ship they do sometimes hope to haue. 3 The tents of the Angels appeare to Iacob in the way to his countrey: so the Angels are giuen as kéepers to the godly in this life,As they did Jacob. which is the way to the heauenly countrey. The Angels protect DanielDaniel. in the midst of the Lions: so they kéepe all the god∣ly in safety, from the laying a∣waite of the infernall Lyon. The Angels do deliuer LotLot. out of the burning of Sodome: so they often deliuer vs by holy
inspirations, from the deuils ten∣tations: and by their protections, out of the infernall fire. The An∣gels carry the soule of LazarusLazarus. into the bosome of Abraham so do they translate the soules of all the elect, into the palace of the hea∣uenly kingdome. The Angel brings PeterPeter. out of prison: so hée often deliuers the godly out of present dangers. 4 Verily, great is the power of our Aduersarie the Deuill, but let the custodie of the Angels comfort vs. Neither do thou doubt, but that these helpers are presentComfor∣table. Present. with thée in all dangers, because the Scripture, vnder the figure of the Cherubim and Se∣raphim, doth paint them out vnto vs winged, that thou mayest cer∣tainly resolue, that they will bée present with incredible swiftnesse,Speedily. to bring helpe vnto thée. Doubt
not, but that in all placesIn all pla∣ces. these protectors are present with thée: because they are most subtile spi∣rits,Without impedi∣ment. whom no body can withhold. All bodies alike, howsoeuer they be solid and thicke, are pierced by them, and are peruious to them. Doubt not,They know. but that these spirits do know thy dangers and afflicti∣ons: because they alwayes sée the face of the heauenly Father, and are prest most readily to all his mi∣nisteries. 5 Thinke also, O deuout soule, that these Angels are holy:They be holy. there∣fore study holinesse, if thou wilt haue them thy fellows. The simi∣litude of manners, doth especially reconcile friendship: accustome therefore thy selfe to holy actions, if thou desirest the custome of the holy Angels.Cause of care in all places. 6 In euery place and corner yéeld reuerence to thine Angel:
neither do any thing in his pre∣sence, which thou art ashamed to do in the sight of men. These spi∣rits are chaste, therefore they are driuen awayEasily dri∣uen away. with filthy actions. Smoake expells Bées; and stink, Doues: so wofull and stinking sinne driues away the Angels that are the kéepers of our life. These guards being lost through sinnes,To our danger, by deuils. how wilt thou be safe from the snares of the deuill? being desti∣tute of the Angels protections, how wilt thou bee safe from the incursion of diuers dangers? If thy soule want the wall of Ange∣licall defence, the deuill will soone ouercome it by the deceit of euill perswasion. 7 These holy Angels are sent from God to their ministerie: therefore thou must first bée re∣conciled vnto God by faith,Be faithful if thou wilt haue the Angel of God to be
thy kéeper. Where there is not the grace of God,No grace, no Angel. there also is not the custody of the Angels. 8 Let vs behold the Angels as certaine sauing hands of God, which can moue themselues to no worke but by his direction.Directed by God. Ioy in our conuer∣sion. There is ioy in heauen before the Angels ouer one sinner that re∣penteth: the teares of penitent sin∣ners, are as it were the wine of Angels, but the impenitent heart driues away the Angels kéepers. Let vs therefore repent vs, that wée may stirre vp ioy to the An∣gels.Be peni∣tent. 9 The Angels are of an hea∣uenly and spirituall nature; there∣fore let vs thinke on heauenly and spirituall things,Haue hea∣uenly thoughts. that it may be a pleasure vnto them to bee present with vs. The Angels are hum∣ble,Be humble and pride is altogether hate∣full vnto them, because they are
not ashamed to do seruice vnto little children: why therefore is dust and ashes so proud, when the heauenly spirits do humble them selues so much? 10 The craft of the deuill is specially to be feared at death,Proued for death. be∣cause it is written, that the Ser∣pent layes waite for the héele: the last part of our body is the héele, the last terme of our life is death. In that last agony of death, most necessarie is the custodie of the Angels, which may deliuer vs from the fiery darts of the deuil, and conueigh our soule, when it is gone forth of the house of our bodie, into the heauenly Para∣dise. When Zacharias did per∣forme his holy ministerie in the Temple, the Angel of the Lord came vnto him:Reioycing in prayers. so also if thou re∣ioycest in the exercise of the word and prayers, thou shalt enioy the
patronage of the Angels. O most mercifull God, which dost lead vs by the holy Angels through the wildernes of this world, grant that by the same we may be brought to thy heauenly kingdome. Vitam moriendo lucramur. Life gai∣ned by death. 32. Meditation. Of the conso∣lation in the death of our Friends. THinke, O deuout soule, on Christ thy Sauiour, and thou shalt not feare deaths terrour. If the violence of death make thée sad, let the power of Christ againe lift thée vp. The Israelites could not drinke the waters of Mara, for the bitternesse: but God shewed Moses a trée,Deaths sweetning. which being cast into the waters, made them swéet. If thou art afraid for the bitternesse of death, God shews thée a trée
which turnes it into swéetnesse, that is to say, the branch which springs out of the root of Iesse: that branch is Christ, whose word who so shall kéepe, he shall not sée death for euer. 1 Our life is full of burdens the ease of them therfore is good.Misery, not the man dieth The misery of a Christian man dyes, and not a Christian man. It is but a certaine taking of a iourney,A iourney. which we thinke to be death: it is not an end, but a passage. We do not léese our friends, but send them before vs: they dye not, but are as it were borne againe. They go before vs, they go not away, they depart not vtterly from vs: it is not a death, but rather a going away for a short time. The depar∣ture of the godly is the doubling of their life, their burialls are their aduantage.Deaths aduantage. 2 Our friends die: interpret it
thus: that they cease to sinne: that they cease to be tossed vp and downe: that they cease to be mise∣rable.Cease to be misera¦ble. 3 They dye in the faith, inter∣pret it thus: that they depart out of the shadow of life, that they may passe to the true life:Go to be¦ter. out of darknesse, that they may go vn∣to light: from men, that they may go vnto God. Our life is a nauigation,Nauiga∣tion. death is the most safe hauen. 4 Wée must not therefore grieue that our friends are dead: but wée must rather reioyce on their behalfe, that they are come out of the turbulent sea, into the hauen. 5 This life is the prisonDeliue∣rance frō prison. of the soule, but death is the deliue∣rance: therefore Simeon being a∣bout to dye, cries out, Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart.
He desired to be dismissed, being shut vp as it were in the prison of his body. Therefore we must reioyce with our friends, that be∣ing fréed out of this prison, they are come to the true liberty. The Apostle likewise desires to be dis∣solued,Slauery dissolued. as though he were tyed to this body of earth, in a certaine wretched slauery. Shall we there∣fore bee sad, that our friends ha∣uing wrested themselues out of these hands, are now truly frée? shall wée weare for them blacke garments, when they haue taken on them white robes? because it is written, that to the elect are giuen white robes for their in∣nocency,Reu. 6.1. and palmes in their hands for victorie: shall wée af∣flict our selues with teares and sighes for them, when God hath wiped away all tearesTeares wi∣ped away. from their eyes? shall we mourne for them
and trouble our selues in our sor∣row, when they are in such a place where neither mourning, nor griefe, nor crying is heard any more, and they restRest. from their la∣bours? shall we kill vp our selues with immoderate sadnes for their death, when in the fellowship of the AngelsWith An∣gels, they enioy true and solid gladnesse? shall we lift vp a wéeping voyce for them, when they before the Lambe singSing. a new song, hauing their Harps and gol∣den Viols? shall we grieue that they are gone out of this earth, when they reioyceReioyce. on their owne behalfe that they are departed? How much it profits to go out of this world, Christ sheweth, who, when his disciples were sad, be∣cause he said that they would go a∣way, answered: If you loued me, you would versly reioyce. 6 If when thou diddest sayle a
troublesome and stormy tempest, the waues being stirred vp with the force of the windes, should foreshew shipwrackeExempt from ship∣wracke. to come, wouldest thou not betake thée to the hauen with all haste? behold, the world doth flit and slide, and testifies her ruine not onely by her age, but also by the end of things: and doest not thou giue God thanks, doest thou not reioyce in the behalfe of thy friends, that by a more timely death, are exempt∣ed from the ruines, and ship∣wrackes, and plagues that hang ouer their heads? In whose hands is the saluation of thy friends more safelySafe. placed, then in the hands of Christ? In what place shall the soule of the friends more safely a∣bide, then in the kingdome of Pa∣radise? Heare what the Apostle saith of death: death is gaine:Gaine. it is gaine to haue escaped the increase
of sinne, it is gaine to haue auoi∣ded worse things, it is gaine to haue past to better. If those whom thou hast lost by death, were very deare, let God be dea∣rer,Let God be dearer. which would haue them to bée translated vnto himselfe. Be not angry with the Lord, which hath taken away nothing, but that which he gaue, he tooke backe his owne,Which ta∣keth his owne. hée hath not taken away thine. 7 Be not angry with the Lord, that hée should aske that which hée gaue thée onely to loane. The Lord alone foresées the euils to come:Prouideth for them. therefore hee doth prouide for thine, lest they should be wrap∣ped in the disasters to come. They that are dead in the Lord, rest swéetlySweet rest. in their graues, when they that remaine aliue, are grieuously vexed, in the very palaces of their kingdome.
8 If thou hast lost thy deare friends by death,Thou shalt haue them againe. beléeue that here∣after thou shalt receiue them more deare.Shortly. A short space of time doth separate thée from them, blessed and secure eternitie shall ioyne thée againe together with them.When thou goest For we do hope on a most faithfull promise, that when wée go out of this life, from whence we haue sent some of our friends before vs, wee shall come to that life, where, by how much they shall be better known vnto vs, so much they shall be dearerMore dea∣rer. vnto vs, and without the feare of any dissension amiable. 9 The multitude of the hea∣uenly spirits, shall receiue as ma∣ny soules as there shall bée, and as many as haue béene before vs, with great applause.With ap∣plause. Here wée shall know the countenances of our owne Nation, and talke to∣gether
with them:And know¦ledge. here the sister shall go with the brother, the sons with the parents, neither shall any euening shut vp their Festiuall dayes. 10 Do not therefore regard onely the time of forsaking, for that thy friends forsake thée in death: but also respectRespect this. the time of restitution, when they shall bée restored vnto thée in the resurrecti∣on. Where there is a firme faithBy faith of the resurrection, there is not the shape of death: but of rest ra∣ther. 11 The whole vniuersitie of things is a looking-glasse of the resurrection.The resur∣rection shewed. The lightBy lights. that sets daily, doth shine forth againe: the hearbsHearbs. that are dead in the Win∣ter, do reuiue in the Spring: the PhenixPhoenix. doth engender it selfe a∣gaine in death: the timesTimes: begin where they are ended: the fruitsFruits.
are consumed and do returne: the séedsSeeds. do not rise vp fruitfully, vnlesse they be corrupted and dis∣solued: all things are preserued by perishing: all things resume their shape out of death. What then, is God to be thought to haue set forth such types vnto vs in na∣ture in vaine? shall nature bée more mighty then GodGods pro∣mise. that pro∣miseth the resurrection of our bodies? 12 He which quickeneth the graines of séeds which are dead and putrified,More ex∣cellent thē nature. by which thou may∣est liue in this world, will much more raise vp again thée, and thine, that thou mayest liue with them for euer. 13 God hath called thy belo∣ued to his chambers, do not en∣uieEnuyeth not. them their secure rest, short∣ly will come the time of raising them vp againe. Thou perhaps
didst hope that thy friends before their death would bee profitable members of the militant Church: but it hath pleased God that they should be members of the trium∣phantThe tri∣umphant members. Church: it hath pleased God, let it also please thée. Thou perhaps diddest hope that they should haue gotten the knowledge of diuers things before their death, but it hath pleased God that they should learne true wisedome in the heauenly Vniuersitie:Truly wise this hath pleased God, let it also please thée. 14 Thou perhaps didst hope, that thy friends before their death should first béene lifted out of the dust, and placed with Princes: but it hath pleased God to associate them to the heauenly Princes,Aduanced. the holy Angels: this hath pleased God, let it also please thée. Thou perhaps didst hope, that thy friends
before their death should get toge∣ther much riches: but it hath plea∣sed God that they should féele the pleasuresRich plea∣sure. of the heauenly king∣dome: this hath pleased God, let it also please thée. O holy God, thou hast taken away that which thou hast giuen, thy holy Name be blessed for euer. Friday Noone. DEfend me, ô Lord,Psal. 91.4. vnder thy wings, and keep me safe vn∣der thy feathers: let thy faithful∣nesse and truth bee my shield and buckler. That no euill happen vnto me,Verse 10. nor no plague come nigh my dwelling.
Domino mens nixa quieta est. The mind is quiet that relies on God. 33 Meditation. Of the true rest of the soule. THE soule oft-times séekes her rest in transitory and worldly things,No peace in the world. but doth not finde it. Wherefore? because the soule is more worthy then all the crea∣tures, therefore she cannot finde rest & peace in those viler things. All worldly things are vaine and transitory:Which is transitory. but the soule is im∣mortall: how therefore should she finde true rest in them? All these things are earthly:Earthly. but our soule is of an earthly beginning, how therefore should she be able to ful∣fill her desire in them? In Christ she finds rest,Rest in Christ by faith. In his wounds. hée can satiate and fulfill her desire. 1 Against the wrath of God, she rests in the wounds of Christ
against the accusation of Satan in the power of Christ. Against the terrour of the Law in the preachingPreaching Bloud. of Christ. Against her sinnes accusing, in the bloud of Christ, which speakes better be∣fore God, then the bloud of Abel. Against the terrour of death shée is at rest, and trusts in the sitting of Christ at the right handSitting at Gods right hand, of the Father. 2 And so our faith finds rest in Christ, but our charityCharity resteth. Not on the world. also findes the chiefest rest there. He which loues earthly things, hath not true rest, because earthly things them∣selues haue it not, neither can they sufficiently satiate the appetite of the soule, because they are all fi∣nite, but our soule being made af∣ter the Image of God, desires that infinit good,But on in∣finit good. in whom are all good things. 3 As therefore our faith ought
to relye on none of all the crea∣tures, but on the onely merit of Christ: so our loue also ought to cleaue to no creature, no not to our owne selues:And on Gods loue for the loue of our selues doth hinder the loue of God: and we ought to prefer the loue of God before all things. A Spouse.4 Our soule is the Spouse of Christ; therefore shée ought to cleave to him alone. Our soule is the habitation of God,Dwelling. there∣fore shee ought to giue place to him alone. Many séeke rest in riches,Not in ri∣ches. but without Christ there is no rest of the soule: but where Christ is, there is pouerty, if not indéed, yet in affliction. Hée the Lord of Heauen and earth, had not where to lay downe his head: and so would hée commend and consecrate pouerty vnto vs. Riches are without vs,Without. but that which must make our soule at
rest, ought to be within vs. But to what shall our soule cleaue in death, when all things in the world are to be left?That leaue vs. either riches forsake vs, or wée them, very of∣ten in our life, but alwayes in death. Where therefore then shall the soule finde peace and rest? Many séeke rest in pleasures,Not plea∣sures. but that may be the rest and quiet of the body for a while, but not of the soule: at length follows the companion of this pleasure, griefe, and mourning. 5 Pleasures belong to this life: but the soule is not created for this lifes sake, because it is constrained to go out by death. How therefore can she finde rest in pleasures?Not with∣out Christ without Christ there is no rest of the soule, but what manner of life was the life of Christ?Christ life. The greatest griefe from the first time of his Na∣tiuitie,
euen to his death. No plea∣sure.6 So hée that could truely e∣stéeme of all things would teach vs, what wée were to thinke of pleasure.Not ho∣nours. Many séeke rest in ho∣nours: but they are wretched which are constrained to want their rest vpon euery change of the fauour of the people.Fleeting. Honour is a good externall, and most fléet∣ing, but that which ought to giue rest to the soule, must bée in our selues. What wilt thou speake more of humane praise and glory, then of the praised picture of A∣pelles? Consider the corner where∣in thou lyest hid, how great is the proportion therof to the whole Prouince, to Europe, to the whole world, that is habitable. 7 That is the true honour which shall be bestowed hereafter of God vpon his chosen.Rest in thy end. The rest of a thing is in the end thereof,
neither doth a thing rest naturally, but after it hath obtained his end and place. The end of the created soule, is God:Which is God. séeing it is made to the Image of God, therefore she cannot be quiet and pacified, but in that her end, that is to say, in God. 8 As the soule is the life of the body,In life. so God is the life of the soule: as therefore the soule liues truly, in which GodOf God. dwels by spirituall grace: so the soule is dead,Without him dead. which hath not God dwel∣ling in it: But what rest can there be to a dead soule? that first death, in sinnes, doth necessarily draw with it the second death of damna∣tion?Damned. 9 He therefore which cleaues firmely in loue vnto God,Rest not disturbed. and cnioyes inwardly the diuine con∣solation, outward euils cannot disturbe his rest. In sorrow he is
ioyfull,Ioyfull. Rich. Secure. in pouerty rich, in the tri∣bulations of the world secure, in worldly troubles at tranquillitie, amongst the reproaches and con∣tumelies of men pacified,Pacified. Euer aliue in death it selfe aliue. He cares not for the threatnings of Tyrants: because hee féeles inwardly the riches of Gods consolation. 10 In aduersitie he is not sad,Not sad. because the holy Ghost doth com∣fort him effectually within. He is not vexed in pouerty,Vexed. because hée is rich in Gods bountie. Hée is not troubledTroubled. with the rebukes of men, because he enioyes the plea∣suresEnioyeth pleasure. of Gods honour. He cares not for the pleasure of the flesh, because he accounts the swéetnesse of the SpiritThe sweet spirit. more acceptable. He séekes not the friendship of the world, because he féeles the plea∣sures of God,Gods plea∣sures. who is kinde and friendly vnto him. Hée doth not
gape after the earthly treasures, because hée hath his chiefe trea∣sureTreasures. laid vp in heauen. He feares not death,Life. because he liues alwaies in God. He desires not greatly the wisedomeWisdome. of the world, be∣cause he hath the holy Ghost to teach him inwardly: the perfect takes away that which is more imperfect. He doth not feare light¦nings and tempests, burnings, and the ouerflowings of waters, the sad configurations of the Planets, and the darknings of the Lights of heauen: because being lifted vp aboue nature, hée relyes by faith on Christ, hee liues in Christ.Liueth in Christ. 11 Hée is not drawne away with the inticements of the world, because he heares in him∣selfe the swéeter voyceHeareth his voyce of Christ. Hée feares not the power of the Deuill, because hée féelesFeeles mercy. the
mercie of God.Strength. Hée is stronger which liues and ouercomes in him, then the deuill which in vain doth go about to ouercome him. Hée follows not the inticements of the flesh, because liuing in the Spirit,Quicken∣ing Spirit. hée féeles the riches of the Spirit: the quickning of the Spi∣rit doth mortifie and crucifie the flesh. 12 He feares not the deuil his accuser, because he knows Christ to be his intercessor.Intercessi∣on. The onely Lord our God, which is blessed for euer, the Author and giuer of this rest, grant vnto vs this true rest of our soule.
Mihi Jesu gratia quaestus. Christs grace my gaine. 34. Meditation. Of an exercise of Faith, out of the loue of Christ in the Agonie of death. SEe, O Lord Iesus, how iniu∣rious I am to thy passion: my heart is vexed, and my soule is very sad, because I haue no works of mine owne, no merits, when notwithstanding,Christs Passion our action. thy passi∣on is mine owne, thy works are my merits. I am iniurious to thy passion, because whereas that is most sufficient, I do yet doubt∣fully séeke mine owne workes supplement:Wrong to seek work for supply. now if I could finde righteousnesse in my selfe, thy righteousnesse would profit mée nothing: or surely I should not so much desire it.Law con∣demneth. If I require the workes of the Law, I shall bée
condemned out of the Law. 1 But I know that I am now no more vnder the Law, but vnder grace, I haue liued wretch∣edly: I haue sinned, O holy Fa∣ther, against heauen, neither am I worthy to bee called thy sonne, yet thou wilt not refuse to call me seruant.God call∣eth mee seruant. Christs Passion freeth the soule.2 I beséech thée let not the most holy fruit of thy Passion bée denyed mée: let not thy bloud waxe drie and barren, but let it bring forth fruite in fréeing my soule.Killeth sin. My sinnes haue alwayes liued in my flesh: let them, I be∣séech thée,Causeth the spirit triumph. Mortifieth the flesh. at length dye with mée. Alwayes hitherto hath my flesh had dominion ouer me, at length let the spirit triumph: let my out∣ward man be subiect to rottennes and wormes, that mine inward man may come forth vnto glory. Alwayes hitherto haue I obeyed
the deuils suggestions, at length I beséech thée, let him be beaten downe vnder my féet. 3 Satan is ready, and doth accuse me, but hée hath nothing in me. The shape of death doth af∣fright me, but death is the end of my sinnes, and the beginning of a holy life. Now at length I can perfectly please thée, O my God, now at length I shall be confirm∣ed in goodnesse and vertue. 4 The Deuill terrifies mée with my sinnes, but let him accuse him, which hath vndertaken mine infirmities, whom the Lord hath smitten for my sinnes. My debt is very great, neither can I pay any thing thereof: but I trust in the riches and benignity of my surety let him frée me which became surety for me, let him pay for me, which hath taken my debt vpon himselfe.
5 I haue sinned, O Lord, and my sinnes are very great, yet I will not commit that hainous sin to accuse thée of a lye,God ac∣quiteth me which testi∣fiest by thy words and déeds, and oath, that thou art satisfied for mine iniquities. I feare not my sinnes, because thou art my righ∣teousnesse.Righte∣ousnesse. I feare not mine igno∣rance, because thou art my wise∣dome. I feare not death, because thou art my life.Life. I feare not er∣rours, because thou art my truth.Truth. I feare not corruption, because thou art my resurrection.Resurre∣ction. Ioy. I feare not the sorrows of death, because thou art my ioy. I feare not the seuerity of iudgement, because thou art my righteousnesse. 6 Let the dew of thy grace and quickening consolation be in∣stilled into my thirsty soule.Refresh¦eth▪ Comfort∣eth. My spirit is dry, but shortly it shall reioyce in thée: my flesh languish∣eth,
and is withered, but shortly it shall wax greene.Reuiueth. I am constrai∣ned to vndergo corruption, but thou shalt deliuer me out of my corruptions,From cor∣ruption. which hast deliuered mee out of all euils. Thou hast created me, how can the work∣manship of thine owne hands bée dissolued?Not to be disslued Thou hast redéemed me from all mine enemies, how then can death alone haue dominion ouer me?Nor dye. Thou hast spent thy bo∣dy and thy bloud, and all that thou hast, yea, euen thine owne selfe, for my saluation, how then shall death detaine those things which are redéemed with so precious a price? Thou art righteousnesse,Christ Al∣mighty to saue. O Lord Iesus, my sinnes shall not preuaile against thée: thou art the life and the resurrection, my death shall not preuaile against thée: thou art God, Satan shal not preuaile against thée.
Giueth the spirit.7 Thou hast giuen me the earnest of thy Spirit: therein I reioyce, therein I triumph, and most firmely beléeue, nothing doubting but it shall bée granted me to enter into the marriage of the Lambe. 8 Thou art my wedding gar∣ment,Wedding Garment. most deare husband, which I haue put on in Baptisme: thou shalt couer my nakednesse: neither will I sow the rags of my righte¦ousnesse to this precious and most faire garment. What is the righ∣teousnesse of man, but a menstru∣ous cloth? how then should I dare to sow that abhominable ragge to the most precious garment of thy righteousnesse? 9 In this garment will I ap∣peare before thy face in thy iudge∣ment, when thou shalt iudge the whole world in iustice and equi∣tie. In this garment will I ap∣peare
before thy face in the hea∣uenly kingdome: this garment shall couer my confusion & shame,Couers our shame. that it be remembred no more for euer. 10 There will I appeare glo∣riousGlorious appea∣rance. and holy in thy face, and this my flesh, this my body, shall be clo∣thed with most blessed glory, I say, with glory euerlasting, and that shall endure world without end. Come, Lord Iesus, and hée that lo∣ueth thée, let him say, Come. Christus Resipiscite clamat. Christ cryes, Re∣pent. 35. Meditation. Of the fruit of true and earnest Re∣pentance. THE foundation and begin∣ing of an holy life, is whole∣some repentance.Repen∣tance. For where there is true repentance, there is
remissionRemission. of sinnes: where there is remission of sinnes, there is the graceGrace. of God: where is the grace of God, there is Christ: where is Christ,Christ. there is his me∣rit:Merit. where is Christs merit, there is satisfaction for sinnes: where is satisfactionSatisfactiō for sinnes, there is righteousnesse: where is righteousnesse,Righte∣ousnesse. there is a glad and quiet conscience:Quiet cō∣science. where there is tranquillitie of conscience, there is the holy Ghost:Holy Ghost. where there is the holy Ghost, there is the whole holy Trinity: where the holy TrinityTrinity. is, there is life eternall:Eternall life▪ therefore where there is true repentance, there is life eternall. No repen∣tance, no life.1 Where true repentance is not, there is neither remission of sinnes, nor the grace of God, nor Christ, nor his merit, nor satis∣faction for sinnes, nor righteous∣nesse,
nor a quiet conscience, nor the holy Ghost, nor the holy Tri∣nity, nor life eternall.Defer not. 2 Why therefore do we defer our repentance? why do we cast it off till to morrow? neither to morrow, nor true repentance, are in the power of our strength:Account for euery day. nei∣ther must we onely render an ac∣count of to morrow, but also of this day in iudgement. To mor∣row is not so certaine as destructi∣on to the impenitent. God hath promised forgiuenesse to him that repents, but he hath not pro∣mised him to morrowsNo pro∣mise for to morrow. day to re∣pent in. 3 There is no place for Christs satisfaction,Christs only plac but in that heart where there is true contri∣tion. Our sinnes make a separa∣tion betwixt God and vs, as wit∣nesseth the Prophet Esay, but by repentance we returne vnto him.
Acknowledge and be sorry for thy sinne, so shalt thou finde God pa∣cified toward thée in his Sonne. I blot out thine iniquities, saith the Lord:Sins writ. therefore our sinnes were written in the Court of hea∣uen. Turne thy face from our sinnes,Put out. prayes the Prophet: there∣fore God puts out our iniquities in his sight. Sinne se∣parateth.4 Be thou turned vnto vs, O God, prayes Moses: therefore our sinnes do separate vs from God. Our sinnes haue answered vs, complaines Isaiah: therefore they do accuseAccuse. vs before the tribunall seat of Gods iustice. Cleanse mée from my sinnes, prayes Dauid: therefore sinne is a most filthieFilthy: soulenesse before God. Heale my soule, because I haue sinned a∣gainst thee, prayes the same Pro∣phet: therefore sinne is a diseaseDisease. of the soule. Whosoeuer shall sin
against me,Blotteth vs out. I will blot him out of my booke, saith the Lord: there∣fore for our sinnes wée are blotted out of the booke of life.Casts vs away. Cast mée not from thy face, prayeth the Psalmist, therefore for our sinnes we are cast from God.Quench∣eth the spirit. Take not thy holy Spirit from mée: there∣fore the holy Ghost is cast out of the Temple of our hearts by sins, as Bées are driuen away with smoake, and Doues by stinke. Restore vnto mée the ioy of salua∣tion: therefore sinnes do vexe the minde,Vex vs. and draw out the iuyce of the heart. The land is infected by her inhabitants, which haue trans∣gressed the Law, cryeth the Pro∣phet Isaiah: therefore sinne is a cer∣taine contagious venome.Contagiō. Out of the depths haue I cryed vnto thée, O Lord, saith the Psalmist: there∣fore by our sinnes we are depres∣sed euen vnto hell.Depres∣seth vs.
6 Sometime we were dead in sinne, saith the Apostle: there∣fore sinne is the spirituall deathDeath. of the soule. By deadly sinne man loseth God: God is infinite and incomprehensible goodnesse, there∣fore to lose God, is infinite and incomprehensible euill.Incompre∣hensible ill. Greatest. Affliction not euill. Euen as God is the greatest good, so sinne is the greatest euill. Punishments and calamities are not true euils, because many good things are drawne out of them, nay, from thence it appeares that they are also good, because they come from the chiefest of good, that is to say, God, from whom there can pro∣céed nothing but good: they were in the chiefest of good, that is to say, Christ, but the chiefest of good doth not partake of that which is truly euill.But good. They leade also to the chiefest of good, that is to say, eternall life: through his
suffering Christ entred into his glory. And through many tribula∣tions, Christians do enter into life eternall. 7 The greatest euill therefore is sinne, because it draws vs away from the greatest good: as much as thou drawest neare to God, so much thou dost recede from sinne: as much as thou dost draw neare to sinne, so much thou dost depart from God.Draweth from God How wholsome a thing therefore is repentance, which recalls vs from sinne, and reduceth vs to God?Sinne, as great as God. Truly so great is sinne, as hée is great which is offended by the sinne, but him heauen and earth cannot containe: againe, so great is our repentance, as hée is great to whom wée returne by repen∣tance.Repen∣tāce great Sinne ac¦cused by the con∣science. 8 The sinner is accused of his owne conscience, which hée hath
polluted: of his Creator,Creator. Fault. whom he hath offended: of the fault, where∣in he hath transgressed: of the creature which he hath abused: of the Deuill,Abused. Deuill. whose instigation hée hath followed. How wholesome therefore is repentance,Repen∣tance freeth. which fréeth vs from so great accusati∣ons? 9 Let vs hastenHaste. therefore, let vs hasten to so wholesome a me∣dicine of so great a disease. If thou repent at thy death,Before death. thou doest not leaue thy sinnes, but thy sinnes leaue thée: thou shalt scarce∣ly finde any one that did truly repent him at his death, but that one Thiefe on the Crosse. Four∣téene yeares haue I serued thée,Then rare said Iacob to Laban:Do as Ia∣cob with Laban. it is time that I prouide for mine owne house: and then, if thou hast serued this world and this life so many yeares, is it not fit that thou be∣gin
to prouide for thy soule? euery day our flesh heapes vp sinnes, euery dayEuery day therefore let the spirit wash them away by repentance. Christ dyed,Because Christ tooke thē away. that sinne should dye in vs, and will we that that should liue & raigne in our hearts, whose life that he might take away, the Sonne of God himselfe did suffer death? 10 Christ doth not enter into the heart of man by grace,Else Christ doth not enter. God first humbleth, then lift∣eth vp. vnlesse Iohn Baptist make way for him by repentance. GOD doth not poure the oyle of his mercy, but into a vessell that is well contrite. The Lord doth first kill by con∣trition, that afterward hée may quicken by the Spirit of consola∣tion, Hée doth first leade vs into hell, by earnest griefe, that hée might bring vs backe out of hell by the sauour of grace. Elias first heard a great and strong winde,
which ouerturned the mountains, and tore the rocks, and after the winde, an earthquake; and after the earthquake, fire; but at length followed the still noyse of a soft aire: so also terrour goes before the taste of Gods loue,Sense of terrour be∣fore of loue. and sadnes before consolation. God doth not binde vp the wounds, vnlesse thou do first acknowledge and deploreDeplore. them.Vncouer. God doth not couer them, vnlesse thou first detect them. He doth not pardon them, vnlesse thou first acknowledge them. He doth not iustifie thée, vnlesse thou first condemne thy selfe. He doth not comfort thée, vnlesse thou first despaire in thy selfe. God bring to passe in vs this true repentance by his Spirit. Amen.
Patientem respice Christum. Behold Christ suf∣fering. 36. Meditation. An exercise of repentance, out of the Passion of our Lord Christ: BEhold, O faithfull soule, the griefe of him that suffers,A blessed spectacle. the wounds of him that hangs, the torments of him that dyes vpon the Crosse. That head which is feared of the Angelicall spirits, is prickedHead pric∣ked. with thicke thornes: the face which is fairer then the sons of men, is deformedFace de∣formed. with the spit∣tle of the wicked: the eyesEyes dark∣ned. that are brighter then the Sunne, are darkened in death: the earesEares haue mocks. which heare the praises of An∣gels, are full of the outragious mockings, and bitter scoffes of sinners: the mouthMouth bittered. that vtters heauenly sayings, and teacheth
the Angels, is drencht with Gall and Vineger: the féet,Feet nay∣led. Hands stretched. at whose footstoole there is worship done, are fastned with nailes: the hands which haue stretched forth the heauens, are stretched forth on the Crosse: the body,Body bea¦ten. which is the most holy seat, and most pure ha∣bitacle of the Deity, is beaten and wounded with the Lance, neither remained there any thing whole in him, but his tongue, that hée might pray for those that crucified him. 1 He that raignes in heauenHeauens King cru∣cified. with the Father, is most wofully afflicted of sinners on the Crosse. GodGod suffe∣reth. dyes, God suffers, GOD poures out his bloud. From the greatnesse of the price, estéeme of the greatnesse of perill:Then great was our misery. from the price of the remedy, estéeme the danger of the disease. Surely, great were the wounds which
could not bée healed but by the wounds of that quicke and quick∣ning flesh: surely great was the disease, which could not be cured but by the death of the Physitian. 2 Consider, O faithfull soule,Great is our Aduo∣cate Christ the burning wrath of God, after the fall of our first Parent: his eternall and onely begotten, and onely beloued Sonne, became an Intercessor. He made interces∣sion: by whom he made the hea∣uens: And hée the great Aduo∣cate of our saluation, tooke the cause of vs poore wretches on himselfe. Notwithstanding, as yet was not his wrath turned a∣way.Incarnate. Our Sauiour put on our flesh vpon him, that the glory of the Diuinity being communica∣ted to our flesh,For vs in communiō Expiation. might expiate our sinfull flesh: that the medicinable force of his perfect Iustice, being communicated to our flesh,Healing. might
wipe away the venemous quali∣tie of sinne, sticking in our flesh, and that grace might be giuen to our flesh.Giuing grace. Notwithstanding, as yet was not his wrath turned a∣way. Hée translated our sinnes and the merits of our sinnes on himselfe:Taketh our sins. Suffered. his body is bound, bea∣ten, wounded, nayled, crucified, laid downe into the Sepulchre:Buried. Bloudshed. the bloud, like vnto dew, flows most abundantly through all his members as he suffers: his most holy SouleSad soule. is sad beyond mea∣sure: nay, hée is sad euen vnto death:To death. hée is subiect to the paines of hell.Hell. The eternall Sonne of God cries out,Cryeth. that he is forsaken of God. Hée poures out such a∣bundance of bloudy sweat:Sweat. hée féeles so great anguish,Anguish. that hée wants the comfort of an Angel, which comforts all the Angels:Death. he dyes, which is the giuer of life
to all the liuing. 3 What shall be done in a dry trée, if this bée done in a gréene? what shall bée done to sinners,All due to vs sinners. if this be done with him that is iust and holy?More due. how shall he punish the sinnes of offenders, which was so fierce toward him that had not offended? how shall he en∣dure that perpetually in his ser∣uants, which he punished so grie∣uously in his Sonne? what shall they suffer whom hee hath repro∣bated, if he suffer so great things whom he onely loueth? If Christ went not out without a scourge, that came in without sinne, of how many scourges are they worthie, which come into the World with sinne, liue in sinne, and go out with sinne? The ser∣uant reioyceth while the sonne sorrows grieuously for his fault:Wonder∣full loue. the seruant heaps vp the wrath
of his Lord, whiles the Sonne la∣bours so much for the appeasing and pacifying of the wrath of his Father.Gods wrath fea∣red. O the infinite anger of God! O his vnspeakable wrath! O the inestimable rigour of his iustice! he that is so fierce against his only and most beloued Sonne, which partakes of his owne es∣sence; not for any fault of his, but because he makes intercession for his seruant, what will he do to that seruant, that perseuers carelesly in sinnes and offences? 4 Let the seruant feareThen feare seruant. and tremble, and be sad for his owne deserts, when the Sonne is pu∣nished for the merits that are not his. Let the seruant feare which doth not cease to sinne,Sinner. when the Sonne endures so much for sinne. Let the creatureCreature. feare, which hath crucified his Creator: let the seruant feare, which hath slaine
his Lord. Let the wickedWicked. and sin∣ner feare, which hath so afflicted the holy and iust▪ 5 Let vs heare him crying out most clearly: let vs heare him wéeping: he crieth from the crosse: Sée man, what I suffer for thée: I cry vnto thée, because I dye for thée: sée the paines with which I am punished: sée the nayles with which I am pierst: there is no griefe like to my griefe: when mine outward griefe is so great, mine inward plaint is more grie∣uous, when I find thée so vngrate∣full. Haue pitie, haue pitie vpon vs, thou that onely doest take pity, and turne our stony hearts vnto thée. Let euery seuerall branch of thy bitter passion, destroy a seue∣rall root of sinne in our naughty hearts.
Crux Christi nostra corona est. Christs Crosse out crowne. 37. Meditation. A consolation of the penitent, out of the Passi∣on of Christ: taken out of Anselme especially. ALl the glory of the godlyGodly glory. is in the ignominie of our Lords Passion All the restRest. of the godly is in the wounds of our Sa∣uiour:Life in Christ. our life is in his death, our glory in his exaltation How great is thy mercy, O heauenly Father, Almighty God? I could offend thée by my self, but I could not pa∣cifie thée towards me by my selfe: therefore thou doest reconcileReconci∣liation. me to thy selfe in Christ. 1 Sée therefore, O holy God, the sacrament of his flesh, and re∣mitRemit. vnto me the guilt of my flesh. Behold what the good Sonne hath suffered, and forgetForget. what
thy euil seruant hath committed. My flesh hath prouoked thée to anger: but I beséech thée, let the flesh of Christ bend thée to mercy.Incline thy mercy Great is that which I haue de∣serued by mine iniquitie but farre greater is that which my Redée∣mer hath deserued by his pietie.To desert. Great is mine vnrighteousnesse, but much greater is my Redée∣mers righteousnesse.Righteous∣nesse. For by how much God is higher then man so much my wickednesse is inferiour to his goodnesse, as in quality, so al∣so in quantity. 2 All that I am by condition is thine, grant also that by loue it may be all thine.Let me be thine. Thou that ma∣kest me to aske, make me also to receiue.To re∣ceiue. Thou giuest vnto mee to seeke grant mee also to finde.Finde. Thou teachest me to knocke, o∣pen therefore vnto mee that knocks. Of thée haue I to desire,Enter.
of thée also let me haue the com∣plement of my desire:Haue my desire. thou hast giuen me to will,To will. giue mée also to do thy will. O holy God, O iust Iudge, if my sinnes bée couered, they are incurable: if they be séene, they are detestable: they afflict me with griefe, but they do more terrifie mée with feare. I beséech thee, withhold not so true mer∣cie, where thou doest acknow∣ledge so true misery.Shew mer¦cy to true misery. Thou findest here great sinne, let thy grace as yet be greater and more full. O holy Father, I beséech thée poure not forth vpon me thy wrath,Not wrath. sée∣ing for my sinnes thou hast alrea∣die smitten thine owne Sonne. Holy Iesus,Iesus free me. frée mée from the wrath of God, which hast borne it vpon thée for me on the Crosse. O holy Spirit, protect meHoly spi∣rit protect me. with thy consolation against the wrath of God, which hast preached mercie
to the contrite and penitent in the Gospell. O holy God, O iust Iudge, I finde no placeNo place else safe. into which I can flye from the face of thine anger. If I climbe vp into heauen,Heauen. thou art there, if I go downe into Hell,Hell. thou art there also, if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the vttermost part of the Sea,Sea. there also thine hand will leade, and thy right hand will lay hold on me. I will flye there∣fore vnto Christ,Christ safe and will hide me in his wounds.By his wounds. O mercifull God, behold the bodie of thy Sonne, wounded on euery part, with wounds, and behold not the wounds of my sinne. Let the bloodBloud. of thy Sonne wash mée from all the spots of my sinne. Heare his most ardent prayersPrayers. offered vnto thée for the saluation of thine elect.
Life a ter∣rour.4 O holy Ghost, O iust iudge, my life doth terrifie me, for being diligently sifted, it appeareth wholly to be either sinne or bar∣rennesse: and if any fruit be séene in it, so it is, that it is either fai∣ned, or imperfect, or some wayes corrupted, that it can either not please, or else that it doth altoge∣ther displease thine eyes. Surely my whole life is either in sinne, and so damnable: or else vnfruit∣full, and so contemptible: but why do I separate vnfruitful from damnable?Damnable. for if it be vnfruitfull, it is damnable: for euery trée that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall bée cast into the fire: not onely that trée that brings forth euill fruit shall be cast into the fire, but that also which brings forth no fruit. 5 The GoatesGoates errible. do affright me, that stand at the left hand of the
Iudge: not because they haue done any euill,For omis¦sion. but because they haue done no good, they haue not giuen meat to the hungry, nor drinke to the thirstie. 6 O therefore dry and vnpro∣fitable wood, and worthy of eter∣nall fire: what wilt thou answer in that day, when an accountAccount feareful. shall bée required of thée, euen to the twinkling of an eye, of all the time of life that God hath lent thée, how it hath béene spent by thée? an haire of thine head shall not perish, nor a moment of thy time. O wofull streights!Wofull streights. on this side of thée shall be thy sinnesSinne. ac∣cusing, on that side, iusticeIustice. terri∣fying, vnder thée the horrible pit of hellHell. gaping, aboue thée, the angry IudgeIudge. threatning, within thée, thy conscienceConsci∣ence. burning, with∣out thée, the worldWorld. flaming. The iust shall scarce be saued, the sin∣ner
taken after this sort, whither shall he turne him? to lye hid will be impossible; to appeare will bée intollerable. 7 Whence therefore is the saluation of my soule? whence is the counsell?Iesus the counsellor who is it which is called the Angel of the great Counsell? It is euen Iesus him∣selfe, the same is the Iudge, be∣twéene whose hands I tremble. Take heart,Cōforter. O my soule, despaire not. Hope in him whom thou fearest, flye to him whom thou hast forsaken. O Iesus Christ, for this thy Name, do vnto mée according to thy Name, looke vpon mée poore wretch, calling vpon thy Name. If thou wilt ad∣mit mée into the most broad bo∣some of thy mercy,His bosom large. it will not bée the narrower for me. It is true, O Lord, my conscience hath de∣serued damnation, and my repen∣tance
is not sufficient for satis∣faction: but it is certaine that thy mercy doth excéed all trangressi∣on. In thée, O Lord, do I put my trust, let mée not be confounded for euer. Friday, Euening Prayer. THou (O Lord) which hast taught vs to pray, hast com∣manded vs not to pray onely for our selues, but minding vs in the first words of that prayer which thy Sonne hath taught vs, of a common Father, hast shewed that we are to commend others to thy piety in our prayers, as well as our selues. Wherefore as a feeling member of that body whereof thy Sonne Iesus Christ is Head, I be∣seech thee that thy goodnes may bee plentifully shewed on thine
owne Vineyard, thy Church, the inheritance which thou hast pur∣chased to thy selfe. Water it (O Lord) with abundance of raine from Heauen, take out of it all things that offend, and commit a∣bomination; blesse it vniuersally, with all spirituall blessings: but more especially I do beseech thee, to looke on the members thereof, in these our kingdomes, and grant that here thy Word hauing free passage amongst vs, many Sonnes and Daughters may thereby bee begotten vnto thee. And because as in the health and good disposi∣tion of the body, the soule can bet∣ter shew forth her force, and vse her faculties; so also in the peace and prosperitie of the Common∣weale, the Church will also the better flourish. Blesse Lord, and prosper the gouernment establish∣ed here amongst vs: blesse the
King, and his Progeny, with the whole Councell, Clergy, Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of this Land, and make these kingdomes as a City or a Countrey, that is at vnity in it selfe, which being safe from all home-bred enemies, may the better bee defended from all forraine inuasion, and power of the Aliants. Looke, Lord, I pray thee, on the distresse and affliction of all poore people, that are either vnder pressure of any want, sick∣nes, prison, infamy, or vnder any other kinde of trouble or danger; be mercifull vnto them, and deli∣uer them, and giue them, for what they want here of outward com∣forts, a full measure of inward con¦solations. Behold with the eye of pitie, all men of a wounded heart, and broken spirit; bring home to thy fold all sheepe that wander and go astray: forgiue mine ene∣mies
and persecuters, recompence their good plentifully to the souls of my Benefactours: deale graci∣ously with those of mine owne flesh, and of my family; and con∣firme me O Lord, in all goodnes, and keepe me safe this night, and the whole course of my life from all dangers, for thy deare Sonnes sake, Christ Iesus. Amen. Saturday, Morning Prayer. VVHile I beare about mee this body of clay, this body of death, I am daily in dan∣ger for my body, lest the things from within or without me, offend my health, and be to me an occa∣sion of ruine: as well plenty as pe∣nury may hurt me, as well that which I haue, as that which I want may annoy me: as well labour as ease may destroy me. What from
the beasts of the field, what from the sonnes of men set on fire, what from the violence of fire, what from the tempests, infectiō, vnsea∣sonablenesse of the aire, drought and moisture, heat and cold; what from the depth and raging of the waters; what from the pits and praecipices of the earth, I am daily in hazard of breaking and spilling this viall of bloud. The pestilence consuming with a whole band of other diseases, the warre wasting, and sword deuouring, famine pinching, and making to pine a∣way, are three maine enemies of my bodily life. I may say of the dangers of my body, as Dauid of the number of his enemies, they are mo then the haires of my head. Seeing then I walke in the midst of so many perils, what shall be my securitie and defence against all inconueniences, feares and hurts,
but the shadow of thy mercifull wings (O Lord) vnder which I do beseech thee, to hide me this day, and all the dayes of my life, that neither the shape of death affright mee, nor any euill come neare to hurt me, but that I may be preser∣ued as in soule, so in body, from all things that may annoy me: which thing I beseech thee to grant vnto mee, for thy deare Sonnes sake, Christ Iesus. Amen. Pietas sapientia summa est. Godlines chiefest wisedome. 38. Meditation. Of generall rules to liue godly. Learne to dye.EVery day thou drawest more eare to death to iudgement, and eternitie: thinke therefore euery day how thou mayst stand in the seuere discussing of death and iudgement:And liue. and how thou
mayest liue for euer. We must haue a straight care of all our thoughts,Looke to thoughts. words, and déeds, be∣cause hereafter a strict account must bée rendered of all our thoughts, wordes, and déeds. Thinke in the euening, that deathDeath im∣minent. hangs ouer thy head this night: thinke in the morning,Certaine. that death hangs ouer thy head this day. Deferre not thy conuersion and good worke till to morow, be∣cause to morrow is vncertaine,To mor∣row vn∣certaine. but death that hangs ouer thy head is alwayes certaine. No∣thing is a greater aduersarie to pietie,Delay, foe to piety. then deferring. If thou contemnest the inward calling of the holy Ghost,To the ho∣ly Ghost. thou shalt neuer come to true conuersion. Deferre not thy conuersion and good deeds to thine age: but offer vnto God the flower of thy youth.Giue God thy youth. Age is vncertaine to a young man, bot
certaine destruction is prepared for an impenitent yong man:Impeni∣tent youth no age is more fit for the seruice of God then youth, that flourisheth in strength both of body and minde. 1 Thou oughtest to vnder∣take an euill action for no mans fauour:Respect no mans fauour. for not that man, but God sometimes shall iudge thy life: therefore resolue that no fauour of men is to be preferred before the fauour of God. In the way of the Lord, we do either go forward, or go backward, examineExamine thy men∣ding. thy life therefore euery day, whether in the study of godlinesse, thou be proficient, or deficient. 2 To stand stillStand not still. in the way of the Lord, is to go backward: let it not delight thée therefore to stand still in the course of piety, but study alwayes to walke in the way of the Lord. In thy conuer∣sationWise con¦uersation to God. be kinde to all, grieuous to
none, familiar to few: to God∣ward liue godly, to thy selfeThy selfe. chastely, to thy neighbour iustly: vse thy friendFriend. with fauour, thine enemieEnemy. with patience, all with beneuolence, those whom thou canst with beneficence: dye dailyDye daily. in thy life to thy selfe, and to thy vices, so in death thou shalt liue vnto God. 3 Let mercie appeare in thy affection,Be gentle. benignitie in thy coun∣tenance, humilitie in thy habite, modesty in thy dwelling, patience in thy tribulation. Alwayes think of thrée things that are past:Three things past. the euil that thou hast committed,Ill. the goodGood: that thou hast omitted, the timeTime. that thou hast lost. Alwayes thinke of thrée things present,Three present. the shortnesse of this life present, the difficultie to be saued,Short life: the small numberNumber. of those that are to bée saued.Saluation. Alwayes thinke of thrée
things to come death,Three to come, Death. then which nothing is more horrible, iudge∣mentIudgment. then which nothing is more terrible: the paines of hell,Hell. then which, nothing is more intole∣rable. Let day mend day.4 Let thy euening prayers a∣mend the sinnes of the day that is past: let the last day of the wéeke amend the faults of the dayes that went before. Thinke in the eue∣ning, how many haue béene cast headlong into hell that day: and giue God thanks that he hath granted thée a time of repentance. 5 Thrée things are aboueThree a∣boue. thée, of which let the remembrance neuer depart from thée. The eyeEye. that sées all, the eareEare. that heares all, and the bookesBooks. into which all things are written. God hath communicated himselfe wholly vnto thée, communicate thy selfe also wholly vnto thy neighbour:God to thee, thou to thy neighbour
that is the best life which doth serue wholly for others.To all sorts. Shew to thy superiour obedience and re∣uerence, to thine equall counsell and helpe, to thine inferiour kéep∣ing and discipline. 6 Let thy bodie be subiect to thy minde,Order. and thy minde vnto God.Respect. Bewaile thine euils that are past, lightly estéeme the good things present, and desire the good things to come, with the whole desire of thy heart. 7 RememberRemember thy sinne, that thou mayest grieue for it: re∣member death, that thou mayest cease from it: remember Gods iustice, that thou mayest feare: remember Gods mercie, that thou do not despaire. As much as thou canst, withdraw thy selfe from the world,Go from the world to God. and addict thy selfe wholly to the seruice of God. Thinke alwayes that
chastitie is in dangerVertues in danger. in delights; humilitie, in riches, pietie, in worldly affaires. Desire to pelase none but Christ,Please Christ. feare to displease none but Christ. Alwayes prayPray. God that hee command what hée will, & giue what he commands: that he hide that which is done, that he gouerne that which is to come.Petitions. No Hypo∣crite. Such a one as thou wilt séeme to bée, such a one also ough∣test thou to be, for God iudgeth not according to the appearance, but according to the truth. 8 In words,Words▪ take héed of bab∣ling, because the iudgement re∣quires an account of euery vaine word: thy workes,Works. whatsoeuer they be, do not passe away, but are cast as certaine séeds of eter∣nitie: if thou sowe in the flesh, of the flesh thou shalt reape cor∣ruption: if thou sowe in the spi∣rit, of the spirit thou shalt reape
the reward of eternall retribution. The honoursHonours, &c. follow not. of the world will not follow thée after death, nor the heaps of riches: pleasures will not follow thée, nor the vanities of the world: but after the last date of thy life, all thy worksWorks. will fol∣low thée, 9 Such therefore as thou wilt be in iudgement, such appeareAppeare well. to day in the sight of God. Estéeme not of the things that thou hast, but rather estéemeEsteeme aright. of the things that thou hast not. Be not proud for that which is giuen thée, but ra∣ther be humbledHumble. for that which is denied thée: learn to liue,Liue. while as yet thou maist liue.Here work In this life e∣ternall life is either gotten or lost, after death there remaines no time of working, but there begins the time of recompence:The re∣compence in the life to come working is not looked for, but the retribution of works.
10 Let holy meditationMeditatiō. bring forth in thée knowledge;Know∣ledge. know∣ledge compunction;Compun∣ction. compunction deuotion;Deuotion. let deuotion make pray∣er.Prayer. A great good for the peace of the heart, is the silenceSilence▪ of the mouth. By how much the more thou shalt be separatedSeparated. from the world, by so much the more shalt thou bée acceptable vnto God. Whatsoeuer thou desirest to haue aske it of God,Aske of God. Giue all to God. whatsoeuer thou hast, attribute it vnto God: he is not worthy of the things that are to be giuen, which doth not giue thanks for the things that are gi∣uen, the course of graces cease, where there is not a recourse of thanks. All to the best.11 Whatsoeuer happens vnto thée, turne it into good: as often as prosperitieProsperi∣ty. happens vnto thée, thinke that there is ministred vn∣to thée matter of blessing and
praising: as often as aduersitieAduersity: be∣falls thée, thinke that it is an ad∣monition of repentance and con∣uersion. Shew the force of thy power in helping, the force of thy wisedome in teaching,All to edi∣fication. Not hurt. the force of thy riches in doing good. Let not aduersity breake thee, neither let prosperitie lift thée vp. Let Christ bée the scopeScope. of thy life, whom follow in the way, that thou mayest attaine him in thy countrey. 12 In all things let this bée thy greatest care, profound humi∣litie, and ardent charitie.Charitie. Let cha∣ritie lift vp thy heart vnto God, that thou maist cleaue vnto him: let humilitie depresse thy heart,Humilitie. Esteeme God a Fa∣ther. Lord. lest thou be proud. Estéeme God a Father in clemency, a Lord in discipline: a Father in mild com∣mand, a Lord in seuere: loue him as a Father, godlily: feare
him as a Lord necessarily: loue him because he will haue mercy: feare him because he will not sin: feare the Lord, and hope in him: acknowledge thy misery, and pro∣claime his grace. O God which hast giuen vnto vs to will, grant vs also to performe thy will. Domino iungaris amore. Be ioyned to God by loue. 39. Meditation. Of louing God onely. God the true good.LIft vp thy selfe, O faithfull soule, and loue that chiefest good, in which are all things that are good, without which there is no other true good. No creature can exatiate our will, because no creature hath in it perfect, but one∣lyOnely. the participated good. A cer∣taine little streame of goodnesse is deriued from the diuinity to it, but the fountaineAnd foun∣taine. alwayes abides in
God, wherefore then leauing the fountaine, will we follow these little streames? all the goodnesse that is in the creatures, is but a certaine image and shadow of that perfect goodnesse which is in God,Perfection nay, which God himselfe is. Wherefore catching at the sha∣dow,Body. will we forsake the thing it selfe? The Doue which was sent out of the arke of Noah, could not on the sliding water finde where her foot might rest: so our soule, in the number of all things vnder the Moone,All else fragile. cannot finde any thing which can fully replenish her de∣sire, by reason of their great in∣constancie and fragilitie. 1 Doth not hée do iniurie to himselfe, which loues any thing below his owne worth?Below our worth. But now our soule is more noble then all the Creatures, because it is redéemed by the
Passion and death of Christ. 2 Wherefore then will it loue the creatures? is it not contrarie to the Maiestie into which God hath exalted it? whatsoeuer wée loue,Causes of Loue. wée loue it either for the might,Might. or for the wisedome,Wisedome or for the beauty:Beauty. but what is mightier then God? what is wiser then God? what is more full of beau∣tie then God?In a l God excelleth. all the might and power of worldly kings is from him, and vnder him: all the wise∣dome of men compared to Gods wisedome, is but foolishnesse: all the beauty of the creatures com∣pared to that of God, is but de∣formitie. 3 If some most mighty KingA mighty king offer∣eth marri∣age. should deale by his Embassadors about marrying with a Virgin of low estate and condition, should not that Virgin do foolishly, if passing by that most potent king,
she should adhere to the poore em∣bassadours and Ministers of the king? so God by all that beauty of the creatures would call vs vnto himselfe, would stirre vs vp to the loue of himselfe:Cleaue not to messen∣gers. why then doth our soule, whom her Hus∣band Christ desires, cleaue vnto the creatures which are as the Embassadours of this spirituall marriage? the creatures them∣selues cry,Which ad∣uise vs better. Why do you cleaue vnto vs? why do you put the end of your desire in vs? wée cannot fill your appetite: go to the Creator of vs both. There can no reciprocke loue bée hoped for from the Creatures: no loue also begun towards vs from the crea∣ture,God loues first. but God which is loue it selfe, cannot choose but loue him that loueth him: nay, with his loue he preuents all our desires, all our loue. How much therefore
is he to be loued, which loued vs so much first of all?Before we were. he loued vs when as yet we were not: for it is of the loue of God, that we are borne into this world. 4 He loued vs when we were his enemies:When e∣nemies. for it is of the mercy and loue of God, that he sent his Sonne the Redéemer. He loued vs when we were falne into sins:Fallen. for it is of the loue of God, that he doth not forthwith deliuer vs vn∣to death if we sinne, but expect our conuersion. Transla∣teth vs.5 It is the loue of God, that besides our deseruing, yea, con∣trary to our deseruing, hée doth translate vs to the heauenly ha∣bitations.Loue brin∣geth know∣ledge. Without the loue of God thou shalt neuer come to the sauing knowledge of him: with∣out the loue of God, all know∣ledge is vnprofitable, nay, it is hurtfull. Wherefore doth loue
excéede the knowledge of all my∣steries? because this is also in the Deuils, that but in the godly.Misery not to loue God. Why is the Deuill most vnhap∣py? because hée cannot loue the chiefest good. Wherefore on the other side,Happy loue. is God most happie and most blessed? because he loues all things, he is delighted in al his works. 6 Why is the loue of God in this life not perfect in vs?Loue as know¦ledge in part. because we loue but as much as we know: but in this life we know onely in part, and in a darke saying: in the other life wee shall bee perfectlyOr perfect blessed, because we shall loue God perfectly: we shall loue him per∣fectly, because we shall know him perfectly. 7 No man can haue hope of the perfect loue of GOD in the other World,Begin here. that doth not begin to loue him in this world: the
kingdome of God must begin in the heart of a man in this life, o∣therwise it shall not bee consum¦mate in the life to come. Without the loue of God there is no desire of eternall life,Loue de∣sires eter∣nitie. how then can hée partake of the greatest good which doth not loue? which doth not séeke? which doth not desire? Such as thy loue is, such art thou thy selfe, because thy loue doth change théeLoue changeth thee. into it selfe. Loue is the grea∣test bond, because the louer and the thing beloued are made one.To be one. What hath conioyned God the most iust, and forlorne sinners? what hath ioyned these things to∣gether, so infinitely distant be∣twéene themselues? infinite loue. Yet lest the iustice of God should bée impaired,With God the infinite price of Christ did come betwéene. What as yet doth ioyne together God the Creator, and the faithfull soule
created, things infinitely distant? Loue.By Christ to the highest degree. In the life eternall we shall be ioyned in the highest degree to God: why? because we shall loue him in the highest degrée. 8 Loue doth vnite and change: if thou louest carnall things, thou art carnall: if thou louest the world, thou shalt become worldly: but flesh and bloud shall not inhe∣rite the kingdome of God. 9 If thou louest God and hea∣uenly things,To be∣come hea¦uenly. thou shalt become heauenly. The loue of God is the chariot of EliasElias cha¦riot. ascending into heauen. The loue of God is the pleasure of the minde, the Para∣dise of the soule,Benefits of loue. it excludes the world, it ouercomes the deuill, it shuts hell, it opens heauen. The loue of God is that sealeSeale of the elect. with which God doth marke the elect and beléeuing. God in the last iudgement will acknowledge none
for his, which is not marked with this seale. For faith it selfe is not the onely true cause of our righ∣teousnesse and saluation, vnlesse it shew forth it selfe by loue. There is no true faith, vnlesse there bée a firme confidence: there is no firme confidenceGiueth confi∣dence. without the loue of God: the benefit is not acknow¦ledged for which wee giue not thanks▪ we giue not thanks to him whom we do not loue. Faiths fruit.10 If therefore thy faith bée true, it will acknowledge the be∣nefit of Christ thy Redéemer, it will acknowledge, and it will giue thanks: it will giue thanks, and it will loue. 11 The loue of God is the life and rest of our soule:Loue of God, the soules life. when the soule departs by death, the life of the body dyes: when God departs from our soules through sinne,In vs. the life of the soule dyeth. Againe, God
dwelleth by faith in our hearts, he dwelleth by loue in our soule, be∣cause the loue of God is poured out into the hearts of the elect by the holy Ghost. There is no tran∣quility of the soule,Loue of the world troubleth it. without the loue of God: the world and the de∣uill are her greatest perturbation, but God is her greatest rest. There is no peace of conscience, but in those that are iustified by faith: there is no true loue of God, but in them which are affected with a filiall confidenceFiliall con∣fidence. in God. Therefore let there dye in vs the loue of our selues, the loue of the world, the loue of the creatures: that there may liue in vs the loue of God, which may begin in vs in this world, and may be perfected in that to come.
Sit vitae regula Christus. Christs life be thy liues rule. 40 Meditation. Of the holy imitation of the life of Christ. THe holy life of Christ is the most perfect patternePerfect patterne. of Ver∣tues: euery action of Christ is al∣so our instruction. Many would attaine Christ, but they refuse to follow him: they would enioy Christ, but they would not imi∣tate him. Learne of me, because I am méeke and humble in heart,For disci∣ples. saith our Sauiour to his Disci∣ples: vnlesse thou wilt be the disci∣ple of Christ, thou shalt neuer be true Christian. 1 Let not onely the passion of Christ be thy merit; but let also the action of Christ bée the exam∣ple of thy life. Thy beloued is white and ruddy: be thou also red
with the aspersion of the bloud of Christ, and white with the imita∣tion of the life of Christ. 2 How doest thou loue Christ truly,Imitation Of holy life. if thou louest not his holy life? If ye loue me, saith our Sa∣uiour, kéep my precepts. He there∣fore that kéepes not his comman∣dements, doth not loue him. The holy life of Christ is a perfect rule of our life. One onely rule of the life of Christ, is infinitely to bee preferred before all the rules of men whatsoeuer. 3 If thou wilt be the adoptiue sonne of God,As the Sonnes sée how that onely begotten Sonne had his conuer∣sation. If thou wilt be a coheireCoheires. of Christ, thou oughtest also to bée the imitator of Christ. Hee that will liue with vices,Vice▪ hath giuen himselfe ouer to the obedi∣ence of the Deuill. But he that will be with the Deuill, how can
he also be with Christ? To loue sinnes and vices,Loueth the deuil. is to loue the di∣uell, because all sinnes are of the deuill: how therefore can he bée a true louer of Christ,Not Christ. which is a louer of the deuil? To loue God, is to loue an holy life,Holy life. Loueth God. because all holy life is from God. How there∣fore can hee bee a louer of God, which is not a louer of an holy life? The trial of loue is the shew∣ing forth of the worke: it is the property of true loue to obey him that is beloued,Obeyeth him. to will the same with him that is beloued, to think the same things with him that is beloued. If therefore thou louest Christ truly, thou wilt shew thy selfe obedient to his commande∣ments, thou wilt loue an holy life with him: and being renued in the spirit of thy minde, thou wilt thinke on heauenly things. 4 Eternall life is in the know∣ledge
of Christ,Without loue, no vertue. but he that loues not Christ, doth also not know him: he which loues not humility, chastity, méeknesse, temperance, charity, doth not also loue Christ: because the life of Christ was no other thing, but humility, chastity, méeknesse, temperance, charitie. Christ saith, that he doth not know them which do not fulfill the will of his Father: therefore also they know not Christ,No know∣ledge of Christ. Christs Spirit fruitfull. which do not the will of the heauenly Fa∣ther. 5 But what is the will of the Father? Euen our sanctification, saith the Apostle. Hée is not Christs, which hath not the spirit of Christ: but wheresoeuer the holy Ghost is, there he is present with his gifts and fruits. But what are the fruits of the Spirit? Loue, ioy, peace, lenity, benigni∣ty, goodnesse, faith, méeknesse,
temperance. Euen as the holy Ghost did rest vpon Christ,Vpon the faithfull. so he doth also rest vpon al those which are in Christ by true faith: because the Spouse of Christ doth runne in the smell of the oyntments of Christ. Who knit in spirit.6 Hée which cleaueth to the Lord, is one spirit with him. Euen as the carnall knot of the man and wife, maketh of them one flesh: so the spirituall coniunction of Christ and the faithfull soule, ma∣keth of them one spirit. 7 But where there is one spi∣rit, there is the same will: where is the same will, there are also the same actions.Are con∣formed to him. He therefore which doth not conforme his life to the life of Christ, is conuinced that he neither cleaues vnto the Lord, nor hath the Spirit of Christ.As is meet Is it not méete and iust, that all our life be made conformable vnto
him, which out of his loue hath conformed himselfe wholly vnto vs? God manifesting himselfe in the flesh,In the flesh. hath set forth vnto vs the example of an holy life, lest any one refusing an holy life, should betake himselfe to the ex∣cuse of the flesh.True plea∣sure. No life is more pleasant and quiet then Christs life, because Christ is true God: But what is more pleasant, or more full of tranquillity then God, as who is the chiefest good?And good. the life of the world brings short ioy, but draws with it eternall sadnesse. 8 To whomsoeuer thou con∣formest thy selfe in thy life,Like here goeth to like at last. to him also thou shalt bee conformed in the Resurrection. If thou begin∣nest here to conforme thy selfe to the life of Christ,Christ. thou shalt also more fully be conformed vnto him in the Resurrection: if thou con∣forme
thy selfe to the deuill by hainous wickednesse,Or the deuill. in the Re∣surrection thou shalt bee confor∣med vnto him by grieuous tor∣ments: 9 He which will follow mee, let him deny himselfe,Deny thy selfe. saith our Sauiour, and let him take vp his crosse daily. If in this life thou deny thy selfe,Christ will acknow¦ledge thee Honour thee. Christ in the iudge∣ment will acknowledge thée to be his. If for Christ in this life thou renounce thine owne honour, thine owne loue, thine owne will, Christ in the life to come, will make thée partaker of his honour, of his loue, of his will. If in this life thou art partaker (Crucis) of the Crosse, in the life to come thou shalt bée partaker (aeternae lucis) of the eternall light.Giue thee light. If in this life thou art partaker of tribulation, in the life to come thou shalt be par∣taker of the consolation: if in this
life thou art partaker of persecu∣tion, in the life to come,Consola∣tion. thou shalt be partaker of the most large re∣tribution. 10 He that confessethConfes∣seth thee. mee in this world, saith Christ, I will al∣so confesse him before my Father which is in heauen.Keeping doctrine and life. But we ought to confesse Christ, not onely in the profession of doctrine, but also in the conformity of life, so at length he shall acknowledge vs for his in iudgement. Whosoeuer shall de∣nie me before men,Else deny. I will also deny him before my Father which is in heauen. 11 Christ is not onely denyed in words,His deny∣ers. but also much more in a wicked life. Him therefore which denies Christ in his déeds in this world, will Christ deny in déeds in the iudgement. Hée is not a Christian, which hath not the true faith of Christ: but true faith
doth graft vs into Christ the spi∣rituall Vine, as it were branches: euery branch in Christ that beares not fruit,And fruit∣lesse bran∣ches. the heauenly Husband∣man takes away: but he which abides in Christ, and in whom Christ dwels by faith, this man brings forth much fruit. That branch is not in the Vine, which doth not draw nourishment out of the Vine:Which are not in him that soule is not in Christ by faith, which draws not the spirituall moysture of charitie out of Christ by faith. Conforme vs to thy life, O good Iesus, in this world, that we may be fully con∣formed vnto it in the world to come. Amen. Saturday Noone. Psal. 91.11.GIue thine Angels charge o∣uer me, O Lord, to keepe me in all my wayes.
Mens recti conscia vita est. A good conscience is life. 41 Meditation. Of the pure∣nesse of the Conscience. IN all thy actions haue the greatest care of thy conscience:Cōscience. If the Deuill entice thée to any sinne, feare the inward iudgement of thy conscience. If thou fearest to sinne in the presence of other men,Vse. much more let thine owne conscience recall thée from sinne: the inward testimonie is of grea∣ter force then the outward. Al∣though therefore thy sinnes escape the accusation of all men,Force. yet they can neuer escape the inward te∣stimonieTestimony of thy conscience. Con∣science shall bée amongst those Bookes,A booke. Reu. 20. 1 Booke of know∣ledge. which the Apocalypse doth testifie that they shall bée hereafter opened in iudgement. The first is the Booke of Gods
al-knowledge, in which shall shine forth manifestly the déeds, the words, the thoughts of all men whatsoeuer.2. Of life. The second Booke is Christ, which is the Booke of Life. In this whosoeuer shall be found written by true faith, hée shall be conueyed of the Angels into the Court of heauen. The third Booke is the Scripture,3 Scrip∣ture. ac∣cording to the rule whereof our faith and works shall be iudged: The word which I haue spoken, saith our Sauiour, shall iudge them in the last day. The fourth Booke containes the outward te∣stimonies of the poore,4. Poore. Luke 16. which in the day of iudgement shall receiue vs into the euerlasting habitati∣ons. The fifth Booke containes the inward testimony of our con∣science,5. Consci∣ence. because our conscience is the Booke in which all our sinnes are written: the Conscience is a
great volume,A great volume. in which all things are written with the pensill of truth. The damned shall not be able to deny their sinnes in iudge∣ment, because they shall be con∣uincedConuin∣cing. by the testimony of their owne conscience.From which no flying. They shall not be able to flye from the accusation of their sinnes, because the tribu∣nall of their conscience is within them. 1 A pure Conscience is the most cleare looking-glasseA looking-glasse. of the soule, in which it doth behold it selfe and God: an vncleance sight cannot behold the brightnesse of the true light. Hence saith our Sauiour; Blessed are the pure in heart, because they shall sée God. 2 As the faire and cleane face of man is acceptableAccepted. to the sight: so a pure and cleane conscience is accepted before the eyes of God,
but a putrified conscience begets the neuer-dying wormes.Wormes begot. To bee strangled. There∣fore in this life present wée must féele and strangle the worme of conscience, and not cherish it to immortalitie. Consci∣ence con∣trolled.3 To amend this Booke, all the other were inuented. What profits great science, if there bee an impure conscience? Thou shalt bee iudged when the time comes, before the Throne of GOD,By it iud∣ged. not out of the Booke of Science, but out of the Booke of Conscience. If thou wilt write this booke aright,Make it by the booke of life, Christ. By con∣formitie. write it according to the example of the Booke of life, the booke of life is Christ: let the profession of thy faith be conformed to the rule of the doctrine of Christ: let the leading of thy life be con∣formed to the rule of the life of Christ.
4 Thy conscience will be good,Good. if it hath purenesse in thy heart, truth in thy mouth, and honestie in thy actions.Vse it a light. Vse thy conscience for a light in all thy actions: for it will throughly shew what are the good actions in thy life, and which are the bad. Flye this iudgementFlye it in iudgement of Conscience, in which one and the same is the guilty, the plantiffe in Law, the witnesse, the iudge, the torturer, the prison, the whip, the execu∣tioner and hangman.No escape. What esca∣ping can there bée here, where the same that accuseth is the wit∣nesse, and nothing can be hidden from him that iudgeth?Else no profit. what profiteth it thée, if all praise thée, and thy Conscience accuse thée? what can it hurt thée,Hurt. if all de∣rogate from thée, and thy Con∣science alone defend thée? This iudge alone is sufficient for euery
man to accuse him,Sufficient. to iudge him, to condemne him. This is an vncorruptVncor∣rupt. Iudge, neither can hée be wonne with prayers, nor cor∣rupted with gifts. Whither so euer thou goest, wheresoeuer thou art,Present. thy conscience is al∣wayes with thée, bearing with it,Register. whatsoeuer thou hast put into it, whether it bée good or euill. This kéepes for a man,Remem∣brancer. and re∣stores to him when hée is dead the charge which it receiued to be kept. So they of a mans owne house, are his enemies indéed; so in thine owne house, and of thine owne Family, thou hast thine accusers,Accuser. obseruers, torturers. What profiteth it to liue in the plentie of all abundance, and to bée tormented with the scourgeScourge. of Conscience? the fountaine of mans felicitie,The foun∣taine with∣in. and miserie is in the verie minde.
What doth it profit him that is afflicted with a burning Feuer, to be placed in a golden Bed? what doth it profit him that is torment∣ed with the Firebrands of his conscience, to reioyce in the abun∣dance of outward felicitie? As great a careCare. as thou hast of eter∣nall saluation, so great also let thy care be of conscience: for when a good conscienceFor good cōscience. is lost, faith is lost: when faith is lost, the grace of God is lost: when the grace of God is lost,Greatest losse. how can we hope for eternall life? Such as is the testi∣mony of thy conscience, such a iudgement shalt thou expect from Christ. The sinners, when none accuse them, or bring any thing in∣to the middest against them, they themselues shall be made their owne accusers.Selfe accu¦sing. 5 As a drunken man, when he swils in much Wine, féeles no
hurt of the wine, but afterwards when hee is raised vp from his drowsinesse and sléeping,Sinne not at first felt. he féeles the discommodities of drunken∣nesse: so sinne also, vntill it be fini∣shed, doth darken the minde, and as it were a thick cloud, doth sha∣dow the brightnesse of true iudge∣ment: but then at length the con∣science riseth vp,Gnaweth at last. and gnaws more grieuously then any accuser. 6 There are thrée iudgements,Three iudge∣ments. the iudgement of the world,World. the iudgement of thy selfe,Thy selfe. and the iudgement of God. But as thou canst not escape the iudgement of God,God. so also thou canst not e∣scapeNo escape. the iudgement of thy selfe, although sometime thou escape the iudgement of the world. No walls do hinder, that this wit∣nesse should not sée thine actions. What excuse shall be able to de∣fend thée,No de∣fence. when the inward accu∣sation
doth condemne thée? The peace of conscience is the begin∣ning of life eternall: thou shalt take more true and pleasant ioyTrue ioy of a good conscience in distresse, then of a bad conscience amongst all worldly delights: against all the backbiting of ill-willers thou mayest confidentlyConfi∣dence. turne the ex∣cuse of conscience. Aske thy selfe of thy selfe, because thou knowest thy selfe far better then any other man. In the last iudgement what will other mens false praises a∣uaile thée, or what will other mens false backbitings hurt thée? thou shalt stand or fall to Gods or thine owne iudgement. Thou shalt not stand or fallStand or fall by thy cōscience. Eternall. to other mens testi∣mony. The conscience neuer shall end, euen as the soule neuer hath end. The ioyes of the saued shall endure so long, to lift them vp on high in Gods fauor, as the defence
of a good conscience doth last. The paines of hellIn hell. shall so long presse downe the damned, as the accusa∣tion of conscience shall endure. No outward fire doth so greatly af∣flict the body, as this inward flame doth grieuouslyMost grie∣uously. burne the soule. Eternall is the soule which is bur∣ned: eternall is the fire of consci∣ence which burneth. No outward scourges are so grieuous to the bodie, as these inward wounds are tormenting to the soule. Flie therefore the guiltFly guilt. of sinne, that thou mayest escape the torment of conscience. Blot out thy sinnesBlot sinne by true repentance out of the book of Conscience, that they be not read in iudgement, and the voyce of Gods sentence be to be feared of thée. Kill the WormeKill the worme. of Con∣science by the heat of deuotion, lest the gnawing thereof bring forth vnto thée eternal horrour. Quench
this inward fire by thy teares, that thou mayest feele the plea∣sures of the heauenly cooling.Quench fire with teares. O Lord, grant that we may war a good warfare, fight a good fight, holding the faith, and a good con∣science, that at last we may come safe and sound to the heauenly countrey. Quis verè pauper? Avarus. Who's poore in∣deed? the couetous. 42. Meditation. Of the auoy∣ding of couetousnesse. AS acceptable as is the sal∣uation of our soules, so odi∣ous ought the sinne of couetous∣nesseOdious Couetous∣nesse. to bée vnto vs. The coue∣tous is the poorest of all men, be∣cause hée wants as well that which he hath, as that which hée hath not. The couetous is the most afflictedAfflicted of all men, because
he is good to none, but he is worst to himselfe. 1 The beginning of all sinne is pride, the rootRoot of ill. of all euill is co∣uetousnesse, that by turning away from God, this by turning vnto the creatures. Riches cause sweatRiches cause sweat. in the getting of them, they bréed feareFeare. in the possessing of them, they bring forth griefeGriefe. in the losing of them: and that which is worse, the labour of the couetous is not one∣ly perishing,Perishing. but also killing: either thy riches do forsake thée, or thou them. 2 If therefore thou hope in ri∣ches, what will thy hopeNo hope. be in the houre of death? How wilt thou trust God with thy soule,Nor trust in God. The might if thou wilt not trust him with thy body? the Almighty God takes care of thée: wherefore doest thou doubt, left he cannot sustaine thée?The wise∣dome. the most wise God takes care of thée,
wherefore doest thou doubt, how he will sustaine thée? The most bountifullBounty. God takes care of thée, wherefore doest thou doubt, whe∣ther he will sustaine thée? Thou hast the hand-writingBy wri∣ting. of Christ, the Lord of all in heauen & earth, that nothing of those things which are néedfull for man shall be wan∣ting to them which séek the king∣dome of God: trust to this promise of Christ, he will not deceiue, for he is the truth. 3 Couetousnesse is the root of all euill. As the briefe of all good∣nesse is in all charity, so the séeds and summe of holy wickednesse, is in couetousnesse. What sinne is there against God or man, but it springeth from couetousnesse? 4 Couetousnesse is the highest Idolatry,Idolatry. because it sets the crea∣tures in the place of God: the couetous man doth translate the
confidence that is due vnto God, to the creatures: whatsoeuer is more loued then God, that is pre∣ferred before God: whatsoeuer is preferred before God, is set vp in the place of God. Belly.5 Esau sold the right of his birth-right for pottage: so many sll the inheritance of the king∣dome of Heauen, which is gotten by Christ, for to get temporall goods. 6 Iudas sold Christ for thirty pieces of siluer:Siluer. the couetous sell the grace of Christ for temporall riches. How can he aspireHindereth to aspire. to the kingdome of heauen, which is eue∣ry day full of the huskes of hogs? how can he striue to God-ward in lifting vp of his heart, which stu∣dies to finde the rest of his soule in riches. Riches are thornes,Riches thornes. saith the Truth: he therefore that loues riches, loues very thornes.
O Thornes, how many soules do ye choke!Choake. Thornes do hinderHinder. the increase of the séed, so the care of riches doth hinder the spirituall fruit of the Word. Thornes af∣flictAfflict, the bodie with pricklings, so riches do vexe the soule with cares. 7 Thou shalt perish,They pe¦rish. if thou gather onely perishing treasures. They that gather together trea∣sures in the Earth, are like to them which lay vp their corne in low and moist places, not regard∣ing that there it will most quickly putrifie. 8 How foolishFoolish end. are they that place the end of their desires in riches? how can a bodily thing fill the soule which is a spirit,Not fill the Spirit when rather the spirituall nature by his owne vertue, doth so com¦prehend corporall things, that it is stretched forth by no quantity?
The soule is created to eternity, thou doest iniurieIniurie to eternity. vnto her, if thou place the end of her desires in temporallTo make her end temporall. and momentany things. 9 The soule, by how much the more it is lifted vp vnto God,The soule to God. by so much the more it is with∣drawne from the loue of riches.From riches. All things, by how much they are nearer to heauenlyNeare heauen. things, by so much they desire lesse, and ga∣ther together fewer things: as the fowlsLike fowls. of heauen do neither sow nor reape. It is a great to∣ken that the soule doth thinke on heauenly, if she little estéeme and contemne earthly goods.Not estee∣ming earthly things. The MiceLike mice and the créeping things do heape together in their caues, for they are of worse condition, and more ignoble nature then the Birds. 10 It is a great signe that the
soule is turned away from God,Be not turned from God to loue riches. and fastned to earthly things, if it cleaue to riches with an inordinate loue. 11 God hath giuen thée thy soule, and darest thou not trustTrust God. him with the care of thy flesh? God féeds the birdsAs Birds. of heauen, and dost thou doubt whether hee will su∣stain thée, séeing thou art created to his owne Image? God clothes the LilliesAnd Lil∣lies. of the field, and doest thou doubt whether he will pro∣uide thée clothing? Let it shame vs, that faith and reasonBy faith & reason. cannot worke that in man, which natu∣rall instinct doth worke in the bird. The birds do neither sow norThey sow nor. reape, but commit the care of their little body vnto God. The couetous doAs coue∣tous do. not giue credit to the Word of God, before they haue prouided wherewith to sustaine themselues.
12 The couetous man is most vniust:Vniust. Why? because hée brought nothing into the world with him, and yet hée is so care∣full of earthly goods, as if hée should beare away verie many things out of the World with him. 13 The couetous man is most vnthankfull:Vnthank¦full. Why? because he enioyes much of Gods goods, and is neuer carried vp with a confi∣dence of his heart, to the giuer of those good things. The couetous man is most foolish.Foolish. Why? be∣cause he leaueth the true good, without which nothing is truly good, and cleaues vnto that which without the grace of God is not good. 14 Hée that is intangled in the loue of earthly things, doth not possessePossessed not pos∣sessing. them, but is possessed of them▪ Couetousnesse is nei∣ther
extinguished by abundance,Not satis¦fied. nor want: it is not therefore di∣minished by want,By want: because the desire of hauing doth increase, when that cannot bée obtained which is long desired: it is not therefore diminished by abun∣dance,By abun∣dance. because the couetous man by how much the more he gets, by so much the more he séeks. When that is gotten which was desired of couetousnesse, there is with∣all ministred as it were vnder hand, a new matter of desiring:New de∣sire. and so after the manner of fire,Like fire. when it hath taken the Woods that it consumes, it increaseth. Couetousnesse is a Brooke,Or a Brook in∣creaseth. little in the beginning, but afterwards it increaseth vnmeasurably. Set downe therefore a boundSet boūds. to thy desire of riches, lest that desire draw thée to eternall destruction.From hell. Many deuoure in this life that
which afterwards they digest in hell: many while they thirst after gaine, runne into present destru∣ction.And de∣struction. 15 Thinking on these things, O deuout soule, as much as thou canst, flieFly. from couetousnesse. Thou shalt beare nothingThou shalt carry no∣thing. of thy goods to iudgement with thée, but that which thou hast giuen to the poore.But almes. Deny not to the poore thy perishing & fraile goods, for whom Christ hath not refused to giue his life. Giue to the poore,Giue to the poore. that thou mayest giue to thy selfe: whatsoe∣uer thou hast not giuen to the poore, another shall haue. 16 Hée is too couetous, to whom the Lord is not sufficient.The Lord sufficient. Hée doth not yet truly hopeNo true hope in riches. for heauenly things, which doth much esteme earthly goods.No loue. How would he lay downe his life for his brother which denies his bro∣ther
whom hée askes his tempo∣rall substance? The hand of the poore is the treasure of heauen,The poore heauens treasure. that which it takes, is put in hea∣uen, lest it perish in the earth. Wilt thou performe an accepta∣ble dutie to Christ?Christ. Exhibite a benefit to the poore: that good which is done to the members, the Head takes as done to him∣selfe. 17 Christ saith vnto thée. GiueGiue to Christ. mée of that, which I haue giuen thée of thine owne. Do good of thy good, that thou mayest get thée good. Giue earthly thingsEarthly things. that thou mayest kéepe them because thou shalt léese them, by keeping them too sparingly. 18 Heare Christs adminition, lest thou bée inforced to heare him saying in iudgement,Mat 25. Cause of damnatiō. Go ye cursed into euerlasting fire: be∣cause ye haue not fed me, when
I was an hungred. Almes déeds are an holy séed,Seed and Haruest. as it is scattered sparingly or bountifully, the har∣uest will be either sparing or plen∣tifull. If thou wilt be in the num∣ber of the shéepe,Sheepe. do some good also to the shéepe.Vnchari∣table. Let the goatsGoates. which are placed at the left hand terrifie thée: not because they haue taken away, but because they haue not fed. Incline our heart, O God, to thy testimonies, and not to coue∣tousnesse. Sanctos dilectio signat. Loue is the Saints marke. 43 Meditation. Of the pro∣perties of true Charity. TRue and sincere Charity, is the constant property of the godly. There is no Christian without faith, and no faith with∣out charity:Charity Vnsepa∣rable. where there is not
the shining of charity, there also is not the heate of faith: remoue light from the Sunne, and thou maist remoue charity from faith: 1 Charity is the outward act of the inward life of a ChristianA Christi∣ans life. man. A dead body is without breathing, so dead faith is with∣out loue. Hée is not Christs, which hath not the SpiritFruit of the Spirit. of Christ: he hath not the Spirit of Christ, which doth not shew forth the gift of charity, because the fruit of the Spirit is loue.Matth. 7. A good trée is not knowne, vnlesse it bée séene to bring forth good fruits. Charity is the bond of Christian perfection.Bond of perfection. As the members of the bodie are ioyned together by the spirit, that is, the soule: so the true members of the mysticall body, are vnited in the bond of charity through the holy Ghost.
2 In the Temple of Solomon all things were layed ouer with goldTrue gold. within and without: so in the spirituall Temple of God, all things are adorned with charitie within and without. Let charitie moue the heart to compassion: let charitie moue the hand to libera∣litie. CompassionCompas∣sion. is not sufficient, if there be not also outward libe∣rality:Liberality. outward liberalitie is not sufficient, if there be not also in∣ward compassion. Faith receiues all from God: Charitie on the other side giues all to his neigh∣bour.Giuing. 3 By faith wee are made par∣takers of the diuine nature, but God is charity. He that hath not charity, hath not God. Therefore where charityNo chari¦ty, no faith. doth not shew it selfe outwardly, let no man be∣léeue that there is faith within. No man beleeues in Christ, which
doth not loue Christ: no man loues Christ, but he which also loues his neighbour. He doth not as yet with true confidenceNo confi∣dence. of heart apprehend the benefit of Christ, which denies a due office to his neighbour. 4 That is not a good workeNo good worke. indéed, which procéedes not of faith, neither is that a good worke indéed, which procéeds not of cha∣rity. Charity is the séed of all vertues:Charity vertues seed. there is no good fruit, but that which springs of the root of Charitie. Charitie is the spirituall taste of the soule.Soules taste. For this alone doth season all that is good, all that is hard, all that is full of aduersitie, all that is laborious. The taste of cha∣ritie also doth make death most swéet: because loue is strong as death, nay stronger then death: because loue brought downe
Christ to death. Loue also doth stirre vpStirreth vs vp. those that are truly god∣ly, that they doubt not to dye for Christ. 5 All the workes of God do procéed of loue, yea, euen punish∣ments themselues: so let all the worksTo works. of a Christian man procéed out of charity. In all the crea∣tures God hath set before vs a looking-glasse of loue.All shew∣eth loue. The Sunne and the StarresStarres. do not shine for themselues, but for vs. The herbesHerbes. do not purge themselues, but our bodies.Elements. The aire, the wa∣ter, the brute beasts,Beasts, &c and all the creatures serue man: so do thou also giue thy self wholly to do good to thy neighbour. 6 The knowledge of tonguesThe tongues cōparing with cha∣rity. doth not profit without loue, be∣cause without loue the know∣ledgeKnow∣ledge. of tongues puffeth vp, but loue edifieth. The knowledge
of mysteries doth not profit without loue, because mysteries are also knowne to the deuill, but loue is onely the true propertie of the godly. FaithFaith. also that remoues mountaines, doth not profit with∣out loue: because such a faith is onely a miraculous, not a sauing faith. 7 Charitie excells the gift of working miracles:Better thē miracles. because that is the indubitate note of true Chri∣stians: this is sometimes grant∣ed to the wicked.Almes. It profits not to distribute all our substance to the poore, if there be no charitie, be∣cause the outward action is hy∣pocriticall, it there be not inward loue. 8 The riuers of beneficenceBenefi∣cence: profit not, if they spring not out of the fountaine of charity. Cha∣rity is patient,Patience. because no man is easily angry with him whom
he loues truely. Charity is boun∣tifull: for he which hath giuen his heart the chiefest good of his soule, through loue, how should he deny the outward things which are no∣thing so good? Charity enuies not:Enuies not because she beholds other mens goods as her owne. Charity doth not frowardly,Not fro∣ward. because no man doth easily hurt him whom he loues truly, and from his soule. Charitie is not puffed vp,Puffed vp. because by loue we are made the members of one body, but one member doth not preferre it selfe before another. Charitie doth not behaue it selfe vncomely,Vncomely because it is the property of an angry man to be∣haue himselfe vncomely, but cha∣ritie is the bridle of anger. Chari∣ty doth not séeke those things that are her owne:Seeketh not her owne. because that which one loues, hee preferres before himselfe, and séekes the good
thereof more then his owne. Cha∣rity is not prouoked:Not pro∣uoked. because all anger is out of pride, but charity casts it selfe below others. Chari∣ty dothDoth none ill. thinke no euill: because it is manifest that a man doth not truly loue him, against whom he is knowne to plot euill. Charity reioycethReioyceth not in ill. not in iniquity, because charity makes other mens misery  trowne. Charity endureth allEndureth all. things, it beléeueth all things, it hopeth all things, it sustaineth all things: for that which charity de∣stres to haue done to it selfe, shée refuseth not to do to others: the tongues shall cease, prophesyings shall be abolished, and knowledge shall vanish away,Lasteth. but charity shall not cease: the imperfection there∣of shall be complete in the life to come, and the perfectionPerfected. thereof shall be increased in the life to come.
9 God commanded two altars to be set vp in the Tabernacle, the fire from that without was tran∣slated to that within: God hath ga∣thered together a twofold Church, Militant and Triumphant: the fire of loue in time to come shall be translatedTranslated to triūph. from the militant to the triumphant. 10 Thinking on these things, (O deuout soule) applyApply loue. thy  to holy charity. Whosoeuer is thy neighbour, hée is the man for whom Christ would dye. Where∣fore then doest thou deny to lay out thy loue on thy neighbour,To thy neighbor. when Christ did not doubt to spend his life for him: if thou louest God truly, thou oughtest also to loue his Image.Gods I∣mage. Wée are all one spirituall body,With one Spirit. therefore let there be one spirituall minde of vs all. It is an vniust thing, that they should be at difference in the earth
who sometimes must liue toge∣therMust liue together. in heauen. While our minds agrée in Christ, let our wills also be conioyned:One hous∣hold. wée are the Ser∣uants of one Lord, it is not méet that we should be at difference be¦twéene our selues. That member of the bodieBody. is dead, which doth not féele the affection of another: let him not estéeme himselfe a true member of the mysticall bo∣dy of Christ, which is not grie∣ued with another member that suffers. 11 There is one God the Fa∣therOne Fa∣ther. of all, whom bring taught of Christ, thou dost daily call Fa∣ther: how shall he acknowledge thée his true Sonne, vnlss thou againe acknowledge his sonnes for thy brothers? LoueLoue him that Gd commen∣deth. the man that is commended vnto thée of God, if he be worthy,Worthy. because he is worthy whom thou louest: but
if he be vnworthy,Vnworthy loue him there∣fore, because God is worthie to whom thou shouldst obey. By the loue of man, thine enemy,Enemy. thou art shewed to bee the friend of God. AttendAttend not man, but God. not what man can do vnto thée, but regard what thou hast done vnto God. Attend not what iniuries thine enemie doth thée: but regard what benefits He con∣ferres vpon thée which commands thée that thou loue thine enemie. We are neighbours in the con∣dition of our earthly natiuitie, we are brethren in the hope of the heauenly inheritance, let vs there∣fore loue one another. Kindle in vs (O God) the fire of charitie by thy Spirit. Amen.
Christi, mens casia, cubile. The chaste Soule Christs chamber. 44. Meditation. Of the study of Chastitie. HE that will be the true disci∣ple of Christ ought to giue himselfe to holy Chastitie.Chastitie necessarie The most bountifull God is a chasteGod chaste: and pure Spirit: him thou ough∣test to call vpon with chaste pray∣ers. A certaine wise man said, that chastitie of the bodie, and sanctitie of the soule, are two keyes of Re∣ligionTwo keyes of religion. and happinesse. 1 If the body be not kept pure and vnspotted from whoredome,Whore∣dome. the soule can hardly be feruent in prayer.Hindereth prayer. Our body is the temple of the holy Ghost, we must take great heed that wée defile not this holy habitation of the holy Ghost.Defileth Gods tem∣ple. Our members are the members of Christ, we must take
héed that wee take not the mem∣bers of ChristProstitute Christs members. and make them the members of an harlot. 2 Let vs cleane vnto the Lord by faith and chastitie, that we may be one Spirit with him. Let vs not cleaue vnto an harlot, lest wée be made one bodyOne body with a harlot. with her. The Sodomites burning in lusts, were stricken of the Lord with blinde∣nessePunished with blind∣nesse. both corporall and spirituall. the same as yet this day is the punishment of vncleane men. The lusts of the Sodomites were reuenged with fireWith fire. and brimstone that came downe from heauen: so God will torment the heate of that euill concupiscence in whore∣mongers, with eternall fire: this fire is not put out, but the smoke of the torments doth a∣scend throughout all ages. With∣outWithout heauen. that is to say, of the hea∣uenly Ierusalem, are dogges, that
is to say, impure and libidinous men. 3 Christ doth wash vs with his precious bloud in Baptisme: we must take great heed, that wee defile notDefile not. our selues with vn∣cleane lusts. By the guidance of Nature it selfe, wicked men do blush to commit such haynous sinnes in the sight of men, and yet they are not ashamed to com∣mit them in the sight of God and the Angels.Before Angels And God No walls do hinder the eyes of God, which are brigh∣ter then the Sunne: no corners do exclude the presence of the Angels.Ep  sent. Before Consci¦ence. No withdrawing places do take away the inward testi∣monie of the Conscience. This is a wonderfull thing, that the heate of luxuryLuxury cryeh to heauen and hell. doth ascend as it were to heauen, when as yet the stink thereof doth descend to hell. That short pleasurePleasure short. will bring
forth eternall paine: it is but a momentany thing that delighteth, it is eternall that tormenteth: short is the pleasure of fornication, perpetuall is the punishmentPerpetuall punish∣ment. of the fornicator. Let morti∣fie thee the crosse.4 Let the remembrance of him that was crucified, crucifie in thée thy flesh. Let the remembrance of hellHell. extinguish in thée the heate of concupiscence. Let the tearesTeares. of repentance extinguish in thée the heat of lust. Let the loue of GodLoue of God. kill thy flesh, lest carnall loue deceiue thée. Thinke that the de∣sire of lust is full of anxietie and folly, the act of abhominationAbomina∣tion of the lust. and ignominy, the end, of sorrow and shame. Looke not on the flatter∣ing face of the deuill,Deuils flattery. when hee en∣ticeth thée to lust, but his pricking tayle when hée flyes from thée: thinke not on the short pleasure, but rather on the eternall damna∣tion.
5 Loue the knowledge of the Scriptures,Scriptures and thou shalt not loue the vices of the flesh. Be al∣waies doing somewhat,Labour. that when the tempter comes, he may finde thée busied. He deceiued Dauid in idlenesse, he could not deceiue Io∣seph in his businesse. 6 Thinke on deathDeath that hangs ouer thy head at all houres, and thou shalt easily despise all the pleasure of the flesh. Loue tem∣perance,Tempe∣rance. and thou shalt easily ouercome euill concupiscence: the belly that is hot with wine, doth quickly froth ouer into lust: chastitie is endangered in dain∣ties: if therefore thou féed thy flesh with immoderate dainties, thou nourishest thine owne e∣nemie. So must the flesh bée nourished, that it may serue thée: so must it be tamed, that it be not proud.
7 Thinke on the terrour of the last iudgement,Last iudge∣ment. and thou shalt easily extinguish the heate of lust: the secrets of hearts shall bee re∣uealed,All mani∣fest. how much more the déeds that were committed in secret? an account must then be rendered of vnprofitable words: how much more of filthy spéeches? an account must bee giuen of filthy words; how much more of vnclean déeds?Account to be made of words, Deeds. as long as thy life hath béene, so longLong. All. shall thine accusation bée. As many as thy sinnes haue béene, so many shall be thine accusers: those thoughts, which with vs are common, will not abide in the dis∣cussing. 8 What therefore doth it pro∣fit thée, that thy whoring should bée hid for a time before men, when in the day of iudgement it must be reuealedReuealed. vnto all mens eyes? what doth it profit thée to
escape the iudgement of an earthly Iudge, when as yet thou canst not escape the tribunall of the IudgeIudged The Iudge not cor∣rupt. that is aboue? thou canst not corrupt this Iudge with gifts, for hée is a most iust Iudge. Thou canst not ouer∣comeOuer∣come. him with prayers, for hee is a most seuere Iudge. Thou canst not escapeEscaped. out of his Pro∣uince and Iurisdiction, for hée is a most mighty Iudge. Thou canst not deceiueDeceiued. him with vaine excu∣ses, for he is a most wise Iudge. Thou canst not appeale fromAppealed from. the sentence that hee giues and pro∣mulges, for hée is the supreme Iudge: there will bée truth in the Inquisition, opennesse in the Publication, seuerity in the Exe∣cution. 9 Therefore, O deuout soule vnto God, let the terrourSet before thee ter∣rour. of this Iudge be euer before thée, so the
heate of lust shall not deceiue thée. Bée thou the Rose of Cha∣ritie, the Violet of Humilitie, and the Lilly of Chastity. Learne hu∣militie of ChristChrists example. thine Husband, learne chastity also of him. Great is the dignity of Chastitie, which was consecratedConsecra∣ted. in the body of Christ. Great is the dignitie of Chastity, because it makes a man to liue in the flesh, besides the flesh. 11 As nothing is more vile then to be ouercome of the flesh; so nothing is more glorious then to ouercome the flesh. Neither are outward whoredomes onely to bée auoyded, but also impure thoughts,Impure thoughts. because GOD is not onely the Iudge of our exte∣riour actions, but also of our in∣teriour cogitations. Pietie is oft-times hurt with the counte∣nance; chastitie is oft-times hurt
with the eyes. Heare what the Truth saith: He that looksLookes. vpon a woman to lustThe mis¦chiefe of lust. after her, hath committed fornication alreadie with her. As hard as the fight is here, so glorious is the victorie. It is an hard thing to quench the burning of lust: it pricks on those that are not ripe of age,Ripe age. it sets youngYong. men on fire, it wea∣ries the oldOld. men and decrepit, it despiseth not cottages, it feares not Palaces. But as hard a thing as it is to fight here, so gloriousGlorious victory. a thing it will bée to triumph here. The first assaults must bée represt, neither is the fuell of e∣uil cogitations to be put vnto this flame. 12 The Apostle when hée sets downe how he must wrSstle with all vices, against fornication hée commands not fight, but flight:By flight. Flie, saith he, fornication:
for euen as a strange begger comes vnto vs with fained sim∣plicity, that he may deceiue vs: if we do not admit him, he goes a∣way, if we suffer him to enter, he becomes a ghest,Admit nor an il ghest. hée gathers strength, at last, if we agrée there∣to, he becomes a master: so the motions of euill concupiscence do pricke vs, if wee giue them not kinde entertainment they depart. If thou wilt not haue this enemy to rule ouer thée, receiue him not into the house of thine heart. Con∣serue vs, O God, in sanctitie of soule, and chastity of body. Amen.
Tandem Patientia victrix. Patience ouercom∣meth at last. 45. Meditation. Of the foun∣dations of Christian Patience. REst thée, O deuout soule, and patiently beare the CrosseBeare the Crosse. that is layed on thée of GOD.With Christ. Thinke on the Passion of Christ thine Husband. Hee suffered for all,Suffered for all. of all, in all. Hée suffered for all, euen those which contemne that his precious Passion,Euen ene∣mies. and trample on his bloud nefariously with their féet. Hee suffered of all:Of all. of his heauenly Father,Father. hee is deliuered, bruised: left of his beloued Disciples,Disciples. he is forsaken: of his owne peculiar peoplePeople. the Iewes he is reiected, which pre¦ferre the Theefe Barabbas before him: of the GentilesGentiles. hée is cru∣cified: refused by the Master-builders,
to build vpon the heathen Tyrants of Rome:Builders. he beares the sinnes of all men; therefore also he is afflicted of all men.All men. He suffer∣ed also in all.In all. His souleSoule. is heauy euen vnto death, & presseth downe with the féeling of Gods iudge∣ment, cries out that she is forsaken of God: all his membersMembers. do sweat out bloud, his headHead. is crowned with thornes, his tongueTongue. tastes a bitter cup, his handsHands. and his féetFeet. are boared through with nayles, his sideSide. is wounded, his whole bo∣dyBody. is scourged and stretched forth on the Crosse. He suffered hun∣ger,Hunger, &c. thirst, cold, contempt, pouer∣ty, reproaches, wounds, death, the Crosse. Now how vniust a thing were it, that the Lord should suffer,So suffred the Lord. and the seruant re∣ioyce? how vniust a thing were it, that our SauiourSauiour. should be grie∣uously punished for our sinnes,
and that we should still take plea∣sure in them? how vniust a thing were it, that the headHead. should be af∣flicted, and the rest of the members should not grieue together with it? Nay, rather, as it behooued Christ, by his passion, to enter into the heauenly glory, so also it be∣hooues vs by many tribulationsFollow him by tri¦bulation. to enter into the kingdome of heauen. 1 Thinke also on the large re∣ward.Be patient for the re∣ward. The sufferings of this time are not worthy of the gloryGlory. that is to come. How great so euer our suffering be, it is but temporall, nay sometimes but for a day: but that glory is eternall.Eternall. God doth diligently obserue all our aduersities, and will one day bring them into iudgement:All come to iudge∣ment. how filthy a thing will it be therefore, in that most glorious méeting of the world, to bée séene without
the ornaments of the CrosseOrnamēts of the crosse. and sufferings. He also wil wipe away all tearesTeares wiped. from the eyes of those that are his. 2 O happyHappy. teares, which the hand of such and so great a Lord shall wipe away! O happy crosse, which shall finde his reward in heauen! 3 Dauid was not ten whole yeares in banishment, but fortyTen to forty. in the kingdome:A figure. here is pregured the shortnesse of sufferings, but the eternity of the glory follow∣ing.Moment to euer∣lasting. It is but a moment of time in which the Saints are exercised by the crosse: the mercies are euerlasting, by which they are ga∣thered together, and so surely to the mornings sorrows succéed the euenings ioyes.Learne patience of the Saints. 4 Thinke moreouer on the tribulation of all the Saints. Be∣hold IobIob. mourning on the dung∣hill,
IohnJohn. hungring in the wil∣dernesse, PeterPeter. stretched out on the crosse, IamesIames. beheaded of He∣rods sword. 5 Behold MaryMary the type of the Church. the blessed mother of our Sauiour, standing vnder the Crosse of her Sonne, which beares the Type of the Church, the spirituall mother of the Lord. 6 Blessed are ye, saith Christ, if they shall persecute you for my name, for so did they to the Pro∣phets.Prophet. Consider the Martyrs of Iesus, that shed their bloud in the sight of all the world, and then ascended to heauen. O glorious persecution! which makes vs conformable to the Prophets and Apostles, to the blessed Martyrs, yea, to all the Saints, nay, to Christ himselfe. Let vs therefore suffer with those that suffer,Suffer with them. let vs bee cruci∣fied
with those that are crucified, that wée may bée glorified with those that are glorified. But if we be sonnes, let vs not detract the condition of the rest of the sonnes. If wée do verily desire the inheritance of God, let vs take it whole. Inheri∣tance, ioy with sad∣nesse.7 But now the sonnes of God are not onely the heires of the ioy and glory in the life to come, but also of sadnesse and sufferings in the life present, because God scourgeth euery sonneTo receiue sonnes. that he re∣ceiueth. He punisheth their sinnes, that hée may spare them in the iudgementTo spare at the iudgment. to come: he multiply∣eth here their tribulation, that there hee may multiply their re∣ward,To multi¦ply the re¦ward. and so not so much the per∣secution, as the reward is multi∣plyed. Benefit of the Crosse8 Thinke on the happy condi∣tion of the Crosse. It doth extin∣guish
the roote of worldly loueRooteth out world∣ly loue. in vs, and doth sow the séed of the loue of God in our hearts. The Crosse ingenders in vs the hate of worldly things,Engender∣eth hate of the world. and lifts vp our mindes to heauenly things: when the flesh is mortified, the spirit liues, when the world wax∣eth bitter, Christ waxeth swéet. 9 Great is the mystery of the Crosse, because by it God doth call vs to contrition,Calleth to contrition to true feare, to the exercise of patience: let vs open to him that knocks, and wée shall heare what the Lord will speake in vs. The sight of the Crosse is contemned before the world, and before the carnall eyes of the outward man: it is glorious before God,Glorious before God. and before the spirituall eyes of the inward man. 10 What was accounted of the Iewes more vile and abiect,
then the suffering of Christ?As Christs sufferings. but what was more worthy and pre∣cious in the eyes of God then it? as that which is the price for the sinnes of the whole world. So al∣so the iust is afflicted, the iust man dyeth, and no man considereth it, but precious is the crosse, precious is the deathPrecious death. of the Saints in the sight of the Lord. Trouble blacke.11 Blacke is the Church, the Spouse of Christ outwardly, by reason of calamities and persecu∣tions: faire inwardly, by reason of Gods consolation.Consola∣tion faire. The Church is a garden shut vp, and euery faithfull soule, because no man knoweth the beauty thereof, but hée that is in it. We shall neuer fully and perfectly féele the conso∣lation of the Spirit,In spirit. vnlesse our flesh be afflicted outwardly. 12 If the loue of the world dwell in vs, there is no place for
the loue of God to enter: a full ves∣sel cannot bee filled with new li∣quour,Empty the pleasures of the world. vnlesse that which was in before be euacuated: therefore let vs poure out the loue of the world that we may bee filled with the loue of God.Fill with Gods loue. 13 Therefore doth God, by the Crosse, extinguish in vs the loue of the world, that there might bée place for the loue of God.Place for God. Besides, the crosse driues vs to prayers,Pray. and is the occasion of vertue. When the North-windeNorth-winde. blows vpon the garden, that is, when persecutions exercise the Church, then do her swéet odours flow,Make o∣dours flow. then are her vertues increased, which breathe out an acceptable smell before God. 14 The beloued Husband of the soule is white and ruddy:So Christ. white in his innocence, ruddy in his suf∣fering: so also the beloued Spouse
of Christ,Made white: Dan. 12. that she may be white in her vertues, is made red in her sufferings. And so the grace of God can bring forth oyle and honyOyle and hony. out of the most hard stone of af∣flictions: so knowes he out of the root of calamitie to bring forth the most swéet fruit of eternall glory: To which the same grace promote vs and bring vs in. Amen. Spes confisa Deo nunquam confusa recedet. Hope de∣parteth not with shame. 36. Meditation. How the temp∣tation of perseuerance is to be ouercome. O Holy Lord Iesus, the most deare husband of my soule, when will it bée, that thou wilt leade mée into the solemnitie of thy marriage?When? Married. I am a pilgrime, and am in banishment from thee: but I most firmely beléeue, no∣thing
doubting,Not doub∣ting. that it will come to passe shortly, that being loosed out of the bands of thy bodie, I shall appeare before the face. Feare1. Feare. and trembling are come vpon mée, because I beare my treasure in earthen vessels, my minde is prone to errours, my will is prone to sinnes:Prone to sinne. where∣upon the Spirit is not alwayes ready in mée, but the flesh is al∣wayes weake.Not ready Sinne leades mée captiue, and the law of my mem¦bers doth resist the law of my minde. Feare and trembling are come vpon mée, because Satan2. Satan. layes waite for my treasure: his craft is great, his desire to hurt is most earnest, his power is greatest. 1 He deceiuedDeceiued. Adam in Pa∣radise, Iudas in the Schoole of our Sauiour: how shall I poore wretch bee secure from his de∣ceits?
Feare and trembling are come vpon me, because I am as yet in the world,3. World. which is wholly set vpon wickednes: the delightsDelights. of the world do inuite mée, the aduersitiesAduersi∣ties. in the way of the Lord do affright me, sometimes the inticementsEntice∣ments. of the world please me well, all the world is full of snares;Snares. how shall I poore wretch bée able to escape them? ioyIoy. oppugnes mée,Sorrow. sadnesse op∣pugnes mée: how shall I poore wretch be able to stand? Fear and trembling are come vpon me, be∣cause it is God4: God. which workes in mée both to will and to do. I feare lest perchance my negli∣gence and carelesnesse cause God to take awayTake a∣way. that good will also which hée hath giuen mée. I do vnworthily vse the remission of sinnes, and refuse the first grace that was giuen gratis: whereupon
I feare, lest by the secret and the iust iudgement of God, that be taken worthily from me which I vnworthily vse. I feare lest I be forsakenForsaken, of him, whom after my first conuersion I haue often forsaken. How grieuously am I tormented, thinking that a grie¦uous and a more seuere iudge∣mentIudgemēt. doth follow these benefits of God, if I vse them vnwor∣thily? 2 But the infinite mercy of God doth lift me vp,1 Lifted vp by mercy. who as hée hath giuen me to will, so he will giue mée also to do his will, be∣cause he is God, and is not chan∣ged. His mercy also is confirmedConfirmed vpon mée, and shall not bee chan∣ged. The foundation of God abi∣deth firme: therefore firme, be∣cause it is in God himselfe, with whom there is no varying.Without varying. Therefore firme, because it is
confirmed by the bloud of Christ,By Christs bloud. which speakes alwayes before the Throne of God. Therefore firme: because it is sealedSealed. vp with the sure seales of the Sacra∣ments. Not the least in my sel e.3 If I should sake but for a very little of my saluation in my selfe, then might I well doubt of my saluation: but as all my righ∣teousnesse, so all my hope of sal∣uation is in Christ. If out of mine owne will I had laid hand on Christ, I might very well feare lest my willNot my will. being changed, I might léese Christ. But he which was found of him that sought him not,2 But in him that sought me. he vndoubtedly after hee is once found, will not withdraw himselfe. Hée that hath drawne meDrew me. out of the shadow of death, to the participation of light, he will not suffer me to be thrust out to the former darknesse.
4 The gifts and calling of God are vnchangeableVnchang∣ably. of the part and will of God: I would that I my selfe also were vnchangeable in that which is good: that treasure is alwayes present, but the hand that layes hold on it, doth some∣time languish. 5 But I shall bée able to lay hand on Christ,Christ giueth promise. who as hée hath reuealed himselfe in his Word and promises, so he wil grant most benignely, that I may giue credit to his word and promises.Credence. With the helpe and safeguard of prayerHelpe of prayer. I will guard my faith, neither will I let the Lord out of the chamber of my heart, before sal∣uation come vnto me. I shall be a∣ble to be kept by the power of God to saluation, the power of the Lord doth lift me vp4 Gods power lifteth vp. and comfort mee, but mine infirmity doth cast mée downe, and make me sad.
6 Yet the power of the Lord will bee brought to passe in mine infirmitie, hée will strengthenStreng∣theneth. mée, from whom comes all the strength of faith. The grace of GOD5 Gods grace. doth lift mée vp, but mine vnworthinesse doth affright mée. 7 But if I were worthie, now it should not be a grace, but a hire:No hire. if of workes, then not of grace: for grace cannot by any meanes be grace, vnlesse it be e∣uery way frée.But free. The blessed Spi∣rit of God doth lift me vp. Mine owne spirit doth cast mee downe with sad sighes and grones. But the Spirit of God doth helpe me, and in the middest of my sighes that would cause me sinke, lifteth my sighes to God, as to my Fa∣ther, with greatest assurance. Therefore I do not looke vnto my works. He will correctCorrect. that which
is amisse he will supplySupply. that which wants, he will abolishAbolish. that which is sinne: that which he will not impute vnto me, is euen as if it were not: my saluation therefore is onely in God, and thereupon sure. Saturday, Euening Prayer. SAuing vs from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate vs, what doest thou require of vs, mercifull and gracious God: but that wee should serue thee in holinesse and righteousnesse, all the dayes of our liues? Which, that wee may the better do, thou hast giuen vs thy Word to be the square and Line by which wee should walke, and furnishing vs with many rules of godly liuing, commandest that wee walke ac∣cording
to these rules, and pro∣misest a blessing to vs, if wee so walke. Giue grace therefore, O thou fountaine of all grace, that obseruing all good precepts, and following all good rules, I may learne and do these things especi∣ally, namely, loue thee my God onely: follow the holy example of the life of thy Sonne: haue a care of my conscience in all mine acti∣ons, to keepe it pure and vnde∣filed: keepe the fire of charitie e∣uer burning on the Altar of mine heart: take heed of all fleshly pol∣lution and vncleannesse, that so I may possesse my vessell in ho∣nour: take vp and beare my crosse with all patience, and relye alwayes on thy grace and fauour, nothing doubting of finall perse∣uerance in thy Sonne Christ Iesus, our Lord and Sauiour, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be
all praise, honour, glory, domi∣nion, power, now and euermore. Amen. Sunday, Morning Prayer. THis is the day, O Lord, that thou hast made for thy selfe, that it should bee kept holy vnto thee, wherein abstaining from all seruile labours and works of the flesh, thy seruants should heare thy Word, praise thy Name, and meditate on thy Workes: vnto which godly exercises, that I may bee more religiously inclined, strengthen mee, O Lord, with thine assistance, that in thy power I may thrust out of the house of my heart, all euill and strange ghests, shake from my hands all wicked and vnlawfull works, and put off from my feet the shooes of
mine owne affections, that so I may prepare a cleane & quiet lod∣ging for thy spirit in my soul, that so I may bee the better fitted to compasse thine Altar, hauing be∣forewasht mine hands in innocen∣cy, and to tread within the Courts of thine house (O my God) where the ground is holy. O thou that hast the key of Dauid, that openest and no man shutteth, and shuttest, and no man openeth; open mine eies this day, that I may behold the wonderfull things in thy law, thy wonders in the world; shut them, that they behold not vanity, to haue pleasure therein, or to seek af∣ter leasing. Open thou mine eares, that I may hearken to the Word of Truth; shut them, that I heare not the lying words of wicked∣nesse, nor the songs of sinners. Open thou my lippes, and my tongue, that they may speake to
thy praise; shut them, that no cor∣rupt communication proceed out of my mouth. Open my heart, that it may receiue the instruction of life: shut it against all wickednesse, arising from mine owne corrupti∣on, or proceeding from the deuils suggestion, that it enter not to lodge deepe in me. Defend me, O Lord, this day from euil thoughts, from euill words, from euill works, and grant that I may keep it holy vnto thee, meditating therein on thy Word, on all thy benefits, and on all thy goodnes, and deliueran∣ces, studying therein, as also in the whole course of my life, holinesse, and applying my selfe wholly thereunto, that so leading here an vncorrupt and holy life, and doing that which is right, I may bee thought worthy hereafter to dwell in thy Tabernacle, and to rest on thy holy hill, enioying there thy
blessed presence, and liuing in the light of thy countenance, euer∣lastingly partaking of thine happi∣nesse, O blessed and euerliuing God. Cum Christo surgere vita est. It is life to rise with Christ. 47. Meditation. Of the spiri∣tuall Resurrection of the godly. THe Resurrection of Christ doth not auaile thée, vnlesse Christ also rise in thée.Christ rise in thee. As Christ must bee conceiued, borne, liue in thée, so hée must also rise againe in thée. DeathFirst death goeth before all rising againe, because nothing but that which hath falne, riseth againe: so also is it in the spiritu∣all resurrection, Christ doth not rise againe in thée, vnlesse AdamOf Adam. first dye in thée: the inward man
doth not rise againe, vnlesse the outward man bée first buried.Then ri∣seth new life. The newnesse of the Spirit will not come forth, vnlesse the oldnes of the flesh be first hidden. Nei∣ther is it sufficient that Christ rise againe onceNot once. onely in thée, because the old Adam cannot be extingui∣shed in one moment, the old Adam will dailyBut daily. begin to liue againe in thée: therefore daily extinguish it, that Christ may daily begin to liue in thée. 1 Christ did not ascend into heauen,First rise. neither did hee enter into his glory, before hee rose againe from death: so thou canst not en∣ter into the glory of heauen,Then en∣ter heauen vn∣lesse Christ first rise againe in thée, and liue in thée. Hée is not a part of the mysticall bodie of Christ, in whom Christ liues not, neither shall any bee brought of Christ to the Church
triumphant,To tri∣umph. but hee which hath béene a part of his bodie in the Church militant. 2 BetrothingRising, a betrothing goes before marriage; the soule shall not be brought vnto the marriage of the heauenly Lambe, which is not be∣trothed to Christ by faith in this life, and sealed with the earnest of the holy Spirit. Therefore let Christ rise againe, and liue in thée, that thou mayest liue with him for euer. 3 This is the first resurrection: blessed and holyHoly. is he, which hath part in the first resurrection, on him the second death shall haue no power. 4 If in the resurrection of the bodies thou wilt come forth to life;To life. Christ must euery day rise againe in thée in this life. When Christ did rise againe, the Sunne did rise:1 Sun rose. so if Christ do rise a∣gaine
in thée spiritually, the light of the sauing knowledgeKnow∣ledge rise. of God, will rise in thy soule. How can there bée the light of the sauing knowledge of God, where as yet the darknesse of most grieuous sinnes hath place? The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wise∣dome, how then can there be hea∣uenly wisedome,Wisedome where the feare of the Lord hath neuer had place? But he which is destitute of the light of the knowledge of God in this life, how can he be made par∣taker of the eternall lightLight. in the life to come? The sonnes of light onely passe to the eternall light: the sonnes of darknes to the eter∣nall darknesse. 5 When Christ rose againe, he triumphed2 Triumph∣ed. ouer death: so hee in whom Christ riseth againe spi∣ritually, hath passed from death to life,To life. neither can he be ouercome
of death, in whom liueth the con∣querour of death. 6 Christ rising againe, hath brought with him perfect righte∣ousnesse:3 Christ bringeth righteous∣nesse. for he dyed for our sins, and rose againe for our righteous∣nesse. So also he in whom Christ riseth againe spiritually, is iustifi∣ed from sinne. For how should sinne haue place there, where the perfect righteousnesse of Christ doth liue and flourish?To liue and flourish. But that righteousnesse of Christ is apply∣ed vnto vs by faith. 7 Christ rising againe brought backe the victory from Satan,4 Satans. because in his descent into hell he destroyed his kingdome, he spoyled his palace, he broke his weapons.Weapons broke. So also against him in whom Christ riseth againe spiritually, Satan can not preuaile, neither can he be ouercomeCannot ouercome. of Satan, in whom liues the conquerour of
Satan. When Christ rose againe, there was a great earthquake:Earth∣quake. that spirituall resurrection with Christ, goes not without seri∣ous commotion and contritionContrition necessary. of heart. 8 That old Adam cannot bée extinguished in thée, without stri∣uingStriue. and resistance: therefore also Christ cannot rise againe in thée spiritually, without great commo∣tion. There is no spirituall resur∣rection with Christ, vnlesse there be an abolishing of sinne:For the a∣bolishing of sinne. there is no abolishing of sinne, vnlesse there go before an acknowledge∣ment of sinne: there is not as yet true acknowledgement of sinne, vnlesse there bee a serious contri∣tionBy contri∣tion. of the heart: therefore there is no spirituall resurrection with Christ, vnlesse there go be∣fore an inward contrition of the heart.
9 Holy EzechiahAs Eze∣kiah. said, he hath broken all my bones in pieces like a Lyon: sée a great commotion. But by and by he addeth: O Lord, so they shall liue, and in such is the life of my spirit: thou shalt re∣buke me, and quicken me, thou hast cast all my sinnes behinde thy backe.Rose from sinne. Sée the spirituall resurre∣ction from sinnes.6 Angels come. Christ rising a∣gaine, the Angel of the Lord came downe from heauen, and sat vpon the sepulchre: so if Christ rise a∣gaine in thée spiritually, thou shalt enioy the societyFor thy so∣cietie. of the Angels. Where the old Adam liues, as yet, and raignes, there is an accep∣table Chamber for the deuill: but where Christ liues and raignes, there the Angels reioyce to dwell for it is written that there is ioy in heauen on a sinner that re∣penteth. 10 But where there is true
repentance,No rising, no grace. there also Christ ri∣seth againe spiritually. Where Christ hath not yet risen againe spiritually, there is not as yet the grace of God. But where there is not as yet the grace of God, there also is not the custody of the Angels.Nor An∣gels. Where Christ hath not as yet risen againe spiritually, there as yet raignes the old A∣dam: but where raignes the old Adam, there sinneBut sinne. raignes: where sinne raignes, there the deuill raignes:And Satan raignes. but what communion can there bee of the Angels with the deuill? Christ rising againe, appeared7 Appeared. to his Disciples, and shewed himselfe to them aliue: so if thou bee made partaker of the spirituall resurrection by faith,To ap∣peare in thee. shew thy selfe a liuely member of Christ through loue. A man is not iudged to be aliue, if hée do not manifest the workes of lifeBy life.
outwardly. Where Christ is, there is also the holy Ghost: where the holy GhostOf the ho∣ly Ghost. is, there he driues and sets forward to euerie good worke: because they which are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sonnes of God.As a son. 11 If therefore we liue in the spirit, let vs walke also in the spi∣rit. The light of the Sunne doth disperse the brightnesse of his beames euery way, the light of faithFaith spreadeth. doth diffuse the heat of cha∣rity round about. Take away light from the Sunne, and thou mayest separate charity from true faith. Sinnes are dead works:Sinnes works dead if thou walkest in dead works, how doest thou liue in Christ, & Christ in thée? Sinnes pertaine to the old Adam:Pertaine to the old man. if the old Adam raigne as yet in thée, how hast thou risen a∣gaine spiritually with Christ? Sinnes pertaine to the oldnesse of
the flesh:Flesh. if thou walkest in the oldnesse of flesh, how doth the new man liue in thée? Raise vsRaise vs. vp, O good Iesus, from the death of sin, that we may walke in newnesse of life. Let thy death kill the old A∣damBy killing Adam. in vs, let thy resurrection call backe our inward man to life: let thy bloud wash vs from sinnes: let thy resurrection put vpon vs the garment of righteousnesse. After thée, O true life, do we sigh,Sigh for life. that are dead in sinnes: after thée, O true righteousnes,For righ∣teousnesse. do we sigh, that are turned away through sinnes: After thée, O true saluation,For salua∣tion. do we sigh, that are damned for sins: quicken vs, iustifie vs, saue vs. Amen.
Sunday Noone. Psal. 84.1, 2OH how amiable are thy dwel¦lings, thou Lord of Hosts! My soule hath a desire & longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh re∣ioyce in the liuing God. For one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand. Psal. 27.4.One thing haue I desired of the Lord, which I will require, euen that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the dayes of my life, to behold the faire beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.
Christi re uerere tribunal. Reuerēce the throne of Christ. 48. Meditation. Of the last Iudgement. THe Father iudgeth no man, but hath giuen all iudgement to the Sonne. I know, O Lord Iesus, that thou which art to come a seuere IudgeChrist the Iudge. of all men, wilt bring to lightAll come to light. the hidden déeds, words, & thoughts of men. Aboue vs will be the seuere iudge,Euery way fearefull. beneath vs gaping hell, within vs a gnawing conscience, with∣out vs burning fire, on our right hand our sins accusing vs, on our left hand the deuils affrighting vs, there will be the good Angels driuing vs from heauen, and the euill drawing vs to hell.Refuge. O Lord Iesus, in these my distresses, to whom shall I flye? I feare all my works, knowing that thou doest
not spare any one that sinnes. 1 I shall be set betwéene time and eternity: the time is past, the infinite spaces of eternitieEternity. do yet remaine. The euill spiritsEuill spi∣rits draw∣ing. will search out the euill works which they haue perswaded: in the most seuere iudgement they will bring forth all things, that they may draw my soule as a fellow with them to their tor∣ments. 2 All the power of the heauens shall meltHeauens melt. away, and the heauens shall bee folded together like a booke:Starres fal. their whole array shall fall away, euen as a leafe fals away from a Vine or a Fig-trée. The Sunne shall waxe red,Sun red. and the Moone shall bee confounded. But if these the works of thine hands,Where the sinners. which neuer haue committed any euill, flye from thy sight, how can I a wretched sinner, appeare be∣fore
thy face? The heauens of heauens are not cleaneHeauens vncleane. before thée: how should then wretched I which drinke iniquitie like water? But if the iust shall scarce bée saued, where shall the sinner ap∣peare? whither therefore shall I flye? to whom shall I turne mée,The Iudge our refuge. but to thée. O Lord? Thou shalt bee the iudge of my sinnes, which hast dyed for my sinnes:Which dyed for vs. for the Father iudgeth no man, but hath deliuered all iudgement to the Sonne. The Father hath deliue∣redDeliuered by the Fa∣ther. the iudgement to the Sonne, but the Sonne againe was deli∣uered for our sinnes: for so God loued the world, that he did giueIoh. 3.16. Giuen. his onely begotten Sonne, not that hée should condemne the world, but that the world might be saued by him. 3 How therefore wilt thou iudge me, O Lord Iesus, whom
thou art sent of the Father that I may bée saued by thée? thou hast performed the will of thy Father in all things: how there∣fore shalt thou not performe it in sauingIn sauing. me a poore wretch? It is not the will of thy Father, that one of the little onesThe little ones. perish: I al∣so am a little one in thy sight, a little one also in mine owne sight. For what am I, but dustDust. & ashes? and not onely dust and ashes, but also too little and small in the pro∣ficienceNot profi¦cient. of piety: performe there∣fore in me a little one, the will of thy Father. 4 Thou camest, O Iesus, to saue that which was lost, how therefore canst thou iudge him that desires to bee saued?Desiring saluation. Accusers. Sinne. Christ ta∣keth sinne away. My sinnes will accuse mée, and re∣quire the seuere sentence of the Iudge: but thou hast translated my sins on thée, thou takest away
the sinnes of the world: how not mine also? How shalt thou con∣demne mée for my sinnes, which dyeest for them? Thou dyedst for the sinnesDyed for sinnes. of the whole world, how not for mine also? yea, O Lord Iesus, if thou wouldest iudge me seuerely, what had con∣strained thée to come downe from heauen into the flesh, to death,Causes of his humi∣litie. to the Crosse? 5 The deuils will accuse me, and require the works of my soul,Satan. which they haue perswaded her vnto.Iudgeth Satan. But the prince of this world is iudged, neither hath he any thing in thée. But if he hath not any thing in thée, neither hath he any thing in me: for I beléeue in thée, O Lord, therefore thou abi∣dest in me, and I in thée. 6 Hée will accuse mée thy friend,That ac∣cuseth. Friend. he will accuse me thy bro∣ther, hée will accuse me the most
beloued SonneSonne. of the eternall Father. How therefore wilt thou seuerely iudge thy friend,Then do not iudge him. Moses ac∣cuseth. thy bro∣ther, and thy sonne? Moses will accuse me in that iudgement, hée will say that I am cursed, because I haue not kept all those things that are written in the Booke of the Law. 7 But thou, O Christ, wert made a curse for mée, that thou mightest frée mee from the curseFree from the curse. of the Law.By desi∣ring a bles¦sing. I shall be cursed of Moses, but blessed of thée: for I desire to heare that voyce; Come ye blessed, possesse the kingdome of my Father. Moses will accuse mée,Christ ac∣cuseth not. but thou wilt not accuse mée with my Father, but wilt make intercession for me. Therefore I do not feare the curse of Moses, because thou hast taken away the hand-writingHand-wri¦ting can∣celled. which was against me.
8 The damned4 Damned will accuse me, and proclaime mée guilty of the like fault with them. I confesse, O Lord Iesus, that guiltinesse doth ioyne me together with them: but the acknowledging of that guilti∣nes: and the saueing knowledge of thée doth disioyneDisioyned by know∣ledge, me from them. 9 He which heares thy Word, and beléeueth him which hath sent thée, hath life eternall, neither shall he come into iudgement. I heare thy Word, O Lord: I be∣léeue in thée with a weake faith but yet with faith. I beléeue,Hearing. Faith. Weake. Yet faith. Lord, but helpe mine vnbeléefe. I beléeue, Lord, but increase my faith. Although I am not frée from the sinnes of all the damned: yet from incredulitie alone thou wilt frée me, O Lord. 10 All those accusersAccusers fearfull. affright me: but thou the Iudge dost con∣firme me. To thée the father hath
deliuered all iudgement,Al Christs hee hath giuen all things into thy hands: but againe he hath deliuered thée for vs all,Christ for all. thou also hast deliuered thy selfe for thy Church, that thou mightest sanctifie it, and cleanse it in the bath of water in the Word. How shalt thou iudge them with seuere iudgement,Iudgeth not his. for whom thou hast deliuered thy selfe to death, euen the death of the crosse? Thou wilt not hate thy flesh, wée are members of thy body, of thy flesh, and of thy bones.Flesh and bones. Thinke, O de∣uout soule, of this refuge and assu∣rance at the last iudgement. And O swéet Iudge, euery day assure mée of my iustification that I may lift vp my head at thy glorious coming, because it shall be the day of my redemption. Amen.
Semper mens respice sursum. Soule euer look aloft 49 Meditation. Of the desire of eternall Life. O Deuout soule, thou ough∣test not to loue the fading life, but rather the abiding. As∣cendAscend to Youth. Life, Ioy. thither by desire, where there is youth without age, life without death, ioy without sad∣nesse, a kingdomeA king∣dome. without change. If beauty delight thée,Beautifull as the Sun the iust shall shine as the Sunne. If swift∣nesse or strength,Strength of Angels. Life eter∣nall. Fulnesse of glory. Melody of Angels. the elect shall be like the Angels of God. If a long and healthfull life, there is sound eternity, and eternall sound∣nesse. If fulnesse, the elect shall bée filled when the glory of the Lord shall appeare. If melodie, there the Quires of Angels sing together without end. If cleanly pleasure,Pleasure. God will make his
drunken, out of the riuer of this pleasure. If wisedome,Wisedome the wise∣dome of God will shew it selfe vn∣to vs. If friendship,Friendship they shall loue God more then themselues, they shall loue one another as them∣selues, and God will loue them more then themselues. 1 If concordConcord. delights vs, all there shall haue none ill. If power, all thingsAll things shall be easie to the elect, they shall desire nothing that they shall not be able to do: nay, they shall desire nothing but that which God will haue them will and de∣sire. If honourHonour. and riches delight thée, God will appoint his faithfull seruants ouer many things. If true securitie,Securitie. there they shall bee certaine that that good will neuer faile them:Good fai∣leth not. By losse. as they shall bee sure that they shall not léese it of their owne accord: neither that God that loues them, will take it away
from those that loue him against their will:Taking away. neither that any thing mightier then God, shall se∣parate God and them,Separatiō. being vn∣willing. 2 Whatsoeuer the Elect can desire,Desires. there they finde, because they behold him face to face, which is all things.Infinite. So great are the good things of that life, that they cannot bee measured: so ma¦ny, that they cannot be numbred: so precious, that they cannot bée estéemed. There will be eternall soundnesseSoundnes. of bodies: there will be the greatest purenesPurenesse. of minds: there will be the fulnesseEulnesse. of Gods glorie and pleasure: there will be perpetuall familiaritieFamilia∣ritie. of the Angels and Saints: there will be an admirable clearnesseClearnes. of their bodies. 3 The Elect shall reioyce for the pleasantnesse of the place,Reioyce in the place.
which they shall possesse: for the swéet societySocietie. in which they shall raigne: for the glorificationGlorifica∣tion. of the body which they shall haue: for the worldWorld. which they haue contem∣ned: for hellHell. which they haue e∣scaped 4 The least crowneExcellent Crowne. of eternal life shall be more excellent then a thousand worlds: because that is infinite, but these all are finite: Neither is the enuyNo enuy. of vnequall brightnesse, there to be feared, be∣cause the vnitie of charitie shall raigne in all, by reason of that greatest charity and loue. What∣soeuer happens vnto one of the Elect,All ioy. shall make the rest so ioy∣full, as if it were giuen to them∣selues. God pos¦sessed.5 There is no greater good in heauen and earth then God, therefore also there can bée no greater and perfecter ioy then to
sée God, to possesse God:Incompa∣rable ioy. there∣fore also to sée God but for one moment, will ouercome all ioyes. For we shall sée God in himselfe, God in vs, and our selues in God. In the way of this life wée haue Christ with vs, but couered vn∣der the vaile of the Word and Sacraments, but we do not know him by certaine knowledge: in the life to come wée shall behold him face to face,1 Joh. 3. See Christ when hée shall distribute vnto vs the bread of e∣ternall sacietie: euen as the Di∣sciples did not know Christ in the way, but at last in the house, when hée did breake bread vnto them. 6 That heauenly Ierusalem hath not a Temple made with hands, neither the Sunne nor the Moone, because the temple there∣of for euer is God, the brightnesseGod brightnes. and light thereof. Vision shall
succéed faith, comprehension hope, perfect fruitionPerfect fruition. loue. No noise.7 In the building of the Tem∣ple of Solomon, the voyce of an axe and hammer was not heard: so in the heauenly Ierusalem, neither is paine nor tribulation felt:No pne. because the matter of this Temple, that is to say, the spi∣rituall stones, were preparedAll prepa¦red. now before in the world by tribu∣lations. Soule a Queene.8 The Quéene comming to Solomon, is the Soule going to Christ into the heauenly Ieru∣salem: shée goes in with a great troupe of holy Angels, with gold and precious stones of diuers ver∣tues. Shée will wonder at the wisedome of ChristWondring at Christs wisedome. the King, and at the order of his Ministers, the Angels and Saints. The fulnesse of the meat of his table,Table. that is, of eternall refection: the preci∣ousnesse
of his garments,Garments that is, the glorification of our bodies: the fairenesse of his house,House. that is, the greatnesse of the heauenly Palace: the multitude of his Sa∣crifices,Sacrifices. that is, of diuine praises. She will confesse, being stricken into amazednesse, that shée could not beléeue those things, which shée now sées with her eyes. Into this most glorious, and most desi∣red presence, the soule is brought by the most comfortable and hea∣uenly Spirit, with seuen burn∣ing bright Lamps, that will re∣ueale to her all the secrets of this blessed kingdome formerly not ma∣nifested, that hereby the soule shall looke no way, whence vnspeakable glory shall not make the soule shine with glory. 9 Therefore let the faithfull soule lift her selfe vp▪ and considerConsider. the good things that are prouided
for her: thither must wée direct the spirit,Direct the spirit. whither it is sometime to go.Go. Wée must striue to go thither in time, where we must abide for all eternitie. Hée shall not enter into this glory of his Master,With de∣sire. which doth not desire to enter. 10 Thou hopest to appeare sometime before the face of God, therefore thou must study holi∣nesse,Then stu∣dy holines because he himselfe is holy. Thou expectest the societie of the heauenly Angels,Beware of sinne. Desire not temporall. sée therefore lest by thy sinnes thou driue their ministery from thée. Thou hopest for eternall things, where∣fore then doest thou so greatly de∣sire temporall? Thou séekest a citie to come, wherefore then dost thou desire here a continuing place? Thou desirest to come vn∣to Christ, wherefore then doest thou feare death? It is his part
to feare death,Desire not to be here. which would not go vnto Christ. Thou desirest to enter into the heauenly Ierusa∣lem;Feare no death. Defile not thy selfe. wherefore then doest thou defile thy selfe with so many and so great sinnes? when as yet it is written, that nothing defiled shall enter into it. Thou desirest here∣after to enioy the trée of life, thou must first lay hold on ChristLay hold on Christ. the true trée of life, in this life, by true faith, because it is written: Blessed are they which wash their long robes in the bloud of the Lambe, that they may haue power on the trée of life,The tree of life. and may enter through the gates into the City. Without are dogsWithout are dogs: Murthe∣rers. and sor∣cerers, take héed therefore of vn∣cleannesse: without are murthe∣rers, take héed therefore of wrath: without are those that serue I∣dols,Idolaters. take héed therefore of co∣uetousnesse: without are lyars,Lyars.
take héed therefore of all the ma∣lice of sinne. 10 If thou desirest to enter in∣to the marriage of the Lambe, de∣sire the comming of the Bride∣groome:Desire the Bride∣groome. the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. If thou hast not the earnest of the Spirit, by which thou mayest cry, that the Lord come, the Bridegroome will not leade thée into the heauenly wed∣ding: thou art not the Bride,Else thou art no Bride. if thou desirest not the comming of the Bridegroome. Wilt thou haue a place in the new heauen, and the new earth, why then doest thou cleaue vnto these old things?Cleaue not to old things. wilt thou be made partaker of the Creator, why doest thou cleaue to the beggerly creatures?Creatures. Doest thou looke for a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternall in heauen, why then doest thou not desire that the earthly
houseEarthly house. of this our habitation bee dissolued? doest thou desire to bée clothed vpon? why then dost thou not looke that thou bee not found naked?Be not naked. If in this life the holy Tri∣nity doth not dwell in thy heart by grace, it will neuer dwell in thée in the life to come through glory.Begin here. If in this life thou doest not taste the beginning of eternall felicity, thou shalt neuer perceiue the full complement thereof. Coelestis curia nostra est. Christs Court is ours. 50 Meditation. Of the most sweet company of the An∣gels in heauen. IN the resurrection of the dead, they shall neither bee married, neither shall they marry wiues, but they shall bee like the AngelsLike An∣gels. of God in heauen. Can any man
set out this dignityGreat dignity. of the blessed, with worthy praises? Into what mans heart hath this glorie of the blessed ascended? The elect being renued by the glory of the resurre∣ction, without any feareWithout feare. of death, without any spotSpot. of corruption, shall enioy the sauing visionSauing vi∣sion. of God. 1 I saw the Lord face to face,Face to face. and my soule was made whole, cryeth out the holy Patriarke. Now if the momentany vision of God could bring so great an heap of ioy; what may his eternallEternally. vi∣sion do? If the beholding of God, appearing in the shape of man, brought to the soule health and life, then vndoubtedly the sight of him face to face will bring eternall life and beatitude.Blessed. 2 What then can happen fur∣ther to this felicitie? what can the elect desire besides the sight
of God? yet neuerthelesse they shall enioy the most blessed and swéet societie of the Angels.Societie of Angels. Similitude Nei∣ther shall they onely enioy their fellowship, but they shall also bée like vnto them in the agilitie, clearnesse, and immortalitie of their bodies.Of clo∣thing. We shall be clothed with the same garment as they, in white robes standing before the Throne of the Lambe: wee shall singSing. an euerlasting song to the Lord: wée shall shineShine. in the same crown of vertues: we shall reioyceReioyce. in the same priuiledge of immor∣talitie. 3 Manoah cryes out, we haue séene the Angel of the Lord, and wée shall dye: but wée shall sée a thousand thousand, and ten thou∣sand hundred thousand Angels, and shall liue for euer.And liue euer. 4 Now if we shall be like vn∣to the Angels, then it is no more
to be feared, lest we may be sepa∣ratedNeuer se∣parated. from them by the dissimili∣tude of sinnes. We shall put off the ragged coat of our sinfull na∣ture, and our nakednesse shall bee couered with the garment of sal∣uation, and wee shall be clothedClothed. with the most brightBright. robe of in∣nocencie.No euils. None is hurt there, none is angry, none enuies, no co∣uetousnesse inflameth, no ambiti∣on of honour or power prouoketh. Wée shall not be burdened with the weight of our sinnes,Burthen of sinnes. neither shall we be compelled to bewaile the blemishes of our sinnes with penitent teares.Teares. Neither are the deadly woundsWounds. of the soule any more to be feared: for the Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah hath ouercome the world, and we haue ouercome in his strength, and our wounds are healed by his happie vi∣ctorie.
5 Againe, if we shall bée like vnto the Angels, then shall there bée no desire of meatNo meat. or drinke. God will be our meat, in whose delight we shall be satisfied. God will bee our meat, who alone re∣fresheth and failes not. The bles∣sed shall neither hungerNo hun∣ger. nor thirst: the heatNo heat. and the Sunne shall not smite them: because he that hath mercy vpon them shall gouerne them. God shall giue them drinkeDrinke. at the springs of waters, there the streames of liuing waters shall flow out of their belly:Floweth out of the belly. there is prepared a banquet of fat things, full of marrow, a banquetBanquet. of the pure vintage. 6 We shall feast,Feast. and we shall reioyce, and we shall triumph, by reason of the ioy of our hearts. O Lord Iesus, these things shall bée performed in Spirit and Truth:In spirit and truth. of the fruit of the Vine shall wée
drinke in the kingdome of thy Father, but in Spirit and truth. For the words which thou hast spoken vnto vs, are spirit and life,And life. and in the wordes of this word thou doest declare the ioyes of the life to come. Againe, if wée shall be like vnto the Angels, then the feare of deathNo death shal be taken away, death shall bee swallowed vp in victory, death shall be cast downe headlong for euer: and God shall wipe away all tearesTeares wiped. from the eies of his people. 7 Therefore there shall be ioyIoy. without sadnes, which containes euerlasting gladnesse: there shall bée healthHealth. without griefe; lifeLife. without labour; lightLight. without darknesse, loueLoue. shall neuer waxe cold, ioy shall neuer decrease, groning shall not bee heard: nei∣ther shall griefeNo griefe bee felt, no sad thing shall be séene, reioycing shall
alwayes be had. There shall be the chiefest and certaine security,Securitie. secure tranquillitie, quiet plea∣sure, pleasant felicitie, happy eternall blessednesse, the blessed Trinity,Blessed vi∣sion of the Trinitie. the vnity of the Trini∣tie, and the Trinitie of the vni∣tie, and the blessed vision of the Deitie. 8 Lift vp thy selfe, O my soule, and weigh more déeply the ho∣nourWeigh the honour. that is bestowed vpon vs of Christ. We shall be associated to the troupes of Angels,Society of mighty Angels. and Arch∣angels, to Thrones and Domini∣ons, to Principalities and Po∣wers. Neither shall wée onely bée associated vnto them, but al∣so wée shall bée like vnto them.Like them. The An∣gel that kept vs. Wée shall there know the An∣gel appointed to kéepe vs in our life, neither shall wée want his ministerie, but we shall reioyce in his swéet societie. We shall not
desire his protection,No need of his pro∣tection. but we shall be glad in his swéet company, and wee shall behold his brightnesse with eyes that are made bright. Againe,Behold him. if wée shall be like vnto the Angels, then our fraile weake mortall bodies shall bee changed, and shall be made spirituall,Spirituall bodies. nim∣ble, immortall. They shall bée bright,Bright. because they are neare vn∣to God, which dwelleth in the light that no man can attaine vnto, and is clothed with light. They shall be incorruptible,Incorrup∣tible. because they shall bée like vnto the Angels: nay, vnto the glorified bodie of Christ: like I say to ChristLike Christ. at his transfiguration, when he appea∣red in his glory, where his face did shine as the Sunne, and his garments were whiter then any Fuller can make, euen glistring as the light. Here Saint Peter confessed it was good being, and
such shall bée the glorie of the Saints. They are sowne here in corruption, they shall rise againe in incorruption: they are sowne in dishonour, they shall rise againe in glory:Glorious. they are sowne in weaknesse, they shall rise againe in power:Powerfull it is sowne a naturall body, it shall rise againe a spiritu∣all body, which shall shine like the brightnesse of the firmament for euer. Come, Lord Iesus, and make vs partakers of that glory. Amen. Sanctorum patria Coelum. Heauen the coun¦trey of Saints. 51. Meditation. Of the most blessed vision of God in Heauen. IN the house of my Father are many mansions:Many mansions. Ioh. 14. they are the words of our Sauiour. I desire
to sée the place,I desire to see mine. O Lord, in which thou hast prepared for me an eter∣nall mansion. I am a stranger and a pilgrime here, as were all my fathers. The dayes of my pilgri∣mage are few and euill;Banished desireth. In heauen therefore in the banishment of this world, I desire the heauenly countrey: for my conuersation is in heauen, I de∣sire to sée the good things of the Lord in the land of the liuing. Short dayes.1 This life passeth away in an image, my dayes may bée measu∣red, and my substance is as no∣thing before thée, what therefore is mine expectation?Expect. is not the Lord? O Lord Iesus, when will it be that I shall come vnto thée? when shall I appeareAppearing before thy face? Euen as the Hart desires the springs of waters, so my soule longeth after thée, O God. 2 O true and perfect, and full ioy!Full ioy. O ioy aboue ioy, ouercom∣ming
all ioy, without which there is no ioy! when shall I enter into thée that I may sée my GodTo see God. which dwelleth in thee? Thou shalt fill mée with ioy, with thy counte∣nance.His coun∣tenance. O Lord, at thy right hand there are pleasuresPleasure. for euermore: I shall bée satisfied with the ful∣nesse of thy house, and thou shalt make me drinke out of the riuer of thy pleasures. With thee is the fountaine of life. O desired life!Life. O blessed felicity! in which the most holy trinityTrinity seene. shall be the perfection of our desires, which shall bée séene without end, shall bée loued without lothsomnesse, shall bée praised without weari∣nesse. 3 It will ouercome all ioyes to sée God, to sée Christ,God Christ. to liue with Christ: to heare Christ will ouercome all the desires of our hearts.
4 O Iesus Christ, the most swéet Husband of my soule, when wilt thou bring thy BrideAs a bride into thy kingly palace? what can there be wanting?Wanting nothing. what can there more be desired or expected, where God shall be all in all?God, faire Sweete. He shal be faire∣nes to the sight, hony to the taste, an harpe to the hearing, balme to the smelling; a floure to the tou∣ching. 5 God shall bee all, and shall distribute good things to euery one according to the desire of his heart:Giuing all desires. if thou desirest life, if health, if peace, if honour, God will there be all in all. Know∣ledge of mysteries.6 The Mysteries which are now sealed vp to the chiefest Doc∣tors in the Church, shall there be-plaine to little children. The bles∣sed humanity of Christ will bee present with vs,By Christs preaching and will preach in a most swéete voice of the hid∣den
Mysteries of our saluation. His voyce is swéet,Full of grace and his face is comely, grace is powred forth in his lips, he goeth on crowned with glory and honour. 7 But if God shall bée all in all, then he shall be fulnes of lightLight: to the vnderstanding, multitude of peacePeace. to the will, continuance of eternityEternity. to the memory. The sonne will fill the vnderstanding with most full knowledge, the ho∣ly Ghost the will with most swéet loue,Loue. the father the memory with the secure remembrance of both. 8 Thou, O God, shalt be light, in whose light we shall see light, that is, thee in thy selfe, in the brightnesse of thy countenance,Bright counte∣nance: when we shal sée thée face to face. Neither shall we onely séeSee. thée, but we shall also liue with thée: neither shall wee onely liueLiue. with thee, but wee shall also praisePraise. thée
neither shall we onely praise thée, but we shall be also partakers of thy ioy:Partake thy ioy. neither shall wee onely reioyce with thee, but we shall be also like vnto the Angels: neither shall we be like to the AngelsLike An∣gels. on∣ly, but shall bee renued to the I∣mage of the most glorious Son of God,Like God. yea to God also himselfe, which is blessed for euer. 9 Let the faithfull soule bée here amazed, and adore the mercyAdore the mercy: of her Sauiour. He doth not re∣ceiue vs his enemies onely to fa∣uour: but hee remits of sinnes: but hée giues vs righteousnesse:Remission Righte∣ousnesse. but he brings vs to the heauenly inheritance.Inheri∣tance. This inheritance is immortall, & continueth for euer vndefiled, without all blemish, It euer groweth greene, and wi∣thereth not. It is heauenly▪ and hath nothing in it of the earth. 10 O most blessed City!Blessed ci∣ty of God. O hea∣uenly
Ierusalem! O holy seat of the most holy Trinity! When will it be that I shall enter into thy Temple? The Temple of the heauenly Ierusalem is the Lambe:The Lambe is the Tem∣ple. the Lambe which takes away the sinnes of the world, and was slaine for them from the be∣ginning of the world. When will it be that I shall worship my God in that temple, that is to say, God in God?Worship God in God. when will that Sunne rise vnto mee, which enlightens that holy City? I am a banished man from my country, but the inheritance that is laid vp for mée is large. Power is giuen by Christ to those that beleeue to be made the sonnes of God. But if we are sonnes, then are we also heires, heires of God, and coheires of Christ.Coheires in Christ. 11 Lift vpLift vp. thy selfe, O my soule, and aspire to thine inheri∣tance.
The Lord is the portion of mine heritage, and mine excéeding great reward. What could the most mercifull bounty of God giue besides this? he giues life:Giueth life: he giues his Son:His Son. he giues him∣selfe:Himselfe: and if he knew any grea∣terNothing. greater. thing in heauen and earth, hée would giue that same vnto vs. We liue in God, we are the tem∣ple of God, we possesse GOD. Here truly in the Spirit, and in a mistery, but there in truth, there our spes shall bée res, our hope shall be the substance of our hope: there wée shall not onely abide. but wee shal also dwel for euer. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come euen so come, come, Lord Iesus, that my soule may come and enioy thée. Amen.
Sunday Euening Prayer. VVHat should I meditate on in the day of rest, but on the euerlasting rest? what should I thinke on in the end of this Sab∣bath, but on the endlesse Sab∣bath? My soule longeth for that day (O Lord) when deliuered from the troubles of this life, the burden of this body, it shall enioy thy blessed sight, and be blessed in thy sight, when for the company of sinfull men on earth, it shall enioy the sweet society and company of the blessed Spirits, Angels, and the souls of iust & perfect men in hea∣uen. There (O Lord) is mine heart and there is my treasure, there art thou, and there would thy seruant be also. Vnto which place of happi∣nesse, thy glorious Kingdome, that I may come, Giue grace (O deare
and louing God) that while here I liue, I may walke in good works, which are the way of thy King∣dome, to which holy society that I may be ioyned, giue me the grace while here I liue, to study holines, that so I may rise from the death of sin to the life of righteousnes, and casting off the sinne that hangeth on and presseth down, aspire with all earnestnesse to that eternal life and blessed company. Make me while I liue here in the world, al∣wayes to thinke of the Iudgement that shall bee in the end of the World, that my conuersation may bee such, that when thou shalt come in the last day to visite the World, I may be of the number of thy sheepe, standing on thy right hand to whom the comfort of that Word shall bee addressed: Come, ye blessed of my Father, receiue the Kingdom prepared for you frō the
beginning of the world. O Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life: the Way, in precepts and example, the Truth in promises, the Life in reward, grant that I may so walke here after thy precepts and exam∣ple, and so lay hold on thy pro∣mises, that by thee I may obtaine the reward of the eternall and ne∣uerfading life, Amen.
A Prayer for a woman in trauaile of Childe. HElpe, Lord, thine Hand-maid in her heauinesse, strengthen her in her weakenesse, sustaine her that shee faint not in her bitter paines, giue her patience to endure power to ouercome, hold thou her vp with thy mercifull hand; loose the bands of her sorrowes, giue an happy issue of this her la∣bour and trouble, and mercifully looking on her in these her suffe∣rings, put an end to her affliction, and in thy good time make her a ioyfull mother, and giue vnto her to behold the fruit of her body with great gladnesse, for thy deare Sons sake, Christ Iesus, Amen.
The thankesgiuing of a woman after the birth, and her deliuerance. THou (O Lord) which hast pro∣mised to be with thin in trou∣ble, hast performed thy promise to me thine Hand-maid, wherefore my heart is glad, my soule reioy∣ceth, and my tongue shall speak of thy praise. O Lord, the helpe was thine, and thou hast giuen the issue: though I wrastled long with paine and sorrow in my heauines, as Ia∣cob with the Angell in the night, yet at last thou gauest the blessing, a blessing in my safe deliuerance, a blessing that I liue to behold the fruit of mine owne body. Now my mouth is fild with laughter, and I will reioyce; all that heare it, shall reioyce with me. Be thou pleased which art my helper & deliuerer,
to manifest thy mercies yet further on me and mine infant, in conti∣nuance of thy wonted fauours to∣wards vs, and addition of all bles∣sings further needefull and expe∣dient for vs: visit vs, O Lord, and remember vs euermore with thy mercies, and make me also to re∣member thee with praise, which hast done so great things for me, where∣of I do reioyce. Amen.
THE DIVISION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. The Lords Prayer is thus to be diuided, 1. The proeme, Our Father. 2. The petitions, Hallowed, &c. 3. The Thanksgiuing, For thine is.
AN EXPOSITION ON THE LORDS PRAYER. Our Father] Act. 17.28.1. NOt in name onely, but of our life and being also. Granaten in Orat. Dom.2. In affection, and 3 In effect and deed. For thou hast 1 Created vs, 2 Adopted vs, and 3 Ministrest all good things vnto vs,
Which art in Heauen,] 1. Of greatest maiestie. 2. Of perfect happinesse. 3. Of euerlasting continuance. For 1. Thou art higher then the highest. 2. In thy presence is the fulnes of ioy. 3. Thy yeeres shall not faile. Hallowed be thy Name,] 1. While beleeuing, we do after thy Word and commande∣ments. 2. While we speake reuerently of thy great name and titles. 3. While in our hearts wee reli∣giously regard and thinke of
thy power, wisedom, mercy, iustice, iudgements, &c. For so 1. Shall we glorifie thy name by our workes. 2. Shal we praise it in our words. 3. Shall wee hallow it in our thoughts, &c. Thy Kingdome come,] 1. In the preaching of thy Gos∣pell. 2. In the power of thy Spirit. 3. In the appearing of thy glory For it 1. Will informe vs in thy truth. 2. Will subdue vs to thy scepter. 3. Will blesse vs with thy sight.
Thy will be done in earth, 1. On vs, in all that thou shalt thinke good. 2. In vs, in all that shal be good. 3. By vs, in all that our hand shall finde to doe. For 1. All that comes from thee, workes together for the best to thy children, Rom. 8.28. 2. This is thy will, euen our sanctification, 1. Thes. 4: 3. Thus it behooueth vs to con∣forme all our actions to thy rule. As it is in Heauen, 1. By thine onely Sonne. 2. By thy holy Angels.
3. By thy blessed Saints. For 1. He doth all thy will. 2. They obey the voice of thy Word. 3. They walke in thy sight. Giue vs this day our daily bread,] 1. For our present necessity. 2. Further commodity. 3. Future ability. For so 1. We shall be kept in life. 2. We shal haue all needfull com∣forts for our life. 3. We may also be helpfull vnto others.
And forgiue vs our trespasses,] 1. Sinning of ignorance. 2. Falling of infirmity. 3. Offending of set purpose. For 1. We know not good from euill. 2. Wee are vnapt to good, and prone to euill. 3. Our hearts are oft-times har∣dened in euill, As wee forgiue them that tres∣passe against vs,] 1. Not retaining their iniuries. 2. Not returning their iniuries. 3. Doing them good moreouer for their iniuries. Though 1. Enuiously they hurt vs.
2. Maliciously they hate vs. 3. Extremely they doe mischiefe and indanger vs. And leade vs not into temp∣tation,) 1. Withdrawing thy grace as∣sisting, from vs. 2. Stirring vp storms and warre against vs. 3. Laying baites and blocks be∣fore vs. For 1. Thereby we shal be vngarded. 2. Therewith we may bee ouer∣whelmed. 3. Thereat we may offend. But deliuer vs from the euill,) 1. Of our owne concupiscence.
2. Of that wicked aduersary. 3. Of the exāples of this naugh∣ty age. For otherwise 1. We shal serue sinne in the lusts thereof. 2. We shall be led captiue of the diuell after his will. 3. We shall be carried away with the current of the times cor∣ruptions. For thine is the Kingdome, 1. Ouer all ex∣celling. the power, 2. Al ruling and disposing. and the glo∣ry, 3. Alwaies brightly shi∣ning.
1. Whereto none ma  mpa∣red 2. Which cannot be withstood. 3. Which shall not be obscured. For euer,) 1. In all ages past, 2. At this present, 3. In all times to come. Amen: So shall it be.) 1. As thou hast said, 2. As we haue prayed. 3. Hereupon our faith is staid. We beleeue, Lord, helpe our vnbeliefe: euen so, Lord Ie∣s, Amen, Amen. FINIS.
